

French Navy


Marine nationale



Logo of the Marine Nationale since 1990.



Active
1624 – present


Country
 France


Type
Naval Force


Size

36,331 personnel (2016)[1] and 2800 civilians (2014)
180 ships[2]
210 aircraft[1]

FAN
FSM
AVIA
FORFUSCO
Marins Pompiers
Gendarmerie Maritime
Service de soutien de la Flotte




Garrison/HQ
Main: Brest, Île Longue, Toulon
Secondary: Cherbourg, Lorient
French overseas territories: Fort de France, Degrad des Cannes, Port des Galets, Dzaoudzi, Nouméa, Papeete
Overseas: Dakar, Djibouti, Abu Dhabi


Nickname(s)
La Royale


Motto(s)
Honneur, patrie, valeur, discipline
("Honour, Homeland, Valour, Discipline")


Colours
Blue, white, red


Ships
Current Fleet


Engagements

Sino-French War
(French: Guerre franco-chinoise)
World War I
(French: Première Guerre mondiale)
World War II
(French: Seconde Guerre mondiale)
Indochina War
(French: Guerre d'Indochine)
Gulf War
(French: Guerre du Golfe)
Kosovo War
(French: Guerre du Kosovo)
War on Terror

War in Afghanistan (2001–2014)
(French: Guerre d'Afghanistan (2001-2014))

Opération Harmattan
(French: Opération Harmattan)


Website
www.defense.gouv.fr/marine


Commanders


Chef d'État-Major de La Marine, CEMM
Amiral Christophe Prazuck


Major Général de La Marine
Amiral Denis Béraud


Insignia


Insignia
Ranks in the French Navy


Naval Ensign







Aircraft flown


Attack
Rafale M


Electronic
warfare
Hawkeye


Fighter
Rafale M


Helicopter
NH90, Eurocopter Lynx, Panther, Dauphin


Utility helicopter
Alouette III


Patrol
Atlantique 2, Falcon 50, Falcon 200


Trainer
Mudry CAP 10, MS-88 Rallye, Falcon 10, Xingu






Marine nationale



Parent unit

Armées françaises (French military)



Components



Force d'action navale
Forces sous-marines (FOST, ESNA)
Aviation navale
FORFUSCO (Commandos Marine and Fusiliers marins)
Gendarmerie Maritime
Bataillon des marins pompiers de Marseille
Commissariat
Service de soutien de la flotte
Service hydrographique et océanographique de la marine
Service de l'aéronautique navale






The French Navy (French: Marine Nationale, "national navy"), informally La Royale, is the maritime arm of the French Armed Forces. Tracing foundation along with the Ministère de la Marine dating back to 1624, La Royale is one of the world's oldest naval forces and historically played a key part in establishing the French colonial empire.
Since the early foundings, maritime force roles of the French Navy have been defined around the seven seas within missions formulating permanent and non-permanent deterring forces, including aeronaval, maintaining intelligence, protecting populations, preventing crises, intervening wherever necessary to reestablish peace, and deterring by permanent oceanic missions any threats against vital French interests.[3]
The Marine Nationale consists of seven main branches and various services: the Force d'Action Navale, the Forces Sous-marines (FOST, ESNA), the French Maritime Force of Naval Aeronautics (French: Force maritime de l'aéronautique navale) or Aéronavale and the Fusiliers Marins (including Commandos Marine), the Marins Pompiers, the Gendarmerie Maritime[4] and the Support Service of the Fleet .
As a blue-water navy, the Marine Nationale operates a wide range of fighting vessels, which include nuclear-powered aircraft carrier with various aéronavale capabilities, attack submarines and ballistic missile submarines, frigates, patrol boats and support ships.
As of June 2014, the French Navy employed a total of 36,776 personnel along with 2800 civilians. The reserve element of the French Navy consisted of 4,827 personnel of the Operational Reserve.[5]
The Naval Fleet of France includes more than a hundred vessels and Submarine Forces.
The main French navy devise (motto) (French: devise de La Marine) is Honneur, patrie, valeur, discipline ("Honour, Homeland, Valour, Discipline"), words which are engraved in white or golden letters on plaques with blue backgrounds fixed on the superstructures of the all vessel types.



Contents


1 Origins
2 Names and symbols
3 History

3.1 17th, 18th, and early 19th centuries
3.2 19th century revival

3.2.1 Restoration and July Monarchy (1814/5–48)
3.2.2 Second Empire (1852–70)
3.2.3 Third Republic
3.2.4 19th century technological innovations


3.3 20th century

3.3.1 The proto-aircraft carrier
3.3.2 Fleet construction between the World Wars
3.3.3 Second World War
3.3.4 French aircraft carriers




4 Organisation

4.1 Main naval bases


5 Equipment

5.1 Ships and submarines
5.2 Aircraft


6 Personnel

6.1 Application requirement


7 Customs and traditions

7.1 Ranks
7.2 Addressing officers
7.3 Uniforms


8 Future
9 Notable French naval officers

9.1 Corsairs
9.2 Heroes of the First Republic
9.3 Explorers
9.4 Other important French naval officers
9.5 Notable people who served in the French Navy


10 See also
11 Notes
12 References
13 Further reading
14 External links



Origins[edit]
The history of French naval power dates back to the Middle Ages, and had three loci of evolution:

The Mediterranean Sea, where the Ordre de Saint-Jean de Jérusalem had its own navy, the Levant Fleet, whose principal ports were Fréjus, Marseille, and Toulon. The Ordre, which was both a religious and military order, recruited knights from the families of French nobility. Members who had fulfilled their service at sea were granted the rank of Knights Hospitaller, elites who served as the officer corps. The Ordre was one of the ancestors of modern French naval schools including the French Naval Academy.
The Manche along Normandy which, since William the Conqueror, always tendered capable marines and sailors from its numerous active seaports;
The Atlantic Ocean, where the navy of the Duchy of Brittany eventually constituted the nucleus of the royal Flotte du Ponant.

Names and symbols[edit]




By a golden anchor interlaced of the same constitution "D'une ancre d'or entrelacée d'un câble de même".


The first true French Royal Navy (French: la Marine Royale) was established in 1624 by Cardinal Richelieu, chief minister to King Louis XIII. During the French Revolution, la Marine Royale was formally renamed la Marine Nationale. Under the First French Empire and the Second French Empire, the navy was designated as the Imperial French Navy (la Marine Française Depuis). Institutionally, however, the navy has never lost its short familiar nickname, la Royale.
The symbol of the French Navy was since its origin a golden anchor, which, beginning in 1830, was interlaced by a sailing rope. This symbol was featured on all naval vessels, arms, and uniforms.[6] Although anchor symbols are still used on uniforms, a new naval logo was introduced in 1990. Authorized by Naval Chief of Staff Bernard Louzeau, the modern design incorporates the tricoleur by flanking the bow section of a white warship with two ascending red and blue spray foams, and the inscription "Marine nationale".
History[edit]






This article duplicates the scope of other articles. Please discuss this issue on the talk page and edit it to conform with Wikipedia's Manual of Style. (December 2017)



Main articles: History of the French Navy and List of ships of the line of France
17th, 18th, and early 19th centuries[edit]


French Armed Forces









Components




French Air Force
French Army
French Navy
Gendarmerie
National Guard




Ranks




Ranks in the French Army
Ranks in the French Navy
Ranks in the French Air Force




History




Military history of France
La Grande Armée







v
t
e









Admiral Duquesne bombing Algiers in 1682


The navy became a consistent instrument of national power around the seventeenth century with Richelieu's efforts under Louis XIII, and Colbert's under Louis XIV.[note 1] Under the tutelage of the "Sun King," the French Navy was well-financed and -equipped, managing to score several early victories in the Nine Years' War against the Royal Navy and the Dutch Navy. Financial troubles, however, forced the navy back to port and allowed the English and the Dutch to regain the initiative. Before the Nine Years' War, in the Franco-Dutch War, it managed to score a decisive victory over a combined Spanish-Dutch fleet at the Battle of Palermo.
The French Navy scored various successes, as in the campaigns led in the Atlantic by Picquet de la Motte. In 1766, Bougainville led the first French circumnavigation. During the American Revolutionary War the French Navy played a decisive role in supporting the Americans. In a very impressive effort, the French under de Grasse managed to defeat a British fleet at the Battle of the Chesapeake in 1781, thus ensuring that the Franco-American ground forces would win the ongoing Battle of Yorktown. French warships participated in the battle by bombarding British ground forces. In India, Suffren waged campaigns against the British (1770–1780), successfully contending for supremacy against Vice-Admiral Sir Edward Hughes.




French Navy ships of the line in the Battle of the Chesapeake.


On 1 June 1794, a fleet under Admiral Villaret Joyeuse fought the Third Battle of Ushant to prevent the Royal Navy from destroying a large convoy, inbound from the United States, that transported grain to a starving France. The convoy escaped unharmed and the sailors were paraded in triumph in the streets of Paris, though the losses sustained during the battle would prove crippling in the following years and ensure the domination of the Royal Navy. In the Mediterranean, the French Navy waged a naval campaign during a 1798 French invasion of Egypt. Evading a pursuing British fleet under the command of Admiral Horatio Nelson, French fleet, consisting of hundreds of ships and carrying 30,000 troops, captured Malta before continuing to Egypt, where the French took Alexandria. French troops subsequently marched inland while the fleet anchored in Aboukir Bay. When Nelson discovered the French fleet's location, he set sail for Aboukir Bay and ordered an immediate attack. In the subsequent Battle of the Nile, the French were defeated, ending French naval power in the Mediterranean and encouraging other nations to join the Second Coalition and go to war with France.
From 1798 to 1800, France and the United States engaged in the Quasi-War, an undeclared naval war. Prior to the war, France had been outraged over US trade with Britain and the refusal to repay war debts from the Revolution on grounds that they were owed to the French crown, not Revolutionary France. French ships began seizing American merchant ships trading with Britain, inflicting substantial losses on American shipping. As a result, the United States Navy fought a series of largely successful naval engagements with the French. By the autumn of 1800, the US Navy and Royal Navy had reduced the activities of French privateers and warships.




The Battle of Grand Port in 1810.


The French Revolution, in eliminating numerous officers of noble lineage (among them, Charles d'Estaing), all but crippled the French Navy. Efforts to make it into a powerful force under Napoleon I were dashed by the death of Latouche Tréville in 1804, and the Battle of Trafalgar in 1805, where the British all but annihilated a combined Franco-Spanish fleet. The disaster guaranteed British naval superiority throughout the Napoleonic Wars, and up until World War II.
Throughout the Napoleonic Wars, the French Navy, even with the help of Allied navies, was smaller: In 1812, the Royal Navy, consisting of 600 cruisers and some smaller vessels, was the size of the rest of the world's navies combined.
19th century revival[edit]
Restoration and July Monarchy (1814/5–48)[edit]
During the Bourbon Restoration, the navy at first suffered from the compounded damage sustained during the French Revolutionary Wars and the Napoleonic Wars, and from the incompetence and dereliction of the royalist officer corps, as epitomised by the disaster of the frigate Méduse and her proverbial Raft of the Medusa. Soon, however, the navy started to restore, under the impulsion of veterans of the Napoleonic Wars like Guy-Victor Duperré, Charles Baudin or Albin Roussin (all heroes of the Mauritius campaign of 1809–1811 who had tasted victory at the Battle of Grand Port). Adequate leadership was compounded with well-financed constructions, notably with large two-decker cruiser-frigates (such as the Surveillante class) and innovative ship of the line designs (such as the straight-walled Hercule class), and sustained efforts of modernisation. Artillery standardised on the 30-pound calibre and later experimentation with Paixhans guns, while navigation saw the introduction of the first steamers with the corvette Sphinx.




Abel Aubert Dupetit Thouars taking over Tahiti on 9 September 1842. July Monarchy.


On 14 June 1830, a large fleet under Duperré, comprising 103 warships and 464 transports, executed the Invasion of Algiers, landing an army at Sidi Ferruch. Sultan-Khalessi, the main fort defending the city, was attacked on 29 June and fell on 4 July. The Bey then started negotiations, leading to his capitulation the next day. This action saw the first practical deployment of military steamers, then used to tow ships of the line to their optimal firing position. The next year, after the Revolution of July, a fleet under Rear Admiral Roussin conducted a show of force against the absolutist Miguel I of Portugal at the Battle of the Tagus, and strong-armed him into signing a humiliating agreement by sailing on the river into his very capital and seizing his fleet. In 1838, the navy conducted another display of force following failed diplomatic demarches, with the Pastry War in Mexico. A small frigate squadron under Baudin bombarded and silenced the defences of Fort San Juan de Ulua at the Battle of Veracruz. This action, where steamers were again used as tugs, marked the first deployment of Paixhans Guns, to great effect which did not go unnoticed by observers from the United Kingdom and the United States.
In 1842, the French Navy took over Tahiti under Admiral Abel Aubert Dupetit Thouars. French activity in those parts would continue throughout the 19th century, as his nephew Abel-Nicolas Bergasse Dupetit Thouars went on pacifying the Marquesas Islands in 1880. In August 1844, a French squadron of French Navy under Joinville attacked the Moroccan city of Mogador, modern Essaouira, and the island facing the city, Mogador island. The campaign was part of the First Franco-Moroccan War.
Second Empire (1852–70)[edit]




Le Napoléon (1850), the first steam battleship in history.


In a speech in 1852, Napoleon III famously proclaimed that "The Empire means peace" ("L'Empire, c'est la paix"), but actually he was thoroughly determined to follow a strong foreign policy to extend France's power and glory. Around that time, the French Navy was involved in a multitude of actions around the world.




The French frigate Guerrière commanded by Admiral Roze was the lead ship in the French Campaign against Korea, 1866. Here the ship is photographed in Nagasaki harbour, circa 1865.


Conquest of Cochinchina: Napoleon III took the first steps to establishing a French colonial influence in Indochina. He approved the launching of the Cochinchina Campaign in 1858 to punish the Vietnamese for their mistreatment of French Catholic missionaries and force the court to accept a French presence in the country. An important factor in his decision was the belief that France risked becoming a second-rate power by not expanding its influence in East Asia. Also, the idea that France had a civilising mission was spreading. This eventually led to a full-out invasion in 1861. By 1862 the war was over and Vietnam conceded three provinces in the south, called by the French Cochin-China, opened three ports to French trade, allowed free passage of French warships to Cambodia (which led to a French protectorate over Cambodia in 1867), allowed freedom of action for French missionaries and gave France a large indemnity for the cost of the war.
The Crimean War: Napoleon III's challenge to Russia's claims to influence in the Ottoman Empire led to France's successful participation in the Crimean War (March 1854 – March 1856). During this war Napoleon successfully established a French alliance with Britain, which continued after the war's close.
Second Opium War: In China, France took part in the Second Opium War along with Britain, and in 1860 French troops entered Beijing. China was forced to concede more trading rights, allow freedom of navigation of the Yangzi river, give full civil rights and freedom of religion to Christians, and give France and Britain a huge indemnity. This combined with the intervention in Vietnam set the stage for further French influence in China leading up to a sphere of influence over parts of Southern China.
Mexico: The French Navy conducted a successful blockade of Mexico in the Pastry War of 1838. It was then heavily involved in French intervention in Mexico (January 1862 – March 1867). Napoleon III, using as a pretext the Mexican Republic's refusal to pay its foreign debts, planned to establish a French sphere of influence in North America by creating a French-backed monarchy in Mexico, a project which was supported by Mexican conservatives tired of the anti-clerical Mexican republic.
Korea, Japan: In 1866, French naval troops took part in the French campaign against Korea. The French Navy also had a significant presence in Japan with the Bombardment of Shimonoseki in 1863. In 1867–1868, some level of presence in Japan was maintained around the actions of French Military Mission to Japan, and the subsequent Boshin War.
Franco-Prussian War: At the outset of the Franco-Prussian War in 1870, the 470-ship French Navy imposed a blockade of the North German coastline, which the Germans never managed to lift. However, the French ships began suffering coal shortages and lacked the necessary weaponry to deal with the coastal defenses around major enemy ports. A planned invasion of northern Germany was scuttled after the marines and naval infantry tasked with the invasion were dispatched for land combat. After most of the professional army was captured in two major French defeats, naval officers were taken from their ships to officer reserve units. The blockade became less effective as autumn storms took their toll on the French ships still enforcing the blockade. In September 1870, the blockade was abandoned for the winter. Isolated engagements between French and German ships also took place in other theaters.[7][8]
Third Republic[edit]
Sino-French War: The projection of French naval power in the Far East reached a peak in the first half of the 1880s. The Far East Squadron (escadre de l'Extrême-Orient), an ad hoc naval grouping of two (subsequently three) naval divisions under the command of Admiral Amédée Courbet created for the duration of the Sino-French War (August 1884 to April 1885), saw considerable action during the war along the China Coast and in the seas around Formosa (Taiwan). Besides almost obliterating China's Fujian Fleet at the Battle of Fuzhou (23 August 1884), the squadron took part in the bombardment and landings at Keelung and Tamsui (5 and 6 August 1884 and 1 to 8 October 1884), the blockade of Formosa (October 1884 to April 1885), the Battle of Shipu (14 February 1885), the so-called Battle of Zhenhai (1 March 1885), the Pescadores Campaign (March 1885) and the 'rice blockade' of the Yangzi River (March to June 1885).
19th century technological innovations[edit]




A painting by Paul Jazet (1848-1918) of a Vauban-class battleship (1882–1905)


In the 19th century, the navy recovered and became arguably the second finest in the world after the Royal Navy, albeit very much smaller. The French Navy, eager to challenge British naval supremacy, took a leadership role in many areas of warship development, with the introduction of new technologies.
France led the development of shell guns for the navy, with its invention Paixhans gun by Henri-Joseph Paixhans. They were first fired in anger, to great effect, at the Battle of Veracruz in 1838. In 1850, Napoléon became the first steam-powered battleship in history. Gloire became the first seagoing ironclad warship in history when she was launched in 1859.
In 1863, the French Navy launched Plongeur, the first submarine in the world to be propelled by mechanical power. In 1876, Redoutable became the first steel-hulled warship ever. In 1887, Dupuy de Lôme became the world's first armoured cruiser.
The French Navy also harboured the "Jeune École" school of thoughts that called for small but powerful warships using torpedoes and shell guns to attack fleets of large conventional warships; this led to the mass production of torpedo boats, that proved unreliable in the open sea, and to inconsistent designs in pre-dreadnought battleships as new ideas were very quickly brought up and phased out. Nevertheless, French warship construction proved attractive to the newly industrialising Japan, when the French engineer Émile Bertin was invited to assist in warship design for the Imperial Japanese Navy.
20th century[edit]
The development of the French Navy slowed down in the beginning of the 20th century as the naval arms race between Germany and Great Britain grew in intensity. As a result, it was outnumbered not only by the Royal Navy but also by the Imperial German Navy and United States Navy, which were also technically superior. It was late to introduce new battleships — dreadnoughts and light cruisers — and it entered World War I with relatively few modern vessels. The Entente Cordiale ended the period in which Britain was seen as a potential enemy, reducing the need for a strong navy. Although there was no formal military alliance, there was a de facto agreement that France would play a leading role in the Mediterranean and Britain would protect the Northern coast of France against a possible German attack. During the war, few warships were built because the main French effort was on land.
The first task of the Mediterranean battle squadrons was to escort transport ships carrying troops from French North Africa to France to join the Battle of the Marne. By the end of August 1914, French battleships, cruisers, destroyers, and submarines were conducting patrols in the Adriatic Sea to prevent any attacks by the Austro-Hungarian Navy. The most important operations of the French Navy were conducted during the Dardanelles Campaign. The French Navy also played an important role in countering Germany's U-boat campaign, with warships patrolling the seas and escorting convoys. In December 1916, French warships arrived off Greece, bombarding Athens and landing sailors, forcing the pro-German Greek government to change its policies. A number of Greek Navy warships were seized and commissioned into the French Navy, and later played an important part in the anti-U-boat campaign. The most significant losses sustained by the French Navy during the war were three pre-dreadnought battleships, one semi-dreadnought, four armored cruisers, one protected cruiser, twelve destroyers, and fourteen submarines.[9]
Listed below is a number of major ships of the French Navy at the outbreak of World War I in 1914 and the end of World War I in 1918. The first figure represents the outbreak and the second figure in brackets () represents the end of World War I.[10]

Dreadnought battleships: 4 (7)
Pre-dreadnought battleships: 17 (13)
Armoured cruisers: 22 (18)
Protected cruisers: 13 (12)
Destroyers: 35 (42)
Torpedo boats: 180 (164)
Submarines: 50 (61)

The proto-aircraft carrier[edit]




Seaplane carrier Foudre


The invention of the seaplane in 1910 with the French Fabre Hydravion led to the earliest development of ships designed to carry airplanes, albeit equipped with floats. In 1911, the first such vessel appeared in the French Navy – Foudre – she was the world's first seaplane carrier. She was commissioned as a seaplane tender, and carried float-equipped planes in hangars on the main deck, from where they were lowered on the sea with a crane. La Foudre was further modified in November 1913 with a 10-metre (33 ft) flat deck to launch her seaplanes.[11] In spite of proposals of the French inventor Clément Ader in 1909 to build a ship with a flat deck to operate aeroplanes at sea, similar to modern aircraft carriers, the French Navy built its first aircraft carrier only in the 1920s and did not go further in developing aircraft carriers before World War II. In 1920, Paul Teste achieved the first carrier landing of the history of the French Navy, aboard Béarn.
Fleet construction between the World Wars[edit]




French destroyer Fantasque


After World War I, the French Navy remained the fourth largest in the world, after the British, US and Japanese navies, but the Italian Navy, considered as the main enemy, was almost as large as the French one. This order of fleets, with the French Navy equal to the Italian Navy, was sanctioned by the 1922 Washington Naval Treaty. Every naval fleet consisted of a variety of ships of different sizes, and no fleet had enough resources to make every vessel supreme in its class. Nonetheless, different countries strove to excel in particular classes. Between the World Wars, the French fleet was remarkable in its building of small numbers of ships that were "over the top" with relation to their equivalents of other powers. For example, the French chose to build "super-destroyers" which were deemed during the Second World War by the Allies as the equivalent of light cruisers. The Fantasque class of destroyer is still the world's fastest class of destroyer. The submarine Surcouf was the largest and most powerful of its day. The Dunkerque-class battleships, designed specially to fight the German so-called pocket battleships, were, in spite of their relatively small size, very well-balanced designs and precursors of a new fast battleship generation in the world. The Richelieu-class full-size battleships are considered by some experts as the most successful battleships built under displacement limits of Washington Treaty in the world.[12]




The submarine Surcouf


Major ships of the French Navy at the beginning of the German attack in May 1940:[13]

Modern battleships: 3 (Dunkerque, Strasbourg, Richelieu)
Old dreadnought battleships: 5 (Bretagne, Provence, Lorraine, Paris and Courbet)
Aircraft carriers: 1 (Béarn)
Seaplane carriers: 1 (Commandant Teste)
Heavy cruisers: 7
Light cruisers: 11
Heavy destroyers (Contre-Torpilleurs): 32
Destroyers: 38
Submarines: 80
Sloops: 65

Second World War[edit]




Battleship Richelieu






Light cruiser Georges Leygues provided fire support during Normandy and French Riviera landings.


At the outset of the war, the French Navy was involved in a number of operations against the Axis powers, participating in the Battle of the Atlantic, the Allied campaign in Norway, the Dunkirk evacuation and, briefly, the Battle of the Mediterranean. However, Pétain's armistice terms completely changed the situation: the French fleet immediately withdrew from the fight. The British perceived the French fleet under the Vichy government as a potentially lethal threat. This threat would be made all the more real should the French somehow become formal enemies or, more likely, should the Kriegsmarine (German navy) gain control of French ships. It was deemed essential that the French Navy be put out of action. Some vessels were in port in France, while others escaped to Britain or British-controlled Egypt. The British boarded all French ships in their hands, with many sailors re-joining the Allies as part of the Free French Navy (Forces navales françaises libres, FNFL) because of General de Gaulle’s growing influence. Although the boardings were conducted relatively peacefully, there was resistance on Surcouf, then the largest submarine in the world, resulting in a skirmish in which one French and three British naval personnel were killed. However, the most powerful concentrations of the French fleet remained in Mers-el-Kébir and Dakar. A Royal Navy squadron delivered an ultimatum to the French fleet at Mers-el-Kébir. The ultimatum demanded that the ships and their crews either join the war effort or sail with reduced crews to a British port, promising that the ships would be repatriated at the end of the war or compensation paid for damages to them, and giving them the option of sailing to a French port in the West Indies where they could be demilitarised or temporarily given to the United States until the end of the war. If the French refused these offers, they had to scuttle their ships or be fired on. On 3 July 1940, the British opened fire after an agreement proved impossible (Operation Catapult). One French battleship was sunk, and two battleships and four destroyers were knocked out. A British submarine also sank an aviso. Six British naval aircraft were shot down. A total of 1,297 French sailors and 2 British airmen were killed.
Though the Free French Naval Forces continued to fight alongside the allies, the rest of the French fleet became hostile as a result of this action. Many senior members of the French Navy considered Britain and France effectively at war. The French Air Force repeatedly bombed Gibraltar, and throughout the war, there were instances where the French Navy came close to engaging the Royal Navy. In November 1942, for example, Admiral Jean de Laborde refused to use the remainder of the French Navy to support Operation Torch, arguing that French ships should instead be attacking the British and Americans.[14] In September, an attempt to take Vichy-held Dakar ended with the Battle of Dakar and a victory for the Vichy forces. In addition, the Allied attack on Dakar led directly to the Vichy bombing of Gibraltar. These actions soured Anglo-French relations, but did not inhibit further defections to the Allies. The subsequent Battle of Gabon, the Syria-Lebanon Campaign, and the Battle of Madagascar ended in Vichy defeats. During Operation Torch in November 1942, the Allies invaded French North Africa, leading to a large naval battle at Casablanca, but the Vichy forces quickly turned sides. In response, the Germans launched Case Anton and occupied the Vichy-held portion of Metropolitan France. The German occupation included the French naval port of Toulon where a large portion (one old battleship, two new battlecruisers, four new heavy cruisers, five new light cruisers and several destroyers and submarines) of the surviving French fleet lay. This was a major German objective and forces under SS command had been detailed to capture them (Operation Lila). This eventually resulted in French sailors sinking their own ships to save them from falling into German hands (scuttling of the French fleet in Toulon). All French capital ships in Toulon were completely destroyed, and few others were taken in reparable condition.[15] A few ships fled Toulon and joined the Allies. Five submarines made way out of the port, of which three succeeded: Casabianca, Glorieux and Marsouin. Following "Torch", remnants of the French Navy moved to the Allies, including ships interned in Egypt, and then there were FNFL warships supporting the Allied landings in Normandy and southern France (Operation Dragoon). A destroyer patrol operated against the Germans in the Adriatic Sea until very late in the war.
The conquest of the European harbours put an end to most of the combat operations of the Navy, which spent the rest of the war clearing mines and repairing port installations. In the Pacific theatre, the French Navy was operative until the Japanese capitulation; Richelieu was present at the Japanese Instrument of Surrender. At the end of the war, the weight of the French navy was 400,000 tonnes (800,000 in May 1940).
French aircraft carriers[edit]
Main article: List of aircraft carriers of France







French aircraft carrier Foch underway during exercise Dragon Hammer '92









French aircraft carrier Clemenceau




Organisation[edit]




French navy facilities in metropolitan France (status 2015)


The chief of the naval staff is Vice-amiral d’escadre Arnaud de Tarlé,[16] and as of 2014 the Navy has an active strength of 36,776 military personnel and 2,909 civilian staff.[17] The Navy is organised into four main operational branches:

The Force d'Action Navale (Naval Action Force) – The surface fleet.
The Forces Sous-marines (Submarine forces) – Nuclear-powered ballistic missile submarines and fleet submarines.
The Aviation Navale (Naval air force) – Ground and sea-based aircraft.
The Fusiliers Marins (Naval riflemen) – Protection force and infantry including the Navy special forces (Commandos Marine).

In addition, the National Gendarmerie of France maintain a maritime force of patrol boats that falls under the operational command of the French Navy:

The Gendarmerie maritime – The coast guard of France.

During most of the Cold War, the Navy was organised in two squadrons based in Brest and Toulon, commanded by ALESCLANT (Amiral commandant l'escadre de l'Atlantique) and ALESCMED (Amiral commandant l'escadre de la Méditerranée) respectively. Since the post-Cold War restructuring process named Optimar '95, the two components have been divided into the Naval Action Force (commanded by ALFAN) and the Antisubmarine Group (commanded by ALGASM).[18]
Main naval bases[edit]
As of 2014, the largest French naval base is the military port of Toulon. Other major bases in metropolitan France are the Brest Arsenal and Ile Longue on the Atlantic, and Cherbourg Naval Base on the English Channel. Overseas French bases include Fort de France and Degrad des Cannes in the Americas; Port des Galets and Dzaoudzi in the Indian Ocean; and Nouméa and Papeete in the Pacific. In addition, the navy shares or leases bases in foreign locales such as Abu Dhabi, Dakar and Djibouti.
Equipment[edit]




Horizon-class frigate






Dassault Rafale


Ships and submarines[edit]
Main article: List of active French Navy ships
Although French naval doctrine calls for two aircraft carriers, as of 2015 the French only have one, Charles de Gaulle. Originally a planned order for French aircraft carrier PA2 was based on the design of the British Queen Elizabeth-class aircraft carrier recently constructed and launched for the British Royal Navy. However the French programme had been delayed several times for budgetary reasons and the result was priority being given to the more exportable FREMM project. In April 2013 it was confirmed that the second aircraft carrier project would be abandoned due to defence cuts announced in the 2013 French White Paper on Defence and National Security.
The French Navy operates three amphibious assault ships, one amphibious transport dock, two air defence frigates, seven anti-submarine frigates, five general purpose frigates and six fleet submarines (SSNs). This constitutes the French Navy’s main oceangoing war-fighting forces. In addition the French Navy operates six light surveillance frigates and nine avisos (light corvettes). They undertake the navy’s offshore patrol combat duties, the protection of French Naval bases and territorial waters, and can also provide low-end escort capabilities to any oceangoing task force. The four ballistic missile submarines (SSBN) of the navy's Strategic Oceanic Force provide the backbone of the French nuclear deterrent.
Aircraft[edit]
Main article: French Naval Aviation
The French Naval Aviation is officially known as the Aéronautique navale and was created on the 19 June 1998 with the merging of Naval patrol aircraft and aircraft carrier squadrons. It has a strength of around 6,800 civilian and military personnel operating from four airbases in Metropolitan France. The Aéronavale is currently in the process of modernisation with a total order of 40 Rafale light fighters on order. Forty have so far been delivered and operate from the aircraft carrier Charles de Gaulle.
Personnel[edit]



Personnel strength of the French Navy 2015



Category
Strength


Commissioned officers
4,500


Petty officers
23,600


Seamen
6,600


Volunteers
767


Civilian employees
2,800


Source: [19]


Application requirement[edit]

Seamen

Seamen must be at least 17 but no more than 24 years old, with a minimum level of schooling.

Petty Officers

Petty officers must be at least 17 but no more than 24 years old, with at least a high school diploma giving access to university studies. Petty Officer Candidate begin training with five months at the Petty Officer School at Brest.

Contract officers

Contract officers serve on an initial eight-year contract, renewable up to 20 years.

Operational officers must be 21 to 26 years old, with at least a bachelor of science degree, or having passed a classe préparatoire aux grandes écoles in engineering or business.
Staff officers have to be 21 to 29 years old, with an honors degree or master's degree in a field corresponding to the military occupational specialty.


Career officers


Less than 22 years old, having passed a classe préparatoire in science. After four years at the École Navale (naval academy) a cadet will graduate as Lieutenant junior grade with an engineering degree.
Less than 25 years old, having an honors degree in science. After three years at the naval academy a cadet will graduate as Lieutenant Jg. with an engineering degree.
Less than 27 years old, having a master's degree. After two years at the naval academy a cadet will graduate as Lieutenant Jg.

Customs and traditions[edit]
Ranks[edit]
Main article: Ranks in the French Navy
The rank insignia of the French Navy are worn on shoulder straps of shirts and white jackets, and on sleeves for navy jackets and mantels. Until 2005, only commissioned officers had an anchor on their insignia, but enlisted personnel are now receiving them as well. Commanding officers have titles of capitaine, but are called commandant (in the army, both capitaine and commandant are ranks, which tends to stir some confusion among the public). The two highest ranks, vice-amiral d'escadre and amiral (admiral), are functions, rather than ranks. They are assumed by officers ranking vice-amiral (vice admiral). The only amiral de la flotte (Admiral of the Fleet) was François Darlan after he was refused the dignity of amiral de France (Admiral of France). Equivalent to the dignity of Marshal of France, the rank of amiral de France remains theoretical in the Fifth Republic; it was last granted in 1869, during the Second Empire, but retained during the Third Republic until the death of its bearer in 1873. The title of amiral de la flotte was created so that Darlan would not have an inferior rank than his counterpart in the British Royal Navy, who had the rank of Admiral of the Fleet.
Addressing officers[edit]
Unlike in the French army and air force, one does not prepend mon to the name of the rank when addressing an officer (that is, not mon capitaine, but simply capitaine).[20] Addressing a French Navy lieutenant de vaisseau (for instance) with a "mon capitaine" will attract the traditional answer "Dans la Marine il y a Mon Dieu et mon cul, pas mon capitaine!" ("In the Navy there are My God and my arse, no 'my captain'!").
Uniforms[edit]







Winter Uniform (22)









Summer Uniform (26)









Overseas (25)









Light Duty Firefighter Suit




Future[edit]




FREMM multipurpose frigate at Lorient






Barracuda-class submarine






EDA-R landing craft on the beach


France's financial problems have affected all branches of her military. The 2013 French White Paper on Defence and National Security cancelled the long-planned new aircraft carrier and a possible fourth Mistral-class amphibious assault ship, and conceded that British help would be needed to sustain an enduring presence.[21] The backbone of the fleet will be the Aquitaine-class FREMM anti-submarine frigates, replacing the Georges Leygues class, but plans to buy a possible seventeen FREMMs were cut back to eleven and then to eight. The cancellation of the third and fourth Horizon destroyers mean that the last two FREMM hulls in 2021/2 will be fitted out as FREDA air-defence ships to replace the Cassard class.[22] DCNS has shown a FREMM-ER concept to meet this requirement, emphasising ballistic missile defence with the Thales Sea Fire 500 AESA radar.[23] Industrial considerations mean that the funds for FREMMs 9-11 will now be spent on five more exportable frégates de taille intermédiaire (FTI, "intermediate size frigates") from 2023 to replace the La Fayette class which in the meantime will be upgraded with new sonars.[24]
On 9 January 2014 it was announced that the two remaining Batrals in French service would be replaced in 2016/17 by three 1500-tonne (empty) Bâtiments Multimission (B2M) at a cost of ~€100m (US$136m), later increased to four.[25] DCNS has funded the construction of the Gowind-class corvette L'Adroit and loaned her to the MN for fishery patrols to support an overseas marketing campaign for the design. At Euronaval 2010 DCNS showed a 30,000t concept called the BRAVE-class replenishment and support ship to replace the Durance class,[26] three Flotlog replenishment ships are planned along with four BSAH offshore support vessels. Construction has started on the first of six Barracuda-class nuclear attack submarines; commissioning of Suffren is planned for 2018. The first MM40 Exocet Block 3 missile was test-fired in 2010 to be produced. Naval versions of the SCALP EG land-attack cruise missile are under development, along with a planned Aster Block 1NT with greater capabilities against ballistic missiles.
Notable French naval officers[edit]


France portal
Nautical portal


Corsairs[edit]

Vice-admiral (lieutenant-général) du Casse
Vice-admiral (lieutenant-général) Duguay-Trouin
Rear admiral (chef d'escadre) Jean Bart
Rear admiral Pierre Bouvet
Captain Cassard
Captain Surcouf
Captain Thurot

Heroes of the First Republic[edit]

Vice-admiral de Latouche-Tréville
Vice-admiral de Villaret-Joyeuse
Vice-admiral Bruix
Rear Admiral du Chayla
Captain du Petit Thouars
Captain Casabianca

Explorers[edit]

Vice-Admiral Bougainville
Rear-Admiral d'Entrecasteaux
Rear-Admiral Dumont d'Urville
Commodore Lapérouse
Captain Samuel de Champlain
Captain d'Iberville
Captain Nicolas Baudin
Captain Louis de Freycinet
Commander Doudart de Lagrée
Lieutenant de St Aloüarn
Lieutenant Francis Garnier
Lieutenant Savorgnan de Brazza

Other important French naval officers[edit]

Admiral Florent de Varennes—first admiral of France
Admiral Jean de Vienne—admiral of the French fleet during the Hundred Years' War
Admiral d'Estaing—admiral of the French fleet which helped the United States secure independence
Admiral de Grasse—commander of the French fleet at Chesapeake Bay during the American Revolutionary War.
Admiral Courbet
Vice-Admiral Tourville—commander of the French fleet at the Battle of Beachy Head
Vice-Admiral Villeneuve—commander of the French and Spanish fleets at the Battle of Trafalgar
Vice-Admiral Duquesne—commander of the French fleet at the Battle of Agosta
Lieutenant commander Paul Teste, pioneer of the modern aeronaval operations.

Notable people who served in the French Navy[edit]

Marcel Cerdan, world boxing champion during the 1940s
Jean Cocteau, poet, novelist, dramatist, designer, playwright, artist and filmmaker
Jacques-Yves Cousteau
Philippe de Gaulle, the son of the general Charles de Gaulle
Alain Delon, actor, served as a fusilier marin in the First Indochina War
Bob Denard, a mercenary notorious for coup attempts and wars in Africa
Jean Gabin, another major French actor, he joined the free French naval force during the Second World War
Paul Gauguin, painter, sculptor, print-maker, ceramist, and writer
Bernard Giraudeau, actor, film director, scriptwriter, producer and writer
André Marty, a leading figure in the French Communist Party (PCF) from 1923 to 1955
Albert II, Prince of Monaco, reserve Lieutenant Commander
Pierre Loti, mostly known for his literary works
Michel Serres, philosopher and author
Eric Tabarly, a famous yachtsman
Victor Segalen, ethnographer, archeologist, writer, poet, explorer, art-theorist, linguist and literary critic
Eugène Sue, a famous 19th-century novelist
Paul Emile Victor, an ethnologist and polar explorer

See also[edit]

French Army


French Air Force


Marine Nationale

Airborne Units of the French Navy
Escorteur
Far East Squadron
French 100 mm naval gun
List of aircraft carriers of France
List of Escorteurs of the French Navy
List of French naval battles
List of Naval Ministers of France
List of submarines of France
Standing French Navy Deployments
Category:French Navy admirals
Category:French Navy officers
Category:Naval ships of France



Notes[edit]



^ Both Richelieu and Colbert have been honoured for their contributions to the navy by having had capital and other types of ships named after them.



References[edit]


^ a b "Defence Key Figures: 2016 Edition". Defense.gouv.fr.  (download PDF file or see HTML version Archived September 6, 2015, at the Wayback Machine.)
^ French Navy, defense.gouv.fr
^ Missions of the French Navy including French Naval Aviation, Ministère de la Défense
^ A composite of the National Gendarmerie under the command of the Chef d'État-Major de la Marine
^ "Key defence figures 2014" (PDF) (in French). Defense.gouv.fr. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2014-12-13.  ()
^ L'Ordonnance royale de 1772 prévoit le port de l'ancre d'or sur les tenues des régiments des ports constituant le corps royal de la Marine, implantés à Toulon, Brest, Rochefort, Saint-Malo, Bordeaux, Le Havre, Bayonne et Cherbourg.
^ Wawro, Geoffrey: The Franco-Prussian War: The German conquest of France in 1870–1871
^ Wilhelm Rustow and John Layland Needham: The Way for the Rhine Frontier, 1870: Its Political and Military History
^ "French Navy, World War 1". Naval-history.net. Retrieved 2011-12-28. 
^ S. A. Balakin: VMS Francyy 1914–1918, Morskaya Kollekcya 3/2000 (in Russian)
^ Description and photograph of Foudre
^ W. H. Garzke, R. O. Dulin: Battleships. Axis and Neutral Battleships in World War II, Naval Institute Press, 1985, ISBN 0-87021-101-3
^ Louis Nicolas : Histoire de la marine française, Presse universitaires de France in French)
^ Guy Walters (1 September 2010). "Merge our proud Royal Navy with the feeble French? | Mail Online". London: Dailymail.co.uk. Retrieved 2011-12-28. 
^ "The Scuttle of the French Fleet at Toulon, November 27, 1942". Bobhenneman.info. Archived from the original on January 7, 2012. Retrieved 2011-12-28. 
^ "État-major" (in French). Defense.gouv.fr. 2011-09-15. Retrieved 2011-12-28. 
^ "Forces (Navy)". Ministry of Defence (France). 18 July 2011. Retrieved 14 November 2011. 
^ T.D. Young, Command in NATO after the Cold War, Carlisle Barracks, 1997
^ Chiffres clés de la Défense - 2016 Retrieved 2017-03-06.
^ Rapport sur la féminisation des noms de métier, fonction, grade ou titre – La diversité des usages
^ "White paper on defense 2013"
^ Projet De Loi De programmation Militarie 2014/2019 (in French) August 2013
^ "DCNS to unveil new FREMM Frigate variant, updated BRAVE supply ship design at Euronaval 2012". Belgium: Navy Recognition. 4 October 2012. 
^ [1]
^ Pape, Alex (9 January 2014). "France orders three new multimission vessels". IHS Jane's Defence Weekly. 
^ [2]


Further reading[edit]

Jenkins, E H (1973). A History of the French Navy from its Beginnings to the Present Day. London: Macdonald and Jane's. ISBN 0356-04196-4. 
Randier, Jean (2006). La Royale: L'histoire illustrée de la Marine nationale française. ISBN 978-2-35261-022-9. 
Winfield, Rif and Roberts, Stephen S., French Warships in the Age of Sail, 1626-1786: Design, Constructions, Careers and Fates (Seaforth Publishing, 2017) ISBN 978-1-4738-9351-1; French Warships in the Age of Sail, 1786-1861: Design, Constructions, Careers and Fates (Seaforth Publishing, 2015) ISBN 978-1-84832-204-2.

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Navy of France.



(in French) Marine nationale—Official site
(in English) French Navy 2011—Guide Book
(in English) French Navy 2011—Information File
(in English) Net-Marine—A well documented database on French navy.
(in French) Mer & Marine—Main website on French maritime affairs (only in French)
(in English) French Fleet Air Arm, about French naval aviation.
(in English) French Navy in World War 1, including warship losses







v
t
e


Marine nationale




Honneur, Patrie, Valeur, Discipline (“Honour, Homeland, Valour, Discipline”)



Command



Naval Ministers
Maritime Prefect
Ranks in the French Navy








Components



Force d'action navale


Forces sous-marines (FOST, ESNA)


Aviation navale


FORFUSCO (Commandos de Marine, Fusiliers Marins)


Gendarmerie maritime





Equipment



Current Fleet
Current deployments
Ensigns and pennants





History



History of the French Navy
Future of the French Navy





Historic ships



battleships
cruisers
ships of the line
Sail frigates












v
t
e


Equipment of the French Navy



Naval Action Force




Aircraft Carriers



Charles de Gaulle





Frigates (1st Class)



Horizon-class frigate
Cassard-class frigate
Aquitaine-class frigate
Georges Leygues-class frigate
La Fayette-class frigate





Frigates (2nd Class)



Floréal-class frigate





Patrol Vessels



P400-class patrol vessel
D'Estienne d'Orves-class aviso





Amphibious assault Vessels



Mistral-class amphibious assault ship





Landing Craft



EDAR
EDIC
CDIC





Minehunter Vessels



Tripartite-class minehunter





Tankers



Durance-class tanker











Submarine Forces
Strategic Oceanic Force




SSN



Rubis class
Barracuda class





SSBN



Triomphant class








Naval aviation




Fighter & Attack



Rafale





Patrol



Breguet Atlantic





Airborne Early Warning



Hawkeye





Transport & communications



Falcon 10





Helicopters



Dauphin
Panther
Lynx
NH90















v
t
e


NATO Maritime Forces



Maritime forces



Albanian Naval Force
Belgian Maritime Component
Bulgarian Navy
Royal Canadian Navy
Croatian Navy
Denmark

Royal Danish Navy
Danish Naval Home Guard


Estonian Navy
France

French Navy
French Maritime Gendarmerie


German Navy
Hellenic Navy
Icelandic Coast Guard
Italian Navy
Latvian Naval Forces
Lithuanian Naval Force
Montenegrin Navy
Royal Netherlands Navy
Norway

Royal Norwegian Navy
Norwegian Home Guard Naval Component


Polish Navy
Portuguese Navy
Romanian Naval Forces
Slovenian Navy
Spain

Spanish Navy
Spanish Royal Guard "Oceanic Sea" Composite Company


Turkey

Turkish Naval Forces
Turkish Coast Guard Command


Royal British Navy
United States

United States Navy
United States Coast Guard







Land forces maritime component



Hungarian Ground Forces
United States Army Transportation Corps





Air forces maritime component



United States Air Force maritime forces












v
t
e


Current navies in Europe



Sovereign states




European Union




Belgium
Bulgaria
Croatia
Cyprus

Denmark
Estonia
Finland
France
Germany
Greece

Republic of Ireland
Italy
Latvia
Lithuania

Malta
Netherlands
Poland
Portugal
Romania

Slovenia
Spain
Sweden
United Kingdom





Other



Albania


Azerbaijan


Georgia
Iceland
Kazakhstan




Montenegro
Norway
Russia

Serbia
Switzerland
Turkey
Ukraine









States with limited
recognition




Abkhazia


Northern Cyprus











Authority control



BNF: cb161915359 (data)






French Navy admirals French Navy officers Category:Naval ships of France Category:Naval ships of France





						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=French_Navy&oldid=818341079"					Categories: French NavyMilitary of FranceHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksCS1 French-language sources (fr)Articles containing French-language textPages using deprecated image syntaxArticles in need of internal mergingArticles with French-language external linksWikipedia articles with BNF identifiers