







This article may be expanded with text translated from the corresponding article in French.  (January 2015) Click [show] for important translation instructions. 


View a machine-translated version of the French article.
Google's machine translation is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia.
Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article.
You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary (using German): Content in this edit is translated from the existing German Wikipedia article at [[:de:Exact name of German article]]; see its history for attribution.
You should also add the template {{Translated|fr|Forces armées françaises}} to the talk page.
For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation.









French Armed Forces


Forces armées françaises



Emblem of the French Republic




Logo of the French Armed Forces



Founded
1792


Service branches
French Army
French Navy
French Air Force
National Gendarmerie
National Guard


Headquarters
Paris


Leadership


Commander-in-Chief
 President Emmanuel Macron


Minister of the Armed Forces
 Florence Parly


Chief of the Defence Staff
 General François Lecointre


Manpower


Military age
17.5


Conscription
None


Active personnel
365,835 (2014) [1]
[2]


Reserve personnel
52,680 reserve (2015)(Gendarmerie inclued) [1]


Expenditures


Budget
€40.5 billion (2017) [3]
Note: Incl. Gendarmerie budget


Percent of GDP
1.7% (2014)[1]


Industry


Foreign suppliers
 Austria
 Belgium
 Germany
 Italy
 Sweden
 United Kingdom
 United States


Related articles


History
Military history of France


The French Armed Forces (French: Forces armées françaises) encompass the French Army, the French Navy, the French Air Force, the French National Guard and the National Gendarmerie of the French Republic. The President of France heads the armed forces, with the title "chef des armées" ("chief of the armed forces").
France maintains the sixth largest defence budget in the world and the largest armed forces in size in the European Union (EU).[4] France also maintains the world's third-largest nuclear deterrent, behind only Russia and the United States.



Contents


1 History
2 International stance today

2.1 2008 White Paper
2.2 Recent operations
2.3 2013 White Paper


3 Personnel
4 Organisation and service branches

4.1 French Army (Armée de terre)
4.2 French Navy (Marine nationale)
4.3 French Air Force (Armée de l'Air)
4.4 National Gendarmerie (Gendarmerie nationale)
4.5 National Guard (Garde nationale)


5 See also
6 References
7 External links



History[edit]
Main articles: Military history of France and List of French Paratrooper Units
The military history of France encompasses an immense panorama of conflicts and struggles extending for more than 2,000 years across areas including modern France, greater Europe, and French territorial possessions overseas. According to the British historian Niall Ferguson, France has participated in 50 of the 125 major European wars fought since 1495, and in 168 battles fought since 387 BC, they have won 109, drawn 10 and lost 49: this makes France the most successful military power in European history—in terms of number of fought and won.[5]
The Gallo-Roman conflict predominated from 60 BC to 50 BC, with the Romans emerging victorious in the conquest of Gaul by Julius Caesar. After the decline of the Roman Empire, a Germanic tribe known as the Franks took control of Gaul by defeating competing tribes. The "land of Francia," from which France gets its name, had high points of expansion under kings Clovis I and Charlemagne. In the Middle Ages, rivalries with England and the Holy Roman Empire prompted major conflicts such as the Norman Conquest and the Hundred Years' War. With an increasingly centralized monarchy, the first standing army since Roman times, and the use of artillery, France expelled the English from its territory and came out of the Middle Ages as the most powerful nation in Europe, only to lose that status to Spain following defeat in the Italian Wars. The Wars of Religion crippled France in the late 16th century, but a major victory over Spain in the Thirty Years' War made France the most powerful nation on the continent once more. In parallel, France developed its first colonial empire in Asia, Africa, and in the Americas. Under Louis XIV, France achieved military supremacy over its rivals, but escalating conflicts against increasingly powerful enemy coalitions checked French ambitions and left the kingdom bankrupt at the opening of the 18th century.




Free French Foreign Legionnaires at the Battle of Bir Hakeim (1942).


Resurgent French armies secured victories in dynastic conflicts against the Spanish, Polish, and Austrian crowns. At the same time, France was fending off attacks on its colonies. As the 18th century advanced, global competition with Great Britain led to the Seven Years' War, where France lost its North American holdings. Consolation came in the form of dominance in Europe and the American Revolutionary War, where extensive French aid in the form of money and arms, and the direct participation of its army and navy led to America's independence.[4] Internal political upheaval eventually led to 23 years of nearly continuous conflict in the French Revolutionary Wars and the Napoleonic Wars. France reached the zenith of its power during this period, dominating the European continent in an unprecedented fashion under Napoleon Bonaparte, but by 1815 it had been restored to its pre-Revolutionary borders. The rest of the 19th century witnessed the growth of the Second French colonial empire as well as French interventions in Belgium, Spain, and Mexico. Other major wars were fought against Russia in the Crimea, Austria in Italy, and Prussia within France itself.
Following defeat in the Franco-Prussian War, Franco-German rivalry erupted again in the First World War. France and its allies were victorious this time. Social, political, and economic upheaval in the wake of the conflict led to the Second World War, in which the Allies were defeated in the Battle of France and the French government surrendered and was replaced with an authoritarian regime. The Allies, including the government in exile's Free French Forces and later a liberated French nation, eventually emerged victorious over the Axis powers. As a result, France secured an occupation zone in Germany and a permanent seat on the United Nations Security Council. The imperative of avoiding a third Franco-German conflict on the scale of those of two world wars paved the way for European integration starting in the 1950s. France became a nuclear power and since the 1990s its military action is most often seen in cooperation with NATO and its European partners.
International stance today[edit]
See also: France and weapons of mass destruction
Today, French military doctrine is based on the concepts of national independence, nuclear deterrence (see Force de frappe), and military self-sufficiency. France is a charter member of NATO, and has worked actively with its allies to adapt NATO—internally and externally—to the post-Cold War environment. In December 1995, France announced that it would increase its participation in NATO's military wing, including the Military Committee (France withdrew from NATO's military bodies in 1966 whilst remaining full participants in the Organisation's political Councils). France remains a firm supporter of the Organisation for Security and Co-operation in Europe and other cooperative efforts. Paris hosted the May 1997 NATO-Russia Summit which sought the signing of the Founding Act on Mutual Relations, Cooperation and Security. Outside of NATO, France has actively and heavily participated in both coalition and unilateral peacekeeping efforts in Africa, the Middle East, and the Balkans, frequently taking a lead role in these operations. France has undertaken a major restructuring to develop a professional military that will be smaller, more rapidly deployable, and better tailored for operations outside of mainland France. Key elements of the restructuring include: reducing personnel, bases and headquarters, and rationalistion of equipment and the armaments industry.
Since the end of the Cold War, France has placed a high priority on arms control and non-proliferation. French Nuclear testing in the Pacific, and the sinking of the Rainbow Warrior strained French relations with its Allies, South Pacific states (namely New Zealand), and world opinion. France agreed to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty in 1992 and supported its indefinite extension in 1995. After conducting a controversial final series of six nuclear tests on Mururoa in the South Pacific, the French signed the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty in 1996. Since then, France has implemented a moratorium on the production, export, and use of anti-personnel landmines and supports negotiations leading toward a universal ban. The French are key players in the adaptation of the Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe to the new strategic environment. France remains an active participant in: the major programs to restrict the transfer of technologies that could lead to the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction: the Nuclear Suppliers Group, the Australia Group (for chemical and biological weapons), and the Missile Technology Control Regime. France has also signed and ratified the Chemical Weapons Convention.
2008 White Paper[edit]
Main article: 2008 French White Paper on Defence and National Security
On 31 July 2007, President Nicolas Sarkozy ordered M. Jean-Claude Mallet, a member of the Council of State, to head up a thirty-five member commission charged with a wide-ranging review of French defence. The commission issued its White Paper in early 2008.[6] Acting upon its recommendations, President Sarkozy began making radical changes in French defense policy and structures starting in the summer of 2008. In keeping with post-Cold War changes in European politics and power structures, the French military's traditional focus on territorial defence will be redirected to meet the challenges of a global threat environment. Under the reorganisation, the identification and destruction of terrorist networks both in metropolitan France and in francophone Africa will be the primary task of the French military. Redundant military bases will be closed and new weapons systems projects put on hold to finance the restructuring and global deployment of intervention forces. In a historic change, Sarkozy furthermore has declared that France "will now participate fully in NATO," four decades after former French president General Charles de Gaulle withdrew from the alliance's command structure and ordered American troops off French soil.[7]
Recent operations[edit]




  France
  French military interventions since 2001: Afghanistan; Ivory Coast; Chad; Libya; Somalia; Mali; Central African Republic; Syria; Iraq.



There are currently 36,000 French troops deployed in foreign territories—such operations are known as "OPEX" for Opérations Extérieures ("External Operations"). Among other countries, France provides troops for the United Nations force stationed in Haiti following the 2004 Haiti rebellion. France has sent troops, especially special forces, into Afghanistan to help the United States and NATO forces fight the remains of the Taliban and Al Qaeda. In Opération Licorne a force of a few thousand French soldiers is stationed in Ivory Coast on a UN peacekeeping mission. These troops were initially sent under the terms of a mutual protection pact between France and the Ivory Coast, but the mission has since evolved into the current UN peacekeeping operation. The French Armed Forces have also played a leading role in the ongoing UN peacekeeping mission along the Lebanon-Israel border as part of the cease-fire agreement that brought the 2006 Lebanon War to an end. Currently, France has 2,000 army personnel deployed along the border, including infantry, armour, artillery and air defence. There are also naval and air personnel deployed offshore.
The French Joint Force and Training Headquarters (État-Major Interarmées de Force et d'Entraînement) at Air Base 110 near Creil maintains the ability to command a medium or large-scale international operation, and runs exercises .[8] In 2011, from 19 March, France participated in the enforcement of a no-fly zone over northern Libya, during the Libyan Civil war, in order to prevent forces loyal to Muammar Gaddafi from carrying out air attacks on Anti-Gaddafi forces. This operation was known as Opération Harmattan and was part of France's involvement in the conflict in the NATO-led coalition, enforcing UN Security Council Resolution 1973. On 11 January 2013 France begun Operation Serval to fight Islamists in Mali with African support but without NATO involvement.
2013 White Paper[edit]
Main article: 2013 French White Paper on Defence and National Security
In May 2014, high ranking defence chiefs of the French Armed Forces threatened to resign if the defence budget received further cuts on top of those already announced in the 2013 White Paper. They warned that further cuts would leave the armed forces unable to support operations abroad.[9]
Personnel[edit]
The head of the French armed forces is the President of the Republic, in his role as chef des armées. However, the Constitution puts civil and military government forces at the disposal of the gouvernement (the executive cabinet of ministers chaired by the Prime Minister, who are not necessarily of the same political side as the president). The Minister of Defence (as of 2017, the incumbent Florence Parly) oversees the military's funding, procurement and operations. Historically, France relied a great deal on conscription to provide manpower for its military, in addition to a minority of professional career soldiers. Following the Algerian War, the use of non-volunteer draftees in foreign operations was ended; if their unit was called up for duty in war zones, draftees were offered the choice between requesting a transfer to another unit or volunteering for the active mission. In 1996, President Jacques Chirac's government announced the end of conscription and in 2001, conscription formally was ended. Young people must still, however, register for possible conscription (should the situation call for it). As of 2015 the French Armed Forces have a reported strength of 208,916 active personnel.[1]
It breaks down as follows (2015):[1]

The French Army; 111,628 personnel.
The French Air Force; 43,597 personnel.
The French Navy; 36,044 personnel.
Tri-service DHS, SEA, and DGA; 17,647 personnel in medical, support and administrative roles, and in the acquisition of weapon systems.

The reserve element of the French Armed Forces consists of two structures; the Operational Reserve and the Citizens Reserve. As of 2015 the strength of the Operational Reserve is 27,785 personnel.[1]
Apart from the three main service branches, the French Armed Forces also includes a fourth paramilitary branch called the National Gendarmerie. It had a reported strength of 98,155 personnel in 2011.[2] They are used in everyday law enforcement, and also form a coast guard formation under the command of the French Navy. There are however some elements of the Gendarmerie that participate in French external operations, providing specialised law enforcement and supporting roles.
Historically the National Guard functioned as the Army's reserve national defense and law enforcement militia. After 145 years since its disbandment, due to the risk of terrorist attacks in the country, the Guard was officially reactivated, this time as a service branch of the Armed Forces, on 12 October 2016.[10]
Organisation and service branches[edit]
The French armed forces are divided into five service branches:
French Army (Armée de terre)[edit]




AMX 56 Leclerc Tank of Armée de terre.


Main article: French Army

Special Forces
Airborne Units
Infantry (Infanterie)
Armoured Cavalry (Arme blindée cavalerie)
Artillery (Artillerie)
French Foreign Legion (Légion étrangère)
Troupes de Marine
French Army Light Aviation (Aviation légére de l'armée de terre, ALAT)
Engineers (Génie)
Paris Fire Brigade (brigade des sapeurs-pompiers de Paris)
Signals (Transmissions)
Transport and logistics (Train)
Supply (Matériel)
Intelligence (Renseignement)

French Navy (Marine nationale)[edit]




The Charles de Gaulle, the nuclear aircraft carrier of Marine nationale.


Main article: French Navy

Parachute Units of the French Navy

Naval Infantry and Naval Commandos (Fusiliers Marins)


Naval Air Arm (Aviation navale)
Submarine Force (Forces sous-marines)
Naval Action Force (Force d'action navale)
The Marseille Marine Fire Battalion

In addition, the National Gendarmerie form a Coast Guard force called the Gendarmerie Maritime which is commanded by the French Navy.
French Air Force (Armée de l'Air)[edit]




Dassault Rafale of Armée de l'Air.


Main article: French Air Force

Parachute Units of the French Air Force

Air force ground troops (Fusiliers Commandos de l'Air)
Paratroopers/Special forces (Commando parachutiste de l'air)


Territorial Air Defence

National Gendarmerie (Gendarmerie nationale)[edit]
Main article: National Gendarmerie

Parachute Units of the National Gendarmerie
Gendarmerie Départementale (GD) - Is a territorial police force.
Gendarmerie Mobile (GM) - Is an anti-riot unit and counter-terrorism group (GIGN).
Garde républicaine - Is the republican guard of France.
Gendarmerie des Transports Aériens - Is an airport security force.
Gendarmerie de l'Air - Used for Air Force security.
Gendarmerie Maritime - Is a coast guard unit.
Provost Gendarmerie - Provides military police services to French Armed Forces personnel in deployments outside France.

The National Gendarmerie is primarily a military and airborne capable police force which serves as a rural and general purpose police force.
National Guard (Garde nationale)[edit]
Main article: National Guard (France)
Reactivated in 2016, the National Guard serves as the official primary military and police reserve service of the Armed Forces. It also doubles as a force multiplier for law enforcement personnel during contingencies and to reinforce military personnel whenever being deployed within France and abroad.
See also[edit]

History of French foreign relations
Military history of France
Airborne Units of France
Combined Joint Expeditionary Force (CJEF)
Ranks in the French Army
Ranks in the French Navy
Ranks in the French Air Force
Ranks in the French Gendarmerie
Bastille Day Military Parade
The Lancaster House Treaties (2010)
French Foreign Legion

References[edit]



^ a b c d e f "Defence Key Figures: 2015 Edition". Defense.gouv.fr.  (download PDF file or see HTML version Archived 2015-09-06 at the Wayback Machine.)
^ a b Gendarmerie - Workforce, gendarmerie.interieur.gouv.fr, 2011
^ (in French)[1], lefigaro.fr
^ "Military expenditure by country, in constant (2015) US$ m., 2007-2016 (table)" (PDF). Stockholm International Peace Research Institute. Retrieved 18 August 2017. 
^ "Quite Interesting: the QI cabinet of curiosity". The Telegraph. 2010-10-22. Retrieved 2012-11-17. 
^ Official Presidential Website, Letter of Engagement to M. Jean-Claude Mallet, 31 July 2007 Archived 21 September 2008 at the Wayback Machine.
^ Jim Hoagland, "France's Whirlwind of Change", Real Clear Politics, 18 June 2008 [2]
^ [3] Archived June 5, 2010, at the Wayback Machine.
^ Samuels, Henry (23 May 2014). "French Military Heads Threaten to Resign Over 'Grave' Defense Cuts". www.atlanticcouncil.org. Telegraph. Retrieved 27 May 2014. 
^ http://www.militarytimes.com/articles/france-creates-national-guard-to-battle-terrorism



External links[edit]

Official site of the French Ministry of Defence
French Military Strategy and NATO Reintegration—Council on Foreign Relations
French Army rank insignia







v
t
e


Common Security and Defence Policy of the European Union



Administration




Leadership and bodies



High Representative
External Action Service (Military Staff (Military Planning and Conduct Capability)· Intelligence and Situation Centre · Crisis Management and Planning Directorate · Civilian Planning and Conduct Capability · Security & Defence College)
Defence Agency
Political and Security Committee (Politico-Military Group · Military Committee · Committee for Civilian Aspects of Crisis Management)
Operations Centre
Border and Coast Guard Agency
Institute for Security Studies
Satellite Centre





Policies



Global Strategy
Procurement
Defence Fund
Coordinated Annual Review on Defence





Other arrangements



Permanent Structured Cooperation (PESCO)
Club de Berne
Petersberg tasks
Headline Goal 2010
Berlin Plus agreement
Military Erasmus
Galileo navigation system
Secure Software-defined Radio (PESCO)
Military Mobility (PESCO)








Forces




Pan-European




Within Union framework



Battlegroups
Medical Command (PESCO)
EUFOR Crisis Response Operation Core (PESCO)





Outside Union framework



Corps
Maritime Force
Gendarmerie Force
See also: Air Transport Command
Movement Coordination Centre
Air Group
Finabel
Organisation for Joint Armament Cooperation








National




PESCO



Austria
Belgium
Bulgaria
Croatia
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Estonia
Finland
France
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Ireland
Italy
Latvia
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Netherlands
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Slovakia
Slovenia
Spain
Sweden





Other



Denmark
Malta
United Kingdom











Decorations



Service medal
Monitor mission medal





History



Treaty of Dunkirk (1947)
Treaty of Brussels (1948)
Western Union Defence Organization (1948 – 1951)
Treaty establishing the European Defence Community (signed 1952, unratified)
London and Paris Conferences (1954)
Western European Union (1954–2011)
European Security and Defence Identity (1996)
Saint-Malo declaration (1998)
Helsinki Headline Goal (1999)
European Security Strategy (2003)
"Synchronised Armed Forces" (2009)
Rapid Operational Force (1995–2012)
CAPECON project (2002-2005)





Lists



Deployments






European Union portal · Military history portal










v
t
e


Militaries of Europe



Sovereign states



Albania
Armenia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Belarus
Belgium
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bulgaria
Croatia
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
France
Georgia
Germany
Greece
Greenland
Hungary
Iceland
Ireland
Italy
Kazakhstan
Latvia
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Macedonia
Malta
Moldova
Monaco
Montenegro
Netherlands
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russia
San Marino
Serbia
Slovakia
Slovenia
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Turkey
Ukraine
United Kingdom
Vatican City





States with limited
recognition



Abkhazia
Artsakh
Kosovo
Northern Cyprus
South Ossetia
Transnistria





Other entities



European Union
Sovereign Military Order of Malta












v
t
e


 North Atlantic Treaty Organization



History



North Atlantic Treaty
Summit
Operations
Enlargement








Structure



Council
Supreme Headquarters Allied Powers Europe

Air Command
Land Command
Maritime Command
JFC Brunssum
JFC Naples


Allied Command Transformation
Parliamentary Assembly
Standardization Agreement





People



Secretary General
Chairman of the Military Committee
Supreme Allied Commander Europe
Supreme Allied Commander Transformation





Members




Main members



Albania
Belgium
Bulgaria
Canada
Croatia
Czech Republic
Denmark
Estonia
France
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Iceland
Italy
Latvia
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Montenegro
Netherlands
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Slovakia
Slovenia
Spain
Turkey
United Kingdom
United States








Multilateral relations



Atlantic Treaty Association
Euro-Atlantic Partnership Council
Mediterranean Dialogue
Istanbul Cooperation Initiative
Partnership for Peace












v
t
e


France topics



History




Periods



Timeline
Prehistory
Celtic Gaul
Roman Gaul
Kingdom of the Visigoths
Francia

West Francia


Middle Ages
Early modern era
Long nineteenth century

Revolutionary era
Napoleonic era
Belle Époque


Twentieth century





Regimes



Absolute monarchy

Ancien Régime


First Republic
First Empire
Constitutional monarchy

Bourbon Restoration
July Monarchy


Second Republic
Second Empire
Third Republic
France during the Second World War

Free France
Vichy France
Provisional Republic


Fourth Republic
Fifth Republic








Geography







Administrative divisions
Cities
Climate
Extreme points
Islands
Lakes
Mountains
Rivers








Politics







Constitution
Elections

presidential


Foreign relations
Government
Human rights

Intersex
LGBT


Judiciary
Law

enforcement


Military
Parliament
Political parties








Economy







Agriculture
Banking

Central bank


Economic history
Energy
Euro
Exports
Franc (former currency)
French subdivisions by GDP
Stock exchange
Taxation
Telecommunications
Tourism
Trade unions
Transport








Society







Crime
Demographics
Education
Health care
People
Poverty
Religion
Social class
Welfare





Culture



Architecture
Art
Cinema (comedy)
Cuisine
Fashion
Gardens
Language
Literature
Media
Music
Philosophy
Public holidays
Sport
Symbols
Theatre












Outline




Book
Category
Portal
WikiProject












						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=French_Armed_Forces&oldid=818033889"					Categories: Military of France1792 establishments in FrancePermanent Structured CooperationHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksArticles with French-language external linksArticles to be expanded from January 2015All articles to be expandedArticles needing translation from French WikipediaArticles containing French-language text