For other uses, see French Revolution (disambiguation).

French Revolution


The Storming of the Bastille, 14 July 1789



Date
5 May 1789 – 9 November 1799 (1789-05-05 – 1799-11-09)
(10 years, 6 months and 4 days)


Location
Kingdom of France


Outcome


Abolition of the French monarchy
Establishment of a secular and democratic republic that became increasingly authoritarian and militaristic
Radical social change based on liberalism and other Enlightenment principles
Rise of Napoleon Bonaparte
Armed conflicts with other European countries







Part of a series on the



History of France







Prehistory


Palaeolithic
Mesolithic
Neolithic
Copper Age
Bronze Age
Iron Age








Ancient



Greek colonies
 


Celtic Gaul
  until 50 BC


Roman Gaul
50 BC – 486 AD









Early Middle Ages



Franks
 


Merovingians
481–751


Carolingians
751–987









Middle Ages



Direct Capetians
987–1328


Valois
1328–1498









Early modern


Ancien Régime



Valois-Orléans
1498–1515


Valois-Angoulême
1515–89


Bourbon
1589–1792









Long 19th century



French Revolution
1789–1799


Kingdom of France
1791–92


First Republic
1792–1804


First Empire
1804–14


Restoration
1814–30


July Monarchy
1830–1848


Second Republic
1848–52


Second Empire
1852–70


Third Republic
1870–1940









20th century



Third Republic
1870–1940





Free France
Vichy France



1940–44


Provisional Republic
1944–46


Fourth Republic
1946–58


Fifth Republic
1958–present







Timeline


 France portal





v
t
e







Part of a series on


Revolution







Types


Colour
Communist
Democratic
Nonviolent
Permanent
Political
Proletarian
Social
Wave








Methods


Boycott
Civil disobedience
Civil war
Class conflict
Coup d'état
Demonstration
Guerrilla warfare
Insurgency
Nonviolent resistance
Protest
Rebellion
Revolutionary terror
Samizdat
Strike action
Tax resistance








Causes


Authoritarianism
Autocracy
Capitalism
Collaborationism
Colonialism
Cronyism
Despotism
Dictatorship
Discrimination
Economic depression
Economic inequality
Electoral fraud
Famine
Fascism
Feudalism
Imperialism
Military occupation
Monarchy
Natural disaster
Nepotism
Persecution
Political corruption
Political repression
Poverty
Totalitarianism
Unemployment








Examples


Commercial Revolution
Industrial Revolution
English Revolution
Atlantic Revolutions
American Revolution
French Revolution
Haitian Revolution
Serbian Revolution
Revolutions of 1820
Revolutions of 1830
Belgian Revolution
Texas Revolution
Revolutions of 1848
Hungarian Revolution of 1848
Philippine Revolution
Persian Constitutional Revolution
Young Turk Revolution
Mexican Revolution
Xinhai Revolution
Revolutions of 1917–23
Russian Revolution
German Revolution of 1918–19
Spanish Revolution of 1936
Guatemalan Revolution
Chinese Communist Revolution
Hungarian Revolution of 1956
Cuban Revolution
Rwandan Revolution
Cultural Revolution
Nicaraguan Revolution
Iranian Revolution
Saur Revolution
People Power Revolution
Carnation Revolution
Revolutions of 1989
Velvet Revolution
Romanian Revolution
Singing Revolution
Bolivarian Revolution
Bulldozer Revolution
Rose Revolution
Orange Revolution
Tulip Revolution
Kyrgyz Revolution of 2010
Arab Spring
Tunisian Revolution
Yemeni Revolution
Euromaidan






 Politics portal





v
t
e





The French Revolution (French: Révolution française [ʁevɔlysjɔ̃ fʁɑ̃sɛːz]) was a period of far-reaching social and political upheaval in France that lasted from 1789 until 1799, and was partially carried forward by Napoleon during the later expansion of the French Empire. The Revolution overthrew the monarchy, established a republic, experienced violent periods of political turmoil, and finally culminated in a dictatorship under Napoleon that rapidly brought many of its principles to Western Europe and beyond. Inspired by liberal and radical ideas, the Revolution profoundly altered the course of modern history, triggering the global decline of absolute monarchies while replacing them with republics and liberal democracies.[1] Through the Revolutionary Wars, it unleashed a wave of global conflicts that extended from the Caribbean to the Middle East. Historians widely regard the Revolution as one of the most important events in human history.[2][3][4]
The causes of the French Revolution are complex and are still debated among historians. Following the Seven Years' War and the American Revolutionary War,[5] the French government was deeply in debt and attempted to restore its financial status through unpopular taxation schemes, which were heavily regressive. Years of bad harvests leading up to the Revolution also inflamed popular resentment of the privileges enjoyed by the clergy and the aristocracy. Demands for change were formulated in terms of Enlightenment ideals and contributed to the convocation of the Estates-General in May 1789. The first year of the Revolution saw members of the Third Estate (commoners) taking control, the assault on the Bastille in July, the passage of the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen in August, and a women's march on Versailles that forced the royal court back to Paris in October. A central event of the first stage, in August 1789, was the abolition of feudalism and the old rules and privileges left over from the Ancien Régime. The next few years featured political struggles between various liberal assemblies and right-wing supporters of the monarchy intent on thwarting major reforms. The Republic was proclaimed in September 1792 after the French victory at Valmy. In a momentous event that led to international condemnation, Louis XVI was executed in January 1793.
External threats closely shaped the course of the Revolution. The Revolutionary Wars beginning in 1792 ultimately featured French victories that facilitated the conquest of the Italian Peninsula, the Low Countries and most territories west of the Rhine – achievements that had eluded previous French governments for centuries. Internally, popular agitation radicalised the Revolution significantly, culminating in the rise of Maximilien Robespierre and the Jacobins. The dictatorship imposed by the Committee of Public Safety during the Reign of Terror, from 1793 until 1794, established price controls on food and other items, abolished slavery in French colonies abroad, dechristianised society through the creation of a new calendar and the expulsion of religious figures, and secured the borders of the new republic from its enemies. Large numbers of civilians were executed by revolutionary tribunals during the Terror, with estimates ranging from 16,000 to 40,000.[6] After the Thermidorian Reaction, an executive council known as the Directory assumed control of the French state in 1795. The rule of the Directory was characterised by suspended elections, debt repudiations, financial instability, persecutions against the Catholic clergy, and significant military conquests abroad.[7] Dogged by charges of corruption, the Directory collapsed in a coup led by Napoleon Bonaparte in 1799. Napoleon, who became the hero of the Revolution through his popular military campaigns, went on to establish the Consulate and later the First Empire, setting the stage for a wider array of global conflicts in the Napoleonic Wars.
The modern era has unfolded in the shadow of the French Revolution. Almost all future revolutionary movements looked back to the Revolution as their predecessor.[8] Its central phrases and cultural symbols, such as La Marseillaise and Liberté, fraternité, égalité, ou la mort, became the clarion call for other major upheavals in modern history, including the Russian Revolution over a century later.[9]
The values and institutions of the Revolution dominate French politics to this day. The Revolution resulted in the suppression of the feudal system, the emancipation of the individual, the greater division of landed property, the abolition of the privileges of noble birth and the nominal establishment of equality. The French Revolution differed from other revolutions in being not merely national, for it aimed at benefiting all humanity.[10]
Globally, the Revolution accelerated the rise of republics and democracies. It became the focal point for the development of all modern political ideologies, leading to the spread of liberalism, radicalism, nationalism, and secularism, among many others. The Revolution also witnessed the birth of total war by organising the resources of France and the lives of its citizens towards the objective of military conquest.[11] Some of its central documents, like the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen, also inspired movements for abolitionism and universal suffrage in the next century.[12]



Contents


1 Causes
2 Ancien Régime

2.1 Financial crisis
2.2 Estates-General of 1789
2.3 National Assembly (1789)


3 Constitutional Monarchy

3.1 National Constituent Assembly (July 1789 – September 1791)

3.1.1 Storming of the Bastille
3.1.2 Abolition of feudalism
3.1.3 Declaration of the Rights of Man
3.1.4 Writing the first constitution
3.1.5 Women's March on Versailles
3.1.6 Revolution and the Church
3.1.7 Intrigues and radicalism
3.1.8 Royal flight to Varennes
3.1.9 Completing the constitution


3.2 Legislative Assembly (Oct.1791–Sept.1792)

3.2.1 Failure of the constitutional monarchy
3.2.2 Constitutional crisis




4 French Revolutionary Wars and Napoleonic Wars

4.1 Colonial uprisings


5 First Republic

5.1 National Convention (Sept.1792–95)

5.1.1 Execution of Louis XVI
5.1.2 Economy
5.1.3 Reign of Terror
5.1.4 Internal and external wars
5.1.5 Girondins expelled
5.1.6 Abounding civil war
5.1.7 Suppressing and retaliating the revolts
5.1.8 Profuse executions
5.1.9 Guillotining politicians
5.1.10 Disregarding the lower classes


5.2 The Directory (1795–99)

5.2.1 Evaluation
5.2.2 Coups d'état
5.2.3 Exporting the Revolution




6 Media and symbolism

6.1 Newspapers
6.2 Symbolism
6.3 La Marseillaise
6.4 Guillotine
6.5 Tricolore cockade
6.6 Fasces
6.7 Liberty cap


7 Role of women

7.1 Prominent women
7.2 Counter-revolutionary women


8 Economic policies
9 Long-term impact

9.1 France

9.1.1 Religion and charity
9.1.2 Economics
9.1.3 Constitutionalism


9.2 Communism
9.3 Outside France

9.3.1 Britain
9.3.2 Germany
9.3.3 Switzerland
9.3.4 Belgium
9.3.5 Scandinavia


9.4 United States


10 Historiography
11 See also

11.1 Political clubs during the French Revolution


12 Notes
13 References
14 Further reading

14.1 Surveys and reference
14.2 European and Atlantic History
14.3 Politics and wars
14.4 Economy and society

14.4.1 Women


14.5 Historiography and memory
14.6 Primary sources


15 External links



Causes
Main article: Causes of the French Revolution




The French government faced fiscal crises in the 1780s, and King Louis XVI was blamed for mishandling these affairs.


Historians have pointed to many events and factors within the Ancien Régime that led to the Revolution. Rising social and economic inequality,[13][14] new political ideas emerging from the Enlightenment,[15] economic mismanagement, environmental factors leading to agricultural failure, unmanageable national debt,[16] and political mismanagement on the part of King Louis XVI have all been cited as laying the groundwork for the Revolution.[17][18][19][20]
Over the course of the 18th century, there emerged what the philosopher Jürgen Habermas called the idea of the "public sphere" in France and elsewhere in Europe.[21] Habermas argued that the dominant cultural model in 17th century France was a "representational" culture, which was based on a one-sided need to "represent" power with one side active and the other passive.[21] A perfect example would be the Palace of Versailles which was meant to overwhelm the senses of the visitor and convince one of the greatness of the French state and Louis XIV.[21] Starting in the early 18th century saw the appearance of the "public sphere" which was "critical" in that both sides were active.[22] Examples of the "public sphere" included newspapers, journals, masonic lodges, coffee houses and reading clubs where people either in person or virtually via the printed word debated and discussed issues.[23] In France, the emergence of the "public sphere" outside of the control of the state saw the shift from Versailles to Paris as the cultural capital of France.[23] Likewise, in the 17th century it was the court that decided what was culturally good and what was not; in the 18th century, the opinion of the court mattered less and it was the consumers who became the arbiters of cultural taste.[24] In the 1750s, during the "Querelle des Bouffons" over the question of the quality of Italian vs. French music, the partisans of both sides appealed to the French public "because it alone has the right to decide whether a work will be preserved for posterity or will be used by grocers as wrapping-paper".[25] In 1782, Louis-Sébastien Mercier wrote: "The word court no longer inspires awe amongst us as in the time of Louis XIV. Reigning opinions are no longer received from the court; it no longer decides on reputations of any sort ... The court's judgments are countermanded; one says openly that it understands nothing; it has no ideas on the subject and could have none."[26] Inevitably, the belief that public opinion had the right to decide cultural questions instead of deferring to the court transformed itself into the demand that the public also have a say on political questions as well.[27]
The economy in the Ancien Régime during the years preceding the Revolution suffered from instability; poor harvests lasting several years and an inadequate transportation system both contributed to making food more expensive.[28][29] The sequence of events leading to the Revolution included the national government's fiscal troubles caused by an inefficient tax system and expenditure on numerous large wars.[16] The attempt to challenge British naval and commercial power in the Seven Years' War was a costly disaster, with the loss of France's colonial possessions in continental North America and the destruction of the French Navy.[30] French forces were rebuilt, and feeling bitter about having lost many of France's overseas colonies to the British Empire during the Seven Years' War, Louis XVI was eager to give the American rebels financial and military support. After the British surrender at the Battle of Saratoga, the French sent 10,000 troops and millions of dollars to the rebels. Despite succeeding in gaining independence for the Thirteen Colonies, France was severely indebted by the American Revolutionary War.[citation needed] France's inefficient and antiquated financial system could not finance this debt.[31] Faced with a financial crisis, the king called an Estates General, recommended by the Assembly of Notables in 1787 for the first time in over a century.[32]
France was experiencing such a severe economic depression that there wasn't enough food to go around. As with most monarchies, the upper class was always insured a stable living so while the rich remained very wealthy, the majority of the French population was starving. Many were so destitute that they couldn't even feed their families and resorted to theft or prostitution to stay alive. Meanwhile, the royal court at Versailles was isolated from and indifferent to the escalating crisis. While in theory King Louis XVI was an absolute monarch, in practice he was often indecisive and known to back down when faced with strong opposition. While he did reduce government expenditures, opponents in the parlements successfully thwarted his attempts at enacting much needed reforms. The Enlightenment had produced many writers, pamphleteers and publishers who could inform or inflame public opinion. The opposition used this resource to mobilise public opinion against the monarchy, which in turn tried to repress the underground literature.[31]
Many other factors involved resentments and aspirations given focus by the rise of Enlightenment ideals. These included resentment of royal absolutism; resentment by peasants, labourers and the bourgeoisie towards the traditional seigneurial privileges possessed by the nobility; resentment of the Catholic Church's influence over public policy and institutions; aspirations for freedom of religion; resentment of aristocratic bishops by the poorer rural clergy; aspirations for social, political and economic equality, and (especially as the Revolution progressed) republicanism; hatred of Queen Marie-Antoinette, who was falsely accused of being a spendthrift and an Austrian spy; and anger towards the King for dismissing ministers, including finance minister Jacques Necker, who were popularly seen as representatives of the people.[33]
Freemasonry played an important role in the revolution. Originally largely apolitical, Freemasonry was radicalised in the late 18th century through the introduction of higher grades which emphasised themes of liberty, equality, and fraternity. Virtually every major player in the Revolution was a Freemason and these themes became the widely recognised slogan of the revolution.[34]
Ancien Régime
Financial crisis




Caricature of the Third Estate carrying the First Estate (clergy) and the Second Estate (nobility) on its back


In 1774 Louis XVI ascended to the throne in the middle of a financial crisis in which the state was faced with a budget deficit and was nearing bankruptcy.[35] This was due in part to France's costly involvements in the Seven Years' War and later the American Revolutionary War.[36] In May 1776, finance minister Turgot was dismissed, after failing to enact reforms. The next year, Jacques Necker, a foreigner, was appointed Comptroller-General of Finance. He could not be made an official minister because he was a Protestant.[37]
Necker realised that the country's extremely regressive tax system subjected the lower classes to a heavy burden,[37] while numerous exemptions existed for the nobility and clergy.[38] He argued that the country could not be taxed higher; that tax exemptions for the nobility and clergy must be reduced; and proposed that borrowing more money would solve the country's fiscal shortages. Necker published a report to support this claim that underestimated the deficit by roughly 36 million livres, and proposed restricting the power of the parlements.[37]
This was not received well by the King's ministers, and Necker, hoping to bolster his position, argued to be made a minister. The King refused, Necker was dismissed, and Charles Alexandre de Calonne was appointed to the Comptrollership.[37] Calonne initially spent liberally, but he quickly realised the critical financial situation and proposed a new tax code.[39]
The proposal included a consistent land tax, which would include taxation of the nobility and clergy. Faced with opposition from the parlements, Calonne organised the summoning of the Assembly of Notables. But the Assembly failed to endorse Calonne's proposals and instead weakened his position through its criticism. In response, the King announced the calling of the Estates-General for May 1789, the first time the body had been summoned since 1614. This was a signal that the Bourbon monarchy was in a weakened state and subject to the demands of its people.[40]
Estates-General of 1789
Main article: Estates General of 1789 in France
The Estates-General was organised into three estates: the clergy, the nobility, and the rest of France. It had last met in 1614. Elections were held in the spring of 1789; suffrage requirements for the Third Estate were for French-born or naturalised males, aged 25 years or more, who resided where the vote was to take place and who paid taxes. Strong turnout produced 1,201 delegates, including 303 clergy, 291 nobles and 610 members of the Third Estate. The First Estate represented 100,000 Catholic clergy; the Church owned about 10% of the land and collected its own taxes (the tithe) on peasants. The lands were controlled by bishops and abbots of monasteries, but two-thirds of the 303 delegates from the First Estate were ordinary parish priests; only 51 were bishops.[41] The Second Estate represented the nobility, about 400,000 men and women who owned about 25% of the land and collected seigneurial dues and rents from their peasant tenants. About a third of these deputies were nobles, mostly with minor holdings. The Third Estate representation was doubled to 610 men, representing 95% of the population. Half were well educated lawyers or local officials. Nearly a third were in trades or industry; 51 were wealthy land owners.[42][43]




The meeting of the Estates General on 5 May 1789 at Versailles


To assist delegates, "Books of grievances" (cahiers de doléances) were compiled to list problems.[44] The books articulated ideas which would have seemed radical only months before; however, most supported the monarchical system in general. Many assumed the Estates-General would approve future taxes, and Enlightenment ideals were relatively rare.[45][46]
Pamphlets by liberal nobles and clergy became widespread after the lifting of press censorship.[47] The Abbé Sieyès, a theorist and Catholic clergyman, argued the paramount importance of the Third Estate in the pamphlet Qu'est-ce que le tiers état? (What is the Third Estate?) published in January, 1789. He asserted: "What is the Third Estate? Everything. What has it been until now in the political order? Nothing. What does it want to be? Something."[48]
The Estates-General convened in the Grands Salles des Menus-Plaisirs in Versailles on 5 May 1789 and opened with a three-hour speech by Necker. The Third Estate demanded that the credentials of deputies should be verified by all deputies, rather than each estate verifying the credentials of its own members, but negotiations with the other estates failed to achieve this. The commoners appealed to the clergy, who asked for more time. Necker then stated that each estate should verify its own members' credentials and that the king should act as arbitrator.[49]
National Assembly (1789)
Main article: National Assembly (French Revolution)




The National Assembly taking the Tennis Court Oath (sketch by Jacques-Louis David)


The middle class were the ones who fanned the flames of revolution. They established the National Assembly and tried to pressure the aristocracy to spread their money evenly between the upper, middle and lower classes. On 10 June 1789 Abbé Sieyès moved that the Third Estate, now meeting as the Communes (English: "Commons") proceed with verifying its own powers and invite the other two estates to take part, but not to wait for them. They proceeded to do so two days later, completing the process on 17 June.[50] Then they voted a measure far more radical, declaring themselves the National Assembly, an assembly not of the Estates but of "the People". They invited the other orders to join them, but made it clear they intended to conduct the nation's affairs with or without them.[51]
In an attempt to keep control of the process and prevent the Assembly from convening, Louis XVI ordered the closure of the Salle des États where the Assembly met, making an excuse that the carpenters needed to prepare the hall for a royal speech in two days. Weather did not allow an outdoor meeting, and fearing an attack ordered by Louis XVI, they met in a tennis court just outside Versailles, where they proceeded to swear the Tennis Court Oath (20 June 1789) under which they agreed not to separate until they had given France a constitution. A majority of the representatives of the clergy soon joined them, as did 47 members of the nobility. By 27 June, the royal party had overtly given in, although the military began to arrive in large numbers around Paris and Versailles. Messages of support for the Assembly poured in from Paris and other French cities.[52]
Constitutional Monarchy
National Constituent Assembly (July 1789 – September 1791)
Main article: National Constituent Assembly (France)
Storming of the Bastille
Main article: Storming of the Bastille
By this time, Necker had earned the enmity of many members of the French court for his overt manipulation of public opinion. Marie Antoinette, the King's younger brother the Comte d'Artois, and other conservative members of the King's privy council urged him to dismiss Necker as financial advisor. On 11 July 1789, after Necker published an inaccurate account of the government's debts and made it available to the public, the King fired him, and completely restructured the finance ministry at the same time.[53]




The Storming of the Bastille in July 1789 is widely regarded as the most iconic event of the Revolution.


Many Parisians presumed Louis' actions to be aimed against the Assembly and began open rebellion when they heard the news the next day. They were also afraid that arriving soldiers – mostly foreign mercenaries – had been summoned to shut down the National Constituent Assembly. The Assembly, meeting at Versailles, went into nonstop session to prevent another eviction from their meeting place. Paris was soon consumed by riots, chaos, and widespread looting. The mobs soon had the support of some of the French Guard, who were armed and trained soldiers.[54]
On 14 July, the insurgents set their eyes on the large weapons and ammunition cache inside the Bastille fortress, which was also perceived to be a symbol of royal power. After several hours of combat, the prison fell that afternoon. Despite ordering a ceasefire, which prevented a mutual massacre, Governor Marquis Bernard-René de Launay was beaten, stabbed and decapitated; his head was placed on a pike and paraded about the city. Although the fortress had held only seven prisoners (four forgers, two noblemen kept for immoral behaviour, and a murder suspect) the Bastille served as a potent symbol of everything hated under the Ancien Régime. Returning to the Hôtel de Ville (city hall), the mob accused the prévôt des marchands (roughly, mayor) Jacques de Flesselles of treachery and butchered him.[55]
The King, alarmed by the violence, backed down, at least for the time being. The Marquis de Lafayette took up command of the National Guard at Paris. Jean-Sylvain Bailly, president of the Assembly at the time of the Tennis Court Oath, became the city's mayor under a new governmental structure known as the commune. The King visited Paris, where, on 17 July he accepted a tricolore cockade, to cries of Vive la Nation ("Long live the Nation") and Vive le Roi ("Long live the King").[56]
Necker was recalled to power, but his triumph was short-lived. An astute financier but a less astute politician, Necker overplayed his hand by demanding and obtaining a general amnesty, losing much of the people's favour.
As civil authority rapidly deteriorated, with random acts of violence and theft breaking out across the country, members of the nobility, fearing for their safety, fled to neighbouring countries; many of these émigrés, as they were called, funded counter-revolutionary causes within France and urged foreign monarchs to offer military support to a counter-revolution.[57]
By late July, the spirit of popular sovereignty had spread throughout France. In rural areas, many commoners began to form militias and arm themselves against a foreign invasion: some attacked the châteaux of the nobility as part of a general agrarian insurrection known as "la Grande Peur" ("the Great Fear"). In addition, wild rumours and paranoia caused widespread unrest and civil disturbances that contributed to the collapse of law and order.[58]
Abolition of feudalism
Main article: Abolition of feudalism in France




The Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen of 26 August 1789


On 4 and 11 August 1789 the National Constituent Assembly abolished privileges and feudalism (numerous peasant revolts had almost brought feudalism to an end) in the August Decrees, sweeping away personal serfdom,[59] exclusive hunting rights and other seigneurial rights of the Second Estate (nobility).
Also the tithe (a 10% tax for the Church, gathered by the First Estate (clergy)) was abolished which had been the main source of income for many clergymen.[60] During the course of a few hours nobles, clergy, towns, provinces, companies and cities lost their special privileges.[61]
Historian Georges Lefebvre summarises the night's work:

Without debate the Assembly enthusiastically adopted equality of taxation and redemption of all manorial rights except for those involving personal servitude—which were to be abolished without indemnification. Other proposals followed with the same success: the equality of legal punishment, admission of all to public office, abolition of venality in office,[62] conversion of the tithe into payments subject to redemption, freedom of worship, prohibition of plural holding of benefices ... Privileges of provinces and towns were offered as a last sacrifice.[63]

Originally the peasants were supposed to pay for the release of seigneurial dues; these dues affected more than a fourth of the farmland in France and provided most of the income of the large landowners.[64] The majority refused to pay and in 1793 the obligation was cancelled. Thus the peasants got their land free, and also no longer paid the tithe to the church.[65]
Furet emphasises that the decisions of August 1789 survived and became an integral part of

the founding texts of modern France. They destroyed aristocratic society from top to bottom, along with its structure of dependencies and privileges. For this structure they substituted the modern, autonomous individual, free to do whatever was not prohibited by law ... The Revolution thus distinguished itself quite early by its radical individualism [66]

The old judicial system, based on the 13 regional parlements, was suspended in November 1789, and officially abolished in September 1790. The main institutional pillars of the old regime had vanished overnight.[67]
Declaration of the Rights of Man
Main article: Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen
On 26 August 1789 the Assembly published the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen, which comprised a statement of principles rather than a constitution with legal effect. The Declaration was directly influenced by Thomas Jefferson working with General Lafayette, who introduced it.[68]
The National Constituent Assembly functioned not only as a legislature, but also as a body to draft a new constitution.
Writing the first constitution
Main article: French Constitution of 1791
Necker, Mounier, Lally-Tollendal and others argued unsuccessfully for a senate, with members appointed by the crown on the nomination of the people. The bulk of the nobles argued for an aristocratic upper house elected by the nobles. The popular party carried the day: France would have a single, unicameral assembly. The King retained only a "suspensive veto"; he could delay the implementation of a law, but not block it absolutely. The Assembly eventually replaced the historic provinces with 83 départements, uniformly administered and roughly equal in area and population.[67]
Amid the Assembly's preoccupation with constitutional affairs, the financial crisis had continued largely unaddressed, and the deficit had only increased. Honoré Mirabeau now led the move to address this matter, and the Assembly gave Necker complete financial dictatorship.
Women's March on Versailles
Main article: Women's March on Versailles




Engraving of the Women's March on Versailles, 5 October 1789


Fuelled by rumours of a reception for the King's bodyguards on 1 October 1789, at which the national cockade had been trampled upon, on 5 October 1789, crowds of women began to assemble at Parisian markets. The women first marched to the Hôtel de Ville, demanding that city officials address their concerns.[69] The women were responding to the harsh economic situations they faced, especially bread shortages. They also demanded an end to royal efforts to block the National Assembly, and for the King and his administration to move to Paris as a sign of good faith in addressing the widespread poverty.
Getting unsatisfactory responses from city officials, as many as 7,000 women joined the march to Versailles, bringing with them cannons and a variety of smaller weapons. Twenty thousand National Guardsmen under the command of Lafayette responded to keep order, and members of the mob stormed the palace, killing several guards.[70] Lafayette ultimately persuaded the king to accede to the demand of the crowd that the monarchy relocate to Paris.
On 6 October 1789, the King and the royal family moved from Versailles to Paris under the "protection" of the National Guards, thus legitimising the National Assembly.
Revolution and the Church
Main articles: Dechristianization of France during the French Revolution and Civil Constitution of the Clergy




In this caricature, monks and nuns enjoy their new freedom after the decree of 16 February 1790.


The Revolution caused a massive shift of power from the Roman Catholic Church to the state.[71] Under the Ancien Régime, the Church had been the largest single landowner in the country, owning about 10% of the land in the kingdom.[72] The Church was exempt from paying taxes to the government, while it levied a tithe—a 10% tax on income, often collected in the form of crops—on the general population, only a fraction of which it then redistributed to the poor.[72]
Resentment towards the Church weakened its power during the opening of the Estates General in May 1789. The Church composed the First Estate with 130,000 members of the clergy. When the National Assembly was later created in June 1789 by the Third Estate, the clergy voted to join them, which perpetuated the destruction of the Estates General as a governing body.[73] The National Assembly began to enact social and economic reform. Legislation sanctioned on 4 August 1789 abolished the Church's authority to impose the tithe. In an attempt to address the financial crisis, the Assembly declared, on 2 November 1789, that the property of the Church was "at the disposal of the nation".[74] They used this property to back a new currency, the assignats. Thus, the nation had now also taken on the responsibility of the Church, which included paying the clergy and caring for the poor, the sick and the orphaned.[75] In December, the Assembly began to sell the lands to the highest bidder to raise revenue, effectively decreasing the value of the assignats by 25% in two years.[76] In autumn 1789, legislation abolished monastic vows and on 13 February 1790 all religious orders were dissolved.[77] Monks and nuns were encouraged to return to private life and a small percentage did eventually marry.[78]
The Civil Constitution of the Clergy, passed on 12 July 1790, turned the remaining clergy into employees of the state. This established an election system for parish priests and bishops and set a pay rate for the clergy. Many Catholics objected to the election system because it effectively denied the authority of the Pope in Rome over the French Church. In October a group of 30 bishops wrote a declaration saying they could not accept that law, and this protest fueled also civilian opposition against that law.[60] Eventually, in November 1790, the National Assembly began to require an oath of loyalty to the Civil Constitution from all the members of the clergy.[78] This led to a schism between those clergy who swore the required oath and accepted the new arrangement and those who remained loyal to the Pope. Priests swearing the oath were indicated as 'constitutional', those not taking the oath as 'non-juring' or 'refractory' clergy.[79] Overall, 24% of the clergy nationwide took the oath.[80] This decree stiffened the resistance against the state’s interference with the church, especially in the west of France like in Normandy, Brittany and the Vendée, where only few priests took the oath and the civilian population turned against the revolution.[60]
Widespread refusal led to legislation against the clergy, "forcing them into exile, deporting them forcibly, or executing them as traitors".[76] Pope Pius VI never accepted the Civil Constitution of the Clergy, further isolating the Church in France.
A new Republican Calendar was established in 1793, with 10-day weeks that made it very difficult for Catholics to remember Sundays and saints' days. Workers complained it reduced the number of first-day-of-the-week holidays from 52 to 37.[81]
During the Reign of Terror, extreme efforts of de-Christianisation ensued, including the imprisonment and massacre of priests and destruction of churches and religious images throughout France. An effort was made to replace the Catholic Church altogether, with civic festivals replacing religious ones. The establishment of the Cult of Reason was the final step of radical de-Christianisation. These events led to a widespread disillusionment with the Revolution and to counter-rebellions across France. Locals often resisted de-Christianisation by attacking revolutionary agents and hiding members of the clergy who were being hunted. Eventually, Robespierre and the Committee of Public Safety were forced to denounce the campaign,[82] replacing the Cult of Reason with the deist but still non-Christian Cult of the Supreme Being. The Concordat of 1801 between Napoleon and the Church ended the de-Christianisation period and established the rules for a relationship between the Catholic Church and the French State that lasted until it was abrogated by the Third Republic via the separation of church and state on 11 December 1905. The persecution of the Church led to a counter-revolution known as the Revolt in the Vendée.[83]
Historians Lynn Hunt and Jack Censer argue that some French Protestants, the Huguenots, wanted an anti-Catholic regime, and that Enlightenment thinkers such as Voltaire helped fuel this resentment.[84] Historian John McManners writes, "In eighteenth-century France throne and altar were commonly spoken of as in close alliance; their simultaneous collapse ... would one day provide the final proof of their interdependence."[85]
Intrigues and radicalism
Factions within the Assembly began to clarify. The aristocrat Jacques Antoine Marie de Cazalès and the abbé Jean-Sifrein Maury led what would become known as the right wing, the opposition to revolution (this party sat on the right-hand side of the Assembly). The "Royalist democrats" or monarchiens, allied with Necker, inclined towards organising France along lines similar to the British constitutional model; they included Jean Joseph Mounier, the Comte de Lally-Tollendal, the comte de Clermont-Tonnerre, and Pierre Victor Malouet, comte de Virieu.
The "National Party", representing the centre or centre-left of the assembly, included Honoré Mirabeau, Lafayette, and Bailly; while Adrien Duport, Barnave and Alexandre Lameth represented somewhat more extreme views. Almost alone in his radicalism on the left was the Arras lawyer Maximilien Robespierre. Abbé Sieyès led in proposing legislation in this period and successfully forged consensus for some time between the political centre and the left. In Paris, various committees, the mayor, the assembly of representatives, and the individual districts each claimed authority independent of the others. The increasingly middle-class National Guard under Lafayette also slowly emerged as a power in its own right, as did other self-generated assemblies.




The Fête de la Fédération on 14 July 1790 celebrated the establishment of the constitutional monarchy


The Assembly abolished the symbolic paraphernalia of the Ancien Régime – armorial bearings, liveries, etc. – which further alienated the more conservative nobles, and added to the ranks of the émigrés. On 14 July 1790, and for several days following, crowds in the Champ de Mars celebrated the anniversary of the fall of the Bastille with the Fête de la Fédération; Talleyrand performed a mass; participants swore an oath of "fidelity to the nation, the law, and the king"; the King and the royal family actively participated.[86]
The electors had originally chosen the members of the Estates-General to serve for a single year. However, by the terms of the Tennis Court Oath, the communes had bound themselves to meet continuously until France had a constitution. Right-wing elements now argued for a new election, but Mirabeau prevailed, asserting that the status of the assembly had fundamentally changed, and that no new election should take place before completing the constitution.[87]
In late 1790 the French army was in considerable disarray. The military officer corps was largely composed of noblemen, who found it increasingly difficult to maintain order within the ranks. In some cases, soldiers (drawn from the lower classes) had turned against their aristocratic commanders and attacked them. At Nancy, General Bouillé successfully put down one such rebellion, only to be accused of being anti-revolutionary for doing so. This and other such incidents spurred a mass desertion as more and more officers defected to other countries, leaving a dearth of experienced leadership within the army.[88]
This period also saw the rise of the political "clubs" in French politics. Foremost among these was the Jacobin Club; 152 members had affiliated with the Jacobins by 10 August 1790. The Jacobin Society began as a broad, general organisation for political debate, but as it grew in members, various factions developed with widely differing views. Several of these factions broke off to form their own clubs, such as the Club of '89.[89]
Meanwhile, the Assembly continued to work on developing a constitution. A new judicial organisation made all magistracies temporary and independent of the throne. The legislators abolished hereditary offices, except for the monarchy itself. Jury trials started for criminal cases. The King would have the unique power to propose war, with the legislature then deciding whether to declare war. The Assembly abolished all internal trade barriers and suppressed guilds, masterships, and workers' organisations: any individual gained the right to practise a trade through the purchase of a license; strikes became illegal.[90]
Royal flight to Varennes
Main article: Flight to Varennes




The return of the royal family to Paris on 25 June 1791, after their failed flight to Varennes


Louis XVI was increasingly dismayed by the direction of the revolution. His brother, the Comte d'Artois and his queen, Marie Antoinette, urged a stronger stance against the revolution and support for the émigrés, while he was resistant to any course that would see him openly side with foreign powers against the Assembly. Eventually, fearing for his own safety and that of his family, he decided to flee Paris to the Austrian border, having been assured of the loyalty of the border garrisons.
Louis cast his lot with General Bouillé, who condemned both the emigration and the Assembly, and promised him refuge and support in his camp at Montmédy. On the night of 20 June 1791 the royal family fled the Tuileries Palace dressed as servants, while their servants dressed as nobles.
However, late the next day, the King was recognised and arrested at Varennes and returned to Paris. The Assembly provisionally suspended the King. He and Queen Marie Antoinette remained held under guard.[91] The King's flight had a profound impact on public opinion, turning popular sentiment further against the clergy and nobility, and built momentum for the institution of a constitutional monarchy.[91]
Completing the constitution
Main article: The Last Days of the National Constituent Assembly
As most of the Assembly still favoured a constitutional monarchy rather than a republic, the various groups reached a compromise which left Louis XVI as little more than a figurehead: he was forced to swear an oath to the constitution, and a decree declared that retracting the oath, heading an army for the purpose of making war upon the nation, or permitting anyone to do so in his name would amount to abdication.
However, Jacques Pierre Brissot drafted a petition, insisting that in the eyes of the nation Louis XVI was deposed since his flight. An immense crowd gathered in the Champ de Mars to sign the petition. Georges Danton and Camille Desmoulins gave fiery speeches. The Assembly called for the municipal authorities to "preserve public order". The National Guard under Lafayette's command confronted the crowd. The soldiers responded to a barrage of stones by firing into the crowd, killing between 13 and 50 people.[92] The incident cost Lafayette and his National Guard much public support.
In the wake of the massacre the authorities closed many of the patriotic clubs, as well as radical newspapers such as Jean-Paul Marat's L'Ami du Peuple. Danton fled to England; Desmoulins and Marat went into hiding.[93]
Meanwhile, in August 1791, a new threat arose from abroad: the King's brother-in-law Holy Roman Emperor Leopold II, King Frederick William II of Prussia, and the King's brother Charles-Philippe, comte d'Artois, issued the Declaration of Pillnitz, declaring their intention to bring the French king in the position "to consolidate the basis of a monarchical government" and that they were preparing their own troops for action,[94] hinting at an invasion of France on the King's behalf.[95]
Although Leopold himself sought to avoid war and made the declaration to satisfy the Comte d'Artois and the other émigrés, the reaction within France was ferocious. The French people expressed no respect for the dictates of foreign monarchs, and the threat of force merely hastened their militarisation.[96]
Even before the Flight to Varennes, the Assembly members had determined to debar themselves from the legislature that would succeed them, the Legislative Assembly. They now gathered the various constitutional laws they had passed into a single constitution, and submitted it to the recently restored Louis XVI, who accepted it, writing "I engage to maintain it at home, to defend it from all attacks from abroad, and to cause its execution by all the means it places at my disposal". The King addressed the Assembly and received enthusiastic applause from members and spectators. With this capstone, the National Constituent Assembly adjourned in a final session on 30 September 1791.[97]
Legislative Assembly (Oct.1791–Sept.1792)
Main article: Louis XVI and the Legislative Assembly
The Legislative Assembly first met on 1 October 1791, elected by those 4 million men – out of a population of 25 million – who paid a certain minimum amount of taxes.[98] Under the Constitution of 1791, France would function as a constitutional monarchy. The King had to share power with the elected Legislative Assembly, but he retained his royal veto and the ability to select ministers.
Early on, the King vetoed legislation that threatened the émigrés with death and that decreed that every non-juring clergyman must take within eight days the civic oath mandated by the Civil Constitution of the Clergy. Over the course of a year, such disagreements would lead to a constitutional crisis.
Late 1791, a group of Assembly members who propagated war against Austria and Prussia was, after some remark of politician Maximilien Robespierre, henceforth indicated as the 'Girondins', although not all of them really came from the southern province of Gironde. A group around Robespierre – later indicated as 'Montagnards' or 'Jacobins' – pleaded against that war; this opposition between those groups would harden and embitter in the next 1½ years.[94]
In response to the threat of war of August 1791 from Austria and Prussia, leaders of the Assembly saw such a war as a means to strengthen support for their revolutionary government, and the French people as well as the Assembly thought that they would win a war against Austria and Prussia. On 20 April 1792, France declared war on Austria.[94][99] Late April 1792, France invaded and conquered the Austrian Netherlands (roughly present-day Belgium and Luxembourg).[94]
Failure of the constitutional monarchy


Part of a series of articles on


Monarchy







Central concepts





Monarch
Monarchism






Divine right of kings
Mandate of Heaven











Types



Absolute
Composite
Constitutional
Diarchy
Dual
Elective
Emirate
Ethnarch
Federal
Hereditary
Legalist (Chinese)
Non-sovereign
Popular
Regency
Tetrarch
Universal









History


Birth of the Roman Empire
Magna Carta
Foundation of the Ottoman Empire



Glorious Revolution
French Revolution






Trienio Liberal
First French Empire






Liberal Wars
Second French Empire






Italian unification
Meiji Restoration



German unification
5 October 1910 Revolution
Proclamation of the Republic in Brazil



Xinhai Revolution
Russian Revolution



Siamese revolution of 1932
Birth of the Italian Republic
Spanish transition to democracy



Iranian Revolution
Modern Cambodia



Nepalese Civil War








Related topics



Aristocracy
Autocracy
Crowned republic
Conservatism
Thomas Hobbes
Legitimists
Oligarchy
Philosopher king
Primogeniture
Royalism
Regicide
Regnal number
Royal family
Ultra-royalist







Politics portal





v
t
e







Part of the Politics series on


Republicanism




Central concepts


Anti-monarchism
Popular sovereignty
Republic
Res publica
Social contract








Schools


Classical republicanism
Neo-republicanism








Important thinkers


Hannah Arendt
Cicero
James Harrington
Thomas Jefferson
John Locke
James Madison
Montesquieu
Philip Pettit
Polybius
Jean Jacques Rousseau
Michael Sandel
Algernon Sidney
Quentin Skinner
Cass Sunstein
Mary Wollstonecraft








History


Roman Republic
Gaṇa sangha
Classical Athens
Republic of Venice
Republic of Genoa
Republic of Florence
Dutch Republic
American Revolution
French Revolution
Spanish American wars of independence
Trienio Liberal
French Revolution of 1848
5 October 1910 revolution
Xinhai Revolution
Russian Revolution
German Revolution of 1918–19
Turkish War of Independence
Mongolian Revolution of 1921
11 September 1922 Revolution
Spanish Civil War
Birth of the Italian Republic
Egyptian Revolution of 1952
14 July Revolution
North Yemen Civil War
Zanzibar Revolution
1969 Libyan coup d'état
Cambodian coup of 1970
Third Hellenic Republic
Iranian Revolution
1987 Fijian coups d'état
Nepalese Civil War








By country


Australia
Barbados
Canada
Ireland
Jamaica
Morocco
Netherlands
New Zealand
Spain
Sweden
Turkey
United Kingdom
United States








Related topics


Communitarianism
Liberalism
Monarchism






Politics portal





v
t
e





See also: Louis XVI and the Legislative Assembly
The Legislative Assembly degenerated into chaos before October 1792. Francis Charles Montague concluded in 1911, "In the attempt to govern, the Assembly failed altogether. It left behind an empty treasury, an undisciplined army and navy, and a people debauched by safe and successful riot."[100]
Lyons argues that the Constituent Assembly had liberal, rational, and individualistic goals that seem to have been largely achieved by 1791. However, it failed to consolidate the gains of the Revolution, which continued with increasing momentum and escalating radicalism until 1794. Lyons identifies six reasons for this escalation. First, the king did not accept the limitations on his powers, and mobilised support from foreign monarchs to reverse it. Second, the effort to overthrow the Roman Catholic Church, sell off its lands, close its monasteries and its charitable operations, and replace it with an unpopular makeshift system caused deep consternation among the pious and the peasants. Third, the economy was badly hurt by the issuance of ever increasing amounts of paper money (assignats), which caused more and more inflation; the rising prices hurt the urban poor who spent most of their income on food. Fourth, the rural peasants demanded liberation from the heavy system of taxes and dues owed to local landowners. Fifth, the working class of Paris and the other cities—the sans-culottes—resented the fact that the property owners and professionals had taken all the spoils of the Revolution. Finally, foreign powers threatened to overthrow the Revolution, which responded with extremism and systematic violence in its own defence.[101]
Constitutional crisis
Main articles: 10 August (French Revolution), September Massacres, and Proclamation of the abolition of the monarchy




On 10 August 1792 the Paris Commune stormed the Tuileries Palace and killed the Swiss Guards


In the summer of 1792, all of Paris was against the king, and hoped that the Assembly would depose the king, but the Assembly hesitated.[102]
At dawn of 10 August 1792, a large, angry crowd of Parisians and soldiers from all over France,[102] insurgents and popular militias, supported by the revolutionary Paris Commune,[103] marched on the Tuileries Palace where the king resided,[102] assailed the Palace and killed the Swiss Guards who were assigned for the protection of the king.[103]
Around 8:00am the king decided to leave his palace and seek safety with his wife and children in the Assembly that was gathered in permanent session in Salle du Manège opposite to the Tuileries.[102] The royal family became prisoners.[104] After 11:00am, a rump session of the Legislative Assembly 'temporarily relieved the king from his task'[102] and thus suspended the monarchy; little more than a third of the deputies were present, almost all of them Jacobins.[104] In reaction, on 19 August the Prussian general Duke of Brunswick invaded France[105] and besieged Longwy.[106]
26 August, the Assembly decreed the deportation of refractory priests in the west of France, as "causes of danger to the fatherland", to destinations like French Guiana. In reaction, peasants in the Vendée took over a town, in another step toward civil war.[106] What remained of a national government depended on the support of the insurrectionary Commune. With enemy troops advancing, the Commune looked for potential traitors in Paris.[107][108]
On 2, 3 and 4 September 1792, hundreds of Parisians, supporters of the revolution, infuriated by Verdun being captured by the Prussian enemy, the uprisings in the west of France, and rumours that the incarcerated prisoners in Paris were conspiring with the foreign enemy, raided the Parisian prisons and murdered between 1,000 and 1,500 prisoners, many of them Catholic priests but also common criminals. Jean-Paul Marat, a political ally of Robespierre, in an open letter on 3 September incited the rest of France to follow the Parisian example; Robespierre kept a low profile in regard to the murder orgy;[109] the Assembly and the city council of Paris (la Commune) seemed inapt and hardly motivated to call a halt to the unleashed bloodshed.[102]
The Commune sent gangs of National Guardsmen and fereres into the prisons to kill 10 or more victims, mostly nonjuring priests. The Commune then sent a circular letter to the other cities of France inviting them to follow this example, and many cities launched their own massacres of prisoners and priests in the "September massacres". The Assembly could offer only feeble resistance. In October, however, there was a counterattack accusing the instigators, especially Marat, of being terrorists. This led to a political contest between the more moderate Girondists and the more radical Montagnards inside the Convention, with rumour used as a weapon by both sides. The Girondists lost ground when they seemed too conciliatory. But the pendulum swung again and after Thermidor, the men who had endorsed the massacres were denounced as terrorists.[107][108]
Chaos persisted until the Convention, elected by universal male suffrage and charged with writing a new constitution, met on 20 September 1792 and became the new de facto government of France. The next day it abolished the monarchy and declared a republic. The following day – 22 September 1792, the first morning of the new Republic – was later retroactively adopted as the beginning of Year One of the French Republican Calendar.[110]
French Revolutionary Wars and Napoleonic Wars
Main articles: French Revolutionary Wars and Napoleonic Wars
From 1793 to 1815 France was engaged almost continuously (with two short breaks) in wars with Britain and a changing coalition of other major powers. The many French successes led to the spread of the French revolutionary ideals into neighbouring countries, and indeed across much of Europe. However, the final defeat of Napoleon in 1814 (and 1815) brought a reaction that reversed some – but not all – of the revolutionary achievements in France and Europe. The Bourbons were restored to the throne, with the brother of executed King Louis XVI becoming King Louis XVIII.




French victory over the Prussians at the Battle of Valmy on 20 September 1792


The politics of the period inevitably drove France towards war with Austria and its allies. The King, many of the Feuillants, and the Girondins specifically wanted to wage war. The King (and many Feuillants with him) expected war would increase his personal popularity; he also foresaw an opportunity to exploit any defeat: either result would make him stronger. The Girondins wanted to export the Revolution throughout Europe and, by extension, to defend the Revolution within France. The forces opposing war were much weaker. Barnave and his supporters among the Feuillants feared a war they thought France had little chance to win and which they feared might lead to greater radicalisation of the revolution. On the other end of the political spectrum Robespierre opposed a war on two grounds, fearing that it would strengthen the monarchy and military at the expense of the revolution, and that it would incur the anger of ordinary people in Austria and elsewhere. The Austrian emperor Leopold II, brother of Marie Antoinette, may have wished to avoid war, but he died on 1 March 1792.[111] France preemptively declared war on Austria (20 April 1792) and Prussia joined on the Austrian side a few weeks later. The invading Prussian army faced little resistance until checked at the Battle of Valmy (20 September 1792) and was forced to withdraw.




The French Revolutionary Army defeated the combined armies of Austrians, Dutch and British at Fleurus in June 1794


The new-born Republic followed up on this success with a series of victories in Belgium and the Rhineland in the fall of 1792. The French armies defeated the Austrians at the Battle of Jemappes on 6 November, and had soon taken over most of the Austrian Netherlands. This brought them into conflict with Britain and the Dutch Republic, which wished to preserve the independence of the southern Netherlands from France. After the king's execution in January 1793, these powers, along with Spain and most other European states, joined the war against France. Almost immediately, French forces faced defeat on many fronts, and were driven out of their newly conquered territories in the spring of 1793. At the same time, the republican regime was forced to deal with rebellions against its authority in much of western and southern France. But the allies failed to take advantage of French disunity, and by the autumn of 1793 the republican regime had defeated most of the internal rebellions and halted the allied advance into France itself.
The stalemate was broken in the summer of 1794 with dramatic French victories. They defeated the allied army at the Battle of Fleurus, leading to a full Allied withdrawal from the Austrian Netherlands. They followed up by a campaign which swept the allies to the east bank of the Rhine and left the French, by the beginning of 1795, conquering the Dutch Republic itself. The House of Orange was expelled and replaced by the Batavian Republic, a French satellite state. These victories led to the collapse of the coalition against France. Prussia, having effectively abandoned the coalition in the fall of 1794, made peace with revolutionary France at Basel in April 1795, and soon thereafter Spain, too, made peace with France. Of the major powers, only Britain and Austria remained at war with France.




Slave revolt in Saint Domingue


Colonial uprisings
Although the French Revolution had a dramatic impact in numerous areas of Europe, the French colonies felt a particular influence. As the Martinican author Aimé Césaire put it, "there was in each French colony a specific revolution, that occurred on the occasion of the French Revolution, in tune with it."[112] The Haitian Revolution (Saint Domingue) became a central example of slave uprisings in French colonies.
First Republic
National Convention (Sept.1792–95)
Main article: National Convention
Late August 1792, elections were held, now under male universal suffrage, for the new National Convention.[109]
On 20 September 1792, the new National Convention replaced the Legislative Assembly. From the start the Convention suffered from the bitter division between a group around Robespierre, Danton and Marat referred to as 'Montagnards' or 'Jacobins' or 'left' and a group referred to as 'Girondins' or 'right'. But the majority of the representatives, referred to as 'la Plaine', were member of neither of those two antagonistic groups and managed to preserve some speed in the Convention's debates.[109][113]
Immediately on 21 September the Convention abolished the monarchy, making France the French First Republic.[102] A new French Republican Calendar was introduced to replace the Christian Gregorian calendar, renaming the year 1792 as year 1 of the Republic.[59]
With wars against Prussia and Austria having started earlier in 1792, in November 1792 France also declared war on the Kingdom of Great Britain and the Dutch Republic.[113] In the course of 1793, the Holy Roman Empire, the kings of Portugal and Naples and the Grand-Duke of Tuscany declared war against France.[114]
Execution of Louis XVI




Execution of Louis XVI in what is now the Place de la Concorde, facing the empty pedestal where the statue of his grandfather, Louis XV, had stood.


Main article: Execution of Louis XVI
See also: Robespierre and the Execution of Louis XVI
In the Brunswick Manifesto, the Imperial and Prussian armies threatened retaliation on the French population if it were to resist their advance or the reinstatement of the monarchy. This among other things made Louis appear to be conspiring with the enemies of France. On 17 January 1793 Louis was condemned to death for "conspiracy against the public liberty and the general safety" by a close majority in Convention: 361 voted to execute the king, 288 voted against, and another 72 voted to execute him subject to a variety of delaying conditions. The former Louis XVI, now simply named Citoyen Louis Capet (Citizen Louis Capet) was executed by guillotine on 21 January 1793 on the Place de la Révolution, former Place Louis XV, now called the Place de la Concorde.[115] Conservatives across Europe were horrified and monarchies called for war against revolutionary France.[116][117]
Economy
When war went badly, prices rose and the sans-culottes – poor labourers and radical Jacobins – rioted; counter-revolutionary activities began in some regions. This encouraged the Jacobins to seize power through a parliamentary coup, backed up by force effected by mobilising public support against the Girondist faction, and by utilising the mob power of the Parisian sans-culottes. An alliance of Jacobin and sans-culottes elements thus became the effective centre of the new government. Policy became considerably more radical, as "The Law of the Maximum" set food prices and led to executions of offenders.[118]
This policy of price control was coeval with the Committee of Public Safety's rise to power and the Reign of Terror. The Committee first attempted to set the price for only a limited number of grain products but, by September 1793, it expanded the "maximum" to cover all foodstuffs and a long list of other goods.[119] Widespread shortages and famine ensued. The Committee reacted by sending dragoons into the countryside to arrest farmers and seize crops. This temporarily solved the problem in Paris, but the rest of the country suffered. By the spring of 1794, forced collection of food was not sufficient to feed even Paris and the days of the Committee were numbered. When Robespierre went to the guillotine in July of that year the crowd jeered, "There goes the dirty maximum!"[120]
Reign of Terror
Main article: Reign of Terror




Queen Marie Antoinette on the way to the guillotine on 16 October 1793 (drawing by Jacques-Louis David).


'Reign of Terror' is a label used by some historians for (part of) French history between July 1789 and July 1794, but those historians adhere that label to different periods.
The Committee of Public Safety came under the control of Maximilien Robespierre, a lawyer, and the Jacobins unleashed the Reign of Terror (1793–94). According to archival records, at least 16,594 people died under the guillotine or otherwise after accusations of counter-revolutionary activities.[121] As many as 40,000 accused prisoners may have been summarily executed without trial or died awaiting trial.[121][122]
On 2 June 1793, Paris sections – encouraged by the enragés ("enraged ones") Jacques Roux and Jacques Hébert – took over the Convention, calling for administrative and political purges, a low fixed price for bread, and a limitation of the electoral franchise to sans-culottes alone.[123] With the backing of the National Guard, they managed to persuade the Convention to arrest 31 Girondin leaders, including Jacques Pierre Brissot. Following these arrests, the Jacobins gained control of the Committee of Public Safety on 10 June, installing the revolutionary dictatorship.[124]
On 24 June, the Convention adopted the first republican constitution of France, variously referred to as the French Constitution of 1793 or Constitution of the Year I. It was progressive and radical in several respects, in particular by establishing universal male suffrage. It was ratified by public referendum, but normal legal processes were suspended before it could take effect.[125]
On 13 July, the assassination of Jean-Paul Marat – a Jacobin leader and journalist known for his bloodthirsty rhetoric – by Charlotte Corday, a Girondin, resulted in further increase of Jacobin political influence. Georges Danton, the leader of the August 1792 uprising against the king, undermined by several political reversals, was removed from the Committee and Robespierre, "the Incorruptible", became its most influential member as it moved to take radical measures against the Revolution's domestic and foreign enemies.[124]
The Reign of Terror ultimately weakened the revolutionary government, while temporarily ending internal opposition. The Jacobins expanded the size of the army, and Carnot replaced many aristocratic officers with soldiers who had demonstrated their patriotism, if not their ability. The Republican army repulsed the Austrians, Prussians, British, and Spanish. At the end of 1793, the army began to prevail and revolts were defeated with ease. The Ventôse Decrees (February–March 1794) proposed the confiscation of the goods of exiles and opponents of the Revolution, and their redistribution to the needy. However, this policy was never fully implemented.[126]
Three approaches attempt to explain the Reign of Terror imposed by the Jacobins in 1793–94. The older Marxist interpretation argued the Terror was a necessary response to outside threats (in terms of other countries going to war with France) and internal threats (of traitors inside France threatening to frustrate the Revolution). In this interpretation, as expressed by the Marxist historian Albert Soboul, Robespierre and the sans-culottes were heroes for defending the revolution from its enemies. François Furet has argued that foreign threats had little to do with the terror.[127] Instead, the extreme violence was an inherent part of the intense ideological commitment of the revolutionaries – their utopian goals required exterminating opposition. Soboul's Marxist interpretation has been largely abandoned by most historians since the 1990s. Hanson (2009) takes a middle position, recognising the importance of the foreign enemies, and sees the terror as a contingency that was caused by the interaction of a series of complex events and the foreign threat. Hanson says the terror was not inherent in the ideology of the Revolution, but that circumstances made it necessary.[128]
Internal and external wars
Further information: War in the Vendée




The War in the Vendée was a royalist uprising that was suppressed by the republican forces in 1796.


Introduction of a nationwide conscription for the army in February 1793 was the spark that in March made the Vendée, already rebellious since 1790 because of the changes imposed on the Roman Catholic Church by the Civil Constitution of the Clergy (1790),[129] ignite into civil (guerrilla) war against the French Revolutionary government in Paris.[113][130][131][132]
North of the Loire, similar revolts were started by the so-called Chouans (royalist rebels).[133] In March 1793, France also declared war on Spain, the Vendée rebels won some victories against Paris, and the French army was defeated in Belgium by Austria with the French general Dumouriez defecting to the Austrians: the French Republic's survival was now in real danger.[113] Facing local revolts and foreign invasions in both the East and West of the country, the most urgent government business was the war.[134] On 6 April 1793, to prevent the Convention from losing itself in abstract debate and to streamline government decisions, the Comité de salut public (Committee of Public Prosperity) was created, as executive government which was accountable to the Convention.[113]
Girondins expelled
In April 1793, the 'Girondins' group indicted Jean-Paul Marat before the Revolutionary Tribunal for 'attempting to destroy the sovereignty of the people' and 'preaching plunder and massacre', referring to his behaviour during the September 1792 Paris massacres. Marat was quickly acquitted but the incident further acerbated the 'Girondins' versus 'Montagnards' party strife in the Convention.[113]
Jacques Hébert, Convention member leaning to the 'Montagnards' group, on 24 May 1793 called on the sans-culottes to rise in revolt against the "henchmen of Capet [the ex-king] and Dumouriez [the defected general]". Hébert was arrested by a Convention committee. While that committee consisted only of members from la Plaine and the Girondins, the anger of the sans-culottes was directed towards the Girondins. 25 May, a delegation of la Commune (the Paris city council) protested against Hébert’s arrest. The Convention’s President Isnard, a Girondin, answered them: "Members of la Commune (…) If by your incessant rebellions something befalls to the representatives of the nation, I declare, in the name of France, that Paris will be totally obliterated".[113]
On 2 June 1793, the Convention's session in Tuileries Palace degenerated into chaos and pandemonium. Crowds of people swarmed in and around the palace. Incessant screaming from the public galeries suggested that all of Paris was against the Girondins. Petitions circulated, indicting and condemning 22 Girondins. Barère, member of the Comité de salut public, suggested: to end this division which is harming the Republic, the Girondin leaders should lay down their offices voluntarily. Late that night after much more tumultuous debate, indeed dozens of Girondins had resigned and left the Convention.[113]
Abounding civil war




The assassination of Jean-Paul Marat by Girondist sympathizer Charlotte Corday on 13 July 1793


By the summer of 1793, most French departments in one way or another opposed the central Paris government, and in many cases 'Girondins', fled from Paris after 2 June, led those revolts.[135] In Brittany's countryside, the people rejecting the Civil Constitution of the Clergy of 1790 had taken to a guerrilla warfare known as Chouannerie.[129] But generally, the French opposition against 'Paris' had now evolved into a plain struggle for power over the country[135] against the 'Montagnards' around Robespierre and Marat now dominating Paris.[129]
In June–July 1793, Bordeaux, Marseilles, Brittany, Caen and the rest of Normandy gathered armies to march on Paris and against 'the revolution'.[130][129] In July, Lyon guillotined the deposed 'Montagnard' head of the city council.[129] Barère, member of the Committee of Public Prosperity, on 1 August incited the Convention to tougher measures against the Vendée, at war with Paris since March: "We'll have peace only when no Vendée remains … we'll have to exterminate that rebellious people".[130] In August, Convention troops besieged Lyon.[129]
On 17 August 1793, the Convention voted for general conscription, the levée en masse, which mobilised all citizens to serve as soldiers or suppliers in the war effort.[134] The consecutive successes in the French revolutionary wars earned Lazare Carnot the title 'Organizer of Victory'.[136][137]
In August–September 1793, militants urged the Convention to do more to quell the counter-revolution. A delegation of the Commune (Paris city council) suggested to form revolutionary armies to arrest hoarders and conspirators.[129] Barère, member of the Committee of Public Prosperity—the de facto executive government—ever since April 1793,[135] among others on 5 September reacted favorably, saying: let's "make terror the order of the day!"[129] The National Convention on 9 September voted to establish sans-culottes paramilitary forces, revolutionary armies, and to force farmers to surrender grain demanded by the government.[134] On 17 September, the Law of Suspects was passed, which ordered the arrest of suspected counter-revolutionaries and people who had revealed themselves as "enemies of freedom".[138] This decree was one of the causes for some 17,000 legal death sentences until the end of July 1794, an average of 370 per week – reason for historians to label those 10½ months 'the (Reign of) Terror'.[139][140]
On 19 September the Vendée rebels again defeated a Republican Convention army.[130] On 29 September, the Convention extended price limits from grain and bread to other household goods and established the Law of the Maximum, intended to prevent price gouging and supply food to the cities.[134]
On 1 October Barère repeated his plea to subdue the Vendée: "refuge of fanaticism, where priests have raised their altars…".[130] In October the Convention troops captured Lyon and reinstated a Montagnard government there.[129]
Criteria for bringing someone before the Revolutionary Tribunal, created March 1793, had always been vast and vague.[135] By August, political disagreement seemed enough to be summoned before the Tribunal; appeal against a Tribunal verdict was impossible.[129] Late August 1793, an army general had been guillotined on the accusation of choosing too timid strategies on the battlefield.[129] Mid-October, the widowed former queen Marie Antoinette was on trial for a long list of charges such as "teaching [her husband] Louis Capet the art of dissimulation" and incest with her son, she too was guillotined.[129] In October 1793, 21 former 'Girondins' Convention members who hadn't left Paris after June were convicted to death and executed, on the charge of verbally supporting the preparation of an insurrection in Caen by fellow-Girondins.[129]
Suppressing and retaliating the revolts




Mass shootings at Nantes in 1793






Shootings and massacres by the Infernal columns under Louis Marie Turreau


17 October 1793, the 'blue' Republican army near Cholet defeated the 'white' Vendéan insubordinate army and all surviving Vendée residents, counting in tens of thousands, fled over the river Loire north into Brittany.[130] A Convention's representative on mission in Nantes commissioned in October to pacify the region did so by simply drowning prisoners in the river Loire: until February 1794 he drowned at least 4,000.[135]
Meanwhile, the instalment of the Republican Calendar on 24 October 1793 caused an anti-clerical uprising. Hébert's and Chaumette's atheist movement campaigned to dechristianise society. The climax was reached with the celebration of the flame of Reason in Notre Dame Cathedral on 10 November.[141]
By November 1793, the revolts in Normandy, Bordeaux and Lyon were overcome, in December also that in Toulon.[129] Two representatives on mission sent to punish Lyon between November 1793 and April 1794 executed 2,000 people to death by guillotine or firing-squad.[135] The Vendéan army since October roaming through Brittany on 12 December 1793 again ran up against Republican troops and saw 10,000 of its rebels perish, meaning the end of this once threatening army.[135]
Some historians claim that after that Vendéan defeat Convention Republic armies in 1794 massacred 117,000 Vendéan civilians to obliterate the Vendéan people, but others contest that claim.[142] Some historians consider the total civil war to have lasted until 1796 with a toll of 170,000[143] or 450,000 lives.[144][145]
Because of the extremely brutal forms that the Republican repression took in many places, historians such as Reynald Secher have called the event a "genocide".[146][147][148] Historian François Furet concluded that the repression in the Vendee "not only revealed massacre and destruction on an unprecedented scale but also a zeal so violent that it has bestowed as its legacy much of the region's identity."[149]
Profuse executions
The guillotine became the tool for a string of executions. Louis XVI had already been guillotined before the start of the terror; Queen Marie Antoinette, Barnave, Bailly, Brissot and other leading Girondins, Philippe Égalité (despite his vote for the death of the King), Madame Roland and many others were executed by guillotine. The Revolutionary Tribunal summarily condemned thousands of people to death by the guillotine, while mobs beat other victims to death.




Nine emigrants go to the guillotine in 1793


At the peak of the terror, the slightest hint of counter-revolutionary thoughts or activities (or, as in the case of Jacques Hébert, revolutionary zeal exceeding that of those in power) could place one under suspicion, and trials did not always proceed according to contemporary standards of due process.[citation needed] Sometimes people died for their political opinions or actions, but many for little reason beyond mere suspicion, or because some others had a stake in getting rid of them.[citation needed] Most of the victims received an unceremonious trip to the guillotine in an open wooden cart (the tumbrel). In the rebellious provinces, the government representatives had unlimited authority and some engaged in extreme repressions and abuses. For example, Jean-Baptiste Carrier became notorious for the Noyades ("drownings") he organised in Nantes;[150] his conduct was judged unacceptable even by the Jacobin government and he was recalled.[151]
Guillotining politicians
Maximilien Robespierre, since July 1793 member of the Committee of Public Prosperity,[130] on 5 February 1794 in a speech in the Convention identified Jacques Hébert and his faction as "internal enemies" working toward the triumph of tyranny.[135] After a dubious trial Hébert and some allies, charged with counter-revolutionary activities,[152] were guillotined in March.[135]
On 5 April, again at the instigation of Robespierre, Danton, a moderate Montagnard, and 13 associated politicians, charged with counter-revolutionary activities,[152] were executed.[135] A week later again 19 politicians. This hushed the Convention deputies: if henceforth they disagreed with Robespierre they hardly dared to speak out.[135]




The Festival of the Supreme Being on 8 June 1794


On 7 June 1794, Robespierre advocated a new state religion and recommended the Convention acknowledge the existence of the "Supreme Being".[152] A law enacted on 10 June 1794 (22 Prairial II) further streamlined criminal procedures: if the Revolutionary Tribunal saw sufficient proof of someone being an "enemy of the people" a counsel for defence would not be allowed. The frequency of guillotine executions in Paris now rose from on average three a day to an average of 29 a day.[135]
Meanwhile, France's external wars were going well, with victories over Austrian and British troops in May and June 1794 opening up Belgium for French conquest.[135] But cooperation within the Committee of Public Prosperity, since April 1793 the de facto executive government, started to break down. On 29 June 1794, three colleagues of Robespierre at 'the Committee' called him a dictator in his face – Robespierre baffled left the meeting. This encouraged other Convention members to also defy Robespierre. On 26 July, a long and vague speech of Robespierre wasn't met with thunderous applause as usual but with hostility; some deputies yelled that Robespierre should have the courage to say which deputies he deemed necessary to be killed next, what Robespierre refused to do.[135]
In the Convention session of 27 July 1794 (9 Thermidor of Year II), Robespierre and his allies hardly managed to say a word as they were constantly interrupted by a row of critics such as Tallien, Billaud-Varenne, Vadier, Barère and acting president Thuriot. Finally, even Robespierre's own voice failed on him: it faltered at his last attempt to beg permission to speak.[135]




The execution of Robespierre on 28 July 1794 marked the end of the Reign of Terror.


A decree was adopted to arrest Robespierre, Saint-Just and Couthon. 28 July, they and 19 other leading Jacobins were beheaded. 29 July, again 70 Parisians were guillotined.[135]
Subsequently, the Law of 22 Prairial (10 June 1794) was repealed, and the 'Girondins' expelled from the Convention in June 1793, if not dead yet, were reinstated as Convention deputies.[153]
Disregarding the lower classes
After July 1794, the French government was dominated by 'Girondins', who indulged in revenge and violence and death sentences against people associated with the previous 'Jacobin'/'Montagnard' governments around Robespierre and Marat, in what was known as the White Terror.[154] The Jacobin Club was closed and banned.[155][156]
After July 1794, most civilians henceforth ignored the Republican calendar and returned to the traditional seven-day weeks. The government in a law of 21 February 1795 set steps of return to freedom of religion and reconciliation with the since 1790 refractory Catholic priests, but any religious signs outside churches or private homes, such as crosses, clerical garb, bell ringing, remained prohibited. When the people's enthousiasm for attending church grew to unexpected levels the government backed out and in October 1795 again, like in 1790, required all priests to swear oaths on the Republic.[153]
In the very cold winter of 1794–95, with the French army demanding more and more bread, same was getting scarce in Paris as was wood to keep houses warm, and in an echo of the October 1789 March on Versailles, on 1 April 1795 (12 Germinal III) a mostly female crowd marched on the Convention calling for bread. But no Convention member sympathized, they just told the women to return home. Again in May a crowd of 20,000 men and 40,000 women invaded the Convention and even killed a deputy in the halls, but again they failed to make the Convention take notice of the needs of the lower classes. Instead, the Convention banned women from all political assemblies, and deputies who had solidarized with this insurrection were sentenced to death: such allegiance between parliament and street fighting was no longer tolerated.[153]
Late 1794, France conquered present-day Belgium.[157] In January 1795 they subdued the Dutch Republic with full consent and cooperation of the influential Dutch patriottenbeweging ('patriots movement'), resulting in the Batavian Republic, a satellite and puppet state of France.[158][159] In April 1795, France concluded a peace agreement with Prussia,[160] later that year peace was agreed with Spain.[citation needed]
The Directory (1795–99)
Main article: French Directory
The Convention on 22 August 1795 approved the new "Constitution of the Year III". A French plebiscite ratified the document, with about 1,057,000 votes for the constitution and 49,000 against.[161] The results of the voting were announced on 23 September 1795, and the new constitution took effect on 27 September 1795.[161] The new constitution created the Directoire (English: Directory) with a bicameral legislature.
The first chamber was called the 'Council of 500' initiating the laws, the second the 'Council of Elders' reviewing and approving or not the passed laws. Each year, one-third of the chambers was to be renewed. The executive power was in the hands of the five members of the five directors of the Directory with a five-year mandate.[153]
The early directors did not much understand the nation they were governing; they especially had an innate inability to see Catholicism as anything else than counter-revolutionary and royalist. Local administrators had a better sense of people's priorities, and one of them wrote to the minister of the interior: "Give back the crosses, the church bells, the Sundays, and everyone will cry: ’vive la République!’"[153]
The Directory denounced the arbitrary executions of the Reign of Terror, but itself engaged in large scale illegal repressions, as well as large-scale massacres of civilians in the Vendee uprising. The economy continued in bad condition, with the poor especially hurt by the high cost of food.
State finances were in total disarray; the government could only cover its expenses through the plunder and the tribute of foreign countries. If peace were made, the armies would return home and the directors would have to face the exasperation of the rank-and-file who had lost their livelihood, as well as the ambition of generals who could, in a moment, brush them aside. Barras and Rewbell were notoriously corrupt themselves and screened corruption in others. The patronage of the directors was ill-bestowed, and the general maladministration heightened their unpopularity.[162]




A small French force tried to invade Britain in February 1797. This contemporary image shows troops landing near Fishguard in Wales. The troops were later forced to surrender.


The constitutional party in the legislature desired toleration of the nonjuring clergy, the repeal of the laws against the relatives of the émigrés, and some merciful discrimination towards the émigrés themselves. The directors baffled all such endeavours. On the other hand, the socialist conspiracy of Babeuf was easily quelled. Little was done to improve the finances, and the assignats continued to fall in value until each note was worth less than the paper it was printed on; debtors easily paid off their debts.[163] A series of financial reforms started by the Directory finally took effect after it fell from power.[citation needed]
Evaluation
Although committed to Republicanism, the Directory distrusted democracy.[citation needed] Historians have seldom praised the Directory; it was a government of self-interest rather than virtue, thus losing any claim on idealism. It never had a strong base of popular support; when elections were held, most of its candidates were defeated. Its achievements were minor.[164][165] Brown stresses the turn towards dictatorship and the failure of liberal democracy under the Directory, blaming it on, "chronic violence, ambivalent forms of justice, and repeated recourse to heavy-handed repression."[166]




General Napoleon and his troops crossing the bridge of Arcole in 1796


The election system was complex and designed to insulate the government from grass roots democracy. The parliament consisted of two houses: the Conseil des Cinq-Cents (Council of the Five Hundred) with 500 representatives, and the Conseil des Anciens (Council of Elders) with 250 senators. Executive power went to five "directors," named annually by the Conseil des Anciens from a list submitted by the Conseil des Cinq-Cents. The universal male suffrage of 1793 was replaced by limited suffrage based on property. The voters had only a limited choice because the electoral rules required two-thirds of the seats go to members of the old Convention, no matter how few popular votes they received.[167]
Citizens of the war-weary nation wanted stability, peace, and an end to conditions that at times bordered on chaos. Nevertheless, those on the right who wished to restore the monarchy by putting Louis XVIII on the throne, and those on the left who would have renewed the Reign of Terror, tried but failed to overthrow the Directory. The earlier atrocities had made confidence or goodwill between parties impossible.[168] The Directory régime met opposition from Jacobins on the left and royalists on the right (the latter were secretly subsidised by the British government). The army suppressed riots and counter-revolutionary activities. In this way the army and in particular Napoleon gained total power.[citation needed]
Coups d'état
Parliamentary elections in the spring of 1797, for one-third of the seats in Parliament, resulted in considerable gains for the royalists,[153] who seemed poised to take control of the Directory in the next elections. This frightened the republican directors and they reacted, in the Coup of 18 Fructidor V (4 September 1797), by purging all the winners banishing 57 leaders to certain death in Guiana, removing two supposedly pro-royalist directors, and closing 42 newspapers.
The new, 'corrected' government, still strongly convinced that Catholicism and royalism were equally dangerous to the Republic, started a fresh campaign to promote the Republican calendar (officially introduced in 1792), with its ten-day week, and tried to hallow the tenth day, décadi, as substitute for the Christian Sunday. Not only citizens opposed and even mocked such decrees, also local government officials refused to enforce such laws.[153]




Napoléon Bonaparte in the coup d'état of 18 Brumaire VIII (9 November 1799).


France was still waging wars, in 1798 in Egypt, Switzerland, Rome, Ireland, Belgium and against the U.S.A., in 1799 in Baden-Württemberg. When the elections of 1798 were again carried by the opposition, the Directory used the army to imprison and exile the opposition leaders and close their newspapers.[citation needed] Increasingly it depended on the Army in foreign and domestic affairs, as well as finance.
In 1799, when the French armies abroad experienced some setbacks, the newly chosen director Sieyes considered a new overhaul necessary for the Directory's form of government because in his opinion it needed a stronger executive. Together with successful general Napoleon Bonaparte who had just returned to France, Sieyes began preparing another coup d'état, which took place on 9–10 November 1799 (18–19 Brumaire VIII), replacing the five directors now with three "consuls": Napoleon, Sieyes, and Roger Ducos.[153] That coup some historians consider the closing of the specifically republican phase of the French Revolution.[169]
Exporting the Revolution
The Army at first was quite successful. It conquered Belgium and turned it into another province of France. It conquered the Netherlands and made it a puppet state. It conquered Switzerland and most of Italy, setting up a series of puppet states. The result was glory for France, and an infusion of much needed money from the conquered lands, which also provided direct support to the French Army. However, the enemies of France, led by Britain and funded by the inexhaustible British Treasury, formed a Second Coalition in 1799 (with Britain joined by Russia, the Ottoman Empire, and Austria). It scored a series of victories that rolled back French successes, retaking Italy, Switzerland and the Netherlands and ending the flow of payments from the conquered areas to France. The treasury was empty. Despite his publicity claiming many glorious victories, Napoleon's army was trapped in Egypt after the British sank the French fleet at the Battle of the Nile. Napoleon escaped by himself, returned to Paris and overthrew the Directory in November, 1799.[170][171]




French-Dutch victory under General Brune and General Daendels against the Russians and British in 1799.


Napoleon conquered most of Italy in the name of the French Revolution in 1797–99. He consolidated old units and split up Austria's holdings. He set up a series of new republics, complete with new codes of law and abolition of old feudal privileges. Napoleon's Cisalpine Republic was centred on Milan. Genoa the city became a republic while its hinterland became the Ligurian Republic. The Roman Republic was formed out of the papal holdings and the pope was sent to France. The Neapolitan Republic was formed around Naples, but it lasted only five months before the enemy forces of the Coalition recaptured it. In 1805 he formed the Kingdom of Italy, with himself as king and his stepson as viceroy. In addition, France turned the Netherlands into the Batavian Republic, and Switzerland into the Helvetic Republic. All these new countries were satellites of France, and had to pay large subsidies to Paris, as well as provide military support for Napoleon's wars. Their political and administrative systems were modernised, the metric system introduced, and trade barriers reduced. Jewish ghettos were abolished. Belgium and Piedmont became integral parts of France.[172]
Most of the new nations were abolished and returned to prewar owners in 1814. However, Artz emphasises the benefits the Italians gained from the French Revolution:

For nearly two decades the Italians had the excellent codes of law, a fair system of taxation, a better economic situation, and more religious and intellectual toleration than they had known for centuries... Everywhere old physical, economic, and intellectual barriers had been thrown down and the Italians had begun to be aware of a common nationality.[173]

Media and symbolism
Main article: Symbolism in the French Revolution
Newspapers




A copy of L'Ami du peuple stained with the blood of Marat


In the Old regime there were a small number of heavily censored newspapers that needed a royal licence to operate. Newspapers and pamphlets played a central role in stimulating and defining the Revolution. The meetings of the Estates-General in 1789 created an enormous demand for news, and over 130 newspapers appeared by the end of the year. Among the most significant of these newspapers in 1789 were Marat's L'Ami du peuple and Elysée Loustallot's Revolutions de Paris. The next decade saw 2000 newspapers founded, with 500 in Paris alone. Most lasted only a matter of weeks. Together they became the main communication medium, combined with the very large pamphlet literature.[174] Newspapers were read aloud in taverns and clubs, and circulated hand to hand. The press saw its lofty role to be the advancement of civic republicanism based on public service, and downplayed the liberal, individualistic goal of making a profit.[175][176][177][178] By 1793 the radicals were most active but at the start the royalists flooded the country with their press the "Ami du Roi" (Friends of the King) until they were suppressed.[179] Napoleon only allowed four newspapers, all under tight control.
Symbolism
Symbolism was a device to distinguish the main features of the Revolution and ensure public identification and support. In order to effectively illustrate the differences between the new Republic and the old regime, the leaders needed to implement a new set of symbols to be celebrated instead of the old religious and monarchical symbolism. To this end, symbols were borrowed from historic cultures and redefined, while those of the old regime were either destroyed or reattributed acceptable characteristics. These revised symbols were used to instil in the public a new sense of tradition and reverence for the Enlightenment and the Republic.[180]
La Marseillaise
Main article: La Marseillaise




Rouget de Lisle, composer of the Marseillaise, sings it for the first time in 1792











La Marseillaise
















The French national anthem La Marseillaise; text in French.






Problems playing this file? See media help.


"La Marseillaise" (French pronunciation: ​[la maʁsɛjɛz]) became the national anthem of France. The song was written and composed in 1792 by Claude Joseph Rouget de Lisle, and was originally titled "Chant de guerre pour l'Armée du Rhin". The French National Convention adopted it as the First Republic's anthem in 1795. It acquired its nickname after being sung in Paris by volunteers from Marseille marching on the capital.
The song is the first example of the "European march" anthemic style. The anthem's evocative melody and lyrics have led to its widespread use as a song of revolution and its incorporation into many pieces of classical and popular music. Cerulo says, "the design of "La Marseillaise" is credited to General Strasburg of France, who is said to have directed de Lisle, the composer of the anthem, to 'produce one of those hymns which conveys to the soul of the people the enthusiasm which it (the music) suggests.'"[181]




English cartoon attacking the excesses of the Revolution as symbolised by the guillotine; between 18,000 and 40,000 people were executed during the Reign of Terror


Guillotine
Main article: Guillotine
Hanson notes, "The guillotine stands as the principal symbol of the Terror in the French Revolution."[182] Invented by a physician during the Revolution as a quicker, more efficient and more distinctive form of execution, the guillotine became a part of popular culture and historic memory. It was celebrated on the left as the people's avenger and cursed as the symbol of the Reign of Terror by the right.[183] Its operation became a popular entertainment that attracted great crowds of spectators. Vendors sold programmes listing the names of those scheduled to die. Many people came day after day and vied for the best locations from which to observe the proceedings; knitting women (tricoteuses) formed a cadre of hardcore regulars, inciting the crowd. Parents often brought their children. By the end of the Terror, the crowds had thinned drastically. Repetition had staled even this most grisly of entertainments, and audiences grew bored.[184]
What it is that horrifies people changes over time. Doyle comments:

Even the unique horror of the guillotine has been dwarfed by the gas chambers of the Holocaust, the organized brutality of the gulag, the mass intimidation of Mao's cultural revolution, or the killing fields of Cambodia.[185]

Tricolore cockade
Main article: tricolore cockade
Cockades were widely worn by revolutionaries beginning in 1789. They now pinned the blue-and-red cockade of Paris onto the white cockade of the Ancien Régime – thus producing the original Tricolore cockade. Later, distinctive colours and styles of cockade would indicate the wearer's faction—although the meanings of the various styles were not entirely consistent, and varied somewhat by region and period.




The tricolour cockade, created in July 1789. White was added to "nationalise" an earlier blue and red design.


The tricolour flag is derived from the cockades used in the 1790s. These were circular rosette-like emblems attached to the hat. Camille Desmoulins asked his followers to wear green cockades on 12 July 1789. The Paris militia, formed on 13 July, adopted a blue and red cockade. Blue and red are the traditional colours of Paris, and they are used on the city's coat of arms. Cockades with various colour schemes were used during the storming of the Bastille on 14 July.[186] The blue and red cockade was presented to King Louis XVI at the Hôtel de Ville on 17 July. Lafayette argued for the addition of a white stripe to "nationalise" the design.[187] On 27 July, a tricolour cockade was adopted as part of the uniform of the National Guard, the national police force that succeeded the militia.[188]
Well after the revolution, by 1912 the French Third Republic had authorised the form of the tricolore cockade for use on its military aircraft by the Aeronautique Militaire as a national insignia,[189] the first-ever in use worldwide – it is still in use by the current Armee de l'Air of France, and directly inspired the use of similar roundel insignia by the United Kingdom and many other nations worldwide.
Fasces




The unofficial but common National Emblem of France is backed by a fasces, representing justice.


Fasces are Roman in origin and suggest Roman Republicanism. Fasces are a bundle of birch rods containing an axe. The French Republic continued this Roman symbol to represent state power, justice, and unity.[180]
Liberty cap




Early depiction of the tricolour in the hands of a sans-culotte


The Liberty cap, also known as the Phrygian cap, or pileus, is a brimless, felt cap that is conical in shape with the tip pulled forward. It reflects Roman republicanism and liberty, alluding to the Roman ritual of manumission of slaves, in which a freed slave receives the bonnet as a symbol of his newfound liberty.[190]
Role of women
Main articles: Women in the French Revolution and Militant feminism in the French Revolution




Club of patriotic women in a church


Historians since the late 20th century have debated how women shared in the French Revolution and what long-term impact it had on French women. Women had no political rights in pre-Revolutionary France; they were considered "passive" citizens; forced to rely on men to determine what was best for them. That changed dramatically in theory as there seemingly were great advances in feminism. Feminism emerged in Paris as part of a broad demand for social and political reform. The women demanded equality for men and then moved on to a demand for the end of male domination. Their chief vehicle for agitation were pamphlets and women's clubs, but the clubs were abolished in October 1793 and their leaders were arrested. The movement was crushed. Devance explains the decision in terms of the emphasis on masculinity in a wartime situation, Marie Antoinette's bad reputation for feminine interference in state affairs, and traditional male supremacy.[191] A decade later the Napoleonic Code confirmed and perpetuated women's second-class status.[192]
When the Revolution opened, groups of women acted forcefully, making use of the volatile political climate. Women forced their way into the political sphere. They swore oaths of loyalty, "solemn declarations of patriotic allegiance, [and] affirmations of the political responsibilities of citizenship." De Corday d'Armont is a prime example of such a woman; engaged in the revolutionary political faction of the Girondins, she assassinated the Jacobin leader, Marat. Throughout the Revolution, other women such as Pauline Léon and her Society of Revolutionary Republican Women supported the radical Jacobins, staged demonstrations in the National Assembly and participated in the riots, often using armed force.[193]
The March to Versailles is but one example of feminist militant activism during the French Revolution. While largely left out of the thrust for increasing rights of citizens, as the question was left indeterminate in the Declaration of the Rights of Man,[194] activists such as Pauline Léon and Théroigne de Méricourt agitated for full citizenship for women.[195] Women were, nonetheless, "denied political rights of 'active citizenship' (1791) and democratic citizenship (1793)."[194]
On 20 June 1792 a number of armed women took part in a procession that "passed through the halls of the Legislative Assembly, into the Tuileries Gardens, and then through the King's residence."[196] Militant women also assumed a special role in the funeral of Marat, following his murder on 13 July 1793. As part of the funeral procession, they carried the bathtub in which Marat had been murdered (by a counter-revolutionary woman) as well as a shirt stained with Marat's blood.[197] On 20 May 1793 women were at the fore of a crowd that demanded "bread and the Constitution of 1793." When their cries went unnoticed, the women went on a rampage, "sacking shops, seizing grain and kidnapping officials."[198]




Olympe de Gouges was the author of the Declaration of the Rights of Woman and the Female Citizen in 1791.


The Society of Revolutionary Republican Women, a militant group on the far left, demanded a law in 1793 that would compel all women to wear the tricolour cockade to demonstrate their loyalty to the Republic. They also demanded vigorous price controls to keep bread – the major food of the poor people – from becoming too expensive. After the Convention passage law in September 1793, the Revolutionary Republican Women demanded vigorous enforcement, but were counted by market women, former servants, and religious women who adamantly opposed price controls (which would drive them out of business ) and resented attacks on the aristocracy and on religion. Fist fights broke out in the streets between the two factions of women.
Meanwhile, the men who controlled the Jacobins rejected the Revolutionary Republican Women as dangerous rabble-rousers. At this point the Jacobins controlled the government; they dissolved the Society of Revolutionary Republican Women, and decreed that all women's clubs and associations were illegal. They sternly reminded women to stay home and tend to their families by leaving public affairs to the men. Organised women were permanently shut out of the French Revolution after October 30, 1793.[199]
Prominent women
Olympe de Gouges wrote a number of plays, short stories, and novels. Her publications emphasised that women and men are different, but this shouldn't stop them from equality under the law. In her "Declaration on the Rights of Woman" she insisted that women deserved rights, especially in areas concerning them directly, such as divorce and recognition of illegitimate children.[200]
Madame Roland (a.k.a. Manon or Marie Roland) was another important female activist. Her political focus was not specifically on women or their liberation. She focused on other aspects of the government, but was a feminist by virtue of the fact that she was a woman working to influence the world. Her personal letters to leaders of the Revolution influenced policy; in addition, she often hosted political gatherings of the Brissotins, a political group which allowed women to join. As she was led to the scaffold, Madame Roland shouted "O liberty! What crimes are committed in thy name!"[201]
Most of these activists were punished for their actions. Many of the women of the Revolution were even publicly executed for "conspiring against the unity and the indivisibility of the Republic".[202]
Counter-revolutionary women
A major aspect of the French Revolution was the dechristianisation movement, a movement strongly rejected by many devout people. Especially for women living in rural areas of France, the closing of the churches meant a loss of normalcy.[203]
When these revolutionary changes to the Church were implemented, it sparked a counter-revolutionary movement among women. Although some of these women embraced the political and social amendments of the Revolution, they opposed the dissolution of the Catholic Church and the formation of revolutionary cults like the Cult of the Supreme Being.[204] As Olwen Hufton argues, these women began to see themselves as the "defenders of faith".[205] They took it upon themselves to protect the Church from what they saw as a heretical change to their faith, enforced by revolutionaries.
Counter-revolutionary women resisted what they saw as the intrusion of the state into their lives.[206] Economically, many peasant women refused to sell their goods for assignats because this form of currency was unstable and was backed by the sale of confiscated Church property. By far the most important issue to counter-revolutionary women was the passage and the enforcement of the Civil Constitution of the Clergy in 1790. In response to this measure, women in many areas began circulating anti-oath pamphlets and refused to attend masses held by priests who had sworn oaths of loyalty to the Republic. These women continued to adhere to traditional practices such as Christian burials and naming their children after saints in spite of revolutionary decrees to the contrary.[207]
Economic policies




Early Assignat of 29 Sept, 1790: 500 livres






The value of Assignats (1789–96)


The French Revolution abolished many of the constraints on the economy that had slowed growth during the ancien regime. It abolished tithes owed to local churches as well as feudal dues owed to local landlords. The result hurt the tenants, who paid both higher rents and higher taxes.[208] It nationalised all church lands, as well as lands belonging to royalist enemies who went into exile. It planned to use these seized lands to finance the government by issuing assignats. It abolished the guild system as a worthless remnant of feudalism.[209] It also abolished the highly inefficient system of tax farming, whereby private individuals would collect taxes for a hefty fee. The government seized the foundations that had been set up (starting in the 13th century) to provide an annual stream of revenue for hospitals, poor relief, and education. The state sold the lands but typically local authorities did not replace the funding and so most of the nation's charitable and school systems were massively disrupted.[210]
The economy did poorly in 1790–96 as industrial and agricultural output dropped, foreign trade plunged, and prices soared. The government decided not to repudiate the old debts. Instead it issued more and more paper money (called "assignat") that supposedly were grounded seized lands. The result was escalating inflation. The government imposed price controls and persecuted speculators and traders in the black market. People increasingly refused to pay taxes as the annual government deficit increased from 10% of gross national product in 1789 to 64% in 1793. By 1795, after the bad harvest of 1794 and the removal of price controls, inflation had reached a level of 3500%. The assignats were withdrawn in 1796 but the replacements also fuelled inflation. The inflation was finally ended by Napoleon in 1803 with the franc as the new currency.[211]
Napoleon after 1799 paid for his expensive wars by multiple means, starting with the modernisation of the rickety financial system.[212] He conscripted soldiers at low wages, raised taxes, placed large-scale loans, sold lands formerly owned by the Catholic Church, sold Louisiana to the United States, plundered conquered areas and seized food supplies, and levied requisitions on countries he controlled, such as Italy.[213]
Long-term impact
Main article: Influence of the French Revolution
The French Revolution had a major impact on Europe and the New World, decisively changing the course of human history.[214][215]
It brought an end to feudalism and made a path for future advances in broadly defined individual freedoms.[2][3][4]
Otto Dann and John Dinwiddy report, "It has long been almost a truism of European history that the French Revolution gave a great stimulus to the growth of modern nationalism."[216] Nationalism was emphasised by historian Carlton J. H. Hayes as a major result of the French Revolution across Europe. The impact on French nationalism was profound. For example, Napoleon became such a heroic symbol of the nation that the glory was easily picked up by his nephew, who was overwhelmingly elected president (and later became Emperor Napoleon III).[217] The influence was great in the hundreds of small German states and elsewhere, where it was either inspired by the French example or in reaction against it.[218][219]
France
The changes in France were enormous; some were widely accepted and others were bitterly contested into the late 20th century.[220] Before the Revolution, the people had little power or voice. The kings had so thoroughly centralised the system that most nobles spent their time at Versailles, and thus played only a small direct role in their home districts. Thompson says that the kings had:

ruled by virtue of their personal wealth, their patronage of the nobility, their disposal of ecclesiastical offices, their provincial governors (intendants) their control over the judges and magistrates, and their command of the Army.[221]

After the first year of revolution, this power had been stripped away. The king was a figurehead, the nobility had lost all their titles and most of their land, the Church lost its monasteries and farmlands, bishops, judges and magistrates were elected by the people, the army was almost helpless, with military power in the hands of the new revolutionary National Guard. The central elements of 1789 were the slogan "Liberty, Equality and Fraternity' and "The Declaration of the Rights of Man and the Citizen", which Lefebvre calls "the incarnation of the Revolution as a whole."[222]
The long-term impact on France was profound, shaping politics, society, religion and ideas, and polarising politics for more than a century. Historian François Aulard writes:

From the social point of view, the Revolution consisted in the suppression of what was called the feudal system, in the emancipation of the individual, in greater division of landed property, the abolition of the privileges of noble birth, the establishment of equality, the simplification of life.... The French Revolution differed from other revolutions in being not merely national, for it aimed at benefiting all humanity."[223]

Religion and charity
The most heated controversy was over the status of the Catholic Church.[224] From a dominant position in 1788, it was almost destroyed in less than a decade, its priests and nuns turned out, its leaders dead or in exile, its property controlled by its enemies, and a strong effort underway to remove all influence of Christian religiosity, such as Sundays, holy days, saints, prayers, rituals and ceremonies. The movement to dechristianise France not only failed but aroused a furious reaction among the pious.[225][226] Napoleon's Concordat was a compromise that restored some of the Catholic Church's traditional roles but not its power, its lands or its monasteries. Priests and bishops were given salaries as part of a department of government controlled by Paris, not Rome. Protestants and Jews gained equal rights.[227] Battles over the role of religion in the public sphere, and closely related issues such as church-controlled schools, that were opened by the Revolution have never seen closure. They raged into the 20th century. By the 21st century, angry debates exploded over the presence of any Muslim religious symbols in schools, such as the headscarves for which Muslim girls could be expelled. J. Christopher Soper and Joel S. Fetzer explicitly link the conflict over religious symbols in public to the French Revolution, when the target was Catholic rituals and symbols.[228]
The revolutionary government seized the charitable foundations that had been set up (starting in the 13th century) to provide an annual stream of revenue for hospitals, poor relief, and education. The state sold the lands but typically local authorities did not replace the funding and so most of the nation's charitable and school systems were massively disrupted.[210]
In the ancien regime, new opportunities for nuns as charitable practitioners were created by devout nobles on their own estates. The nuns provided comprehensive care for the sick poor on their patrons' estates, not only acting as nurses, but taking on expanded roles as physicians, surgeons, and apothecaries. During the Revolution, most of the orders of nuns were shut down and there was no organised nursing care to replace them.[229] However, the demand for their nursing services remained strong, and after 1800 the sisters reappeared and resumed their work in hospitals and on rural estates. They were tolerated by officials because they had widespread support and were the link between elite male physicians and distrustful peasants who needed help.[230]
Economics
Two thirds of France was employed in agriculture, which was transformed by the Revolution. With the breakup of large estates controlled by the Church and the nobility and worked by hired hands, rural France became more a land of small independent farms. Harvest taxes were ended, such as the tithe and seigneurial dues, much to the relief of the peasants. Primogeniture was ended both for nobles and peasants, thereby weakening the family patriarch. Because all the children had a share in the family's property, there was a declining birth rate.[231][232] Cobban says the revolution bequeathed to the nation "a ruling class of landowners."[233]
In the cities, entrepreneurship on a small scale flourished, as restrictive monopolies, privileges, barriers, rules, taxes and guilds gave way. However, the British blockade virtually ended overseas and colonial trade, hurting the port cities and their supply chains. Overall, the Revolution did not greatly change the French business system, and probably helped freeze in place the horizons of the small business owner. The typical businessman owned a small store, mill or shop, with family help and a few paid employees; large-scale industry was less common than in other industrialising nations.[234]
A 2017 National Bureau of Economic Research paper found that the emigration of more than 100,000 individuals (predominantly supporters of the Old Regime) during the Revolution had a significant negative impact on income per capita in the 19th century (due to the fragmentation of agricultural holdings) but became positive in the second half of the 20th century onward (because it facilitated the rise in human capital investments).[235] Another 2017 paper found that the redistribution of land had a positive impact on agricultural productivity, but that these gains gradually declined over the course of the 19th century.[236][237]
Constitutionalism
The Revolution meant an end to arbitrary royal rule, and held out the promise of rule by law under a constitutional order, but it did not rule out a monarch. Napoleon as emperor set up a constitutional system (although he remained in full control), and the restored Bourbons were forced to go along with one. After the abdication of Napoleon III in 1871, the monarchists probably had a voting majority, but they were so factionalised they could not agree on who should be king, and instead the French Third Republic was launched with a deep commitment to upholding the ideals of the Revolution.[238][239] The conservative Catholic enemies of the Revolution came to power in Vichy France (1940–44), and tried with little success to undo its heritage, but they kept it a republic. Vichy denied the principle of equality and tried to replace the Revolutionary watchwords "Liberty, Equality, Fraternity" with "Work, Family, and Fatherland." However, there were no efforts by the Bourbons, Vichy or anyone else to restore the privileges that had been stripped away from the nobility in 1789. France permanently became a society of equals under the law.[240]
Communism
The Jacobin cause was picked up by Marxists in the mid-19th century and became an element of communist thought around the world. In the Soviet Union, "Gracchus" Babeuf was regarded as a hero.[241]
Outside France
Main article: Influence of the French Revolution
According to Daron Acemoglu, Davide Cantoni, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson the French Revolution had long-term effects in Europe. They suggest that "areas that were occupied by the French and that underwent radical institutional reform experienced more rapid urbanization and economic growth, especially after 1850. There is no evidence of a negative effect of French invasion."[242]
A 2016 study in the European Economic Review found that the areas of Germany that were occupied by France in the 19th century and in which the Code Napoleon was applied have higher levels of trust and cooperation today.[243]
Britain
On July 16, 1789, two days after the Storming of the Bastille, John Frederick Sackville, serving as ambassador to France, reported to Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs Francis Osborne, 5th Duke of Leeds, "Thus, my Lord, the greatest revolution that we know anything of has been effected with, comparatively speaking—if the magnitude of the event is considered—the loss of very few lives. From this moment we may consider France as a free country, the King a very limited monarch, and the nobility as reduced to a level with the rest of the nation.[244]" Yet Britain saw minority support while the majority, and especially the among aristocracy, strongly opposed the French Revolution. Britain led and funded the series of coalitions that fought France from 1793 to 1815, and then restored the Bourbons.
Philosophically, there was a significant debate internally, regarding the revolution, including the Revolution Controversy, a "pamphlet war" set off by the publication of Richard Price's speech, A Discourse on the Love of Our Country, supporting the French Revolution (as he had the American Revolution), and saying that patriotism actually centers around loving the people and principles of a nation, not its ruling class. Edmund Burke responded with his own pamphlet, Reflections on the Revolution in France, attacking the French Revolution as a threat to the aristocracy of all countries.[245][246] William Coxe opposed Price's premise that one's country is principles and people, not the State itself.[247]
Conversely, two seminal political pieces of political history were written in Price's favor, supporting the general right of the French people to replace their State, Rights of Man by Thomas Paine, and A Vindication of the Rights of Men by Mary Wollstonecraft, who followed this with what is sometimes described as the first feminist text, A Vindication of the Rights of Woman. In 1792 Christopher Wyvill published Defence of Dr. Price and the Reformers of England, a plea for reform and moderation.[248]
This exchange of ideas has been described as "one of the great political debates in British history".[249] Even in France, there was a varying degree of agreement during this debate, English participants generally opposing the violent means that the Revolution bent itself to for its ends.[250]
In Ireland, the effect was to transform what had been an attempt by Protestant settlers to gain some autonomy into a mass movement led by the Society of United Irishmen involving Catholics and Protestants. It stimulated the demand for further reform throughout Ireland, especially in Ulster. The upshot was a revolt in 1798, led by Wolfe Tone, that was crushed by Britain.[251]
Germany
German reaction to the Revolution swung from favourable to antagonistic. At first it brought liberal and democratic ideas, the end of gilds, serfdom and the Jewish ghetto. It brought economic freedoms and agrarian and legal reform. Above all the antagonism helped stimulate and shape German nationalism.[252]
Switzerland
Main article: Helvetic Republic
The French invaded Switzerland and turned it into an ally known as the "Helvetic Republic" (1798–1803). The interference with localism and traditional liberties was deeply resented, although some modernising reforms took place.[253][254]
Belgium
Main article: French period




The Brabant Revolution broke out in the Austrian Netherlands in October 1789, inspired by the revolution in neighbouring France, but had collapsed by the end of 1790


The region of modern-day Belgium was divided between two polities: the Austrian Netherlands and Prince-Bishopric of Liège. Both territories experienced revolutions in 1789. In the Austrian Netherlands, the Brabant Revolution succeeded in expelling Austrian forces and established the new United Belgian States. The Liège Revolution expelled the tyrannical Prince-Bishop and installed a republic. Both failed to attract international support. By December 1790, the Brabant revolution had been crushed and Liège was subdued the following year.
During the Revolutionary Wars, the French invaded and occupied the region between 1794 and 1814, a time known as the French period. The new government enforced new reforms, incorporating the region into France itself. New rulers were sent in by Paris. Belgian men were drafted into the French wars and heavily taxed. Nearly everyone was Catholic, but the Church was repressed. Resistance was strong in every sector, as Belgian nationalism emerged to oppose French rule. The French legal system, however, was adopted, with its equal legal rights, and abolition of class distinctions. Belgium now had a government bureaucracy selected by merit.[255]
Antwerp regained access to the sea and grew quickly as a major port and business centre. France promoted commerce and capitalism, paving the way for the ascent of the bourgeoisie and the rapid growth of manufacturing and mining. In economics, therefore, the nobility declined while the middle class Belgian entrepreneurs flourished because of their inclusion in a large market, paving the way for Belgium's leadership role after 1815 in the Industrial Revolution on the Continent.[256][257]
Scandinavia
Main article: History of Denmark § Reforms
The Kingdom of Denmark adopted liberalising reforms in line with those of the French Revolution, with no direct contact. Reform was gradual and the regime itself carried out agrarian reforms that had the effect of weakening absolutism by creating a class of independent peasant freeholders. Much of the initiative came from well-organised liberals who directed political change in the first half of the 19th century.[258]
United States
The Revolution deeply polarised American politics, and this polarisation led to the creation of the First Party System. In 1793, as war broke out in Europe, the Republican Party led by Thomas Jefferson favoured France and pointed to the 1778 treaty that was still in effect. George Washington and his unanimous cabinet, including Jefferson, decided that the treaty did not bind the United States to enter the war. Washington proclaimed neutrality instead.[259] Under President John Adams, a Federalist, an undeclared naval war took place with France from 1798 until 1799, often called the "Quasi War". Jefferson became president in 1801, but was hostile to Napoleon as a dictator and emperor. However, the two entered negotiations over the Louisiana Territory and agreed to the Louisiana Purchase in 1803, an acquisition that substantially increased the size of the United States.
Historiography
Main article: Historiography of the French Revolution
The French Revolution has received enormous amounts of historical attention, both from the general public and from scholars and academics. The views of historians, in particular, have been characterised as falling along ideological lines, with disagreement over the significance and the major developments of the Revolution.[260] Alexis de Tocqueville argued that the Revolution was a manifestation of a more prosperous middle class becoming conscious of its social importance.[261]
Other thinkers, like the conservative Edmund Burke, maintained that the Revolution was the product of a few conspiratorial individuals who brainwashed the masses into subverting the old order—a claim rooted in the belief that the revolutionaries had no legitimate complaints.[262] Other historians, influenced by Marxist thinking, have emphasised the importance of the peasants and the urban workers in presenting the Revolution as a gigantic class struggle.[263] In general, scholarship on the French Revolution initially studied the political ideas and developments of the era, but it has gradually shifted towards social history that analyses the impact of the Revolution on individual lives.[264]
Historians until the late 20th century emphasised class conflicts from a largely Marxist perspective as the fundamental driving cause of the Revolution.[265] The central theme of this argument was that the Revolution emerged from the rising bourgeoisie, with support from the sans-culottes, who fought to destroy the aristocracy.[266] However, Western scholars largely abandoned Marxist interpretations in the 1990s. By the year 2000 many historians were saying that the field of the French Revolution was in intellectual disarray. The old model or paradigm focusing on class conflict has been discredited, and no new explanatory model had gained widespread support.[267][268] Nevertheless, as Spang has shown, there persists a very widespread agreement to the effect that the French Revolution was the watershed between the premodern and modern eras of Western history.[269]
Historians widely regard the Revolution as one of the most important events in history. It marks the end of the early modern period, which started around 1500 and is often seen as marking the "dawn of the modern era".[270] Within France itself, the Revolution permanently crippled the power of the aristocracy and drained the wealth of the Church, although the two institutions survived despite the damage they sustained. After the collapse of the First Empire in 1815, the French public lost the rights and privileges earned since the Revolution, but they remembered the participatory politics that characterised the period, with one historian commenting: "Thousands of men and even many women gained firsthand experience in the political arena: they talked, read, and listened in new ways; they voted; they joined new organisations; and they marched for their political goals. Revolution became a tradition, and republicanism an enduring option."[271]
Some historians argue that the French people underwent a fundamental transformation in self-identity, evidenced by the elimination of privileges and their replacement by rights as well as the growing decline in social deference that highlighted the principle of equality throughout the Revolution.[272] The Revolution represented the most significant and dramatic challenge to political absolutism up to that point in history and spread democratic ideals throughout Europe and ultimately the world.[273] Throughout the 19th Century, the revolution was heavily analysed by economists and political scientists, who saw the class nature of the revolution as a fundamental aspect in understanding human social evolution itself. This, combined with the egalitarian values introduced by the revolution, gave rise to a classless and co-operative model for society called "socialism" which profoundly influenced future revolutions in France and around the world.
See also

Timeline of the French Revolution
Glossary of the French Revolution for definitions of technical terms
List of people associated with the French Revolution
History of France
Paris in the 18th Century

Political clubs during the French Revolution

Jacobin
Cordeliers
Feuillant
Society of the Friends of Truth
Montagnards
Girondin

Notes



^ Livesey, James. Making Democracy in the French Revolution p. 19 The Revolution created and elaborated...the ideal of democracy, which forms the creative tension with the notion of sovereignty that informs the functioning of modern democratic liberal states. This was the truly original contribution of the Revolution to modern political culture.
^ a b Linda S. Frey and Marsha L. Frey, The French Revolution (2004), Foreword.
^ a b R.R. Palmer and Joel Colton, A History of the Modern World (5th ed. 1978), p. 341
^ a b Ferenc Fehér, The French Revolution and the Birth of Modernity, (1990) pp. 117–30
^ Tombs, Robert and Isabelle. That Sweet Enemy: The French and the British from the Sun King to the Present. Random House (2007) ISBN 978-1-4000-4024-7. p. 179.
^ Matusitz, Jonathan Symbolism in Terrorism: Motivation, Communication, and Behavior, p. 19
^ Palmer, R.R. & Colton, Joel A History of the Modern World pp. 393–97
^ Palmer, R.R. & Colton, Joel A History of the Modern World p. 361
^ Dmitry Shlapentokh, The French Revolution and the Russian Anti-Democratic Tradition (Edison, NJ: Transaction Publishers, 1997), pp. 220–28
^ A. Aulard in Arthur Tilley, ed. (1922). Modern France. A Companion to French Studies. Cambridge UP. p. 115. CS1 maint: Extra text: authors list (link)
^ Bell, David Avrom (2007). The First Total War: Napoleon's Europe and the birth of warfare as we know it. New York: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt. p. 51. ISBN 0-618-34965-0. 
^ Suzanne Desan et al. eds. The French Revolution in Global Perspective (2013), pp. 3, 8, 10
^ Marshall, Thomas H. Citizenship and social class. Vol. 11. Cambridge, 1950.
^ Lichbach, Mark Irving. "An evaluation of 'does economic inequality breed political conflict?' studies". World Politics 41.04 (1989): 431–70.
^ Gordon, Daniel. Citizens without Sovereignty: Equality and sociability in French thought, 1670–1789. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1994.
^ a b Sargent, Thomas J., and Francois R. Velde. "Macroeconomic features of the French Revolution." Journal of Political Economy (1995): 474–518.
^ Hardman, John. French politics 1774–1789: from the accession of Louis XVI to the fall of the Bastille. Addison-Wesley, 1995.
^ Baker, Keith Michael. "French political thought at the accession of Louis XVI". The Journal of Modern History (1978): 279–303.
^ David P. Jordan (1 January 2004). The King's Trial: The French Revolution Vs. Louis XVI. University of California Press. pp. 11–. ISBN 978-0-520-23697-4. 
^ Campbell, Peter Robert, ed. The origins of the French revolution. Palgrave Macmillan, 2006.
^ a b c Blanning, T.C.W. The French Revolution: Class War or Culture Clash?, London: Macmillan, 1998 p. 26.
^ Blanning, T.C.W. The French Revolution: Class War or Culture Clash?, London: Macmillan, 1998 pp. 26–27.
^ a b Blanning, T.C.W. The French Revolution: Class War or Culture Clash?, London: Macmillan, 1998 p. 27.
^ Blanning, T.C.W. The French Revolution: Class War or Culture Clash?, London: Macmillan, 1998 p. 28.
^ Blanning, T.C.W. The French Revolution: Class War or Culture Clash?, London: Macmillan, 1998 p. 29.
^ Blanning, T.C.W. The French Revolution: Class War or Culture Clash?, London: Macmillan, 1998 pp. 26–27
^ Blanning, T.C.W. The French Revolution: Class War or Culture Clash?, London: Macmillan, 1998 pp. 29–30.
^ Tilly, Louise A. "Food entitlement, famine, and conflict". Journal of Interdisciplinary History (1983): 333–49.
^ Hufton, Olwen. "Social conflict and the grain supply in eighteenth-century France". Journal of interdisciplinary history (1983): 303–31.
^ Cormack, William S. Revolution and Political Conflict in the French Navy 1789–1794. Cambridge University Press, 2002.
^ a b William Doyle, The Oxford History of the French Revolution (2nd ed. 2003), pp. 45–49, 76–77
^ De Tocqueville, Alexis, François Furet, and Françoise Mélonio. The Old Regime and the Revolution, Volume II: Notes on the French Revolution and Napoleon. Vol. 2. University of Chicago Press, 2001.
^ Doyle, The Oxford History of the French Revolution (2003), pp. 73–74
^ Martin, Henri. History of the Decline and Fall of the French monarchy Volume II (1866) p. 481
^ Frey, p. 3
^ "France's Financial Crisis: 1783–1788". Retrieved 26 October 2008. 
^ a b c d Hibbert, pp. 35, 36
^ Frey, p. 2
^ Doyle, The French Revolution: A very short introduction, p. 34
^ Doyle 2003, p. 93
^ William Doyle, The Oxford History of the French Revolution (1989) p. 59
^ Doyle, The Oxford History of the French Revolution (1989) pp. 99–101
^ Albert Soboul, The French Revolution 1787–1799 (1975) pp. 127–29.
^ Frey, pp. 4, 5
^ Doyle 2001, p. 38
^ Neely, pp. 63, 65
^ Neely, p. 56
^ Furet, p. 45
^ Hibbert, p. 54
^ John Hall Stewart. A Documentary Survey of the French Revolution. (1951), p. 86.
^ Schama 2004, p. 303
^ Schama 2004, p.312
^ Schama 2004, p.317
^ Schama 2004, p. 331
^ Schama 2004, p. 344
^ Schama 2004, p. 357
^ Georges Lefebvre, The French Revolution: From its Origins to 1793 (1952) pp. 187–88.
^ Hibbert, 93
^ a b (in Dutch) Niek Pas – De geschiedenis van Frankrijk in een notendop (The history of France in a nutshell). Bert Bakker, Amsterdam, 2008. Chapter 4 (pages 49–62): Revolutie en Keizerrijk (Revolution and Empire).
^ a b c (in Dutch) Noah Shusterman – De Franse Revolutie (The French Revolution). Veen Media, Amsterdam, 2015. (Translation of: The French Revolution. Faith, Desire, and Politics. Routledge, London/New York, 2014.) Chapter 3 (p. 95–139) : The Civil Constitution of the Clergy (summer 1790–spring 1791).
^ François Furet, "Night of August 4," in François Furet, and Mona Ozouf, eds. A Critical Dictionary of the French Revolution (1989) pp. 107–14.
^ The buying and selling of high office.
^ Lefebvre, Georges (1962). The French Revolution: Vol. 1, from Its Origins To 1793. Columbia U.P,. p. 130. ISBN 9780231085984. 
^ Robert Forster, "The survival of the nobility during the French Revolution". Past and Present (1967): 71–86 in JSTOR.
^ Paul R. Hanson, The A to Z of the French Revolution (2013) pp. 293–94
^ Furet, Critical Dictionary of the French Revolution, p. 112
^ a b J.M. Thompson, The French Revolution (1943), pp. 90–111
^ Gregory Fremont-Barnes (2007). Encyclopedia of the Age of Political Revolutions and New Ideologies, 1760–1815. Greenwood. p. 190. ISBN 9780313049514. 
^ Doyle 1989, p.121
^ Doyle 1989, p. 122
^ Gemma Betros, "The French Revolution and the Catholic Church," History Review (2010) Issue 68, pp. 16–21.
^ a b Censer and Hunt, Liberty, Equality, Fraternity: Exploring the French Revolution p. 4.
^ John McManners, The French Revolution and the Church, pp. 50, 4.
^ National Assembly legislation cited in John McManners, The French Revolution and the Church, 27.
^ John McManners, The French Revolution and the Church, p. 27.
^ a b Censer and Hunt, Liberty, Equality, Fraternity: Exploring the French Revolution, p. 61.
^ Emmet Kennedy, A Cultural History of the French Revolution, p 148.
^ a b Censer and Hunt, Liberty, Equality, Fraternity: Exploring the French Revolution, 92.
^ Noah Shusterman – The French Revolution. Faith, Desire, and Politics. Routledge, London and New York, 2014. Chapter 3 (p. 55–87): The Civil Constitution of the Clergy (summer 1790–spring 1791)
^ Emmet Kennedy, A Cultural History of the French Revolution, (1989) p 151.
^ Matthew Shaw, Time and the French Revolution: The Republican Calendar, 1789 – Year XIV (2011)
^ Censer and Hunt, Liberty, Equality, Fraternity: Exploring the French Revolution, pp. 92–94.
^ Jack R. Censer, "Historians Revisit the Terror – Again". Journal of Social History 48#2 (2014): 383–403.
^ Censer and Hunt, Liberty, Equality, Fraternity: Exploring the French Revolution, 16.
^ John McManners, The French Revolution and the Church, p. 5.
^ Schama 2004, pp. 433–34
^ Runkle, Lucia Isabella Gilbert (1902). Library of the World's Best Literature, Ancient and Modern, Volume 17. University of California: J. A. Hill. p. 10079. 
^ William Doyle (2009). Aristocracy and its Enemies in the Age of Revolution. Oxford UP. pp. 334–36. ISBN 9780191609718. 
^ Schama 2004, p. 449
^ Schama 2004, p. 442
^ a b Timothy Tackett, When the King Took Flight (Harvard University Press, 2003)
^ Schama 2004, p. 481
^ Clifford D. Conner, Jean-Paul Marat: Tribune of the French Revolution (2012) ch 4
^ a b c d (in Dutch) Noah Shusterman – De Franse Revolutie (The French Revolution). Veen Media, Amsterdam, 2015. (Translation of: The French Revolution. Faith, Desire, and Politics. Routledge, London/New York, 2014.) Chapter 4 (p. 141–186): The flight of the king and the decline of the French monarchy (summer 1791–summer 1792).
^ Schama 2004, p.500
^ Soboul (1975), pp. 226–27.
^ Lefebvre, p. 212.
^ (German) 'Die Französische Revolution von 1789 bis 1794' (The French Revolution from 1789 until 1794). Glasnost archiv. Retrieved 22 January 2017.
^ The present-day state of Austria did not exist as such, its territory was part of the Habsburg Monarchy which also comprised the present-day states of Hungary, Czech Republic, Slovakia, Belgium, Slovenia and Croatia: that Habsburg Monarchy was usually called 'Austria'.
^ Francis Charles Montague (1911). The Encyclopædia Britannica. p. 158. 
^ Martyn Lyons, France under the Directory (1975), p. 5
^ a b c d e f g (in Dutch) Noah Shusterman – De Franse Revolutie (The French Revolution). Veen Media, Amsterdam, 2015. (Translation of: The French Revolution. Faith, Desire, and Politics. Routledge, London/New York, 2014.) Chapter 5 (p. 187–221): The end of the monarchy and the September Murders (1792).
^ a b Philip Dwyer (2008). Napoleon: The Path to Power 1769–1799. Yale University Press. pp. 99–100. ISBN 9780300148206. 
^ a b Peter McPhee, ed. (2012). A Companion to the French Revolution. pp. 164–66. ISBN 9781118316221. CS1 maint: Extra text: authors list (link)
^ 'French Revolutionary Wars Timeline, 1792'. Emerson Kent.com, "History for the relaxed historian". Retrieved 8 February 2017.
^ a b Noah Shusterman – The French Revolution. Faith, Desire, and Politics. Routledge, London and New York, 2014. Chapter 5 (p. 119–142): The end of the monarchy and the September Massacres (summer–fall 1792)
^ a b Leo Gershoy, The French Revolution and Napoleon pp 221–26
^ a b Timothy Tackett, "Rumor and Revolution: The Case of the September Massacres", French History and Civilization (2011) Vol. 4, pp. 54–64.
^ a b c (in Dutch) Noah Shusterman – De Franse Revolutie (The French Revolution). Veen Media, Amsterdam, 2015. (Translation of: The French Revolution. Faith, Desire, and Politics. Routledge, London/New York, 2014.) Chapter 5 (p. 187–221) : The end of the monarchy and the September Murders (summer–fall 1792).
^ Doyle (2003), p. 194.
^ Schama 2004, p. 505
^ Marcel Dorginy, The Abolition of Slavery: From L.F. Sonthonax to Victor Schoelcher, 1793, 1794, 1848 (Paris: UNESCO, 2003), 167–80.
^ a b c d e f g h (in Dutch) Noah Shusterman – De Franse Revolutie (The French Revolution). Veen Media, Amsterdam, 2015. (Translation of: The French Revolution. Faith, Desire, and Politics. Routledge, London/New York, 2014.) Chapter 6 (p. 223–269) : The new French republic and its enemies (fall 1792–summer 1793).
^ Arthur William Holland – "The French Revolution". In: Encyclopædia Britannica, Eleventh Edition (1910–1911), Cambridge University Press.
^ Doyle 2002, p. 196
^ Ellis Wasson (2009). A History of Modern Britain: 1714 to the Present. John Wiley & Sons. p. 118. ISBN 9781405139359. 
^ William Doyle (2002). The Oxford History of the French Revolution. Oxford University Press. pp. 396–97. ISBN 9780191608292. 
^ White, E. "The French Revolution and the Politics of Government Finance, 1770–1815." The Journal of Economic History 1995, p. 244
^ Schuettinger, Robert. "Forty Centuries of Wage and Price Controls." Heritage Foundation, 2009. p. 45
^ Bourne, Henry. "Maximum Prices in France." American Historical Review, October 1917, p. 112.
^ a b Gough, Hugh (1998). The Terror in the French Revolution. p. 77. 
^ Doyle 1989, p. 258
^ Schama 2004, p. 616
^ a b Schama 2004, p. 641
^ Schama 2004, p. 637
^ Schama 2004, p. 689
^ François Furet, "A Deep-rooted Ideology as Well as Circumstance," in The French Revolution: Conflicting Interpretations, ed. by Frank Kafker et al. (2002). p. 222.
^ Paul R. Hanson, Contesting the French Revolution (2009)
^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n Noah Shusterman – The French Revolution. Faith, Desire, and Politics. Routledge, London and New York, 2014. Chapter 7 (p. 175–203): The federalist revolt, the Vendée, and the start of the Terror (summer–fall 1793).
^ a b c d e f g (in Dutch) Noah Shusterman – De Franse Revolutie (The French Revolution). Veen Media, Amsterdam, 2015. (Translation of: The French Revolution. Faith, Desire, and Politics. Routledge, London/New York, 2014.) Chapter 7 (p. 271–312) : The federalist revolts, the Vendée and the beginning of the Terror (summer–fall 1793).
^ In a Corner of France, Long Live the Old Regime, New York Times
^ McPhee, Peter Review of Reynald Secher, A French Genocide: The Vendée H-France Review Vol. 4 (March 2004), No. 26 Archived 20 April 2012 at the Wayback Machine.
^ Hibbert, p. 321.
^ a b c d Schama 2004, p. 646
^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p Noah Shusterman – The French Revolution. Faith, Desire, and Politics. Routledge, London and New York, 2014. Chapter 8 (p. 204–234): The Reign of Terror (fall 1793–summer 1794).
^ Louis R. Gottschalk, The Era of the French Revolution (1715–1815) (1929) p. 281
^ Chisholm, Hugh (1911). Carnot, Lazare Nicolas Marguerite. Cambridge University Press: Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed). pp. 376–377. 
^ (in French) Decree of 17 September 1793 ordering the arrest of Suspect People. Gallica, the digitalized Bibliothèque nationale de France. Retrieved 21 April 2017.
^ "Reign of Terror". Encyclopædia Britannica (2015). Retrieved 19 April 2017. 
^ 'Principal Dates and Time Line of the French Revolution'. marxists.org. Retrieved 21 April 2017.
^ Schama 2004, p. 658
^ 'State and Counterrevolution in France' – Charles Tilly. In: The French Revolution and the Birth of Modernity, edited by Ferenc Fehér. University of California Press; Berkeley – Los Angeles – Oxford, 1990. Retrieved 6 March 2017.
^ 117,000 according to Reynald Secher, La Vendée-Vengé, le Génocide franco-français (1986); 200,000–250,000 according to Jean-Clément Martin, La Vendée et la France, Éditions du Seuil, collection Points, 1987; 200,000 according to Louis-Marie Clénet, La Contre-révolution, Paris, PUF, collection Que sais-je?, 1992; 170,000 according to Jacques Hussenet (dir.), " Détruisez la Vendée ! " Regards croisés sur les victimes et destructions de la guerre de Vendée, La Roche-sur-Yon, Centre vendéen de recherches historiques, 2007, p.148.
^ Dr Linton, Marisa. "The Terror in the French Revolution" (PDF). Kingston University. Archived from the original (PDF) on 17 January 2012. 
^ Jacques Hussenet (dir.), " Détruisez la Vendée ! " Regards croisés sur les victimes et destructions de la guerre de Vendée, La Roche-sur-Yon, Centre vendéen de recherches historiques, 2007
^ Hugh Cough, "Genocide and the Bicentenary: the French Revolution and the Revenge of the Vendee." Historical Journal 30#4 (1987): 977–88
^ Anthony James Joes, "Insurgency and Genocide: La Vendée." Small Wars & Insurgencies 9#3 (1998): 17–45.
^ The term is rejected by Michel Vovelle, " L'historiographie de la Révolution Française à la veille du bicentenaire ", Estudos avançados, octobre-décembre 1987, volume 1, n° 1, pp. 61–72. [1] ou [2]
^ François Furet and Mona Ozouf, eds. A Critical Dictionary of the French Revolution (1989), p. 175
^ Jean-Baptiste Carrier, Encyclopædia Britannica
^ Soboul (1975), p. 384.
^ a b c Schama 2004, p. 706
^ a b c d e f g h Noah Shusterman – The French Revolution. Faith, Desire, and Politics. Routledge, London and New York, 2014. Chapter 9 (p. 235–254): After the Terror (fall 1794–1799)
^

Alfred Cobban – A History of Modern France vol 1. 1715-1799. Penguin, 1957. (p. 243);
Denis Woronoff – The Thermidorean regime and the Directory. CUP, 1972. (p.23);
Albert Soboul – A short history of the French Revolution: 1789–1799. University of California Press, 1977. (pp. 425–28);
John Paxton – Companion to the French Revolution. Facts on File Publications, 1988. (p.207);
Simon Schama – Citizens: A Chronicle of the French Revolution. Penguin, [1989] 2004. (p. 852).


^ Soboul (1975), pp. 425–28.
^ Schama, p. 852.
^ William Doyle – The Oxford History of the French Revolution (2nd ed.) Oxford University Press, Oxford – New York, 1990. (pp. 206–207.)
^ Simon Schama – Patriots and Liberators. Revolution in the Netherlands 1780–1813. New York: Vintage Books, 1977. (pp. 178–192)
^ J.C.H. Blom and E. Lamberts (editors) – Geschiedenis van de Nederlanden [History of the Low Countries] (3rd ed.) HB uitgevers, Baarn, [2001] 2003. (pp. 227-228)
^ Ernst August Richard Engels – Friedrich Nicolais "Allgemeine deutsche Bibliothek" und der Friede von Basel 1795. Published: Würzburg, Buchdruckerei R. Mayr, 1936.
^ a b Doyle (1989), p. 320
^ Doyle, Oxford History, pp. 322–23
^ Doyle, Oxford History (2003) pp. 322–23
^ François Furet, Revolutionary France 1770–1880 (1995) p. 155
^ Howard G. Brown (2007). Ending the French Revolution: Violence, Justice, and Repression from the Terror to Napoleon. U. of Virginia Press. pp. 5–7. ISBN 9780813927299. 
^ Brown (2007). Ending the French Revolution: Violence, Justice, and Repression from the Terror to Napoleon. p. 1. ISBN 9780813927299. 
^ Doyle, Oxford History (2003) pp. 318–40
^ Doyle, Oxford History p. 331
^ David Nicholls, Napoleon: a biographical companion (1999)
^ William Doyle, The Oxford History of the French Revolution (1989) pp. 341–68
^ Steven T. Ross, European Diplomatic History, 1789–1815: France Against Europe (1969)
^ Alexander Grab, Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe (2003) pp. 62–65, 78–79, 88–96, 115–17, 154–59
^ Frederick B. Artz, Reaction and Revolution: 1814–1832 (1934) pp. 142–43
^ Harvey Chisick, "The pamphlet literature of the French revolution: An overview." History of European ideas (1993) 17#2–3 pp. 149–66.
^ Jane Chapman, "Republican citizenship, ethics and the French revolutionary press," Ethical Space: The International Journal of Communication Ethics (2005) 2#1 pp. 7–12
^ Hugh Gough, The Newspaper Press in the French Revolution (1988)
^ Jeremy Popkin, Revolutionary News: The Press in France 1789–1799 (1990)
^ Jeremy D. Popkin, "The Press and the French revolution after two hundred years." French Historical Studies (1990): 664–83 in JSTOR.
^ Harvey Chisick, "Pamphlets and Journalism in the Early French Revolution: The Offices of the Ami du Roi of the Abbé Royou as a Center of Royalist Propaganda," French Historical Studies (1988) 15#4 623–45 in JSTOR
^ a b Censer and Hunt, "How to Read Images" LEF CD-ROM
^ Karen A. Cerulo, "Symbols and the world system: national anthems and flags." Sociological Forum (1993) 8#2 pp. 243–71.
^ Paul R. Hanson (2007). The A to Z of the French Revolution. Scarecrow Press. p. 151. 
^ R. Po-chia Hsia, Lynn Hunt, Thomas R. Martin, Barbara H. Rosenwein, and Bonnie G. Smith, The Making of the West, Peoples and Culture, A Concise History, Volume II: Since 1340, (2nd ed., 2007), p. 664.
^ R. F. Opie, Guillotine (2003)
^ William Doyle (2001). The French Revolution: A Very Short Introduction. Oxford UP. p. 22. 
^ Crowdy, Terry, French Revolutionary Infantry 1789–1802, p. 42 (2004).
^ Marie Joseph Paul Yves Roch Gilbert Du Motier Lafayette (marquis de), Memoirs, correspondence and manuscripts of General Lafayette, vol. 2, p. 252.
^ Clifford, Dale, "Can the Uniform Make the Citizen? Paris, 1789–1791," Eighteenth-Century Studies, 2001, p. 369.
^ Kershaw, Andrew: The First War Planes, Friend Or Foe, National Aircraft Markings, pp. 41–44. BCP Publishing, 1971.
^ William J. Cooper and John McCardell. "Liberty caps and liberty trees." Past and Present 146#1 (1995): 66–102. in JSTOR
^ Louis Devance, "Le Féminisme pendant la Révolution Française," Annales Historiques de la Révolution Française (1977) 49#3 pp. 341–76
^ Jane Abray, "Feminism in the French Revolution," American Historical Review (1975) 80#1 pp. 43–62 in JSTOR
^ Dalton "Madame Roland" 262
^ a b Rebel Daughters: Women and the French Revolution Edited by Sara E Melzer and Leslie W. Rabine p. 79
^ Women and the Limits of Citizenship in the French Revolution by Olwen W. Hufton pp. 23–24
^ Rebel Daughters by Sara E Melzer and Leslie W. Rabine p. 91
^ Hufton, "Women and the Limits of Citizenship," p. 31
^ James H. McMillan, France and women, 1789–1914: gender, society and politics (Routledge, 2002) p. 24
^ Darline Gay Levy, Harriet Branson Applewhite and Mary Durham Johnson, eds. Women in Revolutionary Paris, 1789–1795 (1981) pp. 143–49
^ De Gouges "Writings" 564–68
^ Susan Dalton, "Gender and the Shifting Ground of Revolutionary Politics: The Case of Madame Roland," Canadian journal of history (2001) 36#2 pp. 262–67
^ Lisa Beckstrand, Deviant women of the French Revolution and the rise of feminism (2009) p. 20
^ Olwen Hufton, Women and the Limits of Citizenship (1992) pp. 106–07
^ Desan p. 452
^ Hufton, Olwen. "In Search of Counter-Revolutionary Women." 1998 p. 303
^ Hufton, Women and the Limits of Citizenship (1992) p. 104
^ Olwen Hufton, "In Search of Counter-Revolutionary Women." 1998 pp. 303–04
^ D. M. G. Sutherland, "Peasants, Lords, and Leviathan: Winners and Losers from the Abolition of French Feudalism, 1780–1820," Journal of Economic History (2002) 62#1 pp. 1–24 in JSTOR
^ Liana Vardi, "The abolition of the guilds during the French Revolution," French Historical Studies (1988) 15#4 pp. 704–17 in JSTOR
^ a b R.R. Palmer, "How Five Centuries of Educational Philanthropy Disappeared in the French Revolution," History of Education Quarterly (1986) 26#2 pp. 181–97 in JSTOR
^ Elise S. Brezis and François H. Crouzet, "The role of assignats during the French Revolution: An evil or a rescuer?" Journal of European economic history (1995) 24#1 pp. 7–40, online.
^ George Lefebvre, Napoleon From 18 Brumaire to Tilsit 1799–1807 (1970)
^ Michael Broers; et al. (2012). The Napoleonic Empire and the New European Political Culture. Palgrave Macmillan. pp. 209–12. ISBN 9780230241312. 
^ R.R. Palmer, The Age of the Democratic Revolution: The Struggle, Volume II: The Struggle (1970)
^ Klaits, Joseph; Haltzel, Michael H.; Haltzel, Michael (2002). Global Ramifications of the French Revolution. Cambridge UP. 
^ Dann, Otto; Dinwiddy, John (1988). Nationalism in the Age of the French Revolution. Continuum. p. 13. 
^ Beatrice Fry Hyslop, French Nationalism in 1789 (1968) especially chap. 7
^ Carlton J. H. Hayes, The Historical Evolution of Modern Nationalism (1931), ch 2–3
^ Keitner, Chimene I. (2007). The Paradoxes of Nationalism: The French Revolution and Its Meaning for Contemporary Nation Building. SUNY Press. p. 12. 
^ John Hall Stewart, A Documentary Survey of the french revolution (1951) pp. 783–94
^ J.M. Thompson, Robespierre and the French Revolution (1962) p. 22
^ Georges Lefebvre (2005) [1947]. The Coming of the French Revolution. Princeton UP. p. 212. 
^ Aulard in Arthur Tilley, ed. (1922) p. 115
^ Emmet Kennedy, A Cultural History of the French Revolution (1989) pp. 145–67
^ Kennedy, A Cultural History of the French Revolution (1989) pp. 338–53
^ Furet, ed., A Critical Dictionary of the French Revolution, pp. 20–32
^ Geoffrey Ellis, 'Religion according to Napoleon', in Nigel Aston, ed., Religious change in Europe, 1650–1914 (1997)
^ J. Christopher Soper and Joel S. Fetzer, "Explaining the accommodation of Muslim religious practices in France, Britain, and Germany." French Politics(2003) 1#1: 39–59; see also Abdulkader H. Sinno (2009). Muslims in Western Politics. Indiana UP. pp. 55–56. 
^ Tim McHugh, "Expanding Women's Rural Medical Work in Early Modern Brittany: The Daughters of the Holy Spirit," Journal of the History of Medicine and Allied Sciences (2012) 67#3 pp. 428–56. online in project MUSE
^ Jacques Léonard, "Femmes, Religion et Médecine: Les Religieuses qui Soignent, en France au XIXe Siècle," Annales: Economies, Societes, Civilisations (1977) 32#5 pp. 887–907
^ P. M. Jones (1988). The Peasantry in the French Revolution. Cambridge UP. pp. 251–54, 265. 
^ Crane Brinton, A decade of revolution, 1789–1799 (1934) pp. 277–78
^ Alfred Cobban, The social interpretation of the French Revolution (1964) p. 89
^ Alfred Cobban, The social interpretation of the French Revolution (1964) pp. 68–80
^ Franck, Raphaël; Michalopoulos, Stelios (October 2017). "Emigration during the French Revolution: Consequences in the Short and Longue Durée". 
^ Finley, Theresa; Franck, Raphael; Johnson, Noel (2017-12-02). "Economic consequences of revolutions: Evidence from the 1789 French Revolution". VoxEU.org. Retrieved 2017-12-02. 
^ Finley, Theresa; Franck, Raphael; Johnson, Noel (2017-09-06). "The Effects of Land Redistribution: Evidence from the French Revolution". Rochester, NY. 
^ Furet, ed., A Critical Dictionary of the French Revolution, pp. 479–93
^ Robert Tombs, "Inventing politics: from Bourbon Restoration to republican monarchy," in Martin S. Alexander, ed., French history since Napoleon (1999), pp. 59–79
^ Paul R. Hanson (2009). Contesting the French Revolution. Wiley. p. 189. 
^ Leszek Kołakowski (1978). Main Currents of Marxism: The Founders, the Golden Age, the Breakdown. W.W. Norton. pp. 152–54. 
^ Acemoglu, Daron; Cantoni, Davide; Johnson, Simon; Robinson, James A. (2011). "The Consequences of Radical Reform: The French Revolution". American Economic Review. 101 (7): 3286–3307. doi:10.1257/aer.101.7.3286. 
^ Buggle, Johannes C. (2016-08-01). "Law and social capital: Evidence from the Code Napoleon in Germany". European Economic Review. 87 (Supplement C): 148–175. doi:10.1016/j.euroecorev.2016.05.003. 
^ Wikisource, https://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Englishmen_in_the_French_Revolution/Chapter_II
^ Emma Vincent Macleod, A War of Ideas: British Attitudes to the War against Revolutionary France, 1792–1802 (1999)
^ Palmer, The Age of the Democratic Revolution: The Struggle, Volume II (1970) pp. 459–505
^ Clark, J. C. D. (2000). English Society: 1660–1832; Religion, Ideology and Politics During the Ancient Regime. Cambridge University Press. p. 233. ISBN 978-0-521-66627-5. Retrieved 16 June 2013. 
^ Graham, pp. 297–98.
^ Crowe, Ian (2005). An Imaginative Whig: Reassessing the Life and Thought of Edmund Burke. University of Missouri Press. p. 93. ISBN 978-0-8262-6419-0. Retrieved 17 June 2013. 
^ On the French reception of Price's Discourse and the Revolution Society, see Duthille, Rémy (2010). "1688–1789. Au carrefour des révolutions : les célébrations de la révolution anglaise de 1688 en Grande-Bretagne après 1789". In Cottret, Bernard; Henneton, Lauric. Du Bon Usage des commémorations : histoire, mémoire, identité, XVIe – XVIIIe siècles (in French). Rennes: Presses Universitaires de Rennes. pp. 107–120. 
^ Nick Pelling (2002). Anglo-Irish Relations: 1798 1922. Routledge. pp. 5–10. ISBN 9780203986554. 
^ Theodore S. Hamerow (1958). Restoration, Revolution, Reaction: Economics and Politics in Germany, 1815–1871. Princeton UP. pp. 22–24, 44–45. ISBN 0691007551. 
^ Marc H. Lerner, "The Helvetic Republic: An Ambivalent Reception of French Revolutionary Liberty," French History (2004) 18#1 pp. 50–75.
^ Palmer, The Age of the Democratic Revolution 2:394–421
^ E.H. Kossmann, The Low Countries: 1780–1940 (1978) pp. 65–81, 101–02
^ Bernard A. Cook, Belgium (2005) pp. 49–54
^ Samuel Clark, "Nobility, Bourgeoisie and the Industrial Revolution in Belgium," Past & Present (1984) # 105 pp. 140–75; in JSTOR
^ Henrik Horstboll, and Uffe Ostergård, "Reform and Revolution: The French Revolution and the Case of Denmark," Scandinavian Journal of History (1990) 15#3 pp. 155–79
^ Susan Dunn, Sister Revolutions: French Lightning, American Light (2000)
^ Rude pp. 12–14
^ Rude, p. 15
^ Rude, p. 12
^ Rude, p. 17
^ Rude, pp. 12–20
^ Soboul, Albert. La Révolution française, pp. 45–48
^ George C. Comninel (1987). Rethinking the French Revolution: Marxism and the Revisionist Challenge. Verso. p. 31. ISBN 9780860918905. 
^ Rebecca L. : Spang, "Paradigms and Paranoia: How modern Is the French Revolution?" American Historical Review (2003) 108#1 pp. 119–47. esp page 120
^ David A. Bell, "Class, consciousness, and the fall of the bourgeois revolution." Critical Review (2004) 16#2–3 pp. 323–51
^ Rebecca L. Spang, "Paradigms and Paranoia."
^ Frey, "Preface"
^ Hanson, p. 189
^ Hanson, p. 191
^ Riemer, Neal; Simon, Douglas (1997). The New World of Politics: An Introduction to Political Science. Rowman & Littlefield. p. 106. ISBN 978-0-939693-41-2. 



References


Censer, Jack; Lynn Hunt (2001). Liberty, Equality, Fraternity: Exploring the French Revolution. Pennsylvania: Pennsylvania State University Press. 
Cole, Alistair; Peter Campbell (1989). French electoral systems and elections since 1789. Gower. 
Palmer, R.R.; Joel Colton (1995). A History of the Modern World. New York: McGraw Hill, Inc. 
Doyle, William (1990). The Oxford history of the French Revolution (3rd ed.). Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-285221-3. 
Doyle, William (2001). The French Revolution: A very short introduction. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-285396-1. 
Doyle, William (2002). The Oxford history of the French Revolution (2nd ed.). Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-925298-X.  online; 2nd edition online
Feher, Ferenc (1990). The French Revolution and the Birth of Modernity. Los Angeles: University of California Press. 
Frey, Linda; Marsha Frey (2004). The French Revolution. Westport, Connecticut: Greenwood Press. ISBN 0-313-32193-0. 
Furet, F. (1981). Interpreting the French Revolution. Cambridge UP. 
Furet, François (1995). Revolutionary France, 1770–1880. Blackwell Publishing. ISBN 0-631-19808-3. 
Hampson, Norman (1988). A Social History of the French Revolution. Routledge: University of Toronto Press. ISBN 0-710-06525-6. 
Hanson, Paul (2009). Contesting the French Revolution. Blackwell Publishing. ISBN 978-1-4051-6083-4. 
Hibbert, Christopher (1980). The Days of the French Revolution. New York: Quill, William Morrow. ISBN 0-688-03704-6. 
Hunt, Lynn (1984). Politics, Culture, and Class in the French Revolution. Berkeley: University of California Press. 
Kennedy, Emmet (1989). A Cultural History of the French Revolution. New Haven: Yale University Press. 
Lefebvre, Georges (1971). The French Revolution: From Its Origins to 1793. Columbia University Press. ISBN 0-231-08598-2. 
Lefebvre, Georges (1964). The Thermidorians & the Directory. New York: Random House. 
Lefebvre, Georges (1963). The French Revolution: from 1793 to 1799. vol. II. New York: Columbia University Press. ISBN 0-231-02519-X. 
McManners, John (1969). The French Revolution and the Church. New York: Harper and Row. 
Montague, Francis Charles. "French Revolution" (1911). The Encyclopædia Britannica. ; this Wikipedia article was originally copied from Montague (which is out of copyright), and portions still remain
Neely, Sylvia (2008). A Concise History of the French Revolution. Rowman & Littlefield. ISBN 0-7425-3411-1. 
Rude, George (1991). The French Revolution: Its Causes, Its History and Its Legacy After 200 Years. Grove Press. ISBN 0-8021-3272-3. 
Schama, Simon (2004) [1989]. Citizens. Penguin. ISBN 0-14-101727-9. 
Shusterman, Noah (2014). The French Revolution. Faith, Desire, and Politics. Routledge, London and New York.
Soboul, Albert (1975). The French Revolution 1787–1799. New York: Vintage. ISBN 0-394-71220-X. 
Soboul, Albert (1977). A short history of the French Revolution: 1789–1799. Geoffrey Symcox. University of California Press, Ltd. ISBN 0-520-03419-8. 
Thompson, J. M. (1959). The French Revolution. Oxford: Basil Blackwell. 
Woronoff, Denis (1984). The Thermidorean regime and the directory: 1794–1799. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-28917-3. 


Further reading
See also: Historiography of the French Revolution

Surveys and reference

Andress, David, ed. The Oxford Handbook of the French Revolution (Oxford University Press, 2015). excerpt, 714pp; 37 articles by experts
Aulard, François-Alphonse. The French Revolution, a Political History, 1789–1804 (4 vol. 1910); famous classic; volume 1 1789–1792 online; Volume 2 1792–95 online
Azurmendi, Joxe (1997). The democrats and the violent. Mirande's critique of the French Revolution. Philosophical viewpoint. (Original: Demokratak eta biolentoak, Donostia: Elkar ISBN 84-7917-744-6).
Ballard, Richard. A New Dictionary of the French Revolution (2011) excerpt and text search
Bosher, J. F. The French Revolution (1989) 365pp
Davies, Peter. The French Revolution: A Beginner's Guide (2009), 192pp
Frey, Linda and Frey, Marsha. The French Revolution. Westport: Greenwood Press, 2004. ISBN 0-313-32193-0
Furet, François. The French Revolution, 1770–1814 (1996) excerpt and text search
Furet, François and Mona Ozouf, eds. A Critical Dictionary of the French Revolution (1989), 1120pp; long essays by scholars; conservative perspective; stress on history of ideas excerpt and text search
Gershoy, Leo. The French Revolution and Napoleon (1945) 585pp
Gershoy, Leo. The Era of the French Revolution, 1789–1799 (1957), brief summary with some primary sources
Gottschalk, Louis R. The Era of the French Revolution (1929), cover 1780s to 1815
Hanson, Paul R. The A to Z of the French Revolution (2013)

Hanson, Paul R. Historical Dictionary of the French Revolution (2004)


Jaurès, Jean. A Socialist History of the French Revolution. Pluto Press, 2015. ISBN 978-0745335001
Jones, Colin. The Longman Companion to the French Revolution (1989)
Jones, Colin. The Great Nation: France from Louis XV to Napoleon (2002) excerpt and text search
Lefebvre, Georges. The French Revolution: From its Origins to 1793 (1962), famous French classic excerpt and text search v 1

Lefebvre, Georges. French Revolution from 1793–1799 (1964)


McPhee, Peter, ed. (2012). A Companion to the French Revolution. Wiley. ISBN 9781118316412. CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link) CS1 maint: Extra text: authors list (link)
Madelin, Louis. The French Revolution (1916); textbook by leading French scholar. online
Paxton, John. Companion to the French Revolution (1987), 234pp; hundreds of short entries.
Popkin, Jeremy D. A Short History of the French Revolution (5th ed. 2009) 176pp
Scott, Samuel F. and Barry Rothaus, eds. Historical Dictionary of the French Revolution, 1789–1799 (2 vol 1984), short essays by scholars vol 1 online; vol 2 online
Shusterman, Noah (2014). The French Revolution. Faith, Desire, and Politics. Routledge, London and New York.
Soboul, Albert. The French Revolution, 1787–1799: From the storming of the Bastille to Napoleon (1975)
Sutherland, D.M.G. France 1789–1815. Revolution and Counter-Revolution (2nd ed. 2003, 430pp excerpts and online search from Amazon.com
Thompson, J. M. The French Revolution (1943), British viewpoint

European and Atlantic History

Amann, Peter H., ed. The eighteenth-century revolution: French or Western? (Heath, 1963) readings from historians
Brinton, Crane. A Decade of Revolution 1789–1799 (1934) the Revolution in European context
Desan, Suzanne, et al. eds. The French Revolution in Global Perspective (2013)
Fremont-Barnes, Gregory. ed. The Encyclopedia of the French Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars: A Political, Social, and Military History (ABC-CLIO: 3 vol 2006)
Goodwin, A., ed. The New Cambridge Modern History, Vol. 8: The American and French Revolutions, 1763–93 (1965), 764pp
Palmer, R. R. "The World Revolution of the West: 1763–1801," Political Science Quarterly (1954) 69#1 pp. 1–14 in JSTOR
Palmer, Robert R. The Age of the Democratic Revolution: A Political History of Europe and America, 1760–1800. (2 vol 1959), highly influential comparative history; vol 1 online
Rude, George F. and Harvey J. Kaye. Revolutionary Europe, 1783–1815 (2000), scholarly survey excerpt and text search

Politics and wars

Andress, David. The terror: Civil war in the French revolution (2006).
Baker, Keith M. ed. The French Revolution and the Creation of Modern Political Culture (Oxford, 1987–94) vol 1: The Political Culture of the Old Regime, ed. K.M. Baker (1987); vol. 2: The Political Culture of the French Revolution, ed. C. Lucas (1988); vol. 3: The Transformation of Political Culture, 1789–1848, eds. F. Furet & M. Ozouf (1989); vol. 4: The Terror, ed. K.M. Baker (1994). excerpt and text search vol 4
Blanning, T.C.W. The French Revolutionary Wars 1787–1802 (1996).
Desan, Suzanne. "Internationalizing the French Revolution," French Politics, Culture & Society (2011) 29#2 pp. 137–60.
Doyle, William. Origins of the French Revolution (3rd ed. 1999) online edition
Englund, Steven. Napoleon: A Political Life. (2004). 575 pages; emphasis on politics excerpt and text search
Fremont-Barnes, Gregory. The French Revolutionary Wars (2013), 96pp; excerpt and text search
Griffith, Paddy. The Art of War of Revolutionary France 1789–1802, (1998); 304 pp; excerpt and text search
Rothenberg, Gunther E. (Spring 1988). "The Origins, Causes, and Extension of the Wars of the French Revolution and Napoleon". Journal of Interdisciplinary History. 18 (4): 771–793. JSTOR 204824. 
Schroeder, Paul. The Transformation of European Politics, 1763–1848. 1996; Thorough coverage of diplomatic history; hostile to Napoleon; online edition
Wahnich, Sophie (2016). In Defence of the Terror: Liberty or Death in the French Revolution (Reprint ed.). Verso. ISBN 978-1784782023. 

Economy and society

Anderson, James Maxwell. Daily life during the French Revolution (2007)
Andress, David. French Society in Revolution, 1789–1799 (1999)
Kennedy, Emmet. A Cultural History of the French Revolution (1989)
McPhee, Peter. "The French Revolution, Peasants, and Capitalism," American Historical Review (1989) 94#5 pp. 1265–1280 in JSTOR
Tackett, Timothy, "The French Revolution and religion to 1794," and Suzanne Desan, "The French Revolution and religion, 1795–1815," in Stewart J. Brown and Timothy Tackett, eds. The Cambridge History of Christianity vol. 7 (Cambridge UP, 2006).

Women

Dalton, Susan. "Gender and the Shifting Ground of Revolutionary Politics: The Case of Madame Roland." Canadian journal of history (2001) 36#2
Godineau, Dominique. The Women of Paris and Their French Revolution (1998) 440pp 1998
Hufton, Olwen. "Women in Revolution 1789–1796" Past & Present (1971) No. 53 pp. 90–108 in JSTOR
Hufton, Olwen. "In Search of Counter-Revolutionary Women." The French Revolution: Recent debates and New Controversies Ed. Gary Kates. (1998) pp 302–36
Kelly, Linda. Women of the French Revolution (1987) 192 pp. biographical portraits or prominent writers and activists
Landes, Joan B. Women and the Public Sphere in the Age of the French Revolution (Cornell University Press, 1988) excerpt and text search
Melzer, Sara E., and Leslie W. Rabine, eds. Rebel daughters: women and the French Revolution (Oxford University Press, 1992)
Proctor, Candice E. Women, Equality, and the French Revolution (Greenwood Press, 1990) online
Roessler, Shirley Elson. Out of the Shadows: Women and Politics in the French Revolution, 1789–95 (Peter Lang, 1998) online

Historiography and memory
Main article: Historiography of the French Revolution

Andress, David. "Interpreting the French Revolution," Teaching History (2013), Issue 150, pp. 28–29, very short summary
Censer, Jack R. "Amalgamating the Social in the French Revolution." Journal of Social History 2003 37(1): 145–50. online
Cox, Marvin R. The Place of the French Revolution in History (1997) 288pp
Desan, Suzanne. "What's after Political Culture? Recent French Revolutionary Historiography," French Historical Studies (2000) 23#1 pp. 163–96.
Furet, François and Mona Ozouf, eds. A Critical Dictionary of the French Revolution (1989), 1120pp; long essays by scholars; strong on history of ideas and historiography (esp pp. 881–1034 excerpt and text search
Furet, François. Interpreting the French revolution (1981).
Germani, Ian, and Robin Swayles. Symbols, myths and images of the French Revolution. University of Regina Publications. 1998. ISBN 978-0-88977-108-6
Geyl, Pieter. Napoleon for and Against (1949), 477pp; summarizes views of major historians on controversial issues
Hanson, Paul R. Contesting the French Revolution (2009). 248 pp.
Kafker, Frank A. and James M. Laux, eds. The French Revolution: Conflicting Interpretations (5th ed. 2002), articles by scholars
Kaplan, Steven Laurence. Farewell, Revolution: The Historians' Feud, France, 1789/1989 (1996), focus on historians excerpt and text search
Kaplan, Steven Laurence. Farewell, Revolution: Disputed Legacies, France, 1789/1989 (1995); focus on bitter debates re 200th anniversary excerpt and text search
Kates, Gary, ed. The French Revolution: Recent Debates and New Controversies (2nd ed. 2005) excerpt and text search
Lewis, Gwynne. The French Revolution: Rethinking the Debate (1993) online; 142 pp.
McPhee, Peter, ed. (2012). A Companion to the French Revolution. Wiley. ISBN 9781118316412. CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link) CS1 maint: Extra text: authors list (link) ; 540pp; 30 essays by experts; emphasis on historiography and memory
Reichardt, Rolf: The French Revolution as a European Media Event, European History Online, Mainz: Institute of European History, 2010, retrieved: December 17, 2012.
Ross, Steven T., ed. The French Revolution: conflict or continuity? (1971) 131pp; excerpt from historians table of contents

Primary sources



Wikisource has original works on the topic: French Revolution



Anderson, F.M. (1904). The constitutions and other select documents illustrative of the history of France, 1789–1901. , complete text online
Burke, Edmund (1790). Reflections on the Revolution in France. 
Dwyer, Philip G. and Peter McPhee, eds. The French Revolution and Napoleon: A Sourcebook (2002) 235 pp; online
Legg, L. G. Wickham, ed. Select Documents Illustrative of the History of the French Revolution (2 Volumes, 1905) 630pp vol 1 online free; in French (not translated)
Levy, Darline Gay, et al. eds. Women in Revolutionary Paris, 1789–1795 (1981) 244pp excerpt and text search
Mason, Laura, and Tracey Rizzo, eds. The French Revolution: A Document Collection (1998) 334pp excerpt and text search
Stewart, John Hall, ed. A Documentary Survey of the French Revolution (1951), 818pp
Thompson, J. M., ed. The French revolution: Documents, 1789–94 (1948), 287pp
 This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain: Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911). "The French Revolution". Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. 
This article incorporates text from the public domain History of the French Revolution from 1789 to 1814, by François Mignet (1824), as made available by Project Gutenberg.


External links



Wikimedia Commons has media related to French Revolution.




Library resources about
the French Revolution





Online books
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries





Museum of the French Revolution (French)
Primary source documents from The Internet Modern History Sourcebook.
Liberty, Equality, Fraternity: Exploring the French Revolution, a collaborative site by the Center for History and New Media (George Mason University) and the American Social History Project (City University of New York).
Vancea, S. The Cahiers de Doleances of 1789, Clio History Journal, 2008.
French Revolution Digital Archive a collaboration of the Stanford University Libraries and the Bibliothèque nationale de France, containing 12000 digitised images
The guillotined of the French Revolution factsheets of all the sentenced to death of the French Revolution
Jean-Baptiste Lingaud papers, Kislak Center for Special Collections, Rare Books and Manuscripts, University of Pennsylvania. Includes a vast number of name lists and secret surveillance records as well as arrest warrants for aristocrats and their sympathisers. Most notable in this part of the collection are letters and documents from the Revolutionary Committee and the Surveillance Committee.
French Revolution Pamphlets, Division of Special Collections, University of Alabama Libraries. Over 300 digitised pamphlets, from writers including Robespierre, St. Juste, Desmoulins, and Danton.



Preceded by
Ancien Régime (Old Regime)
French Revolution
1789–1792
Succeeded by
French First Republic








v
t
e


French Revolution






Causes
Timeline
Ancien Régime
Revolution
Constitutional monarchy
Republic
Directory
Consulate
Glossary










Significant civil and political events by year



1788



Day of the Tiles (7 Jun 1788)
Assembly of Vizille (21 Jul 1788)





1789



What Is the Third Estate? (Jan 1789)
Réveillon riots (28 Apr 1789)
Convocation of the Estates-General (5 May 1789)
National Assembly (17 Jun – 9 Jul 1790)
Tennis Court Oath (20 Jun 1789)
National Constituent Assembly (9 Jul – 30 Sep 1791)
Storming of the Bastille (14 Jul 1789)
Great Fear (20 Jul – 5 Aug 1789)
Abolition of Feudalism (4-11 Aug 1789)
Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen (27 Aug 1789)
Women's March on Versailles (5 Oct 1789)





1790



Abolition of the Parlements (Feb–Jul 1790)
Abolition of the Nobility (19 Jun 1790)
Civil Constitution of the Clergy (12 Jul 1790)





1791



Flight to Varennes (20–21 Jun 1791)
Champ de Mars Massacre (17 Jul 1791)
Declaration of Pillnitz (27 Aug 1791)
The Constitution of 1791 (3 Sep 1791)
Legislative Assembly (1 Oct 1791 – Sep 1792)





1792



France declares war (20 Apr 1792)
Brunswick Manifesto (25 Jul 1792)
Paris Commune becomes insurrectionary (Jun 1792)
10th of August (10 Aug 1792)
September Massacres (Sep 1792)
National Convention (20 Sep 1792 – 26 Oct 1795)
First republic declared (22 Sep 1792)





1793



Execution of Louis XVI (21 Jan 1793)
Revolutionary Tribunal (9 Mar 1793 – 31 May 1795)
Reign of Terror (27 Jun 1793 – 27 Jul 1794)

Committee of Public Safety
Committee of General Security


Fall of the Girondists (2 Jun 1793)
Assassination of Marat (13 Jul 1793)
Levée en masse (23 Aug 1793)
The Death of Marat (painting)
Law of Suspects (17 Sep 1793)
Marie Antoinette is guillotined (16 Oct 1793)
Anti-clerical laws (throughout the year)





1794



Danton and Desmoulins guillotined (5 Apr 1794)
Law of 22 Prairial (10 Jun 1794)
Thermidorian Reaction (27 Jul 1794)
Robespierre guillotined (28 Jul 1794)
White Terror (Fall 1794)
Closing of the Jacobin Club (11 Nov 1794)





1795



Constitution of the Year III (22 Aug 1795)
Conspiracy of the Equals (Nov 1795)
Directoire (1795–99)

Council of Five Hundred
Council of Ancients







1797



Coup of 18 Fructidor (4 Sep 1797)
Second Congress of Rastatt (Dec 1797)





1799



Coup of 30 Prairial VII (18 Jun 1799)
Coup of 18 Brumaire (9 Nov 1799)
Constitution of the Year VIII (24 Dec 1799)
Consulate













Revolutionary campaigns



1792



Verdun
Thionville
Valmy
Royalist Revolts

Chouannerie
Vendée
Dauphiné


Lille
Siege of Mainz
Jemappes
Namur (fr)





1793



First Coalition
Siege of Toulon (18 Sep – 18 Dec 1793)
War in the Vendée
Battle of Neerwinden)
Battle of Famars (23 May 1793)
Expédition de Sardaigne (21 Dec 1792 - 25 May 1793)
Battle of Kaiserslautern
Siege of Mainz
Battle of Wattignies
Battle of Hondschoote
Siege of Bellegarde
Battle of Peyrestortes (Pyrenees)
First Battle of Wissembourg (13 Oct 1793)
Battle of Truillas (Pyrenees)
Second Battle of Wissembourg (26–27 Dec 1793)





1794



Battle of Villers-en-Cauchies (24 Apr 1794)
Battle of Boulou (Pyrenees) (30 Apr – 1 May 1794)
Battle of Tournay (22 May 1794)
Battle of Fleurus (26 Jun 1794)
Chouannerie
Battle of Tourcoing (18 May 1794)
Battle of Aldenhoven (2 Oct 1794)





1795



Peace of Basel





1796



Battle of Lonato (3–4 Aug 1796)
Battle of Castiglione (5 Aug 1796)
Battle of Theiningen
Battle of Neresheim (11 Aug 1796)
Battle of Amberg (24 Aug 1796)
Battle of Würzburg (3 Sep 1796)
Battle of Rovereto (4 Sep 1796)
First Battle of Bassano (8 Sep 1796)
Battle of Emmendingen (19 Oct 1796)
Battle of Schliengen (26 Oct 1796)
Second Battle of Bassano (6 Nov 1796)
Battle of Calliano (6–7 Nov 1796)
Battle of the Bridge of Arcole (15–17 Nov 1796)
The Ireland Expedition (Dec 1796)





1797



Naval Engagement off Brittany (13 Jan 1797)
Battle of Rivoli (14–15 Jan 1797)
Battle of the Bay of Cádiz (25 Jan 1797)
Treaty of Leoben (17 Apr 1797)
Battle of Neuwied (18 Apr 1797)
Treaty of Campo Formio (17 Oct 1797)





1798



French invasion of Switzerland (28 January – 17 May 1798)
French Invasion of Egypt (1798–1801)
Irish Rebellion of 1798 (23 May – 23 Sep 1798)
Quasi-War (1798–1800)
Peasants' War (12 Oct – 5 Dec 1798)





1799



Second Coalition (1798–1802)
Siege of Acre (20 Mar – 21 May 1799)
Battle of Ostrach (20–21 Mar 1799)
Battle of Stockach (25 Mar 1799)
Battle of Magnano (5 Apr 1799)
Battle of Cassano (27 Apr 1799)
First Battle of Zurich (4–7 Jun 1799)
Battle of Trebbia (19 Jun 1799)
Battle of Novi (15 Aug 1799)
Second Battle of Zurich (25–26 Sep 1799)





1800



Battle of Marengo (14 Jun 1800)
Battle of Hohenlinden (3 Dec 1800)
League of Armed Neutrality (1800–02)





1801



Treaty of Lunéville (9 Feb 1801)
Treaty of Florence (18 Mar 1801)
Algeciras Campaign (8 Jul 1801)





1802



Treaty of Amiens (25 Mar 1802)













Military leaders



 French Army



Eustache Charles d'Aoust
Pierre Augereau
Alexandre de Beauharnais
Jean-Baptiste Bernadotte
Louis-Alexandre Berthier
Jean-Baptiste Bessières
Guillaume-Marie-Anne Brune
Jean François Carteaux
Jean Étienne Championnet
Chapuis de Tourville
Adam Philippe, Comte de Custine
Louis-Nicolas Davout
Louis Desaix
Jacques François Dugommier
Thomas-Alexandre Dumas
Charles François Dumouriez
Pierre Marie Barthélemy Ferino
Louis-Charles de Flers
Paul Grenier
Emmanuel de Grouchy
Jacques Maurice Hatry
Lazare Hoche
Jean-Baptiste Jourdan
François Christophe de Kellermann
Jean-Baptiste Kléber
Pierre Choderlos de Laclos
Jean Lannes
Charles Leclerc
Claude Lecourbe
François Joseph Lefebvre
Jacques MacDonald
Jean-Antoine Marbot
Jean Baptiste de Marbot
François Séverin Marceau-Desgraviers
Auguste de Marmont
André Masséna
Bon-Adrien Jeannot de Moncey
Jean Victor Marie Moreau
Édouard Mortier, duc de Trévise
Joachim Murat
Michel Ney
Pierre-Jacques Osten (fr)
Nicolas Oudinot
Catherine-Dominique de Pérignon
Jean-Charles Pichegru
Józef Poniatowski
Laurent de Gouvion Saint-Cyr
Barthélemy Louis Joseph Schérer
Jean-Mathieu-Philibert Sérurier
Joseph Souham
Jean-de-Dieu Soult
Louis-Gabriel Suchet
Belgrand de Vaubois
Claude Victor-Perrin, Duc de Belluno





 French Navy



Charles-Alexandre Linois





Opposition




 Austria



József Alvinczi
Archduke Charles, Duke of Teschen
Count of Clerfayt (Walloon)
Karl Aloys zu Fürstenberg
Friedrich Freiherr von Hotze (Swiss)
Friedrich Adolf, Count von Kalckreuth
Pál Kray (Hungarian)
Charles Eugene, Prince of Lambesc (French)
Maximilian Baillet de Latour (Walloon)
Karl Mack von Leiberich
Rudolf Ritter von Otto (Saxon)
Prince Josias of Saxe-Coburg-Saalfeld
Peter Vitus von Quosdanovich
Prince Heinrich XV of Reuss-Plauen
Johann Mészáros von Szoboszló (Hungarian)
Karl Philipp Sebottendorf
Dagobert von Wurmser





 Britain



Sir Ralph Abercromby
Admiral Sir James Saumarez
Admiral Sir Edward Pellew
Prince Frederick, Duke of York and Albany





 Dutch Republic



William V, Prince of Orange





 Prussia



Charles William Ferdinand, Duke of Brunswick-Wolfenbüttel
Frederick Louis, Prince of Hohenlohe-Ingelfingen





 Russia



Alexander Korsakov
Alexander Suvorov





 Spain



Luis Firmin de Carvajal
Antonio Ricardos
















Other significant figures and factions



Society of 1789



Jean Sylvain Bailly
Gilbert du Motier, Marquis de Lafayette
François Alexandre Frédéric, duc de la Rochefoucauld-Liancourt
Isaac René Guy le Chapelier
Honoré Gabriel Riqueti, comte de Mirabeau
Emmanuel Joseph Sieyès
Charles-Maurice de Talleyrand-Périgord
Nicolas de Condorcet






Feuillants
and monarchiens




Madame de Lamballe
Madame du Barry
Louis de Breteuil
Loménie de Brienne
Charles Alexandre de Calonne
de Chateaubriand
Jean Chouan
Grace Elliott
Arnaud de La Porte
Jean-Sifrein Maury
Jacques Necker
François-Marie, marquis de Barthélemy
Guillaume-Mathieu Dumas
Antoine Barnave
Lafayette
Alexandre-Théodore-Victor, comte de Lameth
Charles Malo François Lameth
André Chénier
Jean-François Rewbell
Camille Jordan
Madame de Staël
Boissy d'Anglas
Jean-Charles Pichegru
Pierre Paul Royer-Collard





Girondists



Jacques Pierre Brissot
Roland de La Platière
Madame Roland
Father Henri Grégoire
Étienne Clavière
Marquis de Condorcet
Charlotte Corday
Marie Jean Hérault
Jean Baptiste Treilhard
Pierre Victurnien Vergniaud
Bertrand Barère de Vieuzac
Jérôme Pétion de Villeneuve
Jean Debry
Jean-Jacques Duval d'Eprémesnil
Olympe de Gouges
Jean-Baptiste Robert Lindet
Louis Marie de La Révellière-Lépeaux





The Plain



Abbé Sieyès
de Cambacérès
Charles François Lebrun
Lazare Nicolas Marguerite Carnot
Philippe Égalité
Louis Philippe I
Mirabeau
Antoine Christophe Merlin de Thionville
Jean Joseph Mounier
Pierre Samuel du Pont de Nemours
François de Neufchâteau





Montagnards



Maximilien Robespierre
Georges Danton
Jean-Paul Marat
Camille Desmoulins
Louis Antoine de Saint-Just
Paul Nicolas, vicomte de Barras
Louis Philippe I
Louis Michel le Peletier de Saint-Fargeau
Jacques-Louis David
Marquis de Sade
Jacques-Louis David
Georges Couthon
Roger Ducos
Jean-Marie Collot d'Herbois
Jean-Henri Voulland
Philippe-Antoine Merlin de Douai
Antoine Quentin Fouquier-Tinville
Philippe-François-Joseph Le Bas
Marc-Guillaume Alexis Vadier
Jean-Pierre-André Amar
Prieur de la Côte-d'Or
Prieur de la Marne
Gilbert Romme
Jean Bon Saint-André
Jean-Lambert Tallien
Pierre Louis Prieur
Bertrand Barère de Vieuzac
Antoine Christophe Saliceti





Hébertists
and Enragés



Jacques Hébert
Jacques Nicolas Billaud-Varenne
Pierre Gaspard Chaumette
Charles-Philippe Ronsin
Antoine-François Momoro
François-Nicolas Vincent
François Chabot
Jean Baptiste Noël Bouchotte
Jean-Baptiste-Joseph Gobel
François Hanriot
Jacques Roux
Stanislas-Marie Maillard
Charles-Philippe Ronsin
Jean-François Varlet
Theophile Leclerc
Claire Lacombe
Pauline Léon
Gracchus Babeuf
Sylvain Maréchal





Others



Charles X
Louis XVI
Louis XVII
Louis XVIII
Louis Antoine, Duke of Enghien
Louis Henri, Prince of Condé
Louis Joseph, Prince of Condé
Marie Antoinette
Napoléon Bonaparte
Lucien Bonaparte
Joseph Bonaparte
Joseph Fesch
Joséphine de Beauharnais
Joachim Murat
Jean Sylvain Bailly
Jacques-Donatien Le Ray
Guillaume-Chrétien de Malesherbes
Talleyrand
Thérésa Tallien
Gui-Jean-Baptiste Target
Catherine Théot
List of people associated with the French Revolution













Influential thinkers






Les Lumières
Beaumarchais
Edmund Burke
Anacharsis Cloots
Charles-Augustin de Coulomb
Pierre Claude François Daunou
Diderot
Benjamin Franklin
Thomas Jefferson
Antoine Lavoisier
Montesquieu
Thomas Paine
Jean-Jacques Rousseau
Abbé Sieyès
Voltaire
Mary Wollstonecraft













Cultural impact






La Marseillaise
French Tricolour
Liberté, égalité, fraternité
Marianne
Bastille Day
Panthéon
French Republican Calendar
Cult of the Supreme Being
Cult of Reason

Temple of Reason


Sans-culottes
Metric system
Phrygian cap
Women in the French Revolution
Symbolism in the French Revolution
Historiography of the French Revolution
Influence of the French Revolution















v
t
e


France topics



History




Periods



Timeline
Prehistory
Celtic Gaul
Roman Gaul
Kingdom of the Visigoths
Francia

West Francia


Middle Ages
Early modern era
Long nineteenth century

Revolutionary era
Napoleonic era
Belle Époque


Twentieth century





Regimes



Absolute monarchy

Ancien Régime


First Republic
First Empire
Constitutional monarchy

Bourbon Restoration
July Monarchy


Second Republic
Second Empire
Third Republic
France during the Second World War

Free France
Vichy France
Provisional Republic


Fourth Republic
Fifth Republic








Geography







Administrative divisions
Cities
Climate
Extreme points
Islands
Lakes
Mountains
Rivers








Politics







Constitution
Elections

presidential


Foreign relations
Government
Human rights

Intersex
LGBT


Judiciary
Law

enforcement


Military
Parliament
Political parties








Economy







Agriculture
Banking

Central bank


Economic history
Energy
Euro
Exports
Franc (former currency)
French subdivisions by GDP
Stock exchange
Taxation
Telecommunications
Tourism
Trade unions
Transport








Society







Crime
Demographics
Education
Health care
People
Poverty
Religion
Social class
Welfare





Culture



Architecture
Art
Cinema (comedy)
Cuisine
Fashion
Gardens
Language
Literature
Media
Music
Philosophy
Public holidays
Sport
Symbols
Theatre












Outline




Book
Category
Portal
WikiProject










Authority control



GND: 4018183-2
BNF: cb11941849g (data)
HDS: 17216











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=French_Revolution&oldid=818321625"					Categories: French Revolution1789 in France1790s in France18th-century rebellions18th-century revolutionsConflicts in 1789Conflicts in 1790Conflicts in 1791Conflicts in 1792Modern history of FranceRepublicanism in FranceHidden categories: CS1 maint: Extra text: authors listArticles with Dutch-language external linksWebarchive template wayback linksArticles with French-language external linksCS1 French-language sources (fr)Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pagesWikipedia indefinitely move-protected pagesUse dmy dates from July 2012Use British English from September 2016Articles containing French-language textAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from January 2016Articles with unsourced statements from July 2016Articles with unsourced statements from April 2017Articles containing explicitly cited English-language textArticles with hAudio microformatsCS1 maint: Multiple names: authors listWikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica without Wikisource referenceWikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia BritannicaInterlanguage link template link numberWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiers