"Schiller" redirects here. For other uses, see Schiller (disambiguation).






This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (May 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)





Friedrich Schiller



Portrait of Schiller by Ludovike Simanowiz (1794)



Born
Johann Christoph Friedrich Schiller
(1759-11-10)10 November 1759
Marbach am Neckar, Württemberg, Germany


Died
9 May 1805(1805-05-09) (aged 45)
Weimar, Saxe-Weimar


Occupation
Poet, playwright, writer, historian, philosopher


Nationality
German


Literary movement
Sturm und Drang, Weimar Classicism


Notable works



The Robbers
Don Carlos
Wallenstein Trilogy
Mary Stuart
William Tell





Spouse
Charlotte von Lengefeld (m. 1790)


Children
Karl Ludwig Friedrich (1793–1857), Ernst Friedrich Wilhelm (1796–1841), Karoline Luise Friederike (1799–1850), Emilie Henriette Luise (1804–1872)


Relatives
Johann Kaspar Schiller (father), Elisabeth Dorothea Schiller, born Kodweiß (mother), Christophine Reinwald (sister)






Signature



Johann Christoph Friedrich von Schiller (German: [ˈjoːhan ˈkʁɪstɔf ˈfʁiːdʁɪç fɔn ˈʃɪlɐ]; 10 November 1759 – 9 May 1805) was a German poet, philosopher, physician, historian, and playwright. During the last seventeen years of his life (1788–1805), Schiller struck up a productive, if complicated, friendship with the already famous and influential Johann Wolfgang von Goethe. They frequently discussed issues concerning aesthetics, and Schiller encouraged Goethe to finish works he left as sketches. This relationship and these discussions led to a period now referred to as Weimar Classicism. They also worked together on Xenien, a collection of short satirical poems in which both Schiller and Goethe challenge opponents to their philosophical vision.



Contents


1 Early life and career
2 Marriage and family
3 Weimar and later career
4 Legacy and honors

4.1 Freemasonry


5 Writing

5.1 Philosophical papers
5.2 Dramas
5.3 Aesthetic Letters


6 Musical settings
7 Schiller's burial
8 Quotations
9 Works
10 See also
11 Notes and citations
12 Further reading
13 External links



Early life and career[edit]
Friedrich Schiller was born on 10 November 1759, in Marbach, Württemberg, as the only son of military doctor Johann Kaspar Schiller (1733–1796) and Elisabeth Dorothea Kodweiß (1732–1802). They also had five daughters, including Christophine, the eldest. Schiller grew up in a very religious family and spent much of his youth studying the Bible, which would later influence his writing for the theatre.[1] His father was away in the Seven Years' War when Friedrich was born. He was named after king Frederick the Great, but he was called Fritz by nearly everyone.[2] Kaspar Schiller was rarely home during the war, but he did manage to visit the family once in a while. His wife and children also visited him occasionally wherever he happened to be stationed.[3] When the war ended in 1763, Schiller's father became a recruiting officer and was stationed in Schwäbisch Gmünd. The family moved with him. Due to the high cost of living—especially the rent—the family moved to nearby Lorch.[4]
Although the family was happy in Lorch, Schiller's father found his work unsatisfying. He sometimes took his son with him.[5] In Lorch, Schiller received his primary education. The quality of the lessons was fairly bad, and Friedrich regularly cut class with his older sister.[6] Because his parents wanted Schiller to become a pastor, they had the pastor of the village instruct the boy in Latin and Greek. Pastor Moser was a good teacher, and later Schiller named the cleric in his first play Die Räuber (The Robbers) after him. As a boy, Schiller was excited by the idea of becoming a cleric and often put on black robes and pretended to preach.[7]
In 1766, the family left Lorch for the Duke of Württemberg's principal residence, Ludwigsburg. Schiller's father had not been paid for three years, and the family had been living on their savings but could no longer afford to do so. So Kaspar Schiller took an assignment to the garrison in Ludwigsburg.[8]




Portrait of Friedrich Schiller by Gerhard von Kügelgen


There the Schiller boy came to the attention of Karl Eugen, Duke of Württemberg. He entered the Karlsschule Stuttgart (an elite military academy founded by the Duke), in 1773, where he eventually studied medicine. During most of his short life, he suffered from illnesses that he tried to cure himself.
While at the Karlsschule, Schiller read Rousseau and Goethe and discussed Classical ideals with his classmates. At school, he wrote his first play, The Robbers, which dramatizes the conflict between two aristocratic brothers: the elder, Karl Moor, leads a group of rebellious students into the Bohemian forest where they become Robin Hood-like bandits, while Franz Moor, the younger brother, schemes to inherit his father's considerable estate. The play's critique of social corruption and its affirmation of proto-revolutionary republican ideals astounded its original audience. Schiller became an overnight sensation. Later, Schiller would be made an honorary member of the French Republic because of this play. The play was inspired by Leisewitz' earlier play Julius of Tarent, a favourite of the young Schiller.[9]
In 1780, he obtained a post as regimental doctor in Stuttgart, a job he disliked. In order to attend the first performance of The Robbers in Mannheim, Schiller left his regiment without permission. As a result, he was arrested, sentenced to 14 days of imprisonment, and forbidden by Karl Eugen from publishing any further works.[10]
He fled Stuttgart in 1782, going via Frankfurt, Mannheim, Leipzig, and Dresden to Weimar. Along this journey he had an affair with an army officer's wife Charlotte von Kalb. She was at the centre of an intellectual circle, and she was known for her cleverness and instability. Schiller needed help from his family and friends to extricate himself from his financial situation and attachment to a married woman.[11] Schiller settled in Weimar in 1787. In 1789, he was appointed professor of History and Philosophy in Jena, where he wrote only historical works. He was ennobled in 1802, thereby adding the honorific von to his name[11].
Marriage and family[edit]
On 22 February 1790, Schiller married Charlotte von Lengefeld (1766–1826). Two sons (Karl Friedrich Ludwig and Ernst Friedrich Wilhelm) and two daughters (Karoline Luise Henriette and Luise Henriette Emilie) were born between 1793 and 1804. The last living descendant of Schiller was a grandchild of Emilie, Baron Alexander von Gleichen-Rußwurm, who died at Baden-Baden, Germany, in 1947.[12]
Weimar and later career[edit]
Schiller returned with his family to Weimar from Jena in 1799. Goethe convinced him to return to playwriting. He and Goethe founded the Weimar Theater, which became the leading theater in Germany. Their collaboration helped lead to a renaissance of drama in Germany.
For his achievements, Schiller was ennobled in 1802 by the Duke of Saxe-Weimar, adding the nobiliary particle "von" to his name. He remained in Weimar, Saxe-Weimar until his death at 45 from tuberculosis in 1805.
Legacy and honors[edit]




Lithograph portrait from 1905, captioned "Friedrich von Schiller" in recognition of his 1802 ennoblement


The first authoritative biography of Schiller was by his sister-in-law Caroline von Wolzogen in 1830, Schillers Leben (Schiller's Life).[13]
The coffin containing what was purportedly Schiller's skeleton was brought in 1827 into the Weimarer Fürstengruft (Weimar's Ducal Vault), the burial place of the house of Saxe-Weimar-Eisenach in the Historical Cemetery of Weimar and later also Goethe's resting place. On 3 May 2008, scientists announced that DNA tests have shown that the skull of this skeleton is not Schiller's, and his tomb is now vacant.[14] The physical resemblance between this skull and the extant death mask[15] as well as to portraits of Schiller, had led many experts to believe that the skull was Schiller's.




Germany's oldest Schiller memorial (1839) on Schillerplatz, Stuttgart


The city of Stuttgart erected in 1839 a statue in his memory on a square renamed Schillerplatz. A Schiller monument was unveiled on Berlin's Gendarmenmarkt in 1871.
In September 2008, Schiller was voted by the audience of the TV channel Arte as the second most important playwright in Europe after William Shakespeare.
Freemasonry[edit]
Some Freemasons speculate that Schiller was a Freemason, but this has not been proven.[16]
In 1787, in his tenth letter about Don Carlos, Schiller wrote:

I am neither Illuminati nor Mason, but if the fraternization has a moral purpose in common with one another, and if this purpose for human society is the most important, ...[17]

In a letter from 1829, two Freemasons from Rudolstadt complain about the dissolving of their Lodge Günther zum stehenden Löwen that was honoured by the initiation of Schiller. According to Schiller's great-grandson Alexander von Gleichen-Rußwurm, Schiller was brought to the Lodge by Wilhelm Heinrich Karl von Gleichen-Rußwurm. No membership document has been found.[17]
Writing[edit]
Philosophical papers[edit]




Goethe–Schiller Monument (1857), Weimar


Schiller wrote many philosophical papers on ethics and aesthetics. He synthesized the thought of Immanuel Kant with the thought of the German Idealist philosopher, Karl Leonhard Reinhold. He elaborated Christoph Martin Wieland's concept of die schöne Seele (the beautiful soul), a human being whose emotions have been educated by reason, so that Pflicht und Neigung (duty and inclination) are no longer in conflict with one another; thus beauty, for Schiller, is not merely an aesthetic experience, but a moral one as well: the Good is the Beautiful. His philosophical work was also particularly concerned with the question of human freedom, a preoccupation which also guided his historical researches, such as the Thirty Years' War and the Dutch Revolt, and then found its way as well into his dramas (the Wallenstein trilogy concerns the Thirty Years' War, while Don Carlos addresses the revolt of the Netherlands against Spain.) Schiller wrote two important essays on the question of the sublime (das Erhabene), entitled "Vom Erhabenen" and "Über das Erhabene"; these essays address one aspect of human freedom—the ability to defy one's animal instincts, such as the drive for self-preservation, when, for example, someone willingly sacrifices themselves for conceptual ideals.
Dramas[edit]
Schiller is considered by most Germans to be Germany's most important classical playwright. Critics like F.J. Lamport and Eric Auerbach have noted his innovative use of dramatic structure and his creation of new forms, such as the melodrama and the bourgeois tragedy. What follows is a brief, chronological description of the plays.

The Robbers (Die Räuber): The language of The Robbers is highly emotional, and the depiction of physical violence in the play marks it as a quintessential work of Germany's Romantic Sturm und Drang movement. The Robbers is considered by critics like Peter Brooks to be the first European melodrama. The play pits two brothers against each other in alternating scenes, as one quests for money and power, while the other attempts to create revolutionary anarchy in the Bohemian Forest. The play strongly criticises the hypocrisies of class and religion, and the economic inequities of German society; it also conducts a complicated inquiry into the nature of evil. Schiller was inspired by the play Julius of Tarent by Johann Anton Leisewitz.[9]
Fiesco (Die Verschwörung des Fiesco zu Genua):
Intrigue and Love (Kabale und Liebe): The aristocratic Ferdinand von Walter wishes to marry Luise Miller, the bourgeois daughter of the city's music instructor. Court politics involving the duke's beautiful but conniving mistress Lady Milford and Ferdinand's ruthless father create a disastrous situation reminiscent of Shakespeare's Romeo and Juliet. Schiller develops his criticisms of absolutism and bourgeois hypocrisy in this bourgeois tragedy. Act 2, scene 2 is an anti-British parody that depicts a firing-squad massacre. Young Germans who refused to join the Hessians and British to quash the American Revolutionary War are fired upon.[18]
Don Carlos: This play marks Schiller's entrée into historical drama. Very loosely based on the events surrounding the real Don Carlos of Spain, Schiller's Don Carlos is another republican figure—he attempts to free Flanders from the despotic grip of his father, King Phillip. The Marquis Posa's famous speech to the king proclaims Schiller's belief in personal freedom and democracy.
The Wallenstein trilogy: Consisting of Wallenstein's Camp, The Piccolomini, and Wallenstein's Death, these plays follow the fortunes of the treacherous commander Albrecht von Wallenstein during the Thirty Years' War.
Mary Stuart (Maria Stuart): This history of the Scottish queen, who was Elizabeth I's rival, portrays Mary Stuart as a tragic heroine, misunderstood and used by ruthless politicians, including and especially, Elizabeth.
The Maid of Orleans (Die Jungfrau von Orleans): about Joan of Arc
The Bride of Messina (Die Braut von Messina)
William Tell (Wilhelm Tell)
Demetrius (unfinished)

Aesthetic Letters[edit]
Main article: Play drive
A pivotal work by Schiller was On the Aesthetic Education of Man in a Series of Letters[19] (Über die ästhetische Erziehung des Menschen in einer Reihe von Briefen), first published 1794, which was inspired by the great disenchantment Schiller felt about the French Revolution, its degeneration into violence and the failure of successive governments to put its ideals into practice.[20] Schiller wrote that "a great moment has found a little people"; he wrote the Letters as a philosophical inquiry into what had gone wrong, and how to prevent such tragedies in the future. In the Letters he asserts that it is possible to elevate the moral character of a people, by first touching their souls with beauty, an idea that is also found in his poem Die Künstler (The Artists): "Only through Beauty's morning-gate, dost thou penetrate the land of knowledge."
On the philosophical side, Letters put forth the notion of der sinnliche Trieb / Sinnestrieb ("the sensuous drive") and Formtrieb ("the formal drive"). In a comment to Immanuel Kant's philosophy, Schiller transcends the dualism between Formtrieb and Sinnestrieb with the notion of Spieltrieb ("the play drive"), derived from, as are a number of other terms, Kant's Critique of the Faculty of Judgment. The conflict between man's material, sensuous nature and his capacity for reason (Formtrieb being the drive to impose conceptual and moral order on the world), Schiller resolves with the happy union of Formtrieb and Sinnestrieb, the "play drive," which for him is synonymous with artistic beauty, or "living form." On the basis of Spieltrieb, Schiller sketches in Letters a future ideal state (a eutopia), where everyone will be content, and everything will be beautiful, thanks to the free play of Spieltrieb. Schiller's focus on the dialectical interplay between Formtrieb and Sinnestrieb has inspired a wide range of succeeding aesthetic philosophical theory, including notably Jacques Rancière's conception of the "aesthetic regime of art," as well as social philosophy in Herbert Marcuse. In the second part of his important work Eros and Civilization, Marcuse finds Schiller's notion of Spieltrieb useful in thinking a social situation without the condition of modern social alienation. He writes, "Schiller's Letters ... aim at remaking of civilization by virtue of the liberating force of the aesthetic function: it is envisaged as containing the possibility of a new reality principle."[21]
Musical settings[edit]
Ludwig van Beethoven said that a great poem is more difficult to set to music than a merely good one because the composer must rise higher than the poet – "who can do that in the case of Schiller? In this respect Goethe is much easier," wrote Beethoven.[22]
There are relatively few famous musical settings of Schiller's poems. Notable exceptions are Beethoven's setting of "An die Freude" (Ode to Joy)[18] in the final movement of his Ninth Symphony, Johannes Brahms' choral setting of "Nänie" and "Des Mädchens Klage" by Franz Schubert, who set 44 of Schiller's poems[23] as Lieder, mostly for voice and piano, also including "Die Bürgschaft". In 2005 Graham Waterhouse set Der Handschuh (The Glove) for cello and speaking voice.




Schiller on his deathbed – drawing by the portraitist Ferdinand Jagemann, 1805


The Italian composer Giuseppe Verdi admired Schiller greatly and adapted several of his stage plays for his operas: I masnadieri is based on The Robbers; Giovanna d'Arco on The Maid of Orleans; Luisa Miller on Intrigue and Love; La forza del destino is based partly on Wallenstein; and Don Carlos on the play of the same title. Donizetti's Maria Stuarda is based on Mary Stuart, and Rossini's Guillaume Tell is an adaptation of William Tell. Nicola Vaccai's Giovanna d'Arco (1827) is based on The Maid of Orleans and his La sposa di Messina (1839) on The Bride of Messina. Tchaikovsky's 1881 opera The Maid of Orleans is partly based on Schiller's work. The 20th-century composer Giselher Klebe adapted The Robbers for his first opera of the same name, which premiered in 1957.
Schiller's burial[edit]
A poem written about the poet's burial:

Two dim and paltry torches that the raging storm
And rain at any moment threaten to put out.
A waving pall. A vulgar coffin made of pine
With not a wreath, not e'en the poorest, and no train –
As if a crime were swiftly carried to the grave!
The bearers hastened onward. One unknown alone,
Round whom a mantle waved of wide and noble fold,
Followed this coffin. 'Twas the Spirit of Mankind.









– Conrad Ferdinand Meyer[24]











Quotations[edit]

"Respect the dreams of thy youth." (Posa, in: Don Carlos)[25]
"Mit der Dummheit kämpfen Götter selbst vergebens", which means "Against stupidity the gods themselves contend in vain" (Talbot, in: The Maid of Orleans)
"Deeper meaning resides in the fairy tales told to me in my childhood than in any truth that is taught in life." (Max in The Piccolomini, act 3, scene 4)[26]
"Eine Grenze hat die Tyrannenmacht", which means "A tyrant's power has a limit" (a Swiss freedom fighter, in: Wilhelm Tell)
"The voice of the majority is no proof of justice." (Talbot, in: Maria Stuart)
"It is not flesh and blood but the heart which makes us fathers and sons." (Franz in The Robbers)
"Live with your century but do not be its creature." (From On the Aesthetic Education of Man)
"Great souls suffer in silence"

Works[edit]




German stamp depicting Schiller






Monument on Schillerplatz in Vienna






Bronze-Plaque-Medal of Schiller's laureate head by the Austrian artist Otto Hofner.


Plays

Die Räuber (The Robbers), 1781
Fiesco (Die Verschwörung des Fiesco zu Genua), 1783
Kabale und Liebe (Intrigue and Love),[18] 1784
Don Karlos, Infant von Spanien (Don Carlos),[27] 1787
Wallenstein,[28] 1800
Maria Stuart (Mary Stuart), 1800
Die Jungfrau von Orleans (The Maid of Orleans), 1801
Turandot, Prinzessin von China, 1801
Die Braut von Messina (The Bride of Messina), 1803
Wilhelm Tell (William Tell), 1804
Demetrius (unfinished at his death)

Histories

Geschichte des Abfalls der vereinigten Niederlande von der spanischen Regierung or The Revolt of the Netherlands
Geschichte des dreißigjährigen Kriegs or A History of the Thirty Years' War
Über Völkerwanderung, Kreuzzüge und Mittelalter or On the Barbarian Invasions, Crusaders and Middle Ages

Translations

Euripides, Iphigenia in Aulis
William Shakespeare, Macbeth
Jean Racine, Phèdre
Carlo Gozzi, Turandot, 1801

Prose

Der Geisterseher or The Ghost-Seer (unfinished novel) (started in 1786 and published periodically. Published as book in 1789)
Über die ästhetische Erziehung des Menschen in einer Reihe von Briefen (On the Aesthetic Education of Man in a Series of Letters), 1794
Der Verbrecher aus verlorener Ehre (Dishonoured Irreclaimable), 1786

Poems

An die Freude (Ode to Joy)[18] (1785) became the basis for the fourth movement of Beethoven's ninth symphony
Der Taucher (The Diver; set to music by Schubert)
Die Kraniche des Ibykus (The Cranes of Ibykus)
Der Ring des Polykrates (Polycrates' Ring)
Die Bürgschaft (The Hostage; set to music by Schubert)
Das Lied von der Glocke (Song of the Bell)
Das verschleierte Bild zu Sais (The Veiled Statue at Sais)
Der Handschuh (The Glove)
Nänie (set to music by Brahms)

See also[edit]


Poetry portal
Biography portal



Musen-Almanach
Friedrich Schiller (train), an express train in Germany
Schiller Park, Columbus, Ohio

Notes and citations[edit]


^ Simons, John D (1990). "Frederich Schiller". Dictionary of Literary Biography, Volume 94: German Writers in the Age of Goethe: Sturm und Drang to Classicism. ISBN 9780810345744. 
^ Lahnstein 1981, p. 18.
^ Lahnstein (1981), p. 20.
^ Lahnstein (1981), pp. 20–21.
^ Lahnstein (1981), p. 23
^ Lahnstein 1981, p. 24.
^ Lahnstein (1981), p. 25.
^ Lahnstein (1981), p. 27.
^ a b "Johann Anton Leisewitz", Encyclopædia Britannica
^ "Friedrich Schiller biography". Studiocleo.com. Retrieved 6 November 2013. 
^ a b Friedrich Schiller, Encyclopædia Britannica, retrieved 17 March 2014
^ Schiller's offspring at the Schiller Birth House Museum's site
^ Sharpe, Lesley (April 1999). "Female Illness and Male Heroism: The Works of Caroline von Wolzogen". German Life and Letters. 52 (2): 184–196. doi:10.1111/1468-0483.00129. 
^ "Schädel in Schillers Sarg wurde ausgetauscht" (Skull in Schiller's coffin has been exchanged), Der Spiegel, 3 May 2008.
"Schädel in Weimar gehört nicht Schiller" (Skull in Weimar does not belong to Schiller), Die Welt, 3 May 2008.
^ "Death Mask". Sammlungen.hu-berlin.de. Retrieved 6 November 2013. 
^ "Friedrich Von Schiller". Freemasonry.bcy.ca. Retrieved 6 November 2013. 
^ a b Eugen Lennhoff, Oskar Posner, Dieter A. Binder: Internationales Freimaurer Lexikon. Herbig publishing, 2006, ISBN 978-3-7766-2478-6
^ a b c d The Autobiography of Col. John Trumbull, Sizer 1953 ed., p. 184, n. 13
^ "Letters Upon The Aesthetic Education of Man", Fordham University
^ Schiller, On the Aesthetic Education of Man, ed. Elizabeth M. Wilkinson and L. A. Willoughby, 1967
^ Marcuse, Herbert. Eros and Civilization. Beacon Press. 1966
^ "Beethoven: the man and the artist, as revealed by his own words, Project Gutenberg". Retrieved 20 November 2011. 
^ Fifty Songs by Franz Schubert by Henry T. Finck Published in 1904 by Oliver Ditson Company
^ Munsterberg, Margarete (1916). A Harvest of German Verse. New York and London: D. Appleton and Company. p. 242. 
^ Don Carlos, act 4, scene 21, translated by Richard Dillon Boylan: "Tell him, in manhood, he must still revere / The dreams of early youth"
^ The Piccolomini, act 3, scene 4, translated by S. T. Coleridge: "a deeper import / Lurks in the legend told my infant years / Than lies upon that truth, we live to learn."
^ Mike Poulton translated this play in 2004.
^ Wallenstein was translated from a manuscript copy into English as The Piccolomini and Death of Wallenstein by Coleridge in 1800.


Further reading[edit]

Lahnstein, Peter (January 1984) [1981]. Schillers Leben. Frankfurt am Main: Fischer. ISBN 3-596-25621-6. 
Engel, Manfred: "Schiller und wir – Ferne aus großer Nähe". Oxford German Studies 37 (2008) 1: 37–49

Schiller's complete works are published in the following excellent editions:

Historical-critical edition by K. Goedeke (17 volumes, Stuttgart, 1867–76)
Säkular-Ausgabe edition by Von der Hellen (16 volumes, Stuttgart, 1904–05)
historical-critical edition by Günther and Witkowski (20 volumes, Leipzig, 1909–10).

Other valuable editions are:

the Hempel edition (1868–74)
the Boxberger edition, in Kürschners National-Literatur (12 volumes, Berlin, 1882–91)
the edition by Kutscher and Zisseler (15 parts, Berlin, 1908)
the Horenausgabe (16 volumes, Munich, 1910, et. seq.)
the edition of the Tempel Klassiker (13 volumes, Leipzig, 1910–11)
Helios Klassiker (6 volumes, Leipzig, 1911).

Documents and other memorials of Schiller are in the Goethe- und Schiller-Archiv in Weimar.
External links[edit]



Wikiquote has quotations related to: Friedrich Schiller





German Wikisource has original text related to this article:
Friedrich Schiller






Wikisource has original works written by or about:
Friedrich Schiller





Wikimedia Commons has media related to Friedrich Schiller.



Books by Friedrich Schiller at Project Gutenberg
Works by or about Friedrich Schiller at Internet Archive
Works by Friedrich Schiller at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) 
Friedrich Schiller Chronology
2005 is Schiller year: all dates
Letters upon the Education of Man
Letters Upon The Aesthetic Education of Man in PDF Format at filepedia.org
Schiller Monument in Schiller Park, German Village, Columbus, Ohio
Pittsburgh Schiller 6–8 is a full school Classical Academy Magnet
Schiller multimedial combines a biographical observation by Norbert Œllers with classic recordings and video clips
Mobile Schiller Mobile Java application containing 20 poems of Schiller
Say it loud – it's Schiller and it's proud What relevance does Schiller have today? By George Steiner at signandsight.com
Friedrich-Schiller University of Jena
An Illustrated edition of Schiller's Aesthetic Letters, For Free Download
Friedrich Schiller at Find a Grave
Friedrich Schiller on IMDb
Friedrich Schiller (character) on IMDb







v
t
e


Friedrich Schiller



Plays



The Robbers
Semele
Fiesco
Intrigue and Love
Körners Vormittag
Don Carlos
Wallenstein

Wallenstein's Camp
The Piccolomini
Wallenstein's Death


Mary Stuart
The Maid of Orleans
The Bride of Messina
William Tell
Die Huldigung der Künste
Demetrius





Selected poems



Ode to Joy
Resignation
Die Götter Griechenlandes
Das verschleierte Bild zu Sais
Die Teilung der Erde
Xenien
Der Handschuh
Der Taucher
Die Kraniche des Ibykus
Ritter Toggenburg
Der Gang nach dem Eisenhammer
Der Ring des Polykrates
Der Kampf mit dem Drachen
Die Bürgschaft
Das Lied von der Glocke
Nänie
Der Antritt des neuen Jahrhunderts
Das Siegesfest





Selected
prose works



The Criminal of Lost Honour
The Ghost-Seer
A magnanimous act





Selected
philosophical works



The Theatre considered as a Moral Institution
Über den Grund des Vergnügens an tragischen Gegenständen
Augustenburger Briefe
On Grace and Dignity
Über das Pathetische
Kallias-Briefe
On the Aesthetic Education of Man
On Naïve and Sentimental Poetry
Über das Erhabene





Historical works



What is universal history and why does one study it?





Journals



Wirtembergisches Repertorium
Thalia
Die Horen





Related



Charlotte von Lengefeld (wife)
Christophine Reinwald (sister)
Weimar Classicism
Play drive
Skull
Schiller Monument (Berlin)
Goethe–Schiller Monument
Friedrich Schiller – The Triumph of a Genius (1940 film)
Beloved Sisters (2014 film)












v
t
e


Aesthetics topics



Philosophers



Abhinavagupta
Theodor W. Adorno
Leon Battista Alberti
Thomas Aquinas
Hans Urs von Balthasar
Alexander Gottlieb Baumgarten
Clive Bell
Bernard Bosanquet
Edward Bullough
R. G. Collingwood
Ananda Coomaraswamy
Arthur Danto
John Dewey
Denis Diderot
Hubert Dreyfus
Curt John Ducasse
Thierry de Duve
Roger Fry
Nelson Goodman
Clement Greenberg
Georg Hegel
Martin Heidegger
David Hume
Immanuel Kant
Paul Klee
Susanne Langer
Theodor Lipps
György Lukács
Jean-François Lyotard
Joseph Margolis
Jacques Maritain
Thomas Munro
Friedrich Nietzsche
José Ortega y Gasset
Dewitt H. Parker
Stephen Pepper
David Prall
Jacques Rancière
Ayn Rand
George Lansing Raymond
I. A. Richards
George Santayana
Friedrich Schiller
Arthur Schopenhauer
Roger Scruton
Irving Singer
Rabindranath Tagore
Giorgio Vasari
Morris Weitz
Johann Joachim Winckelmann
Richard Wollheim
more...





Theories



Classicism
Evolutionary aesthetics
Historicism
Modernism
New Classical
Postmodernism
Psychoanalytic theory
Romanticism
Symbolism
more...





Concepts



Aesthetic emotions
Aesthetic interpretation
Art manifesto
Avant-garde
Axiology
Beauty
Boredom
Camp
Comedy
Creativity
Cuteness
Disgust
Ecstasy
Elegance
Entertainment
Eroticism
Gaze
Harmony
Judgement
Kama
Kitsch
Life imitating art
Magnificence
Mimesis
Perception
Quality
Rasa
Reverence
Style
Sublime
Taste
Work of art





Related topics



Aesthetics of music
Applied aesthetics
Architecture
Art
Arts criticism
Feminist aesthetics
Gastronomy
History of painting
Humour
Japanese aesthetics
Literary merit
Mathematical beauty
Mathematics and architecture
Mathematics and art
Music theory
Neuroesthetics
Painting
Patterns in nature
Philosophy of design
Philosophy of film
Philosophy of music
Poetry
Sculpture
Theory of painting
Theory of art
Tragedy
Visual arts








Index
Outline
Category
Portal












v
t
e


German language literature



Related articles



German language
History of Germany
History of Austria
History of Switzerland
History of Liechtenstein
Medieval German literature
Sturm und Drang
Weimar Classicism
Romanticism
Literary realism
Weimar culture
Exilliteratur
Austrian literature
Swiss literature
German studies





Related categories



Austrian writers
German writers
Liechtenstein writers
Swiss writers in German





Medieval literature



Dietmar von Aist
Reinmar von Hagenau
Hartmann von Aue
Walther von der Vogelweide
Wolfram von Eschenbach
Albrecht von Johansdorf
Heinrich von Morungen
Nibelungenlied
Gottfried von Strassburg





Early modern
literature



Simon Dach
Paul Fleming
Hans Folz
Hans Jakob Christoffel von Grimmelshausen
Andreas Gryphius
Christian Hoffmann von Hoffmannswaldau
Johann Michael Moscherosch
Martin Opitz
Hans Sachs
Angelus Silesius
Anthony Ulrich, Duke of Brunswick-Wolfenbüttel
Georg Wickram





18th century



Barthold Heinrich Brockes
Christian Gellert
Johann Wolfgang von Goethe
Johann Christoph Gottsched
Johann Christian Günther
Friedrich Hölderlin
Friedrich Gottlieb Klopstock
Jakob Michael Reinhold Lenz
Gotthold Ephraim Lessing
Novalis (Friedrich von Hardenberg)
Jean Paul
Friedrich Schiller
Johann Gottfried Schnabel
Christoph Martin Wieland





19th century



Bettina von Arnim
Ludwig Achim von Arnim
Clemens Brentano
Georg Büchner
Adelbert von Chamisso
Annette von Droste-Hülshoff
Marie von Ebner-Eschenbach
Joseph von Eichendorff
Theodor Fontane
Gustav Freytag
Jeremias Gotthelf
Franz Grillparzer
Jacob Grimm
Wilhelm Grimm
Gerhart Hauptmann
Christian Friedrich Hebbel
Johann Peter Hebel
Heinrich Heine
Georg Herwegh
Paul Heyse
E. T. A. Hoffmann
Friedrich Hölderlin
Gottfried Keller
Heinrich von Kleist
Nikolaus Lenau
Karl May
Conrad Ferdinand Meyer
Eduard Mörike
Johann Nestroy
Wilhelm Raabe
Adalbert Stifter
Theodor Storm
Ludwig Tieck
Ludwig Uhland





20th century



Ingeborg Bachmann
Hermann Bahr
Johannes R. Becher
Gottfried Benn
Thomas Bernhard
Heinrich Böll
Volker Braun
Bertolt Brecht
Rolf Dieter Brinkmann
Hermann Broch
Arnolt Bronnen
Hermann Burger
Elias Canetti
Paul Celan
Alfred Döblin
Heimito von Doderer
Friedrich Dürrenmatt
Lion Feuchtwanger
Marieluise Fleißer
Erich Fried
Max Frisch
Stefan George
Günter Grass
Peter Handke
Marlen Haushofer
Hermann Hesse
Georg Heym
Hugo von Hofmannsthal
Ödön von Horváth
Ricarda Huch
Peter Huchel
Ernst Jandl
Uwe Johnson
Ernst Jünger
Franz Kafka
Erich Kästner
Hermann Kesten
Irmgard Keun
Sarah Kirsch
Egon Erwin Kisch
Karl Kraus
Else Lasker-Schüler
Gert Ledig
Siegfried Lenz
Heinrich Mann
Klaus Mann
Thomas Mann
Christian Morgenstern
Erich Mühsam
Heiner Müller
Adolf Muschg
Robert Musil
Erich Maria Remarque
Rainer Maria Rilke
Joseph Roth
Nelly Sachs
Ernst von Salomon
Paul Scheerbart
Arthur Schnitzler
Kurt Schwitters
W. G. Sebald
Anna Seghers
Ernst Toller
Georg Trakl
Kurt Tucholsky
Robert Walser
Josef Weinheber
Peter Weiss
Franz Werfel
Christa Wolf
Fritz Zorn (Fritz Angst)
Stefan Zweig





Contemporary
writers



Zsuzsa Bánk
Thomas Brussig
Jenny Erpenbeck
Rainald Goetz
Durs Grünbein
Peter Handke
Elfriede Jelinek
Reinhard Jirgl
Wladimir Kaminer
Daniel Kehlmann
Alexander Kluge
Christian Kracht
Monika Maron
Terézia Mora
Herta Müller
Emine Sevgi Özdamar
Julya Rabinowich
Rafik Schami
Ingo Schulze
Botho Strauß
Yoko Tawada
Uwe Timm
Martin Walser
Peter Wawerzinek
Wolf Wondratschek
Feridun Zaimoğlu
Juli Zeh





German-language
Nobel laureates



Theodor Mommsen
Rudolf Christoph Eucken
Paul Heyse
Gerhart Hauptmann
Carl Spitteler
Thomas Mann
Hermann Hesse
Nelly Sachs
Heinrich Böll
Elias Canetti
Günter Grass
Elfriede Jelinek
Herta Müller





German-language
literary awards



Ingeborg Bachmann Prize
Georg Büchner Prize
Sigmund Freud Prize
Adelbert von Chamisso Prize
Hans Fallada Prize
Goethe Prize
Heinrich Heine Prize
Kleist Prize
Leipzig Book Fair Prize
Nelly Sachs Prize












v
t
e


Romanticism



Countries



Denmark
England (literature)
France (literature)
Germany
Norway
Poland
Russia (literature)
Scotland





Movements



Bohemianism
Counter-Enlightenment
Dark romanticism
Düsseldorf School
Gesamtkunstwerk
Gothic fiction
Gothic Revival (architecture)
Hudson River School
Indianism
Nazarene movement
Ossian
Romantic hero
Romanticism in science
Romantic nationalism
Opium and Romanticism
Transcendentalism
Ultra-Romanticism
Wallenrodism





Writers



Abovian
Alencar
Alfieri
Andersen
A. v. Arnim
B. v. Arnim
Azevedo
Baratashvili
Baratynsky
Barbauld (Aikin)
Batyushkov
Baudelaire
Beer
Bertrand
Blake
Botev
Brentano
Bryant
Burns
Byron
Castelo Branco
Castilho
Cazotte
Chateaubriand
Chavchavadze
Clare
Coleridge
Cooper
De Quincey
Dias
Dumas
Eichendorff
Emerson
Eminescu
Espronceda
Fouqué
Foscolo
Garrett
Gautier
Goethe
Grimm Brothers
Gutzkow
Hauff
Hawthorne
Heine
Heliade
Herculano
Hoffmann
Hölderlin
Hugo
Ilić
Irving
Jakšić
Jean Paul
Karamzin
Keats
Kleist
Krasiński
Lamartine
Larra
Leopardi
Lermontov
Lowell
Macedonski
Mácha
Magalhães
Malczewski
Manzoni
Maturin
Mérimée
Mickiewicz
Musset
Nalbandian
Nerval
Nodier
Norwid
Novalis
Oehlenschläger
Orbeliani
Poe
Polidori
Potocki
Prešeren
Pushkin
Raffi
Schiller
Schwab
Scott
Seward
M. Shelley
P. B. Shelley
Shevchenko
Słowacki
De Staël
Stendhal
Tieck
Tyutchev
Uhland
Vörösmarty
Vyazemsky
Wordsworth
Zhukovsky
Zorrilla





Music



Adam
Alkan
Auber
Beethoven
Bellini
Bennett
Berlioz
Bertin
Berwald
Brahms
Bruckner
Cherubini
Chopin
Dargomyzhsky
Félicien David
Ferdinand David
Donizetti
Fauré
Field
Franck
Franz
Glinka
Gomis
Halévy
Kalkbrenner
Liszt
Loewe
Marschner
Masarnau
Méhul
Fanny Mendelssohn
Felix Mendelssohn
Méreaux
Meyerbeer
Moniuszko
Moscheles
Mussorgsky
Niedermeyer
Onslow
Paganini
Prudent
Reicha
Rimsky-Korsakov
Rossini
Rubinstein
Schubert
Clara Schumann
Robert Schumann
Smetana
Sor
Spohr
Spontini
Thalberg
Verdi
Voříšek
Wagner
Weber






Theologians and
philosophers




Chaadayev
Coleridge
Feuerbach
Fichte
Goethe
Hegel
Khomyakov
Müller
Ritschl
Rousseau
Schiller
A. Schlegel
F. Schlegel
Schopenhauer
Schleiermacher
Tieck
Wackenroder





Visual artists



Aivazovsky
Bierstadt
Blake
Bonington
Bryullov
Chassériau
Church
Constable
Cole
Corot
Dahl
David d'Angers
Delacroix
Friedrich
Fuseli
Géricault
Girodet
Głowacki
Goya
Gude
Hayez
Janmot
Jones
Kiprensky
Koch
Lampi
Leutze
Loutherbourg
Maison
Martin
Michałowski
Palmer
Porto-Alegre
Préault
Révoil
Richard
Rude
Runge
Saleh
Scheffer
Stattler
Stroj
Tidemand
Tropinin
Turner
Veit
Ward
Wiertz







 « Age of Enlightenment
Realism » 








Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 96994450
LCCN: n79111538
ISNI: 0000 0001 2103 2691
GND: 118607626
SELIBR: 206693
SUDOC: 026670488
BNF: cb11887510q (data)
ULAN: 500228189
HDS: 12255
MusicBrainz: 6eea5386-1d69-424c-851c-1236a72db3c2
NLA: 35480245
NDL: 00455554
NKC: jn19992001048
ICCU: IT\ICCU\VBAV\000092
RLS: 000002672
BNE: XX1144351
RKD: 326058
IATH: w67p8zn1











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Friedrich_Schiller&oldid=814629360"					Categories: Friedrich Schiller1759 births1805 deathsPeople from Marbach am NeckarPeople from the Duchy of WürttembergGerman poetsGerman-language poetsWriters from Baden-WürttembergGerman untitled nobilityGerman philosophersGerman historiansGerman medical writersRomanticismEnlightenment philosophers19th-century deaths from tuberculosisInfectious disease deaths in Germany18th-century German novelists18th-century German dramatists and playwrights19th-century German dramatists and playwrightsPhilosophers of educationGerman literary theoristsTranslators of William ShakespeareFrench–German translatorsTranslators from GreekSturm und DrangHidden categories: Use dmy dates from December 2013Articles needing additional references from May 2017All articles needing additional referencesArticles containing German-language textArticles with Internet Archive linksArticles with LibriVox linksFind a Grave template with ID same as WikidataAC with 18 elementsWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with SELIBR identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersWikipedia articles with ULAN identifiersWikipedia articles with MusicBrainz identifiersWikipedia articles with NLA identifiersWikipedia articles with SBN identifiersWikipedia articles with RKDartists identifiersWikipedia articles with SNAC-ID identifiers