

Friedrich August von Hayek
CH FBA





Born
(1899-05-08)8 May 1899
Vienna, Cisleithania, Austria-Hungary


Died
23 March 1992(1992-03-23) (aged 92)
Freiburg im Breisgau, Baden-Württemberg, Germany


Nationality



Austrian
British








Institution



1931–50  LSE
1950–62  University of Chicago
1962–68  University of Freiburg





Field



Economics
Political science
Law
Philosophy
Psychology





School or
tradition
Austrian School, Chicago School


Alma mater

University of Vienna
(Dr. jur., 1921, Dr. rer. pol, 1923)



Influences



Acton
Böhm-Bawerk
Burke
Eucken
Ferguson
Fetter
Hume
Locke
E. Mach
Mandeville
Menger
Mill
Mises
Popper
Schmitt
Sidney
A. Smith
Spann
Tocqueville
Tucker
Wicksell
Wieser
Wittgenstein





Contributions



Economic calculation problem
Catallaxy
Dispersed knowledge
Price signal
Spontaneous order
Hayek–Hebb model





Awards



1974  Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences
1984  CH
1991  Presidential Medal of Freedom





Information at IDEAS / RePEc





Signature





Friedrich Hayek CH FBA (/ˈhaɪək/; German: [ˈfʁiːdʁɪç ˈaʊ̯ɡʊst ˈhaɪɛk]; 8 May 1899 – 23 March 1992), born in Austria-Hungary as Friedrich August von Hayek and frequently referred to as F. A. Hayek, was an Austrian-British economist and philosopher best known for his defense of classical liberalism. Hayek shared the 1974 Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences with Gunnar Myrdal for his "pioneering work in the theory of money and economic fluctuations and ... penetrating analysis of the interdependence of economic, social and institutional phenomena".[1]
Hayek was a major social theorist and political philosopher of the twentieth century,[2][3] and his account of how changing prices communicate information that helps individuals co-ordinate their plans is widely regarded as an important achievement in economics,[4] leading to his Nobel Prize.[5][6]
Hayek served in World War I and said that his experience in the war and his desire to help avoid the mistakes that had led to the war drew him into economics. Hayek lived in Austria, Great Britain, the United States, and Germany and became a British subject in 1938. He spent most of his academic life at the London School of Economics (LSE), the University of Chicago, and the University of Freiburg.
In 1984, he was appointed a member of the Order of the Companions of Honour by Queen Elizabeth II on the advice of Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher for his "services to the study of economics".[7][8] He was the first recipient of the Hanns Martin Schleyer Prize in 1984.[9] He also received the US Presidential Medal of Freedom in 1991 from President George H. W. Bush.[10] In 2011, his article "The Use of Knowledge in Society" was selected as one of the top 20 articles published in The American Economic Review during its first 100 years.[11]



Contents


1 Life

1.1 Early life
1.2 Education and career
1.3 The Road to Serfdom
1.4 Chicago
1.5 Freiburg, Los Angeles, and Salzburg
1.6 Nobel Memorial Prize Winner
1.7 British politics
1.8 Influence on central European politics
1.9 Recognition


2 Work

2.1 The business cycle
2.2 The economic calculation problem
2.3 Criticism of collectivism
2.4 Investment and choice
2.5 Philosophy of science
2.6 Psychology
2.7 Social and political philosophy

2.7.1 Spontaneous order
2.7.2 Hayek's views on social safety nets
2.7.3 Hayek's liberalism and skepticism
2.7.4 Hayek's views on dictatorship




3 Influence and recognition

3.1 Hayek and conservatism
3.2 Hayek and policy discussions


4 Personal life
5 Legacy and honours
6 Notable works
7 See also
8 References and further reading

8.1 Notes
8.2 References

8.2.1 Introduction


8.3 Primary sources


9 External links



Life[edit]


A timeline of Hayek[12]



1899: F. A. Hayek born in Vienna.
1917: Hayek joins the Austro-Hungarian Army.
1921: Hayek earns a doctorate in law from the University of Vienna.
1921: Ludwig von Mises hires Hayek in an office dealing with finance issues.
1923: Hayek earns another doctorate in political science.
1927: Mises and Hayek found the Austrian Institute for Business Cycle Research.
1928: Hayek first meets John Maynard Keynes at a conference in London.
1931: Hayek moves to the London School of Economics at the invitation of Lionel Robbins.
1931–32: Hayek becomes a critic of Keynes, writing critical reviews of his books and exchanging letters in The Times on the merits of government spending versus private investment.
1936: Keynes publishes The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money.
1936: At the London Economic Club, Hayek gives a talk on the key role of information in economics.
1938: Hayek becomes a British citizen.
1944: Hayek publishes The Road to Serfdom.
1945–46: Hayek lectures across the United States and becomes Visiting Professor at Stanford University.
1947: Hayek founds the Mont Pelerin Society, aiming to keep liberty alive in a postwar world.
1952: Hayek publishes The Counter-Revolution of Science and The Sensory Order.
1956: Antony Fisher founds the free-market Institute of Economic Affairs, having been inspired by Hayek.
1960: Publication of The Constitution of Liberty.
1962: Hayek moves to the University of Freiburg, West Germany. His ideas on unplanned orders and other subjects are published in Studies in Philosophy, Politics and Economics (1967). He begins work on Law, Legislation and Liberty.
1972: As prices soar in Europe and the US, Hayek publishes a passionate critique of inflation and the Keynesian policies that cause it in A Tiger by the Tail. He goes on to propose solutions in Choice in Currency (1976) and The Denationalisation of Money (1976).
1973: Death of Mises
1974: Hayek is awarded the Nobel Memorial Prize.
1975: Through an introduction by the Institute of Economic Affairs, the British Conservative leader Margaret Thatcher meets Hayek for the first time, and is greatly impressed.
1988: Publication of The Fatal Conceit: The Errors of Socialism.
1991: Hayek is awarded the US Presidential Medal of Freedom.
1992: Hayek dies in Freiburg.



Early life[edit]




An ethno-linguistic map of Austria–Hungary, 1910


Friedrich August von Hayek was born in Vienna to August von Hayek and Felicitas Hayek (née von Juraschek). Friedrich's father, from whom he received his middle name, was born in 1871, also in Vienna. He was a medical doctor employed by the municipal ministry of health, with a passion for botany, about which he wrote a number of monographs. August von Hayek was also a part-time botany lecturer at the University of Vienna. Friedrich's mother was born in 1875 to a wealthy, conservative, land-owning family. As her mother died several years prior to Friedrich's birth, Felicitas received a significant inheritance, which provided as much as half of her and August's income during the early years of their marriage. Hayek was the oldest of three brothers, Heinrich (1900–1969) and Erich (1904–1986), who were one-and-a-half and five years younger than him.[13]
His father's career as a university professor influenced Friedrich's goals later in life.[14] Both of his grandfathers, who lived long enough for Friedrich to know them, were scholars. Franz von Juraschek was a leading economist in Austria-Hungary and a close friend of Eugen Böhm von Bawerk, one of the founders of the Austrian School of Economics.[15] Friedrich's paternal grandfather, Gustav Edler von Hayek, taught natural sciences at the Imperial Realobergymnasium (secondary school) in Vienna. He wrote systematic works in biology, some of which are relatively well known.[16]
On his mother's side, Hayek was second cousin to the philosopher Ludwig Wittgenstein. His mother often played with Wittgenstein's sisters, and had known Ludwig well. As a result of their family relationship, Hayek became one of the first to read Wittgenstein's Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus when the book was published in its original German edition in 1921. Although Hayek met Wittgenstein on only a few occasions, Hayek said that Wittgenstein's philosophy and methods of analysis had a profound influence on his own life and thought.[17] In his later years, Hayek recalled a discussion of philosophy with Wittgenstein, when both were officers during World War I.[18] After Wittgenstein's death, Hayek had intended to write a biography of Wittgenstein and worked on collecting family materials; and he later assisted biographers of Wittgenstein.[19]
Hayek displayed an intellectual and academic bent from a very young age. He read fluently and frequently before going to school.[20] At his father's suggestion, Hayek, as a teenager, read the genetic and evolutionary works of Hugo de Vries and the philosophical works of Ludwig Feuerbach.[21] In school Hayek was much taken by one instructor's lectures on Aristotle's ethics.[22] In his unpublished autobiographical notes, Hayek recalled a division between him and his younger brothers who were only few years younger than he, but he believed that they were somehow of a different generation. He preferred to associate with adults.[20]




Austro-Hungarian artillery unit appearing in The Illustrated London News in 1914


In 1917, Hayek joined an artillery regiment in the Austro-Hungarian Army and fought on the Italian front. Much of Hayek's combat experience was spent as a spotter in an aeroplane. Hayek suffered damage to his hearing in his left ear during the war,[23] and was decorated for bravery. During this time Hayek also survived the 1918 flu pandemic.[24]
Hayek then decided to pursue an academic career, determined to help avoid the mistakes that had led to the war. Hayek said of his experience, "The decisive influence was really World War I. It's bound to draw your attention to the problems of political organization." He vowed to work for a better world.[25]
Education and career[edit]




University of Vienna, main building, seen from across the Ringstraße


At the University of Vienna, Hayek earned doctorates in law and political science in 1921 and 1923 respectively; and he also studied philosophy, psychology, and economics. For a short time, when the University of Vienna closed, Hayek studied in Constantin von Monakow's Institute of Brain Anatomy, where Hayek spent much of his time staining brain cells. Hayek's time in Monakow's lab, and his deep interest in the work of Ernst Mach, inspired Hayek's first intellectual project, eventually published as The Sensory Order (1952). It located connective learning at the physical and neurological levels, rejecting the "sense data" associationism of the empiricists and logical positivists.[26] Hayek presented his work to the private seminar he had created with Herbert Furth called the Geistkreis.[27]
During Hayek's years at the University of Vienna, Carl Menger's work on the explanatory strategy of social science and Friedrich von Wieser's commanding presence in the classroom left a lasting influence on him.[21] Upon the completion of his examinations, Hayek was hired by Ludwig von Mises on the recommendation of Wieser as a specialist for the Austrian government working on the legal and economic details of the Treaty of Saint Germain. Between 1923 and 1924 Hayek worked as a research assistant to Prof. Jeremiah Jenks of New York University, compiling macroeconomic data on the American economy and the operations of the US Federal Reserve.[28]


Part of a series on the


Austrian School




Principal works


Capital and Interest
Human Action
Individualism and Economic Order
Man, Economy, and State
Principles of Economics








Theory


Austrian business cycle
Catallactics
Creative destruction
Economic calculation problem
View of inflation
Malinvestment
Marginalism
Methodological individualism
Praxeology
Roundaboutness
Spontaneous order
Subjective theory of value
Theory of interest








Organizations


Cato Institute
Foundation for Economic Education
George Mason University
The Independent Institute
Liberty Fund
Ludwig von Mises Institute
Reason Foundation








People



Eugen Böhm von Bawerk
Walter Block
Peter Boettke
Thomas DiLorenzo
Frank Fetter
Roger Garrison
Friedrich Hayek
Henry Hazlitt
Robert Higgs
Hans-Hermann Hoppe
Steven Horwitz
Jesús Huerta de Soto
Israel Kirzner
Ludwig Lachmann
Don Lavoie
Peter Leeson
Fritz Machlup
Carl Menger
Ludwig von Mises
Robert Murphy
William H. Peterson
Murray Rothbard
Joseph Salerno
Friedrich von Wieser
Richard Ritter von Strigl
Gottfried Haberler
Oskar Morgenstern









Related topics


Austrian School economists
Economic freedom
Perspectives on capitalism






 Business and economics portal





v
t
e





Initially sympathetic to Wieser's democratic socialism, Hayek's economic thinking shifted away from socialism and toward the classical liberalism of Carl Menger after reading von Mises' book Socialism. It was sometime after reading Socialism that Hayek began attending von Mises' private seminars, joining several of his university friends, including Fritz Machlup, Alfred Schutz, Felix Kaufmann, and Gottfried Haberler, who were also participating in Hayek's own, more general, private seminar. It was during this time that he also encountered and befriended noted political philosopher Eric Voegelin, with whom he retained a long-standing relationship.[29]




LSE's Old Building


With the help of Mises, in the late 1920s Hayek founded and served as director of the Austrian Institute for Business Cycle Research, before joining the faculty of the London School of Economics (LSE) in 1931 at the behest of Lionel Robbins. Upon his arrival in London, Hayek was quickly recognised as one of the leading economic theorists in the world, and his development of the economics of processes in time and the co-ordination function of prices inspired the ground-breaking work of John Hicks, Abba Lerner, and many others in the development of modern microeconomics.[30]
In 1932, Hayek suggested that private investment in the public markets was a better road to wealth and economic co-ordination in Britain than government spending programs, as argued in an exchange of letters with John Maynard Keynes, co-signed with Lionel Robbins and others in The Times.[31][32] The nearly decade long deflationary depression in Britain dating from Churchill's decision in 1925 to return Britain to the gold standard at the old pre-war, pre-inflationary par was the public policy backdrop for Hayek's dissenting engagement with Keynes over British monetary and fiscal policy. Well beyond that single public conflict, regarding the economics of extending the length of production to the economics of labour inputs, Hayek and Keynes disagreed on many essential economics matters. Their economic disagreements were both practical and fundamental in nature. Keynes called Hayek's book, Prices and Production, "one of the most frightful muddles I have ever read", famously adding, "It is an extraordinary example of how, starting with a mistake, a remorseless logician can end in Bedlam."[33] Many other notable economists have also been staunch critics of Hayek, including John Kenneth Galbraith and later, Paul Krugman, who wrote: "the Hayek thing is almost entirely about politics rather than economics".[34][35]
Notable economists who studied with Hayek at the LSE in the 1930s and 1940s include Arthur Lewis, Ronald Coase, William Baumol, John Kenneth Galbraith, Leonid Hurwicz, Abba Lerner, Nicholas Kaldor, George Shackle, Thomas Balogh, L. K. Jha, Arthur Seldon, Paul Rosenstein-Rodan, and Oskar Lange.[36][37][38] Some were supportive and some were critical of his ideas. Hayek also taught or tutored many other LSE students, including David Rockefeller.[39]
Unwilling to return to Austria after the Anschluss brought it under the control of Nazi Germany in 1938, Hayek remained in Britain. Hayek and his children became British subjects in 1938.[40] He held this status for the remainder of his life, but he did not live in Great Britain after 1950. He lived in the United States from 1950 to 1962 and then mostly in Germany but also briefly in Austria.[41]
The Road to Serfdom[edit]


Part of a series on


Liberalism







Schools



History of liberalism
Contributions to liberal theory









Ideas



Civil and political rights
Cultural liberalism
Democracy

Liberal democracy


Economic liberalism
Egalitarianism
Free market
Free trade
Freedom of the press
Freedom of religion
Freedom of speech
Gender equality
Harm principle
Internationalism
Laissez-faire
Liberty
Market economy
Natural and legal rights
Negative / positive liberty
Open society
Permissive society
Private property
Rule of law
Secularism
Separation of church and state
Social contract
Welfare state









Variants



Anarcho-capitalism
Civic nationalism
Classical liberalism
Conservative liberalism
Democratic liberalism
Geolibertarianism
Green liberalism
Liberal feminism

Equity feminism


Liberal internationalism
Liberal socialism
Libertarianism
Muscular liberalism
Neoliberalism
Ordoliberalism
Radical centrism
Radicalism
Religious liberalism

Christian
Islamic


Secular liberalism
Social liberalism
Technoliberalism









People



Rifa'a al-Tahtawi
Juan Bautista Alberdi
Chu Anping
Matthew Arnold
Raymond Aron
Frédéric Bastiat
Simone de Beauvoir
Jeremy Bentham
Isaiah Berlin
Eduard Bernstein
William Beveridge
Norberto Bobbio
Ludwig Joseph Brentano
John Bright
Edmund Burke
Thomas Carlyle
Anders Chydenius
Richard Cobden
Marquis de Condorcet
Benjamin Constant
Benedetto Croce
Jean le Rond d'Alembert
Ralf Dahrendorf
John Dewey
Charles Dickens
Denis Diderot
Zhang Dongsun
Ronald Dworkin
Ahmed Lutfi el-Sayed
Ralph Waldo Emerson
Karl-Hermann Flach
Milton Friedman
John Kenneth Galbraith
William Lloyd Garrison
José Ortega y Gasset
David Lloyd George
William Gladstone
Friedrich Hayek
Auberon Herbert
Thomas Hobbes
Leonard Trelawny Hobhouse
John A. Hobson
Qin Hui
Wilhelm von Humboldt
Piero Gobetti
Francisco Luís Gomes
John Gray
Thomas Hill Green
Thomas Jefferson
Zef Jubani
Immanuel Kant
Namık Kemal
John Maynard Keynes
Will Kymlicka
John Locke
Salvador de Madariaga
James Madison
Harriet Martineau
Minoo Masani
James Mill
John Stuart Mill
John Milton
Ludwig von Mises
Donald Barkly Molteno
Leo Chiozza Money
Charles de Montesquieu
José María Luis Mora
Chantal Mouffe
Dadabhai Naoroji
Friedrich Naumann
Robert Nozick
Bertil Ohlin
Thomas Paine
Alan Paton
Karl Raimund Popper
Richard Price
Joseph Priestley
Guillermo Prieto
François Quesnay
Ignacio Ramírez
Ayn Rand
Walther Rathenau
John Rawls
Joseph Raz
David Ricardo
Wilhelm Röpke
Richard Rorty
Carlo Rosselli
Murray Rothbard
Jean-Jacques Rousseau
Jean-Baptiste Say
Amartya Sen
Li Shenzhi
Hu Shih
Algernon Sidney
Emmanuel Sieyès
İbrahim Şinasi
Adam Smith
Hernando de Soto
Herbert Spencer
Baruch Spinoza
Anne Louise Germaine de Staël
William Graham Sumner
R. H. Tawney
Johan Rudolf Thorbecke
Henry David Thoreau
Alexis de Tocqueville
Antoine Destutt de Tracy
Anne Robert Jacques Turgot
Voltaire
Lester Frank Ward
Max Weber
Mary Wollstonecraft
Tao Xingzhi
Gu Zhun









Organizations



Liberal parties
Africa Liberal Network (ALN)

Alliance of Liberals and
Democrats for Europe (ALDE)


Alliance of Liberals and Democrats
for Europe Party (ALDEP)


Arab Liberal Federation (ALF)


Council of Asian Liberals
and Democrats (CALD)

European Democratic Party (EDP)
European Liberal Youth (LYMEC)
European Party for Individual Liberty (EPIL)

International Alliance of
Libertarian Parties (IALP)


International Federation of
Liberal Youth (IFLRY)

Liberal International

Liberal Network for
Latin America (RELIAL)


Liberal South East
European Network (LIBSEEN)










Regional variants



Europe
Latin America
Albania
Armenia
Australia
Austria
Belgium
Bolivia
Brazil
Bulgaria
Canada
China
Chile
Colombia
Croatia
Cuba
Cyprus
Czech lands
Denmark
Ecuador
Egypt
Estonia
Finland
France
Germany
Greece
Honduras
Hong Kong
Hungary
Iceland
India
Iran
Israel
Italy
Japan
Latvia
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Macedonia
Mexico
Moldova
Montenegro
Netherlands
New Zealand
Nicaragua
Nigeria
Norway
Panama
Paraguay
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russia
Senegal
Serbia
Slovakia
Slovenia
Spain
South Africa
South Korea
Sweden
Switzerland
Taiwan
Thailand
Tunisia
Turkey
Ukraine
United Kingdom
United States
Uruguay
Venezuela
Zimbabwe









Related topics



Democratic capitalism
Democratic education
Liberal bias in academia
Liberal conservatism
Liberal socialism
National liberalism
Regressive left









 Liberalism portal
 Politics portal







v
t
e







Part of a series on


Libertarianism




Origins


Age of Enlightenment
Aristotelianism
Classical liberalism








Concepts


Anti-authoritarianism
Antimilitarism
Anti-statism
Anti-war
Argumentation ethics
Class struggle
Communes
Counter-economics
Crypto-anarchism
Decentralization
Direct action
Dispute resolution organization
Economic freedom
Egalitarianism
Expropriative anarchism
Free market
Free-market environmentalism
Free migration
Free society
Free trade
Free will
Freedom of association
Freedom of contract
Gift economy
Homestead principle
Illegalism
Individuality
Individualism
Individual reclamation
Laissez-faire
Liberty
Limited government
Localism
Marriage privatization
Natural and legal rights
Night-watchman state
Non-aggression principle
Non-interventionism
Non-politics
Non-voting
Participatory economics
Polycentric law
Private defense agency
Propaganda of the deed
Property
Really Really Free Market
Refusal of work
Restorative justice
Self-governance
Self-ownership
Single tax
Spontaneous order
Squatting
Stateless society
Tax resistance
Title-transfer theory of contract
Voluntary association
Voluntary society
Wage slavery
Workers' self-management








Schools


Agorism
Anarchism
Anarcho-capitalism
Autarchism

Christian libertarianism
Collectivist anarchism
Consequentialist libertarianism
Free-market anarchism
Fusionism
Geolibertarianism
Georgism
Green anarchism
Green libertarianism
Individualist anarchism
Insurrectionary anarchism
Left-libertarianism
Left-wing market anarchism
Libertarian communism
Libertarian Marxism
Libertarian socialism
Libertarian transhumanism
Minarchism
Mutualism
Natural-rights libertarianism
Paleolibertarianism
Panarchism
Right-libertarianism
Social anarchism
Voluntaryism








People


Émile Armand
Mikhail Bakunin
Frédéric Bastiat
Alexander Berkman
Walter Block
Murray Bookchin
Jason Brennan
Bryan Caplan
Kevin Carson
Voltairine de Cleyre
Joseph Déjacque
Buenaventura Durruti
Francesc Ferrer i Guàrdia
Ricardo Flores Magón
David D. Friedman
Milton Friedman
Luigi Galleani
Henry George
William Godwin
Emma Goldman
Paul Goodman
Friedrich Hayek
Henry Hazlitt
Auberon Herbert
Karl Hess
Thomas Hodgskin
Hans-Hermann Hoppe
Samuel Edward Konkin III
Peter Kropotkin
Étienne de La Boétie
Gustav Landauer
Rose Wilder Lane
Roderick T. Long
Tibor R. Machan
Nestor Makhno
Errico Malatesta
Wendy McElroy
Carl Menger
Louise Michel
John Stuart Mill
Ludwig von Mises
Tim Moen
Gustave de Molinari
Johann Most
Albert Jay Nock
Robert Nozick
Marco Pannella
Isabel Paterson
Ron Paul
Francesc Pi i Margall
Pierre-Joseph Proudhon
Ayn Rand
Rudolf Rocker
Murray Rothbard
Jean-Baptiste Say
J. Neil Schulman
Herbert Spencer
Lysander Spooner
Max Stirner
Henry David Thoreau
Leo Tolstoy
Benjamin Tucker
Voline
Josiah Warren
Thomas Woods








Aspects



Anarcho-capitalism and
minarchism

Criticisms
Intellectual property
Internal debates
LGBT rights
Objectivism
Political parties
Theories of law








Organizations


International Alliance of Libertarian Parties
Students For Liberty








Related topics


Austrian School of economics
Civil libertarianism
Constitutionalism
Libertarian conservatism
Libertarian Democrat
Libertarian hip hop
Libertarian Republican
Libertarian science fiction
Libertarian transhumanism
Libertarianism in the United States
Market liberalism
Objectivism
Public choice theory
Small government
Technolibertarianism








Outline of libertarianism
Libertarianism portal







v
t
e





Main article: The Road to Serfdom
Hayek was concerned about the general view in Britain's academia that fascism was a capitalist reaction to socialism and The Road to Serfdom arose from those concerns. It was written between 1940 and 1943. The title was inspired by the French classical liberal thinker Alexis de Tocqueville's writings on the "road to servitude."[42] It was first published in Britain by Routledge in March 1944 and was quite popular, leading Hayek to call it "that unobtainable book," also due in part to wartime paper rationing.[43] When it was published in the United States by the University of Chicago in September of that year, it achieved greater popularity than in Britain.[44] At the arrangement of editor Max Eastman (an ardent socialist), the American magazine Reader's Digest also published an abridged version in April 1945, enabling The Road to Serfdom to reach a far wider audience than academics. The book is widely popular among those advocating individualism and classical liberalism.[45]
Chicago[edit]


Part of a series on the


Chicago school
of economics




Movements


Libertarianism
Neoliberalism
Positive non-interventionism








Organizations


Cato Institute
George Mason University
Library of Economics and Liberty
Reason Foundation








Beliefs


Consequentialist libertarianism
Monetarism
Neoclassical economics








People
Associates shown in italics


Gary Becker
Ronald Coase
Robert Fogel
David Friedman
Milton Friedman
Rose Friedman
Friedrich Hayek
Frank Knight
Robert Lucas, Jr.
George Stigler









Theories



Comparative advantage
CPI
Economic growth
Economic rationalism
Efficient market
Friedman rule
k-percent rule
Game theory
GDP
Homo economicus
International economics, finance, trade
Laffer curve
Monetary theory
Public choice
Quantity of money
Rational agent, choice, expectations
Symmetrical inflation target









Ideas



Central banks
Denationalization
Deregulation
Economic freedom
Economic integration, interdependence
Economic liberalization
Exchange rate
Fiat currency
Foreign exchange reserves
Free markets
Free trade
Globalization
Inflation adjustment
Inflation targeting
Intellectual property
Laissez-faire
Marketization
Negative income tax
Open market operations
Private property
Privatization
School vouchers
Single market
Tax cuts
Tax reform









Related topics



Alter-globalization
Anti-capitalism
Anti-globalization
Perspectives on capitalism









 Business and economics portal
 Capitalism portal
 Libertarianism portal
 Politics portal







v
t
e





In 1950, Hayek left the London School of Economics for the University of Chicago, where he became a professor in the Committee on Social Thought. Hayek's salary was funded not by the university, but by an outside foundation[which?].
Hayek had made contact with many at the U. of Chicago in the 1940s, with Hayek's The Road to Serfdom playing a seminal role in transforming how Milton Friedman and others understood how society works.[46] Hayek conducted a number of influential faculty seminars while at the U. of Chicago, and a number of academics worked on research projects sympathetic to some of Hayek's own, such as Aaron Director, who was active in the Chicago School in helping to fund and establish what became the "Law and Society" program in the University of Chicago Law School.[47] Hayek, Frank Knight, Friedman and George Stigler worked together in forming the Mont Pèlerin Society, an international forum for libertarian economists. Hayek and Friedman cooperated in support of the Intercollegiate Society of Individualists, later renamed the Intercollegiate Studies Institute, an American student organisation devoted to libertarian ideas.[41][48]




University of Chicago from the Midway Plaisance


Hayek's first class at Chicago was a faculty seminar on the philosophy of science attended by many of the University's most notable scientists of the time, including Enrico Fermi, Sewall Wright and Leó Szilárd. During his time at Chicago, Hayek worked on the philosophy of science, economics, political philosophy, and the history of ideas. Hayek's economics notes from this period have yet to be published. Hayek received a Guggenheim Fellowship in 1954.[49]
After editing a book on John Stuart Mill's letters he planned to publish two books on the liberal order, The Constitution of Liberty and "The Creative Powers of a Free Civilization" (eventually the title for the second chapter of The Constitution of Liberty).[50] He completed The Constitution of Liberty in May 1959, with publication in February 1960. Hayek was concerned "...with that condition of men in which coercion of some by others is reduced as much as is possible in society."[51] Hayek was disappointed that the book did not receive the same enthusiastic general reception as The Road to Serfdom had sixteen years before.[52]
Freiburg, Los Angeles, and Salzburg[edit]




Freiburg around 1900


From 1962 until his retirement in 1968, he was a professor at the University of Freiburg, West Germany, where he began work on his next book, Law, Legislation and Liberty. Hayek regarded his years at Freiburg as "very fruitful".[53] Following his retirement, Hayek spent a year as a visiting professor of philosophy at the University of California, Los Angeles, where he continued work on Law, Legislation and Liberty, teaching a graduate seminar by the same name and another on the philosophy of social science. Primary drafts of the book were completed by 1970, but Hayek chose to rework his drafts and finally brought the book to publication in three volumes in 1973, 1976 and 1979.




University of Salzburg (below, foreground) since the mid 1980s as seen from city center


He became a professor at the University of Salzburg from 1969 to 1977; he then returned to Freiburg, where he spent the rest of his days. When Hayek left Salzburg in 1977, he wrote, "I made a mistake in moving to Salzburg." The economics department was small, and the library facilities were inadequate.[54]
Nobel Memorial Prize Winner[edit]
On 9 October 1974, it was announced that Hayek would be awarded the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economics, along with Swedish economist Gunnar Myrdal. The reasons for the two of them winning the prize are described in the Nobel committee's press release.[55] He was surprised at being given the award and believed that he was given it with Myrdal to balance the award with someone from the opposite side of the political spectrum.[56]
During the Nobel ceremony in December 1974, Hayek met the Russian dissident Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn. Hayek later sent him a Russian translation of The Road to Serfdom.[56] He spoke with apprehension at his award speech about the danger the authority of the prize would lend to an economist,[57] but the prize brought much greater public awareness to then controversial ideas of Hayek and has been described by his biographer as "the great rejuvenating event in his life."[58]
British politics[edit]


Part of the politics series on


Thatcherism







Philosophy


Conservatism
Libertarianism


Anti-communism
Atlanticism
Capitalism
Entrepreneurship
Euroscepticism
Gladstonian liberalism
Home ownership
Individualism
Meritocracy
Monetarism
Supply-side economics
Privatisation








People


Margaret Thatcher


Friedrich Hayek
Milton Friedman
Arthur Seldon
Keith Joseph
Ralph Harris
Alan Walters
Geoffrey Howe
Nicholas Ridley
Norman Tebbit
Nigel Lawson
John Redwood
Michael Portillo
Francis Maude








Organisations


Conservative Party


Bow Group
Bruges Group
Centre for Policy Studies
Conservative Way Forward
The Freedom Association
The Heritage Foundation
Institute of Economic Affairs
Mont Pelerin Society
No Turning Back








Related movements


Economic rationalism (Australia)
Libertarianism in the United Kingdom
New Right (worldwide)
Reaganomics (United States)
Rogernomics (New Zealand)








 Capitalism portal
 Conservatism portal
 British politics portal
 Business and economics portal
 Libertarianism portal







v
t
e





In February 1975, Margaret Thatcher was elected leader of the British Conservative Party. The Institute of Economic Affairs arranged a meeting between Hayek and Thatcher in London soon after.[59] During Thatcher's only visit to the Conservative Research Department in the summer of 1975, a speaker had prepared a paper on why the "middle way" was the pragmatic path the Conservative Party should take, avoiding the extremes of left and right. Before he had finished, Thatcher "reached into her briefcase and took out a book. It was Hayek's The Constitution of Liberty. Interrupting our pragmatist, she held the book up for all of us to see. 'This', she said sternly, 'is what we believe', and banged Hayek down on the table".[60]
In 1977, Hayek was critical of the Lib-Lab pact, in which the British Liberal Party agreed to keep the British Labour government in office. Writing to The Times, Hayek said, "May one who has devoted a large part of his life to the study of the history and the principles of liberalism point out that a party that keeps a socialist government in power has lost all title to the name 'Liberal'. Certainly no liberal can in future vote 'Liberal'".[61] Hayek was criticised by Liberal politicians Gladwyn Jebb and Andrew Phillips, who both claimed that the purpose of the pact was to discourage socialist legislation.
Lord Gladwyn pointed out that the German Free Democrats were in coalition with the German Social Democrats.[62] Hayek was defended by Professor Antony Flew who stated that the German Social Democrats, unlike the British Labour Party, had, since the late 1950s, abandoned public ownership of the means of production, distribution and exchange and had instead embraced the social market economy.[63]
In 1978, Hayek came into conflict with the Liberal Party leader, David Steel, who claimed that liberty was possible only with "social justice and an equitable distribution of wealth and power, which in turn require a degree of active government intervention" and that the Conservative Party were more concerned with the connection between liberty and private enterprise than between liberty and democracy. Hayek claimed that a limited democracy might be better than other forms of limited government at protecting liberty but that an unlimited democracy was worse than other forms of unlimited government because "its government loses the power even to do what it thinks right if any group on which its majority depends thinks otherwise".
Hayek stated that if the Conservative leader had said "...that free choice is to be exercised more in the market place than in the ballot box, she has merely uttered the truism that the first is indispensable for individual freedom while the second is not: free choice can at least exist under a dictatorship that can limit itself but not under the government of an unlimited democracy which cannot."[64]
Influence on central European politics[edit]
US President Ronald Reagan listed Hayek as among the two or three people who most influenced his philosophy and welcomed Hayek to the White House as a special guest.[65] In the 1970s and 1980s, the writings of Hayek were also a major influence on many of the leaders of the "velvet" revolution in Central Europe during the collapse of the old Soviet Empire. Here are some supporting examples:



There is no figure who had more of an influence, no person had more of an influence on the intellectuals behind the Iron Curtain than Friedrich Hayek. His books were translated and published by the underground and black market editions, read widely, and undoubtedly influenced the climate of opinion that ultimately brought about the collapse of the Soviet Union.[66]

—Milton Friedman (Hoover Institution)








The most interesting among the courageous dissenters of the 1980s were the classical liberals, disciples of F. A. Hayek, from whom they had learned about the crucial importance of economic freedom and about the often-ignored conceptual difference between liberalism and democracy.[67]

—Andrzej Walicki (History, Notre Dame)








Estonian Prime Minister Mart Laar came to my office the other day to recount his country's remarkable transformation. He described a nation of people who are harder-working, more virtuous – yes, more virtuous, because the market punishes immorality – and more hopeful about the future than they've ever been in their history. I asked Mr. Laar where his government got the idea for these reforms. Do you know what he replied? He said, "We read Milton Friedman and F. A. Hayek."[68]

—US Representative Dick Armey








I was 25 years old and pursuing my doctorate in economics when I was allowed to spend six months of post-graduate studies in Naples, Italy. I read the Western economic textbooks and also the more general work of people like Hayek. By the time I returned to Czechoslovakia, I had an understanding of the principles of the market. In 1968, I was glad at the political liberalism of the Dubcek Prague Spring, but was very critical of the Third Way they pursued in economics.[69]

—Václav Klaus (former President of the Czech Republic)





Recognition[edit]
In 1980, Hayek, a non-practising Roman Catholic,[70] was one of twelve Nobel laureates to meet with Pope John Paul II, "to dialogue, discuss views in their fields, communicate regarding the relationship between Catholicism and science, and 'bring to the Pontiff's attention the problems which the Nobel Prize Winners, in their respective fields of study, consider to be the most urgent for contemporary man'."[71]
In 1984, he was appointed as a member of the Order of the Companions of Honour (CH) by Queen Elizabeth II of the United Kingdom on the advice of the British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher for his "services to the study of economics".[8] Hayek had hoped to receive a baronetcy, and after he was awarded the CH he sent a letter to his friends requesting that he be called the English version of Friedrich (Frederick) from now on. After his twenty-minute audience with the Queen, he was "absolutely besotted" with her according to his daughter-in-law, Esca Hayek. Hayek said a year later that he was "amazed by her. That ease and skill, as if she'd known me all my life." The audience with the Queen was followed by a dinner with family and friends at the Institute of Economic Affairs. When, later that evening, Hayek was dropped off at the Reform Club, he commented: "I've just had the happiest day of my life."[72]
In 1991, US President George H. W. Bush awarded Hayek the Presidential Medal of Freedom, one of the two highest civilian awards in the United States, for a "lifetime of looking beyond the horizon". Hayek died on 23 March 1992 in Freiburg, Germany, and was buried on 4 April in the Neustift am Walde cemetery in the northern outskirts of Vienna according to the Catholic rite.[73] In 2011, his article The Use of Knowledge in Society was selected as one of the top 20 articles published in the American Economic Review during its first 100 years.[11]
The New York University Journal of Law and Liberty holds an annual lecture in his honour.[74]
Work[edit]
The business cycle[edit]
Main article: Austrian business cycle theory




Parts of a business cycle



Actual business cycle




Hayek's principal investigations in economics concerned capital, money, and the business cycle. Mises had earlier applied the concept of marginal utility to the value of money in his Theory of Money and Credit (1912), in which he also proposed an explanation for "industrial fluctuations" based on the ideas of the old British Currency School and of Swedish economist Knut Wicksell. Hayek used this body of work as a starting point for his own interpretation of the business cycle, elaborating what later became known as the "Austrian Theory of the Business Cycle". Hayek spelled out the Austrian approach in more detail in his book, published in 1929, an English translation of which appeared in 1933 as Monetary Theory and the Trade Cycle. There he argued for a monetary approach to the origins of the cycle. In his Prices and Production (1931), Hayek argued that the business cycle resulted from the central bank's inflationary credit expansion and its transmission over time, leading to a capital misallocation caused by the artificially low interest rates. Hayek claimed that "the past instability of the market economy is the consequence of the exclusion of the most important regulator of the market mechanism, money, from itself being regulated by the market process".
Hayek's analysis was based on Böhm-Bawerk's concept of the "average period of production"[75] and on the effects that monetary policy could have upon it. In accordance with the reasoning later outlined in his essay "The Use of Knowledge in Society" (1945), Hayek argued that a monopolistic governmental agency like a central bank can neither possess the relevant information which should govern supply of money, nor have the ability to use it correctly.[76]
In 1929, Lionel Robbins assumed the helm of the London School of Economics (LSE). Eager to promote alternatives to what he regarded as the narrow approach of the school of economic thought that then dominated the English-speaking academic world (centred at the University of Cambridge and deriving largely from the work of Alfred Marshall), Robbins invited Hayek to join the faculty at LSE, which he did in 1931. According to Nicholas Kaldor, Hayek's theory of the time-structure of capital and of the business cycle initially "fascinated the academic world" and appeared to offer a less "facile and superficial" understanding of macroeconomics than the Cambridge school's.[77]
Also in 1931, Hayek critiqued Keynes's Treatise on Money (1930) in his "Reflections on the pure theory of Mr. J. M. Keynes"[78] and published his lectures at the LSE in book form as Prices and Production.[79] Unemployment and idle resources are, for Keynes, caused by a lack of effective demand; for Hayek, they stem from a previous, unsustainable episode of easy money and artificially low interest rates. Keynes asked his friend Piero Sraffa to respond. Sraffa elaborated on the effect of inflation-induced "forced savings" on the capital sector and about the definition of a "natural" interest rate in a growing economy. (Sraffa–Hayek debate)[80] Others who responded negatively to Hayek's work on the business cycle included John Hicks, Frank Knight, and Gunnar Myrdal.[81] Kaldor later wrote that Hayek's Prices and Production had produced "a remarkable crop of critics" and that the total number of pages in British and American journals dedicated to the resulting debate "could rarely have been equalled in the economic controversies of the past."[77]
Hayek continued his research on monetary and capital theory, revising his theories of the relations between credit cycles and capital structure in Profits, Interest and Investment (1939) and The Pure Theory of Capital (1941), but his reputation as an economic theorist had by then fallen so much that those works were largely ignored, except for scathing critiques by Nicholas Kaldor.[77][82] Lionel Robbins himself, who had embraced the Austrian theory of the business cycle in The Great Depression (1934), later regretted having written the book and accepted many of the Keynesian counter-arguments.[83]
Hayek never produced the book-length treatment of "the dynamics of capital" that he had promised in the Pure Theory of Capital. After 1941, he continued to publish works on the economics of information, political philosophy, the theory of law, and psychology, but seldom on macroeconomics. At the University of Chicago, Hayek was not part of the economics department, and did not influence the rebirth of neoclassical theory that took place there (see Chicago school of economics). When, in 1974, he shared the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economics with Gunnar Myrdal, the latter complained about being paired with an "ideologue". Milton Friedman declared himself "an enormous admirer of Hayek, but not for his economics. I think Prices and Production is a very flawed book. I think his [Pure Theory of Capital] is unreadable. On the other hand, The Road to Serfdom is one of the great books of our time."[83]
The economic calculation problem[edit]
Main article: Economic calculation problem
Building on the earlier work of Ludwig von Mises and others, Hayek also argued that while in centrally planned economies an individual or a select group of individuals must determine the distribution of resources, these planners will never have enough information to carry out this allocation reliably. This argument, first proposed by Max Weber, says that the efficient exchange and use of resources can be maintained only through the price mechanism in free markets (see economic calculation problem).
In 1935, Hayek published Collectivist Economic Planning, a collection of essays from an earlier debate that had been initiated by Ludwig von Mises. Hayek included Mises's essay, in which Mises argued that rational planning was impossible under socialism.
Some socialists such as H. D. Dickinson and Oskar Lange, responded by invoking general equilibrium theory, which they argued disproved Mises's thesis. They noted that the difference between a planned and a free market system lay in who was responsible for solving the equations. They argued, if some of the prices chosen by socialist managers were wrong, gluts or shortages would appear, signalling them to adjust the prices up or down, just as in a free market. Through such a trial and error, a socialist economy could mimic the efficiency of a free market system, while avoiding its many problems.
Hayek challenged this vision in a series of contributions. In "Economics and Knowledge" (1937), he pointed out that the standard equilibrium theory assumed that all agents have full and correct information. In the real world, however, different individuals have different bits of knowledge, and furthermore, some of what they believe is wrong.
In "The Use of Knowledge in Society" (1945), Hayek argued that the price mechanism serves to share and synchronise local and personal knowledge, allowing society's members to achieve diverse, complicated ends through a principle of spontaneous self-organization. He contrasted the use of the price mechanism with central planning, arguing that the former allows for more rapid adaptation to changes in particular circumstances of time and place.[84] Thus, he set the stage for Oliver Williamson's later contrast between markets and hierarchies as alternative co-ordination mechanisms for economic transactions.[85] He used the term catallaxy to describe a "self-organizing system of voluntary co-operation". Hayek's research into this argument was specifically cited by the Nobel Committee in its press release awarding Hayek the Nobel prize.[55]
Criticism of collectivism[edit]




Individualism and Economic Order, Year 1948.


Hayek was one of the leading academic critics of collectivism in the 20th century. Hayek argued that all forms of collectivism (even those theoretically based on voluntary co-operation) could only be maintained by a central authority of some kind. In Hayek's view, the central role of the state should be to maintain the rule of law, with as little arbitrary intervention as possible. In his popular book, The Road to Serfdom (1944) and in subsequent academic works, Hayek argued that socialism required central economic planning and that such planning in turn leads towards totalitarianism.[86]
From The Road to Serfdom:

Although our modern socialists' promise of greater freedom is genuine and sincere, in recent years observer after observer has been impressed by the unforeseen consequences of socialism, the extraordinary similarity in many respects of the conditions under "communism" and "fascism".[87]

Hayek posited that a central planning authority would have to be endowed with powers that would impact and ultimately control social life, because the knowledge required for centrally planning an economy is inherently decentralised, and would need to be brought under control.
Though Hayek did argue that the state should provide law centrally, others have pointed out that this contradicts his arguments about the role of judges in "discovering" the law, suggesting that Hayek would have supported decentralized provision of legal services.[88]
Hayek also wrote that the state can play a role in the economy, and specifically, in creating a safety net. He wrote, "There is no reason why, in a society which has reached the general level of wealth ours has, the first kind of security should not be guaranteed to all without endangering general freedom; that is: some minimum of food, shelter and clothing, sufficient to preserve health. Nor is there any reason why the state should not help to organize a comprehensive system of social insurance in providing for those common hazards of life against which few can make adequate provision."[89]
Investment and choice[edit]
Perhaps more fully than any other economist, Hayek investigated the choice theory of investment. He examined the inter-relations between non-permanent production goods and "latent" or potentially economic permanent resources – building on the choice theoretical insight that, "processes that take more time will evidently not be adopted unless they yield a greater return than those that take less time".[90]
Hayek's work on the microeconomics of the choice theoretics of investment, non-permanent goods, potential permanent resources, and economically-adapted permanent resources mark a central dividing point between his work in areas of macroeconomics and that of almost all other economists. Hayek's work on the macroeconomic subjects of central planning, trade cycle theory, the division of knowledge, and entrepreneurial adaptation especially, differ greatly from the opinions of macroeconomic "Marshallian" economists in the tradition of John Maynard Keynes and the microeconomic "Walrasian" economists in the tradition of Abba Lerner.[citation needed]
Philosophy of science[edit]
See also: The Counter-Revolution of Science
During World War II, Hayek began the ‘Abuse of Reason’ project. His goal was to show how a number of then-popular doctrines and beliefs had a common origin in some fundamental misconceptions about the social science.[91] In his philosophy of science, which has much in common with that of his good friend Karl Popper, Hayek was highly critical of what he termed scientism: a false understanding of the methods of science that has been mistakenly forced upon the social sciences, but that is contrary to the practices of genuine science. Usually, scientism involves combining the philosophers' ancient demand for demonstrative justification with the associationists' false view that all scientific explanations are simple two-variable linear relationships.
Hayek points out that much of science involves the explanation of complex multivariable and nonlinear phenomena[citation needed], and the social science of economics and undesigned order compares favourably with such complex sciences as Darwinian biology. These ideas were developed in The Counter-Revolution of Science in 1952, and in some of Hayek's later essays in the philosophy of science such as Degrees of Explanation and The Theory of Complex Phenomena.
In Counter-Revolution, for example, Hayek observed that the hard sciences attempt to remove the "human factor" to obtain objective, strictly controlled results:

[T]he persistent effort of modern Science has been to get down to "objective facts," to cease studying what men thought about nature or regarding the given concepts as true images of the real world, and, above all, to discard all theories which pretended to explain phenomena by imputing to them a directing mind like our own. Instead, its main task became to revise and reconstruct the concepts formed from ordinary experience on the basis of a systematic testing of the phenomena, so as to be better able to recognize the particular as an instance of a general rule.
— Friedrich A. Hayek, The Counter-Revolution of Science (II: The Problem and the Method of the Natural Sciences)

Meanwhile, the soft sciences are attempting to measure human action itself:[92]

The social sciences in the narrower sense, i.e., those which used to be described as the moral sciences, are concerned with man's conscious or reflected action, actions where a person can be said to choose between various courses open to him, and here the situation is essentially different. The external stimulus which may be said to cause or occasion such actions can of course also be defined in purely physical terms. But if we tried to do so for the purposes of explaining human action, we would confine ourselves to less than we know about the situation.
— Friedrich A. Hayek, The Counter-Revolution of Science (III: The Subjective Character of the Data of the Social Sciences)

He notes that these are mutually exclusive: Social sciences should not attempt to impose positivist methodology, nor to claim objective or definite results:[93]
Psychology[edit]
In The Sensory Order: An Inquiry into the Foundations of Theoretical Psychology (1952), Hayek independently developed a "Hebbian learning" model of learning and memory – an idea he first conceived in 1920, prior to his study of economics. Hayek's expansion of the "Hebbian synapse" construction into a global brain theory has received continued attention[94][95][96][97] in neuroscience, cognitive science, computer science, behavioural science, and evolutionary psychology, by scientists such as Gerald Edelman, and Joaquin Fuster.
Hayek posited two orders, the sensory order that we experience, and the natural order that natural science has revealed. Hayek thought that the sensory order is in fact a product of the brain. He characterized the brain as a highly complex but self-ordering, hierarchical classification system, a huge network of connections.
Social and political philosophy[edit]
In the latter half of his career Hayek made a number of contributions to social and political philosophy, which he based on his views on the limits of human knowledge,[98] and the idea of spontaneous order in social institutions. He argues in favour of a society organised around a market order, in which the apparatus of state is employed almost (though not entirely) exclusively to enforce the legal order (consisting of abstract rules, and not particular commands) necessary for a market of free individuals to function. These ideas were informed by a moral philosophy derived from epistemological concerns regarding the inherent limits of human knowledge. Hayek argued that his ideal individualistic, free-market polity would be self-regulating to such a degree that it would be 'a society which does not depend for its functioning on our finding good men for running it'.[99]
Hayek disapproved of the notion of 'social justice'. He compared the market to a game in which 'there is no point in calling the outcome just or unjust'[100] and argued that 'social justice is an empty phrase with no determinable content';[101] likewise "the results of the individual's efforts are necessarily unpredictable, and the question as to whether the resulting distribution of incomes is just has no meaning".[102] He generally regarded government redistribution of income or capital as an unacceptable intrusion upon individual freedom: "the principle of distributive justice, once introduced, would not be fulfilled until the whole of society was organized in accordance with it. This would produce a kind of society which in all essential respects would be the opposite of a free society."[101]
Spontaneous order[edit]
Main article: Spontaneous order
Hayek viewed the free price system not as a conscious invention (that which is intentionally designed by man), but as spontaneous order or what he referred to as "that which is the result of human action but not of human design". Thus, Hayek put the price mechanism on the same level as, for example, language.
Hayek attributed the birth of civilisation to private property in his book The Fatal Conceit (1988). He explained that price signals are the only means of enabling each economic decision maker to communicate tacit knowledge or dispersed knowledge to each other, to solve the economic calculation problem.
Alain de Benoist of the Nouvelle Droite (New Right) produced a highly critical essay on Hayek's work in an issue of Telos, citing the flawed assumptions behind Hayek's idea of "spontaneous order" and the authoritarian, totalising implications of his free-market ideology.[103]
Hayek’s concept of the market as a spontaneous order has been recently applied to ecosystems to defend a broadly non-interventionist policy.[104] Like the market, ecosystems contain complex networks of information, involve an ongoing dynamic process, contain orders within orders, and the entire system operates without being directed by a conscious mind.[105] On this analysis, species takes the place of price as a visible element of the system formed by a complex set of largely unknowable elements. Human ignorance about the countless interactions between the organisms of an ecosystem limits our ability to manipulate nature.[106] Since humans rely on the ecosystem to sustain themselves, we have a prima facie obligation to not disrupt such systems. This analysis of ecosystems as spontaneous orders does not rely on markets qualifying as spontaneous orders. As such, one need not endorse Hayek’s analysis of markets to endorse ecosystems as spontaneous orders.
Hayek's views on social safety nets[edit]
With regard to a social safety net, Hayek advocated "some provision for those threatened by the extremes of indigence or starvation due to circumstances beyond their control" and argued that the "necessity of some such arrangement in an industrial society is unquestioned—be it only in the interest of those who require protection against acts of desperation on the part of the needy."[107] Summarizing Hayek's views on the topic, journalist Nicholas Wapshott has argued that "[Hayek] advocated mandatory universal health care and unemployment insurance, enforced, if not directly provided, by the state."[108] Critical theorist Bernard Harcourt has argued further that "Hayek was adamant about this."[109] In 1944, Hayek wrote in The Road to Serfdom that:

There is no reason why in a society which has reached the general level of wealth which ours has attained [that security against severe physical privation, the certainty of a given minimum of sustenance for all; or more briefly, the security of a minimum income] should not be guaranteed to all without endangering general freedom. There are difficult questions about the precise standard which should thus be assured... but there can be no doubt that some minimum of food, shelter, and clothing, sufficient to preserve health and the capacity to work, can be assured to everybody. Indeed, for a considerable part of the population of England this sort of security has long been achieved.
Nor is there any reason why the state should not assist... individuals in providing for those common hazards of life against which, because of their uncertainty, few individuals can make adequate provision. Where, as in the case of sickness and accident, neither the desire to avoid such calamities nor the efforts to overcome their consequences are as a rule weakened by the provision of assistance – where, in short, we deal with genuinely insurable risks – the case for the state's helping to organize a comprehensive system of social insurance is very strong.... [And] there is no incompatibility in principle between the state's providing greater security in this way and the preservation of individual freedom. Wherever communal action can mitigate disasters against which the individual can neither attempt to guard himself nor make the provision for the consequences, such communal action should undoubtedly be taken.[110]

In 1973, Hayek reiterated in Law, Legislation and Liberty that:

There is no reason why in a free society government should not assure to all, protection against severe deprivation in the form of an assured minimum income, or a floor below which nobody need to descend. To enter into such an insurance against extreme misfortune may well be in the interest of all; or it may be felt to be a clear moral duty of all to assist, within the organised community, those who cannot help themselves. So long as such a uniform minimum income is provided outside the market to all those who, for any reason, are unable to earn in the market an adequate maintenance, this need not lead to a restriction of freedom, or conflict with the Rule of Law.[111]

Hayek's liberalism and skepticism[edit]
Arthur M. Diamond argues Hayek's problems arise when he goes beyond claims that can be evaluated within economic science. Diamond argued that: “The human mind, Hayek says, is not just limited in its ability to synthesize a vast array of concrete facts, it is also limited in its ability to give a deductively sound ground to ethics. Here is where the tension develops, for he also wants to give a reasoned moral defense of the free market. He is an intellectual skeptic who wants to give political philosophy a secure intellectual foundation. It is thus not too surprising that what results is confused and contradictory.”[112] Chandran Kukathas argues that Hayek's defence of liberalism is unsuccessful because it rests on presuppositions that are incompatible. The unresolved dilemma of his political philosophy is how to mount a systematic defence of liberalism if one emphasizes the limited capacity of reason.[113] Norman P. Barry similarly notes that the “critical rationalism” in Hayek’s writings appears incompatible with “a certain kind of fatalism, that we must wait for evolution to pronounce its verdict.”[114] Milton Friedman and Anna Schwartz argue that the element of paradox exists in the views of Hayek. Noting Hayek's vigorous defense of "invisible hand" evolution that Hayek claimed has created better economic institutions than could be created by rational design, Friedman pointed out the irony that Hayek was then proposing to replace the monetary system thus created with a deliberate construct of his own design.[115] Also, John N. Gray summarized this view as "his scheme for an ultra-liberal constitution was a prototypical version of the philosophy he had attacked."[116] Bruce Caldwell wrote: "If one is judging his work against the standard of whether he provided a finished political philosophy, Hayek clearly did not succeed," although he thinks that "economists may find Hayek's political writings useful."[117]
Hayek's views on dictatorship[edit]



Wikiquote has quotations related to: Friedrich Hayek and dictatorship


Hayek sent António de Oliveira Salazar a copy of The Constitution of Liberty (1960) in 1962. Hayek hoped that his book – this “preliminary sketch of new constitutional principles” – “may assist” Salazar “in his endeavour to design a constitution which is proof against the abuses of democracy.”[118]
Hayek visited Chile in the 1970s and 1980s during the Government Junta of general Augusto Pinochet and accepted being named Honorary Chairman of the Centro de Estudios Públicos, the think tank formed by the economists who transformed Chile into a free market economy.[118]
Asked about the liberal, non-democratic rule by a Chilean interviewer, Hayek is translated from German to Spanish to English as having said, "As long term institutions, I am totally against dictatorships. But a dictatorship may be a necessary system for a transitional period. [...] Personally I prefer a liberal dictatorship to democratic government devoid of liberalism. My personal impression – and this is valid for South America – is that in Chile, for example, we will witness a transition from a dictatorial government to a liberal government." In a letter to the London Times, he defended the Pinochet regime and said that he had "not been able to find a single person even in much maligned Chile who did not agree that personal freedom was much greater under Pinochet than it had been under Allende."[119][120] Hayek admitted that "it is not very likely that this will succeed, even if, at a particular point in time, it may be the only hope there is.", he explained, however, "It is not certain hope, because it will always depend on the goodwill of an individual, and there are very few individuals one can trust. But if it is the sole opportunity which exists at a particular moment it may be the best solution despite this. And only if and when the dictatorial government is visibly directing its steps towards limited democracy."
For Hayek, the supposedly stark difference between authoritarianism and totalitarianism has much importance and Hayek places heavy weight on this distinction in his defence of transitional dictatorship. For example, when Hayek visited Venezuela in May 1981, he was asked to comment on the prevalence of totalitarian regimes in Latin America. In reply, Hayek warned against confusing "totalitarianism with authoritarianism," and said that he was unaware of "any totalitarian governments in Latin America. The only one was Chile under Allende". For Hayek, however, the word 'totalitarian' signifies something very specific: the want to “organize the whole of society” to attain a “definite social goal” – which is stark in contrast to “liberalism and individualism”.[121]
Influence and recognition[edit]
Hayek's influence on the development of economics is widely acknowledged. Hayek is the second-most frequently cited economist (after Kenneth Arrow) in the Nobel lectures of the prize winners in economics, which is particularly striking since his own lecture was critical of the field of orthodox economics and neo-classical modelisation.[122] A number of Nobel Laureates in economics, such as Vernon Smith and Herbert A. Simon, recognise Hayek as the greatest modern economist.[123] Another Nobel winner, Paul Samuelson, believed that Hayek was worthy of his award but nevertheless claimed that "there were good historical reasons for fading memories of Hayek within the mainstream last half of the twentieth century economist fraternity. In 1931, Hayek's Prices and Production had enjoyed an ultra-short Byronic success. In retrospect hindsight tells us that its mumbo-jumbo about the period of production grossly misdiagnosed the macroeconomics of the 1927–1931 (and the 1931–2007) historical scene".[124] Despite this comment, Samuelson spent the last 50 years of his life obsessed with the problems of capital theory identified by Hayek and Böhm-Bawerk, and Samuelson flatly judged Hayek to have been right and his own teacher, Joseph Schumpeter, to have been wrong on the central economic question of the 20th century, the feasibility of socialist economic planning in a production goods dominated economy.[125]
Hayek is widely recognised for having introduced the time dimension to the equilibrium construction and for his key role in helping inspire the fields of growth theory, information economics, and the theory of spontaneous order. The "informal" economics presented in Milton Friedman's massively influential popular work Free to Choose (1980), is explicitly Hayekian in its account of the price system as a system for transmitting and co-ordinating knowledge. This can be explained by the fact that Friedman taught Hayek's famous paper "The Use of Knowledge in Society" (1945) in his graduate seminars.
In 1944 he was elected as a Fellow of the British Academy,[126] after he was nominated for membership by Keynes.[127]
Harvard economist and former Harvard University President Lawrence Summers explains Hayek's place in modern economics: "What's the single most important thing to learn from an economics course today? What I tried to leave my students with is the view that the invisible hand is more powerful than the [un]hidden hand. Things will happen in well-organized efforts without direction, controls, plans. That's the consensus among economists. That's the Hayek legacy."[128]
By 1947, Hayek was an organiser of the Mont Pelerin Society, a group of classical liberals who sought to oppose what they saw as socialism in various areas. He was also instrumental in the founding of the Institute of Economic Affairs, the free-market think tank that inspired Thatcherism. He was in addition a member of the Philadelphia Society.[129]
Hayek had a long-standing and close friendship with philosopher of science Karl Popper, also from Vienna. In a letter to Hayek in 1944, Popper stated, "I think I have learnt more from you than from any other living thinker, except perhaps Alfred Tarski." (See Hacohen, 2000). Popper dedicated his Conjectures and Refutations to Hayek. For his part, Hayek dedicated a collection of papers, Studies in Philosophy, Politics, and Economics, to Popper and, in 1982, said that "ever since his Logik der Forschung first came out in 1934, I have been a complete adherent to his general theory of methodology".[130] Popper also participated in the inaugural meeting of the Mont Pelerin Society. Their friendship and mutual admiration, however, do not change the fact that there are important differences between their ideas.[131]
Hayek also played a central role in Milton Friedman's intellectual development. Friedman wrote:

"My interest in public policy and political philosophy was rather casual before I joined the faculty of the University of Chicago. Informal discussions with colleagues and friends stimulated a greater interest, which was reinforced by Friedrich Hayek's powerful book The Road to Serfdom, by my attendance at the first meeting of the Mont Pelerin Society in 1947, and by discussions with Hayek after he joined the university faculty in 1950. In addition, Hayek attracted an exceptionally able group of students who were dedicated to a libertarian ideology. They started a student publication, The New Individualist Review, which was the outstanding libertarian journal of opinion for some years. I served as an adviser to the journal and published a number of articles in it...."[132]

Hayek's greatest intellectual debt was to Carl Menger, who pioneered an approach to social explanation similar to that developed in Britain by Bernard Mandeville and the Scottish moral philosophers in the Scottish Enlightenment. He had a wide-reaching influence on contemporary economics, politics, philosophy, sociology, psychology and anthropology. For example, Hayek's discussion in The Road to Serfdom (1944) about truth, falsehood and the use of language influenced some later opponents of postmodernism.[133]
Hayek and conservatism[edit]
Hayek received new attention in the 1980s and 1990s with the rise of conservative governments in the United States, United Kingdom, and Canada. After winning the United Kingdom general election, 1979, Margaret Thatcher appointed Keith Joseph, the director of the Hayekian Centre for Policy Studies, as her secretary of state for industry in an effort to redirect parliament's economic strategies. Likewise, David Stockman, Ronald Reagan's most influential financial official in 1981 was an acknowledged follower of Hayek.[134]
Hayek wrote an essay, "Why I Am Not a Conservative" (included as an appendix to The Constitution of Liberty), in which he disparaged conservatism for its inability to adapt to changing human realities or to offer a positive political program, remarking, "Conservatism is only as good as what it conserves." Although he noted that modern day conservatism shares many opinions on economics with classical liberals, particularly a belief in the free market, he believed it's because conservatism wants to "stand still," whereas liberalism embraces the free market because it "wants to go somewhere." Hayek identified himself as a classical liberal, but noted that in the United States it had become almost impossible to use "liberal" in its original definition, and the term "libertarian" has been used instead. In this text, Hayek also opposed conservatism for "its hostility to internationalism and its proneness to a strident nationalism," with its frequent association with imperialism.[135]
However, for his part, Hayek found libertarianism a term "singularly unattractive" and offered the term "Old Whig" (a phrase borrowed from Edmund Burke) instead. In his later life, he said, "I am becoming a Burkean Whig." However, Whiggery as a political doctrine had little affinity for classical political economy, the tabernacle of the Manchester School and William Gladstone.[136] His essay has served as an inspiration to other liberal-minded economists wishing to distinguish themselves from conservative thinkers, for example James M. Buchanan's essay "Why I, Too, Am Not a Conservative: The Normative Vision of Classical Liberalism".
His opponents have attacked Hayek as a leading promoter of neoliberalism. A British journalist, Samuel Brittan, concluded in 2010, "Hayek's book [The Constitution of Liberty] is still probably the most comprehensive statement of the underlying ideas of the moderate free market philosophy espoused by neoliberals."[137] Brittan adds that although Raymond Plant (2009) comes out in the end against Hayek's doctrines, Plant gives The Constitution of Liberty a "more thorough and fair-minded analysis than it has received even from its professed adherents".[137]
In Why F A Hayek is a Conservative,[138] British policy analyst Madsen Pirie claims Hayek mistakes the nature of the conservative outlook. Conservatives, he says, are not averse to change – but like Hayek, they are highly averse to change being imposed on the social order by people in authority who think they know how to run things better. They wish to allow the market to function smoothly and give it the freedom to change and develop. It is an outlook, says Pirie, that Hayek and conservatives both share.
Hayek and policy discussions[edit]
Hayek’s ideas on spontaneous order and the importance of prices in dealing with the knowledge problem has inspired a debate on economic development and transition economies after the fall of the Berlin wall. For instance P. Boettke [139] elaborated in detail on why reforming socialism failed and the Soviet Union broke down. Ronald McKinnon [140] uses Hayekian ideas to describe challenges of transition from a centralized state and planned economy to a market economy. Former World Bank Chief Economist William Easterly emphasizes why foreign aid tends to have no effect at best in bestsellers such as White Man’s Burden.[141]
Since the 2007–08 financial crisis there is a renewed interest in Hayek’s core explanation of boom-and-bust cycles, which serves as an alternative explanation to that of the savings glut as launched by Bernanke. Economists at the Bank of International Settlements, e.g. William White, emphasize the importance of Hayekian insights and the impact of monetary policies and credit growth as root causes of financial cycles.[142] A. Hoffmann and G. Schnabl provide an international perspective and explain recurring financial cycles in the world economy as consequence of gradual interest rate cuts led by the central banks in the large advanced economies since the 1980s.[143] N. Cachanosky outlines the impact of US monetary policy on the production structure in Latin America.[144]
In line with Hayek, an increasing number of contemporary researchers sees expansionary monetary policies and too low interest rates as mal-incentives and main drivers of financial crises in general, and the subprime market crisis in particular.[145][146] To prevent problems caused by monetary policy, Hayekian/Austrian economists discuss alternatives to current policies and organizations. For instance, L. White favors free banking in the spirit of Hayek’s “Denationalization of Money”.[147]
Hayek’s ideas find their way into the discussion of the post-Great Recession issues of secular stagnation. Monetary policy and mounting regulation is argued to have undermined the innovative forces of the market economies. Quantitative easing following the financial crises is argued to have not only conserved structural distortions in the economy, leading to a fall in trend-growth; it also created new distortions and contributes to distributional conflicts.[148]
Personal life[edit]
In August 1926, Hayek married Helen Berta Maria von Fritsch (1901–1960), a secretary at the civil service office where Hayek worked, on the rebound upon hearing of his cousin's marriage. They had two children together.[149] Upon the close of WW2, Friedrich began an affair with his married cousin but kept it secret until 1948. Friedrich and Helen divorced in July 1950 and he married his cousin[150] Helene Bitterlich (1900–1996)[151] just a few weeks later, after moving to Arkansas to take advantage of permissive divorce laws.[152] His wife and children were bribed into accepting a divorce or destitution and the divorce caused scandal at LSE where certain academics refused to have anything to do with him [152] In a 1978 interview to explain his actions, he stated 'He was unhappy in his first marriage, and his wife would not grant him a divorce, he had to enforce it'.[153] He rarely visited his children after the divorce.[154]
Hayek was brought up in non-religious setting and decided that he was an agnostic from age 15.[155]
Legacy and honours[edit]




Friedrich Hayek's grave in Neustifter Friedhof, Vienna


Even after his death, Hayek's intellectual presence is noticeable, especially in the universities where he had taught: the London School of Economics, the University of Chicago, and the University of Freiburg. A number of tributes have resulted, many posthumous:

The Hayek Society, a student-run group at the London School of Economics, was established in his honour.[156]
The Oxford Hayek Society, founded in 1983, is named after Hayek.[157]
The Cato Institute named its lower level auditorium after Hayek, who had been a Distinguished Senior Fellow at Cato during his later years.
The auditorium of the school of economics in Universidad Francisco Marroquín in Guatemala is named after him.
The Hayek Fund for Scholars[158] of the Institute for Humane Studies provides financial awards for academic career activities of graduate students and untenured faculty members.
The Ludwig von Mises Institute holds a lecture named after Hayek every year at its Austrian Scholars Conference and invites notable academics to speak about subjects relating to Hayek's contributions to the Austrian School.
George Mason University has an economics essay award named in honour of Hayek.
The Mercatus Center, a free-market think tank also at George Mason University, has a philosophy, politics, and economics program of study named for Hayek.
The Mont Pelerin Society has a quadrennial economics essay contest named in his honour.
Hayek was awarded honorary degrees from Rikkyo University, University of Vienna, and University of Salzburg.
Hayek has an investment portfolio named after him. The Hayek Fund[159] invests in corporations who financially support free market public policy organisations
1974: Austrian Decoration for Science and Art
1974: Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences (Sweden)
1977: Pour le Mérite for Science and Art (Germany)
1983: Honorary Ring of Vienna
1984: Honorary Dean of WHU-Otto Beisheim School of Management
1984: Order of the Companions of Honour (United Kingdom)
1990: Grand Gold Medal with Star for Services to the Republic of Austria[160]
1991: Presidential Medal of Freedom (United States)
1994: The FA Hayek Scholarship in Economics or Political Science, University of Canterbury. The scholarship supports students toward study for an honours or master's degree in the Economics or Political Science at the University. It was established in 1994 by a gift from entrepreneur Alan Gibbs.

Notable works[edit]
Main article: Friedrich Hayek bibliography

The Road to Serfdom, 1944.
Individualism and Economic Order, 1948.
The Constitution of Liberty, 1960, ...: The Definitive Edition, 2011. Description and preview.
Law, Legislation and Liberty (3 volumes)

Volume I. Rules and Order, 1973.[161]
Volume II. The Mirage of Social Justice, 1976.[162]
Volume III. The Political Order of a Free People, 1979.[163]


The Fatal Conceit: The Errors of Socialism, 1988. Note: The authorship of The Fatal Conceit is under scholarly dispute.[164] The book in its published form may actually have been written entirely by its editor W.W. Bartley, III, not by Hayek.[165]

See also[edit]


Libertarianism portal
Economics portal



Constructivist epistemology
Fear the Boom and Bust – a series of music videos produced by the Mercatus Center in which Keynes and Hayek take part in a rap battle
Global financial system – describes the financial system consisting of institutions and regulators that act on the international level
History of economic thought
Liberalism in Austria

References and further reading[edit]
Notes[edit]



^ Bank of Sweden (1974). "The Sveriges Riksbank Prize in Economic Sciences in Memory of Alfred Nobel 1974". 
^ Edward Feser (2006). "The Cambridge Companion to Hayek (Introduction)". Cambridge University Press. among the most important economists and political philosophers of the twentieth century. ... [He was] almost certainly the most consequential thinker of the mainstream political right in the twentieth century. It is just possible that he was the most consequential twentieth century political thinker, right or left, period. 
^ Schrepel, Thibault (January 2015). "Friedrich Hayek's Contribution to Antitrust Law and Its Modern Application". ICC Global Antitrust Review: 199–216. SSRN 2548420 . 
^ Skarbek, David (March 2009). "F. A. Hayek's Influence on Nobel Prize Winners" (PDF). Review of Austrian Economics. 22 (1): 109–12. doi:10.1007/s11138-008-0069-x. Archived from the original (PDF) on 27 July 2011. 
^ "Friedrich August von Hayek - Facts". www.nobelprize.org. Retrieved 2017-06-30. 
^ kanopiadmin (2010-01-28). "Hayek and the Nobel Prize". Mises Institute. Retrieved 2017-06-30. 
^ "No. 49768". The London Gazette (Supplement). 16 June 1984. p. 4. 
^ a b Alan O. Ebenstein. (2003) Friedrich Hayek: A biography. p. 305. University of Chicago Press, 2003
^ http://www.schleyer-stiftung.de/preise/hms_preis/preise_schleyer_preistraeger_e.html
^ George H. W. Bush (18 November 1991). "Remarks on Presenting the Presidential Medal of Freedom Awards". 
^ a b Arrow, Kenneth J.; Bernheim, B. Douglas; Feldstein, Martin S.; McFadden, Daniel L.; Poterba, James M.; Solow, Robert M. (2011). "100 Years of the American Economic Review: The Top 20 Articles". American Economic Review. 101 (1): 1–8. doi:10.1257/aer.101.1.1. 
^ Butler, Eamonn (2012). Friedrich Hayek: The Ideas and Influence of the Libertarian Economist, Introduction
^ Ebenstein 2001, p. 7.
^ Ebenstein 2001, pp. 7–8.
^ Note: Von Juraschek was a statistician and was later employed by the Austrian government.
^ Ebenstein 2001, p. 8.
^ Ebenstein, p. 245
^ Hayek on Hayek: an autobiographical dialogue, By Friedrich August Hayek, Routledge, 1994, p. 51
^ Young Ludwig: Wittgenstein's life, 1889–1921, Brian McGuinness, Oxford University Press, 2005 p. xii
^ a b Ebenstein 2001, p. 9.
^ a b "UCLA Oral History 1978 Interviews with Friedrich Hayek, pp. 32–38". Archive.org. 10 March 2001. Retrieved 14 September 2011. 
^ Kresge, Stephen; Wenar, Leif (2005-07-22). Hayek on Hayek: An Autobiographical Dialogue. Routledge. ISBN 978-0226320625. :39
^ https://mises.org/daily/3458
^ Adam James Tebble, F.A. Hayek (Continuum, 2010), p. 2, ISBN 978-0826435996
^ Deirdre N. McCloskey (2000). How to Be Human: Though an Economist. U of Michigan Press. p. 33. ISBN 0472067443. 
^ The Sensory Order (1952) on learning

Backhaus, Jurgen G. (2005-01-01). Entrepreneurship, Money and Coordination: Hayek's Theory of Cultural Evolution. Edward Elgar Publishing. ISBN 978-1845427955. :48
Handbook of Knowledge and Economics. Richard Arena, Agnès Festré, Nathalie Lazaric (eds.). Edward Elgar Publishing. 2012-01-01. ISBN 978-1781001028. :133


^ "The Viennese Connection: Alfred Schutz and the Austrian School" by Peter Kurrild-Klitgaard.
^ A. J. Tebble, F.A. Hayek, Continuum International Publishing Group, 2010, pp. 4–5
^ Federici, Michael. Eric Voegelin: The Restoration of Order, ISI Books, 2002, p. 1
^ Baxendale, Toby (25 October 2010). "The Battle of the Letters: Keynes v Hayek 1932, Skidelsky v Besley 2010". The Cobden Centre. Retrieved 14 September 2011. 
^ http://thinkmarkets.files.wordpress.com/2010/06/keynes-hayek-1932-cambridgelse.pdf
^ Malcolm Perrine McNair, Richard Stockton Meriam, Problems in business economics, McGraw-Hill, 1941, p. 504
^ Keynes v Hayek: Two economic giants go head to head Business–BBC News, 2 August 2011.
^ Commanding Heights–John Kenneth Galbraith–Interview Conducted 09/29/2000, PBS.org & accessed 21 March 2017.
^ Paul Krugman. "The Conscience of A Liberal". "The Opinion", New York Times, 5 December 2011.
^ Galbraith, J. K. (1991). "Nicholas Kaldor Remembered". Nicholas Kaldor and Mainstream Economics: Confrontation or Convergence?. New York: St. Martin's Press. ISBN 0312053568. 
^ "Sir Arthur Lewis Autobiography". Nobelprize.org. Retrieved 14 September 2011. 
^ Ebenstein, Alan (2001). Friedrich Hayek: a biography (1st ed.). Palgrave, New York: University of Chicago Press. pp. 62, 248, 284. ISBN 978-0312233440. 
^ Interview with David Rockefeller Archived 6 July 2009 at the Wayback Machine.
^ "No. 34541". The London Gazette. 12 August 1938. p. 5182. 
^ a b Brittan, Samuel (2004). "Hayek, Friedrich August (1899–1992)". Oxford Dictionary of National Biography (online ed.). Oxford University Press. doi:10.1093/ref:odnb/51095.  (Subscription or UK public library membership required.)
^ Ebenstein, p. 116.
^ Ebenstein, p. 128.
^ A. J. Tebble, F.A. Hayek, Continuum International Publishing Group, 2010, p. 8
^ Beam, Christopher (Jan 3, 2011). "The Trouble With Liberty". New York Magazine. New York Media, LLC. Retrieved 7 November 2015. 
^ Milton and Rose Friedman, Two Lucky People: Memoirs (Chicago: U. of Chicago Press, 1998)
^ Ross B. Emmett (2010). The Elgar Companion to the Chicago School of Economics. Edward Elgar Publishing. pp. 164, 200, 266–67. ISBN 9781849806664. 
^ Johan Van Overtveldt, The Chicago School: How the University of Chicago Assembled the Thinkers Who Revolutionized Economics and Business(2006) pp. 7, 341–46
^ Biography at LibertyStory.net
^ Ebenstein, p. 195.
^ F. A. Hayek, The Constitution of Liberty (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1960), p. 11.
^ Ebenstein, p. 203.
^ Ebenstein, p. 218.
^ Ebenstein, p. 254.
^ a b "The Prize in Economics 1974 – Press Release". Nobelprize.org. 9 October 1974. Retrieved 14 September 2011. 
^ a b Ebenstein, p. 263.
^ "Friedrich August von Hayek – Banquet Speech". Nobelprize.org. 10 December 1974. Retrieved 14 September 2011. 
^ Ebenstein, p. 261.
^ Richard Cockett, Thinking the Unthinkable. Think-Tanks and the Economic Counter-Revolution, 1931–1983 (Fontana, 1995), pp. 174–76.
^ John Ranelagh, Thatcher's People: An Insider's Account of the Politics, the Power, and the Personalities (Fontana, 1992), p. ix.
^ "Letters to the Editor: Liberal pact with Labour", The Times (31 March 1977), p. 15.
^ "Letters to the Editor: Liberal pact with Labour", The Times (2 April 1977), p. 15.
^ "Letters to the Editor: German socialist aims", The Times (13 April 1977), p. 13.
^ "Letters to the Editor: The dangers to personal liberty", The Times (11 July 1978), p. 15.
^ Martin Anderson, "Revolution" (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1988), p. 164
^ "Transcript for: Friedrich Hayek". pbs.org. Retrieved February 14, 2015. 
^ Andrzy Walicki, "Liberalism in Poland", Critical Review, Winter, 1988, p. 9.
^ Dick Armey, "Address at the Dedication of the Hayek Auditorium", Cato Institute, Washington, D.C., 9 May 1995.
^ Vaclav Klaus, "No Third Way Out: Creating a Capitalist Czechoslovakia", Reason, 1990, (June): 28–31.
^ "Cato Institute Book Forum – Friedrich Hayek: a Biography" (PDF). 8 May 2001. Archived from the original (PDF) on 3 June 2011. Retrieved 14 September 2011. 
^ Ebenstein, p. 301.
^ Ebenstein, p. 305.
^ Ebenstein 2001, p. 317.
^ New York University Journal of Law and Liberty: About
^ See the chapter "The collaboration with Keynes and the controversy with Hayek,", Heinz D. Kurz and Neri Salvadori, "Piero Sraffa's contributions to economics," in Critical Essays on Piero Sraffa's Legacy in Economics, ed. H. D. Kurz, (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000), pp. 3–24. ISBN 978-0521580892
^ Hayek, Friedrich (1989). The Collected Works of F.A. Hayek. University of Chicago Press. p. 202. ISBN 978-0226320977. 
^ a b c Nicholas Kaldor (1942). "Professor Hayek and the Concertina-Effect". Economica. 9 (36): 359–82. doi:10.2307/2550326. JSTOR 2550326. 
^ F. A. Hayek, "Reflection on the pure theory of money of Mr. J. M. Keynes," Economica, 11, S. 270–95 (1931).
^ F. A. Hayek, Prices and Production, (London: Routledge, 1931).
^ P. Sraffa, "Dr. Hayek on Money and Capital," Economic Journal, 42, S. 42–53 (1932).
^ Bruce Caldwell, Hayek's Challenge: An Intellectual Biography of F. A. Hayek (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2004), p. 179. ISBN 0226091937
^ Nicholas Kaldor (1939). "Capital Intensity and the Trade Cycle". Economica. 6 (21): 40–66. doi:10.2307/2549077. JSTOR 2549077. 
^ a b R. W. Garrison, "F. A. Hayek as 'Mr. Fluctooations:' In Defense of Hayek's 'Technical Economics'", Hayek Society Journal (LSE), 5(2), 1 (2003).
^ Hein Schreuder, "Coase, Hayek and Hierarchy", In: S. Lindenberg et Hein Schreuder, dir., Interdisciplinary Perspectives on Organization Studies, Pergamon Press
^ Douma, Sytse and Hein Schreuder, 2013. "Economic Approaches to Organizations". 5th edition. London: Pearson ISBN 0273735292, ISBN 978-0273735298
^ Chang, Ha-Joon (2014). "4". Economics: The User's Guide. London: Penguin Books Limited. ISBN 978-0718197032. 
^ Hayek, FA. The Road to Serfdom, Ch. 9
^ Stringham, Edward; Zywicki, Todd (January 20, 2011). "Hayekian Anarchism". George Mason University Law and Economics Research Paper Series. 11 (6). SSRN 1744364 . 
^ "Hayek on Social Insurance". The Washington Post. 
^ The Pure Theory of Capital (pdf), Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1941/2007 (Vol. 12 of the Collected Works): p. 90.
^ Caldwell, Bruce. "Hayek, Friedrich August von (1899–1992)." The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics. Second Edition. Eds. Steven N. Durlauf and Lawrence E. Blume. Palgrave Macmillan, 2008.
^ Book Review: The Counter-revolution of Science: Studies on the Abuse of Reason by F. A. Hayek
^ The Moral Foundations of Civil Society
^ Gerald Edelman, Neural Darwinism, 1987, p. 25
^ Joaquin Fuster, Memory in the Cerebral Cortex: An Empirical Approach to Neural Networks in the Human and Nonhuman Primate. Cambridge: MIT Press, 1995, p. 87
^ Joaquin Fuster, Memory in the Cerebral Cortex: An Empirical Approach to Neural Networks in the Human and Nonhuman Primate. Cambridge: MIT Press, 1995, p. 88
^ Joauin Fuster, "Network Memory", Trends in Neurosciences, 1997. Vol. 20, No. 10. (Oct.): 451–59.
^ Hayek. The Use of Knowledge in Society – A selected essay reprint. 
^ Individualism and Economic Order, p. 11
^ The Mirage of Social Justice, chap. 10
^ a b The Mirage of Social Justice, chap. 12
^ The Constitution of Liberty, chap. 6
^ de Benoist, Alain (1998). "Hayek: A Critique". Telos (110). 
^ Lamey, Andy (2014-09-24). "Ecosystems as Spontaneous Orders". Rochester, NY. SSRN 2501745 . 
^ Lamey, Andy (2014-09-24). "Ecosystems as Spontaneous Orders". Rochester, NY: 2–11. SSRN 2501745 . 
^ Lamey, Andy (2014-09-24). "Ecosystems as Spontaneous Orders". Rochester, NY: 12–13. SSRN 2501745 . 
^ Hayek, Friedrich (2011) [1960], Hamowy, Ronald, ed., The Constitution of Liberty (Definitive ed.), Chicago: University of Chicago Press, p. 405, ISBN 978-0-226-31539-3 
^ Wapshott, Nicholas (2011), Keynes Hayek: The Clash That Defined Modern Economics, New York: W. W. Norton & Company, p. 291 
^ Harcourt, Bernard (12 September 2012). "How Paul Ryan enslaves Friedrich Hayek's The Road to Serfdom". The Guardian. Guardian Media Group. Retrieved 27 December 2014. 
^ Hayek, Friedrich (2007) [1944], Caldwell, Bruce, ed., The Road to Serfdom (Definitive ed.), Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 147–48, ISBN 978-0-226-32055-7 
^ Hayek, Friedrich (1976), Law, Legislation and Liberty, 2, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, p. 87, ISBN 978-0-226-32083-0 
^ Diamond, Arthur M. (Fall 1980). "F. A. Hayek on Constructivism and Ethics". The Journal of Libertarian Studies. IV/4: 353–65. 
^ Kukathas, Chandran (1990). Hayek and Modern Liberalism. Oxford University Press. p. 215. 
^ N. P. Barry(1994), "The road to freedom—Hayek’s social and economic philosophy," in Birner, J., and van Zijp, R. (eds) Hayek, Co-ordination and Evolution – His Legacy in Philosophy, Politics, Economics and the History of Ideas, pp. 141–63. London: Routledge.
^ Milton Friedman and Anna J. Schwartz, "Has Government Any Role in Money?" (1986)
^ John Gray, "The Friedrich Hayek I knew, and what he got right – and wrong" (30 July 2015)
^ Bruce Caldwell, Hayek's Challenge: An Intellectual Biography of F. A. Hayek (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2004), pp. 347–48
^ a b Farrant, Andrew, Edward McPhail, and Sebastian Berger. "Preventing the "Abuses" of Democracy: Hayek, the "Military Usurper" and Transitional Dictatorship in Chile?." American Journal of Economics and Sociology 71.3 (2012): 513–38.
^ Greg Grandin, professor of history, New York University, Empire's Workshop: Latin America, the United States, and the Rise of the New Imperialism, pp. 172–73, Metropolitan, 2006, ISBN 0805077383.
^ Dan Avnôn, Liberalism and its Practice, p. 56, Routledge, 1999, ISBN 0415193540.
^ Preventing the "Abuses" of Democracy: Hayek, the "Military Usurper" and Transitional Dictatorship in Chile?, The American Journal of Economics and Sociology
^ Skarbek, David (2009). "F. A. Hayek's Influence on Nobel Prize Winners". Review of Austrian Economics. 22 (1). 
^ Smith

Smith, Vernon (1999). "Reflections on Human Action after 50 years". Cato Journal. 9 (2). Hayek, in my view, is the leading economic thinker of the 20th century. 

Simon

Simon, Herbert (1981). The Sciences of the Artificial (2nd ed.). Cambridge: The MIT Press. “No one has characterized market mechanisms better than Friedrich von Hayek“ :41


^ Samuelson, Paul A (2009). "A few remembrances of Friedrich von Hayek (1899–1992)". Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization. 69: 1–4. doi:10.1016/j.jebo.2008.07.001. 
^ The collected scientific papers of Paul A. Samuelson, Volume 5, p. 315.
^ Fritz Machlup, Essays on Hayek, Routledge, 2003. p. 14.
^ Sylvia Nasar, Grand Pursuit: The Story of Economic Genius, Simon and Schuster, 2011, p. 402
^ Lawrence Summers, quoted in The Commanding Heights: The Battle Between Government and the Marketplace that Is Remaking the Modern World, by Daniel Yergin and Joseph Stanislaw. New York: Simon & Schuster. 1998, pp. 150–51.
^ "Archived copy" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 18 January 2012. Retrieved 5 May 2012. 
^ See Weimer and Palermo, 1982
^ See Birner, 2001, and for the mutual influence they had on each other's ideas on evolution, Birner 2009
^ Milton & Rose Friedman, Two Lucky People: Memoirs (U. of Chicago Press), 1998. p. 333
^ e.g., Wolin 2004
^ Kenneth R. Hoover, Economics as Ideology: Keynes, Laski, Hayek, and the Creation of Contemporary Politics (2003), p. 213
^ "Why I Am Not a Conservative". LewRockwell.com. Retrieved 12 October 2011. 
^ E. H. H. Green, Ideologies of Conservatism. Conservative Political Ideas in the Twentieth Century (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2004), p. 259.
^ a b Samuel Brittan, "The many faces of liberalism," ft.com, 22 January 2010
^ "Why F A Hayek is a Conservative" Eamonn Butler and Madsen Pirie (eds) Hayek on the Fabric of Human Society (Adam Smith Institute, 1987)
^ P. Boettke, "Why Perestroika Failed", The Politics and Economics of Socialist Transformation, Routledge (1993): https://books.google.com/books?id=4y6IAgAAQBAJ&pg=PP1&dq=WHY+PERESTROIKA+FAILED+The+Politics+and+Economics+of+Socialist+Transformation&hl=de&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwjG2b_-8PrOAhUF1RQKHSxXD8sQ6AEIHjAA#v=onepage&q=WHY%20PERESTROIKA%20FAILED%20The%20Politics%20and%20Economics%20of%20Socialist%20Transformation&f=false.
^ McKinnon, Spontaneous Order on the Road Back from Socialism: An Asian Perspective. American Economic Review (1992): https://www.jstor.org/stable/2117371
^ W. Easterly, The White Man's Burden: Why the West's Efforts to Aid the Rest Have Done So Much Ill and So Little Good: https://books.google.com/books?id=Dcj_Ju1wICkC&redir_esc=y
^ https://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/fandd/2009/12/pdf/white.pdf
^ Hoffmann and Schnabl, A Vicious Cycle of Manias, Crises and Asymmetric Policy Responses – An Overinvestment View. Published in The World Economy 34, 3, 382–403 (2011) [1]/ Hoffmann and Schnabl, Monetary Policy, Vagabonding Liquidity and Bursting Bubbles in New and Emerging Markets – An Overinvestment View. Published in The World Economy 31, 9, 1226–52 (2008) (http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1018342).
^ Cachanosky (2014). "The Effects of U.S. Monetary Policy in Colombia and Panama (2002–2007)" The Quarterly Review of Economics and Finance 54. 3:428–36.
^ Brunnermeier, Markus K.; Isabel, Schnabel,. "Bubbles and Central Banks: Historical Perspectives". Central Banks at a Crossroads: What Can We Learn from History?. 
^ See John Taylor: https://ideas.repec.org/p/nbr/nberwo/13682.html
^ "Lawrence H. White on Monetary Policy, Free Banking and the Financial Crisis | Mercatus". mercatus.org. Retrieved 2016-09-19. 
^ Hoffmann and Schnabl, Adverse Effects of Unconventional Monetary Policy, Cato Journal 2016, http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2747865
^ Ebenstein, p. 44.
^ Ebenstein 2001, p. 169.
^ Ebenstein, p. 169.
^ a b Ebenstein, p. 155.
^ http://www.hayek.ufm.edu/index.php/Armen_A._Alchian "Armen A. Alchian interviews Friedrich A. Hayek" & 48:50.
^ Ebenstein p. 169.
^ Ebenstein 2001, p. 13.
^ London School of Economics: Activities
^ Ellis, Lydia. "About the Oxford Hayek Society". Oxford Hayek Society. Retrieved 6 November 2015. 
^ "Hayek Fund for Scholars | Institute For Humane Studies". Theihs.org. Retrieved 14 September 2011. 
^ "Hayekfund.com". Hayekfund.com. Retrieved 14 September 2011. 
^ "Reply to a parliamentary question" (pdf) (in German). p. 885. Retrieved 24 February 2013. 
^ Law, Legislation and Liberty, Volume ... – Google Books. Books.google.com. 15 February 1978. ISBN 978-0226320861. Retrieved 14 September 2011. 
^ Law, Legislation and Liberty, Volume ... – Google Books. Books.google.com. 15 October 1978. ISBN 978-0226320830. Retrieved 14 September 2011. 
^ Hayek, F. A (15 March 1981). "Law, Legislation and Liberty, Volume 3: The Political Order of a Free People". ISBN 978-0226320908. 
^ Alan Ebenstein: Investigation: The Fatal Deceit. Liberty 19:3 (March 2005)Archived 12 February 2008 at the Wayback Machine.
^ Ian Jarvie (Editor), Karl Milford (Editor), David Miller (Editor) (2006), Karl Popper: a Centenary Assessment Vol. 1: Life and Times, and Values in a World of Facts, pp. 120, 295, ISBN 978-0754653752



References[edit]


Birner, Jack (2001). "The mind-body problem and social evolution," CEEL Working Paper 1-02.
Birner, Jack, and Rudy van Zijp, eds. (1994). Hayek: Co-ordination and Evolution: His legacy in philosophy, politics, economics and the history of ideas
Birner, Jack (2009). "From group selection to ecological niches. Popper's rethinking of evolutionary theory in the light of Hayek's theory of culture", in S. Parusnikova & R.S. Cohen eds. (Spring 2009). "Rethinking Popper", Boston Studies in the Philosophy of Science. Vol. 272
Boettke, Peter J. (1995). "Hayek's the Road to Serfdom Revisited: Government Failure in the Argument against Socialism". Eastern Economic Journal. 21 (1): 7–26. JSTOR 40325611. 
Brittan, Samuel (2004). "Hayek, Friedrich August (1899–1992)". Oxford Dictionary of National Biography (online ed.). Oxford University Press. doi:10.1093/ref:odnb/51095.  (Subscription or UK public library membership required.)
Caldwell, Bruce (2005). Hayek's Challenge: An Intellectual Biography of F.A. Hayek
Caldwell, Bruce (1997). "Hayek and Socialism". Journal of Economic Literature. 35 (4): 1856–90. JSTOR 2729881. 
Cohen, Avi J. (2003). "The Hayek/Knight Capital Controversy: the Irrelevance of Roundaboutness, or Purging Processes in Time?" History of Political Economy 35(3): 469–90. ISSN 0018-2702 Fulltext: online in Project Muse, Swetswise and Ebsco
Clavé, Francis (2015). "Comparative Study of Lippmann's and Hayek's Liberalisms (or neo-liberalisms)". The European Journal of the History of Economic Thought. 22 (6): 978–99. doi:10.1080/09672567.2015.1093522. 
Doherty, Brian (2007). Radicals for Capitalism: A Freewheeling History of the Modern American Libertarian Movement
Douma, Sytse and Hein Schreuder, (2013). "Economic Approaches to Organizations". 5th edition. London: Pearson ISBN 0273735292, ISBN 978-0273735298
Ebeling, Richard M. (March 2004). "F. A. Hayek and The Road to Serfdom: A Sixtieth Anniversary Appreciation" (The Freeman
Ebeling, Richard M. (March 2001). "F. A. Hayek: A Biography" Ludwig von Mises Institute
Ebeling, Richard M. (May 1999). "Friedrich A. Hayek: A Centenary Appreciation" The Freeman
Ebenstein, Alan (2001). Friedrich Hayek: A Biography. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan Trade. ISBN 978-0312233440. 
Feldman, Jean-Philippe (1999). "Hayek's Critique Of The Universal Declaration Of Human Rights". Journal des Economistes et des Etudes Humaines. 9 (4): 1145–6396. doi:10.2202/1145-6396.1172. 
Frowen, S. ed. (1997). Hayek: economist and social philosopher
Gamble, Andrew (1996). The Iron Cage of Liberty, an analysis of Hayek's ideas
Goldsworthy, J. D. (1986). "Hayek's Political and Legal Philosophy: An Introduction" [1986] SydLawRw 3; 11(1) Sydney Law Review 44
Gray, John (1998). Hayek on Liberty
Hacohen, Malach (2000). Karl Popper: The Formative Years, 1902–1945
Hamowy, Ronald (2008). "Hayek, Friedrich A. (1899–1992)". The Encyclopedia of Libertarianism. The Encyclopedia of Libertarianism. Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE; Cato Institute. pp. 218–20. doi:10.4135/9781412965811.n131. ISBN 978-1412965804. LCCN 2008009151. OCLC 750831024. 
Horwitz, Steven (2005). "Friedrich Hayek, Austrian Economist". Journal of the History of Economic Thought 27(1): 71–85. ISSN 1042-7716 Fulltext: in Swetswise, Ingenta and Ebsco
Issing, O. (1999). Hayek, currency competition and European monetary union
Jones, Daniel Stedman. (2012) Masters of the Universe: Hayek, Friedman, and the Birth of Neoliberal Politics (Princeton University Press; 424 pages)
Kasper, Sherryl (2002). The Revival of Laissez-Faire in American Macroeconomic Theory: A Case Study of Its Pioneers. Chpt. 4
Kley, Roland (1994). Hayek's Social and Political Thought. Oxford Univ. Press.
Leeson, Robert, ed. Hayek: A Collaborative Biography, Part I: Influences, from Mises to Bartley (Palgrave MacMillan, 2013), 241 pages
Muller, Jerry Z. (2002). The Mind and the Market: Capitalism in Western Thought. Anchor Books.
Marsh, Leslie (Ed.) (2011). Hayek in Mind: Hayek's Philosophical Psychology. Advances in Austrian Economics. Emerald
Pavlík, Ján (2004). nb.vse.cz. F. A. von Hayek and The Theory of Spontaneous Order. Professional Publishing 2004, Prague, profespubl.cz
Plant, Raymond (2009). The Neo-liberal State Oxford University Press, 312 pages
Pressman, Steven (2006). Fifty major economists (2nd ed.). London: Routledge. 
Rosenof, Theodore (1974). "Freedom, Planning, and Totalitarianism: The Reception of F. A. Hayek's Road to Serfdom", Canadian Review of American Studies
Samuelson, Paul A. (2009). "A Few Remembrances of Friedrich von Hayek (1899–1992)", Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 69(1), pp. 1–4. Reprinted at J. Bradford DeLong <eblog
Samuelson, Richard A. (1999). "Reaction to the Road to Serfdom." Modern Age 41(4): 309–17. ISSN 0026-7457 Fulltext: in Ebsco
Schreuder, Hein (1993). "Coase, Hayek and Hierarchy", In: S. Lindenberg & Hein Schreuder, eds., Interdisciplinary Perspectives on Organization Studies, Oxford: Pergamon Press
Shearmur, Jeremy (1996). Hayek and after: Hayekian Liberalism as a Research Programme. Routledge.
Tebble, Adam James (2009). "Hayek and social justice: a critique". Critical Review of International Social and Political Philosophy. 12 (4): 581–604. doi:10.1080/13698230903471343. 
Tebble, Adam James (2013). F A Hayek. Bloomsbury Academic. ISBN 978-1441109064. OCLC 853506722
Touchie, John (2005). Hayek and Human Rights: Foundations for a Minimalist Approach to Law. Edward Elgar
Vanberg, V. (2001). "Hayek, Friedrich A von (1899–1992)," International Encyclopedia of the Social & Behavioral Sciences, pp. 6482–86. doi:10.1016/B0-08-043076-7/00254-0
Vernon, Richard (1976). "The 'Great Society' and the 'Open Society': Liberalism in Hayek and Popper". Canadian Journal of Political Science. 9 (2): 261–76. doi:10.1017/s0008423900043717. 
Wapshott, Nicholas (2011). Keynes Hayek: The Clash That Defined Modern Economics, (W.W. Norton & Company) 382 pages ISBN 978-0393077483; covers the debate with Keynes in letters, articles, conversation, and by the two economists' disciples
Weimer, W., and Palermo, D., eds. (1982). Cognition and the Symbolic Processes. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. Contains Hayek's essay, "The Sensory Order after 25 Years" with "Discussion"
Wolin, Richard. (2004). The Seduction of Unreason: The Intellectual Romance with Fascism from Nietzsche to Postmodernism. Princeton University Press, Princeton.

Introduction[edit]

Boudreaux, Donald J. (2014). The Essential Hayek
Butler, Eamonn (2012). Friedrich Hayek: The Ideas and Influence of the Libertarian Economist


Primary sources[edit]

Hayek, Friedrich. The collected works of F. A. Hayek, ed. W.W. Bartley, III and others (U. of Chicago Press, 1988–); "Plan of the Collected Works of F. A. Hayek" for 19 volumes; vol 2 excerpt and text search; vol 7 2012 excerpt

External links[edit]



Wikiquote has quotations related to: Friedrich Hayek



The Sveriges Riksbank Prize in Economic Sciences in Memory of Alfred Nobel 1974: Gunnar Myrdal, Friedrich August von Hayek Press release regarding the award of the Nobel Prize.
The Pretence of Knowledge 1974 lecture at NobelPrize.org
Register of the Friedrich A. von Hayek Papers at the Hoover Institution Archives.
The Mont Pèlerin Society Records at the Hoover Institution Archives
The Hayek Interviews
Friedrich August Hayek (1899–1992). The Concise Encyclopedia of Economics. Library of Economics and Liberty (2nd ed.). Liberty Fund. 2008. 
Friedrich Hayek on IMDb
Friedrich August von Hayek at Find a Grave
Mises.org The Road to Serfdom in cartoons – The cartoon-booklet version.
F.A Hayek at Curlie (based on DMOZ)
Booknotes interview with Alan Ebenstein on Friedrich Hayek: A Biography, July 8, 2001.
The Liberalism/Conservatism of Edmund Burke and F. A. Hayek: A Critical Comparison, Linda C. Raeder* From Humanitas, Volume X, No. 1, 1997. © National Humanities Institute







v
t
e


Friedrich Hayek



Concepts and career



Business cycle theory
Catallactics
Dispersed knowledge
Extended order





Works



The Road to Serfdom (1944)
"The Use of Knowledge in Society" (1945)
Individualism and Economic Order (1948)
The Counter-Revolution of Science (1952)
The Constitution of Liberty (1960)
Law, Legislation and Liberty (1973)
The Fatal Conceit (1988)





Family



August von Hayek (father)












v
t
e


Laureates of the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences



1969–1975



1969 Ragnar Frisch / Jan Tinbergen
1970 Paul Samuelson
1971 Simon Kuznets
1972 John Hicks / Kenneth Arrow
1973 Wassily Leontief
1974 Gunnar Myrdal / Friedrich Hayek
1975 Leonid Kantorovich / Tjalling Koopmans








1976–2000



1976 Milton Friedman
1977 Bertil Ohlin / James Meade
1978 Herbert A. Simon
1979 Theodore Schultz / Arthur Lewis
1980 Lawrence Klein
1981 James Tobin
1982 George Stigler
1983 Gérard Debreu
1984 Richard Stone
1985 Franco Modigliani
1986 James M. Buchanan
1987 Robert Solow
1988 Maurice Allais
1989 Trygve Haavelmo
1990 Harry Markowitz / Merton Miller / William F. Sharpe
1991 Ronald Coase
1992 Gary Becker
1993 Robert Fogel / Douglass North
1994 John Harsanyi / John Forbes Nash Jr. / Reinhard Selten
1995 Robert Lucas Jr.
1996 James Mirrlees / William Vickrey
1997 Robert C. Merton / Myron Scholes
1998 Amartya Sen
1999 Robert Mundell
2000 James Heckman / Daniel McFadden





2001–present



2001 George Akerlof / Michael Spence / Joseph E. Stiglitz
2002 Daniel Kahneman / Vernon L. Smith
2003 Robert F. Engle / Clive Granger
2004 Finn E. Kydland / Edward C. Prescott
2005 Robert Aumann / Thomas Schelling
2006 Edmund Phelps
2007 Leonid Hurwicz / Eric Maskin / Roger Myerson
2008 Paul Krugman
2009 Elinor Ostrom / Oliver E. Williamson
2010 Peter A. Diamond / Dale T. Mortensen / Christopher A. Pissarides
2011 Thomas J. Sargent / Christopher A. Sims
2012 Alvin E. Roth / Lloyd S. Shapley
2013 Eugene Fama / Lars Peter Hansen / Robert J. Shiller
2014 Jean Tirole
2015 Angus Deaton
2016 Oliver Hart / Bengt Holmström
2017 Richard Thaler












v
t
e


Economics






Economic theory
Econometrics
Applied economics





Macroeconomics



Adaptive expectations
Aggregate demand
Balance of payments
Business cycle
Capacity utilization
Capital flight
Central bank
Consumer confidence
Currency
Demand shock
Depression (Great Depression)
DSGE
Economic growth
Economic indicator
Economic rent
Effective demand
General Theory of Keynes
Hyperinflation
Inflation
Interest
Interest rate
Investment
IS–LM model
Microfoundations
Monetary policy
Money
NAIRU
National accounts
PPP
Rate of profit
Rational expectations
Recession
Saving
Shrinkflation
Stagflation
Supply shock
Unemployment
Macroeconomics publications





Microeconomics



Aggregation problem
Budget set
Consumer choice
Convexity
Cost–benefit analysis
Deadweight loss
Distribution
Duopoly
Economic equilibrium
Economic shortage
Economic surplus
Economies of scale
Economies of scope
Elasticity
Expected utility hypothesis
Externality
General equilibrium theory
Indifference curve
Intertemporal choice
Marginal cost
Market failure
Market structure
Monopoly
Monopsony
Non-convexity
Oligopoly
Opportunity cost
Preference
Production set
Profit
Public good
Returns to scale
Risk aversion
Scarcity
Social choice theory
Sunk costs
Supply and demand
Theory of the firm
Trade
Transaction cost
Value
Uncertainty
Utility
Microeconomics publications





Applied fields



Agricultural
Business
Demographic
Development
Economic history
Education
Engineering
Environmental
Financial
Health
Industrial organization
International
Knowledge
Labour
Law and economics
Monetary
Natural resource
Public
Service
Transportation
Urban
Welfare





Methodology



Behavioral economics
Computational economics
Econometrics
Economic systems
Experimental economics
Mathematical economics
Methodological publications





Economic thought



Ancient economic thought
Austrian school of economics
Chicago school of economics
Classical economics
Feminist economics
Heterodox economics
Institutional economics
Keynesian economics
Mainstream economics
Marxian economics
Neoclassical economics
Post-Keynesian economics
Schools overview






Notable economists and
thinkers within economics




Kenneth Arrow
Gary Becker
Francis Ysidro Edgeworth
Milton Friedman
Ragnar Frisch
Friedrich Hayek
Harold Hotelling
John Maynard Keynes
Tjalling Koopmans
Paul Krugman
Robert Lucas Jr.
Jacob Marschak
Alfred Marshall
Karl Marx
John von Neumann
Vilfredo Pareto
David Ricardo
Paul Samuelson
Joseph Schumpeter
Amartya Sen
Herbert A. Simon
Adam Smith
Robert Solow
Léon Walras
more





International organizations



Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation
Economic Cooperation Organization
European Free Trade Association
International Monetary Fund
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
World Bank
World Trade Organization








Category
Index
Lists
Outline
Publications
Business and economics portal












v
t
e


Austrian School economists



Influences



Frédéric Bastiat
Jean-Baptiste Say
School of Salamanca





Founders



Eugen Böhm von Bawerk
Friedrich Hayek
Carl Menger
Ludwig von Mises
Friedrich von Wieser





Other contributors



Walter Block
Peter Boettke
Thomas DiLorenzo
Frank Fetter
Roger Garrison
Gottfried Haberler
Henry Hazlitt
Robert Higgs
Hans-Hermann Hoppe
Steven Horwitz
Jesús Huerta de Soto
Israel Kirzner
Ludwig Lachmann
Fritz Machlup
Robert Murphy
Larry Reed
Murray Rothbard
Joseph Salerno
Gerhard Tintner





See also

List of Austrian School economists










v
t
e


  Liberalism



Development



Contributions to liberal theory
History of liberalism





Ideas



Civil and political rights
Cultural liberalism
Democracy

Liberal democracy


Economic liberalism
Egalitarianism
Free market
Free trade
Freedom of the press
Freedom of religion
Freedom of speech
Gender equality
Harm principle
Internationalism
Laissez-faire
Liberal neutrality
Liberty
Market economy
Natural and legal rights
Negative/Positive liberty
Open society
Permissive society
Private property
Rule of law
Secularism
Separation of church and state
Social contract
Welfare state





Schools



Anarcho-capitalism
Civic nationalism
Classical liberalism
Conservative liberalism
Democratic liberalism
Geolibertarianism
Green liberalism
Liberal feminism

Equity feminism


Liberal internationalism
Liberal socialism
Muscular liberalism
Neoliberalism
Ordoliberalism
Right-libertarianism
Radical centrism
Radicalism
Religious liberalism
Christian
Islamic
Secular liberalism
Social liberalism
Technoliberalism





Key figures



Juan Bautista Alberdi
Jean le Rond d'Alembert
Rifa'a al-Tahtawi
Chu Anping
Matthew Arnold
Raymond Aron
Frédéric Bastiat
Simone de Beauvoir
Jeremy Bentham
Isaiah Berlin
Eduard Bernstein
William Beveridge
Norberto Bobbio
Ludwig Joseph Brentano
John Bright
Edmund Burke
Thomas Carlyle
Anders Chydenius
Richard Cobden
Marquis de Condorcet
Benjamin Constant
Benedetto Croce
Ralf Dahrendorf
John Dewey
Charles Dickens
Denis Diderot
Zhang Dongsun
Ronald Dworkin
Ralph Waldo Emerson
Karl-Hermann Flach
Milton Friedman
John Kenneth Galbraith
William Lloyd Garrison
José Ortega y Gasset
David Lloyd George
William Gladstone
Piero Gobetti
Francisco Luís Gomes
John Gray
Thomas Hill Green
Friedrich Hayek
Auberon Herbert
Thomas Hobbes
Leonard Hobhouse
John A. Hobson
Qin Hui
Wilhelm von Humboldt
Thomas Jefferson
Immanuel Kant
Namık Kemal
John Maynard Keynes
Will Kymlicka
John Locke
Salvador de Madariaga
James Madison
Harriet Martineau
Minoo Masani
James Mill
John Stuart Mill
John Milton
Ludwig von Mises
Donald Barkly Molteno
Leo Chiozza Money
Charles de Montesquieu
José María Luis Mora
Chantal Mouffe
Dadabhai Naoroji
Friedrich Naumann
Robert Nozick
Bertil Ohlin
Thomas Paine
Alan Paton
Karl Popper
Richard Price
Joseph Priestley
Guillermo Prieto
François Quesnay
Ignacio Ramírez
Ayn Rand
Walther Rathenau
John Rawls
Joseph Raz
David Ricardo
Wilhelm Röpke
Richard Rorty
Carlo Rosselli
Murray Rothbard
Jean-Jacques Rousseau
Jean-Baptiste Say
Ahmed Lutfi el-Sayed
Amartya Sen
Li Shenzhi
Hu Shih
Algernon Sidney
Emmanuel Sieyès
İbrahim Şinasi
Adam Smith
Hernando de Soto
Herbert Spencer
Baruch Spinoza
Anne Louise Germaine de Staël
William Graham Sumner
R. H. Tawney
Johan Rudolph Thorbecke
Henry David Thoreau
Alexis de Tocqueville
Antoine Destutt de Tracy
Anne Robert Jacques Turgot
Voltaire
Lester Frank Ward
Max Weber
Mary Wollstonecraft
Tao Xingzhi
Gu Zhun





Regional variants



Africa

Egypt
Nigeria
Senegal
South Africa
Tunisia
Zimbabwe




Asia

China
Hong Kong
India
Iran
Israel
Japan
South Korea
Philippines
Taiwan
Thailand
Turkey




Europe

Albania
Armenia
Austria
Belgium
Bulgaria
Croatia
Cyprus
Czech lands
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
France
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Iceland
Italy
Latvia
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Macedonia
Moldova
Montenegro
Netherlands
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russia
Serbia
Slovakia
Slovenia
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Ukraine
United Kingdom




Latin America and the Caribbean

Bolivia
Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Cuba
Ecuador
Honduras
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama
Paraguay
Peru
Uruguay
Venezuela




North America

Canada
United States

Modern liberalism






Oceania

Australia
New Zealand







Organisations



Liberal parties
Africa Liberal Network (ALN)
Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe (ALDE)
Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Party (ALDEP)
Arab Liberal Federation
Council of Asian Liberals and Democrats (CALD)
European Democratic Party (EDP)
European Liberal Youth (LYMEC)
International Federation of Liberal Youth (IFLRY)
Liberal International
Liberal Network for Latin America (Relial)
Liberal South East European Network (LIBSEEN)





Related topics



Liberal bias in academia
Liberal conservatism
Liberal socialism
National liberalism
Regressive left








Liberalism portal
Politics portal












v
t
e


Social and political philosophy



Philosophers



Ambedkar
Arendt
Aristotle
Augustine
Aurobindo
Aquinas
Aron
Averroes
Azurmendi
Badiou
Bakunin
Baudrillard
Bauman
Benoist
Bentham
Berlin
Bonald
Bosanquet
Burke
Judith Butler
Camus
Chanakya
Chomsky
Cicero
Comte
Confucius
De Beauvoir
Debord
Du Bois
Durkheim
Emerson
Engels
Foucault
Fourier
Franklin
Gandhi
Gehlen
Gentile
Al-Ghazali
Gramsci
Grotius
Habermas
Han Fei
Hayek
Hegel
Heidegger
Hobbes
Hume
Irigaray
Jefferson
Kant
Kierkegaard
Kirk
Kropotkin
Laozi
Le Bon
Le Play
Leibniz
Lenin
Locke
Luxemburg
Machiavelli
Maistre
Malebranche
Mao
Marcuse
Maritain
Marsilius
Marx
Mencius
Michels
Mill
Mises
Montesquieu
Möser
Mozi
Muhammad
Negri
Niebuhr
Nietzsche
Nozick
Oakeshott
Ortega
Paine
Pareto
Pettit
Plamenatz
Plato
Polanyi
Popper
Radhakrishnan
Rand
Rawls
Renan
Rothbard
Rousseau
Royce
Russell
Sade
Santayana
Sarkar
Sartre
Schmitt
Searle
Shang
Simonović
Skinner
Smith
Socrates
Sombart
Spann
Spencer
Spinoza
Spirito
Stirner
Strauss
Sun
Sun Tzu
Taine
Taylor
Thucydides
Thoreau
Tocqueville
Vivekananda
Voltaire
Walzer
Weber
Žižek





Social theories



Ambedkarism
Anarchism
Authoritarianism
Collectivism
Communism
Communitarianism
Conflict theories
Confucianism
Consensus theory
Conservatism
Contractualism
Cosmopolitanism
Culturalism
Fascism
Feminist political theory
Gandhism
Individualism
Legalism
Liberalism
Libertarianism
Mohism
National liberalism
Republicanism
Social constructionism
Social constructivism
Social Darwinism
Social determinism
Socialism
Utilitarianism
Vaisheshika





Social concepts



Civil disobedience
Democracy
Four occupations
Justice
Law
Mandate of Heaven
Peace
Property
Revolution
Rights
Social contract
Society
War
more...





Related articles



Jurisprudence
Philosophy and economics
Philosophy of education
Philosophy of history
Philosophy of love
Philosophy of sex
Philosophy of social science
Political ethics
Social epistemology








Category
Portal
Task Force









Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 2471646
LCCN: n80126331
ISNI: 0000 0001 2117 8244
GND: 118547364
SELIBR: 190259
SUDOC: 02691669X
BNF: cb119070534 (data)
ULAN: 500264363
MGP: 199660
NDL: 00442762
NKC: jn19990003268
ICCU: IT\ICCU\CFIV\009564
BNE: XX837554
IATH: w6988xvs











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Friedrich_Hayek&oldid=817538519"					Categories: Friedrich Hayek1899 births1992 deathsWriters from Vienna20th-century economists20th-century philosophers20th-century Austrian writers20th-century British writersAcademics of the London School of EconomicsAustrian economistsAustrian philosophersBohemian nobilityAustrian School economistsAustrian libertariansAustrian anti-communistsAustro-Hungarian military personnel of World War IBritish economistsBritish libertariansBritish classical liberalsLibertarian economistsMicroeconomistsMacroeconomistsAnti-nationalistsNobel laureates in EconomicsAustrian Nobel laureatesBritish Nobel laureatesFellows of the British AcademyMembers of the Order of the Companions of HonourRecipients of the Austrian Decoration for Science and ArtRecipients of the Pour le Mérite for Arts and SciencesRecipients of the Grand Decoration with Star for Services to the Republic of AustriaPresidential Medal of Freedom recipientsMises Institute peopleMont Pelerin Society membersPhiladelphia Society membersNaturalised citizens of the United KingdomNew York University facultyGraduate Institute of International and Development Studies facultyPeople associated with the London School of EconomicsPhilosophers of lawUniversity of Chicago facultyUniversity of Freiburg facultyUniversity of Vienna alumniAustrian people of Moravian-German descentPhilosophers of social scienceBritish philosophersBritish expatriate academics in the United StatesAustrian expatriates in the United StatesBritish expatriates in GermanyAustrian expatriates in GermanyAustrian academicsAustrian male writersGuggenheim FellowsAustrian emigrants to EnglandCato Institute peopleEnglish Roman CatholicsAustrian Roman CatholicsEarhart Foundation FellowsHidden categories: Pages containing London Gazette template with parameter supp set to yWebarchive template wayback linksWikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the ODNBCS1 German-language sources (de)EngvarB from August 2014Use dmy dates from August 2014Biography with signatureArticles with hCardsAll articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrasesArticles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from December 2017All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from February 2017Articles with unsourced statements from October 2017Find a Grave template with ID same as WikidataArticles with DMOZ linksAC with 14 elementsWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with SELIBR identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersWikipedia articles with ULAN identifiersWikipedia articles with SBN identifiersWikipedia articles with SNAC-ID identifiers