"Nietzsche" redirects here. For other uses, see Nietzsche (disambiguation).


Friedrich Nietzsche



Nietzsche in Basel, c. 1875



Born
Friedrich Wilhelm Nietzsche
(1844-10-15)15 October 1844
Röcken, Saxony, Prussia


Died
25 August 1900(1900-08-25) (aged 55)
Weimar, Saxe-Weimar-Eisenach, German Empire


Nationality
German


Alma mater



University of Bonn
Leipzig University








Era
19th-century philosophy


Region
Western philosophy


School



Continental philosophy
German idealism[1]
Existentialism
Metaphysical voluntarism





Institutions
University of Basel



Main interests




Aesthetics
Anti-foundationalism
Atheism
Ethics
Existentialism
Fact–value distinction
Metaphysics
Nihilism
Ontology
Philosophy of history
Poetry
Psychology
Tragedy
Value theory
Voluntarism






Notable ideas




Apollonian and Dionysian
Übermensch
Ressentiment
"Will to power"
"God is dead"
Eternal return
Amor fati
Herd instinct
Tschandala
"Last man"
Perspectivism
Master–slave morality
Transvaluation of values
Nietzschean affirmation
"genealogy"







Influences





Dostoyevsky
Goethe[2]
Emerson
Heraclitus
Mainländer[3][4]
Parmenides
Herder[5]
the French moralists
Ritschl
Schopenhauer
Darwin
Spinoza
Wagner
Winckelmann











Influenced





Adorno
Bataille
Camus
Cioran
Deleuze
Derrida
Foucault
Freud
Feyerabend
Carl Schmitt
Evola
Heidegger
Iqbal
Jung
Mencken
Rorty
Rand
Rilke
Sartre
Spengler
Strauss
Williams












Signature





Friedrich Wilhelm Nietzsche (/ˈniːtʃə/;[6] German: [ˈfʁiːdʁɪç ˈvɪlhɛlm ˈniːtʃə] ( listen); 15 October 1844 – 25 August 1900) was a German philosopher, cultural critic, composer, poet, philologist, and Latin and Greek scholar whose work has exerted a profound influence on Western philosophy and modern intellectual history.[7][8][9][10] He began his career as a classical philologist before turning to philosophy. He became the youngest ever to hold the Chair of Classical Philology at the University of Basel in 1869 at the age of 24.[11] He resigned in 1879 due to health problems that plagued him most of his life, and he completed much of his core writing in the following decade.[12] In 1889, at age 44, he suffered a collapse and a complete loss of his mental faculties.[13] He lived his remaining years in the care of his mother until her death in 1897, and then with his sister Elisabeth Förster-Nietzsche, and died in 1900.[14]
Nietzsche's body of work touched widely on art, philology, history, religion, tragedy, culture, and science, and drew early inspiration from figures such as Schopenhauer, Wagner, and Goethe. His writing spans philosophical polemics, poetry, cultural criticism, and fiction while displaying a fondness for aphorism and irony.[15] Some prominent elements of his philosophy include his radical critique of truth in favor of perspectivism; his genealogical critique of religion and Christian morality, and his related theory of master–slave morality;[7][16] his aesthetic affirmation of existence in response to the "death of God" and the profound crisis of nihilism;[7] his notion of the Apollonian and Dionysian; and his characterization of the human subject as the expression of competing wills, collectively understood as the will to power.[17] He also developed influential concepts such as the Übermensch and the doctrine of eternal return.[18][19] In his later work, he became increasingly preoccupied with the creative powers of the individual to overcome social, cultural, and moral contexts in pursuit of new values and aesthetic health.[10]
After his death, Elisabeth Förster-Nietzsche became the curator and editor of her brother's manuscripts, reworking Nietzsche's unpublished writings to fit her own German nationalist ideology while often contradicting or obfuscating his stated opinions, which were explicitly opposed to antisemitism and nationalism. Through her published editions, Nietzsche's work became associated with fascism and Nazism;[20] 20th century scholars contested this interpretation of his work and corrected editions of his writings were soon made available. His thought enjoyed renewed popularity in the 1960s, and his ideas have since had a profound impact on 20th and early-21st century thinkers across philosophy—especially in schools of continental philosophy such as existentialism, postmodernism, and post-structuralism—as well as art, literature, psychology, politics, and popular culture.[8][9][10][21][22]



Contents


1 Life

1.1 Youth (1844–1868)
1.2 Professor at Basel (1869–1878)
1.3 Independent philosopher (1879–1888)
1.4 Psychological illness and death (1889–1900)
1.5 Citizenship, nationality, ethnicity
1.6 Relationships and sexuality


2 Philosophy

2.1 Apollonian and Dionysian
2.2 Perspectivism
2.3 The "slave revolt" in morals
2.4 Death of God and nihilism
2.5 Will to power
2.6 Eternal return
2.7 Übermensch
2.8 Critique of mass culture


3 Reading and influence
4 Reception
5 Works
6 See also
7 References

7.1 Works cited


8 Further reading
9 External links



Life[edit]
Youth (1844–1868)[edit]
 Born on 15 October 1844, Nietzsche grew up in the small town of Röcken, near Leipzig, in the Prussian Province of Saxony. He was named after King Friedrich Wilhelm IV of Prussia, who turned forty-nine on the day of Nietzsche's birth. (Nietzsche later dropped his middle name "Wilhelm".[23]) Nietzsche's parents, Carl Ludwig Nietzsche (1813–1849), a Lutheran pastor and former teacher, and Franziska Nietzsche (de) (1826–1897), married in 1843, the year before their son's birth. They had two other children: a daughter, Elisabeth Förster-Nietzsche, born in 1846, and a second son, Ludwig Joseph, born in 1848. Nietzsche's father died from a brain ailment in 1849; Ludwig Joseph died six months later, at age two.[24] The family then moved to Naumburg, where they lived with Nietzsche's maternal grandmother and his father's two unmarried sisters. After the death of Nietzsche's grandmother in 1856, the family moved into their own house, now Nietzsche-Haus, a museum and Nietzsche study centre.




Nietzsche, 1861


Nietzsche attended a boys' school and then a private school, where he became friends with Gustav Krug, Rudolf Wagner, and Wilhelm Pinder, all of whom came from highly respected families.
In 1854, he began to attend Domgymnasium in Naumburg. Because his father had worked for the state (as a pastor) the now-fatherless Nietzsche was offered a scholarship to study at the internationally recognized Schulpforta (the claim that Nietzsche was admitted on the strength of his academic competence has been debunked: his grades were nowhere near the top of the class).[25] He transferred and studied there from 1858 to 1864, becoming friends with Paul Deussen and Carl von Gersdorff. He also found time to work on poems and musical compositions. Nietzsche led "Germania", a music and literature club, during his summers in Naumburg.[24] At Schulpforta, Nietzsche received an important grounding in languages—Greek, Latin, Hebrew, and French—so as to be able to read important primary sources;[26] he also experienced for the first time being away from his family life in a small-town conservative environment. His end-of-semester exams in March 1864 showed a 1 in Religion and German; a 2a in Greek and Latin; a 2b in French, History, and Physics; and a "lackluster" 3 in Hebrew and Mathematics.[27]
While at Pforta, Nietzsche had a penchant for pursuing subjects that were considered unbecoming. He became acquainted with the work of the then almost-unknown poet Friedrich Hölderlin, calling him "my favorite poet" and composing an essay in which he said that the mad poet raised consciousness to "the most sublime ideality."[28] The teacher who corrected the essay gave it a good mark but commented that Nietzsche should concern himself in the future with healthier, more lucid, and more "German" writers. Additionally, he became acquainted with Ernst Ortlepp, an eccentric, blasphemous, and often drunken poet who was found dead in a ditch weeks after meeting the young Nietzsche but who may have introduced Nietzsche to the music and writing of Richard Wagner.[29] Perhaps under Ortlepp's influence, he and a student named Richter returned to school drunk and encountered a teacher, resulting in Nietzsche's demotion from first in his class and the end of his status as a prefect.[30]




Young Nietzsche


After graduation in September 1864,[31] Nietzsche commenced studies in theology and classical philology at the University of Bonn with hope of becoming a minister. For a short time he and Deussen became members of the Burschenschaft Frankonia. After one semester (and to the anger of his mother), he stopped his theological studies and lost his faith.[32] As early as his 1862 essay "Fate and History", Nietzsche had argued that historical research had discredited the central teachings of Christianity,[33] but David Strauss's Life of Jesus also seems to have had a profound effect on the young man.[32] In addition, Ludwig Feuerbach's The Essence of Christianity influenced young Nietzsche with its argument that people created God, and not the other way around.[34] In June 1865, at the age of 20, Nietzsche wrote to his sister Elisabeth, who was deeply religious, a letter regarding his loss of faith. This letter contains the following sentence:

"Hence the ways of men part: if you wish to strive for peace of soul and pleasure, then believe; if you wish to be a devotee of truth, then inquire..."[35]





Schopenhauer strongly influenced Nietzsche's earliest philosophical thought.


Nietzsche subsequently concentrated on studying philology under Professor Friedrich Wilhelm Ritschl, whom he followed to the University of Leipzig in 1865.[36] There, he became close friends with his fellow student Erwin Rohde. Nietzsche's first philological publications appeared soon after.
In 1865, Nietzsche thoroughly studied the works of Arthur Schopenhauer. He owed the awakening of his philosophical interest to reading Schopenhauer's The World as Will and Representation and later admitted that Schopenhauer was one of the few thinkers whom he respected, dedicating to him the essay "Schopenhauer as Educator" in the Untimely Meditations.
In 1866, he read Friedrich Albert Lange's History of Materialism. Lange's descriptions of Kant's anti-materialistic philosophy, the rise of European Materialism, Europe's increased concern with science, Charles Darwin's theory of evolution, and the general rebellion against tradition and authority intrigued Nietzsche greatly. The cultural environment encouraged him to expand his horizons beyond philology and continue his study of philosophy,[citation needed] although Nietzsche would ultimately argue the impossibility of an evolutionary explanation of the human aesthetic sense.[37]
In 1867, Nietzsche signed up for one year of voluntary service with the Prussian artillery division in Naumburg. He was regarded as one of the finest riders among his fellow recruits, and his officers predicted that he would soon reach the rank of captain. However, in March 1868, while jumping into the saddle of his horse, Nietzsche struck his chest against the pommel and tore two muscles in his left side, leaving him exhausted and unable to walk for months.[38][39] Consequently, Nietzsche turned his attention to his studies again, completing them in 1868 and meeting with Richard Wagner for the first time later that year.[40]
Professor at Basel (1869–1878)[edit]





From left: Erwin Rohde, Karl von Gersdorff, Nietzsche, mid-October 1871


In part because of Ritschl's support, Nietzsche received a remarkable offer in 1869 to become professor of classical philology at the University of Basel in Switzerland. He was only 24 years old and had neither completed his doctorate nor received a teaching certificate ("habilitation"). He was awarded an honorary doctorate by the University of Leipzig, again with Ritschl's support.[41]
Despite the fact that the offer came at a time when he was considering giving up philology for science, he accepted.[42] To this day, Nietzsche is still among the youngest of the tenured Classics professors on record.[43]
Nietzsche's 1870 projected doctoral thesis, Contribution toward the Study and the Critique of the Sources of Diogenes Laertius (Beiträge zur Quellenkunde und Kritik des Laertius Diogenes), examined the origins of the ideas of Diogenes Laërtius.[44] Though never submitted, it was later published as a Gratulationsschrift (congratulatory publication) at Basel.[45][46]
Before moving to Basel, Nietzsche renounced his Prussian citizenship: for the rest of his life he remained officially stateless.[47][48]
Nevertheless, Nietzsche served in the Prussian forces during the Franco-Prussian War (1870–1871) as a medical orderly. In his short time in the military, he experienced much and witnessed the traumatic effects of battle. He also contracted diphtheria and dysentery.[citation needed] Walter Kaufmann speculates that he might also have contracted syphilis at a brothel along with his other infections at this time.[49][50] On returning to Basel in 1870, Nietzsche observed the establishment of the German Empire and Otto von Bismarck's subsequent policies as an outsider and with a degree of skepticism regarding their genuineness. His inaugural lecture at the university was "Homer and Classical Philology". Nietzsche also met Franz Overbeck, a professor of theology who remained his friend throughout his life. Afrikan Spir, a little-known Russian philosopher responsible for the 1873 Thought and Reality, and Nietzsche's colleague the famed historian Jacob Burckhardt, whose lectures Nietzsche frequently attended, began to exercise significant influence on him during this time.[51]
Nietzsche had already met Richard Wagner in Leipzig in 1868 and later Wagner's wife, Cosima. Nietzsche admired both greatly and, during his time at Basel, he frequently visited Wagner's house in Tribschen in Lucerne. The Wagners brought Nietzsche into their most intimate circle—including Franz Liszt, of whom Nietzsche colloquially described: "Liszt or the art of running after women!".[52] Nietzsche enjoyed the attention he gave to the beginning of the Bayreuth Festival. In 1870, he gave Cosima Wagner the manuscript of "The Genesis of the Tragic Idea" as a birthday gift. In 1872, Nietzsche published his first book, The Birth of Tragedy. However, his colleagues within his field, including Ritschl, expressed little enthusiasm for the work, in which Nietzsche eschewed the classical philologic method in favor of a more speculative approach. In his polemic Philology of the Future, Ulrich von Wilamowitz-Moellendorff dampened the book's reception and increased its notoriety. In response, Rohde (then a professor in Kiel) and Wagner came to Nietzsche's defense. Nietzsche remarked freely about the isolation he felt within the philological community and attempted unsuccessfully to transfer to a position in philosophy at Basel instead.




Nietzsche, c. 1872


In 1873, Nietzsche began to accumulate notes that would be posthumously published as Philosophy in the Tragic Age of the Greeks. Between 1873 and 1876, he published four separate long essays: "David Strauss: the Confessor and the Writer", "On the Use and Abuse of History for Life", "Schopenhauer as Educator" and "Richard Wagner in Bayreuth". These four later appeared in a collected edition under the title Untimely Meditations. The essays shared the orientation of a cultural critique, challenging the developing German culture along lines suggested by Schopenhauer and Wagner. During this time, in the circle of the Wagners, Nietzsche met Malwida von Meysenbug and Hans von Bülow, and also began a friendship with Paul Rée, who in 1876 influenced him into dismissing the pessimism in his early writings. However, he was deeply disappointed by the Bayreuth Festival of 1876, where the banality of the shows and baseness of the public repelled him. He was also alienated by Wagner's championing of "German culture", which Nietzsche felt a contradiction in terms, as well as by Wagner's celebration of his fame among the German public. All this contributed to Nietzsche's subsequent decision to distance himself from Wagner.
With the publication in 1878 of Human, All Too Human (a book of aphorisms ranging from metaphysics to morality to religion to gender studies), a new style of Nietzsche's work became clear, highly influenced by Afrikan Spir's Thought and Reality[53] and reacting against the pessimistic philosophy of Wagner and Schopenhauer. Nietzsche's friendship with Deussen and Rohde cooled as well. In 1879, after a significant decline in health, Nietzsche had to resign his position at Basel. (Since his childhood, various disruptive illnesses had plagued him, including moments of shortsightedness that left him nearly blind, migraine headaches, and violent indigestion. The 1868 riding accident and diseases in 1870 may have aggravated these persistent conditions, which continued to affect him through his years at Basel, forcing him to take longer and longer holidays until regular work became impractical.)
Independent philosopher (1879–1888)[edit]
 Living off his pension from Basel and aid from friends, Nietzsche travelled frequently to find climates more conducive to his health and lived until 1889 as an independent author in different cities. He spent many summers in Sils Maria near St. Moritz in Switzerland. He spent his winters in the Italian cities of Genoa, Rapallo, and Turin and the French city of Nice. In 1881, when France occupied Tunisia, he planned to travel to Tunis to view Europe from the outside but later abandoned that idea, probably for health reasons.[54] Nietzsche occasionally returned to Naumburg to visit his family, and, especially during this time, he and his sister had repeated periods of conflict and reconciliation.
While in Genoa, Nietzsche's failing eyesight prompted him to explore the use of typewriters as a means of continuing to write. He is known to have tried using the Hansen Writing Ball, a contemporary typewriter device. In the end, a past student of his, Heinrich Köselitz or Peter Gast, became a sort of private secretary to Nietzsche. In 1876, Gast transcribed the crabbed, nearly illegible handwriting of Nietzsche for the first time with Richard Wagner in Bayreuth.[55] He subsequently transcribed and proofread the galleys for almost all of Nietzsche's work from then on. On at least one occasion on 23 February 1880, the usually broke Gast received 200 marks from their mutual friend, Paul Rée.[56] Gast was one of the very few friends Nietzsche allowed to criticize him. In responding most enthusiastically to Thus Spoke Zarathustra, Gast did feel it necessary to point out that what were described as "superfluous" people were in fact quite necessary. He went on to list the number of people Epicurus, for example, had to rely on even to supply his simple diet of goat cheese.[57]
To the end of his life, Gast and Overbeck remained consistently faithful friends. Malwida von Meysenbug remained like a motherly patron even outside the Wagner circle. Soon Nietzsche made contact with the music-critic Carl Fuchs. Nietzsche stood at the beginning of his most productive period. Beginning with Human, All Too Human in 1878, Nietzsche published one book or major section of a book each year until 1888, his last year of writing; that year, he completed five.




Lou Salomé, Paul Rée and Nietzsche, 1882


In 1882, Nietzsche published the first part of The Gay Science. That year he also met Lou Andreas-Salomé,[58] through Malwida von Meysenbug and Paul Rée. Nietzsche and Salomé spent the summer together in Tautenburg in Thuringia, often with Nietzsche's sister Elisabeth as a chaperone. Nietzsche, however, regarded Salomé less as an equal partner than as a gifted student. Salomé reports that he asked her to marry him on three separate occasions and that she refused, though the reliability of her reports of events has come into question.[59] Nietzsche's relationship with Rée and Salomé broke up in the winter of 1882–1883, partially because of intrigues conducted by Elisabeth. The trio had had plans to establish an educational commune in an abandoned monastery, but the idea was abandoned. Amidst renewed bouts of illness, living in near-isolation after a falling out with his mother and sister regarding Salomé, Nietzsche fled to Rapallo, where he wrote the first part of Thus Spoke Zarathustra in only ten days.




Nietzsche, 1882. Photo by Gustav Adolf Schultze (de)


By 1882 Nietzsche was taking huge doses of opium but was still having trouble sleeping.[60] In 1883, while staying in Nice, he was writing out his own prescriptions for the sedative chloral hydrate, signing them "Dr. Nietzsche".[61]
After severing his philosophical ties with Schopenhauer (who was long dead and never met Nietzsche) and his social ties with Wagner, Nietzsche had few remaining friends. Now, with the new style of Zarathustra, his work became even more alienating and the market received it only to the degree required by politeness. Nietzsche recognized this and maintained his solitude, though he often complained about it. His books remained largely unsold. In 1885, he printed only 40 copies of the fourth part of Zarathustra and distributed only a fraction of these among close friends, including Helene von Druskowitz.
In 1883 he tried and failed to obtain a lecturing post at the University of Leipzig. It was made clear to him that, in view of his attitude towards Christianity and his concept of God, he had become effectively unemployable by any German university. The subsequent "feelings of revenge and resentment" embittered him: "And hence my rage since I have grasped in the broadest possible sense what wretched means (the depreciation of my good name, my character, and my aims) suffice to take from me the trust of, and therewith the possibility of obtaining, pupils."[62]
In 1886 Nietzsche broke with his publisher Ernst Schmeitzner, disgusted by his antisemitic opinions. Nietzsche saw his own writings as "completely buried and unexhumeable in this anti-Semitic dump" of Schmeitzner—associating the publisher with a movement that should be "utterly rejected with cold contempt by every sensible mind".[63] He then printed Beyond Good and Evil at his own expense. He also acquired the publication rights for his earlier works and over the next year issued second editions of The Birth of Tragedy, Human, All Too Human, Daybreak, and The Gay Science with new prefaces placing the body of his work in a more coherent perspective. Thereafter, he saw his work as completed for a time and hoped that soon a readership would develop. In fact, interest in Nietzsche's thought did increase at this time, if rather slowly and hardly perceptibly to him. During these years Nietzsche met Meta von Salis, Carl Spitteler, and Gottfried Keller.
In 1886, his sister Elisabeth married the antisemite Bernhard Förster and travelled to Paraguay to found Nueva Germania, a "Germanic" colony—a plan Nietzsche responded to with mocking laughter.[64][not in citation given] Through correspondence, Nietzsche's relationship with Elisabeth continued through cycles of conflict and reconciliation, but they met again only after his collapse. He continued to have frequent and painful attacks of illness, which made prolonged work impossible.
In 1887, Nietzsche wrote the polemic On the Genealogy of Morality. During the same year, he encountered the work of Fyodor Dostoyevsky, to whom he felt an immediate kinship.[65] He also exchanged letters with Hippolyte Taine and Georg Brandes. Brandes, who had started to teach the philosophy of Søren Kierkegaard in the 1870s, wrote to Nietzsche asking him to read Kierkegaard, to which Nietzsche replied that he would come to Copenhagen and read Kierkegaard with him. However, before fulfilling this promise, he slipped too far into illness. In the beginning of 1888, Brandes delivered in Copenhagen one of the first lectures on Nietzsche's philosophy.
Although Nietzsche had previously announced at the end of On the Genealogy of Morality a new work with the title The Will to Power: Attempt at a Revaluation of All Values, he eventually seems to have abandoned this idea and instead used some of the draft passages to compose Twilight of the Idols and The Antichrist in 1888.[66]
His health seemed to improve, and he spent the summer in high spirits. In the fall of 1888, his writings and letters began to reveal a higher estimation of his own status and "fate". He overestimated the increasing response to his writings, however, especially to the recent polemic, The Case of Wagner. On his 44th birthday, after completing Twilight of the Idols and The Antichrist, he decided to write the autobiography Ecce Homo. In its preface—which suggests Nietzsche was well aware of the interpretive difficulties his work would generate—he declares, "Hear me! For I am such and such a person. Above all, do not mistake me for someone else."[67] In December, Nietzsche began a correspondence with August Strindberg and thought that, short of an international breakthrough, he would attempt to buy back his older writings from the publisher and have them translated into other European languages. Moreover, he planned the publication of the compilation Nietzsche contra Wagner and of the poems that made up his collection Dionysian-Dithyrambs.
Psychological illness and death (1889–1900)[edit]





Drawing by Hans Olde from the photographic series, The Ill Nietzsche, late 1899






Turin house where Nietzsche stayed (background), seen from Piazza Carlo Alberto, where he is said to have had his breakdown. At left: rear façade of Palazzo Carignano.


On 3 January 1889, Nietzsche suffered a mental breakdown.[68] Two policemen approached him after he caused a public disturbance in the streets of Turin. What happened remains unknown, but an often-repeated tale from shortly after his death states that Nietzsche witnessed the flogging of a horse at the other end of the Piazza Carlo Alberto, ran to the horse, threw his arms up around its neck to protect it, and then collapsed to the ground.[69][70]
In the following few days, Nietzsche sent short writings—known as the Wahnzettel ("Madness Letters")—to a number of friends including Cosima Wagner and Jacob Burckhardt. Most of them were signed "Dionysos", though some were also signed "der Gekreuzigte" meaning "the crucified one". To his former colleague Burckhardt, Nietzsche wrote: "I have had Caiaphas put in fetters. Also, last year I was crucified by the German doctors in a very drawn-out manner. Wilhelm, Bismarck, and all anti-Semites abolished."[71] Additionally, he commanded the German emperor to go to Rome to be shot and summoned the European powers to take military action against Germany,[72] that the pope should be put in jail and that he, Nietzsche, created the world and was in progress of having all anti-Semites shot dead.[73]
On 6 January 1889, Burckhardt showed the letter he had received from Nietzsche to Overbeck. The following day, Overbeck received a similar letter and decided that Nietzsche's friends had to bring him back to Basel. Overbeck travelled to Turin and brought Nietzsche to a psychiatric clinic in Basel. By that time Nietzsche appeared fully in the grip of a serious mental illness, and his mother Franziska decided to transfer him to a clinic in Jena under the direction of Otto Binswanger. In January 1889, they proceeded with the planned release of Twilight of the Idols, by that time already printed and bound. From November 1889 to February 1890, the art historian Julius Langbehn attempted to cure Nietzsche, claiming that the methods of the medical doctors were ineffective in treating Nietzsche's condition. Langbehn assumed progressively greater control of Nietzsche until his secretiveness discredited him. In March 1890, Franziska removed Nietzsche from the clinic and, in May 1890, brought him to her home in Naumburg. During this process Overbeck and Gast contemplated what to do with Nietzsche's unpublished works. In February, they ordered a fifty-copy private edition of Nietzsche contra Wagner, but the publisher C. G. Naumann secretly printed one hundred. Overbeck and Gast decided to withhold publishing The Antichrist and Ecce Homo because of their more radical content. Nietzsche's reception and recognition enjoyed their first surge.[chronology citation needed]
In 1893, Nietzsche's sister Elisabeth returned from Nueva Germania in Paraguay following the suicide of her husband. She read and studied Nietzsche's works and, piece by piece, took control of them and their publication. Overbeck eventually suffered dismissal and Gast finally co-operated. After the death of Franziska in 1897, Nietzsche lived in Weimar, where Elisabeth cared for him and allowed visitors, including Rudolf Steiner (who in 1895 had written one of the first books praising Nietzsche),[74][page needed] to meet her uncommunicative brother. Elisabeth at one point went so far as to employ Steiner as a tutor to help her to understand her brother's philosophy. Steiner abandoned the attempt after only a few months, declaring that it was impossible to teach her anything about philosophy.[75]




Peter Gast "corrected" Nietzsche's writings after the breakdown, without Nietzsche's approval.


Nietzsche's mental illness was originally diagnosed as tertiary syphilis, in accordance with a prevailing medical paradigm of the time. Although most commentators regard his breakdown as unrelated to his philosophy, Georges Bataille dropped dark hints ("'Man incarnate' must also go mad")[76] and René Girard's postmortem psychoanalysis posits a worshipful rivalry with Richard Wagner.[77] Nietzsche had previously written, "All superior men who were irresistibly drawn to throw off the yoke of any kind of morality and to frame new laws had, if they were not actually mad, no alternative but to make themselves or pretend to be mad." (Daybreak, 14) The diagnosis of syphilis has since been challenged and a diagnosis of "manic-depressive illness with periodic psychosis followed by vascular dementia" was put forward by Cybulska prior to Schain's study.[78][79] Leonard Sax suggested the slow growth of a right-sided retro-orbital meningioma as an explanation of Nietzsche's dementia;[14][80] Orth and Trimble postulated frontotemporal dementia[81] while other researchers have proposed a hereditary stroke disorder called CADASIL.[82][83] Poisoning by mercury, a treatment for syphilis at the time of Nietzsche's death,[84] has also been suggested.[85]
In 1898 and 1899, Nietzsche suffered at least two strokes. This partially paralyzed him, leaving him unable to speak or walk. He likely suffered from clinical hemiparesis/hemiplegia on the left side of his body by 1899. After contracting pneumonia in mid-August 1900, he had another stroke during the night of 24–25 August and died at about noon on 25 August.[86] Elisabeth had him buried beside his father at the church in Röcken bei Lützen. His friend and secretary Gast gave his funeral oration, proclaiming: "Holy be your name to all future generations!"[87]
Elisabeth Förster-Nietzsche compiled The Will to Power from Nietzsche's unpublished notebooks and published it posthumously. Because his sister arranged the book based on her own conflation of several of Nietzsche's early outlines and took great liberties with the material, the scholarly consensus has been that it does not reflect Nietzsche's intent. (For example, Elisabeth removed aphorism 35 of The Antichrist, where Nietzsche rewrote a passage of the Bible.) Indeed, Mazzino Montinari, the editor of Nietzsche's Nachlass, called it a forgery.[88]
Citizenship, nationality, ethnicity[edit]
General commentators and Nietzsche scholars, whether emphasizing his cultural background or his language, overwhelmingly label Nietzsche as a "German philosopher".[89][90][91][92] Others do not assign him a national category.[93][94][95] Germany had not yet been unified into a nation-state, but Nietzsche was born a citizen of Prussia, which was then part of the German Confederation.[96] His birthplace, Röcken, is in the modern German state of Saxony-Anhalt. When he accepted his post at Basel, Nietzsche applied for the annulment of his Prussian citizenship.[97] The official response confirming the revocation of his citizenship came in a document dated 17 April 1869,[98] and for the rest of his life he remained officially stateless.
Nietzsche believed that his ancestors were Polish,[99] at least toward the end of his life. Nietzsche wrote in 1888, "My ancestors were Polish noblemen (Nietzky); the type seems to have been well preserved despite three generations of German mothers."[100] At one point, Nietzsche becomes even more adamant about his Polish identity. "I am a pure-blooded Polish nobleman, without a single drop of bad blood, certainly not German blood."[101] On yet another occasion, Nietzsche stated, "Germany is a great nation only because its people have so much Polish blood in their veins ... I am proud of my Polish descent."[102] Nietzsche believed his name might have been Germanized, in one letter claiming, "I was taught to ascribe the origin of my blood and name to Polish noblemen who were called Niëtzky and left their home and nobleness about a hundred years ago, finally yielding to unbearable suppression: they were Protestants."[103]
Most scholars dispute Nietzsche's account of his family's origins. Hans von Müller debunked the genealogy put forward by Nietzsche's sister in favor of a Polish noble heritage.[104] Max Oehler, the curator of the Nietzsche Archive at Weimar, argued that all of Nietzsche's ancestors bore German names, including the wives' families.[100] Oehler claims that Nietzsche came from a long line of German Lutheran clergymen on both sides of his family, and modern scholars regard the claim of Nietzsche's Polish ancestry as a "pure invention".[105] Colli and Montinari, the editors of Nietzsche's assembled letters, gloss Nietzsche's claims as a "mistaken belief" and "without foundation."[106][107] The name Nietzsche itself is not a Polish name, but an exceptionally common one throughout central Germany, in this and cognate forms (such as Nitsche and Nitzke). The name derives from the forename Nikolaus, abbreviated to Nick; assimilated with the Slavic Nitz, it first became Nitsche and then Nietzsche.[100]
It is not known why Nietzsche wanted to be thought of as Polish nobility. According to biographer R. J. Hollingdale, Nietzsche's propagation of the Polish ancestry myth may have been part of his "campaign against Germany".[100]
Relationships and sexuality[edit]
Nietzsche never married. Nietzsche proposed to Lou Salomé three times, but his proposal was rejected each time.[108][full citation needed] The Nietzsche scholar Joachim Köhler has attempted to explain Nietzsche's life history and philosophy by claiming that Nietzsche was homosexual. Köhler argues that Nietzsche's syphilis, which is "...usually considered to be the product of his encounter with a prostitute in a brothel in Cologne or Leipzig, is equally likely, it is now held, to have been contracted in a male brothel in Genoa."[109] Köhler also suggests Nietzsche may have had a romantic relationship as well as a friendship with Paul Rée.[110]
Köhler's views have not found wide acceptance among Nietzsche scholars and commentators. Allan Megill argues that, while Köhler's claim that Nietzsche was in confrontation with homosexual desire cannot simply be dismissed, "the evidence is very weak," and Köhler may be projecting twentieth-century understandings of sexuality on nineteenth-century notions of friendship.[110] Other scholars have argued that Köhler's sexuality-based interpretation is not helpful in understanding Nietzsche's philosophy.[111][112] Some like Nigel Rodgers and Mel Thompson have argued that continuous sickness and headaches hindered Nietzsche from engaging much with women. Yet, they bring other examples in which Nietzsche expressed his affections to other women, including Wagner's wife Cosima Wagner.[113]
Philosophy[edit]




Friedrich Nietzsche, 1869


Main article: Philosophy of Friedrich Nietzsche
Because of Nietzsche's evocative style and provocative ideas, his philosophy generates passionate reactions. His works remain controversial, due to varying interpretations and misinterpretations of his work. In the Western philosophy tradition, Nietzsche's writings have been described as the unique case of free revolutionary thought, that is, revolutionary in its structure and problems, although not tied to any revolutionary project.[114] His writings have also been described as a revolutionary project in which his philosophy serves as the foundation of a European cultural rebirth.[115][116]
Apollonian and Dionysian[edit]
Main article: Apollonian and Dionysian
The Apollonian and Dionysian is a two-fold philosophical concept, based on certain features of ancient Greek mythology: Apollo and Dionysus. Even though the concept is famously related to The Birth of Tragedy, the poet Hölderlin had already spoken of it, and Winckelmann had talked of Bacchus. One year before the publication of The Birth of Tragedy, Nietzsche wrote a fragment titled "On Music and Words".[117] In it he asserted the Schopenhauerian judgment that music is a primary expression of the essence of everything. Secondarily derivative are lyrical poetry and drama, which represent mere phenomenal appearances of objects. In this way, tragedy is born from music.
Nietzsche found in classical Athenian tragedy an art form that transcended the pessimism found in the so-called wisdom of Silenus. The Greek spectators, by looking into the abyss of human suffering depicted by characters on stage, passionately and joyously affirmed life, finding it worth living. A main theme in The Birth of Tragedy was that the fusion of Dionysian and Apollonian Kunsttrieben ("artistic impulses") forms dramatic arts, or tragedies. He goes on to argue that this fusion has not been achieved since the ancient Greek tragedians. Apollo represents harmony, progress, clarity and logic, whereas Dionysus represents disorder, intoxication, emotion and ecstasy. Nietzsche used these two forces because, for him, the world of mind and order on one side, and passion and chaos on the other formed principles that were fundamental to the Greek culture:[118][119] the Apollonian side being a dreaming state, full of illusions; and Dionysian being the state of intoxication, representing the liberations of instinct and dissolution of boundaries. In this mold, man appears as the satyr. He is the horror of the annihilation of the principle of individuality and at the same time someone who delights in its destruction.[120] Both of these principles are meant to represent cognitive states that appear through art as the power of nature in man.[121]
The relationship between the Apollonian and Dionysian juxtapositions is apparent, in the interplay of tragedy: the tragic hero of the drama, the main protagonist, struggles to make order (in the Apollonian sense) of his unjust and chaotic (Dionysian) fate, though he dies unfulfilled in the end. Elaborating on the conception of Hamlet as an intellectual who cannot make up his mind, and therefore is a living antithesis to the man of action, Nietzsche argues that a Dionysian figure possesses knowledge to realize that his actions cannot change the eternal balance of things, and it disgusts him enough not to be able to make any act at all. Hamlet falls under this category—he has glimpsed the supernatural reality through the Ghost, he has gained true knowledge and knows that no action of his has the power to change this.[122][123] For the audience of such drama, this tragedy allows them to sense an underlying essence, what Nietzsche called the Primordial Unity, which revives Dionysian nature. He describes this primordial unity as the increase of strength, experience of fullness and plenitude bestowed by frenzy. Frenzy acts as an intoxication, and is crucial for the physiological condition that enables making of any art.[124] Stimulated by this state, a person's artistic will is enhanced:

"In this state one enriches everything out of one's own fullness: whatever one sees, whatever wills is seen swelled, taut, strong, overloaded with strength. A man in this state transforms things until they mirror his power—until they are reflections of his perfection. This having to transform into perfection is—art."

Nietzsche is adamant that the works of Aeschylus and Sophocles represent the apex of artistic creation, the true realization of tragedy; it is with Euripides, he states, that tragedy begins its Untergang (literally "going under" or "downward-way," meaning decline, deterioration, downfall, death, etc.). Nietzsche objects to Euripides' use of Socratic rationalism and morality in his tragedies, claiming that the infusion of ethics and reason robs tragedy of its foundation, namely the fragile balance of the Dionysian and Apollonian. Socrates emphasized reason to such a degree that he diffused the value of myth and suffering to human knowledge. Plato continued with this path in his dialogues, and the modern world eventually inherited reason at the expense of artistic impulses that could be found only in the Apollonian and Dionysus dichotomy. This leads to his conclusion that European culture from the time of Socrates had always been only Apollonian and thus decadent and unhealthy.[125] He notes that whenever Apollonian culture dominates, the Dionysian lacks the structure to make a coherent art, and when Dionysian dominates, the Apollonian lacks the necessary passion. Only the beautiful middle, the interplay of these two forces, brought together as an art, represented real Greek tragedy.[126]
An example of the impact of this idea can be seen in the book Patterns of Culture, where anthropologist Ruth Benedict uses Nietzschean opposites of "Apollonian" and "Dionysian" as the stimulus for her thoughts about Native American cultures.[127] Carl Jung has written extensively on the dichotomy in Psychological Types.[128] Michel Foucault has commented that his book Madness and Civilization should be read "under the sun of the great Nietzschean inquiry". Here Foucault references Nietzsche's description of the birth and death of tragedy and his explanation that the subsequent tragedy of the Western world was the refusal of the tragic and, with that, refusal of the sacred.[129] Painter Mark Rothko was influenced by Nietzsche's view of tragedy, which were presented in The Birth of Tragedy.
Perspectivism[edit]
Main article: Perspectivism
Nietzsche claimed the death of God would eventually lead to the loss of any universal perspective on things, and along with it any coherent sense of objective truth.[130][131][page needed] Nietzsche himself rejected the idea of objective reality, arguing that knowledge is contingent and conditional, relative to various fluid perspectives or interests.[132] This leads to constant reassessment of rules (i.e., those of philosophy, the scientific method, etc.) according to the circumstances of individual perspectives.[133] This view has acquired the name perspectivism.
In Thus Spoke Zarathustra, Nietzsche proclaims that a table of values hangs above every great person. He points out that what is common among different peoples is the act of esteeming, of creating values, even if the values are different from one people to the next. Nietzsche asserts that what made people great was not the content of their beliefs, but the act of valuing. Thus the values a community strives to articulate are not as important as the collective will to see those values come to pass. The willing is more essential than the intrinsic worth of the goal itself, according to Nietzsche. "A thousand goals have there been so far," says Zarathustra, "for there are a thousand peoples. Only the yoke for the thousand necks is still lacking: the one goal is lacking. Humanity still has no goal." Hence, the title of the aphorism, "On The Thousand And One Goals". The idea that one value-system is no more worthy than the next, although it may not be directly ascribed to Nietzsche, has become a common premise in modern social science. Max Weber and Martin Heidegger absorbed it and made it their own. It shaped their philosophical and cultural endeavor, as well as their political understanding. Weber, for example, relies on Nietzsche's perspectivism by maintaining that objectivity is still possible—but only after a particular perspective, value, or end has been established.[134][135]
Among his critique of traditional philosophy of Kant, Descartes and Plato in Beyond Good and Evil, Nietzsche attacked thing in itself and cogito ergo sum ("I think, therefore I am") as unfalsifiable beliefs based on naive acceptance of previous notions and fallacies.[136] Philosopher Alasdair MacIntyre puts Nietzsche in a high place in the history of philosophy. While criticizing nihilism and Nietzsche together as a sign of general decay,[137] he still commends him for recognizing psychological motives behind Kant and Hume's moral philosophy:[138]

For it was Nietzsche's historic achievement to understand more clearly than any other philosopher...not only that what purported to be appeals of objectivity were in fact expressions of subjective will, but also the nature of the problems that this posed for philosophy.[139]

The "slave revolt" in morals[edit]
Main article: Master–slave morality






This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (October 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



In Beyond Good and Evil and On the Genealogy of Morality, Nietzsche's genealogical account of the development of modern moral systems occupies a central place. For Nietzsche, a fundamental shift took place during human history from thinking in terms of good and bad toward good and evil.
The initial form of morality was set by a warrior aristocracy and other ruling castes of ancient civilizations. Aristocratic values of good and bad coincided with and reflected their relationship to lower castes such as slaves. Nietzsche presents this "master morality" as the original system of morality—perhaps best associated with Homeric Greece. To be "good" was to be happy and to have the things related to happiness: wealth, strength, health, power, etc. To be "bad" was to be like the slaves the aristocracy ruled over: poor, weak, sick, pathetic—an object of pity or disgust rather than hatred.
"Slave morality" comes about as a reaction to master-morality. Here, value emerges from the contrast between good and evil: good being associated with other-worldliness, charity, piety, restraint, meekness, and submission; and evil seen as worldly, cruel, selfish, wealthy, and aggressive. Nietzsche sees slave morality as pessimistic and fearful, values for them serving only to ease the existence for those who suffer from the very same thing. He associates slave-morality with the Jewish and Christian traditions, in a way that slave-morality is born out of the ressentiment of slaves. Nietzsche argued that the idea of equality allowed slaves to overcome their own condition without hating themselves. And by denying the inherent inequality of people (such as success, strength, beauty or intelligence), slaves acquired a method of escape, namely by generating new values on the basis of rejecting something that was seen as a perceived source of frustration. It was used to overcome the slave's own sense of inferiority before the (better-off) masters. It does so by making out slave weakness to be a matter of choice, by, e.g., relabeling it as "meekness". The "good man" of master morality is precisely the "evil man" of slave morality, while the "bad man" is recast as the "good man".
Nietzsche sees the slave-morality as a source of the nihilism that has overtaken Europe. Modern Europe and Christianity exist in a hypocritical state due to a tension between master and slave morality, both values contradictorily determining, to varying degrees, the values of most Europeans (who are "motley"). Nietzsche calls for exceptional people to no longer be ashamed of their uniqueness in the face of a supposed morality-for-all, which he deems to be harmful to the flourishing of exceptional people. He cautions, however, that morality, per se, is not bad; it is good for the masses, and should be left to them. Exceptional people, on the other hand, should follow their own "inner law". A favorite motto of Nietzsche, taken from Pindar, reads: "Become what you are."
A long standing assumption about Nietzsche is that he preferred master over slave morality. However, the Nietzsche scholar Walter Kaufmann rejected this interpretation, writing that Nietzsche's analyses of these two types of morality were only used in a descriptive and historic sense, they were not meant for any kind of acceptance or glorifications.[140] On the other hand, it is clear from his own writings that Nietzsche wanted the victory of master morality. He linked the "salvation and future of the human race with the unconditional dominance"[141] of master morality and called master morality "a higher order of values, the noble ones, those that say Yes to life, those that guarantee the future."[142] Just as "there is an order of rank between man and man," there is also an order of rank "between morality and morality."[143] Indeed, Nietzsche waged a philosophical war against the slave morality of Christianity in his "revaluation of all values" in order to bring about the victory of a new master morality that he called the "philosophy of the future" (Beyond Good and Evil is subtitled Prelude to a Philosophy of the Future).[144]
In Daybreak, Nietzsche begins his "Campaign against Morality".[145][146] He calls himself an "immoralist" and harshly criticizes the prominent moral philosophies of his day: Christianity, Kantianism, and utilitarianism. Nietzsche's concept "God is dead" applies to the doctrines of Christendom, though not to all other faiths: he claimed that Buddhism is a successful religion that he compliments for fostering critical thought.[147] Still, Nietzsche saw his philosophy as a counter-movement to nihilism through appreciation of art:

Art as the single superior counterforce against all will to negation of life, art as the anti-Christian, anti-Buddhist, anti-Nihilist par excellence."[148]

Nietzsche claimed that the Christian faith as practised was not a proper representation of Jesus' teachings, as it forced people merely to believe in the way of Jesus but not to act as Jesus did, in particular his example of refusing to judge people, something that Christians had constantly done the opposite of.[147] He condemned institutionalized Christianity for emphasizing a morality of pity (Mitleid), which assumes an inherent illness in society:[149]

Christianity is called the religion of pity. Pity stands opposed to the tonic emotions which heighten our vitality: it has a depressing effect. We are deprived of strength when we feel pity. That loss of strength which suffering as such inflicts on life is still further increased and multiplied by pity. Pity makes suffering contagious.[150]

In Ecce Homo Nietzsche called the establishment of moral systems based on a dichotomy of good and evil a "calamitous error",[151] and wished to initiate a re-evaluation of the values of the Judeo-Christian world.[152] He indicates his desire to bring about a new, more naturalistic source of value in the vital impulses of life itself.
While Nietzsche attacked the principles of Judaism, he was not antisemitic: in his work On the Genealogy of Morality, he explicitly condemns antisemitism, and points out that his attack on Judaism was not an attack on contemporary Jewish people but specifically an attack upon the ancient Jewish priesthood whom he claims antisemitic Christians paradoxically based their views upon.[153] An Israeli historian who performed a statistical analysis of everything Nietzsche wrote about Jews claims that cross references and context make clear that almost all (85%) negative comments are actually attacks on Christian doctrine or, sarcastically, on Richard Wagner.[154]
Nietzsche felt that modern antisemitism was "despicable" and against European ideals.[155] Its cause, in his opinion, was the growth in European nationalism and the endemic "jealousy and hatred" of Jewish success.[155] He wrote that Jews should be thanked for helping uphold a respect for the philosophies of ancient Greece,[155] and for giving rise to "the noblest human being (Christ), the purest philosopher (Spinoza), the mightiest book, and the most effective moral code in the world."[156]
Death of God and nihilism[edit]
Main articles: God is dead and Nihilism
The statement "God is dead", occurring in several of Nietzsche's works (notably in The Gay Science), has become one of his best-known remarks. On the basis of it, most commentators[157] regard Nietzsche as an atheist; others (such as Kaufmann) suggest that this statement reflects a more subtle understanding of divinity. Recent developments in modern science and the increasing secularization of European society had effectively 'killed' the Abrahamic God, who had served as the basis for meaning and value in the West for more than a thousand years. The death of God may lead beyond bare perspectivism to outright nihilism, the belief that nothing has any inherent importance and that life lacks purpose. Here he states that the Christian moral doctrine provides people with intrinsic value, belief in God (which justifies the evil in the world) and a basis for objective knowledge. In this sense, in constructing a world where objective knowledge is possible, Christianity is an antidote to a primal form of nihilism—the despair of meaninglessness. As Heidegger put the problem, "If God as the suprasensory ground and goal of all reality is dead, if the suprasensory world of the ideas has suffered the loss of its obligatory and above it its vitalizing and upbuilding power, then nothing more remains to which man can cling and by which he can orient himself."[158]
One such reaction to the loss of meaning is what Nietzsche calls passive nihilism, which he recognises in the pessimistic philosophy of Schopenhauer. Schopenhauer's doctrine—which Nietzsche also refers to as Western Buddhism—advocates separating oneself from will and desires in order to reduce suffering. Nietzsche characterises this ascetic attitude as a "will to nothingness", whereby life turns away from itself, as there is nothing of value to be found in the world. This moving away of all value in the world is characteristic of the nihilist, although in this, the nihilist appears to be inconsistent:[159]

A nihilist is a man who judges that the real world ought not to be, and that the world as it ought to be does not exist. According to this view, our existence (action, suffering, willing, feeling) has no meaning: this 'in vain' is the nihilists' pathos—an inconsistency on the part of the nihilists.
— Friedrich Nietzsche, KSA 12:9 [60], taken from The Will to Power, section 585, translated by Walter Kaufmann

Nietzsche approaches the problem of nihilism as a deeply personal one, stating that this problem of the modern world is a problem that has "become conscious" in him.[160] Furthermore, he emphasizes both the danger of nihilism and the possibilities it offers, as seen in his statement that "I praise, I do not reproach, [nihilism's] arrival. I believe it is one of the greatest crises, a moment of the deepest self-reflection of humanity. Whether man recovers from it, whether he becomes master of this crisis, is a question of his strength!"[161] According to Nietzsche, it is only when nihilism is overcome that a culture can have a true foundation on which to thrive. He wished to hasten its coming only so that he could also hasten its ultimate departure. Heidegger interprets the death of God with what he explains as the death of metaphysics. He concludes that metaphysics has reached its potential and that the ultimate fate and downfall of metaphysics was proclaimed with the statement "God is dead".
Will to power[edit]
Main article: Will to power
A basic element in Nietzsche's philosophical outlook is the "will to power" (der Wille zur Macht), which he maintained provides a basis for understanding human behavior—more so than competing explanations, such as the ones based on pressure for adaptation or survival.[162][163][164] As such, according to Nietzsche, the drive for conservation appears as the major motivator of human or animal behavior only in exceptions, as the general condition of life is not one of emergency, of 'struggle for existence'.[165] More often than not, self-conservation is but a consequence of a creature's will to exert its strength on the outside world.
In presenting his theory of human behavior, Nietzsche also addressed, and attacked, concepts from philosophies popularly embraced in his days, such as Schopenhauer's notion of an aimless will or that of utilitarianism. Utilitarians claim that what moves people is mainly the desire to be happy, to accumulate pleasure in their lives. But such a conception of happiness Nietzsche rejected as something limited to, and characteristic of, the bourgeois lifestyle of the English society,[166] and instead put forth the idea that happiness is not an aim per se—it is instead a consequence of a successful pursuit of one's aims, of the overcoming of hurdles to one's actions—in other words, of the fulfillment of the will.[167]
Related to his theory of the will to power, is his speculation, which he did not deem final,[168] regarding the reality of the physical world, including inorganic matter—that, like man's affections and impulses, the material world is also set by the dynamics of a form of the will to power. At the core of his theory is a rejection of atomism—the idea that matter is composed of stable, indivisible units (atoms). Instead, he seems to have accepted the conclusions of Ruđer Bošković, who explained the qualities of matter as a result of an interplay of forces.[169][170] One study of Nietzsche defines his fully developed concept of the will to power as "the element from which derive both the quantitative difference of related forces and the quality that devolves into each force in this relation" revealing the will to power as "the principle of the synthesis of forces."[171] Of such forces Nietzsche said they could perhaps be viewed as a primitive form of the will. Likewise he rejected as a mere interpretation the view that the movement of bodies is ruled by inexorable laws of nature, positing instead that movement was governed by the power relations between bodies and forces.[172] Other scholars disagree that Nietzsche considered the material world to be a form of the will to power. Nietzsche thoroughly criticized metaphysics, and by including the will to power in the material world, he would simply be setting up a new metaphysics. Other than aphorism 36 in Beyond Good and Evil, where he raised a question regarding will to power as being in the material world, it was only in his notes (unpublished by himself), where he wrote about a metaphysical will to power. Nietzsche directed his landlord to burn those notes in 1888 when he left Sils Maria for the last time.[173]
Eternal return[edit]
Main article: Eternal return
"Eternal return" (also known as "eternal recurrence") is a hypothetical concept that posits that the universe has been recurring, and will continue to recur, in a self-similar form for an infinite number of times across infinite time or space. It is a purely physical concept, involving no supernatural reincarnation, but the return of beings in the same bodies. Nietzsche first invokes the idea of eternal return in a parable in Section 341 of The Gay Science, and also in the chapter "Of the Vision and the Riddle" in Thus Spoke Zarathustra, among other places.[174] Nietzsche contemplates the idea as potentially "horrifying and paralyzing," and says that its burden is the "heaviest weight" imaginable ("das schwerste Gewicht").[175] The wish for the eternal return of all events would mark the ultimate affirmation of life, a reaction to Schopenhauer's praise of denying the will‐to‐live. To comprehend eternal recurrence in his thought, and to not merely come to peace with it but to embrace it, requires amor fati, "love of fate".[176] As Heidegger points out in his lectures on Nietzsche, Nietzsche's first mention of eternal recurrence presents this concept as a hypothetical question rather than postulating it as a fact. According to Heidegger, it is the burden imposed by the question of eternal recurrence—whether or not such a thing could possibly be true—that is so significant in modern thought: "The way Nietzsche here patterns the first communication of the thought of the 'greatest burden' [of eternal recurrence] makes it clear that this 'thought of thoughts' is at the same time 'the most burdensome thought.'"[177]
Not only does Nietzsche posit that the universe is recurring over infinite time and space, but that the different versions of events that have occurred in the past may at one point or another take place again, hence "all configurations that have previously existed on this earth must yet meet..."[178] And with each version of events is hoping that some knowledge or awareness is gained to better the individual, hence "And thus it will happen one day that a man will be born again, just like me and a woman will be born, just like Mary—only that it is hoped to be that the head of this man may contain a little less foolishness..."[178]
Alexander Nehamas writes in Nietzsche: Life as Literature of three ways of seeing the eternal recurrence: "(A) My life will recur in exactly identical fashion." This expresses a totally fatalistic approach to the idea. "(B) My life may recur in exactly identical fashion." This second view conditionally asserts cosmology, but fails to capture what Nietzsche refers to in The Gay Science, 341. Finally, "(C) If my life were to recur, then it could recur only in identical fashion." Nehamas shows that this interpretation exists totally independently of physics and does not presuppose the truth of cosmology. Nehamas draws the conclusion that if individuals constitute themselves through their actions, then they can only maintain themselves in their current state by living in a recurrence of past actions (Nehamas 153). Nietzsche's thought is the negation of the idea of a history of salvation.[179]
Übermensch[edit]
Main article: Übermensch
Another concept important to an understanding of Nietzsche's thought is the Übermensch[180][181][182][183] Developing the idea of nihilism, Nietzsche wrote Thus Spoke Zarathustra, therein introducing the concept of a value-creating Übermensch, not as a project, but as an anti-project, the absence of any project.[114] According to Lampert, "the death of God must be followed by a long twilight of piety and nihilism (II. 19; III. 8). ... Zarathustra's gift of the overman is given to a mankind not aware of the problem to which the overman is the solution."[184] Zarathustra presents the overman as the creator of new values, and he appears as a solution to the problem of the death of God and nihilism. The overman does not follow morality of common people since that favors mediocrity but instead rises above the notion of good and evil and above the "herd".[185] In this way Zarathustra proclaims his ultimate goal as the journey towards the state of overman. He wants a kind of spiritual evolution of self-awareness and overcoming of traditional views on morality and justice that stem from the superstition beliefs still deeply rooted or related to the notion of God and Christianity.[186]
While interpretations of Nietzsche's overman vary wildly, here is one of his quotations from Thus Spoke Zarathustra (Prologue, §§3–4):

I teach you the overman. Man is something that shall be overcome. What have you done to overcome him?... All beings so far have created something beyond themselves; and do you want to be the ebb of this great flood, and even go back to the beasts rather than overcome man? What is ape to man? A laughing stock or painful embarrassment. And man shall be that to overman: a laughing stock or painful embarrassment. You have made your way from worm to man, and much in you is still worm. Once you were apes, and even now, too, man is more ape than any ape... The overman is the meaning of the earth. Let your will say: the overman shall be the meaning of the earth... Man is a rope, tied between beast and overman—a rope over an abyss ... what is great in man is that he is a bridge and not an end.

Zarathustra contrasts the overman with the last man of egalitarian modernity (most obvious example being democracy), an alternative goal humanity might set for itself. The last man is possible only by mankind's having bred an apathetic creature who has no great passion or commitment, who is unable to dream, who merely earns his living and keeps warm. This concept appears only in Thus Spoke Zarathustra, and is presented as a condition that would render the creation of the overman impossible.[187]
Some have suggested that the notion of eternal return is related to the overman, since willing the eternal return of the same is a necessary step if the overman is to create new values, untainted by the spirit of gravity or asceticism. Values involve a rank-ordering of things, and so are inseparable from approval and disapproval; yet it was dissatisfaction that prompted men to seek refuge in other-worldliness and embrace other-worldly values. It could seem that the overman, in being devoted to any values at all, would necessarily fail to create values that did not share some bit of asceticism. Willing the eternal recurrence is presented as accepting the existence of the low while still recognizing it as the low, and thus as overcoming the spirit of gravity or asceticism. One must have the strength of the overman in order to will the eternal recurrence; that is, only the overman will have the strength to fully accept all of his past life, including his failures and misdeeds, and to truly will their eternal return. This action nearly kills Zarathustra, for example, and most human beings cannot avoid other-worldliness because they really are sick, not because of any choice they made.
Critique of mass culture[edit]
Friedrich Nietzsche held a pessimistic view on modern society and culture. His views stand against the concept of popular culture. He believed the press and mass culture led to conformity and brought about mediocrity. Nietzsche saw a lack of intellectual progress, leading to the decline of the human species. According to Nietzsche, individuals needed to overcome this form of mass culture. He believed some people were able to become superior individuals through the use of will power. By rising above mass culture, society would produce higher, brighter and healthier human beings.[188]
Reading and influence[edit]




The residence of Nietzsche's last three years, along with archive in Weimar, Germany, which holds many of Nietzsche's papers.


Main article: Library of Friedrich Nietzsche
A trained philologist, Nietzsche had a thorough knowledge of Greek philosophy. He read Kant, Plato, Mill, Schopenhauer and Spir,[189] who became his main opponents in his philosophy, and later Spinoza, whom he saw as his "precursor" in many respects[190] but as a personification of the "ascetic ideal" in others. However, Nietzsche referred to Kant as a "moral fanatic", Plato as "boring", Mill as a "blockhead", and of Spinoza he said: "How much of personal timidity and vulnerability does this masquerade of a sickly recluse betray?"[191] He likewise expressed contempt for British author George Eliot.[192]
Nietzsche's philosophy, while innovative and revolutionary, was indebted to many predecessors. While at Basel, Nietzsche offered lecture courses on pre-Platonic philosophers for several years, and the text of this lecture series has been characterized as a "lost link" in the development of his thought. "In it concepts such as the will to power, the eternal return of the same, the overman, gay science, self-overcoming and so on receive rough, unnamed formulations and are linked to specific pre-Platonics, especially Heraclitus, who emerges as a pre-Platonic Nietzsche."[193] The pre-Socratic thinker Heraclitus was known for the rejection of the concept of being as a constant and eternal principle of universe, and his embrace of "flux" and incessant change. His symbolism of the world as "child play" marked by amoral spontaneity and lack of definite rules was appreciated by Nietzsche.[194] From his Heraclitean sympathy, Nietzsche was also a vociferous detractor of Parmenides, who opposed Heraclitus and believed all world is a single Being with no change at all.[195]
In his Egotism in German Philosophy, Santayana claimed that Nietzsche's whole philosophy was a reaction to Schopenhauer. Santayana wrote that Nietzsche's work was "an emendation of that of Schopenhauer. The will to live would become the will to dominate; pessimism founded on reflection would become optimism founded on courage; the suspense of the will in contemplation would yield to a more biological account of intelligence and taste; finally in the place of pity and asceticism (Schopenhauer's two principles of morals) Nietzsche would set up the duty of asserting the will at all costs and being cruelly but beautifully strong. These points of difference from Schopenhauer cover the whole philosophy of Nietzsche."[196]
Nietzsche expressed admiration for 17th-century French moralists such as La Rochefoucauld, La Bruyère and Vauvenargues,[197] as well as for Stendhal.[198] The organicism of Paul Bourget influenced Nietzsche,[199] as did that of Rudolf Virchow and Alfred Espinas.[200] Nietzsche wrote in a letter in 1867 that he was trying to improve his German style of writing with the help of Lessing, Lichtenberg and Schopenhauer. It was probably Lichtenberg (along with Paul Rée) whose aphoristic style of writing contributed to Nietzsche's own use of aphorism instead of an essay.[201] Nietzsche early learned of Darwinism through Friedrich Albert Lange.[202] The essays of Ralph Waldo Emerson had a profound influence on Nietzsche, who "loved Emerson from first to last",[203] wrote "Never have I felt so much at home in a book", and called him "[the] author who has been richest in ideas in this century so far."[204] Hippolyte Taine influenced Nietzsche's view on Rousseau and Napoleon.[205] Notably, he also read some of the posthumous works of Charles Baudelaire,[206] Tolstoy's My Religion, Ernest Renan's Life of Jesus and Fyodor Dostoyevsky's Demons.[206][207] Nietzsche called Dostoevsky "the only psychologist from whom I have anything to learn."[208] While Nietzsche never mentions Max Stirner, the similarities in their ideas have prompted a minority of interpreters to suggest a relationship between the two.[209][210][211][212][213][214][215] In 1861 Nietzsche wrote an enthusiastic essay on his "favorite poet", Friedrich Hölderlin, mostly forgotten at that time.[216] He also expressed deep appreciation for Stifter's Indian Summer,[217] Byron's Manfred and Twain's Tom Sawyer.[218]
Reception[edit]
Main article: Influence and reception of Friedrich Nietzsche




Portrait of Friedrich Nietzsche by Edvard Munch, 1906



Nietzsche's works did not reach a wide readership during his active writing career. However, in 1888 the influential Danish critic Georg Brandes aroused considerable excitement about Nietzsche through a series of lectures he gave at the University of Copenhagen. In the years after Nietzsche's death in 1900, his works became better known, and readers have responded to them in complex and sometimes controversial ways.[219] Many Germans eventually discovered his appeals for greater individualism and personality development in Thus Spoke Zarathustra, but responded to them divergently. He had some following among left-wing Germans in the 1890s; in 1894–1895 German conservatives wanted to ban his work as subversive. During the late 19th century Nietzsche's ideas were commonly associated with anarchist movements and appear to have had influence within them, particularly in France and the United States.[220][221][222] H. L. Mencken produced the first book on Nietzsche in English in 1907, The Philosophy of Friedrich Nietzsche, and in 1910 a book of translated paragraphs from Nietzsche, increasing knowledge of his philosophy in the United States.[223] Nietzsche is known today as a precursor to expressionism,[224] existentialism, and postmodernism.[225]
W. B. Yeats and Arthur Symons described Nietzsche as the intellectual heir to William Blake. Symons went on to compare the ideas of the two thinkers in The Symbolist Movement in Literature, while Yeats tried to raise awareness of Nietzsche in Ireland.[226][227][228] A similar notion was espoused by W. H. Auden who wrote of Nietzsche in his New Year Letter (released in 1941 in The Double Man): "O masterly debunker of our liberal fallacies [...] all your life you stormed, like your English forerunner Blake".[229][230][231] Nietzsche made an impact on composers during the 1890s. Writer on music Donald Mitchell notes that Gustav Mahler was "attracted to the poetic fire of Zarathustra, but repelled by the intellectual core of its writings." He also quotes Mahler himself, and adds that he was influenced by Nietzsche's conception and affirmative approach to nature, which Mahler presented in his Third Symphony using Zarathustra's roundelay. Frederick Delius produced a piece of choral music, A Mass of Life, based on a text of Thus Spoke Zarathustra, while Richard Strauss (who also based his Also sprach Zarathustra on the same book), was only interested in finishing "another chapter of symphonic autobiography".[232] Famous writers and poets influenced by Nietzsche include André Gide, August Strindberg, Robinson Jeffers, Pío Baroja, D. H. Lawrence, Edith Södergran and Yukio Mishima.
Nietzsche was an early influence on the poetry of Rainer Maria Rilke. Knut Hamsun counted Nietzsche, along with Strindberg and Dostoyevsky, as one of his primary influences.[233] Author Jack London wrote that he was more stimulated by Nietzsche than by any other writer.[234] Critics have suggested that the character of David Grief in A Son of the Sun was based on Nietzsche.[235] Nietzsche's influence on Muhammad Iqbal is most evidenced in Asrar-i-Khudi (The Secrets of the Self).[236] Wallace Stevens[237] was another reader of Nietzsche, and elements of Nietzsche's philosophy were found throughout Steven's poetry collection Harmonium.[238][239] Olaf Stapledon was influenced by the idea of the Übermensch and it is a central theme in his books Odd John and Sirius.[240] In Russia, Nietzsche has influenced Russian symbolism[241] and figures such as Dmitry Merezhkovsky,[242] Andrei Bely,[243] Vyacheslav Ivanov and Alexander Scriabin have all incorporated or discussed parts of Nietzsche philosophy in their works. Thomas Mann's novel Death in Venice[244] shows a use of Apollonian and Dionysian, and in Doctor Faustus Nietzsche was a central source for the character of Adrian Leverkühn.[245][246] Hermann Hesse, similarly, in his Narcissus and Goldmund presents two main characters in the sense of Apollonian and Dionysian as the two opposite yet intertwined spirits. Painter Giovanni Segantini was fascinated by Thus Spoke Zarathustra, and he drew an illustration for the first Italian translation of the book. The Russian painter Lena Hades created the oil painting cycle Also Sprach Zarathustra dedicated to the book Thus Spoke Zarathustra.[247]
By World War I, Nietzsche had acquired a reputation as an inspiration for both right-wing German militarism and leftist politics. German soldiers received copies of Thus Spoke Zarathustra as gifts during World War I.[248][249] The Dreyfus affair provides a contrasting example of his reception: the French antisemitic Right labelled the Jewish and leftist intellectuals who defended Alfred Dreyfus as "Nietzscheans".[250] Nietzsche had a distinct appeal for many Zionist thinkers around the start of the 20th century, most notable being Ahad Ha'am,[251] Hillel Zeitlin,[252] Micha Josef Berdyczewski, A. D. Gordon[253] and Martin Buber, who went so far as to extoll Nietzsche as a "creator" and "emissary of life".[254] Chaim Weizmann was a great admirer of Nietzsche; the first president of Israel sent Nietzsche's books to his wife, adding a comment in a letter that "This was the best and finest thing I can send to you."[255] Israel Eldad, the ideological chief of the Stern Gang that fought the British in Palestine in the 1940s, wrote about Nietzsche in his underground newspaper and later translated most of Nietzsche's books into Hebrew.[256] Eugene O'Neill remarked that Zarathustra influenced him more than any other book he ever read. He also shared Nietzsche's view of tragedy.[257] Plays The Great God Brown and Lazarus Laughed are an example of Nietzsche's influence on O'Neill.[258][259][260] Nietzsche's influence on the works of Frankfurt School philosophers Max Horkheimer and Theodor W. Adorno[261] can be seen in the popular Dialectic of Enlightenment. Adorno summed up Nietzsche's philosophy as expressing the "humane in a world in which humanity has become a sham."[262]
Nietzsche's growing prominence suffered a severe setback when his works became closely associated with Adolf Hitler and the Third Reich. Many political leaders of the twentieth century were at least superficially familiar with Nietzsche's ideas, although it is not always possible to determine whether they actually read his work. It is debated among scholars whether Hitler read Nietzsche, although if he did his reading of him may not have been extensive.[263][264][265][266] He was a frequent visitor to the Nietzsche museum in Weimar and did use expressions of Nietzsche's, such as "lords of the earth" in Mein Kampf.[267] The Nazis made selective use of Nietzsche's philosophy. Mussolini,[268][269] Charles de Gaulle[270] and Huey P. Newton[271] read Nietzsche. Richard Nixon read Nietzsche with "curious interest," and his book Beyond Peace might have taken its title from Nietzsche's book Beyond Good and Evil which Nixon read beforehand.[272] Bertrand Russell wrote that Nietzsche had exerted great influence on philosophers and on people of literary and artistic culture, but warned that the attempt to put Nietzsche's philosophy of aristocracy into practice could only be done by an organization similar to the Fascist or the Nazi party.[9]
A decade after World War II, there was a revival of Nietzsche's philosophical writings thanks to exhaustive translations and analyses by Walter Kaufmann and R. J. Hollingdale. Others, well known philosophers in their own right, wrote commentaries on Nietzsche's philosophy, including Martin Heidegger, who produced a four-volume study, and Lev Shestov, who wrote a book called Dostoyevski, Tolstoy and Nietzsche where he portrays Nietzsche and Dostoyevski as the "thinkers of tragedy".[273] Georg Simmel compares Nietzsche's importance to ethics to that of Copernicus for cosmology.[274] Sociologist Ferdinand Tönnies read Nietzsche avidly from his early life, and later frequently discussed many of his concepts in his own works. Nietzsche has influenced philosophers such as Heidegger, Jean-Paul Sartre,[275] Oswald Spengler,[276] George Grant,[277] Emil Cioran,[278] Albert Camus, Ayn Rand,[279] Jacques Derrida, Leo Strauss,[280] Max Scheler, Michel Foucault and Bernard Williams. Camus described Nietzsche as "the only artist to have derived the extreme consequences of an aesthetics of the absurd".[281] Paul Ricœur called Nietzsche one of the masters of the "school of suspicion", alongside Karl Marx and Sigmund Freud.[282] Carl Jung was also influenced by Nietzsche.[283] In Memories, Dreams, Reflections, a biography transcribed by his secretary, he cites Nietzsche as a large influence.[284] Aspects of Nietzsche's philosophy, especially his ideas of the self and his relation to society, also run through much of late-twentieth and early twenty-first century thought.[285][286] His deepening of the romantic-heroic tradition of the nineteenth century, for example, as expressed in the ideal of the "grand striver" appears in the work of thinkers from Cornelius Castoriadis to Roberto Mangabeira Unger.[287] For Nietzsche this grand striver overcomes obstacles, engages in epic struggles, pursues new goals, embraces recurrent novelty, and transcends existing structures and contexts. No social or cultural construct can contain this idealized individual.[285]:195
Works[edit]




The Nietzsche Stone, near Surlej, the inspiration for Thus Spoke Zarathustra






Nietzsche hiking trail in Èze village to Eze sur mer


Main article: Friedrich Nietzsche bibliography
See also: List of works about Friedrich Nietzsche

The Greek Music Drama (1870)
The Greek State (1871)
The Birth of Tragedy (1872)
On Truth and Lies in a Nonmoral Sense (1873)
Philosophy in the Tragic Age of the Greeks (1873)
We Philologists (1874, posthumous)
Untimely Meditations (1876)
Human, All Too Human (1878)
The Dawn (1881)
The Gay Science (1882)
Thus Spoke Zarathustra (1883)
Beyond Good and Evil (1886)
On the Genealogy of Morality (1887)
The Case of Wagner (1888)
Twilight of the Idols (1888)
The Antichrist (1888)
Ecce Homo (1888)
Nietzsche contra Wagner (1888)
The Will to Power (unpublished manuscripts edited by Elisabeth)
Unpublished notes (1869–1889): a translation of Nietzsche's notebooks, so far only available in German (called "Nachlass") and Dutch (called "Nagelaten Fragmenten").
The Peacock and the Buffalo: The Poetry of Nietzsche (2010) (first complete English translation of Nietzsche's poetry)[288]

See also[edit]


Philosophy portal
Atheism portal
Germany portal
Biography portal



Anarchism and Friedrich Nietzsche
Friedrich Nietzsche and free will
Genealogy (philosophy)
Difference (poststructuralism)
The Ascent of Man
Dionysos

References[edit]



^ Guyer, Paul; Horstmann, Rolf-Peter (1 January 2015). Zalta, Edward N., ed. The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy – via Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. 
^ "Friedrich Nietzsche,"[permanent dead link] by Dale Wilkerson, Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy, ISSN 2161-0002, retrieved 14 October 2015.
^ Brobjer, Thomas H. (2008). Nietzsche's Philosophical Context: An Intellectual Biography. University of Illinois Press. p. 149. ISBN 9780252032455. 
^ "Der Philosoph Philipp Mainländer entdeckt das Nirwanaprinzip: Die Welt als Gottes Selbstmordprojekt". Neue Zürcher Zeitung. 15 March 2003. Immerhin hat kein Geringerer als Friedrich Nietzsche, solange er wie Mainländer Schopenhauer verehrte, den philosophischen Mitjünger gewürdigt (beider Lektüreerlebnis gleicht als Erweckung dem augustinischen «Nimm, lies» bis ins Detail). 
^ Michael N. Forster, After Herder: Philosophy of Language in the German Tradition, Oxford University Press, 2010, p. 9.
^ Wells, John C (1990), "Nietzsche", Longman Pronunciation Dictionary, Harlow, UK: Longman, p. 478, ISBN 0-582-05383-8 
^ a b c "Friedrich Nietzsche," by Dale Wilkerson, The Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy, ISSN 2161-0002, http://www.iep.utm.edu/nietzch/[permanent dead link]. 14 October 2015.
^ a b Raymond A. Belliotti, Jesus or Nietzsche: How Should We Live Our Lives? (Rodopi, 2013), 195–201
^ a b c Russell, Bertrand (1945). A History of Western Philosophy. New York: Simon and Schuster. pp. 766, 770. ISBN 0-671-20158-1. 
^ a b c Wicks, R. (Summer 2011) "Friedrich Nietzsche". The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, Edward N. Zalta (ed.). Retrieved 6 October 2011.
^ Anderson, R. Lanier (17 March 2017). "Friedrich Nietzsche". Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. 
^ Brobjer, Thomas. Nietzsche's philosophical context: an intellectual biography, p. 42. University of Illinois Press, 2008.
^ Bernd, Magnus. "Nietzsche, Friedrich". Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved 19 May 2012. 
^ a b Robert Matthews (4 May 2003), "'Madness' of Nietzsche was cancer not syphilis", The Daily Telegraph.
^ McKinnon, A. M. (2012). 'Metaphors in and for the Sociology of Religion: Towards a Theory after Nietzsche'. Journal of Contemporary Religion, vol 27, no. 2, pp. 203–16 [1]
^ See his own words: F. Nietzsche (1888), Twilight of the Idols. "Four Great Errors", 1, tr. W. Kaufmann & R.J. Hollingdale (online version). A strict example of a cause-and-effect mismatch, with regard to the God-creator as the cause and our concepts as the effects, is perhaps not fully stressed in this fragment, but the more explicit it is stressed in the same book, chapter "»Reason« in philosophy", 4, as well as in The Antichrist (57, where real and imaginary origins are contrasted, and 62, where he calls Christianity 'a fatality'—'fatal' also meaning 'unavoidable') and in The Genealogy of Morals, books 1–3, among others. The topic of "false origins" of ideas is also suggested in The Four Great Errors, 3, and (precisely about morality) in e.g. The Will to Power, tr. W. Kaufmann, 343 (online text here).
^ K. Gemes, J. Richardson, The Oxford Handbook of Nietzsche, Oxford Univ. Press, 2013, pp. 177–78 ("The Duality of Nietzsche's Theory of the Will to Power: The Psychological and Cosmological Aspects"). Read online here
^ 1941-, Lampert, Laurence (1986). Nietzsche's teaching : an interpretation of Thus spoke Zarathustra. New Haven: Yale University Press. ISBN 0300044305. OCLC 13497182. 
^ Bowman, William (2016). Friedrich Nietzsche: Herald of a New Era. Hazar Press. pp. 39–59. ISBN 978-0997570304. 
^ Golomb, Jacob and Robert S. Wistrich (eds.), 2002, Nietzsche, Godfather of Fascism?: On the Uses and Abuses of a Philosophy. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.
^ Marianne Constable, "Genealogy and Jurisprudence: Nietzsche, Nihilism, and the Social Scientification of Law," Law & Social Inquiry 19, no. 3 (1 July 1994): 551–90.
^ "100 years after death, Nietzsche's popularity keeps growing: 6/01". 
^ Kaufmann 1974, p. 22.
^ a b Wicks, Robert (1 January 2014). Zalta, Edward N., ed. Friedrich Nietzsche (Winter 2014 ed.). 
^ Brobjer, Thomas H. "Why Did Nietzsche Receive a Scholarship to Study at Schulpforta?". Nietzsche-Studien. 30: 322–27. 
^ Krell, David Farrell, and Donald L. Bates. The Good European: Nietzsche's work sites in word and image. University of Chicago Press, 1997.
^ Cate 2005, p. 37.
^ Hayman, Ronald. Nietzsche: A Critical Life, p. 42. Oxford University Press, 1980.
^ Kohler, Joachim. Nietzsche & Wagner: A Lesson in Subjugation, p. 17. Yale University Press, 1998.
^ Hollingdale, R.J. Nietzche: The Man and his Philosophy, p. 21. Cambridge University Press, 1999.
^ His "valedictorian paper" (Valediktionsarbeit, graduation thesis for Pforta students) was titled "On Theognis of Megara" ("De Theognide Megarensi"); see Anthony K. Jensen, Helmut Heit (eds.), Nietzsche as a Scholar of Antiquity, A&C Black, 2014, p. 4.
^ a b Schaberg, William (1996), The Nietzsche Canon, University of Chicago Press, p. 32 
^ Salaquarda, Jörg (1996), "Nietzsche and the Judaeo-Christian tradition", The Cambridge Companion to Nietzsche, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, p. 99 
^ Higgins, Kathleen (2000), What Nietzsche Really Said, Random House, NY, p. 86 
^ Nietzsche, Letter to His Sister (1865). Archived from the original on 24 November 2012. 
^ "Friedrich Nietzsche (German philosopher) – Encyclopædia Britannica". Encyclopædia Britannica. 22 April 2014. Retrieved 22 August 2014. 
^ Pence, Charles H. (2011). "Nietzsche's aesthetic critique of Darwin". History and Philosophy of the Life Sciences. 33 (2): 165–90. PMID 22288334. 
^ Hayman, Ronald. Nietzsche: A Critical Life, p. 93. Oxford University Press (New York), 1980.
^ Nietzsche, Friedrich. Letter to Karl Von Gersdorff, June 1868.
^ Nietzsche, Friedrich (November 1868), Letter to Rohde 
^ Anthony K. Jensen, Helmut Heit (eds.), Nietzsche as a Scholar of Antiquity, A&C Black, 2014, p. 129.
^ Kaufmann 1974, p. 25.
^ Bishop, Paul (2004), Nietzsche and Antiquity, p. 117 
^ Anthony K. Jensen, Helmut Heit (eds.), Nietzsche as a Scholar of Antiquity, A&C Black, 2014, p. 115.
^ George E. McCarthy, Dialectics and Decadence
^ Between 1868 and 1870, he published two other studies on Diogenes Laertius: De Fontibus Diogenis Laertii ("On the Sources of Diogenes Laertius"; Part I: 1868, Part II: 1869) and Analecta Laertiana (1870); see Jensen and Heit (eds.), 2014, p. 115.
^ Hecker, Hellmuth: "Nietzsches Staatsangehörigkeit als Rechtsfrage", Neue Juristische Wochenschrift, Jg. 40, 1987, nr. 23, pp. 1388–91.
^ His, Eduard: "Friedrich Nietzsches Heimatlosigkeit", Basler Zeitschrift für Geschichte und Altertumskunde, vol. 40, 1941, p. 159–86. Note that some authors (among them Deussen and Montinari) mistakenly claim that Nietzsche became a Swiss citizen.
^ Sax, L. (2003). "What was the cause of Nietzsche's dementia?". Journal of Medical Biography. 11 (1): 47–54. doi:10.1177/096777200301100113. PMID 12522502. 
^ Schain, Richard (2001), The Legend of Nietzsche's Syphilis, Westwood: Greenwood Press .[full citation needed]
^ Green, M.S. Nietzsche and the Transcendental Tradition. University of Illinois Press, 2002.[full citation needed]
^ http://www.bookrags.com/ebooks/11419/1.html#gsc.tab=0
^ Safranski, Rüdiger (trans. Shelley Frisch). Nietzsche: A Philosophical Biography, p. 161. W. W. Norton & Company, 2003. "This work had long been consigned to oblivion, but it had a lasting impact on Nietzsche. Section 18 of Human, All Too Human cited Spir, not by name, but by presenting a 'proposition by an outstanding logician' (2,38; HH I §18)."
^ Güntzel, Stephan (15 October 2003), "Nietzsche's Geophilosophy", Journal of Nietzsche Studies (in English and German), University Park (Penn State): The Pennsylvania State University Press, 25: 85, archived from the original on 27 September 2007 ; republished on HyperNietzsche.
^ Cate 2005, p. 221.
^ Cate 2005, p. 297.
^ Cate 2005, p. 415.
^ "Nietzsche and Lou Andreas-Salomé", F Nietzsche, DE 
^ Kaufmann 1974, p. 49.
^ Cate 2005, p. 389.
^ Cate 2005, p. 453.
^ Nietzsche, Friedrich. Letter to Peter Gast. August 1883.
^ "Correspondences". Thenietzschechannel.com. 1 February 2000. Retrieved 27 November 2013. 
^ "Förster-Nietzsche, Elisabeth". Encyclopædia Britannica (online ed.). 10 October 2008. [permanent dead link]
^ Nietzsche, Friedrich. Letter to Peter Gast. March 1887.
^ Montinari, Mazzino (1974), Friedrich Nietzsche  translated as Friedrich Nietzsche. Eine Einführung (in German), Berlin-New York: De Gruyter, 1991 ; and Friedrich Nietzsche (in French), PUF, 2001 
^ Nietzsche 1888d, Preface, section 1.
^ [https://books.google.com/books?id=Xeb80itrlRIC&pg=PA80
^ Kaufmann 1974, p. 67.
^ Anacleto Verrecchia, "Nietzsche's Breakdown in Turin," in Nietzsche in Italy, ed. Thomas Harrison (Stanford University: ANMA Libri, 1988) 105–12
^ Simon, Gerald (January 1889). "Nietzsches Briefe. Ausgewählte Korrespondenz. Wahnbriefe". The Nietzsche Channel. Retrieved 24 August 2013. Ich habe Kaiphas in Ketten legen lassen; auch bin ich voriges Jahr von den deutschen Ärzten auf eine sehr langwierige Weise gekreuzigt worden. Wilhelm, Bismarck und alle Antisemiten abgeschafft. 
^ Zweig, Stefan (1939), Master Builders [trilogy], The Struggle with the Daimon, Viking Press, p. 524.
^ Nietzsches Briefe, Ausgewählte Korrespondenz, Wahnzettel 1889.
^ Steiner, Rudolf (1895), Friedrich Nietzsche, ein Kämpfer gegen seine Zeit, Weimar 
^ Bailey, Andrew (2002), First Philosophy: Fundamental Problems and Readings in Philosophy, Broadview Press, p. 704 
^ Bataille, Georges (translated by Annette Michelson), "Writings on Laughter, Sacrifice, Nietzsche, Un-Knowing," Special issue, October no. 36, Spring 1986, pp. 42–45.
^ René Girard, "Superman in the Underground: Strategies of Madness—Nietzsche, Wagner, and Dostoevsky", MLN, Vol. 91, No. 6, Comparative Literature. (December 1976), pp. 1161–85.
^ Cybulska, EM (August 2000). "The madness of Nietzsche: a misdiagnosis of the millennium?". Hospital Medicine. 61 (8): 571–75. doi:10.12968/hosp.2000.61.8.1403. PMID 11045229. 
^ Schain, Richard (2001). The Legend of Nietzsche's Syphilis. Westport: Greenwood Press. ISBN 0-313-31940-5. [page needed]
^ Leonard Sax, "What was the cause of Nietzsche's dementia?" Journal of Medical Biography 2003; 11: 47–54.
^ Orth, M; Trimble, MR (December 2006). "Friedrich Nietzsche's mental illness—general paralysis of the insane vs. frontotemporal dementia". Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica. 114 (6): 439–44; discussion 445. doi:10.1111/j.1600-0447.2006.00827.x. PMID 17087793. 
^ Hemelsoet D, Hemelsoet K, Devreese D (March 2008). "The neurological illness of Friedrich Nietzsche". Acta Neurologica Belgica. 108 (1): 9–16. PMID 18575181. Archived from the original on 6 July 2011. 
^ Robert Wicks, Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, first published Fri 30 May 1997; substantive revision Fri 29 April 2011, Friedrich Nietzsche. Retrieved 19 January 2014, "...some maintain that he suffered from CADASIL syndrome, a hereditary stroke disorder...."
^ Dayan, L; Ooi, C (October 2005). "Syphilis treatment: old and new". Expert opinion on pharmacotherapy. 6 (13): 2271–80. doi:10.1517/14656566.6.13.2271. PMID 16218887. 
^ Hammond, David (2013). Mercury Poisoning: The Undiagnosed Epidemic. p. 11. 
^ Concurring reports in Elisabeth Förster-Nietzsche's biography (1904) and a letter by Mathilde Schenk-Nietzsche to Meta von Salis, 30 August 1900, quoted in Janz (1981) p. 221. Cf. Volz (1990), p. 251.
^ Schain, Richard, Nietzsche's Visionary Values – Genius or Dementia?, Philosophos, archived from the original on 13 May 2006 
^ Montinari, Mazzino. The 'Will to Power' Does Not Exist.
^ "Nietzsche", The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy 
^ Nietzsche: A Very Short Introduction, preview, ISBN 0192854143 
^ "Friedrich Nietzsche", Encyclopædia Britannica 
^ Magnus, Bernd; Higgins, Kathleen Marie (1996-01-26). The Cambridge Companion to Nietzsche. p. 1. ISBN 9780521367677. 
^ Craid, Edward, ed. (2005), The Shorter Routledge Encyclopedia of philosophy, Abingdon: Routledge, pp. 726–41 
^ Blackburn, Simon (2005), The Oxford Dictionary of Philosophy, Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 252–53 
^ Rée, Jonathan; Urmson, JO, eds. (2005) [1960]. The Concise encyclopedia of western philosophy (3rd ed.). London: Routledge. pp. 267–70. ISBN 0-415-32924-8. 
^ Mencken, Henry Louis (18 December 2008). The Philosophy of Friedrich Nietzsche. Wilder Publications. pp. 11–. ISBN 978-1-60459-331-0. 
^ Janz, Curt Paul (1978), Friedrich Nietzsche: Biographie, 1, Munich: Carl Hanser, p. 263, Er beantragte also bei der preussischen Behörde seine Expatriierung (translation: he accordingly applied to the Prussian authorities for expatrification) 
^ Colli, Giorgio; Montinari, Mazzino (1993), "Entlassungsurkunde für den Professor Friedrich Wilhelm Nietzsche aus Naumburg", Nietzsche Briefwechsel: Kritische Gesamtausgabe (in German), I.4, Berlin: Walter de Gruyter, p. 566, ISBN 3-11-012277-4 
^ Mencken, Henry Louis (1913). Friedrich Nietzsche. Transaction Publishers. p. 6. ISBN 978-1-56000-649-7. 
^ a b c d Hollingdale, RJ (1999), Nietzsche: The Man and His Philosophy, Cambridge University Press, p. 6 
^ Fredrick Appel Cornell, Nietzsche Contra Democracy. University Press (1998), p. 114
^ Mencken, Henry Louis (2006) [1908], The Philosophy of Friedrich Nietzsche, University of Michigan, p. 6 
^ Letter to Heinrich von Stein, December 1882, KGB III 1, Nr. 342, p. 287; KGW V 2, p. 579; KSA 9 p. 681
^ von Müller, "Nietzsches Vorfahren", reprinted Nietzsche-Studien 31 (2002): 253–75.
^ Mencken, Henry Louis (2003), The Philosophy of Friedrich Nietzche, introd. & comm. Charles Q. Bufe, US: See Sharp Press, p. 2 
^ Letter to Heinrich von Stein, December 1882, KGB III 7.1 p. 313.
^ Letter to Georg Brandes, 10. 4. 1888, KGB III 7.3/1 p. 293.
^ "Nietzsche's and Nietzsche and Lou Andreas-Salomé." Nietzsche's and Nietzsche and Lou Andreas-Salomé.
^ Köhler, Joachim (2002). Zarathustra's secret: the interior life of Friedrich Nietzsche. New Haven: Yale University Press. p. xv. ISBN 0-300-09278-4. 
^ a b Allan Megill (1996). "Historicizing Nietzsche? Paradoxes and Lessons of a Hard Case". The Journal of Modern History. 68 (1): 114–52. doi:10.1086/245288. JSTOR 2124335. 
^ Michael W. Grenke (2003). "How Boring..". The Review of Politics. 65 (1): 152–54. doi:10.1017/s0034670500036640. JSTOR 1408799. 
^ Mathias Risse. "Zarathustra's Secret. The Interior Life of Friedrich Nietzsche". Notre Dame Philosophical Reviews. 
^ Rogers, N., & Thompson, M. (2004). Philosophers Behaving Badly. London: Peter Owen.
^ a b Benjamin Bennett (2001). Goethe As Woman: The Undoing of Literature. Wayne State University Press. p. 184. ISBN 978-0-8143-2948-1. Retrieved 3 January 2013. 
^ Young, Julian (2010). Friedrich Nietzsche: A Philosophical Biography. Cambridge University Press. 
^ Bowman, William (2016). Friedrich Nietzsche: Herald of a New Era. Hazar Press. ISBN 978-0997570304. 
^ On Music and words. 
^ Nietzsche, Dionysus and Apollo. 
^ Desmond, Kathleen K (2011-03-16). Ideas About Art. ISBN 9781444396003. 
^ The Apollonianism and Dionysiansism by Friedrich Nietzsche. 
^ Dionysus in Nietzsche and Greek Myth. Archived from the original on 14 August 2012. 
^ Procrastination in Shakespeare's Hamlet. 
^ Nietzsche on Hamlet (Commonplace Book). 
^ The role of art in Nietzsche's philosophy. 
^ Dionysus versus Apollo. 
^ The Birth of Tragedy Summary. 
^ Benedict, Ruth. Patterns of Culture. 
^ Influence of C.G. Jung on PKD – notes by Frank Bertrand, excerpt Umland. 
^ Mahon, Michael (1992). Foucault's Nietzschean Genealogy. ISBN 9780791411490. 
^ Lampert 1986, pp. 17–18.
^ Heidegger.
^ Cristoph, Cox (1999). Nietzsche: Naturalism and Interpretation. ISBN 9780520921603. 
^ Schacht, Richard, Nietzsche, 1983, p. 61.
^ Steve, Hoenisch. Max Weber's View of Objectivity in Social Science. 
^ Culture and perspectivism in Nietzsche's and Weber's view. 
^ Objective and subjective reality; perspectivism. 
^ Solomon, Robert C (1989). From Hegel to Existentialism. ISBN 9780195061826. 
^ Murphy, Mark C (2003-06-23). Alasdair MacIntyre. ISBN 9780521793810. 
^ Lutz, Christopher Stephen (2009). Tradition in the ethics of Alasdair MacIntyre. ISBN 9780739141489. 
^ Kaufmann, Walter Arnold (1980). From Shakespeare to existentialism. ISBN 0691013675. 
^ Nietzsche, Friedrich (1887). On the Genealogy of Morals. pp. First essay, section 16. 
^ Nietzsche, Friedrich (1908). Ecce Homo. pp. Chapter on The Case of Wagner, section 2. 
^ Nietzsche, Friedrich (1886). Beyond Good and Evil. pp. Section 228. 
^ Bowman, William (2016). Friedrich Nietzsche: Herald of a New Era. Hazar Press. pp. 31–38, 60–106. ISBN 978-0997570304. 
^ Kaufmann 1974, p. 187.
^ Nietzsche 1888d, M I.
^ a b Sedgwick 2009, p. 26.
^ Art in Nietzsche's philosophy. 
^ Sedgwick 2009, p. 27.
^ The Antichrist, section 7. transl. Walter Kaufmann, in The Portable Nietzsche, 1977, pp. 572–73.
^ Nietzsche 1888d, Why I Am a Destiny, §3.
^ Nietzsche 1888c, pp. 4, 8, 18, 29, 37, 40, 51, 57, 59.
^ Sedgwick 2009, p. 69.
^ Zev Golan, "Nietzsche: Anti- or Philo-Semite? An Examination of His Books," in God, Man and Nietzsche, iUniverse, 2008 edition.
^ a b c Sedgwick 2009, p. 68.
^ Nietzsche, Friedrich Wilhelm. Human, All Too Human: A Book for Free Spirits, Univ. of Nebraska Press (1986) p. 231
^ Morgan, George Allen (1941). What Nietzsche Means. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. p. 36. ISBN 0-8371-7404-X. 
^ Heidegger, p. 61.
^ This "will to nothingness" is still a willing of some sort, because it is exactly as a pessimist that Schopenhauer clings to life. See F. Nietzsche, On the Genealogy of Morals, III:7
^ F. Nietzsche, KSA 12:7 [8]
^ Friedrich Nietzsche, Complete Works Vol. 13.
^ Nietzsche 1886, p. 13.
^ Nietzsche 1882, p. 349.
^ Nietzsche 1887, p. II:12.
^ Nietzsche 1888b, Skirmishes of an untimely man, §14.
^ Brian Leiter, Routledge guide to Nietzsche on morality, p. 121
^ Nietzsche 1888c, §2.
^ Nietzsche 1886, I, §36.
^ Nietzsche comments in many notes about matter being a hypothesis drawn from the metaphysics of substance: G. Whitlock, "Roger Boscovich, Benedict de Spinoza and Friedrich Nietzsche: The Untold Story", Nietzsche-Studien 25, 1996, p. 207.
^ Nietzsche 1886, I, §12.
^ Deleuze 2006, p. 46.
^ Nietzsche 1886, I, §22.
^ "Project MUSE – Nietzsche's Mirror: The World as Will to Power (review)". Muse.jhu.edu. doi:10.1353/nie.2006.0006. Retrieved 22 August 2014. 
^ Nietzsche 1961, pp. 176–80.
^ Kundera, Milan (1999), The Unbearable Lightness of Being, p. 5 
^ Dudley, Will (2002). Hegel, Nietzsche, and Philosophy: Thinking Freedom. p. 201. ISBN 9780521812504. 
^ See Heidegger, Nietzsche. Volume II: The Eternal Recurrence of the Same trans. David Farrell Krell. New York: Harper and Row, 1984. 25.
^ a b Kaufmann, Friedrich Nietzsche. Transl., with comm., by Walter (1974). The Gay Science with a Prelude in Rhymes and an Appendix of Songs ([1st ed.] ed.). New York: Vintage Books. p. 16. ISBN 0394719859. 
^ Paul Van Tongeren (2000). Reinterpreting Modern Culture: An Introduction to Friedrich Nietzsche's Philosophy. Purdue University Press. p. 295. ISBN 978-1-55753-157-5. Retrieved 18 April 2013. 
^ Nietzsche, Friedrich (1954). The Portable Nietzsche. trans. Walter Kaufmann. New York: Penguin. 
^ Nietzsche, Friedrich (2006). Nietzsche: Thus Spoke Zarathustra. ed. Adrian Del Caro and Robert Pippin. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-60261-7. 
^ Lampert, Laurence (1986). Nietzsche's Teaching. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. 
^ Rosen, Stanley (1995). The Mask of Enlightenment. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
^ Lampert 1986, p. 18.
^ Philosophy 302: Ethics Nietzsche, "Slave and Master Morality". 
^ Thus Spoke Zarathustra themes. 
^ Nietzsche and Heidegger. Archived from the original on 7 June 2012. 
^ Kellner, Douglas (1999). "Nietzsche's Critique of Mass Culture". International Studies in Philosophy. 31 (3): 77–89. doi:10.5840/intstudphil199931353. 
^ Brobjer, Thomas. "Nietzsche's Reading and Private Library, 1885–1889." Published in Journal of History of Ideas.
^ Letter to Franz Overbeck, 30 July 1881
^ Russell 2004, pp. 693–97.
^ Joudrey, Thomas J. (2017). "The Defects of Perfectionism: Nietzsche, Eliot, and the Irrevocability of Wrong". Philological Quarterly (96.1): 77–104. 
^ Nietzsche 2001, p. xxxvii.
^ Roochnik 2004, pp. 37–39.
^ Roochnik 2004, p. 48.
^ Santayana 1916, p. 114.
^ Brendan Donnellan, "Nietzsche and La Rochefoucauld" in The German Quarterly, Vol. 52, No. 3 (May 1979), pp. 303–18
^ Nietzsche 1888d, "Why I am So Clever", §3.
^ Johan Grzelczyk, "Féré et Nietzsche: au sujet de la décadence" Archived 16 November 2006 at the Wayback Machine., HyperNietzsche, 1 November 2005 (in French). Grzelczyk quotes Jacques Le Rider, Nietzsche en France. De la fin du XIXe siècle au temps présent, Paris, PUF, 1999, pp. 8–9
^ Johan Grzelczyk, "Féré et Nietzsche: au sujet de la décadence" Archived 16 November 2006 at the Wayback Machine., HyperNietzsche, 1 November 2005 (in French). Grzelczyk quotes B. Wahrig-Schmidt, "Irgendwie, jedenfalls physiologisch. Friedrich Nietzsche, Alexandre Herzen (fils) und Charles Féré 1888" in Nietzsche Studien, Band 17, Berlin: Walter de Gruyter, 1988, p. 439
^ Thomas, Brobjer (2010-10-01). Nietzsche's Philosophical Context: An Intellectual Biography. ISBN 9780252090622. 
^ Note sur Nietzsche et Lange: "Le retour éternel", Albert Fouillée, Revue philosophique de la France et de l'étranger. An. 34. Paris 1909. T. 67, S. 519–25 (on French Wikisource)
^ Walter Kaufmann, intr. p. 11 of his transl. of 'The Gay Science'
^ Notebooks, cf. The Gay Science, Walter Kaufmann transl, p. 12
^ Weaver, Santaniello (1994-09-30). Nietzsche, God, and the Jews: His Critique of Judeo-Christianity in Relation to the Nazi Myth. ISBN 9780791421369. 
^ a b Mazzino Montinari, "La Volonté de puissance" n'existe pas, Éditions de l'Éclat, 1996, §13
^ Kaufmann 1974, pp. 306–40.
^ Nietzsche 1888b, §45.
^ Karl Löwith, From Hegel to Nietzsche, New York, 1964, p. 187.
^ S. Taylor, Left Wing Nietzscheans, The Politics of German Expressionism 1910–1920, Walter de Gruyter, Berlin/New York, 1990, p. 144.
^ G. Deleuze, Nietzsche and Philosophy (transl. Hugh Tomlinson), 2006, pp. 153–54.
^ R.C. Solomon & K.M. Higgins, The Age of German Idealism, Routledge, 1993, p. 300.
^ R.A. Samek, The Meta Phenomenon, New York, 1981, p. 70.
^ T. Goyens, Beer and Revolution: The German Anarchist Movement in New York City, Illinois, 2007, p. 197.
^ Laska, Bernd A. "Nietzsche's initial crisis". Germanic Notes and Reviews. 33 (2): 109–33. 
^ Liukkonen, Petri. "Friedrich Hölderlin". Books and Writers (kirjasto.sci.fi). Finland: Kuusankoski Public Library. Archived from the original on 26 December 2014. 
^ Meyer-Sickendiek, Burkhard, "Nietzsche's Aesthetic Solution to the Problem of Epigonism in the Nineteenth Century", ed. Paul Bishop, Nietzsche and Antiquity: His Reaction and Response to the Classical Tradition, Woodbridge, UK: Boydell & Brewer, 2004. p. 323
^ Rebekah, Peery (2008). Nietzsche, Philosopher of the Perilous Perhaps. ISBN 9780875866444. 
^ See 1910 article from the Encyclopædia Britannica
^ O. Ewald, "German Philosophy in 1907", in The Philosophical Review, Vol. 17, No. 4, July 1908, pp. 400–26.
^ T. A. Riley, "Anti-Statism in German Literature, as Exemplified by the Work of John Henry Mackay", in PMLA, Vol. 62, No. 3, September 1947, pp. 828–43.
^ C. E. Forth, "Nietzsche, Decadence, and Regeneration in France, 1891–1895", in Journal of the History of Ideas, Vol. 54, No. 1, January 1993, pp. 97–117.
^ Mencken, H.L. (1910). The Gist of Nietzsche. Boston, J. W. Luce & company. 
^ Expressionism. 
^ Postmodernism 
^ Everdell, William (1998). The First Moderns. Chicago: U Chicago Press. p. 508. ISBN 0-226-22481-3. 
^ Joyce and Nietzsche. Archived from the original on 12 June 2011. 
^ Pasley, Malcolm (1978). Nietzsche:Imagery and thoughts. ISBN 9780520035775. 
^ Forrester, John (1997). Dispatches from the Freud Wars. ISBN 9780674539600. 
^ Argyle, Gisela (2002-06-07). Germany as model and monster: Allusions in English fiction. ISBN 9780773523517. 
^ The Double Man. 
^ Donald, Mitchell (1980). Gustav Mahler: The Early Years. ISBN 9780520041417. 
^ James, Wood. Addicted to Unpredictability. 
^ Reesman, Jeanne Campbell (2011-03-15). Jack London's Racial Lives. ISBN 9780820339702. 
^ London, Jack (2001). A Sun of the Son. ISBN 9780806133621. 
^ Ray, Jackson (2007-03-12). Nietzsche and Islam. ISBN 9781134205004. 
^ Poets of Cambridge. Archived from the original on 29 April 2012. 
^ Wallace Stevens' Harmonium. 
^ Serio, John N (2007-01-18). The Cambridge Companion to Wallace Stevens. ISBN 9781139827546. 
^ Olaf Stapleton. 
^ Brad, Damare. Music and Literature in Silver Age Russia: Mikhail Kuzmin and Alexander Scriabin. ISBN 9780549819103. 
^ Bernice, Rosenthal (2010-11-01). New Myth, New World: From Nietzsche to Stalinism. ISBN 0271046589. 
^ Bernice, Rosenthal. Nietzsche and Soviet Culture: Ally and Adversary. 
^ Shookman, Ellis (2004). Thomas Mann's Death in Venice. ISBN 9780313311598. 
^ Nietzsche Circle. Archived from the original on 23 January 2013. 
^ Mann, Thomas:Doctor Faustus. 
^ Nietzsche, Friedrich: Also Sprach Zarathustra. 
^ Aschheim, Steven E. (1992), The Nietzsche Legacy in Germany, 1890–1990, Berkeley and Los Angeles, p. 135, [a]bout 150,000 copies of a specially durable wartime Zarathustra were distributed to the troops 
^ Kaufmann 1974, p. 8.
^ Schrift, A.D. (1995). Nietzsche's French Legacy: A Genealogy of Poststructuralism. Routledge. ISBN 0-415-91147-8.
^ Jacob, Golomb. Nietzsche and Zion. 
^ Jacob, Golomb. Nietzsche and Zion. 
^ Ohana, David (2012-01-23). The Origins of Israeli Mythology: Neither Canaanites nor Crusaders. ISBN 9781139505208. 
^ Golomb 1997, pp. 234–35.
^ Walter, Kaufmann (2008-09-02). Nietzsche: Philosopher, Psychologist, Antichrist. ISBN 1400820162. 
^ Zev Golan, God, Man and Nietzsche, iUniverse, 2007, p. 169: "It would be most useful if our youth climbed, even if only briefly, to Zarathustra's heights..."
^ Press, Cambridge University (1998-09-24). The Cambridge Companion to Eugene O'Neill. ISBN 9780521556453. 
^ Postomodern considerations of Nietzschean perspectivism. [dead link]
^ Diggins, John Patrick (2008-09-15). Eugene O'Neill's America: Desire Under Democracy. ISBN 9780226148823. 
^ Törnqvist, Egil (2004-01-14). Eugene O'Neill:A Playwright's theatre. ISBN 9780786417131. 
^ Adorno, Theodor. 
^ Arthur, Herman (2010-06-15). The Idea of Decline in Western History. ISBN 9781451603132. 
^ "We know, from his [Hitler's] secretary, that he could quote Schopenhauer by the page, and the other German philosopher of willpower, Nietzsche, whose works he afterwards presented to Mussolini, was often on his lips." Trevor Roper, H. The Mind of Adolf Hitler, p. xxxvii. Introductory essay for Hitler's Table Talk 1941–1944 Secret Conversations. Enigma Books (2008)
^ "'Landsberg,' Hitler told Hans Frank, was his 'university paid for by the state.' He read, he said, everything he could get hold of: Nietzsche, Houston Stewart Chamberlain, Ranke, Treitschke, Marx, Bismarck's Thoughts and Memories, and the war memoirs of German and allied generals and statesmen....But Hitler's reading and reflection were anything but academic, doubtless he did read much. However, as was noted in an earlier chapter, he made clear in My Struggle that reading for him had purely an instrumental purpose. He read not for knowledge or enlightenment, but for confirmation of his own preconceptions." Kershaw, Ian Hitler: Hubris 1889–1936. WW Norton p. 240
^ Weaver Santaniello, Nietzsche, God, and the Jews, SUNY Press, 1994, p. 41: "Hitler probably never read a word of Nietzsche."
^ Berel Lang, Post-Holocaust: Interpretation, Misinterpretation, and the Claims of History, Indiana University Press, 2005, p. 162: "Arguably, Hitler himself never read a word of Nietzsche; certainly, if he did read him, it was not extensively."
^ William L. Shirer, The Rise and Fall of the Third Reich: A History of Nazi Germany, Touchstone, 1959, pp. 100–01
^ Simonetta Falasca-Zamponi, Fascist Spectacle: The Aesthetics of Power in Mussolini's Italy, University of California Press, 2000, p. 44: "In 1908 he presented his conception of the superman's role in modern society in a writing on Nietzsche titled "The Philosophy of Force."
^ Philip Morgan, Fascism in Europe, 1919–1945, Routledge, 2003, p. 21: "We know that Mussolini had read Nietzsche"
^ J. L. Gaddis, P. H. Gordon, E. R. May, J. Rosenberg, Cold War Statesmen Confront the Bomb, Oxford University Press, 1999, p. 217: "The son of a history teacher, de Gaulle read voraciously as a boy and young man—Jacques Bainville, Henri Bergson, Friederich  [sic] Nietzsche, Maurice Barres—and was steeped in conservative French historical and philosophical traditions."
^ Mumia, Abu-Jamal (2004). We Want Freedom: A Life in the Black Panther Party. ISBN 9780896087187. 
^ Crowley, Monica (1998), Nixon in Winter, IB Tauris, p. 351, He read with curious interest the writings of Friedrich Nietzsche [...] Nixon asked to borrow my copy of Beyond Good and Evil, a title that inspired the title of his final book, Beyond Peace. 
^ Lev, Shestov. Dostoevsky, Tolstoy, and Nietzsche. ASIN 0821400533. CS1 maint: ASIN uses ISBN (link)
^ Stefan, Sorgner. Nietzsche & Germany. 
^ Rickman, Hans Peter (1996). Philosophy in Literature. ISBN 9780838636527. 
^ Oswald Spengler. Archived from the original on 20 May 2013. 
^ George Grant. 
^ Tat, Alin; Popenici, Stefan (2008). Romanian Philosophical Culture, Globalization, and Education. ISBN 9781565182424. 
^ The Transformation of Nietzschean Ideas in The Fountainhead. 
^ Lampert, Laurence (1996). Leo Strauss and Nietzsche. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
^ Cornwell, Neil (2006-10-31). The Absurd in Literature. ISBN 9780719074103. 
^ Ricœur, Paul (1970). Freud and Philosophy: An Essay on Interpretation. New Haven and London: Yale University Press. p. 32. ISBN 0-300-02189-5. 
^ "Jarrett, J.L., ed.: Jung's Seminar on Nietzsche's Zarathustra: (Abridged edition) (paperback)". Press.princeton.edu. Retrieved 22 August 2014. 
^ "Jung's Reception of Friedrich Nietzsche: A Roadmap for the Uninitiated by Dr. Ritske Rensma". Depth Insights. Retrieved 22 August 2014. 
^ a b Raymond A. Belliotti, Jesus or Nietzsche: How Should We Live Our Lives? (Rodopi, 2013).
^ Ronald A. Kuipers, "Turning Memory into Prophecy: Roberto Unger and Paul Ricoeur on the Human Condition Between Past and Future," The Heythrop Journal (2011): 1–10.
^ Richard Rorty, "Unger, Castoriadis, and the Romance of a National Future," Northwestern University Law Review 82 (1988 1987): 39.
^ Bloomsbury.com. "The Peacock and the Buffalo". 



Works cited[edit]


Cate, Curtis (2005). Friedrich Nietzsche. Woodstock, NY: The Overlook Press. 
Deleuze, Gilles (2006) [1983]. Nietzsche and Philosophy. trans. Hugh Tomlinson. Athlone Press. ISBN 0-485-11233-7. 
Golomb, Jacob, ed. (1997). Nietzsche and Jewish culture. Routledge. ISBN 9780415095129. 
Heidegger, Martin. The Word of Nietzsche. 
Kaufmann, Walter (1974). Nietzsche: Philosopher, Psychologist, Antichrist. Princeton University Press. ISBN 0-691-01983-5. 
Lampert, Laurence (1986). Nietzsche's Teaching: An Interpretation of "Thus Spoke Zarathustra". New Haven: Yale University Press. ISBN 0-300-04430-5. 
Roochnik, David (2004). Retrieving the Ancients. 
Russell, Bertrand (2004). A History of Western Philosophy. Routledge. 
Santayana, George (1916). "XI". Egotism in German Philosophy. London & Toronto: JM Dent & Sons. 
Sedgwick, Peter R (2009). Nietzsche: the key concepts. Routledge, Oxon, England: Routledge. 
Higgins, Kathleen (2000). What Nietzsche Really Said. University of Texas, Austin, Texas: Random House, NY. 


Further reading[edit]


Arena, Leonardo Vittorio (2012), Nietzsche in China in the XXth Century, ebook 
Babich, Babette E. (1994), Nietzsche's Philosophy of Science, Albany: State University of New York Press.
Baird, Forrest E; Walter Kaufmann (2008), From Plato to Derrida, Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Prentice Hall, pp. 1011–38, ISBN 0-13-158591-6 
Benson, Bruce Ellis (2007). Pious Nietzsche: Decadence and Dionysian Faith. Indiana University Press. p. 296. 
Breitschmid, Markus, Der bauende Geist. Friedrich Nietzsche und die Architektur. Lucerne: Quart Verlag, 2001, ISBN 3-907631-23-4
Breitschmid, Markus, Nietzsche's Denkraum. Zurich: Edition Didacta, 2006, Hardcover Edition: ISBN 978-3-033-01206-6; Paperback Edition: ISBN 978-3-033-01148-9
Brunger, Jeremy. 2015. "Public Opinions, Private Laziness: The Epistemological Break in Nietzsche. Numero Cinq magazine (August).
Corriero, Emilio Carlo, Nietzsche oltre l'abisso. Declinazioni italiane della 'morte di Dio', Marco Valerio, Torino, 2007
Dod, Elmar, "Der unheimlichste Gast. Die Philosophie des Nihilismus". Marburg: Tectum Verlag 2013. ISBN 978-3-8288-3107-0
Eilon, Eli. Nietzsche's Principle of Abundance as Guiding Aesthetic Value. Nietzsche-Studien, December 2001 (30). pp. 200–21. 
Gemes, Ken; May, Simon, eds. (2002). Nietzsche on Freedom and Autonomy. Oxford University Press. .
Golan, Zev. God, Man and Nietzsche: A Startling Dialogue between Judaism and Modern Philosophers (iUniverse, 2007).
Hunt, Lester (2008). "Nietzsche, Friedrich (1844–1900)". In Hamowy, Ronald. The Encyclopedia of Libertarianism. The Encyclopedia of Libertarianism. Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE; Cato Institute. pp. 355–56. doi:10.4135/9781412965811.n217. ISBN 978-1-4129-6580-4. LCCN 2008009151. OCLC 750831024. 
Kaplama, Erman. Cosmological Aesthetics through the Kantian Sublime and Nietzschean Dionysian. Lanham: UPA, Rowman & Littlefield, 2014.
Kopić, Mario, S Nietzscheom o Europi, Jesenski i Turk, Zagreb, 2001 ISBN 978-953-222-016-2
Luchte, James (2008). Nietzsche's Thus Spoke Zarathustra: Before Sunrise. London: Bloomsbury Publishing. ISBN 978-1441116536. .
Magnus and Higgins, "Nietzsche's works and their themes", in The Cambridge Companion to Nietzsche, Magnus and Higgins (ed.), University of Cambridge Press, 1996, pp. 21–58. ISBN 0-521-36767-0
O'Flaherty, James C., Sellner, Timothy F., Helm, Robert M., "Studies in Nietzsche and the Classical Tradition" (University of North Carolina Press) 1979 ISBN 0-8078-8085-X
O'Flaherty, James C., Sellner, Timothy F., Helm, Robert M., "Studies in Nietzsche and the Judaeo-Christian Tradition" (University of North Carolina Press) 1985 ISBN 0-8078-8104-X
Owen, David. Nietzsche, Politics & Modernity (London: Sage Publications, 1995).
Pérez, Rolando. Towards a Genealogy of the Gay Science: From Toulouse and Barcelona to Nietzsche and Beyond. eHumanista/IVITRA. Volume 5, 2014. https://web.archive.org/web/20140924114053/http://www.ehumanista.ucsb.edu/eHumanista%20IVITRA/Volume%205/Volum%20Regular/7_Perez.pdf
Porter, James I. "Nietzsche and the Philology of the Future" (Stanford University Press, 2000). ISBN 0-8047-3698-7
Emilio Carlo Corriero, "Nietzsche's Death of God and Italian Philosophy". Preface by Gianni Vattimo, Rowman & Littlefield, London - New York, 2016
Porter, James I (2000). The Invention of Dionysus: An Essay on The Birth of Tragedy. Stanford University Press. ISBN 0-8047-3700-2. .
Ratner-Rosenhagen, Jennifer (2011), American Nietzsche: A History of an Icon and His Ideas. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Seung, T.K. Nietzsche's Epic of the Soul: Thus Spoke Zarathustra. Lanham, Maryland: Lexington Books, 2005. ISBN 0-7391-1130-2
Shapiro, Gary (2003). Archaeologies of Vision: Foucault and Nietzsche on Seeing and Saying. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. ISBN 0226750477. 
Shapiro, Gary (2016). Nietzsche's Earth: Great Events, Great Politics. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. ISBN 022639445X. 
Shapiro, Gary (1991). Alcyone: Nietzsche on Gifts, Noise, and Women. Albany: SUNY Press. ISBN 079140742X. 
Tanner, Michael (1994). Nietzsche. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-287680-5. 
von Vacano, Diego (2007). The Art of Power: Machiavelli, Nietzsche and the Making of Aesthetic Political Theory. Lanham, MD: Lexington. .
Wicks, Robert. "Friedrich Nietzsche". In Edward N. Zalta. The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2004 ed.). 
Young, Julian. Friedrich Nietzsche: A Philosophical Biography (Cambridge University Press; 2010) 649 pp.


External links[edit]

Find more aboutFriedrich Nietzscheat Wikipedia's sister projects

Media from Wikimedia Commons
Quotations from Wikiquote
Texts from Wikisource
Learning resources from Wikiversity



Nietzsche's brief autobiography
Works by Friedrich Nietzsche at Project Gutenberg
Works by or about Friedrich Nietzsche at Internet Archive
Works by Friedrich Nietzsche at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) 
Publications by and about Friedrich Nietzsche in the catalogue Helveticat of the Swiss National Library
Wilkerson, Dale (2009). "Friedrich Nietzsche". Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy. 

Jensen, Anthony K. "Nietzsche's Philosophy of History". Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy. 


Wicks, Robert (14 November 2007). "Friedrich Nietzsche". In Zalta, Edward N. Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. 

Leiter, Brian (27 July 2007). "Nietzsche's Moral and Political Philosophy". In Zalta, Edward N. Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. 


Nietzsche Source: Digital version of the German critical edition of the complete works and Digital facsimile edition of the entire Nietzsche estate
Lexido: Searchable Database index of Public Domain editions of all Nietzsche's major works
Friedrich Nietzsche at Curlie (based on DMOZ)
Free scores by Friedrich Nietzsche at the International Music Score Library Project (IMSLP)
Timeline of German Philosophers
Walter Kaufmann 1960 Prof. Nietzsche and the Crisis in Philosophy Audio
Kierans, Kenneth (2010). "On the Unity of Nietzsche's Philosophy" (PDF). Animus. 14. ISSN 1209-0689. Retrieved 17 August 2011. 
Brian Leiter's Nietzsche Blog: News, polls, and discussion about Nietzsche and current events in Nietzsche scholarship from Brian Leiter (University of Chicago).
BBC (1999). "Beyond Good and Evil". Human, All Too Human.
Burkhart Brückner, Robin Pape: Biography of Friedrich Wilhelm Nietzsche in: Biographical Archive of Psychiatry (BIAPSY).







v
t
e


Friedrich Nietzsche



Works



The Birth of Tragedy
On the Pathos of Truth
Philosophy in the Tragic Age of the Greeks
On Truth and Lies in a Nonmoral Sense
Untimely Meditations
Hymnus an das Leben
Human, All Too Human
The Dawn
Idylls from Messina
The Gay Science
Thus Spoke Zarathustra
Beyond Good and Evil
On the Genealogy of Morality
The Case of Wagner
Twilight of the Idols
The Antichrist
Ecce Homo
Dionysian-Dithyrambs
Nietzsche contra Wagner
The Will to Power (posthumous)





Concepts



Amor fati
Apollonian and Dionysian
Eternal return
Faith in the Earth
God is dead
Herd instinct
Last man
Master–slave morality
Nietzschean affirmation
Perspectivism
Ressentiment
Transvaluation of values
Tschandala
Übermensch
Will to power
World riddle





Related articles



Works about Nietzsche
Influence and reception of Nietzsche
Anarchism and Nietzsche
Nietzsche's views on women
Nietzsche and free will
The Journal of Nietzsche Studies
Library of Friedrich Nietzsche
Nietzsche and Asian Thought
Nietzsche-Archiv
Nietzsche-Haus, Naumburg
Nietzsche-Haus, Sils Maria
Nietzsche's relationship with Max Stirner
My Sister and I, a tale of incest
When Nietzsche Wept (novel
film)












v
t
e


Friedrich Nietzsche's Thus Spoke Zarathustra



Music



Also sprach Zarathustra
A Mass of Life
Zarathustra





Poetry



Zarathustra's roundelay










Articles related to Friedrich Nietzsche











v
t
e


Continental philosophy



Philosophers



Theodor W. Adorno
Giorgio Agamben
Louis Althusser
Hannah Arendt
Gaston Bachelard
Alain Badiou
Roland Barthes
Georges Bataille
Jean Baudrillard
Zygmunt Bauman
Walter Benjamin
Simone de Beauvoir
Henri Bergson
Maurice Blanchot
Pierre Bourdieu
Wendy Brown
Martin Buber
Judith Butler
Albert Camus
Ernst Cassirer
Cornelius Castoriadis
Emil Cioran
Guy Debord
Gilles Deleuze
Jacques Derrida
Hubert L. Dreyfus
Umberto Eco
Terry Eagleton
Frantz Fanon
Johann Gottlieb Fichte
Michel Foucault
Hans-Georg Gadamer
Félix Guattari
Antonio Gramsci
Roman Ingarden
Jürgen Habermas
Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel
Martin Heidegger
Edmund Husserl
Luce Irigaray
Fredric Jameson
Karl Jaspers
Walter Kaufmann
Søren Kierkegaard
Pierre Klossowski
Alexandre Kojève
Alexandre Koyré
Leszek Kołakowski
Julia Kristeva
Jacques Lacan
François Laruelle
Henri Lefebvre
Claude Lévi-Strauss
Emmanuel Levinas
Niklas Luhmann
György Lukács
Jean-François Lyotard
Gabriel Marcel
Herbert Marcuse
Karl Marx
Quentin Meillassoux
Maurice Merleau-Ponty
Antonio Negri
Friedrich Nietzsche
José Ortega y Gasset
Paul Ricœur
Edward Said
Jean-Paul Sartre
Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph Schelling
Carl Schmitt
Arthur Schopenhauer
Michel Serres
Gilbert Simondon
Peter Sloterdijk
Leo Strauss
Raymond Williams
Slavoj Žižek





Theories



Critical theory
Deconstruction
Existentialism
Frankfurt School
German idealism
Hermeneutics
Neo-Kantianism
Non-philosophy
Phenomenology
Postmodernism
Post-structuralism
Psychoanalytic theory
Social constructionism
Speculative realism
Structuralism
Western Marxism





Concepts



Angst
Authenticity
Being in itself
Boredom
Dasein
Différance
Difference
Existential crisis
Facticity
Intersubjectivity
Ontic
Other
Self-deception
Trace








Category
Index












v
t
e


Existentialism



Concepts



Abandonment
Absurdism
Angst
Authenticity
Bad faith
Being in itself
Existence precedes essence
Existential crisis
Facticity
Meaning
Nihilism
Other





Thinkers



Nicola Abbagnano
Hannah Arendt
Abdel Rahman Badawi
Hazel Barnes
Karl Barth
Nikolai Berdyaev
Steve Biko
Martin Buber
Rudolf Bultmann
Dino Buzzati
Albert Camus
Jane Welsh Carlyle
Thomas Carlyle
Emil Cioran
Walter A. Davis
Simone de Beauvoir
Fyodor Dostoyevsky
William A. Earle
Ralph Ellison
Frantz Fanon
Vilém Flusser
Benjamin Fondane
James Anthony Froude
Alberto Giacometti
Juozas Girnius
Lewis Gordon
Martin Heidegger
Edmund Husserl
Eugène Ionesco
Nae Ionescu
William James
Karl Jaspers
Franz Kafka
Walter Kaufmann
Søren Kierkegaard
Ladislav Klíma
Emmanuel Levinas
Ash Lieb
John Macquarrie
Naguib Mahfouz
Gabriel Marcel
Vytautas Mačernis
Maurice Merleau-Ponty
Friedrich Nietzsche
José Ortega y Gasset
Viktor Petrov
Franz Rosenzweig
Jean-Paul Sartre
Aous Shakra
Lev Shestov
Joseph B. Soloveitchik
Paul Tillich
Rick Turner
Miguel de Unamuno
John Daniel Wild
Colin Wilson
Richard Wright
Peter Wessel Zapffe





Related



Phenomenology (philosophy)
Continental philosophy
Transcendentalism
German idealism
Western Marxism
Existentialist anarchism












v
t
e


Metaphysics



Metaphysicians



Parmenides
Plato
Aristotle
Plotinus
Duns Scotus
Thomas Aquinas
Francisco Suárez
Nicolas Malebranche
René Descartes
John Locke
David Hume
Thomas Reid
Immanuel Kant
Isaac Newton
Arthur Schopenhauer
Baruch Spinoza
Georg W. F. Hegel
George Berkeley
Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz
Henri Bergson
Friedrich Nietzsche
Charles Sanders Peirce
Joseph Maréchal
Ludwig Wittgenstein
Martin Heidegger
Alfred N. Whitehead
Bertrand Russell
Dorothy Emmet
G. E. Moore
Jean-Paul Sartre
Gilbert Ryle
Hilary Putnam
P. F. Strawson
R. G. Collingwood
Adolph Stöhr
Rudolf Carnap
Saul Kripke
Willard V. O. Quine
G. E. M. Anscombe
Donald Davidson
Michael Dummett
David Malet Armstrong
David Lewis
Alvin Plantinga
Peter van Inwagen
Derek Parfit
more ...





Theories



Abstract object theory
Action theory
Anti-realism
Determinism
Dualism
Enactivism
Essentialism
Existentialism
Free will
Idealism
Libertarianism
Liberty
Materialism
Meaning of life
Monism
Naturalism
Nihilism
Phenomenalism
Realism
Physicalism
Pirsig's metaphysics of Quality
Platonic idealism
Relativism
Scientific realism
Solipsism
Subjectivism
Substance theory
Type theory





Concepts



Abstract object
Anima mundi
Being
Category of being
Causality
Choice
Cogito ergo sum
Concept
Embodied cognition
Entity
Essence
Existence
Experience
Hypostatic abstraction
Idea
Identity
Identity and change
Information
Insight
Intelligence
Intention
Linguistic modality
Matter
Meaning
Memetics
Mental representation
Mind
Motion
Necessity
Notion
Object
Pattern
Perception
Physical body
Principle
Property
Qualia
Quality
Reality
Soul
Subject
Substantial form
Thought
Time
Truth
Type–token distinction
Universal
Unobservable
Value
more ...





Related topics



Axiology
Cosmology
Epistemology
Feminist metaphysics
Interpretations of quantum mechanics
Meta-
Ontology
Philosophy of mind
Philosophy of psychology
Philosophy of self
Philosophy of space and time
Teleology
Theoretical physics








 Category
 Portal












v
t
e


Ethics



Theories



Casuistry
Consequentialism
Deontology

Kantian ethics


Ethics of care
Existentialist ethics
Meta-ethics
Particularism
Pragmatic ethics
Role ethics
Virtue ethics





Concepts



Autonomy
Axiology
Belief
Conscience
Consent
Equality
Care
Free will
Good and evil
Happiness
Ideal
Justice
Morality
Norm
Freedom
Principles
Suffering or Pain
Stewardship
Sympathy
Trust
Value
Virtue
Wrong
full index...





Philosophers



Laozi
Plato
Aristotle
Diogenes
Valluvar
Cicero
Confucius
Augustine of Hippo
Mencius
Mozi
Xunzi
Thomas Aquinas
Baruch Spinoza
David Hume
Immanuel Kant
Georg W. F. Hegel
Arthur Schopenhauer
Jeremy Bentham
John Stuart Mill
Søren Kierkegaard
Henry Sidgwick
Friedrich Nietzsche
G. E. Moore
Karl Barth
Paul Tillich
Dietrich Bonhoeffer
Philippa Foot
John Rawls
John Dewey
Bernard Williams
J. L. Mackie
G. E. M. Anscombe
William Frankena
Alasdair MacIntyre
R. M. Hare
Peter Singer
Derek Parfit
Thomas Nagel
Robert Merrihew Adams
Charles Taylor
Joxe Azurmendi
Christine Korsgaard
Martha Nussbaum
more...





Applied ethics



Bioethics
Business ethics
Discourse ethics
Environmental ethics
Legal ethics
Media ethics
Medical ethics
Nursing ethics
Professional ethics
Sexual ethics
Ethics of eating meat
Ethics of technology





Related articles



Christian ethics
Descriptive ethics
Ethics in religion
Evolutionary ethics
Feminist ethics
History of ethics
Ideology
Islamic ethics
Jewish ethics
Normative ethics
Philosophy of law
Political philosophy
Social philosophy








Portal
Category












v
t
e


Aesthetics topics



Philosophers



Abhinavagupta
Theodor W. Adorno
Leon Battista Alberti
Thomas Aquinas
Hans Urs von Balthasar
Alexander Gottlieb Baumgarten
Clive Bell
Bernard Bosanquet
Edward Bullough
R. G. Collingwood
Ananda Coomaraswamy
Arthur Danto
John Dewey
Denis Diderot
Hubert Dreyfus
Curt John Ducasse
Thierry de Duve
Roger Fry
Nelson Goodman
Clement Greenberg
Georg Hegel
Martin Heidegger
David Hume
Immanuel Kant
Paul Klee
Susanne Langer
Theodor Lipps
György Lukács
Jean-François Lyotard
Joseph Margolis
Jacques Maritain
Thomas Munro
Friedrich Nietzsche
José Ortega y Gasset
Dewitt H. Parker
Stephen Pepper
David Prall
Jacques Rancière
Ayn Rand
George Lansing Raymond
I. A. Richards
George Santayana
Friedrich Schiller
Arthur Schopenhauer
Roger Scruton
Irving Singer
Rabindranath Tagore
Giorgio Vasari
Morris Weitz
Johann Joachim Winckelmann
Richard Wollheim
more...





Theories



Classicism
Evolutionary aesthetics
Historicism
Modernism
New Classical
Postmodernism
Psychoanalytic theory
Romanticism
Symbolism
more...





Concepts



Aesthetic emotions
Aesthetic interpretation
Art manifesto
Avant-garde
Axiology
Beauty
Boredom
Camp
Comedy
Creativity
Cuteness
Disgust
Ecstasy
Elegance
Entertainment
Eroticism
Gaze
Harmony
Judgement
Kama
Kitsch
Life imitating art
Magnificence
Mimesis
Perception
Quality
Rasa
Reverence
Style
Sublime
Taste
Work of art





Related topics



Aesthetics of music
Applied aesthetics
Architecture
Art
Arts criticism
Feminist aesthetics
Gastronomy
History of painting
Humour
Japanese aesthetics
Literary merit
Mathematical beauty
Mathematics and architecture
Mathematics and art
Music theory
Neuroesthetics
Painting
Patterns in nature
Philosophy of design
Philosophy of film
Philosophy of music
Poetry
Sculpture
Theory of painting
Theory of art
Tragedy
Visual arts








Index
Outline
Category
Portal












v
t
e


Philosophy of religion



Concepts in religion



Afterlife
Euthyphro dilemma
Faith
Intelligent design
Miracle
Problem of evil
Religious belief
Soul
Spirit
Theodicy
Theological veto





Conceptions of God







Aristotelian view
Brahman
Demiurge
Divine simplicity
Egoism
Holy Spirit
Misotheism
Pandeism
Personal god
Process theology
Supreme Being
Unmoved mover





God in



Abrahamic religions
Buddhism
Christianity
Hinduism
Islam
Jainism
Judaism
Mormonism
Sikhism
Bahá'í Faith
Wicca








Existence of God




For



Beauty
Christological
Consciousness
Cosmological

Kalam
Contingency


Degree
Desire
Experience
Fine-tuning of the Universe
Love
Miracles
Morality
Necessary existent
Ontological
Pascal's Wager
Proper basis
Reason
Teleological

Natural law
Watchmaker analogy


Transcendental





Against



747 gambit
Atheist's Wager
Evil
Free will
Hell
Inconsistent revelations
Nonbelief
Noncognitivism
Occam's razor
Omnipotence
Poor design
Russell's teapot








Theology



Acosmism
Agnosticism
Animism
Antireligion
Atheism
Creationism
Dharmism
Deism
Demonology
Divine command theory
Dualism
Esotericism
Exclusivism
Existentialism

Christian
Agnostic
Atheistic


Feminist theology

Thealogy
Womanist theology


Fideism
Fundamentalism
Gnosticism
Henotheism
Humanism

Religious
Secular
Christian


Inclusivism
Theories about religions
Monism
Monotheism
Mysticism
Naturalism

Metaphysical
Religious
Humanistic


New Age
Nondualism
Nontheism
Pandeism
Panentheism
Pantheism
Perennialism
Polytheism
Possibilianism
Process theology
Religious skepticism
Spiritualism
Shamanism
Taoic
Theism
Transcendentalism
more...





Religious language



Eschatological verification
Language-game
Logical positivism
Apophatic theology
Verificationism





Problem of evil



Augustinian theodicy
Best of all possible worlds
Euthyphro dilemma
Inconsistent triad
Irenaean theodicy
Natural evil
Theodicy






Philosophers
of religion

(by date active)




Ancient
and
Medieval



Anselm of Canterbury
Augustine of Hippo
Avicenna
Averroes
Boethius
Erasmus
Gaunilo of Marmoutiers
Pico della Mirandola
Heraclitus
King James VI and I
Marcion of Sinope
Thomas Aquinas
Maimonides





Enlightenment



Augustin Calmet
René Descartes
Blaise Pascal
Baruch Spinoza
Nicolas Malebranche
Gottfried W Leibniz
William Wollaston
Thomas Chubb
David Hume
Baron d'Holbach
Immanuel Kant
Johann G Herder





1800
1850



Friedrich Schleiermacher
Karl C F Krause
Georg W F Hegel


William Whewell
Ludwig Feuerbach
Søren Kierkegaard
Karl Marx
Albrecht Ritschl
Afrikan Spir





1880
1900



Ernst Haeckel
W. K. Clifford
Friedrich Nietzsche
Harald Høffding
William James


Vladimir Solovyov
Ernst Troeltsch
Rudolf Otto
Lev Shestov
Sergei Bulgakov
Pavel Florensky
Ernst Cassirer
Joseph Maréchal





1920
postwar



George Santayana
Bertrand Russell
Martin Buber
René Guénon
Paul Tillich
Karl Barth
Emil Brunner
Rudolf Bultmann
Gabriel Marcel
Reinhold Niebuhr


Charles Hartshorne
Mircea Eliade
J L Mackie
Walter Kaufmann
Martin Lings
Peter Geach
George I Mavrodes
William Alston
Antony Flew





1970
1990
2010



William L Rowe
Dewi Z Phillips
Alvin Plantinga
Anthony Kenny
Nicholas Wolterstorff
Richard Swinburne
Robert Merrihew Adams


Peter van Inwagen
Daniel Dennett
Loyal Rue
Jean-Luc Marion
William Lane Craig
Ali Akbar Rashad


Alexander Pruss








Related topics



Criticism of religion
Ethics in religion
Exegesis
History of religions
Religion
Religious language
Religious philosophy
Relationship between religion and science
Political science of religion
Faith and rationality
more...








 Portal
 Category












v
t
e


Social and political philosophy



Philosophers



Ambedkar
Arendt
Aristotle
Augustine
Aurobindo
Aquinas
Aron
Averroes
Azurmendi
Badiou
Bakunin
Baudrillard
Bauman
Benoist
Bentham
Berlin
Bonald
Bosanquet
Burke
Judith Butler
Camus
Chanakya
Chomsky
Cicero
Comte
Confucius
De Beauvoir
Debord
Du Bois
Durkheim
Emerson
Engels
Foucault
Fourier
Franklin
Gandhi
Gehlen
Gentile
Al-Ghazali
Gramsci
Grotius
Habermas
Han Fei
Hayek
Hegel
Heidegger
Hobbes
Hume
Irigaray
Jefferson
Kant
Kierkegaard
Kirk
Kropotkin
Laozi
Le Bon
Le Play
Leibniz
Lenin
Locke
Luxemburg
Machiavelli
Maistre
Malebranche
Mao
Marcuse
Maritain
Marsilius
Marx
Mencius
Michels
Mill
Mises
Montesquieu
Möser
Mozi
Muhammad
Negri
Niebuhr
Nietzsche
Nozick
Oakeshott
Ortega
Paine
Pareto
Pettit
Plamenatz
Plato
Polanyi
Popper
Radhakrishnan
Rand
Rawls
Renan
Rothbard
Rousseau
Royce
Russell
Sade
Santayana
Sarkar
Sartre
Schmitt
Searle
Shang
Simonović
Skinner
Smith
Socrates
Sombart
Spann
Spencer
Spinoza
Spirito
Stirner
Strauss
Sun
Sun Tzu
Taine
Taylor
Thucydides
Thoreau
Tocqueville
Vivekananda
Voltaire
Walzer
Weber
Žižek





Social theories



Ambedkarism
Anarchism
Authoritarianism
Collectivism
Communism
Communitarianism
Conflict theories
Confucianism
Consensus theory
Conservatism
Contractualism
Cosmopolitanism
Culturalism
Fascism
Feminist political theory
Gandhism
Individualism
Legalism
Liberalism
Libertarianism
Mohism
National liberalism
Republicanism
Social constructionism
Social constructivism
Social Darwinism
Social determinism
Socialism
Utilitarianism
Vaisheshika





Social concepts



Civil disobedience
Democracy
Four occupations
Justice
Law
Mandate of Heaven
Peace
Property
Revolution
Rights
Social contract
Society
War
more...





Related articles



Jurisprudence
Philosophy and economics
Philosophy of education
Philosophy of history
Philosophy of love
Philosophy of sex
Philosophy of social science
Political ethics
Social epistemology








Category
Portal
Task Force












v
t
e


Philosophers and theologians associated with Death of God theology






Thomas J. J. Altizer
Paul van Buren
John D. Caputo
Meister Eckhart
William Hamilton
G. W. F. Hegel
Friedrich Nietzsche
Pseudo-Dionysius
John Robinson
Richard L. Rubenstein
Paul Tillich
Gabriel Vahanian
Gianni Vattimo
Slavoj Žižek














Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 89798474
LCCN: n79021132
ISNI: 0000 0001 2282 8181
GND: 118587943
SELIBR: 205999
SUDOC: 086200038
BNF: cb11917712p (data)
BIBSYS: 90051300
ULAN: 500222156
HDS: 11641
MusicBrainz: d20d70cd-db2d-476c-80f5-87ebfda2a850
NLA: 35471497
NDL: 00451342
NKC: jn19990006124
BNE: XX905825
RKD: 439285
IATH: w6zk5h48











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Friedrich_Nietzsche&oldid=818333110"					Categories: Friedrich Nietzsche1844 births1900 deaths19th-century atheists19th-century classical composers19th-century German journalists19th-century German musicians19th-century German novelists19th-century German philosophersGerman male journalistsAphoristsAtheist existentialistsAtheist philosophersContinental philosophersCritics of ChristianityDeath of God theologiansDeaths from pneumoniaDeterministsExistentialistsFormer LutheransGerman atheistsGerman classical composersGerman classical philologistsGerman-language poetsGerman male classical composersGerman military personnel of the Franco-Prussian WarGerman music criticsGerman philosophersGerman Romantic composersAnti-nationalistsHellenistsPeople from LützenPeople from the Province of SaxonyPhilosophers of artPhilosophers of historyPhilosophers of nihilismPrussian Army personnelStateless peopleUniversity of Basel facultyLeipzig University alumniUniversity of Bonn alumniWriters from Saxony-AnhaltGerman atheism activistsAtheist writersAntitheistsHidden categories: All articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from January 2017Articles with permanently dead external linksArticles needing more detailed referencesCS1 German-language sources (de)Articles with dead external links from June 2017CS1 French-language sources (fr)Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from September 2010Webarchive template wayback linksArticles with French-language external linksArticles with dead external links from May 2016CS1 maint: ASIN uses ISBNUse dmy dates from November 2016Articles containing German-language textArticles containing Latin-language textBiography with signatureArticles with hCardsArticles with hAudio microformatsInterlanguage link template link numberAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from August 2013All articles with failed verificationArticles with failed verification from October 2015Articles lacking chronology/history sourcesArticles with unsourced statements from August 2014Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from April 2012Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from March 2012Articles needing additional references from October 2017All articles needing additional referencesArticles with Project Gutenberg linksArticles with Internet Archive linksArticles with LibriVox linksArticles with DMOZ linksComposers with IMSLP linksArticles with International Music Score Library Project linksAC with 17 elementsWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with SELIBR identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersWikipedia articles with BIBSYS identifiersWikipedia articles with ULAN identifiersWikipedia articles with MusicBrainz identifiersWikipedia articles with NLA identifiersWikipedia articles with RKDartists identifiersWikipedia articles with SNAC-ID identifiers