For other uses, see Fruit (disambiguation).




Culinary fruits






A large variety of fruits displayed at a market






The Medici citrus collection by Bartolomeo Bimbi, 1715


In botany, a fruit is the seed-bearing structure in flowering plants (also known as angiosperms) formed from the ovary after flowering.
Fruits are the means by which angiosperms disseminate seeds. Edible fruits, in particular, have propagated with the movements of humans and animals in a symbiotic relationship as a means for seed dispersal and nutrition; in fact, humans and many animals have become dependent on fruits as a source of food.[1] Accordingly, fruits account for a substantial fraction of the world's agricultural output, and some (such as the apple and the pomegranate) have acquired extensive cultural and symbolic meanings.
In common language usage, "fruit" normally means the fleshy seed-associated structures of a plant that are sweet or sour, and edible in the raw state, such as apples, bananas, grapes, lemons, oranges, and strawberries. On the other hand, in botanical usage, "fruit" includes many structures that are not commonly called "fruits", such as bean pods, corn kernels, tomatoes, and wheat grains.[2][3] The section of a fungus that produces spores is also called a fruiting body.[4]



Contents


1 Botanic fruit and culinary fruit
2 Structure
3 Development

3.1 Simple fruit
3.2 Aggregate fruit
3.3 Multiple fruits
3.4 Berries
3.5 Accessory fruit
3.6 Table of fruit examples


4 Seedless fruits
5 Seed dissemination
6 Uses

6.1 Nutritional value
6.2 Nonfood uses


7 Safety
8 Allergies
9 Storage
10 See also
11 References
12 Further reading
13 External links



Botanic fruit and culinary fruit




Venn diagram representing the relationship between (culinary) vegetables and botanical fruits[citation needed]


Many common terms for seeds and fruit do not correspond to the botanical classifications. In culinary terminology, a fruit is usually any sweet-tasting plant part, especially a botanical fruit; a nut is any hard, oily, and shelled plant product; and a vegetable is any savory or less sweet plant product.[5] However, in botany, a fruit is the ripened ovary or carpel that contains seeds, a nut is a type of fruit and not a seed, and a seed is a ripened ovule.[6]
Examples of culinary "vegetables" and nuts that are botanically fruit include corn, cucurbits (e.g., cucumber, pumpkin, and squash), eggplant, legumes (beans, peanuts, and peas), sweet pepper, and tomato. In addition, some spices, such as allspice and chili pepper, are fruits, botanically speaking.[6] In contrast, rhubarb is often referred to as a fruit, because it is used to make sweet desserts such as pies, though only the petiole (leaf stalk) of the rhubarb plant is edible,[7] and edible gymnosperm seeds are often given fruit names, e.g., ginkgo nuts and pine nuts.
Botanically, a cereal grain, such as corn, rice, or wheat, is also a kind of fruit, termed a caryopsis. However, the fruit wall is very thin and is fused to the seed coat, so almost all of the edible grain is actually a seed.[8]
Structure
Main article: Fruit anatomy
The outer, often edible layer, is the pericarp, formed from the ovary and surrounding the seeds, although in some species other tissues contribute to or form the edible portion. The pericarp may be described in three layers from outer to inner, the epicarp, mesocarp and endocarp.
Fruit that bears a prominent pointed terminal projection is said to be beaked.[9]
Development




The development sequence of a typical drupe, the nectarine (Prunus persica) over a 7.5 month period, from bud formation in early winter to fruit ripening in midsummer (see image page for further information)


A fruit results from maturation of one or more flowers, and the gynoecium of the flower(s) forms all or part of the fruit.[10]
Inside the ovary/ovaries are one or more ovules where the megagametophyte contains the egg cell.[11] After double fertilization, these ovules will become seeds. The ovules are fertilized in a process that starts with pollination, which involves the movement of pollen from the stamens to the stigma of flowers. After pollination, a tube grows from the pollen through the stigma into the ovary to the ovule and two sperm are transferred from the pollen to the megagametophyte. Within the megagametophyte one of the two sperm unites with the egg, forming a zygote, and the second sperm enters the central cell forming the endosperm mother cell, which completes the double fertilization process.[12][13] Later the zygote will give rise to the embryo of the seed, and the endosperm mother cell will give rise to endosperm, a nutritive tissue used by the embryo.
As the ovules develop into seeds, the ovary begins to ripen and the ovary wall, the pericarp, may become fleshy (as in berries or drupes), or form a hard outer covering (as in nuts). In some multiseeded fruits, the extent to which the flesh develops is proportional to the number of fertilized ovules.[14] The pericarp is often differentiated into two or three distinct layers called the exocarp (outer layer, also called epicarp), mesocarp (middle layer), and endocarp (inner layer). In some fruits, especially simple fruits derived from an inferior ovary, other parts of the flower (such as the floral tube, including the petals, sepals, and stamens), fuse with the ovary and ripen with it. In other cases, the sepals, petals and/or stamens and style of the flower fall off. When such other floral parts are a significant part of the fruit, it is called an accessory fruit. Since other parts of the flower may contribute to the structure of the fruit, it is important to study flower structure to understand how a particular fruit forms.[3]
There are three general modes of fruit development:

Apocarpous fruits develop from a single flower having one or more separate carpels, and they are the simplest fruits.
Syncarpous fruits develop from a single gynoecium having two or more carpels fused together.
Multiple fruits form from many different flowers.

Plant scientists have grouped fruits into three main groups, simple fruits, aggregate fruits, and composite or multiple fruits.[15] The groupings are not evolutionarily relevant, since many diverse plant taxa may be in the same group, but reflect how the flower organs are arranged and how the fruits develop.
Simple fruit




Epigynous berries are simple fleshy fruit. Clockwise from top right: cranberries, lingonberries, blueberries, red huckleberries


Simple fruits can be either dry or fleshy, and result from the ripening of a simple or compound ovary in a flower with only one pistil. Dry fruits may be either dehiscent (they open to discharge seeds), or indehiscent (they do not open to discharge seeds).[16] Types of dry, simple fruits, and examples of each, include:

achene – Most commonly seen in aggregate fruits (e.g., strawberry)
capsule – (e.g., Brazil nut)
caryopsis – (e.g., wheat)
cypsela – an achene-like fruit derived from the individual florets in a capitulum (e.g., dandelion).
fibrous drupe – (e.g., coconut, walnut)
follicle – is formed from a single carpel, opens by one suture (e.g., milkweed), commonly seen in aggregate fruits (e.g., magnolia)
legume – (e.g., bean, pea, peanut)
loment – a type of indehiscent legume
nut – (e.g., beech, hazelnut, oak acorn)
samara – (e.g., ash, elm, maple key)
schizocarp – (e.g., carrot seed)
silique – (e.g., radish seed)
silicle – (e.g., shepherd's purse)
utricle – (e.g., beet)





Lilium unripe capsule fruit


Fruits in which part or all of the pericarp (fruit wall) is fleshy at maturity are simple fleshy fruits. Types of simple, fleshy, fruits (with examples) include:

berry – (e.g., cranberry, gooseberry, redcurrant, tomato)
stone fruit or drupe (e.g., apricot, cherry, olive, peach, plum)





Dewberry flowers. Note the multiple pistils, each of which will produce a drupelet. Each flower will become a blackberry-like aggregate fruit.


An aggregate fruit, or etaerio, develops from a single flower with numerous simple pistils.[17]

Magnolia and peony, collection of follicles developing from one flower.
Sweet gum, collection of capsules.
Sycamore, collection of achenes.
Teasel, collection of cypsellas
Tuliptree, collection of samaras.

The pome fruits of the family Rosaceae, (including apples, pears, rosehips, and saskatoon berry) are a syncarpous fleshy fruit, a simple fruit, developing from a half-inferior ovary.[18]
Schizocarp fruits form from a syncarpous ovary and do not really dehisce, but rather split into segments with one or more seeds; they include a number of different forms from a wide range of families.[15] Carrot seed is an example.
Aggregate fruit
Main article: Aggregate fruit




Detail of raspberry flower


Aggregate fruits form from single flowers that have multiple carpels which are not joined together, i.e. each pistil contains one carpel. Each pistil forms a fruitlet, and collectively the fruitlets are called an etaerio. Four types of aggregate fruits include etaerios of achenes, follicles, drupelets, and berries. Ranunculaceae species, including Clematis and Ranunculus have an etaerio of achenes, Calotropis has an etaerio of follicles, and Rubus species like raspberry, have an etaerio of drupelets. Annona have an etaerio of berries.[19][20]
The raspberry, whose pistils are termed drupelets because each is like a small drupe attached to the receptacle. In some bramble fruits (such as blackberry) the receptacle is elongated and part of the ripe fruit, making the blackberry an aggregate-accessory fruit.[21] The strawberry is also an aggregate-accessory fruit, only one in which the seeds are contained in achenes.[22] In all these examples, the fruit develops from a single flower with numerous pistils.
Multiple fruits
Main article: Multiple fruit
A multiple fruit is one formed from a cluster of flowers (called an inflorescence). Each flower produces a fruit, but these mature into a single mass.[23] Examples are the pineapple, fig, mulberry, osage-orange, and breadfruit.




In some plants, such as this noni, flowers are produced regularly along the stem and it is possible to see together examples of flowering, fruit development, and fruit ripening.


In the photograph on the right, stages of flowering and fruit development in the noni or Indian mulberry (Morinda citrifolia) can be observed on a single branch. First an inflorescence of white flowers called a head is produced. After fertilization, each flower develops into a drupe, and as the drupes expand, they become connate (merge) into a multiple fleshy fruit called a syncarp.
Berries
Main article: Berry
Berries are another type of fleshy fruit; they are simple fruit created from a single ovary.[24] The ovary may be compound, with several carpels. Types include (examples follow in the table below):

Pepo – berries whose skin is hardened, cucurbits
Hesperidium – berries with a rind and a juicy interior, like most citrus fruit

Accessory fruit




The fruit of a pineapple includes tissue from the sepals as well as the pistils of many flowers. It is an accessory fruit and a multiple fruit.


Main article: Accessory fruit
Some or all of the edible part of accessory fruit is not generated by the ovary. Accessory fruit can be simple, aggregate, or multiple, i.e., they can include one or more pistils and other parts from the same flower, or the pistils and other parts of many flowers.
Table of fruit examples

Types of fleshy fruits

True berry
Pepo
Hesperidium
Aggregate fruit
Multiple fruit
Accessory fruit


Blackcurrant, Blueberry, Chili pepper, Cranberry, Eggplant, Gooseberry, Grape, Guava, Kiwifruit, Lucuma, Pomegranate, Redcurrant, Tomato
Cucumber, Gourd, Melon, Pumpkin
Grapefruit, Lemon, Lime, Orange
Blackberry, Boysenberry, Raspberry
Fig, Hedge apple, Mulberry, Pineapple
Apple, Pineapple, Rose hip, Stone fruit, Strawberry


Seedless fruits




Some seedless fruits






An arrangement of fruits commonly thought of as vegetables, including tomatoes and various squash


Seedlessness is an important feature of some fruits of commerce. Commercial cultivars of bananas and pineapples are examples of seedless fruits. Some cultivars of citrus fruits (especially grapefruit, mandarin oranges, navel oranges), satsumas, table grapes, and watermelons are valued for their seedlessness. In some species, seedlessness is the result of parthenocarpy, where fruits set without fertilization. Parthenocarpic fruit set may or may not require pollination, but most seedless citrus fruits require a stimulus from pollination to produce fruit.
Seedless bananas and grapes are triploids, and seedlessness results from the abortion of the embryonic plant that is produced by fertilization, a phenomenon known as stenospermocarpy, which requires normal pollination and fertilization.[25]
Seed dissemination
Variations in fruit structures largely depend on their seeds' mode of dispersal. This dispersal can be achieved by animals, explosive dehiscence, water, or wind.[26]
Some fruits have coats covered with spikes or hooked burrs, either to prevent themselves from being eaten by animals, or to stick to the feathers, hairs, or legs of animals, using them as dispersal agents. Examples include cocklebur and unicorn plant.[27][28]
The sweet flesh of many fruits is "deliberately" appealing to animals, so that the seeds held within are eaten and "unwittingly" carried away and deposited (i.e., defecated) at a distance from the parent. Likewise, the nutritious, oily kernels of nuts are appealing to rodents (such as squirrels), which hoard them in the soil to avoid starving during the winter, thus giving those seeds that remain uneaten the chance to germinate and grow into a new plant away from their parent.[6]
Other fruits are elongated and flattened out naturally, and so become thin, like wings or helicopter blades, e.g., elm, maple, and tuliptree. This is an evolutionary mechanism to increase dispersal distance away from the parent, via wind. Other wind-dispersed fruit have tiny "parachutes", e.g., dandelion, milkweed, salsify.[26]
Coconut fruits can float thousands of miles in the ocean to spread seeds. Some other fruits that can disperse via water are nipa palm and screw pine.[26]
Some fruits fling seeds substantial distances (up to 100 m in sandbox tree) via explosive dehiscence or other mechanisms, e.g., impatiens and squirting cucumber.[29]
Uses




Nectarines are one of many fruits that can be easily stewed.


Many hundreds of fruits, including fleshy fruits (like apple, kiwifruit, mango, peach, pear, and watermelon) are commercially valuable as human food, eaten both fresh and as jams, marmalade and other preserves. Fruits are also used in manufactured foods (e.g., cakes, cookies, ice cream, muffins, or yogurt) or beverages, such as fruit juices (e.g., apple juice, grape juice, or orange juice) or alcoholic beverages (e.g., brandy, fruit beer, or wine).[30] Fruits are also used for gift giving, e.g., in the form of Fruit Baskets and Fruit Bouquets.
Many "vegetables" in culinary parlance are botanical fruits, including bell pepper, cucumber, eggplant, green bean, okra, pumpkin, squash, tomato, and zucchini.[31] Olive fruit is pressed for olive oil. Spices like allspice, black pepper, paprika, and vanilla are derived from berries.[32]
Nutritional value




Each point refers to a 100 g serving of the fresh fruit, the daily recommended allowance of vitamin C is on the X axis and mg of Potassium (K) on the Y (offset by 100 mg which every fruit has) and the size of the disk represents amount of fiber (key in upper right). Watermelon, which has almost no fiber, and low levels of vitamin C and potassium, comes in last place.


Fresh fruits are generally high in fiber, vitamin C, and water.[33]
Regular consumption of fruit is generally associated with reduced risks of several diseases and functional declines associated with aging.[34][35]
Nonfood uses
Because fruits have been such a major part of the human diet, various cultures have developed many different uses for fruits they do not depend on for food. For example:

Bayberry fruits provide a wax often used to make candles;[36]
Many dry fruits are used as decorations or in dried flower arrangements (e.g., annual honesty, cotoneaster, lotus, milkweed, unicorn plant, and wheat). Ornamental trees and shrubs are often cultivated for their colorful fruits, including beautyberry, cotoneaster, holly, pyracantha, skimmia, and viburnum.[37]
Fruits of opium poppy are the source of opium, which contains the drugs codeine and morphine, as well as the biologically inactive chemical theabaine from which the drug oxycodone is synthesized.[38]
Osage orange fruits are used to repel cockroaches.[39]
Many fruits provide natural dyes (e.g., cherry, mulberry, sumac, and walnut).[40]
Dried gourds are used as bird houses, cups, decorations, dishes, musical instruments, and water jugs.
Pumpkins are carved into Jack-o'-lanterns for Halloween.
The spiny fruit of burdock or cocklebur inspired the invention of Velcro.[41]
Coir fiber from coconut shells is used for brushes, doormats, floor tiles, insulation, mattresses, sacking, and as a growing medium for container plants. The shell of the coconut fruit is used to make bird houses, bowls, cups, musical instruments, and souvenir heads.[42]
Fruit is often a subject of still life paintings.

Safety
For food safety, the CDC recommends proper fruit handling and preparation to reduce the risk of food contamination and foodborne illness. Fresh fruits and vegetables should be carefully selected; at the store, they should not be damaged or bruised; and precut pieces should be refrigerated or surrounded by ice.
All fruits and vegetables should be rinsed before eating. This recommendation also applies to produce with rinds or skins that are not eaten. It should be done just before preparing or eating to avoid premature spoilage.
Fruits and vegetables should be kept separate from raw foods like meat, poultry, and seafood, as well as from utensils that have come in contact with raw foods. Fruits and vegetables that are not going to be cooked should be thrown away if they have touched raw meat, poultry, seafood, or eggs.
All cut, peeled, or cooked fruits and vegetables should be refrigerated within two hours. After a certain time, harmful bacteria may grow on them and increase the risk of foodborne illness.[43]
Allergies
Fruit allergies make up about 10 percent of all food related allergies.[44][45]
Storage
All fruits benefit from proper post harvest care, and in many fruits, the plant hormone ethylene causes ripening. Therefore, maintaining most fruits in an efficient cold chain is optimal for post harvest storage, with the aim of extending and ensuring shelf life.[46]
See also


Food portal



Fruit tree
Fruitarianism
List of culinary fruits
List of foods
List of fruit dishes

References


^ Lewis, Robert A. (January 1, 2002). CRC Dictionary of Agricultural Sciences. CRC Press. ISBN 0-8493-2327-4. 
^ Schlegel, Rolf H J (January 1, 2003). Encyclopedic Dictionary of Plant Breeding and Related Subjects. Haworth Press. p. 177. ISBN 1-56022-950-0. 
^ a b Mauseth, James D. (April 1, 2003). Botany: An Introduction to Plant Biology. Jones and Bartlett. pp. 271–272. ISBN 0-7637-2134-4. 
^ "Sporophore from Encyclopædia Britannica". 
^ For a Supreme Court of the United States ruling on the matter, see Nix v. Hedden.
^ a b c McGee, Harold (November 16, 2004). On Food and Cooking: The Science and Lore of the Kitchen. Simon & Schuster. pp. 247–248. ISBN 0-684-80001-2. 
^ McGee (2004-11-16). On Food and Cooking. p. 367. ISBN 978-0-684-80001-1. 
^ Lewis (2002). CRC Dictionary of Agricultural Sciences. p. 238. ISBN 978-0-8493-2327-0. 
^ "Glossary of Botanical Terms". FloraBase. Western Australian Herbarium. Retrieved 23 July 2014. 
^ Esau, K. 1977. Anatomy of seed plants. John Wiley and Sons, New York.
^ [1] Archived December 20, 2010, at the Wayback Machine.
^ Mauseth, James D. (2003). Botany: an introduction to plant biology. Boston: Jones and Bartlett Publishers. p. 258. ISBN 978-0-7637-2134-3. 
^ Rost, Thomas L.; Weier, T. Elliot; Weier, Thomas Elliot (1979). Botany: a brief introduction to plant biology. New York: Wiley. pp. 135–37. ISBN 0-471-02114-8. 
^ Mauseth (2003-04-25). Botany. Chapter 9: Flowers and Reproduction. ISBN 978-0-7637-2134-3. 
^ a b Singh, Gurcharan (2004). Plants Systematics: An Integrated Approach. Science Publishers. p. 83. ISBN 1-57808-351-6. 
^ Schlegel (2003-05-13). Encyclopedic Dictionary. p. 123. ISBN 978-1-56022-950-6. 
^ Schlegel (2003-05-13). Encyclopedic Dictionary. p. 16. ISBN 978-1-56022-950-6. 
^ Evolutionary trends in flowering plants. New York: Columbia University Press. 1991. p. 209. ISBN 0-231-07328-3. 
^ Gupta, Prof. P.K. (2007). Genetics Classical To Modern. Rastogi Publication. pp. 2–134. ISBN 978-81-7133-896-2. 
^ http://www.rkv.rgukt.in/content/Biology/47Module/47fruit.pdf[permanent dead link]
^ McGee (2004-11-16). On Food and Cooking. pp. 361–362. ISBN 978-0-684-80001-1. 
^ McGee (2004-11-16). On Food and Cooking. pp. 364–365. ISBN 978-0-684-80001-1. 
^ Schlegel (2003-05-13). Encyclopedic Dictionary. p. 282. ISBN 978-1-56022-950-6. 
^ Sinha, Nirmal; Sidhu, Jiwan; Barta, Jozsef; Wu, James; Cano, M. Pilar (2012-06-20). Handbook of Fruits and Fruit Processing. John Wiley & Sons. ISBN 9781118352632. 
^ Spiegel-Roy, P.; E. E. Goldschmidt (August 28, 1996). The Biology of Citrus. Cambridge University Press. pp. 87–88. ISBN 0-521-33321-0. 
^ a b c Capon, Brian (February 25, 2005). Botany for Gardeners. Timber Press. pp. 198–199. ISBN 0-88192-655-8. 
^ Heiser, Charles B. (April 1, 2003). Weeds in My Garden: Observations on Some Misunderstood Plants. Timber Press. pp. 93–95. ISBN 0-88192-562-4. 
^ Heiser (2003-04-01). Weeds in My Garden. pp. 162–164. ISBN 978-0-88192-562-3. 
^ Feldkamp, Susan (2002). Modern Biology. Holt, Rinehart, and Winston. p. 634. ISBN 0-88192-562-4. 
^ McGee (2004-11-16). On Food and Cooking. Chapter 7: A Survey of Common Fruits. ISBN 978-0-684-80001-1. 
^ McGee (2004-11-16). On Food and Cooking. Chapter 6: A Survey of Common Vegetables. ISBN 978-0-684-80001-1. 
^ Farrell, Kenneth T. (November 1, 1999). Spices, Condiments and Seasonings. Springer. pp. 17–19. ISBN 0-8342-1337-0. 
^ Hulme, A.C (editor) (1970). "The Biochemistry of Fruits and their Products". 1. London & New York: Academic Press. CS1 maint: Extra text: authors list (link)
^ Lim, Stephen S.; Vos, Theo; Flaxman, Abraham D.; Danaei, Goodarz; Shibuya, Kenji; Adair-Rohani, Heather; Amann, Markus; Anderson, H. Ross; Andrews, Kathryn G. (2012-12-15). "A comparative risk assessment of burden of disease and injury attributable to 67 risk factors and risk factor clusters in 21 regions, 1990-2010: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2010". Lancet. 380 (9859): 2224–2260. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(12)61766-8. ISSN 1474-547X. PMC 4156511 . PMID 23245609. 
^ Wang X, Ouyang Y, Liu J, Zhu M, Zhao G, Bao W, Hu FB (2014). "Fruit and vegetable consumption and mortality from all causes, cardiovascular disease, and cancer: systematic review and dose-response meta-analysis of prospective cohort studies". BMJ. 349 (Jul 29): g4490. doi:10.1136/bmj.g4490. PMC 4115152 . PMID 25073782. CS1 maint: Uses authors parameter (link)
^ K, Amber (December 1, 2001). Candlemas: Feast of Flames. Llewellyn Worldwide. p. 155. ISBN 0-7387-0079-7. 
^ Adams, Denise Wiles (February 1, 2004). Restoring American Gardens: An Encyclopedia of Heirloom Ornamental Plants, 1640–1940. Timber Press. ISBN 0-88192-619-1. 
^ Booth, Martin (June 12, 1999). Opium: A History. St. Martin's Press. ISBN 0-312-20667-4. 
^ Cothran, James R. (November 1, 2003). Gardens and Historic Plants of the Antebellum South. University of South Carolina Press. p. 221. ISBN 1-57003-501-6. 
^ Adrosko, Rita J. (June 1, 1971). Natural Dyes and Home Dyeing: A Practical Guide with over 150 Recipes. Courier Dover Publications. ISBN 0-486-22688-3. 
^ Wake, Warren (March 13, 2000). Design Paradigms: A Sourcebook for Creative Visualization. John Wiley and Sons. pp. 162–163. ISBN 978-0-471-29976-9. 
^ "The Many Uses of the Coconut". The Coconut Museum. Retrieved 2006-09-14. 
^ "Nutrition for Everyone: Fruits and Vegetables – DNPAO – CDC". fruitsandveggiesmatter.gov. Archived from the original on 2009-05-09. 
^ "Asthma and Allergy Foundation of America". Aafa.org. Retrieved 2014-04-25. 
^ Roy Mankovitz (2010). The Wellness Project. ISBN 9780980158441. Retrieved 2014-04-25. 
^ Why Cold Chain for Fruits: Kohli, Pawanexh (2008). "Fruits and Vegetables Post-Harvest Care: The Basics" (PDF). Crosstree Techno-visors. 


Further reading

Books


Gollner, Adam J. (2010). The Fruit Hunters: A Story of Nature, Adventure, Commerce, and Obsession. Scribner. ISBN 978-0-7432-9695-3
Watson, R.R. / Preedy, V.R. (2010, eds.). Bioactive Foods in Promoting Health: Fruits and Vegetables. Academic Press. ISBN 978-0-12-374628-3

External links



Wikiquote has quotations related to: Fruit





Wikibooks Cookbook has a recipe/module on


Fruit






 Media related to Fruit at Wikimedia Commons
 The dictionary definition of Fruit at Wiktionary
Images of fruit development from flowers at bioimages.vanderbilt.edu
Fruit and seed dispersal images at bioimages.vanderbilt.edu
Fruit Facts from California Rare Fruit Growers, Inc.
Photo ID of Fruits by Capt. Pawanexh Kohli
 "Fruit". Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). 1911. 







v
t
e


Types of fruits



Types of fruits



Achene
Berry (modified berries: Hesperidium
Pepo)
Capsule
Caryopsis
Drupe
Follicle
Legume
Loment
Nut
Pome
Samara
Schizocarp
Silique
Syconium





Categories of fruits



Accessory fruit
Simple fruit
Compound fruit
Aggregate fruit
Multiple fruit
Dehiscent fruit





Function



Diaspore
Drift fruit












v
t
e


Botany




History of botany



Subdisciplines



Plant systematics
Ethnobotany
Paleobotany
Plant anatomy
Plant ecology
Phytogeography

Geobotany
Flora


Phytochemistry
Plant pathology
Bryology
Phycology
Floristics
Dendrology





Plant groups



Algae
Archaeplastida
Bryophyte
Non-vascular plants
Vascular plants
Spermatophytes
Pteridophyte
Gymnosperm
Angiosperm






Plant morphology
(glossary)





Plant cells



Cell wall
Phragmoplast
Plastid
Plasmodesma
Vacuole





Tissues



Meristem
Vascular tissue

Vascular bundle


Ground tissue

Mesophyll


Cork
Wood
Storage organs





Vegetative



Root
Rhizoid
Bulb
Rhizome
Shoot

Stem
Leaf

Petiole
Cataphyll


Bud
Sessility







Reproductive
(Flower)



Flower development
Inflorescence

Umbel
Raceme
Bract
Pedicellate


Flower

Whorl
Floral symmetry
Floral diagram
Floral formula


Receptacle
Hypanthium (Floral cup)
Perianth

Tepal
Petal
Sepal


Sporophyll
Gynoecium

Ovary

Ovule


Stigma


Archegonium
Androecium

Stamen
Staminode
Pollen
Tapetum


Gynandrium
Gametophyte
Sporophyte
Plant embryo
Fruit

Fruit anatomy
Berry
Capsule
Seed

Seed dispersal
Endosperm









Surface structures



Epicuticular wax
Plant cuticle
Epidermis
Stoma
Nectary
Trichome
Prickle











Plant physiology
Materials






Nutrition
Photosynthesis

Chlorophyll


Plant hormone
Transpiration
Turgor pressure
Bulk flow
Aleurone
Phytomelanin
Sugar
Sap
Starch
Cellulose





Plant growth and habit



Secondary growth
Woody plants
Herbaceous plants
Habit

Vines

Lianas


Shrubs

Subshrubs


Trees
Succulent plants







Reproduction


Evolution
Ecology






Alternation of generations
Sporangium

Spore
Microsporangia

Microspore


Megasporangium

Megaspore




Pollination

Pollinators
Pollen tube


Double fertilization
Germination
Evolutionary development
Evolutionary history

timeline


Hardiness zone





Plant taxonomy



History of plant systematics
Herbarium
Biological classification
Botanical nomenclature

Botanical name
Correct name
Author citation
International Code of Nomenclature for algae, fungi, and plants (ICN)
- for Cultivated Plants (ICNCP)


Taxonomic rank
International Association for Plant Taxonomy (IAPT)
Plant taxonomy systems
Cultivated plant taxonomy

Citrus taxonomy
cultigen

cultivar
Group
grex









Practice



Agronomy
Floriculture
Forestry
Horticulture








Lists
Related topics






Botanical terms
Botanists

by author abbreviation


Botanical expedition








Category
Commons
Portal
WikiProject












v
t
e


Cuisines



Regional



African

North
West
list


Americas

North
South
list


Asian

Central
South
list


Caribbean
Caucasian
European

Central
Eastern
list


Global
Latin American
Mediterranean
Middle-Eastern

Levantine


Oceanic





National



Afghan
Albanian
Algerian
Angolan
Argentine
Armenian
Australian
Austrian
Azerbaijani
Bahraini
Bangladeshi
Barbadian
Belarusian
Belgian
Belizean
Beninese
Bhutanese
Bissau-Guinean
Bolivian
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Botswana
Brazilian
British

English
Scottish
Welsh
Cornish


Bruneian
Bulgarian
Burkinabé
Burmese
Burundian
Cambodian
Cameroonian
Canadian

Canadian Chinese
Quebec


Central African Republic
Chadian
Chilean
Chinese

Tibetan


Colombian
Congolese
Croatian
Cuban
Cypriot
Czech
Danish
Djiboutian
Dominican
Dominican Republic
Dutch
East Timorese
Ecuadorian
Egyptian
Emirati
Equatorial Guinean
Eritrean
Estonian
Ethiopian
Fijian
Filipino
Finnish
French

Occitania


Gabonese
Gambian
Georgian
German
Ghanaian
Greek
Guatemalan
Guianan
Guinean
Haitian
Honduran
Hong Kong
Hungarian
Icelandic
Indian
Indonesian
Iranian
Iraqi
Irish
Israeli
Italian

Sicilian


Ivorian (Côte d'Ivoire)
Jamaican
Japanese
Jordanian
Kazakh
Kenyan
Korean
Kosovan
Kuwaiti
Kyrgyz
Lao
Latvian
Lebanese
Lesotho
Liberian
Libyan
Liechtensteiner
Lithuanian
Luxembourg
Macau
Macedonian
Malagasy
Malawian
Malaysian

Malay
Chinese
Indian
Eurasian
Sabahan
Sarawakian


Maldivian
Malian
Maltese
Mauritanian
Mauritian
Mexican
Moldovan
Monégasque
Mongolian
Moroccan
Mozambican
Namibian
Nauruan
Nepalese
New Zealand
Nigerian
Nigerien
Norwegian
Niuean
Omani
Pakistani
Palestinian
Panamanian
Peruvian

Chinese


Polish
Portuguese
Qatari
Romanian
Russian
Rwandan
Salvadoran
Saint Helena
Saint Lucian
Sammarinese
São Tomé and Príncipe
Saudi Arabian
Senegalese
Serbian
Seychelles
Sierra Leonean
Singaporean
Slovak
Slovenian
Somali
South African
Spanish

Andalusian
Asturian
Basque
Catalan
Galician
Valencian


Sri Lankan
Sudanese
Swazi
Swedish
Swiss
Syrian
Taiwanese
Tajik
Tanzanian
Thai
Togolese
Tunisian
Turkish
Trinidadian and Tobagonian
Ugandan
Ukrainian
United States

California Cuisine
Hawaiian
New American
Puerto Rican
Soul food


Uruguayan
Uzbek
Venezuelan
Vietnamese
Vatican
Western Saharan
Yemeni
Zambian
Zimbabwean





Ethnic and
religious



Ainu
American Chinese
Anglo-Indian
Arab
Assyrian
Balochi
Balinese
Batak
Bengali
Berber
Betawi
Buddhist
Cajun
Cantonese
Chechen
Chinese Indonesian
Chinese Islamic
Christian
Circassian
Crimean Tatar
Greek American
Hindu
Inuit
Italian American
Jain
Javanese
Jewish

Sephardic
Mizrahi
American
Bukharan
Syrian


Komi
Kurdish
Livonian
Louisiana Creole
Malay
Manado
Maharashtrian
Mordovian
Native American
Okinawan
Ossetian
Padang
Parsi
Pashtun
Pennsylvania Dutch
Peranakan
Punjabi
Sami
Sikh
Sindhi
Soul food
Sundanese
Tatar
Udmurt
Yamal
Yup'ik
Zanzibari





Historical



Ancient Egyptian
Ancient Greek
Ancient Israelite
Ancient Roman
Aztec
Byzantine
Early modern European
Historical Chinese
Historical South Asian
History of seafood
History of vegetarianism
Inca
Mayan
Medieval
Ottoman
Peasant
Soviet
Thirteen Colonies





Styles



Cuisine classique
Fast food
Fusion
Haute
Molecular gastronomy
Note by Note
Nouvelle





Lists



List of cuisines
Lists of prepared foods








 Food portal
 Drink portal
 Category
 Commons
 Cookbook
 WikiProject












v
t
e


Lists of countries by agricultural output rankings



Cereals



Barley
Buckwheat
Maize
Millet
Oats
Rice
Rye
Sorghum
Triticale
Wheat

exports







Fruit



Apples
Apricots
Bananas
Citrus

Oranges


Plums
Pear
Grapes
Mango
Tomatoes





Vegetables



Artichoke
Onion
Potato
Rapeseed
Soybean
Cucumber





Other



Cacao
Cassava
Coffee
Cotton
Fish
Garlic
Milk
Sugar beet
Sugar cane
Sunflower seed
Tea
Tobacco
Wine





Related



Irrigation
Land use









List of international rankings
List of top international rankings by country
Lists by country













v
t
e


Veganism and vegetarianism



Perspectives




Veganism



Animal-free agriculture
Fruitarianism
History
Juice fasting
Low-carbon diet
Raw veganism
Nutrition
Vegan organic gardening





Vegetarianism



Economic vegetarianism
Environmental vegetarianism
History
Lacto vegetarianism
Ovo vegetarianism
Ovo-lacto vegetarianism
Cuisine
Vegetarian Diet Pyramid
Ecofeminism
Nutrition
By country





Semi-vegetarianism



Macrobiotic diet
Pescetarianism





Lists



Vegans
Vegetarians
Vegetarian festivals
Vegetarian organizations
Vegetarian restaurants








Ethics




Secular



Animal rights
Animal welfare
Carnism
Deep ecology
Environmental vegetarianism
Ethics of eating meat
Meat paradox
Nonviolence
Speciesism
Tirukkuṛaḷ





Religious



Buddhism
Christianity
Hinduism

Sattvic
Ahimsa


Sikhism
Rastafari
Jainism
Judaism
Pythagorean diet








Food,
drink



Agar
Agave nectar
Meat analogue

List of meat substitutes


Miso
Mochi
Mock duck
Nutritional yeast
Plant cream
Plant milk
Quinoa
Quorn
Seitan
Soy yogurt
Tempeh
Tofu
Tofurkey
Cheese
Hot dog
Vegetarian mark
Sausage
Beer
Wine
Veggie burger





Groups,
events,
companies




Vegan



American Vegan Society
Beauty Without Cruelty
Food Empowerment Project
Go Vegan
Movement for Compassionate Living
Physicians Committee for Responsible Medicine
Plamil Foods
Vegan Awareness Foundation
Vegan flag
Vegan Ireland
Vegan Outreach
Vegan Prisoners Support Group
The Vegan Society
Veganz
World Vegan Day





Vegetarian



American Vegetarian Party
Boston Vegetarian Society
Christian Vegetarian Association
European Vegetarian Union
Hare Krishna Food for Life
International Vegetarian Union
Jewish Veg
Linda McCartney Foods
Meat-free days

Meatless Monday


Swissveg
Toronto Vegetarian Association
Vegetarian Society
Vegetarian Society (Singapore)
Veggie Pride
Viva! Health
World Esperantist Vegetarian Association
World Vegetarian Day








Books,
reports



Thirty-nine Reasons Why I Am a Vegetarian (1903)
The Benefits of Vegetarianism (1927)
Diet for a Small Planet (1971)
Moosewood Cookbook (1977)
Fit for Life (1985)
Diet for a New America (1987)
The China Study (2004)
Raw Food Made Easy for 1 or 2 People (2005)
Skinny Bitch (2005)
Livestock's Long Shadow (2006)
Eating Animals (2009)
The Kind Diet (2009)
Why We Love Dogs, Eat Pigs, and Wear Cows (2009)
Eat & Run (2012)
Meat Atlas (annual)





Films



Meet Your Meat (2002)
Peaceable Kingdom (2004)
Earthlings (2005)
A Sacred Duty (2007)
Fat, Sick and Nearly Dead (2010)
Planeat (2010)
Forks Over Knives (2011)
Vegucated (2011)
Live and Let Live (2013)
Cowspiracy (2014)
What the Health (2017)
Carnage (2017)





Magazines



Naked Food
Vegetarian Times
VegNews





Physicians,
academics



Neal D. Barnard
T. Colin Campbell
Caldwell Esselstyn
Gary L. Francione
Joel Fuhrman
Michael Greger
Melanie Joy
Michael Klaper
John A. McDougall
Reed Mangels
Dean Ornish
Richard H. Schwartz









Authority control



GND: 4130857-8
NDL: 00565275











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Fruit&oldid=814814579"					Categories: FruitPollinationHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksAll articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from March 2013Articles with permanently dead external linksCS1 maint: Extra text: authors listCS1 maint: Uses authors parameterWikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pagesWikipedia indefinitely move-protected pagesAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from February 2016Commons category with page title different than on WikidataWikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource referenceWikipedia articles with GND identifiers