For other uses, see Fuel (disambiguation).




Wood is one of the first fuels used by humans.[1]


A fuel is any material that can be made to react with other substances so that it releases chemical or nuclear energy as heat or to be used for work. The concept was originally applied solely to those materials capable of releasing chemical energy but has since also been applied to other sources of heat energy such as nuclear energy (via nuclear fission and nuclear fusion).
The heat energy released by reactions of fuels is converted into mechanical energy via a heat engine. Other times the heat itself is valued for warmth, cooking, or industrial processes, as well as the illumination that comes with combustion. Fuels are also used in the cells of organisms in a process known as cellular respiration, where organic molecules are oxidized to release usable energy. Hydrocarbons and related oxygen-containing molecules are by far the most common source of fuel used by humans, but other substances, including radioactive metals, are also utilized.
Fuels are contrasted with other substances or devices storing potential energy, such as those that directly release electrical energy (such as batteries and capacitors) or mechanical energy (such as flywheels, springs, compressed air, or water in a reservoir).



Contents


1 History
2 Chemical

2.1 Solid fuel
2.2 Liquid fuels
2.3 Gaseous fuels
2.4 Biofuels
2.5 Fossil fuels
2.6 Energy


3 Nuclear

3.1 Fission
3.2 Fusion


4 World trade
5 Liquid fuels for transportation
6 See also
7 Footnotes
8 References
9 Further reading



History[edit]
The first known use of fuel was the combustion of wood or sticks by Homo erectus nearly two million years ago.[2][page needed] Throughout most of human history fuels derived from plants or animal fat were only used by humans. Charcoal, a wood derivative, has been used since at least 6,000 BCE for melting metals. It was only supplanted by coke, derived from coal, as European forests started to become depleted around the 18th century. Charcoal briquettes are now commonly used as a fuel for barbecue cooking.[3]
Coal was first used as a fuel around 1000 BCE in China. With the energy in the form of chemical energy that could be released through combustion,[4] but the concept development of the steam engine in the United Kingdom in 1769, coal came into more common use as a power source. Coal was later used to drive ships and locomotives. By the 19th century, gas extracted from coal was being used for street lighting in London. In the 20th and 21st centuries, the primary use of coal is to generate electricity, providing 40% of the world's electrical power supply in 2005.[5]
Fossil fuels were rapidly adopted during the Industrial Revolution, because they were more concentrated and flexible than traditional energy sources, such as water power. They have become a pivotal part of our contemporary society, with most countries in the world burning fossil fuels in order to produce power.
Currently the trend has been towards renewable fuels, such as biofuels like alcohols.
Chemical[edit]
Chemical fuels are substances that release energy by reacting with substances around them, most notably by the process of combustion. Most of the chemical energy released in combustion was not stored in the chemical bonds of the fuel, but in the weak double bond of molecular oxygen.[6]
Chemical fuels are divided in two ways. First, by their physical properties, as a solid, liquid or gas. Secondly, on the basis of their occurrence: primary (natural fuel) and secondary (artificial fuel). Thus, a general classification of chemical fuels is:

General types of chemical fuels


Primary (natural)
Secondary (artificial)


Solid fuels
wood, coal, peat, dung, etc.
coke, charcoal


Liquid fuels
petroleum
diesel, gasoline, kerosene, LPG, coal tar, naphtha, ethanol


Gaseous fuels
natural gas
hydrogen, propane, methane, coal gas, water gas, blast furnace gas, coke oven gas, CNG


Solid fuel[edit]
Main article: Solid fuel




Coal is an important solid fuel


Solid fuel refers to various types of solid material that are used as fuel to produce energy and provide heating, usually released through combustion. Solid fuels include wood , charcoal, peat, coal, hexamine fuel tablets, and pellets made from wood (see wood pellets), corn, wheat, rye and other grains. Solid-fuel rocket technology also uses solid fuel (see solid propellants). Solid fuels have been used by humanity for many years to create fire. Coal was the fuel source which enabled the industrial revolution, from firing furnaces, to running steam engines. Wood was also extensively used to run steam locomotives. Both peat and coal are still used in electricity generation today. The use of some solid fuels (e.g. coal) is restricted or prohibited in some urban areas, due to unsafe levels of toxic emissions. The use of other solid fuels as wood is decreasing as heating technology and the availability of good quality fuel improves. In some areas, smokeless coal is often the only solid fuel used. In Ireland, peat briquettes are used as smokeless fuel. They are also used to start a coal fire.
Liquid fuels[edit]
Main article: Liquid fuel




A gasoline station


Liquid fuels are combustible or energy-generating molecules that can be harnessed to create mechanical energy, usually producing kinetic energy; they also must take the shape of their container. It is the fumes of liquid fuels that are flammable instead of the fluid.
Most liquid fuels in widespread use are derived from the fossilized remains of dead plants and animals by exposure to heat and pressure inside the Earth's crust. However, there are several types, such as hydrogen fuel (for automotive uses), ethanol, jet fuel and bio-diesel which are all categorized as a liquid fuel. Emulsified fuels of oil-in-water such as orimulsion have been developed a way to make heavy oil fractions usable as liquid fuels. Many liquid fuels play a primary role in transportation and the economy.
Some common properties of liquid fuels are that they are easy to transport, and that can be handled easily. Also they are relatively easy to use for all engineering applications, and home use. Fuels like kerosene are rationed in some countries, for example available in government subsidized shops in India for home use.
Conventional diesel is similar to gasoline in that it is a mixture of aliphatic hydrocarbons extracted from petroleum. Kerosene is used in kerosene lamps and as a fuel for cooking, heating, and small engines. Natural gas, composed chiefly of methane, can only exist as a liquid at very low temperatures (regardless of pressure), which limits its direct use as a liquid fuel in most applications. LP gas is a mixture of propane and butane, both of which are easily compressible gases under standard atmospheric conditions. It offers many of the advantages of compressed natural gas (CNG), but is denser than air, does not burn as cleanly, and is much more easily compressed. Commonly used for cooking and space heating, LP gas and compressed propane are seeing increased use in motorized vehicles; propane is the third most commonly used motor fuel globally.
Gaseous fuels[edit]
Main article: Fuel gas




A 20-pound (9.1 kg) propane cylinder


Fuel gas is any one of a number of fuels that are gaseous under ordinary conditions. Many fuel gases are composed of hydrocarbons (such as methane or propane), hydrogen, carbon monoxide, or mixtures thereof. Such gases are sources of potential heat energy or light energy that can be readily transmitted and distributed through pipes from the point of origin directly to the place of consumption. Fuel gas is contrasted with liquid fuels and from solid fuels, though some fuel gases are liquefied for storage or transport. While their gaseous nature can be advantageous, avoiding the difficulty of transporting solid fuel and the dangers of spillage inherent in liquid fuels, it can also be dangerous. It is possible for a fuel gas to be undetected and collect in certain areas, leading to the risk of a gas explosion. For this reason, odorizers are added to most fuel gases so that they may be detected by a distinct smell. The most common type of fuel gas in current use is natural gas.
Biofuels[edit]
Main article: Biofuel
Biofuel can be broadly defined as solid, liquid, or gas fuel consisting of, or derived from biomass. Biomass can also be used directly for heating or power—known as biomass fuel. Biofuel can be produced from any carbon source that can be replenished rapidly e.g. plants. Many different plants and plant-derived materials are used for biofuel manufacture.
Perhaps the earliest fuel employed by humans is wood. Evidence shows controlled fire was used up to 1.5 million years ago at Swartkrans, South Africa. It is unknown which hominid species first used fire, as both Australopithecus and an early species of Homo were present at the sites.[7] As a fuel, wood has remained in use up until the present day, although it has been superseded for many purposes by other sources. Wood has an energy density of 10–20 MJ/kg.[8]
Recently biofuels have been developed for use in automotive transport (for example Bioethanol and Biodiesel), but there is widespread public debate about how carbon efficient these fuels are.
Fossil fuels[edit]
Main article: Fossil fuel




Extraction of petroleum


Fossil fuels are hydrocarbons, primarily coal and petroleum (liquid petroleum or natural gas), formed from the fossilized remains of ancient plants and animals[9] by exposure to high heat and pressure in the absence of oxygen in the Earth's crust over hundreds of millions of years.[10] Commonly, the term fossil fuel also includes hydrocarbon-containing natural resources that are not derived entirely from biological sources, such as tar sands. These latter sources are properly known as mineral fuels.
Fossil fuels contain high percentages of carbon and include coal, petroleum, and natural gas.[11] They range from volatile materials with low carbon:hydrogen ratios like methane, to liquid petroleum to nonvolatile materials composed of almost pure carbon, like anthracite coal. Methane can be found in hydrocarbon fields, alone, associated with oil, or in the form of methane clathrates. Fossil fuels formed from the fossilized remains of dead plants[9] by exposure to heat and pressure in the Earth's crust over millions of years.[12] This biogenic theory was first introduced by German scholar Georg Agricola in 1556 and later by Mikhail Lomonosov in the 18th century.
It was estimated by the Energy Information Administration that in 2007 primary sources of energy consisted of petroleum 36.0%, coal 27.4%, natural gas 23.0%, amounting to an 86.4% share for fossil fuels in primary energy consumption in the world.[13] Non-fossil sources in 2006 included hydroelectric 6.3%, nuclear 8.5%, and others (geothermal, solar, tidal, wind, wood, waste) amounting to 0.9%.[14] World energy consumption was growing about 2.3% per year.
Fossil fuels are non-renewable resources because they take millions of years to form, and reserves are being depleted much faster than new ones are being made. So we must conserve these fuels and use them judiciously. The production and use of fossil fuels raise environmental concerns. A global movement toward the generation of renewable energy is therefore under way to help meet increased energy needs. The burning of fossil fuels produces around 21.3 billion tonnes (21.3 gigatonnes) of carbon dioxide (CO2) per year, but it is estimated that natural processes can only absorb about half of that amount, so there is a net increase of 10.65 billion tonnes of atmospheric carbon dioxide per year (one tonne of atmospheric carbon is equivalent to 44/12 or 3.7 tonnes of carbon dioxide).[15] Carbon dioxide is one of the greenhouse gases that enhances radiative forcing and contributes to global warming, causing the average surface temperature of the Earth to rise in response, which the vast majority of climate scientists agree will cause major adverse effects. Fuels are a source of energy.
Energy[edit]
The amount of energy from different types of fuel depends on the stoichiometric ratio, the chemically correct air and fuel ratio to ensure complete combustion of fuel, and its specific energy, the energy per unit mass.

Energy capacities of common types of fuel

Fuel
Specific energy (MJ/kg)
AFR stoich.
FAR stoich.
Energy @ λ=1 (MJ/kg(Air))


Diesel
48
14.5 : 1
0.069 : 1
3.310


Ethanol
26.4
9 : 1
0.111 : 1
2.933


Gasoline
46.4
14.7 : 1
0.068 : 1
3.156


Hydrogen
142
34.3 : 1
0.029 : 1
4.140


Kerosene
46
15.6 : 1
0.064 : 1
2.949


LPG
46.4
17.2 : 1
0.058 : 1
2.698


Methanol
19.7
6.47 : 1
0.155 : 1
3.045


Nitromethane
11.63
1.7 : 1
0.588 : 1
6.841


1 MJ ≈ 0.28 kWh ≈ 0.37 HPh.
Nuclear[edit]
Main article: Nuclear fuel




CANDU fuel bundles Two CANDU ("CANada Deuterium Uranium") fuel bundles, each about 50 cm long and 10 cm in diameter


Nuclear fuel is any material that is consumed to derive nuclear energy. Technically speaking, all matter can be a nuclear fuel because any element under the right conditions will release nuclear energy,[dubious – discuss] but the materials commonly referred to as nuclear fuels are those that will produce energy without being placed under extreme duress. Nuclear fuel is a material that can be 'burned' by nuclear fission or fusion to derive nuclear energy. Nuclear fuel can refer to the fuel itself, or to physical objects (for example bundles composed of fuel rods) composed of the fuel material, mixed with structural, neutron moderating, or neutron reflecting materials.
Most nuclear fuels contain heavy fissile elements that are capable of nuclear fission. When these fuels are struck by neutrons, they are in turn capable of emitting neutrons when they break apart. This makes possible a self-sustaining chain reaction that releases energy with a controlled rate in a nuclear reactor or with a very rapid uncontrolled rate in a nuclear weapon.
The most common fissile nuclear fuels are uranium-235 (235U) and plutonium-239 (239Pu). The actions of mining, refining, purifying, using, and ultimately disposing of nuclear fuel together make up the nuclear fuel cycle. Not all types of nuclear fuels create power from nuclear fission. Plutonium-238 and some other elements are used to produce small amounts of nuclear power by radioactive decay in radioisotope thermoelectric generators and other types of atomic batteries. Also, light nuclides such as tritium (3H) can be used as fuel for nuclear fusion. Nuclear fuel has the highest energy density of all practical fuel sources.
Fission[edit]




Nuclear fuel pellets are used to release nuclear energy


The most common type of nuclear fuel used by humans is heavy fissile elements that can be made to undergo nuclear fission chain reactions in a nuclear fission reactor; nuclear fuel can refer to the material or to physical objects (for example fuel bundles composed of fuel rods) composed of the fuel material, perhaps mixed with structural, neutron moderating, or neutron reflecting materials. The most common fissile nuclear fuels are 235U and 239Pu, and the actions of mining, refining, purifying, using, and ultimately disposing of these elements together make up the nuclear fuel cycle, which is important for its relevance to nuclear power generation and nuclear weapons.
Fusion[edit]
Fuels that produce energy by the process of nuclear fusion are currently not utilized by humans but are the main source of fuel for stars. Fusion fuels tend to be light elements such as hydrogen which will combine easily. Energy is required to start fusion by raising temperature so high all materials would turn into plasma, and allow nuclei to collide and stick together with each other before repelling due to electric charge. This process is called fusion and it can give out energy.
In stars that undergo nuclear fusion, fuel consists of atomic nuclei that can release energy by the absorption of a proton or neutron. In most stars the fuel is provided by hydrogen, which can combine to form helium through the proton-proton chain reaction or by the CNO cycle. When the hydrogen fuel is exhausted, nuclear fusion can continue with progressively heavier elements, although the net energy released is lower because of the smaller difference in nuclear binding energy. Once iron-56 or nickel-56 nuclei are produced, no further energy can be obtained by nuclear fusion as these have the highest nuclear binding energies. The elements then on use up energy instead of giving off energy when fused. Therefore, fusion stops and the star dies. In attempts by humans, fusion is only carried out with hydrogen (isotope of 2 and 3) to form helium-4 as this reaction gives out the most net energy. Electric confinement (ITER), inertial confinement(heating by laser) and heating by strong electric currents are the popular methods used. .[16]
World trade[edit]
The World Bank reported that the USA was the top fuel importer in 2005 followed by the EU and Japan.[citation needed]
Liquid fuels for transportation[edit]






This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (June 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Most transportation fuels are liquids, because vehicles usually require high energy density. This occurs naturally in liquids and solids. High energy density can also be provided by an internal combustion engine. These engines require clean-burning fuels. The fuels that are easiest to burn cleanly are typically liquids and gases. Thus, liquids meet the requirements of being both energy-dense and clean-burning. In addition, liquids (and gases) can be pumped, which means handling is easily mechanized, and thus less laborious.
See also[edit]


Energy portal




Alcohol fuel
Alternative fuels
Ammonia
Battery (electricity)
Bitumen-based fuel
Biofuels
Compressed natural gas
Cryogenic fuel
Emulsified fuel
Fuel card
Fuel cell
Fuel management systems
Fuel oil
Fuel poverty
Filling station
Hydrogen economy
Hydrogen fuel
Liquid fuels
List of energy topics
Marine fuel management
Propellant
Recycled fuel
Solid fuel
World energy resources and consumption


Footnotes[edit]


^ Schobert, Harold (2013-01-17). Chemistry of Fossil Fuels and Biofuels. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 9780521114004. 
^ Leakey, Richard (1994). Origin of Humankind. Basic Books. ISBN 0-465-03135-8. 
^ Hall, Loretta (2007). "Charcoal Briquette". How Products Are Made. Retrieved 2007-10-01. 
^  One or more of the preceding sentences incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain: Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911). "Fuel". Encyclopædia Britannica. 11 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp. 274–286. 
^ "History of Coal Use". World Coal Institute. Archived from the original on 7 October 2006. Retrieved 10 August 2006. 
^ Schmidt-Rohr, K (2015). "Why Combustions Are Always Exothermic, Yielding About 418 kJ per Mole of O2". J. Chem. Educ. 92 (12): 2094–2099. doi:10.1021/acs.jchemed.5b00333. 
^ Rincon, Paul (22 March 2004). "Bones hint at first use of fire". BBC News. Retrieved 2007-09-11. 
^ Elert, Glenn (2007). "Chemical Potential Energy". The Physics Hypertextbook. Retrieved 2007-09-11. 
^ a b Dr. Irene Novaczek. "Canada's Fossil Fuel Dependency". Elements. Retrieved 2007-01-18. 
^ "Fossil fuel". EPA. Archived from the original on 12 March 2007. Retrieved 2007-01-18. 
^ "Fossil fuel". Archived from the original on 10 May 2012. 
^ "Fossil fuel". EPA. Archived from the original on 12 March 2007. Retrieved 2007-01-18. 
^ "U.S. EIA International Energy Statistics". Retrieved 2010-01-12. 
^ "International Energy Annual 2006". Archived from the original on 5 February 2009. Retrieved 8 February 2009. 
^ "US Department of Energy on greenhouse gases". Retrieved 2007-09-09. 
^ Fewell, M. P. (1995). "The atomic nuclide with the highest mean binding energy". American Journal of Physics. 63 (7): 653–658. Bibcode:1995AmJPh..63..653F. doi:10.1119/1.17828. 


References[edit]

Ratcliff, Brian; et al. (2000). Chemistry 1. Cambridge University press. ISBN 0-521-78778-5. 

Further reading[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Fuels.



"Directive 1999/94/EC of the European Parliament and of the council of 13 December 1999, relating to the availability of consumer information on fuel economy and CO2 emissions in respect of the marketing of new passenger cars" (PDF).  (140 KB).
Council Directive 80/1268/EEC Fuel consumption of motor vehicles.







v
t
e


Firelighting






Campfire
Bonfire
Glossary





Components



Ember
Fire triangle
Firewood
Spark
Tinder
Wood ash
Wood fuel





Topics



Autoignition temperature
Combustion
Friction fire
Minimum ignition energy
Smouldering





Early starters



Burning glass (Solar Spark Lighter)
Fire piston
Fire plough
Fire-saw
Fire striker
Flint
Hand drill

Bow drill
Pump drill







Modern starters



Match
Chisquero
Black match
Electric match
Ferrocerium
Lighter
Blowtorch





Other equipment



Char cloth
Feather stick
Fire pan
Fire pit
Fire ring
Matchbook
Matchbox
Punk
Tinderbox
Torch
Chuckmuck





Related articles



Arson
Control of fire by early humans
Native American use of fire
Outdoor cooking
Firem'n Chit
Pyrolysis
Pyromania
Survival skills






 Fire portal










v
t
e


Energy



Fundamental concepts



Energetics
Energy

Units


Energy system
Energy transformation
Mass

Mass–energy equivalence


Power
Thermodynamics

Laws of thermodynamics


Exergy





Forms



Kinetic
Potential
Mechanical
Electric
Magnetic
Gravitational
Chemical
Ionization
Nuclear
Chromodynamic
Elastic
Mechanical wave
Sound wave
Radiant
Rest
Thermal





Energy carriers



Enthalpy
Fuel

fossil fuel


Heat
Work
Electricity
Battery
Capacitor





Primary energy



Fossil fuel

Coal
Petroleum
Natural gas


Gravitational energy
Nuclear fuel

Natural uranium


Radiant energy
Solar
Wind
Bioenergy
Hydropower
Marine energy
Geothermal





Energy system
components



Energy engineering
Oil refinery
Fossil-fuel power station

Cogeneration
Integrated gasification combined cycle


Nuclear power

Nuclear power plant
Radioisotope thermoelectric generator


Solar power

Photovoltaic system
Concentrated solar power


Solar thermal energy

Solar power tower
Solar furnace


Wind power

Wind farm
High-altitude wind power


Hydropower

Hydroelectricity
Wave farm
Tidal power


Biomass
Geothermal power





Use and
supply



Energy consumption

World energy consumption


Energy security
Energy conservation
Efficient energy use

Transport
Agriculture


Renewable energy
Sustainable energy
Energy policy

Energy development


Worldwide energy supply
South America
USA
Mexico
Canada
Europe
Asia
Africa
Australia





Misc.



Jevons's paradox
Carbon footprint









Authority control



GND: 4008186-2
NDL: 00568095











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Fuel&oldid=817545280"					Categories: FuelsEnergy developmentHidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica without Wikisource referenceWikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia BritannicaWikipedia indefinitely move-protected pagesUse dmy dates from July 2012Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from September 2010All accuracy disputesArticles with disputed statements from October 2016All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from September 2007Articles needing additional references from June 2016All articles needing additional referencesWikipedia articles with GND identifiers