





This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (October 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)







The A Level logo


The A Level (Advanced Level) is a subject-based qualification conferred as part of the General Certificate of Education, as well as a school leaving qualification offered by the educational bodies in the United Kingdom and the educational authorities of British Crown dependencies to students completing secondary or pre-university education. A number of countries, including Singapore, Kenya, Mauritius and Zimbabwe have developed qualifications with the same name as and a similar format to the British A Levels. Obtaining A Level or equivalent qualifications is generally required for university entrance, with universities granting conditional offers based on grades achieved.
Normally, students take between 3-5 A Levels in their first year of sixth form, with the majority deciding to drop down to 3 for their second year. This is due to the fact that university offers are normally based on 3 A Levels. Unlike other level 3 qualifications such as the International Baccalaureate, A Levels have no specific requirements for which subjects to study, so students have the opportunity to combine any subjects they wish to take. However, students normally pick their courses based on the degree they wish to pursue at university: most degrees require specific A Levels for entry, such as A Level Mathematics for a Mathematics degree.
A Levels are generally worked towards over two years. Between 2015 and 2018 (first assessment Summer 2017), new style linear A Levels are being introduced in England as part of the government's educational reforms (initially across 13 subjects), replacing older modular courses where exams could be taken at several points during the course. Instead, reformed A Levels are now taken as a set of terminal exams, and are no longer separated into units. There is less emphasis on coursework, and students must resit all exams if they wish to resit the qualification. Additionally, the AS Level is now a separate qualification and is not required for an A Level award, although still encompasses the first year of the full A Level content. However, as these reforms won't be complete until 2018, students still sit AS Level exams as part of an A Level in unreformed qualifications, most notably Mathematics which is not reformed until 2017. Hence some students may be taking a combination of modular and linear courses during this transition period. Controversially, various A Level courses have been abolished from 2017 as part of these reforms, including Archaeology, Creative Writing and Home Economics among others.
In the older modular courses, A Levels are split into two parts, with first known as the Advanced Subsidiary Level, commonly referred to as the AS Level, which serves as a qualification in its own right aiding university admission, and the second part is known as the A2 Level, which is more in-depth and academically rigorous than the AS Level. The AS Level combines with the A2 Level combined for a full A Level award. The A2 Level is not a qualification on its own, and must be accompanied with an AS Level in the same subject for certification.



Contents


1 Current usage

1.1 United Kingdom

1.1.1 England A Level Reforms


1.2 Hong Kong
1.3 Nepal
1.4 Pakistan
1.5 Brunei
1.6 Cameroon
1.7 Malaysia
1.8 Mauritius
1.9 Seychelles
1.10 Singapore
1.11 Sri Lanka
1.12 India
1.13 Zimbabwe


2 Former usage

2.1 Caribbean


3 See also
4 References
5 External links



Current usage[edit]
A number of countries use A Levels as a school-leaving qualification. The A Levels taken by students in some countries often differ significantly from the A Levels taken in the United Kingdom.[citation needed]
United Kingdom[edit]
Main article: GCE Advanced Level (United Kingdom)
A Levels are a college or sixth form leaving qualification offered in England, Wales, and Northern Ireland. These are not compulsory, unlike GCSEs. In Scotland, A Levels are also offered by selected schools as an alternative school-leaving qualification in place of the Scottish Advanced Higher. The five main examination boards which administer British A Levels in the UK are:

Assessment and Qualifications Alliance (AQA)
Oxford, Cambridge and RSA Examinations (OCR)
Edexcel (Edexcel Pearson - London Examinations)
Welsh Joint Education Committee (WJEC)
Council for the Curriculum, Examinations & Assessment (CCEA)

Edexcel and Cambridge International Examinations (CIE) also offer international versions of the British A Levels in the United Kingdom and worldwide.
The British variant of A/AS levels are also taken in many Commonwealth and former Commonwealth countries, as well as in examination centres worldwide. British international schools in foreign countries generally offer the British A Levels as offered through Edexcel or Cambridge International Examinations. At select examination centres, the British A Level exams may also be available to private candidates.
England A Level Reforms[edit]
Between 2015 and 2018 (first assessment Summer 2017), A Levels in England are being reformed, transitioning from a modular to linear structure (initially across 13 subjects). This means all A Level exams must be sat in one sitting as a set of terminal exams (3 exams for the majority of subjects), and there is less emphasis on coursework. An example of this can be seen in Edexcel's new English Literature A Level, reformed in 2015, which reduces the amount of coursework to 20% (from 40% in the old modular specification). Additionally, A Levels are no longer separated into units, and students must resit all of their exams if they wish to resit the qualification. While these reforms were expected to be complete in 2017, this has been extended to 2018 to include the reforms of less common languages such as Modern Hebrew, Bengali among others.
The AS Level is now a separate qualification and is not required for an A Level award, although still encompasses the first year of the full A Level content. However, unlike AS Levels in the old modular courses, they are now worth only 40% as many UCAS points as a full A Level (from 50% in the modular courses), likely due to the fact that content from the second year of A Level is considered more academically challenging than that of the first year.
As these reforms are taking place in stages, many students will be taking a combination of modular and linear courses, with AS Levels still being part of an A Level in older modular courses.
Controversially, various A Level courses have been abolished from 2017 as part of these reforms. These include Archaeology, Anthropology, Creative Writing, Critical Thinking, General Studies and Home Economics among others.
Due to opposition to these reforms in other parts of the UK, Wales and Northern Ireland have maintained the modular structure to their qualifications.
Hong Kong[edit]
The British A-level qualifications such as GCE A-level and International A-level are widely accepted in Hong Kong as an alternative to the Hong Kong Diploma of Secondary Education for both admission and employment purposes. It is notably one of the most popular qualifications used for university admission via the non-JUPAS channel. For example, average non-JUPAS offers from the Hong Kong University of Science and Technology require one to three A*s (the mid-50% range). Since the introduction of the high distinction grade (A*) in 2010, the British A-level examination has regained its power to differentiate the very top levels of ability. According to the British Department for Education, in the academic year 2014/15, approximately 7.3%, 2.7%, 1.0% and 0.3% of all the candidates from the GCSE cohort (548,480) achieved one to four A*s or a better result in the GCE A-level examination. This percentile rank is one important input for equating the levels in both examinations. On the sole basis of percentile ranks and the grade statistics from HKEAA in 2017, a score of 29/35 from the best five subjects in HKDSE is comparable to 1A*2A in the best three British A-levels, 32/35 to 2A*1A, 33/35 to 3A* and 34/35 to 4A*. In deriving inferences from these statistics, it is important to note that slightly more than a third of the GCSE candidates can go on to study in sixth form before applying to universities via the Universities and Colleges Admissions Service (UCAS) while almost all Hong Kong students can study Form 6 before sitting the HKDSE examination. Relevant authorities such as the Hong Kong Examination and Assessment Authority (HKEAA) and UCAS also sought to connect the results from both exam systems to open doors for the holders of these qualifications who wish to study locally or overseas. Officially, the top distinction levels, A* in A-level and 5** in HKDSE, are currently recognized as broadly equivalent. In particular, in the light of statistical evidence, the 1% cut-off line is often set by admission offices at 2A*1A as compared to a score of 43/45 in the International Baccalaureate Diploma but the Uniform Mark Scale (UMS) instead of the letter grades would be used in many cases to offer a much more subtle view of the candidate's academic potential. Typical offers from Cambridge Medical School require 2A*1A and Oxford Medical School require 1A*2A whereas those from the medical schools of the University of Hong Kong and the Chinese University of Hong Kong require 4A* in A-level due to very intense competition.
Nepal[edit]
In Nepal, Cambridge International Examinations (CIE) GCE Advanced Level qualifications are offered by some of the private, public and international schools as an alternative to the Higher Secondary Education Board (HSEB) +2. A-level has become a popular choice for a number of students in Nepal.
Pakistan[edit]
A-levels offered in Pakistan by non-governmental, private institutions, along with International Baccalaureate and other international examinations. Examinations are handled by international British boards and the program is equivalent to Higher Secondary School Certificate. Academies are established all around the country which prepare the students to take the examinations as a private candidate.
Brunei[edit]
In Brunei, the A Level qualification is offered, with examinations conducted by Cambridge International Examinations (CIE). Some subjects are unique to Brunei or have a format, curriculum, or syllabus that is unique to Brunei.
Cameroon[edit]
The Advance level of Cameroon is based on the Cambridge International Examinations and similarly, conducted by the government of Cameroon in collaboration with Cambridge university. All the course taken are related to what the candidate is willing to pursue as career in university and these courses are on a recognizable internationally standard for university entrance; as they are major relevant courses. You can select between 3 to 5 courses during your advance level studies, prior taken your advance level examination on which.
Malaysia[edit]
In Malaysia, the A Level qualification is offered, with examinations conducted by Cambridge International Examinations (CIE). Some subjects are unique to Malaysia or have a format, curriculum, or syllabus that is unique to Malaysia. For instance, there are two types of A Level in Malaysia, Cambridge A Level (administered by Cambridge International Examinations) and Edexcel International Advanced Level (administered by Pearson International).
Mauritius[edit]
Main article: Higher School Certificate (Mauritius)
In Mauritius, A/AS Level qualifications are taken as part of the Higher School Certificate, awarded upon successful completion of secondary school after passing of examinations jointly administered by the Mauritius Examinations Syndicate and the University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES). A number of exam papers for offered, such as French, are customised to support the national educational standards. Additionally, International A Level qualifications from Edexcel are available, for which exams may be registered through the Mauritius Examinations Syndicate.
Seychelles[edit]
In Seychelles, the A Level qualification is offered, with examinations conducted by Cambridge International Examinations (CIE). Some subjects are unique to Seychelles or have a format, curriculum, or syllabus that is unique to Seychelles.
Singapore[edit]
Main article: Singapore-Cambridge GCE Advanced Level
In Singapore, H1/H2/H3 level qualifications are awarded upon successful completion of examinations jointly administered by Singapore Ministry of Education (MOE), Singapore Examinations and Assessment Board (SEAB) and the University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES).
Sri Lanka[edit]
Main article: GCE Advanced Level in Sri Lanka
In Sri Lanka, A Level is offered by governmental and non governmental schools. The qualifications are awarded upon successful completion of examinations called Local A Levels while most of the private schools award them upon London A Levels. Local GCE Advanced Level qualification is offered by the Department of Examinations. Passing A Levels is the major requirement for applying local universities.
India[edit]
In India, Cambridge International Examinations (CIE) GCE Advanced Level qualifications are offered at private and international schools as an alternative to the conventional Indian School Certificate (ISC) or Higher Secondary Certificate (HSC).[1][2]
Zimbabwe[edit]
The GCE Advanced Level qualification is offered by the Zimbabwe School Examinations Council (ZIMSEC).[3] Before, this qualification was jointly offered by Cambridge International Examinations and the Council in Zimbabwe. The ZIMSEC variant is perceived to be more challenging than the UK version mostly in science subjects.
Former usage[edit]






This article's tone or style may not reflect the encyclopedic tone used on Wikipedia. See Wikipedia's guide to writing better articles for suggestions. (March 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Caribbean[edit]
Recently[when?] within the Caribbean there has been a move away from the GCE Advanced Level to the CXC CAPE examinations,[4] making them a de facto university entrance examination. Some universities also require applicants to take separate entrance examination. The International Baccalaureate and European Baccalaureate are also accepted.
See also[edit]

GCSE - General Certificate of Secondary Education (An entry qualification)
GCE - Ordinary (O) Level (An entry qualification that has been phased out in the United Kingdom)
Further / Special

GCE - Special (S) level (last offered 2001)
Advanced Extension Award (AEA - 2002-2009, 2015 mathematics)
Sixth Term Examination Paper (STEP – used by the University of Cambridge and the University of Warwick for admissions to study mathematics at undergraduate level)


International A-Levels

Hong Kong Advanced Level Examination (HKALE)
Singapore-Cambridge GCE Advanced Level (equivalent examination in Singapore)
Sri Lankan Advanced Level


Scotland

Higher (Scottish) (Scottish university entrance qualification)
Advanced Higher (Scottish) (Scottish equivalent to A Level)


Vocational

BTEC Extended Diploma (Is the highest level of the BTEC structure and is taken by people aged 16 or over (Equal to A Levels).)
NVQ (level 3)
Advanced Vocational Certificate of Education (AVCE)


Europe

Abitur (similar qualification in Germany and Finland)
Eindexamen (similar qualification in the Netherlands)
Matura or Maturità (similar qualification in some European countries)


Baccalaureate

Baccalauréat (similar qualification in France)
European Baccalaureate (examination used mainly in the European School system)
International Baccalaureate (IB) Diploma (alternative examination found across the world)


International alternates

Advanced Placement Program (similar qualification in the United States)
Bagrut (similar qualification in Israel)
Leaving Certificate
Malaysian Higher School Certificate (better known as "STPM", an equivalent examination in Malaysia)
Matriculation Certificate
Senior Secondary Certificate of Education (Australia)



References[edit]


^ "JAIN INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL SCHOOL, BANGALORE, INDIA". jirs.ac.in. 
^ "Modern Indian School". misktm.edu.np. Archived from the original on 24 December 2014. 
^ "Zimbabwe School Examinations Council About". Zimbabwe School Examinations Council. Archived from the original on 2 August 2014. Retrieved 25 July 2014. 
^ Caribbean Examinations Council Report Archived 21 February 2009 at the Wayback Machine.. Reforming the Examination System. House of Commons, 26 March 2003. Retrieved 12 June 2006.


External links[edit]



Wikibooks has more on the topic of: GCE Advanced Level



Qualifications and Curriculum Development Agency: A Level resources
University of Cambridge: International A & AS levels
The Guardian 2005 A Level results, \

2005 A Level results CIE O level and A level Timetable 2018






v
t
e


Education in the United Kingdom



Modern systems



England
Northern Ireland
Scotland
Wales





History



England
Northern Ireland
Scotland
Wales





Higher education



England
Northern Ireland
Scotland
Wales
UK





Topics



Academies
Comprehensives
English medium education
Free school (England)
Gaelic medium education in Scotland
Irish medium education in Northern Ireland
Grammar schools
Studio schools
UTCs
Welsh medium education












v
t
e


Qualifications and Credit Framework in England and Wales and Northern Ireland



Level 8

Doctorate



Level 7

Master's degree



Level 6

Bachelor's degree



Level 5

Bachelor's degree, Foundation degree, Higher National Diploma



Level 4

Bachelor's degree, Foundation degree, Higher National Certificate



Level 3

A-level, BTEC Extended Diploma, BTEC National Certificate



Level 2

GCSE (grades A* to C), BTEC First Diploma



Level 1

GCSE (grades D-G), BTEC First Diploma, Foundation Diploma



Entry Level 3

Key Stage 3, E3 Diploma










v
t
e


National Qualifications Framework in England and Wales and Northern Ireland




For higher levels, compare with the FHEQ system.



Level 8

City & Guilds Fellowship,



Level 7

City & Guilds Membership, National Diploma*, BTEC Advanced Professional Diploma*, Level 5 NVQ



Level 6

City & Guilds Associateship, City & Guilds Graduateship, NEBOSH National Diploma, National Diploma*, BTEC Advanced Professional Diploma*, Level 5 NVQ



Level 5

Higher National Diploma, Higher National Certificate, Level 4 NVQ



Level 4

City & Guilds Licentiateship, Level 4 NVQ



Level 3

BTEC Extended Diploma, BTEC National Certificate, City & Guilds Level 3, Level 3 NVQ, A-level, National Diploma*, Ordinary National Certificate, Advanced Diploma, NEBOSH National General Cerificate, Access to Higher Education Diploma, Advanced Extension Award, International Baccalaureate, Extended Project Qualification



Level 2

City & Guilds Level 2, Level 2 NVQ, GCSE (grades A* to C), BTEC First Diploma, OCR Nationals, Skills for Life*



Level 1

Level 1 NVQ, GCSE (grades D-G), Foundation Diploma, BTEC Introductory Diploma, Introductory Certificate, Skills for Life*



Entry

English as a foreign or second language (up to level 3), Skills for Life*, Functional Skills, Entry level certificates




* certain subjects fall under this level.










v
t
e


Admission tests to colleges and universities



Africa



South Africa: Matriculation in South Africa
Tunisia: Tunisian Baccalaureate





Americas



Brazil: Vestibular, ENEM
Canada: Alberta Diploma Exam
Chile: PSU
Colombia: ICFES
United States: SAT, ACT





Asia-Pacific



Australia: ATAR, STAT
China: Gaokao
Hong Kong: HKDSE (JUPAS)
India: IITJEE, AIEEE, EAMCET
Indonesia: UN, SBMPTN
Iran: Concours
Israel: The Psychometry
Japan: NCTUA, EJU
Kazakhstan: UBT
Malaysia: STPM
Philippines: UPCAT, PUPCET
Singapore: GCE-O, GCE-A
South Korea: Suneung
Taiwan: GSAT, DRT
Thailand: GAT, PAT





Europe



Belarus: CTRB
Denmark: Studentereksamen
Estonia: Küpsuseksamid
Finland: Ylioppilastutkinto
France: Baccalauréat
Germany: Abitur
Ireland: Leaving Certificate
Netherlands: Eindexamen
Portugal: ENES
Romania: Bacalaureat
Russia: Unified State Exam (EGE)
Spain: Selectividad
Sweden: Högskoleprovet
Turkey: YGS-LYS
Ukraine: External independent evaluation (ZNO)
United Kingdom: A-Level, Higher
Albania, Austria, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Czech Republic, Hungary, Italy, Kosovo, Liechtenstein, Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Poland, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, and Switzerland: Matura











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=GCE_Advanced_Level&oldid=817429883"					Categories: Educational qualifications in the United KingdomSchool examinations1951 introductionsSecondary school qualificationsSecondary education in EnglandSecondary education in WalesSecondary education in Northern IrelandHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksArticles needing additional references from October 2017All articles needing additional referencesAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from March 2016Wikipedia articles needing style editing from March 2016All articles needing style editingAll articles with vague or ambiguous timeVague or ambiguous time from March 2016Use dmy dates from May 2013