This article is about the concept of genres. For a list of genres, see List of genres. For genre studies or genre theory, see Genre studies. For other uses, see Genre (disambiguation).






This article includes a list of references, but its sources remain unclear because it has insufficient inline citations. Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations. (May 2010) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Genre (/ˈʒɒ̃rə, ˈʒɒn-, ˈdʒɒn-/; from French genre, meaning 'kind" or "sort') is any form or type of communication in any mode (written, spoken, digital, artistic, etc.) with socially-agreed upon conventions developed over time. Genre is most popularly known as a category of literature, music, or other forms of art or entertainment, whether written or spoken, audio or visual, based on some set of stylistic criteria, yet genres can be aesthetic, rhetorical, communicative, or functional. Genres form by conventions that change over time as new genres are invented and the use of old ones is discontinued. Often, works fit into multiple genres by way of borrowing and recombining these conventions. Stand alone texts, works, or pieces of communication may have individual styles, but genres are amalgams of these texts based on agreed upon or socially inferred conventions. Some genres may be rigid with strictly adhered to guidelines while others may be very flexible.
Genre began as an absolute classification system for ancient Greek literature. Poetry, prose, and performance each had a specific and calculated style that related to the theme of the story. Speech patterns for comedy would not be appropriate for tragedy, and even actors were restricted to their genre under the assumption that a type of person could tell one type of story best. In later periods genres proliferated and developed in response to changes in audiences and creators. Genre became a dynamic tool to help the public make sense out of unpredictable art. Because art is often a response to a social state, in that people write/paint/sing/dance about what they know about, the use of genre as a tool must be able to adapt to changing meanings.
Genre suffers from the same ills of any classification system. Genre is to be reassessed and scrutinized and to weigh works on their unique merit. It has been suggested that genres resonate with people because of the familiarity, the shorthand communication, as well as the tendency of genres to shift with public mores and to reflect the zeitgeist. While the genre of storytelling has been relegated as lesser form of art because of the heavily borrowed nature of the conventions, admiration has grown. Proponents argue that the genius of an effective genre piece is in the variation, recombination, and evolution of the codes.



Contents


1 Visual arts
2 Literature
3 Film
4 Music
5 Popular culture and other media
6 Linguistics
7 Rhetoric
8 History

8.1 Classical and Romance genre theory


9 Culture
10 Audiences
11 Subgenre
12 Microgenre
13 See also
14 References

14.1 Citations
14.2 Sources


15 Further reading
16 External links



Visual arts[edit]




A genre painting (Peasant Dance, c. 1568, by Pieter Brueghel the Elder)


The term genre is much used in the history and criticism of visual art, but in art history has meanings that overlap rather confusingly. Genre painting is a term for paintings where the main subject features human figures to whom no specific identity attaches – in other words, figures are not portraits, characters from a story, or allegorical personifications. These are distinguished from staffage: incidental figures in what is primarily a landscape or architectural painting. Genre painting may also be used as a wider term covering genre painting proper, and other specialized types of paintings such as still-life, landscapes, marine paintings and animal paintings.
The concept of the "hierarchy of genres" was a powerful one in artistic theory, especially between the 17th and 19th centuries. It was strongest in France, where it was associated with the Académie française which held a central role in academic art. The genres in hierarchical order are:

History painting, including narrative religious mythological and allegorical subjects
Portrait painting
Genre painting or scenes of everyday life
Landscape (landscapists were the "common footmen in the Army of Art" according to the Dutch theorist Samuel van Hoogstraten) and cityscape
Animal painting
Still life

Literature[edit]


Literature





Major forms




Novel
Poem
Drama
Short story
Novella




Genres




Comedy
Drama
Epic
Erotic
Nonsense
Lyric
Mythopoeia
Romance
Satire
Tragedy
Tragicomedy




Media




Performance

play


Book




Techniques




Prose
Poetry




History and lists




History

modern




Outline
Glossary of terms


Books
Writers
Literary awards

poetry






Discussion




Criticism
Theory (critical theory)
Sociology
Magazines




 Literature portal





v
t
e





Main articles: Literary genre and List of literary genres
A literary genre is a category of literary composition. Genres may be determined by literary technique, tone, content, or even (as in the case of fiction) length. Genre should not be confused with age category, by which literature may be classified as either adult, young adult, or children's. They also must not be confused with format, such as graphic novel or picture book. The distinctions between genres and categories are flexible and loosely defined, often with subgroups.
The most general genres in literature are (in loose chronological order) epic, tragedy,[1] comedy, novel, and short story. They can all be in the genres prose or poetry, which shows best how loosely genres are defined. Additionally, a genre such as satire might appear in any of the above, not only as a subgenre but as a mixture of genres. Finally, they are defined by the general cultural movement of the historical period in which they were composed. In popular fiction, which is especially divided by genres, genre fiction is the more usual term.
In literature, genre has been known as an intangible taxonomy. This taxonomy implies a concept of containment or that an idea will be stable forever.The earliest recorded systems of genre in Western history can be traced back to Plato and Aristotle. Gérard Genette, a French literary theorist and author of The Architext, describes Plato as creating three Imitational genres: dramatic dialogue, pure narrative, and epic (a mixture of dialogue and narrative). Lyric poetry, the fourth and final type of Greek literature, was excluded by Plato as a non-mimetic mode. Aristotle later revised Plato's system by eliminating the pure narrative as a viable mode and distinguishing by two additional criteria: the object to be imitated, as objects could be either superior or inferior, and the medium of presentation such as words, gestures or verse. Essentially, the three categories of mode, object, and medium can be visualized along an XYZ axis.
Excluding the criteria of medium, Aristotle's system distinguished four types of classical genres: tragedy (superior-dramatic dialogue), epic (superior-mixed narrative), comedy (inferior-dramatic dialogue), and parody (inferior-mixed narrative). Genette continues by explaining the later integration of lyric poetry into the classical system during the romantic period, replacing the now removed pure narrative mode. Lyric poetry, once considered non-mimetic, was deemed to imitate feelings, becoming the third leg of a new tripartite system: lyrical, epical, and dramatic dialogue. This system, which came to "dominate all the literary theory of German romanticism (and therefore well beyond)…" (38), has seen numerous attempts at expansion or revision. However, more ambitious efforts to expand the tripartite system resulted in new taxonomic systems of increasing scope and complexity.
Genette reflects upon these various systems, comparing them to the original tripartite arrangement: "its structure is somewhat superior to…those that have come after, fundamentally flawed as they are by their inclusive and hierarchical taxonomy, which each time immediately brings the whole game to a standstill and produces an impasse" (74). Taxonomy allows for a structured classification system of genre, as opposed to a more contemporary rhetorical model of genre. The concept of "genre" has been criticized by Jacques Derrida.
Film[edit]
Main article: Film genre
The basic genres of film can be regarded as drama, in the feature film and most cartoons, and documentary. Most dramatic feature films, especially from Hollywood fall fairly comfortably into one of a long list of film genres such as the Western, war film, horror film, romantic comedy film, musical, crime film, and many others. Many of these genres have a number of subgenres, for example by setting or subject, or a distinctive national style, for example in the Indian Bollywood musical.
Music[edit]
Main article: Music genre
A music genre is a conventional category that identifies pieces of music as belonging to a shared tradition or set of conventions.[2] It is to be distinguished from musical form and musical style, although in practice these terms are sometimes used interchangeably.[citation needed] There are numerous genres in Western classical music and popular music, as well as musical theatre and the music of non-Western cultures. The term is now perhaps over-used to describe relatively small differences in musical style in modern rock music, that also may reflect sociological differences in their audiences.[citation needed] Timothy Laurie suggests that in the context of rock and pop music studies, the "appeal of genre criticism is that it makes narratives out of musical worlds that often seem to lack them".[3]
Music can be divided into different genres in several ways. The artistic nature of music means that these classifications are often arbitrary and controversial, and some genres may overlap. There are several academic approaches to genres. In his book Form in Tonal Music, Douglass M. Green lists madrigal, motet, canzona, ricercar, and dance as examples of genres from the Renaissance period. According to Green, "Beethoven's Op. 61 and Mendelssohn's Op. 64 are identical in genre – both are violin concertos – but different in form. However, Mozart's Rondo for Piano, K. 511, and the Agnus Dei from his Mass, K. 317 are quite different in genre but happen to be similar in form."[4] Some, like Peter van der Merwe, treat the terms genre and style as the same, saying that genre should be defined as pieces of music that share a certain style or "basic musical language".[5]
Others, such as Allan F. Moore, state that genre and style are two separate terms, and that secondary characteristics such as subject matter can also differentiate between genres.[6] A music genre or subgenre may be defined by the musical techniques, the styles, the context, and content and spirit of the themes. Geographical origin is sometimes used to identify a music genre, though a single geographical category will often include a wide variety of subgenres.
Several music scholars have criticised the priority accorded to genre-based communities and listening practices. For example, Laurie argues that "music genres do not belong to isolated, self-sufficient communities. People constantly move between environments where diverse forms of music are heard, advertised and accessorised with distinctive iconographies, narratives and celebrity identities that also touch on non-musical worlds."[3]
Popular culture and other media[edit]






This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (May 2010) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



The concept of genre is often applied, sometimes rather loosely, to other media with an artistic element, such as video game genres. Genre, and numerous minutely divided subgenres, affect popular culture very significantly, not least as they are used to classify it for publicity purposes. The vastly increased output of popular culture in the age of electronic media encourages dividing cultural products by genre to simplify the search for products by consumers, a trend the Internet has only intensified.
Linguistics[edit]
In philosophy of language, genre figures prominently in the works of philosopher and literary scholar Mikhail Bakhtin. Bakhtin's basic observations were of "speech genres" (the idea of heteroglossia), modes of speaking or writing that people learn to mimic, weave together, and manipulate (such as "formal letter" and "grocery list", or "university lecture" and "personal anecdote"). In this sense, genres are socially specified: recognized and defined (often informally) by a particular culture or community. The work of Georg Lukács also touches on the nature of literary genres, appearing separately but around the same time (1920s–1930s) as Bakhtin. Norman Fairclough has a similar concept of genre that emphasizes the social context of the text: Genres are "different ways of (inter)acting discoursally" (Fairclough, 2003: 26).
A text's genre may be determined by its:

Linguistic function.
Formal traits.
Textual organization.
Relation of communicative situation to formal and organizational traits of the text (Charaudeau and Maingueneau, 2002:278–280).

Rhetoric[edit]
In the field of rhetoric, genre theorists usually understand genres as types of actions rather than types or forms of texts.[7] On this perspective, texts are channels through which genres are enacted. Carolyn Miller's[8] work has been especially important for this perspective. Drawing on Lloyd Bitzer's concept of rhetorical situation,[9] Miller reasons that recurring rhetorical problems tend to elicit recurring responses; drawing on Alfred Schütz,[10] she reasons that these recurring responses become "typified" – that is, socially constructed as recognizable types. Miller argues that these "typified rhetorical actions" (p. 151) are properly understood as genres.
Building off of Miller, Charles Bazerman and Clay Spinuzzi have argued that genres understood as actions derive their meaning from other genres – that is, other actions. Bazerman therefore proposes that we analyze genres in terms of "genre systems,"[11] while Spinuzzi prefers the closely related concept of "genre ecologies".[12]
This tradition has had implications for the teaching of writing in American colleges and universities. Combining rhetorical genre theory with activity theory, David Russell has proposed that standard English composition courses are ill-suited to teach the genres that students will write in other contexts across the university and beyond.[13] Elizabeth Wardle contends that standard composition courses do teach genres, but that these are inauthentic "mutt genres" that are often of little use outside of composition courses.[14]
History[edit]
This concept of genre originated from the classification systems created by Plato. Plato divided literature into the three classic genres accepted in Ancient Greece: poetry, drama, and prose. Poetry is further subdivided into epic, lyric, and drama. The divisions are recognized as being set by Aristotle and Plato; however, they were not the only ones. Many genre theorists added to these accepted forms of poetry.
Classical and Romance genre theory[edit]
The earliest recorded systems of genre in Western history can be traced back to Plato and Aristotle. Gérard Genette explains his interpretation of the history of genre in "The Architext". He described Plato as the creator of three imitational, mimetic genres distinguished by mode of imitation rather than content. These three imitational genres include dramatic dialogue, the drama; pure narrative, the dithyramb; and a mixture of the two, the epic. Plato excluded lyric poetry as a non-mimetic, imitational mode. Genette further discussed how Aristotle revised Plato's system by first eliminating the pure narrative as a viable mode. He then uses two additional criteria to distinguish the system. The first of the criteria is the object to be imitated, whether superior or inferior. The second criterion is the medium of presentation: words, gestures, or verse. Essentially, the three categories of mode, object, and medium can be visualized along an XYZ axis. Excluding the criteria of medium, Aristotle's system distinguished four types of classical genres: tragedy, epic, comedy, and parody.
Genette explained the integration of lyric poetry into the classical system by replacing the removed pure narrative mode. Lyric poetry, once considered non-mimetic, was deemed to imitate feelings, becoming the third "Architext", a term coined by Gennette, of a new long-enduring tripartite system: lyrical; epical, the mixed narrative; and dramatic, the dialogue. This new system that came to "dominate all the literary theory of German romanticism" (Genette 38) has seen numerous attempts at expansion and revision. Such attempts include Friedrich Schlegel's triad of subjective form, the lyric; objective form, the dramatic; and subjective-objective form, the epic. However, more ambitious efforts to expand the tripartite system resulted in new taxonomic systems of increasing complexity. Gennette reflected upon these various systems, comparing them to the original tripartite arrangement: "its structure is somewhat superior to most of those that have come after, fundamentally flawed as they are by their inclusive and hierarchical taxonomy, which each time immediately brings the whole game to a standstill and produces an impasse".
Culture[edit]
Genre is embedded in culture but may clash with it at times. There are occasions in which a cultural group may not be inclined to keep within the set structures of a genre. Anthony Pare's studied Inuit social workers in "Genre and Identity: Individuals, Institutions and Ideology". In this study, Pare described the conflict between the genre of Inuit social workers' record keeping forms and the cultural values that prohibited them from fully being able to fulfill the expectations of this genre. Amy Devitt further expands on the concept of culture in her 2004 essay, "A Theory of Genre" by adding "culture defines what situations and genres are likely or possible" (Devitt 24).
Genre not only coexists with culture but also defines its very components. Genres abound in daily life and people often work within them unconsciously; people often take for granted their prominence and ever present residence in society. Devitt touches on Miller's idea of situation, but expands on it and adds that the relationship with genre and situation is reciprocal. Individuals may find themselves shaping the rhetorical situations, which in turn affect the rhetorical responses that arise out of the situation. Because the social workers worked closely with different families, they did not want to disclose many of the details that are standard in the genre of record keeping related to this field. Giving out such information would violate close cultural ties with the members of their community.
Audiences[edit]
Although genres are not always precisely definable, genre considerations are one of the most important factors in determining what a person will see or read. The classification properties of genre can attract or repel potential users depending on the individual's understanding of a genre.
Genre creates an expectation in that expectation is met or not. Many genres have built-in audiences and corresponding publications that support them, such as magazines and websites. Inversely, audiences may call out for change in an antecedent genre and create an entirely new genre.
The term may be used in categorizing web pages, like "news page" and "fan page", with both very different layout, audience, and intention (Rosso, 2008). Some search engines like Vivísimo try to group found web pages into automated categories in an attempt to show various genres the search hits might fit.
Subgenre[edit]
A subgenre is a subordinate within a genre.[15][16] Two stories being the same genre can still sometimes differ in subgenre. For example, if a fantasy story has darker and more frightening elements of fantasy, it would belong in the subgenre of dark fantasy; whereas another fantasy story that features magic swords and wizards would belong to the subgenre of sword and sorcery.
Microgenre[edit]
Main article: Microgenre
See also[edit]

List of genres

References[edit]
Citations[edit]


^ Bakhtin 1983, p. 3.
^ Samson, Jim. "Genre". In Grove Music Online. Oxford Music Online. Accessed March 4, 2012.
^ a b Laurie, Timothy (2014). "Music Genre As Method". Cultural Studies Review.  20 (2), pp. 283-292.
^ Green, Douglass M. (1965). Form in Tonal Music. Holt, Rinehart, and Winston, Inc. p. 1. ISBN 0-03-020286-8. 
^ van der Merwe, Peter (1989). Origins of the Popular Style: The Antecedents of Twentieth-Century Popular Music. Oxford: Clarendon Press. p. 3. ISBN 0-19-316121-4. 
^ Moore, Allan F. "Categorical Conventions in Music Discourse: Style and Genre". Music & Letters, Vol. 82, No. 3 (Aug. 2001), pp. 432–442.
^ Bawarshi, A. S., & Mary Jo Reiff. (2010). Genre: An Introduction to History, Theory, Research, and Pedagogy. chs. 5 and 6
^ Miller, C. R. (1984). Genre as social action. Quarterly Journal of Speech, 70(2), 151–167.
^ Bitzer, L. F. (1968). The Rhetorical Situation. Philosophy and Rhetoric, 1(1), 1–14.
^ Schutz, A., & Luckmann, T. (1973). The Structures of the Life-World. Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press.
^ Bazerman, C. (1994). Systems of Genre and the Enactment of Social Intentions. In Genre and the New Rhetoric (pp. 79–101). London/Bristol: Taylor & Francis.
^ Spinuzzi, C., & Zachry, M. (2000). Genre Ecologies : An Open-System Approach to Understanding and Constructing Documentation. ACM Journal of Computer Documentation, 24(3), 169–181.
^ Russell, D. R. (1995). Activity theory and its implications for writing instruction. In J. Petraglia (Ed.), Reconceiving writing, rethinking writing instruction (pp. 51–78). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
^ Wardle, E. (2009). "Mutt Genres" and the Goal of FYC: Can we Help Students Write the Genres of the University? College Composition and Communication, 60(4), 765–789.
^ "subgenre". dictionary.com. 
^ "Subgenre". The Free Dictionary. Farlex. 


Sources[edit]


Bakhtin, Mikhail M. (1983). "Epic and Novel". In Holquist, Michael. The Dialogic Imagination: Four Essays. Austin: University of Texas Press. ISBN 0-292-71527-7. 
Charaudeau, P.; Maingueneau, D. and Adam, J. Dictionnaire d'analyse du discours Seuil, 2002.
Devitt, Amy J. "A Theory of Genre". Writing Genres. Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press, 2004. 1–32.
Fairclough, Norman. Analysing Discourse: Textual Analysis for Social Research Routledge, 2003.
Genette, Gérard. The Architext: An Introduction. 1979. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1992.
Jamieson, Kathleen M. "Antecedent Genre as Rhetorical Constraint". Quarterly Journal of Speech 61 (1975): 406–415.
Killoran, John B. "The Gnome In The Front Yard and Other Public Figurations: Genres of Self-Presentation on Personal Home Pages". Biography 26.1 (2003): 66–83.
Коробова А.Г. Теория жанров в музыкальной науке: история и современность. Москва: Московская гос. консерватория, 2007
LaCapra, Dominick. "History and Genre: Comment". New Literary History 17.2 (1986): 219–221.
Miller, Carolyn. "Genre as Social Action". Quarterly Journal of Speech. 70 (1984): 151–67.
Rosso, Mark. "User-based Identification of Web Genres". Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 59 (2008): 1053–1072.


Further reading[edit]

Pare, Anthony. "Genre and Identity". The Rhetoric and Ideology of Genre: Strategies for Stability and Change. Eds. Richard M. Coe, Lorelei Lingard, and Tatiana Teslenko. Creskill, N.J. Hampton Press, 2002.
Sullivan, Ceri (2007) "Disposable elements? Indications of genre in early modern titles", Modern Language Review 102.3, pp. 641–53

External links[edit]



Look up genre in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.





Wikidata has the property: genre (P136) (see uses)




Library resources about
Genre





Resources in your library





Genres of film at the Internet Movie Database
Helping Children Understand Literary Genres
Rhetorica Genre
Museum of Broadcast Communications
Dictionary.com







v
t
e


Film genres



By style



Action

Arthouse
Heroic bloodshed
Hong Kong action


Adventure

Survival


Art
Biographical
Christian
Comedy

Black
Commedia all'italiana
Commedia sexy all'italiana
Bromantic
Dramedy
Gross out
Horror
Parody
Mo lei tau
Thriller
Remarriage
Romantic
Sex
Screwball
Silent
Slapstick


Documentary

Animated
Docudrama
Mockumentary
Mondo
Pseudo
Semi
Travel


Drama

Dramedy
Historical
Legal
Melodrama

Korean




Erotic

Commedia sexy all'italiana
Pink
Sexploitation
Thriller


Educational
Social guidance
Epic

Sword-and-sandal


Experimental
Exploitation

see Exploitation film template


Fantasy

Comic
Contemporary
Dark
Fairy tale
Fantastique
High
Historical
Magic realism
Science


Film noir

Bad girl
Neo-noir
Occult detective
Pulp noir
Tech noir


Gothic

Romance
Southern
Space
Suburban
Urban


Horror

Body
Cannibal
Comedy
Eco
Fantastique
Found footage
German underground
Ghost
Giallo
Holiday
Japanese
Korean
Lovecraftian
Mumblegore
Natural
New French Extremity
Occult detective
Psycho-biddy
Psychological
Religious
Science Fiction
Slasher
Splatter
Satanic


Mumblecore

Mumblegore


Musical

Backstage
Jukebox
Musicarello
Operetta
Sceneggiata


Mystery

Giallo
Occult detective


Pornographic

Hardcore pornography
Softcore pornography


Propaganda
Reality
Romantic

Comedy

Bromantic


Fantasy
Gothic
Paranormal
Thriller


Science fiction

Comic
Cyberpunk
Fantastique
Fantasy
Gothic
Horror
Military
Mundane
New Wave
Parallel universe
Planetary romance
Space opera
Steampunk
Western


Thriller

Comedy
Conspiracy
Erotic
Financial
Giallo
Legal
New French Extremity
Political
Psychological
Romantic
Techno


Transgressive

Cinema of Transgression
New French Extremity


Trick





By theme



Animals
Beach party
Blaxploitation
Body swap
Bourekas
Buddy

Buddy cop
Female


Cannibal
Chicano
Colonial
Coming-of-age
Concert
Crime

Gentleman thief
Gong'an
Heist
Hood
Gangster
Mafia
Mafia comedy
Poliziotteschi
Yakuza
Gokudō


Dance
Disaster

Apocalyptic


Drug

Psychedelic
Stoner


Dystopian
Economic
Ethnographic
Extraterrestrial
Food and drink
Funny animal
Gendai-geki
Ghost
Goona-goona epic
Gothic

Romance
Southern
Space
Suburban
Urban


Ecchi
Girls with guns
Harem
Hentai

Tentacle erotica


Lolicon
Kaitō
Magical girl
Mecha
Shotacon
Yaoi
Yuri
Homeland
Jidaigeki
LGBT
Luchador
Martial arts

Bruceploitation
Chopsocky
Girls with guns
Gun fu
Kung fu
Wuxia


Mecha
Mexploitation
Monster

Giant monster
Jiangshi
Kaiju
Vampire
Werewolf
Zombie


Mountain
Mouth of Garbage
Muslim social
Nature

Environmental issues


Opera
Outlaw biker
Ozploitation
Partisan film
Pirate
Prison

Women


Race
Rape and revenge
Road
Rubble
Rumberas
Samurai
Sexploitation

Bavarian porn
Commedia sexy all'italiana
Mexican sex comedy
Nazi exploitation
Pornochanchada
Nunsploitation
Sex report


Shomin-geki
Slavery
Slice of life
Snuff

Crush


South Seas
Sports
Spy

Eurospy


Superhero
Surfing
Swashbuckler
Sword-and-sandal
Sword and sorcery
Travel
Trial
Vigilante
War

Anti-war
Euro War
Submarine


Western

Acid
Florida
Meat pie
Northern
Ostern
revisionist
Space
Spaghetti
Weird


Zombie

Zombie comedy







By movement
or period



Absolute
Australian New Wave
Auteur films
Berlin School
Bourekas
Brighton School
British New Wave

Kitchen sink realism


Budapest school
Cannibal boom
Cinéma du look
Cinema Novo
Cinema of Transgression
Cinéma pur
Commedia all'italiana
Documentary Film Movement
Dogme 95
Erra Cinema
European art cinema
Film gris
Free Cinema
French New Wave
German Expressionist
German underground horror
Nigerian Golden Age
Grupo Cine Liberación
Heimatfilm
Hollywood on the Tiber
Hong Kong New Wave
Iranian New Wave
Italian futurist
Italian neorealist
Japanese New Wave
Kammerspielfilm
L.A. Rebellion
Lettrist
Mumblecore
Neorealist
New French Extremity
New German
New Generation
New Hollywood
New Nigerian
New Queer
No wave
Nuevo Cine Mexicano
Parallel cinema
Persian Film
Poetic realist
Polish Film School
Poliziotteschi
Praška filmska škola
Prussian film
Pure Film Movement
Remodernist
Romanian New Wave
Spaghetti Western
Socialist realist
Social realist

Kitchen sink realism


Soviet Parallel
Structural
Surrealist
Sword-and-sandal
Telefoni Bianchi
Third Cinema
Yugoslav Black Wave





By audience



Adult
Chick flick
Children's
Family
Guy-cry
Stag
Teen
Woman's





By format,
technique,
approach,
or production



3D
Actuality
Animation

anime
cartoon
computer
stop-motion
traditional


Anthology
Art
B movie
Black-and-white
Blockbuster
Bollywood
Cinéma vérité
Classical Hollywood cinema
Collage
Color
Compilation
Composite
Cult

midnight movie


Database cinema
Docufiction
Ethnofiction
Experimental

Abstract


Feature
Featurette
Film à clef
Film noir
Film-poem
Found footage
Grindhouse
Hyperlink cinema
Independent

Guerrilla filmmaking


Interstitial art
Live action

animation


Low-budget
Major studio
Making-of
Masala
Message picture
Meta-film
Mockbuster
Musical short
Mythopoeia
Neorealist
No budget
Paracinema
Participatory
Poetry
Postmodernist
Sceneggiata
Semidocumentary
Serial
Shinpa
Short
Silent
Socialist realist
Sound
Underground
Video nasty
Z movie












v
t
e


Lists of music genres and styles



Music styles



A–F
G–M
N–R
S–Z
Cultural and regional





Genres and
movements



Classical and art music traditions

Classical music
Opera


Electronic

Breakbeat
Electro
EDM
Hardstyle
House
Techno
Trance


Folk

Traditional


Popular

Blues
Country
Hip hop
Jazz
Pop
Reggae
R&B
Rock

Alternative
Synth
Metal
Punk




Progressive
Psychedelic











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Genre&oldid=816326672"					Categories: GenresFictionNarratologyThemeHidden categories: Articles lacking in-text citations from May 2010All articles lacking in-text citationsAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from May 2013Articles needing additional references from May 2010All articles needing additional references