



A schematic depiction of the major events in the history of Earth


Geochronology is the science of determining the age of rocks, fossils, and sediments using signatures inherent in the rocks themselves. Absolute geochronology can be accomplished through radioactive isotopes, whereas relative geochronology is provided by tools such as palaeomagnetism and stable isotope ratios. By combining multiple geochronological (and biostratigraphic) indicators the precision of the recovered age can be improved.
Geochronology is different in application from biostratigraphy, which is the science of assigning sedimentary rocks to a known geological period via describing, cataloguing and comparing fossil floral and faunal assemblages. Biostratigraphy does not directly provide an absolute age determination of a rock, but merely places it within an interval of time at which that fossil assemblage is known to have coexisted. Both disciplines work together hand in hand however, to the point where they share the same system of naming rock layers and the time spans utilized to classify layers within a stratum.
The science of geochronology is the prime tool used in the discipline of chronostratigraphy, which attempts to derive absolute age dates for all fossil assemblages and determine the geologic history of the Earth and extraterrestrial bodies.



Contents


1 Dating methods

1.1 Radiometric dating
1.2 Fission-track dating
1.3 Cosmogenic nuclide geochronology
1.4 Luminescence dating
1.5 Incremental dating
1.6 Paleomagnetic dating
1.7 Magnetostratigraphy
1.8 Chemostratigraphy
1.9 Correlation of marker horizons


2 Differences from chronostratigraphy
3 See also
4 References
5 Further reading
6 External links



Dating methods[edit]

Units in geochronology and stratigraphy[1]

Segments of rock (strata) in chronostratigraphy
Time spans in geochronology
Notes to
geochronological units


Eonothem
Eon
4 total, half a billion years or more


Erathem
Era
10 defined, several hundred million years


System
Period
22 defined, tens to ~one hundred million years


Series
Epoch
34 defined, tens of millions of years


Stage
Age
99 defined, millions of years


Chronozone
Chron
subdivision of an age, not used by the ICS timescale


Radiometric dating[edit]
Main article: Radiometric dating
By measuring the amount of radioactive decay of a radioactive isotope with a known half-life, geologists can establish the absolute age of the parent material. A number of radioactive isotopes are used for this purpose, and depending on the rate of decay, are used for dating different geological periods. More slowly decaying isotopes are useful for longer periods of time, but less accurate in absolute years. With the exception of the radiocarbon method, most of these techniques are actually based on measuring an increase in the abundance of a radiogenic isotope, which is the decay-product of the radioactive parent isotope.[2][3][4] Two or more radiometric methods can be used in concert to achieve more robust results.[5] Most radiometric methods are suitable for geological time only, but some such as the radiocarbon method and the 40Ar/39Ar dating method can be extended into the time of early human life[6] and into recorded history.[7]
Some of the commonly used techniques are:

Radiocarbon dating. This technique measures the decay of carbon-14 in organic material and can be best applied to samples younger than about 60,000 years.[8]
Uranium–lead dating. This technique measures the ratio of two lead isotope s(lead-206 and lead-207) to the amount of uranium in a mineral or rock. Often applied to the trace mineral zircon in igneous rocks, this method is one of the two most commonly used (along with argon–argon dating) for geologic dating. Monazite geochronology is another example of U–Pb dating, employed for dating metamorphism in particular. Uranium–lead dating is applied to samples older than about 1 million years.
Uranium–thorium dating. This technique is used to date speleothems, corals, carbonates, and fossil bones. Its range is from a few years to about 700,000 years.
Potassium–argon dating and argon–argon dating. These techniques date metamorphic, igneous and volcanic rocks. They are also used to date volcanic ash layers within or overlying paleoanthropologic sites. The younger limit of the argon–argon method is a few thousand years.
Electron spin resonance (ESR) dating

Fission-track dating[edit]
Main article: Fission track dating
Cosmogenic nuclide geochronology[edit]
Main article: Cosmogenic radionuclide dating
A series of related techniques for determining the age at which a geomorphic surface was created (exposure dating), or at which formerly surficial materials were buried (burial dating). Exposure dating uses the concentration of exotic nuclides (e.g. 10Be, 26Al, 36Cl) produced by cosmic rays interacting with Earth materials as a proxy for the age at which a surface, such as an alluvial fan, was created. Burial dating uses the differential radioactive decay of 2 cosmogenic elements as a proxy for the age at which a sediment was screened by burial from further cosmic rays exposure.
Luminescence dating[edit]
Luminescence dating techniques observe 'light' emitted from materials such as quartz, diamond, feldspar, and calcite. Many types of luminescence techniques are utilized in geology, including optically stimulated luminescence (OSL), cathodoluminescence (CL), and thermoluminescence (TL). Thermoluminescence and optically stimulated luminescence are used in archaeology to date 'fired' objects such as pottery or cooking stones, and can be used to observe sand migration.
Incremental dating[edit]
Main article: Incremental dating
Incremental dating techniques allow the construction of year-by-year annual chronologies, which can be fixed (i.e. linked to the present day and thus calendar or sidereal time) or floating.

Dendrochronology
Ice cores
Lichenometry
Varves

Paleomagnetic dating[edit]
A sequence of paleomagnetic poles (usually called virtual geomagnetic poles), which are already well defined in age, constitutes an apparent polar wander path (APWP). Such path is constructed for a large continental block. APWPs for different continents can be used as a reference for newly obtained poles for the rocks with unknown age. For paleomagnetic dating it is suggested to use the APWP in order to date a pole obtained from rocks or sediments of unknown age by linking the paleopole to the nearest point on the APWP. Two methods of paleomagnetic dating have been suggested (1) Angular method and (2) Rotation method.[9] First method is used for paleomagnetic dating of rocks inside of the same continental block. Second method is used for the folded areas where tectonic rotations are possible.
Magnetostratigraphy[edit]
Main article: Magnetostratigraphy
Magnetostratigraphy determines age from the pattern of magnetic polarity zones in a series of bedded sedimentary and/or volcanic rocks by comparison to the magnetic polarity timescale. The polarity timescale has been previously determined by dating of seafloor magnetic anomalies, radiometrically dating volcanic rocks within magnetostratigraphic sections, and astronomically dating magnetostratigraphic sections.
Chemostratigraphy[edit]
Global trends in isotope compositions, particularly Carbon 13 and strontium isotopes, can be used to correlate strata.[10]
Correlation of marker horizons[edit]




Tephra horizons in south-central Iceland. The thick and light-to-dark coloured layer at the height of the volcanologists hands is a marker horizon of rhyolitic-to-basaltic tephra from Hekla.


Marker horizons are stratigraphic units of the same age and of such distinctive composition and appearance, that despite their presence in different geographic sites, there is certainty about their age-equivalence. Fossil faunal and floral assemblages, both marine and terrestrial, make for distinctive marker horizons.[11] Tephrochronology is a method for geochemical correlation of unknown volcanic ash (tephra) to geochemically fingerprinted, dated tephra. Tephra is also often used as a dating tool in archaeology, since the dates of some eruptions are well-established.
Differences from chronostratigraphy[edit]
It is important not to confuse geochronologic and chronostratigraphic units.[12] Geochronological units are periods of time, thus it is correct to say that Tyrannosaurus rex lived during the Late Cretaceous Epoch.[13] Chronostratigraphic units are geological material, so it is also correct to say that fossils of the genus Tyrannosaurus have been found in the Upper Cretaceous Series.[14] In the same way, it is entirely possible to go and visit an Upper Cretaceous Series deposit – such as the Hell Creek deposit where the Tyrannosaurus fossils were found – but it is naturally impossible to visit the Late Cretaceous Epoch as that is a period of time.
See also[edit]

Age of the Earth
Alfred O. C. Nier
Arthur Holmes
Chronological dating
Closure temperature
Consilience
Fritz Houtermans
List of geochronologic names
Thermochronology
Thomas Edvard Krogh

References[edit]



^ Cohen, K.M.; Finney, S.; Gibbard, P.L. (2015), International Chronostratigraphic Chart (PDF), International Commission on Stratigraphy .
^ Dickin, A. P. 1995. Radiogenic Isotope Geology. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-59891-5
^ Faure, G. 1986. Principles of isotope geology. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-471-86412-9
^ Faure, G., and Mensing, D. 2005. "Isotopes - Principles and applications". 3rd Edition. J. Wiley & Sons. ISBN 0-471-38437-2
^ Dalrymple G. B., Grove M., Lovera O. M., Harrison, T. M., Hulen, J. B., and Lanphere, M. A. 1999. Age and thermal history of the Geysers plutonic complex (felsite unit), Geysers geothermal field, California: a 40Ar/39Ar and U–Pb study. Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 173, 285–298 [1]
^ Ludwig, K. R. and Renne, P. R. 2000. Geochronology on the Paleoanthropological Time Scale. Evolutionary Anthropology, 9, 101-110 [2]
^ Renne, P. R., Sharp, W. D., Deino. A. L., Orsi, G., and Civetta, L. 1997. 40Ar/39Ar dating into the historical realm: Calibration against Pliny the Younger. Science, 277, 1279-1280 "Archived copy" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 2008-10-30. Retrieved 2008-10-25. 
^ Plastino, W.; Kaihola, L.; Bartolomei, P.; Bella, F. (2001). "Cosmic Background Reduction In The Radiocarbon Measurement By Scintillation Spectrometry At The Underground Laboratory Of Gran Sasso" (PDF). Radiocarbon. 43 (2A): 157–161. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2008-05-27. 
^ Hnatyshin, D., and Kravchinsky, V.A., 2014. Paleomagnetic dating: Methods, MATLAB software, example. Tectonophysics, doi: 10.1016/j.tecto.2014.05.013 [3]
^ http://www.nrcresearchpress.com/doi/pdf/10.1139/e97-122
^ Demidov, I.N. 2006. Identification of marker horizon in bottom sediments of the Onega Periglacial Lake. Doklady Earth Sciences, 407, 213-216 [4]
^ David Weishampel:The Evolution and Extinction of the Dinosaurs, 1996, Cambridge Press, ISBN 0-521-44496-9
^ Julia Jackson: Glossary of Geology, 1987, American Geological Institute, ISBN 0-922152-34-9
^ Smith, J.B., Lamanna, M.C., Lacovara, K.J., Dodson, P. Jnr., Poole, J.C. and Giegengack, R. 2001. A Giant Sauropod Dinosaur from an Upper Cretaceous Mangrove Deposit in Egypt. Science, 292, 1704-1707 [5]



Further reading[edit]

Smart, P.L., and Frances, P.D. (1991), Quaternary dating methods - a user's guide. Quaternary Research Association Technical Guide No.4 ISBN 0-907780-08-3
Lowe, J.J., and Walker, M.J.C. (1997), Reconstructing Quaternary Environments (2nd edition). Longman publishing ISBN 0-582-10166-2
Mattinson, J. M. (2013), Revolution and evolution: 100 years of U-Pb geochronology. Elements 9, 53-57.
Geochronology bibliography Talk:Origins Archive

External links[edit]

International Commission on Stratigraphy
BGS Open Data Geochronological Ontologies







v
t
e


Time



Key concepts



Past

history
deep time


Present
Future
Futures studies
Far future in religion
Far future in science fiction and popular culture
Timeline of the far future
Eternity
Eternity of the world





Measurement and
standards




Chronometry



UTC
UT
TAI
Unit of time
Planck time
Second
Minute
Hour
Day
Week
Month
Year
Decade
Century
Millennium
Tropical year
Sidereal year
Samvatsara





Measurement
systems



Time zone
Six-hour clock
12-hour clock
24-hour clock
Daylight saving time
Solar time
Sidereal time
Metric time
Decimal time
Hexadecimal time





Calendars



Gregorian
Julian
Hebrew
Islamic
Lunar
Solar Hijri
Mayan
Intercalation
Leap second
Leap year








Clocks



Horology
History of timekeeping devices
Main types

astrarium
atomic

quantum


marine
sundial
sundial markup schema
watch
water-based










Chronology
History






Astronomical chronology
Big History
Calendar era
Chronicle
Deep time
Periodization
Regnal year
Timeline








Religion
Mythology






Dreamtime
Kāla
Kalachakra
Prophecy
Time and fate deities
Wheel of time
Immortality





Philosophy of time



A-series and B-series
B-theory of time
Causality
Duration
Endurantism
Eternal return
Eternalism
Event
Multiple time dimensions
Perdurantism
Presentism
Static interpretation of time
Temporal finitism
Temporal parts
The Unreality of Time





Human experience
and use of time



Accounting period
Chronemics
Fiscal year
Generation time
Mental chronometry
Music
Procrastination
Punctuality
Temporal database
Term
Time discipline
Time management
Time perception

Specious present


Time-tracking software
Time-use research
Time-based currency (time banking)
Time value of money
Time clock
Timesheet
Yesterday – Today – Tomorrow





Time in




Geology



Geological time

age
chron
eon
epoch
era
period


Geochronology
Geological history of Earth





Physics



Absolute time and space
Arrow of time
Chronon
Coordinate time
Imaginary time
Planck epoch
Planck time
Proper time
Rate
Spacetime
Theory of relativity
Time dilation

gravitational


Time domain
Time translation symmetry
Time reversal symmetry





other subject
areas



Chronological dating
Chronobiology
Circadian rhythms
Dating methodologies in archaeology
Time geography








Related topics



Carpe diem
Clock position
Space
System time
Tempus fugit
Time capsule
Time complexity
Time signature
Time travel






 Time portal










v
t
e


Chronology



Key topics



Archaeology
Astronomy
Geology
History
Paleontology
Time








Eras
Epochs







Calendar eras



Human Era
Ab urbe condita
Anno Domini / Common Era
Anno Mundi
Byzantine era
Seleucid era
Spanish era
Before Present
Hijri
Egyptian
Sothic cycle
Hindu units of time (Yuga)
Mesoamerican

Long Count
Short Count
Tzolk'in
Haab'







Regnal year



Canon of Kings
Lists of kings
Limmu





Era names



Chinese
Japanese
Korean
Vietnamese








Calendars




Pre-Julian / Julian



Pre-Julian Roman
Original Julian
Proleptic Julian
Revised Julian





Gregorian



Gregorian
Proleptic Gregorian
Old Style and New Style dates
Adoption of the Gregorian calendar
Dual dating





Astronomical



Lunisolar
Solar
Lunar
Astronomical year numbering





Others



Chinese sexagenary cycle
Geologic Calendar
Hebrew
Iranian
Islamic
ISO week date
Mesoamerican

Maya
Aztec


Winter count (Plains Indians)








Astronomic time



Cosmic Calendar
Ephemeris
Galactic year
Metonic cycle
Milankovitch cycles





Geologic time




Concepts



Deep time
Geological history of Earth
Geological time units





Standards



Global Standard Stratigraphic Age (GSSA)
Global Boundary Stratotype Section and Point (GSSP)





Methods



Chronostratigraphy
Geochronology
Isotope geochemistry
Law of superposition
Luminescence dating
Samarium–neodymium dating








Chronological
dating




Absolute dating



Amino acid racemisation
Archaeomagnetic dating
Dendrochronology
Ice core
Incremental dating
Lichenometry
Paleomagnetism
Radiometric dating

Radiocarbon
Uranium–lead
Potassium–argon


Tephrochronology
Luminescence dating
Thermoluminescence dating





Relative dating



Fluorine absorption
Nitrogen dating
Obsidian hydration
Seriation
Stratigraphy








Genetic methods



Molecular clock





Linguistic methods



Glottochronology





Related topics



Chronicle
New Chronology
Periodization
Synchronoptic view
Timeline
Year zero
Circa
Floruit
Terminus post quem
ASPRO chronology








 Portal











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Geochronology&oldid=813559526"					Categories: GeochronologyRadiometric dating