For the motion of Earth around the Sun, see Earth's orbit. For the shuttle simulator, see Space Cadets (TV series) § Simulator.







This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages)







This article includes a list of references, but its sources remain unclear because it has insufficient inline citations. Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations. (April 2009) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)









This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (December 2015) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)





(Learn how and when to remove this template message)



A geocentric orbit or Earth orbit involves any object orbiting Planet Earth, such as the Moon or artificial satellites. In 1997 NASA estimated there were approximately 2,465 artificial satellite payloads orbiting the Earth and 6,216 pieces of space debris as tracked by the Goddard Space Flight Center.[1] Over 16,291 previously launched objects have decayed into the Earth's atmosphere.[1]



Contents


1 List of terms and concepts
2 Geocentric orbit types

2.1 Altitude classifications
2.2 Inclination classifications
2.3 Eccentricity classifications
2.4 Directional classifications
2.5 Geosynchronous classifications
2.6 Special classifications
2.7 Non-geocentric classifications


3 Tangential velocities at altitude
4 See also
5 References
6 External links



List of terms and concepts[edit]
The following words may have more than one definition or other non-Earth specific definition(s).
In the spirit of brevity some of the definitions have been altered or truncated to reflect only their usage on this page.

Altitude
as used here, the height of an object above the average surface of the Earth's oceans.


Analemma
a term in astronomy used to describe the plot of the positions of the Sun on the celestial sphere throughout one year. Closely resembles a figure-eight.


Apogee
is the farthest point that a satellite or celestial body can go from Earth, at which the orbital velocity will be at its minimum.


Eccentricity
a measure of how much an orbit deviates from a perfect circle. Eccentricity is strictly defined for all circular and elliptical orbits, and parabolic and hyperbolic trajectories.


Equatorial plane
as used here, an imaginary plane extending from the equator on the Earth to the celestial sphere.


Escape velocity
as used here, the minimum velocity an object without propulsion needs to have to move away indefinitely from the Earth. An object at this velocity will enter a parabolic trajectory; above this velocity it will enter a hyperbolic trajectory.


Impulse
the integral of a force over the time during which it acts. Measured in (N·sec or lb * sec).


Inclination
the angle between a reference plane and another plane or axis. In the sense discussed here the reference plane is the Earth's equatorial plane.


Orbital characteristics
the six parameters of the Keplerian elements needed to specify that orbit uniquely.


Orbital period
as defined here, time it takes a satellite to make one full orbit around the Earth.


Perigee
is the nearest approach point of a satellite or celestial body from Earth, at which the orbital velocity will be at its maximum.


Sidereal day
the time it takes for a celestial object to rotate 360°. For the Earth this is: 23 hours, 56 minutes, 4.091 seconds.


Solar time
as used here, the local time as measured by a sundial.


Velocity
an object's speed in a particular direction. Since velocity is defined as a vector, both speed and direction are required to define it.:

Geocentric orbit types[edit]
The following is a list of different geocentric orbit classifications.
Altitude classifications[edit]




Low (cyan) and Medium (yellow) Earth orbit regions to scale. The black dashed line is the geosynchronous orbit. The green dashed line is the 20,230 km orbit used for GPS satellites.



Low Earth orbit (LEO) - Geocentric orbits ranging in altitude from 160 kilometers (100 statute miles) to 2,000 kilometres (1,200 mi) above mean sea level. At 160 km, one revolution takes approximately 90 minutes, and the circular orbital speed is 8,000 metres per second (26,000 ft/s).


Medium Earth orbit (MEO) - Geocentric orbits with altitudes at apogee ranging between 2,000 kilometres (1,200 mi) and that of the geosynchronous orbit at 35,786 kilometres (22,236 mi).


Geosynchronous orbit (GEO) - Geocentric circular orbit with an altitude of 35,786 kilometres (22,236 mi). The period of the orbit equals one sidereal day, coinciding with the rotation period of the Earth. The speed is approximately 3,000 metres per second (9,800 ft/s).


High Earth orbit (HEO) - Geocentric orbits with altitudes at apogee higher than that of the geosynchronous orbit. A special case of high Earth orbit is the highly elliptical orbit, where altitude at perigee is less than 2,000 kilometres (1,200 mi).[2]

Inclination classifications[edit]

Inclined orbit - An orbit whose inclination in reference to the equatorial plane is not 0.






Polar orbit - A satellite that passes above or nearly above both poles of the planet on each revolution. Therefore it has an inclination of (or very close to) 90 degrees.










Polar sun synchronous orbit - A nearly polar orbit that passes the equator at the same local time on every pass. Useful for image-taking satellites because shadows will be the same on every pass.





Eccentricity classifications[edit]

Circular orbit - An orbit that has an eccentricity of 0 and whose path traces a circle.


Elliptic orbit - An orbit with an eccentricity greater than 0 and less than 1 whose orbit traces the path of an ellipse.




Hohmann transfer orbit - An orbital maneuver that moves a spacecraft from one circular orbit to another using two engine impulses. This maneuver was named after Walter Hohmann.






Geosynchronous transfer orbit - A geocentric-elliptic orbit where the perigee is at the altitude of a Low Earth Orbit (LEO) and the apogee at the altitude of a geosynchronous orbit.






Highly elliptical orbit (HEO) - Geocentric orbit with apogee above 35,786 km and low perigee (about 1,000 km) that result in long dwell times near apogee.








Molniya orbit - A highly elliptical orbit with inclination of 63.4° and orbital period of ½ of a sidereal day (roughly 12 hours). Such a satellite spends most of its time over a designated area of the Earth.










Tundra orbit - A highly elliptical orbit with inclination of 63.4° and orbital period of one sidereal day (roughly 24 hours). Such a satellite spends most of its time over a designated area of the Earth.






Hyperbolic trajectory - An "orbit" with eccentricity greater than 1. The object's velocity reaches some value in excess of the escape velocity, therefore it will escape the gravitational pull of the Earth and continue to travel infinitely with a velocity (relative to Earth) decelerating to some finite value, known as the hyperbolic excess velocity.

Escape Trajectory - This trajectory must be used to launch an interplanetary probe away from Earth, because the excess over escape velocity is what changes its heliocentric orbit from that of Earth.
Capture Trajectory - This is the mirror image of the escape trajectory; an object traveling with sufficient speed, not aimed directly at Earth, will move toward it and accelerate. In the absence of a decelerating engine impulse to put it into orbit, it will follow the escape trajectory after periapsis.




Parabolic trajectory - An "orbit" with eccentricity exactly equal to 1. The object's velocity equals the escape velocity, therefore it will escape the gravitational pull of the Earth and continue to travel with a velocity (relative to Earth) decelerating to 0. A spacecraft launched from Earth with this velocity would travel some distance away from it, but follow it around the Sun in the same heliocentric orbit. It is possible, but not likely that an object approaching Earth could follow a parabolic capture trajectory, but speed and direction would have to be precise.

Directional classifications[edit]

Prograde orbit - an orbit in which the projection of the object onto the equatorial plane revolves about the Earth in the same direction as the rotation of the Earth.
Retrograde orbit - an orbit in which the projection of the object onto the equatorial plane revolves about the Earth in the direction opposite that of the rotation of the Earth.

Geosynchronous classifications[edit]

Semi-synchronous orbit (SSO) - An orbit with an altitude of approximately 20,200 km (12,600 mi) and an orbital period of approximately 12 hours


Geosynchronous orbit (GEO) - Orbits with an altitude of approximately 35,786 km (22,236 mi). Such a satellite would trace an analemma (figure 8) in the sky.






Geostationary orbit (GSO): A geosynchronous orbit with an inclination of zero. To an observer on the ground this satellite would appear as a fixed point in the sky.










Clarke orbit - Another name for a geostationary orbit. Named after the writer Arthur C. Clarke.












Earth orbital libration points: The libration points for objects orbiting Earth are at 105 degrees west and 75 degrees east. More than 160 satellites are gathered at these two points.[3]












Supersynchronous orbit - A disposal / storage orbit above GSO/GEO. Satellites will drift west.










Subsynchronous orbit - A drift orbit close to but below GSO/GEO. Satellites will drift east.










Graveyard orbit - An orbit a few hundred kilometers above geosynchronous that satellites are moved into at the end of their operation.












Disposal orbit - A synonym for graveyard orbit.














Junk orbit - A synonym for graveyard orbit.







Special classifications[edit]

Sun-synchronous orbit - An orbit which combines altitude and inclination in such a way that the satellite passes over any given point of the planet's surface at the same local solar time. Such an orbit can place a satellite in constant sunlight and is useful for imaging, spy, and weather satellites.


Moon orbit - The orbital characteristics of Earth's Moon. Average altitude of 384,403 kilometres (238,857 mi), elliptical–inclined orbit.

Non-geocentric classifications[edit]

Horseshoe orbit - An orbit that appears to a ground observer to be orbiting a planet but is actually in co-orbit with it. See asteroids 3753 (Cruithne) and 2002 AA29.


Exo-orbit - A maneuver where a spacecraft approaches the height of orbit but lacks the velocity to sustain it.




Sub-orbital spaceflight - A synonym for Exo-orbit.



Tangential velocities at altitude[edit]


orbit
Center-to-center
distance
Altitude above
the Earth's surface
Speed
Orbital period
Specific orbital energy


Standing on Earth's surface at the equator (for comparison – not an orbit)
6,378 km
0 km
465.1 m/s (1,674 km/h or 1,040 mph)
23 h 56 min
−62.6 MJ/kg


Orbiting at Earth's surface (equator)
6,378 km
0 km
7.9 km/s (28,440 km/h or 17,672 mph)
1 h 24 min 18 sec
−31.2 MJ/kg


Low Earth orbit
6,600–8,400 km
200–2,000 km
circular orbit: 7.8–6.9 km/s (17,450–14,430 mph) respectively
elliptic orbit: 6.5–8.2 km/s respectively
1 h 29 min – 2 h 8 min
−29.8 MJ/kg


Molniya orbit
6,900–46,300 km
500–39,900 km
1.5–10.0 km/s (3,335–22,370 mph) respectively
11 h 58 min
−4.7 MJ/kg


Geostationary
42,000 km
35,786 km
3.1 km/s (6,935 mph)
23 h 56 min
−4.6 MJ/kg


Orbit of the Moon
363,000–406,000 km
357,000–399,000 km
0.97–1.08 km/s (2,170–2,416 mph) respectively
27.3 days
−0.5 MJ/kg


See also[edit]


Spaceflight portal



Earth's orbit
List of orbits
Astrodynamics
Celestial sphere
Heliocentric orbit
Areosynchronous satellite
Areostationary satellite
Escape velocity
Satellite
Space station

References[edit]



^ a b "Satellite Situation Report, 1997". NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. 2000-02-01. Archived from the original on 2006-08-23. Retrieved 2006-09-10. 
^ Definitions of geocentric orbits from the Goddard Space Flight Center Archived May 27, 2010, at the Wayback Machine.
^ Out-of-Control Satellite Threatens Other Nearby Spacecraft, by Peter B. de Selding, SPACE.com, 5/3/10. Archived May 5, 2010, at the Wayback Machine.



External links[edit]

http://www.freemars.org/jeff/speed/index.htm
http://www.tech-faq.com/medium-earth-orbit.shtml
http://www.hq.nasa.gov/office/pao/History/conghand/traject.htm
https://web.archive.org/web/20100221072300/http://www.space.com/scienceastronomy/solarsystem/second_moon_991029.html
http://www.astro.uwo.ca/~wiegert/3753/3753.html
http://www.astro.uwo.ca/~wiegert/AA29/AA29.html







v
t
e


Earth-related topics



History



Age of the Earth
Evolutionary history of life
Faint young Sun paradox
Formation and evolution of the Solar System
Future of Earth
Geologic time scale
Geological history of Earth
History of Earth
Timeline of evolution








Geography
Geology






Clairaut's theorem
Continents
Earthquake
Equatorial bulge
Extremes on Earth
Geology of solar terrestrial planets
Geophysics
Plate tectonics
Structure of the Earth
Time zones





Ecology



Earth Day
Global warming
Human impact on the environment





Imaging



Apple Maps
Baidu Maps
Bhuvan
Bing Maps
Global Map
Google Earth
Google Maps
MapmyIndia
NASA World Wind
Here
OpenStreetMap
Wikimapia
Remote sensing
Yahoo! Maps
Yandex Maps








Arts
Culture
Society






Earth in culture
Earth in science fiction
Etymology of the word "Earth"
History of the world
International law
Landscape painting
List of countries
World economy





Other topics



Biosphere
Earth's orbit
Earth trojan
The ecliptic
Flag of Earth
Gravity
Magnetic field
The Moon
Claimed moons of Earth
2006 RH120
Kordylewski cloud
Solar System
Earth's location in the Universe
Theia








 Earth sciences portal
 Solar System portal












v
t
e


Gravitational orbits



Types




General



Box
Capture
Circular
Elliptical / Highly elliptical
Escape
Graveyard
Horseshoe
Hyperbolic trajectory
Inclined / Non-inclined
Osculating
Parabolic trajectory
Parking
Synchronous

semi
sub


Transfer orbit





Geocentric



Geosynchronous
Geostationary
Sun-synchronous
Low Earth
Medium Earth
High Earth
Molniya
Near-equatorial
Orbit of the Moon
Polar
Tundra





About other points



Areosynchronous
Areostationary
Halo
Lissajous
Lunar
Heliocentric
Heliosynchronous








Parameters







Shape
Size






e  Eccentricity
a  Semi-major axis
b  Semi-minor axis
Q, q  Apsides





Orientation



i  Inclination
Ω  Longitude of the ascending node
ω  Argument of periapsis
ϖ  Longitude of the periapsis





Position



M  Mean anomaly
ν  True anomaly
E  Eccentric anomaly
L  Mean longitude
l  True longitude





Variation



T  Orbital period
n  Mean motion
v  Orbital speed
t0  Epoch








Maneuvers



Collision avoidance (spacecraft)
Delta-v
Delta-v budget
Bi-elliptic transfer
Geostationary transfer
Gravity assist
Gravity turn
Hohmann transfer
Low energy transfer
Oberth effect
Inclination change
Phasing
Rocket equation
Rendezvous
Transposition, docking, and extraction





Orbital mechanics



Celestial coordinate system
Characteristic energy
Escape velocity
Ephemeris
Equatorial coordinate system
Ground track
Hill sphere
Interplanetary Transport Network
Kepler's laws of planetary motion
Lagrangian point
n-body problem
Orbit equation
Orbital state vectors
Perturbation
Retrograde motion
Specific orbital energy
Specific relative angular momentum
Two-line elements








List of orbits












v
t
e


Spaceflight



General



Astrodynamics
History

Timeline
Space Race
Asian Space Race
Records
Accidents and incidents


Space policy

China
European Union
India
Japan
Russia
Soviet Union
United States


Space law

Outer Space Treaty
Rescue Agreement
Space Liability Convention
Registration Convention
Moon Treaty


Private spaceflight








Applications



Astronomy
Earth observation

Archaeology
Imagery and mapping
Reconnaissance
Weather and environment monitoring


Satellite communications

Internet
Radio
Telephone
Television


Satellite navigation
Commercial use of space
Space launch market competition
Militarisation of space
Space architecture
Space exploration
Space research
Space technology
Space weather





Human spaceflight




General



Astronaut
Life support system

Animals in space
Bioastronautics
Space suit


Extravehicular activity
Weightlessness
Space toilet
Space tourism
Space colonization





Programs



Vostok
Mercury
Voskhod
Gemini
Soyuz
Apollo

Skylab
Apollo–Soyuz


Space Shuttle
Mir

Shuttle–Mir


International Space Station
Shenzhou
Tiangong





Health issues



Effect of spaceflight on the human body

Space adaptation syndrome


Health threat from cosmic rays
Psychological and sociological effects of spaceflight
Space and survival
Space medicine
Space nursing








Spacecraft



Launch vehicle
Rocket
Spaceplane
Robotic spacecraft

Satellite
Space probe
Lander
Rover
Self-replicating spacecraft


Spacecraft propulsion

Rocket engine
Electric propulsion
Solar sail
Gravity assist







Destinations



Sub-orbital
Orbital

Geocentric
Geosynchronous


Interplanetary
Interstellar
Intergalactic





Space launch



Direct ascent
Escape velocity
Expendable and reusable launch systems
Launch pad
Non-rocket spacelaunch
Spaceport





Ground segment



Flight controller
Ground station (Pass)
Mission control center





Space agencies



 CoNAE
 AEB
 CSA
 CNSA
 ESA
 CNES
 DLR
 ISRO
 LAPAN
 ISA
 ISA
 ASI
 JAXA
 NADA
 KARI
 SUPARCO
 Roscosmos
 SNSB
 SSAU
 UKSA
 NASA








  Category
  Portal
  WikiProject











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Geocentric_orbit&oldid=788544800"					Categories: Earth orbitsHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksArticles lacking in-text citations from April 2009All articles lacking in-text citationsArticles needing additional references from December 2015All articles needing additional referencesArticles with multiple maintenance issues