





This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (February 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



The Geographical Names Board of Canada (GNBC) is a national committee with a secretariat in Natural Resources Canada, part of the Government of Canada, which authorizes the names used on official federal government maps of Canada created since 1897. The board consists of 27 members, one from each of the provinces and territories, and others from departments of the Government of Canada. The board also is involved with names of areas in the Antarctic through the Antarctic Treaty.



Contents


1 Structure
2 See also
3 References
4 External links



Structure[edit]
The secretariat is provided by Natural Resources Canada. In addition to the provincial and territorial members are members from the following federal government departments: Aboriginal Affairs and Northern Development Canada, Canada Post Corporation, Fisheries and Oceans Canada, Elections Canada, Library and Archives Canada, Department of National Defence, Natural Resources Canada (including Geological Survey of Canada and Canada Centre for Mapping and Earth Observation), Parks Canada, Statistics Canada, and the Translation Bureau. The Chair of the Geographical Names Board of Canada is Connie Wyatt Anderson from The Pas, Manitoba.
See also[edit]

FIPS code
GNIS
GPS·C

References[edit]

External links[edit]

Canadian Geographical Names at Natural Resources Canada




This Canadian government–related article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it.


v
t
e










						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Geographical_Names_Board_of_Canada&oldid=758999290"					Categories: 1897 establishments in CanadaCanadian federal departments and agenciesGeocodesGovernment agencies established in 1897Names of places in CanadaNatural Resources CanadaToponymyCanada government stubsHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from February 2016All articles needing additional referencesAll stub articles