This article is about the first President of the United States. For other uses, see George Washington (disambiguation).


George Washington



George Washington by Gilbert Stuart, 1797






1st President of the United States


In office
April 30, 1789[a] – March 4, 1797


Vice President
John Adams


Preceded by
Position established


Succeeded by
John Adams


Senior Officer of the U.S. Army


In office
July 13, 1798 – December 14, 1799


Appointed by
John Adams


Preceded by
James Wilkinson


Succeeded by
Alexander Hamilton


Commander-in-Chief of the
Continental Army


In office
June 15, 1775 – December 23, 1783


Appointed by
Continental Congress


Preceded by
Position established


Succeeded by
Henry Knox (Senior Officer of the Army)


Delegate to the Second Continental Congress from Virginia


In office
May 10, 1775 – June 15, 1775


Preceded by
Position established


Succeeded by
Thomas Jefferson


Delegate to the First Continental Congress
from Virginia


In office
September 5, 1774 – October 26, 1774


Preceded by
Position established


Succeeded by
Position abolished





Personal details


Born
(1732-02-22)February 22, 1732
Bridges Creek, Colony of Virginia, British America (present-day Virginia, U.S.)


Died
December 14, 1799(1799-12-14) (aged 67)
Mount Vernon, Virginia, U.S.


Cause of death
Epiglottitis and hypovolemic shock


Resting place
Washington Family Tomb, Mount Vernon, Virginia, U.S.


Political party
None


Spouse(s)
Martha Dandridge (m. 1759)[1]


Parents
Augustine Washington
Mary Ball


Awards
Congressional Gold Medal
Thanks of Congress


Signature



Military service


Allegiance
Kingdom of Great Britain
United States of America


Service/branch
Colonial Militia
Continental Army
United States Army


Years of service
1752–58 (British Militia)
1775–83 (Continental Army)
1798–99 (U.S. Army)


Rank
Colonel (British Army)
General and Commander-in-Chief (Continental Army)
Lieutenant General (United States Army)
General of the Armies (promoted posthumously: 1976, by an Act of Congress)


Commands
Virginia Colony's regiment
Continental Army
United States Army


Battles/wars


See battles 

 • French and Indian War
 • Battle of Jumonville Glen
 • Battle of Fort Necessity
 • Braddock Expedition
 • Battle of the Monongahela
 • Forbes Expedition
 • American Revolutionary War
 • Boston campaign
 • New York and New Jersey campaign
 • Philadelphia campaign
 • Yorktown campaign
 • Northwest Indian War







Other offices held

Member of the Virginia House of Burgesses (1758–1765)











This article is part of
a series about
George Washington







Early life
Ancestry
Military career
Electoral history



American Revolution


Commander in Chief of the
Continental Army




Valley Forge
Battle of Trenton




Mount Vernon Conference
1787 Constitutional Convention


President of the United States

Presidency


First term

1788–89 election
1st inauguration


Judiciary Act
Whiskey Rebellion


Thanksgiving
Presidential title
Coinage Act
Residence Act

District of Columbia




Second term

1792 election
2nd inauguration
Neutrality Act
Jay Treaty


Judicial appointments
Farewell Address


Legacy

Legacy
Monuments
Depictions
Slavery
Papers
Library
Bibliography



 





v
t
e





George Washington (February 22, 1732[2][b][c] – December 14, 1799) was an American statesman and soldier who served as the first President of the United States from 1789 to 1797 and was one of the Founding Fathers of the United States. He served as Commander-in-Chief of the Continental Army during the American Revolutionary War, and later presided over the 1787 convention that drafted the United States Constitution. He is popularly considered the driving force behind the nation's establishment and came to be known as the "father of the country," both during his lifetime and to this day.[3]
Washington was born into the provincial gentry of Colonial Virginia to a family of wealthy planters who owned tobacco plantations and slaves, which he inherited. In his youth, he became a senior officer in the colonial militia during the first stages of the French and Indian War. In 1775, the Second Continental Congress commissioned him as commander-in-chief of the Continental Army in the American Revolution. In that command, Washington forced the British out of Boston in 1776 but was defeated and nearly captured later that year when he lost New York City. After crossing the Delaware River in the middle of winter, he defeated the British in two battles (Trenton and Princeton), retook New Jersey, and restored momentum to the Patriot cause. His strategy enabled Continental forces to capture two major British armies at Saratoga in 1777 and Yorktown in 1781. Historians laud Washington for the selection and supervision of his generals, preservation and command of the army, coordination with the Congress, state governors, and their militia, and attention to supplies, logistics, and training. In battle, however, Washington was sometimes outmaneuvered by British generals with larger armies, yet was always able to avoid significant defeats which would have resulted in the surrender of his army and the loss of the American Revolution.
After victory had been finalized in 1783, Washington resigned as commander-in-chief rather than seize power, proving his commitment to American republicanism.[4] Washington presided over the Constitutional Convention in 1787, which devised a new form of federal government for the United States. Washington was widely admired for his strong leadership qualities and was unanimously elected president by the Electoral College in the first two national elections. Following his election as president in 1789, he worked to unify rival factions in the fledgling nation. He supported Alexander Hamilton's programs to satisfy all debts, federal and state, established a permanent seat of government, implemented an effective tax system, and created a national bank.[5]
In avoiding war with Great Britain, he guaranteed a decade of peace and profitable trade by securing the Jay Treaty in 1795, despite intense opposition from the Jeffersonians. He oversaw the creation of a strong, well-financed national government that maintained neutrality in the French Revolutionary Wars, suppressed the Whiskey Rebellion, and won wide acceptance amongst Americans.[6] Washington's incumbency established many precedents still in use today, such as the cabinet system, the inaugural address, and the title Mr. President.[7][8] His retirement from office after two terms established a tradition that lasted until 1940 and was later made law by the 22nd Amendment. He remained non-partisan, never joining the Federalist Party, although he largely supported its policies. Washington's Farewell Address was an influential primer on civic virtue, warning against partisanship, sectionalism, and involvement in foreign wars.
He retired from the presidency in 1797, returning to his home and plantation at Mount Vernon. Upon his death, Washington was eulogized as "first in war, first in peace, and first in the hearts of his countrymen" by Representative Henry Lee III of Virginia.[9] He was revered in life and in death; scholarly and public polling consistently ranks him among the top three presidents in American history. He has been depicted and remembered in monuments, public works, currency, and other dedications to the present day.



Contents


1 Early life (1732–1753)

1.1 Surveyor


2 French and Indian War

2.1 Beginnings of War
2.2 Braddock disaster (1755)
2.3 Commander of Virginia Regiment
2.4 Lessons learned


3 Between the wars: Mount Vernon (1759–1774)
4 American Revolution (1775–1783)

4.1 Commander in Chief
4.2 Victory at Boston
4.3 Defeat at New York
4.4 Crossing the Delaware
4.5 1777 campaigns
4.6 Valley Forge
4.7 Sullivan Expedition
4.8 Hudson River and Southern battles
4.9 Arnold's treason
4.10 Difficulties during the winter of 1780–1781
4.11 Victory at Yorktown
4.12 Demobilization


5 Constitutional Convention
6 Presidency (1789–1797)

6.1 Cabinet
6.2 Domestic issues
6.3 Foreign affairs
6.4 Farewell Address


7 Retirement (1797–1799)

7.1 American Cincinnatus


8 Death

8.1 Subsequent diagnoses
8.2 Move to new burial site


9 Personal life

9.1 Religion
9.2 Freemasonry
9.3 Slavery


10 Legacy

10.1 Papers
10.2 Monuments and memorials
10.3 Postage and currency
10.4 Cherry tree
10.5 Personal property auction record


11 See also
12 Notes
13 References
14 Bibliography

14.1 Book sources
14.2 Online sources
14.3 Primary sources


15 External links



Early life (1732–1753)
Further information: Ancestry of George Washington




Washington's birthplace


George Washington was the first child of Augustine Washington (1694–1743) and his second wife Mary Ball Washington (1708–1789), born on their Pope's Creek Estate near Colonial Beach in Westmoreland County, Virginia. He was born on February 11, 1731, according to the Julian calendar and Annunciation Style of enumerating years then in use in the British Empire. The Gregorian calendar was adopted within the British Empire in 1752, and it renders a birth date of February 22, 1732.[10][b][c]
Washington was of primarily English gentry descent, especially from Sulgrave, England. His great-grandfather John Washington immigrated to Virginia in 1656 and began accumulating land and slaves, as did his son Lawrence and his grandson, George's father Augustine. Augustine was a tobacco planter who also tried his hand at iron manufacturing.[11] In George's youth, the Washingtons were moderately prosperous members of the Virginia gentry, of "middling rank" rather than one of the leading planter families.[12]
Six of George's siblings reached maturity, including older half-brothers Lawrence and Augustine (from his father's first marriage to Jane Butler Washington), and full siblings Samuel, Elizabeth (Betty), John Augustine, and Charles. Three siblings died before adulthood; his sister Mildred died when she was about one, his half-brother Butler died in infancy, and his half-sister Jane died at age 12, when George was about two. His father died of a sudden illness in April 1743 when George was 11 years old, and his half-brother Lawrence became a surrogate father and role model. William Fairfax was Lawrence's father-in-law and the cousin of Virginia's largest landowner Thomas, Lord Fairfax, and he was also a formative influence.[13][14] William Fairfax's son George William Fairfax was a close friend and associate of Washington.[15] His wife Sally was also a friend of Washington and an early romantic interest, and Washington wrote her love letters even after she had married.[16]
Washington's father was the Justice of the Westmoreland County Court.[17] George spent much of his boyhood at Ferry Farm in Stafford County near Fredericksburg. Lawrence Washington inherited another family property from his father, a plantation on the Potomac River at Little Hunting Creek which he named Mount Vernon in honor of his commanding officer Vice Admiral Edward Vernon. George inherited Ferry Farm upon his father's death and eventually acquired Mount Vernon after Lawrence's death.[18]




The Washington family
Coat of Arms[19]



The death of his father prevented Washington from an education at England's Appleby School such as his older brothers had received. He achieved the equivalent of an elementary school education from a variety of tutors, as well as from a school run by an Anglican clergyman in or near Fredericksburg.[20][21] There was talk of securing an appointment for him in the Royal Navy when he was 15, but it was dropped when his widowed mother objected.[22]
In 1751, Washington traveled to Barbados with Lawrence in the hope that the climate would be beneficial to Lawrence's health, as he was suffering from tuberculosis. Washington contracted smallpox during the trip, which left his face slightly scarred but immunized him against future exposures to the disease.[23] Lawrence's health failed to improve, and he returned to Mount Vernon where he died in the summer of 1752.[24] Lawrence's position as Adjutant General (militia leader) of Virginia was divided into four district offices after his death. Washington was appointed by Governor Dinwiddie as one of the four district adjutants in February 1753, with the rank of major in the Virginia militia.[25] During this period, Washington became a freemason while in Fredericksburg, although his involvement was minimal.[26]
Surveyor
Washington's introduction to surveying began at an early age through school exercises that taught him the basics of the profession, followed by practical experience in the field. His first experiences at surveying occurred in the territory surrounding Mount Vernon. His first opportunity as a surveyor occurred in 1748 when he was invited to join a survey party organized by his neighbor and friend George Fairfax of Belvoir. Fairfax organized a professional surveying party to lay out large tracts of land along the border of western Virginia, where the young Washington gained invaluable experience in the field.[27]
Washington began his career as a professional surveyor in 1749 at the age of 17. He subsequently received a commission and surveyor's license from the College of William & Mary[d] and became the official surveyor for the newly formed Culpeper County. He was appointed to this well-paid official position thanks to his brother Lawrence's connection to the prominent Fairfax family. He completed his first survey in less than two days, plotting a 400-acre parcel of land, and was well on his way to a promising career. He was subsequently able to purchase land in the Shenandoah Valley, the first of his many land acquisitions in western Virginia.
For the next four years, Washington worked surveying land in Western Virginia for the Ohio Company, a land investment company funded by Virginia investors. He came to the notice of the new lieutenant governor of Virginia Robert Dinwiddie, thanks to Lawrence's position as commander of the Virginia militia. He was hard to miss; at over six feet,[e] he was taller than most of his contemporaries.[30] In October 1750, Washington resigned his position as an official surveyor, though he continued to work diligently over the next three years at his new profession. He continued to survey professionally for two more years, mostly in Frederick County, before receiving a military appointment as adjutant for southern Virginia. By 1752, Washington completed close to 200 surveys on numerous properties totaling more than 60,000 acres. He continued to survey at different times throughout his life and as late as 1799.[27][30]
French and Indian War
Main articles: George Washington in the French and Indian War and Military career of George Washington




Washington's map, accompanying his Journal to the Ohio (1753–1754)


Washington began his military service in the French and Indian War[f] as a major in the militia of the British Province of Virginia. In 1753, he was sent as an ambassador from the British crown to the French officials and Indians as far north as present-day Erie, Pennsylvania. The Ohio Company was an important vehicle through which British investors planned to expand into the Ohio Valley, opening new settlements and trading posts for the Indian trade.[31]
In 1753 the French began expanding their military control into the Ohio Country, a territory already claimed by the British colonies of Virginia and Pennsylvania. These competing claims led to a war in the colonies called the French and Indian War (1754–62) and contributed to the start of the global Seven Years' War (1756–63). By chance, Washington became involved in its beginning.
Beginnings of War
Deputy governor of colonial Virginia Robert Dinwiddie was ordered by the British government to guard the British territorial claims, including the Ohio River basin. In late 1753, Dinwiddie ordered Washington to deliver a letter asking the French to vacate the Ohio Valley;[31] he was eager to prove himself as the new adjutant general of the militia, appointed by the Lieutenant Governor himself only a year before. During his trip, Washington met with Tanacharison (also called "Half-King") and other Iroquois chiefs allied with England at Logstown to secure their support in case of a military conflict with the French.[32] He delivered the letter to local French commander Jacques Legardeur de Saint-Pierre, who politely refused to leave.[33] Washington kept a diary during his expedition which was printed by William Hunter on Dinwiddie's order and which made Washington's name recognizable in Virginia.[34] This increased popularity helped him to obtain a commission to raise a company of 100 men and start his military career.[35]




An engraving depicting the evening council of George Washington at Fort Necessity.


Dinwiddie sent Washington back to the Ohio Country to safeguard an Ohio Company's construction of a fort at present-day Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. Before he reached the area, a French force drove out colonial traders and began construction of Fort Duquesne. A small detachment of French troops led by Joseph Coulon de Jumonville was discovered by Tanacharison and a few warriors east of present-day Uniontown, Pennsylvania. On May 28, 1754, Washington and some of his militia unit, aided by their Mingo allies, ambushed the French in what has come to be called the Battle of Jumonville Glen. Exactly what happened during and after the battle is a matter of contention, but several primary accounts agree that the battle lasted about 15 minutes, that Jumonville was killed, and that most of his party were either killed or taken prisoner. It is not completely clear whether Jumonville died at the hands of Tanacharison in cold blood, or was somehow shot by an onlooker with a musket as he sat with Washington, or by another means.[36][37] Following the battle, Washington was given the epithet Town Destroyer by Tanacharison.[38]
The French responded by attacking and capturing Washington at Fort Necessity in July 1754.[39] They allowed him to return with his troops to Virginia. Historian Joseph Ellis concludes that the episode demonstrated Washington's bravery, initiative, inexperience, and impetuosity.[40] Upon his return to Virginia, Washington refused to accept a demotion to the rank of captain, and resigned his commission.[41] Washington's expedition into the Ohio Country had international consequences; the French accused Washington of assassinating Jumonville, who they claimed was on a diplomatic mission.[40] Both France and Great Britain were ready to fight for control of the region and both sent troops to North America in 1755; war was formally declared in 1756.[42]
Braddock disaster (1755)
Main article: Braddock Expedition
In 1755, Washington became the senior American aide to British General Edward Braddock on the ill-fated Braddock expedition. This was the largest British expedition to the colonies, and was intended to expel the French from the Ohio Country; the first objective was the capture of Fort Duquesne.[43] Washington initially sought an appointment as a major from Braddock, but he agreed to serve as a staff volunteer upon advice that no rank above captain could be given except by London. During the passage of the expedition, Washington fell ill with severe headaches and fever. He recommended to Braddock that the army be split into two divisions when the pace of the troops continued to slow: a primary and more lightly equipped "flying column" offensive which could move at a more rapid pace, to be followed by a more heavily armed reinforcing division. Braddock accepted the recommendation (likely made in a council of war including other officers) and took command of the lead division.[44][45]
In the Battle of the Monongahela, the French and their Indian allies ambushed Braddock's reduced forces and the general was mortally wounded. After suffering devastating casualties, the British panicked and retreated in disarray. Washington rode back and forth across the battlefield, rallying the remnants of the British and Virginian forces into an organized retreat. In the process, he demonstrated bravery and stamina, despite his lingering illness. He had two horses shot from underneath him, while his hat and coat were pierced by several bullets. Two-thirds of the British force of 976 men were killed or wounded in the battle. Washington's conduct in the battle redeemed his reputation among many who had criticized his command in the Battle of Fort Necessity.[46]
Washington was not included by the succeeding commander Col. Thomas Dunbar in planning subsequent force movements, whatever responsibility rested on him for the defeat as a result of his recommendation to Braddock.[47]
Commander of Virginia Regiment
Lt. Governor Dinwiddie rewarded Washington in 1755 with a commission as "Colonel of the Virginia Regiment and Commander in Chief of all forces now raised in the defense of His Majesty's Colony" and gave him the task of defending Virginia's frontier. The Virginia Regiment was the first full-time American military unit in the colonies, as opposed to part-time militias and the British regular units. He was ordered to "act defensively or offensively" as he thought best.[48] He happily accepted the commission, but the coveted red coat of officer rank (and the accompanying pay) continued to elude him. Dinwiddie as well pressed in vain for the British military to incorporate the Virginia Regiment into its ranks.[49]
In command of a thousand soldiers, Washington was a disciplinarian who emphasized training. He led his men in brutal campaigns against the Indians in the west; his regiment fought 20 battles in 10 months and lost a third of its men. Washington's strenuous efforts meant that Virginia's frontier population suffered less than that of other colonies; Ellis concludes that "it was his only unqualified success" in that war.[50][51]
In 1758, Washington participated in the Forbes Expedition to capture Fort Duquesne. He was embarrassed by a friendly fire episode in which his unit and another British unit each thought that the other was the French enemy and opened fire, with 14 dead and 26 wounded in the mishap. Washington was not involved in any other major fighting on the expedition, and the British scored a major strategic victory, gaining control of the Ohio Valley when the French abandoned the fort. Following the expedition, he retired from his Virginia Regiment commission in December 1758. He did not return to military life until the outbreak of the revolution in 1775.[52]
Lessons learned
Washington never gained the commission in the British army that he yearned for, but in these years he gained valuable military, political, and leadership skills.[53][54] He closely observed British military tactics, gaining a keen insight into their strengths and weaknesses that proved invaluable during the Revolution. Washington learned to organize, train, drill, and discipline his companies and regiments. He learned the basics of battlefield tactics from his observations, readings, and conversations with professional officers, as well as a good understanding of problems of organization and logistics.[55] He gained an understanding of overall strategy, especially in locating strategic geographical points.[56]
Washington demonstrated his resourcefulness and courage in the most difficult situations, including disasters and retreats. He developed a command presence, given his size, strength, stamina, and bravery in battle, which demonstrated to soldiers that he was a natural leader whom they could follow without question.[57][58] Washington's fortitude in his early years was sometimes manifested in less constructive ways. Biographer John R. Alden contends that Washington offered "fulsome and insincere flattery to British generals in vain attempts to win great favor" and on occasion showed youthful arrogance, as well as jealousy and ingratitude in the midst of impatience.[59]
Historian Ron Chernow is of the opinion that his frustrations in dealing with government officials during this conflict led him to advocate the advantages of a strong national government and a vigorous executive agency that could get results;[53] other historians tend to ascribe Washington's position on government to his later American Revolutionary War service.[g] He developed a very negative idea of the value of militia, who seemed too unreliable, too undisciplined, and too short-term compared to regulars.[60] On the other hand, his experience was limited to command of at most 1,000 men and came only in remote frontier conditions that were far removed from the urban situations that he faced during the Revolution at Boston, New York, Trenton, and Philadelphia.[61]
Between the wars: Mount Vernon (1759–1774)




A mezzotint of Martha Washington, based on a 1757 portrait by Wollaston






Washington expanded the estate at Mount Vernon after his marriage.


On January 6, 1759, Washington married wealthy widow Martha Dandridge Custis, then 28 years old. Surviving letters suggest that he may have been in love at the time with Sally Fairfax, the wife of a friend. Nevertheless, George and Martha made a compatible marriage, because Martha was intelligent, gracious, and experienced in managing a planter's estate.[62]
Together they raised her children from her previous marriage, John Parke Custis and Martha Parke (Patsy) Custis. Later, they raised Martha's grandchildren Eleanor Parke Custis and George Washington Parke Custis. George and Martha never had any children together; his earlier bout with smallpox in 1751 may have made him sterile.[63][64][h] The newlywed couple moved to Mount Vernon, near Alexandria, where he took up the life of a planter and political figure.
Washington's marriage to Martha greatly increased his property holdings and social standing, and made him one of Virginia's wealthiest men. He acquired one-third of the 18,000-acre (73 km2) Custis estate upon his marriage, worth approximately $100,000, and managed the remainder on behalf of Martha's children, for whom he sincerely cared.[65]
In 1754, Lieutenant Governor Dinwiddie had promised land bounties to the soldiers and officers who volunteered to serve during the French and Indian War.[66] Washington prevailed upon Lord Botetourt, the new governor, and he finally fulfilled Dinwiddie's promise in 1769–1770,[66][67] with Washington subsequently receiving title to 23,200 acres (94 km2) where the Kanawha River flows into the Ohio River, in what is now western West Virginia.[68] He also frequently bought additional land in his own name. By 1775, Washington had doubled the size of Mount Vernon to 6,500 acres (26 km2), and had increased its slave population to over 100.[69]
As a respected military hero and large landowner, he held local office and was elected to the Virginia provincial legislature, representing Frederick County in the House of Burgesses for seven years beginning in 1758.[69] In the 1758 election, he plied the voters with 170 gallons of rice punch, beer, wine, hard cider, and brandy, though he was largely absent while serving on the Forbes Expedition.[70] With the help of several local elites, Washington won election with roughly forty percent of the vote, defeating three other candidates for the seat.[71] Early in his legislative career, Washington rarely spoke, but he became a prominent critic of Britain's taxation and mercantilist policies in the 1760s.[72]




Washington at the age of 40, 1772


Washington lived an aristocratic lifestyle—fox hunting was a favorite leisure activity.[73][74] He also enjoyed going to dances and parties, in addition to the theater, races, and cockfights. He also was known to play cards, backgammon, and billiards.[75] Like most Virginia planters, he imported luxuries and other goods from England and paid for them by exporting his tobacco crop. By 1764, these luxuries, coupled with a poor tobacco market, left Washington ₤1,800 in debt.[76] He began to pull himself out of debt in the mid-1760s by diversifying his previously tobacco-centric business interests into other ventures and paying more attention to his affairs, especially in the form of buying fewer imported luxuries.[77]
In 1766, he started switching Mount Vernon's primary cash crop away from tobacco to wheat, a crop that could be processed and then sold in various forms in the colonies, and further diversified operations to include flour milling, fishing, horse breeding, hog production, spinning, and weaving, and (in the 1790s) he erected a distillery for whiskey production which yielded more than 1,000 gallons a month.[77][78]
After a history of epileptic attacks, Patsy Custis died suddenly in Washington's arms in 1773.[79] The day following Patsy's death, Washington wrote to Burwell Bassett: "It is an easier to conceive, than to describe, the distress of this Family, especially that of the unhappy Parent of our Dear Patcy Custis, when I inform you that yesterday re- moved the Sweet, Innocent Girl into a more happy & peaceful abode than any she has met with, the aflicted path she hitherto has trod."[80] Washington cancelled all business activity and, for the next three months, was not away from Martha for a single night.[81] Patsy's death enabled Washington to pay off his British creditors, since half of her inheritance passed to him.[82][83][84]
Washington was a successful planter of tobacco and wheat, and also a leader in the social elite in Virginia. From 1768 to 1775, he invited some 2,000 guests to his Mount Vernon estate, mostly those whom he considered "people of rank". As for people not of high social status, his advice was to "treat them civilly" but "keep them at a proper distance, for they will grow upon familiarity, in proportion as you sink in authority".[85] In 1769, he became more politically active, presenting the Virginia Assembly with legislation to ban the importation of goods from Great Britain.[86]
American Revolution (1775–1783)
Main articles: George Washington in the American Revolution and Military career of George Washington
Washington played a leading military and political role in the American Revolution. His involvement began in 1767, when he first took political stands against the various acts of the British Parliament. He opposed the 1765 Stamp Act, the first direct tax on the colonies imposed by the British Parliament, which included no representatives from the colonies; he began taking a leading role in the growing colonial resistance when protests became widespread against the Townshend Acts (enacted in 1767). In May 1769, he introduced a proposal, drafted by his friend George Mason and calling for Virginia to boycott English goods until the Acts were repealed.[87]
Parliament repealed the Townshend Acts in 1770. Washington regarded the passage of the Intolerable Acts in 1774 as "an Invasion of our Rights and Privileges".[88] He told friend Bryan Fairfax, "I think the Parliament of Great Britain has no more right to put their hands in my pocket without my consent than I have to put my hands into yours for money." He also said that Americans must not submit to acts of tyranny "till custom and use shall make us as tame and abject slaves, as the blacks we rule over with such arbitrary sway."[89]
In July 1774, he chaired the meeting at which the "Fairfax Resolves" were adopted, which called for the convening of a Continental Congress, among other things. In August, Washington attended the First Virginia Convention, where he was selected as a delegate to the First Continental Congress.[90][91]
Commander in Chief




George Washington Oil on canvas painted by Charles Willson Peale, July 1776.
Brooklyn Museum.


The colonies went to war after the Battles of Lexington and Concord near Boston in April 1775. Washington appeared at the Second Continental Congress in a military uniform, signaling that he was prepared for war.[92] He had the prestige, military experience, charisma, and military bearing of a military leader and was known as a strong patriot. Virginia was the largest colony and deserved recognition, and New England—where the fighting began—realized that it needed Southern support. Washington did not explicitly seek the office of commander and said that he was not equal to it,[93][94] but there was no serious competition.[95] Congress created the Continental Army on June 14, 1775.[96] Washington was nominated by John Adams of Massachusetts, then appointed as a full General and Commander-in-chief of the Continental Army.[93][97][98] Washington's refusal to accept a salary earned him a reputation as a "noble and disinterested" commanding officer.[99]
The British then articulated the peril of Washington and his army; on August 23, 1775, Britain issued a Royal proclamation labeling American Patriots as traitors. If they resorted to force, they faced confiscation of their property, and their leaders were subject to execution upon the scaffold.[100]




General George Washington at Trenton by John Trumbull, Yale University Art Gallery (1792)


General Washington essentially assumed three roles during the war. First, he provided leadership of troops against the main British forces in 1775–77 and again in 1781. He lost many of his battles, but he never surrendered his army during the war, and he continued to fight the British relentlessly until the war's end. He plotted the overall strategy of the war, in cooperation with Congress.[101]
Second, he was charged with organizing and training the army. He recruited regulars and assigned Baron von Steuben to train them, a veteran of the Prussian general staff. The war effort and getting supplies to the troops were under the purview of Congress,[102] but Washington pressured the Congress to provide the essentials.[103] In June 1776, Congress' first attempt at running the war effort was established with the committee known as "Board of War and Ordnance", succeeded by the Board of War in July 1777, a committee which eventually included members of the military.[102] The command structure of the armed forces was a hodgepodge of Congressional appointees (and Congress sometimes made those appointments without Washington's input) with state-appointments filling the lower ranks. The results of his general staff were mixed, as some of his favorites (such as John Sullivan) never mastered the art of command.[101]
Eventually, he found capable officers, such as General Nathanael Greene, General Daniel Morgan ("the old wagoner" with whom he had served in The French and Indian War), Colonel Henry Knox (chief of artillery), and Colonel Alexander Hamilton (chief of staff). The American officers never equaled their opponents in tactics and maneuver, and consequently, they lost most of the pitched battles. The great successes at Boston (1776), Saratoga (1777), and Yorktown (1781) came from trapping the British far from base with much larger numbers of troops.[101] Daniel Morgan's annihilation of Banastre Tarleton's legion of dragoons at Cowpens in February 1781 came as a result of Morgan's employment of superior line tactics against his British opponent, resulting in one of the very few double envelopments in military history, another being Hannibal's defeat of the Romans at Cannae in 216 BC.
The decisive defeat of Col. Patrick Ferguson's Tory Regiment at King's Mountain demonstrated the superiority of the riflery of American overmountain men over British-trained troops armed with musket and bayonet. These overmountain men were led by a variety of elected officers, including the 6'6" William Campbell who had become one of Washington's officers by the time of Yorktown. Similarly, Morgan's Virginia riflemen proved themselves superior to the British at Saratoga, a post-revolutionary war development being the creation of trained "rifle battalions" in the European armies.
Washington's third and most important role in the war effort was the embodiment of armed resistance to the Crown, serving as the representative man of the Revolution. His long-term strategy was to maintain an army in the field at all times, and eventually this strategy worked. His enormous personal and political stature and his political skills kept Congress, the army, the French, the militias, and the states all pointed toward a common goal. Furthermore, he permanently established the principle of civilian supremacy in military affairs by voluntarily resigning his commission and disbanding his army when the war was won, rather than declaring himself monarch. He also helped overcome the distrust of a standing army by his constant reiteration that well-disciplined professional soldiers counted for twice as much as erratic militias. (This was clearly demonstrated in the rout at Camden, where only the Maryland and Delaware Continentals held firm under Baron DeKalb.)[104]
Victory at Boston




Washington taking Control of the Continental Army, 1775.


Washington assumed command of the Continental Army in the field at Cambridge, Massachusetts in July 1775 during the ongoing siege of Boston. He recognized his army's desperate shortage of gunpowder and sought new sources. American troops raided British arsenals, including some in the Caribbean, and some manufacturing was attempted. They obtained a barely adequate supply (about 2.5 million pounds) by the end of 1776, mostly from France.[105]
Washington reorganized the army during the long standoff in Boston and forced the British to withdraw by putting artillery on Dorchester Heights overlooking the city. The British evacuated Boston in March 1776 and Washington moved his army to New York City.[106]
British newspapers disparaged most of the Patriots, but praised Washington's personal character and qualities as a military commander despite his opposition to Britain, which some believed would ruin the empire.[107]
Defeat at New York
In August 1776, British General William Howe launched a massive naval and land campaign designed to seize New York. Many of Washington's generals preferred retreating from the city and engaging in a defensive strategy, but he believed it better to engage in a major pitched battle.[108] The Continental Army under Washington engaged the enemy for the first time as an army of the United States at the Battle of Long Island, the largest battle of the entire war. The Americans were heavily outnumbered, many men deserted, and Washington was badly defeated. He and his generals determined on a course of retreat, and Washington instructed General William Heath to make available every flat-bottom riverboat and sloop in the area. In little time, Washington's army crossed the East River safely under the cover of darkness to Manhattan Island and did so without loss of life or materiel.[109]
Washington had considered abandoning the island and Fort Washington, but he heeded Generals Greene and Putnam's recommendation to attempt a defense of the fort. He belatedly retreated farther across the Hudson to Fort Lee to avoid encirclement. With the Americans in retreat, Howe was able to take the offensive; he landed his troops on the island on November 16 and surrounded and captured Fort Washington, resulting in high Continental casualties. Biographer Alden claims that "although Washington was responsible for the decision to delay the patriots' retreat, he tried to ascribe blame for the decision to defend Fort Washington to the wishes of Congress and the bad advice of Nathaniel Greene."[110]
Crossing the Delaware




Washington Crossing the Delaware, December 25, 1776, by Emanuel Leutze, 1851


Washington then continued his flight across New Jersey; the future of the Continental Army was in doubt due to expiring enlistments and the string of losses.[111] On the night of December 25, 1776, he led his army across the Delaware River. The next morning, the troops launched a surprise attack on a Hessian outpost in Trenton, New Jersey, capturing nearly 1,000 prisoners. Washington followed up his victory at Trenton with another over British regulars at Princeton on January 3. The British retreated to New York City and its environs, which they held until the peace treaty of 1783.
Washington's victories wrecked the British carrot-and-stick strategy of showing overwhelming force then offering generous terms. The Americans would not negotiate for anything short of independence.[112] These victories alone were not enough to ensure ultimate Patriot victory, however, since many soldiers did not reenlist or deserted during the harsh winter. Washington and Congress reorganized the army with increased rewards for staying and punishment for desertion, which raised troop numbers effectively for subsequent battles.[113]
In February 1777 while encamped at Morristown, New Jersey, Washington became convinced that only smallpox inoculation by variolation would prevent the destruction of his Army. He ordered the inoculation of all troops and, by some reports, death by smallpox in the ranks dropped from 17% of all deaths to 1% of all deaths.[114]
Historians debate whether Washington preferred to fight major battles or to utilize a Fabian strategy[i] to harass the British with quick, sharp attacks followed by a retreat so that the larger British army could not catch him.[j] His southern commander Greene did use Fabian tactics in 1780–81; Washington did so only in fall 1776 to spring 1777, after losing New York City and seeing much of his army melt away. Trenton and Princeton were Fabian examples. By summer 1777 Washington had rebuilt his strength and his confidence; he stopped using raids and went for large-scale confrontations, as at Brandywine, Germantown, Monmouth, and Yorktown.[115]
1777 campaigns
In late summer of 1777, British General John Burgoyne led a major invasion army south from Quebec, with the intention of splitting off rebellious New England. But General Howe in New York took his army south to Philadelphia instead of going up the Hudson River to join with Burgoyne near Albany—a major strategic mistake. Meanwhile, Washington rushed to Philadelphia to engage Howe, while closely following the action in upstate New York, where the patriots were led by General Philip Schuyler and his successor Horatio Gates. The ensuing pitched battles at Philadelphia were too complex for Washington's relatively inexperienced men and they were defeated.[116]
At the Battle of Brandywine on September 11, 1777, Howe outmaneuvered Washington and marched into the American capital at Philadelphia unopposed on September 26. Washington's army unsuccessfully attacked the British garrison at Germantown in early October. Meanwhile, to the north, Burgoyne was beyond the reach of help from Howe, trapped and forced to surrender after the Battles of Saratoga.[116] This was a major turning point militarily and diplomatically—the French responded to Burgoyne's defeat by entering the war, allying with America and expanding the Revolutionary War into a major worldwide affair.
Washington's loss at Philadelphia prompted some members of Congress to consider removing Washington from command. This movement termed the Conway Cabal, failed after Washington's supporters rallied behind him.[117] Biographer Alden relates, "it was inevitable that the defeats of Washington's forces and the concurrent victory of the forces in upper New York should be compared." The zealous admiration of Washington indeed inevitably waned. John Adams was never a fan of the southern delegation to the Continental Congress, and he wrote that "Congress will appoint a thanksgiving; and one cause of it ought to be that the glory of turning the tide of arms is not immediately due to the commander-in-chief nor to southern troops. If it had been, idolatry and adulation would have been unbounded.... Now we can allow a certain citizen to be wise, virtuous, and good, without thinking him a deity or a savior."[118]
Valley Forge
Main article: Valley Forge




General Washington and Lafayette look over the troops at Valley Forge.


Washington's army of 11,000 went into winter quarters at Valley Forge north of Philadelphia in December 1777. Over the next six months, the deaths in camp numbered in the thousands, the majority being from disease, compounded by lack of food and proper clothing, poor shelter, and the extreme cold. Historians' death toll estimates range from 2,000 to over 3,000 men.[119][120][121] The British were comfortably quartered in Philadelphia and paid for their supplies in sterling. In contrast, Washington had difficulty procuring supplies from the few farmers in the area who would not accept rapidly depreciating American paper currency, while the woodlands about the valley had soon been exhausted of game. As conditions worsened, Washington was faced with the task of maintaining morale and discouraging desertion, which had become common by February.[122]
Washington had repeatedly petitioned the Continental Congress for badly needed provisions but with no success. Finally, on January 24, 1778, five Congressmen came to Valley Forge to examine the conditions of the Continental Army. Washington expressed the urgency of the situation, exclaiming, "Something must be done. Important alterations must be made." At this time, he also contended that Congress should take control of the army supply system, pay for its supplies, and promptly expedite them as they became necessary.[123] In response to Washington's urgent appeal, Congress gave full support to funding the supply lines of the army, which also resulted in reorganizing the commissary department, which controlled gathering the supplies for the army. By late February, there were adequate supplies flowing throughout camp.[123]
The next spring, a revitalized army emerged from Valley Forge in good order, thanks in part to a full-scale training program supervised by General von Steuben.[124] The British evacuated Philadelphia for New York in June, 1778. Washington summoned a council of war with Generals Lee, Greene, Wayne, and Lafayette. He decided to make a partial attack on the retreating British at the Battle of Monmouth. The British were commanded by Sir Henry Clinton, Howe's successor. On June 28, Lee and Lafayette moved with 4,000 men. Without Washington's immediate knowledge they attempted to launch but bungled the first attack at the British rear guard. Clinton came about and offered stiff resistance, also with 4,000 men and waiting in anticipation, keeping the Americans in check. After sharp words of criticism, Washington relieved Lee and continued fighting to an effective draw in one of the war's largest battles. When nightfall came, the fighting came to a stop and the British continued their retreat and headed towards New York, where Washington soon moved his army just outside the city.[125][126]
Sullivan Expedition
Main article: Sullivan Expedition
In the summer of 1779, Washington and Congress decided to strike the Iroquois warriors of the "Six Nations" in a campaign to force Britain's Indian allies out of New York, which they had used as a base to attack American settlements around New England.[127] In June 1779, the Indian warriors joined with Tory rangers led by Colonel William Butler and slew over 200 frontiersmen, using barbarities normally shunned, and laid waste to the Wyoming Valley in Pennsylvania. One British officer who witnessed the Tory brutality said that the redcoats on return to England would "scalp every son of a bitch of them."[128] In August 1779, General John Sullivan led a military operation that destroyed at least 40 Iroquois villages, burning all available crops. Few people were killed as the Indians fled to British protection in Canada. Sullivan later reported that "the immediate objects of this expedition are accomplished, viz: total ruin of the Indian settlements and the destruction of their crops, which were designed for the support of those inhuman barbarians."[129]
Hudson River and Southern battles
Washington at this time moved his headquarters from Middlebrook in New Jersey up to New Windsor on the Hudson, with an army of 10,000. The British, led by Clinton, made a move up the Hudson against American posts at Verplanck's Point and Stony Point, and both places succumbed; but a counter-offensive was briefly successful by the patriots led by General Anthony Wayne. Clinton was able to shut off Kings Ferry in the end, but it was a strategic loss; he could proceed no farther up the river due to American fortifications and Washington's army. The skirmishes at Verplanck's Point and at Stony Point demonstrated that the continental infantry had become quite formidable and were an enormous boost to morale.[130]
Washington went into quarters at Morristown during the winter of 1779–1780, which represented the worst suffering for the army during the war. The temperatures fell to 16 below zero, the New York Harbor was frozen over, and snow and ice covered the ground for weeks, with the troops again lacking provisions for a time as at Valley Forge.[131] In late 1779, Clinton moved his forces south to Charleston for an offensive against the patriots led by Benjamin Lincoln. After his success there, Clinton returned victorious to New York, leaving Cornwallis in the south. Congress replaced Lincoln with Gates, despite Washington's recommendation of Greene. Gates failed in South Carolina and was then replaced by Greene. The British at the time seemed to have the South almost in their grasp. Despite this news, Washington was encouraged to learn in mid-1780 that Lafayette had returned from France with additional naval assets and forces.[131]
Arnold's treason
Main article: Military career of Benedict Arnold, 1777–79




A page from the Culper Ring's codebook, listing the men whom Washington gathered to be agents


In the summer of 1778, George Washington ordered Major Benjamin Tallmadge to form the Culper Ring. This group was composed of a select few trustworthy individuals whose purpose was to collect information about the British movements and activities in New York City. The Ring is famous for uncovering Benedict Arnold's intentions of treason,[132] which shocked Washington because Arnold was someone who had contributed significantly to the war effort. Arnold was embittered by his dealings with Congress over rank and finances, as well as the alliance with France, so he conspired with the British in a plan to seize the post that he commanded at West Point. Washington just missed apprehending him, but did capture his co-conspirator Major John André, a British intelligence officer under Clinton who was hanged by order of a court-martial called by Washington.[133]
Difficulties during the winter of 1780–1781
Main articles: Pennsylvania Line mutiny and Pompton Mutiny
Washington's army went into winter quarters at New Windsor in 1780 and suffered again for lack of supplies. Washington prevailed upon Congress as well as state officials to come to their aid with provisions. He sympathized with their suffering, saying that he hoped that the army would not "continue to struggle under the same difficulties they have hitherto endured, which I cannot help remarking seem to reach the bounds of human patience".[134]
Victory at Yorktown




General Washington and the comte de Rochambeau at Yorktown by Auguste Couder, 1836.


In July 1780, 5,000 veteran French troops led by the comte de Rochambeau arrived at Newport, Rhode Island to aid in the war.[135] French naval forces then landed, led by Admiral François Joseph Paul de Grasse. At first Washington hoped to bring the allied fight to New York and to end the war there, but Rochambeau advised de Grasse that Cornwallis in Virginia was the better target. Admiral de Grasse followed this advice and arrived off the Virginia coast. Washington immediately saw the advantage created, made a feinting move with his force towards Clinton in New York, and then headed south to Virginia.[136]
Washington's Continental Army, also newly funded by $20,000 in French gold, delivered the final blow to the British in 1781, after a French naval victory allowed American and French forces to trap a British army in Virginia, preventing reinforcement by Clinton from the North.[137] The surrender at Yorktown on October 19, 1781, marked the end of major fighting in North America.[138] Cornwallis failed to appear at the official surrender ceremony, and sent General Charles O'Hara as his proxy; Washington then had General Benjamin Lincoln accept the surrender in his place.[139]
Demobilization
Substantial combat had ended but the war had not, and a formal treaty of peace was months away. The British still had 26,000 troops occupying New York City, Charleston, and Savannah, and had a powerful fleet. The French army and navy departed, so the Americans were on their own in 1782–83. Money matters fed the anxiety; the treasury was empty, and the unpaid soldiers were growing restive almost to the point of mutiny. At one point, they forced an adjournment of the Congress from Philadelphia to Princeton. Washington dispelled unrest among officers by suppressing the Newburgh Conspiracy in March 1783, and Congress came up with the promise of a five-year bonus.[140]




General George Washington Resigning His Commission by John Trumbull, Capitol Rotunda (commissioned 1817).


With the initial peace treaty articles ratified in April 1783, a recently formed Congressional committee under Hamilton was considering needs and plans for a peacetime army. On May 2, 1783, the Commander in Chief submitted his Sentiments on a Peace Establishment[141] to the Committee, essentially providing an official Continental Army position. The original proposal was defeated in Congress in two votes (May 1783, October 1783), with a truncated version also being rejected in April 1784.[142]
By the Treaty of Paris signed on September 3, 1783, Great Britain recognized the independence of the United States. Washington disbanded his army and gave an eloquent farewell address to his soldiers on November 2.[143] On November 25, the British evacuated New York City, and Washington and the governor took possession. At Fraunces Tavern on December 4, Washington formally bade his officers farewell and he resigned his commission as commander-in-chief on December 23, 1783, to the Continental Congress in the Old Senate Chamber of the Maryland State House in Annapolis, Md.[144] "I consider it an indispensable duty to close this last solemn act of my official life, by commending the interests of our dearest country to the protection of Almighty God, and those who have the superintendence of them, to his holy keeping."[145] Historian Gordon Wood concludes that the greatest act in his life was his resignation as commander of the armies.[146] King George III called Washington "the greatest character of the age" because of this.[147]
Washington later submitted a formal account of the expenses that he had personally advanced the army over the eight-year conflict of about $450,000. It is said to have been detailed regarding small items and vague concerning large ones, and included the expenses incurred from Martha's visits to his headquarters, as well as his compensation for service—none of which had been drawn during the war.[148]
Constitutional Convention




Signing of the U.S. Constitution
by Howard Chandler Christy, 1940



Main article: Constitutional Convention (United States)
Washington's retirement to personal business at Mount Vernon was short-lived. He made an exploratory trip to the western frontier in 1784 and inspected his land holdings in Western Pennsylvania that had been earned decades earlier for his service in the French and Indian War.[93] There he confronted squatters, including David Reed and the Covenanters; they vacated, but only after losing a court decision heard in Washington, Pennsylvania in 1786.[149] He also facilitated the creation of the Potomac Company, a public–private partnership that sought to link the Potomac River with the Ohio River, but technical and financial challenges rendered the company unprofitable.[150]
After much reluctance, he was persuaded to attend the Constitutional Convention in Philadelphia during the summer of 1787 as a delegate from Virginia, where he was unanimously elected as president of the Convention.[151] He held considerable criticism of the Articles of Confederation of the thirteen colonies, for the weak central government which it established, referring to the Articles as no more than "a rope of sand" to support the new nation.[152] Washington's view for the need of a strong federal government grew out of the recent war, as well as the inability of the Continental Congress to rally the states to provide for the needs of the military, as was clearly demonstrated for him during the winter at Valley Forge. The general populace, however, did not share Washington's views of a strong federal government binding the states together, comparing such a prevailing entity to the British Parliament that previously ruled and taxed the colonies.[153]
Washington's participation in the debates was minor, although he cast his vote when called upon; his prestige facilitated the collegiality and productivity of the delegates. After a couple of months into the task, Washington told Alexander Hamilton, "I almost despair of seeing a favorable issue to the proceedings of our convention and do therefore repent having had any agency in the business."[154] Following the Convention, his support convinced many, but not all of his colleagues, to vote for ratification. He unsuccessfully lobbied anti-federalist Patrick Henry, saying that "the adoption of it under the present circumstances of the Union is in my opinion desirable;" he declared that the only alternative would be anarchy. Nevertheless, he did not consider it appropriate to cast his vote in favor of adoption for Virginia, since he was expected to be nominated president under it.[155] The new Constitution was subsequently ratified by all thirteen states.[156] The delegates to the convention designed the presidency with Washington in mind, allowing him to define the office by establishing precedent once elected.[157] Washington thought that the achievements were monumental once they were finally completed.[154]
Presidency (1789–1797)
Main article: Presidency of George Washington




Lansdowne portrait, painted by Gilbert Stuart in 1796


The Electoral College unanimously elected Washington as the first president in 1789[k] and again in 1792.[159] He remains the only president to receive the totality of electoral votes.[l] John Adams received the next highest vote total and was elected vice president. Washington was inaugurated on April 30, 1789, taking the first presidential oath of office on the balcony of Federal Hall in New York City.[160] The oath was administered by Chancellor Robert R. Livingston: "I do solemnly swear that I will faithfully execute the Office of President of the United States and will, to the best of my ability, preserve, protect, and defend the Constitution of the United States." Historian John R. Alden indicates that Washington added the words "so help me God."[161]
The 1st United States Congress voted to pay Washington a salary of $25,000 a year—a large sum in 1789, valued at about $340,000 in 2015 dollars.[m] Washington faced financial troubles then, yet he initially declined the salary. At the urging of Congress, he ultimately accepted the payment to avoid setting a precedent whereby the presidency would be perceived as limited only to independently wealthy individuals who could serve without any salary.[162] He was aware that everything which he did set a precedent, and he attended carefully to the pomp and ceremony of office, making sure that the titles and trappings were suitably republican and never emulated European royal courts.[163][n] To that end, he preferred the title "Mr. President" to the more majestic names proposed by the Senate.[164]
Washington proved an able administrator and established many precedents in the functions of the presidency, including messages to Congress and the cabinet form of government.[8] He set the standard for tolerance of opposition voices, despite fears that a democratic system would lead to political violence, and he conducted a smooth transition of power to his successor.[7] He was an excellent delegator and judge of talent and character; he talked regularly with department heads and listened to their advice before making a final decision.[165] In handling routine tasks, he was "systematic, orderly, energetic, solicitous of the opinion of others ... but decisive, intent upon general goals and the consistency of particular actions with them."[166] After reluctantly serving a second term, Washington refused to run for a third, establishing the tradition of a maximum of two terms for a president which was solidified by Thomas Jefferson and James Madison.[167]
During his first term in office, Washington had to contend with major problems, old and new. The United States was not completely unified; North Carolina and Rhode Island had not yet formally joined the Union, and the status was uncertain of the independent Vermont Republic. Great Britain refused to relinquish its forts in the American West.[168] Additionally, the United States Army was minuscule and the United States Navy did not exist. The old Confederation lacked the powers to handle the needed workload. It had weak leadership, no executive, a small bureaucracy of clerks, a large debt, worthless paper money, and no taxing power. [168]
Cabinet
Congress created executive departments during Washington's first months in office in 1789, including the State Department on July 27, the Department of War in early August, and the Treasury Department on September 2. The President also received two additional officers without departments: the Attorney General and Postmaster General. Washington appointed Richmond lawyer Edmund Randolph as Attorney General and Samuel Osgood as Postmaster General. He also appointed fellow Virginian Thomas Jefferson to be Secretary of State and Henry Knox as Secretary of War. Finally, he appointed Alexander Hamilton to head the Treasury Department.[169] Washington's cabinet eventually developed into a consultation and advisory body, although this was not mandated by the Constitution.[170]
During Washington's administration, the President was given broad powers for removing officials in the executive branch. Congress passed a bill sponsored by James Madison that gave the President the power to remove public officials whose appointments mandated Senatorial approval. In 1789, Vice President John Adams cast the deciding vote in the Senate against a bill that would have mandated senatorial consent for the removal of Senate-confirmed federal and cabinet appointments.[171][172] The bill had been sponsored by Pennsylvania Senator William Maclay.[172]
Washington's cabinet members were known for their dissension, forming rival parties, and having sharply divided views, the most fierce between Hamilton and Jefferson.[173] Jefferson described his relationship with Hamilton as being "daily pitted... like two cocks."[168] Knox almost always sided with Hamilton, while Randolph tried to remain neutral but tended to side more with Jefferson, his fellow Virginian.[168] Washington restricted cabinet discussions to topics of his own choosing, without participating in debate.[168] He occasionally requested cabinet opinions in writing, and he expected his department heads to carry out his decisions without complaint.[168]
Domestic issues




George Washington by Rembrandt Peale, De Young Museum (ca. 1850)


See also: Whiskey Rebellion
Washington was not a member of any political party and hoped that they would not be formed, fearing conflict that would undermine republicanism.[174] His closest advisors formed two factions, setting the framework for the future First Party System. Secretary of Treasury Alexander Hamilton had bold plans to establish the national credit and to build a financially powerful nation, and he formed the basis of the Federalist Party. Secretary of State Thomas Jefferson was the founder of the Jeffersonian Republicans, and he strenuously opposed Hamilton's agenda. Washington typically favored Hamilton over Jefferson, and it was Hamilton's agenda that went into effect. Jefferson's political actions, his support of Philip Freneau's National Gazette,[175] and his attempt to undermine Hamilton nearly led George Washington to dismiss him from his cabinet, though he ultimately left the cabinet voluntarily. Washington never forgave him and never spoke to him again.[176]
In early 1790, Hamilton devised a plan with the approval of Washington, culminating in The Residence Act of 1790, that established the creditworthiness of the new government, as well as its permanent location. Congress had previously issued almost $22 million to suppliers in certificates of debt during the war; some of the states had incurred debt, as well (more so in the North). In accordance with the plan, Congress authorized the assumption and payment of these debts, and provided funding through customs duties and excise taxes. The proposal was largely favored in the North and opposed in the South. Hamilton obtained the approval of the southern states in exchange for an agreement to place the new national capitol on the Potomac River.
The national debt increased as a result during Hamilton's service as Secretary of the Treasury, but the nation established its good credit. Many in the Congress and elsewhere in the government profited from trading in the debt paper which was assumed. Many of Washington's fellow Virginians and others were vexed by this, but he considered that they had adequate redress through their Congressional representatives.[177]
The Revenue Act authorized the president to select the specific location on the Potomac River for the seat of the government. He was to appoint three commissioners to survey and acquire property for it, and Washington personally oversaw this effort throughout his term in office. In 1791, the commissioners named the permanent seat of government "The City of Washington in the Territory of Columbia" to honor Washington. In 1800, the Territory of Columbia became the District of Columbia when the federal government moved to the site, according to the provisions of the Residence Act.[178]
In 1791, Congress imposed an excise tax on distilled spirits, partly as a result of the Copper Panic of 1789, and this led to protests in frontier districts, especially Pennsylvania. Washington ordered the protesters to appear in U.S. district court, but the protests turned into full-scale defiance of federal authority in 1794 known as the Whiskey Rebellion. The federal army was too small to be used, so Washington invoked the Militia Act of 1792 to summon militias from Pennsylvania, Virginia, Maryland, and New Jersey.[179] The governors sent the troops, with Washington taking initial command. He subsequently named Henry "Lighthorse Harry" Lee as field commander to lead the troops into the rebellious districts. The rebels dispersed and there was no fighting, as Washington's forceful action proved that the new government could protect itself. This represented the premier instance of the federal government using military force to exert authority over the states and citizens[180] and is also the only time that a sitting U.S. president personally commanded troops in the field.[181]
Foreign affairs




Miniature Portrait of Washington by Robert Field (1800).


In April 1792, the French Revolutionary Wars broke out between Great Britain and its allies and revolutionary France; Washington, with cabinet approval, proclaimed American neutrality. The revolutionary government of France sent diplomat Edmond-Charles Genêt to America, called "Citizen Genêt". He was welcomed with great enthusiasm and began promoting the case for France, using a network of new Democratic Societies in major cities. He even issued French letters of marque and reprisal to French ships manned by American sailors so that they could capture British merchant ships. Washington denounced the societies and demanded that the French government recall Genêt, which they did.[182]
Hamilton formulated the Jay Treaty to normalize trade relations with Great Britain, remove them from western forts, and resolve financial debts remaining from the Revolution;[183] John Jay negotiated and signed the treaty on November 19, 1794. Jeffersonians supported France and strongly attacked the treaty. Washington listened to both sides, then announced his strong support, which mobilized public opinion and was pivotal in securing ratification in the Senate on June 24, 1795 by the requisite two-thirds majority.[184][185]
The British agreed to depart from their forts around the Great Lakes, and the United States-Canada boundary had to be re-adjusted. Numerous pre-Revolutionary debts were liquidated, and the British opened their West Indies colonies to American trade. Most importantly, the treaty delayed war with Great Britain and instead brought a decade of prosperous trade. The treaty angered the French and became a central issue in many political debates.[186] Relations with France deteriorated after the treaty was signed, leaving succeeding president John Adams with the prospect of war.[187][188]
Farewell Address
Main article: George Washington's Farewell Address




Washington's Farewell Address (September 19, 1796)


Washington's Farewell Address was issued as a public letter in 1796 and was one of the most influential statements of republicanism, drafted primarily by Washington himself with help from Hamilton. It gives advice on the necessity and importance of national union, the value of the Constitution and the rule of law, the evils of political parties, and the proper virtues of a republican people. He referred to morality as "a necessary spring of popular government", and said, "Whatever may be conceded to the influence of refined education on minds of peculiar structure, reason, and experience both forbid us to expect that national morality can prevail in exclusion of religious principle."[189]
The address warned against foreign influence in domestic affairs and American meddling in European affairs, and against bitter partisanship in domestic politics. He also called for men to move beyond partisanship and serve the common good. He cautioned against "permanent alliances with any portion of the foreign world",[190] saying that the United States must concentrate primarily on American interests. He counseled friendship and commerce with all nations, but advised against involvement in European wars and entering into long-term "entangling" alliances, while advancing the general idea of non-involvement in foreign affairs. The Farewell Address made no clear distinction between domestic and foreign policies; John Quincy Adams interpreted Washington's policy as advocating a strong nationalist foreign policy while not limiting America's international activities. The address quickly set American values regarding foreign affairs. Washington's policy of non-involvement in the foreign affairs of the Old World was largely embraced by the founding generation of American statesmen, including John Adams, Thomas Jefferson, and James Madison.[191][192]
Retirement (1797–1799)




A map of the Mount Vernon plantation and lands.


Washington retired from the presidency in March 1797 and returned to Mount Vernon with a profound sense of relief. He devoted much time to his plantations and other business interests, including his distillery, which produced its first batch of spirits in February 1797.[193] His plantation operations were only minimally profitable.[6] His lands in the west (Piedmont) yielded little income because they were under attack by Indians, and the squatters living there refused to pay him rent. Washington attempted to sell off these holdings but failed to obtain the price that he desired. Meanwhile, he was losing money at Mount Vernon due to a glut of unproductive slaves, which he declined to sell due to a desire to keep families intact. In addition, some of the slaves belonged to Martha, but the groups had been living together for years and there had been much intermarriage among them.[194]
Most Americans assumed that he was rich because of the well-known "glorified façade of wealth and grandeur" at Mount Vernon,[195] but nearly all of Washington's wealth was tied up in land or slaves. Historians estimate that his estate was worth about $1 million in 1799 dollars, equivalent to about $19.9 million in 2014.[196]
By 1798, relations with France had deteriorated to the point that war seemed imminent. President Adams offered Washington a commission as lieutenant general on July 4, 1798, and as Commander-in-chief of the armies raised or to be raised for service in a prospective war. He accepted and served as the senior officer of the United States Army from July 13, 1798, until his death seventeen months later. He participated in the planning for a Provisional Army to meet any emergency that might arise but avoided involvement in details as much as possible. He delegated most of the work, including active leadership of the army, to Hamilton, who was then serving as a major general in the U.S. Army. No French army invaded the United States during this period, and Washington did not assume a field command.[197][198] Washington's serving as an official presidential appointee after being president himself was a unique quality about him until 1921, when then-current president Warren G. Harding appointed former president William Howard Taft to the position of Chief Justice of the United States.
American Cincinnatus
During the Revolutionary and Early Republican periods of American history, many commentators compared Washington with Roman aristocrat and statesman Cincinnatus. The comparison arose as Washington, like Cincinnatus, commanded the Continental Army only until the British had been defeated. Thereafter, he returned as quickly as possible to cultivating his lands instead of seeking great political power.[199][200] Poet Philip Freneau remarked on Washington's resignation in December 1783 and his decision to retire to Mount Vernon:

Thus He, whom Rome's proud legions sway'd
Return'd, and sought his sylvan shade.[201]

Lord Byron's Ode to Napoleon also lionized Washington as "the Cincinnatus of the West".[202]
Death
On Thursday, December 12, 1799, Washington spent several hours inspecting his plantation on horseback, in snow, hail, and freezing rain; that evening, he ate his supper without changing from his wet clothes.[203] He awoke the next morning with a severe sore throat and became increasingly hoarse as the day progressed, yet still rode out in the heavy snow, marking trees for cutting on the plantation. Some time around 3 a.m. that Saturday, he suddenly awoke with severe difficulty breathing and almost completely unable to speak or swallow.[203] He was a firm believer in bloodletting, which was a standard medical practice of that era, and he had used it to treat various ailments of slaves on his plantation. He ordered estate overseer Albin Rawlins to remove nearly a pint of his blood.[204]
Three physicians were summoned, including Washington's personal physician Dr. James Craik,[205] along with Dr. Gustavus Brown and Dr. Elisha Dick. Craik and Brown thought that Washington had "quinsey" or "quincy", while Dick thought that the condition was more serious or a "violent inflammation of the throat".[206] By the time that the three physicians finished their treatments and bloodletting of the president, half or more of his total blood content was removed over the course of just a few hours.[203][207] Dick recognized that the bloodletting and other treatments were failing, and he proposed performing an emergency tracheotomy as a last-ditch effort to save Washington's life. Few American doctors were then familiar with this procedure and the other two doctors disapproved.[203][208]
Washington died at home around 10 p.m. on Saturday, December 14, 1799, aged 67. In his journal, Tobias Lear recorded Washington's last words as "'Tis well."[209]
A funeral was held on December 18, 1799 at Mount Vernon, where Washington's body was interred.[210] Congress passed a joint resolution to construct a marble monument for his body in the planned crypt below the rotunda of the center section of the Capitol (then still under construction), a plan acquiesced to by Martha.[211] In December 1800, the House passed an appropriations bill for $200,000 to build the mausoleum, which was to be a pyramid with a 100-foot (30 m) square base. Southern representatives and senators opposed the plan and defeated the measure because they felt that it was best to have Washington's body remain at Mount Vernon.[212]




Published regulations for the funeral procession in honor of Washington (in New York City)


Throughout the world, people admired Washington and were saddened by his death. In the United States, memorial processions were held in major cities and thousands wore mourning clothes for months. Martha Washington wore a black mourning cape for one year. In France, First Consul Napoleon Bonaparte ordered ten days of mourning throughout the country.[213] Ships of the British Royal Navy's Channel Fleet lowered their flags to half mast to honor his passing.[214]
To protect their privacy, Martha Washington burned the correspondence which they had exchanged; only five letters between the couple are known to have survived, two letters from Martha to George and three from him to her.[215][216]
Subsequent diagnoses
The diagnosis of Washington's final illness and the immediate cause of his death have been subjects of debate since the day he died.[203][207][217] In the days immediately following his death, Craik and Dick's published account stated that they felt that his symptoms had been consistent with cynanche trachealis, a term of that period used to describe severe inflammation of the structures of the upper airway.[207][208][218] Even at that early date, there were accusations of medical malpractice, with some believing that Washington had been bled to death.[207][208] Various modern medical authors have speculated that Washington probably died from a severe case of epiglottitis which was complicated by the given treatments (all of which were accepted medical practice in Washington's day), most notably the massive deliberate blood loss, which almost certainly caused hypovolemic shock.[o]
Move to new burial site
In 1830 a disgruntled ex-employee of the estate attempted to steal Washington's skull from the original tomb. [219] The next year a new vault was constructed at Mount Vernon to receive George and Martha Washington's remains, along with other relatives buried in the original tomb.[220]
A joint Congressional committee debated the removal of President Washington's body from Mount Vernon to a crypt in the Capitol in early 1832. The crypt was built by architect Charles Bulfinch in the 1820s during the reconstruction of the burned-out capitol after the British had set it afire in August 1814, during the Burning of Washington. Southern opposition was intense, antagonized by an ever-growing rift between North and South. Congressman Wiley Thompson of Georgia expressed the Southerners' fear when he said, "Remove the remains of our venerated Washington from their association with the remains of his consort and his ancestors, from Mount Vernon and from his native State, and deposit them in this capitol, and then let a severance of the Union occur, and behold the remains of Washington on a shore foreign to his native soil."[212]




The Washington family tomb at Mount Vernon (2014).






The sarcophagi of George (right) and Martha (left) Washington at the entrance to the Washington family tomb (2011).


On October 7, 1837 George Washington's remains, still in the original lead coffin, were placed within a marble sarcophagus designed by William Strickland and constructed by John Struthers.[221][222] The sarcophagus was sealed and encased with planks while an outer vault was constructed around it.[223] The outer vault contains the sarcophagi of George and Martha Washington, the inner vault contains the remains of other Washington family members and relatives.[220]
Personal life




The Washington Family by Edward Savage, painted between 1789 and 1796, shows (from left to right): George Washington Parke Custis, George Washington, Eleanor Parke Custis, Martha Washington, and an enslaved servant, probably William Lee or Christopher Sheels.


As a young man, Washington had red hair.[224] A popular myth is that he wore a wig, as was the fashion among some at the time. Washington did not wear a wig. Instead, he powdered his hair,[225] as is represented in several portraits, including the well-known, unfinished Gilbert Stuart depiction called the "Athenaeum Portrait".[226]
Washington's height was variously recorded as 6 ft (1.83 m) to 6 ft 2 in (1.88 m). He registered six feet three and one-half inches when measured for his coffin.[225] He had unusually great physical strength that amazed younger men. Jefferson called Washington "the best horseman of his age", and both American and European observers praised his riding. The horsemanship benefited his hunting, a favorite hobby. Washington was an excellent dancer and frequently attended the theater, often making Shakespearean references in his letters.[227]
Washington drank in moderation and precisely recorded gambling wins and losses. He disliked the excessive drinking, gambling, smoking, and profanity that were common in colonial Virginia. Washington grew tobacco but he eventually stopped smoking and considered drunkenness a man's worst vice. He was glad that post-Revolutionary Virginia society was less likely to "force [guests] to drink and to make it an honor to send them home drunk."[228]
Washington suffered from problems with his teeth throughout his life, and historians have tracked his experiences in great detail.[229] He lost his first adult tooth when he was twenty-two and had only one left by the time that he became president.[230] John Adams claimed that he lost them because he used them to crack Brazil nuts, but modern historians suggest that mercury oxide probably contributed to the loss, which he was given to treat illnesses such as smallpox and malaria.[231]
Washington had several sets of false teeth made, four of them by a dentist named John Greenwood. None of the sets were made from wood. The set made when he became president was carved from hippopotamus and elephant ivory, held together with gold springs.[231] Prior to these, he had a set made with real human teeth,[232] likely ones that he purchased from "several unnamed 'Negroes,' presumably Mount Vernon slaves" in 1784.[233] Dental problems left Washington in constant pain, for which he took laudanum.[234] This distress may be apparent in many of the portraits painted while he was still in office,[234] including the one still used on the $1 bill.[226][p]
Religion
Main article: George Washington and religion
For his entire life, Washington was affiliated with the established Anglican Church of Great Britain. Following the Revolution, in the United States it was dis-established (in Southern states) and reorganized as the Episcopal Church. Washington served as a vestryman and as church warden for both Fairfax Parish in Alexandria and Truro Parish.[235] These were administrative positions. As with all official positions in Virginia while it had an established church, an officeholder was required to swear that he would not speak or act in a way that did not conform to the tenets of the Church. Numerous historians have suggested that, theologically, Washington agreed largely with the Deists, but he never expressed any particular Deist beliefs which he may have had. He often used words for the deity, such as "God" and "Providence", while avoiding using the words "Jesus" and "Christ." In his collected works, such terms appear in an official letter to Indians, which might have been drafted by an aide.
At the time, Deism was a theological outlook, not an organized denomination. It was compatible with being an Episcopalian. Historian Gregg Frazer argues that Washington was not a deist but a "theistic rationalist." This theological position rejected core beliefs of Christianity, such as the divinity of Christ, the Trinity, and original sin. Unlike the deists, the theological rationalists believed in the efficacy of prayer to God.[236] Theologian Peter A. Lillback argues that Washington was neither a deist nor a "theistic rationalist" but a Christian who accepted the core beliefs of Christianity.[237]
Washington frequently accompanied his wife to church services. Third-hand reports say that he took communion,[238] although he is usually characterized as never or rarely participating in the rite.[239][240] He would regularly leave services before communion with the other non-communicants (as was the custom of the day). He ceased attending at all on communion Sundays after being admonished by a rector.[241]
Washington regarded religion as a protective influence for America's social and political order, and recognized the church's "laudable endeavors to render men sober, honest, and good citizens, and the obedient subjects of a lawful government."[242]
It is generally concluded that Washington was a Christian, although the exact nature of his religious beliefs has been debated by some historians and biographers for over two hundred years. Washington biographer Don Higginbotham notes that, in such instances, people with diametrically opposing opinions frequently base their views of Washington's beliefs on their own beliefs.[235][243] Higginbotham claims that Washington harbored no contempt of organized Christianity and its clergy, and quotes him as saying: "being no bigot myself to any mode of worship".[244] Washington, as commander of the army and as president, was a vigorous promoter of tolerance for all religious denominations. He believed that religion was an important support for public order, morality, and virtue. He often attended services of different denominations, and he suppressed anti-Catholic celebrations in the Army.[245]
Michael Novak and Jana Novak suggest that it may have been "Washington's intention to maintain a studied ambiguity (and personal privacy) regarding his own deepest religious convictions, so that all Americans, both in his own time and for all time to come, might feel free to approach him on their own terms—and might also feel like full members of the new republic, equal with every other."[246] They conclude:

He was educated in the Episcopal Church, to which he always adhered; and my conviction is, that he believed in the fundamental doctrines of Christianity as usually taught in that Church, according to his understanding of them; but without a particle of intolerance, or disrespect for the faith and modes of worship adopted by Christians of other denominations.[247]

Freemasonry




Masonic Memorial


As a young man, Washington was initiated into Freemasonry in 1752 at the age of 20.[248] He had a high regard for the Masonic Order and often praised it, but he seldom attended lodge meetings. He was attracted by the movement's dedication to the Enlightenment principles of rationality, reason, and fraternalism. The American lodges did not share the anti-clerical perspective that made the European lodges so controversial.[249] In 1777, a convention of Virginia lodges recommended Washington to be the Grand Master of the newly established Grand Lodge of Virginia. He declined, due to his responsibility in leading the Continental Army at a critical stage. He also did not consider it Masonically legal to serve as Grand Master because he had never been installed as Master or Warden of a lodge.[250] In 1788, Washington was named Master in the Virginia charter of Alexandria Lodge No. 22, with his personal consent.[251]
Slavery
Main article: George Washington and slavery
Washington was the only prominent Founding Father to arrange in his will for the freeing of all his slaves following his death and the death of his wife.[252][253] He privately opposed slavery as an institution, which he viewed as economically unsound and morally indefensible. He believed that the divisiveness of his countrymen's feelings about slavery was a potentially mortal threat to the unity of the nation.[254] He never publicly challenged the institution of slavery,[255][256] possibly because he wanted to avoid provoking a split in the new republic over so inflammatory an issue.[257] He did sign into law the Slave Trade Act of 1794, which limited American involvement in the Atlantic slave trade.[258]
Washington had owned slaves since the death of his father in 1743, when he inherited 10 slaves. (Washington was 11 at the time.) He owned at least 36 slaves by the time of his marriage to Martha Custis in 1759, which meant that he had achieved the status of a major planter. (Historians of the Upper South said that major planters owned 20 or more slaves.) Martha brought at least 85 "dower slaves" to Mount Vernon after their marriage, as she had inherited one third of her late husband's estate. Washington bought more land using his wife's great wealth, tripling the size of the plantation at Mount Vernon and purchasing the additional slaves needed to work it. By 1774, he paid taxes on 135 slaves (this figure does not include the dower slaves). The last record of a slave purchase by him was in 1772, although he later received some slaves in repayment of debts.[259] Washington also used some hired staff[193] and white indentured servants; in April 1775, he offered a reward for the return of two runaway white servants.[260]
Washington refused to allow his slaves to be sold without their permission. This policy was economically inefficient, resulting in an unnecessarily large work force.[261] In his will, he provided that his slaves should be freed after the death of his wife. However, Martha chose to free them at the end of 1800, fearing that her life was not safe in their hands because her death would make them free.[262] Most of the former slaves were unable to find suitable work after being freed and lived in poverty. Part of this was due to Virginia passing laws against educating blacks and restricting the rights of free blacks.[263]
Washington sought to preserve slaves' families, although he allowed the administration of corporal punishment by overseers, as was customary for the time. He approved when his estate manager Anthony Whitting whipped a slave named Charlotte[264] when Martha deemed her to be "indolent". "Your treatment of Charlotte was very proper," Washington wrote in 1793, "and if she or any other of the servants will not do their duty by fair means, or are impertinent, correction (as the only alternative) must be administered."[265] Another of his estate managers named Hiland (or Hyland) Crow was notorious for brutally flogging slaves.[266] Some of his slaves absconded during the Revolutionary War to find protection with the enemy, and Washington did not let up in his efforts to reclaim what he saw as his property. One internal British memo portrayed him after victory as demanding, "with all the grossness and ferocity of a captain of banditti," that the runaways be returned.[267]
Legacy
Main article: Legacy of George Washington
See also: Historical rankings of Presidents of the United States and Cultural depictions of George Washington




The Constable-Hamilton Portrait by Gilbert Stuart


George Washington's legacy remains among the two or three greatest in American history, as Commander-in-Chief of the Continental Army, hero of the Revolution, and the first President of the United States.[q] Congressman Henry "Light-Horse Harry" Lee, a Revolutionary War comrade, famously eulogized Washington, "First in war—first in peace—and first in the hearts of his countrymen".[268]
Lee's words set the standard by which Washington's overwhelming reputation was impressed upon the American memory. Biographers hailed him as the great exemplar of republicanism. Washington set many precedents for the national government, and the presidency in particular, and was called the "Father of His Country" as early as 1778.[r][8][269][270] Washington's Birthday is a federal holiday in the United States.[271] In terms of personality, biographer Douglas Southall Freeman concluded, "the great big thing stamped across that man is character." By character, says David Hackett Fischer, "Freeman meant integrity, self-discipline, courage, absolute honesty, resolve, and decision, but also forbearance, decency, and respect for others."[272]
Washington became an international icon for liberation and nationalism, as the leader of the first successful revolution against a colonial empire. The Federalists made him the symbol of their party but, for many years, the Jeffersonians continued to distrust his influence and delayed building the Washington Monument.[273] On January 31, 1781, he was elected a member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences.[274]
During the United States Bicentennial year, George Washington was posthumously appointed to the grade of General of the Armies of the United States by the congressional joint resolution Public Law 94-479 passed on January 19, 1976, with an effective appointment date of July 4, 1976.[93] This restored his position as the highest-ranking military officer in U.S. history.[s]
Papers
Main article: The Papers of George Washington
The serious collection and publication of Washington's documentary record began with the pioneer work of Jared Sparks in the 1830s in Life and Writings of George Washington (12 vols., 1834–1837). The Writings of George Washington from the Original Manuscript Sources, 1745–1799 (1931–44) is a 37 volume set edited by John C. Fitzpatrick. It contains over 17,000 letters and documents and is available online from the University of Virginia.[275] The definitive letterpress edition of his writings was begun by the University of Virginia in 1968, and today comprises 52 published volumes, with more to come. It contains everything written by Washington or signed by him, together with most of his incoming letters. Part of the collection is available online from the University of Virginia.[276]
Monuments and memorials
Main article: List of memorials to George Washington




Washington Monument, Washington, DC


Many places and entities have been named in honor of Washington. His name became that of the nation's capital Washington, D.C. The state of Washington is the only state to be named after a United States president.[277] Mount Washington in New Hampshire, the tallest mountain in the Northeast, was named soon after the American Revolution by Colonel John Whipple.[278]
Washington, Theodore Roosevelt, Thomas Jefferson, and Abraham Lincoln are depicted in stone at the Mount Rushmore Memorial. The Washington Monument was built in his honor, one of the best-known American landmarks. The George Washington Masonic National Memorial in Alexandria, Virginia was constructed between 1922 and 1932 with voluntary contributions from all 52 local governing bodies of the Freemasons in the United States.[279][280]
There have been many proposals to build a monument to Washington, starting after victory in the Revolution. After his death, Congress authorized a suitable memorial in the national capital, but the decision was reversed when the Democratic-Republicans took control of Congress in 1801. The Democratic-Republicans were dismayed that Washington had become the symbol of the Federalist Party.[281] Construction of the 554 foot memorial didn't begin until 1848. It was completed in 1885. There are many other "Washington Monuments" in the United States, including two well-known equestrian statues, one in Manhattan and one in Richmond, Virginia. The first statue to show Washington on horseback was dedicated in 1856 and is located in Manhattan's Union Square.[282]
The world's busiest bridge, the George Washington Bridge, is named in his honor. Several naval vessels are named in Washington's honor, including the USS George Washington.[283]








Bailly's George Washington, Independence Hall, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania








The first Washington Monument in Baltimore, Maryland








Jean-Antoine Houdon's statue, State Capitol in Virginia








Lieutenant General George Washington, Washington Circle, Washington, D.C.








George Washington's likeness under construction on Mount Rushmore






Postage and currency
See also: U.S. presidents on U.S. postage stamps § George Washington, and History of Virginia on stamps
George Washington appears on contemporary U.S. currency, including the one-dollar bill and the quarter-dollar coin (the Washington quarter).
Washington and Benjamin Franklin appeared on the nation's first postage stamps in 1847. Since that time, Washington has appeared on many postage issues, more than all other presidents combined.[284]
Washington's victory over Cornwallis at the Battle of Yorktown was commemorated with a two-cent stamp on the battle's 150th anniversary on October 19, 1931.[285] The 150th anniversary of the signing of the Constitution with George Washington as presiding officer was celebrated with a three-cent issue on September 17, 1937, adapted from the painting by Julius Brutus Stearns.[286] Washington's presidential inauguration at Federal Hall in New York City was celebrated on its 150th anniversary on April 30, 1939.[287]


Selected Issues








Washington,
issue of 1862








Washington-Franklin
Issue of 1917








Washington at Valley Forge, issue of 1928








Washington as President of the Constitutional Convention, issue of 1937






Selected currency








George Washington
quarter dollar









George Washington
Presidential One Dollar Coin









George Washington on the
1928 dollar bill







Cherry tree
See also: Parson Weems § The cherry-tree anecdote
Perhaps the best-known story about Washington's childhood is that he chopped down his father's favorite cherry tree and admitted the deed when questioned: "I can't tell a lie, Pa." The anecdote was first reported by biographer Parson Weems, who interviewed people after Washington's death who knew him as a child over a half-century earlier. The Weems text was very widely reprinted throughout the 19th century, for example in McGuffey Readers. Adults wanted children to learn moral lessons from history, especially as taught by example from the lives of great national heroes like Washington. After 1890 historians insisted on scientific research methods to validate every statement, and there was no documentation for this anecdote apart from Weems' report that he learned it from one of the neighbors who knew the young Washington. Joseph Rodman claimed in 1904 that Weems plagiarized other Washington tales from published fiction set in England, but no one has found an alternative source for the cherry tree story.[288][289]
Austin Washington, a descendant of George Washington, maintains that it is unlikely that Parson Weems, a man of the clergy, would write an account about truth and honesty and then lie about such a story. He further maintains that, if Weems was making up a story, he would have more dramatically depicted the young Washington chopping down the cherry tree, not merely "barking it" (i.e., removing some of the bark), as Weems never claimed that the tree was chopped down. There has been much conjecture and ad hominem attacks from some historians about Weems and his story, but none have proven or disproven the story.[290]
Personal property auction record
George Washington's personal annotated copy of the "Acts Passed at a Congress of the United States of America" from 1789 includes the Constitution of the United States and a draft of the Bill of Rights. It was sold on June 22, 2012, at Christie's for $9,826,500 (with fees added to the final cost) to The Mount Vernon Ladies' Association. This was the record for a document sold at auction.[291]
See also


United States portal
American Revolutionary War portal
Virginia portal
Biography portal
Government of the United States portal
Military of the United States portal



Culper Ring, the spy ring organized by Benjamin Tallmadge and supervised by Washington
American gentry
Conotocaurious (Town Destroyer), a nickname given to Washington by Iroquois Native Americans
Electoral history of George Washington
List of federal judges appointed by George Washington
List of notable Freemasons
List of Presidents of the United States, sortable by previous experience
List of United States militia units in the American Revolutionary War
Where's George?, a website that tracks the circulation of American paper money






Book: George Washington
Book: Presidents of the United States (1789–1860)





Notes


^ March 4 is the official start of the first presidential term. April 6 is when Congress counted the votes of the Electoral College and certified a president. April 30 is when Washington was sworn in.
^ a b Contemporaneous records used the Julian calendar and the Annunciation Style of enumerating years, recording his birth as February 11, 1731. The provisions of the British Calendar (New Style) Act 1750, implemented in 1752, altered the official British dating method to the Gregorian calendar with the start of the year on January 1 (it had been March 25). These changes resulted in dates being moved forward 11 days, and an advance of one year for those between January 1 and March 25. For a further explanation, see Old Style and New Style dates.
^ a b Engber 2006
^ Washington received his license through the college, whose charter gave it the authority to appoint Virginia county surveyors. There is no evidence that he actually attended classes there.[28]
^ Accounts of Washington's height vary from 6' 0'' to 6' 3''.[29]
^ Also referred to as the Seven Years' War and The French War
^ Ellis and Ferling, for example, do not discuss this stance in reference to Washington's French and Indian War service, and cast it almost exclusively in terms of his negative experiences dealing with the Continental Congress during the Revolution. See Ellis 2004, p. 218; Ferling 2009, pp. 32–33, 200, 258–72, 316. Don Higginbotham places Washington's first formal advocacy of a strong central government in 1783. Higginbotham 2002, p. 37.
^ Washington may not have been able to admit to his own sterility while privately he grieved over not having his own children. Bumgarner 1994, pp. 1–8
^ The term comes from the Roman strategy used by General Fabius against Hannibal's invasion in the Second Punic War.
^ Ferling and Ellis argue that Washington favored Fabian tactics, and Higginbotham denies it. Ferling 2010, pp. 212, 264; Ellis 2004, p. 11; Higginbotham 1971, p. 211.
^ Under the Articles of Confederation, Congress called its presiding officer "President of the United States in Congress Assembled". The position had no executive powers, but the similarity of titles has confused some into thinking that there were other presidents before Washington.[158]
^ The system in place at the time dictated that each elector cast two votes, with the winner becoming president and the runner-up vice president. Every elector in the elections of 1789 and 1792 cast one of his votes for Washington; thus, it may be said that he was elected president unanimously. James Monroe was re-elected unopposed in 1820, but a "faithless elector" cast a single vote for John Quincy Adams, depriving him of unanimous election.
^ The Coinage Act of 1792 sets the value of $1 USD equal to 24.1g of silver. With the price of silver at $15.95/oz as of June 13, 2015, the value of 25,000 in silver dollars in 1792 value (24.1g/$1) is $338,750.
^ Washington wrote to James Madison: ""As the first of everything in our situation will serve to establish a precedent, it is devoutly wished on my part that these precedents be fixed on true principles." Washington to James Madison, May 5, 1789, cited by Unger, 2013, p. 76.
^ At least three modern medical authors (Wallenborn 1997, Shapiro 1975, Scheidemandel 1976) concluded that Washington most probably died from acute bacterial epiglottitis complicated by the administered treatments. These treatments included multiple doses of calomel (a cathartic or purgative), and extensive bloodletting (with at least 2.365 total liters of blood being taken, which is slightly less than half of a normal adult's blood volume).

See Vadakan 2005, Footnotes for Shapiro and Scheidemandel references. Vadakan's article also directly quotes Doctors Craik and Dick's account (as published in the Times of Alexandria newspaper) of their treatment of Washington during his fatal illness.


^ The Smithsonian Institution states in "The Portrait—George Washington: A National Treasure" that Stuart admired the sculpture of Washington by French artist Jean-Antoine Houdon, probably because it was based on a life mask and therefore extremely accurate. Stuart explained, "When I painted him, he had just had a set of false teeth inserted, which accounts for the constrained expression so noticeable about the mouth and lower part of the face. Houdon's bust does not suffer from this defect. I wanted him as he looked at that time." Stuart preferred the Athenaeum pose, except for the gaze, and used the same pose for the Lansdowne painting.[234]
^ Historians Jay A. Parry and Andrew M. Allison declare that Washington "was the dominant personality in three of the most critical events in that founding: the Revolutionary War, the Constitutional Convention, and the first national administration. Had he not served as America's leader in those three events, all three likely would have failed. And America as we know it today would not exist." Parry, 1991, p. xi.
^ The earliest known image in which Washington is identified as the Father of His Country is in the frontispiece of a 1779 German-language almanac, with calculations by David Rittenhouse and published by Francis Bailey in Lancaster County Pennsylvania. Der Gantz Neue Nord-Americanishe Calendar has Fame appearing with an image of Washington holding a trumpet to her lips, from which come the words "Der Landes Vater" (translated as "the father of the country" or "the father of the land").
^ In Bell 2005, William Gardner Bell states that Washington was recalled back into military service from his retirement in 1798, and "Congress passed legislation that would have made him General of the Armies of the United States, but his services were not required in the field and the appointment was not made until the Bicentennial in 1976, when it was bestowed posthumously as a commemorative honor." How many U.S. Army five-star generals have there been and who were they? states that with Public Law 94-479, President Ford specified that Washington would "rank first among all officers of the Army, past and present. "General of the Armies of the United States" is associated with only two people... one being Washington and the other being John J. Pershing.


References


^ Lillback & Newcombe 2006, pp. 1–1187
^ Old style: February 11, 1731.
^ Grizzard 2002, pp. 105–07
^ Unger 2013, p. 18
^ Unger 2013, p. 236
^ a b Chernow 2010
^ a b Kazin 2009, p. 589
^ a b c Unger 2013, pp. 236–37
^ O'Brien 2009, p. 19
^ University of Virginia 2008
^ Alden 1993, pp. 3–4
^ Dorothy Twohig, in Hofstra 1998
^ Alden 1993, pp. 4–5, 73
^ Chernow 2010, pp. 10–14
^ Thompson, Mary V. (2016). "George William Fairfax". Dictionary of Virginia Biography. The Library of Virginia. Retrieved July 6, 2017. 
^ "Sally Fairfax". Mount Vernon Ladies Association. Retrieved July 6, 2017. 
^ Wiencek 2013, p. 54
^ Freeman 1948, pp. 1:15–72
^ McMillan 2006, pp. 1–2
^ Knott 2005, pp. 1–5
^ Ferling 2010, pp. 5–6
^ Freeman 1948, p. 1:199
^ Flexner 1974, p. 8
^ Freeman 1948, p. 1:264
^ Freeman 1948, p. 1:268
^ Alden 1993, p. 9
^ a b Mount Ladies' Association, 2016
^ U.S. National Archives:
George Washington's Professional Surveys, 2nd prgh
^ Ellis 2004, p. 282
^ a b Chernow 2010, p. 53
^ a b Freeman 1948, pp. 1:274–327.
^ In fact, Washington and Tanacharison became friends.
^ Lengel 2005, pp. 23–24
^ Washington & Dinwiddie 1865
^ Grizzard 2002
^ Lengel 2005, pp. 31–38
^ Anderson 2000, pp. 53–58
^ Misencik 2014, p. 131
^ Grizzard 2002, pp. 115–19
^ a b Ellis 2004, pp. 17–18
^ Ferling 2009, pp. 25–27
^ Anderson 2005, pp. 100–01
^ Alden 1993, pp. 35–36
^ Alden 1993, p. 37
^ Ferling 2010, pp. 35–36
^ Ferling 2009, pp. 28–30
^ Alden 1993, pp. 37–46
^ Flexner 1965, p. 138
^ Alden 1993, pp. 47, 54
^ Fischer 2004, pp. 15–16
^ Ellis 2004, p. 38
^ Lengel 2005, pp. 75–76, 81
^ a b Chernow 2010, ch. 8
^ Freeman 1968, pp. 135–39;
   Flexner 1974, pp. 32–36;
   Ellis 2004, ch. 1;
   Higginbotham 1985, ch. 1;
   Lengel 2005, pp. 77–80.
^ Higginbotham 1985, pp. 14–15
^ Lengel 2005, p. 80
^ Ellis 2004, pp. 38, 69
^ Fischer 2004, p. 13
^ Alden 1993, p. 70
^ Higginbotham 1985, pp. 22–25
^ Freeman 1968, pp. 136–37
^ Ferling 2000, pp. 33–34
^ Chernow 2010, p. 103
^ Flexner 1974, pp. 42–43
^ Wiencek 2013, pp. 67–69, 336
^ a b Rasmussen & Tilton 1999, p. 100
^ Chernow 2010, p. 184
^ Grizzard 2002, pp. 135–37
^ a b Ellis 2004, pp. 41–42, 48
^ Alden 1993, p. 71
^ Ferling 2009, pp. 49–51
^ Ferling 2009, pp. 51–54, 68
^ Ferling 2000, p. 44
^ Ellis 2004, p. 44
^ Ferling 2000, pp. 43–44
^ Ellis 2004, pp. 49–50
^ a b Hirschfeld 1997, pp. 44–45
^ Ferling 2009, p. 351
^ Staff. "Martha Parke Custis". mountvernon.org. Mount Vernon Ladies’ Association. Retrieved November 10, 2016. 
^ DeToledo, John C.; DeToledo, Martha B.; Lowe, Merredith R. (1999). "Historical Article Epilepsy and Sudden Death: Notes from George Washington's Diaries on the Illness and Death of Martha Parke-Custis (1756–1773)". Epilepsia. 40 (12): 1835–36. doi:10.1111/j.1528-1157.1999.tb01608.x. PMID 10612354. 
^ Higginbotham 2001, p. 154
^ Mount Vernon economy: Ferling 2010, pp. 66–67
^ Ellis 2004, pp. 50–53
^ Higginbotham 2001, pp. 67–93
^ Fischer 2004, p. 14
^ Ferling 2000, pp. 73–76
^ Freeman 1968, pp. 174–76
^ Randall 1997, p. 262
^ Alden 1993, p. 101
^ Ferling 2010, p. 100
^ Ford, Hunt & Fitzpatrick 1904, p. 11
^ Rasmussen & Tilton 1999, p. 294
^ a b c d Bell 2005
^ Library of Congress 1905
^ Ellis 2004, pp. 68–72
^ "WEDNESDAY, JUNE 14, 1775 (Journals of the Continental Congress, 1774–1789), ed. Worthington C. Ford et al. (Washington, D.C., 1904–37)". memory.loc.gov. Library of Congress. June 14, 1775. pp. 89–90. Retrieved June 21, 2015. 
^ Cont'l Cong., Commission for General Washington, in 2 Journals of the Continental Congress, 1774–1789 96–97 (Library of Cong. eds., 1905).
^ Cont'l Cong., Instructions for General Washington, in 2 Journals of the Continental Congress, 1774–1789 100–01 (Library of Cong. eds., 1905).
^ Ferling 2009, pp. 86–87
^ Alden 1993, p. 124
^ a b c Higginbotham 1985, ch. 3
^ a b "Creation of the War Department". Papers of the War Department, 1784–1800. Fairfax, Virginia: Center for History and New Media. January 20, 2011. Retrieved June 3, 2011. 
^ Carp 1990, p. 220
^ Jensen 2002
^ Stephenson 1925, pp. 271–81
^ Lengel 2005; Higginbotham 1985, pp. 125–34
^ Bickham 2002
^ Ellis 2004, pp. 95–96
^ McCullough 2005, pp. 186–95
^ Alden 1993, p. 137
^ Ketchum 1999, p. 235
^ Fischer 2004, p. 367
^ Fischer 2004, p. 151
^ Henderson 2009, p. 47
^ Buchanan 2004, p. 226
^ a b Higginbotham 1971, ch. 8
^ Heydt 2005, pp. 50–73
^ Alden 1993, p. 163
^ Ferling 2000, pp. 186
^ Alden 1993, pp. 165, 167
^ Freedman 2008, p. 30
^ Alden 1993, p. 165
^ a b Freedman 2008, p. 42
^ Alden 1993, p. 168
^ Alden 1993, pp. 176–77
^ Ferling 2000, pp. 195–97
^ Grizzard 2002, p. 303
^ Alden 1993, p. 184
^ Mann 2008, p. 106
^ Alden 1993, pp. 185–86
^ a b Alden 1993, pp. 187–88
^ Rose, Alexander (2006). Washington's Spies: The Story of America's First Spy Ring. New York: Bantam Dell, a division of Random House. pp. 75, 224, 258–61. ISBN 978-0-553-38329-4. 
^ Alden 1993, p. 190
^ Alden 1993, p. 193
^ Lancaster & Plumb 1985, p. 311
^ Alden 1993, pp. 198–99
^ Alden 1993, pp. 198, 201
^ Mann 2005, p. 38; Lancaster & Plumb 1985, p. 254.
^ Alden 1993, pp. 201–02
^ Kohn 1970, pp. 187–220
^ (Wright 1987, p. 193)
^ Wright 1987, p. 27
^ Washington 1799, p. 343
^ "General George Washington Resigned his Commission in Annapolis, Maryland - US House of Representatives: History, Art & Archives". history.house.gov. 
^ Alden 1993, p. 210
^ Wood 1992, pp. 105–06
^ Brookhiser 1996, p. 103
^ Alden 1993, p. 209
^ Explore PA 2011
^ Ferling 2009, pp. 251–255
^ Unger 2013, p. 33
^ Alden 1993, p. 221
^ Ellis 2007, pp. 91–92
^ a b Alden 1993, pp. 226–27
^ Alden 1993, p. 229
^ Bruns 1986
^ National Park Service, 2011
^ Jensen 1948, pp. 17879
^ Unger 2013, pp. 61, 146
^ "Presidential Oaths of Office". Presidential Inaugurations. Library of Congress. Retrieved November 13, 2011. 
^ Alden 1993, p. 236
^ Chernow 2010, Kindle location 11,386
^ Unger 2013, p. 79
^ Bassett 1906, p. 155
^ Ellis 2004, pp. 197–98
^ White 1948, p. 100
^ Unger 2013, p. 237
^ a b c d e f Cooke 2002, p. 5.
^ Cooke 2002, p. 4.
^ Cooke 2002, pp. 4-5.
^ Cooke 2002, p. 6.
^ a b McCullough 2001, pp. 413-414.
^ Cooke 2002, p. 5; Banning 1974, p. 5.
^ Elkins & McKitrick 1995, p. 290
^ Elkins & McKitrick 1995, pp. 240, 285, 290, 361
^ Chernow 2004, p. 427
^ Alden 1993, pp. 243–44
^ Webb & Wooldridge 1892, p. 87
^ Coakley 1996, pp. 43–49
^ Kohn 1972, pp. 567–84
^ Ellis 2004, p. 225
^ Elkins & McKitrick 1995, pp. 335–54
^ Elkins & McKitrick 1995, ch. 9
^ Estes 2000, pp. 393–422
^ Estes 2001, pp. 127–58
^ Varg 1963, pp. 95–122
^ Grizzard 2005, p. 263
^ Lengel 2005, p. 357
^ Library of Congress, 2011
^ Washington, George (1796). "Washington's Farewell Address". Avalon Project. Yale Law School, Lillian Goldman Law Library. Retrieved November 29, 2010. 
^ Fishman, Pederson & Rozell 2001, pp. 19–20
^ Gregg & Spalding 1999, pp. 199–216
^ a b Breen & White 2006, pp. 209–20
^ Ellis 2004, pp. 255–61
^ Chernow 2010, ch. 57, note 38
^ Dalzell & Dalzell 1998, p. 219; Purchasing power was calculated at Officer, Lawrence H.; Williamson, Samuel H. (2011). "Purchasing Power of Money in the United States from 1774 to Present". MeasuringWorth. Retrieved January 30, 2016. 
^ Kohn 1975, pp. 225–42
^ Grizzard 2005, p. 264
^ "Lucius (Titus) Quinctius Cincinnatus". Kentucky Educational Television. Retrieved May 20, 2014. 
^ Kristin Fahrenbruck Baumgartner. "American Cincinnatus". characterfirst online library. Archived from the original on May 20, 2014. Retrieved May 20, 2014. 
^ Freneau 1903, eBook
^ Byron 2001
^ a b c d e Vadakan, Vibul V. (Winter–Spring 2005). "A physician looks at the death of Washington". The Early America Review. 6 (1). 
^ Chernow 2010, p. 807
^ "James Craik (1730–1814)". George Washington's Mount Vernon. Archived from the original on June 4, 2013. Retrieved June 4, 2013. 
^ Lear 1799, p. 257
^ a b c d Mitgang, Herbert (December 14, 1999). "Death of a president: a 200-year-old malpractice debate". The New York Times. Archived from the original on October 27, 2011. 
^ a b c Felisati, D; Sperati, G (February 2005). "George Washington (1732–1799)". Acta Otorhinolaryngologica Italica. 25 (1): 55–58. PMC 2639854 . PMID 16080317. 
^ Lear, Tobias (December 14–25, 1799). "Tobias Lear's Journal Account of George Washington's Last Illness and Death 14–25 December 1799". Papers of George Washington (University of Virginia). Archived from the original on July 6, 2006. Retrieved June 1, 2013. 
^ "The Funeral". The Papers of George Washington. University of Virginia. Archived from the original on July 5, 2006. Retrieved July 3, 2011. 
^ Carlson, Brady (2016). "Chapter One (Ebook)". Dead Presidents: An American Adventure into the Strange Deaths and Surprising Afterlives of Our Nations Leaders. W.W. Norton & Company. ISBN 9780393243949. ...in doing this, I need not, I cannot, say what a sacrifice of individual feeling I make to a sense of public duty. 
^ a b Boorstin 1965, pp. 349–50
^ Betts 2013, pp. 147–50
^ Parsons, Eugene. George Washington: A Character Sketch, p. 112. H. G. Campbell, 1898.
^ "Rare Letter from Martha to George Washington Returns to Mount Vernon". Mount Vernon Ladies' Association. February 3, 2003. Archived from the original on June 3, 2004. Retrieved November 12, 2011. 
^ "Today in History: May 22". Library of Congress. Retrieved June 2, 2011. 
^ Wallenborn 1999; Medical report.
^ Craik, James; Dick, Elisha (December 31, 1799). "Doctors Craik and Dick's Account of Washington's Last Illness and Death". The Papers of George Washington (University of Virginia). Archived from the original on July 6, 2006. Retrieved June 1, 2013. 
^ Craughwell, Thomas J. (2009). Stealing Lincoln's Body. Harvard University Press. pp. 77–79. ISBN 9780674029972. Retrieved December 21, 2016. 
^ a b "The (New) Tomb". mountvernon.org. Mount Vernon Ladies' Association. Archived from the original on January 5, 2017. Retrieved December 21, 2016. 
^ Strickland, William (1840). The Tomb of Washington at Mount Vernon. Carey & Hart. pp. 11–14. 
^ Carlson, Brady (2016). "Chapter One (Ebook)". Dead Presidents: An American Adventure into the Strange Deaths and Surprising Afterlives of Our Nations Leaders. W.W. Norton & Company. ISBN 9780393243949. 
^ Strickland, William (1840). The Tomb of Washington at Mount Vernon. Carey & Hart. p. 35. 
^ Homans, Charles (October 6, 2004). "Taking a New Look at George Washington". The Papers of George Washington: Washington in the News. Alderman Library, University of Virginia. Archived from the original on September 1, 2006. Retrieved September 28, 2007. 
^ a b "George Washington, 1732–1799". The Papers of George Washington. University of Virginia. n.d. Archived from the original on March 30, 2015. Retrieved May 4, 2015. 
^ a b Stuart, Gilbert. "George Washington (the Athenaeum portrait)". National Portrait Gallery. Retrieved December 18, 2011. 
^ Chernow 2010, pp. 172–76
^ Chernow 2010, pp. 187–89
^ Van Horn, Jennifer (2016). "George Washington's Dentures: Disability, Deception, and the Republican Body". Early American Studies. 14 (1). 
^ Lloyd, John; Mitchinson, John (2006). The Book of General Ignorance. New York: Harmony Books. p. 97. ISBN 978-0-307-39491-0. Retrieved July 3, 2011. 
^ a b Glover, Barbara (Summer–Fall 1998). "George Washington—A Dental Victim". The Riversdale Letter. Retrieved June 30, 2006. 
^ Dentures, 1790–1799, George Washington's Mount Vernon Estate, Museum and Gardens
^ Mary V. Thompson, "The Private Life of George Washington's Slaves", Frontline, PBS
^ a b c "The Portrait—George Washington:A National Treasure". Smithsonian National Portrait Gallery. Retrieved January 21, 2011. 
^ a b Thompson 2008, p. 40
^ Gregg L. Frazer, The Religious Beliefs of America's Founders: Reason, Revelation, and Revolution (University Press of Kansas, 2012)
^ Peter A. Lillback, George Washington's Sacred Fire (2006) Foreword.
^ Johnson 1919, pp. 87–195
^ Chernow 2010, ch. 12
^ Espinosa 2009, p. 52
^ Chernow 2010, ch. 12, note 14
^ Boller 1963, p. 46
^ Higginbotham 2001, p. 264
^ Higginbotham 2001, p. 313
^ Boller 1963, p. 125
^ Novak, M. and Novak, J., Washington's God: Religion, Liberty, and the Father of Our Country, Basic Books, 2007, p. 158.
^ Novak, M. and Novak, J., Washington's God: Religion, Liberty, and the Father of Our Country, Basic Books, 2007, p. 161.
^ Mackey, Albert G. (November 4, 1852). "Washington as a Freemason". Charleston, SC: Phoenixmasonry Masonic Museum and Library. Retrieved February 17, 2010. 
^ Chernow 2010, pp. 27, 704
^ Harris, R. W. Claude (August 25, 2000). "Washington and Freemasonry" (PDF). Lodge Anecdotes. Alexandria-Washington Lodge No. 22, A.F. & A.M. Retrieved December 28, 2011. 
^ "History". Alexandria-Washington Lodge No. 22, A.F. & A.M. Archived from the original on January 7, 2012. Retrieved December 28, 2011. 
^ Chernow 2010, ch. 66
^ "George Washington's 1799 Will and Testament". 
^ Striner, 2006, p. 15
^ Stewart 2007, p. 257
^ Dunbar, Erica Armstrong (February 16, 2015). "George Washington, Slave Catcher". New York Times. Retrieved February 16, 2015. 
^ Twohig 1994, The Papers of G. Washington
^ "Regulating the Trade". New York Public Library. Retrieved 2015-12-20. 
^ Hirschfeld 1997, pp. 11–12
^ Haworth, Paul Leland (2004) [1915]. George Washington: Farmer. Whitefish, MT: Kessinger Publishing. pp. 78–80. ISBN 1-4191-2162-6. Retrieved November 14, 2011. 
^ Henriques 2006, pp. 164-165.
^ Flexner 1974, p. 397.
^ Flexner 1974, pp. 397-398.
^ "Charlotte". Mount Vernon Ladies Association. Retrieved August 22, 2017. 
^ Fitzpatrick 2016, p. 307
^ Wiencek 2013, p. 125
^ Wiencek 2013, p. 257
^ Safire, William, ed. (2004). Lend Me Your Ears: Great Speeches in History. New York: W.W. Norton. p. 185. ISBN 0-393-05931-6. Retrieved December 29, 2011. 
^ Parry & Allison 1991, p. xi
^ Hindle 1980, p. 92
^ 5 U.S.C. § 6103
^ David Hackett Fischer (2006). Washington's Crossing. Oxford UP. p. 446. ISBN 9780199756674. 
^ Cunliffe 1958, pp. 24–26
^ Willard, Joseph (February 28, 1781). "To George Washington from Joseph Willard, 28 February 1781". Founders Online, National Archives. 
^ Fitzpatrick 2016
^ Lengel 2011
^ "Map of Washington". Worldatlas. Retrieved January 3, 2011. 
^ Burt 1906, pp. 5, 76
^ Callahan, Charles H. (1998) [1913]. Washington: The Man and the Mason. Kila, Mont: Kessinger. pp. 329–42. ISBN 0-7661-0245-9. Retrieved August 25, 2010. 
^ Weber, John (2009). An Illustrated Guide to the Lost Symbol. London: Simon & Schuster. p. 137. ISBN 1-4165-2366-9. Retrieved August 25, 2010. 
^ Cohen 1991, pp. 187–203
^ "July 4th Marks 150th Anniversary of the Dedication Of Union Square's George Washington Monument". City of New York Parks & Recreation. 2006. Retrieved July 7, 2012. 
^ "USS George Washington". Naval History and Heritage Command. Retrieved June 10, 2016. 
^ Kloetzel, James E., ed. (2009). Scott 2010 Specialized Catalogue of United States Stamps & Covers. Sidney, Ohio: Scott Pub. Co. ISBN 978-0-89487-446-8. 
^ Trotter, Gordon T., Yorktown Issue, National Postal Museum online.
^ Trotter, Gordon T., [3c Constitution Sesquicentennial plate block of four Constitution Sesquicentennial Issue], National Postal Museum online.
^ Haimann, Alexander T., Washington Inauguration Issue, National Postal Museum online.
^ Hughes 1926, pp. 1:24, 501
^ Grizzard 2002, pp. 45–47
^ Washington 2014, pp. 20–24
^ "NYC Auction Of George Washington Document Sets Record". CBS News New York. Retrieved June 22, 2012. 


Bibliography
For a list of written works, see Bibliography of George Washington.

Book sources

Alden, John R. (1993). George Washington, a Biography. Norwalk: Easton Press. ISBN 9780807141083. 
Anderson, Fred (2000). Crucible of War: The Seven Years' War and the Fate of Empire in British North America, 1754–1766. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. ISBN 978-0-375-40642-3. 
—— (2005). The War That Made America: A Short History of the French and Indian War (abridged ed.). New York: Viking. ISBN 978-0-670-03454-3. 
Banning, Lance (1974). Woodward C. Vann, ed. Responses of the Presidents to Charges of Misconduct. New York, New York: Delacorte Press. pp. 1–21. ISBN 0-440-05923-2. 
Bassett, John Spencer (1906). The Federalist System, 1789–1801. Harper & Brothers. 
Bell, William Gardner (2005) [1983]. Commanding Generals and Chiefs of Staff, 1775–2005: Portraits & Biographical Sketches of the United States Army's Senior Officer. Washington, D.C: Center of Military History, United States Army. pp. 52–53, 66–67. ISBN 0-16-072376-0. CMH Pub 70–14. 
Betts, William W. (2013). The Nine Lives of George Washington. iUniverse. pp. 147–50. ISBN 9781475985177. Retrieved October 10, 2015. 
Bickham, Troy O. (2002). "Sympathizing with Sedition? George Washington, the British Press, and British Attitudes during the American War of Independence". The William and Mary Quarterly. Omohundro Institute of Early American History and Culture. 59 (1): 101–22. doi:10.2307/3491639. ISSN 0043-5597. JSTOR 3491639. 
Boller, Paul F. (1963). George Washington & Religion. Dallas: Southern Methodist University Press. OCLC 563800860. 
—— (1995). Not So!: Popular Myths About America from Columbus to Clinton. New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-509186-8. 
Bordewich, Fergus M. (2016). The First Congress: How James Madison, George Washington, and a Group of Extraordinary Men Invented the Government. ISBN 9781451692136. 
Boorstin, Daniel J. (1965). The Americans: The National Experience. New York: Vintage Books. pp. 349–50. ISBN 0-394-70358-8. 
Breen, Eleanor E.; White, Esther C. (2006). "A Pretty Considerable Distillery—Excavating George Washington's Whiskey Distillery" (PDF). Quarterly Bulletin of the Archeological Society of Virginia. Archeological Society of Virginia. 61 (4): 209–20. Archived from the original (PDF) on December 24, 2011. Retrieved November 4, 2011. 
Brookhiser, Richard (1996). Founding Father: Rediscovering George Washington. New York: Free Press. ISBN 0-684-82291-1. 
Buchanan, John (2004). The Road to Valley Forge: How Washington Built the Army That Won the Revolution. Hoboken, N.J: John Wiley & Sons. ISBN 978-0-471-44156-4. 
Bumgarner, John R. (1994). The Health of the Presidents: The 41 United States Presidents Through 1993 from a Physician's Point of View. Jefferson, N.C: McFarland & Co. ISBN 0-89950-956-8. 
Burt, Frank H. (1906). Mount Washington: A Handbook for Travellers. George H. Ellis Company. 
Carp, E. Wayne (1990) [1984]. To Starve the Army at Pleasure: Continental Army Administration and American Political Culture, 1775–1783. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press. p. 220. ISBN 978-0-8078-4269-0. Retrieved November 13, 2011. 
Cayton, Andrew (September 30, 2010). "Learning to Be Washington". The New York Times. Retrieved September 30, 2010. 
Chernow, Ron (2004). Alexander Hamilton. New York: Penguin Press. ISBN 1-59420-009-2. 
—— (2010). Washington: A Life. New York: Penguin Press. ISBN 978-1-59420-266-7. , Pulitzer Prize
Cohen, Sheldon S. (April 1991). "Monuments to Greatness: George Dance, Charles Polhill, and Benjamin West's Design for a Memorial to George Washington". Virginia Magazine of History and Biography. 99 (2): 187–203. JSTOR 4249215. 
Coakley, Robert W. (1996) [1989]. The Role of Federal Military Forces in Domestic Disorders, 1789–1878. DIANE Publishing. pp. 43–49. ISBN 978-0-7881-2818-9. Retrieved November 13, 2011. 
Cooke, Jacob E. (2002). "George Washington". In Graff, Henry. The Presidents: A Reference History (7th ed.). pp. 1–21. ISBN 0-684-80551-0. 
Cunliffe, Marcus (1958). George Washington, Man and Monument. Boston: Little, Brown. OCLC 58007859. 
Dalzell, Robert F., Jr.; Dalzell, Lee Baldwin (1998). George Washington's Mount Vernon: At Home in Revolutionary America. New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-512114-7. 
Elkins, Stanley M.; McKitrick, Eric (1995) [1993]. The Age of Federalism. New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-509381-0. , standard political history of 1790s
Ellis, Joseph J. (2004). His Excellency: George Washington. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. ISBN 1-4000-4031-0. 
—— (2007). American Creation. Alfred A. Knopf, New York. ISBN 9780307276452. 
Engber, Daniel (2006). "What's Benjamin Franklin's Birthday?". Slate, January 18, 2006. Retrieved May 21, 2011.  (Both Franklin's and Washington's confusing birth dates are clearly explained.)
Espinosa, Gastón (2009). Religion and the American Presidency: George Washington to George W. Bush with Commentary and Primary Sources. New York: Columbia University Press. ISBN 978-0-231-14332-5. 
Estes, Todd (2000). "Shaping the Politics of Public Opinion: Federalists and the Jay Treaty Debate". Journal of the Early Republic. 20 (3): 393. doi:10.2307/3125063. JSTOR 3125063. 
—— (2001). "The Art of Presidential Leadership: George Washington and the Jay Treaty". The Virginia Magazine of History and Biography. 109 (2). JSTOR 4249911. 
Ferling, John E. (2000). Setting the World Ablaze: Washington, Adams, Jefferson, and the American Revolution. New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-513409-5. 
—— (2009). The Ascent of George Washington: The Hidden Political Genius of an American Icon. New York: Bloomsbury Press. ISBN 978-1-59691-465-0. 
—— (2010) [1988]. First of Men: A Life of George Washington. New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-539867-0. 
Fischer, David Hackett (2004). Washington's Crossing. Oxford, England; New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-517034-2. 
Fishman, Ethan M.; Pederson, William D.; Rozell, Mark J. (2001). George Washington: Foundation of Presidential Leadership and Character. Greenwood Publishing Group. 
Flexner, James Thomas (1965). George Washington: the Forge of Experience, 1732–1775. Boston: Little, Brown. OCLC 426484. 
—— (1974). Washington: The Indispensable Man. Boston: Little, Brown. ISBN 0-316-28605-2. Archived from the original on March 12, 2017. 
Freeman, Douglas Southall (1948). George Washington, a Biography. v.7. New York: Scribner. OCLC 732644234. 
Ford, Worthington Chauncey; Hunt, Gaillard; Fitzpatrick, John Clement (1904). Journals of the Continental Congress, 1774–1789: 1774. U.S. Government Printing Office. 
Freedman, Russell (2008). Washington at Valley Forge. New York: Holiday House. 
—— (1968). Harwell, Richard Barksdale, ed. Washington. New York: Scribner. OCLC 426557. 
Gregg, Gary L., II; Spalding, Matthew, eds. (1999). Patriot Sage: George Washington and the American Political Tradition. Wilmington, Del: ISI Books. ISBN 1-882926-38-2. 
Grizzard, Frank E., Jr. (2002). George Washington: A Biographical Companion. Santa Barbara, Calif: ABC-CLIO. ISBN 1-57607-082-4. 
—— (2005). George!: A Guide to All Things Washington. Buena Vista, Va: Mariner Pub. ISBN 0-9768238-0-2. 
Henderson, Donald (2009). Smallpox: The Death of a Disease. New York: Prometheus Books. ISBN 978-1591027225. 
Henriques, Peter R. (2006). Realistic Visionary: A Portrait of George Washington. Charlottesville, VA: University of Virginia Press. ISBN 978-0-8139-2741-1. 
Heydt, Bruce (2005). "'Vexatious Evils': George Washington and the Conway Cabal". American History. 40 (5). 
Higginbotham, Don (1971). The War of American Independence: Military Attitudes, Policies, and Practice, 1763–1789. New York: Macmillan. ISBN 9780253289100. OCLC 142627. 
—— (1985). George Washington and the American Military Tradition. Athens: University of Georgia Press. ISBN 0-8203-0786-6. 
Higginbotham, Don, ed. (2001). George Washington Reconsidered. Charlottesville: University Press of Virginia. ISBN 0-8139-2005-1. 
—— (2002). George Washington: Uniting a Nation. Lanham, Md: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers. ISBN 0-7425-2208-3. 
Hindle, Brooke (1980) [1964]. David Rittenhouse. New York: Arno Press. p. 92. ISBN 978-0-405-12569-0. Retrieved October 7, 2010. 
Hirschfeld, Fritz (1997). George Washington and Slavery: A Documentary Portrayal. Columbia: University of Missouri Press. ISBN 0-8262-1135-6. 
Hofstra, Warren R. (1998). George Washington and the Virginia Backcountry. Madison, Wis: Madison House. ISBN 0-945612-50-8. 
Hughes, Rupert (1926). George Washington. New York: W. Morrow & Co. OCLC 17399028. 
Jensen, Merrill (1948). The Articles of Confederation: An Interpretation of the Social-Constitutional History of the American Revolution, 1774–1781. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press. OCLC 498124. 
Johnson, William (1919). George Washington, the Christian. New York: The Abingdon Press. OCLC 19524242. Retrieved December 29, 2011. 
Johnston, Elizabeth B. (1889). Visitor's Guide to Mount Vernon. Gibson Brothers Printers, Washington. 
Kazin, Michael; et al. (2009). The Princeton Encyclopedia of American Political History. (Two volume set). Princeton University Press. ISBN 1400833566. 
Ketchum, Richard M. (1999) [1973]. The Winter Soldiers: The Battles for Trenton and Princeton. New York: Henry Holt. ISBN 0-8050-6098-7. 
Kohn, Richard H. (April 1970). "The Inside History of the Newburgh Conspiracy: America and the Coup d'Etat". The William and Mary Quarterly. Omohundro Institute of Early American History and Culture. 27 (2): 187–220. doi:10.2307/1918650. JSTOR 1918650. 
—— (1975). Eagle and Sword: The Federalists and the Creation of the Military Establishment in America, 1783–1802. New York: Free Press. pp. 225–42. ISBN 0-02-917551-8. 
—— (1972). "The Washington Administration's Decision to Crush the Whiskey Rebellion" (PDF). The Journal of American History. 59 (3): 567–84. doi:10.2307/1900658. JSTOR 1900658. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 24, 2015. 
Kolchin, Peter (2003). American Slavery, 1619–1877. Hill and Wang, New York. ISBN 9780809016303. 
Lancaster, Bruce; Plumb, John H. (1985). The American Revolution. New York: American Heritage Press. ISBN 0-8281-0281-3. , heavily illustrated
Lear, Tobias (1799). Tobias Lear to William Augustine Washington December 15, 1799 (The Writings of George Washington, Volume 14). G. P Putman & Sons. p. 257. Retrieved June 4, 2013. 
Lengel, Edward G. (2005). General George Washington: A Military Life. New York: Random House. ISBN 1-4000-6081-8. 
Lillback, Peter; Newcombe, Jerry (2006). George Washington's Sacred Fire (1st ed.). Bryn Mawr, Pa.: Providence Forum Press. ISBN 978-0978605261. 
Mann, Barbara Alice (2005). George Washington's War on Native America. Westport, Conn: Praeger. ISBN 0-275-98177-0. 
—— (2008). George Washington's War on Native America. U. of Nevada Press. p. 106. ISBN 9780803216358. 
McCullough, David (2001). John Adams. New York: Simon & Schuster, Inc. ISBN 978-0-684-81363-9. 
Misencik, Paul R. (2014). George Washington and the Half-King Chief Tanacharison: An Alliance That Began the French and Indian War. McFarland. p. 131. ISBN 9781476615400. 
Middlekauff, Robert (2015). Washington's Revolution: The Making of America's First Leader, The revolution from General Washington's perspective. ISBN 9781101874240. 
McCullough, David (2005). 1776. New York: Simon & Schuster. ISBN 0-7432-2671-2. 
O'Brien, Conor Cruise (2009). First in Peace: How George Washington Set the Course for America. Foreword by Christopher Hitchens. Cambridge: Da Capo Press. ISBN 978-0-306-81619-2. 
Parry, Jay A.; Allison, Andrew M. (1991). The Real George Washington: The True Story of America's Most Indispensable Man. United States: National Center for Constitutional Studies. ISBN 978-0-88080-014-3. 
Randall, Willard Sterne (1997). George Washington: A Life. New York: Henry Holt & Co. ISBN 0-8050-2779-3. 
Rasmussen, William M. S.; Tilton, Robert S. (1999). George Washington-the Man Behind the Myths. Charlottesville: University Press of Virginia. ISBN 0-8139-1900-2. 
Rowe, Jonathan (2008). "Washington, George (1732–1799)". In Hamowy, Ronald. The Encyclopedia of Libertarianism. The Encyclopedia of Libertarianism. Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE; Cato Institute. pp. 535–37. doi:10.4135/9781412965811.n325. ISBN 978-1412965804. LCCN 2008009151. OCLC 750831024. 
Stephenson, Orlando W (1925). "The Supply of Gunpowder in 1776". The American Historical Review. University of Chicago. 30 (2): 2712–81. doi:10.2307/1836657. JSTOR 1836657. 
Stewart, David O. (2007). The Summer of 1787. New York: Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-0-7432-8692-3. 
Striner, Richard (2006). Father Abraham: Lincoln's Relentless Struggle to End Slavery. Oxford University Press. p. 15. ISBN 978-0-19-518306-1. 
Thompson, Mary (2008). In The Hands of a Good Providence. Charlottesville, VA: University of Virginia Press. p. 40. ISBN 978-0-8139-2763-3. 
Unger, Harlow Giles (2013). "Mr. President" George Washington and the Making of the Nation's Highest Office. Boston: Da Capo Press, A Member of the Perseus Book Group. ISBN 978-0-306-82241-4. 
Varg, Paul A. (1963). Foreign Policies of the Founding Fathers. East Lansing: Michigan State University Press. pp. 95–122. OCLC 425621. 
Vadakan, Vibul V., M.D. (Winter–Spring 2005). "A Physician Looks At The Death of Washington". The Early America Review. DEV Communications. 6 (1). ISSN 1090-4247. 
Washington, Austin (2014). The Education of George Washington: How a forgotten book shaped the character of a hero. Regnery Publishing. ISBN 9781621572053. 
Washington, George; Dinwiddie, Hon. Robert (1865). "The Journal of Major George Washington". New York: Reprinted for J. Sabin. (Sent to the Commandment of the French Forces in Ohio.)
Webb, William B.; Wooldridge, John (1892). "Chapter IV: Permanent Capital Site Selected". In Crew, Harvey W. Centennial History of the City of Washington, D.C. Dayton, Ohio: United Brethren Publishing House. OCLC 2843595. Retrieved December 29, 2011. 
Wiencek, Henry (2013). An Imperfect God: George Washington, His Slaves, and the Creation of America. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux. ISBN 0-374-17526-8. 
White, Leonard D. (1948). The Federalists: A Study in Administrative History. New York: Macmillan Co. p. 100. OCLC 1830658. 
Wood, Gordon S. (1992). The Radicalism of the American Revolution. New York: A.A. Knopf. ISBN 0-679-40493-7. 
Wright, Robert K.; Morris J. MacGregor (1987). "The Peace Establishment (George Washington, Sentiments on a Peace Establishment, 2 May 1783)". Soldier-statesmen of the Constitution. U.S. Army Center of Military History (U.S. Government). Retrieved September 7, 2012. 

Online sources

"VI. Religion and the Federal Government". Religion and the Founding of the American Republic. Library of Congress Exhibition. Retrieved November 13, 2011. 
"The President's House: Freedom and Slavery in the Making of a New Nation". Independence National Historical Park. National Park Service. Retrieved January 3, 2011. 
"George Washington's Professional Surveys". U.S. National Archives. 2016. Retrieved June 27, 2016. 
Library of Congress (1905). "Acceptance of Appointment by General Washington, in 2 Journals of the Continental Congress, 1774–1789 91–92". Continental Congress.  Missing or empty |url= (help)
Explore PA (2011). "George Washington, Covenanter squatters Historical Marker". Explore PA. WITF. Retrieved January 7, 2014. 
Bruns, Roger A. (1986). "Constitution of the United States". The Charters of Freedom. National Archives and Records Administration. Retrieved January 3, 2011. 
Byron, Lord George (2001). "Ode to Napoleon Buonoparte". Retrieved May 20, 2014. 
Fitzpatrick, John (ed) (2016). "Writings of George Washington – Online Fitzpatrick edition". University of Virginia / Hathi Trust. Retrieved March 7, 2011. CS1 maint: Extra text: authors list (link)
Freneau, Philip (1903). Fred Lewis Pattee, ed. "The Poems of Philip Freneau, Volume II (of III)". Project Gutenberg. Retrieved 2014-09-06. 
McMillan, Joseph (2006). "The Arms of George Washington". Archived from the original on August 6, 2016. Retrieved June 2, 2016. 
"Surveying". Mount Vernon Ladies’ Association. 2016. Retrieved June 13, 2016. 
Twohig, Dorothy (October 1994). "'That Species of Property': Washington's Role in the Controversy Over Slavery". The Papers of George Washington. University of Virginia. Archived from the original on April 13, 2005. Retrieved November 14, 2011. 
Jensen, Richard (2002). "Military History of the American Revolution". Jensen's Web Guides. University of Illinois at Chicago. Retrieved January 18, 2011. 
Knott, Stephen (2005). "Life Before the Presidency". Miller Center of Public Affairs, University of Virginia. Archived from the original on November 28, 2011. Retrieved November 12, 2011. 
Wallenborn, White McKenzie, M.D. (1999). "George Washington's Terminal Illness: A Modern Medical Analysis of the Last Illness and Death of George Washington". The Papers of George Washington. University of Virginia. 
University of Virginia (2008). "Bible Record for Washington Family". The Papers of George Washington. University of Virginia. Archived from the original on October 5, 2013. Retrieved January 26, 2008. 
Washington, George (1799). "Letter to Continental Army, November 2, 1783, Farewell Orders; Letter to Henry Knox, November 2, 1783". George Washington Papers, 1741–1799: Series 3b Varick Transcripts. Library of Congress. Archived from the original on August 21, 2013. Retrieved November 13, 2011. 
Wood, Gordon (December 16, 2004). "The Man Who Would Not Be King". The New Republic. Retrieved August 4, 2006 – via powells.com. 
Pogue, Dennis J. (January 2004). Shad, Wheat, and Rye (Whiskey): George Washington, Entrepreneur (PDF). The Society for Historical Archaeology Annual Meeting. St. Louis, Missouri: Mount Vernon Ladies' Association. pp. 2–10. Archived from the original (PDF) on December 24, 2011. 

Primary sources

Lengel, Edward G., ed. (2011). "The Papers of George Washington: Digital Edition". University of Virginia. Retrieved March 7, 2011. 
'Writings of George Washington edited by John C. Fitzpatrick, et al. (39 vol. 1931)

"Founders Online," searchable edition






Library resources about
George Washington





Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries




External links

Find more aboutGeorge Washingtonat Wikipedia's sister projects

Definitions from Wiktionary
Media from Wikimedia Commons
Quotations from Wikiquote
Texts from Wikisource
Textbooks from Wikibooks
Learning resources from Wikiversity



Listen to this article (2 parts) ·  (info)
Part 1 • Part 2



This audio file was created from a revision of the article "George Washington" dated 2008-05-28, and does not reflect subsequent edits to the article. (Audio help)
More spoken articles


White House biography

United States Congress. "George Washington (id: W000178)". Biographical Directory of the United States Congress. 
George Washington's Mount Vernon
American President: George Washington (1732–1799) at the Miller Center of Public Affairs, University of Virginia
George Washington: A Resource Guide at the Library of Congress
George Washington Resources at the University of Virginia Library
Original Digitized Letters of George Washington Shapell Manuscript Foundation
The Papers of George Washington at the Avalon Project
The Papers of George Washington, subset of Founders Online from the National Archives
George Washington Birthplace National Monument, Virginia from the National Park Service
Copies of the wills of General George Washington: the first president of the United States and of Martha Washington, his wife (1904), edited by E. R. Holbrook
"What Made George Washington a Good Military Leader?". EDSITEment: Lesson Plans. National Endowment for the Humanities. 
Works by George Washington at Project Gutenberg
Works by or about George Washington at Internet Archive
Works by George Washington at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) 
George Washington Personal Manuscripts







v
t
e


George Washington






1st President of the United States, 1789–1797
Senior Officer of the Army, 1798–1799
Commander-in-Chief of the Continental Army, 1775–1783
Second Continental Congress, 1775
First Continental Congress, 1774





Military career
Revolutionary War



Military career
French and Indian War

Jumonville Glen
Battle of Fort Necessity
Forbes Expedition


Washington and the American Revolution
Commander-in-chief, Continental Army
Aides-de-Camp
Washington's headquarters
Boston campaign

Siege of Boston


New York and New Jersey campaign

Delaware River crossing
Battle of Trenton


Philadelphia campaign

Battle of Brandywine
Battle of Germantown
Battle of White Marsh
Valley Forge
Battle of Monmouth


Battles of Saratoga
Sullivan Expedition
Yorktown campaign

Siege of Yorktown


Culper spy ring
Newburgh Conspiracy

Newburgh letter


Badge of Military Merit

Purple Heart


Washington Before Boston Medal
Horses: Nelson and Blueskin





Other U.S.
founding events



1769 Virginia Association

Continental Association


1774 Fairfax Resolves
Court of Appeals in Cases of Capture
1785 Mount Vernon Conference
Chairman, 1787 Constitutional Convention





Presidency



United States presidential election, 1788–89
1792
First inauguration

inaugural bible


Second inauguration
Title of "Mr. President"
Cabinet of the United States

Secretary of State
Attorney General
Secretary of the Treasury
Secretary of War


Judiciary Act of 1789
Nonintercourse Act
Whiskey Rebellion

Militia Acts of 1792


Coinage Act of 1792

United States Mint


Proclamation of Neutrality

Neutrality Act of 1794


Jay Treaty
Pinckney's Treaty
Slave Trade Act of 1794
Residence Act
Thanksgiving Proclamation
Farewell Address
State of the Union Address 1790
1791
1792
1793
1796
Cabinet
Federal judicial appointments





Views and
public image



Presidential library
The Washington Papers
Religious views
Washington and slavery
Town Destroyer
Legacy





Life and homes



Early life
Birthplace
Ferry Farm boyhood home
Mount Vernon

Gristmill
Woodlawn Plantation


Samuel Osgood House, First Presidential Mansion
Alexander Macomb House, Second Presidential Mansion
President's House, Philadelphia
Germantown White House
Custis estate
Potomac Company
James River and Kanawha Canal
Mountain Road Lottery
Congressional Gold Medal
Thanks of Congress
President-General of the Society of the Cincinnati
Washington College
Washington and Lee University
Electoral history of George Washington





Memorials and
depictions



Washington, D.C.
Washington state
Washington Monument
Mount Rushmore
Washington's Birthday
Purple Heart
The Apotheosis of Washington
George Washington (Houdon)
George Washington (Ceracchi)
George Washington (Trumbull)
Washington Crossing the Delaware
General George Washington at Trenton
Washington at Verplanck's Point
Unfinished portrait
Lansdowne portrait
The Washington Family portrait
Washington at Princeton painting
Point of View sculpture
George Washington University
Washington University
Washington Masonic National Memorial
George Washington Memorial Parkway
George Washington Bridge
Washington and Jefferson National Forests
Washington Monument, Baltimore
Washington, D.C. statue
List of memorials
U.S. Postage stamps

Washington-Franklin Issues
1932 bicentennial


Currency

Washington quarter
Washington dollar


Cultural depictions
George Washington (1984 miniseries
1986 sequel)





Related



Bibliography
Founding Fathers of the United States
Republicanism
Federalist Party

Federalist Era


Virginia dynasty
Coat of arms
Cherry-tree anecdote
River Farm
Washington's Crossing
1751 Barbados trip
Category
Syng inkstand
General of the Armies
American Philosophical Society
American Revolution

patriots


Mount Vernon Ladies' Association





Ancestry
and family



Martha Washington (wife)
John Parke Custis (stepson)
George Washington Parke Custis (step-grandson, adopted son)
Eleanor Parke Custis (step-granddaughter, adopted daughter)
Augustine Washington (father)
Mary Ball (mother)
Lawrence Washington (half-brother)
Augustine Washington Jr. (half-brother)
Betty Washington Lewis (sister)
Samuel Washington (brother)
John A. Washington (brother)
Charles Washington (brother)
Lawrence Washington (grandfather)
John Washington (great-grandfather)
Bushrod Washington (nephew)








John Adams →


 Category










Offices and distinctions







Military offices


New creation
Commander-in-Chief of the Continental Army
1775–1783
Succeeded by
Henry Knox
as Senior Officer of the Army


Preceded by
James Wilkinson
Senior Officer of the Army
1798–1799
Succeeded by
Alexander Hamilton


Political offices


New creation
President of the United States
1789–1797
Succeeded by
John Adams


Honorary titles


New title
Oldest living President of the United States
1789–1799
Succeeded by
John Adams











Articles related to George Washington











v
t
e


Presidents of the United States (list)







George Washington (1789–1797)
John Adams (1797–1801)
Thomas Jefferson (1801–1809)
James Madison (1809–1817)
James Monroe (1817–1825)
John Quincy Adams (1825–1829)
Andrew Jackson (1829–1837)
Martin Van Buren (1837–1841)
William Henry Harrison (1841)
John Tyler (1841–1845)
James K. Polk (1845–1849)
Zachary Taylor (1849–1850)
Millard Fillmore (1850–1853)
Franklin Pierce (1853–1857)
James Buchanan (1857–1861)
Abraham Lincoln (1861–1865)
Andrew Johnson (1865–1869)
Ulysses S. Grant (1869–1877)
Rutherford B. Hayes (1877–1881)
James A. Garfield (1881)
Chester A. Arthur (1881–1885)
Grover Cleveland (1885–1889)
Benjamin Harrison (1889–1893)
Grover Cleveland (1893–1897)
William McKinley (1897–1901)
Theodore Roosevelt (1901–1909)
William H. Taft (1909–1913)
Woodrow Wilson (1913–1921)
Warren G. Harding (1921–1923)
Calvin Coolidge (1923–1929)
Herbert Hoover (1929–1933)
Franklin D. Roosevelt (1933–1945)
Harry S. Truman (1945–1953)
Dwight D. Eisenhower (1953–1961)
John F. Kennedy (1961–1963)
Lyndon B. Johnson (1963–1969)
Richard Nixon (1969–1974)
Gerald Ford (1974–1977)
Jimmy Carter (1977–1981)
Ronald Reagan (1981–1989)
George H. W. Bush (1989–1993)
Bill Clinton (1993–2001)
George W. Bush (2001–2009)
Barack Obama (2009–2017)
Donald Trump (2017–present)









Presidency timelines




Wilson
Harding
Coolidge
Hoover
F. D. Roosevelt

first 100 days


Truman
Eisenhower
Kennedy
L. B. Johnson
Nixon
Ford
Carter
Reagan
G. H. W. Bush
Clinton
G. W. Bush
Obama

first 100 days


Trump

first 100 days











 Book
 Category












v
t
e


Signatories of the United States Constitution



Convention President



George Washington








New Hampshire



John Langdon
Nicholas Gilman





Massachusetts



Nathaniel Gorham
Rufus King





Connecticut



William Samuel Johnson
Roger Sherman





New York



Alexander Hamilton





New Jersey



William Livingston
David Brearley
William Paterson
Jonathan Dayton





Pennsylvania



Benjamin Franklin
Thomas Mifflin
Robert Morris
George Clymer
Thomas Fitzsimons
Jared Ingersoll
James Wilson
Gouverneur Morris





Delaware



George Read
Gunning Bedford Jr.
John Dickinson
Richard Bassett
Jacob Broom





Maryland



James McHenry
Daniel of St. Thomas Jenifer
Daniel Carroll





Virginia



John Blair
James Madison





North Carolina



William Blount
Richard Dobbs Spaight
Hugh Williamson





South Carolina



John Rutledge
Charles Cotesworth Pinckney
Charles Pinckney
Pierce Butler





Georgia



William Few
Abraham Baldwin





Convention Secretary



William Jackson












v
t
e


Leaders of the United States Army



Senior Officer /
Commanding General



Washington
Knox
Doughty
Harmar
St. Clair
Wayne
Wilkinson
Washington
Hamilton
Wilkinson
Dearborn
J. Brown
Macomb
W. Scott
McClellan
Halleck
Grant
Sherman
Sheridan
Schofield
Miles










Chiefs of Staff



Young
Chaffee
Bates
Bell
Wood
Wotherspoon
H. Scott
Bliss
March
Pershing
Hines
Summerall
MacArthur
Craig
Marshall
Eisenhower
Bradley
Collins
Ridgway
Taylor
Lemnitzer
Decker
Wheeler
Johnson
Westmoreland
B. Palmer
Abrams
Weyand
Rogers
Meyer
Wickham
Vuono
Sullivan
Reimer
Shinseki
Schoomaker
Casey
Dempsey
Odierno
Milley





Vice Chiefs of Staff



Collins
Haislip
Hull
Bolte
W. Palmer
Lemnitzer
Decker
Eddleman
Hamlett
Abrams
Haines
B. Palmer
Haig
Weyand
Kerwin
Kroesen
Vessey
Wickham
Thurman
A. Brown
RisCassi
Sullivan
Reimer
Peay
Tilelli
Griffith
Crouch
Shinseki
Keane
Casey
Cody
Chiarelli
Austin
Campbell
Allyn
McConville












v
t
e


The Washington family



First generation



Lawrence Washington (1602–1653)





Second generation



John Washington





Third generation



Lawrence Washington (1659–1698)





Fourth generation



Augustine Washington





Fifth generation



Lawrence Washington (1718–1752)
Augustine Washington Jr.
George Washington
Betty Washington Lewis
Samuel Washington
John Augustine Washington
Charles Washington
William Washington





Sixth generation



Bushrod Washington
George Steptoe Washington
Lawrence Augustine Washington
George William Washington





Seventh generation



John Thornton Augustine Washington
George Corbin Washington





Eighth generation



Lawrence Berry Washington
Lewis Washington
Benjamin Franklin Washington
William D. Washington
Eugenia Washington





Related



Coat of arms








Washington family residences
Abingdon
Arlington House
Beall-Air
Blakeley
Cedar Lawn
Claymont Court
Fairfield
Ferry Farm
George Washington Birthplace National Monument
Happy Retreat
Harewood
Kenmore
Mary Washington House
Mount Vernon
Richwood Hall
Ridgedale
Rising Sun Tavern
River Farm
Sulgrave
Washington Old Hall












v
t
e


Cabinet of President George Washington (1789–97)



Secretary of Foreign Affairs



John Jay (1789)








Secretary of State



John Jay (1789–1790)
Thomas Jefferson (1790–93)
Edmund Randolph (1794–95)
Timothy Pickering (1795–97)





Secretary of the Treasury



Alexander Hamilton (1789–95)
Oliver Wolcott Jr. (1795–97)





Secretary of War



Henry Knox (1789–94)
Timothy Pickering (1795)
James McHenry (1796–97)





Attorney General



Edmund Randolph (1789–94)
William Bradford (1794–95)
Charles Lee (1795–97)





Postmaster General



Samuel Osgood (1789–91)
Timothy Pickering (1791–95)
Joseph Habersham (1795–97)












v
t
e


Washington and Lee University



Academics



The College
Williams School of Commerce, Economics, and Politics
School of Law








Student life



Lexington Triad
Omicron Delta Kappa
Cadaver Society
Sigma Society
Washington and Lee Mock Convention
Washington and Lee Generals
Old Dominion Athletic Conference
"Washington and Lee Swing"





Media



Shenandoah
WLUR
Lee Family Digital Archive
Washington and Lee Law Review
German Law Journal





People



George Washington
Robert E. Lee
Presidents
Alumni and faculty





Campus



Colonnade
Lee Chapel
Liberty Hall Site
Sydney Lewis Hall








 Commons
 Category












v
t
e


Chancellors of the College of William & Mary






Henry Compton (1693–1700)
Thomas Tenison (1700–1707)
Henry Compton (1707–1713)
John Robinson (1714–1721)
William Wake (1721–1729)
Edmund Gibson (1729–1736)
William Wake (1736–1737)
Edmund Gibson (1737–1748)
Thomas Sherlock (1749–1761)
Thomas Hayter (1762)
Charles Wyndham (1762–1763)
Philip Yorke (1764)
Richard Terrick (1764–1776)
George Washington (1788–1799)
Vacant (1800–1858)
John Tyler (1859–1862)
Vacant (1863–1870)
Hugh Blair Grigsby (1871–1881)
Vacant (1882–1941)
John Stewart Bryan (1942–1944)
Vacant (1945)
Colgate Darden (1946–1947)
Vacant (1948–1961)
Alvin Duke Chandler (1962–1974)
Vacant (1975–1985)
Warren E. Burger (1986–1993)
Margaret Thatcher (1993–2000)
Henry Kissinger (2000–2005)
Sandra Day O'Connor (2005–2012)
Robert Gates (2012–)












v
t
e


Hall of Fame for Great Americans






John Adams
John Quincy Adams
Jane Addams
Louis Agassiz
Susan B. Anthony
John James Audubon
George Bancroft
Clara Barton
Henry Ward Beecher
Alexander Graham Bell
Daniel Boone
Edwin Booth
Louis Brandeis
Phillips Brooks
William Cullen Bryant
Luther Burbank
Andrew Carnegie
George Washington Carver
William Ellery Channing
Rufus Choate
Henry Clay
Grover Cleveland
James Fenimore Cooper
Peter Cooper
Charlotte Cushman
James Buchanan Eads
Thomas Alva Edison
Jonathan Edwards
Ralph Waldo Emerson
David Farragut
Stephen Foster
Benjamin Franklin
Robert Fulton
Josiah W. Gibbs
William C. Gorgas
Ulysses S. Grant
Asa Gray
Alexander Hamilton
Nathaniel Hawthorne
Joseph Henry
Patrick Henry
Oliver Wendell Holmes Sr.
Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr.
Mark Hopkins
Elias Howe
Washington Irving
Andrew Jackson
Thomas J. Jackson
Thomas Jefferson
John Paul Jones
James Kent
Sidney Lanier
Robert E. Lee
Abraham Lincoln
Henry Wadsworth Longfellow
James Russell Lowell
Mary Lyon
Edward MacDowell
James Madison
Horace Mann
John Marshall
Matthew Fontaine Maury
Albert A. Michelson
Maria Mitchell
James Monroe
Samuel F. B. Morse
William T. G. Morton
John Lothrop Motley
Simon Newcomb
Thomas Paine
Alice Freeman Palmer
Francis Parkman
George Peabody
William Penn
Edgar Allan Poe
Walter Reed
Franklin D. Roosevelt
Theodore Roosevelt
Augustus Saint-Gaudens
William Tecumseh Sherman
John Philip Sousa
Joseph Story
Harriet Beecher Stowe
Gilbert Stuart
Sylvanus Thayer
Henry David Thoreau
Mark Twain
Lillian Wald
Booker T. Washington
George Washington
Daniel Webster
George Westinghouse
James McNeill Whistler
Walt Whitman
Eli Whitney
John Greenleaf Whittier
Emma Willard
Frances E. Willard
Roger Williams
Woodrow Wilson
Orville Wright
Wilbur Wright














Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 31432428
LCCN: n86140996
ISNI: 0000 0001 2095 8599
GND: 11876439X
SELIBR: 241381
SUDOC: 027333140
BNF: cb11928912p (data)
ULAN: 500126198
NLA: 35592539
NDL: 00621629
NKC: jn19990008936
RLS: 000025437
US Congress: W000178
BNE: XX1157500
KulturNav: 255f3478-efee-4ff7-8d00-560e222e27b0
IATH: w6028ps4











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=George_Washington&oldid=818487115"					Categories: 1732 births1799 deathsGeorge Washington18th-century American Episcopalians18th-century American politiciansAmerican cartographersAmerican deistsAmerican foreign policy writersAmerican FreemasonsAmerican male writersAmerican military personnelAmerican people of Dutch descentAmerican people of English descentAmerican plantersAmerican surveyorsBritish America army officersBurials at Mount VernonChancellors of the College of William & MaryCommanders in chiefCongressional Gold Medal recipientsContinental Army generalsContinental Army officers from VirginiaContinental Congressmen from VirginiaFellows of the American Academy of Arts and SciencesFree speech activistsHall of Fame for Great Americans inducteesHouse of Burgesses membersMembers of the American Philosophical SocietyPeople from Fairfax County, VirginiaPeople from Westmoreland County, VirginiaPeople of the American EnlightenmentPeople of Virginia in the American RevolutionPeople of Virginia in the French and Indian WarPresidents of the United StatesAmerican rebelsSigners of the United States ConstitutionSmallpox survivorsUnited States Army generalsUnited States Army personnelUnited States presidential candidates, 1789United States presidential candidates, 1792Virginia militiamen in the American RevolutionWashington and Lee University peopleWashington College peopleWashington familyAmerican slave ownersVirginia IndependentsHidden categories: Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pagesWikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pagesUse mdy dates from May 2012Pages using web citations with no URLCS1 maint: Extra text: authors listSpoken articlesArticles with Project Gutenberg linksArticles with Internet Archive linksArticles with LibriVox linksAC with 16 elementsWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with SELIBR identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersWikipedia articles with ULAN identifiersWikipedia articles with NLA identifiersWikipedia articles with SNAC-ID identifiersGood articles