This article is about the 38th U.S. President. For other uses, see Gerald Ford (disambiguation).
"Gerald R. Ford" redirects here. For the museum, see Gerald R. Ford Presidential Museum. For the library, see Gerald R. Ford Presidential Library. For international airport, see Gerald R. Ford International Airport.


Gerald Ford



Photo by David H. Kennerly, 1974






38th President of the United States


In office
August 9, 1974 – January 20, 1977


Vice President
None (Aug–Dec. 1974)
Nelson Rockefeller (1974–1977)


Preceded by
Richard Nixon


Succeeded by
Jimmy Carter


40th Vice President of the United States


In office
December 6, 1973 – August 9, 1974


President
Richard Nixon


Preceded by
Spiro Agnew


Succeeded by
Nelson Rockefeller


House Minority Leader


In office
January 3, 1965 – December 6, 1973


Deputy
Leslie C. Arends


Preceded by
Charles A. Halleck


Succeeded by
John Jacob Rhodes


Chair of the House Republican Conference


In office
January 3, 1963 – January 3, 1965


Leader
Charles A. Halleck


Preceded by
Charles B. Hoeven


Succeeded by
Melvin Laird


Member of the U.S. House of Representatives
from Michigan's 5th district


In office
January 3, 1949 – December 6, 1973


Preceded by
Bartel J. Jonkman


Succeeded by
Richard Vander Veen





Personal details


Born
Leslie Lynch King Jr.
(1913-07-14)July 14, 1913
Omaha, Nebraska, U.S.


Died
December 26, 2006(2006-12-26) (aged 93)
Rancho Mirage, California, U.S.


Cause of death
Cerebrovascular disease and diffuse arteriosclerosis


Resting place
Gerald R. Ford Presidential Museum


Political party
Republican


Spouse(s)
Betty Bloomer (m. 1948)


Children
Michael
Jack
Steven
Susan


Parents
Leslie Lynch King Sr.
Dorothy Ayer Gardner Ford


Education
University of Michigan (B.A.)
Yale Law School (J.D.)


Signature



Military service


Allegiance
United States


Service/branch
United States Navy


Years of service
1942–1946


Rank
Lieutenant commander


Battles/wars
World War II


Awards
American Campaign Medal
Asiatic-Pacific Campaign Medal (9 campaign stars)
World War II Victory Medal


Gerald Rudolph Ford Jr. (born Leslie Lynch King Jr.; July 14, 1913 – December 26, 2006) was an American politician who served as the 38th President of the United States from August 1974 to January 1977, following the resignation of Richard Nixon. Prior to this he served eight months as the 40th Vice President of the United States, following the resignation of Spiro Agnew. He was the first person appointed to the vice presidency under the terms of the 25th Amendment, and consequently the only person to have served as both vice president and president without being elected to either office. He is the most recent vice president to become president as a result of an intra-term vacancy in the office; and his 895 day-long presidency is the shortest in American history for any president who did not die in office. Before his appointment to the vice presidency, Ford served 25 years as U.S. Representative from Michigan's 5th congressional district, the final nine of them as the House Minority Leader.
As president, Ford signed the Helsinki Accords, marking a move toward détente in the Cold War. With the collapse of South Vietnam nine months into his presidency, U.S. involvement in Vietnam essentially ended. Domestically, Ford presided over the worst economy in the four decades since the Great Depression, with growing inflation and a recession during his tenure.[1] One of his most controversial acts was to grant a presidential pardon to President Richard Nixon for his role in the Watergate scandal. During Ford's presidency, foreign policy was characterized in procedural terms by the increased role Congress began to play, and by the corresponding curb on the powers of the President.[2] In the Republican presidential primary campaign of 1976, Ford defeated former California Governor Ronald Reagan for the Republican nomination. He narrowly lost the presidential election to the Democratic challenger, former Georgia Governor Jimmy Carter.
Following his years as president, Ford remained active in the Republican Party. His moderate views on various social issues increasingly put him at odds with conservative members of the party in the 1990s and early 2000s. After experiencing a series of health problems, he died at home on December 26, 2006. At the time of his death, Ford—at the age of 93 years and 165 days—was the longest-lived of all U.S. presidents (a mark surpassed by George H. W. Bush on November 25, 2017).



Contents


1 Early life
2 College and law school
3 U.S. Naval Reserve

3.1 Sea duty
3.2 Post-war


4 Marriage and children
5 House of Representatives (1949–1973)

5.1 Warren Commission
5.2 House Minority Leader (1965–1973)


6 Vice presidency (1973–1974)
7 Presidency (1974–1977)

7.1 Swearing-in
7.2 Pardon of Nixon
7.3 Draft dodgers and deserters
7.4 Administration officials
7.5 Midterm elections
7.6 Domestic policy

7.6.1 Inflation
7.6.2 Budget
7.6.3 Swine flu
7.6.4 Other domestic issues


7.7 Foreign policy

7.7.1 Middle East
7.7.2 Vietnam
7.7.3 Mayaguez and Panmunjom
7.7.4 Indonesian invasion of East Timor


7.8 Assassination attempts
7.9 Judicial appointments

7.9.1 Supreme Court
7.9.2 Other judicial appointments


7.10 1976 presidential election


8 Post-presidency (1977–2006)

8.1 Activity
8.2 Health problems


9 Death and legacy

9.1 Longevity
9.2 Public image


10 Civic and Fraternal Organizations

10.1 Freemasonry


11 Honors
12 See also
13 References
14 Bibliography

14.1 Primary sources


15 External links



Early life[edit]
Ford was born Leslie Lynch King Jr. on July 14, 1913, at 3202 Woolworth Avenue in Omaha, Nebraska, where his parents lived with his paternal grandparents. His mother was Dorothy Ayer Gardner and his father was Leslie Lynch King Sr., a wool trader and a son of prominent banker Charles Henry King and Martha Alicia King (née Porter). Dorothy separated from King just sixteen days after her son's birth. She took her son with her to the Oak Park, Illinois, home of her sister Tannisse and brother-in-law, Clarence Haskins James. From there, she moved to the home of her parents, Levi Addison Gardner and Adele Augusta Ayer, in Grand Rapids, Michigan. Dorothy and King divorced in December 1913, and she gained full custody of her son. Ford's paternal grandfather Charles Henry King paid child support until shortly before his death in 1930.[3]




Leslie Lynch King Jr. (later known as Gerald R. Ford) in 1916


Ford later said his biological father had a history of hitting his mother.[4] James M. Cannon, a member of the Ford administration, wrote in a biography of Ford that the Kings' separation and divorce were sparked when, a few days after Ford's birth, Leslie King took a butcher knife and threatened to kill his wife, his infant son, and Ford's nursemaid. Ford later told confidantes that his father had first hit his mother on their honeymoon for smiling at another man.[5]
After two and a half years with her parents, on February 1, 1916, Dorothy married Gerald Rudolff Ford, a salesman in a family-owned paint and varnish company. They then called her son Gerald Rudolff Ford Jr. The future president was never formally adopted, and did not legally change his name until December 3, 1935; he also used a more conventional spelling of his middle name.[6] He was raised in Grand Rapids with his three half-brothers from his mother's second marriage: Thomas Gardner "Tom" Ford (1918–1995), Richard Addison "Dick" Ford (1924–2015), and James Francis "Jim" Ford (1927–2001).[7]
Ford also had three half-siblings from the second marriage of Leslie King, Sr., his biological father: Marjorie King (1921–1993), Leslie Henry King (1923–1976), and Patricia Jane King (1925–1980). They never saw one another as children and he did not know them at all. Ford was not aware of his biological father until he was 17, when his parents told him about the circumstances of his birth. That year his biological father, whom Ford described as a "carefree, well-to-do man who didn't really give a damn about the hopes and dreams of his firstborn son", approached Ford while he was waiting tables in a Grand Rapids restaurant. The two "maintained a sporadic contact" until Leslie King, Sr.'s death in 1941.[4][8]
Ford said, "My stepfather was a magnificent person and my mother equally wonderful. So I couldn't have written a better prescription for a superb family upbringing."[9]




Eagle Scout Gerald Ford (circled in red) in 1929; Michigan Governor Fred W. Green at far left, holding hat






Ford as a center on the University of Michigan football team, 1933


Ford was involved in the Boy Scouts of America, and earned that program's highest rank, Eagle Scout.[10] He is the only Eagle Scout to have ascended to the U.S. Presidency.[10]
Ford attended Grand Rapids South High School, where he was a star athlete and captain of the football team.[11] In 1930, he was selected to the All-City team of the Grand Rapids City League. He also attracted the attention of college recruiters.[9]
College and law school[edit]


This article is part of a series on


Conservatism in
the United States







Schools


Compassionate
Fiscal
Fusion
Libertarian
Movement
Neo
Paleo
Social
Traditional








Principles


Chicago School of Economics
Classical liberalism
Family values
Free market
Judeo-Christian
Limited government
Protectionism
Republicanism
Rule of law
Small government
Tradition








History


Overview
Bourbon Democrat
Conservative coalition
Conservative Democrat
Loyalists (colonial)
Old Right
New Right
Rockefeller Republican
Southern Agrarians
Modern timeline








People


Elliott Abrams
Samuel Alito
Dick Armey
Lee Atwater
Irving Babbitt
Steve Bannon
Glenn Beck
Morton Blackwell
Robert Bork
John R. Bolton
Brent Bozell
Andrew Breitbart
Arthur C. Brooks
Pat Buchanan
William F. Buckley Jr.
George H. W. Bush
George W. Bush
Jeb Bush
Tucker Carlson
Ben Carson
Whittaker Chambers
Dick Cheney
Grover Cleveland
Tom Coburn
Tom Cotton
Calvin Coolidge
Ann Coulter
Steven Crowder
Ted Cruz
Jim DeMint
John Derbyshire
Mark Dice
James Dobson
Terry Dolan
Bob Dole
Dinesh D'Souza
Dwight Eisenhower
Erick Erickson
Jerry Falwell
Edwin Feulner
Steve Forbes
Gerald Ford
Sam Francis
Milton Friedman
Newt Gingrich
Paul Gottfried
Jonah Goldberg
Barry Goldwater
Neil Gorsuch
Franklin Graham
Sean Hannity
Hugh Hewitt
Hans-Hermann Hoppe
David Horowitz
Jesse Helms
Laura Ingraham
Alex Jones
Jack Kemp
Alan Keyes
Russell Kirk
Jeane Kirkpatrick
William F. Knowland
Charles Koch
David Koch
Charles Krauthammer
Irving Kristol
William Kristol
Art Laffer
Mike Lee
Mark Levin
Bernard Lewis
Rush Limbaugh
Henry Cabot Lodge
Dana Loesch
Rich Lowry
Clare Boothe Luce
Michelle Malkin
Noah M. Mason
Joe McCarthy
Mitch McConnell
Larry McDonald
Rebekah Mercer
Robert Mercer
Frank Meyer
Richard Nixon
Peggy Noonan
Grover Norquist
Oliver North
Robert Novak
James O'Keefe
Bill O'Reilly
Sarah Palin
Rand Paul
Ron Paul
Mike Pence
Daniel Pipes
John Podhoretz
Norman Podhoretz
Dennis Prager
Ronald Reagan
Pat Robertson
Karl Rove
Marco Rubio
Donald Rumsfeld
Paul Ryan
Steve Sailer
Ben Sasse
Michael Savage
Antonin Scalia
Phyllis Schlafly
Ben Shapiro
Thomas Sowell
Roger Stone
Leo Strauss
Robert Taft
William Howard Taft
Clarence Thomas
Donald Trump
Emmett Tyrrell
Richard Viguerie
Booker T. Washington
Robert Welch
Paul Weyrich
Paul Wolfowitz
George Will
Walter E. Williams








Parties


American Party
American Independent Party
Conservative Party of New York State
Constitution Party
Libertarian Party
Native American Party
Reform Party
Republican Party (GOP)
States' Rights Democratic Party








Organizations


American Conservative Union
American Enterprise Institute
America First Committee
American Liberty League
Americans for Prosperity
Americans for Tax Reform
American Legislative Exchange Council
Arlington Group
Blue Dog Coalition
Cato Institute
Center for Security Policy
Charles Koch Institute
Citizen's United
Club for Growth
Conservative Caucus
Council for National Policy
Eagle Forum
Faith and Freedom Coalition
Family Research Council
Federalist Society
Foundation for Individual Rights in Education
Freedom Caucus
FreedomWorks
Gatestone Institute
Gun Owners of America
Heartland Institute
Heritage Foundation
Hoover Institution
Hudson Institute
Independent Women's Forum
Intercollegiate Studies Institute
John Birch Society
John M. Olin Foundation
Judicial Watch
Leadership Institute
Liberty Lobby
Log Cabin Republicans
Media Research Center
Moral Majority
National Policy Institute
National Rifle Association
National Taxpayers Union
Oath Keepers
Philadelphia Society
Property and Freedom Society
Project for the New American Century
Republican Study Committee
Rockford Institute
State Policy Network
Susan B. Anthony List
Tea Party Patriots
Turning Point USA
Traditional Values Coalition
United States Chamber of Commerce
Young America's Foundation
Young Americans for Liberty








Media


The American Conservative
The American Spectator
American Thinker
Breitbart
TheBlaze
Chicago Tribune
CBN
CNSNews.com
Commentary
CRTV
Chronicles
Daily Caller
Daily Signal
Daily Wire
Dallas Morning News
Drudge Report
The Federalist
Fox News
FrontPage Magazine
Front Porch Republic
Gateway Pundit
Hot Air
Human Events
Independent Journal Review
Infowars
LifeSiteNews
LifeZette
National Affairs
National Review
The New American
NewsBusters
Newsmax
New York Post
OANN
PJ Media
RedState
RSBN
The Spotlight
Taki's Magazine
Townhall
TruthRevolt
Twitchy
Wall Street Journal
Washington Examiner
Washington Free Beacon
Washington Times
Weekly Standard
WorldNetDaily
VDARE








Variants
Bold text

Alt-right
Christian right
Conservative Democrat
Counter-jihad
Patriot movement
Radical Right
Tea Party movement








See also


Bibliography
American nationalism
Black conservatism
Green conservatism
LGBT conservatism
Libertarianism
Women in conservatism






 Conservatism portal





v
t
e





Attending the University of Michigan as an undergraduate, Ford became a member of the Delta Kappa Epsilon fraternity (Omicron chapter) and washed dishes at his fraternity house to earn money for college expenses.
Ford played center, linebacker, and long snapper for the school's football team,[12] and helped the Wolverines in two undefeated seasons and national titles in 1932 and 1933. The team suffered a steep decline in his 1934 senior year, however, winning only one game. Ford was the team's star nonetheless. After a game during which Michigan held heavily favored Minnesota (the eventual national champion) to a scoreless tie in the first half, assistant coach Bennie Oosterbaan later said, "When I walked into the dressing room at halftime, I had tears in my eyes I was so proud of them. Ford and [Cedric] Sweet played their hearts out. They were everywhere on defense." Ford later recalled, "During 25 years in the rough-and-tumble world of politics, I often thought of the experiences before, during, and after that game in 1934. Remembering them has helped me many times to face a tough situation, take action, and make every effort possible despite adverse odds." His teammates later voted Ford their most valuable player, with one assistant coach noting, "They felt Jerry was one guy who would stay and fight in a losing cause."[13]
During Ford's senior year, a controversy developed when the Georgia Tech Yellow Jackets refused to play a scheduled game if a black player named Willis Ward took the field. Even after protests from students, players and alumni, university officials opted to keep Ward out of the game. Ford was Ward's best friend on the team and they roomed together while on road trips. Ford reportedly threatened to quit the team in response to the university's decision, but eventually agreed to play against Georgia Tech when Ward personally asked him to play.[14]
In 1934, Ford was selected for the Eastern Team on the Shriner's East West Shrine Game at San Francisco (a benefit for physically disabled children), played on January 1, 1935. As part of the 1935 Collegiate All-Star football team, Ford played against the Chicago Bears in the Chicago College All-Star Game at Soldier Field.[15] In honor of his athletic accomplishments and his later political career, the University of Michigan retired Ford's No. 48 jersey in 1994. With the blessing of the Ford family, it was placed back into circulation in 2012 as part of the Michigan Football Legends program and issued to sophomore linebacker Desmond Morgan before a home game against Illinois on October 13.[16]
Ford remained interested in football and his school throughout life, occasionally attending games. Ford also visited with players and coaches during practices, at one point asking to join the players in the huddle.[17] Ford often had the Naval band play the University of Michigan fight song, The Victors, before state events instead of Hail to the Chief.[18]
Following his graduation in 1935 with a Bachelor of Arts degree in economics, Ford turned down contract offers from the Detroit Lions and Green Bay Packers of the National Football League. Instead, in September 1935 he took a job as the boxing coach and assistant varsity football coach at Yale University,[19] and applied to its law school.[20]
Ford hoped to attend Yale's law school beginning in 1935. Yale officials at first denied his admission to the law school because of his full-time coaching responsibilities. He spent the summer of 1937 as a student at the University of Michigan Law School[21] and was eventually admitted in the spring of 1938 to Yale Law School.[22] Ford earned his LL.B. degree in 1941 (later amended to Juris Doctor), graduating in the top 25 percent of his class.
While attending Yale Law School, Ford joined a group of students led by R. Douglas Stuart Jr., and signed a petition to enforce the 1939 Neutrality Act. The petition was circulated nationally and was the inspiration for the America First Committee, a group determined to keep the U.S. out of World War II.[23] In the summer of 1940 he worked in Wendell Willkie's presidential campaign.
Ford graduated from law school in 1941 and was admitted to the Michigan bar shortly thereafter. In May 1941, he opened a Grand Rapids law practice with a friend, Philip W. Buchen,[19] who would later serve as Ford's White House counsel.
U.S. Naval Reserve[edit]




The Gunnery officers of USS Monterey. Ford is second from the right, in the front row.


Ford responded to the December 7, 1941, attack on Pearl Harbor by enlisting in the navy.[24] He received a commission as ensign in the U.S. Naval Reserve on April 13, 1942. On April 20, he reported for active duty to the V-5 instructor school at Annapolis, Maryland. After one month of training, he went to Navy Preflight School in Chapel Hill, North Carolina, where he was one of 83 instructors and taught elementary navigation skills, ordnance, gunnery, first aid, and military drill. In addition, he coached in all nine sports that were offered, but mostly in swimming, boxing and football. During the year he was at the Preflight School, he was promoted to Lieutenant, Junior Grade, on June 2, 1942, and to lieutenant, in March 1943.
Sea duty[edit]




Navy pilots in forward elevator well playing basketball. Jumper at left is Gerald R. Ford, mid-1944


After applying for sea duty, Ford was sent in May 1943 to the pre-commissioning detachment for the new aircraft carrier USS Monterey (CVL-26), at New York Shipbuilding Corporation, Camden, New Jersey. From the ship's commissioning on June 17, 1943, until the end of December 1944, Ford served as the assistant navigator, Athletic Officer, and antiaircraft battery officer on board the Monterey. While he was on board, the carrier participated in many actions in the Pacific Theater with the Third and Fifth Fleets in late 1943 and 1944. In 1943, the carrier helped secure Makin Island in the Gilberts, and participated in carrier strikes against Kavieng, New Ireland in 1943. During the spring of 1944, the Monterey supported landings at Kwajalein and Eniwetok and participated in carrier strikes in the Marianas, Western Carolines, and northern New Guinea, as well as in the Battle of the Philippine Sea.[25] After an overhaul, from September to November 1944, aircraft from the Monterey launched strikes against Wake Island, participated in strikes in the Philippines and Ryukyus, and supported the landings at Leyte and Mindoro.[25]




Ford in Navy uniform, 1945


Although the ship was not damaged by Japanese forces, the Monterey was one of several ships damaged by the typhoon that hit Admiral William Halsey's Third Fleet on December 18–19, 1944. The Third Fleet lost three destroyers and over 800 men during the typhoon. The Monterey was damaged by a fire, which was started by several of the ship's aircraft tearing loose from their cables and colliding on the hangar deck. During the storm, Ford narrowly avoided becoming a casualty himself. As he was going to his battle station on the bridge of the ship in the early morning of December 18, the ship rolled twenty-five degrees, which caused Ford to lose his footing and slide toward the edge of the deck. The two-inch steel ridge around the edge of the carrier slowed him enough so he could roll, and he twisted into the catwalk below the deck. As he later stated, "I was lucky; I could have easily gone overboard."
Ford, serving as General Quarters Officer of the Deck, was ordered to go below to assess the raging fire. He did so safely, and reported his findings back to the ship's commanding officer, Captain Stuart Ingersoll. The ship's crew was able to contain the fire, and the ship got underway again.[26]
After the fire, the Monterey was declared unfit for service, and the crippled carrier reached Ulithi on December 21 before continuing across the Pacific to Bremerton, Washington where it underwent repairs. On December 24, 1944, at Ulithi, Ford was detached from the ship and sent to the Navy Pre-Flight School at Saint Mary's College of California, where he was assigned to the Athletic Department until April 1945. One of his duties was to coach football. From the end of April 1945 to January 1946, he was on the staff of the Naval Reserve Training Command, Naval Air Station, Glenview, Illinois, as the Staff Physical and Military Training Officer. On October 3, 1945, he was promoted to lieutenant commander.
Ford received the following military awards: the American Campaign Medal, the Asiatic-Pacific Campaign Medal with nine ​3⁄16" bronze stars (for operations in the Gilbert Islands, Bismarck Archipelago, Marshall Islands, Asiatic and Pacific carrier raids, Hollandia, Marianas, Western Carolines, Western New Guinea, and the Leyte Operation), the Philippine Liberation Medal with two ​3⁄16" bronze stars (for Leyte and Mindoro), and the World War II Victory Medal.[24]
Post-war[edit]
In January 1946, Ford was sent to the Separation Center, Great Lakes to be processed out. He was released from active duty under honorable conditions on February 23, 1946. On June 28, 1946, the Secretary of the Navy accepted Ford's resignation from the Naval Reserve. Ford remained in the inactive Naval Reserve until 1963.
Marriage and children[edit]




The Fords on their wedding day, October 15, 1948


On October 15, 1948, at Grace Episcopal Church in Grand Rapids, Ford married Elizabeth Bloomer Warren (1918–2011), a department store fashion consultant. Warren had been a John Robert Powers fashion model and a dancer in the auxiliary troupe of the Martha Graham Dance Company. She had previously been married to and divorced from William G. Warren.
At the time of his engagement, Ford was campaigning for what would be his first of thirteen terms as a member of the United States House of Representatives. The wedding was delayed until shortly before the elections because, as The New York Times reported in a 1974 profile of Betty Ford, "Jerry was running for Congress and wasn't sure how voters might feel about his marrying a divorced ex-dancer."[27]
The couple had four children:

Michael Gerald, born in 1949
John Gardner, known as Jack, born in 1951
Steven Meigs, born in 1956
Susan Elizabeth, born in 1957

House of Representatives (1949–1973)[edit]




A billboard for Ford's 1948 Congressional Campaign


After returning to Grand Rapids in 1946, Ford became active in local Republican politics, and supporters urged him to take on Bartel J. Jonkman, the incumbent Republican congressman. Military service had changed his view of the world. "I came back a converted internationalist", Ford wrote, "and of course our congressman at that time was an avowed, dedicated isolationist. And I thought he ought to be replaced. Nobody thought I could win. I ended up winning two to one."[9]
During his first campaign in 1948, Ford visited voters at their doorsteps and as they left the factories where they worked.[28] Ford also visited local farms where, in one instance, a wager resulted in Ford spending two weeks milking cows following his election victory.[29]
Ford was a member of the House of Representatives for 25 years, holding the Grand Rapids congressional district seat from 1949 to 1973. It was a tenure largely notable for its modesty. As an editorial in The New York Times described him, Ford "saw himself as a negotiator and a reconciler, and the record shows it: he did not write a single piece of major legislation in his entire career."[30] Appointed to the House Appropriations Committee two years after being elected, he was a prominent member of the Defense Appropriations Subcommittee. Ford described his philosophy as "a moderate in domestic affairs, an internationalist in foreign affairs, and a conservative in fiscal policy."[31] Ford was known to his colleagues in the House as a "Congressman's Congressman".[32]
In the early 1950s, Ford declined offers to run for either the Senate or the Michigan governorship. Rather, his ambition was to become Speaker of the House,[33] which he called "the ultimate achievement. To sit up there and be the head honcho of 434 other people and have the responsibility, aside from the achievement, of trying to run the greatest legislative body in the history of mankind ... I think I got that ambition within a year or two after I was in the House of Representatives".[34]
Warren Commission[edit]




The Warren Commission presents its report to President Johnson


Further information: Warren Commission and Assassination of John F. Kennedy
On November 29, 1963, Democratic President Lyndon B. Johnson appointed Ford to the Warren Commission, a special task force set up to investigate the assassination of President John F. Kennedy.[35] Ford was assigned to prepare a biography of Lee Harvey Oswald, the accused assassin. According to a 1963 FBI memo released in 2008, Ford was in contact with the FBI throughout his time on the Warren Commission and relayed information to the deputy director, Cartha DeLoach, about the panel's activities.[36][37][38] In the preface to his book, A Presidential Legacy and The Warren Commission, Ford defended the work of the commission and reiterated his support of its conclusions.[39]
House Minority Leader (1965–1973)[edit]




Ford meets with President Richard Nixon as House Minority Leader.






Congressman Gerald Ford, MSFC director Wernher von Braun, Congressman George H. Mahon, and NASA Administrator James E. Webb visit the Marshall Space Flight Center for a briefing on the Saturn program, 1964.


In 1964, Lyndon Johnson led a landslide victory for his party, securing another term as president and taking 36 seats from Republicans in the House of Representatives. Following the election, members of the Republican caucus looked to select a new Minority Leader. Three members approached Ford to see if he would be willing to serve; after consulting with his family, he agreed. After a closely contested election, Ford was chosen to replace Charles Halleck of Indiana as Minority Leader.[40]
With a Democrat majority in both the House of Representatives and the Senate, the Johnson Administration proposed and passed a series of programs that was called by Johnson the "Great Society." During the first session of the Eighty-ninth Congress alone, the Johnson Administration submitted 87 bills to Congress, and Johnson signed 84, or 96%, arguably the most successful legislative agenda in Congressional history.[41]
In 1966, criticism over the Johnson Administration's handling of the Vietnam War began to grow, with Ford and Congressional Republicans expressing concern that the United States was not doing what was necessary to win the war. Public sentiment also began to move against Johnson, and the 1966 midterm elections saw a 47-seat swing in favor of the Republicans. This was not enough to give Republicans a majority in the House, but the victory gave Ford the opportunity to prevent the passage of further Great Society programs.[40]
Ford's private criticism of the Vietnam War became public following a speech from the floor of the House, in which he questioned whether the White House had a clear plan to bring the war to a successful conclusion.[40] The speech angered President Johnson, who accused Ford of having played "too much football without a helmet".[40][42]
As Minority Leader in the House, Ford appeared in a popular series of televised press conferences with Illinois Senator Everett Dirksen, in which they proposed Republican alternatives to Johnson's policies. Many in the press jokingly called this "The Ev and Jerry Show."[43] Johnson said at the time, "Jerry Ford is so dumb he can't fart and chew gum at the same time."[44] The press, used to sanitizing Johnson's salty language, reported this as "Gerald Ford can't walk and chew gum at the same time."[45]
After President Nixon was elected in November 1968, Ford's role shifted to being an advocate for the White House agenda. Congress passed several of Nixon's proposals, including the National Environmental Policy Act and the Tax Reform Act of 1969. Another high-profile victory for the Republican minority was the State and Local Fiscal Assistance act. Passed in 1972, the act established a Revenue Sharing program for state and local governments.[46] Ford's leadership was instrumental in shepherding revenue sharing through Congress, and resulted in a bipartisan coalition that supported the bill with 223 votes in favor (compared with 185 against).[40][47]
During the eight years (1965–1973) that Ford served as Minority Leader, he won many friends in the House because of his fair leadership and inoffensive personality.[40]
Vice presidency (1973–1974)[edit]




Gerald and Betty Ford with the President and First Lady Pat Nixon after President Nixon nominated Ford to be Vice President, October 13, 1973


To become House Speaker, Ford worked to help Republicans across the country get a majority in the chamber, often traveling on the rubber chicken circuit. After a decade of failing to do so, he promised his wife that he would try again in 1974 then retire in 1976.[34] On October 10, 1973, Vice President Spiro Agnew resigned and then pleaded no contest to criminal charges of tax evasion and money laundering, part of a negotiated resolution to a scheme in which he accepted $29,500 in bribes while governor of Maryland. According to The New York Times, Nixon "sought advice from senior Congressional leaders about a replacement." The advice was unanimous. "We gave Nixon no choice but Ford," House Speaker Carl Albert recalled later.[30] Ford agreed to the nomination, telling his wife that the Vice Presidency would be "a nice conclusion" to his career.[34]
Ford was nominated to take Agnew's position on October 12, the first time the vice-presidential vacancy provision of the 25th Amendment had been implemented. The United States Senate voted 92 to 3 to confirm Ford on November 27. Only three Senators, all Democrats, voted against Ford's confirmation: Gaylord Nelson of Wisconsin, Thomas Eagleton of Missouri and William Hathaway of Maine. On December 6, 1973, the House confirmed Ford by a vote of 387 to 35. One hour after the confirmation vote in the House, Ford took the oath of office as Vice President of the United States.
Ford became Vice President as the Watergate scandal was unfolding. On Thursday, August 1, 1974, Chief of Staff Alexander Haig contacted Ford to tell him that "smoking gun" evidence had been found. The evidence left little doubt that President Nixon had been a part of the Watergate cover-up. At the time, Ford and his wife, Betty, were living in suburban Virginia, waiting for their expected move into the newly designated vice president's residence in Washington, D.C. However, "Al Haig asked to come over and see me," Ford later said, "to tell me that there would be a new tape released on a Monday, and he said the evidence in there was devastating and there would probably be either an impeachment or a resignation. And he said, 'I'm just warning you that you've got to be prepared, that things might change dramatically and you could become President.' And I said, 'Betty, I don't think we're ever going to live in the vice president's house.'"[9]
Presidency (1974–1977)[edit]
Main article: Presidency of Gerald Ford
For a chronological guide to this subject, see Timeline of the presidency of Gerald Ford.
Swearing-in[edit]




Gerald Ford is sworn in as the 38th President of the United States by Chief Justice Warren Burger in the White House East Room, while Betty Ford looks on.


When Nixon resigned on August 9, 1974, Ford assumed the presidency, making him the only person to assume the presidency without having been previously voted into either the presidential or vice presidential office. Immediately after taking the oath of office in the East Room of the White House, he spoke to the assembled audience in a speech broadcast live to the nation.[48] Ford noted the peculiarity of his position: "I am acutely aware that you have not elected me as your president by your ballots, and so I ask you to confirm me as your president with your prayers."[49] He went on to state:




Ford and his golden retriever, Liberty, in the Oval Office, 1974



I have not sought this enormous responsibility, but I will not shirk it. Those who nominated and confirmed me as Vice President were my friends and are my friends. They were of both parties, elected by all the people and acting under the Constitution in their name. It is only fitting then that I should pledge to them and to you that I will be the President of all the people.[50]

He also stated:

My fellow Americans, our long national nightmare is over. Our Constitution works; our great Republic is a government of laws and not of men. Here, the people rule. But there is a higher Power, by whatever name we honor Him, who ordains not only righteousness but love, not only justice, but mercy. ... let us restore the golden rule to our political process, and let brotherly love purge our hearts of suspicion and hate.[51]





Message to Congress nominating Nelson A. Rockefeller to be Vice President (August 20, 1974)


A portion of the speech would later be memorialized with a plaque at the entrance to his presidential museum.
On August 20, Ford nominated former New York Governor Nelson Rockefeller to fill the vice presidency he had vacated.[52] Rockefeller's top competitor had been George H. W. Bush. Rockefeller underwent extended hearings before Congress, which caused embarrassment when it was revealed he made large gifts to senior aides, such as Henry Kissinger. Although conservative Republicans were not pleased that Rockefeller was picked, most of them voted for his confirmation, and his nomination passed both the House and Senate. Some, including Barry Goldwater, voted against him.[53]
Pardon of Nixon[edit]
Main article: Pardon of Richard Nixon




President Ford appears at a House Judiciary Subcommittee hearing regarding his pardon of Richard Nixon





Wikisource has original text related to this article:
The Nixon Pardon



On September 8, 1974, Ford issued Proclamation 4311, which gave Nixon a full and unconditional pardon for any crimes he might have committed against the United States while President.[54][55][56] In a televised broadcast to the nation, Ford explained that he felt the pardon was in the best interests of the country, and that the Nixon family's situation "is a tragedy in which we all have played a part. It could go on and on and on, or someone must write the end to it. I have concluded that only I can do that, and if I can, I must."[57]
Ford's decision to pardon Nixon was highly controversial. Critics derided the move and said a "corrupt bargain" had been struck between the men.[9] They said that Ford's pardon was granted in exchange for Nixon's resignation, which had elevated Ford to the presidency. Ford's first press secretary and close friend Jerald terHorst resigned his post in protest after the pardon. According to Bob Woodward, Nixon Chief of Staff Alexander Haig proposed a pardon deal to Ford. He later decided to pardon Nixon for other reasons, primarily the friendship he and Nixon shared.[58] Regardless, historians believe the controversy was one of the major reasons Ford lost the 1976 presidential election, an observation with which Ford agreed.[58] In an editorial at the time, The New York Times stated that the Nixon pardon was a "profoundly unwise, divisive and unjust act" that in a stroke had destroyed the new president's "credibility as a man of judgment, candor and competence".[30] On October 17, 1974, Ford testified before Congress on the pardon. He was the first sitting President since Abraham Lincoln to testify before the House of Representatives.[59][60]
In the months following the pardon, Ford often declined to mention President Nixon by name, referring to him in public as "my predecessor" or "the former president." When, on a 1974 trip to California, White House correspondent Fred Barnes pressed Ford on the matter, Ford replied in surprisingly frank manner: "I just can’t bring myself to do it.”[61]
After Ford left the White House in January 1977, the former President privately justified his pardon of Nixon by carrying in his wallet a portion of the text of Burdick v. United States, a 1915 U.S. Supreme Court decision which stated that a pardon indicated a presumption of guilt, and that acceptance of a pardon was tantamount to a confession of that guilt.[62] In 2001, the John F. Kennedy Library Foundation awarded the John F. Kennedy Profile in Courage Award to Ford for his pardon of Nixon.[63] In presenting the award to Ford, Senator Edward Kennedy said that he had initially been opposed to the pardon, but later decided that history had proved Ford to have made the correct decision.[64]




Pardon given by President Ford under Proclamation 4313


Draft dodgers and deserters[edit]
On September 16, shortly after he announced the Nixon pardon, Ford introduced a conditional amnesty program for Vietnam War draft dodgers who had fled to countries such as Canada, and for military deserters, in Presidential Proclamation 4313. The conditions of the amnesty required that those reaffirm their allegiance to the United States and serve two years working in a public service job or a total of two years service for those who had served less than two years of honorable service in the military.[65] The program for the Return of Vietnam Era Draft Evaders and Military Deserters[66] established a Clemency Board to review the records and make recommendations for receiving a Presidential Pardon and a change in Military discharge status. Full pardon for draft dodgers came in the Carter administration.[67]
Administration officials[edit]
Upon assuming office, Ford inherited Nixon's Cabinet. During Ford's brief administration, all members were replaced except Secretary of State Kissinger and Secretary of the Treasury William E. Simon. Ford's dramatic reorganization of his Cabinet in the fall of 1975 has been referred to by political commentators as the "Halloween Massacre". One of Ford's appointees, William Coleman, as Secretary of Transportation, was the second black man to serve in a presidential cabinet (after Robert C. Weaver) and the first appointed in a Republican administration.[68]


The Ford Cabinet


Office
Name
Term





President
Gerald Ford
1974–1977





Vice President
none*
1974


Nelson Rockefeller
1974–1977





Secretary of State
Henry Kissinger
1974–1977





Secretary of Treasury
William E. Simon
1974–1977





Secretary of Defense
James R. Schlesinger
1974–1975


Donald Rumsfeld
1975–1977





Attorney General
William B. Saxbe
1974–1975


Edward H. Levi
1975–1977





Secretary of the Interior
Rogers Morton
1974–1975


Stanley K. Hathaway
1975


Thomas S. Kleppe
1975–1977





Secretary of Agriculture
Earl Butz
1974–1976


John Albert Knebel
1976–1977





Secretary of Commerce
Frederick B. Dent
1974–1975


Rogers Morton
1975


Elliot Richardson
1975–1977





Secretary of Labor
Peter J. Brennan
1974–1975


John Thomas Dunlop
1975–1976


William Usery Jr.
1976–1977





Secretary of Health,
Education, and Welfare
Caspar Weinberger
1974–1975


F. David Mathews
1975–1977





Secretary of Housing and
Urban Development
James Thomas Lynn
1974–1975


Carla Anderson Hills
1975–1977





Secretary of Transportation
Claude Brinegar
1974–1975


William Thaddeus Coleman Jr.
1975–1977





Chief of Staff
Alexander Haig
1974


Donald Rumsfeld
1974–1975


Dick Cheney
1975–1977





Administrator of the
Environmental Protection Agency
Russell E. Train
1974–1977





Director of the Office of
Management and Budget
Roy Ash
1974–1975


James Thomas Lynn
1975–1977





United States Trade Representative
William Denman Eberle
1974–1975


Frederick B. Dent
1975–1977


* A vacancy by ascension briefly occurred for the position of Vice President from August 9, 1974 to December 19, 1974 after Richard Nixon's resignation from office.


Other members of the administration:

United States National Security Advisor

Henry Kissinger (1974–1975)
Brent Scowcroft (1975–1977)


Director of Central Intelligence

William Colby (1974–1976)
George H. W. Bush (1976–1977)


Press Secretary

Jerald terHorst (1974)
Ron Nessen (1974–1977)


United States Ambassador to the United Nations

John A. Scali (1974–1975)
Daniel Patrick Moynihan (1975–1976)
William Scranton (1976–1977)



Ford selected George H. W. Bush as Chief of the US Liaison Office to the People's Republic of China in 1974, and then Director of the Central Intelligence Agency in late 1975.[69]
Ford's transition chairman and first Chief of Staff was former congressman and ambassador Donald Rumsfeld. In 1975, Rumsfeld was named by Ford as the youngest-ever Secretary of Defense. Ford chose a young Wyoming politician, Richard Cheney, to replace Rumsfeld as his new Chief of Staff; Cheney became the campaign manager for Ford's 1976 presidential campaign.[70]
Midterm elections[edit]




Ford in the Oval Office, 1974


Main articles: United States House elections, 1974 and United States Senate elections, 1974
The 1974 Congressional midterm elections took place less than three months after Ford assumed office and in the wake of the Watergate scandal. The Democratic Party turned voter dissatisfaction into large gains in the House elections, taking 49 seats from the Republican Party, increasing their majority to 291 of the 435 seats. This was one more than the number needed (290) for a two-thirds majority, the number necessary to override a Presidential veto or to propose a constitutional amendment. Perhaps due in part to this fact, the 94th Congress overrode the highest percentage of vetoes since Andrew Johnson was President of the United States (1865–1869).[71] Even Ford's former, reliably Republican House seat was won by a Democrat, Richard Vander Veen, who defeated Robert VanderLaan. In the Senate elections, the Democratic majority became 61 in the 100-seat body.[72]
Domestic policy[edit]
Inflation[edit]




President Ford meets with his Cabinet in 1975


The economy was a great concern during the Ford administration. One of the first acts the new president took to deal with the economy was to create, by Executive Order on September 30, 1974, the Economic Policy Board.[73] In October 1974, in response to rising inflation, Ford went before the American public and asked them to "Whip Inflation Now". As part of this program, he urged people to wear "WIN" buttons.[74] At the time, inflation was believed to be the primary threat to the economy, more so than growing unemployment; there was a belief that controlling inflation would help reduce unemployment.[73] To rein in inflation, it was necessary to control the public's spending. To try to mesh service and sacrifice, "WIN" called for Americans to reduce their spending and consumption.[75] On October 4, 1974, Ford gave a speech in front of a joint session of Congress; as a part of this speech he kicked off the "WIN" campaign. Over the next nine days 101,240 Americans mailed in "WIN" pledges.[73] In hindsight, this was viewed as simply a public relations gimmick which had no way of solving the underlying problems.[76] The main point of that speech was to introduce to Congress a one-year, five-percent income tax increase on corporations and wealthy individuals. This plan would also take $4.4 billion out of the budget, bringing federal spending below $300 billion.[77] At the time, inflation was over twelve percent.[78]
Budget[edit]
The federal budget ran a deficit every year Ford was President.[79] Despite his reservations about how the program ultimately would be funded in an era of tight public budgeting, Ford signed the Education for All Handicapped Children Act of 1975, which established special education throughout the United States. Ford expressed "strong support for full educational opportunities for our handicapped children" according to the official White House press release for the bill signing.[80]
The economic focus began to change as the country sank into the worst recession since the Great Depression four decades earlier.[81] The focus of the Ford administration turned to stopping the rise in unemployment, which reached nine percent in May 1975.[82] In January 1975, Ford proposed a 1-year tax reduction of $16 billion to stimulate economic growth, along with spending cuts to avoid inflation.[77] Ford was criticized greatly for quickly switching from advocating a tax increase to a tax reduction. In Congress, the proposed amount of the tax reduction increased to $22.8 billion in tax cuts and lacked spending cuts.[73] In March 1975, Congress passed, and Ford signed into law, these income tax rebates as part of the Tax Reduction Act of 1975. This resulted in a federal deficit of around $53 billion for the 1975 fiscal year and $73.7 billion for 1976.[83]
When New York City faced bankruptcy in 1975, Mayor Abraham Beame was unsuccessful in obtaining Ford's support for a federal bailout. The incident prompted the New York Daily News' famous headline "Ford to City: Drop Dead", referring to a speech in which "Ford declared flatly ... that he would veto any bill calling for 'a federal bail-out of New York City'".[84][85]
Swine flu[edit]
Main article: 1976 swine flu outbreak
Ford was confronted with a potential swine flu pandemic. In the early 1970s, an influenza strain H1N1 shifted from a form of flu that affected primarily pigs and crossed over to humans. On February 5, 1976, an army recruit at Fort Dix mysteriously died and four fellow soldiers were hospitalized; health officials announced that "swine flu" was the cause. Soon after, public health officials in the Ford administration urged that every person in the United States be vaccinated.[86] Although the vaccination program was plagued by delays and public relations problems, some 25% of the population was vaccinated by the time the program was canceled in December 1976. The vaccine was blamed for twenty-five deaths; more people died from the shots than from the swine flu.[87]
Other domestic issues[edit]




Cheney, Rumsfeld and President Ford in the Oval Office, 1975


Ford was an outspoken supporter of the Equal Rights Amendment, issuing Presidential Proclamation no. 4383 in 1975:

In this Land of the Free, it is right, and by nature it ought to be, that all men and all women are equal before the law.
Now, therefore, I, Gerald R. Ford, President of the United States of America, to remind all Americans that it is fitting and just to ratify the Equal Rights Amendment adopted by the Congress of the United States of America, in order to secure legal equality for all women and men, do hereby designate and proclaim August 26, 1975, as Women's Equality Day.[88]

As president, Ford's position on abortion was that he supported "a federal constitutional amendment that would permit each one of the 50 States to make the choice".[89] This had also been his position as House Minority Leader in response to the 1973 Supreme Court case of Roe v. Wade, which he opposed.[90] Ford came under criticism for a 60 Minutes interview his wife Betty gave in 1975, in which she stated that Roe v. Wade was a "great, great decision".[91] During his later life, Ford would identify as pro-choice.[92]
Foreign policy[edit]




Ford meets with Soviet leader Leonid Brezhnev during the Vladivostok Summit, November 1974, to sign a joint communiqué on the SALT treaty






Ford makes remarks at a Reciprocal Dinner in Beijing on December 4, 1975.


Ford continued the détente policy with both the Soviet Union and China, easing the tensions of the Cold War. Still in place from the Nixon administration was the Strategic Arms Limitation Treaty (SALT).[93] The thawing relationship brought about by Nixon's visit to China was reinforced by Ford's December 1975 visit to that communist country.[94] In 1975, the Administration entered into the Helsinki Accords[95] with the Soviet Union, creating the framework of the Helsinki Watch, an independent non-governmental organization created to monitor compliance that later evolved into Human Rights Watch.[96]
Ford attended the inaugural meeting of the Group of Seven (G7) industrialized nations (initially the G5) in 1975 and secured membership for Canada. Ford supported international solutions to issues. "We live in an interdependent world and, therefore, must work together to resolve common economic problems," he said in a 1974 speech.[97]
According to internal White House and Commission documents posted in February 2016 by the National Security Archive at The George Washington University,[98] the Gerald Ford White House significantly altered the final report of the supposedly independent 1975 Rockefeller Commission investigating CIA domestic activities, over the objections of senior Commission staff. The changes included removal of an entire 86-page section on CIA assassination plots and numerous edits to the report by then-deputy White House Chief of Staff Richard Cheney.[99]
Middle East[edit]




Countries visited by Ford during his presidency


In the Middle East and eastern Mediterranean, two ongoing international disputes developed into crises. The Cyprus dispute turned into a crisis with the Turkish invasion of Cyprus, causing extreme strain within the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) alliance. In mid-August, the Greek government withdrew Greece from the NATO military structure; in mid-September 1974, the Senate and House of Representatives overwhelmingly voted to halt military aid to Turkey. Ford, concerned with both the effect of this on Turkish-American relations and the deterioration of security on NATO's eastern front, vetoed the bill. A second bill was then passed by Congress, which Ford also vetoed, although a compromise was accepted to continue aid until the end of the year.[2] As Ford expected, Turkish relations were considerably disrupted until 1978.




Ford with Anwar Sadat in Salzburg, 1975


In the continuing Arab–Israeli conflict, although the initial cease fire had been implemented to end active conflict in the Yom Kippur War, Kissinger's continuing shuttle diplomacy was showing little progress. Ford considered it "stalling" and wrote, "Their [Israeli] tactics frustrated the Egyptians and made me mad as hell."[100] During Kissinger's shuttle to Israel in early March 1975, a last minute reversal to consider further withdrawal, prompted a cable from Ford to Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin, which included:

I wish to express my profound disappointment over Israel's attitude in the course of the negotiations ... Failure of the negotiation will have a far reaching impact on the region and on our relations. I have given instructions for a reassessment of United States policy in the region, including our relations with Israel, with the aim of ensuring that overall American interests ... are protected. You will be notified of our decision.[101]

On March 24, Ford informed congressional leaders of both parties of the reassessment of the administration policies in the Middle East. "Reassessment", in practical terms, meant canceling or suspending further aid to Israel. For six months between March and September 1975, the United States refused to conclude any new arms agreements with Israel. Rabin notes it was "an innocent-sounding term that heralded one of the worst periods in American-Israeli relations".[102] The announced reassessments upset the American Jewish community and Israel's well-wishers in Congress. On May 21, Ford "experienced a real shock" when seventy-six U.S. senators wrote him a letter urging him to be "responsive" to Israel's request for $2.59 billion in military and economic aid. Ford felt truly annoyed and thought the chance for peace was jeopardized. It was, since the September 1974 ban on arms to Turkey, the second major congressional intrusion upon the President's foreign policy prerogatives.[103] The following summer months were described by Ford as an American-Israeli "war of nerves" or "test of wills".[104] After much bargaining, the Sinai Interim Agreement (Sinai II), was formally signed on September 1, and aid resumed.
Vietnam[edit]




Ford and his daughter Susan watch as Henry Kissinger shakes hands with Mao Zedong, December 2, 1975


One of Ford's greatest challenges was dealing with the continuing Vietnam War. American offensive operations against North Vietnam had ended with the Paris Peace Accords, signed on January 27, 1973. The accords declared a cease fire across both North and South Vietnam, and required the release of American prisoners of war. The agreement guaranteed the territorial integrity of Vietnam and, like the Geneva Conference of 1954, called for national elections in the North and South. The Paris Peace Accords stipulated a sixty-day period for the total withdrawal of U.S. forces.[105]
The accords had been negotiated by United States National Security Advisor Kissinger and North Vietnamese politburo member Lê Đức Thọ. South Vietnamese President Nguyen Van Thieu was not involved in the final negotiations, and publicly criticized the proposed agreement. However, anti-war pressures within the United States forced Nixon and Kissinger to pressure Thieu to sign the agreement and enable the withdrawal of American forces. In multiple letters to the South Vietnamese president, Nixon had promised that the United States would defend Thieu's government, should the North Vietnamese violate the accords.[106]
In December 1974, months after Ford took office, North Vietnamese forces invaded the province of Phuoc Long. General Trần Văn Trà sought to gauge any South Vietnamese or American response to the invasion, as well as to solve logistical issues, before proceeding with the invasion.[107]
As North Vietnamese forces advanced, Ford requested Congress approve a $722 million aid package for South Vietnam, funds that had been promised by the Nixon administration. Congress voted against the proposal by a wide margin.[93] Senator Jacob K. Javits offered "...large sums for evacuation, but not one nickel for military aid".[93] President Thieu resigned on April 21, 1975, publicly blaming the lack of support from the United States for the fall of his country.[108] Two days later, on April 23, Ford gave a speech at Tulane University. In that speech, he announced that the Vietnam War was over "...as far as America is concerned".[106] The announcement was met with thunderous applause.[106]




South Vietnamese refugees arrive on a U.S. Navy vessel during Operation Frequent Wind


1,373 U.S. citizens and 5,595 Vietnamese and third country nationals were evacuated from the South Vietnamese capital of Saigon during Operation Frequent Wind. In that operation, military and Air America helicopters took evacuees to U.S. Navy ships off-shore during an approximately 24-hour period on April 29 to 30, 1975, immediately preceding the fall of Saigon. During the operation, so many South Vietnamese helicopters landed on the vessels taking the evacuees that some were pushed overboard to make room for more people. Other helicopters, having nowhere to land, were deliberately crash landed into the sea after dropping off their passengers, close to the ships, their pilots bailing out at the last moment to be picked up by rescue boats.[109]
Many of the Vietnamese evacuees were allowed to enter the United States under the Indochina Migration and Refugee Assistance Act. The 1975 Act appropriated $455 million toward the costs of assisting the settlement of Indochinese refugees.[110] In all, 130,000 Vietnamese refugees came to the United States in 1975. Thousands more escaped in the years that followed.[111]
Mayaguez and Panmunjom[edit]
North Vietnam's victory over the South led to a considerable shift in the political winds in Asia, and Ford administration officials worried about a consequent loss of U.S. influence there. The administration proved it was willing to respond forcefully to challenges to its interests in the region on two occasions, once when Khmer Rouge forces seized an American ship in international waters and again when American military officers were killed in the demilitarized zone (DMZ) between North and South Korea.[112]
The first crisis was the Mayaguez incident. In May 1975, shortly after the fall of Saigon and the Khmer Rouge conquest of Cambodia, Cambodians seized the American merchant ship Mayaguez in international waters.[113] Ford dispatched Marines to rescue the crew, but the Marines landed on the wrong island and met unexpectedly stiff resistance just as, unknown to the U.S., the Mayaguez sailors were being released. In the operation, two military transport helicopters carrying the Marines for the assault operation were shot down, and 41 U.S. servicemen were killed and 50 wounded while approximately 60 Khmer Rouge soldiers were killed.[114] Despite the American losses, the operation was seen as a success in the United States and Ford enjoyed an 11-point boost in his approval ratings in the aftermath.[115] The Americans killed during the operation became the last to have their names inscribed on the Vietnam Veterans Memorial wall in Washington, D.C.
Some historians have argued that the Ford administration felt the need to respond forcefully to the incident because it was construed as a Soviet plot.[116] But work by Andrew Gawthorpe, published in 2009, based on an analysis of the administration's internal discussions, shows that Ford's national security team understood that the seizure of the vessel was a local, and perhaps even accidental, provocation by an immature Khmer government. Nevertheless, they felt the need to respond forcefully to discourage further provocations by other Communist countries in Asia.[117]
The second crisis, known as the axe murder incident, occurred at Panmunjom, a village which stands in the DMZ between the two Koreas. Encouraged by U.S. difficulties in Vietnam, North Korea had been waging a campaign of diplomatic pressure and minor military harassment to try and convince the U.S. to withdraw from South Korea.[118] Then, in August 1976, North Korean forces killed two U.S. officers and injured South Korean guards who were engaged in trimming a tree in Panmunjom's Joint Security Area. The attack coincided with a meeting of the Conference of Non-Aligned Nations in Colombo, Sri Lanka, at which Kim Jong-il, the son of North Korean leader Kim Il-sung, presented the incident as an example of American aggression, helping secure the passage of a motion calling for a U.S. withdrawal from the South.[119]
At administration meetings, Kissinger voiced the concern that the North would see the U.S. as "the paper tigers of Saigon" if they did not respond, and Ford agreed with that assessment. After mulling various options the Ford administration decided that it was necessary to respond with a major show of force. A large number of ground forces went to cut down the tree, while at the same time the air force was deployed, which included B-52 bomber flights over Panmunjom. The North Korean government backed down and allowed the tree-cutting to go ahead, and later issued an unprecedented official apology.[120]
Indonesian invasion of East Timor[edit]
East Timor's decolonization due to political instability in Portugal saw Indonesia posture to annex the new state in 1975. Just hours before the Indonesian invasion of East Timor (now Timor Leste) on December 7, 1975, Ford and Kissinger had visited Indonesian President Suharto in Jakarta and guaranteed American compliance with the Indonesian operation. Suharto had been a key supporter of American influence in Indonesia and Southeast Asia and Ford did not desire to place pressure on the American-Indonesian relationship.[121]
Under Ford, a policy of arms sales to the Suharto regime began in 1975, before the invasion. "Roughly 90%" of the Indonesian army's weapons at the time of East Timor's invasion were provided by the U.S. according to George H. Aldrich, a former State Department deputy legal advisor.[122] Post-invasion, Ford's military aid averaged about $30 million annually throughout East Timor's occupation, and arms sales increased exponentially under President Carter. This policy continued until 1999.[123]
Assassination attempts[edit]




Reaction immediately after the second assassination attempt


Main articles: Gerald Ford assassination attempt in Sacramento and Sara Jane Moore
Ford faced two assassination attempts during his presidency. In Sacramento, California, on September 5, 1975, Lynette "Squeaky" Fromme, a follower of Charles Manson, pointed a Colt .45-caliber handgun at Ford.[124] As Fromme pulled the trigger, Larry Buendorf,[125] a Secret Service agent, grabbed the gun, and Fromme was taken into custody. She was later convicted of attempted assassination of the President and was sentenced to life in prison; she was paroled on August 14, 2009.[126]
In reaction to this attempt, the Secret Service began keeping Ford at a more secure distance from anonymous crowds, a strategy that may have saved his life seventeen days later. As he left the St. Francis Hotel in downtown San Francisco, Sara Jane Moore, standing in a crowd of onlookers across the street, pointed her .38-caliber revolver at him.[127] Moore fired a single round but missed because the sights were off. Just before she fired a second round, retired Marine Oliver Sipple grabbed at the gun and deflected her shot; the bullet struck a wall about six inches above and to the right of Ford's head, then ricocheted and hit a taxi driver, who was slightly wounded. Moore was later sentenced to life in prison. She was paroled on December 31, 2007, after serving 32 years.[128]
Judicial appointments[edit]
Further information: Gerald Ford judicial appointment controversies
Supreme Court[edit]
Main article: Gerald Ford Supreme Court candidates




John Paul Stevens was Ford's only Supreme Court appointment.


In 1975, Ford appointed John Paul Stevens as Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States to replace retiring Justice William O. Douglas. Stevens had been a judge of the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit, appointed by President Nixon.[129] During his tenure as House Republican leader, Ford had led efforts to have Douglas impeached.[130] After being confirmed, Stevens eventually disappointed some conservatives by siding with the Court's liberal wing regarding the outcome of many key issues.[131] Nevertheless, in 2005 Ford praised Stevens. "He has served his nation well," Ford said of Stevens, "with dignity, intellect and without partisan political concerns."[132]
Other judicial appointments[edit]
Main article: List of federal judges appointed by Gerald Ford
Ford appointed 11 judges to the United States Courts of Appeals, and 50 judges to the United States district courts.[133]

1976 presidential election[edit]
Main article: United States presidential election, 1976




Governor Ronald Reagan congratulates President Ford after the president successfully wins the 1976 Republican nomination, while Bob Dole, Nancy Reagan, and Nelson Rockefeller look on.


Ford reluctantly agreed to run for office in 1976, but first he had to counter a challenge for the Republican party nomination. Former Governor of California Ronald Reagan and the party's conservative wing faulted Ford for failing to do more in South Vietnam, for signing the Helsinki Accords, and for negotiating to cede the Panama Canal. (Negotiations for the canal continued under President Carter, who eventually signed the Torrijos–Carter Treaties.) Reagan launched his campaign in autumn of 1975 and won numerous primaries, including North Carolina, Texas, Indiana, and California, but failed to get a majority of delegates; Reagan withdrew from the race at the Republican Convention in Kansas City, Missouri. The conservative insurgency did lead to Ford dropping the more liberal Vice President Nelson Rockefeller in favor of U.S. Senator Bob Dole of Kansas.[134]
In addition to the pardon dispute and lingering anti-Republican sentiment, Ford had to counter a plethora of negative media imagery. Chevy Chase often did pratfalls on Saturday Night Live, imitating Ford, who had been seen stumbling on two occasions during his term. As Chase commented, "He even mentioned in his own autobiography it had an effect over a period of time that affected the election to some degree."[135]
Ford's 1976 election campaign benefitted from his being an incumbent president during several anniversary events held during the period leading up to the United States Bicentennial. The Washington, D.C. fireworks display on the Fourth of July was presided over by the President and televised nationally.[136] On July 7, 1976, the President and First Lady served as hosts at a White House state dinner for Queen Elizabeth II and Prince Philip of the United Kingdom, which was televised on the Public Broadcasting Service network. The 200th anniversary of the Battles of Lexington and Concord in Massachusetts gave Ford the opportunity to deliver a speech to 110,000 in Concord acknowledging the need for a strong national defense tempered with a plea for "reconciliation, not recrimination" and "reconstruction, not rancor" between the United States and those who would pose "threats to peace".[137] Speaking in New Hampshire on the previous day, Ford condemned the growing trend toward big government bureaucracy and argued for a return to "basic American virtues".[138]




Ford (at right) and Jimmy Carter in a debate on September 23, 1976.


Democratic nominee and former Georgia governor Jimmy Carter campaigned as an outsider and reformer, gaining support from voters dismayed by the Watergate scandal and Nixon pardon. After the Democratic National Convention, he held a huge 33-point lead over Ford in the polls. However, as the campaign continued, the race tightened, and, by election day, the polls showed the race as too close to call. There were three main events in the fall campaign. Most importantly, Carter repeated a promise of a "blanket pardon" for Christian and other religious refugees, and also all Vietnam War draft dodgers (Ford had only issued a conditional amnesty) in response to a question on the subject posed by a reporter during the presidential debates, an act which froze Ford's poll numbers in Ohio, Wisconsin, Hawaii, and Mississippi. (Ford had needed to shift just 11,000 votes in Ohio plus one of the other three in order to win.) It was the first act signed by Carter, on January 20, 1977. Earlier, Playboy magazine had published a controversial interview with Carter; in the interview Carter admitted to having "lusted in my heart" for women other than his wife, which cut into his support among women and evangelical Christians. Also, on September 24, Ford performed well in what was the first televised presidential debate since 1960. Polls taken after the debate showed that most viewers felt that Ford was the winner. Carter was also hurt by Ford's charges that he lacked the necessary experience to be an effective national leader, and that Carter was vague on many issues.




Ford campaigns at the Nassau County Veterans Coliseum in Hempstead, New York on October 31, 1976 during the final days of the campaign.


Televised presidential debates were reintroduced for the first time since the 1960 election. As such, Ford became the first incumbent president to participate in one. Carter later attributed his victory in the election to the debates, saying they "gave the viewers reason to think that Jimmy Carter had something to offer". The turning point came in the second debate when Ford blundered by stating, "There is no Soviet domination of Eastern Europe and there never will be under a Ford Administration." Ford also said that he did not "believe that the Poles consider themselves dominated by the Soviet Union".[139] In an interview years later, Ford said he had intended to imply that the Soviets would never crush the spirits of eastern Europeans seeking independence. However, the phrasing was so awkward that questioner Max Frankel was visibly incredulous at the response.[140] As a result of this blunder, and Carter's promise of a full presidential pardon for political refugees from the Vietnam era during the presidential debates, Ford's surge stalled and Carter was able to maintain a slight lead in the polls.




1976 electoral vote results.


In the end, Carter won the election, receiving 50.1% of the popular vote and 297 electoral votes compared with 48.0% and 240 electoral votes for Ford. The election was close enough that had fewer than 25,000 votes shifted in Ohio and Wisconsin – both of which neighbored his home state – Ford would have won the electoral vote with 276 votes to 261 for Carter.[141] Though he lost, in the three months between the Republican National Convention and the election Ford had managed to close what was once an alleged 33-point Carter lead to a 2-point margin. Ford carried 27 states versus 23 carried by Carter.
Had Ford won the election, the provisions of the 22nd Amendment would have disqualified him from running in 1980, because he had served more than two years of Nixon's remaining term.
Post-presidency (1977–2006)[edit]
Main article: Post-presidency of Gerald Ford
Activity[edit]
The Nixon pardon controversy eventually subsided. Ford's successor, Jimmy Carter, opened his 1977 inaugural address by praising the outgoing President, saying, "For myself and for our Nation, I want to thank my predecessor for all he has done to heal our land."[142]
After leaving the White House, the Ford's moved to Denver, Colorado. Ford successfully invested in oil with Marvin Davis, which later provided an income for Ford's children.[143]
He continued to make appearances at events of historical and ceremonial significance to the nation, such as presidential inaugurals and memorial services. In January 1977, he became the president of Eisenhower Fellowships in Philadelphia, then served as the chairman of its board of trustees from 1980 to 1986.[144] Later in 1977, he reluctantly agreed to be interviewed by James M. Naughton, a New York Times journalist who was given the assignment to write the former President's advance obituary, an article that would be updated prior to its eventual publication.[145] In 1979, Ford published his autobiography, A Time to Heal (Harper/Reader's Digest, 454 pages). A review in Foreign Affairs described it as, "Serene, unruffled, unpretentious, like the author. This is the shortest and most honest of recent presidential memoirs, but there are no surprises, no deep probings of motives or events. No more here than meets the eye."[146]
During the term of office of his successor, Jimmy Carter, Ford received monthly briefs by President Carter's senior staff on international and domestic issues, and was always invited to lunch at the White House whenever he was in Washington, D.C. Their close friendship developed after Carter had left office, with the catalyst being their trip together to the funeral of Anwar el-Sadat in 1981.[147] Until Ford's death, Carter and his wife, Rosalynn, visited the Fords' home frequently.[148] Ford and Carter served as honorary co-chairs of the National Commission on Federal Election Reform in 2001 and of the Continuity of Government Commission in 2002.
Like Presidents Carter, George H. W. Bush, and Clinton, Ford was an honorary co-chair of the Council for Excellence in Government, a group dedicated to excellence in government performance, which provides leadership training to top federal employees. He also devoted much time to his love of golf, often playing both privately and in public events with comedian Bob Hope, a longtime friend. In 1977, he shot a hole in one during a Pro-am held in conjunction with the Danny Thomas Memphis Classic at Colonial Country Club in Memphis, Tennessee. He hosted the Jerry Ford Invitational in Vail, Colorado from 1977 to 1996.
In 1977, Ford established the Gerald R. Ford Institute of Public Policy at Albion College in Albion, Michigan, to give undergraduates training in public policy. In April 1981, he opened the Gerald R. Ford Library in Ann Arbor, Michigan, on the north campus of his alma mater, the University of Michigan,[149] followed in September by the Gerald R. Ford Museum in Grand Rapids.[150][151]
Ford considered a run for the Republican nomination in 1980, foregoing numerous opportunities to serve on corporate boards to keep his options open for a rematch with Carter. Ford attacked Carter's conduct of the SALT II negotiations and foreign policy in the Middle East and Africa. Many have argued that Ford also wanted to exorcise his image as an "Accidental President" and to win a term in his own right. Ford also believed the more conservative Ronald Reagan would be unable to defeat Carter and would hand the incumbent a second term. Ford was encouraged by his former Secretary of State, Henry Kissinger as well as Jim Rhodes of Ohio and Bill Clements of Texas to make the race. On March 15, 1980, Ford announced that he would forgo a run for the Republican nomination, vowing to support the eventual nominee.




On July 16, 1980 (day 3 of the 1980 Republican National Convention) Gerald Ford consults with Bob Dole, Howard Baker and Bill Brock before making a decision to ultimately decline the offer to serve as Ronald Reagan's runningmate


After securing the Republican nomination in 1980, Ronald Reagan considered his former rival Ford as a potential vice-presidential runningmate, but negotiations between the Reagan and Ford camps at the Republican National Convention were unsuccessful. Ford conditioned his acceptance on Reagan's agreement to an unprecedented "co-presidency",[152] giving Ford the power to control key executive branch appointments (such as Kissinger as Secretary of State and Alan Greenspan as Treasury Secretary). After rejecting these terms, Reagan offered the vice-presidential nomination instead to George H. W. Bush.[153] Ford did appear in a campaign commercial for the Reagan-Bush ticket, in which he declared that the country would be "better served by a Reagan presidency rather than a continuation of the weak and politically expedient policies of Jimmy Carter".[154] On October 8, 1980, Ford said President Nixon's involvement in the general election potentially could negatively impact the Reagan campaign: "I think it would have been much more helpful if Mr. Nixon had stayed in the background during this campaign. It would have been much more beneficial to Ronald Reagan."[155]
On October 3, 1980, Ford cast blame on Carter for the latter's charges of ineffectiveness on the part of the Federal Reserve Board due to his appointing of most of its members: "President Carter, when the going gets tough, will do anything to save his own political skin. This latest action by the president is cowardly."[156]
Following the attempted assassination of Ronald Reagan, Ford told reporters while appearing at a fundraiser for Thomas Kean that criminals who use firearms should get the death penalty in the event someone is injured with the weapon.[157]
In September 1981, Ford advised Reagan against succumbing to Wall Street demands and follow his own agenda for the economic policies of the US during an appearance on Good Morning America: "He shouldn't let the gurus of Wall Street decide what the economic future of this country is going to be. They are wrong in my opinion."[158] On October 20, 1981, Ford stated stopping the Reagan administration's Saudi arms package could have a large negative impact to American relations in the Middle East during a news conference.[159]
On March 24, 1982, Ford offered an endorsement of President Reagan's economic policies while also stating the possibility of Reagan being met with a stalemate by Congress if not willing to compromise while in Washington.[160]
Ford founded the annual AEI World Forum in 1982, and joined the American Enterprise Institute as a distinguished fellow. He was also awarded an honorary doctorate at Central Connecticut State University[161] on March 23, 1988.
During an August 1982 fundraising reception, Ford stated his opposition to a constitution amendment requiring the US to have a balanced budget, citing a need to elect "members of the House and Senate who will immediately when Congress convenes act more responsibly in fiscal matters."[162] Ford was a participant in the 1982 midterm elections, traveling to Tennessee in October of that year to help Republican candidates.[163]
In January 1984, a letter signed by Ford and Carter and urging world leaders to extend their failed effort to end world hunger was released and sent to Secretary-General of the United Nations Javier Pérez de Cuéllar.[164]
In 1987, Ford testified before the Senate Judiciary Committee in favor of District of Columbia Circuit Court judge and former Solicitor General Robert Bork after Bork was nominated by President Reagan to be an Associate Justice of the United States Supreme Court.[165] Bork's nomination was rejected by a vote of 58-42.[166]
In 1987 Ford's Humor and the Presidency, a book of humorous political anecdotes, was published.
By 1988, Ford was a member of several corporate boards including Commercial Credit, Nova Pharmaceutical, The Pullman Company, Tesoro Petroleum, and Tiger International, Inc.[167] Ford also became an honorary director of Citigroup, a position he held till his death.[168]
In October 1990, Ford appeared in Gettysburg, Pennsylvania with Bob Hope to commemorate the centennial anniversary of the birth of former President Dwight D. Eisenhower, where the two unveiled a plaque with the signatures of each living former president.[169]
In April 1991, Ford joined former presidents Richard Nixon, Ronald Reagan, and Jimmy Carter, in supporting the Brady Bill.[170] Three years later, he wrote to the U.S. House of Representatives, along with Carter and Reagan, in support of the assault weapons ban.[171]
At the 1992 Republican National Convention, Ford compared the election cycle to his 1976 loss to Carter and urged attention be paid to electing a Republican Congress: "If it's change you want on Nov. 3, my friends, the place to start is not at the White House but in the United States' Capitol. Congress, as every school child knows, has the power of the purse. For nearly 40 years, Democratic majorities have held to the time-tested New Deal formula, tax and tax, spend and spend, elect and elect."[172]




Ford at his 90th birthday with Laura Bush, President George W. Bush, and Betty Ford in the White House State Dining Room in 2003


In April 1997, Ford joined President Bill Clinton, former President Bush, and Nancy Reagan in signing the "Summit Declaration of Commitment" in advocating for participation by private citizens in solving domestic issues within the United States.[173]
On January 20, 1998, during an interview at his Palm Springs home, Ford said the Republican Party's nominee in the 2000 presidential election would lose if very conservative in their ideals: "If we get way over on the hard right of the political spectrum, we will not elect a Republican President. I worry about the party going down this ultra-conservative line. We ought to learn from the Democrats: when they were running ultra-liberal candidates, they didn't win."[174]
In the prelude to the impeachment of President Clinton, Ford conferred with former President Carter and the two agreed to not speak publicly on the controversy, a pact broken by Carter when answering a question from a student at Emory University.[175]
In October 2001, Ford broke with conservative members of the Republican Party by stating that gay and lesbian couples "ought to be treated equally. Period." He became the highest ranking Republican to embrace full equality for gays and lesbians, stating his belief that there should be a federal amendment outlawing anti-gay job discrimination and expressing his hope that the Republican Party would reach out to gay and lesbian voters.[176] He also was a member of the Republican Unity Coalition, which The New York Times described as "a group of prominent Republicans, including former President Gerald R. Ford, dedicated to making sexual orientation a non-issue in the Republican Party".[177]
On November 22, 2004, New York Republican Governor George Pataki named Ford and the other living former Presidents (Carter, George H. W. Bush and Bill Clinton) as honorary members of the board rebuilding the World Trade Center.
In a pre-recorded embargoed interview with Bob Woodward of The Washington Post in July 2004, Ford stated that he disagreed "very strongly" with the Bush administration's choice of Iraq's alleged weapons of mass destruction as justification for its decision to invade Iraq, calling it a "big mistake" unrelated to the national security of the United States and indicating that he would not have gone to war had he been President. The details of the interview were not released until after Ford's death, as he requested.[178][179]
Health problems[edit]




Gerald Ford and Roy W. Hill, Rancho Mirage California






Gerald Ford, Anne T. Hill, and Edgar L. McCoubrey, Rancho Mirage California


On April 4, 1990, Ford was admitted to Eisenhower Medical Center for surgery to replace his left knee, orthopedic surgeon Dr. Robert Murphy saying "Ford's entire left knee was replaced with an artificial joint, including portions of the adjacent femur, or thigh bone, and tibia, or leg bone."[180]
Ford suffered two minor strokes at the 2000 Republican National Convention, but made a quick recovery after being admitted to Hahnemann University Hospital.[181][182] In January 2006, he spent 11 days at the Eisenhower Medical Center near his residence at Rancho Mirage, California, for treatment of pneumonia.[183] On April 23, 2006, President George W. Bush visited Ford at his home in Rancho Mirage for a little over an hour. This was Ford's last public appearance and produced the last known public photos, video footage, and voice recording.
While vacationing in Vail, Colorado, Ford was hospitalized for two days in July 2006 for shortness of breath.[184] On August 15 he was admitted to St. Mary's Hospital of the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minnesota, for testing and evaluation. On August 21, it was reported that he had been fitted with a pacemaker. On August 25, he underwent an angioplasty procedure at the Mayo Clinic. On August 28, Ford was released from the hospital and returned with his wife Betty to their California home. On October 13, he was scheduled to attend the dedication of a building of his namesake, the Gerald R. Ford School of Public Policy at the University of Michigan, but due to poor health and on the advice of his doctors he did not attend. The previous day, Ford had entered the Eisenhower Medical Center for undisclosed tests; he was released on October 16.[185] By November 2006, he was confined to a bed in his study.[186]
Death and legacy[edit]




Ford's casket lies in state at the United States Capitol as his widow, Betty, kneels in prayer


Main article: Death and state funeral of Gerald Ford
Ford died on December 26, 2006, at his home in Rancho Mirage, California, of arteriosclerotic cerebrovascular disease and diffuse arteriosclerosis. He had end-stage coronary artery disease and severe aortic stenosis and insufficiency, caused by calcific alteration of one of his heart valves.[187] He was 93. Ford died on the 34th anniversary of President Harry Truman's death; he was the last surviving member of the Warren Commission.[188]
On December 30, 2006, Ford became the 11th U.S. President to lie in state. A state funeral and memorial services was held at the National Cathedral in Washington, D.C., on January 2, 2007. After the service, Ford was interred at his Presidential Museum in Grand Rapids, Michigan.[189]




Citizens lining outside of the Gerald R. Ford Presidential Museum in Grand Rapids, Michigan during a public visitation of Ford.


Scouting was so important to Ford that his family asked that Scouts participate in his funeral. A few selected Scouts served as ushers inside the National Cathedral. About 400 Eagle Scouts were part of the funeral procession, where they formed an honor guard as the casket went by in front of the museum.[190]
Ford selected the song to be played during his funeral procession at the U.S. Capitol.[191] After his death in December 2006, the University of Michigan Marching Band played the school's fight song for him one final time, for his last ride from the Gerald R. Ford Airport in Grand Rapids, Michigan.[192]
The State of Michigan commissioned and submitted a statue of Ford to the National Statuary Hall Collection, replacing Zachariah Chandler. It was unveiled on May 3, 2011 in the Capitol Rotunda. On the proper right side is inscribed a quotation from a tribute by Thomas P. "Tip" O'Neill, Speaker of the House at the end of Ford's presidency: "God has been good to America, especially during difficult times. At the time of the Civil War, he gave us Abraham Lincoln. And at the time of Watergate, he gave us Gerald Ford—the right man at the right time who was able to put our nation back together again." On the proper left side are words from Ford's swearing-in address: "Our constitution works. Our great republic is a government of laws and not of men. Here the people rule."
Ford's wife, Betty Ford, died on July 8, 2011.[193] Like her husband, she was 93 years old when she died.
Longevity[edit]
On November 12, 2006, upon surpassing the 93 years and 120 days lifespan of Ronald Reagan, who died on June 5, 2004, Ford released his last public statement:

The length of one's days matters less than the love of one's family and friends. I thank God for the gift of every sunrise and, even more, for all the years He has blessed me with Betty and the children; with our extended family and the friends of a lifetime. That includes countless Americans who, in recent months, have remembered me in their prayers. Your kindness touches me deeply. May God bless you all and may God bless America.[194]

At the time of his death, Ford was the longest-lived President, having lived 93 years and 165 days (45 days longer than Ronald Reagan, whose record he surpassed). He is now the second longest-lived President, after George H. W. Bush.[34][195] He was the third-longest-lived Vice President, falling short only of John Nance Garner, 98, and Levi P. Morton, 96. Ford also had the third-longest post-presidency (29 years and 11 months) after Jimmy Carter (36 years, 11 months and counting) and Herbert Hoover (31 years and 7 months).
Public image[edit]




President George W. Bush with Ford and his wife Betty on April 23, 2006; this is the last known public photo of Gerald Ford.


Ford was the only person to hold the presidential office without being elected as either president or vice-president. The choice of Ford to fulfill Spiro Agnew's vacated role as vice president was based on Ford's reputation for openness and honesty.[196] "In all the years I sat in the House, I never knew Mr. Ford to make a dishonest statement nor a statement part-true and part-false. He never attempted to shade a statement, and I never heard him utter an unkind word," said Martha Griffiths.[197]
The trust the American people had in him was rapidly and severely tarnished by his pardon of Nixon.[197] Nonetheless, many grant in hindsight that he had respectably discharged with considerable dignity a great responsibility that he had not sought.[197] His subsequent loss to Carter in 1976 has come to be seen as an honorable sacrifice he made for the nation.[196]
In spite of his athletic record and remarkable career accomplishments, Ford acquired a reputation as a clumsy, likable, and simple-minded Everyman. An incident in 1975, when he tripped while exiting Air Force One in Austria, was famously and repeatedly parodied by Chevy Chase, cementing Ford's image as a klutz.[197][198][199] Pieces of Ford's common Everyman image have also been attributed to Ford's inevitable comparison to Nixon, as well as his perceived Midwestern stodginess and self-deprecation.[196]

Civic and Fraternal Organizations[edit]
Ford was a member of several civic organizations, including the Junior Chamber of Commerce (Jaycees), American Legion, AMVETS, Benevolent and Protective Order of Elks, Sons of the Revolution,[200] and Veterans of Foreign Wars.
Freemasonry[edit]
Ford was initiated into Freemasonry on September 30, 1949.[201] He later said in 1975, "When I took my obligation as a master mason—incidentally, with my three younger brothers—I recalled the value my own father attached to that order. But I had no idea that I would ever be added to the company of the Father of our Country and 12 other members of the order who also served as Presidents of the United States."[202] Ford was made a 33° Scottish Rite Mason on September 26, 1962.[203] In April 1975, Ford was elected by a unanimous vote Honorary Grand Master of the International Supreme Council, Order of DeMolay, a position in which he served until January 1977.[204] Ford received the degrees of York Rite Masonry (Chapter and Council degrees) in a special ceremony in the Oval Office on January 11, 1977, during his term as President of the United States.[205]
Honors[edit]




Ford honored on U.S Postage, issue of 2007


Ford received the Distinguished Eagle Scout Award in May 1970, as well as the Silver Buffalo Award, from the Boy Scouts of America. In 1974, he also received the highest distinction of the Scout Association of Japan, the Golden Pheasant Award.[206] In 1985, he received the 1985 Old Tom Morris Award from the Golf Course Superintendents Association of America, GCSAA's highest honor.[207] In 1992, the U.S. Navy Memorial Foundation awarded Ford its Lone Sailor Award for his naval service and his subsequent government service. In 1999, Ford was honored with a Golden Palm Star on the Palm Springs Walk of Stars.[208] Also in 1999, Ford was awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom by Bill Clinton.[209] In 2001, he was presented with the John F. Kennedy Profiles in Courage Award for his decision to pardon Richard Nixon to stop the agony America was experiencing over Watergate.[210]
The following were named after Ford:

The Ford House Office Building in the U.S. Capitol Complex, formerly House Annex 2.
Gerald R. Ford Freeway (Nebraska)
Gerald R. Ford Freeway (Michigan)
Gerald Ford Memorial Highway, I-70 in Eagle County, Colorado
Gerald R. Ford International Airport in Grand Rapids, Michigan
Gerald R. Ford Library in Ann Arbor, Michigan
Gerald R. Ford Museum in Grand Rapids, Michigan
Gerald R. Ford School of Public Policy, University of Michigan
Gerald R. Ford Institute of Public Policy, Albion College
USS Gerald R. Ford (CVN-78)
Gerald R. Ford Middle School, Grand Rapids, Michigan[211]
President Gerald R. Ford Park in Alexandria, Virginia, located in the neighborhood where Ford lived while serving as a Representative and Vice President
President Ford Field Service Council, Boy Scouts of America The council where he was awarded the rank of Eagle Scout. Serves 25 counties in Western and Northern Michigan with its headquarters located in Grand Rapids, Michigan.[212]

See also[edit]

List of Freemasons
List of Presidents of the United States
List of Presidents of the United States by previous experience
Presidents of the United States on U.S. postage stamps

References[edit]


^ Frum, David (2000). How We Got Here: The '70s. New York City: Basic Books. pp. xxiii, 301. ISBN 0-465-04195-7. 
^ a b George Lenczowski (1990). American Presidents, and the Middle East. Duke University Press. pp. 142–143. ISBN 0-8223-0972-6. 
^ Young, Jeff C. (1997). The Fathers of American Presidents. Jefferson, NC: McFarland & Co. ISBN 0-7864-0182-6. 
^ a b Funk, Josh (December 27, 2006). "Nebraska-born Ford Left State as Infant". Fox News. Associated Press. Archived from the original on April 29, 2011. Retrieved September 2, 2009. 
^ Cannon, James. "Gerald R. Ford". Character Above All. Public Broadcasting System. Retrieved December 28, 2006. 
^ "Gerald R. Ford Genealogical Information". Gerald R. Ford Presidential Library & Museum. University of Texas. Retrieved December 28, 2006. 
^ "Richard Ford remembered as active steward of President Gerald Ford's legacy". MLive. March 20, 2015. Retrieved December 21, 2015. 
^ "A Common Man on an Uncommon Climb" (PDF). The New York Times. August 19, 1976. p. 28. Retrieved April 26, 2009. 
^ a b c d e Kunhardt Jr., Phillip (1999). Gerald R. Ford "Healing the Nation". New York: Riverhead Books. pp. 79–85. Retrieved December 28, 2006. 
^ a b Townley, Alvin (2007) [December 26, 2006]. Legacy of Honor: The Values and Influence of America's Eagle Scouts. New York: St. Martin's Press. pp. 12–13 and 87. ISBN 0-312-36653-1. Retrieved December 29, 2006. 
^ "Investigatory Records on Gerald Ford, Applicant for a Commission" (PDF). Gerald R. Ford Presidential Library. December 30, 1941. Retrieved November 18, 2010. 
^ Wertheimer, Linda (December 27, 2006). "Special Report: Former President Gerald Ford Dies; Sought to Heal Nation Disillusioned by Watergate Scandal". National Public Radio. Retrieved April 26, 2009. 
^ Perry, Will (1974). "No Cheers From the Alumni". The Wolverines: A Story of Michigan Football (PDF). Huntsville, Alabama: The Strode Publishers. pp. 150–152. ISBN 0-87397-055-1. Retrieved December 28, 2006. 
^ Kruger, Brian; Moorehouse, Buddy (August 9, 2012). "Willis Ward, Gerald Ford and Michigan Football's darkest day". The Detroit News. Retrieved October 22, 2012. 
^ Greene, J.R. (1995). The Presidency of Gerald R. Ford (American Presidency Series). University Press of Kansas. p. 2. ISBN 978-0-7006-0638-2. 
^ "Ford Named Michigan Football Legend; Morgan to Wear No. 48 Jersey". 
^ "Clumsy image aside, Ford was Accomplished Athlete". Los Angeles Times. December 28, 2006. Retrieved September 2, 2009. 
^ Rozell, Mark J. (October 15, 1992). The Press and the Ford Presidency. University of Michigan Press. p. 38. ISBN 0-472-10350-4. 
^ a b "Timeline of President Ford's Life and Career". Gerald R. Ford Presidential Library & Museum. Retrieved December 28, 2006. 
^ Wendy Wolff (1997). Vice Presidents of the United States 1789–1993. United States Government Printing Office. 
^ "The U-M Remembers Gerald R. Ford". The University of Michigan. Retrieved January 2, 2007. 
^ "Gerald R. Ford Biography". Gerald R. Ford Presidential Library & Museum. Retrieved January 2, 2007. 
^ Doenecke, Justus D. (1990). "In Danger Undaunted: The Anti-Interventionist Movement of 1940–1941 As Revealed in the Papers of the America First Committee (Hoover Archival Documentaries)". Hoover Institution Press. Retrieved December 28, 2006.  p. 7
^ a b Naughton, James M.; Adam Clymer (December 26, 2006). "Gerald Ford, 38th President, Dies at 93 years and 165 day". The New York Times. Naval Historical Center. Retrieved October 19, 2007. 
^ a b Hove, Duane (2003). American Warriors: Five Presidents in the Pacific Theater of World War II. Burd Street Press. ISBN 1-57249-307-0. 
^ "Lieutenant Gerald Ford and Typhoon Cobra". Naval Historical Foundation. February 7, 2013. Retrieved February 8, 2013. 
^ Howard, Jane (December 8, 1974). "The 38th First Lady: Not a Robot At All". The New York Times. 
^ Winget, Mary Mueller (2007). Gerald R. Ford. Twenty-First Century Books. ISBN 978-0-8225-1509-8. Retrieved September 3, 2009. 
^ Kruse, Melissa (January 3, 2003). "The Patterson Barn, Grand Rapids, Michigan—Barn razing erases vintage landmark". The Grand Rapids Press. p. D1. Archived from the original on April 29, 2011. Retrieved September 3, 2009. 
^ a b c "Gerald R. Ford". The New York Times. December 28, 2006. Retrieved December 29, 2006. 
^ "Gerald R. Ford". The White House. Retrieved October 25, 2009. 
^ Celebrating the life of President Gerald R. Ford on what would have been his 96th birthday, H.R. 409, 111th Congress, 1st Session (2009).
^ "Gerald R. Ford Presidential Library and Museum". Ford.utexas.edu. Retrieved August 9, 2009. 
^ a b c d James M. Naughton; Adam Clymer (December 27, 2006). "Gerald Ford, 38th President, Dies at 93". The New York Times. Retrieved October 19, 2009. 
^ "LBJ Appoints Gerald Ford to the Warren Commission". Miller Center of Public Affairs. Archived from the original on September 25, 2015. Retrieved August 20, 2015. 
^ Newton, Jim (2007). Justice for All: Earl Warren and the Nation He Made. Penguin Group. ISBN 978-1-59448-270-0. 
^ Stephens, Joe (August 8, 2008). "Ford Told FBI of Skeptics on Warren Commission". The Washington Post. Retrieved September 8, 2009. 
^ "Ford told FBI about panel's doubts on JFK murder". USA Today. August 9, 2008. Retrieved September 2, 2009. 
^ Ford, Gerald R. (2007). A Presidential Legacy and The Warren Commission. The FlatSigned Press. ISBN 978-1-934304-02-0. 
^ a b c d e f Roger H. Davidson; Susan Webb Hammond; Raymond Smock (1988). Masters of the House: Congressional leadership over two centuries. Westview Press. pp. 267–275. 
^ Unger, Irwin, 1996: 'The Best of Intentions: the triumphs and failures of the Great Society under Kennedy, Johnson, and Nixon': Doubleday, p. 104.
^ Gray, Paul (December 27, 2006). "Gerald Ford: Steady Hand for a Nation in Crisis". Time. Retrieved September 16, 2009. 
^ Ford, Gerald (May 23, 2001). "Address by President Gerald R. Ford, May 23, 2001". United States Senate. Retrieved December 30, 2006. 
^ Jackson, Harold (December 27, 2006). "Guardian newspaper obituary". The Guardian. London. Retrieved December 30, 2006. 
^ Reeves, Richard (1975). A Ford, not a Lincoln. 
^ James Midgley; Michelle Livermore (2008). The Handbook of Social Policy. SAGE. p. 162. ISBN 1-4129-5076-7. 
^ Hoff, Joan (1995). Nixon Reconsidered. Basic Books. p. 69. ISBN 0-465-05105-7. 
^ "Gerald R. Ford's Remarks Upon Taking the Oath of Office as President". The Gerald R. Ford Presidential Library. August 9, 1974. Retrieved November 18, 2010. 
^ "Remarks By President Gerald Ford On Taking the Oath Of Office As President". Watergate.info. 1974. Archived from the original on July 3, 2008. Retrieved December 28, 2006. 
^ Miller, Danny (December 27, 2006). "Coming of Age with Gerald Ford". Huffington Post. Retrieved September 8, 2009. 
^ Ford, Gerald R. (August 9, 1974). "Gerald R. Ford's Remarks on Taking the Oath of Office as President". Gerald R. Ford Presidential Library. Archived from the original on August 13, 2012. Retrieved May 2, 2011. 
^ "The Daily Diary of President Gerald R. Ford" (PDF). Gerald R. Ford Presidential Library. August 20, 1976. Retrieved November 19, 2010. 
^ "The Vice Presidency: Rocky's Turn to the Right". Time. May 12, 1975. Retrieved September 8, 2009. 
^ Ford, Gerald (September 8, 1974). "President Gerald R. Ford's Proclamation 4311, Granting a Pardon to Richard Nixon". Gerald R. Ford Presidential Library & Museum. University of Texas. Retrieved December 30, 2006. 
^ Ford, Gerald (September 8, 1974). "Presidential Proclamation 4311 by President Gerald R. Ford granting a pardon to Richard M. Nixon". Pardon images. University of Maryland. Archived from the original on October 11, 2007. Retrieved December 30, 2006. 
^ "Ford Pardons Nixon – Events of 1974 – Year in Review". UPI.com. Retrieved November 4, 2011. 
^ Ford, Gerald (September 8, 1974). "Gerald R. Ford Pardoning Richard Nixon". Great Speeches Collection. The History Place. Retrieved December 30, 2006. 
^ a b Shane, Scott (December 29, 2006). "For Ford, Pardon Decision Was Always Clear-Cut". The New York Times. p. A1. Retrieved September 8, 2009. 
^ "Ford Testimony on Nixon Pardon – C-SPAN Video Library". C-spanvideo.org. October 17, 1974. Retrieved December 30, 2012. 
^ "Sitting presidents and vice presidents who have testified before congressional committees" (PDF). Senate.gov. 2004. Retrieved November 22, 2015. 
^ "Fred Barnes on Conversations with Bill Kristol". 
^ Shadow, by Bob Woodward, chapter on Gerald Ford; Woodward interviewed Ford on this matter, about twenty years after Ford left the presidency
^ "Award Announcement". JFK Library Foundation. May 1, 2001. Archived from the original on January 15, 2007. Retrieved March 31, 2007. 
^ "Sen. Ted Kennedy crossed political paths with Grand Rapids' most prominent Republican, President Gerald R. Ford", The Grand Rapids Press, August 26, 2009. Retrieved January 5, 2010.
^ Hunter, Marjorie (September 16, 1974). "Ford Offers Amnesty Program Requiring 2 Years Public Work; Defends His Pardon Of Nixon". The New York Times. Retrieved August 10, 2013. 
^ "Gerald R. Ford: Proclamation 4313 – Announcing a Program for the Return of Vietnam Era Draft Evaders and Military Deserters". ucsb.edu. 
^ "Carter's Pardon". McNeil/Lehrer Report. Public Broadcasting System. January 21, 1977. Archived from the original on February 28, 2007. Retrieved December 30, 2006. 
^ Secretary of Transportation: William T. Coleman Jr. (1975–1977) – AmericanPresident.org (January 15, 2005). Retrieved December 31, 2006.
^ "George Herbert Walker Bush Profile". CNN. Archived from the original on October 28, 2006. Retrieved December 31, 2006. 
^ Richard B. Cheney Archived September 3, 1999, at the Wayback Machine.. United States Department of Defense. Retrieved December 31, 2006.
^ Bush vetoes less than most presidents, CNN, May 1, 2007. Retrieved October 19, 2007.
^ Renka, Russell D. Nixon's Fall and the Ford and Carter Interregnum. Southeast Missouri State University, (April 10, 2003). Retrieved December 31, 2006.
^ a b c d Greene, John Robert. The Presidency of Gerald R. Ford. University Press of Kansas, 1995
^ Gerald Ford Speeches: Whip Inflation Now Archived August 29, 2008, at the Wayback Machine. (October 8, 1974), Miller Center of Public Affairs. Retrieved May 18, 2011
^ Brinkley, Douglas. Gerald R. Ford. New York: Times Books, 2007
^ "WIN buttons and Arthur Burns". Econbrowser. 2006. Archived from the original on January 6, 2007. Retrieved January 24, 2007. 
^ a b Crain, Andrew Downer. The Ford Presidency. Jefferson, North Carolina: McFarland, 2009
^ Dale Jr., Edwin L. (November 22, 1974). "Consumer prices up 0.9% in October, 12.2% for year; annual rate is highest since 1947". The New York Times. p. 1. 
^ CRS Report RL33305, The Crude Oil Windfall Profit Tax of the 1980s: Implications for Current Energy Policy Archived February 11, 2012, at the Wayback Machine., by Salvatore Lazzari, p. 5.
^ "President Gerald R. Ford's Statement on Signing the Education for All Handicapped Children Act of 1975", Gerald R. Ford Presidential Library, December 2, 1975. Retrieved December 31, 2006.
^ Campbell, Ballard C. (2008). "1973 oil embargo". Disasters, accidents and crises in American history: a reference guide to the nation's most catastrophic events. New York: Facts On File. p. 353. ISBN 978-0-8160-6603-2. 
^ Dale Jr., Edwin L. (June 7, 1975). "U.S. jobless rate up to 9.2% in May, highest since '41". The New York Times. p. 1. 
Stein, Judith (2010). "1975 'Capitalism is on the run'". Pivotal decade: how the United States traded factories for finance in the seventies. New Haven: Yale University Press. pp. 116–117. ISBN 978-0-300-11818-6. 
^ "Office of Management and Budget. "Historical Table 1.1"". The White House. Retrieved January 22, 2011. 
^ Roberts, Sam (December 28, 2006). "Infamous 'Drop Dead' Was Never Said by Ford". The New York Times. Retrieved February 16, 2011. 
^ Van Riper, Frank (October 30, 1975). "Ford to New York: Drop Dead". Daily News. New York. Archived from the original on October 6, 2008. Retrieved February 20, 2012. 
^ Pandemic Pointers. Living on Earth, March 3, 2006. Retrieved December 31, 2006.
^ Mickle, Paul. 1976: Fear of a great plague. The Trentonian. Retrieved December 31, 2006.
^ Ford, Gerald R. (August 26, 1975). "Proclamation 4383 – Women's Equality Day, 1975". The American Presidency Project. Retrieved May 2, 2011. 
^ "Presidential Campaign Debate Between Gerald R. Ford and Jimmy Carter, October 22, 1976". Fordlibrarymuseum.gov. Retrieved September 8, 2009. 
^ Ford, Gerald (September 10, 1976). "Letter to the Archbishop of Cincinnati". The American Presidency Project. Retrieved June 12, 2007. 
^ Greene, John Edward. (1995). The presidency of Gerald R. Ford. Lawrence: University Press of Kansas. p. 33. ISBN 0-7006-0639-4. 
^ "The Best of Interviews With Gerald Ford". Larry King Live Weekend. CNN. February 3, 2001. Retrieved June 12, 2007. 
^ a b c Mieczkowski, Yanek (2005). Gerald Ford and the Challenges of the 1970s. Lexington, Kentucky: University Press of Kentucky. pp. 283–284, 290–294. ISBN 0-8131-2349-6. 
^ "Trip To China". Gerald R. Ford Presidential Library. University of Texas. Retrieved December 31, 2006. 
^ "President Gerald R. Ford's Address in Helsinki Before the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe". USA-presidents.info. Archived from the original on October 10, 2007. Retrieved April 4, 2007. 
^ "About Human Rights Watch". Human Rights Watch. Retrieved December 31, 2006. 
^ "President Ford got Canada into G7". Canadian Broadcasting Company. December 27, 2006. Retrieved December 31, 2006. 
^ "National Security Archive - 30+ Years of Freedom of Information Action". nsarchive.gwu.edu. 
^ "Ford White House Altered Rockefeller Commission Report". nsarchive.gwu.edu. 
^ Gerald Ford, A Time to Heal, 1979, p.240
^ Rabin, Yitzak (1996), The Rabin Memoirs, University of California Press, p. 256, ISBN 978-0-520-20766-0
^ Goldstein], Yitzhak Rabin ; [translated by Dov (1996). The Rabin memoirs (Expanded ed.). Berkeley: University of California Press. p. 261. ISBN 0-520-20766-1. 
^ George Lenczowski, American Presidents, and the Middle East, 1990, p.150
^ Gerald Ford, A Time to Heal, 1979, p.298
^ Church, Peter, ed. (2006). A Short History of South-East Asia. Singapore: John Wiley & Sons. pp. 193–194. ISBN 978-0-470-82181-7. 
^ a b c Brinkley, Douglas (2007). Gerald R. Ford. New York, NY: Times Books. pp. 89–98. ISBN 0-8050-6909-7. 
^ Karnow, Stanley (1991). Vietnam: A History. Viking. 
^ "Vietnam's President Thieu resigns". BBC News. April 21, 1975. Retrieved September 24, 2009. 
^ Bowman, John S. (1985). The Vietnam War: An Almanac. Pharos Books. p. 434. ISBN 0-911818-85-5. 
^ Plummer Alston Jones (2004). "Still struggling for equality: American public library services with minorities". Libraries Unlimited. p.84. ISBN 1-59158-243-1
^ Robinson, William Courtland (1998). Terms of refuge: the Indochinese exodus & the international response. Zed Books. p. 127. ISBN 1-85649-610-4. 
^ Gawthorpe, A. J. (2009), "The Ford Administration and Security Policy in the Asia-Pacific after the Fall of Saigon", The Historical Journal, 52(3):697–716.
^ "Debrief of the Mayaguez Captain and Crew". Gerald R. Ford Presidential Library. May 19, 1975. Retrieved November 18, 2010. 
^ "Capture and Release of SS Mayaguez by Khmer Rouge forces in May 1975". United States Merchant Marine. 2000. Retrieved December 31, 2006. 
^ Gerald R. Ford, A Time to Heal, p. 284
^ Cécile Menétray-Monchau (August 2005), "The Mayaguez Incident as an Epilogue to the Vietnam War and its Reflection on the Post-Vietnam Political Equilibrium in Southeast Asia", Cold War History, p. 346.
^ Gawthorpe, Andrew J. (September 1, 2009). "The Ford Administration and Security Policy in the Asia-Pacific after the Fall of Saigon". The Historical Journal. 52 (03): 707–709. doi:10.1017/S0018246X09990082. ISSN 1469-5103. 
^ Oberdorfer, Don (2001), The two Koreas: a contemporary history (New York, NY: Basic Books), pp. 47–83.
^ Gawthorpe, "The Ford Administration and Security Policy", p. 711.
^ Gawthorpe, "The Ford Administration and Security Policy", pp. 710–714.
^ Ricklefs, "A History of Modern Indonesia since c. 1200", p. 342.
^ 1977 hearing of the House International Relations Committee
^ "Report: U.S. Arms Transfers to Indonesia 1975–1997 – World Policy Institute – Research Project". World Policy Institute. Retrieved July 13, 2014. 
^ "1975 Year in Review: Ford Assassinations Attempts". Upi.com. Retrieved May 30, 2011. 
^ "Election Is Crunch Time for U.S. Secret Service". National Geographic News. Retrieved March 2, 2008.
^ "Charles Manson follower Lynette 'Squeaky' Fromme released from prison after more than 30 years". Daily News. New York. Associated Press. August 14, 2009. Retrieved September 7, 2011. 
^ United States Secret Service. "Public Report of the White House Security Review". United States Department of the Treasury. Retrieved January 3, 2007. 
^ Lee, Vic (January 2, 2007). "Interview: Woman Who Tried To Assassinate Ford". San Francisco: KGO-TV. Retrieved January 3, 2007. 
^ "John Paul Stevens". Oyez. Archived from the original on August 22, 2006. Retrieved December 31, 2006. 
^ "News Release, Congressman Gerald R. Ford" (PDF). The Gerald R. Ford Presidential Library. April 15, 1970. Retrieved November 18, 2010. 
^ Levenick, Christopher (September 25, 2005). "The Conservative Persuasion". The Daily Standard. Retrieved December 31, 2006. 
^ Letter from Gerald Ford to Michael Treanor Archived June 14, 2007, at the Wayback Machine.. Fordham University, September 21, 2005. Retrieved March 2, 2008.
^ Biographical Directory of Federal Judges, a public-domain publication of the Federal Judicial Center.
^ Another Loss For the Gipper. Time, March 29, 1976. Retrieved December 31, 2006.
^ VH1 News Presents: Politics: A Pop Culture History Premiering Wednesday, October 20 at 10:00 pm (ET/PT). PRNewswire October 19, 2004. Retrieved December 31, 2006.
^ Election of 1976: A Political Outsider Prevails. C-SPAN. Retrieved December 31, 2006.
^ Shabecoff, Philip. "160,000 Mark Two 1775 Battles; Concord Protesters Jeer Ford – Reconciliation Plea", The New York Times, April 20, 1975, p. 1.
^ Shabecoff, Philip. "Ford, on Bicentennial Trip, Bids U.S. Heed Old Values", The New York Times, April 19, 1975, p. 1.
^ "1976 Presidential Debates". CNN. Retrieved September 28, 2011. 
^ Lehrer, Jim (2000). "1976:No Audio and No Soviet Domination". Debating Our Destiny. PBS. Retrieved March 31, 2007. 
^ "Presidential Election 1976 States Carried". multied.com. Retrieved December 31, 2006.
^ "Jimmy Carter". U.S. Inaugural Addresses. Bartleby.com. January 20, 1977. Retrieved August 14, 2009. 
^ "The Man Who Ate Hollywood". Vanity Fair. November 2005. Retrieved February 19, 2012. 
^ Perrone, Marguerite. "Eisenhower Fellowship: A History 1953–2003". 2003.
^ Naughton, James M (December 27, 2006). "The Real Jerry Ford". PoynterOnline. Retrieved March 31, 2007. 
^ Smith, Gaddis (1979). "A Time to Heal". Foreign Affairs. Council on Foreign Relations. Archived from the original on November 7, 2004. Retrieved April 26, 2009. 
^ Kornblut, Anne (December 29, 2006). "Ford Arranged His Funeral to Reflect Himself and Drew in a Former Adversary". The New York Times. Retrieved April 4, 2007. 
^ Updegrove, Mark K. (August–September 2006). "Flying Coach to Cairo". American Heritage. 57 (4). Retrieved September 28, 2011. "Certainly few observers in January 1977 would have predicted that Jimmy and I would become the closest of friends," Ford said in 2000. 
^ Lessenberry, Jack (April 20, 1981). "Ford to Formally Unveil His Presidential Library". Toledo Blade. Retrieved September 3, 2009. 
^ Ford, Gerald R. (September 18, 1981). "Remarks at the Dedication of the Gerald R. Ford Museum in Grand Rapids, Michigan". Gerald R. Ford Presidential Library. Retrieved November 18, 2010. 
^ Tucker, Brian (September 18, 1981). "Reagan Praises Ford at Opening of Museum". Boston Globe. Retrieved September 3, 2009. 
^ Thomas, Evan (2007). "The 38th President: More Than Met the Eye". Newsweek. Retrieved January 4, 2009. 
^ Allen, Richard V. "How the Bush Dynasty Almost Wasn't" Archived July 6, 2008, at the Wayback Machine., Hoover Institution, reprinted from the New York Times Magazine, July 30, 2000. Retrieved December 31, 2006.
^ "Reagan campaign ad". Livingroomcandidate.org. November 4, 1979. Retrieved January 22, 2011. 
^ Uhlenbrock, Tom (October 8, 1980). "Former President Gerald Ford said Wednesday former President Richard.." UPI. 
^ "Former President Gerald Ford Friday accused President Carter of.." UPI. October 3, 1980. 
^ Brownstein, Pamela (April 3, 1981). "Former President Gerald Ford says people who commit crimes.." UPI. 
^ "Former President Gerald Ford had some advice today for.." UPI. September 18, 1981. 
^ "Former President Gerald Ford continued his campaign in favor.." UPI. October 20, 1981. 
^ Sawislak, Arnold (March 24, 1982). "Former President Gerald Ford endorsed President Reagan's handling of.." UPI. 
^ Whipple, Scott (October 18, 2005). "A $3m gift". The New Britain Herald. Archived from the original on May 1, 2011. Retrieved September 9, 2009. 
^ Henry, Tamara. "Gerald Ford: 'Carter administration blew it'". UPI. 
^ "Former President Gerald Ford and former Vice President Walter.." UPI. October 21, 1982. 
^ "Former presidents Gerald Ford and Jimmy Carter have signed.." UPI. January 2, 1984. 
^ "Archives - Philly.com". articles.philly.com. 
^ Greenhouse, Linda; Times, Special to the New York (October 24, 1987). "Bork&#146;s Nomination Is Rejected, 58-42; Reagan &#146;Saddened&#146;" – via www.nytimes.com. 
^ New York Media, LLC (January 25, 1988). New York Magazine. New York Media, LLC. pp. 19–. ISSN 0028-7369. Retrieved February 19, 2012. 
^ "Ford's Citigroup Connection". The Wall Street Journal. December 27, 2006. Retrieved February 19, 2012. 
^ "Ike commemorated with 100th birthday bash". UPI. October 14, 1990. 
^ "Carter, Ford Join Other Former Presidents in Backing Gun Bill". Los Angeles Times. Associated Press. April 29, 1991. Retrieved July 4, 2014. 
^ Eaton, William J. (May 5, 1994). "Ford, Carter, Reagan Push for Gun Ban". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved July 4, 2014. 
^ Langford, Mark. "Ford warns Clinton victory would return America to Carter era". UPI. 
^ Bennet, James (April 29, 1997). "Presidents Call for Big Citizenship, Not Big Government". New York Times. 
^ Berke, Richard L. (January 20, 1998). "Ford Urges G.O.P. to Drop Abortion Issue and Shift Center". New York Times. 
^ "Carter breaks silence on Clinton, says nation will heal". Emory. September 28, 1998. 
^ Price, Deb. "Gerald Ford: Treat gay couples equally" Archived January 20, 2013, at the Wayback Machine.. The Detroit News, October 29, 2001. Retrieved December 28, 2006
^ Stolberg, Sheryl Gay. "Vocal Gay Republicans Upsetting Conservatives", The New York Times, June 1, 2003, p. N26.
^ Woodward, Bob. "Ford Disagreed With Bush About Invading Iraq". The Washington Post, December 28, 2006. Retrieved December 28, 2006
^ "Embargoed Interview Reveals Ford Opposed Iraq War" Archived December 28, 2006, at the Wayback Machine.. Democracy Now Headlines for December 28, 2006. Retrieved December 28, 2006
^ "Ford undergoes knee surgery". UPI. April 4, 1990. 
^ "Gerald Ford recovering after strokes". BBC, August 2, 2000. Retrieved December 31, 2006.
^ Hospitalized After Suffering a Stroke, Former President Ford Is Expected to Fully Recover The New York Times, August 3, 2000. Retrieved July 5, 2008.
^ Former "President Ford, 92, hospitalized with pneumonia". USA Today, Associated Press, January 17, 2006. Retrieved October 19, 2007.
^ "Gerald Ford released from hospital". MSNBC, Associated Press, July 26, 2006. Retrieved December 31, 2006.
^ "Former President Gerald Ford Released from Hospital". Fox News. October 16, 2006. Archived from the original on April 29, 2011. Retrieved September 3, 2009. 
^ "Gerald Ford Dies At Age 93". CNN Transcript December 26, 2006. Retrieved March 2, 2008.
^ DeFrank T: Write It When I'm Gone, G. Putnam & Sons, New York, NY, 2007.
^ Stout, David (January 2, 2007). "Bush and ex-presidents eulogize Gerald R. Ford". The New York Times. Retrieved September 3, 2009. 
^ Davey, Monica (January 4, 2007). "Ford Is Buried After Thousands in Hometown Pay Respects". The New York Times. Retrieved October 16, 2009. 
^ Ray, Mark (2007). "Eagle Scout Welcome Gerald Ford Home". Scouting Magazine. Boy Scouts of America. Retrieved March 5, 2007. 
^ Anne E. Kornblut, "Ford Arranged His Funeral to Reflect Himself and Drew in a Former Adversary", The New York Times, December 29, 2006.
^ "Funeral: Marching Band Plays in His Honor". Eugene Register-Guard. January 3, 2007. Retrieved September 2, 2009. 
^ "Former first lady Betty Ford dies at 93". MSNBC. July 9, 2011. Retrieved September 9, 2011. 
^ "Ford eclipses Reagan as oldest ex-president". USA Today. November 12, 2006. Retrieved March 2, 2008. 
^ "US ex-President Gerald Ford dies". BBC News. December 27, 2006. Retrieved October 16, 2009. 
^ a b c "Gerald Ford, Betty's Husband". The Phoenix Media/Communications Group. Retrieved December 4, 2009. 
^ a b c d "Gerald R Ford". The Independent. London. January 21, 2009. Retrieved December 2, 2009. 
^ Jake, Coyle (September 12, 2008). "'SNL' returns with spotlight on prez impersonators". CBS Interactive Inc. Retrieved September 16, 2008. 
^ "Chevy Chase recalls Ford as 'a terrific guy': 'SNL' comedian became famous in the 1970s portraying president as klutz". MSNBC. December 27, 2006. Retrieved September 16, 2008. 
^ "Gerald R. Ford 1913–2006". Van Nuys, Calif.: Sons of the Revolution in the State of California. 2006. Retrieved January 8, 2010. 
^ The Supreme Council, Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite, Southern Jurisdiction, USA.
^ "Gerald Ford". The American Presidency Project. University of California – Santa Barbara. Retrieved January 17, 2007. 
^ masons, Wayne Bradywrote in; 07:29:00, 2006-12-31 07:29:00 Wayne Brady mr_lunch masons 2006-12-31. "Masonic Record of Gerald Ford". Retrieved 2016-12-06. 
^ "Masonic American Presidents | The Grand Lodge of Minnesota". www.mn-masons.org. Retrieved 2016-12-06. 
^ Larson, Donna (January 11, 1977). "The Daily Diary of President Gerald R. Ford" (PDF). www.fordlibrarymuseum.gov. Gerald R. Ford Presidential Library. Retrieved December 6, 2016. 
^ reinanzaka-sc.o.oo7.jp/kiroku/documents/20140523-3-kiji-list.pdf
^ "Old Tom Morris Award Recipients". Golf Course Superintendents Association of America. Retrieved September 28, 2011. 
^ "Palm Springs Walk of Stars: By Date Dedicated" (PDF). 
^ "Politicians Who Received the Medal of Freedom". The Political Graveyard. Retrieved December 31, 2006. 
^ "Gerald Ford". John F. Kennedy Library Foundation. 2001. Retrieved December 31, 2006. 
^ "Gerald R. Ford Middle School, Grand Rapids Public Schools". grpublicschools.org. Retrieved February 25, 2012. 
^ "President Ford Field Service Council, Boy Scouts of America". michiganscouting.org. Retrieved September 11, 2010. 


Bibliography[edit]


Brinkley, Douglas (2007). Gerald R. Ford. New York, NY: Times Books. ISBN 0-8050-6909-7.  short biography
Cannon, James. Gerald R. Ford: An Honorable Life (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 2013) 482 pp. biography by a member of the Ford administration

Cannon, James (1993). Time and Chance: Gerald R. Ford's Appointment with History. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press. ISBN 0-472-08482-8.  older full-scale biography


Conley, Richard S. "Presidential Influence and Minority Party Liaison on Veto Overrides: New Evidence from the Ford Presidency". American Politics Research 2002 30(1): 34–65. ISSN 1532-673X Fulltext: in Swetswise
Firestone, Bernard J. and Alexej Ugrinsky (eds) (1992). Gerald R. Ford and the Politics of Post-Watergate America. Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press. ISBN 0-313-28009-6. CS1 maint: Extra text: authors list (link)
Greene, John Robert (1992). The Limits of Power: The Nixon and Ford Administrations. Bloomington: Indiana University Press. ISBN 0-253-32637-0. 
Greene, John Robert (1995). The Presidency of Gerald R. Ford. Lawrence: University Press of Kansas. ISBN 0-7006-0639-4. , the major scholarly study
Hersey, John Richard. The President: A Minute-By-Minute Account of a Week in the Life of Gerald Ford. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. 1975.
Hult, Karen M. and Walcott, Charles E. Empowering the White House: Governance under Nixon, Ford, and Carter. University Press of Kansas, 2004.
Jespersen, T. Christopher. "Kissinger, Ford, and Congress: the Very Bitter End in Vietnam". Pacific Historical Review 2002 71(3): 439–473. ISSN 0030-8684 Fulltext: in University of California; Swetswise; Jstor and Ebsco
Jespersen, T. Christopher. "The Bitter End and the Lost Chance in Vietnam: Congress, the Ford Administration, and the Battle over Vietnam, 1975–76". Diplomatic History 2000 24(2): 265–293. ISSN 0145-2096 Fulltext: in Swetswise, Ingenta, Ebsco
Kaufman, Scott (2017). Ambition, Pragmatism, and Party: A Political Biography of Gerald R. Ford. Lawrence, KS: University Press of Kansas. ISBN 978-0-7006-2500-0.  latest full-scale biography
Maynard, Christopher A. "Manufacturing Voter Confidence: a Video Analysis of the American 1976 Presidential and Vice-presidential Debates". Historical Journal of Film, Radio and Television 1997 17(4): 523–562. ISSN 0143-9685 Fulltext: in Ingenta


Primary sources[edit]


Ford, Gerald R. (1994). Presidential Perspectives from the National Archives. Washington, DC: National Archives and Records Administration. ISBN 1-880875-04-7. 
Ford, Gerald R. (1987). Humor and the Presidency. New York: Arbor House. ISBN 0-87795-918-8. 
Ford, Gerald R. (1979). A Time to Heal: The Autobiography of Gerald R. Ford. New York, NY: Harper & Row. ISBN 0-06-011297-2. 
"Gerald Ford Presidential Autograph Letters". SMF. Shapell Manuscript Foundation. 
Ford, Gerald R. (1973). Selected Speeches. Arlington, Va.: R. W. Beatty. ISBN 0-87948-029-7. 
Ford, Gerald R. (1965). Portrait of the assassin (Lee Harvey Oswald). ASIN B0006BMZM4. 
Ford, Betty (1978). The Times of My Life. New York: Harper & Row. ISBN 0-06-011298-0. 
Casserly, John J. (1977). The Ford White House: Diary of a Speechwriter. Boulder: Colorado Associated University Press. ISBN 0-87081-106-1. 
Coyne, John R. (1979). Fall in and Cheer. Garden City/N.Y.: Doubleday. ISBN 0-385-11119-3. 
DeFrank, Thomas. (2007). Write It When I'm Gone: Remarkable Off-the-Record Conversations with Gerald R. Ford. New York: G.P. Putnam's Sons. ISBN 0-399-15450-7. 
Gergen, David. (2000). Eyewitness to Power: The Essence of Leadership. New York, NY: Simon & Schuster. ISBN 0-684-82663-1. , by speechwriter
Hartmann, Robert T. (1980). Palace Politics: An Insider's Account of the Ford Years. New York: McGraw-Hill. ISBN 0-07-026951-3. , by chief of staff
Hersey, John (1980). Aspects of the Presidency: Truman and Ford in Office (The President: A Minute-by-Minute Account of a Week in the Life of Gerald Ford). New Haven: Ticknor & Fields. ISBN 0-89919-012-X. 
Kissinger, Henry A. (1999). Years of Renewal. New York: Touchstone. ISBN 0-684-85572-0.  by Secretary of State
Thompson, Kenneth (ed.) (1980). The Ford Presidency: Twenty-Two Intimate Perspectives of Gerald Ford. Lanham: University Press of America. ISBN 0-8191-6960-9. CS1 maint: Extra text: authors list (link)


External links[edit]

Find more aboutGerald Fordat Wikipedia's sister projects

Definitions from Wiktionary
Media from Wikimedia Commons
Quotations from Wikiquote
Texts from Wikisource





Official sites

Gerald R. Ford Presidential Library and Museum
Gerald R. Ford Presidential Foundation
White House biography

Media coverage

"Gerald Ford collected news and commentary". The New York Times. 
Appearances on C-SPAN

"Life Portrait of Gerald R. Ford", from C-SPAN's American Presidents: Life Portraits, November 22, 1999



Other


United States Congress. "Gerald Ford (id: F000260)". Biographical Directory of the United States Congress. 
Gerald Ford: A Resource Guide from the Library of Congress.
Essays on Gerald Ford, each member of his cabinet and First Lady from the Miller Center of Public Affairs
Works by or about Gerald Ford at Internet Archive
Gerald Ford on IMDb 







v
t
e


Gerald R. Ford






38th President of the United States (1974–1977)
40th Vice President of the United States (1973–1974)
U.S. Representative for MI-5 (1949–1973)





Presidency
(timeline)



Inauguration
Federal-Aid Highway Amendments of 1974
Education for All Handicapped Children Act
Vladivostok Summit Meeting on Arms Control
Helsinki Accords
National Security Study Memorandum 200
Nixon pardon
Whip inflation now
Wilson desk
Assassination attempts (Sacramento
San Francisco)
State of the Union Addresses (1975
1976)
Cabinet
Federal judiciary appointments

Supreme Court candidates
controversies







Life



Early life
Gerald R. Ford Birthsite and Gardens
President Gerald R. Ford Jr. Boyhood Home
Gerald R. Ford Jr. House
Warren Commission
AEI World Forum
Death and state funeral
Gerald R. Ford Presidential Museum
Gerald R. Ford Presidential Library





Elections



United States House of Representatives elections, 1948
1950
1952
1954
1956
1958
1960
1962
1964
1966
1968
1970
1972
Republican Party presidential primaries, 1976
1980
Republican National Convention, 1976
1980
United States presidential election, 1976





Legacy



Gerald R. Ford International Airport
Gerald R. Ford Award
Gerald R. Ford School of Public Policy
Ford House Office Building
USS Gerald R. Ford (CVN-78)
Gerald R. Ford Freeway
U.S. Postage stamps





Family



Betty Ford (wife)
Michael Gerald Ford (son)
John Gardner Ford (son)
Steven Meigs Ford (son)
Susan Ford Bales (daughter)
Dorothy Gardner Ford (mother)
Leslie Lynch King Sr. (father)
Gerald Rudolff Ford (stepfather)
Thomas Gardner Ford (half-brother)
Charles Henry King (grandfather)
Liberty (family dog)








← Richard Nixon
Jimmy Carter →


 Category










Offices and distinctions







U.S. House of Representatives


Preceded by
Bartel J. Jonkman
Member of the U.S. House of Representatives
from Michigan's 5th congressional district
1949–1973
Succeeded by
Richard Vander Veen


Preceded by
Charles A. Halleck
House Minority Leader
1965–1973
Succeeded by
John Jacob Rhodes


Party political offices


Preceded by
Charles B. Hoeven
Chair of the House Republican Conference
1963–1965
Succeeded by
Melvin Laird


Preceded by
Charles A. Halleck
House Republican Leader
1965–1973
Succeeded by
John Jacob Rhodes


First
Response to the State of the Union address
1966, 1967, 1968
Served alongside: Everett Dirksen (1966, 1967), Howard Baker, George H. W. Bush, Peter Dominick, Robert Griffin, Thomas Kuchel, Mel Laird, Bob Mathias, George Murphy, Dick Poff, Chuck Percy, Al Quie, Charlotte Reid, Hugh Scott, Bill Steiger, John Tower (1968)
Vacant
Title next held by
Donald Fraser, Scoop Jackson, Mike Mansfield, John McCormack, Patsy Mink, Ed Muskie, Bill Proxmire


Preceded by
Richard Nixon
Republican nominee for President of the United States
1976
Succeeded by
Ronald Reagan


Political offices


Preceded by
Spiro Agnew
Vice President of the United States
1973–1974
Succeeded by
Nelson Rockefeller


Preceded by
Richard Nixon
President of the United States
1974–1977
Succeeded by
Jimmy Carter


Diplomatic posts


Preceded by
Valéry Giscard d'Estaing
Chair of the Group of Seven
1976
Succeeded by
James Callaghan


Honorary titles


Preceded by
Ronald Reagan
Oldest living President of the United States
2004–2006
Succeeded by
George H. W. Bush


Preceded by
Rosa Parks
Persons who have lain in state or honor
in the United States Capitol rotunda
2006–2007
Succeeded by
Robert Byrd











Articles related to Gerald Ford











v
t
e


Presidents of the United States (list)







George Washington (1789–1797)
John Adams (1797–1801)
Thomas Jefferson (1801–1809)
James Madison (1809–1817)
James Monroe (1817–1825)
John Quincy Adams (1825–1829)
Andrew Jackson (1829–1837)
Martin Van Buren (1837–1841)
William Henry Harrison (1841)
John Tyler (1841–1845)
James K. Polk (1845–1849)
Zachary Taylor (1849–1850)
Millard Fillmore (1850–1853)
Franklin Pierce (1853–1857)
James Buchanan (1857–1861)
Abraham Lincoln (1861–1865)
Andrew Johnson (1865–1869)
Ulysses S. Grant (1869–1877)
Rutherford B. Hayes (1877–1881)
James A. Garfield (1881)
Chester A. Arthur (1881–1885)
Grover Cleveland (1885–1889)
Benjamin Harrison (1889–1893)
Grover Cleveland (1893–1897)
William McKinley (1897–1901)
Theodore Roosevelt (1901–1909)
William H. Taft (1909–1913)
Woodrow Wilson (1913–1921)
Warren G. Harding (1921–1923)
Calvin Coolidge (1923–1929)
Herbert Hoover (1929–1933)
Franklin D. Roosevelt (1933–1945)
Harry S. Truman (1945–1953)
Dwight D. Eisenhower (1953–1961)
John F. Kennedy (1961–1963)
Lyndon B. Johnson (1963–1969)
Richard Nixon (1969–1974)
Gerald Ford (1974–1977)
Jimmy Carter (1977–1981)
Ronald Reagan (1981–1989)
George H. W. Bush (1989–1993)
Bill Clinton (1993–2001)
George W. Bush (2001–2009)
Barack Obama (2009–2017)
Donald Trump (2017–present)









Presidency timelines




Wilson
Harding
Coolidge
Hoover
F. D. Roosevelt

first 100 days


Truman
Eisenhower
Kennedy
L. B. Johnson
Nixon
Ford
Carter
Reagan
G. H. W. Bush
Clinton
G. W. Bush
Obama

first 100 days


Trump

first 100 days











 Book
 Category












v
t
e


United States Republican Party



Chairpersons
of the RNC



Morgan
Raymond
Ward
Claflin
Morgan
Chandler
Cameron
Jewell
Sabin
Jones
Quay
Clarkson
Carter
Hanna
Payne
Cortelyou
New
Hitchcock
Hill
Rosewater
Hilles
Wilcox
Hays
Adams
Butler
Work
Huston
Fess
Sanders
Fletcher
Hamilton
Martin
Walsh
Spangler
Brownell
Reece
Scott
Gabrielson
Summerfield
Roberts
Hall
Alcorn
T. B. Morton
Miller
Burch
Bliss
R. Morton
Dole
Bush
Smith
Brock
Richards
Laxalt/Fahrenkopf
Reagan/Fahrenkopf
Atwater
Yeutter
Bond
Barbour
Nicholson
Gilmore
Racicot
Gillespie
Mehlman
Martínez
Duncan
Steele
Priebus
Romney McDaniel





Presidential tickets



Frémont/Dayton
Lincoln/Hamlin
Lincoln/Johnson
Grant/Colfax
Grant/Wilson
Hayes/Wheeler
Garfield/Arthur
Blaine/Logan
Harrison/Morton
Harrison/Reid
McKinley/Hobart
McKinley/Roosevelt
Roosevelt/Fairbanks
Taft/Sherman
Taft/Sherman/Butler
Hughes/Fairbanks
Harding/Coolidge
Coolidge/Dawes
Hoover/Curtis (twice)
Landon/Knox
Willkie/McNary
Dewey/Bricker
Dewey/Warren
Eisenhower/Nixon (twice)
Nixon/Lodge
Goldwater/Miller
Nixon/Agnew (twice)
Ford/Dole
Reagan/G. H. W. Bush (twice)
G. H. W. Bush/Quayle (twice)
Dole/Kemp
G. W. Bush/Cheney (twice)
McCain/Palin
Romney/Ryan
Trump/Pence





Parties by state
and territory




State



Alabama
Alaska
Arizona
Arkansas
California
Colorado
Connecticut
Delaware
Florida
Georgia
Hawaii
Idaho
Illinois
Indiana
Iowa
Kansas
Kentucky
Louisiana
Maine
Maryland
Massachusetts
Michigan
Minnesota
Mississippi
Missouri
Montana
Nebraska
Nevada
New Hampshire
New Jersey
New Mexico
New York
North Carolina
North Dakota
Ohio
Oklahoma
Oregon
Pennsylvania
Rhode Island
South Carolina
South Dakota
Tennessee
Texas
Utah
Vermont
Virginia
Washington
West Virginia
Wisconsin
Wyoming





Territory



American Samoa
District of Columbia
Guam
Northern Mariana Islands
Puerto Rico
Virgin Islands








Conventions
(list)



1856 (Philadelphia)
1860 (Chicago)
1864 (Baltimore)
1868 (Chicago)
1872 (Philadelphia)
1876 (Cincinnati)
1880 (Chicago)
1884 (Chicago)
1888 (Chicago)
1892 (Minneapolis)
1896 (Saint Louis)
1900 (Philadelphia)
1904 (Chicago)
1908 (Chicago)
1912 (Chicago)
1916 (Chicago)
1920 (Chicago)
1924 (Cleveland)
1928 (Kansas City)
1932 (Chicago)
1936 (Cleveland)
1940 (Philadelphia)
1944 (Chicago)
1948 (Philadelphia)
1952 (Chicago)
1956 (San Francisco)
1960 (Chicago)
1964 (San Francisco)
1968 (Miami Beach)
1972 (Miami Beach)
1976 (Kansas City)
1980 (Detroit)
1984 (Dallas)
1988 (New Orleans)
1992 (Houston)
1996 (San Diego)
2000 (Philadelphia)
2004 (New York)
2008 (St. Paul)
2012 (Tampa)
2016 (Cleveland)





Affiliated
organizations




Fundraising groups



National Republican Congressional Committee
National Republican Senatorial Committee
Republican Conference of the United States House of Representatives
Republican Conference of the United States Senate
Republican Governors Association





Sectional groups



College Republicans

Chairmen


Congressional Hispanic Conference
International Democrat Union
Log Cabin Republicans
Republican Jewish Coalition
Republican National Hispanic Assembly
Republicans Abroad
Teen Age Republicans
Young Republicans





Factional groups



Republican Main Street Partnership
Republican Majority for Choice
Republican Liberty Caucus
Republican National Coalition for Life
Republican Study Committee
ConservAmerica
Liberty Caucus
Freedom Caucus
Ripon Society
The Wish List








Related articles



History
Primaries
Debates
2009 chairmanship election
2011 chairmanship election
2013 chairmanship election
2015 chairmanship election
2017 chairmanship election
Bibliography
Timeline of modern American conservatism






 Republican Party portal










v
t
e


Vice Presidents of the United States (list)







John Adams (1789–1797)
Thomas Jefferson (1797–1801)
Aaron Burr (1801–1805)
George Clinton (1805–1812)
Elbridge Gerry (1813–1814)
Daniel D. Tompkins (1817–1825)
John C. Calhoun (1825–1832)
Martin Van Buren (1833–1837)
Richard M. Johnson (1837–1841)
John Tyler (1841)
George M. Dallas (1845–1849)
Millard Fillmore (1849–1850)
William R. King (1853)
John C. Breckinridge (1857–1861)
Hannibal Hamlin (1861–1865)
Andrew Johnson (1865)
Schuyler Colfax (1869–1873)
Henry Wilson (1873–1875)
William A. Wheeler (1877–1881)
Chester A. Arthur (1881)
Thomas A. Hendricks (1885)
Levi P. Morton (1889–1893)
Adlai Stevenson (1893–1897)
Garret Hobart (1897–1899)
Theodore Roosevelt (1901)
Charles W. Fairbanks (1905–1909)
James S. Sherman (1909–1912)
Thomas R. Marshall (1913–1921)
Calvin Coolidge (1921–1923)
Charles G. Dawes (1925–1929)
Charles Curtis (1929–1933)
John N. Garner (1933–1941)
Henry A. Wallace (1941–1945)
Harry S. Truman (1945)
Alben W. Barkley (1949–1953)
Richard Nixon (1953–1961)
Lyndon B. Johnson (1961–1963)
Hubert Humphrey (1965–1969)
Spiro Agnew (1969–1973)
Gerald Ford (1973–1974)
Nelson Rockefeller (1974–1977)
Walter Mondale (1977–1981)
George H. W. Bush (1981–1989)
Dan Quayle (1989–1993)
Al Gore (1993–2001)
Dick Cheney (2001–2009)
Joe Biden (2009–2017)
Mike Pence (2017–present)












 Category
 Commons












v
t
e


Minority Leaders of the U.S. House of Representatives






Bailey
Richardson
Williams
Clark
Mann
Clark
Kitchin
Garrett
Garner
Snell
Martin
Rayburn
Martin
Rayburn
Martin
Halleck
Ford
Rhodes
Michel
Gephardt
Pelosi
Boehner
Pelosi















v
t
e


Republican Party Leaders in the United States House of Representatives






Payne
Mann
Mondell
Longworth
Tilson
Snell
Martin
Halleck
Martin
Halleck
Martin
Halleck
Ford
Rhodes
Michel
Armey
DeLay
Blunti
Boehner
Cantor
McCarthy









(i) - interim










v
t
e


Republican Conference Chairs of the United States House of Representatives






Morrill
Schenck
Banks
Blair
Maynard
McCrary
Hale
Frye
Robeson
Cannon
Henderson
Grosvenor
Cannon
Hepburn
Currier
Greene
Towner
S. Anderson
Hawley
Luce
Lehlbach
Woodruff
Hope
Hoeven
Ford
Laird
J. Anderson
Devine
Kemp
Cheney
Lewis
Armey
Boehner
Watts
Pryce
Putnam
Pence
Hensarling
McMorris Rodgers















v
t
e


Members of the U.S. House of Representatives from Michigan







Territory



Woodbridge
Sibley
Richard
Wing
Biddle
Wing
Lyon
Jones





At-large



Crary
J. Howard
Kelley
Staebler
















1st district



McClelland
Buel
Penniman
D. Stuart
W. Howard
Cooper
W. Howard
Granger
Beaman
Waldron
Field
A. S. Williams
Newberry
Lord
Maybury
J. L. Chipman
Griffin
Corliss
Lucking
Denby
Doremus
Codd
Clancy
Sosnowski
Clancy
Sadowski
Tenerowicz
Sadowski
Machrowicz
Nedzi
Conyers
Stupak
Benishek
Bergman





2nd district



Lyon
J. S. Chipman
E. Bradley
C. Stuart
Sprague
C. Stuart
Noble
Waldron
Beaman
Upson
Stoughton
Waldron
Willits
Eldredge
Allen
Gorman
Spalding
H. Smith
Townsend
Wedemeyer
Beakes
Bacon
Beakes
Michener
Lehr
Michener
Meader
Vivian
Esch
Pursell
Hoekstra
Huizenga





3rd district



Hunt
Bingham
J. Conger
Clark
Walbridge
Kellogg
Longyear
Blair
Willard
McGowan
Lacey
O'Donnell
Burrows
Milnes
A. Todd
Gardner
J. Smith
Frankhauser
J. Smith
A. B. Williams
Hooper
Kimball
Main
Shafer
Johansen
P. Todd
G. Brown
Wolpe
Henry
Ehlers
Amash





4th district



Stevens
Peck
Leach
Trowbridge
Kellogg
Ferry
Foster
Burrows
Potter
Keightley
Burrows
Yaple
Burrows
Thomas
Hamilton
Ketcham
Foulkes
Hoffman
Hutchinson
Stockman
Siljander
Upton
Camp
Moolenaar





5th district



Baldwin
Trowbridge
O. Conger
Foster
W. Williams
Stone
Webber
Houseman
Comstock
M. Ford
Belknap
M. Ford
Belknap
Richardson
W. Smith
Diekema
Sweet
Mapes
Jonkman
G. Ford
Vander Veen
Sawyer
Henry
Barcia
D. E. Kildee
D. T. Kildee





6th district



Driggs
Strickland
Sutherland
Begole
Durand
Brewer
Spaulding
Winans
Brewer
Stout
Aitken
S. Smith
Kelley
Hudson
Person
Cady
Blackney
Transue
Blackney
Clardy
Hayworth
Chamberlain
Carr
Dunn
Carr
Upton





7th district



O. Conger
Rich
Carleton
Whiting
Snover
Weeks
McMorran
Cramton
Wolcott
McIntosh
O'Hara
Mackie
Riegle
D. E. Kildee
N. Smith
Schwarz
Walberg
Schauer
Walberg





8th district



N. Bradley
Ellsworth
Horr
Tarsney
Bliss
Youmans
Linton
Brucker
Fordney
Vincent
Hart
Crawford
Bentley
Harvey
Traxler
Carr
Chrysler
Stabenow
Rogers
M. Bishop





9th district



Hubbell
Cutcheon
H. Wheeler
Moon
R. Bishop
McLaughlin
Harry W. Musselwhite
Engel
Thompson
Griffin
Vander Jagt
D. E. Kildee
Knollenberg
Peters
Levin





10th district



Hatch
Fisher
F. Wheeler
Weadock
Crump
Aplin
Loud
Woodruff
Loud
Currie
Woodruff
Cederberg
Albosta
Schuette
Camp
Bonior
Miller
Mitchell





11th district



Breitung
Moffatt
Seymour
Stephenson
Avery
Mesick
Darragh
Dodds
Lindquist
Scott
Bohn
P. Brown
Luecke
F. Bradley
Potter
Knox
Clevenger
Ruppe
Davis
Knollenberg
McCotter
Curson
Bentivolio
Trott





12th district



Stephenson
Shelden
Young
MacDonald
James
Hook
Bennett
Hook
Bennett
O'Hara
Bonior
Levin
J. Dingell Jr.
D. Dingell





13th district



Nichols
McLeod
Brennan
McLeod
O'Brien
McLeod
O'Brien
Coffin
O'Brien
Diggs
Crockett
Collins
W. Ford
Rivers
Kilpatrick
Clarke
Conyers





14th district



Weideman
Rabaut
Youngblood
Rabaut
Ryan
Nedzi
Hertel
Conyers
Peters
Lawrence





15th district



J. Dingell Sr.
J. Dingell Jr.
W. Ford
Collins
Kilpatrick
J. Dingell Jr.





16th district



Lesinski Sr.
Lesinski Jr.
J. Dingell Jr.





17th district



Dondero
Oakman
Griffiths
Brodhead
Levin





18th district



Dondero
Broomfield
Huber
Blanchard
Broomfield





19th district



Farnum
McDonald
Broomfield















v
t
e


Members of the Warren Commission






Earl Warren (Chairman)
Hale Boggs
John Sherman Cooper
Allen Dulles
Gerald Ford
John J. McCloy
Richard Russell Jr.












v
t
e


Cold War






USA
USSR
ANZUS
NATO
Non-Aligned Movement
SEATO
Warsaw Pact





1940s



Morgenthau Plan
Hukbalahap Rebellion
Dekemvriana
Percentages Agreement
Yalta Conference
Guerrilla war in the Baltic states

Forest Brothers
Operation Priboi
Operation Jungle
Occupation of the Baltic states


Cursed soldiers
Operation Unthinkable
Potsdam Conference
Gouzenko Affair
Division of Korea
Operation Masterdom
Operation Beleaguer
Operation Blacklist Forty
Iran crisis of 1946
Greek Civil War
Baruch Plan
Corfu Channel incident
Turkish Straits crisis
Restatement of Policy on Germany
First Indochina War
Truman Doctrine
Asian Relations Conference
May 1947 Crises
Marshall Plan
1948 Czechoslovak coup d'état
Tito–Stalin Split
Berlin Blockade
Western betrayal
Iron Curtain
Eastern Bloc
Western Bloc
Chinese Civil War (Second round)
Malayan Emergency
Albanian Subversion





1950s



Bamboo Curtain
Korean War
McCarthyism
1953 Iranian coup d'état
Uprising of 1953 in East Germany
Dirty War (Mexico)
Bricker Amendment
1954 Guatemalan coup d'état
Partition of Vietnam
First Taiwan Strait Crisis
Geneva Summit (1955)
Bandung Conference
Poznań 1956 protests
Hungarian Revolution of 1956
Suez Crisis
"We will bury you"
Operation Gladio
Arab Cold War

Syrian Crisis of 1957
1958 Lebanon crisis
Iraqi 14 July Revolution


Sputnik crisis
Second Taiwan Strait Crisis
Cuban Revolution
Kitchen Debate
Sino-Soviet split





1960s



Congo Crisis
1960 U-2 incident
Bay of Pigs Invasion
1960 Turkish coup d'état
Soviet–Albanian split
Berlin Wall
Portuguese Colonial War

Angolan War of Independence
Guinea-Bissau War of Independence
Mozambican War of Independence


Cuban Missile Crisis
Sino-Indian War
Communist insurgency in Sarawak
Iraqi Ramadan Revolution
Sand War
1963 Syrian coup d'état
Vietnam War
1964 Brazilian coup d'état
United States occupation of the Dominican Republic (1965–66)
South African Border War
Transition to the New Order
Domino theory
ASEAN Declaration
Laotian Civil War
1966 Syrian coup d'état
Argentine Revolution
Korean DMZ Conflict
Greek military junta of 1967–74
USS Pueblo incident
Six-Day War
War of Attrition
Dhofar Rebellion
Protests of 1968
French May
Cultural Revolution
Prague Spring
Communist insurgency in Malaysia
Invasion of Czechoslovakia
Iraqi Ba'athist Revolution
Goulash Communism
Sino-Soviet border conflict
CPP–NPA–NDF rebellion
Corrective Move





1970s



Détente
Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty
Black September in Jordan
Corrective Movement (Syria)
Cambodian Civil War
Realpolitik
Ping-pong diplomacy
1971 Turkish military memorandum
Corrective Revolution (Egypt)
Four Power Agreement on Berlin
Bangladesh Liberation War
1972 Nixon visit to China
North Yemen-South Yemen Border Conflict
1973 Chilean coup d'état
Yom Kippur War
Carnation Revolution
Strategic Arms Limitation Talks
Rhodesian Bush War
Angolan Civil War
Mozambican Civil War
Ogaden War
Ethiopian Civil War
Lebanese Civil War
Sino-Albanian split
Cambodian–Vietnamese War
Sino-Vietnamese War
Iranian Revolution
Operation Condor
Dirty War
Korean Air Lines Flight 902
Saur Revolution
New Jewel Movement
1979 Herat uprising
Seven Days to the River Rhine
Struggle against political abuse of psychiatry in the Soviet Union





1980s



Soviet–Afghan War
1980 and 1984 Summer Olympics boycotts
1980 Turkish coup d'état
Invasion of Grenada
1986 Black Sea incident
1988 Black Sea bumping incident
Solidarity

Soviet reaction


Contras
Central American crisis
RYAN
Korean Air Lines Flight 007
Able Archer 83
Star Wars
People Power Revolution
Glasnost
Perestroika
Nagorno-Karabakh War
Tiananmen Square protests of 1989
Revolutions of 1989
Fall of the Berlin Wall





1990s



Mongolian Revolution of 1990
German reunification
Yemeni unification
Fall of communism in Albania
Breakup of Yugoslavia
Dissolution of the Soviet Union
Dissolution of Czechoslovakia





Frozen conflicts



Abkhazia
China-Taiwan
Korea
Nagorno-Karabakh
South Ossetia
Transnistria
Sino-Indian border dispute
North Borneo dispute





Foreign policy



Truman Doctrine
Containment
Eisenhower Doctrine
Domino theory
Hallstein Doctrine
Kennedy Doctrine
Peaceful coexistence
Ostpolitik
Johnson Doctrine
Brezhnev Doctrine
Nixon Doctrine
Ulbricht Doctrine
Carter Doctrine
Reagan Doctrine
Rollback
Sovereignty of Puerto Rico during the Cold War





Ideologies




Capitalism



Chicago school
Keynesianism
Monetarism
Neoclassical economics
Reaganomics
Supply-side economics
Thatcherism





Communism



Marxism–Leninism
Castroism
Eurocommunism
Guevarism
Hoxhaism
Juche
Maoism
Naxalism
Stalinism
Titoism





Other



Islamism
Liberal democracy
Social democracy
Third-Worldism
White supremacy








Organizations



ASEAN
CIA
Comecon
EEC
KGB
MI6
Non-Aligned Movement
SAARC
Safari Club
Stasi





Propaganda



Active measures
Crusade for Freedom
Izvestia
Pravda
Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty
Red Scare
TASS
Voice of America
Voice of Russia





Races



Arms race
Nuclear arms race
Space Race





See also



Allied intervention in the Russian Civil War
Soviet espionage in the United States
Soviet Union–United States relations
Soviet–US summits
Russian espionage in the United States
American espionage in the Soviet Union and Russian Federation
NATO–Russia relations
Brinkmanship
CIA and the Cultural Cold War
Cold War II








Category
Commons
Portal
Timeline
List of conflicts












v
t
e


History of Michigan



Timeline



Glaciation
Paleo-Indian
Archaic
Woodland
Algonquian
French
British
Territory
State





Native



Council of Three Fires
Fox
Kickapoo
Mascouten
Menominee
Miami
Ojibwe (Chippewa)
Odawa (Ottawa)
Potawatomi
Sac (Sauk)





Colonial



Fur Trade
Coureurs des Bois
Voyageurs
Iroquois Wars
New France
Detroit
Fox Wars
Fort Michilimackinac
Seven Years' War
Peace of Paris
Pontiac's Rebellion
Royal Proclamation
Indian Reserve
Quebec Act
Revolutionary War
Treaty of Paris





United States




Military



Jay Treaty
Treaty of Saginaw
Treaty of Chicago
Toledo War
Battle of Windsor
Treaty of Fond du Lac
Treaty of La Pointe
Civil War





Industry



Northwest Territory
Chicago Road
Clinton-Kalamazoo Canal
Auto Makers
River Rouge Plant
Willow Run
Ambassador Bridge
Detroit–Windsor Tunnel
Flint Sit-Down Strike
Mackinac Bridge





Politics



Lewis Cass
Gerald Ford















v
t
e


1932 Michigan Wolverines football—Dickinson national champions






Thomas D. Austin
Chuck Bernard
William F. Borgmann
Cecil Cantrill, Jr.
Russell Damm
Herman Everhardus
Stanley Fay
Gerald Ford
John P. Heston
John Kowalik
Abe Marcovsky
Harry Newman
Russell D. Oliver
Ted Petoskey
John Regeczi
Carl Savage
Willis Ward
Ivy Williamson
Whitey Wistert


Head coach: Harry Kipke


Assistant coaches: Jack Blott
Franklin Cappon
Ray Courtright
Cliff Keen
Bennie Oosterbaan
Wally Weber












v
t
e


1933 Michigan Wolverines football—national champions






Thomas Austin
Chuck Bernard
William F. Borgmann
Tony Dauksza
Herman Everhardus
Stanley Fay
Gerald Ford
John Heston
Willard Hildebrand
John Kowalik
Russell D. Oliver
Ted Petoskey
John Regeczi
Bill Renner
Carl Savage
Estel Tessmer
Willis Ward
Louis Westover
Whitey Wistert


Head coach: Harry Kipke


Assistant coaches: Jack Blott
Franklin Cappon
Ray Courtright
Cliff Keen
Bennie Oosterbaan
Wally Weber












v
t
e


Cabinet of President Richard Nixon (1969–74)



Vice President



Spiro T. Agnew (1969–73)
None (1973)
Gerald R. Ford (1973–74)








Secretary of State



William P. Rogers (1969–73)
Henry A. Kissinger (1973–74)





Secretary of the Treasury



David M. Kennedy (1969–71)
John B. Connally (1971–72)
George P. Shultz (1972–74)
William E. Simon (1974)





Secretary of Defense



Melvin R. Laird (1969–73)
Elliot L. Richardson (1973)
James R. Schlesinger (1973–74)





Attorney General



John N. Mitchell (1969–72)
Richard G. Kleindienst (1972–73)
Elliot L. Richardson (1973)
William B. Saxbe (1974)





Postmaster General



Winton M. Blount (1969–71)





Secretary of the Interior



Walter J. Hickel (1969–70)
Rogers C. B. Morton (1970–74)





Secretary of Agriculture



Clifford M. Hardin (1969–71)
Earl L. Butz (1971–74)





Secretary of Commerce



Maurice H. Stans (1969–72)
Peter G. Peterson (1972–73)
Frederick B. Dent (1973–74)





Secretary of Labor



George P. Shultz (1969–70)
James D. Hodgson (1970–73)
Peter J. Brennan (1973–74)





Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare



Robert H. Finch (1969–70)
Elliot L. Richardson (1970–73)
Caspar W. Weinberger (1973–74)





Secretary of Housing and Urban Development



George W. Romney (1969–73)
James T. Lynn (1973–74)





Secretary of Transportation



John Volpe (1969–73)
Claude S. Brinegar (1973–74)












v
t
e


Cabinet of President Gerald Ford (1974–77)








Cabinet



Secretary of State



Henry A. Kissinger (1974–77)








Secretary of the Treasury



William E. Simon (1974–77)





Secretary of Defense



James R. Schlesinger (1974–75)
Donald H. Rumsfeld (1975–77)





Attorney General



William B. Saxbe (1974–75)
Edward H. Levi (1975–77)





Secretary of the Interior



Rogers C. B. Morton (1974–75)
Stanley K. Hathaway (1975)
Thomas S. Kleppe (1975–77)





Secretary of Agriculture



Earl L. Butz (1974–76)
John A. Knebel (1976–77)





Secretary of Commerce



Frederick B. Dent (1974–75)
Rogers C. B. Morton (1975–76)
Elliot L. Richardson (1976–77)





Secretary of Labor



Peter J. Brennan (1974–75)
John T. Dunlop (1975–76)
W. J. Usery Jr. (1976–77)





Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare



Caspar W. Weinberger (1974–75)
F. David Mathews (1975–77)





Secretary of Housing and Urban Development



James T. Lynn (1974–75)
Carla A. Hills (1975–77)





Secretary of Transportation



Claude S. Brinegar (1974–75)
William T. Coleman Jr. (1975–77)













Cabinet-level



Vice President



None (1974)
Nelson A. Rockefeller (1974–77)





White House Chief of Staff



Alexander M. Haig Jr. (1974)
Donald H. Rumsfeld (1974–75)
Richard B. Cheney (1975–77)





Director of the Office of
Management and Budget



Roy L. Ash (1974–75)
James T. Lynn (1975–76)





Director of Central Intelligence



William E. Colby (1974–76)
George H. W. Bush (1976–77)





Administrator of the
Environmental Protection Agency



Russell E. Train (1974–77)





Special Representative
for Trade Negotiations



William D. Eberle (1974–75)
Frederick B. Dent (1975–77)





Ambassador to the United Nations



John A. Scali (1974–75)
Daniel P. Moynihan (1975–76)
William W. Scranton (1976–77)















v
t
e


(1972 ←) United States presidential election, 1976 (→ 1980)



Democratic Party

Convention
Primaries






Nominee



Jimmy Carter





VP nominee



Walter Mondale





Candidates



Birch Bayh
Lloyd Bentsen
Jerry Brown
Robert Byrd
Hugh Carey
Frank Church
Fred R. Harris
Hubert Humphrey
Henry M. Jackson
Leon Jaworski
Barbara Jordan
Eugene McCarthy
Ellen McCormack
Walter Mondale
Jennings Randolph
Terry Sanford
Milton Shapp

campaign


Sargent Shriver
Adlai Stevenson III
Mo Udall
George Wallace








Republican Party

Convention
Primaries






Nominee



Gerald Ford





VP nominee



Bob Dole





Candidates



James L. Buckley
Ronald Reagan
Harold Stassen













Third party and independent candidates



American Party




Nominee



Thomas J. Anderson








American Independent Party




Nominee



Lester Maddox








Communist Party




Nominee



Gus Hall





VP nominee



Jarvis Tyner








Libertarian Party




Nominee



Roger MacBride





VP nominee



David Bergland








People's Party




Nominee



Margaret Wright





VP nominee



Benjamin Spock








Prohibition Party




Nominee



Ben Bubar





VP nominee



Earl Dodge








Socialist Workers Party




Nominee



Peter Camejo





VP nominee



Willie Mae Reid








U.S. Labor Party




Nominee



Lyndon LaRouche














Other 1976 elections: House
Senate
Gubernatorial












v
t
e


Theodore Roosevelt Award winners






1967: Eisenhower
1968: Saltonstall
1969: White
1970: Hovde
1971: Kraft Jr.
1972: Holland
1973: Bradley
1974: Owens
1975: Ford
1976: Hamilton
1977: Bradley
1978: Zornow
1979: Chandler
1980: Cooley
1981: Linkletter
1982: Cosby
1983: Palmer
1984: Lawrence
1985: Fleming
1986: Bush
1987: Zable
1988: Not presented
1989: Ebert
1990: Reagan
1991: Gibson
1992: Kemp
1993: Alexander
1994: Johnson
1995: Mathias
1996: Wooden
1997: Payne
1998: Dole
1999: Richardson
2000: Staubach
2001: Cohen
2002: Shriver
2003: de Varona
2004: Page
2005: Ride
2006: Kraft
2007: Tagliabue
2008: Glenn
2009: Albright
2010: Mitchell
2011: Dunwoody
2012: Allen
2013: Dungy
2014: Mills
2015: Jackson
2016: Ueberroth
2017: Brooke-Marciniak












v
t
e


National Football Foundation Gold Medal winners






1958: Dwight D. Eisenhower
1959: Douglas MacArthur
1960: Herbert Hoover & Amos Alonzo Stagg
1961: John F. Kennedy
1962: Byron "Whizzer" White
1963: Roger Q. Blough
1964: Donold B. Lourie
1965: Juan T. Trippe
1966: Earl H. "Red" Blaik
1967: Frederick L. Hovde
1968: Chester J. LaRoche
1969: Richard Nixon
1970: Thomas J. Hamilton
1971: Ronald Reagan
1972: Gerald Ford
1973: John Wayne
1974: Gerald B. Zornow
1975: David Packard
1976: Edgar B. Speer
1977: Louis H. Wilson
1978: Vincent dePaul Draddy
1979: William P. Lawrence
1980: Walter J. Zable
1981: Justin W. Dart
1982: Silver Anniversary Awards (NCAA) - All Honored Jim Brown, Willie Davis, Jack Kemp, Ron Kramer, Jim Swink
1983: Jack Kemp
1984: John F. McGillicuddy
1985: William I. Spencer
1986: William H. Morton
1987: Charles R. Meyer
1988: Clinton E. Frank
1989: Paul Brown
1990: Thomas H. Moorer
1991: George H. W. Bush
1992: Donald R. Keough
1993: Norman Schwarzkopf
1994: Thomas S. Murphy
1995: Harold Alfond
1996: Gene Corrigan
1997: Jackie Robinson
1998: John H. McConnell
1999: Keith Jackson
2000: Fred M. Kirby II
2001: Billy Joe "Red" McCombs
2002: George Steinbrenner
2003: Tommy Franks
2004: William V. Campbell
2005: Jon F. Hanson
2006: Joe Paterno & Bobby Bowden
2007: Pete Dawkins & Roger Staubach
2008: John Glenn
2009: Phil Knight & Bill Bowerman
2010: Bill Cosby
2011: Robert Gates
2012: Roscoe Brown
2013: National Football League & Roger Goodell
2014: Tom Catena & George Weiss
2015: Condoleezza Rice
2016: Archie Manning













Biography portal
Conservatism portal
Government of the United States portal
Michigan portal
Politics portal
United States Navy portal





Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 110300539
LCCN: n79022087
ISNI: 0000 0001 1479 978X
GND: 118534297
SELIBR: 237206
SUDOC: 027638928
BNF: cb124889486 (data)
BIBSYS: 90245932
MusicBrainz: b65822da-ce5a-4a80-8ec1-0bf7c9821971
NLA: 35093197
NDL: 00439822
US Congress: F000260
BNE: XX930701
IATH: w6m043ks











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Gerald_Ford&oldid=818264238"					Categories: Gerald Ford1913 births2006 deaths20th-century American Episcopalians21st-century American Episcopalians20th-century American politiciansAmerican adopteesAmerican anti-communistsAmerican athlete-politiciansAmerican EpiscopaliansAmerican football centersAmerican gun control advocatesAmerican military personnel of World War IIAmerican people of English descentAmerican people of the Vietnam WarAmerican shooting survivorsAssassination attempt survivorsBurials in MichiganCongressional Gold Medal recipientsDistinguished Eagle ScoutsEast Grand Rapids, MichiganGerald Ford familyHistory of the United States (1964–80)Lawyers from Alexandria, VirginiaMembers of the United States House of Representatives from MichiganMembers of the Warren CommissionMichigan lawyersMichigan RepublicansMichigan Wolverines football playersMilitary personnel from MichiganMinority Leaders of the United States House of RepresentativesNixon administration cabinet membersNixon administration personnel involved in the Watergate scandalPoliticians from Alexandria, VirginiaPeople from Kent County, MichiganPeople from Rancho Mirage, CaliforniaPlayers of American football from MichiganPoliticians from Grand Rapids, MichiganPoliticians from Omaha, NebraskaPresidential Medal of Freedom recipientsPresidents of the United StatesRecipients of the Order of the Cross of Terra Mariana, 1st ClassRepublican Party (United States) presidential nomineesRepublican Party members of the United States House of RepresentativesRepublican Party Presidents of the United StatesRepublican Party Vice Presidents of the United StatesSons of the American RevolutionUniversity of Michigan Law School alumniUnited States Navy officersUnited States presidential candidates, 1976Vice Presidents of the United StatesYale Bulldogs football coachesYale Law School alumniHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksWikipedia indefinitely move-protected pagesUse mdy dates from October 2017CS1 maint: Extra text: authors listArticles with Internet Archive linksAC with 14 elementsWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with SELIBR identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersWikipedia articles with BIBSYS identifiersWikipedia articles with MusicBrainz identifiersWikipedia articles with NLA identifiersWikipedia articles with SNAC-ID identifiersFeatured articles