This article is about social history. For other uses, see Gilded Age (disambiguation).




The Breakers, a Gilded Age mansion in Newport, Rhode Island, belonging to the wealthy Vanderbilt family of railroad industry tycoons.


The Gilded Age in United States history is the late 19th century, from the 1870s to about 1900. The term for this period came into use in the 1920s and 1930s and was derived from writer Mark Twain's 1873 novel The Gilded Age: A Tale of Today, which satirized an era of serious social problems masked by a thin gold gilding. The early half of the Gilded Age roughly coincided with the middle portion of the Victorian era in Britain and the Belle Époque in France. Its beginning in the years after the American Civil War overlaps the Reconstruction Era (which ended in 1877),[1]. It was followed in the 1890s by the Progressive Era.
The Gilded Age was an era of rapid economic growth, especially in the North and West. As American wages were much higher than those in Europe, especially for skilled workers, the period saw an influx of millions of European immigrants. The rapid expansion of industrialization led to real wage growth of 60% between 1860 and 1890, spread across the ever-increasing labor force. The average annual wage per industrial worker (including men, women, and children) rose from $380 in 1880 to $564 in 1890, a gain of 48%. However, the Gilded Age was also an era of abject poverty and inequality as millions of immigrants—many from impoverished European nations—poured into the United States, and the high concentration of wealth became more visible and contentious.[2]
Railroads were the major growth industry, with the factory system, mining, and finance increasing in importance. Immigration from Europe and the eastern states led to the rapid growth of the West, based on farming, ranching, and mining. Labor unions became important in the very rapidly growing industrial cities. Two major nationwide depressions—the Panic of 1873 and the Panic of 1893—interrupted growth and caused social and political upheavals. The South after the Civil War remained economically devastated; its economy became increasingly tied to cotton and tobacco production, which suffered from low prices. With the end of the Reconstruction era in 1877, African-American people in the South were stripped of political power and voting rights and were left economically disadvantaged.
The political landscape was notable in that despite some corruption, turnout was very high and national elections saw two evenly matched parties. The dominant issues were cultural (especially regarding prohibition, education, and ethnic or racial groups), and economic (tariffs and money supply). With the rapid growth of cities, political machines increasingly took control of urban politics. In business, massive, powerful, and wealthy trusts formed. Unions crusaded for the 8-hour working day and the abolition of child labor; middle class reformers demanded civil service reform, prohibition, and women's suffrage. Local governments across the North and West built public schools chiefly at the elementary level; public high schools started to emerge. The numerous religious denominations were growing in membership and wealth, with Catholicism becoming the largest denomination. They all expanded their missionary activity to the world arena. Catholics and Lutherans set up parochial schools and the larger denominations set up numerous colleges, hospitals, and charities. Many of the problems faced by society, especially the poor, during the Gilded Age gave rise to attempted reforms in the subsequent Progressive Era.[3]



Contents


1 The name and the era
2 Industrial and technological advances

2.1 Technical advances
2.2 Railroads

2.2.1 Shipping freight and passengers
2.2.2 Basis of the private financial system
2.2.3 Inventing modern management
2.2.4 Career paths
2.2.5 Love-hate relationship with the railroads
2.2.6 Impact on farming


2.3 Economic growth
2.4 Wages
2.5 Inequality of income
2.6 Rise of labor unions


3 Politics

3.1 Metropolitan area politics
3.2 National politics
3.3 Ethnocultural politics: pietistic Republicans versus liturgical Democrats


4 Immigration

4.1 Waves of old and new immigrants

4.1.1 New immigrants


4.2 Chinese immigrants


5 Rural life
6 Urban life
7 The South and the West

7.1 The South
7.2 The West

7.2.1 Native assimilation
7.2.2 Family life




8 Art
9 Women's roles

9.1 Social activism
9.2 Employment


10 Social thought
11 Religion
12 See also
13 References
14 Further reading

14.1 Historiography
14.2 Primary sources
14.3 Scholarly journals


15 External links



The name and the era[edit]
The term "Gilded Age" for the period of economic boom after the American Civil War up to the turn of the century was applied to the era by historians in the 1920s, who took the term from one of Mark Twain's lesser known novels, The Gilded Age: A Tale of Today (1873). The book (co-written with Charles Dudley Warner) satirized the promised 'golden age' after the Civil War, portrayed as an era of serious social problems masked by a thin gold gilding of economic expansion.[4] In the 1920s and 30s "Gilded Age" became a designated period in American history. The term was adopted by literary and cultural critics as well as historians, including Van Wyck Brooks, Lewis Mumford, Charles Austin Beard, Mary Ritter Beard, Vernon Louis Parrington and Matthew Josephson. For them, "Gilded Age" was a pejorative term used to describe a time of materialistic excesses combined with extreme poverty.[5][6]
The early half of the Gilded Age roughly coincided with the middle portion of the Victorian era in Britain and the Belle Époque in France. With respect to eras of American history, historical views vary as to when the Gilded Age began, ranging from starting right after the American Civil War (ended, 1865), or 1873, or as the Reconstruction Era ended in 1877.[1] The point noted as the end of the Gilded Age also varies. It is generally given as the beginning of the Progressive Era in the 1890s (sometimes the United States presidential election of 1896)[7][8][9][10][11][12] but also falls in a range that includes the Spanish–American War in 1898, Theodore Roosevelt election in 1901, and even the U.S. entry into World War I (1917).[1]
Industrial and technological advances[edit]
Main articles: Second Industrial Revolution, Rail transportation in the United States, and Economic history of the United States




The May 10, 1869 celebration of the completion of the First Transcontinental Railroad.


Technical advances[edit]
The Gilded Age was a period of economic growth as the United States jumped to the lead in industrialization ahead of Britain. The nation was rapidly expanding its economy into new areas, especially heavy industry like factories, railroads, and coal mining. In 1869, the First Transcontinental Railroad opened up the far-west mining and ranching regions. Travel from New York to San Francisco now took six days instead of six months.[13] Railroad track mileage tripled between 1860 and 1880, and then doubled again by 1920. The new track linked formerly isolated areas with larger markets and allowed for the rise of commercial farming, ranching, and mining, creating a truly national marketplace. American steel production rose to surpass the combined totals of Britain, Germany, and France.[14]
London and Paris poured investment money into the railroads through the American financial market centered in Wall Street. By 1900, the process of economic concentration had extended into most branches of industry—a few large corporations, called "trusts", dominated in steel, oil, sugar, meat, and farm machinery. Through vertical integration these trusts were able to control each aspect of the production of a specific good, ensuring that the profits made on the finished product were maximized and prices minimized, and by controlling access to the raw materials, prevented other companies from being able to compete in the marketplace.[15] Several monopolies --most famously Standard Oil--came to dominate their markets by keeping prices low when competitors appeared; they grew at a rate four times faster than that of the competitive sectors.[16]
Increased mechanization of industry is a major mark of the Gilded Age's search for cheaper ways to create more product. Frederick Winslow Taylor observed that worker efficiency in steel could be improved through the use of very close observations with a stop watch to eliminate wasted effort. Mechanization made some factories an assemblage of unskilled laborers performing simple and repetitive tasks under the direction of skilled foremen and engineers. Machine shops grew rapidly, and they comprised highly skilled workers and engineers. Both the number of unskilled and skilled workers increased, as their wage rates grew.[17]
Engineering colleges were established to feed the enormous demand for expertise. Railroads invented modern management, with clear chains of command, statistical reporting, and complex bureaucratic systems.[18] They systematized the roles of middle managers and set up explicit career tracks. They hired young men ages 18–21 and promoted them internally until a man reached the status of locomotive engineer, conductor, or station agent at age 40 or so. Career tracks were invented for skilled blue-collar jobs and for white-collar managers, starting in railroads and expanding into finance, manufacturing, and trade. Together with rapid growth of small business, a new middle class was rapidly growing, especially in northern cities.[19]




A Los Angeles oil district, ca.1895–1901


The United States became a world leader in applied technology. From 1860 to 1890, 500,000 patents were issued for new inventions—over ten times the number issued in the previous seventy years. George Westinghouse invented air brakes for trains (making them both safer and faster). Theodore Vail established the American Telephone & Telegraph Company and built a great communications network.[20] Thomas Edison, in addition to inventing hundreds of devices, established the first electrical lighting utility, basing it on direct current and an efficient incandescent lamp. Electric power delivery spread rapidly across Gilded Age cities. The streets were lighted at night, and electric streetcars allowed for faster commuting to work and easier shopping.[21]
Petroleum launched a new industry beginning with the Pennsylvania oil fields in the 1860s. The United States dominated the global industry into the 1950s. Kerosene replaced whale oil and candles for lighting homes. John D. Rockefeller founded Standard Oil Company and monopolized the oil industry, which mostly produced kerosene before the automobile created a demand for gasoline in the 20th century.[22]
Railroads[edit]
According to historian Henry Adams the system of railroads needed:

the energies of a generation, for it required all the new machinery to be created--capital, banks, mines, furnaces, shops, power-houses, technical knowledge, mechanical population, together with a steady remodelling of social and political habits, ideas, and institutions to fit the new scale and suit the new conditions. The generation between 1865 and 1895 was already mortgaged to the railways, and no one knew it better than the generation itself.[23]

The impact can be examined through five aspects: shipping, finance, management, careers, and popular reaction.
Shipping freight and passengers[edit]
First they provided a highly efficient network for shipping freight and passengers across a large national market. The result was a transforming impact on most sectors of the economy including manufacturing, retail and wholesale, agriculture, and finance. The United States now had an integrated national market practically the size of Europe, with no internal barriers or tariffs, all supported by a common language, and financial system and a common legal system.[24]
Basis of the private financial system[edit]
Railroads financing provided the basis for a dramatic expansion of the private (non-governmental) financial system. Construction of railroads was far more expensive than factories. In 1860, the combined total of railroad stocks and bonds was $1.8 billion; 1897 it reached $10.6 billion (compared to a total national debt of $1.2 billion).[25] Funding came from financiers throughout the Northeast, and from Europe, especially Britain.[26] About 10 percent of the funding came from the government, especially in the form of land grants that could be realized when a certain amount of trackage was opened.[27] The emerging American financial system was based on railroad bonds. New York by 1860 was the dominant financial market. The British invested heavily in railroads around the world, but nowhere more so than the United States; The total came to about $3 billion by 1914. In 1914–1917, they liquidated their American assets to pay for war supplies.[28][29]
Inventing modern management[edit]
Railroad management designed complex systems that could handle far more complicated simultaneous relationships than could be dreamed of by the local factory owner who could patrol every part of his own factory in a matter of hours. Civil engineers became the senior management of railroads. The leading innovators were the Western Railroad of Massachusetts and the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad in the 1840s, the Erie in the 1850s and the Pennsylvania in the 1860s.[30]
Career paths[edit]
The railroads invented the career path in the private sector for both blue-collar workers and white-collar workers. Railroading became a lifetime career for young men; women were almost never hired. A typical career path would see a young man hired at age 18 as a shop laborer, be promoted to skilled mechanic at age 24, brakemen at 25, freight conductor at 27, and passenger conductor at age 57. White-collar careers paths likewise were delineated. Educated young men started in clerical or statistical work and moved up to station agents or bureaucrats at the divisional or central headquarters.[31]
At each level they had more and more knowledge experience and human capital. They were very hard to replace, and were virtually guaranteed permanent jobs and provided with insurance and medical care. Hiring, firing, and wage rates were set not by foreman, but by central administrators, in order to minimize favoritism and personality conflicts. Everything was done by the book, whereby an increasingly complex set of rules dictated to everyone exactly what should be done in every circumstance, and exactly what their rank and pay would be. By the 1880s the career railroaders were retiring, and pension systems were invented for them.[31]
Love-hate relationship with the railroads[edit]
America developed a love-hate relationship with railroads. Boosters in every city worked feverishly to make sure the railroad came through, knowing their urban dreams depended upon it. The mechanical size, scope, and efficiency of the railroads made a profound impression; people dressed in their Sunday best to go down to the terminal to watch the train come in. Travel became much easier, cheaper, and more common. Shoppers from small towns could make day trips to big city stores. Hotels, resorts, and tourist attractions were built to accommodate the demand. The realization that anyone could buy a ticket for a thousand-mile trip was empowering. Historians Gary Cross and Rick Szostak argue:

with the freedom to travel came a greater sense of national identity and a reduction in regional cultural diversity. Farm children could more easily acquaint themselves with the big city, and easterners could readily visit the West. It is hard to imagine a United States of continental proportions without the railroad.[32]

The engineers became model citizens, bringing their can-do spirit and their systematic work effort to all phases of the economy as well as local and national government.[33] By 1910, major cities were building magnificent palatial railroad stations, such as the Pennsylvania Station in New York City, and the Union Station in Washington DC.[34]
But there was also a dark side.[35] By the 1870s, railroads were vilified by Western farmers who absorbed the Granger movement theme that monopolistic carriers controlled too much pricing power, and that the state legislatures had to impose maximum prices. Local merchants and shippers supported the demand and got some "Granger Laws" passed.[36] Anti-railroad complaints were loudly repeated in late 19th century political rhetoric.[37]
The most hated railroad man in the country was Collis P. Huntington (1821–1900), the president of the Southern Pacific Railroad who dominated California's economy and politics. One textbook argues: "Huntington came to symbolize the greed and corruption of late-nineteenth-century business. Business rivals and political reformers accused him of every conceivable evil. Journalists and cartoonists made their reputations by pillorying him.... Historians have cast Huntington as the state's most despicable villain."[38] However Huntington defended himself: "The motives back of my actions have been honest ones and the results have redounded far more to the benefit of California than they have to my own."[39]
Impact on farming[edit]
Further information: Meat packing industry
The growth of railroads from 1850s to 1880s made commercial farming much more feasible and profitable. Millions of acres were opened to settlement once the railroad was nearby, and provided a long-distance outlet for wheat, cattle and hogs that reached all the way to Europe.[40] Rural America became one giant market, as wholesalers bought the consumer products produced by the factories in the East, and shipped them to local merchants in small stores nationwide. Shipping live animals was slow and expensive. It was more efficient to slaughter them in major packing centers such as Chicago, Kansas City, St. Louis, Milwaukee, and Cincinnati, and then ship dressed meat out in refrigerated freight cars. The cars were cooled by slabs of ice that had been harvested from the northern lakes in wintertime, and stored for summer and fall usage. Chicago, the main railroad center, benefited enormously, with Kansas City a distant second. Historian William Cronon concludes:

Because of the Chicago packers, ranchers in Wyoming and feedlot farmers in Iowa regularly found a reliable market for their animals, and on average received better prices for the animals they sold there. At the same time and for the same reason, Americans of all classes found a greater variety of more and better meats on their tables, purchased on average at lower prices than ever before. Seen in this light, the packers' "rigid system of economy" seemed a very good thing indeed.[41]

Economic growth[edit]
Main articles: Economic history of the United States § Late 19th century, and Robber baron (industrialist)




Scottish immigrant Andrew Carnegie led the enormous expansion of the American steel industry.


During the 1870s and 1880s, the U.S. economy rose at the fastest rate in its history, with real wages, wealth, GDP, and capital formation all increasing rapidly.[42] For example, between 1865 and 1898, the output of wheat increased by 256%, corn by 222%, coal by 800% and miles of railway track by 567%.[43] Thick national networks for transportation and communication were created. The corporation became the dominant form of business organization, and a scientific management revolution transformed business operations.[44][45]
By the beginning of the 20th century, gross domestic product and industrial production in the United States led the world. Kennedy reports that "U.S. national income, in absolute figures in per capita, was so far above everybody else's by 1914." Per capita income in the United States was $377 in 1914 compared to Britain in second place at $244, Germany at $184, France at $153, and Italy at $108, while Russia and Japan trailed far behind at $41 and $36.[44][45]
Europe, especially Britain, remained the financial center of the world until 1914, yet the United States' growth caused foreigners to ask, as British author W. T. Stead wrote in 1901, "What is the secret of American success?"[46] The businessmen of the Second Industrial Revolution created industrial towns and cities in the Northeast with new factories, and hired an ethnically diverse industrial working class, many of them new immigrants from Europe.
Wealthy industrialists and financiers such as John D. Rockefeller, Jay Gould, Henry Clay Frick, Andrew W. Mellon, Andrew Carnegie, Henry Flagler, Henry H. Rogers, J. P. Morgan, Leland Stanford, Meyer Guggenheim, Jacob Schiff, Charles Crocker, Cornelius Vanderbilt would sometimes be labeled "robber barons" by their critics, who argue their fortunes were made at the expense of the working class, by chickanery and a betrayal of democracy.[47][48] Their admirers argued that they were "Captains of industry" who built the core America industrial economy and also the non-profit sector through acts of philanthropy.[49] For instance, Andrew Carnegie donated over 90% of his wealth and said that philanthropy was their duty—the "Gospel of Wealth". Private money endowed thousands of colleges, hospitals, museums, academies, schools, opera houses, public libraries, and charities.[50] John D. Rockefeller donated over $500 million to various charities, slightly over half his entire net worth. Nevertheless, many business leaders were influenced by Herbert Spencer's theory of Social Darwinism, which justified laissez-faire capitalism, ruthless competition and social stratification.[51][52]
This emerging industrial economy quickly expanded to meet the new market demands. From 1869 to 1879, the U.S. economy grew at a rate of 6.8% for NNP (GDP minus capital depreciation) and 4.5% for NNP per capita. The economy repeated this period of growth in the 1880s, in which the wealth of the nation grew at an annual rate of 3.8%, while the GDP was also doubled.[53] Economist Milton Friedman states that for the 1880s, "The highest decadal rate [of growth of real reproducible, tangible wealth per head from 1805 to 1950] for periods of about ten years was apparently reached in the eighties with approximately 3.8 percent."[54]
Wages[edit]
The rapid expansion of industrialization led to real wage growth of 60% between 1860 and 1890, spread across the ever-increasing labor force.[55] Real wages (adjusting for inflation) rose steadily, with the exact percentage increase depending on the dates and the specific work force. The Census Bureau reported in 1892 that the average annual wage per industrial worker (including men, women, and children) rose from $380 in 1880 to $564 in 1890, a gain of 48%.[56] Economic historian Clarence D. Long estimates that (in terms of constant 1914 dollars), the average annual incomes of all American non-farm employees rose from $375 in 1870 to $395 in 1880, $519 in 1890 and $573 in 1900, a gain of 53% in 30 years.[57]
Australian historian Peter Shergold found that the standard of living for industrial workers was higher than in Europe. He compared wages and the standard of living in Pittsburgh with Birmingham, England, one of the richest industrial cities of Europe. After taking account of the cost of living (which was 65% higher in the U.S.), he found the standard of living of unskilled workers was about the same in the two cities, while skilled workers in Pittsburgh had about 50% to 100% higher standard of living as those in Birmingham, England. According to Shergold the American advantage grew over time from 1890 to 1914, and the perceived higher American wage led to a heavy steady flow of skilled workers from Britain to industrial America.[58] According to historian Steve Fraser, workers generally earned less than $800 a year, which kept them mired in poverty. Workers had to put in roughly 60 hours a week to earn this much.[59]
Wage labor was widely condemned as 'wage slavery' in the working class press, and labor leaders almost always used the phrase in their speeches.[60] As the shift towards wage labor gained momentum, working class organizations became more militant in their efforts to "strike down the whole system of wages for labor."[60] In 1886, economist and New York Mayoral candidate Henry George, author of Progress and Poverty, stated "Chattel slavery is dead, but industrial slavery remains."[60]
Inequality of income[edit]
The unequal distribution of wealth remained high during this period. From 1860 to 1900, the wealthiest 2% of American households owned more than a third of the nation's wealth, while the top 10% owned roughly three fourths of it.[61] The bottom 40% had no wealth at all.[59] In terms of property, the wealthiest 1% owned 51%, while the bottom 44% claimed 1.1%.[59] Historian Howard Zinn argues that this disparity along with precarious working and living conditions for the working classes prompted the rise of populist, anarchist, and socialist movements.[62][63] French economist Thomas Piketty notes that economists during this time, such as Willford I. King, were concerned that the United States was becoming increasingly in-egalitarian to the point of becoming like old Europe, and "further and further away from its original pioneering ideal."[64]
There was a significant human cost attached to this period of economic growth,[65] as American industry had the highest rate of accidents in the world.[66] In 1889, railroads employed 704,000 men, of whom 20,000 were injured and 1,972 were killed on the job.[67] The U.S. was also the only industrial power to have no workman's compensation program in place to support injured workers.[66]
Rise of labor unions[edit]
Main article: Labor history of the United States




New York police violently attacking unemployed workers in Tompkins Square Park, 1874.


Craft-oriented labor unions, such as carpenters, printers, shoemakers and cigar makers, grew steadily in the industrial cities after 1870. These unions used frequent short strikes as a method to attain control over the labor market, and fight off competing unions.[68] They generally blocked women, blacks and Chinese from union membership, but welcomed most European immigrants.[69]
The railroads had their own separate unions.[70] An especially large episode of unrest (estimated at eighty thousand railroad workers and several hundred thousand other Americans, both employed and unemployed) broke out during the economic depression of the 1870s and became known as the Great Railroad Strike of 1877, which was, according to historian Jack Beatty, "the largest strike anywhere in the world in the 19th century."[71] This strike did not involve labor unions, but rather uncoordinated outbursts in numerous cities. The strike and associated riots lasted 45 days and resulted in the deaths of several hundred participants (no police or soldiers were killed), several hundred more injuries, and millions in damages to railroad property.[72][73] The unrest was deemed severe enough by the government that President Rutherford B. Hayes intervened with federal troops.
Starting in the mid-1880s a new group, the Knights of Labor, grew rapidly. Too rapidly, for it spun out of control and failed to handle the Great Southwest Railroad Strike of 1886. The Knights avoided violence, but their reputation collapsed in the wake of the Haymarket Square Riot in Chicago in 1886, when anarchists allegedly bombed the policemen dispersing a meeting.[74] Police then randomly fired into the crowd, killing and wounding a number of people, including other police, and arbitrarily rounded up anarchists, including leaders of the movement. Seven anarchists went on trial; four were hanged even though no evidence directly linked them to the bombing.[75] One had in his possession a Knights of Labor membership card.[75] At its peak, the Knights claimed 700,000 members. By 1890, membership had plummeted to fewer than 100,000, then faded away.[76]
Strikes organized by labor unions became routine events by the 1880s as the gap between the rich and the poor widened.[77] There were 37,000 strikes between 1881 and 1905. By far the largest number were in the building trades, followed far behind by coal miners. The main goal was control of working conditions and settling which rival union was in control. Most were of very short duration. In times of depression strikes were more violent but less successful, because the company was losing money anyway. They were successful in times of prosperity when the company was losing profits and wanted to settle quickly.[78]
The largest and most dramatic strike was the 1894 Pullman Strike, a coordinated effort to shut down the national railroad system. The strike was led by the upstart American Railway Union led by Eugene V. Debs and was not supported by the established brotherhoods. The union defied federal court orders to stop blocking the mail trains, so President Cleveland used the U.S. Army to get the trains moving again. The ARU vanished and the traditional railroad brotherhoods survived, but avoided strikes.[79]
The new American Federation of Labor, headed by Samuel Gompers, found the solution. The AFL was a coalition of unions, each based on strong local chapters; the AFL coordinated their work in cities and prevented jurisdictional battles. Gompers repudiated socialism and abandoned the violent nature of the earlier unions. The AFL worked to control the local labor market, thereby empowering its locals to obtain higher wages and more control over hiring. As a result, the AFL unions spread to most cities, reaching a peak membership in 1919.[80]
Severe economic recessions—called "panics"—struck the nation in the Panic of 1873 and the Panic of 1893. They lasted several years, with high urban unemployment, low incomes for farmers, low profits for business, slow overall growth, and reduced immigration. They generated political unrest.[81]
Politics[edit]
Main article: Third Party System




A Group of Vultures Waiting for the Storm to "Blow Over" – "Let Us Prey." Cartoon denouncing the corruption of New York's Boss Tweed and other Tammany Hall figures, drawn in 1871 by Thomas Nast and published in Harper's Weekly.


Gilded Age politics, called the Third Party System, featured intense competition between two major parties, with minor parties coming and going, especially on issues of concern to prohibitionists, to labor unions and to farmers. The Democrats and Republicans (nicknamed the "Grand Old Party," GOP) fought over control of offices, which were the rewards for party activists, as well as over major economic issues. Very high voter turnout often exceeded 80% or even 90% in some states as the parties drilled their loyal members much as an army drills its soldiers.
Competition was intense and elections were very close. In the southern states, lingering resentment over the Civil War remained and meant that much of the South would vote Democrat. After the end of Reconstruction in 1877, competition in the South took place mainly inside the Democratic Party. Nationwide, turnout fell sharply after 1900.[82]
Metropolitan area politics[edit]
The major metropolitan centers underwent rapid population growth and as a result had many lucrative contracts and jobs to award. To take advantage of the new economic opportunity, both parties built so-called "political machines" to manage elections, to reward supporters and to pay off potential opponents. Financed by the "spoils system", the winning party distributed most local, state and national government jobs, and many government contracts, to its loyal supporters.[83]
Large cities became dominated by political machines in which constituents supported a candidate in exchange for anticipated patronage. These votes would be repaid with favors back from the government once the appropriate candidate was elected; and very often candidates were selected based on their willingness to play along with the spoils system. Perhaps the largest example of a political machine from this time period is Tammany Hall in New York City, led by Boss Tweed.[83]
Political corruption was rampant, as business leaders spent significant amounts of money ensuring that government did not regulate the activities of big business - and they more often than not got what they wanted. Such corruption was so commonplace that in 1868 the New York state legislature legalized such bribery.[84] Historian Howard Zinn argues that the U.S. government was acting exactly as Karl Marx described capitalist states: "pretending neutrality to maintain order, but serving the interests of the rich".[85]




Reformers like the cartoonist Joseph Keppler depicted the Senate as controlled by the giant moneybags, who represented the nation's financial trusts and monopolies.


National politics[edit]
Further information: History of conservatism in the United States § The Gilded Age
Major scandal reached into Congress with the Crédit Mobilier of America scandal of 1872, and disgraced the White House during the Grant Administration (1869–1877). This corruption divided the Republican party into two different factions: the Stalwarts led by Roscoe Conkling and the Half-Breeds led by James G. Blaine. There was a sense that government-enabled political machines intervened in the economy and that the resulting favoritism, bribery, inefficiency, waste, and corruption were having negative consequences. Accordingly, there were widespread calls for reform, such as Civil Service Reform led by the Bourbon Democrats and Republican Mugwumps.[86] In 1884, their support elected Democrat Grover Cleveland to the White House, and in doing so gave the Democrats their first national victory since 1856.[87]
The Bourbon Democrats supported a free-market policy, with low tariffs, low taxes, less spending and, in general, a laissez-faire (hands-off) government. They argued that tariffs made most goods more expensive for the consumer and subsidized "the trusts" (monopolies). They also denounced imperialism and overseas expansion.[88] By contrast, Republicans insisted that national prosperity depended on industry that paid high wages, and warned that lowering the tariff would bring disaster because goods from low-wage European factories would flood American markets.[89]
Presidential elections between the two major parties were so closely contested that a slight nudge could tip the election in the advantage of either party, and Congress was marked by political stalemate. With support from Union veterans, businessmen, professionals, craftsmen, and larger farmers, the Republicans consistently carried the North in presidential elections.[90] The Democrats, often led by Irish Catholics, had a base among Catholics, poorer farmers, and traditional party-members.
Some sources consider that America in the Gilded Age was led by a string of relatively weak presidents collectively referred to as the "forgettable presidents" (Johnson, Grant, Hayes, Garfield, Arthur and Harrison, with the possible exception of Cleveland)[91] who served in the White House during this period.[92] "What little political vitality existed in Gilded Age America was to be found in local settings or in Congress, which overshadowed the White House for most of this period."[92][93]
Overall, Republican and Democratic political platforms remained remarkably constant during the years before 1900. Republicans generally favored inflationary, protectionist policies, while Democrats favored hard-money, free trade, and other laissez-faire policies.
Ethnocultural politics: pietistic Republicans versus liturgical Democrats[edit]


Voting behavior by religion, Northern US, late 19th century[94]


 
% Dem
% GOP


Immigrant Groups
 
 


Irish Catholics
80
20


All Catholics
70
30


Confessional German Lutherans
65
35


German Reformed
60
40


French Canadian Catholics
50
50


Less Confessional German Lutherans
45
55


English Canadians
40
60


British Stock
35
65


German Sectarians
30
70


Norwegian Lutherans
20
80


Swedish Lutherans
15
85


Haugean Norwegians
5
95


Natives: Northern Stock




Quakers
5
95


Free Will Baptists
20
80


Congregational
25
75


Methodists
25
75


Regular Baptists
35
65


Blacks
40
60


Presbyterians
40
60


Episcopalians
45
55


Natives: Southern Stock (living in North)




Disciples
50
50


Presbyterians
70
30


Baptists
75
25


Methodists
90
10


From 1860 to the early 20th century, the Republicans took advantage of the association of the Democrats with "Rum, Romanism, and Rebellion". "Rum" stood for the liquor interests and the tavernkeepers, in contrast to the GOP, which had a strong dry element. "Romanism" meant Roman Catholics, especially Irish Americans, who ran the Democratic Party in most cities, and whom the reformers denounced for political corruption and their separate parochial-school system. "Rebellion" harked back to the Democrats of the Confederacy, who had tried to break the Union in 1861, as well as to their northern allies, called "Copperheads."[95]
Demographic trends boosted the Democratic totals, as the German and Irish Catholic immigrants became Democrats and outnumbered the English and Scandinavian Republicans. The new immigrants who arrived after 1890 seldom voted at this time. During the 1880s and 1890s, the Republicans struggled against the Democrats' efforts, winning several close elections and losing two to Grover Cleveland (in 1884 and 1892).
Religious lines were sharply drawn.[94] In the North, about 50% of the voters were pietistic Protestants (especially Methodists, Scandinavian Lutherans, Presbyterians, Congregationalists, Disciples of Christ) who believed in using the government to reduce social sins, such as drinking. They strongly supported the GOP, as the table shows. In sharp contrast, liturgical groups, especially the Catholics, Episcopalians, and German Lutherans, voted for the Democrats. They saw the Democratic party as their best protection from the moralism of the pietists, and especially from the threat of prohibition. Both parties cut across the class structure, with the Democrats more bottom-heavy and the GOP better represented among businessmen and professionals in the North.[96]
Many cultural issues, especially prohibition and foreign-language schools, became hard-fought political issues because of the deep religious divisions in the electorate. For example, in Wisconsin the Republicans tried to close down German-language Catholic and Lutheran parochial schools, and were defeated in 1890 when the Bennett Law was put to the test.[97]
Prohibition debates and referendums heated up politics in most states over a period of decades, as national prohibition was finally passed in 1919 (and repealed in 1933), serving as a major issue between the wet Democrats and the dry GOP.[98]
Immigration[edit]
Main article: History of immigration to the United States
Prior to the Gilded Age, the time commonly referred to as the old immigration saw the first real boom of new arrivals to the United States. During the Gilded Age, approximately 20 million immigrants came to the United States in what is known as the new immigration. Some of them were prosperous farmers who had the cash to buy land and tools in the Plains states especially. Many were poor peasants looking for the American Dream in unskilled manual labor in mills, mines, and factories. Few immigrants went to the poverty-stricken South, though. To accommodate the heavy influx, the federal government in 1892 opened a reception center at Ellis Island near the Statue of Liberty.[99]
Waves of old and new immigrants[edit]
These immigrants consisted of two groups: The last big waves of the "Old Immigration" from Germany, Britain, Ireland, and Scandinavia, and the rising waves of the "New Immigration", which peaked about 1910. Some men moved back and forth across the Atlantic, but most were permanent settlers. They moved into well-established communities, both urban and rural. The German American communities spoke German, but their younger generation was bilingual.[100] The Scandinavian groups generally assimilated quickly; they were noted for their support of reform programs, such as prohibition.[101]




Businessman P. J. Kennedy of Boston in 1900; his grandson John became president in 1960.


In terms of immigration, after 1880 the old immigration of Germans, British, Irish, and Scandinavians slackened off. The United States was producing large numbers of new unskilled jobs every year, and to fill them came number from Italy, Poland, Austria, Hungary, Russia, Greece, and other points in southern and central Europe, as well as French Canada. The older immigrants by the 1870s had formed highly stable communities, especially the German Americans.[102] The British immigrants tended to blend into the general population.[103]
Irish Catholics had arrived in large numbers in the 1840s and 1850s in the wake of the great famine in Ireland when starvation killed millions. Their first few decades were characterized by extreme poverty, social dislocation, crime and violence in their slums. By the late 19th century, the Irish communities had largely stabilized, with a strong new "lace curtain" middle-class of local businessmen, professionals, and political leaders typified by P. J. Kennedy (1858–1929) in Boston. In economic terms, Irish Catholics were nearly at the bottom in the 1850s. They reached the national average by 1900, and by the late 20th century they far surpassed the national average.[104]
In political terms, the Irish Catholics comprised a major element in the leadership of the urban Democratic machines across the country.[105] Although they were only a third of the total Catholic population, the Irish also dominated the Catholic Church, producing most of the bishops, college presidents, and leaders of charitable organizations.[106] The network of Catholic institutions provided high status, but low-paying lifetime careers to sisters and nuns in parochial schools, hospitals, orphanages and convents. They were part of an international Catholic network, with considerable movement back and forth from Ireland, England, France, Germany and Canada.[107]
New immigrants[edit]
The "New Immigration" were much poorer peasants and rural folk from southern and eastern Europe, including mostly Italians, Poles and Jews. Some men, especially the Italians and Greeks, saw themselves as temporary migrants who planned to return to their home villages with a nest egg of cash earned in long hours of unskilled labor. Others, especially the Jews, had been driven out of Eastern Europe and had no intention of returning.[108]
Historians analyze the causes of immigration in terms of push factors (pushing people out of the homeland) and pull factors (pulling them to America). The push factors included economic dislocation, shortages of land, and antisemitism. Pull factors were the economic opportunity of good inexpensive farmland or jobs in factories, mills and mines.[109]
The first generation typically lived in ethnic enclaves with a common language, food, religion, and connections through the old village. The sheer numbers caused overcrowding in tenements in the larger cities. In the small mill towns, however, management usually built company housing with cheap rents.[110]
Chinese immigrants[edit]
Asian immigrants—Chinese at this time—were hired by California construction companies for temporary railroad work. The European Americans strongly disliked the Chinese for their alien life-styles and threat of low wages. The construction of the Central Pacific Railroad from California to Utah was handled largely by Chinese laborers. In the 1870 census, there were 63,000 Chinese men (with a few women) in the entire U.S.; this number grew to 106,000 in 1880.[111] Labor unions, led by Samuel Gompers strongly opposed the presence of Chinese labor. Immigrants from China were not allowed to become citizens until 1950; however, as a result of the Supreme Court decision in United States v. Wong Kim Ark, their children born in the U.S. were full citizens.[112]
Congress banned further Chinese immigration through the Chinese Exclusion Act in 1882; the act prohibited Chinese laborers from entering the United States, but some students and businessmen were allowed in on a temporary basis. The Chinese population declined to only 37,000 in 1940. Although many returned to China (a greater proportion than most other immigrant groups), most of them stayed in the United States. Chinese people were unwelcome in urban neighborhoods, so they resettled in the "Chinatown" districts of large cities. The exclusion policy lasted until the 1940s.[113]
Rural life[edit]
Main article: History of agriculture in the United States § Railroad Age: 1860-1910
A dramatic expansion in farming took place during the Gilded Age,[114][115] with the number of farms tripling from 2.0 million in 1860 to 6.0 million in 1905. The number of people living on farms grew from about 10 million in 1860 to 22 million in 1880 to 31 million in 1905. The value of farms soared from $8.0 billion in 1860 to $30 billion in 1906.[116]
The federal government issued 160-acre (65 ha) tracts virtually free to settlers under the Homestead Act of 1862. Even larger numbers purchased lands at very low interest from the new railroads, which were trying to create markets. The railroads advertised heavily in Europe and brought over, at low fares, hundreds of thousands of farmers from Germany, Scandinavia and Britain.[117]
Despite their remarkable progress and general prosperity, 19th-century U.S. farmers experienced recurring cycles of hardship, caused primarily by falling world prices for cotton and wheat.[118]
Along with the mechanical improvements which greatly increased yield per unit area, the amount of land under cultivation grew rapidly throughout the second half of the century, as the railroads opened up new areas of the West for settlement. The wheat farmers enjoyed abundant output and good years from 1876 to 1881 when bad European harvests kept the world price high. They then suffered from a slump in the 1880s when conditions in Europe improved. The farther west the settlers went, the more dependent they became on the monopolistic railroads to move their goods to market, and the more inclined they were to protest, as in the Populist movement of the 1890s.Wheat farmers blamed local grain elevator owners (who purchased their crop), railroads and eastern bankers for the low prices.[119][120] This protest has now been attributed to the far increased uncertainty in farming due to its commercialisation, with monopolies, the gold standard and loans being simply visualisations of this risk.[121]
The first organized effort to address general agricultural problems was the Grange movement. Launched in 1867, by employees of the U.S. Department of Agriculture, the Granges focused initially on social activities to counter the isolation most farm families experienced. Women's participation was actively encouraged. Spurred by the Panic of 1873, the Grange soon grew to 20,000 chapters and 1.5 million members. The Granges set up their own marketing systems, stores, processing plants, factories and cooperatives. Most went bankrupt. The movement also enjoyed some political success during the 1870s. A few Midwestern states passed "Granger Laws", limiting railroad and warehouse fees>[122] . The agricultural problems gained mass political attention in the populist movement, which won 44 votes in the electoral college in 1892[123] Its high point came under with the candidacy of William Jennings Bryan for the Democrats in 1896, who was sympathetic to populist concerns, such as the silver standard.[124] [125]
Urban life[edit]




The Home Insurance Building in Chicago, built in 1885, was the world's first skyscraper.


American society experienced significant changes in the period following the Civil War, most notably the rapid urbanization of the North.[126] Due to the increasing demand for unskilled workers, most European immigrants went to mill towns, mining camps, and industrial cities. New York, Philadelphia, and especially Chicago saw rapid growth. Louis Sullivan became a noted architect using steel frames to construct skyscrapers for the first time while pioneering the idea of "form follows function". Chicago became the center of the skyscraper craze, starting with the ten-story Home Insurance Building in 1884–1885 by William Le Baron Jenney.[127]
Expansion required a better transportation system than horse-drawn street cars. Electric trolleys and street railways were the rage in the 1880s, followed by elevated railways and subways in the largest cities.[128] Most factory workers, however, lived in nearby tenements and walked to work. As immigration increased in cities, poverty rose as well. The poorest crowded into low-cost housing such as the Five Points and Hell's Kitchen neighborhoods in Manhattan. These areas were quickly overridden with notorious criminal gangs such as the Five Points Gang and the Bowery Boys.[129] The living conditions were as such that the death rates in these crowded urban tenements vastly exceeded those in the countryside.[66]
The South and the West[edit]
The South[edit]
Main articles: History of the Southern United States and African-American Civil Rights Movement (1865–95)




The Southern United States in red[130]


The South remained heavily rural and was much poorer than the North or West.[131] In the South, Reconstruction brought major changes in agricultural practices. The most significant of these was sharecropping, where tenant farmers "shared" up to half of their crop with the landowners, in exchange for seed and essential supplies. About 80% of the Black farmers and 40% of White ones lived under this system after the Civil War. Most sharecroppers were locked in a cycle of debt, from which the only hope of escape was increased planting. This led to the over-production of cotton and tobacco (and thus to declining prices and income), soil exhaustion, and poverty among both landowners and tenants.[132]
Agriculture's Share of the Labor Force, 1890[133]


Northeast
15%


Middle Atlantic
17%


Midwest
43%


South Atlantic
63%


South Central
67%


West
29%


There were only a few scattered cities - small courthouse towns serviced the farm population. Local politics revolved around the politicians and lawyers based at the courthouse. Mill towns, narrowly focused on textile production or cigarette manufacture, began opening in the Piedmont region especially in the Carolinas. Racial segregation and outward signs of inequality were everywhere, and rarely were challenged. Blacks who violated the color line were liable to expulsion or lynching.[134] Cotton became even more important than before, as poor whites needed the cash that cotton would bring. Cotton prices were much lower than before the war, so everyone was poor. White southerners showed a reluctance to move north, or to move to cities, so the number of small farms proliferated, and they became smaller as the population grew.[132]
Many of the White farmers, and most of the Blacks, were tenant farmers who owned their work animals and tools, and rented the land. Others were day laborers or very poor sharecroppers, who worked under the supervision of the landowner. There was little cash in circulation, because most farmers operated on credit accounts from local merchants, and paid off their debts at cotton harvest time in the fall. Although there were small country churches everywhere, there were only a few dilapidated elementary schools. Apart from private academies, there were very few high schools until the 1920s. Conditions were marginally better in newer areas, especially in Texas and central Florida, with the deepest poverty in South Carolina, Mississippi, and Arkansas.[135]
The vast majority of African Americans lived in the South, and as the promises of emancipation and reconstruction faded, they entered the nadir of race relations.[136] Every Southern state and city passed Jim Crow laws that were in effect between the late 19th century and 1964, when they were abolished by Congress. They mandated de jure (legal) segregation in all public facilities, such as stores and street cars, with a supposedly "separate but equal" status for Blacks. In reality, this led to treatment and accommodations that were dramatically inferior to those provided for White Americans, systematizing a number of economic, educational and social disadvantages. Schools for Blacks were far fewer and poorly supported by taxpayers, although Northern philanthropies and churches kept open dozens of academies and small colleges.[137]
In the face of years of mounting violence and intimidation directed at blacks during Reconstruction, the federal government was unable to guarantee constitutional protections to freedmen and women. In the Compromise of 1877 President Hayes withdrew Union troops from the South; "Redeemers" (White Democrats) acted quickly to reverse the groundbreaking advances of Reconstruction. Black political power was eliminated in the 1880s and in the 1890s new laws effectively blocked over 90% of the Blacks from voting (with some exceptions in Tennessee; blacks did vote in the border states).[138]
The West[edit]
Main article: American Frontier




Map of the United States, 1870–80. Orange indicates statehood, light blue territories, and green unorganized territories






Norwegian settlers in front of their sod house in North Dakota in 1898


In 1869, the First Transcontinental Railroad—a combination of the Union Pacific from Omaha to Utah and the Central Pacific from Utah to California—opened up the far west mining and ranching regions. Travel from New York to San Francisco now took six days instead of six months.[139]
After the Civil War, many from the East Coast and Europe were lured west by reports from relatives and by extensive advertising campaigns promising "the Best Prairie Lands", "Low Prices", "Large Discounts For Cash", and "Better Terms Than Ever!". The new railroads provided the opportunity for migrants to go out and take a look, with special family tickets, the cost of which could be applied to land purchases offered by the railroads. Farming the plains was indeed more difficult than back east.[140]
Water management was more critical, lightning fires were more prevalent, the weather was more extreme, rainfall was less predictable. The fearful stayed home, while migrants were mainly motivated by a search improve their economic life. Farmers sought larger, cheaper and more fertile land; merchants and tradesman sought new customers and new leadership opportunities. Laborers wanted higher paying work and better conditions. With the Homestead Act providing free land to citizens and the railroads selling cheap lands to European farmers, the settlement of the Great Plains was swiftly accomplished, and the frontier had virtually ended by 1890.[140]




Temporary quarters for Volga Germans in central Kansas, 1875


Native assimilation[edit]
Native American policy was set by the national government (the states had very little role), and after 1865 the national policy was that Native Americans either had to assimilate into the larger community or remain on reservations, where the government provided subsidies. Reservation natives were no longer allowed to roam or fight their traditional enemies. The U.S. Army was to enforce the laws. Natives of the West came in conflict with expansion by miners, ranchers and settlers. By 1880, the buffalo herds, a foundation for the hunting economy had disappeared. Violence petered out in the 1880s and practically ceased after 1890.[141]
Native Americans individually had the choice of living on reservations, with food, supplies, education and medical care provided by the federal government, or living on their own in the larger society and earning wages, typically as a cowboy on a ranch, or manual worker in town. Reformers wanted to give as many Native Americans as possible the opportunity to own and operate their own farms and ranches, so the issue was how to give individual natives land owned by the tribe. To assimilate the natives into American society, reformers set up training programs and schools, such as the Carlisle Indian Industrial School in Carlisle, Pennsylvania, that produced many prominent Native American leaders. however, anti-assimilation traditionalists on the reservations resisted integration and the resulting loss of their traditional life.
In 1887, the Dawes Act proposed to divide tribal land and parcel out 160 acres (0.65 km²) of land to each head of family. Such allotments were to be held in trust by the government for 25 years, then given to owners with full title, so they could sell it or mortgage it. As individual natives sold their land, the total held by the native community shrank by almost half. The individualized system undermined the traditional communal tribal organization. Furthermore, a majority of natives responded to intense missionary activity by converting to Christianity. The long-term goal of Dawes Act was to integrate natives into the mainstream; the majority accepted integration and were absorbed into American society, leaving a trace of native ancestry in millions of American families. Those who refused to assimilate remained in poverty on reservations, supported until now by Federal food, medicine and schooling. In 1934, national policy was reversed again by the Indian Reorganization Act which tried to protect tribal and communal life on reservations.[142]
Family life[edit]
Few single men attempted to operate a farm; farmers clearly understood the need for a hard-working wife, and numerous children, to handle the many chores, including child-rearing, feeding and clothing the family, managing the housework, and feeding the hired hands.[143] During the early years of settlement, farm women played an integral role in assuring family survival by working outdoors. After a generation or so, women increasingly left the fields, thus redefining their roles within the family. New conveniences such as sewing and washing machines encouraged women to turn to domestic roles. The scientific housekeeping movement was promoted across the land by the media and government extension agents, as well as county fairs which featured achievements in home cookery and canning, advice columns for women in the farm papers, and home economics courses in schools.[144]
Although the eastern image of farm life on the prairies emphasizes the isolation of the lonely farmer and the bleakness of farm life, in reality rural folk created a rich social life for themselves. For example, many joined a local branch of the Grange; a majority had ties to local churches. It was popular to organize activities that combined practical work, abundant food, and simple entertainment such as barn raisings, corn huskings, and quilting bees.[145] One could keep busy with scheduled Grange meetings, church services, and school functions. Women organized shared meals and potluck events, as well as extended visits between families.[146]
Childhood on western farms is contested territory. One group of scholars argues the rural environment was salubrious because it allowed children to break loose from urban hierarchies of age and gender, promoted family interdependence, and produced children who were more self-reliant, mobile, adaptable, responsible, independent and more in touch with nature than their urban or eastern counterparts.[147][148] However other historians offer a grim portrait of loneliness, privation, abuse, and demanding physical labor from an early age.[149][150][151]
Art[edit]
Some well-known painters of the Gilded Age include: Winslow Homer, Thomas Eakins, John Singer Sargent, Mary Cassatt, James Abbott McNeill Whistler, Childe Hassam, John Henry Twachtman and Maurice Prendergast.[152]




The Chess Players, Thomas Eakins (1876)






The Cup Of Tea, Mary Cassatt (ca. 1879)


The New York Art world took a major turn during the Gilded age, seeing an outgrowth of exhibitions and the establishment of major auction houses with a focus on American Art.[153] The Gilded Age was pivotal in establishing the New York Art world in the international art market.[154]
New York Art Galleries, Clubs, and Associations During the Gilded Age

American Art Association[155]
American Watercolor Society[156]
Ashcan School
Brummer Gallery[157]
Century Association[158]
Colony Club
Cottier Gallery[159]
Grand Central Art Galleries[160]
Lotos Club[161]
Montross Gallery[162]
National Association of Portrait Painters[163]
Salmagundi Club[164]
Union League Club of New York[165]

Women's roles[edit]




This 1902 cartoon from the Hawaiian Gazette shows WCTU activist using the water cure to torture a brewmaster as the Anti-Saloon League mans the pump


Social activism[edit]
During the Gilded Age, many new social movements took hold in the United States. Many women abolitionists who were disappointed that the Fifteenth Amendment did not extend voting rights to them, remained active in politics, this time focusing on issues important to them. Reviving the temperance movement from the Second Great Awakening, many women joined the Women's Christian Temperance Union (WCTU) in an attempt to bring morality back to America. Its chief leader was Frances Willard (1839-1898), who had a national and international outreach from her base in Evanston, Illinois. Often the WCTU women took up the issue of women's suffrage which had lain dormant since the Seneca Falls Convention. With leaders like Susan B. Anthony, the National American Woman Suffrage Association (NAWSA) was formed in order to secure the right of women to vote.[166]
Employment[edit]
Many young women worked as servants or in shops and factories until marriage, then typically became full-time housewives. However, black, Irish and Swedish adult women often worked as servants. In most large Northern cities, the Irish Catholic women dominated the market for servants.[167] Heavy industry was a male domain, but in light industries such as textiles and food processing, large numbers of young women were hired. Thousands of young unmarried Irish and French Canadian women worked in Northeastern textile mills. Coming from poor families these jobs meant upward social mobility, more money, and more social prestige in their community that made them more attractive marriage partners. In Cohoes, New York, mill women went on strike in 1882 to gain union recognition. They fought off Swedish strike breakers in order to protect the status they had achieved.[168]
After 1860, as the larger cities opened department stores, middle-class women did most of the shopping; increasingly they were served by young middle-class women clerks.[169] Typically, most young women quit their jobs when they married. In some ethnic groups, however, married women were encouraged to work, especially among African-Americans, and Irish Catholics. When the husband operated a small shop or restaurant, wives and other family members could find employment there. Widows and deserted wives often operated boarding houses.[170]
Career women were few. The teaching profession had once been heavily male, but as schooling expanded many women took on teaching careers.[171] If they remained unmarried they could have a prestigious but poorly paid lifetime career in the middle class.[172] At the end of the period nursing schools opened up new opportunities for women, but medical schools remained nearly all male.[173]
Business opportunities were rare, unless it was a matter of a widow taking over her late husband's small business. However the rapid acceptance of the sewing machine made housewives more productive and opened up new careers for women running their own small millinery and dressmaking shops.[174] When her husband died, Lydia Moss Bradley (1816–1908) inherited $500,000; shrewd investments doubled that sum and she later became president of his old bank in Peoria, Illinois. She worked from home to handle banking business. In an age when philanthropists such as Johns Hopkins, Cornell, Purdue, Vanderbilt, Stanford, Rice and Duke were perpetuating their names by founding universities, she lifted her aspirations from the original idea of an orphanage to the loftier goal and in 1897 founded Bradley University in Peoria.[175]
Social thought[edit]
A leading magazine, The Nation espoused Classical liberalism every week starting in 1865, under the influential editor E.L. Godkin (1831–1902).[176]
Science played an important part in social thought as the work of Charles Darwin became known among intellectuals. Following Darwin's idea of natural selection, English philosopher Herbert Spencer proposed the idea of social Darwinism. This new concept justified the stratification of the wealthy and poor, and it was in this proposal that Spencer coined the term "survival of the fittest."
Joining Spencer was Yale professor William Graham Sumner whose book What Social Classes Owe to Each Other (1884) argued that assistance to the poor actually weakens their ability to survive in society. Sumner argued for a laissez-faire and free-market economy. Few people, however, agreed with the social Darwinists, because they ridiculed religion and denounced philanthropy.
Henry George proposed a "single tax" in his book Progress and Poverty. The tax would be leveled on the rich and poor alike, with the excess money collected used to equalize wealth and level out society.
The Norwegian American economist Thorstein Veblen argued in The Theory of the Leisure Class (1899) that the "conspicuous consumption and conspicuous leisure" of the wealthy had become the basis of social status in America.
In Looking Backward (1887), the reformer Edward Bellamy envisioned a future America set in the year 2000 in which a socialist paradise has been established. The works of authors such as George and Bellamy became popular, and soon clubs were created across America to discuss their ideas, although these organizations rarely made any real social change.[177]
Religion[edit]
Main articles: History of religion in the United States and Third Great Awakening
The Third Great Awakening which began before the Civil War returned and made a significant change in religious attitudes toward social progress. Followers of the new Awakening promoted the idea of the Social Gospel which gave rise to organizations such as the YMCA, the American branch of the Salvation Army, and settlement houses such as Hull House, founded by Jane Addams in Chicago in 1889.[178]
The Third Great Awakening was a period of religious activism in American history from the late 1850s to the 20th century. It affected pietistic Protestant denominations and had a strong sense of social activism. It gathered strength from the postmillennial theology that the Second Coming of Christ would come after mankind had reformed the entire earth. The Social Gospel movement gained its force from the Awakening, as did the worldwide missionary movement. New groupings emerged, such as the Holiness movement and Nazarene movements, Theosophy and Christian Science.[179]
The Protestant mainline denominations (especially the Methodist, Episcopal, Presbyterian, and Congregational churches) grew rapidly in numbers, wealth and educational levels, throwing off their frontier beginnings and becoming centered in towns and cities. Leaders such as Josiah Strong advocated a muscular Christianity with systematic outreach to the unchurched in America and around the globe. Others built colleges and universities to train the next generation. Each denomination supported active missionary societies, and made the role of missionary one of high prestige.[3][180] The great majority of pietistic mainline Protestants (in the North) supported the Republican Party, and urged it to endorse prohibition and social reforms.[181][182] (see Third Party System)
The Awakening in numerous cities in 1858 was interrupted by the American Civil War. In the South; on the other hand, the Civil War stimulated revivals and strengthened the Baptists, especially.[183] After the war, Dwight L. Moody made revivalism the centerpiece of his activities in Chicago by founding the Moody Bible Institute. The hymns of Ira Sankey were especially influential.[184]
Across the nation, "drys" crusaded, in the name of religion, for the prohibition of alcohol. The Woman's Christian Temperance Union mobilized Protestant women for social crusades against not only liquor, but also pornography and prostitution, and sparked the demand for women's suffrage.[185]
The Gilded Age plutocracy came under harsh attack from the Social Gospel preachers and reformers in the Progressive Era who became involved with issues of child labor, compulsory elementary education and the protection of women from exploitation in factories.[186]
All the major denominations sponsored growing missionary activities inside the United States and around the world.[187][188]
Colleges associated with churches rapidly expanded in number, size and quality of curriculum. The promotion of muscular Christianity became popular among young men on campus and in urban YMCAs, as well as such denominational youth groups such as the Epworth League for Methodists and the Walther League for Lutherans.[189]
See also[edit]


Victorian era portal



African-American Civil Rights Movement (1865–95)
American business history
American frontier
Belle Époque in France
Gay Nineties
History of the United States (1865–1918)
List of Gilded Age mansions
Nadir of American race relations
New South
Presidency of Ulysses S. Grant

References[edit]


^ a b c Christopher M. Nichols, Nancy C. Unger, A Companion to the Gilded Age and Progressive Era, John Wiley & Sons - 2017, page 7
^ Stiglitz, Joseph (2013). The Price of Inequality: How Today's Divided Society Endangers Our Future. W. W. Norton & Company. p. xxxiv. ISBN 0393345068. 
^ a b Hudson, Winthrop S. (1965). Religion in America. New York: Charles Scribner's Sons. pp. 228–324. 
^ Upchurch, T. Adams (2009). Historical Dictionary of the Gilded Age. Scarecrow Press. p. 82. ISBN 978-0810862999. Retrieved 7 April 2016. 
^ Horowitz, Joseph (2012). Moral Fire: Musical Portraits from America's Fin de Siècle. University of California Press. pp. xi–xii. 
^ Lapolla, Jordan (July 2006). "Thoughts on Periodizing the Gilded Age: Capital Accumulation, Society, and Politics, 1873–1898" (PDF). Journal of the Gilded Age and Progressive Era: 193–94. [permanent dead link]
^ Marcus, Robert (1971). Grand Old Party: Political Structure in the Gilded Age, 1880–1896. New York: Oxford University Press. OCLC 108077. 
^ Jackson, Joy J. (1997). New Orleans in the gilded age: Politics and urban progress, 1880–1896. Baton Rouge: Louisiana Historical Association. ISBN 978-0807109106. 
^ De Santis, Vincent (1973). The Gilded Age, 1877–1896. Northbrook, Illinois: A. H. M. ISBN 978-0882955360. 
^ Grob, Gerald N.; Billias, George Athan (1972). From Jacksonian Democracy to the Gilded Age-Historical Interpretations: 1815–1896 (2nd ed.). New York: Free Press. ISBN 978-0029129104. 
^ Leary, William; Link, Arthur S. (1978). Progressive Era and the Great War, 1896–1920 (2nd ed.). Arlington Heights, Illinois: A. H. M. ISBN 978-0882955742. 
^ Johnston, Robert; Johnson, Benjamin H., eds. (2002). "The Journal of the Gilded Age and Progressive Era".  Missing or empty |url= (help) (covers the period from 1865 through 1920)
^ Stephen E. Ambrose, Nothing Like It In The World; The Men Who Built the Transcontinental Railroad 1863–1869 (2000)
^ Paul Kennedy, The rise and fall of the great powers: economic change and military conflict from 1500 to 2000 (1989) pp. 242–44
^ Cynthia L. Clark (2011). The American Economy: A Historical Encyclopedia. ABC-CLIO. p. 397. 
^ Thomas J. DiLorenzo (1985). "The Origins of Antitrust: An Interest-Group Perspective," International Review of Law and Economics. Elsevier Inc. pp. 73–90. 
^ Daniel Hovey Calhoun, The American Civil Engineer: Origins and Conflicts (1960)
^ Chandler, Alfred D., Jr. (1965). "The Railroads: Pioneers in Modern Corporate Management". Business History Review. 39 (1): 16–40. JSTOR 3112463. 
^ Walter Licht, Working for the Railroad: The Organization of Work in the Nineteenth Century (1983)
^ Richard R. John, Network Nation: Inventing American Telecommunications (2010)
^ Hunter, Louis C.; Bryant, Lynwood (1991). A History of Industrial Power in the United States, 1730–1930, Vol. 3: The Transmission of Power. Cambridge, Massachusetts, London: MIT Press. ISBN 0-262-08198-9. 
^ Harold F. Williamson, The American Petroleum Industry 1859–1899 The Age of Illumination (1959)
^ Adams, Henry (1918). "The Press (1868)". The Education of Henry Adams. p. 240. Retrieved May 11, 2017. 
^ Leland H. Jenks, "Railroads as an economic force in American development." Journal of Economic History 4#1 (1944): 1–20. in JSTOR
^ Edward C. Kirkland, Industry comes of age: Business, labor, and public policy, 1860–1897 (1961) pp. 52, 68–74.
^ Alfred D. Chandler, Jr., "Patterns of American Railroad Finance, 1830–50," Business History Review 28#3 (1954), pp. 248–63 in JSTOR
^ Kirkland, Industry comes of age (1961) pp. 57–68.
^ Leland H. Jenks, "Britain and American railway development." Journal of Economic History 11#4 (1951): 375–88. in JSTOR
^ Saul Engelbourg, The man who found the money: John Stewart Kennedy and the financing of the western railroads (1996).
^ Alfred D. Chandler and Stephen Salsbury. "The railroads: Innovators in modern business administration." in Bruce Mazlish, ed., The Railroad and the Space Program (MIT Press, 1965) pp. 127–62
^ a b Licht, Walter (1983). Working for the Railroad: The Organization of Work in the Nineteenth Century. Princeton University Press. pp. 262–63, 289. ISBN 978-0691609973. 
^ Gary S. Cross and Rick Szostak, Technology and American society: A history (2005) p. 102.
^ Robert Zussman, Mechanics of the middle class: work and politics among American engineers (1985).
^ Carl W. Condit, "Cincinnati Passenger Stations Before 1930," Railroad History No. 132 (1975) pp. 5–36 in JSTOR
^ George H. Douglas, All Aboard! The Railroad in American Life (1992), chapter 5
^ George H. Miller, "Origins of the Iowa Granger Law," Mississippi Valley Historical Review 40#4 (1954), pp. 657–80 in JSTOR
^ Douglas, All Aboard! (1992), chapter 10.
^ Richard B. Rice, William A. Bullough, and Richard J. Orsi, The elusive Eden: A new history of California (1988) p. 247.
^ Dennis Drabelle (2012). The Great American Railroad War: How Ambrose Bierce and Frank Norris Took On the Notorious Central Pacific Railroad. St. Martin's Press. p. 178. 
^ Margaret Walsh, "Pork packing as a leading edge of Midwestern industry, 1835-1875." Agricultural History 51.4 (1977): 702-717. in JSTOR
^ William Cronon (2009). Nature's Metropolis: Chicago and the Great West. W. W. Norton. p. 254. 
^ Edward C. Kirkland, Industry Comes of Age: Business, Labor, and Public Policy, 1860–1897 (1961) pp. 400–05.
^ Kennedy, Paul (1987). The Rise and Fall of the Great Powers. New York: Random House. p. 242. ISBN 0-394-54674-1. 
^ a b Kennedy, Paul (1987). The Rise and Fall of the Great Powers. New York: Random House. p. 243. ISBN 0-394-54674-1. 
^ a b David Mosler; Robert Catley (2000). Global America: Imposing Liberalism on a Recalcitrant World. Praeger. p. 44. 
^ Stead, W. T. (1901). The Americanization of the World. Horace Markley. p. 381. 
^ "Review of Jack Beatty, Age of Betrayal: The Triumph of Money in America, 1865–1900". Kirkus Reviews. February 15, 2007. 
^ Zinn, Howard (2005). "11: Robber Barons and Rebels". A People's History of the United States. New York: Harper Perennial Modern Classics. pp. 253–95. ISBN 0-06-083865-5. 
^ Burton W. Folsom, The Myth of the Robber Barons: A New Look at the Rise of Big Business in America (1991).
^ Harris, Neil (1962). "The Gilded Age Revisited: Boston and the Museum Movement". American Quarterly. 14 (4): 545–66. JSTOR 2710131. 
^ Sean Cashman (1993). America in the Gilded Age: Third Edition. New York University Press. p. 42. ISBN 0814714951. 
^ William A. Link; Susannah J. Link, eds. (2012). The Gilded Age and Progressive Era: A Documentary Reader. Wiley-Blackwell. p. 70. ISBN 1444331396. 
^ U.S. Bureau of the Census, Historical Statistics of the United States (1976) series F1–F5.
^ Milton Friedman, Anna Jacobson Schwartz, A monetary history of the United States, 1867–1960 (1971) p. 93
^ Tregarthen, Timothy D.; Rittenberg, Libby (1999). Macroeconomics (2nd ed.). Worth Publishers. p. 177. 
^ United States. Census Office. 11th census, 1890 (1892). Census Bulletin. p. 2. 
^ Clarence D. Long, Wages and Earnings in the United States, 1860–1890 (NBER, 1960) p 144; U.S. Bureau of the Census, Historical Statistics of the United States (1976) series D736
^ Peter R. Shergold (1982). Working-Class Life: The "American Standard" in Comparative Perspective, 1899–1913. University of Pittsburgh Press. pp. 5–7, 222, 224. ISBN 978-0822976981. 
^ a b c Steve Fraser (2015). The Age of Acquiescence: The Life and Death of American Resistance to Organized Wealth and Power. Little, Brown and Company. p. 66. ISBN 0316185434. 
^ a b c Lawrence B. Glickman (1999). A Living Wage: American Workers and the Making of Consumer Society. Cornell University Press. p. 19. ISBN 0801486149. 
^ Tindall, George Brown and Shi, David E. (2012). America: A Narrative History (Brief Ninth Edition) (Vol. 2). W. W. Norton & Company. ISBN 0393912671 p. 589
^ Zinn, Howard (2005). A People's History of the United States. New York: Harper Perennial Modern Classics. p. 264. ISBN 0-06-083865-5. 
^ Zinn, Howard (2005). "13 The Socialist Challenge". A People's History of the United States. New York: Harper Perennial Modern Classics. pp. 321–357. ISBN 0-06-083865-5. 
^ Piketty, Thomas (2014). Capital in the Twenty-First Century. Belknap Press. pp. 348–50, 506. ISBN 067443000X. 
^ Zinn, Howard (2005). A People's History of the United States. New York: Harper Perennial Modern Classics. p. 256. ISBN 0-06-083865-5. 
^ a b c Tindall, George Brown and Shi, David E. America: A Narrative History (Brief 9th ed. 2012) vol 2 p. 590
^ Walter Licht (1977). Nineteenth-century American Railwaymen: A Study in the Nature and Organization of Work. Princeton UP. pp. 190–91. 
^ Melvyn Dubofsky and Foster Rhea Dulles, Labor in America: a history (2010 and earlier editions)
^ Gwendolyn Mink, Old Labor and New Immigrants in American Political Development: Union, Party and State, 1875–1920 (1990)
^ Paul Michel Taillon (2009). Good, Reliable, White Men: Railroad Brotherhoods, 1877–1917. 
^ Bacon, Katie (June 12, 2007). The Dark Side of the Gilded Age. The Atlantic. Retrieved March 23, 2014.
^ Robert V. Bruce, 1877: Year of Violence (1957), the standard scholarly history.
^ Brier, Stephen, producer & director (1984). 1877, The Grand Army of Starvation (Documentary). American Social History Productions, inc. Retrieved 2013-09-28. 
^ Zinn, Howard (2005). A People's History of the United States. New York: Harper Perennial Modern Classics. p. 272. ISBN 0-06-083865-5. But to this day it has not been discovered who threw the bomb. 
^ a b Tindall, George Brown and Shi, David E. (2012). America: A Narrative History. 2 (Brief Ninth ed.). W. W. Norton & Company. p. 596. ISBN 0393912671. CS1 maint: Uses authors parameter (link)
^ Robert E. Weir, Beyond Labor's Veil: The Culture of the Knights of Labor (1996)
^ Tindall, George Brown and Shi, David E. (2012). America: A Narrative History (Brief Ninth Edition) (Vol. 2). W. W. Norton & Company. ISBN 0393912671 p. 595
^ David Montgomery, "Strikes in Nineteenth-Century America," Social Science History (1980) 4#1 pp. 81–104 in JSTOR
^ Almont Lindsey, The Pullman Strike: The Story of a Unique Experiment and of a Great Labor Upheaval (1943)
^ Livesay, Harold C. (1993). Samuel Gompers and Organized Labor in America. 
^ Wicker, Elmus (2006). Banking panics of the gilded age (PDF). Cambridge University Press. 
^ James Q. Wilson; Dilulio Jr., John J.; Bose, Meena (2012). American Government: Institutions and Policies. Cengage Learning. p. 190. 
^ a b Jaycox, Faith (2005). The Progressive Era. Infobase Publishing. p. 78. 
^ Tindall, George Brown; Shi, David E. (2012). America: A Narrative History (Brief Ninth Edition). 2. W. W. Norton & Company. p. 578. ISBN 0393912671. 
^ Zinn, Howard (2005). A People's History of the United States. New York: Harper Perennial Modern Classics. p. 258. ISBN 0-06-083865-5. 
^ Harrison Cook Thomas, The return of the Democratic Party to power in 1884 (1919) online, covers 1880-88.
^ Kohn, George C. (2001). The New Encyclopedia of American Scandal. Infobase Publishing. pp. 43, 84. 
^ Beito, Linda Royster; Beito, David T. (Spring 2000). "Gold Democrats and the Decline of Classical Liberalism, 1896-1900". Independent Review. 4: 555–75. 
^ Painter, Nell Irvin (1989). Standing at Armageddon: The United States, 1877–1919. W. W. Norton. p. 80. 
^ "Politics in the Gilded Age" (PDF). The Saylor Academy. June 19, 2010. 
^ AP US History. "The Politics of the Gilded Age" (PDF). Los Alamitos, California: Unified School District. Retrieved January 5, 2016. 
^ a b Kennedy, David M.; Cohen, Lizabeth (January 1, 2013). The American Pageant – A History of the American People (Fifteenth ed.). Cengage Advantage Books. p. 486. ISBN 978-1-133-95972-4. Retrieved January 5, 2016. 
^ Kennedy, David M.; Cohen, Lizabeth (2016). American Pageant: Since 1865. 2. Boston: Cengage Learning. pp. 508–09. ISBN 978-1-305-07592-4. Retrieved January 5, 2016. 
^ a b Kleppner, Paul (1979). The Third Electoral System 1853–1892: Parties, Voters, and Political Cultures. Chapel Hill, North Carolina: The University of North Carolina Press. p. 182. ISBN 978-0-8078-6554-5. 
^ Summers, Mark W. (2000). "Chapter 1". Rum, Romanism, and Rebellion: The Making of a President, 1884. University of North Carolina Press. ISBN 978-0-8078-4849-4. 
^ Finkelman, Paul (2001). Encyclopedia of the United States in the Nineteenth Century: Grand tour-presidency. 2. Simon and Schuster. p. 515. ISBN 978-0684805009. 
^ Whyte, William Foote (2006) [June1927]. "The Bennett Law Campaign in Wisconsin". Wisconsin Magazine Of History. 10 (4). 
^ Jensen, Richard J. (1971). The Winning of the Midwest: Social and Political Conflict, 1888–1896. U. of Chicago Press. pp. 89–110. ISBN 0-226-39825-0. 
^ Thomas J. Archdeacon, Becoming American: An Ethnic History (1984)
^ Brian Greenberg; Linda S. Watts (2009). Social History of the United States. ABC-CLIO. pp. 127–28. 
^ Stephan Thernstrom, ed., Harvard Encyclopedia of American Ethnic Groups (1980)
^ Stanley Nadel, Little Germany: Ethnicity, Religion, and Class in New York City, 1845–80 (1990).
^ Rowland Berthoff, British Immigrants in Industrial America, 1790–1950 (1953).
^ Joseph J. Lee and Marion Casey, eds., Making the Irish American: History and heritage of the Irish in the United States (2007).
^ Steven P. Erie, Rainbow's end: Irish-Americans and the dilemmas of urban machine politics, 1840–1985 (1990).
^ Charles Morris, American Catholic: The saints and sinners who built America's most powerful church (2011).
^ Sioban Nelson, Read Say Little, Do Much: Nurses, Nuns, and Hospitals in the Nineteenth Century (2001) online
^ John Higham (2002) [1955]. Strangers in the Land: Patterns of American Nativism, 1860–1925. Rutgers U.P. p. 65. 
^ Susan F. Martin (2010). A Nation of Immigrants. Cambridge U.P. p. 106. 
^ Thomas Adams Upchurch (2009). Historical Dictionary of the Gilded Age. Scarecrow Press. p. 160. 
^ See Historical Census Statistics on the Foreign-born Population of the United States: 1850–1990 U.S. Bureau of the Census
^ Franklin Odo (2002). The Columbia Documentary History of the Asian American Experience. Columbia U.P. p. 112. 
^ Yong Chen, Chinese San Francisco, 1850–1943: A Trans-Pacific Community (2000)
^ Shannon, Fred A. (1945). The farmer's last frontier: agriculture, 1860-1897. New York: Farrar & Rinehart. Archived from the original on 2012-07-10. 
^ Barnhart, John D. (December 1945). "Review of The Farmer's Last Frontier, Agriculture, 1860-1897". Indiana Magazine of History. 41 (4). 
^ Historical Statistics (1975) p. 437 series K1-K16
^ William Clark, Farms and farmers: the story of American agriculture (1970) p. 205
^ Shannon, Fred A. (1945). "Chapter 1". The farmer's last frontier: agriculture, 1860-1897. New York: Farrar & Rinehart. 
^ Elwyn B. Robinson, History of North Dakota (1982) p. 203
^ Press, Donald E. (1977). "Kansas Conflict: Populist Versus Railroader in the 1890s". Kansas Historical Quarterly. 43 (3): 319–33. 
^ "The Economics of American Farm Unrest, 1865-1900". eh.net. 
^ D. Sven Nordin, Rich Harvest: A History of the Grange, 1867–1900 (1974)
^ "U. S. Electoral College". www.archives.gov. 
^ "Bryan's "Cross of Gold" Speech: Mesmerizing the Masses". historymatters.gmu.edu. 
^ Cherny, Robert W. (13 November 1994). "A Righteous Cause: The Life of William Jennings Bryan". University of Oklahoma Press – via Google Books. 
^ Arthur Schlesinger, The Rise of the City, 1878–1898 (1933)
^ Joseph J. Korom (2008). The American Skyscraper, 1850–1940: A Celebration of Height. Branden Books. pp. 93–94. 
^ Robert M. Fogelson (2003). Downtown: Its Rise and Fall, 1880–1950. Yale U.P. 
^ Tyler Anbinder (2001). Five Points: The 19th-century New York City Neighborhood that Invented Tap Dance, Stole Elections, and Became the World's Most Notorious Slum. Simon and Schuster. 
^ "Census Regions and Divisions of the United States" (PDF). US Census Bureau. Retrieved May 11, 2017. 
^ Ayers, Edward L. (2007). The Promise of the New South: Life After Reconstruction - 15th Anniversary Edition. Oxford University Press. 
^ a b Woodward, C. Vann (1951). Origins of the New South, 1877–1913. 
^ Whitten, David O. (2001). Whaples, Robert, ed. "The Depression of 1893". EH.Net Encyclopedia. Retrieved 30 March 2017. 
^ Hahn, Steven (2005). A Nation under Our Feet: Black Political Struggles in the Rural South from Slavery to the Great Migration. Harvard University Press. pp. 425–426. ISBN 978-0674017658. 
^ Woodward, C. Vann (1951). The Origins of the New South, 1877–1913. LSU Press. p. 400. 
^ Logan, Rayford W. (1954). The Negro In American Life And Thought: The Nadir, 1877–1901. 
^ Woodward, C. Vann (1955). The Strange Career of Jim Crow. Oxford University Press. 
^ Perman, Michael (2001). Struggle for Mastery: Disfranchisement in the South, 1888–1908. University of North Carolina Press. ISBN 978-0807849095. 
^ Bain, David (2000). Empire express: Building the first transcontinental railroad. New York: Penguin Books. ISBN 978-0140084993. 
^ a b Ray Allen Billington and Martin Ridge, Westward Expansion (5th ed. 1982) ch. 32
^ Robert M. Utley, and Wilcomb E. Washburn, Indian Wars (1987) pp. 220–79.
^ Francis Paul Prucha, The Great Father: The United States Government and the American Indians (1986) pp. 181–241, 311–25
^ Deborah Fink, Agrarian Women: Wives and Mothers in Rural Nebraska, 1880–1940 (1992)
^ Chad Montrie, "'Men Alone Cannot Settle a Country:' Domesticating Nature in the Kansas-Nebraska Grasslands," Great Plains Quarterly, Fall 2005, Vol. 25 Issue 4, pp. 245–58
^ Karl Ronning, "Quilting in Webster County, Nebraska, 1880–1920," Uncoverings, 1992, Vol. 13, pp. 169–91
^ Nathan B. Sanderson, "More Than a Potluck," Nebraska History, Fall 2008, Vol. 89 Issue 3, pp. 120–31
^ Katherine Harris, Long Vistas: Women and Families on Colorado Homesteads (1993)
^ Elliott West, Growing Up with the Country: Childhood on the Far Western Frontier (1989)
^ Elizabeth Hampsten, Settlers' Children: Growing Up on the Great Plains (1991)
^ Lillian Schlissel, Byrd Gibbens and Elizabeth Hampsten, Far from Home: Families of the Westward Journey (2002)
^ Riney-Kehrberg takes a middle position in Childhood on the Farm: Work, Play, and Coming of Age in the Midwest (2005)
^ Griffin, Randall C. Homer, Eakins, and Anshutz: The Search for American Identity in the Gilded Age. University Park, Pa: Pennsylvania State University, 2004.
^ "Documenting the Gilded Age: New York City Exhibitions at the Turn of the 20th Century". New York Art Resources Consortium. Retrieved February 19, 2017. 
^ Glubok, Shirley. The Art of America in the Gilded Age. New York: Macmillan, 1974.
^ Archives of American Art. "Summary of the American Art Association records, 1853–1924". Smithsonian Institution. Retrieved 4 March 2015. 
^ "Clubs". Retrieved 4 March 2015. 
^ "Galleries". Retrieved 4 March 2015. 
^ "Century Association". Retrieved 4 March 2015. 
^ "Cottier Gallery". Retrieved 4 March 2015. 
^ "Grand Central Art Galleries". Retrieved 4 March 2015. 
^ "Lotos Club". Retrieved 4 March 2015. 
^ "Montross Gallery". Retrieved 4 March 2015. 
^ "National Association of Portrait Painters". Retrieved 4 March 2015. 
^ "Salmagundi Club". Retrieved 4 March 2015. 
^ "Gilded Age New York". New York Art Resources Consortium. Retrieved 4 March 2015. 
^ Aileen S. Kraditor, The Ideas of the Woman Suffrage Movement: 1890–1920 (1965)
^ Hasia R. Diner (1983). Erin's Daughters in America: Irish Immigrant Women in the Nineteenth Century. Johns Hopkins University Press. pp. 74–85. 
^ Daniel J. Walkowitz, "Working-class women in the Gilded Age: factory, community and family life among Cohoes, New York, cotton workers." Journal of Social History 5.4 (1972): 464–90. in JSTOR
^ Susan Porter Benson (1987). Counter cultures: Saleswomen, managers, and customers in American department stores, 1890–1940. p. passim. 
^ Wendy Gamber (2007). The Boardinghouse in Nineteenth-Century America. p. passim. 
^ by Donald H. Parkerson and Jo Ann Parkerson, The Emergence of the Common School in the U.S. Countryside (1998)
^ Jo Anne Preston (1993). "Domestic ideology, school reformers, and female teachers: Schoolteaching becomes women's work in Nineteenth-Century New England". New England Quarterly. 66 (4): 531–51. doi:10.2307/366032. JSTOR 366032. 
^ Gloria Moldow, Women doctors in gilded-age Washington: race, gender, and professionalization (University of Illinois Press, 1987), ch. 1.
^ Wendy Gamber (1997). The Female Economy: The Millinery and Dressmaking Trades, 1860–1930. University of Illinois Press. 
^ Christal Dagit, "Lydia Moss Bradley," Illinois Heritage (Mar/Apr2015) 18#2 pp. 29–31.
^ Gustav Pollak, ed. Fifty Years of American Idealism: 1865–1915.] (1915); online, with excerpts on many political topics.
^ Sidney Fine (1964). Laissez faire and the general-welfare state: a study of conflict in American thought, 1865–1901. U. of Michigan Press. 
^ Charles Howard Hopkins. The Rise of the Social Gospel in American Protestantism, 1865–1915. (1940) online edition
^ Robert William Fogel, The Fourth Great Awakening & the Future of Egalitarianism (2000)
^ Schlesinger, Rise of the City pp 320-48.
^ Paul Kleppner, The Third Electoral System, 1853–1892: Parties, Voters, and Political Cultures (2009)
^ Jensen (171)
^ Randall M. Miller, et al, eds. Religion and the American Civil War (1998)
^ James F. Findlay Dwight L. Moody: American Evangelist, 1837–1899 (2007)
^ Ruth Bordin, Women and Temperance: The Quest for Power and Liberty, 1873–1900 (1981)
^ Marsden, George (1973). "The Gospel of Wealth, the Social Gospel, and the Salvation of Souls in Nineteenth-Century America". Fides et Historia. 5 (1, 2): 10–21. 
^ Varg, Paul A. (1954). "Motives in Protestant Missions, 1890–1917". Church History. 23 (1): 68–82. JSTOR 3161183. 
^ Shenk, Wilbert R., ed. (2004). North American Foreign Missions, 1810–1914: Theology, Theory, and Policy. 
^ Setran, David P. (2005). "Following the Broad-Shouldered Jesus: The College YMCA and the Culture of Muscular Christianity in American Campus Life, 1890–1914". American Educational History Journal. 32 (1): 59–66. 


Further reading[edit]


Archdeacon, Thomas J. Becoming American: An Ethnic History (1984) on immigration and ethnicity
Argersinger; Peter H. Structure, Process, and Party: Essays in American Political History. (1992) online version
Arnesen, Eric, ed. Encyclopedia of U.S. Labor and Working-Class History (3 vol. 2006), essays by scholars
Beatty, Jack (2008). Age of Betrayal: The Triumph of Money in America, 1865–1900. Vintage. ISBN 1400032423. 
Buenker, John D. and Joseph Buenker, eds. Encyclopedia of the Gilded Age and Progressive Era. (2005). 1256 pp. in three volumes. ISBN 0-7656-8051-3; 900 short essays by 200 scholars
Calhoun, Charles W., ed. (2007). The Gilded Age: Perspectives on the Origins of Modern America (2nd ed.). Rowman & Littlefield. ISBN 978-0-7425-5037-7. 
Cherny, Robert W. (1997). American Politics in the Gilded Age, 1868–1900. Wheeling, Illinois: Harlan Davidson. 
Dewey, Davis R. National Problems: 1880–1897 (1907)
Edwards, Rebecca (2005). New Spirits: Americans in the Gilded Age, 1865–1905. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0195147292. 
Faulkner, Harold U.; Politics, Reform, and Expansion, 1890–1900 (1959), scholarly survey, strong on economic and political history Questia edition; also online
Fink, Leon. The Long Gilded Age: American Capitalism and the Lessons of a New World Order (University of Pennsylvania Press, 2015) excerpt
Folsom, Burton W., and Forrest McDonald. The Myth of the Robber Barons: A New Look at the Rise of Big Business in America (1991), by leading conservative scholars
Fraser, Steve (2015). The Age of Acquiescence: The Life and Death of American Resistance to Organized Wealth and Power. Little, Brown and Company. ISBN 0316185434.
Garraty, John A. The New Commonwealth, 1877–1890, 1968 scholarly survey, strong on economic and political history
Jensen, Richard. "Democracy, Republicanism and Efficiency: The Values of American Politics, 1885–1930," in Byron Shafer and Anthony Badger, eds, Contesting Democracy: Substance and Structure in American Political History, 1775–2000 (U of Kansas Press, 2001) pp 149–180; online version
Jordan, Philip D. (1968), Ohio Comes of Age: 1873-1900 Volume 5, The Ohio Historical Society 
Kirkland, Edward C. Industry Comes of Age, Business, Labor, and Public Policy 1860–1897 (1961), standard survey
Kleppner, Paul. The Third Electoral System 1853–1892: Parties, Voters, and Political Cultures U of North Carolina Press, (1979) online version
Knight, Peter. Reading the Market: Genres of Financial Capitalism in Gilded Age America (2016). xiv, 315 pp
Morgan, H. Wayne. From Hayes to McKinley: National Party Politics, 1877–1896 (1969) Questia edition
Morgan, H. Wayne ed. The Gilded Age: A Reappraisal Syracuse University Press 1970. interpretive essays online
Nevins, Allan. The Emergence of Modern America, 1865–1878 (1933) ISBN 0-403-01127-2, social history
Rees, Jonathan. Industrialization and the Transformation of American Life: A Brief Introduction (M.E. Sharpe, 2013) 139 pp
Rothbard, Murray N. (2017). The Progressive Era. Auburn, Alabama: Mises Institute. pp. 109–98. ISBN 978-1610166744.  emphasis on popular voting, online excerpt
Schlesinger, Arthur M. The Rise of the City: 1877–1898 (1933), social history of big city life; online; also online review
Schlesinger, Arthur M., Jr., ed. History of U.S. political parties: vol 2: 1860-1910: the gilded age of politics (1973) online
Schlup, Leonard C.; James G. Ryan (2003). Historical Dictionary of the Gilded Age. M.E. Sharpe. 
Shannon, Fred A. The Farmer's Last Frontier: 1860–1897 (1945) survey of economic history online
Smythe, Ted Curtis; The Gilded Age Press, 1865–1900 (2003). online edition; newspapers and magazines
Stiles, T. J. (2010). The First Tycoon: The Epic Life of Cornelius Vanderbilt. Random House. ; Pulitzer prize.
Trachtenberg, Alan. The incorporation of America: Culture and society in the gilded age (2007) chapter 5 online
Upchurch, Thomas Adams (2009). Historical Dictionary of the Gilded Age. Scarecrow Press.  276 pp
Wagner, David. Ordinary People: In and Out of Poverty in the Gilded Age (2008); traces people who were at one time in a poor house
White, Richard. "Corporations, Corruption, and the Modern Lobby: A Gilded Age Story of the West and the South in Washington, D.C.", Southern Spaces, 16 April 2009.
White, Richard. The Republic for Which It Stands: The United States during Reconstruction and the Gilded Age, 1865-1896 (Oxford History of the United States, 2017).
Woodward, C. Vann (1951), The Origins of the New South, Louisiana State University Press , the classic history. online

Boles, John B; Johnson, Bethany L, eds. (2003), Origins of the new South fifty years later .



Historiography[edit]

De Santis, Vincent P. "The Political Life of the Gilded Age: A Review of the Recent Literature." The History Teacher 9.1 (1975): 73–106. in JSTOR historiography
De Santis, Vincent P. "The Gilded Age In American History" Hayes Historical Journal 7#2 (1988) online
Rodgers, Daniel T. "Capitalism and Politics in the Progressive Era and in Ours." Journal of the Gilded Age & Progressive Era (2014) 13#3 pp 379-386.

Primary sources[edit]

Hoogenboom, Ari, and Olive Hoogenboom, eds. The Gilded Age (1967) online; 66 short annotated excerpts from primary sources.
Link, William A., and Susannah J. Link, eds. The Gilded Age and Progressive Era: A Documentary Reader (2012) excerpt and text search

Scholarly journals[edit]

Journal of the Gilded Age and Progressive Era, scholarly quarterly

Journal of the Gilded Age and Progressive Era on JSTOR


Hayes Historical Journal: A Journal of the Gilded Age 1976-1993, selected articles full text

External links[edit]

More general information to the Gilded Age on the Library of Congress
New Spirits: A Web Site on Americans in the Gilded Age, 1865–1905 by Rebecca Edwards, Vassar College
Documenting the Gilded Age: New York City Exhibitions at the Turn of the 20th Century (NYARC)
Documenting the Gilded Age: New York City Exhibitions at the Turn of the 20th Century (NYARC) Phase 2
Gilding the Gilded Age: Interior Decoration Tastes & Trends in New York City (A collaboration between The Frick Collection and The William Randolph Hearst Archive at LIU Post) Phase 3
WWW-VL: History: United States: The Gilded Age, 1876–1900 by Robert Spencer, University of Southern Maine. An extensive collection of materials.
America's Wealth in the Gilded Age accessed March 29, 2006
Illinois During the Gilded Age, 1866–1896, primary documents; from Northern Illinois University Libraries
Harper's Weekly 150 cartoons on elections 1860–1912; Reconstruction topics; Chinese exclusion; plus American Political Prints from the Library of Congress, 1766–1876

Elections 1860–1912 as covered by Harper's Weekly; news, editorials, cartoons (many by Thomas Nast see also [1], The Cartoons from Thomas Nast provided by HarpWeek, Tusche, tone and stone: 19th C. news illustration in Harper's Weekly: Thomas Nast 1840-1902).


"Graphic Witness" caricatures in history
Gilded Age & Progressive Era Cartoons, industry, labor, politics, prohibition from Ohio State University
Puck cartoons
Keppler cartoons
1892 cartoons
Slum Life In New York City During the Nineteenth Century's Gilded Age
Photographs of prominent politicians, 1861-1922; these are pre-1923 and out of copyright







v
t
e


History of the United States



Timeline



Prehistory
Pre-Columbian
Colonial
America's Critical Period
1776–89
1789–1849
1849–65
1865–1918
1918–45
1945–64
1964–80
1980–91
1991–2008
2008–present





Topics



American Century
Cities
Constitution
Demographic
Diplomatic
Economic
Education
Immigration
Medical
Merchant Marine
Military
Musical
Religious
Slavery
Southern
Technological and industrial
Territorial acquisitions
Territorial evolution
Voting rights
Women








 Category
 Portal












v
t
e


United States articles



History




By event



Timeline of U.S. history
Pre-Columbian era
Colonial era

Thirteen Colonies
military history
Continental Congress


American Revolution

War


American frontier
America's Critical Period
Drafting and ratification of Constitution
Federalist Era
War of 1812
Territorial acquisitions
Territorial evolution
Mexican–American War
Civil War
Reconstruction Era
Indian Wars
Gilded Age
Progressive Era
African-American Civil Rights Movement 1865–1895 / 1896–1954
Spanish–American War
Imperialism
World War I
Roaring Twenties
Great Depression
World War II

home front
Nazism in the United States


American Century
Cold War
Korean War
Space Race
Civil Rights Movement
Feminist Movement
Vietnam War
Post-Cold War (1991–2008)
War on Terror

War in Afghanistan
Iraq War


Recent events (2008–present)





By topic



Outline of U.S. history
Demographic
Discoveries
Economic

debt ceiling


Inventions

before 1890
1890–1945
1946–91
after 1991


Military
Postal
Technological and industrial








Geography







Territory

counties
federal district
federal enclaves
Indian reservations
insular zones
minor outlying islands
populated places
states


Earthquakes
Extreme points
Islands
Mountains

peaks
ranges
Appalachian
Rocky


National Park Service

National Parks


Regions

East Coast
West Coast
Great Plains
Gulf
Mid-Atlantic
Midwestern
New England
Pacific
Central
Eastern
Northern
Northeastern
Northwestern
Southern
Southeastern
Southwestern
Western


Rivers

Colorado
Columbia
Mississippi
Missouri
Ohio
Rio Grande
Yukon


Time
Water supply and sanitation








Politics








Federal




Executive



Cabinet
Civil service
Executive departments
Executive Office
Independent agencies
Law enforcement
President of the United States
Public policy





Legislative



House of Representatives

current members
Speaker


Senate

current members
President pro tempore
Vice President







Judicial



Courts of appeals
District courts
Supreme Court





Law



Bill of Rights

civil liberties


Code of Federal Regulations
Constitution

federalism
preemption
separation of powers


Federal Reporter
United States Code
United States Reports





Intelligence



Central Intelligence Agency
Defense Intelligence Agency
Federal Bureau of Investigation
National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency
National Reconnaissance Office
National Security Agency
Office of the Director of National Intelligence





Uniformed



Armed Forces

Army
Marine Corps
Navy
Air Force
Coast Guard


National Guard
NOAA Corps
Public Health Service Corps











51st state

political status of Puerto Rico
District of Columbia statehood movement


Elections

Electoral College


Foreign relations

Foreign policy


Ideologies

anti-Americanism
exceptionalism
nationalism


Local government
Parties

Democratic
Republican
Third parties


Red states and blue states

Purple America


Scandals
State government

governor
state legislature
state court


Uncle Sam











Economy







By sector

Agriculture
Banking
Communications
Energy
Insurance
Manufacturing
Mining
Tourism
Trade
Transportation


Companies

by state


Currency
Exports
Federal budget
Federal Reserve System
Financial position
Labor unions
Public debt
Social welfare programs
Taxation
Unemployment
Wall Street








Society








Culture



Americana
Architecture
Cinema
Cuisine
Dance
Demography
Education
Family structure
Fashion
Flag
Folklore
Languages

American English
Indigenous languages
ASL

Black American Sign Language


HSL
Plains Sign Talk
Arabic
Chinese
French
German
Italian
Russian
Spanish


Literature
Media

Journalism
Internet
Newspapers
Radio
Television


Music
Names
People
Philosophy
Public holidays
Religion
Sexuality
Sports
Theater
Visual art





Social class



Affluence
American Dream
Educational attainment
Homelessness
Home-ownership
Household income
Income inequality
Middle class
Personal income
Poverty
Professional and working class conflict
Standard of living
Wealth





Issues



Ages of consent
Capital punishment
Crime

incarceration


Criticism of government
Discrimination

affirmative action
antisemitism
intersex rights
islamophobia
LGBT rights
racism
same-sex marriage


Drug policy
Energy policy
Environmental movement
Gun politics
Health care

abortion
health insurance
hunger
obesity
smoking


Human rights
Immigration

illegal


International rankings
National security

Mass surveillance
Terrorism


Separation of church and state















Outline
Index



Book
Category
Portal












						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Gilded_Age&oldid=816354893"					Categories: Eras of United States historyEconomic history of the United StatesGold standardHistory of the United States (1865–1918)Economic boomsProgressive Era in the United StatesGilded AgeHidden categories: All articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from January 2017Articles with permanently dead external linksPages using web citations with no URLCS1 maint: Uses authors parameter