For other uses, see Globalization (disambiguation).
Globalization (or globalisation; see spelling differences) is the increasing interaction of people, states, or countries through the growth of the international flow of money, ideas, and culture. Globalization is primarily an economic process of integration that has social and cultural aspects. It involves goods and services, and the economic resources of capital, technology, and data.[1][2] The steam locomotive, steamship, jet engine, and container ships are some of the advances in the means of transport while the rise of the telegraph and its modern offspring, the Internet and mobile phones show development in telecommunications infrastructure. All of these improvements we enjoy in the modern era have been major factors in globalization and have generated further interdependence of economic and cultural activities.[3][4][5]
Though many scholars place the origins of globalization in modern times, others trace its history long before the European Age of Discovery and voyages to the New World, some even to the third millennium BC.[6][7] Large-scale globalization began in the 1820s.[8] In the late 19th century and early 20th century, the connectivity of the world's economies and cultures grew very quickly. The term globalization is recent, only establishing its current meaning in the 1970s.[9]
In 2000, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) identified four basic aspects of globalization: trade and transactions, capital and investment movements, migration and movement of people, and the dissemination of knowledge.[10] Further, environmental challenges such as global warming, cross-boundary water, air pollution, and over-fishing of the ocean are linked with globalization.[11] Globalizing processes affect and are affected by business and work organization, economics, socio-cultural resources, and the natural environment. Academic literature commonly subdivides globalization into three major areas: economic globalization, cultural globalization, and political globalization.[12]



Contents


1 Etymology and usage
2 History

2.1 Archaic
2.2 Early modern
2.3 Modern


3 Economic globalization
4 Cultural globalization
5 Political globalization
6 Other dimensions

6.1 Movement of people
6.2 Movement of information


7 Measurement
8 Support and criticism

8.1 Public opinion on globalization
8.2 Economics
8.3 Global democracy
8.4 Global civics
8.5 International cooperation
8.6 Anti-globalization movement
8.7 Opposition to capital market integration
8.8 Anti-corporatism and anti-consumerism
8.9 Global justice and inequality

8.9.1 Global justice
8.9.2 Social inequality


8.10 Anti-global governance
8.11 Environmentalist opposition


9 Food Security

9.1 Norway


10 See also
11 References
12 Further reading
13 External links



Etymology and usage[edit]
The term globalization derives from the word globalize, which refers to the emergence of an international network of economic systems.[13] One of the earliest known usages of the term as a noun was in a 1930 publication entitled Towards New Education, where it denoted a holistic view of human experience in education.[14]Charles Taze Russell (of the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society) coined a related term, corporate giants, in 1897[15] to refer to the largely national trusts and other large enterprises of the time. The term 'globalization' had been used in its economic sense at least as early as 1981, and in other senses since at least as early as 1944.[16] Theodore Levitt is credited with popularizing the term and bringing it into the mainstream business audience in the later half of the 1980's. Since its inception, the concept of globalization has inspired competing definitions and interpretations. Its antecedents date back to the great movements of trade and empire across Asia and the Indian Ocean from the 15th century onward.[17][18] Due to the complexity of the concept, various research projects, articles, and discussions often stay focused on a single aspect of globalization.[19]
Sociologists Martin Albrow and Elizabeth King define globalization as "all those processes by which the people of the world are incorporated into a single world society."[1] In The Consequences of Modernity, Anthony Giddens writes: "Globalization can thus be defined as the intensification of worldwide social relations which link distant localities in such a way that local happenings are shaped by events occurring many miles away and vice versa."[20] In 1992, Roland Robertson, professor of sociology at the University of Aberdeen and an early writer in the field, described globalization as "the compression of the world and the intensification of the consciousness of the world as a whole."[21]
In Global Transformations, David Held and his co-writers state:

Although in its simplistic sense globalization refers to the widening, deepening and speeding up of global interconnection, such a definition begs further elaboration. ... Globalization can be on a continuum with the local, national and regional. At one end of the continuum lie social and economic relations and networks which are organized on a local and/or national basis; at the other end lie social and economic relations and networks which crystallize on the wider scale of regional and global interactions. Globalization can refer to those spatial-temporal processes of change which underpin a transformation in the organization of human affairs by linking together and expanding human activity across regions and continents. Without reference to such expansive spatial connections, there can be no clear or coherent formulation of this term. ... A satisfactory definition of globalization must capture each of these elements: extensity (stretching), intensity, velocity and impact.[22]

Held and his co-writers' definition of globalization in that same book as "transformation in the spatial organization of social relations and transactions—assessed in terms of their extensity, intensity, velocity and impact—generating transcontinental or inter-regional flows" was called "probably the most widely-cited definition" in the 2014 DHL Global Connectiveness Index.[23]
Swedish journalist Thomas Larsson, in his book The Race to the Top: The Real Story of Globalization, states that globalization:

is the process of world shrinkage, of distances getting shorter, things moving closer. It pertains to the increasing ease with which somebody on one side of the world can interact, to mutual benefit, with somebody on the other side of the world.[24]

Paul James defines globalization with a more direct and historically contextualized emphasis:

Globalization is the extension of social relations across world-space, defining that world-space in terms of the historically variable ways that it has been practiced and socially understood through changing world-time.[25]

Manfred Steger, professor of global studies and research leader in the Global Cities Institute at RMIT University, identifies four main empirical dimensions of globalization: economic, political, cultural, and ecological. A fifth dimension—the ideological—cutting across the other four. The ideological dimension, according to Steger, is filled with a range of norms, claims, beliefs, and narratives about the phenomenon itself.[26]
James and Steger stated that the concept of globalization "emerged from the intersection of four interrelated sets of 'communities of practice' (Wenger, 1998): academics, journalists, publishers/editors, and librarians."[9]:424 They note the term was used "in education to describe the global life of the mind"; in international relations to describe the extension of the European Common Market; and in journalism to describe how the "American Negro and his problem are taking on a global significance".[9] They have also argued that four different forms of globalization can be distinguished that complement and cut across the solely empirical dimensions.[25][27] According to James, the oldest dominant form of globalization is embodied globalization, the movement of people. A second form is agency-extended globalization, the circulation of agents of different institutions, organizations, and polities, including imperial agents. Object-extended globalization, a third form, is the movement of commodities and other objects of exchange. He calls the transmission of ideas, images, knowledge, and information across world-space disembodied globalization, maintaining that it is currently the dominant form of globalization. James holds that this series of distinctions allows for an understanding of how, today, the most embodied forms of globalization such as the movement of refugees and migrants are increasingly restricted, while the most disembodied forms such as the circulation of financial instruments and codes are the most deregulated.[28]
The journalist Thomas L. Friedman popularized the term "flat world", arguing that globalized trade, outsourcing, supply-chaining, and political forces had permanently changed the world, for better and worse. He asserted that the pace of globalization was quickening and that its impact on business organization and practice would continue to grow.[29]
Economist Takis Fotopoulos defined "economic globalization" as the opening and deregulation of commodity, capital, and labor markets that led toward present neoliberal globalization. He used "political globalization" to refer to the emergence of a transnational élite and a phasing out of the nation-state. Meanwhile, he used "cultural globalization" to reference the worldwide homogenization of culture. Other of his usages included "ideological globalization", "technological globalization", and "social globalization".[30]
Lechner and Boli (2012) define globalization as more people across large distances becoming connected in more and different ways.[31]
Globophobia is used to refer to the fear of globalization, though it can also mean the fear of balloons.[32][33][34]
History[edit]
Main article: History of globalization
See also: Timeline of international trade
There are both distal and proximate causes which can be traced in the historical factors affecting globalization. Large-scale globalization began in the 19th century.[35]
Archaic[edit]




The 13th century world-system, as described by Janet Abu-Lughod


Main article: Archaic globalization
Archaic globalization conventionally refers to a phase in the history of globalization including globalizing events and developments from the time of the earliest civilizations until roughly the 1600s. This term is used to describe the relationships between communities and states and how they were created by the geographical spread of ideas and social norms at both local and regional levels.[36]
In this schema, three main prerequisites are posited for globalization to occur. The first is the idea of Eastern Origins, which shows how Western states have adapted and implemented learned principles from the East.[36] Without the spread of traditional ideas from the East, Western globalization would not have emerged the way it did. The second is distance. The interactions of states were not on a global scale and most often were confined to Asia, North Africa, the Middle East, and certain parts of Europe.[36] With early globalization, it was difficult for states to interact with others that were not within a close proximity. Eventually, technological advances allowed states to learn of others' existence and thus another phase of globalization can occur. The third has to do with inter-dependency, stability, and regularity. If a state is not dependent on another, then there is no way for either state to be mutually affected by the other. This is one of the driving forces behind global connections and trade; without either, globalization would not have emerged the way it did and states would still be dependent on their own production and resources to work. This is one of the arguments surrounding the idea of early globalization. It is argued that archaic globalization did not function in a similar manner to modern globalization because states were not as interdependent on others as they are today.[36]
Also posited is a "multi-polar" nature to archaic globalization, which involved the active participation of non-Europeans. Because it predated the Great Divergence of the nineteenth century, where Western Europe pulled ahead of the rest of the world in terms of industrial production and economic output, archaic globalization was a phenomenon that was driven not only by Europe but also by other economically developed Old World centers such as Gujarat, Bengal, coastal China, and Japan.[37]




Portuguese carrack in Nagasaki, 17th-century Japanese Nanban art


The German historical economist and sociologist Andre Gunder Frank argues that a form of globalization began with the rise of trade links between Sumer and the Indus Valley Civilization in the third millennium B.C.E. This archaic globalization existed during the Hellenistic Age, when commercialized urban centers enveloped the axis of Greek culture that reached from India to Spain, including Alexandria and the other Alexandrine cities. Early on, the geographic position of Greece and the necessity of importing wheat forced the Greeks to engage in maritime trade. Trade in ancient Greece was largely unrestricted: the state controlled only the supply of grain.[6]




The Silk Road in the 1st century






Native New World crops exchanged globally: Maize, tomato, potato, vanilla, rubber, cacao, tobacco


Trade on the Silk Road was a significant factor in the development of civilizations from China, Indian subcontinent, Persia, Europe, and Arabia, opening long-distance political and economic interactions between them.[38] Though silk was certainly the major trade item from China, common goods such as salt and sugar were traded as well; and religions, syncretic philosophies, and various technologies, as well as diseases, also traveled along the Silk Routes. In addition to economic trade, the Silk Road served as a means of carrying out cultural trade among the civilizations along its network.[39] The movement of people, such as refugees, artists, craftsmen, missionaries, robbers, and envoys, resulted in the exchange of religions, art, languages, and new technologies.[40]
Early modern[edit]
Main article: Proto-globalization
"Early modern-" or "proto-globalization" covers a period of the history of globalization roughly spanning the years between 1600 and 1800. The concept of "proto-globalization" was first introduced by historians A. G. Hopkins and Christopher Bayly. The term describes the phase of increasing trade links and cultural exchange that characterized the period immediately preceding the advent of high "modern globalization" in the late 19th century.[41] This phase of globalization was characterized by the rise of maritime European empires, in the 16th and 17th centuries, first the Portuguese and Spanish Empires, and later the Dutch and British Empires. In the 17th century, world trade developed further when chartered companies like the British East India Company (founded in 1600) and the Dutch East India Company (founded in 1602, often described as the first multinational corporation in which stock was offered) were established.[42]
Early modern globalization is distinguished from modern globalization on the basis of expansionism, the method of managing global trade, and the level of information exchange. The period is marked by such trade arrangements as the East India Company, the shift of hegemony to Western Europe, the rise of larger-scale conflicts between powerful nations such as the Thirty Years' War, and the rise of newfound commodities—most particularly slave trade. The Triangular Trade made it possible for Europe to take advantage of resources within the Western Hemisphere. The transfer of animal stocks, plant crops, and epidemic diseases associated with Alfred W. Crosby's concept of the Columbian Exchange also played a central role in this process. European, Muslim, Indian, Southeast Asian, and Chinese merchants were all involved in early modern trade and communications, particularly in the Indian Ocean region.




During the early 19th century the United Kingdom was a global superpower.


Modern[edit]
During the 19th century, globalization approached its form as a direct result of the Industrial Revolution. Industrialization allowed standardized production of household items using economies of scale while rapid population growth created sustained demand for commodities. In the 19th century, steamships reduced the cost of international transport significantly and railroads made inland transportation cheaper. The transport revolution occurred some time between 1820 and 1850.[35] More nations embraced international trade.[35] Globalization in this period was decisively shaped by nineteenth-century imperialism such as in Africa and Asia. The invention of shipping containers in 1956 helped advance the globalization of commerce.[43][44]
After World War II, work by politicians led to the agreements of the Bretton Woods Conference, in which major governments laid down the framework for international monetary policy, commerce, and finance, and the founding of several international institutions intended to facilitate economic growth by lowering trade barriers. Initially, the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) led to a series of agreements to remove trade restrictions. GATT's successor was the World Trade Organization (WTO), which provided a framework for negotiating and formalizing trade agreements and a dispute resolution process. Exports nearly doubled from 8.5% of total gross world product in 1970 to 16.2% in 2001.[45] The approach of using global agreements to advance trade stumbled with the failure of the Doha Development Round of trade negotiation. Many countries then shifted to bilateral or smaller multilateral agreements, such as the 2011 South Korea–United States Free Trade Agreement.
Since the 1970s, aviation has become increasingly affordable to middle classes in developed countries. Open skies policies and low-cost carriers have helped to bring competition to the market. In the 1990s, the growth of low-cost communication networks cut the cost of communicating between different countries. More work can be performed using a computer without regard to location. This included accounting, software development, and engineering design.
Student exchange programs became popular after World War II, and are intended to increase the participants' understanding and tolerance of other cultures, as well as improving their language skills and broadening their social horizons. Between 1963 and 2006 the number of students studying in a foreign country increased 9 times.[46]
In the late 19th and early 20th century, the connectedness of the world's economies and cultures grew very quickly. This slowed down from the 1910s onward due to the World Wars and the Cold War,[47] but picked up again in the 1980s and 1990s.[48] The revolutions of 1989 and subsequent liberalization in many parts of the world resulted in a significant expansion of global interconnectedness. The migration and movement of people can also be highlighted as a prominent feature of the globalization process. In the period between 1965 and 1990, the proportion of the labor force migrating approximately doubled. Most migration occurred between the developing countries and least developed countries (LDCs).[49] As economic integration intensified workers moved to areas with higher wages and most of the developing world oriented toward the international market economy. The collapse of the Soviet Union not only ended the Cold War's division of the world- it also left the United States its sole policeman and an unfettered advocate of free market. It also resulted in the growing prominence of attention focused on the movement of diseases, the proliferation of popular culture and consumer values, the growing prominence of international institutions like the UN, and concerted international action on such issues as the environment and human rights.[50] Other developments as dramatic were the Internet has become influential in connecting people across the world. As of June 2012[update], more than 2.4 billion people—over a third of the world's human population—have used the services of the Internet.[51][52] Growth of globalization has never been smooth. One influential event was the late 2000s recession, which was associated with lower growth (in areas such as cross-border phone calls and Skype usage) or even temporarily negative growth (in areas such as trade) of global interconnectedness.[53][54] The DHL Global Connectedness Index studies four main types of cross-border flow: trade (in both goods and services), information, people (including tourists, students, and migrants), and capital. It shows that the depth of global integration fell by about one-tenth after 2008, but by 2013 had recovered well above its pre-crash peak.[23][53] The report also found a shift of economic activity to emerging economies.[23]
Globalized society offers a complex web of forces and factors that bring people, cultures, markets, beliefs, and practices into increasingly greater proximity to one another.[55]
Economic globalization[edit]
Main article: Economic globalization




Singapore is the top country in the Enabling Trade Index as of 2016.






U.S. Trade Balance and Trade Policies (1895–2015)






Real GDP, Real Wages and Trade Policy in the U.S. (1947–2014)






Number of countries having a banking crisis in each year since 1800. This is based on This Time is Different: Eight Centuries of Financial Folly [56] which covers only 70 countries. The general upward trend might be attributed to many factors. One of these is a gradual increase in the percent of people who receive money for their labor. The dramatic feature of this graph is the virtual absence of banking crises during the period of the Bretton Woods agreement, 1945 to 1971. This analysis is similar to Figure 10.1 in Reinhart and Rogoff (2009). For more details see the help file for "bankingCrises" in the Ecdat package available from the Comprehensive R Archive Network (CRAN).


Economic globalization is the increasing economic interdependence of national economies across the world through a rapid increase in cross-border movement of goods, services, technology, and capital.[57] Whereas the globalization of business is centered around the diminution of international trade regulations as well as tariffs, taxes, and other impediments that suppresses global trade, economic globalization is the process of increasing economic integration between countries, leading to the emergence of a global marketplace or a single world market.[58] Depending on the paradigm, economic globalization can be viewed as either a positive or a negative phenomenon. Economic globalization comprises: Globalization of production; which refers to the obtention of goods and services from a particular source from different locations around the globe to benefit from difference in cost and quality.Likewise, it also comprises globalization of markets; which is defined as the union of different and separate markets into a massive global marketplace. Economic globalization also includes[59] competition, technology, and corporations and industries.[57]
Current globalization trends can be largely accounted for by developed economies integrating with less developed economies by means of foreign direct investment, the reduction of trade barriers as well as other economic reforms, and, in many cases, immigration.
International standards have made trade in goods and services more efficient. An example of such standard is the intermodal container. Containerization dramatically reduced transport of its costs, supported the post-war boom in international trade, and was a major element in globalization.[43] International Organization for Standardization is an international standard-setting body composed of representatives from various national standards organizations.
A multinational corporation or worldwide enterprise[60] is an organization that owns or controls production of goods or services in one or more countries other than their home country.[61] It can also be referred as an international corporation, a transnational corporation, or a stateless corporation.[62]
A free-trade area is the region encompassing a trade bloc whose member countries have signed a free-trade agreement (FTA). Such agreements involve cooperation between at least two countries to reduce trade barriers –  import quotas and tariffs –  and to increase trade of goods and services with each other.[63] If people are also free to move between the countries, in addition to a free-trade agreement, it would also be considered an open border. Arguably the most significant free-trade area in the world is the European Union, a politico-economic union of 28 member states that are located primarily in Europe. The EU has developed European Single Market through a standardised system of laws that apply in all member states. EU policies aim to ensure the free movement of people, goods, services, and capital within the internal market,[64]
Trade facilitation looks at how procedures and controls governing the movement of goods across national borders can be improved to reduce associated cost burdens and maximise efficiency while safeguarding legitimate regulatory objectives.
Global trade in services is also significant. For example, in India, business process outsourcing has been described as the "primary engine of the country's development over the next few decades, contributing broadly to GDP growth, employment growth, and poverty alleviation".[65][66]
William I. Robinson's theoretical approach to globalization is a critique of Wallerstein's World Systems Theory. He believes that the global capital experienced today is due to a new and distinct form of globalization which began in the 1980s. Robinson argues not only are economic activities expanded across national boundaries but also there is a transnational fragmentation of these activities.[67] One important aspect of Robinson's globalization theory is that production of goods are increasingly global. This means that one pair of shoes can be produced by six different countries, each contributing to a part of the production process.

Cultural globalization[edit]




Shakira, a Colombian multilingual singer-songwriter, playing outside her home country.


Main article: Cultural globalization
Cultural globalization refers to the transmission of ideas, meanings, and values around the world in such a way as to extend and intensify social relations.[68] This process is marked by the common consumption of cultures that have been diffused by the Internet, popular culture media, and international travel. This has added to processes of commodity exchange and colonization which have a longer history of carrying cultural meaning around the globe. The circulation of cultures enables individuals to partake in extended social relations that cross national and regional borders. The creation and expansion of such social relations is not merely observed on a material level. Cultural globalization involves the formation of shared norms and knowledge with which people associate their individual and collective cultural identities. It brings increasing interconnectedness among different populations and cultures.[69]
Cross-cultural communication is a field of study that looks at how people from differing cultural backgrounds communicate, in similar and different ways among themselves, and how they endeavour to communicate across cultures. Intercultural communication is a related field of study.
Cultural diffusion is the spread of cultural items—such as ideas, styles, religions, technologies, languages etc. Cultural globalization has increased cross-cultural contacts, but may be accompanied by a decrease in the uniqueness of once-isolated communities. For example, sushi is available in Germany as well as Japan, but Euro-Disney outdraws the city of Paris, potentially reducing demand for "authentic" French pastry.[70][71][72] Globalization's contribution to the alienation of individuals from their traditions may be modest compared to the impact of modernity itself, as alleged by existentialists such as Jean-Paul Sartre and Albert Camus. Globalization has expanded recreational opportunities by spreading pop culture, particularly via the Internet and satellite television.
Religions were among the earliest cultural elements to globalize, being spread by force, migration, evangelists, imperialists, and traders. Christianity, Islam, Buddhism, and more recently sects such as Mormonism are among those religions which have taken root and influenced endemic cultures in places far from their origins.[73]
Globalization has strongly influenced sports.[74] For example, the modern Olympic Games has athletes from more than 200 nations participating in a variety of competitions.[75] The FIFA World Cup is the most widely viewed and followed sporting event in the world, exceeding even the Olympic Games; a ninth of the entire population of the planet watched the 2006 FIFA World Cup Final.[76][77][78][79]
The term globalization implies transformation. Cultural practices including traditional music can be lost or turned into a fusion of traditions. Globalization can trigger a state of emergency for the preservation of musical heritage. Archivists may attempt to collect, record, or transcribe repertoires before melodies are assimilated or modified, while local musicians may struggle for authenticity and to preserve local musical traditions. Globalization can lead performers to discard traditional instruments. Fusion genres can become interesting fields of analysis.[80]
Music has an important role in economic and cultural development during globalization. Music genres such as jazz and reggae began locally and later became international phenomena. Globalization gave support to the world music phenomenon by allowing music from developing countries to reach broader audiences.[81] Though the term "World Music" was originally intended for ethnic-specific music, globalization is now expanding its scope such that the term often includes hybrid subgenres such as "world fusion", "global fusion", "ethnic fusion",[82] and worldbeat.[83][84]




Use of chili pepper has spread from the Americas to cuisines around the world, including Thailand, Korea, Mexico, China, and Italy.[85]


Bourdieu claimed that the perception of consumption can be seen as self-identification and the formation of identity. Musically, this translates into each individual having their own musical identity based on likes and tastes. These likes and tastes are greatly influenced by culture, as this is the most basic cause for a person's wants and behavior. The concept of one's own culture is now in a period of change due to globalization. Also, globalization has increased the interdependency of political, personal, cultural, and economic factors.[86]
A 2005 UNESCO report[87] showed that cultural exchange is becoming more frequent from Eastern Asia, but that Western countries are still the main exporters of cultural goods. In 2002, China was the third largest exporter of cultural goods, after the UK and US. Between 1994 and 2002, both North America's and the European Union's shares of cultural exports declined while Asia's cultural exports grew to surpass North America. Related factors are the fact that Asia's population and area are several times that of North America. Americanization is related to a period of high political American clout and of significant growth of America's shops, markets and objects being brought into other countries.
Some critics of globalization argue that it harms the diversity of cultures. As a dominating country's culture is introduced into a receiving country through globalization, it can become a threat to the diversity of local culture. Some argue that globalization may ultimately lead to Westernization or Americanization of culture, where the dominating cultural concepts of economically and politically powerful Western countries spread and cause harm to local cultures.
Globalization is a diverse phenomenon which relates to a multilateral political world and to the increase of cultural objects and markets between countries. The Indian experience particularly reveals the plurality of the impact of cultural globalization.[88]
Transculturalism is defined as "seeing oneself in the other".[89] Transcultural[90] is in turn described as "extending through all human cultures"[90] or "involving, encompassing, or combining elements of more than one culture".[91]
Political globalization[edit]
Main article: Political globalization




The United Nations Headquarters in New York City.


In general, globalization may ultimately reduce the importance of nation states. Supranational institutions such as the European Union, the WTO, the G8 or the International Criminal Court replace or extend national functions to facilitate international agreement.[92]
Intergovernmentalism is a term in political science with two meanings. The first refers to a theory of regional integration originally proposed by Stanley Hoffmann; the second treats states and the national government as the primary factors for integration.[93] Multi-level governance is an approach in political science and public administration theory that originated from studies on European integration. Multi-level governance gives expression to the idea that there are many interacting authority structures at work in the emergent global political economy. It illuminates the intimate entanglement between the domestic and international levels of authority.
Some people are citizens of multiple nation-states. Multiple citizenship, also called dual citizenship or multiple nationality or dual nationality, is a person's citizenship status, in which a person is concurrently regarded as a citizen of more than one state under the laws of those states.
Increasingly, non-governmental organizations influence public policy across national boundaries, including humanitarian aid and developmental efforts.[94] Philanthropic organizations with global missions are also coming to the forefront of humanitarian efforts; charities such as the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, Accion International, the Acumen Fund (now Acumen) and the Echoing Green have combined the business model with philanthropy, giving rise to business organizations such as the Global Philanthropy Group and new associations of philanthropists such as the Global Philanthropy Forum. The Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation projects include a current multibillion-dollar commitment to funding immunizations in some of the world's more impoverished but rapidly growing countries.[95] The Hudson Institute estimates total private philanthropic flows to developing countries at US$59 billion in 2010.[96]
As a response to globalization, some countries have embraced isolationist policies. For example, the North Korean government makes it very difficult for foreigners to enter the country and strictly monitors their activities when they do. Aid workers are subject to considerable scrutiny and excluded from places and regions the government does not wish them to enter. Citizens cannot freely leave the country.[97][98]
Other dimensions[edit]
Scholars also occasionally discuss other, less common dimensions of globalization, such as environmental globalization (the internationally coordinated practices and regulations, often in the form of international treaties, regarding environmental protection)[99] or military globalization (growth in global extent and scope of security relationships).[100] Those dimensions, however, receive much less attention the three described above, as academic literature commonly subdivides globalization into three major areas: economic globalization, cultural globalization and political globalization.[12]
Movement of people[edit]




Scheduled airline traffic in 2009


An essential aspect of globalization is movement of people. As transportation technology improved, travel time and costs decreased dramatically between the 18th and early 20th century. For example, travel across the Atlantic ocean used to take up to 5 weeks in the 18th century, but around the time of the 20th century it took a mere 8 days.[101] Today, modern aviation has made long-distance transportation quick and affordable.
Tourism is travel for pleasure. The developments in technology and transport infrastructure, such as jumbo jets, low-cost airlines, and more accessible airports have made many types of tourism more affordable. International tourist arrivals surpassed the milestone of 1 billion tourists globally for the first time in 2012.[102] A visa is a conditional authorization granted by a country to a foreigner, allowing them to enter and temporarily remain within, or to leave that country. Some countries – such as those in the Schengen Area – have agreements with other countries allowing each other's citizens to travel between them without visas. The World Tourism Organization announced that the number of tourists who require a visa before traveling was at its lowest level ever in 2015.[103][104]
Immigration is the international movement of people into a destination country of which they are not natives or where they do not possess citizenship in order to settle or reside there, especially as permanent residents or naturalized citizens, or to take-up employment as a migrant worker or temporarily as a foreign worker.[105][106][107] According to the International Labour Organization, as of 2014 there were an estimated 232 million international migrants in the world (defined as persons outside their country of origin for 12 months or more) and approximately half of them were estimated to be economically active (i.e. being employed or seeking employment).[108] International movement of labor is often seen as important to economic development. For example, freedom of movement for workers in the European Union means that people can move freely between member states to live, work, study or retire in another country.
Globalization is associated with a dramatic rise in international education. More and more students are seeking higher education in foreign countries and many international students now consider overseas study a stepping-stone to permanent residency within a country.[109] The contributions that foreign students make to host nation economies, both culturally and financially has encouraged major players to implement further initiatives to facilitate the arrival and integration of overseas students, including substantial amendments to immigration and visa policies and procedures.[46]
A transnational marriage is a marriage between two people from different countries. A variety of special issues arise in marriages between people from different countries, including those related to citizenship and culture, which add complexity and challenges to these kinds of relationships. In an age of increasing globalization, where a growing number of people have ties to networks of people and places across the globe, rather than to a current geographic location, people are increasingly marrying across national boundaries. Transnational marriage is a by-product of the movement and migration of people.
Movement of information[edit]
See also: Internet

Internet users by region

 
2005
2010
2016a


Africa
      2%      
      10%      
      25%      


Americas
36%
49%
65%


Arab States
8%
26%
42%


Asia and Pacific
9%
23%
42%


Commonwealth of
Independent States
 
10%
 
34%
 
67%


Europe
46%
67%
79%


a Estimate.
Source: International Telecommunication Union.[110]


Before electronic communications, long-distance communications relied on mail. Speed of global communications was limited by the maximum speed of courier services (especially horses and ships) until the mid-19th century. The electric telegraph was the first method of instant long-distance communication. For example, before the first transatlantic cable, communications between Europe and the Americas took weeks because ships had to carry mail across the ocean. The first transatlantic cable reduced communication time considerably, allowing a message and a response in the same day. Lasting transatlantic telegraph connections were achieved in the 1865-1866. The first wireless telegraphy transmitters were developed in 1895.
The Internet has been instrumental in connecting people across geographical boundaries. For example, Facebook is a social networking service which has more than 1.65 billion monthly active users as of 31 March 2016.[111]
Globalization can be spread by Global journalism which provides massive information and relies on the internet to interact, "makes it into an everyday routine to investigate how people and their actions, practices, problems, life conditions etc. in different parts of the world are interrelated. possible to assume that global threats such as climate change precipitate the further establishment of global journalism."[112]
Measurement[edit]
See also: List of globalization-related indices
One index of globalization is the KOF Index of Globalization, which measures three important dimensions of globalization: economic, social, and political.[113] Another is the A.T. Kearney / Foreign Policy Magazine Globalization Index.[114]





2014 KOF Index of Globalization

Rank
Country


1
 Ireland


2
 Belgium


3
 Netherlands


4
 Austria


5
 Singapore


6
 Denmark


7
 Sweden


8
 Portugal


9
 Hungary


10
 Finland



 


2006 A.T. Kearney / Foreign Policy Magazine
Globalization Index

Rank
Country


1
 Singapore


2
  Switzerland


3
 United States


4
 Ireland


5
 Denmark


6
 Canada


7
 Netherlands


8
 Australia


9
 Austria


10
 Sweden





Measurements of economic globalization typically focus on variables such as trade, Foreign Direct Investment (FDI), Gross Domestic Product (GDP), portfolio investment, and income. However, newer indices attempt to measure globalization in more general terms, including variables related to political, social, cultural, and even environmental aspects of globalization.[115]
Support and criticism[edit]
See also: Criticisms of globalization
Reactions to processes contributing to globalization have varied widely with a history as long as extraterritorial contact and trade. Philosophical differences regarding the costs and benefits of such processes give rise to a broad-range of ideologies and social movements. Proponents of economic growth, expansion and development, in general, view globalizing processes as desirable or necessary to the well-being of human society.[116]
Antagonists view one or more globalizing processes as detrimental to social well-being on a global or local scale;[116] this includes those who social or natural sustainability of long-term and continuous economic expansion, the social structural inequality caused by these processes, and the colonial, imperialistic, or hegemonic ethnocentrism, cultural assimilation and cultural appropriation that underlie such processes.
Globalization tends to bring people into contact with foreign people and cultures. Xenophobia is the fear of that which is perceived to be foreign or strange.[117][118] Xenophobia can manifest itself in many ways involving the relations and perceptions of an ingroup towards an outgroup, including a fear of losing identity, suspicion of its activities, aggression, and desire to eliminate its presence to secure a presumed purity.[119]
Critiques of globalization generally stem from discussions surrounding the impact of such processes on the planet as well as the human costs. They challenge directly traditional metrics, such as GDP, and look to other measures, such as the Gini coefficient[120] or the Happy Planet Index,[121] and point to a "multitude of interconnected fatal consequences–social disintegration, a breakdown of democracy, more rapid and extensive deterioration of the environment, the spread of new diseases, increasing poverty and alienation"[122] which they claim are the unintended consequences of globalization. Others point out that, while the forces of globalization have led to the spread of western-style democracy, this has been accompanied by an increase in inter-ethnic tension and violence as free market economic policies combine with democratic processes of universal suffrage as well as an escalation in militarization to impose democratic principles and as a means to conflict resolution.[123]
Public opinion on globalization[edit]
A 2005 study by Peer Fiss and Paul Hirsch found a large increase in articles negative towards globalization in the years prior. In 1998, negative articles outpaced positive articles by two to one.[124] The number of newspaper articles showing negative framing rose from about 10% of the total in 1991 to 55% of the total in 1999. This increase occurred during a period when the total number of articles concerning globalization nearly doubled.[124]
A number of international polls have shown that residents of Africa and Asia tend to view globalization more favorably than residents of Europe or North America. In Africa, a Gallup poll found that 70% of the population views globalization favorably.[125] The BBC found that 50% of people believed that economic globalization was proceeding too rapidly, while 35% believed it was proceeding too slowly.[126]
In 2004, Philip Gordon stated that "a clear majority of Europeans believe that globalization can enrich their lives, while believing the European Union can help them take advantage of globalization's benefits while shielding them from its negative effects." The main opposition consisted of socialists, environmental groups, and nationalists. Residents of the EU did not appear to feel threatened by globalization in 2004. The EU job market was more stable and workers were less likely to accept wage/benefit cuts. Social spending was much higher than in the US.[127] In a Danish poll in 2007, 76% responded that globalization is a good thing.[128]
Fiss, et al., surveyed US opinion in 1993. Their survey showed that, in 1993, more than 40% of respondents were unfamiliar with the concept of globalization. When the survey was repeated in 1998, 89% of the respondents had a polarized view of globalization as being either good or bad. At the same time, discourse on globalization, which began in the financial community before shifting to a heated debate between proponents and disenchanted students and workers. Polarization increased dramatically after the establishment of the WTO in 1995; this event and subsequent protests led to a large-scale anti-globalization movement.[124] Initially, college educated workers were likely to support globalization. Less educated workers, who were more likely to compete with immigrants and workers in developing countries, tended to be opponents. The situation changed after the financial crisis of 2007. According to a 1997 poll 58% of college graduates said globalization had been good for the US. By 2008 only 33% thought it was good. Respondents with high school education also became more opposed.[129]
According to Takenaka Heizo and Chida Ryokichi, as of 1998 there was a perception in Japan that the economy was "Small and Frail". However, Japan was resource-poor and used exports to pay for its raw materials. Anxiety over their position caused terms such as internationalization and globalization to enter everyday language. However, Japanese tradition was to be as self-sufficient as possible, particularly in agriculture.[130]
Many in developing countries see globalization as a positive force that lifts them out of poverty.[131] Those opposing globalization typically combine environmental concerns with nationalism. Opponents consider governments as agents of neo-colonialism that are subservient to multinational corporations.[132] Much of this criticism comes from the middle class; the Brookings Institution suggested this was because the middle class perceived upwardly mobile low-income groups as threatening to their economic security.[133]
Economics[edit]
The literature analysing the economics of free trade is extremely rich with extensive work having been done on the theoretical and empirical effects. Though it creates winners and losers, the broad consensus among economists is that free trade is a large and unambiguous net gain for society.[134][135] In a 2006 survey of American economists (83 responders), "87.5% agree that the U.S. should eliminate remaining tariffs and other barriers to trade" and "90.1% disagree with the suggestion that the U.S. should restrict employers from outsourcing work to foreign countries."[136]
Quoting Harvard economics professor N. Gregory Mankiw, "Few propositions command as much consensus among professional economists as that open world trade increases economic growth and raises living standards."[137] In a survey of leading economists, none disagreed with the notion that "freer trade improves productive efficiency and offers consumers better choices, and in the long run these gains are much larger than any effects on employment."[138] Most economists would agree that although increasing returns to scale might mean that certain industry could settle in a geographical area without any strong economic reason derived from comparative advantage, this is not a reason to argue against free trade because the absolute level of output enjoyed by both "winner" and "loser" will increase with the "winner" gaining more than the "loser" but both gaining more than before in an absolute level.
In the book The End of Poverty, Jeffrey Sachs discusses how many factors can affect a country's ability to enter the world market, including government corruption; legal and social disparities based on gender, ethnicity, or caste; diseases such as AIDS and malaria; lack of infrastructure (including transportation, communications, health, and trade); unstable political landscapes; protectionism; and geographic barriers.[139] Jagdish Bhagwati, a former adviser to the U.N. on globalization, holds that, although there are obvious problems with overly rapid development, globalization is a very positive force that lifts countries out of poverty by causing a virtuous economic cycle associated with faster economic growth.[131] However, economic growth does not necessarily mean a reduction in poverty; in fact, the two can coexist. Economic growth is conventionally measured using indicators such as GDP and GNI that do not accurately reflect the growing disparities in wealth.[140] Additionally, Oxfam International argues that poor people are often excluded from globalization-induced opportunities "by a lack of productive assets, weak infrastructure, poor education and ill-health;"[141] effectively leaving these marginalized groups in a poverty trap. Economist Paul Krugman is another staunch supporter of globalization and free trade with a record of disagreeing with many critics of globalization. He argues that many of them lack a basic understanding of comparative advantage and its importance in today's world.[142]
The flow of migrants to advanced economic countries has been claimed to provide a means through which global wages converge. An IMF study noted a potential for skills to be transferred back to developing countries as wages in those a countries rise.[10] Lastly, the dissemination of knowledge has been an integral aspect of globalization. Technological innovations (or technological transfer) is conjectured to benefit most the developing and least developing countries (LDCs), as for example in the adoption of mobile phones.[49]
There has been a rapid economic growth in Asia after embracing market orientation-based economic policies that encourage private property rights, free enterprise and competition. In particular, in East Asian developing countries, GDP per head rose at 5.9% a year from 1975 to 2001 (according to 2003 Human Development Report[143] of UNDP). Like this, the British economic journalist Martin Wolf says that incomes of poor developing countries, with more than half the world’s population, grew substantially faster than those of the world’s richest countries that remained relatively stable in its growth, leading to reduced international inequality and the incidence of poverty.
Certain demographic changes in the developing world after active economic liberalization and international integration resulted in rising general welfare and, hence, reduced inequality. According to Wolf, in the developing world as a whole, life expectancy rose by four months each year after 1970 and infant mortality rate declined from 107 per thousand in 1970 to 58 in 2000 due to improvements in standards of living and health conditions. Also, adult literacy in developing countries rose from 53% in 1970 to 74% in 1998 and much lower illiteracy rate among the young guarantees that rates will continue to fall as time passes. Furthermore, the reduction in fertility rate in the developing world as a whole from 4.1 births per woman in 1980 to 2.8 in 2000 indicates improved education level of women on fertility, and control of fewer children with more parental attention and investment.[144] Consequently, more prosperous and educated parents with fewer children have chosen to withdraw their children from the labor force to give them opportunities to be educated at school improving the issue of child labor. Thus, despite seemingly unequal distribution of income within these developing countries, their economic growth and development have brought about improved standards of living and welfare for the population as a whole.




Of the factors influencing the duration of economic growth in both developed and developing countries, income equality has a more beneficial impact than trade openness, sound political institutions, and foreign investment.[145]


Per capita gross domestic product (GDP) growth among post-1980 globalizing countries accelerated from 1.4 percent a year in the 1960s and 2.9 percent a year in the 1970s to 3.5 percent in the 1980s and 5.0 percent in the 1990s. This acceleration in growth seems even more remarkable given that the rich countries saw steady declines in growth from a high of 4.7 percent in the 1960s to 2.2 percent in the 1990s. Also, the non-globalizing developing countries seem to fare worse than the globalizers, with the former's annual growth rates falling from highs of 3.3 percent during the 1970s to only 1.4 percent during the 1990s. This rapid growth among the globalizers is not simply due to the strong performances of China and India in the 1980s and 1990s—18 out of the 24 globalizers experienced increases in growth, many of them quite substantial.[146]
The globalization of the late 20th and early 21st centuries has led to the resurfacing of the idea that the growth of economic interdependence promotes peace.[147] This idea had been very powerful during the globalization of the late 19th and early 20th centuries, and was a central doctrine of classical liberals of that era, such as the young John Maynard Keynes (1883–1946).[148]
Some opponents of globalization see the phenomenon as a promotion of corporatist interests.[149] They also claim that the increasing autonomy and strength of corporate entities shapes the political policy of countries.[150][151] They advocate global institutions and policies that they believe better address the moral claims of poor and working classes as well as environmental concerns.[152] Economic arguments by fair trade theorists claim that unrestricted free trade benefits those with more financial leverage (i.e. the rich) at the expense of the poor.[153]
Globalization allows corporations to outsource manufacturing and service jobs from high cost locations, creating economic opportunities with the most competitive wages and worker benefits.[65] Critics of globalization say that it disadvantages poorer countries. While it is true that free trade encourages globalization among countries, some countries try to protect their domestic suppliers. The main export of poorer countries is usually agricultural productions. Larger countries often subsidize their farmers (e.g., the EU's Common Agricultural Policy), which lowers the market price for foreign crops.[154]
Global democracy[edit]
Main article: Democratic globalization
Democratic globalization is a movement towards an institutional system of global democracy that would give world citizens a say in political organizations. This would, in their view, bypass nation-states, corporate oligopolies, ideological Non-governmental organizations (NGO), political cults and mafias. One of its most prolific proponents is the British political thinker David Held. Advocates of democratic globalization argue that economic expansion and development should be the first phase of democratic globalization, which is to be followed by a phase of building global political institutions. Dr. Francesco Stipo, Director of the United States Association of the Club of Rome, advocates unifying nations under a world government, suggesting that it "should reflect the political and economic balances of world nations. A world confederation would not supersede the authority of the State governments but rather complement it, as both the States and the world authority would have power within their sphere of competence".[155] Former Canadian Senator Douglas Roche, O.C., viewed globalization as inevitable and advocated creating institutions such as a directly elected United Nations Parliamentary Assembly to exercise oversight over unelected international bodies.[156]
Global civics[edit]
Main articles: Global civics and Multiculturalism
See also: Global citizenship
Global civics suggests that civics can be understood, in a global sense, as a social contract between global citizens in the age of interdependence and interaction. The disseminators of the concept define it as the notion that we have certain rights and responsibilities towards each other by the mere fact of being human on Earth.[157] World citizen has a variety of similar meanings, often referring to a person who disapproves of traditional geopolitical divisions derived from national citizenship. An early incarnation of this sentiment can be found in Socrates, whom Plutarch quoted as saying: "I am not an Athenian, or a Greek, but a citizen of the world."[158] In an increasingly interdependent world, world citizens need a compass to frame their mindsets and create a shared consciousness and sense of global responsibility in world issues such as environmental problems and nuclear proliferation.[159]
Baha’i-inspired author Gregory Paul Meyjes embraces the single world community and emergent global consciousness but warns of globalization[160] as a cloak for an expeditious economic, social, and cultural Anglo-dominance that may be insufficiently fertile to sustain the emergence of a world civilization. He proposes a process of "universalization" as an alternative.
Cosmopolitanism is the proposal that all human ethnic groups belong to a single community based on a shared morality. A person who adheres to the idea of cosmopolitanism in any of its forms is called a cosmopolitan or cosmopolite.[161] A cosmopolitan community might be based on an inclusive morality, a shared economic relationship, or a political structure that encompasses different nations. The cosmopolitan community is one in which individuals from different places (e.g. nation-states) form relationships based on mutual respect. For instance, Kwame Anthony Appiah suggests the possibility of a cosmopolitan community in which individuals from varying locations (physical, economic, etc.) enter relationships of mutual respect despite their differing beliefs (religious, political, etc.).[162]
Canadian philosopher Marshall McLuhan popularized the term Global Village beginning in 1962.[163] His view suggested that globalization would lead to a world where people from all countries will become more integrated and aware of common interests and shared humanity.[164]
International cooperation[edit]
Military cooperation – Past examples of international cooperation exist. One example is the security cooperation between the United States and the former Soviet Union after the end of the Cold War, which astonished international society. Arms control and disarmament agreements, including the Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty (see START I, START II, START III, and New START) and the establishment of NATO’s Partnership for Peace, the Russia NATO Council, and the G8 Global Partnership against the Spread of Weapons and Materials of Mass Destruction, constitute concrete initiatives of arms control and de-nuclearization. The US–Russian cooperation was further strengthened by anti-terrorism agreements enacted in the wake of 9/11.[165]
Environmental cooperation – One of the biggest successes of environmental cooperation has been the agreement to reduce chlorofluorocarbon (CFC) emissions, as specified in the Montreal Protocol, in order to stop ozone depletion. The most recent debate around nuclear energy and the non-alternative coal-burning power plants constitutes one more consensus on what not to do. Thirdly, significant achievements in IC can be observed through development studies.[165]
Anti-globalization movement[edit]
Main article: Anti-globalization movement
Anti-globalization, or counter-globalization,[166] consists of a number of criticisms of globalization but, in general, is critical of the globalization of corporate capitalism.[167] The movement is also commonly referred to as the alter-globalization movement, anti-globalist movement, anti-corporate globalization movement,[168] or movement against neoliberal globalization. Opponents of globalization argue that there is unequal power and respect in terms of international trade between the developed and underdeveloped countries of the world.[169] The diverse subgroups that make up this movement include some of the following: trade unionists, environmentalists, anarchists, land rights and indigenous rights activists, organizations promoting human rights and sustainable development, opponents of privatization, and anti-sweatshop campaigners.[170]
In The Revolt of the Elites and the Betrayal of Democracy, Christopher Lasch analyzes[171] the widening gap between the top and bottom of the social composition in the United States. For him, our epoch is determined by a social phenomenon: the revolt of the elites, in reference to The revolt of the masses (1929) of the Spanish philosopher José Ortega y Gasset. According to Lasch, the new elites, i.e. those who are in the top 20% in terms of income, through globalization which allows total mobility of capital, no longer live in the same world as their fellow-citizens. In this, they oppose the old bourgeoisie of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, which was constrained by its spatial stability to a minimum of rooting and civic obligations. Globalization, according to the sociologist, has turned elites into tourists in their own countries. The de-nationalisation of business enterprise tends to produce a class who see themselves as "world citizens, but without accepting ... any of the obligations that citizenship in a polity normally implies". Their ties to an international culture of work, leisure, information - make many of them deeply indifferent to the prospect of national decline. Instead of financing public services and the public treasury, new elites are investing their money in improving their voluntary ghettos: private schools in their residential neighborhoods, private police, garbage collection systems. They have "withdrawn from common life". Composed of those who control the international flows of capital and information, who preside over philanthropic foundations and institutions of higher education, manage the instruments of cultural production and thus fix the terms of public debate. So, the political debate is limited mainly to the dominant classes and political ideologies lose all contact with the concerns of the ordinary citizen. The result of this is that no one has a likely solution to these problems and that there are furious ideological battles on related issues. However, they remain protected from the problems affecting the working classes: the decline of industrial activity, the resulting loss of employment, the decline of the middle class, increasing the number of the poor, the rising crime rate, growing drug trafficking, the urban crisis.
D.A. Snow et al. contend that the anti-globalization movement is an example of a new social movement, which uses tactics that are unique and use different resources than previously used before in other social movements.[172]
One of the most infamous tactics of the movement is the Battle of Seattle in 1999, where there were protests against the World Trade Organization's Third Ministerial Meeting. All over the world, the movement has held protests outside meetings of institutions such as the WTO, the International Monetary Fund (IMF), the World Bank, the World Economic Forum, and the Group of Eight (G8).[170] Within the Seattle demonstrations the protesters that participated used both creative and violent tactics to gain the attention towards the issue of globalization.
Opposition to capital market integration[edit]
Main article: Anti-capitalist movements




World Bank Protester, Jakarta, Indonesia.


Capital markets have to do with raising and investing money in various human enterprises. Increasing integration of these financial markets between countries leads to the emergence of a global capital marketplace or a single world market. In the long run, increased movement of capital between countries tends to favor owners of capital more than any other group; in the short run, owners and workers in specific sectors in capital-exporting countries bear much of the burden of adjusting to increased movement of capital.[173]
Those opposed to capital market integration on the basis of human rights issues are especially disturbed by the various abuses which they think are perpetuated by global and international institutions that, they say, promote neoliberalism without regard to ethical standards. Common targets include the World Bank (WB), International Monetary Fund (IMF), the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) and the World Trade Organization (WTO) and free trade treaties like the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), Free Trade Area of the Americas (FTAA), the Multilateral Agreement on Investment (MAI) and the General Agreement on Trade in Services (GATS). In light of the economic gap between rich and poor countries, movement adherents claim free trade without measures in place to protect the under-capitalized will contribute only to the strengthening the power of industrialized nations (often termed the "North" in opposition to the developing world's "South").[citation needed]
Anti-corporatism and anti-consumerism[edit]
Main articles: Anti-corporatism and Anti-consumerism
Corporatist ideology, which privileges the rights of corporations (artificial or juridical persons) over those of natural persons, is an underlying factor in the recent rapid expansion of global commerce.[174] In recent years, there have been an increasing number of books (Naomi Klein's 2000 No Logo, for example) and films (e.g. The Corporation & Surplus) popularizing an anti-corporate ideology to the public.
A related contemporary ideology, consumerism, which encourages the personal acquisition of goods and services, also drives globalization.[175] Anti-consumerism is a social movement against equating personal happiness with consumption and the purchase of material possessions. Concern over the treatment of consumers by large corporations has spawned substantial activism, and the incorporation of consumer education into school curricula. Social activists hold materialism is connected to global retail merchandizing and supplier convergence, war, greed, anomie, crime, environmental degradation, and general social malaise and discontent. One variation on this topic is activism by postconsumers, with the strategic emphasis on moving beyond addictive consumerism.[176]
Global justice and inequality[edit]
Global justice[edit]
Main article: Global justice movement




Differences in national income equality around the world as measured by the national Gini coefficient, 2014


The global justice movement is the loose collection of individuals and groups—often referred to as a "movement of movements"—who advocate fair trade rules and perceive current institutions of global economic integration as problems.[177] The movement is often labeled an anti-globalization movement by the mainstream media. Those involved, however, frequently deny that they are anti-globalization, insisting that they support the globalization of communication and people and oppose only the global expansion of corporate power.[178] The movement is based in the idea of social justice, desiring the creation of a society or institution based on the principles of equality and solidarity, the values of human rights, and the dignity of every human being.[179][180][181] Social inequality within and between nations, including a growing global digital divide, is a focal point of the movement. Many nongovernmental organizations have now arisen to fight these inequalities that many in Latin America, Africa and Asia face. A few very popular and well known non-governmental organizations (NGOs) include: War Child, Red Cross, Free The Children and CARE International. They often create partnerships where they work towards improving the lives of those who live in developing countries by building schools, fixing infrastructure, cleaning water supplies, purchasing equipment and supplies for hospitals, and other aid efforts.




The global digital divide: Computers per 100 people.


Social inequality[edit]
Main articles: Social inequality and International inequality
The economies of the world have developed unevenly, historically, such that entire geographical regions were left mired in poverty and disease while others began to reduce poverty and disease on a wholesale basis. From around 1980 through at least 2011, the GDP gap, while still wide, appeared to be closing and, in some more rapidly developing countries, life expectancies began to rise.[182] If we look at the Gini coefficient for world income, since the late 1980s, the gap between some regions has markedly narrowed—between Asia and the advanced economies of the West, for example—but huge gaps remain globally. Overall equality across humanity, considered as individuals, has improved very little. Within the decade between 2003 and 2013, income inequality grew even in traditionally egalitarian countries like Germany, Sweden and Denmark. With a few exceptions—France, Japan, Spain—the top 10 percent of earners in most advanced economies raced ahead, while the bottom 10 percent fell further behind.[183] By 2013, a tiny elite of multibillionaires, 85 to be exact, had amassed wealth equivalent to all the wealth owned by the poorest half (3.5 billion) of the world's total population of 7 billion.[184]
Critics of globalization argue that globalization results in weak labor unions: the surplus in cheap labor coupled with an ever-growing number of companies in transition weakened labor unions in high-cost areas. Unions become less effective and workers their enthusiasm for unions when membership begins to decline.[154] They also cite an increase in the exploitation of child labor: countries with weak protections for children are vulnerable to infestation by rogue companies and criminal gangs who exploit them. Examples include quarrying, salvage, and farm work as well as trafficking, bondage, forced labor, prostitution and pornography.[185]




Immigrant rights march for amnesty, Los Angeles, on May Day, 2006


Women often participate in the workforce in precarious work, including export-oriented employment. Evidence suggests that while globalization has expanded women’s access to employment, the long-term goal of transforming gender inequalities remains unmet and appears unattainable without regulation of capital and a reorientation and expansion of the state’s role in funding public goods and providing a social safety net.[186]
Anti-global governance[edit]
Main article: Global governance
Beginning in the 1930s, opposition arose to the idea of a world government, as advocated by organizations such as the World Federalist Movement (WFM). Those who oppose global governance typically do so on objections that the idea is unfeasible, inevitably oppressive, or simply unnecessary.[187] In general, these opponents are wary of the concentration of power or wealth that such governance might represent. Such reasoning dates back to the founding of the League of Nations and, later, the United Nations.
Environmentalist opposition[edit]




Deforestation of the Madagascar Highland Plateau has led to extensive siltation and unstable flows of western rivers.


Main article: Environmentalism
See also: Global warming, Climate change, and Deforestation
Environmentalism is a broad philosophy, ideology[188][189][190] and social movement regarding concerns for environmental conservation and improvement of the health of the environment. Environmentalist concerns with globalization include issues such as global warming, climate change, global water supply and water crises, inequity in energy consumption and energy conservation, transnational air pollution and pollution of the world ocean, overpopulation, world habitat sustainability, deforestation, biodiversity and species extinction.
One critique of globalization is that natural resources of the poor have been systematically taken over by the rich and the pollution promulgated by the rich is systematically dumped on the poor.[191] Some argue that Northern corporations are increasingly exploiting resources of less wealthy countries for their global activities while it is the South that is disproportionately bearing the environmental burden of the globalized economy. Globalization is thus leading to a type of" environmental apartheid".[192]
Helena Norberg-Hodge, the director and founder of Local Futures/International Society for Ecology and Culture, criticizes globalization in many ways. In her book Ancient Futures, Norberg-Hodge claims that "centuries of ecological balance and social harmony are under threat from the pressures of development and globalization." She also criticizes the standardization and rationalization of globalization, as it does not always yield the expected growth outcomes. Although globalization takes similar steps in most countries, scholars such as Hodge claim that it might not be effective to certain countries and that globalization has actually moved some countries backward instead of developing them.[193]
A related area of concern is the pollution haven hypothesis, which posits that, when large industrialized nations seek to set up factories or offices abroad, they will often look for the cheapest option in terms of resources and labor that offers the land and material access they require (see Race to the bottom).[194] This often comes at the cost of environmentally sound practices. Developing countries with cheap resources and labor tend to have less stringent environmental regulations, and conversely, nations with stricter environmental regulations become more expensive for companies as a result of the costs associated with meeting these standards. Thus, companies that choose to physically invest in foreign countries tend to (re)locate to the countries with the lowest environmental standards or weakest enforcement.
Food Security[edit]
The globalisation of food production is associated with a more efficient system of food production. This is because crops are grown in countries with optimum growing conditions. This improvement causes an increase in the world's food supply which encourages improved food security. [195]
Norway[edit]
Norway's limited crop range advocates globalisation of food production and availability. The northern-most country in Europe requires trade with other countries to ensure population food demands are met. The degree of self-sufficiency in food production is around 50% in Norway.[196]
See also[edit]


Civilizing mission
Deglobalization
Environmental racism
Franchising
Free trade
Global civics
Global commons
Global mobility
Globalism
Global public goods
List of bilateral free-trade agreements
List of globalization-related indices
List of multilateral free-trade agreements
Middle East and globalization
Neorealism (international relations)
North–South divide
Outline of globalization
Postdevelopment theory
Purple economy
Technocapitalism
Transnational cinema
Transnational citizenship
Triadization
United Nations Millennium Declaration
Vermeer's Hat
World Englishes


References[edit]


^ a b Albrow, Martin and Elizabeth King (eds.) (1990). Globalization, Knowledge and Society London: Sage. ISBN 9780803983236
^ Albrow, Martin; King, Elizabeth (1990). [Globalization at Google Books Globalization, knowledge, and society: readings from International sociology] Check |url= value (help). Sage Publications. ISBN 978-0-8039-8323-6. 
^ "Imagining the Internet". History of Information Technologies. Elon University School of Communications. Retrieved 17 August 2009. 
^ Stever, H. Guyford (1972). "Science, Systems, and Society". Journal of Cybernetics. 2 (3): 1–3. doi:10.1080/01969727208542909. 
^ Wolf, Martin (2014). "Shaping Globalization" (PDF). Finance & Development. 51 (3): 22–25. 
^ a b Frank, Andre Gunder. (1998). ReOrient: Global economy in the Asian age. Berkeley: University of California Press. ISBN 978-0520214743
^ "Globalization and Global History" (PDF). p. 127. Retrieved 3 July 2012. [permanent dead link]
^ H., O'Rourke, Kevin; G., Williamson, Jeffrey (1 April 2002). From=fulltext "When did globalisation begin?" Check |url= value (help). European Review of Economic History. 6 (1): 23–50. doi:10.1017/S1361491602000023. ISSN 1361-4916. 
^ a b c James, Paul; Steger, Manfred B. (2014). "A Genealogy of globalization: The career of a concept". Globalizations. 11 (4): 417–34. doi:10.1080/14747731.2014.951186. 
^ a b International Monetary Fund . (2000). "Globalization: Threats or Opportunity." 12 April 2000: IMF Publications.
^ Bridges, G. (2002). "Grounding Globalization: The Prospects and Perils of Linking Economic Processes of Globalization to Environmental Outcomes". Economic Geography. 78 (3): 361–86. doi:10.2307/4140814. JSTOR 4140814. 
^ a b Babones, Salvatore (15 April 2008). "Studying Globalization: Methodological Issues". In Ritzer, George. [Globalization, p. 146, at Google Books The Blackwell Companion to Globalization] Check |url= value (help). John Wiley & Sons. p. 146. ISBN 978-0-470-76642-2.  line feed character in |publisher= at position 6 (help)
^ "Globalization". Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved 7 July 2012. 
^ "Globalization". Oxford English Dictionary Online. September 2009. Retrieved 5 November 2010. 
^ "The Battle of Armageddon, October 1897 pp. 365–70". Pastor-russell.com. Retrieved 31 July 2010. 
^ Feder, Barnaby J. (6 July 2006). "Theodore Levitt, 81, Who Coined the Term 'Globalization', Is Dead". Retrieved 23 April 2014. 
^ Hopkins, A.G. (ed.). (2004). Globalization in World History. London: Norton, pp. 4–8. ISBN 978-0393979428
^ Bakari, Mohamed El-Kamel (2013). "Globalization and Sustainable Development: False Twins?". New Global Studies. 7 (3): 23–56. doi:10.1515/ngs-2013-021. ISSN 1940-0004. 
^ Al-Rodhan, R.F. Nayef and Gérard Stoudmann. (2006). Definitions of the Globalization: A Comprehensive Overview and a Proposed Definition. Archived 19 November 2012 at the Wayback Machine.
^ Giddens, Anthony. (1991). The Consequences of Modernity Cambridge: Polity Press. p. 64. ISBN 9780745609232
^ Robertson, Roland (1992). Globalization : social theory and global culture (Reprint. ed.). London: Sage. ISBN 0803981872. 
^ Held, David; Goldblatt, David; McGrew, Anthony; Perraton, Jonathan (1999). Global Transformations Cambridge: Polity Press. ISBN 9780745614984
^ a b c "DHL Global Connectedness Index 2014" (PDF). DHL. 11 March 2014. 
^ Larsson, Thomas. (2001). The Race to the Top: The Real Story of Globalization Washington, D.C.: Cato Institute. p. 9. ISBN 978-1930865150
^ a b James, Paul (2005). "'Arguing Globalizations: Propositions Towards an Investigation of Global Formation'". Globalizations. 2 (2): 193–209. doi:10.1080/14747730500202206. 
^ Steger, Manfred (2009). Globalization: A Very Short Introduction. New York: Oxford University Press. p. 11. ISBN 978-0-19-955226-9. 
^ Manfred B. Steger; Paul James (2013). "'Levels of Subjective Globalization: Ideologies, Imaginaries, Ontologies'". Perspectives on Global Development and Technology. 12 (1–2). 
^ James, Paul (2014). "'Faces of Globalization and the Borders of States: From Asylum Seekers to Citizens'". Citizenship Studies. 18 (2): 208–23. doi:10.1080/13621025.2014.886440. 
^ Friedman, Thomas L. "The Dell Theory of Conflict Prevention". Emerging: A Reader. Ed. Barclay Barrios. Boston: Bedford, St. Martins, 2008. 49
^ Fotopoulos, Takis. (2001). "Globalization, the reformist Left and the Anti-Globalization 'Movement.'" Democracy & Nature: The International Journal of Inclusive Democracy, 7:(2) (July 2001).
^ Lechner, Frank J. and John Boli (eds.) (2011). The Globalization Reader. New Jersey: Wiley-Blackwell Publishers.
^ Henwood, Doug (1 December 2003). "Beyond Globophobia". The Nation. 
^ Clark, Ross (20 March 2004). "Globophobia". The Spectator. 
^ George Ritzer, ed. (15 April 2008). The Blackwell Companion to Globalization. John Wiley & Sons. pp. 16–. ISBN 978-0-470-76642-2. 
^ a b c O'Rourke, Kevin H. and Jeffrey G. Williamson. (2000). "When Did Globalization Begin?" NBER Working Paper No. 7632.
^ a b c d Martell, Luke (2010). The Sociology of Globalization. Policy Press. 
^ Kochler, Hans (2000). Globality versus Democracy: The Changing Nature of International Relations in the Era of Globalization. Vienna: International Progress Organization. p. 35. 
^ Jerry Bentley, Old World Encounters: Cross-Cultural Contacts and Exchanges in Pre-Modern Times (New York: Oxford University Press, 1993), 32.
^ Jerry Bentley, Old World Encounters: Cross-Cultural Contacts and Exchanges in Pre-Modern Times (New York: Oxford University Press, 1993), 33.
^ "The Legacy of the Silk Road". Yale Global. 25 January 2013. 
^ Hopkins, A.G., ed., 2003. Globalization in World History. New York City, NY: Norton. ISBN 0-393-97942-3 pp. 4–5, 7
^ Chaudhuri, K.N. (1965\1999). The English East India Company: The Study of an Early Joint-stock Company 1600–1640 (Vol. 4). London: Routledge/Thoemmes Press.
^ a b Levinson, Marc. "Sample Chapter for Levinson, M.: The Box: How the Shipping Container Made the World Smaller and the World Economy Bigger". The Box: How the Shipping Container Made the World Smaller and the World Economy Bigger. Princeton University Press. Archived from the original on 22 January 2013. Retrieved 17 February 2013. 
^ Gittins, Ross (12 June 2006). "How the invention of a box changed our world – Business – smh.com.au". The Sydney Morning Herald. Retrieved 17 February 2013. 
^ "World Exports as Percentage of Gross World Product". Global Policy Forum. Archived from the original on 12 July 2008. Retrieved 11 November 2009. 
^ a b Varghese, N.V. 2008, 'Globalization of higher education and cross-border student mobility', International Institute for Educational Planning, UNESCO
^ Wolf, Martin (2001). "Will the nation-state survive globalization?". Foreign Affairs. 80 (1). 
^ Ritzer, George (2011). Globalization: The Essentials. NY: John Wiley & Sons.
^ a b Saggi, Kamal (2002). "Trade, Foreign Direct Investment, and International Technology Transfer: A Survey". World Bank Research Observer. 17 (2): 191–235. doi:10.1093/wbro/17.2.191. 
^ Hunt, Michael H. (2004). The World Transformed 1945 to present. p. 399. 
^ "The Open Market Internet Index". Treese.org. 11 November 1995. Archived from the original on 1 June 2013. Retrieved 15 June 2013. 
^ "World Stats". Internet World Stats. Miniwatts Marketing Group. 30 June 2012. 
^ a b "Signs of life". The Economist. 15 November 2014. 
^ Faiola, Anthony. (2009). "A Global Retreat As Economies Dry Up." The Washington Post, 5 March 2009.
^ Sorrells, Kathryn. (2012). Intercultural Communication Globalization and Social Justice. Thousand Oaks: Sage Pubs. ISBN 9781412927444
^ Works, Anchor Media. "This Time is Different - A Book by Carmen M. Reinhart and Kenneth S. Rogoff". reinhartandrogoff.com. 
^ a b Joshi, Rakesh Mohan, (2009) International Business, Oxford University Press, New Delhi and New York ISBN 0-19-568909-7.
^ Riley, T: "Year 12 Economics", p. 9. Tim Riley Publications, 2005
^ Cite error: The named reference sdefl0012017 was invoked but never defined (see the help page).
^ Pitelis, Christos; Roger Sugden (2000). [Globalization at Google Books The nature of the transnational firm] Check |url= value (help). Routledge. p. H72. ISBN 0-415-16787-6. 
^ "Multinational Corporations". 
^ Roy D. Voorhees, Emerson L. Seim, and John I. Coppett, "Global Logistics and Stateless Corporations," Transportation Practitioners Journal 59, 2 (Winter 1992): 144-51.
^ O'Sullivan, Arthur; Sheffrin, Steven M. (2003). Economics: Principles in Action. Upper Saddle River, New Jersey: Pearson Prentice Hall. p. 453. ISBN 0-13-063085-3. 
^ European Commission. "The EU Single Market: Fewer barriers, more opportunities". Europa web portal. Archived from the original on 1 October 2007. Retrieved 27 September 2007. 
"Activities of the European Union: Internal Market". Europa web portal. Retrieved 29 June 2007. 
^ a b Kuruvilla, Sarosh; Ranganathan, Aruna (October 2008). "Economic Development Strategies And Macro- And Micro-Level Human Resource Policies: The Case Of India's "Outsourcing" Industry" (PDF). Industrial & Labor Relations Review. 62 (1): 39–72. doi:10.1177/001979390806200103. 
^ "Outsourcing to Africa: The world economy calls | The Economist". 16 April 2011. Retrieved 16 April 2011. 
^ Robinson, William I. "Globalization and the sociology of Immanuel Wallerstein: A critical appraisal". International Sociology. 1–23. 
^ James, Paul (2006). Globalism, Nationalism, Tribalism. London: Sage Publications. 
^ Manfred B. Steger and Paul James, ‘Ideologies of Globalism’, in Paul James and Manfred B. Steger, eds, Globalization and Culture: Vol. 4, Ideologies of Globalism, Sage Publications, London, 2010. Inda, Jonathan; Rosaldo, Renato (2002). "Introduction: A World in Motion". The Anthropology of Globalization. Wiley-Blackwell. 
^ Cowen, Tyler; Barber, Benjamin (May–June 2003). "Globalization and Culture" (PDF). Cato Policy Report. Retrieved 15 March 2017. 
^ Nadeem, S (2009) Macaulay's (Cyber) Children: The Cultural Politics of Outsourcing in India. Cultural Sociology
^ Hacker, Violaine (2011), "Building Medias Industry while promoting a community of values in the globalization: from quixotic choices to pragmatic boon for EU Citizens", Politické Védy-Journal of Political Science, Slovakia
^ McAlister, Elizabeth. 2005. "Globalization and the Religious Production of Space." Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion, Vol. 44, No 3, September 2005, 249–255.
^ Globalization and Sport: A Review by Susan Froetschel Archived 23 December 2016 at the Wayback Machine.
^ "Overview of Olympic Games". Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved 4 June 2008. 
^ "2006 FIFA World Cup broadcast wider, longer and farther than ever before". FIFA.com. Fédération Internationale de Football Association. 6 February 2007. Retrieved 11 October 2009. 
^ Dunmore, Tom (16 September 2011). [Globalization, p. 235, at Google Books Historical Dictionary of Soccer] Check |url= value (help). Scarecrow Press. p. 235. ISBN 978-0-8108-7188-5. The World Cup is now the most-watched sporting event in the world on television, above even the Olympic Games. 
^ Dobson, Stephen; Goddard, John (10 February 2011). [Globalization, p. 407, at Google Books The Economics of Football] Check |url= value (help). Cambridge University Press. pp. 407–. ISBN 978-1-139-49630-8. The World Cup is the most widely viewed sporting event in the world: the estimated cumulative television audience for the 2006 World Cup in Germany was 26.2 billion, an average of 409 million viewers per match. 
^ Wong, Glenn M. (8 March 2012). [Globalization, p. 144, at Google Books The Comprehensive Guide to Careers in Sports] Check |url= value (help). Jones & Bartlett Publishers. pp. 144–. ISBN 978-1-4496-0203-1. The World Cup is the most-watched sporting event in the world. In 2006, more than 30 billion viewers in 214 countries watched the World Cup on television, and more than 3.3 million spectators attended the 64 matches of the tournament. 
^ Clayton, Thomas. 2004. "Competing Conceptions of Globalization" Revisited: Relocating the Tension between World-Systems Analysis and Globalization Analysis. In: Comparative Education Review, vol. 48, no. 3, pp. 274–94.
^ Throsby, David. (2002.) "The music industry in the new millennium: Global and Local Perspectives." Paper prepared for The Global Alliance for Cultural Diversity Division of Arts and Cultural Enterprise UNESCO, Paris.[permanent dead link]
^ "Ethnic fusion Music". Allmusic. 
^ "Worldbeat". Allmusic. 
^ "World Fusion Music". worldmusic.nationalgeographic.com. Archived from the original on 14 March 2012. 
^ "Chili: Small Fruit Sets Global Palettes on Fire" Archived 31 December 2016 at the Wayback Machine., History of Globalization, YaleGlobal Online.
^ Beard, David and Keneth Gloag. 2005. Musicology: The Key Concepts. London and New York: Routledge.
^ "International Flows of Selected Goods and Services" (PDF). Retrieved 31 July 2010. 
^ Ghosh, Biswajit (2011). "Cultural Changes and Challenges in the Era of Globalisation." Journal of Developing Societies, SAGE Publications, 27(2): 153–75.
^ Cuccioletta, Donald. Multiculturalism or Transculturalism: Towards a Cosmopolitan Citizenship.[permanent dead link], London Journal of Canadian Studies 2001/2002 Vol. 17, Plattsburgh State University of New York, Interdisciplinary Research Group on the Americas
^ a b transcultural, thefreedictionary.com
^ transcultural, yourdictionary.com
^ Scholte, Jan-Aart (2005). "Chapter 6: Globalization and Governance". Globalization: A Critical Introduction. Palgrave. 
^ Teodor Lucian Moga (2009). "The Contribution of the Neofunctionalist and Intergovernmentalist Theories to the Evolution of the European Integration Process" (PDF). Journal of Alternative Perspectives in the Social Sciences. Retrieved 21 May 2012. 
^ Pawel Zaleski Global Non-governmental Administrative System: Geosociology of the Third Sector, [in:] Gawin, Dariusz & Glinski, Piotr [ed.]: "Civil Society in the Making", IFiS Publishers, Warszawa 2006
^ "Vaccine Delivery". Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation. 
^ The Index of Global Philanthropy and Remittances 2012. Hudson Institute Center for Global Prosperity. Archived 30 July 2012 at the Wayback Machine.
^ "North Korean Refugees NGO". Northkoreanrefugees.com. 20 October 2008. Retrieved 23 August 2010. 
^ United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (2 July 2008). "UNHCR Freedom in the World 2008 – North Korea". Unhcr.org. Archived from the original on 18 October 2012. Retrieved 23 August 2010. 
^ Zimmerer, Karl S. (2006). [Globalization, p. 1, at Google Books Globalization & New Geographies of Conservation] Check |url= value (help). University of Chicago Press. p. 1. ISBN 978-0-226-98344-8. 
^ Krishnan, Armin (3 March 2016). [Globalization, p. PA157, at Google Books War as Business: Technological Change and Military Service Contracting] Check |url= value (help). Routledge. p. 157. ISBN 978-1-317-00049-5. 
^ Boustan, Adain May . "Fertility and Immigration." UCLA. 15 January 2009.
^ "UNWTO World Tourism Barometer" (PDF). UNWTO World Tourism Barometer. World Tourism Organization. 11 (1). January 2013. Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 February 2013. Retrieved 9 April 2013. 
^ Visa requirements for tourism eased around the world, says UN agency
^ "Visa Openness Report 2015 January 2016" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 23 January 2016. 
^ "immigration". OxfordDictionaries.com. Oxford University Press. Retrieved 11 May 2016. 
^ "immigrate". Merriam-Webster.com. Merriam-Webster, In. Retrieved 27 March 2014. 
^ "Who's who: Definitions". London, England: Refugee Council. 2016. Retrieved 7 September 2015. 
^ "Mainstreaming of Migration in Development Policy and Integrating Migration in the Post-2015 UN Development Agenda" (PDF). www.ilo.org. 
^ Gribble, C (2008). "Policy options for managing international student migration: the sending country's perspective". Journal of Higher Education Policy and Management. 30 (1): 25–39. doi:10.1080/13600800701457830. 
^ "ICT Facts and Figures 2005, 2010, 2016". Telecommunication Development Bureau, International Telecommunication Union (ITU). Retrieved 2015-05-24. 
^ "Company Info – Facebook Newsroom". Facebook. 
^ Berglez, Peter (2008). "WHAT IS GLOBAL JOURNALISM?". Journalism Studies. 9 (6): 845–858. doi:10.1080/14616700802337727. 
^ "KOF Index of Globalization". ethz.ch. The KOF Swiss Economic Institute. 2014. 
^ 16 October 2006 Archived 6 March 2008 at the Wayback Machine.. Data for the year 2006. No longer published.
^ Vujakovic, Petra (2010). "How to Measure Globalization? A New Globalization Index (NGI)". Atlantic Economic Journal. 38 (2): 237. doi:10.1007/s11293-010-9217-3. 
^ a b Sen, Amartya K. (1970). Collective choice and social welfare. San Francisco, CA: Holden-Day.
^ "Definition of xenophobia in English from the Oxford dictionary". oxforddictionaries.com. 
^ "Define Xenophobia at Dictionary.com". Dictionary.com. 
^ Guido Bolaffi. Dictionary of race, ethnicity and culture. SAGE Publications Ltd., 2003. p. 332.
^ "Poverty Analysis – Measuring Inequality". worldbank.org. 
^ "The Happy Planet Index". Neweconomics.org. Retrieved 2 June 2013. 
^ Capra, Fritjof (2002). The Hidden Connections. New York, New York: Random House. ISBN 0-385-49471-8. 
^ Sorrells, Kathryn. Intercultural Communication: Globalization and Social Justice. Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE, 2013. Print.
^ a b c Fiss, Peer and Hirsch, Pal: "The Discourse of Globalization: Framing and Sensemaking of an Emerging Concept. American Sociological Review, February 2005. vol. 70 no 1: 29–52.
^ "Africans and Asians Tend to View Globalization Favorably. Europeans and Americans are More Skeptical". World Public Opinion.org. 7 November 2006.
^ BBC World Service (2008). "Widespread Unease about Economy and Globalization – Global poll" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 3 September 2014. Retrieved 24 March 2015. 
^ Gordon, Philip. 2004. "Globalization: Europe's Wary Embrace" Archived 29 June 2011 at the Wayback Machine.. Yale Global, 1 November 2004.
^ Time Magazine: Why Denmark Loves Globalisation
^ Greg Ip: "The Declining Value Of Your College Degree", Wall Street Journal. 17 July 2008.
^ Takenaka Heizo and Chida Ryokichi. 1998. "Japan," Domestic Adjustments to Globalization; (ed, Charles E. Morrison and Hadi Soesastro), Tokyo: Japan center for International Exchange, 1998, pp. 76–102.
^ a b Bhagwati, Jagdish (2004). In Defense of Globalization. Oxford, New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0195330939. 
^ Shoa, S. Rajgopal (2002). "Reclaiming Democracy, the Anti-globalization Movement in South Asia" (PDF) (70). Feminist Review. Archived from the original (PDF) on 14 May 2011. 
^ Graham, Carol (1 January 2011). "Winners and Losers: Perspectives on Globalization from the Emerging Market Economies". Brookings. Archived from the original on 11 May 2011. 
^ Fuller, Dan; Geide-Stevenson, Doris (Fall 2003). "Consensus Among Economists: Revisited" (PDF). Journal of Economic Review. 34 (4): 369–87. doi:10.1080/00220480309595230.  (registration required)
^ Friedman, Milton. "The Case for Free Trade". Hoover Digest. 1997 (4). Archived from the original on 22 January 2007. 
^ Whaples, Robert (2006). "Do Economists Agree on Anything? Yes!". The Economists' Voice. 3 (9). doi:10.2202/1553-3832.1156. 
^ Mankiw, Gregory (7 May 2006). "Outsourcing Redux". Retrieved 22 January 2007. 
^ "Poll Results | IGM Forum". www.igmchicago.org. Archived from the original on 22 June 2016. Retrieved 1 July 2016. 
^ Sachs, Jeffrey (2005). The End of Poverty. New York, New York: The Penguin Press. ISBN 1-59420-045-9. 
^ Peet, Richard; Hartwick, Elaine (2015). Theories of Development, Third Edition: Contentions, Arguments, Alternatives. The Guilford Press. p. 2. ISBN 1462519571. But economic growth can occur without touching problems like inequality or poverty when all the increase in income goes to a relatively few people. 
^ Beaudet, Pierre; Schafer, Jessica; Haslam, Paul A. (2012). Introduction to International Development: Approaches, Actors, and Issues. Oxford University Press. p. 112. ISBN 019544020X. According to Oxfam International, the contrasting experiences of Latin America and East Asia illustrate that globalization-induced growth and poverty can co-exist. Even when the market expands, 'poor people are often excluded from opportunities by a lack of productive assets, weak infrastructure, poor education, and ill-health' 
^ Conversi, Daniele (2009) 'Globalization, ethnic conflict and nationalism Archived 7 June 2011 at the Wayback Machine.', in B. Turner (ed.) Handbook of Globalization Studies. London: Routledge/ Taylor & Francis; Barkawi, Tarak (2005) Globalization and War. Rowman & Littlefield; Smith, Dennis (2006) Globalization: The Hidden Agenda. Cambridge: Polity Press. See also Barber, Benjamin R., Jihad vs. McWorld. Ballantine Books, 1996
^ "Human Development Report 2003" (PDF). UNDP. 2003. Retrieved 6 April 2013. 
^ Martin Wolf (2004). Why Globalization Works. Yale University Press. ISBN 978-0300102529. Archived from the original on 10 May 2013. Retrieved 6 April 2013. 
^ Berg, Andrew G.; Ostry, Jonathan D. (2011). "Equality and Efficiency". Finance and Development. International Monetary Fund. 48 (3). Retrieved 10 September 2012. 
^ Dollar, David; Kraay, Aart. "Trade, Growth, and Poverty". Finance and Development. International Monetary Fund. Retrieved 6 June 2011. 
^ E.g. Pyun, Ju Hyun; Lee, Jong-Wha (21 March 2009). "Globalisation promotes peace". 
^ See, for example, Roy Harrod, The Life of John Maynard Keynes, Macmillan, 1951; Donald Markwell, John Maynard Keynes and International Relations: Economic Paths to War and Peace, Oxford University Press, 2006. Keynes had colourfully described the globalization before World War I in The Economic Consequences of the Peace, Macmillan, 1919, chapter 2.
^ Lee, Laurence (17 May 2007). "WTO blamed for India grain suicides". Al Jazeera. Retrieved 17 May 2007. 
^ Bakan, Joel (2004). The Corporation. New York, New York: Simon & Schuster. ISBN 0-7432-4744-2. 
^ Perkins, John (2004). Confessions of an Economic Hit Man. San Francisco, California: Berrett-Koehler. ISBN 1-57675-301-8. 
^ "Fórum Social Mundial". Forumsocialmundial.org.br. Retrieved 31 July 2010. 
^ "NAFTA at 10". Economic Policy Institute. 
^ a b Hurst E. Charles. Social Inequality: Forms, Causes, and consequences, 6th ed. p. 41
^ "USACOR.org". USACOR.org. 28 July 2009. Retrieved 31 July 2010. 
^ Roche, Douglas. "The Case for a United Nations Parliamentary Assembly" (PDF). The World Federalist Movement–Institute for Global Policy. Archived from the original (PDF) on 31 May 2013. Retrieved 28 May 2012. 
^ Altinay, Hakan (2010). "The Case for Global Civics". Global Economy and Development at Brookings. Archived from the original on 3 June 2010. 
^ "World Citizens Association Australia". World Citizens Association Australia. 
^ Altinay, Hakan (June 2010). "A Global Civics: Necessary? Feasible?". Global Policy. 
^ Meyjes, Gregory Paul P. (1999). "Language and Universalization: a 'Linguistic Ecology' Reading of Bahá'í Writ". The Journal of Bahá’í Studies. Volume IX (1). Ottawa: Association for Bahá’í Studies. pp. 51–63. 
^ "Cosmopolitan". Dictionary.com. Retrieved 7 April 2012. 
^ Kwame Anthony Appiah, "Cosmopolitan Patriots," Critical Inquiry 23, no. 3 (Spring, 1997): 617–639.
^ Marshall McLuhan and Bruce R. Powers (17 September 1992) The Global Village: Transformations in World Life and Media in the 21st century . Oxford University Press: 17 September 1992
^ Chapman, Roger. Culture wars: an encyclopedia of issues, viewpoints, and voices, Volume 1. 2009: M.E.Sharp
^ a b "International cooperation as a stepping-stone to a world government | Global Policy Journal – Practitioner, Academic, Global Governance, International Law, Economics, Security, Institutions, Comment & Opinion, Media, Events, Journal". Global Policy Journal. Retrieved 15 June 2013. 
^ Jacques Derrida (May 2004) Enlightenment past and to come, speech at the party for 50 years of Le Monde diplomatique
^ Morris, Douglas "Globalization and Media Democracy: The Case of Indymedia", Shaping the Network Society, MIT Press 2003. Courtesy link to (pre-publication version) FIS.utoronto.ca Archived 4 March 2009 at the Wayback Machine.
^ Juris, Jeffrey S. (2008). Networking Futures: The Movements against Corporate Globalization. Durham: Duke University Press. p. 2. ISBN 978-0-8223-4269-4. 
^ Staggenborg, S. (2011). Social movements (Rev. ed.). New York: Oxford University Press.
^ a b Engler, M. (30 May 2007). "The Anti-Globalization Movement Defined Share The World's Resources". Retrieved 14 March 2013. [permanent dead link]l
^ https://www.independent.co.uk/voices/the-treachery-of-the-lites-elite-sense-of-irresponsibility-1610879.html
^ Snow, D. A., Soule, S. A., & Kriesi, H. (2004). The Blackwell companion to social movements. Malden, MA: Blackwell Pub..
^ Frieden, Jeffry A. (1991). "Invested Interests: The Politics of National Economic Policies in a World of Global Finance". International Organization. MIT Press. 45 (4): 425–51. doi:10.1017/s0020818300033178. ISSN 1531-5088. JSTOR 2706944. (Registration required (help)). 
^ Ottaway, Marina (September 2001). "Corporatism Goes Global". Global Governance: A Review of Multilateralism and International Organizations. 7 (3). 
^ Storper Michael (2000). "Lived effects of the Contemporary Economy: Globalization, Inequality, and Consumer Society". Public Culture. 12 (2): 375–409. doi:10.1215/08992363-12-2-375. 
^ Cohen, Maurie J. (July 2013). "Collective dissonance and the transition to post-consumerism". Futures. 52: 42–51. doi:10.1016/j.futures.2013.07.001. 
^ Tom Mertes, "A Movement of Movements", New York: Verso, 2004
^ della Porta, D. 2005. "The Social Bases of the Global Justice Movement: Some Theoretical Reflections and Empirical Evidence from the First European Social Forum." Civil Society and Social Movements Programme Paper No. 21.Geneva: UNRISD (United Nations Research Institute for Social Development).
^ Education and Social Justice By J. Zajda, S. Majhanovich, V. Rust, 2006, ISBN 1-4020-4721-5
^ Nursing ethics: across the curriculum and into practice By Janie B. Butts, Karen Rich, Jones and Bartlett Publishers 2005, ISBN 978-0-7637-4735-0
^ Legal Birth Definition Act – Act 135 of 2004
^ Rosling, Hans (2013). "How much do you know about the world?". BBC. Retrieved 9 July 2014. 
^ Stiglits Joseph E. (13 October 2013). "Inequality is a Choice". New York Times. Retrieved 9 July 2014. 
^ "Outlook on the Global Agenda 2014" (PDF). World Economic Forum. Retrieved 9 July 2014. 
^ Pavcnik, Nina; Pavcnik, Nina (September 2005). "Child Labor in the Global Economy". Journal of Economic Perspectives. 19 (1): 199–220. doi:10.1257/0895330053147895. 
^ Seguino, Stephanie; Grown, Caren (November 2006). "Gender equity and globalization: macroeconomic policy for developing countries". Journal of International Development. Wiley. 18 (8): 1081–104. doi:10.1002/jid.1295.  Pdf version – via the World Bank.
^ Kennedy, Paul. (2006.) The Parliament of Man: The Past, Present, and Future of the United Nations. New York: Harper Collins. ISBN 978-0375501654
^ "Ideology and Sustainability". Formal.stanford.edu. Retrieved 13 June 2012. 
^ Ronald Bailey from the February 2002 issue. "Debunking Green Myths". Reason.com. Retrieved 13 June 2012. 
^ Donald Gibson. Environmentalism: Ideology and Power. Nova Science Pub Inc. 2003
^ Low, Nicholas. (2002). Global Ethics and Environment. Routledge Science. ISBN 978-0415197359.
^ Lechner, Frank J., and John Boli. 2012. The Globalization Reader, 4th ed. Wiley-Blackwell. ISBN 978-0470655634.
^ Norberg-Hodge, Helena (1992). Ancient futures : learning from Ladakh (Sierra Club Books pbk. ed.). San Francisco: Sierra Club Books. ISBN 0871566435. 
^ Levinson, Arik; M. Scott Taylor (2008). "Unmasking the Pollution Haven Effect". International Economic Review. 49 (1): 223–54. doi:10.1111/j.1468-2354.2008.00478.x. 
^ Clapp, J. "Food Security and International Trade Unpacking disputed narratives" (PDF). 
^ Flaten and Hisano, 2007. Food Security Policy in a Food Importing Country: The Case of Norway


Further reading[edit]


Acocella, Nicola (2005). [Globalization at Google Books Economic policy in the age of globalisation] Check |url= value (help). Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-54038-0. 
Bales, Kevin (2012). Disposable People: New Slavery in the Global Economy. University of California Press. ISBN 978-0520272910. 
Barbara, Christopher (2008). [Globalization at Google Books International legal personality: Panacea or pandemonium? Theorizing about the individual and the state in the era of globalization] Check |url= value (help). Saarbrücken: Verlag Dr. Müller. ISBN 3-639-11514-7. 
von Braun, Joachim; Eugenio Diaz-Bonilla (2007). Globalization of Food and Agriculture and the Poor. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-569528-1. 
Carpenter, John. "Puritan Missions as Globalization," Fides et Historia. 31:2, 1999 pp. 103–23.
Chaichian, Mohammad (2014). Empires and Walls: Globalization, Migration, and Colonial Control. Leiden: Brill. ISBN 9789004236035. 
Chaichian, Mohammad (2009). Town and Country in the Middle East: Iran and Egypt in the Transition to Globalization. New York: Lexington Books. ISBN 9780739126776. 
Chanda, Nayan (2007). Bound Together: How Traders, Preachers, Warriors and Adventurers Shaped Globalization. Yale University Press, New Haven. ISBN 978-0-300-11201-6. 
Chomsky, Noam and Robert W. McChesney (2011). Profit Over People: Neoliberalism and Global Order. Seven Stories Press. ISBN 978-1888363821. 
Fernando, Salvetti, ed. (2010). "Glocal" Working. Living and Working across the World with Cultural Intelligence. Milan: Franco Angeli. ISBN 978-88-568-2733-0. 
Glyn, Andrew (2006). Capitalism Unleashed: Finance, Globalization, and Welfare. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-922679-2. Archived from the original on 26 December 2010. 
James, Paul (2006). Globalism, Nationalism, Tribalism: Bringing Theory Back In. London: Sage Publications. 
James, Paul; Gills, Barry (2007). Globalization and Economy, Vol. 1: Global Markets and Capitalism. London: Sage Publications. 
James, Paul; Mittelman, James H. (2014). Globalization and Politics, Vol. 3: Political Critiques and Social Theories of the Global. London: Sage Publications. 
James, Paul (2014). "'Faces of Globalization and the Borders of States: From Asylum Seekers to Citizens'". Citizenship Studies. 18 (2): 208–23. doi:10.1080/13621025.2014.886440. 
Jones, Andrew (2010) Globalization. Key Thinkers. Cambridge: Polity Press, John Wiley & Sons. ISBN 0745643221
Kitching, Gavin (2001). Seeking Social Justice through Globalization. Escaping a Nationalist Perspective. Penn State Press. ISBN 0-271-02162-4. Archived from the original on 28 November 2007. 
Klein, Naomi (2008). The Shock Doctrine: The Rise of Disaster Capitalism. Picador. ISBN 978-0312427993. 
Kohler, Gernot; Emilio José Chaves, eds. (2003). Globalization: Critical Perspectives. Hauppauge, New York: Nova Science Publishers. ISBN 1-59033-346-2.  With contributions by Samir Amin, Christopher Chase-Dunn, Andre Gunder Frank, Immanuel Wallerstein
Lewis, Jeff (2011). Crisis in the Global Mediaspheres. London: Palgrave. 
Mander, Jerry; Edward Goldsmith (1996). The case against the global economy: and for a turn toward the local. San Francisco: Sierra Club Books. ISBN 0-87156-865-9. 
Moore, Karl; David Charles Lewis (2009). Origins of Globalization. New York: Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-80598-8. 
Murray, Warwick E. (2006). Geographies of Globalization. New York: Routledge. ISBN 0-415-31799-1. 
Norberg, Johan (2008). "Globalization". In Hamowy, Ronald. [Globalization at Google Books The Encyclopedia of Libertarianism] Check |url= value (help). The Encyclopedia of Libertarianism. Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE; Cato Institute. pp. 207–08. doi:10.4135/9781412965811.n124. ISBN 978-1-4129-6580-4. LCCN 2008009151. OCLC 750831024. 
Neumann, Iver B.; Ole Jacob Sending (2010). Governing the Global Polity: Practice, Mentality, Rationality. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press. ISBN 978-0-472-07093-0. 
Osterhammel, Jürgen; Niels P. Petersson (2005). [Globalization at Google Books Globalization: A Short History] Check |url= value (help). Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press. ISBN 0-691-12165-6. 
"Americans on Globalization: A Study of U.S. Attitudes" (PDF). Program on International Policy Attitudes. 28 March 2000. Retrieved 5 April 2017. 
Panitch, Leo and Sam Gindin (2012). The Making of Global Capitalism: the Political Economy of American Empire. London: Verso. ISBN 978-1-84467-742-9
Pfister, Ulrich (2012). Globalization. Mainz: Institute of European History,. 
Reinsdorf, Marshall; Matthew J. Slaughter (2009). International Trade in Services and Intangibles in the Era of Globalization. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press. ISBN 978-0-226-70959-8. 
Samimi, Parisa; Guan Choo Lim; Abdul Aziz Buang (December 2011). "Globalization Measurement: Notes on Common Globalization Indexes". Knowledge Management, Economics and Information Technology. 1 (7). 
Sassen, Saskia (2014). Expulsions: Brutality and Complexity in the Global Economy. Harvard University Press. ISBN 0674599225. 
Sen, Amartya (1999). Development as Freedom. Oxford, New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0375406190. 
Sirkin, Harold L; James W. Hemerling; Arindam K. Bhattacharya (2008). Globality: Competing with Everyone from Everywhere for Everything. New York: Business Plus. p. 292. ISBN 0-446-17829-2. Archived from the original on 23 September 2008. 
Smith, Charles (2007). International Trade and Globalisation, 3rd edition. Stocksfield: Anforme. ISBN 1-905504-10-1. 
Steger, Manfred B.; James, Paul (2013). "'Levels of Subjective Globalization: Ideologies, Imaginaries, Ontologies'". Perspectives on Global Development and Technology. 12 (1–2). 
Stiglitz, Joseph E. (2002). Globalization and Its Discontents. New York: W.W. Norton. ISBN 0-393-32439-7. 
Stiglitz, Joseph E. (2006). Making Globalization Work. New York: W.W. Norton. ISBN 0-393-06122-1. 
Tausch, Arno (2012). Globalization, the Human Condition, and Sustainable Development in the Twenty-first Century: Cross-national Perspectives and European Implications. With Almas Heshmati and a Foreword by Ulrich Brand (1st ed.). Anthem Press, London. ISBN 9780857284105. 
Osle, Rafael Domingo (2010). The New Global Law. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 9780521193870. 
Sparks, C. (2007). Globalization, development and the mass media. Los Angeles: SAGE.
Weisbrot, Mark (2015). Failed: What the "Experts" Got Wrong about the Global Economy. New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 9780195170184. 


External links[edit]
 Media related to globalization at Wikimedia Commons



Wikiquote has quotations related to: Globalization





Look up globalisation or globalization in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.




Library resources about
Globalization





Online books
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries





Comprehensive discussion of the term at the Site Global Transformations
Globalization Website (Emory University) Links, Debates, Glossary etc.
BBC News Special Report – "Globalisation"
"Globalization collected news and commentary". The Guardian.  
"Resilience, Panarchy, and World-Systems Analysis", from the Ecology and Society Journal
"Globalization" Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Analysis of the idea and its history.
OECD Globalization statistics
Interactive map: Visualization of Global Cargo Ships from UCL Faculty of the Built Environment
Mapping Globalization, Princeton University
"Globalization", from The Canadian Encyclopedia
YaleGlobal Online
Global 3000 Globalization Program by Deutsche Welle-TV
List of Global Development Indexes and Rankings
Explained With Maps – The Globalization of Food (Documentary Video)
Globalization’s True Believers Are Having Second Thoughts. Time. 3 June 2016







v
t
e


Globalization






Journals
Outline
Studies





Aspects



Alter-globalization
Anti-globalization
Counter-hegemonic globalization
Cultural globalization
Deglobalization
Democratic globalization
Economic globalization
Environmental globalization
Financial globalization
Global citizenship

education


Global governance
Global health
History of

archaic
early modern


Military globalization
Political globalization
Trade globalization
Workforce globalization





Issues




Global



Disease
Digital divide
Labor arbitrage
Population
Warming
Water crisis





Other



Brain drain

reverse


Climate change
Climate justice
Development aid
Economic inequality
Endangered languages
Fair trade
Forced migration
Human rights
Illicit financial flows
Invasive species
Investor-state disputes
New international division of labour
North–South divide
Offshoring
Race to the bottom

pollution havens


Transnational crime
McDonaldization
Westernization
American imperialism
British Empire
World war








Theories



Capital accumulation
Dependency
Development
Earth system
Fiscal localism
Modernization

ecological
history of


Primitive accumulation
Social change
World history
World-systems





Notable
scholars



Samir Amin
Arjun Appadurai
K. Anthony Appiah
Daniele Archibugi
Giovanni Arrighi
Ravi Batra
Jean Baudrillard
Zygmunt Bauman
Ulrich Beck
Walden Bello
Jagdish Bhagwati
Robert Brenner
Manuel Castells
Noam Chomsky
Alfred Crosby
Christopher Chase-Dunn
Andre G. Frank
Thomas Friedman
Anthony Giddens
Peter Gowan
Michael Hardt
David Harvey
David Held
Paul Hirst
Michael Hudson
Paul James
Ibn Khaldun
Naomi Klein
Antonio Negri
George Ritzer
Jeffrey Sachs
Saskia Sassen
John R. Saul
Vandana Shiva
Joseph Stiglitz
John Urry
Immanuel Wallerstein








 Portal
 Category












v
t
e


International trade



Terminology



Absolute advantage
Balance of payments
Balance of trade
Capital account
Comparative advantage
Current account
Export-oriented industrialization
Fair trade
Foreign exchange reserves
Globalization
Import substitution industrialization
Net capital outflow
Outsourcing
Tariff
Trade justice
Trade war
Trading nation









Organizations
and policies




International Monetary Fund (IMF)
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
World Bank Group
World Trade Organization (WTO)

International Trade Centre


Bilateral investment treaty
Economic integration
Free-trade zone
Special economic zone
Trade agreement
Trade barrier
Trade bloc





Political economy



Free trade (Adam Smith, The Wealth of Nations, Repeal of the Corn Laws)
Mercantilism
Protectionism (Economic nationalism, Autarky)





Regional organizations



ACU
ASEAN
CACM
CAN
CARICOM
CEMAC
CUBKR
EAC
EAU
EU
GCC
Mercosur
RCEP
SAARC
SACU
WAEMU





Exports by product



Aircraft & Spacecraft
Aircraft parts
Aluminium
Cars
Car parts
Coal
Coffee
Computers
Copper
Corn
Cotton
Diamonds
Electricity
Engines
Gas turbines
Gold
Integrated circuits
Iron ore
Natural gas
Oil
Petrol
Pharmaceuticals
Ships
Steel
Telecommunications equipment
Telephones
Trucks
Wheat
Wine








 Category
 Commons












v
t
e


Aspects of capitalism
(academic views)



General



Business cycle
Competition
Economic bubble
Economic development
Entrepreneurship
Ecoprenuership
Externalities
Financial Revolution
Globalization
History of capitalist theory
Industrial Revolution
Innovation
Invention
Market failure
Merit
Multinational corporation
Oligopoly
Privatization
Profit
Property rights
Regulation
Wage labour
Wealth





Ideology



American Dream
Bipartisanship
Democracy
Free market
Individualism
Laissez-faire
Libertarianism
Neoliberalism





Cultural aspects



Culture of capitalism
Advertising
Consumerism
Decentralization
Economic mobility
Liberty
Mainstream
Philanthropy
Private foundation
Rule of law
Social alienation
Spontaneous order





Social aspects



Economic inequality
Employment
Freedom of association
Labour market flexibility
Labour supply
Productivity
Prosperity
Social venture capital
Unemployment





Criticism



Criticism
Anti-capitalism
Market fundamentalism
Marxism
Wage slavery





Antithesis



Anarchism
Anarcho-syndicalism
Communism
Eco-socialism
Libertarian socialism
Mercantilism
Post-scarcity economy
Sharing economy
Social anarchism
Socialism
Syndicalism









Authority control



GND: 4557997-0
HDS: 48542
NDL: 00938997











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Globalization&oldid=818551611"					Categories: GlobalizationTheories of historyEconomic geographyCultural geographyInternational tradeCapitalismInterculturalismHidden categories: Pages with reference errorsPages with URL errorsAll articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from August 2017Articles with permanently dead external linksCS1 errors: invisible charactersWebarchive template wayback linksPages with broken reference namesArticles with dead external links from December 2017Pages with login required references or sourcesWikipedia indefinitely move-protected pagesUse dmy dates from September 2017Use American English from August 2016All Wikipedia articles written in American EnglishArticles containing potentially dated statements from June 2012All articles containing potentially dated statementsAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from July 2017Commons category with local link different than on WikidataWikipedia articles with GND identifiers