





This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (July 2011) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)







The puck dents the top of the net and knocks off the water bottle for a goal as the goaltender fails to stop the shot.


In ice hockey, a goal is scored when the puck entirely crosses the goal line between the two goal posts and below the goal crossbar. A goal awards one point to the team attacking the goal scored upon, regardless of which team the player who actually deflected the puck into the goal belongs to (see also own goal). Typically, a player on the team attempting to score shoots the puck with his/her stick towards the goal net opening, and a player on the opposing team called a goaltender tries to block the shot to prevent a goal from being scored against his/her team.
The term goal may also refer to the structure in which goals are scored. The ice hockey goal is rectangular in shape; the front frame of the goal is made of steel tube painted red (or another color depending on the league) and consists of two vertical goalposts and a horizontal crossbar. A net is attached to the back of the frame to catch pucks that enter the goal and also to prevent pucks from entering it from behind. The entire goal is considered an inbounds area of the playing surface, and it is legal to play the puck behind the goal. Under NHL rules, the opening of the goal is 72 inches (180 cm) wide by 48 inches (120 cm) tall, and the footprint of the goal is 44 inches (110 cm) deep.



Contents


1 Method of scoring
2 Credit for goals and assists
3 Scoring statistics
4 Types of goals
5 Related terms
6 Goal horn
7 See also
8 References
9 External links



Method of scoring[edit]




In this diagram, the blue player on the right would be credited with an assist, while the blue player on the left would score the goal.


The object of the game of ice hockey is to score more goals than the opposing team. Goaltenders and defencemen are concerned primarily with keeping the other team from scoring a goal, while forwards are primarily concerned with scoring goals on the other team. Forwards also have to be defensively responsible while defencemen need to press offensively, and it is not unknown for goalies to attempt to position the puck for a counterattack, or even attempt to shoot against an unguarded net.
For a goal to be scored, the puck must entirely cross the goal line between the posts and under the crossbar of the goal frame. A goal is not allowed under any of the following conditions:

the puck is sent into the goal from a stick raised above the height of the crossbar
the puck is intentionally kicked, batted, or thrown into the net by an attacking player; a puck may deflect off an attacking player's skate or body provided that player does not make a deliberate attempt to kick or redirect the puck with his or her body
the puck enters the net directly after deflecting off an official
the goaltender is impeded from preventing the goal by an attacking player
the scoring team had too many men on ice at the time of the goal
the goal was scored with a broken stick
the net was dislodged prior to the puck entering it
the goaltender shoots the puck after crossing the center line (however, replacing the goaltender with an extra attacker is allowed).
the puck breaks into two or more pieces prior to any portion of it entering the goal.

Additionally, in many leagues, a goal does not count if a player from the attacking team has a skate or stick in the goal crease before the puck. The National Hockey League (NHL) abolished this rule starting in the 1999-2000 season after the disputed triple-overtime goal in the 1999 Stanley Cup Finals. Brett Hull of the Dallas Stars scored the series-clinching goal against the Buffalo Sabres. There are those who believe that video replay shows Hull's skate in the crease prior to the puck.
Credit for goals and assists[edit]
Typically, the last player on the goal-scoring team to touch the puck before it goes into the net is credited with scoring that goal. Zero, one, or two other players on the goal-scoring team may also credited with an assist for helping their teammate to score the goal. If another player on the goal-scoring team touched the puck to help score the goal before the goal-scoring player touched it without an opposing player intervening (touching the puck in between), then that player gets an assist. If yet another player on the goal-scoring team also touched the puck before that without an opposing player intervening, then that player also gets an assist.[1]
For a hockey player, a goal or an assist credited to him/her is also considered a point; thus the number of goals scored by that player plus the number of assists for him/her equals the number of points for that player. However, a rule says that only one point can be credited to any one player on a goal scored.[2] This means one player cannot be credited with a goal and an assist for the same goal scored; instead the player would only get credit for a goal and a different player may get credit for an assist, if applicable. It also means that one player cannot be credited with two assists for the same goal scored; instead the player would only get credit for one assist and a different player may get credit for the other assist, if applicable.
Usually on a hockey team, forwards score the most goals and get the most points, although defensemen can score goals and often get assists. In professional play, goaltenders only occasionally get an assist, and only very rarely score a goal when the opposite net is empty (without a goaltender).
Scoring statistics[edit]
The number of goals scored is a closely watched statistic. Each year the Rocket Richard Trophy is presented to the NHL player to have scored the most goals. The trophy is named after Maurice Richard, the first player to score 50 goals in a season, at a time when the NHL regular season was only 50 games (compared to 82 today). The player to have scored the most goals in an NHL season is Wayne Gretzky. Gretzky is also the fastest to 50 goals; during his record-setting 1981–82 season, in which he finished with 92 goals, he scored his 50th goal in the Edmonton Oilers' 39th game of the season.
The overall amount of goal scoring is also closely watched. In recent years, goal scoring has decreased. Many believe the game is less entertaining because of this, and blame the change on the increasing size of goaltending equipment and the advent of defensive systems such as the neutral zone trap. Fans of defensive hockey counter by saying the high scoring of the 1980s was an anomaly, and this shift represents a return to the norm. For the 2004-05 American Hockey League season, four major rule changes were made that were intended to increase the scoring in games and make it more popular among casual fans:

increasing the size of the attack zones by narrowing the neutral zone two feet each side and thus moving the goal line back two feet
restrictions on the goaltender playing the puck
permitting offside players to negate the penalty by "tagging up" with the blue line
changing the offside rule by permitting passes which cross the center line and one blue line (but not between both blue lines in certain restrictions).

The AHL rules were slightly modified and adopted in the NHL and ECHL for 2005-06, when the NHL returned after the lockout.
Types of goals[edit]
There are a number of different types of goals for which separate statistics are kept, but all count equally:

An even strength goal is a goal scored when both teams have the same number of players on the ice.
A power play goal (PPG) is a goal scored by a team on a power play, that is, with a numerical advantage in players due to a penalty being served by one or more of the other team's players.
A shorthanded goal (SHG) is a goal scored by a team that is on the penalty kill, that is, at a numerical disadvantage due to a penalty being served by one or more of its players
An empty net goal (ENG) is a goal scored when there is no goalie guarding the net because he has been pulled for an extra attacker
A penalty shot goal is a goal scored on a penalty shot, that is, a one-on-one confrontation between a single offensive player and the goaltender as a result of a penalty
An own goal is when a player puts the puck into their own net, scoring for the other team
An overtime goal is a goal scored in sudden-death overtime
A go-ahead goal is the goal that puts one team ahead of another after the game has been tied
A game-tying goal or an equaliser is a goal that causes the game to be tied, scored by a team that is down one goal (prior to the 1984-85 season, the NHL credited game-tying goals to the final scorers for both teams in tie games).
A game-winning goal (GWG) is the goal scored to put the winning team in the lead. E.g. if the score is 4-2 the game-winning goal would be the 3rd goal scored for the winning team.

Related terms[edit]






This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (April 2011) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



The goal judge is an official positioned off ice behind each goal for the specific purpose of indicating when the puck has crossed the goal line and entered the goal. For arenas so equipped, the goal judge turns on a red light behind the goal when he sees the puck cross the goal line. As in all matters, however, the referee retains final authority and can override the opinion of the goal judge.
If a hockey player is last to touch the puck before it enters his own team's net — which in soccer is called an own goal — credit for the goal goes to the last player on the scoring team to have touched the puck.
Other phrases include a garbage goal, for a goal scored more as the result of luck or opportunism than skill, and a breakaway goal for a goal scored when a player has gotten behind the defenders to face the goaltender alone.
The two teammates of the scorer who last touched the puck before him, provided that no opponent touched it in between, are each credited with an assist. Assists and goals count equally to comprise a player's statistical scoring total.
When a player scores three goals in a game it is known as a hat trick. If he scores his goals consecutively, it becomes known as a natural hat trick. A Gordie Howe hat trick occurs when a player scores a goal, gets an assist, and gets in a fight.
Any puck heading towards the net is counted as a shot. When the goalie prevents the shot from entering the net, he is credited with a save. Shots resulting in saves by the goaltender or goals scored are considered shots on goal (or shots on net). A shot which is blocked by an opposing player before it reaches the goalie is not considered a shot on net. Also, if the puck is deflected wide of the net by another player (regardless of team) it is not counted as a shot on net.
Goal horn[edit]






This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (December 2012) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Ice hockey is one of the few sports along with box lacrosse or indoor soccer in which an air horn, car horn, train horn, foghorn, or siren is used to celebrate a goal. In every NHL arena, the horn blares after each home team goal. This has been a trend since the 1970s, when the Chicago Blackhawks installed one. The only exception to this rule is during the NHL All-Star Game, where the role of that sound is expanded to cover every goal scored, and that the horn only sounds once. The horns are different depending on the teams, some even have sound effects such as an alarm or the foghorn of a ship, or both combined, for the Washington Capitals and the Anaheim Ducks. Hockey fans[who?] have said that the loudest goal horn belongs to the Anaheim Ducks, who have a very loud fog horn with high bass, or the Philadelphia Flyers, who have a very loud ship’s signaling horn. Also, during the 2006 Stanley Cup playoffs, the Edmonton Oilers added a second set of horns to the original horn for the second round. The reason was for that the Oilers had sold out games and the noise level was so loud, that the original horn was getting drowned out by the crowd. The result was a very loud horn used for the rest of the playoffs.
Along with the horn, it is accompanied by a goal song. Most arenas play sections of the song where the crowd can "sing" along or repeat. The two classic goal songs are "Kernkraft 400" by Zombie Nation (its "Sport Chant Stadium Remix" arrangement is used by the Boston Bruins) and "Rock & Roll Part 2" by Gary Glitter (first used by the New Jersey Devils). Although, some teams have songs that are original to them, like the now-defunct Hartford Whalers' famous "Brass Bonanza", "Bro Hymn" by Pennywise (originally used by Anaheim and later adopted by Philadelphia and NY Islanders), "Crowd Chant" by Joe Satriani (originally used by Minnesota Wild and the Columbus Blue Jackets), "Chelsea Dagger" by The Fratellis (Chicago), "Maria (I Like It Loud)" by Scooter feat. Marc Acardipane and Dick Rules (originally used in Philadelphia), "Party Hard" by Andrew W.K. (Pittsburgh), "Holiday" by Green Day (originally used by San Jose, later by Vancouver), "Le But" by Loco Locass (Montreal), "Howling for You" by the Black Keys (Arizona), "I Like It, I Love It" by Tim McGraw (Nashville), "When the Saints Go Marching In" (St. Louis), and "Let Me Clear My Throat" by DJ Kool (Buffalo). If the home team wins, the goal horn will also sound at the conclusion of the game, instead of the normal period end horn, with some exceptions, such as the Bruins using their normal period end siren after a win and then followed by "Dirty Water" by The Standells.
See also[edit]

Assist (ice hockey)
Point (ice hockey)
List of NHL statistical leaders
List of goaltenders who have scored a goal in an NHL game

References[edit]


^ Hockey - NHL Stats Explained
^ "NHL Official Rules - Rule 78 - Goals". Retrieved 5 January 2012. 


External links[edit]

NHL Rulebook, Rule #57 - tripping






						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Goal_(ice_hockey)&oldid=806457932"					Categories: Ice hockey rulesIce hockey statisticsIce hockey terminologyHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from July 2011All articles needing additional referencesArticles needing additional references from April 2011Articles needing additional references from December 2012All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrasesArticles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from December 2012