"Gospel (genre)" redirects here. For the literary genre, see Gospel.






This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (June 2014) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)





Gospel music



Mahalia Jackson in the Concertgebouw concert hall, The Netherlands



Stylistic origins



Christian hymns
negro spirituals





Cultural origins
Mid-19th – early 20th century, United States


Typical instruments



Vocals
piano
organ
guitar
drums
bass guitar
tambourine





Derivative forms



Country
rhythm and blues
soul
rock and roll





Subgenres





Southern gospel
traditional black gospel
urban contemporary gospel





Fusion genres


Christian country music


Gospel music is a genre of Christian music. The creation, performance, significance, and even the definition of gospel music varies according to culture and social context. Gospel music is composed and performed for many purposes, including aesthetic pleasure, religious or ceremonial purposes, and as an entertainment product for the marketplace. Gospel music usually has dominant vocals (often with strong use of harmony) with Christian lyrics. Gospel music can be traced to the early 17th century,[1] with roots in the black oral tradition. Hymns and sacred songs were often repeated in a call and response fashion. Most of the churches relied on hand clapping and foot stomping as rhythmic accompaniment. Most of the singing was done a cappella.[2] The first published use of the term "gospel song" probably appeared in 1874. The original gospel songs were written and composed by authors such as George F. Root, Philip Bliss, Charles H. Gabriel, William Howard Doane, and Fanny Crosby.[3] Gospel music publishing houses emerged. The advent of radio in the 1920s greatly increased the audience for gospel music. Following World War II, gospel music moved into major auditoriums, and gospel music concerts became quite elaborate.[4]
Gospel blues is a blues-based form of gospel music (a combination of blues guitar and evangelistic lyrics).[not verified in body] Southern gospel used all male, tenor-lead-baritone-bass quartet make-up. Progressive Southern gospel is an American music genre that has grown out of Southern gospel over the past couple of decades. Christian country music, sometimes referred to as country gospel music, is a subgenre of gospel music with a country flair. It peaked in popularity in the mid-1990s.
Bluegrass gospel music is rooted in American mountain music. Celtic gospel music infuses gospel music with a Celtic flair, and is quite popular in countries such as Ireland. British black gospel refers to Gospel music of the African diaspora, which has been produced in the UK. Some proponents of "standard" hymns generally dislike gospel music of the late 19th and early 20th centuries. Today, with historical distance, there is a greater acceptance of such gospel songs into official denominational hymnals.



Contents


1 Style
2 Roots and background

2.1 18th century
2.2 19th century
2.3 20th century


3 Gospel music genres and subgenres

3.1 Christian country music
3.2 British Black Gospel


4 Controversies
5 See also
6 References
7 Further reading

7.1 Bibliography


8 External links

8.1 Professional organizations
8.2 Media outlets





Style[edit]









"How Great Thou Art"

Play media

Yolanda Adams performs "How Great Thou Art" at the White House's Celebration of Music from the Civil Rights Movement in 2010.



"How Great Thou Art"





audio only file






Problems playing these files? See media help.


Gospel music features dominant vocals (often with strong use of harmony) and Christian lyrics. Subgenres include contemporary gospel, urban contemporary gospel (sometimes referred to as "black gospel"), Southern gospel, and modern gospel music (now more commonly known as praise and worship music or contemporary Christian music). Several forms of gospel music utilize choirs, use piano or Hammond organ, tambourines, drums, bass guitar and, increasingly, electric guitar. In comparison with hymns, which are generally of a statelier measure, the gospel song is expected to have a refrain and often a more syncopated rhythm.
Several attempts have been made to describe the style of late 19th and early 20th century gospel songs in general. Christ-Janer said "the music was tuneful and easy to grasp ... rudimentary harmonies ... use of the chorus ... varied metric schemes ... motor rhythms were characteristic ... The device of letting the lower parts echo rhythmically a motive announced by the sopranos became a mannerism".[5]
Patrick and Sydnor emphasize the notion that gospel music is "sentimental", quoting Sankey as saying, "Before I sing I must feel", and they call attention to the comparison of the original version of Rowley's "I Will Sing the Wondrous Story" with Sankey's version.[6] Gold said, "Essentially the gospel songs are songs of testimony, persuasion, religious exhortation, or warning. Usually the chorus or refrain technique is found."[7]
Roots and background[edit]
According to Yale University music professor Willie Ruff, the singing of psalms in Gaelic by Presbyterians of the Scottish Hebrides evolved from "lining out" – where one person sang a solo and others followed – into the call and response of gospel music of the American South.[8] Coming out of the African-American religious experience, American gospel music can be traced to the early 17th century.[1] Gospel music has roots in the black oral tradition, and typically utilizes a great deal of repetition, which allows those who could not read the opportunity to participate in worship. During this time, hymns and sacred songs were lined and repeated in a call and response fashion, and Negro spirituals and work songs emerged. Repetition and "call and response" are accepted elements in African music, designed to achieve an altered state of consciousness we sometimes refer to as "trance", and strengthen communal bonds.
Most of the churches relied on hand-clapping and foot-stomping as rhythmic accompaniment. Guitars and tambourines were sometimes available, but not frequently. Church choirs became a norm only after emancipation. Most of the singing was done a cappella.[2]
18th century[edit]
Perhaps the most famous gospel-based hymns were composed in the 1760s-1770s by English writers John Newton ("Amazing Grace") and Augustus Toplady ("Rock of Ages"), members of the Anglican Church. Starting out as lyrics only, it took decades for standardized tunes to be added to them. Although not directly connected with African-American gospel music, they were adopted by African-Americans as well as white Americans, and Newton's connection with the abolition movement provided cross-fertilization.
19th century[edit]
Main article: Gospel Song (19th century)
The first published use of the term "Gospel Song" probably appeared in 1874 when Philip Bliss released a songbook entitled Gospel Songs. A Choice Collection of Hymns and Tunes. It was used to describe a new style of church music, songs that were easy to grasp and more easily singable than the traditional church hymns, which came out of the mass revival movement starting with Dwight L. Moody, whose musician was Ira D. Sankey, as well as the Holiness-Pentecostal movement.[3] Prior to the meeting of Moody and Sankey in 1870, there was an American rural/frontier history of revival and camp meeting songs, but the gospel hymn was of a different character, and it served the needs of mass revivals in the great cities.[9]
The revival movement employed popular singers and song leaders, the most famous of them being Ira D. Sankey. The original gospel songs were written and composed by authors such as George F. Root, Philip Bliss, Charles H. Gabriel, William Howard Doane, and Fanny Crosby.[3] As an extension to his initial publication Gospel Songs, Philip Bliss, in collaboration with Ira D. Sankey issued no's. 1 to 6 of Gospel Hymns in 1875.[10] Sankey and Bliss's collection can be found in many libraries today.
The popularity of revival singers and the openness of rural churches to this type of music (in spite of its initial use in city revivals) led to the late 19th and early 20th century establishment of gospel music publishing houses such as those of Homer Rodeheaver, E. O. Excell, Charlie Tillman, and Charles Tindley. These publishers were in the market for large quantities of new music, providing an outlet for the creative work of many songwriters and composers.[11]
20th century[edit]




Exemplification of gospel music: an open Bible and a CD, which represent the gospel in written and musical forms


The holiness-Pentecostal movement, or sanctified movement, appealed to people who were not attuned to the Europeanized version of black church music. Holiness worship has used any type of instrumentation that congregation members might bring in, from tambourines to electric guitars. Pentecostal churches readily adopted and contributed to the gospel music publications of the early 20th century. Late 20th-century musicians such as Elvis Presley, Jerry Lee Lewis, Mahalia Jackson, Andrae Crouch, and the Blackwood Brothers either were raised in a Pentecostal environment, or have acknowledged the influence of that tradition.[12]
The advent of radio in the 1920s greatly increased the audience for gospel music, and James D. Vaughan used radio as an integral part of his business model, which also included traveling quartets to publicize the gospel music books he published several times a year.[13] Virgil O. Stamps and Jesse R. Baxter studied Vaughan's business model and by the late 1920s were running heavy competition for Vaughan.[12] The 1920s also saw the marketing of gospel records by groups such as the Carter Family.
The first person to introduce the ragtime influence to gospel accompaniment as well as to play the piano on a gospel recording was Arizona Dranes.[14]
In African-American music, gospel quartets developed an a cappella style following the earlier success of the Fisk Jubilee Singers. The 1930s saw the Fairfield Four, the Dixie Hummingbirds, the Five Blind Boys of Mississippi, the Five Blind Boys of Alabama, The Soul Stirrers, the Swan Silvertones, the Charioteers, and the Golden Gate Quartet. Racism divided the nation, and this division did not skip the church. If during slavery blacks were treated as inferior inside the white churches, after emancipation they formed their own separate churches. The gospel groups which were very popular within the black community, were virtually unknown to the white community, though some in the white community began to follow them.[15] In addition to these high-profile quartets, there were many black gospel musicians performing in the 1920s and 30s, usually playing the guitar and singing in the streets of Southern cities. Famous among them were Blind Willie Johnson, Blind Joe Taggart and others.
In the 1930s, in Chicago, Thomas A. Dorsey (known for composing the song "Precious Lord, Take My Hand"), who had spent the 1920s writing and performing secular blues music under the name "Georgia Tom", turned to gospel music, establishing a publishing house.[4] He had experienced many trials in his life,including the death of his pregnant wife. Thomas gained biblical knowledge from his father, who was a Baptist minister, and was taught to play piano by his mother. He started working with blues musicians when the family moved to Atlanta.[16] It has been said that 1930 was the year when modern gospel music began, because the National Baptist Convention first publicly endorsed the music at its 1930 meeting.[17] Dorsey was responsible for developing the musical careers of many African-American artists, such as Mahalia Jackson.[4]
Meanwhile, radio continued to develop an audience for gospel music, a fact that was commemorated in Albert E. Brumley's 1937 song, "Turn Your Radio On" (which is still being published in gospel song books). In 1972, a recording of "Turn Your Radio On" by the Lewis Family was nominated for "Gospel Song of the Year" in the Gospel Music Association's Dove Awards.[18]
Following the World War II, gospel music moved into major auditoriums, and gospel music concerts became quite elaborate.[4] In 1950, black gospel was featured at Carnegie Hall when Joe Bostic produced the Negro Gospel and Religious Music Festival. He repeated it the next year with an expanded list of performing artists, and in 1959 moved to Madison Square Garden.[19] Today, black gospel and white gospel are distinct genres, with distinct audiences. In white gospel, there is a large Gospel Music Association and a Gospel Music Hall of Fame, which includes a few black artists, such as Mahalia Jackson, but which ignores most black artists.[20] In the black community, James Cleveland established the Gospel Music Workshop of America in 1969.
Gospel music genres and subgenres[edit]


This article is a part in a series on


Gospel music











Roots and beginnings


Christian Hymns
Negro Spirituals
Sacred Harp
Shape note








Genres and subgenres


Southern Gospel

Gospel blues
Bluegrass gospel
Christian country music
Country Gospel
Progressive Southern Gospel


Urban contemporary gospel

Christian hip hop










Related music genres


CCM








Associations and groups


Gospel Music Hall of Fame
Gospel Music Workshop of America
National Gospel Singing Convention
National Quartet Convention
Australian Gospel Music Association
GMA Canada








Awards


GMA Dove Awards
Stellar Awards
Covenant Awards
Singing News Fan Awards
Australian Gospel Music Awards
McDonald's Gospelfest








Category
Musicians

See also:

Christianity: Portal
Category


Christian music: Portal
Category







v
t
e





Christian country music[edit]
Christian country music, sometimes referred to as country gospel music, is a subgenre of gospel music with a country flair, is also known as inspirational country. Christian country over the years has progressed into a mainstream country sound with inspirational or positive country lyrics. In the mid-1990s, Christian country hit its highest popularity. So much so that mainstream artists like Larry Gatlin, Charlie Daniels and Barbara Mandrell, just to name a few, began recording music that had this positive Christian country flair. These mainstream artists have now become award winners in this genre.[21][22]
British Black Gospel[edit]
British black gospel refers to Gospel music of the African diaspora, which has been produced in the UK. It is also often referred to as urban contemporary gospel or UK Gospel.[23] The distinctive sound is heavily influenced by UK street culture with many artists from the African and Caribbean majority black churches in the UK.[24] The genre has gained recognition in various awards such as the GEM (Gospel Entertainment Music) Awards,[25] MOBO Awards,[26][27] Urban Music Awards[28] and has its own Official Christian & Gospel Albums Chart.[29]
Controversies[edit]
Some proponents of "standard" hymns generally dislike gospel music of the late 19th and early 20th centuries. For example, Patrick and Sydnor complain that commercial success led to a proliferation of such music, and "deterioration, even in a standard which to begin with was not high, resulted."[30] They went on to say, "there is no doubt that a deterioration in taste follows the use of this type of hymn and tune; it fosters an attachment to the trivial and sensational which dulls and often destroys sense of the dignity and beauty which best befit the song that is used in the service of God."[31]
Gold reviewed the issue in 1958, and collected a number of quotations similar to the complaints of Patrick and Syndor. However, he also provided this quotation: "Gospel hymnody has the distinction of being America's most typical contribution to Christian song. As such, it is valid in its inspiration and in its employment." (Robert Stevenson, Religion in Life, Winter, 1950–51.)[7]
Today, with historical distance, there is a greater acceptance of such gospel songs into official denominational hymnals. For example, the United Methodist Church made this acceptance explicit in The Faith We Sing, a supplement to the official denominational hymnal. In the preface, the editors say, "Experience has shown that some older treasures were missed when the current hymnals were compiled."[32]
See also[edit]

Gospel Music Hall of Fame
List of gospel musicians
Phillip Paul Bliss House
Soul music
Stellar Awards

References[edit]


^ a b "Gospel History Timeline". University of Southern California. Retrieved January 31, 2012. 
^ a b Jackson, Joyce Marie. "The changing nature of gospel music: A southern case study." African American Review 29.2 (1995): 185. Academic Search Premier. EBSCO. Web. October 5, 2010.
^ a b c Malone (1984), p. 520
^ a b c d Malone (1984), p. 523
^ Christ-Janer, Hughes & Smith (1980), p. 365
^ Patrick (1962), pp. 171–172
^ a b Gold, Charles E. "The Gospel Song: Contemporary Opinion," The Hymn. v. 9, no. 3 (July 1958), p. 70.
^ "From Charles Mackintosh's waterproof to Dolly the sheep: 43 innovations Scotland has given the world". The independent. January 3, 2016. 
^ Christ-Janer, Hughes & Smith (1980), p. 364
^ Benson, Louis F. The English Hymn: Its Development and Use in Worship. New York: George H. Doran Co., 1915, p. 486. Several sources cite the Bliss and Sankey 1875 publication as the first to use the word "gospel" in this sense. For example, Malone (1984), p. 520.
^ Hall, Jacob Henry. Biography of Gospel Song and Hymn Writers. New York: Fleming H. Revell Company, 1914, provides contemporary information about songwriters, composers and publishers.
^ a b Malone (1984), p. 521
^ See also Charles Davis Tillman.
^ "COGIC Women in Gospel Music on Patheos". Patheos. June 10, 2009. Retrieved February 2, 2010. 
^ Malone (1984), p. 522
^ "Thomas A. Dorsey". "Southern Music Network". Southern Music in the 20th century. eb. October 14, 2010.
^ Southern (1997), p. 484
^ "The Gospel Music Association's Dove Awards Nominations for the Gospel Song of 1972," Canaan Records (Waco, TX) CAS-9732-LP Stereo.
^ Southern (1997), p. 485
^ Malone (1984), p. 524
^ "Larry Gatlin nominated for Christian Country Album of the Year". 
^ "Barbara Mandrell inducted into the Country Gospel Music Hall of Fame". Archived from the original on February 25, 2015. 
^ "Gospel Music". BBC. July 11, 2011. 
^ Smith, Steve Alexander (2009). British Black Gospel: Foundations of this vibrant UK sound. Monarch Books. ISBN 9781854248961. 
^ Mackay, Maria (November 4, 2005). "Freddie Kofi Wins Best Male at GEM Awards". Christian Today. 
^ N.A. (October 20, 2010). "Mobo Awards 2010: The Winners". The Daily Telegraph. 
^ "Gospel's Lurine Cato is triumphant at the MOBOs". The Voice Online. October 21, 2013. 
^ "Urban Music Awards – UMA- The World's No.1 awards show for HipHop, R&B, Soul, Jazz, Grime and Dance music". www.urbanmusicawards.net. 
^ "UKs first Official Christian & Gospel Albums Chart to launch next week". Record of the Day. March 14, 2013. 
^ Patrick (1962), p. 171
^ Patrick (1962), p. 172
^ Hickman, Hoyt L. (ed). "Introduction," The Faith We Sing. Nashville, TN: Abingdon Press, 2000.


Further reading[edit]





A selection of gospel music collected
by the Library of Congress in 1943

Oh Jonah!





Sung by the Golden Jubilee Quartet


My Lord Is Writin'





Sung by the Cochran Field Singers


Death is an Awful Thing





Sung by the Middle Georgia Singers


We are Americans, Praise the Lord





Sung by Bertha Houston and her congregation.
With a few topical verses on World War II .


Death Come a-Knockin'





Sung by The Four Brothers.


John the Revelator





Sung by the Spiritual Four Quartet: Edward Bond,
Cleve Parker, James Bond, and Elwood Gaines


Problems listening to the files? See media help.






Allen, Ray. Singing in the Spirit: African-American Sacred Quartets in New York City, in series, Publication[s] of the American Folklore Society: New Series. Philadelphia, Penn.: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1991. xx,[2], 268 p., ill. with b&w photos. ISBN 0-8122-1331-9 pbk.
Barlow, Sanna Morrison. Mountain Singing: the Story of Gospel Recordings in the Philippines. Hong Kong: Alliance Press, 1952. 352 p.
Blackwell, Lois. The Wings of a Dove: The Story of Gospel Music in America. Norfolk: Donning, 1978.
Boyer, Horace Clarence. How Sweet the Sound: The Golden Age of Gospel. Elliott and Clark, 1995. ISBN 0-252-06877-7.
Broughton, Viv. Too Close to Heaven: The Illustrated History of Gospel Music. Midnight Books, 1996. ISBN 1-900516-00-4.
Albert E Brumley & Sons. The Best of Albert E. Brumley. Gospel Songs, 1966, ISBN na-paperback Amazing Grace
Cleall, Charles. Sixty Songs From Sankey. London: Marshall, Morgan and Scott, 1960.
Cusic, Don. The Sound of Light: a History of Gospel Music. Bowling Green, Ohio: Bowling Green State University Popular Press, 1990. iv, 267 p. 0-87972-498-6 pbk.
Darden, Robert. People Get Ready: A New History of Black Gospel Music Continuum International Publishing Group, 2005, ISBN 0-8264-1752-3.
Downey, James C. The Gospel Hymn 1875–1930. University of Southern Mississippi, MA, 1963.
Eskew, Harry. "Gospel Music, I" in The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians (1980), VII, 549–554.
Goff, James R. "The Rise of Southern Gospel Music"], Church History, v. 67, no. 4, Dec. 1998, pp. 722ff.
Hanson, Kenneth, The Hymnody and Hymnals of the Restoration Movement. Butler University, BD, 1951.
Heilbut, Tony, The Gospel Sound: Good News and Bad Times, Limelight Editions, 1997, ISBN 0-87910-034-6.
McNeil, W. K., Ed. Encyclopedia of American Gospel Music. Routledge, 2005. ISBN 0-415-94179-2.
Marovich, Robert M., A City Called Heaven: Chicago and the Birth of Gospel Music. Urbana, IL: University of Illinois Press. 2015. ISBN 978 0 252 08069 2.
Stevenson, Arthur L. The Story of Southern Hymnology. Roanoke, VA: Stone Printing and Manufacturing, 1931.
Zolten, Jerry. Great God A' Mighty!: The Dixie Hummingbirds—Celebrating The Rise Of Soul Gospel Music. Oxford University Press, 2003. ISBN 0-19-515272-7.

Bibliography[edit]


Christ-Janer, Albert; Hughes, Charles W.; Smith, Carleton Sprague (1980). American Hymns Old and New. New York, NY: Columbia University Press. 
Malone, Bill C. (1984). "Music, religious, of the Protestant South". In Samuel S. Hill. Encyclopedia of Religion in the South. Mercer University Press. 
Patrick, Millar (1962). The Story of the Church's Song. Revised by James Rawlings Sydnor. Richmond, VA: John Knox Press. 
Southern, Eileen (1997). The Music of Black Americans: a History (3rd ed.). New York, NY: W. W. Norton. 


External links[edit]
 Media related to Gospel music at Wikimedia Commons
Professional organizations[edit]

Gospel Music Association – Acknowledges all forms of gospel/Christian music
Gospel Viu – Gospel Without Borders
Gospel Wire – Primarily urban contemporary gospel
Pacific Gospel Music Association – Known for Southern gospel
Southern Gospel Music Association
Gospel Music Information
Festival Lumen – the biggest gospel music festival in central Europe

Media outlets[edit]

Black Family Channel
Bobby Jones Gospel
Gospel Music Channel
The Inspirational Network
Christian Broadcasting Network
Daystar Television Network
Trinity Broadcasting Network







v
t
e


Christian music



Roots and beginnings



Chorale
Hymn
Jesus music
Sacred Harp
Shape note
Spiritual












Modern genres



Contemporary Christian music
Contemporary worship music
Gospel music
Neues Geistliches Lied





Fusion genres



Christian alternative rock
Christian country music
Christian electronic dance music
Christian hardcore
Christian hip hop
Christian metal
Christian punk
Christian rock
Christian ska
Gospel blues
Latin Christian music
Progressive southern gospel
Southern gospel
Traditional black gospel
Urban contemporary gospel





Chant







v
t
e


Christian liturgical chant



Eastern



Armenian
Byzantine
Coptic
Ethiopian
Georgian
Obikhod

Bulgarian
Greek
Kievan


Prostopinije
Syrian
Znamenny





Western



Ambrosian
Anglican
Beneventan
Celtic
Gallican
Gelineau
Gregorian
Mozarabic
Old Roman








Lists



Anglican church composers
Christian bands and artists by genre
Christian country artists
Christian dance, electronic, and techno artists
Christian hardcore bands
Christian metal artists
Christian performers of hip hop and rap
Christian punk bands
Christian ska bands
Christian record labels
Christian vocal artists
Christian worship music artists
Gospel musicians





Related topics



Anglican church music
Christian media
Christian music festival
Christian music industry
Christianity
Church music
Contemporary Catholic liturgical music








 Category
 Commons
 Portal












v
t
e


American folk music






African-American
Appalachian
Blues
Cajun
Creole
Folk revival (1950s–60s)
Gospel
Jazz

Dixieland


Native American
Old-time
Ragtime
Spirituals
Swamp pop
Tejano
Zydeco





Country music



Americana
Bluegrass
Honky-tonk
Rockabilly
Western swing








music portal







						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Gospel_music&oldid=815298616"					Categories: African-American musicChristian music genresGospel musicHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from June 2014All articles needing additional referencesUse mdy dates from February 2014Articles using Template:Infobox music genre with invalid colour combinationAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from August 2017Articles with hAudio microformatsArticles prone to spam from May 2013Articles containing video clips