
Government of India


Emblem of India



Founding document
Constitution of India


Jurisdiction
Republic of India


Website
india.gov.in


Executive branch


Leader
President of India


Appointer
Electoral College of India


Main organ
Cabinet


Judicial branch


Court
Supreme Court of India





Republic of India






This article is part of a series on the
politics and government of
India




Union Government


Constitution of India
Fundamental rights


Executive:

President
Vice President
Prime Minister
Union Council of Ministers
Cabinet Secretary of India
Civil Services of India


Parliament:

Rajya Sabha
Lok Sabha
The Chairman
The Speaker


Judiciary:

Supreme Court of India
Chief Justice of India
High Courts
District Courts








Elections
Election Commission:

Chief Election Commissioner








Political parties


National parties
State parties


National coalitions:

National Democratic Alliance (NDA)
United Progressive Alliance (UPA)








State Govt. and Local Govt.


Governor
Chief Minister
Chief Secretary


State Level:

Vidhan Sabha
Vidhan Parishad


Local governments:

Divisional commissioner
District magistrate
Sub-divisional magistrate


Rural bodies


Zilla panchayats
Mandal Or Taluka Panchayats
Gram Panchayats


Urban bodies


Municipal Corporations
Municipal councils
Nagar Panchayats









Other countries
Atlas








v
t
e





The Government of India (GoI) is the union government created by the constitution of India as the legislative, executive and judicial authority of the union of 29 states and seven union territories of a constitutionally democratic republic. It is located in New Delhi, the capital of India.



Contents


1 Naming
2 Basic structure
3 Legislative branch
4 Executive branch

4.1 President
4.2 Vice-President
4.3 Prime Minister
4.4 Cabinet, executive departments and agencies
4.5 Civil service

4.5.1 Cabinet Secretariat




5 Judicial branch

5.1 Supreme Court


6 Elections and voting
7 State and local governments
8 Finance

8.1 Taxation
8.2 General budget


9 Issues

9.1 Corruption


10 See also
11 References
12 Further reading
13 External links



Naming[edit]
The full name of India is the Republic of India. The names of India have a long and complex history which stem all the way back to the Greek and Roman times. It is thought that the word Hindustan comes from the Sanskrit word Sindhu, which means "the sea".[1] This evolved in the word Hindu and Hindustan. India comes from the Indus river and the Greeks and Romans wrote about it as India. This became widespread in their writing and then commonly used to refer to the area between the Indus and the Ganges. As time went on, the British favored using India on their maps and this became more commonplace than Hindustan.[2]
Basic structure[edit]
Affecting the Westminster system[3] for governing the state, the union government is mainl ory composed of the executive, legislative, and judicial branches, in which all powers are vested by the Constitution in Parliament, the Prime Minister and the Supreme Court. The President of India is the Head of State and the Supreme Commander of the Indian Armed Forces while the elected Prime Minister acts as the chief executive (of the executive branch) and is responsible for running the union government.[4] There is a bicameral Parliament with the Lok Sabha as a lower house and the Rajya Sabha as an upper house. The judicial branch systematically contains an apex Supreme Court, 24 high courts, and several district courts, all inferior to the Supreme Court.[5]
The basic civil and criminal laws governing the citizens of India are set down in major parliamentary legislation, such as the Civil Procedure Code, the Indian Penal Code, and the Criminal Procedure Code.[6] Similar to the union government, individual state governments each consist of executive, legislative and judicial branches. The legal system as applicable to the union and individual state governments is based on the English Common and Statutory Law.[7] The full name of the country is the Republic of India. India and Bharat are equally official short names for the Republic of India in the Constitution,[8] and both names appears on legal banknotes, in treaties and in legal cases. The Union Government, Central Government or Government of India (Bharat Sarkar) are often used in an official and unofficial capacity to refer to the Government of India.[citation needed] Because the seat of government is in New Delhi, "New Delhi" is commonly used as a synonym for the Central Government.[citation needed]
Legislative branch[edit]




Parliament of India building


The powers of the legislative branch in India are exercised by Parliament, bicameral legislature consisting of the Rajya Sabha and the Lok Sabha. Of the two houses of Parliament, the former is considered to be the upper house or the Council of States and consists of members appointed by the President and elected by the state and territorial legislatures. The latter is considered the lower house or the House of the people.[9]
Parliament does not have complete control and sovereignty, as its laws are subject to judicial review by the Supreme Court of India.[10] However, it does exercise some control over the executive branch. The members of the cabinet, including the prime minister and the Council of Ministers, are either chosen from parliament or elected thereto within six months of assuming office.[11] The cabinet as a whole is responsible to the Lok Sabha.[12] The Lok Sabha is a temporary house and can only be dissolved when the party in power loses the support of the majority of the house. Whereas the Rajya Sabha is a permanent house which can never be dissolved by the members of the Rajya Sabha who are elected for a six-year term.[13]
Executive branch[edit]
The Executive Branch of government is the one that has sole authority and responsibility for the daily administration of the state bureaucracy. The division of power into separate branches of government is central to the republican idea of the separation of powers.[14]
President[edit]
Main article: President of India
The executive power is vested mainly in the President of India, as per Article 53 (1) of the constitution. The President has all constitutional powers and exercises them directly or through officers subordinate to him as per the aforesaid Article 53(1). The President is to act in accordance with aid and advice tendered by the Prime Minister, who leads the Council of Ministers as described in Article 74 of the Constitution of India.
The Council of Ministers remains in power during the 'pleasure' of the President. However, in practice, the Council of Ministers must retain the support of the Lok Sabha. If a President were to dismiss the Council of Ministers on his or her own initiative, it might trigger a constitutional crisis. Thus, in practice, the Council of Ministers cannot be dismissed as long as it holds the support of a majority in the Lok Sabha.
The President is responsible for appointing many high officials in India .These high officials include the Governors of the 29 States, the Chief Justice, other judges of the Supreme Court and High Courts of India on the advice of other judges, the Attorney General , Controller and Auditor General the Chief Election Commissioner and other Election Commissioners, the Chairman and other Members of the Union Public Service Commission, the President's Officer, the Cabinet Secretary and the Ambassadors and High Commissioners to other countries on the recommendations of the cabinet[15][16]
The President, as Head of State also receives the credentials of Ambassadors from other countries, whilst the Prime Minister, as Head of Government, receives credentials of High Commissioners from other members of the Commonwealth, in line with historical tradition.
The President is the de jure Commander in Chief of the Indian Armed Forces.[17]
The President of India can grant a pardon to or reduce the sentence of a convicted person for one time, particularly in cases involving punishment of death.The decisions involving pardoning and other rights by the President are independent of the opinion of the Prime Minister or the Lok Sabha majority. In most other cases, however, the President exercises his or her executive powers on the advice of the Prime Minister.[18]
Vice-President[edit]
Main article: Vice President of India
The Vice-President is the second highest constitutional position in India after the President.The Vice-President represents the nation in the absence of the President and takes charge as acting president in the incident of resignation impeachment or removal of the President.The Vice-President also has the legislative function of acting as the Chairman of the Rajya Sabha.[19] The Vice-President is elected indirectly by members of an electoral college consisting of the members of both Houses of Parliament in accordance with the system of Proportional Representation by means of the Single transferable vote and the voting is by secret ballot conducted by election commission.
Prime Minister[edit]
Main article: Prime Minister of India




The Rashtrapati Bhawan complex, with North and South Block housing the Prime Minister's Office, Cabinet Secretariat, Ministry of Defence, and others


The Prime Minister of India, as addressed in the Constitution of India, is the chief of the government, chief adviser to the President of India, head of the Council of Ministers and the leader of the majority party in the parliament. The prime minister leads the executive branch of the Government of India.
The Prime minister is the senior member of cabinet in the executive branch of government in a parliamentary system. The prime minister selects and can dismiss other members of the cabinet; allocates posts to members within the Government; is the presiding member and chairman of the cabinet and is responsible for bringing a proposal of legislation. The resignation or death of the prime minister dissolves the cabinet.
The Prime minister is appointed by the president to assist the latter in the administration of the affairs of the executive.
Cabinet, executive departments and agencies[edit]
Main articles: Union Council of Ministers and List of Indian government agencies
The Cabinet of India includes the Prime Minister and his Cabinet Ministers.[20] Each Minister must be a member of one of the houses of India's Parliament. The Cabinet is headed by the Prime Minister, and is advised by the Cabinet Secretary, who also acts as the head of the Indian Administrative Service. Other Ministers are either as Union Cabinet Ministers, who are heads of the various Ministries; Ministers of State, who are junior members who report directly to one of the Cabinet Ministers, often overseeing a specific aspect of government; or Junior Ministers of State (Independent Charges), which do not report to a Cabinet Minister. As per article 88 of the constitution, every Minister shall have the right to speak in, and to take part in the proceedings of, either House, any joint sitting of the Houses, and any committee of Parliament of which he may be named a member, but shall not be entitled to a vote in the house where he is not a member.
Civil service[edit]
Main article: Civil Services of India
The Civil Services of India is the civil service and the permanent bureaucracy of the Republic of India. The executive decisions are implemented by the Indian civil servants.
In the parliamentary democracy of India, the ultimate responsibility for running the administration rests with the elected representatives of the people which are the ministers. These ministers are accountable to the legislatures which are also elected by the people on the basis of universal adult suffrage. The ministers are indirectly responsible to the people themselves. But the handful of ministers are not expected to deal personally with the various problems of modern administration. Thus the ministers lay down the policy and it is for the civil servants to enforce it.
Cabinet Secretariat[edit]
The Cabinet Secretariat is the staff agency of the Cabinet .It is operated under the leadership of the Prime Minister of India. The administration of the Cabinet Secretariat is carried out by the Cabinet Secretary of India who is the senior most civil servant in India.
The Cabinet Secretariat is responsible for the administration of the Government of India by facilitating smooth transaction of business in Ministries of the Government .The Secretariat assists in decision-making in Government by ensuring Inter-Ministerial co-ordination, ironing out differences among Ministries and evolving consensus through the instrumentality of the standing or ad-hoc Committees of Secretaries. Management of major crisis situations in the country is also one of the functions of the Cabinet Secretariat
The Cabinet Secretariat ensures that the President of India, the Vice-President and ministers are kept informed of the major activities of all Departments by means of a monthly summary report of their activities.[21]
Judicial branch[edit]




The Supreme Court of India


India's independent union judicial system began under the British, and its concepts and procedures resemble those of Anglo-Saxon countries. The Supreme Court of India consists of a Chief Justice and 30 associate justices, all appointed by the President on the advice of the Chief Justice of India. The jury trials were abolished in India in the early 1960s, after the famous case KM Nanavati v State of Maharashtra, for reasons of being vulnerable to media and public pressure, as well as to being misled.
Unlike its United States counterpart, the Indian justice system consists of a unitary system at both state and union level. The judiciary consists of the Supreme Court of India, High Courts of India at the state level, and District Courts and Sessions Courts at the district level.
Supreme Court[edit]
Main article: Supreme Court of India
The Supreme Court of India is situated in New Delhi, the capital region of India. The Supreme Court of India has the power original, appellate and advisory jurisdiction. Its exclusive original jurisdiction extends to any dispute between the Government of India and one or more states, or between the Government of India and any state or states on one side and one or more states on the other, or between two or more states, if and insofar as the dispute involves any question (whether of law or of fact) on which the existence or extent of a legal right depends on.
In addition, Article 32 of the Indian Constitution gives an extensive original jurisdiction to the Supreme Court in regard to enforcing fundamental rights. It is empowered to issue directions, orders or writs, including writs in the nature of habeas corpus, mandamus, prohibition, quo warranto and certiorari to enforce them. The Supreme Court has been conferred with power to direct transfer of any civil or criminal case from one State High Court to another State High Court, or from a court subordinate to another State High Court and the Supreme Court.Although the proceedings in the Supreme Court arise out of the judgment or orders made by the subordinate courts, of late the Supreme Court has started entertaining matters in which interest of the public at large is involved.This may be done by any individual or group of persons either by filing a Writ Petition at the Filing Counter of the Court, or by addressing a letter to Hon'ble The Chief Justice of India highlighting the question of public importance for redress. These are known as Public Interest Litigation.[22]
Elections and voting[edit]
Main articles: Elections in India and Politics of India
India has a Quasi federal form of government, called "union" or "central" government,[23] with elected officials at the union, state and local levels. On a national level, the head of government, the Prime Minister, is appointed by the President of India amongst the party which won the majority seats in Lok Sabha. The members of the Lok Sabha are directly elected for a term of five years by universal adult suffrage through first-past-the-post voting system. All (except 12 members who are nominated by the President) of the Rajya Sabha, which represents the States, are elected by the members of State legislative assemblies by proportional representation.
India is currently the largest democracy in the world, with around 834 million eligible voters, as of 2014.[24]
State and local governments[edit]
Main articles: State governments of India, Local government § India, and Union territory
State governments in India are the governments ruling States of India and the chief minister heads the state government. Power is divided between union government and state governments. State government's legislature is bicameral in 7 states and unicameral in the rest. Lower house is elected with 5 years term, while in upper house 1/3 of the total members in the house gets elected every 2 years with 6-year term.
Local government function at the basic level. It is the third level of government apart from union and state governments. It consists of panchayats in rural areas and municipalities in urban areas. They are elected directly or indirectly by the people.
Finance[edit]
See Reserve Bank of India
Taxation[edit]
Main article: Taxation in India




Reserve Bank of India's headquarters in Mumbai, India's financial capital


India has a three-tier tax structure, wherein the constitution empowers the union government to levy income tax, tax on capital transactions (wealth tax, inheritance tax), sales tax, service tax, customs and excise duties and the state governments to levy sales tax on intrastate sale of goods, tax on entertainment and professions, excise duties on manufacture of alcohol, stamp duties on transfer of property and collect land revenue (levy on land owned). The local governments are empowered by the state government to levy property tax and charge users for public utilities like water supply, sewage etc.[25] More than half of the revenues of the union and state governments come from taxes, of which 3/4 come from direct taxes. More than a quarter of the union government's tax revenues is shared with the state governments.[26]
The tax reforms, initiated in 1991, have sought to rationalise the tax structure and increase compliance by taking steps in the following directions:

Reducing the rates of individual and corporate income taxes, excises, customs and making it more progressive
Reducing exemptions and concessions
Simplification of laws and procedures
Introduction of permanent account number (PAN) to track monetary transactions
21 of the 29 states introduced value added tax (VAT) on 1 April 2005 to replace the complex and multiple sales tax system[25][27]

The non-tax revenues of the central government come from fiscal services, interest receipts, public sector dividends, etc., while the non-tax revenues of the States are grants from the central government, interest receipts, dividends and income from general, economic and social services.[28]
Inter-state share in the union tax pool is decided by the recommendations of the Finance Commission to the President.
Total tax receipts of Centre and State amount to approximately 18% of national GDP. This compares to a figure of 37–45% in the OECD.
General budget[edit]
The Finance minister of India usually presents the annual union budget in the Parliament on the last working day of February. However, for the F.Y. 2017-18, this tradition had been changed. Now budget will be presented on the 1st day of February. The budget has to be passed by the Lok Sabha before it can come into effect on 1 April, the start of India's fiscal year. The Union budget is preceded by an economic survey which outlines the broad direction of the budget and the economic performance of the country for the outgoing financial year[29]
India's non-development revenue expenditure had increased nearly five-fold in 2003–04 since 1990–91 and more than tenfold since 1985–1986. Interest payments are the single largest item of expenditure and accounted for more than 40% of the total non-development expenditure in the 2003–04 budget. Defense expenditure increased fourfold during the same period and has been increasing because of India's desire to project its military prowess beyond South Asia. In 2007, India's defence spending stood at US$26.5 billion.
Issues[edit]
Corruption[edit]
Main article: Corruption in India
Several ministers are accused of corruption and nearly a quarter of the 543 elected members of parliament had been charged with crimes, including murder, in 2009.[30] Many of the biggest scandals since 2010 have involved high level government officials, including Cabinet Ministers and Chief Ministers, such as the 2G spectrum scam (₹1.7 lakh crore(US$26 billion)), the 2010 Commonwealth Games scam (₹70,000 crore (US$11 billion)), the Adarsh Housing Society scam, the Coal Mining Scam (₹1.86 lakh crore(US$29 billion)), the Mining Scandal in Karnataka and the Cash for Vote scam.
See also[edit]


India portal



President of India
Cabinet of India
Constitution of India
Foreign relations of India
National Portal of India
National Social-media Portal
Parliamentary democracy
Union Council of Ministers of India

References[edit]


^ Yule, Henry; Burnell,, A.C (1903). Hobson-Jobson: a glossary of colloquial AngloIndian words and phrases, and of kindred terms, etymological, historical, geographical and discursive. London. p. 1021. 
^ Barrow, Ian (2003). "From Hindustan to India: Naming Change in Changing Names". South Asia: Journal of South Asian Studies. doi:10.1080/085640032000063977. 
^ Subramanian, K. "A prime ministerial form of government". The Hindu. Retrieved 2017-05-19. 
^ "Government of India, Structure of Government India". www.elections.com date=2018 -01-08.  line feed character in |website= at position 32 (help)CS1 maint: Missing pipe (link)
^ "Constitution of India's definition of India". Indiagovt.in. 
^ "Legal services India on Criminal laws in India". www.legalservicesindia.com. 
^ "STRUCTURE OF INDIAN LEGAL SYSTEM:-ORIGNAL ORIGN AND DEVELOPMENT ---(Dheeraj kumar tiwari BB.A.LL.B. (1st year) Siddhartha law college, Dehradun, Uttarakhand)". International Journal of Law and Legal Jurisprudence Studies. Retrieved 2017-05-19. 
^ Buckley, A. M. (2011-08-01). India. ABDO. ISBN 9781617876257. 
^ Cultural Perspectives on Youth Justice: Connecting Theory, Policy and International Practise. p. 186. ISBN 1137433973. Retrieved 10 May 2017. 
^ "Parliament's actions subject to judicial review: court". The Hindu. Retrieved 2017-07-19. 
^ "Indian Constitution And Parliamentary Government | Law Teacher". Retrieved 2017-07-20. 
^ Laxmikanth. Governance In India. Tata McGraw-Hill Education. ISBN 9780071074667. 
^ "OUR PARLIAMENT". webcache.googleusercontent.com. Retrieved 2017-07-20. 
^ Arnull, Elaine; Fox, Darrell (2016-06-29). Cultural Perspectives on Youth Justice: Connecting Theory, Policy and International Practice. Springer. ISBN 9781137433978. 
^ Pratiyogita Darpan (March 2007). Pratiyogita Darpan. Pratiyogita Darpan. p. 60. Retrieved 10 May 2012. 
^ Bakshi; P M (2010). Constitution Of India, 10/e. Universal Law Publishing Company Limited. pp. 48–. ISBN 978-81-7534-840-0. Retrieved 10 May 2012. 
^ Oldenburg, Philip (31 August 2010). India, Pakistan, and Democracy: Solving the Puzzle of Divergent Paths. Taylor & Francis. p. 71. ISBN 978-0-415-78018-6. Retrieved 3 May 2012. 
^ Kumar; Rajesh. Universal's Guide to the Constitution of India Pg no. 72.
^ "Important India functions of vicepresident". 
^ Cabinet Ministers (as on 26.05.2014). Cabsec.nic.in. Retrieved on 6 December 2013. Archived 27 May 2014 at the Wayback Machine.
^ M.Laxmikanth. Governance in India. McGraw-Hill Education. ISBN 9789339204785. 
^ "PIL". LegalServicesIndia. Retrieved 10 May 2017. 
^ http://lawmin.nic.in/olwing/coi/coi-english/coi-4March2016.pdf
^ D'Ambrogio, Enrico. "India: the biggest democracy in the world" (PDF). European Parliamentary Research Service. Retrieved 21 September 2017. 
^ a b Bernardi, Luigi; Fraschini, Angela (2005). "Tax System And Tax Reforms In India". Working paper n. 51. 
^ Tax revenue was 88% of total union government revenue in 1950–51 and has come down to 73% in 2003–04, as a result of increase in non-tax revenue. Tax revenues were 70% of total state government revenues in 2002 to 2003. Indirect taxes were 84% of the union governments total tax revenue and have come down to 62% in 2003–04, mostly because of cuts in import duties and rationalisation. The states share in union government's tax revenue is 28.0% for the period 2000 to 2005 as per the recommendations of the eleventh finance commission. In addition, states that do not levy sales tax on sugar, textiles and tobacco, are entitled to 1.5% of the proceeds.Datt, Ruddar; Sundharam, K.P.M. (2005). Indian Economy. S.Chand. pp. 938, 942, 946. ISBN 81-219-0298-3. 
^ "Indif_real_GDP_per_capitaa says 21 of 29 states to launch new tax". Daily Times. 25 March 2005. Archived from the original on 16 January 2009. 
^ Datt, Ruddar; Sundharam, K.P.M. "55". Indian Economy. pp. 943–945. 
^ "Union Budget 2017-18". www.ibef.org. Retrieved 2017-07-21. 
^ Washington Post:When the Little Ones Run the Show (quote from the New Delhi based Association for Democratic Reform) retrieved 14 May 2009


Further reading[edit]

Subrata K. Mitra and V.B. Singh (1999). Democracy and Social Change in India: A Cross-Sectional Analysis of the National Electorate. New Delhi: Sage Publications. ISBN 81-7036-809-X (India HB), ISBN 0-7619-9344-4 (US HB).

External links[edit]

Official Portal of the Indian Government







v
t
e


 India topics








History







Overviews



Timeline
Years


Astronomy
Economics
Linguistics
Maritime
Mathematics
Metallurgy
Military
Postal
Science and technology





Pre-colonial



Stone Age
Indus Valley Civilization
Vedic period
Mahajanapadas
Mauryas
Middle kingdoms
Hoysala
Chola
Pala
Kakatiya
Delhi Sultanate
Vijayanagara
Mughals
Marathas
European trade








Colonial
Princely






East India Company
Plassey
1857 rebellion
British Raj
Railways
Economy
Army
Zamindari
Bengali renaissance
Political reforms
Princely states
Partition of Bengal
Independence movement
1943 famine
World War II
Partition





Republic



Integration
Non-Aligned Movement
Five-Year Plans
Sino-Indian War
Indo-Pakistani wars
Green Revolution
White Revolution
Naxal Insurgency
Smiling Buddha
Space programme
The Emergency
Indian Peace Keeping Force (IPKF)
Economic liberalisation
Pokhran-II
















Geography







Environment



Biosphere reserves
Climate

Climatic regions


Earthquakes
Ecoregions
Environmental issues
Fauna
Flora
Geology
National parks
Protected areas
Wildlife
sanctuaries





Landforms



Beaches
Desert
Extreme points
Glaciers
Islands
Lakes
Mountains
Plains

Indo-Gangetic
Eastern coastal
Western coastal


Rivers
Valleys
Volcanoes
Waterfalls





Regions



East
North
Northeast
South
West





Subdivisions



Autonomous administrative divisions
Cities
Districts
Municipalities
States and territories
















Politics







Government



Agencies
Energy policy
Foreign relations
Parliament
President
Vice President
Prime Minister
Union Council of Ministers
Civil Services
Cabinet Secretary
State governments





Law







Chief Justice
Constitution
District Courts
Fundamental rights, principles and duties
High Courts
Human rights
Supreme Court





Enforcement




Federal



Border Security Force (BSF)
Central Industrial Security Force (CISF)
Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF)
Indo-Tibetan Border Police (ITBP)
National Security Guard (NSG)
Railway Protection Force (RPF)
Sashastra Seema Bal (SSB)
Special Protection Group (SPG)





Intelligence



Bureau of Police Research and Development (BPR&D)
Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI)
Directorate of Revenue Intelligence (DRI)
Enforcement Directorate
Intelligence Bureau (IB)
Joint Intelligence Committee (JIC)
Narcotics Control Bureau (NCB)
National Investigation Agency (NIA)
Research and Analysis Wing (R&AW)











Military



Army
Navy
Air Force





Politics



Censorship
Elections
Nationalism
Parliament

Lok Sabha
Rajya Sabha


Political parties

INC
BJP
BSP
CPI
CPM
NCP


Reservations
Scandals
Scheduled groups
Secularism
















Economy







Companies



BSE SENSEX
CNX Nifty
Government-owned companies
List of companies





Governance



Ministry of Finance

Finance ministers


Ministry of Commerce and Industry

Commerce ministers


Finance Commission
Planning Commission
Economic Advisory Council
Central Statistical Office
Securities and Exchange Board of India
Enforcement Directorate
Foreign trade
Remittances
Taxation
Subsidies
Industrial licensing
Voluntary guidelines
NITI Aayog
Make in India
FDI in India





Currency



Indian rupee

History
Historical exchange rates data of the Indian rupee
Coinage


Reserve Bank of India

Governors


India Government Mint





Financial services



Banking

Banks


Insurance
Foreign exchange reserves
Bombay Stock Exchange
National Stock Exchange
Multi Commodity Exchange
Bullion
Black money





History



Economic Development
Economic liberalisation
Licence Raj
Green revolution
Government initiatives
Numbering system





People



Billionaires
Businesspeople
Demography
Income

Poverty


Labour law
Pensions

EPFO
NPS
PPF







States



Andhra Pradesh
Assam
Bihar
Goa
Gujarat
Haryana
Himachal Pradesh
Jammu and Kashmir
Karnataka
Kerala
Madhya Pradesh
Maharashtra
Manipur
Mizoram
Nagaland
Odisha
Punjab
Rajasthan
Tamil Nadu
Telangana
Uttarakhand
Uttar Pradesh
West Bengal





Sectors



Agriculture

Livestock
Fishing


Automotive
Defence
Construction
Education
Energy

Nuclear
Solar
Wind


Entertainment
Forestry
Gambling
Healthcare
Information technology
Media

Cinema
Television
Printing


Mining
Pharmaceuticals
Retail
Science and technology

Biotechnology


Telecommunications
Textiles
Tourism
Transport

Aviation

Civil


Ports
Rail


Utilities

Electricity
Water





















Society
Culture










Society



Caste system
Corruption
Demographics
Education

Universities in India
Medical colleges in India
Law colleges in India
Engineering colleges in India


Ethnic relations
Healthcare

Hospitals in India


Languages
Literacy
Poverty
Prisons
Religion
Socio-economic issues
Standard of living
Water supply and sanitation
Crime





Culture



Arts and entertainment
Architecture
Blogging
Cinema
Comics

Webcomics


Cuisine

wine


Dance
Dress
Folklore
Festivals
Literature
Media

television


Martial arts
Music
Public holidays
Sport


















v
t
e


 Government of India



Constitution



Constitution of India
Fundamental Rights, Directive Principles and Fundamental Duties of India
Federalism in India
Union List
State List
Concurrent List








Executive



Union Government
Prime Minister (list)
Cabinet Ministers
President (list)
Vice President (list)
Civil Services
Cabinet Secretary of India
State governments
Chief Minister (list)
Governors (list)





Legislative



Parliament
Lok Sabha
Rajya Sabha
Vidhan Sabha
Vidhan Parishad
Leader of the Opposition





Judiciary



Supreme Court
Chief Justice
High Courts
District Courts












v
t
e


 Modi ministry




Prime Minister: Narendra Modi



















Cabinet Ministers










Agriculture and Farmers Welfare

Radha Mohan Singh



Chemicals and Fertilizers

Ananth Kumar



Civil Aviation

Ashok Gajapathi Raju



Commerce and Industry

Suresh Prabhu



Consumer Affairs, Food
and Public Distribution

Ram Vilas Paswan



Corporate Affairs

Arun Jaitley



Defence

Nirmala Sitharaman



Drinking Water and Sanitation

Uma Bharati



Earth Sciences

Harsh Vardhan



Electronics and
Information Technology

Ravi Shankar Prasad



External Affairs

Sushma Swaraj



Finance

Arun Jaitley



Food Processing Industry

Harsimrat Kaur Badal



Coal

Piyush Goyal



Environment, Forest
and Climate Change

Harsh Vardhan







Health and Family Welfare

Jagat Prakash Nadda



Heavy Industry and
Public Enterprises

Anant Geete



Home Affairs

Rajnath Singh



Human Resource Development

Prakash Javadekar



Information and Broadcasting

Smriti Irani



Law and Justice

Ravi Shankar Prasad



Overseas Indian Affairs

Sushma Swaraj



Panchayati Raj

Narendra Singh Tomar



Parliamentary Affairs

Ananth Kumar



Personnel, Public Grievances
and Pensions

Narendra Modi



Petroleum and
Natural Gas

Dharmendra Pradhan



Railways

Piyush Goyal



Rural Development

Narendra Singh Tomar



Skill Development and
Entrepreneurship

Dharmendra Pradhan







Science and Technology

Harsh Vardhan



Social Justice and
Empowerment

Thaawar Chand Gehlot



Space

Narendra Modi



Statistics and Programme
Implementation

D. V. Sadananda Gowda



Steel

Chaudhary Birender Singh



Shipping and Road Transport
and Highways

Nitin Gadkari



Textiles

Smriti Irani



Tribal Affairs

Jual Oram



Ministry of Water Resources,
River Development and
Ganga Rejuvenation

Nitin Gadkari



Women and Child Development

Maneka Gandhi



Minority Affairs

Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi



Mines

Narendra Singh Tomar


















Ministers of State (Independent Charge)










AYUSH

Shripad Yasso Naik



Communications

Manoj Sinha



Culture

Mahesh Sharma



Development of North
Eastern Region

Jitendra Singh



Labour and Employment

Santosh Kumar Gangwar



Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises

Giriraj Singh







New and Renewable Energy

Raj Kumar Singh



Planning

Rao Inderjit Singh



Power

Raj Kumar Singh



Tourism

Alphons Kannanthanam



Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation

Hardeep Singh Puri



Youth Affairs and Sports

Rajyavardhan Singh Rathore


















Ministers of State










Agriculture and
Farmers Welfare

Parsottambhai Rupala
S. S. Ahluwalia
Sudarshan Bhagat



Atomic Energy

Jitendra Singh



Chemicals and Fertilizers

Mansukh L. Mandaviya



Civil Aviation

Jayant Sinha



Consumer Affairs, Food
and Public Disturbution

Chhotu Ram Chaudhary



Corporate Affairs

Arjun Ram Meghwal



Defence

Subhash Ramrao Bhamre



Drinking Water
and Sanitation

Ramesh Jigajinagi



Earth Sciences

Y. S. Chowdary



Electronics and IT

P. P. Choudhary



External Affairs

M. J. Akbar
V. K. Singh



Finance

Arjun Ram Meghwal
Santosh Gangwar



Food Processing Industry

Sadhvi Niranjan Jyoti



Health and Family Welfare

Anupriya Patel
Faggan Singh Kulaste







Heavy Industry and Public
Enterprises

G. M. Siddeshwara



Home Affairs

Hansraj Ahir
Kiren Rijiju



Housing and Urban
Poverty Alleviation

Babul Supriyo
Rao Inderjit Singh



Human Resource Development

Mahendra Nath Pandey
Upendra Kushwaha



Information and Broadcasting

Rajyavardhan Singh Rathore



Law and Justice

P P Choudhary



Micro, Small and
Medium Enterprises

Haribhai Parthibhai Chaudhary
Giriraj Singh



Minority Affairs

Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi



Overseas Indian Affairs

V. K. Singh



Panchayati Raj

Parsottambhai Rupala



Parliamentary Affairs

Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi
S. S. Ahluwalia



Personnel, Public Grievances
and Pensions

Jitendra Singh



Prime Minister's Office

Jitendra Singh







Railways

Manoj Sinha
Rajen Gohain



Road Transport
and Highways

Mansukh L. Mandaviya
Pon Radhakrishnan



Rural Development

Ram Kripal Yadav



Science and Technology

Y. S. Chowdary



Social Justice and Empowerment

Krishan Pal Gurjar
Ramdas Athawale
Vijay Sampla



Steel

Vishnudeo Sai



Shipping

Mansukh L. Mandaviya
Pon Radhakrishnan



Space

Jitendra Singh



Textiles

Ajay Tamta



Tribal Affairs

Jasvantsinh Sumanbhai Bhabhor



Ministry of Water Resources,
River Development and
Ganga Rejuvenation

Sanjeev Balyan
Vijay Goel



Women and Child Development

Maneka Gandhi



Urban Development

Babul Supriyo
Rao Inderjit Singh




















v
t
e


Governments of Asia



Sovereign states



Afghanistan
Armenia
Azerbaijan
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Bhutan
Brunei
Cambodia
China
Cyprus
East Timor (Timor-Leste)
Egypt
Georgia
India
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Israel
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
North Korea
South Korea
Kuwait
Kyrgyzstan
Laos
Lebanon
Malaysia
Maldives
Mongolia
Myanmar
Nepal
Oman
Pakistan
Philippines
Qatar
Russia
Saudi Arabia
Singapore
Sri Lanka
Syria
Tajikistan
Thailand
Turkey
Turkmenistan
United Arab Emirates
Uzbekistan
Vietnam
Yemen





States with
limited recognition



Abkhazia
Artsakh
Northern Cyprus
Palestine
South Ossetia
Taiwan





Dependencies and
other territories



British Indian Ocean Territory
Christmas Island
Cocos (Keeling) Islands
Hong Kong
Macau












v
t
e


 Government ministries of India




President (List) • Government of India • Prime Minister (List • Office) • Deputy Prime Minister • Council of Ministers



Current



Agriculture and Farmers Welfare
AYUSH
Chemicals and Fertilizers
Civil Aviation
Coal
Commerce and Industry
Communications
Consumer Affairs
Culture
Defence
Drinking Water and Sanitation
Earth Sciences
Electronics and Information Technology
Environment, Forest and Climate Change
External Affiars
Finance
Food Processing Industries
Health and Family Welfare
Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises
Home Affairs
Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation
Human Resource Development
Information and Broadcasting
Labour and Employment
Law and Justice
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises
Mines
Minority Affairs
New and Renewable Energy
North East
Panchayati Raj
Parliamentary Affairs
Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions
Petroleum
Power
Railways
Road Transport and Highways
Rural Development
Science and Technology
Shipping
Skill Development and Entrepreneurship
Social Justice and Empowerment
Statistics and Programme Implementation
Steel
Textiles
Tourism
Tribal Affairs
Urban Development
Water Resources
Women and Child Development





Defunct



Communications and Information Technology
Overseas Indian Affairs
Surface Transport





Ministers



Home Affairs
Finance
External Affairs
Defence
Railways
Health and Family Welfare
HRD
Information and Broadcasting
Labour and Employment
Parliamentary Affairs
Science and Technology
Tribal Affairs
North Eastern Region











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Government_of_India&oldid=818386751"					Categories: Government of IndiaAsian governmentsHidden categories: CS1 errors: invisible charactersCS1 maint: Missing pipeWebarchive template wayback linksUse Indian English from June 2016All Wikipedia articles written in Indian EnglishUse dmy dates from September 2016All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from July 2017