"GAO" redirects here. For other uses, see Gao (disambiguation).

Government Accountability Office


Seal of the Government Accountability Office




Logo of the Government Accountability Office




Flag of the Government Accountability Office


Agency overview


Formed
July 1, 1921


Headquarters
441 G St., NW
Washington, D.C. 20548


Employees
3,350 (2010)


Annual budget
$557 million (2011)


Agency executive



Eugene Louis Dodaro, Comptroller General of the United States





Website
gao.gov


Footnotes


Measurable benefits of GAO work total $49.9 billion, a return of $87 for every dollar invested; at the end of FY 2010, over 80% of the GAO recommendations made in FY 2006 had been implemented.[1]


The Government Accountability Office (GAO) is a legislative branch government agency that provides auditing, evaluation, and investigative services for the United States Congress.[2] It is the supreme audit institution of the federal government of the United States.



Contents


1 History
2 Reports

2.1 Financial Statements of the U.S. government
2.2 U.S. Public Debt
2.3 Quinquennial Strategic Plan


3 GAO and Technology Assessment
4 See also
5 References
6 External links



History[edit]
The GAO was established as the General Accounting Office by the Budget and Accounting Act of 1921. The act required the head of the GAO to "investigate, at the seat of government or elsewhere, all matters relating to the receipt, disbursement, and application of public funds, and shall make to the President ... and to Congress ... reports [and] recommendations looking to greater economy or efficiency in public expenditures".[3] According to the GAO's current mission statement, the agency exists to support the Congress in meeting its constitutional responsibilities and to help improve the performance and ensure the accountability of the federal government for the benefit of the American people.
The name was changed in 2004 to Government Accountability Office by the GAO Human Capital Reform Act to better reflect the mission of the office.[4] While most other countries have government entities similar to the GAO, their focus (with the exceptions of the Taiwanese Control Yuan and the Israeli State Comptroller) is primarily on conducting financial audits.[citation needed] The GAO's auditors conduct not only financial audits, but also engage in a wide assortment of performance audits.
Over the years, the GAO has been referred to as "The Congressional Watchdog" and "The Taxpayers' Best Friend" for its frequent audits and investigative reports that have uncovered waste and inefficiency in government. News media often draw attention to the GAO's work by publishing stories on the findings, conclusions and recommendations of its reports. Members of Congress also frequently cite the GAO's work in statements to the press, congressional hearings, and floor debates on proposed legislation. In 2007 the Partnership for Public Service ranked the GAO second on its list of the best places to work in the federal government and Washingtonian magazine included the GAO on its 2007 list of great places to work in Washington, a list that encompasses the public, private, and non-profit sectors.
The GAO is headed by the comptroller general of the U.S., a professional and non-partisan position in the U.S. government. The comptroller general is appointed by the president, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, for a 15-year, non-renewable term. The president selects a nominee from a list of at least three individuals recommended by an eight-member bipartisan, bicameral commission of congressional leaders. During such term, the comptroller general has standing to pursue litigation to compel access to federal agency information. The comptroller general may not be removed by the president, but only by Congress through impeachment or joint resolution for specific reasons.[5] Since 1921, there have been only seven comptrollers general, and no formal attempt has ever been made to remove a comptroller general.
Labor-management relations became fractious during the 9-year tenure of the 7th comptroller general, David M. Walker. On September 19, 2007, GAO analysts voted by a margin of two to one (897–445), in a 75% turnout, to establish the first union in the GAO's 86-year history. The analysts voted to affiliate with the International Federation of Professional and Technical Engineers (IFPTE), a member union of the AFL-CIO. There are more than 1,800 analysts in the GAO analysts bargaining unit; the local voted to name itself IFPTE Local 1921, in honor of the date of the GAO's establishment. On February 14, 2008, the GAO analysts' union approved its first-ever negotiated pay contract with management; of just over 1,200 votes, 98 percent were in favor of the contract.




Seal of the General Accounting Office, from 1921 until being renamed in 2004.


The GAO also establishes standards for audits of government organizations, programs, activities, and functions, and of government assistance received by contractors, nonprofit organizations, and other nongovernmental organizations. These standards, often referred to as Generally Accepted Government Auditing Standards (GAGAS), are to be followed by auditors and audit organizations when required by law, regulation, agreement, contract, or policy. These standards pertain to auditors' professional qualifications, the quality of audit effort, and the characteristics of professional and meaningful audit reports.
In 1992 the GAO hosted XIV INCOSAI, the fourteenth triennial convention of the International Organization of Supreme Audit Institutions (INTOSAI).[6]
Reports[edit]




GAO headquarters in Washington, D.C.


GAO is a United States government electronic data provider, as all of its reports are available on its website, except for certain reports whose distribution is limited to official use in order to protect national and homeland security.[citation needed] The variety of topics reported on range from Federal Budget and Fiscal Issues to Financial Management, Education, Retirement Issues, Defense, Homeland Security, Administration of Justice, Health Care, Information Management and Technology, Natural Resources, Environment, International Affairs, Trade, Financial Markets, Housing, Government Management and Human Capital. GAO often produces highlights of its reports that serve as a statement for the record for various subcommittees of the United States Congress.
Most GAO studies and reports are initiated by requests from members of Congress, including requests mandated in statute, and so reflect concerns of current political import, for example to study the impact of a government-wide hiring freeze.[7] Many reports are issued periodically and take a long view of U.S. agencies' operations.[citation needed] GAO also produces annual reports on key issues such as Duplication and Cost savings and High-Risk Update.
The GAO prepares some 900 reports annually. GAO publishes reports and information relating to, inter alia:
Financial Statements of the U.S. government[edit]
Each year the GAO issues an audit report on the financial statements of the United States Government. The 2010 Financial Report of the United States Government was released on December 21, 2010.[8] The accompanying press release states that the GAO 'cannot render an opinion on the 2010 consolidated financial statements of the federal government, because of widespread material internal control weaknesses, significant uncertainties, and other limitations'.[8]
U.S. Public Debt[edit]
As part of its initiative to advocate sustainability, the GAO publishes a Federal Fiscal Outlook Report,[9] as well as data relating to the deficit.[10] The US deficit is presented on a cash rather than accruals basis, although the GAO notes that the accrual deficit 'provides more information on the longer-term implications of the government's annual operations'.[10] In FY 2010, the US federal government had a net operating cost of $2,080 billion, although since this includes accounting provisions (estimates of future liabilities), the cash deficit is $1,294 billion.[11]
Quinquennial Strategic Plan[edit]
The most recent GAO plan, for 2010-2015, sets out four goals, namely to address: (1) Current and Emerging Challenges to the Well-being and Financial Security of the American People; (2) Changing Security Threats and the Challenges of Global Interdependence; (3) Transformation of the Federal Government to Address National Challenges; (4) Maximization of the Value of the GAO.[12]
Forensic Audits and Investigative Service (FAIS)
The Forensic Audits and Investigative Service (FAIS) team provides Congress with high-quality forensic audits and investigations of fraud, waste, and abuse; other special investigations; and security and vulnerability assessments. Its work cuts across a diverse array of government programs administered by IRS, the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, the Department of Veterans Affairs, and the Department of Homeland Security, among others.
GAO and Technology Assessment[edit]
After the closing of the Office of Technology Assessment (OTA) in 1995, Congress directed GAO to conduct a technology assessment (TA) pilot program. Between 2002 and 2006, four reports were completed– use of biometrics for border security, cyber security for critical infrastructure protection, technologies for protecting structures in wildland fires, and cargo container security technologies. In the first report, GAO found that while biometrics technologies could be used to secure the border, they had limitations in fingerprinting and facial recognition systems. An immediate impact of the report was a congressional testimony on the use of biometrics which, in turn, helped to inform U.S. national security reform efforts. GAO reports, which are made available to the public, have become essential vehicles for understanding science and technology (S&T) implications of policies considered by the Congress.
Since 2007, Congress has established a permanent TA function within GAO. This new operational role augments GAO’s performance audits related to S&T issues, including effectiveness and efficiency of U.S. federal programs. In 2010, GAO joined European Parliamentary Technology Assessment (EPTA) as an associate member. In the last three years, GAO has completed TA reports on three topics, the most recent one being released in 2011 – rail security, climate engineering, and alternate neutron detectors. In the climate engineering report, Congress requested GAO to examine three areas: the current S&T state of climate engineering, views of experts on the future of climate engineering research, and potential public responses to climate engineering. When the GAO receives a request to conduct TA, it follows five phases: Acceptance, Planning, Data Gathering and Analysis, Product development and Distribution and Results. Phases one and two include selecting the topic and initiating the TA plan while the other ones are respectively: conducting TA, followed by developing the report and ensuring its accuracy and integrity, and finally receiving feedback from Congress and developing lessons learned to enhance the TA process.
The GAO describes the TA as providing "thorough and balanced analysis of critical technological innovations that affect our society, the environment, and the economy" explaining "the consequences that each featured technology will have on federal agencies and departments, and their wider impacts on American society".[13] This broad working definition enables GAO analysts to utilize TA as a tool for policy analysis. Technology assessments at GAO are conducted in accordance with GAO’s quality assurance framework. GAO initiates technology assessments through congressional mandates, requests from congressional leaders, and through the authority of U.S. Comptroller General.
The Technology Assessment section of GAO's website [14] offers the latest TA reports and videos.
See also[edit]


Title 4 of the Code of Federal Regulations


Offices


Comptroller and Auditor General
Comptroller
Inspector General
Auditor general
Director of audit
Treasurer
Corporate title


Non-governmental organizations (NGOs)


Government Accountability Project
Project On Government Oversight


Audit


Auditor independence
Negative assurance
Positive assurance


International


Australia: Australian National Audit Office
Brazil: Court of Accounts of the Union
Botswana: Office of the Auditor General Botswana[15]
Canada: Auditor General of Canada
Europe: Court of Auditors
Hong Kong: Director of Audit of Hong Kong
India: Comptroller and Auditor General of India
Mexico: Auditoría Superior de la Federación[16]
Philippines: Commission on Audit[17]
United Kingdom: National Audit Office


References[edit]


^ "GAO at a Glance". Government Accountability Office. Retrieved January 27, 2011. 
^ "Office of the Comptroller General". United States Government Accountability Office. 
^ Budget and Accounting Act of 1921, Sec. 312(a), 42 Stat. 25
^ Walker, David M. (July 19, 2004). "GAO Answers the Question: What's in a Name?" (PDF). Roll Call. 
^ See Bowsher v. Synar, 478 U.S. 714 (1986)
^ INTOSAI: 50 Years (1953-2003), Vienna: International Organization of Supreme Audit Institutions, 2004, p. 67 
^ Comptroller General of the United States (March 10, 1982). Recent Government-Wide Hiring Freeze Prove Ineffective In Managing Federal Employment (PDF) (Report). Government Accountability Office (GOA). Retrieved January 24, 2017.  requested sent to Charles A. Bowsher by Geraldine A. Ferraro Chairwoman, Subcommittee on Human Resources Committee on Post Office and Civil Service House of Representatives
^ a b "Press Release". US Government Accountability Office. Retrieved January 8, 2011. 
^ "Most Recent Federal Fiscal Outlook Report". Government Accountability Office. Retrieved January 27, 2011. 
^ a b "Measuring the Deficit: Cash vs. Accrual". Government Accountability Office. Retrieved January 19, 2011. 
^ "2010 Financial Report of the United States Government (vid. pp.v, 43)" (PDF). Government Accountability Office. Retrieved January 7, 2011. 
^ "Strategic Plan: Serving the Congress and the Nation, 2010 –2015" (PDF). Government Accountability Office. Retrieved January 27, 2011. 
^ U.S. GAO - Technology Assessment. Gao.gov. Retrieved on July 19, 2013.
^ GAO-TA
^ OAG.org.bw Archived July 6, 2011, at the Wayback Machine.
^ Auditoria Superior de la Federación. ASF. Retrieved on July 19, 2013.
^ COA.gov.ph/


[1]
External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Government Accountability Office.



GAO homepage
GAO name change
General Accounting Office Reports, on the website of the Federation of American Scientists







v
t
e


United States Congress






House of Representatives
Senate
(114th←115th→116th)
Lists of congressional lists










Members and leaders







Members




Current



By length of service
Freshmen
Youngest members
Resident Commissioner of Puerto Rico
Delegates





Senate



Current

by seniority


Dean of the Senate
Former U.S. Senators

living


Earliest serving
Earliest living
Expelled or censured
Classes
Born outside the U.S.





House



Current

by seniority


Dean of the House
Former U.S. Representatives

living


Oldest living
Earliest serving
Expelled, censured, and reprimanded








Leaders




Senate



President (list)
President pro tempore (list)
Majority and minority leaders
Assistant party leaders
Democratic Caucus (Chair
Secretary
Policy Committee Chair)
Republican Conference (Chair
Vice-Chair
Policy Committee Chair)





House



Speaker
Leaders
Bipartisan Legal Advisory Group
Democratic Caucus
Republican Conference








Districts



List
Apportionment





Caucuses,
women and
minorities



Congressional caucus
African Americans in the House

Congressional Black Caucus


African Americans in the Senate
Arab and Middle-Eastern members
Asian Pacific American members

Congressional Asian Pacific American Caucus


Hispanic and Latino members

Congressional Hispanic Caucus
Congressional Hispanic Conference


Jewish members
LGBT members

LGBT Equality Caucus


Native American members
Women in the House

Congressional Caucus for Women's Issues


Women in the Senate





Related



By length of service historically
















Powers, privileges, procedure, committees, history, and media







Powers



Article I
Copyright
Commerce (Dormant)
Contempt of Congress
Declaration of war
Impeachment
Naturalization
"Necessary and Proper"
Power of enforcement
Taxing/spending





Privileges and
benefits



Salaries
Franking
Immunity





Procedure



Act of Congress (list)
Appropriation bill
Blue slip
Budget resolution
Censure
Closed sessions

House
Senate


Cloture
Concurrent resolution
Continuing resolution
Dear colleague letter
Discharge petition
Engrossed bill
Enrolled bill
Expulsion
Joint resolution
Joint session (list)
Lame-duck session
Majority of the majority (Hastert Rule)
Multiple referral
Procedures (House)
Quorum call
Reconciliation
Rider
Saxbe fix
Sponsorship
Suspension of the rules
Unanimous consent
Veto

Line-item veto
Pocket veto
Veto override







Senate-specific



Advice and consent
Classes
Executive communication
Executive session
Filibuster
Jefferson's Manual
Senate Journal
Morning business
Nuclear option
Presiding Officer
Recess appointment
Reconciliation
Riddick's Senate Procedure
Senate hold
Senatorial courtesy
Seniority
Standing Rules
Tie-breaking votes
Traditions
Treaty Clause





Committees



Chairman and ranking member
Of the Whole
Conference
Discharge petition
Hearings
Markup
Oversight
List (Joint)
List (House)
List (Senate)
Select and special
Standing
Subcommittees





Items



Gavels
Mace of the House
Seal of the Senate





History



Biographical Directory
Divided government
House
Gerrymandering
Party control
Senate
Senate election disputes
Senatorial memoirs
Representative memoirs





Media



C-SPAN
Congressional Quarterly
The Hill
Politico
Roll Call
















Offices, employees, services, and the Capitol Complex







Legislative
offices



Congressional staff
Government Accountability Office (Comptroller General)
Architect of the Capitol
Capitol Police (Capitol Police Board)
Capitol Guide Service (Capitol Guide Board)
Congressional Budget Office (CBO)
Compliance
Library of Congress
Government Publishing Office (GPO)
Technology Assessment





Offices




Senate



Curator
Historical
Library





House



Congressional Ethics
Emergency Planning, Preparedness, and Operations
Interparliamentary Affairs
Legislative Counsel
Law Revision Counsel
Library








Employees




Senate



Secretary
Chaplain
Curator
Inspector General
Historian
Librarian
Pages
Parliamentarian
Sergeant at Arms and Doorkeeper





House



Chaplain
Chief Administrative Officer
Clerk
Doorkeeper
Floor Operations
Floor Services Chief
Historian
Pages (Page Board)
Parliamentarian
Postmaster
Reading Clerk
Sergeant at Arms








Library of
Congress



Congressional Research Service (reports)
Copyright Office (Register of Copyrights)
Law Library
Poet Laureate
THOMAS
Adams Building
Jefferson Building
Madison Building





Government
Publishing Office



Public Printer
Congressional Pictorial Directory
Congressional Record
Official Congressional Directory
United States Government Manual
Serial Set
Statutes at Large
United States Code





Capitol



Brumidi Corridors
Congressional Prayer Room
Crypt
Dome

Statue of Freedom


Rotunda
Hall of Columns
Statuary Hall
Visitor Center
The Apotheosis of Washington
Statue of Freedom
Declaration of Independence painting
Scene at the Signing of the Constitution of the United States
Apotheosis of Democracy
First Reading of the Emancipation Proclamation of President Lincoln
Surrender of General Burgoyne
Surrender of Lord Cornwallis
Revolutionary War Door
Westward the Course of Empire Takes Its Way
Vice President's Room
Vice Presidential Bust Collection





Office
buildings




Senate



Dirksen
Hart

Mountains and Clouds


Russell





House



Building Commission
Cannon
Ford
Longworth
O'Neill
Rayburn








Other
facilities



Botanic Garden
Health and Fitness Facility
House Recording Studio
Senate chamber
Old Senate Chamber
Old Supreme Court Chamber
Power Plant
Webster Page Residence
Subway














Websites
House of Representatives
Senate








^ United States Congress. Senate Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs (December 17, 2013). Government Accountability Office Improvement Act. Washington, D.C. : U.S. Government Printing Office, 2013. pp. 113–128.  Retrieved on September 28, 2015







						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Government_Accountability_Office&oldid=818080338"					Categories: Government agencies established in 1921Open government in the United StatesGovernment auditGovernment Accountability OfficeTechnology assessmentAgencies of the United States Congress1921 establishments in Washington, D.C.Auditing in the United StatesHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksUse mdy dates from August 2015Pages using infobox government agency with unknown parametersAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from September 2015Articles with unsourced statements from March 2014Articles with unsourced statements from July 2007