

Grammatical categories




Affect
Agent/Patient
Agreement
Animacy
Argument/Complement/Adjunct
Associated motion
Associativity[1]
Aspect
Boundedness
Branching
Case
Conjugation
Classifier
Clusivity
Comparison
Contrast
Construct state
Countability/Uncountability
Dative shift
Declension
Definiteness
Evidentiality
Feature
Focus
Genitive construction
Gender/Noun class
Honorifics
Incorporation
Inflection
Lexical aspect (Aktionsart)
Markedness
Mirativity
Modality
Mood
Negation
Number
Person
Polypersonal agreement
Polarity
Possession
Pluractionality
Reciprocity
Predicate
Serial verb construction
Singulative-Collective-Pluractive
Specificity
Subject/Object
Suffixaufnahme (Case stacking)
Tense
Tense–aspect–mood
Telicity
Transitivity
Topic and Comment
Thematic relation
Valency
Voice
Volition







v
t
e









Number of grammatical cases currently in use in European languages. Light grey areas are for languages which don't use grammatical cases.


Case is a special grammatical category of a noun, pronoun, adjective, participle or numeral whose value reflects the grammatical function performed by that word in a phrase, clause, or sentence. In some languages, nouns, pronouns, adjectives, determiners, participles, prepositions, numerals, articles and their modifiers take different inflected forms depending on what case they are in. As a language evolves, cases can merge (for instance, in Ancient Greek, the locative case merged with the dative), a phenomenon formally called syncretism.[2]
English has largely lost its case system, although personal pronouns still have three cases that are simplified forms of the nominative, accusative and genitive cases that are used with personal pronouns: subjective case (I, you, he, she, it, we, they, who, whoever), objective case (me, you, him, her, it, us, them, whom, whomever) and possessive case (my, mine; your, yours; his; her, hers; its; our, ours; their, theirs; whose; whosever[3]). Forms such as I, he and we are used for the subject ("I kicked the ball"), whereas forms such as me, him and us are used for the object ("John kicked me").
Languages such as Sanskrit, Ancient Greek, Latin, Armenian, Hungarian, Hindi, Tibetan, Czech, Slovak, Turkish, Tamil, Romanian, Russian, Polish, Bosnian, Serbo-Croatian, Estonian, Finnish, Icelandic, Belarusian, Ukrainian, Lithuanian, Basque and the majority of the Caucasian languages have extensive case systems, with nouns, pronouns, adjectives, and determiners all inflecting (usually by means of different suffixes) to indicate their case. The number of cases differs between languages: Esperanto has two; German and Icelandic have four; Turkish, Latin and Russian each have at least six; Armenian, Czech, Polish, Bosnian, Serbian, Croatian, Ukrainian, and Lithuanian have seven; Sanskrit has eight; Estonian has fourteen and Finnish has fifteen, Hungarian has eighteen and Tsez has sixty-four.
Commonly encountered cases include nominative, accusative, dative, and genitive. A role that one of these languages marks by case will often be marked in English using a preposition. For example, the English prepositional phrase with (his) foot (as in "John kicked the ball with his foot") might be rendered in Russian using a single noun in the instrumental case, or in Ancient Greek as τῷ ποδί (tôi podí, meaning "the foot") with both words (the definite article, and the noun πούς (poús) "foot") changing to dative form.
More formally, case has been defined as "a system of marking dependent nouns for the type of relationship they bear to their heads".[4]:p.1 Cases should be distinguished from thematic roles such as agent and patient. They are often closely related, and in languages such as Latin several thematic roles have an associated case, but cases are a morphological notion, whereas thematic roles are a semantic one. Languages having cases often exhibit free word order, because thematic roles are not required to be marked by position in the sentence.



Contents


1 Etymology
2 Indo-European languages

2.1 English


3 Hierarchy of cases
4 Case order
5 Case concord systems
6 Declension paradigms
7 Examples

7.1 Belarusian
7.2 German
7.3 Greek
7.4 Japanese
7.5 Korean
7.6 Latin
7.7 Latvian
7.8 Lithuanian
7.9 Polish
7.10 Hungarian
7.11 Romanian
7.12 Russian
7.13 Sanskrit
7.14 Tamil
7.15 Telugu


8 Evolution
9 Linguistic typology
10 See also
11 Notes
12 References

12.1 General references


13 External links



Etymology[edit]
The English word case used in this sense comes from the Latin casus, which is derived from the verb cadere, "to fall", from the Proto-Indo-European root *ḱad-.[5] The Latin word is a calque of the Greek πτῶσις, ptôsis, lit. "falling, fall".[6] The sense is that all other cases are considered to have "fallen" away from the nominative. This picture is also reflected in the word declension, from Latin declinere, "to lean", from the PIE root *ḱley-.
The equivalent to "case" in several other European languages also derives from casus, including cas in French, caso in Spanish and Kasus in German. The Russian word паде́ж (padyézh) is a calque from Greek and similarly contains a root meaning "fall", and the German Fall and Czech pád simply mean "fall", and are used for both the concept of grammatical case and to refer to physical falls. The Finnish equivalent is sija, which can also mean "position" or "support".
Indo-European languages[edit]




On this sign in Russian memorializing an anniversary of the city of Balakhna, the word Balakhna on the right is in the nominative case, whereas the word Balakhne is in the dative case in Balakhne 500 Let ('Balakhna is 500 years old') on the front of the sign. Furthermore, let is in the genitive (plural) case.


Although not very prominent in modern English, cases featured much more saliently in Old English and other ancient Indo-European languages, such as Latin, Ancient Greek, and Sanskrit. Historically, the Indo-European languages had eight morphological cases, though modern languages typically have fewer, using prepositions and word order to convey information that had previously been conveyed using distinct noun forms. Among modern languages, cases still feature prominently in most of the Balto-Slavic languages (except Macedonian and Bulgarian[7]), with most having six to eight cases, as well as Icelandic, German and Modern Greek, which have four. In German, cases are mostly marked on articles and adjectives, and less so on nouns. In Icelandic, articles, adjectives, personal names and nouns are all marked for case, making it, among other things, the living Germanic language that could be said to most closely resemble Proto-Germanic.
The eight historical Indo-European cases are as follows, with examples either of the English case or of the English syntactic alternative to case:


Case
Indicates
Sample case words
Sample sentence
Interrogative
Notes


Nominative
Subject of a finite verb
we
We went to the store.
Who or what?
Corresponds to English's subject pronouns.


Accusative
Direct object of a transitive verb
us,
for us,
the (object)
The clerk remembered us.
John waited for us at the bus stop.
Obey the law.
Whom or what?
Corresponds to English's object pronouns and preposition "for" construction before the object, often marked by a definite article "the". Together with dative, it forms modern English's oblique case.


Dative
Indirect object of a verb
us,
to us,
to the (object)
The clerk gave us a discount.
The clerk gave a discount to us.
According to the law...
Whom or to what?
Corresponds to English's object pronouns and preposition "to" construction before the object, often marked by a definite article "the". Together with accusative, it forms modern English's oblique case.


Ablative
Movement away from
from us
The victim went from us to see the doctor.
Whence? From where/whom?



Genitive
Possessor of another noun
's,
of (the),
his
John's book was on the table.
The pages of the book turned yellow.
Table made out of wood.
To each his own.
Whose? From what or what of?
Roughly corresponds to English's possessive (possessive determiners and pronouns) and preposition "of" construction.


Vocative
Addressee
John
John, are you all right?
Hello, John!




Locative
Location, either physical or temporal
in China,
at the bus stop,
in the future
We live in China.
John is waiting for us at the bus stop.
We will see what will happen in the future.
Where or wherein? When?
Roughly corresponds to English prepositions "in", "on", "at", and "by" and other less common prepositions.


Instrumental
A means or tool used or companion present in/while performing an action
with a mop,
by hand
We wiped the floor with a mop.
This letter was written by hand.
How? With what or using what? By what means?
With whom?
Corresponds to English prepositions "by", "with" and "via" as well as synonymous constructions such as "using", "by use of" and "through".


All of the above are just rough descriptions; the precise distinctions vary from language to language, and are often quite complex. Case is based fundamentally on changes to the noun to indicate the noun's role in the sentence. This is not how English works; instead, word order and prepositions are used to achieve this.
English[edit]
Modern English has largely abandoned the inflectional case system of Indo-European in favor of analytic constructions. The personal pronouns of Modern English retain morphological case more strongly than any other word class (a remnant of the more extensive case system of Old English). For other pronouns, and all nouns, adjectives, and articles, grammatical function is indicated only by word order, by prepositions, and by the "Saxon genitive" (-'s).[a]
Taken as a whole, English personal pronouns are typically said to have three morphological cases:

The nominative case (subjective pronouns such as I, he, she, we), used for the subject of a finite verb and sometimes for the complement of a copula.
The oblique case (object pronouns such as me, him, her, us), used for the direct or indirect object of a verb, for the object of a preposition, for an absolute disjunct, and sometimes for the complement of a copula.
The genitive case (possessive pronouns such as my/mine, his, her(s), our(s)), used for a grammatical possessor. This is not always considered to be a case; see English possessive § Status of the possessive as a grammatical case.

Most English personal pronouns have five forms: the nominative and oblique case forms, the possessive case, which has both a determiner form (such as my, our) and a distinct independent form (such as mine, ours) (with two exceptions: the third person singular masculine and the third person singular neuter it, which use the same form for both determiner and independent [his car, it is his]), and a distinct reflexive or intensive form (such as myself, ourselves). The interrogative personal pronoun who exhibits the greatest diversity of forms within the modern English pronoun system, having definite nominative, oblique, and genitive forms (who, whom, whose) and equivalently coordinating indefinite forms (whoever, whomever, and whosever).
Though English pronouns can have subject and object forms (he/him, she/her), nouns show only a singular/plural and a possessive/non-possessive distinction (e.g. chair, chairs, chair's, chairs'). Note that chair does not change form between "the chair is here" (subject) and "I saw the chair" (direct object), a distinction made by word order and context.
Hierarchy of cases[edit]
Main article: Case hierarchy
Cases can be ranked in the following hierarchy, where a language that does not have a given case will tend not to have any cases to the right of the missing case:[4]:p.89

nominative → accusative or ergative → genitive → dative → locative or prepositional → ablative and/or instrumental → others.

This is, however, only a general tendency. Many forms of Central German, such as Colognian and Luxembourgish, have a dative case but lack a genitive. In Irish nouns, the nominative and accusative have fallen together, whereas the dative–locative has remained separate in some paradigms; Irish also has genitive and vocative cases. In Punjabi, the accusative, genitive, and dative have merged to an oblique case, but the language still retains vocative, locative, and ablative cases. Old English had an instrumental case, but not a locative or prepositional.
Case order[edit]
The "traditional" case order (nom-gen-dat-acc) was expressed for the first time in The Art of Grammar in the 2nd century AD:




Πτώσεις ὀνομάτων εἰσὶ πέντε· ὀρθή, γενική, δοτική, αἰτιατική, κλητική.




There are five Cases, the right [nominative], the generic [genetive], the dative, the accusative, and the vocative.[14]








Latin grammars, such as Ars grammatica, followed the Greek tradition, but added the ablative case of Latin. Later other European languages also followed that Graeco-Roman tradition.
However, for some languages, such as Russian or Latin, due to case syncretism the order may be changed for convinience, where the accusative or the vocative cases are placed after the nominative and before the genitive. For example:




Russian

Case
кот, kot
cat
стол, stol
table


Singular
Plural
Singular
Plural


Nominative
kot
kotý
stol
stolý


Accusative
kotá
kotóv


Genitive
stolá
stolóv


Dative
kotú
kotám
stolú
stolám


Instrumental
kotóm
kotámi
stolóm
stolámi


Prepositional
koté
kotáx
stolé
stoláx





Latin


aqua, aquae
water f.
bellum, bellī
war n.


Singular
Plural
Singular
Plural


Nominative
aqua
aquae
bellum
bella


Vocative


Accusative
aquam
aquās


Genitive
aquae
aquārum
bellī
bellōrum


Dative
aquīs
bellō
bellīs


Ablative
aquā





Case concord systems[edit]
In the most common[4] case concord system, only the head-word (the noun) in a phrase is marked for case. This system appears in many Papuan languages as well as in Turkic, Mongolian, Quechua, Dravidian, Indo-Aryan, and other languages. In Basque and various Amazonian and Australian languages, only the phrase-final word (not necessarily the noun) is marked for case. In many Indo-European, Balto-Finnic, and Semitic languages, case is marked on the noun, the determiner, and usually the adjective. Other systems are less common. In some languages, there is double-marking of a word as both genitive (to indicate semantic role) and another case such as accusative (to establish concord with the head noun).[citation needed]
Declension paradigms[edit]
Main article: Declension
Declension is the process or result of altering nouns to the correct grammatical cases. Languages with rich nominal inflection (use grammatical cases for many purposes) typically have a number of identifiable declension classes, or groups of nouns with a similar pattern of case inflection or declension. Sanskrit has six declension classes, whereas Latin is traditionally considered to have five, and Ancient Greek three declension classes.[15] For example, Slovak has fifteen noun declension classes, five for each gender (the number may vary depending on which paradigms are counted or omitted, this mainly concerns those that modify declension of foreign words; refer to article).
In Indo-European languages, declension patterns may depend on a variety of factors, such as gender, number, phonological environment, and irregular historical factors. Pronouns sometimes have separate paradigms. In some languages, particularly Slavic languages, a case may contain different groups of endings depending on whether the word is a noun or an adjective. A single case may contain many different endings, some of which may even be derived from different roots. For example, in Polish, the genitive case has -a, -u, -ów, -i/-y, -e- for nouns, and -ego, -ej, -ich/-ych for adjectives. To a lesser extent, a noun's animacy or humanness may add another layer of complexity. For example, in Russian:

Кот (NOM, animate, zero ending) ло́вит мыше́й. ((The) cat catches mice)
Столб (NOM, inanimate, zero ending) де́ржит кры́шу. ((The) pillar holds a/the roof)

vs.

Пётр гла́дит кота́ (ACC, animate, -a ending). (Peter strokes a/the cat) or (Peter is stroking a/the cat)

and

Пётр лома́ет столб (ACC, inanimate, zero ending). (Peter breaks a/the pillar) or (Peter is breaking a/the pillar)

Examples[edit]






The examples and perspective in this section may not represent a worldwide view of the subject. You may improve this article, discuss the issue on the talk page, or create a new article, as appropriate. (April 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Belarusian[edit]
An example of a Belarusian case inflection is given below, using the singular forms of the Belarusian term for "country," which belongs to Belarusian's first declension class.

краіна (nominative) "[the] country" [as a subject] (e.g. Гэта краіна знаходзіцца ў Еўропе – this country is located in Europe)
краіны (genitive) "[the] country's / [of the] country" (e.g. Урад Нідэрландаў знаходзіцца ў Гаазе, але сталіца краіны - Амстэрдам – the Dutch government is situated in The Hague, but the country's capital is Amsterdam)
краіне (dative) "[to/for the] country" [as an indirect object] (e.g. Новай краіне не засталося ніякіх прыродных рэсурсаў – there was no natural resources left for the new country)
краіну (accusative) "country" [as a direct object] (e.g. Я часта наведваю гэту краіну – I often visit this country)
краінай (instrumental) "[with the] country/[by the] country/[be a] country" (e.g. Сінгапур быў беднай краінай – Singapore was a poor country)
у краіне (locative) "[in the] country" [as a direct object] (e.g. У краіне не хапае ежы – There is not enough food in the country)

German[edit]
In German, grammatical case is largely preserved in the articles and adjectives, but nouns have lost many of their original endings. Below is an example of case inflection in German using the masculine definite article and one of the German words for "sailor".

der Seemann (nominative) "the sailor" [as a subject] (e.g. Der Seemann steht da – the sailor is standing there)
des Seemannes (genitive) "the sailor's / [of] the sailor" (e.g. Der Name des Seemannes ist Otto – the name of the sailor is Otto)
dem Seemann(e) (dative) "[to/for] the sailor" [as an indirect object] (e.g. Ich gab dem Seemann ein Geschenk – I gave a present to the sailor)
den Seemann (accusative) "the sailor" [as a direct object] (e.g. Ich sah den Seemann – I saw the sailor)

Greek[edit]
Modern Greek has four cases: nominative, genitive, accusative, and vocative. For neuters and most groups of feminines and plural masculines, the genitive case differs from the other three. Below is an example of the declension of ουρανός (sky), which has a different form in the singular of all four cases, together with the appropriate article in both the singular and the plural:

Nominative – ο ουρανός / οι ουρανοί
Genitive – του ουρανού / των ουρανών
Accusative – τον ουρανό / τους ουρανούς
Vocative – ουρανέ / ουρανοί

Ancient Greek had one additional case, the dative. At some point, it was replaced with the preposition εις, followed by the accusative. This became necessary when pronunciation simplified, merging the two long vowels eta and omega to short. The result was that dative did not sound much different from the accusative in the singular of the first two groups. However, the dative case is still used in many expressions.
With time, only the sigma of εις was left and got attached to the article, except when an article is not used and it becomes σε instead. Note that this is not a different case from the accusative.
Below is an example with the dative case of the word πόλη (city):

Nominative – η πόλη / οι πόλεις
Genitive – της πόλης / των πόλεων
Dative – τη πόλη / ταις πόλεσι
Accusative – την πόλη / τις πόλεις
Vocative – πόλη / πόλεις

Japanese[edit]
Cases in Japanese are marked by particles placed after the nouns.[16] A distinctive feature of Japanese is the presence of two cases, which are roughly equivalent to the nominative case in other languages: one representing the sentence topic, the other representing the subject. The most important case markers are the following:

Nominative - が (ga) for subject, は (wa) for the topic
Genitive - の (no)
Dative - に (ni)
Accusative - を (wo)
Lative - へ (e), used for destination direction (like in "to some place")
Ablative - から (kara), used for source direction (like in "from some place")
Instrumental - で (de)

Korean[edit]
Cases in Korean are marked by particles placed after the nouns, similar to Japanese. Like Japanese, the nominative case has two distinctions, one representing the topic of a sentence and the other the subject. In informal speech, nominative (이/가 and 은/는) and accusative (을/를) particles are often omitted, while dative (에게) and ablative (에서) are shortened to simply 에, if the meaning of the sentence can easily be inferred from context. Most common case markers are the following:

Nominative - 이/가 (i/ga) for the subject, 은/는 (eun/neun) for the topic
Genitive - 의 (ui; although transliterated as ui, nowadays it is pronounced the same as 에)
Dative - 에게 (ege), 한테 (hante)
Accusative - 을/를 (eul/reul)
Lative - 에 (e), used for destination direction (like in "to some place")
Ablative - 에서 (eseo), used for source direction (like in "from some place")
Instrumental - 로/으로 (ro/uro)
Vocative - 아/야 (a/ya)

Latin[edit]
An example of a Latin case inflection is given below, using the singular forms of the Latin term for "cook," which belongs to Latin's second declension class.

coquus (nominative) "[the] cook" [as a subject] (e.g. coquus ibī stat – the cook is standing there)
coquī (genitive) "[the] cook's / [of the] cook" (e.g. nōmen coquī Claudius est – the cook's name is Claudius)
coquō (dative) "[to/for the] cook" [as an indirect object] (e.g. coquō dōnum dedī – I gave a present to the cook)
coquum (accusative) "[the] cook" [as a direct object] (e.g. coquum vīdī – I saw the cook)
coquō (ablative) "[by/with/from/in the] cook" [in various uses not covered by the above] (e.g. sum altior coquō – I am taller than the cook: ablative of comparison)
coque (vocative) "[you] the cook" [addressing the object] (e.g. grātiās tibi agō, coque – I thank you, cook)

Latvian[edit]
Main article: Latvian declension
Latvian nouns have seven grammatical cases: nominative, genitive, dative, accusative, instrumental, locative and vocative. The instrumental case is always identical to the accusative in the singular and to the dative in the plural. It is used as a free-standing case (without a preposition) only in highly restricted contexts in modern Latvian.
An example of a Latvian case inflection is given below, using the singular forms of the Latvian term for "man," which belongs to the first declension class.

Nominative: vīrs
Genitive: vīra
Dative: vīram
Instrumental: ar vīru
Accusative: vīru
Locative: vīrā
Vocative: vīr

Lithuanian[edit]
In Lithuanian, only the inflection usually changes in the seven different grammatical cases:

Nominative (vardininkas): Tai yra šuo – "This is a dog."
Genitive (kilmininkas): Tomas paėmė šuns kaulą – "Tom took the dog's bone."
Dative (naudininkas): Jis davė kaulą kitam šuniui – "He gave the bone to another dog."
Accusative (galininkas): Jis nuprausė šunį – "He washed the dog."
Instrumental (įnagininkas): Jis šunimi išgąsdino kates – He scared the cats with (using) the dog.
Locative (vietininkas): Susitiksime "Baltame šunyje – "We'll meet at the White Dog (Cafe)."
Vocative (šauksmininkas): Jis sušuko: Ei, šunie! – "He shouted: Hey, dog!"

Polish[edit]
An example of a Polish case inflection is given below, using the singular forms of the Polish terms for "human" (człowiek) and "monkey" (małpa)

Nominative (mianownik): człowiek, małpa
Genitive (dopełniacz): człowieka, małpy
Dative (celownik): człowiekowi, małpie
Accusative (biernik): człowieka, małpę
Instrumental (narzędnik): człowiekiem, małpą
Locative (miejscownik): człowieku, małpie
Vocative (wołacz): człowieku, małpo

Hungarian[edit]
Hungarian declension is relatively simple with regular suffixes attached to the vast majority of nouns. The following table lists a few of the many cases used in Hungarian.

lakás – flat/apartment

Suffix
Meaning
Example
Meaning of the example
Case name


∅
subject
lakás
flat/apartment (as a subject)
Nominative case


-ot/(-at)/-et/-öt/-t
direct object
lakást
flat/apartment (as an object)
Accusative case


-nak/-nek
indirect object
lakásnak
to the flat/apartment
Dative case


-val/-vel (Assim.)
with
lakással
with the flat/apartment
Instrumental-comitative case


-ért
for, for the purpose of
lakásért
for the flat/apartment
Causal-final case


-vá/-vé (Assim.)
into
lakássá
[turn] into a flat/apartment
Translative case


-ig
as far as, up to
lakásig
as far as the flat/apartment
Terminative case


Romanian[edit]
Romanian is the only modern major Romance language with a case system for all nouns, whereas all other Romance languages dropped the cases for nouns replacing them by prepositions. An example of Romanian case inflection is given below, using the singular form of the word "boy":

Băiatul (nominative) "[the] boy" [as a subject] (e.g. Băiatul a stat acasă – the boy stayed home)
Băiat (accusative) "boy" [as a direct object] (e.g. L-am văzut aseară pe băiat – I saw the boy last night)
Băiatului (genitive) "[the] boy's / [of the] boy" (e.g. Bicicleta băiatului s-a stricat – the boy's bike broke down)
Băiatului (dative) "[to the] boy" (e.g. I-am dat un cadou băiatului – I gave the boy a gift)
Băiete! (vocative) "Boy!" (e.g. Stai acasă, băiete! – stay at home boy!)

Russian[edit]
Main article: Russian declension
An example of a Russian case inflection is given below (with explicit stress marks), using the singular forms of the Russian term for "sailor," which belongs to Russian's first declension class.

моря́к (nominative) "[the] sailor" [as a subject] (e.g. Там стоит моряк: The sailor is standing there)
морякá (genitive) "[the] sailor's / [of the] sailor" (e.g. Сын моряка — художник: The sailor's son is an artist)
моряку́ (dative) "[to/for the] sailor" [as an indirect object] (e.g. Моряку подарили подарок: (They/Someone) gave a present to the sailor)
морякá (accusative) "[the] sailor" [as a direct object] (e.g. Вижу моряка: (I) see the sailor)
моряко́м (instrumental) "[with/by the] sailor" [as a direct object] (e.g. Дружу с моряком: (I) have a friendship with the sailor)
о/на/в моряке́ (prepositional) "[about/on/in the] sailor" [as a direct object] (e.g. Думаю о моряке: (I) think about the sailor)

Up to ten additional cases are identified by linguists, although today all of them are either incomplete (do not apply to all nouns or do not form full word paradigm with all combinations of gender and number) or degenerate (appear identical to one of the main six cases). The most recognized additional cases are locative (в лесу́, на мосту́, в слеза́х), partitive (ча́ю, са́хару, песку́), and two forms of vocative — old (Го́споди, Бо́же, о́тче) and neo-vocative (Маш, пап, ребя́т). Sometimes, so called count-form (for some countable nouns after numerals) is considered to be a sub-case. See details.
Sanskrit[edit]
Grammatical case was analyzed extensively in Sanskrit. The grammarian Pāṇini identified six semantic roles or kāraka,[17] which by default are related to the following eight Sanskrit cases in order:[18]

Sanskrit cases

Order
Default thematic role
English case
Example with राम


Case 1 प्रथमा
Kartṛ
Nominative
रामः (rāmaḥ), रामौ (rāmau), रामाः (rāmāḥ)


Case 2 द्वितीया
Karman
Accusative
रामम् (rāmam), रामौ (rāmau), रामान् (rāmān)


Case 3 तृतीया
Karaṇa
Instrumental
रामेण (rāmeṇa), रामाभ्याम् (rāmābhyām), रामैः (rāmaiḥ)


Case 4 चतुर्थी
Sampradāna
Dative
रामाय (rāmāya), रामाभ्याम् (rāmābhyām), रामेभ्यः (rāmebhyaḥ)


Case 5 पञचमी
Apādāna
Ablative
रामात् (rāmāt), रामाभ्याम् (rāmābhyām), रामेभ्यः (rāmebhyaḥ)


Case 6 षष्ठी
Sambandha
Genitive
रामस्य (rāmasya), रामयोः (rāmayoḥ), रामाणाम् (rāmāṇām)


Case 7 सप्तमी
Adhikaraṇa
Locative
रामे (rāme), रामयोः (rāmayoḥ), रामेषु (rāmeṣhu)


Case 8 सम्बोधन
Sambodhana
Vocative
हे राम (he rāma), हे रामौ (he rāmau), हे रामाः (he rāmāḥ)


For example, in the following sentence leaf is the agent (kartā, nominative case), tree is the source (apādāna, ablative case), and ground is the locus (adhikaraṇa, locative case). The declensions are reflected in the morphemes -āt, -am, and -au respectively.


vṛkṣ-āt
parṇ-am
bhūm-au
patati


from the tree
a leaf
to the ground
falls


However, the cases may be deployed for other than the default thematic roles. A notable example is the passive construction. In the following sentence, Devadatta is the kartā, but appears in the instrumental case, and rice, the karman, object, is in the nominative case (as subject of the verb). The declensions are reflected in the morphemes -ena and -am.


devadatt-ena
odan-am
pacyati


by Devadatta
the rice
is cooked


Tamil[edit]
The Tamil case system is analyzed in native and missionary grammars as consisting of a finite number of cases.[19][20] The usual treatment of Tamil case (Arden 1942)[21] is one in which there are seven cases: nominative (first case), accusative (second case), instrumental (third), dative (fourth), ablative (fifth), genitive (sixth), and locative (seventh). In traditional analyses, there is always a clear distinction made between post-positional morphemes and case endings. The vocative is sometimes given a place in the case system as an eighth case, but vocative forms do not participate in usual morphophonemic alternations and do not govern the use of any postpositions. Modern grammarians, however, argue that this eight-case classification is coarse and artificial[20] and that Tamil usage is best understood if each suffix or combination of suffixes is seen as marking a separate case.[22]


Tamil
English
Significance
Usual suffixes
Suffixes in Tamil


First case(எழுவாய் வேற்றுமை)
Nominative
Subject of sentence
[Zero]



Second case (செயப்படுபொருள் வேற்றுமை)
Accusative
Object of action
-ai
ஐ


Third case (கருவி/துணை வேற்றுமை)
Instrumental, Social
Means by which action is done (Instrumental), Association, or means by which action is done (Social)
-al, -udan, -kondu
ஆல், உடன், கொண்டு


Fourth case
Dative
Object to whom action is performed, Object for whom action is performed
(u)kku
கு


Fifth case
Ablative of motion from
Motion from an animate/inanimate object
-in
இன்


Sixth case
Genitive
Possessive
athu
அது


Seventh case
Locative
Place in which, On the person of (animate) in the presence of
-kan
கண்


Eighth case (விளி வேற்றுமை)
Vocative
Addressing, calling
e, a



Telugu[edit]
Telugu has eight cases.



Telugu
English
Significance
Usual Suffixes
Transliteration of Suffixes


(I)
Prathamā Vibhakti (ప్రథమా విభక్తి)
Nominative
Subject of sentence
డు, ము, వు, లు
ḍu, mu, vu, lu


(II)
Dvitīyā Vibhakti (ద్వితీయా విభక్తి)
Accusative
Object of action
నిన్, నున్, లన్, కూర్చి, గురించి
nin, nun, lan, kūrchi, gurinchi


(III)
Trutīyā Vibhakti (తృతీయా విభక్తి)
Instrumental, Social
Means by which action is done (Instrumental); Association, or means by which action is done (Social)
చేతన్, చేన్, తోడన్, తోన్
chētan, chēn, tōḍan, tōn


(IV)
Chaturthi Vibhakti (చతుర్థి విభక్తి)
Dative
Object to whom action is performed, object for whom action is performed
కొఱకున్, కై
korakun, kai


(V)
Panchamī Vibhakti (పంచమీ విభక్తి)
Ablative of motion from
Motion from an animate/inanimate object
వలనన్, కంటెన్, పట్టి
valanan, kaṃṭen, paṭṭi


(VI)
Shashthī Vibhakti (షష్ఠీ విభక్తి)
Genitive
Possessive
కిన్, కున్, యొక్క, లోన్, లోపలన్
kin, kun, yokka, lōn, lōpalan


(VII)
Saptamī Vibhakti (సప్తమీ విభక్తి)
Locative
Place in which, On the person of (animate) in the presence of
అందున్, నన్
aṃdun, nan


(VIII)
Sambodhanā Prathamā Vibhakti (సంబోధనా ప్రథమా విభక్తి)
Vocative
Addressing, calling
ఓ, ఓయీ, ఓరీ, ఓసీ
ō, ōī, ōrī, ōsī


Evolution[edit]
As languages evolve, case systems change. In early Ancient Greek, for example, the genitive and ablative cases became combined, giving five cases, rather than the six retained in Latin. In modern Hindi, the Sanskrit cases have been reduced to two: a direct case (for subjects and direct objects) and an oblique case.[23] In English, apart from the pronouns discussed above, case has vanished altogether except for the possessive/non-possessive dichotomy in nouns.
The evolution of the treatment of case relationships can be circular.[4]:pp.167–174 Adpositions can become unstressed and sound like they are an unstressed syllable of a neighboring word. A postposition can thus merge into the stem of a head noun, developing various forms depending on the phonological shape of the stem. Affixes can then be subject to various phonological processes such as assimilation, vowel centering to the schwa, phoneme loss, and fusion, and these processes can reduce or even eliminate the distinctions between cases. Languages can then compensate for the resulting loss of function by creating adpositions, thus coming full circle.
Recent experiments in agent-based modeling have shown how case systems can emerge and evolve in a population of language users.[24] The experiments demonstrate that language users may introduce new case markers to reduce the cognitive effort required for semantic interpretation, hence facilitating communication through language. Case markers then become generalized through analogical reasoning and reuse.
Linguistic typology[edit]
Main article: Morphosyntactic alignment
Languages are categorized into several case systems, based on their morphosyntactic alignment—how they group verb agents and patients into cases:

Nominative–accusative (or simply accusative): The argument (subject) of an intransitive verb is in the same case as the agent (subject) of a transitive verb; this case is then called the nominative case, with the patient (direct object) of a transitive verb being in the accusative case.
Ergative–absolutive (or simply ergative): The argument (subject) of an intransitive verb is in the same case as the patient (direct object) of a transitive verb; this case is then called the absolutive case, with the agent (subject) of a transitive verb being in the ergative case.
Ergative–accusative (or tripartite): The argument (subject) of an intransitive verb is in its own case (the intransitive case), separate from that of the agent (subject) or patient (direct object) of a transitive verb (which is in the ergative case or accusative case, respectively).
Active–stative (or simply active): The argument (subject) of an intransitive verb can be in one of two cases; if the argument is an agent, as in "He ate," then it is in the same case as the agent (subject) of a transitive verb (sometimes called the agentive case), and if it is a patient, as in "He tripped," then it is in the same case as the patient (direct object) of a transitive verb (sometimes called the patientive case).
Trigger: One noun in a sentence is the topic or focus. This noun is in the trigger case, and information elsewhere in the sentence (for example a verb affix in Tagalog) specifies the role of the trigger. The trigger may be identified as the agent, patient, etc. Other nouns may be inflected for case, but the inflections are overloaded; for example, in Tagalog, the subject and object of a verb are both expressed in the genitive case when they are not in the trigger case.

The following are systems that some languages use to mark case instead of, or in addition to, declension:

Positional: Nouns are not inflected for case; the position of a noun in the sentence expresses its case.
Adpositional: Nouns are accompanied by words that mark case.

With a few exceptions, most languages in the Uralic family make extensive use of cases. Finnish has 15 cases according to the traditional understanding (or up to 30 depending on the interpretation).[25] However, only 12 are commonly used in speech (see Finnish noun cases). Estonian has 14 and Hungarian has 18, both with additional archaic cases used for some words.
Some languages have very many cases. For example, Tsez, a Northeast Caucasian language, has 64 cases.
The original version of John Quijada's constructed language Ithkuil has 81 noun cases,[26] and its descendent Ilaksh and Ithkuil after the 2011 revision both have 96 noun cases.[27][28]
The lemma form of words, which is the form chosen by convention as the canonical form of a word, is usually the most unmarked or basic case, which is typically the nominative, trigger, or absolutive case, whichever a language may have.
See also[edit]

Agreement (linguistics)
Case hierarchy
Declension
Differential object marking
Inflection
List of grammatical cases
Phi features
Thematic relation
Verbal case
Voice (grammar)

Notes[edit]



^ The status of the possessive as an affix or a clitic is the subject of debate.[8][9] It differs from the noun inflection of languages such as German, in that the genitive ending may attach to the last word of the phrase. To account for this, the possessive can be analysed, for instance as a clitic construction (an "enclitic postposition"[10]) or as an inflection[11][12] of the last word of a phrase ("edge inflection").[13]



References[edit]


^ "Grammatical Features - Associativity". www.grammaticalfeatures.net. 
^ Clackson 2007, p. 91.
^ The Chambers Dictionary, 11th edition
^ a b c d Blake, Barry J. Case. Cambridge University Press: 2001.
^ Harper, Douglas. "case". Online Etymology Dictionary. 
^ "L. cāsus used to translate Gr. πτῶσις lit. 'falling, fall'. By Aristotle πτῶσις was applied to any derived, inflected, or extended form of the simple ὄνομα or ῥῆμα (i.e. the nominative of nouns, the present indicative of verbs), such as the oblique cases of nouns, the variations of adjectives due to gender and comparison, also the derived adverb (e.g. δικαίως was a πτῶσις of δίκαιος), the other tenses and moods of the verb, including its interrogative form. The grammarians, following the Stoics, restricted πτῶσις to nouns, and included the nominative under the designation". "case". Oxford English Dictionary (3rd ed.). Oxford University Press. September 2005.  (Subscription or UK public library membership required.)
^ Slavic Languages on quickia.com Archived 2009-11-21 at the Wayback Machine.
^ Hudson, Richard (2013). "A cognitive analysis of John's hat". In Börjars, Kersti; Denison, David; Scott, Alan. Morphosyntactic Categories and the Expression of Possession. John Benjamins Publishing Company. pp. 123–148. ISBN 9789027273000. 
^ Börjars, Kersti; Denison, David; Krajewski, Grzegorz; Scott, Alan (2013). "Expression of Possession in English". In Börjars, Kersti; Denison, David; Scott, Alan. Morphosyntactic Categories and the Expression of Possession. John Benjamins Publishing Company. pp. 149–176. ISBN 9789027273000. 
^ Quirk, Randolph; Greenbaum, Sidney; Leech, Geoffrey; Svartvik, Jan (1985). A Comprehensive Grammar of the English Language. Harlow: Longman. p. 328. ISBN 978-0-582-51734-9. [the -s ending is] more appropriately described as an enclitic postposition' 
^ Greenbaum, Sidney (1996). The Oxford English Grammar. Oxford University Press. pp. 109–110. ISBN 0-19-861250-8. In speech the genitive is signalled in singular nouns by an inflection that has the same pronunciation variants as for plural nouns in the common case 
^ Quirk, Randolph; Greenbaum, Sidney; Leech, Geoffrey; Svartik, Jan (1985). A Comprehensive Grammar of the English Language. Longman. p. 319. In writing, the inflection of regular nouns is realized in the singular by apostrophe + s (boy's), and in the regular plural by the apostrophe following the plural s (boys') 
^ Payne, John; Huddleston, Rodney (2002). "Nouns and noun phrases". In Huddleston, Rodney; Pullum, Geoffrey. The Cambridge Grammar of the English Language. Cambridge; New York: Cambridge University Press. pp. 479–481. ISBN 0-521-43146-8. We conclude that both head and phrasal genitives involve case inflection. With head genitives it is always a noun that inflects, while the phrasal genitive can apply to words of most classes. 
^ The grammar of Dionysios Thrax. Translated by Tomas Davidson. St. Loius: Studley. 1874. p. 10. 
^ Frank Beetham, Learning Greek with Plato, Bristol Phoenix Press, 2007.
^ Takahashi, Tarou; et al. (2010). A Japanese Grammar (in Japanese) (4 ed.). Japan: Hitsuji Shobou. p. 27. ISBN 978-4-89476-244-2. 
^ Pieter Cornelis Verhagen, Handbook of oriental studies: India. A history of Sanskrit grammatical literature in Tibet, Volume 2, BRILL, 2001, ISBN 90-04-11882-9, p. 281.
^ W.D. Whitney, Sanskrit Grammar
^ "The Tamil Case System" (PDF). Ccat.sas.upenn.edu. Retrieved 20 November 2014. 
^ a b K. V. Zvelebil (1972). "Dravidian Case-Suffixes: Attempt at a Reconstruction". Journal of the American Oriental Society. 92 (2): 272–276. doi:10.2307/600654. JSTOR 600654. 
^ Arden, A. H. 1942, repr. 1969. A Progressive Grammar of the Tamil Language. Madras: Christian Literature Society.
^ Harold F. Schiffman (June 1998). "Standardization or restandardization: The case for "Standard" Spoken Tamil". Language in Society. 27 (3): 359–385. doi:10.1017/S0047404598003030. 
^ R. S. McGregor, Outline of Hindi Grammar, Oxford University Press, 1972.
^ Remi van Trijp, "The Evolution of Case Systems for Marking Event Structure Archived 2013-06-18 at the Wayback Machine.". In: Steels, Luc (Ed.), Experiments in Cultural Language Evolution, Amsterdam: John Benjamins, 2012, p. 169-205.
^ "Finnish Grammar – Adverbial cases". Users.jyu.fi. Retrieved 15 September 2014. 
^ "A Philosophical Grammar of Ithkuil, a Constructed Language – Chapter 4: Case Morphology". Ithkuil.net. Archived from the original on June 8, 2009. Retrieved 15 September 2014. 
^ "Chapter 4". Web.archive.org. Archived from the original on March 12, 2009. Retrieved 15 September 2014. 
^ "A Grammar of the Ithkuil Language – Chapter 4: Case Morphology". Ithkuil.net. Retrieved 15 September 2014. 


General references[edit]


Clackson, James (2007). Indo-European linguistics: an introduction. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 9781139467346. 
Ivan G. Iliev (2007) On the Nature of Grammatical Case ... (Case and Vocativeness)



Iliev, Iv. The Russian Genitive of Negation and Its Japanese Counterpart. International Journal of Russian Stidies. 1, 2018 (In Print)

External links[edit]

Grammatical Features Inventory – DOI: 10.15126/SMG.18/1.04
World Atlas of Language Structures Online

Chapter 28: Case Syncretism
Chapter 49: Number of Cases
Chapter 50: Asymmetrical Case Marking
Chapter 51: Position of Case Affixes
Chapter 98: Alignment of Case Marking of Full Noun Phrases
Chapter 99: Alignment of Case Marking of Pronouns









v
t
e


Grammatical cases






List of cases
Declension
Morphosyntactic alignment










Cases







Morphosyntactic alignment



Absolutive
Accusative
Direct
Ergative
Intransitive
Nominative
Oblique
Partitive
Pegative





Location, time, direction



Ablative
Addirective
Adelative
Adessive
Allative
Antessive
Apudessive
Approximative
Delative
Distantitive
Distributive (–temporal)
Egressive
Elative
Illative
Inelative
Inessive
Initiative
Intrative
Lative
Locative
Medial
Perlative
Pertingent
Postdirective
Postelative
Postessive
Prolative
Prosecutive
Proximative
Separative
Subdirective
Subelative
Subessive
Sublative
Superdirective
Superelative
Superessive
Superlative
Temporal
Terminative





Possession, companion, instrument



Abessive
Associative
Caritive
Comitative
Dative
Genitive
Instrumental (–comitative)
Ornative
Possessed
Possessive
Privative
Sociative





State, manner



Adverbial
Comparative
Equative
Essive (–formal, –modal)
Exessive
Formal
Identical
Instructive
Modal
Multiplicative
Orientative
Revertive
Semblative
Translative





Cause, purpose



Aversive
Benefactive
Causal (–final)
Evitative
Final





Other



Dubitive
Postpositional
Prepositional
Vocative
















Declensions






Czech
Archaic Dutch
English (Middle English, Old English)
Finnish
German (Old High German)
Gothic
Irish
Latin
Latvian
Lithuanian
Serbo-Croatian
Slovak














						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Grammatical_case&oldid=817333672"					Categories: Grammatical casesHidden categories: Articles containing Ancient Greek-language textWebarchive template wayback linksCS1 Japanese-language sources (ja)Articles containing Latin-language textArticles containing Russian-language textAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from October 2013Articles with limited geographic scope from April 2016Articles containing Belarusian-language textArticles containing German-language textArticles containing Greek-language textArticles containing Japanese-language textArticles containing Korean-language textArticles containing Latvian-language textArticles containing Lithuanian-language textArticles containing Polish-language textArticles containing Hungarian-language textArticles containing Romanian-language textArticles containing Sanskrit-language text