This article is about vegetation and landscape. For other uses, see Grassland (disambiguation).
"Greensward" redirects here. For park plan, see Central Park.






This article may be in need of reorganization to comply with Wikipedia's layout guidelines. Please help by editing the article to make improvements to the overall structure. (March 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)







Grassland in Magallanes Region, Patagonia, Chile






A grassland in the Philippines.






An Inner Mongolian grassland in the People's Republic of China.


Grasslands are areas where the vegetation is dominated by grasses (Poaceae), however sedge (Cyperaceae) and rush (Juncaceae) families can also be found. Grasslands occur naturally on all continents except Antarctica. Grasslands are found in most ecoregions of the Earth. For example, there are five terrestrial ecoregion classifications (subdivisions) of the temperate grasslands, savannas, and shrublands biome (ecosystem), which is one of eight terrestrial ecozones of the Earth's surface.



Contents


1 Vegetation
2 Evolution
3 Climates
4 Biodiversity and conservation
5 Human impact and economic importance
6 Types of grasslands

6.1 Schimper (1898)
6.2 Ellenberg and Mueller-Dombois (1967)
6.3 Laycock (1979)
6.4 Other

6.4.1 Tropical and subtropical
6.4.2 Temperate
6.4.3 Flooded
6.4.4 Montane
6.4.5 Tundra
6.4.6 Desert and xeric




7 Animals
8 See also
9 Temperate grasslands, savannas, and shrublands ecoregions
10 Tropical and subtropical grasslands, savannas, and shrublands ecoregions
11 References
12 Further reading



Vegetation[edit]
Grassland vegetation can vary in height from very short, as in chalk grassland, to quite tall, as in the case of North American tallgrass prairie, South American grasslands and African savanna.




The Konza tallgrass prairie in the Flint Hills of northeastern Kansas.


Woody plants, shrubs or trees, may occur on some grasslands – forming savannas, scrubby grassland or semi-wooded grassland, such as the African savannas or the Iberian dehesa.[1]
As flowering plants and trees, grasses grow in great concentrations in climates where annual rainfall ranges between 500 and 900 mm (20 and 35 in).[2] The root systems of perennial grasses and forbs form complex mats that hold the soil in place.
Evolution[edit]
Graminoids are among the most versatile life forms. They became widespread toward the end of the Cretaceous period, and fossilized dinosaur feces (coprolites) have been found containing phytoliths of a variety of grasses that include grasses that are related to modern rice and bamboo.[3]
The appearance of mountains in the western United States during the Miocene and Pliocene epochs, a period of some 25 million years, created a continental climate favorable to the evolution of grasslands. Existing forest biomes declined, and grasslands became much more widespread. Following the Pleistocene ice ages, grasslands expanded in range in the hotter, drier climates, and began to become the dominant land feature worldwide.[1]
Climates[edit]
Grasslands often occur in areas with annual precipitation between 600 mm (24 in) and 1,500 mm (59 in) and average mean annual temperatures ranges from −5 and 20 °C (Woodward et al. 2004). However, some grasslands occur in colder (−20 °C) and hotter (30 °C) climatic conditions.[4] Grassland can exist in habitats that are frequently disturbed by grazing or fire, as such disturbance prevents the encroachment of woody species. Species richness is particularly high in grasslands of low soil fertility such as serpentine barrens and calcareous grasslands, where woody encroachment is prevented as low nutrient levels in the soil may inhibit the growth of forest and shrub species.
Biodiversity and conservation[edit]






This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (September 2012) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Grasslands dominated by unsown wild-plant communities ("unimproved grasslands") can be called either natural or "semi-natural" habitat. The majority of grasslands in temperate climates are "semi-natural". Although their plant communities are natural, their maintenance depends upon anthropogenic activities such as low-intensity farming, which maintains these grasslands through grazing and cutting regimes. These grasslands contain many species of wild plants, including grasses, sedges, rushes, and herbs; 25 or more species per square meter is not unusual.[citation needed] Chalk downlands in England can support over 40 species per square meter. In many parts of the world, few examples have escaped agricultural improvement (fertilizing, weed killing, plowing or re-seeding). For example, original North American prairie grasslands or lowland wildflower meadows in the UK are now rare and their associated wild flora equally threatened. Associated with the wild-plant diversity of the "unimproved" grasslands is usually a rich invertebrate fauna; there are also many species of birds that are grassland "specialists", such as the snipe and the great bustard. Agriculturally improved grasslands, which dominate modern intensive agricultural landscapes, are usually poor in wild plant species due to the original diversity of plants having been destroyed by cultivation, the original wild-plant communities having been replaced by sown monocultures of cultivated varieties of grasses and clovers, such as perennial ryegrass and white clover. In many parts of the world, "unimproved" grasslands are one of the most threatened types of habitat, and a target for acquisition by wildlife conservation groups or for special grants to landowners who are encouraged to manage them appropriately.
Human impact and economic importance[edit]






This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (September 2012) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)







Grassland in Cantabria, northern Spain.






A restored grassland ecosystem at Morton Arboretum in Illinois.



Grassland vegetation often remains dominant in a particular area usually due to grazing, cutting, or natural or man-made fires, all discouraging colonization by and survival of tree and shrub seedlings. Some of the world's largest expanses of grassland are found in the African savanna, and these are maintained by wild herbivores as well as by nomadic pastoralists and their cattle, sheep or goats.
Grasslands may occur naturally or as the result of human activity. Grasslands created and maintained by human activity are called anthropogenic grasslands. Hunting peoples around the world often set regular fires to maintain and extend grasslands, and prevent fire-intolerant trees and shrubs from taking hold. The tallgrass prairies in the U.S. Midwest may have been extended eastward into Illinois, Indiana, and Ohio by human agency. Much grassland in northwest Europe developed after the Neolithic Period when people gradually cleared the forest to create areas for raising their livestock.
The professional study of grasslands falls under the category of rangeland management, which focuses on ecosystem services associated with the grass-dominated arid and semi-arid rangelands of the world. Rangelands account for an estimated 70% of the earth's landmass; thus, many cultures including those of the United States are indebted to the economics that the world's grasslands have to offer, from producing grazing animals, tourism, ecosystems services such as clean water and air, and energy extraction.
Types of grasslands[edit]
Schimper (1898)[edit]
Grassland types by Schimper (1898, 1903):[5]

meadow (hygrophilous or tropophilous grassland)
steppe (xerophilous grassland)
savannah (xerophilous grassland containing isolated trees)

Ellenberg and Mueller-Dombois (1967)[edit]
Grassland types by Ellenberg and Mueller-Dombois (1967):[6]

Formation-class V. Terrestrial herbaceous communities

A. Savannas and related grasslands (tropical or subtropical grasslands and parklands)
B. Steppes and related grasslands (e.g. North American "prairies" etc.)
C. Meadows, pastures or related grasslands
D. Sedge swamps and flushes
E. Herbaceous and half-woody salt swamps
F. Forb vegetation



Laycock (1979)[edit]
Grassland types by Laycock (1979):[7]

(1) tallgrass (true) prairie;
(2) shortgrass prairie;
(3) mixed-grass prairie;
(4) shrub steppe;
(5) annual grassland;
(6) desert (arid) grassland;
(7) high mountain grassland.

Other[edit]






This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (September 2012) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Tropical and subtropical[edit]
These grasslands are classified with tropical and subtropical savannas and shrublands as the tropical and subtropical grasslands, savannas, and shrublands biome. Notable tropical and subtropical grasslands include the Llanos grasslands of South America.
Temperate[edit]
Mid-latitude grasslands, including the prairie and Pacific grasslands of North America, the Pampas of Argentina, Brazil and Uruguay, calcareous downland, and the steppes of Europe. They are classified with temperate savannas and shrublands as the temperate grasslands, savannas, and shrublands biome. Temperate grasslands are the home to many large herbivores, such as bison, gazelles, zebras, rhinoceroses, and wild horses. Carnivores like lions, wolves and cheetahs and leopards are also found in temperate grasslands. Other animals of this region include: deer, prairie dogs, mice, jack rabbits, skunks, coyotes, snakes, fox, owls, badgers, blackbirds (both Old and New World varieties), grasshoppers, meadowlarks, sparrows, quails, hawks and hyenas.




Negri-Nepote temperate grasslands in New Jersey


Flooded[edit]
Grasslands that are flooded seasonally or year-round, like the Everglades of Florida, the Pantanal of Brazil, Bolivia and Paraguay or the Esteros del Ibera in Argentina, are classified with flooded savannas as the flooded grasslands and savannas biome and occur mostly in the tropics and subtropics.
Watermeadows are grasslands that are deliberately flooded for short periods.
Montane[edit]




Grassland in the Antelope Valley, California.


High-altitude grasslands located on high mountain ranges around the world, like the Páramo of the Andes Mountains. They are part of the montane grasslands and shrublands biome and also constitute tundra.
Tundra[edit]
Similar to montane grasslands, polar Arctic tundra can have grasses, but high soil moisture means that few tundras are grass-dominated today. However, during the Pleistocene ice ages, a polar grassland known as steppe-tundra occupied large areas of the Northern Hemisphere. These are in the tundra biome.
Desert and xeric[edit]
Also called desert grasslands, this is composed of sparse grassland ecoregions located in the deserts and xeric shrublands biome.
Animals[edit]
Mites, insect larvae, nematodes and earthworms inhabit deep soil, which can reach 6 metres (20 ft) underground in undisturbed grasslands on the richest soils of the world. These invertebrates, along with symbiotic fungi, extend the root systems, break apart hard soil, enrich it with urea and other natural fertilizers, trap minerals and water and promote growth. Some types of fungi make the plants more resistant to insect and microbial attacks.
Grassland in all its form supports a vast variety of mammals, reptiles, birds, and insects. Typical large mammals include the blue wildebeest, American bison, giant anteater and Przewalski's horse.
While grasslands in general support diverse wildlife, given the lack of hiding places for predators, the African savanna regions support a much greater diversity in wildlife than do temperate grasslands.[8]
There is evidence for grassland being much the product of animal behaviour and movement;[9] some examples include migratory herds of antelope trampling vegetation and African bush elephants eating acacia saplings before the plant has a chance to grow into a mature tree.
See also[edit]


Ecology portal
Environment portal





Wikimedia Commons has media related to Grasslands.




Appalachian bald
Biomes
Bunch grass
Bushveld
Cerrado
Coastal plain
Dambo
Desert
Field
Flood-meadow
Flooded grasslands and savannas
Llanos
Lowland semi-natural grassland
Meadow
Pacific grasslands
Pampa
Pasture
Plain
Plateau
Prairie
Savanna
Sods
Steppe
Taiga
Tundra
Veld
Water-meadow
Wet meadow


Temperate grasslands, savannas, and shrublands ecoregions[edit]

The grassland Ecoregions of the Temperate grasslands, savannas, and shrublands Biome are:




Afrotropic Temperate grasslands, savannas, and shrublands


v
t
e






Al Hajar Al Gharbi montane woodlands
Oman


Amsterdam and Saint-Paul Islands temperate grasslands
Amsterdam Island, Saint-Paul Island


Tristan da Cunha-Gough Islands shrub and grasslands
Tristan da Cunha, Gough Island





Australasia Temperate grasslands, savannas, and shrublands


v
t
e






Canterbury-Otago tussock grasslands
New Zealand


Eastern Australia mulga shrublands
Australia


Southeast Australia temperate savanna
Australia





Nearctic Temperate grasslands, savannas, and shrublands


v
t
e






California Central Valley grasslands
United States


Canadian aspen forests and parklands
Canada, United States


Central and Southern mixed grasslands
United States


Central forest-grasslands transition
United States


Central tall grasslands
United States


Columbia Plateau
United States


Edwards Plateau savanna
United States


Flint Hills tall grasslands
United States


Montana valley and foothill grasslands
United States


Nebraska Sand Hills mixed grasslands
United States


Northern mixed grasslands
Canada, United States


Northern short grasslands
Canada, United States


Northern tall grasslands
Canada, United States


Palouse grasslands
United States


Texas blackland prairies
United States


Western short grasslands
United States





Neotropic Temperate grasslands, savannas, and shrublands


v
t
e






Argentine Espinal
Argentina


Argentine Monte
Argentina


Humid Pampas
Argentina


Patagonian grasslands
Argentina, Chile


Patagonian steppe
Argentina, Chile


Semi-arid Pampas
Argentina





Palearctic temperate grasslands, savannas, and shrublands


v
t
e






Alai-Western Tian Shan steppe
Kazakhstan, Tajikistan, Uzbekistan


Altai steppe and semi-desert
Kazakhstan


Central Anatolian steppe
Turkey


Daurian forest steppe
China, Mongolia, Russia


Eastern Anatolian montane steppe
Armenia, Iran, Turkey


Emin Valley steppe
China, Kazakhstan


Faroe Islands boreal grasslands
Faroe Islands, Denmark


Gissaro-Alai open woodlands
Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Uzbekistan


Kazakh forest steppe
Kazakhstan, Russia


Kazakh steppe
Kazakhstan, Russia


Kazakh Uplands
Kazakhstan


Middle East steppe
Iraq, Syria


Mongolian-Manchurian grassland
China, Mongolia, Russia


Pontic steppe
Kazakhstan, Moldova, Romania, Russia, Ukraine, Bulgaria


Sayan Intermontane steppe
Russia


Selenge-Orkhon forest steppe
Mongolia, Russia


South Siberian forest steppe
Russia


Tian Shan foothill arid steppe
China, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan


Tropical and subtropical grasslands, savannas, and shrublands ecoregions[edit]



Afrotropic Tropical and subtropical grasslands, savannas, and shrublands


v
t
e






Angolan Miombo woodlands
Angola


Angolan Mopane woodlands
Angola, Namibia


Ascension scrub and grasslands
Ascension Island


Central Zambezian Miombo woodlands
Angola, Burundi, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Malawi, Tanzania, Zambia


East Sudanian savanna
Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Eritrea, Ethiopia South Sudan, Sudan, Uganda


Eastern Miombo woodlands
Mozambique, Tanzania


Guinean forest-savanna mosaic
Benin, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, Guinea Bissau, Ivory Coast, Nigeria, Senegal, Togo


Itigi-Sumbu thicket
Tanzania, Zambia


Kalahari Acacia-Baikiaea woodlands
Botswana, Namibia, South Africa, Zimbabwe


Mandara Plateau mosaic
Cameroon, Nigeria


Northern Acacia-Commiphora bushlands and thickets
Ethiopia, Kenya, South Sudan, Uganda


Northern Congolian forest-savanna mosaic
Cameroon, Central African Republic, Democratic Republic of the Congo, South Sudan, Uganda


Sahelian Acacia savanna
Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Chad, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Mali, Mauritania, Niger, Nigeria, Senegal, South Sudan, Sudan


Serengeti
Kenya, Tanzania


Somali Acacia-Commiphora bushlands and thickets
Eritrea, Ethiopia, Kenya, Somalia


Southern Acacia-Commiphora bushlands and thickets
Kenya, Tanzania


Southern Africa bushveld
Botswana, South Africa, Zimbabwe


Southern Congolian forest-savanna mosaic
Angola, Democratic Republic of the Congo


Southern Miombo woodlands
Malawi, Mozambique, Zambia, Zimbabwe


Saint Helena scrub and woodlands
Saint Helena


Victoria Basin forest-savanna mosaic
Burundi, Ethiopia, Kenya, Rwanda, South Sudan, Tanzania, Uganda


West Sudanian savanna
Benin, Burkina Faso, Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, Ivory Coast, Niger, Nigeria, Senegal


Western Congolian forest-savanna mosaic
Angola, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Republic of the Congo


Western Zambezian grasslands
Angola, Zambia


Zambezian and Mopane woodlands
Botswana, Malawi, Mozambique, Namibia, South Africa, Swaziland, Zambia, Zimbabwe


Zambezian Baikiaea woodlands
Angola, Botswana, Namibia, Zambia, Zimbabwe





Australasia Tropical and subtropical grasslands, savannas, and shrublands


v
t
e






Arnhem Land tropical savanna
Australia


Brigalow tropical savanna
Australia


Cape York tropical savanna
Australia


Carpentaria tropical savanna
Australia


Einasleigh upland savanna
Australia


Kimberley tropical savanna
Australia


Mitchell grass downs
Australia


Trans Fly savanna and grasslands
Indonesia, Papua New Guinea


Victoria Plains tropical savanna
Australia





Indomalaya Tropical and subtropical grasslands, savannas, and shrublands


v
t
e






Terai-Duar savanna and grasslands
Bhutan, India, Nepal





Nearctic Tropical and subtropical grasslands, savannas, and shrublands


v
t
e






Western Gulf coastal grasslands
Mexico, United States





Neotropic Tropical and subtropical grasslands, savannas, and shrublands


v
t
e






Aripo Savannas
Trinidad


Beni savanna
Bolivia


Campos rupestres
Brazil


Cerrado
Bolivia, Brazil, Paraguay


Clipperton Island shrub and grasslands
Clipperton Island is an overseas territory of France


Córdoba montane savanna
Argentina


Guianan savanna
Brazil, Guyana, Venezuela


Gran Chaco
Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay


Los Llanos
Venezuela, Colombia


Uruguayan savanna
Argentina, Brazil, Uruguay





Oceania Tropical and subtropical grasslands, savannas, and shrublands


v
t
e






Hawaiian tropical high shrublands
Hawaiʻi


Hawaiian tropical low shrublands
Hawaiʻi


Northwestern Hawaii scrub
Hawaiʻi


References[edit]


^ a b University of California Museum of Paleontology Grasslands website. Ucmp.berkeley.edu. Retrieved on 2011-12-01.
^ NASA Earth Observatory webpage. Earthobservatory.nasa.gov. Retrieved on 2011-12-01.
^ Piperno, D. R.; Sues, HD (2005). "Dinosaurs Dined on Grass". Science. 310 (5751): 1126–8. doi:10.1126/science.1121020. PMID 16293745. 
^ EO Experiments: Grassland Biome. Earthobservatory.nasa.gov. Retrieved on 2011-12-01.
^ Schimper, A. F. W. 1898. Pflanzen-Geographie auf physiologischer Grundlage. Fisher, Jena. 876 pp. English translation, 1903, [1].
^ Ellenberg, H. & D. Mueller-Dombois. 1967. Tentative physiognomic-ecological classification of plant formations of the Earth [based on a discussion draft of the UNESCO working group on vegetation classification and mapping.] Berichte des Geobotanischen Institutes der Eidg. Techn. Hochschule, Stiftung Rübel, Zürich 37 (1965-1966): 21—55, [2].
^ Laycock, W.A. 1979. Introduction, pp. 1-2, in: French. N R. (ed.). Perspectives in Grassland Ecology. Springer, New York, 204 pp., [3].
^ University of California – Santa Barbara Temperate Grasslands website. Kids.nceas.ucsb.edu. Retrieved on 2011-12-01.
^ How can grazing heal land?. ManagingWholes.com. Retrieved on 2011-12-01.


Further reading[edit]

Courtwright, Julie. 2011. Prairie Fire: A Great Plains History. University Press of Kansas. 274 pp.
French, N. R. (ed.). 1979. Perspectives in Grassland Ecology. Springer, New York, 204 pp., [4].
Suttie, J. M.; Reynolds, S. G.; C. Batello. 2005. Grasslands of the world. Rome: FAO. [5].







v
t
e


Biogeographic regionalisations



Biomes




Terrestrial
biomes




Polar/montane



Tundra
Taiga
Montane grasslands and shrublands





Temperate



Coniferous forests
Broadleaf and mixed forests
Deciduous forests
Grasslands, savannas, and shrublands





Tropical and
subtropical



Coniferous forests
Moist broadleaf forests
Dry broadleaf forests
Grasslands, savannas, and shrublands





Dry



Mediterranean forests, woodlands, and scrub
Deserts and xeric shrublands





Wet



Flooded grasslands and savannas
Riparian
Wetland








Aquatic
biomes



Pond
Littoral
Intertidal
Mangroves
Kelp forests
Coral reefs
Neritic zone
Pelagic zone
Benthic zone
Hydrothermal vents
Cold seeps
Demersal zone





Other biomes



Endolithic zone








Biogeographic
realms




Terrestrial



Afrotropical
Antarctic
Australasian
Nearctic
Palearctic
Indomalayan
Neotropical
Oceanian





Marine



Arctic
Temperate Northern Pacific
Tropical Atlantic
Western Indo-Pacific
Central Indo-Pacific
Tropical Eastern Pacific





Subdivisions



Biogeographic provinces
Bioregions
Ecoregions

List of ecoregions
Global 200 ecoregions










See also



Ecological land classification
Floristic kingdoms
Vegetation classifications
Zoogeographic regions












v
t
e


Botany




History of botany



Subdisciplines



Plant systematics
Ethnobotany
Paleobotany
Plant anatomy
Plant ecology
Phytogeography

Geobotany
Flora


Phytochemistry
Plant pathology
Bryology
Phycology
Floristics
Dendrology





Plant groups



Algae
Archaeplastida
Bryophyte
Non-vascular plants
Vascular plants
Spermatophytes
Pteridophyte
Gymnosperm
Angiosperm






Plant morphology
(glossary)





Plant cells



Cell wall
Phragmoplast
Plastid
Plasmodesma
Vacuole





Tissues



Meristem
Vascular tissue

Vascular bundle


Ground tissue

Mesophyll


Cork
Wood
Storage organs





Vegetative



Root
Rhizoid
Bulb
Rhizome
Shoot

Stem
Leaf

Petiole
Cataphyll


Bud
Sessility







Reproductive
(Flower)



Flower development
Inflorescence

Umbel
Raceme
Bract
Pedicellate


Flower

Whorl
Floral symmetry
Floral diagram
Floral formula


Receptacle
Hypanthium (Floral cup)
Perianth

Tepal
Petal
Sepal


Sporophyll
Gynoecium

Ovary

Ovule


Stigma


Archegonium
Androecium

Stamen
Staminode
Pollen
Tapetum


Gynandrium
Gametophyte
Sporophyte
Plant embryo
Fruit

Fruit anatomy
Berry
Capsule
Seed

Seed dispersal
Endosperm









Surface structures



Epicuticular wax
Plant cuticle
Epidermis
Stoma
Nectary
Trichome
Prickle











Plant physiology
Materials






Nutrition
Photosynthesis

Chlorophyll


Plant hormone
Transpiration
Turgor pressure
Bulk flow
Aleurone
Phytomelanin
Sugar
Sap
Starch
Cellulose





Plant growth and habit



Secondary growth
Woody plants
Herbaceous plants
Habit

Vines

Lianas


Shrubs

Subshrubs


Trees
Succulent plants







Reproduction


Evolution
Ecology






Alternation of generations
Sporangium

Spore
Microsporangia

Microspore


Megasporangium

Megaspore




Pollination

Pollinators
Pollen tube


Double fertilization
Germination
Evolutionary development
Evolutionary history

timeline


Hardiness zone





Plant taxonomy



History of plant systematics
Herbarium
Biological classification
Botanical nomenclature

Botanical name
Correct name
Author citation
International Code of Nomenclature for algae, fungi, and plants (ICN)
- for Cultivated Plants (ICNCP)


Taxonomic rank
International Association for Plant Taxonomy (IAPT)
Plant taxonomy systems
Cultivated plant taxonomy

Citrus taxonomy
cultigen

cultivar
Group
grex









Practice



Agronomy
Floriculture
Forestry
Horticulture








Lists
Related topics






Botanical terms
Botanists

by author abbreviation


Botanical expedition








Category
Commons
Portal
WikiProject












v
t
e


Phytogeography: Vegetation classification



Physiognomy



Forests, woodlands, arboretum
Shrublands, scrubs, thickets, fruticetum
Dwarf-shrubland, subshrublands, dwarf-scrubs, suffruticetum
Herbaceous communities, grasslands, steppes, prairies, herbetum
Savannas, parklands
Scarcely vegetated areas, desert vegetation





Latitude



Tropical
Subtropical
Temperate
Subpolar
Polar





Climatic
regime



Pluvial, rainy, ombrophilous
Cloudy
Seasonal
Drought





Altitude



Montane
Submontane
Lowland
Coastal





Leaves



Loss of leaves

Deciduous, caducifolious
Semi-deciduous, semicaducifolious
Evergreen, perennifolious


Leaf hardness

Sclerophyll, stiff leaves
Orthophyll, hyptiophyll leaves


Leaf form

Aciculifolious, needle-leaved
Latifolious, broad-leaved







Substrate



Terrestrial vegetation
Aquatic vegetation

Riparian
Mangrove
Swampy







See also



Biogeographic realms
Biomes
Floristic kingdoms
Plant habits
Plant life-forms
Vegetation










Authority control



NDL: 01025306











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Grassland&oldid=817790236"					Categories: GrasslandsGrassesPoaceaeEcoregionsAgricultural landPlainsHidden categories: Wikipedia articles needing reorganization from March 2016Articles needing additional references from September 2012All articles needing additional referencesAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from September 2007