"North American football" redirects here. For the association football governing body in North America, see CONCACAF.




Diagram of an American football field. Numbers on the field indicate the yards to the nearest end zone






Diagram of a Canadian football field, wider and longer than the American field


Gridiron football,[1] also known as North American football[2] or simply football, is a football sport primarily played in the United States and Canada. American football, which uses 11-player teams, is the form played in the United States and the best known form worldwide, while Canadian football, featuring 12-player teams, predominates in Canada. Other derivative varieties include indoor football, football for smaller teams (most commonly eight players), and informal games such as touch and flag football. Football is played at professional, collegiate, semi-professional, and amateur levels.
The sport originated in the 19th century out of older games related to modern rugby football and soccer (association football). American and Canadian football developed alongside each other and were originally more distinct before Canadian teams adopted features of the American game.[3] Both varieties are distinguished from other football sports by their use of hard plastic helmets and shoulder pads, the forward pass, the system of downs, a number of unique rules and positions, and a distinctive brown leather ball in the shape of a prolate spheroid with pointed ends.
The international governing body for the sport is the International Federation of American Football (IFAF); although the organization plays all of its international competitions under American rules, it uses a definition of the game that is broad enough that it includes Canadian football under its umbrella, and Football Canada (the governing body for Canadian football) is an IFAF member.



Contents


1 Terminology
2 History
3 Versions
4 Professional leagues
5 Play of the game
6 See also
7 References
8 Bibliography



Terminology[edit]




1904 diagram of an American football field (1904). In this period lines were painted along the length of the field as well as the width, making a checkerboard pattern


The sport is typically known as simply "football" in the countries where it originated, regardless of the specific variety.[4] Various sources use the term "North American football" when discussing the American and Canadian games together.[5][6][7][8] It is also sometimes known as "gridiron football".[1] This name originates with the sport's characteristic playing field, which is marked by a series of parallel lines along the width of the field in a pattern resembling a cooking gridiron.[9][10] However, "gridiron football", or "gridiron", usually refers to American football specifically,[11][12] sometimes in distinction from Canadian football.[13][14] "Gridiron" is the usual name for American football in Australia[15] and New Zealand.[16] Some sources, including the International Federation of American Football (IFAF), use "American football" inclusive of Canadian football and other varieties.[17]
History[edit]
The sport developed from informal games played in North America during the 19th century. Early games had a variety of local rules and were generally similar to modern rugby union and soccer. By the 1860s, teams from universities were playing each other, leading to more standardized rules and the creation of college football. While several American schools adopted rules based on the soccer rules of the British Football Association, Harvard University held to its traditional "carrying game". Meanwhile, McGill University in Montreal used rules based on rugby union. In 1874, Harvard and McGill University in Montreal organized two games using each others' rules. Harvard took a liking to McGill's rugby-style rules, and subsequently played several other U.S. colleges over the next several years.[18]
American football teams and organizations subsequently adopted new rules which distinguished the game from rugby.[19] Among the most consequential changes was the adoption of the forward pass, which allows the quarterback to throw the ball forward over the line of scrimmage to a receiver.[20] Canadian football remained akin to rugby for decades, though a progressive faction of players, chiefly based in the western provinces, demanded changes to the game based on the innovations in American football. Over the years, the sport adopted more Americanized rules, though it retained some of its historical features, including a 110-yard field, 12-player teams, and three downs instead of four.[3]
Versions[edit]

American football is the most common and widely known of these sports. It is played with eleven players to a side, four downs and a 100-yard field. The major professional league, the National Football League (NFL), has its own rule book. College football programs generally play under the code defined in the NCAA Football Rules and Interpretations. High schools generally follow the rules and interpretations published by the National Federation of High School Associations (NFHS), although some states follow the NCAA code for high school play. Youth games (below high school age) generally follow NFHS code with modifications. Adult semi-pro, alternative and minor professional, amateur, touch, flag, etc. may follow any one of these codes or use their own rules. While the vast majority of the game is the same among these three codes, subtle variations in rules can lead to large difference in play. Many of the differences are in penalty enforcement and the definitions of fouls.





Canadian Football League field



Canadian football is played almost exclusively in Canada. It was originally more closely related to rugby until the Burnside rules were adopted. The game is played on a 110-yard field and has three downs and twelve players to a side. The Canadian game also features a one-point "single" (formally called a "rouge") for a ball kicked into the end zone and not returned by the receiving team. Like the American game, the Canadian Football League and Canadian Interuniversity Sport both have their own rulebooks for the game, although there are generally fewer differences than between their American counterparts.
Nine-man football, eight-man football and six-man football are varieties of gridiron football played with fewer players. They are played with four downs (often with a 15-yard requirement for a new set of downs, as opposed to 10 in other codes), fewer offensive linemen, and an 80-yard field. These games are generally based on the high school rulebooks, which have an addendum devoted to the play of these codes.
Indoor football is played with special rules to accommodate smaller indoor facilities. It is played on a 50-yard field with, usually, eight players to a side. Prototype games were played in 1902 and 1932, both of which used the shortened field but followed the outdoor standard 11 to a side. However, indoor football did not gain popularity until James F. Foster's proprietary version, arena football, debuted in 1986, and set most of the standards for indoor leagues today. As almost all indoor leagues are for-profit professional leagues, each league has its own proprietary code.
Touch football, flag football and backyard football are informal varieties of the game, played primarily at an amateur and recreational level. No specific rulebooks are universally recognized for these variants, where house rules usually apply.

Professional leagues[edit]


League
Sport
Year
founded
Teams
Revenue
US$ (bn)
Average
attendance
Average
salary


National Football League
American football
1920
32
$9.0
7004676040000000000♠67,604
$1,900,000


Canadian Football League
Canadian football
1958
9
$0.2
7004270050000000000♠27,005
$80,000


Arena Football League
Arena football
1987
5

9,248
$15,000


Play of the game[edit]
Main article: List of gridiron football rules




The football used in North American football has a distinct pointed shape, with a brown color and prominent laces to aid in throwing


This is a minimal description of the game in general, with elements common to all or almost all variants of the game. For more specific rules, see each code's individual articles.
Prior to the start of a game, a coin toss determines which team will kick off the ball to their opponent. Each team lines up on opposite halves of the field, with a minimum ten yards of space between them for the kickoff. The team receiving the ball can make a fair catch (which stops the play immediately), catch the ball and run it back until the ball carrier is tackled, or, if the ball is kicked out of bounds, let the ball go dead on its own (the last case usually happens when the ball is kicked all the way into or through the opponent's end zone, resulting in a touchback and the ball being brought several yards out of the end zone to begin play). A kicking team can, under special circumstances, attempt to recover its own kick, but the rules of the game make it very difficult to do so reliably, and so this tactic is usually only used as a surprise or desperation maneuver.
At this point, play from scrimmage begins. The team in possession of the ball is on offense and the opponent is on defense. The offense is given a set amount of time (up to forty seconds, depending on the governing body), during which the teams can set up a play in a huddle and freely substitute players to set into a formation, in which the offense must remain perfectly still for at least one second (the formation requirement does not apply to Canadian football). At least half of the players (seven in standard American and Canadian football, four in standard indoor ball) on the offense must line up on the line of scrimmage in this formation, including the snapper, who handles the ball before play commences; the rest can (and almost always do) line up behind the line. Neither the offense nor the defense can cross the line of scrimmage before the play commences. Once the formation is set, the snapper snaps the ball to one of the players behind him. (A snapper must snap the ball within 20 to 25 seconds of the official setting the ball back into position after the previous play, and a play clock is kept to enforce the measure.) Once the ball is snapped, the play has commenced, and the offense's goal is to continue advancing the ball toward their opponent's end zone. This can be done either by running with the ball or by a rule unique to football known as the forward pass. In a forward pass, a player from behind the line of scrimmage throws the ball to an eligible receiver (another back or one player on each end of the line), who must catch the ball before it touches the ground. The play stops when a player with the ball touches any part of his body other than hand or foot to the ground, runs out of the boundaries of the field, is obstructed from making further forward progress, or a forward pass hits the ground without being caught (in the last case, the ball returns to the spot it was snapped). To stop play, players on defense are allowed to tackle the ball carrier at any time the ball is in play, provided they do not grab the face mask of the helmet or make helmet-to-helmet contact when doing so. At any time, the player with the ball can attempt a backward, or lateral, pass to any other player in order to keep the ball in play; this is generally rare. Any player on defense can, at any time, attempt to intercept a forward pass in flight, at which point the team gains possession; they can also gain possession by recovering a fumble or stripping the ball away from the ball carrier (a "forced fumble"). A typical play can last between five and twenty seconds.
In the event that any illegal action happens during the play, the results of the previous play are erased and a penalty is assessed, forcing the offending team to surrender between five and fifteen yards of field to the opponent. Whether this yardage is measured from the original spot of the ball before the play, the spot of the illegal action, or the end of the play depends on the individual foul. The most common penalties include false start (when an offensive player jumps to begin the play before the ball is snapped, a five-yard penalty), holding (the grabbing of a player other than the ball carrier to obstruct their progress; a ten-yard penalty against offensive players and a five-yard penalty against defensive ones), and pass interference (when either a receiver or the defending player pushes or blocks the other to prevent them from catching the pass). A team cannot directly score from the result of a penalty unless the offense commits the illegal action in their own end zone or, in extremely rare circumstances, a team commits an unfair act that illegally stops a team from scoring when a score would have been certain had the unfair act not happened. Other than those two scenarios, the most distance a team can gain from a penalty is to move half the distance toward the fouling team's end zone. In the event that the penalty would be less advantageous than the result of the actual play, the team not committing the penalty can decline it.
In order to keep play moving, the offense must make a certain amount of progress (10 yards in most leagues) within a certain number of plays (3 in Canada, 4 in the United States), called downs. If the offense does indeed make this progress, a first down is achieved, and the team gets 3 or 4 more plays to achieve another 10 yards. If not, the offense loses possession to their opponent at the spot where the ball is. More commonly, however, the team on offense will, if they have a minimal chance of gaining a first down and have only one play left to do it (fourth down in the U.S., third down in Canada), attempt a scrimmage kick. There are two types of scrimmage kick: a punt is when the ball is kicked downfield as far as possible; the kicking team loses possession of the ball after the kick and the receiving team can attempt to advance the ball. The other scrimmage kick is a field goal attempt. This must be attempted by place kick or (more rarely) drop kick, and if the kicked ball passes through the goal set at the edge of the opponent's end zone, the team scores three points. (Four-point field goals are available in a few variations of the game under special rules, but the NFL, college and high school football only offer three-point field goals.) In Canada, any kick that goes into the end zone and is not returned, whether it be a punt or a missed field goal, is awarded one single point.
If the team in possession of the ball, at any time, advances (either by carrying or catching) the ball into the opponent's end zone, it is a touchdown, and the team scores six points and a free play known as a try. In a try, a team attempts to score one or two points (rules vary by each league, but under standard rules, a field goal on a try is worth one point while another touchdown is worth two). At the college and professional levels, the defense can also score on a try, but only on the same scale (thus a botched try the defense returns for a touchdown scores only two points and not six).
If a team is in its own end zone and commits a foul, is tackled with the ball, or bats, fumbles, kicks or throws the ball backward out of the field of play through the same end zone, the defense scores a safety, worth two points.
After a try, safety or field goal, the team that had possession of the ball goes back to the middle of the field and kicks the ball off to their opponent, and play continues as it did in the beginning of the game.
Play continues until halftime. (Each team switches their side of the field with the other halfway through each half, at the end of a quarter.) After the halftime break, a new kickoff occurs. Whichever team has more points at the end of the game is declared the winner; in the event of a tie, each league has its own rules for overtime to break the tie. Because of the nature of the game, pure sudden-death overtimes have been abolished at all levels of the game as of 2012.
At all adult levels of the game, a game is 60 timed minutes in length, split into four 15-minute quarters. (High school football uses 12-minute quarters, and the general rule is that the younger the players, the shorter the quarters typically are.) Because of the halftime, quarter breaks, time-outs, the minute warnings (two minutes before the end of a half in the NFL, three minutes in Canadian football), and frequent stoppages of the game clock (the clock stops, for example, after every incomplete pass and any time a ball goes out of bounds), the actual time it takes for a football game to be completed is typically over three hours.[21]
See also[edit]

Football (word)
Comparison of American and Canadian football
Glossary of American football
Glossary of Canadian football

References[edit]


^ a b "Gridiron football". Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved October 20, 2010.
^ See, for example: Jack Brimberg and William Hurley (2006). "Strategic considerations in the coaching of North American football"[permanent dead link]. International Journal of Sport Management and Marketing. From International Journal of Sport Management and Marketing, Volume 1, Number 3, pp. 279–287.
^ a b Flaherty, David H.; Manning, Frank E. (1993). The Beaver Bites Back?: American Popular Culture in Canada. McGill–Queen's Press. p. 16. ISBN 978-0-7735-1120-0. 
^ Rielly, Edward J. (2009). Football: An Encyclopedia of Popular Culture. University of Nebraska Press. pp. 53–55, 285. ISBN 978-0-8032-2630-2. 
^ Flaherty, David H.; Manning, Frank E. (2013). The Soft Tissues: Trauma and Sports Injuries. Butterworth-Heinemann. p. 402. ISBN 978-1-4832-8007-3. 
^ Steinberg, Shirley R. (2010-06-17). Boy Culture: An Encyclopedia. ABC-CLIO. pp. 156–157. ISBN 978-0-313-35081-8. 
^ Puhalla, Jim (2010). Sports Fields: Design, Construction, and Maintenance. John Wiley & Sons. p. 339. ISBN 978-0-470-43893-0. 
^ Mandelbaum, Michael (2005). The Meaning Of Sports. PublicAffairs. p. 26. ISBN 978-0-7867-3884-7. 
^ "Gridiron, n. (3.e.)". Oxford English Dictionary. 1989. Retrieved October 20, 2010. 
^ Matt, Kohl (2017). "Pigskin and gridiron: notes on the American Football lexicon". oed.com. Oxford University Press. Retrieved October 5, 2017. 
^ Markovits, Andrei S.; Rensmann, Lars (2010). Gaming the World: How Sports Are Reshaping Global Politics and Culture. Princeton University Press. p. 209. ISBN 978-1-4008-3466-2. 
^ Carlisle, pp. 237–239.
^ Encyclopædia Britannica (2009). Britannica Almanac 2009. Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc. p. 868. ISBN 978-1-59339-839-2. Retrieved October 20, 2010. 
^ Jewell, Todd (2014). Goddard, John; Sloane, Peter, eds. "Major league soccer in the USA". Handbook on the Economics of Professional Football: 351–367. ISBN 978-1-78100-317-6. Retrieved October 10, 2017. 
^ "Gridiron". Macquarie Dictionary. Macquarie Dictionary Publishers. 2017. Retrieved October 10, 2017. [permanent dead link]
^ Leland, Louis S. (1984) https://books.google.com/books?id=FqlEe5d4yJ8C&pg=PA39#v=onepage&q=gridiron&f=false "gridiron"]. A Personal Kiwi-Yankee Dictionary, p. 49. Pelican Publishing Company. ISBN 1-4556-1037-2.
^ http://www.ifaf.info/wp-content/uploads/2015/09/IFAF-Statutes-2016-EN19-09-2016.pdf
^ Bernstein, Mark F. (2001). Football: The Ivy League Origins of an American Obsession. University of Pennsylvania Press. pp. 9–10. ISBN 978-0-8122-3627-9. 
^ "Camp and His Followers: American Football 1876–1889" (PDF). The Journey to Camp: The Origins of American Football to 1889. Professional Football Researchers Association. Archived from the original (PDF) on June 13, 2010. Retrieved 2010-01-26. 
^ Vancil, Mark (Ed.) (2000). ABC Sports College Football All-Time All-America Team. New York: Hyperion Books. p. 18. ISBN 978-0-7868-6710-3. 
^ Pelissero, Tom (March 24, 2017). "Exclusive: Roger Goodell says changes coming to quicken NFL games in 2017". USA Today. Retrieved March 24, 2017. 


Bibliography[edit]

"Gridiron football". Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved October 20, 2010.
"Gridiron comes to Australia". From 7:30 Report. Retrieved on 2007-10-09 from http://www.abc.net.au/7.30/stories/s41614.htm.
Encyclopædia Britannica (2009). Britannica Almanac 2009. Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc. p. 978. ISBN 978-1-59339-839-2. Retrieved October 20, 2010. 
Carlisle, Rodney P. (2009). Encyclopedia of Play in Today's Society, Volume 1. SAGE. ISBN 978-1-4129-6670-2. 
Funge, Noel (2000). An Australian Dictionary for North Americans. General Store Publishing House. ISBN 978-1-894263-22-1. Retrieved October 20, 2010. 







v
t
e


Gridiron football concepts



Codes



American

Glossary
History

Early
Modern


Rules


Canadian

American–Canadian comparison
Burnside rules
Glossary


Arena
Indoor
9-man
8-man
6-man
Flag
Touch
Street/Backyard
Powderpuff
Wheelchair
Rules of gridiron football codes





Levels of play



Youth/midget

Pop Warner
AYF


High school

Varsity
Junior varsity


College

Club
Sprint


Semi-pro
Professional

Practice squad


Women's
International





Field




Lines



Yard lines

Hash marks
Goal line
Sidelines


Line of scrimmage
Field goal range





Spaces



End zone
Red zone
Neutral zone
Coffin corner
Flat
Gap
Hole
Pocket








Scoring



Touchdown
One-point conversion
Two-point conversion
Field goal
Safety
Single (rouge)





Turnovers



Fumble
Interception
Muffed punt
Turnover on downs





Downs



First down
Three-and-out
Fourth down conversion
Dead ball





Play clock



Timeout
Kneel
Spike
Time warnings

3 min.
2 min.
1 min.


Clock management
Running out the clock
Untimed play
Garbage time





Statistics



Carry
Completion
Rushing yards
Passing yards
Passer rating
Total quarterback rating
Reception
Receiving yards
Pass deflected
Sack
Return yards
Total offense
Yards after catch
Yards from scrimmage
All-purpose yardage
Touchdown pass





Practice



Two-a-days
Oklahoma drill
Three-cone drill
Film session





Officiating



Official (American, Canadian)
Chain crew
Penalty
Penalty flag
Instant replay





Miscellaneous



Ball
Coaching tree
Concussions
Equipment
12th man
Letterman
Overtime
Running up the score
Touchdown celebration
Gatorade shower
Tuck rule
Uniform number












v
t
e


Team sports






Sport
Governing bodies
Sportspeople
National sport





Basket sports



Basketball

beach
deaf
3x3
water
wheelchair


Cestoball
Korfball
Netball

Fast5
indoor
wheelchair


Rezball
Ringball
Slamball





Football codes







Association football

amputee
beach
freestyle
Futsal
indoor
Jorkyball
paralympic
powerchair
roller
street
walking


Australian rules football

AFLX
Lightning football
Metro footy
Nine-a-side
Rec footy


Gaelic football

Ladies'


Circle rules football





Gridiron codes



American football

eight-man
flag
nine-man
six-man
sprint
touch
wheelchair


Canadian football
Indoor American football

Arena football







Hybrid codes



Austus
Eton wall game
International rules football
Samoa rules
Speedball
Swedish football
Universal football
Volata





Medieval football codes



Ba game
Caid
Calcio fiorentino
Camping
Cnapan
Cornish hurling
Cuju
Harpastum
Kemari
Ki-o-rahi
Jegichagi
La soule
Lelo burti
Marn grook
Pasuckuakohowog
Royal Shrovetide
Uppies and downies
Yubi lakpi





Rugby codes



Beach
Rugby league

masters
mod
nines
sevens
tag
wheelchair


Rugby union

American flag
mini
sevens
snow
tag
touch
tens


Touch
Wheelchair








Bat-and-ball games



Baseball
Brännboll
British baseball
Corkball
Cricket

One Day
Test
Twenty20


Danish longball
Indoor cricket
Kickball
Lapta
Matball
Oină
Over-the-line
Pesäpallo
Rounders
Softball

Fastpitch


Stickball
Stoolball
Town ball
Vigoro
Vitilla
Wiffle ball
Wireball





Stick and ball sports







Bando
Cammag
Hurling

Camogie
Super11s
Shinty–Hurling


Indigenous North American stickball
Iomain
Knattleikr
Knotty
Lacrosse

box/indoor
field
intercrosse
women's


Ritinis
Shinty

Shinty–Hurling







Hockey sports



Ball hockey
Bandy

rink


Broomball

Moscow


Field hockey

indoor


Floor hockey
Floorball
Ice hockey

pond
power
ice sledge
underwater


Ringette
Rinkball
Roller hockey

in-line
quad


Rossall hockey
Shinny
Street hockey
Underwater hockey
Unicycle hockey





Polo sports



Auto polo
Cowboy polo
Cycle polo
Elephant polo
Horseball
Motoball
Pato
Polo

Arena polo
chovgan
snow polo


Polocrosse
Segway polo
Yak polo








Net sports



Ball badminton
Beach tennis
Biribol
Bossaball
Fistball
Footbag net
Football tennis
Footvolley
Jianzi
Jokgu
Newcomb ball
Peteca
Sepak takraw
Throwball
Volleyball

beach
paralympic







Other sports



Airsoft
Angleball
Balle à la main
Ballon au poing
Basque pelota

frontenis
jai alai
xare


Bo-taoshi
Boules

Bocce
Bocce volo
Boccia
Bowls
Jeu provençal
Pétanque
Raffa


Buzkashi
Combat (juggling)
Curling

wheelchair


Cycle ball
Digor
Dodgeball
Flickerball
Gateball
Goalball
Guts
Handball

beach
Czech
field


Hornussen
Ice stock sport
Jereed
Kabaddi

indoor
beach


Kho kho
Kin-Ball
Lagori
Longue paume
Mesoamerican ballgame
Paintball
Pelota mixteca
Prisonball
Pushball
Quidditch
Rollball
Roller derby
Slahal
Snow snake
Synchronized skating
Synchronized swimming
Tamburello
Tchoukball

beach


Tejo
Tug of war
Ulama
Ultimate
Underwater football
Underwater rugby
Valencian pilota

Llargues


Water polo

canoe
inner tube
beach


Waboba
Whirlyball
Woodball
Yukigassen












v
t
e


Professional gridiron football leagues in North America








American football







Major



National Football League





Defunct national



All-America Football Conference
American Football League (1926)
American Football League (1936–1937)
American Football League (1940–1941)
American Football League (1960–1969)**
Continental Football League
United Football League (2009–12)
United States Football League
World Football League
World League of American Football/NFL Europe/NFL Europa*
XFL





Defunct regional



American Association (1936–1941)/American Football League (1946–1950)*
American Football Association (1978–83)
American Football League (1934)
American Football League (1938–1939)
American Football League (1944)
Anthracite League
Atlantic Coast Football League*
Dixie League*
Eastern League of Professional Football
Fall Experimental Football League
Midwest Football League
National Football League (1902)
New York Pro Football League
Ohio League
Pacific Coast Professional Football League*
Regional Football League
Seaboard Football League
Spring Football League
Stars Football League
Texas Football League
United Football League (1961–64)
Western Pennsylvania Professional Football Circuit
World Football League (2008–10)








*Official NFL minor league; see also Association of Professional Football Leagues
**Now part of the American Football Conference, one of the components of the NFL. All teams still active.
















Canadian football







Major



Canadian Football League





Predecessors



Interprovincial Rugby Football Union
Western Interprovincial Football Union
















Arena/Indoor football







Current



American Arena League
Arena Football League
Champions Indoor Football
Indoor Football League
National Arena League





Defunct



arenafootball2
American Indoor Football
American Professional Football League
Arena Pro Football
Can-Am Indoor Football League
Champions Professional Indoor Football League
Continental Indoor Football League
Independent Indoor Football Alliance
Indoor Football League (1999–2000)
Indoor Professional Football League
Intense Football League
Lone Star Football League
National Indoor Football League
Professional Indoor Football League (1998)
Professional Indoor Football League (2012)
Southern Indoor Football League
Supreme Indoor Football
Ultimate Indoor Football League
United Indoor Football
X-League Indoor Football
World Indoor Football League (2007)

















						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Gridiron_football&oldid=815325908"					Categories: Gridiron footballSport in North AmericaSport in AustraliaHidden categories: All articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from December 2017Articles with permanently dead external linksUse mdy dates from April 2012