

Ground beetles





Golden ground beetle eating an earthworm in Northern Germany


Scientific classification 


Kingdom:
Animalia


Clade:
Euarthropoda


Class:
Insecta


Order:
Coleoptera


Suborder:
Adephaga


(unranked):
Geadephaga


Superfamily:
Caraboidea


Family:
Carabidae
Latreille, 1802


Subfamilies[1]



Anthiinae
Apotominae
Brachininae
Broscinae
Carabinae
Cicindelinae
Ctenodactylinae
Dryptinae
Elaphrinae
Gineminae
Harpalinae
Hiletinae
Lebiinae
Licininae
Loricerinae
Melaeninae
Migadopinae
Nebriinae
Nototylinae
Omophroninae
Orthogoniinae
Panagaeinae
Paussinae
Platyninae
Promecognathinae
Protorabinae
Pseudomorphinae
Psydrinae
Pterostichinae
Rhysodinae
Scaritinae
Siagoninae
Trechinae
Xenaroswellianinae
(See text)



Ground beetles are a large, cosmopolitan family of beetles, [2] Carabidae, with more than 40,000 species worldwide, around 2,000 of which are found in North America and 2,700 in Europe.[3] It is one of the ten largest animal families, as of 2015.



Contents


1 Description and ecology

1.1 Defensive secretions
1.2 Ecology


2 Relationship with humans
3 Evolution and systematics

3.1 Subfamilies and selected genera

3.1.1 Basal ground beetles
3.1.2 Carabidae Conjunctae




4 Notes
5 References
6 Further reading
7 External links



Description and ecology[edit]
Although their body shapes and coloring vary somewhat, most are shiny black or metallic and have ridged wing covers (elytra). The elytra are fused in some species, particularly large Carabinae, rendering the beetles unable to fly. The genus Mormolyce is known as violin beetles due to their peculiarly shaped elytra. All carabids except the quite primitive flanged bombardier beetles (Paussinae) have a groove on their foreleg tibiae bearing a comb of hairs used for cleaning their antennae.[4]




A Brachinus species typical bombardier beetle (Brachininae: Brachinini) from North Carolina


Defensive secretions[edit]
Typical for the ancient beetle suborder Adephaga to which they belong, they have paired pygidial glands in the lower back of the abdomen. These are well developed in ground beetles, and produce noxious or even caustic secretions used to deter would-be predators. In some, commonly known as bombardier beetles, these secretions are mixed with volatile compounds and ejected by a small combustion, producing a loud popping sound and a cloud of hot and acrid gas which can injure small mammals, such as shrews, and is liable to kill invertebrate predators outright. To humans, getting "bombed" by a bombardier beetle is a decidedly unpleasant experience. This ability has evolved independently twice as it seems – in the flanged bombardier beetles (Paussinae) which are among the most ancient ground beetles, and in the typical bombardier beetles (Brachininae) which are part of a more "modern" lineage. The Anthiini, though, can mechanically squirt their defensive secretions for considerable distances and are able to aim with a startling degree of accuracy; in Afrikaans, they are known as oogpisters ("eye-pissers"). In one of the very few known cases of a vertebrate mimicking an arthropod, juvenile Heliobolus lugubris lizards are colored similar to the aposematic oogpister beetles, and move in a way that makes them look surprisingly similar to the insects at a casual glance.[5]
A folk story claims that Charles Darwin once found himself on the receiving end of a bombardier beetle's attack, based on a passage in his autobiography.[6][7] Darwin stated in a letter to Leonard Jenyns that a beetle had attacked him on that occasion, but he did not know what kind:

A Cychrus rostratus once squirted into my eye & gave me extreme pain; & I must tell you what happened to me on the banks of the Cam in my early entomological days; under a piece of bark I found two carabi (I forget which) & caught one in each hand, when lo & behold I saw a sacred Panagæus crux major; I could not bear to give up either of my Carabi, & to lose Panagæus was out of the question, so that in despair I gently seized one of the carabi between my teeth, when to my unspeakable disgust & pain the little inconsiderate beast squirted his acid down my throat & I lost both Carabi & Panagæus![8]





A Lophyra sp. tiger beetle from Tanzania


Ecology[edit]
Common habitats are under the bark of trees, under logs, or among rocks[2] or sand by the edge of ponds and rivers. Most species are carnivorous and actively hunt for any invertebrate prey they can overpower. [2] Some run swiftly to catch their prey; tiger beetles (Cicindelinae) can sustain speeds of 9 km/h[9] – in relation to their body length they are among the fastest land animals on Earth. Unlike most Carabidae which are nocturnal, the tiger beetles are active diurnal hunters and often brightly coloured; they have large eyes and hunt by sight. Ground beetles of the species Promecognathus laevissimus are specialised predators of the cyanide millipede Harpaphe haydeniana, countering the hydrogen cyanide which makes these millipedes poisonous to most carnivores.
Relationship with humans[edit]
As predators of invertebrates, including many pests, most ground beetles are considered beneficial organisms. The caterpillar hunters (Calosoma) are famous for their habit of devouring prey in quantity, eagerly feeding on tussock moth (Lymantriidae) caterpillars, processionary caterpillars (Thaumetopoeidae) and woolly worms (Arctiidae), which due to their urticating hairs are avoided by most insectivores. Large numbers of the forest caterpillar hunter (C. sycophanta), native to Europe, were shipped to New England for biological control of the gypsy moth (Lymantria dispar) as early as 1905.
A few species are nuisance pests. Zabrus is one of the few herbivorous ground beetle genera, and on rare occasions Zabrus tenebrioides, for example, occurs abundantly enough to cause some damage to grain crops. Large species, usually Carabinae, can become a nuisance if present in numbers, particularly during outdoor activities such as camping; they void their defensive secretions when threatened, and in hiding among provisions their presence may spoil food. Since ground beetles are generally reluctant or even unable to fly, mechanically blocking their potential routes of entry is usually easy. The use of insecticides specifically for Carabid intrusion may lead to unfortunate side effects, such as the release of their repugnatorial secretions, so it generally is not a good idea unless the same applications are intended to exclude ants, parasites or other crawling pests.




A crucifix ground beetle (Panagaeus cruxmajor) got Charles Darwin into trouble in 1828.


Especially in the 19th century and to a lesser extent today, their large size and conspicuous coloration, as well as the odd morphology of some (e.g. the Lebiini), made many ground beetles a popular object of collection and study for professional and amateur coleopterologists. High prices were paid for rare and exotic specimens, and in the early to mid-19th century, a veritable "beetle craze" occurred in England. As mentioned above, Charles Darwin was an ardent collector of beetles when he was about 20 years old, to the extent that he would rather scour the countryside for rare specimens with William Darwin Fox, John Stevens Henslow, and Henry Thompson than to study theology as his father wanted him to do. In his autobiography, he fondly recalled his experiences with Licinus and Panagaeus, and wrote:

No poet ever felt more delight at seeing his first poem published than I did at seeing in Stephen's Illustrations of British Insects the magic words, "captured by C. Darwin, Esq."[7]

Evolution and systematics[edit]
The Adephaga are documented since the end of the Permian, about 250 million years ago. Ground beetles evolved in the latter Triassic, having separated from their closest relatives by 200 million years ago. The family diversified throughout the Jurassic, and the more advanced lineages, such as the Harpalinae, underwent a vigorous radiation starting in the Cretaceous. The closest living relatives of the ground beetles are the false ground beetles (Trachypachidae) and the wrinkled bark beetles (Rhysodidae). They are sometimes even included in the Carabidae as subfamilies or as tribes incertae sedis, but more preferably they are united with the ground beetles in the superfamily Caraboidea.
Much research has been done on elucidating the phylogeny of the ground beetles and adjusting systematics and taxonomy accordingly. While no completely firm consensus exists, a few points are generally accepted: As it seems, the ground beetles consist of a number of more basal lineages and the extremely diverse Harpalinae which contain over half the described species and into which several formerly independent families had to be subsumed.[10]
Subfamilies and selected genera[edit]
The taxonomy used here is based on the Catalogue of Palaearctic Coleoptera[11] and the Carabidae of the World Database.[12] Other classifications, while generally agreeing with the division into a basal radiation of more primitive lineages and the more advanced group informally called "Carabidae Conjunctae",[13] differ in details. For example, the system used by the Tree of Life Web Project makes little use of subfamilies, listing most tribes as incertae sedis as to subfamily.[14] Fauna Europaea, though, splits rather than lumps the Harpalinae, restricting them to what in the system used here is the tribe Harpalini.[15]
All the approaches mentioned above are legitimate as they agree with the phylogeny as far as it has been resolved.[citation needed] The inclusive Harpalinae presented here are used for two reasons, one scientific and one practical – first, the majority of authors presently use this system, following the Catalogue of Palaearctic Coleoptera. Second, the MediaWiki markup cannot at present adequately represent the relationships of the ground beetle subgroups in detail if the restricted view of the Harpalinae is chosen.[citation needed]
Basal ground beetles[edit]




Carabus lateralis (Carabinae: Carabini)






Notiophilus substriatus (Nebriinae: Notiophilini)






Clivina fossor (Scaritinae: Clivinini)






Amblytelus sp. (Amblytelinae: Amblytelini)


Carabinae Latreille, 1802 – including Agoninae and Callistinae

Altagonum
Aplothorax (monotypic genus)
Calosoma - including Callisthenes
Carabus
Cychrus
Homothes
Fortagonum
Laemostenus
Notagonum
Coptolabrus

Cicindelinae – tiger beetles (roughly 2,600 species; sometimes included in the Carabidae)
Cicindinae
Elaphrinae Latreille, 1802

Blethisa
Diacheila Motschulsky, 1844
Elaphrus

Hiletinae
Loricerinae Bonelli, 1810

Loricera

Migadopinae
Nebriinae (includes Notiophilinae, often included in Carabinae)

Leistus
Nebria
Notiophilus
Pelophila Dejean, 1821

Nototylinae
Omophroninae Bonelli, 1810 – round sand beetles

Omophron

Paussinae – ant nest beetles, flanged bombardier beetles
Promecognathinae
Scaritinae Bonelli, 1810 – pedunculate ground beetles

Clivina
Dyschirius Bonelli, 1810
Scarites

Siagoninae Bonelli, 1810
Carabidae Conjunctae[edit]




Dixus sphaerocephalus (Harpalinae: Harpalini)






Mormolyce phyllodes (Lebiinae: Lebiini)


Amblytelinae Sloane, 1898[Note 1]

Amblytelus

Apotominae
Brachininae – typical bombardier beetles
Broscinae
Dryptinae (sometimes in Harpalinae)
Gineminae (sometimes in Harpalinae)
Harpalinae (over 20,000 species[verification needed])
Lebiinae – including Cyclosominae, Mormolycinae, Odacanthinae, Perigoninae (sometimes in Harpalinae)
Licininae – including Chlaeniinae, Oodinae (sometimes in Harpalinae)
Melaeninae
Migadopinae
Orthogoniinae (sometimes in Harpalinae)
Panagaeinae (sometimes in Harpalinae)
Platyninae (sometimes in Harpalinae)
Pseudomorphinae (sometimes in Harpalinae)
Psydrinae
Pterostichinae – including Zabrinae (sometimes in Harpalinae)
Trechinae – including Bembidiinae, Patrobinae
Tribes incertae sedis

Amarotypini – Migadopinae or a distinct subfamily?
Gehringiini – Psydrinae, Trechinae or a distinct subfamily?

Notes[edit]



^ Usually placed in the Psydrinae or Trechinae, they seem to represent a distinct lineage related to Brachininae and Harpalinae, and in the system used here would consequently be eligible for subfamily status.[16]



References[edit]


^ "Carabidae Taxa". Carabidae of the World. 2011. Archived from the original on 2012-11-02. Retrieved 6 Nov 2017. 
^ a b c Gomes Gonçalves, Marcos Paulo (December 2017). "Relationship Between Meteorological Conditions and Beetles in Mata de Cocal". Revista Brasileira de Meteorologia. pp. 543–554. doi:10.1590/0102-7786324003. ISSN 0102-7786. 
^ B. Kromp (1999). "Carabid beetles in sustainable agriculture: a review on pest control efficacy, cultivation aspects and enhancement". Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment. 74 (1–3): 187–228. doi:10.1016/S0167-8809(99)00037-7. 
^ John L. Capinera. Encyclopedia of Entomology. p. 1746. 
^ R. B. Huey & E. R. Pianka (1977). "Natural selection for juvenile lizards mimicking noxious beetles". Science. 195 (4274): 201–203. doi:10.1126/science.831272. PMID 831272. 
^ "Young Naturalist, A Lifelong Passion". Darwin. American Museum of Natural History. 2005. Archived from the original on December 21, 2010. Retrieved February 16, 2011. 
^ a b Nora Barlow, ed. (1958). "Cambridge, 1828–1831". The Autobiography of Charles Darwin. pp. 56–71. 
^ Charles Darwin (1846). "Letter to Leonard Jenyns, October 17, 1846". 
^ "When tiger beetles chase prey at high speeds they go blind temporarily, Cornell entomologists learn - Cornell Chronicle". www.news.cornell.edu. 
^ Shōzō Ōsawa, Zhi-Hui Su & Yūki Inmura (2004). Molecular Phylogeny and Evolution of Carabid Ground Beetles. Springer. ISBN 4-431-00487-4. 
^ I. Löbl & A. Smetana, ed. (2003). Catalogue of Palaearctic Coleoptera. I. Stenstrup, Denmark: Apollo Books. 
^ "Trees of family Carabidae". Carabidae of the World Database. 2008. Archived from the original on September 19, 2008. Retrieved July 24, 2008. 
^ David R. Maddison (January 1, 1995). "Carabidae Conjunctae". Tree of Life Web Project. Retrieved July 24, 2008. 
^ David R. Maddison (April 11, 2006). "Carabidae. Ground beetles and tiger beetles". Tree of Life Web Project. Retrieved July 24, 2008. 
^ "Harpalinae". Fauna Europaea. 2004. Retrieved February 16, 2011. 
^ David R. Maddison (January 1, 1999). "Amblytelini". Tree of Life Web Project. Retrieved July 24, 2008. 


Further reading[edit]


Insects portal
Arthropods portal



E. Csiki (1946). Die Käferfauna des Karpaten-Beckens [The beetle fauna of the Carparthian basin] (in German). Budapest. pp. 71–546. 
K. Kult (1947). Klíč k určování brouků čeledi Carabidae Československé republiky [Key to the beetles of family Carabidae of the Czech Republic] (in Czech). Prague. 
C. H. Lindroth (1942). Coleoptera, Carabidae. Svensk Insectenfauna, Vol. 9 (in Swedish). Stockholm. pp. 1–260. 
Edmund Reitter (1908–1917). Die Käfer des Deutschen Reiches [The beetles of the German Empire] (in German). Stuttgart: K. G. Lutz. 

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Carabidae.





Wikispecies has information related to Carabidae



Carabidae of the World




Authority control



NDL: 00568944












v
t
e


Extant Coleoptera families






Kingdom: Animalia
Phylum: Arthropoda
Class: Insecta
Subclass: Pterygota
Infraclass: Neoptera
Superorder: Endopterygota










Suborder Archostemata






Crowsoniellidae (Crowsoniella relicta)
Cupedidae (reticulated beetles)
Jurodidae (Sikhotealinia zhiltzovae)
Micromalthidae (telephone-pole beetle)
Ommatidae













Suborder Adephaga







Extant families



Amphizoidae (trout-stream beetles)
Aspidytidae
Carabidae (ground beetles)
Dytiscidae (predaceous diving beetles)
Gyrinidae (whirligig beetles)
Haliplidae (crawling water beetles)
Hygrobiidae
Meruidae (Meru phyllisae)
Noteridae (burrowing water beetles)
Rhysodidae (wrinkled bark beetles)
Trachypachidae (false ground beetles)
















Suborder Myxophaga






Hydroscaphidae (skiff beetles)
Lepiceridae
Sphaeriusidae
Torridincolidae













Suborder Polyphaga







Bostrichiformia




Bostrichoidea



Anobiidae (furniture beetles, death watch beetles, spider beetles)
Bostrichidae (auger beetles)
Dermestidae (skin beetles)
Jacobsoniidae (Jacobson's beetles)
Nosodendridae (wounded-tree beetles)





Derodontoidea



Derodontidae (tooth-necked fungus beetles)








Cucujiformia




Chrysomeloidea



Cerambycidae (longhorn beetles)
Chrysomelidae (leaf beetles)
Disteniidae
Megalopodidae
Orsodacnidae
Oxypeltidae
Vesperidae





Cleroidea



Acanthocnemidae (Acanthocnemus nigricans)
Chaetosomatidae
Cleridae (checkered beetles)
Melyridae (soft-wing flower beetles)
Phloiophilidae (Phloiophilus edwardsi)
Phycosecidae
Prionoceridae
Trogossitidae (bark-gnawing beetles)





Cucujoidea



Alexiidae
Biphyllidae (false skin beetles)
Boganiidae
Bothrideridae (dry bark beetles)
Byturidae (fruitworm beetles)
Cavognathidae
Cerylonidae (minute bark beetles)
Coccinellidae (lady beetles, or God's cows)
Corylophidae (minute fungus beetles)
Cryptophagidae (silken fungus beetles)
Cucujidae (flat bark beetles)
Cyclaxyridae
Discolomatidae
Endomychidae (handsome fungus beetles)
Erotylidae (pleasing fungus beetles)
Helotidae
Hobartiidae
Kateretidae (short-winged flower beetles)
Laemophloeidae (lined flat bark beetles)
Lamingtoniidae (Lamingtonium binnaberrense)
Latridiidae (minute brown scavenger beetles)
Monotomidae (root-eating beetles)
Myraboliidae
Nitidulidae (sap beetles)
Passandridae (parasitic flat bark beetles)
Phalacridae (shining flower beetles)
Phloeostichidae
Propalticidae
Protocucujidae
Silvanidae (silvanid flat bark beetles)
Smicripidae (palmetto beetles)
Sphindidae (dry-fungus beetles)





Curculionoidea
(weevils)



Anthribidae (fungus weevils)
Attelabidae (leaf-rolling weevils)
Belidae (primitive weevils)
Brentidae (straight snout weevils, New York weevil)
Caridae
Curculionidae (true weevils, bark beetles, ambrosia beetles)
Nemonychidae (pine flower weevils)





Lymexyloidea



Lymexylidae (ship-timber beetles)





Tenebrionoidea



Aderidae (ant-like leaf beetles)
Anthicidae (ant-like flower beetles)
Archeocrypticidae (cryptic fungus beetles)
Boridae (conifer bark beetles)
Chalcodryidae
Ciidae (minute tree-fungus beetles)
Melandryidae (false darkling beetles)
Meloidae (blister beetles)
Mordellidae (tumbling flower beetles)
Mycetophagidae (hairy fungus beetles)
Mycteridae (palm and flower beetles)
Oedemeridae (false blister beetle)
Perimylopidae, or Promecheilidae
Prostomidae (jugular-horned beetles)
Pterogeniidae
Pyrochroidae (fire-coloured beetles)
Pythidae (dead log bark beetles)
Ripiphoridae (wedge-shaped beetles)
Salpingidae (narrow-waisted bark beetles)
Scraptiidae (false flower beetles)
Stenotrachelidae (false longhorn beetles)
Synchroidae (synchroa bark beetles)
Tenebrionidae (darkling beetles)
Tetratomidae (polypore fungus beetles)
Trachelostenidae
Trictenotomidae
Ulodidae
Zopheridae (ironclad beetles, cylindrical bark beetles)








Elateriformia




Buprestoidea



Buprestidae (jewel beetles, or metallic wood-boring beetles)
Schizopodidae





Byrrhoidea



Byrrhidae (pill beetles)
Callirhipidae (cedar beetles)
Chelonariidae (turtle beetles)
Cneoglossidae
Dryopidae (long-toed water beetles)
Elmidae (riffle beetles)
Eulichadidae (forest stream beetles)
Heteroceridae (variegated mud-loving beetles)
Limnichidae (minute mud beetles)
Lutrochidae (travertine beetles)
Psephenidae (water-penny beetles)
Ptilodactylidae





Dascilloidea



Dascillidae (soft bodied plant beetles)
Rhipiceridae (cicada beetle, cicada parasite beetles)





Elateroidea



Anischiidae
Artematopodidae (soft-bodied plant beetles)
Brachypsectridae (Texas beetles)
Cantharidae (soldier beetles)
Cerophytidae (rare click beetles)
Drilidae
Elateridae (click beetles)
Eucnemidae (false click beetles)
Lampyridae (fireflies)
Lycidae (net-winged beetles)
Omalisidae
Omethidae (false fireflies)
Phengodidae (glowworm beetles, long-lipped beetles)
Plastoceridae (Plastocerus angulosus)
Podabrocephalidae
Rhagophthalmidae
Rhinorhipidae (Rhinorhipus tamborinensis)
Throscidae (false metallic wood-boring beetles)





Scirtoidea



Clambidae
Decliniidae (Declinia relicta)
Eucinetidae (plate-thigh beetles)
Scirtidae








Scarabaeiformia




Scarabaeoidea



Belohinidae (Belohina inexpectata)
Bolboceratidae
Ceratocanthidae
Diphyllostomatidae (false stag beetles)
Geotrupidae (dor beetles)
Glaphyridae (bumble bee scarab beetles)
Glaresidae (enigmatic scarab beetles)
Hybosoridae (scavenger scarab beetles)
Lucanidae (stag beetles)
Ochodaeidae (sand-loving scarab beetles)
Passalidae (betsy beetles)
Pleocomidae (rain beetles)
Scarabaeidae (scarabs)
Trogidae (hide beetles)








Staphyliniformia




Histeroidea



Histeridae (clown beetles)
Sphaeritidae (false clown beetles)
Synteliidae





Hydrophiloidea



Epimetopidae
Georissidae (minute mud-loving beetles)
Helophoridae
Hydrochidae
Hydrophilidae (water scavenger beetles)
Spercheidae





Staphylinoidea



Agyrtidae (primitive carrion beetles)
Hydraenidae
Leiodidae (round fungus beetles)
Ptiliidae (feather-winged beetles)
Scydmaenidae (ant-like stone beetles)
Silphidae (carrion beetles)
Staphylinidae (rove beetles)















List of subgroups of the order Coleoptera







Taxon identifiers



Wd: Q27046
ADW: Carabidae
BugGuide: 186
EoL: 7467
Fauna Europaea: 11013
Fossilworks: 69183
GBIF: 3792
ITIS: 109234
NCBI: 41073
WoRMS: 118092











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ground_beetle&oldid=816528617"					Categories: CarabidaeHidden categories: Articles with 'species' microformatsArticles containing Akan-language textAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from February 2011All pages needing factual verificationWikipedia articles needing factual verification from May 2013CS1 German-language sources (de)CS1 Czech-language sources (cs)CS1 Swedish-language sources (sv)