"Guerrilla" and "Guerrilla War" redirect here; they are not to be confused with Gorilla. For other uses, see Guerrilla (disambiguation).
Not to be confused with Gorilla Warfare.




Spanish guerrilla resistance to the Napoleonic French invasion of Spain in 1808, where the term "guerrilla" was first used in warfare.




Part of a series on


War




History


Prehistoric
Ancient
Post-classical


Early Modern


Late Modern

Industrial
Fourth-Gen










Battlespace


Air
Cyber
Information
Land
Sea
Space








Weapons


Armor
Artillery
Biological
Cavalry
Chemical
Conventional
Cyber
Electronic
Infantry
Nuclear
Psychological
Unconventional








Tactics


Aerial
Battle
Cavalry
Charge
Counterattack
Counter-insurgency
Cover
Foxhole
Guerrilla warfare
Morale
Siege
Swarming
Tactical objective
Trench warfare








Operational


Blitzkrieg
Deep operation
Maneuver warfare
Operational manoeuvre group








Strategy


Attrition
Counter-offensive
Deception
Defensive
Goal
Naval
Offensive








Grand strategy


Containment
Economic warfare
Limited war
Military science
Philosophy of war
Strategic studies
Total war








Organization


Command and control
Doctrine
Education and training
Engineers
Intelligence
Ranks
Staff
Technology and equipment








Logistics


Arms industry
Materiel
Supply chain management








Related


Asymmetric warfare
Broken-Backed War Theory
Court-martial
Cold war
Deterrence theory
Irregular warfare
Law of war
Mercenary
Military campaign
Military operation
Network-centric warfare
Operations research
Principles of war
Proxy war
Religious war
Theater
War crime
War film
War game
War novel
Wartime sexual violence
World war
Colonial war








Lists


Battles
Military occupations
Military tactics
Operations
Sieges
War crimes
Wars
Weapons
Writers









v
t
e





Guerrilla warfare is a form of irregular warfare in which a small group of combatants, such as paramilitary personnel, armed civilians, or irregulars, use military tactics including ambushes, sabotage, raids, petty warfare, hit-and-run tactics, and mobility to fight a larger and less-mobile traditional military.



Contents


1 Etymology
2 Strategy, tactics and organization
3 History
4 Counter-guerrilla warfare

4.1 Scholarship

4.1.1 Classic guidelines
4.1.2 Variants




5 Foco theory
6 See also
7 References
8 External links



Etymology[edit]
The term, the diminutive form of "war" in Spanish, is usually translated as "little war", and the word, guerrilla (Spanish pronunciation: [ɡeˈriʎa]), has been used to refer to the concept as early as the 18th century. In correct Spanish usage, a person who is a member of a guerrilla unit is a guerrillero ([ɡeriˈʎeɾo]) if male, or a guerrillera if female. This term became popular during the early-19th century Peninsular War, when the Spanish people rose against the Napoleonic troops and fought against a highly superior army using the guerrilla strategy.
The term "guerrilla" was used in English as early as 1809 to refer to the fighters (e.g., "The town was taken by the guerrillas"), and also (as in Spanish) to denote a group or band of such fighters. However, in most languages guerrilla still denotes the specific style of warfare. The use of the diminutive evokes the differences in number, scale, and scope between the guerrilla army and the formal, professional army of the state.[original research?]
"Guerrillas" is often used by such fighters themselves and by their sympathizers while others (i.e., opposing forces or victims of collateral damage) might call them terrorists (negative) or partisans (positive). This could depend on many factors, such as their relationship with innocent civilians or their ultimate goal. An objective definition of the difference between "a guerrilla" and "a terrorist" or a "partisan" can be found by identifying who makes up the guerilla force, what their motivations are, and how willing they are to avoid collateral damage.
Strategy, tactics and organization[edit]


Part of a series on


Revolution







Types


Colour
Communist
Democratic
Nonviolent
Permanent
Political
Proletarian
Social
Wave








Methods


Boycott
Civil disobedience
Civil war
Class conflict
Coup d'état
Demonstration
Guerrilla warfare
Insurgency
Nonviolent resistance
Protest
Rebellion
Revolutionary terror
Samizdat
Strike action
Tax resistance








Causes


Authoritarianism
Autocracy
Capitalism
Collaborationism
Colonialism
Cronyism
Despotism
Dictatorship
Discrimination
Economic depression
Economic inequality
Electoral fraud
Famine
Fascism
Feudalism
Imperialism
Military occupation
Monarchy
Natural disaster
Nepotism
Persecution
Political corruption
Political repression
Poverty
Totalitarianism
Unemployment








Examples


Commercial Revolution
Industrial Revolution
English Revolution
Atlantic Revolutions
American Revolution
French Revolution
Haitian Revolution
Serbian Revolution
Revolutions of 1820
Revolutions of 1830
Belgian Revolution
Texas Revolution
Revolutions of 1848
Hungarian Revolution of 1848
Philippine Revolution
Persian Constitutional Revolution
Young Turk Revolution
Mexican Revolution
Xinhai Revolution
Revolutions of 1917–23
Russian Revolution
German Revolution of 1918–19
Spanish Revolution of 1936
Guatemalan Revolution
Chinese Communist Revolution
Hungarian Revolution of 1956
Cuban Revolution
Rwandan Revolution
Cultural Revolution
Nicaraguan Revolution
Iranian Revolution
Saur Revolution
People Power Revolution
Carnation Revolution
Revolutions of 1989
Velvet Revolution
Romanian Revolution
Singing Revolution
Bolivarian Revolution
Bulldozer Revolution
Rose Revolution
Orange Revolution
Tulip Revolution
Kyrgyz Revolution of 2010
Arab Spring
Tunisian Revolution
Yemeni Revolution
Euromaidan






 Politics portal





v
t
e









Boer guerrillas during the Second Boer War in South Africa






Soviet partisans operating under Sydir Kovpak in German-occupied Ukraine


The strategy and tactics of guerrilla warfare tend to focus around the use of a small, mobile force competing against a larger, more unwieldy one.[1] The Guerrilla focuses on organizing in small units, depending on the support of the local population, as well as taking advantage of terrain more accommodating of small units.
Tactically, the guerrilla army would avoid any confrontation with large units of enemy troops, but seek and eliminate small groups of soldiers to minimize losses and exhaust the opposing force. Not limiting their targets to personnel, enemy resources are also preferred targets. All of that is to weaken the enemy's strength, to cause the enemy eventually to be unable to pursue the war any longer, and to force the enemy to withdraw.
It is often misunderstood that guerrilla warfare must involve disguising as civilians to cause enemy troops to fail in telling friend from foe. However, this is not a primary feature of a guerrilla war. This type of war can be practiced anywhere there are places for combatants to cover themselves and where such advantage cannot be made use of by a larger and more conventional force.[original research?]
Communist leaders like Mao Zedong and North Vietnamese Ho Chi Minh both implemented guerrilla warfare giving it a theoretical frame which served as a model for similar strategies elsewhere, such as the Cuban "foco" theory and the anti-Soviet Mujahadeen in Afghanistan.[2] Mao Zedong summarized basic guerrilla tactics at the beginning of the Chinese "Second Revolutionary Civil War" as: "The enemy advances, we retreat; the enemy camps, we harass; the enemy tires, we attack; the enemy retreats, we pursue."[3]:p. 124 At least one author credits the ancient Chinese work The Art of War (dating from at least 200 BC) with providing instruction in such tactics to Mao.[2]:pp. 6–7
While the tactics of modern guerrilla warfare originate in the 20th century, irregular warfare, using elements later characteristic of modern guerrilla warfare, has existed throughout the battles of many ancient civilizations but in a smaller scale. This recent growth was inspired in part by theoretical works on guerrilla warfare, starting with the Manual de Guerra de Guerrillas by Matías Ramón Mella written in the 19th century and, more recently, Mao Zedong's On Guerrilla Warfare, Che Guevara's Guerrilla Warfare and Lenin's text of the same name, all written after the successful revolutions carried by them in China, Cuba and Russia respectively. Those texts characterized the tactic of guerrilla warfare as, according to Che Guevara's text, being "used by the side which is supported by a majority but which possesses a much smaller number of arms for use in defense against oppression".[4]
History[edit]
Main article: History of guerrilla warfare




Sebastiaan Vrancx and Jan Brueghel the Elder's painting depicts "An assault on a convoy" during the Dutch Revolt - effectively an instance of guerrilla warfare, though the term did not yet exist.


The Chinese general and strategist Sun Tzu, in his The Art of War (6th century BC) or 600 BC to 501 BC, was the earliest to propose the use of guerrilla warfare.[5] This directly inspired the development of modern guerrilla warfare.[6] Guerrilla tactics were presumably[original research?] employed by prehistoric tribal warriors against enemy tribes. Evidence of conventional warfare, on the other hand, did not emerge until 3100 BC in Egypt and Mesopotamia. Since the Enlightenment, ideologies such as nationalism, liberalism, socialism, and religious fundamentalism have played an important role in shaping insurgencies and guerrilla warfare. [7]
One of the most remarkable guerrilla warfare warriors was Viriatus, a Lusitanian who led the resistance against the Roman Empire by obtaining several victories between 147 BC and 139 BC in the region of Zamora, Spain. Because of the innovative tactics[example needed] he used during his command, he made himself the name of Terror Romanorum (Terror of the Romans).
Counter-guerrilla warfare[edit]
Main article: Counter-insurgency




Mass shootings of Vendée royalist rebels in western France, 1793






The Third of May 1808 by Francisco Goya, showing Spanish resisters being executed by Napoleon's troops during the Peninsular War.






Polish guerrillas from Batalion Zośka dressed in captured German uniforms and armed with captured weapons, fighting in the Warsaw Uprising.






A Viet Cong base camp being burned, My Tho, South Vietnam, 1968


A counter-insurgency or counterinsurgency[8] (COIN) operation involves actions taken by the recognized government of a nation to contain or quell an insurgency taken up against it.[9] In the main, the insurgents seek to destroy or erase the political authority of the defending authorities in a population they seek to control, and the counter-insurgent forces seek to protect that authority and reduce or eliminate the supplanting authority of the insurgents. Counter-insurgency operations are common during war, occupation and armed rebellions. Counter-insurgency may be armed suppression of a rebellion, coupled with tactics such as divide and rule designed to fracture the links between the insurgency and the population in which the insurgents move. Because it may be difficult or impossible to distinguish between an insurgent, a supporter of an insurgency who is a non-combatant, and entirely uninvolved members of the population, counter-insurgency operations have often rested on a confused, relativistic, or otherwise situational distinction between insurgents and non-combatants.
Scholarship[edit]
Theorists of counter-insurgency warfare have written extensively on the subject since the 1950s and 1960s but as early as the 1720s the third Marques of Santa Cruz de Marcenado (1684–1732) wrote that insurgencies were often the result of state failure and that the goal of those fighting the insurgents should be to seek the people's "heart and love".[10] The two most influential of scholars of counter-insurgency have been Westerners whose job it had been to fight insurgents (often colonized people). Robert Thompson fought during the Malayan Emergency and David Galula fought during the Algerian War. Together these officers advocated multi-pronged strategies to win over the civilian population to the side of the counter-insurgent.
Classic guidelines[edit]
The widely distributed and influential work of Sir Robert Thompson, counter-insurgency expert of the Malayan Emergency, offers several such guidelines. Thompson's underlying assumption was that the counter-insurgent was committed to improving the rule of law and bettering local governance.[11] Some governments, however, give such considerations short shrift. These governments are not interested in state-building and in extreme cases they have carried out counter-insurgency operations by using mass murder, genocide, terror, torture and execution. Historian Timothy Snyder has written, "In the guise of anti-partisan actions, the Germans killed perhaps three quarters of a million people, about 350,000 in Belarus alone, and lower but comparable numbers in Poland and Yugoslavia. The Germans killed more than a hundred thousand Poles when suppressing the Warsaw Uprising of 1944."[12]
In the Vietnam War, the Americans "defoliated countless trees in areas where the communist North Vietnamese troops hid supply lines and conducted guerrilla warfare",[13] (see Operation Ranch Hand). In the Soviet war in Afghanistan, the Soviets countered the U.S.–backed Mujahideen with a 'Scorched Earth' policy, driving over one third of the Afghan population into exile (over 5 million people), and carrying out widespread destruction of villages, granaries, crops, herds and irrigation systems, including the deadly and widespread mining of fields and pastures.[14][15]
Variants[edit]
Some writers on counter-insurgency warfare emphasize the more turbulent nature of today's guerrilla warfare environment, where the clear political goals, parties and structures of such places as Vietnam, Malaysia, and El Salvador are not as prevalent. These writers point to numerous guerrilla conflicts that center around religious, ethnic or even criminal enterprise themes, and that do not lend themselves to the classic "national liberation" template.
The wide availability of the Internet has also caused changes in the tempo and mode of guerrilla operations in such areas as coordination of strikes, leveraging of financing, recruitment, and media manipulation. While the classic guidelines still apply, today's anti-guerrilla forces need to accept a more disruptive, disorderly and ambiguous mode of operation. According to David Kilcullen:

Insurgents may not be seeking to overthrow the state, may have no coherent strategy or may pursue a faith-based approach difficult to counter with traditional methods. There may be numerous competing insurgencies in one theater, meaning that the counterinsurgent must control the overall environment rather than defeat a specific enemy. The actions of individuals and the propaganda effect of a subjective "single narrative" may far outweigh practical progress, rendering counterinsurgency even more non-linear and unpredictable than before. The counterinsurgent, not the insurgent, may initiate the conflict and represent the forces of revolutionary change. The economic relationship between insurgent and population may be diametrically opposed to classical theory. And insurgent tactics, based on exploiting the propaganda effects of urban bombing, may invalidate some classical tactics and render others, like patrolling, counterproductive under some circumstances. Thus, field evidence suggests, classical theory is necessary but not sufficient for success against contemporary insurgencies.[16]

Foco theory[edit]
Main article: Foco




A Tuareg rebel fighter in northern Niger, 2008



Why does the guerrilla fighter fight? We must come to the inevitable conclusion that the guerrilla fighter is a social reformer, that he takes up arms responding to the angry protest of the people against their oppressors, and that he fights in order to change the social system that keeps all his unarmed brothers in ignominy and misery.
— Che Guevara[17]

In the 1960s, the Marxist revolutionary Che Guevara developed the foco (Spanish: foquismo) theory of revolution in his book Guerrilla Warfare, based on his experiences during the 1959 Cuban Revolution. This theory was later formalized as "focalism" by Régis Debray. Its central principle is that vanguardism by cadres of small, fast-moving paramilitary groups can provide a focus for popular discontent against a sitting regime, and thereby lead a general insurrection. Although the original approach was to mobilize and launch attacks from rural areas, many foco ideas were adapted into urban guerrilla warfare movements.
See also[edit]





Asymmetric warfare
Cyberwarfare
Fabian strategy
Freedom Fighters
History of guerrilla warfare




List of guerrilla movements
List of guerrillas
List of revolutions and rebellions
Militia
Paramilitary




Special forces
Unconventional warfare
"Yank" Levy





References[edit]
Notes


^ Van Creveld, Martin (2000). "Technology and War II:Postmodern War?". In Charles Townshend. The Oxford History of Modern War. New York, USA: Oxford University Press. pp. 356–358. ISBN 0-19-285373-2. CS1 maint: Uses editors parameter (link)
^ a b McNeilly, Mark. Sun Tzu and the Art of Modern Warfare, 2003, p. 204. "American arming and support of the anti-Soviet Mujahadeen in Afghanistan is another example."
^ Mao Tse-tung, "A Single Spark Can Start a Prairie Fire", Selected Works, Eng. ed., FLP, Peking, 1965, Vol. I.
^ Guevara, Ernesto; Loveman, Brian; Thomas m. Davies, Jr (1985). Guerrilla Warfare. ISBN 9780842026789. 
^ Leonard, Thomas M., Encyclopedia of the developing world, 1989, p. 728. "One of the earliest proponents of guerrilla war tactics is the Chinese master of warfare, Sun Tzu."
^ Snyder, Craig. Contemporary security and strategy, 1999, p. 46. "Many of Sun Tzu's strategic ideas were adopted by the practitioners of guerrilla warfare."
^ Boot, Max (2013). Invisible Armies: An Epic History of Guerrilla Warfare from Ancient Times to the Present. Liveright. pp. 10–11, 55. ISBN 978-0-87140-424-4. 
^ See American and British English spelling differences#Compounds and hyphens
^ An insurgency is a rebellion against a constituted authority (for example an authority recognized as such by the United Nations) when those taking part in the rebellion are not recognized as belligerents (Oxford English Dictionary second edition 1989 "insurgent B. n. One who rises in revolt against constituted authority; a rebel who is not recognized as a belligerent.")
^ Excerpts from Santa Cruz's writings, translated into English, in Beatrice Heuser: The Strategy Makers: Thoughts on War and Society from Machiavelli to Clausewitz (Santa Monica, CA: Greenwood/Praeger, 2010), ISBN 978-0-275-99826-4, pp. 124-146.
^ Thompson, Robert (1966). Defeating Communist Insurgency: The Lessons of Malaya and Vietnam, Chatto & Windus, ISBN 0-7011-1133-X
^ Snyder, Timothy. "Holocaust: The Ignored Reality"
^ Failoa, Anthony (13 November 2006). "In Vietnam, Old Foes Take Aim at War's Toxic Legacy". The Washington Post. Retrieved 31 October 2011. 
^ Kakar, Hassan. The Story of Genocide in Afghanistan
^ Malhuret, Claude. Report from Afghanistan
^ Kilcullen, David. "Counter-insurgency Redux"
^ Guevara, Ernesto; Davies, Thomas M. Guerrilla Warfare, Rowman & Littlefield, 1997, ISBN 0-8420-2678-9, p. 52


Further reading

Asprey, Robert. War in the Shadows: The Guerrilla in History
Beckett, I. F. W. (15 September 2009). Encyclopedia of Guerrilla Warfare (Hardcover). Santa Barbara, California: Abc-Clio Inc. ISBN 0874369290.  ISBN 9780874369298
Derradji Abder-Rahmane, The Algerian Guerrilla Campaign Strategy & Tactics, the Edwin Mellen Press, New York, USA, 1997.
Hinckle, Warren (with Steven Chain and David Goldstein): Guerrilla-Krieg in USA (Guerrilla war in the USA), Stuttgart (Deutsche Verlagsanstalt) 1971. ISBN 3-421-01592-9
Keats, John (1990). They Fought Alone. Time Life. ISBN 0-8094-8555-9
MacDonald, Peter. Giap: The Victor in Vietnam
Maclean, Fitzroy. Disputed Barricade: The Life and Times of Josip Broz Tito
Peers, William R.; Brelis, Dean. Behind the Burma Road: The Story of America's Most Successful Guerrilla Force. Boston: Little, Brown & Co., 1963.
Schmidt, LS. 1982. "American Involvement in the Filipino Resistance on Mindanao During the Japanese Occupation, 1942-1945". M.S. Thesis. U.S. Army Command and General Staff College. 274 pp.
Weber, Olivier, Afghan Eternity, 2002

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Guerrilla warfare.





Look up guerrilla in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.



abcNEWS: The Secret War on YouTube - Pakistani militants conduct raids in Iran
abcNEWS Exclusive: The Secret War - Deadly guerrilla raids in Iran
Insurgency Research Group - Multi-expert blog dedicated to the study of insurgency and the development of counter-insurgency policy.
Guerrilla warfare on Spartacus Educational
Encyclopædia Britannica, Guerrilla warfare
Mao on guerrilla warfare
Relearning Counterinsurgency Warfare
Casebook on Insurgency and Revolutionary Warfare United States Army Special Operations Command
Counter Insurgency Jungle Warfare School (CIJWS)India




Authority control



LCCN: sh85057695
GND: 4022462-4
NDL: 00562419











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Guerrilla_warfare&oldid=818249871"					Categories: Guerrilla warfareWarfare by typeSpanish words and phrasesWars by typeHidden categories: CS1 maint: Uses editors parameterAll articles that may contain original researchArticles that may contain original research from July 2016Articles containing Spanish-language textWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersUse dmy dates from April 2017