"Sea of Cortez" redirects here. For the John Steinbeck book, see The Log from the Sea of Cortez.


Gulf of California



The Gulf of California (highlighted)



Coordinates
28°0′N 112°0′W﻿ / ﻿28.000°N 112.000°W﻿ / 28.000; -112.000Coordinates: 28°0′N 112°0′W﻿ / ﻿28.000°N 112.000°W﻿ / 28.000; -112.000


River sources
Colorado, Fuerte, Mayo, Sinaloa, Sonora, and the Yaqui


Ocean/sea sources
Pacific Ocean


Basin countries
Mexico





Max. length
1,126 km (700 mi)


Max. width
48–241 km (30–150 mi)


Surface area
160,000 km2 (62,000 sq mi)





Islands
37


References
[1]






UNESCO World Heritage Site



Official name
Islands and Protected Areas of the Gulf of California


Type
Natural


Criteria
vii, ix, x


Designated
2005


Reference no.
1182


State Party
Mexico


Region
Latin America and the Caribbean








The Gulf of California (also known as the Sea of Cortez, Sea of Cortés or Vermilion Sea; locally known in the Spanish language as Mar de Cortés or Mar Bermejo or Golfo de California) is a marginal sea of the Pacific Ocean that separates the Baja California Peninsula from the Mexican mainland. It is bordered by the states of Baja California, Baja California Sur, Sonora, and Sinaloa with a coastline of approximately 4,000 km (2,500 mi). Rivers which flow into the Gulf of California include the Colorado, Fuerte, Mayo, Sinaloa, Sonora, and the Yaqui. The gulf's surface area is about 160,000 km2 (62,000 sq mi).
The Gulf is thought to be one of the most diverse seas on the planet, and is home to more than 5,000 species of micro-invertebrates.[2] Home to over a million people, Baja California is the second-longest peninsula in the world, after the Malay Peninsula in Southeast Asia.[3] Parts of the Gulf of California are a UNESCO World Heritage Site.



Contents


1 Geography
2 Temperature
3 Geology
4 Weather
5 Marine Life
6 Shores and tides
7 Estuaries
8 Islands
9 Bathymetry
10 See also
11 Further reading
12 References
13 External links



Geography[edit]
The International Hydrographic Organization defines the southern limit of the Gulf of California as: "A line joining Piastla Point (23°38'N) in Mexico, and the southern extreme of Lower California".[4]
The Gulf of California is 1,126 km (700 mi) long and 48–241 km (30–150 mi) wide, with an area of 177,000 km2 (68,000 sq mi), a mean depth of 818.08 m (2,684.0 ft), and a volume of 145,000 km3 (35,000 cu mi).[1]
The Gulf of California includes three faunal regions:

the Northern Gulf of California
the Central Gulf of California
the Southern Gulf of California

One recognized transition zone is termed the Southwestern Baja California Peninsula. Transition zones exist between faunal regions, and they usually vary for each individual species. (Faunal regions are distinguishable based on the specific types of animals found there.[5])
Temperature[edit]
The temperature of the water in the Gulf of California generally experiences lows of 16 °C (61 °F) in winter and highs of 24 °C (75 °F) in summer. But temperatures can vary greatly in the gulf, and the water is almost always warmer by the coast than the open ocean. For example, the waters surrounding La Paz reach 30 °C (86 °F) in August, while the waters in neighboring city Cabo San Lucas, only reach 26 °C (79 °F).[1][6][7][8]
Occasionally, the northern Gulf of California will go through significantly cold winters. The water in the Northern Gulf can sometimes drop below 8 °C (46 °F), which can lead to a large die-off of marine organisms. The animals most susceptible to the large decrease in water temperature include macroscopic algae and plankton.[3]

Average sea temperatures of Puerto Peñasco[7]

Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec


17 °C
63 °F

16 °C
61 °F

17 °C
63 °F

19 °C
66 °F

21 °C
70 °F

23 °C
73 °F

26 °C
79 °F

28 °C
82 °F

28 °C
82 °F

26 °C
79 °F

23 °C
73 °F

19 °C
66 °F




Average sea temperatures of La Paz[6]

Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec


19 °C
66 °F

19 °C
66 °F

21 °C
70 °F

23 °C
73 °F

25 °C
77 °F

27 °C
81 °F

28 °C
82 °F

30 °C
85 °F

28 °C
82 °F

27 °C
81 °F

24 °C
75 °F

21 °C
70 °F




Average sea temperatures of Cabo San Lucas[9]

Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec


20 °C
68 °F

19 °C
66 °F

19 °C
66 °F

19 °C
66 °F

20 °C
68 °F

21 °C
70 °F

24 °C
75 °F

26 °C
79 °F

26 °C
79 °F

26 °C
79 °F

24 °C
75 °F

22 °C
72 °F



Geology[edit]




Satellite picture of gulf.


Geologic evidence is widely interpreted by geologists as indicating the Gulf of California came into being around 5.3 million years ago as tectonic forces rifted the Baja California Peninsula off the North American Plate.[10] As part of this process, the East Pacific Rise propagated up the middle of the Gulf along the seabed. This extension of the East Pacific Rise is often referred to as the Gulf of California Rift Zone. The Gulf would extend as far as Indio, California, except for the tremendous delta created by the Colorado River. This delta blocks the sea from flooding the Mexicali and Imperial Valleys. Volcanism dominates the East Pacific Rise. The island of Isla Tortuga is one example of this ongoing volcanic activity.[11] Furthermore, hydrothermal vents due to extension tectonic regime, related to the opening of the Gulf of California, are found in the Bahía de Concepción, Baja California Sur.[12]
Weather[edit]
Even though the shores of the Gulf of California are generally sheltered from the continuous wave shock that is experienced by most other North American shores, storms known as a "chubasco" can cause significant damage to shorelines, despite their brevity.[3]
Marine Life[edit]


Giant Pacific manta ray


The narrow sea is home to a unique and rich ecosystem. In addition to a wide range of endemic creatures, such as the critically endangered tiny vaquita (aka "desert porpoise"), it hosts many migratory species, such as the humpback whale, California gray whale, killer whale, manta ray, Humboldt squid and leatherback sea turtle, and the world's largest animal, the blue whale. The unusual resident populations of fin whales and sperm whales do not migrate annually. The area near the delta of the Colorado river has a small remnant population of the totoaba fish. This region has historically been a magnet for world-class sport fishing activities, with a rich history of sporting world records.
The region also has a rich history as a commercial fishery. However, the data vary wildly according to the species being studied, and the Gulf's ability to recuperate after years of overfishing remains uncertain. Moreover, changes in terrestrial ecology, such as the vast reduction in flow from the Colorado River into the Gulf, have negatively affected fisheries, particularly in the northern region.
The Gulf of California sustains a large number of marine mammals, many of which are rare and endangered. Its more than 900 islands are important nesting sites for thousands of seabirds, and its waters are primary breeding, feeding, and nursing grounds for myriad migratory and resident fish species. For decades, the gulf has been a primary source of two of Mexico's leading marine resources, sardines and anchovies. Water pollution is a problem in the Gulf of California, but the more immediate concerns are overfishing and bottom trawling, which destroys eelgrass beds and shellfish.
Efforts by the Mexican government to create conservation zones and nature reserves have been hampered by lack of enforcement resources, as well as a lack of a political consensus on this issue of conservation of the Gulf.[citation needed] This occurs even though significant areas are a UNESCO World Heritage Site. The thousands of miles of coastline are remote and difficult to police, and the politically powerful commercial fishing industry has been slow to embrace even economically viable conservation measures, much less strict measures of conservation. Conservation of the Gulf's fisheries and coastlines is also complicated by a long history of overcapitalization in the sector, and the direct, often negative, impacts that conservation measures have on the livelihoods of Mexico's coastal inhabitants. At present, the Mexican government and business interests have promoted a macro-level, tourist development vision for the Gulf, the impacts of which on local ecology and society are uncertain.
Coastal communities are highly reliant on both commercial and sport fishing, including San Felipe, San Carlos, Sonora, Cabo San Lucas, La Paz, Loreto, Guaymas, Bahía Kino, Puerto Peñasco, Topolobampo and Mulegé. The well-developed shrimp and sardine fleets of Mazatlán, on the Mexican mainland's Pacific coast, heavily exploit the commercial fisheries of the southern Gulf.
Many marine organisms can only survive within a particular salinity range, which makes salinity a notable factor in determining the types of potentially commercial organisms found in the Gulf of California. The mean annual ranges of salinity of the Sea of Cortez are between 3.5 and 3.58% at the surface.[1] Furthermore, the salinity of the water of the Northern Gulf of California is generally higher than the Central and Southern faunal regions due to the increased amount of evaporation that occurs in that region.[3]
Shores and tides[edit]
The three general types of shores found in the Gulf of California include rocky shore, sandy beach, and tidal flat. Some of the rich biodiversity and high endemism that characterize the Gulf of California and make it such a hotspot for fishing can be attributed to seemingly insignificant factors, such as the types of rocks that make up a shore. Beaches with softer, more porous rocks (such as Coquina limestone, rhyolites, granite, or diorite) generally have a higher species richness than those with harder, smoother rocks (such as basalt or diabase). Porous rocks will naturally have more cracks and crevices in them, making them ideal living spaces for many animals. The rocks themselves, however, generally need to be stable on the shore for a habitat to be stable. Additionally, the color of the rocks can affect the organisms living on a shore. For example, darker rocks will be significantly warmer than lighter ones, and can deter animals that do not have a high tolerance for heat.[3] The northern Gulf of California experiences tidal ranges of up to 5 m (16 ft). Mixed semidiurnal tides are the norm throughout most of the Gulf.
Estuaries[edit]
In the Gulf of California, there are a number of negative estuaries, that is, ones in which the evaporation of seawater is relatively greater than that of the fresh water input. The salinities of these inlets are higher than that of the ocean. The temperatures, poikilothermal, of these negative estuaries also are higher than the general temperature of the Gulf.
It is possible that at one time these estuaries were positive, that is, ones in which the seawater component is diluted; therefore, the water is brackish, with salinity less than that of the ocean.
However, due to human modification of the land use around the Gulf of California and water diversion for municipal and agricultural use, there are no longer many rivers that freely empty into the Gulf of California. The upper Colorado River Delta is one example of a historically major estuary and wetlands ecosystem, that since the 20th century construction of upriver dams and diversion aqueducts on the Colorado River, is now a small ephemeral remnant estuary. It is included in the UNESCO World Heritage Site. The remaining Gulf inlets still are important to several species of fishes, crustaceans, and shellfish that are commercially harvested.[3]
Islands[edit]
The Gulf of California contains 37 major islands – the two largest being Isla Ángel de la Guarda and Tiburón Island. Most of the islands are found on the peninsular side of the gulf. In fact, many of the islands of the Sea of Cortez are the result of volcanic explosions that occurred during the early history of Baja California. The islands of Islas Marías, Islas San Francisco, and Isla Partida are thought to be the result of such explosions. The formations of the islands, however, are not dependent on each other. They were each formed as a result of an individual structural occurrence.[3] Several islands, including Isla Coronados, are home to volcanoes.
The gulf has more than 900 islets and islands which together total about 420 hectares. All of them as a whole were enacted as "Area Reserve and Migratory Bird Refuge and Wildlife" on August 2, 1978. In June 2000, the islands were given a new category "Protection Area Wildlife". In addition to this effort by the Mexican government, for its importance and recognition worldwide, all islands in the Gulf of California are also part of the international program "Man and Biosphere" (MAB) and are part of the World Reserve Network UNESCO Biosphere as Special Biosphere Reserve. Due to the vast expanse covered by this federal protected area conservation and management is carried out through a system of four regional directorates (one per bordering the Gulf of California state) by way of co-direction. There is a regional directorate in the states of Baja California, Baja California Sur, Sonora and Sinaloa. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the work of direct and indirect conservation is done in the islands is governed by a single Management Program, published in 2000, which is complemented by local and specific management programs (at individuals) archipelagos. The Directorate of Protection Area Wildlife California Gulf Islands (APFF-GCR) in Baja California is responsible for 56 islands located off the coast of the state. These are grouped into four archipelagos: San Luis Gonzaga or Enchanted, Guardian Angel, Bahia de los Angeles and San Lorenzo.[13][14]
Bathymetry[edit]
Depth soundings in the gulf have ranged from fording depth at the estuary near Yuma, Arizona, to in excess of 3,000 meters (9,800 ft) in the deepest parts. The depth of the water helps to determine its temperature. For example, shallow depths are directly influenced by the local temperature of the air, while deeper waters are less susceptible to changes in air temperature.[3]
See also[edit]

List of western shore communities on the Gulf of California

Further reading[edit]

Brusca, Richard C. (Editor) (2010). The Gulf of California: Biodiversity and Conservation. University of Arizona Press. pp. 354 pages. CS1 maint: Extra text: authors list (link) Studies by researchers, on both sides of the border, on the threats to the diversity of species in the gulf's waters.

References[edit]


^ a b c d Rebekah K. Nix. "The Gulf of California: A Physical, Geological, and Biological Study" (PDF). University of Texas at Dallas. Retrieved April 10, 2010. 
^ Ernesto Campos, Alma Rosa de Campos & Jesús Angel de León-González (2009). "Diversity and ecological remarks of ectocommensals and ectoparasites (Annelida, Crustacea, Mollusca) of echinoids (Echinoidea: Mellitidae) in the Sea of Cortez, Mexico". Parasitology Research. 105 (2): 479–487. doi:10.1007/s00436-009-1419-8. 
^ a b c d e f g h Richard C. Brusca (1973). A Handbook to the Common Intertidal Invertebrates of the Gulf of California. Tucson, Arizona: University of Arizona Press. pp. 10–15. ISBN 0-8165-0356-7. 
^ "Limits of Oceans and Seas, 3rd edition" (PDF). International Hydrographic Organization. 1953. Retrieved February 7, 2010. 
^ "The Gulf of California Invertebrate Database: The Invertebrate Portion of the Macrofauna Golfo Database". Arizona-Sonora Desert Museum: Center for Sonoran Desert Studies. 
^ a b [1] Archived December 21, 2011, at the Wayback Machine.
^ a b "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 2012-07-15. Retrieved 2012-06-12. 
^ "Marine Biology of Baja California". Math.ucr.edu. Retrieved 2013-12-08. 
^ "San Jorge Water Temperature (Sea) and Wetsuit Guide (Baja Sur, Mexico)". Surf-forecast.com. Retrieved 2013-12-08. 
^ Hamilton, W.B., 1961, Origin of the Gulf of California: GSA Bull., 72, 1307-1318.
^ "Science Plans RCL". review.nsf-margins.org. Retrieved May 27, 2008. 
^ Leal-Acosta, M.L., Prol-Ledesma, R.M., (2016). "Caracterización geoquímica de las manifestaciones termales intermareales de Bahía Concepción en la Península de Baja California" (PDF). Boletín de la Sociedad Geológica Mexicana (in Spanish). 68 (3): 395–407. CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link)
^ "Valle de los Cirios. Tesoro de Baja California". 14 July 2010. 
^ "Área de Protección de Flora y Fauna Islas del Golfo de California en Baja California". 


External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Gulf of California.





Wikisource has original text related to this article:
Gulf of California




All About Baja - Learn all about the Sea of Cortez and the entire Baja peninsula.
CEDO Intercultural
Desert Museum







v
t
e


Earth's oceans and seas



Arctic Ocean



Amundsen Gulf
Barents Sea
Beaufort Sea
Chukchi Sea
East Siberian Sea
Greenland Sea
Gulf of Boothia
Kara Sea
Laptev Sea
Lincoln Sea
Prince Gustav Adolf Sea
Pechora Sea
Queen Victoria Sea
Wandel Sea
White Sea





Atlantic Ocean



Adriatic Sea
Aegean Sea
Alboran Sea
Archipelago Sea
Argentine Sea
Baffin Bay
Balearic Sea
Baltic Sea
Bay of Biscay
Bay of Bothnia
Bay of Campeche
Bay of Fundy
Black Sea
Bothnian Sea
Caribbean Sea
Celtic Sea
English Channel
Foxe Basin
Greenland Sea
Gulf of Bothnia
Gulf of Finland
Gulf of Lion
Gulf of Guinea
Gulf of Maine
Gulf of Mexico
Gulf of Saint Lawrence
Gulf of Sidra
Gulf of Venezuela
Hudson Bay
Ionian Sea
Irish Sea
Irminger Sea
James Bay
Labrador Sea
Levantine Sea
Libyan Sea
Ligurian Sea
Marmara Sea
Mediterranean Sea
Myrtoan Sea
North Sea
Norwegian Sea
Sargasso Sea
Sea of Åland
Sea of Azov
Sea of Crete
Sea of the Hebrides
Thracian Sea
Tyrrhenian Sea
Wadden Sea





Indian Ocean



Andaman Sea
Arabian Sea
Bali Sea
Bay of Bengal
Flores Sea
Great Australian Bight
Gulf of Aden
Gulf of Aqaba
Gulf of Khambhat
Gulf of Kutch
Gulf of Oman
Gulf of Suez
Java Sea
Laccadive Sea
Mozambique Channel
Persian Gulf
Red Sea
Timor Sea





Pacific Ocean



Arafura Sea
Banda Sea
Bering Sea
Bismarck Sea
Bohai Sea
Bohol Sea
Camotes Sea
Celebes Sea
Ceram Sea
Chilean Sea
Coral Sea
East China Sea
Gulf of Alaska
Gulf of Anadyr
Gulf of California
Gulf of Carpentaria
Gulf of Fonseca
Gulf of Panama
Gulf of Thailand
Gulf of Tonkin
Halmahera Sea
Koro Sea
Mar de Grau
Molucca Sea
Moro Gulf
Philippine Sea
Salish Sea
Savu Sea
Sea of Japan
Sea of Okhotsk
Seto Inland Sea
Shantar Sea
Sibuyan Sea
Solomon Sea
South China Sea
Sulu Sea
Tasman Sea
Visayan Sea
Yellow Sea





Southern Ocean



Amundsen Sea
Bellingshausen Sea
Cooperation Sea
Cosmonauts Sea
Davis Sea
D'Urville Sea
King Haakon VII Sea
Lazarev Sea
Mawson Sea
Riiser-Larsen Sea
Ross Sea
Scotia Sea
Somov Sea
Weddell Sea





Landlocked seas



Aral Sea
Caspian Sea
Dead Sea
Salton Sea








  Book
  Category












v
t
e


Coastal geography



Landforms



Anchialine pool
Archipelago
Atoll
Avulsion
Ayre
Barrier island
Bay
Baymouth bar
Bight
Bodden
Brackish marsh
Cape
Channel
Cliff
Coast
Coastal plain
Coastal waterfall
Continental margin
Continental shelf
Coral reef
Cove
Dune

cliff-top


Estuary
Firth
Fjard
Fjord
Freshwater marsh
Fundus
Gat
Geo
Gulf
Gut
Headland
Inlet
Intertidal wetland
Island
Islet
Isthmus
Lagoon
Machair
Marine terrace
Mega delta
Mouth bar
Mudflat
Natural arch
Peninsula
Reef
Regressive delta
Ria
River delta
Salt marsh
Shoal
Shore
Skerry
Sound
Spit
Stack
Strait
Strand plain
Submarine canyon
Tidal island
Tidal marsh
Tide pool
Tied island
Tombolo
Windwatt










Beaches



Beach cusps
Beach evolution
Coastal morphodynamics
Beach ridge
Beachrock
Pocket beach
Raised beach
Recession
Shell beach
Shingle beach
Storm beach
Wash margin





Processes



Blowhole
Cliffed coast
Coastal biogeomorphology
Coastal erosion
Concordant coastline
Current
Cuspate foreland
Discordant coastline
Emergent coastline
Feeder bluff
Fetch
Flat coast
Graded shoreline
Headlands and bays
Ingression coast
Large-scale coastal behaviour
Longshore drift
Marine regression
Marine transgression
Raised shoreline
Rip current
Rocky shore
Sea cave
Sea foam
Shoal
Steep coast
Submergent coastline
Surf break
Surf zone
Surge channel
Swash
Undertow
Volcanic arc
Wave-cut platform
Wave shoaling
Wind wave
Wrack zone





Management



Accretion
Coastal management
Integrated coastal zone management
Submersion





Related



Bulkhead line
Grain size

boulder
clay
cobble
granule
pebble
sand
shingle
silt


Intertidal zone
Littoral zone
Physical oceanography
Region of freshwater influence








 Category
 Commons












v
t
e


World Heritage Sites in Mexico



North West



Archaeological Zone of Paquimé, Casas Grandes
El Pinacate y Gran Desierto de Altar Biosphere Reserve
Islands and Protected Areas of the Gulf of California1
Rock Paintings of Sierra de San Francisco
Whale Sanctuary of El Vizcaino








North Central



El Camino Real de Tierra Adentro
Franciscan Missions in the Sierra Gorda of Querétaro
Historic Centre of Zacatecas
Historic Monuments Zone of Querétaro
Historic Town of Guanajuato and Adjacent Mines
Protected town of San Miguel and the Sanctuary of Jesús Nazareno de Atotonilco





West



Agave Landscape and Ancient Industrial Facilities of Tequila
Archipiélago de Revillagigedo
Historic Centre of Morelia
Hospicio Cabañas, Guadalajara
Islands and Protected Areas of the Gulf of California1
Monarch Butterfly Biosphere Reserve1





East



Earliest 16th-century Monasteries on the slopes of Popocatépetl1
Pre-Hispanic City of El Tajín
Historic Centre of Puebla
Historic Monuments Zone of Tlacotalpan





South West



Historic Centre of Oaxaca and Archaeological Site of Monte Albán
Prehistoric Caves of Yagul and Mitla in the Central Valley of Oaxaca
Pre-Hispanic City and National Park of Palenque





South Central



Archaeological Monuments Zone of Xochicalco
Aqueduct of Padre Tembleque Hydraulic System
Central University City Campus of the UNAM
Earliest 16th-century Monasteries on the slopes of Popocatépetl1
El Camino Real de Tierra Adentro
Historic Centres of Mexico City and Xochimilco
Luis Barragán House and Studio
Monarch Butterfly Biosphere Reserve1
Pre-Hispanic City of Teotihuacán





South East



Ancient Maya City of Calakmul, Campeche
Historic Fortified Town of Campeche
Pre-Hispanic City of Chichén Itzá
Sian Ka'an
Pre-Hispanic Town of Uxmal








1 Shared by more than one region











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Gulf_of_California&oldid=807005432"					Categories: World Heritage Sites in MexicoGulf of CaliforniaGulfs of MexicoGulfs of the Pacific OceanPacific Coast of MexicoLandforms of Baja CaliforniaLandforms of Baja California SurLandforms of SonoraLandforms of SinaloaColorado RiverEcoregions of MexicoCenozoic MexicoCenozoic rifts and grabensHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksCS1 maint: Multiple names: authors listCS1 Spanish-language sources (es)Coordinates on WikidataArticles which use infobox templates with no data rowsAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from March 2012CS1 maint: Extra text: authors list