





This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (February 2010) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)




Gynaecology


A dilating vaginal speculum, a tool for examining the vagina, in a model of the female reproductive system



System
Female reproductive system


Subdivisions
Oncology, Maternal medicine, Maternal-fetal medicine


Significant diseases
Gynaecological cancers, infertility, dysmenorrhea


Significant tests
Laparoscopy


Specialist
Gynaecologist


Gynaecology or gynecology (see spelling differences) is the medical practice dealing with the health of the female reproductive systems (vagina, uterus, and ovaries) and the breasts. Outside medicine, the term means "the science of women". Its counterpart is andrology, which deals with medical issues specific to the male reproductive system.
Almost all modern gynaecologists are also obstetricians (see obstetrics and gynaecology). In many areas, the specialities of gynaecology and obstetrics overlap.



Contents


1 Etymology
2 History
3 Examination
4 Diseases
5 Therapies
6 Specialist training
7 Gender of physicians
8 See also
9 References
10 External links



Etymology[edit]
The word "gynaecology" comes from the oblique stem (γυναικ-) of Greek γυνή (gyne), "woman", and -logia, "study". Charlotte
History[edit]
The Kahun Gynaecological Papyrus, dated to about 1800 BC, deals with women's complaints—gynaecological diseases, fertility, pregnancy, contraception, etc. The text is divided into thirty-four sections, each section dealing with a specific problem and containing diagnosis and treatment; no prognosis is suggested. Treatments are non surgical, comprising applying medicines to the affected body part or swallowing them. The womb is at times seen as the source of complaints manifesting themselves in other body parts.[1]
The Hippocratic Corpus contains several gynaecological treatises dating to the 5th/4th centuries BC. Aristotle is another strong source for medical texts from the 4th century BC with his descriptions of biology primarily found in History of Animals, Parts of Animals, Generation of Animals. [2] The gynaecological treatise Gynaikeia by Soranus of Ephesus (1st/2nd century AD) is extant (together with a 6th-century Latin paraphrase by Muscio, a physician of the same school). He was the chief representative of the school of physicians known as the "Methodists".
J. Marion Sims is widely considered the father of modern gynaecology.[3] Now criticized for the short comings.[clarification needed][4] He developed some of his techniques by operating on slaves, many of whom were not given anaesthesia.[5] Sims performed surgeries on 12 enslaved women in his homemade backyard hospital for four years. While performing the surgeries he invited men physicians and students to come watch the invasive and painful surgeries while the women were exposed. On one of the women, named Anarcha, he performed 13 surgeries and without anesthesia. Due to having so many enslaved women he would rotate from one to another continuous trying to perfect the repairment of fistulas. In the four years he performed these surgeries the physicians and students lost interest in assisting him. Due to this he got the other enslaved women, who were healing from their surgeries, to assist him in the operations, which required them to help in the performance of these painful surgeries on the other women. In 1855 Sims went on to found the Woman's Hospital in New York, this was the first hospital specifically for female disorders.[6]
Examination[edit]




The historic taboo associated with the examination of female genitalia has long inhibited the science of gynaecology. This 1822 drawing by Jacques-Pierre Maygrier shows a "compromise" procedure, in which the physician is kneeling before the woman but cannot see her genitalia. Modern gynaecology no longer uses such a position.


In some countries, women must first see a general practitioner (GP; also known as a family practitioner (FP)) prior to seeing a gynaecologist. If their condition requires training, knowledge, surgical procedure, or equipment unavailable to the GP, the patient is then referred to a gynaecologist. In the United States, however, law and many health insurance plans allow gynaecologists to provide primary care in addition to aspects of their own specialty. With this option available, some women opt to see a gynaecological surgeon for non-gynaecological problems without another physician's referral.
As in all of medicine, the main tools of diagnosis are clinical history and examination. Gynaecological examination is quite intimate, more so than a routine physical exam. It also requires unique instrumentation such as the speculum. The speculum consists of two hinged blades of concave metal or plastic which are used to retract the tissues of the vagina and permit examination of the cervix, the lower part of the uterus located within the upper portion of the vagina. Gynaecologists typically do a bimanual examination (one hand on the abdomen and one or two fingers in the vagina) to palpate the cervix, uterus, ovaries and bony pelvis. It is not uncommon to do a rectovaginal examination for complete evaluation of the pelvis, particularly if any suspicious masses are appreciated. Male gynaecologists may have a female chaperone for their examination. An abdominal or vaginal ultrasound can be used to confirm any abnormalities appreciated with the bimanual examination or when indicated by the patient's history.
Diseases[edit]
Examples of conditions dealt with by a gynaecologist are:

Cancer and pre-cancerous diseases of the reproductive organs including ovaries, fallopian tubes, uterus, cervix, vagina, and vulva
Incontinence of urine
Amenorrhoea (absent menstrual periods)
Dysmenorrhoea (painful menstrual periods)
Infertility
Menorrhagia (heavy menstrual periods); a common indication for hysterectomy
Prolapse of pelvic organs
Infections of the vagina (vaginitis), cervix and uterus (including fungal, bacterial, viral, and protozoal)
UTI and Pelvic Inflammatory Disease
Premenstrual Syndrome
Other vaginal diseases

There is some crossover in these areas. For example, a woman with urinary incontinence may be referred to a urologist.
Therapies[edit]
As with all surgical specialties, gynaecologists may employ medical or surgical therapies (or many times, both), depending on the exact nature of the problem that they are treating. Pre- and post-operative medical management will often employ many standard drug therapies, such as antibiotics, diuretics, antihypertensives, and antiemetics. Additionally, gynaecologists make frequent use of specialized hormone-modulating therapies (such as Clomifene citrate and hormonal contraception) to treat disorders of the female genital tract that are responsive to pituitary or gonadal signals.
For lists of gynaecological drugs (by the ATC classification system), see ATC code G01 and ATC code G02.
Surgery, however, is the mainstay of gynaecological therapy. For historical and political reasons, gynaecologists were previously not considered "surgeons", although this point has always been the source of some controversy. Modern advancements in both general surgery and gynaecology, however, have blurred many of the once rigid lines of distinction. The rise of sub-specialties within gynaecology which are primarily surgical in nature (for example urogynaecology and gynaecological oncology) have strengthened the reputations of gynaecologists as surgical practitioners, and many surgeons and surgical societies have come to view gynaecologists as comrades of sorts. As proof of this changing attitude, gynaecologists are now eligible for fellowship in both the American College of Surgeons and Royal Colleges of Surgeons, and many newer surgical textbooks include chapters on (at least basic) gynaecological surgery.
Some of the more common operations that gynaecologists perform include:

Dilation and curettage (removal of the uterine contents for various reasons, including completing a partial miscarriage and diagnostic sampling for dysfunctional uterine bleeding refractive to medical therapy)
Hysterectomy (removal of the uterus)
Oophorectomy (removal of the ovaries)
Tubal ligation (a type of permanent sterilization)
Hysteroscopy (inspection of the uterine cavity)
Diagnostic laparoscopy – used to diagnose and treat sources of pelvic and abdominal pain; perhaps most famously used to provide a definitive diagnosis of endometriosis.
Exploratory laparotomy – may be used to investigate the level of progression of benign or malignant disease, or to assess and repair damage to the pelvic organs.
Various surgical treatments for urinary incontinence, including cystoscopy and sub-urethral slings.
Surgical treatment of pelvic organ prolapse, including correction of cystocele and rectocele.
Appendectomy – often performed to remove site of painful endometriosis implantation or prophylactically (against future acute appendicitis) at the time of hysterectomy or Caesarean section. May also be performed as part of a staging operation for ovarian cancer.
Cervical Excision Procedures (including cryosurgery) – removal of the surface of the cervix containing pre-cancerous cells which have been previously identified on Pap smear.

Specialist training[edit]

Gynaecologist

Occupation


Names
Doctor, Medical Specialist


Specialty



Activity sectors

Medicine


Description



Education required



Doctor of Medicine (M.D. or MBBS)
Doctor of Osteopathic Medicine (D.O.)





Fields of
employment

Hospitals, Clinics


In the UK the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists, based in London, encourages the study and advancement of both the science and practice of obstetrics and gynaecology. This is done through postgraduate medical education and training development, and the publication of clinical guidelines and reports on aspects of the specialty and service provision. The RCOG International Office works with other international organisations to help lower maternal morbidity and mortality in under-resourced countries.
Gynaecologic oncology is a subspecialty of gynaecology, dealing with gynaecology-related cancer.
Gender of physicians[edit]
Despite the patients being predominantly female, like all specialist areas of health, historically gynaecology has been dominated by male doctors. However, in recent times as many of the barriers to access the education and training required to successfully practice gynaecology were removed, women have started to outnumber men in the field.[7] There are a number of reasons for this, ranging from women being motivated to become gynaecologists after having bad experiences with male doctors to men choosing to specialize in different fields.
Possible reasons reported for the decrease in male gynaecologists range from there being a perception of a lack of respect from other doctors towards them, distrust about their motivations for wanting to work exclusively with female sexual organs[8] and questions about their overall character,[9] as well as a concern about being associated with other male gynaecologists who have been arrested for sex offences and limited future employment opportunities.
Surveys have also shown a large and consistent majority of women are uncomfortable being forced to have intimate exams done by a male doctor. They are also less likely to be embarrassed, so as a result talk more openly and in greater details, when discussing their sexual history with another woman rather than a man, leading to questions about the ability of male gynaecologists to offer quality care to patients.[10] This, when coupled with more women choosing female physicians[11] has decreased the employment opportunities for men choosing to become gynaecologists.[12]
As women are becoming presented with a choice of their doctor's gender, their preferences are starting to be questioned too. Almost 70% of respondents to an online poll agreed it is normal for a husband to 'hate' that his wife saw a male gynaecologist.[13] While there have also been reports of relationships having ended due to selection of a male gynaecologist [14] with some men feeling their partner's desire to have another man touching and penetrating their sexual organs for a routine check-up when there were capable and qualified women available, an act of infidelity. Interviews with male gynaecologists where the doctors openly admitted they liked being 'hit on' by some patients while performing intimate exams further underlined many of the suspicion towards men choosing to become gynaecologists.[15]
In the United States, it has been reported that 4 in 5 students choosing a residency in gynaecology are now female.[16] In Sweden, to counter the lack of demand for male gynaecologists, women have had the right to choose their doctor removed from them.[17] In Turkey, due to patient preference to be seen by another female, there are now few male gynaecologists working in the field.[18]
There have been a number of legal challenges in the US against healthcare providers who have started hiring based on gender of physicians. Dr Mircea Veleanu argued, in part, that his former employers discriminated against him by accommodating the wishes of female patients who had requested female doctors for intimate exams.[19] A male nurse complained about an advert for an all-female obstetrics and gynaecology practice in Columbia, Maryland claiming this was a form of sexual discrimination.[20] Dr David Garfinkel, a New Jersey-based ob-gyn sued his former employer after being fired due to, as he claimed, "because I was male, I wasn't drawing as many patients as they'd expected".[19]
So far, all legal challenges by male gynaecologists to remove patient choice have failed due to there being protection in law for 'bona fide occupational qualification' which in previous cases involving wash-room attendants and male nurses have recognized a justification for gender-based requirements for certain jobs.
See also[edit]

Howard Atwood Kelly
Childbirth and obstetrics in antiquity
Genital schistosomiasis
Hydatidiform mole
Gynography
List of bacterial vaginosis microbiota

References[edit]


^ Laurinda S. Dixon. Perilous Chastity: Women and Illness in Pre-Enlightenment Art and Medicine, Cornell University Press 1995, pp.15f.
^ Lesley Dean-Jones, "The Cultural Construct of the Female Body" In Women’s History and Ancient History, ed. Susan B. Pomeroy (Chapel Hill: The University of North Carolina Press, 1991), 113.
^ Semple, Henry Churchill (1923). J. Marion Sims, the Father of Modern Gynecology. Retrieved 11 October 2013. 
^ Daly, Mary (1990). Gyn/ecology: The Metaethics of Radical Feminism. Beacon Press. pp. 225–. ISBN 9780807014134. Retrieved 11 October 2013. 
^ Adekunle, Julius O.; Williams, Hettie V. (2010-02-24). Color Struck: Essays on Race and Ethnicity in Global Perspective. University Press of America. pp. 397–. ISBN 9780761850922. Retrieved 11 October 2013. 
^ Wallace-Sanders, Kimberly (2002). Skin Deep, Spirit Strong (PDF). Mastering the Female Pelvis. 
^ "From Past to Present: The Changing Demographics of Women in Medicine". 2008-02-01. Archived from the original on 2014-07-03. Retrieved 2014-06-24. 
^ "Why Are Men Gynaecologists?". 2013-12-04. Retrieved 2014-06-24. [permanent dead link]
^ "Are Male Gynecologists Creepy?". 2013-12-09. Retrieved 2014-06-24. 
^ Hall Judith A, Roter Debra L (2002-12-02). "Do patients talk differently to male and female physicians?: A meta-analytic review". Patient Education and Counseling. 48: 217–224. doi:10.1016/S0738-3991(02)00174-X. Retrieved 2014-06-24. 
^ "Patient choice: comparing criteria for selecting an obstetrician-gynaecologist based on image, gender, and professional attributes". 2007-03-15. Retrieved 2014-06-24. 
^ "Career Trends for OB/GYN Physician Jobs". Retrieved 2014-06-24. 
^ "Is it normal that I hate when my wife has to see a male gynecologist?". Retrieved 2014-07-23. 
^ "How Husbands Feel About Male Gynecologists". Retrieved 2014-07-23. 
^ "10 Men Explain Why They Became Gynecologists". Retrieved 2014-09-26. 
^ "Enhancing the Representation of Women as Senior Leaders in Obstetrics and Gynaecology" (PDF). Retrieved 2014-06-24. [permanent dead link]
^ "Discrimination against male gynaecologists? Swedish clinics ban women from choosing female doctors". 2007-01-29. Retrieved 2014-06-24. 
^ "Male Gynaecologist in Turkey: Dying profession?". 2014-05-22. Archived from the original on 2016-03-04. Retrieved 2014-06-25. 
^ a b "Women's Health Is No Longer a Man's World". 2001-02-07. Retrieved 2014-07-14. 
^ "Nurse questions all female OB-GYN practice". 2014-02-02. Retrieved 2014-07-14. 


External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Gynaecology.



Ingenious: archive of historical images related to obstetrics, gynaecology, and contraception.
U.S. Federal Government Website for Women's Health Information.







v
t
e


Medicine






Outline
History





Specialties
and
subspecialties





Surgery






Cardiac surgery
Cardiothoracic surgery
Colorectal surgery
Eye surgery
General surgery
Neurosurgery
Oral and maxillofacial surgery
Orthopedic surgery
Hand surgery
Otolaryngology (ENT)
Pediatric surgery
Plastic surgery
Reproductive surgery
Surgical oncology
Thoracic surgery
Transplant surgery
Trauma surgery
Urology

Andrology


Vascular surgery








Internal medicine






Allergy / Immunology
Angiology
Cardiology
Endocrinology
Gastroenterology

Hepatology


Geriatrics
Hematology
Hospital medicine
Infectious disease
Nephrology
Oncology
Pulmonology
Rheumatology








Obstetrics and gynaecology






Gynaecology
Gynecologic oncology
Maternal–fetal medicine
Obstetrics
Reproductive endocrinology and infertility
Urogynecology








Diagnostic






Radiology

Interventional radiology
Nuclear medicine


Pathology

Anatomical pathology
Clinical pathology
Clinical chemistry
Clinical immunology
Cytopathology
Medical microbiology
Transfusion medicine










Other specialties






Addiction medicine
Adolescent medicine
Anesthesiology
Dermatology
Disaster medicine
Diving medicine
Emergency medicine

Mass-gathering medicine


Family medicine
General practice
Hospital medicine
Intensive-care medicine
Medical genetics
Neurology

Clinical neurophysiology


Occupational medicine
Ophthalmology
Oral medicine
Pain management
Palliative care
Pediatrics

Neonatology


Physical medicine and rehabilitation (PM&R)
Preventive medicine
Psychiatry
Public health
Radiation oncology
Reproductive medicine
Sexual medicine
Sleep medicine
Sports medicine
Transplantation medicine
Tropical medicine

Travel medicine


Venereology








Medical education



Medical school
Bachelor of Medicine, Bachelor of Surgery
Bachelor of Medical Sciences
Master of Medicine
Master of Surgery
Doctor of Medicine
Doctor of Osteopathic Medicine
MD–PhD





Related topics



Allied health

Dentistry
Podiatry
Physiotherapy


Nanomedicine
Molecular oncology
Personalized medicine
Veterinary medicine
Physician

Chief physician


History of medicine








 Book












v
t
e


Reproductive health



Rights



Compulsory sterilization
Contraceptive security
Genital integrity

Circumcision controversies
Genital modification and mutilation
Intersex







Education



Genetic counseling
Pre-conception counseling
Sex education





Planning



Assisted reproductive technology
Birth control
Childfree/Childlessness
Parenting

Adoption
Childbirth
Foster care


Reproductive life plan
Safe sex





Health



Men's
Women's

Vulvovaginal


Research

Self-report sexual risk behaviors







Pregnancy



Abortion
Maternal health
Obstetrics
Options counseling
Pregnancy from rape
Pregnant patients' rights
Prenatal care
Teenage pregnancy
Preteen pregnancy
Unintended pregnancy





Medicine



Andrology
Genitourinary medicine
Gynaecology
Obstetrics and gynaecology
Reproductive endocrinology and infertility
Sexual medicine





Disorder



Disorders of sex development
Infertility
Reproductive system disease
Sexual dysfunction
Sexually transmitted infection

Clinic







By country



China
India
Iran
Ireland
Pakistan
Philippines
Singapore
United Kingdom

Teen


United States

Teen pregnancy
Birth control







History



Birth control movement in the United States
History of condoms
Social hygiene movement
Timeline of reproductive rights legislation





Policy



One-child policy
Two-child policy
Financial

Baby bonus
Bachelor tax
Birth credit
Child benefit
Tax on childlessness














v
t
e


Human sexuality and sexology




Sexual relationship
phenomena




Asexuality

Gray asexuality


Bisexuality
Casual relationship
Casual sex
Celibacy
Celibacy syndrome
Committed relationship
Free love
Foreplay
Herbivore men
Heterosexuality
Homosexuality
Hypersexuality
Marriage
One-night stand
Polyamory
Promiscuity

Female


Romantic love

Romantic orientation


Flirting
Sex life
Sexual abstinence
Sexual partner
Single person
Swinging





Sexual dynamics



Hypergamy
Intersex
Physical attractiveness
Sexual attraction
Sexual ethics





See also



Sexual addiction
Sex Addicts Anonymous
Sexual surrogate









Authority control



GND: 4018225-3
NDL: 00940387











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Gynaecology&oldid=817253455"					Categories: GynaecologyHidden categories: All articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from October 2017Articles with permanently dead external linksUse British English Oxford spelling from August 2016Articles needing additional references from February 2010All articles needing additional referencesPages using deprecated image syntaxWikipedia articles needing clarification from February 2017Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers