

Part of a series on


Hadith







Hadith studies


Terminology
Types (categories)
Biographical evaluation
Criticism
Musannaf
Isra'iliyyat








Collections





Sunni1




Kutub Al-Sittah
("The Six Books")



Sahih Bukhari
صحيح البخاري


Sahih Muslim
صحيح مسلم


Al-Sunan Al-Sughra
السنن الصغرى


Sunan Abu Dawood
سنن أبي داود


Sunan al-Tirmidhi
جامع الترمذي


Sunan ibn Maja
سُنن ابن ماجه





Others




Muwatta Imam Malik



Musnad Ahmad Ibn Hanbal



Sunan Al-Darimi




Shama'il Muhammadiyah
(Shamaail Tirmidhi)




Sahih Ibn Khuzaymah



Ṣaḥīḥ Ibn Ḥibbān



Al-Mustadrak a. Al-Ṣaḥīḥaīn



Al-Mawdū'āt Al-Kubrā



Rīaḍ As-Ṣāliḥīn



Mishkat Al-Masabih



Talkhis Al-Mustadrak



Majma Al-Zawa'id



Bulugh Al-Maram



Kanz al-Ummal



Zujajat al-Masabih



Muntakhab Ahadith










Shi'ah




Al-Kutub Al-Arb'ah
("The Four Books")



Kitab Al-Kafi
الكتاب الكافي



Man La Yahduruhu
Al-Faqih

من لا يحضره الفقيه


Tahdhib Al-Ahkam
تهذیب الاحکام


Al-Istibsar
الاستبصار





Others




Nahj Al-Balagha



Book of Sulaym Ibn Qays



Al-Sahifa Al-Sajjadiyya



Al-Risalah al-Huquq



Sahifah of al-Ridha



Al-Risalah al-Dhahabiah



Daim al-Islam



Uyun al Akhbar ar Reda



Bihar Al-Anwar



Wasā'il Al-Shīʿah



Haqq al-Yaqeen



Ain Al-Hayat



Al-Ghadir










Ibadi


Jami Sahih
Tartib al-Musnad








1 - Books also revered by Ahmadis











Related topics


Jihad in Hadith
Ahl al-Hadith








Category
Book







v
t
e





A hadith (/ˈhædɪθ/[1] or /hɑːˈdiːθ/;[2] Arabic: حديث‎ ḥadīth, plural: ahadith, أحاديث, ʼaḥādīth[3]) is one of various reports describing the words, actions, or habits of the Islamic prophet Muhammad.[3] The term comes from the Arabic language and means a "report", "account" or "narrative".[4]:471 Unlike the Qur'an, which is the same literary work recognized by all Muslims, the ahadith are not one single same collection.
The ahadith refers to different hadith collections, and different branches of Islam (Sunni, Shia, Ibadi) consult different collections of hadith, while the relatively small sect of Quranists reject the authority of any of the hadith collections altogether.[5][6]
Just as the minority Quranists are not a single community, believers of the ahadith, or hadithists, are also not a single community. Hadithists simply share the feature that, in addition to Quran, they incorporate belief and practice of ahadith— though not necessarily the same hadith collection.
Among most hadithists, the importance of ahadith is secondary to Qur'an given that, at least in theory, an Islamic conflict of laws doctrine holds Qur'anic supremacy above ahadith in developing Islamic jurisprudence.[7] Despite this, however, a minority of hadithists have historically placed ahadith at a par with the Qur'an. A smaller minority yet have even upheld ahadith that contradict the Qur'an, thereby in practice placing ahadith above Qur'an, claiming that contradicting ahadith abrogate those parts of the Qur'an with which they conflict.
The hadith literature is based on spoken reports that were in circulation in society after the death of Muhammad. Unlike the Qur'an the hadiths were not quickly and concisely compiled during and immediately after Muhammad's life.[3] Hadith were evaluated and gathered into large collections during the 8th and 9th centuries, generations after the death of Muhammad, after the end of the era of the "rightful" Rashidun Caliphate, over 1,000 km (620 mi) from where Muhammad lived.
Hadith are regarded by hadithists as important tools for understanding the Quran and commentaries (tafsir) written on it. Some important elements, which are today taken to be a long-held part of normative traditional Islamic practice and belief, for example, the detailed ritual practice of the five salat (obligatory Islamic prayers), are in fact not mentioned in the Qur'an at all, but are derived solely from the hadith.[8] Hadithists, therefore, maintain that the ahadith are a necessary requirement for the true and proper practice of Islam, as it gives Muslims the nuanced details of Islamic practice and belief in areas where the Qur'an is silent. Quranists, on the contrary, hold the critical view on hadith that anything on which the Qur'an is silent is deliberate because Allah did not hold its detail to be of consequence, and in the case of ahadith that contradict the Qur'an, more so should those ahadith be forcefully rejected outright as a corruption of Islam.
In the classical example of salat (obligatory Islamic prayers), where salat is commanded in the Qur'an, all Muslims agree that salat is an obligatory part of Islamic religious practice. Divergence among Muslims arises, therefore, in how salat is performed. According to hadithists, the details and instructions of how to correctly perform salat, so as to, in their view, "validly" fulfill the Qur'anic commmand of performing salat, can only be found in the ahadith. Despite this, salat is nonetheless performed differently by different hadithist Islamic sects, depending on which hadith collection each hadithist sect relies upon. Quranists, for their part, leave the detail of salat to be a matter between each individual Muslim and Allah, with salat performance done to each Muslim's own individual understanding, interpretation and need. In the Quranists' view, as the Qur'an is deliberately silent on the details of salat, Allah did not hold its detail to be of consequence, so correctly performed salat lies not in any supposed correct details of the performance of prayer, but on a correct intention to perform the prayers, valid however it may be individually performed.
A hadith has two parts in its classic form, the chain of narrators who have transmitted the report (the isnad), and the main text of the report (the matn).[9][10][11][12] Individual hadith are classified by Muslim clerics and jurists as sahih ("authentic"), hasan ("good") or da'if ("weak").[13] However, different groups and different scholars may classify a hadith differently.




A manuscript copy of al-Bukhari, Mamluk era, 13th century, Egypt. Adilnor Collection, Sweden.





Contents


1 Etymology
2 Definition
3 Components
4 Different schools
5 Impact on Islam
6 History, tradition and usage

6.1 History
6.2 Shia and Sunni textual traditions

6.2.1 Extent and nature in the Sunni tradition
6.2.2 Extent and nature in the Shia tradition


6.3 Modern usage


7 Studies

7.1 Terminology: admissible and inadmissible hadiths
7.2 Biographical evaluation


8 Criticism
9 See also
10 References
11 Bibliography
12 Further reading
13 External links



Etymology[edit]


Part of a series on


Muhammad







Life


Life in Mecca
Migration to Medina
Life in Medina
Farewell Pilgrimage
Milestones and records








Career


First revelation
Military career
Diplomatic career
Conquest of Mecca
Hadith








Miracles


Quran
Isra and Mi'raj
Splitting of the moon
Miracles of Muhammad








Views


Jews
Christians








Succession


Farewell Sermon
Hadith (Pen and Paper)
Saqifah
Ahl al-Bayt
Sahaba
History








Praise


Durood
Naat
Mawlid








Perspectives


Islamic
Muhammad in the Bible
Jewish
Medieval Christian
Historicity
Criticism








Related


Mosque of the prophet
Possessions
Relics








 Muhammad portal
 Islam portal







v
t
e





In Arabic, the noun ḥadīth (Arabic: حديث‎ ḥadīth  IPA: [ħaˈdiːθ]) means "report", "account", or "narrative".[14][15] Its Arabic plural is ʾaḥādīth (أحاديث) (IPA: [ʔaħaːˈdiːθ]).[3] Hadith also refers to the speech of a person.[16]
Definition[edit]
In Islamic terminology, according to Juan Campo, the term hadith refers to reports of statements or actions of Muhammad, or of his tacit approval or criticism of something said or done in his presence,[12] though some sources (Khaled Abou El Fadl) limit hadith to verbal reports, with the deeds of Muhammad and reports about his companions being part of the Sunnah not hadith.[17]
Classical hadith specialist Ibn Hajar al-Asqalani says that the intended meaning of hadith in religious tradition is something attributed to Muhammad but that is not found in the Quran.[18]
Other associated words possess similar meanings including: khabar (news, information) often refers to reports about Muhammad, but sometimes refers to traditions about his companions and their successors from the following generation; conversely, athar (trace, vestige) usually refers to traditions about the companions and successors, though sometimes connotes traditions about Muhammad. The word sunnah (custom) is also used in reference to a normative custom of Muhammad or the early Muslim community.[12]
See also: Categories of Ahadith
Components[edit]
The two major aspects of a hadith are the text of the report (the matn), which contains the actual narrative, and the chain of narrators (the isnad), which documents the route by which the report has been transmitted.[9][12] The isnad was an effort to document that a hadith had actually come from Muhammad, and Muslim scholars from the eighth century until today have never ceased repeating the mantra "The isnad is part of the religion - if not for the isnad, whoever wanted could say whatever they wanted."[9] The isnad means literally 'support', and it is so named due to the reliance of the hadith specialists upon it in determining the authenticity or weakness of a hadith.[19] The isnad consists of a chronological list of the narrators, each mentioning the one from whom they heard the hadith, until mentioning the originator of the matn along with the matn itself.
The first people to hear hadith were the companions who preserved it and then conveyed it to those after them. Then the generation following them received it, thus conveying it to those after them and so on. So a companion would say, "I heard the Prophet say such and such." The Follower would then say, "I heard a companion say, 'I heard the Prophet.'" The one after him would then say, "I heard someone say, 'I heard a Companion say, 'I heard the Prophet..." and so on.[20]
Different schools[edit]
Different branches of Islam refer to different collections of hadith, though the same incident may be found in hadith in different collections:

In the Sunni branch of Islam, the canonical hadith collections are the six books, of which Sahih al-Bukhari and Sahih Muslim generally have the highest status. The other books of hadith are Sunan Abu Dawood, Jami` at-Tirmidhi, Al-Sunan al-Sughra and Sunan ibn Majah. However the Malikis, one of the four Sunni "schools of thought" (madhhabs), traditionally reject Sunan ibn Majah and assert the canonical status of Muwatta Imam Malik.
In the Twelver Shi'a branch of Islam, the canonical hadith collections are the Four Books: Kitab al-Kafi, Man la yahduruhu al-Faqih, Tahdhib al-Ahkam, and Al-Istibsar.
In the Ibadi branch of Islam, the main canonical collection is the Tartib al-Musnad. This is an expansion of the earlier Jami Sahih collection, which retains canonical status in its own right.
The Ismaili shia sects use the Daim al-Islam as hadith collections. ‭
The Ahmadiyya sect generally rely on the Sunni canons.
Some minor groups, collectively known as Quranists, reject the authority of the hadith collections altogether.[5][6]

Impact on Islam[edit]
The hadith had a profound and controversial influence on moulding the commentaries (tafsir) of the Quran. The earliest commentary of the Quran known as Tafsir Ibn Abbas is sometimes attributed to the companion Ibn Abbas, but this is rejected by scholars.
The hadith were used in forming the basis of Sharia (the religious law system forming part of the Islamic tradition), and the hadith are at the root of why there is no single Sharia system, but rather a collection of parallel Sharia systems within Islam.
Much of early Islamic history available today is also based on the hadith and is challenged for lack of basis in primary source material, as well as internal contradictions of the secondary material available.
History, tradition and usage[edit]
History[edit]






This assertion re Muslim historians citing Uthman on hadith needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (April 2011) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Traditions of the life of Muhammad and the early history of Islam were passed down mostly orally for more than a hundred years after Muhammad's death in AD 632. Muslim historians say that Caliph Uthman ibn Affan (the third khalifa (caliph) of the Rashidun Caliphate, or third successor of Muhammad, who had formerly been Muhammad's secretary), is generally believed to urge Muslims to record the hadith just as Muhammad suggested to some of his followers to write down his words and actions.[21][22]
Uthman's labours were cut short by his assassination, at the hands of aggrieved soldiers, in 656. No sources survive directly from this period so we are dependent on what later writers tell us about this period.[23]
According to British historian of Arab world Alfred Guillaume, it is "certain" that "several small collections" of hadith were "assembled in Umayyad times."[24]
In 851 the rationalist Mu`tazila school of thought fell from favor in the Abbasid Caliphate.[citation needed] The Mu`tazila, for whom the "judge of truth ... was human reason,"[25] had clashed with traditionists who looked to the literal meaning of the Quran and hadith for truth. While the Quran had been officially compiled and approved, hadiths had not. One result was the number of hadiths began "multiplying in suspiciously direct correlation to their utility" to the quoter of the hadith (Traditionists quoted hadith warning against listening to human opinion instead of Sharia; Hanafites quoted a hadith stating that "In my community there will rise a man called Abu Hanifa [the Hanafite founder] who will be its guiding light". In fact one agreed upon hadith warned that, "There will be forgers, liars who will bring you hadiths which neither you nor your forefathers have heard, Beware of them."[26] In addition the number of hadith grew enormously. While Malik ibn Anas had attributed just 1720 statements or deeds to the Muhammad, it was no longer unusual to find people who had collected a hundred times that number of hadith.[citation needed]
Faced with a huge corpus of miscellaneous traditions supported differing views on a variety of controversial matters—some of them flatly contradicting each other—Islamic scholars of the Abbasid sought to authenticate hadith. Scholars had to decide which hadith were to be trusted as authentic and which had been invented for political or theological purposes. To do this, they used a number of techniques which Muslims now call the science of hadith.[27]
Shia and Sunni textual traditions[edit]


Part of a series on


Islam







Beliefs


Oneness of God


Prophets
Revealed books


Angels
Predestination


Day of Resurrection








Practices


Profession of faith
Prayer


Fasting
Alms-giving
Pilgrimage








Texts and laws


Quran
Sunnah
Hadith


Sharia (law)
Fiqh (jurisprudence)


Kalam (dialectic)








History


Timeline
Muhammad


Ahl al-Bayt
Sahabah
Rashidun


Imamate
Caliphate
Spread of Islam








Culture and society


Calendar
Festivals
Academics
Art
Moral teachings
Children
Denominations
Feminism
Women
Madrasa
Mosque
Philosophy
Politics
Proselytizing
Animals
LGBT
Science
Demographics
Economics
Finance
Social welfare








Related topics


Criticism of Islam
Islam and other religions


Islamism
Islamophobia


Glossary








 Islam portal







v
t
e





Sunni and Shia hadith collections differ because scholars from the two traditions differ as to the reliability of the narrators and transmitters. Narrators who took the side of Abu Bakr and Umar rather than Ali, in the disputes over leadership that followed the death of Muhammad, are seen as unreliable by the Shia; narrations sourced to Ali and the family of Muhammad, and to their supporters, are preferred. Sunni scholars put trust in narrators, such as Aisha, whom Shia reject. Differences in hadith collections have contributed to differences in worship practices and shari'a law and have hardened the dividing line between the two traditions.
Extent and nature in the Sunni tradition[edit]
In the Sunni tradition, the number of such texts is ten thousand plus or minus a few thousand.[28] But if, say, ten companions record a text reporting a single incident in the life of the prophet, hadith scholars can count this as ten hadiths. So Musnad Ahmad, for example, has over 30,000 hadiths—but this count includes texts that are repeated in order to record slight variations within the text or within the chains of narrations. Identifying the narrators of the various texts, comparing their narrations of the same texts to identify both the soundest reporting of a text and the reporters who are most sound in their reporting occupied experts of hadith throughout the 2nd century. In the 3rd century of Islam (from 225/840 to about 275/889),[29] hadith experts composed brief works recording a selection of about two- to five-thousand such texts which they felt to have been most soundly documented or most widely referred to in the Muslim scholarly community.[30] The 4th and 5th century saw these six works being commented on quite widely. This auxiliary literature has contributed to making their study the place of departure for any serious study of hadith. In addition, Bukhari and Muslim in particular, claimed that they were collecting only the soundest of sound hadiths. These later scholars tested their claims and agreed to them, so that today, they are considered the most reliable collections of hadith.[31] Toward the end of the 5th century, Ibn al-Qaisarani formally standardized the Sunni canon into six pivotal works, a delineation which remains to this day.[32][33][34]
Over the centuries, several different categories of collections came into existence. Some are more general, like the muṣannaf, the muʿjam, and the jāmiʿ, and some more specific, either characterized by the topics treated, like the sunan (restricted to legal-liturgical traditions), or by its composition, like the arbaʿīniyyāt (collections of forty hadiths).[35]
Extent and nature in the Shia tradition[edit]
Shi'a Muslims do not use the six major hadith collections followed by the Sunni, as they do not trust many of the Sunni narrators and transmitters. They have their own extensive hadith literature. The best-known hadith collections are The Four Books, which were compiled by three authors who are known as the 'Three Muhammads'.[36] The Four Books are: Kitab al-Kafi by Muhammad ibn Ya'qub al-Kulayni al-Razi (329 AH), Man la yahduruhu al-Faqih by Muhammad ibn Babuya and Al-Tahdhib and Al-Istibsar both by Shaykh Muhammad Tusi. Shi'a clerics also make use of extensive collections and commentaries by later authors.
Unlike Sunnis, Shia do not consider any of their hadith collections to be sahih (authentic) in their entirety. Therefore, every individual hadith in a specific collection must be investigated separately to determine its authenticity.[37]
Modern usage[edit]
The mainstream sects consider hadith to be essential supplements to, and clarifications of, the Quran, Islam's holy book, as well as for clarifying issues pertaining to Islamic jurisprudence. Ibn al-Salah, a hadith specialist, described the relationship between hadith and other aspect of the religion by saying: "It is the science most pervasive in respect to the other sciences in their various branches, in particular to jurisprudence being the most important of them."[38] "The intended meaning of 'other sciences' here are those pertaining to religion," explains Ibn Hajar al-Asqalani, "Quranic exegesis, hadith, and jurisprudence. The science of hadith became the most pervasive due to the need displayed by each of these three sciences. The need hadith has of its science is apparent. As for Quranic exegesis, then the preferred manner of explaining the speech of God is by means of what has been accepted as a statement of Muhammad. The one looking to this is in need of distinguishing the acceptable from the unacceptable. Regarding jurisprudence, then the jurist is in need of citing as an evidence the acceptable to the exception of the later, something only possible utilizing the science of hadith."[7]
Studies[edit]
Main article: Hadith studies
Hadith studies use a number of methods of evaluation developed by early Muslim scholars in determining the veracity of reports attributed to Muhammad. This is achieved by analyzing the text of the report, the scale of the report's transmission, the routes through which the report was transmitted, and the individual narrators involved in its transmission. On the basis of these criteria, various classifications were devised for hadith. The earliest comprehensive work in hadith studies was Abu Muhammad al-Ramahurmuzi's al-Muhaddith al-Fasil, while another significant work was al-Hakim al-Naysaburi's Ma‘rifat ‘ulum al-hadith. Ibn al-Salah's ʻUlum al-hadith is considered the standard classical reference on hadith studies.[12]
Terminology: admissible and inadmissible hadiths[edit]
Main article: Hadith terminology
By means of hadith terminology, hadith are categorized as ṣaḥīḥ (sound, authentic), ḍaʿīf (weak), or mawḍūʿ (fabricated). Other classifications used also include: ḥasan (good), which refers to an otherwise ṣaḥīḥ report suffering from minor deficiency, or a weak report strengthened due to numerous other corroborating reports; and munkar (denounced) which is a report that is rejected due to the presence of an unreliable transmitter contradicting another more reliable narrator.[39] Both sahīh and hasan reports are considered acceptable for usage in Islamic legal discourse. Classifications of hadith may also be based upon the scale of transmission. Reports that pass through many reliable transmitters at each point in the isnad up until their collection and transcription are known as mutawātir. These reports are considered the most authoritative as they pass through so many different routes that collusion between all of the transmitters becomes an impossibility. Reports not meeting this standard are known as aahad, and are of several different types.[12]
Some hadith are also called hadith qudsi (sacred hadith), like Ziyarat Ashura[citation needed]. It is a sub-category of hadith which some Muslims regard as the words of God (Arabic: Allah). According to as-Sayyid ash-Sharif al-Jurjani, the hadith qudsi differ from the Quran in that the former are "expressed in Muhammad's words", whereas the latter are the "direct words of God". However, note that a hadith qudsi is not necessarily sahih, it can also be da‘if or even mawdu‘.[40]
An example of a hadith qudsi is the hadith of Abu Hurairah who said that Muhammad said:

When God decreed the Creation He pledged Himself by writing in His book which is laid down with Him: My mercy prevails over My wrath.[41][non-primary source needed]

Biographical evaluation[edit]
Main article: Biographical evaluation
Another area of focus in the study of hadith is biographical analysis (‘ilm al-rijāl, lit. "science of people"), in which details about the transmitter are scrutinized. This includes analyzing their date and place of birth; familial connections; teachers and students; religiosity; moral behaviour; literary output; their travels; as well as their date of death. Based upon these criteria, the reliability (thiqāt) of the transmitter is assessed. Also determined is whether the individual was actually able to transmit the report, which is deduced from their contemporaneity and geographical proximity with the other transmitters in the chain.[42] Examples of biographical dictionaries include: Abd al-Ghani al-Maqdisi's Al-Kamal fi Asma' al-Rijal, Ibn Hajar al-Asqalani's Tahdhīb al-Tahdhīb and al-Dhahabi's Tadhkirat al-huffaz.[43]
Criticism[edit]
Main article: Criticism of Hadith
The major points of intra-Muslim criticism of the Hadith literature is based in questions regarding its authenticity.[44] However, Muslim criticism of ahadith is also based on theological and philosophical Islamic grounds of argument and critique.
Muslim scholars have a long history of questioning the Hadith literature throughout Islamic history. Western academics also became active in the field later on.
See also[edit]





Book: Hadith
Book: Islam





Prophetic biography
List of hadith authors and commentators

References[edit]



^ "hadith". Oxford English Dictionary (3rd ed.). Oxford University Press. September 2005.  (Subscription or UK public library membership required.)
^ "Hadith". Dictionary.com Unabridged. Random House. Retrieved 2011-08-13. 
^ a b c d Brown, Jonathan A.C. (2009), p. 3.
^ Mohammad Taqi al-Modarresi (26 March 2016). The Laws of Islam (PDF). Enlight Press. ISBN 978-0994240989. Retrieved 22 December 2017. 
^ a b Aisha Y. Musa, The Qur’anists, Florida International University, accessed May 22, 2013.
^ a b Neal Robinson (2013), Islam: A Concise Introduction, Routledge, ISBN 978-0878402243, Chapter 7, pp. 85-89
^ a b Ibn Hajar, Ahmad. al-Nukat ala Kitab ibn al-Salah, vol. 1, p. 90. Maktabah al-Furqan.
^ Brown, Jonathan A.C. (2014). Misquoting Muhammad: The Challenge and Choices of Interpreting the Prophet's Legacy. Oneworld Publications. p. 18. ISBN 978-1780744209. 
^ a b c Brown, Jonathan A.C. (2009), p. 4.
^ Brown, Jonathan A.C. (2009), p. 6-7.
^ Islahi, Amin Ahsan (1989) [transl. 2009]. Mabadi Tadabbur-i-Hadith (translated as: "Fundamentals of Hadith Interpretation") (in Urdu). Lahore: Al-Mawrid. Retrieved 2 June 2011. 
^ a b c d e f Campo, Juan Eduardo. ""Hadith"". Encyclopedia of Islam. 
^ The Future of Muslim Civilisation by Ziauddin Sardar, 1979, page 26.
^ "Mawrid Reader". ejtaal.net. 
^ al-Kuliyat by Abu al-Baqa’ al-Kafawi, p. 370; Mu'assasah l-Risalah. This last phrase is quoted by al-Qasimi in Qawaid al-Tahdith, p. 61; Dar al-Nafais.
^ Lisan al-Arab, by Ibn Manthour, vol. 2, p. 350; Dar al-Hadith edition.
^ Abou El Fadl, Khaled (22 March 2011). "What is Shari'a?". ABC RELIGION AND ETHICS. Retrieved 20 June 2015. 
^ al-Asqalani, Ahmad ibn 'Ali. Fath al-Bari (in Arabic). 1. Egypt: al-Matba'ah al-Salafiyyah. p. 193. ISBN 1-902350-04-9. 
^ Tadrib al-Rawi, vol. 1, pp. 39–41 with abridgement.
^ Ilm al-Rijal wa Ahimiyatih, by Mualami, p. 16, Dar al-Rayah.
^ ^ Tirmidhi, "‘Ilm," 12.
^ ^ Collected in the Musnad of Ahmad (10\15-6\ 6510 and also nos. 6930, 7017 and 1720), Sunan Abu Dawud (Mukhtasar Sunan Abi Dawud (5\246\3499) and elsewhere.
^ Roman, provincial and Islamic law, Patricia Crone, p2
^ Guillaume, Alfred (1954). Islam (2nd (Revised) ed.). Penguin. p. 89.  ISBN 0140135553
^ Martin, Matthew (2013). Mu'tazila - use of reason in Islamic theology. Amazon. Retrieved 8 September 2015. 
^ Goldziher, Ignác (1967). Muslim Studies, Vol. 1. SUNY Press. p. 127.  ISBN 0873952340
^ Islam – the Straight Path, John Eposito, p.81
^ See the references and discussion by Abdul Fattah Abu Ghuddah Thalathatu rasa'il fi ulum al-hadith; risalat abi dawud ila ahl makkata fi wasf sunanihi, pg 36, footnote. Beirut: Maktaba al-Matbu'at al-Islamiyah: 2nd ed 1426/2005.
^ The earliest book, Bukhari's Sahih was composed by 225/840 since he states that he spent sixteen years composing it (Hady al-Sari, introduction to Fath al-Bari, p. 489, Lahore: Dar Nashr al-Kutub al-Islamiya, 1981/1401) and also that he showed it to Yahya ibn Ma'in (p. 8, ibid.) who died in 233. Nasa'i, the last to die of the authors of the six books, died in 303/915. He probably completed this work a few decades before his death: by 275 or so.
^ Counting multiple narrations of the same texts as a single text, the number of hadiths each author has recorded roughly as follows: Bukhari (as in Zabidi's Mukhtasar of Bukhari's book) 2134, Muslim (as in Mundhiri's Mukhtasar of Muslim's book) 2200, Tirmidhi 4000, Abu Dawud 4000, Nasa'i 4800, Ibn Majah 4300. There is considerable overlap amongst the six books so that Ibn al-Athir's Jami' al-Usul, which gathers together the hadiths texts of all six books deleting repeated texts, has about 9500 hadiths.
^ Muqaddimah Ibn al-Salah, p. 160 Dar al-Ma’aarif edition
^ Ignác Goldziher, Muslim Studies, vol. 2, p. 240. Halle, 1889-1890. ISBN 0-202-30778-6
^ Scott C. Lucas, Constructive Critics, Ḥadīth Literature, and the Articulation of Sunnī Islam, p. 106. Leiden: Brill Publishers, 2004.
^ Ibn Khallikan's Biographical Dictionary, translated by William McGuckin de Slane. Paris: Oriental Translation Fund of Great Britain and Ireland. Sold by Institut de France and Royal Library of Belgium. Vol. 3, p. 5.
^ Muhammad Zubayr Siddiqi, Hadith Literature, Cambridge, Islamic Texts Society, 1993, edited and revised by Abdal Hakim Murad.
^ Momen, Moojan, Introduction to Shi'i Islam, Yale University Press, 1985, p.174.
^ Mohammad A. Shomali (2003). Shi'i Islam: Origins, Faith and Practices (reprint ed.). ICAS Press. p. 35. ISBN 9781904063117. 
^ Ulum al-Hadith by Ibn al-Salah, p. 5, Dar al-Fikr, with the verification of Nur al-Din al-‘Itr.
^ See:

"Hadith," Encyclopedia of Islam Online;
"Hadith," Encyclopedia of Islam and the Muslim world.


^ "Qu'est-ce que le hadith Qudsi ?". aslamna.info. 
^ Related by al-Bukhari, Muslim, an-Nasa'i and Ibn Majah.
^ Berg (2000) p. 8
^ See:

Robinson (2003) pp. 69–70;
Lucas (2004) p. 15


^ B. Hallaq, Wael (1999). "The Authenticity of Prophetic Ḥadîth: A Pseudo-Problem". Studia Islamica. No. 89 (1999): 75–90. JSTOR 1596086. (Registration required (help)). 



Bibliography[edit]

Berg, H. (2000). The development of exegesis in early Islam: the authenticity of Muslim literature from the formative period. Routledge. ISBN 0-7007-1224-0. 
Brown, Jonathan A. C. (2004). "Criticism of the Proto-Hadith Canon: Al-daraqutni's Adjustment of the Sahihayn". Journal of Islamic Studies. 15 (1): 1–37. doi:10.1093/jis/15.1.1. 
Brown, Jonathan A.C. (2007). The Canonization of al-Bukhārī and Muslim (PDF). Leiden, Netherlands: Brill. ISBN 9789004158399. Retrieved 3 October 2017. 
Brown, Jonathan A.C. (2009). Hadith: Muhammad's Legacy in the Medieval and Modern World (Foundations of Islam). Oneworld Publications. ISBN 978-1851686636. 
Lucas, S. (2004). Constructive Critics, Hadith Literature, and the Articulation of Sunni Islam. Brill Academic Publishers. ISBN 90-04-13319-4. 
Robinson, C. F. (2003). Islamic Historiography. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-62936-5. 
Robson, J. "Hadith". In P.J. Bearman; Th. Bianquis; C.E. Bosworth; E. van Donzel; W.P. Heinrichs. Encyclopaedia of Islam Online. Brill Academic Publishers. ISSN 1573-3912. 
Senturk, Recep (2005). Narrative Social Structure: Anatomy of the Hadith Transmission Network, 610-1505. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press. ISBN 9780804752077. 
Swarup, Ram (1983). Understanding Islam through Hadis. New Delhi: Voice of India. ISBN 9788185990736. Retrieved 3 October 2017. 

Further reading[edit]

1000 Qudsi Hadiths: An Encyclopedia of Divine Sayings; New York: Arabic Virtual Translation Center; (2012) ISBN 978-1-4700-2994-4
Hallaq, Wael B. (1999). "The Authenticity of Prophetic Ḥadîth: A Pseudo-Problem". Studia Islamica (89): 75–90. doi:10.2307/1596086. ISSN 0585-5292. JSTOR 1596086. 
Brown, J. (2007). The Canonization of al-Bukhari and Muslim: The Formation and Function of the Sunni Hadith Canon. Leiden: Brill, 2007.
Brown, J. (2009). Hadith: Muhammad's Legacy in the Medieval and Modern World. Oneworld Publications. ISBN 978-1851686636.
Juynboll, G. H. A. (2007). Encyclopedia of Canonical Hadith. Leiden: Brill, 2007.
Lucas, S. (2002). The Arts of Hadith Compilation and Criticism. University of Chicago. OCLC 62284281. 
Musa, A. Y. Hadith as Scripture: Discussions on The Authority Of Prophetic Traditions in Islam, New York: Palgrave, 2008. ISBN 0-230-60535-4
Fred M. Donner, Narratives of Islamic Origins (1998)
Tottoli, Roberto, "Hadith", in Muhammad in History, Thought, and Culture: An Encyclopedia of the Prophet of God (2 vols.), Edited by C. Fitzpatrick and A. Walker, Santa Barbara, ABC-CLIO, 2014, Vol I, pp. 231–236.

External links[edit]



Look up hadith in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.





Wikiquote has quotations related to: Hadith





Wikimedia Commons has media related to Hadith.



Importance of hadith
Hadith – Search by keyword and find hadith by narrator
Hadith by Narrator – Find hadith by narrators
Hadith Advanced Search – Search by keyword
Hadith app, All 13 ahadith books
 "Hadith". New International Encyclopedia. 1905. 
 "Hadis". Encyclopedia Americana. 1920. 







v
t
e


Islam topics




Outline of Islam







Beliefs



God in Islam
Tawhid
Muhammad

In Islam


Prophets of Islam





Five Pillars



Shahada
Salah
Sawm
Zakat
Hajj








History
Leaders






Timeline of Muslim history
Conquests
Golden Age
Historiography
Sahaba
Ahl al-Bayt
Shi'a Imams
Caliphates

Rashidun
Umayyad
Abbasid
Córdoba
Fatimid
Almohad
Sokoto
Ottoman







Religious texts



Quran
Sunnah
Hadith
Tafsir
Seerah





Denominations



Sunni
Shia
Ibadi
Black Muslims
Ahmadiyya
Quranism
Non-denominational








Life
Culture






Animals
Art
Calendar
Children
Clothing
Holidays
Mosques
Madrasas
Moral teachings
Music
Philosophy
Political aspects
Qurbani
Science

medieval


Social welfare
Women
LGBT
Islam by country
















Law
Jurisprudence










Economics



Banking
Economic history
Sukuk
Takaful
Murabaha
Riba





Hygiene



Ghusl
Miswak
Najis
Tayammum
Toilet
Wudu








Marriage
Sex






Marriage contract
Mahr
Mahram
Masturbation
Nikah
Nikah Mut‘ah
Zina





Other aspects



Cleanliness
Criminal
Dhabiĥa
Dhimmi
Divorce
Diet
Ethics
Etiquette
Gambling
Gender segregation
Honorifics
Hudud
Inheritance
Jizya
Leadership
Ma malakat aymanukum
Military

POWs


Slavery
Sources of law
Theological

baligh
kalam


















 Islamic studies







Arts



Arabesque
Architecture
Calligraphy
Carpets
Gardens
Geometric patterns
Music
Pottery





Medieval science



Alchemy and chemistry
Astronomy
Cosmology
Geography and cartography
Mathematics
Medicine
Ophthalmology
Physics





Philosophy



Early
Contemporary
Eschatology
Theological





Other areas



Astrology
Creationism (evolution)
Feminism
Inventions
Liberalism and progressivism
Literature

poetry


Psychology
Shu'ubiyya
Conversion to mosques


















Other religions



Christianity

Mormonism
Protestantism


Hinduism
Jainism
Judaism
Sikhism





Related topics



Apostasy
Criticism of Islam
Cultural Muslim
Islamism

Criticism
Post-Islamism
Qutbism
Salafi movement


Islamophobia

Incidents


Islamic terrorism
Islamic view of miracles
Domestic violence
Nursing
Persecution of Muslims
Quran and miracles
Symbolism








 Islam portal
 Category















v
t
e


Sunni hadith literature



Kutub al-Sittah



Sahih al-Bukhari
Sahih Muslim
Sunan an-Nasa'i al-Sughra
Sunan Abu Dawood
Sunan al-Tirmidhi
Sunan ibn Majah





Primary collections



Sahifah Hammam ibn Munabbih
Musannaf ibn Jurayj
Al-Muwatta
The Musannaf of Abd al-Razzaq
Musnad Ahmad ibn Hanbal
Sunan al-Darimi
Sahih Ibn Khuzaymah
Sahih Ibn Hibbaan
Al-Mustadrak alaa al-Sahihain
Mawdu'at al-Kubra
Tahdhib al-Athar





Secondary collections



Riyadh as-Saaliheen
Masabih al-Sunnah
Mishkat al-Masabih
Majma al-Zawa'id
Bulugh al-Maram
Kanz al-Ummal





Types



Sahih
Musnad
Collections of fabricated hadith
Musannaf
Al-Zawa'id





Commentaries



Fath al-Bari (explanation of Sahih al-Bukhari)






Hadith terminology
and study




Muqaddimah ibn al-Salah fi 'Ulum al-Hadith
The Interpretation of Conflicting Narrations





Biographical evaluation



al-Tarikh al-Kabir
Al-Kamal fi Asma' al-Rijal












v
t
e


Depictions of Muhammad



History



Muhammad in Islam
Aniconism in Islam
Hadith
List of hadith collections
Ibn Ishaq
Ibn Hisham
Muhammad ibn Jarir al-Tabari
Hilya





Controversy



Criticism of Muhammad
Criticism of Hadith
Reactions to Innocence of Muslims
Chennai Protest of Innocence of Muslims
Lars Vilks Muhammad drawings controversy
Everybody Draw Mohammed Day
Jyllands-Posten Muhammad cartoons controversy (Category) •

Descriptions of the cartoons
Economic and social consequences
International reactions
List of newspapers that reprinted the cartoons
Opinions
Timeline


Asmaa Abdol-Hamid
Ahmed Akkari
Geert Wilders
Akkari-Laban dossier
Charlie Hebdo

2015 shooting
Je suis Charlie


Amir Abdur Rehman Cheema
Danish embassy bombing in Islamabad
El Fagr
The Islamic Society in Denmark
Islamist demonstration outside Danish Embassy in London in 2006
Israeli antisemitic cartoons contest
Umran Javed
Naser Khader
Omar Khayam
Ahmad Abu Laban
Manifesto: Together Facing the New Totalitarianism
Flemming Rose
Mohamad Al-Khaled Samha
The Satanic Verses
Andrea Santoro
Vebjørn Selbekk
Trial of Ghazi Beji and Jabeur Mejri
Kurt Westergaard
Curtis Culwell Center attack





Books




List of biographies of Muhammad (Category)



Sirah Rasul Allah
Shama'il Muhammadiyah
Sirat-un-Nabi
Al-Sira Al-Nabawiyya (Ibn Kathir)
Al-Khasais-ul-Kubra
Siyer-i Nebi
Marzubannama
Ar-Raheeq Al-Makhtum
Muhammad: A Biography of the Prophet
Muhammad: A Prophet for Our Time
Muhammad: His Life Based on the Earliest Sources
The Life and Religion of Mohammed
Muhammad (book)
Muhammad at Mecca
Muhammad at Medina (book)





Novel and controversial



Mahomet (play)
Inferno (Dante)
Captain Stormfield's Visit to Heaven
The 100: A Ranking of the Most Influential Persons in History
Vita Mahumeti
The Jewel of Medina
Muhammad: The "Banned" Images
The Quest for the Historical Muhammad
The Truth About Muhammad
The Cartoons that Shook the World








Films (Category)



Muhammad: Legacy of a Prophet
Muhammad: The Last Prophet
The Message
Islam: Empire of Faith
Innocence of Muslims
Islam: What the West Needs to Know
Fetih 1453
Muhammad: The Messenger of God
Bilal





Television




Drama serials and documentaries



Muhammad: The Final Legacy
The Life of Muhammad
Islam: The Untold Story
Omar





South Park



"Super Best Friends"
"Cartoon Wars Part I"
"Cartoon Wars Part II"
"200"
"201"








Video games



Quraish
Muslim Massacre
Faith Fighter








 Category
 Commons
 Portal









Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 175363519
GND: 4158665-7
SUDOC: 027806081
BNF: cb12008332t (data)
NDL: 00563051











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hadith&oldid=816644015"					Categories: 8th-century books9th-century booksHadithIslamic terminologyIslamic theologyMuhammadHidden categories: CS1 Urdu-language sources (ur)CS1 Arabic-language sources (ar)Pages with login required references or sourcesArticles containing Arabic-language textArticles needing additional references from April 2011All articles needing additional referencesAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from January 2016Articles with unsourced statements from November 2015All pages needing factual verificationWikipedia articles needing factual verification from November 2015Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the New International EncyclopediaWikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the Encyclopedia Americana with a Wikisource referenceWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiers