





This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (May 2008) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)




Hakia





Type of site

Web search engine


Website
www.Hakia.com at the Wayback Machine (archived May 11, 2004)


Launched
March 2004; 13 years ago (2004-03)


Current status
Inactive


hakia was an Internet search engine. Hakia.com has not been available since April 2014. Though the Hakia engine is now powering other sites, public access to Hakia.com has been closed down. (Announcement https://www.facebook.com/pages/hakiacom/5670874974. Since 2015 the domain is owned by HughesNet, an Internet Service Provider.
The company invented QDEXing technology, an alternative infrastructure to indexing that uses SemanticRank algorithm, a solution mix from the disciplines of ontological semantics, fuzzy logic, computational linguistics, and mathematics. Founded in 2004, the company is privately held and based in New York City.
Hakia was founded by Rıza Can Berkan, a nuclear scientist by training with a specialization in artificial intelligence and fuzzy logic, and Pentti Kouri, a New York-based economist and venture capitalist. Professor Victor Raskin, a father of ontological semantics and noted international authority in the field of computational linguistics, serves as hakia’s scientific advisor.
Members of its board include former Senator Bill Bradley, Riza C. Berkan, Ryszard Krauze, Anuj Mathur, Murat Vargı and John Grzymala. hakia has raised more than $20 million [1] from private equity investors.
See also[edit]

List of search engines

References[edit]



^ "Hakia | crunchbase". www.crunchbase.com. Retrieved 2017-05-26. 






This article about a search engine website is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it.


v
t
e










						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hakia&oldid=782329758"					Categories: Internet properties established in 2004Companies based in New York CityDefunct internet search enginesSearch engine website stubsHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from May 2008All articles needing additional referencesPages using deprecated image syntaxWebarchive template wayback linksAll stub articles