A hamlet is a small human settlement. In different jurisdictions and geographies, hamlets may be the size of a town, village or parish, be considered a smaller settlement or subdivision of a larger, or be treated as a satellite entity to a larger settlement. The word and concept of a hamlet have roots in the Anglo-Norman settlement of England, where the old French hamlet came to apply to small human settlements. In British geography, a hamlet is considered smaller than a village and distinctly without a church.



Contents


1 Etymology
2 Australia
3 Bangladesh
4 Canada
5 France
6 Germany
7 India
8 Indonesia
9 Pakistan
10 Romania
11 Switzerland
12 Ukraine
13 United Kingdom
14 United States

14.1 Mississippi
14.2 New York
14.3 Oregon


15 Vietnam
16 See also
17 References
18 External links



Etymology[edit]
The word comes from Anglo-Norman hamelet(t)e, corresponding to Old French hamelet, the diminutive of Old French hamel. This, in turn, is a diminutive of Old French ham, possibly borrowed from (West Germanic) Franconian languages. Compare with modern French hameau, Dutch heem, German Heim, Old English hām and Modern English home.[1]
Australia[edit]
In Australia a hamlet is a small village.[citation needed] Officially, a hamlet differs from a village in having no commercial premises, but has residences and may have community buildings such as churches and public halls.[citation needed]
Bangladesh[edit]
In Bangladesh, hamlets are known as "Para" or "Paara" (পাড়া). A village is divided into more than one "Para"[citation needed]. That is the smallest partition of a place in Bangladesh. Each para contains some families, or a group of families.
Canada[edit]
In Canada's three territories, hamlets are officially designated municipalities.[2] As of January 1, 2010:

Northwest Territories had 10 hamlets,[2] which had a population of less than 1,000 people as of the 2006 census;[3][4]
Nunavut had 24 hamlets,[2] all of which had a population of less than 2,500 people as of the 2006 census;[5] and
Yukon had two hamlets,[2] both of which had a population of less than 400 people as of the 2006 census.[6]

In Canada's provinces, hamlets are usually small unincorporated communities within a larger municipality, such as many communities within the single-tier municipalities of Ontario[citation needed] or within Alberta's specialized and rural municipalities.[7]
Canada's two largest hamlets—Fort McMurray (formerly incorporated as a city)[8] and Sherwood Park—are located in Alberta. They each have populations, within their main urban area, in excess of 60,000—well in excess of the 10,000-person threshold that can choose to incorporate as a city in Alberta.[9][10] As such, these two hamlets have been further designated by the Province of Alberta as urban service areas.[11] An urban service area is recognized as equivalent to a city for the purposes of provincial and federal program delivery and grant eligibility.[12][13]
France[edit]
During the 18th century, for rich or noble people, it was up-to-date to create their own hameau (hamlet) in their gardens. They were a group of some houses or farms with rustic appearance, but in fact were very comfortable. The best known is the Hameau de la Reine built by the queen Marie-Antoinette in the park of the Château de Versailles. Or the Hameau de Chantilly built by Louis Joseph, Prince of Condé in Chantilly, Oise.
Lieu-dit (local name) is another name for hamlet.[citation needed] The difference is that a hamlet is permanently inhabited, but a lieu-dit is not (in winter for example, or when the lieu-dit is only an important road crossing).
Germany[edit]
In Germany hamlets are called Weiler (German: [ˈva͡ɪlɐ]). They are often part of bigger villages and municipalities. Most German hamlets are situated in Bavaria, Rhineland-Palatinate and Hesse.[citation needed] In the low Saxon dialect of northwestern Germany hamlets are called Bauernschaft.
India[edit]
In different states of India, there are different words for hamlet. In Haryana and Rajasthan it is called "dhani" (Hindi: ढाणी ḍhāṇī) or "Thok".[14][15][16][17] In Gujarat a hamlet is called a "nesada", which are more prevalent in the Gir forest. In Maharashtra it's called a "pada". In southern Bihar, especially in the Magadh division, a hamlet is called a "bigha".
Indonesia[edit]




The hamlet Kampung Naga in West Java Province, Indonesia


All over Indonesia, hamlets are translated as "small village", or kampung. They are known as dusun in Central Java and East Java, banjar in Bali, jorong or kampuang in West Sumatra.[citation needed]
Pakistan[edit]
In Pakistan a hamlet is called a gron (pronounced as grona with some nasalisation at the end).[citation needed]
Romania[edit]
Main article: Administrative divisions of Romania
In Romania hamlets are called cătunuri (singular: cătun), and they represent villages that contain several houses at most. They are legally considered villages, and statistically, they are placed in the same category. Like villages, they do not have a separate administration, and thus are not an administrative division, but are part of a parent commune.
Switzerland[edit]
In the four national languages hamlets are known as Weiler (German), hameaux (French), frazioni (Italian) and fracziun (Romansh). A hamlet is always part of a larger municipality or may be shared between two municipalities. The difference between a hamlet and a village is that typically a hamlet lacks a compact core settlement and lacks a central building such as a church or inn. However, some hamlets (Kirchwiler) may have grown up as an unplanned settlement around a church.[18] There is no population limit that defines a hamlet and some hamlets have a larger population than some of the smallest municipalities. Generally there are no street names in a hamlet; rather, addresses are given by hamlet name and a number. House numbers might start at one side of the hamlet and continue to the other side or may have no clear organization.
A hamlet may form or have formed a Bürgergemeinde (legal place of citizenship regardless of where a person was born or currently lives) and may own common property for the Bürgergemeinde.
Ukraine[edit]
In Ukraine a very small village such as the hamlet usually is called a hutir.[19]
United Kingdom[edit]




Bodiggo in Cornwall


In the United Kingdom, the word hamlet (having the French origin given at the top of this article), means a house or village without a church,[20] although hamlets are recognised as part of land use planning policies and administration. In modern usage it generally refers to a secondary settlement in a civil parish, after the main settlement (if any). Hamlets may have been formed around a single source of economic activity such as a farm, mill, mine or harbour that employed its working population. Some hamlets, particularly those that have a medieval church, may be the result of the depopulation of a village; an example of such a hamlet is Graby.
The term hamlet was used in some parts of the country [clarification needed] for a geographical subdivision of a parish (which might or might not contain a settlement). Elsewhere, these subdivisions were called "townships" or "tithings".[21][22]
In the Scottish Highlands the term clachan, of Gaelic derivation, may be preferred to the term hamlet.[23] Also found in Scotland more generally is fermtoun used in the specific case of a settlement of agricultural workers' homes.[citation needed]
In Northern Ireland the common Irish place name element baile is sometimes considered equivalent to the term hamlet in English, although baile would actually have referred to what is known in English today as a townland: that is to say, a geographical locality rather than a small village.
United States[edit]
Mississippi[edit]
In Mississippi, a 2009 state law (§ 17-27-5) set aside the term "municipal historical hamlet" to designate any former city, town or village with a current population of less than six hundred (600) inhabitants that lost its charter before 1945. The first such designation was applied to the town of Bogue Chitto, Lincoln County, Mississippi.
New York[edit]
Main article: Administrative divisions of New York
In New York, hamlets are unincorporated settlements within towns. Hamlets are usually not legal entities and have no local government or official boundaries. Their approximate locations will often be noted on road signs, however.
A hamlet usually depends upon the town that contains it for municipal services and government. A hamlet could be described as the rural or suburban equivalent of a neighborhood in a city or village. The area of a hamlet may not be exactly defined and may simply be contained within the ZIP code of its post office, or may be defined by its school or fire district. Others, such as Forestville, New York, will be the remnants of former villages, with borders coextant with the previously defined borders of the defunct or dissolved village. Some hamlets proximate to urban areas are sometimes continuous with their cities and appear to be neighborhoods, but they still are under the jurisdiction of the town. Some hamlets, such as Levittown in the Town of Hempstead, with a population of over 50,000, are more populous than some incorporated cities in the state.
Oregon[edit]
Main article: Hamlet (Oregon)
In Oregon, specifically in Clackamas County, a hamlet is a form of local government for small communities, which allows the citizens therein to organize and co-ordinate community activities. Hamlets do not provide services such as utilities or fire protection, and do not have the authority to levy taxes or fees. There are four hamlets in Oregon: Beavercreek, Mulino, Molalla Prairie, and Stafford.
Vietnam[edit]
Further information: Vietnam § Administrative subdivisions, and Subdivisions of Vietnam
In Vietnam, a hamlet (xóm, ấp) is the smallest unofficial administrative unit. It is a subdivision of a commune or township (xã).
See also[edit]

Clachan
Developed environments
Dhani and villages
Frazione
Khirba
Manorialism
Types of inhabited localities in Russia

References[edit]


^ T. F. Hoad, English Etymology, Oxford University Press, 1993, ISBN 0-19-283098-8.
^ a b c d Statistics Canada (2010). "Interim List of Changes to Municipal Boundaries, Status, and Names (From January 2, 2009 to January 1, 2010)" (PDF). Retrieved 2010-11-17. 
^ Statistics Canada (2010-11-05). "Population and dwelling counts, for Canada, provinces and territories, and census subdivisions (municipalities), 2006 and 2001 censuses – 100% data (Northwest Territories)". Retrieved 2010-11-17. 
^ Statistics Canada (2010-04-30). "Table 1 Changes to census subdivisions in alphabetical order by province and territory (with 8C and 9C)". Retrieved 2010-11-17. 
^ Statistics Canada (2010-11-05). "Population and dwelling counts, for Canada, provinces and territories, and census subdivisions (municipalities), 2006 and 2001 censuses – 100% data (Nunavut)". Retrieved 2010-11-17. 
^ Statistics Canada (2010-11-05). "Population and dwelling counts, for Canada, provinces and territories, and census subdivisions (municipalities), 2006 and 2001 censuses – 100% data (Yukon Territory)". Retrieved 2010-11-17. 
^ Alberta Municipal Affairs (2010-04-01). "Specialized and Rural Municipalities and Their Communities" (PDF). Retrieved 2010-11-17. 
^ Alberta Municipal Affairs (2010-11-15). "Municipal Profile – Regional Municipality of Wood Buffalo". Retrieved 2010-11-17. 
^ Alberta Municipal Affairs (2009-09-15). "2009 Official Population List" (PDF). Retrieved 2010-11-17. 
^ Alberta Queen's Printer (2009-09-15). "2009 Official Population List". Retrieved 2010-11-17. 
^ Alberta Municipal Affairs (2010-04-01). "2010 Municipal Codes" (PDF). Retrieved 2010-11-17. 
^ Province of Alberta (1994-12-21). "Order in Council 817/94 (R.M. of Wood Buffalo status change to specialized municipality)" (PDF). Retrieved 2010-11-17. 
^ Province of Alberta (1995-12-06). "Order in Council 761/95 (Strathcona County status change to specialized municipality)" (PDF). Retrieved 2010-11-17. 
^ Sukhvir Singh Gahlot: Rural Life in Rajasthan, page 4.Rajasthani Granthagar, Giani Press Delhi 1986
^ Ashutosh Goyal, 2015, "RBS Visitors Guide India - Rajasthan: Rajasthan Travel guide.", Data & Expo India Pvt Ltd, ISBN 9380844786.
^ Rann Singh Mann, K. Mann, 1989, "Tribal Cultures and Change.", pp. 23.
^ S. H. M. Rizvi, 1987"Mina, the ruling tribe of Rajasthan: socio-biological appraisal.", pp. 34.
^ Projektteam SINUS. Landschaftsökologische Strukturmerkmale als Indikatoren der Nachhaltigkeit, Spatial INdices for LandUSe Sustainability (SINUS) (PDF) (Report). University of Vienna. pp. 308–317. Archived from the original (PDF) on 14 December 2013. Retrieved 16 May 2013. 
^ ХУТІР (Khutir) // Ukrainian Academic Dictionary – Ukrainian: Академічний тлумачний словник української мови
^ Hardy-Ivamy, E.R. (1993). Mozley & Whiteley's law dictionary. London: Butterworths. p. 124. ISBN 0-406-01420-5. 
^ Kain R J P, Oliver R D, Historic Parishes of England & Wales, HDS, 2001, ISBN 0-9540032-0-9, p 12
^ "Status definition: Hamlet". A Vision of Britain through Time. Great Britain Historical GIS Project. Retrieved 2007-08-31. 
^ "Clachan". Dictionary of the Scots Language. Archived from the original on 4 April 2012. Retrieved 2011-10-24. 


External links[edit]



Look up hamlet in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.





Wikimedia Commons has media related to Hamlets.



Wolfhampcote: A hamlet formed by depopulation
Low Mill: A mill hamlet







v
t
e


Designations for types of administrative territorial entities








English terms








Common English terms1



Area



Insular area
Local government area
Protected area
Special area
Statistical area

Combined statistical area
Metropolitan statistical area
Micropolitan statistical area


Urban area





Canton

Half-canton



Borough



County borough
Metropolitan borough





Capital



Federal capital
Imperial capital





City



City state
Autonomous city
Charter city
Independent city
Incorporated city
Imperial city
Free imperial city
Royal free city





Community



Autonomous community
Residential community





County



Administrative county
Autonomous county
Consolidated city-county
Metropolitan county

Non-metropolitan


Viscountcy





Country



Overseas country





Department



Overseas department





District



Capital district
City district
Congressional district
Electoral district
Federal district
Indian government district
Land district
Metropolitan district

Non-metropolitan district


Military district
Municipal district
Police district
Regional district
Rural district
Sanitary district
Subdistrict
Urban district
Special district





Division



Census division
Police division
Subdivision





Municipality



County municipality

Norway
Nova Scotia
Regional county municipality


Direct-controlled municipality
District municipality
Mountain resort municipality
Neutral municipality
Regional municipality
Resort municipality
Rural municipality
Specialized municipality





Prefecture



Autonomous prefecture
Subprefecture
Super-prefecture
Praetorian prefecture





Province



Autonomous province
Overseas province
Roman province





Region



Administrative region
Autonomous region
Capital region
Development region
Economic region
Mesoregion
Microregion
Overseas region
Planning region
Special administrative region
Statistical region
Subregion





Reserve



Biosphere reserve
Ecological reserve
Game reserve
Indian reserve
Nature reserve





State



Federal state
Free state
Sovereign state





Territory



Capital territory

Federal capital territory


Dependent territory
Federal territory
Military territory
Organized incorporated territory
Overseas territory
Union territory
Unorganized territory





Town



Census town
Market town





Township



Charter township
Civil township
Paper township
Survey township
Urban township





Unit



Autonomous territorial unit
Local administrative unit
Municipal unit
Regional unit





Zone



Economic zone

Exclusive economic zone
Free economic zone
Special economic zone


Free-trade zone
Neutral zone
Self-administered zone










Other English terms



Current



Alpine resort
Bailiwick
Banner

Autonomous


Block
Cadastre
Circle
Circuit
Colony
Commune
Condominium
Constituency
Duchy
Eldership
Emirate
Federal dependency
Governorate
Hamlet
Ilkhanate
Indian reservation
Manor

Royal


Muftiate
Neighbourhood
Parish
Periphery
Precinct
Principality
Protectorate
Quarter
Regency
Autonomous republic
Riding
Sector

Autonomous


Shire
Sultanate
Suzerainty
Townland
Village

Administrative
Summer


Ward






Historical



Agency
Barony
Burgh
Exarchate
Hide
Hundred
Imperial Circle
March
Monthon
Presidency
Residency
Roman diocese
Seat
Tenth
Tithing



















Non-English or loanwords







Current



Amt
Bakhsh
Barangay
Bezirk
Regierungsbezirk
Comune
Frazione
Fu
Gemeinde
Județ
Kunta / kommun

Finland
Sweden


Län
Località
Megye
Muban
Oblast

Autonomous


Okrug
Ostān
Poblacion
Purok
Shahrestān
Sum
Sýsla
Tehsil
Vingtaine





Historical



Commote
Gau
Heerlijkheid
Köping
Maalaiskunta
Nome

Egypt
Greece


Pagus
Pargana
Plasă
Satrapy
Socken
Subah
Syssel
Zhou












v
t
e


Arabic terms for country subdivisions



First-level



Muhafazah (محافظة governorate)
Wilayah (ولاية province)
Mintaqah (منطقة region)
Mudiriyah (مديرية directorate)
Imarah (إمارة emirate)
Baladiyah (بلدية municipality)
Shabiyah (شعبية "popularate")





Second / third-level



Mintaqah (منطقة region)
Qadaa (قضاء district)
Nahiyah (ناحية subdistrict)
Markaz (مركز district)
Mutamadiyah (معتمدية "delegation")
Daerah/Daïra (دائرة circle)
Liwa (لواء banner / sanjak)





City / township-level



Amanah (أمانة municipality)
Baladiyah (بلدية municipality)
Ḥai (حي neighborhood / quarter)
Mahallah (محلة)
Qarya (قرية)
Sheyakhah (شياخة "neighborhood subdivision")






English translations given are those most commonly used.








v
t
e


French terms for country subdivisions






arrondissement
département
préfecture
subprefectures










v
t
e


Greek terms for country subdivisions



Modern



apokentromenes dioikiseis / geniki dioikisis§ / diamerisma§ / periphereia
nomos§ / periphereiaki enotita
demos / eparchia§ / koinotita§





Historical



archontia/archontaton
bandon
demos
despotaton
dioikesis
doukaton
droungos
eparchia
exarchaton
katepanikion
kephalatikion
kleisoura
meris
naukrareia
satrapeia
strategis
thema
toparchia
tourma






§ signifies a defunct institution








v
t
e


Portuguese terms for country subdivisions



Regional subdivisions



Estado
Distrito federal
Província
Região
Distrito
Comarca
Capitania





Local subdivisions



Município
Concelho
Freguesia
Comuna
Circunscrição





Settlements



Cidade
Vila
Aldeia
Bairro
Lugar








Historical subdivisions in italics.










v
t
e


Slavic terms for country subdivisions



Current



dzielnica
gmina
krai
kraj
krajina / pokrajina
městys
obec
oblast / oblast' / oblasti / oblys / obwód / voblast'
okręg
okres
okrug
opština / općina / občina / obshtina
osiedle
powiat / povit
raion
selsoviet / silrada
sołectwo
voivodeship / vojvodina
županija





Historical



darugha
gromada
guberniya / gubernia
jurydyka
khutor
obshchina
okolia
opole
pogost
prowincja
sorok
srez
starostwo / starostva
uyezd
volost
ziemia
župa










v
t
e


Spanish terms for country subdivisions



National, Federal



Comunidad autónoma
Departamento
Distrito federal
Estado
Provincia
Región





Regional, Metropolitan



Cantón
Comarca
Comuna
Corregimiento
Delegación
Distrito
Mancomunidad
Merindad
Municipalidad
Municipio
Parroquia

Ecuador
Spain







Urban, Rural



Aldea
Alquería
Anteiglesia
Asentamiento

Asentamiento informal
Pueblos jóvenes


Barrio
Campamento
Caserío
Ciudad

Ciudad autónoma


Colonia
Lugar
Masía
Pedanía
Población
Ranchería
Sitio
Vereda
Villa
Village (Pueblito/Pueblo)








Historical subdivisions in italics.










v
t
e


Turkish terms for country subdivisions



Modern



il (province)
ilçe (district)
şehir (city)
kasaba (town)
belediye (municipality)
belde (community)
köy (village)
mahalle (neighbourhood/quarter)





Historical



ağalık (feudal district)
bucak (subdistrict)
beylerbeylik (province)
kadılık (subprovince)
kaza (sub-province)
hidivlik (viceroyalty)
mutasarrıflık (subprovince)
nahiye (nahiyah)
paşalık (province)
reya (Romanian principalities)
sancak (prefecture)
vilayet (province)
voyvodalık (Romanian provinces)















1 Used by ten or more countries or having derived terms. Historical derivations in italics.
See also: Census division, Electoral district, Political division, and List of administrative divisions by country








Authority control



NDL: 00571418











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hamlet_(place)&oldid=814820044"					Categories: HamletsHuman habitatsRural geographyTypes of populated placesHidden categories: Articles containing Ukrainian-language textArticles containing Old French-language textArticles containing Anglo-Norman-language textArticles containing French-language textArticles containing Dutch-language textArticles containing German-language textArticles containing Old English-language textAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from October 2016Articles containing Bengali-language textArticles with unsourced statements from November 2010Articles with unsourced statements from April 2012Articles containing Low German-language textArticles containing Hindi-language textArticles containing Indonesian-language textArticles containing Romanian-language textArticles containing Italian-language textArticles containing Romansh-language textWikipedia articles needing clarification from June 2009Articles containing Scottish Gaelic-language textArticles containing Scots-language textArticles with unsourced statements from April 2014Articles containing Irish-language textArticles containing Vietnamese-language textArticles containing Arabic-language text