For other uses, see Handball (disambiguation).

Handball


Handball player moves towards the goal prior to throwing the ball, while the goalkeeper waits to stop it.



Highest governing body
IHF


First played
Late 19th century in Denmark. Invented by Nicolaj Ernst in 1897 in Nyborg.


Characteristics


Contact
Yes (frontal)


Team members
7 per side (including goalkeeper)


Mixed gender
Yes, separate competitions


Type
Team sport, ball sport


Equipment
Ball and goals


Venue
Indoor court


Presence


Olympic
Part of Summer Olympic programme in 1936.
Demonstrated at the 1952 Summer Olympics.
Returned to the Summer Olympic programme since 1972.




Mediendatei abspielen


Handball game highlights video


Handball (also known as team handball or Olympic handball)[1] is a team sport in which two teams of seven players each (six outfield players and a goalkeeper) pass a ball using their hands with the aim of throwing it into the goal of the other team. A standard match consists of two periods of 30 minutes, and the team that scores more goals wins.
Modern handball is played on a court 40 by 20 metres (131 by 66 ft), with a goal in the middle of each end. The goals are surrounded by a 6-meter (20 ft) zone where only the defending goalkeeper is allowed; goals must be scored by throwing the ball from outside the zone or while "diving" into it. The sport is usually played indoors, but outdoor variants exist in the forms of field handball and Czech handball (which were more common in the past) and beach handball. The game is fast and high-scoring: professional teams now typically score between 20 and 35 goals each, though lower scores were not uncommon until a few decades ago. Body contact is permitted by the defenders trying to stop the attackers from approaching the goal.
The game was codified at the end of the 19th century in northern Europe. The modern set of rules was published in 1917 in Germany, and had several revisions since. The first international games were played under these rules for men in 1925 and for women in 1930. Men's handball was first played at the 1936 Summer Olympics in Berlin as outdoors, and the next time at the 1972 Summer Olympics in Munich as indoors, and has been an Olympic sport since. Women's team handball was added at the 1976 Summer Olympics.
The International Handball Federation was formed in 1946 and, as of 2016[update], has 197 member federations.[2] The sport is most popular in the countries of continental Europe, which have won all medals but one in the men's world championships since 1938. In the women's world championships, only two non-European countries have won the title: South Korea and Brazil. The game also enjoys popularity in the Far East, North Africa and parts of South America.



Contents


1 Origins and development
2 Rules

2.1 Summary
2.2 Playing field

2.2.1 Goals
2.2.2 D-Zone
2.2.3 Substitution area


2.3 Duration
2.4 Referees
2.5 Team players, substitutes, and officials

2.5.1 Field players
2.5.2 Goalkeeper
2.5.3 Team officials


2.6 Ball
2.7 Awarded throws
2.8 Penalties


3 Gameplay

3.1 Formations

3.1.1 Offense
3.1.2 Defense


3.2 Offensive play
3.3 Defensive play


4 Organization

4.1 International body
4.2 National competitions

4.2.1 Europe
4.2.2 Other




5 Attendance records
6 Commemorative coins
7 See also
8 References
9 External links



Origins and development[edit]




Stamp depicting 1972 Olympics


There is evidence of ancient Roman women playing a version of handball called expulsim ludere.[3] There are records of handball-like games in medieval France, and among the Inuit in Greenland, in the Middle Ages. By the 19th century, there existed similar games of håndbold from Denmark, házená in the Czech Republic, handbol in Ukraine, and torball in Germany.[4]
The team handball game of today was codified at the end of the 19th century in northern Europe—primarily in Denmark, Germany, Norway and Sweden. The first written set of team handball rules was published in 1906 by the Danish gym teacher, lieutenant and Olympic medalist Holger Nielsen from Ordrup grammar school, north of Copenhagen. The modern set of rules was published on 29 October 1917 by Max Heiser, Karl Schelenz, and Erich Konigh from Germany. After 1919 these rules were improved by Karl Schelenz. The first international games were played under these rules, between Germany and Belgium by men in 1925 and between Germany and Austria by women in 1930.
In 1926, the Congress of the International Amateur Athletics Federation nominated a committee to draw up international rules for field handball. The International Amateur Handball Federation was formed in 1928 and later the International Handball Federation was formed in 1946.
Men's field handball was played at the 1936 Summer Olympics in Berlin. During the next several decades, indoor handball flourished and evolved in the Scandinavian countries. The sport re-emerged onto the world stage as team handball for the 1972 Summer Olympics in Munich. Women's team handball was added at the 1976 Summer Olympics in Montreal. Due to its popularity in the region, the Eastern European countries that refined the event became the dominant force in the sport when it was reintroduced.
The International Handball Federation organised the men's world championship in 1938 and every four (sometimes three) years from World War II to 1995. Since the 1995 world championship in Iceland, the competition has been held every two years. The women's world championship has been held since 1957. The IHF also organizes women's and men's junior world championships. By July 2009, the IHF listed 166 member federations - approximately 795,000 teams and 19 million players.
Rules[edit]
The rules are laid out in the IHF's set of rules.[5]
Summary[edit]
Two teams of seven players (six field players plus one goalkeeper) take the field and attempt to score points by putting the game ball into the opposing team's goal. In handling the ball, players are subject to the following restrictions:

After receiving the ball, players can pass, keep possession, or shoot the ball.
If possessing the ball, players must dribble (similar to a basketball dribble), or can take up to three steps for up to three seconds at a time without dribbling.
No attacking or defending players other than the defending goalkeeper are allowed to touch the floor of the goal area (within six metres of the goal). A shot or pass in the goal area is valid if completed before touching the floor. Goalkeepers are allowed outside the goal area, but are not allowed to cross the goal area boundary with the ball in their hands.
The ball may not be passed back to the goalkeeper when they are positioned in the goal area.

Notable scoring opportunities can occur when attacking players jump into the goal area. For example, an attacking player may catch a pass while launching inside the goal area, and then shoot or pass before touching the floor. Doubling occurs when a diving attacking player passes to another diving teammate.
Playing field[edit]




Schematic diagram of a handball playing field


Handball is played on a court 40 by 20 metres (131 ft × 66 ft), with a goal in the centre of each end. The goals are surrounded by a near-semicircular area, called the zone or the crease, defined by a line six meters from the goal. A dashed near-semicircular line nine metres from the goal marks the free-throw line. Each line on the court is part of the area it encompasses. This implies that the middle line belongs to both halves at the same time.
Goals[edit]
The goals are two meters high and three meters wide. They must be securely bolted either to the floor or the wall behind.
The goal posts and the crossbar must be made out of the same material (e.g., wood or aluminium) and feature a quadratic cross section with sides of 8 cm (3 in). The three sides of the beams visible from the playing field must be painted alternatingly in two contrasting colors which both have to contrast against the background. The colors on both goals must be the same.
Each goal must feature a net. This must be fastened in such a way that a ball thrown into the goal does not leave or pass the goal under normal circumstances. If necessary, a second net may be clasped to the back of the net on the inside.
D-Zone[edit]
The goals are surrounded by the crease. This area is delineated by two quarter circles with a radius of six metres around the far corners of each goal post and a connecting line parallel to the goal line. Only the defending goalkeeper is allowed inside this zone. However, the court players may catch and touch the ball in the air within it as long as the player starts his jump outside the zone and releases the ball before he lands (landing inside the perimeter is allowed in this case as long as the ball has been released).
If a player without the ball contacts the ground inside the goal perimeter, or the line surrounding the perimeter, he must take the most direct path out of it. However, should a player cross the zone in an attempt to gain an advantage (e.g., better position) their team cedes the ball. Similarly, violation of the zone by a defending player is penalized only if they do so in order to gain an advantage in defending.
Substitution area[edit]
Outside of one long edge of the playing field to both sides of the middle line are the substitution areas for each team. The areas usually contain the benches as seating opportunities. Team officials, substitutes, and suspended players must wait within this area. The area always lies to the same side as the team's own goal. During half-time, substitution areas are swapped. Any player entering or leaving the play must cross the substitution line which is part of the side line and extends 4.5 metres (15 ft) from the middle line to the team's side.
Duration[edit]




Team timeout


A standard match for all teams of at least age 16 has two 30-minute halves with a 10- to 15-minute halftime break. At half-time, teams switch sides of the court as well as benches. For youths the length of the halves is reduced—25 minutes at ages 12 to 15, and 20 minutes at ages 8 to 11; though national federations of some countries may differ in their implementation from the official guidelines.
If a decision must be reached in a particular match (e.g., in a tournament) and it ends in a draw after regular time, there are at maximum two overtimes, each consisting of two straight 5-minute periods with a one-minute break in between. Should these not decide the game either, the winning team is determined in a penalty shootout (best-of-five rounds; if still tied, extra rounds afterwards until won by one team).
The referees may call timeout according to their sole discretion; typical reasons are injuries, suspensions, or court cleaning. Penalty throws should trigger a timeout only for lengthy delays, such as a change of the goalkeeper.
Since 2012, teams can call 3 team timeouts per game (up to two per half), which last one minute each. This right may only be invoked by team in ball possession. Team representatives must show a green card marked with a black T on the timekeeper's desk. The timekeeper then immediately interrupts the game by sounding an acoustic signal and stops the time. Before that, it was one per half. For purpose of calling timeouts, overtime and shootouts are extensions of the second half.
Referees[edit]
A handball match is led by two equal referees. Some national bodies allow games with only a single referee in special cases like illness on short notice. Should the referees disagree on any occasion, a decision is made on mutual agreement during a short timeout; or, in case of punishments, the more severe of the two comes into effect. The referees are obliged to make their decisions "on the basis of their observations of facts".[6] Their judgements are final and can be appealed against only if not in compliance with the rules.




The referees (blue shirts) keep both teams between them.


The referees position themselves in such a way that the team players are confined between them. They stand diagonally aligned so that each can observe one side line. Depending on their positions, one is called field referee and the other goal referee. These positions automatically switch on ball turnover. They physically exchange their positions approximately every 10 minutes (long exchange), and change sides every five minutes (short exchange).
The IHF defines 18 hand signals for quick visual communication with players and officials. The signal for warning or disqualification is accompanied by a yellow or red card,[7] respectively. The referees also use whistle blows to indicate infractions or to restart the play.
The referees are supported by a scorekeeper and a timekeeper who attend to formal things such as keeping track of goals and suspensions, or starting and stopping the clock, respectively. They also keep an eye on the benches and notify the referees on substitution errors. Their desk is located between the two substitution areas.
Team players, substitutes, and officials[edit]
Each team consists of seven players on court and seven substitute players on the bench. One player on the court must be the designated goalkeeper, differing in his clothing from the rest of the field players. Substitution of players can be done in any number and at any time during game play. An exchange takes place over the substitution line. A prior notification of the referees is not necessary.
Some national bodies, such as the Deutsche Handball Bund (DHB, "German Handball Federation"), allow substitution in junior teams only when in ball possession or during timeouts. This restriction is intended to prevent early specialization of players to offence or defence.
Field players[edit]
Field players are allowed to touch the ball with any part of their bodies above and including the knee. As in several other team sports, a distinction is made between catching and dribbling. A player who is in possession of the ball may stand stationary for only three seconds, and may take only three steps. They must then either shoot, pass, or dribble the ball. Taking more than three steps at any time is considered travelling, and results in a turnover. A player may dribble as many times as they want (though, since passing is faster, it is the preferred method of attack), as long as during each dribble the hand contacts only the top of the ball. Therefore, carrying is completely prohibited, and results in a turnover. After the dribble is picked up, the player has the right to another three seconds or three steps. The ball must then be passed or shot, as further holding or dribbling will result in a double dribble turnover and a free throw for the other team. Other offensive infractions that result in a turnover include charging and setting an illegal screen. Carrying the ball into the six-meter zone results either in ball possession by the goalkeeper (by attacker) or turnover (by defender).
Goalkeeper[edit]
Only the goalkeepers are allowed to move freely within the goal perimeter, although they may not cross the goal perimeter line while carrying or dribbling the ball. Within the zone, they are allowed to touch the ball with all parts of their bodies, including their feet, with a defensive aim (for other actions, they are subject to the same restrictions as the field players). The goalkeepers may participate in the normal play of their teammates. They may be substituted by a regular field player if their team elects to use this scheme in order to outnumber the defending players. Earlier, this field player become the designated goalkeeper on the court; and had to wear some vest or bib to be identified as such. That shirt had to be equal in colour and form to the goalkeeper's shirt, to avoid confusion. A rule change meant to make the game more offensive now allows any player to substitute with the goalkeeper. The new rule resembles the one used in ice hockey. This rule was first used in the women's world championship in December 2015 and has since been used by the men's European championship in January 2016 and by both genders in the Olympic tournament in Rio in 2016.
If either goalkeeper deflects the ball over the outer goal line, their team stays in possession of the ball, in contrast to other sports like football. The goalkeeper resumes the play with a throw from within the zone ("goalkeeper throw"). Passing to one's own goalkeeper results in a turnover. In a penalty shot, throwing the ball against the head of a goalkeeper who is not moving is punished by a direct disqualification ("red card").
Outside of own D-zone, the goalkeeper is treated as a current field player, and has to follow field players' rules; holding or tackling an opponent player outside the area results in a direct disqualification.[clarification needed] The goalkeeper may not return to the area with the ball.
Team officials[edit]
Each team is allowed to have a maximum of four team officials seated on the benches. An official is anybody who is neither player nor substitute. One official must be the designated representative who is usually the team manager. Since 2012, representatives can call up to 3 team timeouts (up to twice per half), and may address the scorekeeper, timekeeper, and referees (before that, it was once per half); overtime and shootouts are considered extensions of the second half. Other officials typically include physicians or managers. Neither official is allowed to enter the playing court without the permission of the referees.
Ball[edit]




A size III handball


The ball is spherical and must be made either of leather or a synthetic material. It is not allowed to have a shiny or slippery surface. As the ball is intended to be operated by a single hand, its official sizes vary depending on age and gender of the participating teams.


Size
Class
Circumference
(cm)
Circumference
(in)
Weight
(g)
Weight
(oz)


III
Men and male over-16s
58–60
23–24
425–475
15.0–16.8


II
Women, male over-12s, and female over-14s
54–56
21–22
325–375
11.5–13.2


I
Over-8s
50–52
20–20
290–330
10–12


Awarded throws[edit]
The referees may award a special throw to a team. This usually happens after certain events such as scored goals, off-court balls, turnovers and timeouts. All of these special throws require the thrower to obtain a certain position, and pose restrictions on the positions of all other players. Sometimes the execution must wait for a whistle blow by the referee.

Throw-off
A throw-off takes place from the center of the court. The thrower must touch the middle line with one foot, and all the other offensive players must stay in their half until the referee restarts the game. The defending players must keep a distance of at least three meters from the thrower until the ball leaves his hand. A throw-off occurs at the beginning of each period and after the opposing team scores a goal. It must be cleared by the referees.


Modern handball introduced the "fast throw-off" concept; i.e., the play will be immediately restarted by the referees as soon as the executing team fulfills its requirements. Many teams leverage this rule to score easy goals before the opposition has time to form a stable defense line.


Throw-in
The team which did not touch the ball last is awarded a throw-in when the ball fully crosses the side line or touches the ceiling. If the ball crosses the outer goal line, a throw-in is awarded only if the defending field players touched the ball last. Execution requires the thrower to place one foot on the nearest outer line to the cause. All defending players must keep a distance of three metres (9.8 ft). However, they are allowed to stand immediately outside their own goal area even when the distance is less than three meters.


Goalkeeper-throw
If the ball crosses the outer goal line without interference from the defending team or when deflected by the defending team's goalkeeper, or when the attacking team violates the D-zone as described above, a goalkeeper-throw is awarded to the defending team. This is the most common turnover. The goalkeeper resumes the play with a throw from anywhere within the goal area.


Free-throw
A free-throw restarts the play after an interruption by the referees. It takes places from the spot where the interruption was caused, as long as this spot is outside of the free-throw line of the opposing team. In the latter case, the throw is deferred to the nearest spot on the free-throw line. Free-throws are the equivalent to free-kicks in association football; however, conceding them is typically not seen as poor sportsmanship for the defending side, and in itself, they carry no major disadvantages. (In particular, being awarded a free throw while being on warning for passive play will not reset the warning, whereas a shot on goal will.) The thrower may take a direct attempt for a goal which, however, is rarely feasible if the defending team has organised a defense. However, if a free throw is awarded and the half or game ends, a direct throw at the goal is typically attempted, which occasionally goes in.





A seven-metre throw



Seven-meter throw
A seven-meter throw is awarded when a clear chance of scoring is illegally prevented anywhere on the court by an opposing team player, official, or spectator. It is awarded also when the referees have interrupted a legitimate scoring chance for any reason. The thrower steps with one foot behind the seven-metre (23 ft) line with only the defending goalkeeper between him and the goal. The goalkeeper must keep a distance of three metres (9.8 ft), which is marked by a short tick on the floor. All other players must remain behind the free-throw line until execution and the defending field players must keep a distance of three meters. The thrower must await the whistle blow of the referee. A seven-meter throw is the equivalent to a penalty kick in association football; however, it is far more common and typically occurs several times in a single game.

Penalties[edit]




Yellow card shown in a handball match


Penalties are given to players, in progressive format, for fouls that require more punishment than just a free-throw. Actions directed mainly at the opponent and not the ball (such as reaching around, holding, pushing, tripping, and jumping into opponent) as well as contact from the side, from behind a player or impeding the opponent's counterattack are all considered illegal and are subject to penalty. Any infraction that prevents a clear scoring opportunity will result in a seven-meter penalty shot.
Typically the referee will give a warning yellow card for an illegal action; but, if the contact was particularly dangerous, like striking the opponent in the head, neck or throat, the referee can forego the warning for an immediate two-minute suspension. A player can get only one warning before receiving a two-minute suspension. One player is only permitted two two-minute suspensions; after the third time, they will be shown the red card.
A red card results in an ejection from the game and a two-minute penalty for the team. A player may receive a red card directly for particularly rough penalties. For instance, any contact from behind during a fast break is now being treated with a red card. A red-carded player has to leave the playing area completely. A player who is disqualified may be substituted with another player after the two-minute penalty is served. A coach or official can also be penalized progressively. Any coach or official who receives a two-minute suspension will have to pull out one of their players for two minutes; however, the player is not the one punished, and can be substituted in again, as the penalty consists of the team playing with a one player less than the opposing team.
After referees award the ball to the opponents for whatever reason, the player currently in possession of the ball has to lay it down quickly, or else face a two-minute suspension. Also, gesticulating or verbally questioning the referee's order, as well as arguing with the officials' decisions, will normally result in a two-minute suspension. If the suspended player protests further, does not walk straight off the field to the bench, or if the referee deems the tempo deliberately slow, the player can be given an additional two-minute suspension. Illegal substitution (outside of the dedicated area, or if the replacement player enters too early) is also punishable by a two-minute suspension.
Gameplay[edit]
Formations[edit]




Positions of attacking (red) and defending players (blue), in a 5-1 defense formation






Positions of attacking (red) and defending players (blue), in a 6-0 defense formation


Players are typically referred to by the positions they are playing. The positions are always denoted from the view of the respective goalkeeper, so that a defender on the right opposes an attacker on the left. However, not all of the following positions may be occupied depending on the formation or potential suspensions.
Offense[edit]

Left and right wingman. These typically are fast players who excel at ball control and wide jumps from the outside of the goal perimeter in order to get into a better shooting angle at the goal. Teams usually try to occupy the left position with a right-handed player and vice versa.
Left and right backcourt. Goal attempts by these players are typically made by jumping high and shooting over the defenders. Thus, it is usually advantageous to have tall players with a powerful shot for these positions.
Centre backcourt. A player with experience is preferred on this position who acts as playmaker and the handball equivalent of a basketball point guard.
Pivot (left and right, if applicable). This player tends to intermingle with the defence, setting picks and attempting to disrupt the defence's formation. This positions requires the least jumping skills; but ball control and physical strength are an advantage.

Sometimes, the offense uses formations with two pivot players.
Defense[edit]
There are many variations in defensive formations. Usually, they are described as n:m formations, where n is the number of players defending at the goal line and m the number of players defending more offensive. Exceptions are the 3:2:1 defense and n+m formation (e.g. 5+1), where m players defend some offensive player in man coverage (instead of the usual zone coverage).

Far left and far right. The opponents of the wingmen.
Half left and half right. The opponents of the left and right backcourts.
Back center (left and right). Opponent of the pivot.
Front center. Opponent of the center backcourt, may also be set against another specific backcourt player.

Offensive play[edit]
Attacks are played with all field players on the side of the defenders. Depending on the speed of the attack, one distinguishes between three attack waves with a decreasing chance of success:




Women's handball - a jump shot completes a fast-break






Men's handball - a jump shot (Kiril Lazarov, world record-holder for the number of goals scored in one world championship)



First wave
First wave attacks are characterised by the absence of defending players around their goal perimeter. The chance of success is very high, as the throwing player is unhindered in his scoring attempt. Such attacks typically occur after an intercepted pass or a steal, and if the defending team can switch fast to offence. The far left or far right will usually try to run the attack, as they are not as tightly bound in the defence. On a turnover, they immediately sprint forward and receive the ball halfway to the other goal. Thus, these positions are commonly held by quick players.
Second wave
If the first wave is not successful and some defending players have gained their positions around the zone, the second wave comes into play: the remaining players advance with quick passes to locally outnumber the retreating defenders. If one player manages to step up to the perimeter or catches the ball at this spot, he becomes unstoppable by legal defensive means. From this position, the chance of success is naturally very high. Second wave attacks became much more important with the "fast throw-off" rule.


Third wave
The time during which the second wave may be successful is very short, as then the defenders closed the gaps around the zone. In the third wave, the attackers use standardised attack patterns usually involving crossing and passing between the back court players who either try to pass the ball through a gap to their pivot, take a jumping shot from the backcourt at the goal, or lure the defence away from a wingman.

The third wave evolves into the normal offensive play when all defenders not only reach the zone, but gain their accustomed positions. Some teams then substitute specialised offence players. However, this implies that these players must play in the defence should the opposing team be able to switch quickly to offence. The latter is another benefit for fast playing teams.
If the attacking team does not make sufficient progress (eventually releasing a shot on goal), the referees can call passive play (since about 1995, the referee gives a passive warning some time before the actual call by holding one hand up in the air, signalling that the attacking team should release a shot soon), turning control over to the other team. A shot on goal or an infringement leading to a yellow card or two-minute penalty will mark the start of a new attack, causing the hand to be taken down; but a shot blocked by the defense or a normal free throw will not. If it were not for this rule, it would be easy for an attacking team to stall the game indefinitely, as it is difficult to intercept a pass without at the same time conceding dangerous openings towards the goal.
Defensive play[edit]
The usual formations of the defense are 6–0, when all the defense players line up between the 6-metre (20 ft) and 9-metre (30 ft) lines to form a wall; the 5–1, when one of the players cruises outside the 9-metre (30 ft) perimeter, usually targeting the center forwards while the other 5 line up on the 6-metre (20 ft) line; and the less common 4–2 when there are two such defenders out front. Very fast teams will also try a 3–3 formation which is close to a switching man-to-man style. The formations vary greatly from country to country, and reflect each country's style of play. 6–0 is sometimes known as "flat defense", and all other formations are usually called "offensive defense".
Organization[edit]
Handball teams are usually organised as clubs. On a national level, the clubs are associated in federations which organize matches in leagues and tournaments.
International body[edit]
The International Handball Federation (IHF) is the administrative and controlling body for international handball. Handball is an Olympic sport played during the Summer Olympics.[8]
The IHF organizes world championships, held in odd-numbered years, with separate competitions for men and women.[9] The IHF World Men's Handball Championship 2017 title holders are France[10]. The IHF 2017 Women’s World Championship title holders are also France[11].
The IHF is composed of five continental federations: Asian Handball Federation, African Handball Confederation, Pan-American Team Handball Federation, European Handball Federation and Oceania Handball Federation. These federations organize continental championships held every other second year. Handball is played during the Pan American Games,[12] All-Africa Games,[13] and Asian Games.[8] It is also played at the Mediterranean Games. In addition to continental competitions between national teams, the federations arrange international tournaments between club teams.[14]
National competitions[edit]
Europe[edit]

Austria: Handball Liga Austria, Bundesliga Männer (men), Women Handball Austria, Bundesliga Frauen (women), Österreichischer Cup (men, women) http://www.oehb.sportlive.at
Bosnia and Herzegovina: Handball Championship of Bosnia and Herzegovina
Croatia: Croatian First League of Handball
Czech Republic: Zubr extraliga
Denmark: Damehåndboldligaen, Jack & Jones Ligaen
England: England Handball Association
France: Ligue Nationale de Handball
Germany: Handball-Bundesliga
Greece: Greek Men's handball championship
Hungary: Nemzeti Bajnokság I (men), Nemzeti Bajnokság I (women)
Iceland: Olís deildin
Israel: Ligat Winner
Macedonia: Macedonian Handball Super League
Montenegro: First League (men), First League (women), Second League (men), Second League (women)
Netherlands: NHV Eredivisie (men), Eredivisie (women)
Norway: GRUNDIGligaen
Poland: Polish Ekstraklasa Men's Handball League, Polish Ekstraklasa Women's Handball League
Portugal: Andebol 1 (men), 1ª Divisão Feminino (women)
Romania: Liga Națională (men), Liga Naţională (women)
Scotland: Scottish Handball League
Serbia: Serbian First League of Handball
Slovakia: Slovenská hadzanárska extraliga
Slovenia: Slovenian First League of Handball, Handball Cup of Slovenia
Spain: Liga ASOBAL, División de Plata de Balonmano
Sweden: Elitserien (men's handball)


Other[edit]

Angola: Angola Men's Handball League (men), Angola Women's Handball League (women)
Australia: Australian Handball Club Championship, Australian Handball League, Australian National Handball Championship (States)
Tahiti (French Polynesia): Tahitian Handball League
Turkey: Turkish Handball Super League
United States: U.S. intercollegiate handball championships
Japan: Japan Handball League

Attendance records[edit]
The current worldwide attendance record for seven-a-side handball was set on September 6, 2014, during a neutral venue German league game between HSV Hamburg and the Mannheim-based Rhein-Neckar Lions.[15] The matchup drew 44,189 spectators to Commerzbank Arena in Frankfurt, exceeding the previous record of 36,651 set at Copenhagen's Parken Stadium during the 2011 Danish Cup final.[15]
Commemorative coins[edit]




Handball commemorative coin


Handball events have been selected as a main motif in numerous collectors' coins. One of the recent samples is the €10 Greek Handball commemorative coin, minted in 2003 to commemorate the 2004 Summer Olympics. On the coin, the modern athlete directs the ball in his hands towards his target, while in the background the ancient athlete is just about to throw a ball, in a game known as cheirosphaira, in a representation taken from a black-figure pottery vase of the Archaic period.[16]
The most recent commemorative coin featuring handball is the British 50 pence coin, part of the series of coins commemorating the London 2012 Olympic Games.[17]




UK 2012 Olympics commemorative coin


See also[edit]


Handball portal
Sports portal




Handball at the Summer Olympics
Handball in the United States
Handball-Bundesliga
Beach handball


References[edit]
Notes



^ Barbara Schrodt (6 October 2011). "Team Handball". The Canadian Encyclopedia. Historica-Dominion Institute. 
^ "Member Federations". International Handball Federation. 
^ John Anthony Cuddon, The Macmillan Dictionary of Sports and Games, p.393, Macmillan, 1980, ISBN 0-333-19163-3
^ Serinex.NET, SegaAlex in. "Handball History : HAND-BALL.ORG". www.hand-ball.org. Retrieved 28 November 2017. 
^ "The official Handball rules (PDF)" (PDF). Retrieved 30 July 2012. 
^ Official rules, rule 17:11
^ Official rules, hand signal 13
^ a b "Handball The Official Website of the 16th Asian Games". Guangzhou Asian Games. 21 August 2008. Retrieved 2 February 2009. 
^ "Regulations for IHF Competitions" (PDF). International Handball Federation. September 2007. p. 10. Retrieved 2 February 2009. 
^ "Sensational second half secures France sixth world title". Retrieved 2017-12-18. 
^ "France make it a double, Norway dethroned". Retrieved 2017-12-18. 
^ "Deportes Panamericanos - Balonmano" (in Spanish). Guadalajara 2011. Archived from the original on 4 February 2009. Retrieved 2 February 2009. 
^ "Handball at the 2007 All Africa Games in Algiers". International Handball Federation. 20 July 2007. Retrieved 2 February 2009. 
^ "Bylaws" (PDF). International Handball Federation. September 2007. p. 7. Retrieved 2 February 2009. 
^ a b cie. "World record: 44,189 spectators in Frankfurt". www.handball-world.com. Retrieved 2016-12-26. 
^ "Athens 2004 - Series F coins". Fleur de Coin. Retrieved 3 September 2016. 
^ "London 2012 Olympic and Paralympic Games". RoyalMint.com. 2012. Archived from the original on 31 March 2016. Retrieved 3 September 2016. 



External links[edit]



Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Handball in Europe.


 Media related to Handball at Wikimedia Commons

International Handball Federation (IHF)
Team Handball News - Handball news and commentary
Basic Rules







v
t
e


International handball






IHF
Olympic Games
World Championships

Men
Women


National teams
Player of the Year
Achievements by nation
Beach handball

World Championships
World Games







Africa



African Championship

Men
Women
Men's Junior
Women's Junior
Men's Youth
Women's Youth


African Games








Americas



Pan American Championship

Men
Women
Men's Junior
Women's Junior
Men's Youth
Women's Youth
Beach
Beach Youth


Pan American Games





Asia



Asian Championship

Men
Women
Men's Junior
Women's Junior
Men's Youth
Women's Youth
Beach
Beach Youth


Asian Games





Europe



European Championship

Men
Women
Men's U-20
Women's U-19
Men's U-18
Women's U-17
Beach


European Open





Oceania



Oceania Championship

Nations
Junior
Youth
Beach


Pacific Cup





International



World Championships

Men's Junior
Women's Junior
Men's Youth
Women's Youth


Youth Olympics
Summer Universiade
Emerging Nations
IHF Inter-Continental Trophy












v
t
e


Team sports






Sport
Governing bodies
Sportspeople
National sport





Basket sports



Basketball

beach
deaf
3x3
water
wheelchair


Cestoball
Korfball
Netball

Fast5
indoor
wheelchair


Rezball
Ringball
Slamball





Football codes







Association football

amputee
beach
freestyle
Futsal
indoor
Jorkyball
paralympic
powerchair
roller
street
walking


Australian rules football

AFLX
Lightning football
Metro footy
Nine-a-side
Rec footy


Gaelic football

Ladies'


Circle rules football





Gridiron codes



American football

eight-man
flag
nine-man
six-man
sprint
touch
wheelchair


Canadian football
Indoor American football

Arena football







Hybrid codes



Austus
Eton wall game
International rules football
Samoa rules
Speedball
Swedish football
Universal football
Volata





Medieval football codes



Ba game
Caid
Calcio fiorentino
Camping
Cnapan
Cornish hurling
Cuju
Harpastum
Kemari
Ki-o-rahi
Jegichagi
La soule
Lelo burti
Marn grook
Pasuckuakohowog
Royal Shrovetide
Uppies and downies
Yubi lakpi





Rugby codes



Beach
Rugby league

masters
mod
nines
sevens
tag
wheelchair


Rugby union

American flag
mini
sevens
snow
tag
touch
tens


Touch
Wheelchair








Bat-and-ball games



Baseball
Brännboll
British baseball
Corkball
Cricket

One Day
Test
Twenty20


Danish longball
Indoor cricket
Kickball
Lapta
Matball
Oină
Over-the-line
Pesäpallo
Rounders
Softball

Fastpitch


Stickball
Stoolball
Town ball
Vigoro
Vitilla
Wiffle ball
Wireball





Stick and ball sports







Bando
Cammag
Hurling

Camogie
Super11s
Shinty–Hurling


Indigenous North American stickball
Iomain
Knattleikr
Knotty
Lacrosse

box/indoor
field
intercrosse
women's


Ritinis
Shinty

Shinty–Hurling







Hockey sports



Ball hockey
Bandy

rink


Broomball

Moscow


Field hockey

indoor


Floor hockey
Floorball
Ice hockey

pond
power
ice sledge
underwater


Ringette
Rinkball
Roller hockey

in-line
quad


Rossall hockey
Shinny
Street hockey
Underwater hockey
Unicycle hockey





Polo sports



Auto polo
Cowboy polo
Cycle polo
Elephant polo
Horseball
Motoball
Pato
Polo

Arena polo
chovgan
snow polo


Polocrosse
Segway polo
Yak polo








Net sports



Ball badminton
Beach tennis
Biribol
Bossaball
Fistball
Footbag net
Football tennis
Footvolley
Jianzi
Jokgu
Newcomb ball
Peteca
Sepak takraw
Throwball
Volleyball

beach
paralympic







Other sports



Airsoft
Angleball
Balle à la main
Ballon au poing
Basque pelota

frontenis
jai alai
xare


Bo-taoshi
Boules

Bocce
Bocce volo
Boccia
Bowls
Jeu provençal
Pétanque
Raffa


Buzkashi
Combat (juggling)
Curling

wheelchair


Cycle ball
Digor
Dodgeball
Flickerball
Gateball
Goalball
Guts
Handball

beach
Czech
field


Hornussen
Ice stock sport
Jereed
Kabaddi

indoor
beach


Kho kho
Kin-Ball
Lagori
Longue paume
Mesoamerican ballgame
Paintball
Pelota mixteca
Prisonball
Pushball
Quidditch
Rollball
Roller derby
Slahal
Snow snake
Synchronized skating
Synchronized swimming
Tamburello
Tchoukball

beach


Tejo
Tug of war
Ulama
Ultimate
Underwater football
Underwater rugby
Valencian pilota

Llargues


Water polo

canoe
inner tube
beach


Waboba
Whirlyball
Woodball
Yukigassen












v
t
e


Summer Olympic sports



2016 program



Archery
Athletics
Badminton
Basketball
Boxing
Canoeing

Canoe slalom
Canoe sprint


Cycling

BMX
Mountain bike
Road cycling
Track cycling


Diving
Equestrian

Dressage
Eventing
Show jumping


Fencing
Field hockey
Football
Golf
Gymnastics

Artistic gymnastics
Rhythmic gymnastics
Trampolining


Handball
Judo
Modern pentathlon
Rowing
Rugby sevens
Sailing
Shooting
Swimming
Synchronised swimming
Table tennis
Taekwondo
Tennis
Triathlon
Volleyball

Beach volleyball


Water polo
Weightlifting
Wrestling

Freestyle wrestling
Greco-Roman wrestling







2020 addition



Baseball

Softball


Karate
Skateboarding
Sport climbing
Surfing








See also: Paralympic sports and Winter Olympic sports









Authority control



NDL: 00562912











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Handball&oldid=818423759"					Categories: HandballBall gamesIndoor sportsTeam sportsSummer Olympic sportsSports originating in DenmarkSports originating in GermanyHidden categories: CS1 Spanish-language sources (es)Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2016All articles containing potentially dated statementsWikipedia articles needing clarification from August 2016Use dmy dates from May 2011Articles containing video clips