





This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (February 2011) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)





Hanja


Type

Logographic



Languages
Korean



Time period

Time of Southern Koreans



Parent systems


Oracle Bone Script

Seal Script

Clerical Script

Regular script

Hanja












Sister systems

Kanji, Zhuyin, Traditional Chinese, chữ nôm, Khitan script, Jurchen script


This article contains IPA phonetic symbols. Without proper rendering support, you may see question marks, boxes, or other symbols instead of Unicode characters. For an introductory guide on IPA symbols, see Help:IPA.




Hanja





Korean name


Hangul
한자


Hanja
漢字


Revised Romanization
Hanja


McCune–Reischauer
hancha




Chinese characters





Scripts







Precursors



Oracle-bone
Bronze






Seal (bird-worm
large
small)






Clerical
Regular




Semi-cursive
Cursive
Flat brush





Type styles





Imitation Song
Ming
Sans-serif








Properties




Strokes (order)



Radicals
Classification





Variants





Character-form standards







Kangxi Dictionary
Xin Zixing




General Standard Chinese Characters (PRC)


Graphemes of Commonly-used Chinese Characters (Hong Kong)


Standard Typefaces for Chinese Characters (ROC Taiwan)





Grapheme-usage standards




Graphemic variants
General Standard Characters (PRC)
Jōyō kanji (Japan)




Previous standards




Commonly-used Characters (PRC)
Frequently-used Characters (PRC)
Tōyō kanji (Japan)







Reforms





Chinese




Traditional characters

Simplified characters


(first round
second round)




Debate




Japanese





Old (Kyūjitai)
New (Shinjitai)



Ryakuji




Sino-Japanese




Differences in Shinjitai and Simplified characters




Korean




Yakja




Singaporean




Table of Simplified Characters







Homographs




Literary and colloquial readings




Use in particular scripts




Written Chinese
Zetian characters



Nü Shu
Kanji (Kokuji)
Kana (Man'yōgana)
Idu
Hanja (Gukja)
Nom
Sawndip








v
t
e










Korean writing systems


Hangul


Hanja




Hyangchal
Gugyeol
Idu




Mixed script


Braille


Transcription




McCune–Reischauer
Revised Romanization (South)
Sahoe Kwahagwŏn (North)
Kontsevich (Cyrillic)




Transliteration




Yale (scholar)
RR Transliteration (South)
ISO/TR 11941
SKATS (coding)







v
t
e










Calligraphy




Arabic
Chinese
Georgian
Indian
Islamic
Japanese
Korean
Mongolian
Persian
Tibetan
Western







v
t
e





Hanja (Hangul: 한자; Hanja: 漢字; Korean pronunciation: [ha(ː)nt͈ɕa]) is the Korean name for Chinese characters (Chinese: 漢字; pinyin: hànzì).[1] More specifically, it refers to those Chinese characters borrowed from Chinese and incorporated into the Korean language with Korean pronunciation. Hanja-mal or Hanja-eo (the latter is more used) refers to words that can be written with Hanja, and hanmun (한문, 漢文) refers to Classical Chinese writing, although "Hanja" is sometimes used loosely to encompass these other concepts. Because Hanja never underwent major reform, they are almost entirely identical to traditional Chinese and kyūjitai characters, though the stroke orders for some characters are slightly different. For example, the characters 教 and 研 are written as 敎 and 硏.[2] Only a small number of Hanja characters are modified or unique to Korean. By contrast, many of the Chinese characters currently in use in Japan and Mainland China have been simplified, and contain fewer strokes than the corresponding Hanja characters.[not verified in body]
Although a phonetic Korean alphabet, now known as Hangul, had been created by a team of scholars commissioned in the 1440s by King Sejong the Great, it did not come into widespread official use until the late 19th and early 20th century.[3] Thus, until that time it was necessary to be fluent in reading and writing Hanja in order to be literate in Korean, as the vast majority of Korean literature and most other Korean documents were written in Literary Chinese, using Hanja as its primary script. Today, a good working knowledge of Chinese characters is still important for anyone who wishes to study older texts, or anyone who wishes to read scholarly texts in the humanities. Learning a certain number of Hanja is very helpful for understanding the etymology of Sino-Korean words, and for enlarging one's Korean vocabulary. Hanja are not used to write native Korean words, which are always rendered in Hangul, and even words of Chinese origin—Hanja-eo (한자어, 漢字語)—are written with the Hangul alphabet most of the time.[citation needed]



Contents


1 History
2 Character formation
3 Eumhun
4 Education

4.1 South
4.2 North


5 Uses

5.1 Print media
5.2 Dictionaries
5.3 Personal names
5.4 Toponymy
5.5 Academia
5.6 Popular usage


6 Gukja

6.1 Yakja


7 Pronunciation
8 See also
9 References

9.1 Citations
9.2 Sources


10 External links



History[edit]
A major motivation for the introduction of Chinese characters into Korea was the spread of Buddhism. The major Chinese text that introduced Hanja to Koreans, however, was not a religious text but the Chinese text Cheonjamun (천자문; 千字文; Thousand Character Classic).[citation needed]
Although Koreans had to learn Classical Chinese to be properly literate for the most part, some additional systems were developed which used simplified forms of Chinese characters that phonetically transcribe Korean, including hyangchal (향찰; 鄕札), gugyeol (구결; 口訣), and idu (이두; 吏讀).[citation needed]
One way of adapting Hanja to write Korean in such systems (such as Gugyeol) was to represent native Korean grammatical particles and other words solely according to their pronunciation. For example, Gugyeol uses the characters 爲尼 to transcribe the Korean word "hăni", which in modern Korean means "does, and so". In Chinese, however, the same characters are read as the expression "wéi ní", meaning "becoming a nun". This is a typical example of Gugyeol words where the radical (爲) is read in Korean for its meaning (hă—"to do"), whereas the suffix 尼, ni (meaning "nun"), is used phonetically.[citation needed]
Hanja were the sole means of writing Korean until King Sejong the Great promoted the invention of Hangul in the 15th century. Even after the invention of Hangul, however, most Korean scholars continued to write in hanmun.[citation needed]
Hangul effectively replaced Hanja only in the 20th century. Since June 1949, Hanja have not officially been used in North Korea, and, in addition, all texts are now written horizontally instead of vertically.[citation needed] Many words borrowed from Chinese have also been replaced in the North with native Korean words. Nevertheless, a large number of Chinese-borrowed words are still widely used in the North (although written in Hangul), and Hanja still appear in special contexts, such as recent North Korean dictionaries.[4][original research?][dubious – discuss] The replacement has been less total in South Korea where, although usage has declined over time, some Hanja remain in common usage in some contexts.[citation needed]
Character formation[edit]
Each Hanja is composed of one of 214 radicals plus in most cases one or more additional elements. The vast majority of Hanja use the additional elements to indicate the sound of the character, but a few Hanja are purely pictographic, and some were formed in other ways.
Eumhun[edit]
To aid in understanding the meaning of a character, or to describe it orally to distinguish it from other characters with the same pronunciation, character dictionaries and school textbooks refer to each character with a combination of its sound and a word indicating its meaning. This dual meaning-sound reading of a character is called eumhun (음훈; 音訓; from 音 "sound" + 訓 "meaning," "teaching").
The word or words used to denote the meaning are often—though hardly always—words of native Korean (i.e., non-Chinese) origin, and are sometimes archaic words no longer commonly used.
Education[edit]
South[edit]
South Korean primary schools abandoned the teaching of Hanja in 1971, although they are still taught as part of the mandatory curriculum in 6th grade. They are taught in separate courses in South Korean high schools, separately from the normal Korean-language curriculum. Formal Hanja education begins in grade 7 (junior high school) and continues until graduation from senior high school in grade 12. A total of 1,800 Hanja are taught: 900 for junior high, and 900 for senior high (starting in grade 10).[5] Post-secondary Hanja education continues in some liberal-arts universities.[6] The 1972 promulgation of basic Hanja for educational purposes changed on December 31, 2000, to replace 44 Hanja with 44 others.[7]
Debate flared again in 2013 after a move by South Korean authorities to encourage primary and secondary schools to offer Hanja classes. Officials said that learning Chinese characters could enhance students' Korean-language proficiency; protesters called the program "old-fashioned and unnecessary".[8]
North[edit]
Though North Korea rapidly abandoned the general use of Hanja soon after independence,[9] the number of Hanja taught in primary and secondary schools is actually greater than the 1,800 taught in South Korea.[10] Kim Il-sung had earlier called for a gradual elimination of the use of Hanja,[11] but by the 1960s, he had reversed his stance; he was quoted as saying in 1966, "While we should use as few Sinitic terms as possible, students must be exposed to the necessary Chinese characters and taught how to write them."[12] As a result, a Chinese-character textbook was designed for North Korean schools for use in grades 5–9, teaching 1,500 characters, with another 500 for high school students.[13] College students are exposed to another 1,000, bringing the total to 3,000.[14]
Uses[edit]
Because many different Hanja—and thus, many different words written using Hanja—often share the same sounds, two distinct Hanja words (Hanjaeo) may be spelled identically in the phonetic Hangul alphabet. Since Hanja's language of origin, Chinese, has many homophones, Hanja words became even more homophonic when they came into Korean since Korean lacks a tonal system, which is how Chinese distinguishes many words that would otherwise make them homophonic to each other. For example, while 道, 刀, and 島 are all phonetically distinct in Mandarin, which are pronounced dào, dāo, and dǎo respectively, they are all pronounced do (도) in Korean. Thus, Hanja are often used to clarify meaning, either on their own without the equivalent Hangul spelling, or in parentheses after the Hangul spelling as a kind of gloss. Hanja are often also used as a form of shorthand in newspaper headlines, advertisements, and on signs, for example the banner at the funeral for the sailors lost in the sinking of ROKS Cheonan (PCC-772).[15]
Print media[edit]
In South Korea, Hanja are used most frequently in ancient literature, legal documents, and scholarly monographs, where they often appear without the equivalent Hangul spelling.[citation needed] Usually, only those words with a specialized or ambiguous meaning are printed in Hanja.[citation needed] In mass-circulation books and magazines, Hanja are generally used rarely, and only to gloss words already spelled in Hangul when the meaning is ambiguous.[citation needed] Hanja are also often used in newspaper headlines as abbreviations or to eliminate ambiguity.[16] In formal publications, personal names are also usually glossed in Hanja in parentheses next to the Hangul. In contrast, North Korea eliminated the use of Hanja even in academic publications by 1949, a situation that has since remained unchanged.[12] Hanja are often used for advertising or decorative purposes, and appear frequently in athletic events and cultural parades, dictionaries and atlases. For example, the Hanja 辛 (sin or shin, meaning sour or hot) appears prominently on packages of Shin Ramyun noodles.
Dictionaries[edit]
In modern Korean dictionaries, all entry words of Sino-Korean origin are printed in Hangul and listed in Hangul order, with the Hanja given in parentheses immediately following the entry word.
This practice helps to eliminate ambiguity, and it also serves as a sort of shorthand etymology, since the meaning of the Hanja and the fact that the word is composed of Hanja often help to illustrate the word's origin.
As an example of how Hanja can help to clear up ambiguity, many homophones are written in Hangul as 수도 (sudo), including:[17]

修道: spiritual discipline
囚徒: prisoner
水都: "city of water" (e.g. Venice or Suzhou)
水稻: paddy rice
水道: drain, rivers, path of surface water
隧道: tunnel
首都: capital (city)

Hanja dictionaries (Jajeon (자전, 字典) or Okpyeon (옥편, 玉篇)) are organized by radical (the traditional Chinese method of classifying characters).
Personal names[edit]
Korean personal names are generally based on Hanja, although some exceptions exist. On business cards, the use of Hanja is slowly fading away, with most older people displaying their names in Hanja while most of the younger generation uses Hangul. Korean personal names usually consist of a one-character family name (seong, 성, 姓) followed by a two-character given name (ireum, 이름). There are a few two-character family names (e.g. 남궁, 南宮, Namgung), and the holders of such names—but not only them—tend to have one-syllable given names. Traditionally, the given name in turn consists of one character unique to the individual and one character shared by all people in a family of the same sex and generation (see Generation name). During the Japanese administration of Korea (1910–1945), Koreans were encouraged to adopt Japanese-style names, including polysyllabic readings of the Hanja, but this practice was reversed by post-independence governments in Korea. Since the 1970s, some parents have given their children given names that break the Chinese generation style, and are simply native Korean words. Popular ones include Haneul—meaning "sky"—and Iseul—meaning "morning dew". Nevertheless, on official documents, people's names are still recorded in both Hangul and in Hanja (if the name is composed of Hanja).
Toponymy[edit]
Due to standardization efforts during Goryeo and Joseon eras, native Korean placenames were converted to Hanja, and most names used today are Hanja-based. The most notable exception is the name of the capital, Seoul, a native Korean word meaning "capital" with no direct Hanja conversion; the Hanja gyeong (경, 京, "capital") is sometimes used as a back-rendering. For example, disyllabic names of railway lines, freeways, and provinces are often formed by taking one character from each of the two locales' names; thus,

The Gyeongbu (경부, 京釜) corridor connects Seoul (gyeong, 京) and Busan (bu, 釜);
The Gyeongin (경인, 京仁) corridor connects Seoul and Incheon (in, 仁);
The former Jeolla (전라, 全羅) Province took its name from the first characters in the city names Jeonju (전주, 全州) and Naju (나주, 羅州) ("Naju" is originally "Raju," but the initial "r/l" sound in South Korean is simplified to "n").

Most atlases of Korea today are published in two versions: one in Hangul (sometimes with some English as well), and one in Hanja. Subway and railway station signs give the station's name in Hangul, Hanja, and English, both to assist visitors (including Chinese or Japanese who may rely on the Hanja spellings) and to disambiguate the name.
Academia[edit]
Hanja are still required for certain disciplines in academia, such as Oriental Studies and other disciplines studying Chinese, Japanese or historic Korean literature and culture, since the vast majority of primary source text material are written in Hanzi, Kanji, Hanja, etc.
Popular usage[edit]
See also: Korean mixed script




This Korean War propaganda leaflet created by the US Army as part of Operation Moolah uses Hangul–Hanja mixed script.


Opinion surveys in South Korea regarding the issue of Hanja use have had mixed responses in the past. Hanja terms are also expressed through Hangul, the standard script in the Korean language. Hanja use within general Korean literature has declined significantly since the 1980s because formal Hanja education in South Korea does not begin until the seventh year of schooling, due to changes in government policy during the time. In 1956, one study found mixed-script Korean text (in which Sino-Korean nouns are written using Hanja, and other words using Hangul) were read faster than texts written purely in Hangul; however, by 1977, the situation had reversed.[18] In 1988, 80% of one sample of people without a college education "evinced no reading comprehension of any but the simplest, most common hanja" when reading mixed-script passages.[19]
Gukja[edit]
See also: Kokuji
A small number of characters were invented by Koreans themselves. These characters are called gukja (국자, 國字, literally "national characters"). Most of them are for proper names (place-names and people's names) but some refer to Korean-specific concepts and materials. They include 畓 (답; dap; "paddyfield"), 欌 (장; jang, "wardrobe"), 乭 (돌; Dol, a character only used in given names), 㸴 (소; So, a rare surname from Seongju), and 怾 (기; Gi, an old name referring to Kumgangsan).
Further examples include 巭 (부 bu), 頉 (탈 tal), 䭏 (편 pyeon), and 哛 (뿐 ppun),椧 (명 myeong).
Compare to the parallel development in Japan of kokuji (国字), of which there are hundreds, many rarely used—these were often developed for native Japanese plants and animals.
Yakja[edit]




Yakja (약자, 略字) simplification of 無


Some Hanja characters have simplified forms (약자, 略字, yakja) that can be seen in casual use. An example is , which is a cursive form of 無 (meaning "nothing").
Pronunciation[edit]
Each Hanja character is pronounced as a single syllable, corresponding to a single composite character in Hangul. The pronunciation of Hanja in Korean is not identical to the way they are pronounced in modern Chinese, particularly Mandarin, although some Chinese dialects and Korean share similar pronunciations for some characters. For example, 印刷 "print" is yìnshuā in Mandarin Chinese and inswae (인쇄) in Korean, but it is pronounced insue in Shanghainese (a Wu Chinese dialect). One obvious difference is the complete loss[dubious – discuss] of tone from Korean while most Chinese dialects retain tone. In other aspects, the pronunciation of Hanja is more conservative than most northern and central Chinese dialects, for example in the retention of labial consonant codas in characters with labial consonant onsets, such as the characters 法 (법 beop) and 凡 (범 beom); labial codas existed in Middle Chinese but do not survive intact in most northern and central Chinese varieties today, and even in many southern Chinese varieties that still retain labial codas, including Cantonese and Hokkien, labial codas in characters with labial onsets are replaced by their dental counterparts.
Due to divergence in pronunciation since the time of borrowing, sometimes the pronunciation of a Hanja and its corresponding hanzi may differ considerably. For example, 女 ("woman") is nǚ in Mandarin Chinese and nyeo (녀) in Korean. However, in most modern Korean dialects (especially South Korean ones), 女 is pronounced as yeo (여) when used in an initial position, due to a systematic elision of initial n when followed by y or i.
Additionally, sometimes a Hanja-derived word will have altered pronunciation of a character to reflect Korean pronunciation shifts, for example mogwa 모과 木瓜 "quince" from mokgwa 목과, and moran 모란 牡丹 "Paeonia suffruticosa" from mokdan 모단.
There are some pronunciation correspondence between the onset, rhyme, and coda between Cantonese and Korean.[20]
When learning how to write Hanja, students are taught to memorize the native Korean pronunciation for the Hanja's meaning and the Sino-Korean pronunciations (the pronunciation based on the Chinese pronunciation of the characters) for each Hanja respectively so that students know what the syllable and meaning is for a particular Hanja. For example, the name for the Hanja 水 is 물 수 (mul-su) in which 물 (mul) is the native Korean pronunciation for "water", while 수 (su) is the Sino-Korean pronunciation of the character. The naming of Hanja is similar to if "water" were named "water-aqua", "horse-equus", or "gold-aurum" based on a hybridization of both the English and the Latin names. Other examples include 사람 인 (saram-in) for 人 "person/people", 큰 대 (keun-dae) for 大 "big/large//great", 작을 소 (jakeul-so) for 小 "small/little", 아래 하 (arae-ha) for 下 "underneath/below/low", 아비 부 (abi-bu) for 父 "father", and 나라이름 한 (naraireum-han) for 韓 "Han/Korea".
See also[edit]


Korea portal
Language portal



Sino-Korean vocabulary
Korean mixed script
Han-Nom (Vietnamese equivalent)
Kanji (Japanese equivalent)
McCune-Reischauer
Yale Romanization of Korean
Revised Romanization
New Korean Orthography
List of Korea-related topics

References[edit]
Citations[edit]



^ Coulmas, Florian (1991). The writing systems of the world. Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell. p. 116. ISBN 978-0-631-18028-9. 
^ "Korean Hanja Characters » SayJack". www.sayjack.com. Retrieved 2017-11-04. 
^ Fischer, Stephen Roger (2004-04-04). A History of Writing. Globalities. London: Reaktion Books. pp. 189–194. ISBN 1-86189-101-6. Retrieved 2009-04-03. 
^ "New Korean-English Dictionary published". Korean Central News Agency. 2003-05-28. 
^ Hannas 1997: 71. "A balance was struck in August 1976, when the Ministry of Education agreed to keep Chinese characters out of the elementary schools and teach the 1,800 characters in special courses, not as part of Korean language or any other substantive curricula. This is where things stand at present"
^ Hannas 1997: 68-69
^ 한문 교육용 기초 한자 (2000), page 15 (추가자: characters added, 제외자: characters removed)
^ "Hangeul advocates oppose Hanja classes", The Korea Herald, 2013-07-03.
^ Hannas 1997: 67. "By the end of 1946 and the beginning of 1947, the major newspaper Nodong sinmun, mass circulation magazine Kulloja, and similar publications began appearing in all-hangul. School textbooks and literary materials converted to all-hangul at the same time or possibly earlier (So 1989:31)."
^ Hannas 1997: 68. "Although North Korea has removed Chinese characters from its written materials, it has, paradoxically, ended up with an educational program that teachers more characters than either South Korea or Japan, as Table 2 shows."
^ Hannas 1997: 67. "According to Ko Yong-kun, Kim went on record as early as February 1949, when Chinese characters had already been removed from most DPRK publications, as advocating their gradual abandonment (1989:25)."
^ a b Hannas 1997: 67
^ Hannas 1997: 67. "Between 1968 and 1969, a four-volume textbook appeared for use in grades 5 through 9 designed to teach 1,500 characters, confirming the applicability of the new policy to the general student population. Another five hundred were added for grades 10 through 12 (Yi Yun-p'yo 1989: 372)."
^ Hannas 2003: 188-189
^ Yang, Lina (2010-04-29). "S. Korea bids farewell to warship victims". Xinhua. Archived from the original on 2016-03-04. 
^ Brown 1990: 120
^ (in Korean) Naver Hanja Dictionary query of sudo
^ Taylor and Taylor 1983: 90
^ Brown 1990: 119
^ Patrick Chun Kau Chu. (2008). Onset, Rhyme and Coda Corresponding Rules of the Sino-Korean Characters between Cantonese and Korean. Paper presented at the 5th Postgraduate Research Forum on Linguistics (PRFL), Hong Kong, China, March 15–16.



Sources[edit]

Brown, R. A. (1990). "Korean Sociolinguistic Attitudes in Japanese Comparative Perspective". Journal of Asia Pacific Communication. 1: 117–134. 
DeFrancis, John (1990). The Chinese Language: Fact and Fantasy. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press. ISBN 0-8248-1068-6. 
Hannas, William C. (1997). Asia's Orthographic Dilemma. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press. ISBN 0-8248-1842-3. 
Hannas, William C. (2003). The Writing on the Wall: How Asian Orthography Curbs Creativity. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press. ISBN 0-8122-3711-0. 
Taylor, Insup; Taylor, Martin M. (1983). The psychology of reading. New York: Academic Press. ISBN 0-12-684080-6. 

External links[edit]

Hanja–Hangul Convert Project
Hanja (Chinese characters)
Hanja Dictionary for learners of Korean
One out of Five Korean Students Couldn't Write Their Own Names (in hanja)
Hanja Explorer, a website to visualize and study Hanja and Korean vocabulary
Hangul to Hanja Online Transliteration







v
t
e


Types of writing systems







Overview



History of writing
Grapheme





Lists



Writing systems

undeciphered
inventors
constructed


Languages by writing system / by first written accounts













Types












Abjads






Numerals


Aramaic

Hatran


Arabic
Pitman shorthand
Hebrew

Ashuri
Cursive
Rashi
Solitreo


Tifinagh
Manichaean
Nabataean
Old North Arabian
Pahlavi
Pegon
Phoenician

Paleo-Hebrew


Proto-Sinaitic
Psalter
Punic
Samaritan
South Arabian

Zabur
Musnad


Sogdian
Syriac

ʾEsṭrangēlā
Serṭā
Maḏnḥāyā


Teeline Shorthand
Ugaritic













Abugidas







Brahmic




Northern



Asamiya (Ôxômiya)
Bānglā
Bhaikshuki
Bhujinmol
Brāhmī
Devanāgarī
Dogri
Gujarati
Gupta
Gurmukhī
Kaithi
Kalinga
Khojki
Khotanese
Khudawadi
Laṇḍā
Lepcha
Limbu
Mahajani
Meitei Mayek
Modi
Multani
Nāgarī
Nandinagari
Odia
'Phags-pa
Newar
Ranjana
Sharada
Saurashtra
Siddhaṃ
Soyombo
Sylheti Nagari
Takri
Tibetan

Uchen
Umê


Tirhuta
Tocharian
Zanabazar Square
Zhang-Zhung

Drusha
Marchen
Marchung
Pungs-chen
Pungs-chung







Southern



Ahom
Balinese
Batak
Baybayin
Bhattiprolu
Buhid
Burmese
Chakma
Cham
Grantha
Goykanadi
Hanunó'o
Javanese
Kadamba
Kannada
Kawi
Khmer
Kulitan
Lanna
Lao
Leke
Lontara
Malayalam
Maldivian

Dhives Akuru
Eveyla Akuru
Thaana


Mon
Old Makassarese
Old Sundanese
Pallava
Pyu
Rejang
Rencong
Sinhala
Sundanese
Tagbanwa
Tai Le
Tai Tham
Tai Viet
Tamil
Telugu
Thai
Tigalari
Vatteluttu

Kolezhuthu
Malayanma


Visayan








Others



Boyd's syllabic shorthand
Canadian syllabics

Blackfoot
Déné syllabics


Fox I
Ge'ez
Gunjala Gondi
Japanese Braille
Jenticha
Kayah Li
Kharosthi
Mandombe
Masaram Gondi
Meroitic
Miao
Mwangwego
Sorang Sompeng
Pahawh Hmong
Thomas Natural Shorthand
















Alphabets







Linear



Abkhaz
Adlam
Armenian
Avestan
Avoiuli
Bassa Vah
Borama
Carian
Caucasian Albanian
Coorgi–Cox alphabet
Coptic
Cyrillic
Deseret
Duployan shorthand

Chinook writing


Early Cyrillic
Eclectic shorthand
Elbasan
Etruscan
Evenki
Fox II
Fraser
Gabelsberger shorthand
Garay
Georgian

Asomtavruli
Nuskhuri
Mkhedruli


Glagolitic
Gothic
Gregg shorthand
Greek
Greco-Iberian alphabet
Hangul
Hanifi
IPA
Kaddare
Latin

Beneventan
Blackletter
Carolingian minuscule
Fraktur
Gaelic
Insular
Kurrent
Merovingian
Sigla
Sütterlin
Tironian notes
Visigothic


Luo
Lycian
Lydian
Manchu
Mandaic
Medefaidrin
Molodtsov
Mongolian
Mru
Neo-Tifinagh
New Tai Lue
N'Ko
Ogham
Oirat
Ol Chiki
Old Hungarian
Old Italic
Old Permic
Orkhon
Old Uyghur
Osage
Osmanya
Pau Cin Hau
Runic

Anglo-Saxon
Cipher
Dalecarlian
Elder Futhark
Younger Futhark
Gothic
Marcomannic
Medieval
Staveless


Sidetic
Shavian
Somali
Tifinagh
Vagindra
Visible Speech
Vithkuqi
Wancho
Zaghawa





Non-linear



Braille
Maritime flags
Morse code
New York Point
Semaphore line
Flag semaphore
Moon type
















Ideograms/Pictograms






Adinkra
Aztec
Blissymbol
Dongba
Ersu Shaba
Emoji
IConji
Isotype
Kaidā
Míkmaq
Mixtec
New Epoch Notation Painting
Nsibidi
Ojibwe Hieroglyphs
Siglas poveiras
Testerian
Yerkish
Zapotec













Logograms







Chinese family of scripts




Chinese Characters



Simplified
Traditional
Oracle bone script
Bronze Script
Seal Script

large
small
bird-worm


Hanja
Idu
Kanji
Chữ nôm
Zhuang





Chinese-influenced



Jurchen
Khitan large script
Sui
Tangut








Cuneiform



Akkadian
Assyrian
Elamite
Hittite
Luwian
Sumerian





Other logo-syllabic



Anatolian
Bagam
Cretan
Isthmian
Maya
Proto-Elamite
Yi (Classical)





Logo-consonantal



Demotic
Hieratic
Hieroglyphs





Numerals



Hindu-Arabic
Abjad
Attic (Greek)
Muisca
Roman
















Semi-syllabaries







Full



Celtiberian
Northeastern Iberian
Southeastern Iberian
Khom





Redundant



Espanca
Pahawh Hmong
Khitan small script
Southwest Paleohispanic
Zhuyin fuhao
















Somacheirograms






ASLwrite
SignWriting
si5s
Stokoe Notation













Syllabaries






Afaka
Bamum
Bété
Byblos
Cherokee
Cypriot
Cypro-Minoan
Ditema tsa Dinoko
Eskayan
Geba
Great Lakes Algonquian syllabics
Iban
Japanese

Hiragana
Katakana
Man'yōgana
Hentaigana
Sogana
Jindai moji


Kikakui
Kpelle
Linear B
Linear Elamite
Lisu
Loma
Nüshu
Nwagu Aneke script
Old Persian Cuneiform
Vai
Woleai
Yi (Modern)
Yugtun





















v
t
e


Braille  ⠃⠗⠁⠊⠇⠇⠑



Braille cell



1829 braille
International uniformity
ASCII braille
Unicode braille patterns





Braille scripts




French-ordered scripts
(see for more)



Albanian
Amharic
Arabic
Armenian
Azerbaijani
Belarusian
Bharati

Devanagari (Hindi  /  Marathi  /  Nepali)
Bengali
Punjabi
Sinhalese
Tamil
Urdu
etc.


Bulgarian
Burmese
Cambodian
Cantonese
Catalan
Chinese (Mandarin, mainland)
Czech
Dutch
Dzongkha (Bhutanese)
English (Unified English)
Esperanto
Estonian
Faroese
French
Georgian
German
Ghanaian
Greek
Guarani
Hawaiian
Hebrew
Hungarian
Icelandic
Inuktitut (reassigned vowels)
Iñupiaq
IPA
Irish
Italian
Kazakh
Kyrgyz
Latvian
Lithuanian
Maltese
Mongolian
Māori
Nigerian
Northern Sami
Persian
Philippine
Polish
Portuguese
Romanian
Russian
Samoan
Scandinavian
Slovak
South African
Spanish
Tatar
Taiwanese Mandarin (largely reassigned)
Thai & Lao (Japanese vowels)
Tibetan
Turkish
Ukrainian
Vietnamese
Welsh
Yugoslav





Reordered scripts



Algerian Braille (obsolete)





Frequency-based scripts



American Braille (obsolete)





Independent scripts



Japanese
Korean
Two-Cell Chinese





Eight-dot scripts



Luxembourgish
Kanji
Gardner–Salinas braille codes (GS8)








Symbols in braille



Braille music
Canadian currency marks
Computer Braille Code
Gardner–Salinas braille codes (GS8/GS6)
International Phonetic Alphabet (IPA)
Nemeth braille code





Braille technology



Braille e-book
Braille embosser
Braille translator
Braille watch
Mountbatten Brailler
Optical braille recognition
Perforation
Perkins Brailler
Refreshable braille display
Slate and stylus
Braigo





Persons



Louis Braille
Charles Barbier
Valentin Haüy
Thakur Vishva Narain Singh
Sabriye Tenberken
William Bell Wait





Organisations



Braille Institute of America
Braille Without Borders
Japan Braille Library
National Braille Association
Blindness organizations
Schools for the blind
American Printing House for the Blind





Other tactile alphabets



Decapoint
Moon type
New York Point
Night writing
Vibratese





Related topics



Accessible publishing
Braille literacy
RoboBraille














						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hanja&oldid=818053278"					Categories: Korean writing systemChinese scriptsHanjaChinese charactersKorean languageLogographic writing systemsWriting systemsHidden categories: Articles with Korean-language external linksArticles needing additional references from February 2011All articles needing additional referencesArticles containing Korean-language textArticles containing traditional Chinese-language textAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from May 2016Articles with unsourced statements from January 2013Articles with unsourced statements from December 2017Articles with unsourced statements from April 2007All articles that may contain original researchArticles that may contain original research from May 2016All accuracy disputesArticles with disputed statements from December 2017Articles with unsourced statements from February 2008Articles containing Japanese-language textArticles with disputed statements from June 2011