
Hebrew University of Jerusalem

האוניברסיטה העברית בירושלים
الجامعة العبرية في القدس





Type
Public research


Established
July 24, 1918


Endowment
US$471 million (2015)[1]


President
Asher Cohen


Rector
Barak Medina



Administrative staff

250


Students
23,000


Undergraduates
12,500


Postgraduates
5,000



Doctoral students

2,200


Location
Jerusalem and Rehovot, Israel


Campus
Urban


Nickname
Hebrew U, HUJI


Website
huji.ac.il





The Hebrew University of Jerusalem (Hebrew: האוניברסיטה העברית בירושלים‎, Ha-Universita ha-Ivrit bi-Yerushalayim; Arabic: الجامعة العبرية في القدس‎, Al-Jami'ah al-Ibriyyah fi al-Quds; abbreviated HUJI) is Israel's second oldest university, established in 1918, 30 years before the State of Israel. The Hebrew University has three campuses in Jerusalem and one in Rehovot.[2] The world's largest Jewish studies library is located on its Edmond J. Safra Givat Ram campus.
The university has 5 affiliated teaching hospitals including the Hadassah Medical Center, 7 faculties, more than 100 research centers, and 315 academic departments. A third of all the doctoral candidates in Israel are studying at the Hebrew University.
The first Board of Governors included Albert Einstein, Sigmund Freud, Martin Buber, and Chaim Weizmann. Four of Israel's prime ministers are alumni of the Hebrew University. In the last decade, eight researchers and alumni of the University received the Nobel Prize, one was awarded the Fields Medal, and another the Turing Award.



Contents


1 History
2 Campuses

2.1 Mount Scopus
2.2 Edmond J. Safra, Givat Ram
2.3 Ein Kerem
2.4 Rehovot


3 Libraries
4 Rankings
5 Friends of the University
6 Faculty
7 Notable alumni
8 Yissum Research Development Company
9 See also
10 References
11 External links



History[edit]




Establishment of the Hebrew University and laying of the cornerstone, 1918






National Library of Israel, Givat Ram, established 1892






the building of Academy of the Hebrew Language in Givat Ram campus, established 1890






Painting of the inauguration ceremony, 1925


One of the visions of the Zionist movement was the establishment of a Jewish university in the Land of Israel. Founding a university was proposed as far back as 1884 in the Kattowitz (Katowice) conference of the Hovevei Zion society.
The cornerstone for the university was laid on July 24, 1918. Seven years later, on April 1, 1925, the Hebrew University campus on Mount Scopus was opened at a gala ceremony attended by the leaders of the Jewish world, distinguished scholars and public figures, and British dignitaries, including the Earl of Balfour, Viscount Allenby and Sir Herbert Samuel. The University's first Chancellor was Judah Magnes.
By 1947, the University had become a large research and teaching institution. Plans for a medical school were approved in May 1949, and in November 1949, a faculty of law was inaugurated. In 1952, it was announced that the agricultural institute founded by the University in 1940 would become a full-fledged faculty.[3]
During the 1948 Arab-Israeli War, attacks were carried out against convoys moving between the Israeli-controlled section of Jerusalem and the University.[4] The leader of the Arab forces in Jerusalem, Abdul Kader Husseini, threatened military action against the university Hadassah Hospital "if the Jews continued to use them as bases for attacks."[5] After the Hadassah medical convoy massacre, in which 79 Jews, including doctors and nurses, were slaughtered, the Mount Scopus campus was cut off from Jerusalem.[6] British soldier Jack Churchill coordinated the evacuation of 700 Jewish doctors, students and patients from the hospital.[7]
When the Jordan government denied Israeli access to Mount Scopus, a new campus was built at Givat Ram in western Jerusalem and completed in 1958. In the interim, classes were held in 40 different buildings around the city.[8]
The Terra Santa building in Rehavia, rented from the Franciscan Custodians of the Latin Holy Places, was also used for this purpose.[9] A few years later, together with the Hadassah Medical Organization, a medical science campus was built in the south-west Jerusalem neighborhood of Ein Kerem.
By the beginning of 1967, the students numbered 12,500, spread among the two campuses in Jerusalem and the agricultural faculty in Rehovot. After the unification of Jerusalem, following the Six-Day War of June 1967, the University was able to return to Mount Scopus, which was rebuilt. In 1981 the construction work was completed, and Mount Scopus again became the main campus of the University.
On July 31, 2002, a member of a terrorist cell detonated a bomb during lunch hour at the University's "Frank Sinatra" cafeteria when it was crowded with staff and students. Nine people — five Israelis, three Americans, and one dual French-American citizen — were murdered and more than 70 wounded. World leaders, including Kofi Annan, President Bush, and the President of the European Union issued statements of condemnation.[10][11] The Hebrew University of Jerusalem has launched a marijuana research center in a bid to take a leading role in the burgeoning field. It will conduct and coordinate research on cannabis and its biological effects with an eye toward commercial applications."[12]
Campuses[edit]
Mount Scopus[edit]
Further information: Mount Scopus § Hebrew University of Jerusalem




Mount Scopus campus






Mount Scopus campus: Rothberg amphitheater


Mount Scopus (Hebrew: Har HaTzofim הר הצופים), in the north-eastern part of Jerusalem, is home to the main campus, which contains the Faculties of Humanities, Social Sciences, Law, Jerusalem School of Business Administration, Baerwald School of Social Work, Harry S. Truman Research Institute for the Advancement of Peace, Rothberg International School, and the Mandel Institute of Jewish Studies.
The Rothberg International School features secular studies and Jewish/Israeli studies. Included for foreign students is also a mandatory Ulpan program for Hebrew language study which includes a mandatory course in Israeli culture and customs. All Rothberg Ulpan classes are taught by Israeli natives. However, many other classes at the Rothberg School are taught by Jewish immigrants to Israel.
The land on Mt. Scopus was purchased before World War I from Sir John Gray-Hill, along with the Gray-Hill mansion.[13] The master plan for the university was designed by Patrick Geddes and his son-in-law, Frank Mears in December 1919. Only three buildings of this original design were built: The Wolfson National Library, the Mathematics Institute, and the Physics Institute.[13]
Housing for students at Hebrew University who live on Mount Scopus is located at the three dormitories located near the university. These are the Maiersdorf (מאירסדורף) dormitories, the Bronfman (ברונפמן) dormitories, and the Kfar HaStudentim (כפר הסטודנטים, the students' village).
Nearby is the Nicanor Cave, an ancient cave which was planned to be a national pantheon.
Edmond J. Safra, Givat Ram[edit]




Givat Ram campus


The Givat Ram campus (recently renamed after Edmond Safra) is the home of the Faculty of Science including the Einstein Institute of Mathematics; the Israel Institute for Advanced Studies, the Center for the Study of Rationality, as well as the National Library of Israel, (JNUL).
Ein Kerem[edit]
The Faculties of Medicine and Dental Medicine and The Institute For Medical Research, Israel-Canada (IMRIC)[14] are located at the south-western Jerusalem Ein Kerem campus alongside the Hadassah-University Medical Center.
Rehovot[edit]




Rehovot campus, Ariovitch Auditorium


The Robert H. Smith Faculty of Agriculture, Food and the Environment[15] and the Koret School of Veterinary Medicine[16] are located in the city of Rehovot in the coastal plain. The Faculty was established in 1942 and the School of Veterinary Medicine opened in 1985. These are the only institutions of higher learning in Israel that offer both teaching and research programs in their respective fields. The Faculty is a member of the Euroleague for Life Sciences.
Libraries[edit]
The Jewish National and University Library is the central and largest library of the Hebrew University and one of the most impressive book and manuscript collections in the world. It is also the oldest section of the university. Founded in 1892 as a world center for the preservation of books relating to Jewish thought and culture, it assumed the additional functions of a general university library in 1920. Its collections of Hebraica and Judaica are the largest in the world. It houses all materials published in Israel, and attempts to acquire all materials published in the world related to the country. It possesses over five million books and thousands of items in special sections, many of which are unique. Among these are the Albert Einstein Archives, Hebrew manuscripts department, Eran Laor map collection, Edelstein science collection, Gershom Scholem collection, and a collection of Maimonides' manuscripts and early writings.
In his Will, Albert Einstein left the Hebrew University his personal papers and the copyright to them. The Albert Einstein Archives contain some 55,000 items.[17] In March, 2012 the University announced that it had digitized the entire archive, and was planning to make it more accessible online.[18][19][20] Included in the collection are his personal notes, love letters to various women, including the woman who would become his second wife, Elsa.
In addition to the National Library, the Hebrew University operates subject-based libraries on its campuses, among them the Avraham Harman Science Library, Safra, Givat Ram; Mathematics and Computer Science Library, Safra, Givat Ram; Earth Sciences Library, Safra, Givat Ram; Muriel and Philip I. Berman National Medical Library, Ein Kerem; Central Library of Agricultural Science, Rehovot; Bloomfield Library for the Humanities and Social Sciences, Mt. Scopus; Bernard G. Segal Law Library Center, Mt. Scopus; Emery and Claire Yass Library of the Institute of Archaeology, Mt. Scopus; Moses Leavitt Library of Social Work, Mt. Scopus; Zalman Aranne Central Education Library, Mt. Scopus; Library of the Rothberg School for International Students, Mt. Scopus; Roberta and Stanley Bogen Library of the Harry S. Truman Research Institute for the Advancement of Peace, Mt. Scopus; and the Steven Spielberg Jewish Film Archive.
The Hebrew University libraries and their web catalogs can be accessed through the HUJI Library Authority portal.[21]
Rankings[edit]


University rankings


Global


ARWU World[22]
87


Times World[24]
178


QS World[23]
148


According to the Academic Ranking of World Universities, the Hebrew University is the top university in Israel, overall the 59th-best university in the world, 33rd in mathematics, between 76th and 100th in computer science, and between 51st and 75th in business/economics.[25] In 2015, the Center for World University Rankings ranked the Hebrew University 23rd in the world and the top in Israel in its World University Rankings.[26]
Friends of the University[edit]
The university has an international Society of Friends organizations covering more than 25 countries. The American Friends of the Hebrew University (AFHU) is a not-for-profit 501(c)3 organization that provides programs, events and fundraising activities in support of the university. It was founded by the American philanthropist, Felix M. Warburg in 1925.
Supported by its founder, Dr. Stephen Floersheimer, and headed by Prof. Eran Razin, Floersheimer Studies is a singular program, publishing studies in the field of society, governance and space in Israel. It was established in 2007 replacing the Floersheimer Institute for Policy Studies of 1991.[27]
Faculty[edit]

Dorit Aharonov, computer science
Lydia Aran, scholar of Buddhism
Robert Aumann, 2005 Nobel Prize laureate for Economics
Shlomo Avineri, Political Science
Yishai Bar, law
Yehoshua Bar-Hillel, linguistics
Yaacov Bar-Siman-Tov, international relations
Aharon Barak, former President of the Israeli Supreme Court
Yehuda Bauer, Holocaust history
Jacob Bekenstein, physics
Norman Bentwich, international relations
Ernst David Bergmann, chairman of Israeli Atomic Energy Commission
Martin Buber, religion & Jewish philosophy
Howard Cedar, Chairperson, Developmental Biology & Cancer Research, IMRIC
Ilan Chet, agricultural biotechnology
Richard I. Cohen, history
Avishai Dekel Andre Aisenstadt Chair of Theoretical Physics
Shmuel Eisenstadt, sociology
Menachem Elon, former Deputy President of the Israeli Supreme Court
Adolf Abraham Halevi Fraenkel, mathematics
Hillel Furstenberg, mathematics, Israel Prize Winner
Leah Goldberg (1911–1970), poet
Asher Dan Grunis, Supreme Court Justice
Louis Guttman, social sciences and statistics
Ephraim Halevy, Mossad chief
Lumír Ondřej Hanuš, analytic chemist
Gabriel Herman, Historian
Daniel Kahneman, 2002 Nobel Prize laureate for Economics
Ruth Kark, geography of (Eretz) Israel
Elihu Katz, communication
Aharon Katzir, chemistry
David Kazhdan, mathematics
Baruch Kimmerling, sociology
Roger D. Kornberg, visiting professor, 2006 Nobel Prize laureate for chemistry
David Kretzmer, law
Ruth Lapidoth, law
Ruth Lawrence, mathematics
Yeshayahu Leibowitz, biochemistry and Jewish philosophy
Avigdor Levontin, law
Amia Lieblich, psychology
Elon Lindenstrauss, mathematics, laureate of the 2010 Fields Medal
Joram Lindenstrauss, mathematics, Israel Prize Winner
Avishai Margalit, philosophy Israel Prize Winner
Amihai Mazar, archaeology, Israel Prize Winner
Benjamin Mazar. archaeologist, Israel Prize Winner, former University president and rector
Eugen Mittwoch, semitic languages, guest professor in 1924 (famous as head of German Nachrichtenstelle in World War One)
George Mosse, history
Bezalel Narkiss, art history
Amnon Netzer, Jewish Studies and history
Ehud Netzer, archaeology
Yaakov Nahmias, bioengineering
Anat Ninio, psychology
Mordechai Nisan, education
Dan Pagis, literature
Nurit Peled-Elhanan, education
Tsvi Piran, astrophysics
Eliezer E. Goldschmidt, agriculture
Joshua Prawer, history
Michael O. Rabin, computer science and mathematics, Israel Prize Winner and recipient of the Turing Award.
Giulio Racah, physics
Frances Raday, law
Aharon Razin, Researcher, IMRIC
Eliyahu Rips, mathematics
Mordechai Rotenberg, social work
Gershom Scholem, Jewish mysticism
Eliezer Schweid, Jewish philosophy
Zlil Sela, mathematics
Nir Shaviv, astrophysics
Saharon Shelah, mathematics
Avraham Steinberg, medical ethics
Zeev Sternhell, political science
Hayim Tadmor, Assyriology
Jacob Talmon, history
Gadi Taub, social sciences
Amos Tversky, psychology
Claude Vigée, French literature
Avi Wigderson, computer science and mathematics
Hanna Yablonka, Holocaust history
Joseph Yahalom, Hebrew poetry
S. Yizhar, writer
Raphael D. Levine, chemist

Notable alumni[edit]

Actors: Natalie Portman
Nobel Prize laureates: Daniel Kahneman (economics 2002), David Gross (physics 2004), Avram Hershko (chemistry 2004), Aaron Ciechanover (chemistry 2004), Robert Aumann (economics 2005), Roger D. Kornberg (chemistry 2006), and Ada Yonath (chemistry 2009).
Clergy: Malcolm Ranjith, Archbishop of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Colombo, 2nd Sri Lankan to be made a cardinal, Patriarch Theophilos III of Jerusalem
Educators: Brother Rafael S. Donato FSC, Ed.D., was a Filipino De La Salle Brother and was the past President of De La Salle University Manila, University of St. La Salle, De La Salle Lipa, La Salle Green Hills and De La Salle Araneta University.
Fields Medal laureate: Elon Lindenstrauss (2010)
Presidents of Israel: Ephraim Katzir, Yitzhak Navon, Moshe Katsav, Reuven Rivlin
Prime Ministers of Israel: Ehud Barak, Ariel Sharon, Ehud Olmert
Supreme Court Justices: Aharon Barak, Dorit Beinisch, Menachem Elon, Elyakim Rubinstein, Meir Shamgar, Jacob Turkel, Yitzhak Zamir, Salim Joubran, Uri Shoham
Members of the Knesset: Colette Avital, Yael Dayan, Taleb el-Sana, Dalia Itzik, Roman Bronfman, David Rotem, Ahmed Tibi, Avigdor Lieberman, Dov Khenin, Danny Danon, Shulamit Aloni, Rachel Adato, Ze'ev Elkin, Roni Bar-On, Ze'ev Bielski, Yohanan Plesner, David Rotem, Yuval Steinitz, Dan Meridor, Yisrael Katz, Jamal Zahalka, Shai Hermesh, Zvulun Orlev, Menachem Ben-Sasson, Ya'akov Ne'eman, Geulah Cohen, Bechor-Shalom Sheetrit
Judges: Elisheva Barak-Ussoskin
Foreign service: Naomi Ben-Ami, Gabriela Shalev
Sports and culture: Shaul Ladany, Yochanan Vollach, Itzik Kornfein, Adin Talbar
Culture: Natalie Portman, Uri Zohar
Archaeologists: Ruth Amiran, Trude Dothan, Aren Maeir, Benjamin Mazar, Amihai Mazar, Eilat Mazar, Yigael Yadin
Anthropologist: Eliane Karp
Activists: Dorit Reiss, Elie Yossef
Journalists: Khaled Abu Toameh, Ron Ben-Yishai, Nahum Barnea, Zvi Yehezkeli, Sayed Kashua, Amira Hass, Akiva Eldar, Yossi Melman, Meron Benvenisti, Tom Segev, Haviv Rettig, Dan Margalit, Ya'akov Ahimeir, Michael Bar-Zohar, David Witzthum, Haim Gouri, Ehud Yaari, Amos Kenan, Boaz Evron
Writers: Yehuda Amichai, Galila Ron-Feder Amit, Aharon Appelfeld, Netiva Ben-Yehuda, Elias Chacour, Yael Dayan, David Grossman, Batya Gur, Shifra Horn, Amos Oz, A. B. Yehoshua, Amnon Jackont, Amalia Kahana-Carmon, Yehoshua Kenaz, Miriam Roth, Anton Shammas, Gideon Telpaz, Natan Yonatan, Helen Epstein, Amir Segal, Yuval Elizur, Jonah Frankel.
Academics: Ahron Bregman, Richard I. Cohen, Uri Davis, Gerson Goldhaber, Igal Talmi, Haim Harari, Joshua Jortner, Alexander Levitzki, Efraim Karsh, Asa Kasher, Walter Laqueur, Avishai Margalit, Dana Olmert, Neri Oxman, Dana Pe'er, Miri Rubin, Saul Lieberman, Ada Yonath, Eli Salzberger, Amit Schejter, Benjamin Elazari Volcani, Emanuel Adler
Lawyers: Yoram Dinstein, Elias Khoury, Menachem Mazuz, Ya'akov Ne'eman, Dorit Reiss, Malcolm Shaw
Soldiers: Yonatan "Yoni" Netanyahu, Yishai Beer, Uzi Dayan, Yuval Neria
Theologians: Fr Malachi Martin, Yigal Arnon
Physicists: David Gross, Igal Talmi, Haim Harari, Amikam Aharoni, Micha Tomkiewicz
Chemists: Adam Heller, Renata Reisfeld
Business: Léo Apotheker (former CEO of Hewlett-Packard and SAP), Orit Gadiesh (Chairman of Bain & Company), Dina Dublon (Board member of Microsoft, Accenture and PepsiCo), Maxine Fassberg (former CEO of Intel Israel), Gil Shwed (CEO and chairman Check Point Software Technologies), Eli Hurvitz (CEO 1976–2002 Teva Pharmaceuticals), Kobi Alexander (former CEO and founder of Comverse Technology)
Mathematicians: Rami Grossberg (1986), Joram Lindenstrauss (1962), Moshe Machover (1962), Saharon Shelah (1969), Oded Schramm (1987)
Astronomers: David H. Levy
Botanists: Alexander Eig
Scientists: Sarah Spiegel (1974)[28]

Yissum Research Development Company[edit]
Yissum Research Development Company is the university's technology transfer company, founded in 1964. Yissum owns all the intellectual property of the researchers and employees of the Hebrew University. Since its formation Yissum has founded more than 80 spin-off companies such as: Mobileye, BriefCam, HumanEyes, OrCam, ExLibris, BioCancell and many more. Yissum is led by Yaacov Michlin and other leaders in the business industry such as: Tamir Huberman,[29] Dov Reichman, Shoshi Keinan, Ariela Markel and Michal Levy. Yissum is also a member of ITTN (Israel Technology Transfer Organization).
See also[edit]


Israel portal
University portal



Einstein Papers Project
Yehezkel Kaufman
List of Israeli universities and colleges


References[edit]


^ President’s Report 2015, Hebrew University of Jerusalem
^ "The Hebrew University of Jerusalem – About". Huji.ac.il. Retrieved September 6, 2011. 
^ Weitz, Yechiam (March 15, 2011). "The subversives on the hill". Haaretz. Retrieved September 6, 2011. 
^ The Palestine Post, April 14, 1948, p. 3
^ 'Husseini Threatens Hadassah', The Palestine Post, March 18, 1948, p. 1
^ Victims of Hadassah massacre to be memorialized[permanent dead link], Judy Siegel-Itzkovich, Jerusalem Post, April 7, 2008.
^ "Fighting Jack Churchill Survived A Wartime Odyssey Beyond Compare". Wwiihistorymagazine.com. 1941-12-27. Retrieved 2014-03-08. 
^ International dictionary of .. Retrieved September 6, 2011. 
^ "Jerusalem: Architecture in the British Mandate Period". Jewishvirtuallibrary.org. Retrieved September 6, 2011. 
^ "HUJI Memorial Pages". Memorial.huji.ac.il. July 31, 2002. Retrieved September 6, 2011. 
^ "Terrorist bombing at Hebrew University cafeteria". Mfa.gov.il. Archived from the original on December 13, 2010. Retrieved September 6, 2011. 
^ JTA (2017-04-07). "Hebrew University Creates a Buzz With New Marijuana Research Center". Haaretz. Retrieved 2017-04-11. 
^ a b "Architectural Orientalism in the Hebrew University, Diana Dolev". Retrieved September 6, 2011. 
^ "About Us — Institute for Medical Research Israel-Canada (IMRIC)". imric.org. 2014-05-15. Retrieved 2014-05-19. 
^ "Faculty of Agricultural, Food and Environmental Quality Sciences". Agri.huji.ac.il. Retrieved September 6, 2011. 
^ "Koret School of Veterinary Medicine". Departments.agri.huji.ac.il. Retrieved September 6, 2011. 
^ Sela, Shimrit (March 15, 2011). "Albert Einstein's bequest to the Hebrew University". Haaretz. Retrieved September 6, 2011. 
^ Rabinovitch, Ari (March 20, 2012). "Einstein the scientist, dreamer, lover: online". Reuters. Retrieved March 20, 2012. 
^ "Einstein papers to go digital on the Web". Space Daily. March 19, 2012. Retrieved March 20, 2012. 
^ Doyle, Carmel (March 20, 2012). "University digitises Einstein archives via new website". Silicon Republic. Retrieved March 20, 2012. 
^ "lib-authority.huji.ac.il". lib-authority.huji.ac.il. 2013-07-26. Retrieved 2014-05-19. 
^ Academic Ranking of World Universities 2017
^ QS World University Rankings 2018
^ World University Rankings 2018
^ Academic Ranking of World Universities 2015, published by Shanghai Jiao Tong University in 2015.
^ "Top 100". Center for World University Rankings. 2013. Retrieved July 17, 2013. 
^ "Floersheimer Studies". en.fips.huji.ac.il. Retrieved 2017-08-16. 
^ "Sarah Spiegel, Ph.D". Asthma and Allergic Diseases Cooperative Research Center. 2010. Retrieved 2 September 2015. 
^ "Tamir Huberman - Israel | LinkedIn". Il.linkedin.com. Archived from the original on 2013-11-06. Retrieved 2014-05-19. 


External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Hebrew University of Jerusalem.



Official website (in English)
Official website (in Hebrew)
The Mandel Institute of Jewish Studies web site
Einstein Archives at the Hebrew University
American Friends of the Hebrew University
British Friends of The Hebrew University (BFHU)
Canadian Friends of The Hebrew University (CFHU)
The European Alumni of The Hebrew University
Yissum - Technology Transfer Company of the Hebrew University
Center for Jewish Art at the Hebrew University
Online Language Campus of the Hebrew University
Rothberg International School Blog







v
t
e


Israeli Universities






Ariel University
Bar-Ilan University
Ben-Gurion University of the Negev
Open University of Israel
Tel Aviv University
University of Haifa

Founded before the State of Israel

Hebrew University of Jerusalem
Technion – Israel Institute of Technology
Weizmann Institute of Science

















v
t
e


Hebrew University of Jerusalem



Facilities



Center for Jewish Art
Draped Seated Woman 1957–58
Hadassah Medical Center
Hebrew University Stadium
Israel Institute for Advanced Studies
Interdisciplinary Center for Neural Computation
The Nature Park & Galleries, Hebrew University of Jerusalem
Rabbi Dr. I. Goldstein Synagogue
The Racah Institute of Physics
Steven Spielberg Jewish Film Archive
Vidal Sassoon International Center for the Study of Antisemitism





Media



Albert Einstein Archives
Israel Law Review
Jerusalem Review of Legal Studies
Racah Lectures in Physics





Related



Yissum - Technology transfer Company
Einstein Papers Project
Eteacher Group
Hebrew University bombing
Lady Davis Fellows
List of Researchers at Racah Institute
OrCam device
Virtual Melton












v
t
e


Mediterranean Universities Union (UNIMED)








Africa



Algeria



Abou Bekr Belkaïd
Algiers
Annaba
Béjaia
Blida
Constantine
ENP Oran
ENSSP
EPAU
Mostaganem
Oran
Tizi Ouzou





Egypt



AAST
Alexandria
Cairo





Libya



Al-Arab Medical
Al Fateh
Libya





Morocco



Cadi Ayyad
Hassan II Ain Chok
Ibnou Zohr
Mohammed V





Tunisia



Carthage
Gafsa
Jendouba
Kairouan
Monastir
Sfax
Sousse
Tunis
Tunis El Manar













Europe



Albania



Tirana





Cyprus



CUT
University of Cyprus





Finland



Tampere





France



Montpellier 2
Paris 8
Paul Cézanne





Greece



Athens
Panteion





Italy



Bari
Bologna
Camerino
Catania
Messina
Modena
Molise
Naples 2nd
Naples Federico II
Padua
Palermo
Perugia
Perugia Foreigners
Reggio Calabria
Rome III
Rome la Sapienza
Rome S. Pio V
Salento
Sassari
Teramo
Turin
Urbino





Malta



University of Malta





Montenegro



University of Montenegro





Portugal



Aveiro
Évora





Slovenia



Primorska





Spain



Barcelona
Córdoba
Granada
UCM
Valencia













Western Asia



Israel



Ben-Gurion
Jerusalem
Tel Aviv





Jordan



Al al-Bayt
Hashemite
JUST
University of Jordan





Lebanon



Lebanese University
Saint-Esprit de Kaslik





Palestinian territories



Al-Azhar
An-Najah
Bethlehem
Birzeit





Syria



Al-Baath
Aleppo
Damascus
Tishreen









Coordinates: 31°46′33″N 35°12′00″E﻿ / ﻿31.77583°N 35.20000°E﻿ / 31.77583; 35.20000



Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 133172413
ISNI: 0000 0001 2315 5492
GND: 2023678-5
SELIBR: 117630
SUDOC: 085963631
BNF: cb11869862v (data)











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hebrew_University_of_Jerusalem&oldid=818366180"					Categories: Hebrew University of JerusalemLaw schools in IsraelResearch institutes in IsraelUniversities in IsraelUniversities and colleges in JerusalemMount ScopusEducational institutions established in 19181925 establishments in Mandatory PalestineErich Mendelsohn buildingsBuildings and structures in RehovotHidden categories: All articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from November 2017Articles with permanently dead external linksPages using deprecated image syntaxArticles containing Hebrew-language textArticles containing Arabic-language textOfficial website different in Wikidata and WikipediaArticles with Hebrew-language external linksCoordinates on WikidataWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with SELIBR identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiers