"Thoreau" redirects here. For other uses, see Thoreau (disambiguation).


Henry David Thoreau



Thoreau in 1856



Born
(1817-07-12)July 12, 1817
Concord, Massachusetts, US


Died
May 6, 1862(1862-05-06) (aged 44)
Concord, Massachusetts, US


Alma mater
Harvard College





Era
19th century philosophy


Region
Western philosophy


School
Transcendentalism[1]



Main interests




Ethics
Poetry
Religion
Politics
Biology
Philosophy
History






Notable ideas




Abolitionism
tax resistance
development criticism
civil disobedience
conscientious objection
direct action
environmentalism
anarchism
simple living







Influences





Indian philosophy
Ralph Waldo Emerson
Thomas Carlyle
Charles Darwin











Influenced





Mahatma Gandhi
John F. Kennedy
Martin Luther King, Jr.
Walt Whitman
Leo Tolstoy
Marcel Proust
W. B. Yeats
Sinclair Lewis
Ernest Hemingway
Upton Sinclair
Emma Goldman
E. B. White
E. O. Wilson
B. F. Skinner
George Bernard Shaw
John Zerzan












Signature





Henry David Thoreau (see name pronunciation; July 12, 1817 – May 6, 1862) was an American essayist, poet, philosopher, abolitionist, naturalist, tax resister, development critic, surveyor, and historian. A leading transcendentalist,[2] Thoreau is best known for his book Walden, a reflection upon simple living in natural surroundings, and his essay "Civil Disobedience" (originally published as "Resistance to Civil Government"), an argument for disobedience to an unjust state.
Thoreau's books, articles, essays, journals, and poetry amount to more than 20 volumes. Among his lasting contributions are his writings on natural history and philosophy, in which he anticipated the methods and findings of ecology and environmental history, two sources of modern-day environmentalism. His literary style interweaves close observation of nature, personal experience, pointed rhetoric, symbolic meanings, and historical lore, while displaying a poetic sensibility, philosophical austerity, and Yankee attention to practical detail.[3] He was also deeply interested in the idea of survival in the face of hostile elements, historical change, and natural decay; at the same time he advocated abandoning waste and illusion in order to discover life's true essential needs.[3]
He was a lifelong abolitionist, delivering lectures that attacked the Fugitive Slave Law while praising the writings of Wendell Phillips and defending the abolitionist John Brown. Thoreau's philosophy of civil disobedience later influenced the political thoughts and actions of such notable figures as Leo Tolstoy, Mahatma Gandhi, and Martin Luther King Jr.[citation needed]
Thoreau is sometimes referred to as an anarchist.[4][5] Though "Civil Disobedience" seems to call for improving rather than abolishing government—"I ask for, not at once no government, but at once a better government"[6]—the direction of this improvement points toward anarchism: "'That government is best which governs not at all;' and when men are prepared for it, that will be the kind of government which they will have."[6]



Contents


1 Pronunciation of his name
2 Physical appearance
3 Life

3.1 Early life and education, 1817–1837
3.2 Return to Concord, 1837–1844
3.3 "Civil Disobedience" and the Walden years, 1845–1850
3.4 Later years, 1851–1862
3.5 Death
3.6 Nature and human existence
3.7 Sexuality
3.8 Politics
3.9 Intellectual interests, influences, and affinities

3.9.1 Indian sacred texts and philosophy
3.9.2 Biology




4 Influence
5 Criticism
6 Works
7 See also
8 References
9 Further reading
10 External links

10.1 Texts





Pronunciation of his name[edit]
Amos Bronson Alcott and Thoreau's aunt each wrote that "Thoreau" is pronounced like the word thorough (pronounced THUR-oh—/ˈθʌroʊ/—in General American,[7][8] but more precisely THOR-oh—/ˈθɔːroʊ/—in 19th-century New England). Edward Waldo Emerson wrote that the name should be pronounced "Thó-row", with the h sounded and stress on the first syllable.[9] Among modern-day American speakers, it is perhaps more commonly pronounced thə-ROH—/θəˈroʊ/—with stress on the second syllable.[10][11]
Physical appearance[edit]
Thoreau had a distinctive appearance, with a nose that he called "my most prominent feature."[12] Of his appearance and disposition, Ellery Channing wrote,

His face, once seen, could not be forgotten. The features were quite marked: the nose aquiline or very Roman, like one of the portraits of Caesar (more like a beak, as was said); large overhanging brows above the deepest set blue eyes that could be seen, in certain lights, and in others gray,—eyes expressive of all shades of feeling, but never weak or near-sighted; the forehead not unusually broad or high, full of concentrated energy and purpose; the mouth with prominent lips, pursed up with meaning and thought when silent, and giving out when open with the most varied and unusual instructive sayings.[13]

Life[edit]
Early life and education, 1817–1837[edit]




Thoreau's birthplace, the Wheeler-Minot Farmhouse in Concord


Henry David Thoreau was born David Henry Thoreau[14] in Concord, Massachusetts, into the "modest New England family"[15] of John Thoreau, a pencil maker, and Cynthia Dunbar. His paternal grandfather had been born on the UK crown dependency island of Jersey.[16] His maternal grandfather, Asa Dunbar, led Harvard's 1766 student "Butter Rebellion",[17] the first recorded student protest in the American colonies.[18] David Henry was named after his recently deceased paternal uncle, David Thoreau. He began to call himself Henry David after he finished college; he never petitioned to make a legal name change.[19] He had two older siblings, Helen and John Jr., and a younger sister, Sophia.[20] Thoreau's birthplace still exists on Virginia Road in Concord. The house has been restored by the Thoreau Farm Trust,[21] a nonprofit organization, and is now open to the public.
He studied at Harvard College between 1833 and 1837. He lived in Hollis Hall and took courses in rhetoric, classics, philosophy, mathematics, and science.[citation needed] He was a member of the Institute of 1770[22] (now the Hasty Pudding Club). According to legend, Thoreau refused to pay the five-dollar fee (approximately equivalent to $123 in 2017) for a Harvard diploma. In fact, the master's degree he declined to purchase had no academic merit: Harvard College offered it to graduates "who proved their physical worth by being alive three years after graduating, and their saving, earning, or inheriting quality or condition by having Five Dollars to give the college."[23] He commented, "Let every sheep keep its own skin",[24] a reference to the tradition of using sheepskin vellum for diplomas.
Return to Concord, 1837–1844[edit]
The traditional professions open to college graduates—law, the church, business, medicine—did not interest Thoreau,[25]:25 so in 1835 he took a leave of absence from Harvard, during which he taught school in Canton, Massachusetts. After he graduated in 1837, he joined the faculty of the Concord public school, but he resigned after a few weeks rather than administer corporal punishment.[25]:25 He and his brother John then opened the Concord Academy, a grammar school in Concord, in 1838.[25]:25 They introduced several progressive concepts, including nature walks and visits to local shops and businesses. The school closed when John became fatally ill from tetanus in 1842 after cutting himself while shaving.[26][27] He died in Henry's arms.[28]
Upon graduation Thoreau returned home to Concord, where he met Ralph Waldo Emerson through a mutual friend.[15] Emerson, who was 14 years his senior, took a paternal and at times patronizing interest in Thoreau, advising the young man and introducing him to a circle of local writers and thinkers, including Ellery Channing, Margaret Fuller, Bronson Alcott, and Nathaniel Hawthorne and his son Julian Hawthorne, who was a boy at the time.
Emerson urged Thoreau to contribute essays and poems to a quarterly periodical, The Dial, and lobbied the editor, Margaret Fuller, to publish those writings. Thoreau's first essay published in The Dial was "Aulus Persius Flaccus," an essay on the Roman playwright, in July 1840.[29] It consisted of revised passages from his journal, which he had begun keeping at Emerson's suggestion. The first journal entry, on October 22, 1837, reads, "'What are you doing now?' he asked. 'Do you keep a journal?' So I make my first entry to-day."[30]
Thoreau was a philosopher of nature and its relation to the human condition. In his early years he followed Transcendentalism, a loose and eclectic idealist philosophy advocated by Emerson, Fuller, and Alcott. They held that an ideal spiritual state transcends, or goes beyond, the physical and empirical, and that one achieves that insight via personal intuition rather than religious doctrine. In their view, Nature is the outward sign of inward spirit, expressing the "radical correspondence of visible things and human thoughts", as Emerson wrote in Nature (1836).




1967 U.S. postage stamp honoring Thoreau, designed by Leonard Baskin


On April 18, 1841, Thoreau moved into the Emerson house.[31] There, from 1841 to 1844, he served as the children's tutor; he was also an editorial assistant, repairman and gardener. For a few months in 1843, he moved to the home of William Emerson on Staten Island,[32] and tutored the family's sons while seeking contacts among literary men and journalists in the city who might help publish his writings, including his future literary representative Horace Greeley.[33]:68
Thoreau returned to Concord and worked in his family's pencil factory, which he would continue to do alongside his writing and other work for most of his adult life. He rediscovered the process of making good pencils with inferior graphite by using clay as the binder. This invention allowed profitable use of a graphite source found in New Hampshire that had been purchased in 1821 by Thoreau's brother-in-law, Charles Dunbar. The process of mixing graphite and clay, known as the Conté process, had been first patented by Nicolas-Jacques Conté in 1795. The company's other source of graphite had been Tantiusques, a mine operated by Native Americans in Sturbridge, Massachusetts. Later, Thoreau converted the pencil factory to produce plumbago, a name for graphite at the time, which was used in the electrotyping process.[34]
Once back in Concord, Thoreau went through a restless period. In April 1844 he and his friend Edward Hoar accidentally set a fire that consumed 300 acres (1.2 km2) of Walden Woods.[35]
"Civil Disobedience" and the Walden years, 1845–1850[edit]




Thoreau sites at Walden Pond



I went to the woods because I wished to live deliberately, to front only the essential facts of life, and see if I could not learn what it had to teach, and not, when I came to die, discover that I had not lived. I did not wish to live what was not life, living is so dear; nor did I wish to practise resignation, unless it was quite necessary. I wanted to live deep and suck out all the marrow of life, to live so sturdily and Spartan-like as to put to rout all that was not life, to cut a broad swath and shave close, to drive life into a corner, and reduce it to its lowest terms, and, if it proved to be mean, why then to get the whole and genuine meanness of it, and publish its meanness to the world; or if it were sublime, to know it by experience, and be able to give a true account of it in my next excursion.
— Henry David Thoreau, "Where I Lived, and What I Lived For", in Walden[36]

Thoreau felt a need to concentrate and work more on his writing. In March 1845, Ellery Channing told Thoreau, "Go out upon that, build yourself a hut, & there begin the grand process of devouring yourself alive. I see no other alternative, no other hope for you."[37] Two months later, Thoreau embarked on a two-year experiment in simple living on July 4, 1845, when he moved to a small house he had built on land owned by Emerson in a second-growth forest around the shores of Walden Pond. The house was in "a pretty pasture and woodlot" of 14 acres (57,000 m2) that Emerson had bought,[38] 1.5 miles (2.4 km) from his family home.[39]




Original title page of Walden, with an illustration from a drawing by Thoreau's sister Sophia


On July 24 or July 25, 1846, Thoreau ran into the local tax collector, Sam Staples, who asked him to pay six years of delinquent poll taxes. Thoreau refused because of his opposition to the Mexican–American War and slavery, and he spent a night in jail because of this refusal. The next day Thoreau was freed when someone, likely to have been his aunt, paid the tax, against his wishes.[40] The experience had a strong impact on Thoreau. In January and February 1848, he delivered lectures on "The Rights and Duties of the Individual in relation to Government",[41] explaining his tax resistance at the Concord Lyceum. Bronson Alcott attended the lecture, writing in his journal on January 26:



Heard Thoreau's lecture before the Lyceum on the relation of the individual to the State—an admirable statement of the rights of the individual to self-government, and an attentive audience. His allusions to the Mexican War, to Mr. Hoar's expulsion from Carolina, his own imprisonment in Concord Jail for refusal to pay his tax, Mr. Hoar's payment of mine when taken to prison for a similar refusal, were all pertinent, well considered, and reasoned. I took great pleasure in this deed of Thoreau's.
— Bronson Alcott, , Journals[42]



Thoreau revised the lecture into an essay titled "Resistance to Civil Government" (also known as "Civil Disobedience"). It was published by Elizabeth Peabody in the Aesthetic Papers in May 1849. Thoreau had taken up a version of Percy Shelley's principle in the political poem "The Mask of Anarchy" (1819), which begins with the powerful images of the unjust forms of authority of his time and then imagines the stirrings of a radically new form of social action.[43]
At Walden Pond, Thoreau completed a first draft of A Week on the Concord and Merrimack Rivers, an elegy to his brother John, describing their trip to the White Mountains in 1839. Thoreau did not find a publisher for the book and instead printed 1,000 copies at his own expense; fewer than 300 were sold.[31]:234 He self-published the book on the advice of Emerson, using Emerson's publisher, Munroe, who did little to publicize the book.





Reconstruction of the interior of Thoreau's cabin





Replica of Thoreau's cabin and a statue of him near Walden Pond




In August 1846, Thoreau briefly left Walden to make a trip to Mount Katahdin in Maine, a journey later recorded in "Ktaadn", the first part of The Maine Woods.
Thoreau left Walden Pond on September 6, 1847.[31]:244 At Emerson's request, he immediately moved back to the Emerson house to help Emerson's wife, Lidian, manage the household while her husband was on an extended trip to Europe.[44] Over several years, as he worked to pay off his debts, he continuously revised the manuscript of what he eventually published as Walden, or Life in the Woods in 1854, recounting the two years, two months, and two days he had spent at Walden Pond. The book compresses that time into a single calendar year, using the passage of the four seasons to symbolize human development. Part memoir and part spiritual quest, Walden at first won few admirers, but later critics have regarded it as a classic American work that explores natural simplicity, harmony, and beauty as models for just social and cultural conditions.
The American poet Robert Frost wrote of Thoreau, "In one book ... he surpasses everything we have had in America."[45]
The American author John Updike said of the book, "A century and a half after its publication, Walden has become such a totem of the back-to-nature, preservationist, anti-business, civil-disobedience mindset, and Thoreau so vivid a protester, so perfect a crank and hermit saint, that the book risks being as revered and unread as the Bible."[46]
Thoreau moved out of Emerson's house in July 1848 and stayed at a house on nearby Belknap Street. In 1850, he and his family moved into a house at 255 Main Street, where he lived until his death.[47]
In the summer of 1850, Thoreau and Channing journeyed from Boston to Montreal and Quebec City. These would be Thoreau’s only travels outside of the United States.[48] It is as a result of this trip that he developed lectures that eventually became A Yankee in Canada. He jested that all he got from this adventure “was a cold.”[49] In fact, this proved an opportunity to contrast American civic spirit and democratic values with a colony apparently ruled by illegitimate religious and military power. Whereas his own country had had its revolution, in Canada history had failed to turn.[50]
Later years, 1851–1862[edit]




Thoreau in 1854


In 1851, Thoreau became increasingly fascinated with natural history and narratives of travel and expedition. He read avidly on botany and often wrote observations on this topic into his journal. He admired William Bartram and Charles Darwin's Voyage of the Beagle. He kept detailed observations on Concord's nature lore, recording everything from how the fruit ripened over time to the fluctuating depths of Walden Pond and the days certain birds migrated. The point of this task was to "anticipate" the seasons of nature, in his word.[51][52]
He became a land surveyor and continued to write increasingly detailed observations on the natural history of the town, covering an area of 26 square miles (67 km2), in his journal, a two-million-word document he kept for 24 years. He also kept a series of notebooks, and these observations became the source of his late writings on natural history, such as "Autumnal Tints", "The Succession of Trees", and "Wild Apples", an essay lamenting the destruction of indigenous wild apple species.
Until the 1970s, literary critics[who?] dismissed Thoreau's late pursuits as amateur science and philosophy. With the rise of environmental history and ecocriticism as academic disciplines, several new readings of Thoreau began to emerge, showing him to have been both a philosopher and an analyst of ecological patterns in fields and woodlots.[53][54] For instance, his late essay "The Succession of Forest Trees" shows that he used experimentation and analysis to explain how forests regenerate after fire or human destruction, through the dispersal of seeds by winds or animals.




Walden Pond


He traveled to Quebec once, Cape Cod four times, and Maine three times; these landscapes inspired his "excursion" books, A Yankee in Canada, Cape Cod, and The Maine Woods, in which travel itineraries frame his thoughts about geography, history and philosophy. Other travels took him southwest to Philadelphia and New York City in 1854 and west across the Great Lakes region in 1861, when he visited Niagara Falls, Detroit, Chicago, Milwaukee, St. Paul and Mackinac Island.[55] He was provincial in his own travels, but he read widely about travel in other lands. He devoured all the first-hand travel accounts available in his day, at a time when the last unmapped regions of the earth were being explored. He read Magellan and James Cook; the arctic explorers John Franklin, Alexander Mackenzie and William Parry; David Livingstone and Richard Francis Burton on Africa; Lewis and Clark; and hundreds of lesser-known works by explorers and literate travelers.[56] Astonishing amounts of reading fed his endless curiosity about the peoples, cultures, religions and natural history of the world and left its traces as commentaries in his voluminous journals. He processed everything he read, in the local laboratory of his Concord experience. Among his famous aphorisms is his advice to "live at home like a traveler."[57]
After John Brown's raid on Harpers Ferry, many prominent voices in the abolitionist movement distanced themselves from Brown or damned him with faint praise. Thoreau was disgusted by this, and he composed a key speech, A Plea for Captain John Brown, which was uncompromising in its defense of Brown and his actions. Thoreau's speech proved persuasive: the abolitionist movement began to accept Brown as a martyr, and by the time of the American Civil War entire armies of the North were literally singing Brown's praises. As a biographer of Brown put it, "If, as Alfred Kazin suggests, without John Brown there would have been no Civil War, we would add that without the Concord Transcendentalists, John Brown would have had little cultural impact."[58]




Thoreau in his second and final photographic sitting, August 1861


Death[edit]
Thoreau contracted tuberculosis in 1835 and suffered from it sporadically afterwards. In 1860, following a late-night excursion to count the rings of tree stumps during a rainstorm, he became ill with bronchitis.[59][60] His health declined, with brief periods of remission, and he eventually became bedridden. Recognizing the terminal nature of his disease, Thoreau spent his last years revising and editing his unpublished works, particularly The Maine Woods and Excursions, and petitioning publishers to print revised editions of A Week and Walden. He wrote letters and journal entries until he became too weak to continue. His friends were alarmed at his diminished appearance and were fascinated by his tranquil acceptance of death. When his aunt Louisa asked him in his last weeks if he had made his peace with God, Thoreau responded, "I did not know we had ever quarreled."[61]




Grave of Thoreau at Sleepy Hollow Cemetery in Concord


Aware he was dying, Thoreau's last words were "Now comes good sailing", followed by two lone words, "moose" and "Indian".[62] He died on May 6, 1862, at age 44. Amos Bronson Alcott planned the service and read selections from Thoreau's works, and Channing presented a hymn.[63] Emerson wrote the eulogy spoken at the funeral.[64] Thoreau was buried in the Dunbar family plot; his remains and those of members of his immediate family were eventually moved to Sleepy Hollow Cemetery (42°27′53″N 71°20′32″W﻿ / ﻿42.464676°N 71.342251°W﻿ / 42.464676; -71.342251) in Concord, Massachusetts.
Thoreau's friend Ellery Channing published his first biography, Thoreau the Poet-Naturalist, in 1873. Channing and another friend, Harrison Blake, edited some poems, essays, and journal entries for posthumous publication in the 1890s. Thoreau's journals, which he often mined for his published works but which remained largely unpublished at his death, were first published in 1906 and helped to build his modern reputation. A new, expanded edition of the journals is under way, published by Princeton University Press. Today, Thoreau is regarded as one of the foremost American writers, both for the modern clarity of his prose style and the prescience of his views on nature and politics. His memory is honored by the international Thoreau Society and his legacy honored by the Thoreau Institute at Walden Woods, established in 1998 in Lincoln, Massachusetts.
Nature and human existence[edit]

Most of the luxuries and many of the so-called comforts of life are not only not indispensable, but positive hindrances to the elevation of mankind.
— Thoreau[65]

Thoreau was an early advocate of recreational hiking and canoeing, of conserving natural resources on private land, and of preserving wilderness as public land. He was himself a highly skilled canoeist; Nathaniel Hawthorne, after a ride with him, noted that "Mr. Thoreau managed the boat so perfectly, either with two paddles or with one, that it seemed instinct with his own will, and to require no physical effort to guide it." [66]
He was not a strict vegetarian, though he said he preferred that diet[67] and advocated it as a means of self-improvement. He wrote in Walden, "The practical objection to animal food in my case was its uncleanness; and besides, when I had caught and cleaned and cooked and eaten my fish, they seemed not to have fed me essentially. It was insignificant and unnecessary, and cost more than it came to. A little bread or a few potatoes would have done as well, with less trouble and filth."[68]




Thoreau's famous quotation, near his cabin site at Walden Pond


Thoreau neither rejected civilization nor fully embraced wilderness. Instead he sought a middle ground, the pastoral realm that integrates nature and culture. His philosophy required that he be a didactic arbitrator between the wilderness he based so much on and the spreading mass of humanity in North America. He decried the latter endlessly but felt that a teacher needs to be close to those who needed to hear what he wanted to tell them. The wildness he enjoyed was the nearby swamp or forest, and he preferred "partially cultivated country." His idea of being "far in the recesses of the wilderness" of Maine was to "travel the logger's path and the Indian trail", but he also hiked on pristine land. In the essay "Henry David Thoreau, Philosopher" Roderick Nash wrote, "Thoreau left Concord in 1846 for the first of three trips to northern Maine. His expectations were high because he hoped to find genuine, primeval America. But contact with real wilderness in Maine affected him far differently than had the idea of wilderness in Concord. Instead of coming out of the woods with a deepened appreciation of the wilds, Thoreau felt a greater respect for civilization and realized the necessity of balance."[69] Of alcohol, Thoreau wrote, "I would fain keep sober always.... I believe that water is the only drink for a wise man; wine is not so noble a liquor.... Of all ebriosity, who does not prefer to be intoxicated by the air he breathes?"[68]
Sexuality[edit]
Thoreau never married and was childless. He strove to portray himself as an ascetic puritan. However, his sexuality has long been the subject of speculation, including by his contemporaries. Critics have called him heterosexual, homosexual, or asexual.[70][71] There is no evidence to suggest he had physical relations with anyone, man or woman. Some scholars have suggested that homoerotic sentiments run through his writings and concluded that he was homosexual.[70][72][73] The elegy Sympathy was inspired by the eleven-year-old Edmund Sewell, with whom he hiked for five days in 1839.[74] One scholar has suggested that he wrote the poem to Edmund because he could not bring himself to write it to Edmund's sister,[75] and another that Thoreau's "emotional experiences with women are memorialized under a camouflage of masculine pronouns",[76] but other scholars dismiss this.[70][77] It has been argued that the long paean in Walden to the French-Canadian woodchopper Alek Therien, which includes allusions to Achilles and Patroclus, is an expression of conflicted desire.[78] In some of Thoreau's writing there is the sense of a secret self.[79] In 1840 he writes in his journal: "My friend is the apology for my life. In him are the spaces which my orbit traverses".[80] Thoreau was strongly influenced by the moral reformers of his time, and this may have instilled anxiety and guilt over sexual desire.[81]
Politics[edit]


Part of the Politics series on


Green anarchism




Schools of thought


Anarcho-naturism
Social ecology
Anarcho-primitivism
Veganarchism








Theory and Practice


Anarchy
Animal rights
Anti-authoritarianism
Anti-consumerism
Bioregionalism
Communalism
Debate on violence
Deep ecology
Degrowth
Direct action
Do it yourself
Ecovillages
Economic secession
Freeganism
Libertarian municipalism
Lifestyle anarchism
Neo-Luddism
Neo-Malthusianism
Original affluent society
Primitive communism
Radical environmentalism
Refusal of work
Rewilding
Simple living








People


Henry David Thoreau
Leo Tolstoy
Élisée Reclus
Henri Zisly
Émile Gravelle
Isaac Puente
Ethel Mannin
Leopold Kohr
Murray Bookchin
Fredy Perlman
Jacques Ellul
John Zerzan
Janet Biehl
Ivan Ilich








Books and Publications


Walden, or life in the woods
Iniciales
The Breakdown of Nations
Our Synthetic Environment
Post-Scarcity Anarchism
Future Primitive and Other Essays
Against Civilization
Against His-Story, Against Leviathan
Green Anarchy
Green Anarchist
A Language Older Than Words
Species Traitor
The Culture of Make Believe
Endgame








Related topics


Anarchism
Anti-capitalism
Anti-consumerism
Eco-socialism
Green politics
Libertarian socialism
Naturism








Anarchism portal
Environment portal
Politics portal







v
t
e









John Brown “Treason” Broadside, 1859


Thoreau was fervently against slavery and actively supported the abolitionist movement.[1] He participated in the Underground Railroad, delivered lectures that attacked the Fugitive Slave Law, and in opposition to the popular opinion of the time, supported radical abolitionist militia leader John Brown and his party.[1] Two weeks after the ill-fated raid on Harpers Ferry and in the weeks leading up to Brown’s execution, Thoreau regularly delivered a speech to the citizens of Concord, Massachusetts in which he compared the American government to Pontius Pilate and likened Brown’s execution to the crucifixion of Jesus Christ:

“Some eighteen hundred years ago Christ was crucified; this morning, perchance, Captain Brown was hung. These are the two ends of a chain which is not without its links. He is not Old Brown any longer; he is an angel of light.”[3]

In The Last Days of John Brown, Thoreau described the words and deeds of John Brown as noble and an example of heroism.[82] In addition, he lamented the newspaper editors who dismissed Brown and his scheme as “crazy”.[82]
Thoreau was a proponent of limited government and individualism. Although he was hopeful that mankind could potentially have, through self-betterment, the kind of government which “governs not at all”, he distanced himself from contemporary “no-government men” (anarchists), writing: “I ask for, not at once no government, but at once a better government.”[6]
Thoreau deemed the evolution from absolute monarchy to limited monarchy to democracy as “a progress toward true respect for the individual” and theorized about further improvements “towards recognizing and organizing the rights of man.”[6] Echoing this belief, he went on to write: “There will never be a really free and enlightened State until the State comes to recognize the individual as a higher and independent power, from which all its power and authority are derived, and treats him accordingly.”[6]
It is on this basis that Thoreau could so strongly inveigh against British and Catholic power in A Yankee in Canada. Despotic authority had crushed the people’s sense of ingenuity and enterprise; the Canadian habitants had been reduced, in his view, to a perpetual childlike state. Ignoring the recent Rebellions, he argued that there would be no revolution in the St. Lawrence River valley.[83][84]
Although Thoreau believed resistance to unjustly exercised authority could be both violent (exemplified in his support for John Brown) and nonviolent (his own example of tax resistance displayed in Resistance to Civil Government), he regarded pacifist nonresistance as temptation to passivity,[85] writing: “Let not our Peace be proclaimed by the rust on our swords, or our inability to draw them from their scabbards; but let her at least have so much work on her hands as to keep those swords bright and sharp.”[85] Furthermore, in a formal lyceum debate in 1841, he debated the subject “Is it ever proper to offer forcible resistance?”, arguing the affirmative.[86]
Likewise, his condemnation of the Mexican–American War did not stem from pacifism, but rather because he considered Mexico “unjustly overrun and conquered by a foreign army” as a means to expand the slave territory.[87]
Thoreau was ambivalent towards industrialization and capitalism. On one hand he regarded commerce as “unexpectedly confident and serene, adventurous, and unwearied”[3] and expressed admiration for its associated cosmopolitanism, writing:

I am refreshed and expanded when the freight train rattles past me, and I smell the stores which go dispensing their odors all the way from Long Wharf to Lake Champlain, reminding me of foreign parts, of coral reefs, and Indian oceans, and tropical climes, and the extent of the globe. I feel more like a citizen of the world at the sight of the palm-leaf which will cover so many flaxen New England heads the next summer.[3]

On the other hand, he wrote disparagingly of the factory system:

I cannot believe that our factory system is the best mode by which men may get clothing. The condition of the operatives is becoming every day more like that of the English; and it cannot be wondered at, since, as far as I have heard or observed, the principal object is, not that mankind may be well and honestly clad, but, unquestionably, that corporations may be enriched.[3]

Thoreau also favored bioregionalism, the protection of animals and wild areas, free trade, and taxation for schools and highways.[1] He disapproved of the subjugation of Native Americans, slavery, technological utopianism, consumerism, philistinism, mass entertainment, and frivolous applications of technology.[1]
Intellectual interests, influences, and affinities[edit]
Indian sacred texts and philosophy[edit]




Krishna teaching Arjuna from Bhagavata Gita, a text Thoreau read at Walden Pond


Thoreau was influenced by Indian spiritual thought. In Walden, there are many overt references to the sacred texts of India. For example, in the first chapter ("Economy"), he writes: "How much more admirable the Bhagvat-Geeta than all the ruins of the East!"[3] American Philosophy: An Encyclopedia classes him as one of several figures who "took a more pantheist or pandeist approach by rejecting views of God as separate from the world",[88] also a characteristic of Hinduism.
Furthermore, in "The Pond in Winter", he equates Walden Pond with the sacred Ganges river, writing:

In the morning I bathe my intellect in the stupendous and cosmogonal philosophy of the Bhagvat Geeta since whose composition years of the gods have elapsed, and in comparison with which our modern world and its literature seem puny and trivial; and I doubt if that philosophy is not to be referred to a previous state of existence, so remote is its sublimity from our conceptions. I lay down the book and go to my well for water, and lo! there I meet the servant of the Brahmin, priest of Brahma and Vishnu and Indra, who still sits in his temple on the Ganges reading the Vedas, or dwells at the root of a tree with his crust and water jug. I meet his servant come to draw water for his master, and our buckets as it were grate together in the same well. The pure Walden water is mingled with the sacred water of the Ganges.[3]

Thoreau was aware his Ganges imagery could have been factual. He wrote about ice harvesting at Walden Pond. And he knew that New England's ice merchants were shipping ice to foreign ports, including Calcutta.
Additionally, Thoreau followed various Hindu customs, including following a diet of rice ("It was fit that I should live on rice, mainly, who loved so well the philosophy of India."[3]), flute playing (reminiscent of the favorite musical pastime of Krishna), and yoga.
In an 1849 letter to his friend H.G.O. Blake, he wrote about yoga and its meaning to him:

Free in this world as the birds in the air, disengaged from every kind of chains, those who practice yoga gather in Brahma the certain fruits of their works. Depend upon it that, rude and careless as I am, I would fain practice the yoga faithfully. The yogi, absorbed in contemplation, contributes in his degree to creation; he breathes a divine perfume, he hears wonderful things. Divine forms traverse him without tearing him, and united to the nature which is proper to him, he goes, he acts as animating original matter. To some extent, and at rare intervals, even I am a yogi.[89]

Biology[edit]




Bird eggs found by Thoreau and given to the Boston Society of Natural History. Those in the nest are of yellow warbler, the other two of red-tailed hawk.


Thoreau read contemporary works in the new science of biology, including the works of Alexander von Humboldt, Charles Darwin, and Asa Gray (Charles Darwin's staunchest American ally).[90] Thoreau was deeply influenced by Humboldt, especially his work Kosmos.[91]
In 1859, Thoreau purchased and read Darwin's On the Origin of Species. Unlike many natural historians at the time, including Louis Agassiz who publicly opposed Darwinism in favor of a static view of nature, Thoreau was immediately enthusiastic about the theory of evolution by natural selection and endorsed it,[92] stating:

The development theory implies a greater vital force in Nature, because it is more flexible and accommodating, and equivalent to a sort of constant new creation. (A quote from On the Origin of Species follows this sentence.)[90]

Influence[edit]




A bust of Thoreau from the Hall of Fame for Great Americans at the Bronx Community College



Thoreau's careful observations and devastating conclusions have rippled into time, becoming stronger as the weaknesses Thoreau noted have become more pronounced [...] Events that seem to be completely unrelated to his stay at Walden Pond have been influenced by it, including the national park system, the British labor movement, the creation of India, the civil rights movement, the hippie revolution, the environmental movement, and the wilderness movement. Today, Thoreau's words are quoted with feeling by liberals, socialists, anarchists, libertarians, and conservatives alike.
— Ken Kifer, Analysis and Notes on Walden: Henry Thoreau's Text with Adjacent Thoreauvian Commentary[93]

Thoreau's political writings had little impact during his lifetime, as "his contemporaries did not see him as a theorist or as a radical," viewing him instead as a naturalist. They either dismissed or ignored his political essays, including Civil Disobedience. The only two complete books (as opposed to essays) published in his lifetime, Walden and A Week on the Concord and Merrimack Rivers (1849), both dealt with nature, in which he loved to wander."[15] His obituary was lumped in with others rather than as a separate article in an 1862 yearbook.[94] Nevertheless, Thoreau's writings went on to influence many public figures. Political leaders and reformers like Mohandas Gandhi, U.S. President John F. Kennedy, American civil rights activist Martin Luther King, Jr., U.S. Supreme Court Justice William O. Douglas, and Russian author Leo Tolstoy all spoke of being strongly affected by Thoreau's work, particularly Civil Disobedience, as did "right-wing theorist Frank Chodorov [who] devoted an entire issue of his monthly, Analysis, to an appreciation of Thoreau."[95]
Thoreau also influenced many artists and authors including Edward Abbey, Willa Cather, Marcel Proust, William Butler Yeats, Sinclair Lewis, Ernest Hemingway, Upton Sinclair,[96] E. B. White, Lewis Mumford,[97] Frank Lloyd Wright, Alexander Posey,[98] and Gustav Stickley.[99] Thoreau also influenced naturalists like John Burroughs, John Muir, E. O. Wilson, Edwin Way Teale, Joseph Wood Krutch, B. F. Skinner, David Brower, and Loren Eiseley, whom Publishers Weekly called "the modern Thoreau".[100] English writer Henry Stephens Salt wrote a biography of Thoreau in 1890, which popularized Thoreau's ideas in Britain: George Bernard Shaw, Edward Carpenter, and Robert Blatchford were among those who became Thoreau enthusiasts as a result of Salt's advocacy.[101] Mohandas Gandhi first read Walden in 1906 while working as a civil rights activist in Johannesburg, South Africa. He first read Civil Disobedience "while he sat in a South African prison for the crime of nonviolently protesting discrimination against the Indian population in the Transvaal. The essay galvanized Gandhi, who wrote and published a synopsis of Thoreau's argument, calling its 'incisive logic [...] unanswerable' and referring to Thoreau as 'one of the greatest and most moral men America has produced'."[102][103] He told American reporter Webb Miller, "[Thoreau's] ideas influenced me greatly. I adopted some of them and recommended the study of Thoreau to all of my friends who were helping me in the cause of Indian Independence. Why I actually took the name of my movement from Thoreau's essay 'On the Duty of Civil Disobedience', written about 80 years ago."[104]
Martin Luther King, Jr. noted in his autobiography that his first encounter with the idea of nonviolent resistance was reading "On Civil Disobedience" in 1944 while attending Morehouse College. He wrote in his autobiography that it was,

Here, in this courageous New Englander's refusal to pay his taxes and his choice of jail rather than support a war that would spread slavery's territory into Mexico, I made my first contact with the theory of nonviolent resistance. Fascinated by the idea of refusing to cooperate with an evil system, I was so deeply moved that I reread the work several times. I became convinced that noncooperation with evil is as much a moral obligation as is cooperation with good. No other person has been more eloquent and passionate in getting this idea across than Henry David Thoreau. As a result of his writings and personal witness, we are the heirs of a legacy of creative protest. The teachings of Thoreau came alive in our civil rights movement; indeed, they are more alive than ever before. Whether expressed in a sit-in at lunch counters, a freedom ride into Mississippi, a peaceful protest in Albany, Georgia, a bus boycott in Montgomery, Alabama, these are outgrowths of Thoreau's insistence that evil must be resisted and that no moral man can patiently adjust to injustice.[105]

American psychologist B. F. Skinner wrote that he carried a copy of Thoreau's Walden with him in his youth.[106] and, in 1945, wrote Walden Two, a fictional utopia about 1,000 members of a community living together inspired by the life of Thoreau.[107] Thoreau and his fellow Transcendentalists from Concord were a major inspiration of the composer Charles Ives. The 4th movement of the Concord Sonata for piano (with a part for flute, Thoreau's instrument) is a character picture and he also set Thoreau's words.[108]
Actor Ron Thompson did a dramatic portrayal of Henry David Thoreau on the 1976 NBC television series The Rebels.[109][110][111]
Thoreau's ideas have impacted and resonated with various strains in the anarchist movement, with Emma Goldman referring to him as "the greatest American anarchist".[112] Green anarchism and anarcho-primitivism in particular have both derived inspiration and ecological points-of-view from the writings of Thoreau. John Zerzan included Thoreau's text "Excursions" (1863) in his edited compilation of works in the anarcho-primitivist tradition titled Against civilization: Readings and reflections.[113] Additionally, Murray Rothbard, the founder of anarcho-capitalism, has opined that Thoreau was one of the "great intellectual heroes" of his movement.[95] Thoreau was also an important influence on late-19th-century anarchist naturism.[114][115] Globally, Thoreau's concepts also held importance within individualist anarchist circles[116][117] in Spain,[114][115][116] France,[116][118] and Portugal.[119]
For the 200th anniversary of his birth, publishers released several new editions of his work: a recreation of Walden's 1902 edition with illustrations, a picture book with excerpts from Walden, and an annotated collection of Thoreau's essays on slavery.[120]
Criticism[edit]
Although his writings would receive widespread acclaim, Thoreau's ideas were not universally applauded. Scottish author Robert Louis Stevenson judged Thoreau's endorsement of living alone and apart from modern society in natural simplicity to be a mark of "unmanly" effeminacy and "womanish solitude", while deeming him a self-indulgent "skulker".[121]
Nathaniel Hawthorne had mixed feelings about Thoreau. He noted that "He is a keen and delicate observer of nature—a genuine observer—which, I suspect, is almost as rare a character as even an original poet; and Nature, in return for his love, seems to adopt him as her especial child, and shows him secrets which few others are allowed to witness." [122] On the other hand, he also wrote that Thoreau "repudiated all regular modes of getting a living, and seems inclined to lead a sort of Indian life among civilized men".[123][124]
In a similar vein, poet John Greenleaf Whittier detested what he deemed to be the "wicked" and "heathenish" message of Walden, claiming that Thoreau wanted man to "lower himself to the level of a woodchuck and walk on four legs".[125]
In response to such criticisms, English novelist George Eliot, writing for the Westminster Review, characterized such critics as uninspired and narrow-minded:

People—very wise in their own eyes—who would have every man's life ordered according to a particular pattern, and who are intolerant of every existence the utility of which is not palpable to them, may pooh-pooh Mr. Thoreau and this episode in his history, as unpractical and dreamy.[126]

Thoreau himself also responded to the criticism in a paragraph of his work Walden by illustrating the irrelevance of their inquiries:

I should not obtrude my affairs so much on the notice of my readers if very particular inquiries had not been made by my townsmen concerning my mode of life, which some would call impertinent, though they do not appear to me at all impertinent, but, considering the circumstances, very natural and pertinent. Some have asked what I got to eat; if I did not feel lonesome; if I was not afraid; and the like. Others have been curious to learn what portion of my income I devoted to charitable purposes; and some, who have large families, how many poor children I maintained. [...] Unfortunately, I am confined to this theme by the narrowness of my experience. Moreover, I, on my side, require of every writer, first or last, a simple and sincere account of his own life, and not merely what he has heard of other men's lives; [...] I trust that none will stretch the seams in putting on the coat, for it may do good service to him whom it fits.[127]

Recent criticism has accused Thoreau of hypocrisy, misanthropy, and being sanctimonious, based on his writings in Walden,[128] although this criticism has been perceived as highly selective.[129][130][131]
Works[edit]
This list is incomplete; you can help by expanding it.


Henry David Thoreau








Core works and topics


Civil Disobedience
Herald of Freedom
The Last Days of John Brown
Life Without Principle
Paradise (to be) Regained
A Plea for Captain John Brown
Reform and the Reformers

Remarks After the
Hanging of John Brown

The Service
Sir Walter Raleigh
Slavery in Massachusetts
Thomas Carlyle and His Works
Walden
A Walk to Wachusett

A Week on the Concord and
Merrimack Rivers


Wendell Phillips Before the
Concord Lyceum

The Writings of Henry D. Thoreau
Thoreau Society








Related topics





Abolitionism
Anarchism



Anarchism in the United States
Civil disobedience
Concord, Massachusetts
Conscientious objection



Direct action
Ecology



Environmentalism
History of tax resistance
Individualist anarchism



John Brown
Lyceum movement



Nonviolent resistance
Ralph Waldo Emerson



Simple living
Tax resistance






Tax resisters
Transcendentalism



The Night Thoreau Spent in Jail
Walden Pond









v
t
e






Aulus Persius Flaccus (1840)[132]
The Service (1840)[85]
A Walk to Wachusett (1842)[133]
Paradise (to be) Regained (1843)[134]
The Landlord (1843)[135]
Sir Walter Raleigh (1844)
Herald of Freedom (1844)[136]
Wendell Phillips Before the Concord Lyceum (1845)[137]
Reform and the Reformers (1846–48)
Thomas Carlyle and His Works (1847)[138]
A Week on the Concord and Merrimack Rivers (1849)[139]
Resistance to Civil Government, or Civil Disobedience, or On the Duty of Civil Disobedience (1849)[140]
An Excursion to Canada (1853)[141]
Slavery in Massachusetts (1854)[142]
Walden (1854)[143] A Fully Annotated Edition. Jeffrey S. Cramer, ed., Yale University Press, 2004
A Plea for Captain John Brown (1859)[144]
Remarks After the Hanging of John Brown (1859)[145]
The Last Days of John Brown (1860)[82]
Walking (1862)[146]
Autumnal Tints (1862)[147]
Wild Apples: The History of the Apple Tree (1862)[148]
The Fall of the Leaf (1863)[87][149]
Excursions (1863)[150]
Life Without Principle (1863)[151]
Night and Moonlight (1863)[152]
The Highland Light (1864)[153]
The Maine Woods (1864)[154][155] Fully Annotated Edition. Jeffrey S. Cramer, ed., Yale University Press, 2009
Cape Cod (1865)[156]
Letters to Various Persons (1865)[157]
A Yankee in Canada, with Anti-Slavery and Reform Papers (1866)[158]
Early Spring in Massachusetts (1881)
Summer (1884)[159]
Winter (1888)[160]
Autumn (1892)[161]
Miscellanies (1894)[162]
Familiar Letters of Henry David Thoreau (1894)[163]
Poems of Nature (1895)[153]
Some Unpublished Letters of Henry D. and Sophia E. Thoreau (1898)[153]
The First and Last Journeys of Thoreau (1905)[164][165]
Journal of Henry David Thoreau (1906)[166]
The Correspondence of Henry David Thoreau edited by Walter Harding and Carl Bode (Washington Square: New York University Press, 1958)[167]
Poets of the English Language (Viking Press, 1950)[citation needed]
I Was Made Erect and Lone[168]
The Bluebird Carries the Sky on His Back (Stanyan, 1970)[citation needed]
The Dispersion of Seeds published as Faith in a Seed (Island Press, 1993)[citation needed]
The Indian Notebooks (1847-1861) selections by Richard F. Fleck

See also[edit]

American philosophy
List of American philosophers
List of peace activists
Walden Woods Project

References[edit]


^ a b c d e Furtak, Rick. "Henry David Thoreau". The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Retrieved 27 July 2013. 
^ Howe, Daniel Walker, What Hath God Wrought: The Transformation of America, 1815–1848. ISBN 978-0-19-507894-7, p. 623.
^ a b c d e f g h i Thoreau, Henry David. A Week on the Concord and Merrimack Rivers / Walden / The Maine Woods / Cape Cod. Library of America. ISBN 0-940450-27-5.
^ Seligman, Edwin Robert Anderson; Johnson, Alvin Saunders, eds. (1937). Encyclopaedia of the Social Sciences, p. 12.
^ Gross, David, ed. The Price of Freedom: Political Philosophy from Thoreau's Journals. p. 8. ISBN 978-1-4348-0552-2. "The Thoreau of these journals distrusted doctrine, and, though it is accurate I think to call him an anarchist, he was by no means doctrinaire in this either."
^ a b c d e Thoreau, H. D. "Resistance to Civil Government".
^ THUR-oh or Thor-OH? And How Do We Know? Thoreau Reader.
^ Thoreau's Walden, under the sidebar "Pronouncing Thoreau".
^ See the note on pronouncing the name at the Thoreau Institute at Walden Woods.
^ "Thoreau". Dictionary.com. 2013. 
^ Wells, J. C. (1990) Pronunciation Dictionary, s.v. "Thoreau". Essex, U.K.: Longman.
^ Thoreau, H. D. Cape Cod.
^ Harding, Walter. "The Days of Henry Thoreau". thoreau.eserver.org. 
^ Nelson, Randy F. (1981). The Almanac of American Letters. Los Altos, California: William Kaufmann. p. 51. ISBN 0-86576-008-X.
^ a b c McElroy, Wendy (2005-07-30) "Henry David Thoreau and 'Civil Disobedience'". LewRockwell.com.
^ "RootsWeb's WorldConnect Project: Ancestors of Mary Ann Gillam and Stephen Old". 
^ History of the Fraternity System Archived July 4, 2009, at the Wayback Machine..
^ "First Student Protest in the United States". [permanent dead link]
^ Henry David Thoreau Archived October 31, 2006, at the Wayback Machine., "Meet the Writers." Barnes & Noble.com
^ Biography of Henry David Thoreau. americanpoems.com
^ "Thoreau Farm". thoreaufarm.org. 
^ "Organizations Thoreau Joined". Thoreau Society. Archived from the original on May 3, 2013. Retrieved June 26, 2014. 
^ "Thoreau's Diploma". American Literature. Vol. 17, May 1945. pp. 174–75.
^ Walter Harding (June 4, 1984). "Live Your Own Life". Geneseo Summer Compass. Archived from the original on 2006-01-29. Retrieved November 21, 2009. 
^ a b c Sattelmeyer, Robert (1988). Thoreau's Reading: A Study in Intellectual History with Bibliographical Catalogue. Chapter 2 Archived September 8, 2015, at the Wayback Machine.. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
^ Dean, Bradley P. "A Thoreau Chronology".
^ Myerson, Joel (1994). "Barzillai Frost's Funeral Sermon on the Death of John Thoreau Jr". Huntington Library Quarterly. JSTOR 3817844.  Missing or empty |url= (help)
^ Woodlief, Ann. "Henry David Thoreau".
^ "The Dial". Walden.org. Archived from the original on October 18, 2015. 
^ Thoreau, Henry David (2007). I to Myself: An Annotated Selection from the Journal of Henry D. Thoreau. Jeffrey S. Cramer, ed. New Haven: Yale University Press. p. 1.
^ a b c Cheever, Susan (2006). American Bloomsbury: Louisa May Alcott, Ralph Waldo Emerson, Margaret Fuller, Nathaniel Hawthorne, and Henry David Thoreau; Their Lives, Their Loves, Their Work. Detroit: Thorndike Press. p. 90. ISBN 0-7862-9521-X.
^ Salt, H. S. (1890). The Life of Henry David Thoreau. London: Richard Bentley & Son. p. 69. 
^ Sanborn, F. B., ed. (1906). The Writings of Henry David Thoreau. Vol. VI, Familiar Letters. Chapter 1, "Years of Discipline" Archived September 7, 2015, at the Wayback Machine.. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
^ Conrad, Randall. (Fall 2005). "Machine in the Wetland: Re-imagining Thoreau's Plumbago-Grinder". Thoreau Society Bulletin Archived December 23, 2007, at the Wayback Machine. 253.
^ A Chronology of Thoreau's Life, with Events of the Times. The Thoreau Project, Calliope Film Resources. Accessed June 11, 2007.
^ Grammardog Guide to Walden. Grammardog. p. 25. ISBN 1-60857-084-3.
^ Packer, 1833.
^ Richardson. Emerson: The Mind on Fire. p. 399.
^ "Google Maps". 
^ Rosenwald, Lawrence. "The Theory, Practice and Influence of Thoreau's Civil Disobedience". William Cain, ed. (2006). A Historical Guide to Henry David Thoreau. Cambridge: Oxford University Press.
^ Thoreau, H. D., letter to Ralph Waldo Emerson, February 23, 1848.
^ Alcott, Bronson (1938). Journals. Boston: Little, Brown.
^ "Morrissociety.org" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on January 5, 2011. 
^ "Thoreausociety.org". Archived from the original on November 29, 2010. 
^ Frost, Robert (1968). Letter to Wade Van Dore, June 24, 1922, in Twentieth Century Interpretations of Walden. Richard Ruland, ed. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice Hall. p. 8. LCCN 68-14480.
^ Updike, John (2004). "A Sage for All Seasons". The Guardian.
^ Ehrlich, Eugene; Carruth, Gorton (1982). The Oxford Illustrated Literary Guide to the United States. New York: Oxford University Press. p. 45. ISBN 0-19-503186-5.
^ Weisman, Adam Paul (Autumn 1995). "Postcolonialism in North America: Imaginative Colonization in Henry David Thoreau's "A Yankee in Canada" and Jacques Poulin's "Volkswagen Blues"". The Massachusetts Review. 36 (3): 478-479. 
^ Thoreau, Henry David (1961). A Yankee in Canada. Montreal: Harvest House. p. 13. 
^ Lacroix, Patrick (Fall 2017). "Finding Thoreau in French Canada: The Ideological Legacy of the American Revolution". American Review of Canadian Studies. 47 (3): 266-279. 
^ Letters to H. G. O. Blake Archived June 17, 2011, at the Wayback Machine.. Walden.org
^ Thoreau, Henry David (1862). "Autumnal Tints". The Atlantic Monthly, October. pp. 385–402. Reprint Archived March 7, 2010, at the Wayback Machine.. Retrieved November 21, 2009.
^ Thorson, Robert M. (December 6, 2013). Walden's Shore: Henry David Thoreau and Nineteenth-Century Science. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press. ISBN 067472478X. 
^ Primack, Richard B. (June 13, 2013). "Tracking Climate Change with the Help of Henry David Thoreau". Retrieved 23 September 2015. 
^ Thoreau, Henry David (1970). The Annotated Walden. Philip Van Doren Stern, ed. pp. 96, 132.
^ Christie, John Aldrich (1965). Thoreau as World Traveler. New York: Columbia University Press.
^ Letters of H. G. O. Blake Archived June 17, 2011, at the Wayback Machine. in The Writings of Henry David Thoreau: The Digital Collection.
^ Reynolds, David S. (2005). John Brown, Abolitionist. Knopf. p. 4.
^ About Thoreau: Thoreau, the Man Archived June 20, 2016, at the Wayback Machine..
^ Thoreau Chronology.
^ Critchley, Simon (2009). The Book of Dead Philosophers. New York: Random House. p. 181. ISBN 9780307472632. 
^ "The Writer's Almanac". American Public Media. .
^ Packer, Barbara L. (2007). The Transcendentalists. Athens: University of Georgia Press. p. 272. ISBN 978-0-8203-2958-1.
^ Emerson, Ralph Waldo (August 1862). Thoreau. The Atlantic. 
^ Walden, or Life in the Woods (Chapter 1: "Economy")
^ Nathaniel Hawthorne, Passages From the American Note-Books, entry for September 2, 1842.
^ Brooks, Van Wyck. The Flowering of New England. New York: E. P. Dutton and Company, Inc., 1952. p. 310
^ a b Cheever, Susan (2006). American Bloomsbury: Louisa May Alcott, Ralph Waldo Emerson, Margaret Fuller, Nathaniel Hawthorne, and Henry David Thoreau; Their Lives, Their Loves, Their Work. Detroit: Thorndike Press. Large print edition. p. 241. ISBN 0-7862-9521-X.
^ Nash, Roderick. Wilderness and the American Mind: Henry David Thoreau: Philosopher.
^ a b c Harding, Walter (1991). "Thoreau's Sexuality". Journal of Homosexuality 21.3. pp. 23–45.
^ Quinby, Lee. Millennial Seduction. p. 68. 
^ Bronski, Michael (2012). A Queer History of the United States. Beacon Press. p. 50. ISBN 0807044652. 
^ Michael, Warner (1991). "Walden's Erotic Economy" in Comparative American Identities: Race, Sex and Nationality in the Modern Text. Hortense Spillers, ed. New York: Routledge. pp. 157–73.
^ Robbins, Paula Ivaska. "The Natural Thoreau". The Gay And Lesbian Review, September–October 2011. 
^ Richardson, Robert; Moser, Barry (1986). Henry Thoreau: A Life of the Mind. University of California Press. pp. 58–63.
^ Canby, Henry Seidel (1939). Thoreau. Houghton Mifflin. p. 117.
^ Katz, Jonathan Ned (1992). Gay American History: Lesbians and Gay Men in the USA. New York: Meridian. pp. 481–92.
^ López, Robert Oscar (2007). "Thoreau, Homer and Community", in Henry David Thoreau. Harold Bloom, ed. New York: Infobase Publishing. pp. 153–74.
^ Summers, Claude J The Gay and Lesbian Literary Heritage, Routledge, New York, 2002, p. 202
^ Bergman, David, ed. (2009). Gay American Autobiography: Writings From Whitman to Sedaris. University of Wisconsin Press. p. 10
^ Lebeaux, Richard (1984). Thoreau's Seasons. University of Massachusetts Press. p. 386, n. 31.
^ a b c The Last Days of John Brown Archived December 22, 2010, at the Wayback Machine. from the Writings of Henry David Thoreau: The Digital Collection
^ Thoreau, Henry David (1961). A Yankee in Canada. Montreal: Harvest House. p. 105-107. 
^ Lacroix, Patrick (Fall 2017). "Finding Thoreau in French Canada: The Ideological Legacy of the American Revolution". American Review of Canadian Studies. 47 (3): 266-279. 
^ a b c The Service Archived December 22, 2010, at the Wayback Machine. from the Writings of Henry David Thoreau: The Digital Collection
^ Transcendental Ethos from The Thoreau Reader
^ a b "The Walden Woods Project". Walden.org. Archived from the original on June 20, 2016. 
^ John Lachs and Robert Talisse (2007). American Philosophy: An Encyclopedia. p. 310. ISBN 0415939267. 
^ Miller, Barbara S. "Why Did Henry David Thoreau Take the Bhagavad-Gita to Walden Pond?" Parabola 12.1 (Spring 1986): 58–63.
^ a b Berger, Michael Benjamin. Thoreau's Late Career and The Dispersion of Seeds: The Saunterer's Synoptic Vision. ISBN 157113168X, p. 52.
^ Wulf, Andrea. The Invention of Nature: Alexander Humboldt's New World. New York: Alfred A. Knopf 2015, p. 250.
^ Cain, William E. A Historical Guide to Henry David Thoreau. ISBN 0195138635, p. 146.
^ Analysis and Notes on Walden: Henry Thoreau's Text with Adjacent Thoreauvian Commentary Archived March 18, 2006, at the Wayback Machine. by Ken Kifer, 2002
^ Appletons' annual cyclopaedia and register of important events of the year: 1862. New York: D. Appleton & Company. 1863. p. 666. 
^ a b Rothbard, Murray. Confessions of a Right-Wing Liberal, Ramparts, VI, 4, June 15, 1968
^ Maynard, W. Barksdale, Walden Pond: A History. Oxford University Press, 2005. p. 265
^ Mumford, Lewis, The Golden Day: A Study in American Experience and Culture. Boni and Liveright, 1926. pp. 56–59,
^ Posey, Alexander. Lost Creeks: Collected Journals. (Edited by Matthew Wynn Sivils) University of Nebraska Press, 2009. p. 38
^ Saunders, Barry. A Complex Fate: Gustav Stickley and the Craftsman Movement. Preservation Press, 1996. p. 4
^ Kifer, Ken Analysis and Notes on Walden: Henry Thoreau's Text with Adjacent Thoreauvian Commentary Archived March 18, 2006, at the Wayback Machine.
^ Hendrick, George and Oehlschlaeger, Fritz (eds.) Toward the Making of Thoreau's Modern Reputation, University of Illinois Press, 1979.
^ McElroy, Wendy (2011-05-04) Here, the State Is Nowhere to Be Seen, Mises Institute
^ "Although he was practicing civil disobedience before he read Thoreau's essay, Gandhi was quick to point out the debt he owed to Thoreau and other thinkers like him".Shawn Chandler Bingham, Thoreau and the sociological imagination : the wilds of society. Lanham, Md. : Rowman and Littlefield Publishers, 2008. ISBN 9780742560581 p. 31.
^ Miller, Webb. I Found No Peace. Garden City, 1938. 238–39
^ King, M.L. Autobiography of Martin Luther King, Jr. Archived March 8, 2007, at the Wayback Machine. chapter two
^ Skinner, B. F., A Matter of Consequences
^ Skinner, B. F., Walden Two (1948)
^ Burkholder, James Peter. Charles Ives and His World. Princeton University Press, 1996 (pp. 50–51)
^ "Tele-Vues, Sunday, June 6, 1976". Independent Press-Telegram. Long Beach, California. June 6, 1976. p. 170. 
^ "TV Log". Redlands Daily Facts. Redlands, California. June 5, 1976. p. 10. 
^ Actor Ron Thompson as Henry David Thoreau in The Rebels. NBC. June 6, 1976. 
^ Goldman, Emma. Anarchism and Other Essays. p. 62. 
^ Zerzan, John. "Against Civilization: Readings And Reflections" – via Amazon. 
^ a b El naturismo libertario en la Península Ibérica (1890–1939) by Jose Maria Rosello Archived January 2, 2016, at the Wayback Machine.
^ a b Ortega, Carlos. "Anarchism, Nudism, Naturism". [dead link]
^ a b c "La insumisión voluntaria. El anarquismo individualista Español durante la dictadura y la segunda República (1923–1938)" by Xavier Diez Archived May 26, 2006, at the Wayback Machine.
^ "Les anarchistes individualistes du début du siècle l'avaient bien compris, et intégraient le naturisme dans leurs préoccupations. Il est vraiment dommage que ce discours se soit peu à peu effacé, d'antan plus que nous assistons, en ce moment, à un retour en force du puritanisme (conservateur par essence).""Anarchisme et naturisme, aujourd'hui." by Cathy Ytak Archived February 25, 2009, at the Wayback Machine.
^ Recension des articles de l'En-Dehors consacrés au naturisme et au nudisme Archived October 14, 2008, at the Wayback Machine.
^ Freire, João. "Anarchisme et naturisme au Portugal, dans les années 1920" in Les anarchistes du Portugal. [Bibliographic data necessary for this ref.]
^ Williams, John (July 7, 2017). "Alcoholism in America". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. 
^ Stevenson, Robert Louis. "Henry David Thoreau: His Character and Opinions". Cornhill Magazine. June 1880.
^ Nathaniel Hawthorne, Passages From the American Note-Books, entry for September 2, 1842.
^ Hawthorne, The Heart of Hawthorne's Journals, p. 106.
^ Borst, Raymond R. The Thoreau Log: A Documentary Life of Henry David Thoreau, 1817–1862. New York: G.K. Hall, 1992.
^ Wagenknecht, Edward. John Greenleaf Whittier: A Portrait in Paradox. New York: Oxford University Press, 1967: 112.
^ The New England Quarterly, Vol. 6, No. 4 (Dec., 1933), pp. 733–46
^ Thoreau Walden (1854)
^ Schultz, Kathryn (October 19, 2015). "Henry David Thoreau, Hypocrite". The New Yorker. Archived from the original on October 19, 2015. Retrieved October 19, 2015. 
^ "Why do we love Thoreau? Because he was right". Medium. October 19, 2015. Archived from the original on October 19, 2015. Retrieved October 19, 2015. 
^ Malesic, Jonathan (October 19, 2015). "Henry David Thoreau's Radical Optimism". New Republic. Archived from the original on October 19, 2015. Retrieved October 19, 2015. 
^ Hohn, Donovan (October 21, 2015). "Everybody Hates Henry". New Republic. Archived from the original on October 26, 2015. Retrieved October 21, 2015. 
^ Aulus Persius Flaccus Archived December 22, 2010, at the Wayback Machine. from the Writings of Henry David Thoreau: The Digital Collection
^ A Walk to Wachusett Archived December 22, 2010, at the Wayback Machine. from the Writings of Henry David Thoreau: The Digital Collection
^ Paradise (to be) Regained Archived December 22, 2010, at the Wayback Machine. from the Writings of Henry David Thoreau: The Digital Collection
^ "The United States Democratic Review Volume 0013 Issue 64 (Oct 1843)". 
^ Herald of Freedom Archived December 22, 2010, at the Wayback Machine. from the Writings of Henry David Thoreau: The Digital Collection
^ Wendell Phillips Before the Concord Lyceum Archived December 22, 2010, at the Wayback Machine. from the Writings of Henry David Thoreau: The Digital Collection
^ Thomas Carlyle and His Works Archived December 22, 2010, at the Wayback Machine. from the Writings of Henry David Thoreau: The Digital Collection
^ "A Week on the Concord and Merrimack Rivers from Project Gutenberg". 
^ Peabody, Elizabeth Palmer; Emerson, Ralph Waldo; Hawthorne, Nathaniel; Thoreau, Henry David (January 1, 1849). "Aesthetic papers". Boston, : The editor; New York, : G.P. Putnam – via Internet Archive. 
^ A Yankee in Canada Archived June 17, 2011, at the Wayback Machine. from the Writings of Henry David Thoreau: The Digital Collection
^ Slavery in Massachusetts Archived December 22, 2010, at the Wayback Machine. from the Writings of Henry David Thoreau: The Digital Collection
^ Walden Archived September 26, 2010, at the Wayback Machine. from the Writings of Henry David Thoreau: The Digital Collection
^ A Plea for Captain John Brown Archived December 22, 2010, at the Wayback Machine. from the Writings of Henry David Thoreau: The Digital Collection
^ After the Death of John Brown Archived December 22, 2010, at the Wayback Machine. from the Writings of Henry David Thoreau: The Digital Collection
^ "Walking from Project Gutenberg". 
^ Autumnal Tints Archived December 22, 2010, at the Wayback Machine. from the Writings of Henry David Thoreau: The Digital Collection
^ "Wild Apples from Project Gutenberg". 
^ Henry David Thoreau; Bradford Torrey; Franklin Benjamin Sanborn (1863). The Writings of Henry David Thoreau: Excursions, translations, and poems. The Riverside Press, Cambridge. pp. 407–08. 
^ Thoreau, Henry David; Houghton (H. O.) & Company. (1863) bkp CU-BANC; Emerson, Ralph Waldo; Thoreau, Sophia E. (January 1, 1863). "Excursions". Boston, Ticknor and Fields – via Internet Archive. 
^ "The Atlantic Monthly Volume 0012 Issue 71 (September 1863)". 
^ "The Atlantic Monthly Volume 0012 Issue 72 (November 1863)". 
^ a b c "Henry David Thoreau, 1817–1862". ebooks.adelaide.edu. The University of Adelaide. Archived from the original on 1 January 2018. Retrieved 1 January 2018. 
^ The Maine Woods from The Thoreau Reader
^ Thoreau, Henry David; Thoreau, Sophia E.; Channing, William Ellery (January 1, 1864). "The Maine woods". Boston, Ticknor and Fields – via Internet Archive. 
^ Lenat, Richard. "Thoreau's Cape Cod - an annotated edition". 
^ Thoreau, Henry David; Thoreau, Henry David; Emerson, Ralph Waldo (January 1, 1865). "Letters to various persons". Boston : Ticknor and Fields – via Internet Archive. 
^ Thoreau, Henry David; Thoreau, Henry David; Channing, William Ellery; Emerson, Ralph Waldo; Thoreau, Sophia E. (January 1, 1866). "A Yankee in Canada, with Anti-slavery and reform papers". Boston, Ticknor and Fields – via Internet Archive. 
^ Thoreau, Henry David; Blake, H. G. O. (Harrison Gray Otis) (January 1, 1884). "Summer : from the Journal of Henry D. Thoreau". London : T. Fisher Unwin – via Internet Archive. 
^ Thoreau, Henry David; Blake, H. G. O. (January 1, 1888). "Winter : from the Journal of Henry D. Thoreau". Boston : Houghton, Mifflin – via Internet Archive. 
^ Thoreau, Henry David; Blake, Harrison Gray Otis. "Autumn. From the Journal of Henry D. Thoreau". Boston, Houghton, Mifflin – via Internet Archive. 
^ Miscellanies[permanent dead link] from the Writings of Henry David Thoreau: The Digital Collection
^ Thoreau, Henry David; Sanborn, F. B. (Franklin Benjamin) (January 1, 1894). "Familiar letters of Henry David Thoreau". Boston : Houghton, Mifflin – via Internet Archive. 
^ Thoreau, Henry David; Bibliophile Society (Boston, Mass ); Bibliophile Society (Boston, Mass ); Sanborn, F. B. (Franklin Benjamin) (January 1, 1905). "The first and last journeys of Thoreau : lately discovered among his unpublished journals and manuscripts". Boston : Printed exclusively for members of the Bibliophile Society – via Internet Archive. 
^ Thoreau, Henry David; Bibliophile Society (Boston, Mass ); Bibliophile Society (Boston, Mass ); Sanborn, F. B. (Franklin Benjamin) (January 1, 1905). "The first and last journeys of Thoreau : lately discovered among his unpublished journals and manuscripts". Boston : Printed exclusively for members of the Bibliophile Society – via Internet Archive. 
^ The Journal of Henry D. Thoreau Archived May 5, 2010, at the Wayback Machine. from the Writings of Henry David Thoreau: The Digital Collection
^ The Correspondence of Thoreau Archived June 17, 2011, at the Wayback Machine. from the Writings of Henry David Thoreau: The Digital Collection
^ "I Was Made Erect and Lone". 


Further reading[edit]


Bode, Carl. Best of Thoreau's Journals. Southern Illinois University Press. 1967.
Botkin, Daniel. No Man's Garden
Dean, Bradley P. ed., Letters to a Spiritual Seeker. New York: W. W. Norton & Company, 2004.
Furtak, Rick, Ellsworth, Jonathan, and Reid, James D., eds. Thoreau's Importance for Philosophy. New York: Fordham University Press, 2012.
Harding, Walter. The Days of Henry Thoreau. Princeton University Press, 1982.
Hendrick, George. "The Influence of Thoreau's 'Civil Disobedience' on Gandhi's Satyagraha." The New England Quarterly 29, no. 4 (December 1956). 462–71.
Howarth, William. The Book of Concord: Thoreau's Life as a Writer. Viking Press, 1982
Marble, Annie Russell. Thoreau: His Home, Friends and Books. New York: AMS Press. 1969 [1902]
Myerson, Joel et al. The Cambridge Companion to Henry David Thoreau. Cambridge University Press. 1995
Nash, Roderick. Henry David Thoreau, Philosopher
Paolucci, Stefano. "The Foundations of Thoreau's 'Castles in the Air'", Thoreau Society Bulletin, No. 290 (Summer 2015), 10. (See also the Full Unedited Version of the same article.)
Parrington, Vernon. Main Current in American Thought. V 2 online. 1927
Petroski, Henry. "H. D. Thoreau, Engineer." American Heritage of Invention and Technology, Vol. 5, No. 2, pp. 8–16
Petrulionis, Sandra Harbert, ed., Thoreau in His Own Time: A Biographical Chronicle of His Life, Drawn From Recollections, Interviews, and Memoirs by Family, Friends, and Associates. Iowa City: University of Iowa Press, 2012. ISBN 1-60938-087-8
Richardson, Robert D. Henry Thoreau: A Life of the Mind. University of California Press Berkeley and Los Angeles. 1986. ISBN 0-520-06346-5
Riggenbach, Jeff (2008). "Thoreau, Henry David (1817–1862)". In Hamowy, Ronald. The Encyclopedia of Libertarianism. Thousand Oaks, California: SAGE; Cato Institute. pp. 506–07. doi:10.4135/9781412965811.n309. ISBN 978-1-4129-6580-4. LCCN 2008009151. OCLC 750831024. 
Riggenbach, Jeff (July 15, 2010). "Henry David Thoreau: Founding Father of American Libertarian Thought". Mises Daily. Ludwig von Mises Institute. 
Ridl, Jack. "Moose. Indian." Scintilla (poem on Thoreau's last words)
Schneider, Richard Civilizing Thoreau: Human Ecology and the Emerging Social Sciences in the Major Works Rochester, New York. Camden House. 2016. ISBN 978-1-57113-960-3
Smith, David C. "The Transcendental Saunterer: Thoreau and the Search for Self." Savannah, Georgia: Frederic C. Beil, 1997. ISBN 0-913720-74-7
Sullivan, Mark W. "Henry David Thoreau in the American Art of the 1950s." The Concord Saunterer: A Journal of Thoreau Studies, New Series, Vol. 18 (2010), pp. 68–89.
Sullivan, Mark W. Picturing Thoreau: Henry David Thoreau in American Visual Culture. Lanham, Maryland: Lexington Books, 2015
Tauber, Alfred I. Henry David Thoreau and the Moral Agency of Knowing. University of California, Berkeley. 2001. ISBN 0-520-23915-6
Traub, Courtney (2015). "'First-Rate Fellows': Excavating Thoreau's Radical Egalitarian Reflections in a Late Draft of "Allegash"". The Concord Saunterer: A Journal of Thoreau Studies. 23: 74–96. 
Walls, Laura Dassow. Seeing New Worlds: Henry David Thoreau and 19th Century Science. University of Wisconsin. 1995. ISBN 0-299-14744-4
Walls, Laura Dassow. Henry David Thoreau: A Life. The University of Chicago Press. 2017. ISBN 978-0-226-34469-0


External links[edit]



Wikisource has original works written by or about:
Henry David Thoreau





Wikiquote has quotations related to: Henry David Thoreau





Wikimedia Commons has media related to Henry David Thoreau.




Library resources about
Henry David Thoreau





Online books
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries




By Henry David Thoreau




Online books
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries





The Thoreau Society
The Thoreau Edition
The Thoreau Project
The Walden Woods Project – The Thoreau Institute
The Thoreau Farm Trust – Birthplace
The Disarming Honesty of Henry David Thoreau, by Frank Chodorov
Who He Was & Why He Matters – by Randall Conrad
Henry David Thoreau – Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy
Henry David Thoreau – Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
Henry Thoreau: Transcendental Economist by Vernon L. Parrington
FAQ with Answers about Thoreau
"Writings of Emerson and Thoreau" from C-SPAN's American Writers: A Journey Through History
Thoreau Polymonophonic Journal Project

Texts[edit]

The Thoreau Reader by The Thoreau Society
The Writings of Henry David Thoreau at The Walden Woods Project
The Writings of Henry David Thoreau at Princeton University Press
Political & Philosophical Excerpts from Thoreau's Journals
Scans of Thoreau's Land Surveys at the Concord Free Public Library
Henry David Thoreau Online – The Works and Life of Henry D. Thoreau
Works by Henry David Thoreau at Project Gutenberg
Works by Henry D. Thoreau at Faded Page (Canada)
Works by or about Henry David Thoreau at Internet Archive
Works by Henry David Thoreau at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) 
Works by Thoreau at Open Library
Poems by Thoreau at the Academy of American Poets







v
t
e


Henry David Thoreau



Speeches



Remarks After the Hanging of John Brown (1859)





Essays



"The Service" (1840)
"A Walk to Wachusett" (1842)
"Paradise (to be) Regained" (1843)
"Sir Walter Raleigh" (1844)
"Herald of Freedom" (1844)
"Wendell Phillips Before the Concord Lyceum" (1845)
"Reform and the Reformers" (1846–48)
"Thomas Carlyle and His Works" (1847)
"Resistance to Civil Government" ("Civil Disobedience") (1849)
"Slavery in Massachusetts" (1854)
"A Plea for Captain John Brown" (1859)
"The Last Days of John Brown" (1860)
"Walking" (1861)
"Life Without Principle" (1863)
Excursions anthology (1863)





Books



A Week on the Concord and Merrimack Rivers (1849)
Walden (1854)





Related



Thoreau Society
The Writings of Henry D. Thoreau
Wheeler-Minot Farmhouse
Concord Museum
Walden Pond
Walden Woods Project
The Night Thoreau Spent in Jail (1969 play)












v
t
e


Social and political philosophy



Philosophers



Ambedkar
Arendt
Aristotle
Augustine
Aurobindo
Aquinas
Aron
Averroes
Azurmendi
Badiou
Bakunin
Baudrillard
Bauman
Benoist
Bentham
Berlin
Bonald
Bosanquet
Burke
Judith Butler
Camus
Chanakya
Chomsky
Cicero
Comte
Confucius
De Beauvoir
Debord
Du Bois
Durkheim
Emerson
Engels
Foucault
Fourier
Franklin
Gandhi
Gehlen
Gentile
Al-Ghazali
Gramsci
Grotius
Habermas
Han Fei
Hayek
Hegel
Heidegger
Hobbes
Hume
Irigaray
Jefferson
Kant
Kierkegaard
Kirk
Kropotkin
Laozi
Le Bon
Le Play
Leibniz
Lenin
Locke
Luxemburg
Machiavelli
Maistre
Malebranche
Mao
Marcuse
Maritain
Marsilius
Marx
Mencius
Michels
Mill
Mises
Montesquieu
Möser
Mozi
Muhammad
Negri
Niebuhr
Nietzsche
Nozick
Oakeshott
Ortega
Paine
Pareto
Pettit
Plamenatz
Plato
Polanyi
Popper
Radhakrishnan
Rand
Rawls
Renan
Rothbard
Rousseau
Royce
Russell
Sade
Santayana
Sarkar
Sartre
Schmitt
Searle
Shang
Simonović
Skinner
Smith
Socrates
Sombart
Spann
Spencer
Spinoza
Spirito
Stirner
Strauss
Sun
Sun Tzu
Taine
Taylor
Thucydides
Thoreau
Tocqueville
Vivekananda
Voltaire
Walzer
Weber
Žižek





Social theories



Ambedkarism
Anarchism
Authoritarianism
Collectivism
Communism
Communitarianism
Conflict theories
Confucianism
Consensus theory
Conservatism
Contractualism
Cosmopolitanism
Culturalism
Fascism
Feminist political theory
Gandhism
Individualism
Legalism
Liberalism
Libertarianism
Mohism
National liberalism
Republicanism
Social constructionism
Social constructivism
Social Darwinism
Social determinism
Socialism
Utilitarianism
Vaisheshika





Social concepts



Civil disobedience
Democracy
Four occupations
Justice
Law
Mandate of Heaven
Peace
Property
Revolution
Rights
Social contract
Society
War
more...





Related articles



Jurisprudence
Philosophy and economics
Philosophy of education
Philosophy of history
Philosophy of love
Philosophy of sex
Philosophy of social science
Political ethics
Social epistemology








Category
Portal
Task Force












v
t
e


Simple living



Practices



Barter
Cord-cutting
DIY ethic
Downshifting
Dry toilet
Forest gardening
Freeganism
Frugality
Gift economy
Intentional community
Local currency
Low-impact development
Minimalism
No frills
Off-the-grid
Permaculture
Self-sufficiency
Subsistence agriculture
Sustainable living
Sustainable sanitation
Veganism
Vegetarianism
War tax resistance
WWOOF





Religious and spiritual



Asceticism
Aparigraha
Cynicism
Detachment
Distributism
Jesus movement
Mendicant
Mindfulness
Monasticism
New Monasticism
Plain dress
Plain people
Quakers
Rastafari
Temperance
Testimony of simplicity
Tolstoyan movement





Secular movements



Back-to-the-land
Car-free
Compassionate living
Environmental
Hippie
Slow
Small house
Transition town
Open Source Ecology





Notable writers



Wendell Berry
Ernest Callenbach
G. K. Chesterton
Duane Elgin
Mahatma Gandhi
Richard Gregg
Tom Hodgkinson
Harlan Hubbard
Satish Kumar
Helen Nearing
Scott Nearing
Peace Pilgrim
Vicki Robin
Nick Rosen
Dugald Semple
E. F. Schumacher
Henry David Thoreau
Leo Tolstoy





Modern-day adherents



Mark Boyle
Jim Merkel
Suelo
Thomas





Media



"Anekdote zur Senkung der Arbeitsmoral"
Escape from Affluenza
The Good Life
The Moon and the Sledgehammer
Mother Earth News
The Power of Half
Small Is Beautiful
Walden





Related topics



Affluenza
Agrarianism
Anarcho-primitivism
Anti-consumerism
Appropriate technology
Bohemianism
Consumerism
Deep ecology
Degrowth
Ecological footprint
Food miles
Green anarchism
The good life
Global warming
Hedonophobia
Intentional living
Itinerant
Low-technology
Nonviolence
Peak oil
Sustainability
Work–life balance












v
t
e


Anarchism



Schools
of thought



Agorist
Black
Capitalist
Christian
Collectivist
Communist
Egoist
Existentialist
Feminist
Green
Individualist
Insurrectionary
Leftist
Magonist
Market
Mutualist
Nationalist
Naturist
Pacifist
Philosophical
Platformist
Post-anarchist
Postcolonial
Post-left
Primitivist
Queer
Social
Syndicalist
Synthesist
Voluntaryism
Without adjectives





Theory
and practice



Anarchy
Anarchist Black Cross
Anationalism
Anti-authoritarianism
Anti-militarism
Affinity group
Black bloc
Classless society
Class struggle
Communes
Consensus democracy
Conscientious objector
Counter-economics
Decentralization
Deep ecology
Direct action
Direct democracy
Dual power
Especifismo
Expropriative anarchism
Free association
Free love
Free school
Freethought
Horizontalidad
Illegalism
Individualism
Individual reclamation
Isocracy
Law
Non-Aggression Principle
Participatory politics
Permanent autonomous zone
Prefigurative politics
Proletarian internationalism
Propaganda of the deed
Revolution
Rewilding
Social center
Social ecology
Social insertion
Somatherapy
Spontaneous order
Squatting
Temporary Autonomous Zone
Union of egoists





People



Sylvain Maréchal
William Godwin
Max Stirner
Pierre-Joseph Proudhon
Josiah Warren
Henry David Thoreau
Mikhail Bakunin
Lysander Spooner
Eugène Pottier
Louise Michel
Élisée Reclus
Leo Tolstoy
Ravachol
Johann Most
Giovanni Passannante
Peter Kropotkin
Francisco Ferrer Guardia
Leon Czolgosz
Errico Malatesta
Gustav Landauer
Benjamin Tucker
Ricardo Flores Magón
Alexander Berkman
Franz Kafka
Emma Goldman
Max Nettlau
Erich Mühsam
Nestor Makhno
Volin
Rudolf Rocker
Buenaventura Durruti
Albert Camus
Daniel Guérin
Federica Montseny
Jacques Ellul
Léo Ferré
Murray Rothbard
Abbie Hoffman
Murray Bookchin
Ivan Illich
Kurt Vonnegut
Howard Zinn
Noam Chomsky
Alfredo M. Bonanno
John Zerzan
Subcomandante Marcos
Derrick Jensen
David Graeber
Banksy





Issues



Anarcho-capitalism
Crypto-anarchism
Animal rights
Arts
Capitalism
Education
Criticisms
Islam
Marxism
Nationalism
Orthodox Judaism
Religion
Love and sex
Violence





History



Paris Commune
Cantonal rebellion
Hague Congress
International Conference of Rome
Trial of the Thirty
Haymarket affair
May Day
Anarchist Exclusion Act
Congress of Amsterdam
Tragic Week
High Treason Incident
Manifesto of the Sixteen
1919 United States bombings
Biennio Rosso
German Revolution of 1918–19
Bavarian Soviet Republic
Kronstadt rebellion
Third Russian Revolution
Free Territory
Amakasu incident
Escuela Moderna
Individualist anarchism in Europe (in France)
Spanish Revolution
Barcelona May Days
Labadie Collection
May 1968
Provo
LIP
Kate Sharpley Library
Australian Anarchist Centenary
Carnival Against Capital
1999 WTO Conference protest
Occupy movement





Culture



Films
Anarchist Bookfair
Anarcho-punk
Culture jamming
DIY culture
Freeganism
Independent Media Center
Infoshop
"The Internationale"
Jewish anarchism
"Land and liberty"
Lifestylism
"No gods, no masters"
Popular education
"Property is theft!"
Radical cheerleading
Radical environmentalism
Squatting
Symbolism
Glossary
A las Barricadas





Economics



Communization
Co-operatives
Cost the limit of price
Counter-economics
Economic democracy
Economic secession
Free store
Gift economy
Laissez-faire
Market abolitionism
Mass strike
Mutual aid
Participatory economics
Really Really Free Market
Social ownership
Wage slavery
Refusal of work
Workers' self-management





By region



Africa
Argentina
Australia
Azerbaijan
Brazil
Canada
China
Cuba
Ecuador
Egypt
France
Germany
Greece
India
Iceland
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Japan
Korea
Mexico
Monaco
New Zealand
Poland
Romania
Russia
South Africa
Spain
Sweden
Turkey
Ukraine
United Kingdom
United States
Vietnam





Lists



Anarcho-punk bands
Communities
Fictional characters
Jewish anarchists
Love and sex
Musicians
Organizations
Periodicals
Poets
Russian anarchists





Related topics



Anti-statism
Anti-war
Non-aggression principle
Libertarianism
Classical liberalism
Spontaneous order
Anti-corporatism
Anti-capitalism
Anti-consumerism
Anti-fascism
Anti-globalization
Autarchism
Autonomism
Labour movement
Left communism
Libertarian socialism
Neozapatismo
Situationist International








Anarchism portal
Philosophy portal
Politics portal












v
t
e


Mahatma Gandhi



Life events
and movements



Indian Ambulance Corps
Bardoli Satyagraha
Champaran Satyagraha
Kheda Satyagraha
Indian independence movement

Gandhi cap


Non-cooperation Movement
Chauri Chaura incident
Purna Swaraj

flag


Salt March
Dharasana Satyagraha
Vaikom Satyagraha
Aundh Experiment
Gandhi–Irwin Pact

Second Round Table Conference


Padayatra
Poona Pact
Natal Indian Congress
Quit India

speech


Gujarat Vidyapith University
Harijan Sevak Sangh
Ashrams (Kochrab
Tolstoy Farm
Sabarmati
Sevagram)
List of fasts
Assassination





Philosophy



Gandhism
Economics

trusteeship


Education
Sarvodaya
Satyagraha
Swadeshi
Swaraj





Publications



Harijan
Hind Swaraj (Indian Home Rule)
Indian Opinion
The Story of My Experiments with Truth
Young India
Seven Social Sins
(Gandhi Heritage Portal)





Influences



A Letter to a Hindu
Ahimsa

nonviolence


Bhagavad Gita
Henry David Thoreau
Civil Disobedience (essay)
Civil disobedience
Fasting
Harishchandra
Hinduism
John Ruskin
Parsee Rustomjee
Leo Tolstoy
The Kingdom of God Is Within You
The Masque of Anarchy
Muhammad
Narmad
Pacifism
Sermon on the Mount
Shravan
Shrimad Rajchandra
Henry Stephens Salt
Tirukkural
Unto This Last

Gandhi's translation


"Vaishnava Jana To"
Vegetarianism





Associates



Swami Anand
C. F. Andrews
Jamnalal Bajaj
Shankarlal Banker
Sarla Behn
Vinoba Bhave
Brij Krishna Chandiwala
Sudhakar Chaturvedi
Jugatram Dave
Mahadev Desai
Dada Dharmadhikari
Kanu Gandhi
Shiv Prasad Gupta
Umar Hajee Ahmed Jhaveri
J. C. Kumarappa
Hermann Kallenbach
Khan Abdul Ghaffar Khan
Acharya Kripalani
Mirabehn
Mohanlal Pandya
Vallabhbhai Patel
Narhari Parikh
Mithuben Petit
Chakravarti Rajagopalachari
Bibi Amtus Salam
Sonja Schlesin
Anugrah Narayan Sinha
Sri Krishna Sinha
Rettamalai Srinivasan
V. A. Sundaram
Abbas Tyabji
Ravishankar Vyas





Legacy



Artistic depictions
Gandhigiri
Gandhi Peace Award
Gandhi Peace Prize
Mahatma Gandhi Kashi Vidyapith
Indian currency





Family



Karamchand Gandhi (father)
Kasturba (wife)
Harilal (son)
Manilal (son)
Ramdas (son)
Devdas (son)
Maganlal (cousin)
Samaldas (nephew)
Arun (grandson)
Ela (granddaughter)
Rajmohan (grandson)
Gopalkrishna (grandson)
Ramchandra (grandson)
Kanu (grandson)
Kanu (grandnephew)
Tushar (great-grandson)
Leela (great-granddaughter)





Influenced



James Bevel
Steve Biko
14th Dalai Lama
Gopaldas Ambaidas Desai
Morarji Desai
Eknath Easwaran
Maria Lacerda de Moura
James Lawson
Martin Luther King Jr.
Nelson Mandela
Brajkishore Prasad
Rajendra Prasad
Ramjee Singh
Aung San Suu Kyi
Lanza del Vasto
Abhay Bang
Sane Guruji





Memorials




Statues



Houston
Johannesburg
London (Parliament Square)
New York
Patna
Pietermaritzburg
Washington





Observances



Gandhi Jayanti
International Day of Non-Violence
Martyrs' Day
Season for Nonviolence





Other



Aga Khan Palace
Gandhi Bhawan
Gandhi Mandapam
Gandhi Market
Gandhi Promenade
Gandhi Smriti
Gandhi Memorial
Gandhi Memorial Museum, Madurai
Kaba Gandhi No Delo
Kirti Mandir
Mahatma Gandhi College
Mohandas Gandhi High School
National Gandhi Museum
Raj Ghat
Sabarmati Ashram
Satyagraha House
Roads named after Gandhi
Mahatma Gandhi Memorial Centre, Matale















v
t
e


Hall of Fame for Great Americans






John Adams
John Quincy Adams
Jane Addams
Louis Agassiz
Susan B. Anthony
John James Audubon
George Bancroft
Clara Barton
Henry Ward Beecher
Alexander Graham Bell
Daniel Boone
Edwin Booth
Louis Brandeis
Phillips Brooks
William Cullen Bryant
Luther Burbank
Andrew Carnegie
George Washington Carver
William Ellery Channing
Rufus Choate
Henry Clay
Grover Cleveland
James Fenimore Cooper
Peter Cooper
Charlotte Cushman
James Buchanan Eads
Thomas Alva Edison
Jonathan Edwards
Ralph Waldo Emerson
David Farragut
Stephen Foster
Benjamin Franklin
Robert Fulton
Josiah W. Gibbs
William C. Gorgas
Ulysses S. Grant
Asa Gray
Alexander Hamilton
Nathaniel Hawthorne
Joseph Henry
Patrick Henry
Oliver Wendell Holmes Sr.
Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr.
Mark Hopkins
Elias Howe
Washington Irving
Andrew Jackson
Thomas J. Jackson
Thomas Jefferson
John Paul Jones
James Kent
Sidney Lanier
Robert E. Lee
Abraham Lincoln
Henry Wadsworth Longfellow
James Russell Lowell
Mary Lyon
Edward MacDowell
James Madison
Horace Mann
John Marshall
Matthew Fontaine Maury
Albert A. Michelson
Maria Mitchell
James Monroe
Samuel F. B. Morse
William T. G. Morton
John Lothrop Motley
Simon Newcomb
Thomas Paine
Alice Freeman Palmer
Francis Parkman
George Peabody
William Penn
Edgar Allan Poe
Walter Reed
Franklin D. Roosevelt
Theodore Roosevelt
Augustus Saint-Gaudens
William Tecumseh Sherman
John Philip Sousa
Joseph Story
Harriet Beecher Stowe
Gilbert Stuart
Sylvanus Thayer
Henry David Thoreau
Mark Twain
Lillian Wald
Booker T. Washington
George Washington
Daniel Webster
George Westinghouse
James McNeill Whistler
Walt Whitman
Eli Whitney
John Greenleaf Whittier
Emma Willard
Frances E. Willard
Roger Williams
Woodrow Wilson
Orville Wright
Wilbur Wright









Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 68936476
LCCN: n78095600
ISNI: 0000 0001 2102 0957
GND: 118622293
SELIBR: 206135
SUDOC: 027162303
BNF: cb11926580k (data)
BIBSYS: 90057202
ULAN: 500229765
MusicBrainz: 47c0ed92-ba15-468c-ae77-4f9426297a82
NLA: 35548758
NDL: 00458704
NKC: jn20000605316
BNE: XX929953
IATH: w68p5zq3








Biography portal
Cape Cod and the Islands portal
Environment portal
Poetry portal
Politics portal
Social and political philosophy portal
Spirituality portal







						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Henry_David_Thoreau&oldid=818061043"					Categories: Henry David Thoreau1817 births1862 deaths19th-century American poets19th-century American writers19th-century American philosophersAmerican abolitionistsAmerican anarchistsAmerican diaristsAmerican environmentalistsAmerican essayistsAmerican libertariansAmerican male poetsAmerican naturalistsAmerican naturistsAmerican nature writersAmerican nomadsAmerican non-fiction environmental writersAmerican people of French descentAmerican political philosophersAmerican spiritual writersAmerican tax resistersAmerican travel writersAmerican UnitariansAnarchist writersCivil disobedience19th-century deaths from tuberculosisEcological successionEnvironmental writersGreen anarchistsHall of Fame for Great Americans inducteesHarvard University alumniInfectious disease deaths in MassachusettsLecturersNature writersPeople associated with TranscendentalismAnti-consumeristsPeople from Concord, MassachusettsSelf-published authorsSimple living advocatesPoets from MassachusettsUnderground Railroad peopleAmerican surveyorsLeft-libertariansPhilosophers from MassachusettsHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksAll articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from December 2017Articles with permanently dead external linksPages using web citations with no URLArticles with dead external links from October 2016Articles with dead external links from March 2017Wikipedia pending changes protected pages (level 1)Use mdy dates from August 2011Biography with signatureArticles with hCardsAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from June 2017Articles with unsourced statements from June 2014All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrasesArticles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from July 2009Incomplete lists from October 2014Articles with unsourced statements from May 2017Articles with Project Gutenberg linksArticles with Internet Archive linksArticles with LibriVox linksAC with 15 elementsWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with SELIBR identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersWikipedia articles with BIBSYS identifiersWikipedia articles with ULAN identifiersWikipedia articles with MusicBrainz identifiersWikipedia articles with NLA identifiersWikipedia articles with SNAC-ID identifiers