
Her Majesty's Civil Service


Logo of Her Majesty's Civil Service



Organisation overview


Minister responsible



Theresa May, Minister for the Civil Service





Organisation executive



Sir Jeremy Heywood, Head of the Home Civil Service





Website
Official website





United Kingdom






This article is part of a series on the
politics and government of
the United Kingdom




Constitution


Constitution

Cabinet Manual
Erskine May


Taxation








The Crown

British Monarchy


Monarch

Queen Elizabeth II


Heir apparent

The Prince of Wales


Royal family
Succession to the British throne
Royal prerogative








Executive

HM Government


Prime Minister

Theresa May


Cabinet

Current ministry


Her Majesty's Civil Service
Departments
Executive agencies
Public bodies

Privy Council


Crown-in-Council

Queen Elizabeth II










Legislature

Parliament
(56th Parliament)

Crown-in-Parliament

Queen Elizabeth II

House of Lords

Lord Speaker

The Lord Fowler



House of Commons

Speaker

John Bercow


Leader of the Opposition

Jeremy Corbyn





Her Majesty's Loyal Opposition
Shadow Cabinet
State Opening of Parliament
Prime Minister's Questions
Act of Parliament
Statutory Instruments








Judiciary

Supreme Court


President

Lord Neuberger


Deputy President

Lady Hale


Judges of the Supreme Court



Courts of the United Kingdom
Courts of England and Wales
Courts of Scotland
Courts of Northern Ireland








Devolution


Joint Ministerial Committee
Scotland

Government
Parliament


Wales

Government
National Assembly


Reserved matters
Northern Ireland

Executive
Assembly










Administrative geography


England

Subdivisions of England
Local government in England


Scotland

Subdivisions of Scotland
Local government in Scotland


Wales

Local government in Wales


Northern Ireland

Local government in Northern Ireland










Elections


Parliament constituencies
Political parties
Last election
Next election
Referendums








Foreign relations


History
Foreign policy
UK and the United Nations
Politics of the European Union
Commonwealth of Nations






 United Kingdom portal


Other countries
Atlas








v
t
e





Her Majesty's Home Civil Service,[1][2][3] also known as Her Majesty's Civil Service or the Home Civil Service, is the permanent bureaucracy or secretariat of Crown employees that supports Her Majesty's Government, which is composed of a cabinet of ministers chosen by the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, as well as two of the three devolved administrations: the Scottish Government and the Welsh Government, but not the Northern Ireland Executive.
As in other states that employ the Westminster political system, Her Majesty's Home Civil Service forms an inseparable part of the British government. The executive decisions of government ministers are implemented by HM Civil Service. Civil servants are employees of the Crown and not of the British parliament. Civil servants also have some traditional and statutory responsibilities which to some extent protect them from being used for the political advantage of the party in power. Senior civil servants may be called to account to Parliament.
In general use, the term civil servant in the United Kingdom does not include all public sector employees; although there is no fixed legal definition, the term is usually defined as a "servant of the Crown working in a civil capacity who is not the holder of a political (or judicial) office; the holder of certain other offices in respect of whose tenure of office special provision has been made; [or] a servant of the Crown in a personal capacity paid from the Civil List".[4] As such, the civil service does not include government ministers (who are politically appointed), members of the British Armed Forces, the police, officers of local government authorities or quangos of the Houses of Parliament, employees of the National Health Service (NHS), or staff of the Royal Household. As at the end of March 2016 there were 418,343 civil servants in the Home Civil Service, this is down 3.6% on the previous year.[5]
There are two other administratively separate civil services in the United Kingdom. One is for Northern Ireland (the Northern Ireland Civil Service); the other is the foreign service (Her Majesty's Diplomatic Service). The heads of these services are members of the Permanent Secretaries Management Group.[6][7]



Contents


1 History

1.1 Establishment
1.2 Lord Fulton's committee report
1.3 Margaret Thatcher's government
1.4 The Citizen's Charter


2 Governance

2.1 Minister for the Civil Service
2.2 Head of the Home Civil Service
2.3 Permanent Secretaries Management Group (PSMG)
2.4 Civil Service Steering Board (CSSB)
2.5 Civil Service Commissioners


3 Political neutrality
4 Codes

4.1 Civil Service Code
4.2 Civil Service Management Code
4.3 Civil Service Commissioners' Recruitment Code
4.4 Osmotherly Rules
4.5 Directory of Civil Service Guidance


5 Structure

5.1 Grading schemes
5.2 Professions


6 In popular culture
7 See also
8 References
9 Notes
10 External links



History[edit]
Establishment[edit]
The Offices of State grew in England, and later the United Kingdom. Initially, as in other countries, they were little more than secretariats for their leaders, who held positions at court. They were chosen by the king on the advice of a patron, and typically replaced when their patron lost influence. In the 18th century, in response to the growth of the British Empire and economic changes, institutions such as the Office of Works and the Navy Board grew large. Each had its own system and staff were appointed by purchase or patronage. By the 19th century, it became increasingly clear that these arrangements were not working.
In 1806, the East India Company, a private company that ruled only in India, established a college, the East India Company College, near London. The purpose of this college was to train administrators; it was established on recommendation of officials in China who had seen the imperial examination system. The civil service, based on examination similar to the Chinese system, was advocated by a number of Englishmen over the next several decades.[8]
William Ewart Gladstone, then a junior minister, in 1850 sought a more efficient system based on expertise rather than favouritism. The East India Company provided a model for Stafford Northcote, the private Secretary to Gladstone, who with Charles Trevelyan (Permanent Secretary of the Treasury)( drafted the key report in 1854. A permanent, unified and politically neutral civil service, in which appointments were made on merit, was introduced on the recommendations of the Northcote–Trevelyan Report of 1854, which also recommended a clear division between staff responsible for routine ("mechanical") work, and those engaged in policy formulation and implementation in an "administrative" class. The report was not implemented, but it came at a time when the bureaucratic chaos in the Crimean War demonstrated that the military was as backward as the civil service. A Civil Service Commission was set up in 1855 to oversee open recruitment and end patronage. Prime Minister Gladstone took the decisive step in 1870 with his Order in Council to implement the Northcote-Trevelyan proposals.[9] This system was broadly endorsed by Commissions chaired by Playfair (1874), Ridley (1886), MacDonnell (1914), Tomlin (1931) and Priestley (1955).
The Northcote–Trevelyan model remained essentially stable for a hundred years. This was a tribute to its success in removing corruption, delivering public services (even under the stress of two world wars), and responding effectively to political change. Patrick Diamond argues:

The Northcote-Trevelyan model was characterised by a hierarchical mode of Weberian bureaucracy; neutral, permanent and anonymous officials motivated by the public interest; and a willingness to administer policies ultimately determined by ministers. This bequeathed a set of theories, institutions and practices to subsequent generations of administrators in the central state.[10]

The Irish Civil Service was separate from the British civil service; although the Acts of Union 1800 abolished the Parliament of Ireland, the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland was retained in formal charge of the Irish executive based at Dublin Castle. The Irish Office in Whitehall liaised with Dublin Castle. Some British departments' area of operation extended to Ireland, while in other fields the Dublin department was separate from the Whitehall equivalent.[11]
Lord Fulton's committee report[edit]
Following the Second World War, however, demands for change again grew. There was a concern (illustrated in C. P. Snow's Strangers and Brothers series of novels) that technical and scientific expertise was mushrooming, to a point at which the "good all-rounder" culture of the administrative civil servant with a classics or other arts degree could no longer properly engage with it: as late as 1963, for example, the Treasury had just 19 trained economists. The times were, moreover, ones of keen respect for technocracy, with the mass mobilisation of war having worked effectively, and the French National Plan apparently delivering economic success. And there was also a feeling which would not go away, following the war and the radical social reforms of the 1945 Labour government, that the so-called "mandarins" of the higher civil service were too remote from the people. Indeed, between 1948 and 1963 only 3% of the recruits to the administrative class came from the working classes, and in 1966 more than half of the administrators at undersecretary level and above had been privately educated.
Lord Fulton's committee reported in 1968. He found that administrators were not professional enough, and in particular lacked management skills; that the position of technical and scientific experts needed to be rationalised and enhanced; and that the service was indeed too remote. His 158 recommendations included the introduction of a unified grading system for all categories of staff, a Civil Service College and a central policy planning unit. He also said that control of the service should be taken from the Treasury, and given to a new Department, and that the "fast stream" recruitment process for accessing the upper echelons should be made more flexible, to encourage candidates from less privileged backgrounds. The new Department was set up by Prime Minister Harold Wilson's Labour Government in 1968 and named the Civil Service Department, known as CSD. The first Minister was Cabinet Minister Lord Shackleton, also Leader of the House of Lords and Lord Privy Seal. The first Permanent Secretary was Sir William Armstrong, who moved over from his post as Permanent Secretary at the Treasury. After the 1970 General Election, new Conservative Prime Minister Ted Heath appointed Lord Jellicoe in Lord Shackleton's place.
Into Heath's Downing Street came the Central Policy Review Staff (CPRS), and they were in particular given charge of a series of Programme Analysis and Review (PAR) studies of policy efficiency and effectiveness.
But, whether through lack of political will, or through passive resistance by a mandarinate which the report had suggested were "amateurs", Fulton failed. The Civil Service College equipped generalists with additional skills, but did not turn them into qualified professionals as ENA did in France. Recruits to the fast stream self-selected, with the universities of Oxford and Cambridge still producing a large majority of successful English candidates, since the system continued to favour the tutorial system at Oxbridge while to an extent the Scottish Ancient universities educated a good proportion of recruits from north of the border. The younger mandarins found excuses to avoid managerial jobs in favour of the more prestigious postings. The generalists remained on top, and the specialists on tap.
Margaret Thatcher's government[edit]
Margaret Thatcher came to office in 1979 believing in free markets as a better social system in many areas than the state: government should be small but active. Many of her ministers were suspicious of the civil service, in light of public choice research that suggested public servants tend to increase their own power and budgets.
She immediately set about reducing the size of the civil service, cutting numbers from 732,000 to 594,000 over her first seven years in office. Derek Rayner, the former chief executive of Marks & Spencer, was appointed as an efficiency expert with the Prime Minister's personal backing; he identified numerous problems with the Civil Service, arguing that only three billion of the eight billion pounds a year spent at that time by the Civil Service consisted of essential services, and that the "mandarins" (senior civil servants) needed to focus on efficiency and management rather than on policy advice.[12] In late 1981 the Prime Minister announced the abolition of the Civil Service Department, transferring power over the Civil Service to the Prime Minister's Office and Cabinet Office.[13] The Priestley Commission principle of pay comparability with the private sector was abandoned in February 1982.
Meanwhile, Michael Heseltine was introducing a comprehensive system of corporate and business planning (known as MINIS) first in the Department of the Environment and then in the Ministry of Defence. This led to the Financial Management Initiative, launched in September 1982 (Efficiency and Effectiveness in the Civil Service (Cmnd 8616)) as an umbrella for the efficiency scrutiny programme and with a wider focus on corporate planning, efficiency and objective-setting. Progress initially was sluggish, but in due course MINIS-style business planning became standard, and delegated budgets were introduced, so that individual managers were held much more accountable for meeting objectives, and for the first time for the resources they used to do so. Performance-related pay began in December 1984, was built on thereafter, and continues to this day, though the sums involved have always been small compared to the private sector, and the effectiveness of PRP as a genuine motivator has often been questioned.
In February 1988 Robin Ibbs, who had been recruited from ICI in July 1983 to run the Efficiency Unit (now in No. 10), published his report Improving Management in Government: The Next Steps. This envisaged a new approach to delivery featuring clear targets and personal responsibility. Without any statutory change, the managerial functions of Ministries would be hived off into Executive Agencies, with clear Framework Documents setting out their objectives, and whose chief executives would be made accountable directly (in some cases to Parliament) for performance. Agencies were to, as far as possible, take a commercial approach to their tasks. However, the Government conceded that agency staff would remain civil servants, which diluted the radicalism of the reform. The approach seems somewhat similar to the Swedish model, though no influence from Sweden has ever been acknowledged.
The Next Steps Initiative took some years to get off the ground, and progress was patchy. Significant change was achieved, although agencies never really achieved the level of autonomy envisaged at the start.[14] By 5 April 1993, 89 agencies had been established, and contained over 260,000 civil servants, some 49% of the total.[15]
The focus on smaller, more accountable, units revived the keenness of Ministerial interest in the perceived efficiencies of the private sector. Already in the late 1980s, some common services once set up to capture economies of scale, such as the Property Services Agency and the Crown Suppliers, were being dismantled or sold off. Next, shortly after Thatcher left office, in July 1991, a new programme of market-testing of central government services began, with the White Paper Competing for Quality (Cm 1730). Five-yearly or three-yearly policy and finance reviews of all agencies and other public bodies were instituted, where the first question to be answered (the "prior options exercise") was why the function should not be abolished or privatised. In November 1991 the private finance initiative was launched, and by November 1994 the Chancellor of the Exchequer had referred to it as ‘the funding mechanism of choice for most public sector projects’. In 1995 the decision was taken to privatise the Chessington Computer Centre, HMSO, the Occupational Health & Safety Agency and Recruitment & Assessment Services.
The Citizen's Charter[edit]
It was believed with the Thatcher reforms that efficiency was improving. But there was still a perception of carelessness and lack of responsiveness in the quality of public services. The government of John Major sought to tackle this with a Citizen's Charter programme. This sought to empower the service user, by setting out rights to standards in each service area, and arrangements for compensation when these were not met. An Office of Public Service and Science was set up in 1992, to see that the Charter policy was implemented across government.
By 1998, 42 Charters had been published, and they included services provided by public service industries such as the health service and the railways, as well as by the civil service. The programme was also expanded to apply to other organisations such as local government or housing associations, through a scheme of "Chartermark" awards. The programme was greeted with some derision, and it is true that the compensation sometimes hardly seemed worth the effort of claiming, and that the service standards were rarely set with much consumer input. But the initiative did have a significant effect in changing cultures, and paradoxically the spin-off Chartermark initiative may have had more impact on local organisations uncertain about what standards to aim for, than the parent Citizen's Charter programme itself.
Governance[edit]
Minister for the Civil Service[edit]
Main article: Minister for the Civil Service
The position of 'Minister for the Civil Service' is not part of the Civil Service as it is a political position which has always been held by the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom.
Head of the Home Civil Service[edit]
The highest ranking civil servant in the country is the Cabinet Secretary. A subsidiary title that was also held by the incumbent was Head of the Home Civil Service or more recently sometimes styled Head of the Civil Service,[16] who until recently was also the incumbent Cabinet Secretary and Permanent Secretary of the Cabinet Office.[17] However, following the Coalition Government of David Cameron the three posts were split from the single holder. The last person to hold all three positions together was Gus O'Donnell, Cabinet Secretary, Head of the Home Civil Service and Cabinet Office Permanent Secretary, September 2005 – January 2012. The postholder is responsible for ensuring that the Civil Service is equipped with the skills and capability to meet the everyday challenges it faces and that civil servants work in a fair and decent environment. They also chair the Permanent Secretary Management Group and the Civil Service Steering Board which are the main governing bodies of the Civil Service.[17]
It was announced on 11 October 2011 that, following O'Donnell's retirement at the end of 2011, the role of Head of the Home Civil Service would be split from the post of Cabinet Secretary. There will additionally be a new, separate, Permanent Secretary to lead the Cabinet Office.[18] After O'Donnell's retirement, Jeremy Heywood replaced him as Cabinet Secretary; Ian Watmore as Cabinet Office Permanent Secretary; and lastly, Bob Kerslake as Head of the Home Civil Service.[19] In July 2014 it was announced that Kerslake would step down and Heywood would take the title of Head of the HCS.[20]


Name
Dates
Notes


Warren Fisher
1919–1939
also Secretary to the Treasury


Horace Wilson
1939–1942
also Secretary to the Treasury


Edward Bridges
1945–1956
also Secretary to the Treasury


Norman Brook
1956–1962
also Joint Secretary to the Treasury


Laurence Helsby
1963–1968
also Joint Secretary to the Treasury


William Armstrong
1968–1974
also Permanent Secretary, Civil Service Department


Douglas Allen
1974–1978
also Permanent Secretary, Civil Service Department


Ian Bancroft
1978–1981
also Permanent Secretary, Civil Service Department


Douglas Wass
1981–1983
also Secretary to the Treasury


Robert Armstrong
1981–1988
also Secretary to the Cabinet


Robin Butler
1988–1998
also Secretary to the Cabinet


Richard Wilson[21]
1998–2002
also Secretary to the Cabinet


Andrew Turnbull
2002–2005
also Secretary to the Cabinet


Gus O'Donnell
2005–2011
also Secretary to the Cabinet


Bob Kerslake
2012–2014
also Permanent Secretary, Department of Communities and Local Government


Jeremy Heywood
2014–present
also Secretary to the Cabinet


Permanent Secretaries Management Group (PSMG)[edit]
The PSMG consider issues of strategic importance to the Civil Service as a whole, as well as providing corporate leadership where a single position is required across all government departments.[22] It is chaired by the Head of the Home Civil Service[17] and consists of all first permanent secretaries and other selected permanent secretaries and directors general. This includes the Head of the Northern Ireland Civil Service,[6] and the Head of the Diplomatic Service.[7]
Civil Service Steering Board (CSSB)[edit]
The CSSB was established in 2007 and meets monthly,[23] Its role is to enhance the performance and reputation of the Civil Service by focusing on specific areas delegated to it by PSMG.[23][24] The CSSB is chaired by the Head of the Home Civil Service.[17]
Civil Service Commissioners[edit]
Main article: First Civil Service Commissioner
The Civil Service Commissioners are not civil servants and are independent of Ministers, they are appointed directly by the Crown under Royal Prerogative and they report annually to The Queen.[25]
Their main role is regarding the recruitment of civil servants. They have the responsibility to ensure that all civil servants are recruited on the "principle of selection on merit on the basis of fair and open competition." They maintain a recruitment code on the interpretation and application of that principle, and approve any exceptions to it. They audit recruitment policies and practices within the Civil Service and approve all appointments to the most senior levels of the Civil Service.[26]
The Commissioners also hear and determine appeals in cases of concern about propriety and conscience raised by civil servants under the Civil Service Code which cannot be resolved through internal procedures.[26]
Northern Ireland has a separate Commission called the Civil Service Commissioners for Northern Ireland which has the same role.[26][27]
Political neutrality[edit]
The Home Civil Service is a politically neutral body, with the function of impartially implementing the policy programme of the elected government.[28][29][30]
Like all servants of the Crown, civil servants are legally barred from standing for election as Members of Parliament or Members of the European Parliament.[31] Also, under regulations first adopted in 1954 and revised in 1984, members of the Senior Civil Service (the top management grades) are barred from holding office in a political party or publicly expressing controversial political viewpoints, while less senior civil servants at an intermediate (managerial) level must generally seek permission to participate in political activities. The most junior civil servants are permitted to participate in political activities, but must be politically neutral in the exercise of their duties.[31]
All civil servants are subject to the Official Secrets Acts 1911 to 1989, meaning that they may not disclose sensitive government information. Since 1998, there have also been restrictions on contact between civil servants and lobbyists; this followed an incident known as "Lobbygate", where an undercover reporter for The Observer, posing as a business leader, was introduced by a lobbyist to a senior Downing Street official who promised privileged access to government ministers.[32][33] The Committee on Standards in Public Life, also created in 1998, is responsible for regulation of contacts between public officials and lobbyists.
The increasing influence of politically appointed "special advisers" in government departments can reduce the political neutrality of public administration. In Thatcher's government, Alan Walters was an official adviser from 1981 to 1984, and again in 1989.[34] Walters' criticisms "of many aspects of Treasury policy, particularly in relation to exchange rate policy" and Thatcher's refusal to dismiss him led to Nigel Lawson's resignation as chancellor in 1989.[34] Thatcher also claimed that the 1981 budget, which increased taxes during the recession and was criticised by 364 economists, had been devised by Walters.[34] In 2000, then-Prime Minister Tony Blair was criticised for appointing 20 special advisers (compared to eight under his predecessor John Major) and for the fact that the total salary cost of special advisers across all government departments had reached £4 million.[35] In 2001, Stephen Byers, then Secretary of State for Transport, was forced to resign because of the actions of his special adviser Jo Moore, who instructed a departmental civil servant, Martin Sixsmith, that September 11, 2001, would be "a good day to bury bad news"; this was seen as inappropriate political manipulation of the Civil Service.[36] In particular, under the administration of Tony Blair, the influence of two Downing Street special advisers, Jonathan Powell and Alastair Campbell, both of whom were given formal power over Downing Street civil servants, provoked widespread criticism.[37]
The Conservative-Liberal Democrat coalition government of 2010–2015 had proposed introducing a more American-style system where senior civil servants, such as permanent secretaries, became political appointees.[30] However, this was dropped after it was considered that the existing permanent civil service style was better-suited to the government of the United Kingdom.[citation needed]
Codes[edit]
Civil Service Code[edit]
The current civil service code was introduced on 6 June 2006 to outline the core values and standards expected of civil servants. The core values are defined as integrity, honesty, objectivity, and impartiality. A key change from previous values is the removal of anonymity within the core values.[38] The Code includes an independent line of appeal to the Civil Service Commissioners on alleged breaches of the Code.
Civil Service Management Code[edit]
The Civil Service Management Code (CSMC) sets out the regulations and instructions to departments and agencies regarding the terms and conditions of service of civil servants. It is the guiding document which gives delegation to civil service organisations, from the Minister for the Civil Service, in order for them to make internal personnel policies.[39]
Civil Service Commissioners' Recruitment Code[edit]
The Civil Service Commissioners' Recruitment Code is maintained by the Civil Service Commissioners and is based on the principle of selection on merit on the basis of fair and open competition.[40]
Osmotherly Rules[edit]
The Osmotherly Rules set out guidance on how civil servants should respond to Parliamentary select committees.[41]
Directory of Civil Service Guidance[edit]
A two-volume 125-page Directory of Civil Service Guidance was published in 2000 to replace the previous Guidance on Guidance, providing short summaries of guidance on a wide range of issues and pointing to more detailed sources.[42]
Structure[edit]




A breakdown by department of civil servants employed in 2013.


The structure of the home civil service is divided into organisations, grades and professions. Each Secretary of State has a Department which has executive agencies and non-departmental public bodies subordinate to it.
Grading schemes[edit]
The grading system used in the civil service has changed many times, and the current structure is made up of two schemes. All senior grades (Deputy Director / Grade 5 level and above) are part of the Senior Civil Service, which is overseen by the Cabinet Office on behalf of the civil service as a whole. Below the Senior Civil Service, each individual department/executive agency can put in place its own grading and pay arrangements, provided they still comply with the central civil service pay and review guidance.
For other grades many departments overlay their own grading structure, however all these structures must map across to the central government structure as shown below.[43]
All current grades are marked in   bold   and historical grade names are shown italics.


Group[44]
Competence Level[45]
Historic Names
Current Structure[46]
Equivalent Coordinated Grade[47]
Equivalent military rank[48](NATO Code)


Grade (Pre 1971)[49]
1971 Unified grading structure[50]
1996 SCS changes[51]
SCS bands known as[49]
Royal Navy
Army
Royal Air Force


Senior
Civil
Service
6
Cabinet Secretary
Grade 1A
SCS Pay Band 4
Cabinet Secretary

Admiral of the Fleet (OF-10)
Field Marshal (OF-10)
Marshal of the RAF (OF-10)


Permanent [Under] Secretary
Grade 1
Permanent Secretary

Admiral (OF-9)
General (OF-9)
Air Chief Marshal (OF-9)


Deputy [Under] Secretary
Grade 2
SCS Pay Band 3
Director General

Vice Admiral (OF-8)
Lieutenant General (OF-8)
Air Marshal (OF-8)


Assistant Under Secretary, latterly Under Secretary or Director General
Grade 3
SCS Pay Band 2
Director
A7
Rear Admiral (OF-7)
Major General (OF-7)
Air Vice Marshal (OF-7)


5
Under Secretary or Superintendent[52]
Grade 4
SCS Pay Band 1
Director or Deputy Director
A6
Commodore (OF-6)
Brigadier (OF-6)
Air Commodore (OF-6)


Assistant Secretary or Director
Grade 5


Senior Managers
4
Senior Principal [xxx] or Deputy Director
Grade 6
A5
Captain (> 6 years in rank)[53]
N/A
N/A


Principal [xxx] or Assistant Director
Grade 7
Captain (OF-5)
Colonel (OF-5)
Group Captain (OF-5)


Assistant Principal [xxx] or Deputy Assistant Director[54]
Senior Executive Officer (SEO)
A4
Commander (OF-4)
Lieutenant Colonel (OF-4)
Wing Commander (OF-4)


Middle Managers
3
Senior xxx Officer (SxO)


Higher xxx Officer (HxO)
Higher Executive Officer (HEO)
A3
Lieutenant Commander (OF-3)
Major (OF-3)
Squadron Leader (OF-3)


Junior Managers
2
xxx Officer (xO) or Industrial Process & General Supervisory Grade E (PGSE)
Executive Officer (EO) or Industrial Skill Zone 4[55] (SZ4)
A2 or B6
Lieutenant (OF-2)
Captain (OF-2)
Flight Lieutenant (OF-2)


A1 or B5
Sub-Lieutenant (OF-1)
Lieutenant (OF-1)
Flying Officer (OF-1)


Administrative or Support Ranks
1
Higher Clerical Officer (HCO) or Industrial PGSD
Administrative Officer (AO) or Industrial Skill Zone 3 (SZ3)
B4
Warrant Officer (OR8)
Warrant Officer (OR8)
Warrant Officer (OR8)


Clerical Officer (CO) or Industrial PGSC
B3
Petty Officer (OR6)
Sergeant (OR6)
Sergeant (OR6)


Clerical Assistant (CA) or Industrial PGSB
Administrative Assistant (AA) or Industrial Skill Zone 2 (SZ2)
B2
Leading Rate (OR4)
Corporal (OR4)
Corporal (OR4)


Industrial PGSA
Industrial Skill Zone 1 (SZ1)
B1
Able Rate (OR2)
Private (OR2)
Senior Aircraftperson (OR2)


NB – XXX is standing in for
Professions[edit]
The lingua franca is to describe Civil Servants, and in particular their grades, predominanly through a lens of Administrative activity (as in the Current Structure of the table above), but in practice the Civil Service has an always had a number of subdivisions, with the Historic Grades having an additional designator (usually omitted for Senior Managers, but included from Middle and Junior Managers) as shown as "xxx", with the major groupings being:

Executive ([x]EO)
Scientific ([x]SO)
Professional and Technology ([x]PTO)

The Current Structure identifies[56] a number of distinct professional groupings:

Communications and Marketing
Economics
Engineering
Finance
Human Resources
Information Technology
Inspector of Education and Training
Internal Audit
Knowledge and Information Management
Law
Medicine
Operational Delivery
Operational Research
Policy Delivery
Procurement and Contract Management
Programme and Project Management
Property Asset Management
Psychology
Science
Social and Market Research
Statistics
Tax Professionals
Veterinarian
Other (for minority groups, such as Investigating Officers)

In popular culture[edit]
The BBC television series Yes Minister and Yes Prime Minister are a satire on the British civil service and its relationship with government ministers. The portrayal is a caricature of the civil service predominantly characterised through Nigel Hawthorne's Sir Humphrey Appleby. The Thick of It is a similar BBC television series that has been called "the 21st century's answer to Yes Minister", first broadcast in 2005. The series portrays a modernised version of the interactions between the Civil Service and the Government (chiefly in the form of special advisors), as well as the media's involvement in the process. Conversely, there is a long history of civil servants who are also literary authors, who often comment on their own institutions, including such writers as John Milton, John Dryden, Andrew Marvell, Robert Burns, William Wordsworth and Anthony Trollope.
See also[edit]

Departments of the United Kingdom Government
Her Majesty's Diplomatic Service
Colonial Service
Northern Ireland Civil Service
Public administration
Public and Commercial Services Union (PCS)
FDA

References[edit]


^ "Scotland Act 1998 (c. 46)". Section 51(9): Published by the UK Government. 1998. Retrieved 27 July 2010. 
^ "Government of Wales Act 1998 (c.38)" (PDF). Sections 34(2) and 34(3): Published by the UK Government. 1998. Retrieved 27 July 2010. 
^ "Civil Service Order in Council 1995" (PDF). Published by the UK Civil Service Commissioners. Archived from the original (PDF) on 17 May 2008. Retrieved 16 September 2009. 
^ Bradley and Ewing, p.272
^ "Civil Service statistics: 2016". ons.gov.uk. UK Government. 6 October 2016. Retrieved 6 December 2016. 
^ a b "Membership of the Permanent Secretaries Management Group". UK Government. Archived from the original on 17 July 2010. 
^ a b "Sir Peter Ricketts, Permanent Under Secretary, Foreign and Commonwealth Office". UK Government,. Archived from the original on 21 November 2008. 
^ (Bodde 2005)
^ Simon Heffer (2013). High Minds: The Victorians and the Birth of Modern Britain. p. 476. 
^ Patrick Diamond (2013). Governing Britain: Power, Politics and the Prime Minister. I.B.Tauris. p. 42. 
^ McDowell, Robert Brendan (1976-12-01). The Irish administration, 1801-1914. Greenwood Press. ISBN 9780837185613. 
^ Sampson, p.174-5
^ Sampson, p.171
^ The locus classicus showing the difficulty of this boundary was the interview of Michael Howard on Newsnight on 13 May 1997, which pivoted on the question whether as Minister he had intervened in the detailed management of the Prison Services Agency.
^ Patricia Greer, 1994,Transforming Central Government: the Next Steps, preface.
^ "Sir Jeremy Heywood, Cabinet Secretary and Head of the Civil Service". gov.uk. UK Government. Retrieved 6 December 2016. 
^ a b c d "Sir Gus O'Donnell, Cabinet Secretary and Head of the Home Civil Service". UK Government. 29 January 2009. Archived from the original on 20 June 2011. Retrieved 6 December 2016. 
^ Number 10 – Cabinet Secretary announces retirement
^ "Civil Service Live Network: Kerslake to head civil service with promise of 'visible leadership'". Cabinet Office Civil Service Live Network. Archived from the original on 11 July 2012. Retrieved 8 January 2012. 
^ "Sir Jeremy Heywood". www.gov.uk. Retrieved 2016-09-12. 
^ David Butler and Gareth Butler, Twentieth Century British Political Facts 1900–2000, Macmillan 2000, p. 302
^ "Permanent Secretaries Management Group". UK Government. Archived from the original on 15 September 2008. 
^ a b "Civil Service governance". UK Government. Archived from the original on 21 September 2008. 
^ "Civil Service Steering Board". UK Government. Archived from the original on 15 October 2008. 
^ "Civil Service Commissioners website (About Us)". Civil Service Commissioners. Archived from the original on 14 September 2008. 
^ a b c "Civil Service Commissioners website (Code of Practice)". Civil Service Commissioners. Archived from the original on 9 May 2008. 
^ "CCivil Service Commissioners for Northern Ireland". Civil Service Commissioners for Northern Ireland. 
^ James B. Christoph, Political Rights and Administrative Impartiality in the British Civil Service," in Canadian Public Administration, eds. J.E. Hodgetts and D.C. Corbett (Toronto: Macmillan, 1960), 421.
^ "Political Neutrality, The Duty Of Silence And The Right To Publish In The Civil Service" (PDF). Parliamentary Affairs. 39 (4). 1986. 
^ a b Ministers plot end to Civil Service neutrality - UK Politics - UK. The Independent (2012-08-01). Retrieved on 2013-08-24.
^ a b Bradley and Ewing, p.279-80
^ Bradley and Ewing, p.280
^ [Chapter 7: Lobbying and All-Party Groups], Sixth Report of the Committee on Standards in Public Life
^ a b c Alan Budd (6 January 2009). "Obituary-Sir Alan Walters:Economic adviser to Margaret Thatcher, he opposed Britain joining the ERM". Guardian newspapers. Retrieved 23 June 2012. 
^ The advisers: Modernisation or politicisation?, BBC News, 12 January 2000
^ Spin doctor role under spotlight, BBC News, 5 January 2004
^ Uncivil to the servants Archived 4 December 2007 at the Wayback Machine., The Scotsman, 26 February 2002
^ "The Civil Service Code". UK Government. Archived from the original on 23 September 2008. 
^ "The Introduction to the Civil Service Management Code". UK Government. 
^ "The Civil Service Commissioners' Recruitment Code". Civil Service Commissioners. Archived from the original on 19 September 2008. 
^ Gay, Oonagh (2005-08-04). "The Osmotherly Rules (Standard Note: SN/PC/2671)" (PDF). Parliament and Constitution Centre, House of Commons Library. Archived from the original (PDF) on 30 May 2009. Retrieved 2009-05-22. 
^ Directory of Civil Service Guidance, Cabinet Office 2000
^ "Civil Service Equivalent Grades". UK Civil Service, the Cabinet Office. 1 February 2010. Archived from the original on 13 January 2014. Retrieved 7 July 2010. 
^ "Grades and types of work in the Civil Service". Cabinet Office. Retrieved 2016-06-12. 
^ "Civil Service Competency Framework 2012 – 2017" (PDF). UK Civil Service, the Cabinet Office. 2012. Retrieved 2 July 2017. 
^ "What's in a grade?". UK Civil Service, the Cabinet Office. 1 February 2010. Archived from the original on 28 June 2010. Retrieved 7 July 2010. 
^ "About the Co-ordinated Organisations". iSRP / SiRP. iSRP / SiRP. Archived from the original on 14 August 2016. Retrieved 2016-07-15. 
^ "Equivalent Civil Service and Military Ranks". whatdotheyknow.com. 1 February 2010. Retrieved 15 May 2016. 
^ a b "Civil Servant". civilservant.org.uk. Retrieved 15 May 2016. 
^ "PART 3: CHANGES IN THE PUBLIC SERVICE SINCE 1967 (continued)". parliament.uk. UK Parliament. 45. Retrieved 4 December 2016. 
^ "PART 4: THE CIVIL SERVICE TODAY (continued)". parliament.uk. UK Parliament. 92. Retrieved 4 December 2016. 
^ Grade predominantly used in "Establishments"
^ "Tri-service Retired Officers' Pay" (PDF). Retrieved 2016-06-12. 
^ Lapsed 1974
^ "Ministry of Defence – Supporting Narrative and Pay Scales – 2010" (PDF). National Archives. Ministry of Defence. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2012-10-26. Retrieved 2016-06-13. 
^ "Civil Service professions". Retrieved 2016-06-14. 


Notes[edit]

Bodde, D., Chinese Ideas in the West [1]
Bradley, A.W. and Ewing, K.D., Constitutional and Administrative Law (Pearson, 2003)
Foster, C., British Government in Crisis (Hart 2005)
House of Commons Public Administration Committee, "These Unfortunate Events": Lessons of Recent Events at the Former DTLR, HMSO 2002 [2]
Sampson, Anthony, The Changing Anatomy of Britain (Hodder and Stoughton, 1982)
Sullivan, Ceri, Literature in the Civil Service: Sublime Bureaucracy (Palgrave, 2012)
Jonathan Tonge, The New Civil Service (Baseline, Tisbury 1999)
Zifcak, S., New Managerialism: Administrative Reform in Whitehall and Canberra (Open University Press, 1994)

External links[edit]

Site explaining what being a civil servant is all about, maintained by a senior public official, Martin Stanley
Official Civil Service website
Civil Service Club website
Academic article on the first fifteen years of the Citizen's Charter
The National Archives – Operational Selection Policy 24 – (which lists by date issues and events from March 1974 to 2000 relating to the machinery of Government and Civil Service management the key records of which should be preserved)
Cabinet Office – official site
GOV.UK – How Government Works
Collection of civil service conduct and guidance
BBC brief on the British Civil Service – h2g2
Guardian Special Report – Civil Service







v
t
e


Civil service



Concepts



Public sector
Government agency
Bureaucracy
Bureaucrat
Technocracy
Diplomat
Public administration
Public policy
Public service





By country



Australia
Bangladesh
Brazil
Canada
China
European Union
France
Germany
Hong Kong
India
Ireland
Italy
Japan
Malaysia
New Zealand
Nigeria
Northern Ireland
Pakistan
Russia
Singapore
Sri Lanka
United Kingdom
United States





Categories



National civil service commissions
Government occupations
Civil service by country








See also: Civil service reform in developing countries












v
t
e


Downing Street



Buildings



9 Downing Street

Chief Whip's Office


10 Downing Street
11 Downing Street
12 Downing Street
Privy Council Office









Residence



First Lord of the Treasury

Prime Minister


Second Lord of the Treasury (Chancellor of the Exchequer)
Parliamentary Secretary to the Treasury

Government Chief Whip


Chief Mouser to the Cabinet Office





Prime Minister's Office



Chief of Staff
Principal Private Secretary
Parliamentary Private Secretary
Director of Communications
Press Secretary
Director of Policy
Prime Minister's Official Spokesperson





Incidents



Provisional IRA mortar attack (1991)
Plebgate (2012)











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Civil_Service_(United_Kingdom)&oldid=817184602"					Categories: Public administrationCivil Service of the United KingdomCabinet Office (United Kingdom)Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksOfficial website different in Wikidata and WikipediaAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from July 2015Use dmy dates from September 2010