This article is about culinary, medicinal, and spiritual herbs. For the technical usage, see herbaceous plant. For other uses, see Herb (disambiguation).




Basil and green onions, common culinary herbs


In general use, herbs are any plants used for food, flavoring, medicine, or fragrances for their savory or aromatic properties. Culinary use typically distinguishes herbs from spices. Herbs refers to the leafy green or flowering parts of a plant (either fresh or dried), while spices are produced from other parts of the plant (usually dried), including seeds, berries, bark, roots and fruits.
In botanical English, the word "herb" is also used as a synonym of "herbaceous plant".
Herbs have a variety of uses including culinary, medicinal, and in some cases, spiritual. General usage of the term "herb" differs between culinary herbs and medicinal herbs. In medicinal or spiritual use any of the parts of the plant might be considered "herbs", including leaves, roots, flowers, seeds, root bark, inner bark (and cambium), resin and pericarp.
The word "herb" is pronounced /hɜːrb/ in the Commonwealth,[1] but /ɜːrb/ is common among North American speakers and those from other regions where h-dropping occurs.



Contents


1 History
2 Culinary herbs
3 Medicinal herbs
4 Sacred herbs
5 Herbal cosmetics
6 See also
7 References
8 External links



History[edit]


"What is an herb?" "The friend of physicians and the praise of cooks."

--Alcuin and his student Charlemagne[2]
As far back as 5000 BCE, Sumerians used herbs in medicine.[citation needed] Ancient Egyptians used fennel, coriander and thyme around 1555 BCE.[citation needed] In ancient Greece, in 162 CE, the physician Galen was known for concocting complicated herbal remedies that contained up to 100 ingredients.[3] Emperor Charlemagne (742-814) compiled a list of 74 different herbs that were to be planted in his gardens. The connection between herbs and health is important already in the European Middle Ages--The Forme of Cury (that is, "cookery") promotes extensive use of herbs, including in salads, and claims in its preface "the assent and advisement of the masters of physic and philosophy in the King's Court".[2]
Culinary herbs[edit]




A bundle of thyme


See also: List of culinary herbs and spices
Culinary herbs are distinguished from vegetables in that, like spices, they are used in small amounts and provide flavor rather than substance to food.
Herbs can be perennials such as thyme or lavender, biennials such as parsley, or annuals like basil. Perennial herbs can be shrubs such as rosemary, Rosmarinus officinalis, or trees such as bay laurel, Laurus nobilis – this contrasts with botanical herbs, which by definition cannot be woody plants. Some plants are used as both herbs and spices, such as dill weed and dill seed or coriander leaves and seeds. Also, there are some herbs such as those in the mint family that are used for both culinary and medicinal purposes.
Medicinal herbs[edit]
Main article: Herbalism
Some plants contain phytochemicals that have effects on the body. There may be some effects when consumed in the small levels that typify culinary "spicing", and some herbs are toxic in larger quantities. For instance, some types of herbal extract, such as the extract of St. John's-wort (Hypericum perforatum) or of kava (Piper methysticum) can be used for medical purposes to relieve depression and stress.[medical citation needed] However, large amounts of these herbs may lead to toxic overload that may involve complications, some of a serious nature, and should be used with caution. Complications can also arise when being taken with some prescription medicines.




A garden of herbs


Herbs have long been used as the basis of traditional Chinese herbal medicine, with usage dating as far back as the first century CE[4] and far before. In India, the Ayurveda medicinal system is based on herbs. Medicinal use of herbs in Western cultures has its roots in the Hippocratic (Greek) elemental healing system, based on a quaternary elemental healing metaphor. Famous herbalist of the Western tradition include Avicenna (Persian), Galen (Roman), Paracelsus (German Swiss), Culpepper (English) and the botanically inclined Eclectic physicians of 19th century/early 20th century America (John Milton Scudder, Harvey Wickes Felter, John Uri Lloyd). Modern pharmaceuticals had their origins in crude herbal medicines, and to this day, some drugs are still extracted as fractionate/isolate compounds from raw herbs and then purified to meet pharmaceutical standards.
Certain herbs contain psychoactive properties that have been used for both religious and recreational purposes by humans since the early Holocene era, notably the leaves and extracts of the cannabis and coca plants. The leaves of the coca plant have been chewed by people in northern Peruvian societies for over 8,000 years,[5] while the use of cannabis as a psychoactive substance dates back to the first century CE in China and northern Africa.[6]
The indigenous peoples of Australia developed herbal medicine based on plants that were readily available to them. The isolation of the indigenous people meant the remedies developed were for far less serious diseases, this was from not contracting western illnesses. Herbs such as river mint, wattle and eucalyptus were used for coughs, diarrhea, fever and headaches.[3]
Sacred herbs[edit]






This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (January 2015) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Main article: Sacred herbs
Herbs are used in many religions. For example, myrrh (Commiphora myrrha) and frankincense (Boswellia species) in Hellenistic religion, the nine herbs charm in Anglo-Saxon paganism, neem (Azadirachta indica) leaves, bael (Aegele marmelos) leaves, holy basil or tulsi (Ocimum tenuiflorum), turmeric or "haldi" (Curcuma longa), cannabis in Hinduism, and white sage in Wicca. Rastafari also consider cannabis to be a holy plant.
Siberian shamans also used herbs for spiritual purposes. Plants may be used to induce spiritual experiences for rites of passage, such as vision quests in some Native American cultures. The Cherokee Native Americans use both white sage and cedar for spiritual cleansing and smudging.
Herbal cosmetics[edit]
The use of herbal cosmetics dates back to around six centuries ago in the European and Western countries. Mixtures and pastes were often concocted to whiten the face. During the 1940s, herbal cosmetics took a turn with the emerging red lipstick color, with every year gaining a more intense red. Herbal cosmetics come in many forms, such as face creams, scrubs, lipstick, natural fragrances, and body oils.[7][unreliable source?]
See also[edit]


Apothecary
Epazote
Herbaceous plant
Herb chopper
Herb farm
Herb garden
International Herb Association
List of culinary herbs and spices
List of plants used in herbalism
Pot herb
Prehistoric medicine
Strewing herb


References[edit]



^ Cambridge Advanced Learners' Dictionary & Thesaurus, Cambridge University Press: headword "Herb" Online version
^ a b Freeman, Margaret B. (1943). Herbs for the Medieval Household, for Cooking, Healing and Divers uses. New York: The Metropolitan Museum of Art. pp. ix–x. 
^ a b Tapsell, L. C., Hemphill, I., Cobiac, L., Sullivan, D. R., Fenech, M., Patch, C. S., Roodenrys, S., Keogh, J. B., Clifton, P. M., Williams, P. G., Fazio, V. A. & Inge, K. E. (2006). "Health benefits of herbs and spices: The past, the present, the future". Medical Journal of Australia. 185 (4): S1–S24. CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link)
^ "Chinese Herbal Medicine". Archived from the original on 2014-08-20. Retrieved 2007-12-19. 
^ Dillehay et al (2010). "Early Holocene coca chewing in northern Peru" p. 939–959
^ Ernest Abel, Marijuana, The First 12,000 years (Plenum Press, New York 1980) [1]
^ Shivanand, P., Nilam, M., Viral, D. (2010). "Herbs play an important role in the field of cosmetics". International Journal of PharmTech Research. 2 (1): 632–639. CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link)



External links[edit]

 Media related to Herbs at Wikimedia Commons
§182.10 Spices and other natural seasonings and flavorings that are generally recognized as safe, US Code of Federal Regulations







v
t
e


Culinary herbs and spices








Herbs






Angelica
Basil

holy
Thai


Bay leaf
Indian bay leaf (tejpat)
Boldo
Borage
Chervil
Chives

garlic / Chinese


Cicely
Coriander leaf / Cilantro

Bolivian
Vietnamese (rau răm)


Culantro
Cress
Curry leaf
Dill
Epazote
Hemp
Hoja santa
Houttuynia cordata (giấp cá)
Hyssop
Jimbu
Kinh gioi (Vietnamese balm)
Kkaennip
Lavender
Lemon balm
Lemon grass
Lemon myrtle
Lemon verbena
Limnophila aromatica (rice-paddy herb)
Lovage
Marjoram
Mint
Mugwort
Mitsuba
Oregano
Parsley
Perilla
Rosemary
Rue
Sage
Savory
Sanshō leaf
Shiso
Sorrel
Tarragon
Thyme
Woodruff













Spices






Aonori (ground seaweed)
Ajwain
Allspice
Amchoor (mango powder)
Anise

star


Asafoetida
Camphor
Caraway
Cardamom

black


Cassia
Celery powder
Celery seed
Charoli
Chenpi
Cinnamon
Clove
Coriander seed
Cubeb
Cumin

Nigella sativa
Bunium persicum


Deulkkae
Dill / Dill seed
Fennel
Fenugreek

blue


Fingerroot (krachai)
Galangal

greater
lesser


Garlic
Ginger
Aromatic ginger (kencur)
Golpar
Grains of Paradise
Grains of Selim
Horseradish
Juniper berry
Kokum
Korarima
Dried lime
Liquorice
Litsea cubeba
Mace
Mango-ginger
Mastic
Mahleb
Mustard

black
brown
white


Nigella (kalonji)
Njangsa
Nutmeg
Pomegranate seed (anardana)
Poppy seed
Radhuni
Rose
Saffron
Salt
Sarsaparilla
Sassafras
Sesame
Shiso seeds / berries
Sumac
Tamarind
Tonka bean
Turmeric
Uzazi
Vanilla
Voatsiperifery
Wasabi
Yuzu zest
Zedoary
Zereshk
Zest





Peppers






Alligator
Brazilian
Chili

Cayenne
Paprika


Long
Peruvian
Sichuan (huājiāo)
Japanese pricklyash
Tasmanian
Peppercorn (black / green / white)
















Mixtures






Adjika
Advieh
Baharat
Beau monde seasoning
Berbere
Bouquet garni
Buknu
Chaat masala
Chaunk
Chili powder
Cinnamon sugar
Crab boil
Curry powder
Doubanjiang
Douchi
Duqqa
Fines herbes
Five-spice powder
Garam masala
Garlic powder
Garlic salt
Gochujang
Harissa
Hawaij
Herbes de Provence
Idli podi
Jamaican jerk spice
Khmeli suneli
Lemon pepper
Mitmita
Mixed spice
Montreal steak seasoning
Mulling spices
Old Bay Seasoning
Onion powder
Panch phoron
Persillade
Powder-douce
Pumpkin pie spice
Qâlat daqqa
Quatre épices
Ras el hanout
Recado rojo
Sharena sol
Shichimi
Tabil
Tandoori masala
Vadouvan
Yuzukoshō
Za'atar













Lists and related topics








Lists of herbs and spices






Culinary
Australian
Bangladeshi
Indian
Pakistani








Related topics






Chinese herbology
Herbal tea
Marination
Spice rub














Plants portal





Authority control



NDL: 01088547











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Herb&oldid=817416481"					Categories: HerbsHidden categories: CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors listAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from May 2016Articles with unsourced statements from July 2017Articles with unsourced statements from June 2013Articles needing additional references from January 2015All articles needing additional referencesAll articles lacking reliable referencesArticles lacking reliable references from May 2016