This article is about public roads. For other uses of highway, see Highway (disambiguation).




The term highway includes any public road. This is an unpaved highway in Northern England.






An Autobahn in Lehrte, near Hanover, Germany—a busy, high-capacity motorway.






Ontario Highway 401, in Ontario, Canada






The I-75/I-85 Downtown Connector in Atlanta, Georgia, in the United States






Cyclists on Highway M-185 in the US state of Michigan






The Pan-American Highway in the Greater Buenos Aires, Argentina






King Faisal Highway Manama, Bahrain






Highway near Bangalore, India






Delhi Noida Flyway in India






Ayalon Highway, Israel






The Dukhan Highway going between Doha and Dukhan, in Qatar


A highway is any public road or other public way on land. It is used for major roads, but also includes other public roads and public tracks: It is not an equivalent term to controlled-access highway, or a translation for autobahn, autoroute, etc.
In North American and Australian English, major roads such as controlled-access highways or arterial roads are often state highways (Canada: provincial highways). Other roads may be designated "county highways" in the US and Ontario. These classifications refer to the level of government (state, provincial, county) that maintains the roadway.
In British English, "highway" is primarily a legal term. Everyday use normally implies roads, while the legal use covers any route or path with a public right of access, including footpaths etc.
The term has led to several related derived terms, including highway system, highway code, highway patrol and highwayman.
The term highway exists in distinction to "waterway".



Contents


1 Overview
2 Terminology

2.1 England and Wales
2.2 Scotland
2.3 United States


3 History
4 Social effects
5 Economic effects
6 Environmental effects
7 Road traffic safety
8 Statistics
9 Bus lane

9.1 South Korea
9.2 Hong Kong
9.3 Philippines


10 Gallery
11 See also

11.1 General
11.2 By country


12 References
13 External links



Overview[edit]
Major highways are often named and numbered by the governments that typically develop and maintain them. Australia's Highway 1 is the longest national highway in the world at over 14,500 km or 9,000 mi and runs almost the entire way around the continent. China has the world's largest network of highways followed closely by the United States of America. Some highways, like the Pan-American Highway or the European routes, span multiple countries. Some major highway routes include ferry services, such as U.S. Route 10, which crosses Lake Michigan.
Traditionally highways were used by people on foot or on horses. Later they also accommodated carriages, bicycles and eventually motor cars, facilitated by advancements in road construction. In the 1920s and 1930s, many nations began investing heavily in progressively more modern highway systems to spur commerce and bolster national defense.
Major modern highways that connect cities in populous developed and developing countries usually incorporate features intended to enhance the road's capacity, efficiency, and safety to various degrees. Such features include a reduction in the number of locations for user access, the use of dual carriageways with two or more lanes on each carriageway, and grade-separated junctions with other roads and modes of transport. These features are typically present on highways built as motorways (freeways).
Terminology[edit]
England and Wales[edit]
The general legal definition deals with right of use not the form of construction; this is distinct from e.g. the popular use of the word in the US. A highway is defined in English common law by a number of similarly-worded definitions such as "a way over which all members of the public have the right to pass and repass without hindrance"[1] usually accompanied by "at all times"; ownership of the ground is for most purposes irrelevant thus the term encompasses all such ways from the widest trunk roads in public ownership to the narrowest footpath providing unlimited pedestrian access over private land.
A highway might be open to all forms of lawful land traffic (i.e. vehicular, horse, pedestrian) or limited to specific types of traffic or combinations of types of traffic; usually a highway available to vehicles is available to foot or horse traffic, a highway available to horse traffic is available to pedestrians but exceptions can apply usually in the form of a highway only being available to vehicles or subdivided into dedicated parallel sections for different users.
A highway can share ground with a private right of way for which full use is not available to the general public as often will be the case with farm roads which the owner may use for any purpose but for which the general public only has a right of use on foot or horseback. The status of highway on most older roads has been gained by established public use while newer roads are typically dedicated as highways from the time they are adopted (taken into the care and control of a council or other public authority). In England and Wales, a public highway is also known as "The Queen's Highway".[2]
The core definition of a highway is modified in various legislation for a number of purposes but only for the specific matters dealt with in each such piece of legislation. This is typically in the case of bridges, tunnels and other structures whose ownership, mode of use or availability would otherwise exclude them from the general definition of a highway, examples in recent years are commonly toll bridges and tunnels which have the definition of highway imposed upon them (in a legal order applying only to the individual structure) to allow application of most traffic laws to those using them but without causing all of the general obligations or rights of use otherwise applicable to a highway.
Scotland[edit]
Scots law is similar to English law with regard to highways but with differing terminology and legislation. What is defined in England as a highway will often in Scotland be what is defined by s.151 Roads (Scotland) Act 1984 (but only "in this act" although other legislation could imitate) simply as a road, that is :-

"any way (other than a waterway) over which there is a public right of passage (by whatever means [and whether subject to a toll or not]) and includes the road’s verge, and any bridge (whether permanent or temporary) over which, or tunnel through which, the road passes; and any reference to a road includes a part thereof; "

The word highway is itself no longer a statutory expression in Scots law[3] but remains in common law.
United States[edit]
In American law, the word "highway" is sometimes used to denote any public way used for travel, whether a "road, street, and parkway";[4] however, in practical and useful meaning, a "highway" is a major and significant, well-constructed road that is capable of carrying reasonably heavy to extremely heavy traffic.[citation needed] Highways generally have a route number designated by the state and federal departments of transportation.[clarification needed]
California Vehicle Code, Sections 360, 590, define a "highway" as only a way open for use of motor vehicles, but the California Supreme Court has held that "the definition of 'highway' in the Vehicle Code is used for special purposes of that act," and that canals of the Los Angeles neighborhood of Venice, California, are "highways" that are entitled to be maintained with state highway funds.[5]
Smaller roads may be termed byways.[6]
History[edit]




A German Autobahn in the 1930s.


See also: Road and History of road transport
Modern highway systems developed in the 20th century as the automobile gained popularity. The world's first limited access road was constructed on Long Island New York in the United States known as the Long Island Motor Parkway or the Vanderbilt Motor Parkway. It was completed in 1911.[7] Construction of the Bonn–Cologne autobahn began in 1929 and it was opened in 1932 by the mayor of Cologne, Konrad Adenauer.[8]
In the USA, the Federal Aid Highway Act of 1921 (Phipps Act) enacted a fund to create an extensive highway system. In 1922, the first blueprint for a national highway system (the Pershing Map) was published. The Federal Aid Highway Act of 1956 allocated $25 billion for the construction of the 41,000-mile-long (66,000 km) Interstate Highway System over a 20-year period.[9]
In Great Britain, the Special Roads Act 1949 provided the legislative basis for roads for restricted classes of vehicles and non-standard or no speed limits applied (later mostly termed motorways but now with speed limits not exceeding 70 mph);[10] in terms of general road law this legislation overturned the usual principle that a road available to vehicular traffic was also available to horse or pedestrian traffic as is usually the only practical change when non-motorways are reclassified as special roads. The first section of motorway in the UK opened in 1958 (part of the M6 motorway) and then in 1959 the first section of the M1 motorway.[11]
Social effects[edit]




Commonwealth Avenue, a major intercity highway in northeastern Manila metropolitan area, the Philippines.


Reducing travel times relative to city or town streets, modern highways with limited access and grade separation create increased opportunities for people to travel for business, trade or pleasure and also provide trade routes for goods. Modern highways reduce commute and other travel time but additional road capacity can also release latent traffic demand. If not accurately predicted at the planning stage, this extra traffic may lead to the new road becoming congested sooner than would otherwise be anticipated by considering increases in vehicle ownership. More roads allow drivers to use their cars when otherwise alternatives may have been sought, or the journey may not have been made, which can mean that a new road brings only short-term mitigation of traffic congestion.
Where highways are created through existing communities, there can be reduced community cohesion and more difficult local access. Consequently, property values have decreased in many cutoff neighborhoods, leading to decreased housing quality over time.
Economic effects[edit]
Main article: Transport economics
In transport, demand can be measured in numbers of journeys made or in total distance travelled across all journeys (e.g. passenger-kilometres for public transport or vehicle-kilometres of travel (VKT) for private transport). Supply is considered to be a measure of capacity. The price of the good (travel) is measured using the generalised cost of travel, which includes both money and time expenditure.
The effect of increases in supply (capacity) are of particular interest in transport economics (see induced demand), as the potential environmental consequences are significant (see externalities below).
In addition to providing benefits to their users, transport networks impose both positive and negative externalities on non-users. The consideration of these externalities—particularly the negative ones—is a part of transport economics. Positive externalities of transport networks may include the ability to provide emergency services, increases in land value and agglomeration benefits. Negative externalities are wide-ranging and may include local air pollution, noise pollution, light pollution, safety hazards, community severance and congestion. The contribution of transport systems to potentially hazardous climate change is a significant negative externality which is difficult to evaluate quantitatively, making it difficult (but not impossible) to include in transport economics-based research and analysis. Congestion is considered a negative externality by economists.[12]
A 2016 study finds that for the United States "a 10% increase in a region's stock of highways causes a 1.7% increase in regional patenting over a five-year period."[13]
Environmental effects[edit]




Noise, light and air pollution are negative environmental effects highways can have on their surroundings.


Main article: Environmental impacts of roads
Highways are extended linear sources of pollution.
Roadway noise increases with operating speed so major highways generate more noise than arterial streets. Therefore, considerable noise health effects are expected from highway systems. Noise mitigation strategies exist to reduce sound levels at nearby sensitive receptors. The idea that highway design could be influenced by acoustical engineering considerations first arose about 1973.[14][15]
Air quality issues: Highways may contribute fewer emissions than arterials carrying the same vehicle volumes. This is because high, constant-speed operation creates an emissions reduction compared to vehicular flows with stops and starts. However, concentrations of air pollutants near highways may be higher due to increased traffic volumes. Therefore, the risk of exposure to elevated levels of air pollutants from a highway may be considerable, and further magnified when highways have traffic congestion.
New highways can also cause habitat fragmentation, encourage urban sprawl and allow human intrusion into previously untouched areas, as well as (counterintuitively) increasing congestion, by increasing the number of intersections.
They can also reduce the use of public transport, indirectly leading to greater pollution.
High-occupancy vehicle lanes are being added to some newer/reconstructed highways in North America and other countries around the world to encourage carpooling and mass-transit. These lanes help reduce the number of cars on the highway and thus reduces pollution and traffic congestion by promoting the use of carpooling in order to be able to use these lanes. However, they tend to require dedicated lanes on a highway, which makes them difficult to construct in dense urban areas where they are the most effective.
To address habitat fragmentation, wildlife crossings have become increasingly popular in many countries. Wildlife crossings allow animals to safely cross human-made barriers like highways.[16]
Road traffic safety[edit]
Main article: Road traffic safety
Road traffic safety describes the safety performance of roads and streets, and methods used to reduce the harm (deaths, injuries, and property damage) on the highway system from traffic collisions. It includes the design, construction and regulation of the roads, the vehicles used on them and the training of drivers and other road-users.
A report published by the World Health Organization in 2004 estimated that some 1.2m people were killed and 50m injured on the roads around the world each year[17] and was the leading cause of death among children 10–19 years of age.
The report also noted that the problem was most severe in developing countries and that simple prevention measures could halve the number of deaths.[18] For reasons of clear data collection, only harm involving a road vehicle is included.[19] A person tripping with fatal consequences or dying for some unrelated reason on a public road is not included in the relevant statistics.
Statistics[edit]




International sign used widely in Europe denoting the start of special restrictions for a section of highway classed as a motorway.






The Cross Bronx Expressway in New York, United States uses asphalt and concrete pavement, both of which are popular road surfaces on highways.


The United States has the world's largest network of highways, including both the Interstate Highway System and the U.S. Highway System. At least one of these networks is present in every state and they interconnect most major cities.
China's highway network is the second most extensive in the world, with a total length of about 3.573 million km.[20][21][22][23][24] China's expressway network is the longest Expressway system in the world, and it is quickly expanding, stretching some 85,000 km at the end of 2011.[25][26] In 2008 alone, 6,433 km expressways were added to the network.[27]

Longest international highway
The Pan-American Highway, which connects many countries in the Americas, is nearly 25,000 kilometres (15,500 mi) long as of 2005[update].[citation needed] The Pan-American Highway is discontinuous because there is a significant gap in it in southeastern Panama, where the rainfall is immense and the terrain is entirely unsuitable for highway construction.
Longest national highway (point to point)
Trans-Canada Highway has two routes, with the northern Route spanning 7,821 km (4,860 mi) long as of 2006[update] alone, and over 10,700 km long including the southern portion. The T.C.H. runs east-west across southern Canada, the populated portion of the country, and it connects many of the major urban centres along its route crossing almost all of the provinces, and reaching almost all of the capital cities.[28] The T.C.H. begins on the east coast in Newfoundland, traverses that island, and crosses to the mainland by ferry. It reaches most of the Maritime Provinces of eastern Canada, and a side route using ferries traverses the province of Prince Edward Island. After crossing the two most populous provinces of Quebec and Ontario, the T.C.H. continues westward across Manitoba, Saskatchewan, Alberta, and British Columbia. After reaching Vancouver, B.C., on the Pacific Coast, there is a ferry route west to Vancouver Island and the provincial capital city of Victoria, B.C.
Longest national highway (circuit)
Australia's Highway 1 at over 14,500 km (9,000 mi).[citation needed] It runs almost the entire way around the continent's coastline. With the exception of the Federal Capital of Canberra, which is far inland, Highway 1 links all of Australia's capital cities, although Brisbane and Darwin are not directly connected, but rather are bypassed short distances away. Also, there is a ferry connection to the island state of Tasmania, and then a stretch of Highway 1 that links the major towns and cities of Tasmania, including Launceston and Hobart (this state’s capital city).
Largest national highway system
The United States of America has approximately 6.43 million kilometres (4,000,000 mi) of highway within its borders as of 2008[update].[29]
Busiest highway
Highway 401 in Ontario, Canada, has volumes surpassing an average of 500,000 vehicles per day in some sections of Toronto as of 2006[update].[30][31]
Widest highway (maximum number of lanes)
The Katy Freeway (part of Interstate 10) in Houston, Texas, has a total of 26 lanes in some sections as of 2007[update].[citation needed][32] However, they are divided up into general use/ frontage roads/ HOV lanes, restricting the traverse traffic flow.
Widest highway (maximum number of through lanes)
Interstate 5 along a two-mile-long (3.2 km) section between Interstate 805 and California State Route 56 in San Diego, California, which was completed in April 2007, is 22 lanes wide.[33]
Highest international highway
The Karakoram Highway, between Pakistan and China, is at an altitude of 4,693 metres (15,397 ft).[citation needed]

Bus lane[edit]






This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (December 2012) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)







Highway bus lane on Gyeongbu Expressway in South Korea.


Some countries incorporate bus lanes onto highways.


Country
Highway
Bus lanes (km)
Section


Australia
M2 Hills Motorway

Abbott Road–Beecroft Road (Sydney)


India
National Highway (India)
19
30 lanes Road
(Mumbai)



Canada
Don Valley Parkway
0.458
shoulder converted as bypass lane from Lawrence Avenue East to York Mills Road


Canada
Ontario Highway 417
7
Eagleson Road–Ontario Highway 417 (Ottawa)


Canada
Ontario Highway 403
6
Mavis Road–Winston Churchill Boulevard (Mississauga)


Hong Kong
Tuen Mun Road




South Korea
Gyeongbu Expressway
137.4
Hannam IC (Seoul) ~ Sintanjin IC (Daejeon)


Netherlands
A1 motorway (Netherlands)

End of A6-Vechtbrug (Muiden)


South Korea[edit]
In South Korea, in February 1995—Bus lane (essentially an HOV-9) established between the northern terminus and Sintanjin for important holidays and on 1 July 2008—Bus lane enforcement between Seoul and Osan (Sintanjin on weekends) becomes daily between 6 AM and 10 PM. On 1 October this is adjusted to 7 AM to 9 PM weekdays, 9 AM to 9 PM weekends.
Hong Kong[edit]
In Hong Kong, some highways are set up with bus lanes to solve the traffic congestion.


District
Highway
Section


Tuen Mun
 Tuen Mun Road
So Kwun Wat to Sham Tseng


Sha Tin
 Lion Rock Tunnel
The entry of the tunnel


Philippines[edit]
Traffic congestion was a principal problem in major roads and highways in the Philippines, especially in Metro Manila and other major cities. The government decided to set up some bus lanes in Metro Manila like in the Epifanio delos Santos Avenue.
Gallery[edit]







Gravelly Hill Interchange in Birmingham, England









A1 Motorway near Athens, Greece with rest area above









The ten-lane Highway A1 near Bologna, Italy









A Polish expressway in Bielsko-Biała









E4 motorway with rest area outside Nyköping, Sweden









Highway 401 with collector and express lanes in Mississauga, Ontario, Canada









Highway 404 (southbound) with HOV lanes in Toronto, Ontario, Canada









The Pan-American Highway where it serves as the main street in Máncora, Peru









A typical expressway in China









Tolo Highway in Hong Kong









A typical Indian highway









32-lane toll plaza at an Indian expressway









Chennai-Bangalore Highway









Mumbai Pune Expressway as seen from Khandala









A highway interchange in Tehran, Iran









The Metropolitan Expressway in Tokyo, Japan









A highway in Kuwait City









Karakoram Highway, Pakistan









North Luzon Expressway, the Philippines









Namhae Expressway in Jinju, South Korea









Ja-Ela Interchange in the Airport Expressway(E03) in Ja-Ela, Sri Lanka









3/4 highway interchange in Dubai, United Arab Emirates









National Route 1A near Từ Sơn, Vietnam




See also[edit]
General[edit]





Bypass route
Controlled-access highway
Divided highway (dual carriageway)
Freeway
Highway systems by country
Highwayman
Infrastructure
Limited-access road
List of roads and highways
Motorway
Parkway




Passing lane
Ring road
Road
Road junction
Road safety
Road transport
Roadway air dispersion modeling
Roadway noise
Toll road
Undivided highway (single carriageway)





By country[edit]





Algeria East–West Highway
Autobahns of Austria
Autoput and Autocesta (Bosnia and Herzegovina)
Rodovia (Brazil)
Avtomagistrala (Bulgaria, Ukraine)
Freeways in Canada
Expressway (China)
Autocesta (Croatia)
Dálnice (Czech Republic)
Autostrada (Egypt, Poland, Romania)
Autoroute (France)
Autobahns of Germany
Aftokinitodromos (Greece)
Autópálya (Hungary)
National Highways and Expressways (India)
Motorway (Ireland)
List of highways in Israel
Autostrade of Italy (Italy)
Kōsokudōro (Japan)




Lebuhraya (Malaysia)
Avtopat (Rep. Macedonia)
Autoroute (Morocco)
Motorvei (Norway)
Motorways and National Highways of Pakistan
Autoestrada [34] (Portugal)
Autoput (Serbia)
Avtocesta (Slovenia)
Autopista (Spain)
Motorväg (Sweden)
Autobahns of Switzerland
Freeways in Taiwan
Highways in the United Kingdom
Interstate Highway, U.S. Highway, state highway (United States)
Autofamba (Zimbabwe)






References[edit]



^ Diplock LJ, Suffolk County Council v. Mason [1979] AC 705
^ "Queen's highway". Oxford Dictionaries. Oxford University Press. 2013. 
^ Faulds, Ann; Craggs, Trudi & Saunders, John (31 January 2008). Chapter 4: The Definition of a Road?. Scottish Roads Law (2nd ed.). Practical Law Company. Retrieved 21 March 2014. 
^ "23 U.S. Code § 101". 
^ "City of Long Beach v. Payne". Justia Law. Retrieved 2017-02-14. 
^ "highways and byways". The free dictionary. Retrieved 21 April 2010. 
^ "An Autobahn Timeline". About.com. Retrieved 10 April 2010. 
^ "German Myth 8 Hitler and the Autobahn". About.com. 
^ "History of the Interstate Highway System". Federal Highway Administration. Retrieved 10 April 2010. 
^ "Special Roads Act 1949" (PDF). Office of Public Sector Information. 
^ "M1 London: Yorkshire Motorway, M10 and M45". Motorway Archives. Archived from the original on 16 April 2010. Retrieved 10 April 2010. 
^ Small, Kenneth A. & Gomez-Ibañez, José A. (1998). Road Pricing for Congestion Management: The Transition from Theory to Policy. The University of California Transportation Center, University of California at Berkeley. p. 213. 
^ "Roads and Innovation". doi:10.1162/rest_a_00619#.v1we4ualsfq. 
^ Shadely, John (1973). Acoustical analysis of the New Jersey Turnpike widening project between Raritan and East Brunswick. Bolt Beranek and Newman. 
^ Hogan, Michael (17–18 April 1973). Highway Noise. 3rd Environmental Pollution Symposium, sponsored by AIAA, ACS, ASME, SAE. Menlo Park, CA: SRI International. 
^ Zimmerman, Jess. "These beautiful bridges are just for animals". 
^ "World report on road traffic injury prevention". World Health Organisation. Retrieved 14 April 2010. 
^ "UN raises child accidents alarm". BBC News. 10 December 2008. 
^ "National Motor Vehicle Crash Causation Survey" (PDF). U.S. Department of Transportation. Retrieved 2014-08-07. 
^ Graham-Harrison, Emma (16 November 2007). "China says needs extra million km of roads by 2020". Reuters. 
^ "15-3 Length of Transport Routes at Year-end by Region". China National Bureau of Statististcs. 2007. Retrieved 12 January 2013. 
^ "China Has 3.48 Mln Km of Highways in Operation". Chinagate.cn. 6 March 2007. Retrieved 12 January 2013. 
^ "National highway target set for year". Chinadaily.com.cn. 7 January 2008. Retrieved 12 January 2013. 
^ "China Road Construction Report, 2007–2008". Okokok.com.cn. 22 December 2008. Retrieved 12 January 2013. 
^ Staff (10 February 2011). "China Expressway System to Exceed US Interstates". New Geography. Retrieved 21 March 2014. 
^ "中国高速公路总里程达8.5万公里 今年新增1.1万 – 沈阳广播电视台官方网站 – 沈阳电视台 – 资讯潮流 趣味生活 尽在沈视网！". Csytv.com. Archived from the original on 2 February 2013. Retrieved 12 January 2013. 
^ "More rural roads planned this year". Chinadaily.com.cn. 16 January 2009. Retrieved 12 January 2013. 
^ CBC Archives (6 August 2002). "Trans-Canada Highway: Bridging the Distance". CBC News. Retrieved 20 December 2006. 
^ Central Intelligence Agency. "Transportation: Roadways". CIA World Factbook. 
^ Ministry of Transportation (Ontario) (6 August 2002). "Ontario government investing $401 million to upgrade Highway 401". Archived from the original on 2007-09-14. Retrieved 20 December 2006. 
^ Gray, Brian (10 April 2004). "GTA Economy Dinged by Every Crash on the 401: North America's Busiest Freeway". Toronto Sun. Retrieved 18 March 2007 – via Urban Planet. The 'phenomenal' number of vehicles on Hwy. 401 as it cuts through Toronto makes it the busiest freeway in North America... 
^ "List of World record highways". Inautonews.com. Retrieved 21 March 2014. 
^ Schmidt, Steve (28 March 2007). "Four new southbound lanes at I-5/805 merge set to open". San Diego Union-Tribune. Archived from the original on 18 July 2011. 
^ Notable for the introduction of the world's first electronic toll collection system, the Via Verde.



External links[edit]



Look up highway in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.





Wikiquote has quotations related to: Highway





Wikimedia Commons has media related to Highways.



Full list of Euroroutes with distances
The Greenroads Rating System
Legal opinion, Kansas, U.S.A.
Proposed Trans-Global Highway
Euroroutes with distances
U.S. Highways: From US 1 to (US 830)
Ontario Super Highway Program (June 19, 2011)
Video of Highway 401 through Greater Toronto







v
t
e


Streets and roadways



Types of road




Limited-access



Freeway / Motorway
Dual carriageway / Divided highway / Expressway
Elevated highway





By country



Brazil
China
Croatia
Czech Republic
Germany
Greece
Hong Kong
India
Ireland
Italy
Pakistan
Portugal
Spain
United Kingdom
United States





Main roads



Arterial road
Collector road
County highway
Express-collector setup
Farm-to-market road
Highway
Link road
Two-lane expressway
2+1 road
2+2 road
Parkway
Super two
Trunk road
Highway systems by country





Local roads



Alley
Backroad
Bicycle boulevard
Boulevard
Country lane
Dead end
Driveway
Frontage road
Green lane
Main street
Primitive road
Road
Side road
Single carriageway
Single-track road
Street
Sunken lane





Other terms



Channelization
Concurrency
Detour
Hierarchy of roads
Private highway
Route number

Special route
Business route


Street hierarchy
Toll road








Road junctions





Interchanges
(grade-separated)




Cloverleaf
Diamond
Free-flow
Directional T
Diverging diamond
Parclo
Raindrop
Roundabout
Single-point urban (SPUI)
Stack
Three-level diamond
Trumpet






Intersections
(at-grade)




3-way junction
Bowtie
Box junction
Continuous flow
Hook turn
Jughandle
Michigan left
Offset T-intersection
Protected intersection
Quadrant roadway
Right-in/right-out (RIRO)
Roundabout
Seagull intersection
Split intersection
Superstreet
Texas U-turn
Traffic circle
Turnaround








Surfaces



Asphalt concrete
Bioasphalt
Brick
Chipseal
Cobblestone
Concrete

Reinforced concrete


Corduroy
Crocodile cracking
Crushed stone
Diamond grinding of pavement
Dirt
Full depth recycling
Glassphalt
Gravel
Ice
Macadam
Pavement milling
Permeable
Plank
Rubberized asphalt
Sealcoat
Sett
Stamped asphalt
Tarmac
Texture





Road hazards



Aquaplaning
Black ice
Bleeding
Crosswind
Dead Man's Curve
Expansion joint
Fog
Ford
Hairpin turn
Level crossing
Manhole cover
Oil spill
Oversize load
Pothole
Road debris
Road slipperiness
Road train
Roadkill
Rockfall
Rut
Speed bump
Storm drain
Washboarding
Washout
Whiteout





Space and time allocation



Barrier transfer machine
Bicycle lane
Climbing lane
Complete streets
Contraflow lane
Contraflow lane reversal
High-occupancy toll lane
High-occupancy vehicle lane
Lane
Living street
Managed lane
Median / Central reservation
Motorcycle lane
Passing lane
Pedestrian crossing
Pedestrian zone
Refuge island
Reversible lane
Road diet
Road verge
Runaway truck ramp
Shared space
Sidewalk / Pavement
Shoulder
Street running railway
Traffic calming
Traffic directionality
Traffic island
Traffic lanes
Traffic signal preemption
Unused highway
Wide outside lane
Woonerf





Demarcation



Bollard
Botts' dots
Cable barrier
Cat's eye (road)
Concrete step barrier
Constant-slope barrier
Curb
F-Shape barrier
Guard rail
Jersey barrier
Kassel kerb
Noise barrier
Raised pavement marker
Road surface marking
Rumble strip
Traffic barrier
Traffic cone





Structures



Bridge
Causeway
Overpass / Flyover
Underpass / Tunnel








Glossary of road transport terms
Road types by features











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Highway&oldid=818373514"					Categories: HighwaysRoad infrastructureTypes of roadsHidden categories: Use dmy dates from March 2014All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from April 2010Wikipedia articles needing clarification from July 2010Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2005All articles containing potentially dated statementsArticles with unsourced statements from August 2010Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2006Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2008Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2007Articles needing additional references from December 2012All articles needing additional references