This article is about the language historically known as Hindustani, Hindi or Urdu. For Modern Standard Hindi, see Hindi. For Modern Standard Urdu, see Urdu.


Hindustani


Hindi-Urdu





हिन्दुस्तानी  
  ہندوستانی






The word Hindustani in Devanagari script and Nastaliq script



Native to
Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Delhi, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand[1]


Ethnicity
Hindavi people



Native speakers

329 million (2001)[2]
L2 speakers: 215 million (1999)[2]



Language family


Indo-European

Indo-Iranian

Indo-Aryan

Central Zone (Hindi)

Western Hindi

Hindustani














Standard forms


Standard Hindi
Standard Urdu



Dialects


Khariboli
Urdu dialects





Writing system

Devanagari (Hindi alphabet)
Nastaliq (Urdu alphabet)
Braille (Hindi Braille and Pakistani Urdu Braille)
Kaithi (historical)



Signed forms

Indian Signing System (ISS)[3]


Official status



Official language in

 India
(as Hindi, Urdu)
 Pakistan
(as Urdu)
 Fiji[4]
(as Fiji Hindi)


Regulated by
Central Hindi Directorate (Hindi, India);[5]
National Language Promotion Department (Urdu, Pakistan);
National Council for Promotion of Urdu Language (Urdu, India)[6]


Language codes


ISO 639-1
hi – Hindi
ur – Urdu


ISO 639-2
hin – Hindi
urd – Urdu


ISO 639-3
Either:
hin – Hindi
urd – Urdu


Glottolog
hind1270[7]


Linguasphere
59-AAF-qa to -qf



Areas (red) where Hindustani (Khariboli/Kauravi) is the native language



This article contains IPA phonetic symbols. Without proper rendering support, you may see question marks, boxes, or other symbols instead of Unicode characters. For an introductory guide on IPA symbols, see Help:IPA.





Hindi edition of Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia





Urdu edition of Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia


Hindustani (Hindi: हिन्दुस्तानी,[a] Urdu: ہندوستانی‎,[b] [ˌɦɪnd̪ʊsˈt̪aːniː], lit. 'of Hindustan'[8]), historically also known as Hindavi, Dehlavi and Rekhta, is the lingua franca of North India and Pakistan.[9][10] It is an Indo-Aryan language, deriving its base primarily from the Khariboli dialect of Delhi. The language incorporates a large amount of vocabulary from Sanskrit, Persian and Arabic.[11][12] It is a pluricentric language, with two official forms, Modern Standard Hindi and Modern Standard Urdu,[13] which are its standardised registers, and which may be called Hindustani or Hindi-Urdu when taken together.[14] The colloquial registers are mostly indistinguishable, and even though the official standards are nearly identical in grammar, they differ in literary conventions and in academic and technical vocabulary, with Urdu adopting stronger Persian and Arabic influences, and Hindi relying more heavily on Sanskrit.[15][16] Before the Partition of the British Indian Empire, the terms Hindustani, Urdu, and Hindi were synonymous; all covered what would be mostly called Urdu and Hindi today.[17] The term Hindustani is still used for the colloquial language and the lingua franca of North India and Pakistan, for example for the language of Bollywood films, as well as for several quite different varieties of Hindi spoken outside the Indian Subcontinent, such as Fiji Hindi of Fiji and the Caribbean Hindustani of Trinidad and Tobago, Guyana, Suriname, and the rest of the Caribbean. Hindustani is also spoken by a small number of people in Mauritius and South Africa.[citation needed]



Contents


1 History
2 Registers

2.1 Modern Standard Hindi
2.2 Modern Standard Urdu
2.3 Bazaar Hindustani


3 Names
4 Literature
5 Official status
6 Hindustani outside South Asia
7 Phonology
8 Grammar
9 Vocabulary
10 Writing system
11 Sample text

11.1 Formal Hindi
11.2 Formal Urdu


12 Hindustani and Bollywood
13 Urdu films and Lollywood
14 See also
15 Notes
16 References
17 Bibliography
18 External links



History[edit]
Main article: History of Hindustani
Early forms of present-day Hindustani developed from the Middle Indo-Aryan apabhramsha vernaculars of present-day North India in the 7th–13th centuries.[18] Amir Khusro, who lived in the 13th century CE during the Delhi Sultanate period in North India, used these forms (which was the lingua franca of the period) in his writings and referred to it as Hindavi.[18] The Delhi Sultanate, which comprised several Turkic and Afghan dynasties that ruled from Delhi,[19] was succeeded by the Mughal Empire in 1526.
Although the Mughals were of Timurid (Gurkānī) Turko-Mongol descent,[20] they were Persianised, and Persian had gradually become the state language of the Mughal empire after Babur,[21][22][23][24] a continuation since the introduction of Persian by Central Asian Turkic rulers in the Indian Subcontinent,[25] and the patronisation of it by the earlier Turko-Afghan Delhi Sultanate. The basis in general for the introduction of Persian language into the subcontinent was set, from its earliest days, by various Persianised Central Asian Turkic and Afghan dynasties.[26]
In the 18th century, towards the end of the Mughal period, with the fragmentation of the empire and the elite system, a variant of Khariboli, one of the successors of apabhramsha vernaculars at Delhi, and nearby cities, came to gradually replace Persian as the lingua franca among the educated elite upper class particularly in northern India, though Persian still retained much of its pre-eminence for a short period. The term Hindustani (literally "of Hindustan") was the name given to that variant of Khariboli.
For socio-political reasons, though essentially the variant of Khariboli with Persian vocabulary, the emerging prestige dialect became also known as Zabān-e Urdū-e Mualla "language of the court" or Zabān-e Urdū زبان اردو‎, ज़बान-ए उर्दू, "language of the camp" in Persian, derived from Turkic Ordū "camp", cognate with English horde; due to its origin as the common speech of the Mughal army). The more highly Persianised version later established as a language of the court was called Rekhta, or "mixed".
As an emerging common dialect, Hindustani absorbed large numbers of Persian, Arabic, and Turkic words, and as Mughal conquests grew it spread as a lingua franca across much of northern India. Written in the Perso-Arabic Script or Devanagari script,[27] it remained the primary lingua franca of northern India for the next four centuries (although it varied significantly in vocabulary depending on the local language) and achieved the status of a literary language, alongside Persian, in Muslim courts. Its development was centred on the poets of the Mughal courts of cities in Uttar Pradesh such as Delhi, Lucknow, and Agra.
John Fletcher Hurst in his book published in 1891 mentioned that the Hindustani or Camp language or Language of the Camps of Moughal courts at Delhi was not regarded by philologists as distinct language but only as a dialect of Hindi with admixture of Persian. He continued: "But it has all the magnitude and importance of separate language. It is linguistic result of Muslim rule of eleventh & twelfth centuries and is spoken (except in rural Bengal ) by many Hindus in North India and by Musalman population in all parts of India". Next to English it was the official language of British Indian Empire, was commonly written in Arabic or Persian characters, and was spoken by approximately 100,000,000 people.[28]
When the British colonised the Indian subcontinent from the late 18th through to the late 19th century, they used the words 'Hindustani', 'Hindi' and 'Urdu' interchangeably. They developed it as the language of administration of British India,[29] further preparing it to be the official language of modern India and Pakistan. However, with independence, use of the word 'Hindustani' declined, being largely replaced by 'Hindi' and 'Urdu', or 'Hindi-Urdu' when either of those was too specific. More recently, the word 'Hindustani' has been used for the colloquial language of Bollywood films, which are popular in both India and Pakistan and which cannot be unambiguously identified as either Hindi or Urdu.
Registers[edit]
See also: Hindi–Urdu controversy and Register (sociolinguistics)
Although, at the spoken level, Hindi and Urdu are considered registers of a single language, they differ vastly in literary and formal vocabulary; where literary Hindi draws heavily on Sanskrit and to a lesser extent Prakrit, literary Urdu draws heavily on Persian and Arabic. The grammar and base vocabulary (most pronouns, verbs, adpositions, etc.) of both Hindi and Urdu, however, are the same and derive from a Prakritic base, and both have a Persian/Arabic influence.
The standardised registers Hindi and Urdu are collectively known as Hindi-Urdu. Hindustani is perhaps the lingua franca of the north and west of the Indian subcontinent, though it is understood fairly well in other regions also, especially in the urban areas. A common vernacular sharing characteristics with Sanskritised Hindi, regional Hindi and Urdu, Hindustani is more commonly used as a vernacular than highly Sanskritised Hindi or highly Arabicised/Persianised Urdu.
This can be seen in the popular culture of Bollywood or, more generally, the vernacular of North Indians and Pakistanis, which generally employs a lexicon common to both Hindi and Urdu speakers. Minor subtleties in region will also affect the 'brand' of Hindustani, sometimes pushing the Hindustani closer to Urdu or to Hindi. One might reasonably assume that the Hindustani spoken in Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh (known for its usage of Urdu) and Varanasi (a holy city for Hindus and thus using highly Sanskritised Hindi) is somewhat different.
Modern Standard Hindi[edit]




Rigveda manuscript in Devanagari (early 19th century)


Main article: Hindi
Standard Hindi, one of the official languages of India, is based on the Khariboli dialect of the Delhi region and differs from Urdu in that it is usually written in the indigenous Devanagari script of India and exhibits less Persian and Arabic influence than Urdu. Many scholars today employ a Sanskritised form of Hindi developed primarily in Varanasi, the Hindu holy city, which is based on the Eastern Hindi dialect of that region and thus a separate language from official Standard Hindi.[citation needed] It has a literature of 500 years, with prose, poetry, religion & philosophy, under the Bahmani Kings and later on Khutab Shahi Adil Shahi etc. It is a living language, still prevalent all over the Deccan Plateau. Note that the term Hindustani has generally fallen out of common usage in modern India, except to refer to "Indian" as a nationality[30] and a style of Indian classical music prevalent in northern India. The term used to refer to it is Hindi or Urdu, depending on the religion of the speaker, and regardless of the mix of Persian or Sanskrit words used by the speaker. One could conceive of a wide spectrum of dialects and registers, with the highly Persianised Urdu at one end of the spectrum and a heavily Sanskrit-based dialect, spoken in the region around Varanasi, at the other end of the spectrum. In common usage in India, the term Hindi includes all these dialects except those at the Urdu end of the spectrum. Thus, the different meanings of the word Hindi include, among others:

standardised Hindi as taught in schools throughout India (except some states such as Tamil Nadu),
formal or official Hindi advocated by Purushottam Das Tandon and as instituted by the post-independence Indian government, heavily influenced by Sanskrit,
the vernacular dialects of Hindustani as spoken throughout India,
the neutralised form of Hindustani used in popular television and films, or
the more formal neutralised form of Hindustani used in broadcast and print news reports.

Modern Standard Urdu[edit]




The phrase Zabān-e Urdu-e Mo'alla written in Nasta'liq calligraphy


Main article: Urdu
Urdu is the national language of Pakistan and an officially recognised regional language of India. Urdu is the official language of all Pakistani provinces and is taught in all schools as a compulsory subject up to the 12th grade. It is also an official language in the Indian states of Jammu and Kashmir, National Capital Territory of Delhi, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Telangana that have significant Muslim populations.
Bazaar Hindustani[edit]
Main article: Hindi dialects
In a specific sense, Hindustani may be used to refer to the dialects and varieties used in common speech, in contrast with the standardised Hindi and Urdu. This meaning is reflected in the use of the term bazaar Hindustani, in other words, the "language of the street or the marketplace", as opposed to the perceived refinement of formal Hindi, Urdu, or even Sanskrit. Thus, the Webster's New World Dictionary defines the term Hindustani as the principal dialect of Hindi/Urdu, used as a trade language throughout north India and Pakistan.
Names[edit]
Amir Khusro ca. 1300 referred to this language of his writings as Dahlavi ('of Delhi') or Hindavi (हिन्दवी, ہندوی‬ 'of Hindustan'). During this period, Hindustani was used by Sufis in promulgating their message across the Indian subcontinent.[31] After the advent of the Mughals in the subcontinent, Hindustani acquired more Persian loanwords. Rekhta ('mixture') and Hindi (of 'Hindustan')[27] became popular names for the same language until the 18th century.[32] The name Urdu appeared around 1780.[32] During the British Raj, the term Hindustani was used by British officials.[32] In 1796, John Borthwick Gilchrist published a "A Grammar of the Hindoostanee Language".[32][33] Upon partition, India and Pakistan established national standards that they called Hindi and Urdu, respectively, and attempted to make distinct, with the result that Hindustani commonly, but mistakenly, came to be seen as a mixture of Hindi and Urdu.
Grierson, in his highly influential Linguistic Survey of India, proposed that the names Hindustani, Urdu, and Hindi be separated in use for different varieties of the Hindustani language, rather than as the overlapping synonyms they frequently were:

We may now define the three main varieties of Hindōstānī as follows:—Hindōstānī is primarily the language of the Upper Gangetic Doab, and is also the lingua franca of India, capable of being written in both Persian and Dēva-nāgarī characters, and without purism, avoiding alike the excessive use of either Persian or Sanskrit words when employed for literature. The name 'Urdū' can then be confined to that special variety of Hindōstānī in which Persian words are of frequent occurrence, and which hence can only be written in the Persian character, and, similarly, 'Hindī' can be confined to the form of Hindōstānī in which Sanskrit words abound, and which hence can only be written in the Dēva-nāgarī character.[34]

Literature[edit]
Main articles: Hindi literature and Urdu literature
Official status[edit]




Hindustani, in its standardised registers, is one of the official languages of both India (Hindi) and Pakistan (Urdu).


Hindi, a major standardized register of Hindustani, is declared by the Constitution of India as the "official language (राजभाषा, rājabhāshā) of the Union" (Art. 343(1)) (In this context, "Union" means the Federal Government and not the entire country – India has 23 official languages). At the same time, however, the definitive text of Federal laws is officially the English text and proceedings in the higher appellate courts must be conducted in English. At the state level, Hindi is one of the official languages in 9 of the 29 Indian states and three Union Territories (namely Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Jharkhand, Uttarakhand, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Chhattisgarh, Himachal Pradesh, and Haryana and UTs are Delhi, Chandigarh, Andaman and Nicobar Islands). In the remaining states Hindi is not an official language. In the state of Tamil Nadu studying Hindi is not compulsory in the state curriculum. However an option to take the same as second or third language does exist. In many other states, studying Hindi is usually compulsory in the school curriculum as a third language (the first two languages being the state's official language and English), though the intensiveness of Hindi in the curriculum varies.[35]
Urdu, also a major standardized register of Hindustani, is also one of the languages recognized by the Indian Constitution and is an official language of the Indian states of Telangana, Bihar, Delhi, Jammu and Kashmir, and Uttar Pradesh. Although the government school system in most other states emphasises Modern Standard Hindi, at universities in cities such as Lucknow, Aligarh and Hyderabad, Urdu is spoken and learnt, and Saaf Urdu is treated with just as much respect as Shuddha Hindi.
Urdu is also the national language of Pakistan, where it shares official language status with English. Although English is spoken by many, Punjabi is the native language of the majority of the population, Urdu is the lingua franca.
Hindustani was the official language of the British Indian Empire and was synonymous with both Hindi and Urdu.[29][36][37] After India's independence in 1947, the Sub-Committee on Fundamental Rights recommended that the official language of India be Hindustani:

"Hindustani, written either in Devanagari or the Perso-Arabic script at the option of the citizen, shall, as the national language, be the first official language of the Union."[38]

However, this recommendation was not adopted by the Constituent Assembly.
Hindustani outside South Asia[edit]
Besides being the lingua franca of North India and Pakistan in South Asia, Hindustani is also spoken by many in the South Asian diaspora and their descendants around the world, including North America (in Canada, for example, Hindustani is one of the fastest growing languages[39]) and the Middle East.
Hindustani was also one of the languages that was spoken widely in Burma during British rule. Many older Burmese, particularly the Anglo-Indians and Anglo-Burmese of the country, still know it, although it has had no official status in the country since military rule.
Hindustani is also spoken in the countries of the Gulf Cooperation Council, where migrant labour workers from various countries live and work for several years.
Phonology[edit]
Main article: Hindustani phonology
Grammar[edit]
Main article: Hindustani grammar
Vocabulary[edit]
See also: Hindustani etymology
Hindustani contains around 5,500 words of Persian and Arabic origin.[40]
Writing system[edit]
Main articles: Hindi-Urdu orthography, Hindi Braille, and Urdu Braille
Historically, Hindustani was written in the Kaithi, Devanagari, and Urdu alphabets.[27] Kaithi and Devanagari are two of the Brahmic scripts native to India, whereas Urdu is a derivation of the Perso-Arabic script Nastaliq which is preferred calligraphic style for Urdu.
Today, Hindustani continues to be written in the Urdu alphabet, and this is nearly exclusive in Pakistan. In India, the Hindi register is officially written in Devanagari (a relative of Kaithi), and Urdu in Perso-Arabic script Nastaliq, to the extent that these standards are partly defined by their script.
However, in popular publications in India, Urdu is also written in Devanagari script, with slight variations to establish a Devanagari Urdu alphabet alongside the Devanagari Hindi alphabet.

Devanagari

अ
आ
इ
ई
उ
ऊ
ए
ऐ
ओ
औ


ə
aː
ɪ
iː
ʊ
uː
eː
ɛː
oː
ɔː


क
क़
ख
ख़
ग
ग़
घ
ङ


k
q
kʰ
x
ɡ
ɣ
ɡʱ
ŋ


च
छ
ज
ज़
झ
झ़
ञ


t͡ʃ
t͡ʃʰ
d͡ʒ
z
d͡ʒʱ
ʒ
ɲ


ट
ठ
ड
ड़
ढ
ढ़
ण


ʈ
ʈʰ
ɖ
ɽ
ɖʱ
ɽʱ
ɳ


त
थ
द
ध
न


t̪
t̪ʰ
d̪
d̪ʱ
n


प
फ
फ़
ब
भ
म


p
pʰ
f
b
bʱ
m


य
र
ल
व



j
ɾ
l
ʋ



श
ष
स
ह



ʃ
ʂ
s
ɦ




Urdu alphabet

Letter
Name of letter
Transcription
IPA


ا‬
alif
–
–


ب‬
be
b
/b/


پ‬
pe
p
/p/


ت‬
te
t
/t̪/


ٹ‬
ṭe
ṭ
/ʈ/


ث‬
se
s
/s/


ج‬
jīm
j
/d͡ʒ/


چ‬
che
ch
/t͡ʃ/


ح‬
baṛī he
h
/h ~ ɦ/


خ‬
khe
kh
/x/


د‬
dāl
d
/d̪/


ڈ‬
ḍāl
ḍ
/ɖ/


ذ‬
zāl
dh
/z/


ر‬
re
r
/r ~ ɾ/


ڑ‬
ṛe
ṛ
/ɽ/


ز‬
ze
z
/z/


ژ‬
zhe
zh
/ʒ/


س‬
sīn
s
/s/


ش‬
shīn
sh
/ʃ/


ص‬
su'ād
ṣ
/s/


ض‬
zu'ād
z̤
/z/


ط‬
to'e
t
/t/


ظ‬
zo'e
ẓ
/z/


ع‬
‘ain
'
–


غ‬
ghain
gh
/ɣ/


ف‬
fe
f
/f/


ق‬
qāf
q
/q/


ک‬
kāf
k
/k/


گ‬
gāf
g
/ɡ/


ل‬
lām
l
/l/


م‬
mīm
m
/m/


ن‬
nūn
n
/n/


و‬
vā'o
v, o, or ū
/ʋ/, /oː/, /ɔ/ or /uː/


ہ, ﮩ, ﮨ‬
choṭī he
h
/h ~ ɦ/


ھ‬
do chashmī he
h
/ʰ/ or /ʱ/


ء‬
hamza
'
/ʔ/


ی‬
ye
y, i
/j/ or /iː/


ے‬
baṛī ye
ai or e
/ɛː/, or /eː/


Because of anglicisation in South Asia and the international use of the Latin script, Hindustani is occasionally written in the Latin script. This adaptation is called Roman Urdu or Romanised Hindi, depending upon the register used. Because the Bollywood film industry is a major proponent of the Latin script, the use of Latin script to write in Hindi and Urdu is growing amongst younger Internet users.[citation needed] Since Urdu and Hindi are mutually intelligible when spoken, Romanised Hindi and Roman Urdu (unlike Devanagari Hindi and Urdu in the Urdu alphabet) are mutually intelligible as well.
Sample text[edit]
Following is a sample text, Article 1 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, in the two official registers of Hindustani, Hindi and Urdu. Because this is a formal legal text, differences in formal vocabulary are maximised.
Formal Hindi[edit]

अनुच्छेद १—सभी मनुष्यों को गौरव और अधिकारों के विषय में जन्मजात स्वतन्त्रता प्राप्त हैं। उन्हें बुद्धि और अन्तरात्मा की देन प्राप्त है और परस्पर उन्हें भाईचारे के भाव से बर्ताव करना चाहिये।

Nastaliq transcription:

انچھید ١ : سبھی منشیوں کو گورو اور ادھکاروں کے وشے میں جنمجات سؤتنترتا پراپت ہیں۔ انہیں بدھی اور انتراتما کی دین پراپت ہے اور پرسپر انہیں بھائی چارے کے بھاؤ سے برتاؤ کرنا چاہئے۔‬

Transliteration (IAST):

Anucched 1: Sabhī manushyoṇ ko gaurav aur adhikāroṇ ke vishay meṇ janm'jāt svatantratā prāpt haiṇ. Unheṇ buddhi aur antarātmā kī den prāpt hai aur paraspar unheṇ bhāīchāre ke bhāv se bartāv karnā chāhiye.

Transcription (IPA):

ənʊtʃʰːed̪ ek səbʱi mənʊʂjõ ko ɡɔɾəʋ ɔr əd̪ʱɪkaɾõ ke viʂaj mẽ dʒənmdʒat̪ sʋət̪ənt̪ɾət̪a pɾapt̪ hɛ̃ ʊnʱẽ bʊd̪ʱːɪ ɔɾ ənt̪əɾat̪ma kiː d̪en pɾapt̪ hɛ ɔɾ pəɾəspəɾ ʊnʱẽ bʱaitʃaɾe keː bʱaʋ se bəɾt̪aʋ kəɾna tʃahɪe

Gloss (word-to-word):

Article 1—All human-beings to dignity and rights' matter in from-birth freedom acquired is. Them to reason and conscience's endowment acquired is and always them to brotherhood's spirit with behaviour to do should.

Translation (grammatical):

Article 1—All human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights. They are endowed with reason and conscience and should act towards one another in a spirit of brotherhood.

Formal Urdu[edit]

:دفعہ 1: تمام انسان آزاد اور حقوق و عزت کے اعتبار سے برابر پیدا ہوئے ہیں۔ انہیں ضمیر اور عقل ودیعت ہوئی ہیں۔ اسلئے انہیں ایک دوسرے کے ساتھ بھائی چارے کا سلوک کرنا چاہئے۔‬

Devanagari transcription:

दफ़ा १: तमाम इनसान आज़ाद और हुक़ूक़ ओ इज़्ज़त के ऐतबार से बराबर पैदा हुए हैं। इन्हें ज़मीर और अक़्ल वदीयत हुई हैं। इसलिए इन्हें एक दूसरे के साथ भाई चारे का सुलूक करना चाहीए।

Transliteration (ALA-LC):

Dafʻah 1: Tamām insān āzād aur ḥuqūq o ʻizzat ke iʻtibār se barābar paidā hu’e haiṇ. Unheṇ zamīr aur ʻaql wadīʻat hu’ī he. Isli’e unheṇ ek dūsre ke sāth bhā’ī chāre kā sulūk karnā chāhi’e.

Transcription (IPA):

d̪əfa ek t̪əmam ɪnsan azad̪ ɔɾ hʊquq o izːət̪ ke ɛt̪əbaɾ se bəɾabəɾ pɛd̪a hʊe hɛ̃ ʊnʱẽ zəmiɾ ɔɾ əql ʋədiət̪ hʊi hɛ̃ ɪslɪe ʊnʱẽ ek d̪usɾe ke sat̪ʰ bʱai tʃaɾe ka sʊluk kəɾna tʃahɪe

Gloss (word-to-word):

Article 1: All humans free[,] and rights and dignity's consideration from equal born are. To them conscience and intellect endowed is. Therefore, they one another's with brotherhood's treatment do must.

Translation (grammatical):

Article 1—All human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights. They are endowed with reason and conscience. Therefore, they should act towards one another in a spirit of brotherhood.

Hindustani and Bollywood[edit]
The predominant Indian film industry Bollywood, located in Mumbai, Maharashtra uses dialects of Khariboli, Bambaiya Hindi, Urdu,[41] Awadhi, Rajasthani, Bhojpuri, and Braj Bhasha, along with the language of Punjabi and with the liberal use of English or Hinglish for the dialogue and soundtrack lyrics.
Movie titles are often screened in three scripts: Latin, Devanagari and occasionally Perso-Arabic. The use of Urdu or Hindi in films depends on the film's context: historical films set in the Delhi Sultanate or Mughal Empire are almost entirely in Urdu, whereas films based on Hindu mythology make heavy use of Hindi with Sanskrit vocabulary.
Urdu films and Lollywood[edit]
The Pakistani film industry Lollywood, centred historically in Lahore, has seen a rise in Punjabi movies lately. Urdu languages have seen a surge throughout Pakistan specifically Karachi, with new age films, and to a lesser extent in Islamabad and Lahore.
See also[edit]


India portal
Pakistan portal
Languages portal



Languages of India
Languages of Pakistan
List of Hindi authors
List of Urdu writers
Uddin and Begum Hindustani Romanisation

Notes[edit]



^ Hindustānī
^ Hindūstānī



References[edit]


^ "Report of the Commissioner for linguistic minorities: 50th report (July 2012 to June 2013)" (PDF). Commissioner for Linguistic Minorities, Ministry of Minority Affairs, Government of India. Archived from the original (PDF) on 8 July 2016. Retrieved 27 November 2016. 
^ a b Standard Hindi L1: 260.1 million (2001), L2: 120.5 million (1999). Urdu L1: 68.6 million (2001–2014), L2: 94 million (1999): Ethnologue 19. Hindi at Ethnologue (19th ed., 2016). Urdu at Ethnologue (19th ed., 2016).
^ Takkar, Gaurav. "Short Term Programmes". punarbhava.in. 
^ "Fiji Constitution". 
^ The Central Hindi Directorate regulates the use of Devanagari script and Hindi spelling in India. Source: Central Hindi Directorate: Introduction Archived 15 April 2010 at the Wayback Machine.
^ "National Council for Promotion of Urdu Language". www.urducouncil.nic.in. 
^ Hammarström, Harald; Forkel, Robert; Haspelmath, Martin, eds. (2017). "Hindustani". Glottolog 3.0. Jena, Germany: Max Planck Institute for the Science of Human History. 
^ "About Hindi-Urdu". North Carolina State University. Archived from the original on 15 August 2009. Retrieved 9 August 2009. 
^ Mohammad Tahsin Siddiqi (1994), Hindustani-English code-mixing in modern literary texts, University of Wisconsin, ... Hindustani is the lingua franca of both India and Pakistan ... 
^ Lydia Mihelič Pulsipher; Alex Pulsipher; Holly M. Hapke (2005), World Regional Geography: Global Patterns, Local Lives, Macmillan, ISBN 0-7167-1904-5, ... By the time of British colonialism, Hindustani was the lingua franca of all of northern India and what is today Pakistan ... 
^ Michael Huxley (editor) (1935), The Geographical magazine, Volume 2, Geographical Press, ... For new terms it can draw at will upon the Persian, Arabic, Turkish and Sanskrit dictionaries ... CS1 maint: Extra text: authors list (link)
^ Great Britain, Royal Society of Arts (1948), Journal of the Royal Society of Arts, Volume 97, ... it would be very unwise to restrict it to a vocabulary mainly dependent upon Sanskrit, or mainly dependent upon Persian. If a language is to be strong and virile it must draw on both sources, just as English has drawn on Latin and Teutonic sources ... 
^ Robert E. Nunley; Severin M. Roberts; George W. Wubrick; Daniel L. Roy (1999), The Cultural Landscape an Introduction to Human Geography, Prentice Hall, ISBN 0-13-080180-1, ... Hindustani is the basis for both languages ... 
^ Benjamin W. Fortson. Indo-European Language and Culture An Introduction, Second edition. John Wiley & Sons, 2011. p. 223. ISBN 978-1-4051-8896-8. 
^ Hindi by Yamuna Kachru
^ Students' Britannica: India: Select essays by Dale Hoiberg, Indu Ramchandani page 175
^ "Hindustani B2". Oxford English Dictionary (3rd ed.). Oxford University Press. September 2005.  (Subscription or UK public library membership required.)
^ a b Keith Brown; Sarah Ogilvie (2008), Concise Encyclopedia of Languages of the World, Elsevier, ISBN 0-08-087774-5, ... Apabhramsha seemed to be in a state of transition from Middle Indo-Aryan to the New Indo-Aryan stage. Some elements of Hindustani appear ... the distinct form of the lingua franca Hindustani appears in the writings of Amir Khusro (1253–1325), who called it Hindwi ... 
^ Gat, Azar (2013). Nations: The Long History and Deep Roots of Political Ethnicity and Nationalism. Cambridge University Press. p. 126. ISBN 9781107007857. 
^ Zahir ud-Din Mohammad (2002-09-10), Thackston, Wheeler M., ed., The Baburnama: Memoirs of Babur, Prince and Emperor, Modern Library Classics, ISBN 0-375-76137-3, Note: Gurkānī is the Persianized form of the Mongolian word "kürügän" ("son-in-law"), the title given to the dynasty's founder after his marriage into Genghis Khan's family. 
^ B.F. Manz, "Tīmūr Lang", in Encyclopaedia of Islam, Online Edition, 2006
^ Encyclopædia Britannica, "Timurid Dynasty", Online Academic Edition, 2007. (Quotation:...Turkic dynasty descended from the conqueror Timur (Tamerlane), renowned for its brilliant revival of artistic and intellectual life in Iran and Central Asia....Trading and artistic communities were brought into the capital city of Herat, where a library was founded, and the capital became the centre of a renewed and artistically brilliant Persian culture...)
^ "Timurids". The Columbia Encyclopedia (Sixth ed.). New York City: Columbia University. Archived from the original on 5 December 2006. Retrieved 8 November 2006. 
^ Encyclopædia Britannica article: Consolidation & expansion of the Indo-Timurids, Online Edition, 2007.
^ "South Asian Sufis: Devotion, Deviation, and Destiny". Retrieved 2 January 2015. 
^ Sigfried J. de Laet. History of Humanity: From the seventh to the sixteenth century UNESCO, 1994. ISBN 9231028138 p 734
^ a b c McGregor, Stuart (2003), "The Progress of Hindi, Part 1", Literary cultures in history: reconstructions from South Asia, p. 912, ISBN 978-0-520-22821-4  in Pollock (2003)
^ [1] Indika: the country and the people of India and Ceylon By John Fletcher Hurst (1891) Page 344.
^ a b Writing Systems by Florian Coulmas, page 232
^ http://dsalsrv02.uchicago.edu/cgi-bin/philologic/getobject.pl?c.0:10298.bahri
^ "The Origin and Growth of Urdu Language". Yaser Amri. Retrieved 2007-01-08. 
^ a b c d Faruqi, Shamsur Rahman (2003), "A Long History of Urdu Literarature, Part 1", Literary cultures in history: reconstructions from South Asia, p. 806, ISBN 978-0-520-22821-4  in Pollock (2003).
^ A Grammar of the Hindoostanee Language, Chronicle Press, 1796, retrieved 2007-01-08 
^ Grierson, vol. 9-1, p. 47.
^ Government of India: National Policy on Education Archived 20 June 2006 at the Wayback Machine..
^ "Colonial Knowledge and the Fate of Hindustani". 35. Cambridge University Press: 665–682. JSTOR 179178. 
^ Indian critiques of Gandhi by Harold G. Coward page 218
^ "Hindi, not a national language: Court". 
^ http://www.cbc.ca/news/politics/census-wednesday-language-1.4231213
^ Kuczkiewicz-Fraś, Agnieszka (2008). Perso-Arabic Loanwords in Hindustani. Kraków: Księgarnia Akademicka. p. X. ISBN 978-83-7188-161-9. 
^ "Decoding the Bollywood poster". National Science and Media Museum. 28 February 2013. 


Bibliography[edit]


Asher, R. E. (1994). Hindi. In Asher (Ed.) (pp. 1547–1549).
Asher, R. E. (Ed.). (1994). The Encyclopedia of language and linguistics. Oxford: Pergamon Press. ISBN 0-08-035943-4.
Bailey, Thomas G. (1950). Teach yourself Hindustani. London: English Universities Press.
Chatterji, Suniti K. (1960). Indo-Aryan and Hindi (rev. 2nd ed.). Calcutta: Firma K.L. Mukhopadhyay.
Dua, Hans R. (1992). Hindi-Urdu as a pluricentric language. In M. G. Clyne (Ed.), Pluricentric languages: Differing norms in different nations. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter. ISBN 3-11-012855-1.
Dua, Hans R. (1994a). Hindustani. In Asher (Ed.) (pp. 1554).
Dua, Hans R. (1994b). Urdu. In Asher (Ed.) (pp. 4863–4864).
Rai, Amrit. (1984). A house divided: The origin and development of Hindi-Hindustani. Delhi: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-561643-X.


Further reading


Henry Blochmann (1877). English and Urdu dictionary, romanized (8 ed.). CALCUTTA: Printed at the Baptist mission press for the Calcutta school-book society. p. 215. Retrieved 2011-07-06. the University of Michigan
John Dowson (1908). A grammar of the Urdū or Hindūstānī language (3 ed.). LONDON: K. Paul, Trench, Trübner & Co., ltd. p. 264. Retrieved 2011-07-06. the University of Michigan
John Dowson (1872). A grammar of the Urdū or Hindūstānī language. LONDON: Trübner & Co. p. 264. Retrieved 2011-07-06. Oxford University
John Thompson Platts (1874). A grammar of the Hindūstānī or Urdū language. Volume 6423 of Harvard College Library preservation microfilm program. LONDON: W.H. Allen. p. 399. Retrieved 2011-07-06. Oxford University
John Thompson Platts (1892). A grammar of the Hindūstānī or Urdū language. LONDON: W.H. Allen. p. 399. Retrieved 2011-07-06. the New York Public Library
John Thompson Platts (1884). A dictionary of Urdū, classical Hindī, and English (reprint ed.). LONDON: H. Milford. p. 1259. Retrieved 2011-07-06. Oxford University
Shakespear, John. A Dictionary, Hindustani and English. 3rd ed., much enl. London: Printed for the author by J.L. Cox and Son: Sold by Parbury, Allen, & Co., 1834.
Taylor, Joseph. A dictionary, Hindoostanee and English. Available at Hathi Trust. (A dictionary, Hindoostanee and English / abridged from the quarto edition of Major Joseph Taylor ; as edited by the late W. Hunter ; by William Carmichael Smyth.)


External links[edit]



Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Hindi-Urdu_phrasebook.





Wikisource has the text of the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica article Hindostani.



Hamari Boli (Hindustani)
Khan Academy (Hindi-Urdu): academic lessons taught in Hindi-Urdu
Hindi, Urdu, Hindustani, khaRî bolî
Hindustani FAQ at the Wayback Machine (archived 27 October 2009)
Hindustani as an anxiety between Hindi–Urdu Commitment
Hindi? Urdu? Hindustani? Hindi-Urdu?
Hindi/Urdu-English-Kalasha-Khowar-Nuristani-Pashtu Comparative Word List
GRN Report for Hindustani
Hindustani Poetry
Hindustani online resources
Biggest Hindustani-Indian poetry forum
National Language Authority (Urdu), Pakistan (muqtadera qaumi zaban)
"Language: Urdu and the borrowed words", Dawn.com







v
t
e


Hindi






Grammar
Phonology
Devanagari
Braille
History
Vocabulary
Hindustani





Varieties




Western



Braj Bhasha
Bundeli
Haryanvi
Kannauji
Khari Boli (Registers:
Standard Hindi
Standard Urdu)
Sansi Boli





Eastern



Awadhi
Bagheli
Caribbean Hindi
Chhattisgarhi
Fiji Hindi





Pidgins and Creoles



Bombay Hindi
Haflong Hindi
Hinglish








Language politics



Anti-Hindi agitations of Karnataka
Anti-Hindi agitations of Tamil Nadu
Hindi-Urdu controversy
Punjabi Suba movement





Global organizations



World Hindi Secretariat
World Hindi Conference





Arts



Literature
Awards
Sahitya Akademi Award
Jnanpith Award
Cinema
Music
Writers
Poets












v
t
e


Urdu






History
Alphabet
Grammar
Phonology
Vocabulary
Nastaliq
Braille





Varieties




Dialects



Standard Urdu
Dakhini
Hyderabadi
Rekhta





Forms



Aurangabad Urdu
British Urdu
Roman Urdu








Politics



Urdu movement
Hindi-Urdu controversy





Arts



Awards
Literature
Informatics
Cinema
Poetry
Music
Writers
Poets
Progressive Writers' Movement
Uddin & Begum Romanisation












v
t
e


Hindustani-speaking areas of India




See also: Hindi Belt



Bihar



Araria
Arwal
Aurangabad
Banka
Begusarai
Bhagalpur
Bhojpur
Buxar
Darbhanga
East Champaran
Gaya
Gopalganj
Jamui
Jehanabad
Kaimur
Katihar
Khagaria
Kishanganj
Lakhisarai
Madhepura
Madhubani
Munger
Muzaffarpur
Nalanda
Nawada
Patna
Purnia
Rohtas
Saharsa
Samastipur
Saran
Sheikhpura
Sheohar
Sitamarhi
Siwan
Supaul
Vaishali
West Champaran





Chhattisgarh



Bastar
Bilaspur
Dantewada
Dhamtari
Durg
Janjgir-Champa
Jashpur
Kabirdham
Kanker
Korba
Koriya
Mahasamund
Narayanpur
Raigarh
Raipur
Rajnandgaon
Surguja





Delhi



Central Delhi
East Delhi
New Delhi
North Delhi
North East Delhi
North West Delhi
South Delhi
South West Delhi
West Delhi





Haryana



Ambala
Bhiwani
Faridabad
Fatehabad
Gurgaon
Hisar
Jhajjar
Jind
Kaithal
Karnal
Kurukshetra
Mahendragarh
Mewat
Panchkula
Palwal
Panipat
Rewari
Rohtak
Sirsa
Sonipat
Yamuna Nagar





Himachal Pradesh



Bilaspur
Chamba
Hamirpur
Kangra
Kinnaur
Kullu
Lahul and Spiti
Mandi
Shimla
Sirmaur
Solan
Una





Jharkhand



Bokaro
Chatra
Deoghar
Dhanbad
Dumka
East Singhbhum
Garhwa
Giridih
Godda
Gumla
Hazaribagh
Jamtara
Khunti
Koderma
Latehar
Lohardaga
Pakur
Palamu
Ramgarh
Ranchi
Saraikela Kharsawan
Simdega
Singhbhum
Sahebganj





Madhya Pradesh



Anuppur
Ashoknagar
Balaghat
Barwani
Betul
Bhind
Bhopal
Burhanpur
Chhatarpur
Chhindwara
Damoh
Datia
Dewas
Dhar
Dindori
Guna
Gwalior
Harda
Hoshangabad
Indore
Jabalpur
Jhabua
Katni
Khandwa
Khargone
Mandla
Mandsaur
Morena
Narsinghpur
Neemuch
Panna
Raisen
Rajgarh
Ratlam
Rewa
Sagar
Satna
Sehore
Seoni
Shahdol
Shajapur
Sheopur
Shivpuri
Sidhi
Tikamgarh
Ujjain
Umaria
Vidisha





Rajasthan



Ajmer
Alwar
Banswara
Baran
Barmer
Bhilwara
Bikaner
Bharatpur
Bundi
Chittorgarh
Churu
Dausa
Dholpur
Dungarpur
Ganganagar
Hanumangarh
Jaipur
Jaisalmer
Jalore
Jhalawar
Jhunjhunu
Jodhpur
Karauli
Kota
Nagaur
Pali
Pratapgarh
Rajsamand
Sawai Madhopur
Sikar
Sirohi
Tonk
Udaipur





Uttar Pradesh



Agra
Aligarh
Allahabad
Ambedkar Nagar
Amethi
Amroha
Auraiya
Azamgarh
Badaun
Bagpat
Bahraich
Balarampur
Ballia
Banda
Barabanki
Bareilly
Basti
Bijnor
Bulandshahr
Chandauli
Chitrakoot
Devaria
Etah
Etawah
Faizabad
Farrukhabad
Fatehpur
Firozabad
Ghaziabad
Gonda
Gorakhpur
Gautam Buddha Nagar
Ghazipur
Hamirpur
Hardoi
Hathras
Jalaun
Jaunpur
Jhansi
Kannauj
Kanpur
Kanpur Dehat
Kaushambi
Kushinagar
Khair City
Lakhimpur Kheri
Lalitpur
Lucknow
Maharajganj
Mahoba
Mainpuri
Mathura
Mau
Meerut
Mirzapur
Moradabad
Muzaffarnagar
Pilibhit
Pratapgarh
Raebareli
Rampur
Saharanpur
Sant Kabir Nagar
Sant Ravidas Nagar
Shahjahanpur
Shravasti
Siddharthnagar
Sitapur
Sonbhadra
Sultanpur
Unnao
Varanasi





Uttarakhand



Almora
Bageshwar
Chamoli
Champawat
Dehradun
Haridwar
Nainital
New Tehri
Pauri
Pithoragarh
Rudraprayag
Rudrapur
Uttarkashi












v
t
e


Modern Indo-Aryan languages



Dardic



Dameli
Domaaki
Gawar-Bati
Kalami
Kalash
Kashmiri
Khowar
Kohistani
Mankiyali
Nangalami
Palula
Pashayi
Shina
Shumashti
Torwali
Ushoji





Northern




Eastern



Doteli
Jumli
Nepali
Palpa





Central



Garhwali
Kumaoni





Western



Dogri
Kangri
Mandeali








North-
western




Punjabi



Punjabi

dialects







Lahnda



Hindko
Khetrani
Pothwari
Saraiki





Sindhi



Jadgali
Kutchi
Luwati
Memoni
Sindhi








Western




Gujarati



Aer
Gujarati
Jandavra
Koli
Lisan ud-Dawat
Parkari Koli
Saurashtra
Vaghri





Bhil



Bhili
Gamit
Kalto
Vasavi





Rajasthani



Bagri
Goaria
Gujari
Jaipuri
Malvi
Marwari
Mewari
Dhatki





Others



Domari
Khandeshi
Romani








Central




Western



Braj Bhasha
Bundeli
Haryanvi
Hindustani

Hindi

Bombay Hindi


Urdu

Dakhini
Hyderabadi Urdu
Rekhta




Khari Boli
Kannauji
Sansi





Eastern



Awadhi
Bagheli
Chhattisgarhi
Fiji Hindi





Others



Danwar
Parya








Eastern




Bihari



Angika
Bhojpuri
Caribbean Hindustani
Vajjika
Magahi
Maithili
Majhi
Sadri





Bengali–
Assamese



Assamese
Bengali

dialects


Bishnupriya Manipuri
Chakma
Chittagonian
Goalpariya
Hajong
Kamrupi
Kharia Thar
Kurmukar
Rangpuri
Rohingya
Sylheti
Tanchangya





Odia



Odia
Kosli
Bodo Parja
Kupia
Reli





Halbic



Halbi
Bhatri
Kamar
Mirgan
Nahari





Others



Mal Paharia








Southern




Marathi–Konkani



Konkani
Kukna
Marathi
others..





Insular



Maldivian
Sinhalese








Pidgins/
creoles



Andaman Creole Hindi
Haflong Hindi
Nagamese
Nefamese
Vedda





See also



Old and Middle Indo-Aryan
Indo-Iranian languages
Nuristani languages
Iranian languages












v
t
e


Major languages of South Asia



Main articles



Languages of India

list by number of speakers
scheduled


Languages of Pakistan
Languages of Bangladesh
Languages of Bhutan
Languages of the Maldives
Languages of Nepal
Languages of Sri Lanka





Contemporary
languages




Austronesian



Sri Lankan Creole Malay





Dravidian



Brahui
Jeseri
Kannada
Malayalam
Tamil
Telugu
Tulu





Indo-Aryan



Angika
Assamese
Bhojpuri
Bengali
Chakma
Chittagonian
Dhivehi
Dogri
Gujarati
Hindi
Hindko
Kashmiri
Konkani
Kumaoni
Magahi
Mahal
Maithili
Marathi
Nepali
Odia
Punjabi
Sanskrit
Saraiki
Sindhi
Sinhala
Sylheti
Rajasthani language
Urdu





Iranian



Balochi
Pashto
Wakhi





Isolates



Great Andamanese
Burushaski
Nihali
Kusunda





Mon–Khmer



Khasi
Nicobarese





Munda



Ho
Korku
Mundari
Santali
Sora





Ongan



Önge
Jarawa





Tibeto-Burman



Ao
Bodo
Dzongkha
Garo
Meithei
Mizo
Nepal Bhasa
Sikkimese
Tenyidie
Tibetan
Tripuri





European influence



English

Indian English
Pakistani English
Sri Lankan English


French
Portuguese








Scripts




Historical



Indus (Undeciphered)
Brahmi (Abugida)
Kharosthi





Brahmic



Devanagari
Bengali
Gujarati
Gurmukhī
Malayalam
Kannada
Odia
Ranjana
Sinhala
Tamil
Telugu





European



Latin alphabet





Arabic



Arwi
Nastaʿlīq
Shahmukhi
Arabi Malayalam








Language
activism



Hela Havula
Bengali Language Movement
Sanskrit revival
Pure Tamil movement
Nepal Bhasa movement
Punjabi Language Movement
Urdu movement









Authority control



GND: 4133815-7
NDL: 00563214











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hindustani_language&oldid=818054754"					Categories: Languages attested from the 8th centuryHindustani languageLanguage comparisonIndo-Aryan languagesLanguages of FijiHidden categories: Language articles citing Ethnologue 19Webarchive template wayback linksCS1 maint: Extra text: authors listUse dmy dates from May 2016Use Indian English from May 2013All Wikipedia articles written in Indian EnglishArticles containing Urdu-language textLanguages with ISO 639-2 codeLanguages with ISO 639-1 codeISO language articles citing sources other than EthnologueArticles containing Hindi-language textAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from August 2017Articles containing Persian-language textArticles with unsourced statements from May 2010Articles with unsourced statements from March 2009Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers