For other uses, see Hip hop (disambiguation).


Hip hop


Stylistic origins



Funk
disco
electronic music
dub
rhythm and blues
reggae
dancehall
rock
jazz[1]
toasting
performance poetry
spoken word
signifyin'
the Dozens
griots
scat singing
talking blues





Cultural origins
1970s, the Bronx, New York City


Typical instruments



Rapping
turntables
DJ mixer
drum machine
music sequencer
synthesizer
keyboard





Derivative forms



Electro
breakbeat
oldschool jungle
drum and bass
trip hop
grime
breakbeat hardcore
neo soul
big beat
trap





Subgenres




Alternative hip hop
Baltimore club
bounce
Brick City club
Chicano rap
Christian hip hop
conscious hip hop
crunk
experimental hip hop
freestyle rap
gangsta rap
hardcore hip hop
homo hop
horrorcore
instrumental hip hop
Jerkin'
mafioso rap
Miami bass
Native American hip hop
nerdcore
political hip hop




Fusion genres




Country rap
cumbia rap
emo hip hop
ghettotech
glitch hop
grebo[2]
hip hop soul
hip house
hiplife
hyphy
industrial hip hop
jazz rap
Low Bap
merenrap
neo soul
new jack swing
nu metal
nu metalcore
Nuyorican rap
pop-rap
psychedelic hip hop
ragga
rap metal
rap opera
rap rock
reggaeton
wonky




Regional scenes




Atlanta hip hop
Australian hip hop
British hip hop
Canadian hip hop
Desi hip hop
East Coast hip hop
French hip hop
Japanese hip hop
Kenyan hip hop
Korean hip hop
Midwest hip hop
Romanian hip hop
Southern hip hop
Turkish hip hop
West Coast hip hop




 2018 in hip hop music






Two hip hop DJs creating new music by mixing tracks from multiple record players. Pictured are DJ Hypnotize (left) and Baby Cee (right).






MC Hero performing rhythmic rhyming known as "rapping" in Huntsville, Alabama.


Hip hop music, also called hip-hop[3][4] or rap music,[4][5][6] is a music genre developed in the United States by inner-city African Americans in the 1970s which consists of a stylized rhythmic music that commonly accompanies rapping, a rhythmic and rhyming speech that is chanted.[4] It developed as part of hip hop culture, a subculture defined by four key stylistic elements: MCing/rapping, DJing/scratching with turntables, break dancing, and graffiti writing.[7][8][9] Other elements include sampling beats or bass lines from records (or synthesized beats and sounds), and rhythmic beatboxing. While often used to refer solely to rapping, "hip hop" more properly denotes the practice of the entire subculture.[10][11] The term hip hop music is sometimes used synonymously with the term rap music,[4][12] though rapping is not a required component of hip hop music; the genre may also incorporate other elements of hip hop culture, including DJing, turntablism, scratching, beatboxing, and instrumental tracks.[13][14]
Hip hop as both a musical genre and a culture was formed during the 1970s when block parties became increasingly popular in New York City, particularly among African-American, often Muslim youth residing in the Bronx. However hip-hop music did not get officially recorded for the radio or television to play until 1979, largely due to poverty during hip-hop's birth and lack of acceptance outside ghetto neighborhoods. [15] At block parties DJs played percussive breaks of popular songs using two turntables and a DJ mixer to be able to play breaks from two copies of the same record, alternating from one to the other and extending the "break".[16] Hip hop's early evolution occurred as sampling technology and drum machines became widely available and affordable. Turntablist techniques such as scratching and beatmatching developed along with the breaks and Jamaican toasting, a chanting vocal style, was used over the beats. Rapping developed as a vocal style in which the artist speaks or chants along rhythmically with an instrumental or synthesized beat. Notable artists at this time include DJ Kool Herc, Grandmaster Flash and The Furious Five, Fab Five Freddy, Marley Marl, Afrika Bambaataa, Kool Moe Dee, Kurtis Blow, Doug E. Fresh, Whodini, Warp 9, The Fat Boys, and Spoonie Gee. The Sugarhill Gang's 1979 song "Rapper's Delight" is widely regarded to be the first hip hop record to gain widespread popularity in the mainstream.[17] The 1980s marked the diversification of hip hop as the genre developed more complex styles.[18] Prior to the 1980s, hip hop music was largely confined within the United States. However, during the 1980s, it began to spread to music scenes in dozens of countries, many of which mixed hip hop with local styles to create new subgenres.
New school hip hop was the second wave of hip hop music, originating in 1983–84 with the early records of Run-D.M.C. and LL Cool J. The Golden age hip hop period was an innovative period between the mid-1980s and the early 1990s. Notable artists from this era include the Juice Crew, Public Enemy, Eric B. & Rakim, Boogie Down Productions and KRS-One, EPMD, Slick Rick, Beastie Boys, Kool G Rap, Big Daddy Kane, Ultramagnetic MCs, De La Soul, and A Tribe Called Quest. Gangsta rap is a subgenre of hip hop that often focuses on the violent lifestyles and impoverished conditions of inner-city African-American youth. Schoolly D, N.W.A, Ice-T, Ice Cube, and the Geto Boys are key founding artists, known for mixing the political and social commentary of political rap with the criminal elements and crime stories found in gangsta rap.[19] In the West Coast hip hop style, G-funk dominated mainstream hip hop for several years during the 1990s with artists such as Dr. Dre and Snoop Dogg. East Coast hip hop in the early to mid 1990s was dominated by the Afrocentric jazz rap and alternative hip hop of the Native Tongues posse as well as the hardcore rap of artists such as Mobb Deep, Wu-Tang Clan, and Onyx. East Coast hip hop also had gangsta rap musicians such as the Notorious B.I.G. and Lil' Kim.
In the 1990s, hip hop began to diversify with other regional styles emerging, such as Southern rap and Atlanta hip hop. At the same time, hip hop continued to be assimilated into other genres of popular music, examples being neo soul (e.g.: Lauryn Hill, Erykah Badu) and nu metal (e.g.: Korn, Limp Bizkit). Hip hop became a best-selling genre in the mid-1990s and the top selling music genre by 1999. The popularity of hip hop music continued through the 2000s, with hip hop influences also increasingly finding their way into mainstream pop. The United States also saw the success of regional styles such as crunk (e.g.: Lil Jon & the East Side Boys, the Ying Yang Twins), a Southern genre that emphasized the beats and music more than the lyrics. Starting in 2005, sales of hip hop music in the United States began to severely wane. During the mid-2000s, alternative hip hop secured a place in the mainstream, due in part to the crossover success of artists such as OutKast and Kanye West.[20] During the late 2000s and early 2010s, rappers such as Lil Wayne, Soulja Boy, and B.o.B were the most popular rappers. During the 2010s, rappers such as Drake, Nicki Minaj, J. Cole, and Kendrick Lamar all have been extremely popular. Trap, a subgenre of hip hop, also has been popular during the 2010s with hip hop artists and hip hop music groups such as Migos, Travis Scott, and Kodak Black.



Contents


1 Origin of the term
2 1970s

2.1 Origins
2.2 Introduction of rapping
2.3 Influence of disco
2.4 Transition to recording


3 1980s

3.1 New school hip hop
3.2 Golden age hip hop
3.3 Gangsta rap and West Coast hip hop


4 1990s

4.1 Mainstream breakthrough
4.2 East vs. West rivalry

4.2.1 East Coast hip hop
4.2.2 West Coast hip hop


4.3 Diversification of styles


5 2000s

5.1 Crunk and snap music
5.2 Glitch hop and wonky music
5.3 Decline in sales
5.4 Musical theatre
5.5 Innovation and revitalization


6 2010s
7 World hip hop music
8 Rap linguistics
9 Return of the Golden-Era
10 See also
11 Notes
12 References
13 Further reading
14 External links



Origin of the term
The creation of the term hip hop is often credited to Keith Cowboy, rapper with Grandmaster Flash and the Furious Five.[21] However, Lovebug Starski, Keith Cowboy, and DJ Hollywood used the term when the music was still known as disco rap.[22] It is believed that Cowboy created the term while teasing a friend who had just joined the U.S. Army, by scat singing the words "hip/hop/hip/hop" in a way that mimicked the rhythmic cadence of soldiers marching.[21] Cowboy later worked the "hip hop" cadence into a part of his stage performance, which was quickly used by other artists such as The Sugarhill Gang in "Rapper's Delight".[21] Universal Zulu Nation founder Afrika Bambaataa is credited with first using the term to describe the subculture in which the music belonged; although it is also suggested that it was a derogatory term to describe the type of music.[23] The first use of the term in print was in The Village Voice,[24] by Steven Hager, later author of a 1984 history of hip hop.[25]
1970s
Origins
Hip hop as music and culture formed during the 1970s in New York City from the multicultural exchange between African-American youth from the United States and young immigrants and children of immigrants from countries in the Caribbean.[26] Hip hop music in its infancy has been described as an outlet and a voice for the disenfranchised youth of marginalized backgrounds and low-income areas, as the hip hop culture reflected the social, economic and political realities of their lives.[27][28] Many of the people who helped establish hip hop culture, including DJ Kool Herc, DJ Disco Wiz, Grandmaster Flash, and Afrika Bambaataa were of Latin American or Caribbean origin. It is hard to pinpoint the exact musical influences that most affected the sound and culture of early hip hop because of the multicultural nature of New York City. Hip hop's early pioneers were influenced by a mix of music from their cultures and the cultures they were exposed to as a result of the diversity of U.S. cities.[29] New York City experienced a heavy Jamaican hip hop influence during the 1990s. This influence was brought on by cultural shifts particularly because of the heightened immigration of Jamaicans to New York City and the American-born Jamaican youth who were coming of age during the 1990s.  




DJ Kool Herc is recognized as one of the earliest hip hop DJs and artists


In the 1970s, block parties were increasingly popular in New York City, particularly among African-American, Caribbean and Latino youth residing in the Bronx. Block parties incorporated DJs, who played popular genres of music, especially funk and soul music. Due to the positive reception, DJs began isolating the percussive breaks of popular songs. This technique was common in Jamaican dub music,[30] and was largely introduced into New York by immigrants from the Caribbean, including DJ Kool Herc, one of the pioneers of hip hop.[31][32]
Because the percussive breaks in funk, soul and disco records were generally short, Herc and other DJs began using two turntables to extend the breaks. Herc created the blueprint for hip hop music and culture by building upon the Jamaican tradition of impromptu toasting, a spoken type of boastful poetry and speech over music.[33] On August 11, 1973, DJ Kool Herc was the DJ at his sister's back-to-school party. He extended the beat of a record by using two record players, isolating the percussion "breaks" by using a mixer to switch between the two records. Herc's experiments with making music with record players became what we now know as breaking or "scratching".[34]
A second key musical element in hip hop music is emceeing (also called MCing or rapping). Emceeing is the rhythmic spoken delivery of rhymes and wordplay, delivered at first without accompaniment and later done over a beat. This spoken style was influenced by the African American style of "capping", a performance where men tried to outdo each other in originality of their language and tried to gain the favor of the listeners.[35] The basic elements of hip hop—boasting raps, rival "posses" (groups), uptown "throw-downs", and political and social commentary—were all long present in African American music. MCing and rapping performers moved back and forth between the predominance of "toasting" songs packed with a mix of boasting, 'slackness' and sexual innuendo and a more topical, political, socially conscious style. The role of the MC originally was as a Master of Ceremonies for a DJ dance event. The MC would introduce the DJ and try to pump up the audience. The MC spoke between the DJ's songs, urging everyone to get up and dance. MCs would also tell jokes and use their energetic language and enthusiasm to rev up the crowd. Eventually, this introducing role developed into longer sessions of spoken, rhythmic wordplay, and rhyming, which became rapping.
By 1979 hip hop music had become a mainstream genre. It spread across the world in the 1990s with controversial "gangsta" rap.[36] Herc also developed upon break-beat deejaying,[37] where the breaks of funk songs—the part most suited to dance, usually percussion-based—were isolated and repeated for the purpose of all-night dance parties. This form of music playback, using hard funk and rock, formed the basis of hip hop music. Campbell's announcements and exhortations to dancers would lead to the syncopated, rhymed spoken accompaniment now known as rapping. He dubbed his dancers "break-boys" and "break-girls", or simply b-boys and b-girls. According to Herc, "breaking" was also street slang for "getting excited" and "acting energetically".[38]




Afrika Bambaataa with DJ Yutaka of Universal Zulu Nation in 2004


DJs such as Grand Wizzard Theodore, Grandmaster Flash, and Jazzy Jay refined and developed the use of breakbeats, including cutting and scratching.[39] The approach used by Herc was soon widely copied, and by the late 1970s, DJs were releasing 12-inch records where they would rap to the beat. Popular tunes included Kurtis Blow's "The Breaks" and The Sugarhill Gang's "Rapper's Delight".[40] Herc and other DJs would connect their equipment to power lines and perform at venues such as public basketball courts and at 1520 Sedgwick Avenue, Bronx, New York, now officially a historic building.[41] The equipment consisted of numerous speakers, turntables, and one or more microphones.[42] By using this technique, DJs could create a variety of music, but according to Rap Attack by David Toop "At its worst the technique could turn the night into one endless and inevitably boring song".[43] KC The Prince of Soul, a rapper-lyricist with Pete DJ Jones, is often credited with being the first rap lyricist to call himself an "MC".[44]
Street gangs were prevalent in the poverty of the South Bronx, and much of the graffiti, rapping, and b-boying at these parties were all artistic variations on the competition and one-upmanship of street gangs. Sensing that gang members' often violent urges could be turned into creative ones, Afrika Bambaataa founded the Zulu Nation, a loose confederation of street-dance crews, graffiti artists, and rap musicians. By the late 1970s, the culture had gained media attention, with Billboard magazine printing an article titled "B Beats Bombarding Bronx", commenting on the local phenomenon and mentioning influential figures such as Kool Herc.[45] The New York City blackout of 1977 saw widespread looting, arson, and other citywide disorders especially in the Bronx[46] where a number of looters stole DJ equipment from electronics stores. As a result, the hip hop genre, barely known outside of the Bronx at the time, grew at an astounding rate from 1977 onward.[47]
DJ Kool Herc's house parties gained popularity and later moved to outdoor venues in order to accommodate more people. Hosted in parks, these outdoor parties became a means of expression and an outlet for teenagers, where "instead of getting into trouble on the streets, teens now had a place to expend their pent-up energy."[48] Tony Tone, a member of the Cold Crush Brothers, stated that "hip hop saved a lot of lives".[48] For inner-city youth, participating in hip hop culture became a way of dealing with the hardships of life as minorities within America, and an outlet to deal with the risk of violence and the rise of gang culture. MC Kid Lucky mentions that "people used to break-dance against each other instead of fighting".[49][50] Inspired by DJ Kool Herc, Afrika Bambaataa created a street organization called Universal Zulu Nation, centered around hip hop, as a means to draw teenagers out of gang life, drugs and violence.[48]
The lyrical content of many early rap groups focused on social issues, most notably in the seminal track "The Message" by Grandmaster Flash and the Furious Five, which discussed the realities of life in the housing projects.[51] "Young black Americans coming out of the civil rights movement have used hip hop culture in the 1980s and 1990s to show the limitations of the hip hop movement."[52] Hip hop gave young African Americans a voice to let their issues be heard; "Like rock-and-roll, hip hop is vigorously opposed by conservatives because it romanticises violence, law-breaking, and gangs".[52] It also gave people a chance for financial gain by "reducing the rest of the world to consumers of its social concerns."[52]
In late 1979, Debbie Harry of Blondie took Nile Rodgers of Chic to such an event, as the main backing track used was the break from Chic's "Good Times".[40] The new style influenced Harry, and Blondie's later hit single from 1981 "Rapture" became the first major single containing hip hop elements by a white group or artist to hit number one on the U.S. Billboard Hot 100—the song itself is usually considered new wave and fuses heavy pop music elements, but there is an extended rap by Harry near the end.




1520 Sedgwick Avenue, the Bronx, a venue used by Kool Herc that is often considered the birthplace of hip hop in 1973[53]


Hip hop's early evolution into a form distinct from R&B also, not coincidentally, occurred around the time that sampling technology and drum-machines became widely available to the general public at a cost that was affordable to the average consumer—not just professional studios. Drum-machines and samplers were combined in machines that came to be known as MPC's or 'Music Production Centers', early examples of which would include the Linn 9000. The first sampler that was broadly adopted to create this new kind of music was the Mellotron used in combination with the TR-808 drum machine. Mellotrons and Linn's were succeeded by the AKAI, in the late 1980s.[54]
Turntablist techniques – such as rhythmic "scratching" (pushing a record back and forth while the needle is in the groove to create new sounds and sound effects, an approach attributed to Grand Wizzard Theodore[55][56]), beat mixing and/or beatmatching, and beat juggling – eventually developed along with the percussion breaks, creating a musical accompaniment or base that could be rapped over in a manner similar to signifying. As well, the art of Jamaican toasting, a style of talking or chanting into a microphone, often in a boastful style, while beats play over a sound system, was an important influence on the development of hip hop music. Toasting is another influence found in Jamaican dub music.[30][57]
Boxer Muhammad Ali, as an influential African-American celebrity, was widely covered in the media. Ali influenced several elements of hip hop music. Both in the boxing ring and in media interviews, Ali became known in the 1960s for being "rhyming trickster" in the 1960s. Ali used a "funky delivery" for his comments, which included "boasts, comical trash talk, [and] the endless quotabl[e]" lines.[58] According to Rolling Stone, his "freestyle skills" (a reference to a type of vocal improvisation in which lyrics are recited with no particular subject or structure) and his "rhymes, flow, and braggadocio" would "one day become typical of old school MCs" like Run–D.M.C. and LL Cool J,[59] the latter citing Ali as an influence.[58] Hip hop music in its infancy has been described as an outlet and a "voice" for the disenfranchised youth of low-income and marginalized economic areas,[27] as the hip hop culture reflected the social, economic and political realities of their lives.[28]
Introduction of rapping
Rapping, also referred to as MCing or emceeing, is a vocal style in which the artist speaks lyrically and rhythmically, in rhyme and verse, generally to an instrumental or synthesized beat. Beats, almost always in 4/4 time signature, can be created by sampling and/or sequencing portions of other songs by a producer.[60] They also incorporate synthesizers, drum machines, and live bands. Rappers may write, memorize, or improvise their lyrics and perform their works a cappella or to a beat. Hip hop music predates the introduction of rapping into hip hop culture, and rap vocals are absent from many hip hop tracks, such as "Hip Hop, Be Bop (Don't Stop)" by Man Parrish; "Chinese Arithmetic" by Eric B. & Rakim; "Al-Naafiysh (The Soul)" and "We're Rocking the Planet" by Hashim; and "Destination Earth" by Newcleus. However, the majority of the genre has been accompanied by rap vocals, such as the Sci-fi influenced electro hip hop group Warp 9.[61] Female rappers appeared on the scene in the late 1970s and early 80s, including Bronx artist MC Sha Rock, member of the Funky Four Plus One, credited with being the first female MC [62] and The Sequence, a hip hop trio signed to Sugar Hill Records, the first all female group to release a rap record, Funk You Up.[citation needed]
The roots of rapping are found in African-American music and ultimately African music, particularly that of the griots of West African culture.[63] The African-American traditions of signifyin', the dozens, and jazz poetry all influence hip hop music, as well as the call and response patterns of African and African-American religious ceremonies. Soul singer James Brown, and musical 'comedy' acts such as Rudy Ray Moore, Pigmeat Markham and Blowfly are often considered "godfathers" of hip hop music.[citation needed] Within New York City, performances of spoken-word poetry and music by artists such as The Last Poets, Gil Scott-Heron[64] and Jalal Mansur Nuriddin had a significant impact on the post-civil rights era culture of the 1960s and 1970s, and thus the social environment in which hip hop music was created.
DJ Kool Herc and Coke La Rock provided an influence on the vocal style of rapping by delivering simple poetry verses over funk music breaks, after party-goers showed little interest in their previous attempts to integrate reggae-infused toasting into musical sets.[30][65] DJs and MCs would often add call and response chants, often consisting of a basic chorus, to allow the performer to gather his thoughts (e.g. "one, two, three, y'all, to the beat"). Later, the MCs grew more varied in their vocal and rhythmic delivery, incorporating brief rhymes, often with a sexual or scatological theme, in an effort to differentiate themselves and to entertain the audience. These early raps incorporated the dozens, a product of African-American culture. Kool Herc & the Herculoids were the first hip hop group to gain recognition in New York,[65] but the number of MC teams increased over time.




Grandmaster Flash


Often these were collaborations between former gangs, such as Afrikaa Bambaataa's Universal Zulu Nation—now an international organization. Melle Mel, a rapper with The Furious Five is often credited with being the first rap lyricist to call himself an "MC".[66] During the early 1970s B-boying arose during block parties, as b-boys and b-girls got in front of the audience to dance in a distinctive and frenetic style. The style was documented for release to a worldwide audience for the first time in documentaries and movies such as Style Wars, Wild Style, and Beat Street. The term "B-boy" was coined by DJ Kool Herc to describe the people who would wait for the break section of the song, getting in front of the audience to dance in a distinctive, frenetic style.[67]
Although there were many early MCs that recorded solo projects of note, such as DJ Hollywood, Kurtis Blow and Spoonie Gee, the frequency of solo artists did not increase until later with the rise of soloists with stage presence and drama, such as LL Cool J. Most early hip hop was dominated by groups where collaboration between the members was integral to the show.[68] An example would be the early hip hop group Funky Four Plus One, who performed in such a manner on Saturday Night Live in 1981.[69]
Influence of disco




The Sugarhill Gang used disco band Chic's "Good Times" as the source of beats for their 1979 hip hop hit "Rapper's Delight". Pictured is Chic at a 2012 concert.


Hip hop music was both influenced by disco music, as disco also emphasized the key role of the DJ in creating tracks and mixes for dancers. As well, hip hop from the late 1970s used disco tracks as beats. At the same time, hip hop music was also a backlash against certain subgenres of late 1970s disco. While the early disco was African-American and Italian-American-created underground music developed by DJs and producers for the dance club subculture, by the late 1970s, disco airwaves were dominated by mainstream, expensively recorded music industry-produced disco songs. According to Kurtis Blow, the early days of hip hop were characterized by divisions between fans and detractors of disco music. Hip hop had largely emerged as "a direct response to the watered down, Europeanised, disco music that permeated the airwaves".[70][71] The earliest hip hop was mainly based on hard funk loops sourced from vintage funk records. However, by 1979, disco instrumental loops/tracks had become the basis of much hip hop music. This genre was called "disco rap". Ironically, the rise of hip hop music also played a role in the eventual decline in disco's popularity.
The disco sound had a strong influence on early hip hop music. Most of the early rap/hip-hop songs were created by isolating existing disco bass-guitar bass lines and dubbing over them with MC rhymes. The Sugarhill Gang used Chic's "Good Times" as the foundation for their 1979 hit "Rapper's Delight", generally considered to be the song that first popularized rap music in the United States and around the world. In 1982, Afrika Bambaataa released the single "Planet Rock", which incorporated electronica elements from Kraftwerk's "Trans-Europe Express" and "Numbers" as well as YMO's "Riot in Lagos". The Planet Rock sound also spawned a hip-hop electronic dance trend, electro music, which included songs such as Planet Patrol's "Play at Your Own Risk" (1982), C Bank's "One More Shot" (1982), Cerrone's "Club Underworld" (1984), Shannon's "Let the Music Play" (1983), Freeez's "I.O.U." (1983), Midnight Star's "Freak-a-Zoid" (1983), Chaka Khan's "I Feel For You" (1984).
DJ Pete Jones, Eddie Cheeba, DJ Hollywood, and Love Bug Starski were disco-influenced hip hop DJs. Their styles differed from other hip hop musicians who focused on rapid-fire rhymes and more complex rhythmic schemes. Afrika Bambaataa, Paul Winley, Grandmaster Flash, and Bobby Robinson were all members of third s latter group. In Washington, D.C. go-go emerged as a reaction against disco and eventually incorporated characteristics of hip hop during the early 1980s. The DJ-based genre of electronic music behaved similarly, eventually evolving into underground styles known as house music in Chicago and techno in Detroit.
Transition to recording




DJ Marley Marl.


The earliest hip hop music was performed live, at house parties and block party events, and it was not recorded. Prior to 1979, recorded hip hop music consisted mainly of PA system soundboard recordings of live party shows and early hip hop mixtapes by DJs. Puerto Rican DJ Disco Wiz is credited as the first hip hop DJ to create a "mixed plate," or mixed dub recording, when, in 1977, he combined sound bites, special effects and paused beats to technically produce a sound recording.[72] The first hip hop record is widely regarded to be The Sugarhill Gang's "Rapper's Delight", from 1979.[17] However, much controversy surrounds this assertion as some regard "King Tim III (Personality Jock)" by The Fatback Band, which was released a few weeks before "Rapper's Delight", as a rap record.[73] There are various other claimants for the title of first hip hop record.
By the early 1980s, all the major elements and techniques of the hip hop genre were in place, and by 1982, the electronic (electro) sound had become the trend on the street and in dance clubs. New York City radio station WKTU featured Warp 9's "Nunk," in a commercial to promote the station's signature sound of emerging hip hop [74] Though not yet mainstream, hip hop had begun to permeate the music scene outside of New York City; it could be found in cities as diverse as Atlanta, Los Angeles, Chicago, Washington, D.C., Baltimore, Dallas, Kansas City, San Antonio, Miami, Seattle, St. Louis, New Orleans, Houston, and Toronto. Indeed, "Funk You Up" (1979), the first hip hop record released by a female group, and the second single released by Sugar Hill Records, was performed by The Sequence, a group from Columbia, South Carolina which featured Angie Stone.[75] Despite the genre's growing popularity, Philadelphia was, for many years, the only city whose contributions could be compared to New York City's. Hip hop music became popular in Philadelphia in the late 1970s. The first released record was titled "Rhythm Talk", by Jocko Henderson.
The New York Times had dubbed Philadelphia the "Graffiti Capital of the World" in 1971. Philadelphia native DJ Lady B recorded "To the Beat Y'All" in 1979, and became the first female solo hip hop artist to record music.[76] Schoolly D, starting in 1984 and also from Philadelphia, began creating a style that would later be known as gangsta rap.
1980s




DJ Jazzy Jeff, who is also a record producer, manipulating a record turntable in England in 2005.


The 1980s marked the diversification of hip hop as the genre developed more complex styles.[18] New York City became a veritable laboratory for the creation of new hip hop sounds. Early examples of the diversification process can be heard in tracks such as Grandmaster Flash's "The Adventures of Grandmaster Flash on the Wheels of Steel" (1981), a single consisting entirely of sampled tracks[77] as well as Afrika Bambaataa's "Planet Rock" (1982), and Warp 9's "Nunk," (1982)[78] which signified the fusion of hip hop music with electro. In addition, Rammellzee & K-Rob's "Beat Bop" (1983) was a 'slow jam' which had a dub influence with its use of reverb and echo as texture and playful sound effects. "Light Years Away," by Warp 9 (1983), (produced and written by Lotti Golden and Richard Scher) described as a "cornerstone of early 80's beatbox afrofuturism," by the UK paper, The Guardian,[61] introduced social commentary from a sci-fi perspective. In the 1970s, hip hop music typically used samples from funk and later, from disco. The mid-1980s marked a paradigm shift in the development of hip hop, with the introduction of samples from rock music, as demonstrated in the albums King of Rock and Licensed to Ill. Hip hop prior to this shift is characterized as old-school hip hop.




The Roland TR-808 Rhythm Composer, an influential drum machine in hip hop music. Often nicknamed the "808", it was produced from 1980 to 1984. Even in the 2010s, hip hop producers still use 808 samples.


The proliferation of electro hip hop and hip hop records in the early 1980s can be attributed to the new beat-making abilities that the newly-available Roland TR-808 drum machine provided to beatmakers and producers. Hitting the market in 1980, it became the drum machine of choice because of its affordability and the unique character of its analog, synthesized drum sounds, especially its bass drum sound, which had a deep, solid sound in club PA systems.[79] The new generation of drum machines such as the 808 and Oberheim DMX were a defining characteristic of many 1980s songs, allowing record companies to quickly produce new electro and electro hip hop records to meet the high demand on the street. Even in the 2010s, the 808 kick drum sound is used by hip hop producers.
Over time sampling technology became more advanced. However, earlier producers such as Marley Marl used drum machines to construct their beats from small excerpts of other beats in synchronisation, in his case, triggering three Korg sampling-delay units through a Roland 808. Later, samplers such as the E-mu SP-1200 allowed not only more memory but more flexibility for creative production. This allowed the filtration and layering different hits, and with a possibility of re-sequencing them into a single piece. With the emergence of a new generation of samplers such as the AKAI S900 in the late 1980s, producers did not have to create complex, time-consuming tape loops. Public Enemy's first album was created with the help of large tape loops. The process of looping a break into a breakbeat now became more commonly done with a sampler, now doing the job which so far had been done manually by the DJs using turntables. In 1989, DJ Mark James, under the moniker "45 King", released "The 900 Number", a breakbeat track created by synchronizing samplers and vinyl records.[68]
The lyrical content and other instrumental accompaniment of hip hop developed as well. The early lyrical styles in the 1970, which tended to be boasts and clichéd chants, were replaced with metaphorical lyrics exploring a wider range of subjects. As well, the lyrics were performed over more complex, multi-layered instrumental accompaniment. Artists such as Melle Mel, Rakim, Chuck D, KRS-One and Warp 9 revolutionized hip hop by transforming it into a more mature art form, with sophisticated arrangements, often featuring "gorgeous textures and multiple layers"[80] The influential single "The Message" (1982) by Grandmaster Flash and the Furious Five is widely considered to be the pioneering force for conscious rap.
Independent record labels like Tommy Boy, Prism Records and Profile Records became successful in the early 1980s, releasing records at a furious pace in response to the demand generated by local radio stations and club DJs. Early 1980s electro music and rap were catalysts that sparked the hip hop movement, led by artists such as Cybotron, Hashim, Afrika Bambaataa, Planet Patrol, Newcleus and Warp 9. In the New York City recording scene, artists collaborated with producer/writers such as Arthur Baker, John Robie, Lotti Golden and Richard Scher, exchanging ideas that contributed to the development of hip hop.[81] Some rappers eventually became mainstream pop performers. Kurtis Blow's appearance in a Sprite soda pop commercial[82] marked the first hip hop musician to do a commercial for a major product. The 1981 songs "Rapture" by Blondie and "Christmas Wrapping" by the new wave band The Waitresses were among the first pop songs to utilize rap. In 1982, Afrika Bambaataa introduced hip hop to an international audience with "Planet Rock."
Prior to the 1980s, hip hop music was largely confined within the context of the United States. However, during the 1980s, it began its spread and became a part of the music scene in dozens of countries. Greg Wilson was the first DJ to introduce electro hip hop to UK club audiences in the early 1980s, opting for the dub or instrumental versions of Nunk by Warp 9, Extra T's "ET Boogie," Hip Hop, Be Bop (Don't Stop) by Man Parrish, Planet Rock and Dirty Talk (Klein + M.B.O. song).[83]




Beastie Boys in 1992.


In the early part of the decade, B-boying became the first aspect of hip hop culture to reach Japan, Australia and South Africa. In South Africa, the breakdance crew Black Noise established the practice before beginning to rap later in the decade. Musician and presenter Sidney became France's first black TV presenter with his show H.I.P. H.O.P.[84] which screened on TF1 during 1984, a first for the genre worldwide. Sidney is considered the father of French hip hop. Radio Nova helped launch other French hip hop stars including Dee Nasty, whose 1984 album Paname City Rappin' along with compilations Rapattitude 1 and 2 contributed to a general awareness of hip hop in France.
Hip hop has always kept a very close relationship with the Latino community in New York. DJ Disco Wiz and the Rock Steady Crew were among early innovators from Puerto Rico, combining English and Spanish in their lyrics. The Mean Machine recorded their first song under the label "Disco Dreams" in 1981, while Kid Frost from Los Angeles began his career in 1982. Cypress Hill was formed in 1988 in the suburb of South Gate outside Los Angeles when Senen Reyes (born in Havana) and his younger brother Ulpiano Sergio (Mellow Man Ace) moved from Cuba to South Gate with his family in 1971. They teamed up with DVX from Queens (New York), Lawrence Muggerud (DJ Muggs) and Louis Freese (B-Real), a Mexican/Cuban-American native of Los Angeles. After the departure of "Ace" to begin his solo career, the group adopted the name of Cypress Hill named after a street running through a neighborhood nearby in South Los Angeles.
Japanese hip hop is said to have begun when Hiroshi Fujiwara returned to Japan and started playing hip hop records in the early 1980s.[85] Japanese hip hop generally tends to be most directly influenced by old school hip hop, taking the era's catchy beats, dance culture, and overall fun and carefree nature and incorporating it into their music. Hip hop became one of the most commercially viable mainstream music genres in Japan, and the line between it and pop music is frequently blurred.
New school hip hop
Main article: New school hip hop




KRS-One was a key performer in new school hip hop.


The new school of hip hop was the second wave of hip hop music, originating in 1983–84 with the early records of Run-D.M.C. and LL Cool J. As with the hip hop preceding it (which subsequently became known as old school hip hop), the new school came predominately from New York City. The new school was initially characterized in form by drum machine-led minimalism, with influences from rock music, a hip hop "metal music for the 80's-a hard-edge ugly/beauty trance as desperate and stimulating as New York itself."[86] It was notable for taunts and boasts about rapping, and socio-political commentary, both delivered in an aggressive, self-assertive style. In image as in song its artists projected a tough, cool, street b-boy attitude. These elements contrasted sharply with the funk and disco-influenced hip hop groups, whose pre-1984 music was characterized by novelty hits, live bands, synthesizers and "party rhymes" (not all artists prior to 1984 had these styles). New school artists made shorter songs that could more easily gain radio play, and they produced more cohesive LP albums than their old school counterparts. By 1986, their releases began to establish the hip-hop album as a fixture of mainstream music. Hip hop music became commercially successful, as exemplified by the Beastie Boys' 1986 album Licensed to Ill, which was the first rap album to hit No. 1 on the Billboard charts.[87]
Golden age hip hop




Public Enemy in 2006.


Main article: Golden age hip hop
Hip hop's "golden age" (or "golden era") is a name given to a period in mainstream hip hop, produced between the mid-1980s and the early 1990s, which is characterized by its diversity, quality, innovation and influence.[88][89] There were strong themes of Afrocentrism and political militancy in golden age hip hop lyrics. The music was experimental and the sampling drew on eclectic sources.[90] There was often a strong jazz influence in the music. The artists and teams most often associated with this phrase are Public Enemy, Boogie Down Productions, Eric B. & Rakim, De La Soul, A Tribe Called Quest, Gang Starr, Big Daddy Kane and the Jungle Brothers.[91]
The golden age is noted for its innovation – a time "when it seemed that every new single reinvented the genre"[92] according to Rolling Stone. Referring to "hip-hop in its golden age",[93] Spin's editor-in-chief Sia Michel says, "there were so many important, groundbreaking albums coming out right about that time",[93] and MTV's Sway Calloway adds: "The thing that made that era so great is that nothing was contrived. Everything was still being discovered and everything was still innovative and new".[94] Writer William Jelani Cobb says "what made the era they inaugurated worthy of the term golden was the sheer number of stylistic innovations that came into existence... in these golden years, a critical mass of mic prodigies were literally creating themselves and their art form at the same time".[95] The specific time period that the golden age covers varies. MSNBC states, "the 'Golden Age' of hip-hop music: The '80s".[96]
Gangsta rap and West Coast hip hop
Main articles: Gangsta rap and West Coast hip hop


Many black rappers—including Ice-T and Sister Souljah—contend that they are being unfairly singled out because their music reflects deep changes in society not being addressed anywhere else in the public forum. The white politicians, the artists complain, neither understand the music nor desire to hear what's going on in the devastated communities that gave birth to the art form.
“
”

— Chuck Philips, Los Angeles Times, 1992 [97]
Gangsta rap is a subgenre of hip hop that reflects the violent lifestyles of inner-city American black youths.[98] Gangsta is a non-rhotic pronunciation of the word gangster. The genre was pioneered in the mid-1980s by rappers such as Schoolly D and Ice-T, and was popularized in the later part of the 1980s by groups like N.W.A. Ice-T released "6 in the Mornin'", which is often regarded as the first gangsta rap song, in 1986. After the national attention and controversy that Ice-T and N.W.A created in the late 1980s and early 1990s, gangsta rap became the most commercially lucrative subgenre of hip hop.
N.W.A is the group most frequently associated with the founding of gangsta rap. Their lyrics were more violent, openly confrontational, and shocking than those of established rap acts, featuring incessant profanity and, controversially, use of the word "nigga". These lyrics were placed over rough, rock guitar-driven beats, contributing to the music's hard-edged feel. The first blockbuster gangsta rap album was N.W.A's Straight Outta Compton, released in 1988. Straight Outta Compton would establish West Coast hip hop as a vital genre, and establish Los Angeles as a legitimate rival to hip hop's long-time capital, New York City. Straight Outta Compton sparked the first major controversy regarding hip hop lyrics when their song "Fuck tha Police" earned a letter from FBI Assistant Director, Milt Ahlerich, strongly expressing law enforcement's resentment of the song.[99][100]
Controversy surrounded Ice-T's album Body Count, in particular over its song "Cop Killer". The song was intended to speak from the viewpoint of a criminal getting revenge on racist, brutal cops. Ice-T's rock song infuriated government officials, the National Rifle Association and various police advocacy groups.[101] Consequently, Time Warner Music refused to release Ice-T's upcoming album Home Invasion because of the controversy surrounding "Cop Killer". Ice-T suggested that the furor over the song was an overreaction, telling journalist Chuck Philips "...they've done movies about nurse killers and teacher killers and student killers. [Actor] Arnold Schwarzenegger blew away dozens of cops as the Terminator. But I don't hear anybody complaining about that." In the same interview, Ice-T suggested to Philips that the misunderstanding of Cop Killer and the attempts to censor it had racial overtones: "The Supreme Court says it's OK for a white man to burn a cross in public. But nobody wants a black man to write a record about a cop killer."[101]
The subject matter inherent in gangsta rap more generally has caused controversy. The White House administrations of both George Bush senior and Bill Clinton criticized the genre.[97] "The reason why rap is under attack is because it exposes all the contradictions of American culture ...What started out as an underground art form has become a vehicle to expose a lot of critical issues that are not usually discussed in American politics. The problem here is that the White House and wanna-bes like Bill Clinton represent a political system that never intends to deal with inner city urban chaos," Sister Souljah told The Times.[97] Due to the influence of Ice T and N.W.A, gangsta rap is often viewed as an originally West Coast phenomenon, despite the contributions of East Coast acts like Boogie Down Productions in shaping the genre.
1990s
Mainstream breakthrough




Flavor Flav of Public Enemy performing in 1991.


In 1990, Public Enemy's Fear of a Black Planet was a significant success with music critics and consumers.[102] The album played a key role in hip hop's mainstream emergence in 1990, dubbed by Billboard editor Paul Grein as "the year that rap exploded".[102] In a 1990 article on its commercial breakthrough, Janice C. Thompson of Time wrote that hip hop "has grown into the most exciting development in American pop music in more than a decade."[103] Thompson noted the impact of Public Enemy's 1989 single "Fight the Power", rapper Tone Lōc's single Wild Thing being the best-selling single of 1989, and that at the time of her article, nearly a third of the songs on the Billboard Hot 100 were hip hop songs.[103] In a similar 1990 article, Robert Hilburn of the Los Angeles Times put hip hop music's commercial emergence into perspective: In 1990, also while working with the rap group Snap!, Ronald "Bee-Stinger" Savage a former member of the Zulu Nation is credited for carving the term "Six elements of the Hip Hop Movement" by being inspired by Public Enemy's recordings. The "Six Elements Of The Hip Hop Movement" are: Consciousness Awareness, Civil Rights Awareness, Activism Awareness, Justice, Political Awareness, Community Awareness in music. Ronald Savage is known as the Son of The Hip Hop Movement.[104][105][106]

It was 10 years ago that the Sugarhill Gang's "Rapper's Delight" became the first rap single to enter the national Top 20. Who ever figured then that the music would even be around in 1990, much less produce attractions that would command as much pop attention as Public Enemy and N.W.A? "Rapper's Delight" was a novelty record that was considered by much of the pop community simply as a lightweight offshoot of disco—and that image stuck for years. Occasional records—including Grandmaster Flash's "The Message" in 1982 and Run-DMC's "It's Like That" in 1984—won critical approval, but rap, mostly, was dismissed as a passing fancy—too repetitious, too one dimensional. Yet rap didn't go away, and an explosion of energy and imagination in the late 1980s leaves rap today as arguably the most vital new street-oriented sound in pop since the birth of rock in the 1950s.[107]



Rap is the rock 'n' roll of the day. Rock 'n' roll was about attitude, rebellion, a big beat, sex and, sometimes, social comment. If that's what you're looking for now, you're going to find it here.
“
”

— Bill Adler, Time, 1990[103]
MC Hammer hit mainstream success with the multi platinum album Please Hammer, Don't Hurt 'Em. The record reached #1 and the first single, "U Can't Touch This" charted on the top ten of the Billboard Hot 100. MC Hammer became one of the most successful rappers of the early nineties and one of the first household names in the genre. The album raised rap music to a new level of popularity. It was the first hip-hop album certified diamond by the RIAA for sales of over ten million.[108] It remains one of the genre's all-time best-selling albums.[109] To date, the album has sold as many as 18 million units.[110][111][112][113] Released in 1990, "Ice Ice Baby" by Vanilla Ice was the first hip hop single to top the Billboard charts in the U.S. It also reached number one in the UK, Australia among others and has been credited for helping diversify hip hop by introducing it to a mainstream audience.[114] In 1992, Dr. Dre released The Chronic. As well as helping to establish West Coast gangsta rap as more commercially viable than East Coast hip hop,[115] this album founded a style called G Funk, which soon came to dominate West Coast hip hop. The style was further developed and popularized by Snoop Dogg's 1993 album Doggystyle. However, hip hop was still met with resistance from black radio, including urban contemporary radio stations. Russell Simmons said in 1990, "Black radio [stations] hated rap from the start and there's still a lot of resistance to it".[107]
Despite the lack of support from some black radio stations, hip hop became a best-selling music genre in the mid-1990s and the top selling music genre by 1999 with 81 million CDs sold.[116][117][118] By the late 1990s hip hop was artistically dominated by the Wu-Tang Clan, Diddy and the Fugees.[115] The Beastie Boys continued their success throughout the decade crossing color lines and gaining respect from many different artists. Record labels based out of Atlanta, St. Louis, and New Orleans also gained fame for their local scenes. The midwest rap scene was also notable, with the fast vocal styles from artists such as Bone Thugs-n-Harmony, Tech N9ne, and Twista. By the end of the decade, hip hop was an integral part of popular music, and many American pop songs had hip hop components.
East vs. West rivalry
Main article: East Coast–West Coast hip hop rivalry




This graffiti art is a tribute to West Coast rapper Tupac Shakur, who was killed in a drive-by shooting.


The East Coast–West Coast hip hop rivalry was a feud from 1991 to 1997 between artists and fans of the East Coast hip hop and West Coast hip hop scenes in the United States, especially from 1994 to 1997. Focal points of the feud were East Coast-based rapper The Notorious B.I.G. (and his New York-based label, Bad Boy Records) and West Coast-based rapper Tupac Shakur (and his Los Angeles-based label, Death Row Records), who were both fatally shot following drive-by shootings by unknown assailants in 1997 and 1996, respectively.
East Coast hip hop
Main article: East Coast hip hop
In the early 1990s East Coast hip hop was dominated by the Native Tongues posse which was loosely composed of De La Soul with producer Prince Paul, A Tribe Called Quest, the Jungle Brothers, as well as their loose affiliates 3rd Bass, Main Source, and the less successful Black Sheep & KMD. Although originally a "daisy age" conception stressing the positive aspects of life, darker material (such as De La Soul's thought-provoking "Millie Pulled a Pistol on Santa") soon crept in. Artists such as Masta Ace (particularly for SlaughtaHouse) & Brand Nubian, Public Enemy, Organized Konfusion, Ignacio Bernal, had a more overtly militant pose, both in sound and manner. In the early 1990s, the Wu-Tang Clan revitalized the New York hip hop scene by pioneering an East coast hardcore rap equivalent in intensity to what was being produced on the West Coast.[119] According to Allmusic, the production on two Mobb Deep albums, The Infamous and Hell on Earth (1996), are "indebted" to RZA's early production with Wu-Tang Clan.[120][121]




Wu-Tang Clan at the Virgin Festival in 2007.


The success of artists such as Nas and Notorious B.I.G. during 1994–95 cemented the status of the East Coast during a time of West Coast dominance. In a March 2002 issue of The Source Magazine, Nas referred to 1994 as "a renaissance of New York [City] Hip-Hop."[122] The productions of RZA, particularly for Wu-Tang Clan, became influential with artists such as Mobb Deep due to the combination of somewhat detached instrumental loops, highly compressed and processed drums and gangsta lyrical content. Wu-Tang solo albums such as Raekwon the Chef's Only Built 4 Cuban Linx, Ghostface Killah's Ironman, and GZA's Liquid Swords are now viewed as classics along with Wu-Tang "core" material. The clan's base extended into further groups called "Wu-affiliates". Producers such as DJ Premier (primarily for Gangstarr but also for other affiliated artists such as Jeru the Damaja), Pete Rock (With CL Smooth and supplying beats for many others), Buckwild, Large Professor, Diamond D and The 45 King supplying beats for numerous MCs regardless of location. Albums such as Nas's Illmatic, Jay-Z's Reasonable Doubt and O.C.'s Word...Life are made up of beats from this pool of producers.
The rivalry between the East Coast and the West Coast rappers eventually turned personal.[123] Later in the decade the business acumen of the Bad Boy Records tested itself against Jay-Z and his Roc-A-Fella Records and, on the West Coast, Death Row Records. The mid to late 1990s saw a generation of rappers such as the members of D.I.T.C. such as the late Big L and Big Pun. On the East Coast, although the "big business" end of the market dominated matters commercially the late 1990s to early 2000s saw a number of relatively successful East Coast indie labels such as Rawkus Records (with whom Mos Def and Talib Kweli garnered success) and later Def Jux. The history of the two labels is intertwined, the latter having been started by EL-P of Company Flow in reaction to the former, and offered an outlet for more underground artists such as Mike Ladd, Aesop Rock, Mr Lif, RJD2, Cage and Cannibal Ox. Other acts such as the Hispanic Arsonists and slam poet turned MC Saul Williams met with differing degrees of success.
West Coast hip hop
Main article: West Coast hip hop




Snoop Dogg


After N.W.A. broke up, Dr. Dre (a former member) released The Chronic in 1992, which peaked at #1 on the R&B/hip hop chart,[124] #3 on the pop chart and spawned a #2 pop single with "Nuthin' but a 'G' Thang." The Chronic took West Coast rap in a new direction,[125] influenced strongly by P funk artists, melding smooth and easy funk beats with slowly drawled lyrics. This came to be known as G-funk and dominated mainstream hip hop for several years through a roster of artists on Death Row Records, including Tupac Shakur, whose double disc album All Eyez on Me was a big hit with hit songs "Ambitionz az a Ridah" and "2 of Amerikaz Most Wanted",[citation needed] and Snoop Dogg, whose Doggystyle included the songs "What's My Name?" and "Gin and Juice", both top ten hits.[126] As the Los Angeles-based label Death Row Records built an empire around Dr. Dre, Snoop Dogg, and the rapper-actor Tupac Shakur. It also entered into a rivalry with New York City's Bad Boy Records. (See the article on the East Coast-West Coast hip hop rivalry.)
Detached from this scene were other artists such as Freestyle Fellowship, The Pharcyde as well as more underground artists such as the Solesides collective (DJ Shadow and Blackalicious amongst others) Jurassic 5, Ugly Duckling, People Under The Stairs, Tha Alkaholiks, and earlier Souls of Mischief represented a return to hip hop roots of sampling and well planned rhyme schemes.
Diversification of styles
Further information: List of hip hop genres




The rapper Scarface from the southern US group Geto Boys.


In the 1990s, hip hop began to diversify with other regional styles emerging on the national scene. Southern rap became popular in the early 1990s.[127] The first Southern rappers to gain national attention were the Geto Boys out of Houston, Texas.[128] Southern rap's roots can be traced to the success of Geto Boy's Grip It! On That Other Level in 1989, the Rick Rubin produced The Geto Boys in 1990, and We Can't Be Stopped in 1991.[129] The Houston area also produced other artists that pioneered the early southern rap sound such as UGK and the solo career of Scarface.
Atlanta hip hop artists were key in further expanding rap music and bringing southern hip hop into the mainstream. Releases such as Arrested Development's 3 Years, 5 Months and 2 Days in the Life Of... in 1992, Goodie Mob's Soul Food in 1995 and OutKast's ATLiens in 1996 were all critically acclaimed. Later, Master P (Ghetto D) built up a roster of artists (the No Limit posse) based out of New Orleans. Master P incorporated G funk and Miami bass influences; and distinctive regional sounds from St. Louis, Chicago, Washington D.C., Detroit and others began to gain popularity.
In the 1990s, elements of hip hop continued to be assimilated into other genres of popular music. Neo soul, for example, combined hip hop and soul music. In the 1980s and 1990s, rap rock, rapcore and rap metal, fusions of hip hop and rock, hardcore punk and heavy metal[130] became popular among mainstream audiences. Rage Against the Machine and nu metal band Limp Bizkit were among the most well-known bands in these fields.
Digable Planets' 1993 release Reachin' (A New Refutation of Time and Space) was an influential jazz rap record sampling the likes of Don Cherry, Sonny Rollins, Art Blakey, Herbie Mann, Herbie Hancock, Grant Green, and Rahsaan Roland Kirk. It spawned the hit single "Rebirth of Slick (Cool Like Dat)" which reached #16 on the Billboard Hot 100[131] Although white rappers like the Beastie Boys, House of Pain and 3rd Bass had had some popular success or critical acceptance from the hip hop community, Eminem's success, beginning in 1999 with the platinum The Slim Shady LP,[132] surprised many.
2000s




Eminem performing live at the DJ Hero Party in Los Angeles.


The popularity of hip hop music continued through the 2000s. Dr. Dre remained an important figure, and in the year 2000, he produced The Marshall Mathers LP by Eminem. Dre also produced 50 Cent's 2003 album Get Rich or Die Tryin', which debuted at number one on the U.S. Billboard 200 charts.[133] Hip hop influences also found their way increasingly into mainstream pop during this period, mainly during the mid-2000s, as the Los Angeles style of the 1990s lost power. Nelly's debut LP, Country Grammar, sold over nine million copies. In the 2000s, crunk music, a derivative of Southern hip hop, gained considerable popularity via Lil Jon and the Ying Yang Twins. Jay-Z represented the cultural triumph of hip hop. As his career progressed, he went from performing artist to entrepreneur, label president, head of a clothing line, club owner, and market consultant—along the way breaking Elvis Presley's record for most number one albums on the Billboard magazine charts by a solo artist.




50 Cent in 2012.


Alternative hip hop, which was introduced in the 1980s and then declined, resurged in the early 2000s with the rejuvenated interest in indie music by the general public. In the 2000s alternative hip hop reattained its place within the mainstream, due in part to the declining commercial viability of gangsta rap as well as the crossover success of artists such as OutKast and Kanye West. The alternative hip hop movement expanded beyond the US to include the Somali-Canadian poet K'naan, Japanese rapper Shing02, and British artist MIA. Alternative hip hop acts have attained much critical acclaim, but receive relatively little exposure through radio and other media outlets. In the mid-to late-2000s (decade), alternative hip hop artists such as The Roots, Dilated Peoples, Gnarls Barkley and Mos Def achieved significant recognition. Gnarls Barkley's album St. Elsewhere, which contained a fusion of funk, neo soul and hip hop, debuted at number 20 on the Billboard 200 charts. In addition, Aesop Rock's 2007 album None Shall Pass was well received,[134] and reached #50 on the Billboard charts.[135]
Crunk and snap music
Main articles: Crunk and Snap music




Producer Lil Jon is one of crunk's most prominent figures.


Crunk is a regional hip hop genre that originated in Tennessee in the southern United States in the 1990s, influenced by Miami bass. One of the pioneers of crunk, Lil Jon, said that it was a fusion of hip hop, electro, and electronic dance music. The style was pioneered and commercialized by artists from Memphis, Tennessee and Atlanta, Georgia. Looped, stripped-down drum machine rhythms are usually used. The Roland TR-808 and 909 are among the most popular. The drum machine loops are usually accompanied by simple, repeated synthesizer melodies and heavy bass "stabs". The tempo of the music is somewhat slower than hip-hop, around the speed of reggaeton. The focal point of crunk is more often the beats and instrumental music rather than the lyrics. Crunk rappers, however, often shout and scream their lyrics, creating an aggressive, almost heavy, style of hip-hop. While other subgenres of hip-hop address sociopolitical or personal concerns, crunk is almost exclusively "party music", favoring call and response hip-hop slogans in lieu of more substantive approaches.[136]
Snap music is a subgenre of crunk that emerged from Atlanta, Georgia in the late 1990s.[137] The genre gained mainstream popularity and in mid-2005, artists from other southern states such as Tennessee began to emerge performing in this style. Tracks commonly consist of an Roland TR-808 bass drum, hi-hat, bass, finger snapping, a main groove and a vocal track. Hit snap songs include "Lean wit It, Rock wit It" by "Dem Franchize Boyz", "Laffy Taffy" by D4L, "It's Goin' Down" by Yung Joc and "Crank That (Soulja Boy)" by Soulja Boy Tell 'Em.
Glitch hop and wonky music
Main articles: Glitch hop and Wonky (music)




The Glitch Mob


Glitch hop and wonky music evolved following the rise of trip hop, dubstep and intelligent dance music (IDM). Both glitch hop and wonky music frequently reflect the experimental nature of IDM and the heavy bass featured in dubstep songs. While trip hop has been described as being a distinct British upper-middle class take on hip-hop, glitch-hop and wonky music have much more stylistic diversity. Both genres are melting pots of influence. Glitch hop contains echoes of 1980s pop music, Indian ragas, eclectic jazz and West Coast rap. Los Angeles, London, Glasgow and a number of other cities have become hot spots for these scenes, and underground scenes have developed across the world in smaller communities. Both genres often pay homage to older and more well established electronic music artists such as Radiohead, Aphex Twin and Boards of Canada as well as independent hip hop producers like J Dilla and Madlib.
Glitch hop is a fusion genre of hip hop and glitch music that originated in the early to mid-2000s in the United States and Europe. Musically, it is based on irregular, chaotic breakbeats, glitchy basslines and other typical sound effects used in glitch music, like skips. Glitch hop artists include Prefuse 73, Dabrye and Flying Lotus. Wonky is a subgenre of hip hop that originated around 2008, but most notably in the United States and United Kingdom, and among international artists of the Hyperdub music label, under the influence of glitch hop and dubstep. Wonky music is of the same glitchy style as glitch hop, but it was specifically noted for its melodies, rich with "mid-range unstable synths". Scotland has become one of the most prominent wonky scenes, with artists like Hudson Mohawke and Rustie.
Glitch hop and wonky are popular among a relatively smaller audience interested in alternative hip hop and electronic music (especially dubstep); neither glitch hop nor wonky have achieved mainstream popularity. However, artists like Flying Lotus, The Glitch Mob and Hudson Mohawke have seen success in other avenues. Flying Lotus's music has earned multiple positive reviews on the independent music review site Pitchfork.com as well as a prominent (yet uncredited) spot during Adult Swim commercial breaks. Hudson Mohawke is one of few glitch hop artists to play at major music festivals such as Sasquatch! Music Festival.
Decline in sales




While hip hop music sales dropped a great deal in the mid-2000s (decade), rappers like Flo Rida were successful online and with singles, despite low album sales.


Starting in 2005, sales of hip hop music in the United States began to severely wane, leading Time magazine to question if mainstream hip-hop was "dying." Billboard Magazine found that, since 2000, rap sales dropped 44%, and declined to 10% of all music sales, which, while still a commanding figure when compared to other genres, is a significant drop from the 13% of all music sales where rap music regularly placed.[138][139] According to Courtland Milloy of The Washington Post, for the first time on five years, no rap albums were among the top 10 sellers in 2006.[140] NPR culture critic Elizabeth Blair noted that, "some industry experts say young people are fed up with the violence, degrading imagery and lyrics." However, the 2005 report Generation M: Media in the Lives of 8–18 Year-Olds found that hip hop music is by far the most popular music genre for children and teenagers with 65 percent of 8- to-18-year-olds listening to it on a daily basis.[141]
Other journalists say the music is just as popular as it ever was, but that fans have found other means to consume the music,[142] such as illegally downloading music through P2P networks, instead of purchasing albums and singles from legitimate stores. For example, Flo Rida is known for his low album sales regardless of his singles being mainstream and having digital success. His second album R.O.O.T.S. sold only 200,000+ total units in the U.S., which could not line up to the sales of the album's lead single "Right Round". This also happened to him in 2008.[143] Some put the blame on the lack of strong lyrical content that hip hop once had. Another example is Soulja Boy Tell 'Em's 2007 debut album souljaboytellem.com was met with negative reviews.[144] Lack of sampling, a key element of early hip hop, has also been noted for the decrease in quality of modern albums. For example, there are only four samples used in 2008's Paper Trail by T.I., while there are 35 samples in 1998's Moment of Truth by Gang Starr. The decrease in sampling is in part due to it being too expensive for producers.[145]
In Byron Hurt's documentary Hip Hop: Beyond Beats and Rhymes, he claims that hip hop had changed from "clever rhymes and dance beats" to "advocating personal, social and criminal corruption."[146] Despite the fall in record sales throughout the music industry,[147] hip-hop has remained a popular genre, with hip-hop artists still regularly topping the Billboard 200 Charts. In the first half of 2009 alone artists such as Eminem,[148] Rick Ross,[149] The Black Eyed Peas,[150] and Fabolous[151] all had albums that reached the #1 position on the Billboard 200 charts. Eminem's album Relapse was one of the fastest selling albums of 2009.[152]
Musical theatre




In the 2000s, popular Broadway musicals such as Rent incorporated hip hop music influences. This picture shows the Broadway cast from 2005.


Hip hop music has influenced musical theater. Rap-style verses were used in musical theater as early as 1956 in the production My Fair Lady.[153] Rap is used popular musicals such as Rent and Dreamgirls[154] While more notable for funk than hip hop, the Broadway musical Bring in 'da Noise, Bring in 'da Funk fuses tap dance and hip hop dance styles, and includes rap.[155] Hip hop music was used in Off Broadway shows in the 1990s and early 2000s, with the musicals So! What Happens Now? and Jam on the Groove.[156] In the Heights used hip hop music, rapping and hip hop dancing. With music and lyrics by Lin Manuel Miranda and book by Quiara Alegría Hudes, it was performed off Broadway in 2007. The 2008 Broadway production fused salsa and hip hop styles, and included rap.[157] Miranda brought hip hop to Richard Rogers Theater a second time in 2015 with his production Hamilton.[158] The show had box office success. Hamilton and In the Heights included rap and the cast recording of Hamilton made a number one album on the Billboard rap charts. The success of Hamilton shows that hip hop can have a key role in musical theater.[159]
Innovation and revitalization




Kanye West performing in 2008


During the mid-2000s, alternative hip hop secured a place in the mainstream, due in part to the crossover success of artists such as OutKast, Kanye West, and Gnarls Barkley.[20] Not only did OutKast's Speakerboxxx/The Love Below receive high acclaim from music critics, manage to appeal to listeners of all ages, and span numerous musical genres – including rap, rock, R&B, punk, jazz, indie, country, pop, electronica and gospel – but it also spawned two number-one hit singles and has been certified diamond by selling 11 times platinum by the RIAA for shipping more than 11 million units,[160] becoming one of the best selling hip-hop albums of all time as well as winning a Grammy Award for Album of the Year at the 46th Annual Grammy Awards being only the second rap album to do so. Industry observers view the sales race between Kanye West's Graduation and 50 Cent's Curtis as a turning point for hip hop.
West emerged the victor, selling nearly a million copies in the first week alone, proving that innovative rap music could be just as commercially viable as gangsta rap, if not more so.[161] Although he designed it as a melancholic pop rather than rap, Kanye's following 808s & Heartbreak would have a significant effect on hip hop music. While his decision to sing about love, loneliness, and heartache for the entirety of the album was at first heavily criticized by music audiences and the album predicted to be a flop, its subsequent critical acclaim and commercial success encouraged other mainstream rappers to take greater creative risks with their music.[162][163] During the release of The Blueprint 3, New York rap mogul Jay-Z revealed that next studio album would be an experimental effort, stating, "... it's not gonna be a #1 album. That's where I'm at right now. I wanna make the most experimental album I ever made."[164] Jay-Z elaborated that like Kanye, he was unsatisfied with contemporary hip hop, was being inspired by indie-rockers like Grizzly Bear and asserted his belief that the indie rock movement would play an important role in the continued evolution of hip-hop.[165]




In 2009, Time magazine placed M.I.A. in the Time 100 list of "World's Most Influential People"


The alternative hip hop movement is not limited only to the United States, as rappers such as Somali-Canadian poet K'naan, Japanese rapper Shing02, and Sri Lankan British artist M.I.A. have achieved considerable worldwide recognition. In 2009, TIME magazine placed M.I.A in the Time 100 list of "World's Most Influential people" for having "global influence across many genres."[166][167] Global themed movements have also sprung out of the international hip-hop scene with microgenres like "Islamic Eco-Rap" addressing issues of worldwide importance through traditionally disenfranchised voices.[168][169] Today, due in part to the increasing use of music distribution through the internet, many alternative rap artists find acceptance by far-reaching audiences. Several artists, such as Kid Cudi and Drake, have managed to attain chart-topping hit songs, "Day 'n' Nite" and "Best I Ever Had" respectively, by releasing their music on free online mixtapes without the help of a major record label. New artists such as Wale, J. Cole, Lupe Fiasco, The Cool Kids, Jay Electronica, and B.o.B, some of whom mention being directly influenced by their nineties alt-rap predecessors, in addition to the southern rap sound, while their music has been noted by critics as expressing eclectic sounds, life experiences, and emotions rarely seen in mainstream hip hop.[170][171]
2010s
On July 17, 2017, Forbes reported that hip-hop/R&B (which Nielsen SoundScan classifies as being the same genre) has recently usurped rock as the most consumed musical genre, becoming the most popular genre in music for the first time in U.S. history.[172][173][174][175]
World hip hop music




Pete Rock performing at Razel and Friends – Brooklyn Bowl, 2016


Hip-hop music has reached the cultural corridors of the globe and has been absorbed and reinvented around the world.[176] Hip hop music expanded beyond the US, often blending local styles with hip hop. Hip hop has globalized into many cultures worldwide, as evident through the emergence of numerous regional scenes. It has emerged globally as a movement based upon the main tenets of hip hop culture. The music and the art continue to embrace, even celebrate, its transnational dimensions while staying true to the local cultures to which it is rooted. Hip-hop's impact differs depending on each culture. Still, the one thing virtually all hip hop artists worldwide have in common is that they acknowledge their debt to those African-American people in New York who launched the global movement.[177]
Latinos and people from the Caribbean played an integral role in the early development of hip hop in New York, and the style spread to almost every country in that region. Hip hop first developed in the South Bronx, which had a high Latino, particularly Puerto Rican, population in the 1970s.[178] Some famous rappers from New York City of Puerto Rican origin are the late Big Pun, Fat Joe, and Angie Martinez. With Latino rap groups like Cypress Hill on the American charts, Mexican rap rock groups, such as Control Machete, rose to prominence in their native land.
In many Latin American countries, as in the U.S., hip hop has been a tool with which marginalized people can articulate their struggle. Hip hop grew steadily more popular in Cuba in the 1980s and 1990s through Cuba's Special Period that came with the fall of the Soviet Union.[179] During this period of economic crisis, which the country's poor and black populations especially hard, hip hop became a way for the country's Afro-descended population to embrace their blackness and articulate a demand for racial equality for black people in Cuba.[180] The idea of blackness and black liberation was not always compatible with the goals of the Cuban government, which was still operating under the idea that a raceless society was the correct realization of the Cuban Revolution. When hip-hop emerged, the Cuban government opposed the vulgar image that rappers portrayed, but later accepted that it might be better to have hip-hop under the influence of the Ministry of Culture as an authentic expression of Cuban Culture.[181] Rappers who explicitly speak about race or racism in Cuba are still under scrutiny by the government.[182] An annual Cuban hip hop concert, beginning in 1995, held at Alamar in Havana helped popularize Cuban hip hop. Famous Cuban rap groups include Krudas Cubensi and Supercrónica Obsesión.
Black and indigenous people in Latin America and Caribbean islands have been using hip hop for decades to discuss race and class issues in their respective countries. Brazilian hip hop is heavily associated with racial and economic issues in the country, where a lot of Afro-Brazilians live in economically disadvantaged communities, known in Brazil as favelas. São Paulo is where hip hop began in the country, but it soon spread all over Brazil, and today, almost every big Brazilian city, including Rio de Janeiro, Salvador, Curitiba, Porto Alegre, Belo Horizonte, Recife and Brasilia, has a hip hop scene. Some notable artists include Racionais MC's, Thaide, and Marcelo D2. One of Brazil's most popular rappers, MV Bill, has spent his career advocating for black youth in Rio de Janeiro.[182]
Reggaeton, a Puerto Rican style of music, has a lot of similarities with U.S. based hip hop. Both were influenced by Jamaican music, and both incorporate rapping and call and response.[183] Dancehall music and hip from the United States are both popular music in Puerto Rico, and reggaeton is the cumulation of different musical traditions founded by Afro-descended people in the Caribbean and the United States.[184] Some of reggaeton's most popular artists include Don Omar, Tego Calderón, and Daddy Yankee.
In Venezuela, social unrest at the end of the 1980s and beginning of the 1990s coincided with the rise of gangsta rap in the United States and led to the rise of that music in Venezuela as well. Venezuelan rappers in the 1990s generally modeled their music after gangsta rap, embracing and attempting to redefine negative stereotypes about poor and black youth as dangerous and materialistic and incorporating socially conscious critique of Venezuela's criminalization of young, poor, Afro-descended people into their music.[185]
In Haiti, hip hop developed in the early 1980s. Master Dji and his songs "Vakans" and "Politik Pa m" are mostly credited with the rise of Haitian hip hop. What later became known as "Rap Kreyòl" grew in popularity in the late 1990s with King Posse and Original Rap Stuff. Due to cheaper recording technology and flows of equipment to Haiti, more Rap Kreyòl groups are recording songs, even after the January 12 earthquake. Haitian hip hop has recently become a way for artists of Haitian backgrounds in the Haiti and abroad to express their national identity and political opinions about their country of origin.[186] Rappers have embraced the red and blue of the Flag of Haiti and rapping in Haitian Creole to display their national origin. In the Dominican Republic, a recording by Santi Y Sus Duendes and Lisa M became the first single of merenrap, a fusion of hip hop and merengue.




De La Soul at Demon Days Live in 2005


In Europe, Africa, and Asia, hip hop began to move from the underground to mainstream audiences. In Europe, hip hop was the domain of both ethnic nationals and immigrants. British hip hop, for example, became a genre of its own and spawned artists such as Wiley, Dizzee Rascal, The Streets and many more. Germany produced the well-known Die Fantastischen Vier as well as several Turkish performers like the controversial Cartel, Kool Savaş, and Azad. Similarly, France has produced a number of native-born stars, such as IAM and Suprême NTM, MC Solaar, Rohff, Rim'K or Booba. In the Netherlands, important nineties rappers include The Osdorp Posse, a crew from Amsterdam, Extince, from Oosterhout, and Postmen. Italy found its own rappers, including Jovanotti and Articolo 31, grow nationally renowned, while the Polish scene began in earnest early in the decade with the rise of PM Cool Lee. In Romania, B.U.G. Mafia came out of Bucharest's Pantelimon neighborhood, and their brand of gangsta rap underlines the parallels between life in Romania's Communist-era apartment blocks and in the housing projects of America's ghettos.
One of the countries outside the US where hip-hop is most popular is the United Kingdom. In the 2000s a derivative genre from Hip-Hop (as well as UK Garage and Drum and Bass) known as Grime became popular with artists such as Dizzee Rascal becoming successful. Although it is immensely popular, many British politicians criticize the music for what they see as promoting theft and murder, similar to gangsta rap in America. These criticisms have been deemed racist by the mostly Black British grime industry. Despite its controversial nature, grime has had a major effect on British fashion and pop music, with many young working-class youth emulating the clothing worn by grime stars like Dizzee Rascal and Wiley. There are many subgenres of grime, including "Rhythm and Grime," a mix of R&B and grime, and grindie, a mix of indie rock and grime popularized by indie rock band Hadouken!
In Germany and France, gangsta rap has become popular among youths who like the violent and aggressive lyrics. Some German rappers openly or comically flirt with Nazism; for example, Bushido (born Anis Mohamed Youssef Ferchichi) raps "Salutiert, steht stramm, Ich bin der Leader wie A" (Salute, stand to attention, I am the leader like 'A') and Fler had a hit with the record Neue Deutsche Welle (New German Wave) complete with the title written in Third Reich style Gothic print and advertised with an Adolf Hitler quote. These references also spawned great controversy in Germany. Meanwhile, in France, artists like Kery James' Idéal J maintained a radical, anti-authoritarian attitude and released songs like Hardcore which attacked the growth of the French far right. In the Netherlands, MC Brainpower went from being an underground battle rapper to mainstream recognition in the Benelux, thus influencing numerous rap artists in the region. In Israel, rapper Subliminal reaches out to Israeli youth with political and religious-themed lyrics, usually with a Zionist message.




The German rapper Fler caused significant controversy with his music.


In Asia, mainstream stars rose to prominence in the Philippines, led by Francis Magalona, Rap Asia, MC Lara and Lady Diane. In Japan, where underground rappers had previously found a limited audience, and popular teen idols brought a style called J-rap to the top of the charts in the middle of the 1990s. Of particular importance is the influence on East Asian nations, where hip hop music has become fused with local popular music to form different styles such as K-pop, C-pop and J-pop.
Israel's hip hop grew greatly in popularity at the end of the decade, with several stars both Palestinian (Tamer Nafar) and Israeli (Subliminal). In Portugal hip hop has his own kind of rapping, which is more political and underground scene, they are known for Valete, Dealema and Halloween. Russian hip hopemerged during last years of Soviet Union and cemented later, with groups like Malchishnik and Bad Balance enjoying mainstream popularity in the 1990s, while Ligalize and Kasta were popular in the 2000s. In former Yugoslavia hip hop first appeared during the 1980s mostly with Serbian hip hop with performers such as B-boy, The Master Scratch Band, Badvajzer, and others. During the late 1990s hip hop had a boom, with Rambo Amadeus and later Beogradski sindikat becoming a major performer. Bosnian and Herzegovinian hip hop is nowadays dominated by Edo Maajka. In the region hip hop is often used as a political and social message in song themes such as war, profiteering, corruption, etc. Frenkie, another Bosnian rapper, is associated with Edo Maajka, and has collaborated beyond Bosnian borders.
In Tanzania in the early 2000s, local hip hop artists became popular by infusing local styles of Afrobeat and arabesque melodies, dancehall and hip-hop beats with Swahili lyrics.
Rap linguistics
In September 2014 a course in rap linguistics was offered at the University of Calgary in Calgary, Alberta,[187] "examining rap from cultures as diverse as German, French, Navajo and even the Sami people of Northern Europe." The course has difficult content as rap is studied using methodologies applied in linguistics, such as grammar analysis and measurement of vowel sounds using software.[188] According to associate professor Darin Flynn, who is teaching this course, rap heroes, such as Eminem or Jay-Z, are "true poet laureate[s] of the working class"[188] and their songs "crisscross sound, emotion, grammar and multiple metaphors".[188]
Return of the Golden-Era
During the late 2010s, many golden age hip hop artists announced their return to performing, including Eric B. & Rakim,[189] Pete Rock & CL Smooth[190] and A Tribe Called Quest with their latest album titled We Got It from Here... Thank You 4 Your Service.
See also


Music portal
Hip hop portal
African American portal



List of hip hop music festivals
List of hip hop genres


Notes


^ "Hip-Hop's Jazz Roots". Merriam-Urban Jazz. Urban Jazz, Incorporated. Retrieved August 24, 2015. [permanent dead link]
^ Vladimir Bogdanov (editor), All Music Guide to Electronica: The Definitive Guide To Electronic Music, page 404 (Backbeat Books, 2001). ISBN 0-87930-628-9. Quote: "Honing a fusion of rock, pop, and rap which they dubbed 'grebo', the Poppies kickstarted a small revolution."
^ Merriam-Webster Dictionary entry on hip-hop, retrieved from merriam-webster.com: A subculture especially of inner-city black youths who are typically devotees of rap music; the stylized rhythmic music that commonly accompanies rap; also rap together with this music.
^ a b c d Encyclopædia Britannica article on rap, retrieved from britannica.com: Rap, musical style in which rhythmic and/or rhyming speech is chanted ("rapped") to musical accompaniment. This backing music, which can include digital sampling (music and sounds extracted from other recordings by a DJ), is also called hip-hop, the name used to refer to a broader cultural movement that includes rap, deejaying (turntable manipulation), graffiti painting, and break dancing.
^ AllMusic article for rap, retrieved from AllMusic.com
^ Harvard Dictionary of Music article for rap, retrieved from CredoReference
^ Kugelberg, Johan (2007). Born in the Bronx. New York: Oxford University Press. p. 17. ISBN 978-0-7893-1540-3. 
^ Brown, Lauren (February 18, 2009). "Hip to the Game – Dance World vs. Music Industry, The Battle for Hip Hop's Legacy". Movmnt Magazine. Retrieved July 30, 2009. 
^ Chang, Jeff (2005). Can't Stop Won't Stop: A History of the Hip Hop Generation. New York: St. Martin's Press. p. 90. ISBN 0-312-30143-X. 
^ Harvard Dictionary of Music article for hip hop, retrieved from Google Books: While often used to refer to rap music, hip hop more properly denotes the practice of the entire subculture
^ AllMusic article for Hip-hop/Urban, retrieved from AllMusic.com: Hip-Hop is the catch-all term for rap and the culture it spawned. Archived March 11, 2012, at the Wayback Machine.
^ Encyclopædia Britannica article on hip-hop, retrieved from britannica.com: Hip-hop, cultural movement that attained widespread popularity in the 1980s and '90s; also, the backing music for rap, the musical style incorporating rhythmic and/or rhyming speech that became the movement's most lasting and influential art form.
^ "Hip-hop". Merriam-Webster Dictionary. Merriam-Webster, Incorporated. Retrieved February 5, 2017. 
^ "Hip-hop". Oxford English Dictionary. Oxford University Press. Retrieved October 6, 2011. 
^ Dyson, Michael Eric, 2007, Know What I Mean?: Reflections on Hip-Hop, Basic Civitas Books, p. 6.
^ McNamee, David (January 11, 2010). "Hey, what's that sound: Turntablism". www.theguardian.com. The Guardian. Retrieved March 22, 2017. 
^ a b "hip hop". The Encyclopedia of New York State. Syracuse University Press. Retrieved January 12, 2010. 
^ a b Benson, G. (2010).Lonely Planet USA, Lonely Planet
^ Lamont, Michele (1999). The Cultural Territories of Race: Black and White Boundaries. University of Chicago Press. p. 334. Retrieved January 18, 2015. 
^ a b Michel, Sia (September 18, 2006). "Critics' Choice: New CD's". The New York Times. Retrieved May 10, 2008. 
^ a b c "Keith Cowboy – The Real Mc Coy". Web.archive.org. March 17, 2006. Archived from the original on March 17, 2006. Retrieved January 12, 2010. 
^ "Afrika Bambaataa talks about the roots of Hip Hop". 
^ Zulunation.com (cached)
^ Hagar, Steven. "Afrika Bambaataa's Hip-Hop," The Village Voice
^ Hager, Steven. Hip Hop: The Illustrated History of Break Dancing, Rap Music, and Graffiti. St Martins Press, 1984 (out of print).
^ Castillo-Garsow, Melissa; Nichols, Jason (2016). La Verdad: An International Dialogue on Hip Hop Latinidades. Columbus: Ohio University Press. pp. ix. ISBN 978-0-8142-1315-5. 
^ a b Crossley, Scott. "Metaphorical Conceptions in Hip-Hop Music", African American Review, St Louis University Press, 2005. pp. 501–502
^ a b Alridge D, Steward J. "Introduction: Hip Hop in History: Past, Present, and Future", Journal of African American History, 2005. pp. 190.
^ Ogbar, Jeffrey (May 2001). ""Yele, Yele": Caribbean Identity and the Rubric of Race in U.S-Based Hip-Hop" (PDF). University of Florida Digital Collections. 
^ a b c Stas Bekman: stas (at) stason.org. "What is "Dub" music anyway? (Reggae)". Stason.org. Retrieved January 12, 2010. 
^ Karon, Tony (September 22, 2000). "'Hip-Hop Nation' Is Exhibit A for America's Latest Cultural Revolution". Time. Retrieved May 27, 2014. 
^ Farley, Christopher John (October 18, 1999). "Rock's New Spin". Time. Retrieved May 27, 2014. 
^ Campbell & Chang 2005, p. ??.
^ "Birthplace Of Hip Hop – History Detectives – PBS". www.pbs.org. Retrieved June 20, 2017. 
^ Neumann, Fredreich (2000). "Hip hop: Origins, Characteristics and Creative Processes". The World of Music. 42: 51–63. JSTOR 41699313. 
^ "The History of Hip Hop Music". www.acesandeighths.com. Retrieved June 20, 2017. 
^ Browne, P. The guide to United States popular culture Popular Press, 2001. p. 386
^ Kool Herc, in Israel (director), The Freshest Kids: A History of the B-Boy, QD3, 2002.
^ "The History Of Hip Hop". www.daveyd.com. Retrieved June 20, 2017. 
^ a b "The Story of Rapper's Delight by Nile Rodgers". RapProject.tv. Retrieved October 12, 2008. 
^ Lee, Jennifer 8. (January 15, 2008). "Tenants Might Buy Birthplace of Hip-Hop" (weblog). The New York Times. Retrieved March 10, 2009. 
^ Kenner, Rob. "Dancehall", in The Vibe History of Hip-hop, ed. Alan Light, 350-7. New York: Three Rivers Press, 1999.
^ Toop, David. The Rap Attack: African Jive to New York Hip Hop. Boston: South End Press, 1984.
^ Brown, Mike. "Grand Master Mele Mel: Gun Show Part One". AllHipHop.com. Archived from the original on January 18, 2007. 
^ Forman M; M. Neal, That's the joint! The hip-hop studies reader, Routledge, 2004. p. 2.
^ Frum, David (2000). How We Got Here: The '70s. New York, New York: Basic Books. pp. 14–15. ISBN 0-465-04195-7. 
^ Jody Rosen, "A Rolling Shout-Out to Hip-Hop History", The New York Times, February 12, 2006
^ a b c Chang 2007, p. 62.
^ Zimmer, Amy (February 20, 2006). "Bringing that beat back – on the E train". Metro.us. Archived from the original on August 5, 2008. 
^ del Barco, Mandalit. "NPR : Breakdancing, Present at the Creation". www.npr.org. Retrieved June 20, 2017. 
^ Pareles, Jon (March 13, 2007). "The Message From Last Night: Hip-Hop is Rock 'n' Roll, and the Hall of Fame Likes It". The New York Times. p. 3. Retrieved March 10, 2009. 
^ a b c Diawara 1998, pp. 237–76
^ "Culture – 40 years on from the party where hip hop was born". BBC. August 9, 2013. Retrieved August 24, 2014. 
^ "With the invention of sound recording, it was only a matter of time until the device which records itself becomes the instrument. The moment in popular culture a sound playback device became the instrument was in early hip-hop. The use of the turntable, and particularly two turntables, is characteristic. You could set up two turntables with two identical records, and keep a break going forever. So the birth of sampling coincided with the birth of...the idea of the loop." Lott, Ryan. "AKAI MPC 2000/The History of Sampling". Joyful Noise Recordings. Retrieved September 27, 2013. 
^ Dye, David (February 22, 2007). "NPR: The Birth of Rap: A Look Back". NPR. 
^ [dead link]
^ Philen, Robert (November 5, 2007). "Robert Philen's Blog: Mythic Music: Stockhausen, Davis and Macero, Dub, Hip Hop, and Lévi-Strauss". Robertphilen.blogspot.com. Retrieved January 12, 2010. 
^ a b "Muhammad Ali: World's Greatest Boxer Was Also Hip-Hop Pioneer". Rolling Stone. June 4, 2016. 
^ "Muhammad Ali: 4 Ways He Changed America". Rolling Stone. June 5, 2016. 
^ "A database of sampled music". WhoSampled. Retrieved January 12, 2010. 
^ a b Fitzpatrick, Rob, "The 101 strangest records on Spotify: Warp 9 – It's A Beat Wave," May 14, 2014 [1]
^ The Story Of The Beginning and End Of The First Hip Hop Female MC...Luminary Icon Sha-Rock [2]
^ Campbell, K.E. (2005). Gettin' our groove on: rhetoric, language, and literacy for the hip hop generation, Wayne State University Press
^ Cepeda, R., George, N. 2004. And It Don't Stop: The Best American Hip-Hop Journalism of the Last 25 Years, New York, Faber and Faber Inc.
^ a b "History of Hip Hop – Old School". nciMUSIC. Retrieved January 12, 2010. 
^ "Article about Mele Mel (Melle Mel)". AllHipHop.com. 
^ Schloss, J.G. (2009). Foundation: b-boys, b-girls, and hip-hop culture in New York, Oxford University Press
^ a b * David Toop (1984/1991/2000). Rap Attack II: African Rap To Global Hip Hop, p.94, ?, 96. New York. New York: Serpent's Tail. ISBN 1-85242-243-2.
^ Bynoe, Y. (2006). Encyclopedia of rap and hip-hop culture, Greenwood Press
^ nciMUSIC – History of Hip Hop nciMUSIC.com
^ The History Of Hip Hop pg 8 Daveyd.com
^ Hess, Mickey (2009). Hip Hop in America: A Regional Guide. ABC-CLIO. p. xxxiii. ISBN 978-0-313-34323-0. 
^ Chris Heard, Thursday, October 14, 2004, 08:52 GMT 09:52 UK. "Silver jubilee for first rap hit", BBC News.
^ "eteksciki.info". 
^ Greenberg, Steve; Light, Alan [ed.] (1999). The VIBE History of Hip Hop. Three Rivers Press. p. 28. ISBN 0-609-80503-7
^ Anonym (February 26, 2004). "Hip Hop On Wax: Lady B – To The Beat Y'All". Hiphoponwax.blogspot.com. Retrieved January 12, 2010. 
^ Talbot, M,.(2000). The musical work: reality or invention?, Liverpool University Press
^ Toop, David (2000). Rap Attack 3: African Rap to Global Hip Hop. (Expanded Third Edition) London: Serpent's Tail, pp. 150–151 ISBN 1-85242-627-6.
^ Keyboard 14(11)  ; as cited in Théberge, Paul (1997). Any sound you can imagine: making music/consuming all counts of technology. Middletown, Conn: Wesleyan University Press. pp. 197. ISBN 0-8195-6309-9. 
^ Toop, David (2000). Rap Attack 3: African Rap To Global Hip Hop (Expanded Third Edition), London: Serpent's Tail, p. 151, ISBN 1-85242-627-6.
^ Jennifer Lucy Allan, Oren Ambarchi, Matt Anker, Lindsay Barrett, Marcus Boon, Carla Bozulich, Can, Brian Case, Philip Clark, Byron Coley, Richard Cook, Jack Cooke, Julian Cowley, Alan Cummings, Einsturzende Neubauten, Phil England, Kodwo Eshun, Mark Fell, Edward Fox, Phil Freeman, Jason Gross, Alexander Hacke, Mike Hames, Andy Hamilton, Max Harrison, Richard Henderson, Tony Herrington, Ken Hollings, Simon Hopkins, David Ilic, David Keenan, Biba Kopf, Ulrich Krieger, Alan Licht, Eric Lumbleau, Lydia Lunch, Howard Mandel, Merzbow, Keith Moliné, Will Montgomery, Brian Morton, Joe Muggs, Alex Neilson, Andrew Nosnitsky, Kasper Opstrup, Ian Penman, Edwin Pouncey, Brian Priestley, Reinhold Friedl, Adrian Rew, Simon Reynolds, Sam Richards, Robin Rimbaud, Bruce Russell, Sarah Angliss, Irmin Schmidt, Peter Shapiro, Brian Shimkovitz, Mark Sinker, Mark E. Smith, Daniel Spicer, Joseph Stannard, Sue Steward, David Stubbs, Atao Tanaka, David Toop, Dan Warburton, Richard Whitelaw, Barry Witherden, Rob Young. "A-Z of Electro". The Wire. Retrieved August 24, 2014. CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link)
^ [3] Archived September 30, 2008, at the Wayback Machine.
^ "Wilson, Greg, "Electro-Funk-What Did It All Mean" November 2002". Globaldarkness.com. Retrieved August 24, 2014. 
^ MCM retrospective on Sidney: « on peut dire aujourd'hui que Sidney est le papa du hip-hop français. Concepteur de l'émission H.I.P. H.O.P. en 1984 (1ère émission rap au monde diffusée à l'époque le dimanche à 14h00 avant Starsky & Hutch), ce Dj/rappeur/breakeur extravagant fait découvrir cette nouvelle tendance américaine aux Français, à peine remis de la vague disco, et crée des vocations (Joey Starr, Passi, Stomy Bugsy...) » H.I.P H.O.P – L'émission Mythique de Sidney Archived February 7, 2009, at the Wayback Machine.
^ "International Man of Mystery". Theme Magazine. January 8, 2010. Archived from the original on March 29, 2015. Retrieved January 12, 2010. 
^ name: Toop p.151
^ Thomas, Stephen. "Licensed to Ill". AllMusic. Archived from the original on March 10, 2010. Retrieved January 12, 2010. 
^ Jon Caramanica, "Hip-Hop's Raiders of the Lost Archives", New York Times, June 26, 2005.
Cheo H. Coker, "Slick Rick: Behind Bars", Rolling Stone, March 9, 1995.
Lonnae O'Neal Parker, "U-Md. Senior Aaron McGruder's Edgy Hip-Hop Comic Gets Raves, but No Takers", Washington Post, August 20, 1997. Archived May 12, 2011, at the Wayback Machine.
^ Jake Coyle of Associated Press, "Spin magazine picks Radiohead CD as best", published in USA Today, June 19, 2005.
Cheo H. Coker, "Slick Rick: Behind Bars" Archived February 2, 2010, at the Wayback Machine., Rolling Stone, March 9, 1995.
Andrew Drever, "Jungle Brothers still untamed", The Age [Australia], October 24, 2003.
^ Roni Sariq, "Crazy Wisdom Masters" Archived November 23, 2008, at the Wayback Machine., City Pages, April 16, 1997.
Scott Thill, "Whiteness Visible" AlterNet, May 6, 2005.
Will Hodgkinson, "Adventures on the wheels of steel", The Guardian, September 19, 2003.
^ Per Coker, Hodgkinson, Drever, Thill, O'Neal Parker and Sariq above. Additionally:
Cheo H. Coker, "KRS-One: Krs-One", Rolling Stone, November 16, 1995.
Andrew Pettie, "'Where rap went wrong'", Daily Telegraph, August 11, 2005.
Mosi Reeves, "Easy-Chair Rap" Archived November 4, 2006, at the Wayback Machine., Village Voice, January 29, 2002.
Greg Kot, "Hip-Hop Below the Mainstream", Los Angeles Times, September 19, 2001.
Cheo Hodari Coker, "'It's a Beautiful Feeling'", Los Angeles Times, August 11, 1996.
Scott Mervis, "From Kool Herc to 50 Cent, the story of rap – so far", Pittsburgh Post-Gazette, February 15, 2004.
^ Cheo H. Coker, "Slick Rick: Behind Bars", Rolling Stone, March 9, 1995. Archived February 2, 2010, at the Wayback Machine.
^ a b Jake Coyle of Associated Press, "Spin magazine picks Radiohead CD as best", published in USA Today, June 19, 2005.
^ Scott Mervis, "From Kool Herc to 50 Cent, the story of rap – so far", Pittsburgh Post-Gazette, February 15, 2004.
^ Cobb, Jelani William, 2007, To the Break of Dawn, NYU Press, p. 47.
^ "The '80s were golden age of hip-hop – RAP/HIP-HOP MUSIC". MSNBC. August 4, 2004. Retrieved April 23, 2010. 
^ a b c Philips, Chuck (July 19, 1992). "COVER STORY : The Uncivil War : The battle between the Establishment and supporters of rap music reopens old wounds of race and class". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved January 2, 2014. 
^ "Gangsta Rap – What Is Gangsta Rap". Rap.about.com. October 31, 2009. Retrieved April 23, 2010. 
^ Ritchie, Ryan (February 28, 2007). "Eazy to be hard". Press Telegram. Los Angeles Newspaper group. Archived from the original on March 4, 2007. Retrieved January 26, 2008. 
^ Deflem, Mathieu (1993). Rap, Rock, and Censorship: Popular Culture and the Technologies of Justice. Retrieved July 21, 2012. 
^ a b Philips, Chuck (July 19, 1992). "COVER STORY : 'Arnold Schwarzenegger blew away dozens of cops as the Terminator. But I don't hear anybody complaining.' : A Q & A with Ice-T about rock, race and the 'Cop Killer' furor". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved January 2, 2014. 
^ a b Jones IV, James T (December 20, 1990). "MAINSTREAM RAP;Cutting-edge sound tops pop in a year of controversy;Video's child take beat to new streets". USA Today. p. 1.A. Retrieved June 7, 2012. 
^ a b c Simpson, Janice C. (February 5, 1990). "Music: Yo! Rap Gets on the Map". Time. New York. 135: 60. Retrieved June 7, 2012. 
^ "About Us". Hip Hop Movement. Retrieved January 26, 2017. 
^ "The Son Of Hip-Hop, Ronald Savage, Speaks About His Disability, Discrimination &…". kriphopnation.com. February 6, 2017. Retrieved June 20, 2017. 
^ http://nebula.wsimg.com/c76a8fcce85a67bf6f082216067fa335?AccessKeyId=675D7983D578D24BBD95&disposition=0&alloworigin=1
^ a b Hilburn, Robert (February 4, 1990). "Rap—The Power and the Controversy : Success has validated pop's most volatile form, but its future impact could be shaped by the continuing Public Enemy uproar". Los Angeles Times. Los Angeles Times. Retrieved June 7, 2012. 
^ "archived". Archived from the original on September 4, 2009. Retrieved February 23, 2010. 
^ "Please Hammer, Don't Hurt 'Em: Overview". AllMusic. 
^ "archived". Archived from the original on January 25, 2003. Retrieved March 31, 2010. 
^ CHRISTOPHER JOHN FARLEY (June 24, 2001). "Rap's Teen Idols Return". Time. Retrieved September 7, 2012. 
^ Cassidy, John. "The Talk of the Town: Under the Hammer". The New Yorker. Retrieved September 7, 2012. 
^ "Mc Hammer Biography". Sing365.com. Archived from the original on July 15, 2012. Retrieved September 7, 2012. 
^ Kyllonen, Tommy (2007). "An unorthodox culture: hip-hop's history". Un.orthodox: Church. Hip-Hop. Culture. Zondervan. p. 92. ISBN 0-310-27439-7. 
^ a b "hip-hop (music and cultural movement) – Britannica Online Encyclopedia". Encyclopædia Britannica. February 13, 2005. Retrieved September 7, 2012. 
^ Batey, Angus (October 7, 2010). "The hip-hop heritage society". The Guardian. London. Retrieved November 8, 2011. 
^ Coates, Ta-Nehisi (August 17, 2007). "Hip-hop's Down Beat". Time. Retrieved April 16, 2012. 
^ Martinez, Michael (February 9, 2011). "The music dies for once popular 'Guitar Hero' video game". CNN. Archived from the original on August 11, 2011. Retrieved November 27, 2011. 
^ "Hardcore Rap : Significant Albums, Artists and Songs, Most Viewed". AllMusic. Retrieved September 7, 2012. 
^ Huey, Steve. "The Infamous at Allmusic". Retrieved January 1, 2007. 
^ Huey, Steve. "Hell on Earth at Allmusic". Retrieved January 1, 2007. 
^ Osorio, Kim. "1994: The (Second) Most Important Year In Hip Hop". The Source. 
^ "The Murders of gangsta rappers Tupac Shakur and Notorious B.I.G. - Crime Library on truTV.com". Trutv.com. November 30, 1994. Archived from the original on June 1, 2009. Retrieved January 12, 2010. 
^ "The Chronic > Charts & Awards > Billboard Albums". AllMusic. December 15, 1992. Retrieved January 12, 2010. 
^ Nelson, Havelock (March 18, 1993). "The Chronic : Dr. Dre : Review". Rolling Stone. Retrieved January 12, 2010. 
^ "Snoop Dogg Music News & Info |". Billboard. Retrieved January 12, 2010. 
^ Burks, Maggie (September 3, 2008). "Southern Hip-Hop". Jackson Free Press. Retrieved September 11, 2008. 
^ Lomax, John (May 5, 2005). "Mouth of the South". Houston Press. Retrieved November 1, 2011. 
^ Westhoff, Ben (March 18, 2011). "Dirty South". The Village Voice. Archived from the original on April 23, 2011. Retrieved November 1, 2011. 
^ Ambrose, Joe (2001). "Moshing – An Introduction". The Violent World of Moshpit Culture. Omnibus Press. p. 5. ISBN 0-7119-8744-0. 
^ "Digable Planets Music News & Info". Billboard. Retrieved September 7, 2012. 
^ "The Slim Shady LP > Charts & Awards > Billboard Albums". AllMusic. February 23, 1999. Retrieved January 12, 2010. 
^ https://www.billboard.com/artist/431969/50+cent/chart
^ https://www.allmusic.com/album/r1078358
^ Jonathan Cohen, "'High School Musical 2' Starts Third Week At No. 1", Billboard, September 5, 2007.
^ Miller, Matt (June 10, 2008). "Dirty Decade: Rap Music from the South: 1997–2007". Southernspaces.org. Archived from the original on September 18, 2010. Retrieved January 12, 2010. 
^ Vibe, June 2006, "Oh Snap!"
^ "After 21% Decline In Sales, Rap Industry Takes A Hard Look At Itself". Futuremusic.com. April 9, 2006. Retrieved January 12, 2010. 
^ Ta-Nehisi Coates Friday, August 17, 2007 (August 17, 2007). "Hip-Hop's Down Beat". Time. Retrieved January 12, 2010. CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link)
^ Milloy, Courtland. "Gangsta Rap, Dying in the Street". The Washington Post, September 19, 2007.
^ Rideout, Victoria; Roberts, Donald F.; Foehr, Ulla F. (2005). "Generation M: Media in the Lives of 8–18 Year-Olds" (PDF). The Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation. Menlo Park, CA (March). Archived from the original (PDF) on March 7, 2006. Retrieved May 18, 2014. 
^ Blair, Elizabeth (March 11, 2007). "Is Hip-Hop Dying Or Has It Moved Underground?". National Public Radio – All Things Considered. Retrieved January 12, 2010. 
^ Martens, Todd (April 30, 2009). "Better as a song or a ring tone". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved April 30, 2009. 
^ "Soulja Boy Tell 'Em – Souljaboytellem.com – Hip Hop Album Review". Djbooth.net. Retrieved January 12, 2010. 
^ Newton, Matthew (December 1, 2008). "Is Sampling Dead? | by Matthew Newton". Matthew Newton. Archived from the original on September 25, 2009. Retrieved January 12, 2010. 
^ Crouch, Stanley (December 8, 2008). "For the future of hip-hop, all that glitters is not gold teeth". Seattle Post-Intelligencer. Retrieved December 11, 2008. 
^ Sabbagh, Dan (June 18, 2008). "Music sales fall to their lowest level in over twenty years". The Times. London, United Kingdom. Retrieved January 12, 2010. 
^ Kaufman, Gil (May 27, 2009). "Eminem's Relapse Notches Biggest Billboard Debut Of 2009". MTV News. Retrieved January 12, 2010. 
^ "Rick Ross Debuts At No. 1 On Billboard 200 For Third Time". Billboard. September 14, 2009. Retrieved January 12, 2010. 
^ Caulfield, Keith (June 17, 2009). "Black Eyed Peas 'E.N.D.' Up At No. 1 On Billboard 200". Billboard. Retrieved January 12, 2010. 
^ Monica Herrera; Keith Caulfield (August 5, 2009). "Fabolous Tops Billboard 200; Jackson's 'Ones' Now 2009's Second-Best Seller". Billboard. Retrieved January 12, 2010. 
^ "Dizzee Rascal – Dizzee And Eminem Land Fastest-Selling No 1S Of 2009". Contactmusic.com. May 24, 2009. Retrieved January 12, 2010. 
^ Dekic, Megan. "VINTAGE PLAYBILL: My Fair Lady, 1956". Playbill. Retrieved December 6, 2016. 
^ Cerasaro, Pat. "SOUND OFF Special Edition: Top 10 Raddest & Baddest Rap Songs In Broadway History". Broadway World. 
^ "Bring in 'da Noise, Bring in 'da Funk". guidetomusicaltheatre.com. Retrieved February 5, 2017. 
^ Chang, Jeff. ""Dancing on the Through-Line"" (PDF). colum.edu. Archived from the original on November 30, 2011. Retrieved December 6, 2016. CS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknown (link)
^ Jones, Jones. "In the Heights Will Play Broadway's Richard Rodgers Starting February 2008". Playbill. Retrieved November 29, 2016. 
^ Gioia, Michael. "History in the Making – Revolutionary Musical Hamilton Opens on Broadway Tonight". Playbill. Retrieved November 28, 2016. 
^ Tepper, Jennifer. "Are We Living in a New Golden Age of Musical Theatre?". Playbill. Retrieved November 28, 2016. 
^ "Gold and Platinum – Diamond Awards". Recording Industry Association of America. Archived from the original on May 16, 2007. 
^ Sexton, Paul (September 17, 2007). "Kanye Defeats 50 Cent On U.K. Album Chart". Billboard. Retrieved May 31, 2012. 
^ Reid, Shaheem (October 3, 2008). "Common Praises Kanye's Singing; Lupe Fiasco Plays CEO: Mixtape Monday". MTV. Retrieved November 23, 2008. 
^ "Urban Review: Kanye West, 808s and Heartbreak". The Observer. London: Guardian News and Media Ltd. November 9, 2008. Retrieved November 24, 2008. 
^ Kash, Tim; Reid, Shaheem; Rodriguez, Jayson (September 3, 2009). "Exclusive: Jay-Z's Next LP Will Be 'The Most Experimental I Ever Made'". MTV. Retrieved September 3, 2009. 
^ Kash, Tim; Montgomery, James (September 3, 2009). "Jay-Z Hopes Bands Like Grizzly Bear Will 'Push Hip-Hop'". MTV. Retrieved September 3, 2009. 
^ Jonze, Spike (April 30, 2009). "The 2009 – TIME 100". Time. Retrieved January 12, 2010. 
^ "The 2009 TIME 100". Time. Retrieved January 12, 2010. 
^ "Class Is In Session An Interview With Rapper Professor A.L.I". sfbayview.com. Retrieved June 9, 2011. 
^ "INTERVIEW: Professor A.L.I.'s Islamic Eco-Rap Sends Environment Lessons To Muslims". Greenprophet.com. Retrieved June 9, 2011. 
^ Hoard, Christian (September 17, 2009). "Kid Cudi: Hip-Hop's Sensitive Soul". Rolling Stone (1087): 40. 
^ Caramanica, Jon (September 12, 2008). "The Mining of Hip-Hop's Golden Age". The New York Times. Retrieved July 18, 2012. 
^ https://www.vibe.com/2017/07/hip-hop-popular-genre-nielsen-music/
^ https://www.forbes.com/sites/hughmcintyre/2017/07/17/hip-hoprb-has-now-become-the-dominant-genre-in-the-u-s-for-the-first-time/
^ http://www.xxlmag.com/news/2017/07/nielsen-hip-hop-rb-most-consumed-genres-u-s/
^ https://hypebeast.com/2017/7/hip-hop-rock-most-consumed-music-genre-united-states
^ Nawotka, Edward (December 10, 2004). "The globalization of hip-hop starts and ends with 'Where You're At'". USA Today. Retrieved January 12, 2010. 
^ https://moodle.brandeis.edu/file.php/3404/pdfs/kelley-foreword-vinyl-aint-final.pdf[permanent dead link]
^ Rivera, Raquel Z. (2003). New York Ricans from the hip hop zone (1st ed.). New York: Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 1403960445. OCLC 51031024. 
^ 1967–, Perry, Marc D.,. Negro soy yo : hip hop and raced citizenship in neoliberal Cuba. Durham. ISBN 9780822358855. OCLC 903675195. 
^ Perry, Marc D. (2016). Negro soy yo : hip hop and raced citizenship in neoliberal Cuba. Durham: Duke University Press. pp. 78–80. ISBN 9780822358855. OCLC 903675195. 
^ "CNN.com – Cuban hip-hop: The rebellion within the revolution – Nov. 25, 2002". archives.cnn.com. 2002-11-22. Archived from the original on 2009-08-27. Retrieved 2008-02-24. 
^ a b Gates, Henry Louis (2011). Black in Latin America. New York: New York University Press. p. 219. ISBN 9780814738184. OCLC 692291843. 
^ La verdad : an international dialogue on hip hop Latinidades. Castillo-Garsow, Melissa, 1984–, Nichols, Jason, 1978–. Columbus. p. 84. ISBN 9780814213155. OCLC 945948404. 
^ La verdad : an international dialogue on hip hop Latinidades. Castillo-Garsow, Melissa, 1984–, Nichols, Jason, 1978–. Columbus. p. 85. ISBN 9780814213155. OCLC 945948404. 
^ Fernandes, Sujatha (2012). Kwame Dixon, John Burdick, ed. "Comparative Perspectives on Afro-Latin America": 89. 
^ La verdad : an international dialogue on hip hop Latinidades. Castillo-Garsow, Melissa, 1984–, Nichols, Jason, 1978–. Columbus. p. 253. ISBN 9780814213155. OCLC 945948404. 
^ Zamon, Rebecca (September 3, 2014), Coolest Classes In Canada Will Make You Wish You Were Still A Student, The Huffington Post Canada, retrieved September 22, 2014 
^ a b c McCoy, Heath (September 22, 2014), Rap linguistics course 'cool' but challenging: Rap heroes are poet laureates of the working class, says associate professor Darin Flynn, Calgary, Alberta, retrieved September 22, 2014 
^ "Eric B. & Rakim to Reunite for 2017 Tour, Album Reissues". rollingstone.com. Retrieved June 20, 2017. 
^ "After 22 Years, Pete Rock and CL Smooth Are Finally Ready to Make New Music". spin.com. November 28, 2016. Retrieved June 20, 2017. 


References

David Toop (1984/1991). Rap Attack II: African Rap To Global Hip Hop. New York. New York: Serpent's Tail. ISBN 1-85242-243-2.
McLeod, Kembrew. Interview with Chuck D and Hank Shocklee. 2002. Stay Free Magazine.
Corvino, Daniel and Livernoche, Shawn (2000). A Brief History of Rhyme and Bass: Growing Up With Hip Hop. Tinicum, PA: Xlibris Corporation/The Lightning Source, Inc. ISBN 1-4010-2851-9[self-published source]
Hess, Mickey (2009). Hip Hop in America: A Regional Guide: Volume 1: East Coast and West Coast Greenwood. ISBN 0313343233
Rose, Tricia (1994). "Black Noise". Middletown, Connecticut: Wesleyan University Press. ISBN 0-8195-6275-0
Potter, Russell (1995) Spectacular Vernaculars: Hip-Hop and the Politics of Postmodernism. Albany: SUNY Press. ISBN 0-7914-2626-2
Light, Alan (ed). (1999). The VIBE History of Hip-Hop. New York: Three Rivers Press. ISBN 0-609-80503-7
George, Nelson (2000, rev. 2005). Hip-Hop America. New York: Penguin Books. ISBN 0-14-028022-7
Fricke, Jim and Ahearn, Charlie (eds). (2002). Yes Yes Y'All: The Experience Music Project Oral History of Hip Hop's First Decade. New York: Da Capo Press. ISBN 0-306-81184-7
Kitwana, Bakar (2004). The State of Hip-Hop Generation: how hip-hop's culture movement is evolving into political power. Retrieved December 4, 2006. From Ohio Link Database
Chang, Jeff (2005). Can't Stop Won't Stop: A History of the Hip-Hop Generation. Picador, ISBN 0-312-42579-1.

Further reading

George, Nelson. Hip Hop America. Penguin, 2005.
Katz, Mark. Groove Music. The Art and Cuture of the Hip Hop DJ. OUP, 2012.

External links



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Hip hop music.



Can't Stop, Won't Stop: A History of the Hip-Hop Generation — By Jeff Chang
Back in the Days — Vibe
Rap: Striking Tales of Black Frustration and Pride Shake the Pop Mainstream — By Robert Hilburn
When did Reggae become Rap? by D. George
National Geographic Hip Hop Overview at the Wayback Machine (archived October 14, 2008)
Olivo, W. (March 2001). "Phat Lines: Spelling Conventions in Rap Music". Written Language & Literacy. 4 (1): 67–85. doi:10.1075/wll.4.1.05oli. 
Uncivil War: The battle between the Establishment and supporters of rap music reopens old wounds of race and class  — By Chuck Philips







v
t
e


Hip hop






Breaking
DJing
Graffiti
MCing (rapping)





Culture



Battle rap
Dance
Fashion
Feminism

Activism


Festivals
Music
Production
Theater
Albums
Genres





History



Golden age
Old-school
New school
Electro
Feminist





Subgenres



Alternative hip hop
Acoustic hip hop
Bounce
Chicano rap
Chopped and screwed
Chopper
Christian hip hop
Cloud rap
Comedy hip hop
Conscious hip hop
Crunk
Dirty rap
Drill
East Coast
Experimental hip hop
Freestyle rap
Gangsta rap
G-funk
Hardcore hip hop
Horrorcore
Indie hip hop
Instrumental hip hop
LGBT hip hop
Memphis rap
Midwest
Nerdcore hip hop
Political hip hop
Pop rap
Snap music
Southern
Trap
Turntablism
Underground hip hop
West Coast





Fusion
genres



Baltimore club
Country rap
Crunkcore
Cumbia rap
Digital hardcore
Emo hip hop
Ghetto house
Ghettotech
Glitch hop
Grime
Hip hop soul
Hip house
Hiplife
Hipster hop
Hyphy
Igbo rap
Industrial hip hop
Jazz rap
Jersey club
Merenrap
New jack swing
Neo soul
Nu metal
Nu metalcore
Pop rap
Psychedelic hip hop
Rap metal
Rap opera
Rap rock
Trip hop
Urban Pasifika
Wonky





Other topics



Autotune
Beatboxing
DJ

DJ mixer
Record player
Turntablism


Drum machine
Sampler
Synthesizer
Music sequencer
Rapping





By nationality




African



Algerian
Gambian
Igbo
Ivorian
Kenyan
Moroccan
Nigerien
Senegalese
Tanzanian
Togolese
Zimbabwean





North American



Canadian
Greenlandic
Native American





Asian



Bangladeshi
Burmese
Chinese
Filipino
Hong Kong
Indian
Indonesian
Japanese
Korean
Malaysian
Nepalese
Pakistani
Singapore
Taiwanese
Thai





European



Albanian
Austrian
Azerbaijani
Belgian
Bosnian-Herzegovinian
British
Bulgarian
Czech
Dutch
Finnish
French
German
Greek
Hungarian
Icelandic
Italian
Macedonian
Polish
Portuguese
Romanian
Russian
Scottish
Serbian
Slovak
Slovenian
Spanish
Swedish
Swiss
Turkish
Ukrainian





Latin American



Brazilian
Cuban
Dominican
Haitian
Mexican
Salvadoran





Middle Eastern



Arabic
Egyptian
Iranian
Israeli
Lebanese
Palestinian
Yemeni





Oceanian



Australian
New Zealand











 Category
 Portal












v
t
e


Hip hop in the United States



Regions



East Coast
West Coast
Midwest
Southern





Cities



Atlanta
Baltimore
Chicago
Detroit
Memphis
Miami
New Orleans
Minneapolis/St. Paul
New York
Omaha
Philadelphia
Washington, D.C.









Authority control



GND: 4303517-6











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hip_hop_music&oldid=818512830"					Categories: Hip hopAfrican-American cultural historyAfrican-American cultureAfrican-American musicAmerican styles of music20th-century music genres21st-century music genresRadio formatsAfrican-American historyMusical improvisationMusical subculturesPopular music1990s fads and trends2000s fads and trends2010s fads and trendsHidden categories: All articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from April 2017Articles with permanently dead external linksWebarchive template wayback linksArticles with dead external links from January 2011CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors listCS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknownWikipedia indefinitely move-protected pagesWikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pagesUse mdy dates from June 2017All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from August 2017Articles with unsourced statements from May 2013Articles with unsourced statements from July 2010Accuracy disputes from December 2017Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers