For other uses, see Hispania (disambiguation).


Hispania






218 BC–5th century










Roman provinces of Hispania



Capital



Baetica: Corduba
Ulterior: Emerita Augusta
Citerior: Tarraco





Languages
Latin, various Paleohispanic languages


Religion
Traditional indigenous and Roman religion, followed by Christianity


Government
Autocracy


Emperor



 • 
AD 98 – AD 117
Trajan


 • 
AD 117 – AD 138
Hadrian


 • 
AD 379 to AD 395
Theodosius I


Legislature
Roman Senate


Historical era
Classical antiquity


 • 
Established
218 BC


 • 
Disestablished
5th century


Population


 • 
est.
5,000,000 or more 







Preceded by
Succeeded by






Carthaginian Iberia






Visigothic Kingdom



Kingdom of the Suebi









Today part of



 France (very small portion)
 Gibraltar (UK)
 Portugal
 Spain
 Andorra





Hispania (/hɪˈspænjə, -eɪniə/; Latin: [hɪsˈpaːnia]) was the Roman and Greek name for the Iberian Peninsula. Under the Republic, Hispania was divided into two provinces: Hispania Citerior and Hispania Ulterior. During the Principate, Hispania Ulterior was divided into two new provinces, Baetica and Lusitania, while Hispania Citerior was renamed Hispania Tarraconensis. Subsequently, the western part of Tarraconensis was split off, first as Hispania Nova, later renamed Callaecia (or Gallaecia, whence modern Galicia). From Diocletian's Tetrarchy (AD 284) onwards, the south of remaining Tarraconensis was again split off as Carthaginensis, and probably then too the Balearic Islands and all the resulting provinces formed one civil diocese under the vicarius for the Hispaniae (that is, the Celtic provinces). The name, Hispania, was also used in the period of Visigothic rule.
The modern placenames Spain and Hispaniola are both derived from Hispania.



Contents


1 Etymology
2 Pre-Roman history
3 Languages
4 Carthaginian Hispania
5 Roman Hispania

5.1 The Hispaniae
5.2 Byzantine reconquest


6 Germanic Hispania
7 End of Hispania
8 Economy
9 Climate
10 Sources and references

10.1 Modern sources in Spanish and Portuguese
10.2 Other modern sources
10.3 Classical sources
10.4 Neo-modern references


11 See also
12 References
13 External links



Etymology[edit]
The origin of the word Hispania is much disputed and the evidence for the various speculations are based merely upon what are at best mere resemblances, likely to be accidental, and suspect supporting evidence. One theory holds it to be of Punic derivation, from the Phoenician language of colonizing Carthage.[1] Specifically, it may derive from a Punic cognate of Hebrew אי-שפניא (i-shfania) meaning "island of the hyrax" or "island of the hare" or "island of the rabbit" (Phoenician-Punic and Hebrew are both Canaanite languages and therefore closely related to each other).[2] Some Roman coins of the Emperors Trajan and his son Hadrian, born in Hispania, depict Hispania and a rabbit. Golden Roman coin Aureus-Hadrianus showing the face of Hadrian in one side and Hispania with Rabbit. Others derive the word from Phoenician span, meaning "hidden", and make it indicate "a hidden", that is, "a remote", or "far-distant land".[3]
Another theory, proposed by the etymologist Eric Partridge in his work Origins, is that it is of Iberian derivation and that it is to be found in the pre-Roman name for Seville, Hispalis, which strongly hints at an ancient name for the country of *Hispa, an Iberian or Celtic root whose meaning is now lost. Isidore of Sevilla considered Hispania derived from Hispalis.[4] Hispalis may alternatively derive from Heliopolis (Greek for "city of the sun"). According to Manuel Pellicer Catalán, the name derives from Phoenician Spal "lowland", [5][6] rendering this explanation of Hispania dubious. Occasionally Hispania was called Hesperia Ultima, "the last western land" in Greek, by Roman writers, since the name Hesperia had already been used by the Greeks to indicate the Italian peninsula.
Another theory holds that the name derives from Ezpanna, the Basque word for "border" or "edge", thus meaning the farthest area or place.[7][8]
During Antiquity and Middle Ages, the literary texts derive the term Hispania from an eponymous hero named Hispan, who is mentioned for the first time in the work of the Roman historian Gnaeus Pompeius Trogus, in the 1st century BC.






Archaeological Roman Ensemble of Mérida (Emerita Augusta), Extremadura, Spain.






The Tower of Hercules in Corunna, Galicia, Spain, is the world's oldest Roman lighthouse still in use.[9]






The Roman Aqueduct of Segovia, Castile, Spain.






The Roman Temple of Évora (Liberatias Iulia), Alentejo, Portugal.




Although "Hispania" is the Latin root for the modern name "Spain", substituting Spanish for Hispanicus or Hispanic, or Spain for Hispania, should be done carefully and taking into account the correct context. The Estoria de España ("The History of Spain") written on the initiative of Alfonso X of Castile "El Sabio" ("the Wise"), between 1260 and 1274, during the Reconquest of Spain, is believed to be the first extended history of Spain in Old Spanish using the words "España" ("Spain") and "Españoles"("Spanish") to refer to Medieval Hispania. The use of Latin "Hispania", Castilian "España", Catalan "Espanya" and French "Espaigne", between others, to refer to Roman Hispania or Visigothic Hispania was common throughout all the Late Middle Ages. A document dated 1292 mentions the names of foreigners from Medieval Spain as "Gracien d'Espaigne".[10] Latin expressions using "Hispania" or "Hispaniae" like "omnes reges Hispaniae" are used often in the Middle Ages at the same time as the emerging Spain Romance languages during the Reconquista use the Romance version interchangeably. In James Ist Chronicle Llibre dels fets, written between 1208 and 1276, there are many instances of this: when it talks about the different Kings, "los V regnes de Espanya" ("The 5 Kings of Spain"); when it talks about a military fort built by the Christians saying that it is "de los meylors de Espanya" ("from the best of Spain"); when it declared that Catalonia, one of the integral parts of the Crown of Aragon, is "lo meylor Regne Despanya, el pus honrat, el pus noble" ("the best kingdom of Spain, the most honest, the most noble"); when it talks about the conflict that has existed for long "entre los sarrains e los chrestians, en Espanya" ("between Saracens and Christians, in Spain") [11] Since the borders of modern Spain do not coincide with those of the Roman province of Hispania or of the Visigothic Kingdom, it is important to understand the context of medieval Spain versus modern Spain. The Latin term Hispania, often used during Antiquity and the Low Middle Ages as a geographical name, starts to be used also with political connotations, as shown in the expression "Laus Hispaniae" ("Praise to Hispania") to describe the history of the peoples of the Iberian Peninsula of Isidore of Seville's "Historia de regibus Gothorum, Vandalorum et Suevorum". :

You are, Oh Spain, holy and always happy mother of princes and peoples, the most beautiful of all the lands that extend far from the West to India. You, by right, are now the queen of all provinces, from whom the lights are given not only the sunset, but also the East. You are the honor and ornament of the orb and the most illustrious portion of the Earth ... And for this reason, long ago, the golden Rome desired you

In modern history, Spain and Spanish have become increasingly associated with the Kingdom of Spain alone, although this process took several centuries. After the union of the central peninsular Kingdom of Castile with the eastern peninsular Kingdom of Aragon in the 15th century under the Catholic Monarchs in 1492, only Navarra and Portugal were left to complete the whole Peninsula under one Monarchy. Navarre followed soon after in 1512, and Portugal in 1580. During this time, the concept of Spain was still unchanged. The King of Portugal would protest energetically when during a public act King Fernando talked about the "Crown of Spain".[12] This sentiment was also shared by the Portuguese people, as shown by who is considered Portugal's and Portuguese language's greatest poet, Luís de Camões, when in 1572 he defined the Portuguese people as "Uma gente fortíssima de Espanha" ("A very strong people of Spain").[13] It was after the independence of Portugal in 1640 when the concept of Spain started to shift and be applied to all the Peninsula except Portugal. Even so, Portugal would still complain when the terms "Crown of Spain" or "Monarchy of Spain" were still used in the 18th century with the Treaty of Utrecht.[12]
Pre-Roman history[edit]
Main articles: Prehistoric Iberia and Pre-Roman peoples of the Iberian Peninsula
The Iberian peninsula has long been inhabited, first by early hominids such as Homo erectus, Homo heidelbergensis and Homo antecessor. In the Paleolithic period, the Neanderthals entered Iberia and eventually took refuge from the advancing migrations of modern humans. In the 40th millennium BC, during the Upper Paleolithic and the last ice age, the first large settlement of Europe by modern humans occurred. These were nomadic hunter-gatherers originating on the steppes of Central Asia. When the last Ice Age reached its maximum extent, during the 30th millennium BC, these modern humans took refuge in Southern Europe, namely in Iberia, after retreating through Southern France. In the millennia that followed, the Neanderthals became extinct and local modern human cultures thrived, producing pre-historic art such as that found in L'Arbreda Cave and in the Côa Valley.
In the Mesolithic period, beginning in the 10th millennium BC, the Allerød Oscillation occurred. This was an interstadial deglaciation that lessened the harsh conditions of the Ice Age. The populations sheltered in Iberian Peninsula (descendants of the Cro-Magnon) migrated and recolonized all of Western Europe. In this period one finds the Azilian culture in Southern France and Northern Iberia (to the mouth of the Douro river), as well as the Muge Culture in the Tagus valley.
The Neolithic brought changes to the human landscape of Iberia (from the 5th millennium BC onwards), with the development of agriculture and the beginning of the European Megalith Culture. This spread to most of Europe and had one of its oldest and main centres in the territory of modern Portugal, as well as the Chalcolithic and Beaker cultures.
During the 1st millennium BC, in the Bronze Age, the first wave of migrations into Iberia of speakers of Indo-European languages occurred. These were later (7th and 5th centuries BC) followed by others that can be identified as Celts. Eventually urban cultures developed in southern Iberia, such as Tartessos, influenced by the Phoenician colonization of coastal Mediterranean Iberia, with strong competition from the Greek colonization. These two processes defined Iberia's cultural landscape – Mediterranean towards the southeast and Continental in the northwest.
Languages[edit]




Linguistic map: This shows the Linguistic variation of the Iberian Peninsula at about 200 BC (at the end of the Second Punic War).


Main article: Languages of Iberia
Latin was the official language of Hispania during the Rome's more than 600 years of rule, and by the empire's end in Hispania around 460 AD, all the original Iberian languages, except the ancestor of modern Basque, were extinct. Even after the fall of Rome and the invasion of the Germanic Visigoths and Suebi, Latin was spoken by nearly all of the population, but in its common form known as Vulgar Latin, and the regional changes which led to the modern Iberian Romance languages had already begun.
Carthaginian Hispania[edit]




Carthaginian influence sphere before the First Punic War.


Further information: Second Punic War and Carthaginian Iberia
After its defeat by the Romans in the First Punic War (264 BC–241 BC), Carthage compensated for its loss of Sicily by rebuilding a commercial empire in Hispania.
The major part of the Punic Wars, fought between the Punic Carthaginians and the Romans, was fought on the Iberian Peninsula. Carthage gave control of the Iberian Peninsula and much of its empire to Rome in 201 BC as part of the peace treaty after its defeat in the Second Punic War, and Rome completed its replacement of Carthage as the dominant power in the Mediterranean area. By then the Romans had adopted the Carthaginian name, romanized first as Ispania. The term later received an H, much like what happened with Hibernia, and was pluralized as Hispaniae, as had been done with the Three Gauls.
Roman Hispania[edit]
Further information: Roman Conquest of Hispania and Romanization of Hispania




Hispania under Caesar Augustus's rule after the Cantabrian Wars in 29 BC


Roman armies invaded Hispania in 218 BC and used it as a training ground for officers and as a proving ground for tactics during campaigns against the Carthaginians, the Iberians, the Lusitanians, the Gallaecians and other Celts. It was not until 19 BC that the Roman emperor Augustus (r. 27 BC–AD 14) was able to complete the conquest (see Cantabrian Wars). Until then, much of Hispania remained autonomous.
Romanization proceeded quickly in some regions where we have references to the togati, and very slowly in others, after the time of Augustus, and Hispania was divided into three separately governed provinces (nine provinces by the 4th century). More importantly, Hispania was for 500 years part of a cosmopolitan world empire bound together by law, language, and the Roman road. But the impact of Hispania in the newcomers was also big. Caesar wrote on the Civil Wars that the soldiers from the Second Legion had become Hispanicized and regarded themselves as hispanicus.
Some of the peninsula's population were admitted into the Roman aristocratic class and they participated in governing Hispania and the Roman empire, although there was a native aristocracy class who ruled each local tribe. The latifundia (sing., latifundium), large estates controlled by the aristocracy, were superimposed on the existing Iberian landholding system.
The Romans improved existing cities, such as Lisbon (Olissipo) and Tarragona (Tarraco), established Zaragoza (Caesaraugusta), Mérida (Augusta Emerita), and Valencia (Valentia), and reduced other native cities to mere villages. The peninsula's economy expanded under Roman tutelage. Hispania served as a granary and a major source of metals for the Roman market, and its harbors exported gold, tin, silver, lead, wool, wheat, olive oil, wine, fish, and garum. Agricultural production increased with the introduction of irrigation projects, some of which remain in use today. The Romanized Iberian populations and the Iberian-born descendants of Roman soldiers and colonists had all achieved the status of full Roman citizenship by the end of the 1st century. The emperors Trajan (r. 98–117), Hadrian (r. 117–138), and Marcus Aurelius (r. 161–180) were of Hispanic origin. The Iberian denarii, also called argentum oscense by Roman soldiers, circulated until the 1st century BC, after which it was replaced by Roman coins.
Hispania was separated into two provinces (in 197 BC), each ruled by a praetor: Hispania Citerior ("Hither Hispania") and Hispania Ulterior ("Farther Hispania"). The long wars of conquest lasted two centuries, and only by the time of Augustus did Rome managed to control Hispania Ulterior. Hispania was divided into three provinces in the 1st century BC.
In the 4th century, Latinius Pacatus Drepanius, a Gallic rhetorician, dedicated part of his work to the depiction of the geography, climate and inhabitants of the peninsula, writing:






v
t
e


Roman conquest of Hispania






Second Punic War
Celtiberian Wars (First,Second)
Lusitanian War
Numantine War
Cantabrian Wars







This Hispania produces tough soldiers, very skilled captains, prolific speakers, luminous bards. It is a mother of judges and princes; it has given Trajan, Hadrian, and Theodosius to the Empire.

With time, the name Hispania was used to describe the collective names of the Iberian Peninsula kingdoms of the Middle Ages, which came to designate all of the Iberian Peninsula plus the Balearic Islands.
The Hispaniae[edit]




Roman Hispania in 125


During the first stages of Romanization, the peninsula was divided in two by the Romans for administrative purposes. The closest one to Rome was called Citerior and the more remote one Ulterior. The frontier between both was a sinuous line which ran from Cartago Nova (now Cartagena) to the Cantabrian Sea.
Hispania Ulterior comprised what are now Andalusia, Portugal, Extremadura, León, a great portion of the former Castilla la Vieja, Galicia, Asturias, and the Basque Country.
Hispania Citerior comprised the eastern part of former Castilla la Vieja, and what are now Aragon, Valencia, Catalonia, and a major part of former Castilla la Nueva.
In 27 BC, the general and politician Marcus Vipsanius Agrippa divided Hispania into three parts, namely dividing Hispania Ulterior into Baetica (basically Andalusia) and Lusitania (including Gallaecia and Asturias) and attaching Cantabria and the Basque Country to Hispania Citerior.
The emperor Augustus in that same year returned to make a new division leaving the provinces as follows:

Provincia Hispania Ulterior Baetica (or Hispania Baetica), whose capital was Corduba, presently Córdoba. It included a little less territory than present-day Andalusia—since modern Almería and a great portion of what today is Granada and Jaén were left outside—plus the southern zone of present-day Badajoz. The river Anas or Annas (Guadiana, from Wadi-Anas) separated Hispania Baetica from Lusitania.
Provincia Hispania Ulterior Lusitania (Lusitania), whose capital was Emerita Augusta (now Mérida) and without Gallaecia and Asturias.
Provincia Hispania Citerior (or Tarraconensis), whose capital was Tarraco (Tarragona). After gaining maximum importance this province was simply known as Tarraconensis and it comprised Gallaecia (modern Galicia and northern Portugal) and Asturias. In AD 69, the province of Mauretania Tingitana was incorporated into the Diocesis Hispaniarum.

By the 3rd century the emperor Caracalla made a new division which lasted only a short time. He split Hispania Citerior again into two parts, creating the new provinces Provincia Hispania Nova Citerior and Asturiae-Calleciae. In the year 238 the unified province Tarraconensis or Hispania Citerior was re-established.




Provinces of Hispania under the Tetrarchy


In the 3rd century, under the Soldier Emperors, Hispania Nova (the northwestern corner of Spain) was split off from Tarraconensis, as a small province but the home of the only permanent legion is Hispania, Legio VII Gemina. Beginning with Diocletian's Tetrarchy reform in AD 293, the new dioecesis Hispaniae became one of the four dioceses—governed by a vicarius—of the praetorian prefecture of Gaul (also comprising the provinces of Gaul, Germania and Britannia), after the abolition of the imperial Tetrarchs under the Western Emperor (in Rome itself, later Ravenna). The diocese, with capital at Emerita Augusta (modern Mérida), comprised the five peninsular Iberian provinces (Baetica, Gallaecia and Lusitania, each under a governor styled consularis; and Carthaginiensis, Tarraconensis, each under a praeses), the Insulae Baleares and the North African province of Mauretania Tingitana.
Christianity was introduced into Hispania in the 1st century and it became popular in the cities in the 2nd century. Little headway was made in the countryside, however, until the late 4th century, by which time Christianity was the official religion of the Roman Empire. Some heretical sects emerged in Hispania, most notably Priscillianism, but overall the local bishops remained subordinate to the Pope. Bishops who had official civil as well as ecclesiastical status in the late empire continued to exercise their authority to maintain order when civil governments broke down there in the 5th century. The Council of Bishops became an important instrument of stability during the ascendancy of the Visigoths.
Rome continued to dominate the area until the collapse of the Empire in the west. Four tribes of invaders arrived in 409 and caused much trouble. Two of them, the Alans and Siling Vandals were virtually wiped out in 418 by the Visigoths at the order of the Romans. After the departure of the Vandals in 429 only the Sueves remained in a northwest corner of the peninsula. Roman rule which had survived in the eastern quadrant was restored over most of Iberia for 10 years. The diocese may even have been re-established with the capital at Mérida in 418. (Kulikowski, M. The Career of the 'comes Hispanarum' Asterius, {Phoenix, 2000a,54: 123-141}). If so it ended when the Sueves took the city in 439. The Visigoths, a Germanic people, whose kingdom was in southwest Gaul, took the last Roman province when they occupied Tarragona, the capital, in 472. They also confined the Sueves to Galicia and northern Portugal.
Byzantine reconquest[edit]
Main article: Spania
A century later, taking advantage of a struggle for the throne between the Visigothic kings Agila and Athanagild, the eastern emperor Justinian I sent an army under the command of Liberius to take back the peninsula from the Visigoths. This short-lived reconquest covered only a small strip of land along the Mediterranean coast roughly corresponding to the ancient province of Baetica, known as Spania.
Germanic Hispania[edit]
Further information: Visigoths, Suebi, Alans, and Vandals




Iberian Peninsula (AD 530–AD 570)






The Iberian Peninsula in the year 560 AD


Rome's loss of jurisdiction in Hispania began in 409,[citation needed] when the Germanic Buri, Suevi and Vandals, together with the Sarmatian Alans crossed the Rhine and ravaged Gaul until the Visigoths drove them into Iberia that same year. The Suevi established a kingdom in Gallaecia in what is today modern Galicia and northern Portugal. The Alans' allies, the Hasdingi Vandals, also established a kingdom in another part of Gallaecia. The Alans established a kingdom in Lusitania – modern Alentejo and Algarve, in Portugal. The Silingi Vandals briefly occupied parts of South Iberia.
Because large parts of Hispania were outside his control, the western Roman emperor, Honorius (r. 395–423), commissioned his sister, Galla Placidia, and her husband Athaulf, the Visigothic king, to restore order in the Iberian Peninsula. Honorius gave them the rights to settle in and to govern the area in return for defending it.
At the behest of the Roman government the highly romanized Visigoths entered Hispania in 418. They all but wiped out the Silingi and Alans. The remnant joined the Asding Vandals who had settled first in the northwest with the Sueves but south to Baetica. The Roman attempt under general Castorius to dislodge them from Cordoba failed in 422. The Vandals and Alans crossed over to North Africa in 429, an event which is considered to have been decisive in hastening the decline of the Western Empire, but which allowed the Romans to recover 90% of the Iberian peninsula until 439. In 484 the Visigoths established Toledo as the capital of their monarchy. Successive Visigothic kings ruled Hispania as patricians who held imperial commissions to govern in the name of the Roman emperor. In 585 the Visigoths conquered the Suebic Kingdom of Galicia, and thus controlled almost all of Hispania.
Under the Visigoths, lay culture was not as highly developed as it had been under the Romans, and the task of maintaining formal education and government shifted decisively to the church because its Roman clergy alone were qualified to manage higher administration. As elsewhere in early medieval Europe, the church in Hispania stood as society's most cohesive institution. The Visigoths are also responsible for the introduction of mainstream Christianity to the Iberian peninsula; the earliest representation of Christ in Spanish religious art can be found in a Visigothic hermitage, Santa Maria de Lara. It also embodied the continuity of Roman order. In addition, Romans continued to run the civil administration and Latin continued to be the language of government and of commerce.[citation needed]
Religion was the most persistent source of friction between the Roman Catholic Romans and their Arian Visigothic overlords, whom the former considered heretical. At times this tension invited open rebellion, and restive factions within the Visigothic aristocracy exploited it to weaken the monarchy. In 589, Recared, a Visigothic ruler, renounced his Arianism before the Council of Bishops at Toledo and accepted Catholicism, thus assuring an alliance between the Visigothic monarchy and the Romans. This alliance would not mark the last time in the history of the peninsula that political unity would be sought through religious unity.
Court ceremonials – from Constantinople – that proclaimed the imperial sovereignty and unity of the Visigothic state were introduced at Toledo. Still, civil war, royal assassinations, and usurpation were commonplace, and warlords and great landholders assumed wide discretionary powers. Bloody family feuds went unchecked. The Visigoths had acquired and cultivated the apparatus of the Roman state but not the ability to make it operate to their advantage. In the absence of a well-defined hereditary system of succession to the throne, rival factions encouraged foreign intervention by the Greeks, the Franks, and finally the Muslims in internal disputes and in royal elections.
According to Isidore of Seville, it is with the Visigothic domination of the zone that the idea of a peninsular unity is sought after, and the phrase Mother Hispania is first spoken. Up to that date, Hispania designated all of the peninsula's lands. In Historia Gothorum, the Visigoth Suinthila appears as the first monarch where Hispania is dealt with as a Gothic nation.
End of Hispania[edit]
Main article: Muslim conquest of Hispania

I greet you, oh king of Al-Andalus, she that was called Hispania by the ancients.
— Oton's Embassador to Abderramán III in Medina Azahara.





Al-Andalus under the Caliph of Cordoba


The North African Muslims, referred to as Moors, conquered Hispania (اسبانيا, Arabic: Isbānīya) (711–719), and called the area they controlled Al-Andalus (الأندلس). In the chronicles and documents of the High Middle Ages the terms derived from Hispania, Spania, España or Espanha continued to be used by the Christians but only in reference to Muslim controlled areas. King Alfonso I of Aragon (1104–1134) says in his documents that "he reigns over Pamplona, Aragon, Sobrarbe and Ribagorza", and that when in 1126 he made an expedition to Málaga he "went to the lands of España".
In the last years of the 12th century the whole Iberian Peninsula, Muslim and Christian, became known as "Spain" (España, Espanya or Espanha) and the denomination "the Five Kingdoms of Spain" became used to refer to the Muslim Kingdom of Granada and the Christian kingdoms of Aragon, Castile, Portugal, and Navarre.
Economy[edit]
Main article: Economy of Hispania
Before the Punic Wars, Hispania was a land with much untapped mineral and agricultural wealth, limited by the primitive subsistence economies of her native peoples outside of a few trading ports along the coast of the Mediterranean Sea. Occupations by the Carthaginians and then by the Romans for her abundant silver deposits developed Hispania into a thriving multifaceted economy. Several metals, olives, oil from Baetica, salted fish and garum, and wines were some of the goods produced in Hispania and traded throughout the Empire. The gold mining was the most important activity in the NO of the peninsula. This activity is attested in archaeological sites as Las Médulas (Spain) and Casais (Ponte de Lima, Portugal).[14]
Climate[edit]
See also: Climate of Ancient Rome
Unusually high precipitation levels were during the so-called Iberian–Roman Humid Period. The Roman Spain experienced its three phases: the most humid interval in 550–190 BC, an arid interval in 190 BC–150 AD and another humid period in 150–350.[15] In 134 BC the army of Scipio Aemilianus in Spain had to march at night due to extreme heat, when some of its horses and mules died of thirst[16] (even though earlier, in 181 BC, heavy spring rains prevented the Celtiberians from relieving the Roman siege of Contrebia).[16] Through the 2nd century AD warm temperatures dominated particularly in the Austurian mountains along the north coast, punctuated by further cool spells from c. 155 to 180.[17] After about 200 the temperatures fluctuated, trending toward cool.[17]
Sources and references[edit]
 This article incorporates public domain material from the Library of Congress Country Studies website http://lcweb2.loc.gov/frd/cs/.
Modern sources in Spanish and Portuguese[edit]

Altamira y Crevea, Rafael Historia de España y de la civilización española. Tomo I. Barcelona, 1900. Altamira was a professor at the University of Oviedo, a member of the Royal Academy of History, of the Geographic Society of Lisbon and of the Instituto de Coimbra. (In Spanish.)
Aznar, José Camón, Las artes y los pueblos de la España primitiva. Editorial Espasa Calpe, S.A. Madrid, 1954. Camón was a professor at the University of Madrid. (In Spanish.)
Bosch Gimpera, Pedro; Aguado Bleye, Pedro; and Ferrandis, José. Historia de España. España romana, I, created under the direction of Ramón Menéndez Pidal. Editorial Espasa-Calpe S.A., Madrid 1935. (In Spanish.)
García y Bellido, Antonio, España y los españoles hace dos mil años (según la Geografía de Estrabón). Colección Austral de Espasa Calpe S.A., Madrid 1945 (first edition 8-XI-1945). García y Bellido was an archeologist and a professor at the University of Madrid. (In Spanish.)
Mattoso, José (dir.), História de Portugal. Primeiro Volume: Antes de Portugal, Lisboa, Círculo de Leitores, 1992. (in Portuguese)
Melón, Amando, Geografía histórica española Editorial Volvntad, S.A., Tomo primero, Vol. I Serie E. Madrid 1928. Melón was a member of the Royal Geographical Society of Madrid and a professor of geography at the Universities of Valladolid and Madrid. (In Spanish.)
Pellón, José R., Diccionario Espasa Íberos. Espasa Calpe S.A. Madrid 2001. (In Spanish.)
Urbieto Arteta, Antonio, Historia ilustrada de España, Volumen II. Editorial Debate, Madrid 1994. (In Spanish.)


El Housin Helal Ouriachen, 2009, La ciudad bética durante la Antigüedad Tardía. Persistencias y mutaciones locales en relación con la realidad urbana del Mediterraneo y del Atlántico, Tesis doctoral, Universidad de Granada, Granada.

Other modern sources[edit]

This article draws heavily on the corresponding article in the Spanish-language Wikipedia, which was accessed in the version of 27 February 2005.
Westermann Grosser Atlas zur Weltgeschichte (in German)
Hispania

Classical sources[edit]

The notitia dignitatum (c. AD 400; one edition online is http://www.intratext.com/IXT/LAT0212/_PJ.HTM#1WJ)

Other classical sources have been accessed second-hand (see references above):

Strabo, Geographiká. Book III, Iberia, written between the years 29 and 7 BC and touched up in AD 18. The most prestigious and widely used edition is Karl Müller's, published in Paris at the end of the 19th century, one volume, with 2 columns, Greek and Latin. The most reputed French translation is Tardieu, París 1886. The most reputed English translation (with Greek text) is H.L. Jones, vol. I–VIII, London 1917ff., ND London 1931ff.
Ptolemy (Greek astronomer of the 2nd century) Geographiké Hyphaégesis, geographic guidebook.
Pacatus (Gallic rhetorician) directed a panegyric on Hispania to the emperor Theodosius I in 389, which he read to the Senate.
Paulus Orosius (390–418) historian, follower of Saint Augustine and author of Historiae adversus paganos, the first Christian universal history, and of Hispania Universa, an historical guide translated into Anglo-Saxon by Alfred the Great and into Arabic by Abd-ar-Rahman III.
Lucius Anneus Florus (between 1st and 2nd century). Compendium of Roman History and Epitome of the History of Titus Livius (Livy). The relevant texts of Livy have been lost, but we can read them via Florus.
Trogus Pompeius. Believed to be a Gaul with Roman citizenship. Historia universal written in Latin in the times of Augustus Caesar.
Titus Livius (Livy) (59 BC–17 BC). Ab urbe condita, Book CXLII of Livy's surviving work.

Neo-modern references[edit]

E. Hübner, La Arqueologia de España (Barcelona, 1888)
E. S. Bouchier, Spain under the Roman Empire (Oxford, 1914)

See also[edit]





Part of a series on the



History of Portugal







Ancient


Prehistoric Iberia
Pre-Roman Peoples
Roman conquest of Hispania
Romanization of Hispania
Lusitania
Gallaecia
Suebic Kingdom
Visigothic Kingdom








Medieval


Umayyad conquest of Hispania
Al-Andalus
Gharb Al-Andalus
Almoravid dynasty
County of Portugal
Reconquista








Afonsine


Portugal in the Middle Ages
Portuguese House of Burgundy
1383–85 Crisis








Age of Discoveries


Imperial expansion
House of Aviz
Portuguese Renaissance
Portuguese Empire
War of the Portuguese Succession
Iberian Union








Brigantine


Restoration and Pombaline Era
Restoration War
House of Braganza
Imperial decline, war, and revolt
Transfer of Court
Liberal Wars
Constitutional Monarchy
1910 Revolution








First Republic


First Republic
Monarchy of the North
Portugal during World War I
1926 coup d'état








Second Republic


Ditadura Nacional
Portugal during World War II
Estado Novo
Portuguese Colonial War








Third Republic


Carnation Revolution
Processo Revolucionário Em Curso
Transition to democracy
Third Republic








Topic
Archives - Economy - Language - Military - Music






Regions


Azorean history
Madeiran history






Timeline


 Portugal portal





v
t
e












Part of a series on the



History of Spain







Early history


Prehistoric Iberia
Pre-Roman peoples of the Iberian Peninsula
Carthaginian Iberia
Hispania
Roman conquest of Hispania
Romanization of Hispania








Medieval


Suebic kingdom
Visigothic kingdom
Byzantine Spania
Umayyad conquest of Hispania
Al-Andalus / Reconquista








Early modern


Catholic Monarchs
Age of Expansion
Spanish Empire
Golden Age
Enlightenment








Modern


Napoleonic Spain / War of Independence
Cádiz Cortes / 1812 Constitution
Independence of Spanish America
Reaction and Revolution
Spanish confiscation
First Republic
Restoration
Disaster of 1898
Second Republic
Civil War
Francoist Spain








Contemporary


Transition to democracy
Spain since 1975








By topic


Colonial history
Economic history
Military history






Timeline


 Spain portal





v
t
e









List of Roman sites in Spain
Pre-Roman peoples of the Iberian Peninsula
Iberian peninsula
Carthaginian Iberia
Iberian languages (all languages spoken, past & present, in Iberia)
Tartessos (Early Iberian civilization)

Tartessian language
Southwest script


Ophiussa

Oestriminis


Iberians

Iberian language
Iberian scripts


Lusitanians

Lusitanian language
Lusitanian mythology


Cynetes
Celtiberians

Celtiberian language
Celtiberian script


Hispania Citerior
Hispania Ulterior
Tarraconensis
Lusitania
Gallaecia
Baetica
Suevi Gallaecia
Vandals in Hispania
Alans in Hispania
Visigothic Hispania
Al-Andalus (Muslim Medieval Iberia)

Umayyad conquest of Hispania
Timeline of the Muslim Occupation of the Iberian peninsula


Reconquista
Portugal

History of Portugal
Timeline of Portuguese history


Spain

History of Spain




References[edit]



^ pg14
^ Zvi Herman, (1963). Cartage, the Maritime Empire (קרתגו המעצמה הימית) p. 105; Massadah Ltd
^ Malte-Brun, Précis de la Géographie, t. iv, p. 318.
^ pg 292
^ SPAL: Revista de prehistoria y arqueología de la Universidad de Sevilla. Secretariado de Publicaciones de la Universidad de Sevilla. 1998. p. 93. Retrieved 8 February 2013. La presencia de fenicios en la antigua Sevilla parece constatada por el topónimo Spal que en diversas lenguas semíticas significa "zona baja", "llanura verde" o "valle profundo" 
^ "La Emergencia de Sevilla" (PDF). Universidad de Sevilla. Retrieved 2011-05-11. 
^ Anthon, Charles. A System of Ancient and Mediæval Geography for the Use of Schools and Colleges pg.14
^ pg 253–254
^ A Universal Pronouncing Gazetteer from Google Book Search
^ Paul Lebel, Les noms de personnes en France, 1946, p. 108
^ Las Raices Medievales de España, Julio Valdeón Baruque p. 40
^ a b Spain: a unique history, Stanley Paine p. 166
^ Luís de Camões: “Os Lusíada”, (1572) Canto I, estrofa XXXI.
^ Encadré 5.2 de Silva, A. J. M. (2012), Vivre au-delà du fleuve de l'Oubli. Portrait de la communauté villageoise du Castro do Vieito au moment de l'intégration du NO de la péninsule ibérique dans l'orbis Romanum (estuaire du Rio Lima, NO du Portugal), Oxford, Archaeopress.
^ Celia Martín-Puertas; et al. (March 2009). "The Iberian–Roman Humid Period (2600–1600 cal yr BP) in the Zoñar Lake varve record (Andalucía, southern Spain)". Quaternary Research. doi:10.1016/j.yqres.2008.10.004. Retrieved 25 Aug 2014. 
^ a b Leonard A Curchin (2004). The Romanization of Central Spain: Complexity, Diversity and Change in a Provincial Hinterland. Routledge. p. 7. ISBN 1134451121. 
^ a b Michael McCormick et al. (Autumn 2012). "Climate Change during and after the Roman Empire: Reconstructing the Past from Scientific and Historical Evidence" (PDF). Journal of Interdisciplinary History. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2015-07-14. Retrieved 24 Aug 2014. CS1 maint: Uses authors parameter (link)



External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Ancient Roman architecture in Spain.



Detailed map of the Pre-Roman Peoples of Iberia (around 200 BC)
HISPANIA: A Map of Roman Spain and Portugal.
Roman buildings in Barcelona
Amphorae ex Hispania







v
t
e


History of the Roman Empire by modern territory






Albania
Balkans
Belgium
Britain
France
Georgia
Armenia
Azerbaijan
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Israel
Italy
Lebanon
Libya
Luxembourg
Malta
Monaco
Montenegro
Morocco
The Netherlands
North Africa
Palestine
Portugal
Romania
Scotland
Serbia
Slovakia
Slovenia
Spain
Switzerland
Syria
Tunisia
Turkey
Wales












v
t
e


Late Roman provinces (4th–7th centuries AD)








History




As found in the Notitia Dignitatum. Provincial administration reformed and dioceses established by Diocletian, c. 293. Permanent praetorian prefectures established after the death of Constantine I. Empire permanently partitioned after 395. Exarchates of Ravenna and Africa established after 584. After massive territorial losses in the 7th century, the remaining provinces were superseded by the theme system in c. 640–660, although in Asia Minor and parts of Greece they survived under the themes until the early 9th century.











Western Empire (395–476)







Praetorian Prefecture
of Gaul




Diocese of Gaul



Alpes Poeninae et Graiae
Belgica I
Belgica II
Germania I
Germania II
Lugdunensis I
Lugdunensis II
Lugdunensis III
Lugdunensis IV
Maxima Sequanorum





Diocese of Vienne1



Alpes Maritimae
Aquitanica I
Aquitanica II
Narbonensis I
Narbonensis II
Novempopulania
Viennensis





Diocese of Spain



Baetica
Balearica
Carthaginensis
Gallaecia
Lusitania
Mauretania Tingitana
Tarraconensis





Diocese of the Britains



Britannia I
Britannia II
Flavia Caesariensis
Maxima Caesariensis
Valentia (?)








Praetorian Prefecture
of Italy




Diocese of Suburbicarian Italy



Apulia et Calabria
Campania
Corsica
Lucania et Bruttii
Picenum Suburbicarium
Samnium
Sardinia
Sicilia
Tuscia et Umbria
Valeria





Diocese of Annonarian Italy



Alpes Cottiae
Flaminia et Picenum Annonarium
Liguria et Aemilia
Raetia I
Raetia II
Venetia et Istria





Diocese of Africa2



Africa proconsularis (Zeugitana)
Byzacena
Mauretania Caesariensis
Mauretania Sitifensis
Numidia Cirtensis
Numidia Militiana
Tripolitania





Diocese of Pannonia3



Dalmatia
Noricum mediterraneum
Noricum ripense
Pannonia I
Pannonia II
Savia
Valeria ripensis



















Eastern Empire (395–c. 640)







Praetorian prefecture
of Illyricum




Diocese of Dacia



Dacia Mediterranea
Dacia Ripensis
Dardania
Moesia I
Praevalitana





Diocese of Macedonia



Achaea
Creta
Epirus Nova
Epirus Vetus
Macedonia Prima
Macedonia II Salutaris
Thessalia








Praetorian Prefecture
of the East




Diocese of Thrace5



Europa
Haemimontus
Moesia II4
Rhodope
Scythia4
Thracia





Diocese of Asia5



Asia
Caria4
Hellespontus
Insulae4
Lycaonia (370)
Lycia
Lydia
Pamphylia
Pisidia
Phrygia Pacatiana
Phrygia Salutaris





Diocese of Pontus5



Armenia I5
Armenia II5
Armenia Maior5
Armenian Satrapies5
Armenia III (536)
Armenia IV (536)
Bithynia
Cappadocia I5
Cappadocia II5
Galatia I5
Galatia II Salutaris5
Helenopontus5
Honorias5
Paphlagonia5
Pontus Polemoniacus5





Diocese of the East5



Arabia
Cilicia I
Cilicia II
Cyprus4
Euphratensis
Isauria
Mesopotamia
Osroene
Palaestina I
Palaestina II
Palaestina III Salutaris
Phoenice I
Phoenice II Libanensis
Syria I
Syria II Salutaris
Theodorias (528)





Diocese of Egypt5



Aegyptus I
Aegyptus II
Arcadia
Augustamnica I
Augustamnica II
Libya Superior
Libya Inferior
Thebais Superior
Thebais Inferior



















Other territories






Taurica
Quaestura exercitus (536)
Spania (552)











1 Later the Septem Provinciae
2 Re-established after reconquest by the Eastern Empire in 534 as the separate Prefecture of Africa
3 Later the Diocese of Illyricum
4 Placed under the Quaestura exercitus in 536
5 Affected (i.e. boundaries modified, abolished or renamed) by Justinian I's administrative reorganization in 534–536












v
t
e


Spain articles



History




Chronology



Prehistoric Iberia
Roman Hispania
Medieval Spain
Union
Expansion
Enlightenment
Reaction and revolution
First Republic
Restoration
Second Republic
Civil War
Spain under Franco
Transition to democracy
Contemporary Spain





By topic



Empire
Golden Age
Economic
Military








Geography







Autonomous cities
Autonomous communities (Ranked lists)
Climate
Comarcas
Earthquakes
Extreme points
Forests
Islands
Municipalities
National parks
Plazas de soberanía
Provinces








Politics







Constitution
Cortes Generales
Elections
Government

Prime Minister


Human rights

LGBT


Foreign relations
Military
Monarchy
Political parties








Economy







Agriculture
Banks

central
savings


Car industry
Communities

GDP
Unemployment
Median Income


Economic history
Energy
Financial crisis
Forestry
Taxation
Property bubble
Science and technology
Telecommunications
Tourism
Trade unions
Transport
Wine








Society







Crime
Demographics
Education
Health care
Immigration
Languages
Pensions
People
Religion
Time





Culture



Architecture
Art
Bullfighting
Cinema
Cuisine

jamón
paella
tapas
wine


Fiestas (international
national)
Life in early 19th-century Spain
Literature
Media

Newspapers
Radio
TV


Music
Myths and legends
Nationalisms and regionalisms
Public holidays
Sport





Symbols



Anthem
Coat of arms
Flag
Toro de Osborne












Outline
Index



Book
Category
Portal






Coordinates: 40°13′N 4°21′W﻿ / ﻿40.21°N 4.35°W﻿ / 40.21; -4.35





						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hispania&oldid=816823235"					Categories: Former countries in EuropeFormer empiresStates and territories established in the 3rd century BCStates and territories disestablished in the 5th centuryHispaniaAncient history of the Iberian PeninsulaRoman SpainRoman PortugalFormer colonies in EuropeFormer countries on the Iberian Peninsula218 BC210s BC establishments3rd-century BC establishments in the Roman Republic400s disestablishments in the Roman Empire3rd-century BC establishments in Spain5th-century disestablishmentsHidden categories: CS1 maint: Uses authors parameterWikipedia indefinitely move-protected pagesFormer country articles requiring maintenanceAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from August 2007Articles with unsourced statements from March 2007Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the Library of Congress Country StudiesCommons category with local link different than on WikidataCoordinates on Wikidata