Not to be confused with Historiography.






This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (March 2009) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)







A typical histologic specimen, mounted between a glass microscope slide and a glass coverslip, positioned on the stage of a light microscope.






Typical histologic specimen:


glass microscope slide
glass coverslip
stained tissue section, mounted between 1. and 2.









Light micrograph of a histologic specimen of human lung tissue stained with hematoxylin and eosin.


Histology[help 1] is the study of the microscopic anatomy (microanatomy) of cells and tissues of plants and animals. It is commonly performed by examining cells and tissues under a light microscope or electron microscope, the specimen having been sectioned (cut into a thin cross section with a microtome), stained, and mounted on a microscope slide. Histological studies may be conducted using tissue culture, where live human or animal cells are isolated and maintained in an artificial environment for various research projects. The ability to visualize or differentially identify microscopic structures is frequently enhanced through the use of histological stains. Histology is an essential tool of biology and medicine.
Histopathology, the microscopic study of diseased tissue, is an important tool in anatomical pathology, since accurate diagnosis of cancer and other diseases usually requires histopathological examination of samples. Trained physicians, frequently licensed pathologists, are the personnel who perform histopathological examination and provide diagnostic information based on their observations. The trained personnel who prepare histological specimens for examination are histotechnicians, histotechnologists, histology technicians (HT), histology technologists (HTL), medical scientists, medical laboratory technicians, or biomedical scientists and Biomedical Science Support Workers. Their field of study is called histotechnology.



Contents


1 History
2 Types of tissues
3 Sample preparation

3.1 Fixing

3.1.1 Chemical fixation with formaldehyde or other chemicals
3.1.2 Frozen section fixation


3.2 Processing - dehydration, clearing, and infiltration
3.3 Embedding
3.4 Sectioning

3.4.1 Cryosectioning


3.5 Staining


4 Common laboratory stains

4.1 Alternative techniques


5 Artifacts

5.1 Pre-histology
5.2 Post-histology
5.3 Histology art


6 Related sciences
7 See also
8 Notes
9 References
10 External links



History[edit]




Santiago Ramón y Cajal in his laboratory


In the 17th century, Italian Marcello Malpighi invented one of the first microscopes for studying tiny biological entities. Malpighi analysed several parts of the organs of bats, frogs and other animals under the microscope. Malpighi, while studying the structure of the lung, noticed its membranous alveoli and the hair-like connections between veins and arteries, which he named capillaries. His discovery established how the oxygen we breathe enters the blood stream and serves the body.[1]
In the 19th century, histology was an academic discipline in its own right. The French anatomist Bichat introduced the concept of tissue in anatomy in 1801, and the term "histology" first appeared in a book of Karl Meyer in 1819.[2][3][4][5]
The 1906 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine was awarded to histologists Camillo Golgi and Santiago Ramon y Cajal. They had dueling interpretations of the neural structure of the brain based in differing interpretations of the same images. Cajal won the prize for his correct theory and Golgi for the staining technique he invented to make it possible.
Types of tissues[edit]
There are four basic types of animal tissues: muscle tissue, nervous tissue, connective tissue, and epithelial tissue. All tissue types are subtypes of these four basic tissue types (for example, blood is classified as connective tissue, since the blood cells are suspended in an extracellular matrix, the plasma).

Epithelium: the lining of glands, bowel, skin, and some organs like the liver, lung, and kidney
Endothelium: the lining of blood and lymphatic vessels
Mesothelium: the lining of pleural and pericardial spaces
Mesenchyme: the cells filling the spaces between the organs, including fat, muscle, bone, cartilage, and tendon cells
Blood cells: the red and white blood cells, including those found in lymph nodes and spleen
Neurons: any of the conducting cells of the nervous system
Germ cells: reproductive cells (spermatozoa in men, oocytes in women)
Placenta: an organ characteristic of true mammals during pregnancy, joining mother and offspring, providing endocrine secretion and selective exchange of soluble, but not particulate, blood-borne substances through an apposition of uterine and trophoblastic vascularised parts
Stem cells: cells with the ability to develop into different cell types

The tissues from plants, fungi, and microorganisms can also be examined histologically. Their structure is very different from animal tissues. For plants, the study of their tissues is more commonly called as plant anatomy, with the following main types:

Dermal tissue
Vascular tissue
Ground tissue
Meristematic tissue

Sample preparation[edit]




Medical students (EMIS) getting samples from a human stomach for future histological studies in 2012 at Instituto Nacional de Cardiologia in Mexico


Fixing[edit]
Chemical fixation with formaldehyde or other chemicals[edit]
Main article: Fixation (histology)
Chemical fixatives are used to preserve tissue from degradation, and to maintain the structure of the cell and of sub-cellular components such as cell organelles (e.g., nucleus, endoplasmic reticulum, mitochondria). The most common fixative for light microscopy is 10% neutral buffered formalin (4% formaldehyde in phosphate buffered saline). For electron microscopy, the most commonly used fixative is glutaraldehyde, usually as a 2.5% solution in phosphate buffered saline. These fixatives preserve tissues or cells mainly by irreversibly cross-linking proteins. The main action of these aldehyde fixatives is to cross-link amino groups in proteins through the formation of methylene bridges (-CH2-), in the case of formaldehyde, or by C5H10 cross-links in the case of glutaraldehyde. This process, while preserving the structural integrity of the cells and tissue can damage the biological functionality of proteins, particularly enzymes, and can also denature them to a certain extent. This can be detrimental to certain histological techniques. Further fixatives are often used for electron microscopy such as osmium tetroxide or uranyl acetate
Formalin fixation leads to degradation of mRNA, miRNA, and DNA as well as denaturation and modification of proteins in tissues. However, extraction and analysis of nucleic acids and proteins from formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissues is possible using appropriate protocols.[6][7]
Frozen section fixation[edit]
Frozen section procedure is a rapid way to fix and mount histology sections using a refrigeration device called a cryostat. It is often used after surgical removal of tumors to allow rapid determination of margin (that the tumor has been completely removed).
Processing - dehydration, clearing, and infiltration[edit]
The aim of Tissue Processing is to remove water from tissues and replace with a medium that solidifies to allow thin sections to be cut. Biological tissue must be supported in a hard matrix to allow sufficiently thin sections to be cut, typically 5 μm (micrometres; 1000 micrometres = 1 mm) thick for light microscopy and 80-100 nm (nanometre; 1,000,000 nanometres = 1 mm) thick for electron microscopy. For light microscopy, paraffin wax is most frequently used. Since it is immiscible with water, the main constituent of biological tissue, water must first be removed in the process of dehydration. Samples are transferred through baths of progressively more concentrated ethanol to remove the water. This is followed by a hydrophobic clearing agent (such as xylene) to remove the alcohol, and finally molten paraffin wax, the infiltration agent, which replaces the xylene. Paraffin wax does not provide a sufficiently hard matrix for cutting very thin sections for electron microscopy. Instead, resins are used. Epoxy resins are the most commonly employed embedding media, but acrylic resins are also used, particularly where immunohistochemistry is required. Thicker sections (0.35μm to 5μm) of resin-embedded tissue can also be cut for light microscopy. Again, the immiscibility of most epoxy and acrylic resins with water necessitates the use of dehydration, usually with ethanol.
Embedding[edit]




OCT embedding (Optimal Cutting Temperature compound)


After the tissues have been dehydrated, cleared, and infiltrated with the embedding material, they are ready for external embedding. During this process the tissue samples are placed into molds along with liquid embedding material (such as agar, gelatine, or wax) which is then hardened. This is achieved by cooling in the case of paraffin wax and heating (curing) in the case of the epoxy resins. The acrylic resins are polymerised by heat, ultraviolet light, or chemical catalysts. The hardened blocks containing the tissue samples are then ready to be sectioned.
Because Formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissues may be stored indefinitely at room temperature, and nucleic acids (both DNA and RNA) may be recovered from them decades after fixation, FFPE tissues are an important resource for historical studies in medicine.
Embedding can also be accomplished using frozen, non-fixed tissue in a water-based medium. Pre-frozen tissues are placed into molds with the liquid embedding material, usually a water-based glycol, OCT, TBS, Cryogel, or resin, which is then frozen to form hardened blocks.
Sectioning[edit]
Main article: Microtome
For light microscopy, a steel knife mounted in a microtome is used to cut 4-micrometer-thick tissue sections which are mounted on a glass microscope slide. For transmission electron microscopy, a diamond knife mounted in an ultramicrotome is used to cut 50-nanometer-thick tissue sections which are mounted on a 3-millimeter-diameter copper grid. Then the mounted sections are treated with the appropriate stain.
Sections can be cut through the tissue in a number of directions. For pathological evaluation of tissues, vertical sectioning, (cut perpendicular to the surface of the tissue to produce a cross section) is the usual method. Horizontal (also known as transverse or longitudinal) sectioning, cut along the long axis of the tissue, is often used in the evaluation of the hair follicles and pilosebaceous units. Tangential to horizontal sectioning is used in Mohs surgery and in methods of CCPDMA.
Cryosectioning[edit]
Main article: Frozen section procedure
Fixed or unfixed tissue may be frozen and sliced using a microtome mounted in a refrigeration device known as a cryostat. The frozen sections are mounted on a glass slide and may be stained to enhance the contrast between different tissues. Unfixed frozen sections can also be used for studies requiring enzyme localization in tissues and cells. It is necessary to fix tissue for certain procedures such as antibody linked immunofluorescence staining. Frozen sectioning can also be used to determine if a tumour is malignant when it is found incidentally during surgery on a patient.




Sample of a trachea coloured with hematoxylin and eosin


Staining[edit]
Main article: Staining




Example of staining in light microscopy: Carmine staining of a monogenean (parasitic worm)


Biological tissue has little inherent contrast in either the light or electron microscope. Staining is employed to give both contrast to the tissue as well as highlighting particular features of interest. Where the underlying mechanistic chemistry of staining is understood, the term histochemistry is used. Hematoxylin and eosin (H&E stain) is the most commonly used light microscopical stain in histology and histopathology. Hematoxylin, a basic dye, stains nuclei blue due to an affinity to nucleic acids in the cell nucleus; eosin, an acidic dye, stains the cytoplasm pink. Uranyl acetate and lead citrate are commonly used to impart contrast to tissue in the electron microscope.
There are many other staining techniques that have been used to selectively stain cells and cellular components. One of these techniques involves marking peripheral tumors or surgical margins, in which a certain color of dye is applied to the posterior border of a sample, another to the anterior, etc., so that one can identify the location of a tumor or other pathology within a specimen. Other compounds used to color tissue sections include safranin, Oil Red O, Congo red, Fast green FCF, silver salts, and numerous natural and artificial dyes that usually originated from the development of dyes for the textile industry.
Histochemistry refers to the science of using chemical reactions between laboratory chemicals and components within tissue. A commonly performed histochemical technique is the Perls Prussian blue reaction, used to demonstrate iron deposits in diseases like hemochromatosis.
Histology samples have often been examined by radioactive techniques. In historadiography, a slide (sometimes stained histochemically) is X-rayed. More commonly, autoradiography is used to visualize the locations to which a radioactive substance has been transported within the body, such as cells in S phase (undergoing DNA replication) which incorporate tritiated thymidine, or sites to which radiolabeled nucleic acid probes bind in in situ hybridization. For autoradiography on a microscopic level, the slide is typically dipped into liquid nuclear tract emulsion, which dries to form the exposure film. Individual silver grains in the film are visualized with dark field microscopy.
Recently, antibodies have been used to specifically visualize proteins, carbohydrates, and lipids. This process is called immunohistochemistry, or when the stain is a fluorescent molecule, immunofluorescence. This technique has greatly increased the ability to identify categories of cells under a microscope. Other advanced techniques, such as nonradioactive in situ hybridization, can be combined with immunochemistry to identify specific DNA or RNA molecules with fluorescent probes or tags that can be used for immunofluorescence and enzyme-linked fluorescence amplification (especially alkaline phosphatase and tyramide signal amplification). Fluorescence microscopy and confocal microscopy are used to detect fluorescent signals with good intracellular detail. Digital cameras are increasingly used to capture histological and histopathological image
Common laboratory stains[edit]


Stain
Common use
Nucleus
Cytoplasms
Red blood cell (RBC)
Collagen fibers
Specifically stains


Haematoxylin
General staining when paired with eosin (i.e. H&E)
Orange, Cyan Blue or Green
Blue/Brown/Black
N/A
N/A
Nucleic acids—blue
ER (endoplasmic reticulum)—blue


Eosin
General staining when paired with haematoxylin (i.e. H&E)
N/A
Pink
Orange/red
Pink
Elastic fibers—pink
Collagen fibers—pink
Reticular fibers—pink


Toluidine blue
General staining
Blue
Blue
Blue
Blue
Mast cells granules—purple


Masson's trichrome stain
Connective tissue
Black
Red/pink
Red
Blue/green
Cartilage—blue/green
Muscle fibers—red


Mallory's trichrome stain
Connective tissue
Red
Pale red
Orange
Deep blue
Keratin—orange
Cartilage—blue
Bone matrix—deep blue
Muscle fibers—red



Weigert's elastic stain
Elastic fibers
Blue/black
N/A
N/A
N/A
Elastic fibers—blue/black


Heidenhain's AZAN trichrome stain
Distinguishing cells from extracellular components
Red/purple
Pink
Red
Blue
Muscle fibers—red
Cartilage—blue
Bone matrix—blue


Silver stain
Reticular fibers, nerve fibers, fungi
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
Reticular fibers—brown/black
Nerve fibers—brown/black
Fungi—black


Wright's stain
Blood cells
Bluish/purple
Bluish/gray
Red/pink
N/A
Neutrophil granules—purple/pink
Eosinophil granules—bright red/orange
Basophil granules—deep purple/violet
Platelet granules—red/purple


Orcein stain
Elastic fibres
Deep blue
N/A
Bright red
Pink
Elastic fibres—dark brown
Mast cells granules—purple
Smooth muscle—light blue


Periodic acid-Schiff stain (PAS)
Basement membrane, localizing carbohydrates
Blue
N/A
N/A
Pink
Glycogen and other carbohydrates—magenta


Table sourced from Michael H. Ross; Wojciech Pawlina (2006). Histology: A Text and Atlas. Hagerstown, MD: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins. ISBN 0-7817-5056-3. 
The Nissl method and Golgi's method are useful in identifying neurons.
Alternative techniques[edit]
Plastic embedding is commonly used in the preparation of material for electron microscopy. Tissues are embedded in epoxy resin. Very thin sections (less than 0.1 micrometer) are cut using diamond or glass knives. The sections are stained with electron dense stains (uranium and lead) so that they can be seen with the electron microscope.
Artifacts[edit]
Artifacts are structures or features in tissue that interfere with normal histological examination. These are not always present in normal tissue and can come from outside sources. Artifacts interfere with histology by changing the tissues appearance and hiding structures. These can be divided into two categories:
Pre-histology[edit]
These are features and structures that have been introduced prior to the collection of the tissues. A common example of these include: ink from tattoos and freckles (melanin) in skin samples.
Post-histology[edit]
Artifacts can result from tissue processing. Processing commonly leads to changes like shrinkage, washing out of particular cellular components, color changes in different tissues types and alterations of the structures in the tissue. Because these are caused in a laboratory the majority of post histology artifacts can be avoided or removed after being discovered. A common example is mercury pigment left behind after using Zenker's fixative to fix a section.
Histology art[edit]
Normal patterning of tissues and artifacts resulting from the tissue preparation process ensure that each histological section is unique. Like a piece of biological art these images provide a deep insight into the organization and function of our bodies. Histological patterns that look like everyday objects or features are emerging on social and scientific communities [8] and even in histopathology journal articles.[9] Histology is an area of science where art and science collide. It demonstrates that histology can be appreciated by not only the detail-oriented pathologist but also the art loving layperson and is making histology and pathology more accessible and less daunting as a complex science.
Related sciences[edit]

Cell biology is the study of living cells, their DNA and RNA and the proteins they express.
Anatomy is the study of organs visible by the naked eye.
Morphology studies entire organisms.
Cytology is the microscopic study of loose cells or clusters obtained from bodily secretions, aspirations, scrapes, swipes, or washings.

See also[edit]


Medicine portal



Tissue
Anatomical pathology
Automated tissue image analysis
Biological staining
Geoffrey Bourne
Gross anatomy
Cooperative Human Tissue Network (CHTN)
Digital Pathology
Arthur Worth Ham
Histopathology
Important publications in histology (Arthur Worth Ham and David H. Cormack's Histology, for example)
Laser capture microdissection
Pathology
Cytoarchitecture
Plant anatomy
Extracellular matrix
Cell adhesion molecule
Multicellularity

Notes[edit]



^ The word histology (/hɪstˈɒlədʒi/) is New Latin using the combining forms of histo- + -logy, yielding "tissue study", from the Greek words ἱστός histos, "tissue", and -λογία, "study".



References[edit]



^ Adelmann, Howard (1966) Marcello Malpighi and the Evolution of Embryology 5 vol., Cornell University Press, Ithaca, N.Y. OCLC 306783
^ Bock, Ortwin (2015). A history of the development of histology up to the end of the nineteenth century. Research 2: 1283, [1].
^ Bracegirdle, Brian. The History of Histology: A Brief Survey of Sources. History of Science 15(2), 77-101, [2].
^ Bichat, X. (1801). Anatomie générale appliquée à la physiologie et à la médecine, 4 volumes in-8, Brosson, Gabon, Paris, link. (See pp. cvj-cxj).
^ Mayer, August Franz Josef Karl (1819). Ueber Histologie und eine neue Eintheilung der Gewebe des menschlichen Körpers. Bonn, Adolph Marcus, link.
^ Weiss AT, Delcour NM, Meyer A, Klopfleisch R (2010). "Efficient and Cost-Effective Extraction of Genomic DNA From Formalin-Fixed and Paraffin-Embedded Tissues". Veterinary Pathology. 48 (4): 834–8. doi:10.1177/0300985810380399. PMID 20817894. 
^ Bennike, Tue Bjerg; Kastaniegaard, Kenneth; Padurariu, Simona; Gaihede, Michael; Birkelund, Svend; Andersen, Vibeke; Stensballe, Allan (2016-03-01). "⿿Comparing the proteome of snap frozen, RNAlater preserved, and formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded human tissue samples". EuPA Open Proteomics. 10: 9–18. doi:10.1016/j.euprot.2015.10.001. 
^ i-heart-histo. "Histological art". 
^ Coyne J. (2012). "A squamous cell carcinoma with a Saint Valentine's day message". Int J Surg Pathol. 20 (1): 62. doi:10.1177/1066896911434768. PMID 22287650. 




Merck Source (2002). Dorland's Medical Dictionary. Retrieved 2005-01-26.
Stedman's Medical Dictionaries (2005). Stedman's Online Medical Dictionary. Retrieved 2005-01-26.

External links[edit]






This section's use of external links may not follow Wikipedia's policies or guidelines. Please improve this article by removing excessive or inappropriate external links, and converting useful links where appropriate into footnote references. (March 2015) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)






Wikimedia Commons has media related to Histology.




Library resources about
Histology





Resources in your library





HistoNet 2000 - Online Interactive Atlas
Histoweb
SIU SOM Histology
Dr. Kasem Histology Homepage
Visual Histology Atlas
Histology Photomicrographs
Histology-online
Virtual Slidebox
Blue Histology
Medical Histology Lecture Series by Dr. Krause, Department of Pathology and Anatomical Science, University of Missouri School of Medicine







v
t
e


Epithelial tissue



Cells



Squamous
Cuboidal
Columnar





Types



Simple squamous epithelium

Endothelium
Mesothelium




Simple cuboidal epithelium


Simple columnar epithelium


Pseudostratified columnar epithelium

Respiratory epithelium




Stratified squamous epithelium


Stratified cuboidal epithelium


Stratified columnar epithelium


Transitional epithelium

Urothelium







Glands




Types




Mechanism



Merocrine

Eccrine


Apocrine
Holocrine

Sebaceous
Meibomian







Shape



Tubular gland
Alveolar gland





Secretion



Serous glands
Mucous glands








Components



Myoepithelial cell
Serous demilune


Ducts:

Interlobar
Interlobular
Intralobular
Striated
Intercalated


Acinus/Lobe















v
t
e


Histology: Epithelial proteins (TH H1.00.01.1)



Lateral/cell-cell



Cell adhesion molecules: Adherens junction

Cadherin


Desmosome

Desmoglein




Ion channels: Gap junction/Connexon

Connexin




Cytoskeleton: Desmosome

Desmoplakin
Plakoglobin
Tonofibril




other membrane proteins: Tight junction

Claudin
Occludin
MARVELD2







Basal/cell-matrix



Basal lamina
Hemidesmosome/Tonofibril
Focal adhesion
Costamere





Apical



Cilia/Kinocilium
Microvilli/Stereocilia (STRC)












v
t
e


Connective tissue



Physiology



Soft tissue
Fibrosis
Scarring





Composition




Cells




Resident



Fibroblast
Fibrocyte
Reticular cell
Tendon cell
Adipocyte
Melanocyte





Wandering cells



Mast cell
Macrophage








Extracellular
matrix




Ground substance



Tissue fluid





Fibers



Collagen fibers
Reticular fibers

COL3A1


Elastic fibers

Elastin
Fibrillin
FBN1

FBN2
FBN3


EMILIN1
Elaunin













Classification




Proper




Loose



Reticular
Adipose

Brown
White







Dense



Dense irregular connective tissue

Submucosa
Dermis


Dense regular connective tissue

Ligament
Tendon
Aponeurosis










Embryonic



Mucoid
Mesenchymal





Specialized



Cartilage
Bone















v
t
e


Muscle tissue



Smooth
muscle



Calmodulin
Vascular smooth muscle





Striated
muscle




Skeletal
muscle




Costamere/
DAPC




Membrane/
extracellular




DAP:



Sarcoglycan

SGCA
SGCB
SGCD
SGCE
SGCG
SGCZ


Dystroglycan








Sarcospan
Laminin, alpha 2








Intracellular







Dystrophin
Dystrobrevin

A
B


Syntrophin

A
B1
B2
G1
G2


Syncoilin
Dysbindin
Synemin/desmuslin





related:



NOS1
Caveolin 3











Sarcomere/
(a, i, and h bands;
z and m lines)



Myofilament

thin filament/actin
thick filament/myosin
elastic filament/titin
nebulin




Tropomyosin


Troponin

T
C
I







Connective tissue



Epimysium
Fascicle
Perimysium
Endomysium
Connective tissue in skeletal muscle





General



Neuromuscular junction
Motor unit
Muscle spindle
Excitation–contraction coupling
Sliding filament mechanism








Cardiac
muscle



Myocardium
Intercalated disc
Nebulette





Both




Fiber



Muscle fiber

intrafusal
extrafusal


Myofibril
Microfilament/Myofilament
Sarcomere





Cells



Myoblast/Myocyte
Myosatellite cell





Other



Desmin
Sarcoplasm
Sarcolemma

T-tubule


Sarcoplasmic reticulum








Other/
ungrouped



Myotilin
Telethonin
Dysferlin
Fukutin
Fukutin-related protein















v
t
e


Nervous tissue



CNS




Tissue Types



Grey matter
White matter

Projection fibers
Association fiber
Commissural fiber
Lemniscus
Funiculus
Fasciculus
Nerve tract
Decussation
Commissure


Neuropil
Meninges





Cell Types




Neuronal



Pyramidal
Purkinje
Granule





Glial




insulating:



Myelination: Oligodendrocyte





other



Astrocyte

Radial glial cell


Ependymal cells

Tanycyte


Microglia














PNS




General



Dorsal

Root
Ganglion
Ramus


Ventral

Root
Ramus


Ramus communicans

Gray
White


Autonomic ganglion (Preganglionic nerve fibers
Postganglionic nerve fibers)





Connective tissues



Epineurium
Perineurium
Endoneurium
Nerve fascicle





Neuroglia



Myelination: Schwann cell

Neurolemma
Myelin incisure
Node of Ranvier
Internodal segment


Satellite glial cell








Neurons/
nerve fibers




Parts




Soma



Axon hillock





Axon



Telodendron
Axon terminals
Axoplasm
Axolemma
Neurofibril/neurofilament





Dendrite





Nissl body
Dendritic spine
Apical dendrite/Basal dendrite










Types



Bipolar
Unipolar
Pseudounipolar
Multipolar
Interneuron

Renshaw







Afferent nerve fiber/
Sensory neuron



GSA
GVA
SSA
SVA
fibers

Ia or Aα
Ib or Golgi or Aα
II or Aβ and Aγ
III or Aδ or fast pain
IV or C or slow pain







Efferent nerve fiber/
Motor neuron



GSE
GVE
SVE
Upper motor neuron
Lower motor neuron

α motorneuron
β motorneuron
γ motorneuron










Termination




Synapse



Electrical synapse/Gap junction
Chemical synapse

Synaptic vesicle
Active zone
Postsynaptic density


Autapse
Ribbon synapse
Neuromuscular junction





Sensory receptors



Meissner's corpuscle
Merkel nerve ending
Pacinian corpuscle
Ruffini ending
Muscle spindle
Free nerve ending
Nociceptor
Olfactory receptor neuron
Photoreceptor cell
Hair cell
Taste bud












Authority control



GND: 4025092-1
NDL: 00571456











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Histology&oldid=801861273"					Categories: Medical terminologyHistologyHistotechnologyStainingHidden categories: Articles containing Ancient Greek-language textArticles needing additional references from March 2009All articles needing additional referencesWikipedia external links cleanup from March 2015Wikipedia spam cleanup from March 2015Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers