The history of the prepay mobile phone began in the 1990s when mobile phone operators sought to expand their market reach. Up until this point, mobile phone services were exclusively offered on a postpaid basis (contract-based), which excluded individuals with poor credit ratings and minors under the age of 18 (the typical age of contractual capacity).
Nowadays the prepay mobile phone is found across the world.



Contents


1 First US prepay mobile phone installation
2 Early Providers of prepay services
3 Technical evolution
4 See also
5 References



First US prepay mobile phone installation[edit]
A patent for prepay mobile phones (Patent Number 5826185)[1] was filed on November 16, 1994. Among the first, if not the first large metropolitan area implementation of prepay mobile phone service in the United States was in the early 1990s at Houston Cellular Telephone Company, Houston, TX.[citation needed] HCTC was then an independent wireless carrier owned jointly by PacBell and BellSouth. HCTC introduced a service offering branded "calltrac" based on Voice Systems Technology, Inc.'s telephony platform with RPAC-2 billing during the first quarter of 1994.
HCTC initially offered prepay mobile phone as a non-advertised alternative way to provide service to the more than 40% of cash-carrying, walk-in consumers who were being denied cellular service each day due to lack of credit. The plan was very expensive for the day, most subscription plans were double that of their postpaid subscribers and the prepay subscriber still had to pay for their equipment (handsets) and anticipated call usage up front. HCTC used the Calltrack prepay cellular program as a credit development vehicle until they developed subscriber reports intended to show that "Calltrack" was not a profitable venture.
The reports showed that a Calltrack prepay subscriber was actually more profitable than their traditional postpaid subscribers by a huge margin. This was because, at that time it cost an average of 17% of their gross proceeds to collect on their bad debt postpaid subscribers, plus HCTC paid for all the postpaid handsets. HCTC was poised to become the first U.S carrier to go primarily prepay, but it did not happen. Voice Systems Technology Inc. was sold to Boston Communications Group (BCGI) and the subsequent sale of prepay cellular platforms in the US was immediately curtailed and the prepay cellular service bureau was born. U.S Carriers spent several years trying to catch-up and develop their own solutions but patent litigation has kept prepay from becoming the dominant form of payment.[2]






This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (June 2007) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Early Providers of prepay services[edit]
The possibility of "prepay wireless" in the United States actually came from Judge Green's decision to break up AT&T's monopoly. Prior to the 1968 Carterfone decision, it was not permitted to connect non-Bell (Bell Labs or Western Electric) ancillary devices to the telecommunications network.
A provider of prepay mobile phone service was Banana Cellular, founded by Andrew Wise in 1993, which covered the provisioning of prepay wireless services. Banana first sold prepay mobile phone services in April 1993 in a small office located in Phoenix, Arizona.[citation needed]
The first practical implementation of prepay wireless originated in the United States from a small group of entrepreneurs at Voice Systems Technology, Inc. This product was the core product under Houston Cellular's CallTrac(1994), Boatphone BVI's Prepay(1994), Cable & Wireless Prepay (1997) and BellSouth's first international prepay wireless product (1996).[citation needed] The first European PAYG deployment was in Portugal in 1995 when Portuguese operator TMN deployed a PAYG solution called MIMO.
In November 1996, Vodacom (South Africa) became the first network to introduce prepay mobile, under the 'Vodago' package, using an 'Intelligent Network' platform. This made it possible to debit customers’ accounts in real time (MyBroadband (2014) 'Great South African inventions'), and led to a dramatic increase in uptake (Computer Business Review (2001) 'Mobile stats snapshot'). In 1998 Vodacom received a 'Best GSM Service' award from the GSMA for this (GSMA (nd) 'Global Mobile Awards History').
The concept was also developed by Eircell (then owned by incumbent Telecom Éireann) in the Republic of Ireland in 1997, as a method of letting different types of people (those under the age of 18, those without bank accounts and those without proof of identity) obtain a mobile phone. Originally limited to one TACS handset, costing £99 upfront, the system was an amazing success, despite the high price of calls and a 7p service charge on every operation. The system was branded as Ready To Go, a name still used by Vodafone, who now own Eircell.
The concept has since been copied in many other countries, with virtually every network in every European country supporting it. On many networks, such as Ireland's Meteor, pay-as-you-go is the main mode of operation, with pay monthly account phones being very much second-class. Conversely, in the United States, account phones offer the best features with pay as you go services being far more restricted in functionality. In developing countries pre-pay tariffs are chosen by the overwhelming majority of subscribers.
Technical evolution[edit]
Early solutions to monitor the amount of credit remaining were called "hairpin solutions". They were so called because they connected the caller in and out of a central platform to monitor usage, meaning that it took two extra dedicated trunks on the cellular switch to make one call, one for the inbound connection to the telephony platform and the second back to the switch to complete the call. Trunks were an expensive resource in a large metropolitan Mobile Telephone Exchange and switching equipment did not have the capacity that it has today, so prepay was relegated to being the second choice for most US carriers.[3]
Modern prepay mobile phone solutions use an out-of-band signalling called the Intelligent Network to monitor the credit without the need for hairpinning trunks. These are developed as international standards which allow prepay use of a phone all over the world.
See also[edit]

Postpaid mobile phone
History of mobile phones

References[edit]



^ Wise, Andrew. "Prepaid Cellular Patent". 5826185. USPTO. Retrieved January 24, 2012. 
^ "http://www.bcgi.net/assets/pdf/annual/2001.pdf" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on April 14, 2008. Retrieved April 14, 2008.  External link in |title= (help)
^ "http://www.intellinet-tech.com/services/case_studies.php/". Archived from the original on June 2, 2007. Retrieved June 8, 2007.  External link in |title= (help)









v
t
e


Telecommunications



History




Beacon
Broadcasting
Cable protection system
Cable TV
Communications satellite
Computer network
Drums
Electrical telegraph
Fax
Heliographs
Hydraulic telegraph
Internet
Mass media
Mobile phone
Optical telecommunication
Optical telegraphy
Pager
Photophone
Prepaid mobile phone
Radio
Radiotelephone
Satellite communications
Semaphore
Smartphone
Smoke signals
Telecommunications history
Telautograph
Telegraphy
Teleprinter (teletype)
Telephone
The Telephone Cases
Television
Timeline of communication technology
Undersea telegraph line
Videoconferencing
Videophone
Videotelephony
Whistled language





Pioneers



Edwin Howard Armstrong
John Logie Baird
Paul Baran
Alexander Graham Bell
Tim Berners-Lee
Jagadish Chandra Bose
Vint Cerf
Claude Chappe
Donald Davies
Lee de Forest
Philo Farnsworth
Reginald Fessenden
Elisha Gray
Erna Schneider Hoover
Charles K. Kao
Hedy Lamarr
Innocenzo Manzetti
Guglielmo Marconi
Antonio Meucci
Radia Perlman
Alexander Stepanovich Popov
Johann Philipp Reis
Nikola Tesla
Camille Tissot
Alfred Vail
Charles Wheatstone
Vladimir K. Zworykin





Transmission
media



Coaxial cable
Free-space optical communication
Molecular communication
Optical fiber
Radio waves
Transmission line





Network topology
and switching



Links
Nodes
Terminal node
Network switching (circuit
packet)
Telephone exchange





Multiplexing



Space-division
Frequency-division
Time-division
Polarization-division
Orbital angular-momentum
Code-division





Networks



ARPANET
BITNET
Cellular network
Computer
CYCLADES
Ethernet
FidoNet
Internet
ISDN
LAN
Mobile
NGN
NPL network
Public Switched Telephone
Radio
Telecommunications equipment
Television
Telex
WAN
Wireless
World Wide Web








 Category
 Portal











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=History_of_prepay_mobile_phones&oldid=781576201"					Categories: History of mobile phonesHidden categories: CS1 errors: external linksUse mdy dates from April 2012All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from July 2008Articles needing additional references from June 2007All articles needing additional referencesArticles with unsourced statements from August 2008