For the general language group of Fujian (Hokkien) province, see Min Chinese. For other uses, see Hokkien (disambiguation).
See also: Southern Min


Quanzhang


Minnan Proper 閩南語
Quanzhang speech 闽台泉漳片闽南语
Hokkien 福建話


閩南話 / 闽南话
Bân-lâm-oē / Bân-lâm-uē


Native to
China, Taiwan, Hong Kong, Macau and overseas communities


Region
Southern Fujian province and other south-eastern coastal areas of Mainland China, Taiwan, Southeast Asia


Ethnicity
Hoklo (subgroup of Han Chinese)



Native speakers

37 million[citation needed] (date missing)



Language family


Sino-Tibetan

Chinese

Min

Coastal Min

Southern Min

Quanzhang













Dialects


Xiamen/Amoy
Quanzhou
Zhangzhou
Taiwanese
Singaporean
Penang
Medan
Philippine




Official status



Official language in

None (one of the statutory languages for public transport announcements in Taiwan[1])


Regulated by
Ministry of Education in Taiwan and NGOs in Taiwan.


Language codes


ISO 639-3
–


Glottolog
hokk1242[2]
fuki1235[3]



Distribution of Southern Min languages. Quanzhang (Hokkien) is dark green.




Distribution of Quanzhang (Minnan Proper) dialects within Fujian Province and Taiwan. Lengna dialect (Longyan Min) is a variant of Southern Min that is spoken near the Hakka speaking region in Southwest Fujian.



This article contains IPA phonetic symbols. Without proper rendering support, you may see question marks, boxes, or other symbols instead of Unicode characters. For an introductory guide on IPA symbols, see Help:IPA.







Hokkien


Traditional Chinese
福建話


Simplified Chinese
福建话





Transcriptions


Standard Mandarin


Hanyu Pinyin
Fújiànhuà


IPA
[fǔ.tɕjɛ̂n.xwâ]


Wu


Romanization
Foh ji ghae ho


Hakka


Romanization
Fuk5-gien4-fa4


Yue: Cantonese


Yale Romanization
Fuk1-gin3-wa6


Southern Min


Hokkien POJ
Hok-kiàn-oē


Eastern Min


Fuzhou BUC
Hók-gióng-uâ





Hoklo


Traditional Chinese
福佬話


Simplified Chinese
福佬话





Transcriptions


Standard Mandarin


Hanyu Pinyin
Fúlǎohuà


IPA
[fǔ.làu.xwâ]


Wu


Romanization
Foh loh ghae ho


Hakka


Romanization
Fuk5-lau3-fa4


Yue: Cantonese


Yale Romanization
Fuk1-lou2-wa6


Southern Min


Hokkien POJ
Hok-ló-oē


Eastern Min


Fuzhou BUC
Hók-ló-uâ








Hokkien (/ˈhɒkiɛn, hɒˈkiɛn/;[a] from Chinese: 福建話; pinyin: Fújiànhuà; Pe̍h-ōe-jī: Hok-kiàn-oē)[b] or Minnan Proper[citation needed] (閩南語/閩南話), is a Southern Min dialect group spoken throughout the Southern part of Fujian Province in Southeastern China, Taiwan and Southeast Asia, and by other overseas Chinese. Hokkien originated in southern Fujian, the Min-speaking province. It is the mainstream form of Southern Min.
It is closely related to Teochew, though it has limited mutual intelligibility with it, whereas it is more distantly related to other variants such as Hainanese and Leizhou dialect. Besides Hokkien, there are also other Min and Hakka dialects in Fujian province, most of which are not mutually intelligible with Hokkien.
Hokkien historically served as the lingua franca amongst overseas Chinese communities of all dialects and subgroups in Southeast Asia, and remains today as the most spoken variety of Chinese in the region, including in Singapore, Malaysia, Indonesia, Philippines and some parts of Indochina (particularly Thailand, Laos and Cambodia).[4].
The Betawi Malay language, spoken by some five million people in and around the Indonesian capital Jakarta, includes numerous Hokkien loanwords.



Contents


1 Names
2 Geographic distribution
3 Classification

3.1 Southeast Asia


4 History

4.1 Quanzhou
4.2 Zhangzhou
4.3 Xiamen
4.4 Early sources


5 Phonology

5.1 Initials
5.2 Finals
5.3 Vowels
5.4 Tones


6 Comparison

6.1 Mutual intelligibility


7 Grammar

7.1 Pronouns
7.2 Copula ("to be")
7.3 Negation


8 Vocabulary

8.1 Literary and colloquial readings
8.2 Semantic differences between Hokkien and Mandarin
8.3 Words from Minyue
8.4 Loanwords


9 Standard Hokkien
10 Writing systems

10.1 Chinese script
10.2 Latin script
10.3 Computing


11 Cultural and political role
12 See also
13 Notes
14 References
15 Further reading
16 External links



Names[edit]
Chinese speakers of the Quanzhang variety of Southern Min refer to the mainstream Southern Min language as

Bân-lâm-gú / Bân-lâm-ōe (闽南语/闽南话; 閩南語/閩南話, literally 'language or speech of Southern Min') in Mainland China and Taiwan,[5]
Tâi-gí (臺語, literally 'Taiwanese language') in Taiwan, or
Hok-kiàn-ōe (福建话; 福建話, literally 'Fujian speech') in Singapore, Malaysia and Indonesia.
Lán-lâng-ōe (咱儂話, literally 'our people's language') in the Philippines.

In parts of Southeast Asia and in the English-speaking communities, the term Hokkien ([hɔk˥kiɛn˨˩]) is etymologically derived from the Southern Min pronunciation for Fujian (福建), the province from which the language hails. In Southeast Asia and the English press, Hokkien is used in common parlance to refer to the Southern Min dialects of southern Fujian, and does not include reference to dialects of other Sinitic branches also present in Fujian such as Eastern Min or Hakka. In Chinese linguistics, these dialects are known by their classification under the Quanzhang division (Chinese: 泉漳片; pinyin: Quánzhāng piàn) of Min Nan, which comes from the first characters of the two main Hokkien urban centers of Quanzhou and Zhangzhou.
Geographic distribution[edit]
Hokkien originated in the southern area of Fujian province, an important center for trade and migration, and has since become one of the most common Chinese varieties overseas. The major pole of Hokkien varieties outside of Fujian is Taiwan, where, during the 200 years of Qing dynasty rule, thousands of immigrants from Fujian arrived yearly. The Taiwanese version mostly have origins with the Quanzhou and Zhangzhou variants, but since then, the Amoy dialect is becoming the modern prestige standard for the language.
There are many Minnan(Hokkien) speakers among overseas Chinese in Southeast Asia as well as in the United States (Hoklo Americans). Many ethnic Han Chinese emigrants to the region were Hoklo from southern Fujian, and brought the language to what is now Burma (Myanmar), Indonesia (the former Dutch East Indies) and present day Malaysia and Singapore (formerly Malaya and the British Straits Settlements). Many of the Minnan dialects of this region are highly similar to Xiamen dialect(Amoy) and Taiwanese Hokkien with the exception of foreign loanwords. Hokkien is reportedly the native language of up to 80% of the Chinese people in the Philippines, among which is known locally as Lan-nang or Lán-lâng-oē ("Our people’s language"). Hokkien speakers form the largest group of overseas Chinese in Singapore, Malaysia, Indonesia and Philippines.[citation needed]
Classification[edit]






This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (December 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)








Quanzhou



Zhangzhou



Xiamen




Locations of Hokkien (Quanzhang) varieties in Fujian


Southern Fujian is home to three principal Minnan Proper (Hokkien) dialects: Chinchew, Amoy, Chiangchew, originating from the cities of Quanzhou, Xiamen and Zhangzhou(respectively).
Traditionally speaking, Quanzhou dialect spoken in Quanzhou is the Traditional Standard Minnan, it is the dialect that is used in Liyuan Opera (梨园戏) and Nanying music (南音). Being the Traditional Standard Minnan, Quanzhou dialect is considered to have the purest accent and the most conservative Minnan dialect.
In the late 18th to the early 19th century, Xiamen (Amoy) became the principal[citation needed] city of southern Fujian. Xiamen (Amoy) dialect is adopted as the Modern Standard Minnan. It is a hybrid of the Quanzhou and Zhangzhou dialects. It has played an influential role in history, especially in the relations of Western nations with China, and was one of the most frequently learnt dialect of Quanzhang variety by Westerners during the second half of the 19th century and the early 20th century.
Same as Amoy dialect, the Modern Standard form of Quanzhang accent spoken around the city of Tainan in Taiwan is a hybrid of the Quanzhou and Zhangzhou dialects. All Quanzhang dialects spoken throughout the whole of Taiwan are collectively known as Taiwanese Hokkien or just Taiwanese. Used by a majority of the population, it bears much importance from a socio-political perspective, forming the second (and perhaps today most significant) major pole of the language due to the popularity of Taiwanese-language media.
Southeast Asia[edit]
The varieties of Hokkien in Southeast Asia originate from these dialects.
The Singaporeans, Southern Malaysians and people in Indonesia's Riau and surrounding islands variant is from the Quanzhou area. They speak a distinct form of Quanzhou Hokkien called Southern Peninsular Malaysian Hokkien (SPMH).
Among ethnic Chinese inhabitants of Penang, and other states in Northern Malaysia and Medan, with other areas in North Sumatra, Indonesia, a distinct form of Zhangzhou Hokkien has developed. In Penang, it is called Penang Hokkien while across the Malacca Strait in Medan, an almost identical variant is known as Medan Hokkien.
The Philippines variant is mostly from Quanzhou or Amoy (Xiamen), as most of their ancestors are from the aforementioned area.
History[edit]






This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (January 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Variants of Hokkien dialects can be traced to two sources of origin: Quanzhou and Zhangzhou. Both Amoy and most Taiwanese are based on a mixture of Quanzhou and Zhangzhou dialects, while the rest of the Hokkien dialects spoken in South East Asia are either derived from Quanzhou and Zhangzhou, or based on a mixture of both dialects.
Quanzhou[edit]
During the Three Kingdoms period of ancient China, there was constant warfare occurring in the Central Plain of China. Northerners began to enter into Fujian region, causing the region to incorporate parts of northern Chinese dialects. However, the massive migration of northern Han Chinese into Fujian region mainly occurred after the Disaster of Yongjia. The Jìn court fled from the north to the south, causing large numbers of northern Han Chinese to move into Fujian region. They brought the Old Chinese spoken in Central Plain of China from prehistoric era to 3rd century into Fujian. This then gradually evolved into the Quanzhou dialect.
Zhangzhou[edit]
In 677 (during the reign of Emperor Gaozong), Chen Zheng, together with his son Chen Yuanguang, led a military expedition to suppress a rebellion of the She people. In 885, (during the reign of Emperor Xizong of Tang), the two brothers Wang Chao and Wang Shenzhi, led a military expedition force to suppress the Huang Chao rebellion.[6] These two waves of migration from the north brought the language of northern Middle Chinese into the Fujian region. This then gradually evolved into the Zhangzhou dialect.
Xiamen[edit]
Amoy dialect is the main dialect spoken in the Chinese city of Xiamen and its surrounding regions of Tong'an and Xiang'an, both of which are now included in the greater Xiamen area. This dialect developed in the late Ming dynasty when Xiamen was increasingly taking over Quanzhou's position as the main port of trade in southeastern China. Quanzhou traders began travelling southwards to Xiamen to carry on their businesses while Zhangzhou peasants began traveling northwards to Xiamen in search of job opportunities. A need for a common language arose. The Quanzhou and Zhangzhou varieties are similar in many ways (as can be seen from the common place of Henan Luoyang where they originated), but due to differences in accents, communication can be a problem. Quanzhou businessmen considered their speech to be the prestige accent and considered Zhangzhou's to be a village dialect. Over the centuries, dialect leveling occurred and the two speeches mixed to produce the Amoy dialect.
Early sources[edit]
Several playscripts survive from the late 16th century, written in a mixture of Quanzhou and Chaozhou dialects. The most important is the Romance of the Litchi Mirror, with extant manuscripts dating from 1566 and 1581.[7][8]
In the early 17th century, Spanish missionaries in the Philippines produced materials documenting the Hokkien varieties spoken by the Chinese trading community who had settled there in the late 16th century:[7][9]

Diccionarium Sino-Hispanicum (1604), a Spanish-Hokkien dictionary, giving equivalent words, but not definitions.
Doctrina Christiana en letra y lengua china (1607), a Hokkien translation of the Doctrina Christiana.[10][11]
Bocabulario de la lengua sangleya (c. 1617), a Spanish-Hokkien dictionary, with definitions.
Arte de la Lengua Chiõ Chiu (1620), a grammar written by a Spanish missionary in the Philippines.

These texts appear to record a Zhangzhou dialect, from the area of Haicheng (an old port that is now part of Longhai).[12]
Chinese scholars produced rhyme dictionaries describing Hokkien varieties at the beginning of the 19th century:[13]

Huìyīn Miàowù (彙音妙悟 "Understanding of the collected sounds") was written around 1800 by Huang Qian (黃謙), and describes the Quanzhou dialect. The oldest extant edition dates from 1831.
Huìjí yǎsútōng shíwǔyīn (彙集雅俗通十五音 "Compilation of the fifteen elegant and vulgar sounds") by Xie Xiulan (謝秀嵐) describes the Zhangzhou dialect. The oldest extant edition dates from 1818.

Walter Henry Medhurst based his 1832 dictionary on the latter work.
Phonology[edit]
Hokkien has one of the most diverse phoneme inventories among Chinese varieties, with more consonants than Standard Mandarin, Cantonese and Shanghainese. Vowels are more-or-less similar to that of Standard Mandarin. Hokkien varieties retain many pronunciations that are no longer found in other Chinese varieties. These include the retention of the /t/ initial, which is now /tʂ/ (Pinyin 'zh') in Mandarin (e.g. 'bamboo' 竹 is tik, but zhú in Mandarin), having disappeared before the 6th century in other Chinese varieties.[14]
Initials[edit]
Southern Min has aspirated, unaspirated as well as voiced consonant initials. For example, the word khui (開; "open") and kuiⁿ (關; "close") have the same vowel but differ only by aspiration of the initial and nasality of the vowel. In addition, Southern Min has labial initial consonants such as m in m̄-sī (毋是; "is not").
Another example is cha-po͘-kiáⁿ (查埔囝; "boy") and cha-bó͘-kiáⁿ (查某囝; "girl"), which differ in the second syllable in consonant voicing and in tone.
Finals[edit]
Unlike Mandarin, Hokkien retains all the final consonants corresponding to those of Middle Chinese. While Mandarin only preserves the n and ŋ finals, Southern Min also preserves the m, p, t and k finals and developed the ʔ (glottal stop).
Vowels[edit]




Front
Near-front
Central
Near-back
Back


Close






i (y)
ɨ
u
  
  
e
o (ɤ)
ə
ɛ
ɔ
ɐ
a








Near‑close


Close‑mid


Mid


Open‑mid


Near‑open


Open



The following table illustrates some of the more commonly seen vowel shifts. Characters with the same vowel are shown in parentheses.


English
Chinese character
Accent
Pe̍h-ōe-jī
IPA
Teochew Peng'Im


two
二
Quanzhou, Taipei
lī
li˧
jĭ (zi˧˥)[15]


Xiamen, Zhangzhou, Tainan
jī
dzi˧


sick
病 (生)
Quanzhou, Xiamen, Taipei
pīⁿ
pĩ˧
pēⁿ (pẽ˩)


Zhangzhou, Tainan
pēⁿ
pẽ˧


egg
卵 (遠)
Quanzhou, Xiamen, Taiwan
nn̄g
nŋ˧
nn̆g (nŋ˧˥)


Zhangzhou
nūi
nui˧


chopsticks
箸 (豬)
Quanzhou
tīr
tɯ˧
tēu (tɤ˩)


Xiamen, Taipei
tū
tu˧


Zhangzhou, Tainan
tī
ti˧


shoes
鞋 (街)


Quanzhou, Xiamen, Taipei
oê
ue˧˥
ôi (tɤ˩)


Zhangzhou, Tainan
ê
e˧˥


leather
皮 (未)
Quanzhou
phêr
pʰə˨˩
phuê (pʰue˩)


Xiamen, Taipei
phê
pʰe˨˩


Zhangzhou, Tainan
phôe
pʰue˧


chicken
雞 (細)
Quanzhou, Xiamen, Taipei
koe
kue˥˥
koi


Zhangzhou, Tainan
ke
ke˥˥


hair
毛 (兩)
Quanzhou, Taiwan, Xiamen
mn̂g
mŋ
mo


Zhangzhou, Taiwan
mo͘
mõ


return
還
Quanzhou
hoan
huaⁿ
huêng


Xiamen
hâiⁿ
hãɪ²⁴


Zhangzhou, Taiwan
hêng
hîŋ


Speech
話 (花)
Quanzhou, Taiwan
oe
ue



Zhangzhou
oa
ua


Tones[edit]
In general, Hokkien dialects have 5 to 7 phonemic tones. According to the traditional Chinese system, however, there are 7 to 9 tones if the two additional entering tones (see the discussion on Chinese tone). Tone sandhi is extensive.[16] There are minor variations between the Quanzhou and Zhangzhou tone systems. Taiwanese tones follow the patterns of Amoy or Quanzhou, depending on the area of Taiwan. Many dialects have an additional phonemic tone ("tone 9" according to the traditional reckoning), used only in special or foreign loan words.[17]


Tones
平
上
去
入


陰平
陽平
陰上
陽上
陰去
陽去
陰入
陽入


Tone Number
1
5
2
6
3
7
4
8


調值
Xiamen, Fujian
44
24
53
-
21
22
32
4


東 taŋ1
銅 taŋ5
董 taŋ2
-
凍 taŋ3
動 taŋ7
觸 tak4
逐 tak8


Taipei, Taiwan
44
24
53
-
11
33
32
4





-






Tainan, Taiwan
44
23
41
-
21
33
32
44





-






Zhangzhou, Fujian
34
13
53
-
21
22
32
121





-






Quanzhou, Fujian
33
24
55
22
41
5
24





-





Penang, Malaysia[18]
33
23
445
-
21
3
4





-






Comparison[edit]
The Amoy dialect (Xiamen) is a hybrid of the Quanzhou and Zhangzhou dialects. Taiwanese is also a hybrid of these two dialects. Taiwanese in northern and coastal Taiwan tends to be based on the Quanzhou variety, whereas the Taiwanese spoken in central, south and inland Taiwan tends to be based on Zhangzhou speech. There are minor variations in pronunciation and vocabulary between Quanzhou and Zhangzhou dialects. The grammar is generally the same. Additionally, extensive contact with the Japanese language has left a legacy of Japanese loanwords in Taiwanese Hokkien. On the other hand, the variants spoken in Singapore and Malaysia have a substantial number of loanwords from Malay and to a lesser extent, from English and other Chinese varieties, such as the closely related Teochew and some Cantonese.
Penang Hokkien and Medan Hokkien are based on Zhangzhou dialect, whereas Southern Peninsular Malaysian Hokkien is based on Quanzhou dialect.
Mutual intelligibility[edit]
The Quanzhou dialect, Xiamen dialect, Zhangzhou dialect, Taiwanese are mutually intelligible. The overseas variants such as Penang Hokkien and Singaporean Hokkien are slightly less mutually intelligible to mainland Min Nan dialects and Taiwanese dialects due to the existence of foreign loanwords.
The Min Nan varieties of Teochew and Amoy are 84% phonetically similar,[citation needed] and 34% lexically similar,[citation needed] whereas Mandarin and Amoy Min Nan are 62% phonetically similar[citation needed] and 15% lexically similar.[citation needed] In comparison, German and English are 60% lexically similar.[19]
Hainanese, which is sometimes considered Southern Min, has almost no mutual intelligibility with any form of Hokkien.[citation needed]
Grammar[edit]
Hokkien is an analytic language; in a sentence, the arrangement of words is important to its meaning.[20] A basic sentence follows the subject–verb–object pattern (i.e. a subject is followed by a verb then by an object), though this order is often violated because Hokkien dialects are topic-prominent. Unlike synthetic languages, seldom do words indicate time, gender and plural by inflection. Instead, these concepts are expressed through adverbs, aspect markers, and grammatical particles, or are deduced from the context. Different particles are added to a sentence to further specify its status or intonation.
A verb itself indicates no grammatical tense. The time can be explicitly shown with time-indicating adverbs. Certain exceptions exist, however, according to the pragmatic interpretation of a verb's meaning. Additionally, an optional aspect particle can be appended to a verb to indicate the state of an action. Appending interrogative or exclamative particles to a sentence turns a statement into a question or shows the attitudes of the speaker.
Hokkien dialects preserve certain grammatical reflexes and patterns reminiscent of the broad stage of Archaic Chinese. This includes the serialization of verb phrases (direct linkage of verbs and verb phrases) and the infrequency of nominalization, both similar to Archaic Chinese grammar.[21]

你(Lí) 去(khì) 買(bé) 有(ū) 錶仔(pió-á) 無(bo)？
You-go-buy-have watch-no (Gloss)
"Did you go to buy a watch?"

Choice of grammatical function words also varies significantly among the Hokkien dialects. For instance, 乞 khit (denoting the causative, passive or dative) is retained in Jinjiang (also unique to the Jinjiang dialect is 度 thoo) and in Jieyang, but not in Longxi and Xiamen, whose dialects use 互 (hoo) instead.[22]
Pronouns[edit]
Hokkien dialects differ in their preferred choice of pronouns. For instance, while the second person pronoun lí (你) is standard in Taiwanese Hokkien, the Teochew loanword lú (汝) is more common among Hokkien-speaking communities in Southeast Asia. The plural personal pronouns tend to be nasalized forms of the singular ones. Personal pronouns found in the Hokkien dialects are listed below:


Person
Singular
Plural


First person
我
góa
阮1, 3gún, góan

咱2, 3 or 俺
lán or án

我儂
góa-lâng


Second person
你
lí

汝
lú
恁
lín

恁儂
lín lâng


Third person
伊
i
𪜶
in

伊儂
i lâng



1 Inclusive
2 Exclusive
3 儂 (-lâng) is typically suffixed in Southeast Asian Hokkien dialects

Possessive pronouns are marked by the particle ê (的), or its literary version chi (之). Plural pronouns are typically unmarked (the nasalized final serves as the possessive indicator):[23]

阮(góan) 翁(ang) 姓(sèⁿ) 陳(Tân)。
"My husband's surname is Tan."

Reflexive pronouns are made by appending the pronouns ka-kī, ka-tī (家己) or chū-kí (自己).
Hokkien dialects use a variety of differing demonstrative pronouns, which are as follows:

this - che (這, 即), chit-ê (這個, 即個)
that - he (許, 彼), hit-ê (彼個)
here - chia (者), hia/hiâ (遮, 遐), chit-tau 這兜)
there - hia (許, 遐), hit-tau (彼兜)

The interrogative pronouns are:

what - siáⁿ-mih (啥物), sīm-mi̍h (甚麼)
when - tī-sî (底時), kī-sî (幾時), tang-sî (當時), sīm-mi̍h-sî-chūn (甚麼時陣)
where - to-lo̍h (倒落), tó-uī (佗位, 叨位)
who - siáⁿ-lâng (啥人) or siáⁿ (啥)
why - án-chóaⁿ (按怎), khah (盍)
how - án-chóaⁿ (按怎) lû-hô (如何) chóaⁿ-iūⁿ (怎樣)

Copula ("to be")[edit]
States and qualities are generally expressed using stative verbs that do not require the verb "to be":

我(goá) 腹肚(pak-tó͘) 枵(iau)。
"I am hungry." (lit. I-stomach-hungry)

With noun complements, the verb sī (是) serves as the verb "to be".

昨昏(cha-hng) 是(sī) 八月節(peh-go̍eh-cheh)。
"Yesterday was the Mid-Autumn festival."

To indicate location, the words tī (佇) tiàm (踮), teh/leh (咧), which are collectively known as the locatives or sometimes coverbs in Chinese linguistics, are used to express "(to be) at":

我(goá) 踮(tiàm) 遮(chia) 等(tán) 你(lí)。
"I am here waiting for you."


伊(i) 這馬(chit-má) 佇(tī) 厝(chhù) 裡(lí) 咧(teh) 睏(khùn)。
"He's sleeping at home now."

Negation[edit]
Hokkien dialects have a variety of negation particles that are prefixed or affixed to the verbs they modify. There are five primary negation particles in Hokkien dialects:

m̄ (毋, 呣, 唔)
bē, bōe (袂, 未)
mài (莫, 勿)
bô (無)
put (不) - literary

Other negative particles include:

biàu (嫑) - a contraction of bô iàu (無要), as in biàu-kín (嫑緊)[citation needed]
bàng (甭)
bián (免)
thài (汰)

The particles m̄ (毋, 呣, 唔) is general and can negate almost any verb:

伊(i) 毋(m̄) 捌(bat) 字(jī)。
"He cannot read." (lit. he-not-know-word)

The particle mài (莫, 勿), a concatenation of m-ài (毋愛) is used to negate imperative commands:

莫(mài) 講(kóng)!
"Don't speak!"

The particle bô (無) indicates the past tense:

伊(i) 無(bô) 食(chia̍h)。
"He did not eat."

The verb 'to have', ū (有) is replaced by bô (無) when negated (not 無有):

伊(i) 無(bô) 錢(chîⁿ)。
"He does not have any money."

The particle put (不) is used infrequently, mostly found in literary compounds and phrases:

伊(i) 真(chin) 不孝(put-hàu)。
"He is truly unfilial."

Vocabulary[edit]
The majority of Hokkien vocabulary is monosyllabic.[24][better source needed] Many Hokkien words have cognates in other Chinese varieties. That said, there are also many indigenous words that are unique to Hokkien and are potentially not of Sino-Tibetan origin, while others are shared by all the Min dialects (e.g. 'congee' is 糜 mê, bôe, bê, not 粥 zhōu, as in other dialects).
As compared to Standard Chinese (Mandarin), Hokkien dialects prefer to use the monosyllabic form of words, without suffixes. For instance, the Mandarin noun suffix 子 (zi) is not found in Hokkien words, while another noun suffix, 仔 (á) is used in many nouns. Examples are below:

'duck' - 鸭 ah or 鴨仔 ah-á (SC: 鸭子 yāzi)
'color' - 色 sek (SC: 顏色 yán sè)

In other bisyllabic morphemes, the syllables are inverted, as compared to Standard Chinese. Examples include the following:

'guest' - 人客 lâng-kheh (SC: 客人 kèrén)

In other cases, the same word can have different meanings in Hokkien and standard written Chinese. Similarly, depending on the region Hokkien is spoken in, loanwords from local languages (Malay, Tagalog, Burmese, among others), as well as other Chinese dialects (such as Southern Chinese dialects like Cantonese and Teochew), are commonly integrated into the vocabulary of Hokkien dialects.
Literary and colloquial readings[edit]
The existence of literary and colloquial readings is a prominent feature of some Hokkien dialects and indeed in many Sinitic varieties in the south. The bulk of literary readings (文讀, bûn-tha̍k), based on pronunciations of the vernacular during the Tang Dynasty, are mainly used in formal phrases and written language (e.g. philosophical concepts, surnames, and some place names), while the colloquial (or vernacular) ones (白讀, pe̍h-tha̍k) are basically used in spoken language and vulgar phrases. Literary readings are more similar to the pronunciations of the Tang standard of Middle Chinese than their colloquial equivalents.
However, some dialects of Hokkien, such as Penang Hokkien as well as Philippine Hokkien overwhelmingly favor colloquial readings. For example, in both Penang Hokkien and Philippine Hokkien, the characters for 'university,' 大學, are pronounced tōa-o̍h (colloquial readings for both characters), instead of the literary reading tāi-ha̍k, which is common in Taiwanese and Mainland Chinese dialects.
The pronounced divergence between literary and colloquial pronunciations found in Hokkien dialects is attributed to the presence of several strata in the Min lexicon. The earliest, colloquial stratum is traced to the Han dynasty (206 BCE - 220 CE); the second colloquial one comes from the period of the Southern and Northern Dynasties (420 - 589 CE); the third stratum of pronunciations (typically literary ones) comes from the Tang Dynasty (618–907 CE) and is based on the prestige dialect of Chang'an (modern day Xi'an), its capital.[25]
Some commonly seen sound correspondences (colloquial → literary) are as follows:

p- ([p-], [pʰ-]) → h ([h-])
ch-, chh- ([ts-], [tsʰ-], [tɕ-], [tɕʰ-]) → s ([s-], [ɕ-])
k-, kh- ([k-], [kʰ-]) → ch ([tɕ-], [tɕʰ-])
-ⁿ ([-ã], [-uã]) → n ([-an])
-h ([-ʔ]) → t ([-t])
i ([-i]) → e ([-e])
e ([-e]) → a ([-a])
ia ([-ia]) → i ([-i])

This table displays some widely used characters in Hokkien that have both literary and colloquial readings:[26][27]


Chinese character
Reading pronunciations
Spoken pronunciations / †explications
English


白
pe̍k
pe̍h
white


面
biān
bīn
face


書
su
chu
book


生
seng
seⁿ / siⁿ
student


不
put
m̄†
not


返
hóan
tńg†
return


學
ha̍k
o̍h
to study


人
jîn / lîn
lâng
person


少
siàu
chió
few


轉
chóan
tńg
to turn


This feature extends to Chinese numerals, which have both literary and colloquial readings.[27] Literary readings are typically used when the numerals are read out loud (e.g. phone numbers), while colloquial readings are used for counting items.


Numeral
Reading
Numeral
Reading


Literary
Colloquial
Literary
Colloquial


一
it
chi̍t
六
lio̍k
la̍k


二
jī, lī
七
chhit


三
sam
saⁿ
八
pat
peh, poeh


四
sù, sìr
sì
九
kiú
káu


五
ngó
gō
十
si̍p
cha̍p


Semantic differences between Hokkien and Mandarin[edit]
Quite a few words from the variety of Old Chinese spoken in the state of Wu, where the ancestral language of Min and Wu dialect families originated, and later words from Middle Chinese as well, have retained the original meanings in Hokkien, while many of their counterparts in Mandarin Chinese have either fallen out of daily use, have been substituted with other words (some of which are borrowed from other languages while others are new developments), or have developed newer meanings. The same may be said of Hokkien as well, since some lexical meaning evolved in step with Mandarin while others are wholly innovative developments.
This table shows some Hokkien dialect words from Classical Chinese, as contrasted to the written Chinese standard, Mandarin:


Meaning
Hokkien
Mandarin


Hanji
POJ
Hanzi
Pinyin


eye
目睭/目珠
ba̍k-chiu
眼睛
yǎnjīng


chopstick
箸
tī, tū
筷子
kuàizi


to chase
逐
jiok, lip
追
zhuī


wet
潤
jūn, lūn
濕
shī


black
烏
o͘
黑
hēi


book
冊
chheh
書
shū


For other words, the classical Chinese meanings of certain words, which are retained in Hokkien dialects, have evolved or deviated significantly in other Chinese dialects. The following table shows some words that are both used in both Hokkien dialects and Mandarin Chinese, while the meanings in Mandarin Chinese have been modified:


Word
Hokkien
Mandarin


POJ
Meaning
(and Classical Chinese)
Pinyin
Meaning


走
cháu
to flee
zǒu
to walk


細
sè, sòe
tiny, small, young
xì
thin, slender


鼎
tiáⁿ
pot
dǐng
tripod


食
chia̍h
to eat
shí
food


懸
kôan
tall, high
xuán
to hang, to suspend


喙
chhuì
mouth
huì
beak


Words from Minyue[edit]
Some commonly used words, shared by all[citation needed][dubious – discuss] Min Chinese dialects, came from the ancient Minyue languages. Jerry Norman suggested that these languages were Austroasiatic. Some terms are thought be cognates with words in Tai Kadai and Austronesian languages. They include the following examples, compared to the Fuzhou dialect, a Min Dong language:


Word
Hokkien POJ
Foochow Romanized
Meaning


骹
kha [kʰa˥]
kă [kʰa˥]
foot and leg


囝
kiáⁿ [kiã˥˩]
giāng [kiaŋ˧]
son, child, whelp, a small amount


睏
khùn [kʰun˨˩]
káung [kʰɑuŋ˧]
to sleep


骿
phiaⁿ [pʰiã˥]
piăng [pʰiaŋ˥]
back, dorsum


厝
chhù [tsʰu˨˩]
chuó, chió [tsʰuɔ˥˧]
home, house


刣
thâi [tʰai˨˦]
tài [tʰai˥˧]
to kill, to slaughter


(肉)
bah, mah
—
meat


媠
suí
—
beautiful


Loanwords[edit]
Loanwords are not unusual among Hokkien dialects, as speakers readily adopted indigenous terms of the languages they came in contact with. As a result, there is a plethora of loanwords that are not mutually comprehensible among Hokkien dialects.
Taiwanese Hokkien, as a result of linguistic contact with Japanese[28] and Formosan languages, contains many loanwords from these languages. Many words have also been formed as calques from Mandarin, and speakers will often directly use Mandarin vocabulary through codeswitching. Among these include the following examples:

'toilet' - piān-só͘ (便所) from Japanese benjo (便所)

Other Hokkien variants: 屎礐 (sái-ha̍k), 廁所 (chhek-só͘)


'car' - chū-tōng-chhia (自動車) from Japanese jidōsha (自動車)

Other Hokkien variants: 風車 (hong-chhia), 汽車 (khì-chhia)


'to admire' - kám-sim (感心) from Japanese kanshin (感心)

Other Hokkien variants: 感動 (kám-tōng)


'fruit' - chúi-ké / chúi-kóe / chúi-kér (水果) from Mandarin (Chinese: 水果; pinyin: shuǐguǒ)

Other Hokkien variants: 果子 (ké-chí / kóe-chí / kér-chí)



Singaporean Hokkien, Penang Hokkien and other Malaysian Hokkien dialects tend to draw loanwords from Malay, English as well as other Chinese dialects, primarily Teochew. Examples include:

'but' - tapi, from Malay

Other Hokkien variants: 但是 （tān-sī）


'doctor' - 老君 lu-gun, from Malay dukun

Other Hokkien variants: 醫生(i-sing)


'stone/rock' - batu, from Malay batu

Other Hokkien variants: 石头(tsio-tau)


'market' - 巴剎 pa-sat, from Malay pasar from Persian bazaar (بازار)[29]

Other Hokkien variants: 市場 (chhī-tiûⁿ)


'they' - 伊儂 i lâng from Teochew (i1 nang5)

Other Hokkien variants: 𪜶 (in)


'together' - 做瓠 chò-bú from Teochew 做瓠 (jo3 bu5)

Other Hokkien variants: 做夥 (chò-hóe), 同齊 (tâng-chê) or 鬥陣 (tàu-tīn)


茶箍 (Sap-bûn) from Malay sabun from Arabic ṣābūn (صابون).[29][30][31]

Philippine Hokkien dialects, as a result of centuries-old contact with both Philippine language and Spanish also incorporate words from these languages. Examples include:

'cup' - ba-su, from Spanish vaso and Tagalog baso

Other Hokkien variants: 杯子 (poe-á)


'office' - o-pi-sin, from Spanish oficina and Tagalog opisina

Other Hokkien variants: 辦公室 (pān-kong-sek)


'soap' - sa-bun, from Spanish jabon and Tagalog sabon

Other Hokkien variants:


'but' - ka-so, from Tagalog kaso

Other Hokkien variants: 但是 (tan-si)
(em-ko)



Standard Hokkien[edit]
Hokkien originated from Quanzhou.[32][better source needed] After the Opium War in 1842, Xiamen (Amoy) became one of the major treaty ports to be opened for trade with the outside world. From mid-19th century onwards, Xiamen slowly developed to become the political and economical center of the Hokkien-speaking region in China. This caused Amoy dialect to gradually replace the position of dialect variants from Quanzhou and Zhangzhou. From mid-19th century until the end of World War II,[citation needed] western diplomats usually learned Amoy as the preferred dialect if they were to communicate with the Hokkien-speaking populace in China or South-East Asia. In the 1940s and 1950s, Taiwan[who?] also held Amoy Hokkien as its standard and tended to incline towards Amoy dialect.
However, from the 1980s onwards, the development of Hokkien pop music and media industry in Taiwan caused the Hokkien cultural hub to shift from Xiamen to Taiwan.[citation needed] The flourishing Hokkien entertainment and media industry from Taiwan in the 1990s and early 21st century led Taiwan to emerge as the new significant cultural hub for Hokkien.
In the 1990s, marked by the liberalization of language development and mother tongue movement in Taiwan, Taiwanese Hokkien had undergone a fast pace in its development. In 1993, Taiwan became the first region in the world to implement the teaching of Taiwanese Hokkien in Taiwanese schools. In 2001, the local Taiwanese language program was further extended to all schools in Taiwan, and Taiwanese Hokkien became one of the compulsory local Taiwanese languages to be learned in schools.[33] The mother tongue movement in Taiwan even influenced Xiamen (Amoy) to the point that in 2010, Xiamen also began to implement the teaching of Hokkien dialect in its schools.[34] In 2007, the Ministry of Education in Taiwan also completed the standardization of Chinese characters used for writing Hokkien and developed Tai-lo as the standard Hokkien pronunciation and romanization guide. A number of universities in Taiwan also offer Taiwanese degree courses for training Hokkien-fluent talents to work for the Hokkien media industry and education. Taiwan also has its own Hokkien literary and cultural circles whereby Hokkien poets and writers compose poetry or literature in Hokkien.
Thus by the 21st century, Taiwan has truly emerged as one of the most significant Hokkien cultural hubs of the world. The historical changes and development in Taiwan had led Taiwanese Hokkien to become the more influential pole of the Hokkien dialect after mid-20th century. Today, Taiwanese prestige dialect (Taiyu Youshiqiang/Tongxinqiang 台語優勢腔/通行腔), which is based on Tainan variant and heard on Taiwanese Hokkien media.
Writing systems[edit]
Main article: Written Hokkien
Further information: Comparison of Hokkien writing systems
Chinese script[edit]
Hokkien dialects are typically written using Chinese characters (漢字, Hàn-jī). However, the written script was and remains adapted to the literary form, which is based on classical Chinese, not the vernacular and spoken form. Furthermore, the character inventory used for Mandarin (standard written Chinese) does not correspond to Hokkien words, and there are a large number of informal characters (替字, thè-jī or thòe-jī; 'substitute characters') which are unique to Hokkien (as is the case with Cantonese). For instance, about 20 to 25% of Taiwanese morphemes lack an appropriate or standard Chinese character.[26]
While most Hokkien morphemes have standard designated characters, they are not always etymological or phono-semantic. Similar-sounding, similar-meaning or rare characters are commonly borrowed or substituted to represent a particular morpheme. Examples include "beautiful" (美 bí is the literary form), whose vernacular morpheme suí is represented by characters like 媠 (an obsolete character), 婎 (a vernacular reading of this character) and even 水 (transliteration of the sound suí), or "tall" (高 ko is the literary form), whose morpheme kôan is 懸.[35] Common grammatical particles are not exempt; the negation particle m̄ (not) is variously represented by 毋, 呣 or 唔, among others. In other cases, characters are invented to represent a particular morpheme (a common example is the character 𪜶 in, which represents the personal pronoun "they"). In addition, some characters have multiple and unrelated pronunciations, adapted to represent Hokkien words. For example, the Hokkien word bah ("meat") has been reduced to the character 肉, which has etymologically unrelated colloquial and literary readings (he̍k and jio̍k, respectively).[36][37] Another case is the word 'to eat,' chia̍h, which is often transcribed in Taiwanese newspapers and media as 呷 (a Mandarin transliteration, xiā, to approximate the Hokkien term), even though its recommended character in dictionaries is 食.[38]
Moreover, unlike Cantonese, Hokkien does not have a universally accepted standardized character set. Thus, there is some variation in the characters used to express certain words and characters can be ambiguous in meaning. In 2007, the Ministry of Education of the Republic of China formulated and released a standard character set to overcome these difficulties.[39] These standard Chinese characters for writing Taiwanese Hokkien are now taught in schools in Taiwan.
Latin script[edit]
Hokkien, especially Taiwanese Hokkien, is sometimes written in the Latin script using one of several alphabets. Of these the most popular is POJ, developed first by Presbyterian missionaries in China and later by the indigenous Presbyterian Church in Taiwan. Use of this script and orthography has been actively promoted since the late 19th century. The use of a mixed script of Han characters and Latin letters is also seen, though remains uncommon. Other Latin-based alphabets also exist.
Min Nan texts, all Hokkien, can be dated back to the 16th century. One example is the Doctrina Christiana en letra y lengua china, presumably written after 1587 by the Spanish Dominicans in the Philippines. Another is a Ming Dynasty script of a play called Tale of the Lychee Mirror (1566), supposedly the earliest Southern Min colloquial text, although it is written in Teochew dialect.
Taiwan has developed a Latin alphabet for Taiwanese Hokkien, derived from POJ, known as Tai-lo. Since 2006, it has been officially promoted by Taiwan's Ministry of Education and taught in Taiwanese schools. Xiamen University has also developed an alphabet based on Pinyin called Bbánlám pìngyīm.
Computing[edit]




The character for the third person pronoun (they) in some Hokkien dialects, 𪜶 (in), is now supported by the Unicode Standard at U+2A736.


Hokkien is registered as "Southern Min" per RFC 3066 as zh-min-nan.[40]
When writing Hokkien in Chinese characters, some writers create 'new' characters when they consider it impossible to use directly or borrow existing ones; this corresponds to similar practices in character usage in Cantonese, Vietnamese chữ nôm, Korean hanja and Japanese kanji. Some of these are not encoded in Unicode (or the corresponding ISO/IEC 10646: Universal Character Set), thus creating problems in computer processing.
All Latin characters required by Pe̍h-ōe-jī can be represented using Unicode (or the corresponding ISO/IEC 10646: Universal Character Set), using precomposed or combining (diacritics) characters. Prior to June 2004, the vowel akin to but more open than o, written with a dot above right, was not encoded. The usual workaround was to use the (stand-alone; spacing) character Interpunct (U+00B7, ·) or less commonly the combining character dot above (U+0307). As these are far from ideal, since 1997 proposals have been submitted to the ISO/IEC working group in charge of ISO/IEC 10646—namely, ISO/IEC JTC1/SC2/WG2—to encode a new combining character dot above right. This is now officially assigned to U+0358 (see documents N1593, N2507, N2628, N2699, and N2713). Font support is expected to follow.
Cultural and political role[edit]
See also: Hokkien culture
Hokkien (or Min Nan) can trace its roots through the Tang Dynasty and also even further to the people of the Baiyue, the indigenous non-Han people of modern-day southern China.[41] Min Nan (Hokkien) people call themselves "Tang people," (唐人; Tn̂g-lâng) which is synonymous to "Chinese people". Because of the widespread influence of the Tang culture during the great Tang dynasty, there are today still many Min Nan pronunciations of words shared by the Vietnamese, Korean and Japanese languages.
In 2002, the Taiwan Solidarity Union, a party with about 10% of the Legislative Yuan seats at the time, suggested making Taiwanese a second official language.[42] This proposal encountered strong opposition not only from Mainlander groups but also from Hakka and Taiwanese aboriginal groups who felt that it would slight their home languages, as well as others including Hoklo who objected to the proposal on logistical grounds and on the grounds that it would increase ethnic tensions. Because of these objections, support for this measure was lukewarm among moderate Taiwan independence supporters, and the proposal did not pass.


English
Chinese characters
Mandarin Chinese
Taiwanese Hokkien[43]
Korean
Vietnamese
Japanese


Book
冊
Cè
Chheh
Chaek
Tập/Sách
Saku/Satsu/Shaku


Bridge
橋
Qiáo
Kiô
Kyo
Cầu/Kiều
Kyō


Dangerous
危險
Wēixiǎn
Guî-hiám
Wiheom
Nguy hiểm
Kiken


Flag
旗
Qí
Kî
Ki
Cờ/Kỳ
Ki


Insurance
保險
Bǎoxiǎn
Pó-hiám
Boheom
Bảo hiểm
Hoken


News
新聞
Xīnwén
Sin-bûn
Shinmun
Tân Văn
Shinbun


Student
學生
Xuéshēng
Ha̍k-seng
Haksaeng
Học sinh
Gakusei


University
大學
Dàxué
Tāi-ha̍k (Tōa-o̍h)
Daehak
Đại học
Daigaku


See also[edit]


China portal
Taiwan portal
Languages portal



Penang Hokkien
Taiwanese Hokkien
Medan Hokkien
Singaporean Hokkien
Amoy dialect
Lan-nang (Philippine dialect of Hokkien)
Teochew dialect
Languages of China
Languages of Taiwan
Amoy Min Nan Swadesh list

Notes[edit]



^ They are the most common pronunciations while there is another one cited from OxfordDictionaries.com, /hoʊˈkiːn/, which is almost never used actually.
^ also Quanzhang (Quanzhou-Zhangzhou / Chinchew–Changchew; BP: Zuánziū–Ziāngziū)



References[edit]



^ 大眾運輸工具播音語言平等保障法 - 维基文库，自由的图书馆 (in Chinese). Zh.wikisource.org. Retrieved 2010-09-16. 
^ Hammarström, Harald; Forkel, Robert; Haspelmath, Martin, eds. (2017). "Hokkien". Glottolog 3.0. Jena, Germany: Max Planck Institute for the Science of Human History. 
^ Hammarström, Harald; Forkel, Robert; Haspelmath, Martin, eds. (2017). "Fukienese". Glottolog 3.0. Jena, Germany: Max Planck Institute for the Science of Human History. 
^ West (2010), pp. 289-90.
^ "臺灣閩南語漢字之選用原則" (PDF). 
^ Yan, Margaret Mian (2006). Introduction to Chinese Dialectology. LINCOM Europa. p. 120. ISBN 978-3-89586-629-6. 
^ a b Chappell, Hilary; Peyraube, Alain (2006). "The analytic causatives of early modern Southern Min in diachronic perspective". In Ho, D.-a.; Cheung, S.; Pan, W.; Wu, F. Linguistic Studies in Chinese and Neighboring Languages. Taipei: Institute of Linguistics, Academia Sinica. pp. 973–1011. 
^ Lien, Chinfa (2015). "Min languages". In Wang, William S.-Y.; Sun, Chaofen. The Oxford Handbook of Chinese Linguistics. Oxford University Press. pp. 160–172. ISBN 978-0-19-985633-6. 
^ Klöter, Henning (2011). The Language of the Sangleys: A Chinese Vernacular in Missionary Sources of the Seventeenth Century. BRILL. ISBN 978-90-04-18493-0. 
^ Yue, Anne O. (1999). "The Min translation of the Doctrina Christiana". Contemporary Studies on the Min Dialects. Journal of Chinese Linguistics Monograph Series. 14. Chinese University Press. pp. 42–76. JSTOR 23833463. 
^ Van der Loon, Piet (1966). "The Manila Incunabula and Early Hokkien Studies, Part 1" (PDF). Asia Major New Series. 12 (1): 1–43. 
^ Van der Loon, Piet (1967). "The Manila Incunabula and Early Hokkien Studies, Part 2" (PDF). Asia Major New Series. 13 (1): 95–186. 
^ Klöter, Henning (2005). Written Taiwanese. Otto Harrassowitz. pp. 64–65. ISBN 978-3-447-05093-7. 
^ Kane, Daniel (2006). The Chinese language: its history and current usage. Tuttle Publishing. pp. 100–102. ISBN 978-0-8048-3853-5. 
^ for Teochew Peng'Im on the word 'two', ri6 can also be written as dzi6.
^ 無標題文件 (in Chinese). Ntcu.edu.tw. August 1, 2007. Retrieved September 16, 2010. 
^ 周長楫 (2006). 闽南方言大词典 (in Chinese). 福建人民出版社. pp. 17, 28. ISBN 7-211-03896-9. 
^ https://www.academia.edu/5132554/Complete_and_not-so-complete_tonal_neutralization_in_Penang_Hokkien
^ "German". Ethnologue. Retrieved 16 September 2010. 
^ Ratte, Alexander T. (May 2009). "A DIALECTAL AND PHONOLOGICAL ANALYSIS OF PENGHU TAIWANESE" (PDF). Williamstown, Massachusetts: Williams College: 4. 
^ Li, Y.C. (1986). "Historical significance of certain distinct grammatical features in Taiwanese". In John McCoy, Timothy Light. Contributions to Sino-Tibetan studies. Brill Archive. ISBN 978-90-04-07850-5. 
^ Lien, Chinfa (2002). "Grammatical Function Words 乞, 度, 共, 甲, 將 and 力 in Li Jing Ji 荔鏡記 and their Development in Southern Min" (PDF). Papers from the Third International Conference on Sinology. National Tsing Hua University: 179–216. 
^ Klöter, Henning (2005). Written Taiwanese. Otto Harrassowitz Verlag. ISBN 978-3-447-05093-7. 
^ Lim, Beng Soon. "Malay Lexicalized Items in Penang Peranakan Hokkien" (PDF). Singapore: Regional Language Centre (RELC): 165. 
^ Chappell, Hilary; Alain Peyraube. "The Analytic Causatives Of Early Modern Southern Min In Diachronic Perspective" (PDF). Linguistic studies in Chinese and neighboring languages. Paris, France: Centre de Recherches Linguistiques sur l’Asie Orientale: 1–34. 
^ a b Mair, Victor H. (2010). "How to Forget Your Mother Tongue and Remember Your National Language". University of Pennsylvania. Retrieved 2 July 2011. 
^ a b 臺灣閩南語常用詞辭典 [Dictionary of Frequently-Used Taiwan Minnan]. Ministry of Education, R.O.C. 2011. 
^ 臺灣閩南語外來詞 [Dictionary of Frequently-Used Taiwan Minnan] (in Chinese). Taiwan: Ministry of Education, R.O.C. 2011. Retrieved 8 July 2011. 
^ a b 似懂非懂 (8 December 2006). 卑南覓. Hyweb Technology Co. Ltd. pp. 1873–. GGKEY:TPZ824QU3UG. 
^ http://banlam.tawa.asia/2012/10/soap-feizhao-hokkien-sabun.html
^ Thomas Watters (1889). Essays on the Chinese Language. Presbyterian Mission Press. pp. 346–. 
^ http://www.taiwan.cn/twzlk/twgk/yywz/200512/t20051226_222977.htm
^ "《網路社會學通訊期刊》第45期，2005年03月15日". Nhu.edu.tw. Retrieved 16 September 2010. 
^ 有感于厦门学校“闽南语教学进课堂”_博客臧_新浪博客
^ Iûⁿ, Ún-giân. 台語線頂字典 [Taiwanese Hokkien Online Character Dictionary] (in Taiwanese and Chinese). CS1 maint: Unrecognized language (link)
^ Klöter (2005), p. 21.
^ 臺灣閩南語常用詞辭典 [Dictionary of Frequently-Used Taiwan Minnan] (in Chinese). Ministry of Education, R.O.C. 2013. #2607. 
^ Hsieh, Shelley Ching-yu (October 2005). "Taiwanese Loanwords in Mandarin Chinese: Language Interaction in Taiwan" (PDF). Taiwan Papers. Southern Taiwan University of Technology. 5. Retrieved 1 July 2011. 
^ 參、臺灣閩南語 (PDF). National Languages Committee (in Chinese). ROC Ministry of Education. Retrieved 2 July 2011. 
^ "RFC 3066 Language code assignments". Evertype.com. Retrieved 16 September 2010. 
^ Norman, Jerry; Mei, Tsu-lin (1976), "The Austroasiatics in Ancient South China: Some Lexical Evidence" (PDF), Monumenta Serica, 32: 274–301, JSTOR 40726203. 
^ Lin Mei-chun (10 Mar 2002). "Hokkien should be given official status, says TSU". Taipei Times. p. 1. 
^ Iûⁿ, Ún-giân. "Tâi-bûn/Hôa-bûn Sòaⁿ-téng Sû-tián" 台文/華文線頂辭典 [Taiwanese/Chinese Online Dictionary]. Retrieved 1 October 2014. 



Further reading[edit]

Branner, David Prager (2000). Problems in Comparative Chinese Dialectology — the Classification of Miin and Hakka. Trends in Linguistics series, no. 123. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter. ISBN 3-11-015831-0. 
Chung, R.-f (196). The segmental phonology of Southern Min in Taiwan. Taipei: Crane Pub. Co. ISBN 957-9463-46-8. 
DeBernardi, Jean (1991). "Linguistic nationalism: the case of Southern Min". Sino-Platonic Papers. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania. 25. OCLC 24810816. 
Ding, Picus Sizhi (2016). Southern Min (Hokkien) as a Migrating Language. Springer. ISBN 978-981-287-593-8. 

Francis, Norbert (2014). "Southern Min (Hokkien) as a Migrating Language: A Comparative Study of Language Shift and Maintenance across National Borders by Picus Sizhi Ding (review)". China Review International. 21 (2): 128–133. doi:10.1353/cri.2014.0008. 


Klöter, Henning (2011). The Language of the Sangleys: A Chinese Vernacular in Missionary Sources of the Seventeenth Century. BRILL. ISBN 978-90-04-18493-0.  An analysis and facsimile of the Arte de la Lengua Chio-chiu (1620), the oldest extant grammar of Hokkien.

External links[edit]

Lìzhī jì 荔枝記 [Litchi Mirror Tale].  A playscript from the late 16th century.
Doctrina Christiana. Manila. 1607.  Hokkien translation of the Doctrina Christiana.
Arte de la Lengua Chio-chiu. Manila. 1620.  A manual for learning Hokkien written by a Spanish missionary in the Philippines.
Huìjí yǎ sú tōng shíwǔ yīn 彙集雅俗通十五音 [Compilation of the fifteen elegant and vulgar sounds]. 1818.  The oldest known rhyme dictionary of a Zhangzhou dialect.
Douglas, Carstairs (1899). Chinese-English dictionary of the vernacular or spoken language of Amoy. London: Presbyterian Church of England. 
Medhurst, Walter Henry (1832). A dictionary of the Hok-këèn dialect of the Chinese language, according to the reading and colloquial idioms. Macao: C.J. Steyn. 
當代泉州音字彙, a dictionary of Quanzhou speech
Voyager - Spacecraft - Golden Record - Greetings From Earth - Amoy, includes translation and sound clip

(The voyager clip says: Thài-khong pêng-iú, lín-hó. Lín chia̍h-pá--bē? Ū-êng, to̍h lâi gún chia chē--ô͘! 太空朋友，恁好。恁食飽未？有閒著來阮遮坐哦!)









v
t
e


Southern Min



Datian Min



Qianlu dialect
Houlu dialect








Hokkien




East Asia



Quanzhou dialect

Anxi dialect
Hui'an dialect
Jinjiang dialect
Nan'an dialect
Tong'an dialect


Amoy dialect
Toubei dialect
Zhangzhou dialect
Taiwanese

Longhai dialect


Longyan Min

Zhangping dialect







Southeast Asia



Philippine Hokkien
Northern Malaysian Hokkien

Penang Hokkien
Medan Hokkien




Southern Peninsular Malaysian Hokkien

Riau Hokkien
Singaporean Hokkien










Teo-Swa
(Chaoshan)




East Asia



Teochew

Raoping dialect


Shantou dialect (Swatow)

Chenghai dialect
Nan'ao dialect


Jieyang dialect
Chaoyang dialect

Puning dialect
Huilai dialect


Haifeng dialect





Southeast Asia



Bangkok Teochew
Cambodia Teochew
Kalimantan Teochew








Zhenan Min



Cangnan dialect
Pingyang dialect
Dongtou dialect
Yuhuan dialect





Zhongshan Min



Longdu dialect
Nanlang dialect
Sanxiang dialect
Zhangjiabian dialect





Unclassified



Yixing dialect
Zhoushan dialect












v
t
e


Min Chinese








Languages







Eastern Min




Southern subgroup



Fuzhou dialect
Minhou dialect
Lianjiang dialect
Fuqing dialect
Changle dialect
Gutian dialect
Pingtan dialect
Luoyuan dialect
Yongtai dialect
Youxi dialect
Ningde dialect
Weili dialect
Matsu dialect





Northern subgroup



Xiapu dialect
Fu'an dialect
Zherong dialect
Fuding dialect
Shouning dialect
Zhouning dialect





Mango dialect



Taishun Manjiang
Cangnan Manhua











Southern Min



Datian Min
Hokkien
Teochew
Zhenan Min
Zhongshan Min
... (Detail)





Pu-Xian Min
(Hinghwa)



Putian dialect
Xianyou dialect





Northern Min



Jian'ou dialect
Jianyang dialect
Chong'an dialect
Songxi dialect
Zhenghe dialect





Shao-Jiang Min



Shaowu dialect
Jiangle dialect
Guangze dialect
Shunchang dialect





Central Min



Sanming dialect
Shaxian dialect
Yong'an dialect





Leizhou Min



Leizhou Min





Hainanese




Fucheng subgroup



Haikou dialect
Ding'an dialect
Chengmai dialect
Tunchang dialect





Wenchang subgroup



Wenchang dialect
Qionghai dialect





Wanning subgroup



Wanning dialect
Lingshui dialect





Yaxian subgroup



Yaxian dialect





Changgan subgroup



Changjiang dialect



















Writing system







Logographic



Chinese characters





Alphabetic



Pe̍h-ōe-jī
Pêh-uē-jī
Hainan Romanized
Foochow Romanized
Fu'an Romanized
Hinghwa Romanized
Kienning Colloquial Romanized
Taiwanese Romanization System
Taiwanese Language Phonetic Alphabet
Daighi tongiong pingim
Bbánlám pìngyīm
Teochew Transliteration Scheme
Hainanese Transliteration Scheme
Fuzhou dialect Transliteration Scheme
Jian'ou dialect Transliteration Scheme





Mixed



Hàn-lô
















Research







Proto-languages



Proto-Min





Rime dictionaries



Qi Lin Bayin
Anqiang Bayin
Qiyin Zihui
Bayin Dingjue
Paizhang Zhiyin
Dujiangshu Shiwuyin
Huiyin Miaowu
Zengbu Huiyin
Chaosheng Shiwuyin
Jimu Zhiyin
Chaoyu Shiwuyin
Jianzhou Bayin


















v
t
e


Chinese language(s)



Major
subdivisions




Mandarin



Northeastern

Harbin
Shenyang


Beijing

Beijing
Karamay


Ji–Lu

Tianjin
Jinan


Jiao–Liao

Dalian
Qingdao
Weihai


Central Plains

Gangou
Guanzhong
Luoyang
Xuzhou
Dungan
Dongping


Lan–Yin
Southwestern

Sichuanese
Kunming
Minjiang
Wuhan


Lower Yangtze

Nanjing







Wu



Taihu

Shanghainese
Suzhou
Wuxi
Changzhou
Hangzhou
Shaoxing
Ningbo
Jinxiang
Jiangyin
Shadi


Taizhou Wu

Taizhou


Oujiang

Wenzhou


Wuzhou

Jinhua


Chu–Qu

Quzhou
Jiangshan
Qingtian


Xuanzhou





Gan



Chang–Du
Yi–Liu
Ying–Yi
Da–Tong





Xiang



New

Changsha


Old

Shuangfeng


Ji–Xu
Yong–Quan

Qiyang







Min




Eastern



Fuzhou
Fuqing
Fu'an
Manjiang





Southern



Hokkien

Quanzhou
Zhangzhou
Amoy
Taiwanese
Philippine Hokkien
Medan Hokkien
Penang Hokkien
Singaporean Hokkien
Southern Peninsular Malaysian Hokkien


Zhenan
Longyan
Teochew

Shantou
Haifeng


Zhongshan

Nanlang
Sanxiang







other



Northern

Jian'ou
Jianyang


Central
Pu–Xian
Shao–Jiang
Leizhou

Zhanjiang


Hainan








Hakka



Meixian
Wuhua
Tingzhou

Changting


Taiwanese Hakka

Sixian dialect
Raoping dialect







Yue



Yuehai

Cantonese
Xiguan
Jiujiang
Shiqi
Weitou
Dapeng


Gao–Yang
Siyi

Taishan


Goulou
Wu–Hua
Yong–Xun
Luo–Guang
Qin–Lian





Proposed



Huizhou
Jin

Hohhot


Pinghua





Unclassified



Danzhou
Mai
Shaozhou Tuhua
Waxiang
Badong Yao
Yeheni








Standardized forms



Standard Chinese (Mandarin)

Sichuanese
Taiwanese
Philippine
Malaysian
Singaporean


Cantonese
Taiwanese Hokkien





Phonology



Historical

Old


Old National
Cantonese
Mandarin
Literary and colloquial readings





Grammar



Chinese grammar
Chinese classifier
Chinese Idiom





History



Old Chinese
Eastern Han
Middle Chinese
Old Mandarin
Middle Mandarin
Proto-Min
Ba–Shu
Gan





Literary forms




Official



Classical

Adoption
in Vietnam


Vernacular





Other varieties



Written Cantonese
Written Dungan
Written Hokkien
Written Sichuanese








Scripts




Standard



Simplified
Traditional





Historical



Oracle bone
Bronze
Seal
Clerical
Semi-cursive
Cursive





Braille



Cantonese Braille
Mainland Chinese Braille
Taiwanese Braille
Two-Cell Chinese Braille





Other



Romanization

Pinyin
Wade–Giles


Bopomofo
Xiao'erjing
Nüshu
Chinese punctuation
Taiwanese kana
Dungan Cyrillic









List of varieties of Chinese









						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hokkien&oldid=818548576"					Categories: HokkienSouthern Min-language dialectsLanguages of ChinaLanguages of TaiwanLanguages of MalaysiaLanguages of IndonesiaLanguages of the PhilippinesSouthern MinHidden categories: CS1 uses Chinese-language script (zh)CS1 Chinese-language sources (zh)CS1 maint: Unrecognized languageArticles containing Chinese-language textAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from November 2016Language articles with speaker number undatedDialects of languages with ISO 639-3 codeLanguages without ISO 639-3 code but with Glottolog codeLanguage articles without reference fieldArticles containing traditional Chinese-language textArticles with unsourced statements from December 2017Articles containing simplified Chinese-language textArticles with unsourced statements from August 2011Articles needing additional references from December 2017All articles needing additional referencesArticles needing additional references from January 2016Articles with unsourced statements from February 2014Articles with unsourced statements from March 2016Articles with unsourced statements from December 2016All articles lacking reliable referencesArticles lacking reliable references from November 2016All accuracy disputesArticles with disputed statements from November 2016Articles containing Japanese-language textAll articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrasesArticles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from November 2016Articles containing Taiwanese Hokkien-language textUse dmy dates from August 2011Pages using RFC magic links