For the band, see Big Brother and the Holding Company.






The examples and perspective in this article deal primarily with the United States and do not represent a worldwide view of the subject. You may improve this article, discuss the issue on the talk page, or create a new article, as appropriate. (April 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



A holding company is a company that owns other companies' outstanding stock. A holding company usually does not produce goods or services itself; rather, its purpose is to own shares of other companies to form a corporate group. Holding companies allow the reduction of risk for the owners and can allow the ownership and control of a number of different companies.
In the United States, 80% of stock, in voting and value, must be owned before tax consolidation benefits such as tax-free dividends can be claimed.[1] That is, if Company A owns 80% or more of the stock of Company B, Company A will not pay taxes on dividends paid by Company B to its stockholders, as the payment of dividends from B to A is essentially Company A transferring cash from one company to the other. Any other shareholders of Company B will pay the usual taxes on dividends, as they are legitimate and ordinary dividends to these shareholders.
Sometimes a company intended to be a pure holding company identifies itself as such by adding "Holding" or "Holdings" to its name.



Contents


1 United States

1.1 Banking
1.2 Utilities
1.3 Broadcasting
1.4 Personal holding company


2 Parent company
3 See also
4 References
5 External links



United States[edit]
Banking[edit]
Further information: bank holding company
After the financial crisis of 2007–08, many U.S. investment banks converted to holding companies. According to the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council's (FFIEC) website, JPMorgan Chase & Co., Bank of America Corp., Citigroup Inc., Wells Fargo & Co., and Goldman Sachs Groups, Inc. were the five largest bank holding companies in the finance sector, as of 31 December 2013, based on total assets.[2]
Utilities[edit]
The Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935 in the United States caused many energy companies to divest their subsidiary businesses. Between 1938 and 1958 the number of holding companies declined from 216 to 18.[3] An energy law passed in 2005 removed the 1935 requirements, and has led to mergers and holding company formation among power marketing and power brokering companies.[4]
Broadcasting[edit]
Further information: Media conglomerate
In US broadcasting, many major media conglomerates have purchased smaller broadcasters outright, but have not changed the broadcast licenses to reflect this, resulting in stations that are (for example) still licensed to Jacor and Citicasters, effectively making them such as subsidiary companies of their owner iHeartMedia. This is sometimes done on a per-market basis. For example, in Atlanta both WNNX and later WWWQ are licensed to "WNNX LiCo, Inc." (LiCo meaning "license company"), both owned by Susquehanna Radio (which was later sold to Cumulus Media). In determining caps to prevent excessive concentration of media ownership, all of these are attributed to the parent company, as are leased stations, as a matter of broadcast regulation.
Personal holding company[edit]
In the United States, a personal holding company is defined in section 542 of the Internal Revenue Code. A corporation is a personal holding company if both of the following requirements are met:[5]

Gross income test: At least 60% of the corporation's adjusted ordinary gross income is from dividends, interest, rent, and royalties.
Stock ownership test: More than 50% in value of the corporation's outstanding stock is owned by five or fewer individuals.

Parent company[edit]
Main article: Parent company
A parent company is a company that owns enough voting stock in another firm (subsidiary) to control management and operations by influencing or electing its board of directors. A parent company could simply be a company that wholly owns another company, which is then known as a "wholly owned subsidiary".
When an existing company establishes a new company and keeps majority shares with itself, and invites other companies to buy minority shares, it is called a parent company.
See also[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Holding companies.



Berkshire Hathaway
Conglomerate
Conglomerate discount
Keiretsu
Investment company
List of holding companies
Patent holding company

References[edit]



^ I.R.C. § 1504(a); I.R.C. § 243(a)(3).
^ "Holding Companies with Assets Greater Than $10 Billion". National Information Center. June 30, 2014. Retrieved 2014-11-28. 
^ Hirsh, Richard. "Emergence of Electrical Utilities in America". Archived from the original on 2012-09-01. 
^ "Public vs. Private Power : from FDR to Today". PBS.org. Retrieved 2014-11-28. 
^ Cuiffo, Donna-Marie (1993-08-01). "Our Greatest Hits / The Personal Holding Company Trap: Federal Taxation". The CPA Journal. The New York State Society of CPAs. Retrieved 2017-12-06. 



External links[edit]

Emergence of Electrical Utilities in America at Smithsonian Institution's National Museum of American History




Authority control



LCCN: sh85061444
GND: 4160456-8
BNF: cb119502113 (data)
NDL: 00567877











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Holding_company&oldid=814085233"					Categories: Holding companiesTypes of business entityHidden categories: Articles with limited geographic scope from April 2016USA-centricCommons category with local link different than on WikidataWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiers