For other uses, see Holy Spirit (disambiguation).


Part of a series on the


Philosophy of religion




Religious concepts


Afterlife
Apophatism
Cataphatism
Eschatology
Enlightenment
Intelligent design
Miracle
Mysticism
Religious belief
Reincarnation
Religious faith
Scripture (religious text)
Soul
Spirit
Theological veto








Challenges





Ethical egoism
Euthyphro dilemma
Logical positivism
Religious language
Verificationism (eschatological)




Problem of evil




Theodicy (Augustinian
Irenaean)
Best of all possible worlds
Inconsistent triad
Natural evil











God



Conceptions




Aristotelian
Brahman
Demiurge
Divinely simple
Holy Spirit
Maltheist
Pandeist
Personal
Process-theological
Supreme being
Unmoved mover




Existence





Arguments for




Beauty
Christological
Consciousness
Cosmological (kalām
contingency)
Degree
Desire
Experience
Fine-tuned universe
Love
Miracles
Morality
Necessary existent
Ontological
Pascal's Wager
Proper basis
Reason
Teleological (natural law
watchmaker)
Transcendental




Arguments against




747 gambit
Atheist's Wager
Evil
Free will
Hell
Inconsistent revelations
Nonbelief
Noncognitivism
Occam's razor
Omnipotence paradox
Poor design
Russell's teapot







By religion




Abrahamic (Bahá'í
Christianity
Islam
Judaism
Mormonism)
Buddhism
Hinduism
Jainism
Sikhism
Wicca











Theories of religion


Acosmism
Agnosticism
Animism
Antireligion
Atheism
Dharmism
Deism
Divine command theory
Dualism
Esotericism
Exclusivism
Existentialism (agnostic
atheist
Christian)
Feminist
Fundamentalism
Gnosticism
Henotheism
Humanism (Christian
religious
secular)
Inclusivism
Monism
Monotheism
Mysticism
Naturalism (humanistic
metaphysical
religious)
New Age
Nondualism
Nontheism
Pandeism
Panentheism
Pantheism
Perennialism
Polytheism
Process
Spiritualism
Shamanism
Taoic
Theism
Transcendentalism








Philosophers of religion



Atheist / agnostic




Critchley
Dennett
Drange
Draper
Kenny
Hecht
Martin




Buddhist




Nagarjuna
Vasubandhu
Buddhaghosa
Dignaga
Dharmakirti
Jayatilleke
Premasiri
Nanavira
Nakamura
Nishitani
Nishida
Damien Keown
David Loy
Evan Thompson
Smith
Westerhoff
Garfield




Christian




Adams
Alston
Aquinas
Bell
Brümmer
Burns
Caird
Christoyannopoulos
Copan
Craig
Dalferth
Davies
Eliade
Evans
Gamwell
Geisler
Habermas
Hare
Hick
A. von Hildebrand
D. von Hildebrand
van Inwagen
Kierkegaard
Kretzmann
Leftow
McCabe
McIntyre
McLean
Macquarrie
Merricks
Miceli
Moser
Otto
Paley
Pandikattu
Paulsen
Pearcey
Plantinga
Rookmaaker
Schaeffer
de Silva
Smith
Stewart
Swinburne
Taliaferro
Tamer
Thiselton
Ward
White
Wiebe
Wollaston
Yandell




Islamic




al-Amiri
Averroes
Avicenna
Badawi
Brethren of Purity
Damad
al-Farabi
al-Ghazali
Ibn Arabi
Ibn Bajjah
Ibn Masarra
Ibn Miskawayh
A. Iqbal
M. Iqbal
al-Kindi
Nasr
Ramadan
al-Razi
Sadra
al-Shahrastani
Shariati
Suhrawardi
Shaykh Tusi
Waliullah




Jewish




Buber
Heschel
Maimonides
Mendelssohn
Schwarzschild
Soloveitchik
Spinoza




Hindu




Adi Shankara
Ramanuja
Madhvacharya
Udayana
Kumārila Bhaṭṭa
Vācaspati Miśra
Jayanta Bhatta
Abhinavagupta
Raghunatha Siromani
Sri Aurobindo
Radhakrishnan
BK Matilal
KC Bhattacharya




Others




Almaas
Anderson
Davis
Emmet
Esaulov
Ferré
Forman
Glogau
Hartshorne
Hatano
Hatcher
Klostermaier
Kvanvig
Martinich
Meltzer
Runzo
Smart
Vallicella
Zank
Zimmerman











Related topics


Criticism of religion
Ethics in religion
Exegesis
Faith and rationality
History of religions
Political science of religion
Religion and science
Religious philosophy
Theology






Philosophy of religion article index





v
t
e





Holy Spirit or Holy Ghost is a term found in English translations of the Bible that is understood differently among the Abrahamic religions.[1][2] The term is also used to describe aspects of other religions and belief structures.



Contents


1 Etymology
2 Comparative religion
3 Abrahamic faiths

3.1 Judaism
3.2 Christianity
3.3 Islam


4 Other Faiths

4.1 Zoroastrianism
4.2 Bahá'í Faith
4.3 In Hinduism
4.4 Buddhism
4.5 Sikhism


5 See also
6 References

6.1 Works cited





Etymology[edit]
The word "Spirit" (from the Latin spiritus meaning "breath") appears as either alone or with other words, in the Hebrew Bible (Old Testament) and the New Testament. Combinations include expressions such as the "Holy Spirit", "Spirit of God", and in Christianity, "Spirit of Christ".[3]
The word Spirit is rendered as רוּחַ (ruach) in Hebrew-language parts of the Old Testament.[4] In its Aramaic parts, the term is rûacḥ.[5] The Greek translation of the Old Testament, the Septuagint, translates the word as πνεῦμα (pneuma).[4] This is the same word that is used throughout the New Testament, written originally in Greek.[6]
The English term "Spirit" comes from its Latin origin, spiritus, which is how the Vulgate translates both the Old and New Testament concept.[7] The alternative term, "Holy Ghost", comes from Old English translations of spiritus.[8]
Comparative religion[edit]
The Hebrew Bible contains the term "Spirit of God" (ruach hakodesh) in the sense of the might of a unitary God. This meaning is different from the Christian concept of "Holy Spirit" as one personality of God in the Trinity.[9]
The Christian concept tends to emphasize the moral aspect of the Holy Spirit more than Judaism, evident in the epithet Holy Spirit that appeared in Jewish religious writings only relatively late but was a common expression in the Christian New Testament.[10]
According to theologian Rudolf Bultmann, there are two ways to think about the Holy Spirit: "animistic" and "dynamistic". In animistic thinking, it is "an independent agent, a personal power which like a demon can fall upon a man and take possession of him, enabling him or compelling him to perform manifestations of power" while in dynamistic thought it "appears as an impersonal force which fills a man like a fluid".[11] Both kinds of thought appear in Jewish and Christian scripture, but animistic is more typical of the Old Testament whereas dynamistic is more common in the New Testament.[12] The distinction coincides with the Holy Spirit as either a temporary or permanent gift. In the Old Testament and Jewish thought, it is primarily temporary with a specific situation or task in mind, whereas in the Christian concept the gift resides in man permanently.[13]
On the surface, the Holy Spirit appears to have an equivalent in non-Abrahamic Hellenistic mystery religions. These religions included a distinction between the Spirit and psyche, which is also seen in the Pauline epistles. According to proponents of the History of religions school, the Christian concept of the Holy Spirit cannot be explained from Jewish ideas alone without reference to the Hellenistic religions.[14] However, according to theologian Erik Konsmo, the views "are so dissimilar that the only legitimate connection one can make is with the Greek term πνεῦμα [pneuma, Spirit] itself".[15]
Another link with ancient Greek thought is the Stoic idea of the Spirit as anima mundi—or world soul—that unites all people.[15] Some believe that this can be seen in Paul's formulation of the concept of the Holy Spirit that unites Christians in Jesus Christ and love for one another, but Konsmo again thinks that this position is difficult to maintain.[16] In his Introduction to the 1964 book Meditations, the Anglican priest Maxwell Staniforth wrote:

Another Stoic concept which offered inspiration to the Church was that of 'divine Spirit'. Cleanthes, wishing to give more explicit meaning to Zeno's 'creative fire', had been the first to hit upon the term pneuma, or 'spirit', to describe it. Like fire, this intelligent 'spirit' was imagined as a tenuous substance akin to a current of air or breath, but essentially possessing the quality of warmth; it was immanent in the universe as God, and in man as the soul and life-giving principle. Clearly it is not a long step from this to the 'Holy Spirit' of Christian theology, the 'Lord and Giver of life', visibly manifested as tongues of fire at Pentecost and ever since associated – in the Christian as in the Stoic mind – with the ideas of vital fire and beneficient warmth.[17]

Abrahamic faiths[edit]
Judaism[edit]
Main article: Holy Spirit in Judaism
The Hebrew language phrase ruach ha-kodesh (Hebrew: רוח הקודש, "holy spirit" also transliterated ruacḥ ha-qodesh) is a term used in the Hebrew Bible (Tanakh) and Jewish writings to refer to the spirit of YHWH (רוח יהוה). It literally means "spirit of the holiness" or "spirit of the holy place". The Hebrew terms ruacḥ qodshəka, "thy holy spirit" (רוּחַ קָדְשְׁךָ), and ruacḥ qodshō, "his holy spirit" (רוּחַ קָדְשׁוֹ) also occur (when a possessive suffix is added the definite article is dropped).[citation needed]
The "Holy Spirit" in Judaism generally refers to the divine aspect of prophecy and wisdom. It also refers to the divine force, quality, and influence of the Most High God, over the universe or over his creatures, in given contexts.[18]








Ezekiel receives divine command, represented by the Hand of God, Dura-Europos Synagogue, 3rd century CE









Early 14th-century Birds' Head Haggadah: two hands of God appear underneath the text of the Dayenu song, dispensing the manna from heaven[19]









God calling out from the Burning Bush to prophet Moshe, wing panel wall painting, Dura Europos





Christianity[edit]
Main article: Holy Spirit in Christianity
For the large majority of Christians, the Holy Spirit (or Holy Ghost, from Old English gast, "spirit") is a member of the Trinity: The "Triune God" manifested as Father, Son, and Holy Spirit; each aspect itself being God.[20][21][22] Two symbols from the New Testament canon are associated with the Holy Spirit in Christian iconography: a winged dove, and tongues of fire.[23][24][non-primary source needed] Each depiction of the Holy Spirit arose from different historical accounts in the Gospel narratives; the first being at the baptism of Jesus in the Jordan River where the Holy Spirit was said to descend in the form of a dove as the voice of God the Father spoke as described in Matthew, Mark, and Luke[25];the second being from the day of Pentecost, fifty days after Pascha where the descent of the Holy Spirit came upon the Apostles and other followers of Jesus Christ, as tongues of fire as described in the Acts of the Apostles.2:1–31[26] Called "the unveiled epiphany of God",[27] the Holy Spirit is the one who empowers the followers of Jesus with spiritual gifts[28][non-primary source needed] and power[29][30] that enabled the proclamation of Jesus Christ, and the power that brought conviction of faith.








Depiction of the Christian Holy Spirit as a dove, by Gian Lorenzo Bernini, in the apse of Saint Peter's Basilica









A depiction of the Trinity consisting of God the Holy Spirit along with God the Father and God the Son









Pentecost icon depicting the descent of the Holy Spirit upon the Apostles and Mary in the form of tongues of flame above their heads.





Islam[edit]
Main article: Holy Spirit in Islam
The Holy Spirit (Arabic: روح القدس Ruh al-Qudus, "the holy spirit") is mentioned four times in the Qur'an,[31] where it acts as an agent of divine action or communication. While there are similarities to the Holy Spirit mentioned in Christian and Jewish faiths, it is unclear if these four references[32] refer to the same Holy Spirit. The Muslim interpretation of the Holy Spirit is generally consistent with other interpretations based upon the Old and the New Testaments. On the basis of narrations in certain Hadith some Muslims identify it with the angel Gabriel (Arabic Jibrāʾīl). The Spirit (الروح al-Ruh, without the adjective "holy" or "exalted") is described, among other things, as the creative spirit from God by which God enlivened Adam, and which inspired in various ways God's messengers and prophets, including Jesus and Abraham. The belief in a "Holy Trinity", according to the Qur'an, is forbidden and deemed to be blasphemy. The same prohibition applies to any idea of the duality of God (Allah).[33][34]
Other Faiths[edit]
Other religions reference a spirit that has a name resembling the Holy Spirit found in the Christian and Jewish faiths, but similar to Islam, this is a different spirit with a different purpose that is unique to those religions, as is seen below:
Zoroastrianism[edit]
In Zoroastrianism, the Holy Spirit, also known as Spenta Mainyu, is a hypostasis of Ahura Mazda, the God of Zoroastrianism; the Holy Spirit is seen as the source of all goodness in the universe, he is the spark of all life within humanity, and is the ultimate guide for humanity to righteousness and communion with God. The Holy Spirit is put in direct opposition to its eternal dual counterpart, Angra Mainyu, who is the source of all wickedness and who leads humanity astray.[35][36][37]
Bahá'í Faith[edit]
Main article: Maid of Heaven
The Bahá'í Faith has the concept of the Most Great Spirit, seen as the bounty of God.[38] It is usually used to describe the descent of the Spirit of God upon the messengers/prophets of God who include, among others, Jesus, Muhammad and Bahá'u'lláh.[39]
In Bahá'í belief, the Holy Spirit is the conduit through which the wisdom of God becomes directly associated with his messenger, and it has been described variously in different religions such as the burning bush to Moses, the sacred fire to Zoroaster, the dove to Jesus, the angel Gabriel to Muhammad, and the Maid of Heaven to Bahá'u'lláh.[40] The Bahá'í view rejects the idea that the Holy Spirit is a partner to God in the Godhead, but rather is the pure essence of God's attributes.[41]
In Hinduism[edit]
The Hinduism concept of Advaita is linked to Trinity and has been briefly explained by Raimon Panikkar, Professor of Comparative Religion and History of Religions, Department of Religious Studies of the University of California. He states that the Holy Spirit, as one of the Three Persons of the Trinity of "father, Logos and Holy Spirit", is a bridge builder between Christianity and Hinduism. He explains that “The meeting of spiritualistic can take place in the Spirit. No new 'system' has primarily to come of this encounter, but a new and yet old spirit must emerges."[42] In North India, Indian Christians have associated the Hindu term Atman with the Holy Spirit. Atman is Vedic terminology elaborated in Hindu scriptures such as Upanishads and Vedanta signifies the Ultimate Reality and Absolute.[43]
Buddhism[edit]
In Buddhism, Holy Spirit is compared to Buddha Nature as a Buddhist image or Christ consciousness, a oneness with an all encompassing plan. Hence, the Holy Spirit is considered the "means of which the faithful develop and journey to their spiritual goal."[44]
Sikhism[edit]
In Sikhism, the Guru is the medium and the Holy spirit is stated to have moved from Guru Nanak to the nine Sikh Gurus who followed him culminating with Guru Gobind Singh, the "tenth Guru Nanak".[45]
See also[edit]


Avatar
Baptism with the Holy Spirit
Barakah
Cult of the Holy Spirit
Deity
Gender of the Holy Spirit
God in Abrahamic religions
Great Spirit
Intercession of the Spirit
Pneumatology


References[edit]


^ Levison, John R. (2002). The Spirit in First-Century Judaism. Boston: Brill. p. 65. ISBN 0-391-04131-2. Relevant Milieux : Israelite Literature : The expression, holy spirit, occurs in the Hebrew Bible only in Isa 63:10–11 and Ps 51:13. In Isaiah 63, the spirit acts within the corporate experience of Israel... 
^ Caner, Emir Fethi; Caner, Ergun Mehmet (2003). More Than a Prophet: An Insider's Response to Muslim Beliefs about Jesus and Christianity. Grand Rapids, MI: Kregel Publications. p. 43. ISBN 978-0-8254-9682-0. In Surah al-Nahl (16:102), the text is even more explicit: Say, the Holy Spirit has brought the revelation from thy Lord in Truth, in order to strengthen those who believe and as a Guide and glad tidings to Muslims." 
^ Bultmann 2007, p. 153.
^ a b Caulley, Thomas Scott (2001). "Holy Spirit". In Elwell, Walter A. Evangelical Dictionary of Theology. Grand Rapids: Baker Academic. p. 568. ISBN 978-1-4412-0030-3. 
^ Levison, John R. (2009). Filled with the Spirit. Grand Rapids: Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing. p. 129. ISBN 978-0-8028-6372-0. 
^ Bultmann 2007, p. 154.
^ Harper, Douglas. "spirit (n.)". Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved August 29, 2016. 
^ Harper, Douglas. "ghost (n.)". Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved August 29, 2016. 
^ Espín, Orlando O. (2007). "Holy Spirit". In Espín, Orlando O.; Nickoloff, James B. An Introductory Dictionary of Theology and Religious Studies. Collegeville: Liturgical Press. p. 576. ISBN 978-0-8146-5856-7. 
^ Dunn, James D. G. (2006). "Towards the Spirit of Christ: The Emergence of the Distinctive Features of Christian Pneumatology". In Welker, Michael. The Work of the Spirit: Pneumatology and Pentecostalism. Grand Rapids: Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing. p. 3. ISBN 978-0-8028-0387-0. 
^ Bultmann 2007, p. 155.
^ Bultmann 2007, pp. 156–157.
^ Bultmann 2007, pp. 157.
^ Konsmo 2010, p. 2.
^ a b Konsmo 2010, p. 5.
^ Konsmo 2010, p. 6.
^ Aurelius, Marcus (1964). Meditations. London: Penguin Books. p. 25. ISBN 0-14044140-9. ISBN 978-0-140-44140-6. 
^ Alan Unterman and Rivka Horowitz,Ruah ha-Kodesh, Encyclopedia Judaica (CD-ROM Edition, Jerusalem: Judaica Multimedia/Keter, 1997).
^ The Birds' Head Haggadah. The Israel Museum Permanent Exhibitions.
^ Erickson, Millard J. (1992). Introducing Christian Doctrine. Baker Book House. p. 103. 
^ Hammond, T. C. (1968). Wright, David F., ed. In Understanding be Men: A Handbook of Christian Doctrine (6th ed.). Inter-Varsity Press. pp. 54–56, 128–131. 
^ Grudem, Wayne A. (1994). Systematic Theology: An Introduction to Biblical Doctrine. Leicester, England: Inter-Varsity Press; Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan. p. 226.
^ Luke 3:22, NIV
^ Acts 2:3, NIV
^ Luke 3:22, NIV
^ Williams, Charles (1950). The descent of the Dove : a short history of the Holy Spirit in the church. London: Faber. 
^ Kasemann, Ernst (1960). The Beginnings of Christian Theology [W.J. Montague, New Testament Questions of Today] (in German). 102: Philadelphia: Fortress. ISBN 978-1-316-61990-2. 
^ I Corinthians 13:4-11, NIV
^ Acts 1:8
^ Johnson, Bill. When Heaven Invades Earth. Destiny Image, 2005
^ Qur'an search: روح القدس. searchtruth.com.
^ Qur'an search: روح القدس. searchtruth.com.
^ Griffith, Sidney H. Holy Spirit, Encyclopaedia of the Quran.
^ Thomas Patrick Hughes, A Dictionary of Islam, p. 605.
^ [Yasna 45, http://www.zarathushtra.com/z/gatha/dji/yasna45.htm]
^ [Yasna 30,http://www.zarathushtra.com/z/gatha/dji/yasna30.htm]
^ [Yasna 31, http://www.zarathushtra.com/z/gatha/dji/yasna31.htm]
^ `Abdu'l-Bahá (1981) [1904–06]. "The Holy Spirit". Some Answered Questions. Wilmette, Illinois, USA: Bahá'í Publishing Trust. pp. 108–109. ISBN 0-87743-190-6. 
^ Taherzadeh, Adib (1976). The Revelation of Bahá'u'lláh, Volume 1: Baghdad 1853–63. Oxford, UK: George Ronald. p. 10. ISBN 0-85398-270-8. 
^ Abdo, Lil (1994). "Female Representations of the Holy Spirit in Bahá'í and Christian writings and their implications for gender roles". Bahá'í Studies Review. 4 (1). 
^ `Abdu'l-Bahá (1981) [1904–06]. "The Trinity". Some Answered Questions. Wilmette, Illinois, USA: Bahá'í Publishing Trust. pp. 113–115. ISBN 0-87743-190-6. 
^ Camilia Gangasingh MacPherson (1996). A Critical Reading of the Development of Raimon Panikkar's Thought on the Trinity. University Press of America. pp. 41–32. ISBN 978-0-7618-0184-9. 
^ Veli-Matti Kärkkäinen (2010). Holy Spirit and Salvation. Westminster John Knox Press. p. 431. ISBN 978-0-664-23136-1. 
^ Thomas Ragland (2003). The Noble Eightfold Path of Christ: Jesus Teaches the Dharma of Buddhism. Trafford Publishing. p. 107. ISBN 978-1-4120-0013-0. 
^ Kartar S. Duggal (1988). Philosophy and Faith of Sikhism. Himalayan Institute Press. p. 39. ISBN 978-0-89389-109-1. 


Works cited[edit]


Bultmann, Rudolf (2007) [1951]. Theology of the New Testament. 1. Translated by Grobel, Kendrick. Waco: Baylor University Press. § 14. The Spirit: 1. ISBN 978-1-932792-93-5. 
Konsmo, Erik (2010). The Pauline Metaphors of the Holy Spirit: The Intangible Spirit's Tangible Presence in the Life of the Christian. New York: Peter Lang. ISBN 978-1-4331-0691-0. 
Marcus Aurelius (1964). Meditations. London: Penguin Books. ISBN 0-14044140-9. 




Portals
Access related topics


Religion portal
Spirituality portal








Find out more on Wikipedia's
Sister projects


Media
from Commons
Definitions
from Wiktionary
Quotations
from Wikiquote
Data
from Wikidata










v
t
e


Philosophy of religion



Concepts in religion



Afterlife
Euthyphro dilemma
Faith
Intelligent design
Miracle
Problem of evil
Religious belief
Soul
Spirit
Theodicy
Theological veto





Conceptions of God







Aristotelian view
Brahman
Demiurge
Divine simplicity
Egoism
Holy Spirit
Misotheism
Pandeism
Personal god
Process theology
Supreme Being
Unmoved mover





God in



Abrahamic religions
Buddhism
Christianity
Hinduism
Islam
Jainism
Judaism
Mormonism
Sikhism
Bahá'í Faith
Wicca








Existence of God




For



Beauty
Christological
Consciousness
Cosmological

Kalam
Contingency


Degree
Desire
Experience
Fine-tuning of the Universe
Love
Miracles
Morality
Necessary existent
Ontological
Pascal's Wager
Proper basis
Reason
Teleological

Natural law
Watchmaker analogy


Transcendental





Against



747 gambit
Atheist's Wager
Evil
Free will
Hell
Inconsistent revelations
Nonbelief
Noncognitivism
Occam's razor
Omnipotence
Poor design
Russell's teapot








Theology



Acosmism
Agnosticism
Animism
Antireligion
Atheism
Creationism
Dharmism
Deism
Demonology
Divine command theory
Dualism
Esotericism
Exclusivism
Existentialism

Christian
Agnostic
Atheistic


Feminist theology

Thealogy
Womanist theology


Fideism
Fundamentalism
Gnosticism
Henotheism
Humanism

Religious
Secular
Christian


Inclusivism
Theories about religions
Monism
Monotheism
Mysticism
Naturalism

Metaphysical
Religious
Humanistic


New Age
Nondualism
Nontheism
Pandeism
Panentheism
Pantheism
Perennialism
Polytheism
Possibilianism
Process theology
Religious skepticism
Spiritualism
Shamanism
Taoic
Theism
Transcendentalism
more...





Religious language



Eschatological verification
Language-game
Logical positivism
Apophatic theology
Verificationism





Problem of evil



Augustinian theodicy
Best of all possible worlds
Euthyphro dilemma
Inconsistent triad
Irenaean theodicy
Natural evil
Theodicy






Philosophers
of religion

(by date active)




Ancient
and
Medieval



Anselm of Canterbury
Augustine of Hippo
Avicenna
Averroes
Boethius
Erasmus
Gaunilo of Marmoutiers
Pico della Mirandola
Heraclitus
King James VI and I
Marcion of Sinope
Thomas Aquinas
Maimonides





Enlightenment



Augustin Calmet
René Descartes
Blaise Pascal
Baruch Spinoza
Nicolas Malebranche
Gottfried W Leibniz
William Wollaston
Thomas Chubb
David Hume
Baron d'Holbach
Immanuel Kant
Johann G Herder





1800
1850



Friedrich Schleiermacher
Karl C F Krause
Georg W F Hegel


William Whewell
Ludwig Feuerbach
Søren Kierkegaard
Karl Marx
Albrecht Ritschl
Afrikan Spir





1880
1900



Ernst Haeckel
W. K. Clifford
Friedrich Nietzsche
Harald Høffding
William James


Vladimir Solovyov
Ernst Troeltsch
Rudolf Otto
Lev Shestov
Sergei Bulgakov
Pavel Florensky
Ernst Cassirer
Joseph Maréchal





1920
postwar



George Santayana
Bertrand Russell
Martin Buber
René Guénon
Paul Tillich
Karl Barth
Emil Brunner
Rudolf Bultmann
Gabriel Marcel
Reinhold Niebuhr


Charles Hartshorne
Mircea Eliade
J L Mackie
Walter Kaufmann
Martin Lings
Peter Geach
George I Mavrodes
William Alston
Antony Flew





1970
1990
2010



William L Rowe
Dewi Z Phillips
Alvin Plantinga
Anthony Kenny
Nicholas Wolterstorff
Richard Swinburne
Robert Merrihew Adams


Peter van Inwagen
Daniel Dennett
Loyal Rue
Jean-Luc Marion
William Lane Craig
Ali Akbar Rashad


Alexander Pruss








Related topics



Criticism of religion
Ethics in religion
Exegesis
History of religions
Religion
Religious language
Religious philosophy
Relationship between religion and science
Political science of religion
Faith and rationality
more...








 Portal
 Category









Authority control



NDL: 00570360











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Holy_Spirit&oldid=818096666"					Categories: Holy SpiritConceptions of GodGodNames of GodTheologyWisdom godsHidden categories: CS1 German-language sources (de)Use mdy dates from September 2016Use American English from September 2016All Wikipedia articles written in American EnglishAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from August 2016All pages needing factual verificationWikipedia articles needing factual verification from August 2017