"Home School" redirects here. For the novel, see Home School (novel).






This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (April 2013) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)









The examples and perspective in this article may not represent a worldwide view of the subject. You may improve this article, discuss the issue on the talk page, or create a new article, as appropriate. (December 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)





Part of the Politics series on


Youth rights




Activities


Bailey v. Drexel Furniture Co.
Child Labor Deterrence Act
Children's Online Privacy Protection Act
Convention on the Rights of the Child
Fair Labor Standards Act
Hammer v. Dagenhart
History of youth rights in the United States
Morse v. Frederick
Newsboys' strike of 1899
Quebec Charter of Human Rights and Freedoms
Wild in the Streets








Theory/Concepts


Adultcentrism
Adultism
Ageism
Criminalization
Democracy
Ephebiphobia
Fear of children
Fear of youth
Intergenerational equity
Paternalism
Social class
Suffrage
Taking Children Seriously
Universal suffrage
Unschooling
Youth activism
Youth suffrage
Youth voice








Issues


Age of candidacy
Age of consent
Age of majority
Behavior modification facility
Child labour
Compulsory education
Conscription
Corporal punishment
Curfew
Child abuse
Emancipation of minors
Gambling age
Homeschooling
Human rights and youth sport
In loco parentis
Juvenile delinquency
Juvenile court
Legal drinking age
Legal working age
Minimum driving age
Marriageable age
Minor (law)
Minors and abortion
School leaving age
Smoking age
Status offense
Underage drinking in America
Voting age
Youth-adult partnership
Youth participation
Youth politics
Youth voting








Organizations


Americans for a Society Free from Age Restrictions
Human Rights and Youth Rights Commission
National Youth Rights Association
One World Youth Project
Queer Youth Network
Students for a Democratic Society
Freechild Project
Three O'Clock Lobby
Youth International Party
Youth Liberation of Ann Arbor
Young Communist League of Canada








Persons


Adam Fletcher (activist)
David J. Hanson
David Joseph Henry
John Caldwell Holt
Alex Koroknay-Palicz
Lyn Duff
Mike A. Males
Neil Postman
Sonia Yaco








Related


Animal rights
Anti-racism
Direct democracy
Egalitarianism
Feminism
Libertarianism
Socialism
Students rights








 Youth rights
Social movements portal







v
t
e





Homeschooling, also known as home education, is the education of children inside the home. Home education is usually conducted by a parent or tutor.[1] Many families use less formal ways of educating.[2] "Homeschooling" is the term commonly used in North America, whereas "home education" is commonly used in the United Kingdom, Europe, and in many Commonwealth countries.[3]
Before the introduction of compulsory school attendance laws, most childhood education was done by families and local communities.[4] In many developed countries, homeschooling is a legal alternative to public and private schools. In other nations, homeschooling remains illegal or restricted to specific conditions, as recorded by Homeschooling international status and statistics.
According to the US National Center for Education Statistics, about three percent of all children in the US were homeschooled in 2011-2012 school year. The study found that 83 percent were White, 5 percent were Black, 7 percent were Hispanic, and 2 percent were Asian or Pacific Islander.[5] As of 2016, there are about 2.3 million homeschooled students in the United States.[6]
On average, homeschoolers score at or above the national average on standardized tests. Critics of homeschooling claim that students lack necessary social skills. However, studies have found that 98% of students participated in 2 or more activities outside the home. Homeschool students have been accepted into many Ivy League universities.[4]



Contents


1 History
2 Motivations
3 Methodology

3.1 Structured versus unstructured
3.2 Unit studies
3.3 All-in-one curricula
3.4 Unschooling and natural learning
3.5 Autonomous learning


4 Homeschool cooperatives
5 Religious reasons for homeschooling
6 Research

6.1 Test results
6.2 Outcomes
6.3 Socialization


7 General criticism

7.1 Opposition in Germany


8 International status and statistics

8.1 Australia
8.2 Brazil
8.3 Canada
8.4 Israel
8.5 South Africa


9 See also
10 References
11 Further reading
12 External links



History[edit]






The neutrality of this section is disputed. Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page. Please do not remove this message until conditions to do so are met. (July 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)







Frontispiece to Fireside Education, Samuel Griswold (Goodrich).


For most of history and in different cultures, the education of children at home by family members was a common practice. Enlisting professional tutors was an option available only to the wealthy. Homeschooling declined in the 19th and 20th centuries with the enactment of compulsory attendance laws. But, it continued to be practiced in isolated communities. Homechooling began a resurgence in began in the 1960s and 1970s with educational reformists dissatisfied with industrialized education.[4]
The earliest public schools in modern Western culture were established during the reformation with the encouragement of Martin Luther in the German states of Gotha and Thuringia in 1524 and 1527.[7] From the 1500s to 1800s the literacy rate increased until a majority of adults were literate; but, development of the literacy rate occurred before the implementation of compulsory attendance and universal education.[8]
Home education and apprenticeship continued to remain the main form of education until the 1830s.[9] However, in the 18th century, the majority of people in Europe lacked formal education.[10] Since the early-19th century, formal classroom schooling became the most common means of schooling throughout in developed countries.[citation needed]
In 1647, New England made and provided compulsory elementary education. Regional differences in schooling existed in colonial America. In the south, farms and plantations were so widely dispersed that community schools such as those in the more compact settlements were impossible. In the middle colonies, the educational situation varied when comparing New York with New England.[11]
Most Native American tribal cultures, traditionally used home education and apprenticeship to pass knowledge to children. Parents were supported by extended relatives and tribal leaders in the education of their children. The Native Americans vigorously resisted compulsory education in the United States.[12]
In the 1960s, Rousas John Rushdoony began to advocate homeschooling, which he saw as a way to combat the secular nature of the public school system in the United States. He vigorously attacked progressive school reformers such as Horace Mann and John Dewey, and argued for the dismantling of the state's influence in education in three works: Intellectual Schizophrenia, The Messianic Character of American Education, and The Philosophy of the Christian Curriculum. Rushdoony was frequently called as an expert witness by the Home School Legal Defense Association (HSLDA) in court cases. He frequently advocated the use of private schools.[13]
During this time, American educational professionals Raymond and Dorothy Moore began to research the academic validity of the rapidly growing Early Childhood Education movement. This research included independent studies by other researchers and a review of over 8,000 studies bearing on early childhood education and the physical and mental development of children.[citation needed]
They asserted that formal schooling before ages 8–12 not only lacked the anticipated effectiveness, but also harmed children. The Moores published their view that formal schooling was damaging young children academically, socially, mentally, and even physiologically. The Moores presented evidence that childhood problems such as juvenile delinquency, nearsightedness, increased enrollment of students in special education classes and behavioral problems were the result of increasingly earlier enrollment of students.[14] The Moores cited studies demonstrating that orphans who were given surrogate mothers were measurably more intelligent, with superior long-term effects – even though the mothers were "mentally retarded teenagers" – and that illiterate tribal mothers in Africa produced children who were socially and emotionally more advanced than typical western children, "by western standards of measurement".[14]
Their primary assertion was that the bonds and emotional development made at home with parents during these years produced critical long-term results that were cut short by enrollment in schools, and could neither be replaced nor corrected in an institutional setting afterward.[14] Recognizing a necessity for early out-of-home care for some children, particularly special needs and impoverished children and children from exceptionally inferior homes[clarification needed], they maintained that the vast majority of children were far better situated at home, even with mediocre parents, than with the most gifted and motivated teachers in a school setting. They described the difference as follows: "This is like saying, if you can help a child by taking him off the cold street and housing him in a warm tent, then warm tents should be provided for all children – when obviously most children already have even more secure housing."[14]
Like Holt, the Moores embraced homeschooling after the publication of their first work, Better Late Than Early, in 1975, and become important homeschool advocates and consultants with the publication of books such as Home Grown Kids, 1981, and Homeschool Burnout.[citation needed]
Simultaneously, other authors published books questioning the premises and efficacy of compulsory schooling, including Deschooling Society by Ivan Illich in 1970 and No More Public School by Harold Bennet in 1972.
In 1976, Holt published Instead of Education; Ways to Help People Do Things Better. In its conclusion, he called for a "Children's Underground Railroad" to help children escape compulsory schooling.[15] In response, Holt was contacted by families from around the U.S. to tell him that they were educating their children at home. In 1977, after corresponding with a number of these families, Holt began producing Growing Without Schooling, a newsletter dedicated to home education.[16] Holt was nicknamed the "father of home schooling."[4] Holt later wrote a book about homeschooling, Teach Your Own, in 1981.
In 1980, Holt said,

"I want to make it clear that I don't see homeschooling as some kind of answer to badness of schools. I think that the home is the proper base for the exploration of the world which we call learning or education. Home would be the best base no matter how good the schools were."[17]

One common theme in the homeschool philosophies of both Holt and that of the Moores is that home education should not attempt to bring the school construct into the home, or a view of education as an academic preliminary to life. They viewed home education as a natural, experiential aspect of life that occurs as the members of the family are involved with one another in daily living.[18][19][original research?]
Motivations[edit]
Parents commonly cite two main motivations for homeschooling their children: dissatisfaction with the local schools and the interest in increased involvement with their children's learning and development. Parental dissatisfaction with available schools typically includes concerns about the school environment, the quality of academic instruction, the curriculum, bullying, and lack of faith in the school's ability to cater to their children's special needs. Some parents homeschool in order to have greater control over what and how their children are taught, to cater more adequately to an individual child's aptitudes and abilities, to provide instruction from a specific religious or moral position, and to take advantage of the efficiency of one-to-one instruction and thus allow the child to spend more time on childhood activities, socializing, and non-academic learning. Many parents are also influenced by alternative educational philosophies advocated by the likes of Susan Sutherland Isaacs, Charlotte Mason, John Holt, and Kenneth Robinson.[citation needed]
Homeschooling may also be a factor in the choice of parenting style. Homeschooling can be a matter of consistency for families living in isolated rural locations, for those temporarily abroad, and for those who travel frequently. Many young athletes, actors, and musicians are taught at home to accommodate their training and practice schedules more conveniently. Homeschooling can be about mentorship and apprenticeship, in which a tutor or teacher is with the child for many years and becomes more intimately acquainted with the child.[citation needed] Homeschooling increased in popularity in the United States during the 2000s; the percentage of children ages 5 through 17 who were homeschooled increased from 1.7% in 1999 to 3% in 2011/12.[5]
Homeschooling can be used as a form of supplemental education and as a way of helping children learn under specific circumstances. The term may also refer to instruction in the home under the supervision of correspondence schools or umbrella schools. Some jurisdictions require adherence to an approved curriculum.[20] A curriculum-free philosophy of homeschooling is sometimes called unschooling, a term coined in 1977 by American educator and author John Holt in his magazine, Growing Without Schooling. The term emphasizes the more spontaneous, less structured learning environment in which a child's interests drive his pursuit of knowledge.[21] Some parents provide a liberal arts education using the trivium and quadrivium as the main models.[citation needed]
Methodology[edit]
Homeschools use a wide variety of methods and materials. Families choose different educational methods, which represent a variety of educational philosophies and paradigms. Some of the methods or learning environments used include Classical education (including Trivium, Quadrivium), Charlotte Mason education, Montessori method, Theory of multiple intelligences, Unschooling, Radical Unschooling, Waldorf education, School-at-home (curriculum choices from both secular and religious publishers), A Thomas Jefferson Education, unit studies, curriculum made up from private or small publishers, apprenticeship, hands-on-learning, distance learning (both online and correspondence), dual enrollment in local schools or colleges, and curriculum provided by local schools and many others. Some of these approaches are used in private and public schools.[citation needed] Educational research and studies support the use of some of these methods. Unschooling, natural learning, Charlotte Mason Education, Montessori, Waldorf, apprenticeship, hands-on-learning, unit studies are supported to varying degrees by research by constructivist learning theories and situated cognitive theories.[clarification needed] Elements of these theories may be found in the other methods as well.
A student's education may be customized to support his or her learning level, style, and interests.[22] It is not uncommon for a student to experience more than one approach as the family discovers what works best for their student. Many families use an eclectic approach, picking and choosing from various suppliers. For sources of curricula and books a study found that 78 percent utilized "a public library"; 77 percent used "a homeschooling catalog, publisher, or individual specialist"; 68 percent used "retail bookstore or another store"; 60 percent used "an education publisher that was not affiliated with homeschooling." "Approximately half" used curriculum from "a homeschooling organization", 37 percent from a "church, synagogue or other religious institution" and 23 percent from "their local public school or district." In 2003, 41 percent utilized some sort of distance learning, approximately 20 percent by "television, video or radio"; 19 percent via "The Internet, e-mail, or the World Wide Web"; and 15 percent taking a "correspondence course by mail designed specifically for homeschoolers."[23][clarification needed]
Individual governmental units, e. g. states and local districts, vary in official curriculum and attendance requirements.[24]
Structured versus unstructured[edit]
All other approaches to homeschooling are subsumed under two basic categories: structured and unstructured homeschooling. Structured homeschooling includes any method or style of home education that follows a basic curriculum with articulated goals and outcomes. This style attempts to imitate the structure of the traditional school setting while personalizing the curriculum. Unstructured homeschooling is any form of home education where parents do not construct a curriculum at all. Unschooling, as it is known, attempts to teach through the child's daily experiences and focuses more on self-directed learning by the child, free of textbooks, teachers, and any formal assessment of success or failure.[25]
Unit studies[edit]
In a unit study approach, multiple subjects such as math, science, history, art, and geography, are studied in relation to a single topic. Unit studies are useful for teaching multiple grades simultaneously as the difficulty level can be adjusted for each student. An extended form of unit studies, Integrated Thematic Instruction utilizes one central theme integrated throughout the curriculum so that students finish a school year with a deep understanding of a certain broad subject or idea.[citation needed]
All-in-one curricula[edit]
All-in-one homeschooling curricula (variously known as "school-at-home", "The Traditional Approach", "school-in-a-box" or "The Structured Approach"), are instructionist methods of teaching in which the curriculum and homework of the student are similar or identical to those used in a public or private school. Purchased as a grade level package or separately by subject, the package may contain all of the needed books, materials, tests, answer keys, and extensive teacher guides.[26] These materials cover the same subject areas as public schools, allowing for an easy transition into the school system. These are among the more expensive options for homeschooling, but they require minimal preparation and are easy to use. Some localities provide the same materials used at local schools to homeschoolers. The purchase of a complete curriculum and their teaching/grading service from an accredited distance learning curriculum provider may allow students to obtain an accredited high school diploma.[citation needed]
Unschooling and natural learning[edit]
"Natural learning" refers to a type of learning-on-demand where children pursue knowledge based on their interests and parents take an active part in facilitating activities and experiences conducive to learning but do not rely heavily on textbooks or spend much time "teaching", looking instead for "learning moments" throughout their daily activities. Parents see their role as that of affirming through positive feedback and modeling the necessary skills, and the child's role as being responsible for asking and learning.[citation needed]
The term "unschooling" as coined by John Holt describes an approach in which parents do not authoritatively direct the child's education, but interact with the child following the child's own interests, leaving them free to explore and learn as their interests lead.[17][23] "Unschooling" does not indicate that the child is not being educated, but that the child is not being "schooled", or educated in a rigid school-type manner. Holt asserted that children learn through the experiences of life, and he encouraged parents to live their lives with their child. Also known as interest-led or child-led learning, unschooling attempts to follow opportunities as they arise in real life, through which a child will learn without coercion. Children at school learn from 1 teacher and 2 auxiliary teachers in a classroom of approximately 30. Kids have the opportunity of dedicated education at home with a ratio of 1 to 1. An unschooled child may utilize texts or classroom instruction, but these are not considered central to education. Holt asserted that there is no specific body of knowledge that is, or should be, required of a child.[27]
Both unschooling and natural learning advocates believe that children learn best by doing; a child may learn reading to further an interest about history or other cultures, or math skills by operating a small business or sharing in family finances. They may learn animal husbandry keeping dairy goats or meat rabbits, botany tending a kitchen garden, chemistry to understand the operation of firearms or the internal combustion engine, or politics and local history by following a zoning or historical-status dispute. While any type of homeschoolers may also use these methods, the unschooled child initiates these learning activities. The natural learner participates with parents and others in learning together.[citation needed]
Another prominent proponent of unschooling is John Taylor Gatto, author of Dumbing Us Down, The Exhausted School, A Different Kind of Teacher, and Weapons of Mass Instruction. Gatto argues that public education is the primary tool of "state controlled consciousness" and serves as a prime illustration of the total institution — a social system which impels obedience to the state and quells free thinking or dissent.[28]
Autonomous learning[edit]
Autonomous learning is a school of education which sees learners as individuals who can and should be autonomous i.e. be responsible for their own learning climate.
Autonomous education helps students develop their self-consciousness, vision, practicality and freedom of discussion. These attributes serve to aid the student in his/her independent learning. However, a student must not start their autonomous learning completely on their own. It is said, that by first having interaction with someone who has more knowledge in a subject, will speed up the student's learning, and hence allow them to learn more independently.[29]
Some degree of autonomous learning is popular with those who home educate their children. In true autonomous learning, the child usually gets to decide what projects they wish to tackle or what interests to pursue. In home education, this can be instead of or in addition to regular subjects like doing math or English.
According to Home Education UK the autonomous education philosophy emerged from the epistemology of Karl Popper in The Myth of the Framework: In Defence of Science and Rationality, which is developed in the debates, which seek to rebut the neo-Marxist social philosophy of convergence proposed by the Frankfurt School (e.g. Theodor W. Adorno, Jürgen Habermas, Max Horkheimer).[citation needed]
Homeschool cooperatives[edit]
A Homeschool Cooperative is a cooperative of families who homeschool their children. It provides an opportunity for children to learn from other parents who are more specialized in certain areas or subjects. Co-ops also provide social interaction. They may take lessons together or go on field trips. Some co-ops also offer events such as prom and graduation for homeschoolers.[30]
Homeschoolers are beginning to utilize Web 2.0 as a way to simulate homeschool cooperatives online. With social networks homeschoolers can chat, discuss threads in forums, share information and tips, and even participate in online classes via blackboard systems similar to those used by colleges.[citation needed]
Religious reasons for homeschooling[edit]




Homeschooling is a choice for some families, this choice can sometimes stem from religion.


Some parents have objections to the secular nature of public schools and homeschool in order to give their children a religious education. Use of a religious curriculum is common. Recent sociological work suggests that an increasing number of parents are choosing homeschooling because of low academic quality at the local schools, or because of bullying or health problems.[31]
Research[edit]
Test results[edit]
According to the Home School Legal Defense Association (HSLDA) in 2004, "Many studies over the last few years have established the academic excellence of homeschooled children."[32] Homeschooling Achievement—a compilation of studies published by the HSLDA—supported the academic integrity of homeschooling. This booklet summarized a 1997 study by Ray and the 1999 Rudner study.[33] The Rudner study noted two limitations of its own research: it is not necessarily representative of all homeschoolers and it is not a comparison with other schooling methods.[34] Among the homeschooled students who took the tests, the average homeschooled student outperformed his public school peers by 30 to 37 percentile points across all subjects. The study also indicates that public school performance gaps between minorities and genders were virtually non-existent among the homeschooled students who took the tests.[35]
A study conducted in 2008 found that 11,739 homeschooled students, on average, scored 37 percentile points above public school students on standardized achievement tests.[36] This is consistent with the 1999 Rudner study. However, Rudner said that these same students in public school may have scored just as well because of the dedicated parents they had.[37] The Ray study also found that homeschooled students who had a certified teacher as a parent scored one percentile lower than homeschooled students who did not have a certified teacher as a parent.[36] Another nationwide descriptive study conducted by Ray contained students ranging from ages 5–18 and he found that homeschoolers scored at least 80th percentile on their tests.[38]
In 2011, a quasi-experimental study was conducted that included homeschooled and traditional public students between the ages of 5 & 10 and it was discovered that the majority of the homeschooled children achieved higher standardized scores compared to their counterparts (Chang, Gould, & Meuse, 2001).[39] However, Martin-Chang also found that unschooling children ages 5–10 scored significantly below traditionally educated children, while academically oriented homeschooled children scored from one half grade level above to 4.5 grade levels above traditionally schooled children on standardized tests (n=37 home schooled children matched with children from the same socioeconomic and educational background).[40]
Studies have also examined the impact of homeschooling on students' GPAs. Cogan (2010) found that homeschooled students had higher high school GPAs (3.74) and transfer GPAs (3.65) than conventional students.[41] Snyder (2013) provided corroborating evidence that homeschoolers were outperforming their peers in the areas of standardized tests and overall GPAs.[42] Looking beyond high school, a study by the 1990 National Home Education Research Institute (as cited by Wichers, 2001) found that at least 33% of home schooled students attended a four-year college, and 17% attended a two-year college. This same study examined the students after one year, finding that that 17% pursued higher education.[43] Thus, the data indicates that homeschooling can also prepare students for success in higher education.[original research?]
Outcomes[edit]
Homeschooled children may receive more individualized attention than students enrolled in traditional public schools. A 2011 study suggests that a structured environment could play a key role in homeschooler academic achievement.[44] This means that parents were highly involved in their child’s education and they were creating clear educational goals. In addition, these students were being offered organized lesson plans which are either self-made or purchased.[44]
A study conducted by Ray (2010), indicates that the higher the level of parents’ income, the more likely the homeschooled child is able to achieve academic success.[45]
In the 1970s, Raymond and Dorothy Moore conducted four federally funded analyses of more than 8,000 early childhood studies, from which they published their original findings in Better Late Than Early, 1975. This was followed by School Can Wait, a repackaging of these same findings designed specifically for educational professionals.[46] They concluded that, "where possible, children should be withheld from formal schooling until at least ages eight to ten." Their reason was that children "are not mature enough for formal school programs until their senses, coordination, neurological development and cognition are ready". They concluded that the outcome of forcing children into formal schooling is a sequence of "1) uncertainty as the child leaves the family nest early for a less secure environment, 2) puzzlement at the new pressures and restrictions of the classroom, 3) frustration because unready learning tools – senses, cognition, brain hemispheres, coordination – cannot handle the regimentation of formal lessons and the pressures they bring, 4) hyperactivity growing out of nerves and jitter, from frustration, 5) failure which quite naturally flows from the four experiences above, and 6) delinquency which is failure's twin and apparently for the same reason."[47] According to the Moores, "early formal schooling is burning out our children. Teachers who attempt to cope with these youngsters also are burning out." Aside from academic performance, they think early formal schooling also destroys "positive sociability", encourages peer dependence, and discourages self-worth, optimism, respect for parents, and trust in peers. They believe this situation is particularly acute for boys because of their delay in maturity. The Moores cited a Smithsonian Report on the development of genius, indicating a requirement for "1) much time spent with warm, responsive parents and other adults, 2) very little time spent with peers, and 3) a great deal of free exploration under parental guidance." Their analysis suggested that children need "more of home and less of formal school", "more free exploration with... parents, and fewer limits of classroom and books", and "more old fashioned chores – children working with parents – and less attention to rivalry sports and amusements."[47]
Socialization[edit]
Using the Piers-Harris Children's Self-Concept Scale, John Taylor later found that, "while half of the conventionally schooled children scored at or below the 50th percentile (in self-concept), only 10.3% of the home-schooling children did so."[48] He further stated that "the self-concept of home-schooling children is significantly higher statistically than that of children attending conventional school. This has implications in the areas of academic achievement and socialization which have been found to parallel self-concept. Regarding socialization, Taylor's results would mean that very few home-schooling children are socially deprived. He states that critics who speak out against homeschooling on the basis of social deprivation are actually addressing an area which favors homeschoolers.[48]
In 2003, the National Home Education Research Institute conducted a survey of 7,300 U.S. adults who had been homeschooled (5,000 for more than seven years). Their findings included:



Homeschool graduates are active and involved in their communities. 71% participate in an ongoing community service activity, like coaching a sports team, volunteering at a school, or working with a church or neighborhood association, compared with 37% of U.S. adults of similar ages from a traditional education background.






Homeschool graduates are more involved in civic affairs and vote in much higher percentages than their peers. 76% of those surveyed between the ages of 18 and 24 voted within the last five years, compared with only 29% of the corresponding U.S. populace. The numbers are even greater in older age groups, with voting levels not falling below 95%, compared with a high of 53% for the corresponding U.S. populace.






58.9% report that they are "very happy" with life, compared with 27.6% for the general U.S. population. 73.2% find life "exciting", compared with 47.3%.[49]



General criticism[edit]
See also: Unschooling criticisms






The examples and perspective in this article deal primarily with the United States and do not represent a worldwide view of the subject. You may improve this article, discuss the issue on the talk page, or create a new article, as appropriate. (September 2010) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



There are claims that studies showing that homeschooled students do better on standardized tests[32][36] do not compare with mandatory public-school testing.[citation needed]
By contrast, SAT and ACT tests are self-selected by homeschooled and formally schooled students alike. Some homeschoolers averaged higher scores on these college entrance tests in South Carolina.[50] Other scores (1999 data) showed mixed results, for example showing higher levels for homeschoolers in English (homeschooled 23.4 vs national average 20.5) and reading (homeschooled 24.4 vs national average 21.4) on the ACT, but mixed scores in math (homeschooled 20.4 vs national average 20.7 on the ACT as opposed homeschooled 535 vs national average 511 on the 1999 SAT math).[51]
Some advocates of homeschooling and educational choice counter with an input-output theory, pointing out that home educators expend only an average of $500–$600 a year on each student, in comparison to $9,000-$10,000 for each public school student in the United States, which suggests home-educated students would be especially dominant on tests if afforded access to an equal commitment of tax-funded educational resources.[52]
Opposition to homeschooling comes from some organizations of teachers and school districts. The National Education Association, a United States teachers' union and professional association, opposes homeschooling.[53][54]
Stanford University political scientist Professor Rob Reich[55] wrote in The Civic Perils of Homeschooling (2002) that homeschooling can probably result in biased students, as many homeschooling parents view the education of their children as a matter properly under their control and no one else's. He also claims that most parents choose to educate their children at home because they believe that their children's moral and spiritual needs will not be met in campus-based schools.[56]
Many teachers and school districts oppose the idea of homeschooling. However, research has shown that homeschooled children often excel in many areas of academic endeavor. According to a study done on the homeschool movement,[57] homeschoolers often achieve academic success and admission into elite universities. There is also evidence that most are remarkably well socialized. According to the National Home Education Research Institute president, Brian Ray, socialization is not a problem for homeschooling children, many of whom are involved in community sports, volunteer activities, book groups, or homeschool co-ops.[58]
Gallup polls of American voters have shown a significant change in attitude in the last 20 years, from 73% opposed to home education in 1985 to 54% opposed in 2001.[59][60] In 1988, when asked whether parents should have a right to choose homeschooling, 53 percent thought that they should, as revealed by another poll.[61]
Opposition in Germany[edit]
Up until 1920, homeschooling in Germany was seen as an acceptable practice under certain circumstances. With the rise of the Weimar Republic and the Nazi regime, homeschooling was seen as an anti-nationalistic and subversive practice that could undermine children's loyalty to their country. The Reichsschulpflichtgesetz, implemented in 1938, effectively banned all homeschooling with criminal consequences for anyone found practicing. Homeschooling wouldn't become a public concept until the 1980s. In 1989, Helmut Stücher removed his children from the public school system to begin home schooling. Stücher and others who followed suit were fined, and some even lost child custody.[62] It wasn't until the unification of Germany in 1990 that education law was reformed and homeschooling was allowed under strict observation and extreme circumstances. Today, however, homeschooling remains illegal. A 2007 ruling of the German federal court argued that homeschooling was simply another form of child abuse.[63]
Germany has not endorsed homeschooling as other countries have. Its neighbors, Switzerland and Austria, have embraced the notion and are following similar paths as the United States and Canada.[63]
International status and statistics[edit]
Main article: Homeschooling international status and statistics
Homeschooling is legal in some countries. Countries with the most prevalent home education movements include Australia, Canada, New Zealand, the United Kingdom, Mexico, Chile and the United States. Some countries have highly regulated home education programs as an extension of the compulsory school system; others, such as Sweden, Germany[64][65] and most European countries have outlawed it entirely. Brazil has a law project in process. In other countries,[which?] while not restricted by law, homeschooling is not socially acceptable or considered desirable[why?] and is virtually non-existent.
Australia[edit]






This section relies largely or entirely on a single source. Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page. Please help improve this article by introducing citations to additional sources. (April 2017)









This section contains content that is written like an advertisement. Please help improve it by removing promotional content and inappropriate external links, and by adding encyclopedic content written from a neutral point of view. (April 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Home education or homeschooling, in Australia is much the same as elsewhere. Some reasons as to why people choose to homeschool is because it's a lifestyle choice, some people choose to home educate so that they can travel and spend quality time with their kids.[66] Some children learn differently to the general crowd and can get bored or can struggle at school, where the teachers are unable to cater for the individuality of each child.
Homeschooling requires government registration, with different requirements from state to state. Some home educators prefer to be regulated, but others question whether the government has any legitimate authority to oversee the choices parents make to raise and educate their children.[66] Curricular help is offered by the Australian Government.
Many organisations exist to help parents and teachers with home education. The HEA (Home Education Association) is one support organisation, having grown through local support networks. The HEA does not produce educational material, but offers support to families choosing to homeschool.[66][non-primary source needed]
Brazil[edit]
Homeschooling in South America has not taken hold as it has in North American countries of Canada and the United States. In 1824, Brazil permitted home education to take the place of traditional education for nearly 70 years. In 1990, however, The Statute of Children and Adolescents, or the Estatuto da Criança e Adolescente, prohibited homeschooling and did not recognize it as a legitimate form of education.[67] A resurgence in the homeschooling movement, however, has encouraged congressman Lincoln Portela to introduce a new bill that would allow children to be educated at home if parents followed state approved guidelines. The National Association of Home Education was founded in 2010 to achieve these goals. Rough estimates state that around 3,201 families are homeschooling in 2016.[68]
Canada[edit]
Homeschooling is legal in all provinces and territories in Canada and has been for 40 years. The Ontario Education Act, for example, states in Section 21(2)(a) that "A person is excused from attendance at school if [...] the person is receiving education elsewhere".[69] Canada is known as having some of the most comprehensive legal protections for homeschooling parents in the Americas. Some provinces have implemented policies that require parents to notify school boards of their decision to homeschool. Every province requires parents to notify the school system of their intent to withdraw their child from the public school system and to begin home education. Five of ten provinces additionally require parents to submit a detailed curriculum to the state. Seven of these provinces do not require the program to be monitored by the school board or other private school administrators, and only five provinces require routine inspection of home education.[70] These policies, however, are not law; although Canadian legislators recognize the importance of state controls in the homeschooling environment, it is ultimately up to the parent to decide when and how to homeschool. Despite a positive environment that supports and encourages alternatives to traditional schooling, it is estimated that less than .5% of Canadian families were homeschooling in 2015. This number is probably inaccurate, however, as many parents do not report their decisions to homeschool.[70]
Unlike the United States, where homeschooling is largely a consequence of religious conviction, a study of 1,600 families in 2003 found that Canadians primarily choose to homeschool out of a desire to provide better education. For those children whose parents decided to homeschool out of a desire to better education, a 2003 study found statistical significance between traditionally schooled and homeschooled students scores on standardized tests of writing, reading, and mathematics. A more recent 2011 study found that style of home education (structured versus unstructured) was a more important predictor of standardized test performance than other traditional measures, such as income and parents' educational attainment.[71] These findings are similar to findings in U.S. research on homeschooled children and the outcomes of homeschooling.
One technique that is specifically Canadian, specifically British Columbian, is the Distributed Learning approach to home education. Distributed Learning is an online program that is directed by a teacher that meets provincial standards for education. The program draws on public and private curricula. This is distinctive to British Columbia because it is the only province that has Distributed Learning policy. It is one of the most popular forms of home education.[70]
Israel[edit]
Homeschooling is legal in Israel, and requires acquiring a permission from the Ministry of Education.[72] The permission involves a home visit from the person in charge of handing out the permissions, and writing a letter describing the motives, curriculum, daily routine and socialization of the children. Unschooling is legal, and the requirements are minimal. The reasons for homeschooling in Israel are very similar to those of the rest of the world, with the exception of religious motives, since religious schools are prevalent. There is unclear information regarding the number of Homeschooling families, since not all families ask for permission, and many homeschool their children without enlisting. Estimates range between 500-1000 families.
South Africa[edit]
Home education was outlawed in South Africa before 1994, and families were jailed for not sending their children to school. With the acceptance of the South African constitution in 1994, home education was legalised per implication. This was acknowledged with promulgation of the SA Schools Act of 1996 in which home education is accommodated in art. 51. Since home education was legalised, it has grown exponentially. According to the census count of 2011, there were about 57 000 home learners in the country, putting South Africa in the top five countries in terms of number of home learners.
See also[edit]


Alternative education
History of Education
Homeschooling and alternative education in India
Homeschooling in New Zealand
Homeschooling in South Africa
Homeschooling in the United States
Home education in the United Kingdom
List of homeschooled people
Home School Legal Defense Association
Informal learning
List of homeschooling programmes
Unschooling


References[edit]


^ "Homeschool." Dictionary.com. Dictionary.com, 2015. Web. 3 June 2015. Dictionary.reference.com
^ "Informal learning, home education and homeschooling (home schooling)". YMCA George Williams College. Retrieved 2014-08-04. 
^ "Official UK Government Page on Home Education". Retrieved 2014-08-02. 
^ a b c d A. Distefano, K. E. Rudestam, R. J. Silverman (2005) Encyclopedia of Distributed Learning (p221) ISBN 0-7619-2451-5
^ a b "The NCES Fast Facts Tool provides quick answers to many education questions (National Center for Education Statistics)". nces.ed.gov. Retrieved 2017-08-23. 
^ Ray, Brian. (2016). Research facts on homeschooling. National Home Education Research Institute. Retrieved from http://www.nheri.org/research/research-facts-on-homeschooling.html
^ "Education: Free and Compulsory". Mises Institute. Retrieved 19 April 2016. 
^ Houston, Robert (2011-11-28). "Literacy". Retrieved 2017-09-13. 
^ "History of Alternative Education in the United States". Retrieved 19 April 2016. 
^ Encyclopædia Britannica 11 ed. Vol. 8 (Demijohn to Edward the Black Prince). 1911. p. 959. 
^ "How they were schooled". Retrieved 19 April 2016. 
^ "Removing Classrooms from the Battle | SUTHERLAND INSTITUTE" (PDF). SUTHERLAND INSTITUTE. 2008-07-29. p. 377,386 Note 30. Retrieved 2017-08-23. 
^ Edgar, William (January 2007). "The Passing of R. J. Rushdoony". First Things. Archived from the original on April 4, 2014. Retrieved 2014-04-23. 
^ a b c d Better Late Than Early, Raymond S. Moore, Dorothy N. Moore, 1975
^ Christine Field. The Old Schoolhouse Meets Up with Patrick Farenga About the Legacy of John Holt Archived August 16, 2011, at the Wayback Machine.
^ "HSC - A Brief History of Homeschooling". 2007-12-15. Archived from the original on 2007-12-15. Retrieved 2017-08-23. 
^ a b "A Conversation with John Holt - The Natural Child Project". Retrieved 19 April 2016. 
^ "A Conversation with John Holt - The Natural Child Project". www.naturalchild.org. Retrieved 2017-04-04. 
^ "Moore Home Schooling : Moore Formula". www.moorefoundation.com. Archived from the original on 2016-03-05. Retrieved 2017-04-04. 
^ HSLDA. "Homeschooling in New York: A legal analysis" (PDF). Retrieved 13 September 2013. 
^ "Unschooling and Homeschooling FAQ | Alternative Schooling | Self Directed Learning". John Holt GWS. Retrieved 2015-07-16. 
^ "12 Most Compelling Reasons to Homeschool Your Children". 12most.com. 2012-02-07. Archived from the original on 2012-02-09. Retrieved 2014-01-16. 
^ a b "Homeschooling in the United States: 2003 - Executive Summary". Retrieved 19 April 2016. 
^ "HSLDA - Home Schooling-State". Retrieved 19 April 2016. 
^ Martin-Chang, S., Gould, O. N., & Meuse, R. E. (2011). The impact of schooling on academic achievement: Evidence from homeschooled and traditionally schooled students. Canadian Journal of Behavioural Science, 43(3), 195-202. Retrieved from http://search.proquest.com/docview/878227015
^ "Homeschooling Approaches - School-at-Home". www.homeschool.com. Retrieved 2017-10-24. 
^ "Why is education important, homeschooling and the Montessori method". Retrieved 19 April 2016. 
^ John Taylor Gatto, Weapons of Mass Instruction (Odysseus Group, 2008).
^ L. W. Chiu, Hazel (2012). "Supporting the development of autonomous learning skills in reading and writing in an independent language learning centre". Studies in Self-Access Learning Journal. 3: 271–272. 
^ "CHN - Homeschool FAQ". californiahomeschool.net. Retrieved 2016-10-05. 
^ "Reasons Parents Homeschool". Coalition for Responsible Home Education. 2013-09-11. Retrieved 2016-05-15. 
^ a b "HSLDA - Academic Statistics on Homeschooling". Retrieved 19 April 2016. 
^ "Academic Achievement". HSLDA. Retrieved 12 October 2012. 
^ "Achievement and Demographics of Home School Students". Education Policy Analysis Archives. Retrieved 12 October 2012. 
^ "HSLDA - Home Schooling Achievement". Retrieved 19 April 2016. 
^ a b c Ray, Brian. "Progress Report 2009: Homeschool Academic Achievement and Demographics". Survey. National Home Education Research Institute. Retrieved 6 January 2013. 
^ Welner, Kariane Mari; Kevin G. Welner (11 April 1999). "Contextualizing Homeschooling Data: A Response to Rudner". Education Policy Analysis Archives: Education Policy Analysis Archives - Arizona State University. 7 (13). Retrieved 13 September 2013. 
^ Ray, Brian. (2010). Academic achievement and demographic traits of homeschool students: a nationwide study. ''Academic Leadership Live: The Online Journal, 8(1)
^ 1. Chang- Martin, S., Gould, O., & Meuse, R. (2011). The impact of schooling on academic achievement: evidence from homeschooled and traditionally schooled students. Canadian Journal of Behavioural Science, 43(3): 195-202. doi:10.1037/a0022697
^ Martin-Chang, Sandra; Gould, O.N.; Meuse, R.E. (2011). "The impact of schooling on academic achievement: Evidence from home-schooled and traditionally-schooled students". Canadian Journal of Behavioural Science. 43 (3): 195–202. doi:10.1037/a0022697. Retrieved 7 January 2013. 
^ Cogan, F. (2010). Exploring academic outcomes of homeschooled students. Journal of College Admission, 208, 18-25
^ Snyder, Marc. (2013). An evaluative study of the academic achievement of homeschooled students versus traditionally schooled students attending a catholic university. Catholic Education: A Journal of Inquiry and Practice March, 16, 288-308
^ Wichers, M. (2001). Homeschooling: adventitious or detrimental for proficiency in higher education. Education, 122, 145-150
^ a b Chang- Martin, S., Gould, O., & Meuse, R. (2011). The impact of schooling on academic achievement: evidence from homeschooled and traditionally schooled students. Canadian Journal of Behavioural Science, 43(3): 195-202. doi:10.1037/a0022697
^ Ray, Brian. (2010). Academic achievement and demographic traits of homeschool students: a nationwide study. Academic Leadership Live: The Online Journal, 8(1).
^ Better Late Than Early, Raymond S. Moore, Dorothy N. Moore, Seventh Printing, 1993, addendum
^ a b "Moore Foundation : When Education Becomes Abuse". 2009-03-31. Archived from the original on 2009-03-31. Retrieved 2017-08-23. CS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknown (link)
^ a b Self-Concept in home-schooling children, John Wesley Taylor V, Ph.D., Andrews University, Berrien Springs, MI
^ "HSLDA - Homeschooling Grows Up". Retrieved 19 April 2016. 
^ Homeschool Legal Defense Association. "Academic Statistics on Homeschooling." Hslda.org
^ Daniel Golden (11 February 2000). "Home-Schooled Kids Defy Stereotypes, Ace SAT Test". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on January 18, 2010. 
^ "Fostering Educational Innovation in Choice-Based Multi-Venue and Government Single-Venue Settings." (pp. 32 n.21; 35-36 n.27; 42 n.57; 44 n.66)[dead link]
^ Lines, Patricia M. "Homeschooling". Kidsource. Archived from the original on 1 January 2016. Retrieved 13 September 2013. CS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknown (link)
^ Lips, Dan; Feinberg, Evan (2008-04-03). "Homeschooling: A Growing Option in American Education". Heritage Foundation. Archived from the original on 6 August 2013. Retrieved 13 September 2013. CS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknown (link)
^ "Rob Reich". Stanford.edu. Archived from the original on 10 September 2013. Retrieved 13 September 2013. 
^ The civic perils of homeschooling Author: Rob Reich Journal: Educational Leadership (Alexandria) Pub.: 2002-04 Volume: 59 Issue: 7 Pages: 56
^ Stevens, Mitchell L. (2001). Kingdom of Children: Culture and Controversy in the Homeschooling Movement (PDF). Princeton University Press. ISBN 9780691114682. 
^ Sizer, Bridget Bentz. "Socialization: Tackling Homeschooling's "S" word". Pbsparents. 
^ "ERIC/CEM - School Choice Discussion". Archived from the original on 14 November 2007. Retrieved 19 April 2016. 
^ Rose, Lowell C.; Alec M. Gallup; Stanley M. Elam (1997). "The 29th Annual Phi Delta Kappa/Gallup Poll of the Public's Attitudes Toward the Public Schools". Phi Delta Kappan. 1. 79: 41–56. 
^ Gallup, Alec M.; Elam M. Stanley (1988). "The 20th Annual Gallup Poll of the Public's Attitudes Toward the Public Schools". Phi Delta Kappan. 70 (1): 33–46. 
^ J.D., 2010. HOMESCHOOLING IN GERMANY AND THE UNITED STATES. James E. Rogers College of Law The Catholic University of America. Arizona Journal of International and Comparative Law.
^ a b "Homeschooling verboten". www.german-way.com. Retrieved 2016-12-02. 
^ Spiegler, Thomas (2003). "Home education in Germany: An overview of the contemporary situation" (PDF). Evaluation and Research in Education. 17 (2–3): 179–90. doi:10.1080/09500790308668301. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2008-09-10. 
^ "Home-school ban in Sweden forces families to mull leaving". The Washington Times. July 18, 2010. Retrieved 28 July 2013. 
^ a b c "FAQ's". www.hea.edu.au. Retrieved 2016-05-15. 
^ "Homeschooling in Brazil". The Brazil Business. Retrieved 2016-12-02. 
^ "Educação domiciliar ganha força no Brasil e busca legalização". Gazeta do Povo (in Portuguese). Retrieved 2016-12-02. 
^ "Law Document English View". Ontario.ca. 2014-07-24. Retrieved 2016-12-02. 
^ a b c Deani Neven Van Pelt (2015). Home Schooling in Canada: The Current Picture—2015 Edition. Barbara Mitchell Centre for Improvement in Education. Fraser Institute.
^ "Canadian Home Based Learning Resource Page". www.flora.org. Retrieved 2016-12-02. 
^ "Israel Home Education—FAQ". 2016-08-29. 


Further reading[edit]

Holt, John (2004) [1976]. Instead of Education: Ways to Help People Do Things Better. Boulder, CO: Sentient Publications. ISBN 1-59181-009-4. 

External links[edit]



Look up homeschooling in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.





Wikiquote has quotations related to: Homeschooling





Wikisource has original text related to this article:
Homeschooling




A history of the modern homeschool movement, from the Cato Institute.
National Home Education Research Institute NHERI produces research about homeschooling and sponsors the peer-reviewed academic journal Homeschool Researcher.
The National Independent Study Accreditation Council
International Center for Home Education Research Reviews







v
t
e


Homeschooling



Philosophy



Deschooling
Unschooling





Methodology



All-in-one curricula
Homeschool cooperative
Unit studies





People



John Taylor Gatto
John Holt
Grace Llewellyn
Wendy Priesnitz
Rousas Rushdoony





International status



India
Homeschooling international status and statistics
New Zealand
United Kingdom
United States





Organizations



Education Otherwise (UK)
Home School Legal Defense Association (US)
Umbrella school





See also



Alternative education
Single-parent homeschooling








Alternative education
Homeschooling









Authority control



LCCN: sh88002564
GND: 4121517-5
SUDOC: 077067312
BNF: cb14447510m (data)
NDL: 00565169
BNE: XX531048











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Homeschooling&oldid=818312240"					Categories: HomeschoolingSchool typesHomeHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksCS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknownAll articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from May 2016CS1 Portuguese-language sources (pt)Articles needing additional references from April 2013All articles needing additional referencesArticles with limited geographic scope from December 2017NPOV disputes from July 2017All NPOV disputesAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from August 2017Wikipedia articles needing clarification from July 2014All articles that may contain original researchArticles that may contain original research from August 2017Articles with unsourced statements from July 2015Wikipedia articles needing clarification from August 2017Articles with unsourced statements from August 2010Articles with unsourced statements from June 2011Articles with limited geographic scope from September 2010USA-centricArticles with unsourced statements from October 2017All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrasesArticles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from December 2014Wikipedia articles needing clarification from December 2014Articles needing additional references from April 2017Articles with a promotional tone from April 2017All articles with a promotional toneAll pages needing factual verificationWikipedia articles needing factual verification from April 2017Wikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiers