This article is about the British Government department. For a working room or study in a domestic dwelling, see home-office.

Home Office
Welsh: Y Swyddfa Gartref





2 Marsham Street, the headquarters of the Home Office


Department overview


Formed
27 March 1782; 235 years ago (1782-03-27)


Jurisdiction
United Kingdom (but in respect of most policing and justice matters: England and Wales only)


Headquarters
2 Marsham Street, London, SW1P 4DF


Annual budget
£8.9 billion (current) and £500 million (capital) in 2011–12 [1]


Minister responsible



Amber Rudd, Secretary of State for the Home Department





Department executive



Philip Rutnam, Permanent Secretary





Website
www.gov.uk/home-office






A Home Office Immigration Enforcement vehicle in north London.


The Home Office (HO) is a ministerial department of Her Majesty's Government of the United Kingdom, responsible for immigration, security and law and order. As such it is responsible for the police, fire and rescue services, visas and immigration and the Security Service (MI5). It is also in charge of government policy on security-related issues such as drugs, counter-terrorism and ID cards. It was formerly responsible for Her Majesty's Prison Service and the National Probation Service, but these have been transferred to the Ministry of Justice. The Cabinet minister responsible for the department is the Home Secretary.
The remit of the Home Office was substantially reduced in 2007 when, after Home Secretary John Reid had declared the Home Office "not fit for purpose", the Prime Minister Tony Blair separated a new Ministry of Justice from the reduced Home Office.
The Home Office continues to be known, especially in official papers and when referred to in Parliament, as the Home Department.[2]



Contents


1 Organisation

1.1 Non-ministerial government departments
1.2 Inspectorates/accountability
1.3 Divisions
1.4 Non-departmental public bodies
1.5 Operations


2 People

2.1 Ministers


3 Priorities
4 History

4.1 Anonymous attack
4.2 Union action


5 Location
6 Research
7 Devolution
8 See also
9 References
10 External links



Organisation[edit]
The Home Office is headed by the Home Secretary, a Cabinet minister supported by the department's senior civil servant, the Permanent Secretary.
As of October 2014, the Home Office comprised the following organisations:[3]
Non-ministerial government departments[edit]

National Crime Agency

Inspectorates/accountability[edit]

HM Inspectorate of Constabulary
Independent Chief Inspector of Borders and Immigration
Independent Police Complaints Commission and other oversight bodies
Home Affairs Select Committee
HM Chief Inspector of Fire Services

Divisions[edit]

Border Force
HM Passport Office
Immigration Enforcement
Corporate Services
UK Visas and Immigration
Fire and Rescue Service
Office for Security and Counter-Terrorism

Non-departmental public bodies[edit]

Advisory Council on the Misuse of Drugs
Animals in Science Committee
Disclosure and Barring Service
Gangmasters Licensing Authority
Independent Police Complaints Commission
Investigatory Powers Tribunal
Migration Advisory Committee
National DNA Database Ethics Group
Office of Surveillance Commissioners
Office of the Immigration Services Commissioner
Police Advisory Board for England and Wales
Police Discipline Appeals Tribunal
Police Remuneration Review Body
Security Industry Authority
Technical Advisory Board

Operations[edit]
In October 2012, a number of functions of the National Policing Improvement Agency were transferred to the Home Office ahead of the future abolition of the agency.[4]
These included:

Use of the Airwave communications system by police forces
The Police National Database
The National DNA Database
Legislative powers regarding police employment
Forensics policy
The National Procurement Hub for information technology

People[edit]
Ministers[edit]
The Home Office Ministers are as follows:[5]


Minister
Rank
Portfolio


The Rt Hon. Amber Rudd MP
Secretary of State
Overall responsibility for the work of the department; including security and terrorism; legislative programme; expenditure issues.


The Rt Hon. Brandon Lewis MP
Minister of State
Immigration and border policy; foreign national offenders; resettlement policy; implementation of the Immigration Act 2016; UK Visas and Immigration; immigration enforcement; Border Force; Her Majesty’s Passport Office; Independent Chief Inspector of Borders and Immigration; Home Office immigration transparency data; net migration statistics. Member of Cabinet.


The Rt Hon. Ben Wallace MP
Minister of State
Implementing the strategic defence and security review; counter-terrorism; investigatory powers; communications data legislation; communications capabilities development; security industry engagement; single infrastructure policing; aviation security; firearms; chemical biological radiological nuclear defence (CBRNE) and science and technology programme management; small and medium enterprises; serious and organised crime strategy; criminal finance and asset recovery; cyber crime and security; National Crime Agency oversight; UK anti-corruption policy; better regulation; animal testing.


Nick Hurd MP
Minister of State
Police finance and resourcing; police reform and governance; police representative groups; police pay and pensions; police workforce; Independent Police Complaints Commission (IPCC); Policing and Crime Bill; police integrity and transparency; emergency services collaboration; crime statistics; national fire policy; Chief Fire and Rescue Adviser; national resilience and fire programmes; localism and reform; workforce pay; pensions and industrial relations; extradition; mutual legal assistance; EU criminal justice; Interpol; foreign criminality.


Victoria Atkins MP
Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State
Disclosure and Barring Service; drugs; alcohol; countering extremism; hate crime; crime prevention; anti-social behaviour; gangs, youth crime and youth violence; knife crime; wildlife crime; child sexual exploitation and abuse; online child sexual exploitation; mental health; modern slavery; honour-based violence; female genital mutilation (FGM); violence against women and girls; missing people and children; sexual violence; prostitution and lap dancing; domestic violence.


The Baroness Williams of Trafford
Minister of State
All Home Office business in the House of Lords; countering extremism; hate crime; integration; devolution; data strategy; identity and biometrics; Better Regulation; animals in science.






United Kingdom






This article is part of a series on the
politics and government of
the United Kingdom




Constitution


Constitution

Cabinet Manual
Erskine May


Taxation








The Crown

British Monarchy


Monarch

Queen Elizabeth II


Heir apparent

The Prince of Wales


Royal family
Succession to the British throne
Royal prerogative








Executive

HM Government


Prime Minister

Theresa May


Cabinet

Current ministry


Her Majesty's Civil Service
Departments
Executive agencies
Public bodies

Privy Council


Crown-in-Council

Queen Elizabeth II










Legislature

Parliament
(56th Parliament)

Crown-in-Parliament

Queen Elizabeth II

House of Lords

Lord Speaker

The Lord Fowler



House of Commons

Speaker

John Bercow


Leader of the Opposition

Jeremy Corbyn





Her Majesty's Loyal Opposition
Shadow Cabinet
State Opening of Parliament
Prime Minister's Questions
Act of Parliament
Statutory Instruments








Judiciary

Supreme Court


President

Lord Neuberger


Deputy President

Lady Hale


Judges of the Supreme Court



Courts of the United Kingdom
Courts of England and Wales
Courts of Scotland
Courts of Northern Ireland








Devolution


Joint Ministerial Committee
Scotland

Government
Parliament


Wales

Government
National Assembly


Reserved matters
Northern Ireland

Executive
Assembly










Administrative geography


England

Subdivisions of England
Local government in England


Scotland

Subdivisions of Scotland
Local government in Scotland


Wales

Local government in Wales


Northern Ireland

Local government in Northern Ireland










Elections


Parliament constituencies
Political parties
Last election
Next election
Referendums








Foreign relations


History
Foreign policy
UK and the United Nations
Politics of the European Union
Commonwealth of Nations






 United Kingdom portal


Other countries
Atlas








v
t
e





Priorities[edit]
The Department outlined its aims for this Parliament in its Business Plan, which was published in May 2011 and superseded its Structural Reform Plan.[6] The plan said the department will:



1. Empower the public to hold the police to account for their role in cutting crime



Introduce directly elected Police and Crime Commissioners and make police actions to tackle crime and anti-social behaviour more transparent




2. Free up the police to fight crime more effectively and efficiently



Cut police bureaucracy, end unnecessary central interference and overhaul police powers in order to cut crime, reduce costs and improve police value for money. Simplify national institutional structures and establish a National Crime Agency to strengthen the fight against organised crime (and replace the Serious Organised Crime Agency)




3. Create a more integrated criminal justice system



Help the police and other public services work together across the criminal justice system




4. Secure our borders and reduce immigration



Deliver an improved migration system that commands public confidence and serves our economic interests. Limit non-EU economic migrants, and introduce new measures to reduce inflow and minimise abuse of all migration routes, for example the student route. Process asylum applications more quickly, and end the detention of children for immigration purposes




5. Protect people's freedoms and civil liberties



Reverse state interference to ensure there is not disproportionate intrusion into people‟s lives




6. Protect our citizens from terrorism



Keep people safe through the Government‟s approach to counter-terrorism




7. Build a fairer and more equal society (through the Government Equalities Office)



Help create a fair and flexible labour market. Change culture and attitudes. Empower individuals and communities. Improve equality structures, frontline services and support; and help Government Departments and others to consider equality as a matter of course







The Home Office publishes progress against the plan on the 10 Downing Street website.[7]
History[edit]
On 27 March 1782, the Home Office was formed by renaming the existing Southern Department, with all existing staff transferring. On the same day, the Northern Department was renamed the Foreign Office.
To match the new names, there was a transferring of responsibilities between the two Departments of State. All domestic responsibilities were moved to the Home Office, and all foreign matters became the concern of the Foreign Office.
Most subsequently created domestic departments (excluding, for instance, those dealing with education) have been formed by splitting responsibilities away from the Home Office.
The initial responsibilities were:

Answering petitions and addresses sent to the King
Advising the King on

Royal grants
Warrants and commissions
The exercise of Royal Prerogative


Issuing instructions on behalf of the King to officers of the Crown, Lords Lieutenant and magistrates, mainly concerning law and order
Operation of the secret service within the UK
Protecting the public
Safeguarding the rights and liberties of individuals

Responsibilities were subsequently changed over the years that followed:[8]

1793 added: regulation of aliens
1794 removed: control of military forces (to Secretary of State for War)
1801 removed: colonial business (to Secretary of State for War and the Colonies)
1804 removed: Barbary State consuls (to Secretary of State for War and the Colonies)
1823 added: prisons
1829 added: police services
1836 added: registration of births, deaths and marriages in England and Wales
1844 added: naturalisation
1845 added: registration of Friendly Societies
1855 removed: yeomanries and militias (to War Office)
1858 added: local boards of health
1871 removed: local boards of health (to Local Government Board)
1871 removed: registration of births, deaths and marriages (to Local Government Board)
1872 removed: highways and turnpikes (to Local Government Board)
1875 added: control of explosives
1875 removed: registration of Friendly Societies (to Treasury)
1885 removed: Scotland (to Secretary for Scotland and the Scottish Office)
1886 removed: fishing (to Board of Trade)
1889 removed: Land Commissioners (to Board of Agriculture)
1900 removed: matters relating to burial grounds (to Local Government Board)
1905 removed: public housing (to Local Government Board)
1914 added: dangerous drugs
1919 removed: aircraft and air traffic (to Air Ministry)
1919 removed: use of human bodies in medical training (to Ministry of Health)
1919 removed: infant and child care (to Ministry of Health)
1919 removed: lunacy and mental health (to Ministry of Health)
1919 removed: health and safety (to Ministry of Health)
1920 added: firearms
1920 removed: Representation of Britain abroad in labour matters (to Ministry of Labour)
1920 removed: mining (to Mines Department)
1921 added: elections (from the Ministry of Health)
1922 removed: relations with Irish Free State (to Colonial Office)
1923 removed: Order of the British Empire (to Treasury)
1925 removed: registration of trade unions (to Ministry of Labour)
1931 removed: county councils (to Ministry of Health)
1933 added: poisons
1934 removed: metropolitan boroughs (to Ministry of Health)
1935 added: Civil Defence Service
1937 removed: road accident returns (to Ministry of Transport)
1938 added: fire services
1938 removed: Imperial Service Order and medal (to Treasury)
1940 removed: factory inspections (to Ministry of Labour)
1945 removed: workmen's compensation scheme (to Ministry of National Insurance)
1947 added: infant and child care (from Ministry of Health)
1947 removed: regulation of advertisements (to Ministry of Town and Country Planning)
1947 removed: burial fees (to Ministry of Health)
1947 removed: registration of building societies (to Treasury)
1948 removed: Broadmoor hospital (to Lunacy Board of Control)
1949 added: Civil Defence Corps
1950 removed: structural precautions for civil defence (to Ministry of Works)
1950 removed: minor judicial appointments (to Lord Chancellor)
1953 removed: slaughterhouses (to Ministry of Housing and Local Government)
1954 removed: markets (to Ministry of Housing and Local Government)
1956 removed: railway accidents (to Ministry of Transport and Civil Aviation)
1969 removed: reservoirs (to Ministry of Housing and Local Government)
1971 removed: child care in England (to Department of Health and Social Security)
1971 removed: child care in Wales (to Welsh Office)
1972 removed: Northern Ireland (to Northern Ireland Office)
1973 removed: adoption (to Department of Health and Social Security)
1992 removed: broadcasting and sport (to the new Department of National Heritage – later the Department for Culture, Media and Sport)
2007 removed: criminal justice, prisons & probation and legal affairs (to new Ministry of Justice)
2007 added: counter-terrorism strategy (from the Cabinet Office)
2016 added: fire and rescue services (from the Department for Communities and Local Government)

The Home Office retains a variety of functions that have not found a home elsewhere, and sit oddly with the main law-and-order focus of the department, such as regulation of British Summer Time.
Anonymous attack[edit]
On 7 April 2012, hacktivist group Anonymous temporarily took down the UK Home Office website. The group took responsibility for the attack, which was part of ongoing Anonymous activity in protest against the deportation of hackers as part of Operation TrialAtHome. One Anonymous source claimed in their tweet it was also launched in retaliation for "draconian surveillance proposals".[9]
Union action[edit]
On 18 July 2012, the Public and Commercial Services Union announced that thousands of Home Office employees would go on strike over jobs, pay and other issues.[10] However, the PCSU called off the strike before it was planned it claimed the department had, subsequent to the threat of actions, announced 1,100 new border jobs.[11]




The former Home Office building at 50 Queen Anne's Gate, London






Lunar House in Croydon, which holds the headquarters of UK Visas and Immigration


Location[edit]
From 1978 to 2004, the Home Office was located at 50 Queen Anne's Gate, a Brutalist office block in Westminster designed by Sir Basil Spence, close to St. James's Park tube station. Many functions, however, were devolved to offices in other parts of London and the country, notably the headquarters of the Immigration and Nationality Directorate in Croydon.
In 2005, the Home Office moved to a new main office designed by Sir Terry Farrell at 2 Marsham Street, Westminster, SW1P 4DF, on the site of the demolished Marsham Towers building of the Department of the Environment.[12]
For external shots of its fictional Home Office, the TV series Spooks uses an aerial shot of the Government Offices Great George Street instead, serving as stand-in to match the distinctly less modern appearance of the fictitious accommodation interiors the series uses.[citation needed]
Research[edit]
To meet the UK's 5-year science and technology strategy,[13] the Home Office sponsors research in police sciences including:

Biometrics – including face and voice recognition
Cell type analysis – to determine the origin of cells (e.g. hair, skin)
Chemistry – new techniques to recover latent fingerprints
DNA – identifying offender characteristics from DNA
Improved Profiling – of illicit drugs to help identify their source
Raman Spectroscopy – to provide more sensitive drugs and explosives detectors (e.g. roadside drug detection)
Terahertz imaging methods and technologies – e.g. image analysis and new cameras, to detect crime, enhance images and support anti-terrorism

Devolution[edit]
Most front-line law and order policy areas, such as policing and criminal justice, are devolved in Scotland and Northern Ireland but the following reserved and excepted matters are handled by Westminster.
Scotland[14]
Reserved matters:

The Misuse of Drugs Act 1971
Extradition legislation, but the Scottish Ministers (through the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service) have executive responsibility for all aspects of mutual legal assistance
Most aspects of Firearms legislation, but Scottish Ministers have some executive responsibilities for the licensing of firearms. Further powers are transferred under the Scotland Act 2012
Immigration and nationality
Scientific procedures on live animals

The Scottish Government Justice and Communities Directorates are responsible for devolved justice and home affairs policy.
Northern Ireland[15]
Excepted matters:

Extradition (as an international relations matter)
Immigration and nationality

The following matters were not transferred at the devolution of policing and justice on 12 April 2010 and remain reserved:[16]

Drug classification
Parades
Security of explosives
Serious Organised Crime Agency

The Home Office's main counterparts in Northern Ireland are:

Department of Justice (policing, public order and community safety)
Northern Ireland Office (national security in Northern Ireland)[17]

The Department of Justice is accountable to the Northern Ireland Executive whereas the Northern Ireland Office is a UK Government department.
Wales
Under the Welsh devolution settlement, specific policy areas are transferred to the National Assembly for Wales rather than reserved to Westminster.




This section needs expansion. You can help by adding to it. (May 2010)



See also[edit]

Home Office Large Major Enquiry System
John Gieve
Law enforcement in the United Kingdom
List of permanent under secretaries of state of the Home Office
Ministry of Home Security
UK Immigration Service

References[edit]



^ Budget 2011 (PDF). London: HM Treasury. 2011. p. 48. Archived from the original (PDF) on 1 May 2011. Retrieved 30 December 2011. 
^ Department of the Official Report (Hansard), House of Commons, Westminster (9 June 2008). "Hansard – Oral Questions to the Home Department – 9 June 2008". Publications.parliament.uk. Retrieved 2010-06-19. CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link)
^ "Departments, agencies and public bodies - GOV.UK". Gov.uk. Retrieved 2 November 2017. 
^ "Where have NPIA products and services moved to?". National Policing Improvement Agency. 2012. Archived from the original on 18 January 2013. Retrieved 10 February 2013. 
^ "Our ministers". GOV.UK. Home Office. Retrieved 17 June 2017. 
^ "Business Plan". Home Office. Home Office. Retrieved 12 April 2012. 
^ "Business Plan:Home Office". Home Office. 10 Downing Street. Retrieved 12 April 2012. 
^ "Changes to Home Office responsibilities". Casbah.ac.uk. Archived from the original on 9 July 2011. Retrieved 19 June 2010. 
^ "Anonymous takes down the UK Home Office website". Rt.com. Retrieved 2 November 2017. 
^ "Home Office staff vote to strike over jobs and pay". Bbc.co.uk. 2012-07-18. Retrieved 2013-07-28. 
^ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 24 March 2014. Retrieved 24 March 2014. 
^ New Home Office building Archived 26 September 2006 at the Wayback Machine.
^ "Police Science and Technology Strategy: 2004 – 2009" (PDF). Homeoffice.gov.uk. Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 February 2007. Retrieved 27 September 2010. 
^ "Scotland Act 1998, Schedule 5, Part I". Opsi.gov.uk. Retrieved 2010-06-19. 
^ "Northern Ireland Act 1998, Schedule 2". Opsi.gov.uk. 4 November 1950. Retrieved 2010-06-19. 
^ Northern Ireland Assembly Information Office. "''Policing and Justice'' motion, Northern ireland Assembly, 12 April 2010". Niassembly.gov.uk. Archived from the original on 16 December 2010. Retrieved 19 June 2010. 
^ "About the NIO". Nio.gov.uk. 12 April 2010. Archived from the original on 17 September 2010. Retrieved 19 June 2010. 



External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Home Office.



Official website
Records created or inherited by the Home Office, Ministry of Home Security, and related bodies—gives a history of responsibilities of the Home Office, including which functions were merged into or transferred away from the Home Office







v
t
e


Home Office




Headquarters: 2 Marsham Street
Home Secretary: Amber Rudd



Ministers



Immigration
Policing and the Fire Service
Security








Divisions



Border Force
HM Passport Office
Immigration Enforcement
National DNA Database
UK Visas and Immigration
Office for Security and Counter-Terrorism





Non-departmental
public bodies



Advisory Council on the Misuse of Drugs
Animals in Science Committee
Disclosure and Barring Service
Gangmasters Licensing Authority
Independent Police Complaints Commission
Investigatory Powers Tribunal
National DNA Database Ethics Group
Office of the Immigration Services Commissioner
Security Industry Authority












v
t
e


Departments of Her Majesty's Government



Ministerial



Attorney General's Office
Cabinet Office
Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy
Department for Communities and Local Government
Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport
Department for Education
Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs
Department for Exiting the European Union
Department for International Development
Department for International Trade
Department for Transport
Department for Work and Pensions
Department of Health
Foreign and Commonwealth Office
Her Majesty's Treasury
Home Office
Ministry of Defence
Ministry of Justice
Northern Ireland Office
Office of the Advocate General for Scotland
Office of the Leader of the House of Commons
Office of the Leader of the House of Lords
Scotland Office
UK Export Finance
Wales Office










Non-ministerial



Charity Commission for England and Wales
Competition and Markets Authority
Crown Prosecution Service
Food Standards Agency
Forestry Commission
Government Actuary's Department
Government Legal Department
Her Majesty's Land Registry
Her Majesty's Revenue and Customs
National Crime Agency
National Savings and Investments
Office for Standards in Education, Children's Services and Skills
Office of Gas and Electricity Markets
Office of Qualifications and Examinations Regulation
Office of Rail and Road
Ordnance Survey
Serious Fraud Office
Supreme Court of the United Kingdom
The National Archives
UK Statistics Authority
UK Trade & Investment
Water Services Regulation Authority








 Category
 Commons











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Home_Office&oldid=813892169"					Categories: Home Office (United Kingdom)Ministerial departments of the United Kingdom GovernmentEnglish lawPublic safety ministriesLaw enforcement in England and WalesInternal affairs ministriesMinistries established in 17821782 establishments in Great BritainHidden categories: CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors listWebarchive template wayback linksUse dmy dates from March 2013Articles containing Welsh-language textAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from November 2015Articles to be expanded from May 2010All articles to be expandedArticles using small message boxes