This article is about lodging establishments. For shared-room lodging, see Hostel. For hotels designed for motorists, see Motel. For other uses, see Hotel (disambiguation).
"Hotel room" redirects here. For the 1993 HBO television series, see Hotel Room.




A typical hotel room with a bed, desk and television


A hotel is an establishment that provides paid lodging on a short-term basis. Facilities provided may range from a modest-quality mattress in a small room to large suites with bigger, higher-quality beds, a dresser, a refrigerator and other kitchen facilities, upholstered chairs, a flatscreen television and en-suite bathrooms. Small, lower-priced hotels may offer only the most basic guest services and facilities. Larger, higher-priced hotels may provide additional guest facilities such as a swimming pool, business centre (with computers, printers and other office equipment), childcare, conference and event facilities, tennis or basketball courts, gymnasium, restaurants, day spa and social function services. Hotel rooms are usually numbered (or named in some smaller hotels and B&Bs) to allow guests to identify their room. Some boutique, high-end hotels have custom decorated rooms. Some hotels offer meals as part of a room and board arrangement. In the United Kingdom, a hotel is required by law to serve food and drinks to all guests within certain stated hours. In Japan, capsule hotels provide a tiny room suitable only for sleeping and shared bathroom facilities.




The Peninsula Paris hotel


The precursor to the modern hotel was the inn of medieval Europe. For a period of about 200 years from the mid-17th century, coaching inns served as a place for lodging for coach travelers. Inns began to cater to richer clients in the mid-18th century. One of the first hotels in a modern sense was opened in Exeter in 1768. Hotels proliferated throughout Western Europe and North America in the early 19th century, and luxury hotels began to spring up in the later part of the 19th century.
Hotel operations vary in size, function, and cost. Most hotels and major hospitality companies have set industry standards to classify hotel types. An upscale full-service hotel facility offers luxury amenities, full service accommodations, an on-site restaurant, and the highest level of personalized service, such as a concierge, room service and clothes pressing staff. Full service hotels often contain upscale full-service facilities with a large number of full service accommodations, an on-site full service restaurant, and a variety of on-site amenities. Boutique hotels are smaller independent, non-branded hotels that often contain upscale facilities. Small to medium-sized hotel establishments offer a limited amount of on-site amenities. Economy hotels are small to medium-sized hotel establishments that offer basic accommodations with little to no services. Extended stay hotels are small to medium-sized hotels that offer longer-term full service accommodations compared to a traditional hotel.
Timeshare and destination clubs are a form of property ownership involving ownership of an individual unit of accommodation for seasonal usage. A motel is a small-sized low-rise lodging with direct access to individual rooms from the car park. Boutique hotels are typically hotels with a unique environment or intimate setting. A number of hotels have entered the public consciousness through popular culture, such as the Ritz Hotel in London. Some hotels are built specifically as a destination in itself, for example at casinos and holiday resorts.
Most hotel establishments are run by a General Manager who serves as the head executive (often referred to as the "Hotel Manager"), department heads who oversee various departments within a hotel (e.g., food service), middle managers, administrative staff, and line-level supervisors. The organizational chart and volume of job positions and hierarchy varies by hotel size, function and class, and is often determined by hotel ownership and managing companies.



Contents


1 Etymology
2 History
3 International scale
4 Types

4.1 Luxury
4.2 Boutique and lifestyle hotels
4.3 Full-service
4.4 Focused or select service
4.5 Economy and limited service
4.6 Extended stay
4.7 Timeshare and destination clubs
4.8 Motel
4.9 Microstay


5 Management
6 Unique and specialty hotels

6.1 Historic inns and boutique hotels
6.2 Resort hotels
6.3 Other speciality hotels
6.4 Bunker hotels
6.5 Cave hotels
6.6 Cliff hotels
6.7 Capsule hotels
6.8 Day room hotels
6.9 Garden hotels
6.10 Ice, snow and igloo hotels
6.11 Love hotels
6.12 Referral hotel
6.13 Railway hotels
6.14 Straw bale hotels
6.15 Transit hotels
6.16 Treehouse hotels
6.17 Underwater hotels
6.18 Overwater hotels


7 Records

7.1 Largest
7.2 Oldest
7.3 Highest
7.4 Most expensive purchase


8 Long term residence
9 See also

9.1 Industry and careers
9.2 Human habitation types


10 References
11 Further reading



Etymology[edit]
The word hotel is derived from the French hôtel (coming from the same origin as hospital), which referred to a French version of a building seeing frequent visitors, and providing care, rather than a place offering accommodation. In contemporary French usage, hôtel now has the same meaning as the English term, and hôtel particulier is used for the old meaning, as well as "hôtel" in some place names such as Hôtel-Dieu (in Paris), which has been a hospital since the Middle Ages. The French spelling, with the circumflex, was also used in English, but is now rare. The circumflex replaces the 's' found in the earlier hostel spelling, which over time took on a new, but closely related meaning. Grammatically, hotels usually take the definite article – hence "The Astoria Hotel" or simply "The Astoria."
History[edit]




The Tabard Inn, Southwark, London


Facilities offering hospitality to travellers have been a feature of the earliest civilizations. In Greco-Roman culture hospitals for recuperation and rest were built at thermal baths. During the Middle Ages various religious orders at monasteries and abbeys would offer accommodation for travellers on the road.
The precursor to the modern hotel was the inn of medieval Europe, possibly dating back to the rule of Ancient Rome. These would provide for the needs of travelers, including food and lodging, stabling and fodder for the traveler's horse(s) and fresh horses for the mail coach. Famous London examples of inns include the George and the Tabard. A typical layout of an inn had an inner court with bedrooms on the two sides, with the kitchen and parlour at the front and the stables at the back.[1]
For a period of about 200 years from the mid-17th century, coaching inns served as a place for lodging for coach travelers (in other words, a roadhouse). Coaching inns stabled teams of horses for stagecoaches and mail coaches and replaced tired teams with fresh teams. Traditionally they were seven miles apart but this depended very much on the terrain.




Tremont House in Boston, United States, a luxury hotel, the first to provide indoor plumbing


Some English towns had as many as ten such inns and rivalry between them was intense, not only for the income from the stagecoach operators but for the revenue for food and drink supplied to the wealthy passengers. By the end of the century, coaching inns were being run more professionally, with a regular timetable being followed and fixed menus for food.[2]
Inns began to cater for richer clients in the mid-18th century, and consequently grew in grandeur and the level of service provided. One of the first hotels in a modern sense was opened in Exeter in 1768, although the idea only really caught on in the early 19th century. In 1812 Mivart's Hotel opened its doors in London, later changing its name to Claridge's.[3]
Hotels proliferated throughout Western Europe and North America in the 19th century, and luxury hotels, including the Savoy Hotel in the United Kingdom and the Ritz chain of hotels in London and Paris and Tremont House and Astor House in the United States,[4] began to spring up in the later part of the century, catering to an extremely wealthy clientele.
International scale[edit]
Hotels cater to travelers from many countries and languages, since no one country dominates the travel industry.


Country
Hotel rooms in 2011-12[5][6]
Average rooms per hotel[6]
Overnight tourists traveling from each country, annual[5][6]


United States
4,900,000
93
58,000,000


China
1,500,000
132
83,000,000


Japan
1,370,000
27
18,000,000


Italy
1,100,000
32
29,000,000


Germany
950,000
27
72,000,000


Spain
900,000
47
12,000,000


Mexico
660,000
37
16,000,000


United Kingdom
650,000
17
57,000,000


France
620,000
36
26,000,000


Thailand
530,000
NA
6,000,000


Indonesia
410,000
25
7,000,000


Greece
400,000
41
5,000,000


Brazil
400,000
40
8,000,000


Turkey
330,000
117
16,000,000


Austria
290,000
22
11,000,000


Russia
260,000
33
44,000,000


Global total
21,000,000
41
876,000,000


Types[edit]




Services related to the hotel, Radisson Blu hotel in Szczecin, Poland


Hotel operations vary in size, function, and cost. Most hotels and major hospitality companies that operate hotels have set widely accepted industry standards to classify hotel types. General categories include the following:
Luxury[edit]
A luxury hotel offers high quality amenities, full service accommodations, on-site full-service restaurants, and the highest level of personalized and professional service. Luxury hotels are normally classified with at least a Four Diamond or Five Diamond rating by American Automobile Association or a Four or Five Star hotel rating depending on the country and local classification standards. Examples include: InterContinental, Conrad, Mandarin Oriental, Four Seasons, and The Ritz-Carlton.
Boutique and lifestyle hotels[edit]
Boutique hotels are smaller independent non-branded hotels that often contain upscale facilities of varying size in unique or intimate settings with full service accommodations. These hotels are generally 100 rooms or fewer.[7] Lifestyle hotels are branded properties that appeal to a guest with specific lifestyle or personal image. They are typically full-service and sometimes classified as luxury. A key characteristic of boutique and lifestyle hotels is their focus on providing a unique guest experience as opposed to simply providing lodging. Examples include W Hotels, Andaz and Kimpton Hotels.
Full-service[edit]
Full service hotels often provide a wide array of guest services and on-site facilities. Commonly found amenities may include: on-site food and beverage (room service and restaurants), meeting and conference services and facilities, fitness center, and business center. Full-service hotels range in quality from mid-scale to luxury. This classification is based upon the quality of facilities and amenities offered by the hotel. [8] Examples include: Holiday Inn, Sheraton, Hilton, Marriott, and Hyatt Regency brands.
Focused or select service[edit]
Small to medium-sized hotel establishments that offer a limited number of on-site amenities that only cater and market to a specific demographic of travelers, such as the single business traveler. Most focused or select service hotels may still offer full service accommodations but may lack leisure amenities such as an on-site restaurant or a swimming pool. Examples include Hyatt Place, Courtyard by Marriott and Hilton Garden Inn.
Economy and limited service[edit]
Small to medium-sized hotel establishments that offer a very limited amount of on-site amenities and often only offer basic accommodations with little to no services, these facilities normally only cater and market to a specific demographic of travelers, such as the budget-minded traveler seeking a "no frills" accommodation. Limited service hotels often lack an on-site restaurant but in return may offer a limited complimentary food and beverage amenity such as on-site continental breakfast service. Examples include Ibis Budget, Hampton Inn, Aloft, Holiday Inn Express, Fairfield Inn, Four Points by Sheraton, and Days Inn.
Extended stay[edit]
Extended stay hotels are small to medium-sized hotels that offer longer term full service accommodations compared to a traditional hotel. Extended stay hotels may offer non-traditional pricing methods such as a weekly rate that caters towards travelers in need of short-term accommodations for an extended period of time. Similar to limited and select service hotels, on-site amenities are normally limited and most extended stay hotels lack an on-site restaurant. Examples include Staybridge Suites, Candlewood Suites, Homewood Suites by Hilton, Home2 Suites by Hilton, Residence Inn by Marriott, Element, and Extended Stay America.
Timeshare and destination clubs[edit]
Timeshare and Destination clubs are a form of property ownership also referred to as a vacation ownership involving the purchase and ownership of an individual unit of accommodation for seasonal usage during a specified period of time. Timeshare resorts often offer amenities similar that of a Full service hotel with on-site restaurant(s), swimming pools, recreation grounds, and other leisure-oriented amenities. Destination clubs on the other hand may offer more exclusive private accommodations such as private houses in a neighborhood-style setting. Examples of timeshare brands include Hilton Grand Vacations, Marriott Vacation Club International, Westgate Resorts, Disney Vacation Club, and Holiday Inn Club Vacations.
Motel[edit]
A motel, an abbreviation for "motor hotel", is a small-sized low-rise lodging establishment similar to a limited service, lower-cost hotel, but typically with direct access to individual rooms from the car park. Motels were built to serve road travellers, including travellers on road trip vacations and workers who drive for their job (travelling salespeople, truck drivers, etc.). Common during the 1950s and 1960s, motels were often located adjacent to a major highway, where they were built on inexpensive land at the edge of towns or along stretches of freeway.
New motel construction is rare in the 2000s as hotel chains have been building economy-priced, limited service franchised properties at freeway exits which compete for largely the same clientele, largely saturating the market by the 1990s. Motels are still useful in less populated areas for driving travelers, but the more populated an area becomes, the more hotels move in to meet the demand for accommodation. Many of the motels which remain in operation have joined national franchise chains, often rebranding themselves as hotels, inns or lodges.
Microstay[edit]
Hotels may offer rooms for microstays[9], a type of booking for less than 24 hours where the customer chooses the check in time and the length of the stay. This allows the hotel increased revenue by reselling the same room several times a day.[10]
Management[edit]
Main article: Hotel management
Hotel management is a globally accepted professional career field and academic field of study. Degree programs such as hospitality management studies, a business degree, and/or certification programs formally prepare hotel managers for industry practice.
Most hotel establishments consist of a General Manager who serves as the head executive (often referred to as the "Hotel Manager"), department heads who oversee various departments within a hotel, middle managers, administrative staff, and line-level supervisors. The organizational chart and volume of job positions and hierarchy varies by hotel size, function, and is often determined by hotel ownership and managing companies.
Unique and specialty hotels[edit]
 Historic inns and boutique hotels[edit]




Hotel Astoria and statue of Tsar Nicholas I in Saint Petersburg, Russia


Boutique hotels are typically hotels with a unique environment or intimate setting. Some hotels have gained their renown through tradition, by hosting significant events or persons, such as Schloss Cecilienhof in Potsdam, Germany, which derives its fame from the Potsdam Conference of the World War II allies Winston Churchill, Harry Truman and Joseph Stalin in 1945.[11] The Taj Mahal Palace & Tower in Mumbai is one of India's most famous and historic hotels because of its association with the Indian independence movement. Some establishments have given name to a particular meal or beverage, as is the case with the Waldorf Astoria in New York City, United States where the Waldorf Salad was first created or the Hotel Sacher in Vienna, Austria, home of the Sachertorte. Others have achieved fame by association with dishes or cocktails created on their premises, such as the Hotel de Paris where the crêpe Suzette was invented or the Raffles Hotel in Singapore, where the Singapore Sling cocktail was devised.[12]




Hôtel Ritz Paris in France


A number of hotels have entered the public consciousness through popular culture, such as the Ritz Hotel in London, through its association with Irving Berlin's song, 'Puttin' on the Ritz'. The Algonquin Hotel in New York City is famed as the meeting place of the literary group, the Algonquin Round Table, and Hotel Chelsea, also in New York City, has been the subject of a number of songs and the scene of the stabbing of Nancy Spungen (allegedly by her boyfriend Sid Vicious).
Resort hotels[edit]




Wynn Las Vegas, United States


Some hotels are built specifically as a destination in itself to create a captive trade, example at casinos, amusement parks and holiday resorts. Though of course hotels have always been built in popular destinations, the defining characteristic of a resort hotel is that it exists purely to serve another attraction, the two having the same owners.
On the Las Vegas Strip there is a tradition of one-upmanship with luxurious and extravagant hotels in a concentrated area. This trend now has extended to other resorts worldwide, but the concentration in Las Vegas is still the world's highest: nineteen of the world's twenty-five largest hotels by room count are on the Strip, with a total of over 67,000 rooms.[13]
In Europe Center Parcs might be considered a chain of resort hotels, since the sites are largely man-made (though set in natural surroundings such as country parks) with captive trade, whereas holiday camps such as Butlins and Pontin's are probably not considered as resort hotels, since they are set at traditional holiday destinations which existed before the camps.
Other speciality hotels[edit]




RMS Queen Mary, Long Beach, California, United States



The Burj al-Arab hotel in Dubai, United Arab Emirates, built on an artificial island, is structured in the shape of a boat's sail.
The Library Hotel in New York City, is unique in that each of its ten floors is assigned one category from the Dewey Decimal System.
The Jailhotel Löwengraben in Lucerne, Switzerland is a converted prison now used as a hotel.
The Luxor, a hotel and casino on the Las Vegas Strip in Paradise, Nevada, United States is unusual due to its pyramidal structure.
The Liberty Hotel in Boston used to be the Charles Street Jail.
Hotel Kakslauttanen in Finland, a collection of glass igloos in Lapland that allow you to watch the Northern Lights[14]
Built in Scotland and completed in 1936, The former ocean liner RMS Queen Mary in Long Beach, California, United States uses its first-class staterooms as a hotel, after retiring in 1967 from Transatlantic service.
The Wigwam Motels used patented novelty architecture in which each motel room was a free-standing concrete wigwam or teepee.
Various Caboose Motel or Red Caboose Inn properties are built from decommissioned rail cars.
Throughout the world there are several hotels built from converted airliners.

Bunker hotels[edit]
The Null Stern Hotel in Teufen, Appenzellerland, Switzerland and the Concrete Mushrooms in Albania[15] are former nuclear bunkers transformed into hotels.
Cave hotels[edit]
The Cuevas Pedro Antonio de Alarcón (named after the author) in Guadix, Spain, as well as several hotels in Cappadocia, Turkey, are notable for being built into natural cave formations, some with rooms underground. The Desert Cave Hotel in Coober Pedy, South Australia is built into the remains of an opal mine.
Cliff hotels[edit]




On top of the cliff, the Riosol Hotel in Mogán


Located on the coast but high above sea level, these hotels offer unobstructed panoramic views and a great sense of privacy without the feeling of total isolation. Some examples from around the globe are the Riosol Hotel in Gran Canaria, Caruso Belvedere Hotel in Amalfi Coast (Italy), Aman Resorts Amankila in Bali, Birkenhead House in Hermanus (South Africa), The Caves in Jamaica and Caesar Augustus in Capri.[16]
Capsule hotels[edit]




Interior of a capsule hotel in Osaka, Japan


Capsule hotels are a type of economical hotel first introduced in Japan, where people sleep in stacks of rectangular containers.
Day room hotels[edit]
Some hotels fill daytime occupancy with day rooms, for example, Rodeway Inn and Suites near Port Everglades in Fort Lauderdale, Florida.[17] Day rooms are booked in a block of hours typically between 8 am and 5 pm,[18] before the typical night shift. These are similar to transit hotels in that they appeal to travelers, however, unlike transit hotels, they do not eliminate the need to go through Customs.
Garden hotels[edit]
Garden hotels, famous for their gardens before they became hotels, include Gravetye Manor, the home of garden designer William Robinson, and Cliveden, designed by Charles Barry with a rose garden by Geoffrey Jellicoe.
Ice, snow and igloo hotels[edit]
Main article: Ice hotel




Ice Hotel in Jukkasjärvi, Sweden


The Ice Hotel in Jukkasjärvi, Sweden, was the first ice hotel in the world; first built in 1990, it is built each winter and melts every spring. Other ice hotels include the Igloo Village in Kakslauttanen, Finland, and the Hotel de Glace in Duschenay, Canada. They can also be included within larger ice complexes; for example, the Mammut Snow Hotel in Finland is located within the walls of the Kemi snow castle; and the Lainio Snow Hotel is part of a snow village near Ylläs, Finland.
Love hotels[edit]
Main article: Love hotel
A love hotel (also 'love motel', especially in Taiwan) is a type of short-stay hotel found around the world, operated primarily for the purpose of allowing guests privacy for sexual activities, typically for one to three hours, but with overnight as an option. Styles of premises vary from extremely low-end to extravagantly appointed. In Japan, love hotels have a history of over 400 years.[19]
Referral hotel[edit]
Main article: Referral chain
A referral hotel is a hotel chain that offers branding to independently-operated hotels; the chain itself is founded by or owned by the member hotels as a group. Many former referral chains have been converted to franchises; the largest surviving member-owned chain is Best Western.
Railway hotels[edit]
Further information: Category:Railway hotels



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Railway hotels.


The first recorded purpose-built railway hotel was the Great Western Hotel, which opened adjacent to Reading railway station in 1844, shortly after the Great Western Railway opened its line from London. The building still exists, and although it has been used for other purposes over the years, it is now again a hotel and a member of the Malmaison hotel chain.[20][21][22]
Frequently, expanding railway companies built grand hotels at their termini, such as the Midland Hotel, Manchester next to the former Manchester Central Station, and in London the ones above St Pancras railway station and Charing Cross railway station. London also has the Chiltern Court Hotel above Baker Street tube station, there are also Canada's grand railway hotels. They are or were mostly, but not exclusively, used by those traveling by rail.
Straw bale hotels[edit]
The Maya Guesthouse in Nax Mont-Noble in the Swiss Alps, is the first hotel in Europe built entirely with straw bales. Due to the insulation values of the walls it needs no conventional heating or air conditioning system, although the Maya Guesthouse is built at an altitude of 1,300 metres (4,300 ft) in the Alps.[23]
Transit hotels[edit]
Main article: Transit Hotel
Transit hotels are short stay hotels typically used at international airports where passengers can stay while waiting to change airplanes. The hotels are typically on the airside and do not require a visa for a stay or re-admission through security checkpoints.
Treehouse hotels[edit]
Some hotels are built with living trees as structural elements, for example the Treehotel near Piteå, Sweden, the Costa Rica Tree House in the Gandoca-Manzanillo Wildlife Refuge, Costa Rica; the Treetops Hotel in Aberdare National Park, Kenya; the Ariau Towers near Manaus, Brazil, on the Rio Negro in the Amazon; and Bayram's Tree Houses in Olympos, Turkey.
Underwater hotels[edit]




Ithaa, the first undersea restaurant at the Conrad Maldives Rangali Island resort


Some hotels have accommodation underwater, such as Utter Inn in Lake Mälaren, Sweden. Hydropolis, project in Dubai, would have had suites on the bottom of the Persian Gulf, and Jules' Undersea Lodge in Key Largo, Florida requires scuba diving to access its rooms.
Overwater hotels[edit]




An overwater bungalow on the island resort in the Maldives


A resort island is an island or an archipelago that contains resorts, hotels, overwater bungalows, restaurants, tourist attractions and its amenities. Maldives has the most overwater bungalows resorts.
Records[edit]
Largest[edit]
See also: List of largest hotels in the world
In 2006, Guinness World Records listed the First World Hotel in Genting Highlands, Malaysia, as the world's largest hotel with a total of 6,118 rooms.[24] The Izmailovo Hotel in Moscow has the most beds, with 7,500, followed by The Venetian and The Palazzo complex in Las Vegas (7,117 rooms) and MGM Grand Las Vegas complex (6,852 rooms).[25]
Oldest[edit]
According to the Guinness Book of World Records, the oldest hotel in operation is the Nisiyama Onsen Keiunkan in Yamanashi, Japan. The hotel, first opened in AD 707 has been operated by the same family for forty-six generations. The title was held until 2011 by the Hoshi Ryokan, in the Awazu Onsen area of Komatsu, Japan, which opened in the year 718, as the history of the Nisiyama Onsen Keiunkan was virtually unknown.[26]
Highest[edit]
The Ritz-Carlton, Hong Kong claims to be the world's highest hotel.[27] It is located on the top floors of the International Commerce Centre in Hong Kong, at 484 metres (1,588 ft) above ground level.
Most expensive purchase[edit]
In October 2014, the Anbang Insurance Group, based in China, purchased the Waldorf Astoria New York in Manhattan for US$1.95 billion, making it the world's most expensive hotel ever sold.[28]




The Waldorf Astoria New York, the most expensive hotel ever sold, cost US$1.95 billion in 2014[28]


Long term residence[edit]
A number of public figures have notably chosen to take up semi-permanent or permanent residence in hotels.

Fashion designer Coco Chanel lived in the Hôtel Ritz, Paris, on and off for more than 30 years.
Inventor Nikola Tesla lived the last ten years of his life at the New Yorker Hotel until he died in his room in 1943.
Larry Fine (of The Three Stooges) and his family lived in hotels, due to his extravagant spending habits and his wife's dislike for housekeeping. They first lived in the President Hotel in Atlantic City, New Jersey, where his daughter Phyllis was raised, then the Knickerbocker Hotel in Hollywood. Not until the late 1940s did Larry buy a home in the Los Feliz area of Los Angeles.
The Waldorf-Astoria Hotel and its affiliated Waldorf Towers has been the home of many famous persons over the years including former President Herbert Hoover who lived there from the end of his presidency in 1933 until his death in 1964. General Douglas MacArthur lived his last 14 years in the penthouse of the Waldorf Towers. And the composer Cole Porter also spent the last 25 years of his life in an apartment at the Waldorf Towers.
Billionaire Howard Hughes lived in hotels during the last ten years of his life (1966–76), primarily in Las Vegas, as well as Acapulco, Beverly Hills, Boston, Freeport, London, Managua, Nassau, Vancouver, and others.
Vladimir Nabokov and his wife Vera lived in the Montreux Palace Hotel in Montreux, Switzerland (1961-his death in 1977).
Actor Richard Harris lived at the Savoy Hotel while in London. Hotel archivist Susan Scott recounts an anecdote that, when he was being taken out of the building on a stretcher shortly before his death in 2002, he raised his hand and told the diners "it was the food."[29]
Egyptian actor Ahmed Zaki lived his last 15 years in Ramses Hilton Hotel – Cairo.
British entrepreneur Jack Lyons lived in the Hotel Mirador Kempinski in Switzerland for several years until his death in 2008.
American actress Elaine Stritch lived in the Savoy Hotel in London for over a decade.[30]
Uruguayan-Argentinian tango composer Horacio Ferrer lived almost 40 years, from 1976 until his death in 2014, in an apartment inside the Alvear Palace Hotel, in Buenos Aires, one of the most exclusive hotels in the city.[31]

See also[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Hotel.





Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Hotels.





Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Grand old hotels.



List of hotels
Lists of hotels
List of chained-brand hotels
List of defunct hotel chains
Casino hotel
List of casino hotels
Niche tourism markets

Industry and careers[edit]


Bellhop
Concierge
Front desk clerk, a type of clerk
General manager
GOPPAR, RevPAR, TRevPAR – hotel profitability equations.
Hospitality industry
Hotel rating
Innkeeper
Night auditor
Property caretaker
Tourism


Human habitation types[edit]


Apartment hotel
Boutique hotel
Caravanserai
Cruise ship
Dharamshala
Dak bungalow
Eco hotel
Guest house
Glamping
Homestay
Hospitality service
Hostal
Human habitats
Inn
Serviced apartment
Vacation rental
Pop-up hotel


References[edit]


^ "Hotels: A Brief History". Retrieved 2012-12-17. 
^ Coaching Era, The: Stage and Mail Coach Travel in and Around Bath, Bristol and Somerset, Roy Gallop, Fiducia (2003), ISBN 1-85026-019-2
^ "Researching the history of pubs, inns and hotels". Retrieved 2012-12-17. 
^ "Nineteenth Century Hotels In The United States". Retrieved 2012-12-17. 
^ a b "Tourism Factbook". UN World Tourism Organization. 2014. pp. 3.2, 4.13, 4.14. Retrieved 22 April 2014. 
^ a b c "Workers and Guests Have Different Language Needs in a Hotel". Lang1234.com. 2013. Retrieved 22 April 2014. 
^ Balekjian, Cristina (September 2011). "Boutique Hotels Segment" (PDF). HVS. 
^ "Full-Service Vs. Limited-Service Hotels". Travel Tips - USA Today. Retrieved 2015-10-23. 
^ "By-the-Hour Microstays Add to Big Hotels' Bottom Line". Retrieved 5 September 2017. 
^ "Hoteliers urged to tap into microstays market to stay ahead". www.bighospitality.co.uk. Retrieved 5 September 2017. 
^ "Schloss Cecilienhof - Cecilienhof Palace". Landeshauptstadt Potsdam. Retrieved 2015-10-23. 
^ Campbell, Colin (12 December 1982). "Singapore Journal; Back to Somerset Maugham and Life's Seamy Side". The New York Times. Singapore. 
^ "The 25 Largest Hotels in the World". Retrieved 18 April 2009. 
^ "101 Most Luxurious Hotels and Retreats in the World". Retrieved 2014-04-16. 
^ Doug McKinlay (2009-09-13). "Switzerland's Null Stern Hotel: the nuclear option | Travel | The Observer". London: Guardian. Retrieved 2011-01-02. 
^ 7 breathtaking clifftop hotels
^ Owen, Chris (5 November 2015). "Pre-Cruise Hotels". Chris Cruises. Retrieved 3 December 2016. 
^ Booth, Darren (18 December 2012). "Long Layover? Many Airport Hotels Offer Day-Room Rates". CNBC. Retrieved 3 December 2016. 
^ Matthew Alexander; Chien Chuan Chen; Andrew MacLaren; Kevin D. O'Gorman (2010-03-09). "Love motels: oriental phenomenon or emergent sector?". International Journal of Contemporary Hospitality Management. 22 (2): 194–208. doi:10.1108/09596111011018188. ISSN 0959-6119. 
^ Phillips, Daphne (1980). The Story of Reading. Countryside Books. p. 115. ISBN 0-905392-07-8. 
^ "List Entry: Great Western House". English Heritage. Retrieved 24 February 2017. 
^ "Reading". Malmaison. Retrieved 24 February 2017. 
^ "About the first straw bale hotel in Europe". Pr-inside.com. 1 August 2011. Archived from the original on 8 July 2012. Retrieved 29 May 2012. 
^ Genting's First World Recognized As World's Largest Hotel, Bernama.com
^ Esomba, Steve. "1.4". GLOBAL TOURISM & THE ENVIRONMENT: THE NECESSITIES FOR CLEAN ENERGY AND CLEAN. p. 41. ISBN 9781471749681. Retrieved 2015-10-22. 
^ Hoshi Ryokan website, accessed 22 June 2008 Archived 29 May 2008 at the Wayback Machine.. Ho-shi.co.jp. Retrieved on 2011-06-12.
^ "The Ritz-Carlton Hong Kong: The world's highest hotel opens". cnngo.com. 29 March 2011. 
^ a b Robert Frank (6 October 2014). "Waldorf becomes most expensive hotel ever sold: $1.95 billion". CNBC. Retrieved 6 October 2014. 
^ ''Home Suite Home''. BBC News (2007-09-12). Retrieved on 2011-06-12.
^ "Elaine Stritch". Tcm.com. Retrieved 2012-05-29. 
^ "Horacio Ferrer home". La Nación newspaper (in spanish). 2014-12-21. 


Further reading[edit]


Lundberg, Donald E. (1994). The Hotel and Restaurant Business (6th ed.). New York: John Wiley & Sons. ISBN 0471285080. 
"A short history of hotels: Be my guest". The Economist. 21 December 2013. Retrieved 26 March 2014. 








v
t
e


Hotel-related articles



General



Apartment hotel
Casino hotel
Hotel design
Hotel detective
Hotel manager
Hotel suite
Hotel television systems
Hotel thief
Hotel rating
Room service
Transit hotel





List articles



List of hotels
Casino hotels
Chained-brand hotels
Defunct hotel chains
Largest hotels in the world
List of motels
Lists of hotels





Related



Ice hotel
Inn
Motel
Pub












v
t
e


Hotel chains



Accor



Adagio
Fairmont Hotels
Formule 1/F1/Formula 1
Ibis

Budget
Styles


Mama Shelter
Mercure / Grand Mercure
MGallery
Novotel

Suite Novotel


Pullman
Raffles
The Sebel
Sofitel
Swissotel
Thalassa sea & spa





BTG Homeinns



Fairyland Hotel
Home Inn
Jianguo
Jinglun
Motel 168
Nanyuan
Yitel





Carlson Rezidor



Country Inns & Suites
Park Inn
Park Plaza
Quorvus Collection
Radisson
Radisson Blu
Radisson Red





Choice Hotels



Ascend Collection
Cambria Hotels & Suites
Clarion
Comfort Inn
Comfort Suites
Econo Lodge
MainStay Suites
Quality Inn
Rodeway Inn
Sleep Inn
Suburban Extended Stay Hotel





Hilton



Canopy by Hilton
Conrad Hotels
Curio collection
DoubleTree
Embassy Suites
Hampton by Hilton
Hilton Garden Inn
Hilton Grand Vacations
Hilton Hotels & Resorts
Home2 Suites
Homewood Suites
Tru by Hilton
Waldorf Astoria





Hospitality International



Downtowner Inns
Master Host Inns
Passport Inns
Red Carpet Inn
Scottish Inns





Hyatt



Andaz
Grand Hyatt
Hyatt
Hyatt Centric
Hyatt House
Hyatt Place
Hyatt Regency
Hyatt Zilara / Hyatt Ziva
Park Hyatt





InterContinental



Candlewood Suites
Crowne Plaza
Even Hotels
Holiday Inn
Holiday Inn Express
Hotel Indigo
InterContinental
Kimpton Hotels
Staybridge Suites





Jinjiang



7 Days Inn
Bestay
Goldmet Inn
Jin Jiang Hotels
Jinjiang Inn
Louvre Hotels
Metropolo
Vienna





Marriott



AC Hotels
Aloft Hotels
Autograph Collection
Bulgari Hotels & Resorts
Courtyard
Delta Hotels
Design Hotels
EDITION Hotels
Element by Westin
ExecuStay
Fairfield Inn
Four Points
Gaylord Hotels
Grand Residences
JW Marriott
Le Méridien
The Luxury Collection
Marriott Conference Centers
Marriott Executive Apartments
Marriott Golf
Marriott Hotels & Resorts
Marriott Vacation Club
Moxy Hotels
Protea Hotels
Renaissance Hotels
Residence Inn
Ritz-Carlton
Ritz-Carlton Destination Club
St. Regis
Sheraton
SpringHill Suites
TownePlace Suites
Tribute Portfolio
W Hotels
Westin





Okura Nikko



Hotel JAL
Nikko
Okura





Pan Pacific



Pan Pacific
Parkroyal





Red Lion



3 Palms Hotels & Resorts
America's Best Inns
Americas Best Value Inns
Canadas Best Value Inns
Country Hearth Inns & Suites
GuestHouse
Hotel RL
Jameson Inn
Lexington Hotels & Inns
Red Lion Hotels
Red Lion Inn & Suites
Settle Inn





Shangri-La Hotels



Hotel Jen
Kerry Hotels
Shangri-La
Traders Hotels





Taj Hotels



Gateway
Ginger
Taj
Vivanta





Two Roads



Alila Hotels & Resorts
Destination Hotels
Joie de Vivre Hotels
Thompson Hotels
tommie





Wyndham



AmericInn
Baymont Inn & Suites
Days Inn
Dolce Hotels and Resorts
Hawthorn Suites
Howard Johnson
Knights Inn
Microtel Inn And Suites
Ramada
Super 8
Travelodge
TRYP by Wyndham
Wingate by Wyndham
Wyndham Grand
Wyndham Hotels & Resorts





Other



Ace
Aerowisata
Aman Resorts
Apex
Aqua
Archipelago
Best Western
Boscolo
Budget Host
Canad Inns
Canalta
Center Parcs
Club Med
Club Quarters
Coast
Cobblestone
Dan
Drury
Easy Hotel
Extended Stay America
Fiesta Inn
Four Seasons
Hoshino
Huazhu Hotels
Iberostar
InTown Suites
Isrotel
ITC Hotels
Jumeirah
Kempinski
La Quinta
Leading Hotels of the World
Loews
Lotte
Magnuson
Mandarin Oriental
Marco Polo
Masters Inn
Meliá
MGM Resorts
Millennium & Copthorne
Morgans
Motel 6
Motel One
Mövenpick
My Place Hotels
NH
Oberoi
Omni
Outrigger
Paradores
Peninsula
Pestana
Pousadas de Portugal
Premier Inn
Prince
Pueblo Bonito
Red Roof Inn
RIU
Sandman
Santika Indonesia
Scandic
Standard
Steigenberger
Swiss-Belhotel
The Leela
Thistle
Toyoko Inn
Trident
Trump
Value Place
Virgin





Defunct



Adam's Mark
Alamo Plaza Hotel Courts
AmeriHost Inn
AmeriSuites
Crest Hotels
Cross Country Inn
Denizen Hotels
Esso Motor Hotel
Exel Inn
Forte
Fred Harvey
Friendship Inn
Hiway House
Imperial 400
Jack Tar Hotels
Nickelodeon Resorts by Marriott
The Real Hotel Company
Roundtowner Inn
Shoney's Inn
Statler Hotels
Summerfield Suites
Susse Chalet
Tage Inn
United Hotels Company of America
Vantage Hospitality
Wilson World Hotels





Lists



Hotels

chained-brand
largest
United States


Motels








 Category
 Commons












v
t
e


Tourism



Types



Accessible
Adventure
Agritourism
Alternative
Atomic
Birth
Business
Culinary

Enotourism


Cultural

Archaeological
Bookstore
Heritage

Militarism heritage


Literary

Tolkien


Music
Pop-culture


Dark

Holocaust


Disaster
Domestic
Drug
Ecotourism

Shark


Extreme
Factory Tourism
Garden
Genealogy
Geotourism
Honeymoon
Jihadi
Jungle
Justice
LGBT
Medical

Dental


Moon
Nautical
Rail
Religious

Christian
Halal
Kosher


Rural
Sacred
Safaris
Sex

Child sex
Female sex


Slum
Space
Sports
Stag party
Suicide
Sustainable
Vacation
Volunteer travel
War
Water
Wellness
Wildlife





Hospitality
industry



Bed and breakfast
Boutique hotel
Conference and resort hotels
Convention center
Destination spa
Front desk
General manager
Homestay
Hospitality management studies
Hospitality services
Hostel
Hotel
Hotel manager
Inn
Island resort
Motel
Referral chain
Resort
Resort town
Restaurant
Seaside resort
Ski resort





Terminology



Campus tour
Convention (meeting)
Gift shop
Grand Tour
Holiday (vacation)
Hypermobility
Package tour
Passport
Perpetual traveler
Road trip
Roadside attraction
Souvenir
Staycation
Sunday drive
Tour guide
Tour operator
Tourism geography
Tourism minister
Tourism region
Tourist attraction
Tourist gateway
Tourist trap
Touron
Transport
Travel
Travel agency
Travel behavior
Travel document
Travel insurance
Travel literature
Travel medicine
Travel survey
Travel technology
Travel warning
Travel website
Trip planner
Visa
Visitor center





Industry organizations,
rankings and events



American Bus Association
American Hotel and Lodging Association
American Hotel & Lodging Educational Institute
BEST Education Network
Caribbean Tourism Organization
Destination marketing organization
European Travel Commission
Historical archive on tourism
South-East Asian Tourism Organisation
Tourism Radio
Travel and Tourism Competitiveness Report
Wikivoyage
World Tourism Day
World Tourism Organization
World Tourism rankings
World Travel and Tourism Council
World Travel Monitor





Lists



Adjectival tourisms
Attractions
Bibliography
Casino hotels
Casinos
Convention and exhibition centers
Hotels
Largest hotels in the world
Motels
Travel magazines
UNESCO Intangible Cultural Heritage Lists
World Heritage Sites by country








 Category
 Commons
 Portal
 WikiProject









Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 130974178
LCCN: sh85062487
ISNI: 0000 0001 0661 0086
GND: 4025922-5
BNF: cb139040212 (data)
NDL: 00563556











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hotel&oldid=815102832"					Categories: HotelsBuildings and structures by typeHospitality managementHospitality occupationsTourist accommodationsTravel technologyHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksCommons category with local link different than on WikidataWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersUse dmy dates from January 2011