For other uses of "Hour", see Hour (disambiguation).
"Hours" redirects here. For other uses, see Hours (disambiguation).




Midnight to 1 a.m. on a 24-hour clock with a digital face






Midnight (or noon) to 1 on a 12-hour clock with an analog face


An hour (symbol: h;[1] also abbreviated hr.) is a unit of time conventionally reckoned as ​1⁄24 of a day and scientifically reckoned as 3,599–3,601 seconds, depending on conditions.
The seasonal, temporal, or unequal hour was established in the ancient Near East as ​1⁄12 of the night or daytime. Such hours varied by season, latitude, and weather. It was subsequently divided into 60 minutes, each of 60 seconds. Its East Asian equivalent was the shi, which was ​1⁄12 of the apparent solar day; a similar system was eventually developed in Europe which measured its equal or equinoctial hour as ​1⁄24 of such days measured from noon to noon. The minor variations of this unit were eventually smoothed by making it ​1⁄24 of the mean solar day, based on the measure of the sun's transit along the celestial equator rather than along the ecliptic. This was finally abandoned due to the minor slowing caused by the Earth's tidal deceleration by the Moon.
In the modern metric system, hours are an accepted unit of time equal to 3,600 seconds but an hour of Coordinated Universal Time (UTC) may incorporate a positive or negative leap second,[a] making it last 3,599 or 3,601 seconds, in order to keep it within 0.9 seconds of universal time, which is based on measurements of the mean solar day at 0° longitude.




Contents


1 Name
2 History

2.1 Mesopotamia
2.2 Egypt
2.3 East Asia
2.4 Southeast Asia
2.5 Other ancient cultures
2.6 Middle Ages
2.7 Modernity


3 Counting hours

3.1 Counting from dawn

3.1.1 Unequal hours


3.2 Counting from sunset
3.3 Counting from noon
3.4 Counting from midnight


4 Derived measures
5 See also
6 Notes
7 References

7.1 Citations
7.2 Bibliography


8 Further reading
9 External links



Name[edit]




The equation of time—above the axis the sundial will appear fast, compared with a clock showing local mean time, and below the sundial will appear slow.


The modern English word hour is a development of the Anglo-Norman houre and Middle English ure, first attested in the 13th century.[2][b] It displaced the Old English "tide" (Old English: tīd, "time")[4] and "stound" (stund, "span of time").[5] The Anglo-Norman term was a borrowing of Old French ure, a variant of ore, which derived from Latin hōra and Greek hṓrā (ὥρα). Like Old English tīd and stund, hṓrā was originally a vaguer word for any span of time, including seasons and years. Its Proto-Indo-European root has been reconstructed as *yeh₁- ("year, summer"), making hour distantly cognate with year.
The time of day is typically expressed in English in terms of hours. Whole hours on a 12-hour clock are expressed using the contracted phrase o'clock, from the older of clock.[6] (10 am and 10 pm are both read as "ten o'clock".) Hours on a 24-hour clock ("military time") are expressed as "hundred" or "hundred hours".[7] (1000 is read "ten hundred" or "ten hundred hours"; 10 pm would be "twenty-two hundred".) Fifteen and thirty minutes past the hour is expressed as "a quarter past" or "after"[8] and "half past", respectively, from their fraction of the hour. Fifteen minutes before the hour may be expressed as "a quarter to", "of", "till", or "before" the hour.[8] (9:45 may be read "nine forty-five" or "a quarter till ten".)
History[edit]
Further information: History of timekeeping devices
Mesopotamia[edit]
Sumerian and Babylonian hours divided the day and night into 24 equal hours, reckoned from the time of sunrise.[9][10]
Egypt[edit]
Further information: Egyptian calendar, Decans, and History of timekeeping devices in Egypt
The ancient Egyptians began dividing the night into wnwt at some time before the compilation of the Dynasty V Pyramid Texts[11] in the 24th century BC.[12] By 2150 BC (Dynasty IX), diagrams of stars inside Egyptian coffin lids—variously known as "diagonal calendars" or "star clocks"—attest that there were exactly 12 of these.[12] Clagett writes that it is "certain" this duodecimal division of the night followed the adoption of the Egyptian civil calendar,[11] usually placed c. 2800 BC on the basis of analyses of the Sothic cycle, but a lunar calendar presumably long predated this[13] and also would have had twelve months in each of its years. The coffin diagrams show that the Egyptians took note of the heliacal risings of 36 stars or constellations (now known as "decans"), one for each of the ten-day "weeks" of their civil calendar.[14] (12 sets of alternate "triangle decans" were used for the 5 epagomenal days between years.)[15] Each night, the rising of eleven of these decans were noted, separating the night into twelve divisions whose middle terms would have lasted about 40 minutes each. (Another seven stars were noted by the Egyptians during the twilight and predawn periods,[citation needed] although they were not important for the hour divisions.) The original decans used by the Egyptians would have fallen noticeably out of their proper places over a span of several centuries. By the time of Amenhotep III (c. 1350 BC), the priests at Karnak were using water clocks to determine the hours. These were filled to the brim at sunset and the hour determined by comparing the water level against one of its twelve gauges, one for each month of the year.[16] During the New Kingdom, another system of decans was used, made up of 24 stars over the course of the year and 12 within any one night.
The later division of the day into 12 hours was accomplished by sundials marked with ten equal divisions. The morning and evening periods when the sundials failed to note time were observed as the first and last hours.[citation needed]
The Egyptian hours were closely connected both with the priesthood of the gods and with their divine services. By the New Kingdom, each hour was conceived as a specific region of the sky or underworld through which Ra's solar bark travelled.[17] Protective deities were assigned to each and were used as the names of the hours.[17] As the protectors and resurrectors of the sun, the goddesses of the night hours were considered to hold power over all lifespans[17] and thus became part of Egyptian funerary rituals. 2 fire-spitting cobras were said to guard the gates of each hour of the underworld, and Wadjet and the rearing cobra (uraeus) were also sometimes referenced as wnwt from their role protecting the dead through these gates. The Egyptian for astronomer, used as a synonym for priest, was wnwty, "One of the Hours" or "Hour-Watcher".[c] The earliest forms of wnwt include one or three stars, with the later solar hours including the determinative hieroglyph for "sun".[11]
East Asia[edit]




A Chinese diagram from Su Song's AD 1092 Xinyi Xiangfa Yao illustrating his clocktower at Kaifeng.






A reconstruction of another kind of Chinese clepsydra in Beijing's Drum Tower


Main article: Chinese Traditional Time System
Ancient China divided its day into 100 "marks"[26][27] (Chinese: 刻, oc *kʰək,[28] p kè) running from midnight to midnight.[29] The system is said to have been used since remote antiquity,[29] credited to the legendary Yellow Emperor,[30] but is first attested in Han-era water clocks[31] and in the 2nd-century history of that dynasty.[32] It was measured with sundials[33] and water clocks.[d] Into the Eastern Han, the Chinese measured their day schematically, adding the 20-ke difference between the solstices evenly throughout the year, one every nine days.[31] During the night, time was more commonly reckoned during the night by the "watches" (Chinese: 更, oc *kæŋ,[28] p gēng) of the guard, which were reckoned as a fifth of the time from sunset to sunrise.[26][34]
Imperial China continued to use ke and geng but also began to divide the day into 12 "double hours" (t 時, s 时, oc *də,[28] p shí, lit. "time[s]") named after the earthly branches and sometimes also known by the name of the corresponding animal of the Chinese zodiac.[35] The first shi originally ran from 11 pm to 1 am but was reckoned as starting at midnight by the time of the History of Song, compiled during the early Yuan.[36] These apparently began to be used during the Eastern Han that preceded the Three Kingdoms era, but the sections that would have covered them are missing from their official histories; they first appear in official use in the Tang-era Book of Sui.[32] Variations of all these units were subsequently adopted by Japan[34] and the other countries of the Sinosphere.
The 12 shi supposedly began to be divided into 24 hours under the Tang,[34] although they are first attested in the Ming-era Book of Yuan.[29] In that work, the hours were known by the same earthly branches as the shi, with the first half noted as its "starting" and the second as "completed" or "proper" shi.[29] In modern China, these are instead simply numbered and described as "little shi". The modern ke is now used to count quarter-hours, rather than a separate unit.
As with the Egyptian night and daytime hours, the division of the day into twelve shi has been credited to the example set by the rough number of lunar cycles in a solar year,[37] although the 12-year Jovian orbital cycle was more important to traditional Chinese[38] and Babylonian reckoning of the zodiac.[39][e]
Southeast Asia[edit]
Main article: Six-hour clock
In Thailand, Laos, and Cambodia, the traditional system of noting hours is the six-hour clock. This reckons each of a day's 24 hours apart from noon as part of a fourth of the day. 7 am was the first hour of the first half of daytime; 1 pm the first hour of the latter half of daytime; 7 pm the first hour of the first half of nighttime; and 1 am the first hour of the latter half of nighttime. This system existed in the Ayutthaya Kingdom, deriving its current phrasing from the practice of publicly announcing the daytime hours with a gong and the nighttime hours with a drum.[41] It was abolished in Laos and Cambodia during their French occupation and is uncommon there now. The Thai system remains in informal use in the form codified in 1901 by King Chulalongkorn.[42]
Other ancient cultures[edit]




Two of the deified Hours of the Greeks and Romans


Main article: Hindu units of time
The Vedas and Puranas employed units of time based on the sidereal day (nakṣatra ahorātram). This was variously divided into 30 muhūtras of 48 minutes each or 60 dandas[citation needed] or nadís of 24 minutes each.[43] The solar day was later similarly divided into 60 ghaṭikás of about the same duration, each divided in turn into 60 vinadis.[43] The Sinhalese followed a similar system but called their sixtieth of a day a peya.
The ancient Greeks and Romans originally divided the day into 12 hours and the night into 3 or 4 night watches. They were notionally deified as the Horae, although sometimes only as a triad. The Greek astronomer Andronicus of Cyrrhus oversaw the construction of a horologion called the Tower of the Winds in Athens during the first century BC. This structure tracked a 24-hour day using both sundials and mechanical hour indicators.[44] The night was eventually also divided into 12 hours.
Middle Ages[edit]




A 7th-century Saxon tide dial on the porch at Bishopstone in Sussex, with larger crosses marking the canonical hours.[45]


Main article: Canonical hours
During Europe's Middle Ages, the Roman hours continued to be marked on sundials but the more important units of time were the canonical hours of the Orthodox and Catholic Church. During daylight, these followed the pattern set by the three-hour bells of the Roman markets, which were succeeded by the bells of local churches. They rang prime at about 6 am, terce at about 9 am, sext at noon, nones at about 3 pm, and vespers at either 6 pm or sunset. Matins and lauds precede these irregularly in the morning hours; compline follows them irregularly before sleep; and the midnight office follows that. Vatican II ordered their reformation for the Catholic Church in 1963,[46] though they continue to be observed in the Orthodox churches.
When mechanical clocks began to be used to show hours of daylight or nighttime, their period needed to be changed every morning and evening (for example, by changing the length of their pendula). The use of 24 hours for the entire day meant hours varied much less and the clocks needed to be adjusted only a few times a month.
Modernity[edit]
Main articles: Decimal time and Metric system
The minor irregularities of the apparent solar day were smoothed by measuring time using the mean solar day, using the Sun's movement along the celestial equator rather than along the ecliptic. The irregularities of this time system were so minor that most clocks reckoning such hours did not need adjustment. However, scientific measurements eventually became precise enough to note the effect of tidal deceleration of the Earth by the Moon, which gradually lengthens the Earth's days.
During the French Revolution, a general decimalization of measures was enacted, including decimal time between 1793 and 1795. Under its provisions, the French hour (French: heure) was ​1⁄10 of the day and divided formally into 100 decimal minutes (minute décimale) and informally into 10 tenths (décime). This hour was only briefly in official use, being repealed by the same 1795 legislation that first established the metric system.
The metric system bases its measurements of time upon the second, defined since 1952 in terms of the Earth's rotation in AD 1900. Its hours are a secondary unit computed as precisely 3,600 seconds.[47] However, an hour of Coordinated Universal Time (UTC), used as the basis of most civil time, has lasted 3,601 seconds 27 times since 1972 in order to keep it within 0.9 seconds of universal time, which is based on measurements of the mean solar day at 0° longitude. The addition of these seconds accommodates the very gradual slowing of the rotation of the Earth.
In modern life, the ubiquity of clocks and other timekeeping devices means that segmentation of days according to their hours is commonplace. Most forms of employment, whether wage or salaried labor, involves compensation based upon measured or expected hours worked. The fight for an eight-hour day was a part of labor movements around the world. Informal rush hours and happy hours cover the times of day when commuting slows down due to congestion or alcoholic drinks are available at discounted prices. The hour record for the greatest distance traveled by a cyclist within the span of an hour is one of cycling's greatest honors.
Counting hours[edit]




Top view of an equatorial sundial. The hour lines are spaced equally about the circle, and the shadow of the gnomon (a thin cylindrical rod) rotates uniformly. The height of the gnomon is ​5⁄12 the outer radius of the dial. This animation depicts the motion of the shadow from 3 a.m. to 9 p.m. on mid-summer's day, when the Sun is at its highest declination (roughly 23.5°). Sunrise and sunset occur at 3 a.m. and 9 p.m. respectively on that day at geographical latitudes near 57.5°, roughly the latitude of Aberdeen or Sitka, Alaska.






Planispheric astrolabe designed for the latitude of Varese (Italy)


Many different ways of counting the hours have been used. Because sunrise, sunset, and, to a lesser extent, noon, are the conspicuous points in the day, starting to count at these times was, for most people in most early societies, much easier than starting at midnight. However, with accurate clocks and modern astronomical equipment (and the telegraph or similar means to transfer a time signal in a split-second), this issue is much less relevant.
Astrolabes, sundials, and astronomical clocks sometimes show the hour length and count using some of these older definitions and counting methods.
Counting from dawn[edit]
In ancient and medieval cultures, the counting of hours generally started with sunrise. Before the widespread use of artificial light, societies were more concerned with the division between night and day, and daily routines often began when light was sufficient.[48]
Unequal hours[edit]
Sunrise marked the beginning of the first hour, the middle of the day was at the end of the sixth hour and sunset at the end of the twelfth hour. This meant that the duration of hours varied with the season. In the Northern hemisphere, particularly in the more northerly latitudes, summer daytime hours were longer than winter daytime hours, each being one twelfth of the time between sunrise and sunset. These variable-length hours were variously known as temporal, unequal, or seasonal hours and were in use until the appearance of the mechanical clock, which furthered the adoption of equal length hours.[48]
This is also the system used in Jewish law and frequently called "Talmudic hour" (Sha'a Zemanit) in a variety of texts. The talmudic hour is one twelfth of time elapsed from sunrise to sunset, day hours therefore being longer than night hours in the summer; in winter they reverse.
The Indic day began at sunrise. The term hora was used to indicate an hour. The time was measured based on the length of the shadow at day time. A hora translated to 2.5 pe. There are 60 pe per day, 60 minutes per pe and 60 kshana (snap of a finger or instant) per minute. Pe was measured with a bowl with a hole placed in still water. Time taken for this graduated bowl was one pe. Kings usually had an officer in charge of this clock.
Counting from sunset[edit]
In so-called "Italian time", "Italian hours", or "old Czech time", the first hour started with the sunset Angelus bell (or at the end of dusk, i.e., half an hour after sunset, depending on local custom and geographical latitude). The hours were numbered from 1 to 24. For example, in Lugano, the sun rose in December during the 14th hour and noon was during the 19th hour; in June the Sun rose during the 7th hour and noon was in the 15th hour. Sunset was always at the end of the 24th hour. The clocks in church towers struck only from 1 to 12, thus only during night or early morning hours.
This manner of counting hours had the advantage that everyone could easily know how much time they had to finish their day's work without artificial light. It was already widely used in Italy by the 14th century and lasted until the mid-18th century; it was officially abolished in 1755, or in some regions customary until the mid-19th century.[f]
The system of Italian hours can be seen on a number of clocks in Europe, where the dial is numbered from 1 to 24 in either Roman or Arabic numerals. The St Mark's Clock in Venice, and the Orloj in Prague are famous examples. It was also used in Poland and Bohemia until the 17th century.
The Islamic day begins at sunset. The first prayer of the day (maghrib) is to be performed between just after sunset and the end of twilight.
Counting from noon[edit]
For many centuries, up to 1925, astronomers counted the hours and days from noon, because it was the easiest solar event to measure accurately. An advantage of this method (used in the Julian Date system, in which a new Julian Day begins at noon) is that the date doesn't change during a single night's observing.
Counting from midnight[edit]
In the modern 12-hour clock, counting the hours starts at midnight and restarts at noon. Hours are numbered 12, 1, 2, ..., 11. Solar noon is always close to 12 noon (ignoring artificial adjustments due to time zones and daylight saving time), differing according to the equation of time by as much as fifteen minutes either way. At the equinoxes sunrise is around 6 a.m. (Latin: ante meridiem, before noon), and sunset around 6 p.m. (Latin: post meridiem, after noon).
In the modern 24-hour clock, counting the hours starts at midnight, and hours are numbered from 0 to 23. Solar noon is always close to 12:00, again differing according to the equation of time. At the equinoxes sunrise is around 06:00, and sunset around 18:00.
Derived measures[edit]

air changes per hour (ACH), a measure of the replacements of air within a defined space used for indoor air quality
ampere-hour (Ah), a measure of electrical charge used in electrochemistry
BTU-hour, a measure of power used in the power industry and for air conditioners and heaters
credit hour, a measure of an academic course's contracted instructional time per week for a semester
horsepower-hour (hph), a measure of energy used in the railroad industry
hour angle, a measure of the angle between the meridian plane and the hour circle passing through a certain point used in the equatorial coordinate system
kilometer per hour (​km⁄h), a measure of land speed
kilowatt-hour (kWh), a measure of energy commonly used as an electrical billing unit
knot (kn), a measure of nautical miles per hour, used for maritime and aerial speed
man-hour, an averaged amount of work performed per person per hour used in productivity analysis
meter per hour (​m⁄h), a measure of slow speeds
mile per hour (mph), a measure of land speed
passengers per hour per direction (p/h/d), a measure of the capacity of public transportation systems
pound per hour (PPH), a measure of mass flow used for engines' fuel flow
work or working hour, a measure of working time used in various regulations, such as those distinguishing part- and full-time employment and those limiting truck drivers' working hours or hours of service

See also[edit]

Horology
Horae, the deified hours of ancient Greece and Rome
Hexadecimal hour, a proposed unit lasting 1 h 30 min
Decimal hour or deciday, a French Revolutionary unit lasting 2 h 24 min
Golden Hour & Blue Hour in photography
Metric time

Notes[edit]



^ Since 1972, the 27 leap seconds added to UTC have all been additions.
^ From the c. 1250 sermon for Sexagesima Sunday: ...Þos laste on ure habbeþ i-travailed...[3]
^ Wnwty is written variously as
















,[18]







 






,







 






,[19]


















,

















,[20]
















,


















,
















,

















,

















,[21]
















,[22]











,[23]














,[24] and






 





.[25]
^ According to the 2nd-century Shuowen Jiezi, "A water clock holds the water in a copper pot and notes the marks [kè] by a rule. There are 100 marks which represent the day".
^ The late classical Indians also began to reckon years based on the Jovian cycle, but this was much later than their lunar calendar and initially named after it.[40]
^ There is a trace of that system, for instance, in Verdi's operas where in Rigoletto or in Un ballo in maschera midnight is announced by the bell striking 6 times, not 12. But in his last opera, Falstaff, strangely, he abandoned that style, perhaps under influence of contemporary trends at end of 19th century when he composed it, and the midnight bell strikes 12 times.



References[edit]
Citations[edit]


^ "Resolution 7", Resolutions of the CGPM: 9th Meeting, Paris: International Bureau of Weights and Measures, October 1948 .
^ OED, hour, n.
^ Morris, Richard, ed. (1872), "Old Kentish Sermons (Laud MS 471)", An Old English Miscellany, London: N. Trübner & Co. for the Early English Text Society, p. 34 .
^ OED, tide, n.
^ OED, stound, n.¹.
^ OED, clock, n.¹, & o'clock, adv. (and n.).
^ OED, hundred, n. and adj..
^ a b OED, quarter, n.
^ Holford-Strevens (2005).
^ "Different Classification of Hours". 
^ a b c Clagett (1995), p. 49.
^ a b Clagett (1995), p. 50.
^ Parker (1950), pp. 30-2.
^ Clagett (1995), p. 50–1.
^ Clagett (1995), p. 218.
^ Parker (1950), p. 40.
^ a b c Wilkinson (2003), p. 83.
^ Vygus (2015), p. 400.
^ Vygus (2015), p. 408.
^ Vygus (2015), p. 409.
^ Vygus (2015), p. 410.
^ Vygus (2015), p. 412.
^ Vygus (2015), p. 1235.
^ Vygus (2015), p. 1239.
^ Vygus (2015), p. 1240.
^ a b Stephenson (1997).
^ Steele (2000).
^ a b c Baxter & al. (2014).
^ a b c d Sōma & al. (2004), p. 887.
^ Petersen (1992), p. 129.
^ a b Petersen (1992), p. 125.
^ a b Sōma & al. (2004), p. 889.
^ Stephenson & al. (2002), pp. 15–16.
^ a b c Sōma & al. (2004), p. 888.
^ Sōma & al. (2004), p. 904.
^ Sōma & al. (2004), p. 896.
^ 1 .
^ Zai, J. (2015), Taoism and Science, Ultravisum .
^ Rogers (1998), pp. 9–28.
^ Sewell (1924), p. xii.
^ Thongprasert (1985), pp. 229–237.
^ "ประกาศใช้ทุ่มโมงยาม", Royal Gazette, No. 17 (PDF), 29 July 1901, p. 206 . (in Thai)
^ a b Dershowitz & al. (2008), p. 207.
^ "A Walk Through Time". National Institute of Standards and Technology. Retrieved 2 April 2014. 
^ Wall (1912), p. 67.
^ Paul VI (4 December 1963), Constitution on the Sacred Liturgy, Vatican City, §89(d) .
^ "Non-SI Units Accepted for Use with the SI, and Units Based on Fundamental Constants (contd.)", The International System of Units (SI), 8th ed., Paris: International Bureau of Weights and Measures, 2014 .
^ a b Landes (1983), p. 76.


Bibliography[edit]

The Oxford English Dictionary, Oxford: Oxford University Press .
Baxter, William H.; et al. (2014), Old Chinese: A New Reconstruction, Oxford: Oxford University Press , available in part here.
Clagett, Marshall (1995), Ancient Egyptian Science, Vol. II: Calendars, Clocks, and Astronomy, Memoirs of the APS, No. 214, Philadelphia: American Philosophical Society .
Dershowitz, Nachum; et al. (2008), Calendrical Calculations, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press .
Holford-Strevens, Leofranc (2005), The History of Time: A Very Short Introduction, Very Short Introductions, Vol. 133, Oxford: Oxford University Press, ISBN 9780192804990 .
Landes, David S. (1983), Revolution in Time, Cambridge: Harvard University Press .
Parker, Richard Anthony (1950), The Calendars of Ancient Egypt (PDF), Studies in Ancient Oriental Civilization, No. 26, Chicago: University of Chicago Press .
Petersen, Jens Østergård, "The Taiping Jing and the A.D. 102 Clepsydra Reform", Acta Orientalia, Vol. 53, Copenhagen, pp. 122–158 .
Rogers, J.H. (1998), "Origins of the Ancient Constellations", Journal of the British Astronomical Association, No. 108, London: BAA .
Sewell, Robert (1924), The Siddhantas and the Indian Calendar, Kolkata: Government of India Central Publication Branch .
Sōma, Mitsuru; et al. (25 October 2004), "Units of Time in Ancient China and Japan", Publications of the Astronomical Society of Japan, Vol. 56, No. 5, Tokyo: ASJ, pp. 887–904, doi:10.1093/pasj/56.5.887 .
Steele, J.M. (2000), Observations and Predications of Eclipse Times by Early Astronomers, Amsterdam: Kluwer Academic Publications .
Stephenson, F. Richard (1997), Historical Eclipses and Earth's Rotation, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press .
Stephenson, F. Richard; et al. (2002), Historical Supernovae and Their Remnants, Oxford: Oxford University Press, ISBN 0-19-850766-6 .
Thongprasert, Chamnong (1985), "ทุ่ม-โมง-นาฬิกา [Thum-Mong-Nalika]", ภาษาไทยไขขาน [Thai Unlocked], Bangkok: Prae Pitaya Press . (in Thai)
Wall, J. Charles (1912), Porches & Fonts, London: Wells, Gardner, Darton & Co. 
Wilkinson, Richard H. (2003), The Complete Gods and Goddesses of Ancient Egypt, Singapore: Tien Wah Press for Thames & Hudson .

Further reading[edit]

Gerhard Dohrn-van Rossum (1996). History of the Hour: Clocks and Modern Temporal Orders. University of Chicago Press. ISBN 0-226-15510-2. 
Christopher Walker (ed.), Astronomy before the Telescope. London: British Museum Press, 1996.

External links[edit]



Look up hour or stound in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.





Wikimedia Commons has media related to Hour.



World time zones
Accurate time vs. PC Clock Difference







v
t
e


Time



Key concepts



Past

history
deep time


Present
Future
Futures studies
Far future in religion
Far future in science fiction and popular culture
Timeline of the far future
Eternity
Eternity of the world





Measurement and
standards




Chronometry



UTC
UT
TAI
Unit of time
Planck time
Second
Minute
Hour
Day
Week
Month
Year
Decade
Century
Millennium
Tropical year
Sidereal year
Samvatsara





Measurement
systems



Time zone
Six-hour clock
12-hour clock
24-hour clock
Daylight saving time
Solar time
Sidereal time
Metric time
Decimal time
Hexadecimal time





Calendars



Gregorian
Julian
Hebrew
Islamic
Lunar
Solar Hijri
Mayan
Intercalation
Leap second
Leap year








Clocks



Horology
History of timekeeping devices
Main types

astrarium
atomic

quantum


marine
sundial
sundial markup schema
watch
water-based










Chronology
History






Astronomical chronology
Big History
Calendar era
Chronicle
Deep time
Periodization
Regnal year
Timeline








Religion
Mythology






Dreamtime
Kāla
Kalachakra
Prophecy
Time and fate deities
Wheel of time
Immortality





Philosophy of time



A-series and B-series
B-theory of time
Causality
Duration
Endurantism
Eternal return
Eternalism
Event
Multiple time dimensions
Perdurantism
Presentism
Static interpretation of time
Temporal finitism
Temporal parts
The Unreality of Time





Human experience
and use of time



Accounting period
Chronemics
Fiscal year
Generation time
Mental chronometry
Music
Procrastination
Punctuality
Temporal database
Term
Time discipline
Time management
Time perception

Specious present


Time-tracking software
Time-use research
Time-based currency (time banking)
Time value of money
Time clock
Timesheet
Yesterday – Today – Tomorrow





Time in




Geology



Geological time

age
chron
eon
epoch
era
period


Geochronology
Geological history of Earth





Physics



Absolute time and space
Arrow of time
Chronon
Coordinate time
Imaginary time
Planck epoch
Planck time
Proper time
Rate
Spacetime
Theory of relativity
Time dilation

gravitational


Time domain
Time translation symmetry
Time reversal symmetry





other subject
areas



Chronological dating
Chronobiology
Circadian rhythms
Dating methodologies in archaeology
Time geography








Related topics



Carpe diem
Clock position
Space
System time
Tempus fugit
Time capsule
Time complexity
Time signature
Time travel






 Time portal










v
t
e


Time measurement and standards






Chronometry
Orders of magnitude
Metrology





International standards



Coordinated Universal Time

offset


UT
ΔT
DUT1
International Earth Rotation and Reference Systems Service
ISO 31-1
ISO 8601
International Atomic Time
6-hour clock
12-hour clock
24-hour clock
Barycentric Coordinate Time
Barycentric Dynamical Time
Civil time
Daylight saving time
Geocentric Coordinate Time
International Date Line
Leap second
Solar time
Terrestrial Time
Time zone
180th meridian





Obsolete standards



Ephemeris time
Greenwich Mean Time
Prime meridian





Time in physics



Absolute time and space
Spacetime
Chronon
Continuous signal
Coordinate time
Cosmological decade
Discrete time and continuous time
Planck time
Proper time
Theory of relativity
Time dilation
Gravitational time dilation
Time domain
Time translation symmetry
T-symmetry





Horology



Clock
Astrarium
Atomic clock
Complication
History of timekeeping devices
Hourglass
Marine chronometer
Marine sandglass
Radio clock
Watch
Water clock
Sundial
Dialing scales
Equation of time
History of sundials
Sundial markup schema





Calendar



Astronomical
Dominical letter
Epact
Equinox
Gregorian
Hebrew
Hindu
Intercalation
Islamic
Julian
Leap year
Lunar
Lunisolar
Solar
Solstice
Tropical year
Weekday determination
Weekday names





Archaeology and geology



Chronological dating
Geologic time scale
International Commission on Stratigraphy





Astronomical chronology



Galactic year
Nuclear timescale
Precession
Sidereal time





Other units of time



Shake
Jiffy
Second
Minute
Moment
Hour
Day
Week
Fortnight
Month
Year
Olympiad
Lustrum
Decade
Century
Saeculum
Millennium





Related topics



Chronology
Duration

music


Mental chronometry
Metric time
System time
Time value of money
Timekeeper












v
t
e


SI units




Authority: International System of Units (BIPM)



Base units



ampere
candela
kelvin
kilogram
metre
mole
second








Derived units with special names



becquerel
coulomb
degree Celsius
farad
gray
henry
hertz
joule
katal
lumen
lux
newton
ohm
pascal
radian
siemens
sievert
steradian
tesla
volt
watt
weber





Other accepted units



astronomical unit
bar
dalton
day
decibel
degree of arc
electronvolt
hectare
hour
litre
minute
minute of arc
neper
second of arc
tonne
atomic units
natural units





See also



Conversion of units
Metric prefixes
Proposed redefinitions
Systems of measurement








 Book
 Category









Authority control



GND: 4799320-0











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hour&oldid=817748714"					Categories: Orders of magnitude (time)Units of timeHidden categories: Articles containing Old English-language textArticles containing Ancient Egyptian-language textArticles with Thai-language external linksArticles containing Anglo-Norman-language textArticles containing Middle English-language textArticles containing Old French-language textArticles containing Latin-language textArticles containing Ancient Greek-language textAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from March 2017Articles containing Chinese-language textArticles containing French-language textWikipedia articles with GND identifiers