"British House of Commons" redirects here. For the House of Commons 1707–1800, see House of Commons of Great Britain. For other bodies in British history and abroad, see House of Commons.






This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (June 2015) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)





House of Commons of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland





Type


Type

Lower house of the Parliament of the United Kingdom



Leadership



Speaker


John Bercow MP
Since 22 June 2009




Leader of the Commons


Andrea Leadsom MP,
Conservative
Since 11 June 2017




Shadow Leader of the Commons


Valerie Vaz MP,
Labour
Since 6 October 2016




Minor parties Shadow Leaders





Pete Wishart MP, Scottish National
Tom Brake MP, Liberal Democrat
Nigel Dodds MP, Democratic Unionist






Structure


Seats
650 (326 for a majority)






Political groups



HM Government
     Conservative Party (316)
Confidence and supply
     Democratic Unionist Party (10)
HM Most Loyal Opposition
     Labour Party (259)
Other opposition
     Scottish National Party (35)
     Liberal Democrats (12)
     Sinn Féin (7) (abstentionist)
     Plaid Cymru (4)
     Green Party (1)
     Independent (5)
Speaker
     Speaker (1)





Length of term

up to 5 years


Elections



Voting system

First-past-the-post



Last election

8 June 2017



Next election

Latest, 5 May 2022


Redistricting
Boundary commissions


Meeting place





House of Commons chamber
Palace of Westminster
City of Westminster
London, United Kingdom


Website


parliament.uk


The House of Commons is the lower house of the Parliament of the United Kingdom. Like the upper house, the House of Lords, it meets in the Palace of Westminster. Officially, the full name of the house is the Honourable the Commons of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland in Parliament assembled.
The Commons is an elected body consisting of 650 members known as Members of Parliament (MPs). Members are elected to represent constituencies by first-past-the-post and hold their seats until Parliament is dissolved.
The House of Commons of England evolved in the 13th and 14th centuries. It eventually became the House of Commons of Great Britain after the political union with Scotland in 1707, and assumed the title of "House of Commons of Great Britain and Ireland" after the political union with Ireland at the start of the 19th century. The "United Kingdom" referred to was the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland from 1800, and became the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland after the independence of the Irish Free State in 1922. Accordingly, the House of Commons assumed its current title.
Under the Parliament Act 1911, the Lords' power to reject legislation was reduced to a delaying power. The Government is solely responsible to the House of Commons and the Prime Minister stays in office only as long as he or she retains the support of a majority of the Commons.



Contents


1 Role

1.1 Relationship with Her Majesty's Government
1.2 Legislative functions


2 History

2.1 Layout and design
2.2 19th century
2.3 20th century
2.4 21st century

2.4.1 Expenses scandal




3 Members and elections

3.1 Qualifications
3.2 Officers


4 Procedure

4.1 House of Commons recess dates


5 Committees
6 Current composition
7 Commons symbol
8 In film and television
9 See also
10 References
11 Bibliography
12 External links



Role[edit]
Relationship with Her Majesty's Government[edit]
Although it does not formally elect the prime minister, the position of the parties in the House of Commons is of overriding importance. By convention, the prime minister is answerable to, and must maintain the support of, the House of Commons. Thus, whenever the office of prime minister falls vacant, the Sovereign appoints the person who has the support of the House, or who is most likely to command the support of the House—normally the leader of the largest party in the Commons, while the leader of the second-largest party becomes the Leader of the Opposition. Since 1963, by convention, the prime minister is always a member of the House of Commons, rather than the House of Lords.
The Commons may indicate its lack of support for the Government by rejecting a motion of confidence or by passing a motion of no confidence. Confidence and no confidence motions are phrased explicitly, for instance: "That this House has no confidence in Her Majesty's Government." Many other motions were considered confidence issues, even though not explicitly phrased as such. In particular, important bills that form a part of the Government's agenda were formerly considered matters of confidence, as is the annual Budget. When a Government has lost the confidence of the House of Commons, the prime minister is obliged either to resign, making way for another MP who can command confidence, or to request the monarch to dissolve Parliament, thereby precipitating a general election.
Parliament normally sits for a maximum term of five years. Subject to that limit, the prime minister could formerly choose the timing of the dissolution of parliament, with the permission of the Monarch. However, since the Fixed-Term Parliaments Act 2011, terms are now a fixed five years, and an early general election can only be brought about either by a two-thirds majority in favour of a motion for a dissolution, or by a vote of no confidence that is not followed within fourteen days by a vote of confidence (which may be for confidence in the same government or a different one). By this second mechanism, the government of the United Kingdom can change without an intervening general election. Only four of the eight last Prime Ministers have attained office as the immediate result of a general election; the others have gained office upon the resignation of a Prime Minister of their own party. The latter four were Jim Callaghan, John Major, Gordon Brown and the current Prime Minister Theresa May; these four inherited the office from Harold Wilson, Margaret Thatcher, Tony Blair and David Cameron respectively. In such circumstances there may not even have been an internal party leadership election, as the new leader may be chosen by acclaim, having no electoral rival (as in the case of both Brown and May).
A prime minister may resign even if he or she is not defeated at the polls (for example, for personal health reasons). In such a case, the premiership goes to whoever can command a majority in the House of Commons; in practice this is usually the new leader of the outgoing prime minister's party. Until 1965, the Conservative Party had no mechanism for electing a new leader; when Anthony Eden resigned as PM in 1957 without recommending a successor, the party was unable to nominate one. It fell to the Queen to appoint Harold Macmillan as the new prime minister, after taking the advice of ministers.
By convention, all ministers must be members of the House of Commons or of the House of Lords. A handful have been appointed who were outside Parliament, but in most cases they then entered Parliament either in a by-election or by receiving a peerage. Since 1902, all prime ministers have been members of the Commons (the sole exception, the Earl of Home, disclaimed his peerage three days after becoming prime minister, and was immediately elected to the House of Commons as Sir Alec Douglas-Home after twenty days in neither House).
In modern times, the vast majority of ministers belong to the Commons rather than the Lords. Few major cabinet positions (except Lord Privy Seal, Lord Chancellor and Leader of the House of Lords) have been filled by a peer in recent times. Notable exceptions are Lord Carrington, who served as Foreign Secretary from 1979 to 1982, and Lord Young, who was appointed Employment Secretary in 1985. Lord Mandelson was appointed Secretary of State for Business, Enterprise and Regulatory Reform in October 2008; he was also briefly a member of neither the Lords nor the Commons while serving in this capacity. The elected status of members of the Commons, as opposed to the unelected nature of members of the Lords, is seen to lend more legitimacy to ministers. It is also considered important for ministers, and especially senior ministers, to be responsible to the elected house. The prime minister chooses the ministers, and may decide to remove them at any time; the formal appointment or dismissal, however, is made by the Sovereign.
The House of Commons scrutinises HM Government through "Prime Minister's Questions", when members have the opportunity to ask questions of the prime minister; there are other opportunities to question other cabinet ministers. Prime Minister's Questions occurs once each week, normally for half an hour each Wednesday. Questions must relate to the responding minister's official government activities, not to his or her activities as a party leader or as a private Member of Parliament. Customarily, members of the Government party and members of the Opposition alternate when asking questions. In addition to questions asked orally during Question Time, Members of Parliament may also make inquiries in writing.
In practice, the House of Commons' scrutiny of the Government is fairly weak. Since the first-past-the-post electoral system is employed, the governing party often enjoys a large majority in the Commons, and there is often little need to compromise with other parties. Modern British political parties are so tightly organised that they leave relatively little room for free action by their MPs. Also, many ruling party MPs are paid members of the Government. Thus, during the 20th century, the Government has lost confidence issues only three times—twice in 1924, and once in 1979. However, the threat of rebellions by their own party's backbench MPs often forces Governments to make concessions (under the Coalition, over foundation hospitals and under Labour over top-up fees and compensation for failed company pension schemes). Occasionally the Government is defeated by backbench rebellions (Terrorism Act 2006). However, the scrutiny provided by the Select Committees is more serious.
The House of Commons technically retains the power to impeach Ministers of the Crown (or any other subject, even if not a public officer) for their crimes. Impeachments are tried by the House of Lords, where a simple majority is necessary to convict. The power of impeachment, however, has fallen into disuse: the House of Commons exercises its checks on the Government through other means, such as No Confidence Motions; the last impeachment was that of Viscount Melville in 1806.
Legislative functions[edit]
Further information: Act of Parliament
Bills may be introduced in either house, though bills of importance generally originate in the House of Commons. The supremacy of the Commons in legislative matters is assured by the Parliament Acts, under which certain types of bills may be presented to the Queen for Royal Assent without the consent of the House of Lords. The Lords may not delay a money bill (a bill that, in the view of the Speaker of the House of Commons, solely concerns national taxation or public funds) for more than one month. Moreover, the Lords may not delay most other public bills for more than two parliamentary sessions, or one calendar year. These provisions, however, only apply to public bills that originate in the House of Commons. Moreover, a bill that seeks to extend a parliamentary term beyond five years requires the consent of the House of Lords.
By a custom that prevailed even before the Parliament Acts, only the House of Commons may originate bills concerning taxation or Supply. Furthermore, supply bills passed by the House of Commons are immune to amendments in the House of Lords. In addition, the House of Lords is barred from amending a bill so as to insert a taxation or supply-related provision, but the House of Commons often waives its privileges and allows the Lords to make amendments with financial implications. Under a separate convention, known as the Salisbury Convention, the House of Lords does not seek to oppose legislation promised in the Government's election manifesto. Hence, as the power of the House of Lords has been severely curtailed by statute and by practice, the House of Commons is clearly the most powerful branch of Parliament.
History[edit]
Further information: House of Commons of England and House of Commons of Great Britain
The British Parliament of today largely descends, in practice, from the Parliament of England, although the 1706 Treaty of Union, and the Acts of Union that ratified the Treaty, created a new Parliament of Great Britain to replace the Parliament of England and the Parliament of Scotland, with the addition of 45 MPs and sixteen Peers to represent Scotland. Later still the Acts of Union 1800 brought about the abolition of the Parliament of Ireland and enlarged the Commons at Westminster with 100 Irish members, creating the Parliament of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland.
Although popularly considered to refer to the fact its members are commoners, the actual name of the House of Commons comes from the Norman French word for communities – communes.[1][2]
Layout and design[edit]
See also: Palace of Westminster § Commons Chamber
The current Commons' layout is influenced by the use of the original St. Stephen's Chapel in the Palace of Westminster.[3]
The rectangular shape is derived from the shape of the chapel. Benches were arranged using the configuration of the chapel's choir stalls whereby they were facing across from one another. This arrangement facilitated an adversarial atmosphere that is representative of the British parliamentary approach.[citation needed]
The distance across the floor of the House between the government and opposition benches is 3.96 metres (13.0 ft), said to be equivalent to two swords’ length.[4]
19th century[edit]




William Pitt the Younger addressing the Commons on the outbreak of the war with France (1793); painting by Anton Hickel






The House of Commons in the early 19th century by Augustus Pugin and Thomas Rowlandson.


The House of Commons underwent an important period of reform during the 19th century. Over the years, several anomalies had developed in borough representation. The constituency boundaries had not been changed since 1660, so many towns that were once important but had declined by the 19th century still retained their ancient right of electing two members, in addition to other boroughs that had never been important, e.g. Gatton.
Among the most notorious of these "rotten boroughs" were Old Sarum, which had only six voters for two MPs, and Dunwich which had largely collapsed into the sea due to coastal erosion. At the same time, large cities such as Manchester received no separate representation (although their eligible residents were entitled to vote in the corresponding county seat). Also notable were the pocket boroughs, small constituencies controlled by wealthy landowners and aristocrats, whose "nominees" were invariably elected.
The Commons attempted to address these anomalies by passing a Reform Bill in 1831. At first, the House of Lords proved unwilling to pass the bill, but were forced to relent when the prime minister, Lord Grey, advised King William IV to flood the House of Lords by creating pro-Reform peers. To avoid this the Lords relented and passed the bill in 1832. The Reform Act 1832, also known as the "Great Reform Act", abolished the rotten boroughs, established uniform voting requirements for the boroughs, and granted representation to populous cities, but still retained many pocket boroughs.
In the ensuing years, the Commons grew more assertive, the influence of the House of Lords having been reduced by the Reform Bill crisis, and the power of the patrons reduced. The Lords became more reluctant to reject bills that the Commons had passed with large majorities, and it became an accepted political principle that the confidence of the House of Commons alone was necessary for a government to remain in office.
Many more reforms were introduced in the latter half of the 19th century. The Reform Act 1867 lowered property requirements for voting in the boroughs, reduced the representation of the less populous boroughs, and granted parliamentary seats to several growing industrial towns. The electorate was further expanded by the Representation of the People Act 1884, under which property qualifications in the counties were lowered. The Redistribution of Seats Act of the following year replaced almost all multi-member constituencies with single-member constituencies.
20th century[edit]




The old Chamber of the House of Commons built by Sir Charles Barry was destroyed by German bombs during the Second World War. The essential features of Barry's design were preserved when the Chamber was rebuilt.


In 1908, the Liberal Government under Asquith introduced a number of social welfare programmes, which, together with an expensive arms race, forced the Government to seek higher taxes. In 1909, the Chancellor of the Exchequer, David Lloyd George, introduced the "People's Budget", which proposed a new tax targeting wealthy landowners. But this measure failed in the heavily Conservative House of Lords, and the government resigned.
The resulting general election returned a hung parliament, but Asquith remained prime minister with the support of the smaller parties. Asquith then proposed that the powers of the Lords be severely curtailed. After a further election in December 1910, the Asquith Government secured the passage of a bill to curtail the powers of the House of Lords after threatening to flood the House with 500 new Liberal peers to ensure the passage of the bill.
Thus the Parliament Act 1911 came into effect, destroying the legislative equality of the two Houses of Parliament. The House of Lords was permitted only to delay most legislation, for a maximum of three parliamentary sessions or two calendar years (reduced to two sessions or one year by the Parliament Act 1949). Since the passage of these Acts, the House of Commons has become the dominant branch of Parliament, both in theory and in practice.
In 1918, women over 30 were given the right to vote, quickly followed by the passage of a law enabling women to be eligible for election as members of parliament at the younger age of 21. The only woman to be elected that year was an Irish Sinn Féin candidate, Constance Markievicz, who therefore became the first woman MP. However, due to Sinn Féin's policy of abstention from Westminster, she never took her seat.[5]
With effect from the General Election in 1950, various forms of plural voting (i.e. some individuals had the right to vote in more than one constituency in the same election), including University constituencies, were abolished.
Since the 17th century, MPs had been unpaid. Most of the men elected to the Commons had private incomes, while a few relied on financial support from a wealthy patron. Early Labour MPs were often provided with a salary by a trade union, but this was declared illegal by a House of Lords judgment of 1909. Consequently, a resolution was passed in the House of Commons in 1911 introducing salaries for MPs. Government ministers had always been paid.
21st century[edit]
Expenses scandal[edit]
Main article: United Kingdom Parliamentary expenses scandal




This section needs expansion. You can help by adding to it. (April 2016)



In May and June 2009 revelations of MPs' expenses claims caused a major scandal and loss of confidence by the public in the integrity of MPs,[6] as well as causing the first forced resignation of the Speaker in 300 years.[7][8]
Members and elections[edit]


This article is part of a series on the


United Kingdom
House of Commons


House of Commons


Members




Current members of the 57th Parliament

(2017 general election) MPs for constituencies in Northern Ireland MPs for constituencies in Scotland MPs for constituencies in England
MPs for constituencies in Wales


Leadership




Speaker of the House

Leader of the House
Shadow Leader of the House


Father of the House




Committees




Committees of the House of Commons




Places




Palace of Westminster

House of Commons Chamber
Portcullis House





v
t
e





Since 1950, each Member of Parliament has represented a single constituency. There remains a technical distinction between county constituencies and borough constituencies, but the only effect of this difference is in the amount of money candidates are allowed to spend during campaigns. The boundaries of the constituencies are determined by four permanent and independent Boundary Commissions, one each for England, Wales, Scotland, and Northern Ireland. The commissions conduct general reviews of electoral boundaries once every 8 to 12 years, and a number of interim reviews. In drawing boundaries, they are required to take into account local government boundaries, but may deviate from this requirement to prevent great disparities in the populations of the various constituencies. The proposals of the Boundary Commissions are subject to parliamentary approval, but may not be amended. After the next general review of constituencies, the Boundary Commissions will be absorbed into the Electoral Commission, which was established in 2000. As of 2017, the United Kingdom is divided into 650 constituencies, with 533 in England, 40 in Wales, 59 in Scotland, and 18 in Northern Ireland.
General elections occur whenever Parliament is dissolved. The timing of the dissolution was normally chosen by the Prime Minister (see relationship with the Government above); however, as a result of the Fixed-term Parliaments Act 2011, Parliamentary terms are now fixed at five years, except in the event of the House of Commons passing a vote of no confidence or an "early election" motion, the latter having to be passed by a two-thirds majority.[9] The first use of this procedure was in April 2017, when MPs voted in favour of Theresa May's call for a snap election to be held that June.
All elections in the UK are held on a Thursday. The Electoral Commission is unsure when this practice arose, but dates it to 1931, with the suggestion that it was made to coincide with market day; this would ease voting for those who had to travel into the towns to cast their ballot.[10]
A candidate for a constituency must submit nomination papers signed by ten registered voters from that constituency, and pay a deposit of £500, which is refunded only if the candidate wins at least five per cent of the vote. The deposit seeks to discourage frivolous candidates. Each constituency returns one member, using the first-past-the-post electoral system, under which the candidate with a plurality of votes wins. Minors (that is, anyone under the age of 18), members of the House of Lords, prisoners, and insane persons are not qualified to become members of the House of Commons. To vote, one must be a resident of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and a British citizen, or a citizen of a British overseas territory, of the Republic of Ireland, or of a member of the Commonwealth of Nations. British citizens living abroad are allowed to vote for 15 years after moving from the United Kingdom. No person may vote in more than one constituency.
Once elected, Members of Parliament normally continue to serve until the next dissolution of Parliament. But if a member dies or ceases to be qualified (see qualifications below), his or her seat falls vacant. It is also possible for the House of Commons to expel a member, but this power is exercised only in cases of serious misconduct or criminal activity. In each case, the vacancy is filled by a by-election in the constituency, with the same electoral system as in general elections.
The term "Member of Parliament" is normally used only to refer to members of the House of Commons, even though the House of Lords is also a part of Parliament. Members of the House of Commons may use the post-nominal letters "MP". The annual salary of each member is £74,962, effective from 1 April 2016.[11] Members may also receive additional salaries for other offices they hold (for instance, the Speakership). Most members also claim for various office expenses (staff costs, postage, travelling, etc.) and, in the case of non-London members, for the costs of maintaining a home in the capital.
Qualifications[edit]




Another picture of the old House of Commons chamber. Note the dark veneer on the wood, which was purposely made much brighter in the new chamber.


There are numerous qualifications that apply to Members of Parliament. Most importantly, one must be aged at least 18 (the minimum age was 21 until s.17 of the Electoral Administration Act 2006 came into force), and must be a citizen of the United Kingdom, of a British overseas territory, of the Republic of Ireland, or of a member state of the Commonwealth of Nations. These restrictions were introduced by the British Nationality Act 1981, but were previously far more stringent: under the Act of Settlement 1701, only natural-born subjects were qualified. Members of the House of Lords may not serve in the House of Commons, or even vote in parliamentary elections (just as the Queen does not vote); however, they are permitted to sit in the chamber during debates (unlike the Queen, who cannot enter the chamber).
A person may not sit in the Commons if he or she is the subject of a Bankruptcy Restrictions Order (applicable in England and Wales only), or if he or she is adjudged bankrupt (in Northern Ireland), or if his or her estate is sequestered (in Scotland). Previously, MPs detained under the Mental Health Act 1983 for six months or more would have their seat vacated if two specialists reported to the Speaker that the member was suffering from a mental disorder. However, this disqualification was removed by the Mental Health (Discrimination) Act 2013. There also exists a common law precedent from the 18th century that the "deaf and dumb" are ineligible to sit in the Lower House;[12] this precedent, however, has not been tested in recent years. Jack Ashley continued to serve as an MP for 25 years after becoming profoundly deaf.
Anyone found guilty of high treason may not sit in Parliament until he or she has either completed the term of imprisonment or received a full pardon from the Crown. Moreover, anyone serving a prison sentence of one year or more is ineligible. Finally, the Representation of the People Act 1983 disqualifies for ten years those found guilty of certain election-related offences. Several other disqualifications are codified in the House of Commons Disqualification Act 1975: holders of high judicial offices, civil servants, members of the regular armed forces, members of foreign legislatures (excluding the Republic of Ireland and Commonwealth countries), and holders of several Crown offices. Ministers, even though they are paid officers of the Crown, are not disqualified.
The rule that precludes certain Crown officers from serving in the House of Commons is used to circumvent a resolution adopted by the House of Commons in 1623, under which members are not permitted to resign their seats. In practice, however, they always can. Should a member wish to resign from the Commons, he or she may request appointment to one of two ceremonial Crown offices: that of Crown Steward and Bailiff of the Chiltern Hundreds, or that of Crown Steward and Bailiff of the Manor of Northstead. These offices are sinecures (that is, they involve no actual duties); they exist solely to permit the "resignation" of members of the House of Commons. The Chancellor of the Exchequer is responsible for making the appointment, and, by convention, never refuses to do so when asked by a member who desires to leave the House of Commons.
Officers[edit]




The Speaker presides over debates in the House of Commons, as depicted in the above print commemorating the destruction of the Commons Chamber by fire in 1834.


At the beginning of each new parliamentary term, the House of Commons elects one of its members as a presiding officer, known as the Speaker. If the incumbent Speaker seeks a new term, then the House may re-elect him or her merely by passing a motion; otherwise, a secret ballot is held. A Speaker-elect cannot take office until he or she has been approved by the Sovereign; the granting of the royal approbation, however, is a formality. The Speaker is assisted by three Deputy Speakers, the most senior of whom holds the title of Chairman of Ways and Means. The two other Deputy Speakers are known as the First and Second Deputy Chairman of Ways and Means. These titles derive from the Committee of Ways and Means, a body over which the chairman once used to preside; even though the Committee was abolished in 1967, the traditional titles of the Deputy Speakers are still retained. The Speaker and the Deputy Speakers are always members of the House of Commons.
Whilst presiding, the Speaker or Deputy Speaker wears ceremonial dress. The presiding officer may also wear a wig, but this tradition was abandoned by a former Speaker, Betty Boothroyd. Michael Martin, who succeeded to the office, also did not wear a wig whilst in the chamber. The current speaker, John Bercow, has chosen to wear a gown over a lounge suit, a decision which has sparked much debate and opposition.
The Speaker or deputy presides from a chair at the front of the House. This chair was designed by Augustus Pugin, who initially built a prototype of the chair at King Edward's School, Birmingham: that chair is called Sapientia, and is where the Chief master sits. The Speaker is also chairman of the House of Commons Commission, which oversees the running of the House, and he or she controls debates by calling on members to speak. If a member believes that a rule (or Standing Order) has been breached, he or she may raise a "point of order", on which the Speaker makes a ruling that is not subject to any appeal. The Speaker may discipline members who fail to observe the rules of the House. Thus, the Speaker is far more powerful than his Lords counterpart, the Lord Speaker, who has no disciplinary powers. Customarily, the Speaker and the deputies are non-partisan; they do not vote (with the notable exception of tied votes, where the Speaker votes in accordance with Denison's rule), or participate in the affairs of any political party. By convention, a Speaker seeking re-election to parliament is not opposed in his or her constituency by any of the major parties. The lack of partisanship continues even after the Speaker leaves the House of Commons.
The Clerk of the House is both the House's chief adviser on matters of procedure and chief executive of the House of Commons. He or she is a permanent official, not a member of the House itself. The Clerk advises the Speaker on the rules and procedure of the House, signs orders and official communications, and signs and endorses bills. He or she chairs the Board of Management, which consists of the heads of the six departments of the House. The Clerk's deputy is known as the Clerk Assistant. Another officer of the House is the Serjeant-at-Arms, whose duties include the maintenance of law, order, and security on the House's premises. The Serjeant-at-Arms carries the ceremonial mace, a symbol of the authority of the Crown and of the House of Commons, into the House each day in front of the Speaker, and the Mace is laid upon the Table of the House during sittings. The Librarian is head of the House of Commons Library, the House's research and information arm.
Procedure[edit]
See also: Acts of Parliament in the United Kingdom § Stages of a bill
Like the Lords, the Commons meets in the Palace of Westminster in London. The Commons chamber is small and modestly decorated in green, in contrast to the large, lavishly furnished red Lords chamber. There are benches on two sides of the chamber, divided by a centre aisle. This arrangement reflects the design of St Stephen's Chapel, which served as the home of the House of Commons until destroyed by fire in 1834. The Speaker's chair is at one end of the Chamber; in front of it, is the Table of the House, on which the Mace rests. The Clerks sit at one end of the Table, close to the Speaker so that they may advise him or her on procedure when necessary. Members of the Government sit on the benches on the Speaker's right, whilst members of the Opposition occupy the benches on the Speaker's left. In front of each set of benches a red line is drawn, which members are traditionally not allowed to cross during debates. Government ministers and the leader of the Opposition and the Shadow Cabinet sit on the front rows, and are known as frontbenchers. Other members of parliament, in contrast, are known as backbenchers. Not all Members of Parliament can fit into the Chamber at the same time, as it only has space to seat approximately two thirds of the Members. It’s always said that there are 427 seats in the Chamber, but according to Sir Robert Rogers, former Clerk of the House of Commons and Chief Executive, that figure is an average or a finger in the wind estimate.[13] Members who arrive late must stand near the entrance of the House if they wish to listen to debates. Sittings in the Chamber are held each day from Monday to Thursday, and also on some Fridays. During times of national emergency, the House may also sit at weekends.
Sittings of the House are open to the public, but the House may at any time vote to sit in private, which has occurred only twice since 1950. Traditionally, a Member who desired that the House sit privately could shout "I spy strangers" and a vote would automatically follow. In the past, when relations between the Commons and the Crown were less than cordial, this procedure was used whenever the House wanted to keep its debate private. More often, however, this device was used to delay and disrupt proceedings; as a result, it was abolished in 1998. Now, Members seeking that the House sit in private must make a formal motion to that effect.
Public debates are recorded and archived in Hansard. The post war redesign of the House in 1950 included microphones, and debates were allowed to be broadcast by radio in 1975.[14] Since 1989, they have also been broadcast on television, which is now handled by BBC Parliament.[15]
Sessions of the House of Commons have sometimes been disrupted by angry protesters throwing objects into the Chamber from the galleries—items thrown include leaflets, manure, flour by the group Fathers 4 Justice, and a canister of chlorobenzylidene malonitrile (tear gas). Even members have been known to disturb proceedings of the House. For instance, in 1976, Conservative MP Michael Heseltine seized and brandished the Mace of the House during a heated debate. However, perhaps the most famous disruption of the House of Commons was caused by King Charles I, who entered the Commons Chamber in 1642 with an armed force to arrest five members for high treason. This action was deemed a breach of the privilege of the House, and has given rise to the tradition that the monarch does not set foot in the House of Commons.
Each year, the parliamentary session begins with the State Opening of Parliament, a ceremony in the Lords Chamber during which the Sovereign, in the presence of Members of both Houses, delivers an address outlining the Government's legislative agenda. The Gentleman Usher of the Black Rod (a Lords official) is responsible for summoning the Commons to the Lords Chamber. When he arrives to deliver his summons, the doors of the Commons Chamber are traditionally slammed shut in his face, symbolising the right of the Lower House to debate without interference. He then knocks on the door three times with his Black Rod, and only then is granted admittance, where he informs the MPs that the Monarch awaits them, after which they proceed to the House of Lords for the Queen's Speech.
During debates, Members may speak only if called upon by the Speaker (or a Deputy Speaker, if the Speaker is not presiding). Traditionally, the presiding officer alternates between calling Members from the Government and Opposition. The Prime Minister, the Leader of the Opposition, and other leaders from both sides are normally given priority. All Privy Counsellors used to be granted priority; however, the modernisation of Commons procedure in 1998 led to the abolition of this tradition.
Speeches are addressed to the presiding officer, using the words "Mr Speaker", "Madam Speaker", "Mr Deputy Speaker", or "Madam Deputy Speaker". Only the presiding officer may be directly addressed in debate; other members must be referred to in the third person. Traditionally, members do not refer to each other by name, but by constituency, using forms such as "the Honourable Member for [constituency]", or, in the case of Privy Counsellors, "the Right Honourable Member for [constituency]". Members of the same party (or allied parties or groups[16]) refer to each other as "my (Right) Honourable friend". (A member of the Armed Forces used to be called "the Honourable and Gallant Member", a barrister "the Honourable and Learned Member", and a woman "the Honourable Lady the Member".[17]) This may not always be the case during the actual oral delivery, when it might be difficult for a member to remember another member's exact constituency, but it is invariably followed in the transcript entered in the Hansard. The Speaker enforces the rules of the House and may warn and punish members who deviate from them. Disregarding the Speaker's instructions is considered a breach of the rules of the House and may result in the suspension of the offender from the House. In the case of grave disorder, the Speaker may adjourn the House without taking a vote.
The Standing Orders of the House of Commons do not establish any formal time limits for debates. The Speaker may, however, order a member who persists in making a tediously repetitive or irrelevant speech to stop speaking. The time set aside for debate on a particular motion is, however, often limited by informal agreements between the parties. Debate may also be restricted by the passage of "Allocation of Time Motions", which are more commonly known as "Guillotine Motions". Alternatively, the House may put an immediate end to debate by passing a motion to invoke Closure. The Speaker is allowed to deny the motion if he or she believes that it infringes upon the rights of the minority. Today, bills are scheduled according to a Timetable Motion, which the whole House agrees in advance, negating the use of a guillotine.
When the debate concludes, or when the Closure is invoked, the motion in question is put to a vote. The House first votes by voice vote; the Speaker or Deputy Speaker puts the question, and Members respond either "Aye!" (in favour of the motion) or "No!" (against the motion). The presiding officer then announces the result of the voice vote, but if his or her assessment is challenged by any member or the voice vote is unclear, a recorded vote known as a division follows. The presiding officer, if he or she believes that the result of the voice vote is clear, may reject the challenge. When a division occurs, members enter one of two lobbies (the "Aye" lobby or the "No" lobby) on either side of the Chamber, where their names are recorded by clerks. A member who wishes to pointedly abstain from a vote may do so by entering both lobbies, casting one vote for and one against. At each lobby are two tellers (themselves members of the House) who count the votes of the members.
Once the division concludes, the tellers provide the results to the presiding officer, who then announces them to the House. If there is an equality of votes, the Speaker or Deputy Speaker has a casting vote. Traditionally, this casting vote is exercised to allow further debate, if this is possible, or otherwise to avoid a decision being taken without a majority (e.g. voting 'No' to a motion or the third reading of a bill). Ties rarely occur—the last one was in July 1993. The quorum of the House of Commons is 40 members for any vote, including the Speaker and four tellers. If fewer than 40 members have participated, the division is invalid.
Formerly, if a member sought to raise a point of order during a division, suggesting that some of the rules governing parliamentary procedure are violated, he was required to wear a hat, thereby signalling that he was not engaging in debate. Collapsible top hats were kept in the Chamber just for this purpose. This custom was discontinued in 1998.
The outcome of most votes is largely known beforehand, since political parties normally instruct members on how to vote. A party normally entrusts some members of parliament, known as whips, with the task of ensuring that all party members vote as desired. Members of Parliament do not tend to vote against such instructions, since those who do so jeopardise promotion, or may be deselected as party candidates for future elections. Ministers, junior ministers and parliamentary private secretaries who vote against the whips' instructions usually resign. Thus, the independence of Members of Parliament tends to be low, although "backbench rebellions" by members discontent with their party's policies do occur. A member is also traditionally allowed some leeway if the particular interests of his constituency are adversely affected. In some circumstances, however, parties announce "free votes", allowing members to vote as they please. Votes relating to issues of conscience such as abortion and capital punishment are typically free votes.
Pairing is an arrangement where a member from one party agrees with a member of another party not to vote in a particular division, allowing both MPs the opportunity not to attend.[18][19]
A bisque is permission from the Whips given to a member to miss a vote or debate in the House to attend to constituency business or other matters.[20]
House of Commons recess dates[edit]
The House of Commons recess dates for the 2017–8 Parliamentary session were announced by the Leader of the House, Andrea Leadsom, in June 2017:[21]


Recess
Rise of the House
Return of the House


Summer 2017
20 July 2017
5 September 2017


Summer 2018
14 September 2017
9 October 2017


Autumn 2017
7 November 2017
13 November 2017


Christmas 2017
21 December 2017
8 January 2018


February 2018
8 February 2018
20 February 2018


Easter 2018
29 March 2018
16 April 2018


State Opening of Parliament 2017[22]
21 June 2017



Prorogation 2017
27 April 2017



Committees[edit]
Main article: Parliamentary Committees of the United Kingdom
The British Parliament uses committees for a variety of purposes, e.g., for the review of bills. Committees consider bills in detail, and may make amendments. Bills of great constitutional importance, as well as some important financial measures, are usually sent to the "Committee of the Whole House", a body that includes all members of the Commons. Instead of the Speaker, the chairman or a Deputy Chairman of Ways and Means presides. The Committee meets in the House of Commons Chamber.
Most bills were until 2006 considered by Standing Committees, which consisted of between 16 and 50 members. The membership of each Standing Committee roughly reflected the strength of the parties in the House. The membership of Standing Committees changed constantly; new Members were assigned each time the committee considered a new bill. There was no formal limit on the number of Standing Committees, but usually only ten existed. Rarely, a bill was committed to a Special Standing Committee, which investigated and held hearings on the issues raised. In November 2006, Standing Committees were replaced by Public Bill Committees.
The House of Commons also has several Departmental Select Committees. The membership of these bodies, like that of the Standing Committees, reflects the strength of the parties. Each committee elects its own chairman. The primary function of a Departmental Select Committee is to scrutinise and investigate the activities of a particular government department. To fulfil these aims, it is permitted to hold hearings and collect evidence. Bills may be referred to Departmental Select Committees, but such a procedure is seldom used.
A separate type of Select Committee is the Domestic Committee. Domestic Committees oversee the administration of the House and the services provided to Members. Other committees of the House of Commons include Joint Committees (which also include members of the House of Lords), the Committee on Standards and Privileges (which considers questions of parliamentary privilege, as well as matters relating to the conduct of the members), and the Committee of Selection (which determines the membership of other committees).
Current composition[edit]
Main article: List of MPs elected in the United Kingdom general election, 2017


Affiliation
Members[23]


At 2017 election
Current seats



Conservative
317
316



Labour
262
259



SNP
35
35



Liberal Democrat
12
12



DUP
10
10



Sinn Féin
7
7



Plaid Cymru
4
4



Green
1
1


 
Independent
1
5


 
Speaker
1
1


Total
650
650


Seats needed for majority
4
5


Conservative/DUP majority
13
11



Notes


See here for a full list of changes during the fifty-sixth Parliament.
In addition to the parties listed in the table above, the Co-operative Party is also represented in the House of Commons by Labour MPs sitting with the Labour Co-operative designation. The number of these MPs is 38.
The "seats needed for a majority" is calculated as the number of seats needed by the Conservative Party to have a majority of one (320). The "Conservative/DUP majority" is calculated as the sum of Conservative and DUP seats, less the sum of all other seats. This calculation excludes the Speaker, Deputy Speakers (two Labour and one Conservative) and Sinn Féin (who follow a policy of abstentionism).

Commons symbol[edit]
The symbol used by the Commons consists of a portcullis topped by St Edward's Crown. The portcullis has been one of the Royal Badges of England since the accession of the Tudors in the 15th century, and was a favourite symbol of King Henry VII. It was originally a pun on the name Tudor, as in tu-door.[24] The original badge was of gold, but nowadays is shown in various colours, predominantly green or black.
In film and television[edit]






This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (September 2015) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



In 1986, the British television production company Granada Television created a near-full size replica of the post-1950 House of Commons debating chamber at its studios in Manchester for use in its adaptation of the Jeffrey Archer novel First Among Equals. The set was highly convincing, and was retained after the production—since then, it has been used in nearly every British film and television production that has featured scenes set in the chamber. From 1988 until 1999 it was also one of the prominent attractions on the Granada Studios Tour, where visitors could watch actors performing mock political debates on the set. The major difference between the studio set and the real House of Commons Chamber is that the studio set has just four rows of seats on either side whereas the real Chamber has five.
In 2002, the set was purchased by the scriptwriter Paul Abbott so that it could be used in his BBC drama serial State of Play. Abbott, a former Granada Television staff writer, bought it personally as the set would otherwise have been destroyed and he feared it would take too long to get the necessary money from the BBC. Abbott kept the set in storage in Oxford.[25]
The post-1941 Commons Chamber was used in the film Ali G Indahouse, the political satire Restart by Komedy Kollective, about a British prime minister seeking re-election, and was mentioned in the Robin Williams stand-up special Robin Williams Live on Broadway in which he describes it as "like Congress, but with a two drink minimum".[citation needed] The pre-1941 Chamber was recreated in Shepperton Studios for the Ridley Scott/Richard Loncraine 2002 biographical film on Churchill, The Gathering Storm.
See also[edit]


British politics portal



Adjournment debate
Australian House of Representatives
Early day motion
Father of the House
House of Commons of Canada
Introduction (British House of Commons)
List of Stewards of the Chiltern Hundreds
List of United Kingdom Parliament constituencies
New Zealand House of Representatives
Parliament in the Making
Parliament Week
Parliamentary Archives
Parliamentary Brief
Records of members of parliament of the United Kingdom
Relocation of the Parliament of the United Kingdom
Salaries of Members of the United Kingdom Parliament
Speaker Denison's rule
Women in the House of Commons of the United Kingdom

References[edit]


^ Pollard, A.F. (1920). The Evolution of Parliament. Longmans. pp. 107–08. Not that the house of commons was ever that house of the common people which it is sometimes supposed to have been. For " commons " means " communes " ; and while " communes " have commonly been popular organizations, the term might in the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries be applied to any association or confederacy. 
^ "Some Traditions and Customs of the House" (PDF). http://www.parliament.uk. Endorsements on Bills – use of Norman French. August 2010. p. 9. Retrieved 15 June 2015. the Bills themselves are made in Norman French (in this case "soit baillé aux communes") a relic of the very early days of Parliament  External link in |website= (help)
^ "The Commons Chamber in the 16th Century". Parliament of the United Kingdom. Retrieved 14 October 2011. 
^ "Parliamentum". Retrieved 2 June 2017. 
^ "Women in parliament". BBC News. 31 October 2008. Retrieved 30 January 2009. 
^ Nicholas Allen; Sarah Birch (5 February 2015). Ethics and Integrity in British Politics. Cambridge University Press. p. 145. ISBN 978-1-107-05050-1. 
^ "Speaker quits 'for sake of unity'". BBC News. 19 May 2009. Retrieved 10 June 2017. 
^ "Speaker Michael Martin resigns over MPs' expenses". The Daily Telegraph. 19 May 2009. Retrieved 10 June 2017. 
^ "Fixed-term Parliaments Act". Legislation.gov.uk. Retrieved 15 April 2013. 
^ Wilson, Peter (8 May 2010). "Archaic electoral biases must go". The Australian. Sydney, Australia: News Limited. Retrieved 9 May 2010. 
^ "UK Parliament – Pay and expenses for MPs". Parliament.uk. Retrieved 14 April 2014. 
^ A Treatise on the Law of Elections: In All Its Branches – Sir John Simeon – Google Books. Books.google.co.uk. 1789. Retrieved 8 April 2014. 
^ "An insider's guide to the House of Commons". parliament.uk. 19 October 2012. Retrieved 1 September 2017. 
^ "Hansard of the air". parliament.uk. Retrieved 1 December 2015. 
^ "20 years of TV cameras in the Commons". BBC Politics. Retrieved 1 December 2015. 
^ For example: Plaid Cymru, Scottish National Party, the Green Party of England and Wales, and sometimes the Socialist Campaign Group. See e.g. [1], [2], [3]
^ Samuel, Sir Herbert (May 1935). The Pageantry of Parliament. The Rotarian. 46. Rotary International. p. 22. Retrieved 14 April 2015. 
^ "Pairing – Glossary page – UK Parliament". Parliament.uk. 21 April 2010. Retrieved 28 December 2011. 
^ "Pairing". BBC News. 16 October 2008. 
^ "Bisque". BBC News. 6 August 2008. 
^ http://www.parliament.uk/about/faqs/house-of-lords-faqs/lords-recess-dates/
^ United Kingdom general election, 2017
^ "Current State of the Parties". www.parliament.uk. Retrieved 9 December 2016. 
^ Fox-Davies, Arthur (1909). A Complete Guide to Heraldry. London: T.C. & E.C. Jack. 
^ Abbott, Paul. Audio commentary on the DVD release of State of Play. BBC Worldwide. BBCDVD 1493.


Bibliography[edit]


Farnborough, T. E. May, 1st Baron. (1896). Constitutional History of England since the Accession of George the Third, 11th ed. London: Longmans, Green and Co.
Mackenzie, K.R., "The English Parliament", (1950) Pelican Books.
"Parliament" (1911). Encyclopædia Britannica, 11th ed. London: Cambridge University Press.
Pollard, Albert F. (1926). The Evolution of Parliament, 2nd ed. London: Longmans, Green and Co.
Porritt, Edward, and Annie G. Porritt. (1903). The Unreformed House of Commons: Parliamentary Representation before 1832. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Raphael, D. D., Donald Limon, and W. R. McKay. (2004). Erskine May: Parliamentary Practice, 23rd ed. London: Butterworths Tolley.


External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to House of Commons of the United Kingdom.



House of Commons official website

The Parliamentary Archives
Find Your MP
Parliament Live TV (Silverlight is required to watch)
Podcast tour of the Commons chamber with photos


House of Commons from Democracy Live at BBC News

Guide to the Commons


"House of Commons collected news and commentary". The Guardian.  


2010


2010 Intake – Educational/Social Breakdown (BBC Magazine)
2010 Intake – Occupational Background (Times Online)
[=39298] British House of Commons people on www.C-SPAN.org






v
t
e


Officers of the House of Commons and the House of Lords



House of Commons
House of Lords


Speaker
John Bercow
Lord Speaker
The Lord Fowler


Leader of the House of Commons
Andrea Leadsom
Leader of the House of Lords
The Baroness Evans of Bowes Park


Serjeant at Arms
Kamal El-Hajji
Gentleman Usher of the Black Rod
Lt-Gen. David Leakey


Clerk of the House
David Natzler
Clerk of the Parliaments
Edward Ollard








v
t
e


United Kingdom articles



History




Chronology



Formation
Georgian era
Victorian era
Edwardian era
First World War
Interwar
Second World War
UK since 1945 (social history)





By topic



Economic
Empire
Maritime
Military








Geography








Administrative



Countries of the United Kingdom
Crown dependencies
Overseas territories
City status
Towns
Former colonies





Physical



British Isles

terminology
Great Britain


Coastline
Geology

Northern Ireland


Lakes and lochs
Mountains
Rivers
Volcanoes





Resources



Energy/Renewable energy

Biodiesel
Coal
Geothermal
Hydraulic frac.
Hydroelectricity
Marine
North Sea oil
Solar
Wind


Food

Agriculture
Fishing

English
Scottish


Hunting


Materials

Flora
Forestry
Mining













Politics











Constitution
Courts
Elections
Foreign relations

History


Human rights

Intersex
LGBT
Transgender


Judiciary
Law
Law enforcement
Legislation
Monarchy

monarchs


Nationality
Parliament

House of Commons
House of Lords


Political parties





Government



Cabinet

list


Civil service
Departments
Prime Minister

list







Military



Royal Navy
Army
Royal Air Force
Weapons of mass destruction











Economy







Banks

Bank of England


Budget
Economic geography
Manufacturing
Pound (currency)
Stock Exchanges (London Exchange)
Taxation
Telecommunications
Tourism
Transport
British Rail








Society







Affordability of housing
Crime
Demography
Drug policy
Education
Ethnic groups
Health care
Immigration
Innovation
Languages
Poverty

Food banks


Prostitution
Public holidays
Social care
Social structure





Culture



Art
Cinema
Cuisine
Identity
Literature
Media

television


Music
Religion
Sport
Symbols
Theatre

















Countries of the United Kingdom







England



History

social
timeline


Geography
Politics
Law
Economy

tourism


Education
Health care
Culture
Religion
Symbols





Northern Ireland



History
Geography
Politics

Assembly
Executive
First Minister and deputy


Law
Economy

tourism


Education
Health care
Culture
Religion
Symbols





Scotland



History

timeline


Geography
Politics

Parliament
Government
First Minister


Law
Economy

tourism


Education
Health care
Culture
Religion
Symbols





Wales



History
Geography
Welsh Government
Politics

Assembly
First Minister


Law
Economy

tourism


Education
Health care
Culture
Religion
Symbols


















Outline
Index



Book
Category
Portal












v
t
e


Legislatures of the United Kingdom and dependencies



European Union1



European Union legislative procedure

Commission
Parliament
Council of the European Union
national parliaments







United Kingdom




National



Parliament of the United Kingdom

House of Commons
House of Lords







Devolved



Northern Ireland
Scotland
Wales








Dependent territories




Crown dependencies



Bailiwick of Guernsey2

dependencies: Alderney
Sark


Jersey
Isle of Man

House of Keys
Legislative Council







Overseas Territories



Anguilla
Bermuda

House of Assembly
Senate


British Virgin Islands
Cayman Islands
Falkland Islands
Gibraltar1
Montserrat
Pitcairn Islands
Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha
Turks and Caicos Islands








Miscellaneous



Commonwealth Parliamentary Association






1 European Union law applies in the United Kingdom and Gibraltar. Following the invokation of Article 50, the United Kingdom is set to leave the European Union. A Great Repeal Bill has been proposed to incorporate all current European laws into British law.
2 "Bailiwick-wide" legislature passed in the States of Guernsey applies not only in Guernsey, but also in Alderney and Sark, with the consent of their governments.










v
t
e


Lower houses of national legislatures



Federal



Argentina
Australia
Austria
Belgium
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Brazil
Canada
Ethiopia
Germany
India
Malaysia
Mexico
Nepal
Nigeria
Pakistan
Russia
Somalia
South Sudan
Sudan
Switzerland
United States





Unitary



Afghanistan
Algeria
Antigua and Barbuda
Bahamas
Bahrain
Barbados
Belarus
Belize
Bhutan
Bolivia
Burundi
Cambodia
Cameroon
Central African Republic
Chile
Colombia
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Republic of the Congo
Czech Republic
Dominican Republic
Equatorial Guinea
France
Gabon
Grenada
Haiti
Indonesia
Ireland
Italy
Ivory Coast
Jamaica
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Kenya
Lesotho
Liberia
Madagascar
Mauritania
Morocco
Myanmar
Namibia
Netherlands
New Zealand
Oman
Palau
Paraguay
Philippines
Poland
Romania
Rwanda
Saint Lucia
Slovenia
South Africa
Spain
Swaziland
Tajikistan
Trinidad and Tobago
United Kingdom
Uruguay
Uzbekistan
Zimbabwe





Dependent and
other territories



American Samoa
Bermuda
Isle of Man
Northern Mariana Islands
Puerto Rico





Non-UN states



Somaliland





Related



Bicameralism
Unicameralism
List of legislatures by country








National upper houses
National bicameral legislatures
National unicameral legislatures






Coordinates: 51°29′59.6″N 0°07′28.8″W﻿ / ﻿51.499889°N 0.124667°W﻿ / 51.499889; -0.124667



Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 123930966
ISNI: 0000 0001 2106 3447
GND: 146096-1
SUDOC: 027484289
BNF: cb11880544b (data)











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=House_of_Commons_of_the_United_Kingdom&oldid=818549218"					Categories: 1801 establishments in the United KingdomGovernment of the United KingdomHouse of Commons of the United KingdomNational lower housesParliament of the United KingdomWestminster systemHidden categories: CS1 errors: external linksArticles needing additional references from June 2015All articles needing additional referencesInfobox legislature with background colorAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from October 2017Articles to be expanded from April 2016All articles to be expandedArticles using small message boxesArticles needing additional references from September 2015Articles with unsourced statements from September 2015Coordinates on WikidataUse dmy dates from September 2015Use British English from February 2014Wikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiers