This article is about the human anatomy feature. For the animal feature, see Mouth.


Mouth



Head and neck




A closed human mouth



Details


Identifiers


Latin
os, cavitas oralis


MeSH
A01.456.505.631


Dorlands
/Elsevier
12220513


TA
A01.1.00.010


FMA
49184


Anatomical terminology
[edit on Wikidata]



In human anatomy, the mouth is the first portion of the alimentary canal that receives food and produces saliva.[1] The oral mucosa is the mucous membrane epithelium lining the inside of the mouth.
In addition to its primary role as the beginning of the digestive system, in humans the mouth also plays a significant role in communication. While primary aspects of the voice are produced in the throat, the tongue, lips, and jaw are also needed to produce the range of sounds included in human language.
The mouth consists of two regions, the vestibule and the oral cavity proper. The mouth, normally moist, is lined with a mucous membrane, and contains the teeth. The lips mark the transition from mucous membrane to skin, which covers most of the body.



Contents


1 Structure

1.1 Mouth cavity
1.2 Orifice
1.3 Nerve supply
1.4 Development


2 Function
3 See also
4 References
5 External links



Structure[edit]
Mouth cavity[edit]




Photograph of the inside of an open human mouth. One palatine tonsil is also visible (white).






Anatomy of the mouth.


The mouth, consists of 2 regions, the vestibule and the oral cavity proper. The vestibule is the area between the teeth, lips and cheeks.[2] The oral cavity is bounded at the sides and in front by the alveolar process (containing the teeth) and at the back by the isthmus of the fauces. Its roof is formed by hard palate at the front, and a soft palate at the back. The uvula projects downwards from the middle of the soft palate at its back. The floor is formed by the mylohyoid muscles and is occupied mainly by the tongue. A mucous membrane – the oral mucosa, lines the sides and under surface of the tongue to the gums, lining the inner aspect of the jawbone (mandible). It receives the secretions from the submandibular and sublingual salivary glands.
Orifice[edit]
While shut, the orifice of the mouth forms a line between the upper and lower lip. In facial expression, this mouth line is iconically shaped like an up-open parabola in a smile, and like a down-open parabola in a frown. A down-turned mouth means a mouth line forming a down-turned parabola, and when permanent can be normal. Also, a down-turned mouth can be part of the presentation of Prader-Willi syndrome.[3]
Nerve supply[edit]
The teeth and the periodontium (i.e. the tissues that support the teeth) are innervated by the maxillary and mandibular divisions of the trigeminal nerve. Maxillary (upper) teeth and their associated periodontal ligament are innervated by the superior alveolar nerves, branches of the maxillary division, termed the posterior superior alveolar nerve, anterior superior alveolar nerve, and the variably present middle superior alveolar nerve. These nerves form the superior dental plexus above the maxillary teeth. The mandibular (lower) teeth and their associated periodontal ligament are innervated by the inferior alveolar nerve, a branch of the mandibular division. This nerve runs inside the mandible, within the inferior alveolar canal below the mandibular teeth, giving off branches to all the lower teeth (inferior dental plexus).[4][5] The oral mucosa of the gingiva (gums) on the facial (labial) aspect of the maxillary incisors, canines and premolar teeth is innervated by the superior labial branches of the infraorbital nerve. The posterior superior alveolar nerve supplies the gingiva on the facial aspect of the maxillary molar teeth. The gingiva on the palatal aspect of the maxillary teeth is innervated by the greater palatine nerve apart from in the incisor region, where it is the nasopalatine nerve (long sphenopalatine nerve). The gingiva of the lingual aspect of the mandibular teeth is innervated by the sublingual nerve, a branch of the lingual nerve. The gingiva on the facial aspect of the mandibular incisors and canines is innervated by the mental nerve, the continuation of the inferior alveolar nerve emerging from the mental foramen. The gingiva of the buccal (cheek) aspect of the mandibular molar teeth is innervated by the buccal nerve (long buccal nerve).[6]
Development[edit]
The philtrum is the vertical groove in the upper lip, formed where the nasomedial and maxillary processes meet during embryo development. When these processes fail to fuse fully, either a hare lip or cleft palate, (or both) can result.
The nasolabial folds are the deep creases of tissue that extend from the nose to the sides of the mouth. One of the first signs of age on the human face is the increase in prominence of the nasolabial folds.
Function[edit]
The mouth plays an important role in eating, drinking, breathing and speaking. Infants are born with a sucking reflex, by which they instinctively know to suck for nourishment using their lips and jaw. The mouth also helps in chewing and biting food.
A male mouth can hold, on average, 71.2 ml, while a female mouth holds 55.4 ml [7]
See also[edit]
This article uses anatomical terminology; for an overview, see Anatomical terminology.


Dentistry portal



Head and neck anatomy
Mouth breathing
Index of oral health and dental articles
List of basic dentistry topics

References[edit]


^ Maton, Anthea; Jean Hopkins; Charles William McLaughlin; Susan Johnson; Maryanna Quon Warner; David LaHart; Jill D. Wright (1993). Human Biology and Health. Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey, USA: Prentice Hall. ISBN 0-13-981176-1. 
^ Pocock, Gillian (2006). Human Physiology (Third ed.). Oxford University Press. p. 382. ISBN 978-0-19-856878-0. 
^ Cassidy, Suzanne B.; Dykens, Elisabeth; Williams, Charles A. (2000). "Prader-Willi and Angelman syndromes: Sister imprinted disorders". American Journal of Medical Genetics. 97 (2): 136–46. doi:10.1002/1096-8628(200022)97:2<136::AID-AJMG5>3.0.CO;2-V. PMID 11180221. 
^ Susan Standring (editor in chief) (2008). Gray's anatomy : the anatomical basis of clinical practice (40th ed.). [Edinburgh]: Churchill Livingstone/Elsevier. ISBN 978-0443066849. 
^ Lindhe, Jan; Lang, Niklaus P; Karring, Thorkild, eds. (2008) [2003]. Clinical Periodontology and Implant Dentistry 5th edition. Oxford, UK: Blackwell Munksgaard. p. 48. ISBN 9781405160995. 
^ Lindhe, Jan; Lang, Niklaus P; Karring, Thorkild, eds. (2008) [2003]. Clinical Periodontology and Implant Dentistry 5th edition. Oxford, UK: Blackwell Munksgaard. ISBN 9781405160995. 
^ Nascimento WV1, Cassiani RA, Dantas RO., 2012, "Gender effect on oral volume capacity", Dysphagia, 27(3):384-9.


External links[edit]

 Media related to Mouths at Wikimedia Commons
 Quotations related to Mouths at Wikiquote







v
t
e


Human regional anatomy



Head



Ear
Face

Cheek
Chin
Eye
Mouth
Nose
Forehead


Jaw
Occiput
Scalp
Temple





Neck



Adam's apple
Throat





Trunk



Abdomen

Waist
Midriff
Navel


Back
Thorax

Breast


Pelvis

Sex organs







Limbs




Arm



Shoulder
Axilla
Brachium
Elbow
Forearm
Wrist
Hand
Finger

Thumb
Index
Middle
Ring
Little







Leg



Buttocks
Hip
Thigh
Knee
Calf
Foot

Ankle
Heel
Sole


Toe








Other



Écorché






General anatomy: systems and organs, regional anatomy, planes and lines, superficial axial anatomy, superficial anatomy of limbs










v
t
e


Anatomy of the mouth



Lip



Upper
Lower
Vermilion border
Frenulum of lower lip
Labial commissure of mouth
Philtrum





Cheek



Buccal fat pad





Roof



Hard palate
Soft palate
Palatine raphe
Incisive papilla





Gums



Interdental papilla
Gingival sulcus
Gingival margin
Gingival fibers
Junctional epithelium
Mucogingival junction
Sulcular epithelium
Stippling
Periodontium

Cementum
Gingiva
Periodontal ligament







Glands



Parotid gland

duct


Submandibular gland

duct


Sublingual gland

duct







Teeth



see tooth anatomy





Tongue



Top

Taste bud
Median sulcus
Terminal sulcus
Foramen cecum
Lingual tonsils


Underside

Frenulum
Fimbriated fold
Sublingual caruncle
Glossoepiglottic folds
Lingual septum







Back of mouth



Oropharynx
fauces
Plica semilunaris of the fauces
Uvula
Palatoglossal arch
Palatopharyngeal arch
Tonsillar fossa
Palatine tonsil











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Human_mouth&oldid=810479258"					Categories: MouthHuman anatomyDigestive systemHuman mouth anatomyHidden categories: Medicine infobox template using GraySubject or GrayPageMedicine infobox template using Dorlands parameterCommons category without a link on Wikidata