For the television show, see Human Trafficking (miniseries). For other uses, see Human trafficking (disambiguation).
See also: Slavery


Part of a series on
Slavery







Contemporary


Child labour
Conscription
Debt
Forced marriage

Bride buying
Wife selling


Forced prostitution
Human trafficking
Peonage
Penal labour
Sexual slavery
Wage slavery








Historical


Antiquity


Ancient Rome
Babylonia
Ancient Greece


Topics and practices


Atlantic slave trade

Middle Passage


Arab slave trade

Ghilman
Mamluk
Saqaliba


Aztec
Blackbirding
Byzantine Empire
Coolie
Corvée labor
Field slaves in the United States
House slaves
Kholop
Medieval Europe
Panyarring
Thrall
Serfs

History
Russia


Slave market
Slave raiding


Naval


Galley slave
Impressment
Pirates
Shanghaiing
Slave ship








By country or region


Sub-Saharan Africa


Contemporary Africa
Slavery on the Barbary Coast
Barbary slave trade
Slave Coast
Angola
Chad
Ethiopia
Mali
Mauritania
Niger
Somalia
South Africa
Sudan
Seychelles


North and South America


Americas indigenous

U.S. Natives


Brazil

Lei Áurea


Canada
Caribbean

Barbados
Code Noir


Cuba
Haiti

revolt
Restavek


Latin America
Puerto Rico
Trinidad
United States

colonial
maps
female
partus
penal labor
Slave codes
interregional
Human trafficking


Virgin Islands


Central, East, and South Asia


Human trafficking in Southeast Asia
Bhutan
China

Booi Aha
Laogai


India

Debt bondage
Chukri System


Japan

comfort women


South Korea

Yankee princess


North Korea
Vietnam


Australia and Oceania


Blackbirding in Australia
Human trafficking in Australia
Slave raiding in Easter Island
Human trafficking in Papua New Guinea
Blackbirding in Polynesia


Europe and North Asia


Sex trafficking in Europe
Britain
Denmark
Dutch Republic
Germany in World War II
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russia
Spain

colonies


Sweden


North Africa and West Asia


Iran
Libya
Human trafficking in the Middle East
Ottoman Empire
Yemen








Religion


Bible
Christianity

Catholicism
Mormonism


Islam

21st century


Judaism
Bahá'í Faith








Opposition and resistance


Timeline
Abolitionism

U.K.
U.S.


Anti-Slavery International
Blockade of Africa

U.K.
U.S.


Compensated emancipation
Freedman

manumission


Freedom suit
Abolitionists
Slave Power
Underground Railroad

songs


Slave rebellion
Slave Trade Acts
International law
13th Amendment to the United States Constitution








Related


Common law
Indentured servitude
Unfree labour
Fugitive slaves

laws
Great Dismal Swamp maroons


List of slaves

owners


Slave narrative

films
songs


Slave name
Slave catcher
Slave patrol
Slave Route Project
Treatment in U.S.

breeding
court cases
Washington
Jefferson
Adams
Lincoln
40 acres
Freedmen's Bureau
bit


Emancipation Day









v
t
e





Human trafficking is the trade of humans for the purpose of forced labour, sexual slavery, or commercial sexual exploitation for the trafficker or others.[1][2] This may encompass providing a spouse in the context of forced marriage,[3][4][5] or the extraction of organs or tissues,[6][7] including for surrogacy and ova removal.[8] Human trafficking can occur within a country or trans-nationally. Human trafficking is a crime against the person because of the violation of the victim's rights of movement through coercion and because of their commercial exploitation. Human trafficking is the trade in people, especially women and children, and does not necessarily involve the movement of the person from one place to another.
According to the International Labour Organization (ILO), forced labor alone (one component of human trafficking) generates an estimated $150 billion in profits per annum as of 2014.[9] In 2012, the ILO estimated that 21 million victims are trapped in modern-day slavery. Of these, 14.2 million (68%) were exploited for labor, 4.5 million (22%) were sexually exploited, and 2.2 million (10%) were exploited in state-imposed forced labor.[10]
Human trafficking is thought to be one of the fastest-growing activities of trans-national criminal organizations.[11]
Human trafficking is condemned as a violation of human rights by international conventions. In addition, human trafficking is subject to a directive in the European Union.[12]



Contents


1 Overview

1.1 Definition
1.2 Revenue
1.3 Usage of the term


2 General

2.1 Current international treaties (general)
2.2 United States
2.3 Council of Europe
2.4 Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
2.5 India Anti Human Trafficking Portal
2.6 The Anti-trafficking Policy Index
2.7 Religious declaration
2.8 Anti-trafficking initiatives
2.9 Vulnerable groups


3 Types

3.1 Trafficking of children
3.2 Sex trafficking
3.3 Forced marriage
3.4 Labour trafficking
3.5 Trafficking for organ trade


4 Efforts
5 Structural factors

5.1 Poverty and globalization
5.2 Political and institutional challenges
5.3 Commercial demand for sex


6 Consequences

6.1 For victims
6.2 Psychological

6.2.1 Short-term impact – psychological coercion
6.2.2 Long-term impact


6.3 HIV/AIDS
6.4 Economic impacts
6.5 Popular culture


7 Criticism

7.1 Problems with statistics and data
7.2 Problems with the concept
7.3 Problems with anti-trafficking measures

7.3.1 Victim identification and protection in the UK
7.3.2 Law enforcement and the use of raids
7.3.3 "End Demand" programs




8 Modern feminist perspectives

8.1 Social norms
8.2 Singapore


9 See also
10 References
11 External links



Overview[edit]
Definition[edit]
Although human trafficking can occur at local or domestic levels, it has international implications, as recognized by the United Nations in the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, especially Women and Children (also referred to as the Trafficking Protocol or the Palermo Protocol), an international agreement under the UN Convention against Transnational Organized Crime (CTOC) which entered into force on 25 December 2003. The protocol is one of three which supplement the CTOC.[13] The Trafficking Protocol is the first global, legally binding instrument on trafficking in over half a century, and the only one with an agreed-upon definition of trafficking in persons. One of its purposes is to facilitate international cooperation in investigating and prosecuting such trafficking. Another is to protect and assist human trafficking's victims with full respect for their rights as established in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. The Trafficking Protocol, which now has 171 parties,[14] defines human trafficking as:

(a) [...] the recruitment, transportation, transfer, harbouring or receipt of persons, by means of threat or use of force or other forms of coercion, of abduction, of fraud, of deception, of the abuse of power or of a position of vulnerability or of the giving or receiving of payments or benefits to achieve the consent of a person having control over another person, for the purpose of exploitation. Exploitation shall include, at a minimum, the exploitation of the prostitution of others or other forms of sexual exploitation, forced labour or services, slavery or practices similar to slavery, servitude or the removal, manipulation or implantation of organs;
(b) The consent of a victim of trafficking in persons to the intended exploitation set forth in sub-paragraph (a) of this article shall be irrelevant where any of the means set forth in subparagraph (a) have been used;
(c) The recruitment, transportation, transfer, harbouring or receipt of a child for the purpose of exploitation shall be considered "trafficking in persons" even if this does not involve any of the means set forth in sub-paragraph (a) of this article;
(d) "Child" shall mean any person under eighteen years of age.[15]

Revenue[edit]
In 2014, the International Labour Organization estimated $150 billion in annual profit is generated from forced labor alone.[16]
The average cost of a human trafficking victim today is USD $90 whereas the average slave in 1800 America cost the equivalent to USD $40,000.[17]
Usage of the term[edit]
Human trafficking differs from people smuggling, which involves a person voluntarily requesting or hiring another individual to covertly transport them across an international border, usually because the smuggled person would be denied entry into a country by legal channels. Though illegal, there may be no deception or coercion involved. After entry into the country and arrival at their ultimate destination, the smuggled person is usually free to find their own way. According to the International Centre for Migration Policy Development (ICMPD), people smuggling is a violation of national immigration laws of the destination country, and does not require violations of the rights of the smuggled person. Human trafficking, on the other hand, is a crime against a person because of the violation of the victim's rights through coercion and exploitation.[18] Unlike most cases of people smuggling, victims of human trafficking are not permitted to leave upon arrival at their destination.
While smuggling requires travel, trafficking does not. Trafficked people are held against their will through acts of coercion, and forced to work for or provide services to the trafficker or others. The work or services may include anything from bonded or forced labor to commercial sexual exploitation.[1][2] The arrangement may be structured as a work contract, but with no or low payment, or on terms which are highly exploitative. Sometimes the arrangement is structured as debt bondage, with the victim not being permitted or able to pay off the debt.
Bonded labor, or debt bondage, is probably the least known form of labor trafficking today, and yet is the most widely used method of enslaving people. Victims become "bonded" when their labor, the labor which they themselves hired and the tangible goods they have bought are demanded as a means of repayment for a loan or service whose terms and conditions have not been defined, or where the value of the victims' services is not applied toward the liquidation of the debt. Generally, the value of their work is greater than the original sum of money "borrowed".[19]
Forced labor is a situation in which victims are forced to work against their own will under the threat of violence or some other form of punishment; their freedom is restricted and a degree of ownership is exerted. Men are at risk of being trafficked for unskilled work, which globally generates 31 billion USD according to the International Labour Organization.[20] Forms of forced labor can include domestic servitude, agricultural labor, sweatshop factory labor, janitorial, food service and other service industry labor, and begging.[19] Some of the products that can be produced by forced labor are: clothing, cocoa, bricks, coffee, cotton, and gold.[21]
The International Organization for Migration (IOM), the single largest global provider of services to victims of trafficking, reports receiving an increasing number of cases in which victims were subjected to forced labor. A 2012 study observes that "… 2010 was particularly notable as the first year in which IOM assisted more victims of labor trafficking than those who had been trafficked for purposes of sexual exploitation."[22]
Child labour is a form of work that may be hazardous to the physical, mental, spiritual, moral, or social development of children and can interfere with their education. According to the International Labour Organization, the global number of children involved in child labor has fallen during the past decade –  it has declined by one third, from 246 million in 2000 to 168 million children in 2012.[23] Sub-Saharan Africa is the region with the highest incidence of child labour, while the largest numbers of child-workers are found in Asia and the Pacific.[23]
General[edit]




A schematic showing global human trafficking from countries of origin and destination
Countries of origin:


Yellow: Moderate number of persons
Orange: High number of persons
Red: Very high number of persons



Countries of destination:


Light blue: High number of persons
Blue: Very high number of persons


Countries shown in grey are neither countries of origin nor countries of destination






A world map showing the legislative situation in different countries to prevent female trafficking as of 2009[update] according to WomanStats Project.


Gray: No data
Green: Trafficking is illegal and rare
Yellow: Trafficking is illegal but problems still exist
Purple: Trafficking is illegal but is still practiced
Blue: Trafficking is limitedly illegal and is practiced
Red: Trafficking is not illegal and is commonly practiced[24]





The UN Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) has further assisted many non-governmental organizations in their fight against human trafficking. The 2006 armed conflict in Lebanon, which saw 300,000 domestic workers from Sri Lanka, Ethiopia and the Philippines jobless and targets of traffickers, led to an emergency information campaign with NGO Caritas Migrant to raise human-trafficking awareness. Additionally, an April 2006 report, Trafficking in Persons: Global Patterns, helped to identify 127 countries of origin, 98 transit countries and 137 destination countries for human trafficking. To date, it is the second most frequently downloaded UNODC report. Continuing into 2007, UNODC supported initiatives like the Community Vigilance project along the border between India and Nepal, as well as provided subsidy for NGO trafficking prevention campaigns in Bosnia and Herzegovina and Croatia.[25] Public service announcements have also proved useful for organizations combating human trafficking. In addition to many other endeavors, UNODC works to broadcast these announcements on local television and radio stations across the world. By providing regular access to information regarding human-trafficking, individuals are educated how to protect themselves and their families from being exploited.
The United Nations Global Initiative to Fight Human Trafficking (UN.GIFT) was conceived to promote the global fight on human trafficking, on the basis of international agreements reached at the UN. UN.GIFT was launched in March 2007 by UNODC with a grant made on behalf of the United Arab Emirates. It is managed in cooperation with the International Labour Organization (ILO); the International Organization for Migration (IOM); the UN Children's Fund (UNICEF); the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR); and the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE).
Within UN.GIFT, UNODC launched a research exercise to gather primary data on national responses to trafficking in persons worldwide. This exercise resulted in the publication of the Global Report on Trafficking in Persons in February 2009. The report gathers official information for 155 countries and territories in the areas of legal and institutional framework, criminal justice response and victim assistance services.[23] UN.GIFT works with all stakeholders — governments, business, academia, civil society and the media — to support each other's work, create new partnerships, and develop effective tools to fight human trafficking.
The Global Initiative is based on a simple principle: human trafficking is a crime of such magnitude and atrocity that it cannot be dealt with successfully by any government alone. This global problem requires a global, multi-stakeholder strategy that builds on national efforts throughout the world. To pave the way for this strategy, stakeholders must coordinate efforts already underway, increase knowledge and awareness, provide technical assistance, promote effective rights-based responses, build capacity of state and non-state stakeholders, foster partnerships for joint action, and above all, ensure that everybody takes responsibility for this fight. By encouraging and facilitating cooperation and coordination, UN.GIFT aims to create synergies among the anti-trafficking activities of UN agencies, international organizations and other stakeholders to develop the most efficient and cost-effective tools and good practices.[26]
UN.GIFT aims to mobilize state and non-state actors to eradicate human trafficking by reducing both the vulnerability of potential victims and the demand for exploitation in all its forms, ensuring adequate protection and support to those who fall victim, and supporting the efficient prosecution of the criminals involved, while respecting the fundamental human rights of all persons. In carrying out its mission, UN.GIFT will increase the knowledge and awareness on human trafficking, promote effective rights-based responses, build capacity of state and non-state actors, and foster partnerships for joint action against human trafficking. For more information view the UN.GIFT Progress Report 2009.[26][27] UNODC efforts to motivate action launched the Blue Heart Campaign Against Human Trafficking on 6 March 2009,[28] which Mexico launched its own national version of in April 2010.[29][30] The campaign encourages people to show solidarity with human trafficking victims by wearing the blue heart, similar to how wearing the red ribbon promotes transnational HIV/AIDS awareness.[31] On 4 November 2010, U.N. Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon launched the United Nations Voluntary Trust Fund for Victims of Trafficking in Persons to provide humanitarian, legal and financial aid to victims of human trafficking with the aim of increasing the number of those rescued and supported, and broadening the extent of assistance they receive.[32]
In December 2012, UNODC published the new edition of the Global Report on Trafficking in Persons.[33] The Global Report on Trafficking in Persons 2012 has revealed that 27 per cent of all victims of human trafficking officially detected globally between 2007 and 2010 are children, up 7 per cent from the period 2003 to 2006.
The Global Report recorded victims of 136 different nationalities detected in 118 countries between 2007 and 2010, during which period, 460 different flows were identified. Around half of all trafficking took place within the same region with 27 per cent occurring within national borders. One exception is the Middle East, where most detected victims are East and South Asians. Trafficking victims from East Asia have been detected in more than 60 countries, making them the most geographically dispersed group around the world. There are significant regional differences in the detected forms of exploitation. Countries in Africa and in Asia generally intercept more cases of trafficking for forced labour, while sexual exploitation is somewhat more frequently found in Europe and in the Americas. Additionally, trafficking for organ removal was detected in 16 countries around the world.The Report raises concerns about low conviction rates –  16 per cent of reporting countries did not record a single conviction for trafficking in persons between 2007 and 2010. As of September 2017, 171 countries have ratified the United Nations Trafficking in Persons Protocol, of which UNODC is the guardian.[14] Significant progress has been made in terms of legislation: as of 2012, 83 per cent of countries had a law criminalizing trafficking in persons in accordance with the Protocol.[34]
Current international treaties (general)[edit]

Supplementary Convention on the Abolition of Slavery, entered into force in 1957
Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, especially Women and Children
Protocol against the Smuggling of Migrants by Land, Sea and Air
Optional Protocol on the Sale of Children, Child Prostitution and Child Pornography
ILO Forced Labour Convention, 1930 (No. 29)
ILO Abolition of Forced Labour Convention, 1957 (No. 105)
ILO Minimum Age Convention, 1973 (No. 138)
ILO Worst Forms of Child Labour Convention, 1999 (No. 182)

United States[edit]
Main article: Human trafficking in the United States
In 2002, Derek Ellerman and Katherine Chon founded a non-government organization called Polaris Project to combat human trafficking. In 2007, Polaris instituted the National Human Trafficking Resource Center (NHTRC) where[35] callers can report tips and receive information on human trafficking.[36] Polaris' website and hotline informs the public about where cases of suspected human trafficking have occurred within the United States. The website records calls on a map.[37]
In 2007, the U.S. Senate designated 11 January as a National Day of Human Trafficking Awareness in an effort to raise consciousness about this global, national and local issue.[38] In 2010, 2011, 2012 and 2013, President Barack Obama proclaimed January as National Slavery and Human Trafficking Prevention Month.[39] Along with these initiatives libraries across the United States are beginning to contribute to human trafficking awareness. Slowly, libraries are turning into educational centers for those who are not aware of this issue. They are collaborating with other organizations to train staff members to spot human trafficking victims and find ways to help them.[40]
In 2014, DARPA funded the Memex program with the explicit goal of combating human trafficking via domain-specific search.[41] The advanced search capacity, including its ability to reach into the dark web has already allowed for prosecution of human trafficking cases, although they can be difficult to prosecute due to the fraudulent tactics of the human traffickers.[42]
Because of its size and the access to its large airport, Atlanta, Georgia is known as the core of trafficking in the United States. A 2014 study by Urban Institute showed that some traffickers, or "pimps", in Atlanta grossed over $32,000 in one week.[43]
Council of Europe[edit]
On 3 May 2005, the Committee of Ministers adopted the Council of Europe Convention on Action against Trafficking in Human Beings (CETS No. 197).[44] The Convention was opened for signature in Warsaw on 16 May 2005 on the occasion of the 3rd Summit of Heads of State and Government of the Council of Europe. On 24 October 2007, the Convention received its tenth ratification thereby triggering the process whereby it entered into force on 1 February 2008. As of June 2017, the Convention has been ratified by 47 states (including Belarus, a non-Council of Europe state), with Russia being the only state to not have ratified (nor signed).[45]
While other international instruments already exist in this field, the Council of Europe Convention, the first European treaty in this field, is a comprehensive treaty focusing mainly on the protection of victims of trafficking and the safeguard of their rights. It also aims to prevent trafficking and to prosecute traffickers. In addition, the Convention provides for the setting up of an effective and independent monitoring mechanism capable of controlling the implementation of the obligations contained in the Convention.
The Convention is not restricted to Council of Europe member states; non-member states and the European Union also have the possibility of becoming Party to the Convention. In 2013 Belarus became the first non-Council of Europe member state to accede to the Convention.[46][47]
The Convention established a Group of Experts on Action against Trafficking in Human Beings (GRETA) which monitors the implementation of the Convention through country reports. As of 1 March 2013, GRETA has published 17 country reports.[48]
Complementary protection against sex trafficking of children is ensured through the Council of Europe Convention on the Protection of Children against Sexual Exploitation and Sexual Abuse (signed in Lanzarote, 25 October 2007). The Convention entered into force on 1 July 2010.[49] As of September 2017, the Convention has been ratified by 42 states, with another 5 states having signed but not yet ratified.[50]
In addition, the European Court of Human Rights of the Council of Europe in Strasbourg has passed judgments concerning trafficking in human beings which violated obligations under the European Convention on Human Rights: Siliadin v. France,[51] judgment of 26 July 2005, and Rantsev v. Cyprus and Russia,[52] judgment of 7 January 2010.
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe[edit]
Main article: Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe
In 2003, the OSCE established an anti-trafficking mechanism aimed at raising public awareness of the problem and building the political will within participating states to tackle it effectively.
The OSCE actions against human trafficking are coordinated by the Office of the Special Representative for Combating the Traffic of Human Beings.[53] In January 2010, Maria Grazia Giammarinaro became the OSCE Special Representative and Co-ordinator for Combating Trafficking in Human Beings. Dr. Giammarinaro (Italy) has been a judge at the Criminal Court of Rome since 1991. She served from 2006 until 2009 in the European Commission's Directorate-General for Justice, Freedom and Security in Brussels, where she was responsible for work to combat human trafficking and sexual exploitation of children, as well as for penal aspects of illegal immigration within the unit dealing with the fight against organized crime. During this time, she co-ordinated the Group of Experts on Trafficking in Human Beings of the European Commission. From 2001 to 2006 she was a judge for preliminary investigation in the Criminal Court of Rome. Prior to that, from 1996 she was Head of the Legislative Office and Adviser to the Minister for Equal Opportunities. From 2006 to December 2009 the office was headed by Eva Biaudet, a former Member of Parliament and Minister of Health and Social Services in her native Finland.[citation needed]
The activities of the Office of the Special Representative range from training law enforcement agencies to tackle human trafficking to promoting policies aimed at rooting out corruption and organised crime. The Special Representative also visits countries and can, on their request, support the formation and implementation of their anti-trafficking policies. In other cases the Special Representative provides advice regarding implementation of the decisions on human trafficking, and assists governments, ministers and officials to achieve their stated goals of tackling human trafficking.[citation needed]
India Anti Human Trafficking Portal[edit]
In India, the trafficking in persons for commercial sexual exploitation, forced labor, forced marriages and domestic servitude is considered an organized crime. The Government of India applies the Criminal Law (Amendment) Act 2013, active from 3 February 2013, as well as Section 370 and 370A IPC, which defines human trafficking and "provides stringent punishment for human trafficking; trafficking of children for exploitation in any form including physical exploitation; or any form of sexual exploitation, slavery, servitude or the forced removal of organs." Additionally, a Regional Task Force implements the SAARC Convention on the prevention of Trafficking in Women and Children.[54]
Shri R.P.N. Singh, India's Minister of State for Home Affairs, launched a government web portal, the Anti Human Trafficking Portal, on 20 February 2014. The official statement explained that the objective of the on-line resource is for the "sharing of information across all stakeholders, States/UTs[Union Territories] and civil society organizations for effective implementation of Anti Human Trafficking measures."[54] The key aims of the portal are:

Aid in the tracking of cases with inter-state ramifications.
Provide comprehensive information on legislation, statistics, court judgements, United Nations Conventions, details of trafficked people and traffickers and rescue success stories.
Provide connection to "Trackchild", the National Portal on Missing Children that is operational in many states.[54]

Also on 20 February, the Indian government announced the implementation of a Comprehensive Scheme that involves the establishment of Integrated Anti Human Trafficking Units (AHTUs) in 335 vulnerable police districts throughout India, as well as capacity building that includes training for police, prosecutors and judiciary. As of the announcement, 225 Integrated AHTUs had been made operational, while 100 more AHTUs were proposed for the forthcoming financial year.[54]
The Anti-trafficking Policy Index[edit]
The '3P Anti-trafficking Policy Index' measures the effectiveness of government policies to fight human trafficking based on an evaluation of policy requirements prescribed by the United Nations Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, especially Women and Children (2000).[55]
The policy level is evaluated using a five-point scale, where a score of five indicates the best policy practice, while score 1 is the worst. This scale is used to analyze the main three anti-trafficking policy areas: (i) prosecuting (criminalizing) traffickers, (ii) protecting victims, and (iii) preventing the crime of human trafficking. Each sub-index of prosecution, protection and prevention is aggregated to the overall index with an unweighted sum, with the overall index ranging from a score of 3 (worst) to 15 (best). It is available for up to 177 countries over the 2000–2009 period (on an annual basis).
The outcome of the Index shows that anti-trafficking policy has overall improved over the 2000–2009 period. Improvement is most prevalent in the prosecution and prevention areas worldwide. An exception is protection policy,[56] which shows a modest deterioration in recent years.
In 2009 (the most recent year of the evaluation), seven countries demonstrate the highest possible performance in policies for all three dimensions (overall score 15). These countries are Germany, Australia, the Netherlands, Italy, Belgium, Sweden and the US. The second best performing group (overall score 14) consists of France, Norway, South Korea, Croatia, Canada, Austria, Slovenia and Nigeria. The worst performing country in 2009 was North Korea, receiving the lowest score in all dimensions (overall score 3), followed by Somalia. For more information view the Human Trafficking Research and Measurement website.[57]
Religious declaration[edit]
In 2014, for the first time in history major leaders of many religions, Buddhist, Anglican, Catholic, and Orthodox Christian, Hindu, Jewish, and Muslim, met to sign a shared commitment against modern-day slavery; the declaration they signed calls for the elimination of slavery and human trafficking by the year 2020.[58] The signatories were: Pope Francis, Mātā Amṛtānandamayī (also known as Amma), Bhikkhuni Thich Nu Chân Không (representing Zen Master Thích Nhất Hạnh), Datuk K Sri Dhammaratana, Chief High Priest of Malaysia, Rabbi Abraham Skorka, Rabbi David Rosen, Abbas Abdalla Abbas Soliman, Undersecretary of State of Al Azhar Alsharif (representing Mohamed Ahmed El-Tayeb, Grand Imam of Al-Azhar), Grand Ayatollah Mohammad Taqi al-Modarresi, Sheikh Naziyah Razzaq Jaafar, Special advisor of Grand Ayatollah (representing Grand Ayatollah Sheikh Basheer Hussain al Najafi), Sheikh Omar Abboud, Justin Welby, Archbishop of Canterbury, and Metropolitan Emmanuel of France (representing Ecumenical Patriarch Bartholomew.)[58]
Anti-trafficking initiatives[edit]
One of the organizations taking the most active part in the anti-trafficking is the United Nations. In early 2016 the Permanent Mission of the Republic of Kazakhstan to the United Nations held an interactive discussion entitled "Responding to Current Challenges in Trafficking in Human Beings".[59]
One of the current efforts being done to combat human trafficking is an app called TraffickCam.[60] This app was created by the Exchange Initiative[61] and researchers at Washington University. TraffckCam was launched on June 20, 2016 and enables anyone to take photos of their hotel rooms, which then gets uploaded to a large database of hotel images. Since human trafficking victims are often found in hotel rooms for online advertisements, law enforcement and investigators can use these photos to help find and prosecute traffickers.[62]
Anti-trafficking awareness and fundraising campaigns constitute a significant portion of anti-trafficking initiatives.[63] The 24 Hour Race is one such initiative that focuses on increasing awareness among high school students in Asia.[64] The Blue Campaign is another anti-trafficking initiative that works with the U.S. Department of Homeland Security to combat human trafficking and bring freedom to exploited victims.[65]







The Blue Campaign collaborates with law enforcement, government, non-governmental, and private organizations to end human trafficking and protect victims.




[66]
Vulnerable groups[edit]
Trafficking in Persons Report released in June 2016 states that "refugees and migrants; lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, and intersex (LGBTI) individuals; religious minorities; people with disabilities; and those who are stateless" are the most at-risk for human trafficking. Governments best protect victims from being exploited when the needs of vulnerable populations are understood.[67]
Types[edit]
Trafficking of children[edit]
See also: Child harvesting
Trafficking of children involves the recruitment, transportation, transfer, harboring, or receipt of children for the purpose of exploita commercial sexual exploitation of children can take many forms, including forcing a child into prostitution[68][69] or other forms of sexual activity or child pornography. Child exploitation may also involve forced labour or services, slavery or practices similar to slavery, servitude, the removal of organs,[70] illicit international adoption, trafficking for early marriage, recruitment as child soldiers, for use in begging or as athletes (such as child camel jockeys[71] or football players[72]).
IOM statistics indicate that a significant minority (35%) of trafficked persons it assisted in 2011 were less than 18 years of age, which is roughly consistent with estimates from previous years. It was reported in 2010 that Thailand and Brazil were considered to have the worst child sex trafficking records.[73]
Traffickers in children may take advantage of the parents' extreme poverty. Parents may sell children to traffickers in order to pay off debts or gain income, or they may be deceived concerning the prospects of training and a better life for their children. They may sell their children into labor, sex trafficking, or illegal adoptions.
The adoption process, legal and illegal, when abused can sometimes result in cases of trafficking of babies and pregnant women from developing countries to the West.[74] In David M. Smolin's papers on child trafficking and adoption scandals between India and the United States,[75][76] he presents the systemic vulnerabilities in the inter-country adoption system that makes adoption scandals predictable.
The United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child at Article 34, states, "States Parties undertake to protect the child from all forms of sexual exploitation and sexual abuse".[77] In the European Union, commercial sexual exploitation of children is subject to a directive –  Directive 2011/92/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 December 2011 on combating the sexual abuse and sexual exploitation of children and child pornography.[78]
The Hague Convention on Protection of Children and Co-operation in Respect of Intercountry Adoption (or Hague Adoption Convention) is an international convention dealing with international adoption, that aims at preventing child laundering, child trafficking, and other abuses related to international adoption.[79]
The Optional Protocol on the Involvement of Children in Armed Conflict seeks to prevent forceful recruitment (e.g. by guerrilla forces) of children for use in armed conflicts.[80]
Sex trafficking[edit]
Main article: Sex trafficking




Warning of Prostitution and Human trafficking in South Korea for G.I. by United States Forces Korea.


Sex trafficking affects 4.5 million people worldwide.[81] Most victims find themselves in coercive or abusive situations from which escape is both difficult and dangerous.[82]
Trafficking for sexual exploitation was formerly thought of as the organized movement of people, usually women, between countries and within countries for sex work with the use of physical coercion, deception and bondage through forced debt. However, the Trafficking Victims Protection Act of 2000 (US),[83] does not require movement for the offence. The issue becomes contentious when the element of coercion is removed from the definition to incorporate facilitation of consensual involvement in prostitution. For example, in the United Kingdom, the Sexual Offences Act 2003 incorporated trafficking for sexual exploitation but did not require those committing the offence to use coercion, deception or force, so that it also includes any person who enters the UK to carry out sex work with consent as having been "trafficked."[84] In addition, any minor involved in a commercial sex act in the US while under the age of 18 qualifies as a trafficking victim, even if no force, fraud or coercion is involved, under the definition of "Severe Forms of Trafficking in Persons" in the US Trafficking Victims Protection Act of 2000.[83]
Sexual trafficking includes coercing a migrant into a sexual act as a condition of allowing or arranging the migration. Sexual trafficking uses physical or sexual coercion, deception, abuse of power and bondage incurred through forced debt. Trafficked women and children, for instance, are often promised work in the domestic or service industry, but instead are sometimes taken to brothels where they are required to undertake sex work, while their passports and other identification papers confiscated. They may be beaten or locked up and promised their freedom only after earning – through prostitution – their purchase price, as well as their travel and visa costs.[85][86]
Forced marriage[edit]
Main article: Forced marriage
A forced marriage is a marriage where one or both participants are married without their freely given consent.[87] Servile marriage is defined as a marriage involving a person being sold, transferred or inherited into that marriage.[88] According to ECPAT, "Child trafficking for forced marriage is simply another manifestation of trafficking and is not restricted to particular nationalities or countries".[3]
A forced marriage qualifies as a form of human trafficking in certain situations. If a woman is sent abroad, forced into the marriage and then repeatedly compelled to engage in sexual conduct with her new husband, then her experience is that of sex trafficking. If the bride is treated as a domestic servant by her new husband and/or his family, then this is a form of labor trafficking.[89]
Labour trafficking[edit]
Further information: Unfree labour
Labour trafficking is the movement of persons for the purpose of forced labor and services.[90] It may involve bonded labor, involuntary servitude, domestic servitude, and child labor.[90] Labor trafficking happens most often within the domain of domestic work, agriculture, construction, manufacturing and entertainment; and migrant workers and indigenous people are especially at risk of becoming victims.[81] People smuggling operations are also known to traffic people for the exploitation of their labour, for example, as transporters.[91]
Trafficking for organ trade[edit]
Trafficking in organs is a form of human trafficking. It can take different forms. In some cases, the victim is compelled into giving up an organ. In other cases, the victim agrees to sell an organ in exchange of money/goods, but is not paid (or paid less). Finally, the victim may have the organ removed without the victim's knowledge (usually when the victim is treated for another medical problem/illness –  real or orchestrated problem/illness). Migrant workers, homeless persons, and illiterate persons are particularly vulnerable to this form of exploitation. Trafficking of organs is an organized crime, involving several offenders:[92]

the recruiter
the transporter
the medical staff
the middlemen/contractors
the buyers

Trafficking for organ trade often seeks kidneys. Trafficking in organs is a lucrative trade because in many countries the waiting lists for patients who need transplants are very long.[93]
Efforts[edit]
There are many different estimates of how large the human trafficking and sex trafficking industries are. According to scholar Kevin Bales, author of Disposable People (2004), estimates that as many as 27 million people are in "modern-day slavery" across the globe.[94][95] In 2008, the U.S. Department of State estimates that 2 million children are exploited by the global commercial sex trade.[96] In the same year, a study classified 12.3 million individuals worldwide as "forced laborers, bonded laborers or sex-trafficking victims." Approximately 1.39 million of these individuals worked as commercial sex slaves, with women and girls comprising 98% of that 1.36 million.[97]
The enactment of the Victims of Trafficking and Violence Protection Act (TVPA) in 2000 by the United States Congress and its subsequent re-authorizations established the Department of State's Office to Monitor and Combat Trafficking in Persons, which engages with foreign governments to fight human trafficking and publishes a Trafficking in Persons Report annually. The Trafficking in Persons Report evaluates each country's progress in anti-trafficking and places each country onto one of three tiers based on their governments' efforts to comply with the minimum standards for the elimination of trafficking as prescribed by the TVPA.[98] However, questions have been raised by critical anti-trafficking scholars about the basis of this tier system, its heavy focus on compliance with state department protocols, and its failure to consider "risk" and the likely prevalence of trafficking when rating the efforts of diverse countries.[99]
In particular, there were three main components of the TVPA, commonly called the three P's:
PROTECTION: The TVPA increased the US Government's efforts to protect trafficked foreign national victims including, but not limited to: Victims of trafficking, many of whom were previously ineligible for government assistance, were provided assistance; and a non-immigrant status for victims of trafficking if they cooperated in the investigation and prosecution of traffickers (T-Visas, as well as providing other mechanisms to ensure the continued presence of victims to assist in such investigations and prosecutions).
PROSECUTION: The TVPA authorized the US Government to strengthen efforts to prosecute traffickers including, but not limited to: Creating a series of new crimes on trafficking, forced labor, and document servitude that supplemented existing limited crimes related to slavery and involuntary servitude; and recognizing that modern-day slavery takes place in the context of fraud and coercion, as well as force, and is based on new clear definitions for both trafficking into sexual exploitation and labor exploitation: Sex trafficking was defined as, "a commercial sex act that is induced by force, fraud, or coercion, or in which the person induced to perform such an act has not attained 18 years of age". Labor trafficking was defined as, "the recruitment, harboring, transportation, provision, or obtaining of a person for labor or services, through the use of force, fraud, or coercion for the purpose of subjection to involuntary servitude, peonage, debt bondage, or slavery".
PREVENTION: The TVPA allowed for increased prevention measures including: Authorizing the US Government to assist foreign countries with their efforts to combat trafficking, as well as address trafficking within the United States, including through research and awareness-raising; and providing foreign countries with assistance in drafting laws to prosecute trafficking, creating programs for trafficking victims, and assistance with implementing effective means of investigation.[100]
Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton later identified a fourth P, "partnership", in 2009 to serve as a, "pathway to progress in the effort against modern-day slavery."




Findings of the legislative framework in place in different countries to prevent/reduce human trafficking. The findings are from the 2011 Department of State Trafficking in Persons Report[101]


Structural factors[edit]
A complex set of factors fuel sex trafficking, including poverty, unemployment, social norms that discriminate against women, commercial demand for sex, institutional challenges, and globalization.
Poverty and globalization[edit]
Poverty and lack of educational and economic opportunities in one's hometown may lead women to voluntarily migrate and then be involuntarily trafficked into sex work.[102][103] As globalization opened up national borders to greater exchange of goods and capital, labor migration also increased. Less wealthy countries have fewer options for livable wages. The economic impact of globalization pushes people to make conscious decisions to migrate and be vulnerable to trafficking. Gender inequalities that hinder women from participating in the formal sector also push women into informal sectors.[104]
Long waiting lists for organs in the United States and Europe created a thriving international black market. Traffickers harvest organs, particularly kidneys, to sell for large profit and often without properly caring for or compensating the victims. Victims often come from poor, rural communities and see few other options than to sell organs illegally.[105] Wealthy countries' inability to meet organ demand within their own borders perpetuates trafficking. By reforming their internal donation system, Iran achieved a surplus of legal donors and provides an instructive model for eliminating both organ trafficking and -shortage.[106]
Globalization and the rise of Internet technology has also facilitated sex trafficking. Online classified sites and social networks such as Craigslist have been under intense scrutiny for being used by johns and traffickers in facilitating sex trafficking and sex work in general. Traffickers use explicit sites and underground sites (e.g. Craigslist, Backpage, MySpace) to market, recruit, sell, and exploit females. Facebook, Twitter, and other social networking sites are suspected for similar uses. For example, Randal G. Jennings was convicted of sex trafficking five underage girls by forcing them to advertise on Craigslist and driving them to meet the customers.[citation needed] According to the National Center for Missing and Exploited Children, online classified ads reduce the risks of finding prospective customers.[107] Studies have identified the Internet as the single biggest facilitator of commercial sex trade, although it is difficult to ascertain which women advertised are sex trafficking victims.[108] Traffickers and pimps use the Internet to recruit minors, since Internet and social networking sites usage have significantly increased especially among children.[109]
Organized criminals can generate up to several thousand dollars per day from one trafficked girl, and the Internet has further increased profitability of sex trafficking and child trafficking. With faster access to a wider clientele, more sexual encounters can be scheduled.[110] Victims and clients, according to a New York City report on sex trafficking in minors, increasingly use the Internet to meet customers. Because of protests, Craigslist has since closed its adult services section. According to authorities, Backpage is now the main source for advertising trafficking victims.[111] Investigators also frequently browse online classified ads to identify potential underage girls who are trafficked.
While globalization fostered new technologies that may exacerbate sex trafficking, technology can also be used to assist law enforcement and anti-trafficking efforts. A study was done on online classified ads surrounding the Super Bowl. A number of reports have noticed increase in sex trafficking during previous years of the Super Bowl.[112] For the 2011 Super Bowl held in Dallas, Texas, the Backpage for Dallas area experienced a 136% increase on the number of posts in the Adult section on Super Bowl Sunday, where as Sundays typically have the lowest amount of posts. Researchers analyzed the most salient terms in these online ads, which suggested that many escorts were traveling across state lines to Dallas specifically for the Super Bowl, and found that the self-reported ages were higher than usual. Twitter was another social networking platform studied for detecting sex trafficking. Digital tools can be used to narrow the pool of sex trafficking cases, albeit imperfectly and with uncertainty.[113]
However, there has been no evidence found actually linking the Super Bowl –  or any other sporting event –  to increased trafficking or prostitution.[114][115]
Political and institutional challenges[edit]
Corrupt and inadequately trained police officers can be complicit in sex trafficking and/or commit violence against sex workers, including sex trafficked victims. [116] Human traffickers often incorporate abuse of the legal system into their control tactics by making threats of deportation [117] or by turning victims into the authorities, possibly resulting in the incarceration of the victims. [118]
Anti-trafficking agendas from different groups can also be in conflict. In the movement for sex workers rights, sex workers establish unions and organizations, which seek to eliminate trafficking themselves. However, law enforcement also seek to eliminate trafficking and to prosecute trafficking, and their work may infringe on sex workers' rights and agency. For example, the sex workers union DMSC (Durbar Mahila Samanwaya Committee) in Kolkata, India, has "self-regulatory boards" (SRBs) that patrol the red light districts and assist girls who are underage or trafficked. The union opposes police intervention and interferes with police efforts to bring minor girls out of brothels, on the grounds that police action might have an adverse impact on non-trafficked sex workers, especially because police officers in many places are corrupt and violent in their operations.[116] Critics argue that since sex trafficking is an economic and violent crime, it calls for law enforcement to intervene and prevent violence against victims.
Criminalization of sex work also may foster the underground market for sex work and enable sex trafficking.[102]
Difficult political situations such as civil war and social conflict are push factors for migration and trafficking. A study reported that larger countries, the richest and the poorest countries, and countries with restricted press freedom are likely to engage in more sex trafficking. Specifically, being in a transitional economy made a country nineteen times more likely to be ranked in the highest trafficking category, and gender inequalities in a country's labor market also correlated with higher trafficking rates.[119]
An annual US State Department report in June 2013 cited Russia and China as among the worst offenders in combatting forced labour and sex trafficking, raising the possibility of US sanctions being leveraged against these countries.[120] In 1997 alone as many as 175,000 young women from Russia, as well as the former Soviet Union, were sold as commodities in the sex markets of the developed countries in Europe and the Americas.[121]
In 2013, the Supreme Court of Canada declared the laws which effectively prohibited prostitution illegal. It delayed the implementation of this ruling for one year to give the parliament time to enact replacement laws, if it so desired.[122]
Commercial demand for sex[edit]
Abolitionists who seek an end to sex trafficking explain the nature of sex trafficking as an economic supply and demand model. In this model, male demand for prostitutes leads to a market of sex work, which, in turn, fosters sex trafficking, the illegal trade and coercion of people into sex work, and pimps and traffickers become 'distributors' who supply people to be sexually exploited. The demand for sex trafficking can also be facilitated by some pimps' and traffickers' desire for women whom they can exploit as workers because they do not require wages, safe working circumstances, and agency in choosing customers.[102]
Consequences[edit]







Traffickers use physical, emotional, and psychological abuse to control and exploit their victims.




[123]
For victims[edit]
Sex trafficking victims face threats of violence from many sources, including customers, pimps, brothel owners, madams, traffickers, and corrupt local law enforcement officials. Raids as an anti-sex trafficking measure have the potential to help, and also to protect sex trafficked victims. Because of their potentially complicated legal status and their potential language barriers, the arrest or fear of arrest creates stress and other emotional trauma for trafficking victims. Victims may also experience physical violence from law enforcement during raids.[124][125] The challenges facing victims often continue of course, after their experience of "rescue" or removal from coercive sexual exploitation. In addition to coping with their past traumatic experiences, former trafficking victims often experience social alienation in the host and home countries. Stigmatization, social exclusion, and intolerance often make it difficult for former victims to integrate into their host community, or to reintegrate into their former community. Accordingly, one of the central aims of protection assistance, is the promotion of (re)integration.[126][56] Too often however, governments and large institutional donors offer little funding to support the provision of assistance and social services to former trafficking victims. As the victims are also pushed into drug trafficking, many of them face criminal sanctions also.[127]
Psychological[edit]
Short-term impact – psychological coercion[edit]
The use of coercion by perpetrators and traffickers involves the use of extreme control. Perpetrators expose the victim to high amounts of psychological stress induced by threats, fear, and physical and emotional violence. Tactics of coercion are reportedly used in three phases of trafficking: recruitment, initiation, and indoctrination.[128] During the initiation phase, traffickers use foot-in-the-door techniques of persuasion to lead their victims into various trafficking industries. This manipulation creates an environment where the victim becomes completely dependent upon the authority of the trafficker.[128] Traffickers take advantage of family dysfunction, homelessness, and history of childhood abuse to psychologically manipulate women and children into the trafficking industry.[129]
One form of psychological coercion particularly common in cases of sex trafficking and forced prostitution is Stockholm syndrome. Many women entering into the sex trafficking industry are minors whom have already experienced prior sexual abuse.[130] Traffickers take advantage of young girls by luring them into the business through force and coercion, but more often through false promises of love, security, and protection. This form of coercion works to recruit and initiate the victim into the life of a sex worker, while also reinforcing a "trauma bond", also known as Stockholm syndrome. Stockholm syndrome is a psychological response where the victim becomes attached to his or her perpetrator.[130][131]
The goal of a trafficker is to turn a human being into a slave. To do this, perpetrators employ tactics that can lead to the psychological consequence of learned helplessness for the victims, where they sense that they no longer have any autonomy or control over their lives.[129] Traffickers may hold their victims captive, expose them to large amounts of alcohol or use drugs, keep them in isolation, or withhold food or sleep.[129] During this time the victim often begins to feel the onset of depression, guilt and self-blame, anger and rage, and sleep disturbances, PTSD, numbing, and extreme stress. Under these pressures, the victim can fall into the hopeless mental state of learned helplessness.[128][132][133]
For victims of specifically trafficked for the purpose of forced prostitution and sexual slavery, initiation into the trade is almost always characterized by violence.[129] Traffickers hunt down their victims and employ practices of sexual abuse, torture, brainwashing, repeated rape and physical assault until the victim submits to his or her fate as a sexual slave. Victims experience verbal threats, social isolation, and intimidation before they accept their role as a prostitute.[134]
For those enslaved in situations of forced labor, learned helplessness can also manifest itself through the trauma of living as a slave. Reports indicate that captivity for the person and financial gain of their owners adds additional psychological trauma. Victims are often cut off from all forms of social connection, as isolation allows the perpetrator to destroy the victim's sense of self and increase his or her dependence on the perpetrator.[128]
Long-term impact[edit]
Human trafficking victims may experience complex trauma as a result of repeated cases of intimate relationship trauma over long periods of time including, but not limited to, sexual abuse, domestic violence, forced prostitution, or gang rape. Complex trauma involves multifaceted conditions of depression, anxiety, self-hatred, dissociation, substance abuse, self-destructive behaviors, medical and somatic concerns, despair, and revictimization. Psychology researchers report that, although similar to posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), Complex trauma is more expansive in diagnosis because of the effects of prolonged trauma.[135]
Victims of sex trafficking often get "branded"[136] by their traffickers or pimps. These tattoos usually consist of bar codes or the trafficker's name or rules. Even if a victim escapes their trafficker's control or gets rescued, these tattoos are painful reminders of their past and results in emotional distress. To get these tattoos removed or covered-up can cost hundreds of dollars.[137]
Psychological reviews have shown that the chronic stress experienced by many victims of human trafficking can compromise the immune system.[129] Several studies found that chronic stressors (like trauma or loss) suppressed cellular and humoral immunity.[132] Victims may develop STDs and HIV/AIDS.[138] Perpetrators frequently use substance abuse as a means to control their victims, which leads to compromised health, self-destructive behavior, and long-term physical harm.[139] Furthermore, victims have reported treatment similar to torture, where their bodies are broken and beaten into submission.[139][140]
Children are especially vulnerable to these developmental and psychological consequences of trafficking due to their age. In order to gain complete control of the child, traffickers often destroy physical and mental health of the children through persistent physical and emotional abuse.[141] Victims experience severe trauma on a daily basis that devastates the healthy development of self-concept, self-worth, biological integrity, and cognitive functioning.[142] Children who grow up in constant environments of exploitation frequently exhibit antisocial behavior, over-sexualized behavior, self-harm, aggression, distrust of adults, dissociative disorders, substance abuse, complex trauma, and attention deficit disorders.[131][141][142][143] Stockholm syndrome is also a common problem for girls while they are trafficked, which can hinder them from both trying to escape, and moving forward in psychological recovery programs.[140]
Although 98% of the sex trade is composed of women and girls[140] there is an effort to gather empirical evidence about the psychological impact of abuse common in sex trafficking upon young boys.[142][144] Boys often will experience forms of post-traumatic stress disorder, but also additional stressors of social stigma of homosexuality associated with sexual abuse for boys, and externalization of blame, increased anger, and desire for revenge.
HIV/AIDS[edit]




Estimated prevalence in % of HIV among young adults (15–49) per country as of 2011.[145]




  No data
  <0.10
  0.10–0.5
  0.5–1


  1–5
  5–15
  15–50







Sex trafficking increases the risk of contracting HIV/AIDS.[146] The HIV/AIDS pandemic can be both a cause and a consequence of sex trafficking. On one hand, child-prostitutes are sought by customers because they are perceived as being less likely to be HIV positive, and this demand leads to child sex trafficking. On the other hand, trafficking leads to the proliferation of HIV, because victims, being vulnerable and often young/inexperienced, cannot protect themselves properly, and get infected.[147]
Economic impacts[edit]
According to estimates from the International Labour Organization (ILO), every year the human trafficking industry generates 32 billion USD, half of which ($15.5 billion) is made in industrialized countries, and a third of which ($9.7 billion) is made in Asia.[148] A 2011 paper published in Human Rights Review, "Sex Trafficking: Trends, Challenges and Limitations of International Law", notes that, since 2000, the number of sex-trafficking victims has risen while costs associated with trafficking have declined: "Coupled with the fact that trafficked sex slaves are the single most profitable type of slave, costing on average $1,895 each but generating $29,210 annually, [there are] stark predictions about the likely growth in commercial sex slavery in the future."[97] Sex trafficking victims rarely get a share of the money that they make through coerced sex work, which further keeps them oppressed.[149]
Popular culture[edit]







Human Trafficking miniseries about an Immigration and Customs Enforcement agent who are determined to stop the trafficking of women and children.




Main article: Human trafficking in popular culture
Criticism[edit]
Both the public debate on human trafficking and the actions undertaken by the anti-human traffickers have been criticized by Zbigniew Dumienski, a former research analyst at the S. Rajaratnam School of International Studies.[150] The criticism touches upon statistics and data on human trafficking, the concept itself, and anti-trafficking measures.
Problems with statistics and data[edit]
According to a former Wall Street Journal columnist, figures used in human trafficking estimates rarely have identifiable sources or transparent methodologies behind them and in most (if not all) instances, they are mere guesses.[151][152] Dumienski and Laura Agustin argue that this is a result of the fact that it is impossible to produce reliable statistics on a phenomenon happening in the shadow economy.[150][153] According to a UNESCO Bangkok researcher, statistics on human trafficking may be unreliable due to overrepresentation of sex trafficking. As an example, he cites flaws in Thai statistics, who discount men from their official numbers because by law they cannot be considered trafficking victims due to their gender.[154]
A 2012 article in the International Communication Gazette examined the effect of two communication theories (agenda-building and agenda-setting) on media coverage on human trafficking in the United States and Britain. The article analyzed four newspapers including the Guardian and the Washington Post and categorized the content into various categories. Overall, the article found that sex trafficking was the most reported form of human trafficking by the newspapers that were analyzed (p. 154). Many of the other stories on trafficking were non-specific.[155]
Problems with the concept[edit]
According to Zbigniew Dumienski, the very concept of human trafficking is murky and misleading.[150] It has been argued that while human trafficking is commonly seen as a monolithic crime, in reality it is an act of illegal migration that involves various different actions: some of them may be criminal or abusive, but others often involve consent and are legal.[150] Laura Agustin argues that not everything that might seem abusive or coercive is considered as such by the migrant. For instance, she states that: 'would-be travellers commonly seek help from intermediaries who sell information, services and documents. When travellers cannot afford to buy these outright, they go into debt'.[153] Dumienski says that while these debts might indeed be on very harsh conditions, they are usually incurred on a voluntary basis.[150]
The critics of the current approaches to trafficking say that a lot of the violence and exploitation faced by illegal migrants derives precisely from the fact that their migration and their work are illegal and not primarily because of trafficking.[156] Tara McCormack, a lecturer in international relations at Brunel University, has opined in that trafficking discourse can be detrimental to the interests of migrants as it denies them agency and as it depoliticizes debates on migration.[157]
The international Save the Children organization also stated: "…The issue, however, gets mired in controversy and confusion when prostitution too is considered as a violation of the basic human rights of both adult women and minors, and equal to sexual exploitation per se…trafficking and prostitution become conflated with each other…On account of the historical conflation of trafficking and prostitution both legally and in popular understanding, an overwhelming degree of effort and interventions of anti-trafficking groups are concentrated on trafficking into prostitution."[158]
Claudia Aradau of Open University claims that NGOs involved in anti-sex trafficking often employ "politics of pity," which promotes that all trafficked victims are completely guiltless, fully coerced into sex work, and experience the same degrees of physical suffering. One critic identifies two strategies that gain pity: denunciation –  attributing all violence and suffering to the perpetrator –  and sentiment –  exclusively depicting the suffering of the women. NGOs' use of images of unidentifiable females suffering physically help display sex trafficking scenarios as all the same. She points out that not all trafficking victims have been abducted, abused physically, and repeatedly raped, unlike popular portrayals.[159] A study of the relationships between individuals who are defined as sex-trafficking victims by virtue of having a procurer (especially minors) concluded that assumptions about victimization and human trafficking do not do justice to the complex and often mutual relationships that exist between sex workers and their third parties.[160]
Problems with anti-trafficking measures[edit]
Groups like Amnesty International have been critical of insufficient or ineffective government measures to tackle human trafficking. Criticism includes a lack of understanding of human trafficking issues, poor identification of victims and a lack of resources for the key pillars of anti-trafficking –  identification, protection, prosecution and prevention. For example, Amnesty International has called the UK government's new anti-trafficking measures "not fit for purpose."[161]
Victim identification and protection in the UK[edit]
In the UK, human trafficking cases are processed by the same officials to simultaneously determine the refugee and trafficking victim statuses of a person. However, criteria for qualifying as a refugee and a trafficking victim differ and they have different needs for staying in a country. A person may need assistance as a trafficking victim but his/her circumstances may not necessarily meet the threshold for asylum. In which case, not being granted refugee status affects their status as a trafficked victim and thus their ability to receive help. Reviews of the statistics from the National Referral Mechanism (NRM), a tool created by the Council of Europe Convention on Action against Trafficking in Human Beings (CoE Convention) to help states effectively identify and care for trafficking victims, found that positive decisions for non-European Union citizens were much lower than that of EU and UK citizens. According to data on the NRM decisions from April 2009 to April 2011, an average of 82.8% of UK and EU citizens were conclusively accepted as victims while an average of only 45.9% of non-EU citizens were granted the same status.[162] High refusal rates of non-EU people point to possible stereotypes and biases about regions and countries of origin which may hinder anti-trafficking efforts, since the asylum system is linked to the trafficking victim protection system.
Laura Agustin has suggested that, in some cases, "anti-traffickers" ascribe victim status to immigrants who have made conscious and rational decisions to cross the borders knowing they will be selling sex and who do not consider themselves to be victims.[163] There have been instances in which the alleged victims of trafficking have actually refused to be rescued[164] or run away from the anti-trafficking shelters.[165]
In a 2013 lawsuit,[166] the Court of Appeal gave guidance to prosecuting authorities on the prosecution of victims of human trafficking, and held that the convictions of three Vietnamese children and one Ugandan woman ought to be quashed as the proceedings amounted to an abuse of the court's process.[167] The case was reported by the BBC[168] and one of the victims was interviewed by Channel 4.[169]
Law enforcement and the use of raids[edit]
In the U.S., services and protections for trafficked victims are related to cooperation with law enforcement. Legal procedures that involve prosecution and specifically, raids, are thus the most common anti-trafficking measures. Raids are conducted by law enforcement and by private actors and many organizations (sometimes in cooperation with law enforcement). Law enforcement perceive some benefits from raids, including the ability to locate and identify witnesses for legal processes, to dismantle "criminal networks", and to rescue victims from abuse.[124]
The problems against anti-trafficking raids are related to the problem of the trafficking concept itself, as raids' purpose of fighting sex trafficking may be conflated with fighting prostitution. The Trafficking Victims Protection Re-authorization Act of 2005 (TVPRA) gives state and local law enforcement funding to prosecute customers of commercial sex, therefore some law enforcement agencies make no distinction between prostitution and sex trafficking. One study interviewed women who have experienced law enforcement operations as sex workers and found that during these raids meant to combat human trafficking, none of the women were ever identified as trafficking victims, and only one woman was asked whether she was coerced into sex work. The conflation of trafficking with prostitution, then, does not serve to adequately identify trafficking and help the victims. Raids are also problematic in that the women involved were most likely unclear about who was conducting the raid, what the purpose of the raid was, and what the outcomes of the raid would be.[124]
Law enforcement personnel agree that raids can intimidate trafficked persons and render subsequent law enforcement actions unsuccessful. Social workers and attorneys involved in anti-sex trafficking have negative opinions about raids. Service providers report a lack of uniform procedure for identifying trafficking victims after raids. The 26 interviewed service providers stated that local police never referred trafficked persons to them after raids. Law enforcement also often use interrogation methods that intimidate rather than assist potential trafficking victims. Additionally, sex workers sometimes face violence from the police during raids and arrests and in rehabilitation centers.[124]
As raids occur to brothels that may house sex workers as well as sex trafficked victims, raids affect sex workers in general. As clients avoid brothel areas that are raided but do not stop paying for sex, voluntary sex workers will have to interact with customers underground. Underground interactions means that sex workers take greater risks, where as otherwise they would be cooperating with other sex workers and with sex worker organizations to report violence and protect each other. One example of this is with HIV prevention. Sex workers collectives monitor condom use, promote HIV testing, and cares for and monitor the health of HIV positive sex workers. Raids disrupt communal HIV care and prevention efforts, and if HIV positive sex workers are rescued and removed from their community, their treatments are disrupted, furthering the spread of AIDS.[170]
Scholars Aziza Ahmed and Meena Seshu suggest reforms in law enforcement procedures so that raids are last resort, not violent, and are transparent in its purposes and processes. Furthermore, they suggest that since any trafficking victims will probably be in contact with other sex workers first, working with sex workers may be an alternative to the raid and rescue model.[170]
"End Demand" programs[edit]
Critics argue that End Demand programs are ineffective in that prostitution is not reduced, "John schools" have little effect on deterrence and portray prostitutes negatively, and conflicts in interest arise between law enforcement and NGO service providers. A study found that Sweden's legal experiment (criminalizing clients of prostitution and providing services to prostitutes who want to exit the industry in order to combat trafficking) did not reduce the number of prostitutes, but instead increased exploitation of sex workers because of the higher risk nature of their work. The same study reported that johns' inclination to buy sex did not change as a result of john schools, and the programs targeted johns who are poor and colored immigrants. Some john schools also intimidate johns into not purchasing sex again by depicting prostitutes as drug addicts, HIV positive, violent, and dangerous, which further marginalizes sex workers. John schools require program fees, and police's involvement in NGOs who provide these programs create conflicts of interest especially with money involved.[171][172]
Modern feminist perspectives[edit]






The examples and perspective in this article deal primarily with the United States and do not represent a worldwide view of the subject. You may improve this article, discuss the issue on the talk page, or create a new article, as appropriate. (April 2014) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



There are different feminist perspectives on sex trafficking. The third-wave feminist perspective of sex trafficking seeks to harmonize the dominant and liberal feminist views of sex trafficking. The dominant feminist view focuses on "sexualized domination", which includes issues of pornography, female sex labor in a patriarchal world, rape, and sexual harassment. Dominant feminism emphasizes sex trafficking as forced prostitution and considers the act exploitative. Liberal feminism sees all agents as capable of reason and choice. Liberal feminists support sex workers rights, and argue that women who voluntarily chose sex work are autonomous. The liberal feminist perspective finds sex trafficking problematic where it overrides consent of individuals.[173]
Third-wave feminism harmonizes the thoughts that while individuals have rights, overarching inequalities hinder women's capabilities. Third-wave feminism also considers that women who are trafficked and face oppression do not all face the same kinds of oppression. For example, third-wave feminist proponent Shelley Cavalieri identifies oppression and privilege in the intersections of race, class, and gender. Women from low socioeconomic class, generally from the Global South, face inequalities that differ from those of other sex trafficking victims. Therefore, it advocates for catering to individual trafficking victim because sex trafficking is not monolithic, and therefore there is not a one-size-fits-all intervention. This also means allowing individual victims to tell their unique experiences rather than essentializing all trafficking experiences. Lastly, third-wave feminism promotes increasing women's agency both generally and individually, so that they have the opportunity to act on their own behalf.[173]
Third-wave feminist perspective of sex trafficking is loosely related to Amartya Sen's and Martha Nussbaum's visions of the human capabilities approach to development. It advocates for creating viable alternatives for sex trafficking victims. Nussbaum articulated four concepts to increase trafficking victims' capabilities: education for victims and their children, microcredit and increased employment options, labor unions for low-income women in general, and social groups that connect women to one another.[173]
Social norms[edit]
According to modern Feminists, women and girls are more prone to trafficking also because of social norms that marginalize their value and status in society. By this perspective females face considerable gender discrimination both at home and in school. Stereotypes that women belong at home in the private sphere and that women are less valuable because they do not and are not allowed to contribute to formal employment and monetary gains the same way men do further marginalize women's status relative to men. Some religious beliefs also lead people to believe that the birth of girls are a result of bad karma,[citation needed] further cementing the belief that girls are not as valuable as boys. It is generally regarded by feminists that various social norms contribute to women's inferior position and lack of agency and knowledge, thus making them vulnerable to exploitation such as sex trafficking.[174]
Singapore[edit]
As of 2016, Singapore acceded to the United Nations Trafficking in Persons Protocol and affirmed on 28 September 2015 the commitment to combat people trafficking, especially women and children.[175]
See also[edit]


Abusive power and control
Bride-buying
Comfort woman
Human trafficking by country
Financial abuse
Gaslighting
List of organizations opposing human trafficking
Kidnapping
Migrant sex work
Serious and Organised Crime Group
Sexual jihad
Sexual trafficking in Kosovo
Sharecropping
She Has a Name
South East Asia Court of Women on HIV and Human Trafficking
Transnational efforts to prevent human trafficking
Western princess
Wife selling


References[edit]


^ a b "UNODC on human trafficking and migrant smuggling". United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. 2011. Retrieved 22 March 2011. 
^ a b "Amnesty International – People smuggling". Amnesty.org.au. 23 March 2009. Archived from the original on 9 March 2011. Retrieved 22 March 2011. 
^ a b "Child Trafficking for Forced Marriage" (PDF). 
^ "Slovakian 'slave' trafficked to Burnley for marriage". BBC News. 
^ "MARRIAGE IN FORM, TRAFFICKING IN CONTENT: Non – consensual Bride Kidnapping in Contemporary Kyrgyzstan" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 15 April 2014. Retrieved 2 November 2016. 
^ "Trafficking in organs, tissues and cells and trafficking in human beings for the purpose of the removal of organs" (PDF). United Nations. 2009. Retrieved 18 January 2014. 
^ "Human trafficking for organs/tissue removal". Fightslaverynow.org. Retrieved 30 December 2012. 
^ "Human trafficking for ova removal or surrogacy". Councilforresponsiblegenetics.org. 31 March 2004. Retrieved 30 December 2012. 
^ Special Action Programme to Combat Forced Labour (20 May 2014). "Profits and poverty: The economics of forced labour" (PDF). International Labour Organization. p. 4. Retrieved 24 October 2016. 
^ "21 million people are now victims of forced labour, ILO says". International Labour Organization. 1 June 2012. Retrieved 24 October 2016. 
^ Louise Shelley (2010). Human Trafficking: A Global Perspective. Cambridge University Press. p. 2. ISBN 978-1-139-48977-5. 
^ "DIRECTIVE 2011/36/EU OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL of 5 April 2011 on preventing and combating trafficking in human beings and protecting its victims, and replacing Council Framework Decision 2002/629/JH" (PDF). Eur-lex.europa.eu. 
^ "Convention on Transnational Organized Crime". Unodc.org. Retrieved 22 March 2011. 
^ a b "UNTC". un.org. 
^ "United Nations Convention Against Transnational Organized Crime And The Protocols Thereto" (PDF). Retrieved 21 January 2012. 
^ Special Action Programme to Combat Forced Labour (20 May 2014). "Profits and poverty: The economics of forced labour" (PDF). International Labour Organization. p. 4. Retrieved 24 October 2016. 
^ "Modern Slaves". Free The Slaves. Retrieved 20 April 2017. 
^ "Difference between Smuggling and Trafficking". Anti-trafficking.net. Archived from the original on 21 February 2013. Retrieved 30 December 2012. 
^ a b "Labor trafficking fact sheet" (PDF). National Human Trafficking Resource Center. 
^ "A global alliance against forced labour", ILO, 11 May 2005.
^ McCarthy, Ryan (18 December 2010). "13 Products Most Likely to Be Made By Child or Forced Labor". Huffington Post. Retrieved 8 October 2013. 
^ "Counter-Trafficking and Assistance to Vulnerable Migrants, Annual Report of activities 2011" (PDF). International Organization for Migration. Geneva. 
^ a b c "Child Labour". 
^ WomanStats Maps, Woman Stats Project.
^ "Preventing Human Trafficking". Unodc.org. Retrieved 21 January 2012. 
^ a b "Un.Gift.Hub". Ungift.org. Archived from the original on 12 December 2010. Retrieved 21 January 2012. 
^ "UNGIFT progress report" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 July 2011. Retrieved 21 January 2012. 
^ "What is human-trafficking". Unodc.org. 6 March 2009. Retrieved 21 January 2012. 
^ "Blue Heart Campaign Against Human Trafficking – Mexico Campaign". Unodc.org. Retrieved 21 January 2012. 
^ "Kanaal van UNODCHQ". YouTube. Retrieved 21 January 2012. 
^ Blue Heart Campaign Against Human Trafficking
^ "Demi Moore and Ashton Kutcher join Secretary-General to launch Trust Fund for victims of human trafficking". Unodc.org. 4 November 2010. Retrieved 21 January 2012. 
^ "Global report on trafficking in persons". Unodc.org. Retrieved 8 January 2013. 
^ "Global report on trafficking in persons". Unodc.org. Retrieved 8 January 2013. 
^ "Combating Human Trafficking and Modern-day Slavery". Polaris Project. Retrieved 12 January 2013. 
^ "National Human Trafficking Resource Center | Polaris Project | Combating Human Trafficking and Modern-day Slavery". Polaris Project. Retrieved 12 January 2013. 
^ "State Map | Polaris Project | Combating Human Trafficking and Modern-day Slavery". Polaris Project. 7 December 2007. Retrieved 12 January 2013. 
^ Smith, Holly Austin (2014). Walking Prey: How America's Youth Are Vulnerable to Sex Slavery. St. Martin's Press. p. 16. ISBN 978-1-137-43769-3. 
^ "Presidential Proclamation – National Slavery and Human Trafficking Prevention Month, The White House". 
^ "Library Staff Trained to ID Sex Trafficking Victims". NBC 7 San Diego. Retrieved 1 April 2016. 
^ "Memex". DARPA. Retrieved 20 April 2015. 
^ "Human Traffickers Caught on Hidden Internet". Scientific American. Retrieved 20 April 2015. 
^ "Estimating the Size and Structure of the Underground Commercial Sex Economy in Eight Major US Cities". www.urban.org. Retrieved 10 February 2016. 
^ "Council of Europe – Council of Europe Convention on Action against Trafficking in Human Beings (CETS No. 197)". Conventions.coe.int. Retrieved 21 January 2012. 
^ http://www.coe.int/en/web/conventions/full-list/-/conventions/treaty/197/signatures?p_auth=Gn9RcCwG
^ "Liste complète". coe.int. 
^ "Action against Trafficking in Human Beings". coe.int. 
^ "Council of Europe – Action against Trafficking in Human Beings: Publications". Retrieved 2 March 2012. 
^ "Liste complète". coe.int. 
^ http://www.coe.int/en/web/conventions/full-list/-/conventions/treaty/201/signatures
^ "Council of Europe – European Court of Human Rights". Retrieved 2 March 2012. 
^ "Council of Europe – European Court of Human Rights". Retrieved 2 March 2012. 
^ "Combating Trafficking in Human Beings – Secretariat – Office of the Special Representative and Co-ordinator for Combating Trafficking in Human Beings". Osce.org. 3 October 2011. Retrieved 21 January 2012. 
^ a b c d "Launching of Web Portal on Anti Human Trafficking". Print Release Print Press Information Bureau Government of India Ministry of Home Affairs. Government of India. 20 February 2014. Retrieved 15 December 2014. 
^ Cho, Seo-Young, Axel Dreher, and Eric Neumayer. "The Spread of Anti-trafficking Policies-Evidence from a New Index." Available at SSRN 1776842 (2011).
^ a b ia-forum.org. "Interview with Dr. Luke S. Bearup: Human Trafficking – International Affairs Forum". www.ia-forum.org. Retrieved 2017-02-23. 
^ "Human-trafficking-research.org". Human-trafficking-research.org. Retrieved 21 January 2012. 
^ a b "Pope Francis And Other Religious Leaders Sign Declaration Against Modern Slavery". The Huffington Post. 
^ "'Responding to current challenges in trafficking in human beings' discussion in New York". inform.kz. 
^ "TraffickCam | About". traffickcam.com. Retrieved 2017-05-18. 
^ "Exchange Initiative | Real Resources to End Trafficking". www.exchangeinitiative.com. Retrieved 2017-05-18. 
^ Itkowitz, Colby; Itkowitz, Colby (2016-07-01). "An incredibly simple way your phone may help save sex trafficked children". The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Retrieved 2017-05-18. 
^ "Responsible Public Awareness Campaigns for Human Trafficking". Laboratory to Combat Human Trafficking. 2017-02-13. Retrieved 2017-04-26. 
^ "Home". 24 Hour Race. Retrieved 2017-04-26. 
^ "About the Blue Campaign | Homeland Security". www.dhs.gov. Retrieved 2017-05-18. 
^ "Blue Campaign | Homeland Security". www.dhs.gov. Retrieved 2017-05-18. 
^ "Trafficking in Persons Report 2016". www.state.gov. Retrieved 2017-05-17. 
^ Williams, Rachel (3 July 2008). "British-born teenagers being trafficked for sexual exploitation within UK, police say". The 8102998382. London. Retrieved 4 May 2010. 
^ Mother sold girl for sex, 7 May 2010, The Age.
^ http://asiafoundation.org/resources/pdfs/KidneyTraffickinginNepal.pdf
^ "The Facts About Children Trafficked For Use As Camel Jockeys". state.gov. 
^ "Agents in the UEFA spotlight". Archived from the original on 30 April 2009. Retrieved 5 February 2007. CS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknown (link) , UEFA, 29 September 2006. (archived from the original on 30 April 2009)
^ "LatAm – Brazil – Child Prostitution Crisis". Libertadlatina.org. Archived from the original on 3 June 2016. Retrieved 22 March 2011. 
^ "The Age: China sets up website to recover trafficked children: report". Melbourne: News.theage.com.au. 28 October 2009. Archived from the original on 27 April 2011. Retrieved 22 March 2011. 
^ The Two Faces of Inter-country Adoption: The Significance of the Indian Adoption Scandals at the Wayback Machine (archived 26 March 2009), Seton Hall Law Review, 35:403–493, 2005. (archived from the original on 26 March 2009)
^ Child Laundering: How the Inter-country Adoption System Legitimizes and Incentivizes the Practices of Buying, Trafficking, Kidnapping, and Stealing Children by David M. Smolin, bepress Legal Series, Working Paper 749, 29 August 2005.
^ "Convention on the Rights of the Child". ohchr.org. 
^ http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2011:335:0001:0014:EN:PDF
^ "HCCH – Full text". hcch.net. 
^ "Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child". ohchr.org. 
^ a b "Forced labour, human trafficking and slavery". ilo.org. 
^ Siddharth Kara (2009). Sex Trafficking: Inside the Business of Modern Slavery. Columbia University Press. 
^ a b "Victims of Trafficking and Violence Protection Act of 2000". State.gov. Retrieved 22 March 2011. 
^ "Colla UK_Sarah_final" (PDF). Gaatw.net. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 March 2011. Retrieved 22 March 2011. 
^ Migration Information Programme. Trafficking and prostitution: the growing exploitation of migrant women from central and eastern Europe. Geneva, International Organization for Migration, 1995.
^ Chauzy JP. Kyrgyz Republic: trafficking. Geneva, International Organization for Migration, 20 January 2001 (Press briefing notes)
^ "BBC – Ethics – Forced Marriages: Introduction". bbc.co.uk. 
^ "Forced and servile marriage in the context of human trafficking". aic.gov.au. 
^ "Forced Marriage and the Many Faces of Human Trafficking". theahafoundation.org. 
^ a b "Trafficking for Forced Labour". ungift.org. Archived from the original on 4 April 2013. 
^ Palmer, Wayne; Missbach, Antje (2017-09-06). "Trafficking within migrant smuggling operations: Are underage transporters 'victims' or 'perpetrators'?". Asian and Pacific Migration Journal. 26 (3): 287–307. doi:10.1177/0117196817726627. 
^ "Trafficking for organ trade". ungift.org. Archived from the original on 9 November 2014. 
^ "Types of human trafficking". interpol.int. 
^ Bales, Kevin. Disposable People : New Slavery In The Global Economy / Kevin Bales. n.p.: Berkeley, Calif. : University of California Press, c2004., 2004.
^ "Top 10 Facts About Modern Slavery". Free the Slaves. Archived from the original on 21 June 2010. Retrieved 8 December 2010. 
^ U.S. Department of State, Trafficking in Persons Report, 8th ed. (Washington, DC: U.S. Department of State, 2008), 7.
^ a b Smith, Heather M. "Sex trafficking: trends, challenges, and the limitations of international law." Human rights review 12.3 (2011): 271–286.
^ U.S. Department of State. Office to Monitor and Combat Trafficking in Persons, n.d. Web. 1 April 2013.
^ Horning, A.; Thomas, C.; Henninger, A. M.; Marcus, A. (2014). "The Trafficking in Persons Report: a game of risk". International Journal of Comparative and Applied Criminal Justice. 38: 3. 
^ "ATEST GUIDE 2014: Summary of the Trafficking Victims Protection Act (TVPA) and Reauthorizations". endslaveryandtrafficking.org. 
^ "Trafficking in Persons Report 2011". U.S. Department of State. 2011. 
^ a b c Berger, Stephanie M. "No End In Sight: Why The "End Demand" Movement Is The Wrong Focus For Efforts To Eliminate Human Trafficking." Harvard Journal of Law & Gender 35.2 (2012): 523–570. Academic Search Complete. Web. 22 February 2013.
^ Weitzer, Ronald. "The social construction of sex trafficking: ideology and institutionalization of a moral crusade." Politics & Society 35.3 (2007): 447–475.
^ Chuang, Janie (2006). "Beyond a snapshot: Preventing human trafficking in the global economy". Indiana Journal of Global Legal Studies. 13 (1): 137–163. doi:10.1353/gls.2006.0002. 
^ Scheper-Hughes, Nancy. "Organs Without Borders". Foreign Policy. Retrieved 22 January 2014. 
^ Fry-Revere, Sigrid (2014). The Kidney Sellers:A Journey of Discovery in Iran. Carolina Academic Press. 
^ Domestic Minor Sex Trafficking: Hearings on H.R. 5575, Before the Subcommittee on Crime, Terrorism, and Homeland Security, 111th Cong. 145 (2010) (statement of Ernie Allen, president and CEO, National Center for Missing & Exploited Children).
^ Shared Hope International, Demand: A Comparative Examination of Sex Tourism and Trafficking in Jamaica, Japan, the Netherlands, and the United States, n.d., 5.
^ Kim-Kwang Raymond Choo, "Online child grooming: A literature review on the misuse of social networking sites for grooming children for sexual offences", Australian Institute of Criminology Research and Public Policy Series 103, 2009, ii–xiv.
^ US Department of Justice, Project Safe Childhood, The National Strategy for Child Exploitation Prevention and Interdiction, August 2010, 32–33.
^ U.S. Attorney's Office in Atlanta, telephone interview by CCLP research staff, 14 March 2011.
^ "Michelle Goldberg, "The Super Bowl of Sex Trafficking", Newsweek, January 30, 2011". 
^ Latonero, Mark. "Human Trafficking Online: The Role of Social Networking Sites and Online Classifieds." USC Annenberg Center on Communication Leadership & Policy. Available at SSRN 2045851 (2011).
^ Anna Merlan, "Just in Time for February, the Myth of Sex Trafficking and the Super Bowl Returns", Village Voice Blogs, 30 January 2014.
^ Ham, Julie (2011). "What's the Cost of a Rumour?" (PDF). Global Alliance Against Traffic in Women. 
^ a b Burkhalter, Holly. "Sex Trafficking, Law Enforcement and Perpetrator Accountability." Anti Trafficking Review 1 (2012): 122133-. Anti Trafficking Review. Global Alliance Against Traffic in Women, June 2012. Web. 10 March 2013.
^ [1] 2016 Trafficking in Persons Report, U.S. Department of State
^ [2] Alvarez, Larry MS and Cañas-Moreira, Jocelyn. "A Victim-Centered Approach to Sex Trafficking"
^ Rao, Smriti, & Christina Presenti, Understanding Human Trafficking Origin: A Cross-Country Empirical Analysis, in Feminist Economics, vol. 18, no. 2 (April 2012), pp. 231–263, esp. pp. 233–234.
^ Susan Heavey (19 June 2013). "U.S. cites Russia, China among worst in human trafficking: report". Reuters. 
^ Johanna Granville,"From Russia without Love: The ‘Fourth Wave’ of Global Human Trafficking." Demokratizatsiya, vol. 12, no. 1 (Winter 2004): pp. 147–155.
^ "Big Victory For Canada's Sex Workers". Huffington Post. 20 December 2013. 
^ "The Victims & Traffickers". Polaris. 2015-10-12. Retrieved 2017-05-17. 
^ a b c d Ditmore, Melissa, and Juhu Thukral. "Accountability and the Use of Raids to Fight Trafficking." Anti Trafficking Review 1 (2012): 134–48. Anti Trafficking Review. Global Alliance Against Traffic in Women, June 2012. Web. 11 March 2013.
^ Cianciarulo, Marisa Silenzi. "Modern-Day Slavery and Cultural Bias: Proposals for Reforming the US Visa System for Victims of International Human Trafficking." Nev. LJ 7 (2006): 826.
^ Bearup, Luke S (2016-08-01). "Reintegration as an Emerging Vision of Justice for Victims of Human Trafficking". International Migration. 54 (4): 164–176. doi:10.1111/imig.12248. ISSN 1468-2435. 
^ Zheng, Tiantian, ed. Sex trafficking, human rights, and social justice. Vol. 4. Routledge, 2010.
^ a b c d Hopper, E. and Hidalgo, J. (2006). Invisible chains: Psychological coercion of human trafficking victims. "Intercultural Human Rights Law, 1", 185–209.
^ a b c d e Wilson, B. and Butler, L. D. (2013). Running a gauntlet: A review of victimization and violence in the pre-entry, post-entry, and peri-/post-exit periods of commercial sexual exploitation. Psychological Trauma: Theory, Research, Practice, and Policy, Advance online publication. doi:10.1037/a0032977
^ a b McClain, N. M.; Garrity, S. E. (2011). "Sex trafficking and the exploitation of adolescents". JOGNN. 40: 243–252. doi:10.1111/j.1552. 
^ a b Hardy, V. L.; Compton, K. D.; McPhatter, V. S. (2013). "Domestic minor sex trafficking: Practice implications for mental health professionals". Affilia. 28: 8–18. doi:10.1177/0886109912475172. 
^ a b Segerstron, S. C.; Miller, G. E. (2004). "Psychological stress and the human immune system: A meta-analytic study of 30 years of inquiry". Psychological Bulletin. 130: 601–630. doi:10.1037/0033-2909.130.4.601. 
^ Zimmerman, C., Hossain, M., Yun, K., Roche, B., Morison, L., and Watts, C. (2006). Stolen Smiles: A summary report on the physical and psychological health consequences of women and adolescents trafficked in Europe. The London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine: Daphne, 1–28.
^ Hodge, D. R.; Lietz, C. A. (2007). "The international sexual trafficking of women and children: A review of the literature". Affilia. 22: 163–174. doi:10.1177/0886109907299055. 
^ Courtois, C. A. (2004). "Complex trauma, complex reactions: Assessment and treatment". Psychotherapy: Theory, Research, Practice, Training. 41: 412–425. doi:10.1037/0033-3204.41.4.412. 
^ CNN, Sara Sidner. "Old mark of slavery is being used on sex trafficking victims". CNN. Retrieved 2017-05-18. 
^ "Ink180  » The INK 180 Story". ink180.com. Retrieved 2017-05-18. 
^ Galjic-Veljanoski, O.; Steward, D. E. (2007). "Women trafficked into prostitution: Determinants, human rights and health needs". Transcultural Psychiatry. 44: 338–358. 
^ a b Peled, E.; Parke, A. (2013). "The mothering experiences of sex-trafficked women: Between here and there". American Journal of Orthopsychiatry. 83: 576–587. doi:10.1111/ajop.12046. 
^ a b c Rafferty, Y (2013). "Child trafficking and commercial sexual exploitation: A review of promising prevention policies and programs". American Journal of Orthopsychiatry. 83: 559–575. doi:10.1111/ajop.12056. 
^ a b Rafferty, Y (2008). "The impact of trafficking on children: Psychological and social policy perspectives". Child Development Perspectives. 2: 13–18. doi:10.1111/j.1750-8606.2008.00035.x. 
^ a b c Rafferty, Y (2007). "Children for sale: Child trafficking in Southeast Asia". Child Abuse Review. 16: 401–422. doi:10.1002/car.1009. 
^ Browne, A.; Finkelhor, D. (1986). "Impact of child sexual abuse: A review of the research". Psychological Bulletin. 99: 66–77. doi:10.1037/0033-2909.99.1.66. PMID 3704036. 
^ Finkelhor, D (1990). "Early and long-term effects of child sexual abuse: An update". Professional Psychology: Research and Practice. 21: 325–330. doi:10.1037/0735-7028.21.5.325. 
^ "AIDSinfo". UNAIDS. Retrieved 4 March 2013. 
^ Wirth KE, et al. "How Does Sex Trafficking Increase the Risk of HIV Infection? An Observational Study From Southern India". Am J Epidemiol. 177: 232–41. doi:10.1093/aje/kws338. PMC 3626049 . PMID 23324332. 
^ "Human Trafficking and HIV & AIDS". santac.org. Archived from the original on 23 June 2014. 
^ "A Global Alliance Against Forced Labor, Global Report Under the Follow-up to the ILO Declaration on Fundamental Principles and Rights at Work". Geneva: International Labor Office. 2005. p. 55. Retrieved 9 December 2010. 
^ Laczko, Frank, and Marco A. Gramegna. "Developing better indicators of human trafficking." Brown J. World Aff. 10 (2003): 179.
^ a b c d e Dumienski, Zbigniew (2011). "Critical Reflections on Anti-human Trafficking: The Case of Timor-Leste" (PDF). NTS Alert, May, Issue 2, Singapore: RSIS Centre for Non-Traditional Security (NTS) Studies for NTS-Asia. 
^ Bialik, Carl, 2010, 'Suspect Estimates of Sex Trafficking at the World Cup', The Wall Street Journal, 19 June.
^ see also: US Government Accountability Office, 2006, Human Trafficking: Better Data, Strategy and Reporting Needed to Enhance U.S. Antitrafficking Efforts Abroad, Highlights of GAO-06-825 Report, Washington, DC.
^ a b Agustin, Laura, 2008, Sex at the Margins: Migration, Labour Markets and the Rescue Industry, London and New York: Zed Books.
^ Feingold, David A. (2010) 'Trafficking in Numbers' in P. Andreas and K. M. Greenhill (eds) Sex, Drugs, and Body Counts (London: Cornell University Press)
^ "International human trafficking: An agenda-building analysis of the US and British press". International Communication Gazette. 74 (2): 145–158. 2012. doi:10.1177/1748048511432600.  (subscription required)
^ Gülçür, Leyla; İlkkaracan, Pınar (July–August 2002). "The "Natasha" experience: Migrant sex workers from the former Soviet Union and Eastern Europe in Turkey". Women's Studies International Forum. Elsevier. 25 (4): 411–421. doi:10.1016/S0277-5395(02)00278-9.  Pdf.
^ McCormack, Tara (17 January 2012). "The new slave trade?". Spiked-online.com. Archived from the original on 13 February 2012. Retrieved 21 January 2012. 
^ "Definition of Trafficking – Save the Children Nepal". Archived from the original on 20 November 2007. Retrieved 11 January 2010. 
^ Aradau, Claudia (March 2004). "The perverse politics of four-letter words: risk and pity in the securitisation of human trafficking". Millennium: Journal of International Studies. Sage. 33 (2): 251–277. doi:10.1177/03058298040330020101. 
^ Marcus, Anthony; et al. (May 2014). "Conflict and agency among sex workers and pimps: A closer look at domestic minor sex trafficking". The ANNALS of the American Academy of Political and Social Science. 653 (1): 225–246. doi:10.1177/0002716214521993. 
^ "Anti-trafficking measures 'not fit for purpose' and breach international law – new report". Amnesty.org.uk. 
^ Stepnitz, Abigail. "A Lie More Disastrous than the Truth: Asylum and the Identification of Trafficked Women in the UK." Anti Trafficking Review 1 (2012): 104–19. Anti Trafficking Review. Global Alliance Against Traffic in Women, June 2012. Web. 10 March 2013.
^ Kerry Howley (26 December 2007). "The Myth of the Migrant – Reason Magazine". Reason.com. Retrieved 21 January 2012. 
^ 'Chinese Prostitutes Resist Efforts to Rescue Them from Africa', 2011, Times LIVE, 1 January.
^ Siddharth, Kumar (23 October 2010). "Sex Workers Don't Want Rescue". Mid-day.com. 
^ "case G.T. Stewart Solicitors". 21 June 2013. 
^ "Courts and Tribunals Judiciary" (PDF). judiciary.gov.uk. 
^ "Vietnamese trafficking victims win appeal against convictions, BBC 21 June 2013". BBC News. 
^ "Trafficking victim's nightmare journey to UK drug farm, Channel 4". Channel 4 News. 
^ a b Aziza Ahmed and Meena Seshu (June 2012). ""We Have the Right Not to Be 'rescued'…"*: When Anti-Trafficking Programmes Undermine the Health and Well-Being of Sex Workers" (PDF). Anti Trafficking Review. Global Alliance Against Traffic in Women. 1: 149-19. 
^ Wortley, S., Fischer, B., & Webster, C. (2002). Vice lessons: A survey of prostitution offenders enrolled in the Toronto John School Diversion Program" Canadian Journal of Criminology 3(3), 227–248: 394. Monto, Martin A. and Steve Garcia. 2001. "Recidivism Among the Customers of Female Street Prostitutes: Do Intervention Programs Help?" Western Criminology Review 3 (2). (Online)]
^ Fischer, B.; Wortley, S.; Webster, C.; Kirst, M. (2002). "The Socio-Legal Dynamics and Implications of Diversion: The Case Study of the Toronto 'John School' for Prostitution Offenders". Criminal Justice. 2 (4): 385–410. doi:10.1177/17488958020020040201. 
^ a b c CAVALIERI, SHELLEY. "Between Victim And Agent: A Third-Wave Feminist Account Of Trafficking For Sex Work." Indiana Law Journal86.4 (2011): 1409–1458. Legal Collection. Web. 6 March 2013.
^ Rafferty, Yvonne (2007). "Children for sale: Child trafficking in Southeast Asia". Child Abuse Review. 16 (6): 401–422. doi:10.1002/car.1009. 
^ "Singapore Accedes to the United Nations Trafficking in Persons Protocol". Ministry of Home Affairs. Singapore Inter-Agency Taskforce on Trafficking in Persons. Retrieved 20 February 2016. 


External links[edit]


Library resources about
Human trafficking





Online books
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries







Wikinews has news related to:
Human trafficking






Wikimedia Commons has media related to Human trafficking.



Trafficking of women at Curlie (based on DMOZ)
Global Report on Trafficking in Persons
http://www.medaille-trust.org.uk
The Islamic State and its human trafficking practice, pp. 15-21.







v
t
e


Lists of countries by laws and law enforcement rankings



Age of



Consent
Legal candidacy for political office
Criminal responsibility
Legal drinking
Legal driving
Majority
Legal marriage
Retirement age

Mandatory retirement


School leaving
Legal smoking
Voting

Suffrage
Youth suffrage


Working age





Drugs



Alcohol

Alcohol consumption
Alcohol law


Bath salts

Legal status of Mephedrone
Legal status of MPDV
Legal status of Methylone


Cannabis

Legality
annual use
lifetime use


Cocaine use

Legality


Methamphetamine

Legality


LSD

Legality


Opiate use
Salvia divinorum

Legality







Death



Legality of euthanasia
Homicide

by decade


Law enforcement killings
Legality of suicide

Legality of assisted suicide







Guns



Deaths
Ownership





Punishment



Corporal punishment

At home
At school
In court


Death penalty
Incarceration





Obscenity



Incest

Laws


Pornography

Child pornography

Simulated child pornography
Cartoon pornography depicting minors


Internet pornography


Prostitution
Sexual assault

Child sexual abuse
Rape


Sodomy law
Sex trafficking
Zoophilia





Censorship



Censorship by country
Book censorship

by country


Film censorship

by country


Internet censorship

by country


Map censorship
Political censorship
Video gaming censorship

by country







Human rights



Children's rights

Military use of children


Intersex rights
LGBT Rights
Slavery

Human trafficking







Travel



Freedom of movement by country

In the air


Abode





Property and
Environmental



Air
Estate
Land
Minerals
Mining
Mortgage
Water

Riparian water







Business



Corporate

Corporate liability


Competition

Mergers and acquisitions
Monopoly


Legality of bitcoin by country or territory





International
ownership



International Waters

Sea law
Maritime law


Antarctic Treaty System





Other



Abortion law

Minors and abortion


Animal rights
Immigration law
Human cloning
National legal systems
Police brutality

Prisoner abuse


Religious law

Separation of church and state
Sharia


Size of police forces
World Justice Project









List of international rankings
List of top international rankings by country
Lists by country













v
t
e


Abuse



Types



Abuse during childbirth
Anti-social behaviour
Bullying
Child abuse (neglect, sexual)
Cruelty to animals
Domestic abuse
Elder abuse
Gaslighting
Harassment
Humiliation
Incivility
Institutional abuse
Intimidation
Neglect
Persecution
Professional abuse
Proxy abuse
Psychological abuse
Physical abuse
Religious abuse
Sexual abuse
Stalking
Structural abuse
Verbal abuse
more...





Related topics



Abusive power and control
Child grooming
Complex post-traumatic stress disorder
Dehumanization
Denial
Destabilisation
Disengaging from an abuser
Exaggeration
Isolation
Just-world hypothesis
Lying
Manipulation
Minimisation
Narcissism
Psychological projection
Psychological trauma
Psychopathy
Rationalization
Traumatic bonding
Victim blaming
Victim playing
Victimisation












v
t
e


Sexual abuse



Forms



Bride kidnapping
Child

Child-on-child
Child exploitation
Child pornography
Child prostitution
Child sex tourism


Forced prostitution
Genital modification and mutilation
Rape

Campus
Date
Marital
Prison
Statutory


Raptio
Revenge porn
Sexual assault
Sexual bullying
Sexual harassment
Sexual misconduct
Sexual slavery
Sexual violence

War







Sociological
theories



Aggression
Causes of sexual violence
Effects and aftermath of rape
Misandry
Misogyny
Pedophilia
Rape culture
Rape trauma syndrome
Sociobiological theories of rape
Victim blaming





Laws



Laws regarding child sexual abuse
Laws regarding rape
Sexually violent predator laws





Related topics



Child sexual abuse accommodation syndrome
False allegation of child sexual abuse








 Portals: Criminal justice
Law









Authority control



GND: 4125897-6
NDL: 00574816











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Human_trafficking&oldid=818315188"					Categories: Human traffickingHuman rights abusesCrimes against humanityDebt bondageOrganized crime activityGlobal issuesSex crimesViolence against menViolence against womenHidden categories: CS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknownWebarchive template wayback linksPages containing links to subscription-only contentWikipedia indefinitely move-protected pagesUse dmy dates from October 2016Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2009All articles containing potentially dated statementsAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from May 2014Articles with unsourced statements from January 2015Articles with limited geographic scope from April 2014USA-centricArticles with unsourced statements from October 2015Articles with DMOZ linksWikipedia articles with GND identifiersArticles with inconsistent citation formats