This article is about visual artifacts or reproductions. For other uses, see Image (disambiguation).
"Picture" redirects here. For other uses, see Picture (disambiguation).
For Wikipedia image use guidelines, see Wikipedia:Images.






This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (April 2007) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)







A man painting an image of himself.






A scanned image of the definition of image and imagery, from Thomas Blount's Glossographia Anglicana Nova, 1707.






An SAR radar image acquired by the SIR-C/X-SAR radar on board the Space Shuttle Endeavour shows the Teide volcano. The city of Santa Cruz de Tenerife is visible as the purple and white area on the lower right edge of the island. Lava flows at the summit crater appear in shades of green and brown, while vegetation zones appear as areas of purple, green and yellow on the volcano's flanks.


An image (from Latin: imago) is an artifact that depicts visual perception, for example, a photo or a two-dimensional picture, that has a similar appearance to some subject—usually a physical object or a person, thus providing a depiction of it. 


Contents


1 Characteristics

1.1 Still or moving


2 Imagery (literary term)
3 See also
4 References
5 External links



Characteristics[edit]
Images may be two-dimensional, such as a photograph or screen display, or three-dimensional, such as a statue or hologram. They may be captured by optical devices – such as cameras, mirrors, lenses, telescopes, microscopes, etc. and natural objects and phenomena, such as the human eye or water.
The word 'image' is also used in the broader sense of any two-dimensional figure such as a map, a graph, a pie chart, or a painting. In this wider sense, images can also be rendered manually, such as by drawing, the art of painting, carving, rendered automatically by printing or computer graphics technology, or developed by a combination of methods, especially in a pseudo-photograph.
A volatile image is one that exists only for a short period of time. This may be a reflection of an object by a mirror, a projection of a camera obscura, or a scene displayed on a cathode ray tube. A fixed image, also called a hard copy, is one that has been recorded on a material object, such as paper or textile by photography or any other digital process.
A mental image exists in an individual's mind, as something one remembers or imagines. The subject of an image need not be real; it may be an abstract concept, such as a graph, function, or "imaginary" entity. For example, Sigmund Freud claimed to have dreamed purely in aural-images of dialogs.[citation needed]
The development of synthetic acoustic technologies and the creation of sound art have led to a consideration of the possibilities of a sound-image made up of irreducible phonic substance beyond linguistic or musicological analysis.
Still or moving[edit]
A still image is a single static image. This phrase is used in photography, visual media and the computer industry to emphasize that one is not talking about movies, or in very precise or pedantic technical writing such as a standard.
A moving image is typically a movie (film) or video, including digital video. It could also be an animated display such as a zoetrope.
A still frame is a still image derived from one frame of a moving one. In contrast, a film still is a photograph taken on the set of a movie or television program during production, used for promotional purposes.
Imagery (literary term)[edit]
Main article: Imagery
In literature, imagery is a "mental picture" which appeals to the senses.[1][example needed] It can both be figurative and literal.[1]
See also[edit]

Aniconism
Avatar (computing)
Cinematography
Computer animation
Computer-generated imagery
Digital image
Digital imaging
Fine art photography
Graphics
Image editing
Pattern recognition
Photograph





The act of photographing the surrounding environment with a mobile phone camera, while the display of the mobile phone shows a live display of the image.


References[edit]



^ a b Chris Baldick (2008). The Oxford Dictionary of Literary Terms. Oxford University Press. pp. 165–. ISBN 978-0-19-920827-2. 



External links[edit]

 Media related to Images at Wikimedia Commons
 Quotations related to Image at Wikiquote
 The dictionary definition of image at Wiktionary
The B-Z Reaction: The Moving or the Still Image?
Library of Congress – Format Descriptions for Still Images
Image Processing – Online Open Research Group
Legal Issues Regarding Images
Image Copyright Case






						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Image&oldid=815424019"					Categories: PhotographyDigital photographyComputer graphicsGraphic designVisionHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from April 2007All articles needing additional referencesArticles containing Latin-language textAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from November 2017