

Immam of


إمام





Incumbent





Muhammad ibn al-Hasan al-Mahdī -
محمد بن الحسن المهدي for Twelvers

Aṭ-Ṭayyib Abī'l-Qāṣim - الطيب أبو القاس for Ṭāyyibī-Mustā‘lī Ismāʿīlī Muslims

The living Imām for Nizārī Ismā'īlī Muslims

Imāms continuing through the Houthis for Zaidis with no divine attributes





Details


First monarch
Ali


Formation
June 17, 656




 
Part of a series on

Shia Islam








Beliefs and practices


Monotheism
Holy Books
Prophethood
Succession to Muhammad
Imamate
Angels
Judgment Day
Mourning of Muharram
Intercession
Clergy
The Four Companions
Arba'een Pilgrimage








Holy days


Ashura
Arba'een
Mawlid
Eid al-Fitr
Eid al-Adha
Eid al-Ghadeer








History


The verse of purification
Two things
Mubahala
Khumm
Fatimah's house
First Fitna
Second Fitna
Battle of Karbala








Branches of Shi‘i Islam


Zaydi Shia
Imami Shia

Twelvers

Ja'faris
Batinis

Alevism
Bektashism


Ghulat

Alawites
Hurufism


Qizilbash


Ismāʿīlīs

Nizaris
Taiyabi-Musta‘līs

Dawoodi
Sulaymani
Alavi


Batiniyya

Druze


Pamiris


Extinct sects










Ahl al-Kisa


Muhammad
Ali
Fatimah
Hasan
Hussein








Holy women


Fatimah
Khadija bint Khuwaylid
Umm Salama
Zaynab bint Ali
Umm Kulthum bint Ali
Umm ul-Banin
Fatimah bint Hasan
Sukayna bint Husayn
Rubab
Shahrbanu
Fātimah bint Mūsā
Hakimah Khātūn
Narjis
Fatimah bint Asad
Umm Farwah bint al-Qasim






 Shia Islam portal





v
t
e







 Part of a series on Islam
Aqidah







Five Pillars of Islam


Shahada
Salah
Sawm
Zakat
Hajj








Sunni
Six articles of belief

God
Prophets
Holy books
Angels
The Last Judgement
Predestination

Sunni theological traditions

Ilm al-Kalam

Ash'ari1
Maturidi



Sunni Murji'ah
Traditionalist2








Shi'a
Twelver3

Principles

Tawhid
Adalah
Prophecy
Imamah
Qiyamah




Practices

Salah
Sawm
Zakat
Hajj
Khums
Jihad
Commanding what is just
Forbidding what is evil
Tawalla
Tabarra



Seven pillars of Ismailism4

Walayah
Tawhid
Salah
Zakat
Sawm
Hajj
Jihad

Other Shia concepts of Aqidah

Imamate
Batin
Sixth Pillar of Islam








Other schools of theology


Khawarij5
Ibadi6
Murji'ah

Qadariyah
Muʿtazila7
Sufism8






Including:
1Jahmi; 2Karramiyya; 3Alawites & Qizilbash
4Sevener-Qarmatians, Assassins & Druzes
5Ajardi, Azariqa, Bayhasiyya, Najdat & Sūfrī
6Nūkkārī; 7Bahshamiyya & Ikhshîdiyya
8Alevism, Bektashi Order & Qalandariyya
 Islam portal





v
t
e





In Shia Islam, the imamah (Arabic: إمامة‎) is the doctrine that the figures known as imams are rightfully the central figures of the ummah; the entire Shi'ite system of doctrine focuses on the imamah.[1] Shi'ites believe that the Imams are the true Caliphs or rightful successors of Muhammad, and further that Imams are possessed of divine knowledge and authority (Ismah) as well as being part of the Ahl al-Bayt, the family of Muhammad.[2] These Imams have the role of providing commentary and interpretation of the Quran[3] as well as guidance to their tariqa followers as is the case of the living Imams of the Nizari Ismaili tariqah.
According to Nasir al-Din al-Tusi, the Imam is a means through which humans receive divine grace, because "He brings men closer to obedience (of Allah) and keeps them away from disobedience." As fulfilling the human being is his wish, it is logical that God appoints Imams to subject man to his wishes. So his existence and his deeds display two forms of grace of God toward man.[4]



Contents


1 Etymology
2 Introduction
3 Sects

3.1 Twelver view

3.1.1 Why only (specific) members of Muhammad's family?


3.2 The Ismā'īlī view

3.2.1 Why Imam from Only (specific) Members Family


3.3 Zaidi view


4 The period of occultation

4.1 Twelver view
4.2 The Ismā'īlī view

4.2.1 First phase
4.2.2 Second phase




5 Imams

5.1 Twelver Imams

5.1.1 List of The Twelve Imams


5.2 Ismaili Imams
5.3 Zaidi Imams


6 Sunni view of the Shia Imamate
7 See also
8 Notes
9 footnotes
10 Bibliography

10.1 Further reading


11 References
12 External links



Etymology[edit]
The word "Imām" denotes a person who stands or walks "in front". For Sunni Islam, the word is commonly used to mean a person who leads the course of prayer in the mosque. It also means the head of a madhhab ("school of thought"). However, from the Shia point of view this is merely the basic understanding of the word in the Arabic language and, for its proper religious usage, the word "Imam" is applicable only to those members of the house of Muhammad designated as infallible by the preceding Imam.
Introduction[edit]
The Shia further believe only these A'immah have the right to be Caliphs, meaning that all other caliphs, whether elected by consensus (Ijma) or not, are usurpers of the Caliphate so those were political positions not divine positions.
All Muslims believe that Muhammad had said: "To whomsoever I am Mawla, Ali is his Mawla." This hadith has been narrated in different ways by many different sources in no less than 45 hadith books[citation needed] of both Sunni and Shia collections. This hadith has also been narrated by the collector of hadiths, al-Tirmidhi, 3713;[citation needed] as well as Ibn Maajah, 121;[citation needed] etc. The major point of conflict between the Sunni and the Shia is in the interpretation of the word 'Mawla'. For the Shia the word means 'Master' and has the same elevated significance as when the term had been used to address Muhammad himself during his lifetime. Thus, when Muhammad actually (by speech) and physically (by way of having his closest companions including Abu Bakr, Umar and Uthman [the three future Caliphs who had preceded Ali as Caliph] publicly accept Ali as their Master by taking Ali's hand in both of theirs as token of their allegiance to Ali) transferred this title and manner of addressing Ali as the Mawla for all Muslims at Ghadiri Khum Oasis just a few months before his death, the people that came to look upon Ali as Muhammad's immediate successor even before Muhamamd's death came to be known as the Shia. However, for the Sunnis the word simply means the 'beloved' or the 'revered' and has no other significance at all.
Sects[edit]
Main article: Muslim sects
Within Shia Islam (Shiism), the various sects came into being because they differed over their Imams' successions, just as the Shia - Sunni separation within Islam itself had come into being from the dispute that had arisen over the succession to Muhammad. Each succession dispute brought forth a different tariqah (literal meaning 'path'; extended meaning 'sect') within Shia Islam. Each Shia tariqah followed its own particular Imam's dynasty, thus resulting in different numbers of Imams for each particular Shia tariqah. When the dynastic line of the separating successor Imam ended with no heir to succeed him, then either he (the last Imam) or his unborn successor was believed to have gone into concealment, that is, The Occultation.
The Shia tariqah with a majority of adherents are the Twelvers who are commonly known as the "Shia". After that come the Nizari Ismailis commonly known as the Ismailis; and then come the Mustalian Ismailis commonly known as the "Bohras" with further schisms within their Bohri tariqah. The Druze tariqah initially were part of the Fatimid Ismailis and separated from them (the Fatimid Ismailis) after the death of the Fatimid Imam and Caliph al Hakim Bi Amrillah. The Shia Sevener tariqah no longer exists. Another small tariqah is the Zaidi Shias, also known as the Fivers and who do not believe in The Occultation of their last Imam.
Although all these different Shia tariqahs belong to the Shia group (as opposed to the Sunni group) in Islam, there are major doctrinal differences between the main Shia tariqahs. After that there is the complete doctrinal break between all the different Shia tariqahs whose last Imams have gone into Occultation and the Shia Nizari Ismailis who deny the very concept of Occultation. The Shia Nizari Ismailis by definition have to have a present and living Imam until the end of time.[citation needed] Thus if any living Nizari Ismaili Imam fails to leave behind a successor after him then the Nizari Ismailism’s cardinal principle would be broken and it’s very raison d'être would come to an end.
Twelver view[edit]






Part of a series on Shia Islam
Twelvers





The Fourteen Infallibles







Muhammad
Fatimah




The Twelve Imams




Ali
Hasan
Husayn
al-Sajjad
al-Baqir
al-Sadiq
al-Kadhim
ar-Ridha
al-Taqi
al-Naqi
al-Askari
al-Mahdi







Principles





Monotheism
Justice
Prophethood
Imamate
Judgement Day





Other beliefs





Imamate of the Family
Angels
Mourning of Muharram
Intercession
Occultation
Wilayat al-Faqih
Usul al-fiqh
Ijtihad
Taqlid
'Aql
Irfan





Practices





Salat
Sawm
Hajj
Zakāt
Khums
Jihad
Amr bi-l maʿrūf
Nahy ani l-Munkar
Tawalla
Tabarra

Others

Mourning of Muharram
Arba'een Pilgrimage
Intercession





Holy cities





Mecca
Medina
Najaf
Karbala
Mashhad
Jerusalem
Samarra
Kadhimiya
Qom





Groups





Usuli
Akhbari
Shaykhi
Ni'matullāhī
Safaviyya
Qizilbash
Alevism
Alawism
Bektashism and folk religion
Malamatiyya–Qalandariyya




Hurufism–Bektashism
Rifa'i–Galibi





Scholarship





Law
Marja' (list)
Hawza
Ayatollah (list)
Allamah
  Hujjat al-Islam
Ijtihad





Hadith collections




Peak of Eloquence
The Psalms of Islam
Book of Fundamentals
The Book in Scholar's Lieu



Civilization of Laws
The Certainty



Book of Sulaym ibn Qays
Oceans of Light
Wasā'il al-Shīʿa
Reality of Certainty
Keys of Paradise




Related topics




Criticism of Twelver Shi'ism




Related portals




Shia Islam
Ashura







v
t
e





Main articles: Theology of Twelvers and Twelver
Shias believe that Imamah is of the Principles of Faith (Usul al-Din). As the verse 4:165 of Quran expresses the necessity to the appointment of the prophets; so after the demise of the prophet who will play the role of the prophet; till the people have not any plea against Allah. The same logic that necessitated the assignment of prophets also is applied for Imamah. That is Allah must assign someone similar to prophet in his attributes and Ismah as his successor to guide the people without any deviation in religion.[5]
They refer to the verse (...This day I have perfected for you your religion and completed My favor upon you and have approved for you Islam as religion...) 5:3 of Quran which was revealed to the prophet when he appointed Ali as his successor at the day of Ghadir Khumm.[6]
By the verse Quran, 2:124, Shias believe that Imamah is a divine position always Imamah is accompanied by the word guidance, of course a guidance by God's Command.A kind of guidance which brings humanity to the goal. Regarding 17:71, no age can be without an Imam. So, according to the upper verse 1.Imamah is a position which is appointed by God and must be specified by Him 2.Imam is protected by a divine protection and no one exceles him in nobility 3. No age can be without an Imam and finally Imam knows everything which is needed for human being to get to the truth and goal.[7]


Part of a series on


Islam







Beliefs


Oneness of God


Prophets
Revealed books


Angels
Predestination


Day of Resurrection








Practices


Profession of faith
Prayer


Fasting
Alms-giving
Pilgrimage








Texts and laws


Quran
Sunnah
Hadith


Sharia (law)
Fiqh (jurisprudence)


Kalam (dialectic)








History


Timeline
Muhammad


Ahl al-Bayt
Sahabah
Rashidun


Imamate
Caliphate
Spread of Islam








Culture and society


Calendar
Festivals
Academics
Art
Moral teachings
Children
Denominations
Feminism
Women
Madrasa
Mosque
Philosophy
Politics
Proselytizing
Animals
LGBT
Science
Demographics
Economics
Finance
Social welfare








Related topics


Criticism of Islam
Islam and other religions


Islamism
Islamophobia


Glossary








 Islam portal







v
t
e





Why only (specific) members of Muhammad's family?[edit]




This section may be confusing or unclear to readers. In particular, it is not coherent, it is unclear how its text explains what the heading states and some parts read like WP: OR. (December 2015) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



It is forbidden for the Divine Leader not to be from the family of Muhammad.[8] According to Ali al-Ridha, since it is obligatory to obey him, there should be a sign to clearly indicate the Divine Leader. That sign is his well-known ties of kinship with Muhammad and his clear appointment so that the people could distinguish him from others, and be clearly guided toward him.[9][10] Otherwise others are nobler than Muhammad's offspring and they are to be followed and obeyed; and the offspring of Muhammad are obedient and subject to the offspring of Muhammad’s enemies such as Abi Jahl or Ibn Abi Ma’eet.[original research?] However, Muhammad is much nobler than others to be in charge and to be obeyed.[9][10] Moreover, once the prophethood of Muhammad is testified they would obey him, no one would hesitate to follow his offspring and this would not be hard for anyone.[9][10] While to follow the offspring of the corrupted families is difficult.[original research?] And that is maybe why the basic characteristic of Muhammad and other prophets was their nobility.[original research?] For none of them, it is said, were originated from a disgraced family.[citation needed] It is believed that all Muhammad's ancestors up to Adam were true Muslims. [a][citation needed] Jesus was also from a pious family, as it is mentioned in Quran that after his birth, people said to Mary: O sister of Aaron, your father was not a man of evil, nor was your mother unchaste."[b][improper synthesis?]
The Ismā'īlī view[edit]
Main articles: Imamah (Ismaili doctrine), Nizari, Imamah (Nizari Ismaili doctrine), Mustaali, Tayyibi, and Hafizi
According to Ismā‘īlīsm, Allah has sent "seven" great prophets known as “Nātiq” (Spoken) in order to disseminate and improve his Dīn of Islam. All of these great prophets has also one assistant known as “Sāmad (Silent) Imām”. At the end of each seven “Sāmad” silsila, one great “Nātiq” (Spoken) has been sent in order to reimprove the Dīn of Islam. After Adam and his son Seth, and after six “Nātıq” (Spoken) – “Sāmad” (Silent) silsila[12] (Noah–Shem), (Abraham–Ishmael), (Moses–Aaron), (Jesus–Simeon), (Muhammad bin ʿAbd Allāh–Ali ibn Abu Tālib); the silsila of “Nātiqs and Sāmads have been completed with (Muhammad bin Ismā‘īl as-ṣaghīr (Maymūn al-Qaddāḥ[13])–ʿAbd Allāh Ibn-i Maymūn[14] and his sons).
Why Imam from Only (specific) Members Family[edit]
Ismaili view Imams are true representative of God. God has made all prophets his representative. Individual prophets era are distinct. After one prophets God created next prophet. Islam view that Mohammed is last prophet. Mohammed appointed his specific representative Ali. Ali made imams as his next representative and one imam appointed another till date. Ismaili view that these Imam are only from their hereditary chain and their appointment is a must, and Earth cannot remain vacant, without presence of Imam.[15][16][original research?]
Zaidi view[edit]
Main article: Zaidiyyah
Zaidiyyah or Zaidi is a Shia madhhab (sect, school) named after the imam Zayd ibn Ali. Followers of the Zaidi fiqh are called Zaidis (or are occasionally called Fivers in the West). However, there is also a group called the Zaidi Wasītīs who are Twelvers.
The period of occultation[edit]
Twelver view[edit]
Main article: The Occultation
The period of occultation (ghaybat) is divided into two parts:

Ghaybat al-Sughra or Minor Occultation (874–941), consists of the first few decades after the Imam's disappearance when communication with him was maintained through deputies of the Imam.
Ghaybat al-Kubra or Major Occultation began 941 and is believed to continue until a time decided by God, when the Mahdi will reappear to bring absolute justice to the world.

During the Minor Occultation (Ghaybat al-Sughrá), it is believed that al-Mahdi maintained contact with his followers via deputies (Arab. an-nuwāb al-arbaʻa or "the Four Leaders"). They represented him and acted as agents between him and his followers. Whenever the believers faced a problem, they would write their concerns and send them to his deputy. The deputy would ascertain his verdict, endorse it with his seal and signature and return it to the relevant parties. The deputies also collected zakat and khums on his behalf.
For the Shia, the idea of consulting a hidden Imam was not something new because the two prior Twelver Imams had, on occasion, met with their followers from behind a curtain. Also, during the oppressive rule of the later Abbasid caliphs, the Shia Imams were heavily persecuted and held prisoners, thus their followers were forced to consult their Imams via messengers or secretly.
Shia Tradition hold that four deputies acted in succession to one another:

Uthman ibn Sa’id al-Asadi
Abu Jafar Muhammad ibn Uthman
Abul Qasim Husayn ibn Ruh al-Nawbakhti
Abul Hasan Ali ibn Muhammad al-Samarri

In 941 (329 AH), the fourth deputy announced an order by al-Mahdi, that the deputy would soon die and that the deputyship would end and the period of the Major Occultation would begin.
The fourth deputy died six days later and the Shia Muslims continue to await the reappearance of the Mahdi. In the same year, many notable Shia scholars such as Ali ibn Babawayh Qummi and Muhammad ibn Ya'qub Kulayni, the learned compiler of Kitab al-Kafi, also died.
One view is that the Hidden Imam is on earth "among the body of the Shia" but "incognito." "Numerous stories" exist of the Hidden Imam "manifesting himself to prominent members of the ulama."[17]
The Ismā'īlī view[edit]
Main article: Imamah (Ismaili doctrine)


 Part of a series on Shīa Islam
Isma‘ilism







Concepts


Qur'an
Ẓāhir
Bātin
Nūr
Pīr
Ginans
'Aql
ʿIlm
Hujja
Dā'ī
Dawah
Taqiya
Numerology
Panentheism
Reincarnation








Seven Pillars


Love of Mohammad and Ahl_al-Bayt
Purity
Prayer
Charity
Fasting
Pilgrimage
Striving|Struggle








Mustā‘lī & Nizari History


Shuʿayb
Nabi Shu'ayb
Seveners
Qarmatians
Abū Saʿīd al-Jannābī
Abū Tāhir al-Jannābī
Fatimid Caliphate
Nizari Ismaili state
Baghdad Manifesto
Qāżi Noʿmān
Nasir Khusraw
al-Sulayhi
Zoeb bin Moosa
Nizari
Mustā‘lī
Hafizi
Batiniyya
Hassan-i Sabbah
Assassins
Alamut
Lambsar Castle
Alamut Castle
Masyaf Castle
Rashid ad-Din Sinan
Satpanth
Pir Sadardin
Böszörmény
Aga Khan
Jama'at Khana
Du'a








Early Imāms


Ali
Hasan
Husayn
as-Sajjad
al-Baqir
Jaʿfar al-Ṣādiq
Ismāʿīl ibn Jaʿfar al-Mubārak
Muhammad ibn Ismāʿīl ash-Shākir
ʿAbadu l-Lāh (al-Wāfī Ahmad)
Ahmad (al-Taqī Muhammad)
Ḥusayn (ar-Raḍī ʿAbdillāh)
ʿAbdu l-Lāh al-Mahdī bi l-Lāh
al-Qāʾim
al-Manṣūr
al-Muʿizz
al-ʿAzīz
al-Ḥākim
al-Ẓāhir
al-Mustanṣir bi l-Lāh
Nizār al-Muṣṭafā li-Dīn’il-Lāh / Aḥmadu l-Mustāʿlī bi l-Lāh
Manṣūr al-Āmir bi-Aḥkām’il-Lāh
Abu l-Qāsim al-Tayyib








Nizari Ismaili & Taiyabi Da'is 



Nizārī Ismā'īlī
Aga Khan IV


Taiyabi-Musta’li Ismailis


Dawoodi Bohra
Mufaddal Saifuddin


Sulaymani
Al-Fakhri Abdullah


Alavi Bohra
Haatim Zakiyuddin







 Islam portal





v
t
e





The Ismailis differ from Twelvers because they had living imams for centuries after the last Twelver Imam went into concealment. They followed Isma'il ibn Jafar, elder brother of Musa al-Kadhim, as the rightful Imam[18] after his father Ja'far al-Sadiq. The Ismailis believe that whether Imam Ismail did or did not die before Imam Ja'far, he had passed on the mantle of the imamate to his son Muḥammad ibn Ismail as the next imam.[19] Thus, their line of imams is as follows (the years of their individual imamats during the Common Era are given in brackets):


Nizārī Imām
Mustā‘lī Imām
Ismā'īlī Imām
Period


1
Asās/Wāsīh
Ali - Mustaali "Foundation" and first Nizārī Imām
(632–661)


Pir
1
Hasan ibn Ali : First Mustaali Imām ; Nizārīs consider him a pir, not an Imām
(661–669) Mustā‘lī


2
2
Husayn ibn Ali : Second Ismā'īlī Imām
(669–680) Mustā‘lī
(661 - 680) Nizārī


3
3
Ali ibn Husayn Zayn al-Abidin : Third Ismā'īlī Imām
(680–713)


4
4
Muhammad al-Baqir : Fourth Ismā'īlī Imām
(713–733)


5
5
Ja'far al-Sadiq : Fifth Ismā'īlī Imām
(733–765)


6
6
Isma'il ibn Jafar : Sixth Ismā'īlī Imām
(765 - 775)


7
7
Muhammad ibn Ismail : Seventh Ismā'īlī Imām and first distinctly Ismā'īlī (non-Twelver) Imām
(775-813)


First phase[edit]
The eighth Imam, Abd Allah al-Akbar of the Ismaili Shia remained hidden but continued the Ismaili movement in the 9th century in Salamiyah, Syria. The eighth to tenth Imams, (Abadullah, Ahmed and Husain), remained hidden and worked for the movement against the period's time's rulers. The 11th Imam Abdullah al-Mahdi Billah, under the guise of being a merchant, and his son had made their way to Sijilmasa,[20] fleeing persecution by the Abbasids. Imam Abdullah founded Fatimid Caliphate. The Fatimid Ismaili Imams continued till 20th Imam as caliph.
Second phase[edit]
Upon the death of the twentieth Imam, al-Amir bi-Ahkami'l-Lah (d. AH 526 (1131/1132)), his two-year old child at-Tayyib Abu'l-Qasim (b. AH 524 (1129/1130)) was appointed twenty-first Imam. The supporters of Tayyeb became the Tayyibi Ismāʿīlī. As Tayyeb was not in position to run the dawah, Queen Arwa al-Sulayhi, the Da'i al-Mutlaq, acted as his regent. Imam Tayyeb was hidden, and second phase of seclusion started. The Da'i had now been given absolute authority and made independent from political activity. These Dai continued acting on behalf of hidden Imams till date.
Imams[edit]




The name of Imam as it appears in Masjid Nabawi.


Twelver Imams[edit]
Main article: Imamah (Shia Twelver doctrine)
According to the majority of Shī'a, namely the Twelvers (Ithnā'ashariyya), the following is a listing of the rightful successors to Muḥammad. Each Imam was the son of the previous Imam except for Hussayn ibn 'Alī, who was the brother of Hassan ibn 'Alī.The belief in this succession to Muḥammad stems from various Quranic verses which include: 75:36, 13:7, 35:24, 2:30, 2:124, 36:26, 7:142, 42:23.[citation needed] They support their discussion by citing Genesis 17:19–20 and Sunni hadith:Sahih Muslim, Hadith number 4478, English translation by Abdul Hamid Siddiqui.[21][original research?]
List of The Twelve Imams[edit]
Main article: The Twelve Imams
According to Twelvers, there is always an Imam of the era, who is the divinely appointed authority on all matters of faith and law in the Muslim community. Ali was the first of the Twelve Imams, and, in the Twelvers and Sufis' view, the rightful successor to Muhammad, followed by male descendants of Muhammad through his daughter Fatimah. Each Imam was the son of the previous Imam, with the exception of Husayn ibn Ali, who was the brother of Hasan ibn Ali. The twelfth and final Imam is Muhammad al-Mahdi, who is believed by the Twelvers to be currently alive, and hidden in the Major Occultation until he returns to bring justice to the world.[22] It is believed by Twelver Shia and Alevi Muslims that the Twelve Imams have been foretold in the Hadith of the Twelve Successors. All of the Imams met unnatural deaths, with the exception of the last Imam, who according to Twelver and Alevi belief, is living in occultation.
Ismaili Imams[edit]
Main article: List of Ismaili imams
The Ismaili line of imams for both sects (the Nizari and the Mustali) continues undivided until Mustansir Billah (d. 1094). After his death the line of the imamat separates into the Nizari and Mustali dynasties.
The line of imams of the Mustali Ismaili Shia Muslims (also known as the Bohras/Dawoodi Bohra) continued up to Aamir ibn Mustali. After his death, they believe their 21st Imam Taiyab abi al-Qasim went into a Dawr-e-Satr (period of concealment) that continues to this day. In the absence of an imam they are led by a Dai-al-Mutlaq (absolute missionary) who manages the affairs of the Imam-in-Concealment until re-emergence of the Imam from concealment.
The line of imams of the Nizari Ismaili Shia Muslims (also known as the Agha-khani Ismailis in South and Central Asia) continues to their present living 49th hereditary imam, Aga Khan IV (son of Prince Aly Khan). They are the only Shia Muslim community today led by a present and living (Hazir wa Mawjud) imam.[23]
See also: Mustali, Hafizi, and Nizari





Note: Kaysani's Imam Hanafiyyah is descendant of Ali from Ali's wife Khawlah



Zaidi Imams[edit]
Main article: Imams of Yemen
The Zaidi branch of Shi'ism established its own line of Imams starting in the year 897; the line continued without interruption until 1962 when the North Yemen Civil War brought the Imamate to an end and established a republic.
Sunni view of the Shia Imamate[edit]
The Twelver Imamah doctrine is not shared by the Salafi creed.[citation needed] The Syrian mufti Ibn Taymiyyah (d. 728 AH/1328 AD) composed a long refutation of it in his Minhaj as-Sunnah an-Nabawiyyah.[24]
The belief of the Twelver Imamah with the consideration of the sacred status of the four Rashidun Caliphs is shared in Sunni Islam, due to the following hadith of Muhammad:
"I heard the Apostle of Allah say 'Islam shall not cease to be glorious up to twelve Caliphs, every one of them being from the Quraish'". (And in a narration) "The affairs of men will not cease to decline so long as twelve men will rule over them, every one of them coming from Quraish. And in a narration: The religion will continue to be established till the hour comes as there are twelve Caliphs over them, everyone of them coming from the Quraish" [25]
"The affairs of the people will continue to be conducted as long as they are governed by twelve men, he then added from Quraish" [26]
"I will be followed by twelve Khalifas all will be Quraysh". [27]





Imams and Shia Islam



See also[edit]

Succession to Muhammad
Imamzadeh
Ismah
Imams of Yemen



Various Imāmah sects emerged from the descendants of Al-"Imām" and Al-Sādiq





Wahb

Barrah

Fatimah

Abdul-Muttalib

Natīla

























































Aminah bint Wahab

ʿAbd Allāh


Asad ibn Hashim

Fatimah bint Qays

‘Abbas
















































Khadija bint Khuwaylid

Muhammad
(Family tree)

Abi Talib

Fatimah bint Asad

ʿAbd Allāh





















































Fatima Zahra



Ali al Murtaza
(Family tree)



Khawlah b. Ja'far al-Hanafiyyah

ʿAli bin ʿAbd Allāh b. ‘Abbas
























































Hasan al Mujtaba

Husayn ibn Ali (Family)

Shahr Banu

Ibn al-Hanifiyyah














































Fatimah bint Hasan



Zayn al-'Abidin

Jayda al-Sindhi


Kaysanites (Al-Mukhtar)















































Farwah bint
Al-Qasim ibn Muhammad

Muhammad al-Baqir


Zayd ash-Shahīd (Zaydiyyah)




First Sufi
Abu Hashim (Hashimiyya)









































Ja'far al-Sadiq


Yemen-Fivers


Zaydi-Alavids

Muhammad "al-Imām"

























































Isma'il ibn Jafar

 

Al-Aftah
(Aftahiyya)

 

Al-Dibaj
(Sumaytiyya)

 

Musa al-Kadhim

 

Ibrāhim ibn Ali ibn ′Abd Allah

 


 










































Imāmī Ismā'īlīsm


Muhammad al-Aftah

Ibrāhim ibn Mūsā

Imāmī Athnā‘ashariyyah


Muslim’īyyah (Sīnbād)









 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


 


 


 


 



Al-Maktūm
(Mubārakʾiyya)

Seveners






Ali al-Rida


Ishaq al-Turk











































ʿAbadullāh (Wafī Aḥmad)

Ḥamdān Qarmaṭ'l-ʾAšʿaṯ






Muhammad al-Taqī (Jawad)

Muhammerah (Muqanna)





































Aḥmad (Taqī Muhammad)

Abū Sa'id






Ali al Hadi


Khurrāmīyah (Pāpak, Maziar)









































Ḥusayn (Raḍī ʿAbdillāh)

Abū-Tāhir







Hasan al-Askari


Kızılbaş









 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 






Ubayd Allāh (Fatimids)

 

Qarmatis

 

Nāimī-Ḥurūfīs

 


 


 


 


 

Ibn Nusayr (‘Ulyāʾiyya)

 


 


 




 


 


 


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 



al-Qāʾim


ʿAlī Al-Aʿlā (Baktāsh’īyyah)




Muhammad (Imām Zāmān)


Al-Khaṣībī (Nusairis)



















































al-Manṣūr


Pasīkhānī (Nuktawiyya)



Imamiyyah (Twelvers)

Balım Sultan (Baktāshīs)













































al-Muʿizz

 


 

Nasīmī

 

Ja'faris

 

Alevis

 


 


 


 


 




 


 


 


 


 








































al-ʿAzīz

Akhbaris

Shaykhis

Usulis






































al-Ḥākim


Safavids (Safaviyya Iran)

Nuqta-yi Ula (Bábis)


Velayat-e-faqih (Iran, Islamic Rep.)























































al-Ẓāhir

Durzis
(Al-Muqtana)

Mírzá Yaḥyá (Azalis)

Mírzá Ḥusayn (Bahá'ís)


Other Alevis (Bektashism)






































Al-Mustanṣir

Nasir Khusraw

Badakhshan & Afgan Pamiris

Yarsanis
(Sultan Sahak)














 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 



Al-Musta'li (Musta'lis)

Muḥammad ibn Abū Tamīm

Al-Nizār
(Nizārīs)



Ostad Elahi
(‘Ali-Ilahis)









 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


 

Al-Āmir

 


 


 


 

Hashshashins (Ḥ. bin Sabbah)

 


 


 

Işık Alevis

 


 


 




 


 


 





































At-Tayyib (Tayyibis)


Al-Ḥāfīz (Hafizis)

Ḥasan ʿAlā (Alamūt Nizārīs)



Alians (Demir &Otman Babas)










 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 



Arwa
al-Sulayhi

Zoeb Musa (Dawoodis)


Agha Khans (Nizārī Ismā'īlīs)



Harabatis
(Baba Rexheb)















































Sulayman (Sulaymanis)

Ali bin Ibrāhim
(Alavi Bohra)


Hebtiahs Bohra


A . Hussain Jivaji
(Atba-i-Malak)
















































Jafari Bohras (Syed Jafar Ahmad Shirazi)

Progressive Dawoodis (Asghar Ali)

Atba-i-Malak Vakil (A. Qadir Ebrahimji)

Atba-i-Malak Badar (Ghulam Hussain Miya Khan)















Notes[edit]


^ The Sufi spiritual leader Ibn Arabi said:A Muslim is a person who has dedicated his worship exclusively to God...Islam means making one's religion and faith God's alone.[11]
^ 19:28


footnotes[edit]


^ Amir-Moezzi, Mohammad Ali. "SHIʿITE DOCTRINE". Encyclopædia Iranica. Retrieved 24 April 2016. 
^ Nasr 2006, p. 38
^ Sociology of religions: perspectives of Ali Shariati (2008) Mir Mohammed Ibrahim
^ Nasr, Seyyed Hossein; Dabashi, Hamid; Nasr, Seyyed Vali Reza (1988). Shi'ism: Doctrines, Thought, and Spirituality. SUNY Press. ISBN 978-0-88706-689-4. 
^ Tabataba'i 2008
^ al-Tijani al-Samawi, p. 79
^ Ayoub 1984, p. 157
^ Moslem bin Hajjaj (2006). Sahih Moslem. Dar Tayibbah. p. 882. 
^ a b c al-Shaykh al-Saduq 2006, p. 194
^ a b c Sharif al-Qarashi 2003
^ Razi 1900, p. 432
^ "DAWR (1)". 
^ Öz, Mustafa, Mezhepler Tarihi ve Terimleri Sözlüğü (The History of madh'habs and its terminology dictionary), Ensar Yayıncılık, İstanbul, 2011. (This is the name of the trainer of Muhammed bin Ismā‘īl ibn Jā’far. He had established the principles of the Batiniyya Madh'hab, later.)
^ "ʿABDALLĀH B. MAYMŪN AL-QADDĀḤ". 
^ [1], Historical representations of a Fatimid Imam-caliph: Exploring al-Maqrizi’s and Idris’ writings on al-Mu‘izz Li Din Allah, Dr. Shainool Jiwa
^ [2], shiite-encyclopedia-ahlul-bayt
^ Momen, Moojan, An Introduction to Shi'i Islam, Yale University Press, 1985, p.199
^ Rise of The Fatimids, by W. Ivanow. Page 81, 275
^ "ISMAʿILISM xvii. THE IMAMATE IN ISMAʿILISM". 
^ Yeomans 2006, p. 43.
^ Imam Muslim (translated by Aftab Shahryar) (2004). Sahih Muslim Abridged. Islamic Book Service. ISBN 81-7231-592-9. 
^ Gleave, Robert. "Imamate". Encyclopaedia of Islam and the Muslim world; vol.1. MacMillan. ISBN 0-02-865604-0. 
^ "Aga Khan Development Network". 
^ See "Ibn Taymiyya’s Critique of Shia Imamology. Translation of Three Sections of his "Minhāj al-Sunna", by Yahya Michot, The Muslim World, 104/1-2 (2014), pp. 109-149.
^ Mishkat al Masabih Vol 4 p 576, Hadith 5
^ Sahih Muslim, Hadith number 4478
^ Sunan Tirmidhi Volume 1 page 813


Bibliography[edit]

Corbin, Henry (1993). History of Islamic Philosophy, translated by Liadain Sherrard and Philip Sherrard. Kegan Paul International in association with Islamic Publications for The Institute of Ismaili Studies. ISBN 0-7103-0416-1. 
Tabatabaei, Sayyid Mohammad Hosayn (1979). Shi'ite Islam. translated by Seyyed Hossein Nasr. SUNY Press. ISBN 0-87395-272-3. 
Motahhari, Morteza (1980). Master and Mastership. Islamic Seminary Publications. ASIN B0006E4J0C. 

Further reading[edit]

Rizvi, Sa'id Akhtar (1956). Imamate: The Vicegerency of the Prophet. 

References[edit]

Madelung, Wilferd (2003). "Hasan ibn Ali". Encyclopædia Iranica. 
Madelung, Wilferd (1985c). "ʿALĪ AL-REŻĀ". Encyclopaedia Iranica. Retrieved 2007-11-09. 
Kohlberg, E.; Poonawala, I. K. (1985). "ʿALI B. ABI ṬĀLEB". Encyclopaedia Iranica. Retrieved 2014-07-07. 
Amir-Moezzi, Mohammad Ali (2005). "SHIʿITE DOCTRINE". Encyclopaedia Iranica. Retrieved 2014-07-07. 
Madelung, Wilferd (1988). "AL-BAQER, ABU JAFAR MOHAMMAD". Encyclopædia Iranica. Retrieved 2007-11-08. 
Amir-Moezzi, Mohammad Ali (2007). "ISLAM IN IRAN vii. THE CONCEPT OF MAHDI IN TWELVER SHIʿISM". Encyclopædia Iranica. 
Madelung, Wilferd (1985a). "'ALĪ AL-HĀDĪ". Encyclopædia Iranica. 
Madelung, Wilferd (1985b). "ʿALĪ AL-REŻĀ". Encyclopædia Iranica. 
Madelung, Wilferd (2004). "ḤOSAYN B. ʿALI i. LIFE AND SIGNIFICANCE IN SHIʿISM". Encyclopædia Iranica. 
Halm, H (1987). "ʿASKARĪ". Encyclopaedia Iranica. 
Nasr, Seyyed Hossein (2007). "Ali". Encyclopædia Britannica Online. 
Tabataba'e, Muhammad Husayn (2008). Islamic Teachings in Brief. Qum: Ansariyan. 
Encyclopædia Britannica Online. Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc. 
Encyclopædia Iranica. Center for Iranian Studies, Columbia University. ISBN 1-56859-050-4. 
Martin, Richard C. Encyclopaedia of Islam and the Muslim world; vol.1. MacMillan. ISBN 0-02-865604-0. 
Encyclopedia of the Modern Middle East and North Africa. Gale Group. 2004. ISBN 978-0-02-865769-1. 
Nasr, Seyyed Vali Reza (2006). The Shia revival : how conflicts within Islam will shape the future (1st ed.). New York: Norton. ISBN 0-393-06211-2. 
Corbin, Henry (1993) [originally published in French in 1964]. History of Islamic Philosophy, Translated by Liadain Sherrard, Philip Sherrard. London; Kegan Paul International in association with Islamic Publications for The Institute of Ismaili Studies. ISBN 0-7103-0416-1. 
Momen, Moojan (1985). An Introduction to Shi`i Islam: The History and Doctrines of Twelve. Yale University Press. ISBN 0-300-03531-4. 
Sachedina, Abdulaziz Abdulhussein (1988). The Just Ruler (al-sultān Al-ʻādil) in Shīʻite Islam: The Comprehensive Authority of the Jurist in Imamite Jurisprudence. Oxford University Press US. ISBN 0-19-511915-0. 
Tabatabae, Sayyid Mohammad Hosayn (1979). Shi'ite Islam. translated by Seyyed Hossein Nasr. SUNY press. ISBN 0-87395-272-3. 
Ayoub, Mahmoud (1984). The Qur'an and Its Interpreters , Volume 1. SUNY Press. ISBN 978-0-87395-727-4. 
al-Tijani al-Samawi, Muhammad. To Be With The Truthful. 
Corbin, Henry (1993). History of Islamic Philosophy, Translated by Liadain Sherrard, Philip Sherrard. London; Kegan Paul International in association with Islamic Publications for The Institute of Ismaili Studies. ISBN 0-7103-0416-1. 
Madelung, Wilferd; Daftary, Farhad; Meri, Josef W. (2003). Culture and Memory in Medieval Islam: Essays in Honor of Wilferd Madelung. I.B.Tauris. ISBN 978-1-86064-859-5. 
Tabatabae, Sayyid Mohammad Hosayn (1979). Shi'ite Islam. Translated by Seyyed Hossein Nasr. SUNY press. ISBN 0-87395-272-3. 
Tabatabaei, Sayyid Mohammad Hosayn (1975). Shi'ite Islam. Translated by Sayyid Hossein Nasr. State University of New York Press. ISBN 0-87395-390-8. 
Sachedina, Abdulaziz Abdulhussein (1988). The Just Ruler (al-sultān Al-ʻādil) in Shīʻite Islam: The Comprehensive Authority of the Jurist in Imamite Jurisprudence. Oxford University Press US. ISBN 0-19-511915-0. 
Mashita (2002). Theology, ethics and metaphysics. Hiroyuki. London: RoutledgeCurzon. ISBN 9780700716708. 
Chittick, William C. (1980). A Shi'ite Anthology. SUNY Press. ISBN 978-0-87395-510-2. 
Dungersi, Mohammed Raza. A Brief Biography of Imam Hasan bin Ali (a.s.): al-Askari. Bilal Muslim Mission of Tanzania. GGKEY:NT86H2HXN40. 
Nasr, Seyyed Hossein (2013). Islamic Spirituality: Foundations. Routledge. ISBN 978-1-134-53895-9. 
Al-Tabataba'i, Muhammad H. (1977). Shi'ite Islam. SUNY Press. ISBN 978-0-87395-390-0. 
Qurashi, Baqir Shareef (2005). The Life of Imam Muhammad Al-Jawad. Qom: Ansariyan Publications. 
Amir-Moezzi, Mohammad Ali (27 September 1994). The Divine Guide in Early Shi'ism: The Sources of Esotericism in Islam. SUNY Press. ISBN 978-0-7914-2122-2. 
Amir-Moezzi, Mohammad Ali (15 February 2011). The Spirituality of Shi'i Islam: Belief and Practices. I.B.Tauris. ISBN 978-1-84511-738-2. 
Qurashi, Baqir Sharif (1999). The Life of Imam Muhammad ibn 'Ali al-Baqir. Ansariyan Publications. ISBN 9644380444. 
Qurashi, Baqir Sharif (2007). The life of Imām Zayn al ‘Abidin (A.S.). Ansariyan Publications. ISBN 978-9644381652. 
Rizvi, Sayyid Saeed Akhtar (1988). Imamate: The vicegerency of the Holy Prophet. Bilal Muslim Mission of Tanzania. ISBN 978-9976-956-13-9. 
al-Shaykh al-Saduq (2006). UYUN AKHBAR AL-REZA The Source of Traditions on Imam Reza (a.s.) Vol.2. Qom: Ansariyan Publications. p. 194. 

External links[edit]

Al-imamah (emamah) page
A brief introduction of Twelve Imams
Al-Muraja'at
A Brief History Of The Lives Of The Twelve Imams a chapter of Shi'ite Islam (book) by Allameh Tabatabaei
The Twelve Imams Taken From "A Shi'ite Anthology" By Allameh Tabatabaei
A Short History of the Lives of The Twelve Imams
Imamah in the Qur'an
Imam An article by Encyclopædia Britannica Online
Hojjat by Maria Dakake, an article of Encyclopædia Iranica
Shia Islam - Ask Imam
Shia Network Ahlulbayt Discussion Forums
Twelve Successors
Bay Area Shiite-Muslims Association (basma.us)
Imamia Mission Bury
Graphical illustration of the Shia sects
The Shia Islamic Guide (shiacode.com)
Imamah in Sunni Islam
Imamah according to Sunnis







v
t
e


Shia Imams



Twelver



Ali al Murtaza
Hasan al Mujtaba
Husayn ash shaheed
Ali ibn Husayn Zayn al-Abidin
Muhammad al-Baqir
Ja'far al-Sadiq
Musa al-Kadhim
Ali al-Ridha
Muhammad al-Jawad
Ali al-Hadi
Hasan al-Askari
Muhammad al-Mahdi





Tayyibi



Ali ("Asās" or "Wāsih" of "Nabi Muhammad")


Hasan
Husayn
al-Sajjad
al-Baqir
al-Sādiq
Ismā'il
Muhammad
Abadullāh (Wāfi Ahmad)
Ahmad (Tāqi Muhammad)
Husayn (Rādhi Abdullāh)
Abdullah al-Mahdi
Muhammad al-Qā'im
Ismāʿīl al-Mansur
Ma'ādd al-Mu'izz
Nizār al-Aziz
Mansur al-Hākim
Ali az-Zāhir
Ma'ādd al-Mustansir
Ahmad al-Mustāʿli
Mansur al-Amir
Abu'l-Qāsim at-Tāyyib





Nizari



Ali
Husayn ibn Ali
Ali ibn Husayn Zayn al-Abidin
Muhammad al-Baqir
Ja'far al-Sadiq
Isma'il ibn Jafar
Muhammad ibn Isma'il
Ahmad al-Wafi
Muhammad at-Taqi
Abdullah ar-Radi
Abdullah al-Mahdi Billah
al-Qa'im bi-Amr Allah
al-Mansur Billah
Al-Mu'izz li-Din Allah
Al-Aziz Billah
Al-Hakim bi-Amr Allah
Ali az-Zahir
al-Mustansir Billah
Nizar
al-Hādī
al-Mutadī
al-Qāhir
Hassan II
Nur al-Din Muhammad II
Jalaluddin Hasan
‘Alā’ ad-Dīn Muḥammad III
Rukn al-Din Khurshah
Shamsu-d-Dīn Muḥammad
Qāsim Shāh
Islām Shāh
Muḥammad ibn Islām Shāh
al-Mustanṣir billāh II
ʿAbdu s-Salām Shāh
Gharīb Mīrzā
Abū Dharr ʻAlī
Murād Mīrzā
Dhū-l-Fiqār ʻAlī
Nūru d-Dīn ʻAlī
Khalīlullāh II ʻAlī
Nizār II
as-Sayyid ʻAlī
Ḥasan ʻAlī
Qāsim ʻAlī
Abū-l-Hasan ʻAlī
Shāh Khalīlullāh III
Aga Khan I
Aga Khan II
Aga Khan III
Aga Khan IV












v
t
e


Islamic theology











Fields
Theologians
Books










Fields



Aqidah
‘aql
Astronomy
Cosmology
Eschatology
Ethics
Kalam
Fiqh
Logic in philosophy
Peace in philosophy
Philosophy
Physics
Philosophy of education





Theologians



Abd al-Jabbar ibn Ahmad
Abd al-Qadir al-Jilani
Abdul Hosein Amini
Abdulhakim Arvasi
Abū Ḥanīfa
Abu l-A‘la Mawdudi
Abu Yusuf
Ahmad ibn Hanbal
Ahmad Sirhindi
Ahmad Yasavi
Ahmed Raza Khan Barelvi
Akhtar Raza Khan
al-Ash‘ari
al-Ballūṭī
al-Baydawi
al-Dhahabi
al-Ghazali
al-Hilli
al-Jahiz
al-Jubba'i
al-Kindi
al-Masudi
al-Maturidi
al-Mufid
Al-Qasim
al-Qushayri
al-Razi
Al-Shafi‘i
al-Shahrastani
al-Shirazi
al-Tirmidhi
Allameh Majlesi
Amr ibn Ubayd
Dawud al-Zahiri
Fazlur Rahman Malik
Hasan of Basra
Hacı Bayram-ı Veli
Haji Bektash Veli
Hüseyin Hilmi Işık
ibn ‘Arabī
ibn al-Jawzi
ibn ‘Aqil
ibn Hazm
ibn Qudamah
Ibn Taymiyyah
Ja’far al-Sadiq
Jalal al-Din Muhammad Rumi
Malik ibn Anas
Mahmud Hudayi
Morteza Motahhari
Muhammad al-Baqir
Muhammad al-Nafs al-Zakiyya
Muhammad Baqir al-Sadr
Muhammed Hamdi Yazır
Muhammad Hamidullah
Muhammad ibn al-Hanafiyyah
Muhammad Tahir-ul-Qadri
Muhammad Taqi Usmani
Nasir Khusraw
Sadr al-Din al-Qunawi
Said Nursî
Shaykh Tusi
Sheikh Bedreddin
Wasil ibn Ata
Zayd ibn Ali
Zayn al-Abidin





Key books



Crucial Sunni books

al-Irshad
al-Aqidah al-Tahawiyyah


Buyruks
Kitab al Majmu
Masnavi
Nahj al-Balagha
Epistles of Wisdom
Risale-i Nur
















Schools







Sunni



Ash'ari
Maturidi
Traditionalism





Shia




Kaysanites



Mukhtar

Abu Muslim
Sunpadh
Ishaq al-Turk


Muhammerah

Khurramites

Babak
Mazyar
Ismail I / Pir Sultan Abdal – Qizilbash / Safavid conversion of Iran to Shia Islam


al-Muqanna







Zaidiyyah



Jarudi
Batriyya
Alid dynasties of northern Iran

Hasan al-Utrush


List of extinct Shia sects

Dukayniyya
Khalafiyya
Khashabiyya







Imami Isma'ilism



Batiniyyah

Sevener Qarmatians
Hamza / al-Muqtana Baha'uddin / ad-Darazi – Druzes


Musta'li

Hafizi
Taiyabi


Nizari

Assassins
Nizaris


Nasir Khusraw – Badakhshan & Turkestan Alevism





Imami Twelver



Theology of Twelvers

Ja'fari

Akhbari
Shaykhi
Usuli


Alevism

Qutb ad-Dīn Haydar – Qalandariyya
Baba Ishak – Babai Revolt
Galip Hassan Kuscuoglu – Rifa'i-Galibi Order


Ghulat

al-Khaṣībī / ibn Nusayr – Alawites
Fazlallah Astarabadi (Naimi) / Imadaddin Nasimi – Hurufism / Bektashism and folk religion












Independent



Ibadi

ibn Ibāḍ
Jābir ibn Zayd


Jabriyyah

Ibn Safwan


Murji'ah
Karramiyya
Qadariyah

Ma'bad al-Juhani
Muʿtazila
Bahshamiyya







Khawarij



Azariqa
Najdat
Sufri

Abu Qurra


Nakkariyyah

Abu Yazid


Haruriyyah


















v
t
e


Islam topics




Outline of Islam







Beliefs



God in Islam
Tawhid
Muhammad

In Islam


Prophets of Islam





Five Pillars



Shahada
Salah
Sawm
Zakat
Hajj








History
Leaders






Timeline of Muslim history
Conquests
Golden Age
Historiography
Sahaba
Ahl al-Bayt
Shi'a Imams
Caliphates

Rashidun
Umayyad
Abbasid
Córdoba
Fatimid
Almohad
Sokoto
Ottoman







Religious texts



Quran
Sunnah
Hadith
Tafsir
Seerah





Denominations



Sunni
Shia
Ibadi
Black Muslims
Ahmadiyya
Quranism
Non-denominational








Life
Culture






Animals
Art
Calendar
Children
Clothing
Holidays
Mosques
Madrasas
Moral teachings
Music
Philosophy
Political aspects
Qurbani
Science

medieval


Social welfare
Women
LGBT
Islam by country
















Law
Jurisprudence










Economics



Banking
Economic history
Sukuk
Takaful
Murabaha
Riba





Hygiene



Ghusl
Miswak
Najis
Tayammum
Toilet
Wudu








Marriage
Sex






Marriage contract
Mahr
Mahram
Masturbation
Nikah
Nikah Mut‘ah
Zina





Other aspects



Cleanliness
Criminal
Dhabiĥa
Dhimmi
Divorce
Diet
Ethics
Etiquette
Gambling
Gender segregation
Honorifics
Hudud
Inheritance
Jizya
Leadership
Ma malakat aymanukum
Military

POWs


Slavery
Sources of law
Theological

baligh
kalam


















 Islamic studies







Arts



Arabesque
Architecture
Calligraphy
Carpets
Gardens
Geometric patterns
Music
Pottery





Medieval science



Alchemy and chemistry
Astronomy
Cosmology
Geography and cartography
Mathematics
Medicine
Ophthalmology
Physics





Philosophy



Early
Contemporary
Eschatology
Theological





Other areas



Astrology
Creationism (evolution)
Feminism
Inventions
Liberalism and progressivism
Literature

poetry


Psychology
Shu'ubiyya
Conversion to mosques


















Other religions



Christianity

Mormonism
Protestantism


Hinduism
Jainism
Judaism
Sikhism





Related topics



Apostasy
Criticism of Islam
Cultural Muslim
Islamism

Criticism
Post-Islamism
Qutbism
Salafi movement


Islamophobia

Incidents


Islamic terrorism
Islamic view of miracles
Domestic violence
Nursing
Persecution of Muslims
Quran and miracles
Symbolism








 Islam portal
 Category















v
t
e


Islamic states by type



Sunni Islamic state



Sunni Caliphate
Ilkhanate
Emirate
Sheikhdom
Sultanate





Shia Islamic state



Shia Caliphate
Government by Shia Imams

Twelver Imams government
Sevener Imams government


Regency of the Islamic jurist during the Occultation of the Mahdi





Ecumenical or Pan-Islamic



Islamic republic
Islamic monarchy











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Imamah_(Shia)&oldid=816772316"					Categories: Shia IslamIslamic belief and doctrineIslamic states by typeIslamic terminologyHidden categories: Articles containing Arabic-language textAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from June 2014Articles with unsourced statements from September 2014Wikipedia articles needing clarification from December 2015All Wikipedia articles needing clarificationArticles using small message boxesAll articles that may contain original researchArticles that may contain original research from December 2015Articles with unsourced statements from December 2015Articles that may contain original research from December 2016