
Index Fungorum


Type of site

Database


Owner
Index Fungorum Partnership


Created by
Index Fungorum Partnership


Website
IndexFungorum.org


Commercial
No


Registration
Not required


Index Fungorum is an international project to index all formal names (scientific names) in the Fungus Kingdom. As of 2015 the project is based at the Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, one of three partners along with Landcare Research and the Institute of Microbiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences.
It is somewhat comparable to the International Plant Names Index (IPNI), in which the Royal Botanic Gardens is also involved. A difference is that where IPNI does not indicate correct names, the Index Fungorum does indicate the status of a name. In the returns from the search page a currently correct name is indicated in green, while others are in blue (a few, aberrant usages of names are indicated in red). All names are linked to pages giving the correct name, with lists of synonyms.
Index Fungorum is one of three nomenclatural repositories recognized by the Nomenclature Committee for Fungi; the others are MycoBank and Fungal Names.[1]



Contents


1 Current names in Index Fungorum (Species Fungorum)
2 Life Science Identifiers (LSIDs)
3 Services
4 See also
5 References
6 External links



Current names in Index Fungorum (Species Fungorum)[edit]
The main part of Index Fungorum is intended to be a global list of all fungus names which have ever been validly defined, but many of them are conflicting or no longer used. Species Fungorum is a closely related project based at the Royal Botanical Gardens, Kew supported by CABI to decide a consistent subset of the Index Fungorum names which can be recommended as currently valid. It is possible to search in either the Index Fungorum or the Species Fungorum list separately and the Index Fungorum results also give a cross-reference to Species Fungorum where an entry is available - names without such a reference are generally only of historical interest and should not be considered reliable for present use.[2][3]
Life Science Identifiers (LSIDs)[edit]
Index Fungorum provides Life Science Identifiers (LSIDs) for records in its database.
Services[edit]
Index Fungorum provides a SOAP protocol web service for searching its database and retrieving records. A WSDL file describing the services is available.[4]
See also[edit]

Australian Plant Name Index
Index Kewensis
International Plant Names Index

References[edit]



^ Redhead, Scott A.; Norvell, Lorelei L. (2013). "MycoBank, Index Fungorum, and Fungal Names recommended as official nomenclatural repositories for 2013" (PDF). IMA Fungus. 3 (2): 44–45. 
^ See the pop-up "Help with searching" at "Index Fungorum home page". Index Fungorum. Royal Botanic Gardens Kew. Retrieved 2016-10-25. .
^ "Species Fungorum home page". Species Fungorum. Royal Botanic Gardens Kew. Retrieved 2016-10-25. 
^ "Fungus Web Service". www.indexfungorum.org. 



External links[edit]



Wikidata has the property: Index Fungorum IDs (P1391) (see uses)






This fungus-related article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it.


v
t
e










						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Index_Fungorum&oldid=816443540"					Categories: MycologyBiological databasesFungus stubsHidden categories: All stub articles