






This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages)







This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (July 2008) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)









The examples and perspective in this article may not represent a worldwide view of the subject. You may improve this article, discuss the issue on the talk page, or create a new article, as appropriate. (March 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)





(Learn how and when to remove this template message)



An independent record label (or indie label) is a record label that operates without the funding of or outside major record labels. Many commercial bands and musical acts begin their careers on independent labels.[1]



Contents


1 Overview
2 History
3 See also
4 References



Overview[edit]
[2] Independent labels are small companies that produce and distribute records. These labels are not a part of three major label corporations and have a majority of the music titles. They have about 66 percent of music titles according to SoundScan and the RIAA, but only 20 percent of sales.
[3] An independent label, which is also called an indie label is not connected to the three major record companies. Some of these Indie labels are smaller and others make huge profits in business. Independent labels face many struggles such as trying to get their music heard, as well as fighting against companies with more resources.
The boundaries between major and independent labels, and the definitions of each, differ from commentator to commentator. The traditional definition of a "major" record label is one that owns its own distribution channel. Some independent record labels, in particular those with successful performing artists, sign dual-release agreements (and make other deals) with major labels and may rely to some extent on international licensing deals, distribution agreements, and other arrangements with major record labels. Major labels may also wholly or partially acquire independent labels.
Other nominally "independent" labels are started (and sometimes run) by major label artists but are still owned at least in part by the major label parent. These spin-off labels are also frequently referred to as vanity labels or "boutique labels" and are intended to appease established, powerful artists or to give them latitude in discovering and promoting new talent.
According to Association of Independent Music (AIM) "(...) A "major" is defined in AIM's constitution as a multinational company which (together with the companies in its group) has more than 5% of the world market(s) for the sale of records or music videos. The majors are (currently) Sony, Warner and the Universal Music Group (which as of 2012 incorporates EMI).(...) If a major owns 50% or more of the total shares in your company, you would (usually) be owned or controlled by that major."
History[edit]
Independent labels have a long history of signalling developments in popular music, stretching back to the post-war period in the United States.[4] Disputes with major labels about publishing led to a proliferation of labels specializing in country, jazz, and blues. Sun Records played an important part in the development of Rock 'n' roll as well as country, with artists such as Elvis Presley, Carl Perkins, Johnny Cash, Jerry Lee Lewis, Roy Orbison, and Charlie Rich.[4] The independent labels usually aimed their releases at a small but devoted audience, not relying on mass sales for success, giving artists much more scope for experimentation and artistic freedom.
In the United Kingdom during the 1950s and 1960s, the major record companies EMI, Philips, and Decca had so much power that independent labels struggled to become established. Several British producers launched independent labels as outlets for their work including Joe Meek (Triumph), Andrew Oldham (Immediate), and Larry Page (Page One).[4] Chrysalis Records, launched by Chris Wright and Terry Ellis, was perhaps the most successful from that era, and continued to expand. Several major rock stars set up their own independent labels – The Beatles with Apple Records, The Rolling Stones with Rolling Stones Records, and Elton John with The Rocket Record Company, but they generally failed as commercial ventures or were swallowed up by the majors.[4]
[5] In the late 1940s and into the 1950s, the American business changed in music when a group of people became quick learners of the industry. Several companies set up their own studios and the record label owners began to increase. Many of label bosses figured out that whoever publishes a song is legally entitled to receive compensation for every record sold. Following the original pioneers, many new labels were launched over the next few decades by people with experience within the industry. During the 1980s and 90s, many rap labels were formed by artists who sought to find new up and coming talent. Madonna is good example of an artist who helped launch the career of young artists with her Maverick label.
No history of independent labels can be complete without reference to the most successful independent record label of all time, A&M Records. Founded in 1962 by trumpeter Herb Alpert (the A) and record promoter Jerry Moss (the M), A&M was initially the label and distributor for Alpert's own Tijuana Brass hit recordings, but the label quickly began signing other artists. Over its 37-year run, A&M sold records from such artists as Sergio Mendes & Brazil '66, Claudine Longet, The Carpenters, Phil Ochs, Carole King (A&M distributed her label, Ode), Joe Cocker, Free, Cat Stevens, Procol Harum, Humble Pie, Peter Frampton, The Police and Sting as a solo artist, Styx, Bryan Adams, Amy Grant, Suzanne Vega and Sheryl Crow. A&M was also the initial distributor of Windham Hill Records and George Harrison's Dark Horse Records. Alpert and Moss sold A&M Records to Polygram in 1989 with the caveat that Alpert and Moss would continue to manage it independently.[6] Polygram was later bought by Universal Music Group in 1998 and A&M as a label and a brand died the next year. There is little argument that A&M's 37-year run and catalog of both commercially successful and critically revered recordings qualifies it as the most successful independent record label in history.
The punk rock era brought about a turning point for independent labels, the do-it-yourself ethos of the time seeing the emergence of a plethora of independent labels.[4] In the US, independent labels such as Beserkley also found success with artists such as The Modern Lovers. Many of the UK labels ended up signing distribution deals with major labels to remain viable, but others retained their independence (e.g. Industrial Records, Factory Records, Warp, Ninja Tune, Wax On, BlancoMusic) and the factor that came to define independent labels was distribution, which had to be independent of the majors for records to be included in the UK Indie Chart, which was first compiled in 1980.[7] The term 'indie' and the chart itself was unrelated to a specific genre of music, and the chart featured a diverse range of music, from punk to reggae, to MOR and mainstream pop, including several hits from the likes of Kylie Minogue and Jason Donovan on the PWL label. The late 1970s had seen the establishment of independent distribution companies such as Pinnacle and Spartan, giving independent labels an effective means of distribution without involving the majors. The situation improved further with the establishment of 'The Cartel', an association of companies such as Rough Trade Records, Backs Records, and Red Rhino, who helped to take releases from small labels and get them into the shops nationwide.[7] The 'Indie Chart' became a major source of exposure for artists on indie labels, with the top ten singles regularly aired on the national television show The Chart Show. By the late 1980s, the major labels had identified an opportunity to break new acts via the indie chart, and began setting up subsidiary labels that were financed by the majors but distributed via the independent network, thereby being eligible for the chart. With the major labels effectively pushing the genuine indie labels out of the market, the independent chart became less significant in the early 1990s, with 'alternative' increasingly being used to describe artists, and 'indie' often used to describe a broad range of guitar-based rock and pop. The Offspring's 1994 album, Smash, is the highest selling independent record of all time.[8] The album was certified six times platinum in the U.S and sold more than 12 million copies worldwide.
There exists a book written by Norman Schreiber, called The Scouting Party Index of Independent record labels, that covers a list of over 200 independent record labels, their signed artists, and examples of their work.[9]
See also[edit]

Independent music
List of record labels
Open-source record label

References[edit]



^ "Indie Record Labels". Musicians.about.com. Retrieved 2016-01-12. 
^ Pavlik, John V. Converging Media: A new Introduction to Mass Communication. ISBN 9780190271510. 
^ McDonald, Heather. "Signing WIth an Indie Label". Thebalance.com. Retrieved 2 October 2017. 
^ a b c d e Rogan, Johnny (1992) "Introduction" in The Guinness Who's Who of Indie and New Wave Music, Guinness Publishing, ISBN 0-85112-579-4
^ Gillett, Charlies. "Independent record labels and producers". Brittanica.com. Retrieved 2 October 2017. 
^ Solomons, Mark (1998) "'UniGram': The Euro Outlook: A&M U.K. Restructured", Billboard – The International Newsweekly of Music, Video and Home Entertainment, ISSN 0006-2510
^ a b Lazell, Barry (1997) "Indie Hits 1980–1989", Cherry Red Books, ISBN 0-9517206-9-4
^ "The Offspring - Smash (album review 3)". Sputnikmusic. Retrieved 2016-01-12. 
^ “Nonprint”. “Nonprint”. American Libraries 17.6 (1986): 495–496. Web...









v
t
e


Independent production



Reading



Alternative comics
Alternative manga
Fanzine
Webcomic

business


Minicomic

Co-ops


Dōjinshi

conventions
printers
shops


Self publishing
Small press
Amateur press association





Audio







Independent music
Record label

Netlabel
Open-source label


Radio

Station
Pirate radio


Cassette culture
Dōjin music
Lo-fi music
Tracker (MOD) music
Podsafe





Musical instruments



Circuit bending
Experimental musical instrument








Video




Amateur



Home movies
Amateur film
Amateur pornography
Fan film
Machinima





Professional



Independent animation
Cinema of Transgression
Independent film
Exploitation film
B movie

Golden Age
50s
60s–70s
80s–present


Z movie
Midnight movie
Low-budget film
No budget film
No Wave Cinema
Double feature








Software







Cowboy coding
Demo−demoscene
Free software
Open-source software
Software cracking
Unofficial patch
Warez scene





Video games



Indie games−development−developers
Homebrew
Fangame
Dōjin soft
Mod
Open-source video game
ROM hack











Food
Drinks






Independent soft drink
Homebrewing
Microbrewery





Other



Indie art

Amateur photography
Mail art
Naïve art
Outsider art
Visionary environment


Indie RPG
Independent circuit (wrestling)
Independent TV station





General



Indie design
Do it yourself (DIY ethic)
Dōjin
Make (magazine)
Maker Faire












v
t
e


Music industry



Companies and
organizations




Representatives



ARIA
BPI
Music Canada
FIMI
IFPI (worldwide)
PROMUSICAE
RIAA
SNEP





Music publishers



BMG Rights Management
EMI Music Publishing
Fox Music
Imagem
MGM Music
Music catalog
Sony/ATV Music Publishing
Universal Music Publishing Group
Warner/Chappell Music





Record labels



Major: Sony Music
Universal Music Group
Warner Music Group
Independent: Independent UK record labels





Live music



CTS Eventim
Live Nation
LiveStyle
Ticketmaster








Genres



Avant-garde
Blues
Contemporary R&B
Country
Crossover
Dance
Disco
Drum and bass
Easy listening
Electronica
Experimental
Folk
Funk
Gospel
Hip hop
Instrumental
Jazz
Latin
Metal
Motown
New Age
Operatic pop
Pop
Punk
Reggae
Rock
Soul
Soundtrack
World





Sectors and
roles



Album cover design
Artists and repertoire (A&R)
Disc jockey
Distribution
Entertainment law
Music education
Music executive
Music journalism
Music publisher
Music store
Music venue
Musical instruments
Professional audio store
Promotion
Radio promotion
Record label
Record shop
Road crew
Talent manager
Tour promoter




Production



Arrangement
Composer
Conductor
Disc jockey
Hip hop producer
Horn section
Record producer
Recording artist
Rhythm section
Orchestrator
Session musician
Singer

Backup singer
Ghost singer
Vocal coach


Songwriter

Ghostwriter


Sound engineer








Release
formats



Album
Extended play (EP)/Mini album
Single
Music video
Promotional recording
Phonograph record
Eight-track
Compact cassette
CD
DVD
Airplay
Music download
Streaming media





Live shows



Concert
Concert tour
Concert residency
Music festival
Music competition





Charts



ARIA Charts
Billboard Hot 100
Brasil Hot 100 Airplay
Canadian Hot 100
Gaon Music Chart
Irish Singles Chart
Italian Singles Chart
GfK Entertainment Charts
Entertainment Monitoring Africa
Oricon Charts
New Zealand Singles Chart
SNEP Singles Chart
Sverigetopplistan
UK Singles Chart





Publications



Billboard
HitQuarters
Hot Press
Kerrang!
Mojo
Musica e dischi
NME
Q
Rolling Stone
Smash Hits
Top of the Pops





Television




Channels



CMT
TheCoolTV
Fuse
Heartland
Juice
MTV
MTV2
Tr3s
MuchMusic
The Music Factory
Viva
VH1
The Country Network





Series



Idols
Popstars
Star Academy
The Voice
The X Factor
Rising Star








Achievements



Music award
Best-selling music artists
Best-selling albums
Best-selling albums by country
Best-selling singles
Highest-grossing concert tours
Highest-attended concerts
Global Recording Artist of the Year





Other



Album sales
Album-equivalent unit
A-side and B-side
Backmasking
Christian music industry
Hidden track
Grammy Museum
White label








 Category











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Independent_record_label&oldid=813665987"					Categories: Independent record labelsHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from July 2008All articles needing additional referencesArticles with limited geographic scope from March 2017Articles with multiple maintenance issuesUse dmy dates from September 2015