This article is about the Indiana University system. For the system's founding campus, see Indiana University Bloomington. For other uses, see Indiana University (disambiguation).
Not to be confused with Indiana University of Pennsylvania.






This article relies too much on references to primary sources. Please improve this by adding secondary or tertiary sources. (February 2012) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)




Indiana University




Latin: Indianensis Universitas


Motto
Lux et Veritas
(Light and Truth)


Type
Public University system


Established
January 20, 1820


Endowment
$1.986 billion


President
Michael McRobbie



Academic staff

8,733 university-wide[1]


Students
110,436 university-wide[1]


Undergraduates
89,176 university-wide[1]


Postgraduates
21,260 university-wide[1]


Location
Bloomington, Indiana
Indianapolis, Indiana
39°10′N 86°30′W﻿ / ﻿39.167°N 86.500°W﻿ / 39.167; -86.500Coordinates: 39°10′N 86°30′W﻿ / ﻿39.167°N 86.500°W﻿ / 39.167; -86.500


Campus
3,640 acres (14.7 km2) across 9 campuses[1]


Colors
Cream and Crimson          


Affiliations



AAU
BTAA
APLU
ORAU
URA





Mascot
Referred to as "The Hoosiers".


Website
www.iu.edu





Indiana University (IU) is a multi-campus public university system in the state of Indiana, United States.[2] Indiana University has a combined student body of more than 110,000 students, including approximately 46,000 students enrolled at the Indiana University Bloomington campus and approximately 31,000 students enrolled at the Indiana University – Purdue University Indianapolis (IUPUI) campus.[1]



Contents


1 Campuses
2 Endowment
3 Notable alumni
4 Awards
5 Symbols
6 References
7 Further reading

7.1 Primary sources


8 External links



Campuses[edit]
Indiana University has a total of eight different campuses. Each one of the campuses is an accredited, four-year degree-granting institution.
The "core campuses" of Indiana University are located in Bloomington and Indianapolis.[3]

Indiana University Bloomington (IU Bloomington) is the flagship campus of Indiana University.[4] The Bloomington campus is home to numerous premier Indiana University schools, including the College of Arts and Sciences, the IU Jacobs School of Music, the IU School of Informatics and Computing, which includes the Department of Library and Information Science, IU School of Public Health, IU School of Optometry, the IU School of Public and Environmental Affairs, the IU Maurer School of Law, the IU School of Education, and the IU Kelley School of Business.[5]
Indiana University – Purdue University Indianapolis (IUPUI) is the premier urban campus of Indiana University.[6] The campus is operated in cooperation with Purdue University, but is administered by Indiana University. Located just west of downtown Indianapolis, the IUPUI campus hosts numerous Indiana University schools, including the IU School of Medicine, the IU School of Health and Rehabilitation Sciences, the IU School of Dentistry, the Indiana University School of Social Work, the IU Kelley School of Business, and the IU Robert H. McKinney School of Law.[7]

In addition to its two core campuses, Indiana University comprises seven smaller campuses and two extensions spread throughout Indiana. The smaller campuses are:[8]

Indiana University East (IU East) is located in Richmond, Indiana.
Indiana University Kokomo (IU Kokomo) is located in Kokomo, Indiana.
Indiana University Northwest (IU Northwest) is located in Gary, Indiana.
Indiana University South Bend (IU South Bend) is located in South Bend, Indiana.
Indiana University Southeast (IU Southeast) is located in New Albany, Indiana.
Indiana University – Purdue University Fort Wayne (IPFW) is located in Fort Wayne, Indiana. IPFW is operated in cooperation with, and is administered by, Purdue University.
Indiana University – Purdue University Columbus (IUPUC) is located in Columbus, Indiana.

The centers/extensions are:

The Danielson Center (an extension of IU East) is located in New Castle, Indiana.
The Elkhart Center (an extension of IU South Bend) is located in Elkhart, Indiana.

Future projects include;

A School of Medicine complex in Evansville, Indiana.
A School of Medicine complex in Bloomington, Indiana.

Endowment[edit]
According to the National Association of College and University Business Officers (NACUBO), the value of the endowment of the Indiana University and affiliated foundations in 2016 is over $1.986 billion.[9] The annual budget across all campuses totals over $3 Billion. [10]
The Indiana University Research and Technology Corporation (IURTC) is a not-for-profit agency that assists IU faculty and researchers in realizing the commercial potential of their discoveries. Since 1997, university clients have been responsible for more than 1,800 inventions, nearly 500 patents, and 38 start-up companies.[11]
In the 2016 Fiscal Year alone, the IURTC was issued 53 U.S. patents and 112 global patents.[12]
Notable alumni[edit]




Suzanne Collins (1985), Author of the Hunger Games series



Joshua Bell - Grammy award-winning violinist and conductor
Hoagy Carmichael - Composer, pianist, singer, actor, and bandleader
John T. Chambers - Chairman and former CEO of Cisco Systems
Nicole Chevalier - Operatic soprano
Alton Dorian Clark (known by stage name Dorian) - Hip-hop recording artist and record producer
Pamela Coburn (born 1959), soprano
Suzanne Collins - Author of The Underland Chronicles and The Hunger Games trilogy
Mark Cuban - Owner of the NBA's Dallas Mavericks
Mary Czerwinski - Computer scientist at Microsoft Research and Fellow of the Association for Computing Machinery
Jared Fogle - Former spokesperson for Subway restaurants
Michael D. Higgins - 9th President of Ireland
Jamie Hyneman - Host of the television series MythBusters
Narendra Jadhav - Economist, educationist, and writer
Jason Jordan - Professional wrestler
E.W. Kelley - Businessman; former chairman of Steak 'n Shake restaurants
Sylvia McNair - singer
Ryan Murphy - Film and TV screenwriter, director, and producer
Gregory Nagy - Classical scholar at Harvard University
Victor Oladipo - Professional basketball player, currently playing for the Indiana Pacers
Jane Pauley - Journalist, TV anchor on CBS This Morning
Mike Pence - 48th Vice President of the United States; 50th Governor of Indiana
Catt Sadler - TV personality for E! News
Jay Schottenstein - CEO of Schottenstein Stores
Kyle Schwarber - Professional baseball player
Tavis Smiley - Host of The Tavis Smiley Show; author
James B. Smith - Dean of Engineering, Technology, and Aeronautics at Southern New Hampshire University; former U.S. Ambassador to Saudi Arabia
Brad Stephens - former Australian rules football player
Jeri Taylor - Television screenwriter and producer
Randy Tobias - Former Administrator of USAID; former CEO of Eli Lilly & Company
Noah Vonleh - Professional basketball player, currently playing for the Portland Trail Blazers
Jimmy Wales - Entrepreneur; co-founder of Wikipedia
James Watson - Molecular biologist, geneticist, and zoologist

Awards[edit]
Indiana University has three medals to recognize individuals.[13]

The University Medal, the only IU medal that requires approval from the Board of Trustees, was created in 1982 by then IU President John W. Ryan and is the highest award bestowed by the University. It honors individuals for singular or noteworthy contributions, including service to the university and achievement in arts, letters, science and law. The first recipient was Thomas T. Solley, former director of the IU Art Museum.[13][14]
Indiana University President's Medal for Excellence honors individuals for distinction in public service, service to Indiana University, achievement in a profession, and/or extraordinary merit and achievement in the arts, humanities, science, education, and industry.[13] The first recipients were member of the Beaux Arts Trio on September 20, 1985.
Thomas Hart Benton Mural Medallion "recognizes individuals who are shining examples of the values of IU and the universal academic community." President Ryan was the first to award this honor. It was first awarded to the president of Nanjing University on July 21, 1986. It honors individuals for distinction in public office or service, a significant relationship to Indiana University or Indiana, significant service to IU programs, students, or faculty, significant contribution to research or support for research.[13]

Indiana University has a number of ways to recognize the accomplishments of faculty.[15]

Distinguished Professorships – Indiana University's most prestigious academic appointment
University Distinguished Teaching Awards – recognizing "shining examples of dedication and excellence"
Thomas Ehrlich Award for Excellence in Service Learning – recognizing excellence in service learning. The recipient is also the IU nominee for the national Campus Compact Thomas Ehrlich Award for Service Learning.

Symbols[edit]
The Mace, a symbol of authority dating back to medieval times, when it was a studded, club-like weapon that was made of iron and could break armor. It later would be used in processions of city mayors and other dignitaries, and became an emblem of order and authority during academic ceremonies. The staff of IU's Mace is 30 inches long and made of polished ebony encircled with four brass, gold-plated collars and entwined by swirled gold bands. Atop the staff is a globe of plated brass with four flat sides. The sides of the globe are embossed with IU's seal, the seal of the state of Indiana, the emblematic initials "IU," and the donor inscription. The Mace was presented to the university by Indiana Alpha of Phi Delta Theta in 1949. Mounted on the globe of the Mace are 12 large synthetic jewels of blue sapphire, ruby, garnet and topaz. Atop this rests an eagle with outstretched wings.
The Jewel and Chain of Office is worn by the university president at ceremonial occasions. The Jewel of Office is handcrafted of gold-plated sterling silver and precious jewels. Each part of the design has a symbolic meaning that reflects IU's historic origin and educational mission, noting such things as the number of states in the Union when the university was founded in 1820 (22 states), the year Indiana became a state (1816), and the years that mark IU's evolution from a seminary to a university (1820, 1828 and 1838). The jewels in the item include emeralds, sapphires, topaz, rubies and diamonds. The Jewel of Office was presented to the university in 1946 by the Pi chapter of Beta Theta Pi. The Chain of Office was donated to the university in 1958 by the Lambda chapter of Sigma Chi. The chain is handcrafted of gold-plated sterling silver and contains 44 linked panels, eight of which are engraved with the names of the presidents who have served the university since the Jewel of Office was first worn as the symbol of the presidency.
References[edit]


^ a b c d e f "2011–12 IU Factbook". Indiana University (Bloomington, Indiana). Retrieved 2012-06-16. 
^ "CHE: Institutional Missions". Archived from the original on 5 September 2015. Retrieved 3 August 2015. 
^ "Campuses: Indiana University". Retrieved 3 August 2015. 
^ "About". Indiana University Bloomington. Retrieved 3 August 2015. 
^ "Schools". Indiana University Bloomington. Retrieved 3 August 2015. 
^ "About IUPUI". Indiana University–Purdue University Indianapolis. Retrieved 3 August 2015. 
^ "Schools". Indiana University-Purdue University Indianapolis. Retrieved 3 August 2015. 
^ Regional Campus Agreement
^ "U.S. and Canadian Institutions Listed by Fiscal Year 2016 Endowment Market Value and Change* in Endowment Market Value from FY2015 to FY2016" (PDF). NACUBO and Commonfund Institute. Retrieved 2017-02-24. 
^ "Fast Facts about IU". 
^ "The Indiana University Research and Technology Corporation (IURTC)". 
^ "IU Fast Facts (See: #5)". 
^ a b c d "Medals". Indiana University Office of University Ceremonies. Retrieved 2010-02-20. 
^ "IU President McRobbie presents University Medal to Elinor and Vincent Ostrom". Retrieved 2010-02-20. 
^ "Medals". Indiana University Office of University Ceremonies. Retrieved 2010-02-20. 


Indiana University.
Further reading[edit]

Capshew, James H. Herman B Wells: The Promise of the American University (Indiana University Press, 2012) 460 pp (excerpt and text search)
Clark, Thomas D. Indiana University, Midwest Pioneer, Volume I: The Early Years (1970)
Clark, Thomas D. Indiana University: Midwestern Pioneer, Vol II In Mid-Pasage (1973)
Clark, Thomas D. Indiana University: Midwestern Pioneer: Volume III/ Years of Fulfillment (1977) covers 1938–68 with emphasis on Wells.
Gray, Donald J., ed. The Department of English at Indiana University, Bloomington, 1868–1970 (1974)

Primary sources[edit]

Wells, Herman B. Being Lucky: Reminiscences and Reflections (1980) (excerpt and text search)

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Indiana University.



Official website







v
t
e


Indiana University






Bloomington (Hoosiers)
East (Red Wolves)
Kokomo (Cougars)
Northwest (Redhawks)
South Bend (Titans)
Southeast (Grenadiers)


Indiana University – Purdue University Indianapolis (Jaguars)
Indiana University – Purdue University Fort Wayne (Mastodons)










Links to related articles











v
t
e


Public colleges and universities in Indiana



Indiana University System



IU Bloomington
IU East
IU Kokomo
IU Northwest
IU South Bend
IU Southeast





Purdue University System



Purdue West Lafayette
Purdue Northwest

Calumet
North Central







Joint IU–PU Campuses



Indiana University – Purdue University Fort Wayne
Indiana University – Purdue University Columbus
Indiana University – Purdue University Indianapolis





Others



Ball State University
Indiana State
Ivy Tech System
University of Southern Indiana
Vincennes












v
t
e


Accredited Indiana colleges and universities






Ancilla College
Anderson University
Ball State University
Bethel College
Butler University
Calumet College
Christian Theological Seminary
Concordia Theological Seminary
DePauw University
Earlham College
Franklin College
Goshen College
Grace College & Seminary
Hanover College
Holy Cross College
Huntington University
Indiana Tech
Indiana State University
Indiana University System
Indiana Wesleyan
Ivy Tech
Manchester University
Marian University
Martin University
Oakland City University
Purdue University system
Rose-Hulman Institute of Technology
St. Joseph's College
St. Mary-of-the-Woods College
St. Mary's College
Saint Meinrad Seminary and School of Theology
Taylor University
Trine University
University of Evansville
University of Indianapolis
University of Notre Dame
University of St. Francis
University of Southern Indiana
Valparaiso University
Vincennes University
Wabash College
Western Governor's University












v
t
e


Big Ten Academic Alliance






University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign
Indiana University
University of Iowa
University of Maryland, College Park
University of Michigan
Michigan State University
University of Minnesota
University of Nebraska–Lincoln
Northwestern University
Ohio State University
Pennsylvania State University
Purdue University
Rutgers University
University of Wisconsin–Madison












v
t
e


Largest United States university campuses by enrollment






Arizona State University
University of Central Florida
Ohio State University
Florida International University
Texas A&M University
University of Texas at Austin
Michigan State University
University of Florida
University of Minnesota
Indiana University






(2013–14 Academic Year)














						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Indiana_University&oldid=816870732"					Categories: Educational institutions established in 1820Universities and colleges in IndianaIndiana UniversityPublic university systems in the United States1820 establishments in IndianaHidden categories: Articles lacking reliable references from February 2012All articles lacking reliable referencesArticles containing Latin-language textCoordinates on WikidataInstances of Infobox university using image size