"Australian peoples" redirects here. For other people of Australia, see Australians.

Indigenous Australians
(Aboriginal Australians and Torres Strait Islanders)

Total population


649,171 (2016)
2.8% of Australia's population (2016)[1]


Population distribution by state/territory





 New South Wales
208,476
(2.89%)


 Queensland
188,954
(4.22%)


 Western Australia
88,270
(3.75%)


 Northern Territory
68,850
(29.77%)


 Victoria
47,333
(0.85%)


 South Australia
37,408
(2.28%)


 Tasmania
24,165
(4.72%)


 Australian Capital Territory
6,160
(1.67%)





Languages


Several hundred Indigenous Australian languages (many extinct or nearly so), Australian English, Australian Aboriginal English, Torres Strait Creole, Kriol


Religion


Christianity 73%
Non-religious 24%
Traditional Aboriginal religion 1%


Related ethnic groups


see List of Indigenous Australian group names


Indigenous Australians are the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people of Australia, descended from groups that existed in Australia and surrounding islands prior to British colonisation. The time of arrival of the first Indigenous Australians is a matter of debate among researchers. The earliest definitely human remains found in Australia are those of Mungo Man LM3 and Mungo Lady, which have been dated to around 50,000 years BP.[2] Recent archaeological evidence from the analysis of charcoal and artifacts revealing human use suggests a date as early as 65,000 B.P. [3][4] Luminescence dating has suggested habitation in Arnhem Land as far back as 60,000 years BP.[5] Genetic research has inferred a date of habitation as early as 80,000 years BP. Other estimates have ranged up to 100,000 years[6] and 125,000 years ago.[7]
Although there are a number of commonalities between indigenous Aboriginal Australians, there is also a great diversity among different Indigenous communities and societies in Australia, each with its own mixture of cultures, customs and languages. In present-day Australia these groups are further divided into local communities.[8] At the time of initial European settlement, over 250 languages were spoken; it is currently estimated that 120 to 145 of these remain in use, but only 13 of these are not considered endangered.[9][10] Aboriginal people today mostly speak English, with Aboriginal phrases and words being added to create Australian Aboriginal English (which also has a tangible influence of Indigenous languages in the phonology and grammatical structure). The population of Indigenous Australians at the time of permanent European settlement is contentious and has been estimated at between 318,000[11] and 1,000,000[12] with the distribution being similar to that of the current Australian population, the majority living in the south-east, centred along the Murray River.[13] A population collapse following European settlement, and a smallpox epidemic spreading three years after the arrival of Europeans may have caused a massive and early depopulation.[14][15]
Since 1995, the Australian Aboriginal Flag and the Torres Strait Islander Flag have been among the official flags of Australia.



Contents


1 Indigenous Australia

1.1 Terminology
1.2 Regional groups
1.3 Torres Strait Islanders
1.4 The terms "black" and "blackfella"


2 History

2.1 Migration to Australia
2.2 Before European contact
2.3 British colonisation
2.4 Early 20th century
2.5 Late 20th century to present


3 Society, language, culture, and technology

3.1 Languages
3.2 Belief systems
3.3 Music
3.4 Art
3.5 Literature
3.6 Film
3.7 Traditional recreation and sport
3.8 Technology


4 Population

4.1 Definition
4.2 Inclusion in the National Census
4.3 Demographics

4.3.1 State distribution and identification growth rate
4.3.2 Urbanisation rate
4.3.3 Intermarriage rate




5 Groups and communities
6 Contemporary issues

6.1 Identity
6.2 Stolen Generations
6.3 Political representation

6.3.1 Australian politicians of Indigenous ancestry


6.4 Age characteristics
6.5 Life expectancy
6.6 Education
6.7 Employment
6.8 Health
6.9 Crime and imprisonment
6.10 Substance abuse
6.11 Native title and sovereignty
6.12 Stolen wages
6.13 Cross-cultural miscommunication


7 Prominent Indigenous Australians
8 See also
9 Notes

9.1 Citations


10 References
11 External links



Indigenous Australia[edit]
See also: Aboriginal Australians and Torres Strait Islanders




The Australian Aboriginal Flag


Terminology[edit]
Though Indigenous Australians are seen as being broadly related as part of what has been called the Australoid race,[16] there are significant differences in social, cultural and linguistic customs between the various Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander groups.
The word aboriginal has been in the English language since at least the 16th century, to mean, "first or earliest known, indigenous". It comes from the Latin word aborigines, derived from ab (from) and origo (origin, beginning).[17] The word was used in Australia to describe its indigenous peoples as early as 1789. It soon became capitalised and employed as the common name to refer to all Indigenous Australians.
Strictly speaking, Aborigine is the noun and Aboriginal the adjectival form, but the latter is often also employed as a noun. Use of either Aborigine(s) or Aboriginal(s) to refer to individuals has acquired negative connotations in some sectors of the community, and it is generally regarded as insensitive and even offensive.[18][19] The more accepted expression is Aboriginal Australians or Aboriginal people. The term Indigenous Australians, which also includes Torres Strait Islander peoples, has found increasing acceptance, particularly since the 1980s.[20]
Regional groups[edit]
Main article: List of Indigenous Australian group names
The broad term Aboriginal Australians includes many regional groups that often identify under names from local Indigenous languages. These include:




Men and boys playing a game of gorri, 1922



Murrawarri people – see Murrawarri Republic and Murawari language;
Koori (or Koorie) in New South Wales and Victoria (Victorian Aborigines);
Ngunnawal in the Australian Capital Territory and surrounding areas of New South Wales;
Goorie in South East Queensland and some parts of northern New South Wales;
Murrdi in Southwest and Central Queensland;
Murri used in Queensland and northern New South Wales where specific collective names (such as Gorrie or Murrdi) are not used;
Nyungar in southern Western Australia;
Yamatji in central Western Australia;
Wangai in the Western Australian Goldfields;
Nunga in southern South Australia;
Anangu in northern South Australia, and neighbouring parts of Western Australia and Northern Territory;
Yapa in western central Northern Territory;
Arrernte in central Australia;
Yolngu in eastern Arnhem Land (NT);
Bininj in Western Arnhem Land (NT);
Tiwi on Tiwi Islands off Arnhem Land.
Anindilyakwa on Groote Eylandt off Arnhem Land;
Palawah (or Pallawah) in Tasmania.





Men from Bathurst Island, 1939


These larger groups may be further subdivided; for example, Anangu (meaning a person from Australia's central desert region) recognises localised subdivisions such as Pitjantjatjara, Yankunytjatjara, Ngaanyatjarra, Luritja and Antikirinya. It is estimated that prior to the arrival of British settlers, the population of Indigenous Australians was approximately 318,000–750,000 across the continent.[12]
Torres Strait Islanders[edit]




Map of Torres Strait Islands


Main article: Torres Strait Islanders
The Torres Strait Islanders possess a heritage and cultural history distinct from Aboriginal traditions. The eastern Torres Strait Islanders in particular are related to the Papuan peoples of New Guinea, and speak a Papuan language.[21] Accordingly, they are not generally included under the designation "Aboriginal Australians". This has been another factor in the promotion of the more inclusive term "Indigenous Australians". Six percent of Indigenous Australians identify themselves fully as Torres Strait Islanders. A further 4% of Indigenous Australians identify themselves as having both Torres Strait Islander and Aboriginal heritage.[22]
The Torres Strait Islands comprise over 100 islands[23] which were annexed by Queensland in 1879.[23] Many Indigenous organisations incorporate the phrase "Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander" to highlight the distinctiveness and importance of Torres Strait Islanders in Australia's Indigenous population.
Eddie Mabo was from "Mer" or Murray Island in the Torres Strait, which the famous Mabo decision of 1992 involved.[23]
The terms "black" and "blackfella"[edit]
Further information: Blackfella
The term "black" has been used to refer to Indigenous Australians since European settlement.[24] While originally related to skin colour, the term is used today to indicate Aboriginal heritage or culture in general and refers to any people of such heritage regardless of their level of skin pigmentation.[25]
In the 1970s, many Aboriginal activists, such as Gary Foley, proudly embraced the term "black", and writer Kevin Gilbert's ground-breaking book from the time was entitled Living Black. The book included interviews with several members of the Aboriginal community, including Robert Jabanungga, reflecting on contemporary Aboriginal culture. A less formal term, used by Indigenous Australians themselves and not normally derogatory, is "blackfellas", as distinguished from "whitefellas".
History[edit]
Main articles: History of Indigenous Australians, Prehistory of Australia, and Australian archaeology
See also: Aboriginal Australians § Origins






This article is missing information about pre-European contact technology. Please expand the article to include this information. Further details may exist on the talk page. (January 2016)



Migration to Australia[edit]




Artwork depicting the first contact that was made with the Gweagal Aboriginal people and Captain James Cook and his crew on the shores of the Kurnell Peninsula, New South Wales


Several settlements of humans in Australia have been dated around 49,000 years ago,.[26][27] Luminescence dating of sediments surrounding stone artefacts at Madjedbebe, a rock shelter in northern Australia, indicates human activity at 65,000 years BP.[28] Genetic studies appear to support an arrival date of 50-70,000 years ago.[29]
The earliest anatomically modern human remains found in Australia (and outside of Africa) are those of Mungo Man; they have been dated at 42,000 years old.[30][31] The initial comparison of the mitochondrial DNA from the skeleton known as Lake Mungo 3 (LM3) with that of ancient and modern Aborigines indicated that Mungo Man is not related to Australian Aborigines.[32] However, these findings have been met with a general lack of acceptance in scientific communities.[citation needed] The sequence has been criticised as there has been no independent testing, and it has been suggested that the results may be due to posthumous modification and thermal degradation of the DNA.[33][34][35][36] Although the contested results seem to indicate that Mungo Man may have been an extinct subspecies that diverged before the most recent common ancestor of contemporary humans,[32] the administrative body for the Mungo National Park believes that present-day local Aborigines are descended from the Lake Mungo remains.[37] Independent DNA testing is unlikely as the Indigenous custodians are not expected to allow further invasive investigations.[38]
It is generally believed that Aboriginal people are the descendants of a single migration into the continent, a people that split from the first modern human populations to leave Africa 64,000 to 75,000 years ago,[39] although a minority proposed an earlier theory that there were three waves of migration,[40] most likely island hopping by boat during periods of low sea levels (see Prehistory of Australia). Recent work with mitochondrial DNA suggests a founder population of between 1,000 and 3,000 women to produce the genetic diversity observed, which suggests "that initial colonization of the continent would have required deliberate organized sea travel, involving hundreds of people".[41] Aboriginal people seem to have lived a long time in the same environment as the now extinct Australian megafauna.[42]
Genetically, while Indigenous Australians are most closely related to Melanesian and Papuan people, there is also a Eurasian component that could indicate South Asian admixture or more recent European influence.[43][44] Research indicates a single founding Sahul group with subsequent isolation between regional populations which were relatively unaffected by later migrations from the Asian mainland, which may have introduced the dingo 4-5,000 years ago. The research also suggests a divergence from the Papuan people of New Guinea and Mamanwa people of the Philippines about 32,000 years ago with a rapid population expansion about 5,000 years ago.[44] A 2011 genetic study found evidence that the Aboriginal, Papuan and Mamanwa peoples carry some of the genes associated with the Denisovan peoples of Asia, (not found amongst populations in mainland Asia) suggesting that modern and archaic humans interbred in Asia approximately 44,000 years ago, before Australia separated from Papua New Guinea and the migration to Australia.[45][46] A 2012 paper reports that there is also evidence of a substantial genetic flow from India to northern Australia estimated at slightly over four thousand years ago, a time when changes in tool technology and food processing appear in the Australian archaeological record, suggesting that these may be related.[47]
Indigenous Australians have Haplogroup C-M347 (Y-DNA) in high frequency of 60.2%[48]-68.7%.[49]
Before European contact[edit]
Aboriginal people mainly lived as foragers and hunter-gatherers, hunting and foraging for food from the land. Although Aboriginal society was generally mobile, or semi-nomadic, moving according to the changing food availability found across different areas as seasons changed, the mode of life and material cultures varied greatly from region to region, and there were permanent settlements[50] and agriculture[51] in some areas. The greatest population density was to be found in the southern and eastern regions of the continent, the River Murray valley in particular.
There is evidence that some Aboriginal populations in northern Australia regularly traded with Makassan fishermen from Indonesia before the arrival of Europeans.[52][53]
At the time of first European contact, it is generally estimated that the pre-1788 population was 314,000, while recent archaeological finds suggest that a population of 500,000 to 750,000 could have been sustained, with some ecologists estimating that a population of up to a million or even two million people was possible.[12][54][55] More recent work suggests that Aboriginal populations exceeded 1.2 million 500 years ago, but may have fallen somewhat with the introduction of disease pathogens from Eurasia in the last 500 years.[56] The population was split into 250 individual "nations", many of which were in alliance with one another, and within each nation there existed separate, often related "clans", from as few as 5 or 6 to as many as 30 or 40. Each "nation" had its own language, and a few had several.[57]
All evidence suggests that the section of the Australian continent now occupied by Queensland was the single most densely populated area of pre-contact Australia.

Distribution of the pre-contact Indigenous population when imposed on the current Australian states and territories[58]

State/territory
1930-estimated share of population
1988-estimated share of population
Distribution of trad. tribal land


Queensland
38.2%
37.9%
34.2%


Western Australia
19.7%
20.2%
22.1%


Northern Territory
15.9%
12.6%
17.2%


New South Wales
15.3%
18.9%
10.3%


Victoria
4.8%
5.7%
5.7%


South Australia
4.8%
4.0%
8.6%


Tasmania
1.4%
0.6%
2.0%


The evidence based on two independent sources thus suggests that the territory of Queensland had a pre-contact Indigenous population density twice that of New South Wales, at least six times that of Victoria and more than twenty times that of Tasmania.[dubious – discuss] Equally, there are signs that the population density of Indigenous Australia was comparatively higher in the north-eastern sections of New South Wales, and along the northern coast from the Gulf of Carpentaria and westward including certain sections of Northern Territory and Western Australia. (See also Horton's Map of Aboriginal Australia.[59])
British colonisation[edit]
Main articles: Australian frontier wars and List of massacres of Indigenous Australians




Wurundjeri people at the signing of Batman's Treaty, 1835






European settlers with Aborigines, South Australia, 1850


British colonisation of Australia began with the arrival of the First Fleet in Botany Bay, New South Wales, in 1788. Settlements were subsequently established in Tasmania (1803), Victoria (1803), Queensland (1824), the Northern Territory (1824), Western Australia (1826), and South Australia (1836).
One immediate consequence was a series of epidemics of European diseases such as measles, smallpox and tuberculosis. In the 19th century, smallpox was the principal cause of Aboriginal deaths, and vaccinations of the “native inhabitants” had begun in earnest by the 1840's.[60] This smallpox epidemic in 1789 is estimated to have killed up to 90% of the Darug people. The cause of the outbreak is disputed. Some scholars have attributed it to European settlers,[61][62][63] but it is also argued that Macassan fishermen from South Sulawesi and nearby islands may have introduced smallpox to Australia prior to the arrival of Europeans.[64] A third suggestion is that the outbreak was caused by contact with members of the First Fleet.[65] A fourth theory is that the epidemic was of chickenpox, not smallpox, carried by members of the First Fleet, and to which the Aborigines also had no immunity.[66][67][68][69]
Another consequence of British colonisation was European seizure of land and water resources, with the decimation of kangaroo and other indigenous foodstuffs which continued throughout the 19th and early 20th centuries as rural lands were converted for sheep and cattle grazing.[citation needed] In 1819, Governor Macquarrie declared total warfare against the Walpuri people of Western New South Wales, waging a war of extermination against them.[70] Settlers also participated in the rape and forcible prostitution of Aboriginal women.[71] Despite this a number of Europeans, including convicts, formed favourable impressions of Aboriginal life through living with Aboriginal Groups.[72]
In 1834 there occurred the first recorded use of Aboriginal trackers, who proved very adept at navigating their way through the Australian landscape and finding people.[73]
During the 1860s, Tasmanian Aboriginal skulls were particularly sought internationally for studies into craniofacial anthropometry. The skeleton of Truganini, a Tasmanian Aboriginal who died in 1876, was exhumed within two years of her death despite her pleas to the contrary by the Royal Society of Tasmania, and later placed on display. Campaigns continue to have Aboriginal body parts returned to Australia for burial; Truganini's body was returned in 1976 and cremated, and her ashes were scattered according to her wishes.
In 1868, a group of mostly Aboriginal cricketers toured England, becoming the first Australian cricket team to travel overseas.[74]
Early 20th century[edit]
By 1900, the recorded Indigenous population of Australia had declined to approximately 93,000.[75] However, this was only a partial count as both mainstream and tribal Aboriginal people and Torres Strait Islanders were poorly covered, with desert Aboriginal peoples not counted at all until the 1930s.[76] The last uncontacted tribe left the Gibson Desert in 1984.[77] During the first half of the twentieth century, many Indigenous Australians worked as stockmen on sheep stations and cattle stations for extremely low wages. The Indigenous population continued to decline, reaching a low of 74,000 in 1933 before numbers began to recover. By 1995, population numbers had reached pre-colonisation levels, and in 2010 there were around 563,000 Indigenous Australians.[54]
Although, as British subjects, all Indigenous Australians were nominally entitled to vote, generally only those who merged into mainstream society did so. Only Western Australia and Queensland specifically excluded Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people from the electoral rolls. Despite the Commonwealth Franchise Act 1902, which excluded "Aboriginal natives of Australia, Asia, Africa and Pacific Islands except New Zealand" from voting unless they were on the roll before 1901, South Australia insisted that all voters enfranchised within its borders would remain eligible to vote in the Commonwealth, and Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people continued to be added to their rolls, albeit haphazardly.[76]




Aboriginal women, Northern Territory, 1928. Photo taken by Herbert Basedow.


Despite efforts to bar their enlistment, over 1,000 Indigenous Australians fought for Australia in the First World War.[78]
1934 saw the first appeal to the High Court by an Aboriginal Australian, and it succeeded. Dhakiyarr was found to have been wrongly convicted of the murder of a white policeman, for which he had been sentenced to death; the case focused national attention on Aboriginal rights issues. Dhakiyarr disappeared upon release.[79][80] In 1938, the 150th anniversary of the arrival of the British First Fleet was marked as a Day of Mourning and Protest at an Aboriginal meeting in Sydney, and has since become marked around Australia as "Invasion Day" or "Survival Day" by Aboriginal protesters and their supporters.[81]
Hundreds of Indigenous Australians served in the Australian armed forces during World War Two – including with the Torres Strait Light Infantry Battalion and The Northern Territory Special Reconnaissance Unit, which were established to guard Australia's North against the threat of Japanese invasion.[82] However, most were denied pension rights and military allotments, except in Victoria, where each case was judged individually, without a blanket denial of rights accruing from their service. [a]
Late 20th century to present[edit]
The 1960s was a pivotal decade in the assertion of Aboriginal rights and a time of growing collaboration between Aboriginal activists and white Australian activists.[84] In 1962, Commonwealth legislation specifically gave Aboriginal people the right to vote in Commonwealth elections.[85] A group of University of Sydney students organised a bus tour of western and coastal New South Wales towns in 1965 to raise awareness of the state of Aboriginal health and living conditions. This Freedom Ride also aimed to highlight the social discrimination faced by Aboriginal people and encourage Aboriginal people themselves to resist discrimination.[86] In 1966, Vincent Lingiari led a famous walk-off of Indigenous employees of Wave Hill Station in protest against poor pay and conditions[87] (later the subject of the Paul Kelly song "From Little Things Big Things Grow").[88] The landmark 1967 referendum called by Prime Minister Harold Holt allowed the Commonwealth to make laws with respect to Aboriginal people by modifying section 51(xxvi) of the Constitution, and for Aboriginal people to be included when the country does a count to determine electoral representation by repealing section 127. The referendum passed with 90.77% voter support.[89]
In the controversial 1971 Gove land rights case, Justice Blackburn ruled that Australia had been terra nullius before British settlement, and that no concept of native title existed in Australian law. Following the 1973 Woodward commission enquiry, in 1976 the Australian federal government under Gough Whitlam enacted the Aboriginal Land Rights (Northern Territory) Act 1976 to recognise Aboriginal Australians' system of land rights in the Northern Territory. In 1985, the Australian government returned ownership of Uluru (formerly known as Ayers Rock) to the Pitjantjatjara Aboriginal people. In 1992, the High Court of Australia reversed Justice Blackburn's ruling and handed down its decision in the Mabo Case, declaring the previous legal concept of terra nullius to be invalid and confirming the existence of native title in Australia.
Indigenous Australians began to serve in political office from the 1970s. In 1971, Neville Bonner joined the Australian Senate as a Senator for Queensland for the Liberal Party, becoming the first Indigenous Australian in the Federal Parliament. A year later, the Aboriginal Tent Embassy was established on the steps of Parliament House in Canberra. In 1976, Sir Douglas Nicholls was appointed as the 28th Governor of South Australia, the first Aboriginal person appointed to vice-regal office.[90] In the general election of 2010, Ken Wyatt of the Liberal Party became the first Indigenous Australian elected to the Australian House of Representatives. In the general election of 2016, Linda Burney of the Australian Labor Party became the second Indigenous Australian, and the first Indigenous Australian woman, elected to the Australian House of Representatives.[91] She was immediately appointed Shadow Minister for Human Services.[92]
In sport Evonne Goolagong Cawley became the world number-one ranked tennis player in 1971 and won 14 Grand Slam titles during her career. In 1973 Arthur Beetson became the first Indigenous Australian to captain his country in any sport when he first led the Australian National Rugby League team, the Kangaroos.[93] In 1982, Mark Ella became Captain of the Australian National Rugby Union Team, the Wallabies.[94] In 2000, Aboriginal sprinter Cathy Freeman lit the Olympic flame at the opening ceremony of the 2000 Summer Olympics in Sydney, and went on to win the 400 metres at the Games.
In 1984, a group of Pintupi people who were living a traditional hunter-gatherer desert-dwelling life were tracked down in the Gibson Desert in Western Australia and brought in to a settlement. They are believed to have been the last uncontacted tribe in Australia.[95]




Picture of Albert Namatjira at the Albert Namatjira Gallery, Alice Springs. Aboriginal art and artists became increasingly prominent in Australian cultural life during the second half of the 20th century.






Australian tennis player Evonne Goolagong


Reconciliation between non-Indigenous and Indigenous Australians became a significant issue in Australian politics in the late 20th century. In 1991, the Council for Aboriginal Reconciliation was established by the federal government to facilitate reconciliation. In 1998, a Constitutional Convention which selected a Republican model for a referendum included just six Indigenous participants, leading Monarchist delegate Neville Bonner to end his contribution to the Convention with his Jagera tribal "Sorry Chant" in sadness at the low number of Indigenous representatives. The republican model, as well as a proposal for a new Constitutional preamble which would have included the "honouring" of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people, was put to referendum but did not succeed.[96] In 1999, the Australian Parliament passed a Motion of Reconciliation drafted by Prime Minister John Howard in consultation with Aboriginal Senator Aden Ridgeway naming mistreatment of Indigenous Australians as the most "blemished chapter in our national history", although Howard refused to offer any formal apology.[97] In 2001, the Federal Government dedicated Reconciliation Place in Canberra. On 13 February 2008, Prime Minister Kevin Rudd reversed Howard's decision and issued a public apology to members of the Stolen Generations on behalf of the Australian Government. In 2010, the federal government appointed a panel comprising Indigenous leaders, other legal experts and some members of parliament (including Ken Wyatt) to provide advice on how best to recognise Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples in the federal Constitution. The panel's recommendations, reported to the federal government in January 2012,[98] included deletion of provisions of the Constitution referencing race (Section 25 and Section 51(xxvi)), and new provisions on meaningful recognition and further protection from discrimination.[99] Subsequently, a proposed referendum on Constitutional recognition of Indigenous Australians was ultimately abandoned in 2013.
During the same period, the federal government enacted a number of significant, but controversial, policy initiatives in relation to Indigenous Australians. A representative body, the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Commission, was set up in 1990, but was abolished by the Australian Government in 2004 amidst allegations of corruption.[100] The Northern Territory National Emergency Response (also known as the Northern Territory Intervention) was launched in 2007 by the government of Prime Minister John Howard, in response to the Little Children are Sacred Report into allegations of child abuse among Indigenous communities. The government banned alcohol in prescribed communities in the Territory; quarantined a percentage of welfare payments for essential goods purchasing; dispatched additional police and medical personnel to the region; and suspended the permit system for access to Indigenous communities.[101] In addition to these measures, the army were released into communities[102] and there were increased police powers, which were later further increased with the so-called 'paperless arrests' legislation.[103] In 2010, United Nations Special Rapporteur James Anaya found the Emergency Response to be racially discriminatory, and said that aspects of it represented a limitation on "individual autonomy".[104][105] These findings were criticised by the government's Indigenous Affairs Minister Jenny Macklin, the Opposition and Indigenous leaders like Warren Mundine and Bess Price.[106][107] In 2011, the Australian government enacted legislation to implement the Stronger Futures policy, which is intended to address key issues that exist within Aboriginal communities of the Northern Territory such as unemployment, school attendance and enrolment, alcohol abuse, community safety and child protection, food security and housing and land reforms. The policy has been criticised by organisations such as Amnesty International and other groups, including on the basis that it maintains "racially-discriminatory" elements of the Northern Territory Emergency Response Act and continue control of the Australian Government over "Aboriginal people and their lands".[108]
Society, language, culture, and technology[edit]
Main article: Indigenous Australian culture




Aboriginal dancers in 1981


There are a large number of tribal divisions and language groups in Aboriginal Australia, and, correspondingly, a wide variety of diversity exists within cultural practices. However, there are some similarities between cultures.
Languages[edit]
Main articles: Australian Aboriginal English, Australian Aboriginal languages, and Australian Aboriginal sign languages
According to the 2005 National Indigenous Languages Survey (NILS), at the time the Australian continent was colonised, there were around 250 different Indigenous languages, with the larger language groups each having up to 100 related dialects. Some of these languages were only ever spoken by perhaps 50 to 100 people. Indigenous languages are divided into language groups with from ten to twenty-four language families identified.[9] It is currently estimated that up to 145 Indigenous languages remain in use, of which fewer than 20 are considered to be strong in the sense that they are still spoken by all age groups.[9][109] All but 13 Indigenous languages are considered to be endangered.[10] Several extinct Indigenous languages are being reconstructed. For example, the last fluent speaker of the Ngarrindjeri language died in the late 1960s; using recordings and written records as a guide, a Ngarrindjeri dictionary was published in 2009,[110] and the Ngarrindjeri language is today being spoken in complete sentences.[9]
Linguists classify many of the mainland Australian languages into one large group, the Pama–Nyungan languages. The rest are sometimes lumped under the term "non-Pama–Nyungan". The Pama–Nyungan languages comprise the majority, covering most of Australia, and are generally thought to be a family of related languages. In the north, stretching from the Western Kimberley to the Gulf of Carpentaria, are found a number of non-Pama–Nyungan groups of languages which have not been shown to be related to the Pama–Nyungan family nor to each other.[111] While it has sometimes proven difficult to work out familial relationships within the Pama–Nyungan language family, many Australian linguists feel there has been substantial success.[112] Against this, some linguists, such as R. M. W. Dixon, suggest that the Pama–Nyungan group – and indeed the entire Australian linguistic area – is rather a sprachbund, or group of languages having very long and intimate contact, rather than a genetic language family.[113]
It has been suggested that, given their long presence in Australia, Aboriginal languages form one specific sub-grouping. The position of Tasmanian languages is unknown, and it is also unknown whether they comprised one or more than one specific language family.
Belief systems[edit]
Main article: Indigenous Australian culture
See also: Australian Aboriginal mythology




Depiction of a corroboree by 19th century Indigenous activist William Barak


Religious demography among Indigenous Australians is not conclusive because the methodology of the census is not always well suited to obtaining accurate information on Aboriginal people.[114] In the 2006 census, 73% of the Indigenous population reported an affiliation with a Christian denomination, 24% reported no religious affiliation and 1% reported affiliation with an Australian Aboriginal traditional religion.[115] A small minority of Aborigines are followers of Islam as a result of intermarriage with "Afghan" camel drivers brought to Australia in the late 19th and early 20th century.[116]
Aboriginal people traditionally adhered to animist spiritual frameworks. Within Aboriginal belief systems, a formative epoch known as 'the Dreamtime' or 'the Dreaming' stretches back into the distant past when the creator ancestors known as the First Peoples travelled across the land, and naming as they went.[117] Indigenous Australia's oral tradition and religious values are based upon reverence for the land and a belief in this Dreamtime.
The Dreaming is at once both the ancient time of creation and the present-day reality of Dreaming. There were a great many different groups, each with its own individual culture, belief structure, and language. These cultures overlapped to a greater or lesser extent, and evolved over time. Major ancestral spirits include the Rainbow Serpent, Baiame, Dirawong and Bunjil.
Traditional healers (known as Ngangkari in the Western desert areas of Central Australia) were highly respected men and women who not only acted as healers or doctors, but were generally also custodians of important Dreamtime stories.[118]
Music[edit]
Main article: Indigenous Australian music




A didgeridoo player


Music has formed an integral part of the social, cultural and ceremonial observances of people through the millennia of their individual and collective histories to the present day, and has existed for 50,000 years.[119][120][121][122]
The various Indigenous Australian communities developed unique musical instruments and folk styles. The didgeridoo, which is widely thought to be a stereotypical instrument of Aboriginal people, was traditionally played by people of only the eastern Kimberley region and Arnhem Land (such as the Yolngu), and then by only the men.[123]
Around 1950, the first research into Aboriginal music was undertaken by the anthropologist Adolphus Elkin, who recorded Aboriginal music in Arnhem Land.[124]
Hip hop music is helping preserve indigenous languages.[125]
At the Sydney 2000 Olympics, Christine Anu sang the song "My Island Home" at the Closing Ceremony.[126]
Art[edit]
Main article: Indigenous Australian art




Bradshaw rock paintings in the Kimberley region of Western Australia



Arnhem Land artist at work



Aboriginal Memorial, National Gallery of Australia



Australia has a tradition of Aboriginal art which is thousands of years old, the best known forms being rock art and bark painting. Evidence of Aboriginal art in Australia can be traced back at least 30,000 years.[127] Examples of ancient Aboriginal rock artworks can be found throughout the continent – notably in national parks such as those of the UNESCO listed sites at Uluru and Kakadu National Park in the Northern Territory, but also within protected parks in urban areas such as at Ku-ring-gai Chase National Park in Sydney.[128][129][130] The Sydney rock engravings are approximately 5000 to 200 years old. Murujuga in Western Australia has the Friends of Australian Rock Art have advocated its preservation, and the numerous engravings there were heritage listed in 2007.[131][132]
In terms of age and abundance, cave art in Australia is comparable to that of Lascaux and Altamira in Europe,[133] and Aboriginal art is believed to be the oldest continuing tradition of art in the world.[134] There are three major regional styles: the geometric style found in Central Australia, Tasmania, the Kimberley and Victoria known for its concentric circles, arcs and dots; the simple figurative style found in Queensland and the complex figurative style found in Arnhem Land and the Kimberley which includes X-Ray art, Gwian Gwian (Bradshaw) and Wunjina. These designs generally carry significance linked to the spirituality of the Dreamtime.[127] Paintings were usually created in earthy colours, from paint made from ochre. Such ochres were also used to paint their bodies for ceremonial purposes.
Modern Aboriginal artists continue the tradition, using modern materials in their artworks. Several styles of Aboriginal art have developed in modern times, including the watercolour paintings of the Hermannsburg School, and the acrylic Papunya Tula "dot art" movement. William Barak (c.1824–1903) was one of the last traditionally educated of the Wurundjeri-willam, people who come from the district now incorporating the city of Melbourne. He remains notable for his artworks which recorded traditional Aboriginal ways for the education of Westerners (which remain on permanent exhibition at the Ian Potter Centre of the National Gallery of Victoria and at the Ballarat Fine Art Gallery. Margaret Preston (1875–1963) was among the early non-indigenous painters to incorporate Aboriginal influences in her works. Albert Namatjira (1902–1959) is one of the most famous Australian artists and an Arrernte man. His landscapes inspired the Hermannsburg School of art. The works of Elizabeth Durack are notable for their fusion of Western and indigenous influences. Since the 1970s, indigenous artists have employed the use of acrylic paints – with styles such as that of the Western Desert Art Movement becoming globally renowned 20th-century art movements.
The National Gallery of Australia exhibits a great many indigenous art works, including those of the Torres Strait Islands who are known for their traditional sculpture and headgear.[135]
Literature[edit]
Main article: Indigenous Australian literature




David Unaipon, the first Aboriginal published author



Aboriginal lawyer, activist and essayist Noel Pearson




By 1788, Indigenous Australians had not developed a system of writing[citation needed], so the first literary accounts of Aborigines come from the journals of early European explorers, which contain descriptions of first contact, both violent and friendly. Early accounts by Dutch explorers and the English buccaneer William Dampier wrote of the "natives of New Holland" as being "barbarous savages", but by the time of Captain James Cook and First Fleet marine Watkin Tench (the era of Jean-Jacques Rousseau), accounts of Aborigines were more sympathetic and romantic: "these people may truly be said to be in the pure state of nature, and may appear to some to be the most wretched upon the earth; but in reality they are far happier than ... we Europeans", wrote Cook in his journal on 23 August 1770.
Letters written by early Aboriginal leaders like Bennelong and Sir Douglas Nicholls are retained as treasures of Australian literature, as is the historic Yirrkala bark petitions of 1963 which is the first traditional Aboriginal document recognised by the Australian Parliament.[136] David Unaipon (1872–1967) is credited as providing the first accounts of Aboriginal mythology written by an Aboriginal: Legendary Tales of the Aborigines; he is known as the first Aboriginal author. Oodgeroo Noonuccal (1920–1995) was a famous Aboriginal poet, writer and rights activist credited with publishing the first Aboriginal book of verse: We Are Going (1964).[137] Sally Morgan's novel My Place was considered a breakthrough memoir in terms of bringing indigenous stories to wider notice. Leading Aboriginal activists Marcia Langton (First Australians, 2008) and Noel Pearson ("Up From the Mission", 2009) are active contemporary contributors to Australian literature.
The voices of Indigenous Australians are being increasingly noticed and include the playwright Jack Davis and Kevin Gilbert. Writers coming to prominence in the 21st century include Alexis Wright, Kim Scott, twice winner of the Miles Franklin award, Tara June Winch, in poetry Yvette Holt and in popular fiction Anita Heiss. Australian Aboriginal poetry – ranging from sacred to everyday – is found throughout the continent.[138]




Mathinna, painted in 1842 by convict Thomas Bock, inspired Richard Flanagan to write Wanting (2008).


Many notable works have been written by non-indigenous Australians on Aboriginal themes. Examples include the poems of Judith Wright; The Chant of Jimmie Blacksmith by Thomas Keneally and the short story by David Malouf: "The Only Speaker of his Tongue".[139]
Histories covering Indigenous themes include The Native Tribes of Central Australia by Spencer and Gillen, 1899; the diaries of Donald Thompson on the subject of the Yolngu people of Arnhem Land (c.1935–1943); Geoffrey Blainey (Triumph of the Nomads, 1975); Henry Reynolds (The Other Side of the Frontier, 1981); and Marcia Langton (First Australians, 2008). Differing interpretations of Aboriginal history are also the subject of contemporary debate in Australia, notably between the essayists Robert Manne and Keith Windshuttle.
AustLit's BlackWords project provides a comprehensive listing of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Writers and Storytellers. The Living Archive of Aboriginal Languages contains stories written in traditional languages of the Northern Territory.
Film[edit]
Australian cinema has a long history and the ceremonies of Indigenous Australians were among the first subjects to be filmed in Australia – notably a film of Aboriginal dancers in Central Australia, shot by the anthropologist Baldwin Spencer in 1900.[140]
1955's Jedda was the first Australian feature film to be shot in colour, the first to star Aboriginal actors in lead roles, and the first to be entered at the Cannes Film Festival.[141] 1971's Walkabout was a British film set in Australia; it was a forerunner to many Australian films related to indigenous themes and introduced David Gulpilil to cinematic audiences. 1976's Chant of Jimmie Blacksmith, directed by Fred Schepisi, was an award-winning historical drama from a book by Thomas Keneally about the tragic story of an Aboriginal bushranger. The canon of films related to Indigenous Australians also increased over the period of the 1990s and early 21st Century, with Nick Parson's 1996 film Dead Heart featuring Ernie Dingo and Bryan Brown;[142] Rolf de Heer's Tracker, starring Gary Sweet and David Gulpilil;[143] and Phillip Noyce's Rabbit-Proof Fence[144] in 2002.
The 2006 film Ten Canoes was filmed entirely in an indigenous language, and the film won a special jury prize at the Cannes Film Festival.[145]
Traditional recreation and sport[edit]




1857 depiction of the Jarijari (Nyeri Nyeri) people near Merbein engaged in recreational activities, including a type of Aboriginal football.[146][147]






Aboriginal cricket team with Tom Wills (coach and captain), Melbourne Cricket Ground, December 1866


Though lost to history, many traditional forms of recreation were played and while these varied from tribe to tribe, there were often similarities. Ball games were quite popular and played by tribes across Australia, as were games based on use of weapons. There is extensive documented evidence of traditional football games being played. Perhaps the most documented is a game popularly played by tribes in western Victorian regions of the Wimmera, Mallee and Millewa by the Djab wurrung, Jardwadjali and Jarijari people. Known as Marn Grook, it was a type of kick and catch football game played with a ball made of possum hide, the existence of which was corroborated in accounts from European eyewitnesses and depicted in illustration.[148] According to some accounts, it was played as far away as the Yarra Valley by the Wurundjeri people,[149] Gippsland by the Gunai people, and the Riverina in south-western New South Wales. Since the 1980s it has been speculated that Marn Grook influenced Australian rules football, however there is no direct evidence in its favour.
A team of Aboriginal cricketers toured England in 1868, making it the first Australian sports team to travel overseas. Cricketer and Australian rules football pioneer Tom Wills coached the team in an Aboriginal language he learnt as a child, and Charles Lawrence accompanied them to England. Johnny Mullagh, the team's star player, was regarded as one of the era's finest batsmen.
Lionel Rose earned a world title in boxing. Evonne Goolagong became the world number-one ranked female tennis player with 14 Grand Slam titles. Arthur Beetson, Laurie Daley and Gorden Tallis captained Australia in Rugby League and the annual NSW Koori Knockout and Murri Rugby League Carnival. Mark Ella captained Australia in Rugby Union. Notable Aboriginal athletes include Cathy Freeman who earned gold medals in the Olympics, World Championships, and Commonwealth Games. In Australian football, an increasing number of Indigenous Australians are playing at the highest level, the Australian Football League.[150] Graham Farmer is said to have revolutionised the game in the ruck and handball areas. Two Indigenous Team of the Century players, Gavin Wanganeen and Adam Goodes, have also been Brownlow Medallists. Goodes was also the Australian of the Year for 2014. Two basketball players, Nathan Jawai and Patty Mills, have played in the sport's most prominent professional league, the National Basketball Association.
Aboriginal Australia has since been represented by various sporting teams, including the Indigenous All-Stars, Flying Boomerangs, the Indigenous Team of the Century (Australian rules football), Indigenous All Stars (rugby league) and the Murri Rugby League Team.
Technology[edit]
Further information: Australian Aboriginal fibrecraft
Technology used by indigenous Australian societies before European contact included weapons, tools, shelters, watercraft, and the message stick. Weapons included boomerangs, spears (sometimes thrown with a woomera) with stone or fishbone tips, clubs, and (less commonly) axes. The stone age tools available included knives with ground edges, grinding devices, and eating containers. Fibre nets, baskets, and bags were used for fishing, hunting, and carrying liquids. Trade networks spanned the continent, and transportation included canoes. Shelters varied regionally, and included wiltjas in the Atherton Tablelands, paperbark and stringybark sheets and raised platforms in Arnhem Land, whalebone huts in what is now South Australia, stone shelters in what is now western Victoria, and a multi-room pole and bark structure found in Corranderrk.[151] A bark tent or lean-to is known as a humpy, gunyah, or wurley.
Clothing included the possum-skin cloak in the southeast and riji (pearl shells) in the northeast.
Population[edit]
Definition[edit]
Over time Australia has used various means to determine membership of ethnic groups such as lineage, blood quantum, birth and self-determination. From 1869 until well into the 1970s, Indigenous children under 12 years of age, with 25% or less Aboriginal blood were considered "white" and were often removed from their families by the Australian Federal and State government agencies and church missions, under acts of their respective parliaments in order that they would have "a reasonable chance of absorption into the white community to which they rightly belong".[152] Grey areas in determination of ethnicity led to people of mixed ancestry being caught in the middle of divisive policies which often led to absurd situations:[153]

In 1935, an Australian of part Indigenous descent left his home on a reserve to visit a nearby hotel where he was ejected for being Aboriginal. He returned home but was refused entry to the reserve because he was not Aboriginal. He attempted to remove his children from the reserve but was told he could not because they were Aboriginal. He then walked to the next town where he was arrested for being an Aboriginal vagrant and sent to the reserve there. During World War II he tried to enlist but was rejected because he was an Aborigine so he moved to another state where he enlisted as a non-Aborigine. After the end of the war he applied for a passport but was rejected as he was an Aborigine, he obtained an exemption under the Aborigines Protection Act but was now told he could no longer visit his relatives as he was not an Aborigine. He was later told he could not join the Returned Servicemens Club because he was an Aborigine.[153]

In 1983 the High Court of Australia[154] defined an Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander as "a person of Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander descent who identifies as an Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander and is accepted as such by the community in which he or she lives".
The ruling was a three-part definition comprising descent, self-identification and community identification. The first part – descent – was genetic descent and unambiguous, but led to cases where a lack of records to prove ancestry excluded some. Self- and community identification were more problematic as they meant that an Indigenous person separated from her or his community due to a family dispute could no longer identify as Aboriginal.
As a result, there arose court cases throughout the 1990s where excluded people demanded that their Aboriginality be recognised. As a result, lower courts refined the High Court test when subsequently applying it. In 1995, Justice Drummond in the Federal Court held in Gibbs v Capewell "..either genuine self-identification as Aboriginal alone or Aboriginal communal recognition as such by itself may suffice, according to the circumstances." This contributed to an increase of 31% in the number of people identifying as Indigenous Australians in the 1996 census when compared to the 1991 census.[155] In 1998 Justice Merkel held in Shaw v Wolf that Aboriginal descent is "technical" rather than "real" – thereby eliminating a genetic requirement. This decision established that anyone can classify him or herself legally as an Aboriginal, provided he or she is accepted as such by his or her community.[156]
Inclusion in the National Census[edit]
Main article: Demographics of Australia




Aboriginal boys and men in front of a bush shelter, Groote Eylandt, c. 1933


As there is no formal procedure for any community to record acceptance, the primary method of determining Indigenous population is from self-identification on census forms.
Until 1967, official Australian population statistics excluded "full-blood aboriginal natives" in accordance with section 127 of the Australian Constitution, even though many such people were actually counted. The size of the excluded population was generally separately estimated. "Half-caste aboriginal natives" were shown separately up to the 1966 census, but since 1971 there has been no provision on the forms to differentiate 'full' from 'part' Indigenous or to identify non-Indigenous persons who are accepted by Indigenous communities but have no genetic descent.[157]
In the 2011 Census, there was a 20% rise in people who identify as Aboriginal. One explanation for this is: "the definition being the way it is, it's quite elastic. You can find out that your great-great grandmother was Aboriginal and therefore under that definition you can identify. It's that person's right to identify so [...] that's what explains the large increase."[158]
Demographics[edit]




Indigenous Australians as a percentage of the population, 2011



Aboriginal Australians as a percentage of the population, 2011



Torres Strait Islanders as a percentage of the population, 2011



Both Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders as a percentage of the population, 2011



State distribution and identification growth rate[edit]
The Australian Bureau of Statistics 2005 census of Australian demographics showed that the Indigenous population had grown at twice the rate of the overall population since 1996 when the Indigenous population stood at 283,000. The Australian Bureau of Statistics estimated the total resident Indigenous population to be 458,520 in June 2001 (2.4% of Australia's total), 90% of whom identified as Aboriginal, 6% Torres Strait Islander and the remaining 4% being of dual Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander parentage. Much of the increase since 1996 can be attributed to greater numbers of people identifying themselves as Aboriginal or of Aboriginal descent. Changed definitions of Aboriginality and positive discrimination via material benefits have been cited as contributing to a movement to indigenous identification.[76]
In the 2006 Census, 407,700 respondents declared they were Aboriginal, 29,512 declared they were Torres Strait Islander, and a further 17,811 declared they were both Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders.[159] After adjustments for undercount, the indigenous population at the end of June 2006 was estimated to be 517,200, representing about 2.5% of the population.[160]
Based on Census data at 30 June 2006, the preliminary estimate of Indigenous resident population of Australia was 517,200, broken down as follows:

New South Wales – 148,200
Queensland – 146,400
Western Australia – 77,900
Northern Territory – 66,600
Victoria – 30,800
South Australia – 26,000
Tasmania – 16,900
Australian Capital Territory – 4,000
and a small number in other Australian territories[161]

The state with the largest total Indigenous population is New South Wales. Indigenous Australians constitute 2.2% of the overall population of the State. The Northern Territory has the largest Indigenous population in percentage terms for a State or Territory, with 31.6% of the population being Indigenous.
In all of the other states and territories, less than 4% of their total population identifies as Indigenous; Victoria has the lowest percentage at 0.6%.[161]
Urbanisation rate[edit]
In 2006 about 31% of the Indigenous population was living in 'major cities' (as defined by the Australian Bureau of Statistics/Australian Standard Geographical Classification) and another 45% in 'regional Australia', with the remaining 24% in remote areas. The populations in Victoria, South Australia, and New South Wales are more likely to be urbanised.[162]
Intermarriage rate[edit]
The proportion of Aboriginal adults married (de facto or de jure) to non-Aboriginal spouses increased to 74% according to the 2011 census,[163] up from 71% in 2006, 64% in 1996, 51% in 1991 and 46% in 1986. The census figures show there were more intermixed Aboriginal couples in capital cities: 87% in 2001 compared to 60% in rural and regional Australia.[164] It is reported that up to 88% of the offspring of mixed marriages subsequently self identify as Indigenous Australians.[155]
Groups and communities[edit]
Main articles: List of Indigenous Australian group names, Australian Aboriginal kinship, and Australian Aboriginal language




Aboriginal farmers in Victoria, 1858


Throughout the history of the continent, there have been many different Aboriginal groups, each with its own individual language, culture, and belief structure. At the time of British settlement, there were over 200 distinct languages.[165]
There are an indeterminate number of Indigenous communities, comprising several hundred groupings. Some communities, cultures or groups may be inclusive of others and alter or overlap; significant changes have occurred in the generations after colonisation.
The word "community" is often used to describe groups identifying by kinship, language or belonging to a particular place or "country". A community may draw on separate cultural values and individuals can conceivably belong to a number of communities within Australia; identification within them may be adopted or rejected.
An individual community may identify itself by many names, each of which can have alternate English spellings. The largest Aboriginal communities – the Pitjantjatjara, the Arrernte, the Luritja and the Warlpiri – are all from Central Australia.
Indigenous "communities" in remote Australia are typically small, isolated towns with basic facilities, on traditionally owned land. These communities have between 20 – 300 inhabitants and are often closed to outsiders for cultural reasons. The long term viability and resilience of Indigenous communities has been debated by scholars[166] and continues to be a political issue receiving fluctuating media attention.




This section needs expansion. You can help by adding to it. (June 2008)



Tasmania
Main article: Tasmanian Aborigines




Robert Hawker Dowling, Group of Natives of Tasmania, 1859


The Tasmanian Aboriginal population are thought to have first crossed into Tasmania approximately 40,000 years ago via a land bridge between the island and the rest of mainland Australia during the last glacial period.[167] Estimates of the population of the Aboriginal people of Tasmania, before European arrival, are in the range of 3,000 to 15,000 people although genetic studies have suggested significantly higher figures, which are supported by Indigenous oral traditions that indicate a reduction in population from diseases introduced by British and American sealers before settlement.[168][169] The original population was further reduced to around 300 between 1803 and 1833 due to disease,[170] warfare and other actions of British settlers.[171] Despite over 170 years of debate over who or what was responsible for this near-extinction, no consensus exists on its origins, process, or whether or not it was genocide. However, using the "UN definition, sufficient evidence exists to designate the Tasmanian catastrophe genocide."[168]
A woman named Trugernanner (often rendered as Truganini) who died in 1876, was, and still is, widely believed to be the very last of the full-blooded Aborigines. However, in 1889 Parliament recognized Fanny Cochrane Smith (d:1905) as the last surviving full-blooded Tasmanian Aborigine.[172][173] The 2006 census showed that there were nearly 17,000 Indigenous Australians in the State.
Contemporary issues[edit]
The Indigenous Australian population is a mostly urbanised demographic, but a substantial number (27% in 2002[174]) live in remote settlements often located on the site of former church missions. The health and economic difficulties facing both groups are substantial. Both the remote and urban populations have adverse ratings on a number of social indicators, including health, education, unemployment, poverty and crime.[175]
In 2004, Prime Minister John Howard initiated contracts with Aboriginal communities, where substantial financial benefits are available in return for commitments such as ensuring children attend school. These contracts are known as Shared Responsibility Agreements. This saw a political shift from 'self determination' for Aboriginal communities to 'mutual obligation',[176] which has been criticised as a "paternalistic and dictatorial arrangement".[177]
Identity[edit]
Who has the right to identify as indigenous has become an issue of controversy. The prominent Aboriginal activist Noel Pearson has stated: "The essence of indigeneity … is that people have a connection with their ancestors whose bones are in the soil. Whose dust is part of the sand. I had to come to the somewhat uncomfortable conclusion that even Andrew Bolt was becoming Indigenous because the bones of his ancestors are now becoming part of the territory."[178]
Stolen Generations[edit]


Part of a series on


Indigenous rights





Rights




Ancestral domain
Intellectual property
Land rights
Language
Traditional knowledge
Treaty rights




Governmental organizations




AADNC
ACHPR
Arctic Council
Bureau of Indian Affairs
CDI
Council of Indigenous Peoples
FUNAI
NCIP
UNPFII




NGOs and political groups




AFN
Amazon Watch
CAP
COICA
CONAIE
Cultural Survival
EZLN
fPcN
IPACC
IPCB
IWGIA
NARF
ONIC
Survival International
UNPO

more ...






Issues




Civilizing mission
Manifest Destiny


Lands inhabited by indigenous peoples


Discovery doctrine
Indigenism




Legal representation




ILO 107
ILO 169
United Nations Declaration




Category





v
t
e





Main article: Stolen Generations
The term Stolen Generations refers to those children of Australian Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander descent who were forcibly removed[179] from their families by the Australian Federal and State government agencies and church missions, under acts of their respective parliaments.[180][181] The removals occurred in the period between approximately 1871[182] and 1969,[183][184] although, in some places, children were still being taken in the 1970s.[185]
On 13 February 2008, the federal government of Australia, led by Prime Minister Kevin Rudd, issued a formal apology to the Indigenous Australians over the Stolen Generations.[186]
Political representation[edit]
See also: Voting rights of Australian Aborigines
Under Section 41 of the Australian Constitution, Aboriginal Australians always had the legal right to vote in Australian Commonwealth elections if their State granted them that right. This meant that all Aboriginal peoples outside Queensland and Western Australia had a legal right to vote. The right of Indigenous ex-servicemen to vote was affirmed in 1949 and all Indigenous Australians gained the unqualified right to vote in Federal elections in 1962.[187] Unlike other Australians, however, voting was not made compulsory for Indigenous people.
It was not until the repeal of Section 127 of the Australian Constitution in 1967 that Indigenous Australians were counted in the population for the purposes of distribution of electoral seats. Only six Indigenous Australians have been elected to the Australian Senate: Neville Bonner (Liberal, 1971–1983), Aden Ridgeway (Democrat, 1999–2005), Nova Peris (Labor, 2013–2016), Jacqui Lambie (2014–incumbent), Pat Dodson (Labor, 2016-incumbent), and former Northern Territory MLA Malarndirri McCarthy (Labor, 2016-incumbent). Following the 2010 Australian Federal Election, Ken Wyatt of the Liberal Party won the Western Australian seat of Hasluck, becoming the first Indigenous person elected to the Australian House of Representatives.[188] His nephew, Ben Wyatt was concurrently serving as Shadow Treasurer in the Western Australian Parliament and in 2011 considered a challenge for the Labor Party leadership in that state.[189] In March 2013, Adam Giles of the Country Liberal Party became Chief Minister of the Northern Territory – the first indigenous Australian to become head of government in a state or territory of Australia.[190]
A number of Indigenous people represent electorates at State and Territorial level and South Australia has had an Aboriginal Governor, Sir Douglas Nicholls. The first Indigenous Australian to serve as a minister in any government was Ernie Bridge, who entered the Western Australian Parliament in 1980. Carol Martin was the first Aboriginal woman elected to an Australian parliament (the Western Australian Legislative Assembly) in 2001, and the first woman minister was Marion Scrymgour, who was appointed to the Northern Territory ministry in 2002 (she became Deputy Chief Minister in 2008).[187] Representation in the Northern Territory has been relatively high, reflecting the high proportion of Aboriginal voters. The 2012 Territory election saw large swings to the conservative Country Liberal Party achieved in remote Territory electorates and a total of five Aboriginal CLP candidates won election to the Assembly (along with one Labor candidate) in a chamber of 25 members. Among those elected for the CLP were high-profile activists Bess Price and Alison Anderson.[191]
The Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Commission (ATSIC), a representative body of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders, was set up in 1990 under the Hawke government. In 2004, the Howard government disbanded ATSIC and replaced it with an appointed network of thirty Indigenous Coordination Centres that administer Shared Responsibility Agreements and Regional Partnership Agreements with Aboriginal communities at a local level.[192]
In October 2007, just prior to the calling of a federal election, the then Prime Minister, John Howard, revisited the idea of bringing a referendum to seek recognition of Indigenous Australians in the Constitution (his government first sought to include recognition of Aboriginal peoples in the Preamble to the Constitution in a 1999 referendum). His 2007 announcement was seen by some as a surprising adoption of the importance of the symbolic aspects of the reconciliation process, and reaction was mixed. The ALP initially supported the idea, however Kevin Rudd withdrew this support just prior to the election – earning stern rebuke from activist Noel Pearson.[193] Critical sections of the Australian public and media[194] meanwhile suggested that Howard's raising of the issue was a "cynical" attempt in the lead-up to an election to "whitewash" his handling of this issue during his term in office. David Ross of the Central Land Council was sceptical, saying "it's a new skin for an old snake",[195] while former Chairman of the Reconciliation Council Patrick Dodson gave qualified support, saying: "I think it's a positive contribution to the process of national reconciliation...It's obviously got to be well discussed and considered and weighed, and it's got to be about meaningful and proper negotiations that can lead to the achievement of constitutional reconciliation."[196] The Gillard Government, with bi-partisan support, convened an expert panel to consider changes to the Australian Constitution that would see recognition for Indigenous Australians. The Government promised to hold a referendum on the constitutional recognition of indigenous Australians on or before the federal election due for 2013.[197] The plan was abandoned in September 2012, with Minister Jenny Macklin citing insufficient community awareness for the decision.
Australian politicians of Indigenous ancestry[edit]
Only 32 people recognised to be of Indigenous Australian ancestry have been members of the ten Australian legislatures.[citation needed][when?]
The Northern Territory has an exceptionally high Indigenous proportion – about one third of its population –  and a greater rate of Indigenous politicians within the Northern Territory parliament. Adam Giles, who became Chief Minister of the Northern Territory in 2013, is the first Indigenous head of government in Australia.
Major political parties in Australia have tried to increase the number of Indigenous representation within their parties. A suggestion for increasing the number of Indigenous representation has been the introduction of seat quotas like the Maori electorates in New Zealand.
Age characteristics[edit]
The Indigenous population of Australia is much younger than the non-Indigenous population, with an estimated median age of 21 years (37 years for non-Indigenous), due to higher rates of birth and death.[198] For this reason, age standardisation is often used when comparing Indigenous and non-Indigenous statistics.[174]
Life expectancy[edit]
The life expectancy of Indigenous Australians is difficult to quantify accurately. Indigenous deaths are poorly identified, and the official figures for the size of the population at risk include large adjustment factors. Two estimates of Indigenous life expectancy in 2008 differed by as much as five years.[199]
In some regions the median age at death was identified in 1973 to be as low as 47 years and the life expectancy gap between Aboriginal people and the rest of the Australian population as a whole, to be 25 years.
From 1996 to 2001, the Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) used indirect methods for its calculations, because census results were deemed to be unreliable.,[citation needed] and figures published in 2005 (59.4 years for males and 64.8 years for females) indicated a widely quoted gap of 17 years between indigenous and non-indigenous life expectancy, though the ABS does not now consider the 2005 figures to be reliable.
Using a new method based on tracing the deaths of people identified as Indigenous at the 2006 census, in 2009 the ABS estimated life expectancy at 67.2 years for Indigenous men (11.5 years less than for non-Indigenous) and 72.9 years for Indigenous women (9.7 years less than for non-Indigenous). Estimated life expectancy of Indigenous men ranges from 61.5 years for those living in the Northern Territory to a high of 69.9 years for those living in New South Wales, and for Indigenous women, 69.2 years for those living in the Northern Territory to a high of 75.0 years for those living in New South Wales.[200][201][202][203]
Education[edit]
Aboriginal students generally leave school earlier—and live with a lower standard of education—than their cohorts, although the situation is improving, with significant gains between 1994 and 2002.[174]

39% of indigenous students stayed on to year 12 at high school, compared with 75% for the Australian population as a whole.[204]
22% of indigenous adults had a vocational or higher education qualification, compared with 48% for the Australian population as a whole.[204]
4% of Indigenous Australians held a bachelor's degree or higher, compared with 21% for the population as a whole. This proportion is increasing, but at a slower rate than for the Australian population as a whole.[204]

The performance of indigenous students in national literacy and numeracy tests conducted in school years three, five, and seven is also inferior to that of their cohorts. The following table displays the performance of indigenous students against the general Australian student population as reported in the National Report on Schooling in Australia 2004.[205]

Percent achieving 2004 benchmark


Reading
Writing
Numeracy



Year 3
Year 5
Year 7
Year 3
Year 5
Year 7
Year 3
Year 5
Year 7


Indigenous
82.9
69.4
71.0
76.8
81.7
78.8
79.2
69.4
51.9


Australia
93.0
88.7
91.0
92.9
94.2
93.6
93.7
91.2
82.1


In response to this problem, the Commonwealth Government formulated a National Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Education Policy. A number of government initiatives have resulted, some of which are listed at the Commonwealth Government's website.[206]
The Aboriginal Centre for the Performing Arts was established as a training centre by the State and Federal Governments in 1997.
Employment[edit]
Indigenous Australians as a group generally experience high unemployment compared to the national average. This can be correlated to lower educational outcomes (ABS 2010).
In 2002, the average household income for Indigenous Australian adults (adjusted for household size and composition) was 60% of the non-Indigenous average.[174]
Health[edit]
Further information: Indigenous health in Australia
Indigenous Australians were twice as likely to report their health as fair/poor and 1.5 times more likely to have a disability or long-term health condition (after adjusting for demographic structures).[207]
Health problems with the highest disparity (compared with the non-Indigenous population) in incidence[208] are outlined in the table below:


Health complication
Comparative incidence rate
Comment


Circulatory system
2 to 10-fold
5 to 10-fold increase in rheumatic heart disease and hypertensive disease, 2-fold increase in other heart disease, 3-fold increase in death from circulatory system disorders. Circulatory system diseases account for 24% deaths[209]


Renal failure
2 to 3-fold
2 to 3-fold increase in listing on the dialysis and transplant registry, up to 30-fold increase in end stage renal disease, 8-fold increase in death rates from renal failure, 2.5% of total deaths[209]


Communicable
10 to 70-fold
10-fold increase in tuberculosis, hepatitis B and hepatitis C virus, 20-fold increase in chlamydia, 40-fold increase in shigellosis and syphilis, 70-fold increase in gonococcal infections


Diabetes
3 to 4-fold
11% incidence of type 2 diabetes in Indigenous Australians, 3% in non-Indigenous population. 18% of total indigenous deaths[209]


Cot death
2 to 3-fold
Over the period 1999–2003, in Queensland, Western Australia, South Australia and the Northern Territory, the national cot death rate for infants was three times the rate


Mental health
2 to 5-fold
5-fold increase in drug-induced mental disorders, 2-fold increase in diseases such as schizophrenia, 2 to 3-fold increase in suicide.[210]


Optometry/Ophthalmology
2-fold
A 2-fold increase in cataracts


Neoplasms
60% increase in death rate
60% increased death rate from neoplasms. In 1999–2003, neoplasms accounted for 17% of all deaths[209]


Respiratory
3 to 4-fold
3 to 4-fold increased death rate from respiratory disease accounting for 8% of total deaths


Each of these indicators is expected to underestimate the true prevalence of disease in the population due to reduced levels of diagnosis.[208]
In addition, the following factors have been at least partially implicated in the inequality in life expectancy:[208]

poverty
insufficient education
substance abuse[211][212]
for remote communities poor access to health services
for urbanised Indigenous Australians, cultural pressures which prevent access to health services
cultural differences resulting in poor communication between Indigenous Australians and health workers

Successive Federal Governments have responded to these issues by implementing programs such as the Office of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Health (OATSIH).
Crime and imprisonment[edit]
Main article: Indigenous Australians and crime
In 2009 the imprisonment rate for Indigenous people was 14 times higher than that of non-Indigenous people.[213] In 2000, Indigenous Australians were more likely per capita to be both victims of and perpetrators of reported crimes in New South Wales.[214] In 2002, Indigenous Australians were twice as likely as non-Indigenous Australians of the same age group to be a victim of violent aggression,[215] with 24% of Indigenous Australians reported as being a victim of violence in 2001.[215] In 2004, Indigenous Australians were 11 times more likely to be in prison (age-standardised figures). In June 2004, 21% of prisoners in Australia were Indigenous.[215] There are frequent reports of domestic violence and community disturbances.[216]
In 2007, the Northern Territory Government commissioned a study into sexual abuse crimes being committed on children in aboriginal communities. The study, Ampe Akelyernemane Meke Mekarle "Little Children are Sacred", found that children in Aboriginal communities were being widely exposed to inappropriate sexual activity such as pornography, adult films and adults having sex within their view. The report indicated that this exposure has likely produced a number of effects, particularly the "sexualisation" of childhood and the creation of normalcy around sexual activity that may be used to engage children in sexual activity. This sexualisation of children and the wider community has led to a breakdown in traditional aboriginal law. Due to the nature of the issue, quantitative data was difficult to collect however a large amount of anecdotal evidence was relied upon which lead the author to the conclusion that issues such as rape and incest are widespread particularly within regional aboriginal communities however they are drastically under reported to local government or police.[217]
Substance abuse[edit]
Further information: Indigenous health in Australia




A signpost outside Yirrkala, NT, where kava was introduced as a safer alternative to alcohol, but was withdrawn in 2007.


Many Indigenous communities suffer from a range of health, social and legal problems associated with substance abuse of both legal and illegal drugs.
The 2004–05 National Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Health Survey (NATSIHS) by the ABS found that the proportion of the Indigenous adult population engaged in 'risky' and 'high-risk' alcohol consumption (15%) was comparable with that of the non-Indigenous population (14%), based on age-standardised data.[218] The definition of "risky" and "high-risk" consumption used is four or more standard drinks per day average for males, two or more for females.
The 2007 National Drug Strategy Household Survey[219] reported that Indigenous peoples were "more likely than other Australians to abstain from alcohol consumption (23.4% versus 16.8%) and also more likely to consume alcohol at risky or high-risk levels for harm in the short term (27.4% versus 20.1%)". These NDSHS comparisons are non-age-standardised; the paper notes that Indigenous figures are based on a sample of 372 people and care should be exercised when using Indigenous figures.
NATSIHS 2004/5 also found that, after adjusting for age differences between the two populations, Indigenous adults were more than twice as likely as non-Indigenous adults to be current daily smokers of tobacco.[220]
To combat the problem, a number of programs to prevent or mitigate alcohol abuse have been attempted in different regions, many initiated from within the communities themselves. These strategies include such actions as the declaration of "Dry Zones" within Indigenous communities, prohibition and restriction on point-of-sale access, and community policing and licensing.
Some communities (particularly in the Northern Territory) introduced kava as a safer alternative to alcohol, as over-indulgence in kava produces sleepiness, in contrast to the violence that can result from over-indulgence in alcohol. These and other measures met with variable success, and while a number of communities have seen decreases in associated social problems caused by excessive drinking, others continue to struggle with the issue and it remains an ongoing concern.
The ANCD study notes that in order to be effective, programs in general need also to address "...the underlying structural determinants that have a significant impact on alcohol and drug misuse" (Op. cit., p. 26). In 2007, Kava was banned in the Northern Territory.[221]
Petrol sniffing is also a problem among some remote Indigenous communities. Petrol vapour produces euphoria and dulling effect in those who inhale it, and due to its previously low price and widespread availability, is an increasingly popular substance of abuse.
Proposed solutions to the problem are a topic of heated debate among politicians and the community at large.[222][223] In 2005 this problem among remote Indigenous communities was considered so serious that a new, low aromatic petrol Opal was distributed across the Northern Territory to combat it.[224]
Native title and sovereignty[edit]
About 22% of land in Northern Australia (Kimberley, Top End and Cape York) is now Aboriginal-owned.[225][226] In the last decade, nearly 200 native title claims covering 1.3 million km2 of land – approximately 18% of the Australian continent – have been approved.[227]
In 1992, in Mabo v Queensland, the High Court of Australia recognised native title in Australia for the first time. The majority in the High Court rejected the doctrine of terra nullius, in favour of the concept of native title.[228]
In 2013 an Indigenous group describing itself as the Murrawarri Republic declared independence from Australia, claiming territory straddling the border between the states of New South Wales and Queensland.[229] Australia's Attorney General's Department indicated it did not consider the declaration to have any meaning in law.[229]
Stolen wages[edit]




Graph showing the destination of Indigenous wages in Queensland in the 19th and 20th centuries


Throughout the majority of the 19th and 20th centuries, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people had their lives under the jurisdiction of various state-based protection acts. These acts appointed protectors, whose role was to ensure the safety of Indigenous Australians as well as controlling their live in matters of employment and marriage. Indigenous Australians received less income than their non-Indigenous counterparts in employment, which led to events such as the Gurindji strike. Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people in Queensland in particular had their income quarantined by the protector and were allowed a minimal amount of their income. Since 1999, the Queensland Government, under pressure from the Queensland Council of Unions, has established a number of schemes to give any earned income not received at the time back to Indigenous Australians.[230][231]
Cross-cultural miscommunication[edit]
According to Michael Walsh and Ghil'ad Zuckermann, Western conversational interaction is typically "dyadic", between two particular people, where eye contact is important and the speaker controls the interaction; and "contained" in a relatively short, defined time frame. However, traditional Aboriginal conversational interaction is "communal", broadcast to many people, eye contact is not important, the listener controls the interaction; and "continuous", spread over a longer, indefinite time frame.[232][232][233]
Prominent Indigenous Australians[edit]
Main article: Lists of Indigenous Australians




Cathy Freeman surrounded by world media and carrying the Aboriginal and Australian flags following her victory in the 400 m final of the Sydney Olympics, 2000.




Play media


ABC footage and interviews of Australians celebrating Freeman's Olympics win – many noting how it brought the country together "as one".


After the arrival of European settlers in New South Wales, some Indigenous Australians became translators and go-betweens; the best-known was Bennelong, who eventually adopted European dress and customs and travelled to England where he was presented to King George III. Others, such as Pemulwuy, Yagan, and Windradyne, became famous for armed resistance to the European settlers.
During the twentieth century, as social attitudes shifted and interest in Indigenous culture increased, there were more opportunities for Indigenous Australians to gain recognition. Albert Namatjira became a painter, and actors such as David Gulpilil, Ernie Dingo, and Deborah Mailman became well known. Bands such as Yothu Yindi, and singers Christine Anu, Jessica Mauboy and Geoffrey Gurrumul Yunupingu, have combined Indigenous musical styles and instruments with pop/rock, gaining appreciation amongst non-Indigenous audiences. Polymath David Unaipon is commemorated on the Australian $50 note.
While relatively few Indigenous Australians have been elected to political office (Neville Bonner, Aden Ridgeway, Ken Wyatt, Nova Peris, Jacqui Lambie and Linda Burney remain the only Indigenous Australians to have been elected to the Australian Federal Parliament), Aboriginal rights campaigner Sir Douglas Nicholls was appointed Governor of the State of South Australia in 1976, and many others have become famous through political activism – for instance, Charles Perkins' involvement in the Freedom Ride of 1965 and subsequent work; or Torres Strait Islander Eddie Mabo's part in the landmark native title decision that bears his name. The voices of Cape York activists Noel Pearson and Jean Little, and academics Marcia Langton and Mick Dodson, today loom large in national debates. Some Indigenous people who initially became famous in other spheres – for instance, poet Oodgeroo Noonuccal – have used their celebrity to draw attention to Indigenous issues.
In health services, Kelvin Kong became the first Indigenous surgeon in 2006 and is an advocate of Indigenous health issues.[234][235][236][237]
See also[edit]


Australia portal
Indigenous peoples of Australia portal





Wikiquote has quotations related to: Indigenous Australians





Wikimedia Commons has media related to Aboriginal Australians.



Aboriginal sacred site
Aboriginal sites of New South Wales
Australian Indigenous HealthInfoNet
Australian Institute of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Studies
Australian outback literature of the 20th century
Australoid race
Customary Aboriginal law
Indigenous Protected Areas
List of Indigenous Australian firsts
List of Indigenous Peoples
List of laws concerning Indigenous Australians
List of Indigenous Australian politicians
NAIDOC Week
Northern Territory National Emergency Response
Welcome to Country and Acknowledgement of Country

Notes[edit]



^ Indigenous people across Australia and other settler societies - Canada, New Zealand and South Africa - did not gain equal access to their repatriation benefits and military wages. In contrast to other Australian states, Aboriginal authorities in Victoria did not systematically deny Aboriginal people military allotments and pensions, but judged each case on its 'merits'.[83]



Citations[edit]


^ "Australia census: Five takeaways from a changing country". BBC News. 27 June 2017. 
^ Bowler et al.
^ Davidson & Wahlquist 2017.
^ Wright 2017.
^ Bird et al., p. 1074.
^ Reyes-Centeno et al.
^ Bindon, P. A. (1997). "Aboriginal people and granite domes" (PDF). Journal of the Royal Society of Western Australia (80): 173–179. Retrieved 20 April 2016. 
^ Hodge, Robert (1990). "Aboriginal truth and white media: Eric Michaels meets the spirit of Aboriginalism". The Australian Journal of Media & Culture. 3 (3). 
^ a b c d "LANGUAGES OF ABORIGINAL AND TORRES STRAIT ISLANDER PEOPLES – A UNIQUELY AUSTRALIAN HERITAGE". Australian Bureau of Statistics. Australian Bureau of Statistics. Retrieved 26 May 2015. 
^ a b "Community, identity, wellbeing: The report of the Second National Indigenous Languages Survey" AIATSIS, 2014. Retrieved 18 May 2015.
^ 1301.0 – Year Book Australia, 2002 Australian Bureau of Statistics 25 January 2002
^ a b c Gough, Myles (11 May 2011) Prehistoric Australian Aboriginal populations were growing. Cosmos Magazine.
^ Pardoe, C. (2006). "Becoming Australian". Before Farming. 2006: 1–21. doi:10.3828/bfarm.2006.1.4. 
^ Some American estimates of mortality from smallpox amongst native American populations may have been 90%
^ Mann, Charles C., (2006), "1491:New Revelations of the Americas Before Columbus" (Vintage Books)
^ Huxley, Thomas (1870). "On the Geographical Distribution of the Chief Modifications of Mankind". Journal of the Ethnological Society of London. 
^ Aborigine – Definition and More from the Free Merriam-Webster Dictionary. Merriam-webster.com (31 August 2012). Retrieved 2 August 2013.
^ "Communicating Positively: A guide to appropriate Aboriginal terminology" (PDF). NSW Health. Retrieved 23 December 2013. 
^ "Dead Reckoning: a guide to family history research in WA: Aboriginal People". State Library of Western Australia. Retrieved 3 August 2013. 
^ "Appropriate Terminology, Indigenous Australian Peoples" (PDF). General Information Folio 5. Flinders University, Adelaide, Australia. Retrieved 10 May 2011. 
^ "Ethnologue report for language code: ulk". Ethnologue.com. Retrieved 9 August 2009. 
^ Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander population, Australian Bureau of Statistics 2004. Retrieved 21 June 2007.
^ a b c Places – Torres Strait Islands ABC Radio Australia website, 2005. Retrieved 21 June 2007.
^ "08 Nov 1828 – Classified Advertising". Trove.nla.gov.au. Retrieved 13 August 2013. 
^ Dylan Bird. "Andrew Bolt on Trial on Racism Charges". The Sydney Morning Herald. Retrieved 13 August 2013. 
^ Marcus Strom (3 November 2016). "Astounding archaeology discovery places inland human occupation of Australia at 49,000 years". The Sydney Morning Herald. Retrieved 5 November 2016. 
^ "Oldest known evidence of Aboriginal settlement in arid Australia found in Flinders Ranges rock shelter". Australian Broadcasting Corporation. 3 November 2016. Retrieved 5 November 2016. 
^ Clarkson, Chris; Jacobs, Zenobia; Marwick, Ben; Fullagar, Richard; Wallis, Lynley; et al. (19 July 2017). "Human occupation of northern Australia by 65,000 years ago". Nature. 547 (7663): 306–310. doi:10.1038/nature22968. 
^ Malaspinas, Anna-Sapfo; Westaway, Michael C.; Muller, Craig; Sousa, Vitor C.; Lao, Oscar; et al. (21 September 2016). "A genomic history of Aboriginal Australia". Nature. 538 (7624): 207–214. doi:10.1038/nature18299. 
^ Bowler, J. M.; Johnston, H.; Olley, J. M.; Prescott, J. R.; Roberts, R. G.; Shawcross, W.; Spooner, N. A. (2003). "New ages for human occupation and climatic change at Lake Mungo, Australia". Nature. 421 (6925): 837–40. Bibcode:2003Natur.421..837B. doi:10.1038/nature01383. PMID 12594511. 
^ Olley, J. M.; Roberts, R. G.; Yoshida, H.; Bowler, J. M. (2006). "Single-grain optical dating of grave-infill associated with human burials at Lake Mungo, Australia". Quaternary Science Reviews. 25 (19–20): 2469–2474. Bibcode:2006QSRv...25.2469O. doi:10.1016/j.quascirev.2005.07.022. 
^ a b Adcock, G. J.; Dennis, E. S.; Easteal, S.; Huttley, G. A.; Jermiin, L. S.; Peacock, W. J.; Thorne, A. (2001). "Mitochondrial DNA sequences in ancient Australians: Implications for modern human origins". Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 98 (2): 537–42. Bibcode:2001PNAS...98..537A. doi:10.1073/pnas.98.2.537. PMC 14622 . PMID 11209053. 
^ Cooper, A. (2001). "Human Origins and Ancient Human DNA". Science. 292 (5522): 1655–6. doi:10.1126/science.292.5522.1655. PMID 11388352. 
^ Smith, C. I.; Chamberlain, A. T.; Riley, M. S.; Stringer, C.; Collins, M. J. (2003). "The thermal history of human fossils and the likelihood of successful DNA amplification". Journal of Human Evolution. 45 (3): 203–17. doi:10.1016/S0047-2484(03)00106-4. PMID 14580590. 
^ "The spread of people to Australia – Australian Museum". australianmuseum.net.au.
^ Adcock, G. J.; Dennis, E. S.; Esteal, S.; Huttley, G. A.; et al. (2001). "Mitochondrial DNA sequences in ancient Australians: Implications for modern human origins" (PDF). Archaeology in Oceania. Wiley-Blackwell. 36 (3): 163. doi:10.1002/j.1834-4453.2001.tb00490.x. Archived from the original (PDF) on 15 May 2013. 
^ "Mungo Lady and Mungo Man". Mungo National Park, Willandra Lakes Region World Heritage Area. Retrieved 28 January 2017. 
^ Brown, Peter James (18 November 2015) [2002]. "Lake Mungo 3". peterbrown-palaeoanthropology.net. Retrieved 28 January 2017. 
^ Aboriginal culture one of world's oldest, Australian Geographic, 23 September 2011
^ Windschuttle, Keith; Tim Gillin (June 2002). "The extinction of the Australian pygmies". Quadrant. ANU Press. 29. Archived from the original on 29 July 2013. 
^ William, Alan (2013), "A new population curve for prehistoric Australia" (Proceedings of the Royal Society, 24 April 2013)
^ "Australia's Megafauna Coexisted With Humans". University Of Sydney. ScienceDaily. 31 May 2005. Retrieved 28 January 2013. 
^ Sequencing Uncovers a 9,000 Mile Walkabout. ICommunity Newsletter. April 2012
^ a b McEvoy, B. P.; Lind, J. M.; Wang, E. T.; Moyzis, R. K.; Visscher, P. M.; Van Holst Pellekaan, S. M.; Wilton, A. N. (2010). "Whole-Genome Genetic Diversity in a Sample of Australians with Deep Aboriginal Ancestry". The American Journal of Human Genetics. 87 (2): 297–305. doi:10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.07.008. PMC 2917718 . PMID 20691402. 
"Some individuals are close to the Oceanic cluster, composed of MEL and PAP individuals but most occupy a wide range on PC2 between Europeans and East Asians, generally falling in an area occupied by Central and South Asian populations."
^ Rasmussen, M.; Guo, X.; Wang, Y.; Lohmueller, K. E.; Rasmussen, S.; et al. (2011). "An Aboriginal Australian Genome Reveals Separate Human Dispersals into Asia". Science. 334 (6052): 94–98. Bibcode:2011Sci...334...94R. doi:10.1126/science.1211177. PMC 3991479 . PMID 21940856. 
^ Callaway, E. (2011). "First Aboriginal genome sequenced". Nature. doi:10.1038/news.2011.551. 
^ Irina Pugach; Frederick Delfin; Ellen Gunnarsdóttir; Manfred Kayser; Mark Stoneking (14 January 2013). "Genome-wide data substantiate Holocene gene flow from India to Australia". PNAS. 110 (5): 1803–1808. Bibcode:2013PNAS..110.1803P. doi:10.1073/pnas.1211927110. PMC 3562786 . PMID 23319617. 
^ Hudjashov, G.; Kivisild, T.; Underhill, P. A.; Endicott, P.; Sanchez, J. J.; Lin, A. A.; Shen, P.; Oefner, P.; Renfrew, C.; Villems, R.; Forster, P. (2007). "Revealing the prehistoric settlement of Australia by Y chromosome and mtDNA analysis". Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 104 (21): 8726–30. doi:10.1073/pnas.0702928104. PMC 1885570. PMID 17496137.
^ Kayser, M; Brauer, Silke; Weiss, Gunter; Schiefenhövel, Wulf; Underhill, Peter; Shen, Peidong; Oefner, Peter; Tommaseo-Ponzetta, Mila; Stoneking, Mark (2003). "Reduced Y-Chromosome, but Not Mitochondrial DNA, Diversity in Human Populations from West New Guinea". The American Journal of Human Genetics 72 (2): 281–302. doi:10.1086/346065. PMC 379223. PMID 12532283.
^ "National Heritage Places – Budj Bim National Heritage Landscape". Australian Government Department of Sustainability, Environment, Water, Population and Communities. Retrieved 13 August 2013. 
^ Flood, Josephine (1984), "Archaeology of the Dreamtime" (Uni of Hawaii Press)
^ MacKnight, C. C. (1986). "Macassans and the Aboriginal past". Archaeology in Oceania. 21: 69–75. doi:10.1002/j.1834-4453.1986.tb00126.x. 
^ Pasco: Bruce (2015) "Dark Emu; Black Seeds: Agriculture or Accident" (Magaballa Books)
^ a b Population Distribution, Migration and Climate Change in Australia: An Exploration. NCCARF March 2012
^ Thomson, Neil (2001) "Indigenous Australia: Indigenous Health", p. 153 in James Jupp (ed), The Australian people: an encyclopedia of the nation, its people and their Origins, Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-80789-1 This article says the likely aboriginal population of Australia in 1788 was around 750,000 or even over a million. There was also a chart from the Australian Bureau of Statistics – Experimental Projections of the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Population, Canberra, ABS, 1998 – with estimated populations for each state and for Australia as a whole total being 418,841.
^ William, Alan, (2013) op cit
^ "Gadian Society". Aboriginal. Gadian Society. Retrieved 25 September 2013. 
^ Statistics compiled by Ørsted-Jensen for Frontier History Revisited (Brisbane 2011), page 10-11 & 15. Column one is the distribution percentage calculated on the estimates gathered and publicised in 1930 (Official Year Book of the Commonwealth of Australia XXIII, 1930, pp672, 687–696) by the social anthropologist Alfred Reginald Radcliffe-Brown. The percentage in column two was calculated on the basis of N.G. Butlin: Our Original Aggression and "others", by M. D. Prentis for his book A Study in Black and White (2 revised edition, Redfern NSW 1988, page 41). Column three however, is calculated on the basis of the "Aboriginal Australia" map, published by Australian Institute of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Studies (AIATSIS), Canberra 1994.
^ "Map of Aboriginal Australia". ecu.edu.au.
^ Glynn, Ian; Jenifer Glynn (2004). The Life and Death of Smallpox. Cambridge University Press. pp. 145–146. ISBN 978-0-521-84542-7. Retrieved 29 January 2017. 
^ Heiss, Anita; Melodie-Jane Gibson (2013). "Aboriginal People and Place". Barani: Sydney's Aboriginal History. City of Sydney. Retrieved 28 January 2017. 
^ "Blackwell Public School: History". blackwell-p.schools.nsw.edu. Archived from the original on 20 February 2012. Retrieved 25 September 2010. 
^ Infobase. Hi.com.au. Retrieved 25 September 2010.
^ Campbell, Judy (2007). Invisible Invaders: Smallpox and Other Diseases in Aboriginal Australia, 1780–1880. Carlton, Vic: Melbourne UP. ISBN 0-522-84939-3. Retrieved 1 August 2016. 
^ Mear, Craig (2008). "The Origin of the Smallpox Outbreak in Sydney in 1789". Journal of the Royal Australian Historical Society. 94 (1): 1–22. 
^ McIlroy, Tom. "Chickenpox blamed for Aboriginal deaths". The Canberra Times. Retrieved 17 October 2015. 
^ Carmody (7 August 2013). "Seminar: The 'myth' of smallpox at Sydney Cove in April 1789". Australian National University. Retrieved 28 January 2017. 
^ In A. Dirk Moses (ed.)Genocide and Settler Society, Berghahn Books, 2004, p79ff.
^ "United Service" (PDF). 65 (1). March 2014: 7. 
^ Grant, Stan (2016) "Talking to My Country"
^ Connor, Liz (2016) "Skin Deep: Settler impressions of Aboriginal women" (University of WA Publishing)
^ Maynard, John & Haskins, Victoria (2016), "Living with the Locals: Early Europeans' Experience of Indigenous Life" (National Library of Australia)
^ Spooner, P. G.; Firman, M.; Yalmambirra (2013). "Origins of Travelling Stock Routes. 1. Connections to Indigenous traditional pathways". The Rangeland Journal. 32 (3): 329. doi:10.1071/RJ10009. 
^ The Australian Eleven: The first Australian team, National Museum of Australia. Retrieved 19 May 2011.
^ "Year Book Australia, 2002". Australian Bureau of Statistics. 2002. Retrieved 23 September 2008. 
^ a b c Hughes, Helen (November 2008). "Who Are Indigenous Australians?". Quadrant. Retrieved 16 December 2009. 
^ Colliding worlds: first contact in the western desert, 1932–1984, National Museum of Australia
^ Londey, Peter. "Indigenous Australian servicemen". Australian War Memorial. Retrieved 17 August 2014. 
^ "Appeal for Justice: Dhakiyarr Wirrpanda". Uncommonlives.naa.gov.au. 20 October 2004. Archived from the original on 5 May 2010. Retrieved 12 October 2009. 
^ Tuckiar v R (1934) 52 CLR 335. Retrieved 12 March 2011. Dhakiyarr is named "Tuckiar" in the proceedings and is referred to in the main judgment as "a completely uncivilised aboriginal native". The decision is unanimous and strongly criticises the conduct of the trial.
^ "GF's Koori History Website – Koori History Images – 1930s". Kooriweb.org. 26 January 1938. Retrieved 12 October 2009. 
^ "Australian War Memorial – Encyclopedia". Awm.gov.au. Retrieved 12 October 2009. 
^ Horton 2015, p. 205.
^ Collaborating for Indigenous Rights 1957–1973, National Museum of Australia. Retrieved 19 June 2011.
^ Australian Electoral Commission: Indigenous people and the vote. aec.gov.au. Retrieved 19 June 2011.
^ Collaborating for Indigenous Rights: Freedom Ride, 1965, National Museum of Australia. Retrieved 19 June 2011.
^ Collaborating for Indigenous Rights: Wave Hill walk off, 1966–67, National Museum of Australia. Retrieved 19 June 2011.
^ "From Little Things Big Things Grow" song lyrics. Paulkelly.com.au (1 September 2010). Retrieved 20 November 2011.
^ "Timeline: 1960-69: 1967, 27 May referendum". National Museum of Australia. 13 July 1968. Archived from the original on 10 May 2013. Retrieved 12 October 2009. 
^ "Civics and Citizenship Education: Sir Douglas Nicholls". Civicsandcitizenship.edu.au. 14 June 2005. Retrieved 29 January 2017. 
^ "'I am the first!' Linda Burney proclaims history for Indigenous people, women". Australian Broadcasting Corporation. 3 July 2016. Retrieved 23 July 2016. 
^ Norman, Jane (22 July 2016). "Bill Shorten keeps Kim Carr on frontbench in shadow ministry shuffle". Australian Broadcasting Corporation. Retrieved 23 July 2016. 
^ "Arthur Beetson OAM" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 20 January 2012. Retrieved 3 March 2010. 
^ "The International Rugby Hall of Fame". Rugbyhalloffame.com. 9 October 2007. Archived from the original on 10 September 2012. Retrieved 12 October 2009. 
^ Thorley, Peter (2006). "Colliding worlds: first contact in the western desert, 1932–1984". reCollections.nma.gov.au. Retrieved 29 January 2017. 
^ McKenna, Mark (4 April 2000). "First Words: A Brief History of Public Debate on a New Preamble to the Australian Constitution 1991–1999 (Research Paper 16 1999–2000)". Parliament of Australia, Parliamentary Library. Archived from the original on 16 February 2012. Retrieved 12 October 2009. 
^ Brennan, Frank (21 February 2008). "The History of Apologies Down Under". Thinking Faith – online journal of the British Jesuits. Archived from the original on 2 December 2014. 
^ "Recognising Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Peoples in the Constitution: Report of the Expert Panel". Commonwealth of Australia. January 2012. Archived from the original on 2012-11-29. Retrieved 25 October 2012. 
^ For a discussion of the recommendations, see: Wood, Asmi (2012). "Constitutional Reform 2013: What are we trying to achieve?". Alternative Law Journal. 37 (3): 156. 
^ Pratt, Angela (11 August 2003). "Research Note no. 5 2003–2004. ATSIC Review: Complex Challenges, No Simple Solutions". Parliament of Australia, Parliamentary Library. Archived from the original on 3 February 2012. 
^ Gibson, Joel (27 October 2007). "One policy, two camps – the takeover rift". The Sydney Morning Herald. Retrieved 29 January 2017. 
^ Kerry McCallum and Lisa Waller, (2012) 'The Failed State of Health', Arena Magazine, 118, 33-34 (30 July 2016)
^ Police Administration Act (NT), Division 4AA in AustLII.
^ Anaya, James (February 2010). "Observations on the Northern Territory Emergency Response in Australia" (PDF). un.org.au. Archived from the original (PDF) on 20 April 2013. Retrieved 18 June 2011. 
^ The World Today – UN rapporteur raps NT intervention 24/02/2010. Australian Broadcasting Corporation.au (2 October 1980). Retrieved 20 November 2011.
^ PM – UN's claims of 'racist' NT intervention are widely condemned 28/08/2009. Australian Broadcasting Corporation.au (28 August 2009). Retrieved 20 November 2011.
^ Defence, Discrimination and Regrets. Australian Broadcasting Corporation.au (11 April 2011). Retrieved 20 November 2011.
^ Stand for Freedom (2012). "About- Stand for Freedom". Our Generation. Retrieved 26 April 2012. 
^ Zuckermann, Ghil'ad (26 August 2009) "Aboriginal languages deserve revival", The Australian Higher Education.
^ University of South Australia, "Preserving Indigenous culture through language", 26 May 2015,[1]. Retrieved 15 January 2010.
^ Evans, Nicholas (2003). The non-Pama-Nyungan languages of northern Australia: comparative studies of the continent's most linguistically complex region. Canberra Australia: Australian National University. ISBN 978-0-85883-538-2. 
^ Bowern, Claire and Harold Koch (eds.). 2004. Australian Languages: Classification and the comparative method. John Benjamins, Sydney ISBN 90-272-4761-7
^ Dixon, R. M. W. (1997) The Rise and Fall of Languages. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-62654-4
^ Tatz, C. (1999, 2005). Aboriginal Suicide Is Different. Aboriginal Studies Press.
^ "Australian Bureau of Statistics, 4713.0 – Population Characteristics, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Australians, 2006, Religion". Retrieved 14 November 2012. 
^ Mercer, Phil (31 March 2003). "Aborigines turn to Islam". BBC. Retrieved 25 May 2007. 
^ Andrews, M. (2004) The Seven Sisters, Spinifex Press, North Melbourne. ISBN 1-876756-45-4. p. 424
^ Traditional Healers of Central Australia: Ngangkari. Ngaanyatjarra Pitjantjatjara Women's Council Aboriginal Corporation. 2013. Magabala Books, Broome, WA, pp. 15–19.
^ Aboriginal Australia & the Torres Strait Islands: Guide to Indigenous Australia. Lonely Planet Publications. 2001. ISBN 978-1-86450-114-8. Retrieved 13 May 2013. 
^ Fiona Richards (2007). The Soundscapes of Australia: Music, Place And Spirituality. Ashgate Publishing, Ltd. ISBN 978-0-7546-4072-1. Retrieved 13 May 2013. 
^ Newton, Janice (1990). "Becoming 'Authentic' Australians through Music". Social Analysis: The International Journal of Social and Cultural Practice. 27: 93–101. doi:10.2307/23164573. JSTOR 23164573. 
^ Dunbar‐Hall, P.; Gibson, C. (2000). "Singing about nations within nations: Geopolitics and identity in Australian indigenous rock music". Popular Music and Society. 24 (2): 45–73. doi:10.1080/03007760008591767. 
^ "History of the Didgeridoo Yidaki". Aboriginalarts.co.uk. Retrieved 9 August 2009. 
^ Dieter Riemenschneider, Geoffrey V. Davis, Ar̲atjara: Aboriginal Culture and Literature in Australia, 1997, p. 225
^ "The new corroboree – Music – Entertainment". The Age. Australia. 1 April 2006. Retrieved 9 August 2009. 
^ Christine Anu live at Sydney 2000 Olympics Closing Ceremony (YouTube). Retrieved 29 December 2011.
^ a b "Australian Indigenous art". Australian Culture and Recreation Portal. Australia Government. 21 December 2007. Archived from the original on 16 April 2010. Retrieved 26 September 2010. 
^ "Kakadu: Rock art". parksaustralia.gov.au. Retrieved 29 January 2017. 
^ "Uluru-Kata Tjuta: Rock art". parksaustralia.gov.au. Retrieved 29 January 2017. 
^ "Aboriginal Heritage walk: Ku-ring-gai Chase National Park". nationalparks.nsw.gov.au. Retrieved 29 January 2017. 
^ Pilbara Rock Art not Affected by Mining Emissions: Study. ABC Online 10.02.09
^ Phillips, Yasmine (13 January 2009) World protection urged for Burrup art[dead link]. thewest.com.au
^ "The spread of people to Australia". Australian Museum. 26 May 2011. Retrieved 2 June 2011. 
^ "The Indigenous Collection". The Ian Potter Centre: NGV Australia. National Gallery of Victoria. Archived from the original on 14 June 2010. Retrieved 6 December 2010. 
^ "National Gallery of Australia". Nga.gov.au. Retrieved 13 August 2013. 
^ "Documenting Democracy". Foundingdocs.gov.au. Retrieved 2 June 2011. 
^ "Modern Australian poetry". Australian Government Culture and Recreation Poral. Archived from the original on 23 July 2007. 
^ Ronald M. Berndt has published traditional Aboriginal song-poetry in his book "Three Faces of Love", Nelson 1976. R.M.W. Dixon and M. Duwell have published two books dealing with sacred and everyday poetry: "The Honey Ant Men's Love Song" and "Little Eva at Moonlight Creek", University of Queensland Press, 1994.
^ "Contents, The Literature of Australia, W. W. Norton & Company". Books.wwnorton.com. 4 June 1989. Retrieved 2 June 2011. 
^ "Spencer, Sir Walter Baldwin (1860–1929) Biographical Entry – Australian Dictionary of Biography Online". Adbonline.anu.edu.au. 14 July 1929. Retrieved 2 June 2011. 
^ "Festival de Cannes – From 11 to 22 May 2011". Festival-cannes.com. 22 May 2011. Archived from the original on 18 January 2012. Retrieved 2 June 2011. 
^ "Dead Heart (1996) on ASO – Australia's audio and visual heritage online". Aso.gov.au. Retrieved 2 June 2011. 
^ "The Tracker (2002) on ASO – Australia's audio and visual heritage online". Aso.gov.au. Retrieved 2 June 2011. 
^ "Rabbit-Proof Fence (2002) on ASO – Australia's audio and visual heritage online". Aso.gov.au. Retrieved 2 June 2011. 
^ "Canoes set Cannes jury afloat". The Sydney Morning Herald.
^ (From William Blandowski's Australien in 142 Photographischen Abbildungen, 1857, (Haddon Library, Faculty of Archaeology and Anthropology, Cambridge)
^ Tim Hilferti, The Australian Game The Advertiser Pg 79 24 October 2010
^ Kids play "kick to kick" −1850s style from abc.net.au
^ Isabel Ellender and Peter Christiansen, pp45 People of the Merri Merri. The Wurundjeri in Colonial Days, Merri Creek Management Committee, 2001 ISBN 0-9577728-0-7
^ "Influence of Aboriginal players". Footy.lisaj.id.au. 31 July 2007. Retrieved 27 June 2010. 
^ "Australian Indigenous tools and technology". australia.gov.au. 20 April 2016. Retrieved 28 January 2017. 
^ Bleakley, John William (1929). The Aboriginals and Half-Castes of Central Australia and North Australia (PDF). Melbourne: Government Printer. p. 17. 
^ a b Spencer, Stephen (2006). Race And Ethnicity: Culture, identity and representation. Pg 33–34: Routledge. ISBN 1-134-26639-1. 
^ Commonwealth v Tasmania [1983, HCA 21; (1983) 158 CLR 1 (1 July 1983).
^ a b Greg Gardiner, Eleanor Bourke: (2002). "Indigenous Populations, Mixed Discourses and Identities pdf" (PDF). People and Place Volume 8 No 2 Monash University. Retrieved 16 December 2009. 
^ "Legal definitions of Aboriginality | ALRC". alrc.gov.au.
^ Gardiner-Garden, John (5 December 2000). "Research Note 18 2000-01: The Definition of Aboriginality". Parliament of Australia, Parliamentary Library. Archived from the original on 7 February 2012. Retrieved 5 February 2008. 
^ "Aboriginal or not". sbs.com.au. 7 August 2012
^ "2914.0.55.002–2006 Census of Population and Housing: Media Releases and Fact Sheets, 2006". Abs.gov.au. Retrieved 12 October 2009. 
^ "Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Population". 1301.0 – Year Book Australia, 2008. Australian Bureau of Statistics. 7 February 2008. Retrieved 3 January 2009. 
^ a b Population Distribution, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Australians Australian Bureau of Statistics 15 August 2007 pdf.
^ Population Distribution, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Australians, Australian Bureau of Statistics, 2006.
^ "2077.0 – Census of Population and Housing: Understanding the Increase in Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Counts, 2006–2011". abs.gov.au.
^ Birrell, R and J Hirst (2002). "Aboriginal Couples at the 2001 Census". People and Place. 10 (3): 27. 
^ Australian Aboriginal languages. Encyclopædia Britannica
^ Smith, M. S.; Moran, M.; Seemann, K. (2008). "The 'viability' and resilience of communities and settlements in desert Australia". The Rangeland Journal. 30: 123. doi:10.1071/RJ07048. 
^ Pardoe, C. (1991). "Isolation and Evolution in Tasmania". Current Anthropology. 32: 1. doi:10.1086/203909. 
^ a b Madley, B. (2012). "From Terror to Genocide: Britain's Tasmanian Penal Colony and Australia's History Wars". The Journal of British Studies. 47: 77–106. doi:10.1086/522350. 
^ Rhys Jones:3,000-5,000, N. J. B. Plomley: 4,000–6,000, Henry Reynolds: 5,000–7,000, Colin Pardoe: 12,000+ and David Davies: 15,000.
^ Historian dismisses Tasmanian aboriginal genocide "myth", PM show, ABC Local Radio, 12 December 2002. Transcript. Retrieved 22 June 2007
^ Blainey, Geoffrey (1980) A Land Half Won, Macmillan, South Melbourne, Vic. ISBN 0-333-29949-3. p. 75
^ For discussion of the Truganini claim, and the other candidates, Suke and Fanny Cochrane Smith, see Taylor, Rebe (2004) Unearthed: the Aboriginal Tasmanians of Kangaroo Island, Wakefield Press. ISBN 1-86254-552-9. pp. 140ff.
^ Ryan, Lyndall (1996) The Aboriginal Tasmanians. Allen & Unwin. ISBN 1-86373-965-3. p. 220, denies Truganini was the last 'full-blood', and makes a case for Suke (d.circa 1888)
^ a b c d "1301.0 – Year Book Australia, 2005". Australian Bureau of Statistics. 21 January 2005. 
^ Australian Bureau of Statistics. Year Book Australia 2005
^ Mutual obligation, shared responsibility agreements & Indigenous health strategy, Ian PS Anderson NIH.gov
^ Nothing mutual about denying Aborigines a voice, Larissa Behrendt, The Age newspaper, 8 December 2004 SMH.com.au
^ Seed, Daniel Live: Woodford Folk Festival 2015/16: Fire event and New Year's Day: News: Noel Pearson says Andrew Bolt 'becoming Indigenous' , Brisbane Times, 1:28pm on 1 January 2016;http://www.brisbanetimes.com.au/queensland/live-woodford-folk-festival-201516-fire-event-and-new-years-day-20160101-glxrx2.html
^ HURIGHTS OSAKA – Living with the Past. Hurights.or.jp. Retrieved 25 September 2010.
^ Bringing them Home, The general principle that came to be followed was that those who were identified as purely Aboriginal were left alone, because it was assumed that they would die out in a few generations, but part-Aborigines were 'rescued' so that they could be brought up like white children. A few may have benefited from this, but for a majority of them separation from their families was distressing. Appendices listing and interpretation of state acts regarding 'Aborigines'[permanent dead link]: Appendix 1.1 NSW[permanent dead link]; Appendix 1.2 ACT[permanent dead link]; [www.austlii.edu.au/au/special/rsjproject/rsjlibrary/hreoc/stolen/stolen65.html Appendix 2 Victoria][permanent dead link]; [www.austlii.edu.au/au/special/rsjproject/rsjlibrary/hreoc/stolen/stolen66.html Appendix 3 Queensland][permanent dead link]; Tasmania[permanent dead link]; [www.austlii.edu.au/au/special/rsjproject/rsjlibrary/hreoc/stolen/stolen68.html Appendix 5 Western Australia][permanent dead link]; [www.austlii.edu.au/au/special/rsjproject/rsjlibrary/hreoc/stolen/stolen69.html Appendix 6 South Australia][permanent dead link]; [www.austlii.edu.au/au/special/rsjproject/rsjlibrary/hreoc/stolen/stolen70.html Appendix 7 Northern Territory][permanent dead link]
^ "Bringing them home education module]: the laws: [www.humanrights.gov.au/education/bth/resources/laws_act.html Australian Capital Territory]; [www.humanrights.gov.au/education/bth/resources/laws_nsw.html New South Wales]; [ww.humanrights.gov.au/education/bth/resources/laws_nt.html Northern Territory]; [www.humanrights.gov.au/education/bth/resources/laws_qld.html Queensland Queensland]; [www.humanrights.gov.au/education/bth/resources/laws_sa.html South Australia]; [www.humanrights.gov.au/education/bth/resources/laws_sa.html Tasmania]; [www.humanrights.gov.au/education/bth/resources/laws_vic.html Victoria]; [www.humanrights.gov.au/education/bth/resources/laws_wa.html Western Australia". 
^ Marten, James A. (2002). Children and War: A Historical Anthology. New York: New York University Press. p. 229. ISBN 0-8147-5667-0. 
^ "Indigenous Australia: Family". Australian Museum. 2004. Archived from the original on 18 November 2000. Retrieved 28 March 2008. 
^ Read, Peter (1981). The Stolen Generations: The Removal of Aboriginal children in New South Wales 1883 to 1969 (PDF). Department of Aboriginal Affairs (New South Wales government). ISBN 0-646-46221-0. Archived from the original (PDF) on 9 April 2012. 
^ In its submission to the Bringing Them Home report, the Victorian government stated that "despite the apparent recognition in government reports that the interests of Indigenous children were best served by keeping them in their own communities, the number of Aboriginal children forcibly removed continued to increase, rising from 220 in 1973 to 350 in 1976" Bringing Them Home: "Victoria".[permanent dead link]
^ "Rudd says sorry", Dylan Welch, The Sydney Morning Herald 13 February 2008.
^ a b "AEC.gov.au". AEC.gov.au. 25 October 2007. Retrieved 27 June 2010. 
^ The West Australian. Yahoo!! News.com (29 August 2010). Retrieved 25 September 2010.
^ Lloyd Jones (5 January 2011). "Wyatt to challenge for WA Labor leadership". The Sydney Morning Herald. Retrieved 13 August 2013. 
^ Mills dumped as Giles takes top Territory job – ABC News (Australian Broadcasting Corporation). Australian Broadcasting Corporation. Retrieved 2 August 2013.
^ "Indigenous vote decided outcome in the Territory". The Australian. 22 September 2012. 
^ "4. Administration: Coordination and engagement at regional and national levels". Australian Government, Office of Indigenous Policy Coordination. 2006. Archived from the original on 20 February 2008. Retrieved 17 May 2006. 
^ "Noel Pearson's statement on Kevin Rudd, The Australian". Theaustralian.news.com.au. 23 November 2007. Retrieved 12 October 2009. 
^ "Eurekastreet.com.au". Eurekastreet.com.au. Retrieved 27 June 2010. 
^ (ABC Television News 12 October 2007)
^ (ABC radio 12 October 2007)
^ Karvelas, Patricia (20 January 2012). "Historic Constitution vote over indigenous recognition facing hurdles". The Australian. 
^ "4704.0 – The Health and Welfare of Australia's Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Peoples, 2008". Australian Bureau of Statistics. 2008. Retrieved 8 January 2009. 
^ 'Death forms undermine promises', NIT 157, 10 July 2008
^ "3302.0.55.003 – Experimental Life Tables for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Australians, 2005–2007". Australian Bureau of Statistics. 25 May 2009. Retrieved 28 May 2009. 
^ Lunn, Stephen (26 November 2008). "Life gap figures not black and white". The Australian. Retrieved 24 April 2009. 
^ Joel Gibson (10 April 2009). "Indigenous health gap closes by five years". The Sydney Morning Herald. Retrieved 24 September 2010. 
^ Australian Indigenous Health Vol 9 No 2, April 2009 – June 2009 Australian Bureau of Statistics
^ a b c "1370.0 – Measures of Australia's Progress, 2004". Abs.gov.au. Retrieved 12 October 2009. 
^ "Chapter 10: Indigenous education". Cms.curriculum.edu.au. Retrieved 9 August 2009. 
^ Indigenous Education. dest.gov.au
^ Australian Bureau of Statistics.
^ a b c The health and welfare of Australia's Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples 2003. Australian Institute of Health and Welfare.
^ a b c d Indigenous Australians. Australian Institute of Health and Welfare.
^ Vos, T.; Barker, B.; Stanley, L.; Lopez, A (2007). The burden of disease and injury in Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples: Summary report, p. 14. Brisbane: School of Population Health, University of Queensland].
^ Petrol Sniffing – Health & Wellbeing. Australian Broadcasting Corporation
^ Alcohol and Other Drugs – Petrol. nt.gov.au
^ 4517.0 – Prisoners in Australia, 2009: Imprisonment rates, Australian Bureau of Statistics, 10 December 2009. Retrieved 11 November 2010. Archived 12 November 2010 at WebCite by WebCite on 11 November 2010.
^ Fitzgerald, Jacqueline; Don Weatherburn (December 2001). "Aboriginal victimisation and offending: the picture from police records" (PDF). NSW Bureau of Crime Statistics and Research. Archived from the original (PDF) on 12 November 2010. Retrieved 28 June 2009. 
^ a b c "4102.0 – Australian Social Trends, 2005: Crime and Justice: Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander People: Contact with the Law ABS". Australian Bureau of Statistics. 12 July 2005. Archived from the original on 12 November 2010. Retrieved 28 April 2007. 
^ "Australian Database of Indigenous Violence". Retrieved 14 November 2009. 
^ Ampe Akelyernemane Meke Mekarle. Report of the Northern Territory Board of Inquiry into the Protection of Aboriginal Children from Sexual Abuse. 2007. ISBN 978-0-9803874-1-4
^ "National Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Health Survey, 2004–2005 (ABS Cat. 4715.0), Table 6" (PDF). pdf. Australian Bureau of Statistics. 2006. Retrieved 1 June 2006. 
^ Australian Institute of Health and Welfare (2008). "Australian Institute of Health and Welfare 2008. 2007 National Drug Strategy Household Survey: detailed findings. Drug statistics series no. 22. Cat. no. PHE 107. Canberra: AIHW" (PDF). pdf. Australian Institute of Health and Welfare. Retrieved 13 April 2010. 
^ "National Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Health Survey, 2004–2005 (ABS Cat. 4715.0), Table 1" (PDF). pdf. Australian Bureau of Statistics. 2006. Retrieved 23 June 2008. 
^ Australian Broadcasting Commission (2007) Kava Ban 'Sparks Black Market Boom', ABC Darwin 23 August 2007. Retrieved 18 October 2007.
^ Effects of sniffing petrol Northern Territory Government Health Department
^ Petrol Sniffing in Remote Northern Territory Communities Legislative Assembly of the Northern Territory.
^ "Roll out of OPAL fuel to help combat petrol sniffing". Australian Government, Australian Health Ministry. 10 February 2006. Archived from the original on 3 April 2013. Retrieved 9 August 2009. 
^ Savanna Windows – All Regions – Savanna People – Indigenous – Healthy People Healthy Country. EnviroNorth. Retrieved 16 July 2013.
^ Aboriginal Stewardship Models Brought to Canada. Pew Environment Group. 24 October 2012
^ Australia's Aborigines Launch a Bold Legal Push for Independence. Time. 30 May 2013
^ "Mabo v Queensland (No 2) ('Mabo case') [1992] HCA 23; (1992) 175 CLR 1". Australasian Legal Information Institute. 3 June 1992. Retrieved 28 January 2017. 
^ a b Neubauer, Ian Lloyd (30 May 2013). "Australia's Aborigines Launch a Bold Legal Push for Independence". Time. Retrieved 11 April 2014. 
^ "About the reparations scheme". qld.gov.au. Retrieved 23 November 2016. 
^ "History of Indigenous wages". qld.gov.au. Retrieved 23 November 2016. 
^ a b Zuckermann, Ghil'ad; et al. (2015), ENGAGING – A Guide to Interacting Respectfully and Reciprocally with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander People, and their Arts Practices and Intellectual Property (PDF), Australian Government: Indigenous Culture Support, p. 12 CS1 maint: Explicit use of et al. (link)
^ Walsh, Michael (1997), Cross cultural communication problems in Aboriginal Australia, Australian National University, North Australia Research Unit, pp. 7–9 
^ "INSPIRE: Kelvin Kong". The Australian. 2 August 2008. Retrieved 27 June 2010. 
^ "2020 Summiteer Dr Kelvin Kong – Life Matters". Australia: ABC. 3 March 2008. Retrieved 27 June 2010. 
^ "Kong Family – Koori doctors:". Australia: ABC. 14 October 2003. Retrieved 27 June 2010. 
^ "Aborigine stitches up role as surgeon". The Sydney Morning Herald. 5 January 2003. Retrieved 27 June 2010. 


References[edit]


Horton, Jessica (2015). 'Willing to fight to a man': The First World War and Aboriginal activism in the Western District of Victoria. Aboriginal History. 39. Australian National University Press. pp. 203–222. 
Bird, M.I.; Turney, C.S.M.; Fifield, L.K.; Jones, R.; Ayliffe, L.K.; Palmer, A.; Cresswell, R.; Robertson, S. (2002). Radiocarbon analysis of the early archaeological site of Nauwalabila I, Arnhem Land, Australia: implications for sample suitability and stratigraphic integrity (PDF). Quaternary Science Reviews. 21. pp. 1061–1075. 
Bowler, James. M.; Johnston, H; Olley, J. M; Prescott, John R; Roberts, Richard G; Shawcross, Wilfred; Spooner., Nigel. A (20 February 2003). New ages for human occupation and climatic change at Lake Mungo, Australia. Nature. 421. Nature Publishing Group. pp. 837–840. 
Davidson, Helen; Wahlquist, Calla (20 July 2017). "Australian dig finds evidence of Aboriginal habitation up to 80,000 years ago". The Guardian. 
Reyes-Centeno, Hugo; Ghirotto, Silvia; Détroit, Florent; Grimaud-Hervé, Dominique; Barbujani, Guido; Harvati, Katerina (20 May 2014). Genomic and cranial phenotype data support multiple modern human dispersals from Africa and a southern route into Asia (PDF). 111. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. pp. 7248–7253. 
Tindale, Norman Barnett (1974). Aboriginal Tribes of Australia: Their Terrain, Environmental Controls, Distribution, Limits, and Proper Names (PDF). Australian National University Press. ISBN 978-0-708-10741-6. 
Wright, Tony (20 July 2017). "Aboriginal archaeological discovery in Kakadu rewrites the history of Australia". Sydney Morning Herald. 


External links[edit]


Library resources about
Indigenous Australians





Resources in your library





Colonization of the indigenous
Australian Institute of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Studies
AUSTLANG Australian Indigenous Languages Database
Science 2.0: Australian Aborigines were once Indians – Study
Australian Bureau of Statistics, Key Messages from "The Health and Welfare of Australia's Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Peoples, 2010". Data from the 2008 National Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Social Survey (NATSISS), Census of Population and Housing, the Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS), and other administrative data sources. 4704.0 – "The Health and Welfare of Australia's Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Peoples, 2010"
Closing the Gap – celebrates the achievements of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people and a gateway to information on Australian Government Indigenous initiatives and programs
Australian Museum: Indigenous Australia
The South Australian Museum: Tribal boundaries in Aboriginal Australia map
Indigenous Language Map
Australian Indigenous Health InfoNet
Australian Human Rights Commission: Aboriginal & Torres Strait Islander Social Justice Index
Indigenous Law Resources
National Indigenous Times – national Indigenous affairs newspaper
NT Mojos – Northern Territory Mobile Journalists – an innovative, pilot mobile journalism project that is helping close the gap in the Northern Territory by giving Indigenous communities a chance to tell their stories in their own way
Singing about nations within nations: Geopolitics and Identity in Australian Indigenous rock music
The politics of suffering: Indigenous policy in Australia since the 1970s







v
t
e


Indigenous peoples of the world by continent










Africa





Asia





Europe





North America





Oceania





South America









Indigenous peoples by geographic regions










v
t
e


Australia articles



History







Timeline
Bibliography
Prehistory
Archaeology
European Exploration
Territorial evolution
1788–1850
1851–1900
1901–1945
Since 1945





By topic



Constitutional
Diplomatic
Economic
Federation
Immigration
Indigenous
Military
Monarchy
Railway








Geography







Climate
Continent
Deserts
Environment

issues


Earthquakes
Flora
Fauna
Forests
Geology
Islands
Mountains
Regions
Protected areas
Rivers





Subdivisions



States and Territories
Capitals
Cities








Politics







Constitution
Courts
Elections

Donations
Electoral system
Parties


Federal budget
Foreign relations
Government
Governor-General
Human rights

Intersex
LGBT
Transgender


Intelligence and security
Law

Constitution
Judiciary
Enforcement


Military
Monarchy
National debt
Parliament
Public Service
Women

Government leaders
Government ministers










Economy







Agriculture
Dollar (currency)
Energy
Gross state product
Home ownership

Public housing


Household income
Manufacturing
Media
Mining
Poverty
Reserve Bank
Stock Exchange
Superannuation
Taxation
Telecommunications
Tourism
Transportation
Welfare system








Society







Crime
Demographics
Education
Ethnic groups
Healthcare
Homelessness
Immigration
Languages
Religion
Women





Culture



Architecture
Art
Arts
Australian English
Cinema
Cuisine
Dance
Literature
Music
Public holidays
Radio
Sport
Symbols
Television
Theatre












Outline
Index



Book
Category
Portal












v
t
e


Indigenous Australians



Peoples



Aboriginal Australians
Australoids
Blackfellas
Communities
Groups
Half-castes
Tasmanians
Torres Strait Islanders
Victorians
Western Australians





Individuals



Activists
Musicians
People from politics and public service
Performing artists
Sportspeople
Visual artists
Writers





Culture



Astronomy
Avoidance
Bora
Corroboree
Deadly Awards
Deities
Dreamtime
Enumeration
Flag
Kinship
Kurdaitcha
Literature of Indigenous Australians
Marn Grook
Message stick
NAIDOC Week
National Indigenous Human Rights Awards
Outstation movement
Religion and mythology
Riji
Seasons
Sacred sites
Smoking ceremony
Songlines
Tjurunga
Torres Strait Islands
Woggabaliri





Languages



Avoidance speech
Australian Aboriginal English
Macro-Gunwinyguan languages
Australian Creole
Language groups
Loanwords into English
Palawa
Pama–Nyungan languages
Placenames
Sign languages
Torres Strait Island languages





Organisations



ATSIC
Aboriginal Medical Service
Aborigines Advancement League
Aborigines Progressive Association
AIATSIS
Australian Aboriginal Progress Association
Australian Aborigines' League
Central Land Council
Media
National Congress of Australia's First Peoples
National Indigenous Council
Northern Land Council
Office of the Registrar of Indigenous Corporations
Politics
TSRA
Reconciliation Australia

Sorry Day







Bushcraft



Boomerang
Buka
Bush bread
Bush tucker
Bush medicine
Coolamon
Dugout canoe
Fibrecraft
Fire-stick farming
Food groups
Humpy
Possum-skin cloak
Scarred tree
Soaks
Spinifex resin
Sweet foods
Waddy
Woomera





Arts



Artifacts
Bark painting
Contemporary visual art
Dance
Didgeridoo
Dreaming
Music

Music groups
Rock


NATSIA Award
Papunya Tula
Sandpainting
Vibe
Visual art
Yininmadyemi





History



Aboriginal Land Rights Act 1976
Caledon Bay crisis
Cummeragunja walk-off
Day of Mourning
Gurindji Strike
Historical figures
History

Prehistory
History wars


King plates
Massacres

Black War


Missions
Native police
Pilbara strike
Pintupi Nine
Tent embassy
Western Australia





Issues



Crime
Health
Land rights

Native title
Protected Area


Media portrayal
Northern Territory National Emergency Response
Self-determination
Stolen Generations

Half-Caste Act


Voting rights

1967 Referendum














v
t
e


Culture of indigenous Oceania




List of resources about traditional arts and culture of Oceania



Art



Ahu
Australia
Austronesia
Cook Islands
Hawaiʻi
kapa (Hawaiʻi)
Lei
magimagi
Māori
moai
New Zealand
nguzu nguzu
Oceania
Papua New Guinea
reimiro
tā moko
tabua
ta'ovala
tapa ["masi" (Fiji), "ngatu" (Tonga), "siapo" (Sāmoa), " ʻuha" (Rotuma)]
tattoo
tēfui
tivaevae





Broad culture



areca nut
kava, " ʻawa" (Hawaii), "yaqona" (Fiji), or "sakau" (Pohnpei)
Kava culture
Lapita
Māori
Polynesia
Polynesian navigation
Sāmoa 'ava ceremony
wood carving





Geo-specific,
general



Australia
Australian Aboriginal astronomy
Austronesia
Caroline Islands, -Pwo
Chatham Islands
Cook Islands
Easter Island
Fiji

Lau Islands
traditions and ceremonies


Guam
Hawaiʻi

Lomilomi massage


Kiribati
French Polynesia's Marquesas Islands
Marshall Islands

Stick charts of


Federated States of Micronesia
Nauru
New Caledonia
New Zealand
Niue
Norfolk Island
Palau
Papua New Guinea
Pitcairn Islands
Sāmoa
Solomon Islands
Tonga
Torres Strait Islands
Tuvalu
Vanuatu
Wallis and Futuna
Yap

navigation
Weriyeng navigation school







Canoes



Aboriginal Dugout
Alingano Maisu
Bangka
Drua
Dugout (boat)
Hawaiʻiloa
Hōkūleʻa
Kaep
Karakoa
Malia (Hawaiian)
Māori migration
Outrigger
Paraw
Polynesian sailing
Proa
Vinta
Waka

list


Walap





Dance



'Aparima
cibi
fara
fire dancing
firewalking
haka
hivinau
hula
kailao
kapa haka
Kiribati
meke
'ote'a
pa'o'a
poi
Rotuma
siva
Tahiti
tāmūrē
tautoga
Tonga
'upa'upa





Festivals



Australia

Garma Festival


Hawaiʻi

Aloha Festivals
Merrie Monarch Festival
World Invitational Hula Festival


Fiji
New Zealand

Pasifika Festival


The Pacific Community

Festival of Pacific Arts


Papua New Guinea





Languages




by area







v
t
e


Languages of Oceania



Sovereign states



Australia
Federated States of Micronesia
Fiji
Kiribati
Marshall Islands
Nauru
New Zealand
Palau
Papua New Guinea
Samoa
Solomon Islands
Tonga
Tuvalu
Vanuatu





Associated states
of New Zealand



Cook Islands
Niue





Dependencies
and other territories



American Samoa
Christmas Island
Cocos (Keeling) Islands
Easter Island
French Polynesia
Guam
Hawaii
New Caledonia
Norfolk Island
Northern Mariana Islands
Pitcairn Islands
Tokelau
Wallis and Futuna








by category

Languages of Oceania






Literature







v
t
e


Literature of Oceania



Sovereign states



Australia
Federated States of Micronesia
Fiji
Kiribati
Marshall Islands
Nauru
New Zealand
Palau
Papua New Guinea
Samoa
Solomon Islands
Tonga
Tuvalu
Vanuatu





Associated states
of New Zealand



Cook Islands
Niue





Dependencies
and other territories



American Samoa
Christmas Island
Cocos (Keeling) Islands
Easter Island
French Polynesia
Guam
Hawaii
New Caledonia
Norfolk Island
Northern Mariana Islands
Pitcairn Islands
Tokelau
Wallis and Futuna








Music



Austral Islands (French Polynesia)
Australia
Austronesia
Cook Islands
Easter Island
Fiji
Guam
Hawaiʻi
Kiribati
Lali
Māori
Melanesia
Micronesia
Federated States of Micronesia
Nauru
New Caledonia
New Zealand
Niue
Northern Mariana Islands
Palau
Papua New Guinea
Polynesia
Sāmoa
Slit drum
Solomon Islands
Tahiti
Tokelau
Tonga
Tuvalu
Vanuatu
Wallis and Futuna





Mythology



Australian Aboriginal
Fijian
Hawaiian
Mangarevan
Maohi
Māori
Melanesian
Menehune
Micronesian
Oceanian legendary creatures
Polynesian
Rapa Nui
Samoan
Tuvaluan
Vanuatuan





Research



Asian American and Pacific Islander Policy Research Consortium
Australian Institute of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Studies





People



Indigneous Australian
Austronesian
Bajau
Chamorro
Chatham Islander (Moriori or Rekohu)
Fijian (iTaukei)
Igorot
Hawaiian (kānaka maoli)
Māori
Marshallese
Melanesian
Micronesian
Negrito
Norfolk Islander
Papuan
Polynesian
Indigenous Polynesian (Mā’ohi)
Rapa Nui
Rotuman
Ryukyuan
Samoan (Tagata Māo‘i)
Tahitian
Taiwanese aborigines
Tongan
Torres Strait Islander
Yami





Religion







v
t
e


Religion in Oceania



Sovereign states



Australia
Federated States of Micronesia
Fiji
Kiribati
Marshall Islands
Nauru
New Zealand
Palau
Papua New Guinea
Samoa
Solomon Islands
Tonga
Tuvalu
Vanuatu





Associated states
of New Zealand



Cook Islands
Niue





Dependencies
and other territories



American Samoa
Christmas Island
Cocos (Keeling) Islands
Easter Island
French Polynesia
Guam
Hawaii
New Caledonia
Norfolk Island
Northern Mariana Islands
Pitcairn Islands
Tokelau
Wallis and Futuna









Not included: Oceanian: cinema, (indigenous) currency, dress, folkore, cuisine. Also see Category:Oceanian culture.







Authority control



GND: 4000178-7
NDL: 00614152











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Indigenous_Australians&oldid=818487581"					Categories: Members of the Unrepresented Nations and Peoples OrganizationIndigenous peoples of AustraliaHidden categories: All articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from September 2016Articles with dead external links from January 2017Articles with permanently dead external linksWebarchive template webcite linksCS1 maint: Explicit use of et al.Wikipedia pending changes protected pages (level 1)Use dmy dates from February 2015Use Australian English from October 2015All Wikipedia articles written in Australian English"Related ethnic groups" needing confirmationArticles using infobox ethnic group with image parametersArticles to be expanded from January 2016All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from March 2016All accuracy disputesArticles with disputed statements from May 2017Articles with unsourced statements from January 2011Articles with unsourced statements from January 2015Articles to be expanded from June 2008All articles to be expandedArticles using small message boxesArticles with unsourced statements from November 2015All articles with vague or ambiguous timeVague or ambiguous time from November 2015Articles with unsourced statements from September 2011Use Australian English from November 2011Wikipedia articles with GND identifiersArticles containing video clips