This article is about the Indian Army since 1947. For the earlier period, see Military history of India.


Indian Army
Bharatiya Sena



Crest of the Indian Army



Founded
1 April 1895; 122 years ago (1895-04-01)


Country
 India


Type
Army


Size
1,237,117 active personnel[1]
990,960 reserve personnel[2]
136 aircraft[3]


Part of
Indian Armed Forces


Headquarters
New Delhi


Motto(s)
"Service Before Self"


Colors
Gold, red and black
            


Anniversaries
15 January – Army Day


Website
indianarmy.nic.in


Commanders


Chief of the Army Staff (COAS)
General Bipin Rawat, UYSM, AVSM, YSM, SM, VSM [4]


Vice Chief of the Army Staff (VCOAS)
Lieutenant General Sarath Chand, UYSM, AVSM, VSM[5]


Notable
commanders
Field Marshal K. M. Cariappa
Field Marshal Sam Manekshaw


Insignia


Flag



Aircraft flown


Helicopter
HAL Rudra


Transport
HAL Dhruv, HAL Chetak, HAL Cheetah and Cheetal


The Indian Army is the land-based branch and the largest component of the Indian Armed Forces. The President of India is the Supreme Commander of the Indian Army,[6] and it is commanded by the Chief of Army Staff (COAS), who is a four-star general. Two officers have been conferred with the rank of field marshal, a five-star rank, which is a ceremonial position of great honour. The Indian Army originated from the armies of the East India Company, which eventually became the British Indian Army, and the armies of the princely states, which finally became the national army after independence. The units and regiments of the Indian Army have diverse histories and have participated in a number of battles and campaigns across the world, earning a large number of battle and theatre honours before and after Independence.[7]
The primary mission of the Indian Army is to ensure national security and national unity, defending the nation from external aggression and internal threats, and maintaining peace and security within its borders. It conducts humanitarian rescue operations during natural calamities and other disturbances, like Operation Surya Hope, and can also be requisitioned by the government to cope with internal threats. It is a major component of national power alongside the Indian Navy and the Indian Air Force.[8] The army has been involved in four wars with neighbouring Pakistan and one with China. Other major operations undertaken by the army include: Operation Vijay, Operation Meghdoot and Operation Cactus. Apart from conflicts, the army has conducted large peace time exercises like Operation Brasstacks and Exercise Shoorveer, and it has also been an active participant in numerous United Nations peacekeeping missions including those in: Cyprus, Lebanon, Congo, Angola, Cambodia, Vietnam, Namibia, El Salvador, Liberia, Mozambique and Somalia.
The Indian Army has a regimental system, but is operationally and geographically divided into seven commands, with the basic field formation being a division. It is an all-volunteer force and comprises more than 80% of the country's active defence personnel. It is the 2nd largest standing army in the world, with 1,237,117[9][10] active troops and 990,960 reserve troops.[2] The army has embarked on an infantry modernisation program known as Futuristic Infantry Soldier As a System (F-INSAS), and is also upgrading and acquiring new assets for its armoured, artillery and aviation branches.[11][12][13]



Contents


1 History

1.1 British Indian Army

1.1.1 World wars
1.1.2 Independence


1.2 Conflicts and operations

1.2.1 First Kashmir War (1947)
1.2.2 Annexation of Hyderabad (1948)
1.2.3 Medical assistance during Korean War (1950–1953)
1.2.4 Annexation of Goa, Daman and Diu (1961)
1.2.5 Sino-Indian War (1962)
1.2.6 Indo-Pakistani War of 1965
1.2.7 1967 Sino-Indian Conflict
1.2.8 Operation against the Naxalites during 1971
1.2.9 Bangladesh Liberation War of 1971
1.2.10 Siachen conflict (1984)
1.2.11 Counter-insurgency activities
1.2.12 Kargil war (1999)
1.2.13 United Nations peacekeeping missions


1.3 Major exercises

1.3.1 Operation Brasstacks
1.3.2 Exercise Ashwamedha
1.3.3 Yudh Abhyas
1.3.4 Exercise Shakti
1.3.5 Exercise Shoorveer
1.3.6 Exercise Rudra Akrosh
1.3.7 Exercise Nomadic Elephant
1.3.8 Exercise Shatrujeet




2 Mission and doctrine
3 Organisation

3.1 Command structure
3.2 Combat arms

3.2.1 Armoured Corps
3.2.2 Mechanized Infantry
3.2.3 Infantry


3.3 Combat Support Arms

3.3.1 Artillery
3.3.2 Corps of Engineers
3.3.3 Corps of Signals
3.3.4 Army Aviation Corps
3.3.5 Corps of Army Air Defence


3.4 Services

3.4.1 Training
3.4.2 Intelligence


3.5 Field formations
3.6 Indian Army forts


4 Personnel

4.1 Rank Structure

4.1.1 Commissioned Officers
4.1.2 Other Ranks


4.2 Uniforms
4.3 Medals and awards
4.4 Female


5 Equipment

5.1 Future developments


6 See also
7 References
8 External links



History[edit]

Indian Army











Headquarters


New Delhi


History and traditions


Indian military history
British Indian Army
Indian National Army


Equipment


Equipment of the Indian Army


Installations


Regiments


Exercises


Exercises


Personnel


Chief of Army Staff
Ranks and insignia
Para Special Forces


This box:

view
talk
edit





British Indian Army[edit]
Main article: British Indian Army
Further information: List of regiments of the Indian Army (1903)




No. 4 (Hazara) Mountain Battery with RML7 pounder "Steel Gun" Mountain Gun in Review Order. Left to right Naick, Havaldar, Subadar (Sikhs) and Gunner (Punjabi Musalman) circa 1895.


A Military Department was created within the Government of the East India Company at Kolkata in the year 1776. Its main function was to sift and record orders relating to the Army that were issued by various Departments of the East India Company for the territories under its control.[14]
With the Charter Act of 1833, the Secretariat of the Government of the East India Company was reorganised into four Departments, including a Military Department. The army in the Presidencies of Bengal, Bombay and Madras functioned as respective Presidency Armies until 1 April 1895 when they were unified into a single Indian Army.[15][16][17][18] For administrative convenience, it was divided into four commands at that point, namely Punjab (including the North West Frontier), Bengal, Madras (including Burma) and Bombay (including Sind, Quetta and Aden).[19]
The British Indian Army was a critical force for the primacy of the British Empire both in India and across the world. Besides maintaining the internal security of the British Raj, the Army fought in many other theatres: the Anglo-Burmese Wars, First and Second Anglo-Sikh Wars, First, Second and Third Anglo-Afghan Wars, First and Second Opium Wars in China, Abyssinia, and the Boxer Rebellion in China.
World wars[edit]
Main articles: Indian Army during World War I and Indian Army during World War II




French postcard depicting the arrival of 15th Sikh Regiment in France during World War I. The postcard reads, "Gentlemen of India marching to chasten the German hooligans."






A Sikh soldier of the 4th Division (the Red Eagles) of the Indian Army, attached to the British Fifth Army in Italy. Holding a captured swastika after the surrender of German forces in Italy, May 1945. Behind him, a fascist inscriptions says "VIVA IL DUCE", "Long live the Duce" (i.e. Mussolini).


In the 20th century, the Indian Army was a crucial adjunct to the British forces in both world wars. 1.3 million Indian soldiers served in World War I (1914–1918) with the Allies, in which 74,187 Indian troops were killed or missing in action.[20] In 1915 there was a mutiny by Indian soldiers in Singapore. The United Kingdom made promises of self-governance to the Indian National Congress in return for its support but reneged on them after the war, following which the Indian Independence movement gained strength.
The "Indianisation" of the British Indian Army began with the formation of the Prince of Wales Royal Indian Military College at Dehradun in March 1912 with the purpose of providing education to the scions of aristocratic and well-to-do Indian families, and to prepare selected Indian boys for admission into the Royal Military College, Sandhurst. Indian officers were given a King's commission after passing out and were posted to one of the eight units selected for Indianisation. Because of the slow pace of Indianisation, with just 69 officers being commissioned between 1918 and 1932, political pressure was applied leading to the formation of the Indian Military Academy in 1932 and greater numbers of officers of Indian origin being commissioned.[21]
In World War II Indian soldiers fought with the Allies. In 1939, British officials had no plan for expansion and training of Indian forces, which comprised about 130,000 men (in addition there were 44,000 men in British units in India in 1939). Their mission was internal security and defence against a possible Soviet threat through Afghanistan. As the war progressed, the size and role of the Indian Army expanded dramatically, and troops were sent to battlefronts as soon as possible. The most serious problem was lack of equipment.[22] Indian units served in Burma, where in 1944–45, five Indian divisions were engaged along with one British and three African divisions. Even larger numbers operated in the Middle East. Some 87,000 Indian soldiers died in the war. By the end of the war it had become the largest volunteer army in history, rising to over 2.5 million men in August 1945.[23][24]
In the African and Middle-Eastern Campaigns, captured Indian troops were given a choice to join the German Army to eventually "liberate" India from Great Britain instead of being sent to POW camps. These men, along with Indian students who were in Germany when the war broke out, made up what was called the Free India Legion. They were originally intended as pathfinders for German forces in Asia, but were soon sent to help guard the Atlantic Wall. Few who were part of the Free India Legion ever saw any combat, and very few were ever stationed outside Europe. At its height the Free India Legion had over 3,000 troops in its ranks.[25]
Indian POWs also joined the Indian National Army which was allied with the Empire of Japan. It was raised by a former colonel of the British Indian Army (Gen) Mohan Singh, but later led by Netaji Subhas Chandra Bose and Rash Bihari Bose. With the fall of Singapore in 1942, about 40,000 Indian soldiers were captured. They were given a choice and over 30,000 joined the Indian National Army. Those who refused became POWs and were mostly shipped to New Guinea.[26] After initial success it was defeated along with the Japanese, but it had a huge impact on the Indian independence movement. Similar organisations were also formed in Germany and Japan. In 1946 Indian sailors revolted against the British in the 1946 British Indian Navy Mutiny.
Independence[edit]
Upon independence and the subsequent Partition of India in 1947, four of the ten Gurkha regiments were transferred to the British Army. The rest of the British Indian Army was divided between the newly created nations of India and Pakistan. The Punjab Boundary Force, which had been formed to help police the Punjab during the partition period, was disbanded,[27] and Headquarters Delhi and East Punjab Command was formed to administer the area. Army Day is celebrated on 15 January every year in India, in recognition of Lieutenant General K. M. Cariappa's taking over as the first Commander-in-Chief of the Indian Army from General Sir Francis Butcher, the last British Commander-in-Chief of India, on 15 January 1949.
Conflicts and operations[edit]
Main article: Military operations of India
First Kashmir War (1947)[edit]
Main articles: Indo-Pakistani War of 1947 and Kashmir conflict
Immediately after independence, tensions between India and Pakistan began to boil over, and the first of three full-scale wars between the two nations broke out over the then princely state of Kashmir. The Maharaja of Kashmir wanted to have a standstill position. Since Kashmir was a Muslim majority state, Pakistan wanted to make Kashmir a Pakistani territory. As a result, Pakistan invaded Kashmir on 22 October 1947, causing Maharaja Hari Singh to look to India, specifically to Lord Mountbatten of Burma, the governor general, for help. He signed the Instrument of Accession to India on 26 October 1947. Indian troops were airlifted to Srinagar from 27 October dawn onwards.[28] This contingent included General Thimayya who distinguished himself in the operation and in the years that followed became a Chief of the Indian Army. An intense war was waged across the state and former comrades found themselves fighting each other. Pakistan suffered significant losses. Its forces were stopped on the line formed which is now called LOC (Line of Control).[citation needed] An uneasy UN sponsored peace returned by the end of 1948 with Indian and Pakistani soldiers facing each other directly on the Line of Control, which has since divided Indian-held Kashmir from Pakistan-held Kashmir. A number of UN resolutions (38–47) were passed calling for a plebiscite to be held in Kashmir to determine accession to India or Pakistan only after Pakistan withdrew its army from Kashmir.[29] A precondition to the resolution was for Pakistan and India to return to a state of "as was" prior to the conflict. Pakistan would withdraw all tribesmen and Pakistani nationals brought in to fight in Kashmir. With Pakistan refusing to pull back there could be no further dialogue on fulfilling the UN resolution.[30][29] Tensions between India and Pakistan, largely over Kashmir, have never been entirely eliminated.
Annexation of Hyderabad (1948)[edit]




Major General El Edroos (at right) offers his surrender of the Hyderabad State Forces to Major General (later Army Chief) J.N. Chaudhuri at Secunderabad


Main article: Operation Polo
After the partition of India, the State of Hyderabad, a princely state under the rule of a Nizam, chose to remain independent. The Nizam, refused to accede his state to the Union of India. The following stand-off between the Government of India and the Nizam ended on 12 September 1948 when India's then deputy Prime Minister Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel ordered Indian troops to secure the state. During five days of fighting, the Indian Army, backed by an Indian Air Force squadron of Hawker Tempest aircraft, routed the Hyderabad State forces. Five Indian Army infantry battalions and one armoured squadron were engaged in the operation. The following day, the State of Hyderabad was proclaimed as a part of the Union of India. Major General Joyanto Nath Chaudhuri, who led the Operation Polo and accepted the surrender of the Nizam's forces on 18 September 1948, was appointed the military governor of Hyderabad (1948–1949) to restore law and order.
Medical assistance during Korean War (1950–1953)[edit]
Main article: Korean War
During the Korean War, India sent the 60th Indian (Parachute) Field Ambulance unit to aid the UN troops fighting against the Chinese and North Korean invasion of South Korea, though they decided against sending combat forces. The 60th PFA was included in the 1st Commonwealth Division. In the aftermath of the war, an Indian infantry brigade formed the Custodian Force of India as some of the soldiers were also sent to Korea as part of the Neutral Nations Repatriation Committee to assist in the exchange of prisoners of war. The NNRC was commanded by Lt Gen KS Thimayya.[citation needed]
Annexation of Goa, Daman and Diu (1961)[edit]
Main article: Annexation of Goa
Even though the British and French vacated all their colonial possessions in the Indian subcontinent, Portugal refused to relinquish control of its Indian colonies of Goa, Daman and Diu. After repeated attempts by India to negotiate with Portugal for the territory were spurned by Portuguese prime minister and dictator, António de Oliveira Salazar, India launched Operation Vijay on 12 December 1961 to take Goa from the Portuguese. A small contingent of its troops entered Goa, Daman, and Diu to capture and secure the territory. After a brief conflict, in which 31 Portuguese soldiers were killed, the Portuguese Navy frigate NRP Afonso de Albuquerque destroyed, and over 3,000 Portuguese captured, Portuguese General Manuel António Vassalo e Silva surrendered to Maj Gen KP Candeth (Kunhiraman Palat Kandoth) of the Indian Army, after twenty-six hours. Goa, Daman and Diu became a part of the Republic of India.
Sino-Indian War (1962)[edit]
Main article: Sino-Indian War
The cause of this war was a dispute over the sovereignty of the widely separated Aksai Chin and Arunachal Pradesh border regions. Aksai Chin, claimed by India to belong to Kashmir, and by China to be part of Xinjiang, contains an important road link that connects the Chinese regions of Tibet and Xinjiang. China's construction of this road was one of the triggers of the conflict.
Small-scale clashes between Indian and Chinese forces broke out as India insisted on the disputed McMahon Line being regarded as the international border between the two countries. Chinese troops claimed not to have retaliated to the cross-border firing by Indian troops, despite sustaining losses.[31] China's suspicion of India's involvement in Tibet created more rifts between the two countries.[32]
In 1962, the Indian Army was ordered to move to the Thag La ridge located near the border between Bhutan and Arunachal Pradesh and about three miles (5 km) north of the disputed McMahon Line. Meanwhile, Chinese troops had also made incursions into Indian-held territory, and tensions between the two reached a new high when Indian forces discovered a road constructed by China in Aksai Chin. After a series of failed negotiations, the People's Liberation Army attacked Indian Army positions at the Thag La ridge. This move by China caught India by surprise and by 12 October, Nehru gave orders for the Chinese to be expelled from Aksai Chin. However, poor co-ordination among various divisions of the Indian Army, and the late decision to mobilise the Indian Air Force in vast numbers, gave China a crucial tactical and strategic advantage over India. On 20 October, Chinese soldiers attacked India in both the North-West and North-Eastern parts of the border and captured vast portions of Aksai Chin and Arunachal Pradesh.
As the fighting moved beyond disputed territories, China called on the Indian government to negotiate, however India remained determined to regain lost territory. With no peaceful agreement in sight, China unilaterally withdrew its forces from Arunachal Pradesh. The reasons for the withdrawal are disputed with India claiming various logistical problems for China and diplomatic support from the United States, while China stated that it still held territory it had staked diplomatic claim over. The dividing line between the Indian and Chinese forces was named the Line of Actual Control.
The poor decisions made by India's military commanders and, its political leadership, raised several questions. The Henderson-Brooks & Bhagat committee was soon set up by the Government of India to determine the causes of the poor performance of the Indian Army. Its report criticised the decision not to allow the Indian Air Force to target Chinese transport lines out of fear of a Chinese aerial counter-attack on Indian civilian areas. Much of the blame was also targeted at the incompetence of then-Defence Minister, Krishna Menon who resigned from his post soon after the war ended. Despite frequent calls for its release, the Henderson-Brooks report still remains classified.[33] Neville Maxwell has written an account of the war.[34]
Indo-Pakistani War of 1965[edit]
Main article: Indo-Pakistani War of 1965
A second confrontation with Pakistan took place in 1965. Although the war is described as inconclusive, India had the better of the war and was a clear winner in tactical and strategic terms.[35][36][37] Pakistani President Ayub Khan launched Operation Gibraltar in August 1965, during which several Pakistani paramilitary troops infiltrated into Indian-administered Kashmir and attempt to ignite an anti-India agitation in Jammu and Kashmir. Pakistani leaders believed that India, which was still recovering from the disastrous Sino-Indian War, would be unable to deal with a military thrust and a Kashmiri rebellion. India reacted swiftly and launched a counter offensive on Pakistan. Pakistan launched Operation Grand Slam in reply on 1 September, invading India's Chamb-Jaurian sector. In retaliation, the Indian Army launched a major offensive throughout its border with Pakistan, with Lahore as its prime target.




The Indian Army captured a Police Station in Lahore, Pakistan after winning the Battle of Burki in the 1965 War.[38] It was left by them after the signing of the Tashkent Declaration.


Initially, the Indian Army met with considerable success in the northern sector. After launching prolonged artillery barrages against Pakistan, India was able to capture three important mountain positions in Kashmir. By 9 September, the Indian Army had made considerable in-roads into Pakistan. India had its largest haul of Pakistani tanks when the offensive of Pakistan's 1st Armoured Division was blunted at the Battle of Asal Uttar, which took place on 10 September near Khemkaran.[39] The biggest tank battle of the war came in the form of the Battle of Chawinda, the largest tank battle in history after World War II. Pakistan's defeat at the Battle of Asal Uttar hastened the end of the conflict.[39]
At the time of ceasefire declaration, India reported casualties of about 3,000 killed. On the other hand, it was estimated that more than 4,000 Pakistani soldiers were killed in the battle.[40][41][42] About 471 Pakistani tanks were either destroyed or captured by India. India lost a total of 128 tanks during the conflict.[39][43] The decision to return to pre-war positions, following the Tashkent Declaration, caused an outcry among the polity[who?] in New Delhi. It was widely believed that India's decision to accept the ceasefire was due to political factors, and not military, since it was facing considerable pressure from the United States and the UN to stop hostilities.[44]
1967 Sino-Indian Conflict[edit]
Main article: Cho La incident
The 1967 Sino-Indian skirmish, also known as the Cho La incident, was a military conflict between Indian troops and members of the Chinese People's Liberation Army who had infiltrated on 1 October 1967 in Sikkim, then a protectorate of India. On 10 October, both sides clashed again. Defence Minister Sardar Swaran Singh assured the Indian people that the government was taking care of developments along the border. In the aftermath of the conflict Indian losses were 88 killed, and 163 wounded, while Chinese casualties were 300 killed and 450 wounded in Nathula, and 40 in Chola.[45] The Chinese Army left Sikkim after being defeated by Indian troops.[46][47][48]
Operation against the Naxalites during 1971[edit]
Under the supervision of Indira Gandhi during the president's rule in 1971, the Indian Army and the Indian police launched Operation Steeplechase, a gigantic "counter-insurgency" operation against the Naxalites, which resulted in the death of hundreds of Naxalites and the imprisonment of more than 20,000 suspects and cadres including senior leaders.[49] The army was also assisted by a brigade of para commandos and the Indian paramilitary. The operation was organised in October 1969, and Lieutenant General J.F.R. Jacob was enjoined by Govind Narain, the home secretary of India, that "there should be no publicity and no records" and Jacob's request to be presented with written orders was also repudiated by Sam Manekshaw.[50]
Bangladesh Liberation War of 1971[edit]
Main article: Indo-Pakistani War of 1971
See also: Battle of Longewala, Battle of Hilli, and Battle of Basantar




Pakistan's Lt. Gen. A. A. K. Niazi signing the instrument of surrender in Dhaka on 16 Dec' 1971, in the presence of India's Lt. Gen. Aurora. Standing behind them are officers of India's Army, Navy and Air Force.


An independence movement broke out in East Pakistan which was crushed by Pakistani forces. Due to large-scale atrocities against them, thousands of Bengalis took refuge in neighbouring India causing a major refugee crisis there. In early 1971, India declared its full-support for the Bengali rebels, known as Mukti Bahini, and Indian agents were extensively involved in covert operations to aid them.[citation needed]
On 20 November 1971, the Indian Army moved the 14 Punjab Battalion 45 Cavalry into Garibpur, a strategically important town near India's border with East Pakistan, and successfully captured it. The following day, more clashes took place between Indian and Pakistani forces. Wary of India's growing involvement in the Bengali rebellion, the Pakistan Air Force (PAF) launched a preemptive strike on 10 Indian air bases at: Srinagar, Jammu, Pathankot, Amritsar, Agra, Adampur, Jodhpur, Jaisalmer, Uttarlai and Sirsa at 17:45 hours on 3 December. However, this aerial offensive failed to accomplish its stated objectives, and gave India an excuse to declare a full-scale war against Pakistan the same day. By midnight, the Indian Army, accompanied by the Indian Air Force, launched a major three-pronged assault into East Pakistan. The Indian Army won several battles on the eastern front including the decisive battle of Hilli, which was the only front where the Pakistani Army was able to build up considerable resistance. The operation also included a battalion-level airborne operation on Tangail, which resulted in the capitulation of all resistance within five days.[51] India's massive early gains were attributed largely to the speed and flexibility with which Indian armoured divisions moved across East Pakistan.[52]




Indian Army personnel celebrate victory at the end Battle of Basantar on top of a knocked out Pakistani Patton tank.


Pakistan launched a counter-attack against India on the western front. On 4 December 1971, the A company of the 23rd Battalion of India's Punjab Regiment detected and intercepted the movement of the 51st Infantry Brigade of the Pakistani Army near Ramgarh, Rajasthan. The battle of Longewala ensued during which the A company, though being outnumbered, thwarted the Pakistani advance until the Indian Air Force directed its fighters to engage the Pakistani tanks. By the time the battle had ended, 38 Pakistani tanks and 100 armoured vehicles were either destroyed or abandoned. About 200 Pakistani troops were killed in action during the battle while only two Indian soldiers lost their lives. Pakistan suffered another major defeat on the western front during the battle of Basantar which was fought from 4 December to the 16th. By the end of the battle, about 66 Pakistani tanks were destroyed and 40 more were captured. In return, Pakistani forces were able to destroy only 11 Indian tanks. None of the many Pakistani offensives on the western front materialised.[53] By 16 December, Pakistan had lost sizeable territory on both the eastern and western fronts.
Under the command of Lt. General J.S. Arora, the three corps of the Indian Army, which had invaded East Pakistan, entered Dhaka and forced Pakistani forces to surrender on 16 December 1971, one day after the conclusion of the battle of Basantar. After Pakistan's Lt General A A K Niazi signed the Instrument of Surrender, India took more than 90,000 Pakistani prisoners of war. By the time of the signing, 11,000 Pakistani soldiers were killed-in-action while India suffered 3,500 battle-related deaths.[41] In addition, Pakistan lost 220 tanks during the battle compared to India's 69.[54]
In 1972, the Simla Agreement was signed between the two countries and tensions simmered. However, there were occasional spurts in diplomatic tensions which culminated in increased military vigilance on both sides.
Siachen conflict (1984)[edit]
Main article: Siachen conflict




A memorial at the headquarters of the Dogra Regiment of the Indian Army in remembrance of members of the regiment who died or served in the Siachen Conflict


The Siachen Glacier, though a part of the Kashmir region, was not officially demarcated on maps prepared and exchanged between the two sides in 1947. As a consequence, prior to the 1980s, neither India nor Pakistan maintained any permanent military presence in the region. However, Pakistan began conducting and allowing a series of mountaineering expeditions to the glacier beginning in the 1950s. By the early 1980s, the Government of Pakistan was granting special expedition permits to mountaineers and United States Army maps deliberately showed Siachen as a part of Pakistan.[citation needed] This practice gave rise to the contemporary meaning of the term oropolitics.
India, possibly irked by these developments, launched Operation Meghdoot in April 1984. An entire battalion of the Kumaon Regiment was airlifted to the glacier. Pakistani forces responded quickly and clashes between the two followed. The Indian Army secured the strategic Sia La and Bilafond La mountain passes, and by 1985 more than 1,000 square miles (2,600 km2) of territory 'claimed' by Pakistan was under Indian control.[55] The Indian Army continues to control all the Siachen Glacier and its tributary glaciers. Pakistan made several unsuccessful attempts to regain control over Siachen. In late 1987, Pakistan mobilised about 8,000 troops and garrisoned them near Khapalu, aiming to capture Bilafond La.[56] However, they were repulsed by Indian Army personnel guarding Bilafond. During the battle, about 23 Indian soldiers lost their lives, while more than 150 Pakistani troops perished.[57] Further unsuccessful attempts to reclaim positions were launched by Pakistan in 1990, 1995, 1996 and 1999, most notably in Kargil that year.
India continues to maintain a strong military presence in the region, despite extremely inhospitable conditions. The conflict over Siachen is regularly cited as an example of mountain warfare.[58][59] The highest peak in the Siachen glacier region, Saltoro Kangri, could be viewed as strategically important for India because of its immense altitude which could enable the Indian forces to monitor some Pakistani or Chinese movements in the immediate area.[60] Maintaining control over Siachen poses several logistical challenges for the Indian Army. Several infrastructure projects were constructed in the region, including a helipad at 21,000 feet (6,400 m) above the sea level.[61] In 2004, the Indian Army was spending an estimated US$2 million a month to support its personnel stationed in the region.[62]
Counter-insurgency activities[edit]
The Indian Army has played a crucial role in the past, fighting insurgents and terrorists within the nation. The army launched Operation Blue Star and Operation Woodrose in the 1980s to combat Sikh insurgents. The army, along with some paramilitary forces, has the prime responsibility of maintaining law and order in the troubled Jammu and Kashmir region, led specifically by the Northern Command. The Indian Army also sent a contingent to Sri Lanka in 1987 as a part of the Indian Peace Keeping Force. Allied with the work of the Northern Command and its peace time activities is "North Tech Symposium", an annual event, with the aim of providing a viable platform for knowledge diffusion on relevant, contemporary military technologies available as commercial off the shelf (COTS) worldwide.[63][64][65] The Indian Army also successfully conducted Operation Golden Bird in 1995 for counter-insurgency in northeast India.[66]
Kargil war (1999)[edit]
Main article: Kargil War
In 1998, India carried out nuclear tests and a few days later, Pakistan responded with more nuclear tests giving both countries nuclear deterrence capability, although India had tested one hydrogen bomb which Pakistan lacked. Diplomatic tensions eased after the Lahore Summit was held in 1999. However, the sense of optimism was short-lived since in mid-1999 Pakistani paramilitary forces and Kashmiri insurgents captured the deserted, but strategic, Himalayan heights in the Kargil district of India. These had been vacated by the Indian army during the onset of the inhospitable winter and were supposed to be reoccupied in spring. The regular Pakistani troops who took control of these areas received important support, both in the form of arms and supplies, from Pakistan. Some of the heights under their control, which also included the Tiger Hill, overlooked the vital Srinagar-Leh Highway (NH 1A), Batalik and Dras.
Once the scale of the Pakistani incursion was realised, the Indian Army quickly mobilised about 200,000 troops and Operation Vijay was launched. However, since the heights were under Pakistani control, India was at a clear strategic disadvantage. From their observation posts, the Pakistani forces had a clear line-of-sight to lay down indirect artillery fire on NH 1A, inflicting heavy casualties on the Indians.[67] This was a serious problem for the Indian Army as the highway was its main logistical and supply route.[68] Thus, the Indian Army's first priority was to recapture peaks that were in the immediate vicinity of NH 1A. This resulted in Indian troops first targeting the Tiger Hill and Tololing complex in Dras.[69] This was soon followed by more attacks on the Batalik-Turtok sub-sector which provided access to Siachen Glacier. Point 4590, which had the nearest view of the NH 1A, was successfully recaptured by Indian forces on 14 June.[70]




Indian soldiers after winning a battle during the Kargil War


Though most of the posts in the vicinity of the highway were cleared by mid-June, some parts of it near Drass witnessed sporadic shelling until the end of the war. Once the NH 1A area was cleared, the Indian Army turned to driving the invading force back across the Line of Control. The Battle of Tololing, among other assaults, slowly tilted the combat in India's favour. Nevertheless, some posts put up a stiff resistance, including Tiger Hill (Point 5140) that fell only later in the war. As the operation was fully under way, about 250 artillery guns were brought in to clear the infiltrators in the posts that were in the line-of-sight. At many vital points, neither artillery nor air power could dislodge the outposts manned by the Pakistan soldiers, who were out of visible range. The Indian Army mounted some direct frontal ground assaults which were slow and took a heavy toll given the steep ascent that had to be made on peaks as high as 18,000 feet (5,500 m). Two months into the conflict, Indian troops had slowly retaken most of the ridges they had lost;[71][72] according to official count, an estimated 75%–80% of the intruded area, and nearly all high ground, was back under Indian control.
Following the Washington accord on 4 July, where Sharif agreed to withdraw Pakistani troops, most of the fighting came to a gradual halt, but some Pakistani forces remained in positions on the Indian side of the LOC. In addition, the United Jihad Council (an umbrella for all extremist groups) rejected Pakistan's plan for a climb-down, instead deciding to fight on.[73] The Indian Army launched its final attacks in the last week of July; as soon as the Drass sub-sector had been cleared of Pakistani forces, the fighting ceased on 26 July. The day has since been marked as Kargil Vijay Diwas (Kargil Victory Day) in India. By the end of the war, India had resumed control of all the territory south and east of the Line of Control, as was established in July 1972 per the Shimla Accord. By the time all hostilities had ended, the number of Indian soldiers killed during the conflict stood at 527,[74] while more than 700 regular members of the Pakistani Army were killed.[75] The number of Islamist fighters, also known as Mujahideen, killed by Indian Armed Forces during the conflict stood at about 3,000.[citation needed]
United Nations peacekeeping missions[edit]




An Indian Army officer with a local at the UN mission in Congo, 2013


Main article: Indian Army United Nations peacekeeping missions
India has been the largest troop contributor to UN missions since its inception. So far India has taken part in 43 Peacekeeping missions with a total contribution exceeding 160,000 troops and a significant number of police personnel having been deployed. In 2014 India is the third largest troop contributor [TCC] with 7,860 personnel deployed with ten UN Peacekeeping Missions of which 995 are police personnel, including the first Female Formed Police Unit under the UN.[76] The Indian Army has undertaken numerous UN peacekeeping missions.[77] As of 30 June 2014, 157 Indians have been killed during such operations.[78] The Indian army has also provided paramedical units to facilitate the withdrawal of the sick and wounded.
Major exercises[edit]
See also: List of exercises of the Indian Army for a list of Exercises of the Indian Army.
Operation Brasstacks[edit]
Operation Brasstacks was launched by the Indian Army in November 1986 to simulate a full-scale war on its western border. The exercise was the largest ever conducted in India and comprised nine infantry, three mechanised, three armoured and one air assault division, and included three independent armoured brigades. Amphibious assault exercises were also conducted with the Indian Navy. Brasstacks also allegedly incorporated nuclear attack drills. It led to tensions with Pakistan and a subsequent rapprochement in mid-1987.[79][80]
Exercise Ashwamedha[edit]
Indian Army tested its network centric warfare capabilities in the exercise Ashwamedha. The exercise was held in the Thar desert, in which over 300,000 troops participated.[81] Asymmetric warfare capability was also tested by the Indian Army during the exercise.[82]
Yudh Abhyas[edit]
Main article: India–United_States relations § Military relations


Play media


Yudh Abhyas 2012 – US and Indian Army military exercise Trailer.


Exercise Yudh Abhyas is part of an ongoing series of joint exercises between the Indian and United States Armies since 2005, agreed upon under the New Framework of the India-US Defence Relationship. Commencing at the platoon level, the exercise has graduated to a command post (CPX) and field training exercise (FTX).
The seventh edition of Yudh Abhyas is currently underway since 5 March 2012 in two locations under the South Western Command. The US Army contingent is from the US Army Pacific (USARPAC), part of the United States Pacific Command (USPACOM). The Command Post Exercise has an engineer brigade headquarters with its planners from both sides, while the Field Training Exercise comprises troops of the 2nd Squadron 14th US Cavalry Regiment from the 25th Infantry Division, Hawaii, along with a platoon of Strykers, and a similar sized Indian Army contingent of mechanised infantry. The event is all the more interesting as a number of key surveillance, communications and Improvised Explosive Devices detection and neutralisation technologies, available to both sides have been fielded in the exercise.[83]




U.S Army soldiers familiarise themselves with the latest INSAS 1B1 during exercise Yudh Abhyas 2015






Indian army infantry vehicles during Yudh Abhyas exercises


An Indian-born US Army linguist and translator assigned to the John F. Kennedy Special Warfare Center and School, explains weapons-range safety procedures to Indian Army soldiers with the 99th Mountain Brigade before they fire American machine guns 4 May 2013, at Fort Bragg, N.C. They are part of Yudh Abhyas 2013, the latest annual training event between the armies of India and the United States, sponsored by US Army Pacific. [84] [85]
The eighth edition of Yudh Abhyas was conducted with The Indian army's 99th Mountain Brigade and the 1st Bde. Combat Team, 82nd Airborne Division at Fort Bragg, N.C. Other units represented were the 3rd Squadron, 73rd Cavalry Regiment, from the US forces, and from India, the 2nd Battalion, 5th Gurka Rifles; the 50th Independent Para Bde.; and the 54th Engineers Regt. The U.S. Army-Pacific sponsored a bilateral training exercise with the Indian army, 3–17 May 2013, that focused on the two countries' cultures, weapons training and tactics.[86][87]
Exercise Shakti[edit]
Exercise Shakti is an ongoing series of joint exercises between the Indian and French armies since 2011. Exercise Shakti is conducted to practice and validate anti-terrorist operations and drills in snowbound and mountainous areas. The second joint military exercise between the two countries was held in September 2013 with the first one being held in India in October 2011. The theme of the exercise is to conduct platoon level joint counter insurgency operations in high altitude mountainous terrain under the UN Charter, thus emphasising the shared concerns of both countries about global terrorism. An added aim of the exercise is to qualitatively enhance knowledge of each other's military procedures thus increasing the scope for interoperability and better responsiveness to a common threat. The twelve-day exercise with the French Army is scheduled to be conducted in multiple modules in order to achieve complete integration between the two contingents at every stage.[88][89]
Exercise Shoorveer[edit]
On first week of April 2012 the Indian Army launched a massive summer exercise in the Rajasthan desert involving over 50,000 troops and several hundred artillery guns and infantry combat vehicles as part of its efforts to shore up its battle worthiness on the western front with Pakistan. The exercise, code-named "Shoorveer", was being conducted by the Jaipur-based South Western Command and ended in the first week of May. This was the largest ever exercise conducted by Indian army since 1947. The collective training started with honing of basic battle procedures and tactical drills at a tactical level.
A number of field firings were carried out to check the accuracy and lethality of the weapon systems. A large number of innovations and modifications carried out by units and formations to enhance combat power were tested in the field. The troops built on the training momentum gradually, with increased combat tempo to set the stage for a major joint army-air force exercise in the later part of the exercise.[90]
Exercise Rudra Akrosh[edit]
In May 2012 the Indian army started testing the preparedness level of its units and to validate new age technology, battle concepts, organizational structures and networked operations. The Western Army Command conducted its summer training exercises in Punjab and Jammu and Kashmir. Code named Exercise Rudra Akrosh, the war games were aimed at validating the operational and transformational effectiveness of various formations under the Western Army Command. The exercise which entered its culmination phase was also witnessed by Western Army Commander Lt General S R Ghosh. It included various summer training manoeuvres where approximately 20,000 troops tested battle skills with state-of-the-art weapons systems in complete integration with the fighter and transport aircraft provided by the Indian Air Force. Besides interacting with the soldiers and officers co-ordinating the war games, Lt Gen Ghosh witnessed various battle manoeuvres by infantry troops, mechanised infantry, tanks, artillery, Heli-borne troops and surveillance equipment. Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) and attack helicopters were also co-opted in the operational scenario. Recently, the Jaipur-based South Western Command—also known as Sapta Shakti command—conducted its summer war games with more than 50,000 troops, latest weaponry and air assets.[91]
Exercise Nomadic Elephant[edit]
The Indian Army has been conducting training exercises with the Mongolian Army. The first exercise took place in 2004, and these exercises have since been taking place every year. In 2012, the exercise took place in Belgaum, and in June 2013, they were held in Mongolia. The aim of the exercises is to enhance counter insurgency and counter terrorism operations, and conduct peacekeeping operations under the mandate of the United Nation.[92][93]
Exercise Shatrujeet[edit]
In April 2016, the Indian Army conducted a major exercise called "Shatrujeet" with the elite Mathura-based Strike Corps in the desert area of the Mahajan field firing range in Rajasthan. The capability to strike deep into enemy territory in an integrated air-land battle environment was evaluated. The focus of the exercise was to achieve co-ordination among all the forces in a nuclear, biological, chemical warfare scenario so as to deliver a quick, lethal strike against the enemy. The operationally-oriented exercise was focused on validating integrated theatre battle fighting concepts by incorporating new age technologies, weapons platforms and systems, as well as long-range precision targeting vectors. This exercise is in the last phase and on 22 April, Army Chief D S Suhag is expected to review the exercise.[94][95][96]
Mission and doctrine[edit]




The Indian Army began inducting women officers in 1992.[97] A female Indian Army officer briefing Russian soldiers during a joint exercise.



Initially, the army's main objective was to defend the nation's frontiers. However, over the years, the army has also taken up the responsibility of providing internal security, especially against insurgencies in Kashmir and the Northeast. The current combat doctrine of the Indian Army is based on effectively utilising holding formations and strike formations. In the case of an attack, the holding formations would contain the enemy and strike formations would counter-attack to neutralise enemy forces. In the case of an Indian attack, the holding formations would pin enemy forces down, whilst the strike formations attack at a point of Indian choosing. The Indian Army is large enough to devote several corps to the strike role. Currently, the army is also looking at enhancing its special forces capabilities. With the role of India increasing, and the requirement for protection of India's interests in far-off countries become important, the Indian Army and Indian Navy are jointly planning to set up a marine brigade.[98][needs update]
Organisation[edit]
The troops are organized into 40 Divisions in 14 Corps.[99] Army headquarters is located in the Indian capital, New Delhi, and it is under the overall command of the Chief of Army Staff (COAS).
Command structure[edit]
The army operates six operational commands and one training command.[100] Each command is headed by General Officer Commanding-in-Chief with the rank of Lieutenant General. Each command is directly affiliated to the Army HQ in New Delhi. These commands are given below in their correct order of raising, location (city) and their commanders. There is also the Army Training Command abbreviated as ARTRAC. Besides these, army officers may head tri-service commands such as the Strategic Forces Command and Andaman and Nicobar Command, as well as institutions like Integrated Defence Staff.


Command Insignia
Command Name
Headquarters
Commander
Subordinate Unit(s)



Headquarters, Indian Army
New Delhi

50th Independent Parachute Brigade – Agra



Central Command
Lucknow
Lt General Balwant Singh Negi[101]
I Corps — Currently assigned to South Western Command



Eastern Command
Kolkata
Lt General Abhay Krishna[102]


23rd Infantry Division – Ranchi
III Corps – Dimapur

2nd Mountain Division – Dibrugarh
57th Mountain Division – Leimakhong
56th Mountain Division – Zakhama


IV Corps – Tezpur, Assam

71st Mountain Division – Missamari
5th Mountain Division – Bomdila
21st Mountain Division – Rangia


XXXIII Corps – Siliguri, West Bengal

17th Mountain Division – Gangtok
20th Mountain Division – Binnaguri
27th Mountain Division – Kalimpong


XVII Corps** – Panagarh, West Bengal[103][104]

59th Infantry Division –Panagarh
72 Infantry Division** – Pathankot







Northern Command
Udhampur
Lt General Devraj Anbu[105][106]


XIV Corps, – Leh

3rd Infantry Division – Leh
8th Mountain Division – Dras


XV Corps, – Srinagar

19th Infantry Division – Baramulla,
28th Mountain Division – Gurez


XVI Corps – Nagrota

10th Infantry Division – Akhnoor
25th Infantry Division – Rajauri
39th Infantry Division – Yol
10 Artillery brigade







Southern Command
Pune
Lt General Rabindranath Soni[107]


41st Artillery Division – Pune
XII Corps – Jodhpur

4th Armoured Brigade
340th Mechanised Brigade
11th Infantry Division – Ahmedabad
12th Infantry Division (converting to RAPID) – Jodhpur


XXI Corps – Bhopal

31st Armoured Division – Jhansi
36th RAPID – Sagar
54th Infantry Division – Hyderabad/Secunderabad
475th Engineering Brigade







South Western Command
Jaipur
Lt General Cherish Mathson[108]


42nd Artillery Division – Jaipur
I Corps – Mathura

4th Infantry Division – Allahabad
6th Mountain Division – Bareilly
33rd Armoured Division – Hisar Military Station


X Corps – Bhatinda

16th Infantry Division – Sri Ganganagar
18th RAPID – Kota
24th RAPID – Bikaner
6th Independent Armoured Brigade
615th Independent Air Defence Brigade
471st Engineering Brigade







Western Command
Chandigarh
Lt General Surinder Singh[109][110][111]


40th Artillery Division – Ambala
II Corps, – Ambala

1st Armoured Division – Patiala
14th RAPID at Dehradun
22nd Infantry Division – Meerut
474th Engineering Brigade
612th Mechanised Independent Air Defence Brigade


IX Corps, – Yol

26th Infantry Division – Jammu
29th Infantry Division – Pathankot
2nd Independent Armoured Brigade
3rd Independent Armoured Brigade


XI Corps, headquartered at Jalandhar

7th Infantry Division – Firozpur
9th Infantry Division – Meerut
15th Infantry Division – Amritsar
23rd Armoured Brigade
55th Mechanised Brigade







Army Training Command
Shimla
Lt General Manoj Mukund Naravane[112]



Note: ** = Currently being raised




Indian Army Structure (click to enlarge)


Combat arms[edit]




An Indian Army soldier during an exercise in Alaska.






An Indian Army soldier during an exercise






Soldiers of the Sikh Light Infantry.


Main article: List of regiments of the Indian Army
Not to be confused with the Field Corps mentioned above, the corps mentioned below are the functional divisions entrusted with specific pan-Army tasks. The Indian Territorial Army has battalions affiliated with different infantry regiments and some department units which are either from the Corps of Engineers, Army Medical Corps or the Army Service Corps. They serve as a part-time reserve. On 4 June 2017, the chief of staff announced that the Army was planning to open combat positions to women, who would first be appointed to positions in the military police.[citation needed]


Name
Director General
Center


Armoured Corps

The Armoured Corps Centre and School, Ahmednagar


Regiment of Artillery
Lt General P K Srivastava, VSM[113]
The School of Artillery, Devlali near Nasik


Corps of Army Air Defence 
Lt General A K Sahgal, VSM[114]
Gopalpur, Odisha.


Army Aviation Corps
Lt General P K Bharali, VSM[115]
Combat Army Aviation Training School, Nasik.


Corps of Engineers

The College of Military Engineering, Dapodi, Pune
Madras Engineer Group, Bangalore
Bengal Engineer Group, Roorkee
Bombay Engineer Group, Khadki near Pune


Corps of Signals

Military College of Telecommunication Engineering (MCTE), Mhow
Two Signal Training Centres at Jabalpur and Goa.


Mechanised Infantry

Ahmednagar


Infantry




Ordnance Corps
Lt General Amit Sarin AVSM, SM, VSM, ADC[116]
Secunderabad


Armoured Corps[edit]
There are 65 Armoured Regiments in the Indian Army (including the PBG and 61st Cavalry). These include the following historic regiments dating back to the nineteenth century or earlier: 1st (Skinner's) Horse, the 2nd Lancers (Gardner's Horse), the 3rd Cavalry, the 4th (Hodson's) Horse, the 7th Light Cavalry, the 8th Light Cavalry, the 9th (Deccan) Horse, the 14th (Scinde) Horse, the 17th (Poona) Horse, the 15th Lancers, the 16th Light Cavalry, the 18th Cavalry, the 20th Lancers and the 21st (Central India) Horse. A substantial number of additional units designated as either "Cavalry" or "Armoured" Regiments have been raised since Independence.
Mechanized Infantry[edit]
The Mechanized Infantry is the newest Combat Arm of the Indian Army. Often referred to as "tomorrow's arm in today's Army", it is formed of two Regiments; The Brigade of the Guards and Mechanized Infantry Regiment and comprises 48 Mechanized Infantry Battalions in all. The brain-child of raising of this arm was that of Gen Krishnaswamy Sundarji, PVSM (28 April 1930 – 8 February 1999), who was the Chief of Army Staff of the Indian Army from 1986 to 1988. During the late 70s, as part of Indian Army modernization, there was an urgent need to re-calibrate the Indian Mechanized Forces by forming of Mechanized Infantry units to further the shock-action, fire-power, flexibility and mobility of Armoured formations to include ground-holding ability. Thus, the Mechanized Infantry Regiment was born by careful selection of existing Infantry battalions based on operational performance. As the need for more Mechanized battalions grew, the elite Brigade of The Guards were also converted to the Mechanized profile. The two Regiments along with the Armoured Corps form part of the Indian Army's elite "Mechanized Forces".
Infantry[edit]




Soldiers of the 99th Mountain Brigade's 2nd Battalion, 5 Gorkha Rifles, during Yudh Abhyas 2013


Upon its inception, the Indian Army inherited the British Army's organisational structure, which is still maintained today. Therefore, like its predecessor, an Indian infantry regiment's responsibility is not to undertake field operations but to provide battalions and well trained personnel to the field formations. As such it is common to find battalions of the same regiment spread across several brigades, divisions, corps, commands, and even theatres. Like its British and Commonwealth counterparts, troops enlisted within the regiment are immensely loyal, take great pride in the regiment to which they are assigned, and generally spend their entire career within the regiment.
Indian Army infantry regiments recruit based on certain selection criteria, such as on region, caste/community, or religion such as the Assam Regiment, the Jat Regiment, and the Sikh Regiment. Most of them continue the heritage of regiments raised under the British Raj, but some have been raised after independence. Some regiments raised after independence have specialised in border defence, in particular the Ladakh Scouts, the Arunachal Scouts and the Sikkim Scouts.




A Jammu and Kashmir Light Infantry soldier guarding India Gate with an INSAS rifle






Soldiers of the Rajput Regiment during a Republic Day Parade






Soldiers of the Sikh Light Infantry during a Republic Day Parade






Soldiers of the Madras Regiment during a Republic Day Parade


Over the years there have been fears that troops' allegiance lay more with their regiments and the regions/castes/communities/religions from which they were recruited, as opposed to the union of India as a whole. Thus some "all India" or "all class" regiments have been created that recruit troops from all over India regardless of region, caste/community or religion, such as the Brigade of the Guards (which later converted to the Mechanised Infantry profile) and the Parachute Regiment.
Infantry regiments in order of seniority within the Indian Army are:[117]


Regiment
Regimental Center
Raised


Parachute Regiment
Bangalore, Karnataka
1945


Punjab Regiment
Ramgarh Cantonment, Jharkhand
1761


Madras Regiment
Wellington Cantonment, Tamil Nadu
1758


The Grenadiers
Jabalpur, Madhya Pradesh
1778


Maratha Light Infantry
Belgaum, Karnataka
1768


Rajputana Rifles
Delhi Cantonment, New Delhi
1775


Rajput Regiment
Fatehgarh, Uttar Pradesh
1778


Jat Regiment
Bareilly, Uttar Pradesh
1795


Sikh Regiment
Ramgarh Cantonment, Jharkhand
1846


Sikh Light Infantry
Fatehgarh, Uttar Pradesh
1857


Dogra Regiment
Faizabad, Uttar Pradesh
1877


Garhwal Rifles
Lansdowne, Uttarakhand
1887


Kumaon Regiment
Ranikhet, Uttarakhand
1813


Assam Regiment
Shillong, Meghalaya
1941


Bihar Regiment
Danapur Cantonment, Bihar
1941


Mahar Regiment
Sagar, Madhya Pradesh
1941


Jammu & Kashmir Rifles
Jabalpur, Madhya Pradesh
1821


Jammu and Kashmir Light Infantry
Avantipur, Jammu and Kashmir
1947


Naga Regiment
Ranikhet, Uttarakhand
1970


1 Gorkha Rifles
Sabathu, Himachal Pradesh
1815


3 Gorkha Rifles
Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh
1815


4 Gorkha Rifles
Sabathu, Himachal Pradesh
1857


5 Gorkha Rifles (Frontier Force)
Shillong, Meghalaya
1858


8 Gorkha Rifles
Shillong, Meghalaya
1824


9 Gorkha Rifles
Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh
1817


11 Gorkha Rifles
Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh
1918


Ladakh Scouts
Leh, Jammu and Kashmir
1963


Rashtriya Rifles

1990


Arunachal Scouts
Shillong, Meghalaya
2010


Sikkim Scouts

2013


Combat Support Arms[edit]
Artillery[edit]




Pinaka Multi Barrel Rocket Launchers were used during the Kargil War.


The Regiment of Artillery is the second largest arm of the Indian Army, constituting nearly one sixth of the Army's total strength. Originally raised in 1935 as part of the Royal Indian Artillery of the British Indian Army, the Regiment is now tasked with providing the Army's towed and self-propelled field artillery, including guns, howitzers, heavy mortars, rockets and missiles.
As an integral part of nearly all combat operations conducted by the Indian Army, the Regiment of Artillery has a history of being a major contributor to Indian military success. During the Kargil War, it was the Indian Artillery that inflicted the most damage.[118] Over the years, five artillery officers have gone on to the Army's highest post as Chief of Army Staff of the Indian Army.




Bofors artillery gun


For some time, the Regiment of Artillery commanded a significantly larger share of the Army's personnel than it does now, as it was also responsible for air defense artillery and some aviation assets. The 1990s saw the formation of the Corps of Army Air Defence and the coalescing of all aviation assets into the Army Aviation Corps. The arm is now focused on field artillery, and supplies regiments and batteries to each of the operational commands. The home of the Regiment is in Nashik, Maharashtra, where their headquarters is located along with the service's museum. The School of Artillery of the Indian Army is located nearby in Devlali.
After undergoing consistent failures to import or produce modern artillery for three decades,[119][120] the Regiment of Artillery is finally going ahead with procurement of brand new 130-mm and 150-mm artillery guns.[121][122][123] The Army is also putting large numbers of rocket launchers into service, with the indigenously-developed Pinaka multi barrel rocket launcher to equip 22 regiments by the end of the next decade.[124]
Corps of Engineers[edit]

Madras Engineer Group
Bengal Engineer Group
Bombay Engineer Group

The Indian Army Corps of Engineers has a long history dating back to the mid-18th century. The earliest existing subunit of the Corps (18 Field Company) dates back to 1777 while the Corps officially recognises its birth as 1780 when the senior most group of the Corps, the Madras Sappers were raised. The Corps consists of three groups of combat engineers, namely the Madras Sappers, the Bengal Sappers and the Bombay Sappers. A group is roughly analogous to a regiment of Indian infantry, each group consisting of a number of engineer regiments. The engineer regiment is the basic combat engineer unit, analogous to an infantry battalion.
Corps of Signals[edit]
Indian Army Corps of Signals is a corps and the arm of the Indian Army which handles its military communications. It was formed on 15 February 1911 as a separate entity under Lieutenant Colonel S H Powell, and went on to make important contributions to World War I and World War II.[125] The corps celebrated its 100-year anniversary of its raising on 15 February 2011.[126]
Army Aviation Corps[edit]
The Army Aviation Corps, formed on 1 November 1986, is a component of the Indian Army. The aviation arm is headed by a Director General of the rank of Lt General at the Army HQ, New Delhi.
Corps of Army Air Defence[edit]
The Corps of Army Air Defence (abbreviated as AAD) is an active corps of the Indian Army and a major combative formation tasked with air defences of the country from foreign threats. The AAD Corps is responsible for the protection of Indian air space from enemy aircraft and missiles, especially below 5,000 feet.[127]
The history of the AAD dates back to 1939 during the times of the British Raj in India. The corps actively took part in the Second World War fighting on behalf of the British Empire. Post independence, the corps has participated in all the wars involving India, starting from the 1947 Indo-Pakistani War to the 1999 Kargil conflict. The corps enjoyed autonomous status from 1994, after the bifurcation of the Corps of Air Defence Artillery from the Army's artillery regiment. A separate training school, the Army Air Defence College (AADC), was established to train its personnel.
Services[edit]


Name
Director General
Centre


Army Service Corps
Lt General Balbir Singh Sandhu[128]
Bangalore


Army Medical Corps
Lt General Velu Nair, AVSM, VSM[129]
Lucknow/Pune


Army Dental Corps
Lt General T K Bandyopadhyay[130]
Lucknow


Army Ordnance Corps
Lt General Amit Sarin[131]
Jabalpur and Secunderabad (HQ)


Corps of Electronics and Mechanical Engineers

Secunderabad


Remount and Veterinary Corps
Lt General A J Singh, VSM[132]
Meerut


Military Farms Service

Military Farms School and Centre, Meerut Cantonment


Army Education Corps
Major General Sunil Chandra[133]
Pachmarhi


Corps of Military Police

Bangalore


Pioneer Corps

Bangalore


Army Postal Service Corps

Kamptee near Nagpur


Territorial Army




Defence Security Corps




Intelligence Corps

Pune


Judge Advocate General's Department

Institute of Military Law Kamptee, Nagpur


Military Nursing Service

Pune and Lucknow


Training[edit]
Main article: Military academies in India
Pre-commission training of Gentlemen Cadets is carried out at the Indian Military Academy at Dehradun and the Officers Training Academy at Chennai. There are also specialised training institutions like the Army War College, at Mhow, Madhya Pradesh, the High Altitude Warfare School (HAWS), at Gulmarg, Jammu and Kashmir, the Counter Insurgency and Jungle Warfare School (CIJW), in Vairengte, Mizoram, and the College of Military Engineering (CME), in Pune. There is an Army Training Command (ARTRAC) at Shimla, whose main aim is to maximise the effectiveness of the training of personnel.
Intelligence[edit]
Main article: Directorate of Military Intelligence (India)
The Directorate of Military Intelligence (DMI) is the Intelligence arm of the Indian Army. The MI (as it is commonly referred to) was constituted in 1941 and was initially created to check corruption in the Army's own ranks. With time, its role has evolved into cross border intelligence, intelligence sharing with friendly nations, infiltrating insurgent groups and counter-terrorism. In the late 1970s, the MI was embroiled in the Samba spy scandal wherein three Indian Army officers were falsely implicated as Pakistani spies. The organisation has since emerged from the scandal as a prime Intelligence organisation of the Indian Army. As of 2012, the MI has seen many of its roles taken away in a turf war with the newly created National Technical Research Organisation and the Defence Intelligence Agency.[134] Since it was set up in 2004 as a premier apex scientific agency under the National Security Adviser in the Prime Minister's Office, it also includes the National Institute of Cryptology Research and Development (NICRD), which is the first of its kind in Asia.[135]
Field formations[edit]
Below are the basic field formations of the Indian Army:

Command: Indian Army has six operational commands and one training command. Each one is headed by a General Officer Commanding-in-Chief (GOC-in-C), known as the Army Commander, who is among the senior-most Lieutenant General officers in the army.
Corps: A command generally consists of two or more corps. Indian Army has 14 Corps each one commanded by a General Officer Commanding (GOC), known as the Corps Commander, who holds the rank of Lieutenant General.[100] Each corps is composed of three or four Divisions. There are three types of corps in the Indian Army: Strike, Holding and Mixed. The Corps HQ is the highest field formation in the army.[136]
Division: Each Division is headed by GOC (Division Commander) in the rank of Major General.[100] It usually consists of three to four Brigades.[100] Currently, the Indian Army has 40 Divisions [137] including four RAPIDs (Re-organised Army Plains Infantry Division), 18 Infantry Divisions, 12 Mountain Divisions, three Armoured Divisions and three Artillery Divisions.
Brigade: A Brigade generally consists of around 3,000 combat troops with supporting elements. An Infantry Brigade usually has three Infantry Battalions along with various Support Elements.[100] It is commanded by a brigade commander who is a Brigadier,[100] equivalent to a Brigadier General in some armies. In addition to the Brigades in various Army Divisions, the Indian Army also has five Independent Armoured Brigades, 15 Independent Artillery Brigades, seven Independent Infantry Brigades, one Independent Parachute Brigade, three Independent Air Defence Brigades, two Independent Air Defence Groups and four Independent Engineer Brigades. These Independent Brigades operate directly under the Corps Commander (GOC Corps).
Battalion: Composed of four rifle companies.[100] Commanded by a battalion commander who is a Colonel[100] and is the Infantry's main fighting unit. Every infantry battalion also possesses one Ghatak Platoon.[138]
Company: Composed of three platoons.[100] Commanded by a Company Commander who is a Major or Lieutenant-Colonel.[100]
Platoon: Composed of three sections.[100] Commanded by a Platoon Commander who is a JCO.[100]
Section: Smallest military outfit with a strength of 10 personnel. Commanded by a Section Commander of the rank of Havaldar.[100]

Indian Army forts[edit]

Fort William, Kolkata: Garrison of Eastern Army Command
Fort St George, Chennai: Garrison of ATNK&K Army Area
OD Fort, Allahabad, Ordnance Depot

Personnel[edit]
As of 1 July 2017[update], the Indian Army has a sanctioned strength of 49,932 officers (42,253 serving with 7,679 under strength), and 1,215,049 enlisted personnel (1,194,864 serving with 20,185 under strength).[9][10] Recently, it has been proposed to enhance the strength of the army by more than 90,000 to counter the increasing presence of Chinese troops along the Line of Actual Control.[139][140]
The Indian Army is a voluntary service, and although a provision for military conscription exists in the Indian constitution, it has never been imposed. According to the International Institute for Strategic Studies, in 2010 the army had a strength of 1,129,900 active personnel and 960,000 reserve personnel.[141] Of those in reserve 160,000 were in the Indian Territorial Army, however only 40,000 of those regularly report for duty. This makes the Indian Army the world's largest standing volunteer army.[142][143][needs update]
Rank Structure[edit]
Main article: Army ranks and insignia of India
The ranks of the Indian Army for the most part follow the British Army tradition.
Commissioned Officers[edit]
Commissioned officers are the leaders of the army and command everywhere from platoon/company to brigade, division, corps and the whole army.
Indian Army officers are continually put through different courses and assessed on merit throughout their career, for promotions and appointments. Substantive promotions up to lieutenant colonel or equivalent are based on time in service whereas those for colonel and above are based on selection, with promotion to colonel also based on time served.



Equivalent ranks of Indian military



Indian Navy
Indian Army
Indian Air Force



Commissioned ranks



Admiral of
the Fleet
Field Marshal
Marshal of
the Air Force


Admiral
General
Air Chief Marshal


Vice Admiral
Lieutenant General
Air Marshal


Rear Admiral
Major General
Air Vice Marshal


Commodore
Brigadier
Air Commodore


Captain
Colonel
Group Captain


Commander
Lieutenant Colonel
Wing Commander


Lt. Commander
Major
Squadron Leader


Lieutenant
Captain
Flight Lieutenant


Sub Lieutenant
Lieutenant
Flying Officer



Junior commissioned ranks



Master Chief
Petty Officer
1st Class
Subedar Major[Alt 1]
Master warrant officer


Master Chief
Petty Officer
2nd Class
Subedar[Alt 2]
Warrant officer


Chief
Petty Officer
Naib Subedar[Alt 3]
Junior warrant officer



Non-commissioned ranks



Petty Officer
Havildar
Sergeant


Leading Seaman
Naik
Corporal


Seaman 1
Lance Naik
Leading aircraftsman


Seaman 2
Sepoy
Aircraftsman



Footnotes







^ Risaldar Major in cavalry and armoured regiments
^ Risaldar in cavalry and armoured regiments
^ Naib Risaldar in cavalry and armoured regiments.
Called as Jemadar until 1965.








Equivalent
NATO code
OF-10
OF-9
OF-8
OF-7
OF-6
OF-5
OF-4
OF-3
OF-2
OF-1

Ranks of the Indian Army - Officer Ranks

Shoulder
Insignia












Rank
Field
Marshal1
General2
Lieutenant
General
Major
General
Brigadier
Colonel
Lieutenant
Colonel
Major
Captain
Lieutenant







1Honorary/wartime rank.
2Held only by the Chief of the Army Staff












An Indian Army paratrooper with the 50th Parachute Brigade jumps from a helicopter


Other Ranks[edit]

Ranks of the Indian Army - JCOs and Other Ranks


Junior Commissioned Officer

Other ranks


Shoulder
Insignia



Arm






Rank
Subedar
Major1
Subedar2
Naib
Subedar3,

Havildar
Naik
Lance Naik
Sepoy4







1 Risaldar Major in cavalry and armoured regiments
2 Risaldar in cavalry and armoured regiments
3 Naib Risaldar in cavalry and armoured regiments. Called Jemadar until 1965.
4 No Insignia




Uniforms[edit]




Soldiers of the Assam Regiment


The Indian Army camouflage consists of shirts, trousers and cap of a synthetic material. Shirts are buttoned up with two chest pockets with buttoned up flaps. Trousers have two pockets, two thigh box pockets and a back pocket. The Indian Army Jungle camouflage dress features a jungle camouflage pattern and is designed for use in woodland environments. The Indian Army Desert camouflage, which features a desert camouflage pattern, is used by artillery and infantry posted in dusty, semi-desert and desert areas of Rajasthan and its vicinity.
The forces of the East India Company in India were forced by casualties to dye their white summer tunics to neutral tones, initially a tan called khaki (from the Hindi word for "dusty"). This was a temporary measure which became standard in the Indian service in the 1880s. Only during the Second Boer War in 1902, did the entire British Army standardise on dun for Service Dress. The Indian Army uniform standardises on dun for khaki.




Camouflaged Indian Army soldiers carrying INSAS rifle (right) and a Dragunov Sniper rifle


The modern Indian Army wears distinctive parade uniforms characterised by variegated turbans and waist-sashes in regimental colours. The Gurkha and Garwhal Rifles and the Assam, Kumaon and Naga Regiments wear broad brimmed hats of traditional style. Traditionally, all rifle regiments (the Jammu and Kashmir Rifles, the Garhwal Rifles, all Gorkha Rifles, and the Rajputana Rifles) as well as the Jammu and Kashmir Light Infantry wear rank badges, buttons and blackened wire embroidered articles of uniform in black instead of the usual brass (or gold) colour as the original role of the rifle regiments was camouflage and concealment.
Medals and awards[edit]
The medals awarded by the President of India for gallantry displayed at the battlefield, in order of precedence, are- Param Vir Chakra, Maha Vir Chakra and Vir Chakra.
The medals awarded by the President for gallantry displayed away from the battlefield, in order of precedence, are- Ashoka Chakra, Kirti Chakra and Shaurya Chakra.
Many of the recipients of these awards have been Indian Army personnel.
Female[edit]




A female officer in the Indian Army briefing Russian soldiers during a joint exercise in 2015.


The role of women in the Indian army began when the "Indian Military Nursing Service" was formed in 1888, and nurses fought in World War I and II where 350 Indian Army nurses either died or were taken prisoner of war or declared missing in action, this includes nurses who died when SS Kuala was sunk by the Japanese Bombers in 1942.[144] In 1992, the Indian Army began inducting women officers in non-medical roles.[145] On 19 January 2007, the United Nations first all female peacekeeping force made up of 105 Indian policewomen was deployed to Liberia.[146] In 2014, India's army had 3 per cent women, the Navy 2.8 per cent and the Air Force performed best with 8.5 per cent women.[147] In 2015 India opened new combat air force roles for women as fighter pilots, adding to their role as helicopter pilots in the Indian Air Force.[148]
Equipment[edit]
Main articles: Equipment of the Indian Army and List of active Indian military aircraft




T-72 tank


Most of the army equipment is imported, but efforts are being made to manufacture indigenous equipment. The Defence Research and Development Organisation has developed a range of weapons for the Indian Army ranging from small arms, artillery, radars and the Arjun tank. All Indian Military small-arms are manufactured under the umbrella administration of the Ordnance Factories Board, with principal Firearm manufacturing facilities in Ichhapore, Cossipore, Kanpur, Jabalpur and Tiruchirapalli. The Indian Small Arms System (INSAS) rifle, which has been successfully inducted by Indian Army since 1997, is a product of the Ishapore Rifle Factory, while ammunition is manufactured at Khadki and possibly at Bolangir.[citation needed]
In 2014, Army chief General Bikram Singh said that if given sufficient budget support, the Indian Army might be able to acquire half the ammunition needed to fight in a major conflict by the next year.[149]




HAL Rudra


Aircraft - The Army Aviation Corps is the main body of the Indian Army for tactical air transport, reconnaissance, and medical evacuation, while the Indian Air Force's helicopter assets are responsible for assisting the army troop transport and close air support. It operates around 150 helicopters. The Indian army had projected a requirement for a helicopter that can carry loads of up to 750 kilograms (1,650 lb) to heights of 23,000 feet (7,000 m) on the Siachen Glacier in Jammu and Kashmir. Flying at these heights poses unique challenges due to the rarefied atmosphere. The Indian Army will induct the HAL Light Utility Helicopter to replace its ageing fleet of Chetaks and Cheetahs, some of which were inducted more than three decades ago.[150]
On 13 October 2012, The defence minister has given the control of attack helicopters to the Indian Army from the Indian Air force.[151]
Future developments[edit]

F-INSAS is the Indian Army's principal infantry modernisation programme, which aims to modernise the army's 465 infantry and paramilitary battalions by 2020. The programme aims to upgrade the infantry with a multi-calibre rifle with an under-barrel grenade launcher and bulletproof jackets and helmets. The helmet would include a visor, flashlight, thermal sensors, night vision devices and a miniature computer with audio headsets. It will also include a new lightweight and waterproof uniform, which would help the soldier in carrying extra load and fighting in an NBC environment.[152]
India is currently re-organising its mechanised forces to achieve strategic mobility and high-volume firepower for rapid thrusts into enemy territory. India proposes to progressively induct as many as 248 Arjun MBT and to develop and induct the Arjun MK-II variant, 1,657 Russian-origin T-90S main-battle tanks (MBTs). The army is procuring 2,000 pieces of night vision devices for T-72 tanks for Rs 10 billion; 1,200 pieces for T-90 tanks for Rs 9.60 billion and 1,780 pieces for infantry combat vehicles for Rs 8.60 billion. It is also acquiring 700 TISAS (thermal imaging stand alone systems) and 418 TIFACS (thermal fire control systems) for its T-72 fleet at a cost of around $230 million. 300 Israeli TISAS were installed as part of several T-72 upgrade phases, followed by 3,860 image intensifier-based night-vision devices. 310 Russian produced T-90S Main Battle Tanks were also fitted with French Catherine TI cameras.[153][154]
The Cabinet Committee on Security approved raising two new infantry mountain divisions (with around 15,000 combat soldiers each) and an artillery brigade in 2008. These divisions were likely to be armed with ultralight howitzers.[155] In July 2009, it was reported that the Army was advocating a new artillery division. The proposed artillery division, under the Kolkata-based Eastern Command, was to have three brigades – two of 155 mm howitzers and one of the Russian "Smerch" and indigenous "Pinaka" multiple-launch rocket systems.[156]

The major ongoing weapons programmes of the Indian Army are as follows:

Tanks and Armoured vehicles


Arjun MK-III [157]
Futuristic Battle Tank (FMBT) – The FMBT will be a lighter tank of 50 tons. At conceptual stage.
FICV – Futuristic Infantry Combat Vehicle
TATA Kestrel -A modern armoured personnel carrier developed by Tata Motors and the Defence Research and Development Organisation (DRDO). It is developed with the intention to replace age old Soviet era BMPs and APCs in service with Indian army. Expected to join Indian Army by 2017.





The Brahmos supersonic cruise missile is a crucial component of the Indian Army's strike capabilities.



Missiles





Advanced Air Defence (AAD) missile launch, 2008



Intercontinental Ballistic Missiles

Agni-V – 5,500 km (3,400 mi)–8,000 km (5,000 mi) Successfully Tested third time canistered version by DRDO on 31 January 2015.
Agni-VI – 8,000 km (5,000 mi)–12,000 km (7,500 mi) range with MIRVed warheads. Currently in planning stage.


Cruise Missiles

Hypersonic missile
Nirbhay Missile
BrahMos – M


Tactical Ballistic Missiles

Prahaar (missile) – With a range of 150 kilometres (93 mi).[158]
Shaurya (missile) – It has a range of between 750 km (470 mi)-1,900 km (1,200 mi)


Anti-Tank Guided Missiles

Nag Anti-tank guided missile – ground and air-launched variant.


The Indian Ballistic Missile Defence Programme is an initiative to develop and deploy a multi-layered ballistic missile defence system to protect India from ballistic missile attacks. It is a double-tiered system consisting of two interceptor missiles, namely the Prithvi Air Defence (PAD) missile for high altitude interception, and the Advanced Air Defence (AAD) Missile for lower altitude interception.[159][160]


Vehicles


Tata Motors offers a full range 6×6, 8×8 and 12×12 multi-purpose high mobility carriers, designed especially for integrating specialist rocket and missile systems. Tata 2038 6×6 vehicle platform also stands qualified by the Indian Army for GRAD BM21 Multi Barrel Rocket Launcher (MBRL) application after rigorous field firing evaluation trials.
Mahindra Axe – Light utility vehicle to be purchased.
The army needs 3,000 light support vehicles and 1600 heavy motor vehicles for mounting rockets and radar, and for reconnaissance and transportation at the cost of Rs 15 billion.[161]


Artillery


Under the Field Artillery Rationalisation Plan, the army plans to procure 3000 to 4000 pieces of artillery at the cost of ₹200 billion (US$3 billion). This includes purchasing 1580 towed, 814 mounted, 180 self-propelled wheeled, 100 self-propelled tracked and 145 ultra-light 155 mm/52 calibre artillery guns. The requirement for artillery guns would be met with indigenous development and production.[162]


Small Arms


Excalibur rifle – Replacement for the INSAS rifle in service.[163]
Multi Caliber Individual Weapon System (MCIWS)





HAL Light Combat Helicopter



Modern Sub Machine Carbine – The Modern Sub Machine Carbine (MSMC) is the latest combined venture of ARDE & OFB, developed for the Indian Army on a platform of experiences from the INSAS rifle. RFI's worth ₹220 billion (US$3 billion) were issued for assault rifles, carbines, pump-action shotguns, sniper rifles, anti-material rifles, general purpose machine guns and heavy machine guns.


Army Aviation


Procurement process for 197 light utility helicopters (LUH) has been scrapped, of which 64 will be inducted in the Army Aviation to replace the Cheetak and Cheetah Helicopters.
HAL Light Utility Helicopter (LUH);– requirement for 384 helicopters for both the army and air force.
HAL has obtained a firm order to deliver 114 HAL Light Combat Helicopters to the Indian Army.[164]

See also[edit]


Military of India portal



Indian Armed Forces
Indian Navy
Indian Air Force
Centre for Land Warfare Studies
List of serving Generals of the Indian Army

References[edit]

Citations



^ http://www.news18.com/news/india/20-sailor-shortage-in-navy-15-officer-posts-vacant-in-army-nirmala-sitharaman-tells-parliament-1616303.html
^ a b International Institute for Strategic Studies (3 February 2014). The Military Balance 2014, pp. 241–246. London: Routledge. ISBN 9781857437225. 
^ "World Air Forces 2015" (PDF). Flightglobal.com. p. 17. Archived (PDF) from the original on 29 December 2016. Retrieved 20 December 2016. 
^ "Chief of the Army Staff". Official Website of the Indian Army. Archived from the original on 3 January 2017. Retrieved 31 December 2016. 
^ "Lieutenant-general sarath chand  is vice chief of army staff". Archived from the original on 7 January 2017. 
^ "About – The President of India". Archived from the original on 5 April 2016. Retrieved 4 April 2016. 
^ Singh, Sarbans (1993). Battle Honours of the Indian Army 1757–1971. New Delhi: Vision Books. ISBN 8170941156. 
^ Headquarters Army Training Command. "Indian Army Doctrine". October 2004. [https://web.archive.org/web/20071201062843/http://indianarmy.nic.in/indianarmydoctrine_1.doc "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 1 December 2007. Retrieved 1 December 2007.  Archive link] via archive.org (original url: {{cite web|url=http://indianarmy.nic.in/indianarmydoctrine_1.doc |title=Archived copy |accessdate=1 December 2007 |deadurl=yes |archiveurl=https://web.archive.org/web/20071201062843/http://indianarmy.nic.in/indianarmydoctrine_1.doc |archivedate=1 December 2007 }}).
^ a b "20% Sailor Shortage in Navy, 15% Officer Posts Vacant In Army, Nirmala Sitharaman Tells Parliament". News18. Retrieved 2017-12-28. 
^ a b "Armed forces facing shortage of nearly 60,000 personnel: Government". The Economic Times. 2017-12-27. Retrieved 2017-12-28. 
^ The Military Balance 2010. Oxfordshire: Routledge. 2010. pp. 351, 359–364. ISBN 1857435575. 
^ "Indian Army Modernisation Needs a Major Push". India Strategic. February 2010. Archived from the original on 6 September 2013. Retrieved 10 July 2013. 
^ "India's Military Modernisation Up To 2027 Gets Approval". Defence Now. 2 April 2012. Archived from the original on 29 October 2013. Retrieved 10 July 2013. 
^ "About The Ministry". Ministry of Defence, Government of India. Archived from the original on 9 May 2012. Retrieved 31 March 2011. 
^ Editorial Team. "10 Facts Which Prove Indian Army Living Up To Its Motto – "Service Before Self"". SSB Interview Tips & Coaching – SSBCrack. Archived from the original on 14 April 2016. 
^ "Indian army official Facebook page wiki-facts, official website, motto". GuidingHawk. Archived from the original on 11 April 2016. 
^ THE BRITISH INDIAN ARMY DURING THE FIRST WORLD WAR Archived 28 February 2016 at the Wayback Machine.
^ Institute for Defence Studies and Analyses"Archived copy". Archived from the original on 15 April 2016. Retrieved 2 April 2016. 
^ Harold E. Raugh, The Victorians at war, 1815–1914: an encyclopaedia of British military history (2004) pp 173–79
^ Urlanis, Boris (1971). Wars and Population. Moscow. p. 85. 
^ Khanduri, Chandra B. (2006). Thimayya: an amazing life. New Delhi: Knowledge World. p. 394. ISBN 978-81-87966-36-4. Archived from the original on 6 January 2016. Retrieved 30 July 2010. 
^ Kaushik Roy, "Expansion And Deployment of the Indian Army during World War II: 1939–45,"Journal of the Society for Army Historical Research, Autumn 2010, Vol. 88 Issue 355, pp 248–268
^ Sumner, p.25
^ "Commonwealth War Graves Commission Report on India 2007–2008" (PDF). Commonwealth War Graves Commission. Archived from the original (PDF) on 18 June 2010. Retrieved 7 September 2009. 
^ Martin Bamber and Aad Neeven (26 August 1942). "The Free Indian Legion – Infantry Regiment 950 (Ind)". Freeindianlegion.info. Archived from the original on 17 March 2012. Retrieved 1 June 2012. 
^ Peter Stanley, "Great in adversity": Indian prisoners of war in New Guinea," Journal of the Australian War Memorial (October 2002) No. 37 online Archived 8 February 2016 at the Wayback Machine.
^ For the Punjab Boundary Force, see Daniel P. Marston, 'The Indian Army, Partition, and the Punjab Boundary Force, 1945–47,' War in History November 2009, vol. 16 no. 4 469–505
^ Cooper, Tom (29 October 2003). "Indo-Pakistani War, 1947–1949". ACIG. Archived from the original on 13 June 2006. 
^ a b "Kashmir in the United Nations". 28 January 1998. Archived from the original on 28 January 1998. CS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknown (link)
^ "47 (1948). Resolution of 21 April 1948 [S/726]". United Nations. Archived from the original on 13 May 2016. Retrieved 13 July 2016. 
^ Bruce Bueno de Mesquita & David Lalman. War and Reason: Domestic and International Imperatives. Yale University Press (1994), p. 201 Archived 9 May 2016 at the Wayback Machine.. ISBN 978-0-300-05922-9.
^ Alastair I. Johnston & Robert S. Ross. New Directions in the Study of China's Foreign Policy. Stanford University Press (2006), p. 99 Archived 6 January 2016 at the Wayback Machine.. ISBN 978-0-8047-5363-0.
^ Claude Arpi. India and her neighbourhood: a French observer's views. Har-Anand Publications (2005), p. 186 Archived 6 January 2016 at the Wayback Machine.. ISBN 978-81-241-1097-3.
^ CenturyChina, www.centurychina.com/plaboard/uploads/1962war.htm
^ Dennis Kux's "India and the United States estranged democracies", 1941–1991, ISBN 1-4289-8189-6, DIANE Publishing, Pg 238
^ Dijkink, Gertjan. National identity and geopolitical visions: maps of pride and pain. Routledge, 1996. ISBN 0-415-13934-1.
^ Praagh, David. The greater game: India's race with destiny and China. McGill-Queen's Press – MQUP, 2003. ISBN 0-7735-2639-0.
^ Capture of Barki by 4 Sikh -pdf file Archived 1 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine.
^ a b c R.D. Pradhan & Yashwantrao Balwantrao Chavan (2007). 1965 War, the Inside Story: Defence Minister Y.B. Chavan's Diary of India-Pakistan War. Atlantic Publishers & Distributors. p. 47. ISBN 978-81-269-0762-5. Archived from the original on 6 January 2016. 
^ Sumit Ganguly. "Pakistan". In India: A Country Study Archived 1 April 2007 at the Wayback Machine. (James Heitzman and Robert L. Worden, editors). Library of Congress Federal Research Division (September 1995).
^ a b "Indo-Pakistan Wars". Microsoft Encarta 2008. Archived 1 November 2009 at WebCite 31 October 2009.
^ Thomas M. Leonard. Encyclopedia of the developing world, Volume 2. Taylor & Francis, 2006. ISBN 978-0-415-97663-3. 
^ Spencer Tucker. Tanks: An Illustrated History of Their Impact. ABC-CLIO (2004), p. 172 Archived 6 January 2016 at the Wayback Machine.. ISBN 978-1-57607-995-9.
^ Sumit Ganguly. Conflict unending: India-Pakistan tensions since 1947. Columbia University Press (2002), p. 45 Archived 6 January 2016 at the Wayback Machine.. ISBN 978-0-231-12369-3.
^ "Rapprochement Across the Himalayas: Emerging India-China Relations Post Cold""Archived copy". Archived from the original on 6 January 2016. Retrieved 15 November 2015.  p. 40
^ Hoontrakul, Pongsak (2014). The Global Rise of Asian Transformation: Trends and Developments in Economic Growth Dynamics (illustrated ed.). Palgrave Macmillan. p. 37. ISBN 9781137412355. Archived from the original on 18 May 2016. 
^ "50 years after Sino-Indian war". Millennium Post. 16 May 1975. Archived from the original on 3 December 2013. Retrieved 12 July 2013. 
^ "Kirantis' khukris flash at Chola in 1967". Hindustan Times. Archived from the original on 28 February 2016. Retrieved 22 July 2015. 
^ Lawoti, Mahendra; Pahari, Anup Kumar (2009). "Part V: Military and state dimension". The Maoist Insurgency in Nepal: Revolution in the Twenty-first Century. London: Routledge. p. 208. ISBN 978-11-35261-68-9. The second turning point came in the wake of the 1971 Bangladesh war of independence which India supported with armed troops. With large contingents of Indian Army troops amassed in the West Bengal border with what was then East Pakistan, the Government of Indira Gandhi used the opening provided by President's Rule to divert sections of the army to assist the police in decisive counter–insurgency drives across Naxal–impacted areas. "Operation Steeplechase," a police and army joint anti–Naxalite undertaking, was launched in July–August 1971. By the end of "Operation Steeplechase" over 20,000 suspected Naxalites were imprisoned and including senior leaders and cadre, and hundreds had been killed in police encounters. It was a massive counter–insurgency undertaking by any standards. 
^ Pandita, Rahul (2011). Hello, Bastar : The Untold Story of India's Maoist Movement. Chennai: Westland (Tranquebar Press). pp. 23–24. ISBN 978-93-80658-34-6. OCLC 754482226. Archived from the original on 6 January 2016. Meanwhile, the Congress government led by Indira Gandhi decided to send in the army and tackle the problem militarily. A combined operation called Operation Steeplechase was launched jointly by military, paramilitary and state police forces in West Bengal, Bihar and Orissa.
In Kolkata, Lt General J.F.R. Jacob of the Indian Army's Eastern Command received two very important visitors in his office in October 1969. One was the army chief General Sam Manekshaw and the other was the home secretary Govind Narain. Jacob was told of the Centre's plan to send in the army to break the Naxal. More than 40 years later, Jacob would recall how he had asked for more troops, some of which he got along with a brigade of para commandos. When he asked his boss to give him something in writing, Manekshaw declined, saying, 'Nothing in writing.' while secretary Narain added that there should be no publicity and no records. 
^ Owen Bennett Jones. Pakistan: Eye of the Storm. Yale University Press (2003), p. 177 Archived 6 January 2016 at the Wayback Machine.. ISBN 978-0-300-10147-8.
^ Eric H. Arnett. Military capacity and the risk of war: China, India, Pakistan, and Iran. Oxford University Press (1997), p. 134 Archived 6 January 2016 at the Wayback Machine.. ISBN 978-0-19-829281-4.
^ S. Paul Kapur. Dangerous deterrent: nuclear weapons proliferation and conflict in South Asia. Stanford University Press (2007), p. 17 Archived 6 January 2016 at the Wayback Machine.. ISBN 978-0-8047-5550-4.
^ Encyclopedia of the Developing World, p. 806 Archived 6 January 2016 at the Wayback Machine..
^ Edward W. Desmond. "The Himalayas War at the Top Of the World" Archived 14 January 2009 at the Wayback Machine.. Time (31 July 1989).
^ Vivek Chadha. Low Intensity Conflicts in India: An Analysis. SAGE (2005), p. 105 Archived 6 January 2016 at the Wayback Machine.. ISBN 978-0-7619-3325-0.
^ Pradeep Barua. The State at War in South Asia. University of Nebraska Press (2005), p. 256 Archived 6 January 2016 at the Wayback Machine.. ISBN 978-0-8032-1344-9.
^ Tim McGirk with Aravind Adiga. "War at the Top of the World". Time (4 May 2005). Archived 27 December 2008 at the Wayback Machine.
^ Kamal Thakur (1 November 2014). "16 Things You Should Know About India's Soldiers Defending Siachen". Topyaps. Archived from the original on 31 October 2014. Retrieved 16 May 2014. 
^ Sanjay Dutt. War and Peace in Kargil Sector. APH Publishing (2000), p. 389-90 Archived 21 May 2016 at the Wayback Machine.. ISBN 978-81-7648-151-9.
^ Nick Easen. Siachen: The world's highest cold war Archived 23 August 2016 at the Wayback Machine.. CNN (17 September 2003).
^ Arun Bhattacharjee. "On Kashmir, hot air and trial balloons" Archived 28 February 2016 at the Wayback Machine.. Asia Times (23 September 2004).
^ "Indian Army organizes a Symposium titled "North Technical-2014" – Scoop News Jammu Kashmir". Archived from the original on 6 January 2016. Retrieved 4 April 2016. 
^ "e-Symposium – Northern Command". Official Website of Indian Army. Archived from the original on 24 December 2016. Retrieved 9 January 2017. 
^ "e-Symposium – Northern Command: North Tech Symposium 2016". Official Website of Indian Army. Archived from the original on 24 December 2016. Retrieved 9 January 2017. 
^ "Troubled Periphery: The Crisis of India's North East By Subir Bhaumik". Archived from the original on 6 January 2017. 
^ Indian general praises Pakistani valour at Kargil 5 May 2003 Daily Times, Pakistan Archived 16 January 2009 at the Wayback Machine.
^ Kashmir in the Shadow of War By Robert Wirsing Published by M.E. Sharpe, 2003 ISBN 0-7656-1090-6 pp36
^ Managing Armed Conflicts in the 21st Century By Adekeye Adebajo, Chandra Lekha Sriram Published by Routledge pp192,193
^ The State at War in South Asia By Pradeep Barua Published by U of Nebraska Press Page 261
^ "Tariq Ali · Bitter Chill of Winter: Kashmir · LRB 19 April 2001". London Review of Books. Archived from the original on 1 October 2009. Retrieved 4 April 2016. 
^ Colonel Ravi Nanda (1999). Kargil : A Wake Up Call. Vedams Books. ISBN 81-7095-074-0.  Online summary of the Book Archived 28 September 2007 at the Wayback Machine.
^ Alastair Lawson. "Pakistan and the Kashmir militants" Archived 28 February 2003 at the Wayback Machine.. BBC News (5 July 1999).
^ A.K. Chakraborty. "Kargil War brings into sharp focus India's commitment to peace" Archived 18 August 2014 at the Wayback Machine.. Government of India Press Information Bureau (July 2000).
^ Michael Edward Brown. Offense, defence, and war. MIT Press (2004), p. 393 Archived 6 January 2016 at the Wayback Machine..
^ [1] Archived 21 February 2014 at the Wayback Machine.
^ "Past peacekeeping operations". United Nations Peacekeeping. Archived from the original on 12 September 2009. Retrieved 31 March 2011. 
^ "United Nations peacekeeping – Fatalities By Year up to 30 June 2014" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 2 July 2017. 
^ John Pike. "Brass Tacks". Globalsecurity.org. Archived from the original on 11 February 2011. Retrieved 31 March 2011. 
^ John Cherian (8 June 2001). "An exercise in anticipation". Hinduonnet.com. Archived from the original on 7 December 2004. Retrieved 31 March 2011. 
^ "Indian Army tests network centric warfare capability in Ashwamedha war games". India-defence.com. Archived from the original on 5 February 2012. Retrieved 1 June 2012. 
^ 'Ashwamedha' reinforces importance of foot soldiers Archived 27 September 2007 at the Wayback Machine.[dead link]
^ "Indo-US Army Exercise Yudh Abhyas". Defence.pk. 14 March 2012. Archived from the original on 18 April 2012. Retrieved 1 June 2012. 
^ Sgt. Michael J. MacLeod (11 May 2013). "Yudh Abhyas 2013 Begins". Archived from the original on 2 October 2015. Retrieved 4 April 2016. 
^ "File:Sgt. Balkrishna Dave explains weapons-range safety procedures to Indian Army soldiers with the 99th Mountain Brigade before they fire American machine guns.jpg". Archived from the original on 26 October 2015. Retrieved 4 April 2016. 
^ "Yudh Abhyas enhances U.S., Indian Army partnership". Hawaii Army Weekly. 22 May 2013. Archived from the original on 5 July 2014. Retrieved 11 August 2014. 
^ "Steele_August2013.pdf – Association of the United States Army" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 21 September 2013. 
^ "Indo-French joint Army exercise Shakti 2013 begins today". Zeenews.india.com. Archived from the original on 6 July 2014. Retrieved 11 August 2014. 
^ "Indo-French Joint Army Exercise "Shakti 2016"". Facebook. Archived from the original on 18 October 2015. Retrieved 11 August 2014. 
^ "Indian Army gears up for war game in Rajasthan desert". FacenFacts. 25 April 2012. Archived from the original on 5 June 2012. Retrieved 1 June 2012. 
^ "Western Army Command conducts summer training exercises, IBN Live News". Ibnlive.in.com. Archived from the original on 28 September 2015. Retrieved 1 June 2012. [dead link]
^ "India, Mongolia engage in joint military exercises". Business Standard. 11 June 2013. Archived from the original on 15 June 2013. Retrieved 27 June 2013. 
^ Exercise Nomadic Elephant, Indo Mongolian Joint Military Exercise Archived 18 October 2015 at the Wayback Machine.. Facebook (24 June 2013). Retrieved 12 July 2013.
^ "Indian Army's firing exercise 'Shatrujeet' enters its last phase – Times of India". The Times of India. Archived from the original on 18 April 2016. Retrieved 18 April 2016. 
^ "Indian Army Conducts Battle Exercise 'Shatrujeet' In Rajasthan". NDTV.com. Archived from the original on 17 April 2016. Retrieved 18 April 2016. 
^ Admin. "Indian Army Test Its Operation Abilities". News Ghana. Archived from the original on 22 April 2016. Retrieved 18 April 2016. 
^ "Entry Schemes Women : Officers Selection – Join Indian Army". Archived from the original on 25 February 2016. 
^ "Army and navy plan to set up a marine brigade". Indiatoday.intoday.in. 9 June 2010. Archived from the original on 19 October 2010. Retrieved 1 June 2012. 
^ Divisions and Corps of Indian Army, Global Security Archived 28 June 2011 at the Wayback Machine.
^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m "Know Your Army: Structure". Official Indian Army Web Portal. Archived from the original on 24 December 2016. Retrieved 31 December 2016. 
^ "Central Command: General Officer Commanding-in-Chief". Official Website of Indian Army. Archived from the original on 24 December 2016. Retrieved 31 December 2016. 
^ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 1 August 2017. Retrieved 1 August 2017. 
^ "Eye on China, India to raise second division for mountain corps". The Indian Express. 17 March 2017. Archived from the original on 17 March 2017. Retrieved 17 March 2017. 
^ "The mountain is now a molehill". Archived from the original on 7 December 2016. Retrieved 17 March 2017. 
^ "Northern Command: General Officer Commanding-in-Chief". Official Website of Indian Army. Archived from the original on 24 December 2016. Retrieved 31 December 2016. 
^ "Lieutenant General Devraj Anbu new chief of Northern Command". The Indian Express. 9 November 2016. Archived from the original on 1 December 2016. Retrieved 30 November 2016. 
^ "Lt Gen Soni takes over as chief of Southern Command". The Indian Express. 2017-12-02. Retrieved 2017-12-13. 
^ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 28 August 2017. Retrieved 1 August 2017. 
^ "Western Command: General Officer Commanding-in-Chief". Official Website of Indian Army. Archived from the original on 28 February 2016. Retrieved 4 January 2017. 
^ India, Press Trust of (17 September 2016). "Lt Gen Surinder Singh takes charge of Western Command". Business Standard India. Archived from the original on 18 September 2016. Retrieved 18 September 2016. 
^ "Lt Gen Surinder Singh takes over as GOC-in-C". 18 September 2016. Archived from the original on 19 September 2016. Retrieved 18 September 2016. 
^ "Lt Gen Naravane takes over as ARTRAC chief". 
^ "The Regiment of Artillery: Director General and Colonel Commandant". Official Website of Indian Army. Archived from the original on 24 December 2016. Retrieved 7 January 2017. 
^ "Army Air Defence: Director General and Colonel Commandant". Official Website of Indian Army. Archived from the original on 24 December 2016. Retrieved 7 January 2017. 
^ "Army Aviation Corps: Director General and Colonel Commandant". Official Website of Indian Army. Archived from the original on 24 December 2016. Retrieved 7 January 2017. 
^ "Army Ordnance Corps: Director General and Colonel Commandant". Official Website of Indian Army. Archived from the original on 28 February 2016. Retrieved 29 January 2017. 
^ "Infantry Regiments". Bharat Rakshak. 2008. Archived from the original on 7 October 2013. Retrieved 24 January 2014. 
^ "Indian artillery inflicted maximum damage to Pak during Kargil". Zee News. Archived from the original on 31 October 2014. Retrieved 26 November 2014. 
^ RAGHUVSNSHI, VIVEK (21 March 2014). "Upgraded Indian Howitzers Cleared for Summer Trials". www.defensenews.com. Gannett Government Media. Retrieved 21 March 2014. 
^ Swami, Praveen (29 March 2012). "Inside India's defence acquisition mess". The Hindu. Archived from the original on 7 January 2014. Retrieved 4 January 2014. 
^ "In 'Dhanush', Indian Army's Prayers Answered". NDTV.com. Archived from the original on 3 November 2014. Retrieved 26 November 2014. 
^ "Defence ministry agrees to army's long pending demand of artillery guns". dna. Archived from the original on 24 November 2014. Retrieved 26 November 2014. 
^ "Indigenous Artillery Gun 'Dhanush' to be Ready This Year". The New Indian Express. Archived from the original on 22 November 2014. Retrieved 26 November 2014. 
^ "Indian Army to increase indigenous rocket regiments by 2022". Firstpost. 7 December 2016. Archived from the original on 8 December 2016. Retrieved 8 December 2016. 
^ Brett-James, Antony Report my Signals London Hennel Locke 1948 - personal account of a British officer attached to Indian Army in Egypt and Burma
^ "Corps Of Signals – Inaugural: Ceremony Centenary Year". Ministry of Defence. 15 February 2010. Archived from the original on 22 February 2014. 
^ Rishabh Mishra (24 June 2015). "21 Different Branches Of Indian Army That Make It Such An Efficient Defence Force". TopYaps. Archived from the original on 11 June 2016. Retrieved 7 June 2016. 
^ "Army Service Corps, DGST: Director General, Supplies and Transport". Official Website of the Indian Army. Archived from the original on 24 December 2016. Retrieved 25 October 2016. 
^ "Army Medical Corps: DGMS (Army) [Director General, Medical Services, Army]". Official Website of the Indian Army. Archived from the original on 24 December 2016. Retrieved 25 October 2016. 
^ "Army Dental Corps: Director General, Dental Services". Official Website of the Indian Army. Archived from the original on 24 December 2016. Retrieved 25 October 2016. 
^ "Army Ordnance Corps: Director General, Ordnance Services". Official Website of the Indian Army. Archived from the original on 24 December 2016. Retrieved 25 October 2016. 
^ "Remount and Veterinary Corps: Director General, Remount Veterinary Services". Official Website of the Indian Army. Archived from the original on 28 February 2016. Retrieved 25 October 2016. 
^ "Army Education Corps: General Information". Official Website of the Indian Army. Archived from the original on 24 December 2016. Retrieved 25 October 2016. 
^ "How Indian Army's Military Intelligence Directorate works : Special Report – India Today". Indiatoday.intoday.in. 28 January 2012. Archived from the original on 31 October 2012. Retrieved 4 November 2012. 
^ "State govt allots land for NTRO in Borda village". IBNLive. Archived from the original on 17 October 2013. Retrieved 4 April 2016. 
^ Richard Rinaldi; Ravi Rikhye (2010). Indian Army Order of Battle. General Data LLC. ISBN 978-0982054178. Archived from the original on 28 February 2016. 
^ John Pike. "Indian Army Divisions". Globalsecurity.org. Archived from the original on 28 June 2011. Retrieved 31 March 2011. 
^ "Know about Ghatak commandos, the invincible Special Forces of India". Archived from the original on 15 October 2014. Retrieved 26 November 2014. 
^ "The mountain is now a molehill". Archived from the original on 19 November 2016. Retrieved 18 November 2016. 
^ "More soldiers but weaker Army". www.dailypioneer.com. Archived from the original on 19 November 2016. Retrieved 18 November 2016. 
^ IISS 2010, pp. 360
^ "General V K Singh takes over as new Indian Army chief". The Times of India. 31 March 2010. Archived from the original on 28 February 2016. Retrieved 31 March 2010. 
^ Page, Jeremy. "Comic starts adventure to find war heroes" Archived 9 August 2011 at the Wayback Machine.. The Times (9 February 2008).
^ stop disrimination, Hindustan Times, 13 Dec 2017.
^ Women officers entry
^ "First All-Female U.N. Peacekeeping Force to Deploy to Liberia". Fox News Channel. 19 January 2007. Retrieved 28 January 2008. 
^ "Indian Army's shameful treatment of women recruits". NDTV. 
^ "India paves way for women in military combat roles" Channel NewsAsia 24 Oct 2015
^ Pandit, Rajat (24 March 2014). "Army running low on ammunition". indiatimes.com. TNN. Archived from the original on 26 March 2014. Retrieved 24 March 2014. 
^ PTI. "HAL developing light choppers for high-altitude operations". The Hindu Business Line. Archived from the original on 21 March 2014. Retrieved 26 November 2014. 
^ Gautam Datt (13 October 2012). "Army to get attack helicopters: Defence Ministry". Mail Today (epaper). Archived from the original on 1 December 2012. Retrieved 30 November 2012. 
^ "DRDO's F-INSAS programme to be ready in two years". Defence News. 9 July 2013. Archived from the original on 12 December 2013. Retrieved 10 July 2013. 
^ "Night-vision devices for Indian Army approved". Zee News. 2 April 2013. Archived from the original on 8 June 2013. Retrieved 10 July 2013. 
^ "Army to get night vision devices worth over Rs 2,800 crore for its tanks and infantry combat vehicles". The Economic Times. 2 April 2013. Archived from the original on 28 February 2016. Retrieved 10 July 2013. 
^ Pandit, Rajat. "Army to raise 2 mountain units to counter Pak, China" Archived 28 February 2016 at the Wayback Machine.. The Times of India, 7 February 2008. Retrieved 4 January 2010.
^ Rajat Pandit, Eye on China, is India adding muscle on East? Archived 28 February 2016 at the Wayback Machine. 2 2009 July 0325hrs
^ "Arjun, Dhruv Get Thumbs Up From Indian Army Chief". Archived from the original on 20 April 2016. Retrieved 4 April 2016. 
^ "Prahaar Missile to be test-fired on Sunday". Ibnlive.in.com. 17 July 2011. Archived from the original on 16 October 2012. Retrieved 1 June 2012. 
^ The New GuardianIndia unveils an all new anti-ballistic missile expected to be the fore-runner of a sophisticated air defence system to thwart, among other threats, a Pakistani nuclear weapons attack
^ "India tests interceptor missile". Google.com. 6 March 2009. Archived from the original on 2 June 2013. Retrieved 19 April 2013. 
^ "Indian Military News Headlines ::". Bharat-Rakshak.com. Archived from the original on 5 November 2012. Retrieved 4 November 2012. 
^ Business Standard. "155-mm gun contract: DRDO enters the fray". Business-standard.com. Archived from the original on 6 October 2012. Retrieved 1 June 2012. 
^ "Exclusive: Made in India rifles to replace INSAS". Archived from the original on 28 February 2016. Retrieved 4 April 2016. 
^ Shenoy, Ramnath. "India to test fly light combat helicopters shortly". Press Trust of India, 14 December 2009. Retrieved 4 January 2010. Archived 18 December 2009 at the Wayback Machine.



Bibliography


International Institute for Strategic Studies; Hackett, James (ed.) (2010). The Military Balance 2010. London: Routledge. ISBN 1-85743-557-5. CS1 maint: Extra text: authors list (link)
International Institute for Strategic Studies; Hackett, James (ed.) (7 March 2012). The Military Balance 2012. London: Routledge. ISBN 1857436423. CS1 maint: Extra text: authors list (link)
Praval, K.C. Praval Indian Army After Independence (3rd ed. 2013) excerpt and text search
International Institute for Strategic Studies (3 February 2014). The Military Balance 2014. London: Routledge. ISBN 9781857437225. 

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Indian Army.



Official website
Indian Army at Bharat Rakshak
Indian army guide at Global Security
Indian Army news
Join Indian Army







v
t
e


Arms and Services of Indian Army



Combat
arms




Regiments



Mechanised Infantry
Guards
Parachute
Punjab
Madras
Grenadiers
Maratha LI
Naga
Rajputana Rifles
Rajput
Jat
Sikh
Sikh LI
Dogra
Garhwal Rifles
Kumaon
Assam
Bihar
Mahar
J&K Rifles
J&K LI
1 GR
3 GR
4 GR
5 GR
8 GR
9 GR
11 GR
Ladakh Scouts
Arunachal Scouts
Sikkim Scouts





Corps



Artillery
Armoured
Army Aviation
Army Air Defence
Engineers (Madras, Bengal, Bombay)
Signals
Intelligence











Support
services




Corps



Dental
Education
Medical
Ordnance
Postal Service
Army Service Corps
Electronics and Mechanical Engineers
Military Police
Remount and Veterinary
Pioneer
Defence Security Corps





Other



Judge Advocate General's Department
Military Farms Service
Military Nursing Service
Territorial Army
National Cadet Corps















v
t
e


Indian Army Infantry Regiments






Brigade of the Guards
Parachute Regiment
Mechanised Infantry Regiment
Punjab Regiment
Madras Regiment
The Grenadiers
Maratha Light Infantry
Rajputana Rifles
Rajput Regiment
Jat Regiment
Sikh Regiment
Sikh Light Infantry
Dogra Regiment
Garhwal Rifles
Kumaon Regiment
Assam Regiment
Bihar Regiment
Mahar Regiment
Jammu & Kashmir Rifles
Jammu & Kashmir Light Infantry
Naga Regiment
1 Gorkha Rifles (The Malaun Regiment)
3 Gorkha Rifles
4 Gorkha Rifles
5 Gorkha Rifles (Frontier Force)
8 Gorkha Rifles
9 Gorkha Rifles
11 Gorkha Rifles
Ladakh Scouts
Arunachal Scouts
Sikkim Scouts















v
t
e


 Military of India 






 Indian Army
 Indian Navy
 Indian Air Force





Leadership



Chief of the Army Staff
Chief of the Naval Staff
Chief of the Air Staff





Topics



History
Academies
Ranks and insignia

Army
Air Force
Navy


Special Forces
Indian Peace Keeping Force
Central Armed Police Forces
Paramilitary forces
Andaman and Nicobar Command
Strategic Forces Command
Nuclear Command Authority
Ballistic missiles
Weapons of mass destruction
Defence Research and Development Organisation
Ordnance Factories Board
Territorial Army
National Cadet Corps





Wars and
conflicts



Indo-Pakistani wars

1947
1965
1971


Operation Polo
Congo Crisis
Operation Vijay
Operation Trident
Sino-Indian War
Cho La incident
Siachen conflict
Blue Star
Woodrose
1987 Sino-Indian skirmish
Indian intervention in the Sri Lankan Civil War
Operation Cactus
Kargil War
Kashmir insurgency
2001 Bangladeshi-Indian border skirmish
Operation Parakram
Piracy off the coast of Somalia








 Category

Army
Navy
Air Force














v
t
e


 Indian military academies and colleges



Education & training



Sainik School, Kunjpura
Sainik School
Armed Forces Medical College
Ajmer Military School
Bangalore Military School
Belgaum Military School
Chail Military School
Dholpur Military School
Rashtriya Indian Military College





Tri Service



Defence Services Staff College
National Defence Academy
National Defence College





Indian Army



Army Cadet College
Army War College
College of Military Engineering
Counter-Insurgency and Jungle Warfare School
High Altitude Warfare School
Indian Military Academy
Military College of Telecommunication Engineering
Officers Training Academy





Indian Air Force



Air Force Academy
Indian Air Force Test Pilot School





Indian Navy



Indian Naval Academy








Military academy
Military education and training












v
t
e


Current Indian Armed Forces infantry weapons and cartridges



Handguns



Pistol AUTO 9 mm 1A
Glock 17
SIG P226





Rifles




Assault rifles



INSAS
1A SLR
AKM
AK-103
MPi-KM-72
Arsenal Co. AR
Vz. 58
IMI Tavor TAR-21





Carbine



M4A1 Carbine
Zittara
AKS-74U





Designated Marksman



Dragunov SVD59





Sniper



Mauser SP66
IMI Galil 7.62 Sniper
Heckler & Koch MSG-90
Vidhwansak
Denel NTW-20
Gepard GM6 Lynx
OSV-96








Submachine guns



SAF Carbine 1A
Heckler & Koch MP5
Heckler & Koch MP5K
Uzi





Machine guns



MG 1B
INSAS LMG
IMI Negev
PKM
MG 2A1
Browning M2
NSV
KPV





Grenade launchers



GP-25
MKEK T-40
Multi Grenade Launcher 40mm
AGS-17 Plamya





Mortars



E1 51mm Mortar
E1 81mm Mortar
E1 120mm Mortar





Rockets



RPG-7
RCL Mk II
RCL Mk III
Shipon





Missiles



MILAN
9M133 Kornet (AT-14 Spriggan)
9M113 Konkurs (AT-5 Spandrel)
9M111 Fagot (AT-4 Spigot)
SA-16 Gimlet
SA-7 Grail





Cartridges



9×19mm NATO
5.56×45mm NATO
7.62×39mm
7.62×51mm NATO
7.62×54mmR
.50 BMG (12.7×99mm NATO)
12.7×108mm
14.5×114mm
30mm grenade
40×46mm












v
t
e


Indian Military honours and decorations



Wartime



 Param Vir Chakra
 Maha Vir Chakra
 Vir Chakra





Peacetime



 Ashoka Chakra
 Kirti Chakra
 Shaurya Chakra





Distinguished
Service & Gallantry







 Sena Medal

Army


 Nao Sena Medal

Navy


 Vayu Sena Medal

Air Force







Wartime



 Sarvottam Yudh Seva Medal
 Uttam Yudh Seva Medal
 Yudh Seva Medal





Peacetime



 Param Vishisht Seva Medal
 Ati Vishisht Seva Medal
 Vishisht Seva Medal








Service and
campaign medals



 Wound Medal
 General Service Medal 1947
 Samanya Seva Medal
 Special Service Medal
 Samar Seva Star
 Poorvi Star
 Paschimi Star
 Operation Vijay Star
 Siachen Glacier Medal
 Raksha Medal
 Sangram Medal
 Operation Vijay Medal
 Operation Parakram Medal
 Sainya Seva Medal
 High Altitude Service Medal
 Videsh Seva Medal





Long service awards



 Meritorious Service Medal
 Long Service and Good Conduct Medal
 30 Years Long Service Medal
 20 Years Long Service Medal
 9 Years Long Service Medal
 Territorial Army Decoration
 Territorial Army Medal





Independence Awards



 Indian Independence Medal
 50th Independence Anniversary Medal
 25th Independence Anniversary Medal





Other Awards



Mention in Dispatches
Commendation Card












v
t
e


 India topics








History







Overviews



Timeline
Years


Astronomy
Economics
Linguistics
Maritime
Mathematics
Metallurgy
Military
Postal
Science and technology





Pre-colonial



Stone Age
Indus Valley Civilization
Vedic period
Mahajanapadas
Mauryas
Middle kingdoms
Hoysala
Chola
Pala
Kakatiya
Delhi Sultanate
Vijayanagara
Mughals
Marathas
European trade








Colonial
Princely






East India Company
Plassey
1857 rebellion
British Raj
Railways
Economy
Army
Zamindari
Bengali renaissance
Political reforms
Princely states
Partition of Bengal
Independence movement
1943 famine
World War II
Partition





Republic



Integration
Non-Aligned Movement
Five-Year Plans
Sino-Indian War
Indo-Pakistani wars
Green Revolution
White Revolution
Naxal Insurgency
Smiling Buddha
Space programme
The Emergency
Indian Peace Keeping Force (IPKF)
Economic liberalisation
Pokhran-II
















Geography







Environment



Biosphere reserves
Climate

Climatic regions


Earthquakes
Ecoregions
Environmental issues
Fauna
Flora
Geology
National parks
Protected areas
Wildlife
sanctuaries





Landforms



Beaches
Desert
Extreme points
Glaciers
Islands
Lakes
Mountains
Plains

Indo-Gangetic
Eastern coastal
Western coastal


Rivers
Valleys
Volcanoes
Waterfalls





Regions



East
North
Northeast
South
West





Subdivisions



Autonomous administrative divisions
Cities
Districts
Municipalities
States and territories
















Politics







Government



Agencies
Energy policy
Foreign relations
Parliament
President
Vice President
Prime Minister
Union Council of Ministers
Civil Services
Cabinet Secretary
State governments





Law







Chief Justice
Constitution
District Courts
Fundamental rights, principles and duties
High Courts
Human rights
Supreme Court





Enforcement




Federal



Border Security Force (BSF)
Central Industrial Security Force (CISF)
Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF)
Indo-Tibetan Border Police (ITBP)
National Security Guard (NSG)
Railway Protection Force (RPF)
Sashastra Seema Bal (SSB)
Special Protection Group (SPG)





Intelligence



Bureau of Police Research and Development (BPR&D)
Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI)
Directorate of Revenue Intelligence (DRI)
Enforcement Directorate
Intelligence Bureau (IB)
Joint Intelligence Committee (JIC)
Narcotics Control Bureau (NCB)
National Investigation Agency (NIA)
Research and Analysis Wing (R&AW)











Military



Army
Navy
Air Force





Politics



Censorship
Elections
Nationalism
Parliament

Lok Sabha
Rajya Sabha


Political parties

INC
BJP
BSP
CPI
CPM
NCP


Reservations
Scandals
Scheduled groups
Secularism
















Economy







Companies



BSE SENSEX
CNX Nifty
Government-owned companies
List of companies





Governance



Ministry of Finance

Finance ministers


Ministry of Commerce and Industry

Commerce ministers


Finance Commission
Planning Commission
Economic Advisory Council
Central Statistical Office
Securities and Exchange Board of India
Enforcement Directorate
Foreign trade
Remittances
Taxation
Subsidies
Industrial licensing
Voluntary guidelines
NITI Aayog
Make in India
FDI in India





Currency



Indian rupee

History
Historical exchange rates data of the Indian rupee
Coinage


Reserve Bank of India

Governors


India Government Mint





Financial services



Banking

Banks


Insurance
Foreign exchange reserves
Bombay Stock Exchange
National Stock Exchange
Multi Commodity Exchange
Bullion
Black money





History



Economic Development
Economic liberalisation
Licence Raj
Green revolution
Government initiatives
Numbering system





People



Billionaires
Businesspeople
Demography
Income

Poverty


Labour law
Pensions

EPFO
NPS
PPF







States



Andhra Pradesh
Assam
Bihar
Goa
Gujarat
Haryana
Himachal Pradesh
Jammu and Kashmir
Karnataka
Kerala
Madhya Pradesh
Maharashtra
Manipur
Mizoram
Nagaland
Odisha
Punjab
Rajasthan
Tamil Nadu
Telangana
Uttarakhand
Uttar Pradesh
West Bengal





Sectors



Agriculture

Livestock
Fishing


Automotive
Defence
Construction
Education
Energy

Nuclear
Solar
Wind


Entertainment
Forestry
Gambling
Healthcare
Information technology
Media

Cinema
Television
Printing


Mining
Pharmaceuticals
Retail
Science and technology

Biotechnology


Telecommunications
Textiles
Tourism
Transport

Aviation

Civil


Ports
Rail


Utilities

Electricity
Water





















Society
Culture










Society



Caste system
Corruption
Demographics
Education

Universities in India
Medical colleges in India
Law colleges in India
Engineering colleges in India


Ethnic relations
Healthcare

Hospitals in India


Languages
Literacy
Poverty
Prisons
Religion
Socio-economic issues
Standard of living
Water supply and sanitation
Crime





Culture



Arts and entertainment
Architecture
Blogging
Cinema
Comics

Webcomics


Cuisine

wine


Dance
Dress
Folklore
Festivals
Literature
Media

television


Martial arts
Music
Public holidays
Sport


















v
t
e


Active corps of the Indian Army



By commands




Central Command



I Corps*





Eastern Command



III Corps
IV Corps
XVII Corps
XXXIII Corps





Northern Command



XIV Corps
XV Corps
XVI Corps





Southern Command



XII Corps
XXI Corps





South Western Command



I Corps
X Corps





Western Command



II Corps
IX Corps
XI Corps











By number



I Corps
II Corps
III Corps
IV Corps
IX Corps
X Corps
XI Corps
XII Corps
XIV Corps
XV Corps
XVI Corps
XVII Corps
XXI Corps
XXXIII Corps






(*Currently assigned to South Western Command)









						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Indian_Army&oldid=818464104"					Categories: 1895 establishments in India1947 establishments in IndiaIndian ArmyCantonments of IndiaDefence agencies of IndiaGovernment agencies established in 1947Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksCS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknownWebarchive template webcite linksAll articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from March 2016Articles with dead external links from April 2016Use Indian English from June 2016All Wikipedia articles written in Indian EnglishUse dmy dates from October 2016All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from July 2015Articles with unsourced statements from June 2017All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrasesArticles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from April 2011Articles with unsourced statements from March 2013Wikipedia articles in need of updating from June 2017All Wikipedia articles in need of updatingArticles containing potentially dated statements from July 2017All articles containing potentially dated statementsCS1 maint: Extra text: authors listArticles containing video clips