For a similar concept in the United States, see Indian reservation. For the area set aside in the Royal Proclamation of 1763, see Indian Reserve (1763). For other uses, see Indian reserve (disambiguation).






This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (August 2013) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)





Indigenous peoples
in Canada







First Nations
Inuit
Métis






History


Paleo-Indians
Pre-colonization
Genetics
Residential schools
Indian hospitals
Conflicts
First Nations
Inuit








Politics


Crown and Indigenous peoples
Treaty rights
Health Policy
Numbered Treaties
Royal Commission
Self-government
Indian Act
British Columbia Treaty Process
Idle No More
Missing and Murdered Indigenous Women
Politics
Organizations
Case law

Indigenous and Northern
Affairs Canada









Culture


Indigenous cultures
Indigenous personalities
Country food
Music








Demographics


Indian reserves
AB

FN
Métis


Atlantic CA
BC
MB
ON
QC
SK
Territories
Pacific Coast








Linguistics


Indigenous languages
Inuit languages
Indigenous English Dialects
NAPA
Aboriginal syllabics
Inuit grammar








Religions


Traditional beliefs

Inuit mythology










Index


Index of articles
Indigenous
First Nations
Inuit
Métis
Stubs








Wikiprojects
Portal

Indigenous Canadian portal

WikiProject

Indigenous North Americans

First Nations

Commons
Wiktionary

Inuit

Commons
Wiktionary

Métis

Commons
Wiktionary









v
t
e





In Canada, an Indian reserve (French: réserve autochtone) is specified by the Indian Act as a "tract of land, the legal title to which is vested in Her Majesty, that has been set apart by Her Majesty for the use and benefit of a band."[1]
First Nations reserves are the areas set aside for First Nations people after a contract with the Canadian state ("the Crown"), and are not to be confused with land claims areas, which involve all of that First Nations' traditional lands: a much larger territory than any other reserve.



Contents


1 Demographics
2 Governance
3 Constitution Act 1867
4 Treaties and reserves, pre-1867
5 Numbered treaties, 1871–1921
6 The Indian Act 1876
7 Indian Act

7.1 Housing loans


8 Public policy

8.1 CEPA 1999


9 Water quality
10 See also
11 Citations
12 References
13 Further reading
14 External links



Demographics[edit]
A single "band" (First Nations government) may control one reserve or several, in addition some reserves are shared between multiple bands. In 2003 the Department of Indian Affairs stated there were 2,300 reserves in Canada, comprising 28,000 square kilometres (11,000 sq mi).[2] According to Statistics Canada in 2011, there are more than 600 First Nations/Indian bands in Canada and 3,100 Indian reserves across Canada.[3] Examples include the Sturgeon Lake First Nation, which like many bands, has only one reserve, Sturgeon Lake Indian Reserve No. 101. Musqueam No. 2 and No. 4, and Sea Island Indian Reserve No. 3 are governed by the Musqueam Indian Band, one of many examples where a single government has more than one reserve.[4] In 2003, 60 percent of status Indians lived on reserves.[2]
Of the 637,660 First Nations people who reported being Registered Indians, nearly one-half (49.3%) lived on an Indian reserve. This proportion varies across the country.[5]
Many reserves have no resident population; typically they are small, remote, discontiguous pieces of land, a fact which has led many to be abandoned, or used only seasonally (as a trapping territory, for example). Statistics Canada counts only those reserves which are populated (or potentially populated) as "subdivisions" for the purpose of the national census. For the 2011 census, of the more than 3,100 Indian reserves across Canada, there were only 961 Indian reserves classified as census subdivisions (including the 6 reserves added for 2011).[6] Some reserves that were originally rural were gradually surrounded by urban development. Montreal, Vancouver and Calgary are examples of cities with urban reserves.
Governance[edit]
One band Chief and Council commonly administer more than one reserve such as the Beaver Lake Cree Nation with two reserves, or the Lenape people, who are in Canada incorporated as the Munsee-Delaware Nation and who occupy Munsee-Delaware Nation Indian Reserve No. 1, consists of three discontiguous parcels of land totally 1054 ha. within the Chippewas of the Thames First Nation 42 near Muncy, Ontario, which was formerly shared between them and the Chippewas of the Thames First Nation as a single parcel of land. Some reserves are shared by multiple bands, whether as fishing camps or educational facilities such as Peckquaylis, a reserve on the Fraser River which is used by 21 Indian bands; it was formerly St. Mary's Indian Residential School and is an example of a reserve created in modern times.[7][8] Another multi-band reserve of the Sto:lo peoples is Grass Indian Reserve No. 15, which is located in the City of Chilliwack and is shared by nine bands.
Constitution Act 1867[edit]
In 1867, legislative jurisdiction over "Indians and Lands reserved for the Indians" was assigned to the Parliament of Canada through the Constitution Act, 1867,[9] a major part of Canada's Constitution, originally enacted as the British North America Act (BNA), which acknowledged that First Nations had special status. Separate powers covered "status and civil rights on the one hand and Indian lands on the other."[10][11]
In 1870 the newly formed Dominion government acquired Rupert's Land, a vast territory in British North America, consisting mostly of the Hudson Bay drainage basin, that had been controlled by the Hudson's Bay Company under its Charter with the British Crown from 1670-1870. Numerous aboriginal groups lived in the same territory and disputed the sovereignty of the area. The Dominion of Canada promised Britain to honour the provisions of the Proclamation of 1763 to "negotiate with its Amerindians for the extinguishment of their title and the setting aside of reserves for their exclusive use." This promise led to the numbered treaties.[12]
Treaties and reserves, pre-1867[edit]
After the Royal Proclamation and before Confederation in 1867 the Upper Canada Treaties (1764–1862 Ontario) and the Douglas Treaties (1850-1854 British Columbia) treaties were signed. "Some of these pre-confederation and post-confederation treaties addressed reserve lands, hunting, fishing, trapping rights, annuities and other benefits."[13] Governor Douglas of British Columbia, which formally became a colony in 1858, also worked to establish many reserves on the mainland during his tenure, though most of these were overturned by successor colonial governments and later royal commissions once the province joined Confederation in 1871.
Numbered treaties, 1871–1921[edit]
Between 1871 and 1921, through numbered treaties with First Nations, the Canadian government gained large areas of land for settlers and for industry in Northwestern Ontario, Northern Canada and in the Prairies. The treaties, also called the Land Cession or Post-Confederation Treaties,[14] Treaty 1 was a controversial agreement established August 3, 1871, between Queen Victoria and various First Nations in southeastern Manitoba, including the Chippewa and Swampy Cree tribes. Treaty 1 First Nations comprise the Brokenhead Ojibway Nation, Fort Alexander (Sagkeeng First Nation), Long Plain First Nation, Peguis First Nation, Roseau River Anishinabe First Nation, Sandy Bay First Nation and Swan Lake First Nation.
The Indian Act 1876[edit]
The rights and freedoms of Canada's First Nations people have been governed by the Indian Act since its enactment in 1876[15] by the Parliament of Canada. The provisions of Section 91(24) of the Constitution Act, 1867, provided Canada's federal government exclusive authority to legislate in relation to "Indians and Lands Reserved for Indians".[16]
Wikwemikong Unceded Reserve on Manitoulin Island is subject to the Indian Act provisions governing reserves even though its lands were never ceded to the Crown by treaty.[citation needed]
Indian Act[edit]
The Indian Act gives the Minister of Aboriginal Affairs the right to "determine whether any purpose for which lands in a reserve are used is for the use and benefit of the band."[17] Title to land within the reserve may be transferred to only the band or to individual band members. Reserve lands may not be seized legally, nor is the personal property of a band or a band member living on a reserve subject to "charge, pledge, mortgage, attachment, levy, seizure distress or execution in favour or at the instance of any person other than an Indian or a band" (section 89 (1) of the[18] GCa (1985), Indian Act, Government of Canada .
Housing loans[edit]
While the act was intended to protect the Indian holdings, the limitations make it difficult for the reserves and their residents to obtain financing for development and construction, or renovation. To answer this need, Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation (CMHC) has created an on-reserve housing loan program. Members of bands may enter into a trust agreement with CMHC, and lenders can receive loans to build or repair houses. In other programs, loans to residents of reserves are guaranteed by the federal government.
Provinces and municipalities may expropriate reserve land only if specifically authorized by a provincial or federal law. Few reserves have any economic advantages, such as resource revenues. The revenues of those reserves which do are held in trust by the minister of Indian Affairs. Reserve lands and the personal property of bands and resident band members are exempt from all forms of taxation except local taxation.
Corporations owned by members of First Nations are not exempt, however. This exemption has allowed band members operating in proprietorships or partnerships to sell heavily taxed goods, such as cigarettes, on their reserves at prices considerably lower than those at stores off the reserves. Most reserves are self-governed, within the limits already described, under guidelines established by the Indian Act.
Due to treaty settlements, some Indian reserves are now incorporated as villages, such as New Aiyansh, British Columbia, which like other Nisga'a reserves was relieved of that status by the Nisga'a Treaty. Similarly, the Indian reserves of the Sechelt Indian Band are now Indian government districts.
Public policy[edit]
Indian reserves play a very important role in public policy stakeholder consultations, particularly when reserves are located in areas that have valuable natural resources with potential for economic development. Beginning in the 1970s, First Nations gained "recognition of their constitutionally protected rights."[19] First Nations' rights are protected by section 35 of the Constitution Act, 1982. By 2002 (Valiente) First Nations had already "finalised 14 comprehensive land claims and self-government agreements, with numerous others, primarily in northern Canada and British Columbia, at different stages of negotiations." Land claims and self-government agreements are "modern treaties" and therefore hold constitutional status.
CEPA 1999[edit]
The Canadian Environmental Protection Act, 1999 (CEPA), "places aboriginal participation on par with federal ministers and the provinces in the National Advisory Committee."[19] Among other things, CEPA clarified the term "aboriginal land" in 3 (1): "The definitions in this subsection apply in this Act. "aboriginal land" means (a) reserves, surrendered lands and any other lands that are set apart for the use and benefit of a band and that are subject to the Indian Act."[20] Under sections 46–50 of the CEPA, Environment Canada's National Pollutant Release Inventory (NPRI) was initiated. NPRI is the inventory of "pollutants released, disposed of and sent for recycling by facilities across the country".[21] The NPRI is used by First Nation administrations on reserves, along with other research tools, to monitor pollution. For example, NPRI data from Environment Canada's National Pollutant Release Inventory (NPRI) showed the Aamjiwnaang First Nation in Sarnia, Ontario, was "ground zero for Ontario's heaviest load of air pollution."[21]
Water quality[edit]
By 2006,[22] nearly 100 Indian reserves had boil-water advisories and many others had substandard water. Kwikwasut'inuxw Haxwa'mis First Nation, on an island off the British Columbia coast, had a boil-water advisory beginning in 1997.[22] In October 2005, "high E. coli levels were found in the Kashechewan First Nation reserve's drinking water and chlorine levels had to be increased to 'shock' levels, causing skin problems and eventually resulting in an evacuation of hundreds of people from the reserve and costing approximately $16 million."[22]
See also[edit]

Aboriginal peoples in Canada
Lands inhabited by indigenous peoples
List of Indian reserves in Canada
List of Indian reserves in Canada by population
The Canadian Crown and Aboriginal peoples
Urban Indian reserve

Citations[edit]


^ http://laws-lois.justice.gc.ca/eng/acts/I-5/page-1.html?txthl=tract+lands+land#s-2
^ a b DIAND 2003, p. 2.
^ StatsCan 2011.
^ Indian and Northern Affairs Canada, Reserves/Settlements/Villages Detail Archived 2013-12-02 at the Wayback Machine.
^ StatsCan 2011b.
^ http://www.statcan.gc.ca/pub/92-195-x/2011001/geo/csd-sdr/def-eng.htm
^ "Pekw'Xe:yles". BC Geographical Names. 
^ Indian and Northern Affairs Canada - Reserves/Settlements/Villages detail Archived March 2, 2012, at the Wayback Machine.
^ Constitution Act, 1867 Archived May 31, 2012, at the Wayback Machine., 30 & 31 Victoria, c. 3 (U.K.), R.S.C. 1985, App. II, No. 11.
^ GC 1870.
^ GC 1867, s.146.
^ Dickason 2009, p. 241.
^ DIAND 2003, p. 1.
^ Robert & 2001-5.
^ Clegg 1982.
^ Constitution Act Archived August 10, 2014, at the Wayback Machine.
^ Indian Act
^ GCa 1985.
^ a b Henriques et al.
^ CEPA 1999
^ a b Colihan 2008.
^ a b c CBC 2006.


References[edit]


AANDC (1 October 2012), Terminology, Aboriginal Affairs and Northern Development Canada, archived from the original on 14 January 2013, retrieved 20 September 2013 
AANDC (28 May 2013), Indian Status, Aboriginal Affairs and Northern Development Canada, retrieved 20 September 2013 
AB (n.d.), Alberta Policy Glossary, First Nation, Métis, and Inuit Policy Framework, Government of Alberta 
BC (July 2010), Building Relationships with First Nations: Respecting Rights and Doing Good Business (PDF), Ministry of Aboriginal Relations and Reconciliation 
Berger, Thomas R. (1977), Northern Frontier, Northern Homeland: the Report of the Mackenzie Valley Pipeline Inquiry (PDF), Supply and Services Canada, ISBN 0-660-00775-4 
Carlson, Keith Thor (ed.) (2001). A Stó:lō-Coast Salish Historical Atlas. Vancouver, BC: Douglas & McIntyre. pp. 6–18. ISBN 1-55054-812-3. CS1 maint: Extra text: authors list (link)
CBC (2001), Twenty-five years after the Berger pipeline inquiry 
CBC (9 November 2006), Kashechewan: Water crisis in Northern Ontario (PDF), Aboriginal Canadians, CBC 
Clegg, Cindy (4 September 1982), Our Native Land: Making the Canadian Indian, CBC 
Colihan, Mary Ann (1 April 2008), Chemical valley: Aamjiwnaang First Nation in Sarnia sounds alarm over toxins, Aboriginal Canadians, CBC News 
DIAND (2003), Resolving Aboriginal Claims: a Practical Guide to Canadian Experiences (PDF), Ottawa, Ontario: Department of Indian Affairs and Northern Development, ISBN 0-662-35239-4 
Dickason, Olive Patricia (2009), David T. McNab, ed., Canada's First Nations: a History of Founding Peoples from Earliest Times, University of Oxford Press, ISBN 978-0-19-542892-6 
GC (1867), Constitution Act, 1867, Government of Canada, p. s.146 
GC (23 June 1870), Rupert's Land and North-Western Territory Order, Government of Canada, archived from the original on July 20, 2011 
GCa (1985), Indian Act, Government of Canada 
Henriques, Irene; Sadorsky, Perry (2004), Environmental Policy Tools and Firm Level Management Practices in Canada (PDF), Paris: OECD 
Husky (n.d.), Community, Husky Energy 
INAC (February 2001), Words First: an Evolving Terminology Relating to Aboriginal Peoples in Canada (PDF), Ottawa, Ontario: Communications Branch at Indian and Northern Affairs Canada (INAC), ISBN 0-662-33143-5, archived from the original (PDF) on 29 September 2013, retrieved 20 September 2013 
MANA (n.d.), Manitoba's Aboriginal Community: Who are Manitoba's Aboriginal People?, Manitoba Aboriginal and Northern Affairs, retrieved 20 September 2013 
CRA (2013), Canada Revenue Agency, Government of Canada 
Robert, Jean-Claude, Numbered Treaty Overview, Canada in the Making - Specific Events, Canadiana, retrieved 20 September 2013 
Ryerson (1998), Ryerson Journalism, archived from the original on 2013-09-28 
Ryerson (n.d.), Ryerson Journalism Diversity Watch, archived from the original on 2013-09-27 
SCS, Guidelines for Integrating Indian and Métis Content and Perspectives, Saskatoon Catholic Schools, retrieved 20 September 2013 
Shell (n.d.), Shell At a Glance Shell 
StatsCan (2011), Aboriginal Peoples in Canada: First Nations People, Métis and Inuit, Statistics Canada, retrieved 16 August 2013 
StatsCan (2011a), Tsinstikeptum 9, National Household Survey (NHS) Focus on Geography Series, Statistics Canada 
StatsCan (2011b), Highlights: First Nations people, Aboriginal Peoples in Canada: First Nations People, Métis and Inuit, Statistics Canada, retrieved 16 August 2013 
StatsCan (2012), High Level Indicators –Aboriginal Peoples Survey 2012 (PDF), 2012 Aboriginal Peoples Survey (APS), Statistics Canada 
Inclusive language guidelines, Vancouver, BC: University of British Columbia, n.d. 


Further reading[edit]

StatsCan (2011a). Tsinstikeptum 9 (Report). National Household Survey (NHS) Focus on Geography Series. Statistics Canada.  This series provides data on individual reserves including population by Aboriginal identity, immigrant population, educational attainment, labour, income and housing. In the documents footnote it was pointed out that, "[r]espondents self-identified as 'First Nations (North American Indian)' on the NHS questionnaire; however, the term 'First Nations people' is used throughout this document." In the document, "term 'Aboriginal identity' refers to whether the person reported being an Aboriginal person, that is, First Nations (North American Indian), Métis or Inuk (Inuit) and/or being a Registered or Treaty Indian, (that is, registered under the Indian Act of Canada) and/or being a member of a First Nation or Indian band. Aboriginal peoples of Canada are defined in the Constitution Act, 1982, section 35 (2) as including the Indian, Inuit and Métis peoples of Canada."

External links[edit]

First Nation Community Profiles, INAC, archived from the original on 2012-11-05 
Aboriginal Affairs and Northern Development Canada (formerly INAC)
Ontario Plaques - Rama Indian Reserve







v
t
e


Designations for types of administrative territorial entities








English terms








Common English terms1



Area



Insular area
Local government area
Protected area
Special area
Statistical area

Combined statistical area
Metropolitan statistical area
Micropolitan statistical area


Urban area





Canton

Half-canton



Borough



County borough
Metropolitan borough





Capital



Federal capital
Imperial capital





City



City state
Autonomous city
Charter city
Independent city
Incorporated city
Imperial city
Free imperial city
Royal free city





Community



Autonomous community
Residential community





County



Administrative county
Autonomous county
Consolidated city-county
Metropolitan county

Non-metropolitan


Viscountcy





Country



Overseas country





Department



Overseas department





District



Capital district
City district
Congressional district
Electoral district
Federal district
Indian government district
Land district
Metropolitan district

Non-metropolitan district


Military district
Municipal district
Police district
Regional district
Rural district
Sanitary district
Subdistrict
Urban district
Special district





Division



Census division
Police division
Subdivision





Municipality



County municipality

Norway
Nova Scotia
Regional county municipality


Direct-controlled municipality
District municipality
Mountain resort municipality
Neutral municipality
Regional municipality
Resort municipality
Rural municipality
Specialized municipality





Prefecture



Autonomous prefecture
Subprefecture
Super-prefecture
Praetorian prefecture





Province



Autonomous province
Overseas province
Roman province





Region



Administrative region
Autonomous region
Capital region
Development region
Economic region
Mesoregion
Microregion
Overseas region
Planning region
Special administrative region
Statistical region
Subregion





Reserve



Biosphere reserve
Ecological reserve
Game reserve
Indian reserve
Nature reserve





State



Federal state
Free state
Sovereign state





Territory



Capital territory

Federal capital territory


Dependent territory
Federal territory
Military territory
Organized incorporated territory
Overseas territory
Union territory
Unorganized territory





Town



Census town
Market town





Township



Charter township
Civil township
Paper township
Survey township
Urban township





Unit



Autonomous territorial unit
Local administrative unit
Municipal unit
Regional unit





Zone



Economic zone

Exclusive economic zone
Free economic zone
Special economic zone


Free-trade zone
Neutral zone
Self-administered zone










Other English terms



Current



Alpine resort
Bailiwick
Banner

Autonomous


Block
Cadastre
Circle
Circuit
Colony
Commune
Condominium
Constituency
Duchy
Eldership
Emirate
Federal dependency
Governorate
Hamlet
Ilkhanate
Indian reservation
Manor

Royal


Muftiate
Neighbourhood
Parish
Periphery
Precinct
Principality
Protectorate
Quarter
Regency
Autonomous republic
Riding
Sector

Autonomous


Shire
Sultanate
Suzerainty
Townland
Village

Administrative
Summer


Ward






Historical



Agency
Barony
Burgh
Exarchate
Hide
Hundred
Imperial Circle
March
Monthon
Presidency
Residency
Roman diocese
Seat
Tenth
Tithing



















Non-English or loanwords







Current



Amt
Bakhsh
Barangay
Bezirk
Regierungsbezirk
Comune
Frazione
Fu
Gemeinde
Județ
Kunta / kommun

Finland
Sweden


Län
Località
Megye
Muban
Oblast

Autonomous


Okrug
Ostān
Poblacion
Purok
Shahrestān
Sum
Sýsla
Tehsil
Vingtaine





Historical



Commote
Gau
Heerlijkheid
Köping
Maalaiskunta
Nome

Egypt
Greece


Pagus
Pargana
Plasă
Satrapy
Socken
Subah
Syssel
Zhou












v
t
e


Arabic terms for country subdivisions



First-level



Muhafazah (محافظة governorate)
Wilayah (ولاية province)
Mintaqah (منطقة region)
Mudiriyah (مديرية directorate)
Imarah (إمارة emirate)
Baladiyah (بلدية municipality)
Shabiyah (شعبية "popularate")





Second / third-level



Mintaqah (منطقة region)
Qadaa (قضاء district)
Nahiyah (ناحية subdistrict)
Markaz (مركز district)
Mutamadiyah (معتمدية "delegation")
Daerah/Daïra (دائرة circle)
Liwa (لواء banner / sanjak)





City / township-level



Amanah (أمانة municipality)
Baladiyah (بلدية municipality)
Ḥai (حي neighborhood / quarter)
Mahallah (محلة)
Qarya (قرية)
Sheyakhah (شياخة "neighborhood subdivision")






English translations given are those most commonly used.








v
t
e


French terms for country subdivisions






arrondissement
département
préfecture
subprefectures










v
t
e


Greek terms for country subdivisions



Modern



apokentromenes dioikiseis / geniki dioikisis§ / diamerisma§ / periphereia
nomos§ / periphereiaki enotita
demos / eparchia§ / koinotita§





Historical



archontia/archontaton
bandon
demos
despotaton
dioikesis
doukaton
droungos
eparchia
exarchaton
katepanikion
kephalatikion
kleisoura
meris
naukrareia
satrapeia
strategis
thema
toparchia
tourma






§ signifies a defunct institution








v
t
e


Portuguese terms for country subdivisions



Regional subdivisions



Estado
Distrito federal
Província
Região
Distrito
Comarca
Capitania





Local subdivisions



Município
Concelho
Freguesia
Comuna
Circunscrição





Settlements



Cidade
Vila
Aldeia
Bairro
Lugar








Historical subdivisions in italics.










v
t
e


Slavic terms for country subdivisions



Current



dzielnica
gmina
krai
kraj
krajina / pokrajina
městys
obec
oblast / oblast' / oblasti / oblys / obwód / voblast'
okręg
okres
okrug
opština / općina / občina / obshtina
osiedle
powiat / povit
raion
selsoviet / silrada
sołectwo
voivodeship / vojvodina
županija





Historical



darugha
gromada
guberniya / gubernia
jurydyka
khutor
obshchina
okolia
opole
pogost
prowincja
sorok
srez
starostwo / starostva
uyezd
volost
ziemia
župa










v
t
e


Spanish terms for country subdivisions



National, Federal



Comunidad autónoma
Departamento
Distrito federal
Estado
Provincia
Región





Regional, Metropolitan



Cantón
Comarca
Comuna
Corregimiento
Delegación
Distrito
Mancomunidad
Merindad
Municipalidad
Municipio
Parroquia

Ecuador
Spain







Urban, Rural



Aldea
Alquería
Anteiglesia
Asentamiento

Asentamiento informal
Pueblos jóvenes


Barrio
Campamento
Caserío
Ciudad

Ciudad autónoma


Colonia
Lugar
Masía
Pedanía
Población
Ranchería
Sitio
Vereda
Villa
Village (Pueblito/Pueblo)








Historical subdivisions in italics.










v
t
e


Turkish terms for country subdivisions



Modern



il (province)
ilçe (district)
şehir (city)
kasaba (town)
belediye (municipality)
belde (community)
köy (village)
mahalle (neighbourhood/quarter)





Historical



ağalık (feudal district)
bucak (subdistrict)
beylerbeylik (province)
kadılık (subprovince)
kaza (sub-province)
hidivlik (viceroyalty)
mutasarrıflık (subprovince)
nahiye (nahiyah)
paşalık (province)
reya (Romanian principalities)
sancak (prefecture)
vilayet (province)
voyvodalık (Romanian provinces)















1 Used by ten or more countries or having derived terms. Historical derivations in italics.
See also: Census division, Electoral district, Political division, and List of administrative divisions by country











v
t
e


 The Numbered Treaties



Numbered Treaties



Treaty 1
Treaty 2
Treaty 3
Treaty 4
Treaty 5
Treaty 6
Treaty 7
Treaty 8
Treaty 9
Treaty 10
Treaty 11












v
t
e


Indigenous and minority rights



Rights



Ancestral domain
Free, prior and informed consent
Intellectual property
Land rights
Language
Self-determination

in Australia
in Canada
in the United States


Traditional knowledge
Treaty rights





Governmental
organizations



African Commission on Human and Peoples' Rights
Arctic Council
Bureau of Indian Affairs
Council of Indigenous Peoples(Taiwan)
Fundação Nacional do Índio
Indigenous and Northern Affairs Canada
National Commission for the Development of Indigenous Peoples
National Commission on Indigenous Peoples (Philippines)
United Nations Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues





Non-governmental and
political organizations



Amazon Watch
Assembly of First Nations
Confederation of Indigenous Nationalities of Ecuador
Congress of Aboriginal Peoples
Coordinator of Indigenous Organizations of the Amazon River Basin
Cultural Survival
Indigenous Environmental Network
Indigenous Peoples Council on Biocolonialism
International Work Group for Indigenous Affairs
National Indigenous Organization of Colombia
Native American Rights Fund
Survival International
Unrepresented Nations and Peoples Organization
Zapatista Army of National Liberation
(more ...)





Issues



Civilizing mission
Colonialism

Internal colonialism
Settler colonialism


Cultural appropriation

Sports mascots
Redface


Dakota Access Pipeline protests
Discovery doctrine
Homeland
Lands inhabited by indigenous peoples

Bantustan
American Indian reservation
Indian reserve
Ranchería


Manifest destiny
Plastic shaman
Rainbow Warriors
Two-Spirit





Legal representation



Indigenous and Tribal Peoples Convention, 1989
Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, 2007





Historical cases



2009 Peruvian political crisis
Alta controversy
Chiapas conflict
Depopulation of Diego Garcia
High Arctic relocation
Indian removal
Mapuche conflict
Oka Crisis
Residential Schools

Canada
New Zealand
South Africa
United States


Rubber boom
San controversy
Stolen Generations








 Human Rights
 Indigenous rights • Minority rights











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Indian_reserve&oldid=815385720"					Categories: 1871 treatiesTypes of country subdivisionsIndian reservesLocal government in CanadaNumbered TreatiesHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksArticles needing additional references from August 2013All articles needing additional referencesArticles containing French-language textAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from October 2017CS1 maint: Extra text: authors list