This article is about the Bloomington campus of Indiana University. For other uses, see Indiana University (disambiguation).

Indiana University Bloomington




Latin: Indianensis Universitatis


Motto
Lux et Veritas



Motto in English

Light and Truth


Type
Flagship
Public


Established
January 20, 1820 (1820-01-20)



Academic affiliations




Indiana University
AAU
BTAA
APLU
ORAU
URA





Endowment
$1.986 billion (2016)[1]


President
Michael McRobbie


Provost
Lauren Robel



Academic staff

2,149 (2014)


Students
43,710 (2017)[2]


Undergraduates
33,429 (2017)[2]


Postgraduates
10,281 (2017)[2]


Location
Bloomington, Indiana, U.S.
39°10′02″N 86°31′17″W﻿ / ﻿39.167222°N 86.521389°W﻿ / 39.167222; -86.521389Coordinates: 39°10′02″N 86°31′17″W﻿ / ﻿39.167222°N 86.521389°W﻿ / 39.167222; -86.521389


Campus
small city: 1,937 acres (7.84 km2)[3] (2011)


Colors
Cream and Crimson[4]
         


Nickname
Hoosiers



Sporting affiliations

NCAA Division I – Big Ten


Website
www.indiana.edu





Indiana University Bloomington (abbreviated "IU Bloomington"[5] and colloquially referred to as "IU" or simply "Indiana") is a public research university located in Bloomington, Indiana, United States.[6] With over 40,000 students, IU Bloomington is the flagship institution of the Indiana University system and its largest university.[7]
Indiana University is one of America's "Public Ivy" universities, which refers to the top public universities in the United States that are considered to provide a quality of education comparable with the Ivy League.[8] It is a member of the Association of American Universities and has numerous schools and programs, including the Jacobs School of Music, the School of Informatics and Computing, the Kelley School of Business, the School of Public Health, the School of Nursing, the School of Optometry, the School of Public and Environmental Affairs, the Maurer School of Law, the School of Education, the Media School, and the School of Global and International Studies.[9]
As of Fall 2017, 43,710 students attend Indiana University. While 55.1% of the student body was from Indiana, students from all 50 states, Washington D.C., Puerto Rico and 165 foreign nations were also enrolled.[3] In 2016, the average accepted ACT score was a 28, and a SAT score of 1275.[10] The university is home to an extensive student life program, with more than 750 student organizations on campus and with around 17 percent of undergraduates joining the Greek system.[11] Indiana athletic teams compete in Division I of the NCAA and are known as the Indiana Hoosiers. The university is a member of the Big Ten Conference.
Among IU Bloomington’s many graduate-level programs are the Kelley School of Business, School of Education, School of Public and Environmental Affairs and Maurer School of Law. Indiana’s law school has a program with a first-year team-based approach, a diversion from the typical legal education. Notable Indiana alumni include CEO and co-founder of Siri and Viv Dag Kittlaus;[12] award-winning author Suzanne Collins, who wrote The Hunger Games series; composer and songwriter Hoagy Carmichael, who penned "Georgia on My Mind"; John Chambers, executive chairman and former CEO of Cisco Systems; and Mark Cuban, billionaire owner of the Dallas Mavericks, Landmark Theatres, and Magnolia Pictures. See: List of Indiana University (Bloomington) people for more.
In terms of academics and other criteria, IU Bloomington consistently ranks well within the top 100 national universities in the United States and the top 50 public universities in the country. The school's sports teams are notorious competitors in the NCAA Division I Big Ten Conference, and, since Indiana University does not have a mascot, all teams are known simply as "Hoosiers". There are more than 750 student organizations on campus including Indiana University Dance Marathon, the nation's second largest entirely student-run organization; and more than 5,000 students go Greek in the school’s large community of fraternities and sororities.[13]



Contents


1 History

1.1 Early years
1.2 20th century


2 Campus

2.1 Facilities and architecture
2.2 Athletic facilities
2.3 Indiana Memorial Union


3 Libraries

3.1 Herman B Wells Library
3.2 Branch libraries
3.3 Lilly Library
3.4 Fine Arts Library
3.5 William and Gayle Cook Music Library


4 Museums

4.1 Sidney and Lois Eskenazi Museum of Art
4.2 Mathers Museum of World Cultures
4.3 Grunwald Gallery of Art
4.4 Indiana Memorial Union


5 Academics

5.1 Rankings and recognition
5.2 Schools and Colleges

5.2.1 College of Arts and Sciences

5.2.1.1 School of Art + Design
5.2.1.2 School of Global and International Studies
5.2.1.3 The Media School


5.2.2 Hutton Honors College
5.2.3 Jacobs School of Music
5.2.4 Kelley School of Business
5.2.5 Maurer School of Law
5.2.6 School of Education
5.2.7 School of Informatics, Computing, and Engineering
5.2.8 School of Public and Environmental Affairs
5.2.9 School of Public Health-Bloomington
5.2.10 School of Social Work
5.2.11 School of Medicine
5.2.12 School of Nursing
5.2.13 School of Optometry
5.2.14 University Graduate School




6 Athletics
7 Media
8 Faculty

8.1 Enrollment statistics


9 Notable faculty and alumni
10 Sustainability
11 Transportation
12 References
13 Further reading

13.1 Primary sources


14 External links



History[edit]
Early years[edit]
Indiana's state government in Corydon established Indiana University on January 20, 1820, as the "State Seminary."[14] Construction began in 1822 at what is now called Seminary Square Park near the intersection of Second Street and College Avenue. The first professor was Baynard Rush Hall, a Presbyterian minister who taught all of the classes in 1825–27. In the first year, he taught twelve students and was paid $250. Hall was a classicist who focused on Greek and Latin and believed that the study of classical philosophy and languages formed the basis of the best education.[15] The first class graduated in 1830. From 1820 to 1889 a legal-political battle was fought between IU and Vincennes University as to which was the legitimate state university.[16][17]




The Sample Gates, the main entrance to the Indiana University Bloomington Campus


In 1829, Andrew Wylie became the first president, serving until his death in 1851. The school's name was changed to "Indiana College" in 1829, and to "Indiana University" in 1839. Wylie and David Maxwell, president of the board of trustees, were devout Presbyterians. They spoke of the nonsectarian status of the school but generally hired fellow Presbyterians. Presidents and professors were expected to set a moral example for their charges. After six ministers in a row, the first non-clergyman to become president was the young biology professor David Starr Jordan, in 1885.[18] Jordan followed Baptist theologian Lemuel Moss, who resigned after a scandal broke regarding his involvement with a female professor.
Jordan (president 1884–1891) improved the university's finances and public image, doubled its enrollment, and instituted an elective system along the lines of his alma mater, Cornell University.[19] Jordan became president of Stanford University in June 1891.[20]
Growth of the college was slow. In 1851, IU had nearly a hundred students and seven professors. IU admitted its first woman student, Sarah Parke Morrison, in 1867, making IU the fourth public university to admit women on an equal basis with men. Morrison went on to become the first female professor at IU in 1873.
Mathematician Joseph Swain was IU’s first Hoosier-born president, 1893 to 1902. He established Kirkwood Hall in 1894; a gymnasium for men in 1896, which later was named Assembly Hall; and Kirkwood Observatory in 1900. He began construction for Science Hall in 1901. During his presidency, student enrollment increased from 524 to 1,285.[21][22]




Morrison Hall in June 1942


In 1883, IU awarded its first Ph.D. and played its first intercollegiate sport (baseball), prefiguring the school's future status as a major research institution and a power in collegiate athletics. But another incident that year was of more immediate concern: the original campus in Seminary Square burned to the ground. The college was rebuilt between 1884 and 1908 at the far eastern edge of Bloomington. (Today, the city has expanded eastward, and the "new" campus is once again at the center of the city.) One challenge was that Bloomington's limited water supply was inadequate for its population of 12,000 and could not handle university expansion. The University commissioned a study that led to building a reservoir for its own use.[23]
20th century[edit]
In 1902, IU enrolled 1203 undergraduates; all but 65 were Hoosiers. There were 82 graduate students including ten from out-of-state. The curriculum emphasized the classics, as befitted a gentleman, and stood in contrast to the service-oriented curriculum at Purdue, which presented itself as of direct benefit to farmers, industrialists, and businessmen.[24]
The first extension office of IU was opened in Indianapolis in 1916. In 1920/1921 the School of Music and the School of Commerce and Finance (what later became the Kelley School of Business) were opened. In the 1940s Indiana University opened extension campuses in Kokomo and Fort Wayne. The controversial Kinsey Institute for sexual research was established in 1945.
During the Great Depression, Indiana University fared much better than most state schools thanks to the entrepreneurship of its young president Herman Wells. He collaborated with Frederick L. Hovde, the president of IU's cross state rival, Purdue; together they approached the Indiana delegation to Congress, indicating their highest priorities. For Wells, it was to build a world-class music school, replacing dilapidated facilities. As a result of these efforts, the Works Progress Administration (WPA) built one of finest facilities in the country. He added matching funds from the state legislature, and opened a full-scale fund-raising campaign among alumni and the business community. In 1942, Wells reported that "The past five years have been the greatest single period of expansion in the physical plant of the University in its entire history. In this period 15 new buildings have been constructed.[25][26]
In 1960, the IU student body elected Thomas Atkins, an African-American from Elkhart, Indiana, to the position of president of the student body. A throng of white students protested the result by parading around campus waving Confederate flags and allegedly blamed Atkins' victory on a "bunch of beatniks." When the protesters approached the female dormitory on campus, they were apparently met with "a barrage of cosmetic bottles, old shoes and other objects."[27]
Campus[edit]
The Indiana University Bloomington campus of 1,933 acres (7.82 km2) includes abundant green space and historic buildings dating to the university's reconstruction in the late nineteenth century. In 2011, Travel+Leisure listed the University as one of the most beautiful college campuses in the United States.[28] The campus rests on a bed of Indiana Limestone, specifically Salem Limestone and Harrodsburg Limestone, with outcroppings of St. Louis Limestone.
The "Jordan River" is a stream flowing through the center of campus. A section of Bloomington's Clear Creek,[29] it is named for David Starr Jordan, Darwinist, ichthyologist, and president of IU, later, of Stanford University.[30] Bloomington was ranked 5th best city for educated millennials by Business Insider.[31] College Ranker listed Bloomington as #6 Best College Town to Live in Forever.[32] Lumosity and VentureBeat both rank Bloomington as the 7th smartest city in America.[33][34] Bloomington has been ranked the 4th "Gayest (per-capita) City in America" by Advocate & 3rd best gay-friendly university by bestcolleges.com.[35][36]
Facilities and architecture[edit]






The Old Crescent




U.S. National Register of Historic Places




U.S. Historic district







Maxwell Hall



Location
Indiana University Campus, Bloomington, Indiana


Area
20 acres (8.1 ha)


Built
1884 (1884)


Architect
Multiple


Architectural style
Late Victorian, Gothic, Romanesque


NRHP reference #
80000028[37]


Added to NRHP
September 8, 1980


Many of the campus's buildings, especially the older central buildings, are made from Indiana Limestone quarried locally. The Works Progress Administration built much of the campus's core during the Great Depression. Many of the campus's buildings were built and most of its land acquired during the 1950s and 1960s when first soldiers attending under the GI Bill and then the baby boom swelled the university's enrollment from 5,403 in 1940 to 30,368 in 1970. Some buildings on campus underwent similar expansion. As additions were constructed by building onto the outside of existing buildings, exterior surfaces were incorporated into their new interiors, making this expansion clearly visible in the affected buildings' architecture. The Chemistry and Biology buildings serve as examples, where two of the interior walls of the latter's library are clearly constructed as limestone exteriors. The Bryan House is the traditional on-campus home of the university president.
Nine of the oldest buildings are included in a national historic district known as The Old Crescent. It was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1980.[37] They are the Collegiate Gothic style Student Service Building (1906-1908); Indiana University Museum (1905); Richardsonian Romanesque style Maxwell Building (1890, 1907-1908); Owen Hall (1885); Wylie Hall (1885); Kirkwood Hall (1895); Lindley Hall (1903); Gothic Revival style Rose Well House (1908); and Kirkwood Observatory (1900).[38]
The 1979 movie Breaking Away was filmed on location in Bloomington and the IU campus. It also featured a reenactment of the annual Little 500 bicycle race. The IU campus also has trails that many use for biking and running. The trails in Bloomington and nearby areas total nearly 1,200 miles (1,900 km).
Athletic facilities[edit]
See also: Indiana Hoosiers
Indiana University's athletic facilities are located on campus and are grouped in between East 17th Street, Dunn Street and the IN-45/IN-46 bypass. In the 17,000-seat Assembly Hall (home to the IU NCAA basketball team), there are five NCAA Men's Division I Basketball Championship banners on display. Cook Hall, Memorial Stadium, Mellencamp Pavilion, the Gladstein Fieldhouse, the IU Tennis Center, the Billy Hayes Track and Bill Armstrong Stadium are all also located within the complex.
Indiana Memorial Union[edit]
Main article: Indiana Memorial Union
The over 500,000-square-foot (46,000 m2) Indiana Memorial Union (IMU) is the second largest student union in the world. In addition to stores and restaurants, it features an eight-story student activities tower (home to the Indiana University Student Association, Indiana Memorial Union Board, and a variety of other student organizations), a 186-room hotel, a 400-seat theatre, a 5,000-square-foot (460 m2) Alumni Hall, 50,000 square feet (4,600 m2) of meeting space, and a bowling alley. The IMU houses an outstanding collection of Indiana art including artists from Brown County, the Hoosier Group, Richmond Group and others. This collection is the largest public collection of art outside of a museum.
Libraries[edit]




Herman B Wells Library, seen from IU Arboretum


The Indiana University Bloomington Library System supports over twenty libraries and provides access to more than 9.9 million books, 800 databases, 60,000 electronic journal titles, and 815,000 ebooks.[39] The system is the 14th largest library in North America by volumes held.[40]
Herman B Wells Library[edit]
IU's Herman B Wells Library holds more than 4.6 million volumes.[41] Prior to a ceremony in June 2005, when it was renamed for IU's former president and chancellor, this building was simply called the Main Library.[42] Built in 1969, the building contains eleven floors in the East Tower (research collection) and five floors in the West Tower (the undergraduate core collection). In 2014 the first floors of both towers were renovated and reintroduced as the Learning Commons and Scholars' Commons. The library is also home to Indiana University Press and the University Graduate School.
An oft-repeated urban legend holds that the library is sinking because when it was built, engineers failed to take into account the weight of all the books that would occupy the building. An article in the Indiana Daily Student newspaper debunks this myth, stating, among other things, that the building rests on a 94 ft (28.6 m) thick limestone bedrock.[43]
Branch libraries[edit]
In addition to IU's main library, the Bloomington Libraries support more than twenty additional libraries:[44]

Archives of African American Music & Culture
Archives of Traditional Music
Black Film Center/Archive
Business/SPEA Information Commons (Library for the Kelley School of Business and the School of Public and Environmental Affairs)
Chemistry Library
Education Library
GLBT Library
Indiana Institute on Disability and Community, Center for Disability Information and Referral (CeDIR) Library
Indiana Prevention Resource Center Library
IU Libraries Moving Image Archive
Kinsey Institute Library
Law Library (Library for the Maurer School of Law)
Life Sciences Library (Library for the Biology Department, Medical Sciences Program, and Nursing Program)
Lilly Library (rare books and manuscripts)
Neal-Marshall Black Culture Center Library
Optometry Library
Ostrom Workshop Library
Residential Programs and Services Libraries
Sinor Research Institute for Inner Asian Studies
University Archives and Records Management
William & Gayle Cook Music Library
Wylie House Museum

Lilly Library[edit]




Lilly Library


Main article: Lilly Library
The Lilly Library is one of the largest rare book and manuscript libraries in the United States. Founded in 1960 with the collection of Josiah K. Lilly, Jr., of Eli Lilly and Company in Indianapolis, the library now contains approximately 400,000 rare books, 6.5 million manuscripts, and 100,000 pieces of sheet music.[45] The library's holdings are particularly strong in British and American history and literature, religious texts, Latin Americana, medicine and science, food and drink, children's literature, fine printing and binding, popular music, medieval and Renaissance manuscripts, and early printing. Notable items in the library's collections include the New Testament of the Gutenberg Bible, a first edition copy of the Book of Mormon, the first printed collection of Shakespeare's works, a pair of the Spock’s ears worn by Leonard Nimoy in Star Trek VI, Audubon's Birds of America, one of 25 extant copies of the "First Printing of the Declaration of Independence" (also known as the "Dunlap Broadside") that was printed in Philadelphia on July 4, 1776, George Washington's letter accepting the presidency of the United States, Abraham Lincoln's desk from his law office, a leaf from the famous Abraham Lincoln "Sum Book" c. 1824–1826, Lord Chesterfield's letters to his son, the manuscripts of Robert Burns's "Auld Lang Syne", the Boxer Codex, annotated production scripts for Star Trek, J. M. Synge's The Playboy of the Western World, and J. M. Barrie's Peter Pan, and typescripts of many of Ian Fleming's James Bond novels. The library also owns the papers of Hollywood directors Orson Welles and John Ford, the poets Sylvia Plath and Ezra Pound, and authors Edith Wharton, Max Eastman and Upton Sinclair. The library is also home to four Academy Awards, donated by alumni. In 2006, the library received a collection of 30,000 mechanical puzzles from Jerry Slocum. The collection will be on permanent display. Special permission is not required to use the collections, and the library has several exhibition galleries which are open to the public.
Within the Lilly Library is the Ruth E. Adomeit collection of miniature books, one of the world’s largest.[46] Among the collection are rare miniature books such as "From Morn Till Eve", a miniature book that presents biblical quotations in a devotional form, with one phrase for each morning and evening of a month. The Online Computer Library Center (OCLC) had listed that, "the only known copy as being in the collection of famed miniature book collector Ruth E. Adomeit",[47] which is now in the Lilly Library.
Fine Arts Library[edit]
IU's first Fine Arts Library was established in the late 1930s as part of the Departmental office on the second floor, east wing of the University Library which was then located in Franklin Hall. In 1941, two important events occurred: art historian Henry Radford Hope became chairman of the Fine Arts Department in the Fall and the Fine Arts Center was created by remodeling Mitchell Hall Annex. The Fine Arts Library moved into IU Art Museum designed by I.M. Pei in August 1981. This location was closed for renovations to the museum in spring 2017. All fine arts materials are currently located on the 9th floor of the Herman B Wells Library.[48]
William and Gayle Cook Music Library[edit]
The William and Gayle Cook Music Library, recognized as one of the largest academic music libraries in the world, serves the Jacobs School of Music and the Bloomington Campus of Indiana University. The collection comprises over 700,000 catalogued items on 56,733 linear feet of shelves. It occupies a four-floor, 55,000 square-foot facility in a wing of the Bess Meshulam Simon Music Library and Recital Center, dedicated in November 1995.
Museums[edit]
Sidney and Lois Eskenazi Museum of Art[edit]
Main article: Indiana University Art Museum




IU Art Museum


The Sidney and Lois Eskenazi Museum of Art, formerly known as the Indiana University Art Museum,[49] was established in 1941 and has been located in a building designed by the world-renowned architecture firm I.M. Pei and Partners since 1982. The museum houses a collection of over 40,000 objects and includes works by Claude Monet, Marcel Duchamp, Pablo Picasso, Henri Matisse, and Jackson Pollock. The museum has particular strengths in the art of Africa, Oceania, the Americas, Ancient Greece and Rome, and European Modernism. It also holds a substantial collection of works on paper (prints, drawings, and photographs). The museum routinely has been ranked among the best university art museums in the United States.[50]
Mathers Museum of World Cultures[edit]
The Mathers Museum Collections consist of over 30,000 objects and 10,000 photographs representing cultures from each of the world's inhabited continents. These materials have been collected and curated to serve the museum's primary mission as a teaching museum within a university setting. The ethnology collections strengths include traditional musical instruments, photographs of Native Americans and the Bloomington community, Inupiaq and Yupik Eskimo materials, and Pawnee material culture, among others.
Grunwald Gallery of Art[edit]
Grunwald Gallery of Art is the region’s premier contemporary art space, featuring experimental works by significant emerging and established artists as well as by faculty and students within the Department of Studio Art.
Indiana Memorial Union[edit]
The Indiana Memorial Union, in addition to hosting many events, holds the largest public collection of art outside a museum. The artwork within the building ranges from priceless sculptures to beautiful paintings.
Academics[edit]
Rankings and recognition[edit]


National Graduate Program Rankings[51]


Program
Ranking


Analytical Chemistry
5


Audiology
13


Biological Sciences
34


Business
21


Chemistry
24


Clinical Psychology
16


Cognitive Psychology
8


Computer Science
52


Earth Sciences
42


Economics
39


Education
32


English
20


Entrepreneurship
8


Environmental Policy & Management
1


Fine Arts
33


Health Care Management
42


Health Policy & Management
12


History
20


Law
30


Library and Information Studies
9


Mathematics
34


Nonprofit Management
1


Nuclear Physics
5


Physics
39


Political Science
29


Psychology
17


Public Affairs
1


Public Finance & Budgeting
1


Social Psychology
2


Sociology
15


Speech-Language Pathology
12




University rankings


National


ARWU[52]
51-61


Forbes[53]
115


U.S. News & World Report[54]
75


Washington Monthly[55]
77


Global


ARWU[57]
101-150


QS[58]
291


Times[59]
81-90 [56]


U.S. News & World Report[60]
113


Indiana University is one of 62 members of the Association of American Universities, an organization of leading North American research universities.
Forty graduate programs and four schools at Indiana University are ranked among the top 25 in the country in the U.S. News & World Report's 2016 rankings.[61] Indiana University-Bloomington's Chemistry program is ranked 24th in the United States, 5th in Analytical Chemistry. IU ranks 34th in the nation in both Biological Sciences and Math. The school is also ranked 20th in Programming Languages and 5th in Nuclear Physics.[62] IU's graduate department of Sociology is ranked 15th in the nation; 10th in Social Stratification and 2nd in Social Psychology (1st among public universities).[63] As of 2016, IU Bloomington's Masters in Public Affairs Program is ranked #1 in the nation by U.S. News.[64] IU is also ranked #1 in Environmental Policy and Management, Nonprofit Management, and Public Finance and Budgeting.[65]The Kelley School of Business at IU, known for being a top-tier business school around the world, is ranked as the #1 public undergraduate business program by Bloomberg Businessweek.[66] A 2017 report by Crist|Kolder Associates listed Indiana University 5th in the world in producing current Fortune 500 CEOs and #1 in producing Fortune 500 CFOs among public institutions.[67]
The Academic Ranking of World Universities ranked IU Bloomington 101–150 in the world and 51–61 nationally in 2016. Additionally, it gave the university global rankings of 29th best for economics/business and 35th best for the social sciences in 2015.[68] U.S. News ranks IU 36th out of the top public universities in the United States.[69] Forbes ranks IU 20th out of Public Universities.[70]
Upon assuming leadership of Indiana University, one of President Adam Herbert's biggest initiatives focused on "mission differentiation" for IU's eight campuses, which includes making the flagship Bloomington campus choosier among freshman applicants. Under the proposal, IUB would educate the professionals, executives, and researchers while the regional campuses would educate the state's remaining labor force. Advocates believe it will rejuvenate Indiana's economy while critics argue it betrays the university's mission of educating more of Indiana's populace.[71]
Schools and Colleges[edit]




Morrison Hall


Main article: Academic Structure of Indiana University (Bloomington)
The Office of the Provost oversees the academic programs, research, and policies of 16 schools on the Indiana University Bloomington campus. Together, these units offer more than 550 individual degree programs and majors.[72]
College of Arts and Sciences[edit]




The Student Building, home of the Departments of Anthropology and Geography


The College of Arts and Sciences is the largest of the University's academic divisions and home to more than 40 percent of IU's undergraduates. In addition, the College offers many electives and general education courses for students enrolled in most other schools on campus. There are more than 50 academic departments in the College, encompassing a broad range of disciplines from the traditional (such as Anthropology, Art History, Biology, Biochemistry, Chemistry, Classics, English, Economics, Geography, History, Mathematics, Philosophy, Physics, Political Science, Religious Studies, and Sociology) to more modern and specialized areas, including Jewish Studies, History and Philosophy of Science and Medicine, and International Studies. Through the College, IU also offers instruction in over 50 foreign languages, one of the largest language study offerings at any American university. IU is the only university in the nation that offers a degree in Hungarian (although it was done through the Individualized Major Program) and is the first university in the United States to offer a doctorate in Gender Studies.[73] The Department of Geography has highly recognized programs in climate and environmental change, GIS, human-environment interaction, and human geography. Indiana University is also home to the nation's only degree-granting Department of Central Eurasian Studies. The university's catalog at one time boasted that a student could study any language from Akan to Zulu. The College is the parent division for fifteen individual research institutes and holds the distinction of being the only academic division within the university to house autonomous schools (The School of Art + Design, The School of Global and International Studies, and the Media School) within it. A number of first- and second-year students from the Indiana University School of Medicine (which is based at IUPUI) complete their preclinical education at the Bloomington campus's Medical Science Program, which is housed within the Department of Biology and the Indiana Molecular Biology Institute. The College is also home to the Department of Folklore and Ethnomusicology, the first formally established academic department in folklore at any United States university, and the only such department to integrate these two practices into one field. IU also features a world-class cyclotron operated by the Department of Physics. The College also houses IU's Department of Theatre, Drama, and Contemporary Dance which offers a Bachelor of Arts in Theatre, a BFA in Contemporary Dance, a Master of Fine Arts in Acting, Directing, Playwriting or Design/Technology, and a BFA in Musical Theatre. In 2009, professor of political science Elinor Ostrom became the first woman to win the Nobel Prize in Economic Sciences since its inception in 1969.
School of Art + Design[edit]
The School of Art, Architecture and Design houses fourteen different areas in art, architecture, design, and merchandising. Our students are encouraged to learn collaboratively and across-disciplines, while immersing themselves in a particular area of study. Additionally, the school’s positioning as part of the College of Arts and Sciences allows us to equip graduates with the insights and values of a classical liberal arts education. Since 1895, IU has been a national leader in fine arts. The School of Art, Architecture and Design redefines tradition for the future.
School of Global and International Studies[edit]
The SGIS is an international affairs school composed of over 500 students from four academic departments and twenty-one institutes and centers. It also runs the Indiana University Summer Language Workshop (SWSEEL).
The Media School[edit]
A school within the College of Arts and Sciences, the Media School is built on the decades-long traditions of journalism and communications at one of the nation’s premier public universities. Established July 1, 2014, it comprises the 100-year-old journalism program, the more than half century old telecommunications department and film studies. Its faculty teaches in these areas:

Communication Science
Cinema and Media Studies
Journalism: Housed in a building named for famed war correspondent and alumnus Ernie Pyle, the School of Journalism[74] was established in 1911. In July 2014 the School of Journalism merged with the newly founded Media School at IU. The Media School offers a B.A. in Journalism and a Masters of Science degree for those preparing for careers as reporters, editors, broadcasters, public relations professionals, multimedia specialists, and educators. It draws students from as far away as China and Ukraine and as close as Bloomington or other Indiana towns. Among the alumni are more than 30 Pulitzer Prize winners. Alumni work in every field of journalism, from the oldest form of print publishing to newest form as online journalists. Many remain active in supporting the school by mentoring students, facilitating internship programs, and donating time and financial gifts to the school.
Media Arts and Production

Hutton Honors College[edit]




Hutton Honors College


Admission into the Hutton Honors College requires students to have the following minimum requirements:[75]

High school GPA of 3.90 (or top 7.5% class rank), and
Score of 32 or higher on the ACT, 1390 or higher on the old SAT (CR+M), or 1440 or higher on the new SAT

OR

High school GPA of 3.85 (or top 10% class rank), and
Score of 34 or higher on the ACT, 1470 or higher on the old SAT (CR+M), or 1510 or higher on the new SAT

Jacobs School of Music[edit]




The Jacobs School of Music


Main article: Jacobs School of Music
Founded in the beginning of the 20th century by Charles Campbell, the Jacobs School of Music focuses on voice, opera, orchestral conducting, and jazz studies. It has been ranked #1 in the country tied with Juilliard and Eastman School of Music by U.S. News & World Report.[76] U.S. News has not since published a music school ranking. Jacobs still ranks highly among other publications. The Hollywood Reporter ranked the Jacobs School of Music #4 in the world.[77] Music School Central currently ranks Jacobs #1 in the nation.[78]
With more than 1,600 students, the school is one of the largest of its kind in the US and among the largest in the world. The school's facilities, including five buildings located in the heart of campus, comprise recital halls, more than 170 practice rooms, choral and instrumental rehearsal rooms, and more than 100 offices and studios. Its faculty has included such notable names as David Effron, Arthur Fagen, János Starker, Costanz Cuccaro, Timothy Noble, André Watts, Menahem Pressler, Linda Strommen, Abbey Simon, Jorge Bolet, Ray Cramer, David Baker, William Bell, Harvey Phillips, Earl Bates, Carol Vaness, Sylvia McNair, Howard Klug, violinist Joshua Bell, conductor Leonard Slatkin, and composer Sven-David Sandström. Notable alumni include Edgar Meyer and soprano Angela Brown. Many alumni have gone on to win Grammy's and other music awards.
Kelley School of Business[edit]
Main article: Kelley School of Business
The Kelley School of Business (known colloquially as "Kelley" or "The B-School") was founded in 1920 as the University's School of Commerce and Finance. Approximately 6,100 students are enrolled in undergraduate, graduate Accountancy and Information Systems degrees, MBA and PhD programs, and online degree program Kelley Direct.
In order for incoming freshmen to be considered for direct admission into Kelley, they must meet/exceed the following requirements:

Indicated one of Kelley’s business majors as your intended major.
Earned the required test score.

ACT - 30
SAT - 1390 (Evidence-Based Reading & Writing and Math)


Earned a cumulative GPA of 3.8 on a 4.0 scale in high school.
Otherwise, students must apply after their freshman year after exceeding strict requirements.
If requirements are not met, students may petition to gain Direct Admission. [79]

The Kelley School of Business undergraduate program has been ranked top 15 in the nation for over fifteen years and top 10 in the last four, across various publications.
In its 2017 rankings, U.S. News & World Report ranked the undergraduate program tied for 9th in the nation and the MBA program tied for 21st in the U.S., with the online MBA program ranking 3rd.[80] In 2007, the Wall Street Journal ranked Kelley's MBA program fifth in the nation among regional programs. Kelley's programs in consumer products and energy and industrial products and services were second, marketing was third and accounting, eighth.
Business Week ranked the undergraduate program 8th in 2014 (3rd among public schools) and the graduate program 15th in the nation in 2008[81] and fourth among public schools. In addition, Business Week gave the undergraduate program an A in teaching and an A+ in career services. In 2016, Business Week ranked the undergraduate program 4th in the nation, #1 among public universities.[82] The 2016 ranking for "Best Undergraduate Business Schools" by Poets & Quants ranked the Kelley School of Business 7th in the nation and 2nd among public schools. Kelley is also ranked 2nd in academic excellence. It lists a selective acceptance rate well under 40% with more than 75% of students being in their high school's "Top 10", and average ACT/SAT scores of 30/1390.[83]
Poets & Quants also ranked Kelley's MBA program 5th in the nation in producing Fortune 500 CEOs.[84] In 2017, the Economist ranked the MBA program 17th in the nation, and 22nd in the world. It was ranked 7th in terms of percentage increase from pre-MBA salary.[85]
Kelley partners with the Scotts Miracle-Gro Company to offer Bloomington Brands, a unique work-study program for undergraduates and MBA students. Participating students obtain real-world brand management experience by managing the Osmocote Plant Food brand under contract to Scotts.[86] Kelley also partners with Coca-Cola for a program called Global Business Institute that is available in the Middle East, North Africa, and Asia. This is a program that was designed to let select groups of students in participating countries to learn about business from the context of American culture.[87] Many classes partner with corporations and have students work on projects affecting the company. Most notably, in freshman year, students hold a in-class case competition for their required Business Presentations class, with a case provided by Macy's. The final four teams present in front of Macy's executives and the winning team is flown to the Macy's offices in New York City.
In the 2016 fiscal year alone, the Top 20 Distinguished Corporate Sponsors of Kelley gave over $1.2 million in support.[88]
Maurer School of Law[edit]




The main building of the Maurer School of Law


Main article: Indiana University Maurer School of Law
The Maurer School of Law, founded in 1842, is one of the oldest schools on the Bloomington campus. It features a law library recently ranked first in the nation and is situated on the southwest corner of campus. In 2000, then-Chief Justice William Rehnquist presided over a mock trial of King Henry VIII in the school's moot courtroom. In the 2016 U.S. News & World Report rankings, the school was ranked tied for 25th in the nation among law schools.[61] Notable alumni from the School of Law include songwriter Hoagy Carmichael, and Vice-Chairman of the 9/11 Commission and former congressman Lee H. Hamilton. On December 4, 2008, the school of law was renamed the Michael Maurer School of Law.[89]
School of Education[edit]




School of Education


Main article: Indiana University School of Education
The School of Education, formerly a part of the College of Arts and Science, has been independent since 1923. One of the largest schools of education in the United States, it was ranked 25th in the nation by U.S. News & World Report in its 2016 rankings.[61] It offers a range of degrees in professional education: a B.S. in teacher education leading to a teaching license, M.S., education specialist (Ed. S.) and doctoral (Ed. D, Ph.D.) degrees.
School of Informatics, Computing, and Engineering[edit]
Main article: Indiana University School of Informatics




Lindley Hall (Computer Science Dept)


In 1999, the Indiana University School of Informatics was established as an environment for research professors and students to develop new uses for information technology in order to solve specific problems in areas as diverse as biology, fine arts, and economics.[90] Informatics is also interested in "how people transform technology, and how technology transforms us."[91] In 2005 the Department of Computer Science moved from the College of Arts and Sciences to the School of Informatics, prompting the school to expand its name to "School of Informatics and Computing".[92] This move merged several faculty, bringing the total core faculty to over 100. Informatics also has strong ties with the Media School, Jacobs School of Music, and the Cognitive Science program.
The School is one of a handful that offer degrees in Human-Computer Interaction.[93] The School offers master's degrees in Human-Computer Interaction Design, Music Informatics, Bioinformatics, Chemical Informatics, Security Informatics, and Computer Science, and Ph.D. degrees in Computer Science and in Informatics. Specialization areas for the Ph.D. in Computer Science include artificial intelligence, databases, distributed systems, formal methods, high-performance computing, programming languages, and security. The Informatics Ph.D. program offers tracks in bioinformatics, cheminformatics, complex systems, human-computer interaction design, logic and mathematical foundations of informatics, music informatics, security informatics, and social informatics.
The School has three departments:

Computer Science and Informatics
Information and Library Science: the IU Department of Information and Library Science (ILS) was ranked by U.S. News & World Report in 2016 as the 8th best program in the nation.[61] It has also been ranked number 1 in scholarly productivity by a 2006 study published in the journal Library & Information Science Research.[94] ILS is housed in the ground floor of the Wells Library's Western Tower. In April 2012, what was formerly known as the School of Library and Information Science and IU's School of Informatics and Computing began a discussion on a possible merger of the two schools. With the success of negotiations and arrangements, Indiana University Board of Trustees approved the merger on October 22, 2012. Effective from July 1, 2013, IU School of Informatics and School of Library and Information and Science will merge into a single school to be called the IU School of Informatics and Computing.[95]
Intelligent Systems Engineering

A new major established in 2016.
School of Public and Environmental Affairs[edit]
Main article: Indiana University School of Public and Environmental Affairs
The School of Public and Environmental Affairs (or SPEA) is the largest school of its kind in the United States. Founded in 1972, SPEA is known for its distinctive interdisciplinary approach. It brings together the social, natural, behavioral, and administrative sciences in one faculty. SPEA has a sister "core" campus at Indiana University-Purdue University Indianapolis (or IUPUI) and an affiliate program is operated at Indiana University's Gary campus.
In their 2016 rankings, U.S. News & World Report rated SPEA ranked tied for first in the nation, with five of its programs ranked in the top 10: environmental policy and management 1st, nonprofit management 1st, public finance and budgeting 1st, public management administration 3rd, and public policy analysis 7th.[96] Similar rankings do not yet exist for graduate schools of environmental science or for undergraduate schools in either public affairs or environmental science.
SPEA is the headquarters of the Public Administration Review, the premier journal of public administration research, theory, and practice. SPEA is also home to the Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, the Journal of Public Budgeting and Finance and Small Business Economics.
SPEA has more than a dozen joint programs in social and natural sciences and professional fields. Popular majors include nonprofit management, public policy, public finance, and arts administration. SPEA alumni include radio and television host Tavis Smiley and former U.S. Treasury Secretary Paul O’Neill. Among SPEA's faculty was Elinor Ostrom, the first woman to receive the Nobel Prize in Economics. She was named by Time Magazine one of the 100 most influential people in the United States.
School of Public Health-Bloomington[edit]




Indiana University School of Public Health-Bloomington


Main article: Indiana University School of Public Health-Bloomington
Established in 2012[97] the school and programs have grown to encompass a broad spectrum of academic interests and professional fields. The school was founded in 1946 as the School of Health, Physical Education, and Recreation. It transitioned into the School of Public Health-Bloomington and was renamed in September 2012.[98][99] It was accredited by the Council on Education in Public Health in June 2015.[100]
The school has nearly 3,000 students and 24,000 living alumni, with undergraduate and advanced degree programs offered through five academic departments: Applied Health Science, Environmental Health, Epidemiology & Biostatistics, Kinesiology, and Recreation, Park, & Tourism Studies.[101] The Division of Campus Recreational Sports within the IU School of Public Health-Bloomington provides sport and fitness opportunities for the IU community and the public.[102]
The school has numerous centers, institutes, and specialized laboratories, including the Center for Sexual Health Promotion, the Indiana Prevention Resource Center, the National Center on Accessibility, the Rural Center for AIDS/STD Prevention, among others.[103]
The school's resources include more than 12,000 square feet (1,100 m2) of research and teaching laboratories, and nearly 275,000 square feet (25,500 m2) of indoor and outdoor sport and fitness facilities, including recreation centers, aquatics centers, and acreage that includes Bradford Woods.
School of Social Work[edit]
The Indiana University School of Social Work was founded in 1911 as the Department of Social Service, thus making it the oldest professional social work education program begun and continuously functioning as a part of a university. In July 2007, the Indiana University Division of Labor Studies merged with the School of Social Work.[104]

Department of Labor Studies: the Department of Labor Studies, a unit housed within the School of Social Work, was founded in the 1940s during the tenure of Herman B Wells in response to the growing role of organized labor in American society. Today, the Division is one of only several degree-granting programs in the nation for the area of labor studies or industrial relations. Notable faculty in recent years have included Leonard Page, General Counsel for the National Labor Relations Board during the Clinton Administration, and labor economist/author Michael Yates.

School of Medicine[edit]
Main article: Indiana University School of Medicine
School of Nursing[edit]
The Indiana University Training School for Nurses was established in Indianapolis in 1914 in conjunction with the establishment of the Robert W. Long Hospital and in association with the IU School of Medicine to offer training leading to a Registered Nurse diploma. A Division of Nursing Education under the IU School of Education was created on the Bloomington campus, and offered additional training to registered nurses seeking B.S. and M.S. degrees. The two programs were united with the creation of the School of Nursing in 1965 and located in Indianapolis.
Today, the School of Nursing is located at several of the IU campuses, with Indianapolis and Bloomington being the main locations. The Indiana University School of Nursing, comprising campuses in Indianapolis, Bloomington, and Columbus, has the distinction of being recognized as a Center of Excellence in two categories simultaneously: Creating Environments that Promote the Pedagogical Expertise of Faculty and Creating Environments that Advance the Science of Nursing Education. Indiana's third continuing designation for Promoting Pedagogical Expertise of Faculty is effective for five years, from 2012 through 2017. The IU School of Nursing ranks 8th among public universities who receive funding from the National Institutes of Health. Almost 40% of the baccalaureate prepared professional nurses in Indiana graduate from the IU School of Nursing each year. The U.S. News & World Report 2014 Graduate School rankings place IU School of Nursing's graduate program 15th overall and higher still in adult health CNS (3rd).
School of Optometry[edit]




The main building of the School of Optometry


The Indiana University School of Optometry has a long history of optometric education and research, having been founded 1951. The school became a degree-granting institution of its own in 1975. Located at the southwest border of campus the Doctor of Optometry (OD) program admits on average 70-80 students per year.
The school operates a 22,000-square-foot (2,000 m2) community eye care clinic in Bloomington and a clinic in Indianapolis. In addition to providing optometric education, the facility also houses the Borish Center for Ophthalmic Research, officially dedicated in October 1995. The Borish Center provides opportunities for undergraduate, professional, and graduate students to participate directly in vision research.
University Graduate School[edit]
Athletics[edit]
Main article: Indiana Hoosiers
See also: Indiana Hoosiers men's basketball, Indiana Hoosiers football, and Indiana Hoosiers men's soccer




Basketball players huddle before a game in their candy striped pants.


IU's intercollegiate athletics program has a long tradition in several key sports. From its beginnings with baseball in 1867, the Hoosier athletic program has grown to include over 600 male and female student-athletes on 24 varsity teams boasting one of the nation's best overall records. Sports sponsored by the university include football, men's basketball, women's basketball, cross country and track, softball, baseball, golf, tennis, rowing, volleyball, swimming and diving, and wrestling
The Hoosiers became a member of the Big Ten Conference on December 1, 1899. The school's national affiliation is with the National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA). National team titles (now totaling 26; 25 NCAA, 1 AIAW) have been won in nine men's sports and one women's sport (tennis), topped by a record-setting six straight men's swimming & diving titles, eight men's soccer crowns and five titles in men's basketball. Indiana University's men's basketball team is one of the most decorated programs in the nation, having won five national championships. Indiana student-athletes have won 133 NCAA individual titles, including 79 in men's swimming and diving and 31 in men's track and field. In addition, IU teams have won or shared 157 Big Ten Conference championships.
The IU athletics endowment is $42 million, the largest in the Big Ten Conference.[105] The Varsity Club, which is the fundraising arm of the Athletics Department, drew a record $11.5 million in gifts and pledges in the fiscal year 2004–05. In addition, overall annual giving has increased 8.3% in the last year and 44.8 percent in the last three years.
In addition to its rich tradition in intervarsity sports, IU also boasts a strong reputation in many non-varsity sports. Many of these "club" teams, especially those in ice hockey and rugby union, have achieved a great deal of success in intercollegiate competition. Hurling has also become more popular, with the Indiana University Hurling Club becoming the first American national champions in history. The consistent success of these athletic clubs has several times led the university to establish varsity programs in sports in which there had previously not been a team for NCAA intervarsity competition.




The Statue of Herman B Wells


A large percentage of the IU student body regularly participates in both formal and/or informal intramural sports, including football, soccer, tennis, basketball, and golf. Among intramural athletics, IU's reputation for student participation and instruction in the martial arts is particularly strong.
Media[edit]
Media outlets of Indiana University include:

WFIU radio - a charter member of the National Public Radio network, WFIU is a public radio station operating out of the Radio and TV Center on the Bloomington, Indiana Campus. Licensed to the Trustees of Indiana University, it is funded by several sources: Indiana University; the Corporation for Public Broadcasting; program underwriting grants from community businesses and organizations; and voluntary contributions from listeners. Programming centers on classical music, national and international news. Other formats include folk music, jazz, comedy, and news & public affairs programming.
WTIU television - a 24-hour public television licensed to Indiana University, operating out of the Radio and TV Center on the Bloomington, Indiana campus. WTIU is a PBS affiliate and carries national and locally produced programming, serving over 20 counties in west and south-central Indiana, including the cities of Bloomington, Bedford, Columbus, and Terre Haute, and the communities of Martinsville, Linton, Bloomfield, Nashville, Spencer, and Seymour. Approximately 175,000 TV households are included in the viewing area, cable and off-air combined.
IUSTV (Indiana University Student television station) - an entirely student-run television station broadcasting to over 12,000 on campus residents and over 40,000 Bloomington residents via Public-access television. Founded in 2002, IUSTV has quickly grown to be a leading media entity and student organization on campus.
Indiana Daily Student - free daily newspaper fully supported financially through ad sales. Founded in 1867, it has a circulation of over 15,000 and is produced by IU students.
WIUX - an entirely student-run radio station that broadcasts currently on FM 99.1 and via live internet streaming on its website. It broadcasts 24 hours a day, 7 days a week during the fall and spring semesters. Besides playing independent music, the station provides coverage of nine different Indiana University sports teams. The station was established in 1963 under the call letters WQAD. It was granted a low-power FM license in the spring of 2005 and transitioned to FM in early 2006.
IU Home Pages - faculty and staff news. In print, the audience includes approximately 17,000 employees on eight campuses.

Faculty[edit]
With over 1,823 full-time faculty members, Indiana University leads the Big Ten public universities in the number of endowed faculty positions, with 333 chairs, professorships, and curators. IUB also reported in fall 2004 that it employed 334 part-time faculty, totaling 1,877 full-time equivalents. Of the full-time faculty, 76% were tenured. Like the student body, IUB's faculty is predominantly white. Of full-time administrators, faculty, and lecturers, 118 (6%) were Asian, 74 (4%) were African-American, 62 (4%) were Hispanic, 5 (0.3%) were Native American, and 1,535 (85%) were "other." More men (62%) than women held academic appointments at the university.
Professors at IUB were better paid than their counterparts in the IU system. A full professor earned an average of $126,500, an associate professor $89,000, and an assistant professor $74,400.
Enrollment statistics[edit]
Top 5 Indiana counties for enrollment


Rank County
County
2015 Enrollment[106]


1
Monroe (Bloomington)
4,352


2
Hamilton (Carmel, Fishers, & Noblesville)
3,853


3
Marion (Indianapolis)
3,686


4
Lake (Gary)
1,389


5
Allen (Fort Wayne)
1,196


Notable faculty and alumni[edit]
Main article: List of Indiana University (Bloomington) people
Sustainability[edit]
IU Bloomington's Von Lee Theatre building is LEED Certified.[107] The "More Art, Less Trash" recycling initiative included a design contest for recycling bin artwork and promotes both recycling and outdoor art.[108] The university employs a group of student sustainability interns each summer,[109] and students can get involved in campus and community-based sustainability initiatives through the Volunteers in Sustainability coordination group[110] or the Student Sustainability Council.[111]
Transportation[edit]
A campus bus system operates several routes on a regular schedule around the IUB campus throughout the semesters. In December 2014, a shuttle service ("Campus Connection") has been introduced between the IUB and the IUPUI campus as well.[112] The campus buses are free to all and handicap accessible. IU students and employees also gain free access to Bloomington transit buses around the city.[113]
References[edit]


^ As of June 30, 2016. "U.S. and Canadian Institutions Listed by Fiscal Year (FY) 2016 Endowment Market Value and Change in Endowment Market Value from FY 2015 to FY 2016" (PDF). National Association of College and University Business Officers and Commonfund Institute. 2017. 
^ a b c "Indiana University Bloomington Welcomes Freshmen". Indiana University Bloomington. Retrieved October 28, 2017. 
^ a b "2011-121 IU Factbook". 
^ "Colors IU". Retrieved 2016-09-27. 
^ "Editorial Style Guide". Indiana University. Retrieved December 30, 2013.
^ "Carnegie Classifications Institution Profile". Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching. 
^ "About". Indiana University Bloomington. 
^ Greene, Howard R.; Greene, Matthew W. (2001). The Public Ivies: America's Flagship Public Universities (1st ed.). New York: Cliff Street Books. ISBN 978-0060934590. 
^ "Schools". Indiana University Bloomington. 
^ "IU Class Profile". 
^ "Indiana University Bloomington". Indiana University Bloomington. 
^ "Dag Kittlaus, LinkedIn Profile". 
^ "Indiana University--Bloomington". 
^ "Chronology of Indiana University History". Indiana University. Retrieved February 12, 2016. 
^ Thomas D. Clark, Indiana University Midwestern Pioneer: The Early Years. Vol. 1. pp 9, 33
^ Howard F. McMains, "The Indiana Seminary Charter of 1820," Indiana Magazine of History (2010) 106#4 pp 356-380.
^ Thomas D. Clark, Indiana University: Vol. I: The Early Years (1970)
^ Gayle Williams, "Andrew Wylie and Religion at Indiana University, 1824–1851: Nonsectarianism and Democracy," Indiana Magazine of History (2003) 99#1 pp 3-24
^ Paul J. Ramsey, "Building A 'Real' University in the Woodlands of Indiana: The Jordan Administration, 1885–1891," American Educational History Journal (2004) 31#1 pp 20-28
^ "David Starr Jordan Collected Papers (CDG-A), Swarthmore College Peace Collection". swarthmore.edu. 
^ Joseph Swain (1893). Inaugural Address of Joseph Swain: President Indiana University, Delivered June 14, 1893, at the Annual Commencement of Indiana University. 
^ Indiana University (1921). Indiana University, 1820–1920: Centennial Memorial Volume. Indiana university. pp. 330–37. 
^ Donald H. Maxwel, "Impounded water in Bloomington, Ind.," Municipal and county engineering: design, construction, maintenance, and operation of all public works (Jan 1921) 60#1 pp 159–161 online
^ Thomas D. Clark, Indiana University 2:5, 9
^ Herman B Wells, Being Lucky (1980), pp 155-69
^ Thomas D Clark, Indiana University: Midwestern Pioneer volume 3: Years of Fulfillment (1977), p 168.
^ "Student president wins by 45 votes". The Baltimore Afro-American. April 16, 1960. 
^ "America's most beautiful college campuses", Travel+Leisure (September, 2011)
^ Water Basics: Stream Archived September 16, 2012, at the Wayback Machine. (City of Bloomington)
^ Clark Kimberling, David Starr Jordan Landmarks on the campus of Indiana University, Bloomington Archived August 5, 2012, at the Wayback Machine., with a further source given as the Indiana Alumni Magazine [vol. 18 (June 1956) page 7].
^ "The Best Small Cities for Educated Millennials". Business Insider. 
^ "Best College Towns to Live in Forever". College Ranker. 
^ "Lumosity Ranks "Smartest" and "Dumbest" Cities in America". Daily Tech. 
^ "These are the 100 smartest cities in America (study)". Venture Beat. 
^ "Gayest Cities in America". NPR. 
^ "Best Colleges for LGBT Students". Best Colleges. 
^ a b National Park Service (2010-07-09). "National Register Information System". National Register of Historic Places. National Park Service. 
^ "Indiana State Historic Architectural and Archaeological Research Database (SHAARD)" (Searchable database). Department of Natural Resources, Division of Historic Preservation and Archaeology. Retrieved 2016-05-01.  Note: This includes Daniel F. Harrington (n.d.). "National Register of Historic Places Inventory Nomination Form: The Old Crescent" (PDF). Retrieved 2016-05-01. , site map, and Accompanying photographs.
^ "About IU Libraries". Indiana University. 
^ "The Nation's Largest Libraries: A Listing By Volumes Held". American Library Association. Retrieved 19 July 2016. 
^ "Herman B Wells Library". Indiana University Libraries. Retrieved 19 July 2016. 
^ Malcomb, Lou. "Herman B Wells Library". History of the IU Libraries. Archived from the original on September 3, 2016. Retrieved July 19, 2016. 
^ Hogan, Madison. "Libraries provide countless resources for the public". Indiana Daily Student. Retrieved 19 July 2016. 
^ "Indiana University Libraries". Indiana University Libraries. Retrieved October 15, 2015. 
^ "The Lilly Library: The Collections". Indiana University (Bloomington, Indiana). Retrieved August 9, 2007. 
^ Miniature book collection- Retrieved January 7, 2012
^ Rare book- Retrieved January 8, 2012
^ https://libraries.indiana.edu/access-iu-libraries-fine-arts-materials
^ "IU Art Museum receives $15 million gift from Sidney and Lois Eskenazi". artmuseum.indiana.edu. May 11, 2016. Retrieved August 14, 2016. 
^ "IU Bloomington Online Tour". Indiana University. 2005. Archived from the original on March 10, 2009. Retrieved April 9, 2009. 
^ "Indiana University-Bloomington - U.S. News Best Grad School Rankings". U.S. News & World Report. Retrieved 6 August 2017. 
^ "Academic Ranking of World Universities 2017: USA". Shanghai Ranking Consultancy. Retrieved August 29, 2017. 
^ "America's Top Colleges". Forbes. July 5, 2016. 
^ "Best Colleges 2017: National Universities Rankings". U.S. News & World Report. September 12, 2016. 
^ "2016 Rankings - National Universities". Washington Monthly. Retrieved September 6, 2016. 
^ "Times Higher Education". 
^ "Academic Ranking of World Universities 2017". Shanghai Ranking Consultancy. 2017. Retrieved August 29, 2017. 
^ "QS World University Rankings® 2018". Quacquarelli Symonds Limited. 2017. Retrieved 25 July 2017. 
^ "World University Rankings 2016-17". THE Education Ltd. Retrieved September 21, 2016. 
^ "Best Global Universities Rankings: 2017". U.S. News & World Report LP. Retrieved October 25, 2016. 
^ a b c d "U.S. News Best Colleges Rankings - Indiana University Bloomington". U.S. News & World Report. Retrieved November 23, 2015. 
^ "Science Rankings". U.S. News. 
^ U.S. News https://www.usnews.com/best-graduate-schools/top-humanities-schools/indiana-university-bloomington-151351.  Missing or empty |title= (help)
^ "Public Affairs Rankings National". U.S. News. 
^ [Public Finance and Budgeting "Graduate Rankings"] Check |url= value (help). U.S News Rankings. 
^ "Best Undergrad Business Schools". Bloomberg BusinessWeek. 
^ "Crist|Kolder Associates Volatility Report 2017" (PDF). 
^ "Academic Ranking of World Universities 2015 - Indiana University Bloomington". ShanghaiRanking Consultancy. Retrieved November 23, 2015. 
^ "Top Public Universities". US News. 
^ "Top 25 Colleges". Forbes. 
^ "IU needs brave leader for road ahead". The Indianapolis Star. September 25, 2005. 
^ "Degrees & Majors: Academics: Indiana University Bloomington". www.indiana.edu. Retrieved August 14, 2016. 
^ "Indiana Creates First Gender Studies Ph.D". Inside Higher Ed. November 10, 2004. Retrieved August 9, 2007. 
^ "Indiana University Media School". 
^ "Hutton Honrs College Admissions". Hutton Honors College. Retrieved December 20, 2017. 
^ "USNWR 2009 Graduate School Rankings". Retrieved May 20, 2008. 
^ "Top 25 Music Schools". The Hollywood Reporter. 
^ "Top 15 Music Schools in the US". Music School Central. 
^ "Future Freshmen". Kelley School of Business. Retrieved 2017-09-10. 
^ "Indiana University--Bloomington Rankings". U.S. News 2017 Rankings. 
^ BusinessWeek Archived December 8, 2008, at the Wayback Machine.
^ Bloomberg Business Week https://www.bloomberg.com/features/2016-best-undergrad-business-schools/.  Missing or empty |title= (help)
^ "Poets&Quants' Best Undergraduate Business Programs Of 2016". Poets & Quants. 
^ "Schools With Most Fortune 500 CEOs". Poets & Quants. 
^ "Kelley School of Business 2017 MBA Rankings". The Economist. Retrieved 28 October 2017. 
^ "Bloomington Brands". Kelley School of Business. Retrieved May 4, 2015. 
^ "Global Business Institute: Institute for International Business : Kelley School of Business: Indiana University". kelley.iu.edu. Retrieved April 6, 2016. 
^ "Top 20 Distinguished Sponsors". Kelley School of Business. 
^ "IU Bloomington School of Law renamed in honor of largest-ever donor". IU News Room: Indiana University. 
^ "Informatics: Indiana University". 
^ "What Is Informatics?". Indiana University. Retrieved June 15, 2006. 
^ "School of Informatics Renamed". Indiana University. Archived from the original on September 10, 2009. Retrieved October 3, 2009. 
^ "HCI Degree Programs". Human Factors International. Retrieved June 15, 2006. 
^ Adkins, D. (2006). "Scholarly productivity of U.S. LIS faculty". Library & Information Science. pp. 374–389. 
^ "SLIS and Informatics Merger Approved". Indiana University. Archived from the original on December 14, 2012. Retrieved November 27, 2012. 
^ "Graduate School Rankings". U.S. News & World Report. Retrieved March 16, 2016. 
^ "History: About Us: School of Public Health: Indiana University Bloomington". 
^ "IU School of Public Health-Bloomington formally named, celebrated". IU News Room: Indiana University. 
^ "HPER Renamed IU School Of Public Health". News - Indiana Public Media. 
^ "About us: Accreditation". www.publichealth.indiana.edu. Retrieved May 10, 2016. 
^ "Departments, Centers & Institutes: School of Public Health: Indiana University Bloomington". 
^ "IU Recreational Sports". Archived from the original on October 14, 2012. 
^ "Centers & Institutes: Departments, Centers & Institutes: School of Public Health: Indiana University Bloomington". 
^ "IU School of Social Work: Program History". socialwork.iu.edu. Retrieved August 14, 2016. 
^ "IU Athletics receives single largest gift in its history". Retrieved May 19, 2008. 
^ https://web.archive.org/web/20151007162601/https://www.iu.edu/~uirr/reports/standard/factbook/2014-15/Bloomington/Student_Data/Enrollment/Student_Origin/By_Indiana_County. Archived from the original on October 7, 2015. Retrieved October 3, 2015.  Missing or empty |title= (help)
^ "Von Lee Receives Sustainability Certification". Office of Creative Services. Retrieved June 8, 2009. 
^ ""More Art, Less Trash" artistic recycling bins to be installed on campus". IU News Room. Retrieved June 8, 2009. 
^ "Sustainability task force announces summer internship program". IU News. Retrieved June 8, 2009. 
^ "About Volunteers in Sustainability". Indiana University at Bloomington. Retrieved June 8, 2009. 
^ "About Student Sustainability Council". SSC. Retrieved July 15, 2010. 
^ April Toler. "New shuttle available for people traveling between IU Bloomington, IUPUI". Inside IU. 
^ "IU Bloomington Transportation Services". 


Further reading[edit]

Capshew, James H. Herman B Wells: The Promise of the American University (Indiana University Press, 2012) 460 pp excerpt and text search
Clark, Thomas D. Indiana University, Midwest Pioneer, Volume I: The Early Years (1970)
Clark, Thomas D. Indiana University: Midwestern Pioneer, Vol II: In Mid-Pasage (1973)
Clark, Thomas D. Indiana University: Midwestern Pioneer: Volume III: Years of Fulfillment (1977) covers 1938–68
Gros Louis, Kenneth. "Herman B Wells and the Legacy of Leadership at Indiana University," Indiana Magazine of History (2007) 103#3 pp 290–301. online

Primary sources[edit]

Wells, Herman B. Being Lucky: Reminiscences and Reflections (1980) excerpt and text search

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Indiana University Bloomington.



Official website
Indiana University Athletics website
 "Indiana, University of". Collier's New Encyclopedia. 1921. 







v
t
e


Indiana University Bloomington




Located in: Bloomington, Indiana



Academics



Hutton Honors College
School of Medicine
School of Law
Jacobs School of Music
Kelley School of Business
School of Education
School of Journalism
School of Public and Environmental Affairs
School of Library and Information Science








Athletics







Indiana Hoosiers
Baseball
Basketball

Men's
Women's


Field hockey
Football
Men's soccer
Marching Hundred
"Indiana, Our Indiana"





Rivalries



Indiana–Purdue rivalry
Indiana–Kentucky basketball rivalry
Indiana–Michigan State football rivalry





Facilities



Simon Skjodt Assembly Hall
Bill Armstrong Stadium
Memorial Stadium
John Mellencamp Pavilion
Men's Gymnasium
Bart Kaufman Field
Wildermuth Intramural Center








Campus



Bloomington
Art Museum
Bryan House
Indiana Memorial Union
Kinsey Institute
Kirkwood Observatory
Legg House
Lilly Library
Wylie House





Student life



Student Association
Little 500
Women's Little 500
Indiana Daily Student
Indiana Review
IUSTV
WIUX





People



Notable alumni
Notable faculty








Founded: 1820
Students: 48,514
Endowment: us$1.986 billion










Links to related articles











v
t
e


Indiana University






Bloomington (Hoosiers)
East (Red Wolves)
Kokomo (Cougars)
Northwest (Redhawks)
South Bend (Titans)
Southeast (Grenadiers)


Indiana University – Purdue University Indianapolis (Jaguars)
Indiana University – Purdue University Fort Wayne (Mastodons)












v
t
e


Big Ten Conference



East Division



Indiana Hoosiers
Maryland Terrapins
Michigan Wolverines
Michigan State Spartans
Ohio State Buckeyes
Penn State Nittany Lions
Rutgers Scarlet Knights








West Division



Illinois Fighting Illini
Iowa Hawkeyes
Minnesota Golden Gophers
Nebraska Cornhuskers
Northwestern Wildcats
Purdue Boilermakers
Wisconsin Badgers





Associate members



Johns Hopkins Blue Jays (men's and women's lacrosse)
Notre Dame Fighting Irish (men's ice hockey)





Former team



Chicago Maroons





Championships & awards



National Championships
Athlete of the Year






Big Ten Network * B1G Super Saturday










v
t
e


Big Ten Academic Alliance






University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign
Indiana University
University of Iowa
University of Maryland, College Park
University of Michigan
Michigan State University
University of Minnesota
University of Nebraska–Lincoln
Northwestern University
Ohio State University
Pennsylvania State University
Purdue University
Rutgers University
University of Wisconsin–Madison












v
t
e


Public colleges and universities in Indiana



Indiana University System



IU Bloomington
IU East
IU Kokomo
IU Northwest
IU South Bend
IU Southeast





Purdue University System



Purdue West Lafayette
Purdue Northwest

Calumet
North Central







Joint IU–PU Campuses



Indiana University – Purdue University Fort Wayne
Indiana University – Purdue University Columbus
Indiana University – Purdue University Indianapolis





Others



Ball State University
Indiana State
Ivy Tech System
University of Southern Indiana
Vincennes












v
t
e


Association of American Universities



Public



Arizona
California

Berkeley
Davis
Irvine
Los Angeles
San Diego
Santa Barbara


Colorado
Florida
Georgia Tech
Illinois
Indiana
Iowa
Iowa State
Kansas
Maryland
Michigan
Michigan State
Minnesota
Missouri
SUNY

Buffalo
Stony Brook


North Carolina
Ohio State
Oregon
Penn State
Pittsburgh
Purdue
Rutgers
Texas
Texas A&M
Virginia
Washington
Wisconsin





Private



Boston U
Brandeis
Brown
Caltech
Carnegie Mellon
Case Western Reserve
Chicago
Columbia
Cornell
Duke
Emory
Harvard
Johns Hopkins
MIT
Northwestern
NYU
UPenn
Princeton
Rice
Rochester
USC
Stanford
Tulane
Vanderbilt
Wash U
Yale





Canadian (public)



McGill
Toronto












v
t
e


Universities Research Association



Public



Alabama
Arizona
Arizona State
California

Berkeley
Davis
Irvine
Los Angeles
Riverside
San Diego
Santa Barbara


Colorado
Colorado State
Florida
Florida State
Houston
Illinois

Chicago
Urbana–Champaign


Indiana
Iowa
Iowa State
LSU
Maryland
Michigan
Michigan State
Minnesota
Mississippi
Nebraska
New Mexico
New Mexico State
North Carolina
North Texas
Northern Illinois
Ohio State
Oklahoma
Oregon
Penn State
Pittsburgh
Purdue
Rutgers
South Carolina
SUNY

Buffalo
Stony Brook


Tennessee
Texas

Arlington
Austin
Dallas


Texas A&M
Texas Tech
Virginia
Virginia Tech
Washington
Wayne State
William & Mary
Wisconsin





Private



Boston U
Brown
Caltech
Carnegie Mellon
Case Western Reserve
Chicago
Columbia
Cornell
Duke
Harvard
Illinois Tech
Johns Hopkins
MIT
Northeastern
Northwestern
Notre Dame
Penn
Princeton
Rice
Rochester
Rockefeller
SMU
Stanford
Syracuse
Tufts
Tulane
Vanderbilt
WUSTL
Yale





International



McGill
Toronto
Pisa
Waseda
Manchester
Liverpool
UCL












v
t
e


Public Ivy universities




Richard Moll's 1985 list



Original Eight



College of William & Mary
Miami University
University of California
University of Michigan
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
University of Texas at Austin
University of Vermont
University of Virginia





"Worthy Runners-Up"



Binghamton University, State University of New York
University of Colorado Boulder
Georgia Institute of Technology
University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign
New College of Florida
Pennsylvania State University
University of Pittsburgh
University of Washington at Seattle
University of Wisconsin–Madison






Greenes' Guides 2001 list



Eastern



Binghamton University, State University of New York
College of William & Mary
Pennsylvania State University
Rutgers University
University of Connecticut
University of Delaware
University of Maryland
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
University of Vermont
University of Virginia





Western



University of Arizona
University of California:

Berkeley
Davis
Irvine
Los Angeles
San Diego
Santa Barbara


University of Colorado Boulder
University of Washington





Great Lakes & Midwest



Indiana University
Miami University
Ohio State University
University of Illinois
University of Iowa
University of Michigan
Michigan State University
University of Minnesota
University of Wisconsin





Southern



University of Florida
University of Georgia
University of Texas at Austin












v
t
e


Largest United States university campuses by enrollment






Arizona State University
University of Central Florida
Ohio State University
Florida International University
Texas A&M University
University of Texas at Austin
Michigan State University
University of Florida
University of Minnesota
Indiana University






(2013–14 Academic Year)










v
t
e


U.S. National Register of Historic Places in Indiana



Topics



Contributing property
Keeper of the Register
Historic district
History of the National Register of Historic Places
National Park Service
Property types










Lists
by county



Adams
Allen
Bartholomew
Benton
Blackford
Boone
Brown
Carroll
Cass
Clark
Clay
Clinton
Crawford
Daviess
Dearborn
Decatur
DeKalb
Delaware
Dubois
Elkhart
Fayette
Floyd
Fountain
Franklin
Fulton
Gibson
Grant
Greene
Hamilton
Hancock
Harrison
Hendricks
Henry
Howard
Huntington
Jackson
Jasper
Jay
Jefferson
Jennings
Johnson
Knox
Kosciusko
LaGrange
Lake
LaPorte
Lawrence
Madison
Marion: Center Township
Marion: Other
Marshall
Martin
Miami
Monroe
Montgomery
Morgan
Newton
Noble
Ohio
Orange
Owen
Parke
Perry
Pike
Porter
Posey
Pulaski
Putnam
Randolph
Ripley
Rush
St. Joseph
Scott
Shelby
Spencer
Starke
Steuben
Sullivan
Switzerland
Tippecanoe
Tipton
Union
Vanderburgh
Vermillion
Vigo
Wabash
Warren
Warrick
Washington
Wayne
Wells
White
Whitley





Other lists



Bridges
National Historic Landmarks








Keeper of the Register
History of the National Register of Historic Places
Property types
Historic district
Contributing property
















						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Indiana_University_Bloomington&oldid=816591371"					Categories: Historic districts on the National Register of Historic Places in IndianaUniversity and college buildings on the National Register of Historic Places in IndianaBuildings and structures in Bloomington, IndianaUniversities and colleges in IndianaEducational institutions established in 1820Schools of informaticsPublic universitiesIndiana University BloomingtonTourist attractions in Bloomington, IndianaFlagship universities in the United States1820 establishments in IndianaNational Register of Historic Places in Monroe County, IndianaDiscoveries by Indiana University (Indiana Asteroid Program)Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksPages with citations lacking titlesPages with citations having bare URLsPages with URL errorsUse mdy dates from May 2016Articles containing Latin-language textCoordinates not on WikidataInstances of Infobox university using image sizeWikipedia articles incorporating a citation from Collier's Encyclopedia