This article is about the family of languages found in much of Europe and Asia. For other uses, see Indo-European.


Indo-European


Geographic
distribution
 • Originally, parts of Asia and majority of Europe
 • Now worldwide
 • More than 3.4 billion speakers


Linguistic classification
One of the world's primary language families


Proto-language
Proto-Indo-European


Subdivisions


Albanian
Anatolian (extinct)
Armenian
Balto-Slavic (Baltic and Slavic)
Celtic
Germanic
Hellenic (including Greek)
Indo-Iranian (Indo-Aryan, Iranian, and Nuristani)
Italic (including Romance)
Tocharian (extinct)




ISO 639-2 / 5
ine


Glottolog
indo1319[1]



Present-day native distribution of Indo-European languages, within their homeland of Eurasia:
  Albanian
  Armenian
  Balto-Slavic (Baltic)
  Balto-Slavic (Slavic)
  Celtic
  Germanic
  Hellenic (Greek)
  Indo-Iranian (Indo-Aryan, Iranian, and Nuristani)
  Italic (Romance)
  Non-Indo-European languages
Dotted/striped areas indicate where multilingualism is common





Part of a series on


Indo-European topics







Languages



List of Indo-European languages



Historical


Albanian
Armenian
Balto-Slavic

Baltic
Slavic


Celtic
Germanic
Hellenic

Greek


Indo-Iranian

Indo-Aryan
Iranian


Italic

Romance




Extinct


Anatolian
Tocharian
Paleo-Balkan
Dacian
Illyrian
Liburnian
Messapian
Mysian
Paeonian
Phrygian
Thracian



Reconstructed


Proto-Indo-European language

Phonology: Sound laws, Accent, Ablaut





Hypothetical


Daco-Thracian
Graeco-Armenian
Graeco-Aryan
Graeco-Phrygian
Indo-Hittite
Italo-Celtic
Thraco-Illyrian



Grammar


Vocabulary
Root
Verbs
Nouns
Pronouns
Numerals
Particles



Other


Proto-Anatolian
Proto-Armenian
Proto-Germanic (Proto-Norse)
Proto-Celtic
Proto-Italic
Proto-Greek
Proto-Balto-Slavic (Proto-Slavic)
Proto-Indo-Iranian (Proto-Iranian)








Philology


Hittite texts
Hieroglyphic Luwian
Linear B
Rigveda
Avesta
Homer
Behistun
Gaulish epigraphy
Latin epigraphy
Runic epigraphy
Ogam
Gothic Bible
Armenian Bible
Slanting Brahmi
Old Irish glosses








Origins


Homeland
Proto-Indo-Europeans
Society
Religion



Mainstream


Kurgan hypothesis
Indo-European migrations
Eurasian nomads



Alternative and fringe


Anatolian hypothesis
Armenian hypothesis
Indigenous Aryans
Baltic homeland
Paleolithic Continuity Theory








Archaeology


Chalcolithic (Copper Age)

Pontic Steppe

Domestication of the horse
Kurgan
Kurgan culture
Steppe cultures

Bug-Dniester
Sredny Stog
Dnieper-Donets
Samara
Khvalynsk
Yamna

Mikhaylovka culture





Caucasus

Maykop

East-Asia

Afanasevo

Eastern Europe

Usatovo
Cernavodă
Cucuteni

Northern Europe

Corded ware

Baden
Middle Dnieper





Bronze Age

Pontic Steppe

Chariot
Yamna
Catacomb
Multi-cordoned ware
Poltavka
Srubna

Northern/Eastern Steppe

Abashevo culture
Andronovo
Sintashta

Europe

Globular Amphora
Corded ware
Beaker
Unetice
Trzciniec
Nordic Bronze Age
Terramare
Tumulus
Urnfield
Lusatian

South-Asia

BMAC
Yaz
Gandhara grave



Iron Age

Steppe

Chernoles

Europe

Thraco-Cimmerian
Hallstatt
Jastorf

Caucasus

Colchian

India

Painted Grey Ware
Northern Black Polished Ware








Peoples and societies


Bronze Age


Anatolians
Armenians
Mycenaean Greeks
Indo-Iranians


Iron Age

Indo-Aryans

Indo-Aryans

Iranians

Iranians

Scythians
Persians
Medes



Europe

Celts

Gauls
Celtiberians
Insular Celts


Hellenic peoples
Italic peoples
Germanic peoples
Paleo-Balkans/Anatolia:

Thracians
Dacians
Illyrians
Phrygians




Middle Ages

East-Asia

Tocharians

Europe

Balts
Slavs
Albanians
Medieval Europe

Indo-Aryan

Medieval India

Iranian

Greater Persia








Religion and mythology


Reconstructed


Proto-Indo-European religion
Proto-Indo-Iranian religion



Historical


Hittite

Indian

Vedic

Hinduism


Buddhism
Jainism

Iranian

Persian

Zoroastrianism


Kurdish

Yazidism
Yarsanism


Scythian

Ossetian



Other

Armenian

Europe

Paleo-Balkans
Greek
Roman
Celtic

Irish
Scottish
Breton
Welsh
Cornish


Germanic

Anglo-Saxon
Continental
Norse


Baltic

Latvian
Lithuanian


Slavic
Albanian


Practices


Fire-sacrifice
Horse sacrifice
Sati
Winter solstice/Yule








Indo-European studies


Scholars


Marija Gimbutas
J.P. Mallory


Institutes


Copenhagen Studies in Indo-European


Publications


Encyclopedia of Indo-European Culture
The Horse, the Wheel and Language
Journal of Indo-European Studies
Indogermanisches etymologisches Wörterbuch
Indo-European Etymological Dictionary









v
t
e





The Indo-European languages[2] are a language family of several hundred related languages and dialects.
There are about 445 living Indo-European languages, according to the estimate by Ethnologue, with over two thirds (313) of them belonging to the Indo-Iranian branch.[3] The most widely spoken Indo-European languages by native speakers are Spanish, English, Hindustani (Hindi-Urdu), Portuguese, Bengali, Punjabi, Russian, each with over 100 million speakers, with German, French, and Persian also having significant numbers. Today, about 46% of the human population speaks an Indo-European language as a first language, by far the highest of any language family.
The Indo-European family includes most of the modern languages of Europe; exceptions include Hungarian, Finnish, Estonian, and several minor Uralic languages, as well as Turkish (a Turkic language), Basque (a language isolate), and Maltese (a Semitic language). The Indo-European family is also represented in Asia with the exception of East and Southeast Asia. It was also predominant in ancient Anatolia (present-day Turkey), the ancient Tarim Basin (present-day Northwest China) and most of Central Asia until the medieval Turkic and Mongol invasions. With written evidence appearing since the Bronze Age in the form of the Anatolian languages and Mycenaean Greek, the Indo-European family is significant to the field of historical linguistics as possessing the second-longest recorded history, after the Afroasiatic family, although certain language isolates, such as Sumerian, Elamite, Hurrian, Hattian, and Kassite are recorded earlier.
All Indo-European languages are descendants of a single prehistoric language, reconstructed as Proto-Indo-European, spoken sometime in the Neolithic era. Although no written records remain, aspects of the culture and religion of the Proto-Indo-European people can also be reconstructed from the related cultures of ancient and modern Indo-European speakers who continue to live in areas to where the Proto-Indo-Europeans migrated from their original homeland.[citation needed] Several disputed proposals link Indo-European to other major language families.



Contents


1 History of Indo-European linguistics
2 Classification

2.1 Grouping
2.2 Tree versus wave model
2.3 Proposed subgroupings
2.4 Satem and centum languages
2.5 Suggested macrofamilies


3 Evolution

3.1 Proto-Indo-European
3.2 Diversification
3.3 Important languages for reconstruction
3.4 Sound changes
3.5 Comparison of conjugations


4 Comparison of cognates
5 Present distribution
6 See also
7 References
8 Sources
9 Further reading
10 External links

10.1 Databases
10.2 Lexica





History of Indo-European linguistics[edit]
Main article: Indo-European studies
Although ancient Greek and Roman grammarians noticed similarities between their languages, as well as with surrounding Celtic and Germanic speakers, the sheer ubiquity of Indo-European languages around them led them to the assumption that all human languages were related.[citation needed] This assumption would continue among many grammarians into the early 19th century, the grammatical similarities among Indo-European languages sometimes being seen as evidence of the Tower of Babel until the establishment of the study of Indo-European linguistics proper and the study of non-Indo-European language families.[4][not in citation given][non-primary source needed]
In the 16th century, European visitors to the Indian subcontinent began to notice similarities among Indo-Aryan, Iranian, and European languages. In 1583, English Jesuit missionary and Konkani scholar Thomas Stephens wrote a letter from Goa to his brother (not published until the 20th century)[5] in which he noted similarities between Indian languages and Greek and Latin.
Another account was made by Filippo Sassetti, a merchant born in Florence in 1540, who travelled to the Indian subcontinent. Writing in 1585, he noted some word similarities between Sanskrit and Italian (these included devaḥ/dio "God", sarpaḥ/serpe "serpent", sapta/sette "seven", aṣṭa/otto "eight", and nava/nove "nine").[5] However, neither Stephens' nor Sassetti's observations led to further scholarly inquiry.[5]
In 1647, Dutch linguist and scholar Marcus Zuerius van Boxhorn noted the similarity among certain Asian and European languages and theorized that they were derived from a primitive common language which he called Scythian.[citation needed] He included in his hypothesis Dutch, Albanian, Greek, Latin, Persian, and German, later adding Slavic, Celtic, and Baltic languages. However, Van Boxhorn's suggestions did not become widely known and did not stimulate further research.




Franz Bopp, pioneer in the field of comparative linguistic studies.


Ottoman Turkish traveler Evliya Çelebi visited Vienna in 1665–1666 as part of a diplomatic mission and noted a few similarities between words in German and in Persian. Gaston Coeurdoux and others made observations of the same type. Coeurdoux made a thorough comparison of Sanskrit, Latin and Greek conjugations in the late 1760s to suggest a relationship among them. Meanwhile, Mikhail Lomonosov compared different language groups, including Slavic, Baltic ("Kurlandic"), Iranian ("Medic"), Finnish, Chinese, "Hottentot", and others, noting that related languages (including Latin, Greek, German and Russian) must have separated in antiquity from common ancestors.[6]
The hypothesis reappeared in 1786 when Sir William Jones first lectured on the striking similarities among three of the oldest languages known in his time: Latin, Greek, and Sanskrit, to which he tentatively added Gothic, Celtic, and Persian,[7] though his classification contained some inaccuracies and omissions.[8]
Thomas Young first used the term Indo-European in 1813, deriving from the geographical extremes of the language family: from Western Europe to North India.[9][10] A synonym is Indo-Germanic (Idg. or IdG.), specifying the family's southeasternmost and northwesternmost branches. This first appeared in French (indo-germanique) in 1810 in the work of Conrad Malte-Brun; in most languages this term is now dated or less common than Indo-European, although in German indogermanisch remains the standard scientific term. A number of other synonymous terms have also been used.
Franz Bopp wrote in 1816 On the conjugational system of the Sanskrit language compared with that of Greek, Latin, Persian and Germanic[11] and between 1833 and 1852 he wrote Comparative Grammar. This marks the beginning of Indo-European studies as an academic discipline. The classical phase of Indo-European comparative linguistics leads from this work to August Schleicher's 1861 Compendium and up to Karl Brugmann's Grundriss, published in the 1880s. Brugmann's neogrammarian reevaluation of the field and Ferdinand de Saussure's development of the laryngeal theory may be considered[by whom?] the beginning of "modern" Indo-European studies. The generation of Indo-Europeanists active in the last third of the 20th century (such as Calvert Watkins, Jochem Schindler, and Helmut Rix) developed a better understanding of morphology and of ablaut in the wake of Kuryłowicz's 1956 Apophony in Indo-European, who in 1927 pointed out the existence of the Hittite consonant ḫ.[12] Kuryłowicz's discovery supported Ferdinand de Saussure's 1879 proposal of the existence of coefficients sonantiques, elements de Saussure reconstructed to account for vowel length alternations in Indo-European languages. This led to the so-called laryngeal theory, a major step forward in Indo-European linguistics and a confirmation of de Saussure's theory.[citation needed]
Classification[edit]
See also: Indo-European migrations and List of languages by first written accounts
The various subgroups of the Indo-European language family include ten major branches, listed below in alphabetical order

Albanian, attested from the 13th century AD;[13] Proto-Albanian has evolved from an ancient Paleo-Balkan language, traditionally thought to be Illyrian,[14] however, the evidence supporting this is still insufficient.[15]
Anatolian, extinct by Late Antiquity, spoken in Asia Minor, attested in isolated terms in Luwian/Hittite mentioned in Semitic Old Assyrian texts from the 20th and 19th centuries BC, Hittite texts from about 1650 BC.[16][17]
Armenian, attested from the early 5th century AD.
Balto-Slavic, believed by most Indo-Europeanists[18] to form a phylogenetic unit, while a minority ascribes similarities to prolonged language-contact.

Slavic (from Proto-Slavic), attested from the 9th century AD (possibly earlier), earliest texts in Old Church Slavonic. Slavic languages include Bulgarian, Russian, Polish, Czech, Slovak, Montenegrin, Macedonian, Bosnian, Croatian, Serbian, Slovenian, Ukrainian, Belarusian, and Rusyn.
Baltic, attested from the 14th century AD; for languages first attested that recently, they retain unusually many archaic features attributed to Proto-Indo-European (PIE). Living examples are Lithuanian and Latvian.


Celtic (from Proto-Celtic), attested since the 6th century BC; Lepontic inscriptions date as early as the 6th century BC; Celtiberian from the 2nd century BC; Primitive Irish Ogham inscriptions from the 4th or 5th century AD, earliest inscriptions in Old Welsh from the 7th century AD. Modern Celtic languages include Welsh, Cornish, Breton, Scots Gaelic, Irish Gaelic and Manx.
Germanic (from Proto-Germanic), earliest attestations in runic inscriptions from around the 2nd century AD, earliest coherent texts in Gothic, 4th century AD. Old English manuscript tradition from about the 8th century AD. Includes English, Frisian, German, Dutch, Danish, Swedish, Norwegian, Afrikaans, Yiddish, Low German, Icelandic and Faroese.
Hellenic and Greek (from Proto-Greek, see also History of Greek); fragmentary records in Mycenaean Greek from between 1450 and 1350 BC have been found.[19] Homeric texts date to the 8th century BC.
Indo-Iranian, attested circa 1400 BC, descended from Proto-Indo-Iranian (dated to the late 3rd millennium BC).

Indo-Aryan (including Dardic), attested from around 1400 BC in Hittite texts from Asia Minor, showing traces of Indo-Aryan words.[20][21] Epigraphically from the 3rd century BC in the form of Prakrit (Edicts of Ashoka). The Rigveda is assumed to preserve intact records via oral tradition dating from about the mid-second millennium BC in the form of Vedic Sanskrit. Includes a wide range of modern languages from Northern India, Pakistan and Bangladesh including Hindustani, Bengali, Assamese, Punjabi, Kashmiri, Gujarati, Marathi, Odia and Nepali as well as Sinhalese of Sri Lanka.
Iranian or Iranic, attested from roughly 1000 BC in the form of Avestan. Epigraphically from 520 BC in the form of Old Persian (Behistun inscription). Includes Persian, Ossetian and Kurdish
Nuristani


Italic (from Proto-Italic), attested from the 7th century BC. Includes the ancient Osco-Umbrian languages, Faliscan, as well as Latin and its descendants (the Romance languages).
Tocharian, with proposed links to the Afanasevo culture of Southern Siberia.[22] Extant in two dialects (Turfanian and Kuchean, or Tocharian A and B), attested from roughly the 6th to the 9th century AD. Marginalized by the Old Turkic Uyghur Khaganate and probably extinct by the 10th century.

In addition to the classical ten branches listed above, several extinct and little-known languages and language-groups have existed:

Illyrian: possibly related to Albanian, Messapian, or both
Venetic: shares several similarities with Latin and the Italic languages, but also has some affinities with other IE languages, especially Germanic and Celtic.[23][24]
Liburnian: doubtful affiliation, features shared with Venetic, Illyrian, and Indo-Hittite, significant transition of the Pre-Indo-European elements
Messapian: not conclusively deciphered
Phrygian: language of the ancient Phrygians
Paionian: extinct language once spoken north of Macedon
Thracian: possibly including Dacian
Dacian: possibly very close to Thracian
Ancient Macedonian: proposed relationship to Greek.
Ligurian – possibly close to or part of Celtic.[25]
Sicel: an ancient language spoken by the Sicels (Greek Sikeloi, Latin Siculi), one of the three indigenous (i.e. pre-Greek and pre-Punic) tribes of Sicily. Proposed relationship to Latin or proto-Illyrian (Pre-Indo-European) at an earlier stage.[26]
Lusitanian: possibly related to (or part of) Celtic, Ligurian, or Italic
Cimmerian: possibly Iranic, Thracian, or Celtic

Grouping[edit]
Further information: Language families




Indo-European Family Tree


Membership of languages in the Indo-European language family is determined by genealogical relationships, meaning that all members are presumed descendants of a common ancestor, Proto-Indo-European. Membership in the various branches, groups and subgroups of Indo-European is also genealogical, but here the defining factors are shared innovations among various languages, suggesting a common ancestor that split off from other Indo-European groups. For example, what makes the Germanic languages a branch of Indo-European is that much of their structure and phonology can be stated in rules that apply to all of them. Many of their common features are presumed innovations that took place in Proto-Germanic, the source of all the Germanic languages.
Tree versus wave model[edit]
See also: Language change
The "tree model" is considered an appropriate representation of the genealogical history of a language family if communities do not remain in contact after their languages have started to diverge. In this case, subgroups defined by shared innovations form a nested pattern. The tree model is not appropriate in cases where languages remain in contact as they diversify; in such cases subgroups may overlap, and the "wave model" is a more accurate representation.[27] Most approaches to Indo-European subgrouping to date have assumed that the tree model is by-and-large valid for Indo-European;[28] however, there is also a long tradition of wave-model approaches.[29][30][31]
In addition to genealogical changes, many of the early changes in Indo-European languages can be attributed to language contact. It has been asserted, for example, that many of the more striking features shared by Italic languages (Latin, Oscan, Umbrian, etc.) might well be areal features. More certainly, very similar-looking alterations in the systems of long vowels in the West Germanic languages greatly postdate any possible notion of a proto-language innovation (and cannot readily be regarded as "areal", either, because English and continental West Germanic were not a linguistic area). In a similar vein, there are many similar innovations in Germanic and Balto-Slavic that are far more likely areal features than traceable to a common proto-language, such as the uniform development of a high vowel (*u in the case of Germanic, *i/u in the case of Baltic and Slavic) before the PIE syllabic resonants *ṛ,* ḷ, *ṃ, *ṇ, unique to these two groups among IE languages, which is in agreement with the wave model. The Balkan sprachbund even features areal convergence among members of very different branches.
Using an extension to the Ringe-Warnow model of language evolution, early IE was confirmed to have featured limited contact between distinct lineages, whereas only the Germanic subfamily exhibited a less treelike behaviour as it acquired some characteristics from neighbours early in its evolution rather than from its direct ancestors. The internal diversification of especially West Germanic is cited[by whom?] to have been radically non-treelike.[32]
Proposed subgroupings[edit]


Hypothetical Indo-European
phylogenetic clades


Balkan




Daco-Thracian
Graeco-Armenian
Graeco-Aryan
Graeco-Phrygian
Hellenic
Thraco-Illyrian




Other




Italo-Celtic
Indo-Hittite
Indo-Uralic







v
t
e





Specialists have postulated the existence of higher-order subgroups such as Italo-Celtic, Graeco-Armenian, Graeco-Aryan or Graeco-Armeno-Aryan, and Balto-Slavo-Germanic. However, unlike the ten traditional branches, these are all controversial to a greater or lesser degree.[33]
The Italo-Celtic subgroup was at one point uncontroversial, considered by Antoine Meillet to be even better established than Balto-Slavic.[34] The main lines of evidence included the genitive suffix -ī; the superlative suffix -m̥mo; the change of /p/ to /kʷ/ before another /kʷ/ in the same word (as in penkʷe > *kʷenkʷe > Latin quīnque, Old Irish cóic); and the subjunctive morpheme -ā-.[35] This evidence was prominently challenged by Calvert Watkins;[36] but other, stronger evidence has since emerged.[37][need quotation to verify]
Evidence for a relationship between Greek and Armenian includes the regular change of the second laryngeal to a at the beginnings of words, as well as terms for "woman" and "sheep".[38] Greek and Indo-Iranian share innovations mainly in verbal morphology and patterns of nominal derivation.[39] Relations have also been proposed between Phrygian and Greek,[40] and between Thracian and Armenian.[41][42] Some fundamental shared features, like the aorist (a verb form denoting action without reference to duration or completion) having the perfect active particle -s fixed to the stem, link this group closer to Anatolian languages[43] and Tocharian. Shared features with Balto-Slavic languages, on the other hand (especially present and preterit formations), might be due to later contacts.[44]
The Indo-Hittite hypothesis proposes that the Indo-European language family consists of two main branches: one represented by the Anatolian languages and another branch encompassing all other Indo-European languages. Features that separate Anatolian from all other branches of Indo-European (such as the gender or the verb system) have been interpreted alternately as archaic debris or as innovations due to prolonged isolation. Points proffered in favour of the Indo-Hittite hypothesis are the (non-universal) Indo-European agricultural terminology in Anatolia[45] and the preservation of laryngeals.[46] However, in general this hypothesis is considered to attribute too much weight to the Anatolian evidence. According to another view, the Anatolian subgroup left the Indo-European parent language comparatively late, approximately at the same time as Indo-Iranian and later than the Greek or Armenian divisions. A third view, especially prevalent in the so-called French school of Indo-European studies, holds that extant similarities in non-satem languages in general—including Anatolian—might be due to their peripheral location in the Indo-European language-area and to early separation, rather than indicating a special ancestral relationship.[47] Hans J. Holm, based on lexical calculations, arrives at a picture roughly replicating the general scholarly opinion and refuting the Indo-Hittite hypothesis.[48]
Satem and centum languages[edit]




Some significant isoglosses in Indo-European daughter languages at around 500 BC.
  Blue: centum languages
  Red: satem languages
  Orange: languages with augment
  Green: languages with PIE *-tt- > -ss-
  Tan: languages with PIE *-tt- > -st-
  Pink: languages with instrumental, dative and ablative plural endings (and some others) in *-m- rather than *-bh-



Main article: Centum and satem languages
The division of the Indo-European languages into satem and centum groups was put forward by Peter von Bradke in 1890, although Karl Brugmann had proposed a similar type of division in 1886. In the satem languages, which include the Balto-Slavic and Indo-Iranian branches, as well as (in most respects) Albanian and Armenian, the reconstructed Proto-Indo-European palatovelars remained distinct and were fricativized, while the labiovelars merged with the "plain velars". In the centum languages, the palatovelars merged with the plain velars, while the labiovelars remained distinct. The results of these alternative developments are exemplified by the words for "hundred" in Avestan (satem) and Latin (centum)—the initial palatovelar developed into a fricative [s] in the former, but became an ordinary velar [k] in the latter.
Rather than being a genealogical separation, the centum–satem division is commonly seen as resulting from innovative changes that spread across PIE dialect-branches over a particular geographical area; the centum–satem isogloss intersects a number of other isoglosses that mark distinctions between features in the early IE branches. It may be that the centum branches in fact reflect the original state of affairs in PIE, and only the satem branches shared a set of innovations, which affected all but the peripheral areas of the PIE dialect continuum.[49] Kortlandt proposes that the ancestors of Balts and Slavs took part in satemization before being drawn later into the western Indo-European sphere.[50]
Suggested macrofamilies[edit]
See also: Origin of language
Some linguists propose that Indo-European languages form part of one of several hypothetical macrofamilies. However, these theories remain highly controversial, not being accepted by most linguists in the field. Some of the smaller proposed macrofamilies include:

Pontic, postulated by John Colarusso, which joins Indo-European with Northwest Caucasian
Indo-Uralic, joining Indo-European with Uralic

Other, greater proposed families including Indo-European languages, include:

Eurasiatic, a theory championed by Joseph Greenberg
Nostratic, comprising all or some of the Eurasiatic languages, as well as the Kartvelian, Uralic, Dravidian (or even the Elamo-Dravidian macrofamily), Altaic, and Afroasiatic language families

Objections to such groupings are not based on any theoretical claim about the likely historical existence or non-existence of such macrofamilies; it is entirely reasonable to suppose that they might have existed. The serious difficulty lies in identifying the details of actual relationships between language families, because it is very hard to find concrete evidence that transcends chance resemblance, or is not equally likely explained as being due to borrowing (including Wanderwörter, which can travel very long distances). Because the signal-to-noise ratio in historical linguistics declines steadily over time, at great enough time-depths it becomes open to reasonable doubt that one can even distinguish between signal and noise.
Evolution[edit]
Proto-Indo-European[edit]
Main article: Proto-Indo-European language




Scheme of Indo-European migrations from ca. 4000 to 1000 BC according to the Kurgan hypothesis.


The proposed Proto-Indo-European language (PIE) is the hypothetical common ancestor of the Indo-European languages, spoken by the Proto-Indo-Europeans. From the 1960s, knowledge of Anatolian became certain enough to establish its relationship to PIE. Using the method of internal reconstruction an earlier stage, called Pre-Proto-Indo-European, has been proposed.
PIE was an inflected language, in which the grammatical relationships between words were signaled through inflectional morphemes (usually endings). The roots of PIE are basic morphemes carrying a lexical meaning. By addition of suffixes, they form stems, and by addition of endings, these form grammatically inflected words (nouns or verbs). The hypothetical Indo-European verb system is complex and, like the noun, exhibits a system of ablaut.
Diversification[edit]
See also: Indo-European migrations


Expansion of Indo-European languages













IE languages c. 4000 BC 













IE languages c. 3000 BC 













IE languages c. 2000 BC 













IE languages c. 500 BC 








Expansion of Indo-European languages (alternative view)













IE languages c. 3500 BC 













IE languages c. 2500 BC 













IE languages c. 1500 BC 













IE languages c. 500 AD 






The diversification of the parent language into the attested branches of daughter languages is historically unattested. The timeline of the evolution of the various daughter languages, on the other hand, is mostly undisputed, quite regardless of the question of Indo-European origins.
Using a mathematical analysis borrowed from evolutionary biology, Don Ringe and Tandy Warnow propose the following evolutionary tree of Indo-European branches:[51]

Pre-Anatolian (before 3500 BC)
Pre-Tocharian
Pre-Italic and Pre-Celtic (before 2500 BC)
Pre-Armenian and Pre-Greek (after 2500 BC)
Pre-Germanic and Pre-Balto-Slavic;[51] proto-Germanic c. 500 BC[52]
Proto-Indo-Iranian (2000 BC)

David Anthony proposes the following sequence:[53]

Pre-Anatolian (4200 BC)
Pre-Tocharian (3700 BC)
Pre-Germanic (3300 BC)
Pre-Italic and Pre-Celtic (3000 BC)
Pre-Armenian (2800 BC)
Pre-Balto-Slavic (2800 BC)
Pre-Greek (2500 BC)
Proto-Indo-Iranian (2200 BC); split between Iranian and Old Indic 1800 BC

From 1500 BC the following sequence may be given:

1500 BC–1000 BC: The Nordic Bronze Age develops pre-Proto-Germanic, and the (pre)-Proto-Celtic Urnfield and Hallstatt cultures emerge in Central Europe, introducing the Iron Age. Migration of the Proto-Italic speakers into the Italian peninsula (Bagnolo stele). Redaction of the Rigveda and rise of the Vedic civilization in the Punjab. The Mycenaean civilization gives way to the Greek Dark Ages. Hittite goes extinct.
1000 BC–500 BC: The Celtic languages spread over Central and Western Europe. Baltic languages are spoken in a huge area from present-day Poland to the Ural Mountains.[54] Proto Germanic. Homer and the beginning of Classical Antiquity. The Vedic Civilization gives way to the Mahajanapadas. Siddhartha Gautama preaches Buddhism. Zoroaster composes the Gathas, rise of the Achaemenid Empire, replacing the Elamites and Babylonia. Separation of Proto-Italic into Osco-Umbrian and Latin-Faliscan. Genesis of the Greek and Old Italic alphabets. A variety of Paleo-Balkan languages are spoken in Southern Europe.
500 BC–1 BC/AD: Classical Antiquity: spread of Greek and Latin throughout the Mediterranean and, during the Hellenistic period (Indo-Greeks), to Central Asia and the Hindukush. Kushan Empire, Mauryan Empire. Proto-Germanic.
1 BC/ AD 500: Late Antiquity, Gupta period; attestation of Armenian. Proto-Slavic. The Roman Empire and then the Migration period marginalize the Celtic languages to the British Isles. Sogdian, an Eastern Iranian language, becomes the lingua franca of the Silk Road in Central Asia leading to China, due to the proliferation of Sogdian merchants there. The last of the Anatolian languages are extinct.
500–1000: Early Middle Ages. The Viking Age forms an Old Norse koine spanning Scandinavia, the British Isles and Iceland. The Islamic conquest and the Turkic expansion results in the Arabization and Turkification of significant areas where Indo-European languages were spoken. Tocharian is extinct in the course of the Turkic expansion while Northeastern Iranian (Scytho-Sarmatian) is reduced to small refugia. Slavic languages spread over wide areas in central, eastern and southeastern Europe, largely replacing Romance in the Balkans (with the exception of Romanian) and whatever was left of the paleo-Balkan languages with the exception of Albanian.
1000–1500: Late Middle Ages: Attestation of Albanian and Baltic.
1500–2000: Early Modern period to present: Colonialism results in the spread of Indo-European languages to every continent, most notably Romance (North, Central and South America, North and Sub-Saharan Africa, West Asia), West Germanic (English in North America, Sub-Saharan Africa, East Asia and Australia; to a lesser extent Dutch and German), and Russian to Central Asia and North Asia.

Important languages for reconstruction[edit]
In reconstructing the history of the Indo-European languages and the form of the Proto-Indo-European language, some languages have been of particular importance. These generally include the ancient Indo-European languages that are both well-attested and documented at an early date, although some languages from later periods are important if they are particularly linguistically conservative (most notably, Lithuanian). Early poetry is of special significance because of the rigid poetic meter normally employed, which makes it possible to reconstruct a number of features (e.g. vowel length) that were either unwritten or corrupted in the process of transmission down to the earliest extant written manuscripts.
Most important[citation needed] of all:

Vedic Sanskrit (c. 1500 – 500 BC). This language is unique in that its source documents were all composed orally, and were passed down through oral tradition (shakha schools) for c. 2,000 years before ever being written down. The oldest documents are all in poetic form; oldest and most important of all is the Rig Veda (c. 1500 BC).
Mycenaean Greek (c. 1450 BC)[55] and Ancient Greek (c. 750 – 400 BC). Mycenaean Greek is the oldest recorded form, but its value is lessened by the limited material, restricted subject matter, and highly ambiguous writing system. More important is Ancient Greek, documented extensively beginning with the two Homeric poems (the Iliad and the Odyssey, c. 750 BC).
Hittite (c. 1700 – 1200 BC). This is the earliest-recorded of all Indo-European languages, and highly divergent from the others due to the early separation of the Anatolian languages from the remainder. It possesses some highly archaic features found only fragmentarily, if at all, in other languages. At the same time, however, it appears to have undergone a large number of early phonological and grammatical changes which, combined with the ambiguities of its writing system, hinder its usefulness somewhat.

Other primary sources:

Latin, attested in a huge amount of poetic and prose material in the Classical period (c. 200 BC – 100 AD) and limited older material from as early as c. 600 BC.
Gothic (the most archaic well-documented Germanic language, c. 350 AD), along with the combined witness of the other old Germanic languages: most importantly, Old English (c. 800 – 1000 AD), Old High German (c. 750 – 1000 AD) and Old Norse (c. 1100 – 1300 AD, with limited earlier sources dating all the way back to c. 200 AD).
Old Avestan (c. 1700 – 1200 BC) and Younger Avestan (c. 900 BC). Documentation is sparse, but nonetheless quite important due to its highly archaic nature.
Modern Lithuanian, with limited records in Old Lithuanian (c. 1500 – 1700 AD).
Old Church Slavonic (c. 900 – 1000 AD).

Other secondary sources, of lesser value due to poor attestation:

Luwian, Lycian, Lydian and other Anatolian languages (c. 1400 – 400 BC).
Oscan, Umbrian and other Old Italic languages (c. 600 – 200 BC).
Old Persian (c. 500 BC).
Old Prussian (c. 1350 – 1600 AD); even more archaic than Lithuanian.

Other secondary sources, of lesser value[citation needed] due to extensive phonological changes and relatively limited attestation:

Old Irish (c. 700 – 850 AD).
Tocharian (c. 500 – 800 AD), underwent large phonetic shifts and mergers in the proto-language, and has an almost entirely reworked declension system.
Classical Armenian (c. 400 – 1100 AD).
Albanian (c. 1450 – current time).

Sound changes[edit]
Main article: Indo-European sound laws
As the Proto-Indo-European (PIE) language broke up, its sound system diverged as well, changing according to various sound laws evidenced in the daughter languages.
PIE is normally reconstructed with a complex system of 15 stop consonants, including an unusual three-way phonation (voicing) distinction between voiceless, voiced and "voiced aspirated" (i.e. breathy voiced) stops, and a three-way distinction among velar consonants (k-type sounds) between "palatal" ḱ ǵ ǵh, "plain velar" k g gh and labiovelar kʷ gʷ gʷh. (The correctness of the terms palatal and plain velar is disputed; see Proto-Indo-European phonology.) All daughter languages have reduced the number of distinctions among these sounds, often in divergent ways.
As an example, in English, one of the Germanic languages, the following are some of the major changes that happened:


As in other centum languages, the "plain velar" and "palatal" stops merged, reducing the number of stops from 15 to 12.
As in the other Germanic languages, the Germanic sound shift changed the realization of all stop consonants, with each consonant shifting to a different one:

bʰ → b → p → f
dʰ → d → t → θ
gʰ → g → k → x (Later initial x →h)
gʷʰ → gʷ → kʷ → xʷ (Later initial xʷ →hʷ)

Each original consonant shifted one position to the right. For example, original dʰ became d, while original d became t and original t became θ (written th in English). This is the original source of the English sounds written f, th, h and wh. Examples, comparing English with Latin, where the sounds largely remain unshifted:

For PIE p: piscis vs. fish; pēs, pēdis vs. foot; pluvium "rain" vs. flow; pater vs. father
For PIE t: trēs vs. three; māter vs. mother
For PIE d: decem vs. ten; pēdis vs. foot; quid vs. what
For PIE k: centum vs. hund(red); capere "to take" vs. have
For PIE kʷ: quid vs. what; quandō vs. when


Various further changes affected consonants in the middle or end of a word:

The voiced stops resulting from the sound shift were softened to voiced fricatives (or perhaps the sound shift directly generated fricatives in these positions).
Verner's law also turned some of the voiceless fricatives resulting from the sound shift into voiced fricatives or stops. This is why the t in Latin centum ends up as d in hund(red) rather than the expected th.
Most remaining h sounds disappeared, while remaining f and th became voiced. For example, Latin decem ends up as ten with no h in the middle (but note taíhun "ten" in Gothic, an archaic Germanic language). Similarly, the words seven and have have a voiced v (compare Latin septem, capere), while father and mother have a voiced th, although not spelled differently (compare Latin pater, māter).




None of the daughter-language families (except possibly Anatolian, particularly Luvian) reflect the plain velar stops differently from the other two series, and there is even a certain amount of dispute whether this series existed at all in PIE. The major distinction between centum and satem languages corresponds to the outcome of the PIE plain velars:

The "central" satem languages (Indo-Iranian, Balto-Slavic, Albanian, and Armenian) reflect both "plain velar" and labiovelar stops as plain velars, often with secondary palatalization before a front vowel (e i ē ī). The "palatal" stops are palatalized and often appear as sibilants (usually but not always distinct from the secondarily palatalized stops).
The "peripheral" centum languages (Germanic, Italic, Celtic, Greek, Anatolian and Tocharian) reflect both "palatal" and "plain velar" stops as plain velars, while the labiovelars continue unchanged, often with later reduction into plain labial or velar consonants.

The three-way PIE distinction between voiceless, voiced and voiced aspirated stops is considered extremely unusual from the perspective of linguistic typology—particularly in the existence of voiced aspirated stops without a corresponding series of voiceless aspirated stops. None of the various daughter-language families continue it unchanged, with numerous "solutions" to the apparently unstable PIE situation:

The Indo-Aryan languages preserve the three series unchanged but have evolved a fourth series of voiceless aspirated consonants.
The Iranian languages probably passed through the same stage, subsequently changing the aspirated stops into fricatives.
Greek converted the voiced aspirates into voiceless aspirates.
Italic probably passed through the same stage, but reflects the voiced aspirates as voiceless fricatives, especially f (or sometimes plain voiced stops in Latin).
Celtic, Balto-Slavic, Anatolian, and Albanian merge the voiced aspirated into plain voiced stops.
Germanic and Armenian change all three series in a chain shift (e.g. with bh b p becoming b p f (known as Grimm's law in Germanic).

Among the other notable changes affecting consonants are:

The Ruki sound law (s becomes /ʃ/ before r, u, k, i) in the satem languages.
Loss of prevocalic p in Proto-Celtic.
Development of prevocalic s to h in Proto-Greek, with later loss of h between vowels.
Verner's law in Proto-Germanic.
Grassmann's law (dissimilation of aspirates) independently in Proto-Greek and Proto-Indo-Iranian.

The following table shows the basic outcomes of PIE consonants in some of the most important daughter languages for the purposes of reconstruction. For a fuller table, see Indo-European sound laws.

Proto-Indo-European consonants and their reflexes in selected Indo-European daughter languages

PIE
Skr.
O.C.S.
Lith.
Greek
Latin
Old Irish
Gothic
English
Examples


PIE
Eng.
Skr.
Gk.
Lat.
Lith. etc.


*p
p; phH
p
Ø;
chT [x]
f;
`-b- [β]
f;
-v/f-
*pṓds ~ *ped-
foot
pád-
poús (podós)
pēs (pedis)
pãdas


*t
t; thH
t
t;
-th- [θ]
þ [θ];
`-d- [ð];
tT-
th;
`-d-;
tT-
*tréyes
three
tráyas
treĩs
trēs
trỹs


*ḱ
ś [ɕ]
s
š [ʃ]
k
c [k]
c [k];
-ch- [x]
h;
`-g- [ɣ]
h;
-Ø-;
`-y-
*ḱm̥tóm
hund(red)
śatám
he-katón
centum
šimtas


*k
k; cE [tʃ];
khH
k;
čE [tʃ];
cE' [ts]
k
*kreuh₂
"raw meat"
OE hrēaw
raw
kravíṣ-
kréas
cruor
kraûjas


*kʷ
p;
tE;
k(u)
qu [kʷ];
c(O) [k]
ƕ [ʍ];
`-gw/w-
wh;
`-w-
*kʷid, kʷod
what
kím
tí
quid, quod
kas, kad


*kʷekʷlom
wheel
cakrá-
kúklos

kãklas


*b
b; bhH
b
b [b];
-[β]-
p


*d
d; dhH
d
d [d];
-[ð]-
t
*déḱm̥(t)
ten,
Goth. taíhun
dáśa
déka
decem
dẽšimt


*ǵ
j [dʒ];
hH [ɦ]
z
ž [ʒ]
g
g [ɡ];
-[ɣ]-
k
c / k;
chE'
*ǵénu, *ǵnéu-
OE cnēo
knee
jā́nu
gónu
genu



*g
g;
jE [dʒ];
ghH;
hH,E [ɦ]
g;
žE [ʒ];
dzE'
g
*yugóm
yoke
yugám
zugón
iugum
jùngas


*gʷ
b;
de;
g(u)
u [w > v];
gun− [ɡʷ]
b [b];
-[β]-
q [kʷ]
qu
*gʷīw-
quick
"alive"
jīvá-
bíos,
bíotos
vīvus
gývas


*bʰ
bh;
b..Ch
b
ph;
p..Ch
f-;
b
b [b];
-[β]-;
-f
b;
-v/f-(rl)
*bʰerō
bear "carry"
bhar-
phérō
ferō
OCS berǫ


*dʰ
dh;
d..Ch
d
th;
t..Ch
f-;
d;
b(r),l,u-
d [d];
-[ð]-
d [d];
-[ð]-;
-þ
d
*dʰwer-, dʰur-
door
dhvā́raḥ
thurā́
forēs
dùrys


*ǵʰ
h [ɦ];
j..Ch
z
ž [ʒ]
kh;
k..Ch
h;
h/gR
g [ɡ];
-[ɣ]-
g;
-g- [ɣ];
-g [x]
g;
-y/w-(rl)
*ǵʰans-
goose,
OHG gans
haṁsáḥ
khḗn
(h)ānser
žąsìs


*gʰ
gh;
hE [ɦ];
g..Ch;
jE..Ch
g;
žE [ʒ];
dzE'
g


*gʷʰ
ph;
thE;
kh(u);
p..Ch;
tE..Ch;
k(u)..Ch
f-;
g /
-u- [w];
ngu [ɡʷ]
g;
b-;
-w-;
ngw
g;
b-;
-w-
*sneigʷʰ-
snow
sneha-
nípha
nivis
sniẽgas


*gʷʰerm-
 ??warm
gharmáḥ
thermós
formus
Latv. gar̂me


*s
s
h-;
-s;
s(T);
-Ø-;
[¯](R)
s;
-r-
s [s];
-[h]-
s;
`-z-
s;
`-r-
*septḿ̥
seven
saptá
heptá
septem
septynì


ṣruki- [ʂ]
xruki- [x]
šruki- [ʃ]
*h₂eusōs
"dawn"
east
uṣā́ḥ
āṓs
aurōra
aušra


*m
m
m [m];
-[w̃]-
m
*mūs
mouse
mū́ṣ-
mũs
mūs
OCS myšĭ


*-m
-m
-˛ [˜]
-n
-m
-n
-Ø
*ḱm̥tóm
hund(red)
śatám
(he)katón
centum
OPrus simtan


*n
n
n;
-˛ [˜]
n
*nokʷt-
night
nákt-
núkt-
noct-
naktis


*l
r (dial. l)
l
*leuk-
light
rócate
leukós
lūx
laũkas


*r
r
*h₁reudʰ-
red
rudhirá-
eruthrós
ruber
raũdas


*i̯
y [j]
j [j]
z [dz > zd, z] /
h;
-Ø-
i [j];
-Ø-
Ø
j
y
*yugóm
yoke
yugám
zugón
iugum
jùngas


*u̯
v [ʋ]
v
v [ʋ]
w > h / Ø
u [w > v]
f;
-Ø-
w
*h₂weh₁n̥to-
wind
vā́taḥ
áenta
ventus
vėtra


PIE
Skr.
O.C.S.
Lith.
Greek
Latin
Old Irish
Gothic
English



Notes:


C- At the beginning of a word.
-C- Between vowels.
-C At the end of a word.
`-C- Following an unstressed vowel (Verner's law).
-C-(rl) Between vowels, or between a vowel and r, l (on either side).
CT Before a (PIE) stop (p, t, k).
CT− After a (PIE) obstruent (p, t, k, etc.; s).
C(T) Before or after an obstruent (p, t, k, etc.; s).
CH Before an original laryngeal.
CE Before a (PIE) front vowel (i, e).
CE' Before secondary (post-PIE) front-vowels.
Ce Before e.
C(u) Before or after a (PIE) u (boukólos rule).
C(O) Before or after a (PIE) o, u (boukólos rule).
Cn− After n.
CR Before a sonorant (r, l, m, n).
C(R) Before or after a sonorant (r, l, m, n).
C(r),l,u− Before r, l or after r, u.
Cruki− After r, u, k, i (Ruki sound law).
C..Ch Before an aspirated consonant in the next syllable (Grassmann's law, also known as dissimilation of aspirates).
CE..Ch Before a (PIE) front vowel (i, e) as well as before an aspirated consonant in the next syllable (Grassmann's law, also known as dissimilation of aspirates).
C(u)..Ch Before or after a (PIE) u as well as before an aspirated consonant in the next syllable (Grassmann's law, also known as dissimilation of aspirates).

Comparison of conjugations[edit]
The following table presents a comparison of conjugations of the thematic present indicative of the verbal root *bʰer- of the English verb to bear and its reflexes in various early attested IE languages and their modern descendants or relatives, showing that all languages had in the early stage an inflectional verb system.



Proto-Indo-European
(*bʰer- 'to carry, to bear')


I (1st sg.)
*bʰéroh₂


You (2nd sg.)
*bʰéresi


He/She/It (3rd sg.)
*bʰéreti


We (1st dual)
*bʰérowos


You (2nd dual)
*bʰéreth₁es


They (3rd dual)
*bʰéretes


We (1st pl.)
*bʰéromos


You (2nd pl.)
*bʰérete


They (3rd pl.)
*bʰéronti




Major subgroup
Hellenic
Indo-Iranian
Italic
Celtic
Armenian
Germanic
Balto-Slavic
Albanian


Indo-Aryan
Iranian
Baltic
Slavic


Ancient representative
Ancient Greek
Vedic Sanskrit
Avestan
Latin
Old Irish
Classical Arm.
Gothic
Old Prussian
Old Church Sl.
Old Albanian


I (1st sg.)
phérō
bhárāmi
barā
ferō
biru; berim
berem
baíra /bɛra/

berǫ
*berja


You (2nd sg.)
phéreis
bhárasi
barahi
fers
biri; berir
beres
baíris

bereši



He/She/It (3rd sg.)
phérei
bhárati
baraiti
fert
berid
berē
baíriþ

beretъ



We (1st dual)
—
bhárāvas
barāvahi
—
—
—
baíros

berevě



You (2nd dual)
phéreton
bhárathas
—
—
—
—
baírats

bereta



They (3rd dual)
phéreton
bháratas
baratō
—
—
—
—

berete



We (1st pl.)
phéromen
bhárāmas
barāmahi
ferimus
bermai
beremk`
baíram

beremъ



You (2nd pl.)
phérete
bháratha
baraϑa
fertis
beirthe
berēk`
baíriþ

berete



They (3rd pl.)
phérousi
bháranti
barəṇti
ferunt
berait
beren
baírand

berǫtъ



Modern representative
Modern Greek
Hindustani
Persian
Sardinian
Irish
Armenian (Eastern; Western)
German
Lithuanian
Czech
Albanian


I (1st sg.)
férno
(maiṃ) bharūṃ
(man) {mi}baram
férjo
beirim
berum em; g'perem
(ich) {ge}bäre
beriu
beru
(unë) bie


You (2nd sg.)
férnis
(tū) bhare
(tu) {mi}bari
féris
beirir
berum es; g'peres
(du) {ge}bierst
beri
bereš
(ti) bie


He/She/It (3rd sg.)
férni
(vah) bhare
(ān) {mi}barad
férit
beireann; %beiridh
berum ē; g'perē
(er)(sie)(es) {ge}biert
beria
bere
(ai/ajo) bie


We (1st dual)







beriava




You (2nd dual)







beriata




They (3rd dual)







beria




We (1st pl.)
férnume
(ham) bhareṃ
(mā) {mi}barim
ferìmus
beirimid; beiream
berum enk`; g'perenk`
(wir) {ge}bären
beriame
berem(e)
(ne) biem


You (2nd pl.)
férnete
(tum) bharo
(šomā) {mi}barid
ferí(t)es
beireann sibh; %beirthaoi
berum ek`; g'perek`
(ihr) {ge}bärt
beriate
berete
(ju) bini


They (3rd pl.)
férnun
(ve) bhareṃ
(ānān) {mi}barand
férin(t)
beirid
berum en; g'peren
(sie) {ge}bären
beria
berou
(ata/ato) bien


While similarities are still visible between the modern descendants and relatives of these ancient languages, the differences have increased over time. Some IE languages have moved from synthetic verb systems to largely periphrastic systems. In addition, the pronouns of periphrastic forms are in brackets when they appear. Some of these verbs have undergone a change in meaning as well.

In Modern Irish beir usually only carries the meaning to bear in the sense of bearing a child; its common meanings are to catch, grab.
The Hindi verb bharnā, the continuation of the Sanskrit verb, can have a variety of meanings, but the most common is "to fill". The forms given in the table, although etymologically derived from the present indicative, now have the meaning of subjunctive. The present indicative is conjugated periphrastically, using a participle (etymologically the Sanskrit present participle bharant-) and an auxiliary: maiṃ bhartā hūṃ, tū bhartā hai, vah bhartā hai, ham bharte haiṃ, tum bharte ho, ve bharte haiṃ (masculine forms).
German is not directly descended from Gothic, but the Gothic forms are a close approximation of what the early West Germanic forms of c. 400 AD would have looked like. The cognate of Germanic beranan (English bear) survives in German only in the compound gebären, meaning "bear (a child)".
The Latin verb ferre is irregular, and not a good representative of a normal thematic verb. In most Romance Languages such as French, other verbs now mean "to carry" (e.g. Fr. porter < Lat. portare) and ferre only survives in compounds such as souffrir "to suffer" (from Latin sub- and ferre) and conférer "to confer" (from Latin "con-" and "ferre"). However, Sardinian still retains a reflex of ferre in the verb fèrrere.[56][57]
In Modern Greek, phero φέρω (modern transliteration fero) "to bear" is still used but only in specific contexts and is most common in such compounds as αναφέρω, διαφέρω, εισφέρω, εκφέρω, καταφέρω, προφέρω, προαναφέρω, προσφέρω etc. The form that is (very) common today is pherno φέρνω (modern transliteration ferno) meaning "to bring". Additionally, the perfective form of pherno (used for the subjunctive voice and also for the future tense) is also phero.
In Modern Russian брать (brat') carries the meaning to take. Бремя (br'em'a) means burden, as something heavy to bear, and derivative беременность (b'er'em'ennost') means pregnancy.

Comparison of cognates[edit]
Main article: Indo-European vocabulary
See also: Proto-Indo-European numerals and List of numbers in various languages
Present distribution[edit]




Countries where an Indo-European language is:
  a primary de facto national or official language
  a secondary official language
  officially recognized







The approximate present-day distribution of Indo-European languages within the Americas by country:
Romance:
  Spanish
  Portuguese–Galician
  French
Germanic:
  English
  Dutch



Today, Indo-European languages are spoken by almost 3 billion native speakers across all inhabited continents,[58] the largest number by far for any recognised language family. Of the 20 languages with the largest numbers of native speakers according to Ethnologue, 11 are Indo-European: Spanish, English, Hindustani, Portuguese, Bengali, Russian, Punjabi, German, French, Marathi, accounting for over 1.7 billion native speakers.[59] Additionally, hundreds of millions of persons worldwide study Indo-European languages as secondary or tertiary languages, including in cultures which have completely different language families and historical backgrounds—there between 600,000,000[60] and one billion[61] L2 learners of English alone.
The success of the language family, including the large number of speakers and the vast portions of the Earth that they inhabit, is due to several factors. The ancient Indo-European migrations and widespread dissemination of Indo-European culture throughout Eurasia, including that of the Proto-Indo-Europeans themselves, and that of their daughter cultures including the Indo-Aryans, Iranian peoples, Celts, Greeks, Romans, Germanic peoples, and Slavs, led to these peoples' branches of the language family already taking a dominant foothold in virtually all of Eurasia except for North and East Asia by the end of the prehistoric era, replacing the previously-spoken pre-Indo-European languages of this extensive area.
Despite being unaware of their common linguistic origin, diverse groups of Indo-European speakers continued to culturally dominate and replace the indigenous languages of the western two-thirds of Eurasia. By the beginning of the Common Era, Indo-European peoples controlled almost the entirety of this area: the Celts western and central Europe, the Romans southern Europe, the Germanic peoples northern Europe, the Slavs eastern Europe, the Iranian peoples the entirety of western and central Asia and parts of eastern Europe, and the Indo-Aryan peoples south Asia, with the Tocharians inhabiting the Indo-European frontier in western China. By the medieval period, only the Vasconic, Semitic, Dravidian, Caucasian and Uralic languages remained of the (relatively) indigenous languages of Europe and the western half of Asia.
Despite medieval invasions by Eurasian nomads, a group to which the Proto-Indo-Europeans had once belonged, Indo-European expansion reached another peak in the early modern period with the dramatic increase in the population of the Indian subcontinent and European expansionism throughout the globe during the Age of Discovery, as well as the continued replacement and assimilation of surrounding non-Indo-European languages and peoples due to increased state centralization and nationalism. These trends compounded throughout the modern period due to the general global population growth and the results of European colonization of the Western Hemisphere and Oceania, leading to an explosion in the number of Indo-European speakers as well as the territories inhabited by them.
Due to colonization and the modern dominance of Indo-European languages in the fields of global science, technology, education, finance, and sports, even many modern countries whose populations largely speak non-Indo-European languages have Indo-European languages as official languages, and the majority of the global population speaks at least one Indo-European language. The overwhelming majority of languages used on the Internet are Indo-European, with English continuing to lead the group; English in general has in many respects become the lingua franca of global communication.

See also[edit]


Afroasiatic languages
Grammatical conjugation
The Horse, The Wheel and Language (book)
Indo-European copula
Indo-European sound laws
Indo-European studies
Indo-European vocabulary
Indo-Semitic languages
Indo-Uralic languages
Eurasiatic languages
Language family
Languages of Asia
Languages of Europe
Languages of India
List of Indo-European languages
Proto-Indo-European root
Proto-Indo-European religion


References[edit]


^ Hammarström, Harald; Forkel, Robert; Haspelmath, Martin, eds. (2017). "Indo-European". Glottolog 3.0. Jena, Germany: Max Planck Institute for the Science of Human History. 
^ https://indo-european.info/indo-european-demic-diffusion-model-2.pdf
^ "Ethnologue report for Indo-European". Ethnologue.com. 
^ Gilchrist, John (January 1804). "A New Theory and Prospectus of the Persian Verbs, with their Hindoostanee Synonymes in Persian and English". The Critical Review: or, Annals of Literature. 3. Volume 1: 565–571. 
^ a b c Auroux, Sylvain (2000). History of the Language Sciences. Berlin, New York: Walter de Gruyter. p. 1156. ISBN 3-11-016735-2. 
^ M. V. Lomonosov (drafts for Russian Grammar, published 1755). In: Complete Edition, Moscow, 1952, vol. 7, pp. 652–659: Представимъ долготу времени, которою сіи языки раздѣлились. ... Польской и россійской языкъ коль давно раздѣлились! Подумай же, когда курляндской! Подумай же, когда латинской, греч., нѣм., росс. О глубокая древность! [Imagine the depth of time when these languages separated! ... Polish and Russian separated so long ago! Now think how long ago [this happened to] Kurlandic! Think when [this happened to] Latin, Greek, German, and Russian! Oh, great antiquity!]
^ "Indo-European Practice and Historical Methodology (cited on pp. 14–15)" (PDF). Retrieved 2010-08-07. 
^ Roger Blench. "Archaeology and Language: methods and issues" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on May 17, 2006. Retrieved May 29, 2010.  In: A Companion To Archaeology. J. Bintliff ed. 52–74. Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 2004. (He erroneously included Egyptian, Japanese, and Chinese in the Indo-European languages, while omitting Hindi.)[dead link]
^ Robinson, Andrew (2007). The Last Man Who Knew Everything: Thomas Young, the Anonymous Genius who Proved Newton Wrong and Deciphered the Rosetta Stone, among Other Surprising Feats. Penguin. ISBN 0-13-134304-1. 
^ In London Quarterly Review X/2 1813.; cf. Szemerényi 1999:12, footnote 6
^ Franz Bopp (2010) [1816]. Über das Conjugationssystem der Sanskritsprache : in Vergleichung mit jenem der griechischen, lateinischen, persischen und germanischen Sprache. Documenta Semiotica : Serie 1, Linguistik (2 ed.). Hildesheim: Olms. 
^ Kurylowicz, Jerzy (1927). "ə indo-européen et ḫ hittite". In Taszycki, W.; Doroszewski, W. Symbolae grammaticae in honorem Ioannis Rozwadowski. 1. pp. 95–104. 
^ Elsie, Robert (2005). "Theodor of Shkodra (1210) and Other Early Texts". Albanian Literature: A Short History. New York/Westport/London: I.B.Tauris. p. 5. 
^ In his latest book, Eric Hamp supports the thesis that the Illyrian language belongs to the Northwestern group, that the Albanian language is descended from Illyrian, and that Albanian is related to Messapic which is an earlier Illyrian dialect (Comparative Studies on Albanian, 2007).
^ Curtis, Matthew Cowan. "Slavic-Albanian Language Contact, Convergence, and Coexistence". ProQuest LLC. p. 18. Retrieved 31 March 2017. So while linguists may debate about the ties between Albanian and older languages of the Balkans, and while most Albanians may take the genealogical connection to Illyrian as incontrovertible, the fact remains that there is simply insufficient evidence to connect Illyrian, Thracian, or Dacian with any language, including Albanian 
^ "2006-05-02 Hittite". www.leidenuniv.nl. 7 July 2017. 
^ Güterbock, Hans G. "The Hittite Computer Analysis Project" (PDF). 
^ such as Schleicher 1861, Szemerényi 1957, Collinge 1985, and Beekes 1995
^ "Tablet Discovery Pushes Earliest European Writing Back 150 Years". Science 2.0. 30 March 2011. 
^ Indian History. Allied Publishers. p. 114. ISBN 978-81-8424-568-4. 
^ Mark, Joshua J. (28 April 2011). "Mitanni". Ancient History Encyclopedia. 
^ David W. Anthony, "Two IE phylogenies, three PIE migrations, and four kinds of steppe pastoralism", Journal of Language Relationship, vol. 9 (2013), pp. 1–22
^ Michel Lejeune (1974), Manuel de la langue vénète. Heidelberg: Indogermanische Bibliothek, Lehr- und Handbücher.[page needed]
^ Julius Pokorny (1959), Indogermanisches Etymologisches Wörterbuch. Publisher Bern.[page needed]
^ Kruta, Venceslas (1991). The Celts. Thames and Hudson. p. 54. 
^ Fine, John (1985). The ancient Greeks: a critical history. Harvard University Press. p. 72. ISBN 0674033140. "Most scholars now believe that the Sicans and Sicels, as well as the inhabitants of southern Italy, were basically of Illyrian stock superimposed on an aboriginal 'Mediterranean' population."
^ François, Alexandre (2014), "Trees, Waves and Linkages: Models of Language Diversification" (PDF), in Bowern, Claire; Evans, Bethwyn, The Routledge Handbook of Historical Linguistics, London: Routledge, pp. 161–189, ISBN 978-0-41552-789-7 
^ Blažek, Václav (2007). "From August Schleicher to Sergei Starostin: on the development of the tree-diagram models of the Indo-European languages". Journal of Indo-European Studies. 35 (1–2): 82–109. 
^ Meillet, Antoine (1908). Les dialectes indo-européens. Paris: Honoré Champion. 
^ Bonfante, Giuliano (1931). I dialetti indoeuropei. Brescia: Paideia. 
^ Porzig, Walter (1954). Die Gliederung des indogermanischen Sprachgebiets. Heidelberg: Carl Winter Universitätsverlag. 
^ Nakhleh, Luay; Ringe, Don & Warnow, Tandy (2005). "Perfect Phylogenetic Networks: A New Methodology for Reconstructing the Evolutionary History of Natural Languages" (PDF). Language: Journal of the Linguistic Society of America. 81 (2): 382–420. doi:10.1353/lan.2005.0078. 
^ Mallory, J.P.; Adams, D.Q. (1997). Encyclopedia of Indo-European Culture. London: Fitzroy Dearborn. 
^ Porzig 1954, p. 39.
^ Fortson 2004, p. 247.
^ Watkins, Calvert (1966). "Italo-Celtic revisited". In Birnbaum, Henrik; Puhvel, Jaan. Ancient Indo-European dialects. Berkeley: University of California Press. pp. 29–50. 
^ Weiss, Michael (2012). "Italo-Celtica: linguistic and cultural points of contact between Italic and Celtic". In Jamison, Stephanie W.; Melchert, H. Craig; Vine, Brent. Proceedings of the 23rd annual UCLA Indo-European conference. Bremen: Hempen. pp. 151–173. 
^ Greppin, James (1996). "Review of The linguistic relationship between Armenian and Greek by James Clackson". Language. 72 (4): 804–807. doi:10.2307/416105. 
^ Euler, Wolfram (1979). Indoiranisch-griechische Gemeinsamkeiten der Nominalbildung und deren indogermanische Grundlagen. Innsbruck: Institut für Sprachwissenschaft der Universität Innsbruck. 
^ Lubotsky – The Old Phrygian Areyastis-inscription, Kadmos 27, 9–26, 1988
^ Kortlandt – The Thraco-Armenian consonant shift, Linguistique Balkanique 31, 71–74, 1988
^ Renfrew, Colin (1987). Archaeology & Language. The Puzzle of the Indo-European Origins. London: Jonathan Cape. ISBN 0-224-02495-7. 
^ Encyclopædia Britannica, vol.22, Helen Hemingway Benton Publisher, Chicago, (15th ed.) 1981, p. 593
^ George S. Lane, Douglas Q. Adams, Britannica 15th edition 22:667, "The Tocharian problem"
^ The supposed autochthony of Hittites, the Indo-Hittite hypothesis and migration of agricultural "Indo-European" societies became intrinsically linked together by C. Renfrew. (Renfrew, C 2001a The Anatolian origins of Proto-Indo-European and the autochthony of the Hittites. In R. Drews ed., Greater Anatolia and the Indo-Hittite language. family: 36–63. Washington, DC: Institute for the Study of Man).
^ Britannica 15th edition, 22 p. 586 "Indo-European languages, The parent language, Laryngeal theory" – W.C.; p. 589, 593 "Anatolian languages" – Philo H.J. Houwink ten Cate, H. Craig Melchert and Theo P.J. van den Hout
^ Britannica 15th edition, 22 p. 594, "Indo-Hittite hypothesis"
^ Holm, Hans J. (2008). "The Distribution of Data in Word Lists and its Impact on the Subgrouping of Languages". In Preisach, Christine; Burkhardt, Hans; Schmidt-Thieme, Lars; et al. Data Analysis, Machine Learning, and Applications. Proc. of the 31st Annual Conference of the German Classification Society (GfKl), University of Freiburg, March 7–9, 2007. Studies in Classification, Data Analysis, and Knowledge Organization. Heidelberg-Berlin: Springer-Verlag. ISBN 978-3-540-78239-1. The result is a partly new chain of separation for the main Indo-European branches, which fits well to the grammatical facts, as well as to the geographical distribution of these branches. In particular it clearly demonstrates that the Anatolian languages did not part as first ones and thereby refutes the Indo-Hittite hypothesis. 
^ Britannica 15th edition, vol.22, 1981, pp. 588, 594
^ Kortlandt, Frederik (1989). "The spread of the Indo-Europeans" (PDF). Retrieved 2010-08-07. 
^ a b Anthony 2007, pp. 56–58.
^ Ringe 2006, p. 67.
^ Anthony 2007, p. 100.
^ "Indo-European Languages: Balto-Slavic Family". Utexas.edu. 2008-11-10. Archived from the original on 2011-06-04. Retrieved 2010-08-07. 
^ "Ancient Tablet Found: Oldest Readable Writing in Europe". 1 April 2011. 
^ Vocabulario Sardo-Logudorese / Italiano di Pietro Casu (Istituto Superiore Etnografico della Sardegna 2011)
^ Sardo/Verbi irregolari (Wikibooks 2017)
^ "Ethnologue list of language families". Ethnologue.com. Retrieved 2010-08-07. 
^ "Ethnologue list of languages by number of speakers". Ethnologue.com. Retrieved 2010-08-07. 
^ "English". Ethnologue. Retrieved January 17, 2017. 
^ "Then Things You Might Not Have Known About the English Language". Oxford Dictionary. 


Sources[edit]


Anthony, David W. (2007). The Horse, the Wheel, and Language: How Bronze-Age Riders from the Eurasian Steppes Shaped the Modern World. Princeton University Press. ISBN 0-691-05887-3. 
Auroux, Sylvain (2000). History of the Language Sciences. Berlin: Walter de Gruyter. ISBN 3-11-016735-2. 
Fortson, Benjamin W. (2004). Indo-European Language and Culture: An Introduction. Malden, Massachusetts: Blackwell. ISBN 1-4051-0315-9. 
Brugmann, Karl (1886). Grundriss der Vergleichenden Grammatik der indogermanischen Sprachen (in German). Erster Band. Strassburg: Karl J. Trübner. 
Houwink ten Cate, H. J.; Melchert, H. Craig & van den Hout, Theo P. J. (1981). "Indo-European languages, The parent language, Laryngeal theory". Encyclopædia Britannica. 22 (15th ed.). Chicago: Helen Hemingway Benton. 
Holm, Hans J. (2008). "The Distribution of Data in Word Lists and its Impact on the Subgrouping of Languages". In Preisach, Christine; Burkhardt, Hans; Schmidt-Thieme, Lars; et al. Data Analysis, Machine Learning, and Applications. Proceedings of the 31st Annual Conference of the German Classification Society (GfKl), University of Freiburg, March 7–9, 2007. Heidelberg-Berlin: Springer-Verlag. ISBN 978-3-540-78239-1. 
Kortlandt, Frederik (1990). "The Spread of the Indo-Europeans" (PDF). Journal of Indo-European Studies. 18 (1–2): 131–140. 
Lubotsky, A. (1988). "The Old Phrygian Areyastis-inscription". Kadmos. 27: 9–26. 
Kortlandt, Frederik (1988). "The Thraco-Armenian consonant shift". Linguistique Balkanique. 31: 71–74. 
Lane, George S.; Adams, Douglas Q. (1981). "The Tocharian problem". Encyclopædia Britannica. 22 (15th ed.). Chicago: Helen Hemingway Benton. 
Renfrew, C. (2001). "The Anatolian origins of Proto-Indo-European and the autochthony of the Hittites". In Drews, R. Greater Anatolia and the Indo-Hittite language family. Washington, DC: Institute for the Study of Man. ISBN 0-941694-77-1. 
Schleicher, August (1861). Compendium der vergleichenden Grammatik der indogermanischen Sprachen (in German). Weimar: Böhlau (reprinted by Minerva GmbH, Wissenschaftlicher Verlag). ISBN 3-8102-1071-4. 
Szemerényi, Oswald; Jones, David; Jones, Irene (1999). Introduction to Indo-European Linguistics. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-823870-3. 
von Bradke, Peter (1890). Über Methode und Ergebnisse der arischen (indogermanischen) Alterthumswissenshaft (in German). Giessen: J. Ricker'che Buchhandlung. 


Further reading[edit]

Beekes, Robert S. P. (1995). Comparative Indo-European Linguistics. Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 
Chakrabarti, Byomkes (1994). A comparative study of Santali and Bengali. Calcutta: K.P. Bagchi & Co. ISBN 81-7074-128-9. 
Collinge, N. E. (1985). The Laws of Indo-European. Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 
Mallory, J.P. (1989). In Search of the Indo-Europeans. London: Thames and Hudson. ISBN 0-500-27616-1. 
Renfrew, Colin (1987). Archaeology & Language. The Puzzle of the Indo-European Origins. London: Jonathan Cape. ISBN 0-224-02495-7. 
Meillet, Antoine. Esquisse d'une grammaire comparée de l'arménien classique, 1903.
Ramat, Paolo; Ramat, Anna Giacalone (1998). The Indo-European languages. Routledge. 
Schleicher, August, A Compendium of the Comparative Grammar of the Indo-European Languages (1861/62).
Strazny, Philip; Trask, R. L., eds. (2000). Dictionary of Historical and Comparative Linguistics (1 ed.). Routledge. ISBN 978-1-57958-218-0. 
Szemerényi, Oswald (1957). "The problem of Balto-Slav unity". Kratylos. 2: 97–123. 
Watkins, Calvert (2000). The American Heritage Dictionary of Indo-European Roots. Houghton Mifflin. ISBN 978-0-618-08250-6. 
Remys, Edmund, General distinguishing features of various Indo-European languages and their relationship to Lithuanian. Berlin, New York: Indogermanische Forschungen, Vol. 112, 2007.
P. Chantraine (1968), Dictionnaire étymologique de la langue grecque, Klincksieck, Paris.

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Indo-European languages.





Wikinews has related news: New research shows over 400 languages originated in Turkey





Wikisource has the text of the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica article Indo-European Languages.


Databases[edit]

Dyen, Isidore; Kruskal, Joseph; Black, Paul (1997). "Comparative Indo-European". wordgumbo. Retrieved 13 December 2009. 
"Indo-European". LLOW Languages of the World. Retrieved 14 December 2009. 
"Indo-European Documentation Center". Linguistics Research Center, University of Texas at Austin. 2009. Archived from the original on 3 September 2009. Retrieved 14 December 2009. 
Lewis, M. Paul, ed. (2009). "Language Family Trees: Indo-European". Ethnologue: Languages of the World, Online version (Sixteenth ed.). Dallas, Tex.: SIL International. .
"Thesaurus Indogermanischer Text- und Sprachmaterialien: TITUS" (in German). TITUS, University of Frankfurt. 2003. Retrieved 13 December 2009. 
"Indo-European Lexical Cognacy Database (IELex)". Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen. 

Lexica[edit]

"Indo-European Etymological Dictionary (IEED)". Leiden, Netherlands: Department of Comparative Indo-European Linguistics, Leiden University. Archived from the original on 7 February 2006. Retrieved 14 December 2009. 
"Indo-European Roots Index". The American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language (Fourth ed.). Internet Archive: Wayback Machine. August 22, 2008 [2000]. Archived from the original on February 17, 2009. Retrieved 9 December 2009. 
Köbler, Gerhard (2014). Indogermanisches Wörterbuch (in German) (5th ed.). Gerhard Köbler. Retrieved 29 March 2015. 
Schalin, Johan (2009). "Lexicon of Early Indo-European Loanwords Preserved in Finnish". Johan Schalin. Retrieved 9 December 2009. 







v
t
e


List of primary language families



Africa



Afro-Asiatic
Austronesian
Khoe
Kx'a
Niger–Congo
Nilo-Saharan?
Tuu
Mande?
Songhay?
Ijaw?
Ubangian?
Kadu?




Isolates



Bangime
Hadza
Jalaa
Sandawe
Kwadi?
Laal?
Shabo?





Sign languages



Arab
BANZSL
French
Lasima
Tanzanian
Others








Europe
and Asia



Afro-Asiatic
Ainu
Austroasiatic
Austronesian
Chukotko-Kamchatkan
Dravidian
Eskimo–Aleut
Great Andamanese
Hmong–Mien
Hurro-Urartian
Indo-European
Japonic
Kartvelian
Koreanic
Mongolic
Northeast Caucasian
Northwest Caucasian
Ongan
Sino-Tibetan
Tai–Kadai
Tungusic
Turkic
Tyrsenian
Uralic
Yeniseian
Yukaghir
Dené–Yeniseian?
Altaic?
Austronesian–Ongan?
Austro-Tai?
Sino-Austronesian?
Digaro?
Kho-Bwa?
Siangic?
Miji?
Vasconic?




Isolates



Basque
Burushaski
Elamite
Hattic
Kusunda
Nihali
Nivkh
Sumerian
Hruso?
Miju?
Puroik?





Sign languages



BANZSL
French
German
Japanese
Swedish
Chinese
Indo-Pakistani
Arab
Chiangmai–Bangkok
Others








New Guinea
and
the Pacific



Arai–Samaia
Arafundi
Austronesian
Baining
Binanderean–Goilalan
Border
Bulaka River
Central Solomons
Chimbu–Wahgi
Doso–Turumsa
East Geelvink Bay
East Strickland
Eleman
Engan
Fas
Kaure–Kosare
Kiwaian
Kutubuan
Kwomtari
Lakes Plain
Lower Mamberamo
Lower Sepik
Madang
Mairasi
North Bougainville
Pauwasi
Piawi
Ramu
Senagi
Sentani
Sepik
Skou
South Bougainville
Teberan
Tor–Kwerba–Nimboran
Torricelli
Trans-Fly
Trans–New Guinea
Turama–Kikorian
West Papuan
Yam
Yawa
Yuat
North Papuan?
Northeast New Guinea?
Papuan Gulf?




Isolates



Abinomn
Anêm?
Ata?
Kol
Kuot
Porome
Taiap?
Pawaia
Porome
Sulka?
Tambora
Wiru





Sign languages



Hawai'i Sign Language
Others








Australia



Arnhem/Macro-Gunwinyguan
Bunuban
Darwin River
Eastern Daly
Eastern Tasmanian
Garawan
Iwaidjan
Jarrakan
Mirndi
Northern Tasmanian
Northeastern Tasmanian
Nyulnyulan
Pama–Nyungan
Southern Daly
Tangkic
Wagaydyic
Western Daly
Western Tasmanian
Worrorran
Yangmanic (Wardaman)




Isolates



Giimbiyu
Malak-Malak
Marrgu
Tiwi
Wagiman








North
America



Algic
Alsea
Caddoan
Chimakuan
Chinookan
Chumashan
Comecrudan
Coosan
Eskimo–Aleut
Iroquoian
Kalapuyan
Keresan
Maiduan
Muskogean
Na-Dene
Palaihnihan
Plateau Penutian
Pomoan
Salishan
Shastan
Siouan
Tanoan
Tsimshianic
Utian
Uto-Aztecan
Wakashan
Wintuan
Yokutsan
Yukian
Yuman–Cochimí
Dené–Yeniseian?
Hokan?
Penutian?




Isolates



Chimariko
Haida
Karuk
Kutenai
Seri
Siuslaw
Takelma
Timucua
Waikuri
Washo
Yana
Yuchi
Zuni





Sign languages



Inuit (Inuiuuk)
Plains Sign Talk
Others








Mesoamerica



Chibchan
Jicaquean
Lencan
Mayan
Misumalpan
Mixe–Zoque
Oto-Manguean
Tequistlatecan
Totonacan
Uto-Aztecan
Xincan
Totozoquean?




Isolates



Cuitlatec
Huave
Tarascan/Purépecha





Sign languages



Plains Sign Talk
Mayan
Others








South
America



Arawakan
Arauan
Araucanian
Arutani–Sape
Aymaran
Barbacoan
Boran
Borôroan
Cahuapanan
Cariban
Catacaoan
Chapacuran
Charruan
Chibchan
Choco
Chonan
Guaicuruan
Guajiboan
Jê/Gê
Harákmbut–Katukinan
Jirajaran
Jivaroan
Kariri
Katembri–Taruma
Mascoian
Matacoan
Maxakalian
Nadahup
Nambikwaran
Otomákoan
Pano-Tacanan
Peba–Yaguan
Purian
Quechuan
Piaroa–Saliban
Ticuna–Yuri
Timotean
Tiniguan
Tucanoan
Tupian
Uru–Chipaya
Witotoan
Yabutian
Yanomaman
Zamucoan
Zaparoan
Chimuan?
Esmeralda–Yaruro?
Hibito–Cholón?
Lule–Vilela?
Macro-Jê?
Tequiraca–Canichana?




Isolates
(extant in 2000)



Aikanã?
Alacalufan
Andoque?
Camsá
Candoshi
Chimane
Chiquitano
Cofán?
Fulniô
Guató
Hodï/Joti
Irantxe?
Itonama
Karajá
Krenak
Kunza
Leco
Maku-Auari of Roraima
Movima
Mura-Pirahã
Nukak?
Ofayé
Puinave
Huaorani/Waorani
Trumai
Urarina
Warao
Yamana
Yuracaré








See also



Language isolates
Unclassified languages
Creoles
Pidgins
Mixed languages
Artificial languages
List of sign languages







Families with more than 30 languages are in bold. Families in italics have no living members.








Authority control



LCCN: sh85065703
GND: 4114006-0
SUDOC: 027236293
BNF: cb11932222t (data)
NDL: 00564144
BNE: XX527449











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Indo-European_languages&oldid=817433412"					Categories: Indo-EuropeanIndo-European languagesHidden categories: All articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from May 2011Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from May 2017All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from October 2017Articles with unsourced statements from December 2017All articles with failed verificationArticles with failed verification from July 2017All pages needing factual verificationWikipedia articles needing factual verification from July 2017Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from October 2015Articles with unsourced statements from May 2016Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from October 2017Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from October 2017Articles with unsourced statements from September 2016Pages containing citation needed template with deprecated parametersArticles containing French-language textCS1 German-language sources (de)Wikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersArticles with inconsistent citation formats