For the Danish newspaper, see Dagbladet Information.
For the formal criminal charge, see Information (formal criminal charge).




The ASCII codes for the word "Wikipedia" represented in binary, the numeral system most commonly used for encoding textual computer information




Communication


Portal · History


General Aspects




Communication theory
Information
Semiotics
Language
Logic
Sociology




Fields




Discourse analysis
Linguistics
Mass communication
Organizational communication
Pragmatics
Semiotics
Sociolinguistics




Disciplines




Public speaking
Interaction
Discourse
Culture
Argumentation
Persuasion
Research
Rhetoric
Literature
Philosophy




Categories




Outline







v
t
e







Part of a series on Statistics


Data visualization







Major dimensions


Exploratory data analysis •  Information design
Interactive data visualization
Descriptive statistics •  Inferential statistics
Statistical graphics •  Plot
Data analysis  •  Infographic
Data science








Thought leaders


Tamara Munzner  •  Ben Shneiderman  •  John W. Tukey  •  Edward Tufte  •  Fernanda Viégas  •  Hadley Wickham








Information graphic types


Line chart  •  Bar chart
Histogram •  Scatterplot
Boxplot •  Pareto chart
Pie chart •  Area chart
Control chart  •  Run chart
Stem-and-leaf display •  Cartogram
Small multiple •  Sparkline
Table








Related Topics


Data • Information
Big data •  Database
Chartjunk •  Visual perception
Regression analysis •  Statistical model
Misleading graph









v
t
e





Information is that which informs. In other words, it is the answer to a question of some kind. It is thus related to data and knowledge, as data represents values attributed to parameters, and knowledge signifies understanding of real things or abstract concepts.[1] As it regards data, the information's existence is not necessarily coupled to an observer (it exists beyond an event horizon, for example), while in the case of knowledge, the information requires a cognitive observer.[2]
Information is conveyed either as the content of a message or through direct or indirect observation of anything. That which is perceived can be construed as a message in its own right, and in that sense, information is always conveyed as the content of a message.
Information can be encoded into various forms for transmission and interpretation (for example, information may be encoded into a sequence of signs, or transmitted via a sequence of signals). It can also be encrypted for safe storage and communication.
Information reduces uncertainty. The uncertainty of an event is measured by its probability of occurrence and is inversely proportional to that. The more uncertain an event, the more information is required to resolve uncertainty of that event. The bit is a typical unit of information, but other units such as the nat may be used. For example, the information encoded in one "fair" coin flip is log2(2/1) = 1 bit, and in two fair coin flips is log2(4/1) = 2 bits.
The concept that information is the message has different meanings in different contexts.[3] Thus the concept of information becomes closely related to notions of constraint, communication, control, data, form, education, knowledge, meaning, understanding, mental stimuli, pattern, perception, representation, and entropy.



Contents


1 Etymology
2 Information theory approach
3 As sensory input
4 As representation and complexity
5 As an influence that leads to transformation
6 As a property in physics
7 The application of information study
8 Technologically mediated information
9 As records
10 Semiotics
11 See also
12 References
13 Further reading
14 External links



Etymology[edit]
See also: History of the word and concept "information"
The English word apparently derives from the Latin stem (information-) of the nominative (informatio): this noun derives from the verb informare (to inform) in the sense of "to give form to the mind", "to discipline", "instruct", "teach". Inform itself comes (via French informer) from the Latin verb informare, which means to give form, or to form an idea of. Furthermore, Latin itself already contained the word informatio meaning concept or idea, but the extent to which this may have influenced the development of the word information in English is not clear.
The ancient Greek word for form was μορφή (morphe; cf. morph) and also εἶδος (eidos) "kind, idea, shape, set", the latter word was famously used in a technical philosophical sense by Plato (and later Aristotle) to denote the ideal identity or essence of something (see Theory of Forms). "Eidos" can also be associated with thought, proposition, or even concept.
The ancient Greek word for information is πληροφορία, which transliterates (plērophoria) from πλήρης (plērēs) "fully" and φέρω (phorein) frequentative of (pherein) to carry through. It literally means "bears fully" or "conveys fully". In modern Greek the word Πληροφορία is still in daily use and has the same meaning as the word information in English. In addition to its primary meaning, the word Πληροφορία as a symbol has deep roots in Aristotle's semiotic triangle. In this regard it can be interpreted to communicate information to the one decoding that specific type of sign. This is something that occurs frequently with the etymology of many words in ancient and modern Greek where there is a very strong denotative relationship between the signifier, e.g. the word symbol that conveys a specific encoded interpretation, and the signified, e.g. a concept whose meaning the interpreter attempts to decode.
Information theory approach[edit]
Main article: Information theory
From the stance of information theory, information is taken as an ordered sequence of symbols from an alphabet, say an input alphabet χ, and an output alphabet ϒ. Information processing consists of an input-output function that maps any input sequence from χ into an output sequence from ϒ. The mapping may be probabilistic or deterministic. It may have memory or be memoryless.[4]
As sensory input[edit]
Often information can be viewed as a type of input to an organism or system. Inputs are of two kinds; some inputs are important to the function of the organism (for example, food) or system (energy) by themselves. In his book Sensory Ecology[5] Dusenbery called these causal inputs. Other inputs (information) are important only because they are associated with causal inputs and can be used to predict the occurrence of a causal input at a later time (and perhaps another place). Some information is important because of association with other information but eventually there must be a connection to a causal input. In practice, information is usually carried by weak stimuli that must be detected by specialized sensory systems and amplified by energy inputs before they can be functional to the organism or system. For example, light is mainly (but not only, e.g. plants can grow in the direction of the lightsource) a causal input to plants but for animals it only provides information. The colored light reflected from a flower is too weak to do much photosynthetic work but the visual system of the bee detects it and the bee's nervous system uses the information to guide the bee to the flower, where the bee often finds nectar or pollen, which are causal inputs, serving a nutritional function.
As representation and complexity[edit]
The cognitive scientist and applied mathematician Ronaldo Vigo argues that information is a concept that requires at least two related entities to make quantitative sense. These are, any dimensionally defined category of objects S, and any of its subsets R. R, in essence, is a representation of S, or, in other words, conveys representational (and hence, conceptual) information about S. Vigo then defines the amount of information that R conveys about S as the rate of change in the complexity of S whenever the objects in R are removed from S. Under "Vigo information", pattern, invariance, complexity, representation, and information—five fundamental constructs of universal science—are unified under a novel mathematical framework.[6][7][8] Among other things, the framework aims to overcome the limitations of Shannon-Weaver information when attempting to characterize and measure subjective information.
As an influence that leads to transformation[edit]
Information is any type of pattern that influences the formation or transformation of other patterns.[9][10] In this sense, there is no need for a conscious mind to perceive, much less appreciate, the pattern.[citation needed] Consider, for example, DNA. The sequence of nucleotides is a pattern that influences the formation and development of an organism without any need for a conscious mind. One might argue though that for a human to consciously define a pattern, for example a nucleotide, naturally involves conscious information processing.
Systems theory at times seems to refer to information in this sense, assuming information does not necessarily involve any conscious mind, and patterns circulating (due to feedback) in the system can be called information. In other words, it can be said that information in this sense is something potentially perceived as representation, though not created or presented for that purpose. For example, Gregory Bateson defines "information" as a "difference that makes a difference".[11]
If, however, the premise of "influence" implies that information has been perceived by a conscious mind and also interpreted by it, the specific context associated with this interpretation may cause the transformation of the information into knowledge. Complex definitions of both "information" and "knowledge" make such semantic and logical analysis difficult, but the condition of "transformation" is an important point in the study of information as it relates to knowledge, especially in the business discipline of knowledge management. In this practice, tools and processes are used to assist a knowledge worker in performing research and making decisions, including steps such as:

Review information to effectively derive value and meaning
Reference metadata if available
Establish relevant context, often from many possible contexts
Derive new knowledge from the information
Make decisions or recommendations from the resulting knowledge

Stewart (2001) argues that transformation of information into knowledge is critical, lying at the core of value creation and competitive advantage for the modern enterprise.
The Danish Dictionary of Information Terms[12] argues that information only provides an answer to a posed question. Whether the answer provides knowledge depends on the informed person. So a generalized definition of the concept should be: "Information" = An answer to a specific question".
When Marshall McLuhan speaks of media and their effects on human cultures, he refers to the structure of artifacts that in turn shape our behaviors and mindsets. Also, pheromones are often said to be "information" in this sense.
As a property in physics[edit]
Main article: Physical information
Information has a well-defined meaning in physics. In 2003 J. D. Bekenstein claimed that a growing trend in physics was to define the physical world as being made up of information itself (and thus information is defined in this way) (see Digital physics). Examples of this include the phenomenon of quantum entanglement, where particles can interact without reference to their separation or the speed of light. Material information itself cannot travel faster than light even if that information is transmitted indirectly. This could lead to all attempts at physically observing a particle with an "entangled" relationship to another being slowed down, even though the particles are not connected in any other way other than by the information they carry.
The mathematical universe hypothesis suggests a new paradigm, in which virtually everything, from particles and fields, through biological entities and consciousness, to the multiverse itself, could be described by mathematical patterns of information. By the same token, the cosmic void can be conceived of as the absence of material information in space (setting aside the virtual particles that pop in and out of existence due to quantum fluctuations, as well as the gravitational field and the dark energy). Nothingness can be understood then as that within which no matter, energy, space, time, or any other type of information could exist, which would be possible if symmetry and structure break within the manifold of the multiverse (i.e. the manifold would have tears or holes).
Another link is demonstrated by the Maxwell's demon thought experiment. In this experiment, a direct relationship between information and another physical property, entropy, is demonstrated. A consequence is that it is impossible to destroy information without increasing the entropy of a system; in practical terms this often means generating heat. Another more philosophical outcome is that information could be thought of as interchangeable with energy. Toyabe et al. experimentally showed in nature that information can be converted into work.[13] Thus, in the study of logic gates, the theoretical lower bound of thermal energy released by an AND gate is higher than for the NOT gate (because information is destroyed in an AND gate and simply converted in a NOT gate). Physical information is of particular importance in the theory of quantum computers.
In thermodynamics, information is any kind of event that affects the state of a dynamic system that can interpret the information.
The application of information study[edit]
The information cycle (addressed as a whole or in its distinct components) is of great concern to Information Technology, Information Systems, as well as Information Science. These fields deal with those processes and techniques pertaining to information capture (through sensors) and generation (through computation, formulation or composition), processing (including encoding, encryption, compression, packaging), transmission (including all telecommunication methods), presentation (including visualization / display methods), storage (such as magnetic or optical, including holographic methods), etc. Information does not cease to exist, it may only get scrambled beyond any possibility of retrieval (within Information Theory, see lossy compression; in Physics, the black hole information paradox gets solved with the aid of the holographic principle).
Information Visualization (shortened as InfoVis) depends on the computation and digital representation of data, and assists users in pattern recognition and anomaly detection.







Partial map of the Internet, with nodes representing IP addresses









Galactic (including dark) matter distribution in a cubic section of the Universe









Information embedded in an abstract mathematical object with symmetry breaking nucleus









Visual representation of a strange attractor, with converted data of its fractal structure




Information Security (shortened as InfoSec) is the ongoing process of exercising due diligence to protect information, and information systems, from unauthorized access, use, disclosure, destruction, modification, disruption or distribution, through algorithms and procedures focused on monitoring and detection, as well as incident response and repair.
Information Analysis is the process of inspecting, transforming, and modelling information, by converting raw data into actionable knowledge, in support of the decision-making process.
Information Quality (shortened as InfoQ) is the potential of a dataset to achieve a specific (scientific or practical) goal using a given empirical analysis method.
Information Communication represents the convergence of informatics, telecommunication and audio-visual media & content.
Technologically mediated information[edit]
It is estimated that the world's technological capacity to store information grew from 2.6 (optimally compressed) exabytes in 1986 – which is the informational equivalent to less than one 730-MB CD-ROM per person (539 MB per person) – to 295 (optimally compressed) exabytes in 2007.[14] This is the informational equivalent of almost 61 CD-ROM per person in 2007.[15]
The world’s combined technological capacity to receive information through one-way broadcast networks was the informational equivalent of 174 newspapers per person per day in 2007.[14]
The world's combined effective capacity to exchange information through two-way telecommunication networks was the informational equivalent of 6 newspapers per person per day in 2007.[15]
As records[edit]
Records are specialized forms of information. Essentially, records are information produced consciously or as by-products of business activities or transactions and retained because of their value. Primarily, their value is as evidence of the activities of the organization but they may also be retained for their informational value. Sound records management ensures that the integrity of records is preserved for as long as they are required.
The international standard on records management, ISO 15489, defines records as "information created, received, and maintained as evidence and information by an organization or person, in pursuance of legal obligations or in the transaction of business".[16] The International Committee on Archives (ICA) Committee on electronic records defined a record as, "a specific piece of recorded information generated, collected or received in the initiation, conduct or completion of an activity and that comprises sufficient content, context and structure to provide proof or evidence of that activity".[this quote needs a citation]
Records may be maintained to retain corporate memory of the organization or to meet legal, fiscal or accountability requirements imposed on the organization. Willis expressed the view that sound management of business records and information delivered "...six key requirements for good corporate governance...transparency; accountability; due process; compliance; meeting statutory and common law requirements; and security of personal and corporate information."[17][citation not found]
Semiotics[edit]
Michael Buckland has classified "information" in terms of its uses: "information as process", "information as knowledge", and "information as thing".[18]
Beynon-Davies[19][20] explains the multi-faceted concept of information in terms of signs and signal-sign systems. Signs themselves can be considered in terms of four inter-dependent levels, layers or branches of semiotics: pragmatics, semantics, syntax, and empirics. These four layers serve to connect the social world on the one hand with the physical or technical world on the other.
Pragmatics is concerned with the purpose of communication. Pragmatics links the issue of signs with the context within which signs are used. The focus of pragmatics is on the intentions of living agents underlying communicative behaviour. In other words, pragmatics link language to action.
Semantics is concerned with the meaning of a message conveyed in a communicative act. Semantics considers the content of communication. Semantics is the study of the meaning of signs - the association between signs and behaviour. Semantics can be considered as the study of the link between symbols and their referents or concepts – particularly the way that signs relate to human behavior.
Syntax is concerned with the formalism used to represent a message. Syntax as an area studies the form of communication in terms of the logic and grammar of sign systems. Syntax is devoted to the study of the form rather than the content of signs and sign-systems.
Nielsen (2008) discusses the relationship between semiotics and information in relation to dictionaries. He introduces the concept of lexicographic information costs and refers to the effort a user of a dictionary must make to first find, and then understand data so that they can generate information.
Communication normally exists within the context of some social situation. The social situation sets the context for the intentions conveyed (pragmatics) and the form of communication. In a communicative situation intentions are expressed through messages that comprise collections of inter-related signs taken from a language mutually understood by the agents involved in the communication. Mutual understanding implies that agents involved understand the chosen language in terms of its agreed syntax (syntactics) and semantics. The sender codes the message in the language and sends the message as signals along some communication channel (empirics). The chosen communication channel has inherent properties that determine outcomes such as the speed at which communication can take place, and over what distance.
See also[edit]


Abstraction
Accuracy and precision
Anti-information reduces certainty
Classified information
Complex adaptive system
Complex system
Cybernetics
Data storage device#Recording medium
Exformation
Free Information Infrastructure
Freedom of information
Information and communication technologies
Information architecture
Information broker
Information continuum
Informatics
Information geometry
Information inequity
Information infrastructure
Information management
Information mapping
Information overload
Information processor
Information sensitivity
Information superhighway
Information Quality (InfoQ)
Information warfare
Infosphere
Lexicographic information cost
Library science
Philosophy of information
Propaganda model
Quantum information
Receiver operating characteristic
Satisficing


References[edit]


^ "Information | Definition of Information by Merriam-Webster". Merriam-webster.com. Retrieved 2017-05-01. 
^ "epistemology - Can there be information without a "knower"?". Philosophy Stack Exchange. 2017-01-05. Retrieved 2017-05-01. 
^ A short overview is found in: Luciano Floridi (2010). Information - A Very Short Introduction. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-160954-4. The goal of this volume is to provide an outline of what information is... 
^ Stephen B. Wicker, Saejoon Kim (2003). Fundamentals of Codes, Graphs, and Iterative Decoding. Springer. pp. 1 ff. ISBN 1-4020-7264-3. 
^ Dusenbery, David B. (1992). Sensory Ecology. New York: W.H. Freeman. ISBN 0-7167-2333-6. 
^ Vigo, R. (2011). "Representational information: a new general notion and measure of information". Information Sciences. 181 (21): 4847–59. doi:10.1016/j.ins.2011.05.020. 
^ Vigo, R. (2013). "Complexity over Uncertainty in Generalized Representational Information Theory (GRIT): A Structure-Sensitive General Theory of Information". Information. 4 (1): 1–30. doi:10.3390/info4010001. 
^ Vigo, R. (2014). Mathematical Principles of Human Conceptual Behavior: The Structural Nature of Conceptual Representation and Processing. New York and London: Scientific Psychology Series, Routledge. ISBN 0415714362. 
^ Shannon, Claude E. (1949). The Mathematical Theory of Communication. 
^ Casagrande, David (1999). "Information as verb: Re-conceptualizing information for cognitive and ecological models" (PDF). Journal of Ecological Anthropology. 3 (1): 4–13. doi:10.5038/2162-4593.3.1.1. 
^ Bateson, Gregory (1972). Form, Substance, and Difference, in Steps to an Ecology of Mind. University of Chicago Press. pp. 448–66. 
^ Simonsen, Bo Krantz. "Informationsordbogen - vis begreb". Informationsordbogen.dk. Retrieved 2017-05-01. 
^ Merali, Zeeya. "Demonic device converts information to energy : Nature News". Nature.com. Retrieved 2017-05-01. 
^ a b Hilbert, Martin; López, Priscila (2011). "The World's Technological Capacity to Store, Communicate, and Compute Information"". Science. 332 (6025): 60–65.  Free access to the article at martinhilbert.net/WorldInfoCapacity.html
^ a b "World_info_capacity_animation". YouTube. 2011-06-11. Retrieved 2017-05-01. 
^ ISO 15489 
^ Willis 2005.
^ Buckland, Michael K. (June 1991). "Information as thing". Journal of the American Society for Information Science. 42 (5): 351–360. doi:10.1002/(SICI)1097-4571(199106)42:5<351::AID-ASI5>3.0.CO;2-3. 
^ Beynon-Davies, P. (2002). Information Systems: an introduction to informatics in Organisations. Basingstoke, UK: Palgrave. ISBN 0-333-96390-3. 
^ Beynon-Davies, P. (2009). Business Information Systems. Basingstoke: Palgrave. ISBN 978-0-230-20368-6. 


Further reading[edit]

Liu, Alan (2004). The Laws of Cool: Knowledge Work and the Culture of Information. University of Chicago Press. 
Bekenstein, Jacob D. (August 2003). "holographic universe". Scientific American. 
Gleick, James (2011). The Information: A History, a Theory, a Flood. New York, NY: Pantheon. 
Lin, Shu-Kun (2008). "Gibbs Paradox and the Concepts of Information, Symmetry, Similarity and Their Relationship". Entropy. 10 (1): 1–5. 
Floridi, Luciano (2005). "Is Information Meaningful Data?" (PDF). Philosophy and Phenomenological Research. 70 (2): 351–70. 
Floridi, Luciano (2005). "Semantic Conceptions of Information". In Zalta, Edward N. The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 2005 ed.). 
Floridi, Luciano (2010). Information: A Very Short Introduction. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Logan, Robert K. What is Information? - Propagating Organization in the Biosphere, the Symbolosphere, the Technosphere and the Econosphere. Toronto: DEMO Publishing. 
Nielsen, Sandro (2008). "The Effect of Lexicographical Information Costs on Dictionary Making and Use". Lexikos. 18: 170–89. 
Stewart, Thomas (2001). Wealth of Knowledge. New York, NY: Doubleday. 
Young, Paul (1987). The Nature of Information. Westport, Ct: Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 0-275-92698-2. 

External links[edit]



Look up information in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.





Wikiquote has quotations related to: Information technology





Wikimedia Commons has media related to Information.



Semantic Conceptions of Information Review by Luciano Floridi for the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
Principia Cybernetica entry on negentropy
Fisher Information, a New Paradigm for Science: Introduction, Uncertainty principles, Wave equations, Ideas of Escher, Kant, Plato and Wheeler. This essay is continually revised in the light of ongoing research.
How Much Information? 2003 an attempt to estimate how much new information is created each year (study was produced by faculty and students at the School of Information Management and Systems at the University of California at Berkeley)
(in Danish) Informationsordbogen.dk The Danish Dictionary of Information Terms / Informationsordbogen







v
t
e


Communication studies




Topics and
terminology




Biocommunication
Broadcasting
Communication
Computer-mediated communication
Conversation
History of communication
Information
Intercultural / Interpersonal / Intrapersonal communication
Journalism
Mass media
Meaning
Media ecology
Meta-communication
Models of communication
New media
Nonverbal communication
Propaganda
Reading
Speech
Symbol
Telecommunication
Text and conversation theory
Writing








Subfields



Communication design
Communication theory
Communicology
Crisis communication
Cross-cultural communication
Development communication
Discourse analysis
Environmental communication
Health communication
International communication
Mass communication
Media studies
Mediated cross-border communication
Organizational communication
Political communication
Risk communication
Science communication
Technical communication
Visual communication





Related fields



Conversation analysis
Critical theory
Cultural studies
Digital rhetoric
Film criticism
Heritage interpretation
Journalism

photojournalism


Linguistics
Philosophy of language
Political science
Pragmatics
Public relations
Rhetoric
Semiotics
Sociolinguistics
Sociology of culture
Theatre





Scholars



Adorno
Barthes
Bateson
Benjamin
Burke
Castells
Chomsky
Craig
Fisher
Flusser
Gerbner
Goffman
Habermas
Horkheimer
Huxley
Innis
Jakobson
Janis
Johnson
Kincaid
Lippman
Luhmann
Marcuse
McLuhan
Mead
Morgan
Ong
Packard
Peirce
Postman
Quebral
Richards
Rogers
Schramm
Tankard
Tannen
Wertheimer








Category
History
Journals
Organizations
Outline
Scholars
Templates












v
t
e


World view








Related terms






Basic beliefs/Beliefs
Collective consciousness/Collective unconscious
Conceptual system
Context
Conventions
Cultural movement
Epic poetry/National epics/Pan-national epics
Facts and factoids
Framing
Ideology
Life stance
Lifestyle
Memes/Memeplex
Mental model
Metanarrative
Mindset
Norms
Paradigm
Philosophical theory
Point of view
Presuppositions
Reality tunnel
Received view
Schemata
School of thought
Set
Social reality
Theory of everything
Umwelt
Value system













Aspects







Biases



Academic
Attentional
Attitude polarization
Belief
Cognitive (list)
Collective narcissism
Confirmation
Congruence
Cryptomnesia
Cultural
Ethnocentrism
Filter bubble
Homophily
In-group favoritism
Magical thinking
Media
Observer-expectancy
Observational error
Selective exposure
Selective perception
Self-deception
Self-fulfilling prophecy (Clever Hans effect, placebo effect, wishful thinking)
Status quo
Stereotyping





Change and maintenance



Activism
Argument
Argumentum ad populum
Attitude change
Censorship
Charisma
Circular reporting
Cognitive dissonance
Critical thinking
Crowd manipulation
Cultural dissonance
Deprogramming
Echo chamber
Education (religious, values)
Euphemism
Excommunication
Fearmongering
Historical revisionism
Ideological repression
Indoctrination
Media manipulation
Media regulation
Mind control
Missionaries
Moral entrepreneurship
Persuasion
Polite fiction
Political engineering
Propaganda
Propaganda model
Proselytism
Psychological manipulation
Psychological warfare
Religious conversion (forced)
Religious persecution
Religious uniformity
Revolutions
Rhetoric
Self-censorship
Social change
Social control
Social engineering
Social influence
Social progress
Suppression of dissent
Systemic bias
Woozle effect





Culture



Anthropology (cultural, social)
Calendars
Ceremonies
Coronations
Cross-cultural psychology
Cultural psychology
Doctrine
Employment/Serfdom/Slavery
Families
Funerals/Burial
Games
Holidays
Hygiene (ritual)
Identity (philosophy) (cultural)
Institutions
Liminality
Liturgy
Marriage
Myth and ritual
Oaths
Pilgrimages
Play
Rites of passage (secular)
Rituals
Social class/Social status/Caste
Symbols
Symbolic boundaries
Worship





Groupthink



Abilene paradox
Bandwagon effect
Collectives
Collective behavior (animal)
Collective effervescence
Collective intelligence
Conformity
Consensus theory
Crowd psychology
Cults
Culture-bound syndromes
Deindividuation
Democracy
Emergence
Emotional contagion
Entitativity
False-consensus effect
Folie à deux
Group action
Group dynamics
Group emotion
Group polarization
Groupshift
Herd behavior
Holism
Hysterical contagion
Information cascade
Invisible hand
Lynching
Majoritarianism/Ochlocracy
Mass action
Mass hysteria
Mass psychogenic illness
Milieu control
Mobbing
Moral panic
Organizations
Peer pressure
Pluralistic ignorance
Political correctness
Pseudoconsensus
Scapegoating
Self-organization
Social action
Social behavior
Social emotions
Social exclusion
Social facilitation (animal)
Social group
Social proof
Social psychology
Sociology
Spontaneous order
Status quo
Stigmergy
Swarm behaviour
System justification
Viral phenomena





Knowledge



Axioms (tacit assumptions)
Conceptual framework
Epistemology (outline)
Evidence (anecdotal, scientific)
Explanations
Faith (fideism)
Gnosis
Intuition
Meaning-making
Memory
Metaknowledge
Methodology
Observation
Observational learning
Perception
Reasoning (fallacious, logic)
Revelation
Testimony
Tradition (folklore)
Truth (consensus theory, criteria)





Metaphysics



Ætiology
Afterlife
Anima mundi
Being
Causality
Concepts
Consciousness (mind–body problem)
Cosmogony
Cosmology (religious)
Creation myth
Deities (existence)
Destiny
Eschatology
Everything/Nothing
Evolution
Existence
Fiction/Non-fiction
Free will
Future
History
Ideas
Idios kosmos
Illusions
Incarnation
Information
Intelligence
Magic
Matter
Miracles
Mythology (comparative)
National mythoi
Nature (philosophical)
Ontology
Origin myths (political myths)
Otherworlds (axes mundi)
Problem of evil
Physics (natural philosophy)
Reality
Souls
Spirit
Supernature
Teleology
Theology
Time
Unobservables





Value



Æsthetics
Almsgiving/Charity
Altruism
Autonomy
Beauty
Codes of conduct
Comedy
Common good
Conscience
Consent
Creativity
Disgust
Duty
Economics
Ecstasy (emotional, religious)
Elegance
Emotions (æsthetic)
Entertainment
Eroticism
Ethics
Étiquette
Family values
Food and drink prohibitions (unclean animals)
Golden Rule
Guilt/Culpability
Happiness
Harmony
Honour
Human rights
Judgement
Justice
Laws (jurisprudence, religious)
Liberty (political freedom)
Love
Magnificence
Maxims
Meaning of life
Morality (public)
Obligations
Peace
Piety
Praxeology
Principles
Punishment
Qualities
Repentance
Reverence
Rights
Sexuality (ethics)
Sin
Social stigma
Stewardship
Styles
Sublime, The
Suffering
Sympathy
Taboo
Taste
Theodicy
Trust
Unspoken rules
Virtues and Vices
Works of art
Wrongdoing
















Examples







Attitudes



Nihilism
Optimism
Pessimism
Reclusion
Weltschmerz





Economic and
political ideologies



Authoritarianism
Anarchism
Capitalism
Christian democracy
Collectivism
Colonialism
Communalism
Communism
Communitarianism
Conservatism
Constitutionalism
Distributism
Environmentalism
Extremism
Fanaticism
Fascism
Feminism
Fundamentalism
Globalism
Green politics
Imperialism
Individualism
Industrialism
Intellectualism
Islamism
Liberalism
Libertarianism
Masculism
Militarism
Monarchism
Nationalism
Pacifism
Progressivism
Radicalism
Reformism
Republicanism
Social democracy
Socialism
Utilitarianism
Veganism





Religions



African traditional religions
Bahá'í
Buddhism
Cao Dai
Cheondoism
Chinese traditional religions
Christianity
Ethnic religions
Hòa Hảo
Hinduism
Islam
Jainism
Judaism
Korean shamanism
Neo-Paganism
Rastafarianism
Secular/Nonreligious/Agnostic/Atheist
Shinto
Sikhism
Spiritism
Taoism
Tenrikyo
Tenriism
Unitarian Universalism
Zoroastrianism





Schools of philosophy



Agriculturalism
Aristotelianism
Atomism
Averroism
Cartesianism
Cārvāka
Collectivism
Confucianism/New Confucianism
Critical theory
Cynicism
Cyrenaics
Determinism
Dualism
Eleatics
Empiricism
Eretrian school
Epicureanism
Existentialism
Foundationalism
Hedonism
Hegelianism
Hermeneutics
Historicism/New Historicism
Holism
Humanism/Renaissance humanism
Illuminationism
ʿIlm al-Kalām
Idealism
Individualism
Ionian
Kantianism/Neo-Kantianism
Kokugaku
Legalism
Logicians
Materialism
Mohism
Megarian school
Modernism/Postmodernism
Monism
Natural Law
Naturalism (Chinese)
Naturalism (western)
Nihilism
Peripatetic
Phenomenology
Platonism/Neoplatonism
Pluralism
Positivism
Pragmatism
Presocratic
Pyrrhonism
Pythagoreanism/Neopythagoreanism
Rationalism
Reductionism
Scholasticism/Neo-Scholasticism
Social constructionism
Sophism
Spinozism
Stoicism
Structuralism/Post-structuralism
Thomism
Transcendentalism
Utilitarianism
Yangism


















v
t
e


Metaphysics



Metaphysicians



Parmenides
Plato
Aristotle
Plotinus
Duns Scotus
Thomas Aquinas
Francisco Suárez
Nicolas Malebranche
René Descartes
John Locke
David Hume
Thomas Reid
Immanuel Kant
Isaac Newton
Arthur Schopenhauer
Baruch Spinoza
Georg W. F. Hegel
George Berkeley
Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz
Henri Bergson
Friedrich Nietzsche
Charles Sanders Peirce
Joseph Maréchal
Ludwig Wittgenstein
Martin Heidegger
Alfred N. Whitehead
Bertrand Russell
Dorothy Emmet
G. E. Moore
Jean-Paul Sartre
Gilbert Ryle
Hilary Putnam
P. F. Strawson
R. G. Collingwood
Adolph Stöhr
Rudolf Carnap
Saul Kripke
Willard V. O. Quine
G. E. M. Anscombe
Donald Davidson
Michael Dummett
David Malet Armstrong
David Lewis
Alvin Plantinga
Peter van Inwagen
Derek Parfit
more ...





Theories



Abstract object theory
Action theory
Anti-realism
Determinism
Dualism
Enactivism
Essentialism
Existentialism
Free will
Idealism
Libertarianism
Liberty
Materialism
Meaning of life
Monism
Naturalism
Nihilism
Phenomenalism
Realism
Physicalism
Pirsig's metaphysics of Quality
Platonic idealism
Relativism
Scientific realism
Solipsism
Subjectivism
Substance theory
Type theory





Concepts



Abstract object
Anima mundi
Being
Category of being
Causality
Choice
Cogito ergo sum
Concept
Embodied cognition
Entity
Essence
Existence
Experience
Hypostatic abstraction
Idea
Identity
Identity and change
Information
Insight
Intelligence
Intention
Linguistic modality
Matter
Meaning
Memetics
Mental representation
Mind
Motion
Necessity
Notion
Object
Pattern
Perception
Physical body
Principle
Property
Qualia
Quality
Reality
Soul
Subject
Substantial form
Thought
Time
Truth
Type–token distinction
Universal
Unobservable
Value
more ...





Related topics



Axiology
Cosmology
Epistemology
Feminist metaphysics
Interpretations of quantum mechanics
Meta-
Ontology
Philosophy of mind
Philosophy of psychology
Philosophy of self
Philosophy of space and time
Teleology
Theoretical physics








 Category
 Portal









Authority control



GND: 4026899-8











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Information&oldid=817144238"					Categories: Concepts in metaphysicsInformationInformation scienceHidden categories: Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pagesAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from July 2010Articles with unsourced quotesAll articles with broken links to citationsArticles with Danish-language external linksWikipedia articles with GND identifiers