





This article's lead section does not adequately summarize key points of its contents. Please consider expanding the lead to provide an accessible overview of all important aspects of the article. Please discuss this issue on the article's talk page. (September 2017)





Public infrastructure



Grand Coulee Dam



Assets and facilities




Airports
Bridges
Broadband
Canals
Coastal management
Critical infrastructure
Dams
Electricity
Energy
Hazardous waste
Hospitals
Irrigation schemes
Levees
Lighthouses
Parks
Pipeline transport
Ports
Mass transit
Public housing
State schools
Public spaces
Rail
Roads
Sewage
Sluices
Solid waste
Telecommunication
Utilities
Water supply
Weirs
Wastewater




Concepts




Asset management
Appropriation
Lindahl tax
Build-Operate-Transfer
Design-Build
Earmark
Fixed cost
Engineering contracts
Externality
Government debt
Life cycle assessment
Maintenance
Monopoly
Property tax
Public-private partnership
Public capital
Public finance
Public good
Public sector
Renovation
Replacement (upgrade)
Spillover effect
Supply chain
Taxation




Issues and ideas




Air traffic control
Brownfield
Carbon footprint
Containerization
Congestion pricing
Ecotax
Ethanol fuel
Fuel tax
Groundwater
High-speed rail
Hybrid vehicles
Land-use planning
Mobile data terminal
Pork barrel
Rapid bus transit
Recycling
Renewables
Reverse osmosis
Smart grid
Smart growth
Stormwater
Urban sprawl
Traffic congestion
Transit-oriented development
Vehicle efficiency
Waste-to-energy
Weatherization
Wireless technology




Fields of study




Architecture
Civil
Electrical
Mechanical engineering
Public economics
Public policy
Urban planning






Examples

Akashi Kaikyō Bridge
Trans-Alaska pipeline
Autobahn
Brazilian energy independence
Brooklyn Bridge
Channel Tunnel
Chicago wastewater
China's high-speed rail
Curtiba rapid bus transit
Danish wind-power
British offshore wind-power
Nuclear power in France
Solar power in Germany
Hoover Dam
Hong Kong Int'l Airport
Intercity-Express
Interstate highways
Jamnagar Refinery
Kansai Int'l Airport
Panama Canal
Port of Shanghai
San Francisco Bay Bridge
Three Gorges Dam
Shinkansen
Spanish high-speed rail
French TGV rail
Spanish autovias and autopistas
Transcontinental Railroad
Power transmission in the USA





Infrastructure portal





v
t
e





Infrastructure is the fundamental facilities and systems serving a country, city, or other area,[1] including the services and facilities necessary for its economy to function.[2] It typically characterises technical structures such as roads, bridges, tunnels, water supply, sewers, electrical grids, telecommunications (including Internet connectivity and broadband speeds), and so forth, and can be defined as "the physical components of interrelated systems providing commodities and services essential to enable, sustain, or enhance societal living conditions."[3]
The word infrastructure has been used in English since 1887 and in French since 1875, originally meaning "The installations that form the basis for any operation or system".[4][5] The word was imported from French, where it means subgrade, the native material underneath a constructed pavement or railway. The word is a combination of the Latin prefix "infra", meaning "below", and "structure". The army use of the term achieved currency in the United States after the formation of NATO in the 1940s, and by 1970 was adopted by urban planners in its modern civilian sense.[6]



Contents


1 Classifications
2 Related concepts
3 Ownership and financing
4 Types

4.1 Engineering and construction
4.2 Civil defense and economic development
4.3 Military
4.4 Green
4.5 Marxism
4.6 Communications


5 In the developing world

5.1 Regional differences
5.2 Sources of funding


6 See also
7 References
8 Bibliography
9 External links



Classifications[edit]
A 1987 US National Research Council panel adopted the term "public works infrastructure", referring to:

"... both specific functional modes – highways, streets, roads, and bridges; mass transit; airports and airways; water supply and water resources; wastewater management; solid-waste treatment and disposal; electric power generation and transmission; telecommunications; and hazardous waste management – and the combined system these modal elements comprise. A comprehension of infrastructure spans not only these public works facilities, but also the operating procedures, management practices, and development policies that interact together with societal demand and the physical world to facilitate the transport of people and goods, provision of water for drinking and a variety of other uses, safe disposal of society's waste products, provision of energy where it is needed, and transmission of information within and between communities."[7]

The OECD also classifies communications as a part of infrastructure.[8]
The American Society of Civil Engineers issues a US "Infrastructure Report Card" every 2-4 years.[9] As of 2017[update] they grade 16 categories, namely Aviation, Bridges, Dams, Drinking Water, Energy, Hazardous Waste, Inland Waterways, Levees, Parks & Recreation, Ports, Rail, Roads, Schools, Solid Waste, Transit and Wastewater.[9]:4
Hard infrastructure is the physical networks necessary for the functioning of a modern industrial nation.[citation needed] Soft infrastructure is the institutions which are required to maintain an economy,[10] like health, and cultural and social standards of a country, such as the financial system, the education system, the health care system, the system of government, and law enforcement, as well as emergency services.[5][11]
Critical infrastructure distinguishes those infrastructure elements that, if significantly damaged or destroyed, would cause serious disruption of a system or organization. Storm, flood, or earthquake damage leading to loss of certain transportation routes in a city, for example bridges crossing a river, that would make it impossible for people to evacuate, and for emergency services to operate, would be deemed critical infrastructure. Similarly, an on-line booking system might be critical infrastructure for an airline. These elements of infrastructure are the focus of recovery efforts in the aftermath of natural disasters.[citation needed]
Related concepts[edit]
The term infrastructure may be confused with the following overlapping or related concepts.
Land improvement and land development are general terms that in some contexts may include infrastructure, but in the context of a discussion of infrastructure would refer only to smaller scale systems or works that are not included in infrastructure, because they are typically limited to a single parcel of land, and are owned and operated by the land owner. For example, an irrigation canal that serves a region or district would be included with infrastructure, but the private irrigation systems on individual land parcels would be considered land improvements, not infrastructure. Service connections to municipal service and public utility networks would also be considered land improvements, not infrastructure.[12][13]
The term public works includes government-owned and operated infrastructure as well as public buildings, such as schools and court houses. Public works generally refers to physical assets needed to deliver public services. Public services include both infrastructure and services generally provided by government.
Ownership and financing[edit]
Main article: Infrastructure and economics
Infrastructure may be owned and managed by governments or by private companies, such as sole public utility or railway companies. Generally, most roads, major airports and other ports, water distribution systems, and sewage networks are publicly owned, whereas most energy and telecommunications networks are privately owned.[citation needed] Publicly owned infrastructure may be paid for from taxes, tolls, or metered user fees, whereas private infrastructure is generally paid for by metered user fees.[citation needed] Major investment projects are generally financed by the issuance of long-term bonds.[citation needed]
Government-owned and operated infrastructure may be developed and operated in the private sector or in public-private partnerships, in addition to in the public sector. As of 2008[update] in the United States for example, public spending on infrastructure has varied between 2.3% and 3.6% of GDP since 1950.[14] Many financial institutions invest in infrastructure.
Types[edit]
Engineering and construction[edit]
Engineers generally limit the term "infrastructure" to describe fixed assets that are in the form of a large network; in other words, hard infrastructure.[citation needed] Efforts to devise more generic definitions of infrastructures have typically referred to the network aspects of most of the structures, and to the accumulated value of investments in the networks as assets.[citation needed] One such definition from 1998 defined infrastructure as the network of assets "where the system as a whole is intended to be maintained indefinitely at a specified standard of service by the continuing replacement and refurbishment of its components".[15]
Civil defense and economic development[edit]
See also: Civil defense by country
Civil defense planners and developmental economists generally refer to both hard and soft infrastructure, including public services such as schools and hospitals, emergency services such as police and fire fighting, and basic financial services. The notion of infrastructure-based development combining long-term infrastructure investments by government agencies at central and regional levels with public private partnerships has proven popular among economists in Asia (notably Singapore and China), mainland Europe, and Latin America.
Military[edit]
Military infrastructure is the buildings and permanent installations necessary for the support of military forces, whether they are stationed in bases, being deployed or engaged in operations. For example, barracks, headquarters, airfields, communications facilities, stores of military equipment, port installations, and maintenance stations.[16]
Green[edit]
Main article: Green infrastructure
Green infrastructure (or blue-green infrastructure) highlights the importance of the natural environment in decisions about land use planning.[17][18] In particular there is an emphasis on the "life support" functions provided by a network of natural ecosystems, with an emphasis on interconnectivity to support long-term sustainability. Examples include clean water and healthy soils, as well as the more anthropocentric functions such as recreation and providing shade and shelter in and around towns and cities. The concept can be extended to apply to the management of stormwater runoff at the local level through the use of natural systems, or engineered systems that mimic natural systems, to treat polluted runoff.[19][20]
Marxism[edit]
In Marxism, the term "infrastructure" is sometimes used as a synonym for "base" in the dialectic synthetic pair base and superstructure. However, the Marxist notion of "base" is broader than the non-Marxist use of the term "infrastructure", and some soft infrastructure, such as laws, governance, regulations, and standards, would be considered by Marxists to be part of the superstructure, not the base.[21]
Communications[edit]
Communications infrastructure is the informal and formal channels of communication, political and social networks, or beliefs held by members of particular groups, as well as information technology, software development tools. Still underlying these more conceptual uses is the idea that infrastructure provides organizing structure and support for the system or organization it serves, whether it is a city, a nation, a corporation, or a collection of people with common interests. Examples include IT infrastructure, research infrastructure, terrorist infrastructure, employment infrastructure and tourism infrastructure.[citation needed]
In the developing world[edit]
According to researchers at the Overseas Development Institute, the lack of infrastructure in many developing countries represents one of the most significant limitations to economic growth and achievement of the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). Infrastructure investments and maintenance can be very expensive, especially in such areas as landlocked, rural and sparsely populated countries in Africa. It has been argued that infrastructure investments contributed to more than half of Africa's improved growth performance between 1990 and 2005, and increased investment is necessary to maintain growth and tackle poverty. The returns to investment in infrastructure are very significant, with on average thirty to forty percent returns for telecommunications (ICT) investments, over forty percent for electricity generation, and eighty percent for roads.[22]
Regional differences[edit]
The demand for infrastructure, both by consumers and by companies is much higher than the amount invested.[22] There are severe constraints on the supply side of the provision of infrastructure in Asia.[23] The infrastructure financing gap between what is invested in Asia-Pacific (around US$48 billion) and what is needed (US$228 billion) is around US$180 billion every year.[22]
In Latin America, three percent of GDP (around US$71 billion) would need to be invested in infrastructure in order to satisfy demand, yet in 2005, for example, only around two percent was invested leaving a financing gap of approximately US$24 billion.[22]
In Africa, in order to reach the seven percent annual growth calculated to be required to meet the MDGs by 2015 would require infrastructure investments of about fifteen percent of GDP, or around US$93 billion a year. In fragile states, over thirty-seven percent of GDP would be required.[22]
Sources of funding[edit]
The source of financing varies significantly across sectors. Some sectors are dominated by government spending, others by overseas development aid (ODA), and yet others by private investors.[22]
In Sub-Saharan Africa, governments spend around US$9.4 billion out of a total of US$24.9 billion. In irrigation, governments represent almost all spending. In transport and energy a majority of investment is government spending. In ICT and water supply and sanitation, the private sector represents the majority of capital expenditure. Overall, between them aid, the private sector, and non-OECD financiers exceed government spending. The private sector spending alone equals state capital expenditure, though the majority is focused on ICT infrastructure investments. External financing increased in the 2000s (decade) and in Africa alone external infrastructure investments increased from US$7 billion in 2002 to US$27 billion in 2009. China, in particular, has emerged as an important investor.[22]
See also[edit]


Infrastructure portal




Airport infrastructure
Asset Management Plan
Green infrastructure
Infrastructure as a service
Infrastructure asset management
Infrastructure security
Logistics
Megaproject
Project finance
Pseudo-urbanization
Public capital
Sustainable architecture
Sustainable engineering


References[edit]


^ . Infrastructure | Define Infrastructure at Dictionary.com
^ O'Sullivan, Arthur; Sheffrin, Steven M. (2003). Economics: Principles in Action. Upper Saddle River, New Jersey 07458: Pearson Prentice Hall. p. 474. ISBN 0-13-063085-3. 
^ Fulmer, Jeffrey (2009). "What in the world is infrastructure?". PEI Infrastructure Investor (July/August): 30–32. 
^ Online Etymology Dictionary. Douglas Harper, Historian. http://dictionary.reference.com/browse/infrastructure (accessed: April 24, 2008)
^ a b "Soft Infrastructure – Definition". Archived from the original on 2011-07-23. Retrieved 2015-03-21. 
^ Stephen Lewis The Ecology of Infrastructure and the Infrastructure of the Internet, blog Hag Pak Sak, posted September 22, 2008.
^ Infrastructure for the 21st Century, Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press, 1987.
^ OECD Economic Infrastructure. Common Reporting Standard (CRS) Codes 2 pages, n.d.
^ a b 2017 Infrastructure Report, 112pp, American Society of Civil Engineers, 2017
^ The soft infrastructure of a market economy Archived 2011-03-28 at the Wayback Machine. William A. Niskanen, 1991, Cato Journal, Vol.11, No.2, 233-238, Cato Institute
^ "Infrastructure in India" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 2011-07-03. Retrieved 2010-10-24. 
^ Land improvement, Online BusinessDictionary.com, http://www.businessdictionary.com/definition/land-development.html (accessed January 31, 2009)
^ Land development, Online BusinessDictionary.com, http://www.businessdictionary.com/definition/land-development.html (accessed January 31, 2009)
^ The New York Times, "Money for Public Projects", November 19, 2008 (accessed January 26, 2009)
^ Association of Local Government Engineers New Zealand: "Infrastructure Asset Management Manual", June 1998 - Edition 1.1
^ D.O.D. Dictionary of Military and Associated Terms, 2001 (rev. 2005)
^ The Conservation Fund, Arlington, VA. "Green Infrastructure". Accessed 2009-10-06.
^ Maryland Department of Natural Resources, Annapolis, MD. Maryland's Green Infrastructure Assessment: A Comprehensive Strategy for Land Conservation and Restoration. Archived 2008-03-09 at the Wayback Machine. May 2003.
^ U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), Washington, D.C., et al., Green Infrastructure Statement of Intent. 2007-04-19. Archived May 12, 2009, at the Wayback Machine.
^ EPA et al. "Managing Wet Weather with Green Infrastructure: Action Strategy 2008." January 2008. Archived May 12, 2009, at the Wayback Machine.
^ Marx, Karl Heinrich (1818–1883), accessed January 9, 2011.
^ a b c d e f g Christian K.M. Kingombe 2011. Mapping the new infrastructure financing landscape. London: Overseas Development Institute
^ Peter McCawley (2010), 'Infrastructure Policy in Developing countries', Asian-Pacific Economic Literature, 24(1), May. See also Asian-Pacific Economic Literature Policy Brief No 19, May 2010, on 'Infrastructure policy in developing countries in Asia'.


Nurre, Sarah G. "Restoring infrastructure systems: An integrated network design and scheduling (INDS) problem." European Journal of Operational Research. (12/2012), 223 (3), p. 794–806.
Bibliography[edit]

Ascher, Kate; researched by Wendy Marech (2007). The works: anatomy of a city (Reprint. ed.). New York: Penguin Press. ISBN 978-0143112709. 
Larry W. Beeferman, "Pension Fund Investment in Infrastructure: A Resource Paper", Capital Matter (Occasional Paper Series), No.3 December 2008
A. Eberhard, "Infrastructure Regulation in Developing Countries", PPIAF Working Paper No. 4 (2007) World Bank
M. Nicolas J. Firzli and Vincent Bazi, "Infrastructure Investments in an Age of Austerity : The Pension and Sovereign Funds Perspective", published jointly in Revue Analyse Financière, Q4 2011 issue, pp. 34–37 and USAK/JTW July 30, 2011 (online edition)
Hayes, Brian (2005). Infrastructure: the book of everything for the industrial landscape (1st ed.). New York City: Norton. ISBN 978-0393329599. 
Huler, Scott (2010). On the grid: a plot of land, an average neighborhood, and the systems that make our world work. Emmaus, Penn.: Rodale. ISBN 978-1-60529-647-0. 
Georg Inderst, "Pension Fund Investment in Infrastructure", OECD Working Papers on Insurance and Private Pensions, No. 32 (2009)
Dalakoglou, Dimitris (2017). The Road: An Ethnography of (Im)mobility, space and cross-border infrastructures. Manchester: Manchester University Press/ Oxford university Press. 

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Infrastructure.





Look up infrastructure in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.



Body of Knowledge on Infrastructure Regulation
Next Generation Infrastructures international research programme
Report Card on America's Infrastructure







v
t
e


Infrastructure






Bridge
Canal
Causeway
Dam
Drainage
Footbridge
Interchange
Levee
Overpass
Road
Skyway
Storm drain
Tunnel








See also: Architecture
Arena
Civil engineering
Construction
Playground
Stadium
Theatre
Urban park












v
t
e


Public infrastructure



assets
and
facilities



Airports
Bridges
Broadband
Canals
Critical infrastructure
Dams
Electricity generation
Energy development
Hazardous waste
Hospitals
Levees
Lighthouses
Municipal solid waste
Parks
Ports
Public housing
Public spaces
Public transport
Public utilities
Public works
Rail transport
Roads
Sewage
State schools
Telecommunications
Wastewater
Water supply network
Wind power





concepts



Appropriation
Infrastructure asset management
Build–operate–transfer
Design–build
Earmark
Engineering contracts
Externality
Fixed cost
Government debt
Life-cycle assessment
Lindahl tax
Maintenance, repair, and operations
Natural monopoly
Property tax
Public capital
Public finance
Public good
Public sector
Public–private partnership
Renovation
Spillover effect
Supply chain
Taxation
Upgrade





issues
and
ideas



Air traffic control
Brownfield land
Bus rapid transit
Carbon footprint
Congestion pricing
Containerization
Ethanol fuel
Fuel efficiency
Fuel tax
Groundwater
High-speed rail
Hybrid vehicles
Land-use planning
Mobile data terminal
Pork barrel
Recycling
Renewable resources
Reverse osmosis
Smart grid
Smart growth
Stormwater
Sustainable urban infrastructure
Traffic congestion
Transit-oriented development
Urban sprawl
Waste-to-energy
Weatherization
Wireless





fields
of study



Architecture
Civil engineering
Electrical engineering
Mechanical engineering
Public economics
Public policy
Urban planning





examples



Akashi Kaikyō Bridge
Autobahn
Brooklyn Bridge
Bus rapid transit systems
Channel Tunnel
Controlled-access highway systems
Electric power transmission
High-speed trains
Hong Kong International Airport
Hoover Dam
Humber Bridge
Kansai International Airport
Millau Viaduct
Nuclear power
Offshore wind farms
Panama Canal
Port of Shanghai
San Francisco–Oakland Bay Bridge
Solar power
Three Gorges Dam
Trans-Alaska pipeline
Transcontinental railroads












v
t
e


Railway infrastructure



Permanent
way (history)



Axe ties
Baulk road
Breather switch
Cant
Clip and scotch
Datenail
Fishplate
Ladder track
Minimum radius
Rail fastening system
Rail profile
Railroad tie/Sleeper
Track ballast
Track transition curve





Trackwork
and track
structures



Balloon loop
Classification yard
Coaling tower
Headshunt
Junction
Gauntlet track
Guide bar
Passing loop
Track gauge

Dual gauge


Rail track

Tramway track


Rail yard
Railway electrification system

Third rail
Overhead lines


Railway turntable
Roll way
Siding

Refuge siding


Switch
Track geometry
Track pan
Water crane
Wye





Signalling
and safety



Block post
Buffer stop
Catch points
Derail
Interlocking
Level crossing
Loading gauge
Railway signal
Signalling control
Structure gauge
Signal bridge
Tell-tale
Train stop
Wayside horn





Buildings



Goods shed
Motive power depot
Railway platform
Railway station
Roundhouse
Station building
Station clock
Train shed









Authority control



GND: 4026944-9
NDL: 00571883











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Infrastructure&oldid=812392738"					Categories: InfrastructureConstructionPhysical systemsTechnology in societyHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksWikipedia introduction cleanup from September 2017All pages needing cleanupArticles covered by WikiProject Wikify from September 2017All articles covered by WikiProject WikifyArticles containing potentially dated statements from 2017All articles containing potentially dated statementsAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from March 2017Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2008Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers