





This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (July 2015) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)











This article may be expanded with text translated from the corresponding article in French.  (December 2008) Click [show] for important translation instructions. 


View a machine-translated version of the French article.
Google's machine translation is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia.
Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article.
You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary (using German): Content in this edit is translated from the existing German Wikipedia article at [[:de:Exact name of German article]]; see its history for attribution.
You should also add the template {{Translated|fr|Code Insee}} to the talk page.
For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation.







The INSEE code is a numerical indexing code used by the French National Institute for Statistics and Economic Studies (INSEE) to identify various entities, including communes, départements. They are also used as national identification numbers given to people.



Contents


1 Created under Vichy
2 National identification numbers
3 History
4 SIREN and SIRET codes
5 Geographical codes
6 See also
7 References
8 External links



Created under Vichy[edit]






This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (November 2007) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Although today this national identification number is used by social security in France and is present on each person's social security card (carte Vitale), it was originally created under Vichy France under the guise of the Registration Number to the National Directory of Identification of Physical People (Numéro d'inscription au répertoire des personnes physiques, NIRPP or simply NIR). The latter was originally to be used as a clandestine military recruitment tool, but at the end served to identify Jews, gypsies and other "undesirable" populations under Vichy's conceptions. The first digit of the NIR was 1 for a male European, 2 for a female European, 3 for a male Muslim, 4 for a female Muslim, 5 for a male Jew, 6 for a female Jew, 7 for a male foreigner, or 8 for a female foreigner. 9 and 0 were reserved for persons of undetermined racial status.
The Demographic Service had been created in 1940 in order to replace the military recruitment office prohibited by the June 1940 Armistice with Nazi Germany. On October 11, 1941, the Demographic Service absorbed the former General Statistics of France (SGF, created in 1833). The new organization was called the National Statistical Service (Service national des statistiques, SNS).
National identification numbers[edit]
Each French person receives at birth a national identification number, the "numéro d'inscription au répertoire" (NIR or National Repertory registration), also called a "numéro de sécurité sociale" (or Social Security number). This INSEE number is composed of 13 digits + a two-digit key. Although the total number is of 15 digits, its composition makes it easy for individuals to remember at least the first seven digits (they just have to know their sex, year and month of birth, and department of birth). Since this number is used in many administrative procedures (whether by the state or by private enterprises), most people know by memory part of this identification number.
Their format is as follows: syymmlloookkk cc,[1] where

s is 1 for a male, 2 for a female,
yy are the last two digits of the year of birth,
mm is the month of birth, usually 01 to 12 (but there are special values for persons whose exact date of birth is not known),
ll is the number of the départment of origin : 2 digits, or 1 digit and 1 letter in metropolitan France, 3 digits for overseas.
ooo is the commune of origin (a department is composed of various communes) : 3 digits in metropolitan France or 2 digits for overseas.
kkk is an order number to distinguish people being born at the same place in the same year and month. This number is the one given by the Acte de naissance, an official paper which officialize a birth (and is needed throughout life for various administrative procedures, such as getting an identity card).
'cc' is the "control key", 01 to 97, equal to 97-(the rest of the number modulo 97) or to 97 if the number is a multiple of 97.
There are exceptions for people in particular situations.[2]

The "sex" codes (s: 1 for male, 2 for female) can be given in special occasions for temporary registrations, such as for someone who a person who works as a wage-earner but is not registered for miscellaneous reasons. Under Vichy France, but only in Algeria (not in metropolitan France) this s code was also used to register Jews, Algerian Muslims, foreigners, or ill-defined people. Thus, 8 or 9 was given to Muslim people of Algeria and of all colonies; 1 or 2 for indigenous Jews; 7 or 8 for foreigners; 1 or 0 for miscellaneous and ill-defined status (people in none of these classes).
The part llooo is used together, referred to as the COG, which identifies the person's location of birth.[3]
They are also specific codes for people whose date or place of birth is unknown, although this is today more and more rare (for example, the birth code is greater than 20 if the month of birth is unknown, and the communal code is 990 if the commune of origin is unknown). For overseas departments, the department number has three digits, and the communal number two digits (since 1950). People born abroad have a departmental code of 99, and the communal code is replaced by the code of the country of birth, which has three digits. Before 1964, departmental codes from 91 to 96 were used for Algeria, Tunisia and Morocco.
If in a specified month the total number of births exceeds 999, an extension common code is created.
The last code is obtained by a mathematical method (dividing by 97 the number formed by the first 13 digits, taking the remainder from this division, and then the "complement to 97", that is the difference between 97 and this remainder): this gives the control key code.
History[edit]
The NIR (National Identification Repertory) was created by René Carmille, who died at the Dachau concentration camp in 1944) who conducte between April and August 1941, under the Vichy regime, the first general survey to prepare the secret mobilisation of a French army. The codification was then done by General Marie in Algeria, to obtain a census of Jews, Muslims and other categories. The aim was to create a file of the whole of the French population and to discriminate according to ethnic or statutory criteria, following the racial policies of Vichy. Thus, the first digit that is now used to distinguish males and females then had other purposes: 3 or 4 for Algerian non-Jewish indigenous people, 5 or 6 for indigenous Jews, 7 or 8 for foreigners, and 9 or 0 for miscellaneous and ill-defined statutes.
This discriminatory categorization used in Algeria was abolished in 1944 and has never been used in Metropolitan France where, during the whole of the war, only "1" and "2" (for male and female) was used. The administration of the NIR was assigned in 1946 to the new Statistical Institute, the INSEE. This institution is also in charge of the RNIPP (répertoire national d'identification des personnes physiques, National Repertory of Identification of Physical Persons), which contains for each individual: the NIR, last name, first name, sex, date and place of birth, and a reference of the Birth Registration (Acte de naissance).
SIREN and SIRET codes[edit]
SIREN codes are given to businesses and nonprofit associations, SIRET codes to their establishments and facilities (SIRENE database).
Geographical codes[edit]
INSEE also gives numerical indexing codes (French: les Codes INSEE) to various administrative entities in France:

INSEE codes (known as COG, for Code officiel géographique) are given to various administrative units, notably the French communes (they do not coincide with postcodes, as there are 36 778 communes in France and many have the same name). The code has five digits:

2 digits (département) and 3 digits (commune) for the 96 départements of Metropolitan France
3 digits (département or collectivity) and 2 digits (commune) for the overseas departments and overseas collectivities.



The departmental codes are well known since they were used as the last two digits of vehicle registration plates (75 is Paris, 13 Marseille, 31 Toulouse, etc.). However, this license plate numbering system became optional in 2009 so the last two digits no longer necessarily indicate the department to which the car is registered.
The commune codes were assigned initially by numbering the alphabetically ordered list of commune names within each department or overseas division. Exceptions have occurred over time because some communes were renamed, some communes were split and new communes have been added to the end of the list.
The departmental codes are also best known as part of the French postal codes; but the postal codes do not include the INSEE commune numbers but were designed by geographical series starting by the main city of the department and then split geographically around them, with additional series given for special distribution. Some areas of the largest and most populated communes can also be assigned distinct series. The postal codes do not indicate precisely the communes but the location of the post office in charge for the distribution, and many rural communes share the same postal code number as the commune where the post office is located.
There are also 5-digit INSEE codes for foreign countries and territories, beginning with 99.[4]
See also[edit]

INSEE
Biometrics
National identification number
National Insurance number (a similar number in the United Kingdom)
Death Master File
Social Insurance Number (a similar number in Canada)
Uniform civil number (a similar number in Bulgaria)
Personal ID Number (CURP) (Mexico) (a similar number in Mexico)
Service number
SNILS (a similar number in Russia)
Tax file number (a similar number in Australia)
Cadastro de Pessoas Físicas (similar number in Brazil)
NIE Number (a similar number in Spain)
PPS number (Irish system)
Codice Fiscale (a similar number in Italy)

References[edit]



^ "Normalisation du numero INSEE des personnes physiques" (PDF). Retrieved 2015-05-13. 
^ "Normalisation du numero INSEE des personnes physiques" (PDF). Retrieved 2015-05-13. 
^ "Normalisation du numero INSEE des personnes physiques" (PDF). Retrieved 2015-05-13. 
^ "Insee - COG - Codification des pays et territoires étrangers". Insee.fr. Retrieved 2015-07-25. 



External links[edit]



Wikidata has the property: INSEE municipality code (P374) (see uses)



INSEE website







v
t
e


National identification numbers by country






Australia
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Brazil (RG • CPF • CNPJ)
Bulgaria
Canada
China
Croatia
Denmark
France
Ghana
Hong Kong
Iceland
India
Indonesia
Ireland
Italy
Macedonia
Malaysia
Mexico
Montenegro
Netherlands
New Zealand
Poland
Russia
Saudi Arabia
Serbia
Singapore
Slovenia
South Korea
Spain (DNI • NIE)
Sri Lanka
Sweden
Taiwan
Turkey
United Kingdom
United States











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=INSEE_code&oldid=809611606"					Categories: INSEEGeography of FranceStatistical data codingHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from July 2015All articles needing additional referencesArticles to be expanded from December 2008All articles to be expandedArticles needing translation from French WikipediaArticles needing additional references from November 2007Articles containing French-language text