"Technology school" redirects here. It is not to be confused with Technical school.







This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages)







This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (May 2014) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)









This article contains wording that promotes the subject in a subjective manner without imparting real information. Please remove or replace such wording and instead of making proclamations about a subject's importance, use facts and attribution to demonstrate that importance. (May 2014) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)





(Learn how and when to remove this template message)







The Technical University of Berlin (TU Berlin), one of Europe's first and a rolemodel for later establishments


An institute of technology (also: university of technology, polytechnic university, technikon, and technical university) is a type of university which specializes in engineering, technology, applied science, and sometimes natural sciences. In some countries, institutes of technology and polytechnic universities are well-defined categories; in others, such as the United States, they are simply names with no formal meaning.
The English term polytechnic appeared in the early 19th century, from the French École Polytechnique, an engineering school founded in 1794 in Paris. The French term comes from the Greek πολύ (polú or polý) meaning "many" and τεχνικός (tekhnikós) meaning "arts".[1]



Contents


1 Institutes of technology versus polytechnics
2 Institutes by country

2.1 Argentina
2.2 Australia
2.3 Austria
2.4 Bangladesh
2.5 Belarus
2.6 Belgium and the Netherlands
2.7 Brazil
2.8 Bulgaria
2.9 Cambodia
2.10 Canada
2.11 China
2.12 Chile
2.13 Croatia
2.14 Czech Republic
2.15 Denmark
2.16 Dominican Republic
2.17 Ecuador
2.18 Egypt
2.19 Finland
2.20 France and Francophone regions
2.21 Germany
2.22 Greece
2.23 Hong Kong
2.24 Hungary
2.25 India
2.26 Indonesia
2.27 Iran
2.28 Iraq
2.29 Ireland
2.30 Israel
2.31 Italy
2.32 Jamaica
2.33 Japan
2.34 Jordan
2.35 Malaysia
2.36 Mauritius
2.37 Moldova
2.38 New Zealand
2.39 Nigeria
2.40 Pakistan
2.41 Philippines
2.42 Poland
2.43 Portugal
2.44 Romania
2.45 Russia
2.46 Singapore
2.47 Slovakia
2.48 South Africa
2.49 Sri Lanka
2.50 Switzerland
2.51 Thailand
2.52 Turkey
2.53 Ukraine
2.54 United Kingdom
2.55 United States
2.56 Venezuela
2.57 Vietnam


3 See also
4 References
5 External links



Institutes of technology versus polytechnics[edit]
The institutes of technology and polytechnics have been in existence since at least the 18th century, but became popular after World War II with the expansion of engineering and applied science education, associated with the new needs created by industrialization. The world's first institution of technology, the Berg-Schola (today its legal successor is the University of Miskolc[2]), was founded by the Court Chamber of Vienna in Selmecbánya, Kingdom of Hungary (now Banská Štiavnica, Slovakia), in 1735 in order to train specialists of precious metal and copper mining according to the requirements of the industrial revolution in Hungary. The oldest German Institute of Technology is the Braunschweig University of Technology, founded in 1745 as "Collegium Carolinum". Another exception is the École Polytechnique, which has educated French élites since its foundation in 1794. In some cases, polytechnics or institutes of technology are engineering schools or technical colleges.
In several countries, like Germany, the Netherlands, Switzerland and Turkey, institutes of technology and polytechnics are institutions of higher education, and have been accredited to award academic degrees and doctorates. Famous examples are the Istanbul Technical University, ETH Zurich, İYTE, Delft University of Technology and RWTH Aachen, all considered universities.[citation needed]
In countries like Iran, Finland, Malaysia, Portugal, Singapore or the United Kingdom, there is often a significant and confused distinction between polytechnics and universities. In the UK a binary system of higher education emerged consisting of universities (research orientation) and polytechnics (engineering and applied science and professional practice orientation). Polytechnics offered university equivalent degrees mainly in STEM subjects from bachelor's, master's and PhD that were validated and governed at the national level by the independent UK Council for National Academic Awards. In 1992 UK polytechnics were designated as universities which meant they could award their own degrees. The CNAA was disbanded. The UK's first polytechnic, the Royal Polytechnic Institution (now the University of Westminster), was founded in 1838 in Regent Street, London. In Ireland the term "institute of technology" is the more favored synonym of a "regional technical college" though the latter is the legally correct term; however, Dublin Institute of Technology is a university in all but name as it can confer degrees in accordance with law, Cork Institute of Technology[3] and other Institutes of Technology have delegated authority from HETAC to make awards to and including master's degree level — Level 9 of the Republic of Ireland's National Framework for Qualifications (NFQ) — for all areas of study and Doctorate level in a number of others.
In a number of countries, although being today generally considered similar institutions of higher learning across many countries, polytechnics and institutes of technology used to have a quite different statute among each other, its teaching competences and organizational history. In many cases "polytechnic" were elite technological universities concentrating on applied science and engineering and may also be a former designation for a vocational institution, before it has been granted the exclusive right to award academic degrees and can be truly called an "institute of technology". A number of polytechnics providing higher education is simply a result of a formal upgrading from their original and historical role as intermediate technical education schools. In some situations, former polytechnics or other non-university institutions have emerged solely through an administrative change of statutes, which often included a name change with the introduction of new designations like "institute of technology", "polytechnic university", "university of applied sciences", or "university of technology" for marketing purposes.[4][5] Such emergence of so many upgraded polytechnics, former vocational education and technical schools converted into more university-like institutions has caused concern where the lack of specialized intermediate technical professionals lead to industrial skill shortages in some fields, being also associated to an increase of the graduate unemployment rate. This is mostly the case in those countries, where the education system is not controlled by the state and any institution can grant degrees.[citation needed] Evidence have also shown a decline in the general quality of teaching and graduate's preparation for the workplace, due to the fast-paced conversion of that technical institutions to more advanced higher level institutions.[6][7] Mentz, Kotze and Van der Merwe argue that all the tools are in place to promote the debate on the place of technology in higher education in general and in universities of technology specifically, and they posit several questions for the debate.[8]
Institutes by country[edit]
See also: Category:Higher education by country
Argentina[edit]
See also: Education in Argentina and List of universities in Argentina
In the so-called Latin American docta the main higher institution advocates to the study of technology is the National Technological University which has brand ramifications through all the country geographic space in the way of Regional Faculties. The Buenos Aires Institute of Technology (ITBA) is other important recognized institute of technology with renowned and prestige in the country.
Australia[edit]
See also: Education in Australia, Technical and Further Education, College of Advanced Education, and Category:Australian tertiary institutions

1970s–1990s

During the 1970s to early 1990s, the term was used to describe state owned and funded technical schools that offered both vocational and higher education. They were part of the College of Advanced Education system. In the 1990s most of these merged with existing universities, or formed new ones of their own. These new universities often took the title University of Technology, for marketing rather than legal purposes. AVCC report The most prominent such university in each state founded the Australian Technology Network a few years later.

1990s–today

Since the mid-1990s, the term has been applied to some technically minded technical and further education (TAFE) institutes. A recent example is the Melbourne Polytechnic rebranding and repositioning in 2014 from Northern Melbourne Institute of TAFE.[9] These primarily offer vocational education, although some like Melbourne Polytechnic are expanding into higher education offering vocationally oriented applied bachelor degress. This usage of the term is most prevalent historically in NSW and the ACT. The new terminology is apt given that this category of institution are becoming very much like the institutes of the 1970s–1990s period.
In Tasmania in 2009 the old college system and TAFE Tasmania have started a 3-year restructure to become the Tasmanian Polytechnic www.polytechnic.tas.edu.au, Tasmanian Skills Institute www.skillsinstitute.tas.edu.au and Tasmanian Academy www.academy.tas.edu.au
In the higher education sector, there are seven designated Universities of Technology in Australia (though, note, not all use the phrase "university of technology", such as the Universities of Canberra and South Australia, which used to be Colleges of Advanced Education before transitioning into fully-fledged universities with the ability - most important of all - to confer doctorates):

Curtin University, Western Australia
Queensland University of Technology, Queensland
Royal Melbourne Institute of Technology, Victoria
Swinburne University of Technology, Victoria
University of Canberra, Australian Capital Territory
University of South Australia, South Australia
University of Technology, Sydney, New South Wales

Austria[edit]
The world's first technical institute the Berg-Schola was founded in the Austro-Hungarian Empire in 1735 by the Chamber of Vienna.

Technische Universität

These institutions grant can grant habilitation and doctoral degrees and focus on research.

Graz University of Technology (11.000 students, founded 1811, Hochschule since 1865, doctoral degrees since 1901, university since 1975)
TU Wien (15.000 students, founded 1815, Hochschule since 1872, doctoral degrees since 1901, university since 1975)
University of Natural Resources and Applied Life Sciences Vienna focused on agriculture (8600 students, founded as Hochschule in 1872, doctoral degrees since 1906, university since 1975)
Montanuniversität Leoben specialized in mining, metallurgy, and materials (2.700 students, founded 1840, Hochschule since 1904, doctoral degrees since 1906, university since 1975)


Research institutions

These institutions focus only on research.

Austrian Institute of Technology (founded 1956)
Institute of Science and Technology Austria (founded 2007)


Technical faculties at universities

Some universities have a Faculty of Technology that can grant habilitation and doctoral degrees and focus on research.

Johannes Kepler University Linz (Faculty of Engineering and Natural Sciences founded 1965, university since 1975)
University of Innsbruck (Faculty of Civil Engineering founded 1969)
Alpen-Adria-Universität Klagenfurt (Faculty of Technical Sciences founded 2007)


Fachhochschulen

Fachhochschule is a German type of tertiary education institution and adopted later in Austria and Switzerland. They do not focus exclusively on technology, but may also offer courses in social science, medicine, business and design. They grant bachelor's degrees and master's degrees, and focus more on teaching than research and more on specific professions than on science.
In 2010, there were 20 Fachhochschulen in Austria[10]
Bangladesh[edit]
There are some public engineering universities in Bangladesh.

Bangladesh University of Engineering & Technology (BUET)
Chittagong University of Engineering & Technology (CUET). Formerly known as Bangladesh Institute of Technology, Chittagong.
Khulna University of Engineering & Technology (KUET). Formerly known as Bangladesh Institute of Technology, Khulna
Rajshahi University of Engineering & Technology (RUET). Formerly known as Bangladesh Institute of Technology, Rajshahi.
Dhaka University of Engineering & Technology (DUET). Formerly Known as Bangladesh Institute of Technology, Dhaka.


There are some general and technological universities in Bangladesh offer engineering programs.

Dhaka University. Engineering programs offer under the faculty of Engineering and Technology.
Rajshahi University. Engineering programs offer under the faculty of Engineering and Technology.
Chittagong University. Engineering programs offer under the faculty of Engineering and Technology.
Islamic University, Bangladesh (IU). Engineering programs offer under the faculty of Applied Science and Technology.
Khulna University. Engineering programs offer under the faculty of Science, Engineering and Technology.
Shahjalal University of Science and Technology. Engineering programs offer under the faculty of Applied Science and Technology.
Military Institute of Science and Technology (MIST)
Bangladesh University of Textiles (BUTex)


There is only one private engineering specialized university in Bangladesh.

Ahsanullah University of Science and Technology (AUST).

There is only one international engineering specialized university in Bangladesh.

Islamic University of Technology (IUT).

There are numerous private and other universities as well as science and technology universities providing engineering education. Most prominents are:

American International University-Bangladesh
North South University
International Islamic University Chittagong
East West University
BRAC University
Independent University, Bangladesh

Belarus[edit]

Brest State Technical University (Brest, Belarus)
Belarusian State University of Informatics and Radioelectronics (Minsk, Belarus)
Belarusian National Technical University (BNTU) (Minsk, Belarus)

Belgium and the Netherlands[edit]
Hogeschool is used in Belgium and in the Netherlands. The hogeschool has many similarities to the Fachhochschule in the German language areas and to the ammattikorkeakoulu in Finland.
Hogeschool institutions in the Flemish Community of Belgium (such as the Erasmus Hogeschool Brussel) are currently undergoing a process of academization. They form associations with a university and integrate research into the curriculum, which will allow them to deliver academic master's degrees.
In the Netherlands, four former institutes of technology have become universities over the past decades. These are the current three Technical Universities (at Delft, Eindhoven and Enschede), plus the former agricultural institute in Wageningen. A list of all hogescholen in the Netherlands, including some which might be called polytechnics, can be found here.
Brazil[edit]

Federal Technological University of Paraná
Instituto Militar de Engenharia
Federal Institute of São Paulo
Instituto Tecnológico de Aeronáutica
Sao Paulo State Technological College

Bulgaria[edit]




Students at the Technical University of Sofia, Bulgaria



Technical University of Gabrovo
Technical University of Sofia
Technical University of Varna
University of Chemical Technology and Metallurgy

Cambodia[edit]
In Cambodia, there are institutes of technology/polytechnic institutes, and Universities that offer instruction in a variety of programs that can lead to: certificates, diplomas, and degrees. Institutes of technology/polytechnic institutes and universities tend to be independent institutions.

Institutes of technology/polytechnic institutes


ITC or Institute of Technology of Cambodia or Institut de Technologies du Cambodge (polytechnic institute in Phnom Penh, Cambodia)
PPIT or Phnom Penh Institute of Technology (polytechnic institute in Phnom Penh, Cambodia)


Universities


RUPP or Royal Université de Phnom Penh (polytechnic university in Phnom Penh, Cambodia)

Canada[edit]
In Canada, there are affiliate schools, colleges, institutes of technology/polytechnic institutes, and universities that offer instruction in a variety of programs that can lead to engineering and applied science degrees, apprenticeship and trade programs, certificates, and diplomas. Affiliate schools are polytechnic divisions belonging to a national university and offer select technical and engineering programs. Colleges, institutes of technology/polytechnic institutes, and universities tend to be independent institutions.
Credentials are typically conferred at the undergraduate level; however, university-affiliated schools like the École de technologie supérieure and the École Polytechnique de Montréal (both of which are located in Quebec), also offer graduate and postgraduate programs, in accordance with provincial higher education guidelines. Canadian higher education institutions, at all levels, undertake directed and applied research with financing allocated through public funding, private equity, or industry sources.
Some of Canada's most esteemed colleges and polytechnic institutions also partake in collaborative institute-industry projects, leading to technology commercialization, made possible through the scope of Polytechnics Canada, a national alliance of eleven leading research-intensive colleges and institutes of technology.

Affiliate schools


ETS or École de technologie supérieure (technical school part of the Université du Québec system in Montreal, Quebec)
École Polytechnique de Montréal (polytechnic school affiliated with the Université de Montréal in Montreal, Quebec)


Colleges


Algonquin College ( Ottawa, Ontario)
Conestoga College (Kitchener, Ontario)
George Brown College (Toronto, Ontario)
Humber College (Toronto)
Red River College of Applied Arts, Science and Technology (college in Winnipeg, Manitoba offering degrees)
Seneca College of Applied Arts and Technology (Toronto)
St. Clair College (Windsor)


Institutes of technology/polytechnic institutes


British Columbia Institute of Technology (BCIT; polytechnic institute in Burnaby, British Columbia)
Kwantlen Polytechnic University (polytechnic university in Surrey, British Columbia)
Northern Alberta Institute of Technology (NAIT; polytechnic institute in Edmonton, Alberta)
Ryerson University (university in Toronto, Ontario) - While not having the name "polytechnic" anymore, Ryerson was one of the originators of applied education in Ontario, and Canada. It dropped the term "polytechnic" in 1993 when it was able to grant master and doctoral degrees, using the term "university" instead, and changed the name of some degree designations to bring it in line with other "traditional" universities.
Saskatchewan Polytechnic, formerly SIAST (polytechnic institute; multiple campuses with headquarters in Saskatoon, Saskatchewan)
Sheridan Institute of Technology and Advanced Learning (polytechnic institute in Oakville, Ontario)
Southern Alberta Institute of Technology (SAIT; polytechnic institute in Calgary, Alberta)
University of Ontario Institute of Technology (UOIT; university in Oshawa, Ontario)

China[edit]
China's modern higher education began in 1895 with the Imperial Tientsin University which was a polytechnic plus a law department. Liberal arts were not offered until three years later at Capital University. To this day, about half of China's elite universities remain essentially polytechnical.
Chile[edit]

Federico Santa María Technical University

Croatia[edit]
In Croatia there are many polytechnic institutes and colleges that offer a polytechnic education. The law about polytechnic education in Croatia was passed in 1997.

Polytechnic institutions


Polytechnic „Lavoslav Ružička“ in Vukovar
Polytechnic „Marko Marulić“ in Knin
Polytechnic „Nikola Tesla“ in Gospić
Polytechnic of Čakovec
Polytechnic of Karlovac
Polytechnic of Požega
Polytechnic of Pula
Polytechnic of Rijeka (VELERI) - one of the largest polytechnic institutions in Croatia, with departments in Rijeka, Poreč, Pazin, Otočac, Gospić and Ogulin
Polytechnic of Šibenik
Polytechnic of Slavonski Brod
Polytechnic of Varaždin
Polytechnic of Velika Gorica
Polytechnic of Zagreb
Polytechnic Vern
Social polytechnic of Zagreb
University of Applied Health Studies

Czech Republic[edit]
See also: Category:Universities in the Czech Republic.

Technical universities





Founding decree of the Czech Technical University in Prague from January 18, 1707






Lecture at the Faculty of Biomedical Engineering, CTU in Prague



Brno University of Technology (VUT), founded in 1899, 24.000 students
Collegium Nobilium in Olomouc, 1725 - 1847
Czech Technical University in Prague (ČVUT), college founded in 1707, university since 1806, 23.000 students, belongs to the oldest technical universities in the world
Czech University of Life Sciences Prague (ČZU), founded in 1904, focused on agriculture, 18.000 students
Institute of Chemical Technology in Prague (VŠCHT), founded in 1952, 3,000 student
Mendel University Brno (MENDELU), founded in 1919, focused on agriculture, 9.000 students
Technical University of Liberec (TUL), founded in 1953, 8.000 students
Technical University of Ostrava (VŠB TUO), founded in 1849, 22.000 students
Tomáš Baťa University in Zlín (UTB), founded in 2000, 10,000 students


Research institutions


Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic (AV ČR), dates back to 1784, 14,000 research staff altogether


Technical faculties at universities


Jan Evangelista Purkyně University in Ústí nad Labem (Faculty of Production Technology and Management, University founded in 1991)
University of Pardubice (Faculty of Chemical Technology since 1950, Jan Perner Faculty of Transportation since 1991, Institute of Electrical Engineering and Informatics since 2002)
University of West Bohemia (Faculty of Mechanical Engineering, Faculty of Electrical Engineering; University founded in 1991)

Denmark[edit]

Technical University of Denmark, founded in 1829 by Hans Christian Ørsted

Dominican Republic[edit]

Instituto Tecnológico de Santo Domingo
Universidad Tecnológica de Santiago

Ecuador[edit]

EPN, National Polytechnic School, Quito, Ecuador

EPN is known for research and education in the applied science, astronomy, atmospheric physics, engineering and physical sciences. The Geophysics Institute[11][12] monitors the country's seismic, tectonic and volcanic activity in the continental territory and in the Galápagos Islands.
One of the oldest observatories in South America is the Quito Astronomical Observatory. It was founded in 1873 and located 12 minutes south of the Equator in Quito, Ecuador. The Quito Astronomical Observatory is the National Observatory of Ecuador and is located in the Historic Center of Quito and is managed by the National Polytechnic School.[13][14]
The Nuclear Science Department at EPN is the only one in Ecuador and has the large infrastructure, related to irrradiation facilities like cobalt-60 source and electron beam processing.
Egypt[edit]

Alexandria Higher Institute of Engineering & Technology (AIET)
Higher Technological Institute
Institute of Aviation Engineering & Technology

Finland[edit]

Universities of technology

Universities of technology are categorised as universities, are allowed to grant B.Sc. (Tech.), M.Sc. (Tech.), Lic.Sc. (Tech.), Ph.D. and D.Sc. (Tech.) degrees and roughly correspond to Instituts de technologie of French-speaking areas and Technische Universität of Germany in prestige. In addition to universities of technology, some universities, e.g. University of Oulu and Åbo Akademi University, are allowed to grant the B.Sc. (tech.), M.Sc. (tech.) and D.Sc. (Tech.) degrees.
Universities of technology are academically similar to other (non-polytechnic) universities. Prior to Bologna process, M.Sc. (Tech.) required 180 credits, whereas M.Sc. from a normal university required 160 credits. The credits between universities of technology and normal universities are comparable.
Some Finnish universities of technology are:

Aalto University, formed from Helsinki University of Technology and other universities
Lappeenranta University of Technology
Tampere University of Technology


Polytechnics

Polytechnic schools are distinct from academic universities in Finland. Ammattikorkeakoulu is the common term in Finland, as is the Swedish alternative "yrkeshögskola" – their focus is on studies leading to a degree (for instance insinööri, engineer; in international use, Bachelor of Engineering) in kind different from but in level comparable to an academic bachelor's degree awarded by a university. Since 2006 the polytechnics have offered studies leading to master's degrees (Master of Engineering). After January 1, 2006, some Finnish ammattikorkeakoulus switched the English term "polytechnic" to the term "university of applied sciences" in the English translations of their legal names. The ammattikorkeakoulu has many similarities to the hogeschool in Belgium and in the Netherlands and to the Fachhochschule in the German language areas.
Some recognized Finnish polytechnics are:

Helsinki Metropolia University of Applied Sciences
Lapland University of Applied Sciences
Tampere University of Applied Sciences
Turku University of Applied Sciences

A complete list may be found in List of polytechnics in Finland.
France and Francophone regions[edit]

Instituts de technologie (grandes écoles)

Collegiate universities grouping several engineering schools or multi-site clusters of French grandes écoles provide sciences and technology curricula as autonomous higher education engineering institutes. They include:

Arts et Métiers ParisTech
Centrale Graduate School
Grenoble Institute of Technology
Institut national des sciences appliquées
Institut Supérieur de l'Aéronautique et de l'Espace
Paris Institute of Technology

They provide science and technology master's degrees and doctoral degrees.

'Universités technologiques / instituts universitaires de technologie / polytechs

French education system also includes three universities of technology:

Université de technologie de Belfort-Montbéliard
University of Technology of Compiègne
University of Technology of Troyes

In addition, France's education system includes many institutes of technology, embedded within most French universities. They are referred-to as institut universitaire de technologie (IUT). Instituts universitaires de technologie provide undergraduate technology curricula. 'Polytech institutes', embedded as a part of eleven French universities provide both undergraduate and graduate engineering curricula.
In the French-speaking part of Switzerland exists also the term haute école specialisée for a type of institution called Fachhochschule in the German-speaking part of the country. (see below).

Écoles polytechniques

Higher education systems, that are influenced by the French education system set at the end of the 18th century, use a terminology derived by reference to the French École polytechnique. Such terms include Écoles Polytechniques (Algeria, Belgium, Canada, France, Switzerland, Tunisia), Escola Politécnica (Brasil, Spain), Polytechnicum (Eastern Europe).
In French language, higher education refers to écoles polytechniques, providing science and engineering curricula:

École polytechnique or X (near Paris)
École polytechnique de Bruxelles
École polytechnique de Montréal
École polytechnique fédérale de Lausanne
National Polytechnic Institute of Lorraine
National Polytechnic Institute of Toulouse

Germany[edit]

Fachhochschule

Main article: Fachhochschule


Fachhochschulen were first founded in the early 1970s. They do not focus exclusively on technology, but may also offer courses in social science, medicine, business and design. They grant bachelor's degrees and master's degrees, and focus more on teaching than research and more on specific professions than on science.
In 2009/10, there existed about 200 Fachhochschulen in Germany.[15] See the German Wikipedia for a list.

Technische Universität

Technische Universität (abbreviation: TU) is the common term for universities of technology or technical university. These institutions can grant habilitation and doctoral degrees and focus on research.
The nine largest and most renowned Technische Universitäten in Germany have formed TU9 German Institutes of Technology as community of interests. Technische Universitäten normally have faculties or departements of natural sciences and often of economics but can also have units of cultural and social sciences and arts. RWTH Aachen, TU Dresden and TU München also have a faculty of medicine associated with university hospitals (Klinikum Aachen, University Hospital Dresden, Rechts der Isar Hospital).
There are 17 universities of technology in Germany with about 290,000 students enrolled. The four states of Bremen, Mecklenburg-Vorpommern, Saxony-Anhalt and Schleswig-Holstein are not operating a Technische Universität. Saxony and Lower Saxony have the highest counts of TUs, while in Saxony three out of four universities are universities of technology.

List of Technische Universitäten in Germany

Name
Land
Foundation
Students
Notes


Rheinisch-Westfälische Technische Hochschule (RWTH Aachen)
 North Rhine-Westphalia
1870
35,813
member of TU9


Berlin Institute of Technology
 Berlin
1770
29,234
member of TU9


Brandenburg University of Technology
 Brandenburg
1991
6,400
in Cottbus


Technische Universität Braunschweig
Carolo-Wilhelmina
 Lower Saxony
1745
15,500
member of TU9, oldest TU in Germany


Chemnitz University of Technology
 Saxony
1836
10,850



Clausthal University of Technology
 Lower Saxony
1775
4,080



Technische Universität Darmstadt
 Hesse
1877
23,100
member of TU9


Technische Universität Dresden
 Saxony
1828
36,534
member of TU9, largest TU in Germany by students enrolled


TU Dortmund University
 North Rhine-Westphalia
1968
24,873



Freiberg University of Mining and Technology
 Saxony
1765
5,000
the world's oldest university of mining and second oldest institution of higher technological education


Technische Universität Hamburg-Harburg
 Hamburg
1978
5,100



Leibniz University of Hanover
 Lower Saxony
1831
26,035
member of TU9


Technische Universität Ilmenau
 Thuringia
1894
7,200



Technische Universität Kaiserslautern
 Rhineland-Palatinate
1970
12,510



Karlsruhe Institute of Technology
Fridericiana
 Baden-Württemberg
1825
22,552
member of TU9


Technische Universität München
 Bavaria
1868
38,000
member of TU9


University of Stuttgart
 Baden-Württemberg
1829
22,632
member of TU9


Some universities in Germany can also be seen as institutes of technology due to comprising a wide spread of technical sciences and having a history as a technical university. Examples are

University of Duisburg-Essen
Otto-von-Guericke University Magdeburg
University of Rostock with a tradition in ship building and engineering

Greece[edit]
In Greece, there are Technological Universities or Institutes of Technology that are part of the public higher education and they confer a 4-year bachelor's degree (Diplom FH) (240E.C.T.S – I.S.C.E.D. 5A). Also, there are Polytechnics that are part of the public higher education system and they confer a 5-year Diplom Uni (300E.C.T.S – I.S.C.E.D. 5A).
Hong Kong[edit]
See also: Education in Hong Kong and List of universities in Hong Kong
The first polytechnic in Hong Kong is The Hong Kong Polytechnic, established in 1972 through upgrading the Hong Kong Technical College (Government Trade School before 1947). The second polytechnic, the City Polytechnic of Hong Kong, was founded in 1984. These polytechnics awards diplomas, higher diplomas, as well as academic degrees. Like the United Kingdom, the two polytechnics were granted university status in 1994, and renamed The Hong Kong Polytechnic University and the City University of Hong Kong respectively. The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, a university with a focus in applied science, engineering and business, was founded in 1991.
Hungary[edit]
The world's first[16][17] Institute of Technology the Berg-Schola (Bergschule) established in Selmecbánya, Kingdom of Hungary by the Court Chamber of Vienna in 1735 providing Further education to train specialists of precious metal and copper mining. In 1762 the institute ranked up to be Academia[18][19] providing Higher Education courses. After the Treaty of Trianon the institute had to be moved to Sopron.[20]

University of Miskolc re-established in 1949 as Technical University of Heavy Industry in Miskolc and in 1990 as University of Miskolc. The university is the successor of the University of Mining and Metallurgy of Selmecbánya (est. as Bergshule 1735).[21][22][23][24]
Budapest University of Technology and Economics, one of the oldest Institute of technology of the world is located in Budapest (est. 1782). The BME was the first University in Europe to award engineering degrees.[25]
University of Debrecen - Faculty of Engineering
University of Dunaújváros
Pallasz Athéné University - GAMF
University of Nyíregyháza - Institute of Technical and Agricultural Sciences
University of Sopron
University of Szeged - Faculty of Engineering
Szent István University
Széchenyi István University
University of Pannonia
University of Pécs - Faculty of Engineering and Information Technology
Óbuda University

India[edit]
There are 16 autonomous Indian Institutes of Technology in addition to 30 National Institutes of Technology which are Government Institutions. In addition to these there are many other Universities which offer higher technical courses. The Authority over technical education in India is the AICTE.

The Indian Institutes of Technology


Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur
Indian Institute of Technology (BHU) Varanasi
Indian Institute of Technology Bombay
Indian Institute of Technology Madras
Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur
Indian Institute of Technology Delhi
Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati
Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee
Indian Institute of Technology Ropar
Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneshwar
Indian Institute of Technology Hyderabad
Indian Institute of Technology Gandhinagar
Indian Institute of Technology Patna
Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur
Indian Institute of Technology Mandi
Indian Institute of Technology Indore


The National Institutes of Technology


National Institute of Technology, Agartala
Motilal Nehru National Institute of Technology, Allahabad
Maulana Azad National Institute of Technology, Bhopal
National Institute of Technology, Calicut
National Institute of Technology, Durgapur
National Institute of Technology, Hamirpur
Malaviya National Institute of Technology, Jaipur
Dr. B R Ambedkar National Institute of Technology, Jalandhar
National Institute of Technology, Jamshedpur
National Institute of Technology, Kurukshetra
Visvesvaraya National Institute of Technology, Nagpur
National Institute of Technology, Patna
National Institute of Technology, Raipur
National Institute of Technology, Rourkela
National Institute of Technology, Silchar
National Institute of Technology, Srinagar
S V National Institute of Technology, Surat
National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli
National Institute of Technology, Warangal
National Institute of Technology, Goa
National Institute of Technology, Puducherry
National Institute of Technology Delhi
National Institute of Technology Uttarakhand
National Institute of Technology Mizoram
National Institute of Technology Meghalaya
National Institute of Technology Manipur
National Institute of Technology Nagaland
National Institute of Technology Arunachal Pradesh
National Institute of Technology Sikkim

In India there are many polytechnic institutes and colleges that offer a polytechnic education. In India a Diploma in Engineering is a specific academic award usually awarded in technical or vocational courses e.g. Engineering, Pharmacy, Designing, etc. These Institutions offer three year diploma in engineering post Tenth class. These institutes have affiliation from state bord of technical education of respective state governments. after which one can apply for post of junior engineer or continue higher studies by appearing for exams of AMIE to become an engineering graduate.

Pusa Polytechnic being one of the famous Polytechnic in India.
Government Polytechnic, Mumbai
Jnan Chandra Ghosh Polytechnic, Kolkata
Government Polytechnic Lucknow
Government Polytechnic Nainital
Government Polytechnic Nilokheri
Government Polytechnic Barabanki
Government Polytechnic, Nagpur
Central Polytechnic College, Vattiyoorkavu, Trivandrum. This was where the socio- technological youth rebel group- Association for Back Bench Alambs- ABBA (not to be confused with the music band ABBA) was established in 1994.

Indonesia[edit]
There are four public institutes of technology in Indonesia that owned by the government of Indonesia. Other than that, there are hundreds other institute that owned by private or other institutions.
Four public institutes are:

Bandung Institute of Technology, Bandung
Sepuluh Nopember Institute of Technology, Surabaya
Kalimantan Institute of Technology, Balikpapan
Sumatera Institute of Technology, Bandar Lampung

Politeknik provides vocational education offers either three-year Diploma degrees, which is similar to an associate degree, or four-year bachelor's degree. The more advanced Master's and doctoral degrees are still in progress.
Iran[edit]
There are 18 technological universities in Iran.

Amirkabir University of Technology, Tehran
Sharif University of Technology, Tehran
Technical and Vocational University, 172 branches in Iran
Iran University of Science and Technology, Tehran
K. N. Toosi University of Technology, Tehran
Petroleum University of Technology, Tehran and Ahwaz
Isfahan University of Technology, Isfahan
Sahand University of Technology, Tabriz
Shiraz University of Technology, Shiraz
Arak University of Technology, Arak
Urmia University of Technology, Urmia
Babol University of Technology, Babol
Shahrood University of Technology, Shahrood
Hamedan University of Technology, Hamedan
Kermanshah University of Technology, Kermanshah
Qom University of Technology, Qom
Birjand University of Technology, Birjand
Jondi-Shapur University of Technology, Dezful
Sirjan University of Technology, Sirjan

Iraq[edit]
See also: List of Iraqi technical colleges and institutes

University of Technology, Iraq

Ireland[edit]
Ireland has an "Institute of Technology" system, formerly referred to as Regional Technical College (RTCs) system. The abbreviation IT is now widely used to refer to an Institute of Technology. These institutions offer sub-degree, degree and post-graduate level studies. Unlike the Irish university system an Institute of Technology also offers sub-degree programmes such as 2-year Higher Certificate programme in various academic fields of study. Some institutions have "delegated authority" that allows them to make awards in their own name, after authorisation by the Higher Education & Training Awards Council.
Dublin Institute of Technology developed separately from the Regional Technical College system, and after several decades of association with the University of Dublin, Trinity College it acquired the authority to confer its own degrees.
The IOTI, is the representative body for the various Institutes of Technology in Ireland.[26]
Israel[edit]

Technion – Israel Institute of Technology in 2010 ranked 38 in the world.

Italy[edit]
See also: Istituto tecnico
In Italy, the term "technical institute" generally refers to a secondary school which offers a five-year course granting the access to the university system.[27]
In higher education, Politecnico refers to a technical university awarding degrees in engineering. Historically there were two Politecnici, one in each of the two largest industrial cities of the north:

Politecnico di Torino, established 1859;
Politecnico di Milano, established 1863.

A third Politecnico was added in the south in 1990:

Politecnico di Bari, established 1990.

However, many other universities have a faculty of engineering.
In 2003, the Ministry of Education, Universities and Research and the Ministry of Economy and Finance jointly established the Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia (Italian Institute of Technology), headquartered in Genoa with 10 laboratories around Italy, which however focuses on research, not entirely in the fields of engineering, and does not offer undergraduate degrees.
Jamaica[edit]

University of Technology, Jamaica, in Kingston, Jamaica.

Japan[edit]
See also: Technical education in Japan and Colleges of technology in Japan
In Japan, an institute of technology (工業大学, kōgyō daigaku) is a type of university that specializes in the sciences. See also the Imperial College of Engineering, which was the forerunner of the University of Tokyo's engineering faculty.

Tokyo Institute of Technology, 1929
Chiba Institute of Technology, 1942
Kyoto Institute of Technology, 1949
Muroran Institute of Technology, 1949
Nagoya Institute of Technology, 1949
Kyushu Institute of Technology, 1949
University of Electro-Communications, 1949
Tokyo University of Agriculture and Technology, 1949
Osaka Institute of Technology, 1949
Shibaura Institute of Technology, 1949
Aichi Institute of Technology, 1959
Hiroshima Institute of Technology, 1963
Fukuoka Institute of Technology, 1963
Shonan Institute of Technology, 1963
Tohoku Institute of Technology, 1964
Kanazawa Institute of Technology, 1965
Fukui University of Technology, 1965
Kitami Institute of Technology, 1966
Nippon Institute of Technology, 1967
Hokkaido Institute of Technology, 1967
Ashikaga Institute of Technology, 1967
Hachinohe Technical University, 1972
Kanagawa Institute of Technology, 1975
Nagaoka University of Technology, 1976
Toyohashi University of Technology, 1976
Saitama Institute of Technology, 1976
Japan Advanced Institute of Science And Technology, 1986
Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Technology, 1986
Tokyo University of Technology, 1986
Kobe Design University, 1989
Tohoku University of Art and Design, 1991
Shizuoka Institute of Science and Technology, 1991
Niigata Institute of Technology, 1995
Maebashi Institute of Technology, 1997
Kochi University of Technology, 1997
Aichi University of Technology, 2000
Nara Institute of Science and Technology, 2006
Advanced Institute of Industrial Technology, 2006
Okinawa Institute of Science and Technology,2011

Jordan[edit]

Princess Sumaya University for Technology in Amman.
Jordan University of Science and Technology in Irbid.
New York Institute of Technology, Jordan campus.
Balqa Applied University in Salt.

Malaysia[edit]
See also: Education in Malaysia

Polytechnics

Polytechnics in Malaysia has been operated for almost 44 years. The institutions provide courses for bachelor's degree & Bachelor of Science (BSc) (offer at Premier Polytechnics for September 2013 intake & 2014 intake), Advanced Diploma, Diploma and Special Skills Certificate. It was established by the Ministry of Education with the help of UNESCO in 1969. The amount of RM24.5 million is used to fund the pioneer of Politeknik Ungku Omar located in Ipoh, Perak from the United Nations Development Program (UNDP).
At present, Malaysia have developed 32 polytechnic at all over states in engineering, agriculture, commerce, hospitality and design courses with 60,840 students in 2009 to 87,440 students in 2012.
The following is a list of the polytechnics in Malaysia in order of establishment:-


Official Name in Malay
Acronym
Foundation
Type
Location


Politeknik Ungku Omar
PUO
1969
Premier Polytechnic (University Status)
Ipoh, Perak


Politeknik Sultan Haji Ahmad Shah
POLISAS
1976
Conventional Polytechnic
Kuantan, Pahang


Politeknik Sultan Abdul Halim Muadzam Shah
POLIMAS
1984
Conventional Polytechnic
Jitra, Kedah


Politeknik Kota Bharu
PKB
1985
Conventional Polytechnic
Ketereh, Kelantan


Politeknik Kuching Sarawak
PKS
1987
Conventional Polytechnic
Kuching, Sarawak


Politeknik Port Dickson
PPD
1990
Conventional Polytechnic
Si Rusa, Negeri Sembilan


Politeknik Kota Kinabalu
PKK
1996
Conventional Polytechnic
Kota Kinabalu, Sabah


Politeknik Sultan Salahuddin Abdul Aziz Shah
PSA
1997
Premier Polytechnic (University Status)
Shah Alam, Selangor


Politeknik Ibrahim Sultan
PIS
1998
Premier Polytechnic (University Status)
Pasir Gudang, Johor


Politeknik Seberang Perai
PSP
1998
Conventional Polytechnic
Permatang Pauh, Pulau Pinang


Politeknik Melaka
PMK
1999
Conventional Polytechnic
Melaka


Politeknik Kuala Terengganu
PKKT
1999
Conventional Polytechnic
Kuala Terengganu, Terengganu


Politeknik Sultan Mizan Zainal Abidin
PSMZA
2001
Conventional Polytechnic
Dungun, Terengganu


Politeknik Merlimau
PMM
2002
Conventional Polytechnic
Merlimau, Melaka


Politeknik Sultan Azlan Shah
PSAS
2002
Conventional Polytechnic
Behrang, Perak


Politeknik Tuanku Sultanah Bahiyah
PTSB
2002
Conventional Polytechnic
Kulim, Kedah


Politeknik Sultan Idris Shah
PSIS
2003
Conventional Polytechnic
Sungai Air Tawar, Selangor


Politeknik Tuanku Syed Sirajuddin
PTSS
2003
Conventional Polytechnic
Arau, Perlis


Politeknik Muadzam Shah
PMS
2003
Conventional Polytechnic
Muadzam Shah, Pahang


Politeknik Mukah Sarawak
PMU
2004
Conventional Polytechnic
Mukah, Sarawak


Politeknik Balik Pulau
PBU
2007
Conventional Polytechnic
Balik Pulau, Pulau Pinang


Politeknik Jeli
PJK
2007
Conventional Polytechnic
Jeli, Kelantan


Politeknik Nilai
PNS
2007
Conventional Polytechnic
Negeri Sembilan


Politeknik Banting
PBS
2007
Conventional Polytechnic
Kuala Langat, Selangor


Politeknik Mersing
PMJ
2008
Conventional Polytechnic
Mersing, Johor


Politeknik Hulu Terengganu
PHT
2008
Conventional Polytechnic
Kuala Berang, Terengganu


Politeknik Sandakan
PSS
2009
Conventional Polytechnic
Sandakan, Sabah


Politeknik METrO Kuala Lumpur
PMKL
2011
METrO Polytechnic
Kuala Lumpur


Politeknik METrO Kuantan
PMKU
2011
METrO Polytechnic
Kuantan, Pahang


Politeknik METrO Johor Bahru
PMJB
2011
METrO Polytechnic
Johor Bahru, Johor


Politeknik METrO Betong
PMBS
2012
METrO Polytechnic
Kuching, Sarawak


Politeknik METrO Tasek Gelugor
PMTG
2012
METrO Polytechnic
George Town, Pulau Pinang


Politeknik Pagoh
TBD
2013
Conventional Polytechnic
Muar, Johor



Technical University

There are 4 technical universities in Malaysia, and all are belongs to Malaysian Technical University Network:

Universiti Tun Hussein Onn Malaysia
Universiti Malaysia Perlis
Universiti Teknikal Malaysia Melaka
Universiti Malaysia Pahang

Mauritius[edit]
The only technical university in Mauritius is the University of Technology, Mauritius with its main campus situated in La Tour Koenig, Pointe aux Sables. It has a specialized mission with a technology focus. It applies traditional and beyond traditional approaches to teaching, training, research and consultancy. The university has been founded with the aim to play a key role in the economic and social development of Mauritius through the development of programmes of direct relevance to the country’s needs, for example in areas like technology, sustainable development science, and public sector policy and management.
Moldova[edit]
See also: Education in Moldova

Technical University of Moldova, 1964

New Zealand[edit]
See also: Public sector organisations in New Zealand § Polytechnics and institutes of technology, and Education in New Zealand
New Zealand polytechnics are established under the Education Act 1989 as amended, and are typically considered state-owned tertiary institutions along with universities, colleges of education, and wānanga; there is today often much crossover in courses and qualifications offered between all these types of Tertiary Education Institutions. Some have officially taken the title 'institute of technology' which is a term recognized in government strategies equal to that of the term 'polytechnic'. One has opted for the name 'Universal College of Learning' (UCOL), and another 'Unitec New Zealand'. These are legal names but not recognized terms like 'polytechnic' or 'institute of technology'. Many if not all now grant at least bachelor-level degrees. Some colleges of education or institutes of technology are privately owned, however, the qualification levels vary widely.
Since the 1990s, there has been consolidation in New Zealand's state-owned tertiary education system. In the polytechnic sector: Wellington Polytechnic amalgamated with Massey University. The Central Institute of Technology explored a merger with the Waikato Institute of Technology, which was abandoned, but later, after financial concerns, controversially amalgamated with Hutt Valley Polytechnic, which in turn became Wellington Institute of Technology. Some smaller polytechnics in the North Island, such as Waiarapa Polytechnic, amalgamated with UCOL. (The only other amalgamations have been in the colleges of education.)
The Auckland University of Technology is the only polytechnic to have been elevated to university status; while Unitec has had repeated attempts blocked by government policy and consequent decisions; Unitec has not been able to convince the courts to overturn these decisions.
Nigeria[edit]
See also: List of polytechnics in Nigeria
Virtually every state in Nigeria has a polytechnic university operated by either the federal or state government. In Rivers State for example, there are two state-owned polytechnic universities; Kenule Beeson Saro-Wiwa Polytechnic, Bori City and the Rivers State College of Arts and Science, Port Harcourt. The former was established on 13 May 1988 while the latter–though founded in 1984–was approved by the NBTE in 2006. The first private polytechnic university in the state is the Eastern Polytechnic, established in 2008.
Pakistan[edit]
The Polytechnic institutes in Pakistan, offer a diploma spanning three years in different branches. Students are admitted to the diploma program based on their results in the 10th grade standardized exams. The main purpose of Polytechnic Institutes is to train people in various trades.
Achievements in the field of Technical Education.
Some people in the world are institutions by themselves.
One name from them is Engr. Syed Waji-ul-Husnain Sherazi who has done lot of work for his country on National and International Level. He has developed a curriculum for three year educational program DAE Information & Communication Technology not only recognized by the Govt. of Pakistan but also recognized by the Govt. Organization of England.
These institutes are located throughout Pakistan and have been in service since early 1950s.
After successfully completing a diploma at a polytechnic, students can gain lateral entry to engineering degree (under graduate) courses called BE, which are conducted by engineering colleges affiliated to universities or University of Engineering & Technology or University of Engineering Sciences.
University of Engineering & Technology or University of Engineering Sciences are the recognized universities that grant Bachelor's and master's degrees in undergraduate and graduate studies respectively. The Bachelor of Science degree awarded by Universities of Engineering & Technology or University of Engineering Sciences are 4 years full-time program after finishing 13 years of education (international high school certificate) in Pakistan known as F.Sc equivalent to British system A-Level.
List of Technical colleges in Pakistan.

Govt College of Technology Rawalakot Azad Kashmir(Information & Communication Technology Department)
Hassani College Of Technology. Block-18, New Samnabad, F.B Area, Karachi.
Zubaida Polytechnic Institute Of Technology. Nazimabad No.7, Karachi.
Muhammad Shafi Institute Of Technology. Plot No.C-56, Block-B, Urdu Bazar Road, Sher Shah, Karachi.
Aligarh Institute Of Technology. University Road, Near Bhatthi Park, Gulshan-E- Iqbal, Karachi.
Y.M.C.A Polytechnic Institute. Near Governor House, Karachi.
St.Patrick’s Polytechnic Institute. Ahmed Munir S.J Shaheed Road, Saddar Karachi.
Institute Of Textile Technology & Management. H-18, Near S.I.T.E Stadium Karachi.
Metallurgical Training Centre Pakistan Steel. Bin Qasim, Karachi.
Pakistan Navy Polytechnic Institute (PNPI), Karachi.
Suparco (SITT). Hub River Road, Karachi.
Aska Institute Of Technology. Guddu, Sindh.
Karachi Institute Of Management & Technology. F-100/A, Block F, North Nazimabad, Karachi.
Al-Ghouse Institute Of Computer Science. 3-C-1, Sector 15-A, Fouji Hotel, Orangi Town, Karachi.
Shipyard Institute Of Technology (SIT). Karachi Shipyard Engg. Works Ltd. West Wharf, Dockyard Road, Karachi.
Pak Swiss Training Centre (PCSIR). Off: Country Club Road, Near Karachi University, Karachi.
Muhammad Safiullah Institute Of Technology. B-167, Block-2, Gulshan-E-Iqbal, Karachi.
Al-Muhaimin Institute Of Science & Technology Plot No.6, Phase-II, Khuda Ki Basti No.3, Taiser Town, Scheme-45, Karachi.
SMA Rizvi Textile Institute Plot No: 231, Sector 23, Road, 10,000 Korangi Induatrial Area Karachi.
Pakistan Polytechnic College Nazimabad No.1, Karachi.
Azeem Technical Institute F-53, S.I.T.E, Hub River Road, Karachi.
Govt. College Of Technology, S.I.T.E., Karachi.
Govt. College Of Technology, Wahdat Colonyt, Hyderabad
Govt. College Of Technology Khairpur.
Govt. Polytechnic Institute (Women) Latifabad, Hyderabad.
Govt. Polytechnic Institute Dadu.
Govt. Monotechnic Institute Asu Goth, Malir, Karachi.
Govt. Monotechnic Institute Sector 51-A, Korangi Karach.
Govt. Monotechnic Institute 7-C, Orangi Town, Karachi.
Govt. Monotechnic Institute Faiz Gang, Distt: Khairpur.
Govt. Monotechnic Institute Tando Adam.
Govt. Monotechnic Institute Memon Goth, Malir.
Govt. Monotechnic Institute F.B Area, Block-10, Karachi.
Govt. Monotechnic Institute Urdu Nagar, Malir.
Govt. Polytechnic Institute Mirpurkhas.
Govt. Monotechnic Institute Khipro.
Govt. Monotechnic Institute Noushehro Feroze.
Govt. Polytechnic Institute Mithi.
Govt. Habib College of Technology Nawabshah.
Govt. Jamia Millia Institute of Technology Malir, Karachi.
Govt. Monotechnic Institute Badin.
Govt. Monotechnic Institute Landhi No. 3, Near Babar Market, Karachi.
Govt. Polytechnic Institute For Women FC Area, Karimabad, Karachi.
Govt. Monotechnic Institute Lyari, Karachi.
Govt. Monotechnic Institute For Women Lyari, Karachi.
Govt. Monotechnic Institute Baldia Town, Karachi.
Govt. Monotechnic Institute Orangi Town No. 11/1/2, Karachi.
Govt. Monotechnic Institute Daharki.
Govt. Monotechnic Institute Tando Allahyar.
Govt. Monotechnic Institute Singoo Lane, Lyari, Karachi.
Govt. Monotechnic Institute Mehar.
Jinnah Polytechnic Institute. Near Board Of Secondary Education, Karachi.
Govt. College of Technology, Raiwand Road, II Campus, Lahore.
Govt. College of Technology, Railway Road, I Campus, Lahore

Philippines[edit]

Mapúa University, the premier engineering school of the Philippines. Being an internationally accredited engineering school, the Institute consistently tops various board exams for engineering students in the Philippines.
Technological Institute of the Philippines, a premier engineering school with an international accreditation.
Bicol University, Center in teaching excellence, offers IT Courses and a well known university.
Cebu Institute of Technology – University, a premier engineering school located in Cebu City, Philippines in the Visayas region. The University is known to have high selectivity in admissions as well as excellence in engineering research and education.
Cebu Technological University
Far Eastern University - East Asia College, an engineering school operating under the Far Eastern University system.
Mindanao State University - Iligan Institute of Technology, the premier state university in the southern Philippines, and the science and technology flagship campus of the Mindanao State University System (the second biggest university system in the Philippines next to the University of the Philippines).
Polytechnic University of the Philippines, a state university in the Philippines that consistently tops various board exams for engineering students in the Philippines, also referred to as the National Comprehensive University of the Philippines.
Quezon City Polytechnic University, a Local University, this university is well known in Engineering, IT and Technical Education.
Rizal Technological University, the only university that offers degree courses in astronomy.
Technological University of the Philippines, The premier state university of technology education in the Philippines.

Poland[edit]
Politechnika (translated as a "technical university" or "university of technology") is a main kind of technical university name in Poland. There are some biggest Polytechnic in Poland:

Politechnika Śląska
Politechnika Wrocławska
Politechnika Warszawska
Politechnika Poznańska
Politechnika Krakowska
Politechnika Gdańska
Politechnika Łódzka
Politechnika Białostocka
Politechnika Lubelska

Other polytechnical universities:

Akademia Górniczo-Hutnicza
Uniwersytet Technologiczno-Przyrodniczy w Bydgoszczy
Zachodniopomorski Uniwersytet Technologiczny

Portugal[edit]
Main article: Polytechnic (Portugal)
The designation "Institute of Technology" is not applied at all, being meaningless in Portugal. However, there are a number of non-university higher educational institutions which are called polytechnic institutes since the 1970s. Some of these institutions existed since the 19th century with different designations (industrial and commercial institutes, agricultural managers, elementary teachers and nurses schools, etc.). In theory, the polytechnics higher education system is aimed to provide a more practical training and be profession-oriented, while the university higher education system is aimed to have a stronger theoretical basis and be highly research-oriented. The polytechnics are also oriented to provide shorter length studies aimed to respond to local needs. The Portuguese polytechnics can then be compared to the US community colleges.
Since the implementation of Bologna Process in Portugal in 2007, the polytechnics offer the 1st cycle (licentiate degree) and 2nd cycle (master's degree) of higher studies. Until 1998, the polytechnics only awarded bachelor (Portuguese: bacharelato) degrees (three-year short-cycle degrees) and were not authorized to award higher degrees. They however granted post-bachelor diplomas in specialized higher studies (DESE, diploma de estudos superiores especializados), that could be obtained after the conclusion of a two-year second cycle of studies and were academical equivalent to the university's licentiate degrees (licenciatura). After 1998, they started to be allowed to confer their own licentiate degrees, which replaced the DESE diplomas.
Romania[edit]
See also: Education in Romania

Politehnica University of Bucharest, 1864
Polytechnic University of Timișoara, 1920
Gheorghe Asachi Technical University of Iași, 1937
Technical University of Cluj-Napoca, 1948
Technical University of Civil Engineering of Bucharest, 1948
Oil & Gas University of Ploieşti, 1948
Technical Military Academy of Bucharest, 1949

Russia[edit]
See also: List of institutions of higher learning in Russia

Bauman Moscow State Technical University
Saint Petersburg Polytechnical University
Novosibirsk State Technical University
Tomsk Polytechnic University

Singapore[edit]
See also: Education in Singapore
The Polytechnics in Singapore do not offer bachelors, masters or PhD degrees. However, the Polytechnics in Singapore offers three-year diploma courses in fields such as information technology, engineering subjects and other vocational fields, like psychology and nursing. The Polytechnic diploma certification in Singapore is equivalent to a junior college in the UK or a community college in the United States. There are 5 polytechnics in Singapore. They are namely: Singapore Polytechnic, Ngee Ann Polytechnic, Temasek Polytechnic, Nanyang Polytechnic and Republic Polytechnic.
A Polytechnic diploma in Singapore is known to be parallel and sometimes equivalent to the first years at a bachelor's degree-granting institution, thus, Polytechnic graduates in Singapore have the privilege of being granted transfer credits or module exemptions when they apply to local and overseas universities, depending on the university's policies on transfer credits.
The only university in Singapore with the term "institute of technology", most notably the Singapore Institute of Technology were developed in 2009 as an option for Polytechnic Diploma graduates who desire to pursue a bachelor's degree. Other technological university in Singapore includes the Nanyang Technological University (1981) and the Singapore University of Technology and Design (2009).
Slovakia[edit]

Slovak University of Technology in Bratislava

The world's first institution of technology or technical university with tertiary technical education is the Banská Akadémia in Banská Štiavnica, Slovakia,[17] founded in 1735, Academy since December 13, 1762 established by queen Maria Theresa in order to train specialists of silver and gold mining and metallurgy in neighbourhood. Teaching started in 1764. Later the department of Mathematics, Mechanics and Hydraulics and department of Forestry were settled. University buildings are still at their place today and are used for teaching. University has launched the first book of electrotechnics in the world.

Technical University of Košice
University of Žilina
Technical University in Zvolen
Trenčín University in Trenčín
Dubnica Technology Institute

South Africa[edit]
See also: List of universities in South Africa




Cape Peninsula University of Technology






Tshwane University of Technology


South Africa has completed a process of transforming its "higher education landscape". Historically a division has existed in South Africa between Universities and Technikons (polytechnics) as well between institutions servicing particular racial and language groupings. In 1993 Technikons were afforded the power to award certain technology degrees. Beginning in 2004 former Technikons have either been merged with traditional Universities to form Comprehensive Universities or have become Universities of Technology, however the Universities of Technology have not to date acquired all of the traditional rights and privileges of a University (such as the ability to confer a wide range of degrees).[28]
Sri Lanka[edit]




University of Vocational Technology Sri Lanka



University of Moratuwa
University of Vocational Technology
Sri Lanka Institute of Information Technology
Technical College

Switzerland[edit]

Eidgenössische Technische Hochschule Zürich (ETH Zurich)
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL)

Thailand[edit]
See also: Education in Thailand
Most of Thailand's institutes of technology were developed from technical colleges, in the past could not grant bachelor's degrees; today, however, they are university level institutions, some of which can grant degrees to the doctoral level. Examples are Pathumwan Institute of Technology (developed from Pathumwan Technical School), King Mongkut's Institute of Technology Ladkrabang (Nondhaburi Telecommunications Training Centre), and King Mongkut's Institute of Technology North Bangkok (Thai-German Technical School).
There are two former institutes of technology, which already changed their name to "University of Technology": Rajamangala University of Technology (formerly Institute of Technology and Vocational Education) and King Mongkut's University of Technology Thonburi (Thonburi Technology Institute).
Institutes of technology with different origins are Asian Institute of Technology, which developed from SEATO Graduate School of Engineering, and Sirindhorn International Institute of Technology, an engineering school of Thammasat University. Suranaree University of Technology is the only government-owned technological university in Thailand that was established (1989) as such; while Mahanakorn University of Technology is the most well known private technological institute. Technology/Technical colleges in Thailand is associated with bitter rivalries which erupts into frequent off-campus brawls and assassinations of students in public locations that has been going on for nearly a decade, with innocent bystanders also commonly among the injured[29] and the military under martial law still unable to stop them from occurring.[30]
Turkey[edit]
See also: Education in Turkey
In Turkey and the Ottoman Empire, the oldest technical university is Istanbul Technical University. Its graduates contributed to a wide variety of activities in scientific research and development. In 1950s, 2 technical universities were opened in Ankara and Trabzon. In recent years, Yildiz University is reorganized as Yildiz Technical University and 2 institutes of technology were founded in Kocaeli and Izmir. In 2010, another technical university named Bursa Technical University was founded in Bursa. Moreover, a sixth technical university is about to be opened in Konya named Konya Technical University.

List of Technical Universities in Turkey

Name
City
Foundation
Students
Notes


Istanbul Technical University (ITU)
Istanbul
1773
21000
Ranked 108th in THES QS University ranking in the field of technology


Yıldız Technical University (YTU)
Istanbul
1911
21000



Karadeniz Technical University (KTU)
Trabzon
1955

First technical university in Turkey outside Istanbul


Middle East Technical University (ODTU)
Ankara
1956
23000
ODTU is the best university in Middle East. Ranked 100 in Times Higher Education.


Gebze Institute of Technology (GYTE)
Kocaeli
1992




İzmir Institute of Technology (IYTE)
Izmir
1992




Bursa Technical University (BTU)
Bursa
2010




Erzurum Technical University (ETU)
Erzurum
2010




Adana Science and Technology University (ABTU)
Adana
2011











Istanbul Technical University Suleyman Demirel Cultural Center, Istanbul.









Yıldız Technical University, located in Beşiktaş district of Istanbul.









Statue of Tree of Science by the main entrance to Middle East Technical University campus in Ankara.









A-1 Building, İzmir Institute of Technology Teknopark, Izmir.









Entrance of mechanical engineering department, Karadeniz Technical University, located in Trabzon.




Ukraine[edit]

Donbas State Technical University
Donetsk National Technical University
Kyiv Polytechnic Institute
Kharkiv Polytechnic Institute
Lviv Polytechnic

United Kingdom[edit]
Main article: Polytechnic (United Kingdom)
Polytechnics were tertiary education teaching institutions in England, Wales and Northern Ireland. Since 1965 UK Polytechnics operated under the binary system of education along with universities. Polytechnics offered diplomas and degrees (bachelor's, master's, PhD) validated at the national level by the UK Council for National Academic Awards CNAA. They particularly excelled in engineering and applied science degree courses and other STEM subjects similar to technological universities in the USA and continental Europe. The comparable institutions in Scotland were collectively referred to as Central Institutions. Britain's first Polytechnic, the Royal Polytechnic Institution later known as the Polytechnic of Central London (now the University of Westminster) was established in 1838 at Regent Street in London and its goal was to educate and popularize engineering and scientific knowledge and inventions in Victorian Britain "at little expense." The London Polytechnic led a mass movement to create numerous Polytechnic institutes across the UK in the late 19th Century. Most Polytechnic institutes were established at the centre of major metropolitan cities and their focus was on engineering, applied science and technology education.
In 1956, some colleges of technology received the designation College of Advanced Technology. They became universities in the 1960s meaning they could award their own degrees. The designation "Institute of Technology" was occasionally used by polytechnics (Bolton), Central Institutions (Dundee, Robert Gordon's), and postgraduate universities, (Cranfield and Wessex), most of which later adopted the designation University, and there were two "Institutes of Science and Technology": UMIST and UWIST, part of the University of Wales. Loughborough University was called Loughborough University of Technology from 1966 to 1996, the only institution in the UK to have had such a designation.
Polytechnics were granted university status under the Further and Higher Education Act 1992. This meant that Polytechnics could confer degrees without the oversight of the national CNAA organization. These institutions are sometimes referred to as post-1992 universities.
Institutions called "technical institutes" or "technical schools" that were formed in the early 20th century provided further education between high school and University or Polytechnic. Most technical institutes have been merged into regional colleges and some have been designated university colleges if they are associated with a local university.
In 2016 the UK government announced plans to establish new "institutes of technology" in England as part of its reforms to Post-16 skills provision "to provide technical education in STEM subjects at levels 3, 4 and 5. Each IoT is likely to build on infrastructure that already exists but will have its own independent identity, governance arrangements which directly involve employers, and national branding".[31]
United States[edit]
Main article: Institute of Technology (United States)




Students from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology


Polytechnic institutes are technological universities, many dating back to the mid-19th century. A handful of world-renowned elite American universities include the phrases "Institute of Technology", "Polytechnic Institute", "Polytechnic University", or similar phrasing in their names; these are generally research-intensive universities with a focus on engineering, science and technology. The earliest and most famous of these institutions are, respectively, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute (RPI, 1824), Rochester Institute of Technology (RIT, 1829), New York University Tandon School of Engineering (1854), Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT, 1861), Stevens Institute of Technology (1870), and Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University (1872). Conversely, schools dubbed "technical colleges" or "technical institutes" generally provide post-secondary training in technical and mechanical fields, focusing on training vocational skills primarily at a community college level, parallel and sometimes equivalent to the first two years at a bachelor's degree-granting institution.
Venezuela[edit]
Institutes of technology in Venezuela were developed in the 1950s as an option for post-secondary education in technical and scientific courses, after the polytechnic French concepts. At that time, technical education was considered essential for the development of a sound middle class economy.
Nowadays, most of the Institutos de Tecnología are privately run businesses, with varying degrees of quality.
Most of these institutes award diplomas after three or three and a half years of education. The institute of technology implementation (IUT, from Instituto universitario de tecnologia in Spanish) began with the creation of the first IUT at Caracas, the capital city of Venezuela, called IUT. Dr. Federico Rivero Palacio adopted the French "Institut Universitaire de Technologie"s system, using French personnel and study system based on three-year periods, with research and engineering facilities at the same level as the main national universities to obtain French equivalent degrees. This IUT is the first and only one in Venezuela having French equivalent degrees accepted, implementing this system and observing the high-level degrees some other IUTs were created in Venezuela, regardless of this the term IUT was not used appropriately resulting in some institutions with mediocre quality and no equivalent degree in France. Later, some private institutions sprang up using IUT in their names, but they are not regulated by the original French system and award lower quality degrees.
Vietnam[edit]

Da Nang University of Technology
Hanoi University of Science and Technology
Ho Chi Minh City University of Technology
Le Quy Don Technical University
FPT University

See also[edit]

Engineer's degree
List of forestry universities and colleges
List of institutions using the term "institute of technology" or "polytechnic"
List of schools of mines
Secondary Technical School
University of Science and Technology

References[edit]


^ "Online Etymology Dictionary". etymonline.com. 
^ "Misckolc and the University". Miskolci Egyetem (University of Miskolci). Retrieved 29 October 2017. [not in citation given]
^ Evaluation Group for the Delegation of Authority to Make Awards (June 2005), Report of the Delegated Authority Evaluation Group on the Cork Institute of Technology (PDF), Higher Education and Training Awards Council, archived from the original (PDF) on September 12, 2008 
^ Heita, Desie (14 January 2005). "Status of Polytechnic still pending". Namibia Economist. Archived from the original on 28 September 2011. 
^ "Name change on the cards for APU". Anglia Ruskin University, United Kingdom. 2006. Retrieved 15 June 2006. [permanent dead link]
^ Morley, Louise (2001). "Producing New Workers: quality, equality and employability in higher education" (PDF). Quality in Higher Education. 7 (2). Archived from the original (PDF) on January 12, 2006. Retrieved 15 June 2006. 
^ Bruwer, Johan (November 1998), First destination graduate employment as key performance indicator: outcomes assessment perspectives (PDF), Unit for Institutional Planning and Research, Cape Technikon, South Africa, archived from the original (PDF) on August 21, 2006, retrieved 15 June 2006 
^ Mentz, J.; Kotzé, P.; Van der Merwe, A. (December 2008). "Searching for the Technology in University of Technology". South African Computer Journal. 42: 29–37. 
^ Kylie Adoranti, Herald Sun, 3 October 2014 Northern Melbourne Institute of TAFE to be rebranded as Melbourne Polytechnic, Retrieved 2 December 2014
^ Mokka Medienagentur GmbH. "Bundesministerium für Wissenschaft und Forschung: Fachhochschulen". Bmwf.gv.at. Archived from the original on January 19, 2014. Retrieved 2014-01-28. 
^ "Instituto Geofísico - EPN - Home". igepn.edu.ec. 
^ https://www.youtube.com/user/institutogeofisico YouTube Channel for the Geophysics Institute at EPN
^ "NASA Creating a Virtual Telescope with Two Small Spacecraft". NASA. 
^ Super Usuario. "HOME". 
^ "Startseite - Statistisches Bundesamt (Destatis)". destatis.de. 
^ Historický časopis, 50, 3, 2002, pp. 483–494, Bratislava.
^ a b "Mining maps and plans of the Main Chamber - Count Office in Banská Štiavnica" (PDF). UNESCO. Retrieved 2014-01-28. 
^ Academica Montanistica "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 2013-08-02. Retrieved 2014-01-28. 
^ KAMENICKÝ, M.: Samuel Mikovini and Mining Academy in Banská Štiavnica.
^ "Miskolc and the University" (in Hungarian). Oldwww.uni-miskolc.hu. 1949-09-18. Archived from the original on 2012-03-01. Retrieved 2014-01-28. 
^ History of University of Miskolc "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 2012-03-01. Retrieved 2014-01-28. 
^ "SEFI and IGIP Joint Annual Conference". Sefi-igip2007.com. Archived from the original on December 7, 2013. Retrieved 2014-01-28. 
^ Somosi Viktor. "k.k. Bergschule" (in Hungarian). Uni-miskolc.hu. Retrieved 2014-01-28. 
^ Somosi Viktor. "k.k. Bergakademie" (in Hungarian). Oldwww.uni-miskolc.hu. Archived from the original on 2013-08-02. Retrieved 2014-01-28. 
^ "Brief History – Budapest University of Technology and Economics". Retrieved 2016-09-27. 
^ http://www.ioti.ie/ Institutes of Technology Ireland
^ "TECNICO - Dizionario Italiano online Hoepli - Parola, significato e traduzione". http://dizionari.hoepli.it/.  External link in |work= (help)
^ Mentz, J., Kotzé, P., Van der Merwe, A. (2008). Searching for the Technology in University of Technology. South African Computer Journal, Vol 42, December 2008, pp. 29–37, looks at the role of Universities of Technologies after these mergers.
^ "Schools will face action over student brawls". The Nation. 19 August 2011. Archived from the original on 17 December 2014. 
^ Tech students' brawl shuts concert | Bangkok Post: news
^ https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/536068/56259_Cm_9280_print.pdf


External links[edit]

 Fitch, Joshua Girling; Garnett, William (1911). "Polytechnic". Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). 







v
t
e


School types



By educational stage




Early childhood



Preschool
Pre-kindergarten
Kindergarten





Primary



Elementary school
First school
Infant school
Junior school
Primary school





Secondary



Adult high school
Comprehensive school
Grammar school
Gymnasium
High school
Lyceum
Middle school
Secondary school
Sixth form college
Studio school
University-preparatory school
University technical college
Upper school





Tertiary







Continuing education
Further education
Professional school
Vocational school





Higher



Academy
College
Community college
Graduate school
Institute of technology
Junior college
University
Upper division college
Vocational university
Seminary











By funding / eligibility



Academy (England)
Charter school
Comprehensive school
For-profit education
Free education
Free school (England)
Independent school
UK Independent school

preparatory
public


Private school
Selective school
Separate school
State or public school
State-integrated school (New Zealand)





By style of education



Adult education
Alternative school
Boarding school
Day school
Folk high school
Free skool
Homeschool
International school
K-12
Madrasa
Magnet school
Montessori school
One-room schools
Parochial school
Ranch school
Sink school
Virtual school
Vocal school
Yeshiva





By scope



College preparatory
Compulsory education
Democratic education
Gifted education
Remedial education
Vocational education





Historical







Ancient higher-learning institutions

Platonic Academy
Lyceum


Monastic schools
Cathedral schools
Medieval universities






Schools imposed on
indigenous peoples




in Canada
in New Zealand
in the United States
in South Africa





Informal or illegal



in Ireland
in Greece
in South Tyrol











 Category
 Commons









Authority control



GND: 4132417-1











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Institute_of_technology&oldid=816897836"					Categories: Institutes of technologyHidden categories: All articles with failed verificationArticles with failed verification from October 2017All articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from December 2017Articles with permanently dead external linksCS1 Hungarian-language sources (hu)CS1 errors: external linksArticles needing additional references from May 2014All articles needing additional referencesArticles with peacock terms from May 2014All articles with peacock termsArticles with multiple maintenance issuesAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from January 2013Articles containing Japanese-language textArticles containing Portuguese-language textWikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource referenceWikipedia articles with GND identifiers