For similarly named institutes in other countries, see Instituto Nacional de Estadística (disambiguation).






This article does not cite any sources. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (August 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)




National Institute of Statistics

Instituto Nacional de Estadística





Agency overview


Formed
3 November 1856


Preceding agencies



Junta de Estadística
Instituto Geográfico y Estadístico





Jurisdiction
Government of Spain


Headquarters
Paseo de la Castellana, 183
Madrid


Agency executive



Jaume García Villar, President





Website
www.ine.es






INE headquarters, Madrid.


The National Institute of Statistics (Spanish: Instituto Nacional de Estadística, INE) is the official organisation in Spain that collects statistics about demography, economy, and Spanish society. It is an autonomous organization in Spain responsible for overall coordination of statistical services of the General State Administration in monitoring, control and supervision of technical procedures. Every 10 years, this organisation conducts a national census. The last census took place in 2011.
Through the official website you can follow all the updates of different fields of study.
National Institute of Statistics[edit]
The National Institute of Statistics was created following the Law of December 31, 1945, published in the BOE of January 3, 1946, with a mission to develop and refine the demographic, economic and social statistics already existing, creating new statistics and coordination with the statistical offices of provincial and municipal areas.
At the end of 1964 the first computer was installed at the INE. It was a first-generation IBM 1401, for which a team was formed consisting of four statistics faculty and ten technicians. In the four years following it was possible that said computer would operate at its full capacity.
References[edit]

External links[edit]

INE Website







v
t
e


Departments and agencies of the Government of Spain



Cabinet



President of the Government of Spain
Vice President of the Government of Spain


Ministry of the Presidency
Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Cooperation
Ministry of Justice
Ministry of Defence
Ministry of the Treasury and Public Function
Ministry of Economy, Industry and Competitiveness
Ministry of the Interior
Ministry of Public Works
Ministry of Education, Culture and Sport
Ministry of Agriculture, Food and Environment
Ministry of Health
Ministry of Employment and Social Security
Ministry of Energy, Tourism and Digital Agenda
Spokesperson of the Government of Spain





Agencies



Bank of Spain
Centro Nacional de Inteligencia
Spanish National Research Council (CSIC)
Instituto Nacional de Estadística
National Securities Market Commission
National Transplant Organization
Meteorological Office
Agencia Española de Protección de Datos
Agencia Española de Cooperación Internacional para el Desarrollo
Agencia Tributaria
Agencia Nacional de la Evaluación de la Calidad y Acreditación
Boletín Oficial del Estado
Agencia Estatal de Seguridad Ferroviaria
Spanish Aviation Safety and Security Agency
Agencia Estatal de Evaluación de las Políticas Públicas y la Calidad de los Servicios
Agencia Estatal de Investigación
Spanish Anti-Doping Agency
Intelligence Center for Counter-Terrorism and Organized Crime
Department of Homeland Security









Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 152436926
LCCN: n79054104
ISNI: 0000 0001 2254 4402
SUDOC: 027982920
BNF: cb119909993 (data)
NLA: 36542964
BNE: XX253893
CiNii: DA03349178











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Instituto_Nacional_de_Estadística_(Spain)&oldid=794996815"					Categories: Demographics of SpainGovernment of SpainScientific organisations based in SpainNational statistical servicesSpanish government agenciesHidden categories: Articles lacking sources from August 2017All articles lacking sourcesArticles containing Spanish-language textWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersWikipedia articles with NLA identifiers