See also: Notable Current and Former IMF Employees
"IMF" redirects here. For other uses, see IMF (disambiguation).

International Monetary Fund


Coat of arms



Abbreviation
IMF


Formation
27 December 1945 (72 years ago) (1945-12-27)


Type
International financial institution


Purpose
Promote international monetary co-operation, facilitate international trade, foster sustainable economic growth, make resources available to members experiencing balance of payments difficulties[1]


Headquarters
Washington, D.C., United States


Coordinates
38°53′56.42″N 77°2′39.21″W﻿ / ﻿38.8990056°N 77.0442250°W﻿ / 38.8990056; -77.0442250Coordinates: 38°53′56.42″N 77°2′39.21″W﻿ / ﻿38.8990056°N 77.0442250°W﻿ / 38.8990056; -77.0442250



Region

Worldwide



Membership

189 countries



Official language

English[2]



Managing Director

Christine Lagarde



Main organ

Board of governors



Parent organization

United Nations[3][4]



Staff

2,700[1]


Website
imf.org


The International Monetary Fund (IMF) is an international organization headquartered in Washington, D.C., of "189 countries working to foster global monetary cooperation, secure financial stability, facilitate international trade, promote high employment and sustainable economic growth, and reduce poverty around the world."[1] Formed in 1945 at the Bretton Woods Conference primarily by the ideas of Harry Dexter White and John Maynard Keynes,[5] it came into formal existence in 1945 with 29 member countries and the goal of reconstructing the international payment system. It now plays a central role in the management of balance of payments difficulties and international financial crises.[6] Countries contribute funds to a pool through a quota system from which countries experiencing balance of payments problems can borrow money. As of 2016[update], the fund had SDR477 billion (about $668 billion).[7]
Through the fund, and other activities such as the gathering of statistics and analysis, surveillance of its members' economies and the demand for particular policies,[8] the IMF works to improve the economies of its member countries.[9] The organisation's objectives stated in the Articles of Agreement are:[10] to promote international monetary co-operation, international trade, high employment, exchange-rate stability, sustainable economic growth, and making resources available to member countries in financial difficulty.[11]



Contents


1 Functions

1.1 Surveillance of the global economy
1.2 Conditionality of loans

1.2.1 Structural adjustment
1.2.2 Benefits




2 History

2.1 Since 2000


3 Member countries

3.1 Qualifications
3.2 Benefits


4 Leadership

4.1 Board of Governors
4.2 Executive Board
4.3 Managing Director

4.3.1 List of Managing Directors




5 Voting power

5.1 Effects of the quota system
5.2 Inflexibility of voting power
5.3 Overcoming borrower/creditor divide


6 Use

6.1 Exceptional Access Framework – sovereign debt


7 IMF and globalization
8 Criticisms

8.1 Conditionality
8.2 Reform

8.2.1 Function and policies
8.2.2 US influence and voting reform


8.3 Support of dictatorships
8.4 Impact on access to food
8.5 Impact on public health
8.6 Impact on environment


9 Scandals
10 Alternatives
11 In the media
12 See also
13 Notes and references
14 Further reading
15 External links



Functions[edit]
According to the IMF itself, it works to foster global growth and economic stability by providing policy, advice and financing the members, by working with developing nations to help them achieve macroeconomic stability and reduce poverty.[12] The rationale for this is that private international capital markets function imperfectly and many countries have limited access to financial markets. Such market imperfections, together with balance-of-payments financing, provide the justification for official financing, without which many countries could only correct large external payment imbalances through measures with adverse economic consequences.[13] The IMF provides alternate sources of financing.
Upon the founding of the IMF, its three primary functions were: to oversee the fixed exchange rate arrangements between countries,[14] thus helping national governments manage their exchange rates and allowing these governments to prioritise economic growth,[15] and to provide short-term capital to aid the balance of payments.[14] This assistance was meant to prevent the spread of international economic crises. The IMF was also intended to help mend the pieces of the international economy after the Great Depression and World War II.[15] As well, to provide capital investments for economic growth and projects such as infrastructure.
The IMF's role was fundamentally altered by the floating exchange rates post-1971. It shifted to examining the economic policies of countries with IMF loan agreements to determine if a shortage of capital was due to economic fluctuations or economic policy. The IMF also researched what types of government policy would ensure economic recovery.[16] A particular concern of the IMF was to prevent financial crisis, such as those in Mexico 1982, Brazil in 1987, East Asia in 1997–98 and Russia in 1998, from spreading and threatening the entire global financial and currency system. The challenge was to promote and implement policy that reduced the frequency of crises among the emerging market countries, especially the middle-income countries which are vulnerable to massive capital outflows.[17] Rather than maintaining a position of oversight of only exchange rates, their function became one of surveillance of the overall macroeconomic performance of member countries. Their role became a lot more active because the IMF now manages economic policy rather than just exchange rates.
In addition, the IMF negotiates conditions on lending and loans under their policy of conditionality,[14] which was established in the 1950s.[15] Low-income countries can borrow on concessional terms, which means there is a period of time with no interest rates, through the Extended Credit Facility (ECF), the Standby Credit Facility (SCF) and the Rapid Credit Facility (RCF). Nonconcessional loans, which include interest rates, are provided mainly through Stand-By Arrangements (SBA), the Flexible Credit Line (FCL), the Precautionary and Liquidity Line (PLL), and the Extended Fund Facility. The IMF provides emergency assistance via the Rapid Financing Instrument (RFI) to members facing urgent balance-of-payments needs.[18]
Surveillance of the global economy[edit]
The IMF is mandated to oversee the international monetary and financial system and monitor the economic and financial policies of its member countries.[19] This activity is known as surveillance and facilitates international co-operation.[20] Since the demise of the Bretton Woods system of fixed exchange rates in the early 1970s, surveillance has evolved largely by way of changes in procedures rather than through the adoption of new obligations.[19] The responsibilities changed from those of guardian to those of overseer of members’ policies.
The Fund typically analyses the appropriateness of each member country’s economic and financial policies for achieving orderly economic growth, and assesses the consequences of these policies for other countries and for the global economy.[19]




IMF Data Dissemination Systems participants:
  IMF member using SDDS
  IMF member using GDDS
  IMF member, not using any of the DDSystems
  non-IMF entity using SDDS
  non-IMF entity using GDDS
  no interaction with the IMF



In 1995 the International Monetary Fund began work on data dissemination standards with the view of guiding IMF member countries to disseminate their economic and financial data to the public. The International Monetary and Financial Committee (IMFC) endorsed the guidelines for the dissemination standards and they were split into two tiers: The General Data Dissemination System (GDDS) and the Special Data Dissemination Standard (SDDS).
The executive board approved the SDDS and GDDS in 1996 and 1997 respectively, and subsequent amendments were published in a revised Guide to the General Data Dissemination System. The system is aimed primarily at statisticians and aims to improve many aspects of statistical systems in a country. It is also part of the World Bank Millennium Development Goals and Poverty Reduction Strategic Papers.
The primary objective of the GDDS is to encourage member countries to build a framework to improve data quality and statistical capacity building to evaluate statistical needs, set priorities in improving the timeliness, transparency, reliability and accessibility of financial and economic data. Some countries initially used the GDDS, but later upgraded to SDDS.
Some entities that are not themselves IMF members also contribute statistical data to the systems:

Palestinian Authority – GDDS
Hong Kong – SDDS
Macau – GDDS[21]
EU institutions:

the European Central Bank for the Eurozone – SDDS
Eurostat for the whole EU – SDDS, thus providing data from Cyprus (not using any DDSystem on its own) and Malta (using only GDDS on its own)



Conditionality of loans[edit]
IMF conditionality is a set of policies or conditions that the IMF requires in exchange for financial resources.[14] The IMF does require collateral from countries for loans but also requires the government seeking assistance to correct its macroeconomic imbalances in the form of policy reform.[22] If the conditions are not met, the funds are withheld.[14][23] The concept of conditionality was introduced in a 1952 Executive Board decision and later incorporated into the Articles of Agreement.
Conditionality is associated with economic theory as well as an enforcement mechanism for repayment. Stemming primarily from the work of Jacques Polak, the theoretical underpinning of conditionality was the "monetary approach to the balance of payments".[15]
Structural adjustment[edit]
Further information: Structural adjustment
Some of the conditions for structural adjustment can include:

Cutting expenditures, also known as austerity.
Focusing economic output on direct export and resource extraction,
Devaluation of currencies,
Trade liberalisation, or lifting import and export restrictions,
Increasing the stability of investment (by supplementing foreign direct investment with the opening of domestic stock markets),
Balancing budgets and not overspending,
Removing price controls and state subsidies,
Privatization, or divestiture of all or part of state-owned enterprises,
Enhancing the rights of foreign investors vis-a-vis national laws,
Improving governance and fighting corruption.

These conditions are known as the Washington Consensus.
Benefits[edit]
These loan conditions ensure that the borrowing country will be able to repay the IMF and that the country will not attempt to solve their balance-of-payment problems in a way that would negatively impact the international economy.[24][25] The incentive problem of moral hazard—when economic agents maximise their own utility to the detriment of others because they do not bear the full consequences of their actions—is mitigated through conditions rather than providing collateral; countries in need of IMF loans do not generally possess internationally valuable collateral anyway.[25]
Conditionality also reassures the IMF that the funds lent to them will be used for the purposes defined by the Articles of Agreement and provides safeguards that country will be able to rectify its macroeconomic and structural imbalances.[25] In the judgment of the IMF, the adoption by the member of certain corrective measures or policies will allow it to repay the IMF, thereby ensuring that the resources will be available to support other members.[23]
As of 2004[update], borrowing countries have had a very good track record for repaying credit extended under the IMF's regular lending facilities with full interest over the duration of the loan. This indicates that IMF lending does not impose a burden on creditor countries, as lending countries receive market-rate interest on most of their quota subscription, plus any of their own-currency subscriptions that are loaned out by the IMF, plus all of the reserve assets that they provide the IMF.[13]
History[edit]




IMF "Headquarters 1" in Washington, D.C.


The IMF was originally laid out as a part of the Bretton Woods system exchange agreement in 1944.[26] During the Great Depression, countries sharply raised barriers to trade in an attempt to improve their failing economies. This led to the devaluation of national currencies and a decline in world trade.[27]




The Gold Room within the Mount Washington Hotel where the Bretton Woods Conference attendees signed the agreements creating the IMF and World Bank


This breakdown in international monetary co-operation created a need for oversight. The representatives of 45 governments met at the Bretton Woods Conference in the Mount Washington Hotel in Bretton Woods, New Hampshire, in the United States, to discuss a framework for postwar international economic co-operation and how to rebuild Europe.
There were two views on the role the IMF should assume as a global economic institution. American delegate Harry Dexter White foresaw an IMF that functioned more like a bank, making sure that borrowing states could repay their debts on time.[28] Most of White's plan was incorporated into the final acts adopted at Bretton Woods. British economist John Maynard Keynes imagined that the IMF would be a cooperative fund upon which member states could draw to maintain economic activity and employment through periodic crises. This view suggested an IMF that helped governments and to act as the United States government had during the New Deal in response to World War II.




First page of the Articles of Agreement of the International Monetary Fund, 1 March 1946. Finnish Ministry of Foreign Affairs archives


The IMF formally came into existence on 27 December 1945, when the first 29 countries ratified its Articles of Agreement.[29] By the end of 1946 the IMF had grown to 39 members.[30] On 1 March 1947, the IMF began its financial operations,[31] and on 8 May France became the first country to borrow from it.[30]




Plaque Commemorating the Formation of the IMF in July 1944 at the Bretton Woods Conference


The IMF was one of the key organisations of the international economic system; its design allowed the system to balance the rebuilding of international capitalism with the maximisation of national economic sovereignty and human welfare, also known as embedded liberalism.[15] The IMF's influence in the global economy steadily increased as it accumulated more members. The increase reflected in particular the attainment of political independence by many African countries and more recently the 1991 dissolution of the Soviet Union because most countries in the Soviet sphere of influence did not join the IMF.[27]
The Bretton Woods system prevailed until 1971, when the United States government suspended the convertibility of the US$ (and dollar reserves held by other governments) into gold. This is known as the Nixon Shock.[27] The changes to the IMF articles of agreement reflecting these changes were ratified by the 1976 Jamaica Accords.
Since 2000[edit]
In May 2010, the IMF participated, in 3:11 proportion, in the first Greek bailout that totalled €110 billion, to address the great accumulation of public debt, caused by continuing large public sector deficits. As part of the bailout, the Greek government agreed to adopt austerity measures that would reduce the deficit from 11% in 2009 to "well below 3%" in 2014.[32] The bailout did not include debt restructuring measures such as a haircut, to the chagrin of the Swiss, Brazilian, Indian, Russian, and Argentinian Directors of the IMF, with the Greek authorities themselves (at the time, PM George Papandreou and Finance Minister Giorgos Papakonstantinou) ruling out a haircut.[33]
A second bailout package of more than €100 billion was agreed over the course of a few months from October 2011, during which time Papandreou was forced from office. The so-called Troika, of which the IMF is part, are joint managers of this programme, which was approved by the Executive Directors of the IMF on 15 March 2012 for SDR23.8 billion,[34] and which saw private bondholders take a haircut of upwards of 50%. In the interval between May 2010 and February 2012 the private banks of Holland, France and Germany reduced exposure to Greek debt from €122 billion to €66 billion.[33][35]
As of January 2012, the largest borrowers from the IMF in order were Greece, Portugal, Ireland, Romania, and Ukraine.[36]
On 25 March 2013, a €10 billion international bailout of Cyprus was agreed by the Troika, at the cost to the Cypriots of its agreement: to close the country's second-largest bank; to impose a one-time bank deposit levy on Bank of Cyprus uninsured deposits.[37][38] No insured deposit of €100k or less were to be affected under the terms of a novel bail-in scheme.[39][40]
The topic of sovereign debt restructuring was taken up by the IMF in April 2013 for the first time since 2005, in a report entitled "Sovereign Debt Restructuring: Recent Developments and Implications for the Fund’s Legal and Policy Framework".[41] The paper, which was discussed by the board on 20 May,[42] summarised the recent experiences in Greece, St Kitts and Nevis, Belize, and Jamaica. An explanatory interview with Deputy Director Hugh Bredenkamp was published a few days later,[43] as was a deconstruction by Matina Stevis of the Wall Street Journal.[44]
In the October 2013 Fiscal Monitor publication, the IMF suggested that a capital levy capable of reducing Euro-area government debt ratios to "end-2007 levels" would require a very high tax rate of about 10%.[45]
The Fiscal Affairs department of the IMF, headed at the time by Acting Director Sanjeev Gupta, produced a January 2014 report entitled "Fiscal Policy and Income Inequality" that stated that "Some taxes levied on wealth, especially on immovable property, are also an option for economies seeking more progressive taxation ... Property taxes are equitable and efficient, but underutilized in many economies ... There is considerable scope to exploit this tax more fully, both as a revenue source and as a redistributive instrument."[46]
At the end of March 2014, the IMF secured an $18 billion bailout fund for the provisional government of Ukraine in the aftermath of the 2014 Ukrainian revolution.[47][48]
Member countries[edit]




  IMF member states
  IMF member states not accepting the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2, 3, and 4[49]



Not all member countries of the IMF are sovereign states, and therefore not all "member countries" of the IMF are members of the United Nations.[50] Amidst "member countries" of the IMF that are not member states of the UN are non-sovereign areas with special jurisdictions that are officially under the sovereignty of full UN member states, such as Aruba, Curaçao, Hong Kong, and Macau, as well as Kosovo.[51][52] The corporate members appoint ex-officio voting members, who are listed below. All members of the IMF are also International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) members and vice versa.[citation needed]
Former members are Cuba (which left in 1964),[53] and the Republic of China (Taiwan), which was ejected from the UN in 1980 after losing the support of then United States President Jimmy Carter and was replaced by the People's Republic of China.[54] However, "Taiwan Province of China" is still listed in the official IMF indices.[55]
Apart from Cuba, the other UN states that do not belong to the IMF are Andorra, Liechtenstein, Monaco and North Korea.
The former Czechoslovakia was expelled in 1954 for "failing to provide required data" and was readmitted in 1990, after the Velvet Revolution. Poland withdrew in 1950—allegedly pressured by the Soviet Union—but returned in 1986.[56]
Qualifications[edit]
Any country may apply to be a part of the IMF. Post-IMF formation, in the early postwar period, rules for IMF membership were left relatively loose. Members needed to make periodic membership payments towards their quota, to refrain from currency restrictions unless granted IMF permission, to abide by the Code of Conduct in the IMF Articles of Agreement, and to provide national economic information. However, stricter rules were imposed on governments that applied to the IMF for funding.[15]
The countries that joined the IMF between 1945 and 1971 agreed to keep their exchange rates secured at rates that could be adjusted only to correct a "fundamental disequilibrium" in the balance of payments, and only with the IMF's agreement.[57]
Some members have a very difficult relationship with the IMF and even when they are still members they do not allow themselves to be monitored.
Benefits[edit]
Member countries of the IMF have access to information on the economic policies of all member countries, the opportunity to influence other members’ economic policies, technical assistance in banking, fiscal affairs, and exchange matters, financial support in times of payment difficulties, and increased opportunities for trade and investment.[58]
Leadership[edit]
Board of Governors[edit]
The Board of Governors consists of one governor and one alternate governor for each member country. Each member country appoints its two governors. The Board normally meets once a year and is responsible for electing or appointing executive directors to the Executive Board. While the Board of Governors is officially responsible for approving quota increases, Special Drawing Right allocations, the admittance of new members, compulsory withdrawal of members, and amendments to the Articles of Agreement and By-Laws, in practice it has delegated most of its powers to the IMF's Executive Board.[59]
The Board of Governors is advised by the International Monetary and Financial Committee and the Development Committee. The International Monetary and Financial Committee has 24 members and monitors developments in global liquidity and the transfer of resources to developing countries.[60] The Development Committee has 25 members and advises on critical development issues and on financial resources required to promote economic development in developing countries. They also advise on trade and environmental issues.[60]
Executive Board[edit]
24 Executive Directors make up Executive Board. The Executive Directors represent all 189 member countries in a geographically based roster.[61] Countries with large economies have their own Executive Director, but most countries are grouped in constituencies representing four or more countries.[59]
Following the 2008 Amendment on Voice and Participation which came into effect in March 2011,[62] eight countries each appoint an Executive Director: the United States, Japan, China, Germany, France, the United Kingdom, Russia, and Saudi Arabia.[61] The remaining 16 Directors represent constituencies consisting of 4 to 22 countries. The Executive Director representing the largest constituency of 22 countries accounts for 1.55% of the vote.[citation needed] This Board usually meets several times each week.[63] The Board membership and constituency is scheduled for periodic review every eight years.[64]


List of Executive Directors of the IMF, as of January 2017




Country
Region
Number of Member(s) Represented
Director
Country with Most Votes


United States
United States
1
Sunil Sabharwal
United States


Japan
Japan
1
Masaaki Kaizuka
Japan


China
China
1
Jin Zhongxia
China


Belgium
Benelux and Eastern Europe
15
Anthony De Lannoy
Netherlands


Germany
Germany
1
Steffen Meyer
Germany


Mexico
Spain & Central America
8
Carlos Hurtado
Spain


Malaysia
Southeast Asia
13
Marzunisham Omar
Indonesia


Italy
Mediterranean Europe
6
Carlo Cottarelli
Italy


France
France
1
Herve de Villeroche
France


United Kingdom
United Kingdom
1
Stephen Field
United Kingdom


Korea
Far East
16
Heenam Choi
Korea


Canada
North Atlantic & Caribbean
12
Nancy Gail Horsman
Canada


Sweden
Northern Europe
8
Thomas Ostros
Sweden


Czech Republic
Central Europe
8
Ibrahim Canakci
Turkey


Brazil
Northern South America
11
Alexandre A. Tombini
Brazil


India
Indian subcontinent
4
Subir Gokarn
India


Malawi
Africa 1
23
Maxwell M. Mkwezalamba
South Africa


Egypt
North Africa & Middle East
13
Hazem Beblawi Elbeblawi
United Arab Emirates


Poland
Switzerland, Poland & Near East
8
Miroslaw Jan Panek
Switzerland


Russia
Russia
1
Aleksei V. Mozhin
Russia


Iran
Iran & Middle East
7
Jafar Mojarrad
Iran


Saudi Arabia
Saudi Arabia
1
Hesham Fahad Alogeel
Saudi Arabia


Senegal
Africa 2
23
Daouda Sembene
Democratic Republic of the Congo


Argentina
Southern South America
6
Jorge Angel Estrella
Argentina




Managing Director[edit]
The IMF is led by a managing director, who is head of the staff and serves as Chairman of the Executive Board. The managing director is assisted by a First Deputy managing director and three other Deputy Managing Directors.[59] Historically the IMF's managing director has been European and the president of the World Bank has been from the United States. However, this standard is increasingly being questioned and competition for these two posts may soon open up to include other qualified candidates from any part of the world.[65][66]
In 2011 the world's largest developing countries, the BRIC nations, issued a statement declaring that the tradition of appointing a European as managing director undermined the legitimacy of the IMF and called for the appointment to be merit-based.[65][67]
List of Managing Directors[edit]


Nr
Dates
Name
Nationality
Background


1
6 May 1946 – 5 May 1951
Camille Gutt
Belgium
Politician, Minister of Finance


2
3 August 1951 – 3 October 1956
Ivar Rooth
Sweden
Law, Central Banker


3
21 November 1956 – 5 May 1963
Per Jacobsson
Sweden
Law, Economics, League of Nations, BIS


4
1 September 1963 – 31 August 1973
Pierre-Paul Schweitzer
France
Law, Central Banker, Civil Servant


5
1 September 1973 – 18 June 1978
Johan Witteveen
Netherlands
Economics, academic, author, politician, Minister of Finance, Deputy Prime Minister, CPB


6
18 June 1978 – 15 January 1987
Jacques de Larosière
France
Civil Servant


7
16 January 1987 – 14 February 2000
Michel Camdessus
France
Economics, Central Banker


8
1 May 2000 – 4 March 2004
Horst Köhler
Germany
Economics, EBRD


9
7 June 2004 – 31 October 2007
Rodrigo Rato
Spain
Law, MBA, politician, Minister of the Economy


10
1 November 2007 – 18 May 2011
Dominique Strauss-Kahn
France
Economics, Law, politician, Minister of the Economy and Finance


11
5 July 2011 – present
Christine Lagarde
France
Law, politician, Minister of Finance






On 28 June 2011, Christine Lagarde was named managing director of the IMF, replacing Dominique Strauss-Kahn.


Previous managing director Dominique Strauss-Kahn was arrested in connection with charges of sexually assaulting a New York hotel room attendant and resigned on 18 May. The charges were later dropped.[68] On 28 June 2011 Christine Lagarde was confirmed as managing director of the IMF for a five-year term starting on 5 July 2011.[69][70] In 2012, Lagarde was paid a tax-exempt salary of US$467,940, and this is automatically increased every year according to inflation. In addition, the director receives an allowance of US$83,760 and additional expenses for entertainment.[71]
Voting power[edit]
Voting power in the IMF is based on a quota system. Each member has a number of basic votes (each member's number of basic votes equals 5.502% of the total votes),[72] plus one additional vote for each Special Drawing Right (SDR) of 100,000 of a member country's quota.[73] The Special Drawing Right is the unit of account of the IMF and represents a claim to currency. It is based on a basket of key international currencies. The basic votes generate a slight bias in favour of small countries, but the additional votes determined by SDR outweigh this bias.[73] Changes in the voting shares require approval by a supermajority of 85% of voting power.[6]


The table below shows quota and voting shares for IMF members[74]





Rank
IMF Member country
Quota: millions of SDRs
Quota: percentage of the total
Governor
Alternative
Number of votes
Percentage out of total votes


1
 United States
82,994.2
17.68
Steven Mnuchin
Janet Yellen
831,396
16.73


2
 Japan
30,820.5
6.56
Taro Aso
Haruhiko Kuroda
309,659
6.23


3
 China
30,482.9
6.49
Zhou Xiaochuan
Gang Yi
306,283
6.16


4
 Germany
26,634.4
5.67
Jens Weidmann
Wolfgang Schäuble
267,798
5.39


5
 France
20,155.1
4.29
Bruno Le Maire
François Villeroy de Galhau
203,005
4.09


6
 United Kingdom
20,155.1
4.29
Philip Hammond
Mark Carney
203,005
4.09


7
 Italy
15,070.0
3.21
Pier Carlo Padoan
Ignazio Visco
152,154
3.06


8
 India
13,114.4
2.79
Arun Jaitley
Urjit Patel
132,598
2.67


9
 Russia
12,903.7
2.75
Anton Siluanov
Elvira S. Nabiullina
130,491
2.63


10
 Brazil
11,042.0
2.35
Henrique Meirelles
Ilan Goldfajn
111,874
2.25


11
 Canada
11,023.9
2.35
Bill Morneau
Stephen Poloz
111,693
2.25


12
 Saudi Arabia
9,992.6
2.13
Ibrahim A. Al-Assaf
Fahad Almubarak
101,380
2.04


13
 Spain
9,535.5
2.03
Luis de Guindos
Luis M. Linde
96,809
1.95


14
 Mexico
8,912.7
1.90
Luis Videgaray
Agustín Carstens
90,581
1.82


15
 Netherlands
8,736.5
1.86
Klaas Knot
Hans Vijlbrief
88,819
1.79


16
 South Korea
8,582.7
1.83
Dong-yeon Kim
Juyeol Lee
87,281
1.76


17
 Australia
6,572.4
1.40
Scott Morrison
John Fraser
67,178
1.35


18
 Belgium
6,410.7
1.37
Jan Smets
Marc Monbaliu
65,561
1.32


19
  Switzerland
5,771.1
1.23
Thomas Jordan
Eveline Widmer-Schlumpf
59,165
1.19


20
 Indonesia
4,648.4
0.99
Agus D.W. Martowardojo
Mahendra Siregar
47,938
0.96





In December 2015, the United States Congress adopted a legislation authorising the 2010 Quota and Governance Reforms. As a result,

all 188 members' quotas will increase from a total of about SDR 238.5 billion to about SDR 477 billion, while the quota shares and voting power of the IMF's poorest member countries will be protected.
more than 6 percent of quota shares will shift to dynamic emerging market and developing countries and also from over-represented to under-represented members.
four emerging market countries (Brazil, China, India, and Russia) will be among the ten largest members of the IMF. Other top 10 members are the United States, Japan, Germany, France, the United Kingdom and Italy.[75]

Effects of the quota system[edit]
The IMF's quota system was created to raise funds for loans.[15] Each IMF member country is assigned a quota, or contribution, that reflects the country's relative size in the global economy. Each member's quota also determines its relative voting power. Thus, financial contributions from member governments are linked to voting power in the organisation.[73]
This system follows the logic of a shareholder-controlled organisation: wealthy countries have more say in the making and revision of rules.[15] Since decision making at the IMF reflects each member's relative economic position in the world, wealthier countries that provide more money to the IMF have more influence than poorer members that contribute less; nonetheless, the IMF focuses on redistribution.[73]
Inflexibility of voting power[edit]
Quotas are normally reviewed every five years and can be increased when deemed necessary by the Board of Governors. IMF voting shares are relatively inflexible: countries that grow economically have tended to become under-represented as their voting power lags behind.[6] Currently, reforming the representation of developing countries within the IMF has been suggested.[73] These countries' economies represent a large portion of the global economic system but this is not reflected in the IMF's decision making process through the nature of the quota system. Joseph Stiglitz argues, "There is a need to provide more effective voice and representation for developing countries, which now represent a much larger portion of world economic activity since 1944, when the IMF was created."[76] In 2008, a number of quota reforms were passed including shifting 6% of quota shares to dynamic emerging markets and developing countries.[77]
Overcoming borrower/creditor divide[edit]
The IMF's membership is divided along income lines: certain countries provide the financial resources while others use these resources. Both developed country "creditors" and developing country "borrowers" are members of the IMF. The developed countries provide the financial resources but rarely enter into IMF loan agreements; they are the creditors. Conversely, the developing countries use the lending services but contribute little to the pool of money available to lend because their quotas are smaller; they are the borrowers. Thus, tension is created around governance issues because these two groups, creditors and borrowers, have fundamentally different interests.[73]
The criticism is that the system of voting power distribution through a quota system institutionalises borrower subordination and creditor dominance. The resulting division of the IMF's membership into borrowers and non-borrowers has increased the controversy around conditionality because the borrowers are interested in increasing loan access while creditors want to maintain reassurance that the loans will be repaid.[78]
Use[edit]
A recent[when?] source revealed that the average overall use of IMF credit per decade increased, in real terms, by 21% between the 1970s and 1980s, and increased again by just over 22% from the 1980s to the 1991–2005 period. Another study has suggested that since 1950 the continent of Africa alone has received $300 billion from the IMF, the World Bank, and affiliate institutions.[79]
A study by Bumba Mukherjee found that developing democratic countries benefit more from IMF programs than developing autocratic countries because policy-making, and the process of deciding where loaned money is used, is more transparent within a democracy.[79] One study done by Randall Stone found that although earlier studies found little impact of IMF programs on balance of payments, more recent studies using more sophisticated methods and larger samples "usually found IMF programs improved the balance of payments".[26]
Exceptional Access Framework – sovereign debt[edit]
The Exceptional Access Framework was created in 2003 when John B. Taylor was Under Secretary of the US Treasury for International Affairs. The new Framework became fully operational in February 2003 and it was applied in the subsequent decisions on Argentina and Brazil.[80] Its purpose was to place some sensible rules and limits on the way the IMF makes loans to support governments with debt problem—especially in emerging markets—and thereby move away from the bailout mentality of the 1990s. Such a reform was essential for ending the crisis atmosphere that then existed in emerging markets. The reform was closely related to, and put in place nearly simultaneously with, the actions of several emerging market countries to place collective action clauses in their bond contracts.
In 2010, the framework was abandoned so the IMF could make loans to Greece in an unsustainable and political situation.[81][82]
The topic of sovereign debt restructuring was taken up by IMF staff in April 2013 for the first time since 2005, in a report entitled "Sovereign Debt Restructuring: Recent Developments and Implications for the Fund's Legal and Policy Framework".[41] The paper, which was discussed by the board on 20 May,[42] summarised the recent experiences in Greece, St Kitts and Nevis, Belize and Jamaica. An explanatory interview with Deputy Director Hugh Bredenkamp was published a few days later,[43] as was a deconstruction by Matina Stevis of the Wall Street Journal.[44]
The staff was directed to formulate an updated policy, which was accomplished on 22 May 2014 with a report entitled "The Fund's Lending Framework and Sovereign Debt: Preliminary Considerations", and taken up by the Executive Board on 13 June.[83] The staff proposed that "in circumstances where a (Sovereign) member has lost market access and debt is considered sustainable ... the IMF would be able to provide Exceptional Access on the basis of a debt operation that involves an extension of maturities", which was labelled a "reprofiling operation". These reprofiling operations would "generally be less costly to the debtor and creditors—and thus to the system overall—relative to either an upfront debt reduction operation or a bail-out that is followed by debt reduction ... (and) would be envisaged only when both (a) a member has lost market access and (b) debt is assessed to be sustainable, but not with high probability ... Creditors will only agree if they understand that such an amendment is necessary to avoid a worse outcome: namely, a default and/or an operation involving debt reduction ... Collective action clauses, which now exist in most—but not all—bonds, would be relied upon to address collective action problems."[83]
IMF and globalization[edit]
Globalization encompasses three institutions: global financial markets and transnational companies, national governments linked to each other in economic and military alliances led by the United States, and rising "global governments" such as World Trade Organization (WTO), IMF, and World Bank.[84] Charles Derber argues in his book People Before Profit, "These interacting institutions create a new global power system where sovereignty is globalized, taking power and constitutional authority away from nations and giving it to global markets and international bodies".[84] Titus Alexander argues that this system institutionalises global inequality between western countries and the Majority World in a form of global apartheid, in which the IMF is a key pillar.[85]
The establishment of globalised economic institutions has been both a symptom of and a stimulus for globalisation. The development of the World Bank, the IMF regional development banks such as the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD), and multilateral trade institutions such as the WTO signals a move away from the dominance of the state as the exclusive unit of analysis in international affairs. Globalization has thus been transformative in terms of a reconceptualising of state sovereignty.[86]
Following United States President Bill Clinton's administration's aggressive financial deregulation campaign in the 1990s, globalisation leaders overturned longstanding restrictions by governments that limited foreign ownership of their banks, deregulated currency exchange, and eliminated restrictions on how quickly money could be withdrawn by foreign investors.[84]
Fund report in May 2015, the world's governments indirectly subsidise fossil fuel companies with $5.3tn (£3.4tn) a year. Most this is due to polluters not paying the costs imposed on governments by the burning of coal, oil and gas: air pollution, health problems, the floods, droughts and storms driven by climate change.[87]
Criticisms[edit]
Overseas Development Institute (ODI) research undertaken in 1980 included criticisms of the IMF which support the analysis that it is a pillar of what activist Titus Alexander calls global apartheid.[88]

Developed countries were seen to have a more dominant role and control over less developed countries (LDCs).
Secondly, the Fund worked on the incorrect assumption that all payments disequilibria were caused domestically. The Group of 24 (G-24), on behalf of LDC members, and the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) complained that the IMF did not distinguish sufficiently between disequilibria with predominantly external as opposed to internal causes. This criticism was voiced in the aftermath of the 1973 oil crisis. Then LDCs found themselves with payments deficits due to adverse changes in their terms of trade, with the Fund prescribing stabilisation programmes similar to those suggested for deficits caused by government over-spending. Faced with long-term, externally generated disequilibria, the G-24 argued for more time for LDCs to adjust their economies.
Some IMF policies may be anti-developmental; the report said that deflationary effects of IMF programmes quickly led to losses of output and employment in economies where incomes were low and unemployment was high. Moreover, the burden of the deflation is disproportionately borne by the poor.
Lastly is the suggestion that the IMF's policies lack a clear economic rationale. Its policy foundations were theoretical and unclear because of differing opinions and departmental rivalries whilst dealing with countries with widely varying economic circumstances.

ODI conclusions were that the IMF's very nature of promoting market-oriented approaches attracted unavoidable criticism. On the other hand, the IMF could serve as a scapegoat while allowing governments to blame international bankers. The ODI conceded that the IMF was insensitive to political aspirations of LDCs, while its policy conditions were inflexible.[89]
Argentina, which had been considered by the IMF to be a model country in its compliance to policy proposals by the Bretton Woods institutions, experienced a catastrophic economic crisis in 2001,[90] which some believe to have been caused by IMF-induced budget restrictions—which undercut the government's ability to sustain national infrastructure even in crucial areas such as health, education, and security—and privatisation of strategically vital national resources.[91] Others attribute the crisis to Argentina's misdesigned fiscal federalism, which caused subnational spending to increase rapidly.[92] The crisis added to widespread hatred of this institution in Argentina and other South American countries, with many blaming the IMF for the region's economic problems. The current—as of early 2006—trend toward moderate left-wing governments in the region and a growing concern with the development of a regional economic policy largely independent of big business pressures has been ascribed to this crisis.
In 2006, a senior ActionAid policy analyst Akanksha Marphatia stated that IMF policies in Africa undermine any possibility of meeting the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) due to imposed restrictions that prevent spending on important sectors, such as education and health.[93]
In an interview (2008-05-19), the former Romanian Prime Minister Călin Popescu-Tăriceanu claimed that "Since 2005, IMF is constantly making mistakes when it appreciates the country's economic performances".[94] Former Tanzanian President Julius Nyerere, who claimed that debt-ridden African states were ceding sovereignty to the IMF and the World Bank, famously asked, "Who elected the IMF to be the ministry of finance for every country in the world?"[95][96]
Former chief economist of IMF and former Reserve Bank of India (RBI) Governor Raghuram Rajan who predicted Financial crisis of 2007–08 criticised IMF for remaining a sideline player to the Developed world. He criticised IMF for praising the monetary policies of the US, which he believed were wreaking havoc in emerging markets.[97] He had been critical of the ultra-loose money policies of the Western nations and IMF.[98][99]
Conditionality[edit]
The IMF has been criticised for being "out of touch" with local economic conditions, cultures, and environments in the countries they are requiring policy reform.[14] The economic advice the IMF gives might not always take into consideration the difference between what spending means on paper and how it is felt by citizens.[100]
Jeffrey Sachs argues that the IMF's "usual prescription is 'budgetary belt tightening to countries who are much too poor to own belts'".[100] Sachs[Or who says it?] wrote that the IMF's role as a generalist institution specialising in macroeconomic issues needs reform. Conditionality has also been criticised because a country can pledge collateral of "acceptable assets" to obtain waivers—if one assumes that all countries are able to provide "acceptable collateral".[25]
One view is that conditionality undermines domestic political institutions.[101] The recipient governments are sacrificing policy autonomy in exchange for funds, which can lead to public resentment of the local leadership for accepting and enforcing the IMF conditions. Political instability can result from more leadership turnover as political leaders are replaced in electoral backlashes.[14] IMF conditions are often criticised for reducing government services, thus increasing unemployment.[15]
Another criticism is that IMF programs are only designed to address poor governance, excessive government spending, excessive government intervention in markets, and too much state ownership.[100] This assumes that this narrow range of issues represents the only possible problems; everything is standardised and differing contexts are ignored.[100] A country may also be compelled to accept conditions it would not normally accept had they not been in a financial crisis in need of assistance.[23]
On top of that, regardless of what methodologies and data sets used, it comes to same conclusion of exacerbating income inequality. With Gini coefficient, it became clear that countries with IMF programs face increased income inequality.[102]
It is claimed that conditionalities retard social stability and hence inhibit the stated goals of the IMF, while Structural Adjustment Programs lead to an increase in poverty in recipient countries.[103] The IMF sometimes advocates "austerity programmes", cutting public spending and increasing taxes even when the economy is weak, to bring budgets closer to a balance, thus reducing budget deficits. Countries are often advised to lower their corporate tax rate. In Globalization and Its Discontents, Joseph E. Stiglitz, former chief economist and senior vice-president at the World Bank, criticises these policies.[104] He argues that by converting to a more monetarist approach, the purpose of the fund is no longer valid, as it was designed to provide funds for countries to carry out Keynesian reflations, and that the IMF "was not participating in a conspiracy, but it was reflecting the interests and ideology of the Western financial community".[105]
International politics play an important role in IMF decision making. The clout of member states is roughly proportional to its contribution to IMF finances. The United States has the greatest number of votes and therefore wields the most influence. Domestic politics often come into play, with politicians in developing countries using conditionality to gain leverage over the opposition to influence policy.[106]
Reform[edit]
Function and policies[edit]
The IMF is only one of many international organisations, and it is a generalist institution that deals only with macroeconomic issues; its core areas of concern in developing countries are very narrow. One proposed reform is a movement towards close partnership with other specialist agencies such as UNICEF, the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), and the United Nations Development Program (UNDP).[100]
Jeffrey Sachs argues in The End of Poverty that the IMF and the World Bank have "the brightest economists and the lead in advising poor countries on how to break out of poverty, but the problem is development economics".[100] Development economics needs the reform, not the IMF. He also notes that IMF loan conditions should be paired with other reforms—e.g., trade reform in developed nations, debt cancellation, and increased financial assistance for investments in basic infrastructure.[100] IMF loan conditions cannot stand alone and produce change; they need to be partnered with other reforms or other conditions as applicable.
US influence and voting reform[edit]
The scholarly consensus is that IMF decision-making is not simply technocratic, but also guided by political and economic concerns.[107] The United States is the IMF's most powerful member, and its influence reaches even into decision-making concerning individual loan agreements.[108] The North American giant is openly opposed to losing what Treasury Secretary Jacob Lew describes as its "leadership role" at the IMF, "our ability to shape international norms and practices".[109]
Reforms to give more powers to emerging economies were agreed by the G20 in 2010. They could not pass, however, until ratification by the US Congress,[110][111][112] since 85% of the Fund's voting power was required,[113] and the Americans hold more than 16% of voting power.[114] After repeated criticism,[115][116] the United States finally ratified the voting reforms at the end of 2015.[117] The OECD countries maintained their overwhelming majority of voting share, and the United States in particular retained its share at over 16%.[118]
Support of dictatorships[edit]
The role of the Bretton Woods institutions has been controversial since the late Cold War, because of claims that the IMF policy makers supported military dictatorships friendly to American and European corporations, but also other Anti-communist and Communist regimes (such as Mobutu's Zaire and Ceaușescu's Romania, respectively). Critics also claim that the IMF is generally apathetic or hostile to human rights, and labour rights. The controversy has helped spark the anti-globalization movement.
An example of IMF's support for a dictatorship was its ongoing support for Mobutu's rule in Zaire, although its own envoy, Erwin Blumenthal, provided a sobering report about the entrenched corruption and embezzlement and the inability of the country to pay back any loans.[119]
Arguments in favour of the IMF say that economic stability is a precursor to democracy; however, critics highlight various examples in which democratised countries fell after receiving IMF loans.[120]
A 2017 study found no evidence IMF lending programs undermined democracy in borrowing countries.[121] To the contrary, it found "evidence for modest but definitively positive conditional differences in the democracy scores of participating and non-participating countries."[121]
Impact on access to food[edit]
A number of civil society organisations[122] have criticised the IMF's policies for their impact on access to food, particularly in developing countries. In October 2008, former United States president Bill Clinton delivered a speech to the United Nations on World Food Day, criticising the World Bank and IMF for their policies on food and agriculture:

We need the World Bank, the IMF, all the big foundations, and all the governments to admit that, for 30 years, we all blew it, including me when I was president. We were wrong to believe that food was like some other product in international trade, and we all have to go back to a more responsible and sustainable form of agriculture.
— Former U.S. president Bill Clinton, Speech at United Nations World Food Day, October 16, 2008[123]

Impact on public health[edit]
A 2009 study concluded that the strict conditions resulted in thousands of deaths in Eastern Europe by tuberculosis as public health care had to be weakened. In the 21 countries to which the IMF had given loans, tuberculosis deaths rose by 16.6%.[124]
In 2009, a book by Rick Rowden titled The Deadly Ideas of Neoliberalism: How the IMF has Undermined Public Health and the Fight Against AIDS, claimed that the IMF's monetarist approach towards prioritising price stability (low inflation) and fiscal restraint (low budget deficits) was unnecessarily restrictive and has prevented developing countries from scaling up long-term investment in public health infrastructure. The book claimed the consequences have been chronically underfunded public health systems, leading to demoralising working conditions that have fuelled a "brain drain" of medical personnel, all of which has undermined public health and the fight against HIV/AIDS in developing countries.[125]
In 2016, the IMF's research department published a report titled "Neoliberalism: Oversold?" which, while praising some aspects of the "neoliberal agenda," claims that the organisation has been "overselling" fiscal austerity policies and financial deregulation, which they claim has exacerbated both financial crises and economic inequality around the world.[126][127][128]
Impact on environment[edit]
IMF policies have been repeatedly criticised for making it difficult for indebted countries to say no to environmentally harmful projects that nevertheless generate revenues such as oil, coal, and forest-destroying lumber and agriculture projects. Ecuador for example had to defy IMF advice repeatedly to pursue the protection of its rainforests, though paradoxically this need was cited in IMF argument to support that country. The IMF acknowledged this paradox in the 2010 report that proposed the IMF Green Fund, a mechanism to issue special drawing rights directly to pay for climate harm prevention and potentially other ecological protection as pursued generally by other environmental finance.[129]
While the response to these moves was generally positive[130] possibly because ecological protection and energy and infrastructure transformation are more politically neutral than pressures to change social policy. Some experts voiced concern that the IMF was not representative, and that the IMF proposals to generate only US$200 billion a year by 2020 with the SDRs as seed funds, did not go far enough to undo the general incentive to pursue destructive projects inherent in the world commodity trading and banking systems—criticisms often levelled at the World Trade Organization and large global banking institutions.
In the context of the European debt crisis, some observers noted that Spain and California, two troubled economies within Europe and the United States, and also Germany, the primary and politically most fragile supporter of a euro currency bailout would benefit from IMF recognition of their leadership in green technology, and directly from Green Fund–generated demand for their exports, which could also improve their credit ratings.
Scandals[edit]
Both Lagarde and her two predecessors Strauss-Kahn and Rato have been investigated by the authorities and have either faced trial or are scheduled to go on trial for a variety of offences.[131]
Lagarde had been accused of giving preferential treatment to businessman-turned-politician Bernard Tapie as he pursued a legal challenge against the French government. At the time, Lagarde was the French economic minister.[132] Within hours of her conviction, in which she escaped any punishment, the fund's 24-member executive board put to rest any speculation that she might have to resign, praising her "outstanding leadership" and the "wide respect" she commands around the world.[133]
Alternatives[edit]
In March 2011 the Ministers of Economy and Finance of the African Union proposed to establish an African Monetary Fund.[134]
At the 6th BRICS summit in July 2014 the BRICS nations (Brazil, Russia, India, China, and South Africa) announced the BRICS Contingent Reserve Arrangement (CRA) with an initial size of US$100 billion, a framework to provide liquidity through currency swaps in response to actual or potential short-term balance-of-payments pressures.[135]
In 2014, the China-led Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank was established.[109]
In the media[edit]
Life and Debt, a documentary film, deals with the IMF's policies' influence on Jamaica and its economy from a critical point of view. Debtocracy, a 2011 independent Greek documentary film, also criticises the IMF. Portuguese musician José Mário Branco's 1982 album FMI is inspired by the IMF's intervention in Portugal through monitored stabilisation programs in 1977–78. In the 2015 film, Our Brand Is Crisis, the IMF is mentioned as a point of political contention.
See also[edit]


African Monetary Fund
Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank
BRICS Development Bank
Bank for International Settlements
Conditionality
Globalization
Group of Thirty
Group of Ten (economic)
General Arrangements to Borrow
International Financial Institution
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
Special drawing rights
Smithsonian Agreement
Structural Adjustment Program
Washington Consensus
World Bank
World Bank residual model


Notes and references[edit]

Notes



a.
^ There is no worldwide consensus on the status of the Republic of Kosovo: it is recognised as independent by 110 countries, while others consider it an autonomous province of Serbia. See: International recognition of Kosovo.



References



^ a b c "About the IMF". IMF. Retrieved 14 October 2012. 
^ Boughton 2001, p. 7 n.5.
^ "Factsheet: The IMF and the World Bank". IMF. 21 September 2015. Retrieved 1 December 2015. 
^ "About the IMF Overview". www.imf.org. Retrieved 1 August 2017. 
^ https://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/wp/2002/wp0252.pdf
^ a b c Lipscy 2015.
^ "The IMF at a Glance". www.imf.org. Retrieved 15 December 2016. 
^ Schlefer, Jonathan. "There is No Invisible Hand". Harvard Business Review. Harvard Business Review. 
^ Escobar, Arturo. 1980. Power and Visibility: Development and the Invention and Management of the Third World. Cultural Anthropology 3 (4): 428–443.
^ imf.org: "Articles of Agreement, International Monetary Fund" (2011)
^ "Articles of Agreement of the International Monetary Fund – 2016 Edition". 
^ "About the IMF". International Monetary Fund. Retrieved 12 March 2012. 
^ a b Isard, Peter (2005). Globalization and the International Financial System: What's Wrong and What Can be Done. New York: Cambridge University Press. 
^ a b c d e f g Jensen, Nathan (April 2004). "Crisis, Conditions, and Capital: The Effect of the IMF on Direct Foreign Investment". Journal of Conflict Resolution. 48 (48): 194. doi:10.1177/0022002703262860. 
^ a b c d e f g h i Chorev, Nistan; Sarah Babb (2009). "The crisis of neoliberalism and the future of international institutions: a comparison of the IMF and the WTO". Theory and Society. 38: 459–484. doi:10.1007/s11186-009-9093-5. 
^ Jensen, Nathan (April 2004). "Crisis, Conditions, and Capital: The Effect of the IMF on Foreign Direct Foreign Investment". Journal of Conflict Resolution. 48 (48): 194. doi:10.1177/0022002703262860. 
^ Fischer, Stanley (March 2003). "Financial Crises and Reform of the International Financial System". Review of World Economics. Springer Publications. 
^ "Factsheet: IMF Lending". About the IMF. International Monetary Fund. Retrieved 8 April 2012. 
^ a b c Bossone, Biagio. "IMF Surveillance: A Case Study on IMF Governance" (PDF). Independent Office of the International Monetary Fund. 
^ "Factsheet: IMF Surveillance". About the IMF. International Monetary Fund. 
^ "Press Release: Macao SAR Begins Participation in the IMF's General Data Dissemination System". 
^ Guimaraes, Bernardo; Iazdi, Oz (2015). "IMF conditionalities, liquidity provision, and incentives for fiscal adjustment". International Tax and Public Finance. 22: 705–722. doi:10.1007/s10797-014-9329-9. 
^ a b c Buira, Ariel (August 2003). "An Analysis of IMF Conditionality". G-24 Discussion Papers. United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (22). 
^ "Factsheet: IMF Conditionality". About the IMF. International Monetary Fund. Retrieved 18 March 2012. 
^ a b c d Khan, Mohsin S.; Sunil Sharm (24 September 2001). "IMF Conditionality and Country Ownership of Programs" (PDF). IMF Institute. 
^ a b Jensen, Nathan (2004). "Crisis, Conditions, and Capital: The Effect of the International Monetary Fund on Foreign Direct Investment". Journal of Conflict Resolution. 48 (2): 194–210. doi:10.1177/0022002703262860. 
^ a b c "Cooperation and Reconstruction (1944–71)". About the IMF. Retrieved 18 March 2012. 
^ "IMF History and Structural Adjustment Conditions". UC Atlas of Global Inequality. Economic Crises. Archived from the original on 22 April 2012. Retrieved 18 March 2012. 
^ Somanath, V. S. (1 February 2011). International Financial Management. p. 79. ISBN 9789381141076. 
^ a b De Vries, Margaret G (1986). The IMF in a Changing World: 1945–85. pp. 66–68. ISBN 9781455280964. 
^ Kenwood, George; Lougheed, Alan (1 June 2002). Growth of the International Economy 1820–2000: An Introductory Text. p. 269. ISBN 9780203199350. 
^ "Press Release: IMF Executive Board Approves €30 Billion Stand-By Arrangement for Greece". 
^ a b thepressproject.net: "IMF leak: European banks had committed to maintain exposure in Greek bonds after first bailout – but didn't" 3 Feb 2014 Archived 19 October 2014 at the Wayback Machine.
^ treasury.gov: "Quarterly Report to Congress on International Monetary Fund Lending: 1st Qtr 2012"
^ País, Ediciones El (1 February 2014). "Berlín y París incumplen con Grecia". 
^ IMF's biggest borrowers, Al Jazeera (17 Jan 2012)
^ Ehrenfreund, Max (27 March 2013). "Cypriot banks to reopen amid criticism of bailout". The Washington Post. 
^ "Cyprus disaster shines light on global tax haven industry no". MSNBC. 26 March 2013. Retrieved 2 April 2013. 
^ Jan Strupczewski; Annika Breidthardt (25 March 2013). "Last-minute Cyprus deal to close bank, force losses". Reuters. Retrieved 25 March 2013. 
^ "Eurogroup signs off on bailout agreement reached by Cyprus and troika". Ekathimerini. Greece. 25 March 2013. Retrieved 25 March 2013. 
^ a b imf.org: "SOVEREIGN DEBT RESTRUCTURING—RECENT DEVELOPMENTS AND IMPLICATIONS FOR THE FUND’S LEGAL AND POLICY FRAMEWORK" 26 Apr 2013
^ a b "Public Information Notice: IMF Executive Board Discusses Sovereign Debt Restructuring—Recent Developments and Implications for the Fund’s Legal and Policy Framework". 
^ a b imf.org: "GLOBAL WORK AGENDA IMF Launches Discussion of Sovereign Debt Restructuring" IMF Survey online, 23 May 2013
^ a b Stevis, Matina (24 May 2013). "IMF Searches Soul, Blames Europe". 
^ Fiscal Monitor: "Taxing Times" Oct 2013, p.49
^ IMF: "Fiscal Affairs and Income Inequality" 23 Jan 2014
^ "Ukraine to get $15bn as Russia hit by downgrades". 
^ "Windfall for hedge funds and Russian banks as IMF rescues Ukraine". 
^ Articles of Agreement of the International Monetary Fund, Article VIII – General Obligations of Members
Section 2: Avoidance of restrictions on current payments;
Section 3: Avoidance of discriminatory currency practices;
Section 4: Convertibility of foreign-held balances.
^ "IMF – Country Information". 
^ "Republic of Kosovo is now officially a member of the IMF and the World Bank". The Kosovo Times. 29 June 2009. Archived from the original on 2 July 2009. Retrieved 29 June 2009. Kosovo signed the Articles of Agreement of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (the World Bank) on behalf of Kosovo at the State Department in Washington. 
^ "Kosovo Becomes the International Monetary Fund's 186th Member" (Press release). International Monetary Fund. 29 June 2009. Retrieved 29 June 2009. 
^ "Brazil calls for Cuba to be allowed into IMF". Caribbean Net News. 27 April 2009. Retrieved 7 May 2009. Cuba was a member of the IMF until 1964, when it left under revolutionary leader Fidel Castro following his confrontation with the United States. [permanent dead link]
^ Andrews, Nick; Bob Davis (7 May 2009). "Kosovo Wins Acceptance to IMF". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved 7 May 2009. Taiwan was booted out of the IMF in 1980 when China was admitted, and it hasn't applied to return since. 
^ "World Economic Outlook Database for April 2012 – Country information". Imf.org. 17 April 2012. Retrieved 7 November 2012. 
^ "II The IMF and the Transition from Central Planning" (PDF). International Monetary Fund. p. 255. Retrieved 1 October 2012. 
^ "What is the IMF?". Telegraph. 12 April 2011. 
^ "Obligations and Benefits of IMF Membership". Money Matters: An IMF Exhibit --The Importance of Global Cooperation.  Missing or empty |url= (help)
^ a b c "Governance Structure". About the IMF: Governance. Retrieved 18 March 2012. 
^ a b "Factsheet: Guide to Committees, Groups, and Clubs". About the IMF. International Monetary Fund. 
^ a b "IMF Executive Directors and Voting Power". Member Quotas Shares, Governors, and Voting Power. International Monetary Fund. 
^ "Press Release: The IMF’s 2008 Quota and Voice Reforms Take Effect". 
^ "Press Release: IMF Board of Governors Approves Major Quota and Governance Reforms". 
^ "Press Release: IMF Executive Board Approves Major Overhaul of Quotas and Governance". 
^ a b Harding, Robin (24 May 2011). "Brics say European IMF claim 'obsolete'". The Financial Times. Retrieved 17 June 2011. 
^ Woods 2003, pp. 92–114.
^ Mallaby, Sebastian (9 June 2011). "Can the BRICs Take the IMF?". Foreign Affairs. 
^ "IMF Managing Director Dominique Strauss-Kahn Resigns". Press Release No. 11/187. International Monetary Fund. Retrieved 14 June 2011. 
^ "IMF Executive Board Selects Christine Lagarde as Managing Director". Press Release. IMF. 28 June 2011. Retrieved 28 June 2011. 
^ "France's Lagarde elected new IMF chief". Reuters. 28 June 2011. Retrieved 28 June 2011. 
^ "Anger over Christine Lagarde's tax-free salary". 30 May 2012. 
^ "Membership". About the IMF. International Monetary Fund. Retrieved 18 March 2012. 
^ a b c d e f Blomberg & Broz 2006.
^ "IMF Members' Quotas and Voting Power, and IMF Board of Governors". 
^ IMF IMF Managing Director Christine Lagarde Welcomes U.S. Congressional Approval of the 2010 Quota and Governance Reforms, Press release No. 15/573, 18 December 2015.
^ Stiglitz and Members of a UN Commission on Financial Experts, Joseph E. (2010). The Stiglitz Report: Reforming the International Monetary and Financial Systems in the Wake of the Global Crisis. New York: The New Press. 
^ "Factsheet: IMF Quotas". About the IMF. The International Monetary Fund. 
^ Kafka, Alejandre. "Some IMF Problems after the Committee of Twenty". International Financial Policy: Essays in honour of Jaques J. Polack.  Missing or empty |url= (help)
^ a b Mukherjee, Bumba (2008). "International Economic Organizations and Economic Development". SAIS Review of International Affairs. 28 (2): 123–137. doi:10.1353/sais.0.0013. 
^ inf.org: "INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND – Review of Exceptional Access Policy", 23 March 2004
^ Taylor, John (26 March 2014). "Why the IMF's Exceptional Access Framework is So Important". 
^ "WSJ" – via online.wsj.com. 
^ a b "THE FUND’S LENDING FRAMEWORK AND SOVEREIGN DEBT—PRELIMINARY CONSIDERATIONS" 22 May 2014 (also bears date June 2014; team of 20 led by Reza Bakir and supervised by Olivier Blanchard, Sean Hagan, Hugh Bredenkamp, and Peter Dattels)
^ a b c Derber, Charles (2002). People Before Profit. New York: Picador. 
^ Alexander, Titus (1996). Unravelling Global Apartheid: an overview of world politics. Polity press. pp. 127–133. 
^ McCorquodale, Robert; Richard Fairbrother (August 1999). "Globalization and Human Rights". Human Rights Quarterly. 21 (3): 735–766. doi:10.1353/hrq.1999.0041. 
^ Fossil fuels subsidised by $10m a minute, says IMF The Guardian 18 May 2015
^ Alexander, Titus (1996). Unravelling Global Apartheid: an overview of world politics. Polity press. p. 133. 
^ "The IMF and the Third World". ODI briefing paper. Overseas Development Institute. Archived from the original on 7 January 2012. Retrieved 6 July 2011. 
^ Memoria del Saqueo, Fernando Ezequiel Solanas, documentary film, 2003 (Language: Spanish; Subtitles: English) YouTube.com
^ "Economic debacle in Argentina: The IMF strikes again". Twnside.org.sg. Archived from the original on 3 March 2010. Retrieved 30 May 2010. 
^ Stephen Webb, "Argentina: Hardening the Provincial Budget Constraint", in Rodden, Eskeland, and Litvack (eds.), Fiscal Decentralization and the Challenge of Hard Budget Constraints (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2003).
^ "Ultimate Profit Solution Review by Toshko Raychev – SCI Trading". Archived from the original on 24 November 2016. 
^ "Tăriceanu: FMI a făcut constant greşeli de apreciere a economiei româneşti – Mediafax". Mediafax.ro. Retrieved 30 May 2010. 
^ Godfrey Mwakikagile (2006). Africa is in a Mess: What Went Wrong and what Should be Done. Godfrey Mwakikagile, New Africa Press. pp. 27–. ISBN 978-0-9802534-7-4. 
^ "Reflections on Leadership in Africa – Forty Years After Independence" (PDF). houseofknowledge.org.uk. Retrieved 14 May 2014. 
^ "RBI Guv Raghuram Rajan blasts IMF for being soft on easy money policies of West". 19 October 2015. Archived from the original on 22 October 2015. 
^ Choudhury, Suvashree. "RBI chief Rajan urges IMF to act against 'extreme' policies". 
^ "RBI's Raghuram Rajan urges IMF to act against 'extreme' policies". 
^ a b c d e f g Sachs, Jeffrey (2005). The End of Poverty. New York: The Penguin Press. 
^ Stiglitz, Joseph E. (2006). Making Globalization Work. Great Britain: Allen Lane: an imprint of the Penguin Group. 
^ Garuda, Gopal (1998). The distributional effects of IMF program. Cambridge: The Harvard university. 
^ Hertz, Noreena. The Debt Threat. New York: Harper Collins Publishers, 2004.
^ Stiglitz, Joseph. Globalization and its Discontents. New York: WW Norton & Company, 2002.
^ More by Benjamin M. Friedman (15 August 2002). "Globalization: Stiglitz's Case". Nybooks.com. Retrieved 30 May 2010. 
^ Vreeland, James (2007). The International Monetary Fund (IMF): Politics of Conditional Lending. UK: Taylor & Francis Books UK. 
^ Breen 2013, p. 13.
^ Oatley & Yackee 2004.
^ a b Donnan, Shawn; Dyer, Geoff (17 March 2015). "US warns of loss of influence over China bank". ft.com. Retrieved 2 July 2015. 
^ Jonathan Weisman (25 March 2014). "Senate Democrats Drop I.M.F. Reforms From Ukraine Aid". New York Times. Retrieved 9 April 2014. 
^ "Britain urges U.S. Congress to stop blocking IMF reform". Yahoo. Reuters. 7 April 2014. Retrieved 9 April 2014. 
^ Hughes, Krista (9 April 2014). "Australia treasurer 'disappointed' at U.S. impasse on IMF reform". Reuters. Retrieved 9 April 2014. 
^ "Acceptances of the Proposed Amendment of the Articles of Agreement on Reform of the Executive Board and Consents to 2010 Quota Increase". imf.org. Retrieved 9 July 2015. 
^ "IMF Members' Quotas and Voting Power, and IMF Board of Governors". imf.org. Retrieved 9 July 2015. 
^ "WSJ" – via online.wsj.com. 
^ Mayeda, Andrew (12 May 2015). "Obama Seeks to Keep IMF Veto as China Influence Is Expanded". bloomberg.com. Retrieved 9 July 2015. 
^ "IMF Managing Director Christine Lagarde Welcomes U.S. Congressional Approval of the 2010 Quota and Governance Reforms". imf.org. 18 December 2015. Retrieved 25 July 2017. 
^ Weisbrot, Mark; Johnston, Jake (2016). "Voting Share Reform at the IMF: Will it Make a Difference?" (PDF). Washington, DC: Center for Economic and Policy Research. Retrieved 25 July 2017. 
^ David van Reybrouck. Congo: The Epic History of a People. HarperCollins, 2012. p. 374ff. ISBN 978-0-06-220011-2. 
^ "World Bank – IMF support to dictatorships". Committee for the Abolition of the Third World Debt. Retrieved 21 September 2007. 
^ a b Nelson, Stephen C.; Wallace, Geoffrey P. R. (2017-12-01). "Are IMF lending programs good or bad for democracy?". The Review of International Organizations. 12 (4): 523–558. doi:10.1007/s11558-016-9250-3. ISSN 1559-7431. 
^ Oxfam, Death on the Doorstep of the Summit Archived 7 January 2012 at the Wayback Machine., August 2002.
^ Bill Clinton, "Speech: United Nations World Food Day", October 13, 2008
^ International Monetary Fund Programs and Tuberculosis Outcomes in Post-Communist Countries Archived 20 September 2008 at the Wayback Machine. PLoS Medicine. The study has not been independently verified, nor have the authors published parts of their supporting data. Retrieved 29 July 2008.
^ Rowden, Rick (2009). The Deadly Ideas of Neoliberalismh: How the IMF has Undermined Public Health and the Fight Against AIDS. Zed Books. ISBN 978-1-84813-284-9. 
^ Rowden, Rick (6 July 2016). "The IMF Confronts Its N-Word". Foreign Policy. Retrieved 22 October 2016. 
^ Globalization’s True Believers Are Having Second Thoughts. Time. 3 June 2016
^ IMF: The last generation of economic policies may have been a complete failure. Business Insider. May 2016.
^ "Financing the Response to Climate Change, Staff Position Note 10/06, March 25, 2010" (PDF). Retrieved 30 May 2010. 
^ Robert, Adam (25 March 2010). "Finance: IMF Proposes 100-Billion-Dollar Climate Fund—Global Issues". Globalissues.org. Retrieved 30 May 2010. 
^ "Tapie affair: Background to case". 22 July 2016 – via www.bbc.co.uk. 
^ Petroff, Alanna (19 December 2016). "Christine Lagarde, IMF chief, guilty of negligence". 
^ "IMF Bets on Lagarde as Trump Aims to Upend World Order". 20 December 2016 – via www.bloomberg.com. 
^ "AU discussions on African Monetary Fund". TradeMark Southern Africa. 16 March 2011. Archived from the original on 14 July 2014. Retrieved 5 July 2014. 
^ "Sixth BRICS Summit – Fortaleza Declaration". VI BRICS Summit. 15 July 2014. Retrieved 15 July 2014. 



Sources



Lipscy, Phillip (2015). "Explaining Institutional Change: Policy Areas, Outside Options, and the BrettonWoods Institutions" (PDF). American Journal of Political Science. 59 (2): 341–356. doi:10.1111/ajps.12130. 
Blomberg, Brock; Broz, J. Lawrence (17 November 2006). The Political Economy of IMF Voting Power (PDF). 2006 International Political Economy Society Meeting (IPES). Niehaus Center for Globalization & Governance, Woodrow Wilson School of Public and International Affairs. 
Boughton, James M. (2001). Silent Revolution: The International Monetary Fund 1979–1989. Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund. ISBN 978-1-557-75971-9. 
——— (2012). Tearing Down Walls: The International Monetary Fund, 1990–1999. Washington, DC: IMF. ISBN 978-1-616-35084-0. 
Breen, Michael (2013). The Politics of IMF Lending. International Political Economy Series. Basingstoke and New York, NY: Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 978-1-137-26380-3. 
Broz, J. Lawrence; Hawes Brewster, Michael (2006). "US domestic politics and International Monetary Fund policy" (PDF). In Darren G. Hawkins et al. (eds.), Delegation and Agency in International Organizations, pp. 77–106. Political Economy of Institutions and Decisions. Cambridge and New York, NY: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-86209-7. 
Oatley, Thomas; Yackee, Jason (2004). "American Interests and IMF Lending" (PDF). International Politics. 41 (3): 415–429. doi:10.1057/palgrave.ip.8800085. 
Vreeland, James Raymond (2007). The International Monetary Fund: Politics of Conditional Lending. Abingdon and New York, NY: Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-37462-0. 
Woods, Ngaire (2003). "The United States and the International Financial Institutions: Power and Influence Within the World Bank and the IMF". In Rosemary Foot, S. Neil MacFarlane, and Michael Mastanduno, eds., US Hegemony and International Organizations, pp. 92–114. Oxford and New York, NY: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-199-26142-0. 


Further reading[edit]

Bordo, M. D. "The Bretton Woods International Monetary System: A Historical Overview", in A Retrospective on the Bretton Woods System, edited by M. D. Bordo and B. Eichengreen. London:1993.
deVries, Margaret Garritsen. The IMF in a Changing World, 1945–85, International Monetary Fund, 1986.
James, H. International Monetary Cooperation since Bretton Woods, Oxford, 1996.
Joicey, N. and Pickford, S. "The International Monetary Fund and Global Economic Cooperation" in Nicholas Bayne and Stephen Woolcock, The New Economic Diplomacy: Decision-Making and Negotiation in International Relations, (Ashgate Publishing, 2011).
Keynes, J. M. The Collected Writings, Vol. XXVI. Activities 1941–1946: Shaping the Post-War World: Bretton Woods and Reparations, Cambridge, 1980.
Moschella, M. Governing Risk: The IMF and Global Financial Crises (Palgrave Macmillan; 2010).
Skidelsky, R. John Maynard Keynes: Fighting for Britain, London, 2000.
Truman, E. Strengthening IMF Surveillance: A Comprehensive Proposal[permanent dead link], Policy Brief 10–29, Peterson Institute for International Economics, 2010.
Woods, N. The Globalizers: The IMF, the World Bank, and Their Borrowers, Ithaca, 2006

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to 
IMF
International Monetary Fund.



Official website

IMF Publications page

World Economic Outlook – quarterly staff periodical
recurrent Regional Economic Reports – published annually
biennial Global Financial Stability Report
Staff Discussion Notes – publication as and when desired
Fiscal Monitor publication as and when desired
Finance and Development – quarterly academic journal




International Monetary Fund at Curlie (based on DMOZ)
IFIWatchNet (Web resource for analysis and commentary critical of the IMF and similar institutions)
"IMF-Supported Macroeconomic Policies and the World Recession: A Look at Forty-One Borrowing Countries", from the Center for Economic and Policy Research, October 2009
"Proceedings and Documents of the United Nations Monetary and Financial Conference, Bretton Woods, New Hampshire, July 1–22, 1944"
"IMF's Effect on Third World Countries" from the Dean Peter Krogh Foreign Affairs Digital Archives
"IMF and Ukraine found a compromise"







v
t
e


International trade



Terminology



Absolute advantage
Balance of payments
Balance of trade
Capital account
Comparative advantage
Current account
Export-oriented industrialization
Fair trade
Foreign exchange reserves
Globalization
Import substitution industrialization
Net capital outflow
Outsourcing
Tariff
Trade justice
Trade war
Trading nation









Organizations
and policies




International Monetary Fund (IMF)
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
World Bank Group
World Trade Organization (WTO)

International Trade Centre


Bilateral investment treaty
Economic integration
Free-trade zone
Special economic zone
Trade agreement
Trade barrier
Trade bloc





Political economy



Free trade (Adam Smith, The Wealth of Nations, Repeal of the Corn Laws)
Mercantilism
Protectionism (Economic nationalism, Autarky)





Regional organizations



ACU
ASEAN
CACM
CAN
CARICOM
CEMAC
CUBKR
EAC
EAU
EU
GCC
Mercosur
RCEP
SAARC
SACU
WAEMU





Exports by product



Aircraft & Spacecraft
Aircraft parts
Aluminium
Cars
Car parts
Coal
Coffee
Computers
Copper
Corn
Cotton
Diamonds
Electricity
Engines
Gas turbines
Gold
Integrated circuits
Iron ore
Natural gas
Oil
Petrol
Pharmaceuticals
Ships
Steel
Telecommunications equipment
Telephones
Trucks
Wheat
Wine








 Category
 Commons












v
t
e


Central banks



Global



Bank for International Settlements
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision
Financial Stability Board





Policies



Capital requirement
Contractionary monetary policy
Expansionary monetary policy
Basel II
Basel III
Basel 4





Implementation



Capital control
Discount rate
Interest rates
Money creation
Open market operation
Sovereign wealth fund





Bretton Woods system



International Monetary Fund
World Bank Group

International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes
International Development Association
International Finance Corporation
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency







Lists



List of central banks
Central banks and currencies of Africa
Central banks and currencies of Asia-Pacific
Central banks and currencies of the Caribbean
Central banks and currencies of Europe
Central banks and currencies of Central America and South America












v
t
e


International organizations



Intergovernmental
organizations




Non-cultural IGOs



International Criminal Court
International Monetary Fund
International Seabed Authority
Inter-Parliamentary Union
Interpol
New Development Bank
Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
United Nations
World Bank Group
World Trade Organization





Cultural IGOs



Commonwealth of Nations
Community of Portuguese Language Countries
Organisation internationale de la Francophonie















v
t
e


 United Nations






António Guterres, Secretary-General
Amina J. Mohammed, Deputy Secretary-General
Peter Thomson, General Assembly President





United Nations System




United Nations Charter



Preamble





Principal organs



General Assembly

President


Security Council

Members


Economic and Social Council
Secretariat

Secretary-General
Deputy Secretary-General
Under-Secretary-General


International Court of Justice

statute


Trusteeship Council





Secretariat Offices
and Departments



Headquarters
Envoy on Youth
Spokesperson for the Secretary-General
Geneva
Palace of Nations
Nairobi
Vienna
Economic and Social Affairs
Political Affairs
Public Information

Dag Hammarskjöld Library


Safety and Security
Palestinian Rights
Peacekeeping Operations
Internal Oversight
Legal Affairs
Developing Countries
Sport for Development and Peace
Disarmament Affairs
Outer Space Affairs
Partnerships
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
UN organizations by location
United Nations Office for Developing Countries






Programmes and
specialized agencies




FAO
ICAO
IFAD
ILO
IMO
ITC
IPCC
IAEA
MINURSO
UNIDO
ITU
UNAIDS
SCSL
UNCTAD
UNCITRAL
UNCDF
UNDG
UNDP
UNDPI
UNDPKO

peacekeeping


UNEP

OzonAction
UNEP/GRID-Arendal
UNEP-WCMC


UNESCO
UNFIP
UNFPA
UN-HABITAT
OHCHR
UNHCR
UNHRC
UNICEF
UNICRI
UNIDIR
UNITAR
UN-Oceans
UNODC
UNOPS
UNOSAT
UNRISD
UNRWA
UNSSC
UNU

UNU-OP
UNU-CRIS


UNV
UN Women
UNWTO
UPU
WFP
WHO
WIPO
WMO








Members / observers



Full members
Founding members

UNSC Permanent members


Observers

European Union







History



League of Nations
Four Policemen
Declaration by United Nations
Peacekeeping missions

history
timeline


Enlargement





Resolutions



Security Council vetoes
General Assembly

66th
67th


Security Council

Cyprus
Iran
Iraq
Israel
Lebanon
Nagorno-Karabakh
North Korea
Palestine
Syria
Western Sahara







Elections



Secretary-General (2006
2016)
International Court of Justice 2011
General Assembly President (2012
2016)
Security Council (2015
2016)





Related



Bretton Woods system
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty
Criticism
Delivering as One
Flag

Honour Flag


Four Nations Initiative
Genocide Convention
UN Global Compact
ICC
International Years
UN laissez-passer
Military Staff Committee
Official languages
Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
Peacekeeping
Treaty Series
UN Day
Universal Declaration of Human Rights
Millennium Declaration

Summit
Development Goals


Security Council veto power
UN reform

Security Council reform


UN Art Collection
UN Memorial Cemetery Korea





Other



Outline
UN television film series (1964–1966)
In popular culture












v
t
e


Economics






Economic theory
Econometrics
Applied economics





Macroeconomics



Adaptive expectations
Aggregate demand
Balance of payments
Business cycle
Capacity utilization
Capital flight
Central bank
Consumer confidence
Currency
Demand shock
Depression (Great Depression)
DSGE
Economic growth
Economic indicator
Economic rent
Effective demand
General Theory of Keynes
Hyperinflation
Inflation
Interest
Interest rate
Investment
IS–LM model
Microfoundations
Monetary policy
Money
NAIRU
National accounts
PPP
Rate of profit
Rational expectations
Recession
Saving
Shrinkflation
Stagflation
Supply shock
Unemployment
Macroeconomics publications





Microeconomics



Aggregation problem
Budget set
Consumer choice
Convexity
Cost–benefit analysis
Deadweight loss
Distribution
Duopoly
Economic equilibrium
Economic shortage
Economic surplus
Economies of scale
Economies of scope
Elasticity
Expected utility hypothesis
Externality
General equilibrium theory
Indifference curve
Intertemporal choice
Marginal cost
Market failure
Market structure
Monopoly
Monopsony
Non-convexity
Oligopoly
Opportunity cost
Preference
Production set
Profit
Public good
Returns to scale
Risk aversion
Scarcity
Social choice theory
Sunk costs
Supply and demand
Theory of the firm
Trade
Transaction cost
Value
Uncertainty
Utility
Microeconomics publications





Applied fields



Agricultural
Business
Demographic
Development
Economic history
Education
Engineering
Environmental
Financial
Health
Industrial organization
International
Knowledge
Labour
Law and economics
Monetary
Natural resource
Public
Service
Transportation
Urban
Welfare





Methodology



Behavioral economics
Computational economics
Econometrics
Economic systems
Experimental economics
Mathematical economics
Methodological publications





Economic thought



Ancient economic thought
Austrian school of economics
Chicago school of economics
Classical economics
Feminist economics
Heterodox economics
Institutional economics
Keynesian economics
Mainstream economics
Marxian economics
Neoclassical economics
Post-Keynesian economics
Schools overview






Notable economists and
thinkers within economics




Kenneth Arrow
Gary Becker
Francis Ysidro Edgeworth
Milton Friedman
Ragnar Frisch
Friedrich Hayek
Harold Hotelling
John Maynard Keynes
Tjalling Koopmans
Paul Krugman
Robert Lucas Jr.
Jacob Marschak
Alfred Marshall
Karl Marx
John von Neumann
Vilfredo Pareto
David Ricardo
Paul Samuelson
Joseph Schumpeter
Amartya Sen
Herbert A. Simon
Adam Smith
Robert Solow
Léon Walras
more





International organizations



Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation
Economic Cooperation Organization
European Free Trade Association
International Monetary Fund
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
World Bank
World Trade Organization








Category
Index
Lists
Outline
Publications
Business and economics portal









Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 147860995
LCCN: n81052755
ISNI: 0000 0001 2295 783X
GND: 1013082-2
SELIBR: 119884
SUDOC: 028535219
BNF: cb118842198 (data)
NLA: 35232399
NDL: 00288626
NKC: kn20010710543
BNE: XX138883








Economy portal







						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=International_Monetary_Fund&oldid=817633127"					Categories: International Monetary FundInternational finance institutionsUnited Nations specialized agenciesGlobal policy organizationsInternational development organizationsUnited Nations Development GroupUnited Nations Economic and Social CouncilOrganizations established in 1945Organizations based in Washington, D.C.1945 in economicsHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksAll articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from August 2017Articles with permanently dead external linksPages using web citations with no URLEngvarB from April 2017Use dmy dates from April 2017Coordinates not on WikidataArticles containing potentially dated statements from 2016All articles containing potentially dated statementsArticles containing potentially dated statements from 2004All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from April 2011Articles with unsourced statements from April 2014All articles with vague or ambiguous timeVague or ambiguous time from July 2015Articles with dead external links from December 2017Articles with DMOZ linksWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with SELIBR identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersWikipedia articles with NLA identifiers