"ISS" redirects here. For other uses, see ISS (disambiguation).

International Space Station


The International Space Station on 23 May 2010 as seen from the departing Space Shuttle Atlantis during STS-132.



Station statistics


SATCAT no.
25544


Call sign
Alpha, Station


Crew
Fully crewed: 6
Currently aboard: 6
(Expedition 54)


Launch
20 November 1998 (1998-11-20)


Launch pad



Baikonur 1/5 and 81/23
Kennedy LC-39





Mass
≈ 419,455 kg (924,740 lb)[1]


Length
72.8 m (239 ft)


Width
108.5 m (356 ft)


Height
≈ 20 m (66 ft)
nadir–zenith, arrays forward–aft
(27 November 2009)[needs update]


Pressurised volume
931.57 m3 (32,898 cu ft)[2]
(28 May 2016)


Atmospheric pressure
101.3 kPa (29.9 inHg; 1.0 atm)


Perigee
401.1 km (249.2 mi) AMSL[3]


Apogee
408.0 km (253.5 mi) AMSL[3]


Orbital inclination
51.64 degrees[3]


Orbital speed
7.67 km/s[3]
(27,600 km/h; 17,200 mph)


Orbital period
92.65 minutes[3]


Orbits per day
15.54[3]


Orbit epoch
7 July 2017, 13:10:09 UTC[3]


Days in orbit
19 years, 1 month, 15 days
(4 January 2018)


Days occupied
17 years, 2 months, 2 days
(4 January 2018)


No. of orbits
102,491 as of July 2017[update][3]


Orbital decay
2 km/month


Statistics as of 9 March 2011
(unless noted otherwise)
References: [1][3][4][5][6][7]


Configuration



Station elements as of June 2017[update]
(exploded view)






The International Space Station (ISS) is a space station, or a habitable artificial satellite, in low Earth orbit. Its first component launched into orbit in 1998, the last pressurised module was fitted in 2011, and the station is expected to be used until 2028. Development and assembly of the station continues, with components scheduled for launch in 2018 and 2019. The ISS is the largest human-made body in low Earth orbit and can often be seen with the naked eye from Earth.[8][9] The ISS consists of pressurised modules, external trusses, solar arrays, and other components. ISS components have been launched by Russian Proton and Soyuz rockets, and American Space Shuttles.[10]
The ISS serves as a microgravity and space environment research laboratory in which crew members conduct experiments in biology, human biology, physics, astronomy, meteorology, and other fields.[11][12][13] The station is suited for the testing of spacecraft systems and equipment required for missions to the Moon and Mars.[14] The ISS maintains an orbit with an altitude of between 330 and 435 km (205 and 270 mi) by means of reboost manoeuvres using the engines of the Zvezda module or visiting spacecraft. It completes 15.54 orbits per day.[15]
The ISS programme is a joint project among five participating space agencies: NASA, Roscosmos, JAXA, ESA, and CSA.[16][17] The ownership and use of the space station is established by intergovernmental treaties and agreements.[18] The station is divided into two sections, the Russian Orbital Segment (ROS) and the United States Orbital Segment (USOS), which is shared by many nations. As of January 2014[update], the American portion of ISS is being funded until 2024.[19][20][21] Roscosmos has endorsed the continued operation of ISS through 2024[22] but has proposed using elements of the Russian Orbital Segment to construct a new Russian space station called OPSEK.[23]
The ISS is the ninth space station to be inhabited by crews, following the Soviet and later Russian Salyut, Almaz, and Mir stations as well as Skylab from the US. The station has been continuously occupied for 7003627200000000000♠17 years and 63 days since the arrival of Expedition 1 on 2 November 2000. This is the longest continuous human presence in low Earth orbit, having surpassed the previous record of 7003364400000000000♠9 years and 357 days held by Mir. The station is serviced by a variety of visiting spacecraft: the Russian Soyuz and Progress, the American Dragon and Cygnus, the Japanese H-II Transfer Vehicle,[16] and formerly the Space Shuttle and the European Automated Transfer Vehicle. It has been visited by astronauts, cosmonauts and space tourists from 17 different nations.[24]
After the U.S. Space Shuttle programme ended in 2011, Soyuz rockets became the only provider of transport for astronauts at the International Space Station, and Dragon became the only provider of bulk cargo return to Earth (called downmass). Soyuz has very limited downmass capability.
On 28 March 2015, Russian sources announced that Roscosmos and NASA had agreed to collaborate on the development of a replacement for the current ISS.[25][26] NASA later issued a guarded statement expressing thanks for Russia's interest in future co-operation in space exploration but fell short of confirming the Russian announcement.[27][28]



Contents


1 Purpose

1.1 Scientific research

1.1.1 Microgravity


1.2 Exploration
1.3 Education and cultural outreach


2 Assembly
3 Station structure

3.1 Comparison


4 Pressurised modules

4.1 Zarya
4.2 Unity
4.3 Zvezda
4.4 Destiny
4.5 Quest
4.6 Pirs and Poisk
4.7 Harmony
4.8 Tranquility
4.9 Columbus
4.10 Kibō
4.11 Cupola
4.12 Rassvet
4.13 Leonardo
4.14 Bigelow Expandable Activity Module
4.15 International Docking Adapter-2
4.16 Elements pending Russia launch

4.16.1 Nauka
4.16.2 Uzlovoy Module
4.16.3 Science Power Modules 1 & 2


4.17 Elements pending US launch

4.17.1 International Docking Adapter-3
4.17.2 NanoRacks Airlock Module


4.18 Cancelled components


5 Unpressurised elements

5.1 Robotic arms and cargo cranes


6 Station systems

6.1 Life support

6.1.1 Atmospheric control systems


6.2 Power and thermal control
6.3 Communications and computers


7 Station operations

7.1 Expeditions and private flights
7.2 Orbit

7.2.1 Orientation




8 Mission controls

8.1 Repairs


9 Fleet operations

9.1 Currently docked/berthed
9.2 Scheduled missions
9.3 Docking
9.4 Launch and docking windows


10 Life aboard

10.1 Crew activities
10.2 Food
10.3 Hygiene


11 Crew health and safety

11.1 Radiation
11.2 Stress
11.3 Medical
11.4 Microbiological environmental hazards


12 Threat of orbital debris
13 End of mission
14 Cost
15 International co-operation
16 Sightings from Earth

16.1 Naked eye
16.2 Astrophotography


17 See also
18 Notes
19 References
20 External links

20.1 Agency ISS websites
20.2 Research
20.3 Live viewing
20.4 Multimedia





Purpose




Sunrise at Zvezda






Fisheye view of several labs






CubeSats are deployed by the NanoRacks CubeSat Deployer attached to the end of the Japanese robotic arm


According to the original Memorandum of Understanding between NASA and Rosaviakosmos, the International Space Station was intended to be a laboratory, observatory and factory in low Earth orbit. It was also planned to provide transportation, maintenance, and act as a staging base for possible future missions to the Moon, Mars and asteroids.[29] In the 2010 United States National Space Policy, the ISS was given additional roles of serving commercial, diplomatic[30] and educational purposes.[31]
Scientific research
Main article: Scientific research on the ISS
The ISS provides a platform to conduct scientific research. Small unmanned spacecraft can provide platforms for zero gravity and exposure to space, but space stations offer a long-term environment where studies can be performed potentially for decades, combined with ready access by human researchers over periods that exceed the capabilities of manned spacecraft.[24][32]
The ISS simplifies individual experiments by eliminating the need for separate rocket launches and research staff. The wide variety of research fields include astrobiology, astronomy, human research including space medicine and life sciences, physical sciences, materials science, space weather, and weather on Earth (meteorology).[11][12][13][33][34] Scientists on Earth have access to the crew's data and can modify experiments or launch new ones, which are benefits generally unavailable on unmanned spacecraft.[32] Crews fly expeditions of several months duration, providing approximately 160-man-hours per week of labour with a crew of 6.[11][35]
To detect dark matter and answer other fundamental questions about our universe, engineers and scientists from all over the world built the Alpha Magnetic Spectrometer (AMS), which NASA compares to the Hubble space telescope, and says could not be accommodated on a free flying satellite platform partly because of its power requirements and data bandwidth needs.[36][37] On 3 April 2013, NASA scientists reported that hints of dark matter may have been detected by the Alpha Magnetic Spectrometer.[38][39][40][41][42][43] According to the scientists, "The first results from the space-borne Alpha Magnetic Spectrometer confirm an unexplained excess of high-energy positrons in Earth-bound cosmic rays."




Comet Lovejoy photographed by Expedition 30 commander Dan Burbank



Expedition 8 Commander and Science Officer Michael Foale conducts an inspection of the Microgravity Science Glovebox




The space environment is hostile to life. Unprotected presence in space is characterised by an intense radiation field (consisting primarily of protons and other subatomic charged particles from the solar wind, in addition to cosmic rays), high vacuum, extreme temperatures, and microgravity.[44] Some simple forms of life called extremophiles,[45] including small invertebrates called tardigrades[46] can survive in this environment in an extremely dry state called desiccation.
Medical research improves knowledge about the effects of long-term space exposure on the human body, including muscle atrophy, bone loss, and fluid shift. This data will be used to determine whether lengthy human spaceflight and space colonisation are feasible. As of 2006[update], data on bone loss and muscular atrophy suggest that there would be a significant risk of fractures and movement problems if astronauts landed on a planet after a lengthy interplanetary cruise, such as the six-month interval required to travel to Mars.[47][48] Medical studies are conducted aboard the ISS on behalf of the National Space Biomedical Research Institute (NSBRI). Prominent among these is the Advanced Diagnostic Ultrasound in Microgravity study in which astronauts perform ultrasound scans under the guidance of remote experts. The study considers the diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions in space. Usually, there is no physician on board the ISS and diagnosis of medical conditions is a challenge. It is anticipated that remotely guided ultrasound scans will have application on Earth in emergency and rural care situations where access to a trained physician is difficult.[49][50][51]
Microgravity




A comparison between the combustion of a candle on Earth (left) and in a microgravity environment, such as that found on the ISS (right)


The Earth's gravity is only slightly weaker at the altitude of the ISS than at the surface, but objects in orbit are in a continuous state of freefall, resulting in an apparent state of weightlessness. This perceived weightlessness is disturbed by five separate effects:[52]

Drag from the residual atmosphere; when the ISS enters the Earth's shadow, the main solar panels are rotated to minimise this aerodynamic drag, helping reduce orbital decay.
Vibration from movements of mechanical systems and the crew.
Actuation of the on-board attitude control moment gyroscopes.
Thruster firings for attitude or orbital changes.
Gravity-gradient effects, also known as tidal effects. Items at different locations within the ISS would, if not attached to the station, follow slightly different orbits. Being mechanically interconnected these items experience small forces that keep the station moving as a rigid body.





ISS crew member storing samples


Researchers are investigating the effect of the station's near-weightless environment on the evolution, development, growth and internal processes of plants and animals. In response to some of this data, NASA wants to investigate microgravity's effects on the growth of three-dimensional, human-like tissues, and the unusual protein crystals that can be formed in space.[12]
Investigating the physics of fluids in microgravity will provide better models of the behaviour of fluids. Because fluids can be almost completely combined in microgravity, physicists investigate fluids that do not mix well on Earth. In addition, examining reactions that are slowed by low gravity and low temperatures will improve our understanding of superconductivity.[12]
The study of materials science is an important ISS research activity, with the objective of reaping economic benefits through the improvement of techniques used on the ground.[53] Other areas of interest include the effect of the low gravity environment on combustion, through the study of the efficiency of burning and control of emissions and pollutants. These findings may improve current knowledge about energy production, and lead to economic and environmental benefits. Future plans are for the researchers aboard the ISS to examine aerosols, ozone, water vapour, and oxides in Earth's atmosphere, as well as cosmic rays, cosmic dust, antimatter, and dark matter in the universe.[12]
Exploration




A 3D plan of the Russia-based MARS-500 complex, used for ground-based experiments which complement ISS-based preparations for a human mission to Mars


The ISS provides a location in the relative safety of Low Earth Orbit to test spacecraft systems that will be required for long-duration missions to the Moon and Mars. This provides experience in operations, maintenance as well as repair and replacement activities on-orbit, which will be essential skills in operating spacecraft farther from Earth, mission risks can be reduced and the capabilities of interplanetary spacecraft advanced.[14] Referring to the MARS-500 experiment, ESA states that "Whereas the ISS is essential for answering questions concerning the possible impact of weightlessness, radiation and other space-specific factors, aspects such as the effect of long-term isolation and confinement can be more appropriately addressed via ground-based simulations".[54] Sergey Krasnov, the head of human space flight programmes for Russia's space agency, Roscosmos, in 2011 suggested a "shorter version" of MARS-500 may be carried out on the ISS.[55]
In 2009, noting the value of the partnership framework itself, Sergey Krasnov wrote, "When compared with partners acting separately, partners developing complementary abilities and resources could give us much more assurance of the success and safety of space exploration. The ISS is helping further advance near-Earth space exploration and realisation of prospective programmes of research and exploration of the Solar system, including the Moon and Mars."[56] A manned mission to Mars may be a multinational effort involving space agencies and countries outside the current ISS partnership. In 2010, ESA Director-General Jean-Jacques Dordain stated his agency was ready to propose to the other four partners that China, India and South Korea be invited to join the ISS partnership.[57] NASA chief Charlie Bolden stated in February 2011, "Any mission to Mars is likely to be a global effort".[58] Currently, American legislation prevents NASA co-operation with China on space projects.[59]
Education and cultural outreach




Japan's Kounotori 4 berthing


The ISS crew provides opportunities for students on Earth by running student-developed experiments, making educational demonstrations, allowing for student participation in classroom versions of ISS experiments, and directly engaging students using radio, videolink and email.[16][60] ESA offers a wide range of free teaching materials that can be downloaded for use in classrooms.[61] In one lesson, students can navigate a 3-D model of the interior and exterior of the ISS, and face spontaneous challenges to solve in real time.[62]
JAXA aims both to "Stimulate the curiosity of children, cultivating their spirits, and encouraging their passion to pursue craftsmanship", and to "Heighten the child's awareness of the importance of life and their responsibilities in society."[63] Through a series of education guides, a deeper understanding of the past and near-term future of manned space flight, as well as that of Earth and life, will be learned.[64][65] In the JAXA Seeds in Space experiments, the mutation effects of spaceflight on plant seeds aboard the ISS is explored. Students grow sunflower seeds which flew on the ISS for about nine months as a start to 'touch the Universe'. In the first phase of Kibō utilisation from 2008 to mid-2010, researchers from more than a dozen Japanese universities conducted experiments in diverse fields.[66]




Original Jules Verne manuscripts displayed by crew inside Jules Verne ATV


Cultural activities are another major objective. Tetsuo Tanaka, director of JAXA's Space Environment and Utilization Center, says "There is something about space that touches even people who are not interested in science."[67]
Amateur Radio on the ISS (ARISS) is a volunteer programme which encourages students worldwide to pursue careers in science, technology, engineering and mathematics through amateur radio communications opportunities with the ISS crew. ARISS is an international working group, consisting of delegations from nine countries including several countries in Europe as well as Japan, Russia, Canada, and the United States. In areas where radio equipment cannot be used, speakerphones connect students to ground stations which then connect the calls to the station.[68]
First Orbit is a feature-length documentary film about Vostok 1, the first manned space flight around the Earth. By matching the orbit of the International Space Station to that of Vostok 1 as closely as possible, in terms of ground path and time of day, documentary filmmaker Christopher Riley and ESA astronaut Paolo Nespoli were able to film the view that Yuri Gagarin saw on his pioneering orbital space flight. This new footage was cut together with the original Vostok 1 mission audio recordings sourced from the Russian State Archive. Nespoli, during Expedition 26/27, filmed the majority of the footage for this documentary film, and as a result is credited as its director of photography.[69] The film was streamed through the website firstorbit.org in a global YouTube premiere in 2011, under a free license.[70]
In May 2013, commander Chris Hadfield shot a music video of David Bowie's "Space Oddity" on board the station; the film was released on YouTube.[71] It was the first music video ever to be filmed in space.[72]














ESA Astronaut Paolo Nespoli's spoken voice, recorded about the ISS in November 2017, for Wikipedia


In November 2017, while participating in Expedition 52/53 on the ISS, Paolo Nespoli made two recordings (one in English the other in his native Italian) of his spoken voice, for use on Wikipedia articles. These were the first content made specifically for Wikipedia, in space.[73][74]
Assembly
Main articles: Assembly of the International Space Station and List of ISS spacewalks




ISS in 2000, with Z1 truss added






ISS in 2000, with P6 truss added






ISS in 2002, with S0 truss added






ISS in 2002, with S1 truss added






ISS in 2002, with P1 Truss added






ISS in 2006, with P3/P4 truss added






ISS in 2006, with P5 truss added






ISS in 2007, with S3/S4 truss added






ISS in 2007, with S5 truss added






ISS in 2007, with P6 truss relocated






ISS in 2009, with S6 truss added


The assembly of the International Space Station, a major endeavour in space architecture, began in November 1998.[5] Russian modules launched and docked robotically, with the exception of Rassvet. All other modules were delivered by the Space Shuttle, which required installation by ISS and shuttle crewmembers using the Canadarm2 (SSRMS) and extra-vehicular activities (EVAs); as of 5 June 2011[update], they had added 159 components during more than 1,000 hours of EVA (see List of ISS spacewalks). 127 of these spacewalks originated from the station, and the remaining 32 were launched from the airlocks of docked Space Shuttles.[4] The beta angle of the station had to be considered at all times during construction, as it directly affects how long during its orbit the station (and any docked or docking spacecraft) is exposed to the sun; the Space Shuttle would not perform optimally above a limit called the "beta cutoff".[75] Many of the modules that launched on the Space Shuttle were integrated and tested on the ground at the Space Station Processing Facility to find and correct issues prior to launch.
The first module of the ISS, Zarya, was launched on 20 November 1998 on an autonomous Russian Proton rocket. It provided propulsion, attitude control, communications, electrical power, but lacked long-term life support functions. Two weeks later, a passive NASA module Unity was launched aboard Space Shuttle flight STS-88 and attached to Zarya by astronauts during EVAs. This module has two Pressurized Mating Adapters (PMAs), one connects permanently to Zarya, the other allows the Space Shuttle to dock to the space station. At that time, the Russian station Mir was still inhabited. The ISS remained unmanned for two years, while Mir was de-orbited. On 12 July 2000, Zvezda was launched into orbit. Preprogrammed commands on board deployed its solar arrays and communications antenna. It then became the passive target for a rendezvous with Zarya and Unity: it maintained a station-keeping orbit while the Zarya-Unity vehicle performed the rendezvous and docking via ground control and the Russian automated rendezvous and docking system. Zarya's computer transferred control of the station to Zvezda's computer soon after docking. Zvezda added sleeping quarters, a toilet, kitchen, CO2 scrubbers, dehumidifier, oxygen generators, exercise equipment, plus data, voice and television communications with mission control. This enabled permanent habitation of the station.[76][77]
The first resident crew, Expedition 1, arrived in November 2000 on Soyuz TM-31. At the end of the first day on the station, astronaut Bill Shepherd requested the use of the radio call sign "Alpha", which he and cosmonaut Krikalev preferred to the more cumbersome "International Space Station".[78] The name "Alpha" had previously been used for the station in the early 1990s,[79] and following the request, its use was authorised for the whole of Expedition 1.[80] Shepherd had been advocating the use of a new name to project managers for some time. Referencing a naval tradition in a pre-launch news conference he had said: "For thousands of years, humans have been going to sea in ships. People have designed and built these vessels, launched them with a good feeling that a name will bring good fortune to the crew and success to their voyage."[81] Yuri Semenov, the President of Russian Space Corporation Energia at the time, disapproved of the name "Alpha"; he felt that Mir was the first space station, and so he would have preferred the names "Beta" or "Mir 2" for the ISS.[80][82][83]
Expedition 1 arrived midway between the flights of STS-92 and STS-97. These two Space Shuttle flights each added segments of the station's Integrated Truss Structure, which provided the station with Ku-band communication for US television, additional attitude support needed for the additional mass of the USOS, and substantial solar arrays supplementing the station's existing 4 solar arrays.[84]
Over the next two years, the station continued to expand. A Soyuz-U rocket delivered the Pirs docking compartment. The Space Shuttles Discovery, Atlantis, and Endeavour delivered the Destiny laboratory and Quest airlock, in addition to the station's main robot arm, the Canadarm2, and several more segments of the Integrated Truss Structure.
The expansion schedule was interrupted by the Space Shuttle Columbia disaster in 2003 and a resulting two-year hiatus in the Space Shuttle programme. The space shuttle was grounded until 2005 with STS-114 flown by Discovery.[85]
Assembly resumed in 2006 with the arrival of STS-115 with Atlantis, which delivered the station's second set of solar arrays. Several more truss segments and a third set of arrays were delivered on STS-116, STS-117, and STS-118. As a result of the major expansion of the station's power-generating capabilities, more pressurised modules could be accommodated, and the Harmony node and Columbus European laboratory were added. These were soon followed by the first two components of Kibō. In March 2009, STS-119 completed the Integrated Truss Structure with the installation of the fourth and final set of solar arrays. The final section of Kibō was delivered in July 2009 on STS-127, followed by the Russian Poisk module. The third node, Tranquility, was delivered in February 2010 during STS-130 by the Space Shuttle Endeavour, alongside the Cupola, followed in May 2010 by the penultimate Russian module, Rassvet. Rassvet was delivered by Space Shuttle Atlantis on STS-132 in exchange for the Russian Proton delivery of the Zarya module in 1998 which had been funded by the United States.[86] The last pressurised module of the USOS, Leonardo, was brought to the station by Discovery on her final flight, STS-133, in February 2011.[87] The Alpha Magnetic Spectrometer was delivered by Endeavour on STS-134 the same year.[88]
As of June 2011[update], the station consisted of 15 pressurised modules and the Integrated Truss Structure. Five modules are still to be launched, including the Nauka with the European Robotic Arm, the Uzlovoy Module, and two power modules called NEM-1 and NEM-2.[89] As of August 2017[update], Russia's future primary research module Nauka is set to launch in the first quarter of 2018, along with the European Robotic Arm which will be able to relocate itself to different parts of the Russian modules of the station. After the Nauka module is attached, the Uzlovoy Module will be attached to one of its docking ports. When completed, the station will have a mass of more than 400 tonnes (440 short tons).[5]
The gross mass of the station changes over time. The total launch mass of the modules on orbit is about 417,289 kg (919,965 lb) (as of 3 September 2011).[90] The mass of experiments, spare parts, personal effects, crew, foodstuff, clothing, propellants, water supplies, gas supplies, docked spacecraft, and other items add to the total mass of the station. Hydrogen gas is constantly vented overboard by the oxygen generators.
Station structure




Russian Orbital Segment Windows



USOS International Space Station window locations




The ISS is a third generation[91] modular space station.[92] Modular stations can allow the mission to be changed over time and new modules can be added or removed from the existing structure, allowing greater flexibility.
Below is a diagram of major station components. The blue areas are pressurised sections accessible by the crew without using spacesuits. The station's unpressurised superstructure is indicated in red. Other unpressurised components are yellow. Note that the Unity node joins directly to the Destiny laboratory. For clarity, they are shown apart.

































Russian
docking port














Solar array

Zvezda DOS-8
(service module)

Solar array

































Russian
docking port
Poisk (MRM-2)
airlock








Pirs
airlock
Russian
docking port















































Nauka lab
to replace Pirs

European
robotic arm











































Solar array

Zarya FGB
(first module)

Solar array
















































Rassvet
(MRM-1)
Russian
docking port

















PMA 1




































Cargo spacecraft
berthing port


Leonardo
cargo bay




BEAM
habitat










































Quest
airlock

Unity
Node 1

Tranquility
Node 3















ESP-2






Cupola



























Solar array


Solar array

Heat radiator


Heat radiator

Solar array


Solar array






















































ELC 2, AMS




Z1 truss




ELC 3














S5/6 Truss
S3/S4 Truss
S1 Truss
S0 Truss
P1 Truss
P3/P4 Truss
P5/6 Truss















ELC 4, ESP 3












ELC 1






















Dextre
robotic arm


Canadarm2
robotic arm
















Solar array


Solar array










Solar array


Solar array








































ESP-1
Destiny
laboratory

























Kibō logistics
cargo bay
















Cargo spacecraft
berthing port


PMA 3
docking port






























Kibō
robotic arm









External payloads
Columbus
laboratory

Harmony
Node 2

Kibō
laboratory
Kibō
external platform

















PMA 2
docking port

















IDA 2
docking adapter


























Comparison
The ISS follows Salyut and Almaz series, Skylab, and Mir as the 11th space station launched, as the Genesis prototypes were never intended to be manned. Other examples of modular station projects include the Soviet/Russian Mir and the planned Russian OPSEK and Chinese space station. First generation space stations, such as early Salyuts and NASA's Skylab were not designed for re-supply.[93] Generally, each crew had to depart the station to free the only docking port for the next crew to arrive, Skylab had more than one docking port but was not designed for resupply. Salyut 6 and 7 had more than one docking port and were designed to be resupplied routinely during crewed operation.[94]
Pressurised modules






This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (November 2015) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Zarya




Zarya as seen by Space Shuttle Endeavour during STS-88


Zarya (Russian: Заря́; lit. dawn), also known as the Functional Cargo Block or FGB (from the Russian "Функционально-грузовой блок", Funktsionalno-gruzovoy blok or ФГБ), was the first module of the International Space Station to be launched. The FGB provided electrical power, storage, propulsion, and guidance to the ISS during the initial stage of assembly. With the launch and assembly in orbit of other modules with more specialised functionality, Zarya is now primarily used for storage, both inside the pressurised section and in the externally mounted fuel tanks. Zarya is a descendant of the TKS spacecraft designed for the Soviet Salyut programme. The name Zarya was given to the FGB because it signified the dawn of a new era of international co-operation in space. Although it was built by a Russian company, it is owned by the United States. Zarya weighs 19,300 kg (42,500 lb), is 12.55 m (41.2 ft) long and 4.1 m (13 ft) wide, discounting solar arrays.
Zarya was built from December 1994 to January 1998 at the Khrunichev State Research and Production Space Center (KhSC) in Moscow. The control system was developed by the Ukrainian Khartron corporation in Kharkiv.
Zarya was launched on 20 November 1998, on a Russian Proton rocket from Baikonur Cosmodrome Site 81 in Kazakhstan to a 400 km (250 mi) high orbit with a designed lifetime of at least 15 years. After Zarya reached orbit, STS-88 launched on 4 December 1998, to attach the Unity module.
Although only designed to fly autonomously for six to eight months, Zarya did so for almost two years because of delays with the Russian Service Module, Zvezda, which finally launched on 12 July 2000, and docked with Zarya on 26 July using the Russian Kurs docking system.
Unity




Unity as pictured by Space Shuttle Endeavour


Unity, or Node 1, is one of three nodes, or passive connecting modules, in the US Orbital Segment of the station. It was the first US-built component of the Station to be launched. The module is made of aluminium and cylindrical in shape, with six berthing locations facilitating connections to other modules. Essential space station resources such as fluids, environmental control and life support systems, electrical and data systems are routed through Unity to supply work and living areas of the station. More than 50,000 mechanical items, 216 lines to carry fluids and gases, and 121 internal and external electrical cables using six miles of wire were installed in the Unity node. Prior to its launch, conical Pressurized Mating Adapters (PMAs) were attached to the aft and forward berthing mechanisms of Unity. Unity and the two mating adapters together weighed about 11,600 kg (25,600 lb). The adapters allow the docking systems used by the Space Shuttle and by Russian modules to attach to the node's hatches and berthing mechanisms.
Unity was carried into orbit by Space Shuttle Endeavour in 1998 as the primary cargo of STS-88, the first Space Shuttle mission dedicated to assembly of the station. On 6 December 1998, the STS-88 crew mated the aft berthing port of Unity with the forward hatch of the already orbiting Zarya module.
Zvezda
Zvezda (Russian: Звезда́, meaning "star"), also known as DOS-8, Service Module or SM (Russian: СМ). Early in the station's life, Zvezda provided all of its critical systems.[95][96] It made the station permanently habitable for the first time, adding life support for up to six crew and living quarters for two.[10] Zvezda's DMS-R computer handles guidance, navigation and control for the entire space station.[97] A second computer which performs the same functions will be installed in the Nauka module, FGB-2.
The hull of Zvezda was completed in February 1985, with major internal equipment installed by October 1986.[96] The module was launched by a Proton-K rocket from Site 81/23 at Baikonur, on 12 July 2000. Zvezda is at the rear of the station according to its normal direction of travel and orientation, and its engines may be used to boost the station's orbit. Alternatively Russian and European spacecraft can dock to Zvezda's aft port and use their engines to boost the station.[98][99]
Destiny




Destiny interior in February 2001


Destiny, also known as the U.S. Lab, is the primary research facility for United States payloads aboard the ISS. In 2011, NASA chose the not-for-profit group Center for the Advancement of Science in Space (CASIS) to be the sole manager of all American science on the station which does not relate to manned exploration. The module houses 24 International Standard Payload Racks, some of which are used for environmental systems and crew daily living equipment. Destiny also serves as the mounting point for the station's Truss Structure.[100]
Quest
Quest is the only USOS airlock, and hosts spacewalks with both United States EMU and Russian Orlan spacesuits. It consists of two segments: the equipment lock, which stores spacesuits and equipment, and the crew lock, from which astronauts can exit into space. This module has a separately controlled atmosphere. Crew sleep in this module, breathing a low nitrogen mixture the night before scheduled EVAs, to avoid decompression sickness (known as "the bends") in the low-pressure suits.[101]
Pirs and Poisk
Pirs (Russian: Пирс, meaning "pier"), (Russian: Стыковочный отсек), "docking module", SO-1 or DC-1 (docking compartment), and Poisk (Russian: По́иск; lit. Search), also known as the Mini-Research Module 2 (MRM 2), Малый исследовательский модуль 2, or МИМ 2. Pirs and Poisk are Russian airlock modules, each having 2 identical hatches. An outward-opening hatch on the Mir space station failed after it swung open too fast after unlatching, because of a small amount of air pressure remaining in the airlock.[102] A different entry was used, and the hatch was repaired. All EVA hatches on the ISS open inwards and are pressure-sealing. Pirs was used to store, service, and refurbish Russian Orlan suits and provided contingency entry for crew using the slightly bulkier American suits. The outermost docking ports on both airlocks allow docking of Soyuz and Progress spacecraft, and the automatic transfer of propellants to and from storage on the ROS.[103]
Harmony




Harmony node in 2011



Tranquility node in 2011




Harmony, also known as Node 2, is the second of the station's node modules and the utility hub of the USOS. The module contains four racks that provide electrical power, bus electronic data, and acts as a central connecting point for several other components via its six Common Berthing Mechanisms (CBMs). The European Columbus and Japanese Kibō laboratories are permanently berthed to the starboard and port radial ports respectively. The nadir and zenith ports can be used for docking visiting spacecraft including HTV, Dragon, and Cygnus, with the nadir port serving as the primary docking port. American Shuttle Orbiters docked with the ISS via PMA-2, attached to the forward port.
Tranquility
Tranquility, also known as Node 3, is the third and last of the station's US nodes, it contains an additional life support system to recycle waste water for crew use and supplements oxygen generation. Like the other US nodes, it has six berthing mechanisms, five of which are currently in use. The first one connects to the station's core via the Unity module, others host the Cupola, the PMA docking port #3, the Leonardo PMM and the Bigelow Expandable Activity Module. The final zenith port remains free.
Columbus




Columbus module in 2008


Columbus, the primary research facility for European payloads aboard the ISS, provides a generic laboratory as well as facilities specifically designed for biology, biomedical research and fluid physics. Several mounting locations are affixed to the exterior of the module, which provide power and data to external experiments such as the European Technology Exposure Facility (EuTEF), Solar Monitoring Observatory, Materials International Space Station Experiment, and Atomic Clock Ensemble in Space. A number of expansions are planned for the module to study quantum physics and cosmology.[104][105] ESA's development of technologies on all the main areas of life support has been ongoing for more than 20 years and are/have been used in modules such as Columbus and the ATV. The German Aerospace Center DLR manages ground control operations for Columbus and the ATV is controlled from the French CNES Toulouse Space Center.
Kibō




Not large enough for crew using spacesuits, the airlock on Kibō has a sliding drawer for external experiments.


Kibō (Japanese: きぼう, "hope") is a laboratory and the largest ISS module. It is used for research in space medicine, biology, Earth observations, materials production, biotechnology and communications, and has facilities for growing plants and fish. During August 2011, the MAXI observatory mounted on Kibō, which uses the ISS's orbital motion to image the whole sky in the X-ray spectrum, detected for the first time the moment when a star was swallowed by a black hole.[106][107] The laboratory contains 23 racks, including 10 experiment racks, and has a dedicated airlock for experiments. In a 'shirt sleeves' environment, crew attach an experiment to the sliding drawer within the airlock, close the inner, and then open the outer hatch. By extending the drawer and removing the experiment using the dedicated robotic arm, payloads are placed on the external platform. The process can be reversed and repeated quickly, allowing access to maintain external experiments without the delays caused by EVAs.







Pressurized Module









Experiment Logistics Module









Exposed Facility









Experiment Logistics Module









Remote Manipulator System




A smaller pressurised module is attached to the top of Kibō, serving as a cargo bay. The dedicated Interorbital Communications System (ICS) allows large amounts of data to be beamed from Kibō's ICS, first to the Japanese KODAMA satellite in geostationary orbit, then to Japanese ground stations. When a direct communication link is used, contact time between the ISS and a ground station is limited to approximately 10 minutes per visible pass. When KODAMA relays data between a LEO spacecraft and a ground station, real-time communications are possible in 60% of the flight path of the spacecraft. Japanese ground controllers use telepresence robotics to remotely conduct onboard research and experiments, thus reducing the workload of station astronauts. Ground controllers also use a free-floating autonomous ball camera to photodocument astronaut and space station activities, further freeing up astronaut time.
Cupola




The Cupola's design has been compared to the Millennium Falcon from Star Wars.



Dmitri Kondratyev and Paolo Nespoli in the Cupola. Background left to right, Progress M-09M, Soyuz TMA-20, the Leonardo module and HTV-2.




Cupola is a seven-window observatory, used to view Earth and docking spacecraft. Its name derives from the Italian word cupola, which means "dome". The Cupola project was started by NASA and Boeing, but cancelled due to budget cuts. A barter agreement between NASA and ESA led to ESA resuming development of Cupola in 1998. It was built by Thales Alenia Space in Turin, Italy. The module comes equipped with robotic workstations for operating the station's main robotic arm and shutters to protect its windows from damage caused by micrometeorites. It features 7 windows, with an 80-centimetre (31 in) round window, the largest window on the station (and the largest flown in space to date). The distinctive design has been compared to the 'turret' of the fictitious Millennium Falcon from the motion picture Star Wars;[108][109] the original prop lightsaber used by actor Mark Hamill as Luke Skywalker in the 1977 film was flown to the station in 2007.[110]
Rassvet
Rassvet (Russian: Рассве́т; lit. "dawn"), also known as the Mini-Research Module 1 (MRM-1) (Russian: Ма́лый иссле́довательский модуль, МИМ 1) and formerly known as the Docking Cargo Module (DCM), is similar in design to the Mir Docking Module launched on STS-74 in 1995. Rassvet is primarily used for cargo storage and for docking by visiting spacecraft. It was flown to the ISS aboard NASA's Space Shuttle Atlantis on the STS-132 mission and connected in May 2010,[111][112] Rassvet is the only Russian-owned module launched by NASA, to repay for the launch of Zarya, which is Russian designed and built, but partially paid for by NASA.[113] Rassvet was launched with the Russian Nauka laboratory's experiments airlock temporarily attached to it, and spare parts for the European Robotic Arm.
Leonardo




Leonardo installed


Leonardo Permanent Multipurpose Module (PMM) is a storage module attached to the Tranquility node.[114][115] The three NASA Space Shuttle MPLM cargo containers—Leonardo, Raffaello and Donatello—were built for NASA in Turin, Italy by Alcatel Alenia Space, now Thales Alenia Space.[116] The MPLMs were provided to NASA's ISS programme by Italy (independent of their role as a member state of ESA) and are considered to be US elements. In a bartered exchange for providing these containers, the US gave Italy research time aboard the ISS out of the US allotment in addition to that which Italy receives as a member of ESA.[117] The Permanent Multipurpose Module was created by converting Leonardo into a module that could be permanently attached to the station.[118][119][120]
Bigelow Expandable Activity Module
Bigelow Expandable Activity Module (BEAM) is a prototype inflatable space habitat serving as a two-year technology demonstration.[121] It was built by Bigelow Aerospace under a contract established by NASA on 16 January 2013. BEAM was delivered to the ISS aboard SpaceX CRS-8 on 10 April 2016, was berthed to the aft port of the Tranquility node on 16 April,[122][123] and was fully expanded on 28 May.[124]
During its two-year test run, instruments are measuring its structural integrity and leak rate, along with temperature and radiation levels. The hatch leading into the module remains closed except for periodic visits by space station crew members for inspections and data collection. The module was originally planned to be jettisoned from the station following the test,[125] but following positive data after a year in orbit, NASA has suggested that it could remain on the station as a storage area.[126]
International Docking Adapter-2
The International Docking Adapter (IDA) is a spacecraft docking system adapter being developed to convert APAS-95 to the NASA Docking System (NDS)/ International Docking System Standard (IDSS). IDA-2 was launched on SpaceX CRS-9 on 18 July 2016. It was attached and connected to PMA-2 during a spacewalk on 19 August 2016.
Elements pending Russia launch
Nauka
Nauka (Russian: Нау́ка; lit. "science"), also known as the Multipurpose Laboratory Module (MLM) or FGB-2 (Russian: Многофункциональный лабораторный модуль, МЛМ), is the major Russian laboratory module. It was scheduled to arrive at the station in 2014, docking to the port that was occupied by the Pirs module.[127] Due to deterioration during many years spent in storage, it proved necessary to build a new propulsion module,[128] and the launch date was postponed to 2018.[129] Before the Nauka module arrives, a Progress spacecraft will remove Pirs from the station and deorbit it to reenter over the Pacific Ocean. Nauka contains an additional set of life support systems and attitude control. Originally it would have routed power from the single Science-and-Power Platform, but that single module design changed over the first ten years of the ISS mission, and the two science modules, which attach to Nauka via the Uzlovoy Module, or Russian node, each incorporate their own large solar arrays to power Russian science experiments in the ROS.
Nauka's mission has changed over time. During the mid-1990s, it was intended as a backup for the FGB, and later as a universal docking module (UDM); its docking ports will be able to support automatic docking of both spacecraft, additional modules and fuel transfer. Nauka has its own engines. Like Zvezda and Zarya, Nauka will be launched by a Proton rocket, while smaller Russian modules such as Pirs and Poisk were delivered by modified Progress spacecraft. Russia plans to separate Nauka, along with the rest of the Russian Orbital Segment, to form the OPSEK space station before the ISS is deorbited.
Uzlovoy Module
The Uzlovoy Module (UM), or Node Module is a 4-metric-ton[130] ball-shaped module that will allow docking of two scientific and power modules during the final stage of the station assembly, and provide the Russian segment additional docking ports to receive Soyuz MS and Progress MS spacecraft. UM is due to be launched in late 2018. It will be integrated with a special version of the Progress cargo ship and launched by a standard Soyuz rocket. Progress would use its own propulsion and flight control system to deliver and dock the Node Module to the nadir (Earth-facing) docking port of the Nauka MLM/FGB-2 module. One port is equipped with an active hybrid docking port, which enables docking with the MLM module. The remaining five ports are passive hybrids, enabling docking of Soyuz and Progress vehicles, as well as heavier modules and future spacecraft with modified docking systems. The node module was conceived to serve as the only permanent element of the future Russian successor to the ISS, OPSEK. Equipped with six docking ports, the Node Module would serve as a single permanent core of the future station with all other modules coming and going as their life span and mission required.[131][132] This would be a progression beyond the ISS and Russia's modular Mir space station, which are in turn more advanced than early monolithic first generation stations such as Skylab, and early Salyut and Almaz stations.
Science Power Modules 1 & 2
(NEM-1, NEM-2) (Russian: Нау́чно-Энергетический Модуль-1 и -2)
Elements pending US launch
International Docking Adapter-3
The International Docking Adapter (IDA) is a spacecraft docking system adapter being developed to convert APAS-95 to the NASA Docking System (NDS)/ International Docking System Standard (IDSS). IDA-3 is scheduled to be launched on the SpaceX CRS-16 mission during summer 2018. IDA-3 is being built mostly from spare parts to speed construction.
NanoRacks Airlock Module
The NanoRacks Airlock Module is a commercially-funded airlock module intended to be launched in 2019. The module is being built by NanoRacks and Boeing,[133] and will be used to deploy CubeSats, small satellites, and other external payloads for NASA, CASIS, and other commercial and governmental customers. It is intended to be manifested with a Commercial Resupply Services mission.[134]




The cancelled Habitation module under construction in 1997


Cancelled components
Several modules planned for the station were cancelled over the course of the ISS programme. Reasons include budgetary constraints, the modules becoming unnecessary, and station redesigns after the 2003 Columbia disaster. The US Centrifuge Accommodations Module would have hosted science experiments in varying levels of artificial gravity.[135] The US Habitation Module would have served as the station's living quarters. Instead, the sleep stations are now spread throughout the station.[136] The US Interim Control Module and ISS Propulsion Module would have replaced the functions of Zvezda in case of a launch failure.[137] Two Russian Research Modules were planned for scientific research.[138] They would have docked to a Russian Universal Docking Module.[139] The Russian Science Power Platform would have supplied power to the Russian Orbital Segment independent of the ITS solar arrays.
Unpressurised elements




ISS Truss Components breakdown showing Trusses and all ORUs in situ


The ISS has a large number of external components that do not require pressurisation. The largest of these is the Integrated Truss Structure (ITS), to which the station's main solar arrays and thermal radiators are mounted.[140] The ITS consists of ten separate segments forming a structure 108.5 m (356 ft) long.[5]
The station in its complete form has several smaller external components, such as the six robotic arms, the three External Stowage Platforms (ESPs) and four ExPRESS Logistics Carriers (ELCs).[141][142] While these platforms allow experiments (including MISSE, the STP-H3 and the Robotic Refueling Mission) to be deployed and conducted in the vacuum of space by providing electricity and processing experimental data locally, their primary function is to store spare Orbital Replacement Units (ORUs). ORUs are parts that can be replaced when they fail or pass their design life. Examples of ORUs include pumps, storage tanks, antennas and battery units. Such units are replaced either by astronauts during EVA or by robotic arms. Spare parts were routinely transported to and from the station via Space Shuttle resupply missions, with a heavy emphasis on ORU transport once the NASA Shuttle approached retirement.[143] Several shuttle missions were dedicated to the delivery of ORUs, including STS-129,[144] STS-133[145] and STS-134.[146] As of January 2011[update], only one other mode of transportation of ORUs had been utilised – the Japanese cargo vessel HTV-2 – which delivered an FHRC and CTC-2 via its Exposed Pallet (EP).[147][needs update]




Construction of the Integrated Truss Structure over New Zealand.


There are also smaller exposure facilities mounted directly to laboratory modules; the Kibō Exposed Facility serves as an external 'porch' for the Kibō complex,[148] and a facility on the European Columbus laboratory provides power and data connections for experiments such as the European Technology Exposure Facility[149][150] and the Atomic Clock Ensemble in Space.[151] A remote sensing instrument, SAGE III-ISS, was delivered to the station in 2014 aboard a Dragon capsule, and the NICER experiment is scheduled to be delivered in 2016.[152][153] The largest such scientific payload externally mounted to the ISS is the Alpha Magnetic Spectrometer (AMS), a particle physics experiment launched on STS-134 in May 2011, and mounted externally on the ITS. The AMS measures cosmic rays to look for evidence of dark matter and antimatter.[154]
Robotic arms and cargo cranes




Commander Volkov stands on Pirs with his back to the Soyuz whilst operating the manual Strela crane holding photographer Kononenko. Zarya is seen to the left and Zvezda across the bottom of the image.



Dextre, like many of the station's experiments and robotic arms, can be operated from Earth and perform tasks while the crew sleeps.




The Integrated Truss Structure serves as a base for the station's primary remote manipulator system, called the Mobile Servicing System (MSS), which is composed of three main components. Canadarm2, the largest robotic arm on the ISS, has a mass of 1,800 kilograms (4,000 lb) and is used to dock and manipulate spacecraft and modules on the USOS, hold crew members and equipment in place during EVAs and move Dextre around to perform tasks.[155] Dextre is a 1,560 kg (3,440 lb) robotic manipulator with two arms, a rotating torso and has power tools, lights and video for replacing orbital replacement units (ORUs) and performing other tasks requiring fine control.[156] The Mobile Base System (MBS) is a platform which rides on rails along the length of the station's main truss. It serves as a mobile base for Canadarm2 and Dextre, allowing the robotic arms to reach all parts of the USOS.[157] To gain access to the Russian Segment a grapple fixture was added to Zarya on STS-134, so that Canadarm2 can inchworm itself onto the ROS.[158] Also installed during STS-134 was the 15 m (50 ft) Orbiter Boom Sensor System (OBSS), which had been used to inspect heat shield tiles on Space Shuttle missions and can be used on station to increase the reach of the MSS.[158] Staff on Earth or the station can operate the MSS components via remote control, performing work outside the station without space walks.
Japan's Remote Manipulator System, which services the Kibō Exposed Facility,[159] was launched on STS-124 and is attached to the Kibō Pressurised Module.[160] The arm is similar to the Space Shuttle arm as it is permanently attached at one end and has a latching end effector for standard grapple fixtures at the other.
The European Robotic Arm, which will service the Russian Orbital Segment, will be launched alongside the Multipurpose Laboratory Module in 2017.[161] The ROS does not require spacecraft or modules to be manipulated, as all spacecraft and modules dock automatically and may be discarded the same way. Crew use the two Strela (Russian: Стрела́; lit. Arrow) cargo cranes during EVAs for moving crew and equipment around the ROS. Each Strela crane has a mass of 45 kg (99 lb).
Station systems
Life support
Main articles: ISS ECLSS and Chemical oxygen generator
The critical systems are the atmosphere control system, the water supply system, the food supply facilities, the sanitation and hygiene equipment, and fire detection and suppression equipment. The Russian Orbital Segment's life support systems are contained in the Zvezda service module. Some of these systems are supplemented by equipment in the USOS. The MLM Nauka laboratory has a complete set of life support systems.
Atmospheric control systems




The interactions between the components of the ISS Environmental Control and Life Support System (ECLSS)


The atmosphere on board the ISS is similar to the Earth's.[162] Normal air pressure on the ISS is 101.3 kPa (14.7 psi);[163] the same as at sea level on Earth. An Earth-like atmosphere offers benefits for crew comfort, and is much safer than the alternative, a pure oxygen atmosphere, because of the increased risk of a fire such as that responsible for the deaths of the Apollo 1 crew.[164] Earth-like atmospheric conditions have been maintained on all Russian and Soviet spacecraft.[165]
The Elektron system aboard Zvezda and a similar system in Destiny generate oxygen aboard the station.[166] The crew has a backup option in the form of bottled oxygen and Solid Fuel Oxygen Generation (SFOG) canisters, a chemical oxygen generator system.[167] Carbon dioxide is removed from the air by the Vozdukh system in Zvezda. Other by-products of human metabolism, such as methane from the intestines and ammonia from sweat, are removed by activated charcoal filters.[167]
Part of the ROS atmosphere control system is the oxygen supply. Triple-redundancy is provided by the Elektron unit, solid fuel generators, and stored oxygen. The primary supply of oxygen is the Elektron unit which produces O
2 and H
2 by electrolysis of water and vents H2 overboard. The 1 kW system uses approximately one litre of water per crew member per day. This water is either brought from Earth or recycled from other systems. Mir was the first spacecraft to use recycled water for oxygen production. The secondary oxygen supply is provided by burning O
2-producing Vika cartridges (see also ISS ECLSS). Each 'candle' takes 5–20 minutes to decompose at 450–500 °C, producing 600 litres of O
2. This unit is manually operated.[168]
The US Orbital Segment has redundant supplies of oxygen, from a pressurised storage tank on the Quest airlock module delivered in 2001, supplemented ten years later by ESA-built Advanced Closed-Loop System (ACLS) in the Tranquility module (Node 3), which produces O
2 by electrolysis.[169] Hydrogen produced is combined with carbon dioxide from the cabin atmosphere and converted to water and methane.
Power and thermal control
Main articles: Electrical system of the International Space Station and External Active Thermal Control System




Russian solar arrays, backlit by sunset.



One of the eight truss mounted pairs of USOS solar arrays




Double-sided solar, or Photovoltaic, arrays provide electrical power for the ISS. These bifacial cells are more efficient and operate at a lower temperature than single-sided cells commonly used on Earth, by collecting sunlight on one side and light reflected off the Earth on the other.[170]
The Russian segment of the station, like the Space Shuttle and most spacecraft, uses 28 volt DC from four rotating solar arrays mounted on Zarya and Zvezda. The USOS uses 130–180 V DC from the USOS PV array, power is stabilised and distributed at 160 V DC and converted to the user-required 124 V DC. The higher distribution voltage allows smaller, lighter conductors, at the expense of crew safety. The ROS uses low voltage; the two station segments share power with converters.
The USOS solar arrays are arranged as four wing pairs, for a total production of 75 to 90 kilowatts.[171] These arrays normally track the sun to maximise power generation. Each array is about 375 m2 (4,036 sq ft) in area and 58 m (190 ft) long. In the complete configuration, the solar arrays track the sun by rotating the alpha gimbal once per orbit; the beta gimbal follows slower changes in the angle of the sun to the orbital plane. The Night Glider mode aligns the solar arrays parallel to the ground at night to reduce the significant aerodynamic drag at the station's relatively low orbital altitude.[172]
The station uses rechargeable nickel–hydrogen batteries (NiH
2) for continuous power during the 35 minutes of every 90-minute orbit that it is eclipsed by the Earth. The batteries are recharged on the day side of the Earth. They have a 6.5-year lifetime (over 37,000 charge/discharge cycles) and will be regularly replaced over the anticipated 20-year life of the station.[173] As of 2017, the nickel–hydrogen batteries are being replaced by lithium-ion batteries, which are expected to last until the end of the ISS program.[174]
The station's large solar panels generate a high potential voltage difference between the station and the ionosphere. This could cause arcing through insulating surfaces and sputtering of conductive surfaces as ions are accelerated by the spacecraft plasma sheath. To mitigate this, plasma contactor units (PCU)s create current paths between the station and the ambient plasma field.[175]




ISS External Active Thermal Control System (EATCS) diagram


The station's systems and experiments consume a large amount of electrical power, almost all of which converts to heat. Little of this heat dissipates through the walls of the station. To keep the internal ambient temperature within comfortable, workable limits, ammonia is continuously pumped through pipes throughout the station to collect heat, then into external radiators to emit infrared radiation, then back into the station.[176] Thus this passive thermal control system (PTCS) is made of external surface materials, insulation such as MLI, and heat pipes.
If the PTCS cannot keep up with the heat load, an External Active Thermal Control System (EATCS) maintains the temperature. The EATCS consists of an internal, non-toxic, water coolant loop used to cool and dehumidify the atmosphere, which transfers collected heat into an external liquid ammonia loop that can withstand the much lower temperature of space, and is circulated through radiators to remove the heat. The EATCS provides cooling for all the US pressurised modules, including Kibō and Columbus, as well as the main power distribution electronics of the S0, S1 and P1 trusses. It can reject up to 70 kW. This is much more than the 14 kW of the Early External Active Thermal Control System (EEATCS) via the Early Ammonia Servicer (EAS), which was launched on STS-105 and installed onto the P6 Truss.[177]
Communications and computers
Main articles: Tracking and Data Relay Satellite and Luch (satellite)
See also: ThinkPad § Use in space




The communications systems used by the ISS
* Luch satellite and the Space Shuttle are not currently in use


Radio communications provide telemetry and scientific data links between the station and Mission Control Centres. Radio links are also used during rendezvous and docking procedures and for audio and video communication between crew members, flight controllers and family members. As a result, the ISS is equipped with internal and external communication systems used for different purposes.[178]
The Russian Orbital Segment communicates directly with the ground via the Lira antenna mounted to Zvezda.[16][179] The Lira antenna also has the capability to use the Luch data relay satellite system.[16] This system, used for communications with Mir, fell into disrepair during the 1990s, and so is no longer in use,[16][180][181] although two new Luch satellites—Luch-5A and Luch-5B—were launched in 2011 and 2012 respectively to restore the operational capability of the system.[182] Another Russian communications system is the Voskhod-M, which enables internal telephone communications between Zvezda, Zarya, Pirs, Poisk and the USOS, and also provides a VHF radio link to ground control centres via antennas on Zvezda's exterior.[183]
The US Orbital Segment (USOS) makes use of two separate radio links mounted in the Z1 truss structure: the S band (used for audio) and Ku band (used for audio, video and data) systems. These transmissions are routed via the United States Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (TDRSS) in geostationary orbit, which allows for almost continuous real-time communications with NASA's Mission Control Center (MCC-H) in Houston.[10][16][178] Data channels for the Canadarm2, European Columbus laboratory and Japanese Kibō modules are routed via the S band and Ku band systems, although the European Data Relay System and a similar Japanese system will eventually complement the TDRSS in this role.[10][184] Communications between modules are carried on an internal digital wireless network.[185]




Laptop computers surround the Canadarm2 console.


UHF radio is used by astronauts and cosmonauts conducting EVAs. UHF is used by other spacecraft that dock to or undock from the station, such as Soyuz, Progress, HTV, ATV and the Space Shuttle (except the shuttle also makes use of the S band and Ku band systems via TDRSS), to receive commands from Mission Control and ISS crewmembers.[16] Automated spacecraft are fitted with their own communications equipment; the ATV uses a laser attached to the spacecraft and equipment attached to Zvezda, known as the Proximity Communications Equipment, to accurately dock to the station.[186][187]
The ISS is equipped with approximately 100 IBM and Lenovo ThinkPad model A31 and T61P laptop computers. Each computer is a commercial off-the-shelf purchase which is then modified for safety and operation including updates to connectors, cooling and power to accommodate the station's 28V DC power system and weightless environment. Heat generated by the laptops does not rise but stagnates around the laptop, so additional forced ventilation is required. Laptops aboard the ISS are connected to the station's wireless LAN via Wi-Fi and to the ground via Ku band. This provides speeds of 10 Mbit/s to and 3 Mbit/s from the station, comparable to home DSL connection speeds.[188][189]
The operating system used for key station functions is the Debian Linux distribution.[190] The migration from Microsoft Windows was made in May 2013 for reasons of reliability, stability and flexibility.[191]
Station operations
Expeditions and private flights




Zarya and Unity were entered for the first time on 10 December 1998.






Soyuz TM-31 being prepared to bring the first resident crew to the station in October 2000






ISS was slowly assembled over a decade of spaceflights and crews






Expeditions have included crew members from many nations


See also the list of International Space Station expeditions (professional crew), space tourism (private travellers), and the list of human spaceflights to the ISS (both).
Each permanent crew is given an expedition number. Expeditions run up to six months, from launch until undocking, an 'increment' covers the same time period, but includes cargo ships and all activities. Expeditions 1 to 6 consisted of 3 person crews, Expeditions 7 to 12 were reduced to the safe minimum of two following the destruction of the NASA Shuttle Columbia. From Expedition 13 the crew gradually increased to 6 around 2010.[192][193] With the arrival of the American Commercial Crew vehicles in the middle of the 2010s, expedition size may be increased to seven crew members, the number ISS is designed for.[194][195]
Sergei Krikalev, member of Expedition 1 and Commander of Expedition 11, has spent more time in space than anyone else, a total of 803 days and 9 hours and 39 minutes. His awards include the Order of Lenin, Hero of the Soviet Union, Hero of the Russian Federation, and 4 NASA medals. On 16 August 2005 at 1:44 am EDT, he passed the record of 748 days held by Sergei Avdeyev, who had 'time travelled' 1/50th of a second into the future aboard Mir.[196] He participated in psychosocial experiment SFINCSS-99 (Simulation of Flight of International Crew on Space Station), which examined inter-cultural and other stress factors affecting integration of crew in preparation for the ISS spaceflights. Scott Kelly has spent the most time in space of any American. Kelly returned from the ISS on 1 March 2016 having spent 340 consecutive days in orbit.
Travellers who pay for their own passage into space are termed spaceflight participants by Roscosmos and NASA, and are sometimes referred to as space tourists, a term they generally dislike.[note 1] All seven were transported to the ISS on Russian Soyuz spacecraft. When professional crews change over in numbers not divisible by the three seats in a Soyuz, and a short-stay crewmember is not sent, the spare seat is sold by MirCorp through Space Adventures. When the space shuttle retired in 2011, and the station's crew size was reduced to 6, space tourism was halted, as the partners relied on Russian transport seats for access to the station. Soyuz flight schedules increase after 2013, allowing 5 Soyuz flights (15 seats) with only two expeditions (12 seats) required.[202] The remaining seats are sold for around US$40 million to members of the public who can pass a medical exam. ESA and NASA criticised private spaceflight at the beginning of the ISS, and NASA initially resisted training Dennis Tito, the first man to pay for his own passage to the ISS.[note 2]
Anousheh Ansari became the first Iranian in space and the first self-funded woman to fly to the station. Officials reported that her education and experience make her much more than a tourist, and her performance in training had been "excellent."[203] Ansari herself dismisses the idea that she is a tourist. She did Russian and European studies involving medicine and microbiology during her 10-day stay. The documentary Space Tourists follows her journey to the station, where she fulfilled "an age-old dream of man: to leave our planet as a "normal person" and travel into outer space."[204]
In 2008, spaceflight participant Richard Garriott placed a geocache aboard the ISS during his flight.[205] This is currently the only non-terrestrial geocache in existence.[206] At the same time, the Immortality Drive, an electronic record of eight digitised human DNA sequences, was placed aboard the ISS.[207]
Orbit




Graph showing the changing altitude of the ISS from November 1998 until January 2009



Play media

Animation of ISS orbit from a North American geostationary point of view (sped up 1800 times)




The ISS is maintained in a nearly circular orbit with a minimum mean altitude of 330 km (205 mi) and a maximum of 410 km (255 mi), in the centre of the thermosphere, at an inclination of 51.6 degrees to Earth's equator, necessary to ensure that Russian Soyuz and Progress spacecraft launched from the Baikonur Cosmodrome may be safely launched to reach the station. Spent rocket stages must be dropped into uninhabited areas and this limits the directions rockets can be launched from the spaceport.[208][209] It travels at an average speed of 27,724 kilometres per hour (17,227 mph), and completes 15.54 orbits per day (93 minutes per orbit).[3][15] The station's altitude was allowed to fall around the time of each NASA shuttle mission. Orbital boost burns would generally be delayed until after the shuttle's departure. This allowed shuttle payloads to be lifted with the station's engines during the routine firings, rather than have the shuttle lift itself and the payload together to a higher orbit. This trade-off allowed heavier loads to be transferred to the station. After the retirement of the NASA shuttle, the nominal orbit of the space station was raised in altitude.[210][211] Other, more frequent supply ships do not require this adjustment as they are substantially lighter vehicles.[32][212]




Orbits of the ISS, shown in April 2013


Orbital boosting can be performed by the station's two main engines on the Zvezda service module, or Russian or European spacecraft docked to Zvezda's aft port. The ATV has been designed with the possibility of adding a second docking port to its other end, allowing it to remain at the ISS and still allow other craft to dock and boost the station. It takes approximately two orbits (three hours) for the boost to a higher altitude to be completed.[212] Maintaining ISS altitude uses about 7.5 tonnes of chemical fuel per annum[213] at an annual cost of about $210 million.[214]
In December 2008 NASA signed an agreement with the Ad Astra Rocket Company which may result in the testing on the ISS of a VASIMR plasma propulsion engine.[215] This technology could allow station-keeping to be done more economically than at present.[216][217]
The Russian Orbital Segment contains the Data Management System, which handles Guidance, Navigation and Control (ROS GNC) for the entire station.[97] Initially, Zarya, the first module of the station, controlled the station until a short time after the Russian service module Zvezda docked and was transferred control. Zvezda contains the ESA built DMS-R Data Management System.[218] Using two fault-tolerant computers (FTC), Zvezda computes the station's position and orbital trajectory using redundant Earth horizon sensors, Solar horizon sensors as well as Sun and star trackers. The FTCs each contain three identical processing units working in parallel and provide advanced fault-masking by majority voting.
Orientation
Zvezda uses gyroscopes and thrusters to turn itself around. Gyroscopes do not require propellant, rather they use electricity to 'store' momentum in flywheels by turning in the opposite direction to the station's movement. The USOS has its own computer controlled gyroscopes to handle the extra mass of that section. When gyroscopes 'saturate', thrusters are used to cancel out the stored momentum. During Expedition 10, an incorrect command was sent to the station's computer, using about 14 kilograms of propellant before the fault was noticed and fixed. When attitude control computers in the ROS and USOS fail to communicate properly, it can result in a rare 'force fight' where the ROS GNC computer must ignore the USOS counterpart, which has no thrusters.[219][220][221] When an ATV, NASA Shuttle, or Soyuz is docked to the station, it can also be used to maintain station attitude such as for troubleshooting. Shuttle control was used exclusively during installation of the S3/S4 truss, which provides electrical power and data interfaces for the station's electronics.[222]
Mission controls
The components of the ISS are operated and monitored by their respective space agencies at mission control centres across the globe, including:

Roscosmos's Mission Control Center at Korolyov, Moscow Oblast, controls the Russian Orbital Segment which handles Guidance, Navigation and Control for the entire Station.,[97][218] in addition to individual Soyuz and Progress missions.[16]
ESA's ATV Control Centre, at the Toulouse Space Centre (CST) in Toulouse, France, controls flights of the unmanned European Automated Transfer Vehicle.[16]
JAXA's JEM Control Center and HTV Control Center at Tsukuba Space Center (TKSC) in Tsukuba, Japan, are responsible for operating the Kibō complex and all flights of the 'White Stork' HTV Cargo spacecraft, respectively.[16]
NASA's Mission Control Center at Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center in Houston, Texas, serves as the primary control facility for the United States segment of the ISS and also controlled the Space Shuttle missions that visited the station.[16]
NASA's Payload Operations and Integration Center at Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, coordinates payload operations in the USOS.[16]
ESA's Columbus Control Centre at the German Aerospace Centre (DLR) in Oberpfaffenhofen, Germany, manages the European Columbus research laboratory.[16]
CSA's MSS Control at Saint-Hubert, Quebec, Canada, controls and monitors the Mobile Servicing System, or Canadarm2.[16]






Space centres involved with the ISS programme


Repairs
Main articles: Orbital Replacement Units and International Space Station maintenance




Spare parts are called ORUs; some are externally stored on pallets called ELCs and ESPs.


Orbital Replacement Units (ORUs) are spare parts that can be readily replaced when a unit either passes its design life or fails. Examples of ORUs are pumps, storage tanks, controller boxes, antennas, and battery units. Some units can be replaced using robotic arms. Many are stored outside the station, either on small pallets called ExPRESS Logistics Carriers (ELCs) or share larger platforms called External Stowage Platforms which also hold science experiments. Both kinds of pallets have electricity as many parts which could be damaged by the cold of space require heating. The larger logistics carriers also have computer local area network connections (LAN) and telemetry to connect experiments. A heavy emphasis on stocking the USOS with ORU's occurred around 2011, before the end of the NASA shuttle programme, as its commercial replacements, Cygnus and Dragon, carry one tenth to one quarter the payload.




While anchored on the end of the OBSS during STS-120, astronaut Scott Parazynski performs makeshift repairs to a US solar array which damaged itself when unfolding.






Mike Hopkins on his Christmas Eve spacewalk


Unexpected problems and failures have impacted the station's assembly time-line and work schedules leading to periods of reduced capabilities and, in some cases, could have forced abandonment of the station for safety reasons, had these problems not been resolved. During STS-120 in 2007, following the relocation of the P6 truss and solar arrays, it was noted during the redeployment of the array that it had become torn and was not deploying properly.[223] An EVA was carried out by Scott Parazynski, assisted by Douglas Wheelock. The men took extra precautions to reduce the risk of electric shock, as the repairs were carried out with the solar array exposed to sunlight.[224] The issues with the array were followed in the same year by problems with the starboard Solar Alpha Rotary Joint (SARJ), which rotates the arrays on the starboard side of the station. Excessive vibration and high-current spikes in the array drive motor were noted, resulting in a decision to substantially curtail motion of the starboard SARJ until the cause was understood. Inspections during EVAs on STS-120 and STS-123 showed extensive contamination from metallic shavings and debris in the large drive gear and confirmed damage to the large metallic race ring at the heart of the joint, and so the joint was locked to prevent further damage.[225] Repairs to the joint were carried out during STS-126 with lubrication of both joints and the replacement of 11 out of 12 trundle bearings on the joint.[226][227]
2009 saw damage to the S1 radiator, one of the components of the station's cooling system. The problem was first noticed in Soyuz imagery in September 2008, but was not thought to be serious.[228] The imagery showed that the surface of one sub-panel has peeled back from the underlying central structure, possibly because of micro-meteoroid or debris impact. It is also known that a Service Module thruster cover, jettisoned during an EVA in 2008, had struck the S1 radiator, but its effect, if any, has not been determined. On 15 May 2009 the damaged radiator panel's ammonia tubing was mechanically shut off from the rest of the cooling system by the computer-controlled closure of a valve. The same valve was used immediately afterwards to vent the ammonia from the damaged panel, eliminating the possibility of an ammonia leak from the cooling system via the damaged panel.[228]
Early on 1 August 2010, a failure in cooling Loop A (starboard side), one of two external cooling loops, left the station with only half of its normal cooling capacity and zero redundancy in some systems.[229][230][231] The problem appeared to be in the ammonia pump module that circulates the ammonia cooling fluid. Several subsystems, including two of the four CMGs, were shut down.
Planned operations on the ISS were interrupted through a series of EVAs to address the cooling system issue. A first EVA on 7 August 2010, to replace the failed pump module, was not fully completed because of an ammonia leak in one of four quick-disconnects. A second EVA on 11 August successfully removed the failed pump module.[232][233] A third EVA was required to restore Loop A to normal functionality.[234][235]
The USOS's cooling system is largely built by the American company Boeing,[236] which is also the manufacturer of the failed pump.[237]
An air leak from the USOS in 2004,[238] the venting of fumes from an Elektron oxygen generator in 2006,[239] and the failure of the computers in the ROS in 2007 during STS-117 left the station without thruster, Elektron, Vozdukh and other environmental control system operations, the root cause of which was found to be condensation inside the electrical connectors leading to a short-circuit.[citation needed]
The four Main Bus Switching Units (MBSUs, located in the S0 truss), control the routing of power from the four solar array wings to the rest of the ISS. In late 2011 MBSU-1, while still routing power correctly, ceased responding to commands or sending data confirming its health, and was scheduled to be swapped out at the next available EVA. In each MBSU, two power channels feed 160V DC from the arrays to two DC-to-DC power converters (DDCUs) that supply the 124V power used in the station. A spare MBSU was already on board, but 30 August 2012 EVA failed to be completed when a bolt being tightened to finish installation of the spare unit jammed before electrical connection was secured.[240] The loss of MBSU-1 limits the station to 75% of its normal power capacity, requiring minor limitations in normal operations until the problem can be addressed.
On 5 September 2012, in a second, 6 hr, EVA to replace MBSU-1, astronauts Sunita Williams and Akihiko Hoshide successfully restored the ISS to 100% power.[241]
On 24 December 2013, astronauts made a rare Christmas Eve space walk, installing a new ammonia pump for the station's cooling system. The faulty cooling system had failed earlier in the month, halting many of the station's science experiments. Astronauts had to brave a "mini blizzard" of ammonia while installing the new pump. It was only the second Christmas Eve spacewalk in NASA history.[242]
Fleet operations
See also: List of human spaceflights to the International Space Station and List of unmanned spaceflights to the International Space Station




ISS orbit with calendar of expeditions and modules through 2014






Dragon and Cygnus cargo vessels were docked at the ISS together for the first time in April 2016.


A wide variety of manned and unmanned spacecraft have supported the station's activities. More than 60 Progress spacecraft, including M-MIM2 and M-SO1 which installed modules, and more than 40 Soyuz spacecraft have flown to the ISS. 35 flights of the retired NASA Space Shuttle were made to the station.[4] There have been five European ATV, five Japanese HTV 'Kounotori', eight SpaceX Dragon and four Orbital ATK Cygnus flights.
Currently docked/berthed
See also the list of professional crew, private travellers, both or just unmanned spaceflights.

Key

  Uncrewed cargoships are in light blue
  Crewed spacecraft are in light green


Spacecraft and mission[243]
Location
Arrival (UTC)
Departure (planned)



Progress MS-06
Progress 67 cargo
Zvezda aft
16 June 2017
7 December 2017[244]



Soyuz MS-06
Expedition 53/54
Poisk zenith
12 September 2017[245]
27 February 2018



Progress MS-07
Progress 68 cargo
Pirs nadir
16 October 2017
March 2018[246]



CRS-13
Dragon CRS-13 cargo
Harmony nadir
17 December 2017
mid January 2018[247]



Soyuz MS-07
Expedition 54/55
Rassvet nadir
19 December 2017
3 June 2018[248]


Scheduled missions

All dates are UTC. Dates are the earliest possible dates and may change.
Forward ports are at the front of the station according to its normal direction of travel and orientation (attitude). Aft is at the rear of the station, used by spacecraft boosting the station's orbit. Nadir is closest the Earth, Zenith is on top.
Spacecraft operated by government agencies are indicated with 'Gov' and under commercial arrangements are indicated with 'Com'.


Key

  Uncrewed cargo ships are in light blue colour
  Crewed spacecraft are in light green colour
  Modules are in wheat colour



Launch date (NET)
Launch vehicle
Launch site
Launch service provider
Payload
Spacecraft
Mission
Docking / berthing port
Ref.




9 February 2018
Falcon 9 FT

Kennedy LC-39A


SpaceX

CRS-14
Dragon
Dragon 14 cargo
Harmony nadir
[249]


13 February 2018
Soyuz 2.1a

Baikonur Site 31/6


Roscosmos

Progress MS-08
Progress
Progress 69 cargo
Zvezda aft
[249]


February 2018
H-IIB

Tanegashima Pad Y2


JAXA

Kounotori 7
HTV
HTV 7 cargo
Harmony nadir
[250]


10 March 2018
Soyuz-FG

Baikonur Pad 1/5


Roscosmos

Soyuz MS-08 (54S)
Soyuz
Expedition 55/56
Poisk zenith
[249]


April 2018
Falcon 9 B5

Kennedy LC-39A


SpaceX

SpX-DM1
Dragon V2
Uncrewed test flight
Unity forward
[251]


25 April 2018
Soyuz-FG

Baikonur Pad 1/5


Roscosmos

Soyuz MS-09 (55S)
Soyuz
Expedition 56/57
Rassvet nadir
[249]


1 May 2018
Antares 230

MARS Pad 0A


Orbital ATK

CRS-9
Cygnus
Cygnus 9 cargo
Unity nadir
[249]


27 June 2018
Soyuz 2.1a

Baikonur Site 31/6


Roscosmos

Progress MS-09
Progress
Progress 70 cargo
Pirs nadir
[249]


August 2018
Falcon 9 FT

Kennedy LC-39A


SpaceX

CRS-15
Dragon
Dragon 15 cargo
Harmony nadir
[250]


August 2018
Atlas V N22

Canaveral SLC-41


Boeing

Boe-OFT
Starliner
Uncrewed test flight
Unity forward
[251]


August 2018
Falcon 9 B5

Kennedy LC-39A


SpaceX

SpX-DM2
Dragon V2
Crewed test flight
Unity forward
[251]


30 September 2018
Soyuz-FG

Baikonur Pad 1/5


Roscosmos

Soyuz MS-10 (56S)
Soyuz
Expedition 57/58
Poisk zenith
[252]


16 October 2018
Soyuz 2.1a

Baikonur Site 31/6


Roscosmos

Progress MS-10
Progress
Progress 71 cargo
Zvezda aft
[252]


October 2018
Antares 230

MARS Pad 0A


Orbital ATK

CRS-10
Cygnus
Cygnus 10 cargo
Unity nadir
[250]


November 2018
Atlas V N22

Canaveral SLC-41


Boeing

Boe-CFT
Starliner
Crewed test flight
Unity
[251]


30 November 2018
Soyuz-FG

Baikonur Pad 1/5


Roscosmos

Soyuz MS-11 (57S)
Soyuz
Expedition 58/59
Rassvet nadir
[252]


Q4, 2018
Proton M

Baikonur


Roscosmos

Nauka
N/A
Module assembly
Zvezda nadir
[252][253]


Q4, 2018
Soyuz 2.1b

Baikonur


Roscosmos

Uzlovoy Module
Progress M-UM
Module assembly
Nauka
[252]



Docking
See also: Docking and berthing of spacecraft




The Progress M-14M resupply vehicle as it approaches the ISS in 2012. Over 50 unpiloted Progress spacecraft have been sent with supplies during the lifetime of the station.


All Russian spacecraft and self-propelled modules are able to rendezvous and dock to the space station without human intervention using the Kurs docking system. Radar allows these vehicles to detect and intercept ISS from over 200 kilometres away. The European ATV uses star sensors and GPS to determine its intercept course. When it catches up it uses laser equipment to optically recognise Zvezda, along with the Kurs system for redundancy. Crew supervise these craft, but do not intervene except to send abort commands in emergencies. The Japanese H-II Transfer Vehicle parks itself in progressively closer orbits to the station, and then awaits 'approach' commands from the crew, until it is close enough for a robotic arm to grapple and berth the vehicle to the USOS. The American Space Shuttle was manually docked, and on missions with a cargo container, the container would be berthed to the Station with the use of manual robotic arms. Berthed craft can transfer International Standard Payload Racks. Japanese spacecraft berth for one to two months. Russian and European Supply craft can remain at the ISS for six months,[254][255] allowing great flexibility in crew time for loading and unloading of supplies and trash. NASA Shuttles could remain docked for 11–12 days.[256]




Space Shuttle Endeavour, ATV-2, Soyuz TMA-21 and Progress M-10M docked to the ISS, as seen from the departing Soyuz TMA-20


The American manual approach to docking allows greater initial flexibility and less complexity. The downside to this mode of operation is that each mission becomes unique and requires specialised training and planning, making the process more labour-intensive and expensive. The Russians pursued an automated methodology that used the crew in override or monitoring roles. Although the initial development costs were high, the system has become very reliable with standardisations that provide significant cost benefits in repetitive routine operations.[257] An automated approach could allow assembly of modules orbiting other worlds prior to crew arrival.
Soyuz spacecraft used for crew rotation also serve as lifeboats for emergency evacuation; they are replaced every six months and have been used once to remove excess crew after the Columbia disaster.[258] Expeditions require, on average, 2,722 kg of supplies, and as of 9 March 2011[update], crews had consumed a total of around 22,000 meals.[4] Soyuz crew rotation flights and Progress resupply flights visit the station on average two and three times respectively each year,[259] with the ATV and HTV planned to visit annually from 2010 onwards.[citation needed] Cygnus and Dragon were contracted to fly cargo to the station after retirement of the NASA Shuttle.[260][261]
From 26 February 2011 to 7 March 2011 four of the governmental partners (United States, ESA, Japan and Russia) had their spacecraft (NASA Shuttle, ATV, HTV, Progress and Soyuz) docked at the ISS, the only time this has happened to date.[262] On 25 May 2012, SpaceX became the world's first privately held company to send cargo, via the Dragon spacecraft, to the International Space Station.[263]
Launch and docking windows
Prior to a ship's docking to the ISS, navigation and attitude control (GNC) is handed over to the ground control of the ships' country of origin. GNC is set to allow the station to drift in space, rather than fire its thrusters or turn using gyroscopes. The solar panels of the station are turned edge-on to the incoming ships, so residue from its thrusters does not damage the cells. When a NASA Space Shuttle docked to the station, other ships were grounded, as the Shuttle's reinforced carbon-carbon wing leading edges, cameras, windows, and instruments were too much at risk from damage or contamination by thruster residue from other ships' movements.
Approximately 30% of NASA shuttle launch delays were caused by poor weather. Occasional priority was given to the Soyuz arrivals at the station where the Soyuz carried crew with time-critical cargoes such as biological experiment materials, also causing shuttle delays. Departure of the NASA shuttle was often delayed or prioritised according to weather over its two landing sites.[264] Whilst the Soyuz is capable of landing anywhere, anytime, its planned landing time and place is chosen to give consideration to helicopter pilots and ground recovery crew, to give acceptable flying weather and lighting conditions. Soyuz launches occur in adverse weather conditions, but the cosmodrome has been shut down on occasions when buried by snow drifts up to 6 metres in depth, hampering ground operations.
Life aboard
Crew activities




Crewmember peers out of a window


A typical day for the crew begins with a wake-up at 06:00, followed by post-sleep activities and a morning inspection of the station. The crew then eats breakfast and takes part in a daily planning conference with Mission Control before starting work at around 08:10. The first scheduled exercise of the day follows, after which the crew continues work until 13:05. Following a one-hour lunch break, the afternoon consists of more exercise and work before the crew carries out its pre-sleep activities beginning at 19:30, including dinner and a crew conference. The scheduled sleep period begins at 21:30. In general, the crew works ten hours per day on a weekday, and five hours on Saturdays, with the rest of the time their own for relaxation or work catch-up.[265]
The time zone used aboard the ISS is Coordinated Universal Time (UTC). The windows are covered at night hours to give the impression of darkness because the station experiences 16 sunrises and sunsets per day. During visiting space shuttle missions, the ISS crew mostly follows the shuttle's Mission Elapsed Time (MET), which is a flexible time zone based on the launch time of the shuttle mission.[266][267][268]
The station provides crew quarters for each member of the expedition's crew, with two 'sleep stations' in the Zvezda and four more installed in Harmony.[269][270] The American quarters are private, approximately person-sized soundproof booths. The Russian crew quarters include a small window, but provide less ventilation and sound proofing. A crew member can sleep in a crew quarter in a tethered sleeping bag, listen to music, use a laptop, and store personal items in a large drawer or in nets attached to the module's walls. The module also provides a reading lamp, a shelf and a desktop.[271][272][273] Visiting crews have no allocated sleep module, and attach a sleeping bag to an available space on a wall. It is possible to sleep floating freely through the station, but this is generally avoided because of the possibility of bumping into sensitive equipment.[274] It is important that crew accommodations be well ventilated; otherwise, astronauts can wake up oxygen-deprived and gasping for air, because a bubble of their own exhaled carbon dioxide has formed around their heads.[271]
See also: Christmas on the International Space Station
Food




The crews of STS-127 and Expedition 20 enjoy a meal inside Unity.


See also: Space food
Most of the food aboard is vacuum sealed in plastic bags. Cans are rare because they are heavy and expensive to transport. Preserved food is not highly regarded by the crew, and taste is reduced in microgravity.[271] Therefore, effort is made to make the food more palatable, such as using more spices than in regular cooking. The crew looks forward to the arrival of any ships from Earth, as they bring fresh fruit and vegetables. Care is taken that foods do not create crumbs. Sauces are often used to avoid contaminating station equipment. Each crew member has individual food packages and cooks them using the on-board galley. The galley features two food warmers, a refrigerator added in November 2008, and a water dispenser that provides both heated and unheated water.[272] Drinks are provided as dehydrated powder that is mixed with water before consumption.[272][273] Drinks and soups are sipped from plastic bags with straws. Solid food is eaten with a knife and fork attached to a tray with magnets to prevent them from floating away. Any food that floats away, including crumbs, must be collected to prevent it from clogging the station's air filters and other equipment.[273]
Hygiene




Space toilet in the Zvezda service module


Showers on space stations were introduced in the early 1970s on Skylab and Salyut 3.[275]:139 By Salyut 6, in the early 1980s, the crew complained of the complexity of showering in space, which was a monthly activity.[276] The ISS does not feature a shower; instead, crewmembers wash using a water jet and wet wipes, with soap dispensed from a toothpaste tube-like container. Crews are also provided with rinseless shampoo and edible toothpaste to save water.[274][277]
There are two space toilets on the ISS, both of Russian design, located in Zvezda and Tranquility.[272] These Waste and Hygiene Compartments use a fan-driven suction system similar to the Space Shuttle Waste Collection System. Astronauts first fasten themselves to the toilet seat, which is equipped with spring-loaded restraining bars to ensure a good seal.[271] A lever operates a powerful fan and a suction hole slides open: the air stream carries the waste away. Solid waste is collected in individual bags which are stored in an aluminium container. Full containers are transferred to Progress spacecraft for disposal.[272][278] Liquid waste is evacuated by a hose connected to the front of the toilet, with anatomically correct "urine funnel adapters" attached to the tube so that men and women can use the same toilet. The diverted urine is collected and transferred to the Water Recovery System, where it is recycled into drinking water.[273]
Crew health and safety
Main article: Effect of spaceflight on the human body
Radiation
The ISS is partially protected from the space environment by Earth's magnetic field. From an average distance of about 70,000 km (43,000 mi), depending on Solar activity, the magnetosphere begins to deflect solar wind around Earth and ISS. Solar flares are still a hazard to the crew, who may receive only a few minutes warning. In 2005, during the initial 'proton storm' of an X-3 class solar flare, the crew of Expedition 10 took shelter in a more heavily shielded part of the ROS designed for this purpose.[279][280]


Play media


Video of the Aurora Australis taken by the crew of Expedition 28 on an ascending pass from south of Madagascar to just north of Australia over the Indian Ocean.


Subatomic charged particles, primarily protons from cosmic rays and solar wind, are normally absorbed by Earth's atmosphere. When they interact in sufficient quantity, their effect is visible to the naked eye in a phenomenon called an aurora. Outside Earth's atmosphere, crews are exposed to about 1 millisievert each day, which is about a year of natural exposure on Earth. This results in a higher risk of cancer for astronauts. Radiation can penetrate living tissue and damage the DNA and chromosomes of lymphocytes. These cells are central to the immune system, and so any damage to them could contribute to the lower immunity experienced by astronauts. Radiation has also been linked to a higher incidence of cataracts in astronauts. Protective shielding and drugs may lower risks to an acceptable level.[47]
Radiation levels on the ISS are about five times greater than those experienced by airline passengers and crew. Earth's electromagnetic field provides almost the same level of protection against solar and other radiation in low Earth orbit as in the stratosphere. For example, on a 12-hour flight an airline passenger would experience 0.1 millisieverts of radiation, or a rate of 0.2 millisieverts per day; only 1/5 the rate experienced by an astronaut in LEO. Additionally, airline passengers experience this level of radiation for a few hours of flight, while ISS crew are exposed for their whole stay.[281]
See also: Coronal mass ejection and Aurora (astronomy)
Stress




Cosmonaut Nikolai Budarin at work inside Zvezda service module crew quarters


There is considerable evidence that psychosocial stressors are among the most important impediments to optimal crew morale and performance.[282] Cosmonaut Valery Ryumin wrote in his journal during a particularly difficult period on board the Salyut 6 space station: "All the conditions necessary for murder are met if you shut two men in a cabin measuring 18 feet by 20 and leave them together for two months."
NASA's interest in psychological stress caused by space travel, initially studied when their manned missions began, was rekindled when astronauts joined cosmonauts on the Russian space station Mir. Common sources of stress in early American missions included maintaining high performance under public scrutiny and isolation from peers and family. The latter is still often a cause of stress on the ISS, such as when the mother of NASA Astronaut Daniel Tani died in a car accident, and when Michael Fincke was forced to miss the birth of his second child.
A study of the longest spaceflight concluded that the first three weeks are a critical period where attention is adversely affected because of the demand to adjust to the extreme change of environment.[283] Skylab's three crews remained one, two, and three months respectively, long term crews on Salyut 6, Salyut 7, and the ISS last about five to six months and Mir's expeditions often lasted longer. The ISS working environment includes further stress caused by living and working in cramped conditions with people from very different cultures who speak a different language. First-generation space stations had crews who spoke a single language; second and third-generation stations have crew from many cultures who speak many languages. The ISS is unique because visitors are not classed automatically into 'host' or 'guest' categories as with previous stations and spacecraft, and may not suffer from feelings of isolation in the same way. Crew members with a military pilot background and those with an academic science background or teachers and politicians may have problems understanding each other's jargon and worldview.
Medical




Astronaut Frank De Winne is attached to the TVIS treadmill with bungee cords aboard the International Space Station


Medical effects of long-term weightlessness include muscle atrophy, deterioration of the skeleton (osteopenia), fluid redistribution, a slowing of the cardiovascular system, decreased production of red blood cells, balance disorders, and a weakening of the immune system. Lesser symptoms include loss of body mass, and puffiness of the face.[47]
Sleep is disturbed on the ISS regularly because of mission demands, such as incoming or departing ships. Sound levels in the station are unavoidably high; because the atmosphere is unable to thermosiphon, fans are required at all times to allow processing of the atmosphere which would stagnate in the freefall (zero-g) environment.
To prevent some of these adverse physiological effects, the station is equipped with two treadmills (including the COLBERT), and the aRED (advanced Resistive Exercise Device) which enables various weightlifting exercises which add muscle but do not compensate for or raise astronauts' reduced bone density,[284] and a stationary bicycle; each astronaut spends at least two hours per day exercising on the equipment.[271][272] Astronauts use bungee cords to strap themselves to the treadmill.[285][286]
Microbiological environmental hazards
See also: Mir § Microbiological environmental hazards
Hazardous moulds which can foul air and water filters may develop aboard space stations. They can produce acids which degrade metal, glass, and rubber. They can also be harmful for the crew's health. Microbiological hazards have led to a development of the LOCAD-PTS that can identify common bacteria and moulds faster than standard methods of culturing, which may require a sample to be sent back to Earth.[287] As of 2012[update], 76 types of unregulated micro-organisms have been detected on the ISS.[288]
Reduced humidity, paint with mould-killing chemicals, and antiseptic solutions can be used to prevent contamination in space stations. All materials used in the ISS are tested for resistance against fungi.[289]
Threat of orbital debris
Main article: Space debris




A 7 g object (shown in centre) shot at 7 km/s (23,000 ft/s), the orbital velocity of the ISS, made this 15 cm (5.9 in) crater in a solid block of aluminium.



Radar-trackable objects, including debris, with distinct ring of geostationary satellites




At the low altitudes at which the ISS orbits, there is a variety of space debris,[290] consisting of different objects including entire spent rocket stages, defunct satellites, explosion fragments—including materials from anti-satellite weapon tests, paint flakes, slag from solid rocket motors, and coolant released by US-A nuclear-powered satellites. These objects, in addition to natural micrometeoroids,[291] are a significant threat. Large objects could destroy the station, but are less of a threat because their orbits can be predicted.[292][293] Objects too small to be detected by optical and radar instruments, from approximately 1 cm down to microscopic size, number in the trillions. Despite their small size, some of these objects are a threat because of their kinetic energy and direction in relation to the station. Spacesuits of spacewalking crew could puncture, causing exposure to vacuum.[294]
Ballistic panels, also called micrometeorite shielding, are incorporated into the station to protect pressurised sections and critical systems. The type and thickness of these panels depends on their predicted exposure to damage. The station's shields and structure have different designs on the ROS and the USOS. On the USOS, a thin aluminium sheet is held apart from the hull and causes objects to shatter into a cloud before hitting the hull, thereby spreading the energy of impact. On the ROS, a carbon plastic honeycomb screen is spaced from the hull, an aluminium honeycomb screen is spaced from that, with a screen-vacuum thermal insulation covering, and glass cloth over the top. It is about 50% less likely to be punctured, and crew move to the ROS when the station is under threat. Punctures on the ROS would be contained within the panels which are 70 cm square.




Example of risk management: A NASA model showing areas at high risk from impact for the International Space Station.


Space debris is tracked remotely from the ground, and the station crew can be notified.[295] This allows for a Debris Avoidance Manoeuvre (DAM) to be conducted, which uses thrusters on the Russian Orbital Segment to alter the station's orbital altitude, avoiding the debris. DAMs are not uncommon, taking place if computational models show the debris will approach within a certain threat distance. Eight DAMs had been performed prior to March 2009,[296] the first seven between October 1999 and May 2003.[297] Usually, the orbit is raised by one or two kilometres by means of an increase in orbital velocity of the order of 1 m/s. Unusually, there was a lowering of 1.7 km on 27 August 2008, the first such lowering for 8 years.[297][298] There were two DAMs in 2009, on 22 March and 17 July.[299] If a threat from orbital debris is identified too late for a DAM to be safely conducted, the station crew close all the hatches aboard the station and retreat into their Soyuz spacecraft, so that they would be able to evacuate in the event the station was seriously damaged by the debris. This partial station evacuation has occurred on 13 March 2009, 28 June 2011, 24 March 2012 and 16 June 2015.[300][301]
End of mission




Many ISS resupply spacecraft have already undergone atmospheric re-entry, such as Jules Verne ATV


According to a 2009 report, Space Corporation Energia is considering methods to remove from the station some modules of the Russian Orbital Segment when the end of mission is reached and use them as a basis for a new station, called the Orbital Piloted Assembly and Experiment Complex (OPSEK). The modules under consideration for removal from the current ISS include the Multipurpose Laboratory Module (Nauka), currently scheduled to be launched in mid-2018, and other Russian modules which are planned to be attached to Nauka afterwards. Those modules would be within their useful lives in 2016 or 2020. The report presents a statement from an unnamed Russian engineer that, based on the experience from Mir, a 30-year life should be possible, except for micrometeorite damage, because the Russian modules have been built with on-orbit refurbishment in mind.[302]
According to the Outer Space Treaty the United States and Russia are legally responsible for all modules they have launched.[303] In ISS planning, NASA examined options including returning the station to Earth via shuttle missions (deemed too expensive, as the USOS is not designed for disassembly and this would require at least 27 shuttle missions[304]), natural orbital decay with random reentry similar to Skylab, boosting the station to a higher altitude (which would delay reentry) and a controlled targeted de-orbit to a remote ocean area.[305]
A controlled deorbit into a remote ocean was found to be technically feasible only with Russia's assistance.[305] The Russian Space Agency has experience from de-orbiting the Salyut 4, 5, 6, 7 and Mir space stations; NASA's first intentional controlled de-orbit of a satellite (the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory) occurred in 2000.[306] As of late 2010, the preferred plan is to use a slightly modified Progress spacecraft to de-orbit the ISS.[307] This plan was seen as the simplest, cheapest and with the highest margin.[307] Skylab, the only space station built and launched entirely by the US, decayed from orbit slowly over 5 years, and no attempt was made to de-orbit it using a deorbital burn. Remains of Skylab hit populated areas of Esperance, Western Australia[308] without injuries or loss of life.
The Exploration Gateway Platform, a discussion by NASA and Boeing at the end of 2011, suggested using leftover USOS hardware and 'Zvezda 2'  [sic] as a refuelling depot and service station located at one of the Earth-Moon Lagrange points, L1 or L2. The entire USOS cannot be reused and will be discarded, but some Russian modules are planned to be reused. Nauka, the Uzlovoy Module, two science power platforms and Rassvet, launched between 2010 and 2015 and joined to the ROS, may be separated to form OPSEK.[309] Nauka will be used in the station, whose main goal is supporting manned deep space exploration. OPSEK will orbit at a higher inclination of 71 degrees, allowing observation to and from all of the Russian Federation.
In February 2015, Roscosmos announced that it would remain a part of the ISS programme until 2024.[22] Nine months earlier—in response to US sanctions against Russia over the conflict in the Crimea—Russian Deputy Prime Minister Dmitry Rogozin had stated that Russia would reject a US request to prolong the orbiting station's use beyond 2020, and would only supply rocket engines to the US for non-military satellite launches.[310]
A proposed modification that would reuse some of the ISS American and European segments is to attach a VASIMR drive module to the vacated Node with its own onboard power source. This would allow long-term reliability testing of the concept for less cost than building a dedicated space station from scratch.[311]
On 28 March 2015, Russian sources announced that Roscosmos and NASA had agreed to collaborate on the development of a replacement for the current ISS.[25][26] Igor Komarov, the head of Russia's Roscosmos, made the announcement with NASA administrator Charles Bolden at his side. Komarov said "Roscosmos together with NASA will work on the programme of a future orbital station", "We agreed that the group of countries taking part in the ISS project will work on the future project of a new orbital station", "The first step is that the ISS will operate until 2024", and that Roscosmos and NASA "do not rule out that the station's flight could be extended".[312] In a statement provided to SpaceNews on 28 March, NASA spokesman David Weaver said the agency appreciated the Russian commitment to extending the ISS, but did not confirm any plans for a future space station.[28]
On 30 September 2015, Boeing's contract with NASA as prime contractor for the ISS was extended to 30 September 2020. Part of Boeing's services under the contract will relate to extending the station's primary structural hardware past 2020 to the end of 2028.[313]
Regarding extending the ISS, on 15 November 2016 General Director Vladimir Solntsev of RSC Energia stated "Maybe the ISS will receive continued resources. Today we discussed the possibility of using the station until 2028," and "Much will depend on the political moments in relations with the Americans, with the new administration. It will be discussed."[314][315]
Cost
The ISS has been described as the most expensive single item ever constructed.[316] In 2010 the cost was expected to be $150 billion. This includes NASA's budget of $58.7 billion (inflation-unadjusted) for the station from 1985 to 2015 ($72.4 billion in 2010 dollars), Russia's $12 billion, Europe's $5 billion, Japan's $5 billion, Canada's $2 billion, and the cost of 36 shuttle flights to build the station; estimated at $1.4 billion each, or $50.4 billion in total. Assuming 20,000 person-days of use from 2000 to 2015 by two- to six-person crews, each person-day would cost $7.5 million, less than half the inflation-adjusted $19.6 million ($5.5 million before inflation) per person-day of Skylab.[317]
International co-operation
Main articles: Politics of the International Space Station and International Space Station program




Dated 29 January 1998



Participating countries



 Canada
 Japan
 Russia
 United States
 European Space Agency

 Austria
 Belgium
 Denmark
 France
 Germany
 Italy
 Netherlands
 Norway
 Portugal
 Spain
 Sweden
  Switzerland
 United Kingdom





Former member


 Brazil

Sightings from Earth







The ISS and HTV photographed using a telescope-mounted camera by Ralf Vandebergh








A time exposure of a station pass






Naked eye
The ISS is visible to the naked eye as a slow-moving, bright white dot because of reflected sunlight, and can be seen in the hours after sunset and before sunrise, when the station remains sunlit but the ground and sky are dark.[318] The ISS takes about 10 minutes to pass from one horizon to another, and will only be visible part of that time because of moving into or out of the Earth's shadow. Because of the size of its reflective surface area, the ISS is the brightest artificial object in the sky, excluding flares, with an approximate maximum magnitude of −4 when overhead (similar to Venus). The ISS, like many satellites including the Iridium constellation, can also produce flares of up to 8 or 16 times the brightness of Venus as sunlight glints off reflective surfaces.[319][320] The ISS is also visible during broad daylight conditions, albeit with a great deal more effort.
Tools are provided by a number of websites such as Heavens-Above (see Live viewing below) as well as smartphone applications that use orbital data and the observer's longitude and latitude to indicate when the ISS will be visible (weather permitting), where the station will appear to rise, the altitude above the horizon it will reach and the duration of the pass before the station disappears either by setting below the horizon or entering into Earth's shadow.[321][322][323][324]
In November 2012 NASA launched its "Spot the Station" service, which sends people text and email alerts when the station is due to fly above their town.[325] The station is visible from 95% of the inhabited land on Earth, but is not visible from extreme northern or southern latitudes.[208]
Astrophotography




The ISS as it transits the sun during an eclipse (4 frame composite image)


Using a telescope-mounted camera to photograph the station is a popular hobby for astronomers,[326] whilst using a mounted camera to photograph the Earth and stars is a popular hobby for crew.[327] The use of a telescope or binoculars allows viewing of the ISS during daylight hours.[328]
Some amateur astronomers also use telescopic lenses to photograph the ISS while it transits the sun, sometimes doing so during an eclipse (and so the Sun, Moon, and ISS are all positioned approximatelly in a single line). One example is during the August 21 solar eclipse, where at one location in Wyoming, images of the ISS were captured during the eclipse.[329] Similar images were captured by NASA from a location in Washington.
Parisian engineer and astrophotographer Thierry Legault, known for his photos of spaceships transiting the Sun, travelled to Oman in 2011 to photograph the Sun, Moon and space station all lined up.[330] Legault, who received the Marius Jacquemetton award from the Société astronomique de France in 1999, and other hobbyists, use websites that predict when the ISS will transit the Sun or Moon and from what location those passes will be visible.

See also





Book: International Space Station






Spaceflight portal
Space portal



Center for the Advancement of Science in Space – operates the US National Laboratory on the ISS
List of space stations
Origins of the International Space Station
Space architecture

Notes



^ Privately funded travellers who have objected to the term include Dennis Tito, the first such traveller (Associated Press, 8 May 2001), Mark Shuttleworth, founder of Ubuntu (Associated Press, The Spokesman Review, 6 January 2002, p. A4), Gregory Olsen and Richard Garriott.[197][198] Canadian astronaut Bob Thirsk said the term does not seem appropriate, referring to his crewmate, Guy Laliberté, founder of Cirque du Soleil.[199] Anousheh Ansari denied being a tourist[200] and took offence at the term.[201]
^ ESA director Jörg Feustel-Büechl said in 2001 that Russia had no right to send 'amateurs' to the ISS. A 'stand-off' occurred at the Johnson Space Centre between Commander Talgat Musabayev and NASA manager Robert Cabana. Cabana refused to train Dennis Tito, a member of Musabayev's crew along with Yuri Baturin. The commander argued that Tito had trained 700 hours in the last year and was as qualified as any NASA astronaut, and refused to allow his crew to be trained on the American portions of the station without Tito. Cabana stated training could not begin, and the commander returned with his crew to their hotel.



References


^ a b Garcia, Mark (1 October 2015). "About the Space Station: Facts and Figures". NASA. Retrieved 2 October 2015. 
^ "Space to Ground: Friending the ISS: 06/03/2016". YouTube.com. NASA. 3 June 2016. 
^ a b c d e f g h i j Peat, Chris (7 July 2017). "ISS – Orbit". Heavens-above.com. Retrieved 7 July 2017. 
^ a b c d "The ISS to Date". NASA. 9 March 2011. Retrieved 21 March 2011. 
^ a b c d NASA (18 February 2010). "On-Orbit Elements" (PDF). NASA. Archived from the original (PDF) on 29 October 2009. Retrieved 19 June 2010. 
^ "STS-132 Press Kit" (PDF). NASA. 7 May 2010. Retrieved 19 June 2010. 
^ "STS-133 FD 04 Execute Package" (PDF). NASA. 27 February 2011. Retrieved 27 February 2011. 
^ "Central Research Institute for Machine Building (FGUP TSNIIMASH) Control of manned and unmanned space vehicles from Mission Control Centre Moscow" (PDF). Russian Federal Space Agency. Retrieved 26 September 2011. [permanent dead link]
^ "NASA Sightings Help Page". Spaceflight.nasa.gov. 30 November 2011. Retrieved 1 May 2012. 
^ a b c d Catchpole, John E. (17 June 2008). The International Space Station: Building for the Future. Springer-Praxis. ISBN 978-0-387-78144-0. 
^ a b c "International Space Station Overview". ShuttlePressKit.com. 3 June 1999. Retrieved 17 February 2009. 
^ a b c d e "Fields of Research". NASA. 26 June 2007. Archived from the original on 23 January 2008. 
^ a b "Getting on Board". NASA. 26 June 2007. Archived from the original on 8 December 2007. 
^ a b "ISS Research Program". NASA. Archived from the original on 13 February 2009. Retrieved 27 February 2009. 
^ a b "Current ISS Tracking data". NASA. 15 December 2008. Retrieved 28 January 2009. 
^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o Gary Kitmacher (2006). Reference Guide to the International Space Station. Canada: Apogee Books. pp. 71–80. ISBN 978-1-894959-34-6. ISSN 1496-6921. 
^ "Human Spaceflight and Exploration—European Participating States". European Space Agency (ESA). 2009. Retrieved 17 January 2009. 
^ "International Space Station legal framework". European Space Agency (ESA). 19 November 2013. Retrieved 21 February 2015. 
^ Achenbach, Joel (8 January 2014). "NASA: International space station operation extended by Obama until at least 2024". The Washington Post. Retrieved 8 January 2014. 
^ Clark, Stephen (11 March 2010). "Space station partners set 2028 as certification goal". Spaceflight Now. Retrieved 1 June 2011. 
^ "Canada's space station commitment renewed". CBC News. 29 February 2012. 
^ a b de Selding, Peter B. (25 February 2015). "Russia — and Its Modules — To Part Ways with ISS in 2024". Space News. Retrieved 26 February 2015. 
^ Bodner, Matthew (17 November 2014). "Russia May Be Planning National Space Station to Replace ISS". The Moscow Times. Retrieved 3 March 2015. 
^ a b "Nations Around the World Mark 10th Anniversary of International Space Station". NASA. 17 November 2008. Retrieved 6 March 2009. 
^ a b Boren, Zachary Davies (28 March 2015). "Russia and the US will build a new space station together". The Independent. 
^ a b "Russia & US agree to build new space station after ISS, work on joint Mars project". RT.com. 28 March 2015. Retrieved 28 March 2015. 
^ Moon, Mariella (28 March 2015). "NASA is working with Russia on a new space station (update: not quite)". Engadget. Retrieved 29 March 2015. 
^ a b Foust, Jeff (28 March 2015). "NASA Says No Plans for ISS Replacement with Russia". SpaceNews. 
^ "Memorandum of Understanding Between the National Aeronautics and Space Administration of the United States of America and the Russian Space Agency Concerning Cooperation on the Civil International Space Station". NASA. 29 January 1998. Retrieved 19 April 2009. 
^ Payette, Julie (10 December 2012). "Research and Diplomacy 350 Kilometers above the Earth: Lessons from the International Space Station". Science & Diplomacy. 1 (4). 
^ "National Space Policy of the United States of America" (PDF). White House; USA Federal government. Retrieved 20 July 2011. 
^ a b c Oberg, James (2005). "International Space Station". World Book Online Reference Center. Retrieved 3 April 2016. 
^ "Monitor of All-sky X-ray Image (MAXI)". JAXA. 2008. Retrieved 12 March 2011. 
^ ESA via SPACEREF "SOLAR: three years observing and ready for solar maximum", 14 March 2011
^ "The International Space Station: life in space". Science in School. 10 December 2008. Retrieved 17 February 2009. 
^ NASA – AMS to Focus on Invisible Universe. Nasa.gov (18 March 2011). Retrieved 8 October 2011.
^ In Search of Antimatter Galaxies – NASA Science. Science.nasa.gov (16 May 2011). Retrieved 8 October 2011.
^ Aguilar, M. et al. (AMS Collaboration) (3 April 2013). "First Result from the Alpha Magnetic Spectrometer on the International Space Station: Precision Measurement of the Positron Fraction in Primary Cosmic Rays of 0.5–350 GeV". Physical Review Letters. 110: 141102. Bibcode:2013PhRvL.110n1102A. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.110.141102. PMID 25166975. Archived from the original on 14 April 2013. Retrieved 3 April 2013. CS1 maint: Uses authors parameter (link)
^ Staff (3 April 2013). "First Result from the Alpha Magnetic Spectrometer Experiment". AMS Collaboration. Retrieved 3 April 2013. 
^ Heilprin, John; Borenstein, Seth (3 April 2013). "Scientists find hint of dark matter from cosmos". Associated Press. Retrieved 3 April 2013. 
^ Amos, Jonathan (3 April 2013). "Alpha Magnetic Spectrometer zeroes in on dark matter". BBC News. Retrieved 3 April 2013. 
^ Perrotto, Trent J.; Byerly, Josh (2 April 2013). "NASA TV Briefing Discusses Alpha Magnetic Spectrometer Results". NASA. Retrieved 3 April 2013. 
^ Overbye, Dennis (3 April 2013). "New Clues to the Mystery of Dark Matter". The New York Times. Retrieved 3 April 2013. 
^ G Horneck, DM Klaus & RL Mancinelli (March 2010). "Space Microbiology, section Space Environment (p. 122)" (PDF). Microbiology and Molecular Biology Reviews. Archived from the original (PDF) on 30 August 2011. Retrieved 4 June 2011. 
^ Jonathan Amos (23 August 2010). "Beer microbes live 553 days outside ISS". BBC News. Retrieved 4 June 2011. 
^ "Spacesuits optional for 'water bears'". Nature. 8 September 2008. Retrieved 4 June 2011. 
^ a b c Jay Buckey (23 February 2006). Space Physiology. Oxford University Press USA. ISBN 978-0-19-513725-5. 
^ List Grossman (24 July 2009). "Ion engine could one day power 39-day trips to Mars". New Scientist. Retrieved 8 January 2010. 
^ Brooke Boen (1 May 2009). "Advanced Diagnostic Ultrasound in Microgravity (ADUM)". NASA. Archived from the original on 29 October 2009. Retrieved 1 October 2009. 
^ Sishir Rao; et al. (2008). "A Pilot Study of Comprehensive Ultrasound Education at the Wayne State University School of Medicine". Journal of Ultrasound in Medicine. 27 (5): 745–749. PMID 18424650. 
^ Michael Fincke; et al. (2004). "Evaluation of Shoulder Integrity in Space: First Report of Musculoskeletal US on the International Space Station". Radiology. 234 (2): 319–322. doi:10.1148/radiol.2342041680. PMID 15533948. 
^ "European Users Guide to Low Gravity Platforms". European Space Agency. 6 December 2005. Archived from the original on 2 April 2013. Retrieved 22 March 2013. 
^ "Materials Science 101". Science@NASA. 15 September 1999. Archived from the original on 14 June 2009. Retrieved 18 June 2009. 
^ "Mars500 study overview". ESA. 4 June 2011. 
^ "Space station may be site for next mock Mars mission". New Scientist. 4 November 2011. 
^ "The Sustainable Utilisation of the ISS Beyond 2015" (PDF). International Astronautical Congress. Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 April 2012. Retrieved 15 December 2011. 
^ de Selding, Peter B. (3 February 2010). "ESA Chief Lauds Renewed U.S. Commitment to Space Station, Earth Science". Space News. 
^ "Charlie Bolden". space.com. 4 June 2011. 
^ Seitz, Virginia (11 September 2011), "Memorandum Opinion for the General Counsel, Office of Science and Technology Policy" (PDF), Office of Legal Counsel, 35, archived from the original (PDF) on 13 July 2012, retrieved 23 May 2012 
^ Gro Mjeldheim Sandal; Dietrich Manzey (December 2009). "Cross-cultural issues in space operations: A survey study among ground personnel of the European Space Agency". Acta Astronautica. 65 (11–12): 1520–1529. Bibcode:2009AcAau..65.1520S. doi:10.1016/j.actaastro.2009.03.074. 
^ "Online Materials". European Space Agency. Retrieved 3 April 2016. 
^ "ISS 3-D Teaching Tool: Spaceflight Challenge I". European Space Agency. 24 May 2011. Retrieved 8 October 2011. 
^ Building Peace in Young Minds through Space Education (PDF). Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, 53rd Session. June 2010. Vienna, Austria. JAXA. June 2010. 
^ "JAXA Spaceflight Seeds Kids I : Spaceflight Sunflower seeds – Let's make them flower! and learn freshly the Earth environment just by contrast with the Space one". JAXA. 2006. Archived from the original on 18 March 2012. 
^ "JAXA Seeds in Space I : Let's Cultivate Spaceflight Asagao (Japanese morning glory), Miyako-gusa (Japanese bird's foot trefoil) Seeds and Identify the Mutants!". JAXA. 2006. Archived from the original on 18 March 2012. 
^ Keiji Murakami (14 October 2009). "JEM Utilization Overview" (PDF). JAXA. Steering Committee for the Decadal Survey on Biological and Physical Sciences in Space. 
^ Tetsuo Tanaka. "Kibo: Japan's First Human Space Facility". JAXA. Retrieved 8 October 2011. 
^ "Amateur Radio on the International Space Station". 6 June 2011. Archived from the original on 27 May 2011. Retrieved 10 June 2011. 
^ Riley, Christopher (11 April 2011). "What Yuri Gagarin saw: First Orbit film to reveal the view from Vostok 1". The Guardian. London. 
^ "Yuri Gagarin's First Orbit – FAQs". Firstorbit.org. Retrieved 1 May 2012. 
^ Warr, Philippa (13 May 2013). "Commander Hadfield bids farewell to ISS with Reddit-inspired Bowie cover". Wired.co.uk. Archived from the original on 12 October 2013. Retrieved 22 October 2013. 
^ Davis, Lauren. "Chris Hadfield sings 'Space Oddity' in the first music video in space". io9. 
^ Mabbett, Andy. "Close encounters of the Wikipedia kind: Astronaut is first to specifically contribute to Wikipedia from space – Wikimedia Blog". [Wikimedia foundation. Retrieved 4 December 2017. 
^ Petris, Antonella (1 December 2017). "Primo contributo 'extraterrestre' su Wikipedia: è di Nespoli". Meteo Web (in Italian). Retrieved 4 December 2017. 
^ Derek Hassman, NASA Flight Director (1 December 2002). "MCC Answers". NASA. Retrieved 14 June 2009. 
^ NASA Facts. The Service Module: A Cornerstone of Russian International Space Station Modules. NASA. January 1999
^ "STS-88". Science.ksc.nasa.gov. Retrieved 19 April 2011. 
^ Brad Liston (2 November 2000). "Upward Bound: Tales of Space Station Alpha". Time. Retrieved 5 August 2010. 
^ "Space Station – Impact on the expanded Russian role of funding and research" (PDF). United State General Accounting Office. 21 June 1994. Retrieved 9 August 2010. 
^ a b Alan Ladwig (3 November 2000). "Call Bill Shepherd the Alpha Male of the International Space Station". Space.com. Archived from the original on 23 May 2009. Retrieved 9 August 2010. 
^ Todd Halvorson (2 November 2000). "Expedition One Crew Wins Bid To Name Space Station Alpha". Space.com. Archived from the original on 23 May 2009. Retrieved 9 August 2010. 
^ "Interview with RSC Energia's Yuri Semenov". Space.com. 3 September 2001. Retrieved 22 August 2010. 
^ "Interview with Yuri Semenov, general designer of Space Rocket corporation Energy". Voice of Russia. 21 March 2001. Retrieved 5 October 2010. 
^ "STS-92". Science.ksc.nasa.gov. Retrieved 19 April 2011. 
^ Chris Bergin (26 July 2005). "Discovery launches—The Shuttle is back". NASASpaceflight.com. Retrieved 6 March 2009. 
^ "Mini-Research Module 1 (MIM1) Rassvet (MRM-1)". Russianspaceweb.com. Archived from the original on 25 August 2011. Retrieved 12 July 2011. 
^ "STS-133". NASA. Retrieved 1 September 2014. 
^ "STS-134". NASA. Retrieved 1 September 2014. 
^ "Russia works on a new-generation space module". Russianspaceweb.com. Archived from the original on 8 April 2016. Retrieved 29 November 2015. 
^ "NASA – The ISS to Date (03/09/2011)". Nasa.gov. Retrieved 12 July 2011. 
^ "DLR – International Space Station ISS – From Cold War to international cooperation – the story of the ISS". Dlr.de. Retrieved 1 May 2012. 
^ "Third Generation Soviet Space Systems". Astronautix.com. Archived from the original on 18 June 2012. Retrieved 1 May 2012. 
^ "A History of U.S. Space Stations" (PDF). Spaceflight.nasa.gov. Retrieved 10 August 2017. 
^ "Space Station | Russian Space History". Pbs.org. Retrieved 1 May 2012. 
^ Cáceres, Marco (14 July 2014). "When Keeping the Space Station Open Suddenly Became a Cause Célèbre". The Huffington Post. Retrieved 11 September 2016. 
^ a b Lewis, Cathleen (19 August 2015). "Zvezda Service Module Celebrates 15 Years in Orbit". Smithsonian National Air and Space Museum. Retrieved 11 September 2016. 
^ a b c "DMS-R: ESA's Data Management System for the Russian Segment of the ISS". 
^ Oberg, James (1 May 2007). "Space station lights its 'big engines'". NBC News. Retrieved 11 September 2016. 
^ Pappalardo, Joe (1 March 2007). "How does the International Space Station dodge space junk?". Air & Space/Smithsonian. Retrieved 11 September 2016. 
^ "NASA—US Destiny Laboratory". NASA. 26 March 2007. Retrieved 26 June 2007. 
^ "Space Station Extravehicular Activity". NASA. 4 April 2004. Retrieved 11 March 2009. 
^ "Mir close calls". Russianspaceweb.com. Retrieved 1 May 2012. 
^ "Pirs Docking Compartment". NASA. 10 May 2006. Retrieved 28 March 2009. 
^ Chris Bergin (10 January 2008). "PRCB plan STS-122 for NET Feb 7—three launches in 10–11 weeks". NASASpaceflight.com. Retrieved 12 January 2008. 
^ "Columbus laboratory". European Space Agency (ESA). 10 January 2009. Retrieved 6 March 2009. 
^ JAXA (30 March 2007). "Monitor of All-sky X-ray Image (MAXI): Experiment – Kibo Japanese Experimental Module – JAXA". Kibo.jaxa.jp. Archived from the original on 28 April 2012. Retrieved 1 May 2012. 
^ "JAXA | Scientific paper in Nature using the Monitor of All-sky X-ray Image (MAXI) on Kibo and the Swift satellite (USA) observations – First observation of a massive black hole swallowing a star". Jaxa.jp. Retrieved 1 May 2012. 
^ "Astronauts Bask in Spectacular Views From New Space Windows". Space.com. Retrieved 1 May 2012. 
^ "First Photos: Space Station's Observation Deck Unveiled". National Geographic. Retrieved 1 May 2012. 
^ "NASA Shuttle to Launch Luke Skywalker's Lightsaber". Space.com. 28 August 2007. Retrieved 1 May 2012. 
^ Chris Gebhardt (9 April 2009). "STS-132: PRCB baselines Atlantis' mission to deliver Russia's MRM-1". NASAspaceflight.com. Retrieved 12 November 2009. 
^ NASA (18 May 2010). "STS-132 MCC Status Report #09". Retrieved 7 July 2010. 
^ MIM1 Archived 25 August 2011 at the Wayback Machine.. russianspaceweb.com
^ "Leonardo Attached to Space Station". ESA.int. 1 March 2011. Retrieved 11 June 2013. 
^ Garcia, Mark (27 May 2015). "Module Relocated Prepping Station for Commercial Crew". NASA. Retrieved 27 May 2015. 
^ Thales Alenia Space and ISS modules – Thales Alenia Space and ISS modules. Thalesaleniaspace-issmodules.com. Retrieved 8 October 2011.
^ Space Station User's Guide. SpaceRef (3 April 2001). Retrieved 8 October 2011.
^ Chris Gebhardt (5 August 2009). "STS-133 refined to a five crew, one EVA mission—will leave MPLM on ISS". NASASpaceflight.com. 
^ Amos, Jonathan (29 August 2009). "Europe looks to buy Soyuz craft". BBC News. 
^ "Shuttle Q&A Part 5". NASASpaceflight.com. 27 September 2009. Retrieved 12 October 2009. 
^ "NASA to Test Bigelow Expandable Module on Space Station". NASA. 16 January 2013. Retrieved 17 January 2013. 
^ Pearlman, Robert (10 April 2016). "SpaceX Dragon Arrives at Space Station, Delivers Inflatable Room Prototype". Space.com. Retrieved 19 April 2016. 
^ Clark, Stephen (16 April 2016). "Expandable room installed on space station". Spaceflight Now. Retrieved 19 April 2016. 
^ Garcia, Mark (28 May 2016). "BEAM Expanded To Full Size". NASA. 
^ Harwood, William (16 January 2013). "Bigelow inflatable module bound for space station". Spaceflight Now. Retrieved 17 January 2013. 
^ Palca, Joe (26 July 2017). "After A Year In Space, The Air Hasn't Gone Out Of NASA's Inflated Module". NPR. Retrieved 6 August 2017. 
^ Morring, Frank (23 May 2012). "Russia Sees Moon Base As Logical Next Step". Aviation Week. Archived from the original on 12 November 2012. Retrieved 29 May 2012. 
^ Anatoly Zak (29 April 2014). "MLM (FGB-2)". Russian Space Web. Retrieved 14 May 2014. 
^ Donimirska, Monika (25 March 2017). "Last Russian module of ISS still delayed". military-technologies.net. 
^ Zak, Anatoly. "Node Module". RussianSpaceWeb.com. Archived from the original on 3 March 2016. Retrieved 7 January 2015. 
^ S.P. Korolev RSC Energia – News. Energia.ru (13 January 2011). Retrieved 8 October 2011.
^ Node Module Archived 3 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine.. Russianspaceweb.com. Retrieved 8 October 2011.
^ "NanoRacks, Boeing to Build First Commercial Airlock Module on International Space Station". NanoRacks. 6 February 2017. 
^ Garcia, Mark (3 February 2017). "Progress Underway for First Commercial Airlock on Space Station". NASA. 
^ "CAM – location?". NASA Spaceflight Forums. Retrieved 12 October 2009. 
^ Tariq Malik (14 February 2006). "NASA Recycles Former ISS Module for Life Support Research". Space.com. Retrieved 11 March 2009. 
^ "ICM Interim Control Module". U.S. Naval Center for Space Technology. Archived from the original on 8 February 2007. 
^ "Russian Research Modules". Boeing. Retrieved 21 June 2009. 
^ Anatoly Zak. "Russian segment of the ISS". russianspaceweb.com. Retrieved 3 October 2009. 
^ "Spread Your Wings, It's Time to Fly". NASA. 26 July 2006. Retrieved 21 September 2006. 
^ NASA (2008). "Consolidated Launch Manifest". NASA. Retrieved 8 July 2008. 
^ "EXPRESS Racks 1 and 2 fact sheet". NASA. 12 April 2008. Retrieved 4 October 2009. 
^ "Soyuz TMA-03M docks to ISS, returns station to six crewmembers for future ops". NASASpaceFlight.com. 23 December 2011. Retrieved 1 May 2012. 
^ L. D. Welsch (30 October 2009). "EVA Checklist: STS-129 Flight Supplement" (PDF). NASA. 
^ "Space Shuttle Mission: STS-131" (PDF). NASA. February 2011. 
^ "Space Shuttle Mission: STS-134" (PDF). NASA. April 2011. 
^ "HTV2: Mission Press Kit" (PDF). Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency. 20 January 2011. 
^ "Exposed Facility:About Kibo". JAXA. 29 August 2008. Archived from the original on 3 August 2009. Retrieved 9 October 2009. 
^ "NASA—European Technology Exposure Facility (EuTEF)". NASA. 6 October 2008. Archived from the original on 19 October 2008. Retrieved 28 February 2009. 
^ "ESA—Columbus—European Technology Exposure Facility (EuTEF)". ESA. 13 January 2009. Retrieved 28 February 2009. 
^ "Atomic Clock Ensemble in Space (ACES)". ESA. Archived from the original on 9 June 2009. Retrieved 9 October 2009. 
^ NICER Team. "The Neutron star Interior Composition ExploreR (NICER): an Explorer mission of opportunity for soft x-ray timing spectroscopy" (PDF). Goddard Space Flight Center. Retrieved 8 April 2013. 
^ Michael Finneran (1 March 2011). "Time to Fly: SAGE III — ISS Prepped for Space Station". NASA. Retrieved 12 March 2011. 
^ "The Alpha Magnetic Spectrometer Experiment". CERN. 21 January 2009. Retrieved 6 March 2009. 
^ "Canadarm2 and the Mobile Servicing System". NASA. 8 January 2013. Retrieved 22 June 2015. 
^ "Dextre, the International Space Station's Robotic Handyman". Canadian Space Agency. Retrieved 22 June 2015. 
^ "Mobile Base System". Canadian Space Agency. Retrieved 22 June 2015. 
^ a b "Space Shuttle Mission STS-134: Final Flight of Endeavour – Press Kit" (PDF). NASA. April 2011. pp. 51–53. Retrieved 22 June 2015. 
^ "Remote Manipulator System: About Kibo". JAXA. 29 August 2008. Archived from the original on 20 March 2008. Retrieved 4 October 2009. 
^ "International Space Station Status Report #02-03". NASA. 14 January 2002. Retrieved 4 October 2009. 
^ "MLM (FGB-2) module of the ISS". RussianSpaceWeb. Retrieved 16 June 2014. 
^ Freudenrich, Craig (20 November 2000). "How Space Stations Work". Howstuffworks. Retrieved 23 November 2008. 
^ "5–8: The Air Up There". NASAexplores. NASA. Archived from the original on 18 December 2004. Retrieved 31 October 2008. 
^ Anderson, Clinton P.; 90th Congress, 2nd Session; et al. (30 January 1968). Apollo 204 Accident: Report of the Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, United States Senate (PDF) (Report). Washington, D.C.: US Government Printing Office. p. 8. Report No. 956. 
^ Davis, Jeffrey R.; Johnson, Robert & Stepanek, Jan (2008), Fundamentals of Aerospace Medicine, XII, Philadelphia PA, USA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, pp. 261–264 
^ Tariq Malik (15 February 2006). "Air Apparent: New Oxygen Systems for the ISS". Space.com. Retrieved 21 November 2008. 
^ a b Patrick L. Barry (13 November 2000). "Breathing Easy on the Space Station". NASA. Archived from the original on 21 September 2008. Retrieved 21 November 2008. 
^ RuSpace | ISS Russian Segment Life Support System. Suzymchale.com. Retrieved 8 October 2011.
^ Breathing Easy on the Space Station – NASA Science. Science.nasa.gov (13 November 2000). Retrieved 8 October 2011.
^ "The early history of bifacial solar cell_百度文库". Wenku.baidu.com. 25 October 2010. Retrieved 14 August 2012. 
^ Garcia, Mark (28 April 2016). "Facts and Figures". NASA. Retrieved 24 May 2017. 
^ G. Landis and C-Y. Lu (1991). "Solar Array Orientation Options for a Space Station in Low Earth Orbit". Journal of Propulsion and Power. 7 (1): 123–125. doi:10.2514/3.23302. 
^ Thomas B. Miller (24 April 2000). "Nickel-Hydrogen Battery Cell Life Test Program Update for the International Space Station". NASA. Archived from the original on 25 August 2009. Retrieved 27 November 2009. 
^ Clark, Stephen (13 December 2016). "Japanese HTV makes battery delivery to International Space Station". Spaceflight Now. Retrieved 29 January 2017. 
^ Patterson, Michael J. (1998). "Cathodes Delivered for Space Station Plasma Contactor System". Research & Technology. NASA / Lewis Research Center. TM-1999-208815. Archived from the original on 5 July 2011. 
^ Price, Steve; Phillips, Tony; Knier, Gil (21 March 2001). "Staying Cool on the ISS". NASA. Retrieved 22 July 2016. 
^ ATCS Team Overview. (PDF). Retrieved 8 October 2011.
^ a b "Communications and Tracking". Boeing. Archived from the original on 11 June 2008. Retrieved 30 November 2009. 
^ Mathews, Melissa; James Hartsfield (25 March 2005). "International Space Station Status Report: SS05-015". NASA News. NASA. Retrieved 11 January 2010. 
^ Harland, David (30 November 2004). The Story of Space Station Mir. New York: Springer-Verlag New York Inc. ISBN 978-0-387-23011-5. 
^ Harvey, Brian (2007). The rebirth of the Russian space program: 50 years after Sputnik, new frontiers. Springer Praxis Books. p. 263. ISBN 0-387-71354-9. 
^ Anatoly Zak (4 January 2010). "Space exploration in 2011". RussianSpaceWeb. Archived from the original on 26 June 2010. Retrieved 12 January 2010. 
^ "ISS On-Orbit Status 05/02/10". NASA. 2 May 2010. Retrieved 7 July 2010. 
^ "Memorandum of Understanding Between the National Aeronautics and Space Administration of the United States of America and the Government of Japan Concerning Cooperation on the Civil International Space Station". NASA. 24 February 1998. Retrieved 19 April 2009. 
^ "Operations Local Area Network (OPS LAN) Interface Control Document" (PDF). NASA. February 2000. Retrieved 30 November 2009. 
^ "ISS/ATV communication system flight on Soyuz". EADS Astrium. 28 February 2005. Retrieved 30 November 2009. 
^ Chris Bergin (10 November 2009). "STS-129 ready to support Dragon communication demo with ISS". NASASpaceflight.com. Retrieved 30 November 2009. 
^ Bilton, Nick (22 January 2010). "First Tweet From Space". The New York Times. Retrieved 29 April 2014. 
^ Smith, Will (19 October 2012). "How Fast is the ISS's Internet? (and Other Space Questions Answered)". Tested.com. Retrieved 29 April 2014. 
^ Thomson, Iain (10 May 2013). "Penguins in spa-a-a-ce! ISS dumps Windows for Linux on laptops". The Register. Retrieved 15 May 2013. 
^ Gunter, Joel (10 May 2013). "International Space Station to boldly go with Linux over Windows". The Daily Telegraph. Retrieved 15 May 2013. 
^ "International Space Station Expeditions". NASA. 10 April 2009. Retrieved 13 April 2009. 
^ NASA (2008). "International Space Station". NASA. Retrieved 22 October 2008. 
^ Morring, Frank (27 July 2012). "ISS Research Hampered By Crew Availability". Aviation Week. Archived from the original on 1 May 2013. Retrieved 30 July 2012. A commercial capability would allow the station's crew to grow from six to seven by providing a four-seat vehicle for emergency departures in addition to the three-seat Russian Soyuz capsules in use today. 
^ Hoversten, Paul (1 May 2011). "Assembly (Nearly) Complete". Air & Space Magazine. Retrieved 8 May 2011. In fact, we're designed on the U.S. side to take four crew. The ISS design is actually for seven. We operate with six because first, we can get all our work done with six, and second, we don't have a vehicle that allows us to fly a seventh crew member. Our requirement for the new vehicles being designed is for four seats. So I don't expect us to go down in crew size. I would expect us to increase it. 
^ "Let's Do the Time Warp Again". Web.archive.org. 28 June 2010. Archived from the original on 28 June 2010. Retrieved 1 May 2012. 
^ Schwartz, John (10 October 2008). "Russia Leads Way in Space Tourism With Paid Trips into Orbit". The New York Times. 
^ Boyle, Alan. "Space passenger Olsen to pull his own weight". MSNBC. 
^ "Flight to space ignited dreams | St. Catharines Standard". Stcatharinesstandard.ca. Retrieved 1 May 2012. 
^ "ESA – Human Spaceflight and Exploration – Business – "I am NOT a tourist"". Esa.int. 18 September 2006. Retrieved 1 May 2012. 
^ "Interview with Anousheh Ansari, the First Female Space Tourist". Space.com. 15 September 2006. Retrieved 1 May 2012. 
^ "Breaking News | Resumption of Soyuz tourist flights announced". Spaceflight Now. Retrieved 1 May 2012. 
^ Maher, Heather (15 September 2006). "U.S.: Iranian-American To Be First Female Civilian in Space". Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty. Retrieved 1 May 2012. 
^ "Space Tourists | A Film By Christian Frei". Space-tourists-film.com. Retrieved 1 May 2012. 
^ "International Space Station Traditional Geocache". 
^ Cook, John (29 August 2011). "From outer space to the ocean floor, Geocaching.com now boasts more than 1.5 million hidden treasures". Geekwire.com. Retrieved 27 February 2013. 
^ "American game designer follows father into orbit". ABC News. 12 October 2008. Retrieved 16 May 2016. 
^ a b Cooney, Jim. "Mission Control Answers Your Questions". Houston, TX. Jim Cooney ISS Trajectory Operations Officer 
^ Pelt, Michel van (2009). Into the Solar System on a String : Space Tethers and Space Elevators (1st ed.). New York, NY: Springer New York. p. 133. ISBN 0-387-76555-7. 
^ "Europe's ATV-2 departs ISS to make way for Russia's Progress M-11M". NASASpaceFlight.com. 20 June 2011. Retrieved 1 May 2012. 
^ Rand Simberg (29 July 2008). "The Uncertain Future of the International Space Station: Analysis". Popular Mechanics. Archived from the original on 31 March 2009. Retrieved 6 March 2009. 
^ a b "ISS Environment". Johnson Space Center. Archived from the original on 13 February 2008. Retrieved 15 October 2007. 
^ "Rocket company tests world's most powerful ion engine". Newscientist.com. Retrieved 10 August 2017. 
^ "Executive summary" (PDF). Ad Astra Rocket Company. 24 January 2010. Archived from the original (PDF) on 31 March 2010. Retrieved 27 February 2010. 
^ "Press Release 121208" (PDF). AdAstra Rocket Company. 12 December 2008. Retrieved 7 December 2009. 
^ "Propulsion Systems of the Future". NASA. Retrieved 29 May 2009. 
^ David Shiga (5 October 2009). "Rocket company tests world's most powerful ion engine". New Scientist. Retrieved 7 October 2009. 
^ a b "Exercising Control 49 months of DMS-R Operations" (PDF). 
^ "Microsoft Word – hb_qs_vehicle_RussianUSGNCForceFight_pg1.doc" (PDF). Retrieved 1 May 2012. 
^ "International Space Station Status Report #05-7". NASA. 11 February 2005. Retrieved 23 November 2008. 
^ Carlos Roithmayr (2003). Dynamics and Control of Attitude, Power, and Momentum for a Spacecraft Using Flywheels and Control Moment Gyroscopes (PDF). Langley Research Center: NASA. Retrieved 12 July 2011. 
^ Chris Bergin (14 June 2007). "Atlantis ready to support ISS troubleshooting". NASASPaceflight.com. Retrieved 6 March 2009. 
^ Liz Austin Peterson (30 October 2007). "Astronauts notice tear in solar panel". Associated Press. Retrieved 30 October 2007. 
^ Stein, Rob (4 November 2007). "Space Station's Damaged Panel Is Fixed". The Washington Post. Retrieved 4 November 2007. 
^ William Harwood (25 March 2008). "Station chief gives detailed update on joint problem". CBS News & SpaceflightNow.com. Retrieved 5 November 2008. 
^ "Crew Expansion Prep, SARJ Repair Focus of STS-126". NASA. 30 October 2008. Retrieved 5 November 2008. 
^ William Harwood (18 November 2008). "Astronauts prepare for first spacewalk of shuttle flight". CBS News & SpaceflightNow.com. Retrieved 22 November 2008. 
^ a b Chris Bergin (1 April 2009). "ISS concern over S1 Radiator – may require replacement via shuttle mission". NASASpaceflight.com. Retrieved 3 April 2009. 
^ "Problem forces partial powerdown aboard station". Spaceflightnow.com. 31 July 2010. Retrieved 16 November 2010. 
^ "NASA ISS On-Orbit Status 1 August 2010 (early edition)". Spaceref.com. 31 July 2010. Retrieved 16 November 2010. 
^ "ISS Active Control System". Boeing. 21 November 2006. Retrieved 16 November 2010. 
^ Harwood, William (10 August 2010). "Wednesday spacewalk to remove failed coolant pump". Spaceflight Now. 
^ Gebhardt, Chris (11 August 2010). "Large success for second EVA as failed Pump Module is removed". NASA Spaceflight. 
^ Harwood, William (11 August 2010). "Station's bad pump removed; more spacewalking ahead". Spaceflight Now. 
^ Bergin, Chris (18 August 2010). "ISS cooling configuration returning to normal confirming ETCS PM success". Spaceflight Now. 
^ Chow, Denise (2 August 2010). "Cooling System Malfunction Highlights Space Station's Complexity". Space.com. 
^ Harwood, William (31 July 2010). "Spacewalks needed to fix station cooling problem". Spaceflight Now. 
^ Oberg, James (11 January 2004). "Crew finds 'culprit' in space station leak". MSNBC. Retrieved 22 August 2010. 
^ Harwood, William (18 September 2006). "Oxygen Generator Problem Triggers Station Alarm". CBS News via Spaceflight Now. Retrieved 24 November 2008. 
^ 30 August 2012 by Pete Harding (30 August 2012). "Astronaut duo complete challenging first post-Shuttle US spacewalk on ISS". NASA Spaceflight. Retrieved 22 October 2013. 
^ Spaceref.com Sept 5, 2012 Marc Boucher "Critical Space Station spacewalk a Success".
^ AP (24 December 2013). "Astronauts Complete Rare Christmas Eve Spacewalk". Leaker. Archived from the original on 26 December 2013. Retrieved 24 December 2013. 
^ "International Space Station Calendar". Spaceflight 101. 21 November 2016. Retrieved 14 December 2016. 
^ "Progress MS-06 Cargo Ship completes flawless Rendezvous & Docking with fresh Supplies for ISS". Spaceflight 101. Retrieved 1 September 2017. 
^ "Three Crewmen Arrive at International Space Station after Express Soyuz Rendezvous". Spaceflight 101. Retrieved 13 September 2017. 
^ "Progress supply ship completes space station delivery". Spaceflight Now. Retrieved 17 October 2017. 
^ "Previously-Flown Dragon Cargo Craft Captured by Space Station Crew for Second Supply Delivery". Spaceflight101. Retrieved 17 December 2017. 
^ "International Space Station Calendar". Spaceflight101. Retrieved 19 December 2017. 
^ a b c d e f Clark, Stephen (21 October 2017). "Launch Schedule". Spaceflight Now. Retrieved 22 October 2017. 
^ a b c "International Space Station Calendar". Spaceflight 101. 15 September 2017. Retrieved 23 September 2017. 
^ a b c d Heiney, Anna (5 October 2017). "NASA's Commercial Crew Program Target Test Flight Dates". NASA. Retrieved 8 October 2017. 
^ a b c d e Pietrobon, Steven (7 October 2017). "Russian Launch Manifest". Retrieved 8 October 2017. 
^ Zak, Anatoly (27 March 2017). "Russian engineers tackle problems with MLM/Nauka module". Russian Space Web. Retrieved 28 March 2017. 
^ "ESA — ATV — Crew role in mission control". Esa.int. 2 March 2011. Retrieved 23 May 2011. 
^ "ESA — Human Spaceflight and Exploration — International Space Station — Automated Transfer Vehicle (ATV)". Esa.int. 16 January 2009. Retrieved 23 May 2011. 
^ Memi, Ed. "Space Shuttle upgrade lets astronauts at ISS stay in space longer". Boeing. Retrieved 17 September 2011. 
^ Woffinden, David C.; Geller, David K. (July 2007). "Navigating the Road to Autonomous Orbital Rendezvous". Journal of Spacecraft and Rockets. 44 (4): 898–909. Bibcode:2007JSpRo..44..898W. doi:10.2514/1.30734. 
^ "ISS EO-6". Astronautix.com. Archived from the original on 18 June 2012. Retrieved 1 May 2012. 
^ "Live listing of spacecraft operations". NASA. 1 December 2009. Archived from the original on 3 August 2008. Retrieved 8 December 2009. 
^ Space Operations Mission Directorate (30 August 2006). "Human Space Flight Transition Plan" (PDF). NASA. 
^ "NASA Seeks Proposals for Crew and Cargo Transportation to Orbit" (Press release). NASA. 18 January 2006. Retrieved 21 November 2006. 
^ "NASA proposes Soyuz photo op; shuttle launch readiness reviewed (UPDATED)". CBS. Retrieved 11 February 2011. 
^ Chang, Kenneth (25 May 2012). "Space X Capsule Docks at Space Station". The New York Times. Retrieved 25 May 2012. 
^ Trinidad, Katherine; Thomas, Candrea (22 May 2009). "NASA's Space Shuttle Landing Delayed by Weather". NASA. Retrieved 26 June 2015. 
^ "ISS Crew Timeline" (PDF). NASA. 5 November 2008. Retrieved 5 November 2008. 
^ "NASA – Time in Space, A Space in Time". www.nasa.gov. Retrieved 5 May 2015. 
^ "A Slice of Time Pie". 17 March 2013. Archived from the original on 17 March 2013. Retrieved 5 May 2015. 
^ "Human Space Flight (HSF) – Crew Answers". spaceflight.nasa.gov. Retrieved 5 May 2015. 
^ "At Home with Commander Scott Kelly (Video)". International Space Station: NASA. 6 December 2010. Retrieved 8 May 2011. 
^ Broyan, James Lee; Borrego, Melissa Ann; Bahr, Juergen F. (2008). "International Space Station USOS Crew Quarters Development" (PDF). SAE International. Retrieved 8 May 2011. 
^ a b c d e "Daily life". ESA. 19 July 2004. Retrieved 28 October 2009. 
^ a b c d e f Mansfield, Cheryl L. (7 November 2008). "Station Prepares for Expanding Crew". NASA. Retrieved 17 September 2009. 
^ a b c d "Living and Working on the International Space Station" (PDF). CSA. Archived from the original (PDF) on 19 April 2009. Retrieved 28 October 2009. 
^ a b Malik, Tariq (27 July 2009). "Sleeping in Space is Easy, But There's No Shower". Space.com. Retrieved 29 October 2009. 
^ Benson, Charles Dunlap and William David Compton. Living and Working in Space: A History of Skylab. NASA publication SP-4208.
^ Portree, David S. F. (March 1995). Mir Hardware Heritage (PDF). NASA. p. 86. OCLC 755272548. Reference Publication 1357. 
^ Nyberg, Karen (12 July 2013). Karen Nyberg Shows How You Wash Hair in Space. YouTube.com. NASA. Retrieved 6 June 2015. 
^ Lu, Ed (8 September 2003). "Greetings Earthling". NASA. Retrieved 1 November 2009. 
^ Ker Than (23 February 2006). "Solar Flare Hits Earth and Mars". Space.com. 
^ "A new kind of solar storm". NASA. 10 June 2005. 
^ "Galactic Radiation Received in Flight". FAA Civil Aeromedical Institute. Archived from the original on 29 March 2010. Retrieved 20 May 2010. 
^ Peter Suedfeld1; Kasia E. Wilk; Lindi Cassel. Flying with Strangers: Postmission Reflections of Multinational Space Crews. 
^ Manzey, D.; Lorenz, B.; Poljakov, V. (1998). "Mental performance in extreme environments: Results from a performance monitoring study during a 438-day spaceflight". Ergonomics. 41 (4): 537–559. doi:10.1080/001401398186991. PMID 9557591. 
^ Schneider, S. M.; Amonette, W. E.; Blazine, K.; Bentley, J.; c. Lee, S. M.; Loehr, J. A.; Moore, A. D.; Rapley, M.; Mulder, E. R.; Smith, S. M. (2003). "Training with the International Space Station Interim Resistive Exercise Device". Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise. 35 (11): 1935–1945. doi:10.1249/01.MSS.0000093611.88198.08. PMID 14600562. 
^ "Bungee Cords Keep Astronauts Grounded While Running". NASA. 16 June 2009. Retrieved 23 August 2009. 
^ Amiko Kauderer (19 August 2009). "Do Tread on Me". NASA. Retrieved 23 August 2009. 
^ Trudy E. Bell (2007). "Preventing "Sick" Spaceships". Retrieved 29 March 2015. 
^ "Mutant space microbes attack ISS: 'Munch' metal, may crack glass". RT. 23 April 2012. Retrieved 29 March 2015. 
^ Patrick L. Barry (2000). "Microscopic Stowaways on the ISS". Retrieved 29 March 2015. 
^ Michael Hoffman (3 April 2009). "National Space Symposium 2009: It's getting crowded up there". Defense News. Retrieved 7 October 2009. [permanent dead link]
^ F. L. Whipple (1949). "The Theory of Micrometeoroids". Popular Astronomy. Vol. 57. p. 517. Bibcode:1949PA.....57..517W. 
^ Chris Bergin (28 June 2011). "STS-135: FRR sets 8 July Launch Date for Atlantis – Debris misses ISS". NASASpaceflight.com. Retrieved 28 June 2011. 
^ Henry Nahra (24–29 April 1989). "Effect of Micrometeoroid and Space Debris Impacts on the Space Station Freedom Solar Array Surfaces" (PDF). NASA. Retrieved 7 October 2009. 
^ "Space Suit Punctures and Decompression". The Artemis Project. Retrieved 20 July 2011. 
^ "Microsoft PowerPoint – EducationPackage SMALL.ppt" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 8 April 2008. Retrieved 1 May 2012. 
^ Rachel Courtland (16 March 2009). "Space station may move to dodge debris". New Scientist. Retrieved 20 April 2010. 
^ a b "ISS Maneuvers to Avoid Russian Fragmentation Debris" (PDF). Orbital Debris Quarterly News. NASA. 12 (4): 1&2. October 2008. Archived from the original (PDF) on 27 May 2010. Retrieved 20 April 2010. 
^ "ATV carries out first debris avoidance manoeuvre for the ISS". ESA. 28 August 2008. Retrieved 26 February 2010. 
^ "Avoiding satellite collisions in 2009" (PDF). Orbital Debris Quarterly News. NASA. 14 (1): 2. January 2010. Archived from the original (PDF) on 27 May 2010. Retrieved 20 April 2010. 
^ "ISS crew take to escape capsules in space junk alert". BBC News. 24 March 2012. Retrieved 24 March 2012. 
^ "Station Crew Takes Precautions for Close Pass of Space Debris". NASA Blog. 16 June 2015. Retrieved 16 June 2015. 
^ Anatoly Zak (22 May 2009). "Russia 'to save its ISS modules'". BBC News. Retrieved 23 May 2009. 
^ United Nations Treaties and Principles on Outer Space. (PDF). United Nations. New York. 2002. ISBN 92-1-100900-6. Retrieved 8 October 2011.
^ Thomas Kelly (2000). Engineering Challenges to the Long-Term Operation of the International Space Station. National Academies Press. pp. 28–30. ISBN 0-309-06938-6. Retrieved 12 July 2011. 
^ a b "Tier 2 EIS for ISS" (PDF). NASA. Retrieved 12 July 2011. 
^ "Entry Debris Field estimation methods and application to Compton Gamma Ray Observatory" (PDF). Mission Operations Directorate, NASA Johnson Space Center. Retrieved 12 July 2011. 
^ a b Suffredini, Michael (October 2010). "ISS End-of-Life Disposal Plan" (PDF). NASA. Retrieved 7 March 2012. 
^ "Paul Maley's (Skylab spaceflight controller) Space Debris Page". Archived from the original on 27 February 2005. Retrieved 28 May 2011. 
^ "DC-1 and MIM-2". Russianspaceweb.com. Archived from the original on 10 February 2009. Retrieved 12 July 2011. 
^ "Russia to ban US from using Space Station over Ukraine sanctions". The Telegraph. Reuters. 13 May 2014. Retrieved 14 May 2014. 
^ "From the earth to the moon, and then beyond – Technology & science – Space | NBC News". nbcnews.com. Retrieved 27 May 2014. 
^ "Russia announces plan to build new space station with NASA". Space Daily. Agence France-Presse. 28 March 2015. 
^ Maass, Ryan (30 September 2015). "NASA extends Boeing contract for International Space Station". Space Daily. UPI. Retrieved 2 October 2015. 
^ "ISS' Life Span Could Extend Into 2028 – Space Corporation Energia Director". Sputnik. 15 November 2016. Retrieved 18 November 2016. 
^ "Space Cowboys: Moscow to Mull Building Russian Orbital Station in Spring 2017". Sputnik. 16 November 2016. Retrieved 18 November 2016. 
^ Zidbits (6 November 2010). "What Is The Most Expensive Object Ever Built?". Zidbits.com. Retrieved 22 October 2013. 
^ Lafleur, Claude (8 March 2010). "Costs of US piloted programs". The Space Review. Retrieved 18 February 2012.  See author correction in comments.
^ Price, Pat (2005). The Backyard Stargazer: An Absolute Beginner's Guide to Skywatching With and Without a Telescope. Gloucester, MA: Quarry Books. p. 140. ISBN 1-59253-148-2. 
^ "Artificial Satellites > (Iridium) Flares". Calsky.com. Retrieved 1 May 2012. 
^ "How to Spot the International Space Station (and other satellites)". Hayden Planetarium. Retrieved 12 July 2011. 
^ NASA (2 July 2008). "International Space Station Sighting Opportunities". NASA. Retrieved 28 January 2009. 
^ "ISS – Information". Heavens-Above.com. Retrieved 8 July 2010. 
^ Harold F. Weaver (1947). "The Visibility of Stars Without Optical Aid". Publications of the Astronomical Society of the Pacific. 59 (350): 232. Bibcode:1947PASP...59..232W. doi:10.1086/125956. 
^ "ISS visible during the daytime". Spaceweather.com. 5 June 2009. Retrieved 5 June 2009. 
^ "Get notified when the International Space Station is in your area". 3 News NZ. 6 November 2012. 
^ "Satellite Watching". HobbySpace. Retrieved 1 May 2012. 
^ "Space StationAstrophotography – NASA Science". Science.nasa.gov. 24 March 2003. Retrieved 1 May 2012. 
^ "[VIDEO] The ISS and Atlantis shuttle as seen in broad daylight". Zmescience.com. 20 July 2011. Retrieved 1 May 2012. 
^ https://www.youtube.com Space Station Transiting 2017 Eclipse.
^ Grossman, Lisa. "Moon and Space Station Eclipse the Sun". Wired. 


External links






This article's use of external links may not follow Wikipedia's policies or guidelines. Please improve this article by removing excessive or inappropriate external links, and converting useful links where appropriate into footnote references. (November 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)




Find more aboutInternational Space Stationat Wikipedia's sister projects

Media from Wikimedia Commons
News from Wikinews
Quotations from Wikiquote
Texts from Wikisource
Textbooks from Wikibooks
Travel guide from Wikivoyage
Learning resources from Wikiversity


Agency ISS websites

 Canadian Space Agency
 European Space Agency
 Centre national d'études spatiales (National Centre for Space Studies)
 German Aerospace Centre
 Italian Space Agency
 Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency
 S.P. Korolev Rocket and Space Corporation Energia
 Russian Federal Space Agency
 National Aeronautics and Space Administration

Research

NASA: Daily ISS Reports
NASA: Station Science
ESA: Columbus
RSC Energia: Science Research on ISS Russian Segment

Live viewing
See also: List of satellite pass predictors

Live ISS webcam by NASA at uStream.tv
Live HD ISS webcams by NASA HDEV at uStream.tv
Real-time position at Heavens-above.com
Real-time position at N2YO.com

Multimedia

Image gallery search page at NASA.gov
Assembly sequence animation by USA Today and NASA
ISS tour with Sunita Williams by NASA at YouTube.com
ISS tour with André Kuipers by ESA at YouTube.com
ISS photo tour with Samantha Cristoforetti by ESA
The Future of Hope, Kibō module documentary by JAXA at YouTube.com
Journey to the ISS by ESA at YouTube.com
ISS Photo Library containing the entire collection of photos made by the ISS mission's astronauts







v
t
e


Extremes of motion



Speed



Wave (Light
Sound)
Vehicle

Spacecraft
Aircraft

or propeller-based
transcontinental
FAI records


Water-borne vehicle

or sailing
underwater
transatlantic


Land vehicle (rocket-based
wheel-driven
railed
motorcycle

or production motorcycle (by speed / by acceleration)


production car (by speed / by acceleration)
British)







Distance



Space (furthest spacecraft
furthest landing on another world
furthest travels on another world
furthest humans
closest spacecraft to the Sun)
Aircraft (furthest flight
highest altitude
FAI records)
Deepest Earth ocean dive





Endurance



Space (most enduring spaceflight
most endurance on another world
most time as a person in space
most enduring population of a spacecraft)
Aircraft





See also



Spaceflight records












v
t
e


Spaceflight



General



Astrodynamics
History

Timeline
Space Race
Asian Space Race
Records
Accidents and incidents


Space policy

China
European Union
India
Japan
Russia
Soviet Union
United States


Space law

Outer Space Treaty
Rescue Agreement
Space Liability Convention
Registration Convention
Moon Treaty


Private spaceflight








Applications



Astronomy
Earth observation

Archaeology
Imagery and mapping
Reconnaissance
Weather and environment monitoring


Satellite communications

Internet
Radio
Telephone
Television


Satellite navigation
Commercial use of space
Space launch market competition
Militarisation of space
Space architecture
Space exploration
Space research
Space technology
Space weather





Human spaceflight




General



Astronaut
Life support system

Animals in space
Bioastronautics
Space suit


Extravehicular activity
Weightlessness
Space toilet
Space tourism
Space colonization





Programs



Vostok
Mercury
Voskhod
Gemini
Soyuz
Apollo

Skylab
Apollo–Soyuz


Space Shuttle
Mir

Shuttle–Mir


International Space Station
Shenzhou
Tiangong





Health issues



Effect of spaceflight on the human body

Space adaptation syndrome


Health threat from cosmic rays
Psychological and sociological effects of spaceflight
Space and survival
Space medicine
Space nursing








Spacecraft



Launch vehicle
Rocket
Spaceplane
Robotic spacecraft

Satellite
Space probe
Lander
Rover
Self-replicating spacecraft


Spacecraft propulsion

Rocket engine
Electric propulsion
Solar sail
Gravity assist







Destinations



Sub-orbital
Orbital

Geocentric
Geosynchronous


Interplanetary
Interstellar
Intergalactic





Space launch



Direct ascent
Escape velocity
Expendable and reusable launch systems
Launch pad
Non-rocket spacelaunch
Spaceport





Ground segment



Flight controller
Ground station (Pass)
Mission control center





Space agencies



 CoNAE
 AEB
 CSA
 CNSA
 ESA
 CNES
 DLR
 ISRO
 LAPAN
 ISA
 ISA
 ASI
 JAXA
 NADA
 KARI
 SUPARCO
 Roscosmos
 SNSB
 SSAU
 UKSA
 NASA








  Category
  Portal
  WikiProject












v
t
e


Space stations and habitats



Active



International Space Station (ISS)
Tiangong-2





Defunct




Soviet Union
and Russia



Salyut

Salyut 1
DOS-2†
Salyut 2† ‡
Cosmos 557†
Salyut 3‡
Salyut 4
Salyut 5‡
Salyut 6
Salyut 7


Mir





United States



OPS 0855°
Skylab
Genesis I° and II° (private, Bigelow Aerospace)





China



Tiangong

Tiangong-1










Cancelled




Individual projects



Manned Orbiting Laboratory
Skylab B
Galaxy
Almaz commercial
Tiangong-3





Incorporated into ISS



Space Station Freedom

USOS


Columbus MTFF
Mir-2

ROS










Developmental




China



Chinese large modular space station





Private



Bigelow Commercial Space Station





Russia



OPSEK
LOS





International



Deep Space Gateway








Concepts



Bernal sphere
Bishop Ring
Deep Space Habitat
Exploration Gateway Platform
Industrial Space Facility
McKendree cylinder
Nautilus-X
O'Neill cylinder
Orbital Technologies Commercial Space Station
Rotating wheel
Wet workshop
Space habitat
Stanford torus
Skylab II (FlexCraft)






Notes: † Never inhabited due to launch or on-orbit failure, ‡ Part of the Almaz military program, ° Never inhabited, lacks docking mechanism.










v
t
e


People currently in low Earth orbit



International Space Station (Expedition 54)




Soyuz MS-06



Alexander Misurkin
Mark T. Vande Hei
Joseph M. Acaba





Soyuz MS-07



Anton Shkaplerov
Norishige Kanai
Scott D. Tingle











ISS expeditions
Spaceflights to the ISS

manned
unmanned


ISS spacewalks
ISS visitors
ISS year long mission












v
t
e


Components of the International Space Station



Overview



Assembly
US Orbital Segment
Russian Orbital Segment
Expeditions
Spacewalks
Unmanned visits
Program
Scientific research
Major incidents









Orbiting




Major
components



Zarya (Functional Cargo Block)
Zvezda (Service Module)
Destiny (laboratory)
Columbus (laboratory)
Kibō (PM, ELM-PS, EF)
Unity (Node 1)
Harmony (Node 2)
Tranquility (Node 3)
Quest Joint Airlock
Pirs (docking module, airlock)
Rassvet (MRM 1)
Poisk (MRM 2)
Leonardo (PMM)
Cupola
Integrated Truss Structure (ITS)
Bigelow Expandable Activity Module (BEAM)





Subsystems



Mobile Servicing System (MSS) Canadarm2
Dextre (SPDM)
Boom Assembly
Strela cranes
Kibō Remote Manipulator System
External Stowage Platforms (ESPs)
ExPRESS Logistics Carriers (ELCs) 1-4
Pressurized Mating Adapters (PMAs)
International Docking Adapters (IDAs)
Electrical System
Life Support System





Experimental
devices



AMS-02
CALET
CATS
HDEV
MAXI
NICER
PK-3 Plus
SAGE III








Future




Via Proton



Nauka (Multipurpose Laboratory Module) (with European Robotic Arm (ERA))
Science Power Module





Via Soyuz

Prichal (Uzlovoy Module)



Via CRS

NanoRacks Airlock Module



Proposed



Node 4
XBASE
Ixion
Axiom








Spare
hardware



Multi-Purpose Logistics Modules (MPLMs)
Kibō (ELM-ES)
ExPRESS Logistics Carrier (ELC) 5
Interim Control Module (ICM)





Cancelled



Propulsion Module
Centrifuge Accommodations Module (CAM)
Habitation Module
Crew Return Vehicle (CRV/ACRV)
Science Power Platform (SPP)
Universal Docking Module (UDM)
Russian Research Module (RM)





Support
vehicles




Current



Cygnus
Dragon
H-II Transfer Vehicle (HTV)
Progress
Soyuz





Future



CST-100 Starliner
Dragon 2
Dream Chaser Cargo System (DCCS)
Federation (PPTS)





Former



Space Shuttle
Automated Transfer Vehicle (ATV)





Cancelled



NASDA HOPE-X
ESA Hermes








Mission
control



MCC-H (NASA)
TsUP (RKA)
Col-CC (ESA)
ATV-CC (ESA)
JEM-CC (JAXA)
HTV-CC (JAXA)
MSS-CC (CSA)





Administrative
and legal

Multilateral Coordination Board






 Book
 Category
 Portal












v
t
e


Expeditions to the International Space Station






See also: {{Manned ISS flights}}
{{Unmanned ISS flights}}





2000–2004



Expedition 1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10










2005–2009



Expedition 11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22





2010–2014



Expedition 23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42





2015–2019



Expedition 43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54 (current)
55 (planned)








 Book
 Category
 List
 Portal












v
t
e


Human spaceflights to the International Space Station




See also: {{ISS expeditions}}, {{Unmanned ISS flights}}



1998–2004



1998

STS-88


1999

STS-96


2000

STS-101
106
92
Soyuz TM-31
STS-97


2001

STS-98
102
100
Soyuz TM-32
STS-104
105
Soyuz TM-33
STS-108


2002

STS-110
Soyuz TM-34
STS-111
112
Soyuz TMA-1
STS-113


2003

Soyuz TMA-2
TMA-3


2004

Soyuz TMA-4
TMA-5










2005–2009



2005

Soyuz TMA-6
STS-114
Soyuz TMA-7


2006

Soyuz TMA-8
STS-121
115
Soyuz TMA-9
STS-116


2007

Soyuz TMA-10
STS-117
118
Soyuz TMA-11
STS-120


2008

STS-122
123
Soyuz TMA-12
STS-124
Soyuz TMA-13
STS-126


2009

STS-119
Soyuz TMA-14
TMA-15
STS-127
128
Soyuz TMA-16
STS-129
Soyuz TMA-17







2010–2014



2010

STS-130
Soyuz TMA-18
STS-131
132
Soyuz TMA-19
TMA-01M
TMA-20


2011

STS-133
Soyuz TMA-21
STS-134
Soyuz TMA-02M
STS-135
Soyuz TMA-22
TMA-03M


2012

Soyuz TMA-04M
TMA-05M
TMA-06M
TMA-07M


2013

Soyuz TMA-08M
TMA-09M
TMA-10M
TMA-11M


2014

Soyuz TMA-12M
TMA-13M
TMA-14M
TMA-15M







2015–present



2015

Soyuz TMA-16M
TMA-17M
TMA-18M
TMA-19M


2016

Soyuz TMA-20M
MS-01
MS-02
MS-03
MS-04
MS-05







Current



2017

Soyuz MS-06
MS-07







Planned



2018

Soyuz MS-08
MS-09
Dragon SpX-DM2
Soyuz MS-10
Starliner Boe-CFT
Soyuz MS-11


2019

Soyuz MS-12
MS-13







Vehicles



Past

Space Shuttle


Present

Soyuz


Future

NASA CCDev

CST-100 Starliner
Dragon 2


Federation














v
t
e


Unmanned spaceflights to the International Space Station






See also: {{Manned ISS flights}}
{{ISS expeditions}}





2000–2004



2000

1P
2P
3P


2001

4P
5P
6P


2002

7P
8P
9P


2003

10P
11P
12P


2004

13P
14P
15P
16P










2005–2009



2005

17P
18P
19P
20P


2006

21P
22P
23P


2007

24P
25P
26P
27P


2008

28P
ATV-1
29P
30P
31P


2009

32P
33P
34P
HTV-1
35P







2010–2014



2010

36P
37P
38P
39P
40P


2011

HTV-2
41P
ATV-2
42P
43P
44P†
45P


2012

46P
ATV-3
47P
SpX-D
HTV-3
48P
SpX-1
49P


2013

50P
SpX-2
51P
ATV-4
52P
HTV-4
Orb-D1
53P


2014

Orb-1
54P
55P
SpX-3
Orb-2
56P
ATV-5
SpX-4
Orb-3†
57P







2015–present



2015

SpX-5
58P
SpX-6
59P†
SpX-7†
60P
HTV-5
61P
OA-4
62P


2016

OA-6
63P
SpX-8
64P
SpX-9
OA-5
65P†
HTV-6


2017

SpX-10
66P
OA-7
SpX-11
67P
SpX-12
68P
OA-8E
SpX-13







Future



2018

SpX-14
69P
HTV-7
SpX-DM1
OA-9E
70P
SpX-15
Boe-OFT
71P
OA-10E
Nauka
Uzlovoy


2019

HTV-8
OA-11
72P
SpX-16
73P
SpX-17
SpX-18
74P
Dream Chaser demo mission


2020

SpX-19
HTV-9
75P
SpX-20
76P
77P


2021

HTV-X1







Spacecraft



Roscosmos Progress
ESA ATV
JAXA HTV
NASA CRS

SpaceX Dragon
Orbital ATK Cygnus
Sierra Nevada Dream Chaser








Signs † indicate missions which failed to reach ISS










v
t
e


United States human spaceflight programs



Active



International Space Station (joint)
Orion (in development)








Previous



X-15 (suborbital)
Mercury
Gemini
Apollo
Skylab
Apollo–Soyuz (with USSR)
Space Shuttle
Shuttle-Mir (with Russia)





Canceled



MISS
Orion (nuclear)
Dyna-Soar
Manned Orbiting Laboratory
National Aero-Space Plane
Space Station Freedom (now ISS)
Orbital Space Plane
Project Constellation












v
t
e


Soviet and Russian government manned space programs



Active



Soyuz
ISS (joint)

Russian Orbital Segment







In development



Federation
OPSEK





Past



Vostok
Voskhod
Salyut
Almaz (incorporated into Salyut program) / TKS
Apollo–Soyuz (joint)
Mir

Shuttle-Mir (joint)







Cancelled



Zond (7K-L1) (Moon flyby)
N1-L3 (Moon landing)
LK-700 (alternate Moon landing)
Zvezda (moonbase)
TMK (Mars/Venus flyby)
Spiral
Zvezda
Energia / Buran
Zarya
MAKS
Kliper








List of Soyuz missions
List of Soviet manned space missions
List of Russian manned space missions












v
t
e


European human spaceflight



General



European Astronaut Corps
ISS contribution
ISS research





















Facilities



European Astronaut Centre
Columbus Control Centre
Oberpfaffenhofen
Concordia Station





Earth-based research



AMASE
Concordia winterovers
Euro-MARS
European Space Camp
MARS-500
MELiSSA
Zero-G Airbus A310





Spacecraft used




Active



Soyuz-MS





Planned and proposed



DC4EU
Orion (Orion Service Module)





Retired and cancelled



CSTS
Hermes
Soyuz-TM
Soyuz-TMA
Soyuz TMA-M
Space Shuttle








Mission highlights




Space Station



Mir (Euromir, Interkosmos)
International Space Station (ELIPS programme; Modules: Columbus, Cupola, Harmony, Tranquility)





Other



European Retrievable Carrier
Hubble Space Telescope (Faint Object Camera)
Multi-Purpose Logistics Module
Spacelab (Deutschland-1, Deutschland-2)
Tethered Satellite System (STS-46)















v
t
e


← 1997  ·  Orbital launches in 1998  ·  1999 →




Lunar Prospector | Skynet 4D | Ofek-4 | STS-89 | Soyuz TM-27 | USA-137 | Brasilsat B3 · Inmarsat-3 F5 | Orbcomm FM3 · Orbcomm FM4 · GFO · Ad Astra | Globalstar 1 · Globalstar 2 · Globalstar 3 · Globalstar 4 | Kosmos 2349 | Iridium 50 · Iridium 52 · Iridium 53 · Iridium 54 · Iridium 56 | Kakehashi | SNOE · Teledesic 1 | Hot Bird 4 | Intelsat 806 | Progress M-38 (VDU-2) | USA-138 | SPOT 4 | Iridium 51 · Iridium 61 | Iridium 55 · Iridium 57 · Iridium 58 · Iridium 59 · Iridium 60 | TRACE | Iridium 62 · Iridium 63 · Iridium 64 · Iridium 65 · Iridium 66 · Iridium 67 · Iridium 68 | STS-90 | Globalstar 6 · Globalstar 8 · Globalstar 14 · Globalstar 15 | Nilesat 101 · BSat-1B | Kosmos 2350 | Iridium 69 · Iridium 71 | Kosmos 2351 | EchoStar IV | USA-139 | NOAA-15 | Progress M-39 | Iridium 70 · Iridium 72 · Iridium 73 · Iridium 74 · Iridium 75 | Zhongwei 1 | STS-91 | Thor 3 | Kosmos 2352 · Kosmos 2353 · Kosmos 2354 · Kosmos 2355 · Kosmos 2356 · Kosmos 2357 | Intelsat 805 | Kosmos 2358 | Kosmos 2359 | Molniya 3-49 | Nozomi | Shtil-1 · Tubsat-N · Tubsat-N1 | Resurs-O1 #4 · Fasat-Bravo · TMSAT · Gurwin Techsat 1B · WESTPAC · SAFIR-2 | Sinosat-1 | Kosmos 2360 | Orbcomm FM13 · Orbcomm FM14 · Orbcomm FM15 · Orbcomm FM16 · Orbcomm FM17 · Orbcomm FM18 · Orbcomm FM19 · Orbcomm FM20 | Mercury 3 | Soyuz TM-28 | Iridium 3 · Iridium 76 | ST-1 | Galaxy 10 | Astra 2A | Kwangmyŏngsŏng-1 | Iridium 77 · Iridium 79 · Iridium 80 · Iridium 81 · Iridium 82 | Globalstar 5 · Globalstar 7 · Globalstar 9 · Globalstar 10 · Globalstar 11 · Globalstar 12 · Globalstar 13 · Globalstar 16 · Globalstar 17 · Globalstar 18 · Globalstar 20 · Globalstar 21 | PAS-7 | Orbcomm FM21 · Orbcomm FM22 · Orbcomm FM23 · Orbcomm FM24 · Orbcomm FM25 · Orbcomm FM26 · Orbcomm FM27 · Orbcomm FM28 | Molniya-1T #99 | STEX (USA-141) | Eutelsat W2 · Sirius 3 | Hot Bird 5 | USA-140 | Maqsat 3 | Deep Space 1 · SEDSAT-1 | Progress M-40 (Sputnik 41) | AfriStar · GE-5 | STS-95 (SPARTAN-201 · PANSAT) | PAS-8 | Iridium 2 · Iridium 83 · Iridium 84 · Iridium 85 · Iridium 86 | Zarya / ISS | Bonum 1 | STS-88 (Unity · PMA-1 · PMA-2 · SAC-A · MightySat-1 | Satmex 5 | SWAS | Nadezhda 5 · Astrid 2 | Mars Climate Orbiter | Iridium 11 · Iridium 20 | PAS-6B | Kosmos 2361 | Kosmos 2362 · Kosmos 2363 · Kosmos 2364




Payloads are separated by bullets ( · ), launches by pipes ( | ). Manned flights are indicated in bold text. Uncatalogued launch failures are listed in italics. Payloads deployed from other spacecraft are denoted in brackets.







Authority control



GND: 4486542-9
BNF: cb135092841 (data)











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=International_Space_Station&oldid=816973876"					Categories: International Space StationArtificial satellites orbiting EarthPopulated places established in 1998United States Department of Energy national laboratoriesSpacecraft launched in 1998Hidden categories: All articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from June 2017Articles with permanently dead external linksCS1 maint: Uses authors parameterCS1 Italian-language sources (it)Webarchive template wayback linksArticles with dead external links from November 2017Wikipedia semi-protected pagesUse British English from December 2013Use dmy dates from November 2017Start-date transclusions with invalid parametersWikipedia articles in need of updating from May 2010Articles containing potentially dated statements from July 2017All articles containing potentially dated statementsArticles containing potentially dated statements from June 2017Articles containing potentially dated statements from January 2014Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2006Articles containing potentially dated statements from June 2011Articles containing potentially dated statements from August 2017Articles needing additional references from November 2015All articles needing additional referencesArticles containing Russian-language textArticles containing Japanese-language textArticles containing potentially dated statements from January 2011Wikipedia articles in need of updating from January 2013All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from June 2011Articles containing potentially dated statements from March 2011Articles with unsourced statements from January 2012Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2012Wikipedia external links cleanup from November 2017Wikipedia spam cleanup from November 2017Wikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersArticles containing video clips