Not to be confused with Supranational union.
For the academic journal, see International Organization.




The headquarters of the International Committee of the Red Cross. Geneva (Switzerland) is the city that hosts the highest number of international organizations in the world.[1]


An international organization is an organization with an international membership, scope, or presence. There are two main types:[2]

International nongovernmental organizations (INGOs): non-governmental organizations (NGOs) that operate internationally. These include international non-profit organizations and worldwide companies such as the World Organization of the Scout Movement, International Committee of the Red Cross and Médecins Sans Frontières.
Intergovernmental organizations, also known as international governmental organizations (IGOs): the type of organization most closely associated with the term 'international organization', these are organizations that are made up primarily of sovereign states (referred to as member states). Notable examples include the United Nations (UN), Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE), Council of Europe (COE), International Labour Organization (ILO) and International Police Organization (INTERPOL). The UN has used the term "intergovernmental organization" instead of "international organization" for clarity.[3]

The first and oldest intergovernmental organization is the Central Commission for Navigation on the Rhine, created in 1815 by the Congress of Vienna.
The role of international organizations is helping to set the international agenda, mediating political bargaining, providing place for political initiatives and acting as catalysts for coalition- formation. International organizations also define the salient issues and decide which issues can be grouped together, thus help governmental priority determination or other governmental arrangements.
Not all international organizations seek economic, political and social cooperation and integration.
See also[edit]

List of intergovernmental organizations
List of regional organizations by population
List of trade blocs
Regional Economic Communities
Regional integration
Regional organization
Supranational union

Notes and references[edit]


^ (in French) François Modoux, "La Suisse engagera 300 millions pour rénover le Palais des Nations", Le Temps, Friday 28 June 2013, page 9.
^ The Penguin Dictionary of International Relations divides modern international organizations into two "basic types, the 'public' variety known as intergovernmental organizations (IGOs) and the 'private' variety, the international non-governmental organization (INGOs)." (Evans, Graham, and Richard Newnham. Penguin Dictionary of International Relations. Penguin, 1998, p. 270.)
^ "Intergovernmental organizations having received a standing invitation to participate as observers in the sessions and the work of the General Assembly and maintaining permanent offices at Headquarters." United Nations Department of Public Information, United Nations Secretariat.


External links[edit]

Headquarters of International Organisation List of International Organisation and their Headquarters
Procedural history and related documents on the 'Articles on the Responsibility of International Organizations in the Historic Archives of the United Nations Audiovisual Library of International Law
World News related documents on the World News related documents







v
t
e


International organizations



Intergovernmental
organizations




Non-cultural IGOs



International Criminal Court
International Monetary Fund
International Seabed Authority
Inter-Parliamentary Union
Interpol
New Development Bank
Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
United Nations
World Bank Group
World Trade Organization





Cultural IGOs



Commonwealth of Nations
Community of Portuguese Language Countries
Organisation internationale de la Francophonie












Authority control



GND: 4027366-0
NDL: 00566438








International relations portal







						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=International_organization&oldid=808168553"					Categories: International organizationsCultural globalizationHidden categories: Articles with French-language external linksWikipedia articles with GND identifiers