This article is about the legal concept. For the 2006 film, see Intellectual Property (film).


Intellectual property and Intellectual rights law


Primary rights





Copyright
Patent
Trademark
Trade dress
Trade secret
Geographical indication





Sui generis rights





Authors' rights
Database right
Indigenous intellectual property
Industrial design right
Integrated circuit layout design protection
Moral rights
Plant breeders' rights
Related rights
Supplementary protection certificate
Utility model





Related topics





Abandonware
Anti-copyright
Bioprospecting
Limitations and exceptions to copyright



(Fair dealing
Fair use
Right to quote)



Orphan works
Public domain
Societal views



Outline of intellectual property







v
t
e







Part of a series on


Capitalism







Concepts


Business
Business cycle
Businessperson
Capital
Capital accumulation
Capital markets
Capitalist mode of production
Company
Corporation
Competitive markets
Economic interventionism
Economic surplus
Entrepreneurship
Fictitious capital
Financial market
Free price system
Free market
Goods and services
Investor
Invisible hand
Liberalization
Marginalism
Money
Private property
Privatization
Profit
Supply and demand
Surplus value
Value
Wage labour
Wage slavery








Economic systems


Anglo-Saxon
Free market
Laissez-faire
Mercantile
Mixed
Nordic
Regulated market
Regulatory
Rhine
Social market
State
Welfare
East Asian








Economic theories


American
Austrian
Chicago
Classical
Institutional
Keynesian
Marxian
Modern Monetary
Monetarist
Neoclassical
New institutional
New Keynesian
Supply-side








Origins


Age of Enlightenment
Capitalism and Islam
Commercial Revolution
Feudalism
Industrial Revolution
Mercantilism
Primitive accumulation
Physiocracy
Simple commodity production








Development


Advanced
Consumer
Corporate
Crony
Finance
Global
Late
Marxist
Merchant
Rentier
State monopoly
Techno








People


Adam Smith
John Stuart Mill
David Ricardo
Thomas Malthus
Jean-Baptiste Say
Milton Friedman
Friedrich Hayek
John Maynard Keynes
Alfred Marshall
Ludwig von Mises
Ayn Rand
Murray Rothbard
Joseph Schumpeter
Thorstein Veblen
Max Weber
Ronald Coase








Related topics


Anti-capitalism
Black capitalism
Capitalist state
Consumerism
Corporatism
Crisis theory
Criticism of capitalism
Cronyism
Culture of capitalism
Exploitation
Globalization
History
History of theory
Market economy
Periodizations of capitalism
Perspectives on capitalism
Post-capitalism
Speculation
Spontaneous order
Venture philanthropy








Ideologies


Anarcho-capitalism
Democratic capitalism
Dirigisme
Eco-capitalism
Humanistic capitalism
Inclusive capitalism
Liberalism (economic)
Libertarianism
Neo-Capitalism
Neoliberalism
Objectivism
Ordoliberalism
Social democracy








Capitalism portal
Economics portal
Philosophy portal
Politics portal







v
t
e





Intellectual property (or "IP") is a category of property that includes intangible creations of the human intellect, and primarily encompasses copyrights, patents, and trademarks. It also includes other types of rights, such as trade secrets, publicity rights, moral rights, and rights against unfair competition. Artistic works like music and literature, as well as some discoveries, inventions, words, phrases, symbols, and designs can all be protected as intellectual property.[1][2] Intellectual property law has evolved over centuries. It was not until the 19th century that the term "intellectual property" began to be used, and not until the late 20th century that it became commonplace in the majority of the world.[3]
The main purpose of intellectual property law is to encourage the creation of a wide variety of intellectual goods. To achieve this, the law gives people and businesses property rights to the information and intellectual goods they create, usually for a limited period of time. Because they can then profit from them, this gives economic incentive for their creation.[4]
The intangible nature of intellectual property presents difficulties when compared with traditional property like land or goods. Unlike traditional property, intellectual property is indivisible – an unlimited number of people can "consume" an intellectual good without it being depleted. Additionally, investments in intellectual goods suffer from problems of appropriation – while a landowner can surround their land with a robust fence and hire armed guards to protect it, a producer of information or an intellectual good can usually do very little to stop their first buyer from replicating it and selling it at a lower price. Balancing rights so that they are strong enough to encourage the creation of information and intellectual goods but not so strong that they prevent their wide use is the primary focus of modern intellectual property law.[5]



Contents


1 History
2 Intellectual property rights

2.1 Patents
2.2 Copyright
2.3 Industrial design rights
2.4 Plant varieties
2.5 Trademarks
2.6 Trade dress
2.7 Trade secrets


3 Objectives of intellectual property law

3.1 Financial incentive
3.2 Economic growth
3.3 Morality


4 Infringement, misappropriation, and enforcement

4.1 Patent infringement
4.2 Copyright infringement
4.3 Trademark infringement
4.4 Trade secret misappropriation


5 Criticisms

5.1 The term "intellectual property"

5.1.1 Alternative terms


5.2 Objections to overbroad intellectual property laws
5.3 Expansion in nature and scope of intellectual property laws


6 See also
7 References

7.1 Citations
7.2 Sources


8 External links



History[edit]
Main articles: History of copyright law and History of patent law




The Statute of Anne came into force in 1710


The Statute of Monopolies (1624) and the British Statute of Anne (1710) are seen as the origins of patent law and copyright respectively,[6] firmly establishing the concept of intellectual property.
The first known use of the term intellectual property dates to 1769, when a piece published in the Monthly Review used the phrase.[7] The first clear example of modern usage goes back as early as 1808, when it was used as a heading title in a collection of essays.[8]
The German equivalent was used with the founding of the North German Confederation whose constitution granted legislative power over the protection of intellectual property (Schutz des geistigen Eigentums) to the confederation.[9] When the administrative secretariats established by the Paris Convention (1883) and the Berne Convention (1886) merged in 1893, they located in Berne, and also adopted the term intellectual property in their new combined title, the United International Bureaux for the Protection of Intellectual Property.
The organization subsequently relocated to Geneva in 1960, and was succeeded in 1967 with the establishment of the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) by treaty as an agency of the United Nations. According to Lemley, it was only at this point that the term really began to be used in the United States (which had not been a party to the Berne Convention),[3] and it did not enter popular usage there until passage of the Bayh-Dole Act in 1980.[10]

"The history of patents does not begin with inventions, but rather with royal grants by Queen Elizabeth I (1558–1603) for monopoly privileges... Approximately 200 years after the end of Elizabeth's reign, however, a patent represents a legal right obtained by an inventor providing for exclusive control over the production and sale of his mechanical or scientific invention... [demonstrating] the evolution of patents from royal prerogative to common-law doctrine."[11]

The term can be found used in an October 1845 Massachusetts Circuit Court ruling in the patent case Davoll et al. v. Brown., in which Justice Charles L. Woodbury wrote that "only in this way can we protect intellectual property, the labors of the mind, productions and interests are as much a man's own...as the wheat he cultivates, or the flocks he rears."[12] The statement that "discoveries are..property" goes back earlier. Section 1 of the French law of 1791 stated, "All new discoveries are the property of the author; to assure the inventor the property and temporary enjoyment of his discovery, there shall be delivered to him a patent for five, ten or fifteen years."[13] In Europe, French author A. Nion mentioned propriété intellectuelle in his Droits civils des auteurs, artistes et inventeurs, published in 1846.
Until recently, the purpose of intellectual property law was to give as little protection as possible in order to encourage innovation. Historically, therefore, they were granted only when they were necessary to encourage invention, limited in time and scope.[14]
The concept's origins can potentially be traced back further. Jewish law includes several considerations whose effects are similar to those of modern intellectual property laws, though the notion of intellectual creations as property does not seem to exist – notably the principle of Hasagat Ge'vul (unfair encroachment) was used to justify limited-term publisher (but not author) copyright in the 16th century.[15] In 500 BCE, the government of the Greek state of Sybaris offered one year's patent "to all who should discover any new refinement in luxury".[16]
According to Morin, "the global intellectual property regime is currently in the midst of a paradigm shift".[17] Indeed, up until the early 2000s the global IP regime used to be dominated by high standards of protection characteristic of IP laws from Europe or the United States, with a vision that uniform application of these standards over every country and to several fields with little consideration over social, cultural or environmental values or of the national level of economic development. Morin argues that "the emerging discourse of the global IP regime advocates for greater policy ﬂexibility and greater access to knowledge, especially for developing countries." Indeed, with the Development Agenda adopted by WIPO in 2007, a set of 45 recommendations to adjust WIPO’s activities to the specific needs of developing countries and aim to reduce distortions especially on issues such as patients’ access to medicines, Internet users’ access to information, farmers’ access to seeds, programmers’ access to source codes or students’ access to scientific articles.[18] However, this paradigm shift has not yet manifested itself in concrete legal reforms at the international level.[19]
Intellectual property rights[edit]
Intellectual property rights include patents, copyright, industrial design rights, trademarks, plant variety rights, trade dress, geographical indications,[20] and in some jurisdictions trade secrets. There are also more specialized or derived varieties of sui generis exclusive rights, such as circuit design rights (called mask work rights in the US) and supplementary protection certificates for pharmaceutical products (after expiry of a patent protecting them) and database rights (in European law).
Patents[edit]
Main article: Patent
A patent is a form of right granted by the government to an inventor, giving the owner the right to exclude others from making, using, selling, offering to sell, and importing an invention for a limited period of time, in exchange for the public disclosure of the invention. An invention is a solution to a specific technological problem, which may be a product or a process and generally has to fulfill three main requirements: it has to be new, not obvious and there needs to be an industrial applicability.[21]:17
Copyright[edit]
Main article: Copyright
A copyright gives the creator of an original work exclusive rights to it, usually for a limited time. Copyright may apply to a wide range of creative, intellectual, or artistic forms, or "works".[22][23] Copyright does not cover ideas and information themselves, only the form or manner in which they are expressed.[24]
Industrial design rights[edit]
Main article: Industrial design right
An industrial design right (sometimes called "design right" or design patent) protects the visual design of objects that are not purely utilitarian. An industrial design consists of the creation of a shape, configuration or composition of pattern or color, or combination of pattern and color in three-dimensional form containing aesthetic value. An industrial design can be a two- or three-dimensional pattern used to produce a product, industrial commodity or handicraft.
Plant varieties[edit]
Main article: Plant breeders' rights
Plant breeders' rights or plant variety rights are the rights to commercially use a new variety of a plant. The variety must amongst others be novel and distinct and for registration the evaluation of propagating material of the variety is examined.
Trademarks[edit]
Main article: Trademark
A trademark is a recognizable sign, design or expression which distinguishes products or services of a particular trader from the similar products or services of other traders.[25][26][27]
Trade dress[edit]
Main article: Trade dress
Trade dress is a legal term of art that generally refers to characteristics of the visual and aesthetic appearance of a product or its packaging (or even the design of a building) that signify the source of the product to consumers.[28]
Trade secrets[edit]
Main article: Trade secret
A trade secret is a formula, practice, process, design, instrument, pattern, or compilation of information which is not generally known or reasonably ascertainable, by which a business can obtain an economic advantage over competitors and customers. There is no formal government protection granted; each business must take measures to guard its own trade secrets (e.g., Formula of its soft drinks is a trade secret for Coca-Cola.)
Objectives of intellectual property law[edit]
The main purpose of intellectual property law is to encourage the creation of a wide variety of intellectual goods for consumers.[4] To achieve this, the law gives people and businesses property rights to the information and intellectual goods they create, usually for a limited period of time. Because they can then profit from them, this gives economic incentive for their creation.[4] The intangible nature of intellectual property presents difficulties when compared with traditional property like land or goods. Unlike traditional property, intellectual property is indivisible – an unlimited number of people can "consume" an intellectual good without it being depleted. Additionally, investments in intellectual goods suffer from problems of appropriation – while a landowner can surround their land with a robust fence and hire armed guards to protect it, a producer of information or an intellectual good can usually do very little to stop their first buyer from replicating it and selling it at a lower price. Balancing rights so that they are strong enough to encourage the creation of information and intellectual goods but not so strong that they prevent their wide use is the primary focus of modern intellectual property law.[5]
By exchanging limited exclusive rights for disclosure of inventions and creative works, society and the patentee/copyright owner mutually benefit, and an incentive is created for inventors and authors to create and disclose their work. Some commentators have noted that the objective of intellectual property legislators and those who support its implementation appears to be "absolute protection". "If some intellectual property is desirable because it encourages innovation, they reason, more is better. The thinking is that creators will not have sufficient incentive to invent unless they are legally entitled to capture the full social value of their inventions".[14] This absolute protection or full value view treats intellectual property as another type of "real" property, typically adopting its law and rhetoric. Other recent developments in intellectual property law, such as the America Invents Act, stress international harmonization. Recently there has also been much debate over the desirability of using intellectual property rights to protect cultural heritage, including intangible ones, as well as over risks of commodification derived from this possibility.[29] The issue still remains open in legal scholarship.
Financial incentive[edit]
These exclusive rights allow owners of intellectual property to benefit from the property they have created, providing a financial incentive for the creation of an investment in intellectual property, and, in case of patents, pay associated research and development costs.[30] In the United States Article I Section 8 Clause 8 of the Constitution, commonly called the Patent and Copyright Clause, reads; "[The Congress shall have power] 'To promote the progress of science and useful arts, by securing for limited times to authors and inventors the exclusive right to their respective writings and discoveries.'"[31] ”Some commentators, such as David Levine and Michele Boldrin, dispute this justification.[32]
In 2013 the United States Patent & Trademark Office approximated that the worth of intellectual property to the U.S. economy is more than US $5 trillion and creates employment for an estimated 18 million American people. The value of intellectual property is considered similarly high in other developed nations, such as those in the European Union.[33] In the UK, IP has become a recognised asset class for use in pension-led funding and other types of business finance. However, in 2013, the UK Intellectual Property Office stated: "There are millions of intangible business assets whose value is either not being leveraged at all, or only being leveraged inadvertently".[34]
Economic growth[edit]
The WIPO treaty and several related international agreements underline that the protection of intellectual property rights is essential to maintaining economic growth. The WIPO Intellectual Property Handbook gives two reasons for intellectual property laws:

One is to give statutory expression to the moral and economic rights of creators in their creations and the rights of the public in access to those creations. The second is to promote, as a deliberate act of Government policy, creativity and the dissemination and application of its results and to encourage fair trading which would contribute to economic and social development.[35]

The Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement (ACTA) states that "effective enforcement of intellectual property rights is critical to sustaining economic growth across all industries and globally".[36]
Economists estimate that two-thirds of the value of large businesses in the United States can be traced to intangible assets.[37] "IP-intensive industries" are estimated to generate 72 percent more value added (price minus material cost) per employee than "non-IP-intensive industries".[38][dubious – discuss]
A joint research project of the WIPO and the United Nations University measuring the impact of IP systems on six Asian countries found "a positive correlation between the strengthening of the IP system and subsequent economic growth."[39]
Morality[edit]
According to Article 27 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, "everyone has the right to the protection of the moral and material interests resulting from any scientific, literary or artistic production of which he is the author".[40] Although the relationship between intellectual property and human rights is a complex one,[41] there are moral arguments for intellectual property.
The arguments that justify intellectual property fall into three major categories. Personality theorists believe intellectual property is an extension of an individual. Utilitarians believe that intellectual property stimulates social progress and pushes people to further innovation. Lockeans argue that intellectual property is justified based on deservedness and hard work.[42]
Various moral justifications for private property can be used to argue in favor of the morality of intellectual property, such as:

Natural Rights/Justice Argument: this argument is based on Locke's idea that a person has a natural right over the labour and/or products which is produced by his/her body. Appropriating these products is viewed as unjust. Although Locke had never explicitly stated that natural right applied to products of the mind,[43] it is possible to apply his argument to intellectual property rights, in which it would be unjust for people to misuse another's ideas.[44] Locke's argument for intellectual property is based upon the idea that laborers have the right to control that which they create. They argue that we own our bodies which are the laborers, this right of ownership extends to what we create. Thus, intellectual property ensures this right when it comes to production.
Utilitarian-Pragmatic Argument: according to this rationale, a society that protects private property is more effective and prosperous than societies that do not. Innovation and invention in 19th century America has been attributed to the development of the patent system.[45] By providing innovators with "durable and tangible return on their investment of time, labor, and other resources", intellectual property rights seek to maximize social utility.[46] The presumption is that they promote public welfare by encouraging the "creation, production, and distribution of intellectual works".[46] Utilitarians argue that without intellectual property there would be a lack of incentive to produce new ideas. Systems of protection such as Intellectual property optimize social utility.
"Personality" Argument: this argument is based on a quote from Hegel: "Every man has the right to turn his will upon a thing or make the thing an object of his will, that is to say, to set aside the mere thing and recreate it as his own".[47] European intellectual property law is shaped by this notion that ideas are an "extension of oneself and of one's personality".[48] Personality theorists argue that by being a creator of something one is inherently at risk and vulnerable for having their ideas and designs stolen and/or altered. Intellectual property protects these moral claims that have to do with personality.

Lysander Spooner (1855) argues "that a man has a natural and absolute right—and if a natural and absolute, then necessarily a perpetual, right—of property, in the ideas, of which he is the discoverer or creator; that his right of property, in ideas, is intrinsically the same as, and stands on identically the same grounds with, his right of property in material things; that no distinction, of principle, exists between the two cases".[49]
Writer Ayn Rand argued in her book Capitalism: The Unknown Ideal that the protection of intellectual property is essentially a moral issue. The belief is that the human mind itself is the source of wealth and survival and that all property at its base is intellectual property. To violate intellectual property is therefore no different morally than violating other property rights which compromises the very processes of survival and therefore constitutes an immoral act.[50]
Infringement, misappropriation, and enforcement[edit]
Main article: Intellectual property infringement
Violation of intellectual property rights, called "infringement" with respect to patents, copyright, and trademarks, and "misappropriation" with respect to trade secrets, may be a breach of civil law or criminal law, depending on the type of intellectual property involved, jurisdiction, and the nature of the action.
As of 2011 trade in counterfeit copyrighted and trademarked works was a $600 billion industry worldwide and accounted for 5–7% of global trade.[51]
Patent infringement[edit]
Main article: Patent infringement
Patent infringement typically is caused by using or selling a patented invention without permission from the patent holder. The scope of the patented invention or the extent of protection[52] is defined in the claims of the granted patent. There is safe harbor in many jurisdictions to use a patented invention for research. This safe harbor does not exist in the US unless the research is done for purely philosophical purposes, or in order to gather data in order to prepare an application for regulatory approval of a drug.[53] In general, patent infringement cases are handled under civil law (e.g., in the United States) but several jurisdictions incorporate infringement in criminal law also (for example, Argentina, China, France, Japan, Russia, South Korea).[54]
Copyright infringement[edit]
Main article: Copyright infringement
Copyright infringement is reproducing, distributing, displaying or performing a work, or to make derivative works, without permission from the copyright holder, which is typically a publisher or other business representing or assigned by the work's creator. It is often called "piracy".[55] While copyright is created the instant a work is fixed, generally the copyright holder can only get money damages if the owner registers the copyright.[citation needed] Enforcement of copyright is generally the responsibility of the copyright holder.[56] The ACTA trade agreement, signed in May 2011 by the United States, Japan, Switzerland, and the EU, and which has not entered into force, requires that its parties add criminal penalties, including incarceration and fines, for copyright and trademark infringement, and obligated the parties to active police for infringement.[51][57] There are limitations and exceptions to copyright, allowing limited use of copyrighted works, which does not constitute infringement. Examples of such doctrines are the fair use and fair dealing doctrine.
Trademark infringement[edit]
Main article: Trademark infringement
Trademark infringement occurs when one party uses a trademark that is identical or confusingly similar to a trademark owned by another party, in relation to products or services which are identical or similar to the products or services of the other party. In many countries, a trademark receives protection without registration, but registering a trademark provides legal advantages for enforcement. Infringement can be addressed by civil litigation and, in several jurisdictions, under criminal law.[51][57]
Trade secret misappropriation[edit]
Main article: Trade secret § Misappropriation
Trade secret misappropriation is different from violations of other intellectual property laws, since by definition trade secrets are secret, while patents and registered copyrights and trademarks are publicly available. In the United States, trade secrets are protected under state law, and states have nearly universally adopted the Uniform Trade Secrets Act. The United States also has federal law in the form of the Economic Espionage Act of 1996 (18 U.S.C. §§ 1831–1839), which makes the theft or misappropriation of a trade secret a federal crime. This law contains two provisions criminalizing two sorts of activity. The first, 18 U.S.C. § 1831(a), criminalizes the theft of trade secrets to benefit foreign powers. The second, 18 U.S.C. § 1832, criminalizes their theft for commercial or economic purposes. (The statutory penalties are different for the two offenses.) In Commonwealth common law jurisdictions, confidentiality and trade secrets are regarded as an equitable right rather than a property right but penalties for theft are roughly the same as in the United States.[citation needed]
Criticisms[edit]
Further information: Criticism of patents and Anti-copyright movement




Demonstration in Sweden in support of file sharing, 2006.






"Copying is not theft!" badge with a character resembling Mickey Mouse in reference to the in popular culture rationale behind the Sonny Bono Copyright Term Extension Act of 1998


The term "intellectual property"[edit]
Criticism of the term intellectual property ranges from discussing its vagueness and abstract overreach to direct contention to the semantic validity of using words like property and rights in fashions that contradict practice and law. Many detractors think this term specially serves the doctrinal agenda of parties opposing reform in the public interest or otherwise abusing related legislations; and that it disallows intelligent discussion about specific and often unrelated aspects of copyright, patents, trademarks, etc.[58]
Free Software Foundation founder Richard Stallman argues that, although the term intellectual property is in wide use, it should be rejected altogether, because it "systematically distorts and confuses these issues, and its use was and is promoted by those who gain from this confusion". He claims that the term "operates as a catch-all to lump together disparate laws [which] originated separately, evolved differently, cover different activities, have different rules, and raise different public policy issues" and that it creates a "bias" by confusing these monopolies with ownership of limited physical things, likening them to "property rights".[59] Stallman advocates referring to copyrights, patents and trademarks in the singular and warns against abstracting disparate laws into a collective term. He argues that "to avoid spreading unnecessary bias and confusion, it is best to adopt a firm policy not to speak or even think in terms of 'intellectual property'."[60]
Similarly, economists Boldrin and Levine prefer to use the term "intellectual monopoly" as a more appropriate and clear definition of the concept, which they argue, is very dissimilar from property rights.[61]
On the assumption that intellectual property rights are actual rights, Stallman says that this claim does not live to the historical intentions behind these laws, which in the case of copyright served as a censorship system, and later on, a regulatory model for the printing press that may have benefited authors incidentally, but never interfered with the freedom of average readers.[62] Still referring to copyright, he cites legal literature such as the United States Constitution and case law to demonstrate that the law is meant to be an optional and experimental bargain to temporarily trade property rights and free speech for public, not private, benefits in the form of increased artistic production and knowledge. He mentions that "if copyright were a natural right nothing could justify terminating this right after a certain period of time".[63]
Law professor, writer and political activist Lawrence Lessig, along with many other copyleft and free software activists, has criticized the implied analogy with physical property (like land or an automobile). They argue such an analogy fails because physical property is generally rivalrous while intellectual works are non-rivalrous (that is, if one makes a copy of a work, the enjoyment of the copy does not prevent enjoyment of the original).[64][65] Other arguments along these lines claim that unlike the situation with tangible property, there is no natural scarcity of a particular idea or information: once it exists at all, it can be re-used and duplicated indefinitely without such re-use diminishing the original. Stephan Kinsella has objected to intellectual property on the grounds that the word "property" implies scarcity, which may not be applicable to ideas.[66]
Entrepreneur and politician Rickard Falkvinge and hacker Alexandre Oliva have independently compared George Orwell's fictional dialect Newspeak to the terminology used by intellectual property supporters as a linguistic weapon to shape public opinion regarding copyright debate and DRM.[67][68]
Alternative terms[edit]
In civil law jurisdictions, intellectual property has often been referred to as intellectual rights, traditionally a somewhat broader concept that has included moral rights and other personal protections that cannot be bought or sold. Use of the term intellectual rights has declined since the early 1980s, as use of the term intellectual property has increased.
Alternative terms monopolies on information and intellectual monopoly have emerged among those who argue against the "property" or "intellect" or "rights" assumptions, notably Richard Stallman. The backronyms intellectual protectionism and intellectual poverty,[69] whose initials are also IP, have found supporters as well, especially among those who have used the backronym digital restrictions management.[70][71]
The argument that an intellectual property right should (in the interests of better balancing of relevant private and public interests) be termed an intellectual monopoly privilege (IMP) has been advanced by several academics including Birgitte Andersen[72] and Thomas Alured Faunce.[73]
Objections to overbroad intellectual property laws[edit]




The free culture movement champions the production of content that bears little or no restrictions.


Some critics of intellectual property, such as those in the free culture movement, point at intellectual monopolies as harming health (in the case of pharmaceutical patents), preventing progress, and benefiting concentrated interests to the detriment of the masses,[74][75][76][77] and argue that the public interest is harmed by ever-expansive monopolies in the form of copyright extensions, software patents, and business method patents. More recently scientists and engineers are expressing concern that patent thickets are undermining technological development even in high-tech fields like nanotechnology.[78][79]
Petra Moser has asserted that historical analysis suggests that intellectual property laws may harm innovation:

Overall, the weight of the existing historical evidence suggests that patent policies, which grant strong intellectual property rights to early generations of inventors, may discourage innovation. On the contrary, policies that encourage the diffusion of ideas and modify patent laws to facilitate entry and encourage competition may be an effective mechanism to encourage innovation.[80]

Peter Drahos notes, "Property rights confer authority over resources. When authority is granted to the few over resources on which many depend, the few gain power over the goals of the many. This has consequences for both political and economic freedoms with in a society."[81]:13
The World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) recognizes that conflicts may exist between the respect for and implementation of current intellectual property systems and other human rights.[82] In 2001 the UN Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights issued a document called "Human rights and intellectual property" that argued that intellectual property tends to be governed by economic goals when it should be viewed primarily as a social product; in order to serve human well-being, intellectual property systems must respect and conform to human rights laws. According to the Committee, when systems fail to do so they risk infringing upon the human right to food and health, and to cultural participation and scientific benefits.[83][84] In 2004 the General Assembly of WIPO adopted The Geneva Declaration on the Future of the World Intellectual Property Organization which argues that WIPO should "focus more on the needs of developing countries, and to view IP as one of many tools for development—not as an end in itself".[85]
Further along these lines, The ethical problems brought up by IP rights are most pertinent when it is socially valuable goods like life-saving medicines are given IP protection. While the application of IP rights can allow companies to charge higher than the marginal cost of production in order to recoup the costs of research and development, the price may exclude from the market anyone who cannot afford the cost of the product, in this case a life-saving drug.[86] "An IPR driven regime is therefore not a regime that is conductive to the investment of R&D of products that are socially valuable to predominately poor populations".[86]:1108–9
Some libertarian critics of intellectual property have argued that allowing property rights in ideas and information creates artificial scarcity and infringes on the right to own tangible property. Stephan Kinsella uses the following scenario to argue this point:

[I]magine the time when men lived in caves. One bright guy—let's call him Galt-Magnon—decides to build a log cabin on an open field, near his crops. To be sure, this is a good idea, and others notice it. They naturally imitate Galt-Magnon, and they start building their own cabins. But the first man to invent a house, according to IP advocates, would have a right to prevent others from building houses on their own land, with their own logs, or to charge them a fee if they do build houses. It is plain that the innovator in these examples becomes a partial owner of the tangible property (e.g., land and logs) of others, due not to first occupation and use of that property (for it is already owned), but due to his coming up with an idea. Clearly, this rule flies in the face of the first-user homesteading rule, arbitrarily and groundlessly overriding the very homesteading rule that is at the foundation of all property rights.[87]

Thomas Jefferson once said in a letter to Isaac McPherson on August 13, 1813:

"If nature has made any one thing less susceptible than all others of exclusive property, it is the action of the thinking power called an idea, which an individual may exclusively possess as long as he keeps it to himself; but the moment it is divulged, it forces itself into the possession of every one, and the receiver cannot dispossess himself of it. Its peculiar character, too, is that no one possesses the less, because every other possesses the whole of it. He who receives an idea from me, receives instruction himself without lessening mine; as he who lights his taper at mine, receives light without darkening me."[88]

In 2005 the RSA launched the Adelphi Charter, aimed at creating an international policy statement to frame how governments should make balanced intellectual property law.[89]
Another aspect of current U.S. Intellectual Property legislation is its focus on individual and joint works; thus, copyright protection can only be obtained in 'original' works of authorship.[90]
Expansion in nature and scope of intellectual property laws[edit]




Expansion of U.S. copyright law (Assuming authors create their works by age 35 and live for seventy years)


Other criticism of intellectual property law concerns the expansion of intellectual property, both in duration and in scope.
In addition, as scientific knowledge has expanded and allowed new industries to arise in fields such as biotechnology and nanotechnology, originators of technology have sought IP protection for the new technologies. Patents have been granted for living organisms,[91] (and in the United States, certain living organisms have been patentable for over a century).[92]
The increase in terms of protection is particularly seen in relation to copyright, which has recently been the subject of serial extensions in the United States and in Europe.[64][93][94][95][96] With no need for registration or copyright notices, this is thought to have led to an increase in orphan works (copyrighted works for which the copyright owner cannot be contacted), a problem that has been noticed and addressed by governmental bodies around the world.[97]
Also with respect to copyright, the American film industry helped to change the social construct of intellectual property via its trade organization, the Motion Picture Association of America. In amicus briefs in important cases, in lobbying before Congress, and in its statements to the public, the MPAA has advocated strong protection of intellectual-property rights. In framing its presentations, the association has claimed that people are entitled to the property that is produced by their labor. Additionally Congress's awareness of the position of the United States as the world's largest producer of films has made it convenient to expand the conception of intellectual property.[98] These doctrinal reforms have further strengthened the industry, lending the MPAA even more power and authority.[99]




RIAA representative Hilary Rosen testifies before the Senate Judiciary Committee on the future of digital music (July 11, 2000)


The growth of the Internet, and particularly distributed search engines like Kazaa and Gnutella, have represented a challenge for copyright policy. The Recording Industry Association of America, in particular, has been on the front lines of the fight against copyright infringement, which the industry calls "piracy". The industry has had victories against some services, including a highly publicized case against the file-sharing company Napster, and some people have been prosecuted for sharing files in violation of copyright. The electronic age has seen an increase in the attempt to use software-based digital rights management tools to restrict the copying and use of digitally based works. Laws such as the Digital Millennium Copyright Act have been enacted that use criminal law to prevent any circumvention of software used to enforce digital rights management systems. Equivalent provisions, to prevent circumvention of copyright protection have existed in EU for some time, and are being expanded in, for example, Article 6 and 7 the Copyright Directive. Other examples are Article 7 of the Software Directive of 1991 (91/250/EEC), and the Conditional Access Directive of 1998 (98/84/EEC). This can hinder legal uses, affecting public domain works, limitations and exceptions to copyright, or uses allowed by the copyright holder. Some copyleft licenses, like GNU GPL 3, are designed to counter that.[100] Laws may permit circumvention under specific conditions like when it is necessary to achieve interoperability with the circumventor's program, or for accessibility reasons; however, distribution of circumvention tools or instructions may be illegal.
In the context of trademarks, this expansion has been driven by international efforts to harmonise the definition of "trademark", as exemplified by the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights ratified in 1994, which formalized regulations for IP rights that had been handled by common law, or not at all, in member states. Pursuant to TRIPs, any sign which is "capable of distinguishing" the products or services of one business from the products or services of another business is capable of constituting a trademark.[101]
See also[edit]

Information policy
Industrial property
Freedom of information
Libertarianism and intellectual property

References[edit]
Citations[edit]


^ "What are intellectual property rights?". World Trade Organization. World Trade Organization. Retrieved 2016-05-23. 
^ "Intellectual property", Black's Law Dictionary, 10th ed. (2014).
^ a b "property as a common descriptor of the field probably traces to the foundation of the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) by the United Nations." in Mark A. Lemley, Property, Intellectual Property, and Free Riding Archived 2009-02-26 at the Wayback Machine., Texas Law Review, 2005, Vol. 83:1031, page 1033, footnote 4.
^ a b c Goldstein & Reese (2008), p. 17.
^ a b Goldstein & Reese (2008), pp. 18–19.
^ Brad, Sherman; Lionel Bently (1999). The making of modern intellectual property law: the British experience, 1760–1911. Cambridge University Press. p. 207. ISBN 978-0-521-56363-5. 
^ "intellectual property". Oxford English Dictionary (3rd ed.). Oxford University Press. September 2005.  (Subscription or UK public library membership required.) (Citing Monthly Review, vol. 41. p. 290 (1769): "What a niggard this Doctor is of his own, and how profuse he is of other people's intellectual property.")
^ "intellectual property". Oxford English Dictionary (3rd ed.). Oxford University Press. September 2005.  (Subscription or UK public library membership required.) (Citing Medical Repository Of Original Essays And Intelligence, vol. 11. p. 303 (1808): "New-England Association in favour of Inventors and Discoverers, and particularly for the Protection of intellectual Property.")
^ 'Article 4 No. 6 of the Constitution of 1867 (German)' Hastings Law Journal, Vol. 52, p. 1255, 2001
^ Mark A. Lemley, "Property, Intellectual Property, and Free Riding" (Abstract); see Table 1: 4–5.
^ Mossoff, A. 'Rethinking the Development of Patents: An Intellectual History, 1550–1800,' Hastings Law Journal, Vol. 52, p. 1255, 2001
^ 1 Woodb. & M. 53, 3 West.L.J. 151, 7 F.Cas. 197, No. 3662, 2 Robb.Pat.Cas. 303, Merw.Pat.Inv. 414
^ "Patent Archives – Ladas & Parry LLP". Ladas.com. Archived from the original on 2013-01-15. Retrieved 2015-08-17. 
^ a b Mark A. Lemley. "Property, Intellectual Property, and Free Riding". Heinonline.org. Retrieved 2015-08-17. 
^ "Jewish Law – Articles ("Jewish Law and Copyright")". Jlaw.com. Retrieved 2015-08-17. 
^ Charles Anthon, A Classical Dictionary: Containing an Account of the Principal Proper Names Mentioned in Ancient Authors, and Intended to Elucidate All the Important Points Connected with the Geography, History, Biography, Mythology, and Fine Arts of the Greek and Romans. Together with an Account of Coins, Weights, and Measures, with Tabular Values of the Same 1273 (Harper & Brothers 1841). See also "The first patent law was enacted in Sybaris, a city in the South of Italy, before the Roman domination; (…) The law was mentioned by Atheneus, an ancient writer..." in Takenaka, Toshiko (2013). Intellectual Property in Common Law and Civil Law. Edward Elgar Publishing. p. 419. (chapter by Mario Franzosi).
^ Morin, Jean-Frederic. "Paradigm shift in the global IP regime: The agency of academics, Review of International Political Economy, vol 21-2, 2014, p.275" (PDF). 
^ Morin, Jean-Frederic. "Paradigm shift in the global IP regime: The agency of academics, Review of International Political Economy, vol 21-2, 2014, p.275" (PDF). 
^ Morin, Jean-Frederic. "Paradigm shift in the global IP regime: The agency of academics, Review of International Political Economy, vol 21-2, 2014, p.275" (PDF). 
^ Article 1(2) of the Paris Convention: "The protection of industrial property has as its object patents, utility models, industrial designs, trademarks, service marks, trade names, indications of source or appellations of origin, and the repression of unfair competition."
^ WIPO Intellectual Property Handbook: Policy, Law and Use. Chapter 2: Fields of Intellectual Property Protection WIPO 2008
^ Peter K, Yu (2007). Intellectual Property and Information Wealth: Copyright and related rights]. Greenwood Publishing Group. p. 346. ISBN 978-0-275-98883-8. 
^ World Intellectual Property Organisation. "Understanding Copyright and Related Rights" (PDF). WIPO. p. 8. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2012-03-19. Retrieved August 2008.  Check date values in: |access-date= (help)
^ Simon, Stokes (2001). Art and copyright]. Hart Publishing. pp. 48–49. ISBN 978-1-84113-225-9. 
^ "Trademark, Patent, or Copyright?". Retrieved 2015-11-23. 
^ "A trade mark is a sign which can distinguish your goods and services from those of your competitors (you may refer to your trade mark as your "brand")". Retrieved 2012-12-22. 
^ "Trade marks identify the goods and services of particular traders". 
^ Merges, Robert P.; Menell, Peter S.; Lemley, Mark A. (2007). Intellectual Property in the New Technological Age (4th rev. ed.). New York: Wolters Kluwer. p. 29. ISBN 978-0-7355-6989-8. 
^ Farah, Paolo Davide; Tremolada, Riccardo (March 15, 2014). "Desirability of Commodification of Intangible Cultural Heritage: The Unsatisfying Role of Intellectual Property Rights". Transnational Dispute Management. 11 (2). SSRN 2472339 . 
^ Prudential Reasons for IPR Reform, University of Melbourne, Doris Schroeder and Peter Singer, May 2009
^ "Copyright & Fair Use". Stanford University Libraries. Retrieved 26 June 2017. 
^ Levine, David; Michele Boldrin (2008-09-07). Against intellectual monopoly (PDF). Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-87928-6. 
^ Thomas Bollyky (10 April 2013). "Why Chemotherapy That Costs $70,000 in the U.S. Costs $2,500 in India". The Atlantic. The Atlantic Monthly Group. Retrieved 18 April 2013. 
^ Brassell, King, Martin, Kelvin (2013). Banking on IP? (PDF). Newport, Wales: The Intellectual Property Office. p. 15. ISBN 978-1-908908-86-5. 
^ p. 3.
^ [1] Archived May 7, 2012, at the Wayback Machine.
^ Robert J. Shapiro; Nam D. Pham. "Economic Effects of Intellectual Property-Intensive Manufacturing in the United States" (PDF). Sonecon.com. Retrieved 2015-08-17. 
^ Economic Effects of Intellectual Property-Intensive Manufacturing in the United States, Robert Shapiro and Nam Pham, July 2007 (archived on archive.org).
^ Measuring the Economic Impact of IP Systems, WIPO, 2007.
^ United Nations. "The Universal Declaration of Human Rights". Retrieved October 25, 2011. 
^ WIPO – The World Intellectual Property Organization. "Human Rights and Intellectual Property: An Overview". Archived from the original on October 22, 2011. Retrieved October 25, 2011. 
^ Moore, Adam (2014). "Intellectual Property". Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. 
^ Ronald V. Bettig. "Critical Perspectives on the History and Philosophy of Copyright" in Copyrighting Culture: The Political Economy of Intellectual Property, by Ronald V. Bettig. (Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1996), 19–20
^ Richard T. De George, "14. Intellectual Property Rights," in The Oxford Handbook of Business Ethics, by George G. Brenkert and Tom L. Beauchamp, vol. 1, 1st ed. (Oxford, England: Oxford University Press, n.d.), 415–416.
^ Richard T. De George, "14. Intellectual Property Rights," in The Oxford Handbook of Business Ethics, by George G. Brenkert and Tom L. Beauchamp, vol. 1, 1st ed. (Oxford, England: Oxford University Press, n.d.), 416.
^ a b Spinello, Richard A. (January 2007). "Intellectual property rights". Library Hi Tech. 25 (1): 12–22. doi:10.1108/07378830710735821. 
^ Richard T. De George, "14. Intellectual Property Rights," in The Oxford Handbook of Business Ethics, by George G. Brenkert and Tom L. Beauchamp, vol. 1, 1st ed. (Oxford, England: Oxford University Press, n.d.), 417.
^ Richard T. De George, "14. Intellectual Property Rights," in The Oxford Handbook of Business Ethics, by George G. Brenkert and Tom L. Beauchamp, vol. 1, 1st ed. (Oxford, England: Oxford University Press, n.d.), 418.
^ The Law of Intellectual Property, Part 1 Chapter 1 Section 9 – Lysander Spooner
^ Rand, Ayn (1967) [1966]. Capitalism: The Unknown Ideal (paperback 2nd ed.). New York: Signet. 
^ a b c Miriam Bitton (2012) Rethinking the Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement's Criminal Copyright Enforcement Measures The Journal of Criminal Law & Criminology 102(1):67-117
^ Article 69 EPC
^ Pradip K. Sahu and Shannon Mrksich, Ph.D. The Hatch-Waxman Act: When Is Research Exempt from Patent Infringement? ABA-IPL Newsletter 22(4) Summer 2004
^ Matthew L. Cutler (2008) International Patent Litigation Survey: A Survey of the Characteristics of Patent Litigation in 17 International Jurisdictions Archived 2013-09-22 at the Wayback Machine.
^ Panethiere, Darrell (July–September 2005). "The Persistence of Piracy: The Consequences for Creativity, for Culture, and for Sustainable Development" (PDF). UNESCO e-Copyright Bulletin. p. 2. 
^ Correa, Carlos Maria; Li, Xuan (2009). Intellectual property enforcement: international perspectives. Edward Elgar Publishing. p. 211. ISBN 978-1-84844-663-2. 
^ a b Irina D. Manta Spring 2011 The Puzzle of Criminal Sanctions for Intellectual Property Infringement Harvard Journal of Law & Technology 24(2):469-518
^ Mike Masnick (6 March 2008). "If Intellectual Property Is Neither Intellectual, Nor Property, What Is It?". techdirt.com. Techdirt. Archived from the original on 13 August 2014. Retrieved 17 August 2014. 
^ Richard M. Stallman. "Did You Say "Intellectual Property"? It's a Seductive Mirage". Free Software Foundation, Inc. Retrieved 2008-03-28. 
^ Richard M. Stallman. "Words to Avoid (or Use with Care) Because They Are Loaded or Confusing". The GNU Project. Retrieved 2016-12-01. 
^ Boldrin, Michele, and David K. Levine. Against intellectual monopoly. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2008.
^ Richard Stallman (19 April 2001). "copyright and globalization in the age of computer networks". mit.edu. Archived from the original on 2 March 2015. Retrieved 21 October 2015. 
^ Richard Stallman. "Misinterpreting Copyright". gnu.org. Archived from the original on 5 September 2015. Retrieved 21 October 2015. 
^ a b "Against perpetual copyright". 
^ Doctorow, Cory (2008-02-21). ""Intellectual property" is a silly euphemism". The Guardian. Retrieved 2008-02-23. 
^ Stephan Kinsella (2001) Against Intellectual Property Journal of Libertarian Studies 15(2):1–53
^ Rick Falkvinge (14 July 2013). "Language Matters: Framing The Copyright Monopoly So We Can Keep Our Liberties". torrentfreak.com. Archived from the original on 4 June 2014. Retrieved 17 August 2014. 
^ Alexandre Oliva. "1984+30: GNU speech to defeat e-newspeak" (PDF). Retrieved 17 August 2014. 
^ Stephan Kinsella for Ludwig von Mises Institute blog, January 6, 2011. Intellectual Poverty
^ Official drm.info site run by the Free Software Foundation Europe (FSFE)
^ "What is DRM?". Defective by Design. Retrieved 2015-08-17. 
^ Birgitte Andersen. "'Intellectual Property Right' Or 'Intellectual Monopoly Privilege: Which One Should Patent Analysts Focus On?" CONFERENCIA INTERNACIONAL SOBRE SISTEMAS DE INOVAÇÃO E ESTRATÉGIAS DE DESENVOLVIMENTO PARA O TERCEIRO MILÊNIO. Nov 2003
^ Martin, G; Sorenson, C; Faunce, TA (2007). "Balancing intellectual monopoly privileges and the need for essential medicines". Globalization and Health. 3: 4. doi:10.1186/1744-8603-3-4. PMC 1904211 . PMID 17565684. Balancing the need to protect the intellectual property rights (IPRs) (which the third author considers are more accurately described as intellectual monopoly privileges (IMPs)) of pharmaceutical companies, with the need to ensure access to essential medicines in developing countries is one of the most pressing challenges facing international policy makers today. 
^ Birgitte Andersen. 'Intellectual Property Right' Or 'Intellectual Monopoly Privilege': Which One Should Patent Analysts Focus On? Archived 2013-05-02 at the Wayback Machine. Conferência Internacional Sobre Sistemas De Inovação E Estratégias De Desenvolvimento Para O Terceiro Milênio. Nov. 2003
^ Martin, G; Sorenson, C; Faunce, TA (2007). "Editorial: Balancing the need to protect the intellectual property rights (IPRs)". Globalization and Health. 3: 4. 
^ On patents - Daniel B. Ravicher (August 6, 2008). "Protecting Freedom In The Patent System: The Public Patent Foundation's Mission and Activities". 
^ Joseph Stiglitz (October 13, 2006). "Authors@Google: Joseph Stiglitz – Making Globalization Work". 
^ Stallman's got company: Researcher wants nanotech patent moratorium – Ars Technica
^ Freeze on nanotechnology patents proposed to help grow the sector Archived 2014-03-02 at the Wayback Machine.- Wired UK 11-23-2012
^ Moser, Petra. 2013. "Patents and Innovation: Evidence from Economic History." Journal of Economic Perspectives, 27(1): 23-44.
^ Peter Drahos and John Braithwaite. Information Feudalism: Who Owns the Knowledge Economy?, Earthscan 2002
^ WIPO – World Intellectual Property Organization. "Human Rights and Intellectual Property: An Overview". Archived from the original on October 22, 2011. Retrieved October 25, 2011. 
^ Staff, UN Committee on Economic Social and Cultural Rights. Geneva, November 12–30, 2001. Human rights and intellectual property
^ Chapman, Audrey R. (December 2002). "The Human Rights Implications of Intellectual Property Protection". Journal of International Economic Law. 5 (4): 861–882. doi:10.1093/jiel/5.4.861. Retrieved February 9, 2013. 
^ The Geneva Declaration on the Future of the World Intellectual Property Organization
^ a b Jorn Sonderholm (2010) Ethical Issues Surrounding Intellectual Property Rights, Philosophy Compass 5(12): 1107–1115.
^ N. Stephan Kinsella, Against Intellectual property (2008), p. 44.
^ Thomas Jefferson, Letter to Isaac McPherson (August 13, 1813)
^ Boyle, James (14 October 2005). Protecting the public domain. The Guardian.
^ Bennet, Philip (2009). "Native Americans and Intellectual Property: the Necessity of Implementing Collective Ideals into Current United States Intellectual Property Laws". 
^ Council for Responsible Genetics, DNA Patents Create Monopolies on Living Organisms. Accessed 2008.12.18.
^ Plant Patents USPTO.gov
^ E.g., the U.S. Copyright Term Extension Act, Pub.L. 105–298.
^ Mark Helprin, Op-ed: A Great Idea Lives Forever. Shouldn't Its Copyright? The New York Times, May 20, 2007.
^ Eldred v. Ashcroft Eldred v. Ashcroft, 537 U. S. 186 (2003)
^ Mike Masnick (May 21, 2007). "Arguing For Infinite Copyright... Using Copied Ideas And A Near Total Misunderstanding Of Property". techdirt. 
^ Library of Congress Copyright Office Docket No. 2012–12 Orphan Works and Mass Digitization Federal Register, Vol. 77, No. 204. Monday, October 22, 2012. Notices. PP 64555–64561; see p 64555 first column for international efforts and 3rd column for description of the problem.
^ Dennis Wharton, "MPAA's Rebel With Cause Fights for Copyright Coin," Variety (August 3, 1992), Vol. 348, No. 2, p. 18.
^ William W. Fisher III, The Growth of Intellectual Property:A History of the Ownership of Ideas in the United States Eigentumskulturen im Vergleich (Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1999)
^ Brett Smith (2007–2010). "A Quick Guide to GPLv3". Free Software Foundation. Retrieved 2013-02-15. 
^ Katherine Beckman and Christa Pletcher (2009) Expanding Global Trademark Regulation Wake Forest Intellectual Property Law Journal 10(2): 215–239


Sources[edit]


Arai, Hisamitsu. "Intellectual Property Policies for the Twenty-First Century: The Japanese Experience in Wealth Creation", WIPO Publication Number 834 (E). 2000. wipo.int
Bettig, R. V. (1996). Critical Perspectives on the History and Philosophy of Copyright. In R. V. Bettig, Copyrighting Culture: The Political Economy of Intellectual Property. (pp. 9–32). Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
Boldrin, Michele and David K. Levine. "Against Intellectual Monopoly", 2008. dkleving.com
Hahn, Robert W., Intellectual Property Rights in Frontier Industries: Software and Biotechnology, AEI Press, March 2005.
Branstetter, Lee, Raymond Fishman and C. Fritz Foley. "Do Stronger Intellectual Property Rights Increase International Technology Transfer? Empirical Evidence from US Firm-Level Data". NBER Working Paper 11516. July 2005. weblog.ipcentral.info
Connell, Shaun. "Intellectual Ownership". October 2007. rebithofffreedom.org
De George, Richard T. "14. Intellectual Property Rights." In The Oxford Handbook of Business Ethics, by George G. Brenkert and Tom L. Beauchamp, 1:408-439. 1st ed. Oxford, England: Oxford University Press, n.d.
Farah, Paolo and Cima, Elena. "China's Participation in the World Trade Organization: Trade in Goods, Services, Intellectual Property Rights and Transparency Issues" in Aurelio Lopez-Tarruella Martinez (ed.), El comercio con China. Oportunidades empresariales, incertidumbres jurídicas, Tirant lo Blanch, Valencia (Spain) 2010, pp. 85–121. ISBN 978-84-8456-981-7. Available at SSRN.com
Farah, Paolo Davide, Tremolada Riccardo, Desirability of Commodification of Intangible Cultural Heritage: The Unsatisfying Role of IPRs, in TRANSNATIONAL DISPUTE MANAGEMENT, Special Issues "The New Frontiers of Cultural Law: Intangible Heritage Disputes", Volume 11, Issue 2, March 2014, ISSN 1875-4120 Available at SSRN.com
Farah, Paolo Davide, Tremolada Riccardo, Intellectual Property Rights, Human Rights and Intangible Cultural Heritage, Journal of Intellectual Property Law, Issue 2, Part I, June 2014, ISSN 0035-614X, Giuffre, pp. 21–47. Available at SSRN.com
Goldstein, Paul; Reese, R. Anthony (2008). Copyright, Patent, Trademark and Related State Doctrines: Cases and Materials on the Law of Intellectual Property (6th ed.). New York: Foundation Press. ISBN 1-59941-139-3. 
Gowers, Andrew. "Gowers Review of Intellectual Property". Her Majesty's Treasury, November 2006. hm-treasury.gov.uk ISBN 978-0-11-840483-9.
Greenhalgh, C. & Rogers M., (2010). Innovation, Intellectual Property, and Economic Growth. New Jersey: Princeton University Press.
Kinsella, Stephan. "Against Intellectual Property". Journal of Libertarian Studies 15.2 (Spring 2001): 1–53. mises.org
Lai, Edwin. "The Economics of Intellectual Property Protection in the Global Economy". Princeton University. April 2001. dklevine.com
Lee, Richmond K. Scope and Interplay of IP Rights Accralaw offices.
Lessig, Lawrence. "Free Culture: How Big Media Uses Technology and the Law to Lock Down Culture and Control Creativity". New York: Penguin Press, 2004. free-culture.cc.
Lindberg, Van. Intellectual Property and Open Source: A Practical Guide to Protecting Code. O'Reilly Books, 2008. ISBN 0-596-51796-3 | ISBN 978-0-596-51796-0
Maskus, Keith E. "Intellectual Property Rights and Economic Development". Case Western Reserve Journal of International Law, Vol. 32, 471. journals/jil/32-3/maskusarticle.pdf law.case.edu
Mazzone, Jason. "Copyfraud". Brooklyn Law School, Legal Studies Paper No. 40. New York University Law Review 81 (2006): 1027. (Abstract.)
Miller, Arthur Raphael, and Michael H. Davis. Intellectual Property: Patents, Trademarks, and Copyright. 3rd ed. New York: West/Wadsworth, 2000. ISBN 0-314-23519-1.
Moore, Adam, "Intellectual Property", The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer 2011 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.),
Morin, Jean-Frederic, Paradigm Shift in the Global IP Regime: The Agency of Academics, Review of International Political Economy, vol. 21(2), 2014, p. 275-309.
Mossoff, A. 'Rethinking the Development of Patents: An Intellectual History, 1550–1800,' Hastings Law Journal, Vol. 52, p. 1255, 2001
Rozanski, Felix. "Developing Countries and Pharmaceutical Intellectual Property Rights: Myths and Reality" stockholm-network.org
Perelman, Michael. Steal This Idea: Intellectual Property and The Corporate Confiscation of Creativity. Palgrave Macmillan, 2004.
Rand, Ayn. "Patents and Copyrights" in Ayn Rand, ed. 'Capitalism: The Unknown Ideal,' New York: New American Library, 1966, pp. 126–128
Reisman, George. 'Capitalism: A Complete & Integrated Understanding of the Nature & Value of Human Economic Life,' Ottawa, Illinois: 1996, pp. 388–389
Schechter, Roger E., and John R. Thomas. Intellectual Property: The Law of Copyrights, Patents and Trademarks. New York: West/Wadsworth, 2003, ISBN 0-314-06599-7.
Schneider, Patricia H. "International Trade, Economic Growth and Intellectual Property Rights: A Panel Data Study of Developed and Developing Countries". July 2004. mtholyoke.edu
Shapiro, Robert and Nam Pham. "Economic Effects of Intellectual Property-Intensive Manufacturing in the United States". July 2007. the-value-of.ip.org. Retrieved 2008-04-09.
Spooner, Lysander. "The Law of Intellectual Property; or An Essay on the Right of Authors and Inventors to a Perpetual Property in their Ideas". Boston: Bela Marsh, 1855.
Vaidhyanathan, Siva. The Anarchist in the Library: How the Clash Between Freedom and Control Is Hacking the Real World and Crashing the System. New York: Basic Books, 2004.
Burk, Dan L. and Mark A. Lemley (2009). The Patent Crisis and How the Courts Can Solve It. University of Chicago Press. ISBN 978-0-226-08061-1. 


External links[edit]



Wikiquote has quotations related to: Intellectual property




Library resources about
Intellectual property





Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries





The European Audiovisual Observatory hosts articles on Copyright legislature and covers media laws in their Newsletter







v
t
e


Law



Core subjects



Administrative law
Constitutional law
Contract
Criminal law
Deed
Equity
Evidence
International law
Law of obligations
Procedure

Civil
Criminal


Property law
Public law
Restitution
Statutory law
Tort





Other subjects



Agricultural law
Aviation law
Banking law
Bankruptcy
Commercial law
Competition law
Conflict of laws
Construction law
Consumer protection
Corporate law
Cyberlaw
Election law
Energy law
Entertainment law
Environmental law
Family law
Financial regulation
Health law
Immigration law
Intellectual property
International criminal law
International human rights
International slavery laws
Labour
Law of war
Legal archaeology
Legal fiction
Maritime law
Media law
Military law
Probate

Estate
Will and testament


Product liability
Public international law
Space law
Sports law
Tax law
Transport law
Trust law
Women in law





Sources of law



Charter
Constitution
Custom
Divine right
Human rights
Natural and legal rights
Case law

Precedent







Law making



Ballot measure
Codification
Decree

Edict
Executive order
Proclamation


Legislation

Delegated legislation
Regulation
Rulemaking


Promulgation
Repeal
Treaty
Statutory law

Statute
Act of Parliament
Act of Congress (US)







Legal systems



Civil law
Common law
Chinese law
Legal pluralism
Religious law

Canon law
Hindu law
Jain law
Jewish law
Sharia


Roman law
Socialist law
Statutory law
Xeer
Yassa





Legal theory



Critical legal studies
Comparative law
Feminist
Law and economics
Legal formalism
History
Natural law
International legal theory
Principle of legality
Rule of law
Sociology





Jurisprudence



Adjudication
Administration of justice
Criminal justice
Court-martial
Dispute resolution
Fiqh
Lawsuit/Litigation
Legal opinion
Legal remedy
Judge

Justice of the peace
Magistrate


Judgment
Judicial review
Jurisdiction
Jury
Justice
Practice of law

Attorney
Barrister
Counsel
Lawyer
Legal representation
Prosecutor
Solicitor


Question of fact
Question of law
Trial
Trial advocacy
Trier of fact
Verdict





Legal institutions



Bureaucracy
The bar
The bench
Civil society
Court
Election commission
Executive
Judiciary
Law enforcement
Legal education

Law school


Legislature
Military
Police
Political party
Tribunal








Category
Index
Outline
Portal












v
t
e


Intellectual property activism



Issues



Copyright infringement
Digital rights management
Gripe site
Legal aspects of file sharing
Mashup

digital
music
videos


Monopolies of knowledge
Music piracy
Orphan works
Patents

biological
software
software patent debate
trolling


Public domain





Concepts



All rights reversed
Alternative compensation system
Anti-copyright notice
Business models for open-source software
Copyleft
Commercial use of copyleft works
Commons-based peer production
Free content
Free software license
Libertarian positions
Open content
Open design
Open Music Model
Open patent
Open-source hardware
Open-source software
Prize system

contests


Share-alike
Video on demand





Movements



Access to Knowledge movement
Anti-copyright
Cultural environmentalism
Free culture movement
Free software movement





Organizations



Copyright Alliance
Creative Commons

Electronic Frontier Foundation
Free Software Foundation
Open Rights Group
Organization for Transformative Works
The Pirate Bay
Piratbyrån
Pirate Party
Sci-Hub
Students for Free Culture





People



Alexandra Elbakyan
Rick Falkvinge
Lawrence Lessig
Richard Stallman
Peter Sunde
Peter Suber
Aaron Swartz





Documentaries



Steal This Film (2006, 2007)
Good Copy Bad Copy (2007)
RiP!: A Remix Manifesto (2008)
TPB AFK: The Pirate Bay Away From Keyboard (2013)
The Internet's Own Boy (2014)












v
t
e


Property



By owner



Common

Common land
Communal land
Community


Cooperative
Private
Public
State

Crown property
Crown land







By nature



Croft
Intangible
Intellectual

indigenous


Personal
Tangible

immovable
real







Common resources



Common-pool resource
Digital
Global
Information
Knowledge






Theory



Bundle of rights
Commodity

fictitious commodities


Common good (economics)
Excludability
First possession

appropriation
homestead principle


Free rider problem
Game theory
Georgism
Gift economy
Labor theory of property
Law of rent

rent-seeking


Legal plunder
Natural rights
Ownership

common
customary
self
state


Property rights

primogeniture
usufruct
women's


Right to property
Rivalry
Tragedy of the commons

anticommons







Applications







Acequia (watercourse)
Ejido (agrarian land)
Forest types
Inheritance
Land tenure
Property law

alienation
easement
restraint on alienation
real estate
title







Rights



Air
Fishing
Forest-dwelling (India)
Freedom to roam
Grazing

pannage


Hunting
Land

aboriginal
indigenous
squatting


Littoral
Mineral

Bergregal


Right of way
Water

prior-appropriation
riparian










Disposession/
redistribution



Bioprospecting
Collectivization
Eminent domain
Enclosure
Eviction
Expropriation
Farhud
Forced migration

population transfer


Illegal fishing
Illegal logging
Land reform
Legal plunder
Piracy
Poaching
Primitive accumulation
Privatization
Regulatory taking
Slavery

bride-buying
human trafficking
wage
wife selling


Tax

inheritance
poll
progressive
property


Theft





Scholars
(key work)



Frédéric Bastiat
Ronald Coase
Henry George
Garrett Hardin
David Harvey
John Locke

Two Treatises of Government


Karl Marx
Marcel Mauss

The Gift


John Stuart Mill
Elinor Ostrom
Karl Polanyi

The Great Transformation


Pierre-Joseph Proudhon

What Is Property?


David Ricardo
Murray N. Rothbard

The Ethics of Liberty


Jean-Jacques Rousseau

The Social Contract


Adam Smith

The Wealth of Nations










 Categories: Property
Property law

by country











Authority control



GND: 4136832-0
NDL: 00576736











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Intellectual_property&oldid=818528004"					Categories: CreativityIntellectual property lawSocial information processingEconomics of the arts and literatureIntangible assetsHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksCS1 errors: datesAll accuracy disputesArticles with disputed statements from July 2009All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from July 2015Articles containing Spanish-language textWikipedia articles with GND identifiers