
The New York Times International Edition





The New York Times International Edition (8 August 2017)



Type
Daily newspaper


Format
Broadsheet


Owner(s)
The New York Times Company


Publisher
Arthur Ochs Sulzberger, Jr.[1]


Founded
1887


Political alignment
None


Headquarters
La Défense, France
Several international offices


Circulation
242,073


OCLC number
185273721


Website
www.nytimes.com






The front page of an issue of the International Herald Tribune before it was renamed the International New York Times






Front page of the International New York Times of October 15, 2013, the first to be issued under this name before being integrated into The New York Times International Edition in October 2016


Not to be confused with The New York Times.
The New York Times International Edition is an English-language newspaper printed at 38 sites throughout the world and sold in more than 160 countries and territories. Founded under the title Paris Herald in 1887 in Paris as the European edition of the New York Herald, it changed owners and was renamed several times: it became the Paris Herald Tribune, global edition of the New York Herald Tribune in 1924, then the International Herald Tribune in 1967, with The Washington Post and The New York Times as joint parent newspapers.
In 2002, The New York Times Company took control of the International Herald Tribune, which was subtitled since then The Global Edition of the New York Times. On October 15, 2013, the paper was renamed The International New York Times,[2][3] and in October 2016, it was fully integrated with its parent and renamed The New York Times International Edition.[4] Autumn that year also saw the closing of editing and preproduction operations in the Paris newsroom,[5] where the paper, under its various names, had been headquartered since 1887.[6]



Contents


1 History

1.1 Acquisition by The New York Times Company


2 Columnists

2.1 Jonathan Spollen


3 Affiliations
4 References
5 External links



History[edit]
The Paris Herald was founded on 4 October 1887, as the European edition of the New York Herald by the parent paper’s owner, James Gordon Bennett, Jr.[7][8] The company was based in Neuilly-sur-Seine, a suburb of Paris, France.
After the death of Bennett in 1918, Frank Andrew Munsey bought the New York Herald and the Paris Herald. Munsey sold the Herald newspapers in 1924 to the New York Tribune, and the Paris Herald became the Paris Herald Tribune, while the New York paper became New York Herald Tribune.
The newspaper became a mainstay of American expatriate culture in Europe. In Ernest Hemingway’s 1926 novel, The Sun Also Rises, the first thing the novel’s protagonist Jake Barnes does on returning from Spain to France is to buy the New York Herald from a kiosk in Bayonne and read it at a cafe.[9] In Jean-Luc Godard’s 1960 film Breathless, the female lead character Patricia (played by Jean Seberg) is an American student journalist who sells the New York Herald Tribune on the streets of Paris.[9] Pages from the day’s paper can be seen tacked up through the office windows, a tradition that was to continue with the International Herald Tribune.
In 1959 John Hay Whitney, a businessman and United States Ambassador to the United Kingdom, bought the New York Herald Tribune and its European edition. In 1966 the New York Herald Tribune was merged into the short-lived New York World Journal Tribune and ceased publication, but the Whitney family kept the Paris paper going through partnerships. In December 1966 The Washington Post became a joint owner.
The New York Times became a joint owner of the Paris Herald Tribune in May 1967, whereupon the newspaper became known as the International Herald Tribune (IHT).[7]
In 1974, the IHT began transmitting facsimile pages of the paper between nations and opened a printing site near London. In 1977 the paper opened a second site in Zürich.
The IHT began transmitting electronic images of newspaper pages from Paris to Hong Kong via satellite in 1980, making the paper simultaneously available on opposite sides of the planet. This was the first such intercontinental transmission of an English-language daily newspaper and followed the pioneering efforts of the Chinese-language newspaper Sing Tao Daily (星島日報).
In 1991, The Washington Post and The New York Times became sole and equal shareholders of the IHT. In February 2005 it opened its Asia newsroom in Hong Kong.
In April 2001, the Japanese newspaper Asahi Shimbun (朝日新聞) tied up with the IHT and published an English-language newspaper, the International Herald Tribune/Asahi Shimbun.[10] After The Washington Post sold their stake in the IHT, it continued being published under the name International Herald Tribune/Asahi Shimbun, but it was discontinued on February 2011.[10]
Acquisition by The New York Times Company[edit]
On 30 December 2002 The New York Times Company took control of the paper by buying the 50% stake owned by The Washington Post Company. The takeover ended a 35-year partnership between the two US domestic competitors. The Post was forced to sell when the Times threatened to pull out and start a competing paper.[citation needed] As a result, the Post entered into an agreement to publish selected Post articles in The Wall Street Journal’s European edition. After the takeover the IHT was subtitled The Global Edition of the New York Times.
In 2008, the NYT Company announced the merger of the New York Times and IHT websites. In March 2009 the IHT website became the global version of NYTimes.com. In 2013, the New York Times Company announced that the newspaper itself would be renamed The International New York Times to reflect the company’s focus on its core New York Times newspaper and to build its international presence.[2] On 14 October 2013 the International Herald Tribune appeared on newsstands for the last time. It came with a supplemental section, titled Turning the Page, a retrospective on the Herald Tribune’s past articles, photographs and place in newspaper history. On October 15, 2013, the International New York Times debuted with a ‘Premier Edition’ flash above the masthead. It came with a supplement titled Turning the Page II, which discussed and predicted likely developments in many global areas including energy, finance, technology and media.
Columnists[edit]
While the International Edition shares many columnists with The New York Times, it has its own voice, particularly in the field of culture. Well-known commentators include Alice Rawsthorn on design and Souren Melikian on art.
Jonathan Spollen[edit]
Jonathan Spollen, an Irish copy editor at the paper’s Hong Kong bureau, went missing while in northern India in February 2012, sparking an international campaign to locate him.[11] Spollen’s local Teachta Dála Eoghan Murphy appealed for support for the campaign in the Dáil Éireann.[12]
Affiliations[edit]
Affiliations with international newspapers include:

Asahi Shimbun (Japan)
Le Figaro (France)
The Japan Times (Japan)
JoongAng Daily (South Korea)
Haaretz (Israel)
Kathimerini (Greece)
The Express Tribune (Pakistan)
The Malaysian Reserve (Malaysia)
República (Nepal)
The Jakarta Post (Indonesia)
Ara (Spain)

Typically, the affiliation consists of an English-language edition of the local newspaper circulated together with the New York Times International Weekly.
References[edit]



^ Sulzberger Jr., Arthur Ochs (October 14, 2013). "Introducing The International New York Times". The New York Times. Retrieved October 15, 2013. 
^ a b Herald Tribune to Be Renamed The International New York Times Archived July 9, 2013, at the Wayback Machine.
^ The New York Times Company Announces Plan to Rebrand the International Herald Tribune as the International New York Times February 25, 2013 Archived July 9, 2013, at the Wayback Machine.
^ https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2016/oct/11/the-new-york-times-introduces-its-new-international-edition
^ http://en.rfi.fr/france/20160929-international-new-york-times-closes-paris
^ "The International Herald Tribune". Ihtinfo.com. Archived from the original on April 11, 2012. 
^ a b "History". International Herald Tribune. Archived from the original on March 3, 2010. Retrieved 2010-07-04. Entrepreneur James Gordon Bennett Jr. founded the New York Herald’s European edition in 1887. Cosmopolitan and innovative, Bennett was the embodiment of an international spirit that thrived through changes of ownership and name until the newspaper became the International Herald Tribune in 1967. 
^ James L. Crouthamel (1989). Bennett’s New York Herald and the Rise of the Popular Press. Syracuse University Press. 
^ a b "End of an era as venerable 'Herald Tribune' to be reborn as 'International New York Times'". Irish Times. 12 October 2013. 
^ a b The Diplomat TOKYO NOTES (December 7, 2010). Asahi to Drop English Daily. Retrieved June 1, 2015.
^ "Jonathon Spollen, Missing Irishman, May Have Fallen Victim To Mysterious 'India Syndrome'". The Huffington Post. 
^ "Topical Issue: The Search Effort for Jonathan Spollen - EoghanMurphy.ie". eoghanmurphy.ie. 



External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to International Herald Tribune.



Official website
Mobile apps of the New York Times







v
t
e


The New York Times Company



Executives



Arthur Sulzberger Jr. (Chairman)
Mark Thompson (President and CEO)
Dean Baquet
James Bennet
Meredith Kopit Levien
Arthur Gregg Sulzberger
Joseph Kahn





Newspapers



The New York Times
The New York Times International Edition
The New York Times International Weekly





Magazines



The New York Times Magazine
The New York Times Book Review
T: The New York Times Style Magazine





Other assets



Donohue Malbaie Inc.
The New York Times Syndicate & News Service
The Takeaway
Times Books
The Wirecutter
Full list





Publishers



Adolph Ochs
Arthur Hays Sulzberger
Orvil Dryfoos
Arthur Ochs Sulzberger
Arthur Ochs Sulzberger Jr.





Headquarters



New York Times Building (41 Park Row) (1889–1903)
One Times Square (1903–1913)
The Times Square Building (1913–2007)
The New York Times Building (2007–present)





Related articles



Pulitzer Prizes awarded to The New York Times staff
The New York Times Best Seller list
List of employees
Controversies
Carlos Slim (largest shareholder)









Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 176606469
LCCN: n81111676
GND: 4476359-1











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=The_New_York_Times_International_Edition&oldid=805354207"					Categories: English-language newspapersInternational newspapersPublications established in 1887The New York TimesNewspapers published in France1887 establishments in FranceHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksPages using deprecated image syntaxPages using infobox newspaper with unknown parametersAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from October 2013Official website different in Wikidata and WikipediaWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiers