
International Maritime Organization





The IMO flag



Abbreviation
IMO / OMI


Formation
1959


Type
Specialised agency


Legal status
Active


Headquarters
London, United Kingdom



Head

Kitack Lim[1][2]


Website
www.imo.org


Formerly Inter-Governmental Maritime Consultative Organization


The International Maritime Organization (IMO), known as the Inter-Governmental Maritime Consultative Organization (IMCO) until 1982,[3] is a specialised agency of the United Nations responsible for regulating shipping. The IMO was established in Geneva in 1948[4] and came into force ten years later, meeting for the first time in 1959. Headquartered in London, United Kingdom, the IMO has 172 Member States and three Associate Members.[3]
The IMO's primary purpose is to develop and maintain a comprehensive regulatory framework for shipping and its remit today includes safety, environmental concerns, legal matters, technical co-operation, maritime security and the efficiency of shipping. IMO is governed by an assembly of members and is financially administered by a council of members elected from the assembly. The work of IMO is conducted through five committees and these are supported by technical subcommittees. Other UN organisations may observe the proceedings of the IMO. Observer status is granted to qualified non-governmental organisations.
IMO is supported by a permanent secretariat of employees who are representative of the organisation's members. The secretariat is composed of a Secretary-General who is periodically elected by the assembly, and various divisions such as those for marine safety, environmental protection and a conference section.



Contents


1 History

1.1 SOLAS
1.2 Torrey Canyon
1.3 International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution by Ship 73/78


2 Headquarters
3 Membership
4 Structure
5 Legal instruments
6 Current issues
7 Governance of IMO
8 Secretary-General
9 Technical committees

9.1 Maritime Safety Committee
9.2 Sub-Committees

9.2.1 Resolutions




10 See also
11 Notes and references
12 Further reading
13 External links



History[edit]




The Headquarters of the IMO are located on Albert Embankment, Lambeth, London.


SOLAS[edit]
Main article: SOLAS Convention
Inter-Governmental Maritime Consultative Organization (IMCO) was formed to fulfill a desire to bring the regulation of the safety of shipping into an international framework, for which the creation of the United Nations provided an opportunity. Hitherto such international conventions had been initiated piecemeal, notably the Safety of Life at Sea Convention (SOLAS), first adopted in 1914 following the Titanic disaster.[3] IMCO's first task was to update that Convention; the resulting 1960 Convention was subsequently recast and updated in 1974 and it is that Convention that has been subsequently modified and updated to adapt to changes in safety requirements and technology.
When IMCO began its operations in 1959 certain other pre-existing instruments were brought under its aegis, most notable the International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution of the Sea by Oil (OILPOL) 1954. The first meetings of the newly formed IMCO were held in London in 1959.[5] Throughout its existence IMCO, later renamed the IMO in 1982, has continued to produce new and updated instruments across a wide range of maritime issues covering not only safety of life and marine pollution but also encompassing safe navigation, search and rescue, wreck removal, tonnage measurement, liability and compensation, ship recycling, the training and certification of seafarers, and piracy. More recently SOLAS has been amended to bring an increased focus on maritime security through the International Ship and Port Facility Security (ISPS) Code. The IMO has also increased its focus on smoke emissions from ships.
In January 1959, IMO began to maintain and promote the 1954 OILPOL Convention. Under the guidance of IMO, the convention was amended in 1962, 1969, and 1971.
Torrey Canyon[edit]
Main article: Torrey Canyon oil spill
As oil trade and industry developed, many people in the industry began to recognise a need for further improvements in regards to oil pollution prevention at sea. This became increasingly apparent in 1967, when the tanker Torrey Canyon spilled 120,000 tons of crude oil when it ran aground entering the English Channel[6]
The Torrey Canyon grounding was the largest oil pollution incident recorded up to that time. Among other things, the accident forced the maritime industry and public to question the efficacy of standing regulations and preventative measures pertaining to oil pollution at sea. This incident prompted a series of new conventions.[6]
International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution by Ship 73/78[edit]
Main article: MARPOL 73/78




The waterfront of Lambeth, London with the International Maritime Organization Headquarters in centre.


IMO held an emergency session of its Council to deal with the need to readdress regulations pertaining to maritime pollution. In 1969, the IMO Assembly decided to host an international gathering in 1973 dedicated to this issue.[6] The goal at hand was to develop an international agreement for controlling general environmental contamination by ships when out at sea.
During the next few years IMO brought to the forefront a series of measures designed to prevent large ship accidents and to minimise their effects. It also detailed how to deal with the environmental threat caused by routine ship duties such as the cleaning of oil cargo tanks or the disposal of engine room wastes. Interestingly enough in terms of tonnage the afore-mentioned was a bigger problem than accidental pollution.[6]
The most significant thing to come out of this conference was the International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships, 1973. It covers not only accidental and operational oil pollution but also different types of pollution by chemicals, goods in packaged form, sewage, garbage and air pollution.[7]
The original MARPOL was signed on 17 February 1973, but did not come into force due to lack of ratifications. The current convention is a combination of 1973 Convention and the 1978 Protocol. It entered into force on 2 October 1983. As of May 2013, 152 states, representing 99.2 per cent of the world's shipping tonnage, are involved in the convention.[7]
In 1983 the IMO established the World Maritime University in Malmö, Sweden.
Headquarters[edit]
The IMO headquarters are located in a large purpose-built building facing the River Thames on the Albert Embankment, in Lambeth, London.[8] The organisation moved into its new headquarters in late 1982, with the building being officially opened by Queen Elizabeth II on 17 May 1983.[8] The architects of the building were Douglass Marriott, Worby & Robinson.[9] The front of the building is dominated by a seven-metre high, ten-tonne bronze sculpture of the bow of a ship, with a lone seafarer maintaining a look-out.[9] The previous headquarters of IMO were at 101 Piccadilly (now the home of the Embassy of Japan), prior to that at 22 Berners Street in Fitzrovia and originally in Chancery Lane.[5]
Membership[edit]




International Maritime Organization:
  member states
  associate members



To become a member of the IMO, a state ratifies a multilateral treaty known as the Convention on the International Maritime Organization. As of December 2016, there are 172 member states of the IMO, which includes 171 of the UN member states plus the Cook Islands. The first state to ratify the convention was the United Kingdom in 1949. The most recent member to join was Belarus, which became an IMO member in November 2016.[10]
The three associate members of the IMO are the Faroe Islands, Hong Kong and Macao.
Most UN member states that are not members of IMO are landlocked countries. These include Afghanistan, Andorra, Armenia, Bhutan, Botswana, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Central African Republic, Chad, Kyrgyzstan, Laos, Lesotho, Liechtenstein, Mali, Niger, Rwanda, South Sudan, Swaziland, Tajikistan and Uzbekistan. However, the Federated States of Micronesia and Nauru, which are island nations in the Pacific Ocean, are also non-members.
Structure[edit]
The IMO consists of an Assembly, a Council and five main Committees: the Maritime Safety Committee; the Marine Environment Protection Committee; the Legal Committee; the Technical Co-operation Committee and the Facilitation Committee. A number of Sub-Committees support the work of the main technical committees.[11]
Legal instruments[edit]


Admiralty law





History




Ordinamenta et consuetudo maris
Amalfian Laws
Hanseatic League




Features




Shipping

Freight rate
General average
Marine insurance
Marine salvage
Maritime lien
Ship mortgage
Ship registration
Ship transport

International Regulations for
Preventing Collisions at Sea





Contracts of affreightment




Bill of lading
Charter-party




Types of charter-party




Bareboat
Demise
Time
Voyage




Parties




Carrier
Charterer
Consignee
Consignor
Shipbroker
Ship-manager
Ship-owner
Shipper
Stevedore




Judiciary




Admiralty court
Vice admiralty court




International conventions




Hague-Visby Rules
Hamburg Rules
Rotterdam Rules
Maritime Labour Convention
International Convention on Salvage

United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS)

SOLAS Convention
Ballast Water Management Convention




International organisations




International Maritime Organization
London Maritime Arbitrators Association







v
t
e





IMO is the source of approximately 60 legal instruments that guide the regulatory development of its member states to improve safety at sea, facilitate trade among seafaring states and protect the maritime environment. The most well known is the International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea (SOLAS), as well as International Convention on Oil Pollution Preparedness, Response and Co-operation (OPRC). Others include the International Oil Pollution Compensation Funds (IOPC).[12] It also functions as a depository of yet to be ratified treaties, such as the International Convention on Liability and Compensation for Damage in Connection with the Carriage of Hazardous and Noxious Substances by Sea, 1996 (HNS Convention) and Nairobi International Convention of Removal of Wrecks (2007).[13]
IMO regularly enacts regulations, which are broadly enforced by national and local maritime authorities in member countries, such as the International Regulations for Preventing Collisions at Sea (COLREG). The IMO has also enacted a Port State Control (PSC) authority, allowing domestic maritime authorities such as coast guards to inspect foreign-flag ships calling at ports of the many port states. Memoranda of Understanding (protocols) were signed by some countries unifying Port State Control procedures among the signatories.
Conventions, Codes and Regulations:

MARPOL Convention

Marpol Annex I


SOLAS Convention

IMDG Code
ISM Code
ISPS Code


STCW Convention
International Code of Signals
International Regulations for Preventing Collisions at Sea
HNS Convention
International Convention on Civil Liability for Oil Pollution Damage
International Convention on the Establishment of an International Fund for Compensation for Oil Pollution Damage
International Ballast Water Management Convention

Current issues[edit]
Recent initiatives at the IMO have included amendments to SOLAS, which upgraded fire protection standards on passenger ships, the International Convention on Standards of Training, Certification and Watchkeeping for Seafarers (STCW) which establishes basic requirements on training, certification and watchkeeping for seafarers and to the Convention on the Prevention of Maritime Pollution (MARPOL 73/78), which required double hulls on all tankers.
In December 2002, new amendments to the 1974 SOLAS Convention were enacted. These amendments gave rise to the International Ship and Port Facility Security (ISPS) Code, which went into effect on 1 July 2004. The concept of the code is to provide layered and redundant defences against smuggling, terrorism, piracy, stowaways, etc. The ISPS Code required most ships and port facilities engaged in international trade to establish and maintain strict security procedures as specified in ship and port specific Ship Security Plans and Port Facility Security Plans.
The IMO has a role in tackling international climate change. The First Intersessional Meeting of IMO's Working Group on Greenhouse Gas Emissions from Ships took place in Oslo, Norway (23–27 June 2008), tasked with developing the technical basis for the reduction mechanisms that may form part of a future IMO regime to control greenhouse gas emissions from international shipping, and a draft of the actual reduction mechanisms themselves, for further consideration by IMO's Marine Environment Protection Committee (MEPC).[14] The IMO participated in the 2015 United Nations Climate Change Conference in Paris seeking to establish itself as the "appropriate international body to address greenhouse gas emissions from ships engaged in international trade".[15] Nonetheless, there has been widespread criticism of the IMO's relative inaction since the conclusion of the Paris conference, with the initial data-gathering step of a three-stage process to reduce maritime greenhouse emissions expected to last until 2020.[16] The IMO has also taken action to mitigate the global effects of ballast water and sediment discharge, through the 2004 Ballast Water Management Convention, which entered into force in September 2017.[17]
The IMO is also responsible for publishing the International Code of Signals for use between merchant and naval vessels. IMO has harmonised information available to seafarers and shore-side traffic services called e-Navigation. An e-Navigation strategy was ratified in 2005, and an implementation plan was developed through three IMO sub-committees. The plan was completed by 2014 and implemented in November of that year.[18] IMO has also served as a key partner and enabler of US international and interagency efforts to establish Maritime Domain Awareness.
Governance of IMO[edit]
The governing body of the International Maritime Organization is the Assembly which meets every two years. In between Assembly sessions a Council, consisting of 40 Member States elected by the Assembly, acts as the governing body. The technical work of the International Maritime Organization is carried out by a series of Committees. The Secretariat consists of some 300 international civil servants headed by a Secretary-General.[19]
Secretary-General[edit]
The current Secretary-General is Kitack Lim (South Korea), elected for a four-year term at the 106th session of the IMO Council in June 2015 and at the 27th session of the IMO's Assembly in November 2015. His mandate started on 1 January 2016.[1][2]
Previous Secretaries-General:

1959 Ove Nielsen (Denmark)
1961 William Graham (United Kingdom; acting, following death of Mr Nielsen)
1963 Jean Roullier (France)
1968 Colin Goad (United Kingdom)
1974 Chandrika Prasad Srivastava (India)
1990 William O'Neil (Canada)
2003 Efthimios E. Mitropoulos (Greece)
2011 Koji Sekimizu (Japan)
2015 Kitack Lim (South Korea)

Technical committees[edit]




An image of the main hall assembly chamber, where the MSC and MEPC committee's of the International Maritime Organization meet each year.


The technical work of the International Maritime Organisation is carried out by a series of Committees.[20][19] These include:

The Maritime Safety Committee (MSC)
The Marine environment Protection Committee (MEPC)
The Legal Committee
The Technical Cooperation Committee, for capacity building
The Facilitation Committee, to simplify the documentation and formalities required in international shipping.

Maritime Safety Committee[edit]
It is regulated in the Article 28(a) of the Convention on the IMO:

ARTICLE 28
(a) The Maritime Safety Committee shall consider any matter within the scope of the Organization concerned with aids to navigation, construction and equipment of vessels, manning from a safety standpoint, rules for the prevention of collisions, handling of dangerous cargoes, maritime safety procedures and requirements, hydrographic information, log-books and navigational records, marine casualty investigation, salvage and rescue, and any other matters directly affecting maritime safety.
(b) The Maritime Safety Committee shall provide machinery for performing any duties assigned to it by this Convention, the Assembly or the Council, or any duty within the scope of this Article which may be assigned to it by or under any other international instrument and accepted by the Organization.
(c) Having regard to the provisions of Article 25, the Maritime Safety Committee, upon request by the Assembly or the Council or, if it deems such action useful in the interests of its own work, shall maintain such close relationship with other bodies as may further the purposes of the Organization

The Maritime Safety Committee is the most senior of these and is the main Technical Committee; it oversees the work of its nine sub-committees and initiates new topics. One broad topic it deals with is the effect of the human element on casualties; this work has been put to all of the sub-committees, but meanwhile, the Maritime Safety Committee has developed a code for the management of ships which will ensure that agreed operational procedures are in place and followed by the ship and shore-side staff.[19]
Sub-Committees[edit]
The MSC and MEPC are assisted in their work by a number of sub-committees which are open to all Member States.[20] The committees are:

Sub-Committee on Human Element, Training and Watchkeeping (HTW)
Sub-Committee on Implementation of IMO Instruments (III)
Sub-Committee on Navigation, Communications and Search and Rescue (NCSR)
Sub-Committee on Pollution Prevention and Response (PPR)
Sub-Committee on Ship Design and Construction (SDC)
Sub-Committee on Ship Systems and Equipment (SSE)
Sub-Committee on Carriage of Cargoes and Containers (CCC)

The names of the IMO sub-committees were changed in 2013.[20] Prior to 2013 there were nine Sub-Committees as follows:

Bulk Liquids and Gases (BLG)
Carriage of Dangerous Goods, Solid Cargoes and Containers(DSC)
Fire Protection (FP)
Radio-communications and Search and Rescue (COMSAR)
Safety of Navigation (NAV)
Ship Design and Equipment (DE)
Stability and Load Lines and Fishing Vessels Safety (SLF)
Standards of Training and Watchkeeping (STW)
Flag State Implementation (FSI)

Resolutions[edit]
Resolution MSC.255(84), of 16 May 2008, adopts the Code of the International Standards and Recommended Practices for a Safety Investigation into a Marine casualty or Marine Incident. It is also known as the Casualty Investigation Code.[21]
See also[edit]


United Nations portal



IMO ship identification number
International Maritime Law Institute
International Maritime Rescue Federation
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea
Standard Marine Communication Phrases developed by the IMO, to improve safety at sea
NAVAREA

Notes and references[edit]



^ a b Personal Page of the Secretary-General, accessed: 30 January 2012
^ a b Press-Briefing "Positional changes at IMO Secretariat", accessed: 30 January 2012
^ a b c "Introduction to IMO". International Maritime Organization. Retrieved 28 August 2015. 
^ Hoffman, Michael L. (4 March 1948). "Ship Organization Nears Final Form; U.N. Maritime Body Expected to Have 3 Principal Organs – Panama in Opposition". New York Times. p. 51. Retrieved 28 August 2015. (Subscription required (help)). 
^ a b "IMO History in Pictures" (PDF). International Maritime Organization. Retrieved 27 October 2016. 
^ a b c d "MARPOL73-78: Brief history – list of amendments to date and where to find them". IMO. March 2012. Retrieved 1 June 2015. 
^ a b "History of IMO". IMO. IMO. 2015. Retrieved 3 June 2015. 
^ a b "IMO History: 30 years" (PDF). International Maritime Organization. Retrieved 27 October 2016. 
^ a b "IMO Building History". International Maritime Organization. Retrieved 27 October 2016. 
^ "Member States". International Maritime Organization. Retrieved 28 August 2015. 
^ "Structure". IMO. 1 January 2012. Retrieved 3 October 2012. 
^ "About us". International Oil Compensation Funds. Retrieved 3 May 2016. 
^ Nairobi International Convention on Removal of Wrecks (PDF), retrieved 10 February 2014 
^ SustainableShipping: (S) News – IMO targets greenhouse gas emissions (17 Jun 2008) – The forum dedicated to marine transportation and the environment[permanent dead link]
^ http://www.imo.org/en/OurWork/Environment/PollutionPrevention/AirPollution/Pages/IMO-at-COP21.aspx IMO at COP21 statement
^ Offshore Carbon: Why a Climate Deal for Shipping is Sinking (Climate Home)
^ "Ballast water management - the control of harmful invasive species". International Maritime Organization. Retrieved July 7, 2017. 
^ [1] Archived 16 May 2013 at the Wayback Machine.
^ a b c "The International Maritime Organization". Marine.gov.uk. 28 July 2007. Retrieved 3 October 2012. 
^ a b c "Structure of IMO". International Maritime Organization. Retrieved 25 October 2016. 
^ "RESOLUTION MSC.255(84)" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 1 March 2012. Retrieved 3 October 2012. 



Further reading[edit]

Mankabady, Samir. (1986). The International Maritime Organization. London: Routledge. ISBN 978-0-7099-3591-9
Nordquist, Myron H. and John Morton Moore. (1999). Current Maritime Issues and the International Maritime Organization. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff Publishers. ISBN 978-90-411-1293-4 OCLC: 42652709
International Maritime Coｍmittee (de)

External links[edit]

International Maritime Organization
List of IMO member states on www.imo.org
IMO: What It Is(2001)
Convention:

status
text


IMO moved to Piccadilly in 1970







v
t
e


 United Nations






António Guterres, Secretary-General
Amina J. Mohammed, Deputy Secretary-General
Peter Thomson, General Assembly President





United Nations System




United Nations Charter



Preamble





Principal organs



General Assembly

President


Security Council

Members


Economic and Social Council
Secretariat

Secretary-General
Deputy Secretary-General
Under-Secretary-General


International Court of Justice

statute


Trusteeship Council





Secretariat Offices
and Departments



Headquarters
Envoy on Youth
Spokesperson for the Secretary-General
Geneva
Palace of Nations
Nairobi
Vienna
Economic and Social Affairs
Political Affairs
Public Information

Dag Hammarskjöld Library


Safety and Security
Palestinian Rights
Peacekeeping Operations
Internal Oversight
Legal Affairs
Developing Countries
Sport for Development and Peace
Disarmament Affairs
Outer Space Affairs
Partnerships
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
UN organizations by location
United Nations Office for Developing Countries






Programmes and
specialized agencies




FAO
ICAO
IFAD
ILO
IMO
ITC
IPCC
IAEA
MINURSO
UNIDO
ITU
UNAIDS
SCSL
UNCTAD
UNCITRAL
UNCDF
UNDG
UNDP
UNDPI
UNDPKO

peacekeeping


UNEP

OzonAction
UNEP/GRID-Arendal
UNEP-WCMC


UNESCO
UNFIP
UNFPA
UN-HABITAT
OHCHR
UNHCR
UNHRC
UNICEF
UNICRI
UNIDIR
UNITAR
UN-Oceans
UNODC
UNOPS
UNOSAT
UNRISD
UNRWA
UNSSC
UNU

UNU-OP
UNU-CRIS


UNV
UN Women
UNWTO
UPU
WFP
WHO
WIPO
WMO








Members / observers



Full members
Founding members

UNSC Permanent members


Observers

European Union







History



League of Nations
Four Policemen
Declaration by United Nations
Peacekeeping missions

history
timeline


Enlargement





Resolutions



Security Council vetoes
General Assembly

66th
67th


Security Council

Cyprus
Iran
Iraq
Israel
Lebanon
Nagorno-Karabakh
North Korea
Palestine
Syria
Western Sahara







Elections



Secretary-General (2006
2016)
International Court of Justice 2011
General Assembly President (2012
2016)
Security Council (2015
2016)





Related



Bretton Woods system
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty
Criticism
Delivering as One
Flag

Honour Flag


Four Nations Initiative
Genocide Convention
UN Global Compact
ICC
International Years
UN laissez-passer
Military Staff Committee
Official languages
Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
Peacekeeping
Treaty Series
UN Day
Universal Declaration of Human Rights
Millennium Declaration

Summit
Development Goals


Security Council veto power
UN reform

Security Council reform


UN Art Collection
UN Memorial Cemetery Korea





Other



Outline
UN television film series (1964–1966)
In popular culture









Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 123847071
LCCN: n83019162
ISNI: 0000 0001 2106 0940
GND: 274510-0
SELIBR: 119865
SUDOC: 026488922
BNF: cb11872776s (data)
NLA: 36564788
NKC: ko2010571684
BNE: XX97164











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=International_Maritime_Organization&oldid=817430428"					Categories: United Nations specialized agenciesInternational Maritime OrganizationInternational organisations based in LondonInternational water transportWater transportOrganizations established in 19481948 establishments in SwitzerlandHidden categories: Pages containing links to subscription-only contentAll articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from April 2017Articles with permanently dead external linksWebarchive template wayback linksEngvarB from April 2017Use dmy dates from April 2017Interlanguage link template link numberWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with SELIBR identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersWikipedia articles with NLA identifiers