"Silicon chip" redirects here. For the electronics magazine, see Silicon Chip.
"Microchip" redirects here. For other uses, see Microchip (disambiguation).




Erasable Programmable Read-Only Memory (EPROM) integrated circuits. These packages have a transparent window that shows the die inside. The window is used to erase the memory by exposing the chip to ultraviolet light.






Integrated circuit from an EPROM memory microchip showing the memory blocks, the supporting circuitry and the fine silver wires which connect the integrated circuit die to the legs of the packaging.






Synthetic detail of an integrated circuit through four layers of planarized copper interconnect, down to the polysilicon (pink), wells (greyish), and substrate (green)


An integrated circuit or monolithic integrated circuit (also referred to as an IC, a chip, or a microchip) is a set of electronic circuits on one small flat piece (or "chip") of semiconductor material, normally silicon. The integration of large numbers of tiny transistors into a small chip results in circuits that are orders of magnitude smaller, cheaper, and faster than those constructed of discrete electronic components. The IC's mass production capability, reliability and building-block approach to circuit design has ensured the rapid adoption of standardized ICs in place of designs using discrete transistors. ICs are now used in virtually all electronic equipment and have revolutionized the world of electronics. Computers, mobile phones, and other digital home appliances are now inextricable parts of the structure of modern societies, made possible by the small size and low cost of ICs.
ICs were made possible by experimental discoveries showing that semiconductor devices could perform the functions of vacuum tubes, and by mid-20th-century technology advancements in semiconductor device fabrication. Since their origins in the 1960s, the size, speed, and capacity of chips have progressed enormously, driven by technical advances that fit more and more transistors on chips of the same size - a modern chip may have several billion transistors in an area the size of a human fingernail. These advances, roughly following Moore's law, make a computer chip of today possess millions of times the capacity and thousands of times the speed of the computer chips of the early 1970s.
ICs have two main advantages over discrete circuits: cost and performance. Cost is low because the chips, with all their components, are printed as a unit by photolithography rather than being constructed one transistor at a time. Furthermore, packaged ICs use much less material than discrete circuits. Performance is high because the IC's components switch quickly and consume comparatively little power because of their small size and close proximity. The main disadvantage of ICs is the high cost to design them and fabricate the required photomasks. This high initial cost means ICs are only practical when high production volumes are anticipated.



Contents


1 Terminology
2 Invention
3 Advances
4 Design
5 Types
6 Manufacturing

6.1 Fabrication
6.2 Packaging
6.3 Chip labeling and manufacture date


7 Intellectual property
8 Other developments
9 Generations

9.1 SSI, MSI and LSI
9.2 VLSI
9.3 ULSI, WSI, SOC and 3D-IC


10 Silicon labelling and graffiti
11 ICs and IC families
12 See also
13 References
14 Further reading
15 External links



Terminology[edit]
An integrated circuit is defined as:[1]

A circuit in which all or some of the circuit elements are inseparably associated and electrically interconnected so that it is considered to be indivisible for the purposes of construction and commerce.

Circuits meeting this definition can be constructed using many different technologies, including thin-film transistors, thick film technologies, or hybrid integrated circuits. However, in general usage integrated circuit has come to refer to the single-piece circuit construction originally known as a monolithic integrated circuit.[2][3]
Invention[edit]
Main article: Invention of the integrated circuit
Early developments of the integrated circuit go back to 1949, when German engineer Werner Jacobi (Siemens AG)[4] filed a patent for an integrated-circuit-like semiconductor amplifying device[5] showing five transistors on a common substrate in a 3-stage amplifier arrangement. Jacobi disclosed small and cheap hearing aids as typical industrial applications of his patent. An immediate commercial use of his patent has not been reported.
The idea of the integrated circuit was conceived by Geoffrey Dummer (1909–2002), a radar scientist working for the Royal Radar Establishment of the British Ministry of Defence. Dummer presented the idea to the public at the Symposium on Progress in Quality Electronic Components in Washington, D.C. on 7 May 1952.[6] He gave many symposia publicly to propagate his ideas and unsuccessfully attempted to build such a circuit in 1956.
A precursor idea to the IC was to create small ceramic squares (wafers), each containing a single miniaturized component. Components could then be integrated and wired into a bidimensional or tridimensional compact grid. This idea, which seemed very promising in 1957, was proposed to the US Army by Jack Kilby and led to the short-lived Micromodule Program (similar to 1951's Project Tinkertoy).[7] However, as the project was gaining momentum, Kilby came up with a new, revolutionary design: the IC.




Jack Kilby's original integrated circuit


Newly employed by Texas Instruments, Kilby recorded his initial ideas concerning the integrated circuit in July 1958, successfully demonstrating the first working integrated example on 12 September 1958.[8] In his patent application of 6 February 1959,[9] Kilby described his new device as "a body of semiconductor material … wherein all the components of the electronic circuit are completely integrated."[10] The first customer for the new invention was the US Air Force.[11]
Kilby won the 2000 Nobel Prize in Physics for his part in the invention of the integrated circuit.[12] His work was named an IEEE Milestone in 2009.[13]
Half a year after Kilby, Robert Noyce at Fairchild Semiconductor developed his own idea of an integrated circuit that solved many practical problems Kilby's had not. Noyce's design was made of silicon, whereas Kilby's chip was made of germanium. Noyce credited Kurt Lehovec of Sprague Electric for the principle of p–n junction isolation, a key concept behind the IC.[14] This isolation allows each transistor to operate independently despite being parts of the same piece of silicon.
Fairchild Semiconductor was also home of the first silicon-gate IC technology with self-aligned gates, the basis of all modern CMOS computer chips. The technology was developed by Italian physicist Federico Faggin in 1968. In 1970, he joined Intel in order to develop the first single-chip central processing unit (CPU) microprocessor, the Intel 4004, for which he received the National Medal of Technology and Innovation in 2010. The 4004 was designed by Busicom's Masatoshi Shima and Intel's Ted Hoff in 1969, but it was Faggin's improved design in 1970 that made it a reality.[15]
Advances[edit]
Advances in IC technology, primarily smaller features and larger chips, have allowed the number of transistors in an integrated circuit to double every two years, a trend known as Moore's law. This increased capacity has been used to decrease cost and increase functionality. In general, as the feature size shrinks, almost every aspect of an IC's operation improves. The cost per transistor and the switching power consumption per transistor go down, while the memory capacity and speed go up, through the relationships defined by Dennard scaling.[16] Because speed, capacity, and power consumption gains are apparent to the end user, there is fierce competition among the manufacturers to use finer geometries. Over the years, transistor sizes have decreased from 10s of microns in the early 1970s to 10 nanometers in 2017 [17] with a corresponding million-fold increase in transistors per unit area. As of 2016, typical chip areas range from a few square millimeters to around 600 mm2, with up to 25 million transistors per mm2.[18]
The expected shrinking of feature sizes, and the needed progress in related areas was forecast for many years by the International Technology Roadmap for Semiconductors (ITRS). The final ITRS was issued in 2016, and it is being replaced by the International Roadmap for Devices and Systems.[19]
Initially, ICs were strictly electronic devices. The success of ICs has led to the integration of other technologies, in the attempt to obtain the same advantages of small size and low cost. These technologies include mechanical devices, optics, and sensors.

Charge-coupled devices, and the closely related active pixel sensors, are chips that are sensitive to light. They have largely replaced film in scientific, medical, and consumer applications. Billions of these devices are now produced each year for applications such as cellphones, tablets, and digital cameras. This sub-field of ICs won the Nobel prize in 2009.
Very small mechanical devices driven by electricity can be integrated onto chips, a technology known as microelectromechanical systems. These devices were developed in the late 1980s[20] and are used in a variety of commercial and military applications. Examples include DLP projectors, inkjet printers, and accelerometers and MEMS gyroscopes used to deploy automobile airbags.
Since the early 2000s, the integration of optical functionality (optical computing) into silicon chips has been actively pursued in both academic research and in industry resulting in the successful commercialization of silicon based integrated optical transceivers combining optical devices (modulators, detectors, routing) with CMOS based electronics.[21] Integrated optical circuits are also being developed.
Integrated circuits are also being developed for sensor applications in medical implants or other bioelectronic devices.[22] Special sealing techniques have to be applied in such biogenic environments to avoid corrosion or biodegradation of the exposed semiconductor materials.[23]

As of 2016, the vast majority of all transistors are fabricated in a single layer on one side of a chip of silicon in a flat 2-dimensional planar process. Researchers have produced prototypes of several promising alternatives, such as:

various approaches to stacking several layers of transistors to make a three-dimensional integrated circuit, such as through-silicon via, "monolithic 3D",[24] stacked wire bonding,[25] etc.
transistors built from other materials: graphene transistors, molybdenite transistors, carbon nanotube field-effect transistor, gallium nitride transistor, transistor-like nanowire electronic devices, organic field-effect transistor, etc.
fabricating transistors over the entire surface of a small sphere of silicon.[26][27]
modifications to the substrate, typically to make "flexible transistors" for a flexible display or other flexible electronics, possibly leading to a roll-away computer.

Design[edit]
The cost of designing and developing a complex integrated circuit is quite high, normally in the multiple tens of millions of dollars.[28] This only makes economic sense if production volume is high, so the non-recurring engineering (NRE) costs are spread across typically millions of production units.
Main articles: Electronic design automation and Hardware description language
Modern semiconductor chips have billions of components, and are too complex to be designed by hand. Software tools to help the designer are essential. Electronic Design Automation (EDA), also referred to as Electronic Computer-Aided Design (ECAD),[29] is a category of software tools for designing electronic systems, including integrated circuits. The tools work together in a design flow that engineers use to design and analyze entire semiconductor chips.
Types[edit]






This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (April 2012) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)







A CMOS 4511 IC in a DIP


Integrated circuits can be classified into analog,[30] digital[31] and mixed signal[32] (both analog and digital on the same chip).
Digital integrated circuits can contain anywhere from one[33] to billions[18] of logic gates, flip-flops, multiplexers, and other circuits in a few square millimeters. The small size of these circuits allows high speed, low power dissipation, and reduced manufacturing cost compared with board-level integration. These digital ICs, typically microprocessors, DSPs, and microcontrollers, work using boolean algebra to process "one" and "zero" signals.




The die from an Intel 8742, an 8-bit microcontroller that includes a CPU running at 12 MHz, 128 bytes of RAM, 2048 bytes of EPROM, and I/O in the same chip


Among the most advanced integrated circuits are the microprocessors or "cores", which control everything from computers and cellular phones to digital microwave ovens. Digital memory chips and application-specific integrated circuits (ASICs) are examples of other families of integrated circuits that are important to the modern information society.
In the 1980s, programmable logic devices were developed. These devices contain circuits whose logical function and connectivity can be programmed by the user, rather than being fixed by the integrated circuit manufacturer. This allows a single chip to be programmed to implement different LSI-type functions such as logic gates, adders and registers. Current devices called field-programmable gate arrays (FPGAs) can (as of 2016) implement the equivalent of millions of gates in parallel and operate up to 1 GHz.[34]
Analog ICs, such as sensors, power management circuits, and operational amplifiers, work by processing continuous signals. They perform functions like amplification, active filtering, demodulation, and mixing. Analog ICs ease the burden on circuit designers by having expertly designed analog circuits available instead of designing a difficult analog circuit from scratch.
ICs can also combine analog and digital circuits on a single chip to create functions such as A/D converters and D/A converters. Such mixed-signal circuits offer smaller size and lower cost, but must carefully account for signal interference. Prior to the late 1990s, radios could not be fabricated in the same low-cost CMOS processes as microprocessors. But since 1998, a large number of radio chips have been developed using CMOS processes. Examples include Intel's DECT cordless phone, or 802.11 (Wi-Fi) chips created by Atheros and other companies.[35]
Modern electronic component distributors often further sub-categorize the huge variety of integrated circuits now available:

Digital ICs are further sub-categorized as logic ICs, memory chips, interface ICs (level shifters, serializer/deserializer, etc.), Power Management ICs, and programmable devices.
Analog ICs are further sub-categorized as linear ICs and RF ICs.
mixed-signal integrated circuits are further sub-categorized as data acquisition ICs (including A/D converters, D/A converter, digital potentiometers) and clock/timing ICs.

Manufacturing[edit]
Fabrication[edit]
Main article: Semiconductor fabrication




Rendering of a small standard cell with three metal layers (dielectric has been removed). The sand-colored structures are metal interconnect, with the vertical pillars being contacts, typically plugs of tungsten. The reddish structures are polysilicon gates, and the solid at the bottom is the crystalline silicon bulk.






Schematic structure of a CMOS chip, as built in the early 2000s. The graphic shows LDD-MISFET's on an SOI substrate with five metallization layers and solder bump for flip-chip bonding. It also shows the section for FEOL (front-end of line), BEOL (back-end of line) and first parts of back-end process.


The semiconductors of the periodic table of the chemical elements were identified as the most likely materials for a solid-state vacuum tube. Starting with copper oxide, proceeding to germanium, then silicon, the materials were systematically studied in the 1940s and 1950s. Today, monocrystalline silicon is the main substrate used for ICs although some III-V compounds of the periodic table such as gallium arsenide are used for specialized applications like LEDs, lasers, solar cells and the highest-speed integrated circuits. It took decades to perfect methods of creating crystals without defects in the crystalline structure of the semiconducting material.
Semiconductor ICs are fabricated in a planar process which includes three key process steps –  imaging, deposition and etching. The main process steps are supplemented by doping and cleaning.
Mono-crystal silicon wafers (or for special applications, silicon on sapphire or gallium arsenide wafers) are used as the substrate. Photolithography is used to mark different areas of the substrate to be doped or to have polysilicon, insulators or metal (typically aluminium or copper) tracks deposited on them.

Integrated circuits are composed of many overlapping layers, each defined by photolithography, and normally shown in different colors. Some layers mark where various dopants are diffused into the substrate (called diffusion layers), some define where additional ions are implanted (implant layers), some define the conductors (polysilicon or metal layers), and some define the connections between the conducting layers (via or contact layers). All components are constructed from a specific combination of these layers.
In a self-aligned CMOS process, a transistor is formed wherever the gate layer (polysilicon or metal) crosses a diffusion layer.
Capacitive structures, in form very much like the parallel conducting plates of a traditional electrical capacitor, are formed according to the area of the "plates", with insulating material between the plates. Capacitors of a wide range of sizes are common on ICs.
Meandering stripes of varying lengths are sometimes used to form on-chip resistors, though most logic circuits do not need any resistors. The ratio of the length of the resistive structure to its width, combined with its sheet resistivity, determines the resistance.
More rarely, inductive structures can be built as tiny on-chip coils, or simulated by gyrators.

Since a CMOS device only draws current on the transition between logic states, CMOS devices consume much less current than bipolar devices.
A random-access memory is the most regular type of integrated circuit; the highest density devices are thus memories; but even a microprocessor will have memory on the chip. (See the regular array structure at the bottom of the first image.) Although the structures are intricate – with widths which have been shrinking for decades – the layers remain much thinner than the device widths. The layers of material are fabricated much like a photographic process, although light waves in the visible spectrum cannot be used to "expose" a layer of material, as they would be too large for the features. Thus photons of higher frequencies (typically ultraviolet) are used to create the patterns for each layer. Because each feature is so small, electron microscopes are essential tools for a process engineer who might be debugging a fabrication process.
Each device is tested before packaging using automated test equipment (ATE), in a process known as wafer testing, or wafer probing. The wafer is then cut into rectangular blocks, each of which is called a die. Each good die (plural dice, dies, or die) is then connected into a package using aluminium (or gold) bond wires which are thermosonically bonded[36] to pads, usually found around the edge of the die. . Thermosonic bonding was first introduced by A. Coucoulas which provided a reliable means of forming these vital electrical connections to the outside world. After packaging, the devices go through final testing on the same or similar ATE used during wafer probing. Industrial CT scanning can also be used. Test cost can account for over 25% of the cost of fabrication on lower-cost products, but can be negligible on low-yielding, larger, or higher-cost devices.
As of 2016, a fabrication facility (commonly known as a semiconductor fab) can cost over US$8 billion to construct.[37] The cost of a fabrication facility rises over time (Rock's law) because much of the operation is automated. Today, the most advanced processes employ the following techniques:

The wafers are up to 300 mm in diameter (wider than a common dinner plate).
As of 2016, a state of the art foundry can produce 14 nm transistors, as implemented by Intel, TSMC, Samsung, and Global Foundries. The next step, to 10 nm devices, is expected in 2017.[38]
Copper interconnects where copper wiring replaces aluminium for interconnects.
Low-K dielectric insulators.
Silicon on insulator (SOI).
Strained silicon in a process used by IBM known as strained silicon directly on insulator (SSDOI).
Multigate devices such as tri-gate transistors being manufactured by Intel from 2011 in their 22 nm process.

Packaging[edit]
Main article: Integrated circuit packaging




A Soviet MSI nMOS chip made in 1977, part of a four-chip calculator set designed in 1970[39]


The earliest integrated circuits were packaged in ceramic flat packs, which continued to be used by the military for their reliability and small size for many years. Commercial circuit packaging quickly moved to the dual in-line package (DIP), first in ceramic and later in plastic. In the 1980s pin counts of VLSI circuits exceeded the practical limit for DIP packaging, leading to pin grid array (PGA) and leadless chip carrier (LCC) packages. Surface mount packaging appeared in the early 1980s and became popular in the late 1980s, using finer lead pitch with leads formed as either gull-wing or J-lead, as exemplified by the small-outline integrated circuit (SOIC) package – a carrier which occupies an area about 30–50% less than an equivalent DIP and is typically 70% thinner. This package has "gull wing" leads protruding from the two long sides and a lead spacing of 0.050 inches.
In the late 1990s, plastic quad flat pack (PQFP) and thin small-outline package (TSOP) packages became the most common for high pin count devices, though PGA packages are still often used for high-end microprocessors. Intel and AMD are currently[when?] transitioning from PGA packages on high-end microprocessors to land grid array (LGA) packages.
Ball grid array (BGA) packages have existed since the 1970s. Flip-chip Ball Grid Array packages, which allow for much higher pin count than other package types, were developed in the 1990s. In an FCBGA package the die is mounted upside-down (flipped) and connects to the package balls via a package substrate that is similar to a printed-circuit board rather than by wires. FCBGA packages allow an array of input-output signals (called Area-I/O) to be distributed over the entire die rather than being confined to the die periphery.
Traces going out of the die, through the package, and into the printed circuit board have very different electrical properties, compared to on-chip signals. They require special design techniques and need much more electric power than signals confined to the chip itself.
When multiple dies are put in one package, the result is a System in Package, or SiP. A multi-chip module, or MCM, is created by combining multiple dies on a small substrate often made of ceramic. The distinction between a big MCM and a small printed circuit board is sometimes fuzzy.
Chip labeling and manufacture date[edit]
Most integrated circuits are large enough to include identifying information. Four common sections are the manufacturer's name or logo, the part number, a part production batch number and serial number, and a four-digit date-code to identify when the chip was manufactured. Extremely small surface mount technology parts often bear only a number used in a manufacturer's lookup table to find the chip characteristics.
The manufacturing date is commonly represented as a two-digit year followed by a two-digit week code, such that a part bearing the code 8341 was manufactured in week 41 of 1983, or approximately in October 1983.
Intellectual property[edit]
Main article: Integrated circuit layout design protection
The possibility of copying by photographing each layer of an integrated circuit and preparing photomasks for its production on the basis of the photographs obtained is a reason for the introduction of legislation for the protection of layout-designs. The Semiconductor Chip Protection Act of 1984 established intellectual property protection for photomasks used to produce integrated circuits.[40]
A diplomatic conference was held at Washington, D.C., in 1989, which adopted a Treaty on Intellectual Property in Respect of Integrated Circuits (IPIC Treaty).
The Treaty on Intellectual Property in respect of Integrated Circuits, also called Washington Treaty or IPIC Treaty (signed at Washington on 26 May 1989) is currently not in force, but was partially integrated into the TRIPS agreement.[41]
National laws protecting IC layout designs have been adopted in a number of countries, including Japan,[42] the EC,[43] the UK, Australia, and Korea.[44]
Other developments[edit]
Future developments seem to follow the multi-core multi-microprocessor paradigm, already used by Intel and AMD multi-core processors. Rapport Inc. and IBM started shipping the KC256 in 2006, a 256-core microprocessor. Intel, as recently as February–August 2011, unveiled a prototype, "not for commercial sale" chip that bears 80 cores. Each core is capable of handling its own task independently of the others. This is in response to to heat-versus-speed limit, that is about to be reached using existing transistor technology (see: thermal design power). This design provides a new challenge to chip programming. Parallel programming languages such as the open-source X10 programming language are designed to assist with this task.[45]
Generations[edit]
In the early days of simple integrated circuits, the technology's large scale limited each chip to only a few transistors, and the low degree of integration meant the design process was relatively simple. Manufacturing yields were also quite low by today's standards. As the technology progressed, millions, then billions[46] of transistors could be placed on one chip, and good designs required thorough planning, giving rise to the field of Electronic Design Automation, or EDA.


Name
Signification
Year
Transistors number[47]
Logic gates number[48]


SSI
small-scale integration
1964
1 to 10
1 to 12


MSI
medium-scale integration
1968
10 to 500
13 to 99


LSI
large-scale integration
1971
500 to 20 000
100 to 9999


VLSI
very large-scale integration
1980
20 000 to 1 000 000
10 000 to 99 999


ULSI
ultra-large-scale integration
1984
1 000 000 and more
100 000 and more


SSI, MSI and LSI [edit]
The first integrated circuits contained only a few transistors. Early digital circuits containing tens of transistors provided a few logic gates, and early linear ICs such as the Plessey SL201 or the Philips TAA320 had as few as two transistors. The number of transistors in an integrated circuit has increased dramatically since then. The term "large scale integration" (LSI) was first used by IBM scientist Rolf Landauer when describing the theoretical concept;[citation needed] that term gave rise to the terms "small-scale integration" (SSI), "medium-scale integration" (MSI), "very-large-scale integration" (VLSI), and "ultra-large-scale integration" (ULSI). The early integrated circuits were SSI.
SSI circuits were crucial to early aerospace projects, and aerospace projects helped inspire development of the technology. Both the Minuteman missile and Apollo program needed lightweight digital computers for their inertial guidance systems. Although the Apollo guidance computer led and motivated integrated-circuit technology,[49] it was the Minuteman missile that forced it into mass-production. The Minuteman missile program and various other Navy programs accounted for the total $4 million integrated circuit market in 1962, and by 1968, U.S. Government space and defense spending still accounted for 37% of the $312 million total production.
The demand by the U.S. Government supported the nascent integrated circuit market until costs fell enough to allow IC firms to penetrate first the industrial and eventually the consumer markets. The average price per integrated circuit dropped from $50.00 in 1962 to $2.33 in 1968.[50] Integrated circuits began to appear in consumer products by the turn of the decade, a typical application being FM inter-carrier sound processing in television receivers.
The first MOS chips were small-scale integration chips for NASA satellites.[51]
The next step in the development of integrated circuits, taken in the late 1960s, introduced devices which contained hundreds of transistors on each chip, called "medium-scale integration" (MSI).
In 1964, Frank Wanlass demonstrated a single-chip 16-bit shift register he designed, with an incredible (at the time) 120 transistors on a single chip.[51][52]
MSI devices were attractive economically because while they cost a little more to produce than SSI devices, they allowed more complex systems to be produced using smaller circuit boards, less assembly work (because of fewer separate components), and a number of other advantages.
Further development, driven by the same economic factors, led to "large-scale integration" (LSI) in the mid-1970s, with tens of thousands of transistors per chip.
The masks used to process and manufacture SSI, MSI and early LSI and VLSI devices (such as the microprocessors of the early 1970s) were mostly created by hand, often using Rubylith-tape or similar.[53] For large or complex ICs (such as memories or processors), this was often done by specially hired layout people under supervision of a team of engineers, who would also, along with the circuit designers, inspect and verify the correctness and completeness of each mask. However, modern VLSI devices contain so many transistors, layers, interconnections, and other features that it is no longer feasible to check the masks or do the original design by hand. The engineer depends on computer programs and other hardware aids to do most of this work.[54]
Integrated circuits such as 1K-bit RAMs, calculator chips, and the first microprocessors, that began to be manufactured in moderate quantities in the early 1970s, had under 4,000 transistors. True LSI circuits, approaching 10,000 transistors, began to be produced around 1974, for computer main memories and second-generation microprocessors.
Some SSI and MSI chips, like discrete transistors, are still mass-produced, both to maintain old equipment and build new devices that require only a few gates. The 7400 series of TTL chips, for example, has become a de facto standard and remains in production.
VLSI[edit]
Main article: Very-large-scale integration




Upper interconnect layers on an Intel 80486DX2 microprocessor die


The final step in the development process, starting in the 1980s and continuing through the present, was "very-large-scale integration" (VLSI). The development started with hundreds of thousands of transistors in the early 1980s, and continues beyond ten billion transistors as of 2016.
Multiple developments were required to achieve this increased density. Manufacturers moved to smaller design rules and cleaner fabrication facilities, so that they could make chips with more transistors and maintain adequate yield. The path of process improvements was summarized by the International Technology Roadmap for Semiconductors (ITRS). Design tools improved enough to make it practical to finish these designs in a reasonable time. The more energy-efficient CMOS replaced NMOS and PMOS, avoiding a prohibitive increase in power consumption.
In 1986 the first one-megabit RAM chips were introduced, containing more than one million transistors. Microprocessor chips passed the million-transistor mark in 1989 and the billion-transistor mark in 2005.[55] The trend continues largely unabated, with chips introduced in 2007 containing tens of billions of memory transistors.[56]
ULSI, WSI, SOC and 3D-IC[edit]
To reflect further growth of the complexity, the term ULSI that stands for "ultra-large-scale integration" was proposed for chips of more than 1 million transistors.[57]
Wafer-scale integration (WSI) is a means of building very large integrated circuits that uses an entire silicon wafer to produce a single "super-chip". Through a combination of large size and reduced packaging, WSI could lead to dramatically reduced costs for some systems, notably massively parallel supercomputers. The name is taken from the term Very-Large-Scale Integration, the current state of the art when WSI was being developed.[58]
A system-on-a-chip (SoC or SOC) is an integrated circuit in which all the components needed for a computer or other system are included on a single chip. The design of such a device can be complex and costly, and building disparate components on a single piece of silicon may compromise the efficiency of some elements. However, these drawbacks are offset by lower manufacturing and assembly costs and by a greatly reduced power budget: because signals among the components are kept on-die, much less power is required (see Packaging).[59]
A three-dimensional integrated circuit (3D-IC) has two or more layers of active electronic components that are integrated both vertically and horizontally into a single circuit. Communication between layers uses on-die signaling, so power consumption is much lower than in equivalent separate circuits. Judicious use of short vertical wires can substantially reduce overall wire length for faster operation.[60]
Silicon labelling and graffiti[edit]
To allow identification during production most silicon chips will have a serial number in one corner. It is also common to add the manufacturer's logo. Ever since ICs were created, some chip designers have used the silicon surface area for surreptitious, non-functional images or words. These are sometimes referred to as chip art, silicon art, silicon graffiti or silicon doodling.
ICs and IC families[edit]

The 555 timer IC
The 741 operational amplifier
7400 series TTL logic building blocks
4000 series, the CMOS counterpart to the 7400 series (see also: 74HC00 series)
Intel 4004, the world's first microprocessor, which led to the famous 8080 CPU and then the IBM PC's 8088, 80286, 486 etc.
The MOS Technology 6502 and Zilog Z80 microprocessors, used in many home computers of the early 1980s
The Motorola 6800 series of computer-related chips, leading to the 68000 and 88000 series (used in some Apple computers and in the 1980s Commodore Amiga series)
The LM-series of analog integrated circuits

See also[edit]


Electronics portal



Integrated circuit development
Integrated injection logic
Ion implantation
Monolithic microwave integrated circuit
Multi-threshold CMOS
Photonic integrated circuit
Silicon-germanium
Sound chip
SPICE

References[edit]


^ "Integrated circuit (IC)". JEDEC. 
^ Andrew Wylie (2009). "The first monolithic integrated circuits". Retrieved 14 March 2011. Nowadays when people say 'integrated circuit' they usually mean a monolithic IC, where the entire circuit is constructed in a single piece of silicon. 
^ Horowitz, Paul; Hill, Winfield (1989). The Art of Electronics (2nd ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 61. ISBN 0-521-37095-7. Integrated circuits, which have largely replaced circuits constructed from discrete transistors, are themselves merely arrays of transistors and other components built from a single chip of semiconductor material. 
^ "Integrated circuits help Invention". Integratedcircuithelp.com. Retrieved 2012-08-13. 
^ DE 833366  W. Jacobi/SIEMENS AG: "Halbleiterverstärker" priority filing on 14 April 1949, published on 15 May 1952.
^ "The Hapless Tale of Geoffrey Dummer" Archived 11 May 2013 at the Wayback Machine., (n.d.), (HTML), Electronic Product News, accessed 8 July 2008.
^ George Rostky, (n. d.), "Micromodules: the ultimate package", (HTML), EE Times, accessed 8 July 2008.
^ The Chip that Jack Built, (c. 2008), (HTML), Texas Instruments, Retrieved 29 May 2008.
^ Jack S. Kilby, Miniaturized Electronic Circuits, United States Patent Office, US Patent 3,138,743, filed 6 February 1959, issued 23 June 1964.
^ Winston, Brian (1998). Media Technology and Society: A History : From the Telegraph to the Internet. Routledge. p. 221. ISBN 978-0-415-14230-4. 
^ "Texas Instruments – 1961 First IC-based computer". Ti.com. Retrieved 2012-08-13. 
^ Nobel Web AB, (10 October 2000),(The Nobel Prize in Physics 2000, Retrieved 29 May 2008
^ "Milestones:First Semiconductor Integrated Circuit (IC), 1958". IEEE Global History Network. IEEE. Retrieved 3 August 2011. 
^ Kurt Lehovec's patent on the isolation p–n junction: U.S. Patent 3,029,366 granted on 10 April 1962, filed 22 April 1959. Robert Noyce credits Lehovec in his article – "Microelectronics", Scientific American, September 1977, Volume 23, Number 3, pp. 63–9.
^ Federico Faggin, The Making of the First Microprocessor, IEEE Solid-State Circuits Magazine, Winter 2009, IEEE Xplore
^ Davari, Bijan, Robert H. Dennard, and Ghavam G. Shahidi (1995). "CMOS scaling for high performance and low power-the next ten years" (PDF). Proceedings of the IEEE. 83 (4). pp. 595–606. CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link)
^ "Qualcomm and Samsung Collaborate on 10nm Process Technology for the Latest Snapdragon 835 Mobile Processor". news.samsung.com. Retrieved 2017-02-11. 
^ a b "Inside Pascal: NVIDIA's Newest Computing Platform". . 15,300,000,000 transistors in 610 mm2.
^ "International Roadmap for Devices and Systems" (PDF). IEEE. 2016. 
^ H. Fujita (1997). A decade of MEMS and its future. Tenth Annual International Workshop on Micro Electro Mechanical Systems. 
^ A. Narasimha; et al. (2008). "A 40-Gb/s QSFP optoelectronic transceiver in a 0.13 µm CMOS silicon-on-insulator technology". Proceedings of the Optical Fiber Communication Conference (OFC): OMK7. 
^ M. Birkholz; A. Mai; C. Wenger; C. Meliani; R. Scholz (2016). "Technology modules from micro- and nano-electronics for the life sciences". WIREs Nanomed. Nanobiotech. 8: 355–377. doi:10.1002/wnan.1367. 
^ A.H.D. Graham; J. Robbins; C.R. Bowen; J. Taylor (2011). "Commercialisation of CMOS Integrated Circuit Technology in Multi-Electrode Arrays for Neuroscience and Cell-Based Biosensors". Sensors. 11: 4943–4971. doi:10.3390/s110504943. 
^ Zvi Or-Bach. "Why SOI is the Future Technology of Semiconductors". 2013.
^ "Samsung’s Eight-Stack Flash Shows up in Apple’s iPhone 4". 2010.
^ "Spherical semiconductor radio temperature sensor". NatureInterface. 2002.
^ Takeda, Nobuo, MEMS applications of Ball Semiconductor Technology (PDF), archived from the original (PDF) on 2015-01-01 
^ Mark LaPedus (16 April 2015). "FinFET Rollout Slower Than Expected". Semiconductor Engineering. 
^ "About the EDA Industry". Electronic Design Automation Consortium. Archived from the original on 2 August 2015. Retrieved 29 July 2015. 
^ Paul R. Gray; Paul J. Hurst; Stephen H. Lewis; Robert G. Meyer (2009). Analysis and Design of Analog Integrated Circuits. Wiley. ISBN 978-0470245996. 
^ Jan M. Rabaey; Anantha Chandrakasan; Borivoje Nikolic (2003). Digital Integrated Circuits (2nd Edition). Pearson. ISBN 978-0130909961. 
^ Jacob Baker (2008). CMOS: Mixed-Signal Circuit Design. Wiley. ISBN 978-0470290262. 
^ "CD4068 data sheet" (PDF). Intersil. 
^ "Stratix 10 Device Overview" (PDF). Altera. 12 December 2015. Retrieved 18 Nov 2016. 
^ Nathawad, L.; Zargari, M.; Samavati, H.; Mehta, S.; Kheirkhaki, A.; Chen, P.; Gong, K.; Vakili-Amini, B.; Hwang, J.; Chen, M.; Terrovitis, M.; Kaczynski, B.; Limotyrakis, S.; Mack, M.; Gan, H.; Lee, M.; Abdollahi-Alibeik, B.; Baytekin, B.; Onodera, K.; Mendis, S.; Chang, A.; Jen, S.; Su, D.; Wooley, B. "20.2: A Dual-band CMOS MIMO Radio SoC for IEEE 802.11n Wireless LAN" (PDF). IEEE Entity Web Hosting. IEEE. Retrieved 22 October 2016. 
^ Coucoulas, A., http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Hot_Work_Ultrasonic_(Thermosonic)_Bonding_549-556.pdf "Hot Work Ultrasonic Bonding – A Method Of Facilitating Metal Flow By Restoration Processes", Proc. 20th IEEE Electronic Components Conf. Washington, D.C., May 1970, pp. 549–556.https://sites.google.com/site/hotworkultrasonicbonding/
^ Max Chafkin; Ian King (June 9, 2016). "How Intel Makes a Chip". Bloomburg Businessweek. 
^ Mark Lapedus (May 21, 2015). "10 nm Fab Watch". Semiconductor Engineering. 
^ "145 series ICs (in Russian)". Retrieved 22 April 2012. 
^ "Federal Statutory Protection for Mask Works" (PDF). United States Copyright Office. United States Copyright Office. Retrieved 22 October 2016. 
^ On Jan. 1, 1995, the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPs) (Annex 1C to the World Trade Organization (WTO) Agreement), went into force. Part II, section 6 of TRIPs protects semiconductor chip products and was the basis for Presidential Proclamation No. 6780, March 23, 1995, under SCPA § 902(a)(2), extending protection to all present and future WTO members.
^ Japan was the first country to enact its own version of the SCPA, the Japanese "Act Concerning the Circuit Layout of a Semiconductor Integrated Circuit" of 1985.
^ In 1986 the EC promulgated a directive requiring its members to adopt national legislation for the protection of semiconductor topographies. Council Directive 1987/54/EEC of 16 Dec. 1986 on the Legal Protection of Topographies of Semiconductor Products, art. 1(1)(b), 1987 O.J. (L 24) 36.
^ The UK enacted the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act, 1988, c. 48, § 213, after it initially took the position that its copyright law fully protected chip topographies. See British Leyland Motor Corp. v. Armstrong Patents Co. Criticisms of inadequacy of the UK copyright approach as perceived by the US chip industry are summarized in Further chip rights developments, Micro Law, IEEE Micro, Aug. 1985, pp. 91-92. Australia passed the Circuit Layouts Act of 1989 as a sui generis form of chip protection. Korea passed the Act Concerning the Layout-Design of Semiconductor Integrated Circuits
^ Biever, C. "Chip revolution poses problems for programmers", New Scientist (Vol 193, Number 2594)
^ Peter Clarke, Intel enters billion-transistor processor era, EE Times, 14 October 2005
^ http://www.iutbayonne.univ-pau.fr/~dalmau/documents/cours/archi/MICROPancien.pdf
^ Bulletin de la Societe fribourgeoise des sciences naturelles, Volumes 62 à 63 (in French). 1973. 
^ Mindell, David A. (2008). Digital Apollo: Human and Machine in Spaceflight. The MIT Press. ISBN 978-0-262-13497-2. 
^ Ginzberg, Eli (1976). Economic impact of large public programs: the NASA Experience. Olympus Publishing Company. p. 57. ISBN 0-913420-68-9. 
^ a b Bob Johnstone (1999). We were burning: Japanese entrepreneurs and the forging of the electronic age. Basic Books. pp. 47–48. ISBN 978-0-465-09118-8. 
^ Lee Boysel (2007-10-12). "Making Your First Million (and other tips for aspiring entrepreneurs)". U. Mich. EECS Presentation / ECE Recordings. 
^ "Intel's Accidental Revolution". CNET. 
^ C. F. O'Donnell. "Engineering for systems using large scale integration". p. 870.
^ Peter Clarke, EE Times: Intel enters billion-transistor processor era, 14 November 2005
^ Antone Gonsalves, EE Times, "Samsung begins production of 16-Gb flash", 30 April 2007
^ Meindl, J.D. "Ultra-large scale integration". ieee.org. IEEE. Retrieved 21 September 2014. 
^ Shanefield, Daniel. "Wafer scale integration". google.com/patents. Retrieved 21 September 2014. 
^ Klaas, Jeff. "System-on-a-chip". google.com/patents. Retrieved 21 September 2014. 
^ Topol, A.W.; Tulipe, D.C.La; Shi, L; et., al. "Three-dimensional integrated circuits". ieee.org. International Business Machines Corporation (IBM). Retrieved 21 September 2014. 


Further reading[edit]

Veendrick, H. J. M. (2017). Nanometer CMOS ICs, from Basics to ASICs. Springer. ISBN 978-3-319-47595-0. 
Baker, R. J. (2010). CMOS: Circuit Design, Layout, and Simulation (3rd ed.). Wiley-IEEE. ISBN 978-0-470-88132-3. 
Marsh, Stephen P. (2006). Practical MMIC design. Artech House. ISBN 978-1-59693-036-0. 
Camenzind, Hans (2005). Designing Analog Chips (PDF). Virtual Bookworm. ISBN 978-1589397187. Archived from the original (PDF) on June 12, 2017. Hans Camenzind invented the 555 timer 
Hodges, David; Jackson, Horace; Saleh, Resve (2003). Analysis and Design of Digital Integrated Circuits. McGraw-Hill. ISBN 978-0-07-228365-5. 
Rabaey, J. M.; Chandrakasan, A.; Nikolic, B. (2003). Digital Integrated Circuits (2nd ed.). Pearson. ISBN 0-13-090996-3. 
Mead, Carver; Conway, Lynn (1980). Introduction to VLSI systems. Addison Wesley Publishing Company. ISBN 978-0-201-04358-7. 

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Integrated circuit.


General

The first monolithic integrated circuits
A large chart listing ICs by generic number including access to most of the datasheets for the parts.
The History of the Integrated Circuit at Nobelprize.org

Patents

US3,138,743 – Miniaturized electronic circuit – J. S. Kilby
US3,138,747 – Integrated semiconductor circuit device – R. F. Stewart
US3,261,081 – Method of making miniaturized electronic circuits – J. S. Kilby
US3,434,015 – Capacitor for miniaturized electronic circuits or the like – J. S. Kilby

Integrated circuit die manufacturing

IC Die Photography – A gallery of IC die photographs
Zeptobars – Yet another gallery of IC die photographs
Silicon Chip Wafer Fab Mailbag on YouTube –  A look at some equipment and wafers used in the manufacturing of silicon chip wafers







v
t
e


Digital electronics



Components



Combinational logic
Integrated circuit (IC)
Logic gate
Sequential logic





Theory



Digital signal (electronics)
Boolean algebra
Logic synthesis
Logic in computer science
Computer architecture
Digital signal (signal processing)
Digital signal processing
Circuit minimization
Switching circuit theory





Design



Logic synthesis
Register-transfer level
Formal equivalence checking
Synchronous logic
Asynchronous logic
Finite-state machine





Applications



Computer hardware
Digital audio

radio


Digital photography
Digital telephone
Digital video

cinema
television


Electronic literature





Design issues



Metastability
Runt pulse












v
t
e


Electronic components



Semiconductor devices



Avalanche diode
Transistor
Tetrode transistor
Pentode transistor
Memistor
Memristor
Bipolar junction transistor (BJT)
FinFET
CMOS
MOSFET
JFET
Field-effect transistor (FET)
Quantum circuit
Constant-current diode (CLD, CRD)
Darlington transistor
DIAC
Diode
Heterostructure barrier varactor
Insulated-gate bipolar transistor (IGBT)
Integrated circuit (IC)
Light-emitting diode (LED)
Photodetector
Photodiode
PIN diode
Schottky diode
Silicon controlled rectifier (SCR)
Thyristor
TRIAC
Unijunction transistor (UJT)
Varicap
Zener diode





Voltage regulators



Linear regulator
Low-dropout regulator
Switching regulator
Buck
Boost
Buck–boost
Split-pi
Ćuk
SEPIC
Charge pump
Switched capacitor





Vacuum tubes



Acorn tube
Audion
Beam tetrode
Barretter
Compactron
Diode
Fleming valve
Nonode
Nuvistor
Pentagrid (Hexode, Heptode, Octode)
Pentode
Photomultiplier
Phototube
Tetrode
Triode





Vacuum tubes (RF)



Backward-wave oscillator (BWO)
Cavity magnetron
Crossed-field amplifier (CFA)
Gyrotron
Inductive output tube (IOT)
Klystron
Maser
Sutton tube
Traveling-wave tube (TWT)





Cathode ray tubes



Beam deflection tube
Charactron
Iconoscope
Magic eye tube
Monoscope
Selectron tube
Storage tube
Trochotron
Video camera tube
Williams tube





Gas-filled tubes



Cold cathode
Crossatron
Dekatron
Ignitron
Krytron
Mercury-arc valve
Neon lamp
Nixie tube
Thyratron
Trigatron
Voltage-regulator tube





Adjustable



Potentiometer

digital


Variable capacitor
Varicap





Passive



Connector

audio and video
electrical power
RF


Electrolytic detector
Ferrite
Fuse

resettable


Resistor
Switch
Thermistor
Transformer
Varistor
Wire

Wollaston wire







Reactive



Capacitor

types


Ceramic resonator
Crystal oscillator
Inductor
Parametron
Relay

reed relay
mercury switch














v
t
e


Semiconductor packages



Diode



DO-204 (DO-7 / DO-35 / DO-41)
DO-213 (MELF)
DO-214 (SMA / SMB / SMC)
SOD (SOD-123 / SOD-323 / SOD-523 / SOD-923)





Transistor



SOT / TSOT
TO-3 (TH / Panel)
TO-5 (TH)
TO-18 (TH)
TO-66 (TH / Panel)
TO-92 (TH)
TO-126 (TH / Panel)
TO-220 (TH / Panel)
TO-247 (TH / Panel)
TO-251 (IPAK) (SMT)
TO-252 (DPAK) (SMT)
TO-262 (I2PAK) (SMT)
TO-263 (D2PAK) (SMT)
TO-273 (Super-220) (SMT)
TO-274 (Super-247) (SMT)





Single row



SIP / SIL





Dual row



DFN
DIP / DIL
Flat Pack
SO / SOIC
SOP / SSOP
TSOP / TSSOP
ZIP





Quad row



LCC
PLCC
QFN
QFP
QUIP / QUIL





Grid array



BGA
eWLB
LGA
PGA





Wafer



COB
COF
COG
CSP
Flip Chip
PoP
QP
UICC
WL-CSP / WLP





Related topics



Electronic packaging
Integrated circuit packaging
List of integrated circuit package dimensions
List of integrated circuit packaging types
Printed circuit board
Surface-mount technology
Through-hole technology






Note: It's relatively common to find packages that contain other components than their designated ones, such as diodes or voltage regulators in transistor packages, etc.










v
t
e


Major fields of computer science




Note: This template roughly follows the 2012 ACM Computing Classification System.



Hardware



Printed circuit board
Peripheral
Integrated circuit
Very-large-scale integration
Energy consumption
Electronic design automation





Computer systems
organization



Computer architecture
Embedded system
Real-time computing
Dependability





Networks



Network architecture
Network protocol
Network components
Network scheduler
Network performance evaluation
Network service





Software organization



Interpreter
Middleware
Virtual machine
Operating system
Software quality





Software notations
and tools



Programming paradigm
Programming language
Compiler
Domain-specific language
Modeling language
Software framework
Integrated development environment
Software configuration management
Software library
Software repository





Software development



Software development process
Requirements analysis
Software design
Software construction
Software deployment
Software maintenance
Programming team
Open-source model





Theory of computation



Model of computation
Formal language
Automata theory
Computational complexity theory
Logic
Semantics





Algorithms



Algorithm design
Analysis of algorithms
Randomized algorithm
Computational geometry





Mathematics
of computing



Discrete mathematics
Probability
Statistics
Mathematical software
Information theory
Mathematical analysis
Numerical analysis





Information
systems



Database management system
Information storage systems
Enterprise information system
Social information systems
Geographic information system
Decision support system
Process control system
Multimedia information system
Data mining
Digital library
Computing platform
Digital marketing
World Wide Web
Information retrieval





Security



Cryptography
Formal methods
Security services
Intrusion detection system
Hardware security
Network security
Information security
Application security





Human–computer
interaction



Interaction design
Social computing
Ubiquitous computing
Visualization
Accessibility





Concurrency



Concurrent computing
Parallel computing
Distributed computing
Multithreading
Multiprocessing





Artificial
intelligence



Natural language processing
Knowledge representation and reasoning
Computer vision
Automated planning and scheduling
Search methodology
Control method
Philosophy of artificial intelligence
Distributed artificial intelligence





Machine learning



Supervised learning
Unsupervised learning
Reinforcement learning
Multi-task learning
Cross-validation





Graphics



Animation
Rendering
Image manipulation
Graphics processing unit
Mixed reality
Virtual reality
Image compression
Solid modeling





Applied
computing



E-commerce
Enterprise software
Computational mathematics
Computational physics
Computational chemistry
Computational biology
Computational social science
Computational engineering
Computational healthcare
Digital art
Electronic publishing
Cyberwarfare
Electronic voting
Video game
Word processing
Operations research
Educational technology
Document management








 Book
 Category
 Portal
WikiProject
 Commons









Authority control



GND: 4027242-4
NDL: 00572448











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Integrated_circuit&oldid=817354328"					Categories: Integrated circuits1949 in computer scienceAmerican inventionsComputer-related introductions in 1949Digital electronicsDiscovery and invention controversiesGerman inventionsSemiconductor devicesHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksCS1 maint: Multiple names: authors listCS1 French-language sources (fr)Use dmy dates from May 2012Articles needing additional references from April 2012All articles needing additional referencesAll articles with vague or ambiguous timeVague or ambiguous time from May 2017All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from March 2011Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers