"IERS" redirects here. For other uses, see IERS (disambiguation).

International Earth Rotation and Reference Systems Service


The IERS logo



Abbreviation
IERS


Website
www.iers.org


The International Earth Rotation and Reference Systems Service (IERS), formerly the International Earth Rotation Service, is the body responsible for maintaining global time and reference frame standards, notably through its Earth Orientation Parameter (EOP) and International Celestial Reference System (ICRS) groups.



Contents


1 History
2 Function
3 Earth orientation products
4 See also
5 References
6 External links



History[edit]
The IERS was established in its present form in 1987 by the International Astronomical Union and the International Union of Geodesy and Geophysics, replacing the earlier International Polar Motion Service (IPMS) and the Earth rotation section of the Bureau International de l'Heure (BIH). The service began operation on January 1, 1988. Since its inception, the IERS has established new bureaus including the GPS Coordinating Centre in 1990, the DORIS Coordinating Centre in 1994 and the GGF Coordinating Centre in 1998. The organization was formerly known as International Earth Rotation Service until 2003 when it formally changed its name to its present form, in which the organization chose to retain the acronym IERS.
Function[edit]
The IERS has various components located in the United States, Europe and Australia. Among its other functions, the IERS is responsible for announcing leap seconds.
The Sub-bureau for Rapid Service and Predictions of Earth Orientation Parameters of the IERS, located at the United States Naval Observatory, monitors the Earth's rotation. Part of its mission involves the determination of a time scale based on the current rate of the rotation of the Earth. Other services of IERS are at the Paris Observatory.
UT1 is the non-uniform time defined based on the Earth's rotation.
It defined the IERS Reference Meridian, the International Terrestrial Reference System (ITRS), and subsequent International Terrestrial Reference Frames (ITRF). Related coordinate systems are used by satellite navigation systems like GPS and Galileo: WGS84 and GTRF. The definitions and relationships among ITRF, ICRF and EOP are established by IERS conventions standards. As of 2016, the most recent convention is the IERS Conventions (2010).[1]
Earth orientation products[edit]
A mission of the IERS is to provide earth orientation information to the greater geodesy community in the form of bulletins:[2][3]

Bulletin A provides a rapid turnaround service for providing current EOP and a prediction model for EOP up to a year in the future. It is released weekly.
Bulletin B provides final measurements of EOP and is released monthly.
Bulletin C provides announcements of leap seconds
Bulletin D provides DUT1 = (UT1 − UTC) to a 0.1 second precision.

See also[edit]

International Atomic Time
Coordinated Universal Time
International Celestial Reference Frame
Earth rotation, ΔT
IERS Reference Meridian

References[edit]



^ "IERS Conventions Center". 62.161.69.131. IERS. Retrieved 2 August 2016. 
^ "Earth Orientation Center". Observatoire de Paris. Retrieved 2 August 2016. 
^ "IERS Rapid Service/Prediction Center for Earth Orientation Parameters". U.S. Naval Observatory. Archived from the original on 2 August 2013. Retrieved 2 August 2016. 




Altamimi, Zuheir; Collilieux, Xavier (2013) Reference Frames for Applications in Geosciences Berlin; New York: Springer ISBN 3642329985, pg 57.
Gupta, Harsh K. (2011) Encyclopedia of Solid Earth Geophysics Springer ISBN 904818701X, pg 128.
McCarthy, Dennis D.; Seidelmann, P. Kenneth (2009) Time: From Earth Rotation to Atomic Physics John Wiley & Sons ISBN 3527627952, pg 290.

External links[edit]

Official website
(in English) (in French) (in Russian) Earth Orientation Center of the IERS : data and interactive analysis (Paris Observatory)
(in English) (in French) International Celestial Reference Frame of the IERS







v
t
e


Time measurement and standards






Chronometry
Orders of magnitude
Metrology





International standards



Coordinated Universal Time

offset


UT
ΔT
DUT1
International Earth Rotation and Reference Systems Service
ISO 31-1
ISO 8601
International Atomic Time
6-hour clock
12-hour clock
24-hour clock
Barycentric Coordinate Time
Barycentric Dynamical Time
Civil time
Daylight saving time
Geocentric Coordinate Time
International Date Line
Leap second
Solar time
Terrestrial Time
Time zone
180th meridian





Obsolete standards



Ephemeris time
Greenwich Mean Time
Prime meridian





Time in physics



Absolute time and space
Spacetime
Chronon
Continuous signal
Coordinate time
Cosmological decade
Discrete time and continuous time
Planck time
Proper time
Theory of relativity
Time dilation
Gravitational time dilation
Time domain
Time translation symmetry
T-symmetry





Horology



Clock
Astrarium
Atomic clock
Complication
History of timekeeping devices
Hourglass
Marine chronometer
Marine sandglass
Radio clock
Watch
Water clock
Sundial
Dialing scales
Equation of time
History of sundials
Sundial markup schema





Calendar



Astronomical
Dominical letter
Epact
Equinox
Gregorian
Hebrew
Hindu
Intercalation
Islamic
Julian
Leap year
Lunar
Lunisolar
Solar
Solstice
Tropical year
Weekday determination
Weekday names





Archaeology and geology



Chronological dating
Geologic time scale
International Commission on Stratigraphy





Astronomical chronology



Galactic year
Nuclear timescale
Precession
Sidereal time





Other units of time



Shake
Jiffy
Second
Minute
Moment
Hour
Day
Week
Fortnight
Month
Year
Olympiad
Lustrum
Decade
Century
Saeculum
Millennium





Related topics



Chronology
Duration

music


Mental chronometry
Metric time
System time
Time value of money
Timekeeper











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=International_Earth_Rotation_and_Reference_Systems_Service&oldid=807245707"					Categories: Standards organizationsGeodesyAstronomy organizations1979 establishments in FranceInternational organizations based in FranceOrganizations based in ParisHidden categories: Articles with French-language external linksArticles with Russian-language external links