





This article relies too much on references to primary sources. Please improve this article by adding secondary or tertiary sources. (February 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)




International Electrotechnical Commission





Logotype of the IEC.



Abbreviation
IEC


Motto
"Making electrotechnology work for you"


Formation
26 June 1906
London, England, United Kingdom


Type
Private standard-setting organization[1]


Legal status
Active


Purpose
Standardization for electrical technology, electronic and related.


Headquarters
Geneva, Switzerland



Membership



60 countries

 Algeria
 Argentina
 Australia
 Austria
 Belarus
 Belgium
 Brazil
 Bulgaria
 Canada
 Colombia
 Chile
 China
 Croatia
 Czech Republic
 Denmark
 Egypt
 Finland
 France
 Germany
 Greece
 Hungary
 India
 Indonesia
 Iran
 Iraq
 Ireland
 Israel
 Italy
 Japan
 Libya
 Luxembourg
 Malaysia
 Mexico
 Netherlands
 New Zealand
 Norway
 Oman
 Pakistan
 Philippines
 Poland
 Portugal
 Qatar
 Romania
 Russia
 Saudi Arabia
 Serbia
 Singapore
 Slovakia
 Slovenia
 South Korea
 South Africa
 Spain
 Sweden
  Switzerland
 Thailand
 Turkey
 Ukraine
 United Arab Emirates
 United Kingdom
 United States






Official languages

English, French



President

James Shannon[2]



Budget

CHF 20 Million / US$ 20.938 Million / €19.3 Million


Website
www.iec.ch


The International Electrotechnical Commission[3] (IEC; in French: Commission électrotechnique internationale) is an international standards organization[4][5] that prepares and publishes International Standards for all electrical, electronic and related technologies – collectively known as "electrotechnology". IEC standards cover a vast range of technologies from power generation, transmission and distribution to home appliances and office equipment, semiconductors, fibre optics, batteries, solar energy, nanotechnology and marine energy as well as many others. The IEC also manages three global conformity assessment systems that certify whether equipment, system or components conform to its International Standards.
The IEC charter embraces all electrotechnologies including energy production and distribution, electronics, magnetics and electromagnetics, electroacoustics, multimedia, telecommunication and medical technology, as well as associated general disciplines such as terminology and symbols, electromagnetic compatibility (by its Advisory Committee on Electromagnetic Compatibility, ACEC), measurement and performance, dependability, design and development, safety and the environment.



Contents


1 History
2 IEC standards
3 Membership and participation

3.1 Full members
3.2 Associate members (limited voting and managerial rights)[10]
3.3 Affiliates


4 See also
5 References
6 External links



History[edit]
The first International Electrical Congress took place in 1881 at the International Exposition of Electricity, held in Paris. At that time the International System of Electrical and Magnetic Units was agreed to.
The International Electrotechnical Commission held its inaugural meeting on 26 June 1906, following discussions among the British Institution of Electrical Engineers, the American Institute of Electrical Engineers, and others, which began at the 1900 Paris International Electrical Congress, and continued with Colonel R. E. B. Crompton playing a key role.




International Electrotechnical Commission - Central Office - Geneva


The IEC was instrumental in developing and distributing standards for units of measurement, particularly the gauss, hertz, and weber. [6] It also first proposed a system of standards, the Giorgi System, which ultimately became the SI, or Système International d’unités (in English, the International System of Units).
In 1938, it published a multilingual international vocabulary to unify terminology relating to electrical, electronic and related technologies. This effort continues, and the International Electrotechnical Vocabulary (the on-line version of which is known as the Electropedia) remains an important work in the electrical and electronic industries.
The CISPR (Comité International Spécial des Perturbations Radioélectriques) – in English, the International Special Committee on Radio Interference – is one of the groups founded by the IEC.
Currently, 82 countries are members while another 82 participate in the Affiliate Country Programme, which is not a form of membership but is designed to help industrializing countries get involved with the IEC. Originally located in London, the commission moved to its current headquarters in Geneva in 1948.
It has regional centres in Asia-Pacific (Singapore), Latin America (São Paulo, Brazil) and North America (Boston, United States).
Today, the IEC is the world's leading international organization in its field, and its standards are adopted as national standards by its members. The work is done by some 10,000 electrical and electronics experts from industry, government, academia, test labs and others with an interest in the subject.
IEC standards[edit]
See also: List of IEC standards
IEC standards have numbers in the range 60000–79999 and their titles take a form such as IEC 60417: Graphical symbols for use on equipment. Following the Dresden Agreement with CENELEC the numbers of older IEC standards were converted in 1997 by adding 60000, for example IEC 27 became IEC 60027. Standards of the 60000 series are also found preceded by EN to indicate that the IEC standard is also adopted by CENELEC as a European standard; for example IEC 60034 is also available as EN 60034.
The IEC cooperates closely with the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) and the International Telecommunication Union (ITU). In addition, it works with several major standards development organizations, including the IEEE with which it signed a cooperation agreement in 2002, which was amended in 2008 to include joint development work.
Standards developed jointly with ISO such as ISO/IEC 26300 (Open Document Format for Office Applications (OpenDocument) v1.0), ISO/IEC 27001 (Information technology, Security techniques, Information security management systems, Requirements), and CASCO ISO/IEC 17000 series, carry the acronym of both organizations. The use of the ISO/IEC prefix covers publications from ISO/IEC Joint Technical Committee 1 - Information Technology, as well as conformity assessment standards developed by ISO CASCO and IEC CAB (Conformity Assessment Board). Other standards developed in cooperation between IEC and ISO are assigned numbers in the 80000 series, such as IEC 82045-1.
IEC standards are also being adopted by other certifying bodies such as BSI (United Kingdom), CSA (Canada), UL & ANSI/INCITS (United States), SABS (South Africa), SAI (Australia), SPC/GB (China) and DIN (Germany). IEC standards adopted by other certifying bodies may have some noted differences from the original IEC standard.[7]
Membership and participation[edit]




  Full members
  Associate members
  Affiliates



The IEC is made up of members, called national committees, and each NC represents its nation's electrotechnical interests in the IEC. This includes manufacturers, providers, distributors and vendors, consumers and users, all levels of governmental agencies, professional societies and trade associations as well as standards developers from national standards bodies. National committees are constituted in different ways. Some NCs are public sector only, some are a combination of public and private sector, and some are private sector only. About 90% of those who prepare IEC standards work in industry.
IEC Member countries include:[8]
Full members[edit]





Algeria
Argentina – Instituto Argentino de Normalización y Certificación (IRAM)
Australia – Standards Australia
Austria – Österreichischer Verband für Elektrotechnik (ÖVE)
Belarus
Belgium
Brazil – Comitê Brasileiro de Eletricidade, Eletrônica, Iluminação e Telecomunicações (Cobei)
Bulgaria
Canada – Standards Council of Canada
Colombia
Chile
China – Standardization Administration of China (SAC)
Croatia
Czech Republic
Denmark
Egypt
Finland
France – AFNOR
Germany – Deutsche Kommission Elektrotechnik Elektronik Informationstechnik im DIN und VDE (DKE)
Greece
Hungary




India – Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS)
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Ireland
Israel
Italy – Comitato Elettrotecnico Italiano (CEI)
Japan – Japanese Industrial Standards Committee
Libya
Luxembourg
Malaysia
Mexico
Netherlands
New Zealand
Norway
Oman
Pakistan
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Qatar
Romania
Russia – Federal Agency for Technical Regulation and Metrology (Rostekhregulirovaniye)




Saudi Arabia
Serbia
Singapore
Slovakia
Slovenia
South Korea – Korean Agency for Technology and Standards (KATS)
South Africa – South African Bureau of Standards (SABS)
Spain – Asociación Española de Normalización y Certificación (AENOR)
Sweden – Swedish Electrical Standard (SEK)
Switzerland – Swiss Electrotechnical Committee (CES)
Thailand
Turkey
Ukraine
United Arab Emirates
United Kingdom – British Electrotechnical Committee (BEC), part of the British Standards Institution (BSI)
United States – American National Standards Institute (ANSI) (USNC/IEC); NEMA also helps to develop and promote IEC standards[9]





Associate members (limited voting and managerial rights)[10][edit]





Albania[11]
Bahrain
Bosnia & Herzegovina
Cuba
Cyprus
Estonia
Georgia[11]
Iceland – Icelandic Standards (IST)




Jordan[11]
Kazakhstan
Kenya
Latvia
Lithuania
Republic of Macedonia
Malta




Moldova[11]
Montenegro
Morocco – COMELEC[12]
Nigeria
Sri Lanka
Tunisia
Vietnam – Vietnamese National Committee Directorate for Standards and Quality (STAMEQ)





Affiliates[edit]
In 2001 and in response to calls from the WTO to open itself to more developing nations, the IEC launched the Affiliate Country Programme to encourage developing nations to become involved in the Commission's work or to use its International Standards. Countries signing a pledge to participate in the work and to encourage the use of IEC Standards in national standards and regulations are granted access to a limited number of technical committee documents for the purposes of commenting. In addition, they can select a limited number of IEC Standards for their national standards' library. Countries as of 2011 participating in the Affiliate Country Programme are:[13]





Afghanistan
Angola
Antigua and Barbuda
Armenia
Azerbaijan
Bangladesh
Barbados
Belize
Benin
Bhutan
Bolivia
Botswana
Brunei Darussalam
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cambodia
Cameroon
Central African Republic
Chad
Comoros
Congo
Congo (Democratic Rep. of)
Costa Rica
Côte d'Ivoire
Dominica
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
El Salvador




Eritrea
Ethiopia
Fiji
Gabon
Gambia
Ghana
Grenada
Guatemala
Guinea
Guinea Bissau
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Jamaica
Kyrgyzstan
Lao Pdr
Lebanon
Lesotho
Madagascar
Malawi
Mali
Mauritania
Mauritius
Mongolia
Mozambique




Myanmar
Namibia
Nepal
Niger
Palestinian Authority
Panama
Papua New Guinea
Paraguay
Peru
Rwanda
Saint Lucia
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
Senegal
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Sudan
Suriname
Swaziland
Tanzania
Togo
Trinidad and Tobago
Turkmenistan
Uganda
Uruguay
Venezuela
Yemen
Zambia
Zimbabwe





See also[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to International Electrotechnical Commission.



International Organisation for Standardisation
List of IEC standards
List of IEC Technical Committees

References[edit]



^ International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) (PDF), Paris: International OECD Publishing, 2016 
^ IEC Officers, CH: International Electrotechnical Commission, 2017 
^ "IEC Statutes and Rules of Procedure" (PDF). IEC. 2011-07-01. p. 30. 
^ IEC Organization and funding, CH: International Electrotechnical Commission, 2017 
^ International Geneva, Facts and Figures (PDF), CH: Swiss Government, 2017 
^ Electrical Engineering for Non-Electrical Engineers. ISBN 1482228831. 
^ IEC Webstore | Welcome. Webstore.iec.ch.
^ IEC full and associate members
^ "The IEC and NEMA", nema.org, accessed 2009-04-12
^ IEC membership levels
^ a b c d Formerly participating in the affiliate programme.
^ "Morocco, the 5th largest African economy, joins the IEC". IEC. 27 July 2010. Retrieved 27 July 2010. 
^ IEC affiliates



External links[edit]

IEC Home Page
IEC Webstore
Free online multilingual dictionary of 20 000 electrical and electronic terms
IEC System of Conformity Assessment for Electrotechnical Equipment and Components
IEC System for quality assessment of electronic components and associated materials and processes
IEC Scheme for certification to standards for electrical equipment for explosive atmospheres
IEC System for Certification to Standards Relating to Equipment for Use in Renewable Energy Applications
List of IEC Technical Committees on IEC Official Website


Technical Committee Webpages


http://tc3.iec.ch — IEC Graphical Symbols
http://tc4.iec.ch — IEC Hydraulic Turbines
http://tc17.iec.ch — IEC Switchgear
http://tc56.iec.ch — IEC Dependability
http://tc57.iec.ch — IEC Power Systems Management
http://tc86.iec.ch — IEC Fibre Optics
http://tc100.iec.ch — IEC Multimedia




IEC Standards and tools in database format


International Electrotechnical Vocabulary
IEC Glossary
IEC 60061: Lamp caps, lampholders and gauges
IEC 60417 - ISO 7000: Graphical Symbols for Use on Equipment
IEC 60617: Graphical Symbols for Diagrams









v
t
e


International Electrotechnical Commission



Subsidiaries



CISPR





Technical committees



IEC TC 25
IEC TC 57
ISO/IEC JTC 1

ISO/IEC JTC 1/SC 2
ISO/IEC JTC 1/SC 6
ISO/IEC JTC 1/SC 7
ISO/IEC JTC 1/SC 17
ISO/IEC JTC 1/SC 22
ISO/IEC JTC 1/SC 23
ISO/IEC JTC 1/SC 24
ISO/IEC JTC 1/SC 25
ISO/IEC JTC 1/SC 27
ISO/IEC JTC 1/SC 28
ISO/IEC JTC 1/SC 29
ISO/IEC JTC 1/SC 31
ISO/IEC JTC 1/SC 32
ISO/IEC JTC 1/SC 34
ISO/IEC JTC 1/SC 35
ISO/IEC JTC 1/SC 36
ISO/IEC JTC 1/SC 37
ISO/IEC JTC 1/SC 38
ISO/IEC JTC 1/SC 39
ISO/IEC JTC 1/SC 40
ISO/IEC JTC 1/SWG-A







Technical reports‎



ISO/IEC TR 12182





Related



Information Technology Task Force
International Electrotechnical Vocabulary
List of International Electrotechnical Commission standards









Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 133254239
LCCN: n81008302
ISNI: 0000 0001 1956 1631
GND: 7235-7
SUDOC: 026518600
BNF: cb11875169k (data)
NLA: 35230267
NKC: ko2003181180
BNE: XX100157











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=International_Electrotechnical_Commission&oldid=817362363"					Categories: Electrical engineering organizationsInternational Electrotechnical CommissionStandards organizationsHidden categories: Articles lacking reliable references from February 2017All articles lacking reliable referencesUse British English Oxford spelling from December 2011Pages using deprecated image syntaxWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersWikipedia articles with NLA identifiers