
International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC)


IUPAC logo



Abbreviation
IUPAC


Motto
Advancing Chemistry Worldwide


Formation
1919; 98 years ago (1919)


Type
INGO, standards organization


Headquarters
Registered in Zürich, Switzerland
Secretariat in Research Triangle Park, North Carolina, United States



Region served

Worldwide



Official language

English



President

Natalia Tarasova (Russia)[1]


Website
IUPAC.org


The International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC) /ˈaɪjuːpæk/ or /ˈjuːpæk/ is an international federation of National Adhering Organizations that represents chemists in individual countries. It is a member of the International Council for Science (ICSU).[2] IUPAC is registered in Zürich, Switzerland, and the administrative office, known as the "IUPAC Secretariat", is in Research Triangle Park, North Carolina, United States. This administrative office is headed by IUPAC's executive director,[3] currently Lynn Soby.[4]
IUPAC was established in 1919 as the successor of the International Congress of Applied Chemistry for the advancement of chemistry. Its members, the National Adhering Organizations, can be national chemistry societies, national academies of sciences, or other bodies representing chemists. There are fifty-four National Adhering Organizations and three Associate National Adhering Organizations.[2] IUPAC's Inter-divisional Committee on Nomenclature and Symbols (IUPAC nomenclature) is the recognized world authority in developing standards for the naming of the chemical elements and compounds. Since its creation, IUPAC has been run by many different committees with different responsibilities.[5] These committees run different projects which include standardizing nomenclature,[6] finding ways to bring chemistry to the world,[7] and publishing works.[8][9][10]
IUPAC is best known for its works standardizing nomenclature in chemistry and other fields of science, but IUPAC has publications in many fields including chemistry, biology and physics.[11] Some important work IUPAC has done in these fields includes standardizing nucleotide base sequence code names; publishing books for environmental scientists, chemists, and physicists; and improving education in science.[11][12] IUPAC is also known for standardizing the atomic weights of the elements through one of its oldest standing committees, the Commission on Isotopic Abundances and Atomic Weights (CIAAW).



Contents


1 Creation and history
2 Committees and governance
3 Nomenclature

3.1 Organic nomenclature
3.2 Inorganic nomenclature


4 Amino acid and nucleotide base codes
5 Publications

5.1 Non-series books
5.2 Experimental Thermodynamics book series
5.3 Series of books on analytical and physical chemistry of environmental systems
5.4 Colored cover book and website series (nomenclature)


6 International Year of Chemistry
7 See also
8 References
9 External links



Creation and history[edit]




Friedrich August Kekulé von Stradonitz


The need for an international standard for chemistry was first addressed in 1860 by a committee headed by German scientist Friedrich August Kekulé von Stradonitz. This committee was the first international conference to create an international naming system for organic compounds.[11] The ideas that were formulated in that conference evolved into the official IUPAC nomenclature of organic chemistry.[11] IUPAC stands as a legacy of this meeting, making it one of the most important historical international collaborations of chemistry societies.[11] Since this time, IUPAC has been the official organization held with the responsibility of updating and maintaining official organic nomenclature.[13] IUPAC as such was established in 1919.[14] One notable country excluded from this early IUPAC is Germany. Germany's exclusion was a result of prejudice towards Germans by the Allied powers after World War I.[15] Germany was finally admitted into IUPAC during 1929. However, Nazi Germany was removed from IUPAC during World War II.
During World War II, IUPAC was affiliated with the Allied powers, but had little involvement during the war effort itself. After the war, East and West Germany were eventually readmitted to IUPAC.[15][16] Since World War II, IUPAC has been focused on standardizing nomenclature and methods in science without interruption.
In 2016, IUPAC denounced the use of chlorine as a chemical weapon. The organization pointed out their concerns in a letter to Ahmet Üzümcü, the director of the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), in regards to the practice of utilizing chlorine for weapon usage in Syria among other locations. The letter stated, "Our organizations deplore the use of chlorine in this manner. The indiscriminate attacks, possibly carried out by a member state of the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC), is of concern to chemical scientists and engineers around the globe and we stand ready to support your mission of implementing the CWC." According to the CWC, "the use, stockpiling, distribution, development or storage of any chemical weapons is forbidden by any of the 192 state party signatories."[17]
Committees and governance[edit]
IUPAC is governed by several committees that all have different responsibilities. The committees are as follows: Bureau, CHEMRAWN (Chem Research Applied to World Needs) Committee, Committee on Chemistry Education, Committee on Chemistry and Industry, Committee on Printed and Electronic Publications, Evaluation Committee, Executive Committee, Finance Committee, Interdivisional Committee on Terminology, Nomenclature and Symbols, Project Committee, and Pure and Applied Chemistry Editorial Advisory Board.[5] Each committee is made up of members of different National Adhering Organizations from different countries.[2]
The steering committee hierarchy for IUPAC is as follows:[18]

All committees have an allotted budget to which they must adhere.
Any committee may start a project.
If a project's spending becomes too much for a committee to continue funding, it must take the issue to the Project Committee.
The project committee either increases the budget or decides on an external funding plan.
The Bureau and Executive Committee oversee operations of the other committees.


Committees table

Committee name (abbreviation)
Responsibilities


Bureau


Discussing and making changes to which committee has authority over a specific project
Controlling finances for all other committees and IUPAC as a whole
Discussing general governance of IUPAC [19]




Physical and Biophysical Chemistry Division (Division I)


Organizing and promoting the international collaboration between scientists in physical and biophysical chemistry and related fields




Inorganic Chemistry Division (Division II)


Inorganic and inorganic materials chemistry, isotopes and atomic weights, periodic table




Organic and Biomolecular Chemistry Division (Division III)


Promoting the goals of IUPAC in the field of organic and biomolecular chemistry in the broadest sense




Polymer Division (Division IV)


The science and technology of macromolecules and polymers




Analytical Chemistry Division (Division V)


The general aspects of analytical chemistry, separation methods, spectrochemical methods, electrochemical methods, nuclear chemistry methods, and applications to human health and the environment.




Chemistry and the Environment Division (Division VI)


Providing unbiased and timely authoritative reviews on the behavior of chemical compounds in food and the environment.




Chemistry and Human Health Division (Division VII)


Medicinal and clinical chemistry





Chemical Nomenclature and Structure Representation Division (Division VIII)



Maintaining and developing standard systems for designating chemical structures, including both conventional nomenclature and computer-based systems.




CHEMRAWN Committee (Chem Research Applied to World Needs)


Discussing different ways chemistry can and should be used to help the world[7]




Committee on Chemistry Education (CCE)


Coordinating IUPAC chemistry research with the educational systems of the world[20]




Committee on Chemistry and Industry (COCI)


Coordinating IUPAC chemistry research with industrial chemistry needs[21]




Committee on Electronic and Printed Publications (CPEP)


Designing and implementing IUPAC publications
Heading the Subcommittee on Spectroscopic Data Standards[22]




Evaluation Committee (EvC)


Evaluating every project
Reporting back to the Executive Committee on every project[10]




Executive Committee (EC)


Planning and discussing IUPAC events
Discussing IUPAC fundraising
Reviewing other committees' work[23]

Current officers of the Executive Committee:

President: Moreau, Nicole J.
Vice president: Tatsumi, Kazuyuki
Treasurer: Corish, John
Secretary general: Black, David StC.[24]




Finance Committee (FC)


Helping other committees properly manage their budgets
Advising union officers on investments [25]




Interdivisional Committee on Terminology (ICTNS)


Managing IUPAC nomenclature
Working through many projects to standardize nomenclature
Standardizing measurements
Discussing atomic weight standardization[6]




Project Committee (PC)


Managing funds that are under the jurisdiction of multiple projects
Judging if a project is too large for its funding
Recommending sources of external funding for projects
Deciding how to fund meetings in developing countries and countries in crisis[9]




Pure and Applied Chemistry Editorial Advisory Board (PAC-EAB)


Helping to plan, implement, and publish Pure and Applied Chemistry[8]




Nomenclature[edit]
Main article: Preferred IUPAC name
IUPAC committee has a long history of officially naming organic and inorganic compounds. IUPAC nomenclature is developed so that any compound can be named under one set of standardized rules to avoid duplicate names. The first publication, which is information from the International Congress of Applied Chemistry,[26] on IUPAC nomenclature of organic compounds, can be found from the early 20th century in A Guide to IUPAC Nomenclature of Organic Compounds (1900).
Organic nomenclature[edit]
IUPAC organic nomenclature has three basic parts: the substituents, carbon chain length and chemical ending.[13] The substituents are any functional groups attached to the main carbon chain. The main carbon chain is the longest possible continuous chain. The chemical ending denotes what type of molecule it is. For example, the ending ane denotes a single bonded carbon chain, as in "hexane" (C
6H
14).[27]
Another example of IUPAC organic nomenclature is cyclohexanol:





Cyclohexanol




The substituent name for a ring compound is cyclo.
The indication (substituent name) for a six carbon chain is hex.
The chemical ending for a single bonded carbon chain is ane
The chemical ending for an alcohol is ol
The two chemical endings are combined for an ending of anol indicating a single bonded carbon chain with an alcohol attached to it.[13][27][28]

Inorganic nomenclature[edit]
Basic IUPAC inorganic nomenclature has two main parts: the cation and the anion. The cation is the name for the positively charged ion and the anion is the name for the negatively charged ion.[13]
An example of IUPAC nomenclature of inorganic chemistry is potassium chlorate (KClO3):





Potassium chlorate




"Potassium" is the cation name.
"Chlorate" is the anion name.[13]

Amino acid and nucleotide base codes[edit]
IUPAC also has a system for giving codes to identify amino acids and nucleotide bases. IUPAC needed a coding system that represented long sequences of amino acids. This would allow for these sequences to be compared to try to find homologies.[29] These codes can consist of either a one letter code or a three letter code.
These codes make it easier and shorter to write down the amino acid sequences that make up proteins. The nucleotide bases are made up of purines (adenine and guanine) and pyrimidines (cytosine and thymine or uracil). These nucleotide bases make up DNA and RNA. These nucleotide base codes make the genome of an organism much smaller and easier to read.[30]


Nucleic acid code
Meaning
Mnemonic


A
A
Adenine


C
C
Cytosine


G
G
Guanine


T
T
Thymine


U
U
Uracil


R
A or G
Purine


Y
C, T or U
Pyrimidines


K
G, T or U
Bases which are ketones


M
A or C
Bases with amino groups


S
C or G
Strong interaction


W
A, T or U
Weak interaction


B
Not A (i.e. C, G, T or U)
B comes after A


D
Not C (i.e. A, G, T or U)
D comes after C


H
Not G (i.e., A, C, T or U)
H comes after G


V
Neither T nor U (i.e. A, C or G)
V comes after U


N
A C G T U
Nucleic acid


X
Masked



-
Gap of indeterminate length



The codes for amino acids (24 amino acids and three special codes) are:


Amino acid code
Meaning


A
Alanine


B
Aspartic acid or asparagine


C
Cysteine


D
Aspartic acid


E
Glutamic acid


F
Phenylalanine


G
Glycine


H
Histidine


I
Isoleucine


J
Leucine or isoleucine


K
Lysine


L
Leucine


M
Methionine


N
Asparagine


O
Pyrrolysine


P
Proline


Q
Glutamine


R
Arginine


S
Serine


T
Threonine


U
Selenocysteine


V
Valine


W
Tryptophan


Y
Tyrosine


Z
Glutamic acid or glutamine


X
Any


*
Translation stop


-
Gap of indeterminate length


Publications[edit]
Non-series books[edit]


Book name
Description


Principles and Practices of Method Validation

Principles and Practices of Method Validation is a book entailing methods of validating and analyzing many analytes taken from a single aliquot.[31] Also, this book goes over techniques for analyzing many samples at once. Some methods discussed include: chromatographic methods, estimation of effects, matrix induced effects, and the effect of an equipment setup on an experiment.[31]



Fundamental Toxicology

Fundamental Toxicology is a textbook that proposes a curriculum for toxicology courses.[32] Fundamental Toxicology is based on the book Fundamental Toxicology for Chemists.[33] Fundamental Toxicology is enhanced through many revisions and updates. New information added in the revisions includes: risk assessment and management; reproductive toxicology; behavioral toxicology; and ecotoxicology.[33] This book is relatively well received as being useful for reviewing chemical toxicology.[32]



Macromolecular Symposia

Macromolecular Symposia is a journal that publishes fourteen issues a year. This journal includes contributions to the macromolecular chemistry and physics field. The meetings of IUPAC are included in this journal along with the European Polymer Federation, the American Chemical Society, and the Society of Polymer Science in Japan.[34]



Experimental Thermodynamics book series[edit]
The Experimental Thermodynamics books series covers many topics in the fields of thermodynamics.


Book
Description


Measurement of the Transport Properties of Fluids

Measurement of the Transport Properties of Fluids is a book that is published by Blackwell Science. The topics that are included in this book are low and high temperature measurements, secondary coefficients, diffusion coefficients, light scattering, transient methods for thermal conductivity, methods for thermal conductivity, falling-body viscometers, and vibrating viscometers.[35]



Solution Calorimetry

Solution Calorimetry is a book that gives background information on thermal analysis and calorimetry. Thermoanalytical and calorimetric techniques along with thermodynamic and kinetic properties are also discussed. Later volumes of this book discuss the applications and principles of these thermodynamic and kinetic methods.[36]



Equations of State for Fluids and Fluid Mixtures Part I

Equations of State for Fluids and Fluid Mixtures Part I is a book that gives up to date equations of state for fluids and fluid mixtures. This book covers all ways to develop equations of state. It gives the strengths and weaknesses of each equation. Some equations discussed include: virial equation of state cubic equations; generalized Van der Waals equations; integral equations; perturbation theory; and stating and mixing rules. Other things that Equations of State for Fluids and Fluid Mixtures Part I goes over are: associating fluids, polymer systems, polydisperse fluids, self-assembled systems, ionic fluids, and fluids near their critical points.[37]



Measurement of the Thermodynamic Properties of Single Phases

Measurement of the Thermodynamic Properties of Single Phases is a book that gives an overview of techniques for measuring the thermodynamic quantities of single phases. It also goes into experimental techniques to test many different thermodynamic states precisely and accurately. Measurement of the Thermodynamic Properties of Single Phases was written for people interested in measuring thermodynamic properties.[38]



Measurement of the Thermodynamic Properties of Multiple Phases

Measurement of the Thermodynamic Properties of Multiple Phases is a book that includes multiple techniques that are used to study multiple phases of pure component systems. Also included in this book are the measurement techniques to obtain activity coefficients, interfacial tension, and critical parameters. This book was written for researchers and graduate students as a reference source.[39]



Series of books on analytical and physical chemistry of environmental systems[edit]


Book name
Description


Atmospheric Particles

Atmospheric Particles is a book that delves into aerosol science. This book is aimed as a reference for graduate students and atmospheric researchers. Atmospheric Particles goes into depth on the properties of aerosols in the atmosphere and their effect. Topics covered in this book are: acid rain; heavy metal pollution; global warming; and photochemical smog. Atmospheric Particles also covers techniques to analyze the atmosphere and ways to take atmospheric samples.[40]



Environmental Colloids and Particles: Behaviour, Separation and Characterisation

Environmental Colloids and Particles: Behaviour, Separation and Characterisation is a book that discusses environmental colloids and current information available on them. This book focuses on environmental colloids and particles in aquatic systems and soils. It also goes over techniques such as: techniques for sampling environmental colloids, size fractionation, and how to characterize of colloids and particles. Environmental Colloids and Particles: Behaviour, Separation and Characterisation also delves into how these colloids and particles interact.[41]



Biophysical Chemistry of Fractal Structures and Processes in Environmental Systems

Biophysical Chemistry of Fractal Structures and Processes in Environmental Systems is meant to give an overview of a technique based on fractal geometry and the processes of environmental systems. This book gives ideas on how to use fractal geometry to compare and contrast different ecosystems. It also gives an overview of the knowledge needed to solve environmental problems. Finally, Biophysical Chemistry of Fractal Structures and Processes in Environmental Systems shows how to use the fractal approach to understand the reactivity of flocs, sediments, soils, microorganisms and humic substances.[42]



Interactions Between Soil Particles and Microorganisms: Impact on the Terrestrial Ecosystem

Interactions Between Soil Particles and Microorganisms: Impact on the Terrestrial Ecosystem is meant to be read by chemists and biologists that study environmental systems. Also, this book should be used as a reference for earth scientists, environmental geologists, environmental engineers, and professionals in microbiology and ecology. Interactions Between Soil Particles and Microorganisms: Impact on the Terrestrial Ecosystem is about how minerals, microorganisms, and organic components work together to affect terrestrial systems. This book identifies that there are many different techniques and theories about minerals, microorganisms, and organic components individually, but they are not often associated with each other. It further goes on to discuss how these components of soil work together to affect terrestrial life. Interactions Between Soil Particles and Microorganisms: Impact on the Terrestrial Ecosystem gives techniques to analyze minerals, microorganisms, and organic components together. This book also has a large section positing why environmental scientists working in the specific fields of minerals, microorganisms, and organic components of soil should work together and how they should do so.[43]



The Biogeochemistry of Iron in Seawater

The Biogeochemistry of Iron in Seawater is a book that describes how low concentrations of iron in Antarctica and the Pacific Ocean are a result of reduced chlorophyll for phytoplankton production.[44] It does this by reviewing information from research in the 1990s. This book goes into depth about: chemical speciation; analytical techniques; transformation of iron; how iron limits the development of high nutrient low chlorophyll areas in the Pacific Ocean.[45]



In Situ Monitoring of Aquatic Systems: Chemical Analysis and Speciation

In Situ Monitoring of Aquatic Systems: Chemical Analysis and Speciation is a book that discusses techniques and devices to monitor aquatic systems and how new devices and techniques can be developed. This book emphasizes the future use of micro-analytical monitoring techniques and microtechnology. In Situ Monitoring of Aquatic Systems: Chemical Analysis and Speciation is aimed at researchers and laboratories that analyze aquatic systems such as rivers, lakes, and oceans.[46]



Structure and Surface Reactions of Soil Particles

Structure and Surface Reactions of Soil Particles is a book about soil structures and the molecular processes that occur in soil. Structure and Surface Reactions of Soil Particles is aimed at any researcher researching soil or in the field of anthropology. It goes into depth on topics such as: fractal analysis of particle dimensions; computer modeling of the structure; reactivity of humics; applications of atomic force microscopy; and advanced instrumentation for analysis of soil particles.[47]



Metal Speciation and Bioavailability in Aquatic Systems, Series on Analytical and Physical Chemistry of Environmental Systems Vol. 3

Metal Speciation and Bioavailability in Aquatic Systems, Series on Analytical and Physical Chemistry of Environmental Systems Vol. 3 is a book about the effect of trace metals on aquatic life.[48] This book is considered a specialty book for researchers interested in observing the effect of trace metals in the water supply. This book includes techniques to assess how bioassays can be used to evaluate how an organism is affected by trace metals. Also, Metal Speciation and Bioavailability in Aquatic Systems, Series on Analytical and Physical Chemistry of Environmental Systems Vol. 3 looks at the limitations of the use of bioassays to observe the effects of trace metals on organisms.



Physicochemical Kinetics and Transport at Biointerfaces

Physicochemical Kinetics and Transport at Biointerfaces is a book created to aid environmental scientists in field work. The book gives an overview of chemical mechanisms, transport, kinetics, and interactions that occur in environmental systems. Physicochemical Kinetics and Transport at Biointerfaces continues from where Metal Speciation and Bioavailability in Aquatic Systems leaves off.[49]



Colored cover book and website series (nomenclature)[edit]
Main article: IUPAC book
IUPAC color code their books in order to make each publication distinguishable.[11]


Title
Description


Compendium of Analytical Nomenclature

One extensive book on almost all nomenclature written (IUPAC nomenclature of organic chemistry and IUPAC nomenclature of inorganic chemistry) by IUPAC committee is the Compendium of Analytical Nomenclature – The Orange Book, 1st edition (1978)[50] This book was revised in 1987. The second edition has many revisions that come from reports on nomenclature between 1976 and 1984.[51] In 1992, the second edition went through many different revisions which led to the third edition.[51]



Pure and Applied Chemistry (journal)

Pure and Applied Chemistry is the official monthly journal of IUPAC. This journal debuted in 1960. The goal statement for Pure and Applied Chemistry is to "publish highly topical and credible works at the forefront of all aspects of pure and applied chemistry."[52] The journal itself is available by subscription, but older issues are available in the archive on IUPAC's website.
Pure and Applied Chemistry was created as a central way to publish IUPAC endorsed articles.[53] Before its creation, IUPAC did not have a quick, official way to distribute new chemistry information.
Its creation was first suggested at the Paris IUPAC Meeting of 1957.[53] During this meeting the commercial publisher of the journal was discussed and decided on. In 1959, IUPAC Pure and Applied Chemistry Editorial Advisory Board was created and put in charge of the journal. The idea of one journal being a definitive place for a vast amount of chemistry was difficult for the committee to grasp at first.[53] However, it was decided that the journal would reprint old journal editions to keep all chemistry knowledge available.



Compendium of Chemical Terminology

The Compendium of Chemical Terminology, also known as the "Gold Book", was originally worked on by Victor Gold. This book is a collection of names and terms already discussed in Pure and Applied Chemistry.[54] The Compendium of Chemical Terminology was first published in 1987.[11] The first edition of this book contains no original material, but is meant to be a compilation of other IUPAC works.
The second edition of this book was published in 1997.[28] This book made large changes to the first edition of the Compendium of Chemical Terminology. These changes included updated material and an expansion of the book to include over seven thousand terms.[28] The second edition was the topic of an IUPAC XML project. This project made an XML version of the book that includes over seven thousand terms. The XML version of the book includes an open editing policy, which allows users to add excerpts of the written version.[28]



IUPAC Nomenclature of Organic Chemistry (online publication)
IUPAC Nomenclature of Organic Chemistry, also known as the "Blue Book", is a website published by the Advanced Chemistry Department Incorporated with the permission of IUPAC. This site is a compilation of the books A Guide to IUPAC Nomenclature of Organic Compounds and Nomenclature of Organic Chemistry.[55]


International Year of Chemistry[edit]




International Year of Chemistry logo


IUPAC and UNESCO were the lead organizations coordinating events for the International Year of Chemistry, which took place in 2011.[56][57] The International Year of Chemistry was originally proposed by IUPAC at the general assembly in Turin, Italy.[58] This motion was adopted by UNESCO at a meeting in 2008.[58] The main objectives of the International Year of Chemistry were to increase public appreciation of chemistry and gain more interest in the world of chemistry. This event is also being held to encourage young people to get involved and contribute to chemistry. A further reason for this event being held is to honour how chemistry has made improvements to everyone's way of life.[12]
See also[edit]


Chemistry portal



CAS registry number
Chemical nomenclature
Commission on Isotopic Abundances and Atomic Weights
European Association for Chemical and Molecular Sciences
Institute for Reference Materials and Measurements (IRMM)
International Chemical Identifier (InChI)
International Union of Pure and Applied Physics (IUPAP)
International Union of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology (IUBMB)
List of chemical elements naming controversies
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST)
Simplified molecular-input line-entry system (SMILES)

References[edit]


^ "Our Leadership: Professor Natalia Tarasova (Russia), President". 2016. Archived from the original on 17 September 2016. Retrieved 13 October 2016. 
^ a b c "IUPAC National Adhering Organizations". Iupac.org. 2 June 2011. Archived from the original on 4 June 2011. Retrieved 8 June 2011. 
^ "IUPAC Council Agenda Book 2009" (PDF). IUPAC. 2009. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 March 2012. Retrieved 17 April 2010. 
^ "IUPAC contacts". Retrieved 25 October 2015. [permanent dead link]
^ a b IUPAC Committees list Archived 4 January 2010 at the Wayback Machine. retrieved 15 April 2010
^ a b Interdivisional Committee on Terminology web page Archived 9 October 2010 at the Wayback Machine. retrieved 15 April 2010
^ a b Chemdrawn Archived 6 July 2008 at the Wayback Machine. retrieved 15 April 2010
^ a b Pure and Applied Chemistry Editorial Advisory Board web page Archived 9 October 2010 at the Wayback Machine. retrieved 15 April 2010
^ a b "Project Committee web page". Iupac.org. 2 June 2011. Archived from the original on 29 June 2011. Retrieved 8 June 2011. 
^ a b Evaluation Committee page Archived 9 October 2010 at the Wayback Machine. retrieved 15 April 2010
^ a b c d e f g Fennel, R.W. (1994). History of IUPAC, 1919–1987. Blackwell Science. ISBN 0-86542-878-6. 
^ a b IYC: Introduction. Archived 8 October 2011 at the Wayback Machine. 9 July 2009. Retrieved on 17 February 2010. Retrieved 15 April 2010
^ a b c d e Brown, Theodore L.; H. Eugene LeMay Jr, Bruce E Bursten (2006). Chemistry The Central Science Tenth Edition. Pearson Books. ISBN 0-13-109686-9. 
^ International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry: About Archived 2012-12-14 at the Wayback Machine.. IUPAC. Retrieved on 2013-07-29.
^ a b Kaderas, Brigitte (2002). Wissenschaften und Wissenschaftspolitik: Bestandsaufnahmen zu Formationen, Brüchen und Kontinuitäten im Deutschland des 20. Jahrhunderts (in German). Franz Steiner Verlag. ISBN 3-515-08111-9. 
^ O'Sullivan, Dermot A. (1973). "IUPAC raises dues, ponders industry's role". Chemical & Engineering News. American Chemical Society. 51 (38): 10. doi:10.1021/cen-v051n038.p010. Retrieved 2016-06-11. 
^ "International chemical industry condemns the use of chlorine as a weapon". Homeland Preparedness News. 1 December 2016. Archived from the original on 1 September 2017. Retrieved 8 December 2016. 
^ IUPAC Project Committee Archived 29 June 2011 at the Wayback Machine. retrieved 15 April 2010
^ IUPAC news and references Archived 26 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine. retrieved 15 April 2010
^ Chemistry Education Archived 23 August 2010 at the Wayback Machine. retrieved 15 April 2010
^ Chemistry and Industry Archived 23 August 2010 at the Wayback Machine. retrieved 15 April 2010
^ Committee on Electronic and Printed Publications webpage Archived 30 March 2010 at the Wayback Machine. retrieved 15 April 2010
^ Executive Committee meeting[permanent dead link] retrieved 15 April 2010
^ Executive Committee Page Archived 23 August 2010 at the Wayback Machine. retrieved 15 April 2010
^ Finance Committee web page Archived 23 August 2010 at the Wayback Machine. retrieved 15 April 2010
^ IUPAC Publications List Archived 9 May 2010 at the Wayback Machine. retrieved 15 April 2010
^ a b Klein, David R. (2008). Organic Chemistry I As a Second Language: Translating the Basic Concepts Second Edition. John Wiley & Sons Inc. ISBN 978-0-470-12929-6. 
^ a b c d "Gold Book web page". Old.iupac.org. 19 October 2006. Archived from the original on 25 May 2011. Retrieved 8 June 2011. 
^ Amino Acid Codes Archived 5 February 2007 at the Wayback Machine. retrieved 15 April 2010
^ Amino Acid and Nucleotide Base Codes Archived 12 July 2009 at the Wayback Machine. retrieved 15 April 2010
^ a b Flipkart Review of Principles and Practices of Method Validation Archived 12 March 2010 at the Wayback Machine. retrieved 15 April 2010
^ a b Fundamental Toxicology review on amazon retrieved 15 April 2010
^ a b Fundamental Toxicology review on rsc.org Archived 7 January 2009 at the Wayback Machine. retrieved 15 April 2010
^ Macromolecular Symposia Archived 3 March 2010 at the Wayback Machine. retrieved 15 April 2010
^ Measurement of the Transport Properties of Fluids review on Amazon retrieved 15 April 2010
^ Solution Calorimetry review on Amazon retrieved 15 April 2010
^ Equations of State for Fluids and Fluid Mixtures part I review on Amazon retrieved 15 April 2010
^ Flipkart review of Measurement of the Thermodynamic properties of Single Phases retrieved 15 April 2010
^ Measurement of the Thermodynamic Properties of Multiple Phases review on Amazon retrieved 15 April 2010
^ Flipkart review of Atmospheric Particles retrieved 15 April 2010
^ Amazon Review of Environmental Colloids and Particles: Behaviour, Separation, and Characterisation retrieved 15 April 2010
^ Wiley on Biophysical Chemistry of Fractal Structures and Processes in Environmental Systems Archived 7 June 2011 at the Wayback Machine.. New York: Wiley. Retrieved 15 April 2010
^ Flipkart review of Interactions Between Soil Particles and Microorganisms: Impact on the Terrestrial Ecosystem. Retrieved 15 April 2010.
^ SciTech Book News, Vol. 26, No. 2, June 2002.
^ Review of Biogeochemistry of Iron in Seawater retrieved 15 April 2010
^ Review of In Situ Monitoring of Aquatic Systems: Chemical Analysis and Speciation from Barnes and Noble Archived 7 June 2011 at the Wayback Machine.. Retrieved 15 April 2010
^ Review of Structure and Surface Reactions of Soil Particles Archived 21 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine. retrieved 15 April 2010
^ Metal Speciation and Bioavailability in Aquatic Systems. Series on Analytical and Physical Chemistry of Environmental Systems Vol. 3. Review on Amazon. Retrieved 15 April 2010
^ Physicochemical Kinetics and Transport at Biointerfaces review retrieved 15 April 2010
^ IUPAC orange book publication history[permanent dead link]
^ a b Orange Book Preamble Archived 8 February 2012 at the Wayback Machine. retrieved 15 April 2010
^ IUPAC Pure and Applied Chemistry Archived 11 June 2012 at the Wayback Machine. retrieved 15 April 2010
^ a b c IUPAC Pure and Applied Chemistry Issue 1 Archived 4 October 2011 at the Wayback Machine. retrieved 15 April 2010
^ Gold Book Online Archived 24 November 2016 at the Wayback Machine. retrieved 15 April 2010
^ Online version of Blue Book Archived 8 June 2011 at the Wayback Machine. retrieved 15 April 2010
^ United Nations Resolution 63/209: International Year of Chemistry. Archived 5 August 2010 at the Wayback Machine. 3 February 2009. Retrieved on 24 April 2010.
^ About IYC: Introduction. Archived 12 June 2010 at the Wayback Machine. 9 July 2009. Retrieved on 24 April 2010.
^ a b "International Year of Chemistry Prospectus". Portal.acs.org. Archived from the original on 5 November 2011. Retrieved 8 June 2011. 


External links[edit]

Official website
Panel on Biochemical Thermodynamics (1994). "Recommendations for nomenclature and tables in biochemical thermodynamics". G. P. Moss, Queen Mary University of London. 







v
t
e


International Council for Science (ICSU)



National
members



Albania
Angola
Argentina
Armenia
Australia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Bangladesh
Belarus
Belgium
Bolivia
Bosnia & Herzegovina
(Republic of Srpska)
Botswana
Brazil
Bulgaria
Burkina Faso
Cameroon
Canada
Caribbean
Chile
China
Colombia
Costa Rica
Croatia
Cuba
Czech Republic
Côte d'Ivoire
Denmark
Dominican Republic
Egypt
Estonia
Ethiopia
Finland
France
Georgia
Germany
Ghana
Greece
Guatemala
Hungary
India
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Jamaica
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Kenya
Laos
Latvia
Lebanon
Lesotho
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Macedonia
Madagascar
Malawi
Malaysia
Mauritius
Mexico
Moldova
Monaco
Mongolia
Montenegro
Morocco
Mozambique
Namibia
Nepal
Netherlands
New Zealand
Nigeria
North Korea
Norway
Pakistan
Panama
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russia
Rwanda
Saudi Arabia
Senegal
Serbia
Seychelles
Singapore
Slovakia
Slovenia
South Africa
South Korea
South Pacific
Spain
Sri Lanka
Sudan
Swaziland
Sweden
Switzerland
Taiwan
Tajikistan
Tanzania
Thailand
Togo
Tunisia
Turkey
Uganda
Ukraine
United Kingdom
United States
Uruguay
Uzbekistan
Vatican City
Venezuela
Vietnam
Zambia
Zimbabwe





International
scientific
unions



International Astronomical Union (IAU)
International Brain Research Organization (IBRO)
International Cartographic Association (ICA)
International Geographical Union (IGU)
International Mathematical Union (IMU)
International Society for Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing (ISPRS)
International Union for Physical and Engineering Sciences in Medicine (IUPESM)
International Union for Pure and Applied Biophysics (IUPAB)
International Union for Quaternary Research (INQUA)
International Union of Anthropological and Ethnological Sciences (IUAES)
International Union of Basic and Clinical Pharmacology (IUPHAR)
International Union of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology (IUBMB)
International Union of Biological Sciences (IUBS)
International Union of Crystallography (IUCr)
International Union of Food Science and Technology (IUFoST)
International Union of Forest Research Organizations (IUFRO)
International Union of Geodesy and Geophysics (IUGG)
International Union of Geological Sciences (IUGS)
International Union of History and Philosophy of Science (IUHPS)
International Union of Immunological Societies (IUIS)
International Union of Materials Research Societies (IUMRS)
International Union of Microbiological Societies (IUMS)
International Union of Nutritional Sciences (IUNS)
International Union of Physiological Sciences (IUPS)
International Union of Psychological Science (IUPsyS )
International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC)
International Union of Pure and Applied Physics (IUPAP)
International Union of Radio Science (URSI)
International Union of Soil Sciences (IUSS)
International Union of Theoretical and Applied Mechanics (IUTAM)
International Union of Toxicology





Scientific
associates



Academia de Ciencias de América Latina (ACAL)
Engineering Committee on Oceanic Resources (ECOR)
Federation of Asian Scientific Academies and Societies (FASAS)
International Arctic Science Committee (IASC)
International Association for Hydro-Environment Engineering and Research (IAHR)
International Commission for Acoustics (ICA)
International Commission for Optics (ICO)
International Council for Laboratory Animal Science (ICLAS)
International Council for Scientific and Technical Information (ICSTI)
International Federation for Information Processing (IFIP)
International Federation of Library Associations and Institutions (IFLA)
International Federation of Societies for Microscopy (IFSM)
International Federation of Surveyors (FIG)
International Foundation for Science (IFS)
International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA)
International Union for Vacuum Science, Technique and Applications (IUVSTA)
International Union of Speleology (UIS)
International Water Association (IWA)
Pacific Science Association (PSA)
Society for Social Studies of Science (4S)
The World Academy of Sciences (TWAS)












v
t
e


Periodic table



Periodic
table
forms




Standard



18-column
18-column, large cells
32-column, large cells





Alternative



Alternatives
Chemical Galaxy
Janet's left step table





Extended



Extension beyond the 7th period

Fricke model

large cells


Pyykkö model










Sets of
elements




By
periodic
table
structure




Groups



1 (Alkali metals)
2 (Alkaline earth metals)
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15 (Pnictogens)
16 (Chalcogens)
17 (Halogens)
18 (Noble gases)





Periods



1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8+

Aufbau
Fricke
Pyykkö







Blocks



s-block
p-block
d-block
f-block
g-block
Aufbau principle








By
metallicity




Metals



Alkali metals
Alkaline earth metals
Lanthanides
Actinides
Superactinides
Eka-superactinides
Transition metals
Post-transition metals





Metalloids



Lists of metalloids by source
Dividing line





Nonmetals



Polyatomic nonmetals
Diatomic nonmetals
Noble gases








Other
sets



Nutritional elements
Platinum-group metals (PGM)
Rare-earth elements
Refractory metals
Precious metals
Coinage metals
Noble metal
Heavy metals
Native metals
Transuranium elements
Transactinide elements
Major actinides
Minor actinides








Elements




Lists



By: Abundance (in humans)
Atomic properties
Nuclear stability
Production
Symbol





Properties



Atomic weight
Crystal structure
Electron affinity
Electron configuration
Electronegativity

Allen
Pauling


Goldschmidt classification
Maximum valence





Data
pages



Abundance
Atomic radius
Boiling point
Critical point
Density
Elasticity
Electrical resistivity
Electron affinity
Electron configuration
Electronegativity
Hardness
Heat capacity
Heat of fusion
Heat of vaporization
Ionization energy
Melting point
Oxidation state
Speed of sound
Thermal conductivity
Thermal expansion coefficient
Vapor pressure








History



Element discoveries

Mendeleev's predictions


Naming

Etymology
controversies
places
scientists
in East Asia







See also



IUPAC

nomenclature
systematic element name


Trivial name
Dmitri Mendeleev








 Book
 Category
 Chemistry Portal









Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 134291432
LCCN: n79070126
ISNI: 0000 0001 2288 4343
GND: 1011135-9
SUDOC: 066951534
BNF: cb12328259h (data)
NLA: 35235202
NDL: 00743370
NKC: kn20010724320
BNE: XX253919











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=International_Union_of_Pure_and_Applied_Chemistry&oldid=817362326"					Categories: Chemical nomenclatureChemistry organizationsInternational scientific organizationsMembers of the International Council for ScienceOrganisations based in ZürichScientific organisations based in SwitzerlandScientific organizations established in 1919Standards organizationsHidden categories: All articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from November 2017Articles with permanently dead external linksWebarchive template wayback linksCS1 German-language sources (de)Articles with dead external links from September 2017Use dmy dates from July 2012Use British English Oxford spelling from November 2017Good articlesWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersWikipedia articles with NLA identifiers