






This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages)







This article may be in need of reorganization to comply with Wikipedia's layout guidelines. Please help by editing the article to make improvements to the overall structure. (May 2014) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)









The lead section of this article may need to be rewritten. Please discuss this issue on the article's talk page. Use the lead layout guide to ensure the section follows Wikipedia's norms and to be inclusive of all essential details. (May 2014) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)





(Learn how and when to remove this template message)





Part of a series on financial services


Banking




Types of banks


Advising
Central
Commercial
Community development
Cooperative
Credit union
Custodian
Depository
Direct
Export credit agency
Investment
Industrial
Merchant
Mutual savings
National
Offshore
Postal savings
Private
Public
Retail
Savings
Savings and loan
Universal

Lists of banks






Accounts · Cards



Accounts




Christmas club
Deposit
Money-market
Savings
Time deposit (Bond)

Transaction (checking / current)


Cards




ATM
Credit
Debit











Funds transfer


Electronic

bill payment


Wire
Cheque
SWIFT
Automated Clearing House
Giro








Banking terms





Automatic teller machine
Bank regulation
Loan
Money creation






Anonymous banking
Ethical banking
Fractional reserve banking
Islamic banking
Private banking











Related topics
Financial market (participants)

Corporate finance
Personal finance
Public finance
Financial regulation
List of banks









v
t
e





An investment bank is typically a private company that provides various financial and related and other services to individuals, corporations, and governments such as raising financial capital by underwriting or acting as the client's agent in the issuance of securities. An investment bank may also assist companies involved in mergers and acquisitions (M&A) and provide ancillary services such as market making, trading of derivatives and equity securities, and FICC services (fixed income instruments, currencies, and commodities).
Unlike commercial banks and retail banks, investment banks do not take deposits. From the passage of Glass–Steagall Act in 1933 until its repeal in 1999 by the Gramm–Leach–Bliley Act, the United States maintained a separation between investment banking and commercial banks. Other industrialized countries, including G7 countries, have historically not maintained such a separation. As part of the Dodd–Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act of 2010 (Dodd–Frank Act of 2010), the Volcker Rule asserts some institutional separations of investment banking services from commercial banking.[1]
The two main lines of business in investment banking are called the sell side and the buy side. The "sell side" involves trading securities for cash or for other securities (e.g. facilitating transactions, market-making), or the promotion of securities (e.g. underwriting, research, etc.). The "buy side" involves the provision of advice to institutions that buy investment services. Private equity funds, mutual funds, life insurance companies, unit trusts, and hedge funds are the most common types of buy-side entities.
An investment bank can also be split into private and public functions with a Chinese wall separating the two to prevent information from crossing. The private areas of the bank deal with private insider information that may not be publicly disclosed, while the public areas, such as stock analysis, deal with public information.
An advisor who provides investment banking services in the United States must be a licensed broker-dealer and subject to U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) and Financial Industry Regulatory Authority (FINRA) regulation.[2]



Contents


1 History

1.1 Early history
1.2 Further developments


2 Organizational structure

2.1 Core investment banking activities

2.1.1 Front office

2.1.1.1 Corporate finance
2.1.1.2 Sales and trading
2.1.1.3 Research


2.1.2 Front and middle office

2.1.2.1 Risk management


2.1.3 Middle office
2.1.4 Back office

2.1.4.1 Technology




2.2 Other businesses


3 Industry profile

3.1 Global size and revenue mix
3.2 Top 10 banks


4 Financial crisis of 2007–2008
5 Criticisms

5.1 Conflicts of interest
5.2 Compensation


6 See also
7 References
8 Further reading



History[edit]
Early history[edit]
See also: Economic history of the Dutch Republic and Financial history of the Dutch Republic
The Dutch East India Company (VOC) was first company to issue bonds and shares of stock to the general public. It was also the first publicly traded company, being the first company to be listed on an official stock exchange. The Dutch also helped lay the foundations of the modern practice of investment banking.[3][4][5]
Further developments[edit]
See also: History of investment banking in the United States
Investment banking has changed over the years, beginning as a partnership form focused on underwriting security issuance, i.e. initial public offerings (IPOs) and secondary market offerings, brokerage, and mergers and acquisitions, and evolving into a "full-service" range including securities research, proprietary trading, and investment management. In the 21st century, the SEC filings of the major independent investment banks such as Goldman Sachs and Morgan Stanley reflect three product segments: (1) investment banking (mergers and acquisitions, advisory services and securities underwriting), (2) asset management (sponsored investment funds), and (3) trading and principal investments (broker-dealer activities, including proprietary trading ("dealer" transactions) and brokerage trading ("broker" transactions)).[6]
In the United States, commercial banking and investment banking were separated by the Glass–Steagall Act, which was repealed in 1999. The repeal led to more "universal banks" offering an even greater range of services. Many large commercial banks have therefore developed investment banking divisions through acquisitions and hiring. Notable large banks with significant investment banks include JPMorgan Chase, Bank of America, Credit Suisse, Deutsche Bank, UBS, Barclays, and Wells Fargo. After the financial crisis of 2007–08 and the subsequent passage of the Dodd-Frank Act of 2010, regulations have limited certain investment banking operations, notably with the Volcker Rule's restrictions on proprietary trading.[7]
The traditional service of underwriting security issues has declined as a percentage of revenue. As far back as 1960, 70% of Merrill Lynch's revenue was derived from transaction commissions while "traditional investment banking" services accounted for 5%. However, Merrill Lynch was a relatively "retail-focused" firm with a large brokerage network.[7]
Organizational structure[edit]
Core investment banking activities[edit]
Investment banking is split into front office, middle office, and back office activities. While large service investment banks offer all lines of business, both "sell side" and "buy side", smaller sell-side investment firms such as boutique investment banks and small broker-dealers focus on investment banking and sales/trading/research, respectively.
Investment banks offer services to both corporations issuing securities and investors buying securities. For corporations, investment bankers offer information on when and how to place their securities on the open market, an activity very important to an investment bank's reputation. Therefore, investment bankers play a very important role in issuing new security offerings.[7]
Front office[edit]
Front office is generally described as a revenue generating role. There are two main areas within front office: investment banking and markets:[citation needed]

Investment banking involves advising organizations on mergers and acquisitions, as well as a wide array of capital raising strategies.
Markets is divided into "sales and trading" (including "structuring"), and "research".

Corporate finance[edit]
Corporate finance is the traditional aspect of investment banks, which involves helping customers raise funds in capital markets and giving advice on mergers and acquisitions (M&A); this may involve subscribing investors to a security issuance, coordinating with bidders, or negotiating with a merger target. A pitch book of financial information is generated to market the bank to a potential M&A client; if the pitch is successful, the bank arranges the deal for the client. The investment banking division (IBD) is generally divided into industry coverage and product coverage groups. Industry coverage groups focus on a specific industry—such as healthcare, public finance (governments), FIG (financial institutions group), industrials, TMT (technology, media, and telecommunications), P&E (power & energy), consumer/retail, food & beverage, corporate defense and governance—and maintain relationships with corporations within the industry to bring in business for the bank. Product coverage groups focus on financial products—such as mergers and acquisitions, leveraged finance, public finance, asset finance and leasing, structured finance, restructuring, equity, and high-grade debt—and generally work and collaborate with industry groups on the more intricate and specialized needs of a client.
Sales and trading[edit]
On behalf of the bank and its clients, a large investment bank's primary function is buying and selling products.[citation needed] In market making, traders will buy and sell financial products with the goal of making money on each trade. Sales is the term for the investment bank's sales force, whose primary job is to call on institutional and high-net-worth investors to suggest trading ideas (on a caveat emptor basis) and take orders. Sales desks then communicate their clients' orders to the appropriate trading rooms, which can price and execute trades, or structure new products that fit a specific need. Structuring has been a relatively recent activity as derivatives have come into play, with highly technical and numerate employees working on creating complex structured products which typically offer much greater margins and returns than underlying cash securities. In 2010, investment banks came under pressure as a result of selling complex derivatives contracts to local municipalities in Europe and the US.[8] Strategists advise external as well as internal clients on the strategies that can be adopted in various markets. Ranging from derivatives to specific industries, strategists place companies and industries in a quantitative framework with full consideration of the macroeconomic scene. This strategy often affects the way the firm will operate in the market, the direction it would like to take in terms of its proprietary and flow positions, the suggestions salespersons give to clients, as well as the way structurers create new products. Banks also undertake risk through proprietary trading, performed by a special set of traders who do not interface with clients and through "principal risk"—risk undertaken by a trader after he buys or sells a product to a client and does not hedge his total exposure. Banks seek to maximize profitability for a given amount of risk on their balance sheet. The necessity for numerical ability in sales and trading has created jobs for physics, computer science, mathematics and engineering Ph.D.s who act as quantitative analysts.
Research[edit]
The securities research division reviews companies and writes reports about their prospects, often with "buy", "hold" or "sell" ratings. Investment banks typically have sell-side analysts which cover various industries. Their sponsored funds or proprietary trading offices will also have buy-side research. While the research division may or may not generate revenue (based on policies at different banks), its resources are used to assist traders in trading, the sales force in suggesting ideas to customers, and investment bankers by covering their clients.[citation needed] Research also serves outside clients with investment advice (such as institutional investors and high-net-worth individuals) in the hopes that these clients will execute suggested trade ideas through the sales and trading division of the bank, and thereby generate revenue for the firm. Research also covers credit research, fixed income research, macroeconomic research, and quantitative analysis, all of which are used internally and externally to advise clients but do not directly affect revenue. All research groups, nonetheless, provide a key service in terms of advisory and strategy. There is a potential conflict of interest between the investment bank and its analysis, in that published analysis can impact the performance of a security (in the secondary markets or an initial public offering) or influence the relationship between the banker and its corporate clients, thereby affecting the bank's profitability .[citation needed]
Front and middle office[edit]
Risk management[edit]
Risk management involves analyzing the market and credit risk that an investment bank or its clients take onto their balance sheet during transactions or trades. Credit risk focuses around capital markets activities, such as syndicated loans, bond issuance, restructuring, and leveraged finance. Market risk conducts review of sales and trading activities utilizing the VaR model and provide hedge-fund solutions to portfolio managers. Other risk groups include country risk, operational risk, and counterparty risks which may or may not exist on a bank to bank basis. Credit risk solutions are key part of capital market transactions, involving debt structuring, exit financing, loan amendment, project finance, leveraged buy-outs, and sometimes portfolio hedging. Front office market risk activities provide service to investors via derivative solutions, portfolio management, portfolio consulting, and risk advisory. Well-known risk groups in JPMorgan Chase, Morgan Stanley, Goldman Sachs and Barclays engage in revenue-generating activities involving debt structuring, restructuring, syndicated loans, and securitization for clients such as corporates, governments, and hedge funds. J.P. Morgan IB Risk works with investment banking to execute transactions and advise investors, although its Finance & Operation risk groups focus on middle office functions involving internal, non-revenue generating, operational risk controls.[9][10][11] Credit default swap, for instance, is a famous credit risk hedging solution for clients invented by J.P. Morgan's Blythe Masters during the 1990s. The Loan Risk Solutions group[12] within Barclays' investment banking division and Risk Management and Financing group[13] housed in Goldman Sach's securities division are client-driven franchises. However, risk management groups such as operational risk, internal risk control, and legal risk are restrained to internal business functions including firm balance-sheet risk analysis and assigning trading cap that are independent of client needs, even though these groups may be responsible for deal approval that directly affects capital market activities. Risk management is a broad area, and like research, its roles can be client-facing or internal.
Middle office[edit]
This area of the bank includes treasury management, internal controls, and internal corporate strategy.
Corporate treasury is responsible for an investment bank's funding, capital structure management, and liquidity risk monitoring.
Internal control tracks and analyzes the capital flows of the firm, the finance division is the principal adviser to senior management on essential areas such as controlling the firm's global risk exposure and the profitability and structure of the firm's various businesses via dedicated trading desk product control teams. In the United States and United Kingdom, a comptroller (or financial controller) is a senior position, often reporting to the chief financial officer.
Internal corporate strategy tackling firm management and profit strategy, unlike corporate strategy groups that advise clients, is non-revenue regenerating yet a key functional role within investment banks.
This list is not a comprehensive summary of all middle-office functions within an investment bank, as specific desks within front and back offices may participate in internal functions.[14]
Back office[edit]
The back office data-checks trades that have been conducted, ensuring that they are not wrong, and transacts the required transfers. Many banks have outsourced operations. It is, however, a critical part of the bank.[citation needed]
Technology[edit]
Every major investment bank has considerable amounts of in-house software, created by the technology team, who are also responsible for technical support. Technology has changed considerably in the last few years as more sales and trading desks are using electronic trading. Some trades are initiated by complex algorithms for hedging purposes.
Firms are responsible for compliance with local and foreign government regulations and internal regulations.
Other businesses[edit]

Global transaction banking is the division which provides cash management, custody services, lending, and securities brokerage services to institutions. Prime brokerage with hedge funds has been an especially profitable business, as well as risky, as seen in the bank run with Bear Stearns in 2008.
Investment management is the professional management of various securities (stocks, bonds, etc.) and other assets (e.g., real estate), to meet specified investment goals for the benefit of investors. Investors may be institutions (insurance companies, pension funds, corporations etc.) or private investors (both directly via investment contracts and more commonly via investment funds e.g., mutual funds). The investment management division of an investment bank is generally divided into separate groups, often known as private wealth management and private client services.
Merchant banking can be called "very personal banking"; merchant banks offer capital in exchange for share ownership rather than loans, and offer advice on management and strategy. Merchant banking is also a name used to describe the private equity side of a firm.[15] Current examples include Defoe Fournier & Cie. and JPMorgan Chase's One Equity Partners. The original J.P. Morgan & Co., Rothschilds, Barings and Warburgs were all merchant banks. Originally, "merchant bank" was the British English term for an investment bank.

Industry profile[edit]
There are various trade associations throughout the world which represent the industry in lobbying, facilitate industry standards, and publish statistics. The International Council of Securities Associations (ICSA) is a global group of trade associations.
In the United States, the Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association (SIFMA) is likely the most significant; however, several of the large investment banks are members of the American Bankers Association Securities Association (ABASA),[16] while small investment banks are members of the National Investment Banking Association (NIBA).
In Europe, the European Forum of Securities Associations was formed in 2007 by various European trade associations.[17] Several European trade associations (principally the London Investment Banking Association and the European SIFMA affiliate) combined in November 2009 to form the Association for Financial Markets in Europe (AFME).[18]
In the securities industry in China (particularly mainland China), the Securities Association of China is a self-regulatory organization whose members are largely investment banks.
Global size and revenue mix[edit]
Global investment banking revenue increased for the fifth year running in 2007, to a record US$84 billion, which was up 22% on the previous year and more than double the level in 2003.[19] Subsequent to their exposure to United States sub-prime securities investments, many investment banks have experienced losses. As of late 2012, global revenues for investment banks were estimated at $240 billion, down about a third from 2009, as companies pursued less deals and traded less.[20] Differences in total revenue are likely due to different ways of classifying investment banking revenue, such as subtracting proprietary trading revenue.
In terms of total revenue, SEC filings of the major independent investment banks in the United States show that investment banking (defined as M&A advisory services and security underwriting) only made up about 15–20% of total revenue for these banks from 1996 to 2006, with the majority of revenue (60+% in some years) brought in by "trading" which includes brokerage commissions and proprietary trading; the proprietary trading is estimated to provide a significant portion of this revenue.[6]
The United States generated 46% of global revenue in 2009, down from 56% in 1999. Europe (with Middle East and Africa) generated about a third while Asian countries generated the remaining 21%.[19]:8 The industry is heavily concentrated in a small number of major financial centers, including City of London, New York City, Frankfurt, Hong Kong and Tokyo.
According to estimates published by the International Financial Services London, for the decade prior to the financial crisis in 2008, M&A was a primary source of investment banking revenue, often accounting for 40% of such revenue, but dropped during and after the financial crisis.[19]:9 Equity underwriting revenue ranged from 30% to 38% and fixed-income underwriting accounted for the remaining revenue.[19]:9
Revenues have been affected by the introduction of new products with higher margins; however, these innovations are often copied quickly by competing banks, pushing down trading margins. For example, brokerages commissions for bond and equity trading is a commodity business but structuring and trading derivatives has higher margins because each over-the-counter contract has to be uniquely structured and could involve complex pay-off and risk profiles. One growth area is private investment in public equity (PIPEs, otherwise known as Regulation D or Regulation S). Such transactions are privately negotiated between companies and accredited investors.
Banks also earned revenue by securitizing debt, particularly mortgage debt prior to the financial crisis. Investment banks have become concerned that lenders are securitizing in-house, driving the investment banks to pursue vertical integration by becoming lenders, which is allowed in the United States since the repeal of the Glass–Steagall Act in 1999.[21]
Top 10 banks[edit]
Further information: List of investment banks
According to the Financial Times, in terms of total advisory fees for the whole of 2016, the top ten investment banks were:[22]


Rank
Company
Ticker[23]
Fees ($m)


1.
 J.P. Morgan & Co.
JPM
5,727.97


2.
 Goldman Sachs
GS
5,040.39


3.
 Bank of America Merrill Lynch
BAC
4,498.11


4.
 Morgan Stanley
MS
4,453.97


5.
 Citigroup
C
3,843.40


6.
 Barclays Investment Bank
BARC
3,161.33


7.
 Credit Suisse
CS
2,864.58


8.
 Deutsche Bank
DBKGn
2,701.96


9.
 Wells Fargo Securities
WFC
2,093.97


10.
 RBC Capital Markets
RY
1,779.95


The above list is just a ranking of the advisory arm (M&A advisory, syndicated loans, equity capital markets and debt capital markets) of each bank and does not include the generally much larger portion of revenues from sales and trading and asset management.
Mergers and acquisitions and capital markets are also often covered by The Wall Street Journal and Bloomberg.




Global market share of revenue of leading investment[24]


institutions



percentage


JPMorgan

 

8.1


Goldman Sachs

 

6.9


Bank of America Merrill Lynch

 

6.5


Morgan Stanley

 

6.1


Citi

 

5.8


Barclays

 

4.6


Credit Suisse

 

4.3


Deutsche Bank

 

3.4


RBC Capital Markets

 

2.4


UBS

 

2.2


(as of July 2017)




Financial crisis of 2007–2008[edit]
The 2008 financial credit crisis led to the collapse of several notable investment banks, such as the bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers (one of the largest investment banks in the world) and the hurried sale of Merrill Lynch and the much smaller Bear Stearns to much larger banks, which effectively rescued them from bankruptcy. The entire financial services industry, including numerous investment banks, was rescued by government loans through the Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP). Surviving U.S. investment banks such as Goldman Sachs and Morgan Stanley converted to traditional bank holding companies to accept TARP relief.[25] Similar situations occurred across the globe with countries rescuing their banking industry. Initially, banks received part of a $700 billion TARP intended to stabilize the economy and thaw the frozen credit markets.[26] Eventually, taxpayer assistance to banks reached nearly $13 trillion, most without much scrutiny,[27] lending did not increase[28] and credit markets remained frozen.[29]
The crisis led to questioning of the business model of the investment bank[30] without the regulation imposed on it by Glass–Steagall.[neutrality is disputed] Once Robert Rubin, a former co-chairman of Goldman Sachs, became part of the Clinton administration and deregulated banks, the previous conservatism of underwriting established companies and seeking long-term gains was replaced by lower standards and short-term profit.[31] Formerly, the guidelines said that in order to take a company public, it had to be in business for a minimum of five years and it had to show profitability for three consecutive years. After deregulation, those standards were gone, but small investors did not grasp the full impact of the change.[31]
A number of former Goldman Sachs top executives, such as Henry Paulson and Ed Liddy were in high-level positions in government and oversaw the controversial taxpayer-funded bank bailout.[31] The TARP Oversight Report released by the Congressional Oversight Panel found that the bailout tended to encourage risky behavior and "corrupt[ed] the fundamental tenets of a market economy".[32]
Under threat of a subpoena, Goldman Sachs revealed that it received $12.9 billion in taxpayer aid, $4.3 billion of which was then paid out to 32 entities, including many overseas banks, hedge funds and pensions.[33] The same year it received $10 billion in aid from the government, it also paid out multimillion-dollar bonuses; the total paid in bonuses was $4.82 billion.[34][35] Similarly, Morgan Stanley received $10 billion in TARP funds and paid out $4.475 billion in bonuses.[36]
Criticisms[edit]
The investment banking industry, and many individual investment banks, have come under criticism for a variety of reasons, including perceived conflicts of interest, overly large pay packages, cartel-like or oligopolic behavior, taking both sides in transactions, and more.[37] Investment banking has also been criticised for its opacity.[38]
Conflicts of interest[edit]
Conflicts of interest may arise between different parts of a bank, creating the potential for market manipulation, according to critics. Authorities that regulate investment banking, such as the Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) in the United Kingdom and the SEC in the United States, require that banks impose a "Chinese wall" to prevent communication between investment banking on one side and equity research and trading on the other. However, critics say such a barrier does not always exist in practice. Independent advisory firms that exclusively provide corporate finance advice argue that their advice is not conflicted, unlike bulge bracket banks.
Conflicts of interest often arise in relation to investment banks' equity research units, which have long been part of the industry. A common practice is for equity analysts to initiate coverage of a company in order to develop relationships that lead to highly profitable investment banking business. In the 1990s, many equity researchers allegedly traded positive stock ratings for investment banking business. Alternatively, companies may threaten to divert investment banking business to competitors unless their stock was rated favorably. Laws were passed to criminalize such acts, and increased pressure from regulators and a series of lawsuits, settlements, and prosecutions curbed this business to a large extent following the 2001 stock market tumble after the dot-com bubble.
Philip Augar, author of The Greed Merchants, said in an interview that, "You cannot simultaneously serve the interest of issuer clients and investing clients. And it’s not just underwriting and sales; investment banks run proprietary trading operations that are also making a profit out of these securities."[37]
Many investment banks also own retail brokerages. During the 1990s, some retail brokerages sold consumers securities which did not meet their stated risk profile. This behavior may have led to investment banking business or even sales of surplus shares during a public offering to keep public perception of the stock favorable.
Since investment banks engage heavily in trading for their own account, there is always the temptation for them to engage in some form of front running – the illegal practice whereby a broker executes orders for their own account before filling orders previously submitted by their customers, thereby benefiting from any changes in prices induced by those orders.
Documents under seal in a decade-long lawsuit concerning eToys.com's IPO but obtained by New York Times' Wall Street Business columnist Joe Nocera alleged that IPOs managed by Goldman Sachs and other investment bankers involved asking for kickbacks from their institutional clients who made large profits flipping IPOs which Goldman had intentionally undervalued. Depositions in the lawsuit alleged that clients willingly complied with these demands because they understood it was necessary in order to participate in future hot issues.[39] Reuters Wall Street correspondent Felix Salmon retracted his earlier, more conciliatory, statements on the subject and said he believed that the depositions show that companies going public and their initial consumer stockholders are both defrauded by this practice, which may be widespread throughout the IPO finance industry.[40] The case is ongoing, and the allegations remain unproven.
Compensation[edit]
Investment banking is often criticized for the enormous pay packages awarded to those who work in the industry. According to Bloomberg Wall Street's five biggest firms paid over $3 billion to their executives from 2003 to 2008, "while they presided over the packaging and sale of loans that helped bring down the investment-banking system." [41]
The highly generous pay packages include $172 million for Merrill Lynch & Co. CEO Stanley O'Neal from 2003 to 2007, before it was bought by Bank of America in 2008, and $161 million for Bear Stearns Co.'s James Cayne before the bank collapsed and was sold to JPMorgan Chase & Co. in June 2008.[41]
Such pay arrangements have attracted the ire of Democrats and Republicans in the United States Congress, who demanded limits on executive pay in 2008 when the U.S. government was bailing out the industry with a $700 billion financial rescue package.[41]
Writing in the Global Association of Risk Professionals, Aaron Brown, a vice president at Morgan Stanley, says "By any standard of human fairness, of course, investment bankers make obscene amounts of money." [37]
See also[edit]

List of investment banks
Traditional investments
Alternative investment
Bulge bracket, bulge bracket comprises the world's largest and most profitable multi-national investment banks.
Independent advisory firm
Investment Banking Exam

References[edit]


^ root (2008-11-19). "Investment Banking Definition | Investopedia (WATCH THE VIDEO)". Retrieved 2016-08-05. 
^ U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission
^ Cross, Frank B.; Prentice, Robert A.: Law and Corporate Finance. (Edward Elgar Publishing Ltd., 2007, ISBN 1847201075), p. 130
^ "The Keynes Conundrum by David P. Goldman". First Things (firstthings.com). 11 October 2010. Retrieved 21 November 2017. As Reuven Brenner & David P. Goldman (2010) noted, "Western societies developed the institutions that support entrepreneurship only through a long and fitful process of trial and error. Stock and commodity exchanges, investment banks, mutual funds, deposit banking, securitization, and other markets have their roots in the Dutch innovations of the seventeenth century but reached maturity, in many cases, only during the past quarter of a century." 
^ Wu, Wei Neng (26 February 2014). "Hub Cities — London: Why did London lose its preeminent port hub status, and how has it continued to retain its dominance in marine logistics, insurance, financing and law?". Civil Service College Singapore (cscollege.gov.sg). Retrieved 21 November 2017. 
^ a b Rhee RJ. (2010). The Decline of Investment Banking: Preliminary Thoughts on the Evolution of the Industry 1996–2008. Journal of Business and Technology Law.
^ a b c Morrison AD, Wilhelm WJ. (2007). Investment Banking: Past, Present, and Future.
^ Rachel Sanderson (October 22, 2010). "UniCredit municipal deal nullified". The Financial Times. Retrieved October 23, 2010. 
^ Risk Management Consulting | J.P. Morgan
^ J.P. Morgan | Operations - internships and graduate roles
^ J.P. Morgan | Business areas - Finance
^ Barclays Risk Loan http://www.barcap.com/client-offering/investment-banking.html
^ Goldman Sachs | Prime Brokerage - Risk Management and Financing
^ Goldman Sachs | Our Divisions – Finance
^ Merchant Banking: Past and Present
^ ABA Securities Association
^ Investment banking trade associations join forces in Europe. Finextra.
^ History – About – AFME (Association for Financial Markets in Europe)
^ a b c d International Financial Services London. (2010). BANKING City Business Series[permanent dead link]
^ (Sept 15, 2012). Dream turns to nightmare. The Economist.
^ Rickards, James (2012). "Repeal of Glass-Steagall Caused the Financial Crisis". U.S. News & World Report. Retrieved 1 April 2014. In fact, the financial crisis might not have happened at all but for the 1999 repeal of the Glass–Steagall law that separated commercial and investment banking for seven decades. 
^ "League Tables". Financial Times. Archived from the original on February 21, 2017. Retrieved 21 February 2017. 
^ "Company exchange symbol (ticker)". Investing.com. Retrieved 14 March 2017. 
^ [1] statista Retrieved October 17, 2017
^ The End of Wall Street. Wall Street Journal.
^ Erin Nothwehrm "Emergency Economic Stabilization Act of 2008" University of Iowa (December 2008). Retrieved June 1, 2012
^ "The true cost of the bank bailout" PBS/WNET "Need to Know" (September 3, 2010). Retrieved March 7, 2011
^ Samuel Sherraden, "Banks use TARP funds to boost lending – NOT!" The Washington Note (July 20, 2009). Retrieved March 7, 2011
^ "Fed May Keep Rates Low as Tight Credit Impedes Small Businesses" Bloomberg Businessweek (April 26, 2010). Retrieved March 7, 2011
^ Jagger, Suzy (January 18, 2016). "End of the Wall Street investment bank". The Times. London. Retrieved March 7, 2011. 
^ a b c Matt Taibbi, "The Great American Bubble Machine" Rolling Stone magazine (April 5, 2010). Retrieved March 7, 2011
^ Edward Niedermeyer, "TARP Oversight Report: Bailout Goals Conflict, Moral Hazard Alive And Well" (January 13, 2011). Retrieved March 7, 2011
^ Karen Mracek and Thomas Beaumont, "Goldman reveals where bailout cash went" The Des Moines Register (July 26, 2010). Retrieved March 7, 2011
^ Stephen Grocer, "Wall Street Compensation–’No Clear Rhyme or Reason’" The Wall Street Journal Blogs (July 30, 2009). Retrieved March 7, 2011
^ "Goldman Sachs: The Cuomo Report’s Bonus Breakdown" The Wall Street Journal Blogs (July 30, 2009). Retrieved March 7, 2011
^ "Morgan Stanley: The Cuomo Report’s Bonus Breakdown" The Wall Street Journal Blogs (July 30, 2009). Retrieved March 7, 2011
^ a b c Aaron Brown, review of "The Greed Merchants: How Investment Banks Played the Free Market Game" by Philip Augar, HarperCollins, April 2005. Published in Global Association of Risk Professionals, March/April 05 Issue 23
^ William D. Cohan, author of House of Cards: How Wall St. Bankers Broke Capitalism, speaking on BBC Radio 5 Live, Up All Night, 13 April 2011
^ Nocera, Joe (March 9, 2013). "Rigging the I.P.O. Game". New York Times. Retrieved 14 March 2013. 
^ Salmon, Felix (March 11, 2013). "Where banks really make money on IPOs". Reuters. Retrieved 14 March 2013. 
^ a b c Tom Randall and Jamie McGee, "Wall Street Executives Made $3 Billion Before Crisis (Update1)", Bloomberg, September 26, 2008


Further reading[edit]

Fleuriet Michel Investment Banking Explained: An Insider's Guide to the Industry McGraw-Hill New York NY 2008 ISBN 978-0-07-149733-6
DePamphilis, Donald (2008). Mergers, Acquisitions, and Other Restructuring Activities. New York: Elsevier, Academic Press. p. 740. ISBN 978-0-12-374012-0. 
Cartwright, Susan; Schoenberg, Richard (2006). "Thirty Years of Mergers and Acquisitions Research: Recent Advances and Future Opportunities". British Journal of Management. 17 (S1): S1–S5. doi:10.1111/j.1467-8551.2006.00475.x. 
Harwood, I. A. (2006). "Confidentiality constraints within mergers and acquisitions: gaining insights through a 'bubble' metaphor". British Journal of Management. 17 (4): 347–359. doi:10.1111/j.1467-8551.2005.00440.x. 
Rosenbaum, Joshua; Joshua Pearl (2009). Investment Banking: Valuation, Leveraged Buyouts, and Mergers & Acquisitions. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons. ISBN 0-470-44220-4. 
Straub, Thomas (2007). Reasons for Frequent Failure in Mergers and Acquisitions: A Comprehensive Analysis. Wiesbaden: Deutscher Universitätsverlag. ISBN 978-3-8350-0844-1. 
Scott, Andy (2008). China Briefing: Mergers and Acquisitions in China (2nd ed.). 







v
t
e


Corporate finance and investment banking



Capital structure



Convertible debt
Exchangeable debt
Mezzanine debt
Pari passu
Preferred equity
Second lien debt
Senior debt
Senior secured debt
Shareholder loan
Stock
Subordinated debt
Warrant








Transactions
(terms/conditions)




Equity offerings



At-the-market offering
Book building
Bookrunner
Corporate spin-off
Equity carve-out
Follow-on offering
Greenshoe

Reverse


Initial public offering
Private placement
Public offering
Rights issue
Seasoned equity offering
Secondary market offering
Underwriting





Mergers and
acquisitions



Buy side
Control premium
Demerger
Divestment
Drag-along right
Management due diligence
Managerial entrenchment
Minority discount
Pitch book
Pre-emption right
Proxy fight
Post-merger integration
Sell side
Shareholder rights plan
Special-purpose entity
Special situation
Squeeze out
Staggered board of directors
Stock swap
Super-majority amendment
Tag-along right
Takeover

Reverse


Tender offer





Leverage



Debt restructuring
Debtor-in-possession financing
Financial sponsor
Leveraged buyout
Leveraged recapitalization
High-yield debt
Private equity
Project finance








Valuation



Accretion/dilution analysis
Adjusted present value
Associate company
Business valuation
Conglomerate discount
Cost of capital

Weighted average


Discounted cash flow
Economic Value Added
Enterprise value
Fairness opinion
Financial modeling
Free cash flow

Free cash flow to equity


Market value added
Minority interest
Modigliani–Miller theorem
Net present value
Pure play
Real options
Residual income
Stock valuation
Sum-of-the-parts analysis
Tax shield
Terminal value
Valuation using multiples








 List of investment banks
 Outline of finance












v
t
e


Economic history of the Netherlands



General



Economy of the Netherlands from 1500–1700
Economic history of the Dutch Republic
Economic history of the Netherlands (1500–1815)
Financial history of the Dutch Republic
Dutch guilder
Amsterdam Entrepôt
Tulip mania
Dutch Financial Revolution
Dutch economic miracle
Whaling in the Netherlands
Diamond industry in the Dutch Republic
Sugar industry in the Dutch Republic
Shipbuilding industry in the Dutch Republic
Pulp and paper industry in the Dutch Republic

Hollander beater


History of the chocolate industry

Dutch process chocolate


Polder model
Dutch disease





Key institutions




Pre-1815



Amsterdam Stock Exchange
Amsterdam Wisselbank
Brabantsche Compagnie
Compagnie van Verre
Dutch East India Company
Dutch West India Company
New Netherland Company
Noordsche Compagnie





Post-1815



De Nederlandsche Bank
Dutch Caribbean Securities Exchange (DCSX)
Stichting Max Havelaar








Notable business and
financial innovators



Louis De Geer
Gerard Adriaan Heineken
Isaac Le Maire
Johan Palmstruch
Anton Philips
Gerard Philips
Nico Roozen
Coenraad Johannes van Houten
Frans van der Hoff









Authority control



NDL: 00573351











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Investment_banking&oldid=818548927"					Categories: Investment bankingBanking termsDutch inventions17th-century introductionsHidden categories: All articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from November 2017Articles with permanently dead external linksWikipedia articles needing reorganization from May 2014Wikipedia introduction cleanup from May 2014All pages needing cleanupArticles covered by WikiProject Wikify from May 2014All articles covered by WikiProject WikifyArticles with multiple maintenance issuesAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from February 2016All articles with minor POV problemsArticles with minor POV problems from June 2012