This article is about Internet Protocol Television. For public television broadcasting, see Iowa Public Television.
Internet Protocol television (IPTV) is the delivery of television content over Internet Protocol (IP) networks. This is in contrast to delivery through traditional terrestrial, satellite, and cable television formats. Unlike downloaded media, IPTV offers the ability to stream the source media continuously. As a result, a client media player can begin playing the content (such as a TV channel) almost immediately. This is known as streaming media.
Although IPTV uses the Internet protocol it is not limited to television streamed from the Internet, (Internet television). IPTV is widely deployed in subscriber-based telecommunications networks with high-speed access channels into end-user premises via set-top boxes or other customer-premises equipment. IPTV is also used for media delivery around corporate and private networks. IPTV in the telecommunications arena is notable for its ongoing standardisation process (e.g., European Telecommunications Standards Institute).
IPTV services may be classified into three main groups:

Live television and live media, with or without related interactivity;
Time-shifted media: e.g. catch-up TV (replays a TV show that was broadcast hours or days ago), start-over TV (replays the current TV show from its beginning);
Video on demand (VOD): browse and view items in a stored media catalogue.




Contents


1 Definition
2 History

2.1 Promise


3 Markets

3.1 Residential
3.2 Commercial and corporate


4 Architecture

4.1 Elements
4.2 Architecture of a video server network
4.3 Residential IPTV home networks
4.4 Telecomms IMS architecture


5 Protocols
6 Via satellite
7 Hybrid IPTV
8 Advantages

8.1 Economics
8.2 Interactivity
8.3 Video-on-demand
8.4 IPTV-based converged services


9 Limitations

9.1 Latency


10 Bandwidth requirements
11 Privacy implications
12 Vendors
13 Service bundling
14 Regulation
15 See also
16 References
17 External links



Definition[edit]
Historically, many different definitions of IPTV have appeared, including elementary streams over IP networks, transport streams over IP networks and a number of proprietary systems.
One official definition approved by the International Telecommunication Union focus group on IPTV (ITU-T FG IPTV) is:

IPTV is defined as multimedia services such as television/video/audio/text/graphics/data delivered over IP based networks managed to provide the required level of quality of service and experience, security, interactivity and reliability.[1]

Another definition of IPTV, relating to the telecommunications industry, is the one given by Alliance for Telecommunications Industry Solutions (ATIS) IPTV Exploratory Group on 2005:

IPTV is defined as the secure and reliable delivery to subscribers of entertainment video and related services. These services may include, for example, Live TV, Video On Demand (VOD) and Interactive TV (iTV). These services are delivered across an access agnostic, packet switched network that employs the IP protocol to transport the audio, video and control signals. In contrast to video over the public Internet, with IPTV deployments, network security and performance are tightly managed to ensure a superior entertainment experience, resulting in a compelling business environment for content providers, advertisers and customers alike.[2]

History[edit]
The term IPTV first appeared in 1995 with the founding of Precept Software by Judith Estrin and Bill Carrico. Precept developed an Internet video product named IP/TV. IP/TV was a multicast backbone (MBONE) compatible Windows and Unix-based application that transmitted single and multi-source audio and video traffic, ranging from low to DVD quality, using both unicast and IP multicast Real-time Transport Protocol (RTP) and Real time control protocol (RTCP). The software was written primarily by Steve Casner, Karl Auerbach, and Cha Chee Kuan. Precept was acquired by Cisco Systems in 1998.[3] Cisco retains the IP/TV trademark.
Internet radio company AudioNet started the first continuous live webcasts with content from WFAA-TV in January 1998 and KCTU-LP on 10 January 1998.[4]
Kingston Communications, a regional telecommunications operator in the UK, launched KIT (Kingston Interactive Television) the brainchild of Matt Child, an IPTV over digital subscriber line (DSL) broadband interactive TV service in September 1999 after conducting various TV and video on demand (VoD) trials. The operator added additional VoD service in October 2001 with Yes TV, a VoD content provider. Kingston was one of the first companies in the world to introduce IPTV and IP VoD over ADSL as a commercial service. The service became the reference for various changes to UK Government regulations and policy on IPTV. In 2006, the KIT service was discontinued, subscribers having declined from a peak of 10,000 to 4,000.[5][6]
In 1999, NBTel (now known as Bell Aliant) was the first to commercially deploy Internet protocol television over DSL in Canada[7][8] using the Alcatel 7350 DSLAM and middleware created by iMagic TV (owned by NBTel's parent company Bruncor[9]). The service was marketed under the brand VibeVision in New Brunswick, and later expanded into Nova Scotia in early 2000[10] after the formation of Aliant. iMagic TV was later sold to Alcatel.[11]
In 2002, Sasktel was the second in Canada to commercially deploy Internet Protocol (IP) video over DSL, using the Lucent Stinger DSL platform.[12]
In 2005, SureWest Communications was the first North American company to offer high-definition television (HDTV) channels over an IPTV service.[13]
In 2005, Bredbandsbolaget launched its IPTV service as the first service provider in Sweden. As of January 2009, they are not the biggest supplier any longer; TeliaSonera, who launched their service later now has more customers.[14]
In 2007, TPG became the first internet service provider in Australia to launch IPTV. Complementary to its ADSL2+ package this was, and still is,[when?] free of charge to customers on eligible plans and now[when?] offers over 45 local free to air channels and international channels.[citation needed] By 2010, iiNet and Telstra launched IPTV services in conjunction to internet plans but with extra fees.[15]
In 2008, PTCL (Pakistan Telecommunication Company Limited) launched IPTV under the brand name of PTCL Smart TV in Pakistan. This service is available in 150 major cities of the country offering 140 live channels and more than 500 titles for VOD with key features such as:

EPG (electronic programme guide)
Parental Control
Time-Shift Television
VOD (video on demand)

In 2010, CenturyLink – after acquiring Embarq (2009) and Qwest (2010) – entered five U.S. markets with an IPTV service called Prism.[16] This was after successful test marketing in Florida. During the 2014 Winter Olympics Shortest path bridging (IEEE 802.1aq) was used to deliver 36 IPTV HD Olympic channels.[citation needed]
In 2016, KCTV (Korean Central Television) introduced the Set-top box called "Manbang" (meaning ‘everywhere’ or ‘every direction’), claiming to provide video-on-demand services in North Korea via quasi-internet protocol television (IPTV). With "Manbang", viewers are able to watch five different TV channels in real-time, find information related to the leader’s activities and Juche ideology, and read articles from the newspaper Rodong Sinmun and the Korean Central News Agency (KCNA). According to KCTV, viewers can use the service not only in Pyongyang, but also in Sinuiju and Sariwon. Stating that the demands for the equipment are "particularly" high in Sinuiju, with several hundred users in the region.[17]
Promise[edit]
The technology was hindered by low broadband penetration and by the relatively high cost of installing wiring capable of transporting IPTV content reliably in the customer's home.[citation needed] However, residential IPTV was expected to grow[original research?] as broadband was available to more than 200 million households worldwide in 2005.[18]
In December 2009, the FCC began looking into using set-top boxes to make TVs with cable or similar services into network video players. FCC Media Bureau Chief Bill Lake had said earlier that TV and the Internet would soon be the same, but only 75 percent of homes had computers, while 99 percent had TV. A 2009 Nielsen survey found 99 percent of video viewing was done on TV.[19]
Markets[edit]
Residential[edit]
The number of global IPTV subscribers was expected to grow from 28 million in 2009 to 83 million in 2013. Europe and Asia are the leading territories in terms of the over-all number of subscribers. But in terms of service revenues, Europe and North America generate a larger share of global revenue, due to very low average revenue per user (ARPU) in China and India, the fastest growing (and ultimately, the biggest markets) is Asia. The global IPTV market revenues are forecast to grow from US$12 billion in 2009 to US$38 billion in 2013.[20]
Services also launched in Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Pakistan, Canada, Croatia, Lithuania, Moldova, Macedonia, Montenegro, Poland, Mongolia, Romania, Serbia, Slovenia,[21] the Netherlands,[22] Georgia, Greece, Denmark, Finland, Estonia, Czech Republic, Slovakia, Hungary,[23][24] Norway, Sweden, Iceland, Latvia, Turkey, Colombia, Chile and Uzbekistan.[25] The United Kingdom launched IPTV early and after a slow initial growth, in February 2009 BT announced that it had reached 398,000 subscribers to its BT Vision service.[26] Claro has launched their own IPTV service called "Claro TV". This service is available in several countries in which they operate, such as Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua. IPTV is just beginning to grow in Central and Eastern Europe and Latin America, and now it is growing in South Asian countries such as Sri Lanka, Pakistan and India.[27] but significant plans exist in countries such as Russia. Kazakhstan introduced[28] its own IPTV services by the national provider Kazakhtelecom JSC[29] and content integrator Alacast under the "iD TV" brand in two major cities Astana and Almaty in 2009 and is about to go nationwide starting 2010.[needs update] Australian ISP iiNet launched Australia's first IPTV with fetchtv.[30]
The first IPTV service to launch on the Chinese mainland sells under the "BesTV" brand and is currently available in the cities of Shanghai and Harbin.[31] In India, IPTV was launched by Airtel and the government service provider MTNL and BSNL through tie up with AKSH and is available in most of the major cities of the country. Meanwhile, UF Group which is the franchise owner for UFO movies in Southern India plans to offer multiple host of services such as customer's movies on demand, shopping online, video conferencing, media player, e-learning on their single IPTV set top box branded as Emagine.[32]
In Sri Lanka, IPTV was launched by Sri Lanka Telecom (operated by SLT VisionCom) in 2008, under the brand name of PEO TV. This service is available in whole country.
In Pakistan, IPTV was launched by PTCL in 2008, under the brand name of PTCL Smart TV. This service is available in 150 major cities of the country.[citation needed]
In the Philippines, PLDT offers Cignal IPTV services as an add-on in certain ADSL and fiber optic plans.[33][34]
In Malaysia, various companies have attempted to launch IPTV services since 2005. Failed PayTV provider MiTV attempted to use an IPTV-over-UHF service but the service failed to take off. Hypp.TV was supposed to use an IPTV-based system, but not true IPTV as it does not provide a set-top box and requires users to view channels using a computer. True IPTV providers available in the country at the moment are Fine TV and DETV. In Q2 2010, Telekom Malaysia launched IPTV services through their fibre to the home product UniFi in select areas. In April 2010, Astro began testing IPTV services on TIME dotCom Berhad's high-speed fibre to the home optical fibre network. In December 2010, Astro began trials with customers in high-rise condominium buildings around the Mont Kiara area. In April 2011, Astro commercially launched its IPTV services under the tag line "The One and Only Line You'll Ever Need", a triple play offering in conjunction with TIME dotCom Berhad that provides all the Astro programming via IPTV, together with voice telephone services and broadband Internet access all through the same fibre optic connection into the customer's home.
In Turkey, TTNET launched IPTV services under the name IPtivibu in 2010. It was available in pilot areas in the cities of Istanbul, İzmir and Ankara. As of 2011, IPTV service is launched as a large-scale commercial service and widely available across the country under the trademark "Tivibu EV".[35][36] Superonline plans to provide IPTV under the different name "WebTV" in 2011. Türk Telekom started building the fibre optic substructure for IPTV in late 2007.
Commercial and corporate[edit]
IPTV has been widely used since around 2002 to distribute television and audio-visual (AV) media around businesses and commercial sites, whether as live TV channels or Video on Demand (VOD). Examples of types of commercial users include airports, schools, offices, hotels, and sports stadiums, to name just a few.
Architecture[edit]




A simplified network diagram for IPTV


Elements[edit]

IPTV head-end: where live TV channels and AV sources are encoded, encrypted and delivered in the form of IP multicast streams.
Video on Demand (VOD) platform: where on-demand video assets are stored and served as IP unicast streams when a user makes a request. The VOD platform may sometimes be located with, and considered part of, the IPTV headend.
Interactive portal: allows the user to navigate within the different IPTV services, such as the VOD catalogue.
Delivery network: the packet switched network that carries IP packets (unicast and multicast).
Endpoints: User equipment that can request, decode and deliver IPTV streams for display to the user. This can include computers and mobile devices as well as set-top boxes.
Home TV gateway: the piece of equipment at a residential IPTV user's home that terminates the access link from the delivery network.
User set-top box: the piece of endpoint equipment that decodes and decrypts TV and VOD streams for display on the TV screen.

Architecture of a video server network[edit]
Depending on the network architecture of the service provider, there are two main types of video server architecture that can be considered for IPTV deployment: centralised and distributed.
The centralised architecture model is a relatively simple and easy to manage solution. Because all media content is stored in centralised servers, it does not require a comprehensive content distribution system. Centralised architecture is generally good for a network that provides relatively small VOD service deployment, has adequate core and edge bandwidth and has an efficient content delivery network (CDN).
Distributed architecture is just as scalable as the centralised model, however it has bandwidth usage advantages and inherent system management features that are essential for managing a larger server network. Operators who plan to deploy a relatively large system should therefore consider implementing a distributed architecture model right from the start. Distributed architecture requires intelligent and sophisticated content distribution technologies to augment effective delivery of multimedia contents over service provider's network.[37]
Residential IPTV home networks[edit]
In many cases, the residential gateway that provides connectivity with the Internet access network is not located close to the IPTV set-top box. This scenario becomes very common as service providers start to offer service packages with multiple set-top boxes per subscriber.
Networking technologies that take advantage of existing home wiring (such as power lines,[38][39] phone lines or coaxial cables[40][41]) or of wireless hardware have become common solutions for this problem, although fragmentation in the wired home networking market has limited somewhat the growth in this market.[42][43]
In December 2008, ITU-T adopted Recommendation G.hn (also known as G.9960), which is a next-generation home networking standard that specifies a common PHY/MAC that can operate over any home wiring (power lines, phone lines or coaxial cables).[44] During 2012 IEC will adopt a prenorm for POF networking at Gigabit speed. This pre standard will specify a PHY that operates at an adaptable bit rate between 100 Mbit/s and 1 Gbit/s depending on the link power budget.
Groups such as the Multimedia over Coax Alliance, HomePlug Powerline Alliance, Home Phoneline Networking Alliance, and Quasar Alliance (Plastic Optical Fibre)[45] each advocate their own technologies.
Telecomms IMS architecture[edit]
There is a growing standardisation effort on the use of the 3GPP IP Multimedia Subsystem (IMS) as an architecture for supporting IPTV services in telecomms carriers networks. Both ITU-T and ETSI are working on so-called "IMS-based IPTV" standards (see e.g. ETSI TS 182 027[46]). Carriers will be able to offer both voice and IPTV services over the same core infrastructure and the implementation of services combining conventional TV services with telephony features (e.g. caller ID on the TV screen) will become straightforward.[47] The MultiService Forum recently conducted interoperability of IMS-based IPTV solutions during its GMI event in 2008.[48]
Protocols[edit]
IPTV covers both live TV (multicast) as well as stored video-on-demand/VoD (unicast). Playback requires a broadband device connected to either a fixed or wireless IP network in the form of either a standalone personal computer or limited embedded OS device such as a smartphone, touch screen tablet, game console, connected TV or set-top box. Video compression is provided by either a H.263 or H.264 derived codec, audio is compressed via a MDCT based codec and then encapsulated in either an MPEG transport stream or RTP packets or Flash Video packets for live or VoD streaming. IP multicasting allows for live data to be sent to multiple receivers using a single multicast group address. H.264/MPEG-4 AVC is commonly used for internet streaming over higher bit rate standards such as H.261 and H.263 which were more designed for ISDN video conferencing. H.262/MPEG-1/2 is generally not used as the bandwidth required would quite easily saturate a network which is why they are only used in single link broadcast or storage applications.
In standards-based IPTV systems, the primary underlying protocols used are:

Service provider-based streaming:

IGMP for subscribing to a live multicast stream (TV channel) and for changing from one live multicast stream to another (TV channel change). IP multicast operates within LANs (including VLANs) and across WANs also. IP multicast is usually routed in the network core by Protocol Independent Multicast (PIM), setting up correct distribution of multicast streams (TV channels) from their source all the way to the customers who wants to view them, duplicating received packets as needed. On-demand content uses a negotiated unicast connection. Real-time Transport Protocol (RTP) over User Datagram Protocol (UDP) or the lower overhead H.222 transport stream over Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) are generally the preferred methods of encapsulation.


Web-based unicast only live and VoD streaming:

Adobe Flash Player prefers RTMP over TCP with setup and control via either AMF or XML or JSON transactions.
Apple iOS uses HLS adaptive bitrate streaming over HTTP with setup and control via an embedded M3U playlist file.
Microsoft Silverlight uses smooth streaming (adaptive bitrate streaming) over HTTP.


Web-based multicast live and unicast VoD streaming:

The Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) recommends RTP over UDP or TCP transports with setup and control using RTSP over TCP.


Connected TVs, game consoles, set-top boxes and network personal video recorders:

local network content uses UPnP AV for unicast via HTTP over TCP or for multicast live RTP over UDP.
Web-based content is provided through either inline Web plug-ins or a television broadcast-based application that uses a middleware language such as MHEG-5 that triggers an event such as loading an inline Web browser using an Adobe Flash Player plug-in.



A telecommunications company IPTV service is usually delivered over an investment-heavy walled garden network.
Local IPTV, as used by businesses for audio visual AV distribution on their company networks is typically based on a mixture of:

Conventional TV reception equipment and IPTV encoders
IPTV gateways that take broadcast MPEG channels and IP wrap them to create multicast streams.

Via satellite[edit]
Although IPTV and conventional satellite TV distribution have been seen as complementary technologies, they are likely to be increasingly used together in hybrid IPTV networks that deliver the highest levels of performance and reliability. IPTV is largely neutral to the transmission medium, and IP traffic is already routinely carried by satellite for Internet backbone trunking and corporate VSAT networks.[49] The use of satellite to carry IP is fundamental to overcoming the greatest shortcoming of IPTV over terrestrial cables – the speed/bandwidth of the connection, as well as availability.
The copper twisted pair cabling that forms the last mile of the telephone and broadband network in many countries is not able to provide a sizeable proportion of the population with an IPTV service that matches even existing terrestrial or satellite digital TV distribution. For a competitive multi-channel TV service, a connection speed of 20 Mbit/s is likely to be required, but unavailable to most potential customers.[50] The increasing popularity of high-definition television (with twice the data rate of SD video) increases connection speed requirements, or limits IPTV service quality and connection eligibility even further.
However, satellites are capable of delivering in excess of 100 Gbit/s via multi-spot beam technologies, making satellite a clear emerging technology for implementing IPTV networks. Satellite distribution can be included in an IPTV network architecture in several ways. The simplest to implement is an IPTV-direct to home (DTH) architecture, in which hybrid DVB-broadband set-top boxes in subscriber homes integrate satellite and IP reception to give near-infinite bandwidth with return channel capabilities. In such a system, many live TV channels may be multicast via satellite (IP-encapsulated or as conventional DVB digital TV) with stored video-on-demand transmission via the broadband connection. Arqiva’s Satellite Media Solutions Division suggests “IPTV works best in a hybrid format. For example, you would use broadband to receive some content and satellite to receive other, such as live channels”.[51]
Hybrid IPTV[edit]






This section's factual accuracy may be compromised due to out-of-date information. Please update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information. (July 2011)



Hybrid IPTV refers to the combination of traditional broadcast TV services and video delivered over either managed IP networks or the public Internet. It is an increasing trend in both the consumer and pay TV [operator] markets.[52][53][54]
Hybrid IPTV has grown in popularity in recent years[when?] as a result of two major drivers. Since the emergence of online video aggregation sites, like YouTube and Vimeo in the mid-2000s, traditional pay TV operators have come under increasing pressure to provide their subscribers with a means of viewing Internet-based video [both professional and user-generated] on their televisions. At the same time, specialist IP-based operators [often telecommunications providers] have looked for ways to offer analogue and digital terrestrial services to their operations, without adding either additional cost or complexity to their transmission operations. Bandwidth is a valuable asset for operators, so many have looked for alternative ways to deliver these new services without investing in additional network infrastructures.
A hybrid set-top allows content from a range of sources, including terrestrial broadcast, satellite, and cable, to be brought together with video delivered over the Internet via an Ethernet connection on the device. This enables television viewers to access a greater variety of content on their TV sets, without the need for a separate box for each service.
Hybrid IPTV set-top boxes also enable users to access a range of advanced interactive services, such as VOD / catch-up TV, as well as Internet applications, including video telephony, surveillance, gaming, shopping, e-government accessed via a television set.
From a pay-TV operator’s perspective, a hybrid IPTV set-top box gives them greater long-term flexibility by enabling them to deploy new services and applications as and when consumers require, most often without the need to upgrade equipment or for a technician to visit and reconfigure or swap out the device. This reduces the cost of launching new services, increases speed to market and limits disruption for consumers.[55]
The Hybrid Broadcast Broadband TV (HbbTV) consortium of industry companies is currently[when?] promoting and establishing an open European standard for hybrid set-top boxes for the reception of broadcast and broadband digital TV and multimedia applications with a single user interface.[56] These trends led to the development of Hybrid Broadcast Broadband TV set-top boxes that included both a broadcast tuner and an Internet connection – usually an Ethernet port. The first commercially available hybrid IPTV set-top box was developed by Advanced Digital Broadcast, a developer of digital television hardware and software, in 2005. The platform was developed for Spanish pay TV operator Telefonica,[57] and used as part of its Movistar TV service, launched to subscribers at the end of 2005.
An alternative approach is the IPTV version of the Headend in the Sky cable TV solution. Here, multiple TV channels are distributed via satellite to the ISP or IPTV provider’s point of presence (POP) for IP-encapsulated distribution to individual subscribers as required by each subscriber.
This can provide a huge selection of channels to subscribers without overburdening Internet trunking to the POP, and enables an IPTV service to be offered to small or remote operators outside the reach of terrestrial high speed broadband connection. An example is a network combining fibre and satellite distribution via an SES New Skies satellite of 95 channels to Latin America and the Caribbean, operated by IPTV Americas.[58]
While the future development of IPTV probably lies with a number of coexisting architectures and implementations, it is clear[according to whom?] that broadcasting of high bandwidth applications such as IPTV is accomplished more efficiently and cost-effectively using satellite[59] and it is predicted that the majority of global IPTV growth will be fuelled by hybrid networks.[60]
Advantages[edit]
The Internet protocol-based platform offers significant advantages, including the ability to integrate television with other IP-based services like high speed Internet access and VoIP.
A switched IP network also allows for the delivery of significantly more content and functionality. In a typical TV or satellite network, using broadcast video technology, all the content constantly flows downstream to each customer, and the customer switches the content at the set-top box. The customer can select from as many choices as the telecomms, cable or satellite company can stuff into the “pipe” flowing into the home. A switched IP network works differently. Content remains in the network, and only the content the customer selects is sent into the customer’s home. That frees up bandwidth, and the customer’s choice is less restricted by the size of the “pipe” into the home. This also implies that the customer's privacy could be compromised to a greater extent than is possible with traditional TV or satellite networks. It may also provide a means to hack into, or at least disrupt (see Denial of service) the private network.
Economics[edit]
The cable industry's expenditures of approximately $1 billion per year are based on network updates to accommodate higher data speeds. Most operators use 2–3 channels to support maximum data speeds of 50 Mbit/s to 100 Mbit/s. However, because video streams require a high bit rate for much longer periods of time, the expenditures to support high amounts of video traffic will be much greater. This phenomenon is called persistency. Data persistency is routinely 5% while video persistency can easily reach 50%. As video traffic continues to grow, this means that significantly more CMTS downstream channels will be required to carry this video content. Based on today's market, it is likely that industry expenditures for CMTS expansion could exceed $2 billion a year, virtually all of that expenditure being driven by video traffic. Adoption of IPTV for carrying the majority of this traffic could save the industry approximately 75% of this capital expenditure.[61]
Interactivity[edit]
An IP-based platform also allows significant opportunities to make the TV viewing experience more interactive and personalised. The supplier may, for example, include an interactive programme guide that allows viewers to search for content by title or actor’s name, or a picture-in-picture functionality that allows them to “channel surf” without leaving the programme they’re watching. Viewers may be able to look up a player’s stats while watching a sports game, or control the camera angle. They also may be able to access photos or music from their PC on their television, use a wireless phone to schedule a recording of their favourite show, or even adjust parental controls so their child can watch a documentary for a school report, while they’re away from home.
In order that there can take place an interaction between the receiver and the transmitter, a feedback channel is needed. Due to this, terrestrial, satellite, and cable networks for television do not allow interactivity. However, interactivity with those networks can be possible by combining TV networks with data networks such as the Internet or a mobile communication network.
Video-on-demand[edit]
IPTV technology is bringing video on demand (VoD) to television,[62] which permits a customer to browse an online programme or film catalogue, to watch trailers and to then select a selected recording. The playout of the selected item starts nearly instantaneously on the customer's TV or PC.
Technically, when the customer selects the movie, a point-to-point unicast connection is set up between the customer's decoder (set-top box or PC) and the delivering streaming server. The signalling for the trick play functionality (pause, slow-motion, wind/rewind etc.) is assured by RTSP (Real Time Streaming Protocol).
The most common codecs used for VoD are MPEG-2, MPEG-4 and VC-1.
In an attempt to avoid content piracy, the VoD content is usually encrypted. Whilst encryption of satellite and cable TV broadcasts is an old practice, with IPTV technology it can effectively be thought of as a form of Digital rights management. A film that is chosen, for example, may be playable for 24 hours following payment, after which time it becomes unavailable.
IPTV-based converged services[edit]
Another advantage is the opportunity for integration and convergence. This opportunity is amplified when using IMS-based solutions.[63] Converged services implies interaction of existing services in a seamless manner to create new value added services. One example is on-screen Caller ID, getting Caller ID on a TV and the ability to handle it (send it to voice mail, etc.). IP-based services will help to enable efforts to provide consumers anytime-anywhere access to content over their televisions, PCs and cell phones, and to integrate services and content to tie them together. Within businesses and institutions, IPTV eliminates the need to run a parallel infrastructure to deliver live and stored video services.
Limitations[edit]
IPTV is sensitive to packet loss and delays if the streamed data is unreliable. IPTV has strict minimum speed requirements in order to facilitate the right number of frames per second to deliver moving pictures. This means that the limited connection speed and bandwidth available for a large IPTV customer base can reduce the service quality delivered.
Although a few countries have very high-speed broadband-enabled populations, such as South Korea with 6 million homes benefiting from a minimum connection speed of 100 Mbit/s, in other countries (such as the UK) legacy networks struggle to provide 3–5 Mbit/s[64][needs update] and so simultaneous provision to the home of TV channels, VOIP and Internet access may not be viable. The last-mile delivery for IPTV usually has a bandwidth restriction that only allows a small number of simultaneous TV channel streams – typically from one to three – to be delivered.[65]
Streaming IPTV across wireless links within the home has proved troublesome; not due to bandwidth limitations as many[who?] assume, but due to issues with multipath and reflections of the RF signal carrying the IP data packets. An IPTV stream is sensitive to packets arriving at the right time and in the right order. Improvements in wireless technology are now[when?] starting to provide equipment to solve the problem.[66]
Due to the limitations of wireless, most IPTV service providers today use wired home networking technologies instead of wireless technologies like IEEE 802.11. Service providers such as AT&T (which makes extensive use of wireline home networking as part of its AT&T U-verse IPTV service) have expressed support for the work done in this direction by ITU-T, which has adopted Recommendation G.hn (also known as G.9960), which is a next-generation home networking standard that specifies a common PHY/MAC that can operate over any home wiring (power lines, phone lines or coaxial cables).[67][68]
Latency[edit]
The latency inherent in the use of satellite Internet is often held up as reason why satellites cannot be successfully used for IPTV. In practice, however, latency is not an important factor for IPTV, since it is a service that does not require real-time transmission, as is the case with telephony or videoconferencing services.
It is the latency of response to requests to change channel, display an EPG, etc. that most affects customers’ perceived quality of service, and these problems affect satellite IPTV no more than terrestrial IPTV. Command latency problems, faced by terrestrial IPTV networks with insufficient bandwidth as their customer base grows, may be solved by the high capacity of satellite distribution.
Satellite distribution does suffer from latency – the time for the signal to travel up from the hub to the satellite and back down to the user is around 0.25 seconds, and cannot be reduced. However, the effects of this delay are mitigated in real-life systems using data compression, TCP-acceleration, and HTTP pre-fetching.[69]
Satellite latency can be detrimental to especially time-sensitive applications such as on-line gaming (although it only seriously affects the likes of first-person shooters while many MMOGs can operate well over satellite Internet[70]), but IPTV is typically a simplex operation (one-way transmission) and latency is not a critical factor for video transmission.
Existing video transmission systems of both analogue and digital formats already introduce known quantifiable delays. Existing DVB TV channels that simulcast by both terrestrial and satellite transmissions experience the same 0.25-second delay difference between the two services with no detrimental effect, and it goes unnoticed by viewers.
Bandwidth requirements[edit]






This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (July 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)







Bandwidth capacity for simultaneously two HDTV streams, two SD streams, additional to HSD and voice


Digital video is a combination of sequence of digital images, and they are made up of pixels or picture elements. Each pixel has two values, which are luminance and chrominance. Luminance is representing intensity of the pixel; chrominance represents the colour of the pixel. Three bytes would be used to represent the colour of the high quality image for a true colour technique. A sequence of images is creating the digital video, in that case, images are called as frames.
Movies use 24 frames per second; however, the rate of the frames can change according to territories' electrical systems so that there are different kinds of frame rates, for instance, North America is using approximately 30 frames per second where the Europe television frame rate is 25 frames per second. Each digital video has dimensions width and height; when referred to analogue television, the dimension for SDTV is 720×480 pixels, on the other hand, numerous HDTV requires 1920×1080 pixels. Moreover, whilst for SDTV, two bytes (16 bits) is enough to create the colour depth, HDTV requires three bytes (24 bits) to create the colour depth.[citation needed]
Thereby, with a rate of 30 frames/second, the uncompressed data rate for SDTV becomes 30×720×480×16,[vague] in other words, 147,456,000 bits per second. Moreover, for HDTV, at the same frame rate, uncompressed date rate becomes 30×1920×1080×24 or 1,492,992,000 bits per second. With that simple calculation, it is obvious that without using a lossy compression method a service provider’s service delivery to the subscribers is limited.
There is no absolute answer for the bandwidth requirement for the IPTV service because the bandwidth requirement is increasing due to the devices inside the household. Thus, currently compressed HDTV content can be delivered at a data rate between 8 and 10 Mbit/s, but if the home of the consumer equipped with several HDTV outputs, this rate will be multiplied respectively.
The high-speed data transfer will increase the needed bandwidth for the viewer, at least 2 Mbit/s is needed to use web-based applications on the computer. Additionally to that, 64 kbit/s is required to use landline telephone for the property. In minimal usage, to receive an IPTV triple-play service requires 13 Mbit/s to process in a household.
Privacy implications[edit]
Due to limitations in bandwidth, an IPTV channel is delivered to the user one at a time, as opposed to the traditional multiplexed delivery. Changing a channel requires requesting the head-end server to provide a different broadcast stream, much like VOD (For VOD the stream is delivered using unicast, for the normal TV signal multicast is used). This could enable the service provider to accurately track each and every programme watched and the duration of watching for each viewer; broadcasters and advertisers could then understand their audience and programming better with accurate data and targeted advertising.
In conjunction with regulatory differences between IPTV and cable TV, this tracking could pose a threat to privacy according to critics.[71] For IP multicast scenarios, since a particular multicast group (TV channel) needs to be requested before it can be viewed, the same privacy concerns apply.
Vendors[edit]
A small number of companies supply most current IPTV systems. Some, such as Movistar TV, were formed by telecoms operators themselves, to minimise external costs, a tactic also used by PCCW of Hong Kong. Some major telecoms vendors are also active in this space, notably Alcatel-Lucent (sometimes working with Movistar TV), Sri Lanka Telecom, Ericsson (notably since acquiring Tandberg Television), NEC, Accenture (Accenture Video Solution), Thomson, Huawei, and ZTE, as are some IT houses, led by Microsoft. California-based UTStarcom, Inc., Tennessee-based Worley Consulting, Tokyo-based The New Media Group, Malaysian-based Select-TV and Oslo/Norway-based SnapTV also offer end-to-end networking infrastructure for IPTV-based services, and Hong Kong-based BNS Ltd. provides turnkey open platform IPTV technology solutions. Global sales of IPTV systems exceeded 2 billion USD in 2007.
Hospitality IPTV Ltd, having established many closed network IPTV systems, expanded in 2013 to OTT delivery platforms for markets in New Zealand, Australia and Asia Pacific region.[citation needed]
Google Fiber offers an IPTV service in various US cities which includes up to 1 Gigabit-speed internet and over 290 channels depending of package via the fibre optic network being built out in Kansas City Kansas and Kansas City Missouri.
Many of these IPTV solution vendors participated in the biennial Global MSF Interoperability 2008 (GMI) event which was coordinated by the MultiService Forum (MSF) at five sites worldwide from 20 to 31 October 2008. Test equipment vendors including Netrounds, Codenomicon, Empirix, Ixia, Mu Dynamics and Spirent joined solution vendors such as the companies listed above in one of the largest IPTV proving grounds ever deployed.
Service bundling[edit]
For residential users, IPTV is often provided in conjunction with video on demand and may be bundled with Internet services such as Internet access and Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP) telecommunications services. Commercial bundling of IPTV, VoIP and Internet access is sometimes referred to in marketing as triple play service. When these three are offered with cellular service, the combined service may be referred to as quadruple play.
Regulation[edit]
Historically, broadcast television has been regulated differently from telecommunications. As IPTV allows TV and VoD to be transmitted over IP networks, new regulatory issues arise.[72] Professor Eli M. Noam highlights in his report "TV or Not TV: Three Screens, One Regulation?" some of the key challenges with sector specific regulation that is becoming obsolete due to convergence in this field.[73]
See also[edit]

Comparison between OTT and IPTV
Comparison of streaming media systems
Comparison of video services
Content delivery network
Internet television
List of music streaming services
List of streaming media systems
P2PTV
Protection of Broadcasts and Broadcasting Organizations Treaty
Software as a service
Streaming media
TV gateway
Web television
Webcast

References[edit]


^ "IPTV Standardization on Track Say Industry Experts". ITU-T Newslog. 27 October 2006. Retrieved 17 January 2012. 
^ "ATIS IPTV Exploratory Group Report and Recommendation to the TOPS Council" (PDF). Alliance for Telecommunications Industry Solutions. July 2006. Retrieved 17 January 2012. 
^ Cisco – Summary of Acquisitions Archived 21 August 2007 at the Wayback Machine.
^ Hart, Timothy (15 February 1998). "KCTU-TV earns a place in television, Internet history". 
^ https://www.theregister.co.uk/2006/02/27/kingston_iptv/
^ KIT Kingston Interactive Television. Kitv.co.uk. Retrieved on 12 March 2014.
^ Integrated Design Tools Inc Archived 24 June 2016 at the Wayback Machine.
^ NBTel leading the way in North America with Aliant's new interactive information and entertainment television service – VibeVision Archived 22 January 2009 at the Wayback Machine.
^ Bruncor launches iMagic TV
^ Aliant Telecom Launches New Television Technology in Halifax Archived 17 June 2008 at the Wayback Machine.
^ "Alcatel Acquires iMagic TV". ITBusiness.ca. 2003. 
^ "Lucent Technologies Introduces First Commercial IP Video Over DSL Solution, Business Net". Business Wire. 10 April 2002. Archived from the original on 6 June 2013. Retrieved 4 February 2008. 
^ https://investor.aminocom.com/story-EMQ1314.  Missing or empty |title= (help)
^ (in Northern Sami)"Bredbandsbolaget is mobilizing for IP TV"
^ Broadband Providers Plans
^ "CenturyLink Quietly Launches Prism IPTV Product". Telecompetitor.com. Retrieved 15 June 2013. 
^ Ji, Dagyum (18 August 2016). "Netflix style video-on-demand comes to North Korea, state TV shows". NK News. Retrieved 25 August 2016. 
^ Gartner – 2007 Press releases
^ Eggerton, John (14 December 2009). "Broadcasters Squeezed by Convergence Push". Broadcasting & Cable. Archived from the original on 11 January 2012. Retrieved 17 December 2009. 
^ IPTV Global Forecast (2008–2013) International Television Expert Group
^ BHTelecom.ba
^ KPN.com
^ T-Home.hu Archived 17 September 2009 at the Wayback Machine.
^ InviTV.hu[permanent dead link]
^ uzonline.uz
^ BT Vision passes 398k subs in 4Q08
^ "Salad days," Chris Dziadul, Broadband TV News, 2 May 2008
^ Delivering IPTV System to Kazakhtelecom Article from the IPTV industrial portal
^ iD TV services for broadband subscribers in Kazakhstan Archived 8 October 2011 at the Wayback Machine. Kazakhtelecom JSC – iD TV service for Home users
^ iiNet's Age of Terabyte Archived 10 October 2010 at the Wayback Machine. PDF from iiNet press release 18 August 2010
^ "BabyFirst launches on BesTV in China," Indiantelevision.com Team, 2 May 2008.
^ "UF Group to launch E box for movies on demand, online shopping, e-learning " Netindian.in, 1 February 2012.
^ "PLDT HOME leads fixed broadband market, adds six times more subscribers than competition". PLDT Incorporated. 25 May 2016. Retrieved 17 February 2016. 
^ [1]
^ "Turkey's iptv, Tivibu Ev is on air" ntvmsnbc.com, 23 February 2011.
^ "Tivibu Ev's Official Homepage" tivibu.com/ev, 13 March 2011. Archived 24 February 2011 at the Wayback Machine.
^ Distributed Architecture vsCentralized Architecture for IP VoD, Annual Review of Communications, Vol. 58
^ HomePlug Alliance keeps plugging away at powerline communications
^ IPTV distribution using DS2 powerline networks Archived 11 July 2009 at the Wayback Machine.
^ "20 Million MoCA Nodes Have Been Shipped". Reuters. 17 February 2009. 
^ LightReading: Why AT&T Likes HomePNA
^ Could MoCA/HomePlug win in-home networking wars?
^ HomeGrid Forum Blog – Why do we need a unified standard at all? Archived 22 June 2009 at the Wayback Machine.
^ New global standard for fully networked home Archived 21 February 2009 at the Wayback Machine., ITU-T Press Release
^ Quasar POF alliance
^ ETSI TS 182 027
^ IMS-based IPTV services – architecture and implementation
^ MSforum.org
^ Berlocher, Greg and Freyer, Dan. "IP And Satellite: Communications Worlds Merging" Via Satellite January 2009 p 24–28
^ Taga, Karim. "Hybrid delivery of content for IPTV" InterComms Issue 11 August 2008 p 13–14
^ Holmes, Mark. "Broadcast 2.0: The Changing Scene In Europe" Via Satellite September 2008 p 20–25
^ 19.46 Europe/London (14 October 2009). "UK and France lead with hybrid IPTV set-tops". Broadbandtvnews.com. Retrieved 15 June 2013. 
^ [2] Archived 2 April 2010 at the Wayback Machine.
^ "HYBRID Set Top Boxes for IPTV | Digital Media Strategy by Jeff Vinson". Jviptv.wordpress.com. 25 June 2009. Retrieved 15 June 2013. 
^ [3] Archived 5 April 2010 at the Wayback Machine.
^ "New European initiative merges television with the power of the Internet" (PDF) (Press release). HbbTV Consortium. 27 August 2009. Archived from the original (PDF) on 7 October 2009. 
^ "ADB Delivers World's First Hybrid, Single-Chip, Advanced Video Coding, High Definition IPTV Set-Top Boxes To TELEFÓNICA". Digitaltvnews.net. Archived from the original on 27 February 2012. Retrieved 15 June 2013. 
^ "IPTV Americas Launches First IPTV Satellite Distribution Platform for Latin America and The Caribbean via SES NEW SKIES' NSS-806" (Press release). IPTV Americas. 13 January 2009. Archived from the original on 16 October 2011. 
^ International Datacasting Corporation "Why IP Over Satellite?". Accessed 18 January 2009. Company factsheet Archived 19 November 2008 at the Wayback Machine.
^ "Future Looks Bright For IPTV" Satellite Today. Retrieved 18 January 2009.
^ "The Economics of IPTV". 2 February 2015. Retrieved 23 July 2016. 
^ Broadband Users Control What They Watch and When Archived 20 April 2010 at the Wayback Machine.
^ Session and Media Signalling for IPTV via IMS Archived 25 June 2008 at the Wayback Machine.
^ Bulkley, Kate. "IPTV’s Eastern Promise" Digital TV Europe October 2008 p 48
^ Brown, Peter J. "Super Headends And High Expectations" Via Satellite April 2006 p 18–30
^ Market Wire "ZyXEL Announces Industry's First ADSL2/2+ 802.11n Gateway and New IPTV Product Offerings" June 2008
^ HomePNA and HomeGrid Sign Liaison Agreement[dead link], Groups Work to Promote New ITU G.hn Global Wired Home Networking Standard
^ AT&T Participating in G.hn Standard Development
^ Newtec Productions NV "TP210 Sat3Play Broadband Terminal" (Version R2/06.2010). Satellite Internet Modem factsheet Archived 17 November 2010 at the Wayback Machine.
^ Tom’s Hardware "How much latency is too much for Online Gaming?". Accessed 23 January 2009. Internet Forum Archived 19 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine.
^ IPTV privacy risks Archived 5 January 2010 at the Wayback Machine.
^ "Ericsson report on need for regulation" (PDF).  (217 KB)
^ TV or Not TV


External links[edit]

Ars Technica: An Introduction to IPTV







v
t
e


Cable, satellite, and other specialty television providers










v
t
e


Cable, satellite, and other specialty television providers in Africa, Asia, the Middle East and Oceania



Cable



Cable TV Hong Kong
Cablevision (Lebanon)
Cablelink
Destiny Cable
Docomo Pacific
eonet (Japan)
First Media
Foxtel
GMM Z
Hathway
Hot
InCablenet
Itscom (Japan)
JCTV (Japan)
Kbro
Lanka Broadband Networks (Sri Lanka)
Montage Cable TV (Nigeria)
NayaTel
OkeVision
Optus Television
Ooredoo (Qatar)
PPCTV
Rostelecom
Siti Cable
Sky Cable
Sonatel
TBC (Taiwan)
Tokai Cable
Top TV (Indonesia)
TransACT
Tata Sky
TrueVisions
United Communication Service
Vodafone New Zealand
WorldCall





Satellite



Airtel digital TV
Aora
Astro (Malaysia)
beIN (Middle East and North Africa)
BiG TV (Indonesia)
CanalSat Afrique
CanalSat Calédonie
Cignal
Consat (Nigeria)
DD Free Dish
DDishTV
Dialog TV (Sri Lanka)
Dish TV
Dish TV Sri Lanka
Dish Home
Dream Satellite TV
DStv (Sub-Saharan Africa)
Foxtel (Australia)
GMM Z
G Sat
HiTV
Indosat
K+ (Vietnam)
K-Vision
Kristal-Astro
KT SkyLife
MediaNet
Metro Digital
MBC
MNC Vision
MRTV-4
myHD
NJOI
NTV Plus
OrangeTV
OSN (Middle East and North Africa)
Pacific Broadcasting Services Fiji
Pearl Digital TV
Pra International Green Group India
Real VU
Reliance Digital TV
Sky Direct
Sky Pacific
SKY PerfecTV!
Sky Television (New Zealand)
Sky Net
STAR (Greater China)
Star India
StarSat, South Africa
Star Select
StarTimes
STAR TV
Sun Direct
Tata Sky
Telone (Zimbabwe)
Transvision (Indonesia)
TrendTV
TrueVisions
Videocon d2h
Viva+
WOWOW
Yes (Israel)
ZAP
Zuku





Fiber/IPTV



Sky on demand
BTV
BesTV
DU
Fetch TV
Fine TV
GTA Teleguam
Hikari TV
HyppTV (Malaysia)
LG Uplus
Maroc Telecom
My.T
NET TV (Nepal)
now TV
Olleh TV
Omantel
PEO TV (Sri Lanka)
Rostelecom
Saudi Telecom Company
Singtel TV
Skytel (Mongolia)
StarHub TV
USeeTV





Terrestrial



ABS-CBN TV Plus (Philippines)
Freeview (Australia)
Freeview (New Zealand)
Igloo (New Zealand)
Mediacorp (Singapore)
MYTV (Malaysia)
StarTimes





Defunct



Austar
CTH (Thailand)
DishHD
Galaxy (Australia)
Mega TV (Malaysia)
Neighbourhood Cable (Australia)
SelecTV (Australia)
U Television (Malaysia)
UBI World TV (Australia)








Africa, Asia, Middle East and Oceania
Europe
Americas
Canada
United States
Central and South America















v
t
e


Cable, satellite, and other specialty television providers in Canada




Terrestrial and satellite



Satellite



Bell TV
Shaw Direct
Telus Satellite TV





Cable




Major1



Bell (Cablevision for Val-d'Or, QC, MTS for Manitoba)
Cogeco (Ontario, Quebec)
EastLink (Atlantic, Northern Ontario, Western Canada)
Look Communications
Rogers Cable (Ontario, New Brunswick, Newfoundland)
Source (Hamilton, ON)
Shaw (Western Canada, Northwestern Ontario)
Vidéotron (Quebec)





Minor



Access (Saskatchewan)
Cable Axion (Magog, QC)
CityWest (Prince Rupert, BC)
DERYtelecom (Saguenay, QC)
Novus Cable (select areas of BC Lower Mainland)
Omineca Cablevision (Prince George, BC)
Westman (Brandon, MB)





See also



Defunct cable and DBS companies of Canada








IPTV



Bell

Fibe (Aliant)
Fibe TV (ON/QC)
MTS TV (MB)


SaskTel MaxTV
Telus Optik TV
Tbaytel Digital TV
Vmedia
Zazeen





MMDS



Craig Wireless








Africa, Asia, and Oceania
Americas
Europe

1More than 400,000 television service subscribers.















This article may require cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards. The specific problem is: a complete mess with the names of countries being repeated in parentheses; lists companies without Wikipedia articles; wall of text Please help improve this article if you can. (November 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)









v
t
e


Cable, satellite, and other speciality television providers in Europe



Cable



Alma TV
Anvia
ASTA-NET
AS Starman
ASK CATV (Bosnia and Herzegovina)
Nowo (Portugal)
Caiway (Netherlands)
Canal Digital (Norway)
Casema
Com Hem (Sweden)
dna Welho (Finland)
EVision (Ireland)
ELTA-KABEL (Bosnia and Herzegovina)
ER-Telecom
Get
GO (Malta)
INEA (Poland)
IPKO
Kabel Deutschland (Germany)
Kabel Noord
KATV1 (Azerbaijan)
Kazakhtelecom (Kazakhstan)
Kujtesa
Lattelecom
Madritel
Magnet Networks
Magyar Telekom
MC Cable
Melita Cable
MEO (Portugal)
MISS.NET (Bosnia and Herzegovina)
Movistar+ (Spain)
Mtel (Bulgaria)
MTIS (Belarus)
M&H Company
Naxoo (Switzerland)
North-West Telecom
NOS (Portugal)
Numericable-SFR (France)
SFR (Belgium)
ONO (Spain)
Orange TV (France)
Petrus (Poland)
PostTV Luxembourg
Primacom (Germany)
Promax (Poland)
Radijus Vektor
RCS & RDS (Romania)
Rostelecom (Russia)
R (Spain)
Sappa TV
Sat Film (Poland)
SATRO (Slovakia)
SEEMORE
Serbia Broadband (Serbia)
Southern Telecom
Splius (Lithuania)
Stofa (Demnark)
STV AS
Swisscom
Tango TV (Luxembourg)
Telecable (Spain)
Telekabel (Macedonia)
Tele Columbus (Germany)
Tele2
Telemach (Bosnia and Herzegovina, Montenegro and Slovenia)
Telenet (Belgium)
Teledünya (Turkey)
Telset (Estonia)
Terrakom
TOYA (Poland)
Turksat Kablo TV (Turkey)
Unitymedia (Germany)
Uralsvyazinform
UPC Austria
UPC Magyarország (Hungary)
UPC Polska (Poland)
UPC Romania
UPC Switzerland
VECTRA
Virgin TV (UK)
Virgin Media Ireland
Vodafone Ireland
Vodafone Spain
VolgaTelecom
Volia (Ukraine)
VOO
WightFibre
YouSee (Denmark)
Ziggo (Netherlands)





Satellite



AB Sat (France)
AKTA TV (Romania)
Antik Sat
Austriasat
Bulsatcom
Canal Digital (Denmark, Sweden, Norway and Finland)
CanalDigitaal (Netherlands and Flanders)
Canalsat (France)
Caspio HD
Cosmote TV (Greece)
CS Link
Cyfrowy Polsat (Poland)
Digi TV
Digit-Alb
Digiturk (Turkey)
Dolce (Romania)
D-Smart (Turkey)
Euro1080
Filbox
Focus Sat (Romania)
fransat
Freesat (UK)
Freesat from Sky (UK)
Free Sat (Romania)
GlobeCast World TV
HD+ (Germany)
MagtiCom (Georgia)
Movistar+ (Spain)
Mtel (Bulgaria)
MEO (Portugal)
NC+ (Poland)
NOS (Portugal)
NOVA Cyprus
NOVA Greece
NTV Plus (Russia)
Orbita Telecom
Otau TV (Kazakhstan)
Real Digital
Saorsat
Sky UK
Sky Deutschland (Germany)
Sky Ireland
Sky Italia (Italy)
Skylink
TéléSAT Numérique (Belgium)
Tivù Sat (Italy)
TNTSAT
TotalTV
Tricolor TV (Russia)
Tring Digital TV
TV Vlaanderen Digitaal (Flanders)
UPC Direct
Viasat (Denmark, Sweden, Norway, Finland, Latvia, Estonia and Lithuania)
Viasat Ukraine
Vip SAT TV
Vivacom
Xtra TV (Ukraine)
ZeonBud





IPTV



A1 Telekom Austria
Altibox
Amis
Beeline
Bouygues Telecom
BT TV (UK)
Bulsatcom (Bulgaria)
Canal Digital
Cosmote TV (Greece)
CytaVision (Cyprus)
DartyBox (France)
Fastweb (Italy)
Free (France)
Freewire (UK)
HOME.TV (Bosnia and Herzegovina)
iNES (Romania)
Infostrada TV (Italy)
KPN (Netherlands)
Magnet Networks (Ireland)
Moja TV (Bosnia and Herzegovina)
Moldtelecom
Movistar+ (Spain)
Mtel (Bulgaria)
Mts TV (Serbia)
MEO (Portugal)
Neuf Cegetel
NOS (Portugal)
Open IPTV (Bosnia and Herzegovina)
Optimus Clix (Portugal)
Orange TV (France)
Plusnet
Portugal Telecom
PrimeTel (Cyprus)
Proximus TV (Belgium)
Sappa TV
Scarlet (Belgium)
SFR (France)
ShqipTV
Síminn (Iceland)
Smart Telecom (Ireland)
Super TV (Bosnia and Herzegovina)
Sure TV
T-2 (Slovenia)
TalkTalk TV (UK)
Telekom Entertain (Germany)
Telenor (Norway)
Telfort (Netherlands)
Telia Digital-tv
TeliaSonera
Teo LT
TIMvision
Tivibu
YouView (UK)
Vivacom (Bulgaria)
Vodafone Greece
Vodafone Italy
Vodafone Portugal
XS4ALL (Netherlands)





Terrestrial



Antena PLUS (Serbia)
Boxer TV Access (Sweden)
Boxer TV A/S (Denmark)
Digea (Greece)
Easy TV (Ireland)
evotv (Croatia)
Freeview (UK)
KPN Digitenne (Netherlands)
Mediaset Premium (Italy)
PlusTV (Finland)
PTDT (Portugal)
RiksTV (Norway)
Saorview (Ireland)
TNT (France)
Vip TV (Macedonia)
Zala TV (Belarus)





Defunct



Alice Home TV
Boom TV (Romania)
CableTel (Bulgaria)
On Telecoms (Greece)
Romtelecom
Numericable
UPC Nederland
TDC (Denmark)















v
t
e


Cable, satellite, and other specialty television providers in Latin America and the Caribbean



Cable



Axtel TV (Mexico)
Airlink Communications (Trinidad and Tobago)
Cablecom (Mexico)
Cablemás (Mexico)
Cable Onda
Cablevisión (Argentina)
CaboTelecom
Claro Colombia
Digicel Play (Caribbean)
Columbus/FLOW (Caribbean)
Independent Cable Network of Trinidad and Tobago (ICNTT)
Izzi Telecom (Mexico)
Massy Communications (Trinidad and Tobago)
Mayaro Cable TV (Trinidad and Tobago)
Megacable (Mexico)
Movistar TV (Chile, Colombia, Peru and Venezuela)
Mundo Pacifico (Chile)
NET (Brazil)
Oi TV (Brazil)
Red Intercable (Argentina)
RVR International (Trinidad and Tobago)
Tricom (Dominican Republic)
TRICO Industries Limited (Trinidad and Tobago)
Une (Colombia)
VTR (Chile)





Satellite



CanalSat Caraïbes (Caribbean)
CANTV (Venezuela)
Claro TV
DirecTV (South America & Caribbean)
Dish México
Entel (Chile)
Green Dot (Caribbean)
Inter Satélital
Movistar TV (Chile, Colombia, Peru and Venezuela)
Oi TV (Brazil)
SKY Brasil
SKY México, Dominican Republic & Central America
Vivo TV (Brazil)





Fiber/IPTV



bmobile (Trinidad and Tobago)
Claro República Dominicana
Vivo TV (Brazil)





Terrestrial microwave



Multi-Choice TV (Barbados)





Defunct satellite



DirecTV Brazil
DirecTV Mexico
GVT TV (Brazil)
Sky Argentina
Sky Chile
Sky Colombia
Sky Ecuador
Sky Peru
Sky Venezuela





Defunct cable



Vivo TV Plus (Brazil)








Africa, Asia, and Oceania
Americas
Canada
Europe
United States















v
t
e


Cable, satellite, and other specialty television providers in the United States



Cable MVPD



Adams Cable
Altice USA

Optimum
Suddenlink Communications


Armstrong
Atlantic Broadband
Blue Ridge Communications
Blue Stream
Broadstripe
Buckeye Broadband
Cable One
Charter Spectrum
Comcast Xfinity
Consolidated Communications

FairPoint Communications


Cox Communications
Docomo Pacific
Emery Telcom
Full Channel
GCI
Hargray
Mediacom
Midco
Northland Communications
Liberty Puerto Rico
Satview Broadband
Service Electric
SRT Communications
TDS Telecom
TPG

Grande Communications
RCN Corporation
Wave Broadband


TruVista Communications
WOW!





Satellite MVPD



Claro
Dish Network
DirecTV
Glorystar
Headend in the Sky
Home2US





Fiber MVPD / IPTV



AT&T U-verse
CenturyLink Prism TV
Cincinnati Bell FiOptics
Claro
Consolidated Communications

FairPoint Communications


EPB
Frontier FiOS
Google Fiber
GTA Teleguam
Hawaiian Telcom
Midco
NEP Datastream TV
TDS Telecom
Verizon FiOS
Windstream Kinetic





Virtual MVPD



DirecTV Now
FuboTV
Hulu with Live TV
Philo
PlayStation Vue
Sling TV
Spectrum TV Stream
Xfinity Instant TV
YouTube TV





Over-the-top



Amazon Video
Anime Network
Apple TV (iTunes Store)
CBS All Access
Crackle
Crunchyroll
CW Seed
CuriosityStream
DramaFever
Fandor
Feeln
FunimationNow
go90
HBO Now
History Vault
Hulu
iON (IPTV)
Lifetime Movie Club
Netflix
Noggin
Pluto TV
Roku
Seeso
Showtime
StarzPlay
Tribeca Shortlist
Tubi TV
Univision NOW
Yupptv
WWE Network





Defunct cable



Adelphia Communications Corporation
Alameda Power and Telecom1
Astound Broadband
AT&T Broadband

MediaOne / Continental Cablevision
Tele-Communications Inc.


Baja Broadband

US Cable


Bresnan Communications
Bright House Networks
Cablevision
Champion Broadband
Cobridge Communications
Community Home Entertainment
Graceba Total Communications
Insight Communications
Jones Intercable
King Videocable
Knology
Marcus Cable
NPG Cable
Paragon Cable
Rapid Communications
TelePrompTer / Group W Cable
Time Warner Cable
UA-Columbia Cablevision
Windjammer Communications

1 – Still in operation, but no longer offers cable or Internet as part of its services




Defunct satellite



AlphaStar
GlobeCast World TV
PrimeStar
United States Satellite Broadcasting
Voom HD Networks





Defunct IPTV



Sky Angel
Virtual Digital Cable





Defunct terrestrial



Aereo
USDTV
MovieBeam












v
t
e


Additional resources on North American television



North America



List of local television stations in North America
DTV transition
North American TV mini-template





Canada



Canadian networks
List of Canadian television networks
List of Canadian television channels
List of Canadian specialty channels
Local Canadian TV stations
List of United States stations available in Canada
2001 Vancouver TV realignment
2007 Canada broadcast TV realignment





Mexico



Mexican networks
Local Mexican TV stations





United States



American networks
List of American cable and satellite networks
List of American over-the-air networks
Local American TV stations (W)
Local American TV stations (K)
Spanish-language TV networks
1994 United States broadcast TV realignment
2006 United States broadcast TV realignment
List of Canadian television stations available in the United States
Insular Areas TV











Africa, Asia, and Oceania
Americas
Europe














						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=IPTV&oldid=817461983"					Categories: Digital televisionFilm and video technologyInternet broadcastingInternet radioInternet televisionVideo on demand servicesTelevision technologyTelevision terminologyComputer-related introductions in 1995Telecommunications-related introductions in 1995Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksPages with citations lacking titlesPages with citations having bare URLsArticles with Northern Sami-language external linksAll articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from May 2017Articles with permanently dead external linksArticles with dead external links from February 2016Use dmy dates from July 2017Use British English from January 2012Kvng RTHAll articles with vague or ambiguous timeVague or ambiguous time from April 2013All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from April 2013Articles with unsourced statements from December 2017Articles with unsourced statements from May 2017All articles that may contain original researchArticles that may contain original research from January 2012Wikipedia articles in need of updating from December 2010Articles with obsolete information from July 2011All Wikipedia articles in need of updatingVague or ambiguous time from January 2012All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrasesArticles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from January 2012Wikipedia articles in need of updating from August 2013Articles needing additional references from July 2017All articles needing additional referencesArticles with unsourced statements from July 2017All Wikipedia articles needing clarificationWikipedia articles needing clarification from July 2017Articles with unsourced statements from October 2013Articles needing cleanup from November 2017All pages needing cleanupCleanup tagged articles with a reason field from November 2017Wikipedia pages needing cleanup from November 2017