This article is about irrigation for agriculture and landscapes. For other uses, see Irrigation (disambiguation).




The hub of a center-pivot irrigation system


Irrigation is the application of controlled amounts of water to plants at needed intervals. Irrigation helps grow agricultural crops, maintain landscapes, and revegetate disturbed soils in dry areas and during periods of inadequate rainfall. Irrigation also has other uses in crop production, including frost protection,[1] suppressing weed growth in grain fields[2] and preventing soil consolidation.[3] In contrast, agriculture that relies only on direct rainfall is referred to as rain-fed or dry land farming.
Irrigation systems are also used for cooling livestock, dust suppression, disposal of sewage, and in mining. Irrigation is often studied together with drainage, which is the removal of surface and sub-surface water from a given area.




Irrigation canal in Osmaniye, Turkey






Sprinkler irrigation of blueberries in Plainville, New York, United States


Irrigation has been a central feature of agriculture for over 5,000 years and is the product of many cultures. Historically, it was the basis for economies and societies across the globe, from Asia to the Southwestern United States.



Contents


1 History

1.1 China
1.2 Korea
1.3 North America


2 Present extent
3 Types of irrigation

3.1 Surface irrigation
3.2 Micro-irrigation

3.2.1 Drip irrigation


3.3 Sprinkler irrigation

3.3.1 Center pivot
3.3.2 Irrigation by Lateral move (side roll, wheel line, wheelmove)[31][32]
3.3.3 Lawn sprinkler systems
3.3.4 Hose-end sprinklers


3.4 Subirrigation

3.4.1 Subsurface textile irrigation




4 Water sources
5 Efficiency
6 Technical challenges
7 Impact on society
8 See also
9 References
10 Further reading

10.1 Journals


11 External links



History[edit]




Animal-powered irrigation, Upper Egypt, ca. 1846


Archaeological investigation has found evidence of irrigation where natural rainfall was insufficient to support crops for rainfed agriculture.
Perennial irrigation was practiced in the Mesopotamian plain whereby crops were regularly watered throughout the growing season by coaxing water through a matrix of small channels formed in the field.[4] Ancient Egyptians practiced Basin irrigation using the flooding of the Nile to inundate land plots which had been surrounded by dykes. The flood water was held until the fertile sediment had settled before the surplus was returned to the watercourse.[5] There is evidence of the ancient Egyptian pharaoh Amenemhet III in the twelfth dynasty (about 1800 BCE) using the natural lake of the Faiyum Oasis as a reservoir to store surpluses of water for use during the dry seasons. The lake swelled annually from flooding of the Nile.[6]




Young engineers restoring and developing the old Mughal irrigation system during the reign of the Mughal Emperor Bahadur Shah II


The Ancient Nubians developed a form of irrigation by using a waterwheel-like device called a sakia. Irrigation began in Nubia some time between the third and second millennium BCE.[7] It largely depended upon the flood waters that would flow through the Nile River and other rivers in what is now the Sudan.[8]




Irrigation in Tamil Nadu, India


In sub-Saharan Africa irrigation reached the Niger River region cultures and civilizations by the first or second millennium BCE and was based on wet season flooding and water harvesting.[9][10]
Terrace irrigation is evidenced in pre-Columbian America, early Syria, India, and China.[5] In the Zana Valley of the Andes Mountains in Peru, archaeologists found remains of three irrigation canals radiocarbon dated from the 4th millennium BCE, the 3rd millennium BCE and the 9th century CE. These canals are the earliest record of irrigation in the New World. Traces of a canal possibly dating from the 5th millennium BCE were found under the 4th millennium canal.[11] Sophisticated irrigation and storage systems were developed by the Indus Valley Civilization in present-day Pakistan and North India, including the reservoirs at Girnar in 3000 BCE and an early canal irrigation system from circa 2600 BCE.[12][13] Large scale agriculture was practiced and an extensive network of canals was used for the purpose of irrigation.
Ancient Persia (modern day Iran) used irrigation as far back as the 6th millennium BCE to grow barley in areas where natural rainfall was insufficient.[14] The Qanats, developed in ancient Persia in about 800 BCE, are among the oldest known irrigation methods still in use today. They are now found in Asia, the Middle East and North Africa. The system comprises a network of vertical wells and gently sloping tunnels driven into the sides of cliffs and steep hills to tap groundwater.[15] The noria, a water wheel with clay pots around the rim powered by the flow of the stream (or by animals where the water source was still), was first brought into use at about this time by Roman settlers in North Africa. By 150 BCE the pots were fitted with valves to allow smoother filling as they were forced into the water.[16]
The irrigation works of ancient Sri Lanka, the earliest dating from about 300 BCE, in the reign of King Pandukabhaya and under continuous development for the next thousand years, were one of the most complex irrigation systems of the ancient world. In addition to underground canals, the Sinhalese were the first to build completely artificial reservoirs to store water. Due to their engineering superiority in this sector, they were often called 'masters of irrigation'.[by whom?] Most of these irrigation systems still exist undamaged up to now, in Anuradhapura and Polonnaruwa, because of the advanced and precise engineering. The system was extensively restored and further extended during the reign of King Parakrama Bahu (1153–1186 CE).[17]
China[edit]




Inside a karez tunnel at Turpan, Xinjiang, China


The oldest known hydraulic engineers of China were Sunshu Ao (6th century BCE) of the Spring and Autumn period and Ximen Bao (5th century BCE) of the Warring States period, both of whom worked on large irrigation projects. In the Sichuan region belonging to the State of Qin of ancient China, the Dujiangyan Irrigation System devised by the Qin Chinese hydrologist and irrigation engineer Li Bing was built in 256 BCE to irrigate a vast area of farmland that today still supplies water.[18] By the 2nd century AD, during the Han Dynasty, the Chinese also used chain pumps that lifted water from a lower elevation to a higher one.[19] These were powered by manual foot pedal, hydraulic waterwheels, or rotating mechanical wheels pulled by oxen.[20] The water was used for public works of providing water for urban residential quarters and palace gardens, but mostly for irrigation of farmland canals and channels in the fields.[21]
Korea[edit]
In 15th century Korea, the world's first rain gauge, uryanggye (Korean:우량계), was invented in 1441. The inventor was Jang Yeong-sil, a Korean engineer of the Joseon Dynasty, under the active direction of the king, Sejong the Great. It was installed in irrigation tanks as part of a nationwide system to measure and collect rainfall for agricultural applications. With this instrument, planners and farmers could make better use of the information gathered in the survey.[22]
North America[edit]




Irrigation ditch in Montour County, Pennsylvania


Main article: Hohokam
The earliest agricultural irrigation canal system known in the U.S. dates to between 1200 B.C. and 800 B.C. and was discovered in Marana, Arizona (adjacent to Tucson) in 2009.[23] The irrigation canal system predates the Hohokam culture by two thousand years and belongs to an unidentified culture. In North America, the Hohokam were the only culture known to rely on irrigation canals to water their crops, and their irrigation systems supported the largest population in the Southwest by AD 1300. The Hohokam constructed an assortment of simple canals combined with weirs in their various agricultural pursuits. Between the 7th and 14th centuries, they also built and maintained extensive irrigation networks along the lower Salt and middle Gila rivers that rivaled the complexity of those used in the ancient Near East, Egypt, and China. These were constructed using relatively simple excavation tools, without the benefit of advanced engineering technologies, and achieved drops of a few feet per mile, balancing erosion and siltation. The Hohokam cultivated varieties of cotton, tobacco, maize, beans and squash, as well as harvested an assortment of wild plants. Late in the Hohokam Chronological Sequence, they also used extensive dry-farming systems, primarily to grow agave for food and fiber. Their reliance on agricultural strategies based on canal irrigation, vital in their less than hospitable desert environment and arid climate, provided the basis for the aggregation of rural populations into stable urban centers.[24]
Present extent[edit]




Irrigation of land in Punjab, India


As of the year 2000, 2,788,000 km² (689 million acres) of fertile land were equipped with irrigation infrastructure worldwide. About 68% of this area is in Asia, 17% in the Americas, 9% in Europe, 5% in Africa and 1% in Oceania. The largest contiguous areas of high irrigation density are found:



In Northern India and Pakistan along the Ganges and Indus rivers
In the Hai He, Huang He and Yangtze basins in China
Along the Nile river in Egypt and Sudan
In the Mississippi-Missouri river basin, the Southern Great Plains, and in parts of California



Smaller irrigation areas are spread across almost all populated parts of the world.[25]
Only eight years later, in 2008, the area of irrigated land had increased to an estimated total of 3,245,566 km² (802 million acres), which is nearly the size of India.[26]
Types of irrigation[edit]
There are several methods of irrigation. They vary in how the water is supplied to the plants. The goal is to apply the water to the plants as uniformly as possible, so that each plant has the amount of water it needs, neither too much nor too little.
Surface irrigation[edit]
Main article: Surface irrigation




Basin flood irrigation of wheat


Surface irrigation is the oldest form of irrigation and has been in use for thousands of years. In surface (furrow, flood, or level basin) irrigation systems, water moves across the surface of an agricultural lands, in an order to wet it and infiltrate into the soil. Surface irrigation can be subdivided into furrow, borderstrip or basin irrigation. It is often called flood irrigation when the irrigation results in flooding or near flooding of the cultivated land. Historically, this has been the most common method of irrigating agricultural land and still used in most parts of the world.
Where water levels from the irrigation source permit, the levels are controlled by dikes, usually plugged by soil. This is often seen in terraced rice fields (rice paddies), where the method is used to flood or control the level of water in each distinct field. In some cases, the water is pumped, or lifted by human or animal power to the level of the land. The water application efficiency of surface irrigation is typically lower than other forms of irrigation.




Residential flood irrigation in Phoenix, Arizona


Surface irrigation is even used to water landscapes in certain areas, for example, in and around Phoenix, Arizona. The irrigated area is surrounded by a berm and the water is delivered according to a schedule set by a local irrigation district.[27]
Micro-irrigation[edit]
Main article: Micro-irrigation




Drip irrigation – a dripper in action


Micro-irrigation, sometimes called localized irrigation, low volume irrigation, or trickle irrigation is a system where water is distributed under low pressure through a piped network, in a pre-determined pattern, and applied as a small discharge to each plant or adjacent to it. Traditional drip irrigation using individual emitters, subsurface drip irrigation (SDI), micro-spray or micro-sprinkler irrigation, and mini-bubbler irrigation all belong to this category of irrigation methods.[28]
Drip irrigation[edit]




Drip irrigation layout and its parts


Main article: Drip irrigation




Micro-sprinkler


Drip (or micro) irrigation, also known as trickle irrigation, functions as its name suggests. In this system water falls drop by drop just at the position of roots. Water is delivered at or near the root zone of plants, drop by drop. This method can be the most water-efficient method of irrigation,[29] if managed properly, evaporation and runoff are minimized. The field water efficiency of drip irrigation is typically in the range of 80 to 90 percent when managed correctly.
In modern agriculture, drip irrigation is often combined with plastic mulch, further reducing evaporation, and is also the means of delivery of fertilizer. The process is known as fertigation.
Deep percolation, where water moves below the root zone, can occur if a drip system is operated for too long or if the delivery rate is too high. Drip irrigation methods range from very high-tech and computerized to low-tech and labor-intensive. Lower water pressures are usually needed than for most other types of systems, with the exception of low energy center pivot systems and surface irrigation systems, and the system can be designed for uniformity throughout a field or for precise water delivery to individual plants in a landscape containing a mix of plant species. Although it is difficult to regulate pressure on steep slopes, pressure compensating emitters are available, so the field does not have to be level. High-tech solutions involve precisely calibrated emitters located along lines of tubing that extend from a computerized set of valves.
Sprinkler irrigation[edit]




Crop sprinklers near Rio Vista, California






A traveling sprinkler at Millets Farm Centre, Oxfordshire, United Kingdom


Further information: Irrigation sprinkler
In sprinkler or overhead irrigation, water is piped to one or more central locations within the field and distributed by overhead high-pressure sprinklers or guns. A system utilizing sprinklers, sprays, or guns mounted overhead on permanently installed risers is often referred to as a solid-set irrigation system. Higher pressure sprinklers that rotate are called rotors and are driven by a ball drive, gear drive, or impact mechanism. Rotors can be designed to rotate in a full or partial circle. Guns are similar to rotors, except that they generally operate at very high pressures of 40 to 130 lbf/in² (275 to 900 kPa) and flows of 50 to 1200 US gal/min (3 to 76 L/s), usually with nozzle diameters in the range of 0.5 to 1.9 inches (10 to 50 mm). Guns are used not only for irrigation, but also for industrial applications such as dust suppression and logging.
Sprinklers can also be mounted on moving platforms connected to the water source by a hose. Automatically moving wheeled systems known as traveling sprinklers may irrigate areas such as small farms, sports fields, parks, pastures, and cemeteries unattended. Most of these utilize a length of polyethylene tubing wound on a steel drum. As the tubing is wound on the drum powered by the irrigation water or a small gas engine, the sprinkler is pulled across the field. When the sprinkler arrives back at the reel the system shuts off. This type of system is known to most people as a "waterreel" traveling irrigation sprinkler and they are used extensively for dust suppression, irrigation, and land application of waste water.
Other travelers use a flat rubber hose that is dragged along behind while the sprinkler platform is pulled by a cable.
Center pivot[edit]




A small center pivot system from beginning to end






Rotator style pivot applicator sprinkler






Center pivot with drop sprinklers






Wheel line irrigation system in Idaho, 2001


Main article: Center pivot irrigation





Center pivot irrigation



Center pivot irrigation is a form of sprinkler irrigation utilising several segments of pipe (usually galvanized steel or aluminium) joined together and supported by trusses, mounted on wheeled towers with sprinklers positioned along its length.[30] The system moves in a circular pattern and is fed with water from the pivot point at the center of the arc. These systems are found and used in all parts of the world and allow irrigation of all types of terrain. Newer systems have drop sprinkler heads as shown in the image that follows.
As of 2017[update] most center pivot systems have drops hanging from a U-shaped pipe attached at the top of the pipe with sprinkler heads that are positioned a few feet (at most) above the crop, thus limiting evaporative losses. Drops can also be used with drag hoses or bubblers that deposit the water directly on the ground between crops. Crops are often planted in a circle to conform to the center pivot. This type of system is known as LEPA (Low Energy Precision Application). Originally, most center pivots were water-powered. These were replaced by hydraulic systems (T-L Irrigation) and electric-motor-driven systems (Reinke, Valley, Zimmatic). Many modern pivots feature GPS devices.[citation needed]
Irrigation by Lateral move (side roll, wheel line, wheelmove)[31][32][edit]
A series of pipes, each with a wheel of about 1.5 m diameter permanently affixed to its midpoint, and sprinklers along its length, are coupled together. Water is supplied at one end using a large hose. After sufficient irrigation has been applied to one strip of the field, the hose is removed, the water drained from the system, and the assembly rolled either by hand or with a purpose-built mechanism, so that the sprinklers are moved to a different position across the field. The hose is reconnected. The process is repeated in a pattern until the whole field has been irrigated.
This system is less expensive to install than a center pivot, but much more labor-intensive to operate - it does not travel automatically across the field: it applies water in a stationary strip, must be drained, and then rolled to a new strip. Most systems use 4 or 5-inch (130 mm) diameter aluminum pipe. The pipe doubles both as water transport and as an axle for rotating all the wheels. A drive system (often found near the centre of the wheel line) rotates the clamped-together pipe sections as a single axle, rolling the whole wheel line. Manual adjustment of individual wheel positions may be necessary if the system becomes misaligned.
Wheel line systems are limited in the amount of water they can carry, and limited in the height of crops that can be irrigated. One useful feature of a lateral move system is that it consists of sections that can be easily disconnected, adapting to field shape as the line is moved. They are most often used for small, rectilinear, or oddly-shaped fields, hilly or mountainous regions, or in regions where labor is inexpensive.
Lawn sprinkler systems[edit]
A lawn sprinkler system is permanently installed, as opposed to a hose-end sprinkler, which is portable. Sprinkler systems are installed in residential lawns, in commercial landscapes, for churches and schools, in public parks and cemeteries, and on golf courses. Most of the components of these irrigation systems are hidden under ground, since aesthetics are important in a landscape. A typical lawn sprinkler system will consist of one or more zones, limited in size by the capacity of the water source. Each zone will cover a designated portion of the landscape. Sections of the landscape will usually be divided by microclimate, type of plant material, and type of irrigation equipment. A landscape irrigation system may also include zones containing drip irrigation, bubblers, or other types of equipment besides sprinklers.
Although manual systems are still used, most lawn sprinkler systems may be operated automatically using an irrigation controller, sometimes called a clock or timer. Most automatic systems employ electric solenoid valves. Each zone has one or more of these valves that are wired to the controller. When the controller sends power to the valve, the valve opens, allowing water to flow to the sprinklers in that zone.
There are two main types of sprinklers used in lawn irrigation, pop-up spray heads and rotors. Spray heads have a fixed spray pattern, while rotors have one or more streams that rotate. Spray heads are used to cover smaller areas, while rotors are used for larger areas. Golf course rotors are sometimes so large that a single sprinkler is combined with a valve and called a 'valve in head'. When used in a turf area, the sprinklers are installed with the top of the head flush with the ground surface. When the system is pressurized, the head will pop up out of the ground and water the desired area until the valve closes and shuts off that zone. Once there is no more pressure in the lateral line, the sprinkler head will retract back into the ground. In flower beds or shrub areas, sprinklers may be mounted on above ground risers or even taller pop-up sprinklers may be used and installed flush as in a lawn area.




An impact sprinkler watering a lawn, an example of a hose-end sprinkler.


Hose-end sprinklers[edit]
There are many types of hose-end sprinklers. Many of them are smaller versions of larger agricultural and landscape sprinklers, sized to work with a typical garden hose. Some have a spiked base allowing them to be temporarily stuck in the ground, while others have a sled base designed to be dragged while attached to the hose.
Subirrigation[edit]
Subirrigation has been used for many years in field crops in areas with high water tables. It is a method of artificially raising the water table to allow the soil to be moistened from below the plants' root zone. Often those systems are located on permanent grasslands in lowlands or river valleys and combined with drainage infrastructure. A system of pumping stations, canals, weirs and gates allows it to increase or decrease the water level in a network of ditches and thereby control the water table.
Subirrigation is also used in commercial greenhouse production, usually for potted plants. Water is delivered from below, absorbed upwards, and the excess collected for recycling. Typically, a solution of water and nutrients floods a container or flows through a trough for a short period of time, 10–20 minutes, and is then pumped back into a holding tank for reuse. Sub-irrigation in greenhouses requires fairly sophisticated, expensive equipment and management. Advantages are water and nutrient conservation, and labor savings through reduced system maintenance and automation. It is similar in principle and action to subsurface basin irrigation.
Another type of subirrigation is the self-watering container, also known as a sub-irrigated planter. This consists of a planter suspended over a reservoir with some type of wicking material such as a polyester rope. The water is drawn up the wick through capillary action.[33][34]
Subsurface textile irrigation[edit]
Main article: Subsurface textile irrigation




Diagram showing the structure of an example SSTI installation


Subsurface Textile Irrigation (SSTI) is a technology designed specifically for subirrigation in all soil textures from desert sands to heavy clays. A typical subsurface textile irrigation system has an impermeable base layer (usually polyethylene or polypropylene), a drip line running along that base, a layer of geotextile on top of the drip line and, finally, a narrow impermeable layer on top of the geotextile (see diagram). Unlike standard drip irrigation, the spacing of emitters in the drip pipe is not critical as the geotextile moves the water along the fabric up to 2 m from the dripper. The impermeable layer effectively creates an artificial water table.
Water sources[edit]




Irrigation is underway by pump-enabled extraction directly from the Gumti, seen in the background, in Comilla, Bangladesh.


Irrigation water can come from groundwater (extracted from springs or by using wells), from surface water (withdrawn from rivers, lakes or reservoirs) or from non-conventional sources like treated wastewater, desalinated water, drainage water, or fog collection. A special form of irrigation using surface water is spate irrigation, also called floodwater harvesting. In case of a flood (spate), water is diverted to normally dry river beds (wadis) using a network of dams, gates and channels and spread over large areas. The moisture stored in the soil will be used thereafter to grow crops. Spate irrigation areas are in particular located in semi-arid or arid, mountainous regions. While floodwater harvesting belongs to the accepted irrigation methods, rainwater harvesting is usually not considered as a form of irrigation. Rainwater harvesting is the collection of runoff water from roofs or unused land and the concentration of this.
Around 90% of wastewater produced globally remains untreated, causing widespread water pollution, especially in low-income countries. Increasingly, agriculture uses untreated wastewater as a source of irrigation water. Cities provide lucrative markets for fresh produce, so are attractive to farmers. However, because agriculture has to compete for increasingly scarce water resources with industry and municipal users (see Water scarcity below), there is often no alternative for farmers but to use water polluted with urban waste, including sewage, directly to water their crops. Significant health hazards can result from using water loaded with pathogens in this way, especially if people eat raw vegetables that have been irrigated with the polluted water. The International Water Management Institute has worked in India, Pakistan, Vietnam, Ghana, Ethiopia, Mexico and other countries on various projects aimed at assessing and reducing risks of wastewater irrigation. They advocate a 'multiple-barrier' approach to wastewater use, where farmers are encouraged to adopt various risk-reducing behaviours. These include ceasing irrigation a few days before harvesting to allow pathogens to die off in the sunlight, applying water carefully so it does not contaminate leaves likely to be eaten raw, cleaning vegetables with disinfectant or allowing fecal sludge used in farming to dry before being used as a human manure.[35] The World Health Organization has developed guidelines for safe water use.
There are numerous benefits of using recycled water for irrigation, including the low cost (when compared to other sources, particularly in an urban area), consistency of supply (regardless of season, climatic conditions and associated water restrictions), and general consistency of quality. Irrigation of recycled wastewater is also considered as a means for plant fertilization and particularly nutrient supplementation. This approach carries with it a risk of soil and water pollution through excessive wastewater application. Hence, a detailed understanding of soil water conditions is essential for effective utilization of wastewater for irrigation.[36]
In countries where humid air sweeps through at night, water can be obtained by condensation onto cold surfaces. This is practiced in the vineyards at Lanzarote using stones to condense water. Fog collectors are also made of canvas or foil sheets. Using condensate from air conditioning units as a water source is also becoming more popular in large urban areas.




Grapes in Petrolina, only made possible in this semi arid area by drip irrigation


Efficiency[edit]
Modern irrigation methods are efficient enough to supply the entire field uniformly with water, so that each plant has the amount of water it needs, neither too much nor too little.[37] Water use efficiency in the field can be determined as follows:

Field Water Efficiency (%) = (Water Transpired by Crop ÷ Water Applied to Field) x 100

Until 1960s, the common perception was that water was an infinite resource. At that time, there were fewer than half the current number of people on the planet. People were not as wealthy as today, consumed fewer calories and ate less meat, so less water was needed to produce their food. They required a third of the volume of water we presently take from rivers. Today, the competition for water resources is much more intense. This is because there are now more than seven billion people on the planet, their consumption of water-thirsty meat and vegetables is rising, and there is increasing competition for water from industry, urbanisation and biofuel crops. To avoid a global water crisis, farmers will have to strive to increase productivity to meet growing demands for food, while industry and cities find ways to use water more efficiently.[38]
Successful agriculture is dependent upon farmers having sufficient access to water. However, water scarcity is already a critical constraint to farming in many parts of the world. With regards to agriculture, the World Bank targets food production and water management as an increasingly global issue that is fostering a growing debate.[39] Physical water scarcity is where there is not enough water to meet all demands, including that needed for ecosystems to function effectively. Arid regions frequently suffer from physical water scarcity. It also occurs where water seems abundant but where resources are over-committed. This can happen where there is overdevelopment of hydraulic infrastructure, usually for irrigation. Symptoms of physical water scarcity include environmental degradation and declining groundwater. Economic scarcity, meanwhile, is caused by a lack of investment in water or insufficient human capacity to satisfy the demand for water. Symptoms of economic water scarcity include a lack of infrastructure, with people often having to fetch water from rivers for domestic and agricultural uses. Some 2.8 billion people currently live in water-scarce areas.[40]
Technical challenges[edit]
Main article: Environmental impact of irrigation
Irrigation schemes involve solving numerous engineering and economic problems while minimizing negative environmental impact.[41]

Competition for surface water rights.[42]
Overdrafting (depletion) of underground aquifers. In the mid-20th century, the advent of diesel and electric motors led to systems that could pump groundwater out of major aquifers faster than drainage basins could refill them. This can lead to permanent loss of aquifer capacity, decreased water quality, ground subsidence, and other problems. The future of food production in such areas as the North China Plain, the Punjab, and the Great Plains of the US is threatened by this phenomenon.[43][44]


Ground subsidence (e.g. New Orleans, Louisiana)
Underirrigation or irrigation giving only just enough water for the plant (e.g. in drip line irrigation) gives poor soil salinity control which leads to increased soil salinity with consequent buildup of toxic salts on soil surface in areas with high evaporation. This requires either leaching to remove these salts and a method of drainage to carry the salts away. When using drip lines, the leaching is best done regularly at certain intervals (with only a slight excess of water), so that the salt is flushed back under the plant's roots.[45][46]
Overirrigation because of poor distribution uniformity or management wastes water, chemicals, and may lead to water pollution.[47]
Deep drainage (from over-irrigation) may result in rising water tables which in some instances will lead to problems of irrigation salinity requiring watertable control by some form of subsurface land drainage.[48][49]
Irrigation with saline or high-sodium water may damage soil structure owing to the formation of alkaline soil
Clogging of filters: It is mostly algae that clog filters, drip installations and nozzles. UV[50] and ultrasonic[51] method can be used for algae control in irrigation systems.

Impact on society[edit]
A 2016 study found that countries whose agriculture depended on irrigation are more likely to be autocratic than other countries. The authors of the study "argue that the effect has historical origins: irrigation allowed landed elites in arid areas to monopolize water and arable land. This made elites more powerful and better able to oppose democratization."[52]
See also[edit]


Agriculture and Agronomy portal




Deficit irrigation
Environmental impact of irrigation
Farm water
Gezira Scheme
Irrigation district
Irrigation management
Irrigation statistics
Leaf Sensor
Lift irrigation schemes
List of countries by irrigated land area
Nano Ganesh
Paddy field
Qanat
Surface irrigation
Tidal irrigation


References[edit]


^ Snyder, R. L.; Melo-Abreu, J. P. (2005). "Frost protection: fundamentals, practice, and economics" (PDF). Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. ISSN 1684-8241. 
^ Williams, J. F.; S. R. Roberts; J. E. Hill; S. C. Scardaci; G. Tibbits. "Managing Water for 'Weed' Control in Rice". UC Davis, Department of Plant Sciences. Archived from the original on 2007-04-03. Retrieved 2007-03-14. 
^ "Arid environments becoming consolidated". Retrieved 2012-06-19. 
^ Hill, Donald: A History of Engineering
^ a b p19 Hill
^ "Amenemhet III". Britannica Concise. Archived from the original on 2007-05-10. Retrieved 2007-01-10. 
^ G. Mokhtar (1981-01-01). Ancient civilizations of Africa. Unesco. International Scientific Committee for the Drafting of a General History of Africa. p. 309. ISBN 9780435948054. Retrieved 2012-06-19 – via Books.google.com. 
^ Richard Bulliet, Pamela Kyle Crossley, Daniel Headrick, Steven Hirsch. Pages 53-56 (2008-06-18). The Earth and Its Peoples, Volume I: A Global History, to 1550. Books.google.com. ISBN 0618992383. Retrieved 2012-06-19. CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link)
^ "Traditional technologies". Fao.org. Retrieved 2012-06-19. 
^ "Africa, Emerging Civilizations In Sub-Sahara Africa. Various Authors; Edited By: R. A. Guisepi". History-world.org. Retrieved 2012-06-19. 
^ Dillehay TD, Eling HH Jr, Rossen J (2005). "Preceramic irrigation canals in the Peruvian Andes". Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 102 (47): 17241–4. doi:10.1073/pnas.0508583102. PMC 1288011 . PMID 16284247. CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link)
^ Rodda, J. C. and Ubertini, Lucio (2004). The Basis of Civilization – Water Science? pg 161. International Association of Hydrological Sciences (International Association of Hydrological Sciences Press 2004).
^ "Ancient India Indus Valley Civilization". Minnesota State University "e-museum". Archived from the original on 2007-02-05. Retrieved 2007-01-10. 
^ The History of Technology – Irrigation. Encyclopædia Britannica, 1994 edition. 
^ "Qanat Irrigation Systems and Homegardens (Iran)". Globally Important Agriculture Heritage Systems. UN Food and Agriculture Organization. Retrieved 2007-01-10. 
^ Encyclopædia Britannica, 1911 and 1989 editions
^ de Silva, Sena (1998). "Reservoirs of Sri Lanka and their fisheries". UN Food and Agriculture Organization. Retrieved 2007-01-10. 
^ China – history. Encyclopædia Britannica,1994 edition. 
^ Needham, Joseph (1986). Science and Civilization in China: Volume 4, Physics and Physical Technology, Part 2, Mechanical Engineering. Taipei: Caves Books Ltd. Pages 344-346.
^ Needham, Volume 4, Part 2, 340-343.
^ Needham, Volume 4, Part 2, 33, 110.
^ Baek Seok-gi 백석기 (1987). Jang Yeong-sil 장영실. Woongjin Wiin Jeon-gi 웅진위인전기 11. Woongjin Publishing Co., Ltd. 
^ "Earliest Canals in America - Archaeology Magazine Archive". 
^ James M. Bayman, "The Hohokam of Southwest North America." Journal of World Prehistory 15.3 (2001): 257-311.
^ Siebert, S.; J. Hoogeveen, P. Döll, J-M. Faurès, S. Feick, and K. Frenken (2006-11-10). "The Digital Global Map of Irrigation Areas – Development and Validation of Map Version 4" (PDF). Tropentag 2006 – Conference on International Agricultural Research for Development. Bonn, Germany. Retrieved 2007-03-14. CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link)
^ The CIA World Factbook, retrieved 2011-10-30 
^ "Flood Irrigation Service". City of Tempe, Arizona. Retrieved 29 July 2017. 
^ Frenken, K. (2005). Irrigation in Africa in figures – AQUASTAT Survey – 2005 (PDF). Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. ISBN 92-5-105414-2. Retrieved 2007-03-14. 
^ Provenzano, Giuseppe (2007). "Using HYDRUS-2D Simulation Model to Evaluate Wetted Soil Volume in Subsurface Drip Irrigation Systems". J. Irrig. Drain Eng. 133 (4): 342–350. doi:10.1061/(ASCE)0733-9437(2007)133:4(342). 
^ Mader, Shelli (May 25, 2010). "Center pivot irrigation revolutionizes agriculture". The Fence Post Magazine. Retrieved June 6, 2012. 
^ Peters, Troy. "Managing Wheel ‐ Lines and Hand ‐ Lines for High Profitability" (PDF). Retrieved 29 May 2015. 
^ Hill, Robert. "Wheelmove Sprinkler Irrigation Operation and Management" (PDF). Retrieved 29 May 2015. 
^ "Polyester ropes natural irrigation technique". Entheogen.com. Archived from the original on April 12, 2012. Retrieved 2012-06-19. 
^ "DIY instructions for making self-watering system using ropes". Instructables.com. 2008-03-17. Retrieved 2012-06-19. 
^ Wastewater use in agriculture: Not only an issue where water is scarce! International Water Management Institute, 2010. Water Issue Brief 4
^ http://www.hydrol-earth-syst-sci.net/17/4339/2013/hess-17-4339-2013.pdf
^ "Water use efficiency - agriwaterpedia.info". 
^ Chartres, C. and Varma, S. Out of water. From Abundance to Scarcity and How to Solve the World's Water Problems FT Press (USA), 2010
^ "Reengaging in Agricultural Water Management: Challenges and Options". The World Bank. pp. 4–5. Retrieved 2011-10-30. 
^ Molden, D. (Ed). Water for food, Water for life: A Comprehensive Assessment of Water Management in Agriculture. Earthscan/IWMI, 2007.
^ ILRI, 1989, Effectiveness and Social/Environmental Impacts of Irrigation Projects: a Review. In: Annual Report 1988, International Institute for Land Reclamation and Improvement (ILRI), Wageningen, The Netherlands, pp. 18 – 34 . On line: [1]
^ Rosegrant, Mark W., and Hans P. Binswanger. "Markets in tradable water rights: potential for efficiency gains in developing country water resource allocation." World development (1994) 22#11 pp: 1613–1625.
^ "A new report says we're draining our aquifers faster than ever". High Country News. 2013-06-22. Retrieved 2014-02-11. 
^ "Management of aquifer recharge and discharge processes and aquifer storage equilibrium" (PDF). Groundwater storage is shown to be declining in all populated continents... 
^ EOS magazine, september 2009
^ World Water Council
^ Hukkinen, Janne, Emery Roe, and Gene I. Rochlin. "A salt on the land: A narrative analysis of the controversy over irrigation-related salinity and toxicity in California's San Joaquin Valley." Policy Sciences 23.4 (1990): 307-329. online Archived 2015-01-02 at the Wayback Machine.
^ Drainage Manual: A Guide to Integrating Plant, Soil, and Water Relationships for Drainage of Irrigated Lands. Interior Dept., Bureau of Reclamation. 1993. ISBN 0-16-061623-9. 
^ "Free articles and software on drainage of waterlogged land and soil salinity control in irrigated land". Retrieved 2010-07-28. 
^ UV treatment http://www.uvo3.co.uk/?go=Irrigation_Water
^ ultrasonic algae control http://www.lgsonic.com/irrigation-water-treatment/
^ Bentzen, Jeanet Sinding; Kaarsen, Nicolai; Wingender, Asger Moll (2016-06-01). "Irrigation and Autocracy". Journal of the European Economic Association: n/a–n/a. doi:10.1111/jeea.12173. ISSN 1542-4774. 


Further reading[edit]

Elvin, Mark. The retreat of the elephants: an environmental history of China (Yale University Press, 2004)
Hallows, Peter J., and Donald G. Thompson. History of irrigation in Australia ANCID, 1995.
Howell, Terry. "Drops of life in the history of irrigation." Irrigation journal 3 (2000): 26-33. the history of sprinker systems online
Hassan, John. A history of water in modern England and Wales (Manchester University Press, 1998)
Vaidyanathan, A. Water resource management: institutions and irrigation development in India (Oxford University Press, 1999)

Journals[edit]

Irrigation Science, ISSN 1432-1319 (electronic) 0342-7188 (paper), Springer
Journal of Irrigation and Drainage Engineering, ISSN 0733-9437, ASCE Publications
Irrigation and Drainage, ISSN 1531-0361, John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

External links[edit]



Look up irrigation in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.





Wikimedia Commons has media related to Irrigation.



"Irrigation techniques". USGS. Archived from the original on December 2, 2005. Retrieved December 8, 2005. 
Royal Engineers Museum: 19th century Irrigation in India
International Commission on Irrigation and Drainage (ICID)
Irrigation at the Water Quality Information Center, U.S. Department of Agriculture
AQUASTAT: FAO's global information system on water and agriculture

 This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain: Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911). "Irrigation". Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. 






v
t
e


Water resources management and irrigation by country



Africa



Burkina Faso
Egypt
Mali
Morocco
South Africa
Sudan
Tanzania





Asia



Afghanistan
Bangladesh
China
Iran
Iraq
India
Israel
Kazakhstan
Pakistan
Saudi Arabia
Syria
Turkey
Turkmenistan





Europe



Belgium
Italy
Russia





North America



Belize
Canada
Costa Rica
Dominican Republic
El Salvador
Guatemala
Honduras
Jamaica
Mexico
Nicaragua
United States





Oceania



Australia
New Zealand
Indonesia
Philippines





South America



Argentina
Bolivia
Brazil - supply
Brazil - irrigation
Chile
Colombia
Peru
Uruguay








List of countries by irrigated land area












v
t
e


Agricultural water management



Irrigation



Surface irrigation
Drip irrigation
Tidal irrigation
Irrigation statistics
Irrigation management
Irrigation environmental impacts





Subsurface drainage



Tile drainage
Drainage equation
Drainage system (agriculture)
Watertable control
Drainage research
Drainage by wells





Surface water/runoff



Contour trenching
Hydrological modelling
Hydrological transport model
Runoff model (reservoir)





Groundwater



Groundwater flow
Groundwater energy balance
Groundwater model
Hydraulic conductivity
Watertable





Problem soils



Acid sulphate soils
Alkali soils
Saline soils





Agro-hydro-salinity group



Hydrology (agriculture)
Soil salinity control
Leaching model (soil)
SaltMod integrated model
SahysMod polygonal model: Saltmod coupled to a groundwater model





Related topics



Sand dam












v
t
e


Natural resources



Air




Pollution / quality



Ambient standards (USA)
Index
Indoor

developing nations


Law

Clean Air Act (USA)


Ozone depletion





Emissions



Airshed
Trading
Deforestation (REDD)











Energy



Law
Resources
Fossil fuels (peak oil)
Geothermal
Nuclear
Solar

sunlight
shade


Tidal
Wave
Wind





Land



Arable

peak farmland


Degradation
Law

property


Management

habitat conservation


Minerals

mining

law
sand


peak
rights


Soil

conservation
fertility
health
resilience


Use

planning
reserve







Life



Biodiversity
Bioprospecting
Biosphere
Bushfood
Bushmeat
Fisheries

law
management


Food
Forests

genetic resources
law
management


Game

law


Gene bank
Herbalist plants
Marine conservation
Non-timber forest products
Rangeland
Seed bank
Wildlife

conservation
management


Wood





Water




Types / location



Aquifer

storage and recovery


Drinking
Fresh
Groundwater

pollution
recharge
remediation


Hydrosphere
Ice

bergs
glacial
polar


Irrigation
Rain

harvesting


Stormwater
Surface water
Wastewater

reclaimed







Aspects



Desalination
Floods
Law
Leaching
Sanitation
Conflict
Conservation
Peak water
Pollution
Privatization
Quality
Right
Resources

management
policy










Related







Commons

enclosure
global
land
tragedy of


Economics

ecological
land


Ecosystem services
Exploitation

overexploitation
Earth Overshoot Day


Management

adaptive


Natural capital

accounting


Nature reserve
Systems ecology
Urban ecology
Wilderness





Resource



Common-pool
Conflict (perpetuation)
Curse
Depletion
Extraction
Nationalism
Renewable / Non-renewable








 Portals



Agriculture and agronomy
Energy
Environment
Fishing
Forestry
Mining
Water
Wetlands








 Category

agencies
law
management
ministries
organizations


Colleges
 Natural resources












v
t
e


Wastewater



Sources



Acid mine drainage
Ballast water
Bathroom
Blackwater (coal)
Blackwater (waste)
Boiler blowdown
Brine
Combined sewer
Cooling tower
Cooling water
Fecal sludge
Greywater
Infiltration/Inflow
Industrial effluent
Ion exchange
Leachate
Manure
Papermaking
Produced water
Return flow
Reverse osmosis
Sanitary sewer
Septage
Sewage
Sewage sludge
Toilet
Urban runoff





Quality indicators



Biochemical oxygen demand
Chemical oxygen demand
Coliform index
Dissolved oxygen
Heavy metals
pH
Salinity
Temperature
Total dissolved solids
Total suspended solids
Turbidity





Treatment options



Activated sludge
Aerated lagoon
Agricultural wastewater treatment
API oil-water separator
Carbon filtration
Chlorination
Clarifier
Constructed wetland
Decentralized wastewater system
Extended aeration
Facultative lagoon
Fecal sludge management
Filtration
Imhoff tank
Industrial wastewater treatment
Ion exchange
Membrane bioreactor
Reverse osmosis
Rotating biological contactor
Secondary treatment
Sedimentation
Septic tank
Settling basin
Sewage sludge treatment
Sewage treatment
Sewer mining
Stabilization pond
Trickling filter
Ultraviolet germicidal irradiation
UASB
Vermifilter
Wastewater treatment plant





Disposal options



Combined sewer
Evaporation pond
Groundwater recharge
Infiltration basin
Injection well
Irrigation
Marine dumping
Marine outfall
Reclaimed water
Sanitary sewer
Septic drain field
Sewage farm
Storm drain
Surface runoff












v
t
e


Prehistoric technology






Prehistory

timeline
outline
Stone Age
subdivisions
New Stone Age


Technology

history












Tools







Farming



Neolithic Revolution

founder crops
New World crops


Ard / plough
Celt
Digging stick
Domestication
Goad
Irrigation
Secondary products
Sickle
Terracing





Food processing



Fire
Basket
Cooking

Earth oven


Granaries
Grinding slab
Ground stone
Hearth

Aşıklı Höyük
Qesem Cave


Manos
Metate
Mortar and pestle
Pottery
Quern-stone
Storage pit





Hunting







Arrow
Boomerang

throwing stick


Bow and arrow

history


Nets
Spear

Spear-thrower
baton
harpoon
woomera
Schöningen Spears







Projectile points



Arrowhead
Bare Island
Cascade
Clovis
Cresswell
Cumberland
Eden
Folsom
Lamoka
Manis Site
Plano
Transverse arrowhead





Systems



Game drive system

Buffalo jump










Toolmaking



Earliest toolmaking

Oldowan
Acheulean
Mousterian


Clovis culture
Cupstone
Fire hardening
Gravettian culture
Hafting
Hand axe

Grooves


Langdale axe industry
Levallois technique
Lithic core
Lithic reduction

analysis
debitage
flake


Lithic technology
Magdalenian culture
Metallurgy
Microblade technology
Mining
Prepared-core technique
Solutrean industry
Striking platform
Tool stone
Uniface
Yubetsu technique





Other tools



Adze
Awl

bone


Axe
Bannerstone
Blade

prismatic


Bone tool
Bow drill
Burin
Canoe

Oar
Pesse canoe


Chopper

tool


Cleaver
Denticulate tool
Fire plough
Fire-saw
Hammerstone
Knife
Microlith
Quern-stone
Racloir
Rope
Scraper

side


Stone tool
Tally stick
Weapons
Wheel

illustration


















Architecture







Ceremonial



Göbekli Tepe
Kiva
Standing stones

megalith
row
Stonehenge


Pyramid





Dwellings



Neolithic architecture
British megalith architecture
Nordic megalith architecture
Burdei
Cave
Cliff dwelling
Dugout
Hut

Quiggly hole


Jacal
Longhouse
Mud brick

Mehrgarh


Neolithic long house
Pit-house
Pueblitos
Pueblo
Rock shelter

Blombos Cave
Abri de la Madeleine
Sibudu Cave


Stone roof
Roundhouse
Stilt house

Alp pile dwellings


Wattle and daub





Water management



Check dam
Cistern
Flush toilet
Reservoir
Water well





Other architecture



Archaeological features
Broch
Burnt mound

fulacht fiadh


Causewayed enclosure

Tor enclosure


Circular enclosure

Goseck


Cursus
Henge

Thornborough


Oldest buildings
Megalithic architectural elements
Midden
Timber circle
Timber trackway

Sweet Track


















Arts and culture







Material goods



Baskets
Beadwork
Beds
Chalcolithic
Clothing/textiles

timeline


Cosmetics
Glue
Hides

shoes
Ötzi


Jewelry

amber use


Mirrors
Pottery

Cardium
Grooved ware
Linear
Jōmon
Unstan ware


Sewing needle
Weaving
Wine

Winery
wine press







PrehistArt



Art of the Upper Paleolithic
Art of the Middle Paleolithic

Blombos Cave


List of Stone Age art
Bird stone
Bradshaw rock paintings
Cairn
Carved Stone Balls
Cave paintings

painting
pigment


Cup and ring mark
Geoglyph
Golden hats
Guardian stones
Megalithic art
Petroform
Petroglyph
Petrosomatoglyph
Pictogram
Rock art

Stone carving


Sculpture
Statue menhir
Stone circle

list
British Isles and Brittany


Venus figurines





Burial



Burial mounds

Bowl barrow
Round barrow


Mound Builders culture

U.S. sites


Chamber tomb

Severn-Cotswold


Cist

Dartmoor kistvaens


Clava cairn
Court tomb
Cremation
Dolmen

Great dolmen


Funeral pyre
Gallery grave

transepted
wedge-shaped


Grave goods
Jar burial
Long barrow

unchambered
Grønsalen


Megalithic tomb
Mummy
Passage grave
Rectangular dolmen
Ring cairn
Simple dolmen
Stone box grave
Tor cairn
Tumulus
Unchambered long cairn





Other cultural



Astronomy

sites
lunar calendar


Behavioral modernity
Origin of language
Prehistoric medicine

trepanning


Evolutionary musicology

music archaeology


Prehistoric music

Alligator drum
flutes
Divje Babe flute
gudi


Prehistoric numerals
Origin of religion

Paleolithic religion
Prehistoric religion
Spiritual drug use


Prehistoric warfare
Symbols

symbolism

















Authority control



LCCN: sh00006268
GND: 4006306-9
NDL: 00568646












						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Irrigation&oldid=816382127"					Categories: IrrigationAgricultural soil scienceAgronomyEnvironmental issues with waterLand managementWater managementHidden categories: CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors listWebarchive template wayback linksArticles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from July 2014Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2017All articles containing potentially dated statementsAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from May 2011Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica without Wikisource referenceWikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia BritannicaWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiers