This article is about the news provider in the United Kingdom. For the channel in Sri Lanka, see Independent Television Network. For the news programme with ITV, see ITV News. For other uses, see ITN (disambiguation).

Independent Television News


ITN logo



Genre
News


Founded
January 1955


Headquarters
London, England, UK



Area served

Worldwide



Key people

John Hardie (CEO)


Owner
ITV plc (40%)
DMGT (20%)
Thomson Reuters (20%)
UBM plc (20%)


Divisions
ITN News
ITN Productions
ITN Source


Website
www.itn.co.uk


Independent Television News (ITN) is a British-based news and content provider. It is made up of three divisions: ITN News, ITN Source and ITN Productions. ITN is based in London, with bureaux and offices in Beijing, Brussels, Jerusalem, Johannesburg, New York, Paris, Sydney and Washington DC.
ITN produces content for ITV, Channel 4, Channel 5, UK mobile phone operators, online outlets such as YouTube, MSN, Telegraph Media Group, Yahoo!, and film producers and researchers worldwide.
Between 1955 and 1999, ITN was more commonly known as the general brand name of ITV's news programmes. Since 1999, ITV has used ITV News as the brand name for their news programmes, though ITN continues as the network's news provider.



Contents


1 History
2 Operations

2.1 ITN produced programmes schedule
2.2 ITV News

2.2.1 ITN/ITV News
2.2.2 Channel 4 News
2.2.3 5 News
2.2.4 International
2.2.5 Other ventures


2.3 ITN Source
2.4 ITN Productions


3 Ownership
4 Parodies
5 See also
6 References
7 External links



History[edit]
ITN was founded in January 1955 by the Independent Television Authority, as part of the new British commercial television network referred to as "Independent Television" (later ITV).
It began as a consortium of the initial ITV broadcasting companies, with former Labour MP Aidan Crawley as editor-in-chief. One of those companies, the London weekday contract-holder Associated-Rediffusion offered the new company studio space in its headquarters in Aldwych, London. The first bulletin was broadcast at 10pm on 22 September 1955 on ITV's launch night. The bulletin was presented by former champion athlete Christopher Chataway. From the start, ITN broke new ground by introducing in-vision and named 'newscasters' (rather than the BBC's nameless and sound-only 'newsreaders'), and reporter packages. The unique, probing reporting style of Robin Day caused shock among politicians, finding themselves questioned continually for information – this had never been the case with the BBC. There was also some early tensions with the ITV companies. ABC Television, the ITV contractor for the north and Midlands on weekends, immediately called for shorter ITN bulletins. While the ITA ruled on a minimum of a 20-minute bulletin, disagreements with the ITV companies over ITN's budget triggered the resignation of its news editor Aidan Crawley after just one year in 1956. He was replaced by Geoffrey Cox.[1] Throughout the early years, ITN continued to develop its service to the ITV network with an agenda to firstly, fulfil its public service broadcasting requirements and secondly satisfy the ITV companies by attracting viewers. Under this method, ITN continued to differentiate itself from the BBC by conducting probing interviews, introducing more human interest stories and bringing ordinary people on to screen by using so-called 'vox pops' (interviews, usually held in the street, with members of the general public), all of which were seen as a radical departure at the time in British broadcasting.[1] As the ITN reporter and later ITN political editor Julian Haviland, put it: "My view was that at ITN we must be at least as responsible and accurate as the BBC, without being so damned boring".[2] As ITV expanded, each ITV company that made up the network's federal structure had to purchase a stake in ITN and to continue to finance the company.
In 1967, ITN was given the go-ahead by the ITA to provide a full 30 minute daily news programme at 10pm on ITV. There was further tension with the ITV executives as they were sceptical of the idea that viewers would want a full 30 minutes of news every Monday to Friday and they were also losing valuable peak time slots which could be used for the sale of commercial advertising. News at Ten began broadcasting on 3 July 1967 with a newscaster team consisting of Alastair Burnet, Andrew Gardner, George Ffitch and Reginald Bosanquet. It was initially given a 13-week trial run, however, the programme proved to be extremely popular with viewers and continued for a further 32 years. News at Ten was to become one of the most prestigious news programmes of its time in British history with a reputation for high quality journalism and innovation.[1] ITN's News at Ten also prompted the BBC to establish a fixed nightly news bulletin at 9pm. The Nine O'Clock News began broadcasting in 1970 as News at Ten's rival. ITN also established other programmes in the ITV schedule. First Report, a lunchtime bulletin began in 1972 and by 1976, News at 5.45 commenced. This was a period when ITN enjoyed its greatest plaudits, following Lord Annan's 1977 report on the future of broadcasting, which declared: "We subscribe to the generally held view that ITN has the edge over BBC news."[3]
ITN commenced producing Channel 4 News when the channel started broadcasting in 1982. The programme was launched by Peter Sissons, Trevor McDonald and Sarah Hogg. The hour long programme has been broadcast at 7pm since it started and has a reputation for high quality journalism and thorough analysis.
Until the 1990s, ITN had a guaranteed right and obligation to provide news for ITV and Channel 4. Since the Broadcasting Act 1990, ITN has had to apply and bid for a licence to provide such services on these networks and would have to fight competition in order to preserve its services, as had become the case with other ITV franchisees. The Broadcasting Act also changed the ownership rules of ITN. The ITV companies were no longer the owners of ITN but rather external investors to expand the service and transform it into a profit-making operation.[3] The move was to transform the company from a 'cost centre' to a 'profit-making business'. The move saw 400 staff made redundant and the closure of a number of international bureaux to claw back a £10 million deficit in order to provide a competitive product to obtain the ITV news contract. Within three years the company turned to profit in 1993 with suggestions at the time that the company should be listed on the stock exchange.[1]
The company launched 5 News in 1997 following the foundation of Channel 5.
The 1990s saw major changes to the television landscape in Britain. The growth of multichannel television saw ITV's share of audience fall. Against this backdrop ITV itself became increasingly commercially aggressive. This was to be a major turning point in ITN's history which saw a reduction in the ITV news contract. By this period the main ITV companies Granada and Carlton had also viewed unfavourably the scheduling of News at Ten which became a subject of dispute between ITN and the ITV companies. ITN favoured keeping the bulletin, however, the ITV companies claimed audiences were lost at 10pm as the news interrupted films and drama programming. News at Ten eventually ended in March 1999 with ITN's flagship bulletin moved to 6.30pm with a shorter late night bulletin at 11pm. Consolidation of the ITV network under a unified ITV brand also saw the removal of the on-screen ITN brand which was replaced with ITV News.[4] From this point, the ITN brand was gradually phased out and it is now only referenced to in the end production caption.
The early years of the 21st century was to prove to be a challenging period. The axing of News at Ten caused public outcry and ITN's viewership figures fell by 13.9%[5] Political pressure and pressure from the media resulted in ITV bringing back a shorter 20 minute bulletin at 10pm three nights a week. The programme eventually lost share to the BBC News at Ten (which launched in 2000 to capitalise on ITV's move) and ITV eventually axed the programme again in 2004 and moved the bulletin to 10.30pm before bringing it back to 10pm again in 2008. The biggest challenge came in 2001 when British Sky Broadcasting bid to supply network news to ITV as part of a consortium. ITN eventually succeeded and was awarded a contract extension to 2008. In January 2005 Sky News took over supplying bulletins to Channel 5; ITN had produced 5 News since its launch in 1997 and the contract was returned in February 2012, following a change of ownership at Channel 5. Also in 2005, ITN started producing The Queen's speech to the Commonwealth at Christmas every other year, so for the first time since the inception of Independent Television in 1955, ITN produced a programme for its rival the BBC.
In August 2000, ITN launched its own 24-hour news channel in the UK, broadcast on satellite, cable and digital terrestrial. It was 50% owned by ITN and 50% owned by NTL. Carlton and Granada gradually bought out the two stakes and renamed the channel the ITV News Channel. It closed down on 23 December 2005. Poor ratings in comparison to BBC News 24 and Sky News, and ITV's desire to re-use the channel's allocation on Freeview, were cited as the reasons.[6]
In March 2004 following its acquisition of the London News Network, a company previously owned by the now merged Carlton and Granada, ITN began producing local news bulletins for the ITV London region. ITN produced More4 News between 2005 and 2009. In 2007 it began producing Setanta Sports News; however it closed in 2009.[7]
Between 1996 and 2002, it also owned a share of London News Radio, which was based at ITN's Gray's Inn Road headquarters and operated the LBC and News Direct London radio stations. ITN used to operate a radio news service on behalf of Independent Radio News (IRN) but on 15 October 2008, IRN announced that Sky News Radio was to replace ITN as its main supplier from March 2009.
While news production remains the cornerstone of ITN's business model, the company has diversified from its original remit. ITN Source (originally ITN Archive) is one of the world's largest sources of historical film.[8] ITN Productions creates multi-platform content for major global brands, covering genres such as factual, entertainment, news and corporate production. Clients that commission award-winning programmes from ITN Productions include major UK and international broadcasters such as ITV, the BBC, Channel 4, Channel 5, History and Discovery, with television commissions including Climbing Great Buildings on BBC2 and Mud Men on History.[9]
John Hardie is the chief executive officer of ITN, a position he took up in June 2009. Prior to this, he was executive VP and MD of Walt Disney Television EMEA.[citation needed]
Operations[edit]




An ITN satellite van


ITN produced programmes schedule[edit]


Programme
Channel
Days
Start time
End time
Presenters


ITV Lunchtime News
ITV, STV, UTV
Weekdays
13:30
13:55
Nina Hossain or Alastair Stewart


ITV Evening News
Weekdays
18:30
19:00
Mary Nightingale


News at Ten
Weekdays
22:00
22:30
Tom Bradby or Julie Etchingham


ITV News
Weekends
Various
Various


Channel 4 News
Channel 4
Weekdays
19:00
19:55
Jon Snow,
Krishnan Guru-Murthy,
Matt Frei,
Cathy Newman


Channel 4 News
Weekends
Various


Channel 4 News Summary
Weekdays
12:00
12:05


5 News
Channel 5
Weekdays
20:58
21:00
Various


5 News at 5
Weekdays
17:00
17:30
Sian Williams


5 News Tonight
Weekdays
18:30
19:00
Matt Barbet


5 News at Lunchtime
Weekdays
12:10
12:15
Various


5 News Weekend
Weekends
Various
Various


5 News at 19:58
Weekdays
19:58
20:00
Various


5 News at 20:58
Weekdays
20:58
21:00
Various


ITV News[edit]
Main article: ITV News
ITN/ITV News[edit]






This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (February 2012) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



ITN has produced all national news bulletins on ITV since the network was launched on 22 September 1955. Originally the ITN logo and brand featured prominently on all news bulletins on ITV, however since March 1999, bulletins have been branded as ITV News. Trademarks of ITV News include the use of the clock-face of the Elizabeth Tower of Westminster Palace, the chimes of Big Ben punctuating the days headlines and the signature theme tune; The Awakening by Johnny Pearson.
Throughout the early years, ITN established programmes in the ITV schedule including First Report at lunchtime, News at 5.45 in the evening and the flagship News at Ten. Today, ITV News on weekdays broadcasts the ITV Lunchtime News at 1.30pm, the ITV Evening News at 6.30pm and ITV News at Ten with bulletins broadcast at various times on weekends. ITN has at times interrupted the ITV schedule to provide updates on major breaking stories of national and international importance including the September 11 attacks, London bombings, 2005 or events involving the British Royal Family. ITN has covered every general election since 1955 for ITV, providing comprehensive coverage of the counts throughout election night and has also broadcast special programmes covering the UK budget speech given by the Chancellor of the Exchequer.
ITN's history is inextricably linked to that of ITV as prior to the 1990 Television Act each of the ITV companies were required to own a share and fund ITN. In the 1990s, under new ownership, it was accused of abandoning its previous news style, which was broadsheet in style to mid-market tabloid with news stories that focused on personalities in the news rather than heavy news coverage leading to accusations of dumbing down its coverage.
ITN's most famous news programme, News at Ten was also controversially replaced by an 11pm news bulletin in 1999, said to be in order to allow ITV to broadcast films without the interruption of a 10 o'clock news bulletin. News at Ten was subsequently re-instated in 2001 after heavy public criticism over the change. The restored programme was 10 minutes shorter than its predecessor and carried less in-depth news coverage. It was also broadcast at a later time at least one day a week, which meant it was often jokingly referred to as News at When? There was increasing speculation that the News at Ten would again be moved, after under-performing against the Ten O'Clock News on BBC One which broadcasts every day at 10:00pm. In October 2003, the Independent Television Commission gave ITV approval to move News at Ten.
The ITV News at 10.30 launched on ITV on 2 February 2004 (the day that ITV in England, Wales and Southern Scotland came under the ownership of a single company) and was presented by Sir Trevor McDonald. The programme was longer than its predecessor and carried an integrated regional bulletin, as well as more business stories, a nightly sports update and a preview of the following day's newspapers. Mark Austin took over main presenting duties on 16 January 2006.
The rebranded programme again saw new titles, this time featuring people walking over the face of Big Ben and has lately followed a more "sensationalist" approach to its main headlines. When ITV executive chairman Michael Grade joined ITV, he made it clear that he saw news as the key in defining any channel. On 14 January 2008, the News at Ten returned, presented by Julie Etchingham and McDonald returned to his duties again. Mark Austin joined Etchingham as co-presenter in 2009. As of October 2015 Tom Bradby has been the main presenter on the programme.
ITV News at 6.30 has, since it was launched in 1999, been the network's most popular bulletin. Its presenters include Mark Austin, Mary Nightingale and Alastair Stewart.
In March 2004, ITN took over production of ITV London's regional news programmes, which relocated from The London Television Centre on the South Bank to ITN's Gray's Inn Road base.
Channel 4 News[edit]
Main article: Channel 4 News
ITN is home to Channel 4 News, having produced the programme since the channel's inception in 1982.
Channel 4 News flagship programme is 55 minutes of in-depth news and current affairs broadcast at 7pm each weekday and at 6.30pm on Saturdays and Sundays. The weekday evening programme is anchored by Jon Snow, whereas Krishnan Guru-Murthy presents the weekend bulletins.
A five-minute long news summary goes out Monday to Friday at midday. The bulletin replaced Channel 4's 30-minute News at Noon programme in late 2009, six years after its launch during the Iraq War of 2003.
ITN created More4 News when the digital channel More4 was launched in October 2005. It ran at 8pm, immediately after Channel 4 News. It was originally presented by Sarah Smith; Kylie Morris took over presenting duties in June 2007 and Smith was posted to the US as Channel 4 News' Washington correspondent. In December 2009 Channel 4 cancelled More4 News.[10]
5 News[edit]
Main article: 5 News
From the launch of Channel 5 in 1997, ITN provided the news bulletins for 5 News. However, in January 2005, ITN lost the contract, which was awarded to Sky News. In 2011 ITN regained the contract in a three-year deal to provide news for Channel 5 from early 2012, but on a much reduced budget. The deal followed an agreement by Sky and Northern & Shell, the then-owner of Channel 5, to terminate the 5 News contract early.
International[edit]
ITN began its own World News bulletins in the late 1980s, which were shown around the world on local television channels, particularly on PBS stations in the US, where presenter Daljit Dhaliwal (now with Al-Jazeera English) enjoyed cult status.
These were discontinued in 2001, in the face of competition from dedicated news channels such as BBC World (now known as BBC World News), although it still provides footage to CNN International and reports often appear on PBS NewsHour. Its ITV Evening News bulletin was shown on the Newsworld International cable channel in the US.
Other ventures[edit]
ITN launched its 24-hour news channel in 2000, which was jointly bought by the main ITV companies Carlton and Granada in 2002 and rebranded as the ITV News Channel. It was closed down in 2005.
Setanta Sports News was a 24-hour sports news television channel produced by ITN and jointly owned by Virgin Media Television and Setanta Sports, launched on 29 November 2007. The channel ceased broadcasting on 23 June 2009, when Setanta's UK operation were placed into administration following financial difficulties.
ITN Consulting was the management consultancy arm of ITN, combining the resources of ITN with the consulting team’s experience to advise global media companies on issues spanning all areas of strategy and operations, including financial planning, marketing, scheduling and content, recruitment, and interim management. With partner, Venture Consulting, it had offices in London, Milan, Dubai, Singapore and Sydney. It operated as a network with its consultants working on engagements globally and focused "on how strategy can be implemented to deliver to real change". ITN Consulting stated that "an understanding of how global, regional and local media markets conflict and come together enables them to identify the opportunities this creates". They took an external, outsider perspective as well as having the viewpoint of senior "insider" media executives. ITN Consulting was extensively involved in the development of business plans for local TV in the UK.[11] It also consulted a range of national broadcasters on improving performance. The unit closed in 2012.
ITN Source[edit]
ITN Source[12] (formerly ITN Archive) licenses video footage from ITN's one million hours of archive content including news, drama, celebrity, comedy, music, wildlife, natural history and film. It also syndicates on-the-day news footage generated by ITN to other broadcasters and producers worldwide. The company represents the moving image libraries of Reuters, ITV (including ITV Studios), ANI, UTV, Fox News, Fox Movietone, Gaumont British, Nine Network and other specialist collections. Its headquarters are in London and it has sales offices in New York, Toronto, Paris, Johannesburg, Sydney and Tokyo.
In 2005, ITN became a shareholder in Espresso Group, a provider of digital content to more than 60% of primary schools in the UK and also internationally. Espresso services feature an extensive library of broadband teaching resources and student activities to motivate pupils and support teachers, including content from ITN Source. In May 2008, the Education Clip Library,[13] a unique, video licensing service for educational publishers and broadcasters around the world, was launched. It is aimed at educational publishers and broadcasters seeking to add video to their instructional products and services. Espresso was acquired by Discovery Education (part of Discovery Communications) on 7 November 2013.[14]
In October 2008, ITN Source announced the creation of Diagonal View,[15] a joint venture with Matt Heiman, a digital entrepreneur. The company packages content from ITN Source's archive and syndicates it to a range of commercial partners including MySpace, YouTube and MSN.
ITN Productions[edit]






This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (August 2010) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



ITN Productions was formed in February 2010 and incorporates the non-news operations of ITN, including the former ITN On, ITN Factual and ITN Corporate divisions.[16]
ITN was the one of the first companies to provide news content for 3G mobile phones, when it struck a deal to provide daily news bulletins for the 3 network in 2003.
It has since expanded its video news service providing news, sport and showbiz content to a wide range of broadcasters, newspapers and websites.
Clients include:
Newspaper websites: Daily Mail, Daily Express, Daily Star, The Daily Telegraph, The Guardian and The Independent.
Other websites: MSN, Yahoo!, AOL, YouTube and Dailymotion.
Showbiz bulletins from ITN are broadcast daily on a number of television channels, including FYI Daily on ITV2, ITV3 and ITV4, The Fix on 4Music and 5* Access on 5*. A daily showbiz breakfast show, The Breakfast Fix, is broadcast on 4Music.
From August 2013, ITN Productions was awarded the contract to produce the Premier League online and mobile highlights service for News UK. Content appears on The Sun and The Times subscription websites and mobile apps.
Digital content is supplied to sports news video agency SNTV.
ITN Productions also creates factual programming for ITV, Channel 4 and Channel 5 as well as international broadcasters, including Discovery Channel, History Channel, PBS and National Geographic Channel.
ITN has produced shows for Sky, with one if its later programmes being Harrow: A Very British School.
ITN also supplied programming to the now-closed Teachers TV service.
Ownership[edit]






This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (August 2010) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



From its inception in 1955, ITN was originally owned jointly by all the ITV operating companies, the shares split roughly in proportion to each company's advertising income. However the 1990 Broadcasting Act limited the ITV companies to a maximum joint 49% stake, with no single company allowed more than a 20% holding. These requirements were abolished by the Communications Act 2003.


Owner
Shares[17]


ITV plc
40%


Daily Mail and General Trust
20%


Thomson Reuters
20%


UBM plc
20%



ITV plc's shareholding forms part of the wider ITV News Group which incorporates the regional operations in England, Southern Scotland, Wales, Northern Ireland and the Channel Islands. The Director of the ITV News Group is Michael Jermey, a former editor and executive at ITN.
ITV's ownership of 40% of ITN (at that time equally split between Carlton and Granada) made the 2001 bid from Sky for ITV bulletins unlikely to succeed, the network having a vested interest to see ITN continue. The ITN contract for ITV News expires at the end of 2012. On 2 April 2007 ITN signed a deal which superseded the existing contract, worth at least £42m per year, and invested more than £15m to upgrade ITN's newsroom as part of the deal.
Parodies[edit]






This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (June 2009) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



ITN has been spoofed several times on ITV's The Benny Hill Show, namely in one 1971 show with the logo reading "NIT" instead of "ITN" and with Hill as Reginald "Boozenquet" and Andrew Gardner.
ITN was also spoofed in 1978 in the Leprechaun Independent Television sketch with Hill as Angela O'Rippon, a parody of Angela Rippon, and as Ann Afford, a parody of Anna Ford. It was also spoofed in a black and white 1971 show and a 1973 episode.
See also[edit]

List of ITV journalists and newsreaders
Independent Radio News

References[edit]


^ a b c d Johnson (1 September 2005). "Itv Cultures". McGraw-Hill Education (UK) – via Google Books. 
^ Lindley, Richard (2005). And Finally... The History of ITN. London: Politico's Publishing. ISBN 9781842750674. 
^ a b Hayward, Anthony (20 July 2012). "Sir Alastair Burnet obituary". 
^ Catherine, Johnson; Rob, Turnock (1 September 2005). "Itv Cultures: Independent Television Over Fifty Years: Independent Television Over Fifty Years". McGraw-Hill Education (UK) – via Google Books. 
^ Bromley, Michael (11 September 2014). "No News is Bad News: Radio, Television and the Public". Routledge – via Google Books. 
^ Conlan, Tara (14 December 2005). "ITV News Channel axed". MediaGuardian (web only). London. Retrieved 2007-12-31. 
^ "Setanta UK goes into administration". Irish Times. 23 June 2009. Retrieved 23 June 2009. 
^ "The world's leading provider of archive footage". 
^ "The Nativity Factor - About". 
^ Deans, Jason (5 August 2009). "Channel 4 to axe News at Noon and More4 News". The Guardian. London. Retrieved 5 May 2010. 
^ "ITN Consulting: Local TV". Archived from the original on 26 September 2011. 
^ ITN Source
^ Education Clip Library
^ "Discovery Communications announces acquisition of Espresso Education, the leading provider of primary school digital education content in the U.K". Retrieved 24 December 2013. 
^ Diagonal View
^ Jennifer Whitehead (25 February 2010). "Wheeler steps down as ITN On MD following divisions merger". New Media Age. 
^ http://www.itn.co.uk/press-releases/itn-announces-new-chairman/


External links[edit]
 Media related to ITN at Wikimedia Commons

Official website
ITN Source
ITN Consulting





Links to related articles











v
t
e


ITV



Channels




Current




Domestic



SD: ITV, STV, UTV
ITV2
ITV3
ITV4
ITVBe
ITV Encore
CITV
The Store
HD: ITV HD, STV HD, UTV HD
ITV2 HD
ITV3 HD
ITV4 HD
ITVBe HD
ITV Encore HD
ITV Box Office





International



ITV Choice








Defunct



ITV News Channel
ITV Play
ITV Sport Channel
S2
UTV2
UTV Ireland








Companies




Current



ITV plc
STV Group plc





Former



Alpha Television
Associated Television
Carlton Communications plc
Granada plc
ITV Digital Ltd
Trident Television
UTV Media plc
Yorkshire-Tyne Tees Television








Divisions,
brands and
services




Current



children's: CITV
news: ITV News (ITN)
sport: ITV Sport
production: ITV Studios (Australia), 12 Yard, Big Talk Productions, Gameface, The Garden, Mammoth Screen, Possessed, Potato, Shiver Productions, So Television, Twofour
weather: ITV Weather
online: itv.com, stv.tv
catch up: ITV Hub, STV Player





Defunct



ITV Day
ITV Digital
ITV Local
ITV Play
ITV Schools
UTV Player
u.tv








Franchises
and
regions




National
franchises



breakfast: TV-am (1983–1992), GMTV (1993–2010), ITV Breakfast (2010–present)
teletext: ORACLE (1974–1992), Teletext Ltd. (1993–present)





Regional
franchises



Northern Scotland: Grampian Television
Central Scotland: Scottish Television
Scottish and English Border: Border Television
Northern Ireland: UTV
North East England: Tyne Tees Television
Yorkshire and Lincolnshire: Yorkshire Television
North of England (weekdays), later North West England and Isle of Man (all week): Granada Television
North of England and Midlands (weekends): ABC Network
Wales and the West of England: TWW, WWN/Teledu Cymru, ITSWW, HTV
Midlands (weekdays), later Midlands (all week): ATV
Midlands (all week): Central Independent Television
East Anglia: Anglia Television
London (weekdays): Associated-Rediffusion, Thames Television, Carlton Television
London (weekends): ATV, LWT
South and South East England: Southern Television, TVS, Meridian Broadcasting
South West England: Westward Television, TSW, Westcountry Television
Channel Islands: Channel Television





Unsuccessful
franchise bids



London Weekday, East Anglia and South and South East England: CPV-TV
North West England: North West Television





Non-franchise
regions




Current



ITV Central
ITV London
ITV Meridian
ITV West Country
ITV Tyne Tees & Border
STV





Defunct



ITV Thames Valley











Regulators



Independent Television Authority (1954–72)
Independent Broadcasting Authority (1972–90)
Independent Television Commission (1991–2003)
Ofcom (2003–present)





Other



Freesat
History of ITV (Idents
ITV Emergency National Service (1968)
ITV Telethon
Night Network)
Timeline of ITV
ITV Nightscreen
people (journalists and newsreaders)
programmes (ITV2
CITV)
Television House
List of ITV regions
United Kingdom Independent Broadcasting
ITV Advertising operations
ITV 50








Television in the United Kingdom
 Category












v
t
e


ITV News



Current programmes



ITV Lunchtime News
ITV Evening News
ITV News at Ten
ITV Weekend News





Former programmes



ITV News at 5:30
ITV Nightly News
ITV News at 10.30
Jonathan Dimbleby
The Late News





Key people



Presenters
Correspondents/Editors





Related



Good Morning Britain
ITV Weather
After the News
The Agenda with Tom Bradby
Exposure
On Assignment
Tonight
ITV News Channel (defunct)
ITV journalists and newsreaders
ITN












v
t
e


Channel Four Television Corporation



Television channels




Wholly owned



Channel 4 (FourText1
Programming
T41)
Film4
E4
More4
4seven





The Box Plus Network2



4Music
Box Upfront
The Box
Box Hits
Kerrang! TV
Kiss TV
Magic








Online services



All 4 (Film4oD . Walter Presents)
Channel4.com





Radio1



4 Digital Group
4radio
E4 Radio





Other



Film4 Productions
ITV Schools1
S4C
UKIB
Timeline of Channel 4








1Defunct
2Joint venture between Channel Four Television Corporation (50%) and Bauer Media Group (50%)


 Category
 Commons












v
t
e


Channel 5 Broadcasting



Channels



Channel 5 (Programmes)
5Spike
5Star
5USA
My5 (Channel)
Milkshake! (Channel)
Paramount Channel





Brands



News: 5 News (provided by ITN)
Sport: Football on 5
Children: Milkshake!
Shake!
Automotive: Fifth Gear
Popular technology: The Gadget Show
Reality TV: Big Brother
Celebrity Big Brother





Online



My5
5FWD






 Category










v
t
e


Daily Mail and General Trust



DMG Media



Daily Mail
MailOnline
The Mail on Sunday
Irish Daily Mail
Irish Mail on Sunday
Metro
Metro.co.uk
7days
London Evening Standard (24.9%)





DMG Broadcasting



British Pathé
ITN (20%)
Teletext (minority holding)





DMG Events



Ad:tech





Euromoney Institutional
Investor PLC (70%)



Absolute Return + Alpha
American Metal Market
Compliance Reporter
Engel Publishing Partners
Euromoney
EuroWeek
Gulf Publishing Company
Industrial Minerals
Institutional Investor
LatinFinance
Metal Bulletin
Petroleum Economist





DMG Information

Dolphin Software



Corporate directors



Lord Rothermere
Peter Williams
Paul Dacre
Padraic Fallon
Charles Dunstone
Nicholas Berry








 Category












v
t
e


Thomson Reuters



Professional Division




Legal (US & Intl.)



Carswell
Derwent World Patents Index
FindLaw (Writ)
La Ley
Practical Law Company
Sweet & Maxwell (IDS)
West
Westlaw
West LegalEdCenter
Pangea3








Markets Division



Breakingviews
EcoWin
Eikon
Extel Surveys
I/B/E/S
ITN (20%)
Lipper
Reuters
Thomson Reuters Business Classification
Thomson Reuters Indices
Thomson Reuters/Jefferies CRB Index
Thomson Reuters league tables
Thomson Reuters Messenger
Thomson Reuters Realized Volatility Index
Zawya





Predecessors



Reuters Group
The Thomson Corporation





Other



3 Times Square
Tom Glocer
David Thomson
The Woodbridge Company






 Category










v
t
e


 Media in the United Kingdom








UK national newspapers, magazines, and other periodicals







Newspapers
(History)




Berliner



The Guardian
The Observer





Broadsheet



Financial Times
The Daily Telegraph
The Sunday Telegraph
The Sunday Times





Compact



i
The Times





Middle-market



Daily Express
Daily Mail
The Mail on Sunday





Tabloid



Daily Mirror
Sunday Mirror
Morning Star
The Sunday People
Daily Star
Daily Star Sunday
The Sun
Sunday Sport








Magazines &
other periodicals



List of magazines by circulation
















Radio in the UK







National
stations




BBC



Analogue / digital
Radio 1
Radio 2
Radio 3
Radio 4
5 Live
Digital only
Radio 1Xtra
Radio 4 Extra
5 Live Sports Extra
6 Music
Asian Network
World Service
BBC National DAB (multiplex)





Independent
/ commercial



Analogue / digital
Absolute Radio
Classic FM
Heart
Kiss
Talksport
Digital only
Absolute 80s
Absolute Radio Extra
BFBS Radio
Capital
Digital One (multiplex)
Heart Extra
heat
The Hits
Jazz FM
Kerrang!
Kiss Fresh
Kisstory
LBC
Magic
Planet Rock
Premier Christian Radio
Radio X
RNIB Connect Radio
Sound Digital (multiplex)
Smooth
Talkradio
UCB UK
Virgin Radio UK








Regional
& local
stations




BBC



List of BBC Local Radio stations
List of BBC Regional Radio stations





Independent
/ commercial



List of community radio stations
List of local commercial radio stations
List of semi-national / regional analogue and digital radio stations








Other
stations



List of hospital radio stations
Pirate radio
Restricted Service Licence (RSL)

List of RSL stations


List of satellite radio stations
List of student and schools radio





Other



Broadcasting House
FM broadcasting
The Studios, MediaCityUK
Radio Academy

Radio Academy Awards


Radio Independents Group
RAJAR
Most listened to programmes
















Television in the UK







Principal
channels
(List)




BBC



BBC One
BBC Two
BBC Four
BBC News
BBC Parliament
CBBC
CBeebies





ITV



ITV
ITV2
ITV3
ITV4
CITV
ITV Encore
ITVBe
ITV Box Office





Ch 4



Channel 4
E4
Film4
More4
4seven





Ch 5



Channel 5
5Prime
5Spike
5Star
5USA





Sky



Challenge
Pick
Real Lives
Sky One
Sky Two
Sky Arts
Sky Atlantic
Sky Cinema
Sky Living
Sky News
Sky Sports
Sky Sports F1
Sky Sports News





UKTV



Alibi
Dave
Drama
Eden
Gold
Good Food
Home
Really
W
Yesterday





Sony Pictures Television



Chart Show TV
Chart Show Hits
Movies4Men
Pop
Pop Max
Starz TV
Sony Channel
Sony Movie Channel
Scuzz
Tiny Pop
True Crime
True Entertainment
True Movies
truTV
The Vault








Services
&
platforms



All 4

Film4oD


analogue

analogue terrestrial (defunct)


BBC iPlayer

BBC Three


BBC Store
TalkTalk TV Store
BT TV
cable
digital

digital terrestrial
List of channels


Freesat

Freesat+


Freeview
high-definition

List of channels


ITV

ITV Hub, STV Player


local television
My5
Now TV
Real Digital
Restricted Service Licence
satellite

List of channels


Sky

Freesat from Sky
On Demand
Sky+
Sky+ HD


TalkTalk TV
Top Up TV
TVPlayer
Virgin Media

FilmFlex
TiVo
V+


YouView
Zattoo





Studios




Current



BBC Elstree Centre
BBC Pacific Quay
The Bottle Yard Studios
Broadcasting House
Broadcasting House, Belfast
Broadcasting House, Bristol
Broadcasting House, Cardiff
Elstree Studios (Shenley Road)
Gas Street Studios
The Leeds Studios
The London Studios
The Maidstone Studios
Mailbox Birmingham
MediaCityUK
Osterley Television Centre
Roath Lock
Television Centre, London





Defunct



British and Dominions Imperial Studios
Fountain Studios
Gate Studios
Granada Studios
MGM-British Studios
Pebble Mill Studios
Teddington Studios
Television Centre, Newcastle upon Tyne
Television Centre, Southampton
Upper Boat Studios








Other



Defunct channels
Edinburgh International Television Festival
History

List of years


List of channels
Student television
Viewing statistics

Most-watched broadcasts


















Companies and organisations







Companies




Major
companies



Archant
Ascential
Bauer Radio
BBC
Bloomsbury Publishing
BT Group
Channel Four Television Corporation
Daily Mail and General Trust
Dentsu Aegis Network
Economist Group
EMI Music Publishing
Endemol Shine UK
Global Group
Guardian Media Group
Haymarket Media Group
Informa
ITN
ITV plc
Johnston Press
Mecom Group
News UK
Newsquest
Northern & Shell
Now TV Limited
Origin Broadband
Pearson PLC
Press Holdings
RELX Group
Reuters
Sky UK Limited
Sky plc
STV Group
Syco
TalkTalk Group
Time Inc. UK
Trinity Mirror
UBM plc
Virgin Media
Wireless Group





Other resources



Arqiva
List of largest UK book publishers








Government
& regulatory
bodies



Advertising Standards Authority
BBC Trust
British Board of Film Classification
British Film Institute
Culture, Media, and Sport Select Committee
Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport
Independent Press Standards Organisation
Ofcom
Press Recognition Panel
S4C Authority





Industry
& trades
bodies



British Academy of Film and Television Arts
British Phonographic Industry
Broadcasting, Entertainment, Cinematograph and Theatre Union
Clearcast
Digital TV Group
Digital UK
Equity
Federation Against Copyright Theft
National Union of Journalists
The Publishers Association
Royal Television Society
United Kingdom Independent Broadcasting





Other



BBC Academy
National Film and Television School
National Science and Media Museum
















Regional and student media







Regional media



Media in England

Birmingham
London
Manchester


Media in Scotland

Aberdeen
Dundee
Glasgow


Media in Wales

Cardiff







Student media



Student television














 Category
















						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=ITN&oldid=814479599"					Categories: International Emmy Awards Current Affairs & News winnersITNDaily Mail and General TrustITVTelevision news in the United Kingdom1955 establishments in EnglandInternational management consulting firmsThomson ReutersHidden categories: Use dmy dates from October 2015Use British English from October 2015Pages using deprecated image syntaxAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from February 2012Articles needing additional references from February 2012All articles needing additional referencesArticles needing additional references from August 2010Articles needing additional references from June 2009