This article is about the British television channel. For the ITV Network as a whole, see ITV (TV network). For the regional franchise serving Scotland, see STV (TV channel) and for the regional franchise serving Northern Ireland, UTV (TV channel). For the channel's owner, see ITV plc. For other meanings, see ITV.


ITV



ITV logo used since 2013



Launched
22 September 1955; 62 years ago (1955-09-22)


Network
ITV


Owned by
ITV plc


Picture format
576i (SDTV);
1080i (HDTV)


Audience share
ITV Network:
12.41% (October 2017 (2017-10), BARB)


Slogan
Come on in


Country
England & Wales (STV available in Scotland and UTV available in NI)


Language
English


Broadcast area
England, Wales, South Scotland, Isle of Man and Channel Islands


Formerly called
ITV1
(2001 to 2013, and later reverted to the ITV name)


Replaced
Anglia Television, Border Television, Carlton Television, Central Independent Television, Channel Television, Granada Television, HTV, LWT, Meridian Broadcasting, Tyne Tees Television, Westcountry Television and Yorkshire Television
(on 28 October 2002)


Sister channel(s)
ITV2
ITV3
ITV4
ITVBe
ITV Encore
CITV
The Store
ITV Box Office


Timeshift service
ITV +1


Website
www.itv.com/hub/itv



Availability



Terrestrial


Freeview
Channel 3
Channel 33 (+1)
Channel 103 (HD)


Satellite


Freesat
Channel 103
Channel 111 (HD)
Channel 112 (+1)
Channel 977 (AD) (ITV London)


Sky UK only
Channel 103
Channel 131 (+1)
Channel 178 (HD)
Channel 973 (AD) (ITV London)


Astra 2E
10758 V 22000 5/6
10891 H 22000 5/6 (+1)
10832 H 22000 5/6 (HD)


Eutelsat 10A
(BFBS)
8003


NSS 12
(BFBS)
8103


NSS 806
(BFBS)
8103


Cable


Virgin Media
Channel 103
Channel 113 (HD)
Channel 114 (+1)
Channel 853 (AD) (ITV London)


Naxoo
(Switzerland)
Channel 217 (ITV London)


UPC Switzerland (Switzerland)
Channel 205 (HD) (ITV London)


WightFibre
Channel 3


IPTV


Freewire
Channel 103


SwisscomTV
(Switzerland)
Channel arbitrary


Streaming media


ITV Hub
Watch live
(ITV London, ITV regions only)


TVPlayer
Watch live (UK only)


Virgin TV Anywhere
Watch live
(ITV London, UK only)


Sky Go
Watch live
(UK and Ireland only)


ITV is a commercial television channel in the United Kingdom. Previously a network of separate regional television channels, ITV currently operates in England, Wales, Scotland, the Isle of Man and the Channel Islands.
From 2001 until 2013, the channel was called ITV1. In 2004, Granada Television acquired Carlton Communications to form ITV plc.
ITV is the biggest and most popular commercial television channel in the United Kingdom. ITV and its predecessor channels have contended with BBC One for the status of the UK's most watched television channel since the 1950s. However, in line with other terrestrial channels, ITV's audience share has fallen in the era of multi-channel television.



Contents


1 History
2 Corporate unification

2.1 Regional variations
2.2 Proposed regional changes


3 Branding

3.1 Independent Television (1955–1989)
3.2 ITV (1989–2001)

3.2.1 "TV from the Heart" (1999-2001)


3.3 ITV1 (2001–2013)

3.3.1 ITV Day


3.4 2013 rebranding


4 Notable programming

4.1 Daytime programming
4.2 Primetime programming
4.3 Weekend programming
4.4 Nighttime programming


5 Subsidiary channels

5.1 ITV HD
5.2 ITV +1


6 Availability outside the UK
7 Logos
8 Notes
9 References
10 External links



History[edit]
Main article: History of ITV
Following the creation of the Television Act 1954, the establishment of a commercial television service in the UK began.
The Independent Television service, or ITV, was made up of regions, with each region run by different companies. The three largest regions (London, the Midlands and the North of England) were subdivided into weekday and weekend services, with a different company running each. ITV existed in a region-heavy form from its inception to the 2000s, although the switch was gradual.
ITV1 became the generic on-screen brand name used by the twelve franchises of the ITV Network in the United Kingdom. The brand was introduced in 2001 by Carlton- and Granada-owned franchises, initially used alongside the local regional name. However, it became the sole on-air identity in 2002 when the two companies decided to create a single unified playout of the channel, with regional references only used prior to regional programming. Carlton and Granada went on to merge in 2004, creating ITV plc which now owns thirteen of the fifteen regional ITV licences.
The ITV1 name was only used in England, Wales, Southern Scotland and Isle of Man until Channel Television adopted the name in January 2006, bringing it to the Channel Islands. It should be noted, however, that as national continuity is often used on Channel Television, ITV1 national branding had been seen on the station for several years previously.
The licencees that used the ITV brand were Anglia Television, Border Television, Carlton Television, Central Independent Television, Channel Television, Granada Television, HTV, London Weekend Television, Meridian Television, Tyne Tees Television, Westcountry Television and Yorkshire Television.
ITV Wales & West was the only exception, using the name ITV1 Wales at all times for the Welsh part of its broadcast area as it has a higher regional commitment. Latterly the ITV1 Wales name was only used on breakbumpers and regionally advertised programmes till 2013. Non ITV plc-owned licencees on the network generally did not refer to the ITV name.
The network production arms of the ITV-plc owned licencees have been gradually combined since 1993 to eventually form ITV Studios.
Corporate unification[edit]




ITV share of viewing 1981-2007 BARB figures






Flow diagram displaying consolidation of ITV franchises into ITV plc


ITV was formed by the unification of eleven of the ITV licences. The Broadcasting Act 1990 changed many of the rules regulating the ITV Network, which most notably relaxed franchise ownership and hours of production. However, as far back as 1974, Yorkshire Television and its North East neighbour, Tyne Tees Television, formally created Trident Television, a merged entity of the two companies. By 1981 due to regulation, the company was forced to de-merge; however, they resumed their alliance in 1993 as Yorkshire-Tyne Tees Television, which therefore owned the two franchises and integrated the two company's assets more than its predecessor.
However, the intense race to own more of the ITV Network began in 1994 when Carlton Communications, the owner of London weekday broadcaster Carlton Television, took control of Central Independent Television in the Midlands. Literally days afterwards, Granada plc, owner of Granada Television of the North West purchased London Weekend Television. Meridian's owner, Mills and Allen International, then went on to purchase Anglia Television in the same year, before merging to become United News and Media (UNM) in 1995. UNM then went on to purchase Wales and West broadcaster, HTV in 1996, while Carlton purchased Westcountry Television later that year. Granada then agreed a deal to take over Yorkshire-Tyne Tees Television in 1997, giving the broadcaster access to both Yorkshire and North East franchises.
There was no movement in the take-over of franchises until 2000 when Border Television and all of its radio assets were sold to Capital Radio Group, who consequently sold the television broadcasting arm to Granada Media Group. Granada then went on to purchase all of UNM's television interests (including its ITV franchises), which brought Meridian, Anglia and HTV into its power, but due to regulation Granada was forced to sell HTV to Carlton. By this time, all of the franchises in England and Wales were owned by either Carlton or Granada.
In 2004, Granada plc officially merged with Carlton Communications, creating ITV plc, although it was a takeover by Granada in effect. In 2011, ITV plc acquired Channel Television from its private owners Yattendon Group plc. On 19 October 2015 ITV announced they were to buy UTV for £100 subject to regulatory approval. The deal also included UTV Ireland, UTV's Irish channel. Unlike other ITV franchises owned by ITV plc that use the ITV name, the UTV name will be retained.
Regional variations[edit]
ITV consists of eleven franchises in England and Wales which broadcast regional news and other local programming to its area. Many franchise areas in England previously had sub-regions providing separate regional news bulletins. For example, the Anglia region was divided into West and East. This arrangement came to an end in February 2009 when ITV implemented plans to save the company £40m a year on the amount it spent making local news.
Since 27 October 2002, all ITV plc-owned franchises, regional programming was either preceded or plugged by an oral regional announcement, in the format ITV1 regional brand, e.g. ITV1 Granada. In English regions, up until 13 November 2006, regional names were also superimposed (post-production) on these idents below the ITV1 logo, but this practice has since ceased. ITV Wales remains unaffected and still continues to use dual-branding across all of its on-screen presentation. Despite the lack of regional names on screen, the regional name is usually spoken by the announcer prior to local programmes. After ITV's unification in 2002, the two London franchises, Carlton Television and London Weekend Television were merged into a single entity, ITV London, while the Wales and West franchise lost its official identity and instead was substituted with ITV Wales and ITV West on-air, with no reference linking the two together (the licence was formally split in two by Ofcom from 1 January 2014).
Channel Television adopted the ITV1 brand on-air prior to the 2011 ITV plc takeover of the channel.
Areas with full ITV branding and continuity:


Broadcast area
Pre-ITV1 branding
Post-ITV1 branding


The Midlands
Carlton Television[1]



English-Scottish border/Isle of Man
Border Television
ITV


North East England
Tyne Tees Television
ITV


Yorkshire and Lincolnshire
Yorkshire Television
ITV


North West England
Granada Television
ITV


Wales
HTV Wales
ITV Cymru Wales


West of England
HTV West
ITV


The Midlands
Central Independent Television[1]
ITV


East of England
Anglia Television
ITV


London (weekdays)
ITV London
ITV


London (weekends)
LWT (London Weekend Television)
ITV


South and South East England
Meridian Broadcasting
ITV


South West England
Westcountry Television[1]
ITV


Channel Islands
Channel Television
ITV Channel Television


In the English regions, the channel has been known from 2006 until 2013 as ITV1 and since 14 January 2013 as ITV at all times. Regional references no longer appear before any programming at all in these areas.

The ITV Wales name is not used overnight and throughout the day.
The STV and UTV branding is use throughout the day 9.25am - 6am daily

Areas without full ITV branding and continuity:


Broadcast area
Present branding
Former branding


Northern Ireland
UTV
Ulster Television***


Northern Scotland
STV (North)
Grampian Television


Central Scotland
STV (Central)
Scottish Television


Proposed regional changes[edit]
In June 2007, ITV plc executive chairman Michael Grade hinted at a possible re-structure of the ITV regional layout, stating the existence of smaller regional services "no longer makes sense" relative to the regional audience they serve.[2]
The plan was confirmed in September 2007, reducing the number of regional news programmes from 17 to just 9, saving around £35 to £40 million each year, and affecting every ITV plc regional company with the exception of ITV London, ITV Wales and ITV Granada. These changes were implemented in early 2009. All sub-regional news programmes ceased, ITV Border's Lookaround programme was merged with ITV Tyne Tees' North East Tonight programme, ITV Westcountry's Westcountry Live merged with ITV West's The West Tonight programme, and ITV Meridian's Meridian Tonight south and south east editions merged with ITV Thames Valley's Thames Valley Tonight.
On 16 September 2013 ITV reverted to a more localised system, as was the case prior to a shake-up in 2009, with 14 news regions (rather than eight).[3] This meant people in the Borders, for example, saw a return to a Border-only news service, with all stories covered solely on Southern Scotland and Cumbria, similar to the pre-Tyne Tees merger in February 2009.[4] Meanwhile, in the Westcountry, viewers in Devon and Cornwall also saw a return to a more localised service.
Branding[edit]
Main article: History of ITV television idents




ITV Reem (typeface used since 2013)


Independent Television (1955–1989)[edit]
From the founding of the ITV Network in 1955, it was known nationally as Independent Television (later ITV) and locally by the regional branding of the local ITV franchise operator.
ITV (1989–2001)[edit]
In 1989, the ITV Association set out a generic presentation package with a new "ITV" logo, which included idents, promotions and general on and off air design, and an edit of this package was designed for each franchise holder. The dual branded idents included a large "ITV" logo, in which the "V" contained part of the franchise's logo, and written below the logo in a grey capitalised font was the name of the regional broadcaster. However, only half of the regional broadcasters opted to use the package, which had completely failed by 1997.
"TV from the Heart" (1999-2001)[edit]
In 1999, another second common presentation package (once again using dual-branding with the ITV name) was launched, under the theme, "TV from the Heart". Like the 1989 attempt, a version was created for every franchise holder, but it was only taken by nine of the fifteen ITV broadcasters, two of which resorted to other designs, being London Weekend Television, which actually used the look for a year but then adopted a more original look (claiming it "wasn't exciting enough"), and HTV which adopted Carlton's identity [Note 1] when it was purchased by the company in 2001. Carlton, owner of three ITV licences at the time, did not adopt the generic look and instead used another package designed by Lambie-Nairn, which again followed the "TV from the Heart" theme, but with more emphasis on the Carlton corporate identity.
ITV1 (2001–2013)[edit]
By 2001, all eleven franchises of England and Wales were owned by either Granada plc or Carlton Communications, and a new common name, ITV1, was launched on 11 August 2001 to coincide with digital channel ITV2. The existing "Hearts" idents were simply re-edited.
However, from 28 October 2002, in England, the Scottish/English Border and Isle of Man (where all the franchises are owned by ITV plc), the station dropped regional branding and identification before most programming and adopted a unified national branding of ITV1. In Wales, although the HTV name has been dropped, some regional identification remains in the form of ITV1 Wales. At this time all regional continuity announcers were replaced with a single team of six national continuity announcers. Since the re-brand of 2006, that team has been reduced to just four.
In January 2006, the channel adopted a new on-air look, designed mainly to improve cross-channel promotion across ITV's multichannel presence. The new logo brought ITV1, ITV2 and ITV3 in line with ITV4's, and had been observed on various billboard ads in the UK when the new identity was first used on-screen on 16 January 2006. The overhaul also put an end to the former ITV Day brand, which was axed in favour of a full-time ITV1 identity.
On 13 November 2006, a new set of idents replaced the previous set which debuted in January, the theme being "alive with colour". The initial set consisted of 'Beach', 'Bike', 'Lake' and 'Market'; 'Basketball' and 'Pavement Art' were added later in the year. They were created by Blink Productions for ITV, unlike the old idents which were masterminded by Red Bee Media. The logo remained the same in essence; only the 'itv' lettering was inverted from its previous white state to black, to allow it to stand out against the yellow more.[5]
On 3 September 2007, four more idents were added to the set, featuring 'Bubbles', 'Fountains', 'Garden' and 'Buildings', and as of 19 September 2009, all now have 'the brighter side' on their breakbumpers. On 9 April 2010, four more idents where added to the set, 'Lanterns', 'Sunflowers', 'Snakes and Ladders' and 'Dodgems', featuring an updated ITV1 logo as seen on ITV1 HD.
In September 2009 ITV plc announced that ITV1 +1, a one-hour time-shift version of ITV1, would launch in October 2009 from 10.25 am to 7 am daily. The hours covered by GMTV from 7 am to 10.25 am will not originally have been included in the relay.[6] The channel launched on 11 January 2011.
ITV Day[edit]
In 2005, ITV plc introduced a new channel branding called ITV Day, used to identify ITV1 between 9.25 am and 6.00 pm. ITV Day was treated as a separate entity to ITV1 and featured its own presentation set focusing using the colours of red, orange and yellow and featured scenes of typical "daytime" activities. Promotions were used in a similar format to ITV1, and all daytime programmes advertised within ITV1 hours were branded with the ITV Day logo. A similar "UTV Day" branding was adopted in Northern Ireland. The branding was scrapped in January 2006 when the ITV corporate rebrand took place.
2013 rebranding[edit]
On 15 November 2012, it was announced that as part of a major rebranding, ITV1 was renamed back to its previous name, ITV. In addition to this, ITV had a new colour-changing logo stylised as handwriting, that changed colour depending on the programming it is used on. It was revealed that the logo had green and purple for Dancing on Ice, and green and brown for I'm a Celebrity...Get Me Out of Here!.[7] The overhaul is linked to ITV's attempt to cut costs, curb debts and reduce the company's reliance on advertising. This overhaul of their brand affected all ITV plc channels and online services. The rebrand went live on 14 January 2013, at the same time as the other ITV channels. Also for the first time in its history, a digital on-screen graphic (DOG) was introduced.
Notable programming[edit]
Main article: List of television programmes broadcast by ITV




Daytime programming[edit]

The Chase
Dickinson's Real Deal
Good Morning Britain
Lorraine
ITV Lunchtime News
ITV Regional News
The Jeremy Kyle Show
Jeremy Kyle's Emergency Room
Judge Rinder
Loose Women
Secret Dealers
This Morning
Tipping Point
Who's Doing the Dishes?



Primetime programming[edit]

The Agenda with Tom Bradby
All Star Mr & Mrs
Benidorm
Big Star's Little Star
Birds of a Feather
Cold Feet
Coronation Street
Doc Martin
Emmerdale
Exposure
Gino's Italian Escape
I'm a Celebrity...Get Me Out of Here!
ITV Evening News
ITV News at Ten
Lewis
Little Big Shots
Love Your Garden
The Nightly Show
On Assignment
Paul O'Grady: For the Love of Dogs
Sport
Tonight
Documentaries
Drama premieres





Weekend programming[edit]

All Star Family Fortunes
Ant & Dec's Saturday Night Takeaway
Britain's Got Talent
Catchphrase
The Chase: Celebrity Special
The Cube
Dance Dance Dance
Dancing On Ice
News
The Jonathan Ross Show
Ninja Warrior UK
Piers Morgan's Life Stories
Sport
Saturday Morning with James Martin
Surprise Surprise
Take Me Out
Through the Keyhole
Tipping Point: Lucky Stars
The Voice UK
Weekend
The X Factor
You've Been Framed!
Drama premieres
Movies

Nighttime programming[edit]

ITV Nightscreen
Jackpot247
The Jeremy Kyle Show
The Jeremy Kyle Show USA
Motorsport
The Store
Documentaries
Dramas
Movies
Primetime repeats

Subsidiary channels[edit]
ITV HD[edit]
Main article: ITV HD
A high-definition simulcast of ITV, ITV HD, debuted on 2 December 2009 with the technical launch of the Freeview HD service. The channel has its roots in ITV HD, which began as a trial service in 2006 on a low-power digital terrestrial (DVB-T) channel from London's Crystal Palace transmitting station, and on Telewest TV Drive cable service. The channel was revived on 7 June 2008 in time for the UEFA Euro 2008 football tournament, this time exclusively available on the Freesat digital satellite service [8][9] With its debut on Freeview HD, the channel was re-branded as ITV1 HD in December 2009.[10]
ITV +1[edit]






This article needs to be updated. Please update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information. (January 2011)



On 1 September 2009 it was announced that ITV would get a one-hour timeshift on digital satellite and Virgin Media, on 1 October 2009, subject to the Competition Commission's ruling on the contract rights renewal system.[11][12] However, on 18 September 2009, it was announced that ITV1 +1 had been postponed until further notice.[13] Prior to this announcement, EPG data for the service had appeared on satellite.[14]
The Competition Commission delayed the final decision in its review of ITV's Contract Rights Renewal undertakings to the end of February 2010 because it had to consider the "significant" submissions it has received.[15]
On 19 January 2010, the Competition Commission delivered its provisional findings, ruling that audiences for both ITV1 +1 and ITV1 HD will be accredited to ITV1's commercial impacts.[16] The Competition Commission recognised that the broadcaster had been deterred from launching new ways of delivering ITV1, because of the way media buying is currently conducted under the established contracts rights renewal (CRR) mechanism. However, the regulator rejected ITV's proposed removal of large elements of the "outdated" CRR Undertakings while maintaining an obligation on ITV to offer ITV1 airtime on "fair and reasonable" terms. The Competition Commission announced that such a change would leave the process too open to interpretation and that they were "not likely to be either practicable or effective in addressing the adverse effects of the merger".
On 12 May 2010, the Competition Commission stood by its provisional decision to retain the contracts rights renewal system – but it added that the mechanism should be dropped at some point and that the entire UK TV ad sales market needs a review.[17][18][19] "ITV1 remains a 'must have' for certain advertisers and certain types of campaign," said the chairman of the CRR review group at the Competition Commission, Diana Guy. "Despite all the changes in this market, no other channel or medium can come close to matching the size of audience that ITV regularly provides. So the essential reason for the CRR undertakings remains: to protect advertisers and other commercial broadcasters." The ITV chief executive, Adam Crozier, said that the ruling was "out of touch and damaging for the interests of creative Britain". He added that it was "unlikely" that ITV would look to seek a judicial review but that ITV would redouble its lobbying campaign for a liberalisation of regulation and "urgent modernisation" of competition law. But the commission said there was "virtual unanimity" among advertisers, media agencies, commercial broadcasters and trade bodies that CRR should be kept "in some form". The commission confirmed that the CRR remedy should be broadened to include ITV+1 and ITV's high definition channels.
On 27 July 2010, the House Of Lords confirmed plans to launch an inquiry into the television advertising market, which "paid particular attention" to the CRR mechanism.[20] The Lords committee investigated the declining revenues that commercial broadcasters gain from the sale of advertising across their networks. The members also considered possible changes to current ad market regulation, including the CRR system, product placement rules and the scheduling and sale of advertising. The committee wanted to hear evidence on the current levels of regulation and what impact a relaxation of the rules could have had on the commercial broadcasting sector. Interested parties submitted written evidence to the inquiry on 24 September 2010, with oral evidence been heard in October. A written report was expected to follow in late 2010 or early 2011.[needs update]
On 3 August 2010, ITV plc announced the launch of ITV1 +1 would take place in Q1 2011,[21] with BARB later reporting that the channel would be launched on 11 January 2011.[22] In December 2010 full testing of all six regions began on satellite.
ITV1 +1 was launched on 11 January 2011 on Freesat channel 112, Freeview channel 33, Sky channel 131 and Virgin Media channel 114.[23] ITV1 broadcasts 22 different editions of digital satellite, but the timeshift service originally only transmitted six macro regional variants:[24]

London
South East Macro (encompassing Meridian Broadcasting and Anglia Television)
West Macro (encompassing Wales & West and Westcountry Television)
Central
Yorkshire/Tyne Tees Macro (encompassing Yorkshire Television and Tyne Tees Television)
Granada/Border Macro (encompassing Granada Television and Border Television)

On 1 March 2012, four additional variations were launched for the Anglia Television, Tyne Tees Television, West and Westcountry Television regions, with the South East Macro becoming Meridian Broadcasting, West Macro becoming Wales and Yorkshire/Tyne Tees Macro becoming Yorkshire Television.
The channel was rebranded as ITV +1 on 14 January 2013 as part of the rebranding of ITV's television channels and ITV's online services.
Availability outside the UK[edit]
ITV channels are available on cable and IPTV in Switzerland and Liechtenstein. In the Republic of Ireland, ITV (as UTV) was widely available, however, UTV Ireland was launched in 2015 and replaced UTV in the Republic of Ireland.
Since 27 March 2013, ITV London has been offered by British Forces Broadcasting Service (BFBS) to members of HM Forces and their families around the world, replacing the BFBS3 TV channel, which already carried a selection of ITV programmes.[25]
Logos[edit]







ITV logo used from October 1998 to August 2001









The first ITV1 logo, a minor adjustment to the previous logo, used from August 2001 to October 2002









The ITV1 logo was broken into blocks and was used from November 2004 to January 2006.









The ITV1 logo text was changed from white to black. The logo was white from January 2006 until 2010 and the black logo was from 2010 until the rebranding in 2013.









The "1" was dropped from the channel name as part of a major rebranding of the entire ITV company. This current logo debuted in January 2013.




Notes[edit]



^ The opening films was retained, but the endings was in the "Hearts" style. Check TV Ark.



References[edit]


^ a b c "The Carltonisation of ITV". Retrieved 26 May 2012. 
^ "Grade hints at ITV region restructure". Digital Spy. 12 September 2007. Retrieved 12 September 2007. 
^ Press Gazette Ofcom slashes number of regional news minutes http://www.pressgazette.co.uk/ofcom-slashes-number-regional-news-minutes-itv-required-broadcast
^ ATV ITV Border service returns with quiet re-launch http://www.atvtoday.co.uk/p44634-border-tv/
^ Deans, Jason (13 November 2006). "ITV1 rolls out more idents". London: Guardian. Retrieved 6 June 2006. 
^ "ITV1+1 to launch in October". Marketing Magazine. 2 September 2009. Retrieved 5 September 2009. 
^ "ITV1 to become ITV in channel rebrand". The Daily Telegraph. 16 November 2012. Retrieved 16 November 2012. 
^ "Confirmed: ITV HD is Freesat exclusive". Digital Spy. 6 May 2008. Retrieved 6 May 2008. 
^ "HD version of ITV to launch next Spring". Digital Spy. 12 September 2007. Retrieved 12 September 2007. 
^ "ITV HD will relaunch for Freeview HD". What Satellite & Digital TV. 7 August 2009. Archived from the original on 12 August 2009. 
^ "Implementation – ITV1+1". AGB Nielsen Media Research. 1 September 2009. [dead link]
^ "ITV to wait for CRR ruling before launching +1 channel". AGB Nielsen Media Research. 3 September 2009. Archived from the original on 21 April 2012. 
^ "ITV postpones ITV1+1 launch". Digital Spy. 18 September 2009. 
^ "ITV1+1 data appears on Sky's EPG". Digital Spy. 17 September 2009. 
^ "CRR decision put back as commission chews on submissions". Brand Republic. 2 December 2009. 
^ "ITV given green light for +1 and HD channels under CRR". Media Week. 19 January 2010. 
^ Sweney, Mark (12 May 2010). "ITV's CRR ad rules stay – for now". London: The Guardian. 
^ "CC publishes final decision on PUBLISHES" (PDF). Competition Commission. 12 May 2010. Archived from the original (PDF) on 19 January 2012. 
^ "ITV Statement In Response To The Competition Commission's Final Decision On Contract Rights Renewal (CRR)". ITV plc. 12 May 2010. Archived from the original on 14 June 2011. 
^ "Lords to review ITV1's CRR mechanism". Digital Spy. 28 July 2010. 
^ "ITV plc 2010 Interim Results & Sky deal". ITV plc. 3 August 2010. Archived from the original on 12 July 2014. 
^ "ITV1+1 sets January launch date". Digital Spy. 14 December 2010. 
^ "ITV1+1 to launch tonight". Digital Spy. 11 January 2011. 
^ "ITV to launch ITV1+1 channel". Digital Spy. 1 September 2009. 
^ BFBS TV Set For A Makeover On 27th March, BFBS


External links[edit]

ITV at itv.com







v
t
e


ITV



Channels




Current




Domestic



SD: ITV, STV, UTV
ITV2
ITV3
ITV4
ITVBe
ITV Encore
CITV
The Store
HD: ITV HD, STV HD, UTV HD
ITV2 HD
ITV3 HD
ITV4 HD
ITVBe HD
ITV Encore HD
ITV Box Office





International



ITV Choice








Defunct



ITV News Channel
ITV Play
ITV Sport Channel
S2
UTV2
UTV Ireland








Companies




Current



ITV plc
STV Group plc





Former



Alpha Television
Associated Television
Carlton Communications plc
Granada plc
ITV Digital Ltd
Trident Television
UTV Media plc
Yorkshire-Tyne Tees Television








Divisions,
brands and
services




Current



children's: CITV
news: ITV News (ITN)
sport: ITV Sport
production: ITV Studios (Australia), 12 Yard, Big Talk Productions, Gameface, The Garden, Mammoth Screen, Possessed, Potato, Shiver Productions, So Television, Twofour
weather: ITV Weather
online: itv.com, stv.tv
catch up: ITV Hub, STV Player





Defunct



ITV Day
ITV Digital
ITV Local
ITV Play
ITV Schools
UTV Player
u.tv








Franchises
and
regions




National
franchises



breakfast: TV-am (1983–1992), GMTV (1993–2010), ITV Breakfast (2010–present)
teletext: ORACLE (1974–1992), Teletext Ltd. (1993–present)





Regional
franchises



Northern Scotland: Grampian Television
Central Scotland: Scottish Television
Scottish and English Border: Border Television
Northern Ireland: UTV
North East England: Tyne Tees Television
Yorkshire and Lincolnshire: Yorkshire Television
North of England (weekdays), later North West England and Isle of Man (all week): Granada Television
North of England and Midlands (weekends): ABC Network
Wales and the West of England: TWW, WWN/Teledu Cymru, ITSWW, HTV
Midlands (weekdays), later Midlands (all week): ATV
Midlands (all week): Central Independent Television
East Anglia: Anglia Television
London (weekdays): Associated-Rediffusion, Thames Television, Carlton Television
London (weekends): ATV, LWT
South and South East England: Southern Television, TVS, Meridian Broadcasting
South West England: Westward Television, TSW, Westcountry Television
Channel Islands: Channel Television





Unsuccessful
franchise bids



London Weekday, East Anglia and South and South East England: CPV-TV
North West England: North West Television





Non-franchise
regions




Current



ITV Central
ITV London
ITV Meridian
ITV West Country
ITV Tyne Tees & Border
STV





Defunct



ITV Thames Valley











Regulators



Independent Television Authority (1954–72)
Independent Broadcasting Authority (1972–90)
Independent Television Commission (1991–2003)
Ofcom (2003–present)





Other



Freesat
History of ITV (Idents
ITV Emergency National Service (1968)
ITV Telethon
Night Network)
Timeline of ITV
ITV Nightscreen
people (journalists and newsreaders)
programmes (ITV2
CITV)
Television House
List of ITV regions
United Kingdom Independent Broadcasting
ITV Advertising operations
ITV 50








Television in the United Kingdom
 Category












v
t
e


 Media in the United Kingdom








UK national newspapers, magazines, and other periodicals







Newspapers
(History)




Berliner



The Guardian
The Observer





Broadsheet



Financial Times
The Daily Telegraph
The Sunday Telegraph
The Sunday Times





Compact



i
The Times





Middle-market



Daily Express
Daily Mail
The Mail on Sunday





Tabloid



Daily Mirror
Sunday Mirror
Morning Star
The Sunday People
Daily Star
Daily Star Sunday
The Sun
Sunday Sport








Magazines &
other periodicals



List of magazines by circulation
















Radio in the UK







National
stations




BBC



Analogue / digital
Radio 1
Radio 2
Radio 3
Radio 4
5 Live
Digital only
Radio 1Xtra
Radio 4 Extra
5 Live Sports Extra
6 Music
Asian Network
World Service
BBC National DAB (multiplex)





Independent
/ commercial



Analogue / digital
Absolute Radio
Classic FM
Heart
Kiss
Talksport
Digital only
Absolute 80s
Absolute Radio Extra
BFBS Radio
Capital
Digital One (multiplex)
Heart Extra
heat
The Hits
Jazz FM
Kerrang!
Kiss Fresh
Kisstory
LBC
Magic
Planet Rock
Premier Christian Radio
Radio X
RNIB Connect Radio
Sound Digital (multiplex)
Smooth
Talkradio
UCB UK
Virgin Radio UK








Regional
& local
stations




BBC



List of BBC Local Radio stations
List of BBC Regional Radio stations





Independent
/ commercial



List of community radio stations
List of local commercial radio stations
List of semi-national / regional analogue and digital radio stations








Other
stations



List of hospital radio stations
Pirate radio
Restricted Service Licence (RSL)

List of RSL stations


List of satellite radio stations
List of student and schools radio





Other



Broadcasting House
FM broadcasting
The Studios, MediaCityUK
Radio Academy

Radio Academy Awards


Radio Independents Group
RAJAR
Most listened to programmes
















Television in the UK







Principal
channels
(List)




BBC



BBC One
BBC Two
BBC Four
BBC News
BBC Parliament
CBBC
CBeebies





ITV



ITV
ITV2
ITV3
ITV4
CITV
ITV Encore
ITVBe
ITV Box Office





Ch 4



Channel 4
E4
Film4
More4
4seven





Ch 5



Channel 5
5Prime
5Spike
5Star
5USA





Sky



Challenge
Pick
Real Lives
Sky One
Sky Two
Sky Arts
Sky Atlantic
Sky Cinema
Sky Living
Sky News
Sky Sports
Sky Sports F1
Sky Sports News





UKTV



Alibi
Dave
Drama
Eden
Gold
Good Food
Home
Really
W
Yesterday





Sony Pictures Television



Chart Show TV
Chart Show Hits
Movies4Men
Pop
Pop Max
Starz TV
Sony Channel
Sony Movie Channel
Scuzz
Tiny Pop
True Crime
True Entertainment
True Movies
truTV
The Vault








Services
&
platforms



All 4

Film4oD


analogue

analogue terrestrial (defunct)


BBC iPlayer

BBC Three


BBC Store
TalkTalk TV Store
BT TV
cable
digital

digital terrestrial
List of channels


Freesat

Freesat+


Freeview
high-definition

List of channels


ITV

ITV Hub, STV Player


local television
My5
Now TV
Real Digital
Restricted Service Licence
satellite

List of channels


Sky

Freesat from Sky
On Demand
Sky+
Sky+ HD


TalkTalk TV
Top Up TV
TVPlayer
Virgin Media

FilmFlex
TiVo
V+


YouView
Zattoo





Studios




Current



BBC Elstree Centre
BBC Pacific Quay
The Bottle Yard Studios
Broadcasting House
Broadcasting House, Belfast
Broadcasting House, Bristol
Broadcasting House, Cardiff
Elstree Studios (Shenley Road)
Gas Street Studios
The Leeds Studios
The London Studios
The Maidstone Studios
Mailbox Birmingham
MediaCityUK
Osterley Television Centre
Roath Lock
Television Centre, London





Defunct



British and Dominions Imperial Studios
Fountain Studios
Gate Studios
Granada Studios
MGM-British Studios
Pebble Mill Studios
Teddington Studios
Television Centre, Newcastle upon Tyne
Television Centre, Southampton
Upper Boat Studios








Other



Defunct channels
Edinburgh International Television Festival
History

List of years


List of channels
Student television
Viewing statistics

Most-watched broadcasts


















Companies and organisations







Companies




Major
companies



Archant
Ascential
Bauer Radio
BBC
Bloomsbury Publishing
BT Group
Channel Four Television Corporation
Daily Mail and General Trust
Dentsu Aegis Network
Economist Group
EMI Music Publishing
Endemol Shine UK
Global Group
Guardian Media Group
Haymarket Media Group
Informa
ITN
ITV plc
Johnston Press
Mecom Group
News UK
Newsquest
Northern & Shell
Now TV Limited
Origin Broadband
Pearson PLC
Press Holdings
RELX Group
Reuters
Sky UK Limited
Sky plc
STV Group
Syco
TalkTalk Group
Time Inc. UK
Trinity Mirror
UBM plc
Virgin Media
Wireless Group





Other resources



Arqiva
List of largest UK book publishers








Government
& regulatory
bodies



Advertising Standards Authority
BBC Trust
British Board of Film Classification
British Film Institute
Culture, Media, and Sport Select Committee
Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport
Independent Press Standards Organisation
Ofcom
Press Recognition Panel
S4C Authority





Industry
& trades
bodies



British Academy of Film and Television Arts
British Phonographic Industry
Broadcasting, Entertainment, Cinematograph and Theatre Union
Clearcast
Digital TV Group
Digital UK
Equity
Federation Against Copyright Theft
National Union of Journalists
The Publishers Association
Royal Television Society
United Kingdom Independent Broadcasting





Other



BBC Academy
National Film and Television School
National Science and Media Museum
















Regional and student media







Regional media



Media in England

Birmingham
London
Manchester


Media in Scotland

Aberdeen
Dundee
Glasgow


Media in Wales

Cardiff







Student media



Student television














 Category











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=ITV_(TV_channel)&oldid=818252915"					Categories: ITV television channelsTelevision channels in the United KingdomTelevision channels and stations established in 19551955 establishments in the United KingdomHidden categories: All articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from February 2013Wikipedia articles in need of updating from January 2011All Wikipedia articles in need of updatingWikipedia articles in need of updating from January 2012Use dmy dates from September 2015