This article is about the ITV network across the United Kingdom. For the television channel operating in England, Wales, southern Scotland, the Isle of Man and the Channel Islands, see ITV (TV channel). For the network's operator, see ITV plc.


ITV





Launched
22 September 1955; 62 years ago (1955-09-22)


Owned by
ITV Network Limited
(JV owned by ITV plc and STV Group plc)


Audience share
ITV Network:
21.84% (October 2017 (2017-10), BARB)


Country
United Kingdom


Affiliates
STV


Headquarters
London, SE1


Website
itv.com,
stv.tv,


ITV is a commercial TV network in the United Kingdom. Launched in 1955 as Independent Television under the auspices of the Independent Television Authority (ITA, then after the Sound Broadcasting Act 1972, Independent Broadcasting Authority, now Ofcom) to provide competition to the long established BBC,[1] it is also the oldest commercial network in the UK. Since the passing of the Broadcasting Act 1990 its legal name has been Channel 3, to distinguish it from the other analogue channels at the time, namely BBC 1, BBC 2 and Channel 4. In part, the number 3 was assigned as television sets would usually be tuned so that the regional ITV station would be on the third button, with the other stations being allocated to the number within their name.
ITV is a network of television channels that operate regional television services as well as sharing programmes between each other to be displayed on the entire network. In recent years, several of these companies have merged so currently the fifteen franchises are in the hands of two companies.
The ITV network is to be distinguished from ITV plc, the company that resulted from the merger of Granada plc and Carlton Communications in 2004 and which holds the Channel 3 broadcasting licences in England, Wales, southern Scotland, the Isle of Man, the Channel Islands and Northern Ireland. With the exception of Northern Ireland, the ITV brand is the brand used by ITV plc for the Channel 3 service in these areas. In Northern Ireland, ITV plc uses the brand name UTV. STV Group plc, uses the STV brand for its two franchises of central and northern Scotland.



Contents


1 History
2 Organisation (other networks)

2.1 ITV plc
2.2 STV Group


3 Current licensees
4 Programming

4.1 National and international news
4.2 Breakfast
4.3 Regional news

4.3.1 Current regions
4.3.2 Former programmes


4.4 Weather
4.5 Sport
4.6 Children's programming
4.7 Teletext provider
4.8 Schools programming


5 Availability outside the UK
6 Criticism
7 Awards and nominations
8 Logo gallery
9 See also
10 Notes
11 References
12 External links

12.1 Parent companies





History[edit]
Main article: History of ITV




The London Studios near Waterloo was originally the base for the ITV London weekend contractor LWT but is now ITV's main London headquarters.






Granada Studios was the oldest TV studios in the UK, having been built in 1954 to house the broadcaster of the same name. The studios were closed in June 2013. Granada is the only franchise to remain an ITV contractor since creation in 1954.


The origins of ITV lie in the passing of the Television Act 1954, designed to break the monopoly on television held by the BBC Television Service.[1] The act created the Independent Television Authority (ITA, then IBA after the Sound Broadcasting Act) to heavily regulate the industry and to award franchises. The first six franchises were awarded in 1954 for London, the Midlands and the North of England, with separate franchises for Weekdays and Weekends.[1] The first ITV network to launch was London's Associated-Rediffusion on 22 September 1955,[2] with the Midlands and North services launching in February 1956 and May 1956 respectively. Following these launches, the ITA awarded more franchises until the whole country was covered by fourteen regional stations, all launched by 1962.
The network has been modified several times through franchise reviews that have taken place in 1963,[3] 1967,[4] 1974,[5] 1980[6][7] and 1991,[8] during which broadcast regions have changed and service operators have been replaced. Only one service operator has ever been declared bankrupt, WWN in 1963,[9] with all other operators leaving the network as a result of a franchise review. Separate weekend franchises were removed, with the exception of London, in 1968[3] and over the years more services were added including a teletext service and a national breakfast franchise, operating between 6:00 am and 9:25 am, in 1983.[6] The Broadcasting Act 1990 changed the nature of ITV; the then regulator the IBA was replaced with a light-touch regulator the ITC, companies now able to purchase other ITV regional companies[10] and franchises were now being awarded based upon a highest-bidder auction, with few safeguards in place.[8] This heavily criticised part of the review saw four operators replaced and the operators facing different annual payments to the treasury: Central Television, for example, paid only £2000, despite holding a lucrative and large region, because they were unopposed, while Yorkshire television paid £37.7 million for a region of the same size and status due to heavy competition.[8][11]
Following the 1993 changes, ITV as a network began to consolidate with several companies doing so to save money by ceasing the duplication of services present when they were all separate companies. By 2004, ITV was owned by five companies of which two, Carlton and Granada had become major players by owning between them all the franchises in England, Wales, the Scottish borders and the Isle of Man.[12][13][14] That same year, the two merged to form ITV plc[12][13][14] with the only subsequent acquisitions being the takeover of Channel Television, the Channel Islands franchise, in 2011.[15] and UTV, the franchise for Northern Ireland, in 2015.
Organisation (other networks)[edit]




ITV (ITV plc)



UTV (ITV plc)



STV (STV Group)

The logos of the three ITV brands.


The ITV Network is not owned or operated by one company, but by a series of licensees that provide a regional service while also broadcasting programmes across the network. Since 2016 the fifteen licences are held by two companies, with the majority held by ITV Broadcasting Limited, part of ITV plc.
The network is regulated by the media regulator Ofcom who is responsible for awarding the broadcast licences. The last major review of the Channel 3 franchises was in 1991, with all operators' licences having been renewed between 1999 and 2002 and again from 2014 without a further contest. While this has been the longest period that the ITV Network has gone without a major review of its licence holders, Ofcom announced (following consultation) that it would split the Wales and West licence from 1 January 2014, creating a national licence for Wales and joining the newly separated West region to Westcountry Television, to form a new licence for the enlarged South West of England region.
All companies holding a licence were part of the non-profit body ITV Network Limited, which commissioned and scheduled network programming, with compliance previously handled by ITV plc and Channel Television. However, due to amalgamation of several of these companies since the creation of ITV Network Limited (and given Channel Television is now owned by ITV plc), it has been replaced by an affiliation system.[16] Approved by Ofcom, this results in ITV plc commissioning and funding the network schedule, with STV and UTV paying a fee to broadcast it.[16] All licensees have the right to opt out of network programming (except for the national news bulletins), however many do not due to pressures from the parent company or because of limited resources.[16] Prior to the affiliate system being introduced, STV would frequently (and sometimes controversially) opt out of several popular network programmes – such as the original run of the first series of Downton Abbey – citing the need to provide more Scottish content to its viewers.[17]
As a public service broadcaster, the ITV network is obliged to broadcast programming of public importance, including news, current affairs, children's and religious programming as well as party election broadcasts on behalf of the major political parties and political events, such as the Budget. The network also needs to produce accessible output containing subtitles, signing and audio description. In exchange for this programming, the ITV network is available on all platforms free to air and can be found at the top of the EPG of all providers.
Since the launch of the platform in 1998, all of the ITV licensees have received gifted capacity on the digital terrestrial television platform. At present, the companies are able to broadcast additional channels and all choose to broadcast the ITV plc owned ITV2, ITV3, ITV4 and CITV in their region. UTV and STV (formerly Scottish Television and Grampian Television) previously broadcast their own services – UTV2 in Northern Ireland and S2 in central and northern Scotland – until 2002, when they adopted the ITV plc channels. The broadcasters all make use of the Digital 3&4 multiplex, shared with Channel 4. ITV Encore launched on June 2014 and ITVBe launched in October 2014.
ITV plc[edit]
Main article: ITV plc




The Leeds Studios, used by ITV Yorkshire. Each ITV region originally had its own studios, however the rise of publisher-broadcasters like Carlton Television and the takeover of regions caused several studios to be closed.


ITV plc owns thirteen of the fifteen franchises and broadcasts to England, Wales, southern Scotland, the Isle of Man, the Channel Islands and Northern Ireland through its subsidiary companies ITV Broadcasting Limited, and UTV Limited [15] The company also owns the breakfast contractor[18] that broadcasts across the network between 6:00 and 9:25am each morning using the Good Morning Britain (previously Daybreak) and Lorraine names. The company broadcasts a centralised service under the ITV brand. In Northern Ireland, ITV uses the UTV brand name.
The group also owns ITV Studios, the production arm of the company and formed from an amalgamation of all the production departments of the regional licences they own. The company produces a large proportion of ITV's networked programming (around 47%, but previously as high as 66% according to some reports[19]), with the rest coming primarily from independent suppliers (Under the Broadcasting Act 1990, at least 25% of ITV's total output must be from independent companies).[20] ITV plc hope to increase the amount of in-house programming to as close to the 75% limit as possible.
The group has recently cut the number of regional news programmes offered from 17 in 2007 to 9 by 2009, resulting several regions being merged to form one programme, including the Border Television and Tyne Tees Television regions, the Westcountry Television and West regions and the removal of sub regional programming, with some regions only represented by pre-recorded segments. [21]
STV Group[edit]
Main article: STV Group (Scotland)
STV Group plc owns two franchises, covering central and northern Scotland, through subsidiary companies STV Central and STV North, broadcasting a central service under the STV brand.
The company has had several disputes with ITV plc in recent years over network programming. STV aims to broadcast more Scottish programmes at peak times and so removed several key ITV plc programmes from their schedule in July 2009 including The Bill, Midsomer Murders and Lewis.[22] Despite STV's explanation of expense, ITV plc were angered by the decision, as a recent schedule change had made The Bill central to their programming, and broadcast the programmes on ITV3 as well to ensure Scottish viewers could see the programmes. On 23 September ITV was reported to be in the process of suing STV for £20 million, as ITV plc felt dropping the shows constituted a breach of network agreements;[23] STV subsequently counter-sued ITV plc for £35 million.
The dispute was ended in 2011 with STV agreeing to pay ITV plc £18 million. The signing of the new affiliation deal has resulted in STV paying a flat fee for all networked programming, and so to drop any programmes is unlikely due to the large costs involved.[24]
Current licensees[edit]
Further information: List of ITV regions
There are fourteen regional licences and one national licence for the breakfast service. Other licences exist to provide specific programming services, such as Teletext and national news, but are not listed here. All licences listed here were renewed until the end of 2014. Licences in England and Wales were held by the individual regional ITV plc owned companies prior to November 2008.[25]


Regional Channel 3 Licences


Licence Service Area
Licence Holder[26]
Licence held since
Parent Company
Service Name
On Air Name


Northern Scotland
STV North Limited
30 September 1961
STV Group plc
STV North
STV


Central Scotland
STV Central Limited
31 August 1957
STV Group plc
STV Central
STV


Northern Ireland
UTV Limited
31 October 1959
ITV plc[27]
Ulster Television
UTV


Channel Islands
ITV Broadcasting Limited
March 2017
ITV plc
ITV Channel TV
ITV [Note 1]


England–Scotland Border
ITV Broadcasting Limited
November 2008
ITV plc
ITV Border
ITV


North East England
ITV Broadcasting Limited
November 2008
ITV plc
ITV Tyne Tees
ITV


Yorkshire, Lincolnshire and North Norfolk
ITV Broadcasting Limited
November 2008
ITV plc
ITV Yorkshire
ITV


North West England [Note 2] and Isle of Man [Note 3]
ITV Broadcasting Limited
November 2008
ITV plc
ITV Granada
ITV


Wales and West of England
ITV Broadcasting Limited
November 2008
ITV plc
ITV Wales
ITV West
ITV Cymru Wales [Note 4]
ITV


Midlands [Note 5]
ITV Broadcasting Limited
November 2008
ITV plc
ITV Central
ITV


East of England
ITV Broadcasting Limited
December 2006 [Note 6]
ITV plc
ITV Anglia
ITV


London (Weekdays)
ITV Broadcasting Limited
November 2008
ITV plc
ITV London (weekdays)
ITV


London (Weekends)
ITV Broadcasting Limited
November 2008
ITV plc
ITV London (weekends)
ITV


South and South East England
ITV Broadcasting Limited
November 2008
ITV plc
ITV Meridian
ITV


South West England
ITV Broadcasting Limited
November 2008
ITV plc
ITV Westcountry
ITV




National Channel 3 Licences


Licence Service Area
Licence Holder[26]
Licence held since
Parent Company
Service Name
On Air Name


National breakfast time [Note 7]
ITV Breakfast Broadcasting Limited
1993
ITV plc [Note 8]
ITV Breakfast
ITV


Programming[edit]






This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (September 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)







ITV share of viewing 1981–2008 Broadcasters' Audience Research Board figures.


See also: List of television programmes broadcast by ITV
For over 60 years of ITV, the homegrown programmes have become the best loved and remembered as well as being extremely successful. Before the 1990s, nearly all of the content for the channel was produced by the fifteen franchise licensees: the regional companies.
However, in the last decade, and following legislation in the Broadcasting Act 1990 imposing a 25% quota for commissioning of independent productions,[20] the number of programmes from independent production companies not connected to the traditional ITV Network, has increased rapidly. Notable examples include Talkback Thames (one half of which, Thames Television, was itself a former ITV franchisee), producers of The Bill and co-producers of The X Factor, and 2waytraffic (previously Celador), producers of Who Wants to Be a Millionaire?.
From the late 1990s, ITV's long-standing commitment to strong current affairs and documentary programming began to diminish with the ending of productions such as World in Action (Granada Television), This Week (Rediffusion London/Thames Television), First Tuesday (Yorkshire Television), Network First, Survival (Anglia Television), and Weekend World (LWT) and their replacement with populist shows such as Tonight. News at Ten was also axed in 1999, although it was reinstated in 2001. In December 2009, the final edition of ITV's long-running arts programme, The South Bank Show was broadcast.
ITV's primetime schedules are dominated by its soap operas, such as the flagship Coronation Street and Emmerdale. At the start of the 21st century, Independent Television faced criticism for including a large amount of "reality TV" programmes in the schedule, such as Celebrity Fit Club, Celebrity Wrestling and Love Island. In its defence, ITV does continue to show its major strengths in the fields of sports coverage and drama productions, and it continues to schedule national news in primetime.
ITV's strong daytime line-up helped by programmes such as This Morning, Loose Women, Dickinson's Real Deal and game shows Tipping Point and The Chase are very popular, achieving the highest audience share during the daytime slot.[28]
National and international news[edit]
Main article: ITV News
Since the network started, Independent Television News Limited (ITN) has held the contract to produce news for the ITV Network, with 30-minute national news bulletins broadcast at 1:30 pm, 6:30 pm, and 10:00 pm. These bulletins were broadcast under the ITN brand between 1955 and 1999, when a new network identity reinforced the ITV brand, resulting in the new bulletins being broadcast under the ITV News brand.[29][30]
ITN has long been respected in the news industry as a source of reliable information and news, and as a result the service has won many awards for their programmes, the latest being in May 2011 when News at Ten was named best news programme by the Royal Television Society and BAFTA.
Breakfast[edit]
Between 6 am to 9.25 am on Monday to Friday, ITV broadcast 2 breakfast programmes called Good Morning Britain and Lorraine. Good Morning Britain keeps viewers up to date with all the latest news, sport, features and weather, whilst Lorraine predominantly focuses on celebrity interviews, recipes, fashion and showbiz.
Regional news[edit]
The regional ITV companies are required to provide local news as part of their franchise agreement, with the main local bulletin at 6pm and regional bulletins located after each national news programme. In addition to this, traditionally ITV companies would provide other regional programming based on current affairs, entertainment or drama. However, apart from a monthly political programme, most non-news regional programming in the English regions was dropped by ITV plc in 2009, although it continues in Wales and the Channel Islands, as well as on STV and UTV & from 2014 ITV Border Scotland.[31] On 14 January 2013, ITV plc regional news programmes titles were discontinued in favour of more generic branding under the ITV News title with the region listed as the subheading. However some "heritage" brand names were retained including Calendar, Granada Reports and Lookaround. On the 28 June 2014, ITV Cymru Wales News returned to its historic name of Wales at Six.
Current regions[edit]

Anglia: ITV News Anglia (with East and West variations)
Border: ITV News Lookaround
Central: ITV News Central (With East and West variations)
Channel: ITV News Channel TV
Granada: ITV News Granada Reports
London: ITV News London
Meridian: ITV News Meridian (With South and a Thames Valley opt-out and South East variations)
STV Central: STV News (non-ITV plc) (With East and West variations)
STV North: STV News (non-ITV plc) (With a Dundee and Tayside opt-out)
Tyne Tees: ITV News Tyne Tees
UTV: UTV Live
Wales: ITV News: Wales at Six
West Country: ITV News West Country (With East and West variations)
Yorkshire: ITV News Calendar (With North and South variations)

Former programmes[edit]

ATV: ATV Midlands News, ATV Today
Anglia: About Anglia, Anglia News, Anglia News Tonight, Anglia Tonight
Carlton: London Tonight
Central / Carlton (Central): Central News, Central News at Six, Central Tonight
Channel: Channel Report
Grampian: North Tonight
Granada: Northern Newscast, Scene at Six Thirty, Granada Tonight
HTV Wales / ITV Wales: Wales Tonight, HTV News, HTV Wales News
HTV West / ITV West: HTV News, HTV West News, The West Tonight The West Country Tonight
London Weekend Television / LWT: LWT News, London Tonight
Meridian: Meridian Tonight
Scottish Television / STV: Scotland Today
Southern: Day by Day
Television South West / TSW: Today South West, TSW Today
Television South / TVS: Coast to Coast
Thames: Thames News
Thames Valley: Thames Valley Tonight
Tyne Tees: Northern Life, Tyne Tees News / Network North (Bilsdale Transmitter), North East Tonight
Ulster Television / UTV: Good Evening Ulster, Six Tonight
Westward: Westward Diary
Westcountry / Carlton (Westcountry): Westcountry Live

Weather[edit]
Main article: ITV Weather
The ITV National Weather forecast was first broadcast in 1989, using data supplied by the Met Office, and was presented by a number of weather forecasters. The forecasts are sponsored in which the sponsors message, would appear prior to and following the forecast. The forecasts are made immediately after the main national news bulletins.
Prior to the creation of the national forecast, regional forecast provided by each regional companies were shown in each region only. The regional forecasts today are incorporated into the main regional news bulletins, and in the summer months, includes a Pollen Count.
Sport[edit]
Main article: ITV Sport
ITV covers many popular sports. The channel emphasises coverage of football, with the channel previously holding the UK terrestrial rights to the UEFA Champions League and with the channel sharing coverage of international football events such as the World Cup with the BBC. On 30 March 2007 The Football Association confirmed that it had agreed a new four-year £425m television deal for ITV and Setanta Sports to show FA Cup and England international matches (the Scottish regional broadcaster STV replaces these games with regular programming). The deal with the FA represented a 42% increase on the existing deal with BBC Sport and BSkyB.
In May 2009, ITV acquired the rights to broadcast live cricket from the Indian Premier League. The network also covers motorsport, rugby, and other sports.
Children's programming[edit]
Main article: CITV
The network broadcasts children's programming under the CITV (Children's ITV) strand. Children's programming was originally provided during weekday afternoons and weekend mornings, however following the launch of the CITV Channel in 2006, all children's programming, with the exception of the weekend ITV Breakfast slot, were relocated from the ITV line-up to the CITV channel in 2007, a move which was challenged by Ofcom in April 2007.
Teletext provider[edit]
The Public Teletext Licence[32] allows the holder to broadcast a text-based information service around the clock on Channel 3 (as well as Channel 4 and S4C) frequencies. Teletext on ITV was provided by ORACLE from 1974 until 1993 and from 1993 to 2010 by Teletext Ltd., whose news, sport and TV listings pages rivalled the BBC's offering, Ceefax on terrestrial and BBC Red Button on digital. Teletext Ltd. also provided digital teletext for the Channel 3 services, as well as the text output for both Channel 4 and S4C under the same licence and Channel 5. However, the licence was revoked by Ofcom on 29 January 2010 for failing to provide news and local non-news information on ITV and there is currently no teletext licence holder for ITV.[33]
Schools programming[edit]
Main article: ITV Schools
Schools programming on the network began in 1957 in some regions and expanded as more regions began broadcasting. It is a contractual obligation for the ITV company to broadcast schools programming, and this was initially broadcast as part of the normal scheduling. The programmes were moved into a segment for broadcast during the day in the 1960s, under the banner Independent Television for Schools and Colleges and from 1987 were broadcast on Channel 4 in the ITV Schools on Channel 4 segment. In 1993, this segment became Channel 4 Schools and later in 2000 4Learning. These strands of programming consisted of schools programming from all the ITV companies or from independent sources. The schools strand itself is now defunct, with no particular branding segment used.
Availability outside the UK[edit]
ITV (as UTV) is widely available in the Republic of Ireland on cable and MMDS, as well as being received directly in areas bordering Northern Ireland, or in coastal areas from Wales (as ITV Cymru Wales). It is also available on cable and IPTV in Switzerland and Liechtenstein. Since 27 March 2013, it has been offered by British Forces Broadcasting Service (BFBS) to members of HM Forces and their families around the world, replacing the BFBS3 TV channel, which already carried a selection of ITV programmes.[34]
Criticism[edit]
Since the launch of ITV, there have been concerns from politicians and the press that ITV faced a conflict concerning programme audiences and advertisers. As advertisers are reluctant to buy advertising space around low viewing programmes, there is a pressure on ITV to broadcast more popular programmes in peak times. This has become more profound in recent years following a relaxation in regulation and significantly more competition in the advertising market following the huge increase in commercial channels. In recent years, programmes have started to dominate from the reality television genre including the celebrity and talent show subgenres. This has led to accusations of ITV 'dumbing down' their programmes and appealing to the 'lowest common denominator', accusations that are at odds with the network's status as a public service broadcaster.[35][36][37] ITV was also heavily criticised for scaling back its regional programmes, including regional news.
Awards and nominations[edit]


Year
Association
Category
Nominee(s)
Result


2017
Diversity in Media Awards
Broadcaster of the Year
ITV
Nominated


Logo gallery[edit]







The first widely used logo, from 1989 to 1998.









Second logo used from 1998 to 2006.









The third logo used from 2006 to 2013.









The fourth and current logo used since 2013.




See also[edit]

List of television stations in the United Kingdom
List of ITV channels
List of television programmes broadcast by ITV
List of ITV journalists and newsreaders

Notes[edit]


^ Since 2013 all presentation has only carried the ITV name, however the name ITV Channel Television was previously used on-screen. This is now restricted to voice announcements before regional programmes.
^ Up to 1968, the service for a single Northern area consisting of both the current North West region and most of the current Yorkshire region was provided by Granada Television for Monday to Friday and by ABC Television for weekends.
^ Coverage was transferred from ITV Border and Tyne Tees to ITV Granada following DSO in the Isle of Man in July 2009.
^ Usually just ITV.
^ Up to 1968, the service for the Midlands region was provided by ATV for Monday to Friday and by ABC Television for weekends.
^ "Anglia Television Limited", which had provided the service since 1959, had its name changed to "ITV Broadcasting Limited" on 29 December 2006.
^ The current breakfast holder, ITV Breakfast Ltd, is a rebrand of GMTV, which took over from the previous incumbent, TV-am in 1993.
^ ITV plc purchased the remaining stake of GMTV (now ITV Breakfast) from The Walt Disney Company in November 2009.


References[edit]


^ a b c "Commercial Television: A Guide to the constitution and working of the new service". Times. 19 August 1955. Retrieved 18 January 2013. 
^ "1955: New TV channel ends BBC monopoly". BBC Online. Retrieved 20 September 2015. 
^ a b "No New Independent Tv Companies Appointed". Times. 9 January 1964. Retrieved 18 January 2013. 
^ "BIG five' pattern for Independent TV". Times. 22 December 1966. Retrieved 18 January 2013. 
^ "Discussions start on TV contract extensions". Times. 11 October 1974. Retrieved 18 January 2013. 
^ a b Gosling, Kenneth (25 January 1980). "Breakfast-time television and dual regions for Midlands and the South planned by IBA". Times. Retrieved 19 January 2013. 
^ Gosling, Kenneth (29 December 1980). "Southern and Westward TV lose franchises and others to be restructured". Times. Retrieved 19 January 2013. 
^ a b c Wittstock, Melinda (17 October 1991). "Legal threats follow biggest ITV shake-up". Times. Retrieved 19 January 2013. 
^ "Rescue Operation' For Tv Company". Times. 24 September 1963. Retrieved 18 January 2013. 
^ Frean, Alexandra (25 November 1993). "ITV rule changes herald takeovers". Times. Retrieved 19 January 2013. 
^ ITC, quoted in Encouraging Bidding In The Single Licence National Lottery Framework report, UK National Lottery Commission, 19 November 2004
^ a b "History". ITV plc. Retrieved 19 January 2013. 
^ a b Madslein, Jorn (2 February 2004). "ITV: A third force in broadcasting". BBC News. Retrieved 19 January 2013. 
^ a b Tryhorn, Chris (2 February 2004). "Finally, ITV plc is born". Guardian. London. Retrieved 19 January 2013. 
^ a b Mark Sweney, Tara Conlan (18 October 2011). "ITV plc buys Channel Television". The Guardian. London. Retrieved 19 January 2013. 
^ a b c McIvor, Jamie (5 March 2012). "Broadcaster STV reaches new deal with ITV". BBC News. Retrieved 19 January 2013. 
^ McIvor, Jamie (25 August 2011). "STV counts cost of ITV peace deal". BBC News. Retrieved 19 January 2013. 
^ Robinson, James (26 November 2009). "ITV takes full control of breakfast TV broadcaster GMTV". Guardian. London. Retrieved 19 January 2013. 
^ "Lygo quits Channel 4". C21 Media. 30 April 2010. Archived from the original on 25 October 2007. Retrieved 1 May 2010. 
^ a b Evans, Richard (20 June 1990). "Dispute over ITV and BBC quotas". Times. Retrieved 19 January 2013. 
^ Holmwood, Leigh (12 September 2007). "Unions slam ITV regional cuts". London: MediaGuardian. Retrieved 27 September 2007. 
^ Holmwood, Leigh (21 July 2009), The Bill to be shown on ITV3 so Scottish viewers don't miss out, London: The Guardian, retrieved 2 November 2010 
^ "ITV launches £38m STV legal claim". BBC News. 22 September 2009. Retrieved 5 May 2010. 
^ McCulloch, Scott (5 March 2012). "Business7 – Business News – Scottish Business News – STV agrees new Channel 3 licensing deal with ITV". Business7. Archived from the original on 9 March 2012. Retrieved 28 April 2012. 
^ "Television Broadcast Licensing Update November 2008". Ofcom. November 2008. Archived from the original on 31 July 2010. Retrieved 20 September 2012. 
^ a b "Channel 3 (ITV)". Ofcom. Retrieved 27 September 2007. 
^ "ITV buys Irish broadcaster UTV for £100m". Independent. 20 August 2015. Retrieved 23 January 2016. 
^ Brown, Maggie (25 January 2013). "BBC1 daytime revamp hits BBC2 and Channel 4 ratings". The Guardian. Retrieved 18 August 2013. 
^ "About ITN". ITN. Retrieved 19 January 2013. 
^ "ITV News". ITN. Retrieved 19 January 2013. 
^ Douglas, Torin (25 September 2008). "Analysis: Ofcom's regional news proposals". BBC News. Retrieved 19 January 2013. 
^ "Public Teletext Licence" (PDF). Ofcom. 17 December 2004. Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 September 2007. Retrieved 27 September 2007. 
^ "Teletext Revocation Notice" (PDF). Ofcom. 29 January 2010. Retrieved 11 August 2010. 
^ BFBS TV IS CHANGING Archived 17 October 2012 at the Wayback Machine.
^ Murray-Watson, Andrew (10 September 2006). "ITV 'dumbing down' threatens ad revenues". The Telegraph. London. Retrieved 6 January 2013. 
^ Thomas, Liz (3 November 2010). "ITV has dumbed down and appeals to 'lowest common denominator' say its bosses". Daily Mail. London. Retrieved 6 January 2013. 
^ Sherryl Wilson (2005). "9". In Catherine Johnson and Rob Turnock. ITV Cultures: Independent Television over Fifty years. Maidenhead: Open University Press. pp. 159–176. ISBN 9780335217298. 


External links[edit]

ITV - www.itv.com
STV - www.stv.tv

Parent companies[edit]

ITV plc
STV Group plc







v
t
e


ITV



Channels




Current




Domestic



SD: ITV, STV, UTV
ITV2
ITV3
ITV4
ITVBe
ITV Encore
CITV
The Store
HD: ITV HD, STV HD, UTV HD
ITV2 HD
ITV3 HD
ITV4 HD
ITVBe HD
ITV Encore HD
ITV Box Office





International



ITV Choice








Defunct



ITV News Channel
ITV Play
ITV Sport Channel
S2
UTV2
UTV Ireland








Companies




Current



ITV plc
STV Group plc





Former



Alpha Television
Associated Television
Carlton Communications plc
Granada plc
ITV Digital Ltd
Trident Television
UTV Media plc
Yorkshire-Tyne Tees Television








Divisions,
brands and
services




Current



children's: CITV
news: ITV News (ITN)
sport: ITV Sport
production: ITV Studios (Australia), 12 Yard, Big Talk Productions, Gameface, The Garden, Mammoth Screen, Possessed, Potato, Shiver Productions, So Television, Twofour
weather: ITV Weather
online: itv.com, stv.tv
catch up: ITV Hub, STV Player





Defunct



ITV Day
ITV Digital
ITV Local
ITV Play
ITV Schools
UTV Player
u.tv








Franchises
and
regions




National
franchises



breakfast: TV-am (1983–1992), GMTV (1993–2010), ITV Breakfast (2010–present)
teletext: ORACLE (1974–1992), Teletext Ltd. (1993–present)





Regional
franchises



Northern Scotland: Grampian Television
Central Scotland: Scottish Television
Scottish and English Border: Border Television
Northern Ireland: UTV
North East England: Tyne Tees Television
Yorkshire and Lincolnshire: Yorkshire Television
North of England (weekdays), later North West England and Isle of Man (all week): Granada Television
North of England and Midlands (weekends): ABC Network
Wales and the West of England: TWW, WWN/Teledu Cymru, ITSWW, HTV
Midlands (weekdays), later Midlands (all week): ATV
Midlands (all week): Central Independent Television
East Anglia: Anglia Television
London (weekdays): Associated-Rediffusion, Thames Television, Carlton Television
London (weekends): ATV, LWT
South and South East England: Southern Television, TVS, Meridian Broadcasting
South West England: Westward Television, TSW, Westcountry Television
Channel Islands: Channel Television





Unsuccessful
franchise bids



London Weekday, East Anglia and South and South East England: CPV-TV
North West England: North West Television





Non-franchise
regions




Current



ITV Central
ITV London
ITV Meridian
ITV West Country
ITV Tyne Tees & Border
STV





Defunct



ITV Thames Valley











Regulators



Independent Television Authority (1954–72)
Independent Broadcasting Authority (1972–90)
Independent Television Commission (1991–2003)
Ofcom (2003–present)





Other



Freesat
History of ITV (Idents
ITV Emergency National Service (1968)
ITV Telethon
Night Network)
Timeline of ITV
ITV Nightscreen
people (journalists and newsreaders)
programmes (ITV2
CITV)
Television House
List of ITV regions
United Kingdom Independent Broadcasting
ITV Advertising operations
ITV 50








Television in the United Kingdom
 Category












v
t
e


 Media in the United Kingdom








UK national newspapers, magazines, and other periodicals







Newspapers
(History)




Berliner



The Guardian
The Observer





Broadsheet



Financial Times
The Daily Telegraph
The Sunday Telegraph
The Sunday Times





Compact



i
The Times





Middle-market



Daily Express
Daily Mail
The Mail on Sunday





Tabloid



Daily Mirror
Sunday Mirror
Morning Star
The Sunday People
Daily Star
Daily Star Sunday
The Sun
Sunday Sport








Magazines &
other periodicals



List of magazines by circulation
















Radio in the UK







National
stations




BBC



Analogue / digital
Radio 1
Radio 2
Radio 3
Radio 4
5 Live
Digital only
Radio 1Xtra
Radio 4 Extra
5 Live Sports Extra
6 Music
Asian Network
World Service
BBC National DAB (multiplex)





Independent
/ commercial



Analogue / digital
Absolute Radio
Classic FM
Heart
Kiss
Talksport
Digital only
Absolute 80s
Absolute Radio Extra
BFBS Radio
Capital
Digital One (multiplex)
Heart Extra
heat
The Hits
Jazz FM
Kerrang!
Kiss Fresh
Kisstory
LBC
Magic
Planet Rock
Premier Christian Radio
Radio X
RNIB Connect Radio
Sound Digital (multiplex)
Smooth
Talkradio
UCB UK
Virgin Radio UK








Regional
& local
stations




BBC



List of BBC Local Radio stations
List of BBC Regional Radio stations





Independent
/ commercial



List of community radio stations
List of local commercial radio stations
List of semi-national / regional analogue and digital radio stations








Other
stations



List of hospital radio stations
Pirate radio
Restricted Service Licence (RSL)

List of RSL stations


List of satellite radio stations
List of student and schools radio





Other



Broadcasting House
FM broadcasting
The Studios, MediaCityUK
Radio Academy

Radio Academy Awards


Radio Independents Group
RAJAR
Most listened to programmes
















Television in the UK







Principal
channels
(List)




BBC



BBC One
BBC Two
BBC Four
BBC News
BBC Parliament
CBBC
CBeebies





ITV



ITV
ITV2
ITV3
ITV4
CITV
ITV Encore
ITVBe
ITV Box Office





Ch 4



Channel 4
E4
Film4
More4
4seven





Ch 5



Channel 5
5Prime
5Spike
5Star
5USA





Sky



Challenge
Pick
Real Lives
Sky One
Sky Two
Sky Arts
Sky Atlantic
Sky Cinema
Sky Living
Sky News
Sky Sports
Sky Sports F1
Sky Sports News





UKTV



Alibi
Dave
Drama
Eden
Gold
Good Food
Home
Really
W
Yesterday





Sony Pictures Television



Chart Show TV
Chart Show Hits
Movies4Men
Pop
Pop Max
Starz TV
Sony Channel
Sony Movie Channel
Scuzz
Tiny Pop
True Crime
True Entertainment
True Movies
truTV
The Vault








Services
&
platforms



All 4

Film4oD


analogue

analogue terrestrial (defunct)


BBC iPlayer

BBC Three


BBC Store
TalkTalk TV Store
BT TV
cable
digital

digital terrestrial
List of channels


Freesat

Freesat+


Freeview
high-definition

List of channels


ITV

ITV Hub, STV Player


local television
My5
Now TV
Real Digital
Restricted Service Licence
satellite

List of channels


Sky

Freesat from Sky
On Demand
Sky+
Sky+ HD


TalkTalk TV
Top Up TV
TVPlayer
Virgin Media

FilmFlex
TiVo
V+


YouView
Zattoo





Studios




Current



BBC Elstree Centre
BBC Pacific Quay
The Bottle Yard Studios
Broadcasting House
Broadcasting House, Belfast
Broadcasting House, Bristol
Broadcasting House, Cardiff
Elstree Studios (Shenley Road)
Gas Street Studios
The Leeds Studios
The London Studios
The Maidstone Studios
Mailbox Birmingham
MediaCityUK
Osterley Television Centre
Roath Lock
Television Centre, London





Defunct



British and Dominions Imperial Studios
Fountain Studios
Gate Studios
Granada Studios
MGM-British Studios
Pebble Mill Studios
Teddington Studios
Television Centre, Newcastle upon Tyne
Television Centre, Southampton
Upper Boat Studios








Other



Defunct channels
Edinburgh International Television Festival
History

List of years


List of channels
Student television
Viewing statistics

Most-watched broadcasts


















Companies and organisations







Companies




Major
companies



Archant
Ascential
Bauer Radio
BBC
Bloomsbury Publishing
BT Group
Channel Four Television Corporation
Daily Mail and General Trust
Dentsu Aegis Network
Economist Group
EMI Music Publishing
Endemol Shine UK
Global Group
Guardian Media Group
Haymarket Media Group
Informa
ITN
ITV plc
Johnston Press
Mecom Group
News UK
Newsquest
Northern & Shell
Now TV Limited
Origin Broadband
Pearson PLC
Press Holdings
RELX Group
Reuters
Sky UK Limited
Sky plc
STV Group
Syco
TalkTalk Group
Time Inc. UK
Trinity Mirror
UBM plc
Virgin Media
Wireless Group





Other resources



Arqiva
List of largest UK book publishers








Government
& regulatory
bodies



Advertising Standards Authority
BBC Trust
British Board of Film Classification
British Film Institute
Culture, Media, and Sport Select Committee
Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport
Independent Press Standards Organisation
Ofcom
Press Recognition Panel
S4C Authority





Industry
& trades
bodies



British Academy of Film and Television Arts
British Phonographic Industry
Broadcasting, Entertainment, Cinematograph and Theatre Union
Clearcast
Digital TV Group
Digital UK
Equity
Federation Against Copyright Theft
National Union of Journalists
The Publishers Association
Royal Television Society
United Kingdom Independent Broadcasting





Other



BBC Academy
National Film and Television School
National Science and Media Museum
















Regional and student media







Regional media



Media in England

Birmingham
London
Manchester


Media in Scotland

Aberdeen
Dundee
Glasgow


Media in Wales

Cardiff







Student media



Student television














 Category












v
t
e


Freeview



TV channels



4Music
4seven

HD


5Spike
5Star
5USA
Al Jazeera Arabic
Al Jazeera English

HD


Arise News
BBC One

HD


BBC Two

HD


BBC Four

HD


BBC Alba
BBC News Channel
BBC Parliament
Blaze
CBBC

HD


CBeebies

HD


CBS Action
CBS Drama
CBS Reality
Challenge
Channel 4

+1
HD
+1 HD


Channel 5

+1
HD


Chart Show TV
CITV
Clubland TV
Community Channel
Create and Craft
Dave

ja vu


Drama
E4

+1


Film4

+1


Food Network
Fox

Fox HD
Fox +1


FreeSports
Gems TV
Home
Horror Channel
Ideal World
ITV

+1
HD


ITV2

+1


ITV3

+1


ITV4

+1


ITVBe

+1


The Jewellery Channel
More4
Movies4Men
Pick
POP

+1


Pop Max
Quest

+1


Quest Red
QVC
QVC Beauty
QVC Style
Really
Rocks & Co
RT/RT UK
RTÉ One
RTÉ2
S4C
Sky News
Sony Movie Channel

+1


Talking Pictures TV
TG4
TBN UK
The Store
Travel Channel
Tiny Pop

+1


True Crime
True Entertainment
True Movies
TruTV

+1


The Vault
Vintage TV
Viva
Yesterday
YourTV

+1







Radio stations



Absolute Radio
BBC Asian Network
BBC Radio 1
BBC Radio 1Xtra
BBC Radio 2
BBC Radio 3
BBC Radio 4
BBC Radio 4 Extra
BBC Radio 5 Live
BBC Radio 5 Live Sports Extra
BBC Radio 6 Music
BBC Radio Cymru
BBC Radio Foyle
BBC Radio nan Gàidheal
BBC Radio Scotland
BBC Radio Ulster
BBC Radio Wales
BBC World Service
Capital London
Classic FM
Heart London
Heat Radio
The Hits Radio
Insight Radio
Kerrang Radio
Kiss
KissFresh
Kisstory
LBC
Magic 105.4 FM
Premier Christian Radio
RTÉ Raidió na Gaeltachta
Smooth Radio
Talksport
U105





Local channels



Bay TV Liverpool
Big Centre TV
Estuary TV
Latest TV
London Live
Made in Bristol
Made in Cardiff
Made in Leeds
Made in Tyne & Wear
Mustard TV
Notts TV
NVTV
Sheffield Live TV
STV Edinburgh
STV Glasgow
That's Manchester
That's Oxfordshire
That's Solent





TV platforms



Analogue
Analogue terrestrial
Cable
Digital
Digital terrestrial
High-definition
IPTV
Satellite





Miscellaneous



History of Freeview UK











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=ITV_(TV_network)&oldid=817593727"					Categories: 1955 establishments in the United KingdomITVTelevision broadcasting companies of the United KingdomTelevision channels and stations established in 1955Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksEngvarB from June 2014Use dmy dates from June 2014Articles needing additional references from September 2017All articles needing additional references