This article is about the patriarch. For other uses, see Jacob (disambiguation).


Jacob



Jacob Wrestling with the Angel, by Rembrandt



Born
Canaan


Died
New Kingdom of Egypt


Other names
Israel


Children
12 sons (Twelve Tribes of Israel)
Dinah (only daughter)


Parent(s)
Isaac and Rebecca


Relatives
Abraham (grandfather)
Sarah (grandmother)
Ishmael (uncle)
Esau (twin brother)
Rachel (cousin, wife)
Leah (cousin, wife)


Jacob (/ˈdʒeɪkəb/; Hebrew: יַעֲקֹב‬, Modern  Ya‘akōv (help·info) Tiberian Yā‘āqōḇ), later given the name Israel, is regarded as a Patriarch of the Israelites. According to the Book of Genesis, Jacob was the third Hebrew progenitor with whom God made a covenant. He is the son of Isaac and Rebecca, the grandson of Abraham, Sarah and Bethuel, the nephew of Ishmael, and the younger twin brother of Esau. Jacob had twelve sons and at least one daughter, by his two wives, Leah and Rachel, and by their handmaidens Bilhah and Zilpah.
Jacob's twelve sons, named in Genesis, were Reuben, Simeon, Levi, Judah, Dan, Naphtali, Gad, Asher, Issachar, Zebulun, Joseph, and Benjamin. His only daughter mentioned in Genesis is Dinah. The twelve sons became the progenitors of the "Tribes of Israel".[1]




Jacob's Dream statue and display on the campus of Abilene Christian University. The artwork is based on Genesis 28:10–22 and graphically represents the scenes alluded to in the hymn "Nearer, My God, to Thee" and the spiritual "We Are Climbing Jacob's Ladder" as well as other musical works.


As a result of a severe drought in Canaan, Jacob and his sons moved to Egypt at the time when his son Joseph was viceroy. After 17 years in Egypt, Jacob died, and the length of Jacob's life was 147 years. Joseph carried Jacob's remains to the land of Canaan, and gave him a stately burial in the same Cave of Machpelah as were buried Abraham, Sarah, Isaac, Rebecca, and Jacob's first wife, Leah.
Jacob is mentioned in a number of sacred scriptures, including the Hebrew Bible, the Talmud, the New Testament, the Quran, hadith, and the Book of Mormon.



Contents


1 Etymology
2 Genesis narrative

2.1 Jacob and Esau's birth
2.2 Acquiring birthright
2.3 Blessing of Isaac
2.4 Jacob's ladder
2.5 Jacob's marriages
2.6 Journey back to Canaan
2.7 Jacob in Hebron
2.8 Seven year famine
2.9 Jacob in Egypt
2.10 Final days
2.11 Children of Jacob
2.12 Family tree


3 Religious perspectives

3.1 Jewish tradition
3.2 Christianity
3.3 Islamic tradition
3.4 Non-religious perspective


4 Historicity
5 References
6 Further reading
7 External links



Etymology
According to the folk etymology found in Genesis 25:26, the name Yaʿaqob יעקב is derived from ʿaqeb עָקֵב "heel".[2][3] The historical origin of the name is uncertain. Yaʿqob-'el is notably recorded as a placename in a list by Thutmose III (15th century BC). The same name is recorded earlier still, in c. 1800 BC, in cuneiform inscriptions (spelled ya-ah-qu-ub-el, ya-qu-ub-el).[4] The suggestion that the personal name may be shortened from this compound name, which would translate to "may El protect", originates with Bright (1960).[5] The Septuagint renders the name Ιακωβος, whence Latin Jacobus, English Jacob.
The name Israel given to Jacob following the episode of his wrestling with the angel (Genesis 32:22–32) is etymologized as composition of אֵל el "god" and the root שָׂרָה śarah "to rule, contend, have power, prevail over": [6] שָׂרִיתָ עִם־אֱלֹהִים (KJV: "a prince hast thou power with God"); alternatively, the el can be read as the subject, for a translation of "[The God] El rules/condends/struggles".[7]
Genesis narrative







The biblical account of the life of Jacob is found in the Book of Genesis, chapters 25–50.
Jacob and Esau's birth
Jacob and his twin brother, Esau, were born to Isaac and Rebecca after 20 years of marriage, when Isaac was 60 years of age (Genesis 25:20, 25:26). Rebekah was uncomfortable during her pregnancy and went to inquire of God why she was suffering. She received the prophecy that twins were fighting in her womb and would continue to fight all their lives, even after they became two separate nations. The prophecy also said that "the one people shall be stronger than the other people; and the elder shall serve the younger;" (Genesis 25:25 KJV)
When the time came for Rebecca to give birth, the firstborn, Esau, came out covered with red hair, as if he were wearing a hairy garment, and his heel was grasped by the hand of Jacob, the secondborn. According to Genesis 25:25, Isaac and Rebecca named the first son Hebrew: עשו‎, Esau. The second son they named יעקב, Jacob (Ya`aqob or Ya`aqov, meaning "heel-catcher", "supplanter", "leg-puller", "he who follows upon the heels of one", from Hebrew: עקב‎, `aqab or `aqav, "seize by the heel", "circumvent", "restrain", a wordplay upon Hebrew: עקבה‎, `iqqebah or `iqqbah, "heel").[8]
The boys displayed very different natures as they matured. "... and Esau was a cunning hunter, a man of the field; but Jacob was a simple man, dwelling in tents" (Genesis 25:27). Moreover, the attitudes of their parents toward them also differed: "And Isaac loved Esau, because he did eat of his venison: but Rebecca loved Jacob." (Genesis 25:28)




Jacob offering a dish of lentils to Esau for his birthright, 18th-century painting by Zacarias Gonzalez Velazquez.


Acquiring birthright
Main article: Jacob and Esau
Genesis 25:29–34 tells the account of Esau selling his birthright to Jacob. This passage tells that Esau, returning famished from the fields, begged Jacob to give him some of the stew that Jacob had just made. (Esau referred to the dish as "that same red pottage", giving rise to his nickname, Hebrew: אדום‎ (`Edom, meaning "Red").) Jacob offered to give Esau a bowl of stew in exchange for his birthright, to which Esau agreed.
Blessing of Isaac
As Isaac aged, he became blind and was uncertain when he would die, so he decided to bestow Esau's birthright upon him. He requested that Esau go out to the fields with his weapons (quiver and bow) to kill some venison. Isaac then requested that Esau make "savory meat" for him out of the venison, according to the way he enjoyed it the most, so that he could eat it and bless Esau.
Rebecca overheard this conversation. It is suggested that she realized prophetically that Isaac's blessings would go to Jacob, since she was told before the twins' birth that the older son would serve the younger.[9] Rebecca blessed Jacob and she quickly ordered Jacob to bring her two kid goats from their flock so that he could take Esau's place in serving Isaac and receiving his blessing. Jacob protested that his father would recognize their deception since Esau was hairy and he himself was smooth-skinned. He feared his father would curse him as soon as he felt him, but Rebecca offered to take the curse herself, then insisted that Jacob obey her.[10] Jacob did as his mother instructed and, when he returned with the kids, Rebekah made the savory meat that Isaac loved. Before she sent Jacob to his father, she dressed him in Esau's garments and laid goatskins on his arms and neck to simulate hairy skin.




An elderly Isaac blessing Jacob, oil on canvas by Govert Flinck, 1638


Disguised as Esau, Jacob entered Isaac's room. Surprised that Esau was back so soon, Isaac asked how it could be that the hunt went so quickly. Jacob responded, "Because the LORD your God brought it to me." Rashi, on Genesis 27:21 says Isaac's suspicions were aroused even more, because Esau never used the personal name of God. Isaac demanded that Jacob come close so he could feel him, but the goatskins felt just like Esau's hairy skin. Confused, Isaac exclaimed, "The voice is Jacob's voice, but the hands are the hands of Esau!" Genesis 27:22. Still trying to get at the truth, Isaac asked him directly, "Art thou my very son Esau?" and Jacob answered simply, "I am." Isaac proceeded to eat the food and to drink the wine that Jacob gave him, and then told him to come close and kiss him. As Jacob kissed his father, Isaac smelled the clothes which belonged to Esau and finally accepted that the person in front of him was Esau. Isaac then blessed Jacob with the blessing that was meant for Esau. Genesis 27:28–29 states Isaac's blessing: "Therefore God give thee of the dew of heavens, and the fatness of the earth, and plenty of corn and wine: Let people serve thee: be lord over thy brethren, and let thy mother's sons bow down to thee: cursed be every one that curseth thee, and blessed be he that blesseth thee."
Jacob had scarcely left the room when Esau returned from the hunt to prepare his game and receive the blessing. The realization that he had been deceived shocked Isaac, yet he acknowledged that Jacob had received the blessings by adding, "Indeed, he will be [or remain] blessed!" (27:33).
Esau was heartbroken by the deception and begged for his own blessing. Having made Jacob a ruler over his brothers, Isaac could only promise, "By your sword you shall live, but your brother you shall serve; yet it shall be that when you are aggrieved, you may cast off his yoke from upon your neck" (27:39–40).
Although Esau sold Jacob his own birthright, which was his blessing, for "red pottage", Esau still hated Jacob for receiving his blessing that their father Isaac unknowingly had given to him. He vowed to kill Jacob as soon as Isaac died. When Rebecca heard about his murderous intentions,[11] she ordered Jacob to travel to her brother Laban's house in Haran, until Esau's anger subsided. She convinced Isaac to send Jacob away by telling him that she despaired of his marrying a local girl from the idol-worshipping families of Canaan (as Esau had done). After Isaac sent Jacob away to find a wife, Esau realized his own Canaanite wives were evil in his father's eyes and so he took a daughter of Isaac's half-brother, Ishmael, as another wife.
Jacob's ladder
Main article: Jacob's Ladder




Jacob's Dream by William Blake (c. 1800, British Museum, London)


Near Luz en route to Haran, Jacob experienced a vision of a ladder, or staircase, reaching into heaven with angels going up and down it, commonly referred to as "Jacob's ladder". He heard the voice of God, who repeated many of the blessings upon him, coming from the top of the ladder.
According to Midrash Genesis Rabbah, the ladder signified the exiles that the Jewish people would suffer before the coming of the Jewish Messiah: the angels that represented the exiles of Babylonia, Persia, and Greece each climbed up a certain number of steps, paralleling the years of the exile, before they "fell down"; but the angel representing the last exile, that of Edom, kept climbing higher and higher into the clouds. Jacob feared that his descendants would never be free of Esau's domination, but God assured him that at the End of Days, Edom too would come falling down.[12]
In the morning, Jacob awakened and continued on his way to Haran, after naming the place where he had spent the night "Bethel", "God's house".
Jacob's marriages
Arriving in Haran, Jacob saw a well where shepherds were gathering their flocks to water them and met Laban's younger daughter, Rachel, Jacob's first cousin; she was working as a shepherdess. He loved her immediately, and after spending a month with his relatives, asked for her hand in marriage in return for working seven years for Laban the Aramean. Laban agreed to the arrangement. These seven years seemed to Jacob "but a few days, for the love he had for her", but when they were complete and he asked for his wife, Laban deceived Jacob by switching Rachel for her older sister, Leah, as the veiled bride.




Rachel and Jacob by William Dyce


In the morning, when the truth became known, Laban justified his action, saying that in his country it was unheard of to give a younger daughter before the older. However, he agreed to give Rachel in marriage as well if Jacob would work another seven years. After the week of wedding celebrations with Leah, Jacob married Rachel, and he continued to work for Laban for another seven years.
Jacob loved Rachel more than Leah, and Leah felt hated. God opened Leah's womb and she gave birth to four sons rapidly: Reuben, Simeon, Levi, and Judah. Rachel, however, remained barren. Following the example of Sarah, who gave her handmaid to Abraham after years of infertility, Rachel gave Jacob her handmaid, Bilhah, in marriage so that Rachel could raise children through her. Bilhah gave birth to Dan and Naphtali. Seeing that she had left off childbearing temporarily, Leah then gave her handmaid Zilpah to Jacob in marriage so that Leah could raise more children through her. Zilpah gave birth to Gad and Asher. Afterwards, Leah became fertile again and gave birth to Issachar, Zebulun, and Dinah, Jacob's first and only daughter. God remembered Rachel, who gave birth to Joseph and Benjamin. If pregnancies of different marriages overlapped, the first twelve births (all the sons except Benjamin, and the daughter Dinah) could have occurred within seven years. That is one obvious, but not universally held, interpretation of Genesis 29:27–30:25.[13]
After Joseph was born, Jacob decided to return home to his parents. Laban the Aramean was reluctant to release him, as God had blessed his flock on account of Jacob. Laban asked what he could pay Jacob. Jacob suggested that all the spotted, speckled, and brown goats and sheep of Laban's flock, at any given moment, would be his wages. Jacob placed rods of poplar, hazel, and chestnut, all of which he peeled "white streaks upon them",[14] within the flocks' watering holes or troughs in a performance of sympathetic magic, associating the stripes of the rods with the growth of stripes on the livestock.[15] Despite this practicing of magic, later on Jacob says to his wives that it was God who made the livestock give birth to the convenient offspring, in order to turn the tide against the deceptive Laban.[16] As time passed, Laban's sons noticed that Jacob was taking the better part of their flocks, and so Laban's friendly attitude towards Jacob began to change. The angel of the Lord, in a dream back during the breeding season, told Jacob "Now lift your eyes and see [that] all the he goats mounting the animals are ringed, speckled, and striped, for I have seen all that Laban is doing to you",[17] that he is the God whom Jacob met at Bethel,[18] and that Jacob should leave and go back to the land where he was born,[19] which he and his wives and children did without informing Laban. Before they left, Rachel stole the teraphim, considered to be household idols, from Laban's house.
Laban pursued Jacob for seven days. The night before he caught up to him, God appeared to Laban in a dream and warned him not to say anything good or bad to Jacob. When the two met, Laban said to Jacob, “What have you done, that you have tricked me and driven away my daughters like captives of the sword?"[20] He also asked for his stolen teraphim back. Knowing nothing about Rachel's theft, Jacob told Laban that whoever stole them should die and stood aside to let him search. When Laban reached Rachel's tent, she hid the teraphim by sitting on them and stating she could not get up because she was menstruating. Jacob and Laban then parted from each other with a pact to preserve the peace between them. Laban returned to his home and Jacob continued on his way.
Journey back to Canaan




Jacob Wrestling with the Angel by Eugène Delacroix.


Main article: Jacob wrestling with the angel
As Jacob neared the land of Canaan, he sent messengers ahead to his brother Esau. They returned with the news that Esau was coming to meet Jacob with an army of 400 men. With great apprehension, Jacob prepared for the worst. He engaged in earnest prayer to God, then sent on before him a tribute of flocks and herds to Esau, "a present to my lord Esau from thy servant Jacob".
Jacob then transported his family and flocks across the ford Jabbok by night, then recrossed back to send over his possessions, being left alone in communion with God. There, a mysterious being appeared ("man", Genesis 32:24, 28; or "God", Genesis 32:28, 30, Hosea 12:3, 5; or "angel", Hosea 12:4), and the two wrestled until daybreak. When the being saw that he did not overpower Jacob, he touched Jacob on the sinew of his thigh (the gid hanasheh, גיד הנשה), and, as a result, Jacob developed a limp (Genesis 32:31). Because of this, "to this day the people of Israel do not eat the sinew of the thigh that is on the hip socket" (Genesis 32:32). This incident is the source of the mitzvah of porging.[21]
Jacob then demanded a blessing, and the being declared in Genesis 32:28 that, from then on, Jacob would be called יִשְׂרָאֵל, Israel (Yisra`el, meaning "one that struggled with the divine angel" (Josephus), "one who has prevailed with God" (Rashi), "a man seeing God" (Whiston), "he will rule as God" (Strong), or "a prince with God" (Morris), from Hebrew: שרה‎, "prevail", "have power as a prince").[22] While he is still called Jacob in later texts, his name Israel makes some consider him the eponymous ancestor of the Israelites.
Jacob asked the being's name, but he refused to answer. Afterwards, Jacob named the place Penuel (Penuw`el, Peniy`el, meaning "face of God"),[23] saying: "I have seen God face to face and lived."
Because the terminology is ambiguous ("el" in Yisra`el) and inconsistent, and because this being refused to reveal his name, there are varying views as to whether he was a man, an angel, or God. Josephus uses only the terms "angel", "divine angel", and "angel of God", describing the struggle as no small victory. According to Rashi, the being was the guardian angel of Esau himself, sent to destroy Jacob before he could return to the land of Canaan. Trachtenberg theorized that the being refused to identify itself for fear that, if its secret name was known, it would be conjurable by incantations.[24] Literal Christian interpreters like Henry M. Morris say that the stranger was "God Himself and, therefore, Christ in His preincarnate state", citing Jacob's own evaluation and the name he assumed thereafter, "one who fights victoriously with God", and adding that God had appeared in the human form of the Angel of the Lord to eat a meal with Abraham in Genesis 18.[25] Geller wrote that, "in the context of the wrestling bout, the name implies that Jacob won this supremacy, linked to that of God's, by a kind of theomachy."[26]
In the morning, Jacob assembled his 4 wives and 11 sons, placing the maidservants and their children in front, Leah and her children next, and Rachel and Joseph in the rear. Some commentators cite this placement as proof that Jacob continued to favor Joseph over Leah's children, as presumably the rear position would have been safer from a frontal assault by Esau, which Jacob feared. Jacob himself took the foremost position. Esau's spirit of revenge, however, was apparently appeased by Jacob's bounteous gifts of camels, goats and flocks. Their reunion was an emotional one.




Peter Paul Rubens, The Reconciliation of Jacob and Esau, 1624.


Esau offered to accompany them on their way back to Israel, but Jacob protested that his children were still young and tender (born 6 to 13 years prior in the narrative); Jacob suggested eventually catching up with Esau at Mount Seir. According to the Sages, this was a prophetic reference to the End of Days, when Jacob's descendants will come to Mount Seir, the home of Edom, to deliver judgment against Esau's descendants for persecuting them throughout the millennia (see Obadiah 1:21). Jacob actually diverted himself to Succoth and was not recorded as rejoining Esau until, at Machpelah, the two bury their father Isaac, who lived to be 180, and was 60 years older than they were.
Jacob then arrived in Shechem, where he bought a parcel of land, now identified as Joseph's Tomb. In Shechem, Jacob's daughter Dinah was kidnapped and raped by the ruler's son, who desired to marry the girl. Dinah's brothers, Simeon and Levi, agreed in Jacob's name to permit the marriage as long as all the men of Shechem first circumcised themselves, ostensibly to unite the children of Jacob in Abraham's covenant of familial harmony. On the third day after the circumcisions, when all the men of Shechem were still in pain, Simeon and Levi put them all to death by the sword and rescued their sister Dinah, and their brothers plundered the property, women, and children. Jacob condemned this act, saying: "You have brought trouble on me by making me a stench to the Canaanites and Perizzites, the people living in this land."[27] He later rebuked his two sons for their anger in his deathbed blessing (Genesis 49:5–7).




Jacob struggles with the angel. Gutenberg Bible, 1558.


Jacob returned to Bethel, where he had another vision of blessing. Although the death of Rebecca, Jacob's mother, is not explicitly recorded in the Bible, Deborah, Rebecca's nurse, died and was buried at Bethel, at a place that Jacob calls Allon Bachuth (אלון בכות), "Oak of Weepings" (Genesis 35:8). According to the Midrash,[28] the plural form of the word "weeping" indicates the double sorrow that Rebecca also died at this time.
Jacob then made a further move while Rachel was pregnant; near Bethlehem, Rachel went into labor and died as she gave birth to her second son, Benjamin (Jacob's twelfth son). Jacob buried her and erected a monument over her grave. Rachel's Tomb, just outside Bethlehem, remains a popular site for pilgrimages and prayers to this day. Jacob then settled in Migdal Eder, where his firstborn, Reuben, slept with Rachel's servant Bilhah; Jacob's response was not given at the time, but he did condemn Reuben for it later, in his deathbed blessing. Jacob was finally reunited with his father Isaac in Mamre (outside Hebron).
When Isaac died at the age of 180, Jacob and Esau buried him in the Cave of the Patriarchs, which Abraham had purchased as a family burial plot. At this point in the biblical narrative, two genealogies of Esau's family appear under the headings "the generations of Esau". A conservative interpretation is that, at Isaac's burial, Jacob obtained the records of Esau, who had been married 80 years prior, and incorporated them into his own family records, and that Moses augmented and published them.[29]
Jacob in Hebron
Main article: Plot against Joseph
The house of Jacob dwelt in Hebron,[30] in the land of Canaan. His flocks were often fed in the pastures of Shechem[31][32] as well as Dothan.[33] Of all the children in his household, he loved Rachel’s firstborn son, Joseph, the most. Thus Joseph’s half brothers were jealous of him and they ridiculed him often. Joseph even told his father about all of his half brothers’ misdeeds. When Joseph was seventeen years old, Jacob made a long coat or tunic of many colors for him. Seeing this, the half brothers began to hate Joseph. Then Joseph began to have dreams that implied that his family would bow down to him. When he told his brothers about these dreams, it drove them to conspire against him. When Jacob heard of these dreams, he rebuked his son for proposing the idea that the house of Jacob would even bow down to Joseph. Yet, he contemplated his son’s words about these dreams. (Genesis 37:1–11)




Joseph's Coat Brought to Jacob
by Giovanni Andrea de Ferrari, c. 1640.


Sometime afterward, the sons of Jacob by Leah, Bilhah and Zilpah, were feeding his flocks in Shechem. Jacob wanted to know how things were doing, so he asked Joseph to go down there and return with a report.[34] This was the last time he would ever see his son in Hebron. Later that day, the report that Jacob ended up receiving came from Joseph's brothers who brought before him a coat laden with blood. Jacob identified the coat as the one he made for Joseph. At that moment he cried “It is my son’s tunic. A wild beast has devoured him. Without doubt Joseph is torn to pieces.” He rent his clothes and put sackcloth around his waist mourning for days. No one from the house of Jacob could comfort him during this time of bereavement. (Genesis 37:31–35)
The truth was, Joseph's older brothers had turned on him, apprehended him and ultimately sold into slavery on a caravan headed for Egypt. (Genesis 37:36)
Seven year famine
See also: Joseph's brothers sent to Egypt
Twenty years later,[35] throughout the Middle East a severe famine occurred like none other that lasted seven years.[36] It crippled nations.[37] The word was that the only kingdom prospering was Egypt. In the second year of this great famine,[38] when Israel (Jacob) was about 130 years old,[39] he told his ten sons of Leah, Bilhah and Zilpah, to go to Egypt and buy grain. Israel’s youngest son Benjamin, born from Rachel, stayed behind by his father’s order to keep him safe. (Genesis 42:1–5)
Nine of the sons returned to their father Israel from Egypt, stockpiled with grain on their donkeys. They relayed to their father all that had happened in Egypt. They spoke of being accused of as spies and that their brother Simeon, had been taken prisoner. When Reuben, the eldest, mentioned that they needed to bring Benjamin to Egypt to prove their word as honest men, their father became furious with them. He couldn't understand how they were put in a position to tell the Egyptians all about their family. When the sons of Israel opened their sacks, they saw their money that they used to pay for the grain. It was still in their possession, and so they all became afraid. Israel then became angry with the loss of Joseph, Simeon, and now possibly Benjamin. (Genesis 42:26–38)
It turned out that Joseph, who identified his brothers in Egypt, was able to secretly return that money that they used to pay for the grain, back to them.[40] When the house of Israel consumed all the grain that they brought from Egypt, Israel told his sons to go back and buy more. This time, Judah spoke to his father in order to persuade him about having Benjamin accompany them, so as to prevent Egyptian retribution. In hopes of retrieving Simeon and ensuring Benjamin's return, Israel told them to bring the best fruits of their land, including: balm, honey, spices, myrrh, pistachio nuts and almonds. Israel also mentioned that the money that was returned to their money sacks was probably a mistake or an oversight on their part. So, he told them to bring that money back and use double that amount to pay for the new grain. Lastly, he let Benjamin go with them and said “may God Almighty give you mercy… If I am bereaved, I am bereaved!” (Genesis 43:1–14)
Jacob in Egypt




House of Israel welcomed by Pharaoh, watercolor by James Tissot (c. 1900)






Joseph with his father Jacob and brothers in Egypt


See also: Joseph's family reunited
When the sons of Israel (Jacob) returned to Hebron from their second trip, they came back with twenty additional donkeys carrying all kinds of goods and supplies as well as Egyptian transport wagons. When their father came out to meet them, his sons told him that Joseph was still alive, that he was the governor over all of Egypt and that he wanted the house of Israel to move to Egypt. Israel’s heart “stood still” and just couldn’t believe what he was hearing. Looking upon the wagons he declared “Joseph my son is still alive. I will go and see him before I die.” (Genesis 45:16–28)
Israel and his entire house of seventy,[41] gathered up with all their livestock and began their journey to Egypt. En route, Israel stopped at Beersheba for the night to make a sacrificial offering to his God, Yahweh. Apparently he had some reservations about leaving the land of his forefathers, but God reassured him not to fear that he would rise again. God also assured that he would be with him, he would prosper, and he would also see his son Joseph who would lay him to rest. Continuing their journey to Egypt, when they approached in proximity, Israel sent his son Judah ahead to find out where the caravans were to stop. They were directed to disembark at Goshen. It was here, after twenty-two years, that Jacob saw his son Joseph once again. They embraced each other and wept together for quite a while. Israel then said, “Now let me die, since I have seen your face, because you are still alive.” (Genesis 46:1–30)
The time had come for Joseph’s family to personally meet the Pharaoh of Egypt. After Joseph prepared his family for the meeting, the brothers came before the Pharaoh first, formally requesting to pasture in Egyptian lands. The Pharaoh honored their stay and even made the notion that if there were any competent men in their house, then they may elect a chief herdsman to oversee Egyptian livestock. Finally, Joseph’s father was brought out to meet the Pharaoh. Because the Pharaoh had such a high regard for Joseph, practically making him his equal,[42] it was an honor to meet his father. Thus, Israel was able to bless the Pharaoh. The two chatted for a bit, the Pharaoh even inquiring of Israel’s age which happened to be 130 years old at that time. After the meeting, the families were directed to pasture in the land of Ramses where they lived in the province of Goshen. The house of Israel acquired many possessions and multiplied exceedingly during the course of seventeen years, even through the worst of the seven-year famine. (Genesis 46:31–47:28)
Final days
Main article: Blessing of Jacob




Jacob blessing Ephraim and Manasseh






Jacob's funeral procession


Israel (Jacob) was 147 years old when he called to his favorite son Joseph and pleaded that he not be buried in Egypt. Rather, he requested to be carried to the land of Canaan to be buried with his forefathers. Joseph swore to do as his father asked of him. Not too long afterward, Israel had fallen ill, losing much of his vision. When Joseph came to visit his father, he brought with him his two sons, Ephraim and Manasseh. Israel declared that they would be heirs to the inheritance of the house of Israel, as if they were his own children, just as Reuben and Simeon were. Then Israel laid his right hand on the younger Ephraim’s head and his left hand on the eldest Manasseh’s head and blessed Joseph. However, Joseph was displeased that his father’s right hand was not on the head of his firstborn, so he switched his father’s hands. But Israel refused saying, “but truly his younger brother shall be greater than he.” A declaration he made, just as Israel himself was to his firstborn brother Esau. Then Israel called all of his sons in and prophesied their blessings or curses to all twelve of them in order of their ages. (Genesis 47:29–49:32)
Afterward, Israel died and the family, including the Egyptians, mourned him seventy days. Israel was embalmed and a great ceremonial journey to Canaan was prepared by Joseph. He led the servants of Pharaoh, and the elders of the houses Israel and Egypt beyond the Jordan River to Atad where they observed seven days of mourning. Their lamentation was so great that it caught the attention of surrounding Canaanites who remarked “This is a deep mourning of the Egyptians.” This spot was then named Abel Mizraim. Then they buried him in the cave of Machpelah, the property of Abraham when he bought it from the Hittites. (Genesis 49:33–50:14)
Children of Jacob
See also: Israelites
Jacob, through his two wives and his two concubines had twelve biological sons; Reuben (Genesis 29:32), Simeon (Genesis 29:33), Levi (Genesis 29:34), Judah (Genesis 29:35), Dan (Genesis 30:5), Naphtali (Genesis 30:7), Gad (Genesis 30:10), Asher (Genesis 30:12), Issachar (Genesis 30:17), Zebulun (Genesis 30:19), Joseph (Genesis 30:23) and Benjamin (Genesis 35:18) and at least one daughter, Dinah (if there were other daughters, they are not mentioned in the Genesis story)(Genesis 30:21). In addition, Jacob also adopted the two sons of Joseph, Manasseh and Ephraim.(Genesis 48:5)






v
t
e


Children of Jacob by wife in order of birth



Leah



Reuben (1)
Simeon (2)
Levi (3)
Judah (4)
Issachar (9)
Zebulun (10)
Dinah (11)





Rachel



Joseph (12)
Benjamin (13)





Bilhah (Rachel's servant)



Dan (5)
Naphtali (6)





Zilpah (Leah's servant)



Gad (7)
Asher (8)






The offspring of Jacob's sons became the tribes of Israel following the Exodus, when the Israelites conquered and settled in the Land of Israel.
Family tree










Terah



















































































Sarah[43]

Abraham

Hagar











Haran


























Nahor






































Ishmael









Milcah

Lot

Iscah








































































Ishmaelites


7 sons[44]

Bethuel

1st daughter





2nd daughter





























































Isaac

Rebecca








Laban

Moabites

Ammonites



































































Esau

Jacob


















Rachel
















































Bilhah






















Edomites















Zilpah




































Leah







































































1. Reuben
2. Simeon
3. Levi
4. Judah
9. Issachar
10. Zebulun
Dinah (daughter)

7. Gad
8. Asher

5. Dan
6. Naphtali

11. Joseph
12. Benjamin








Religious perspectives


Jacob/Israel



Russian Orthodox Icon of St. Jacob, 18th century (Iconostasis) of Kizhi monastery, Russia



Prophet, Patriarch


Venerated in
Judaism
Christianity
Islam
Bahá'í Faith


Major shrine
Cave of the Patriarchs, Hebron


Jewish tradition
There are two opinions in the Midrash as to how old Rebekah was at the time of her marriage and, consequently, at the twins' birth. According to the traditional counting cited by Rashi, Isaac was 37 years old at the time of the Binding of Isaac, and news of Rebekah's birth reached Abraham immediately after that event.[45] In that case, since Isaac was 60 when Jacob and Essau were born and they had been married for 20 years, then Isaac was 40 years old when he married Rebekah (Gen. 25:20), making Rebekah 3 years old at the time of her marriage, and 23 years old at the birth of Jacob and Essau. According to the second opinion, Rebekah was 14 years old at the time of their marriage, and 34 years old at the birth of Jacob and Essau.[citation needed] In either case, Isaac and Rebekah were married for 20 years before Jacob and Esau were born. The Midrash says that during Rebekah's pregnancy whenever she would pass a house of Torah study, Jacob would struggle to come out; whenever she would pass a house of idolatry, Esau would agitate to come out.[46]
Rashi explained that Isaac, when blessing Jacob instead of Esau, smelled the heavenly scent of Gan Eden (Paradise) when Jacob entered his room and, in contrast, perceived Gehenna opening beneath Esau when the latter entered the room, showing him that he had been deceived all along by Esau's show of piety.[47]
When Laban planned to deceive Jacob into marrying Leah instead of Rachel, the Midrash recounts that both Jacob and Rachel suspected that Laban would pull such a trick; Laban was known as the "Aramean" (deceiver), and changed Jacob's wages ten times during his employ (Genesis 31:7). The couple therefore devised a series of signs by which Jacob could identify the veiled bride on his wedding night. But when Rachel saw her sister being taken out to the wedding canopy, her heart went out to her for the public shame Leah would suffer if she were exposed. Rachel therefore gave Leah the signs so that Jacob would not realize the switch.
Jewish Apocalyptic literature of the Hellenistic period includes many ancient texts with narratives about Jacob, many times with details different from Genesis. The more important are the book of Jubilees and the Book of Biblical Antiquities. Jacob is also the protagonist of the Testament of Jacob, of the Ladder of Jacob and of the Prayer of Joseph, which interpret the experience of this Patriarch in the context of merkabah mysticism.
Christianity
The Eastern Orthodox Church and those Eastern Catholic Churches which follow the Byzantine Rite see Jacob's dream as a prophecy of the Incarnation of the Logos, whereby Jacob's ladder is understood as a symbol of the Theotokos (Virgin Mary), who, according to Orthodox theology, united heaven and earth in her womb. The biblical account of this vision (Genesis 28:10–17) is one of the standard Old Testament readings at Vespers on Great Feasts of the Theotokos.
The Catholic church considers Jacob as a Saint along with other biblical patriarchs.[48] Along with other patriarchs his feast day is celebrated in the Byzantine rite of the Catholic Church on the Second Sunday before the Advent (December 11–17), under the title the Sunday of the Forefathers.[49]
Islamic tradition
Main article: Jacob in Islam




Cenotaph of Jacob, Cave of the Patriarchs


Yaqub (Arabic: يَعْقُوب‎, translit. Yaʿqūb; also later Isra'il, Arabic: إِسْرَآئِیل [ˈisraāˈiyl]; Classical/ Qur'anic Arabic: إِسْرَآءِیْل [ˈisraāãˈiyl]), also known as Jacob in the Old Testament, is recognized in Islam as a prophet who received inspiration from God. He is acknowledged as a patriarch of Islam. Muslims believe that he preached the same monotheistic faith as his forefathers ʾIbrāhīm, ʾIsḥāq and Ismā'īl. Jacob is mentioned 16 times in the Qur'an.[50] In the majority of these references, Jacob is mentioned alongside fellow prophets and patriarchs as an ancient and pious prophet. According to the Qur'an, Jacob remained in the company of the elect throughout his life. (38:47) The Qur'an specifically mentions that Jacob was guided (6:84) and inspired (4:163) and was chosen to enforce the awareness of the Hereafter. (38:46) Jacob is described as a good-doer (21:72) and the Qur'an further makes it clear that God inspired Jacob to contribute towards purification and hold the contact prayer. (21:73) Jacob is further described as being resourceful and a possessor of great vision (38:45) and is further spoken of as being granted a "tongue [voice] of truthfulness to be heard". (19:50)
Of the life of Jacob, the Qur'an narrates two especially important events. The first is the role he plays in the story of his son Joseph. The Qur'an narrates the story of Joseph in detail, and Jacob, being Joseph's father, is mentioned thrice and is referenced another 25 times.[50] In the narrative, Jacob does not trust some of his older sons (12: 11, 18, 23) because they do not respect him. (12: 8, 16–17) Jacob's prophetic nature is evident from his foreknowledge of Joseph's future greatness (12:6), his foreboding and response to the supposed death of Joseph (12: 13, 18) and in his response to the sons' plight in Egypt. (12: 83, 86–87, 96) Islamic literature fleshes out the narrative of Jacob, and mentions that his wives included Rachel.[51] Jacob is later mentioned in the Qur'an in the context of the promise bestowed to Zechariah, regarding the birth of John the Baptist. (19:6) Jacob’s second mention is in the Qur'an’s second chapter. As Jacob lay on his deathbed, he asked his twelve sons to testify their faith to him before he departed from this world to the next. (2:132) Each son testified in front of Jacob that they would promise to remain Muslim (in submission to God) until the day of their death, that is they would surrender their wholeselves to God alone and would worship only Him.
In contrast to the Judeo-Christian view of Jacob, one main difference is that the story of Jacob's blessing, in which he deceives Isaac, is not accepted in Islam. The Qur'an makes it clear that Jacob was blessed by God as a prophet and, therefore, Muslims believe that his father, being a prophet as well, also knew of his son's greatness.[52] Jacob is also cited in the Hadith as an example of one who was patient and trusting in God in the face of suffering.[50]
Non-religious perspective
The life of Jacob as depicted in the Bible also influenced and inspired many non-religious people. Critics tracing the history of the Love Story note the story of Jacob and Rachel as one of the earliest examples of this genre.
During the Second World War, the French writer André Malraux worked on his last novel, The Struggle with the Angel, the title drawn from the story of Jacob. The manuscript was destroyed by the Gestapo after Malraux's capture in 1944. A surviving first section, titled The Walnut Trees of Altenburg, was published after the war.
Historicity
According to Steven Feldman of the Center for Online Judaic Studies, most scholars would date the stories of the patriarchs to the period of the monarchy.[53] Recent excavations in the Timna Valley dating copper mining to the 10th century BCE also discovered what may be the earliest camel bones found in Israel or even outside the Arabian peninsula, dating to around 930 BCE. This is seen as evidence that the stories of Abraham, Joseph, Jacob, and Esau were written after this time.[54]
N. M. Sarna indicates that an inability to precisely date the patriarchs, according to the present state of knowledge does not necessarily invalidate the historicity of the narratives. William F. Albright maintained that the narratives contained accurate details of an earlier period.[55]
Scholars such as Thomas L. Thompson view the patriarchical narratives, including the life of Jacob, as late (6th and 5th centuries BCE) literary compositions that have ideological and theological purposes but are unreliable for historical reconstruction of the presettlement period of Israel’s past.[56][57] In Thompson's The Historicity of the Patriarchal Narratives, he suggests that the patriarchal narratives arose in a response to some present situation, expressed as an imaginative picture of the past to embody present hope.[58]
Gerhard von Rad, in his Old Testament Theology, seems to take a middle view, explaining that the patriarch "saga" describes actual events subsequently interpreted by the community through its own experience.[59] It is neither entirely mythical, nor strictly "historical", according to the present understanding of the term. Goldingay cites R.J Coggins' analogy of looking to Genesis for the history of ancient Canaan as similar to reading Hamlet in order to learn Danish history.[58]
References


^ Enumerations of the twelve tribes vary. Because Jacob effectively adopted two of his grandsons by Joseph and Asenath, namely Ephraim and Manasseh, the two grandsons were often substituted for the Tribe of Joseph, yielding thirteen tribes, or twelve if Levi is set apart.
^ יָדֹו אֹחֶזֶת בַּעֲקֵב עֵשָׂו (KJV: "and his hand took hold on Esau's heel"). Strong's Concordance H6119.
^ David Noel Freedman; Allen C. Myers (31 December 2000). Eerdmans Dictionary of the Bible. Amsterdam University Press. p. 666. ISBN 978-90-5356-503-2. 
^ Victor P. Hamilton, The Book of Genesis, Chapters 18-50 (1995), p. 179.
^ Jonathan Z. Smith, Map is Not Territory: Studies in the History of Religions, University of Chicago Press (1978), p. 33.
^ שָׂרָה śarah "to contend, have power, contend with, persist, exert oneself, persevere" (Strong's Concordance H8323); שָׂרַר śarar "to be or act as prince, rule, contend, have power, prevail over, reign, govern" (Strong's Concordance h8280)
^ "The Jewish Study Bible" of Oxford University Press (p. 68=) "The scientific etymology of Israel is uncertain, a good guess being '[The God] El rules.'"[1]
^ Strong's Concordance 3290, 6117.
^ Scherman, Rabbi Nosson (1993). The Chumash. Brooklyn, New York: Mesorah Publications, p. 135.
^ Ginzberg, Louis (1909). Legends of the Jews Vol I : Isaac blesses Jacob (Translated by Henrietta Szold) Philadelphia: Jewish Publication Society.
^ Genesis 27:42
^ The Four Exiles by Rabbi Dr. Hillel ben David
^ Zimmerman, Charles L (1972), "The chronology and birth of Jacob's children by Leah and her handmaid" (PDF), Grace Journal, Grace Theological Seminary (13.1 (Winter 1972)): 3–12 
^ Genesis 30:37
^ >Genesis 30:39
^ Genesis 31:7-9
^ Genesis 31:12
^ Genesis 31:13
^ Genesis 31:13
^ Genesis 31:26
^ Eisenstein, Judah David (1901–1906). "Porging". Jewish Encyclopedia. New York City. LCCN:16014703. Retrieved 2008-11-19. 
^ Strong's Concordance 3478, 8280.
^ Strong's Concordance 6439.
^ Trachtenberg 1939, p. 80.
^ Morris, Henry M. (1976). The Genesis Record: A Scientific and Devotional Commentary on the Book of Beginnings. Grand Rapids, Michigan: Baker Book House. pp. 337, 499–502. 
^ Geller, Stephen A. (1982). "The Struggle at the Jabbok: the Uses of Enigma in a Biblical Narrative". Journal of the Ancient Near Eastern Society (JANES). New Jork: Columbia University. 14: 37–60. Archived from the original on August 14, 2014. Retrieved June 27, 2013. CS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknown (link) Also in: Geller, Stephen A. (1996). "2 – The Struggle at the Jabbok. The uses of enigma in biblical religion (pp. 9ff.)". Sacred Enigmas. Literary Religion in the Hebrew Bible. London: Routledge. p. 22. ISBN 0-415-12771-8; ISBN 978-04-1512-771-4. 
^ Genesis 34:30
^ Bereshit Rabbah 81:5.
^ Morris, Henry M. (1976). The Genesis Record: A Scientific and Devotional Commentary on the Book of Beginnings. Grand Rapids, Michigan: Baker Book House. pp. 524–25. 
^ Genesis 37:14
^ Genesis 37:12
^ Josephus. The Antiquities of the Jews, Book II, 2.4.18
^ Genesis 37:16,17
^ Genesis 37:12–14
^ Compare Genesis 37:2,41:46
^ Genesis 41:53
^ Genesis 41:54–57,47:13
^ Genesis 45:9–11
^ Compare Genesis 47:9
^ Genesis 42:25
^ Genesis 46:27
^ Genesis 44:18
^ Genesis 20:12: Sarah was the half–sister of Abraham.
^ Genesis 22:21-22: Uz, Buz, Kemuel, Chesed, Hazo, Pildash, and Jidlaph
^ Rashi writes, "The Holy One, blessed be He, announced to him [Abraham] that Rebekah, his [Isaac's] mate, had been born." Commentary on Gen. 22:20.
^ Bereshit Rabbah 63:6.
^ Pirkei d'Rav Kahana, quoted in Scherman, p. 139.
^ The patriarchs, prophets and certain other Old Testament figures have been and always will be honored as saints in all the Church's liturgical traditions. – Catechism of the Catholic Church 61
^ Liturgy > Liturgical year >The Christmas Fast – Byzantine Catholic Archeparchy of Pittsburgh
^ a b c "Jacob", Encyclopedia of Islam Vol. XI, p. 254.
^ Kathir, Ibn. "Jacob", Stories of the Prophets
^ Azzam, Leila. "Isaac and Jacob", Lives of the Prophets
^ Feldman, Steven. "Biblical History: From Abraham to Moses, c. 1850–1200 BCE", COJS
^ Hasson, Nir (Jan 17, 2014). "Hump stump solved: Camels arrived in region much later than biblicalreference". Haaretz. Retrieved 30 January 2014. 
^ Bimson, John J. "Archaeological Data and the Dating of the Patriarchs", Essays on the Patriarchal Narratives, pp. 59–92, (A.R. Millard & D.J. Wiseman, eds., Leicester: IVP, 1980. Hbk. ISBN 0851117430
^ Megan Bishop Moore, Brad E. Kelle, Biblical History and Israel's Past: The Changing Study of the Bible and History, Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing, 2011, pp. 57–74.
^ Rainer Albertz, Israel in exile: the history and literature of the sixth century B.C.E., Society of Biblical Literature, 2003, p. 246
^ a b Goldingay, John. "The Patriarchs in Scripture and History", Essays on the Patriarchal Narratives, pp. 11–42, (A.R. Millard & D.J. Wiseman, eds., Leicester: IVP, 1980. Hbk. ISBN 0851117430
^ von Rad, Gerhard. Old Testament Theology, vol. 1, pp. 106–08, New York: Harper, 1962


Further reading

Trachtenberg, Joshua (1939), Jewish Magic and Superstition: A Study in Folk Religion, New York: Behrman's Jewish Book house 

External links



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Jacob.



 Texts on Wikisource:

“Jacob,” a poem by Arthur Hugh Clough
Cook, Stanley Arthur (1911). "Jacob". Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). 
"Jacob". The New Student's Reference Work. 1914. 
"Jacob". Collier's New Encyclopedia. 1921. 









v
t
e


Prophets in the Hebrew Bible



Pre-Patriarchal



Abel
Kenan
Enoch
Noah (in rabbinic literature)





Patriarchs / Matriarchs



Abraham
Isaac
Jacob
Levi
Joseph
Sarah
Rebecca
Rachel
Leah






Israelite prophets
in the Torah




Moses (in rabbinic literature)
Aaron
Miriam
Eldad and Medad
Phinehas






Mentioned in the
Former Prophets




Joshua
Deborah
Gideon
Eli
Elkanah
Hannah
Abigail
Samuel
Gad
Nathan
David
Solomon
Jeduthun
Ahijah
Shemaiah
Elijah
Elisha
Iddo
Hanani
Jehu
Micaiah
Jahaziel
Eliezer
Zechariah ben Jehoiada
Huldah





Major



Isaiah (in rabbinic literature)
Jeremiah
Ezekiel
Daniel (in rabbinic literature)





Minor



Hosea
Joel
Amos
Obadiah
Jonah (in rabbinic literature)
Micah
Nahum
Habakkuk
Zephaniah
Haggai
Zechariah
Malachi





Noahide



Beor
Balaam
Job (in rabbinic literature)





Other



Amoz
Beeri
Baruch
Agur
Uriah
Buzi
Mordecai
Esther (in rabbinic literature)
Oded
Azariah






Italics indicate persons whose status as prophets is not universally accepted.










v
t
e


Prophets in the Quran











آدم
إدريس
نوح
هود
صالح
إبراهيم
لوط
إسماعيل





Adam
Adam






Idris
Enoch (?)






Nuh
Noah






Hud
Eber (?)






Saleh
Salah (?)






Ibrahim
Abraham






Lut
Lot






Ismail
Ishmael




















إسحاق
يعقوب
يوسف
أيوب
شُعيب
موسى
هارون
ذو الكفل
داود





Is'haq
Isaac






Yaqub
Jacob






Yusuf
Joseph






Ayyub
Job






Shuayb
Jethro (?)






Musa
Moses






Harun
Aaron






Dhul-Kifl
Ezekiel (?)






Daud
David




















سليمان
إلياس
إليسع
يونس
زكريا
يحيى
عيسى
مُحمد





Sulaiman
Solomon






Ilyas
Elijah






Al-Yasa
Elisha






Yunus
Jonah






Zakaria
Zechariah






Yahya
John






Isa
Jesus






Muhammad
Muhammad













Note: Muslims believe that there were many prophets sent by God to mankind. The Islamic prophets above are only the ones mentioned by name in the Quran.










v
t
e


Adam to David according to the Bible



Creation to Flood



Adam
Seth
Enos
Kenan
Mahalalel
Jared
Enoch
Methuselah
Lamech
Noah
Shem





Cain line



Adam
Cain
Enoch
Irad
Mehujael
Methusael
Lamech
Tubal-cain





Patriarchs after Flood



Arpachshad
Cainan
Shelah
Eber
Peleg
Reu
Serug
Nahor
Terah
Abraham
Isaac
Jacob





Tribe of Judah to Kingdom



Judah
Perez
Hezron
Ram
Amminadab
Nahshon
Salmon
Boaz
Obed
Jesse
David






Names in italics only appear in the Greek Septuagint version










v
t
e


People and things in the Quran








Characters



Non-humans



Allâh ("The God")

Names of Allah found in the Quran


Beings in Jannah (Paradise, literally 'Garden')

Ghilman & Wildan
Houri


Zaqqum




Animals




Related



Cattle of Israelites

A real baqarah (cow) that was slaughtered for a purpose
The ‘ijl (golden calf statue)


The dhi’b (wolf) that Jacob feared could attack Joseph
The hud-hud (hoopoe) of Solomon
The kalb (dog) of the sleepers of the cave
The nūn (fish or whale) of Jonah
The nāqaṫ (she-camel) of Saleh
The fīl (elephant) of the Abyssinians)





Non-related



Ḥimār (domesticated donkey or wild ass)
Qaswarah ('Lion', 'Beast of prey' or 'Hunter')








Jinns



Iblīs the Devil
Ifrit
Marid
Qareen








Prophets




Mentioned



Ādam (Adam)
Al-Yasa‘ (Elisha)
Ayyūb (Job)
Dāwūd (David)
Dhūl-Kifl (Ezekiel?)
Hārūn (Aaron)
Hūd (Eber?)
Idrīs (Enoch?)
Ilyās (Elijah)
‘Imrān (Joachim the father of Maryam)
Is-ḥāq (Isaac)
Ismā‘īl (Ishmael)

Dhabih Ullah


Isma'il Ṣādiq al-Wa‘d (Fulfiller of the Promise)
Lūṭ (Lot)
Ṣāliḥ
Shu‘ayb (Jethro, Reuel or Hobab?)
Sulaymān ibn Dāwūd (Solomon son of David)
‘Uzair (Ezra?)
Yaḥyā ibn Zakariyyā (John the Baptist the son of Zechariah)
Ya‘qūb (Jacob)

Isrâ’îl (Israel)


Yūnus (Jonah)

Dhūn-Nūn ("He of the Fish (or Whale)" or "Owner of the Fish (or Whale)")
Ṣāḥib al-Ḥūṫ ("Companion of the Whale")


Yūsuf ibn Ya‘qūb (Joseph son of Jacob)
Zakariyyā (Zechariah)




Ulu-l-‘Azm



Muḥammad

Aḥmad
Other names and titles of Muhammad


ʿĪsā (Jesus)

Al-Masīḥ (The Messiah)
Ibn Maryam (Son of Mary)


Mūsā Kalīmullāh (Moses He who spoke to God)
Ibrāhīm Khalīlullāh (Abraham Friend of God)
Nūḥ (Noah)





Debatable ones



Dhūl-Qarnain (Cyrus the Great?)
Luqmân
Maryam (Mary)
Ṭâlûṫ (Saul or Gideon?)








Implied



Ermia/Jeremiah
Ṣamû’îl (Samuel)
Yusha' ibn Nūn/Joshua (companion and successor of Musa)








People of Prophets




Mentioned evil ones



Āzar (possibly Terah)
Fir'aun (Pharaoh of Moses)
Hāmān
Jâlûṫ (Goliath)
Qarun/Korah (cousin of Musa/Moses)
As-Sāmirī
Abu Lahab





Specified good ones



Zechariah's wife
Adam's immediate relatives

Martyred son
Wife


Women of Moses

Moses' mother
Sister
Wife
Sister-in-law


Isaac's mother
Zayd





Non-specified good ones



Abiona/Amtelai daughter of Karnebo (mother of Ibrahim)
Bathsheba (wife of Dawud, mother of Sulayman)
Hājar/Hagar (wife of Ibrahim, mother of Isma'il)
Hannah/Anne daughter of Faquz (mother of Maryam, wife of Imran)
Imran/Amram (father of Musa)
Lamech (father of Nuh)
Rāhil/Rachel (wife of Ya'qub, mother of Yūsuf)
Rahma/Dinah (wife of Ayyub)
Shamkha bint Anush/Betenos (mother of Nuh)
Son of Luqman





Implied



Asiyah bint Muzahim/Bithiah (wife of Fir'aun)
Asif ibn Barkhiya (vizier and successor of Sulayman)
Bilquis (Queen of Saba/Sheba)
Believer of Fir'aun Family (Hizbil/Hizqil ibn Sabura)
Benyamin/Benjamin
Habib the Carpenter (believer of Ya-Sin)
Kaleb/Caleb (companion of Yusha')
Khidr
Magicians of Fir'aun
Simon Cephas/Simon Peter
Abrahah
Bal'am/Balaam
Barsisa
Nebuchadnezzar II
Nimrod
Potiphar (Al-Aziz)
Shaddad
Simeon (son of Ya'qub)
Slayers of Saleh's she-camel (Qaddar ibn Salif and Musda' ibn Dahr)
Valid ibn Rayyan (king of Egypt in the account of Yūsuf)
Zuleikha (wife of al-Aziz)








Groups




Mentioned



A‘rāb (Arabs or Bedouins)
Aş-ḥāb al-Jannah

People of Paradise
People of the Burnt Garden


Aş-ḥāb as-Sabṫ (Companions of the Sabbath)
Christian apostles

Disciples of Jesus


Companions of Noah's Ark
Aş-ḥāb al-Kahf war-Raqīm (Companions of the Cave and Al-Raqaim?
Companions of the Elephant
People of al-Ukhdūd
People of the City (People of Ya-Sin)
People of Yathrib or Medina
Folk of Dawud
Folk of Lut
Folk of Musa and Harun
Nation of Nuh




Tribes, ethnicities or families



'Ād (people of Hud)
Arab & Ajam
Children of Israel/Israelites
Companions of the Rass
People of Ibrahim
People of Ilyas
People of Lut (Mu'tafikat)
People of Nuh
People of Saba'/Sheba
People of Shuaib

Ahl Madyan People of Madyan)
Aṣ-ḥāb al-Aykah ("Companions of the Wood")


Qawm Tubba‘ (People of Tubba)
Qawm Yûnus (People of Jonah)
Quraysh
Rûm (literally 'Romans')
Thamûd (people of Saleh)

Aṣ-ḥâb al-Ḥijr ("Companions of the Stoneland")


Ya'juj and Ma'juj/Gog and Magog
Ahl al-Bayṫ ("People of the Household")

Household of Abraham

Brothers of Yūsuf
Daughters of Abraham's nephew Lot (Ritha, Za'ura, et al.)
Progeny of Imran
Household of Moses
Household of Muhammad ibn Abdullah ibn Abdul-Muttalib ibn Hashim

Daughters of Muhammad
Wives of Muhammad




Household of Salih


People of Fir'aun
Current Ummah of Islam (Ummah of Muhammad)
Hezbollah
Aṣ-ḥāb Muḥammad (Companions of Muhammad)

Muhajirun (Emigrants)
Anṣār Muslims of Medina who helped Muhammad and his Meccan followers, literally 'Helpers')


People of Mecca
Children of Ayyub
Dead son of Sulaiman
Qabil/Cain (son of Adam)
Umm Jamil (wife of Abu Lahab)
Wali'ah or Wa'ilah/Waala (wife of Nuh)
Walihah or Wahilah (wife of Lut)
Yam or Kan'an (son of Nuh)








Implicitly
mentioned



Amalek
Ahl al-Suffa (People of the Verandah)
Banu Nadir
Banu Qaynuqa
Banu Qurayza
Iranian people
Umayyad Dynasty
Aus & Khazraj
People of Quba





Religious groups



Ahl al-dhimmah (Dhimmi)
Kâfirûn (Infidels)
Zoroastrians
Munafiqun (Hypocrites)
Muslims
People of the Book (Ahl al-Kiṫāb)

Christian (People of the Injil)

Ruhban (Christian monks)
Qissis (Christian priest)


Jews

Ahbār (Jewish scholars)
Rabbani/Rabbi


Sabians


Polytheists

Meccan polytheists at the time of Muhammad
Mesopotamian polytheists at the time of Abraham and Lot










Locations




Mentioned



Al-Aḥqāf ("The Sandy Plains," or "the Wind-curved Sand-hills")
Al-Arḍ Al-Mubārakah ("The Land The Blessed")

Al-Arḍ Al-Muqaddasah ("The Land The Holy")


Al-Jūdiyy

Munzalanm-Mubārakan ("Place-of-Landing Blessed")


Al-Madīnah (formerly Yathrib)
Al-Wād Al-Muqaddas Ṭuwan (The Holy Valley of Tuwa)
‘Arafāṫ
Bābil (Babylon)
Badr
Door of Hittah
Al-Ḥijr (Hegra)
Ḥunayn
Iram dhāṫ al-‘Imād (Iram of the Pillars)
Ka'bah/Kaaba (Bayt al-Harām/Sacred House, Bayt al-'Atīq/Ancient House)
Madyan (Midian)
Majma' al-Bahrain
Makkah (Mecca)

Bakkah


Maqām Ibrāhīm (Station of Abraham)
Miṣr (Mainland Egypt)
Sinai Region or Tīh Desert

Al-Wādil-Ayman (The valley on the 'righthand' side of the Valley of Tuwa and Mount Sinai)
Mount Sinai or Mount Tabor


Mu'tafikat (Sodom)
Qaryaṫ Yūnus ("Township of Jonah," that is Nineveh)
Rass
Saba’ (Sheba)
Safa and Marwah





Implied



Antioch

Antakya


Ayla
Barrier of Dhul-Qarnayn
Bayt al-Muqaddas & 'Ariha
Bilād ar-Rāfidayn (Mesopotamia)
Canaan
Cave of Hira & Ghar al-Thawr (Cave of the Bull)
Cave of Seven Sleepers
Dār al-Nadwa
Al-Ḥijāz (literally "The Barrier")

Black Stone (Al-Ḥajar al-Aswad) & Al-Hijr of Isma'il
Ta'if


Hudaybiyyah
Jordan River
Ma'rib Dam
Nile River
Palestine River
Paradise of Shaddad





Religious locations



Bay'a (Church)
Mihrab
Monastery
Masjid (Mosque, literally "Place of Prostration")

Al-Mash‘ar Al-Ḥarām ("The Monument the Sacred")
Al-Masjid Al-Aqṣā (Al-Aqsa Mosque, literally "The Place-of-Prostration The Farthest")
Al-Masjid Al-Ḥarām (The Sacred Mosque of Mecca)
Masjid al-Dirar
A Mosque in the area of Medina, possibly:

Masjid Qubâ’ (Quba Mosque)
The Prophet's Mosque




Salat (Synagogue)








Non-human
physical
entities




Religious texts



Al-Injîl (The Gospel of Jesus)
Al-Qur’ân (The book of Muhammad)
Ṣuḥuf-i Ibrâhîm (Scroll(s) of Abraham)
Aṫ-Ṫawrâṫ (The Torah)

Ṣuḥuf-i-Mûsâ (Scroll(s) of Moses)
Tablets of Stone


Az-Zabûr (The Psalms of David)





Related objects



Forbidden fruit of Adam
Heavenly Food of Christian Apostles
Noah's Ark
Staff of Musa
Tabut al-Sakina (Casket of Shekhinah)
Throne of Bilqis
Trumpet of Israfil





Mentioned idols
(cult images)



Baal
Lāt, 'Uzza and Manāt
Wadd, Suwa', Yaghuth, Ya'uq and Nasr
Jibt and Taghut
Ansāb








Events



Battle of al-Aḥzāb ("the Confederates")
Battle of Badr
Battle of Hunayn
Battle of Khaybar
Battle of Tabouk
Battle of Uhud
Conquest of Mecca
Hadith of the Pond of Khumm
Incident of Ifk
Laylat al-Mabit
Mubahala
The Farewell Pilgrimage (Hujja al-Wada')
Treaty of Hudaybiyyah
Umrah al-Qaza
Yawm al-Dār









Note: The names are sorted alphabetically. Standard form: Islamic name / Biblical name (title or relationship)










v
t
e


Saints of the Catholic Church



Virgin Mary



Mother of God (Theotokos)
Immaculate Conception
Perpetual virginity
Assumption
Marian apparition

Guadalupe
Laus
Miraculous Medal
Lourdes
Fatima


Titles of Mary








Apostles



Andrew
Barnabas
Bartholomew
James of Alphaeus
James the Greater
John
Jude
Matthew
Matthias
Paul
Peter
Philip
Simon
Thomas





Archangels



Gabriel
Michael
Raphael





Confessors



Anatolius
Chariton the Confessor
Edward the Confessor
Maximus the Confessor
Michael of Synnada
Paphnutius the Confessor
Paul I of Constantinople
Salonius
Theophanes the Confessor





Disciples



Apollos
Mary Magdalene
Priscilla and Aquila
Silvanus
Stephen
Timothy
Titus
Seventy disciples





Doctors







Gregory the Great
Ambrose
Augustine of Hippo
Jerome
John Chrysostom
Basil of Caesarea
Gregory of Nazianzus
Athanasius of Alexandria
Cyril of Alexandria
Cyril of Jerusalem
John of Damascus
Bede the Venerable
Ephrem the Syrian
Thomas Aquinas
Bonaventure
Anselm of Canterbury
Isidore of Seville
Peter Chrysologus
Leo the Great
Peter Damian
Bernard of Clairvaux
Hilary of Poitiers
Alphonsus Liguori
Francis de Sales
Peter Canisius
John of the Cross
Robert Bellarmine
Albertus Magnus
Anthony of Padua
Lawrence of Brindisi
Teresa of Ávila
Catherine of Siena
Thérèse of Lisieux
John of Ávila
Hildegard of Bingen
Gregory of Narek








Evangelists



Matthew
Mark
Luke
John





Church
fathers



Alexander of Alexandria
Alexander of Jerusalem
Ambrose of Milan
Anatolius
Athanasius of Alexandria
Augustine of Hippo
Caesarius of Arles
Caius
Cappadocian Fathers
Clement of Alexandria
Clement of Rome
Cyprian of Carthage
Cyril of Alexandria
Cyril of Jerusalem
Damasus I
Desert Fathers
Desert Mothers
Dionysius of Alexandria
Dionysius of Corinth
Dionysius
Ephrem the Syrian
Epiphanius of Salamis
Fulgentius of Ruspe
Gregory the Great
Gregory of Nazianzus
Gregory of Nyssa
Hilary of Poitiers
Hippolytus of Rome
Ignatius of Antioch
Irenaeus of Lyons
Isidore of Seville
Jerome of Stridonium
John Chrysostom
John of Damascus
Maximus the Confessor
Melito of Sardis
Quadratus of Athens
Papias of Hierapolis
Peter Chrysologus
Polycarp of Smyrna
Theophilus of Antioch
Victorinus of Pettau
Vincent of Lérins
Zephyrinus





Martyrs



Canadian Martyrs
Carthusian Martyrs
Forty Martyrs of England and Wales
Four Crowned Martyrs
Great Martyr
The Holy Innocents
Irish Martyrs
Joan of Arc
Lübeck martyrs
Korean Martyrs
Martyrology
Martyrs of Albania
Martyrs of China
Martyrs of Japan
Martyrs of Laos
Martyrs of Natal
Martyrs of Otranto
Martyrs of the Spanish Civil War
Maximilian Kolbe
Perpetua and Felicity
Saints of the Cristero War
Stephen
Three Martyrs of Chimbote
Uganda Martyrs
Vietnamese Martyrs





Patriarchs



Adam
Abel
Abraham
Isaac
Jacob
Joseph
Joseph (father of Jesus)
David
Noah
Solomon
Matriarchs





Popes



Adeodatus I
Adeodatus II
Adrian III
Agapetus I
Agatho
Alexander I
Anacletus
Anastasius I
Anicetus
Anterus
Benedict II
Boniface I
Boniface IV
Caius
Callixtus I
Celestine I
Celestine V
Clement I
Cornelius
Damasus I
Dionysius
Eleuterus
Eugene I
Eusebius
Eutychian
Evaristus
Fabian
Felix I
Felix III
Felix IV
Gelasius I
Gregory I
Gregory II
Gregory III
Gregory VII
Hilarius
Hormisdas
Hyginus
Innocent I
John I
John XXIII
John Paul II
Julius I
Leo I
Leo II
Leo III
Leo IV
Leo IX
Linus
Lucius I
Marcellinus
Marcellus I
Mark
Martin I
Miltiades
Nicholas I
Paschal I
Paul I
Peter
Pius I
Pius V
Pius X
Pontian
Sergius I
Silverius
Simplicius
Siricius
Sixtus I
Sixtus II
Sixtus III
Soter
Stephen I
Stephen IV
Sylvester I
Symmachus
Telesphorus
Urban I
Victor I
Vitalian
Zachary
Zephyrinus
Zosimus





Prophets



Agabus
Amos
Anna
Baruch ben Neriah
David
Dalua
Elijah
Ezekiel
Habakkuk
Haggai
Hosea
Isaiah
Jeremiah
Job
Joel
John the Baptist
Jonah
Judas Barsabbas
Malachi
Melchizedek
Micah
Moses
Nahum
Obadiah
Samuel
Seven Maccabees and their mother
Simeon
Zechariah (prophet)
Zechariah (NT)
Zephaniah





Virgins



Agatha of Sicily
Agnes of Rome
Bernadette Soubirous
Brigid of Kildare
Cecilia
Clare of Assisi
Eulalia of Mérida
Euphemia
Genevieve
Kateri Tekakwitha
Lucy of Syracuse
Maria Goretti
Mother Teresa
Narcisa de Jesús
Rose of Lima





See also



Military saints
Virtuous pagan








 Catholicism portal
 Saints portal









Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 6271152
LCCN: n82025275
IATH: w6cp0jfk











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Jacob&oldid=817628573"					Categories: Prophets of the Hebrew BibleJacobAngelic visionariesBiblical patriarchsBiblical twinsChristian saints from the Old TestamentEsauProphets of IslamHidden categories: Articles containing Hebrew-language textCS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknownWikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pagesArticles with hCardsArticles with hAudio microformatsArticles containing Ancient Greek-language textArticles containing Latin-language textAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from August 2015Articles containing Arabic-language textWikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource referenceWikipedia articles incorporating citation to the NSRWWikipedia articles incorporating citation to the NSRW with an wstitle parameterWikipedia articles incorporating a citation from Collier's EncyclopediaWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with SNAC-ID identifiers