For other uses, see Jamaica (disambiguation).


Jamaica






Flag



Coat of arms






Motto: "Out of Many, One People"




Anthem: 


"Jamaica, Land We Love"







Royal anthem: "God Save the Queen
























Capital
and largest city
Kingston
17°59′N 76°48′W﻿ / ﻿17.983°N 76.800°W﻿ / 17.983; -76.800


Official languages
English


National language
Jamaican Patois (de facto)


Ethnic groups (2011[1])



92.1% African
6.1% Mixed
0.8% Indian
0.4% Other
0.7% Unspecified





Religion



68.9% Christian
1.1% Rastafarian
6.5% Other
2.3% Not stated
21.3% None


[2]


Demonym
Jamaican


Government
Unitary parliamentary representative democracy under constitutional monarchy



• Monarch

Elizabeth II



• Governor-General

Patrick Allen



• Prime Minister

Andrew Holness


Legislature
Parliament



• Upper house

Senate



• Lower house

House of Representatives


Independence from the United Kingdom



• Granted

6 August 1962


Area



• Total

10,991 km2 (4,244 sq mi) (160th)



• Water (%)

1.5


Population



• 2016 estimate

2,881,355[3] (139th)



• Density

268/km2 (694.1/sq mi) (49th)


GDP (PPP)
2017 estimate



• Total

$26.446 billion[4] (2017)



• Per capita

$9,297[4]


GDP (nominal)
2017 estimate



• Total

$14.556 billion[4]



• Per capita

$5,117[4]


Gini (2004)
45.5[5]
medium · 84th[6]


HDI (2014)
 0.719[7]
high · 99th


Currency
Jamaican dollar (JMD)


Time zone
(UTC-5)


Drives on the
left


Calling code
+1-876
+1-658 (Overlay of 876; active in November 2018)


ISO 3166 code
JM


Internet TLD
.jm


Jamaica (/dʒəˈmeɪkə/ ( listen)) is an island country situated in the Caribbean Sea. Spanning 10,990 square kilometres (4,240 sq mi) in area, it is the third-largest island of the Greater Antilles and the fourth-largest island country in the Caribbean. Jamaica lies about 145 kilometres (90 mi) south of Cuba, and 191 kilometres (119 mi) west of Hispaniola (the island containing the countries of Haiti and the Dominican Republic).
Previously inhabited by the indigenous Arawak and Taíno peoples, the island came under Spanish rule following the arrival of Christopher Columbus in 1494. Many of the indigenous people died of disease, and the Spanish transplanted African slaves to Jamaica as labourers. Named Santiago, the island remained a possession of Spain until 1655, when England (later Great Britain) conquered it and renamed it Jamaica. Under British colonial rule Jamaica became a leading sugar exporter, with its plantation economy highly dependent on slaves forcibly transported from Africa. The British fully emancipated all slaves in 1838, and many freedmen chose to have subsistence farms rather than to work on plantations. Beginning in the 1840s, the British utilized Chinese and Indian indentured labour to work on plantations. The island achieved independence from the United Kingdom on 6 August 1962.
With 2.9 million people,[3] Jamaica is the third-most populous Anglophone country in the Americas (after the United States and Canada), and the fourth-most populous country in the Caribbean. Kingston is the country's capital and largest city, with a population of 937,700. Jamaicans predominately have African ancestry, with significant European, Chinese, Indian, and mixed-race minorities. Due to a high rate of emigration for work since the 1960s, Jamaica has a large diaspora around the world, particularly in Canada, the United Kingdom, and the United States.
Jamaica is a Commonwealth realm, with Queen Elizabeth II as its monarch and head of state. Her appointed representative in the country is the Governor-General of Jamaica, an office held by Sir Patrick Allen since 2009. Andrew Holness has served as the head of government and Prime Minister of Jamaica from March 2016. Jamaica is a parliamentary constitutional monarchy with legislative power vested in the bicameral Parliament of Jamaica, consisting of an appointed Senate and a directly elected House of Representatives.




A map of Jamaica





Contents


1 Etymology
2 History

2.1 Prehistory
2.2 Spanish rule (1509–1655)
2.3 British rule (1655–1962)
2.4 Independence (1962)


3 Government and politics

3.1 Political culture
3.2 Administrative divisions
3.3 Military


4 Geography and environment

4.1 Flora and fauna


5 Demographics

5.1 Ethnic origins
5.2 Languages
5.3 Emigration
5.4 Crime
5.5 Major cities


6 Religion
7 Culture

7.1 Music
7.2 Literature
7.3 Film
7.4 Cuisine
7.5 National symbols
7.6 Sport


8 Education
9 Economy
10 Infrastructure

10.1 Transport

10.1.1 Roadways
10.1.2 Railways
10.1.3 Air transport
10.1.4 Ports, shipping and lighthouses


10.2 Energy
10.3 Water supply and sanitation
10.4 Communication


11 See also
12 References
13 Further reading
14 External links



Etymology
The indigenous people, the Taíno, called the island Xaymaca in Arawakan,[8] meaning the "Land of Wood and Water" or the "Land of Springs".[9]
Colloquially Jamaicans refer to their home island as the "Rock." Slang names such as "Jamrock", "Jamdown" ("Jamdung" in Jamaican Patois), or briefly "Ja", have derived from this.[10]
History
Main article: History of Jamaica
Prehistory
The Arawak and Taíno indigenous people, originating in South America, settled on the island between 4000 and 1000 BC.[11] When Christopher Columbus arrived in 1494, there were more than 200 villages ruled by caciques (chiefs of villages). The south coast of Jamaica was the most populated, especially around the area now known as Old Harbour.[11] The Taino still inhabited Jamaica when the English took control of the island in 1655.[11] The Jamaican National Heritage Trust is attempting to locate and document any evidence of the Taino/Arawak.[12]
Spanish rule (1509–1655)
Further information: Colony of Santiago (Jamaica)
Christopher Columbus claimed Jamaica for Spain after landing there in 1494. His probable landing point was Dry Harbour, called Discovery Bay,[13] St. Ann's Bay was named "Saint Gloria" by Columbus, as the first sighting of the land. One and a half kilometres west of St. Ann's Bay is the site of the first Spanish settlement on the island, Sevilla, which was established in 1509 and abandoned around 1524 because it was deemed unhealthy.[14] The capital was moved to Spanish Town, then called St. Jago de la Vega, around 1534 (at present-day St. Catherine).[15]
British rule (1655–1962)
Spanish Town has the oldest cathedral of the British colonies in the Caribbean.[15] The Spanish were forcibly evicted by the English at Ocho Rios in St. Ann. In 1655, the English, led by Sir William Penn and General Robert Venables, took over the last Spanish fort in Jamaica.[16] The name of Montego Bay, the capital of the parish of St. James, was derived from the Spanish name manteca bahía (or Bay of Lard), alluding to the lard-making industry based on processing the numerous boars in the area.[17]




Henry Morgan was a famous Caribbean pirate and privateer; he had first come to the West Indies as an indentured servant, like most of the early English colonists.[18]


The English continued to "import" African slaves as labourers.
In 1660, the population of Jamaica was about 4,500 white and 1,500 black.[19] By the early 1670s, as the English developed sugar cane plantations and "imported" more slaves, black people formed a majority of the population.[20]
The Irish in Jamaica also formed a large part of the island's early population, making up 2 thirds of the white population on the island in the late 17th century, twice that of the English population. They were brought in as indentured labourers and soldiers after the conquest of Jamaica by Cromwells forces in 1655, The majority of Irish were transported by force as political prisoners of war from Ireland as a result of the ongoing Wars of the Three Kingdoms at the time.[21] Migration of large numbers Irish to the island continued into the 18th century.[22]
Jews were expelled from Spain in 1492 and then forcibly converted to Christianity in Portugal, during a period of persecution by the Inquisition. Some Spanish and Portuguese Jewish refugees went to the Netherlands and England, and from there to Jamaica. Others were part of the Iberian colonisation of the New World, after overtly converting to Catholicism, as only Catholics were allowed in the Spanish colonies. By 1660, Jamaica had become a refuge for Jews in the New World, also attracting those who had been expelled from Spain and Portugal.
An early group of Jews arrived in 1510, soon after the son of Christopher Columbus settled on the island. Primarily working as merchants and traders, the Jewish community was forced to live a clandestine life, calling themselves "Portugals". After the British took over rule of Jamaica, the Jews decided the best defense against Spain's regaining control was to encourage making the colony a base for Caribbean pirates. With the pirates installed in Port Royal, the Spanish would be deterred from attacking. The British leaders agreed with the viability of this strategy to forestall outside aggression.[23]
When the English captured Jamaica in 1655, the Spanish colonists fled after freeing their slaves.[16] The slaves dispersed into the mountains, joining the maroons, those who had previously escaped to live with the Taíno native people.[24] During the centuries of slavery, Maroons established free communities in the mountainous interior of Jamaica, where they maintained their freedom and independence for generations. The Jamaican Maroons fought the British during the 18th century. Under treaties of 1738 and 1739, the British agreed to stop trying to round them up in exchange for their leaving the colonial settlements alone, but serving if needed for military actions.[24] Some of the communities were broken up and the British deported Maroons to Nova Scotia and, later, Sierra Leone. The name is still used today by modern Maroon descendants, who have certain rights and autonomy at the community of Accompong.
During its first 200 years of British rule, Jamaica became one of the world's leading sugar-exporting, slave-dependent colonies, producing more than 77,000 tons of sugar annually between 1820 and 1824. After the abolition of the international slave trade in 1807,[25] the British began to "import" indentured servants to supplement the labour pool, as many freedmen resisted working on the plantations. After slavery was abolished, workers recruited from India began arriving in 1845, Chinese workers in 1854,[26] as many freedmen resisted working on the plantations. Many South Asian and Chinese descendants continue to reside in Jamaica today.[27][28]




Montpelier Plantation, the property of C. R. Ellis, Esq. M.P., c. 1820


By the beginning of the 19th century, Jamaica's dependence on slave labour and a plantation economy had resulted in black people outnumbering white people by a ratio of almost 20 to 1. Although the UK had outlawed the importation of slaves, some were still smuggled in from Spanish colonies and directly. While planning the abolition of slavery, the British Parliament passed laws to improve conditions for slaves. They banned the use of whips in the field and flogging of women; informed planters that slaves were to be allowed religious instruction, and required a free day during each week when slaves could sell their produce, prohibiting Sunday markets to enable slaves to attend church.[citation needed]
The House of Assembly in Jamaica resented and resisted the new laws. Members (then restricted to European-Jamaicans) claimed that the slaves were content and objected to Parliament's interference in island affairs. Slave owners feared possible revolts if conditions were lightened. Following a series of rebellions on the island and changing attitudes in Great Britain, the British government formally abolished slavery by an 1833 act, beginning in 1834, with full emancipation from chattel slavery declared in 1838. The population in 1834 was 371,070, of whom 15,000 were white, 5,000 free black; 40,000 'coloured' or free people of color (mixed race); and 311,070 were slaves.[19]
In the 19th century, the British established a number of botanical gardens. These included the Castleton Botanical Gardens, developed in 1862 to replace the Bath Botanical Gardens (created in 1779) which was subject to flooding. Bath Botanical Gardens was the site for planting breadfruit, brought to Jamaica from the Pacific by Captain William Bligh. It became a staple in island diets. Other gardens were the Cinchona Plantation, founded in 1868, and the Hope Botanical Gardens founded in 1874. In 1872, Kingston was designated as the island's capital.
In 1945, Sir Horace Hector Hearne became Chief Justice and Keeper of the Records in Jamaica. He headed the Supreme Court, Kingston between 1945 and 1950/1951. After Kenya achieved independence, its government appointed him as Chief Justice and he moved there.
Independence (1962)
Main article: Independence of Jamaica




Prince Charles and the Duchess of Cornwall during a visit to Jamaica in 2008


Jamaica slowly gained increasing independence from the United Kingdom. In 1958, it became a province in the Federation of the West Indies, a federation among the British West Indies. Jamaica attained full independence by leaving the federation in 1962.
Strong economic growth, averaging approximately 6% per annum, marked the first ten years of independence under conservative Jamaica Labour Party governments; they were led successively by Prime Ministers Alexander Bustamante, Donald Sangster and Hugh Shearer. The growth was fueled by strong private investments in bauxite/alumina, tourism, the manufacturing industry and, to a lesser extent, the agricultural sector.
The optimism of the first decade was accompanied by a growing sense of inequality among many Afro-Jamaicans, and a concern that the benefits of growth were not being shared by the urban poor.[citation needed] Combined with the effects of a slowdown in the global economy in 1970,[citation needed] the voters elected the PNP (People's National Party) in 1972. They tried to implement more socially equitable policies in education and health, but the economy suffered under their leadership. By 1980, Jamaica's gross national product had declined to some 25% below the 1972 level. Due to rising foreign and local debt, accompanied by large fiscal deficits, the government sought International Monetary Fund (IMF) financing from the United States and others.
Economic deterioration continued into the mid-1980s, exacerbated by a number of factors. The first and third largest alumina producers, Alpart and Alcoa, closed, and there was a significant reduction in production by the second-largest producer, Alcan. Reynolds Jamaica Mines, Ltd. left the Jamaican industry. There was also a decline in tourism, which was important to the economy.
Independence, however widely celebrated in Jamaica, has been questioned in the early 21st century. In 2011, a survey showed that approximately 60% of Jamaicans believe that the country would be better off had it remained a British colony, citing as problems years of social and fiscal mismanagement in the country.[29][30]
Government and politics
Main article: Politics of Jamaica
Further information: Foreign relations of Jamaica and Republicanism in Jamaica




Inside the Jamaican Parliament


Jamaica is a parliamentary democracy and constitutional monarchy, with Queen Elizabeth II serving as the Jamaican monarch.[31] As Elizabeth II is shared as head of state of fifteen other countries and resides mostly in the United Kingdom, she is thus often represented as Queen of Jamaica in Jamaica and abroad by the Governor-General of Jamaica.[32]
The governor-general is nominated by the Prime Minister of Jamaica and the entire Cabinet and appointed by the monarch. All the members of the Cabinet are appointed by the governor-general on the advice of the prime minister. The monarch and the governor-general serve largely ceremonial roles, apart from their reserve powers for use in certain constitutional crisis situations.
Jamaica's current constitution was drafted in 1962 by a bipartisan joint committee of the Jamaican legislature. It came into force with the Jamaica Independence Act, 1962 of the United Kingdom parliament, which gave Jamaica independence.
The Parliament of Jamaica is bicameral, consisting of the House of Representatives (Lower House) and the Senate (Upper House). Members of the House (known as Members of Parliament or MPs) are directly elected, and the member of the House of Representatives who, in the governor-general's best judgement, is best able to command the confidence of a majority of the members of that House, is appointed by the governor-general to be the prime minister. Senators are nominated jointly by the prime minister and the parliamentary Leader of the Opposition and are then appointed by the governor-general.
Political culture
Jamaica has traditionally had a two-party system, with power often alternating between the People's National Party (PNP) and Jamaica Labour Party (JLP). The party with current administrative and legislative power is the Jamaica Labour Party, with a one-seat parliamentary majority as of 2016[update]. There are also several minor parties who have yet to gain a seat in parliament; the largest of these is the National Democratic Movement (NDM).
Administrative divisions
Main article: Parishes of Jamaica
Jamaica is divided into 14 parishes, which are grouped into three historic counties that have no administrative relevance.


Cornwall County
Capital
km2
Middlesex County
Capital
km2
Surrey County
Capital
km2


1
Hanover
Lucea
  450
6
Clarendon
May Pen
1,196
11
Kingston
Kingston
25


2
Saint Elizabeth
Black River
1,212
7
Manchester
Mandeville
   830
12
Portland
Port Antonio
814


3
Saint James
Montego Bay
  595
8
Saint Ann
St. Ann's Bay
1,213
13
Saint Andrew
Half Way Tree
453


4
Trelawny
Falmouth
  875
9
Saint Catherine
Spanish Town
1,192
14
Saint Thomas
Morant Bay
743


5
Westmoreland
Savanna-la-Mar
  807
10
Saint Mary
Port Maria
   611




























Military
Main article: Jamaica Defence Force




Jamaican soldiers training to fire the FN FAL in 2002.


The Jamaica Defence Force (JDF) is the small but professional military force of Jamaica. The JDF is based on the British military model with similar organisation, training, weapons and traditions. Once chosen, officer candidates are sent to one of several British or Canadian basic officer courses depending on the arm of service. Enlisted soldiers are given basic training at Up Park Camp or JDF Training Depot, Newcastle, both in St. Andrew. As with the British model, NCOs are given several levels of professional training as they rise up the ranks. Additional military schools are available for speciality training in Canada, the United States and the United Kingdom.
The JDF is directly descended from the British Army's West India Regiment formed during the colonial era.[33] The West India Regiment was used extensively by the British Empire in policing the empire from 1795 to 1926. Other units in the JDF heritage include the early colonial Jamaica Militia, the Kingston Infantry Volunteers of WWI and reorganised into the Jamaican Infantry Volunteers in World War II. The West Indies Regiment was reformed in 1958 as part of the West Indies Federation, after dissolution of the Federation the JDF was established.
The Jamaica Defence Force (JDF) comprises an infantry Regiment and Reserve Corps, an Air Wing, a Coast Guard fleet and a supporting Engineering Unit.[34] The infantry regiment contains the 1st, 2nd and 3rd (National Reserve) battalions. The JDF Air Wing is divided into three flight units, a training unit, a support unit and the JDF Air Wing (National Reserve). The Coast Guard is divided between seagoing crews and support crews who conduct maritime safety and maritime law enforcement as well as defence-related operations.[35]
The role of the support battalion is to provide support to boost numbers in combat and issue competency training in order to allow for the readiness of the force.[36] The 1st Engineer Regiment was formed due to an increased demand for military engineers and their role is to provide engineering services whenever and wherever they are needed.[37] The Headquarters JDF contains the JDF Commander, Command Staff as well as Intelligence, Judge Advocate office, Administrative and Procurement sections.[38]
In recent years the JDF has been called on to assist the nation's police, the Jamaica Constabulary Force (JCF), in fighting drug smuggling and a rising crime rate which includes one of the highest murder rates in the world. JDF units actively conduct armed patrols with the JCF in high-crime areas and known gang neighbourhoods. There has been vocal controversy as well as support of this JDF role. In early 2005, an Opposition leader, Edward Seaga, called for the merger of the JDF and JCF. This has not garnered support in either organisation nor among the majority of citizens.
Geography and environment
Main article: Geography of Jamaica




Doctor's Cave Beach Club is a popular destination in Montego Bay.






The picturesque Dunn's River Falls in Ocho Ríos.


Jamaica is the third largest island in the Caribbean.[39] It lies between latitudes 17° and 19°N, and longitudes 76° and 79°W. Mountains, including the Blue Mountains, dominate the inland. They are surrounded by a narrow coastal plain.[40] Jamaica only has two cities, the first being Kingston, the capital city and centre of business, located on the south coast and the 'second' city being Montego Bay, one of the best known cities in the Caribbean for tourism, located on the north coast. Other towns include Portmore, Spanish Town, Mandeville and the resort towns of Ocho Ríos, Port Antonio and Negril.[41]
Kingston Harbour is the seventh-largest natural harbour in the world,[42] which contributed to the city being designated as the capital in 1872.
Tourist attractions include Dunn's River Falls in St. Ann, YS Falls in St. Elizabeth, the Blue Lagoon in Portland, believed to be the crater of an extinct volcano. Port Royal was the site of a major earthquake in 1692 that helped form the island's Palisadoes.[43][44][45][46]
The climate in Jamaica is tropical, with hot and humid weather, although higher inland regions are more temperate.[47] Some regions on the south coast, such as the Liguanea Plain and the Pedro Plains, are relatively dry rain-shadow areas.[48]
Jamaica lies in the hurricane belt of the Atlantic Ocean and because of this, the island sometimes suffers significant storm damage.[49] Hurricanes Charlie and Gilbert hit Jamaica directly in 1951 and 1988, respectively, causing major damage and many deaths. In the 2000s (decade), hurricanes Ivan, Dean, and Gustav also brought severe weather to the island.
Among the variety of terrestrial, aquatic and marine ecosystems are dry and wet limestone forests, rainforest, riparian woodland, wetlands, caves, rivers, seagrass beds and coral reefs. The authorities have recognised the tremendous significance and potential of the environment and have designated some of the more 'fertile' areas as 'protected'. Among the island's protected areas are the Cockpit Country, Hellshire Hills, and Litchfield forest reserves. In 1992, Jamaica's first marine park, covering nearly 15 square kilometres (5.8 sq mi), was established in Montego Bay. Portland Bight Protected Area was designated in 1999.[50]
The following year Blue and John Crow Mountains National Park was created on roughly 300 square miles (780 km2) of wilderness, which supports thousands of tree and fern species and rare animals.
Flora and fauna




Jamaican boa






Jamaican hutia


Jamaica's climate is tropical, supporting diverse ecosystems with a wealth of plants and animals.
Jamaica's plant life has changed considerably over the centuries. When the Spanish arrived in 1494, except for small agricultural clearings, the country was deeply forested. The European settlers cut down the great timber trees for building and ships' supplies, and cleared the plains, savannas, and mountain slopes for intense agricultural cultivation. Many new plants were introduced including sugarcane, bananas, and citrus trees.
Areas of heavy rainfall contain stands of bamboo, ferns, ebony, mahogany, and rosewood. Cactus and similar dry-area plants are found along the south and southwest coastal area. Parts of the west and southwest consist of large grasslands, with scattered stands of trees.
The Jamaican animal life, typical of the Caribbean, includes highly diversified wildlife with many endemic species found nowhere else on earth. As with other oceanic islands, land mammals are mostly bats. The only non-bat native mammal extant in Jamaica is the Jamaican hutia, locally known as the coney. Introduced mammals such as wild boar and the small Asian mongoose are also common. Jamaica is also home to about 50 species of reptiles,[51] the largest of which is the American crocodile; however, it is only present within the Black River and a few other areas. Lizards such as anoles, iguanas and snakes such as racers and the Jamaican boa (the largest snake on the island), are common in areas such as the Cockpit Country. None of Jamaica's eight species of native snakes is venomous.[52]
One species of freshwater turtle is native to Jamaica, the Jamaican slider. It is found only on Jamaica, Cat Island, and a few other islands in the Bahamas. In addition, many types of frogs are common on the island, especially treefrogs. Birds are abundant, and make up the bulk of the endemic and native vertebrate species. Beautiful and exotic birds, such as the Jamaican tody and the doctor bird (the national bird), can be found among a large number of others.
Jamaican waters contain considerable resources of fresh-and saltwater fish.[53] The chief varieties of saltwater fish are kingfish, jack, mackerel, whiting, bonito, and tuna. Fish that occasionally enter freshwater and estuarine environments include snook, jewfish, mangrove snapper, and mullets. Fish that spend the majority of their lives in Jamaica's fresh waters include many species of livebearers, killifish, freshwater gobies, the mountain mullet, and the American eel. Tilapia have been introduced from Africa for aquaculture, and are very common.
Insects and other invertebrates are abundant, including the world's largest centipede, the Amazonian giant centipede, and the Homerus swallowtail, the western hemisphere's largest butterfly.
Demographics
Further information: Demographics of Jamaica and Jamaican people
Ethnic origins




Jamaica's population, 1961–2003.






The streets of Montego Bay, Jamaica


According to the most recent census, conducted in 2011, the majority of Jamaicans identify as black.[54]


Ethnic Group
 %


Black[1]
92.1%


Mixed[1]
6.1%


Asian[1]
0.8%


Other[1]
0.4%


Unspecified[1]
0.7%


Much of Jamaica's black population are of African or partially African descent with many being able to trace their origins to West Africa,[55] as well as Europe[56] and Asia.[57] Like many other anglophone Caribbean countries, many Jamaicans with mixed ancestry self-report as black.[citation needed]
Asians form the second largest group and include Indo-Jamaicans and Chinese Jamaicans.[54] Most are descended from indentured workers brought by the British colonial government to fill labour shortages following the abolition of slavery in 1838.
In recent years, immigration has increased, coming mainly from China, Haiti, Cuba, Colombia, and Latin America; 20,000 Latin Americans reside in Jamaica.[citation needed] About 7,000 Americans also reside in Jamaica,[citation needed] as well as many first-generation American, British and Canadians of Jamaican descent.[58]
A study found that the average admixture on the island was 78.3% Sub-Saharan African, 16.0% European, and 5.7% East Asian.[59]
Languages
Main articles: Jamaican Patois and Jamaican English
Jamaica is regarded as a bilingual country, with two major languages in use by the population.[60] The official language is Jamaican Standard English (JSE) or Standard Jamaican English (SJE), which is "used in all domains of public life", including the government, the legal system, the media, and education.[61] However, the primary spoken language is an English-based creole called Jamaican Patois (or Patwa). A 2007 survey by the Jamaican Language Unit found that 17.1 percent of the population were monolingual in JSE, 36.5 percent were monolingual in Patois, and 46.4 percent were bilingual, although earlier surveys had pointed to a greater degree of bilinguality (up to 90 percent).[62] The Jamaican education system has only recently begun to offer formal instruction in Patois, while retaining JSE as the "official language of instruction".[63]
Additionally, some Jamaicans speak one or more of Jamaican Sign Language, American Sign Language or the indigenous Jamaican Country Sign Language (Konchri Sain).[citation needed] Both JSL and ASL are rapidly replacing Konchri Sain for a variety of reasons.[citation needed]
Emigration
Main article: Jamaican diaspora
Many Jamaicans have emigrated to other countries, especially to the United Kingdom, the United States, and Canada. In the case of the United States, about 20,000 Jamaicans per year are granted permanent residence.[64] The great number of Jamaicans living abroad has become known as the Jamaican diaspora. There has also been emigration of Jamaicans to Cuba.[65] The scale of emigration has been widespread and similar to other Caribbean entities such as Puerto Rico, Guyana, and The Bahamas. It was estimated in 2004 that up to 2.5 million Jamaicans and Jamaican descendants live abroad.[66]
Jamaicans in the United Kingdom number an estimated 800,000 making them by far the country's largest African-Caribbean group. Large-scale migration from Jamaica to the UK occurred primarily in the 1950s and 1960s (when the country was still under British rule). Jamaican communities exist in most large UK cities.[67] Concentrations of expatriate Jamaicans are quite considerable in numerous cities in the United States, including New York City, Buffalo, the Miami metro area, Atlanta, Chicago, Orlando, Tampa, Washington, D.C., Philadelphia, Hartford, Providence and Los Angeles. In Canada, the Jamaican population is centred in Toronto, and there are smaller communities in cities such as Hamilton, Montreal, Winnipeg, Vancouver and Ottawa.
Crime
Main article: Crime in Jamaica
See also: Prisons in Jamaica and LGBT rights in Jamaica
When Jamaica gained independence in 1962, the murder rate was 3.9 per 100,000 inhabitants, one of the lowest in the world. By 2009, the rate was 62 per 100,000 inhabitants, one of the highest in the world.[68] Jamaica has had one of the highest murder rates in the world for many years, according to UN estimates.[69][70] Some areas of Jamaica, particularly cities such as Kingston, experience high levels of crime and violence.[71] Some Jamaicans are hostile towards LGBT and intersex people,[72] and there have been reported cases of mob attacks against gay people.[73][74][75]
However, there were 1,682 reported murders in 2009 and 1,428 in 2010.[citation needed] Since 2011 the murder rate continued to fall following the downward trend in 2010 after a strategic programme was launched.[76] In 2012, the Ministry of National Security reported a 30 percent decrease in murders.[77] Nevertheless, in 2017 murders rose by 22% over the previous year.[78]
Major cities



 


v
t
e


Largest cities or towns in Jamaica
Demographic Statistics 2016, pp. 15–16 (2011 Census)




Rank
Name
Parish
Pop.




Kingston
1
Kingston
Kingston
661,862

Spanish Town

Montego Bay


2
Portmore
Saint Catherine
182,153


3
Spanish Town
Saint Catherine
147,152


4
Montego Bay
Saint James
110,115


5
May Pen
Clarendon
61,548


6
Mandeville
Manchester
49,695


7
Old Harbour
Saint Catherine
28,912


8
Savanna-la-Mar
Westmoreland
22,633


9
Ocho Rios
Saint Ann
16,671


10
Linstead
Saint Catherine
15,231


Religion
Main article: Religion in Jamaica




Mandeville Church (est. 1816), an Anglican church in Manchester Parish


Christianity is the largest religion practised in Jamaica. Protestants form the majority of approximately 70% in the country, and Roman Catholics are a minority with 2% of the population. According to the 2001 census, the country's largest Protestant denominations are the Church of God (24%), Seventh-day Adventist Church (11%), Pentecostal (10%), Baptist (7%), Anglican (4%), United Church (2%), Methodist (2%), Moravian (1%) and Plymouth Brethren (1%)[79] The Christian faith gained acceptance as British Christian abolitionists and Baptist missionaries joined educated former slaves in the struggle against slavery.[80]
The Rastafari movement has 29,026 adherents, according to the 2011 census, with 25,325 Rastafarian males and 3,701 Rastafarian females.[79] Other religions in Jamaica include Jehovah's Witnesses (2% population), the Bahá'í faith, which counts perhaps 8,000 adherents[81] and 21 Local Spiritual Assemblies,[82] Buddhism, and Hinduism.[83] There is a small population of Jews, about 200, who describe themselves as Liberal-Conservative.[84] The first Jews in Jamaica trace their roots back to early 15th century Spain and Portugal.[85] Other small groups include Muslims, who claim 5,000 adherents,[79] as do the Mormons.[86]
Culture






This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (August 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Main article: Culture of Jamaica




Marcus Garvey, father of the Back to Africa Movement and Jamaica's first National Hero.






Bob Marley, the most famous reggae artist from Jamaica.


Music
Main article: Music of Jamaica
Though a small nation, Jamaican culture has a strong global presence. The musical genres reggae, ska, mento, rocksteady, dub, and, more recently, dancehall and ragga all originated in the island's vibrant, popular urban recording industry. Jamaica also played an important role in the development of punk rock, through reggae and ska. Reggae has also influenced American rap music, as they share roots as rhythmic, African styles of music. Some rappers, such as The Notorious B.I.G., Busta Rhymes, and Heavy D, are of Jamaican descent. Internationally known reggae musician Bob Marley was also Jamaican.
Many other internationally known artists were born in Jamaica, including Millie Small, Lee "Scratch" Perry, Gregory Isaacs, Half Pint, Protoje, Peter Tosh, Bunny Wailer, Big Youth, Jimmy Cliff, Dennis Brown, Desmond Dekker, Beres Hammond, Beenie Man, Shaggy, Grace Jones, Shabba Ranks, Super Cat, Buju Banton, Sean Paul, I Wayne, Bounty Killer and many others. Bands that came from Jamaica include Black Uhuru, Third World Band, Inner Circle, Chalice Reggae Band, Culture, Fab Five and Morgan Heritage. The genre jungle emerged from London's Jamaican diaspora. The birth of hip-hop in New York City owed much to the city's Jamaican community.
Literature
Main article: Jamaican literature
Ian Fleming, who lived in Jamaica, repeatedly used the island as a setting in his James Bond novels, including Live and Let Die, Doctor No, "For Your Eyes Only", The Man with the Golden Gun, and Octopussy and The Living Daylights. In addition, James Bond uses a Jamaica-based cover in Casino Royale. So far, the only James Bond film adaptation to have been set in Jamaica is Doctor No. Filming for the fictional island of San Monique in Live and Let Die took place in Jamaica.
The journalist and author H. G. de Lisser (1878–1944) used his native country as the setting for his many novels. Born in Falmouth, Jamaica, de Lisser worked as a reporter for the Jamaica Times at a young age and in 1920 began publishing the magazine Planters' Punch. The White Witch of Rosehall is one of his better-known novels. He was named Honorary President of the Jamaican Press Association; he worked throughout his professional career to promote the Jamaican sugar industry.
Marlon James (1970), novelist has published three novels: John Crow's Devil (2005), The Book of Night Women (2009) and A Brief History of Seven Killings (2014), winner of the 2015 Man Booker Prize.
Film
See also: List of Jamaican films
The cinema actor Errol Flynn lived with his third wife Patrice Wymore in Port Antonio in the 1950s. He helped develop tourism to this area, popularising trips down rivers on bamboo rafts.[87]
Jamaica has a long history in the film industry dating from the early 1960s. A look at delinquent youth in Jamaica is presented in the 1970s musical crime film The Harder They Come, starring Jimmy Cliff as a frustrated (and psychopathic) reggae musician who descends into a murderous crime spree. The American film Cocktail (1988), starring Tom Cruise, is one of the more popular films to depict Jamaica. Another popular Jamaican-based film is the 1993 Disney comedy Cool Runnings, which is loosely based on the true story of Jamaica's first bobsled team trying to make it in the Winter Olympics.
Cuisine
Main article: Jamaican cuisine
The island is famous for its Jamaican jerk spice, which is integral to Jamaican cuisine. Jamaica is also home to Red Stripe beer and Jamaican Blue Mountain Coffee.
National symbols
(From the Jamaica Information Service)[88]

National bird: red-billed streamertail (also called doctor bird) (a hummingbird, Trochilus polytmus)
National flower – lignum vitae (Guiacum officinale)
National tree: blue mahoe (Hibiscus talipariti elatum)
National fruit: ackee (Blighia sapida)
National motto: "Out of Many, One People."





Jamaica motto on a building at Papine High School in Kingston, Jamaica.


Sport
Main article: Sport in Jamaica




Usain Bolt at the 2009 World Championships in Athletics in Berlin


Sport is an integral part of national life in Jamaica and the island's athletes tend to perform to a standard well above what might ordinarily be expected of such a small country.[89] While the most popular local sport is cricket, on the international stage Jamaicans have tended to do particularly well at track and field athletics.[89][90]
Jamaica has produced some of the world's most famous cricketers, including George Headley, Courtney Walsh, and Michael Holding.[91] The country was one of the venues of 2007 Cricket World Cup and the West Indies cricket team is one of 10 ICC full member teams that participate in international Test cricket.[92] The Jamaica national cricket team competes regionally, and also provides players for the West Indies team. Sabina Park is the only Test venue in the island, but the Greenfield Stadium is also used for cricket.[93][94] Chris Gayle is the most renowned batsman from Jamaica currently representing the West Indies cricket team.
Since independence Jamaica has consistently produced world class athletes in track and field.[89] In Jamaica involvement in athletics begins at a very young age and most high schools maintain rigorous athletics programs with their top athletes competing in national competitions (most notably the VMBS Girls and Boys Athletics Championships) and international meets (most notably the Penn Relays). In Jamaica it is not uncommon for young athletes to attain press coverage and national fame long before they arrive on the international athletics stage.
Over the past six decades Jamaica has produced dozens of world class sprinters including Olympic and World Champion Usain Bolt, world record holder in the 100m for men at 9.58s, and 200m for men at 19.19s. Other noteworthy Jamaican sprinters include Arthur Wint, the first Jamaican Olympic Gold Medalist; Donald Quarrie, Elaine Thompson double Olympic champion from Rio 2016 in the 100m and 200m, Olympic Champion and former 200m world record holder; Roy Anthony Bridge, part of the International Olympic Committee; Merlene Ottey; Delloreen Ennis-London; Shelly-Ann Fraser-Pryce, the former World and two time Olympic 100m Champion; Kerron Stewart; Aleen Bailey; Juliet Cuthbert; three-time Olympic gold medalist; Veronica Campbell-Brown; Sherone Simpson; Brigitte Foster-Hylton; Yohan Blake; Herb McKenley; George Rhoden, Olympic Gold Medalist; Deon Hemmings, Olympic Gold Medalist; as well as Asafa Powell, former 100m world record holder and 2x 100m Olympic finalist and Gold medal winner in the men's 2008 Olympic 4 × 100 m.
Jamaica has also produced several world class amateur and professional boxers including Trevor Berbick and Mike McCallum. First-generation Jamaican athletes have continued to make a significant impact on the sport internationally, especially in the United Kingdom where the list of top British boxers born in Jamaica or of Jamaican parents includes Lloyd Honeyghan, Chris Eubank, Audley Harrison, David Haye, Lennox Lewis and Frank Bruno.
Association football and horse-racing are other popular sports in Jamaica. The national football team qualified for the 1998 FIFA World Cup.
The Jamaica national bobsled team was once a serious contender in the Winter Olympics, beating many well-established teams. Chess and basketball are widely played in Jamaica and are supported by the Jamaica Chess Federation (JCF) and the Jamaica Basketball Federation (JBF), respectively. Netball is also very popular on the island, with the Jamaica national netball team called The Sunshine Girls consistently ranking in the top five in the world.[95]
The Jamaica national rugby league team is made up of players who play in Jamaica, and UK-players from professional and semi professional teams in the UK.[96] Their first international was a 37–22 loss to the United States national rugby league team in November 2009.[97] Rugby league in Jamaica is growing with universities and high schools taking up the sport.[98][99] The JRLA Championship is the main rugby league competition in the country.[100] The Hurricanes Rugby League are a professional rugby league team who are hoping to compete in either the USA Rugby League or the AMNRL by 2013 during that time they will be training young players aged 14–19 who will be part of the Hurricanes RL Academy in the hope of developing into full-time professional players.
According to ESPN, the highest paid Jamaican professional athlete in 2011 was Justin Masterson, starting pitcher for the Cleveland Indians.[101]
Education
Main article: Education in Jamaica
The emancipation of the slaves heralded in the establishment of the Jamaican education system for the masses. Prior to emancipation there were few schools for educating locals. Many sent their children off to England to access quality education.
After emancipation the West Indian Commission granted a sum of money to establish Elementary Schools, now known as All Age Schools. Most of these schools were established by the churches.[102] This was the genesis of the modern Jamaican school system.
Presently the following categories of schools exist:

Early childhood – Basic, Infant and privately operated pre-school. Age cohort: 2 – 5 years.
Primary – Publicly and privately owned (Privately owned being called Preparatory Schools). Ages 3 – 12 years.
Secondary – Publicly and privately owned. Ages 10 – 19 years. The high schools in Jamaica may be either single-sex or co-educational institutions, and many schools follow the traditional English grammar school model used throughout the British West Indies.
Tertiary – Community Colleges, Teachers' Colleges with The Mico Teachers' College (now The MICO University College) being the oldest founded in 1836, The Shortwood Teachers' College (which was once an all-female teacher training institution), Vocational Training Centres, Colleges and Universities – Publicly and privately owned. There are five local universities namely: The University of the West Indies (Mona Campus); the University of Technology, Jamaica formerly The College of Art Science and Technology (CAST); the Northern Caribbean University formerly West Indies College; the University College of The Caribbean and the International University of the Caribbean.

Additionally, there are many community and teacher training colleges.
Education is free from the early childhood to secondary levels. There are also opportunities for those who cannot afford further education in the vocational arena through the Human Employment and Resource Training-National Training Agency (HEART Trust-NTA) programme,[103] which is opened to all working age national population[104] and through an extensive scholarship network for the various universities.
Students are taught Spanish in school from the primary level upwards; about 40–45% of educated people in Jamaica knows some form of Spanish.
Economy
Main article: Economy of Jamaica




A beach in Negril with a hotel and restaurant






James Bond Beach in Oracabessa


Jamaica is a mixed economy with both state enterprises and private sector businesses. Major sectors of the Jamaican economy include agriculture, mining, manufacturing, tourism, and financial and insurance services. Tourism and mining are the leading earners of foreign exchange. Half the Jamaican economy relies on services, with half of its income coming from services such as tourism. An estimated 1.3 million foreign tourists visit Jamaica every year.[105]
Supported by multilateral financial institutions, Jamaica has, since the early 1980s, sought to implement structural reforms aimed at fostering private sector activity and increasing the role of market forces in resource allocation. Since 1991, the government has followed a programme of economic liberalisation and stabilisation by removing exchange controls, floating the exchange rate, cutting tariffs, stabilising the Jamaican currency, reducing inflation and removing restrictions on foreign investment. Emphasis has been placed on maintaining strict fiscal discipline, greater openness to trade and financial flows, market liberalisation and reduction in the size of government. During this period, a large share of the economy was returned to private sector ownership through divestment and privatisation programmes.
The macroeconomic stabilisation programme introduced in 1991, which focused on tight fiscal and monetary policies, has contributed to a controlled reduction in the rate of inflation. The annual inflation rate decreased from a high of 80.2% in 1991 to 7.9% in 1998. Inflation for FY1998/99 was 6.2% compared to 7.2% in the corresponding period in CUU1997/98. The Government of Jamaica remains committed to lowering inflation, with a long-term objective of bringing it in line with that of its major trading partners.
After a period of steady growth from 1985 to 1995, real GDP decreased by 1.8% and 2.4% in 1996 and 1997, respectively. The decrease in GDP in 1996 and 1997 was largely due to significant problems in the financial sector and, in 1997, a severe island-wide drought (the worst in 70 years) that drastically reduced agricultural production. In 1997, nominal GDP was approximately J$220,556.2 million (US$6,198.9 million based on the average annual exchange rate of the period).




Fishing boats and bauxite cargo ships share the waterways near Alligator Pond, Jamaica


The economy in 1997 was marked by low levels of import growth, high levels of private capital inflows and relative stability in the foreign exchange market.
Recent economic performance shows the Jamaican economy is recovering. Agricultural production, an important engine of growth increased 15.3% in third quarter of 1998 compared to the corresponding period in 1997, signaling the first positive growth rate in the sector since January 1997. Bauxite and alumina production increased 5.5% from January to December, 1998 compared to the corresponding period in 1997. January's bauxite production recorded a 7.1% increase relative to January 1998 and continued expansion of alumina production through 2009 is planned by Alcoa.[106] Jamaica is the fifth largest exporter of bauxite in the world, after Australia, China, Brazil and Guinea. Tourism, which is the largest foreign exchange earner, showed improvement as well. In the third quarter of 1998, growth in tourist arrivals accelerated with an overall increase of 8.5% in tourism earnings in 1998 when compared to the corresponding period in 1997. Jamaica's agricultural exports are sugar, bananas, coffee, rum, and yams.
Jamaica has a wide variety of industrial and commercial activities. The aviation industry is able to perform most routine aircraft maintenance, except for heavy structural repairs. There is a considerable amount of technical support for transport and agricultural aviation. Jamaica has a considerable amount of industrial engineering, light manufacturing, including metal fabrication, metal roofing, and furniture manufacturing. Food and beverage processing, glassware manufacturing, software and data processing, printing and publishing, insurance underwriting, music and recording, and advanced education activities can be found in the larger urban areas. The Jamaican construction industry is entirely self-sufficient, with professional technical standards and guidance.[107]
Since the first quarter of 2006, the economy of Jamaica has undergone a period of staunch growth. With inflation for the 2006 calendar year down to 6.0% and unemployment down to 8.9%, the nominal GDP grew by an unprecedented 2.9%.[108] An investment programme in island transportation and utility infrastructure and gains in the tourism, mining, and service sectors all contributed this figure. All projections for 2007 show an even higher potential for economic growth with all estimates over 3.0% and hampered only by urban crime and public policies.
In 2006, Jamaica became part of the CARICOM Single Market and Economy (CSME) as one of the pioneering members.
The global economic downturn had a significant impact on the Jamaican economy for the years 2007 to 2009, resulting in negative economic growth. The government implemented a new Debt Management Initiative, the Jamaica Debt Exchange (JDX) on 14 January 2010. The initiative would see holders of Government of Jamaica (GOJ) bonds returning the high interest earning instruments for bonds with lower yields and longer maturities. The offer was taken up by over 95% of local financial institutions and was deemed a success by the government. Owing to the success of the JDX program, the Bruce Golding-led government was successful in entering into a borrowing arrangement with the IMF on 4 February 2010 for the amount of US$1.27b. The loan agreement is for a period of three years. [109]
In April 2014, the Governments of Jamaica and China signed the preliminary agreements for the first phase of the Jamaican Logistics Hub (JLH) – the initiative that aims to position Kingston as the fourth node in the global logistics chain, joining Rotterdam, Dubai and Singapore, and serving the Americas.[110] The Project, when completed, is expected to provide many jobs for Jamaicans, Economic Zones for multinational companies[111] and much needed economic growth to alleviate the country's heavy debt-to-GDP ratio. Strict adherence to the IMF's refinancing programme and preparations for the JLH has favourably affected Jamaica's credit rating and outlook from the three biggest rating agencies.
Infrastructure
Transport
Further information: Transport in Jamaica




Halfway Tree Transport Center, Kingston, Jamaica


The transport infrastructure in Jamaica consists of roadways, railways and air transport, with roadways forming the backbone of the island's internal transport system.
Roadways
Main article: Roads in Jamaica
The Jamaican road network consists of almost 21,000 kilometres (13,000 mi) of roads, of which over 15,000 kilometres (9,300 mi) is paved.[1] The Jamaican Government has, since the late 1990s and in cooperation with private investors, embarked on a campaign of infrastructural improvement projects, one of which includes the creation of a system of freeways, the first such access-controlled roadways of their kind on the island, connecting the main population centres of the island. This project has so far seen the completion of 33 kilometres (21 mi) of freeway.
Railways
Main article: Railways of Jamaica
Railways in Jamaica no longer enjoy the prominent position they once did, having been largely replaced by roadways as the primary means of transport. Of the 272 kilometres (169 mi) of railway found in Jamaica, only 57 kilometres (35 mi) remain in operation, currently used to transport bauxite.[1]
On 13 April 2011, limited passenger service was resumed between May Pen, Spanish Town and Linstead.
Air transport




A US Airways aircraft landing at Montego Bay (2013)


There are three international airports in Jamaica with modern terminals, long runways, and the navigational equipment required to accommodate the large jet aircraft used in modern and air travel: Norman Manley International Airport in Kingston; Ian Fleming International Airport in Boscobel, Saint Mary Parish; and the island's largest and busiest airport, Sir Donald Sangster International Airport in the resort city of Montego Bay. Manley and Sangster International airports are home to the country's national airline, Air Jamaica. In addition there are local commuter airports at Tinson Pen (Kingston), Port Antonio, and Negril, which cater to internal flights only. Many other small, rural centres are served by private fields on sugar estates or bauxite mines.
Ports, shipping and lighthouses
See also: Lighthouses in Jamaica
Owing to its location in the Caribbean Sea in the shipping lane to the Panama Canal and relative proximity to large markets in North America and emerging markets in Latin America, Jamaica receives high container traffic. The container terminal at the Port of Kingston has undergone large expansion in capacity in recent years to handle growth both already realised as well as that which is projected in coming years.[112] Montego Freeport in Montego Bay also handles a variety of cargo like (though more limited than) the Port of Kingston, mainly agricultural products.
There are several other ports positioned around the island, including Port Esquivel in St. Catherine (WINDALCO), Rocky Point in Clarendon, Port Kaiser in St. Elizabeth, Port Rhoades in Discovery Bay, Reynolds Pier in Ocho Rios, and Boundbrook Port in Port Antonio.
To aid the navigation of shipping, Jamaica operates nine lighthouses.
Energy
See also: Solar power in Jamaica
Jamaica depends on petroleum imports to satisfy its national energy needs.[1] Many test sites have been explored for oil, but no commercially viable quantities have been found.[113] The most convenient sources of imported oil and motor fuels (diesel, gasoline, and jet fuel) are from Mexico and Venezuela.
Jamaica's electrical power is produced by diesel (bunker oil) generators located in Old Harbour. Other smaller power stations (most owned by the Jamaica Public Service Company – the island's electricity provider) support the island's electrical grid including the Hunts Bay Power Station, the Bogue Power Station, the Rockfort Power Station and small hydroelectric plants on the White River, Rio Bueno, Morant River, Black River (Maggotty) and Roaring River.[114] A wind farm, owned by the Petroleum Corporation of Jamaica, was established at Wigton, Manchester.[115]
Jamaica has successfully operated a SLOWPOKE-2 nuclear reactor of 20 kW capacity since the early 1980s, but there are no plans to expand nuclear power at present.[116]
Jamaica imports approximately 80,000 barrels (13,000 m3) of oil energy products per day,[113] including asphalt and lubrication products. Just 20% of imported fuels are used for road transportation, the rest being used by the bauxite industry, electricity generation, and aviation. 30,000 barrels/day of crude imports are processed into various motor fuels and asphalt by the Petrojam Refinery in Kingston.[117]
Jamaica produces enormous quantities of drinking alcohol (at least 5% water content), most of which appears to be consumed as beverages, and none of it used as motor fuel. Facilities exist to refine hydrous ethanol feedstock into anhydrous ethanol (0% water content), but as of 2007, the process appeared to be uneconomic and the production plant was idle.[118]
Water supply and sanitation
Main article: Water supply and sanitation in Jamaica
Water supply and sanitation is characterised by high levels of access to an improved water source, while access to adequate sanitation stands at only 80%. This situation affects especially the poor, including the urban poor many of which live in the country's over 595 unplanned squatter settlements in unhealthy and unsanitary environments with a high risk of waterborne disease. Despite a number of policy papers that were mainly focused on water supply and despite various projects funded by external donors, increases in access have remained limited (1% for water and 5% for sanitation between 1990 and 2004).
The responsibility for water and sanitation policies within the government rests with the Ministry of Water and Housing, and the main service provider is the National Water Commission. An autonomous regulatory agency, the Office of Utilities Regulation, approves tariffs and establishes targets for efficiency increases.
Communication
Main article: Telecommunications in Jamaica
Jamaica has a fully digital telephone communication system with a mobile penetration of over 95%.[119]
The country's two mobile operators – FLOW Jamaica (formerly LIME, bMobile and Cable and Wireless Jamaica) and Digicel Jamaica have spent millions in network upgrades and expansion. The newest operator, Digicel was granted a licence in 2001 to operate mobile services in the newly liberalised telecom market that had once been the sole domain of the incumbent FLOW (then Cable and Wireless Jamaica) monopoly. Digicel opted for the more widely used GSM wireless system, while a past operator, Oceanic (which became Claro Jamaica and later merged with Digicel Jamaica in 2011) opted for the CDMA standard. FLOW (formerly "LIME" – pre-Columbus Communications merger) which had begun with TDMA standard, subsequently upgraded to GSM in 2002, decommissioned TDMA in 2006 and only utilised that standard until 2009 when LIME launched its 3G network.[120] Both operators currently provide islandwide coverage with HSPA+ (3G) technology. Currently, only Digicel offers LTE to its customers [121] whereas FLOW Jamaica has committed to launching LTE in the cities of Kingston and Montego Bay, places where Digicel's LTE network is currently only found in, in short order.
A new entrant to the Jamaican communications market, Flow Jamaica, laid a new submarine cable connecting Jamaica to the United States. This new cable increases the total number of submarine cables connecting Jamaica to the rest of the world to four. Cable and Wireless Communications (parent company of LIME) acquired the company in late 2014 and replaced their brand LIME with FLOW.[122] FLOW Jamaica currently has the most broadband and cable subscribers on the island and also has 1 million mobile subscribers,[123] second to Digicel (which had, at its peak, over 2 Million mobile subscriptions on its network).
Digicel entered the broadband market in 2010 by offering WiMAX broadband,[124] capable of up to 6 Mbit/s per subscriber. To further their broadband share post-LIME/FLOW merger in 2014, the company introduced a new broadband service called Digicel Play,[125] which is Jamaica's second FTTH offering (after LIME's deployment in selected communities in 2011[126]). It is currently only available in the parishes of Kingston, Portmore and St. Andrew. It offers speeds of up to 200 Mbit/s down, 100 Mbit/s up via a pure fibre optic network. Digicel's competitor, FLOW Jamaica, has a network consisting of ADSL, Coaxial and Fibre to the Home (inherited from LIME) and only offers speeds up to 100 Mbit/s. FLOW has committed to expanding its Fibre offering to more areas in order to combat Digicel's entrance into the market.
It was announced that the Office and Utilities Regulations (OUR), Ministry of Science, Technology, Energy and Mining (MSTEM) and the Spectrum Management Authority (SMA) have given approval for another mobile operator licence in January 2016.[127] The identity of this entrant was ascertained on May 20, 2016, when the Jamaican Government named the new carrier as Symbiote Investments Limited operating under the name Caricel.[128] The company will focus on 4G LTE data offerings and will first go live in the Kingston Metropolitan Area and will expand to the rest of Jamaica thereafter.
See also

Index of Jamaica-related articles
Outline of Jamaica



Jamaica portal
Caribbean portal
Caribbean Community portal
Commonwealth realms portal


References


^ a b c d e f g h i The CIA World Factbook – Jamaica. Retrieved 2015-09-16.
^ "The World Factbook — Central Intelligence Agency". Cia.gov. Retrieved 2017-09-25. 
^ a b "World Population Prospects: The 2017 Revision". ESA.UN.org (custom data acquired via website). United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division. Retrieved 10 September 2017. 
^ a b c d "Jamaica". International Monetary Fund. 2016. Retrieved 1 April 2016. 
^ "Gini Index". World Bank. Retrieved 2 March 2011. 
^ "Country Comparison: Distribution 0f Family Income – Gini Index". World Factbook. CIA. Retrieved 8 February 2016. 
^ "2015 Human Development Report" (PDF). United Nations Development Programme. 2014. Retrieved 15 December 2015. 
^ As represented in Old Spanish orthography, meaning it began with a "sh" sound.
^ "Taíno Dictionary" (in Spanish). The United Confederation of Taíno People. Archived from the original on 16 October 2007. Retrieved 18 October 2007. 
^ as known from the songs "Roots, Rock, Reggae" by Bob Marley ("roots" referring to Africa, while "rock" means Jamaica), "Jahman inna Jamdown" by Peter Tosh, and "Welcome to Jamrock" by Damian Marley
^ a b c "The Taino of Jamaica (Jamaica)". Jamaicans.com. 1 April 2001. Retrieved 4 July 2009. 
^ "Jamaican National Heritage Trust". Web.archive.org. 28 September 2007. Archived from the original on 28 September 2007. Retrieved 26 June 2010. 
^ Pickering, Keith A. "A Christopher Columbus Timeline". Retrieved 30 September 2010. 
^ "History of Jamaica". Jamaica National Heritage Trust. Archived from the original on 26 September 2010. Retrieved 30 September 2010. 
^ a b "Spanish Town". Jamaica National Heritage Trust. Archived from the original on 25 September 2010. Retrieved 30 September 2010. 
^ a b "Jamaica's English History". Jamaica National Heritage Trust. Retrieved 3 March 2016. 
^ "Montego Bay, Jamaica – Visitors Guide". Mobay.com. 2011. Retrieved 14 February 2017. 
^ "Henry Morgan: The Pirate Who Invaded Panama in 1671", Historynet.com.
^ a b Donovan, J. (1910). Jamaica. Catholic Encyclopedia. New York: Robert Appleton Company
^ Trevor Burnard, "A failed settler society: marriage and demographic failure in early Jamaica", Journal of Social History, Fall, 1994
^ https://tudorstuartireland.files.wordpress.com/2014/01/tsi-2015-abstracts.pdf
^ "Rodgers, Nini, 'The Irish in the Caribbean 1641–1837: An Overview'". Irlandeses.org. Retrieved 2017-09-25. 
^ Kritzler, Edward, The Jewish Pirates of the Caribbean, Anchor, 2009, p. 15, ISBN 0767919521
^ a b Benitez, Suzette. "The Maroons". Retrieved 30 September 2010. 
^ The Sugar Revolutions and Slavery, U.S. Library of Congress
^ History of Jamaica
^ Tortello, Rebecca (3 November 2003). "The Arrival Of The Indians". The Jamaica Gleaner. Retrieved 27 May 2017. 
^ Hemlock, Doreen (17 April 2005). "Out of Many, One People: Chinese-Jamaicans Treasure Their Roots and Their Communities". The Sun-Sentinel. Retrieved 27 May 2017. 
^ "Give Us The Queen!". The Gleaner. Gleaner Company. 28 June 2011. Retrieved 13 February 2017. 
^ Ghosh, Palash (29 June 2011). "Most Jamaicans Would Prefer To Remain British". International Business Times. Retrieved 13 February 2017. 
^ Queen of Jamaica http://www.royal.gov.uk/MonarchAndCommonwealth/Jamaica/Jamaica.aspx
^ "The Monarchy Today: Queen and Commonwealth". Archived from the original on 7 June 2007. Retrieved 25 June 2007. 
^ "Jamaica Defense Force History". Jamaica Defense Force. Retrieved 10 October 2010. 
^ "Jamaica Defense Force General Information". Jamaica Defense Force. Retrieved 10 October 2010. 
^ "JDF Coast Guard Roles". Jamaica Defense Force. Retrieved 10 October 2010. 
^ "The Combat Support Battalion (Cbt Sp Bn)". Jamaica Defense Force. Retrieved 10 October 2010. 
^ "1st Engineering Regiment History". Jamaica Defense Force. Retrieved 11 October 2010. 
^ "Headquarters Jamaica Defence Force (HQ JDF)". Jamaica Defense Force. Retrieved 11 October 2010. 
^ "County Background – Jamaica" (PDF). Pan American Health Organization. Retrieved 11 October 2010. 
^ "Geography of Jamaica". Jamaica Gleaner. Retrieved 11 October 2010. 
^ "Jamaican Cities". My Island Jamaica. Retrieved 11 October 2010. 
^ "Port Authority History". Port Authority of Jamaica. Retrieved 11 October 2010. 
^ "Kingston tourist destinations". Planet Aware. Retrieved 11 October 2010. 
^ "Jamaican tourist attractions". Planet Aware. Retrieved 11 October 2010. 
^ "Port Antonio tourist attractions". Planet Aware. Retrieved 11 October 2010. 
^ "Ocho Rios tourist attractions". Planet Aware. Retrieved 11 October 2010. 
^ "Jamaica Climate and Weather". Word Travels. Retrieved 11 October 2010. 
^ "Climate of Jamaica". Jamaica Gleaner. Retrieved 11 October 2010. 
^ "Construction and Building in Jamaica". Projects Abroad. Retrieved 11 October 2010. 
^ "CSI Activities (Portland Bight, Jamaica)". Unesco.org. Retrieved 20 October 2012. 
^ "THE REPTILE DATABASE". reptile-database.org. 
^ "Amphibians and reptiles found in Cockpit Country jamaica". Cockpitcountry.com. Retrieved 31 October 2011. 
^ "All fishes reported from Jamaica". fishbase.org. 
^ a b https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/geos/jm.html CIA (The World Factbook): Jamaica
^ Richardson, David; Tibbles, Anthony; Schwarz, Suzanne (2007). Liverpool and Transatlantic Slavery. Liverpool University Press. p. 141. ISBN 1-84631-066-0. 
^ "Pieces of the Past:The Arrival Of The Irish". Jamaica Gleaner. 1 December 2003. Archived from the original on 1 January 2011. Retrieved 20 December 2010. 
^ Bouknight-Davis 2004, p. 83
^ "Special Reports | Brits Abroad". BBC News. 6 December 2006. Retrieved 4 July 2009. 
^ Simms, Tanya M.; Rodríguez, Carol E.; Rodríguez, Rosa; Herrera, René J. (May 2010). "The genetic structure of populations from Haiti and Jamaica reflect divergent demographic histories". Am J Phys Anthropol. 142: 63. doi:10.1002/ajpa.21194. PMID 19918989. Retrieved 18 May 2015. 
^ Ronald C. Morren and Diane M. Morren (2007). Are the goals and objectives of Jamaica's Bilingual Education Project being met?" – SIL International (working paper). Retrieved 31 August 2015.
^ Bernstein, Antje (2006). "English in Jamaica: The Coexistence of Standard Jamaican English and the English-based Jamaican Creole". English Language and Literature Studies. seminar paper. Retrieved 31 August 2015. 
^ Jettka, Daniel (2010). "English in Jamaica: The Coexistence of Standard Jamaican English and the English-based Jamaican Creole" (PDF). Hamburg Centre for Language Corpora. Hamburg University. Retrieved 31 August 2015. 
^ Claude Robinson (30 March 2014). "English lessons for Jamaica" – Jamaica Observer. Retrieved 31 August 2015.
^ "United States immigration statistics". Dhs.gov. 23 June 2009. Retrieved 4 July 2009. 
^ Jamaicans to Cuba. Encarta.msn.com. Archived from the original on 1 November 2009. Retrieved 4 July 2009. 
^ Linking the Jamaican Diaspora. Jamaica Observer. 20 June 2004.
^ "Jamaica: Mapping exercise" (PDF). London: International Organization for Migration. July 2007. Archived from the original (PDF) on 11 May 2011. Retrieved 27 May 2010. 
^ "Crime and crisis in Jamaica". Focal.ca. Retrieved 2017-09-25. 
^ "Nationmaster Crime Stats". Nationmaster.com. Retrieved 4 July 2009. 
^ "Crime, violence and development: trends, costs, and policy options in the Caribbean" (PDF). United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. p. 37. Retrieved 26 December 2007. 
^ "Jamaica Travel Advice: Safety and Security". Foreign Travel Advice. Government of the United Kingdom. Retrieved 25 June 2014. 
^ "Jamaica Travel Advice: Local Laws and Customs". Foreign Travel Advice. Government of the United Kingdom. Retrieved 25 June 2014. 
^ Lacey, Marc (24 February 2008). "Attacks Show Easygoing Jamaica Is Dire Place for Gays". New York Times. Retrieved 19 March 2009. 
^ "Jamaica: Shield Gays from Mob Attacks". Human Rights Watch. 31 January 2008. Retrieved 19 March 2009. 
^ "Document – Jamaica: Amnesty International condemns homophobic violence" (Press release). Amnesty International. 15 April 2007. Archived from the original on 8 September 2009. Retrieved 19 March 2009. 
^ "Prime Minister Golding Speaks on Crime Reduction". The Gleaner. June 9, 2011. Archived from the original on 4 Jan 2017. Retrieved 16 Dec 2017. 
^ Pachico, Elyssa (2012-3-30). "Jamaica Murder Rate Dropped 30% in 2012". InSightCrime: Organized Crime in the Americas. Retrieved 2012-12-1.
^ http://rjrnewsonline.com/local/jamaicas-murder-tally-over-1500-this-year
^ a b c "Jamaica". State.gov. 14 September 2007. Retrieved 4 July 2009. 
^ Jamaican Christian Missions:Their Influence in the Jamaican Slave Rebellion "Archived copy" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 27 March 2009. Retrieved 6 April 2010. 
^ "Map Source: www.worldmap.org". 2007. 
^ Bahá'í International Community (11 August 2006). "Jamaicans celebrate 4th National Baha'i Day". Bahá'í World News Service. 
^ religiousintelligence.co.uk, religiousfreedom.lib.virginia.edu Archived 29 November 2014 at the Wayback Machine.
^ Haruth Communications; Harry Leichter. "Jamaican Jews". Haruth.com. Retrieved 4 July 2009. 
^ Dawes, Mark (10 June 2003). "Jews hold firm Life goes on in Old Synagogue". Gleaner Co. Archived from the original on 10 May 2011. Retrieved 11 March 2010. 
^ "Jamaica – LDS Statistics and Church Facts | Total Church Membership". Mormonnewsroom.org. Retrieved 6 August 2012. 
^ Dr. Rebecca Tortello "The History of Jamaica – Captivated by Jamaica" Archived 17 July 2009 at the Wayback Machine., Jamaica Gleaner
^ "National Symbols of Jamaica". Jis.gov.jm. 6 August 1962. Archived from the original on 19 June 2006. Retrieved 26 June 2010. 
^ a b c "Athletics in Jamaica". My island Jamaica. Retrieved 11 October 2010. 
^ "Jamaican Sports An Overview". My Island Jamaica. Retrieved 11 October 2010. 
^ Margaret J.Bailey, Cricket in Jamaica :http://jamaicans.com/cricketjamaica/ Retrieved 9 January 2016
^ "Test and ODI cricket playing nations". Cricinfo. Retrieved 11 October 2010. 
^ "Cricket Ground Information". Windies Online. Retrieved 11 October 2010. 
^ "Greenfield Stadium". Surf India. Retrieved 11 October 2010. 
^ IFNA. "Current World Rankings". Retrieved 3 November 2013. 
^ "Jamaica to Tour UK". Americanrugbynews.com. Archived from the original on 18 August 2010. Retrieved 20 December 2010. 
^ "Rugby League Europe Federation". Rlef.eu.com. 15 November 2009. Retrieved 20 December 2010. 
^ "The World of Rugby League". rleague.com. Archived from the original on 27 February 2015. Retrieved 20 December 2010. 
^ "The World of Rugby League". rleague.com. Archived from the original on 27 February 2015. Retrieved 20 December 2010. 
^ "The World of Rugby League". rleague.com. Archived from the original on 27 February 2015. Retrieved 20 December 2010. 
^ "Best-paid athletes from 200 countries". espn.com. Retrieved 4 May 2012. 
^ "Moravian Church Contribution to Education in Jamaica". Archived from the original on 23 November 2007. Retrieved 22 December 2007. 
^ "Transforming the Jamaican Education System". Archived from the original on 20 May 2008. Retrieved 22 December 2007. 
^ "Vocational Education in Jamaica". UNESCO-UNEVOC. August 2012. Retrieved 26 May 2014. 
^ Sex tourism as economic aid. Smh.com.au. 12 July 2003.
^ No gas from Trinidad, Venezuela by 2009 – Jamaica Observer.com Archived 17 February 2008 at the Wayback Machine. at www.jamaicaobserver.com
^ "History of Aviation in Jamaica: Part I". Jamaica-gleaner.com. Archived from the original on 17 July 2009. Retrieved 4 July 2009. 
^ Statistical Institute of Jamaica at www.statinja.com
^ "Jamaica Gleaner News – IMF says yes – US$1.27b loan for Jamaica approved – US$950m fund for financial sector". Jamaica-gleaner.com. 5 February 2010. Retrieved 31 October 2011. 
^ "Jamaica signs deal for China-built cargo shipping hub". Reuters. 
^ "Proposed Caymanas Economic Zone To Be One Of 16 – Jamaica Information Service". Jamaica Information Service. 
^ The Jamaica Observer Archived 26 September 2007 at the Wayback Machine.. Retrieved 27 June 2007.
^ a b "Petroleum Corp of Jamaica, Petroleum Industry Statistics". Archived from the original on 3 February 2001. Retrieved 21 July 2007. 
^ "JPS – JPS' Power Plants". Archived from the original on 2 December 2010. Retrieved 1 January 2011. 
^ "Wigton Wind Farm Company". Retrieved 25 March 2008. 
^ List of nuclear reactors#Jamaica
^ "Corporate Fact Sheet | Petrojam Limited". Petrojam.com. Retrieved 2017-09-25. 
^ "Petroleum Corp of Jamaica, Petrojam Ethanol". Archived from the original on 17 July 2007. Retrieved 21 July 2007. 
^ Doing eBusiness in Jamaica, The Economist Intelligence Unit.
^ LIME 3G launch in 2009
^ Digicel Jamaica launches LTE
^ New FLOW brand unveiled in Jamaica
^ FLOW celebrates hitting 1 million mobile subscribers mark
^ Digicel launches WiMAX to non-business users
^ Digicel Play website
^ LIME FTTH rollout
^ Jamaica approves third mobile player
^ Caricel, first Jamaican company to get mobile spectrum licence


Further reading


Ahmed, Faiz (2008). The Development Path Taken by Jamaica: A brief account of the islands natural-history, economic policies, and social conditions (PDF).  (pp. 45–83)
Arbell, Mordehay (2000). The Portuguese Jews of Jamaica. Canoe Press. ISBN 978-976-8125-69-9. 
Ammar, N. "From Whence they came". Jamaica Journal.
Bahadur, Gaiutra. Coolie Woman: The Odyssey of Indenture. The University of Chicago (2014), ISBN 978-0-226-21138-1
Chapman, Valentine Jackson (1961). The marine algae of Jamaica: Myxophyceae and Chlorophyceae. 
Chapman, Valentine Jackson (1963). The marine Algae of Jamaica: Part II: Phaeophyceae and Rhodophyceae. 
Hall, D. "Bounties European Immigration with Special Reference of the German Settlement at Seaford Town, Parts 1 and 2". Jamaica Journal, 8, (4), 48–54 and 9 (1), 2–9.
Issa, Suzanne (1994). Mr Jamaica, Abe Issa: a pictorial biography. S. Issa. ISBN 978-976-8091-69-7. 
Jacobs, H. P. (2003). Germany in Jamaica. Indian heritage in Jamaica. Jamaica Journal, 10, (2,3,4), 10–19,
Mullally, R (2003). "'One Love' The Black Irish of Jamaica". Jamaica Journal. 42: 104–116. 
Parboosingh, I. S. "An Indo-Jamaica beginning". Jamaica Journal. 18 (3): 2–10, 12. 
Senior, Olive (2003). Encyclopedia of Jamaican Heritage. Twin Guinep Publishers. ISBN 978-976-8007-14-8. 
Sherlock, Philip Manderson; Bennett, Hazel (1998). The Story of the Jamaican People. Ian Randle Publishers. ISBN 978-1-55876-145-2. 
Thomson, Ian (2009). The Dead Yard: Tales of Modern Jamaica. Nation Books. ISBN 978-0-571-22761-7. 
Williams, Joseph John (1932). Whence the "Black Irish" of Jamaica?. L. MacVeagh, Dial Press, Inc. 
The Gleaner. Seaford Town Advertising Feature. 14 August 2003, D7-8,


External links

Listen to this article (2 parts) ·  (info)
Part 1 • Part 2



This audio file was created from a revision of the article "Jamaica" dated 2005-09-23, and does not reflect subsequent edits to the article. (Audio help)
More spoken articles


Find more aboutJamaicaat Wikipedia's sister projects

Definitions from Wiktionary
Media from Wikimedia Commons
News from Wikinews
Quotations from Wikiquote
Texts from Wikisource
Textbooks from Wikibooks
Travel guide from Wikivoyage
Learning resources from Wikiversity



Governmental details


Government of Jamaica
Jamaica at the Royal Family website
Official website of the Jamaica Information Service
The Cabinet Office of the Government of Jamaica
Chief of State and Cabinet Members


General information


"Jamaica". The World Factbook. Central Intelligence Agency. 
Jamaica from UCB Libraries GovPubs
Jamaica at Curlie (based on DMOZ)
Jamaica from the BBC News
 Wikimedia Atlas of Jamaica
National Library of Jamaica materials in the Digital Library of the Caribbean
JAMAICA VIRTUAL TOUR IN HD – many locations around the island
Key Development Forecasts for Jamaica from International Futures







v
t
e


Jamaica articles



History



Arawaks
Taínos
Atlantic slave trade
British conquest
Governors
Port Royal
Piracy
Maroons
1692 earthquake
First Maroon War
Tacky's War
Second Maroon War
Baptist War
Morant Bay rebellion
1907 earthquake
British West Indies
West Indies Federation
Hurricane Charley
Hurricane Ivan








Geography







Cities
Fauna
Flora
Islands
Parishes
Rivers
Water resources








Politics







Cabinet
Constitution
Elections
Foreign relations
Governor-General
Judiciary
Law enforcement
LGBT rights
Military
Monarchy
Parliament
Political parties
Prime Minister
Attorney general
Chief Justice








Economy







Central bank
Dollar (currency)
Free trade zones
Stock exchange
Telecommunications
Transport








Society







Crime
Demographics
Education
Ethnic groups
Languages
Religion
Water supply and sanitation





Culture



Anthem
Cinema
Coat of arms
Cuisine
Flag
Heritage sites
Literature
Music
Newspapers
Public holidays
Sports
Television












Outline
Index



Category
Portal










Articles relating to Jamaica











v
t
e


Countries and dependencies of North America



Sovereign states




Entire



Antigua and Barbuda
Bahamas
Barbados
Belize
Canada
Costa Rica
Cuba
Dominica
Dominican Republic
El Salvador
Grenada
Guatemala
Haiti
Honduras
Jamaica
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama
St. Kitts and Nevis
Saint Lucia
St. Vincent and the Grenadines
Trinidad and Tobago
United States





In part



Colombia

San Andrés and Providencia


France

Guadeloupe
Martinique


Caribbean Netherlands

Bonaire
Saba
Sint Eustatius













Dependencies




Denmark



Greenland





France



Clipperton Island
St. Barthélemy
St. Martin
St. Pierre and Miquelon





Netherlands



Aruba
Curaçao
Sint Maarten





United Kingdom



Anguilla
Bermuda
British Virgin Islands
Cayman Islands
Montserrat
Turks and Caicos Islands





United States



Navassa Island
Puerto Rico
United States Virgin Islands





Venezuela



Federal Dependencies
Nueva Esparta


















International membership











v
t
e


Caribbean Community (CARICOM)




Secretariat (Secretary-General)



Members



Antigua and Barbuda
Bahamas1
Barbados
Belize
Dominica
Grenada
Guyana
Haiti1
Jamaica
Montserrat2
St. Kitts and Nevis
St. Lucia
St. Vincent and the Grenadines
Suriname
Trinidad and Tobago








Associate members



Anguilla
Bermuda
British Virgin Islands
Cayman Islands
Turks and Caicos Islands





Observers



Aruba
Colombia
Curaçao
Dominican Republic
Mexico
Puerto Rico
Sint Maarten
Venezuela





Institutions



Common Fund for Commodities (CFC)
Court of Justice (CCJ)
Disaster Emergency Management (CDEMA)
Examinations Council (CXC)
Meteorological Institute (CMI)
Meteorological Organisation (CMO)
Public Health Agency (CARPHA)
Single Market and Economy (CSME)





Related organizations



CARIFORUM
Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States (OECS)








1 Member of the Community but not of the CARICOM Single Market and Economy (CSME)
2 British overseas territory awaiting entrustment to join the CSME












v
t
e


Members of the Commonwealth of Nations



Sovereign states
(Members)



Antigua and Barbuda
Australia
Bahamas
Bangladesh
Barbados
Belize
Botswana
Brunei
Cameroon
Canada
Cyprus
Dominica
Fiji
Ghana
Grenada
Guyana
India
Jamaica
Kenya
Kiribati
Lesotho
Malawi
Malaysia
Malta
Mauritius
Mozambique
Namibia
Nauru
New Zealand
Nigeria
Pakistan
Papua New Guinea
Rwanda
St. Kitts and Nevis
St. Lucia
St. Vincent and the Grenadines
Samoa
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Singapore
Solomon Islands
South Africa
Sri Lanka
Swaziland
Tanzania
Tonga
Trinidad and Tobago
Tuvalu
Uganda
United Kingdom
Vanuatu
Zambia





Dependencies
of Members




Australia



Ashmore and Cartier Islands
Australian Antarctic Territory
Christmas Island
Cocos (Keeling) Islands
Coral Sea Islands
Heard Island and McDonald Islands
Norfolk Island





New Zealand



Cook Islands
Niue
Ross Dependency
Tokelau





United Kingdom



Akrotiri and Dhekelia
Anguilla
Bermuda
British Antarctic Territory
British Indian Ocean Territory
British Virgin Islands
Cayman Islands
Falkland Islands
Gibraltar
Guernsey
Isle of Man
Jersey
Montserrat
Pitcairn Islands
St. Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha
South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands
Turks and Caicos Islands









Source: Commonwealth Secretariat - Member States










v
t
e


Commonwealth realms and dominions



Current



Antigua and Barbuda (monarchy)
Australia (monarchy)
Bahamas (monarchy)
Barbados (monarchy)
Belize (monarchy)
Canada (monarchy)
Grenada (monarchy)
Jamaica (monarchy)
Realm of New Zealand

Cook Islands
New Zealand
Niue


Papua New Guinea (monarchy)
Saint Kitts and Nevis (monarchy)
Saint Lucia (monarchy)
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines (monarchy)
Solomon Islands (monarchy)
Tuvalu (monarchy)
United Kingdom (monarchy)





Former



Ceylon
Fiji (monarchy)
The Gambia
Ghana
Guyana
India1
Ireland1 (monarchy)
Kenya
Malawi
Malta
Mauritius
Newfoundland2
Nigeria
Pakistan
Rhodesia3
Sierra Leone
South Africa (monarchy)
Tanganyika
Trinidad and Tobago
Uganda








1 Dominion, became republic before adoption of the term "realm"
2 Dominion, never ratified Statute of Westminster 1931, London-based external government 1934–1949, annexed by Canada in 1949
3 Rhodesia unilaterally declared independence as a realm in 1965, but this was not recognised internationally. Declared itself a republic in 1970.












v
t
e


Nations in the Group of 15 (G-15)



Summits



1990
1991
1992
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2004
2006
2010
2012





Members



Algeria
Argentina
Brazil
Chile
Egypt
India
Indonesia
Iran
Jamaica
Kenya
Malaysia
Mexico
Nigeria
Senegal
Sri Lanka
Venezuela
Zimbabwe

















v
t
e


English-speaking world






Click on a coloured area to see an article about English in that country or region






































































Further links







Articles



English-speaking world
History of the English language
British Empire
English in the Commonwealth of Nations
Anglosphere





Lists



List of countries by English-speaking population
List of countries where English is an official language









 







Countries and territories where English is the national language or the native language of the majority





Africa



Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha





Americas



Anguilla
Antigua and Barbuda
The Bahamas
Barbados
Belize
Bermuda
British Virgin Islands
Canada
Cayman Islands
Dominica
Falkland Islands
Grenada
Guyana
Jamaica
Montserrat
Saba
Saint Kitts and Nevis
Saint Lucia
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
Sint Eustatius
Sint Maarten
South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands
Trinidad and Tobago
Turks and Caicos Islands
United States
United States Virgin Islands





Europe



Guernsey
Ireland
Isle of Man
Jersey
United Kingdom





Oceania



Australia
New Zealand
Norfolk Island
Pitcairn Islands








 







Countries and territories where English is an official language, but not the majority first language





Africa



Botswana
Cameroon
The Gambia
Ghana
Kenya
Lesotho
Liberia
Malawi
Mauritius
Namibia
Nigeria
Rwanda
Sierra Leone
Somaliland
South Africa
South Sudan
Sudan
Swaziland
Tanzania
Uganda
Zambia
Zimbabwe





Americas



Puerto Rico





Asia



Christmas Island
Cocos (Keeling) Islands
Hong Kong Special Administrative Region
India
Pakistan
Philippines
Singapore





Europe



Gibraltar
Malta





Oceania



American Samoa
Cook Islands
Fiji
Guam
Kiribati
Marshall Islands
Micronesia
Nauru
Niue
Northern Mariana Islands
Palau
Papua New Guinea
Samoa
Solomon Islands
Tokelau
Tuvalu
Vanuatu












Dependencies shown in italics.










Coordinates: 18°N 77°W﻿ / ﻿18°N 77°W﻿ / 18; -77



Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 150701983
LCCN: n83017737
GND: 4028456-6
HDS: 3387
NDL: 00574977











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Jamaica&oldid=816777843"					Categories: JamaicaCountries in the CaribbeanEnglish-speaking countries and territoriesFormer Spanish coloniesG15 nationsGreater AntillesLiberal democraciesMember states of the Caribbean CommunityMember states of the Commonwealth of NationsMember states of the United NationsStates and territories established in 1962Small Island Developing States1962 establishments in JamaicaCountries in North AmericaHidden categories: CS1 Spanish-language sources (es)Webarchive template wayback linksWikipedia pages semi-protected against vandalismUse dmy dates from March 2013Articles with hAudio microformatsArticles including recorded pronunciations (English)Articles containing Spanish-language textAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from February 2016Articles with unsourced statements from March 2016Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2016All articles containing potentially dated statementsArticles with unsourced statements from August 2015Articles with unsourced statements from October 2014Articles with unsourced statements from April 2016Articles with unsourced statements from December 2017Articles needing additional references from August 2017All articles needing additional referencesSpoken articlesArticles with DMOZ linksCoordinates on WikidataWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiers