For the TV miniseries, see Japanese Americans (miniseries).

Japanese Americans
日系アメリカ人（日系米国人）
Nikkei Amerikajin (Nikkei Beikokujin)


The Japanese American National Museum



Total population


1,469,637[1]
0.3% of the U.S. population (2015)


Regions with significant populations


Hawaii, the West Coast, and urban areas elsewhere.


Languages


American English and Japanese


Religion


32% Unaffiliated, 33% Protestantism, 25% Buddhism, 4% Catholicism, 4% Shinto (2012)[2][3]


Japanese Americans (日系アメリカ人, Nikkei Amerikajin) are Americans who are fully or partially of Japanese descent, especially those who identify with that ancestry, along with their cultural characteristics. Japanese Americans were among the three largest Asian American ethnic communities during the 20th century, but since the 2000 census, they have declined in number to constitute the sixth largest Asian American group at around 1.3 million, including those of partial ancestry.[1] According to the 2010 census, the largest Japanese American communities were found in California with 272,528, Hawaii with 185,502, New York with 37,780, Washington with 35,008, Illinois with 17,542, and Ohio with 16,995.[4] Southern California has the largest Japanese American population in North America, and the city of Torrance holds the densest Japanese American population in the 48 contiguous states.[5][6]



Contents


1 History

1.1 Immigration
1.2 Internment and redress


2 Cultural profile

2.1 Generations
2.2 Languages
2.3 Education

2.3.1 Schools for Japanese Americans and Japanese nationals


2.4 Intermarriage
2.5 Religion
2.6 Celebrations


3 Politics
4 Genetics

4.1 Risk for inherited diseases


5 Japanese Americans by state

5.1 California
5.2 Connecticut
5.3 Georgia
5.4 Hawaii
5.5 Illinois
5.6 Michigan
5.7 New Jersey
5.8 Virginia


6 Neighborhoods and communities

6.1 The West Coast
6.2 Outside the West Coast


7 Notable people

7.1 Politics
7.2 Science and technology
7.3 Art and literature
7.4 Music
7.5 Sports
7.6 Entertainment and media


8 Works about Japanese Americans
9 See also
10 References
11 Further reading

11.1 In Hawaii


12 External links



History[edit]
Main articles: Japanese-American history, Japanese-American life before World War II, and Japanese-American life after World War II
Immigration[edit]




A street in Seattle's Nihonmachi in 1909


People from Japan began migrating to the US in significant numbers following the political, cultural, and social changes stemming from the Meiji Restoration in 1868. Large numbers went to Hawaii and later the West Coast. In 1907, the "Gentlemen's Agreement" between the governments of Japan and the US ended immigration of Japanese unskilled workers, but permitted the immigration of businessmen, students and spouses of Japanese immigrants already in the US. The Immigration Act of 1924 banned the immigration of nearly all Japanese.
The ban on immigration produced unusually well-defined generational groups within the Japanese American community. Original immigrants belonged to an immigrant generation, the Issei, and their US-born children to the Nisei Japanese American-generation. The Issei comprised exclusively those who had immigrated before 1924. Because no new immigrants were permitted, all Japanese Americans born after 1924 were—by definition—born in the US. This generation, the Nisei, became a distinct cohort from the Issei generation in terms of age, citizenship, and English-language ability, in addition to the usual generational differences. Institutional and interpersonal racism led many of the Nisei to marry other Nisei, resulting in a third distinct generation of Japanese Americans, the Sansei. Significant Japanese immigration did not occur again until the Immigration and Nationality Act of 1965 ended 40 years of bans against immigration from Japan and other countries.
The Naturalization Act of 1790 restricted naturalized United States citizenship to "free white persons", which excluded the Issei from citizenship. As a result, the Issei were unable to vote and faced additional restrictions such as the inability to own land under many state laws. Japanese Americans were parties in several important Supreme Court decisions, including Ozawa v. United States (1922) and Korematsu v. United States (1943). The Korematsu case originated the "strict scrutiny" standard, which is applied, with great controversy, in government considerations of race since the 1989 Adarand Constructors v. Peña decision.
In recent years, immigration from Japan has been more like that from Western Europe. The numbers involve on average 5 to 10 thousand per year, and is similar to the amount of immigration to the US from Germany. This is in stark contrast to the rest of Asia, where family reunification is the primary impetus for immigration. Japanese Americans also have the oldest demographic structure of any non-European ethnic group in the US.
Internment and redress[edit]
Main articles: Internment of Japanese Americans and Japanese American redress and court cases




Families of Japanese ancestry being removed from Los Angeles during World War II


During World War II, an estimated 120,000 Japanese Americans and Japanese nationals or citizens residing on the West Coast of the United States were forcibly interned in ten different camps across the western interior of the country. The internments were based on the race or ancestry rather than activities of the interned. Families, including children, were interned together. Decades later, the Civil Liberties Act of 1988 officially acknowledged the "fundamental violations of the basic civil liberties and constitutional rights" of the internment.[7] Many Japanese-Americans consider the term internment camp a euphemism and prefer to refer to the forced relocation of Japanese-Americans as imprisonment in concentration camps.[8] Webster's New World Fourth College Edition defines a concentration camp as, "A prison camp in which political dissidents, members of minority ethnic groups, etc. are confined."
Cultural profile[edit]
Generations[edit]
The nomenclature for each of their generations who are citizens or long-term residents of countries other than Japan, used by Japanese Americans and other nationals of Japanese descent are explained here; they are formed by combining one of the Japanese numbers corresponding to the generation with the Japanese word for generation (sei 世). The Japanese American communities have themselves distinguished their members with terms like Issei, Nisei, and Sansei, which describe the first, second, and third generations of immigrants. The fourth generation is called Yonsei (四世), and the fifth is called Gosei (五世). The term Nikkei (日系) encompasses Japanese immigrants in all countries and of all generations.


Generation
Summary


Issei (一世)
The generation of people born in Japan who later immigrated to another country.


Nisei (二世)
The generation of people born in North America, Latin America, Hawaii, or any country outside Japan either to at least one Issei or one non-immigrant Japanese parent.


Sansei (三世)
The generation of people born in North America, Latin America, Hawaii, or any country outside Japan to at least one Nisei parent.


Yonsei (四世)
The generation of people born in North America, Latin America, Hawaii, or any country outside Japan to at least one Sansei parent.


Gosei (五世)
The generation of people born in North America, Latin America, Hawaii, or any country outside Japan to at least one Yonsei parent.


The kanreki (還暦), a pre-modern Japanese rite of passage to old age at 60, is now being celebrated by increasing numbers of Japanese American Nisei. Rituals are enactments of shared meanings, norms, and values; and this traditional Japanese rite of passage highlights a collective response among the Nisei to the conventional dilemmas of growing older.[9]
Languages[edit]
See also: Japanese language education in the United States
Issei and many nisei speak Japanese in addition to English as a second language. In general, later generations of Japanese Americans speak English as their first language, though some do learn Japanese later as a second language. In Hawaii however, where Nikkei are about one-fifth of the whole population, Japanese is a major language, spoken and studied by many of the state's residents across ethnicities.[citation needed] It is taught in private Japanese language schools as early as the second grade. As a courtesy to the large number of Japanese tourists (from Japan), Japanese characters are provided on place signs, public transportation, and civic facilities. The Hawaii media market has a few locally produced Japanese language newspapers and magazines, although these are on the verge of dying out, due to a lack of interest on the part of the local (Hawaii-born) Japanese population. Stores that cater to the tourist industry often have Japanese-speaking personnel. To show their allegiance to the US, many nisei and sansei intentionally avoided learning Japanese. But as many of the later generations find their identities in both Japan and America or American society broadens its definition of cultural identity, studying Japanese is becoming more popular than it once was.[citation needed]
Education[edit]
Japanese American culture places great value on education and culture. Across generations, children are often instilled with a strong desire to enter the rigors of higher education. Because of such widespread ambition among members of the Japanese American community, math and reading scores on the SAT and ACT may often exceed the national averages. Japanese Americans have the largest showing of any ethnic group in nationwide Advanced Placement testing each year.[citation needed]
A large majority of Japanese Americans obtain post-secondary degrees. Japanese Americans often face the "model minority" stereotype that they are dominant in math- and science-related fields in colleges and universities across the United States. In reality, however, there is an equal distribution of Japanese Americans between the arts and humanities and the sciences.[citation needed] Although their numbers have declined slightly in recent years, Japanese Americans are still a prominent presence in Ivy League schools, the top University of California campuses including UC Berkeley and UCLA, and other elite universities.[citation needed] The 2000 census reported that 40.8% of Japanese Americans held a college degree.[10]
Schools for Japanese Americans and Japanese nationals[edit]




Nihon Go Gakko in Seattle






Seigakuin Atlanta International School on March 23, 2014


A Japanese school opened in Hawaii in 1893 and other Japanese schools for temporary settlers in North America followed.[11] In the years prior to World War II, many second generation Japanese American attended the American school by day and the Japanese school in the evening to keep up their Japanese skill as well as English. Other first generation Japanese American parents were worried that their child might go through the same discrimination when going to school so they gave them the choice to either go back to Japan to be educated, or to stay in America with their parents and study both languages.[12][page needed] Anti-Japanese sentiment during World War I resulted in public efforts to close Japanese-language schools. The 1927 Supreme Court case Farrington v. Tokushige protected the Japanese American community's right to have Japanese language private institutions. During the internment of Japanese Americans in World War II many Japanese schools were closed. After the war many Japanese schools reopened.[13]
There are primary school-junior high school Japanese international schools within the United States. Some are classified as nihonjin gakkō or Japanese international schools operated by Japanese associations,[14] and some are classified as Shiritsu zaigai kyōiku shisetsu[disambiguation needed] (私立在外教育施設) or overseas branches of Japanese private schools.[15] They are: Seigakuin Atlanta International School, Chicago Futabakai Japanese School, Japanese School of Guam, Nishiyamato Academy of California near Los Angeles, Japanese School of New Jersey, and New York Japanese School. A boarding senior high school, Keio Academy of New York, is near New York City. It is a Shiritsu zaigai kyōiku shisetsu.[15]
There are also supplementary Japanese educational institutions (hoshū jugyō kō) that hold Japanese classes on weekends. They are located in several US cities.[16] The supplementary schools target Japanese nationals and second-generation Japanese Americans living in the United States. There are also Japanese heritage schools for third generation and beyond Japanese Americans.[17] Rachel Endo of Hamline University,[18] the author of "Realities, Rewards, and Risks of Heritage-Language Education: Perspectives from Japanese Immigrant Parents in a Midwestern Community," wrote that the heritage schools "generally emphasize learning about Japanese American historical experiences and Japanese culture in more loosely defined terms".[19]
Tennessee Meiji Gakuin High School and International Bilingual School were full-time Japanese schools that were formerly in existence.
Intermarriage[edit]






This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (February 2008) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Before the 1960s, the trend of Japanese Americans marrying partners outside their racial or ethnic group was generally low, as well a great many traditional Issei parents encouraged Nisei to marry only within their ethnic/cultural group. Arrangements to purchase and invite picture brides from Japan to relocate and marry Issei or Nisei males was commonplace.[citation needed]
In California and other western states until the end of World War II, there were attempts to make it illegal for Japanese and other Asian Americans to marry European Americans, but those laws were declared unconstitutional by the U.S. Supreme Court, like the anti-miscegenation laws which prevented European Americans from marrying African Americans in the 1960s.
According to a 1990 statistical survey by the Japan Society of America, the Sansei or third generations have an estimated 20 to 30 percent out-of-group marriage, while the 4th generation or Yonsei approaches nearly 50 percent.
During the World War II Internment era, the U.S. Executive Order 9066 had an inclusion of orphaned infants with "one drop of Japanese blood" (as explained in a letter by one official) or the order stated anyone at least one-sixteenth Japanese (descended from any intermarriage) lends credence to the argument that the measures were racially motivated, rather than a military necessity.
There were sizable numbers of Korean-Japanese, Chinese-Japanese, Filipino-Japanese, Mexican-Japanese, Native Hawaiian-Japanese and Cherokee-Japanese in California according to the 1940 U.S. Census who were eligible for internment as "Japanese" to indicate the first stage of widespread intermarriage of Japanese Americans, including those who passed as "white" or half-Asian/European.
Religion[edit]
Japanese Americans practice a wide range of religions, including Mahayana Buddhism (Jōdo Shinshū, Jōdo-shū, Nichiren, Shingon, and Zen forms being most prominent) their majority faith, Shinto, and Christianity. In many ways, due to the longstanding nature of Buddhist and Shinto practices in Japanese society, many of the cultural values and traditions commonly associated with Japanese tradition have been strongly influenced by these religious forms.
A large number of the Japanese American community continue to practice Buddhism in some form, and a number of community traditions and festivals continue to center around Buddhist institutions. For example, one of the most popular community festivals is the annual Obon Festival, which occurs in the summer, and provides an opportunity to reconnect with their customs and traditions and to pass these traditions and customs to the young. These kinds of festivals are mostly popular in communities with large populations of Japanese Americans, such as Southern California and Hawaii. It should be noted however, that a reasonable number of Japanese people both in and out of Japan are secular, as Shinto and Buddhism are most often practiced by rituals such as marriages or funerals, and not through faithful worship, as defines religion for many Americans.
Many Japanese Americans practice Christianity. Among mainline denominations the Presbyterians have long been active. The First Japanese Presbyterian Church of San Francisco opened in 1885.[20] There is also the Japanese Evangelical Missionary Society (JEMS) formed in the 1950s. It operates Asian American Christian Fellowships (AACF) programs on university campuses, especially in California.[21] The Japanese language ministries are fondly known as "Nichigo" in Japanese American Christian communities. The newest trend includes Asian American members who do not have a Japanese heritage.[22]
Celebrations[edit]
An important annual festival for Japanese Americans is the Obon Festival, which happens in July or August of each year. Across the country, Japanese Americans gather on fair grounds, churches and large civic parking lots and commemorate the memory of their ancestors and their families through folk dances and food. Carnival booths are usually set up so Japanese American children have the opportunity to play together.
Japanese American celebrations tend to be more sectarian in nature and focus on the community-sharing aspects.




A nebuta float during Nisei Week in Los Angeles






Kazari streamers hung during the Tanabata festival in Los Angeles' Little Tokyo






Bon Odori in Seattle






A kagami mochi display for the upcoming Japanese New Year in San Diego's Nijiya Market




Major celebrations in the United States

Date
Name
Region


January 1
Shōgatsu New Year's Celebration
Nationwide


February
Japanese Heritage Fair
Honolulu, HI


February to March
Cherry Blossom Festival
Honolulu, HI


March 3
Hinamatsuri (Girls' Day)
Hawaii


March
Honolulu Festival
Honolulu, HI


March
Hawaiʻi International Taiko Festival
Honolulu, HI


March
International Cherry Blossom Festival
Macon, GA


March to April
National Cherry Blossom Festival
Washington, DC


April
Northern California Cherry Blossom Festival
San Francisco, CA


April
Pasadena Cherry Blossom Festival
Pasadena, CA


April
Seattle Cherry Blossom Festival
Seattle, WA


May 5
Tango no Sekku (Boys' Day)
Hawaii


May
Shinnyo-En Toro-Nagashi (Memorial Day Floating Lantern Ceremony)
Honolulu, HI


June
Pan-Pacific Festival Matsuri in Hawaiʻi
Honolulu, HI


July 7
Tanabata (Star Festival)
Nationwide


July–August
Obon Festival
Nationwide


August
Nihonmachi Street Fair
San Francisco, CA


August
Nisei Week
Los Angeles, CA



Politics[edit]
Japanese Americans have shown strong support for candidates in both political parties. Shortly prior to the 2004 US presidential election, Japanese Americans narrowly favored Democrat John Kerry by a 42% to 38% margin over Republican George W. Bush.[23] In the 2008 US presidential election, the National Asian American Survey found that Japanese American favored Democrat Barack Obama by a 62% to 16% margin over Republican John McCain, while 22% were still undecided.[24]
Genetics[edit]
The distribution of the Y-chromosome among Japanese males is a lot different from the males of neighboring countries, such as in Taiwanese males. The Y chromosome is directly correlated to Asian populations, especially in Japanese Americans. The chromosome addition of Y Alu polymorphic element is only displayed in Japanese American men. People of Japanese descent show the highest frequency of the haplogroup O3a5. Haplogroups are groups of genetic populations that share a common ancestor, paternally or maternally. The frequency of this haplogroup is about 5% higher than its frequency in other Asian groups such as Koreans, Manchus, and other Northeast Asians. The Japanese DNA sequence consists of 24.2% Korean, 16.1% Okinawa, 4.8% Uniquely Japanese, 25.8% Chinese, 8.1% Ainu, and 21% Unidentified. With the Ainu, there has been research that that group were descendants of the caucasian group. The Ainu people were the key to the Japanese genetic origins because researchers found an exact DNA match with the Ainu and the Jomon Japanese to conclude the Ainu rooted all the way back to the Jomon.[25] From mainland Japanese people, the MtDNA haplogroup frequencies are most occurring in the D4 haplogroup, with about 33%, with the second largest frequency in the B4 haplogroup, containing about 9%, and the third largest frequency in the M7a haplogroup, occurring at about 8%. The rest of the other haplogroup frequencies are much smaller than D4, with frequencies ranging from about 3-5%, consisting of mostly N9a, M8, and M9 haplogroups. Between the different Japanese populations, the Yayoi population has the highest haplogroup frequencies of the D4 haplogroup. The Jomon Japanese group has the highest frequency of the N9b haplogroup. In modern Japanese Americans, the highest haplogroup frequency is in the D4 haplogroup, the same as the Yayoi Japanese population. In Okinawa Japanese populations, the highest frequency of haplogroups is the D haplogroup, with the M7a haplogroup frequency directly behind. Of the Ainu Japanese population, the highest haplogroup frequency occurs in the G haplogroup, with an even distribution of frequency in the M7a and Y haplogroups. Lastly, for mainland Japanese populations, the D haplogroup presents the highest frequency.[26][27] In Japanese Americans, the biggest components are Chinese, Korean, and Okinawan. People of Japanese descent show two pre-Yayoi ancestral Y chromosome lineages descended from Paleolithic people who had been isolated on the mainland of Japan. Studies of the mitochondrial component of Japanese American genes of haplogroup M12 shows a direct correlation of Japanese haplotypes with Tibetans. Other haplotypes that early descents of Japanese people were thought to be carried into include C-M8, which is another Y-chromosome haplotype. Also going back to the Jomon, that gene is displayed in high frequencies in people of Japanese descent. The estimated percentage of this type of gene in Japanese Americans is about 34.7%. The highest frequencies occur in Okinawans and Hokkaidos.[28] Overall, the genetic makeup of Japanese Americans show very mixed origins of genes, all due to the result of migrations of the Japanese ancestors in the past.
Risk for inherited diseases[edit]
Studies have looked into the risk factors that are more prone to Japanese Americans, specifically in hundreds of family generations of Nisei (The generation of people born in North America, Latin America, Hawaii, or any country outside Japan either to at least one Issei or one non-immigrant Japanese parent) second-generation pro-bands (A person serving as the starting point for the genetic study of a family, used in medicine and psychiatry). The risk factors for genetic diseases in Japanese Americans include coronary heart disease and diabetes. One study, called the Japanese American Community Diabetes Study that started in 1994 and went through 2003, involved the pro-bands taking part to test whether the increased risk of diabetes among Japanese Americans is due to the effects of Japanese Americans having a more westernized lifestyle due to the many differences between the United States of America and Japan. One of the main goals of the study was to create an archive of DNA samples which could be used to identify which diseases are more susceptible in Japanese Americans. Concerns with these studies of the risks of inherited diseases in Japanese Americans is that information pertaining to the genetic relationship may not be consistent with the reported biological family information given of Nisei second generation pro-bands.[29] Also, research has been put on concerning apolipoprotein E genotypes; this polymorphism has three alleles (*e2, *e3, and *e4)and was determined from research because of its known association with increased cholesterol levels and risk of coronary heart disease in Japanese Americans. Specifically too, the apolipoprotein *e4 allele is linked to Alzheimer’s disease as well. Also, there is increased coronary heart disease in Japanese-American men with a mutation in the cholesterol ester transfer protein gene despite having increased levels of HDL. By definition, HDL are plasma high density lipoproteins that show a genetic relationship with coronary heart disease (CHD). The cholesterol ester transfer protein(CETP) helps the transfer of cholesterol esters from lipoproteins to other lipoproteins in the human body. It plays a fundamental role in the reverse transport of cholesterol to the liver, which is why a mutation in this can lead to coronary heart disease. Studies have shown that the CETP is linked to increased HDL levels. There is a very common pattern of two different cholesterol ester transfer protein gene mutations (D442G, 5.1%; intron 14G:A, 0.5%) found in about 3,469 Japanese American men. This was based off a program called the Honolulu Heart Program. The mutations correlated with decreased CETP levels (-35%) and increased HDL cholesterol levels (+10% for D442G). The relative risk of CHD was 1.43 in men with mutations (P<0.05), and after research found for CHD risk factors, the relative risk went up to 1.55 (P=0.02); after further adjustments for HDL levels, the relative risk went up again to 1.68 (P=0.008). Genetic CETP deficiency is an independent risk factor for coronary heart disease, which is due mainly to increased CHD risks in Japanese American men with the D442G mutation and lipoprotein cholesterol levels between 41 and 60 mg/dl.[30] With research and investigations, the possibility of finding “bad genes” denounces the Japanese Americans and will be associated only with Japanese American ancestry, leading to other issues the Japanese Americans had to deal with in the past such as discrimination and prejudice.[31]
Japanese Americans by state[edit]




This section needs expansion. You can help by adding to it. (June 2013)



California[edit]
See also: History of the Japanese in Los Angeles and History of the Japanese in San Francisco
In the early 1900s, Japanese Americans established fishing communities on Terminal Island and in San Diego.[32] By 1923, there were two thousand Japanese fishermen sailing out of Los Angeles Harbor.[33] By the 1930s, legislation was passed that attempted to limit Japanese fishermen. Still, areas like San Francisco's Japan Town managed to thrive.
Due to the internment of Japanese Americans during World War II, historically Japanese areas fell into disrepair or became adopted by other minority groups (in the case of Black and Latino populations in Little Tokyo). Boats owned by Japanese Americans were confiscated by the U.S. Navy.[34] One of the vessels owned by a Japanese American, the Alert, built in 1930,[35] became YP-264 in December 1941,[32] and was finally struck from the Naval Vessel Register in 2014.[36] When Japanese Americans returned from internment, many settled in neighborhoods where they set up their own community centers in order to feel accepted. Today, many have been renamed cultural centers and focus on the sharing of Japanese culture with local community members, especially in the sponsorship of Obon festivals.[37]
The city of Torrance in Greater Los Angeles has headquarters of Japanese automakers and offices of other Japanese companies. Because of the abundance of Japanese restaurants and other cultural offerings are in the city, and Willy Blackmore of L.A. Weekly wrote that Torrance was "essentially Japan's 48th prefecture".[38]
Connecticut[edit]
The Japanese School of New York is located in Greenwich, Connecticut in Greater New York City; it had formerly been located in New York City.
Georgia[edit]
The Seigakuin Atlanta International School is located in Peachtree Corners in Greater Atlanta.
Hawaii[edit]
Main article: Japanese in Hawaii
Illinois[edit]
As of 2011 there is a Japanese community in Arlington Heights, near Chicago. Jay Shimotake, the president of the Mid America Japanese Club, an organization located in Arlington Heights, said "Arlington Heights is a very convenient location, and Japanese people in the business environment know it's a nice location surrounding O'Hare airport."[39] The Chicago Futabakai Japanese School is located in Arlington Heights. The Mitsuwa Marketplace, a shopping center owned by Japanese, opened around 1981. Many Japanese companies have their US headquarters in nearby Hoffman Estates and Schaumburg.[39]
Michigan[edit]
As of April 2013, the largest Japanese national population in Michigan is in Novi, with 2,666 Japanese residents, and the next largest populations are respectively in Ann Arbor, West Bloomfield Township, Farmington Hills, and Battle Creek. The state has 481 Japanese employment facilities providing 35,554 local jobs. 391 of them are in Southeast Michigan, providing 20,816 jobs, and the 90 in other regions in the state provide 14,738 jobs. The Japanese Direct Investment Survey of the Consulate-General of Japan, Detroit stated that over 2,208 more Japanese residents were employed in the State of Michigan as of October 1, 2012, than had been in 2011.[40]
New Jersey[edit]
As of March 2011 about 2,500 Japanese Americans combined live in Edgewater and Fort Lee; this is the largest concentration of Japanese Americans in the state.[41] The New Jersey Japanese School is located in Oakland.
Virginia[edit]
There are about 5,500 Japanese Americans in Northern Virginia, representing the majority of Japanese Americans in the state and the multi-state Baltimore-Washington metropolitan area. A small, but relatively high number of Japanese Americans can be found areas surrounding the University of Virginia and Virginia Tech.
Neighborhoods and communities[edit]






This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (June 2011) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



See also: Japantown and List of U.S. cities with large Japanese-American populations
The West Coast[edit]

Hawaii:

See also: Japanese in Hawaii


California:





Little Tokyo Village in Los Angeles' Little Tokyo





Southern California:

Los Angeles, includes the Little Tokyo section
Anaheim and Orange County[42]
Cerritos, Fullerton and adjacent cities
Fontana in the Inland Empire
Gardena in Los Angeles' South Bay area
Long Beach, California – historic Japanese fisheries presence in Terminal Island
Pasadena in the Los Angeles' San Gabriel Valley
Palm Desert, the Japanese also developed the year-round agricultural industries in the Coachella Valley and Imperial Valley
Sawtelle, California, in West Los Angeles
Torrance in Los Angeles' South Bay area


San Diego area:

University City
Chula Vista
Japanese community center in Vista in North County, one of two of its kind in Southern California


Central Valley, California region:

Bakersfield / Kern County.
Fresno, 5% of county residents have Japanese ancestry
Merced
Stockton
Butte County
Sutter County









Miyako Mall in San Francisco's Japantown





San Francisco Bay Area, the main concentration of Nisei and Sansei in the 20th century:

Alameda County, concentrated and historic populations in the cities of Alameda, Berkeley, Fremont, Oakland, and Hayward
Contra Costa County, concentrated in Walnut Creek
San Mateo County, especially Daly City and Pacifica
San Jose, has one of the three remaining officially recognized Japantowns in North America
Santa Clara County, concentrated in Cupertino, Palo Alto, Santa Clara, and Sunnyvale
San Francisco, notably in the Japantown district, the largest Japanese community in North America[43]
Santa Cruz County


Monterey County, especially Salinas, California
Sacramento and the neighborhoods of Florin and Walnut Grove







Uwajimaya Village in Seattle



Washington State:

Seattle area
Bellevue
Redmond
Tacoma


Puget Sound region (San Juan Islands) have Japanese fisheries for over a century
Skagit Valley of Washington
Yakima Valley, Washington
Chehalis Valley of Washington
Oregon:

Portland and surrounding area
Willamette Valley


Idaho:

Boise Area
Meridian
Nampa
Caldwell


Arizona:

Phoenix Area, notably a section of Grand Avenue in Northwest Phoenix, and Maryvale
Las Vegas Area, with a reference of Japanese farmers on Bonzai Slough, Arizona near Needles, California
Southern Arizona, part of the "exclusion area" for Japanese internment during World War II along with the Pacific coast states
Yuma County, Arizona



Outside the West Coast[edit]
On the East Coast of the United States, the New York metropolitan area has the highest number of Japanese Americans, followed by the Washington metropolitan area.[44]

Arlington, Virginia and Alexandria, Virginia (the Northern Virginia region)
Bergen County, New Jersey
Boise, Idaho
Boone County, Kentucky
Boston, Massachusetts
Cambridge, Massachusetts
Chicago, Illinois and suburbs:

Arlington Heights
Buffalo Grove
Evanston
Elk Grove Heights and nearby Elk Grove Village
Kane County
Naperville
Schaumburg
Skokie
Wilmette


Denver, Colorado, note Sakura Square
Gallup, New Mexico, in World War II the city fought to prevent the internment of its 800 Japanese residents
Grand Prairie, Texas (the Dallas-Fort Worth Metroplex area)
Greeley, Colorado
New York City, New York, according to the Japanese Embassy of the USA, over 100,000 persons of Japanese ancestry live in the NYC metro area, including South Shore (Long Island) and Hudson Valley; Fairfield County, Connecticut and Northern New Jersey
Columbus, Ohio
Novi, Michigan
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania with the suburbs of Chester County
Pueblo, Colorado
Salem, New Jersey and Cherry Hill, New Jersey (see Delaware Valley)
Seabrook Farms, New Jersey[45]
Salt Lake City, Utah
Washington, DC

Notable people[edit]
For a more comprehensive list, see List of Japanese Americans.
Politics[edit]




Senator Inouye of Hawaii was the President pro tempore of the United States Senate and the highest ranking Asian American in congressional history.


After the Territory of Hawaiʻi's statehood in 1959, Japanese American political empowerment took a step forward with the election of Daniel K. Inouye to Congress. Spark Matsunaga was elected to the US House of Representatives in 1963, and in 1965 Patsy Mink became the first Asian American woman elected to the United States Congress. Inouye, Matsunaga, and Mink's success led to the gradual acceptance of Japanese American leadership on the national stage, culminating in the appointments of Eric Shinseki and Norman Y. Mineta, the first Japanese American military chief of staff and federal cabinet secretary, respectively.
Japanese American members of the United States House of Representatives have included Daniel K. Inouye, Spark Matsunaga, Patsy Mink, Norman Mineta, Bob Matsui, Pat Saiki, Mike Honda, Doris Matsui, Mazie Hirono, Mark Takano, and Mark Takai. Japanese American members of the United States Senate have included Daniel K. Inouye, Samuel I. Hayakawa, Spark Matsunaga, and Mazie Hirono. In 2010, Inouye was sworn in as President Pro Tempore making him the highest-ranking Asian-American politician in American history.
George Ariyoshi served as the Governor of Hawaiʻi from 1974 to 1986. He was the first American of Asian descent to be elected governor of a state of the United States. David Ige is the current governor of Hawaii and has served in that office since 2014.
Science and technology[edit]




Yoichiro Nambu, the 2008 Nobel Laureate in Physics


Many Japanese Americans have also gained prominence in science and technology. In 1979, biochemist Harvey Itano became the first Japanese American elected to the United States National Academy of Sciences.
Charles J. Pedersen won the 1987 Nobel Prize in Chemistry for his methods of synthesizing crown ethers. Yoichiro Nambu won the 2008 Nobel Prize in Physics for his work on quantum chromodynamics and spontaneous symmetry breaking. Shuji Nakamura won the 2014 Nobel Prize in Physics for the invention of efficient blue light-emitting diodes.
Michio Kaku is a theoretical physicist specializing in string field theory, and a well-known science popularizer. Ellison Onizuka became the first Asian American astronaut and was the mission specialist aboard Challenger at the time of its explosion. Immunologist Santa J. Ono became the first Japanese American president of a major research university University of Cincinnati and subsequently University of British Columbia.
Bell M. Shimada was a notable fisheries scientist of the 1950s after whom the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration research ship NOAAS Bell M. Shimada (R 227) and the Shimada Seamount in the Pacific Ocean were named.[46][47]
Art and literature[edit]
In the arts, Minoru Yamasaki was the architect of the World Trade Center. Artist Sueo Serisawa helped establish the California Impressionist style of painting. Other influential Japanese American artists include Chiura Obata, Isamu Noguchi, Kenjiro Nomura, George Tsutakawa, George Nakashima, and Hideo Noda.
Japanese American recipients of the American Book Award include Milton Murayama, Ronald Phillip Tanaka, Miné Okubo, Keiho Soga, Taisanboku Mori, Sojin Takei, Muin Ozaki, Toshio Mori, William Minoru Hohri, Karen Tei Yamashita, Sheila Hamanaka, Lawson Fusao Inada, Ronald Takaki, Kimiko Hahn, Lois-Ann Yamanaka, Ruth Ozeki, Hiroshi Kashiwagi, and Yuko Taniguchi. Hisaye Yamamoto received an American Book Award for Lifetime Achievement in 1986.
Cynthia Kadohata won the Newbery Medal in 2005.
Poet laureate of San Francisco Janice Mirikitani has published three volumes of poems. Lawson Fusao Inada was named poet laureate of the state of Oregon.
Michi Weglyn and Ronald Takaki received Anisfield-Wolf Book Awards in 1977 and 1994 respectively.
Tomie Arai's work is part of permanent collection of Museum of Modern Art, Library of Congress, and the Museum of Chinese in the Americas.
Michiko Kakutani is an American Pulitzer Prize-winning literary critic and former chief book critic for The New York Times.
Music[edit]
Classical violinist Midori Gotō is a recipient of the prestigious Avery Fisher Prize, while world-renowned violinist Anne Akiko Meyers received an Avery Fisher career grant in 1993. Juno Award-nominated classical violinist Hidetaro Suzuki was the concertmaster of the Indianapolis Symphony Orchestra from 1978 to 2005.
Other notable Japanese American musicians include singer, actress and Broadway star Pat Suzuki; rapper Mike Shinoda of Linkin Park and Fort Minor; rapper Kikuo Nishi aka "KeyKool" of The Visionaries; Hiro Yamamoto, original bassist of Soundgarden; ukulele player Jake Shimabukuro; guitarist James Iha of The Smashing Pumpkins fame; singer-songwriter Rachael Yamagata; bilingual singer-songwriter Emi Meyer; and Trivium lead vocalist and rhythm guitarist Matt Heafy. Marc Okubo, guitarist of Veil of Maya, is of Japanese descent.
Singer-songwriter and composer Mari Iijima is a Japanese expat currently living in the United States. J-Pop singers Hikaru Utada and Joe Inoue were both born in the United States but gained their fame in Japan.
Sports[edit]
Japanese Americans first made an impact in Olympic sports in the late 1940s and in the 1950s. Harold Sakata won a weightlifting silver medal in the 1948 Olympics, while Japanese Americans Tommy Kono (weightlifting), Yoshinobu Oyakawa (100-meter backstroke), and Ford Konno (1500-meter freestyle) each won gold and set Olympic records in the 1952 Olympics. Konno won another gold and silver swimming medal at the same Olympics and added a silver medal in 1956, while Kono set another Olympic weightlifting record in 1956. Also at the 1952 Olympics, Evelyn Kawamoto won two bronze medals in swimming.
Several decades later, Eric Sato won gold (1988) and bronze (1992) medals in volleyball, while his sister Liane Sato won bronze in the same sport in 1992. Bryan Clay (hapa) won the decathlon gold medal in the 2008 Olympics, the silver medal in the 2004 Olympics, and was the sport's 2005 world champion. Apolo Anton Ohno (hapa) won eight Olympic medals in short-track speed skating (two gold) in 2002, 2006, and 2010, as well as a world cup championship. Brothers Kawika and Erik Shoji won bronze medals in volleyball in 2016.
In figure skating, Kristi Yamaguchi, a fourth-generation Japanese American, won three national championship titles (one in singles, two in pairs), two world titles, and the 1992 Olympic Gold medal. Rena Inoue, a Japanese immigrant to America who later became a US citizen, competed at the 2006 Olympics in pair skating for the United States. Kyoko Ina, who was born in Japan, but raised in the United States, competed for the United States in singles and pairs, and was a multiple national champion and an Olympian with two different partners. Mirai Nagasu won the 2008 U.S. Figure Skating Championships at the age of 14 and became the second youngest woman to ever win that title.
In distance running, Miki (Michiko) Gorman won the Boston and New York City marathons twice in the 1970s. A former American record holder at the distance, she is the only woman to win both races twice, and is one of only two women to win both marathons in the same year.
In professional sports, Wataru Misaka broke the NBA color barrier in the 1947–48 season, when he played for the New York Knicks. Misaka also played a key role in Utah's NCAA and NIT basketball championships in 1944 and 1947. Wally Kaname Yonamine was a professional running back for the San Francisco 49ers in 1947. Rex Walters, whose mother was Japanese, played in the NBA from 1993 to 2000. Lindsey Yamasaki was the first Asian American to play in the WNBA and finished off her NCAA career with the third-most career 3-pointers at Stanford University.
Hikaru Nakamura became the youngest American ever to earn the titles of National Master (age 10) and International Grandmaster (age 15) in chess. In 2004, at the age of 16, he won the U.S. Chess Championship for the first time. He later won two other times.
Entertainment and media[edit]




1957 Academy Award winner Miyoshi Umeki


Miyoshi Umeki won the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress in 1957. Actors Sessue Hayakawa, Mako Iwamatsu, and Pat Morita were nominated for Academy Awards in 1957, 1966, and 1984 respectively. Chris Tashima won the Academy Award for Best Live Action Short Film in 1997.
Jack Soo, born Goro Suzuki, (Valentine's Day and Barney Miller), George Takei (Star Trek fame) and Pat Morita (Happy Days and The Karate Kid) helped pioneer acting roles for Asian Americans while playing secondary roles on the small screen during the 1960s and 1970s. In 1976, Morita also starred in Mr. T and Tina, the first American sitcom centered on a person of Asian descent. Keiko Yoshida appeared on the TV show ZOOM on PBS Kids. Gregg Araki (director of independent films) is also Japanese American.
Shin Koyamada had a leading role in the Warner Bros. epic movie The Last Samurai and Disney Channel movie franchise Wendy Wu: Homecoming Warrior and TV series Disney Channel Games. Masi Oka played a prominent role in the NBC series Heroes, Grant Imahara appeared on the Discovery Channel series MythBusters and Derek Mio appeared in the NBC series Day One.
Japanese Americans now anchor TV newscasts in markets all over the country. Notable anchors include Tritia Toyota, Adele Arakawa, David Ono, Kent Ninomiya, Lori Matsukawa, and Rob Fukuzaki.[48]
Works about Japanese Americans[edit]
See also: the categories Japanese-American internment films, and Japanese-American internment books.

In 2010 TBS produced a five-part, ten-hour fictional Japanese language miniseries, Japanese Americans. This featured many of the major events and themes of the Issei and Nisei experience, including emigration, racism, picture brides, farming, pressure due to the China and Pacific wars, internment, a key character who serves in the 442nd, and the ongoing redefinition in identity of what it means to be Japanese and American.[49]

See also[edit]


Asian Americans portal
Japan portal
United States portal



Chicago Shimpo
Day of Remembrance (Japanese Americans)
Japanese American Citizens League
Japanese American National Library
Japanese American National Museum
Japanese American service in World War II

442nd Infantry Regiment, and the related 522nd Field Artillery Battalion
100th Infantry Battalion
Military Intelligence Service


List of Japanese American Servicemen and Servicewomen in World War II
Japanese Community Youth Council (San Francisco)
Japanese in New York City
Japanese Brazilians
Japanese Peruvians
Japanese Filipinos
Japanese Canadians
Japanese British
Japanese Mexicans
Model minority
Nisei Baseball Research Project
Pacific Movement of the Eastern World

References[edit]


^ a b "ASIAN ALONE OR IN ANY COMBINATION BY SELECTED GROUPS: 2015". U.S. Census Bureau. Retrieved 15 October 2015. 
^ "Asian Americans: A Mosaic of Faiths". Pew Research Center's Religion & Public Life Project. July 19, 2012. Retrieved March 17, 2015. 
^ "Japanese Americans - Pew Forum on Religion & Public Life". Retrieved March 17, 2015. 
^ Data Access and Dissemination Systems (DADS). "American FactFinder - Results". Retrieved March 17, 2015. 
^ "Redirect". Retrieved March 17, 2015. 
^ "Toyota built Torrance into the second-largest home of Japanese Americans. Now, it's leaving". 
^ "Civil Liberties Act of 1988". Archived from the original on January 17, 2012. 
^ "Euphemisms, Concentration Camps And The Japanese Internment". 
^ Doi, Mary L. "A Transformation of Ritual: The Nisei 60th Birthday." Journal of Cross-Cultural Gerontology. Vol. 6, No. 2 (April, 1991).
^ Le, Cuong. "Socioeconomic Statistics & Semographics". Retrieved 2012-04-17. 
^ Endo, R. (Hamline University). "Realities, Rewards, and Risks of Heritage-Language Education: Perspectives from Japanese Immigrant Parents in a Midwestern Community." Bilingual Research Journal, 2013, Vol.36(3), p.278-294. CITED: p. 279.
^ Ronald T, Takaki (1994). Issei and Nisei: The Settling of Japanese America. New York: Chelsea House. 
^ Endo, R. (Hamline University). "Realities, Rewards, and Risks of Heritage-Language Education: Perspectives from Japanese Immigrant Parents in a Midwestern Community." Bilingual Research Journal, 2013, Vol.36(3), p.278-294. CITED: p. 280.
^ "日本人学校及び補習授業校の児童生徒在籍数等 （平成１４年４月１５日現在）" (). Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology. Retrieved on March 4, 2015. Includes New York, New Jersey, Chicago, and Guam
^ a b "私立在外教育施設一覧" (). Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology. Retrieved on March 1, 2015.
^ "北米の補習授業校一覧（平成25年4月15日現在）." (Archive) Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology. Retrieved on May 5, 2014.
^ Endo, R. (Hamline University). "Realities, Rewards, and Risks of Heritage-Language Education: Perspectives from Japanese Immigrant Parents in a Midwestern Community." Bilingual Research Journal, 2013, Vol.36(3), p.278-294. CITED: p. 281.
^ "Endo Presents and Leads at Conference" (Archive). Hamline University. April 20, 2012. Retrieved on March 4, 2015.
^ Endo, R. (Hamline University). "Realities, Rewards, and Risks of Heritage-Language Education: Perspectives from Japanese Immigrant Parents in a Midwestern Community." Bilingual Research Journal, 2013, Vol.36(3), p.278-294. CITED: p. 282.
^ Brian Niiya (1993). Japanese American History: An A-To-Z Reference from 1868 to the Present. VNR AG. p. 28. ISBN 9780816026807. 
^ Hans Joachim Hillerbrand (2004). The Encyclopedia of Protestantism. Taylor & Francis. p. 197. ISBN 9780203484319. 
^ Robert A. Orsi (1999). Gods of the City: Religion and the American Urban Landscape. Indiana UP. p. 299. ISBN 0253212766. 
^ Lobe, Jim (September 16, 2004). "Asian-Americans lean toward Kerry". AsiaTimes. Archived from the original on June 28, 2011 
^ Wong, Junn, Lee, Ramakrishnan, Janelle, Jane, Taeku, S. Karthick. "Race-Based Considerations and the Obama Vote" (PDF). 2008 National Asian American Survey. CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link)
^ sdfsdflgggdl (2009-01-31), Looking for the Genetic Roots of the Japanese(2/5), retrieved 2016-12-05 
^ "Making sense of DNA data and the origins of the Japanese". Heritage of Japan. 2009-02-27. Retrieved 2016-12-05. 
^ "Genetic structure of the Japanese and the formation of the Ainu population" (PDF). 
^ "Jomon Genes Using DNA, researchers probe the genetic origins of modern Japanese". 
^ "Genetics of the Metabolic Syndrome in Japanese Americans - Full Text View - ClinicalTrials.gov". clinicaltrials.gov. Retrieved 2016-12-05. 
^ Zhong, S; Sharp, D S; Grove, J S; Bruce, C; Yano, K; Curb, J D; Tall, A R (1996-06-15). "Increased coronary heart disease in Japanese-American men with mutation in the cholesteryl ester transfer protein gene despite increased HDL levels". Journal of Clinical Investigation. 97 (12): 2917–2923. doi:10.1172/JCI118751. ISSN 0021-9738. PMC 507389 . PMID 8675707. 
^ Austin, Melissa A. (2002-04-01). "Ethical issues in human genome epidemiology: a case study based on the Japanese American Family Study in Seattle, Washington". American Journal of Epidemiology. 155 (7): 585–592. doi:10.1093/aje/155.7.585. ISSN 0002-9262. PMID 11914185. 
^ a b Felando, August; Medina, Harold (Winter 2012). "The Origins of California' High-Seas Tuna Fleet" (PDF). Journal of San Diego History. San Diego History Center. 58 (1). Retrieved 6 April 2015. 
^ Western Canner and Packer. Miller Freeman Publications of California. 1922. p. 36. 
^ Andrew F. Smith (2012). American Tuna: The Rise and Fall of an Improbable Food. University of California Press. pp. 63–69. ISBN 978-0-520-26184-6. 
^ "San Diego Marine Construction, San Diego CA". Shipbuilding History. 27 June 2014. Retrieved 6 April 2015. 
^ Gary P. Priolo (14 February 2014). "YP-264". NavSource Naval History. Retrieved 6 April 2015. 
^ "A Marker of the Past, a Warning for the Future". The Argonaut Newspaper. 2017-05-04. Retrieved 2017-05-07. 
^ Blackmore, Willy. "Top 10: Japanese Noodles Shops in Torrance." L.A. Weekly. Retrieved on May 10, 2013.
^ a b Selvam, Ashok. "Asian population booming in suburbs." Daily Herald (Arlington Heights, Illinois). March 6, 2011. Retrieved on June 19, 2013.
^ Stone, Cal (April 11, 2013). "State's Japanese employees increasing". Observer & Eccentric. Detroit. Archived from the original on May 5, 2013. Retrieved May 5, 2013. 
^ Stirling, Stephen. "Japanese Americans in Fort Lee, Edgewater describe frantic calls to loved ones in quake's wake." The Star-Ledger. Friday, March 11, 2011. Updated Saturday, March 12, 2011. Retrieved on June 19, 2013.
^ June Casagrande (December 2004). "Holiday Heritage". Orange Coast Magazine. 30 (12): 174–176. 
^ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on December 20, 2009. Retrieved 2011-08-10. 
^ "D.C. region's Asian population is up 60 percent since 2000, census data show". The Washington Post. 
^ Niiya, Brian (1993). Japanese American History. Japanese American National Museum (Los Angeles, Calif.): VNR AG. p. 307. ISBN 0816026807. 
^ "NOAA and the Preserve America Initiative". preserveamerica.noaa.gov. 
^ "NOAA Honors Nisei with Launch of Fisheries Vessel "Bell M. Shimada"". www.nvcfoundation.org. 
^ ""...First male Japanese-American TV anchor in Los Angeles local TV News."". a.abclocal.go.com. Retrieved 2017-02-07. 
^ "Northern California Premiere of '99 Years of Love'". Rafu Shimpo. April 12, 2011 


Further reading[edit]


"Present-Day Immigration with Special Reference to the Japanese," Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science (Jan 1921), pp. 1–232 online 24 articles by experts, mostly about California
Azuma, Eiichiro. "A History of Oregon's Issei, 1880-1952." Oregon Historical Quarterly. Oregon Historical Society. Vol. 94, No. 4, Winter, 1993/1994., pp. 315–367. Available on JStor.
DeWan, George. "Learning How To Stay Japanese In America." Newsday. January 6, 1990. PART 11, Start page NOPGCIT.
Hosokawa, Bill. Nisei, the Quiet Americans (1969).
Inouye, Karen M., “Changing History: Competing Notions of Japanese American Experience, 1942–2006” (PhD dissertation Brown University, 2008). Dissertation Abstracts International No. DA3318331.
Jacobson, Matthew Frye. (2000). Barbarian Virtues: The United States Encounters Foreign Peoples at Home and Abroad, 1876–1917. Hill and Wang, ISBN 978-0-8090-1628-0
Kase, Toyoshi. "Nisei Samurai: Culture and Agency in Three Japanese American Lives." (PhD dissertation 2005). online
Kikumura-Yano, Akemi, ed. "Encyclopedia of Japanese Descendants in the Americas." Walnut Creek, CA: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, 2002.
Lai, Eric, and Dennis Arguelles, eds. "The New Face of Asian Pacific America: Numbers, Diversity, and Change in the 21st century." San Francisco, CA: Asian Week, 2003.
Miyakawa, Tetsuo Scott. East across the Pacific: historical & sociological studies of Japanese immigration & assimilation (ABC-CLIO, 1972).
Moulin, Pierre. (1993). U.S. Samurais in Bruyeres – People of France and Japanese Americans: Incredible story Hawaii CPL Editions. ISBN 2-9599984-0-5
Moulin, Pierre. (2007). Dachau, Holocaust and US Samurais – Nisei Soldiers first in Dachau Authorhouse Editions. ISBN 978-1-4259-3801-7
Thernstrom, Stephan; Ann Orlov; Oscar Handlin (1980). "Japanese". Harvard Encyclopedia of American Ethnic Groups (2 ed.). Harvard University Press. pp. 561–562. ISBN 0-674-37512-2. 
Tsuchiya, Tomoko, “Interracial Marriages between American Soldiers and Japanese Women at the Beginning of the Cold War,” Journal of American and Canadian Studies (Tokyo) (no. 29, 2011), 59–84
"United States Census 2000". United States Census Bureau. April 2000. Retrieved 2007-03-16. 

In Hawaii[edit]
Further information: Japanese in Hawaii § Further reading

Asato, Noriko (September 2005). Teaching Mikadoism: The Attack on Japanese Language Schools in Hawaii, California, and Washington, 1919-1927. Honolulu: University of Hawaii. 
Kono, Hideto; Sinoto, Kazuko (2000). "Observations of the first Japanese to Land in Hawai'i" (PDF). The Hawaiian Journal of History. 34: 49–62. 
Kawakami, Barbara F. Japanese immigrant clothing in Hawaii, 1885-1941 (University of Hawaii Press, 1995).
Morgan, William. Pacific Gibraltar: U.S.-Japanese Rivalry over the Annexation of Hawai'i, 1885-1898 (Naval Institute Press, 2011).
Morimoto, Toyotomi (1997). Japanese Americans and Cultural Continuity: Maintaining Language through Heritage. Routledge. 
Nordyke, Eleanor C., and Y. Scott Matsumoto. "Japanese in Hawaii: a Historical and Demographic Perspective." (1977). online
Takagi, Mariko (1987). Moral Education in Pre-War Japanese Language Schools in Hawaii. Honolulu: University of Hawaii. 


External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Japanese Americans.



"Japanese Americans". (Archive) State of California.
Japanese American National Museum
Embassy of Japan in Washington, DC
Japanese American Citizens League
Japanese Cultural Center of Hawaii
Japanese Cultural & Community Center of Northern California
Japanese American Community and Cultural Center of Southern California
Japanese American Historical Society
Densho: The Japanese American Legacy Project
Japanese American Museum of San Jose, California
Japanese American Network
Japanese-American's own companies in USA
Japanese American Relocation Digital Archives
Online Archive of the Japanese American Relocation during World War II
Photo Exhibit of Japanese American community in Florida
Nikkei Federation
Discover Nikkei
Summary of a panel discussion on changing Japanese American identities
The War: Fighting for Democracy: Japanese Americans
“The War Relocation Centers of World War II: When Fear Was Stronger than Justice”, a National Park Service Teaching with Historic Places (TwHP) lesson plan
U.S. Government interned Japanese from Latin America
Short radio episode Baseball from "Lil' Yokohama" by Toshio Mori, 1941. California Legacy Project.
American Life in the 20th Century in Washington State - University of Washington Digital Collections







v
t
e


Japanese Americans and Japanese expatriates in the United States by location






Chicago
Columbus, Ohio
Denver
Detroit
Hawaii
Houston
Los Angeles
New York City
San Francisco
Seattle






List of U.S. cities with large Japanese-American populations










v
t
e


 Japanese diaspora and Japanese expatriates



Africa



Egypt
South Africa





Americas




Caribbean



Cuba
Dominican Republic
Haiti
Jamaica





Elsewhere



Argentina
Bolivia
Brazil (São Paulo City)
Canada

Montreal
Toronto


Chile
Colombia
Mexico (Mexico City)
Paraguay
Peru
Uruguay
Venezuela
United States

By state and/or city










Asia



China

Hong Kong
Shanghai


India
Indonesia
North Korea
Malaysia
Nepal
Pakistan
Philippines
Singapore
Sri Lanka
Thailand
United Arab Emirates
Vietnam





Europe



Belgium (Brussels)
France (Paris)
Germany (Düsseldorf)
Netherlands
Russia
Spain
Turkey
United Kingdom (London)





Oceania




Micronesia



Federated States of Micronesia
Kiribati
Marshall Islands
Palau





Elsewhere



Australia

Melbourne


Hawaii (United States)
New Caledonia (France)
New Zealand
Papua New Guinea
Solomon Islands








Generations



Issei (immigrants)
Nisei (second generation)
Sansei (third generation)
Yonsei (fourth generation)
Gosei (fifth generation)





Related articles



Dekasegi
Foreign-born Japanese
The Japanese and Europe
The Japanese in Latin America
Japantown
Hoshū jugyō kō (list)
New Worlds, New Lives
Nihonjin gakkō












v
t
e


Ethnic groups in Hawaii



Africa



African





Americas



Puerto Rican





Asia



Asian
Chinese
Filipino
Japanese
Korean





Europe



Haole
White and European
British
French
German
Greek
Portuguese
Spanish





Oceania



Hawaiian
Marshallese
Samoan
Tahitian
Tongan












v
t
e


Asian Americans1, 2



Central Asian3



Mongolian
Uzbek








East Asian



Chinese

Hong Kong
Tibetan4
Fuzhou/Hokchiu
Hokkien/Hoklo/Minnan
Hakka


Japanese

Hawaii


Korean
Taiwanese





South Asian5



Bangladeshi

Bengali


Bhutanese
Indian

Indo-Caribbean
Bengali
Punjabi
Sindhi
Tamil


Nepalese
Pakistani

Baloch
Pashtun
Punjabi
Sindhi


Sri Lankan

Tamil







Southeast Asian



Burmese
Cambodian
Filipino
Hmong
Indonesian
Laotian
Malaysian
Mien
Singaporean
Thai
Vietnamese





Other



Hispanic and Latino

Punjabi Mexican


Multiracial American

Afro-Asian
Amerasian
Eurasian







History



General
Immigration
Military





Topics



Arts and Entertainment
Demographics
Politics
Stereotypes





Religion



Buddhists
Christians

Catholics
Protestants


Hindus
Jainism
Muslims
Sikhs





Regions



California
Hawaii
Maryland
New York City
Puerto Rico
Washington








Notes 

1 The U.S. Census Bureau definition of Asians refers to a person having origins in any of the original peoples of the Far East, Southeast Asia, or the Indian subcontinent. [1][2]
2 The United States Government classified Kalmyks as Asian until 1951, when Kalmyk Americans were reclassified as White Americans.[3]
3 The U.S. Census Bureau considers Mongolians and Uzbeks as Central Asians,[4] but a specific Central Asian American group similar to Middle Eastern American does not yet exist.[5]
4 The U.S. Census Bureau reclassifies anyone identifying as "Tibetan American" as "Chinese American".[6]
5 Bengali Americans may be classified as Bangladeshi or Indian.[7] Punjabi Americans may be classified as Indian or Pakistani.[8] Tamil Americans may be classified as Indian or Sri Lankan.












v
t
e


Demographics of the United States




Demographic history



By economic
and social



Affluence
Educational attainment
Emigration
Home-ownership
Household income
Immigration
Income inequality
Language
LGBT
Middle classes
Personal income
Poverty
Social class
Unemployment by state
Wealth





By religion



Buddhists
Christians

Catholics
Coptics
Protestants


Hindus
Jains
Jews
Muslims

Ahmadiyyas


Neopagans
Non-religious
Rastafaris
Scientologists
Sikhs





By continent
and ethnicity




Africa



African diaspora in the Americas

Afro-Caribbean / West Indian Americans

Bahamian Americans
Belizean Americans
Guyanese Americans
Haitian Americans
Jamaican Americans
Trinidadian and Tobagonian Americans


Black Hispanic and Latino Americans




African immigrants to the United States

Central Africans in the United States
Horn Africans in the United States
North Africans in the United States
Southeast Africans in the United States
Southern Africans in the United States
West Africans in the United States







Asia



Asian Hispanic and Latino Americans


East Asia

Chinese Americans

Hong Kong Americans
Tibetan Americans


Japanese Americans
Korean Americans
Mongolian Americans
Taiwanese Americans




South Asia

Bangladeshi Americans
Bhutanese Americans
Indian Americans
Nepalese Americans
Pakistani Americans
Romani Americans
Sri Lankan Americans




Southeast Asia

Burmese Americans
Cambodian Americans
Filipino Americans
Hmong Americans
Indonesian Americans
Laotian Americans
Malaysian Americans
Singaporean Americans
Thai Americans
Vietnamese Americans




West Asia

Arab Americans
Assyrian Americans
Iranian Americans
Israeli Americans
Jewish Americans







Europe



White Americans

English Americans
French Americans
German Americans
Irish Americans
Italian Americans
Scandinavian Americans
Slavic Americans
Spanish Americans


Non-Hispanic whites
White Hispanic and Latino Americans





Oceania



Pacific Islands Americans

Chamorro Americans
Native Hawaiians
Samoan Americans
Tongan Americans


Euro Oceanic Americans

Australian Americans
New Zealand Americans







North America



Native Americans and Alaska Natives
Canadian Americans
Cuban Americans
Mexican Americans
Puerto Ricans (Stateside)





South America



Hispanic and Latino Americans
Brazilian Americans
Colombian Americans
Ecuadorian Americans





Multiethnic



Melungeon








People of the United States / Americans
American ancestry
Maps of American ancestries
2010 Census
Race and ethnicity in the Census
Race and ethnicity in the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
Racism














						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Japanese_Americans&oldid=816572511"					Categories: Japanese AmericanJapanese-American historyJapanese-American culture in HawaiiHistory of immigration to HawaiiAmerican people of Japanese descentJapanese diaspora by countryAsian-American societyHidden categories: Articles with inconsistent citation formatsCS1 maint: Multiple names: authors listUse mdy dates from April 2012Articles containing Japanese-language textArticles using infobox ethnic group with image parametersAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from October 2011Articles with unsourced statements from October 2013Articles with unsourced statements from April 2011Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from March 2015All articles with links needing disambiguationArticles with links needing disambiguation from June 2017Articles needing additional references from February 2008All articles needing additional referencesArticles with unsourced statements from March 2008Articles to be expanded from June 2013All articles to be expandedArticles using small message boxesArticles needing additional references from June 2011