Not to be confused with Encyclopaedia Judaica.




Cover page from the Jewish Encyclopedia




Part of a series on


Jews and Judaism








Etymology
Who is a Jew?


Jewish peoplehood
Jewish identity







Religion


God in Judaism (names)



Principles of faith
Mitzvot (613)
Halakha
Shabbat
Holidays
Prayer
Tzedakah
Land of Israel
Brit
Bar and Bat Mitzvah
Marriage
Bereavement
Philosophy
Ethics
Kabbalah
Customs
Synagogue
Rabbi









Texts



Tanakh


(Torah
Nevi'im
Ketuvim)





Talmud


(Mishnah
Gemara)





Rabbinic


(Midrash
Tosefta)







Targum
Beit Yosef
Mishneh Torah
Tur
Shulchan Aruch
Zohar









Communities





Ashkenazim
Sephardim
Italkim
Romaniotes
Mizrahim
Cochin
Bene Israel
Beta Israel




Related groups




Bnei Anusim
Lemba
Crimean Karaites
Krymchaks
Samaritans
Crypto-Jews
Mosaic Arabs
Subbotniks











Population



Land of Israel




Old Yishuv
New Yishuv
Israeli Jews




Europe




Austria
Belarus
Bulgaria
Czech Republic
Estonia
France
Georgia
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Italy
Latvia
Lithuania
Moldova
Netherlands
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russia
Spain
Sweden
Ukraine
United Kingdom




Asia




Yemen
Iraq
Iran
Turkey
Cyprus
Syria
Lebanon
Uzbekistan
Azerbaijan
India
China
Indonesia
Vietnam
Japan
Philippines




Africa




Morocco
Algeria
Tunisia
Libya
Egypt
Ethiopia
South Africa
Zimbabwe




North America




United States
Canada




Latin America and Caribbean




Argentina
Bolivia
Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Cuba
Dominican Republic
El Salvador
Guyana
Haiti
Jamaica
Mexico
Paraguay
Puerto Rico
Suriname
Uruguay
Venezuela




Oceania




Australia
Fiji
Guam
New Zealand
Palau






Judaism by country
Lists of Jews
Historical population comparisons








Denominations



Orthodox
Reform
Conservative
Karaite
Reconstructionist
Renewal
Humanistic
Haymanot









Culture



Minyan
Music

Religious
Secular


Wedding
Clothing
Niddah
Pidyon haben
Kashrut
Shidduch
Zeved habat
Conversion to Judaism
Hiloni
Cuisine

Israelite
Israeli
Sephardic
Mizrahi


Literature

Israeli
Yiddish
American


Yiddish theatre
Dance
Humour









Languages



Hebrew (Biblical)
Yiddish
Jewish Koine Greek
Yevanic
Juhuri
Shassi
Judæo-Iranian
Ladino
Ghardaïa Sign
Bukharian
Knaanic
Zarphatic
Italkian
Gruzinic
Judeo-Aramaic
Judeo-Arabic
Judeo-Berber
Judeo-Malayalam









History



Timeline
Leaders
Ancient history


Kingdom of Judah
Temple in Jerusalem
Babylonian captivity
Assyrian captivity
Yehud Medinata
Jerusalem (in Judaism
timeline)
Hasmonean dynasty
Sanhedrin
Schisms
Pharisees
Hellenistic Judaism
Jewish–Roman wars
History of the Jews in the Byzantine Empire
Christianity and Judaism
Hinduism and Judaism
Islamic–Jewish relations
Diaspora
Middle Ages
Golden Age
Sabbateans
Hasidism
Haskalah
Emancipation
Antisemitism
Anti-Judaism
Persecution
The Holocaust
Israel
Land of Israel
Aliyah
Jewish atheism
Baal teshuva
Arab–Israeli conflict









Politics


Politics of Israel

Zionism


(General
Green
Labor
Neo
Religious
Revisionist)







World Agudath Israel
Bundism
Feminism
Jewish left / right









Category: Jews and Judaism
Portal: Judaism
WikiProject Judaism







v
t
e





The Jewish Encyclopedia[n 1] is an English encyclopedia containing over 15,000 articles on the history, culture, and state of Judaism and the Jews up to the early 20th century.[1] It was originally published in 12 volumes by Funk and Wagnalls of New York City between 1901 and 1906 and reprinted in the 1960s by KTAV Publishing House. The work's scholarship is still highly regarded: the American Jewish Archives has called it "the most monumental Jewish scientific work of modern times"[2] and Rabbi Joshua L. Segal said that, "For events prior to 1900, it is considered to offer a level of scholarship superior to either of the more recent Jewish Encyclopedias written in English."[3] It is now in the public domain[n 2] and hosted at various sites around the internet.
The encyclopedia's managing editor was Isidore Singer. The editorial board was chaired by Isaac K. Funk and Frank H. Vizetelly. The other editors participating in all twelve volumes were Cyrus Adler, Gotthard Deutsch, Richard Gottheil, Joseph Jacobs, Kaufmann Kohler, Herman Rosenthal, and Crawford Howell Toy. Morris Jastrow, Jr. and Frederick de Sola Mendes assisted with volumes I & II; Marcus Jastrow with volumes I, II, & III; Louis Ginzberg with the first four volumes; Solomon Schechter with volumes IV through VII; Emil G. Hirsch with volumes IV through XII; and Wilhelm Bacher with volumes VIII through XII. William Popper served as the assistant revision editor and chief of translation for Vols. IV through XII.



Contents


1 History

1.1 Singer’s idea
1.2 Editorial board


2 Content

2.1 Relation to German scholarship


3 Editions

3.1 Russian
3.2 Online


4 See also
5 Notes
6 References

6.1 Citations
6.2 Bibliography


7 Further reading
8 External links



History[edit]
Singer’s idea[edit]
Singer conceived of a Jewish encyclopedia in Europe and proposed creating an “Allgemeine Encyklopädia für Geschichte und Wissenschaft des Judenthums” in 1891. He envisioned twelve volumes, published over ten or fifteen years, and costing fifty dollars as a set. They would contain scientific and unbiased articles on ancient and modern Jewish culture. This proposal received good press coverage and interest from the Brockhaus publishing company. However, after the House of Rothschild in Paris, consulted by Zadoc Kahn, offered to back the project with only 8% of the minimum funds requested by Brockaus, the project was abandoned. Following the Dreyfus affair and associated unpleasantness Singer emigrated to New York City.[4]
Initially believing that American Jews could do little more than provide funding for his project, Singer was impressed by the level of scholarship in the United States. He wrote a new prospectus, changing the title of his planned encyclopedia to “Encyclopedia of the History and Mental Evolution of the Jewish Race”. His radical ecumenism and opposition to orthodoxy upset many of his Jewish readers; nevertheless he attracted the interest of publisher Isaac K. Funk, a Lutheran minister who also believed in integrating Judaism and Christianity. Funk agreed to publish the encyclopedia on the condition that it remain unbiased on issues which might seem unfavorable for Jews. Singer accepted and was established in an office at Funk & Wagnalls on 2 May 1898.[5]
Publication of the prospectus in 1898 created a severe backlash, including accusations of poor scholarship and of subservience to Christians. Kaufmann Kohler and Gotthard Deutsch, writing in American Hebrew, highlighted Singer’s factual errors, and accused him of commercialism and irreligiosity. Now considering that the project could not succeed with Singer at the helm, Funk & Wagnalls appointed an editorial board to oversee creation of the encyclopedia.[6]
Editorial board[edit]
Funk & Wagnalls assembled an editorial board between October 1898 and March 1899. Singer toned down his ideological rhetoric, indicated his desire to collaborate, and changed the work’s proposed title to “Jewish Encyclopedia”. Despite their reservations about Singer, rabbi Gustav Gottheil and Cyrus Adler agreed to join the board, followed by Morris Jastrow, then Frederick de Sola Mendes and two published critics of the project: Kauffmann Kohler and Gotthard Deutsch. Theologian and Presbyterian minister George Foot Moore was added to the board for balance. (Soon after work started, Moore withdrew and was replaced by Baptist minister Crawford Toy.) Last was added the elderly Marcus Jastrow, mostly for his symbolic imprimatur as America's leading Talmudist. In March 1899 the Central Conference of American Rabbis, which had been contemplating a competing project, agreed to discuss collaborating with Funk & Wagnalls—thus securing the position of the Jewish Encyclopedia as the only major project of its kind.[7][n 3]
The editors plunged into their enormous task and soon identified and solved some inefficiencies with the project. Article assignments were shuffled around and communication practices were streamlined. Joseph Jacobs was hired as a coordinator. (He also wrote four hundred articles and procured many of the encyclopedia's illustrations.) Herman Rosenthal, an authority on Russia, was added as an editor. Louis Ginzberg joined the project and later became head of the rabbinical literature department.[8]
The board naturally faced many difficult editorial questions and disagreements. Singer wanted specific entries for every Jewish community in the world, with detailed information about, for example, the name and dates of the first Jewish settler in Prague. Conflict also arose over what types of bible interpretation should be included, with some editors fearing that Morris Jastrow's involvement in "higher criticism" would lead to unfavorable treatment of scripture.[9]
Content[edit]
Relation to German scholarship[edit]




Jewish Encyclopedia Illustration, most are black and white ink.






Illustration of Jewish grave in France with menorah used for the h in hic and Hebrew characters at the bottom right.


The scholarly style of the Jewish Encyclopedia is very much in the mode of the Wissenschaft des Judentums ("Jewish studies"), an approach to Jewish scholarship and religion that flourished in 19th-century Germany; indeed, the Encyclopedia may be regarded as the culmination of this movement, which sought to modernize scholarly methods in Jewish research. In the 20th century, the movement's members dispersed to Jewish Studies departments in the United States and Israel. The scholarly authorities cited in the Encyclopedia—besides the classical and medieval exegetes—are almost uniformly Wissenschaft figures, such as Leopold Zunz, Moritz Steinschneider, Solomon Schechter, Wilhelm Bacher, J.L. Rapoport, David Zvi Hoffman, Heinrich Graetz, etc. This particular scholarly style can be seen in the Jewish Encyclopedia's almost obsessive attention to manuscript discovery, manuscript editing and publication, manuscript comparison, manuscript dating, and so on; these endeavors were among the foremost interests of Wissenschaft scholarship.[10]
The Jewish Encyclopedia is an English-language work, but the vast majority of the encyclopedia's contemporary sources are German-language sources, since this was the mother tongue of the Wissenschaft scholars and the lingua franca of Biblical scholarship in general in that period. Of the works cited which are not German—usually the more classical works—the large part are either Hebrew or Arabic. The only heavily cited English-language source of contemporary scholarship is Solomon Schechter's publications in the Jewish Quarterly Review. The significance of the work's publication in English rather than German or Hebrew is captured by Harry Wolfson writing in 1926 (Schwarz 1965):

About twenty-five years ago, there was no greater desert, as far as Jewish life and learning, than the English-speaking countries, and English of all languages was the least serviceable for such a Jewish work of reference. To contemporary European reviewers of the Jewish Encyclopedia, the undertaking seemed then like an effort wasted on half-clad Zulus in South Africa and Jewish tailors in New York. Those who were then really in need of such a work and could benefit thereby would have been better served if it were put out in Hebrew, German or Russian.
— Harry Wolfson

The editors and authors of the Jewish Encyclopedia proved prescient in their choice of language, since within that same span of 25 years, English rose to become the dominant language of academic Jewish scholarship and among Jews worldwide. Wolfson continues that "if a Jewish Encyclopedia in a modern language were planned for the first time [i.e., in 1926], the choice would undoubtedly have fallen upon English."
Editions[edit]
Russian[edit]
The Jewish Encyclopedia was heavily used as a source by the 16-volume Jewish Encyclopedia in Russian,[11] published by Brockhaus and Efron in Saint Petersburg between 1906 and 1913.
Online[edit]
The unedited text of the original can be found at the Jewish Encyclopedia website.[12] The site offers both JPEG facsimiles of the original articles and Unicode transcriptions of all texts.
The search capability is somewhat handicapped by the fact that the search mechanism fails to take into account the decision to maintain all diacritical marks in the transliterated Hebrew and Aramaic from the 1901–1906 text, which used a large number of diacriticals not in common use today. Thus, for example, to successfully search for "Halizah" (the ceremony by which the widow of a brother who has died childless released her brother-in-law from the obligation of marrying her), one would have to know that they have transliterated this as "Ḥaliẓah". The alphabetic index ignores diacriticals so it can be more useful when searching for an article whose title is known.
The scholarly apparatus of citation is thorough, but can be a bit daunting to contemporary users. Books that might have been widely known among scholars of Judaism at the time the encyclopedia was written (but which are quite obscure to a lay reader today) are referred to by author and title, but with no publication information and often without indication of the language in which they were written. A list of abbreviations used in the encyclopedia is provided on the Jewish Encyclopedia website.[13]
See also[edit]

The Encyclopædia Biblica, from which the Jewish Encyclopedia sometimes quotes verbatim[n 4]
Hastings' Dictionary of the Bible (1898–1904)
The Shorter Jewish Encyclopedia
The Encyclopedia Judaica
The Catholic Encyclopedia and Encyclopaedia of Islam & Islamica
Lists of encyclopedias
Nahum Goldmann
Topics from the Jewish Encyclopedia on Wikipedia

Notes[edit]



^ Full name: The Jewish Encyclopedia: A Descriptive Record of the History, Religion, Literature, and Customs of the Jewish People from the Earliest Times to the Present Day.
^ Note, however, that some websites hosting the text claim copyright over the digitized images. Public domain scans are available elsewhere, as at the Internet Archive.
^ Schwartz 1991 (p. 48) describes the payment scheme arranged at this time as follows:

Members of the local executive committee, exclusive of Singer and, of course, Funk, would receive one thousand dollars per annum, while the rest of the department editors would receive five hundred. All collaborators, editors included, would be paid five dollars per printed page of about one thousand English words. If the article was written in a foreign language, payment would be only $3.50 per page. Singer's compensation was forty dollars a week (thirty-five plus five for a life insurance premium). His salary was considered an advance, since Singer alone was to share with the company in the profits.


^ For example, in its article concerning marriage.[14]



References[edit]
Citations[edit]


^ "The Jewish Encyclopedia". New York Times. 16 August 1902. Retrieved 17 March 2014. 
^ "The Larger Task" (PDF). American Jewish Archives. Retrieved 17 October 2013. .
^ Segal, Joshua L. (November 2003), "Rabbi's Message: Nov. 2003 - Cheshvan 5764: A Jewish Reference Library at Betenu", Betenu, Vol. 21, No. 4 .
^ Schwartz 1991, pp. 25–27.
^ Schwartz 1991, p. 28–31.
^ Schwartz 1991, pp. 33–36.
^ Schwartz 1991, pp. 37–51.
^ Schwartz 1991, pp. 51–56.
^ Schwartz 1991, pp. 57–59.
^ Schwartz 1991, pp. 2–4.
^ eleven.co.il
^ The Jewish Encyclopedia .
^ "Abbreviations Listings". JewishEncyclopedia.com. Retrieved 2014-02-26. 
^ JE, Vol. VIII 1904, "Marriage".


Bibliography[edit]

The Jewish Encyclopedia, Vol. I, New York: Funk & Wagnalls Co., 1901, LCCN 16014703 .
The Jewish Encyclopedia, Vol. II, New York: Funk & Wagnalls Co., 1902, LCCN 16014703 .
The Jewish Encyclopedia, Vol. III, New York: Funk & Wagnalls Co., 1902, LCCN 16014703 .
The Jewish Encyclopedia, Vol. IV, New York: Funk & Wagnalls Co., 1903, LCCN 16014703 .
The Jewish Encyclopedia, Vol. V, New York: Funk & Wagnalls Co., 1903, LCCN 16014703 .
The Jewish Encyclopedia, Vols. VI & VII, New York: Funk & Wagnalls Co., 1904, LCCN 16014703 .
The Jewish Encyclopedia, Vol. VIII, New York: Funk & Wagnalls Co., 1904, LCCN 16014703 .
The Jewish Encyclopedia, Vols. IX, X, & XI, New York: Funk & Wagnalls Co., 1905, LCCN 16014703 .
The Jewish Encyclopedia, Vols. XII, New York: Funk & Wagnalls Co., 1906, LCCN 16014703 .
Schwartz, Shuly Rubin. The Emergence of Jewish Scholarship in America: The Publication of the Jewish Encyclopedia. Monographs of the Hebrew Union College, Number 13. Cincinnati: Hebrew Union College Press, 1991. ISBN 0-87820-412-1
Schwarz, Leo W. (1965), "A bibliographical essay", in Lieberman, Saul, Harry Austryn Wolfson Jubilee Volume on the Occasion of His Seventy-Fifth Birthday, Jerusalem: American Academy for Jewish Research 

Further reading[edit]


Internet Archive
KTAV Reprint


Volume
From
To


Volume 1
Aach
Apocalyptic


Volume 2
Apocrypha
Benash


Volume 3
Bencemero
Chazanuth


Volume 4
Chazars
Dreyfus


Volume 5
Dreyfus
Goat


Volume 6
God
Istria


Volume 7
Italy
Leon


Volume 8
Leon
Moravia


Volume 9
Morawyczyk
Philippson


Volume 10
Philipson
Samoscz


Volume 11
Samson
Talmid


Volume 12
Talmud
Zweifel


External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Jewish Encyclopedia.



 Media related to Jewish Encyclopedia at Wikimedia Commons (complete Encyclopedia)
 Works related to Jewish Encyclopedia at Wikisource (incomplete Encyclopedia)
JewishEncyclopedia.com (see above), maintained by the Kopelman Foundation.
multiple copies at the Internet Archive
Hathi Trust. Jewish Encyclopedia (fulltext)







v
t
e


Jews and Judaism






Outline of Judaism
Index of Jewish history-related articles





History



Timeline
Israelites
Origins of Judaism
Ancient Israel and Judah
Second Temple period
Rabbinic Judaism
Middle Ages
Haskalah
Zionism





Population



Assimilation
Diaspora

Ashkenazi
Sephardi
Mizrahi


Languages

Hebrew


Lists of Jews
Persecution

Antisemitism







Philosophy



Beliefs

Mitzvah


Chosen people
Conversion
Eschatology

Messiah


Ethics
God
Halakha
Kabbalah
Land of Israel
Who is a Jew?





Schisms



Religious movements

Orthodox
Haredi
Hasidic
Conservative
Reform
Karaite
relations


Secularism





Literature



Tanakh

Torah
Nevi'im
Ketuvim


Rabbinic

Mishnah
Talmud
Midrash


Kabbalah texts

Zohar


Shulchan Aruch
Siddur
Hebrew literature





Culture



Calendar

Holidays


Cuisine

Kashrut


Education
Leadership

Rabbi


Marriage
Music
Names
Politics
Prayer

Synagogue


Symbolism





Studies



Ashkenazi intelligence
Genetics
Jew (word)
Jewish Virtual Library
Relations with other Abrahamic religions

Christianity
Islam










 Category: Jews and Judaism
 Judaism portal
 Judaism – Wikipedia book









Authority control



GND: 4318519-8











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Jewish_Encyclopedia&oldid=815474298"					Categories: 1901 books1906 booksEncyclopedias of culture and ethnicityEncyclopedias of religionJewish encyclopediasOnline encyclopediasReference works in the public domainFunk & Wagnalls booksHidden categories: Commons category with local link different than on WikidataWikipedia articles with GND identifiers