This article is about the Baroque composer. For his grandson of the same name, see Johann Sebastian Bach (painter). For other uses of Bach, see Bach (disambiguation).


Johann Sebastian Bach



Portrait of Bach, aged 61, by E. G. Haussmann, 1748



Born
21 March 1685 (O.S.)
31 March 1685 (N.S.)
Eisenach


Died
28 July 1750(1750-07-28) (aged 65)
Leipzig


Works
List of compositions


Signature





Johann Sebastian Bach[a] (31 March [O.S. 21 March] 1685 – 28 July 1750) was a German composer and musician of the Baroque period. He is known for instrumental compositions such as the Brandenburg Concertos and the Goldberg Variations, and vocal music such as the St Matthew Passion and the Mass in B minor. Since the 19th-century Bach Revival he has been generally regarded as one of the greatest composers of all time.[3]
The Bach family already counted several composers when Johann Sebastian was born as the last child of a city musician in Eisenach. Having become an orphan at age 10, he lived for five years with his eldest brother, after which he continued his musical formation in Lüneburg. From 1703 he was back in Thuringia, working as a musician for Protestant churches in Arnstadt and Mühlhausen and, for longer stretches of time, at courts in Weimar—where he expanded his repertoire for the organ—and Köthen—where he was mostly engaged with chamber music. From 1723 he was employed as Thomaskantor (cantor at St. Thomas) in Leipzig. He composed music for the principal Lutheran churches of the city, and for its university's student ensemble Collegium Musicum. From 1726 he published some of his keyboard and organ music. In Leipzig, as had happened in some of his earlier positions, he had a difficult relation with his employer, a situation that was little remedied when he was granted the title of court composer by the Elector of Saxony and King of Poland in 1736. In the last decades of his life he reworked and extended many of his earlier compositions. He died of complications after eye surgery in 1750.
Bach enriched established German styles through his mastery of counterpoint, harmonic and motivic organisation, and his adaptation of rhythms, forms, and textures from abroad, particularly from Italy and France. Bach's compositions include hundreds of cantatas, both sacred and secular.[4] He composed Latin church music, Passions, oratorios and motets. He often adopted Lutheran hymns, not only in his larger vocal works, but for instance also in his four-part chorales and his sacred songs. He wrote extensively for organ and for other keyboard instruments. He composed concertos, for instance for violin and for harpsichord, and suites, as chamber music as well as for orchestra. Many of his works employ the genres of canon and fugue.
Throughout the 18th century Bach was primarily valued as an organist, while his keyboard music, such as The Well-Tempered Clavier, was appreciated for its didactic qualities. The 19th century saw the publication of some major Bach-biographies, and by the end of that century all of his known music had been printed. Dissemination of scholarship on the composer continued through periodicals and websites exclusively devoted to him, and other publications such as the Bach-Werke-Verzeichnis (BWV, a numbered catalogue of his works) and new critical editions of his compositions. His music was further popularised through a multitude of arrangements, including for instance the Air on the G String, and of recordings, for instance three different box sets with complete performances of the composer's oeuvre marking the 250th anniversary of his death.



Contents


1 Life

1.1 Childhood (1685–1703)
1.2 Weimar, Arnstadt, and Mühlhausen (1703–1708)
1.3 Return to Weimar (1708–1717)
1.4 Köthen (1717–1723)
1.5 Leipzig (1723–1750)

1.5.1 Appointment in Leipzig
1.5.2 Cantata cycle years (1723–1729)
1.5.3 Middle years of the Leipzig period (1730–1739)
1.5.4 Last period (1740–1750)




2 Musical style

2.1 Four-part harmony
2.2 Modulations
2.3 Ornamentation
2.4 Giving soloist roles to continuo instruments
2.5 Instrumentation
2.6 Counterpoint
2.7 Structure, lyrics


3 Compositions

3.1 Passions and oratorios

3.1.1 St Matthew Passion
3.1.2 St John Passion


3.2 Cantatas

3.2.1 Church cantatas
3.2.2 Secular cantatas


3.3 A cappella music

3.3.1 Motets
3.3.2 Chorale harmonisations


3.4 Church music in Latin

3.4.1 Magnificat
3.4.2 Mass in B minor


3.5 Keyboard music

3.5.1 Organ works
3.5.2 Harpsichord and clavichord


3.6 Orchestral and chamber music

3.6.1 Violin concertos
3.6.2 Brandenburg Concertos
3.6.3 Keyboard concertos
3.6.4 Orchestral suites


3.7 Copies, arrangements and works with an uncertain attribution


4 Reception

4.1 18th century
4.2 19th century
4.3 20th century
4.4 21st century
4.5 Burial site
4.6 Recognition in Protestant churches


5 Notes
6 References
7 Bibliography

7.1 Biographies
7.2 Other


8 External links



Life




Places where Bach lived


Bach was born in Eisenach, in the duchy of Saxe-Eisenach, into a great musical family. His father, Johann Ambrosius Bach, was the director of the town musicians, and all of his uncles were professional musicians. His father probably taught him to play the violin and harpsichord, and his brother Johann Christoph Bach taught him the clavichord and exposed him to much contemporary music.[5] Apparently at his own initiative, Bach attended St. Michael's School in Lüneburg for two years. After graduating he held several musical posts across Germany: he served as Kapellmeister (director of music) to Leopold, Prince of Anhalt-Köthen, and as Thomaskantor in Leipzig, a position of music director at the main Lutheran churches and educator at the Thomasschule. He received the title of "Royal Court Composer" from Augustus III in 1736.[6][7] Bach's health and vision declined in 1749, and he died on 28 July 1750.
Childhood (1685–1703)




Johann Ambrosius Bach, Bach's father






Page from the Neues vollständiges Eisenachisches Gesangbuch, the Lutheran hymnal that was in use in the Eisenach of Bach's youth.[8][9]






Lüneburg, some two decades before Bach's stay in that town: St Michael's pictured in lower right


See also: Bach family
Johann Sebastian Bach was born in Eisenach, the capital of the duchy of Saxe-Eisenach, in present-day Germany, on 21 March 1685 O.S. (31 March 1685 N.S.). He was the son of Johann Ambrosius Bach, the director of the town musicians, and Maria Elisabeth Lämmerhirt.[10] He was the eighth and youngest child of Johann Ambrosius,[11] who likely taught him violin and basic music theory.[12] His uncles were all professional musicians, whose posts included church organists, court chamber musicians, and composers. One uncle, Johann Christoph Bach (1645–1693), introduced him to the organ, and an older second cousin, Johann Ludwig Bach (1677–1731), was a well-known composer and violinist.[13]
Bach's mother died in 1694, and his father died eight months later.[7] The 10-year-old Bach moved in with his eldest brother, Johann Christoph Bach (1671–1721), the organist at St. Michael's Church in Ohrdruf, Saxe-Gotha-Altenburg.[14] There he studied, performed, and copied music, including his own brother's, despite being forbidden to do so because scores were so valuable and private and blank ledger paper of that type was costly.[15][16] He received valuable teaching from his brother, who instructed him on the clavichord. J.C. Bach exposed him to the works of great composers of the day, including South German composers such as Johann Pachelbel (under whom Johann Christoph had studied) and Johann Jakob Froberger; North German composers;[5] Frenchmen, such as Jean-Baptiste Lully, Louis Marchand, and Marin Marais; and the Italian clavierist Girolamo Frescobaldi. Also during this time, he was taught theology, Latin, Greek, French, and Italian at the local gymnasium.[17]
By 3 April 1700, Bach and his schoolfriend Georg Erdmann—who was two years Bach's elder—were enrolled in the prestigious St. Michael's School in Lüneburg, some two weeks' travel north of Ohrdruf.[18][19] Their journey was probably undertaken mostly on foot.[17][19] His two years there were critical in exposing Bach to a wider range of European culture. In addition to singing in the choir, he played the School's three-manual organ and harpsichords.[17] He came into contact with sons of aristocrats from northern Germany, sent to the highly selective school to prepare for careers in other disciplines.
While in Lüneburg, Bach had access to St. John's Church and possibly used the church's famous organ from 1553, since it was played by his organ teacher Georg Böhm.[20] Because of his musical talent, Bach had significant contact with Böhm while a student in Lüneburg, and also took trips to nearby Hamburg where he observed "the great North German organist Johann Adam Reincken".[20][21] Stauffer reports the discovery in 2005 of the organ tablatures that Bach wrote out when still in his teens of works by Reincken and Dieterich Buxtehude, showing "a disciplined, methodical, well-trained teenager deeply committed to learning his craft".[20]
Weimar, Arnstadt, and Mühlhausen (1703–1708)




The Wender organ Bach played in Arnstadt






Portrait of the young Bach (disputed).[22]


In January 1703, shortly after graduating from St. Michael's and being turned down for the post of organist at Sangerhausen,[23] Bach was appointed court musician in the chapel of Duke Johann Ernst III in Weimar.[24] His role there is unclear, but it probably included menial, non-musical duties. During his seven-month tenure at Weimar, his reputation as a keyboardist spread so much that he was invited to inspect the new organ and give the inaugural recital, at the New Church (now Bach Church) in Arnstadt, located about 30 kilometres (19 mi) southwest of Weimar.[25] In August 1703, he became the organist at the New Church, with light duties, a relatively generous salary, and a fine new organ tuned in a temperament that allowed music written in a wider range of keys to be played.
Despite strong family connections and a musically enthusiastic employer, tension built up between Bach and the authorities after several years in the post. Bach was dissatisfied with the standard of singers in the choir. He called one of them a "Zippel Fagottist" (weenie bassoon player). Late one evening this student, named Geyersbach, went after Bach with a stick. Bach filed a complaint against Geyersbach with the authorities. These acquitted Geyersbach with a minor reprimand and ordered Bach to be more moderate regarding the musical qualities he expected from his students. Some months later Bach upset his employer by a prolonged absence from Arnstadt: having obtained a leave permission for four weeks he had been absent for around four months in 1705–1706 to visit the organist and composer Dieterich Buxtehude in the northern city of Lübeck. The visit to Buxtehude involved a 450-kilometre (280 mi) journey each way, reportedly on foot.[26][27]
In 1706, Bach applied for a post as organist at the Blasius Church (also known as St Blasius or as Divi Blasii) in Mühlhausen.[28][29] As part of his application, he had a cantata performed on Easter, 24 April 1707, likely an early version of his Christ lag in Todes Banden.[30] A month later Bach's application was accepted and he took up the post in July.[28] The position included a significantly higher remuneration, improved conditions, and a better choir. Four months after arriving at Mühlhausen, Bach married Maria Barbara Bach, his second cousin. Bach was able to convince the church and town government at Mühlhausen to fund an expensive renovation of the organ at the Blasius Church. In 1708 Bach wrote Gott ist mein König, a festive cantata for the inauguration of the new Council, which was published at the Council's expense.[17]
Return to Weimar (1708–1717)




Bach's autograph of the first movement of the Sonata No. 1 in G minor for solo violin (BWV 1001) –  Audio.


For more details on this topic, see Erschallet, ihr Lieder, erklinget, ihr Saiten! BWV 172 § Background.
Bach left Mühlhausen in 1708, returning to Weimar this time as organist and from 1714 Konzertmeister (director of music) at the ducal court, where he had an opportunity to work with a large, well-funded contingent of professional musicians.[17] Bach and his wife moved into a house close to the ducal palace.[31] Later the same year, their first child, Catharina Dorothea, was born, and Maria Barbara's elder, unmarried sister joined them. She remained to help run the household until her death in 1729. Three sons were also born in Weimar: Wilhelm Friedemann, Carl Philipp Emanuel, and Johann Gottfried Bernhard. Johann Sebastian and Maria Barbara had three more children who however did not live to their first birthday, including twins born in 1713.[32]
Bach's time in Weimar was the start of a sustained period of composing keyboard and orchestral works. He attained the proficiency and confidence to extend the prevailing structures and to include influences from abroad. He learned to write dramatic openings and employ the dynamic motor rhythms and harmonic schemes found in the music of Italians such as Vivaldi, Corelli, and Torelli. Bach absorbed these stylistic aspects in part by transcribing Vivaldi's string and wind concertos for harpsichord and organ; many of these transcribed works are still regularly performed. Bach was particularly attracted to the Italian style in which one or more solo instruments alternate section-by-section with the full orchestra throughout a movement.[33]
In Weimar, Bach continued to play and compose for the organ, and to perform concert music with the duke's ensemble.[17] He also began to write the preludes and fugues which were later assembled into his monumental work The Well-Tempered Clavier (Das Wohltemperierte Klavier—"Klavier" meaning clavichord or harpsichord),[34] consisting of two books, compiled in 1722 and 1744,[35] each containing 24 preludes and fugues in every major and minor key.
Also in Weimar Bach started work on the Little Organ Book, containing traditional Lutheran chorale tunes set in complex textures. In 1713, Bach was offered a post in Halle when he advised the authorities during a renovation by Christoph Cuntzius of the main organ in the west gallery of the Market Church of Our Dear Lady.[36][37]
In the spring of 1714, Bach was promoted to Konzertmeister, an honour that entailed performing a church cantata monthly in the castle church.[38] The first three cantatas Bach composed in Weimar were Himmelskönig, sei willkommen, BWV 182, for Palm Sunday, which coincided with the Annunciation that year, Weinen, Klagen, Sorgen, Zagen, BWV 12, for Jubilate Sunday, and Erschallet, ihr Lieder, erklinget, ihr Saiten!  BWV 172 for Pentecost.[39] Bach's first Christmas cantata Christen, ätzet diesen Tag, BWV 63 was premiered in 1714 or 1715.[40][41]




The Paulinerkirche in Leipzig: in 1717 Bach had tested the new organ in this church


In 1717, Bach eventually fell out of favour in Weimar and was, according to a translation of the court secretary's report, jailed for almost a month before being unfavourably dismissed: "On November 6, [1717], the quondam concertmaster and organist Bach was confined to the County Judge's place of detention for too stubbornly forcing the issue of his dismissal and finally on December 2 was freed from arrest with notice of his unfavourable discharge."[42]
Köthen (1717–1723)




Bach's seal, used throughout his Leipzig years. It contains the letters J S B superimposed over their mirror image topped with a crown






St. Thomas Church, Leipzig


Leopold, Prince of Anhalt-Köthen, hired Bach to serve as his Kapellmeister (director of music) in 1717. Prince Leopold, himself a musician, appreciated Bach's talents, paid him well and gave him considerable latitude in composing and performing. The prince was Calvinist and did not use elaborate music in his worship; accordingly, most of Bach's work from this period was secular,[43] including the orchestral suites, the cello suites, the sonatas and partitas for solo violin, and the Brandenburg Concertos.[44] Bach also composed secular cantatas for the court such as Die Zeit, die Tag und Jahre macht, BWV 134a. A significant influence upon Bach's musical development during his years with the Prince is recorded by Stauffer as Bach's "complete embrace of dance music, perhaps the most important influence on his mature style other than his adoption of Vivaldi's music in Weimar".[20]
Despite being born in the same year and only about 130 kilometres (81 mi) apart, Bach and Handel never met. In 1719, Bach made the 35-kilometre (22 mi) journey from Köthen to Halle with the intention of meeting Handel, however, Handel had left the town.[45] In 1730, Bach's oldest son Wilhelm Friedemann travelled to Halle to invite Handel to visit the Bach family in Leipzig, but the visit did not come to pass.[46]
On 7 July 1720, while Bach was away in Carlsbad with Prince Leopold, Bach's wife suddenly died.[47] The following year, he met Anna Magdalena Wilcke, a young, highly gifted soprano sixteen years his junior, who performed at the court in Köthen; they married on 3 December 1721.[48] Together they had thirteen more children, six of whom survived into adulthood: Gottfried Heinrich; Elisabeth Juliane Friederica (1726–1781); Johann Christoph Friedrich and Johann Christian, who both, especially Johann Christian, became significant musicians; Johanna Carolina (1737–1781); and Regina Susanna (1742–1809).[49]
Leipzig (1723–1750)




St. Nicholas Church, Leipzig, c. 1850






Café Zimmermann, Leipzig, where the Collegium Musicum performed


In 1723, Bach was appointed Thomaskantor, Cantor of the Thomasschule at the Thomaskirche (St. Thomas Church) in Leipzig, which provided music for four churches in the city, the Thomaskirche, the Nikolaikirche (St. Nicholas Church), and to a lesser extent the Neue Kirche (New Church) and the Peterskirche (St. Peter's Church).[50] This was "the leading cantorate in Protestant Germany",[51] located in the mercantile city in the Electorate of Saxony, which he held for twenty-seven years until his death. During that time he gained further prestige through honorary appointments at the courts of Köthen and Weissenfels, as well as that of the Elector Frederick Augustus (who was also King of Poland) in Dresden.[51] Bach frequently disagreed with his employer, Leipzig's city council, who he thought were "penny-pinching".[52]
Appointment in Leipzig






It has been suggested that portions of Jesus nahm zu sich die Zwölfe, BWV 22  (part of the content in the subsections "Audition in Leipzig" and "Assuming the position" ) be split from it and merged into this section. (Discuss) (July 2017)



Johann Kuhnau had been Thomaskantor in Leipzig from 1701 until his death on 5 June 1722. Bach had visited Leipzig during Kuhnau's tenure: in 1714 he attended the service at the St. Thomas church on the first Sunday of Advent,[53] and in 1717 he had tested the organ of the Paulinerkirche.[54] In 1716 Bach and Kuhnau had met on the occasion of the testing and inauguration of an organ in Halle.[37]
After having been offered the position, Bach was invited to Leipzig only after Georg Philipp Telemann indicated that he would not be interested in relocating to Leipzig.[55] Telemann went to Hamburg where he "had his own struggles with the city's senate".[56]
Bach was required to instruct the students of the Thomasschule in singing and to provide church music for the main churches in Leipzig. Bach was required to teach Latin, but he was allowed to employ four "prefects" (deputies) to do this instead. The prefects also aided with musical instruction.[57] A cantata was required for the church services on Sundays and additional church holidays during the liturgical year.
Cantata cycle years (1723–1729)
Bach usually led performances of his cantatas, most of which were composed within three years of his relocation to Leipzig. The first was Die Elenden sollen essen, BWV 75, performed in the Nikolaikirche on 30 May 1723, the first Sunday after Trinity. Bach collected his cantatas in annual cycles. Five are mentioned in obituaries, three are extant.[39] Of the more than three hundred cantatas which Bach composed in Leipzig, over one hundred have been lost to posterity.[4] Most of these concerted works expound on the Gospel readings prescribed for every Sunday and feast day in the Lutheran year. Bach started a second annual cycle the first Sunday after Trinity of 1724 and composed only chorale cantatas, each based on a single church hymn. These include O Ewigkeit, du Donnerwort, BWV 20, Wachet auf, ruft uns die Stimme, BWV 140, Nun komm, der Heiden Heiland, BWV 62, and Wie schön leuchtet der Morgenstern, BWV 1.
Bach drew the soprano and alto choristers from the School, and the tenors and basses from the School and elsewhere in Leipzig. Performing at weddings and funerals provided extra income for these groups; it was probably for this purpose, and for in-school training, that he wrote at least six motets.[58] As part of his regular church work, he performed other composers' motets, which served as formal models for his own.[59]
Bach's predecessor as Cantor, Johann Kuhnau, had also been music director for the Paulinerkirche, the church of Leipzig University. But when Bach was installed as Cantor in 1723, he was put in charge only of music for "festal" (church holiday) services at the Paulinerkirche; his petition to provide music also for regular Sunday services there (for a corresponding salary increase) went all the way up to the Elector but was denied. After this, in 1725, Bach "lost interest" in working even for festal services at the Paulinerkirche and appeared there only on "special occasions".[60] The Paulinerkirche had a much better and newer (1716) organ than did the Thomaskirche or the Nikolaikirche.[61] Bach was not required to play any organ in his official duties, but it is believed he liked to play on the Paulinerkirche organ "for his own pleasure".[62]
Bach broadened his composing and performing beyond the liturgy by taking over, in March 1729, the directorship of the Collegium Musicum, a secular performance ensemble started by Telemann. This was one of the dozens of private societies in the major German-speaking cities that was established by musically active university students; these societies had become increasingly important in public musical life and were typically led by the most prominent professionals in a city. In the words of Christoph Wolff, assuming the directorship was a shrewd move that "consolidated Bach's firm grip on Leipzig's principal musical institutions".[63] Year round, the Leipzig's Collegium Musicum performed regularly in venues such as the Café Zimmermann, a coffeehouse on Catherine Street off the main market square. Many of Bach's works during the 1730s and 1740s were written for and performed by the Collegium Musicum; among these were parts of his Clavier-Übung (Keyboard Practice) and many of his violin and keyboard concertos.[17]
Middle years of the Leipzig period (1730–1739)
In 1733, Bach composed a mass for the Dresden court (Kyrie and Gloria) which he later incorporated in his Mass in B Minor. He presented the manuscript to the Elector in an eventually successful bid to persuade the prince to give him the title of Court Composer.[6] He later extended this work into a full mass, by adding a Credo, Sanctus, and Agnus Dei, the music for which was partly based on his own cantatas, partly newly composed. Bach's appointment as Court Composer was part of his long-term struggle to achieve greater bargaining power with the Leipzig council. Between 1737 and 1739, Bach's former pupil Carl Gotthelf Gerlach held the directorship of the Collegium Musicum.
In 1735 Bach started to prepare his first publication of organ music, which was printed as third Clavier-Übung in 1739.[64] From around that year he started to compile and compose the set of preludes and fugues for harpsichord that would become his second book of The Well-Tempered Clavier.[65]
Last period (1740–1750)
From 1740 to 1748 Bach copied, transcribed, expanded and/or programmed music in an older polyphonic style (stile antico), by, among others, Palestrina (BNB I/P/2),[66] Kerll (BWV 241),[67] Torri (BWV Anh. 30),[68] Bassani (BWV 1081),[69] Gasparini (Missa Canonica)[70] and Caldara (BWV 1082).[71] Bach's own style shifted in the last decade of his life, showing an increased integration of polyphonic structures and canons, and other elements of the stile antico.[72] His fourth and last Clavier-Übung volume, the Goldberg Variations, for two-manual harpsichord, contained nine canons and was published in 1741.[73] Throughout this period Bach also continued to adopt music of contemporaries such as Handel (BNB I/K/2)[74] and Stölzel (BWV 200),[75] and gave many of his own earlier compositions, such as the St Matthew and St John Passions and the Great Eighteen Chorale Preludes,[76] their final revisions. He also programmed and adapted music by composers of a younger generation, including Pergolesi (BWV 1083)[77] and his own students such as Goldberg (BNB I/G/2).[78]
In 1746 Bach was preparing to enter Lorenz Christoph Mizler's Society of Musical Sciences (de).[79] In order to be admitted Bach had to submit a composition, for which he chose his Canonic Variations on "Vom Himmel hoch da komm' ich her", and a portrait, which was painted by Elias Gottlob Haussmann and featured Bach's Canon triplex á 6 Voc.[80] In May 1747, Bach visited the court of King Frederick II of Prussia at Potsdam. The king played a theme for Bach and challenged him to improvise a fugue based on his theme. Bach obliged, playing a three-part fugue on one of Frederick's fortepianos, which was a new type of instrument at the time. Upon his return to Leipzig he composed a set of fugues and canons, and a trio sonata, based on the Thema Regium (theme of the king). Within a few weeks this music was published as The Musical Offering, dedicated to Frederick. The Schübler Chorales, a set of six chorale preludes transcribed from cantata movements Bach had composed some two decades earlier, was published within a year after that.[81][82] Around the same time, the set of five Canonic Variations which Bach had submitted when entering Mizler's Society in 1747, was also printed.[83]
Two large-scale compositions occupied a central place in Bach's last years. From around 1742 he wrote and reworked the various canons and fugues of The Art of Fugue, which he continued to prepare for publication until shortly before his death.[84][85] After having extracted a cantata, BWV 191, from his 1733 Kyrie-Gloria Mass for the Dresden court in the mid 1740s, Bach expanded that Mass setting into his Mass in B minor in the last years of his life. Stauffer describes it as "Bach's most universal church work. Consisting mainly of recycled movements from cantatas written over a thirty-five-year period, it allowed Bach to survey his vocal pieces one last time and pick select movements for further revision and refinement."[20] Although the complete mass was never performed during the composer's lifetime, it is considered to be among the greatest choral works of all time.[86]
In January 1749 Bach's daughter Elisabeth Juliane Friederica married his pupil Johann Christoph Altnickol. Bach's health was however declining. On 2 June, Heinrich von Brühl wrote to one of the Leipzig burgomasters to request that his music director, Johann Gottlob Harrer, fill the Thomaskantor and Director musices posts "upon the eventual ... decease of Mr. Bach".[87] Becoming blind, Bach underwent eye surgery, in March 1750, and again in April, from the British eye surgeon John Taylor.[88] Bach died on 28 July 1750, from complications connected to the unsuccessful treatment.[89][90][91] An inventory drawn up a few months after Bach's death, shows that his estate included five harpsichords, two lute-harpsichords, three violins, three violas, two cellos, a viola da gamba, a lute and a spinet, along with 52 "sacred books", including works by Martin Luther and Josephus.[92] The composer's son Carl Philipp Emanuel saw to it that The Art of Fugue, however still unfinished, was published in 1751.[93] Together with one of the composer's former students, Johann Friedrich Agricola, this son of Bach also wrote the obituary ("Nekrolog") which was published in Mizler's Musikalische Bibliothek (de), the organ of the Society of Musical Sciences, in 1754.[94]
Musical style




A handwritten note by Bach in his copy of the Calov Bible. The note next to 2 Chronicles 5:13 reads: "NB Bey einer andächtigen Musiq ist allezeit Gott mit seiner Gnaden Gegenwart" (N(ota) B(ene) In a music of worship God is always present with his grace)






"O Haupt voll Blut und Wunden": the four-part chorale setting as included in the St. Matthew Passion










Chromatic Fantasia and Fugue BWV 903 performed by Kevin MacLeod

1. Fantasia









2. Fugue





Bach re-interpreting older genres tied to the modal system








Bach's guide on ornaments as contained in the Klavierbüchlein für Wilhelm Friedemann Bach






"Aria" of the Goldberg Variations, showing Bach's use of ornaments –  Audio










Sonata No. 3 in G minor for viola da gamba and harpsichord BWV 1029 performed by John Michel

1st movement









2nd movement









3rd movement





Continuo instruments moving to the front (here performed on cello and piano)












Keyboard Concerto No. 1 in D minor, BWV 1052 performed by the Fulda Symphonic Orchestra conducted by Simon Schindler with Johannes Volker Schmidt (piano)

1. Allegro









2. Adagio









3. Allegro





Keyboard concerto












Chaconne, 5th movement of Partita for Violin No. 2, BWV 1004

performed by Ben Goldstein as written down by Bach





written for violin like no other...



Brahms' piano version performed by Martha Goldstein





...not less impressive as a piano piece








The Art of Fugue (title page) – Performed by Mehmet Okonsar on organ and harpsichord:  Nos. 1–12 •  Nos. 13–20










Double Violin Concerto in D minor BWV 1043 performed by the Advent Chamber Orchestra with David Perry and Roxana Pavel Goldstein (violins)

1. Vivace









2. Largo ma non tanto









3. Allegro





A strictly contrapuntal composition (the two violins playing in canon throughout) in the guise of an Italian type of concerto








Analysis of the counterpoint of the chorale prelude Herr Jesu Christ, dich zu uns wend', BWV 632 (Orgelbüchlein)

BWV 632 (extract)

Play media

the images of this video show the intertwining of melodies and motives, including the melody of the chorale "Herr Jesu Christ, dich zu uns wend' (de)" ( Audio)




See also: List of compositions by Johann Sebastian Bach
To a large extent, Bach's musical style fits in the conventions of his day, which is the final stage of the baroque style. When his contemporaries, such as Handel, Telemann and Vivaldi wrote concertos he did so too. When they wrote suites, he did so too. Similar with recitatives followed by da capo arias, four-part choral music, use of basso continuo etc. The specifics of his style lie with characteristics such as his skill in contrapuntal invention and motivic control and his talent for writing tightly woven music of powerful sonority. From an early age, he imbued himself with the compositions of his contemporaries and of prior generations, all of what was available from European composers, such as the French, the Italian, and those from all parts of Germany, and there is little of it that didn't appear in his own music.[95]
Religious music was at the centre of Bach's output for much of his life. The hundreds of sacred works he created are usually seen as manifesting not just his craft but a truly devout relationship with God.[96][97] He had taught Luther's Small Catechism as the Thomaskantor in Leipzig, and some of his pieces represent it.[98] The Lutheran chorale was the basis of much of his work. In elaborating these hymns into his chorale preludes, he wrote more cogent and tightly integrated works than most, even when they were massive and lengthy.[citation needed] The large-scale structure of every major Bach sacred vocal work is evidence of subtle, elaborate planning to create a religiously and musically powerful expression. For example, the St Matthew Passion, like other works of its kind, illustrated the Passion with Bible text reflected in recitatives, arias, choruses, and chorales; but in crafting this work, Bach created an overall experience that has been found over the centuries since to be both musically thrilling and spiritually profound.[99]
Bach published or carefully compiled in manuscript many collections of pieces that explored the range of artistic and technical possibilities inherent in almost every genre of his time except opera. For example, The Well-Tempered Clavier comprises two books, each of which presents a prelude and fugue in every major and minor key, displaying a dizzying variety of structural, contrapuntal and fugal techniques.[100]
Four-part harmony
Four-part harmonies predate Bach, but he lived during a time when modal music in Western tradition was largely supplanted in favour of the tonal system. In this system a piece of music progresses from one chord to the next according to certain rules, each chord being characterised by four notes. The principles of four-part harmony cannot only be found in Bach's four-part choral music, but he also prescribes it for instance for the figured bass accompaniment.[101] The new system was at the core of Bach's style, and his compositions are to a large extent considered as laying down the rules for the evolving scheme that would dominate musical expression in the next centuries. Some examples of this characteristic of Bach's style and its influence:

When in the 1740s Bach staged his arrangement of Pergolesi's Stabat Mater, he upgraded the viola part (that in the original composition plays unisono with the bass part) to fill out the harmony, thus conforming the composition to his four-part harmony style.[102]
When from the 19th century in Russia there was a discussion about the authenticity of four-part Court chant settings, compared to earlier Russian traditions, Bach's four-part Chorale settings, such as those ending his Chorale cantatas, were considered as foreign-influenced models: such influence was, however, deemed unavoidable.[103]

Bach putting his foot down on the tonal system, and contributing to its shaping, did not imply he was less at ease with the older modal system, and the genres associated with it: more than his contemporaries (who had "moved on" to the tonal system without much exception) Bach often returned to the then antiquated modi and genres. His Chromatic Fantasia and Fugue, re-emulating the chromatic fantasia genre, as used by earlier composers such as Dowland and Sweelinck, in D dorian mode (comparable to D minor in the tonal system), is an example of this.
Modulations
Modulations, changing key in the course of a piece, is another style characteristic where Bach goes beyond what was usual in his time. Baroque instruments vastly limited modulation possibilities: keyboard instruments, prior to a workable system of temperament, limited the keys that could be modulated to, and wind instruments, especially brass instruments such as trumpets and horns, about a century before they were fitted with valves, were tied to the key of their tuning. Bach pushed the limits: he added "strange tones" in his organ playing, confusing the singing, according to an indictment he had to face in Arnstadt,[104] and Louis Marchand, another early experimenter with modulation, seems to have avoided confrontation with Bach because the latter went further than anyone had done before.[105] In the "Suscepit Israel" of his 1723 Magnificat, he had the trumpets in E-flat play a melody in the enharmonic scale of C minor.[106]
The major development taking place in Bach's time, and to which he contributed in no small way, was the development of a temperament for keyboard instruments that allowed to use these in all available keys (12 major and 12 minor), and which allowed modulating without retuning. Already his Capriccio on the departure of a beloved brother, a very early work, showed a gusto for modulation incomparable to any contemporary work this composition has been compared to,[107] but the full expansion came with the Well-Tempered Clavier, using all keys, which Bach seems to have been developing from around 1720, with the Klavierbüchlein für Wilhelm Friedemann Bach as one of its earliest witnesses.[108]
Ornamentation
The second page of the Klavierbüchlein für Wilhelm Friedemann Bach is an ornament notation and performance guide that Bach wrote for his eldest son, who was nine years old at the time. Bach was generally quite specific on ornamentation in his compositions (where in his time much of the ornamentation was not written out by composers, rather being considered a liberty of the performer),[109] and his ornamentation was often quite elaborate. For instance, the "Aria" of the Goldberg Variations has rich ornamentation in nearly every measure. Bach's dealing with ornamentation can also be seen in a keyboard arrangement he made of Marcello's Oboe Concerto: he added written out ornamentation, which, some centuries later, is played by oboists when performing the concerto.
Although Bach did not write any opera, he was not averse to the genre, nor to its ornamented vocal style. In church music, Italian composers had imitated the operatic vocal style in genres such as the Neapolitan mass. In Protestant surroundings, there was more reticence to adopt such style for liturgical music. For instance, Kuhnau, Bach's predecessor in Leipzig, had notoriously written against opera and Italianate virtuoso vocal music.[110] Bach was less imbued; one of the comments after a performance of his St Matthew Passion was that it all sounded much like opera.[111]
Giving soloist roles to continuo instruments
In concerted playing in Bach's time the basso continuo, consisting of instruments such as organ, and/or viola da gamba and harpsichord, usually had the role of accompaniment: providing the harmonic and rhythmic foundation of a piece. From the late 1720s, Bach had the organ play concertante (i.e. as soloist) with the orchestra in instrumental cantata movements,[112] a decade before Handel published his first organ concertos.[113] Apart from the 5th Brandenburg Concerto and the Triple Concerto, which already had harpsichord soloists in the 1720s, Bach wrote and arranged his harpsichord concertos in the 1730s,[114] and in his sonatas for viola da gamba and harpsichord neither instrument plays a continuo part: they are treated as equal soloists, way beyond the figured bass role. In this sense, Bach played a key role in the development of genres such as the keyboard concerto.[115]
Instrumentation
Bach wrote virtuoso music for specific instruments, as well as music independent of instrumentation. For instance, the Sonatas and partitas for solo violin are considered the pinnacle of what has been written for this instrument, only within reach of accomplished players: the music fits the instrument, pushing it to the full scale of its possibilities, requiring virtuosity of the player, but without bravura. Notwithstanding that the music and the instrument seem inseparable, Bach made transcriptions for other instruments of some pieces of this collection. Similarly, for the cello suites, the virtuoso music seems tailored for the instrument, the best of what is on offer for it, yet Bach made an arrangement for lute of one of these suites. Likewise for much of his most virtuoso keyboard music. Bach exploited the capabilities of an instrument to the fullest while keeping the core of such music independent of the instrument on which it is performed.
In this sense, it is no surprise that Bach's music is easily and often performed on instruments it was not necessarily written for, that it is transcribed so often, and that his melodies turn up in unexpected places such as jazz music. Apart from that, Bach left a number of compositions without specified instrumentation: the Canons BWV 1072–1078 fall in that category, as well as the bulk of the Musical Offering and the Art of Fugue.[116]
Counterpoint
See also: List of fugal works by Johann Sebastian Bach
Another characteristic of Bach's style is his extensive use of counterpoint, as opposed to the homophony used, for instance, in his four-part Chorale settings. Bach's Canons, and especially his Fugues, are most characteristic of this style, which Bach did not invent, but his contribution to it was so fundamental that he defined it to a large extent. Fugues are as characteristic to Bach's style, as, for instance, the Sonata form is characteristic to the composers of the Classical period.[117]
Not only these strictly contrapuntal compositions, but most of Bach's music is characterised by distinct melodic lines for each of the voices, where the chords formed by the notes sounding at a given point follow the rules of four-part harmony. Forkel, Bach's first biographer, gives this description of this feature of Bach's music, that sets it apart from most other music:[118]

If the language of music is merely the utterance of a melodic line, a simple sequence of musical notes, it can justly be accused of poverty. The addition of a Bass puts it upon a harmonic foundation and clarifies it, but defines rather than gives it added richness. A melody so accompanied—even though all the notes are not those of the true Bass—or treated with simple embellishments in the upper parts, or with simple chords, used to be called “homophony.” But it is a very different thing when two melodies are so interwoven that they converse together like two persons upon a footing of pleasant equality. In the first case the accompaniment is subordinate, and serves merely to support the first or principal part. In the second case the two parts are not similarly related. New melodic combinations spring from their interweaving, out of which new forms of musical expression emerge. If more parts are interwoven in the same free and independent manner, the apparatus of language is correspondingly enlarged, and becomes practically inexhaustible if, in addition, varieties of form and rhythm are introduced. Hence harmony becomes no longer a mere accompaniment of melody, but rather a potent agency for augmenting the richness and expressiveness of musical conversation. To serve that end a simple accompaniment will not suffice. True harmony is the interweaving of several melodies, which emerge now in the upper, now in the middle, and now in the lower parts.
From about the year 1720, when he was thirty-five, until his death in 1750, Bach's harmony consists in this melodic interweaving of independent melodies, so perfect in their union that each part seems to constitute the true melody. Herein Bach excels all the composers in the world. At least, I have found no one to equal him in music known to me. Even in his four-part writing we can, not infrequently, leave out the upper and lower parts and still find the middle parts melodious and agreeable.

Structure, lyrics
Bach devoted more attention than his contemporaries to the structure of compositions. This can be seen in minor adjustments he made when adopting someone else's composition, for example, his earliest version of the "Keiser" St Mark Passion, where he enhances scene transitions,[119] and in the architecture of his own compositions such as his Magnificat,[106] and his Leipzig Passions. In the last years of his life, Bach would revise several of his prior compositions, often the recasting of such previously composed music in an enhanced structure being the most visible change, as in the Mass in B minor. Bach's known preoccupation with structure led, peaking around the 1970s, to various numerological analyses of his compositions, although many such over-interpretations were later rejected, especially when wandering off in symbolism-ridden hermeneutics.[120][121]
The librettos, that is the lyrics, for his vocal compositions played an important role for Bach: he sought collaboration with various text authors for his cantatas and major vocal compositions, eventually writing or adapting such texts himself to make them fit in the structure of the composition he was designing, when he could not lean on the talents of other text authors. His collaboration with Picander for the St Matthew Passion libretto is best known, but there was a similar process to come to a multi-layered structure for his St John Passion libretto a few years earlier.[122]
Compositions
See also: List of compositions by Johann Sebastian Bach and List of fugal works by Johann Sebastian Bach




Bach's autograph of the recitative with the gospel text of Christ's death from St Matthew Passion. (Matthew 27:45–47a)






Christmas Oratorio: printed edition of the libretto










Cantata Wachet auf, ruft uns die Stimme, BWV 140 performed by the MIT Concert Choir conducted by W. Cutter

1. Chorus "Wachet auf, ruft uns die Stimme"









2. Recitative "Er kommt, er kommt, der Bräut’gam kommt"









3. Duet "Wenn kömmst du, mein Heil?"









4. Chorale "Zion hört die Wächter singen"









5. Recitative "So geh herein zu mir"









6. Duet "Mein Freund ist mein!"









7. Chorale "Gloria sei dir gesungen"





Cantata text












from Mass in B minor

Agnus Dei





performed by Solomija Drozd (voice), Petro Titiajev (violin) and Ivan Ostapovych (organ)












Prelude and Fugue in A minor, BWV 543 performed by Noah Horn on the 1974 Dirk A. Flentrop organ at the Oberlin Conservatory of Music

Prelude









Fugue














Title page of The Well-Tempered Clavier, book 1 –  Prelude No. 1 in C major BWV 846 performed on harpsichord by Robert Schröter










Italian Concerto BWV 971 performed by Martha Goldstein

1st movement









2nd movement









3rd movement














Title page of the Goldberg Variations – performed by Mehmet Okonsar, piano:  Aria and Variation 1–9 •  Variation 10–22 •  Variation 23–30 and Aria da capo






Title page of Anna Magdalena Bach's copy of the cello suites – Cello Suite No. 1 BWV 1007 performed by John Michel:  1. Prelude •  2. Allemande •  3. Courante •  4. Sarabande •  5. Minuets •  6. Gigue










Brandenburg Concerto No. 4 in G Major, BWV 1049

1. Allegro








2. Andante









3. Presto


















Some of Bach's most popular melodies are, more often than not, heard in various arrangements:

Air on the G String (excerpt)





"Air", 2nd movement from Orchestral Suite No. 3 in D major, BWV 1068, performed in a Air on the G String adaptation by Capella Istropolitana conducted by Oliver von Dohnányi (courtesy of Naxos)



"Sheep May Safely Graze" (instrumental version)





The Aria "Schafe können sicher weiden" (Sheep May Safely Graze), No. 9 from the Hunting Cantata, BWV 208: composed for soprano, recorders and continuo the music of this movement exists in a variety of instrumental arrangements.




In 1950, Wolfgang Schmieder published a thematic catalogue of Bach's compositions, called Bach-Werke-Verzeichnis (Bach Works Catalogue).[123] Schmieder largely followed the Bach-Gesellschaft-Ausgabe, a comprehensive edition of the composer's works that was produced between 1850 and 1900. The first edition of the catalogue listed 1080 surviving compositions without doubt composed by Bach.[124]


BWV Range
Compositions


BWV 1–224
Cantatas


BWV 225–231
Motets


BWV 232–243
Liturgical compositions in Latin


BWV 244–249
Passions and Oratorios


BWV 250–438
Four-part chorales


BWV 439–524
Small vocal works


BWV 525–771
Organ compositions


BWV 772–994
Other keyboard works


BWV 995–1000
Lute compositions


BWV 1001–1040
Other chamber music


BWV 1041–1071
Orchestral music


BWV 1072–1078
Canons


BWV 1079–1080
Late contrapuntal works


BWV 1081–1126 were added to the catalogue in the second half of the 20th century and BWV 1127 and higher were still later additions.[125][126][127]
Passions and oratorios
See also: List of masses, passions and oratorios by Johann Sebastian Bach § Passions and oratorios
Bach composed Passions for Good Friday services and oratorios such as the Christmas Oratorio, which is a set of six cantatas for use in the liturgical season of Christmas.[128][129][130] Shorter oratorios are the Easter Oratorio and the Ascension Oratorio.
St Matthew Passion
See also: St Matthew Passion
With its double choir and orchestra the St Matthew Passion is one of Bach's most extended works.
St John Passion
See also: St John Passion
The St John Passion was the first Passion Bach composed during his tenure as Thomaskantor in Leipzig.
Cantatas
See also: Bach cantata and List of Bach cantatas
According to his obituary, Bach would have composed five year cycles of sacred cantatas, and additional church cantatas for instance for weddings and funerals.[94] Approximately 200 of these sacred works are extant, an estimated two thirds of the total number of church cantatas he composed.[4][131] The Bach Digital website lists 50 known secular cantatas by the composer,[132] about half of which are extant or largely reconstructable.[133]
Church cantatas
See also: Church cantata (Bach)
Bach's cantatas vary greatly in form and instrumentation, including those for solo singers, single choruses, small instrumental groups, and grand orchestras. Many consist of a large opening chorus followed by one or more recitative-aria pairs for soloists (or duets) and a concluding chorale. The melody of the concluding chorale often appears as a cantus firmus in the opening movement.
Bach's earliest cantatas date from his years in Arnstadt and Mühlhausen. The earliest one with a known date is Christ lag in Todes Banden, BWV 4, for Easter 1707, which is one of his chorale cantatas.[134] Gottes Zeit ist die allerbeste Zeit, BWV 106, a.k.a. Actus Tragicus, is a funeral cantata from the Mühlhausen period.[135] Around 20 church cantatas are extant from his later years in Weimar, for instance, Ich hatte viel Bekümmernis, BWV 21.[136]
After taking up his office as Thomaskantor late May 1723, Bach performed a cantata each Sunday and feast day that corresponded to the lectionary readings of the week.[17] His first cantata cycle ran from the first Sunday after Trinity of 1723 to Trinity Sunday the next year. For instance, the Visitation cantata Herz und Mund und Tat und Leben, BWV 147, containing the chorale that is known in English as "Jesu, Joy of Man's Desiring", belongs to this first cycle. The cantata cycle of his second year in Leipzig is called the chorale cantata cycle as it is mainly consisting of works in the chorale cantata format. His third cantata cycle was developed over a period of several years, followed by the Picander cycle of 1728–1729.
Later church cantatas include the chorale cantatas Ein feste Burg ist unser Gott, BWV 80 (final version)[137] and Wachet auf, ruft uns die Stimme, BWV 140.[138] Only the first three Leipzig cycles are more or less completely extant. Apart from his own work, Bach also performed cantatas by Telemann and by his distant relative Johann Ludwig Bach.[17]
Secular cantatas
See also: List of secular cantatas by Johann Sebastian Bach
Bach also wrote secular cantatas, for instance for members of the Royal-Polish and Prince-electoral Saxonian family (e.g. Trauer-Ode),[139] or other public or private occasions (e.g. Hunting Cantata).[140] The text of these cantatas was occasionally in dialect (e.g. Peasant Cantata)[141] or in Italian (e.g. Amore traditore).[142] Many of the secular cantatas went lost, but for some of these the text and the occasion are known, for instance when Picander later published their libretto (e.g. BWV Anh. 11–12).[143] Some of the secular cantatas had a plot carried by mythological figures of Greek antiquity (e.g. Der Streit zwischen Phoebus und Pan),[144] others were almost miniature buffo operas (e.g. Coffee Cantata).[145]
A cappella music
Bach's a cappella music includes motets and chorale harmonisations.
Motets
Main article: Motets (Bach)
Bach's motets (BWV 225–231) are pieces on sacred themes for choir and continuo, with instruments playing colla parte. Several of them were composed for funerals.[146] The six motets certainly composed by Bach are Singet dem Herrn ein neues Lied, Der Geist hilft unser Schwachheit auf, Jesu, meine Freude, Fürchte dich nicht, Komm, Jesu, komm, and Lobet den Herrn, alle Heiden. The motet Sei Lob und Preis mit Ehren (BWV 231) is part of the composite motet Jauchzet dem Herrn, alle Welt (BWV Anh. 160), other parts of which may be based on work by Telemann.[147]
Chorale harmonisations
See also: List of chorale harmonisations by Johann Sebastian Bach
Bach wrote hundreds of four-part harmonisations of Lutheran chorales.
Church music in Latin
See also: Bach's church music in Latin
Bach church music in Latin includes his Magnificat, four Kyrie–Gloria Masses, and his Mass in B minor.
Magnificat
See also: Magnificat (Bach)
The first version of Bach's Magnificat dates from 1723, but the work is best known in its D major version of 1733.
Mass in B minor
See also: Mass in B minor
In 1733 Bach composed a Kyrie–Gloria Mass for the Dresden court. Near the end of his life, around 1748–1749 he expanded this composition into the large scale Mass in B minor. The work was never performed in full during Bach's lifetime.[148][149]
Keyboard music
Bach wrote for the organ and other keyboard instruments of his day, mainly the harpsichord, but also the clavichord and his personal favourite: the lute-harpsichord (the compositions listed as works for the lute, BWV 995-1000 and 1006a were probably written for this instrument).
Organ works
See also: List of organ compositions by Johann Sebastian Bach
Bach was best known during his lifetime as an organist, organ consultant, and composer of organ works in both the traditional German free genres—such as preludes, fantasias, and toccatas—and stricter forms, such as chorale preludes and fugues.[17] At a young age, he established a reputation for his great creativity and ability to integrate foreign styles into his organ works. A decidedly North German influence was exerted by Georg Böhm, with whom Bach came into contact in Lüneburg, and Dieterich Buxtehude, whom the young organist visited in Lübeck in 1704 on an extended leave of absence from his job in Arnstadt. Around this time, Bach copied the works of numerous French and Italian composers to gain insights into their compositional languages, and later arranged violin concertos by Vivaldi and others for organ and harpsichord. During his most productive period (1708–1714) he composed about a dozen pairs of preludes and fugues, five toccatas and fugues, and the Little Organ Book, an unfinished collection of forty-six short chorale preludes that demonstrates compositional techniques in the setting of chorale tunes. After leaving Weimar, Bach wrote less for organ, although some of his best-known works (the six trio sonatas, the German Organ Mass in Clavier-Übung III from 1739, and the Great Eighteen chorales, revised late in his life) were composed after his leaving Weimar. Bach was extensively engaged later in his life in consulting on organ projects, testing newly built organs, and dedicating organs in afternoon recitals.[150][151] The Canonic Variations on "Vom Himmel hoch da komm' ich her" and the Schübler Chorales are organ works Bach published in the last years of his life.
Harpsichord and clavichord
See also: List of solo keyboard compositions by Johann Sebastian Bach
Bach wrote many works for harpsichord, some of which may have been played on the clavichord. The larger works are usually intended for a harpsichord with two manuals, while performing them on a keyboard instrument with a single manual (like a piano) may provide technical difficulties for the crossing of hands. Many of his keyboard works are anthologies that encompass whole theoretical systems in an encyclopaedic fashion.

The Well-Tempered Clavier, Books 1 and 2 (BWV 846–893). Each book consists of a prelude and fugue in each of the 24 major and minor keys in chromatic order from C major to B minor (thus, the whole collection is often referred to as "the 48"). "Well-tempered" in the title refers to the temperament (system of tuning); many temperaments before Bach's time were not flexible enough to allow compositions to utilise more than just a few keys.[152][153]
The Inventions and Sinfonias (BWV 772–801). These short two- and three-part contrapuntal works are arranged in the same chromatic order as The Well-Tempered Clavier, omitting some of the rarer keys. These pieces were intended by Bach for instructional purposes.[154]
Three collections of dance suites: the English Suites (BWV 806–811), the French Suites (BWV 812–817), and the Partitas for keyboard (Clavier-Übung I, BWV 825–830). Each collection contains six suites built on the standard model (Allemande–Courante–Sarabande–(optional movement)–Gigue). The English Suites closely follow the traditional model, adding a prelude before the allemande and including a single movement between the sarabande and the gigue.[155] The French Suites omit preludes, but have multiple movements between the sarabande and the gigue.[156] The partitas expand the model further with elaborate introductory movements and miscellaneous movements between the basic elements of the model.[157]
The Goldberg Variations (BWV 988), an aria with thirty variations. The collection has a complex and unconventional structure: the variations build on the bass line of the aria, rather than its melody, and musical canons are interpolated according to a grand plan. There are nine canons within the thirty variations, every third variation is a canon.[158] These variations move in order from canon at the unison to canon at the ninth. The first eight are in pairs (unison and octave, second and seventh, third and sixth, fourth and fifth). The ninth canon stands on its own due to compositional dissimilarities. The final variation, instead of being the expected canon at the tenth, is a quodlibet.
Miscellaneous pieces such as the Overture in the French Style (French Overture, BWV 831) and the Italian Concerto (BWV 971) (published together as Clavier-Übung II), and the Chromatic Fantasia and Fugue (BWV 903).

Among Bach's lesser known keyboard works are seven toccatas (BWV 910–916), four duets (BWV 802–805), sonatas for keyboard (BWV 963–967), the Six Little Preludes (BWV 933–938), and the Aria variata alla maniera italiana (BWV 989).
Orchestral and chamber music
See also: List of chamber music works by Johann Sebastian Bach and List of orchestral works by Johann Sebastian Bach
Bach wrote for single instruments, duets, and small ensembles. Many of his solo works, such as his six sonatas and partitas for violin (BWV 1001–1006) and his six cello suites (BWV 1007–1012), are widely considered among the most profound in the repertoire.[159] He wrote sonatas for a solo instrument such as the viola de gamba accompanied by harpsichord or continuo, as well as trio sonatas (two instruments and continuo).
The Musical Offering and The Art of Fugue are late contrapuntal works containing pieces for unspecified (combinations of) instruments.
Violin concertos
Surviving works in the concerto form include two violin concertos (BWV 1041 in A minor and BWV 1042 in E major) and a concerto for two violins in D minor, BWV 1043, often referred to as Bach's "double" concerto.
Brandenburg Concertos
For more details on this topic, see Brandenburg Concertos.
Bach's best-known orchestral works are the Brandenburg Concertos, so named because he submitted them in the hope of gaining employment from Margrave Christian Ludwig of Brandenburg-Schwedt in 1721; his application was unsuccessful.[17] These works are examples of the concerto grosso genre.
Keyboard concertos
For more details on this topic, see Keyboard concertos by Johann Sebastian Bach.
Bach composed and transcribed concertos for one to four harpsichords. Many of the harpsichord concertos were not original works, but arrangements of his concertos for other instruments now lost.[160] A number of violin, oboe, and flute concertos have been reconstructed from these.
Orchestral suites
Main article: Orchestral suites (Bach)
In addition to concertos, Bach wrote four orchestral suites, each suite being a series of stylised dances for orchestra, preceded by a French overture.[161]
Copies, arrangements and works with an uncertain attribution
See also: BWV Anh.
In his early youth, Bach copied pieces by other composers to learn from them.[162] Later, he copied and arranged music for performance and/or as study material for his pupils. Some of these pieces, like "Bist du bei mir" (not even copied by Bach but by Anna Magdalena), became famous before being dissociated with Bach. Bach copied and arranged Italian masters such as Vivaldi (e.g. BWV 1065), Pergolesi (BWV 1083) and Palestrina (Missa Sine nomine), French masters such as François Couperin (BWV Anh. 183), and closer to home various German masters, including Telemann (e.g. BWV 824=TWV 32:14) and Handel (arias from Brockes Passion), and music from members of his own family. Then he also often copied and arranged his own music (e.g. BWV 233–236), as likewise his music was copied and arranged by others. Some of these arrangements, like the late 19th-century "Air on the G string" helped in popularising Bach's music.
Sometimes who copied whom is not clear. For instance, Forkel mentions a Mass for double chorus among the works composed by Bach. The work was published and performed in the early 19th century, and although a score partially in Bach's handwriting exists, the work was later considered spurious.[163] In 1950, the setup of the Bach-Werke-Verzeichnis was to keep such works out of the main catalogue: if there was a strong association with Bach they could be listed in its appendix (in German: Anhang, abbreviated as Anh.), so, for instance, the aforementioned Mass for double chorus became BWV Anh. 167. This was however far from the end of attribution issues—for instance, Schlage doch, gewünschte Stunde, BWV 53 was later re-attributed to Melchior Hoffmann. For other works, Bach's authorship was put in doubt without a generally accepted answer to the question whether or not he composed it: the best known organ composition in the BWV catalogue, the Toccata and Fugue in D minor, BWV 565 was indicated as one of these uncertain works in the late 20th century.[164]
Reception
See also: List of transcriptions of compositions by Johann Sebastian Bach






This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (July 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)







First page of Bach's Nekrolog by Carl Philipp Emanuel Bach and Johann Friedrich Agricola, as published in Mizler's Musikalische Bibliothek, Volume IV Part 1 (1754). Despite the errors contained in it, this obituary of less than 20 pages is arguably "the richest and most trustworthy" source on Bach produced before the 19th century.[165]


Throughout the 18th century, the appreciation of Bach's music was mostly limited to distinguished connoisseurs. The 19th century started with the first biography of the composer being published and ended with the completion of the publication of all of Bach's known works by the Bach Gesellschaft. A Bach Revival had started from Mendelssohn's performance of the St. Matthew Passion in 1829. Soon after that performance, Bach started to become regarded as one of the greatest composers of all times, if not the greatest, a reputation he has retained ever since. A new extensive Bach biography was published in the second half of the 19th century.
In the 20th century, Bach's music was widely performed and recorded, while the Neue Bachgesellschaft, among others, published research on the composer. Modern adaptations of Bach's music contributed greatly to his popularisation in the second half of the 20th century. Among these were the Swingle Singers' versions of Bach pieces (for instance, the "Air" from Orchestral Suite No. 3, or the Wachet Auf... chorale prelude) and Wendy Carlos' 1968 Switched-On Bach, which used the Moog electronic synthesiser.
By the end of the 20th century, more classical performers were gradually moving away from the performance style and instrumentation that were established in the romantic era: they started to perform Bach's music on period instruments of the baroque era, studied and practised playing techniques and tempi as established in his time, and reduced the size of instrumental ensembles and choirs to what he would have employed. The BACH motif, used by the composer in his own compositions, was used in dozens of tributes to the composer from the 19th century to the 21st. In the 21st century, the complete extant output of the composer became available on-line, with several websites exclusively dedicated to him.
18th century




Image of the Bach memorial (de) Felix Mendelssohn had erected in Leipzig in 1843






1908 Statue of Bach in front of the Thomaskirche in Leipzig


In his own time, Bach's reputation equalled those of Telemann, Graun and Handel.[166] During his life, Bach received public recognition, such as the title of court composer by Augustus III of Poland, and the appreciation he was shown by Frederick the Great and Herman Karl von Keyserling. Such highly placed appreciation contrasted with the humiliations he had to cope with, for instance in his hometown of Leipzig.[167] Also in the contemporary press, Bach had his detractors, such as Johann Adolf Scheibe, suggesting he write less complex music and his supporters such as Johann Mattheson and Lorenz Christoph Mizler.[168][169][170]
After his death, Bach's reputation as a composer at first declined: his work was regarded as old-fashioned compared to the emerging galant style.[171] Initially, he was remembered more as a virtuoso player of the organ and as a teacher. The bulk of the music that had been printed during the composer's lifetime, at least the part that was remembered, was for the organ and the harpsichord. Thus, his reputation as a composer was initially mostly limited to his keyboard music, and that even fairly limited to its value in music education.
Bach's surviving family members, who inherited a large part of his manuscripts, were not all equally concerned with preserving them, leading to considerable losses.[172] Carl Philipp Emanuel, his second eldest son, was most active in safeguarding his father's legacy: he co-authored his father's obituary, contributed to the publication of his four-part chorales,[173] staged some of his works, and the bulk of previously unpublished works of his father were preserved through his hands.[174] Wilhelm Friedemann, the eldest son, performed several of his father's cantatas in Halle, but after becoming unemployed, sold part of the large collection of his father's works he owned.[175][176][177] Several students of the old master, such as his son-in-law Johann Christoph Altnickol, Johann Friedrich Agricola, Johann Kirnberger, and Johann Ludwig Krebs, contributed to the dissemination of his legacy. The early devotees were not all musicians; for example, in Berlin, Daniel Itzig, a high official of Frederick the Great's court, venerated Bach.[178] His eldest daughters took lessons from Kirnberger; their sister Sara from Wilhelm Friedemann Bach, who was in Berlin from 1774 to 1784.[178][179] Sara Itzig Levy became an avid collector of works by Johann Sebastian Bach and his sons and was a "patron" of CPE Bach.[179]
While in Leipzig, performances of Bach's church music were limited to some of his motets and, under cantor Doles, some of his Passions,[180] a new generation of Bach aficionados emerged: they studiously collected and copied his music, including some of his large-scale works, such as the Mass in B minor, and performed it privately. One such connoisseur was Gottfried van Swieten, a high-ranking Austrian official who was instrumental in passing Bach's legacy on to the composers of the Viennese school. Haydn owned manuscript copies of the Well-Tempered Clavier and the Mass in B minor, and was influenced by Bach's music. Mozart owned a copy of one of Bach's motets,[181] transcribed some of his instrumental works (K. 404a, 405),[182][183] and wrote contrapuntal music influenced by his style.[184][185] Beethoven played the entire Well-Tempered Clavier by the time he was eleven, and described Bach as "Urvater der Harmonie" (progenitor of harmony).[186][187][188][189][190]
19th century
See also: Bach Revival and St Matthew Passion § 19th century




The church in Arnstadt where Bach had been the organist from 1703 to 1707. In 1935 the church was renamed to "Bachkirche"






28 July 1950: memorial service for Bach in Leipzig's Thomaskirche, on the 200th anniversary of the composer's death


In 1802, Johann Nikolaus Forkel published Ueber Johann Sebastian Bachs Leben, Kunst und Kunstwerke, the first biography of the composer, which contributed to the composer becoming known to a wider public.[191] In 1805, Abraham Mendelssohn, who had married one of Itzig's granddaughters, bought a substantial collection of Bach manuscripts that had come down from C. P. E. Bach, and donated it to the Berlin Sing-Akademie.[178] The Sing-Akademie occasionally performed Bach's works in public concerts, for instance his first keyboard concerto, with Sara Itzig Levy at the piano.[178]
The first decades of the 19th century saw an increasing number of first publications of Bach's music: Breitkopf started publishing chorale preludes,[192] Hoffmeister harpsichord music,[193] and the Well-Tempered Clavier was printed concurrently by Simrock (Germany), Nägeli (Switzerland) and Hoffmeister (Germany and Austria) in 1801.[194] Vocal music was also published: motets in 1802 and 1803, followed by the E♭ major version of the Magnificat, the Kyrie-Gloria Mass in A major, and the cantata Ein feste Burg ist unser Gott (BWV 80).[195] In 1818, Hans Georg Nägeli called the Mass in B Minor the greatest composition ever.[186] Bach's influence was felt in the next generation of early Romantic composers.[187] When Felix Mendelssohn, Abraham's son, aged 13, produced his first Magnificat setting in 1822, it is clear that he was inspired by the then-unpublished D major version of Bach's Magnificat.[196]
Felix Mendelssohn significantly contributed to the renewed interest in Bach's work with his 1829 Berlin performance of the St Matthew Passion, instrumental in setting off what has been called the Bach Revival. The St John Passion saw its 19th-century premiere in 1833, and the first performance of the Mass in B minor followed in 1844. Besides these and other public performances and an increased coverage on the composer and his compositions in printed media, the 1830s and 40s also saw the first publication of more vocal works by Bach: six cantatas, the St Matthew Passion and the Mass in B minor. A series of organ compositions saw their first publication in 1833.[197] Chopin started composing his 24 Preludes, Op. 28, inspired by the Well-Tempered Clavier, in 1835, and Schumann published his Sechs Fugen über den Namen B-A-C-H in 1845. Bach's music was transcribed and arranged to suit contemporary tastes and performance practice by composers such as Carl Friedrich Zelter, Robert Franz, and Franz Liszt, or combined with new music such as the melody line of Charles Gounod's Ave Maria.[186][198] Brahms, Bruckner, and Wagner were among the composers who promoted Bach's music or wrote glowingly about it.
In 1850, the Bach-Gesellschaft (Bach Society) was founded to promote Bach's music. In the second half of the 19th century, the Society published a comprehensive edition of the composer's works. Also in the second half of the 19th century, Philipp Spitta published Johann Sebastian Bach, the standard work on Bach's life and music.[199] By that time, Bach was known as the first of the three Bs in music. Throughout the 19th century, 200 books were published on Bach. By the end of the century, local Bach societies were established in several cities, and his music had been performed in all major musical centres.[186]
In Germany all throughout the century, Bach was coupled to nationalist feelings, and the composer was inscribed in a religious revival. In England, Bach was coupled to an already existing revival of religious and baroque music. By the end of the century, Bach was firmly established as one of the greatest composers, recognised for both his instrumental and his vocal music.[186]
20th century
During the 20th century, the process of recognising the musical as well as the pedagogic value of some of the works continued, as in the promotion of the cello suites by Pablo Casals, the first major performer to record these suites.[200] Leading performers of classical music, such as Herbert von Karajan, Arthur Grumiaux, Helmut Walcha, Wanda Landowska, Karl Richter, I Musici, Dietrich Fischer-Dieskau, Glenn Gould, and many others recorded his music.




Bosehaus in Leipzig where the Bach Archive has been housed since 1985


A significant development in the later part of the 20th century was the momentum gained by the historically informed performance practice, with forerunners such as Nikolaus Harnoncourt acquiring prominence by their performances of Bach's music. His keyboard music was again rather performed on the instruments Bach was familiar with, instead of on modern pianos and 19th-century romantic organs. Ensembles playing and singing Bach's music not only kept to the instruments and the performance style of his day, they were also reduced to the size of the groups Bach used for his performances.[201] But that was far from the only way Bach's music came to the forefront in the 20th century: his music was heard in versions ranging from Ferruccio Busoni's late romantic piano transcriptions, jazzy interpretations such as those by the Swingle Singers, and orchestrations such as the one opening Walt Disney's Fantasia movie, to synthesiser performances such as Wendy Carlos' Switched-On Bach recordings.
Bach's music has influenced other genres. For instance, jazz musicians have adopted Bach's music, with Jacques Loussier, Ian Anderson, Uri Caine, and the Modern Jazz Quartet among those creating jazz versions of his works.[202] Several 20th-century composers referred to Bach or his music—for instance, Eugène Ysaÿe in his Six Sonatas for solo violin, Dmitri Shostakovich in his 24 Preludes and Fugues and Heitor Villa-Lobos in his Bachianas Brasileiras. All kinds of publications involved Bach: not only were there the Bach Jahrbuch publications of the Neue Bachgesellschaft, various other studies and biographies, by among others Albert Schweitzer, Charles Sanford Terry, John Butt, Christoph Wolff, and the 1950 first edition of the Bach Werke Verzeichnis, but also books such as Gödel, Escher, Bach put the composer's art in a wider perspective. Bach's music was extensively listened to, performed, broadcast, arranged, adapted, and commented upon in the 1990s.[203] Around 2000, the 250th anniversary of Bach's death, three record companies issued box sets with complete recordings of Bach's music.[204][205][206]




Mark Rutte, Prime Minister of the Netherlands, along with the rest of the public, awaiting the start of a 2011 performance of the St. Matthew Passion


Bach's music features three times—more than that of any other composer—on the Voyager Golden Record, a gramophone record containing a broad sample of the images, common sounds, languages, and music of Earth, sent into outer space with the two Voyager probes.[207] Tributes to Bach in the 20th century include statues erected in his honour, and a variety of things, such as streets and space objects, being named after him.[208][209] Also, a multitude of musical ensembles such as the Bach Aria Group, the Deutsche Bachsolisten, the Bachchor Stuttgart, and the Bach Collegium Japan adopted the composer's name. Bach festivals were held in several continents, and competitions and prizes such as the International Johann Sebastian Bach Competition and the Royal Academy of Music Bach Prize were named after the composer. While by the end of the 19th century, Bach had been inscribed in nationalism and religious revival, the late 20th century saw Bach as the subject of a secularised art-as-religion (Kunstreligion).[186][203]
21st century




Bach's grave and altar in the St. Thomas Church, Leipzig


In the 21st century, Bach's compositions became available on-line, for instance at the International Music Score Library Project.[210] High resolution facsimiles of Bach's autographs became available at the Bach digital website.[211] Websites dedicated exclusively to the composer or parts of his music include jsbach.org,[212] and the Bach Cantatas Website.[213]
21st-century biographers include Peter Williams and the conductor John Eliot Gardiner.[214][215][216] Also in this century, overviews of what is best in classical music typically include a great deal of Bach. For example, in The Telegraph's list of the 168 best classical music recordings, Bach's music is featured more often than that of any other composer.[217]
Burial site
Bach was originally buried at Old St. John's Cemetery in Leipzig. His grave went unmarked for nearly 150 years, but in 1894 his remains were located and moved to a vault in St. John's Church. This building was destroyed by Allied bombing during World War II, so in 1950 Bach's remains were taken to their present grave in St. Thomas Church.[17] Later research has called into question whether the remains in the grave are actually those of Bach.[218]
Recognition in Protestant churches
The liturgical calendar of the Episcopal Church remembers Bach annually with a feast day on 28 July, together with George Frideric Handel and Henry Purcell; on the same day, the Calendar of Saints of the Lutheran Church remembers Bach and Handel with Heinrich Schütz.
Notes



^ German: [ˈjoːhan zeˈbasti̯an ˈbax] ( listen). The last name appears as /bɑːx/ in OED/OUP.[1] According to Webster's, the last consonant can alternatively be pronounced as /k/.[2]



References



^ "Bach, Johann Sebastian" entry at www.oxforddictionaries.com. Retrieved 3 May 2016.
^ "bach trumpet" entry p. 157 in Webster's Third New International Dictionary (unabridged). Merriam-Webster, 1981. ISBN 0877792062
^ Blanning, T. C. W. (2008). The Triumph of Music: The Rise of Composers, Musicians and Their Art. p. 272. And of course the greatest master of harmony and counterpoint of all time was Johann Sebastian Bach, 'the Homer of music'. 
^ a b c Wolff (1997), p. 5
^ a b Wolff (2000), pp. 19, 46
^ a b "Bach Mass in B Minor BWV 232". The Baroque Music Site. Retrieved 21 February 2012. 
^ a b Miles (1962), pp. 86–87
^ Johann Günther Rörer (editor). Neues vollständiges Eisenachisches Gesangbuch: Worinnen in ziemlich bequeemer und füglicher Ordnung vermittels fünffacher Abteilung so wol die alte als neue doch mehrenteils bekante geistliche Kirchenlieder und Psalmen D. Martin Luthers und anderer Gottseeligen Männer befindlich. Eisenach: Rörer, 1673.
^ Geck 2003, p. 5
^ Jones (2007), p. 3
^ "Lesson Plans". Bach to School. The Bach Choir of Bethlehem. Archived from the original on 16 January 2013. Retrieved 23 December 2014. 
^ Boyd (2000), p. 6
^ Johann Sebastian Bach drafted a genealogy around 1735, titled "Origin of the musical Bach family", printed in translation in David, Mendel, and Wolff (1998), p. 283
^ Boyd (2000), pp. 7–8
^ David, Mendel & Wolff (1998), p. 299
^ Wolff (2000), p. 45
^ a b c d e f g h i j k l "Johann Sebastian Bach: a detailed informative biography". The Baroque Music Site. Retrieved 19 February 2012. 
^ Wolff (2000), pp. 41–43
^ a b Eidam 2001, Ch. I
^ a b c d e Stauffer, George B. (20 February 2014). "Why Bach Moves Us". The New York Review of Books. Retrieved 10 April 2014. 
^ Geiringer (1966), p. 13
^ Towe, Teri Noel. "The Portrait in Erfurt Alleged to Depict Bach, the Weimar Concertmeister". The Face Of Bach. Archived from the original on 16 July 2011. Retrieved 23 December 2014. 
^ Rich (1995), p. 27
^ Boyd (2000), pp. 15–16
^ Chiapusso (1968), p. 62
^ Wolff (2000), pp. 83ff
^ Snyder, Kerala J. (2007). Dieterich Buxtehude: Organist in Lübeck (2nd ed.). pp. 104–106. 
^ a b Wolff (2000), pp. 102–104)
^ Williams (2003), pp. 38–39
^ Bach Digital Work 0005 at www.bach-digital.de
^ "History of the Bach House". Bach House Weimar. Retrieved 10 August 2015. 
^ Forkel/Terry 1920, Table VII, p. 309
^ Thornburgh, Elaine. "Baroque Music – Part One". Music in Our World. San Diego State University. Archived from the original on 5 September 2015. Retrieved 24 December 2014. 
^ Chiapusso (1968), p. 168
^ Schweitzer (1935), p. 331
^ Koster, Jan. "Weimar (II) 1708–1717". J.S. Bach Archive and Bibliography. Retrieved 11 April 2014. 
^ a b Sadie, Julie Anne, ed. (1998). Companion to Baroque Music. p. 205. 
^ Wolff (2000), pp. 147, 156
^ a b Wolff (1991), p. 30
^ Gardiner, John Eliot (2010). "Cantatas for Christmas Day: Herderkirche, Weimar" (PDF). pp. 1–2. Retrieved 27 December 2014. 
^ Wolff, Christoph (1996). "From konzertmeister to thomaskantor: Bach's cantata production 1713–1723" (PDF). pp. 15–16. Retrieved 27 December 2014. 
^ David, Mendel & Wolff (1998), p. 80
^ Miles (1962), p. 57
^ Boyd (2000), p. 74
^ Van Til (2007), pp. 69, 372
^ Spaeth (1937), p. 37
^ Spitta (1899a), p. 11
^ Geiringer (1966), p. 50
^ Wolff (1983), pp. 98, 111
^ Spitta (1899a), pp. 192–193
^ a b Wolff 2013, p. 253
^ Wolff 2013, p. 345
^ Spitta (1899a), p. 265
^ Spitta (1899a), p. 184
^ British Library. On-line gallery.Bach biography..
^ Wolff 2013, p. 348
^ Wolff 2013, p. 349
^ "Motets BWV 225–231". Bach Cantatas Website. Retrieved 31 December 2014. 
^ "Works of Other Composers performed by J.S. Bach". Bach Cantatas Website. Retrieved 31 December 2014. 
^ Boyd (2000), pp. 112–113
^ Spitta (1899a), pp. 288–290
^ Spitta (1899a), pp. 281, 287
^ Wolff (2000), p. 341
^ US-PRu M 3.1. B2 C5. 1739q at Bach Digital website
^ GB-Lbl Add. MS. 35021 at Bach Digital website
^ D-B Mus. ms. 16714 at Bach Digital website
^ D-Cv A.V,1109,(1), 1a and 1b at Bach Digital website
^ D-B Mus. ms. Bach P 195 at Bach Digital website
^ D-B Mus. ms. 1160 at Bach Digital website
^ D-WFe 191 at Bach Digital website (RISM No. 250000899)
^ D-Bsa SA 301, Fascicle 1 and Fascicle 2 at Bach Digital website
^ Neuaufgefundenes Bach-Autograph in Weißenfels at lisa.gerda-henkel-stiftung.de
^ F-Pn Ms. 17669 at Bach Digital website
^ D-B N. Mus. ms. 468 and Privatbesitz C. Thiele, BWV deest (NBA Serie II:5) at Bach Digital website
^ D-B N. Mus. ms. 307 at Bach Digital website
^ D-B Mus. ms. Bach P 271, Fascicle 2 at Bach Digital website
^ D-B Mus. ms. 30199, Fascicle 14 and D-B Mus. ms. 17155/16 at Bach Digital website
^ D-B Mus. ms. 7918 at Bach Digital website
^ Musikalische Bibliothek, III.2 [1746], 353, Felbick 2012, 284. In 1746, Mizler announced the membership of three famous members, Musikalische Bibliothek, III.2 [1746], 357.
^ Musikalische Bibliothek, IV.1 [1754], 108 and Tab. IV, fig. 16 (Source online); letter of Mizler to Spieß, 29 June 1748, in: Hans Rudolf Jung und Hans-Eberhard Dentler: Briefe von Lorenz Mizler und Zeitgenossen an Meinrad Spieß, in: Studi musicali 2003, Nr. 32, 115.
^ US-PRscheide BWV 645-650 (original print of the Schübler Chorales with Bach's handwritten corrections and additions from before August 1748 – description at Bach Digital website)
^ Breig, Werner (2010). "Introduction" (pp. 14, 17–18) in Vol. 6: Clavierübung III, Schübler-Chorales, Canonische Veränderungen of Johann Sebastian Bach: Complete Organ Works. Breitkopf.
^ Bach, Carl Philipp Emanuel & Agricola, Johann Friedrich (1754). "Nekrolog". Musikalische Bibliothek (de) (in German). Leipzig: Mizlerischer Bücherverlag. IV.1: 173. 
^ Hans Gunter Hoke: "Neue Studien zur Kunst der Fuge BWV 1080", in: Beiträge zur Musikwissenschaft 17 (1975), 95–115; Hans-Eberhard Dentler: "Johann Sebastian Bachs Kunst der Fuge – Ein pythagoreisches Werk und seine Verwirklichung", Mainz 2004; Hans-Eberhard Dentler: "Johann Sebastian Bachs Musicalisches Opfer – Musik als Abbild der Sphärenharmonie", Mainz 2008.
^ Chiapusso (1968), p. 277
^ Rathey, Markus (18 April 2003). Johann Sebastian Bach's Mass in B Minor: The Greatest Artwork of All Times and All People (PDF). The Tangeman Lecture. New Haven. 
^ Wolff (2000), p. 442, from David, Mendel & Wolff (1998)
^ Zegers, Richard H.C. (2005). "The Eyes of Johann Sebastian Bach". Archives of Ophthalmology. 123 (10): 1427–1430. doi:10.1001/archopht.123.10.1427. 
^ Hanford, Jan. "J.S. Bach: Timeline of His Life". J.S. Bach Home Page. Retrieved 8 March 2012. 
^ David, Mendel & Wolff (1998), p. 188
^ Spitta (1899b), p. 274
^ David, Mendel & Wolff (1998), pp. 191–197
^ "Did Bach really leave Art of Fugue unfinished?". The Art of Fugue. American Public Media. Retrieved 28 March 2014. 
^ a b Bach, Carl Philipp Emanuel & Agricola, Johann Friedrich (1754). "Nekrolog". Musikalische Bibliothek (in German). Leipzig: Mizlerischer Bücherverlag. IV.1: 158–173.  Printed in translation in David, Mendel & Wolff (1998), p. 299.
^ Wolff (2000), p. 166
^ Herl (2004), p. 123
^ Fuller Maitland, J.A., ed. (1911). "Johann Sebastian Bach". Grove's Dictionary of Music and Musicians. 1. New York: Macmillan Publishers. p. 154. 
^ Leaver (2007), pp. 280, 289–291
^ Huizenga, Tom. "A Visitor's Guide to the St. Matthew Passion". NPR Music. National Public Radio. Retrieved 25 February 2012. 
^ Traupman-Carr, Carol. "The Well Tempered Clavier BWV 846–869". Bach 101. Bach Choir of Bethlehem. Archived from the original on 2 July 2013. Retrieved 23 December 2014. 
^ Spitta III (1899b), Appendix XII p. 315
^ Clemens Romijn. Liner notes for Tilge, Höchster, meine Sünden BWV 1083 (after Pergolesi's Stabat Mater). Brilliant Classics, 2000. (2014 reissue: J.S. Bach Complete Edition. "Liner notes" p. 54)
^ Jopi Harri. St. Petersburg Court Chant and the Tradition of Eastern Slavic Church Singing. Finland: University of Turku (2011), p. 24
^ Eidam 2001, Ch. IV
^ Eidam 2001, Ch. IX
^ a b Marshall, Robert L. (1989). Don O., Franklin, ed. On the Origin of Bach's Magnificat: a Lutheran composer's challenge. Bach Studies. Cambridge. pp. 3–17. ISBN 978-0-521-34105-9. 
^ Eidam 2001, Ch. III
^ Klavierbüchlein für W. F. Bach at www.bachdigital.de
^ Donington (1982), p. 91
^ Kuhnau, Johann (1700), Der musicalische Quack-Salber, Dresden 
^ Eidam 2001, Ch. XVIII
^ André Isoir (organ) and Le Parlement de Musique conducted by Martin Gester. Johann Sebastian Bach: L'oeuvre pour orgue et orchestre. Calliope 1993. Liner notes by Gilles Cantagrel.
^ George Frideric Handel. 6 Organ Concertos, Op. 4 at IMSLP website
^ Peter Wollny, "Harpsichord Concertos," booklet notes for Andreas Staier's 2015 recording of the concertos, Harmonia mundi HMC 902181.82
^ Schulenberg (2006), pp. 1–2
^ "Did Bach intend Art of Fugue to be performed?". The Art of Fugue. American Public Media. Retrieved 28 March 2014. 
^ Eidam 2001, Ch. XXX
^ Forkel/Terry 1920 pp. 73–74
^ Bach Digital Work 1677 at www.bachdigital.de
^ Williams, Peter F. (1980). The Organ Music of J. S. Bach, Volume 1: Preludes, Toccatas, Fantasias, Fugues, Sonatas, Concertos and Miscellaneous Pieces (BWV 525–598, 802–805 etc). Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-21723-1, p. 217
^ Alberto Basso (1979). Frau Musika: La vita e le opere di J. S. Bach, Volume 1 (of 2): Le origini familiari, l'ambiente luterano, gli anni giovanili, Weimar e Köthen (1685–1723). Turin, EDT. ISBN 88-7063-011-0 p. 493
^ Don O. Franklin. "The Libretto of Bach's John Passion and the Doctrine of Reconciliation: An Historical Perspective", pp. 179–203 in Proceedings of the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences Vol. 143 edited by A. A. Clement, 1995.
^ "Bach Works Catalogue". Bach Digital. Retrieved 29 September 2015. 
^ Wolfgang Schmieder (editor). Thematisch-systematisches Verzeichnis der musikalischen Werke von Johann Sebastian Bach. Leipzig: Breitkopf & Härtel, 1950. Unaltered up unto its eighth printing in 1986.
^ Schmieder, Wolfgang, Alfred Dürr, and Yoshitake Kobayashi (eds.). 1998. Bach-Werke-Verzeichnis: Kleine Ausgabe (BWV2a). Wiesbaden: Breitkopf & Härtel. ISBN 978-3765102493.(in German)
^ Bach Digital Work 1307
^ Joel H. Kuznik. "BWV 1128: A recently discovered Bach organ work" pp. 22–23[permanent dead link] in The Diapason, Vol. 99 No. 22. December 2008. (archived July 21, 2011)
^ Leaver (2007), p. 430
^ Williams (2003), p. 114
^ Traupman-Carr, Carol. "The Christmas Oratorio, BWV 248". Bach 101. Bach Choir of Bethlehem. Retrieved 29 March 2014. 
^ Traupman-Carr, Carol. "Bach, Master of the Cantata". Bach 101. Bach Choir of Bethlehem. Archived from the original on 2 July 2013. Retrieved 24 December 2014. 
^ Bach's secular cantatas in BWV order, each followed by a link to the Bach Digital Work (BDW) page of the cantata at the Bach-Digital website:


BWV 30a (BDW 0039)
BWV 36a (BDW 0049)
BWV 36b (BDW 0050)
BWV 36c (BDW 0051)
BWV 66a (BDW 0083)
BWV 134a (BDW 0166)
BWV 173a (BDW 0211)
BWV 184a (BDW 0223)
BWV 193a (BDW 0235)
BWV 194a (BDW 0239)
BWV 198 (BDW 0246)
BWV 201 (BDW 0251)
BWV 202 (BDW 0252)
BWV 203 (BDW 0253)
BWV 204 (BDW 0254)
BWV 205 (BDW 0255)
BWV 205a (BDW 0256)
BWV 206, first version (BDW 0257)
BWV 206, second version (BDW 0258)
BWV 207 (BDW 0259)
BWV 207a (BDW 0260)
BWV 208, first version (BDW 0261)
BWV 208, second version (BDW 0262)
BWV 208a (BDW 0263)
BWV 209 (BDW 0264)
BWV 210 (BDW 0265)
BWV 210a (BDW 0266)
BWV 211 (BDW 0267)
BWV 212 (BDW 0268)
BWV 213 (BDW 0269)
BWV 214 (BDW 0270)
BWV 215 (BDW 0271)
BWV 216 (BDW 0272)
BWV 216a (BDW 0273)
BWV 249a (BDW 0318)
BWV 249b (BDW 0319)
BWV Anh. 6 (BDW 1314)
BWV Anh. 7 (BDW 1315)
BWV Anh. 8 (BDW 1316)
BWV Anh. 9 (BDW 1317)
BWV Anh. 10 (BDW 1318)
BWV Anh. 11 (BDW 1319)
BWV Anh. 12 (BDW 1320)
BWV Anh. 13 (BDW 1321)
BWV Anh. 18 (BDW 1326)
BWV Anh. 19 (BDW 1327)
BWV Anh. 20 (BDW 1328)
BWV Anh. 195 (BDW 1506)
BWV Anh. 196 (BDW 1507)
BWV deest (BDW 1536)



^ For instance, Helmut Rilling's box set of the complete secular cantatas contains 22 works
^ An Easter cantata, "one of Bach's better-known early works", writes David Schulenburg in Boyd, ed., 1999
^ "perhaps the most admired of Bach's compositions presumed to date from before his appointment in Weimar (1708)", David Schulenburg in Boyd, ed., 1999.
^ "justifiably considered among Bach's finest contributions", writes Nicholas Anderson in Boyd, Ed., 1999
^ "Especially in its opening chorus, it is one of Bach's contrapuntal masterpieces": Robin A. Leaver in Boyd, ed., 1999
^ "one of Bach's best-known church works" wrote David Schulenberg in Boyd, ed., 1999
^ Bach Digital Work 0246 at www.bachdigital.de
^ Bach Digital Work 0261, 0262 at www.bachdigital.de
^ Bach Digital Work 0268 at www.bachdigital.de
^ Bach Digital Work 0253 at www.bachdigital.de
^ Bach Digital Work 1319, 1320 at www.bachdigital.de
^ Bach Digital Work 0251 at www.bachdigital.de
^ Traupman-Carr, Carol. "Cantata BWV 211, Coffee Cantata". Bach 101. Bach Choir of Bethlehem. Retrieved 31 March 2014. 
^ Traupman-Carr, Carol. "Choral Works". Bach 101. Bach Choir of Bethlehem. Retrieved 31 March 2014. 
^ Melamed, Daniel R. (1995). J. S. Bach and the German Motet. pp. 90–94. 
^ "The Mass in B Minor, BWV 232". Bach 101. Bach Choir of Bethlehem. Retrieved 29 March 2014. 
^ Herz (1985), p. 187
^ "Bach, Johann Sebastian". GMN ClassicalPlus. Archived from the original on 19 June 2008. Retrieved 19 May 2008. 
^ Smith, Timothy A. "Arnstadt (1703–1707)". The Canons and Fugues of J. S. Bach. Retrieved 11 April 2014. 
^ Schweitzer (1935), p. 333
^ Kroesbergen, Willem & Cruickshank, Andrew (November 2013). "18th Century Quotes on J.S. Bach's Temperament". Academia.edu. 
^ Tomita, Yo. "J. S. Bach: Inventions and Sinfonias". Retrieved 22 February 2012. 
^ McComb, Todd M. "Bach: English Suites". Early Music FAQ. Retrieved 10 December 2014. 
^ Traupman-Carr, Carol. "French Suites 1–6". Bach 101. The Bach Choir of Bethlehem. Archived from the original on 2 July 2013. Retrieved 23 December 2014. 
^ McComb, Todd M. "Bach: Partitas, BWV 825–30". Early Music FAQ. Retrieved 10 December 2014. 
^ Libbey, Ted. "Gold Standard for Bach's 'Goldberg Variations'". NPR Music. National Public Radio. Retrieved 22 February 2012. 
^ Bratman, David. "Shaham: Bold, Brilliant, All-Bach". San Francisco Classical Voice. Retrieved 23 February 2012. 
^ "Baroque Music". Music of the Baroque. Archived from the original on 27 December 2014. Retrieved 27 December 2014. 
^ Traupman-Carr, Carol. "A compendium of works performed by the Bach Choir". Bach 101. Bach Choir of Bethlehem. Archived from the original on 19 July 2013. Retrieved 23 December 2014. 
^ Forkel/Terry 1920 pp. 10–11
^ Forkel/Terry 1920 pp. 140–141
^ Zehnder, Jean-Claude (de) (2011) Toccatas and Fugues / Individual Works. Leipzig, Breitkopf & Härtel. Introduction p. 20.
^ David, Mendel & Wolff (1998), p. 297
^ Geck & Bell (2003), p. 141
^ Johann Sebastian Bach. Letter to Augustus III of Poland. 27 July 1733; Quoted in Hans T. David and Arthur Mendel, The Bach Reader: A Life of Johann Sebastian Bach in Letters and Documents. W. W. Norton & Company, 1945, p. 128; Quoted in David, Mendel & Wolff (1998), p. 158. ISBN 978-0-393-04558-1
^ Johann Adolf Scheibe. pp. 46–47 in Critischer Musicus VI, 14 May 1737. Quoted in Eidam 2001, Chapter XXII.
^ Johann Mattheson. Das Beschützte Orchestre, oder desselben Zweyte Eröffnung, footnote p. 222 Hamburg: Schiller, 1717.
^ Lorenz Christoph Mizler. Musikalische Bibliothek. Volume I, Part 4, pp. 61–73. Leipzig, April 1738. Includes a reprint of Johann Abraham Birnbaum's Unpartheyische Anmerckungen über eine bedenckliche stelle in dem Sechsten stück des Critischen Musicus. published early January of the same year.
^ Bach was regarded as "passé even in his own lifetime". (Morris 2005, p. 2)
^ Wolff (2000), pp. 456–461
^ Forkel/Terry 1920, pp. 85–86.
^ Listing of manuscripts of Bach compositions once in the possession of C. P. E. Bach[permanent dead link] at www.bach-digital.de
^ Peter Wollny. "Chapter twelve: Wilhelm Friedemann Bach's Halle performances of cantatas by his father", pp. 202–228 in Bach Studies 2 edited by Daniel R. Melamed. Cambridge University Press 2006. ISBN 9780521028912
^ Forkel/Terry 1920, p. 139
^ Wolff 2013, p. 459
^ a b c d Christoph Wolff. "A Bach Cult in Late-Eighteenth-Century Berlin: Sara Levy’s Musical Salon" in Bulletin of the American Academy. Spring 2005. pp. 26–31.
^ a b Applegate, 2005, p. 14
^ Spitta 1899a, pp. 518–519, 611
^ A-Wgm A 169 b (III 31685) at www.bachdigital.de
^ Preludes and Fugues, K.404a: Scores at the International Music Score Library Project (IMSLP)
^ Köchel, Ludwig Ritter von (1862). Chronologisch-thematisches Verzeichniss sämmtlicher Tonwerke Wolfgang Amade Mozart's (in German). Leipzig: Breitkopf & Härtel. OCLC 3309798. Archived from the original on 12 February 2008. , No. 405, pp. 328–329
^ "Bach, Mozart and the 'Musical Midwife'". 
^ Brown, A. Peter, The Symphonic Repertoire (Volume 2). Indiana University Press (ISBN 025333487X), pp. 423–432 (2002).
^ a b c d e f McKay, Cory. "The Bach Reception in the 18th and 19th century" at www.music.mcgill.ca
^ a b Schenk, Winston & Winston (1959), p. 452
^ Daniel Heartz. Mozart, Haydn and Early Beethoven: 1781–1802, p. 678. W. W. Norton & Company, 2008. ISBN 9780393285789
^ Kerst (1904), p. 101
^ Edward Noel Green. Chromatic Completion in the Late Vocal Music of Haydn and Mozart: A Technical, Philosophic, and Historical Study, p. 273 New York University. ISBN 9780549794516
^ Geck (2006), pp. 9–10 (excerpt)
^ Schneider 1907, p. 94
^ Schneider 1907, pp. 96–97
^ Schneider 1907, p. 100
^ Forkel/Terry 1920, p. xvii
^ Felix Mendelssohn Bartholdy. Magnificat, MWV A2 edited by Pietro Zappalà. Carus, 1996. Foreword, p. VI
^ Johann Sebastian Bach's noch wenig bekannte Orgelcompositionen (auch am Pianoforte von einem oder zwei Spielern ausführbar), three volumes, edited by Adolph Bernhard Marx. Leipzig: Breitkopf & Härtel, 1833
^ Kupferberg (1985), p. 126
^ Spitta 1992, 1899a, 1899b (first publication in German, in two volumes: Leipzig, Breitkopf & Härtel 1873 and 1880)
^ "Robert Johnson and Pablo Casals' Game Changers Turn 70". NPR Music. National Public Radio. Retrieved 22 February 2012. 
^ McComb, Todd M. "What is Early Music?–Historically Informed Performance". Early Music FAQ. Retrieved 2 January 2015. 
^ Shipton, Alyn. "Bach and Jazz". A Bach Christmas. BBC Radio 3. Retrieved 27 December 2014. 
^ a b Rokus de Groot (2000). "And Nowhere Bach. Bach Reception in a Late Twentieth-Century Dutch Composition by Elmer Schönberger" pp. 145–158 in Tijdschrift van de Koninklijke Vereniging voor Nederlandse Muziekgeschiedenis, Volume 50, No. 1/2. Koninklijke Vereniging voor Nederlandse Muziekgeschiedenis.
^ "Bach Edition" at www.musicweb-international.com 1 December 2001
^ Teldec's 1999 Bach 2000 Box set, Limited Edition at www.amazon.com
^ Bach-Edition: The Complete Works (172 CDs & CDR) Archived 29 September 2015 at the Wayback Machine. at the Hänssler Classic website
^ "Golden Record: Music from Earth". NASA. Retrieved 26 July 2012. 
^ Bach, USGS Gazetteer of Planetary Nomenclature
^ "JPL Small-Body Database Browser". 
^ List of works by Johann Sebastian Bach and Category:Bach, Johann Sebastian at IMSLP website
^ www.bach-digital.de
^ www.jsbach.org
^ www.bach-cantatas.com
^ Williams 2003
^ Williams 2007
^ Gardiner 2013
^ "The 168 best classical music recordings" in The Telegraph. 2009, revised by Ivan Hewett in 2014.
^ Zegers, Richard H.C.; Maas, Mario; Koopman, A.G. & Maat, George J.R. (2009). "Are the alleged remains of Johann Sebastian Bach authentic?" (PDF). The Medical Journal of Australia. 190 (4): 213–216. 



Bibliography





Book: Johann Sebastian Bach




Biographies
See also: Biographies of Johann Sebastian Bach

Boyd, Malcolm (2000). Bach. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-514222-5. 
David, Hans T.; Mendel, Arthur & Wolff, Christoph (1998). The New Bach Reader: A Life of Johann Sebastian Bach in Letters and Documents. New York: W. W. Norton & Company. ISBN 0-393-31956-3. 
Eidam, Klaus (2001). The True Life of Johann Sebastian Bach. New York: Basic Books. ISBN 0-465-01861-0. 
Forkel, Johann Nikolaus, translated by Charles Sanford Terry (1920). Johann Sebastian Bach: His Life, Art, and Work. New York: Harcourt, Brace and Howe; London: Constable.
Gardiner, John Eliot (2013). Bach: Music in the Castle of Heaven. New York: Alfred O. Knopf. ISBN 978-0-375-41529-6. 
Gardiner, John Eliot (2013). Music in the Castle of Heaven: A Portrait of Johann Sebastian Bach. London: Allen Lane. ISBN 978-0-7139-9662-3. 
Geck, Martin, translated by Bell, Anthea (2003). Bach. Haus Publishing. ISBN 9781904341161
Geck, Martin (2006). Johann Sebastian Bach: Life and Work. Orlando: Harcourt. ISBN 0-15-100648-2. 
Geiringer, Karl (1966). Johann Sebastian Bach: The Culmination of an Era. New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-500554-6. 
Schweitzer, Albert (1935). J. S. Bach. Volume 1. New York: Macmillan Publishers. 
Philipp Spitta (1992). Johann Sebastian Bach: His Work and Influence on the Music of Germany, 1685–1750 in three volumes (Volume 1) Translated by Clara Bell and J. A. Fuller Maitland. Republication of the 1952 Dover edition (with "Bibliographical Note" by Saul Novack)
Spitta, Philipp (1899a). Johann Sebastian Bach: His Work and Influence on the Music of Germany, 1685–1750 (Volume 2). London: Novello & Co. 
Spitta, Philipp (1899b). Johann Sebastian Bach: His Work and Influence on the Music of Germany, 1685–1750 (Volume 3). London: Novello & Co. 
Williams, Peter (2007). J. S. Bach: A Life in Music. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-87074-7. 
Williams, Peter (2003). The Life of Bach. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-53374-0. 
Wolff, Christoph (1991). Bach: Essays on his Life and Music. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press. ISBN 0-674-05926-3. 
Wolff, Christoph (2000). Johann Sebastian Bach: The Learned Musician. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-816534-X. , second edition, 2013, W. W. Norton, New York and London, ISBN 0-393-32256-4 pbk.

Other

Applegate, Celia (2014). Bach in Berlin: Nation and Culture in Mendelssohn's revival of the St. Matthew Passion. Ithaca, New York: Cornell University Press. 
Baron, Carol K. (2006). Bach's Changing World: Voices in the Community. Rochester, New York: University of Rochester Press. ISBN 1-58046-190-5. 
Boyd, Malcolm, Ed., Oxford Composer Companions: J. S. Bach, Oxford University Press, 1999.
Chiapusso, Jan (1968). Bach's World. Scarborough, Ontario: Indiana University Press. ISBN 0-253-10520-X. 
Donington, Robert (1982). Baroque Music: Style and Performance: A Handbook. New York: W. W. Norton & Company. ISBN 0-393-30052-8. 
Dörffel, Alfred (1882). Thematisches Verzeichnis der Instrumentalwerke von Joh. Seb. Bach (in German). Leipzig: C.F. Peters.  N.B.: First published in 1867; superseded, for scholarly purposes, by Wolfgang Schmieder's complete thematic catalog, but useful as a handy reference tool for only the instrumental works of Bach and as a partial alternative to Schmieder's work.
Herl, Joseph (2004). Worship Wars in Early Lutheranism: Choir, Congregation, and Three Centuries of Conflict. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-515439-8. 
Herz, Gerhard (1985). Essays on J.S. Bach. Ann Arbor, Michigan: UMI Research Press. ISBN 978-0835719896. 
Hofstadter, Douglas (1999). Gödel, Escher, Bach: An Eternal Golden Braid. New York: Basic Books. ISBN 0-465-02656-7. 
Jones, Richard (2007). The Creative Development of Johann Sebastian Bach. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-816440-8. 
Kerst, Friedrich (1904). Beethoven im eigenen Wort (in German). Berlin: Schuster & Loeffler. 
Kupferberg, Herbert (1985). Basically Bach: A 300th Birthday Celebration. New York: McGraw-Hill Book Company. ISBN 0-07-035646-7. 
Leaver, Robin A. (2007). Luther's Liturgical Music. Grand Rapids, Michigan: William B. Eerdmans Publishing Company. ISBN 0-8028-3221-0. 
Miles, Russell H. (1962). Johann Sebastian Bach: An Introduction to His Life and Works. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice Hall. OCLC 600065. 
Morris, Edmund (2005). Beethoven: the Universal Composer. New York: HarperCollins. ISBN 0-06-075974-7. 
Pirro, André (2014) [1907]. The Aesthetic of Johann Sebastian Bach. Lanham, Maryland: Rowman & Littlefield. ISBN 978-1-4422-3290-7. 
Rich, Alan (1995). Johann Sebastian Bach: Play by Play. San Francisco: HarperCollins. ISBN 0-06-263547-6. 
Schenk, Erich; Winston, Richard & Winston, Clara (1959). Mozart and his times. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. OCLC 602180. 
Schneider, Max (de) (1907). "Verzeichnis der bis zum Jahre 1851 gedruckten (und der geschrieben im Handel gewesenen) Werke von Johann Sebastian Bach", pp. 84–113 in Bach-Jahrbuch 1906, Neue Bachgesellschaft VII (3).
Schulenberg, David (2006). The Keyboard Music of J.S. Bach. New York: Routledge. ISBN 0-415-97400-3. 
Spaeth, Sigmund (1937). Stories Behind the World's Great Music. New York: Whittlesey House. 
Stauffer, George B. & May, Ernest (1986). J. S. Bach as Organist: His Instruments, Music, and Performance Practices. Bloomington: Indiana University Press. ISBN 0-253-33181-1. 
Van Til, Marian (2007). George Frideric Handel: A Music Lover's Guide to His Life, His Faith & the Development of Messiah and His Other Oratorios. Youngstown, New York: WordPower Publishing. ISBN 0-9794785-0-2. 
Wolff, Christoph, ed. (1983). The New Grove Bach Family. London: Macmillan Publishers. ISBN 0-333-34350-6. 
Wolff, Christoph, ed. (1997). The World of the Bach Cantatas: Johann Sebastian Bach's Early Sacred Cantatas. New York: W. W. Norton & Company. ISBN 978-0-393-33674-0. 
Wolff, Christoph, ed. (1998), The New Bach Reader: a life of Johann Sebastian Bach in Letters and Documents, W. W. Norton; 1945 and 1972 eds. by Hans T. David and Arthur Mendel.

External links

Find more aboutJohann Sebastian Bachat Wikipedia's sister projects

Media from Wikimedia Commons
Quotations from Wikiquote
Texts from Wikisource





German Wikisource has original text related to this article:
Johann Sebastian Bach




Johann Sebastian Bach at Encyclopædia Britannica
J.S. Bach Home Page, by Jan Hanford—extensive information on Bach and his works; database of recordings and user reviews
Bach Bibliography, by Yo Tomita of Queen's University Belfast—especially useful to scholars
Bach Cantatas Website, by Aryeh Oron—information on the cantatas as well as other works
Johann Sebastian Bach at the Musopen project
Works by or about Johann Sebastian Bach at Internet Archive

Scores

Free sheet music of Johann Sebastian Bach from Cantorion.org
Free scores by Johann Sebastian Bach in the Choral Public Domain Library (ChoralWiki)
Free scores by Johann Sebastian Bach at the International Music Score Library Project (IMSLP)—the Bach-Gesellschaft-Ausgabe volumes split up into individual works, plus other editions

Recordings

All of Bach website with a growing number of recordings by the Netherlands Bach Society and guest musicians
The complete organ works of Bach performed by James Kibbie on German Baroque organs
""Discovering Bach" material". BBC Radio 3 archives. 
"Exploring Bach" series at the Oregon Bach Festival







v
t
e


Johann Sebastian Bach



Compositions




by BWV



Cantatas
Motets
Masses, Mass movements, Magnificats, Passions and Oratorios
Chorale harmonisations
Songs and arias
Organ compositions
Keyboard and lute
Chamber music
Orchestral works
Fugal works





More info



Bach cantata
Church music in Latin
Passions
Bach's choir and orchestra
Performance practice
Printed during Bach's lifetime
New Bach Edition
Transcriptions











People



Family
Students
Biographers and scholars: Basso, Dürr, Forkel, Jones, Neumann, Riemenschneider, Rust, Schmieder, Spitta, Terry, Wolff





Organizations



Bach Society
Bach Gesellschaft
Neue Bachgesellschaft
Bach Archive (Leipzig)
Johann Sebastian Bach Institute (Göttingen)
Internationale Bachakademie Stuttgart





Places



Bach House (Eisenach)
Bach House (Köthen)
Café Zimmermann
St. Thomas Church, Leipzig





Other topics



BACH motif
Bach festivals
Competitions and prizes: International Johann Sebastian Bach Competition, Royal Academy of Music Bach Prize












v
t
e


Bach family, showing relationship to Johann Sebastian Bach






Anna Magdalena Bach (2nd wife)
Carl Philipp Emanuel Bach (son)
Christoph Bach (grandfather)
Elisabeth Lämmerhirt (mother)
Georg Christoph Bach (uncle)
Gottfried Heinrich Bach (son)
Johann Aegidius Bach (uncle)
Johann Ambrosius Bach (father)
Johann Bernhard Bach (2nd cousin)
Johann Bernhard Bach the Younger (nephew)
Johann Christian Bach (son)
Johann Christoph Bach (1st cousin once removed)
Johann Christoph Bach (organist at Ohrdruf) (brother)
Johann Christoph Bach (musician at Arnstadt) (uncle)
Johann Christoph Friedrich Bach (son)
Johann Ernst Bach (musician at Saxe-Weimar)
Johann Gottfried Bernhard Bach (son)
Johann Jacob Bach (brother)
Johann Ludwig Bach (2nd cousin)
Johann Michael Bach (father-in-law)
Johann Michael Bach (musician at Wuppertal) (nephew)
Johann Nicolaus Bach (2nd cousin)
Johann Sebastian Bach (self)
Johann Sebastian Bach the Younger (grandson)
Johannes Bach
Maria Barbara Bach (1st wife/2nd cousin)
Veit Bach (great-great-grandfather)
Wilhelm Friedemann Bach (son)
Wilhelm Friedrich Ernst Bach (grandson)












v
t
e


Lutheran hymnody



Hymnals



First Lutheran hymnal (1524)
Erfurt Enchiridion (1524)
Eyn geystlich Gesangk Buchleyn (1524)
Praxis pietatis melica (1640/47)
Becker Psalter
Evangelisches Gesangbuch
Christian Worship Hymnal
Evangelical Lutheran Worship
Hymns of Zion
Lutheran Book of Worship
Lutheran Hymnal
Lutheran Hymnal (Finland)
Lutheran Hymnal with Supplement
Lutheran Service Book
Lutheran Worship
Passion Hymns
Service Book and Hymnal





Hymnodists
and
hymnologists



Michael Altenburg
Johann Sebastian Bach
Martin Behm
Joachim a Burck
Dieterich Buxtehude
Elisabeth Cruciger
Johann Crüger
Simon Dach
Wolfgang Dachstein
Paul Eber
Paul Fleming
Johann Franck
Michael Franck
Melchior Franck
Paul Gerhardt
Bartholomäus Gesius
Johannes Gigas
N. F. S. Grundtvig
Andreas Hammerschmidt
Claus Harms
Johann Heermann
Ludwig Helmbold
Valerius Herberger
Nikolaus Herman
Johannes Hermann
Sebald Heyden
Konrad Hubert
Justus Jonas
Sigfrid Karg-Elert
Christian Keymann
Balthasar Kindermann
Johann Kolross
Johann Balthasar König
Martin Luther
Hemminki of Masku
Felix Mendelssohn
Johann Matthäus Meyfart
Georg Neumark
Philipp Nicolai
Johann Pachelbel
Hallgrímur Pétursson
Michael Praetorius
Christian Heinrich Postel
Adam Reusner
Bartholomäus Ringwaldt
Martin Rinkart
Johann von Rist
Gottfried Wilhelm Sacer
Carl Schalk
Martin Schalling
Heinrich Scheidemann
Johann Schein
Cyriakus Schneegass
Johann Schop
Heinrich Schütz
Nikolaus Selnecker
Lazarus Spengler
Paul Speratus
Paul Stockmann
Melchior Teschner
N. Samuel of Tranquebar
Jaroslav Vajda
Gottfried Vopelius
Philipp Wackernagel
Johann Walter
Michael Weiße
Catherine Winkworth
Johannes Zahn









List of hymns by Martin Luther
Lutheran hymn
Lutheran chorale
Chorale setting
Chorale cantata









Biography portal
Classical music portal





Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 12304462
LCCN: n79021425
ISNI: 0000 0001 2276 4157
GND: 11850553X
SELIBR: 176434
SUDOC: 026699656
BNF: cb118897907 (data)
BIBSYS: 90970064
MusicBrainz: 24f1766e-9635-4d58-a4d4-9413f9f98a4c
NLA: 35011573
NDL: 00432003
NKC: jn19990000367
ICCU: IT\ICCU\CFIV\077206
BNE: XX992838
IATH: w63x84mt











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Johann_Sebastian_Bach&oldid=817929469"					Categories: Johann Sebastian Bach1685 births1750 deaths18th-century classical composers18th-century German musicians18th-century German people18th-century keyboardistsAnglican saintsBach familyBurials at St. Thomas Church, LeipzigClassical composers of church musicComposers for celloComposers for harpsichordComposers for luteComposers for pipe organComposers for violinGerman Baroque composersGerman classical composersGerman classical organistsGerman LutheransGerman male classical composersMusic in LeipzigOratorio composersOrgan improvisersOrganists and composers in the North German traditionPeople celebrated in the Lutheran liturgical calendarPeople from EisenachPeople from Saxe-EisenachThomaskantorsHidden categories: Articles with hAudio microformatsArticles containing German-language textInterlanguage link template link numberCS1 German-language sources (de)Articles with German-language external linksAll articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from November 2017Articles with permanently dead external linksArticles with dead external links from April 2017Works with IMSLP linksArticles with International Music Score Library Project linksWebarchive template wayback linksWikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pagesUse dmy dates from December 2012Use British English from September 2012Biography with signatureArticles with hCardsArticles containing Latin-language textArticles to be split from July 2017All articles to be splitAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from November 2015Articles containing French-language textArticles containing Italian-language textArticles needing additional references from July 2017All articles needing additional referencesArticles with Encyclopædia Britannica linksArticles with Internet Archive linksComposers with IMSLP linksAC with 15 elementsWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with SELIBR identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersWikipedia articles with BIBSYS identifiersWikipedia articles with MusicBrainz identifiersWikipedia articles with NLA identifiersWikipedia articles with SBN identifiersWikipedia articles with SNAC-ID identifiersArticles containing video clips