This article is about the Christian saint. For other uses, see Chrysostomos (disambiguation).


Saint John Chrysostom



A Byzantine mosaic of John Chrysostom
from the Hagia Sophia.



East: Great Hierarch and Ecumenical Teacher
West: Bishop and Doctor of the Church


Born
c. 349[1]
Antioch


Died
14 September 407
(aged c. 58)[2]
Comana in Pontus[3]


Venerated in
Eastern Orthodoxy
Roman Catholicism
Oriental Orthodoxy
Church of the East
Anglican Communion


Beatified
does not apply


Canonized
already considered a saint before the mid-5th century in Constantinople


Feast
Eastern Orthodoxy
13 November (Accession to the archbishopric of Constantinople)
27 January (Translation of Relics)
30 January (Three Holy Hierarchs)
Western Christianity
13 September (Repose—transferred from 14 September); 27 January (extraordinary form)


Attributes
Vested as a Bishop, holding a Gospel Book or scroll, right hand raised in blessing. He is depicted as emaciated from fasting, with a high forehead, balding with dark hair and a small beard. Symbols: beehive, a white dove, a pan,[4] chalice on a bible, pen and inkhorn


Patronage
Constantinople, education, epilepsy, lecturers, orators, preachers [4]




Part of a series on the


Eastern Orthodox Church



Mosaic of Christ Pantocrator, Hagia Sophia



Overview





Structure
Theology (History of theology)
Liturgy
Church history
Holy Mysteries
View of salvation
View of Mary
View of icons







Background



Crucifixion / Resurrection / Ascension
of Jesus




Christianity
Christian Church
Apostolic succession
Four Marks of the Church
Orthodoxy









Organization



Autocephaly
Patriarchate
Ecumenical Patriarch
Episcopal polity
Clergy
Bishops
Priests
Deacons
Monasticism
Degrees of monasticism









Autocephalous jurisdictions



Constantinople
Alexandria
Antioch
Jerusalem
Russia
Serbia
Romania
Bulgaria
Georgia
Cyprus
Greece
Poland
Albania
Czech lands and Slovakia
North America









Ecumenical Councils


Seven Ecumenical Councils:



First
Second
Third
Fourth
Fifth
Sixth
Seventh



Other important councils:



Quinisext Council
Constantinople IV
Constantinople V
Jassy
Jerusalem









History



Church Fathers
Pentarchy
Byzantine Empire
Christianization of Bulgaria
Christianization of Kievan Rus'
Great Schism
Russia
Ottoman Empire
North America









Theology


History of Orthodox Theology

(20th century (Neo-Palamism))





Apophaticism
Chrismation
Contemplative prayer
Essence vs. Energies
Hesychasm
Holy Trinity
Hypostatic union
Icons
Metousiosis
Mystical theology
Nicene Creed
Nepsis
Oikonomia
Ousia
Palamism
Philokalia
Phronema
Sin
Theosis
Theotokos



Differences from the Catholic Church
Opposition to the Filioque
Opposition to papal supremacy








Liturgy and worship


Divine Liturgy
Divine Services



Akathist
Apolytikion
Artos
Ectenia
Euchologion
Holy Water
Iconostasis
Jesus Prayer
Kontakion
Liturgical entrances
Liturgical fans
Lity
Memorial service
Memory Eternal
Omophorion
Orthodox bowing
Orthodox marriage
Praxis
Paraklesis
Paschal greeting
Paschal Homily
Paschal troparion
Prayer rope
Prosphora
Russian bell ringing
Semantron
Sign of the cross
Sticheron
Troparion
Vestments
Use of incense









Liturgical calendar


Paschal cycle
12 Great Feasts
Other feasts:



Feast of Orthodoxy
Intercession of the Theotokos



The four fasting periods:



Nativity Fast
Great Lent
Apostles' Fast
Dormition Fast









Major figures



Athanasius of Alexandria
Ephrem the Syrian
Basil of Caesarea
Cyril of Jerusalem
Gregory of Nazianzus
Gregory of Nyssa
John Chrysostom
Cyril of Alexandria
John Climacus
Maximus the Confessor
John of Damascus
Theodore the Studite
Kassiani
Cyril and Methodius
Photios I of Constantinople
Gregory Palamas









Other topics



Architecture
Encyclical of the Eastern Patriarchs
Orthodox cross
Saint titles
Statistics by country










v
t
e







Part of a series on


Christian mysticism







Theology · Philosophy


Apophatic
Ascetical
Cataphatic
Catholic spirituality
Hellenistic
Mystical theology
Neoplatonic

Henosis










Practices


Monasticism


Monasticism
Asceticism
Spiritual direction


Meditation


Meditation
Lectio Divina


Active ascetism


Contemplation




Hesychasm
Jesus prayer
Quietism




Stages of Christian perfection
Divinization




Catharsis
Theosis




Kenosis
Spiritual dryness


Passive ascetism


Abstinence








People (by era or century)





Antiquity


Ancient African
Origen
Gregory of Nyssa
Pseudo-Dionysius








Desert Fathers


Paul of Thebes
Anthony the Great
Arsenius the Great
Poemen
Macarius of Egypt
Moses the Black
Syncletica
Athanasius
John Chrysostom
Hilarion
John Cassian








11th · 12th


Bernard of Clairvaux
Guigo II
Hildegard of Bingen
Hadewijch
Symeon the New Theologian








13th · 14th



Dominican




Dominic de Guzmán




Franciscan




Francis of Assisi
Anthony of Padua
Bonaventure
Jacopone da Todi
Angela of Foligno




English




Richard Rolle
Walter Hilton
Julian of Norwich
Margery Kempe




Flemish




Beatrice of Nazareth
John of Ruysbroeck




German




Meister Eckhart
Johannes Tauler
Henry Suso




Female




Beatrice of Nazareth
Bridget of Sweden
Catherine of Siena











15th · 16th



Spanish




Ignatius of Loyola
Francisco de Osuna
John of Ávila
Teresa of Ávila
John of the Cross




Others




Catherine of Genoa











17th · 18th



French




Pierre de Bérulle
Jean-Jacques Olier
Louis de Montfort
Charles de Condren
John Eudes
John of St. Samson




Others




María de Ágreda
Anne Catherine Emmerich
Veronica Giuliani
Francis de Sales











19th


Dina Bélanger
Catherine Labouré
Mélanie Calvat
Maximin Giraud
Bernadette Soubirous
Conchita de Armida
Luisa Piccarreta
Mary of the Divine Heart
Thérèse of Lisieux
Gemma Galgani








20th


Padre Pio
Therese Neumann
Marthe Robin
Adrienne von Speyr
Alexandrina of Balazar
Faustina Kowalska
Berthe Petit
Sister Lúcia of Fátima
Edgar Cayce
Simone Weil
Alfred Delp
Thomas Merton
Charles de Foucauld








Contemporary papal views

Aspects of meditation
(Orationis Formas, 1989)
Reflection on the New Age (2003)











Literature · Media


Lingua Ignota
Ordo Virtutum
Scivias
Ascent of Mount Carmel
Dark Night of the Soul
Spiritual Canticle
Way of Perfection
Book of the First Monks
The Interior Castle
Abbey of the Holy Ghost
A Dialogue of Comfort against Tribulation
Diary: Divine Mercy in My Soul
From Willow Creek to Sacred Heart
The Glories of Mary
The Imitation of Christ
The Ladder of Divine Ascent
Philokalia
Revelations of Divine Love
Spiritual Canticle
The Story of a Soul
Theologia Germanica
Devotio Moderna
The Miracle of Our Lady of Fatima
Sol de Fátima
The Cloud of Unknowing
The Consolation of Philosophy
The Mirror of Simple Souls
Sister Catherine Treatise
Tractatus de Purgatorio Sancti Patricii
The Vision of Adamnán
Divine Comedy

Inferno
Purgatorio
Paradiso











v
t
e





John Chrysostom (/ˈkrɪsəstəm, krɪˈsɒstəm/; Greek: Ἰωάννης ὁ Χρυσόστομος; c. 349 – 14 September 407),[5] Archbishop of Constantinople, was an important Early Church Father. He is known for his preaching and public speaking, his denunciation of abuse of authority[6] by both ecclesiastical and political leaders, the Divine Liturgy of Saint John Chrysostom, and his ascetic sensibilities. The epithet Χρυσόστομος (Chrysostomos, anglicized as Chrysostom) means "golden-mouthed" in Greek and denotes his celebrated eloquence.[2][7] Chrysostom was among the most prolific authors in the early Christian Church, exceeded only by Augustine of Hippo in the quantity of his surviving writings.[8]
He is honored as a saint in the Eastern Orthodox, Catholic, and Anglican churches, as well as in some others. The Eastern Orthodox, together with the Byzantine Catholics, hold him in special regard as one of the Three Holy Hierarchs (alongside Basil the Great and Gregory of Nazianzus). The feast days of John Chrysostom in the Eastern Orthodox Church are 13 November and 27 January. In the Roman Catholic Church he is recognized as a Doctor of the Church and commemorated on 13 September in the current General Roman Calendar and on 27 January in the older calendar. Other churches of the Western tradition, including some Anglican provinces and some Lutheran churches, also commemorate him on 13 September. However, certain Lutheran churches and Anglican provinces commemorate him on the traditional feast day of 27 January. The Coptic Church also recognizes him as a saint (with feast days on 16 Thout and 17 Hathor).[9]



Contents


1 Biography

1.1 Early life and education
1.2 Diaconate and service in Antioch
1.3 Archbishop of Constantinople
1.4 Exile and death
1.5 Veneration and canonization


2 Writings

2.1 Homilies

2.1.1 Paschal Homily
2.1.2 General
2.1.3 Homilies against Jews and Judaizing Christians
2.1.4 Homily against Homosexuality


2.2 Treatises
2.3 Liturgy


3 Legacy and influence

3.1 Influence on the Catechism of the Catholic Church and clergy
3.2 Music and literature
3.3 The legend of the penance of Saint John Chrysostom
3.4 Relics


4 Notes
5 References

5.1 Collected works


6 Further reading
7 External links

7.1 Works
7.2 Orthodox feast days





Biography[edit]
Early life and education[edit]
John was born in Antioch in 349 to Greek parents from Syria. Different scholars describe his mother Anthusa as a pagan[10] or as a Christian, and his father was a high-ranking military officer.[11] John's father died soon after his birth and he was raised by his mother. He was baptised in 368 or 373 and tonsured as a reader (one of the minor orders of the Church).[12]
As a result of his mother's influential connections in the city, John began his education under the pagan teacher Libanius.[13] From Libanius, John acquired the skills for a career in rhetoric, as well as a love of the Greek language and literature.[14]
As he grew older, however, John became more deeply committed to Christianity and went on to study theology under Diodore of Tarsus, founder of the re-constituted School of Antioch. According to the Christian historian Sozomen, Libanius was supposed to have said on his deathbed that John would have been his successor "if the Christians had not taken him from us".[15]
John lived in extreme asceticism and became a hermit in about 375; he spent the next two years continually standing, scarcely sleeping, and committing the Bible to memory. As a consequence of these practices, his stomach and kidneys were permanently damaged and poor health forced him to return to Antioch.[16]
Diaconate and service in Antioch[edit]
For more details on this topic, see Meletian schism.
John was ordained as a deacon in 381 by Saint Meletius of Antioch who was not then in communion with Alexandria and Rome. After the death of Meletius, John separated himself from the followers of Meletius, without joining Paulinus, the rival of Meletius for the bishopric of Antioch. But after the death of Paulinus he was ordained a presbyter (priest) in 386 by Evagrius, the successor of Paulinus.[17] He was destined later to bring about reconciliation between Flavian I of Antioch, Alexandria, and Rome, thus bringing those three sees into communion for the first time in nearly seventy years.[18]
In Antioch, over the course of twelve years (386–397), John gained popularity because of the eloquence of his public speaking at the Golden Church, Antioch's cathedral, especially his insightful expositions of Bible passages and moral teaching. The most valuable of his works from this period are his Homilies on various books of the Bible. He emphasised charitable giving and was concerned with the spiritual and temporal needs of the poor. He spoke against abuse of wealth and personal property:

Do you wish to honour the body of Christ? Do not ignore him when he is naked. Do not pay him homage in the temple clad in silk, only then to neglect him outside where he is cold and ill-clad. He who said: "This is my body" is the same who said: "You saw me hungry and you gave me no food", and "Whatever you did to the least of my brothers you did also to me"... What good is it if the Eucharistic table is overloaded with golden chalices when your brother is dying of hunger? Start by satisfying his hunger and then with what is left you may adorn the altar as well.[19]





A sculpture of John Chrysostom in Saint Patrick's Cathedral, New York City


His straightforward understanding of the Scriptures – in contrast to the Alexandrian tendency towards allegorical interpretation – meant that the themes of his talks were practical, explaining the Bible's application to everyday life. Such straightforward preaching helped Chrysostom to garner popular support. He founded a series of hospitals in Constantinople to care for the poor.[20]
One incident that happened during his service in Antioch illustrates the influence of his homilies. When Chrysostom arrived in Antioch, Flavian, the bishop of the city, had to intervene with Emperor Theodosius I on behalf of citizens who had gone on a rampage mutilating statues of the Emperor and his family. During the weeks of Lent in 387, John preached more than twenty homilies in which he entreated the people to see the error of their ways. These made a lasting impression on the general population of the city: many pagans converted to Christianity as a result of the homilies. As a result, Theodosius' vengeance was not as severe as it might have been.[6]
Archbishop of Constantinople[edit]




John Chrysostom confronting Aelia Eudoxia, in a 19th-century painting by Jean-Paul Laurens.


In the autumn of 397, John was appointed Archbishop of Constantinople, after having been nominated without his knowledge by the eunuch Eutropius. He had to leave Antioch in secret due to fears that the departure of such a popular figure would cause civil unrest.[21]
During his time as Archbishop he adamantly refused to host lavish social gatherings, which made him popular with the common people, but unpopular with wealthy citizens and the clergy. His reforms of the clergy were also unpopular. He told visiting regional preachers to return to the churches they were meant to be serving—without any payout.[22]
His time in Constantinople was more tumultuous than his time in Antioch. Theophilus, the Patriarch of Alexandria, wanted to bring Constantinople under his sway and opposed John's appointment to Constantinople. Theophilus had disciplined four Egyptian monks (known as "the Tall Brothers") over their support of Origen's teachings. They fled to John and were welcomed by him. Theophilus therefore accused John of being too partial to the teaching of Origen. He made another enemy in Aelia Eudoxia, wife of Emperor Arcadius, who assumed that John's denunciations of extravagance in feminine dress were aimed at herself.[6] Eudoxia, Theophilus and other of his enemies held a synod in 403 (the Synod of the Oak) to charge John, in which his connection to Origen was used against him. It resulted in his deposition and banishment. He was called back by Arcadius almost immediately, as the people became "tumultuous" over his departure, even threatening to burn the royal palace.[23] There was an earthquake the night of his arrest, which Eudoxia took for a sign of God's anger, prompting her to ask Arcadius for John's reinstatement.[24]
Peace was short-lived. A silver statue of Eudoxia was erected in the Augustaion, near his cathedral. John denounced the dedication ceremonies as pagan and spoke against the Empress in harsh terms: "Again Herodias raves; again she is troubled; she dances again; and again desires to receive John's head in a charger",[25] an allusion to the events surrounding the death of John the Baptist. Once again he was banished, this time to the Caucasus in Abkhazia.[26]
Around 405, John began to lend moral and financial support to Christian monks who were enforcing the emperors' anti-Pagan laws, by destroying temples and shrines in Phoenicia and nearby regions.[27]
Exile and death[edit]
The causes of John's exile are not clear, though Jennifer Barry suggests that they have to do with his connections to Arianism. Other historians, including Wendy Mayer and Geoffrey Dunn, have argued that "the surplus of evidence reveals a struggle between Johannite and anti-Johannite camps in Constantinople soon after John's departure and for a few years after his death".[28] Faced with exile, John Chrysostom wrote an appeal for help to three churchmen: Pope Innocent I, Venerius the Bishop of Milan, and the third to Chromatius, the Bishop of Aquileia.[29][30][31] In 1872, church historian William Stephens wrote:

The Patriarch of the Eastern Rome appeals to the great bishops of the West, as the champions of an ecclesiastical discipline which he confesses himself unable to enforce, or to see any prospect of establishing. No jealousy is entertained of the Patriarch of the Old Rome by the Patriarch of the New Rome. The interference of Innocent is courted, a certain primacy is accorded him, but at the same time he is not addressed as a supreme arbitrator; assistance and sympathy are solicited from him as from an elder brother, and two other prelates of Italy are joint recipients with him of the appeal.[32]

Pope Innocent I protested John's banishment from Constantinople to the town of Cucusus in Cappadocia, but to no avail. Innocent sent a delegation to intercede on behalf of John in 405. It was led by Gaudentius of Brescia; Gaudentius and his companions, two bishops, encountered many difficulties and never reached their goal of entering Constantinople.[33]
John wrote letters which still held great influence in Constantinople. As a result of this, he was further exiled from Cucusus (where he stayed from 404 to 407) to Pitiunt (Pityus) (in modern Abkhazia) where his tomb is a shrine for pilgrims. He never reached this destination, as he died at Comana Pontica on 14 September 407 during the journey. His last words are said to have been "δόξα τῷ θεῷ πάντων ἕνεκεν" (Glory be to God for all things).[24]
Veneration and canonization[edit]




Byzantine 11th-century soapstone relief of John Chrysostom, Louvre.






The return of the relics of Saint John Chrysostom to the Church of the Holy Apostles in Constantinople.


John came to be venerated as a saint soon after his death. Almost immediately after, an anonymous supporter of John (known as pseudo-Martyrius) wrote a funeral oration to reclaim John as a symbol of Christian orthodoxy.[28] But three decades later, some of his adherents in Constantinople remained in schism.[34] Saint Proclus, Patriarch of Constantinople (434–446), hoping to bring about the reconciliation of the Johannites, preached a homily praising his predecessor in the Church of Hagia Sophia. He said, "O John, your life was filled with sorrow, but your death was glorious. Your grave is blessed and reward is great, by the grace and mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ O graced one, having conquered the bounds of time and place! Love has conquered space, unforgetting memory has annihilated the limits, and place does not hinder the miracles of the saint."[35]
These homilies helped to mobilize public opinion, and the patriarch received permission from the emperor to return Chrysostom's relics to Constantinople, where they were enshrined in the Church of the Holy Apostles on 28 January 438. The Eastern Orthodox Church commemorates him as a "Great Ecumenical Teacher", with Basil the Great and Gregory the Theologian. These three saints, in addition to having their own individual commemorations throughout the year, are commemorated together on 30 January, a feast known as the Synaxis of the Three Hierarchs.[36]
There are several feast days dedicated to him:

27 January, Translation of the relics of Saint John Chrysostom from Comana to Constantinople
30 January, Synaxis of the Three Great Hierarchs
14 September, Repose of Saint John Chrysostom
13 November, Saint John Chrysostom the Archbishop of Constantinople

Writings[edit]
Homilies[edit]
Paschal Homily[edit]




The Byzantine emperor Nicephorus III receives a book of homilies from John Chrysostom, the Archangel Michael stands on his left (11th-century illuminated manuscript).


The best known of his many homilies, the Paschal Homily (Hieratikon), is rather brief. In the Eastern Orthodox Church it is traditionally read in full each year at the Paschal Divine Liturgy (eucharistic) service following the midnight Orthros (or Matins).[37]
General[edit]
Chrysostom's extant homiletical works are vast, including many hundreds of exegetical homilies on both the New Testament (especially the works of Saint Paul) and the Old Testament (particularly on Genesis). Among his extant exegetical works are sixty-seven homilies on Genesis, fifty-nine on the Psalms, ninety on the Gospel of Matthew, eighty-eight on the Gospel of John, and fifty-five on the Acts of the Apostles.[38]
The homilies were written down by stenographers and subsequently circulated, revealing a style that tended to be direct and greatly personal, but formed by the rhetorical conventions of his time and place.[39] In general, his homiletical theology displays much characteristic of the Antiochian school (i.e., somewhat more literal in interpreting Biblical events), but he also uses a good deal of the allegorical interpretation more associated with the Alexandrian school.[38]
John's social and religious world was formed by the continuing and pervasive presence of paganism in the life of the city. One of his regular topics was the paganism in the culture of Constantinople, and in his homilies he thunders against popular pagan amusements: the theatre, horseraces, and the revelry surrounding holidays.[40] In particular, he criticizes Christians for taking part in such activities:

"If you ask [Christians] who is Amos or Obadiah, how many apostles there were or prophets, they stand mute; but if you ask them about the horses or drivers, they answer with more solemnity than sophists or rhetors".[41]

One of the recurring features of John's homilies is his emphasis on care for the needy.[42] Echoing themes found in the Gospel of Matthew, he calls upon the rich to lay aside materialism in favor of helping the poor, often employing all of his rhetorical skills to shame wealthy people to abandon conspicuous consumption:

"Do you pay such honor to your excrements as to receive them into a silver chamber-pot when another man made in the image of God is perishing in the cold?"[43]

Homilies against Jews and Judaizing Christians[edit]
Main article: Adversus Judaeos
During his first two years as a presbyter in Antioch (386–387), John denounced Jews and Judaizing Christians in a series of eight homilies delivered to Christians in his congregation who were taking part in Jewish festivals and other Jewish observances.[44] It is disputed whether the main target were specifically Judaizers or Jews in general. His homilies were expressed in the conventional manner, utilizing the uncompromising rhetorical form known as the psogos (Greek: blame, censure).[citation needed]
One of the purposes of these homilies was to prevent Christians from participating in Jewish customs, and thus prevent the perceived erosion of Chrysostom's flock. In his homilies, John criticized those "Judaizing Christians", who were participating in Jewish festivals and taking part in other Jewish observances, such as the shabbat, submitted to circumcision and made pilgrimage to Jewish holy places.[45]
John claimed that synagogues were full of Christians on the shabbats and Jewish festivals, especially of Christian women, because they loved the solemnity of the Jewish liturgy and enjoyed listening to the shofar on Rosh Hashanah, and applauded famous preachers in accordance with the contemporary custom.[46] A more recent theory is that he instead tried to persuade Jewish Christians, who for centuries had kept connections with Jews and Judaism, to choose between Judaism and Christianity.[47]
In Greek the homilies are called Kata Ioudaiōn (Κατὰ Ιουδαίων), which is translated as Adversus Judaeos in Latin and Against the Jews in English.[48] The original Benedictine editor of the homilies, Bernard de Montfaucon, gives the following footnote to the title: "A discourse against the Jews; but it was delivered against those who were Judaizing and keeping the fasts with them [the Jews]."[48]
According to Patristics scholars, opposition to any particular view during the late 4th century was conventionally expressed in a manner, utilizing the rhetorical form known as the psogos, whose literary conventions were to vilify opponents in an uncompromising manner; thus, it has been argued that to call Chrysostom an "anti-Semite" is to employ anachronistic terminology in a way incongruous with historical context and record.[49] This does not preclude assertions that Chrysostom's theology was a form of Anti-Jewish supersessionism.[50]
Homily against Homosexuality[edit]
Chrysostom loathed homosexuality.[51] His most notable discourse in this regard is his fourth homily on Romans 1:26–27, where he argues that those who have sex with the same gender must do so because they are insane:

"All of these affections then were vile, but chiefly the mad lust after males; for the soul is more the sufferer in sins, and more dishonored than the body in diseases. ... [The men] have done an insult to nature itself. And a yet more disgraceful thing than these is it, when even the women seek after these intercourses, who ought to have more shame than men."[52]

He describes homosexuality as the worst of sins, greater than murder. He asserts that punishment will be found in hell for such transgressors, and that women can be guilty of the sin as much as men (although the former disrupt the patriarchal hierarchy through such as act). Chrysostom argues that the male passive partner has effectively renounced his manhood and become a woman – such an individual deserves to be "driven out and stoned". Chrysostom was particularly influential in shaping early Christian thought that same-sex desire was an evil that ultimately resulted in social injustice – altering the traditional interpretation of Sodom as a place of inhospitality, to one where the sexual transgressions of the Sodomites became paramount.[53] Allen describes the sermon as the "climax and consummation of homophobia in the late classical world".[54]
Treatises[edit]
Apart from his homilies, a number of John's other treatises have had a lasting influence. One such work is John's early treatise Against Those Who Oppose the Monastic Life, written while he was a deacon (sometime before 386), which was directed to parents, pagan as well as Christian, whose sons were contemplating a monastic vocation.[55] Chrysostom wrote that, already in his day, it was customary for Antiochenes to send their sons to be educated by monks.[56]
Another important treatise written by John is titled On the Priesthood (written 390/391, it contains in Book 1 an account of his early years and a defence of his flight from ordination by Bishop Meletios of Antioch, and then proceeds in later books to expound on his exalted understanding of the priesthood). Two other notable books by John are Instructions to Catechumens and On the Incomprehensibility of the Divine Nature.[57] In addition, he wrote a series of letters to the deaconess Olympias, of which seventeen are extant.[58]
Liturgy[edit]
Beyond his preaching, the other lasting legacy of John is his influence on Christian liturgy. Two of his writings are particularly notable. He harmonized the liturgical life of the Church by revising the prayers and rubrics of the Divine Liturgy, or celebration of the Holy Eucharist. To this day, Eastern Orthodox and Eastern Catholic Churches of the Byzantine Rite typically celebrate the Divine Liturgy of Saint John Chrysostom as the normal Eucharistic liturgy, although his exact connection with it remains a matter of debate among experts.[59]
Legacy and influence[edit]
During a time when city clergy were subject to criticism for their high lifestyle, John was determined to reform his clergy in Constantinople. These efforts were met with resistance and limited success. He was an excellent preacher[59] whose homilies and writings are still studied and quoted. As a theologian, he has been and continues to be very important in Eastern Christianity, and is generally considered among the Three Holy Hierarchs of the Greek Church, but has been less important to Western Christianity. His writings have survived to the present day more so than any of the other Greek Fathers.[2]
Influence on the Catechism of the Catholic Church and clergy[edit]
John's influence on church teachings is interwoven throughout the current Catechism of the Catholic Church (revised 1992). The Catechism cites him in eighteen sections, particularly his reflections on the purpose of prayer and the meaning of the Lord's Prayer:

Consider how [Jesus Christ] teaches us to be humble, by making us see that our virtue does not depend on our work alone but on grace from on high. He commands each of the faithful who prays to do so universally, for the whole world. For he did not say "thy will be done in me or in us", but "on earth", the whole earth, so that error may be banished from it, truth take root in it, all vice be destroyed on it, virtue flourish on it, and earth no longer differ from heaven.[60]

Christian clerics, such as R. S. Storr, refer to him as "one of the most eloquent preachers who ever since apostolic times have brought to men the divine tidings of truth and love", and the 19th-century John Henry Newman described John as a "bright, cheerful, gentle soul; a sensitive heart."[61]
Music and literature[edit]
John's liturgical legacy has inspired several musical compositions. Particularly noteworthy are Sergei Rachmaninoff's Liturgy of St. John Chrysostom, Op. 31, composed in 1910,[62] one of his two major unaccompanied choral works; Pyotr Tchaikovsky's Liturgy of St. John Chrysostom, Op. 41; and Ukrainian composer Kyrylo Stetsenko's Liturgy of St. John Chrysostom. Arvo Pärt's Litany sets Chrysostom's twenty-four prayers, one for each hour of the day,[63] for soli, mixed choir and orchestra. And the compositions of Alexander Grechaninovs "Liturgy of Johannes Chrysostomos No. 1, Op. 13 (1897)", "Liturgy of Johannes Chrysostomos No. 2, Op.29 (1902)", "Liturgia Domestica (Liturgy Johannes Chrysostomos No. 3), Op. 79 (1917)" and "Liturgy of Johannes Chrysostomos No. 4, Op. 177 (1943)" are noteworthy.
James Joyce's novel Ulysses includes a character named Mulligan who brings 'Chrysostomos' into another character (Stephen Dedalus)'s mind because Mulligan's gold-stopped teeth and his gift of the gab earn him the title which St. John Chrysostom's preaching earned him, 'golden-mouthed':[64] "[Mulligan] peered sideways up and gave a long low whistle of call, then paused awhile in rapt attention, his even white teeth glistening here and there with gold points. Chrysostomos."[65]
The legend of the penance of Saint John Chrysostom[edit]




The Penance of St. John Chrysostom. Engraving by Lucas Cranach the Elder, 1509. The saint can be seen in the background on all fours, whilst the princess and their baby dominate the foreground.


A late medieval legend (not included in the Golden Legend) relates that, when John Chrysostom was a hermit in the desert, he was approached by a royal princess in distress.[66] The Saint, thinking she was a demon, at first refused to help her, but the princess convinced him that she was a Christian and would be devoured by wild beasts if she were not allowed to enter his cave. He therefore admitted her, carefully dividing the cave in two parts, one for each of them. In spite of these precautions, the sin of fornication was committed, and in an attempt to hide it the distraught saint took the princess and threw her over a precipice. He then went to Rome to beg absolution, which was refused. Realising the appalling nature of his crimes, Chrysostom made a vow that he would never rise from the ground until his sins were expiated, and for years he lived like a beast, crawling on all fours and feeding on wild grasses and roots. Subsequently, the princess reappeared, alive, and suckling the saint's baby, who miraculously pronounced his sins forgiven. This last scene was very popular from the late 15th century onwards as a subject for engravers and artists. The theme was depicted by Albrecht Dürer around 1496,[67] Hans Sebald Beham and Lucas Cranach the Elder, among others. Martin Luther mocked this same legend in his Die Lügend von S. Johanne Chrysostomo (1537).[68][69] The legend was recorded in Croatia in the 16th century.[70]
Relics[edit]
John Chrysostom died in the city of Comana in the year 407 on his way to his place of exile. There his relics remained until 438 when, thirty years after his death, they were transferred to Constantinople during the reign of the Empress Eudoxia's son, the Emperor Theodosius II (408–450), under the guidance of John's disciple, St. Proclus, who by that time had become Archbishop of Constantinople (434–447).
Most of John's relics were looted from Constantinople by Crusaders in 1204 and taken to Rome, but some of his bones were returned to the Orthodox Church on 27 November 2004 by Pope John Paul II.[71] They are now enshrined in the Church of St. George, Istanbul.[72]
The skull, however, having been kept at the monastery at Vatopedi on Mount Athos in northern Greece, was not among the relics that were taken by the crusaders in the 13th century. In 1655, at the request of Tsar Alexei Mikhailovich, the skull was taken to Russia, for which the monastery was compensated in the sum of 2000 rubles. In 1693, having received a request from the Vatopedi Monastery for the return of Saint John's skull, Tsar Peter the Great ordered that the skull remain in Russia but that the monastery was to be paid 500 rubles every four years. The Russian state archives document these payments up until 1735. The skull was kept at the Moscow Kremlin, in the Cathedral of the Dormition of the Mother of God, until 1920, when it was confiscated by the Soviets and placed in the Museum of Silver Antiquities. In 1988, in connection with the 1000th Anniversary of the Baptism of Russia, the head, along with other important relics, was returned to the Russian Orthodox Church and kept at the Epiphany Cathedral, until being moved to the Cathedral of Christ the Saviour after its restoration.[citation needed]
Today, the monastery at Vatopedi posits a rival claim to possessing the skull of John Chrysostom, and there a skull is venerated by pilgrims to the monastery as that of Saint John. Two sites in Italy also claim to have the saint's skull: the Basilica di Santa Maria del Fiore in Florence and the Dal Pozzo chapel in Pisa. The right hand of Saint John[73] is preserved on Mount Athos, and numerous smaller relics are scattered throughout the world.[74]
Notes[edit]


^ The exact date of John's birth is in question, and dates between 344 and 349 are given. In the most recent general biography of Chrysostom, eminent patristics scholar JND Kelly, after a review of the evidence and literature, favours 349 as the date that best fits all available evidence, in agreement with Robert Carter. See Kelly, Golden Mouth: The Story of John Chrysostom: Ascetic, Preacher, Bishop, (Grand Rapids: Baker Academic 1998: originally published Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1995), p. 4 fn. 12; esp. Appendix B passim. For a discussion of alternatives presented in the literature, see Robert Carter, "The Chronology of St. John Chrysostom's Early Life", in Traditio 18:357–64 (1962); Jean Dumortier, "La valeur historique du dialogue de Palladius et la chronologie de saint Jean Chrysostome", in Mélanges de science religieuse, 8:51–56 (1951). Carter dates his birth to the year 349. See also Robert Louis Wilken, John Chrysostom and the Jews: Rhetoric and Reality in the Late Fourth Century, (Berkeley: University of California Press: 1983), p. 5.
^ a b c "St John Chrysostom" profile, Catholic Encyclopedia (see here); retrieved 20 March 2007.
^ "CATHOLIC ENCYCLOPEDIA: St. John Chrysostom". www.newadvent.org. 
^ a b "Catholic-forum.com". Archived from the original on 2008-01-17. 
^ The exact date of John's birth is in question, and dates between 344 and 349 are often given, and limits set at 340 and 350 (Kelly 296). In the most recent general biography of Chrysostom, eminent patristics scholar JND Kelly, after a review of the evidence and literature, favours 349 as the date that best fits all available evidence, in agreement with Robert Carter. See Kelly, Golden Mouth: The Story of John Chrysostom: Ascetic, Preacher, Bishop, Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Academic, 1998: originally published Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1995), p. 4 fn. 12; esp. 296–298 passim. For a concurring analysis which is followed in most recent reconstructions of the early life of Chrysostomos, see Robert Carter, "The Chronology of St. John Chrysostom's Early Life", in Traditio 18:357–64 (1962). For a discussion of alternatives, often in older literature, see especially G. Ettlinger, Traditio 16 (1960), pp. 373–80, Jean Dumortier, "La valeur historique du dialogue de Palladius et la chronologie de saint Jean Chrysostome", Mélanges de science religieuse, 8:51–56 (1951)
^ a b c Robert Wilken, "John Chrysostom" profile, Encyclopedia of Early Christianity (ed. Everett Ferguson), New York: Garland Publishing, 1997
^ Pope Vigilius, Constitution of Pope Vigilius, pg. 553
^ Writings of Chrysostom in the Christian Classics Ethereal Library edition of the Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers:. Six full volumes by Chysostom, compared to eight full volumes for Augustine.
^ Coptic synaxarium Archived 2009-03-27 at the Wayback Machine.
^ "John Chrysostom", Encyclopaedia Judaica
^ The Encyclopaedia Judaica describes Chrysostom's mother as a pagan. In Pauline Allen and Wendy Mayer, John Chrysostom (pg. 5), she is described as a Christian.
^ Wilken (p. 7) prefers 368 for the date of Chrysostom's baptism, the Encyclopaedia Judaica prefers the later date of 373.
^ Cameron, Averil (1998) "Education and literary culture" in Cameron, A. and Garnsey, P. (eds.) The Cambridge ancient history: Vol. XIII The late empire, A.D. 337–425. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pg. 668.
^ Wilken, pg. 5.
^ Sozomen (1995) [1890]. "Ecclesiastical History of Sozomen, Book VIII, Chapter II: Education, Training, Conduct, and Wisdom of the Great John Chrysostom". In Schaff, Philip and Wace, Henry (trs., eds.). Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers, Volume II: Socrates and Sozomenus Ecclesiastical Histories. Zenos, A. C. (rev., notes) (reprint ed.). Peabody, MA: Hendrickson Publishers. p. 399. ISBN 1-56563-118-8. Retrieved 29 March 2007. CS1 maint: Uses editors parameter (link)
^ Allen, Pauline & Wendy Mayer, John Chrysostom, Routledge: 2000, pg. 6
^ Scholasticus, Socrates. Ecclesiastical History, VI, 3
^ Philip Hughes, History of the Church, Sheed and Ward, 1934, vol I, pp. 231–232.
^ Chrysostom, John. In Evangelium S. Matthaei, homily 50:3–4, pp 58, 508–509
^ Baluffi, Catejan. The Charity of the Church (trans. Denis Gargan), Dublin: M H Gill and Son, 1885, p. 39
Schmidt, Alvin J. Under the Influence: How Christianity Transformed Civilization, Grand Rapids, MI, Zondervan, 2001, p. 152
^ Allen and Mayer, 2000, pg. 6
^ Farmer, David H. The Oxford Dictionary of the Saints (2nd ed.), New York: Oxford University Press, 1987, pg. 232
^ Socrates Scholasticus (1995) [1890]. "Book VI, Chapter XVI: Sedition on Account of John Chrysostom's Banishment". In Schaff, Philip and Wace, Henry (trs., eds.). Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers, Volume II: Socrates and Sozomenus Ecclesiastical Histories. Zenos, A. C. (rev., notes) (reprint ed.). Peabody, MA: Hendrickson Publishers. p. 149. ISBN 1-56563-118-8. Retrieved 29 March 2007. CS1 maint: Uses editors parameter (link)
^ a b "St John Chrysostom the Archbishop of Constantinople". Orthodox Church in America. Retrieved 29 March 2007. 
^ Socrates Scholasticus, op cit "Chapter XVIII: Of Eudoxia's Silver Statue", p. 150.
^ "John Chrysostom" profile, The Oxford Dictionary of Church History (ed. Jerald C. Brauer), Philadelphia: Westminster Press (1971)
^ A chronicle of the last pagans, pg. 75
^ a b Barry, Jennifer (2016). "Diagnosing Heresy: Ps.-Martyrius's Funerary Speech for John Chrysostom". Journal of Early Christian Studies. 24 (3). Retrieved 17 July 2017. 
^ (Ep. CLV: PG LII, 702)
^ Vatican Library webpage; accessed 20 June 2015.
^ Appeal to the Pope, earlychurchtexts.com; accessed 20 June 2015.
^ Stephens, W.R.W., (2005) “Saint Chrysostom: His Life and Times”, Elibron Classics, pp. 349–50
^ St Gaudentius profile, newadvent.org; accessed 20 June 2015.
^ Holum, K.G., (1982) "Theodosian Empresses", (University of California Press), pg. 184
^ The Divine Liturgy of St. John Chrysostom. Primedia E-launch LLC. 1980. pp. 8–9. ISBN 978-1-61979-382-8. 
^ "Three Holy Hierarchs: St Basil the Great, St Gregory the Theologian, and St John Chrysostom". Orthodox Christian Network. 27 January 2015. Retrieved 17 July 2017. 
^ Barker, Jason (2005). "Pascal Homily". Be Transformed. Antiochian Orthodox Christian Archdiocese of North America, dept. of Youth Ministry. Retrieved 17 November 2009. 
^ a b "John Chrysostom" profile, Catholic Encyclopaedia Online, newadvent.org; retrieved 20 March 2007.
^ Yohanan (Hans) Lewy, "John Chrysostom" in Encyclopaedia Judaica (ed. Cecil Roth), Keter Publishing House: 1997; ISBN 965-07-0665-8
^ Wilken, p. 30.
^ Chrysostom, John (quoted in Wilken, p. 30)
^ Liebeschuetz, J.H.W.G. Barbarians and Bishops: Army, Church, and State in the age of Arcadius and Chrysostom, Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1990, pp. 175–176
^ Chrysostom, John (quoted in Liebeschuetz, p. 176)
^ See Wilken, p. xv, and also "John Chrysostom" in Encyclopaedia Judaica
^ Wilken, p. xv.
^ "John Chrysostom" profile, Encyclopaedia Judaica.
^ Stark, Rodney. The Rise of Christianity. How the Obscure, Marginal Jesus Movement Became the Dominant Religious Force in the Western World in a Few Centuries, Princeton University Press: 1997, pp. 66–67
^ a b Chrysostom, John. "Discourses Against Judaizing Christians", Fathers of the Church (vol. 68), Paul W. Harkins (trans.), Washington, D.C.: Catholic University of America Press, 1979, pp. x, xxxi
^ Wilken, Robert Louis. John Chrysostom and the Jews: Rhetoric and Reality in the Late Fourth Century (1983), University of California, Berkeley Press; ISBN 978-0-520-04757-0, pp. 124–126. Cited in CCL 2.0 at "John Chrysostom" profile, New World Encyclopedia; retrieved 25 October 2011.
^ Fonrobert, Charlotte. "Jewish Christians, Judaizers, and Anti-Judaism", Late Ancient Christianity (2010), Minneapolis, MN: Fortress Press, pp. 234–254
^ Robert H. Allen, The Classical Origins of Modern Homophobia, (2006) p.187
^ "John Chrysostom: Homilies on Romans: Homily IV". orthodoxchurchfathers.com. 
^ Michael Carden, Sodomy: A history of a Christian Biblical Myth, Routledge, 2004
^ Robert H. Allen, The Classical Origins of Modern Homophobia, (2006) p.187
^ Wilken, p. 26.
^ Woods, Thomas. How the Catholic Church Built Western Civilization, Washington, D.C.: Regenery, 2005; ISBN 0-89526-038-7, pg. 44
^ On the Priesthood was well-known already during Chrysostom's lifetime, and is cited by Jerome in 392 in his De Viris Illustribus, chapter 129
^ Kirsch, Johann Peter (1911). "St. Olympias". Catholic Encyclopedia. Robert Appleton Company. Retrieved 17 November 2009. 
^ a b Parry (2001), pp. 268–269
^ Chrysostom, John. Hom. in Mt. 19,5: pp. 57, 280.
^ Newman, John Cardinal, "St. Chrysostom" profile, The Newman Reader, Rambler: 1859 available online (see esp. chapter 2); retrieved 20 March 2007.
^ "The Divine Liturgy of St John Chrysostom, Op 31". Hyperion Records, Ltd. 
^ "Litany". www.arvopart.org. Retrieved 15 April 2014. 
^ Blaimes (1996, 3).
^ Joyce (1961, 3).
^ A variant relates that this was Genevieve of Brabant, wife of Count Siegfried of Treves, who was unjustly accused of infidelity and sentenced to death. She was led into the forest to be put to death, but her executioners relented and there abandoned her.
^ http://www.codexcoop.it, Codex, Pavia (IT) -. "La penitenza di San Giovanni Crisostomo, Dürer, Albrecht – Stampe e incisioni – Lombardia Beni Culturali". www.lombardiabeniculturali.it. 
^ Available online
^ Fenelli, Laura. "From the Vita Pauli to the Legenda Breviarii: Real and imaginary animals as a Guide to the Hermit in the Desert", Animals and Otherness in the Middle Ages: Perspectives Across Disciplines, Oxford, Archaeopress (BAR International Series 2500), 2013, p. 41, fn. 40
^ "Legend of St John Chrysostom", Zgombic Miscellany. 16th-century Glagolitic manuscript [in Croatian Church Slavonic]. Zagreb, Archive of the Croatian Academy of Sciences and Arts. Shelf-mark VII 30. pp. 67–75.
^ Pope John Paul II. "Letter to the Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople, His Holiness Bartholomew I". Retrieved 30 March 2007. 
^ Relics of St. John Chrysostom at the Church of St. George, Istanbul, cbc.ca; retrieved 13 September 2010.
^ "OrthodoxPhotos.com". www.orthodoxphotos.com. 
^ "Thousands queue outside Cyprus church after reports of miracle-working relic". International Herald Tribune. 13 November 2007. Retrieved 20 June 2015. 


References[edit]


Allen, Pauline and Mayer, Wendy (2000). John Chrysostom. Routledge. ISBN 0-415-18252-2
Attwater, Donald (1960). St. John Chrysostom: Pastor and Preacher. London: Catholic Book Club.
Blamires, Harry (1996). The New Bloomsday Book: A Guide Through Ulysses. London: Routledge. ISBN 0-415-13858-2
Brändle, R., V. Jegher-Bucher, and Johannes Chrysostomus (1995). Acht Reden gegen Juden (Bibliothek der griechischen Literatur 41), Stuttgart: Hiersemann.
Brustein, William I. (2003). Roots of Hate: Anti-Semitism in Europe before the Holocaust. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-77308-3
Carter, Robert (1962). "The Chronology of St. John Chrysostom's Early Life." Traditio 18:357–64.
Chrysostom, John (1979). Discourses Against Judaizing Christians, trans. Paul W. Harkins. The Fathers of the Church; v. 68. Washington: Catholic University of America Press.
Chuvin, Pierre (1990). "A chronicle of the last pagans". Harvard University Press
Dumortier, Jean (1951). "La valeur historique du dialogue de Palladius et la chronologie de saint Jean Chrysostome." Mélanges de science religieuse 8, 51–56.
Hartney, Aideen (2004). John Chrysostom and the Transformation of the City. London: Duckworth. ISBN 0-520-04757-5.
Joyce, James (1961). Ulysses. New York: The Modern Library.
Kelly, John Norman Davidson (1995). Golden Mouth: The Story of John Chrysostom-Ascetic, Preacher, Bishop. Ithaca, New York: Cornell University Press. ISBN 0-8014-3189-1.
Laqueur, Walter (2006). The Changing Face of Antisemitism: From Ancient Times To The Present Day. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-530429-2.
Liebeschuetz, J.H.W.G. (1990) Barbarians and Bishops: Army, Church and State in the Age of Arcadius and Chrysostom. Oxford: Clarendon Press. ISBN 0-19-814886-0.
Lewy, Yohanan [Hans] (1997). "John Chrysostom". Encyclopaedia Judaica (CD-ROM Edition Version 1.0). Ed. Cecil Roth. Keter Publishing House. ISBN 965-07-0665-8.
Meeks, Wayne A., and Robert L. Wilken (1978). Jews and Christians in Antioch in the First Four Centuries of the Common Era (The Society of Biblical Literature, Number 13). Missoula: Scholars Press. ISBN 0-89130-229-8.
Morris, Stephen. "'Let Us Love One Another': Liturgy, Morality, and Political Theory in Chrysostom's Sermons on Rom. 12–13 and II Thess. 2," in: Speculum Sermonis: Interdisciplinary Reflections on the Medieval Sermon, ed. Georgiana Donavin, Cary J. Nederman, and Richard Utz. Turnhout: Brepols, 2004. pp. 89–112.
Palladius, Bishop of Aspuna. Palladius on the Life And Times of St. John Chrysostom, transl. and edited by Robert T. Meyer. New York: Newman Press, 1985. ISBN 0-8091-0358-3.
Parks, James (1969). Prelude to Dialogue. London.
Parry, David; David Melling, eds. (2001). The Blackwell Dictionary of Eastern Christianity. Oxford: Blackwell. ISBN 0-631-18966-1. 
Pradels, W. (2002). "Lesbos Cod. Gr. 27 : The Tale of a Discovery", Zeitschrift für Antikes Christentum 6, pp. 81–89.
Pradels, W., R. Brändle, and M. Heimgartner (2001). "Das bisher vermisste Textstück in Johannes Chrysostomus, Adversus Judaeos, Oratio 2", Zeitschrift für Antikes Christentum 5, pp. 23–49.
Pradels, W., R. Brändle, and M. Heimgartner (2002). "The sequence and dating of the series of John Chrysostom's eight discourses Adversus Judaeos", Zeitschrift für Antikes Christentum 6, 90–116.
Schaff, Philip, and Henry Wace (eds.) (1890). Socrates, Sozomenus: Church Histories (A Select Library of Nicene and post-Nicene Fathers of the Christian Church, second series, vol. II). New York: The Christian Literature Company.
Stark, Rodney (1997). The Rise of Christianity. How the Obscure, Marginal Jesus Movement Became the Dominant Religious Force in the Western World in a Few Centuries. Princeton University Press.
Stephens, W.R.W. (1883). Saint John Chrysostom, His Life and Times. London: John Murray.
Stow, Kenneth (2006). Jewish Dogs, An Imagine and Its Interpreters: Continiuity in the Catholic-Jewish Encounter. Stanford: Stanford University Press. ISBN 0-8047-5281-8.
Wilken, Robert Louis (1983). John Chrysostom and the Jews: Rhetoric and Reality in the Late Fourth Century. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Willey, John H. (1906). Chrysostom: The Orator. Cincinnati: Jennings and Graham.
Woods, Thomas (2005). How the Catholic Church Built Western Civilization. Washington, D.C.: Regenery. ISBN 0-89526-038-7


Collected works[edit]
Widely used editions of Chrysostom's works are available in Greek, Latin, English, and French. The Greek edition is edited by Sir Henry Savile (eight volumes, Eton, 1613); the most complete Greek and Latin edition is edited by Bernard de Montfaucon (thirteen volumes, Paris, 1718–38, republished in 1834–40, and reprinted in Migne's "Patrologia Graeca", volumes 47–64). There is an English translation in the first series of the Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers (London and New York, 1889–90). A selection of his writings has been published more recently in the original with facing French translation in Sources Chrétiennes.
Further reading[edit]

Bibliography


Chrysostom Bibliography


Primary sources


Sermon on Alms Translated by Margaret M. Sherwood from the Parallel Greek and Latin Text of the Abbé Migne (New York: The New York School of Philanthropy, 1917)
The priesthood: a translation of the Peri hierosynes of St. John Chrysostom, by WA Jurgens, (New York: Macmillan, 1955)
Commentary on Saint John the apostle and evangelist: homilies 1–47, translated by Sister Thomas Aquinas Goggin, Fathers of the Church vol 33, (New York: Fathers of the Church, Inc, 1957)
Commentary on Saint John the Apostle and Evangelist, translated by Sister Thomas Aquinas Goggin. Homilies 48–88, Fathers of the Church vol 41, (Washington, DC: Catholic University of America Press, 1959) [translation of Homiliae in Ioannem]
Baptismal instructions, translated and annotated by Paul W Harkins, (Westminster, MD: Newman Press, 1963)
Discourses against judaizing Christians, translated by Paul W Harkins., Fathers of the Church vol 68, (Washington: Catholic University of America Press, 1979)
On the incomprehensible nature of God, translated by Paul W Harkins. Fathers of the Church vol 72, (Washington, DC: Catholic University of America Press, 1984)
On wealth and poverty, translated and introduced by Catharine P Roth, (Crestwood, New York: St. Vladimir's Seminary Press, 1984)
Chrysostom, John (1985). Apologist. Margaret A. Schatkin and Paul W. Harkins, trans. Washington, D.C.: Catholic University of America Press. ISBN 0-8132-0073-3.  [translations of Discourse on blessed Babylas, and Against the Greeks: Demonstration against the pagans that Christ is God.]
Chrysostom, John (1986). Homilies on Genesis. Robert C. Hill, trans. Washington, D.C.: Catholic University of America Press. ISBN 0-8132-0074-1.  [translation of Homilies on Genesis 1–17]
Chrysostom, John (1986). On marriage and family life. Catherine P. Roth, trans. Crestwood, N.Y.: St. Vladimir's Seminary Press. ISBN 0-913836-86-9. 
Samuel NC Lieu, ed, The Emperor Julian: panegyric and polemic. Claudius Mamertinus, John Chrysostom, Ephrem the Syrian, (Liverpool: Liverpool University Press, 1986.) [contains translation of John Chrysostom, Homily on St. Babylas, against Julian and the pagans XIV-XIX]
Commentaries on the sages, translated with an introduction by Robert Charles Hill, 2 vols, (Brookline, MA: Holy Cross Orthodox Press, 2006) [Vol 1 is a translation of the Commentary on Job; vol 2 is a translation of the Commentary on Proverbs]


Secondary sources


Attwater, Donald (1939). St. John Chrysostom: The Voice of Gold. London: Harvill. 
Baur, Chrysostomus (1959). John Chrysostom and His Times. M. Gonzaga, trans (2nd ed.). London: Sands. 
Lim, Richard (1995). Public disputation, power, and social order in late antiquity. Berkeley: University of California Press. ISBN 0-585-16041-4. 

External links[edit]

Quotes by Saint John Chrysostom by Orthodox Church Quotes
On Saint John Chrysostom's Antioch Years by Pope Benedict XVI
Symposium Commemorating the 1600th Anniversary of Saint John's Repose
St. John Chrysostom article from The Catholic Encyclopedia (Newadvent Website)
Jewish Encyclopedia: Chrysostomus, Joannes
John Chrysostom on Patristique.org (French)
Was St. John Chrysostom Anti-Semitic?
Saint John Chrysostom and the Anglican Communion
Saint John Chrysostom the Archbishop of Constantinople Orthodox icon and synaxarion (13 November feast day)
Translation of the relics of Saint John Chrysostom the Archbishop of Constantinople (27 January feast day)
Synaxis of the Ecumenical Teachers and Hierarchs: Basil the Great, Gregory the Theologian, and John Chrysostom (30 January feast day)
Colonnade Statue St Peter's Square
John Chrysostom Mosaic in Hagia Sophia

Works[edit]

Works by or about John Chrysostom at Internet Archive
Works by John Chrysostom at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) 
The Divine Liturgy of St. John Chrysostom
Study Text of the Divine Liturgy of Saint John Chrysostom (Ruthenian Edition, with Scriptural references)
Writings of Chrysostom in the Christian Classics Ethereal Library edition of the Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers:

On the Priesthood, Ascetic Treatises, Select Homilies and Letters, Homilies on the Statues
Homilies on the Gospel of St. Matthew '
Homilies on the Acts of the Apostles and the Epistle to the Romans
Homilies on First and Second Corinthians
Homilies on the Epistles to the Galatians, Ephesians, Philippians, Colossians, Thessalonians, Timothy, Titus, and Philemon
Homilies on the Gospel of St. John and the Epistle to the Hebrews


The Hieratikon Easter Sermon of St. John Chrysostom
Eight Homilies Against the Jews
Opera Omnia by Migne Patrologia Graeca with analytical indexes
The Auxiliary Resources page on the Electronic Manipulus florum Project Website provides digital transcriptions of the Latin translations of De laudibus sancti Pauli homeliae (PG 50, 473–514), Dialogus de sacerdotio (PG 48, 623–91), and In epistolam ad Hebraeos homeliae (PG 63, 9–236), as well as the Latin text of the Pseudo-Chrysostom Opus imperfectum in Mattheum (PG 56, 611–946). It also provides digital transcriptions of Anianus of Celeda's prologue on the homilies on Matthew and his Latin translations of the first eight homilies (PG 58, 975–1058) and also Anianus of Celeda's prologue and his Latin translations of Chrysostom's homelies 1–25 on Matthew from the editio princeps published in Venice in 1503.
Ps.Chrysostom Homily 2 on Christmas at Tertullian.org and here at Archive.org.

Orthodox feast days[edit]

27 January, Translation of the relics of Saint John Chrysostom to Constantinople
30 January, Synaxis of the Three Great Hierarchs
14 September, Repose of Saint John Chrysostom
13 November, Saint John Chrysostom the Archbishop of Constantinople



Titles of the Great Christian Church


Preceded by
Nectarius
Archbishop of Constantinople
398–404
Succeeded by
Arsacius of Tarsus








v
t
e


Bishops of Byzantium and Patriarchs of Constantinople



Bishops of Heraclea/Byzantium
(to 330 AD)



Andrew
Stachys
Onesimus
Polycarpus I
Plutarch
Sedecion
Diogenes
Eleutherius
Felix
Polycarpus II
Athenodorus
Euzois
Laurence
Alypius
Pertinax
Olympianus
Marcus I
Philadelphus
Cyriacus I
Castinus
Eugenius I
Titus
Dometius
Rufinus
Probus
Metrophanes
Alexander








Archbishops of Constantinople
(330–451 AD)



Alexander
Paul I
Eusebius
Macedonius I
Eudoxius
Evagrius
Demophilus
Maximus I
Gregory I
Nectarius
John I Chrysostom
Arsacius
Atticus
Sisinnius I
Nestorius
Maximianus
Proclus
Flavian
Anatolius





Patriarchs of Constantinople
Byzantine period (451–1453 AD)



Anatolius
Gennadius I
Acacius
Fravitta
Euphemius
Macedonius II
Timothy I
John II
Epiphanius
Anthimus I
Menas
Eutychius
John III
John IV
Cyriacus II
Thomas I
Sergius I
Pyrrhus
Paul II
Peter
Thomas II
John V
Constantine I
Theodore I
George I
Paul III
Callinicus I
Cyrus
John VI
Germanus I
Anastasius
Constantine II
Nicetas I
Paul IV
Tarasius
Nicephorus I
Theodotus I
Antony I
John VII
Methodius I
Ignatios
Photios I
Stephen I
Antony II
Nicholas I
Εuthymius I
Stephen II
Tryphon
Theophylact
Polyeuctus
Βasil I
Αntony III
Nicholas II
Sisinnius II
Sergius II
Eustathius
Alexius
Michael I
Constantine III
John VIII
Cosmas I
Eustratius
Nicholas III
John IX
Leo
Michael II
Cosmas II
Nicholas IV
Theodotus II
Neophytus I
Constantine IV
Luke
Michael III
Chariton
Theodosius I
Basil II
Nicetas II
Leontius
Dositheus
George II
John X
Michael IV†
Theodore II†
Maximus II†
Μanuel I†
Germanus II†
Methodius II†
Manuel II†
Arsenius†
Nicephorus II†
Germanus III
Joseph I
John XI
Gregory II
Athanasius I
John XII
Nephon I
John XIII
Gerasimus I
Isaias
John XIV
Isidore I
Callistus I
Philotheus
Macarius
Nilus
Antony IV
Callistus II
Matthew I
Euthymius II
Joseph II
Metrophanes II
Gregory III
Athanasius II





Patriarchs of Constantinople
Ottoman period (1453–1923 AD)



Gennadius II
Isidore II
Joasaph I
Sophronius I
Mark II
Symeon I
Dionysius I
Raphael I
Maximus III
Nephon II
Maximus IV
Joachim I
Pachomius I
Theoleptus I
Jeremias I
Joannicius I
Dionysius II
Joasaph II
Metrophanes III
Jeremias II
Pachomius II
Theoleptus II
Matthew II
Gabriel I
Theophanes I
Meletius I
Neophytus II
Raphael II
Cyril I
Timothy II
Gregory IV
Anthimus II
Cyril II
Athanasius III
Neophytus III
Parthenius I
Parthenius II
Joannicius II
Cyril III
Paisius I
Parthenius III
Gabriel II
Parthenius IV
Dionysius III
Clement
Methodius III
Dionysius IV
Gerasimus II
Athanasius IV
James
Callinicus II
Neophytus IV
Gabriel III
Neophytus V
Cyprianus
Athanasius V
Cyril IV
Cosmas III
Jeremias III
(Callinicus III)
Paisius II
Seraphim I
Neophytus VI
Cyril V
Callinicus IV (III)
Seraphim II
Joannicius III
Samuel
Meletius II
Theodosius II
Sophronius II
Gabriel IV
Procopius
Neophytus VII
Gerasimus III
Gregory V
Callinicus V (IV)
Jeremias IV
Cyril VI
Eugenius II
Anthimus III
Chrysanthus
Agathangelus
Constantius I
Constantius II
Gregory VI
Anthimus IV
Anthimus V
Germanus IV
Meletius III
Anthimus VI
Cyril VII
Joachim II
Sophronius III
Joachim III
Joachim IV
Dionysius V
Neophytus VIII
Anthimus VII
Constantine V
Germanus V
Meletius IV





Patriarchs of Constantinople
Modern period (since 1923 AD)



Gregory VII
Constantine VI
Basil III
Photius II
Benjamin
Maximus V
Athenagoras
Demetrius
Bartholomew








† in exile at Nicaea
 Eastern Christianity portal












v
t
e


Greek Orthodox Church



Patriarchates



Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople
Patriarchate of Alexandria
Patriarchate of Antioch
Patriarchate of Jerusalem








Autocephalous churches



Church of Greece
Church of Cyprus
Church of Albania





Autonomous churches



Church of Crete
Church of Sinai





History



33–717 AD
717–1204 AD
1204–1453 AD
1453–1821 AD
1821–1924 AD
1924–1974 AD
1974-2008 AD
Since 2008 AD






 Eastern Christianity portal










v
t
e


Catholic Church






Index
Outline





History
(Timeline)



Jesus
Holy Family

Mary
Joseph


Apostles
Early Christianity
History of the papacy
Ecumenical councils
Missions
Great Schism of East
Crusades
Great Schism of West
Protestant Reformation
Council of Trent
Counter-Reformation
Catholic Church by country
Vatican City

index






Vatican II



Definition of the Church
Ecumenism
Dei verbum
Dignitatis humanae
Gaudium et spes
Lumen gentium
Nostra aetate
Sacrosanctum concilium











Hierarchy
(Precedence)




Pope (List)



Pope Francis (2013–)

conclave
inauguration
theology
canonizations
visits


Pope Emeritus Benedict XVI (2005–2013)







Roman Curia
College of Cardinals

Cardinal


Patriarchate
Episcopal conference
Patriarch
Major archbishop
Primate
Metropolitan
Archbishop
Diocesan bishop
Coadjutor bishop
Auxiliary bishop
Titular bishop
Bishop emeritus
Abbot
Abbess
Superior general
Provincial superior
Grand Master
Prior (-ess)
Priest
Brother

Friar


Sister
Monk
Nun
Hermit
Master of novices
Novice
Oblate
Postulant
Laity





Theology



Body and soul
Bible
Catechism
Divine grace
Dogma
Ecclesiology

Four Marks of the Church


Original sin

List


Salvation
Sermon on the Mount
Ten Commandments
Trinity
Worship




Mariology



Assumption
History
Immaculate Conception
Mariology of the popes
Mariology of the saints
Mother of God
Perpetual virginity
Veneration








Philosophy



Natural law
Moral theology
Personalism
Social teaching
Philosophers





Sacraments



Baptism
Confirmation
Eucharist
Penance
Anointing of the Sick

Last rites


Holy orders
Matrimony





Saints



Mary
Apostles
Archangels
Confessors
Disciples
Doctors of the Church
Evangelists
Church Fathers
Martyrs
Patriarchs
Prophets
Virgins





Doctors
of the
Church







Gregory the Great
Ambrose
Augustine of Hippo
Jerome
John Chrysostom
Basil of Caesarea
Gregory of Nazianzus
Athanasius of Alexandria
Cyril of Alexandria
Cyril of Jerusalem
John of Damascus
Bede the Venerable
Ephrem the Syrian
Thomas Aquinas
Bonaventure
Anselm of Canterbury
Isidore of Seville
Peter Chrysologus
Leo the Great
Peter Damian
Bernard of Clairvaux
Hilary of Poitiers
Alphonsus Liguori
Francis de Sales
Peter Canisius
John of the Cross
Robert Bellarmine
Albertus Magnus
Anthony of Padua
Lawrence of Brindisi
Teresa of Ávila
Catherine of Siena
Thérèse of Lisieux
John of Ávila
Hildegard of Bingen
Gregory of Narek








Institutes,
orders,
and societies



Assumptionists
Annonciades
Augustinians
Basilians
Benedictines
Bethlehemites
Blue nuns
Camaldoleses
Camillians
Carmelites
Carthusians
Cistercians
Clarisses
Conceptionists
Crosiers
Dominicans
Franciscans
Good Shepherd Sisters
Hieronymites
Jesuits
Mercedarians
Minims
Olivetans
Oratorians
Piarists
Premonstratensians
Redemptorists
Servites
Theatines
Trappists
Trinitarians
Visitandines





Associations
of the faithful



International Federation of Catholic Parochial Youth Movements
International Federation of Catholic Universities
International Kolping Society
Schoenstatt Apostolic Movement
International Union of Catholic Esperantists
Community of Sant'Egidio





Charities



Aid to the Church in Need
Caritas Internationalis
Catholic Home Missions
Catholic Relief Services
CIDSE





Particular
churches
(By country)



Latin Church
Eastern Catholic Churches: Albanian
Armenian
Belarusian
Bulgarian
Chaldean
Coptic
Croatian and Serbian
Eritrean
Ethiopian
Georgian
Greek
Hungarian
Italo-Albanian
Macedonian
Maronite
Melkite
Romanian
Russian
Ruthenian
Slovak
Syriac
Syro-Malabar
Syro-Malankara
Ukrainian




Liturgical rites



Alexandrian
Antiochian
Armenian
Byzantine
East Syrian
Latin

Anglican Use
Ambrosian
Mozarabic
Roman


West Syrian











 Catholicism portal
 Pope portal
 Vatican City portal


 Book
Name
 Media

 Category
 Templates
 WikiProject














v
t
e


History of Catholic theology



General history



History of the Catholic Church
Early Christianity
History of the papacy
Ecumenical Councils
Timeline of the Catholic Church
History of Christianity
History of Christian theology








Church beginnings



Paul
Clement of Rome
First Epistle of Clement
Didache
Ignatius of Antioch
Polycarp
Epistle of Barnabas
The Shepherd of Hermas
Aristides of Athens
Justin Martyr
Epistle to Diognetus
Irenaeus
Montanism
Tertullian
Origen
Antipope Novatian
Cyprian






Constantine to
Pope Gregory I




Eusebius
Athanasius of Alexandria
Arianism
Pelagianism
Nestorianism
Monophysitism
Ephrem the Syrian
Hilary of Poitiers
Cyril of Jerusalem
Basil of Caesarea
Gregory of Nazianzus
Gregory of Nyssa
Ambrose
John Chrysostom
Jerome
Augustine of Hippo
John Cassian
Orosius
Cyril of Alexandria
Peter Chrysologus
Pope Leo I
Boethius
Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite
Pope Gregory I





Early Middle Ages



Isidore of Seville
John Climacus
Maximus the Confessor
Monothelitism
Ecthesis
Bede
John of Damascus
Iconoclasm
Transubstantiation dispute
Predestination disputes
Paulinus II of Aquileia
Alcuin
Benedict of Aniane
Rabanus Maurus
Paschasius Radbertus
John Scotus Eriugena





High Middle Ages



Roscellinus
Gregory of Narek
Berengar of Tours
Peter Damian
Anselm of Canterbury
Joachim of Fiore
Peter Abelard
Decretum Gratiani
Bernard of Clairvaux
Peter Lombard
Anselm of Laon
Hildegard of Bingen
Hugh of Saint Victor
Dominic de Guzmán
Robert Grosseteste
Francis of Assisi
Anthony of Padua
Beatrice of Nazareth
Bonaventure
Albertus Magnus
Boetius of Dacia
Henry of Ghent
Thomas Aquinas
Siger of Brabant
Thomism
Roger Bacon





Mysticism and reforms



Ramon Llull
Duns Scotus
Dante Alighieri
William of Ockham
Richard Rolle
John of Ruusbroec
Catherine of Siena
Brigit of Sweden
Meister Eckhart
Johannes Tauler
Walter Hilton
The Cloud of Unknowing
Heinrich Seuse
Geert Groote
Devotio Moderna
Julian of Norwich
Thomas à Kempis
Nicholas of Cusa
Marsilio Ficino
Girolamo Savonarola
Giovanni Pico della Mirandola






Reformation
Counter-Reformation




Erasmus
Thomas Cajetan
Thomas More
John Fisher
Johann Eck
Francisco de Vitoria
Thomas of Villanova
Ignatius of Loyola
Francisco de Osuna
John of Ávila
Francis Xavier
Teresa of Ávila
Luis de León
John of the Cross
Peter Canisius
Luis de Molina (Molinism)
Robert Bellarmine
Francisco Suárez
Lawrence of Brindisi
Francis de Sales






Baroque period to
French Revolution




Tommaso Campanella
Pierre de Bérulle
Pierre Gassendi
René Descartes
Mary of Jesus of Ágreda
António Vieira
Jean-Jacques Olier
Louis Thomassin
Jacques-Bénigne Bossuet
François Fénelon
Cornelius Jansen (Jansenism)
Blaise Pascal
Nicolas Malebranche
Giambattista Vico
Alphonsus Liguori
Louis de Montfort
Maria Gaetana Agnesi
Alfonso Muzzarelli
Johann Michael Sailer
Clement Mary Hofbauer
Bruno Lanteri





19th century



Joseph Görres
Felicité de Lamennais
Luigi Taparelli
Antonio Rosmini
Ignaz von Döllinger
John Henry Newman
Henri Lacordaire
Jaime Balmes
Gaetano Sanseverino
Giovanni Maria Cornoldi
Wilhelm Emmanuel Freiherr von Ketteler
Giuseppe Pecci
Joseph Hergenröther
Tommaso Maria Zigliara
Matthias Joseph Scheeben´
Émile Boutroux
Modernism
Léon Bloy
Désiré-Joseph Mercier
Friedrich von Hügel
Vladimir Solovyov
Marie-Joseph Lagrange
George Tyrrell
Maurice Blondel
Thérèse of Lisieux





20th century



G. K. Chesterton
Reginald Garrigou-Lagrange
Joseph Maréchal
Pierre Teilhard de Chardin
Jacques Maritain
Étienne Gilson
Ronald Knox
Dietrich von Hildebrand
Gabriel Marcel
Marie-Dominique Chenu
Romano Guardini
Edith Stein
Fulton Sheen
Henri de Lubac
Jean Guitton
Josemaría Escrivá
Adrienne von Speyr
Karl Rahner
Yves Congar
Bernard Lonergan
Emmanuel Mounier
Jean Daniélou
Hans Urs von Balthasar
Alfred Delp
Edward Schillebeeckx
Thomas Merton
G. E. M. Anscombe
René Girard
Johann Baptist Metz
Jean Vanier
Henri Nouwen





21st century



Pope Benedict XVI
Walter Kasper
Raniero Cantalamessa
Michał Heller
Jean-Luc Marion
Tomáš Halík
Scott Hahn
Robert Barron








 Catholicism portal
 Pope portal












v
t
e


Doctors of the Catholic Church






Gregory the Great
Ambrose
Augustine of Hippo
Jerome
John Chrysostom
Basil of Caesarea
Gregory of Nazianzus
Athanasius of Alexandria
Cyril of Alexandria
Cyril of Jerusalem
John of Damascus
Bede the Venerable
Ephrem the Syrian
Thomas Aquinas
Bonaventure
Anselm of Canterbury
Isidore of Seville
Peter Chrysologus
Leo the Great
Peter Damian
Bernard of Clairvaux
Hilary of Poitiers
Alphonsus Liguori
Francis de Sales
Peter Canisius
John of the Cross
Robert Bellarmine
Albertus Magnus
Anthony of Padua
Lawrence of Brindisi
Teresa of Ávila
Catherine of Siena
Thérèse of Lisieux
John of Ávila
Hildegard of Bingen
Gregory of Narek








 Catholicism portal












v
t
e


Saints of the Catholic Church



Virgin Mary



Mother of God (Theotokos)
Immaculate Conception
Perpetual virginity
Assumption
Marian apparition

Guadalupe
Laus
Miraculous Medal
Lourdes
Fatima


Titles of Mary








Apostles



Andrew
Barnabas
Bartholomew
James of Alphaeus
James the Greater
John
Jude
Matthew
Matthias
Paul
Peter
Philip
Simon
Thomas





Archangels



Gabriel
Michael
Raphael





Confessors



Anatolius
Chariton the Confessor
Edward the Confessor
Maximus the Confessor
Michael of Synnada
Paphnutius the Confessor
Paul I of Constantinople
Salonius
Theophanes the Confessor





Disciples



Apollos
Mary Magdalene
Priscilla and Aquila
Silvanus
Stephen
Timothy
Titus
Seventy disciples





Doctors







Gregory the Great
Ambrose
Augustine of Hippo
Jerome
John Chrysostom
Basil of Caesarea
Gregory of Nazianzus
Athanasius of Alexandria
Cyril of Alexandria
Cyril of Jerusalem
John of Damascus
Bede the Venerable
Ephrem the Syrian
Thomas Aquinas
Bonaventure
Anselm of Canterbury
Isidore of Seville
Peter Chrysologus
Leo the Great
Peter Damian
Bernard of Clairvaux
Hilary of Poitiers
Alphonsus Liguori
Francis de Sales
Peter Canisius
John of the Cross
Robert Bellarmine
Albertus Magnus
Anthony of Padua
Lawrence of Brindisi
Teresa of Ávila
Catherine of Siena
Thérèse of Lisieux
John of Ávila
Hildegard of Bingen
Gregory of Narek








Evangelists



Matthew
Mark
Luke
John





Church
fathers



Alexander of Alexandria
Alexander of Jerusalem
Ambrose of Milan
Anatolius
Athanasius of Alexandria
Augustine of Hippo
Caesarius of Arles
Caius
Cappadocian Fathers
Clement of Alexandria
Clement of Rome
Cyprian of Carthage
Cyril of Alexandria
Cyril of Jerusalem
Damasus I
Desert Fathers
Desert Mothers
Dionysius of Alexandria
Dionysius of Corinth
Dionysius
Ephrem the Syrian
Epiphanius of Salamis
Fulgentius of Ruspe
Gregory the Great
Gregory of Nazianzus
Gregory of Nyssa
Hilary of Poitiers
Hippolytus of Rome
Ignatius of Antioch
Irenaeus of Lyons
Isidore of Seville
Jerome of Stridonium
John Chrysostom
John of Damascus
Maximus the Confessor
Melito of Sardis
Quadratus of Athens
Papias of Hierapolis
Peter Chrysologus
Polycarp of Smyrna
Theophilus of Antioch
Victorinus of Pettau
Vincent of Lérins
Zephyrinus





Martyrs



Canadian Martyrs
Carthusian Martyrs
Forty Martyrs of England and Wales
Four Crowned Martyrs
Great Martyr
The Holy Innocents
Irish Martyrs
Joan of Arc
Lübeck martyrs
Korean Martyrs
Martyrology
Martyrs of Albania
Martyrs of China
Martyrs of Japan
Martyrs of Laos
Martyrs of Natal
Martyrs of Otranto
Martyrs of the Spanish Civil War
Maximilian Kolbe
Perpetua and Felicity
Saints of the Cristero War
Stephen
Three Martyrs of Chimbote
Uganda Martyrs
Vietnamese Martyrs





Patriarchs



Adam
Abel
Abraham
Isaac
Jacob
Joseph
Joseph (father of Jesus)
David
Noah
Solomon
Matriarchs





Popes



Adeodatus I
Adeodatus II
Adrian III
Agapetus I
Agatho
Alexander I
Anacletus
Anastasius I
Anicetus
Anterus
Benedict II
Boniface I
Boniface IV
Caius
Callixtus I
Celestine I
Celestine V
Clement I
Cornelius
Damasus I
Dionysius
Eleuterus
Eugene I
Eusebius
Eutychian
Evaristus
Fabian
Felix I
Felix III
Felix IV
Gelasius I
Gregory I
Gregory II
Gregory III
Gregory VII
Hilarius
Hormisdas
Hyginus
Innocent I
John I
John XXIII
John Paul II
Julius I
Leo I
Leo II
Leo III
Leo IV
Leo IX
Linus
Lucius I
Marcellinus
Marcellus I
Mark
Martin I
Miltiades
Nicholas I
Paschal I
Paul I
Peter
Pius I
Pius V
Pius X
Pontian
Sergius I
Silverius
Simplicius
Siricius
Sixtus I
Sixtus II
Sixtus III
Soter
Stephen I
Stephen IV
Sylvester I
Symmachus
Telesphorus
Urban I
Victor I
Vitalian
Zachary
Zephyrinus
Zosimus





Prophets



Agabus
Amos
Anna
Baruch ben Neriah
David
Dalua
Elijah
Ezekiel
Habakkuk
Haggai
Hosea
Isaiah
Jeremiah
Job
Joel
John the Baptist
Jonah
Judas Barsabbas
Malachi
Melchizedek
Micah
Moses
Nahum
Obadiah
Samuel
Seven Maccabees and their mother
Simeon
Zechariah (prophet)
Zechariah (NT)
Zephaniah





Virgins



Agatha of Sicily
Agnes of Rome
Bernadette Soubirous
Brigid of Kildare
Cecilia
Clare of Assisi
Eulalia of Mérida
Euphemia
Genevieve
Kateri Tekakwitha
Lucy of Syracuse
Maria Goretti
Mother Teresa
Narcisa de Jesús
Rose of Lima





See also



Military saints
Virtuous pagan








 Catholicism portal
 Saints portal








Portals
Access related topics


Biography portal
Christianity portal








Find out more on Wikipedia's
Sister projects


Media
from Commons
Quotations
from Wikiquote
Source texts
from Wikisource
Data
from Wikidata







Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 297475745
LCCN: n80001460
ISNI: 0000 0001 2282 4041
GND: 118557831
SELIBR: 191679
SUDOC: 026938987
BNF: cb11908883h (data)
NLA: 35028283
ICCU: IT\ICCU\CFIV\154732











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=John_Chrysostom&oldid=812966562"					Categories: 340s births407 deaths4th-century archbishops5th-century archbishops4th-century Byzantine people5th-century Byzantine people5th-century Christian saints4th-century Christian theologians5th-century Christian theologiansAncient Christian antisemitismAncient Christians involved in controversiesAncient Roman exilesArchbishops of ConstantinopleByzantine hermitsByzantine theologiansChristian anti-JudaismChristian mysticsChurch FathersDoctors of the ChurchJudaism-related controversiesPeople from AntiochSaints from ConstantinopleSaints from Roman AnatoliaSermon writersSyrian archbishopsSyrian Christian saintsHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksCS1 maint: Uses editors parameterArticles containing Latin-language textArticles containing Greek-language textAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from June 2015Articles with Internet Archive linksArticles with LibriVox linksGood articlesWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with SELIBR identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersWikipedia articles with NLA identifiersWikipedia articles with SBN identifiers