This article is about the second President of the United States. For his son, the 6th President, see John Quincy Adams. For other uses, see John Adams (disambiguation).


John Adams



John Adams by John Trumbull, 1793






2nd President of the United States


In office
March 4, 1797 – March 4, 1801


Vice President
Thomas Jefferson


Preceded by
George Washington


Succeeded by
Thomas Jefferson


1st Vice President of the United States


In office
April 21, 1789 – March 4, 1797


President
George Washington


Preceded by
Inaugural holder


Succeeded by
Thomas Jefferson


United States Minister to the
Court of St. James's


In office
April 1, 1785 – March 30, 1788


Appointed by
Congress of the Confederation


Preceded by
Inaugural holder


Succeeded by
Thomas Pinckney


United States Minister to the Netherlands


In office
April 19, 1782 – March 30, 1788


Appointed by
Congress of the Confederation


Preceded by
Inaugural holder


Succeeded by
Charles W. F. Dumas (acting)


United States Envoy to France


In office
April 1, 1778 – June 17, 1779
Serving with Benjamin Franklin, Arthur Lee


Appointed by
Second Continental Congress


Preceded by
Silas Deane


Succeeded by
Benjamin Franklin (alone)


Delegate to the Second Continental Congress from Massachusetts


In office
May 10, 1775 – June 27, 1778


Preceded by
Inaugural holder


Succeeded by
Samuel Holten


Delegate to the First Continental Congress
from Massachusetts Bay


In office
September 5, 1774 – October 26, 1774


Preceded by
Inaugural holder


Succeeded by
Position abolished





Personal details


Born
(1735-10-30)October 30, 1735
Braintree, Province of Massachusetts Bay, British America
(present-day Quincy, Massachusetts, U.S.),


Died
July 4, 1826(1826-07-04) (aged 90)
Quincy, Massachusetts, U.S.


Cause of death
Congestive heart failure


Resting place
United First Parish Church
Quincy, Massachusetts


Political party
Pro-Administration (before 1795)
Federalist (1795–1826)


Spouse(s)
Abigail Smith (m. 1764;  d. 1818)


Children
Abigail, John Quincy, Susanna, Charles, Thomas, and Elizabeth (stillborn)


Parents
John Adams, Sr.
Susanna Boylston


Alma mater
Harvard College


Signature



John Adams (October 30 [O.S. October 19] 1735 – July 4, 1826) was an American statesman who served as the second President of the United States (1797–1801) and the first Vice President (1789–97).[1] He was a lawyer, diplomat, statesman, political theorist, and, as a Founding Father, a leader of the movement for American independence from Great Britain. He was also a dedicated diarist and correspondent, particularly with his wife and closest advisor Abigail.
John Adams collaborated with his cousin, revolutionary leader Samuel Adams, but he established his own prominence prior to the American Revolution. After the Boston Massacre, he provided a successful (though unpopular) legal defense of the accused British soldiers, in the face of severe local anti-British sentiment and driven by his devotion to the right to counsel and the "protect[ion] of innocence".[2] Adams was a delegate from Massachusetts to the Continental Congress, where he played a leading role in persuading Congress to declare independence. He assisted Thomas Jefferson in drafting the Declaration of Independence in 1776, and was its foremost advocate in the Congress. As a diplomat in Europe, he helped negotiate the eventual peace treaty with Great Britain, and acquired vital governmental loans from Amsterdam bankers. Adams was the primary author of the Massachusetts Constitution in 1780. This influenced the development of America's own constitution, as did his earlier Thoughts on Government (1776).
Adams's credentials as a revolutionary secured for him two terms as President George Washington's vice president (1789 to 1797) and also his own election in 1796 as the second president. In his single term as president, he encountered fierce criticism from the Jeffersonian Republicans, as well as the dominant faction in his own Federalist Party, led by his rival Alexander Hamilton. Adams signed the controversial Alien and Sedition Acts, and built up the army and navy in the face of an undeclared naval "Quasi-War" with France. The major accomplishment of his presidency was a peaceful resolution of the conflict in the face of Hamilton's opposition. Due to his strong posture on defense, Adams is "often called the father of the American Navy."[3] He was the first U.S. president to reside in the executive mansion, now known as the White House.
In 1800, Adams lost re-election to Thomas Jefferson and retired to Massachusetts. He eventually resumed his friendship with Jefferson upon the latter's own retirement by initiating a correspondence which lasted fourteen years. He and his wife established a family of politicians, diplomats, and historians now referred to as the Adams political family. Adams was the father of John Quincy Adams, the sixth President of the United States. He died on the fiftieth anniversary of the adoption of the Declaration of Independence, and the same day as Jefferson. Modern historians in the aggregate have favorably ranked his administration.



Contents


1 Early life and education

1.1 Childhood
1.2 College education and adulthood
1.3 Law practice and marriage


2 Career before the Revolution

2.1 Opponent of Stamp Act 1765
2.2 Counsel for the British: Boston Massacre
2.3 Objections to British Parliament's authority


3 Continental Congress

3.1 Member of Continental Congress
3.2 Thoughts on Government
3.3 Declaration of Independence

3.3.1 Government during revolution




4 Diplomat in Europe

4.1 Commissioner to France and Minister Plenipotentiary
4.2 Ambassador to Holland
4.3 Ambassador to Great Britain
4.4 Conceptions of constitutional government


5 Vice Presidency, 1789–97

5.1 Election
5.2 President of the Senate
5.3 Other activities
5.4 Presidential election of 1796


6 Presidency, 1797–1801

6.1 Quasi-War and peace with France (1798–1800)
6.2 Alien and Sedition Acts
6.3 Move to Washington
6.4 Election of 1800


7 Cabinet
8 Judicial appointments
9 Retirement

9.1 Correspondence with Jefferson
9.2 Death


10 Political philosophy and views

10.1 Slavery
10.2 Accusations of monarchism
10.3 Religious views


11 Legacy

11.1 Historical reputation
11.2 In memoriam
11.3 Records


12 See also
13 Notes
14 Bibliography

14.1 Biographies
14.2 Specialized studies
14.3 Primary sources


15 Further reading
16 External links



Early life and education
Childhood




Adams' birthplace in Quincy, Massachusetts


John Adams was born on October 30, 1735 (October 19, 1735 Old Style, Julian calendar) to John Adams Sr. (1691–1761) and Susanna Boylston (1708–1797). He had two younger brothers, Peter and Elihu.[4] Adams' birthplace was then in Braintree, Massachusetts (now Quincy, Massachusetts), and is preserved at Adams National Historical Park. Adams' mother was from a leading medical family of present-day Brookline, Massachusetts.[4] His father was a deacon in the Congregational Church, a farmer, a cordwainer, and a lieutenant in the militia. His great-grandfather, Henry Adams, emigrated to Massachusetts from Braintree, Essex, England around 1638.[5] John Sr. also served as a selectman (town councilman) and supervised the building of schools and roads. Adams often praised his father and recalled their close relationship.[4]
Though raised in modest surroundings, Adams felt an acute responsibility to live up to his family's heritage of reverence. He was a direct descendant of Puritans who came to the American wilderness in the 1630s, established a colonial presence in America, and profoundly affected the culture, laws, and traditions of their region. Journalist Richard Brookhiser wrote that Adams' Puritan ancestors "believed they lived in the Bible. England under the Stuarts was Egypt; they were Israel fleeing ... to establish a refuge for godliness, a city upon a hill."[6] By the time of John Adams' birth in 1735, Puritan tenets such as predestination were no longer as widely accepted, and many of their stricter practices had moderated with time, but Adams "considered them bearers of freedom, a cause that still had a holy urgency." It was a value system which he believed in and wished to live up to.[6] Adams emphatically recalled that his parents "held every Species of Libertinage in... Contempt and horror," and portrayed "pictures of disgrace, or baseness and of Ruin" from any debauchery.[7]
Adams, as the eldest child, was under a mandate from his parents to obtain a formal education. This began at age six at a Dame school for boys and girls, which was conducted at a teacher's home and centered upon The New England Primer. Shortly thereafter, Adams attended Braintree Latin School under Joseph Cleverly, where studies included Latin, rhetoric, logic, and arithmetic. Adams' reflections on early education were in the negative mostly, including incidents of truancy, a dislike for his master, and a desire to become a farmer. All questions on the matter ended when his father commanded that he remain in school saying, "You shall comply with my desires." Deacon Adams also retained a new school master named Joseph Marsh, and his son responded positively.[4]
College education and adulthood
At age sixteen, Adams entered Harvard College in 1751. He studied under Joseph Mayhew.[8] He did not share his father's expectation that he become a minister. After graduating in 1755 with an A.B. degree, he taught school for a few years in Worcester, Massachusetts while pondering his permanent vocation. In the next four years, he discerned a passion for prestige, saying that he craved "Honour or Reputation" and "more defference from [his] fellows" and, at age twenty-one, he was determined to become "a great Man".[4] He decided to become a lawyer to further those ends, writing his father that he found among lawyers "noble and gallant achievements" but, among the clergy, the "pretended sanctity of some absolute dunces." Doctrinally, he later became a Unitarian, and dropped belief in predestination, eternal damnation, the divinity of Christ, and most other Calvinist beliefs of his Puritan ancestors. Nevertheless, his remnant Puritanism frequently prompted reservations about his hunger for fame, which he once referred to as mere "trumpery", and he questioned his not properly attending to the "happiness of [his] fellow men."[9]
The French and Indian War began in 1754 and Adams began to struggle with the issue of a young man's responsibility in the conflict; contemporaries of his social position were largely spectators, while those who were less solvent joined the battle as a means to make some money. Adams later said, "I longed more ardently to be a Soldier than I ever did to be a Lawyer." He was acutely aware that he was the first in his family that "degenerated from the virtues of the house so far as not to have been an officer in the militia."[10]
Law practice and marriage




Mrs. Abigail Smith Adams – 1766 Portrait by Benjamin Blythe


Adams followed the usual course of reading the law in order to obtain his license to practice. In 1756, he became an apprentice in the office of John Putnam, a leading lawyer in Worcester.[11] In 1758, he earned an A.M. from Harvard,[12] and the following year was admitted to the Massachusetts bar, having completed his studies under Putnam.[13] From an early age, he developed the habit of writing descriptions of events and impressions of men which are scattered through his diary, which included his report of the 1761 argument of James Otis Jr. in the Massachusetts Superior Court as to the legality of Writs of Assistance. Otis's argument inspired Adams to the cause of the American colonies.[14]
In 1763, he had published seven essays in Boston newspapers, treatises that represented his forging into the convoluted realm of political theory. The essays were offered anonymously, with Adams using the nom de plume "Humphrey Ploughjogger;" this author reappeared in the Boston Gazette in 1765 to oppose the Stamp Act.[15] Adams was initially not as well known as his cousin Samuel, but his influence emerged through his work as a constitutional lawyer and his in-depth analysis of historical examples, together with his dedication to the principles of republicanism. Even so, Adams often found his inborn contentiousness to be a constraint in his political career.[16]
Adams married his third cousin Abigail Smith (1744–1818) on October 25, 1764. Her parents were Elizabeth Quincy and Rev. William Smith, a Congregational minister at Weymouth, Massachusetts.[17] John and Abigail had six children: Abigail "Nabby" in 1765,[18] future president John Quincy Adams in 1767,[19] Susanna in 1768, Charles in 1770, Thomas in 1772,[20] and Elizabeth in 1777.[21] Susanna died after about a year,[20] while Elizabeth was stillborn.[21] The fate of his three sons is curious. All three became lawyers. Charles and Thomas were both unsuccessful in their law professions and eventually became alcoholics, "while John Quincy so conspicuously excelled." Adams never divulged in writing his feelings on this fact.[22]
Career before the Revolution
Opponent of Stamp Act 1765




John Adams – 1766 Portrait by Benjamin Blyth


Adams first rose to prominence leading widespread opposition to the Stamp Act of 1765, imposed by the British Parliament without consulting the American legislatures, and requiring payment of a direct tax by the colonies for various stamped documents. Adams authored the "Braintree Instructions" in 1765, a letter sent to the representatives of Braintree in the Massachusetts legislature which served as a model for other towns' instructions.[23] In the piece, he explained that the Stamp Act should be opposed since it denied two fundamental rights guaranteed to all Englishmen, and which all free men deserved: rights to be taxed only by consent and to be tried only by a jury of one's peers. The instructions were a succinct and forthright defense of colonial rights and liberties.[23]
In August 1765, he reprised his pen name "Humphrey Ploughjogger" and contributed four articles to the Boston Gazette (republished in The London Chronicle in 1768 as True Sentiments of America, also known as A Dissertation on the Canon and Feudal Law). He delivered a speech in December before the governor and council in which he pronounced the Stamp Act invalid on the ground that Massachusetts had not given its assent to it, being without representation in Parliament.[24][25] He later observed that many protests were sparked by an oft-reprinted sermon of Boston minister Jonathan Mayhew, invoking Romans 13 to justify insurrection.[26] In 1766, a town meeting of Braintree elected John Adams as a selectman.[27] Adams strongly supported the right of all Americans to jury trials. Adams protested the 1765 passage of the Stamp Act, which gave jurisdiction to British Vice Admiralty Courts, rather than common law courts.[28] Many colonists, including Adams, believed these courts, which operated without a jury, were corrupt and unfair.[29]
Adams moved the family to Boston in April 1768, renting a clapboard house on Brattle Street that was known locally as the "White House." He and Abigail and the children lived there for a year, then moved to Cold Lane; still later, they moved again to a larger house in Brattle Square in the center of the city.[19]
Counsel for the British: Boston Massacre
On March 5, 1770, a street confrontation resulted in British soldiers killing five civilians in what came to be known as the Boston Massacre.[30] The accused soldiers were arrested on criminal charges and had trouble finding legal representation. Adams ultimately agreed to defend them, though he feared that it would hurt his reputation. In arguing their case, Adams made his legendary statement regarding jury decisions: "Facts are stubborn things; and whatever may be our wishes, our inclinations, or the dictates of our passion, they cannot alter the state of facts and evidence."[2] He also expounded upon Blackstone's Ratio: "It is more important that innocence be protected than it is that guilt be punished, for guilt and crimes are so frequent in this world that they cannot all be punished. But if innocence itself is brought to the bar and condemned, perhaps to die, then the citizen will say, 'whether I do good or whether I do evil is immaterial, for innocence itself is no protection,' and if such an idea as that were to take hold in the mind of the citizen that would be the end of security whatsoever." Adams won an acquittal for six of the soldiers. Two of them who had fired directly into the crowd were charged with murder but were convicted only of manslaughter. Adams was paid a small sum by his clients.[31][32]
Biographer John E. Ferling suggests that Adams made the most of juror selection during the jury selection stage of the trial, saying that Adams "expertly exercised his right to challenge individual jurors and contrived what amounted to a packed jury. Not only were several jurors closely tied through business arrangements to the British army, but five ultimately became Loyalist exiles." While benefitting from prosecutorial mismanagement, Adams "performed brilliantly." Hiller B. Zobel is a scholar who has closely studied the trial, and he concluded, "we can be fairly sure that before a single witness had been sworn, the outcome of the trial was certain."[33] Ferling also surmises that Adams may have been encouraged to take the case in exchange for political office; one of Boston's seats opened three months later in the Massachusetts legislature, and Adams was the town's first choice to fill the vacancy.[34]
His law practice increased greatly from this exposure, as did the demands on his time. In 1771, he moved Abigail and the children to Braintree, but he kept his office in Boston, saying, "I shall spend more Time in my Office than ever I did." He also noted on the day of the family's move, "Now my family is away, I feel no Inclination at all, no Temptation, to be any where but at my Office. I am in it by 6 in the Morning – I am in it at 9 at night.... In the Evening, I can be alone at my Office, and no where else. I never could in my family." Nevertheless, after some time in the capital, he became disenchanted with the rural and "vulgar" Braintree as a home for his family. In August 1772, therefore, Adams moved his family back to Boston. He purchased a large brick house on Queen Street, not far from his office.[35] In 1774, Adams and Abigail returned the family to the farm due to the increasingly unstable situation in Boston, and Braintree remained their permanent Massachusetts home.[36]
Objections to British Parliament's authority
Governor Thomas Hutchinson and his judges until 1772 received their salaries from the Massachusetts legislature. The Coercive Acts and the Tea Act were then passed by Parliament, and the British Crown assumed payment of those wages, drawn from customs revenues imposed upon that colony. According to biographer Ferling, the British government thus singled out Massachusetts for reprisals of previous rebellion and hoped in the process to force the other colonies into line. Boston radicals protested and asked John Adams to proclaim their objections. In "Two Replies of the Massachusetts House of Representatives to Governor Hutchinson" Adams argued that the colonists had never been under the sovereignty of Parliament. Their original charter, as well as their allegiance, was exclusively with the king. If a workable line could not be drawn between parliamentary sovereignty and the total independence of the colonies, he continued, the colonies would have no other choice but independence from England.[30]
In 1775, in response to a set of essays by Daniel Leonard (writing under the pen name "Massachusettensis") defending Hutchinson's arguments for the absolute authority of Parliament over the colonies, Adams (writing as "Novanglus") composed a series of essays addressed to the people living in the Massachusetts Bay Colony. In them, he gave a point-by-point refutation of Leonard's essays, and then provided one of the most extensive and learned arguments made by the colonists against British imperial policy. It was a systematic attempt by Adams to describe the origins, nature, and jurisdiction of (unwritten) British concepts of constitutionality. Adams used his wide knowledge of English and colonial legal history to argue that the provincial legislatures were fully sovereign over their own internal affairs, and that the colonies were connected to Great Britain only through the king.[37][38]
The Boston Tea Party, a historic demonstration against the British enactments, took place on December 16, 1773. The British schooner Dartmouth, loaded with tea to be traded subject to the new tea tax, had previously dropped anchor. By 9:00 PM, the work of the protesters was done – they had demolished 342 chests of tea worth about ten thousand pounds – today's equivalent of about $1 million. Adams was briefly retained by the Dartmouth owners regarding the question of their liability for the destroyed shipment. Adams applauded the destruction of the tea. There had been no choice, he thought, and he called the defiant boarding of the vessels and the quick obliteration of the dutied beverage the "grandest Event" in the history of the colonial protest movement.[39] He wrote the following day in his diary that the destruction of the dutied tea by the protesters had been an "absolutely and indispensably" necessary action.[40]
Continental Congress
Member of Continental Congress




Trumbull's Declaration of Independence – committee presents draft to Congress. Adams at center with his hand on hip.


Massachusetts sent Adams to the first and second Continental Congresses in 1774 and from 1775 to 1777 respectively. The Massachusetts delegation resolved to assume a largely passive role in the first Congress. But Adams felt strongly that the conservatives of 1774, men like Joseph Galloway and James Duane, were no different than Hutchinson and Peter Oliver, and he denigrated such men, telling Abigail that "Spiders, Toads, Snakes, are their only proper Emblems." Yet at that point his views were similar to those of conservative John Dickinson. He sought repeal of objectionable policies, but at the early stage he continued to see positive benefits for America remaining part of the British empire.[41]
In 1774, the First Continental Congress was convened in response to the passage of the Intolerable Acts. Adams agreed to attend,[42] despite an emotional plea from his friend Jonathan Sewall to do otherwise.[43] At the Congress, Adams renewed his push for the right to a jury trial, stating "Representative government and trial by jury are the heart and lungs of liberty. Without them, we have no other fortification against being ridden like horses, fleeced like sheep, worked like cattle, and fed and clothed like swines and hounds.”[44] Adams did not generally like the other delegates to the Congress. He complained of what he considered to be their pretentiousness, writing to Abigail, "I believe if it was moved and seconded that We should come to a Resolution that Three and two make five We should be entertained with Logick and Rhetorick, Law, History, Politicks and Mathematicks, concerning the Subject for two whole Days, and then We should pass the Resolution unanimously in the Affirmative."[45] The Congress disbanded in October after sending a letter of grievances to King George III.[46]
The absence of Adams from home was hard on Abigail, who was left alone to care for the family. But she encouraged her husband in his task, writing: "You cannot be, I know, nor do I wish to see you an inactive Spectator, but if the Sword be drawn I bid adieu to all domestick felicity, and look forward to that Country where there is neither wars nor rumors of War in a firm belief that thro the mercy of its King we shall both rejoice there together."[47]
A month after the Battles of Lexington and Concord, Adams returned to Philadelphia for the Second Continental Congress as the leader of the Massachusetts delegation.[48] He moved cautiously at first, observing that Congress was divided between Loyalist (American Revolution), those hesitant to take any position, and those favoring independence.[49] He became convinced that Congress was moving in the proper direction – away from its relationship with Great Britain. Publicly, Adams supported "reconciliation if practicable," but privately agreed with Benjamin Franklin's confidential observation that independence was inevitable.[50] He opposed various attempts, including the Olive Branch Petition, aimed at trying to find peace between the colonies and Great Britain,[51] writing, "In my opinion Powder and Artillery are the most efficacious, Sure, and infallibly conciliatory Measures We can adopt."[52] In June 1775, with a view of promoting union among the colonies, he nominated George Washington of Virginia as commander-in-chief of the army then assembled around Boston.[53] Ferling writes, "By the fall of 1775 no one in Congress labored more ardently than Adams to hasten the day when America would be separate from Great Britain."[50]
In October 1775, Adams was appointed the chief judge of the Massachusetts Superior Court, but he never served, and resigned in February 1777.[53]
Thoughts on Government
A number of delegates sought Adams' advice about forming new governments.[54] While recognizing its importance, Adams had privately criticized Thomas Paine's 1776 pamphlet Common Sense, saying that the author had "a better hand at pulling down than building."[55] Yet, some delegates found his views so convincing they urged him to commit them to paper. He did so in separate letters to these colleagues, each missive a bit longer and more thoughtful. So impressed was Richard Henry Lee that, with Adams's consent, he had the most comprehensive letter printed. Published anonymously just after mid-April 1776, it was titled simply Thoughts on Government and styled as "a Letter from a Gentleman to his Friend." Many historians agree that none of Adams' other compositions rivaled the enduring influence of this pamphlet.[54]
Adams advised that the form of government should be chosen to attain the desired ends – the happiness and virtue of the greatest number of people. He wrote that, "There is no good government but what is republican. That the only valuable part of the British constitution is so because the very definition of a republic is an empire of laws, and not of men." The treatise also defended bicameralism, for "a single assembly is liable to all the vices, follies and frailties of an individual."[56] He also suggested that there should be a separation of powers between the executive, the judicial and the legislative branches, and further recommended that if a continental government were to be formed then it "should sacredly be confined" to certain enumerated powers. Thoughts on Government was referenced as an authority in every state-constitution writing hall.[57]
Declaration of Independence
Adams in the 1776 session of Congress drafted the preamble to the Lee resolution of colleague Richard Henry Lee (Virginia), which called on the colonies to adopt new independent governments.[58] On June 7, 1776 he seconded the resolution, which stated, "These colonies are, and of right ought to be, free and independent states."[59] Adams also championed the measure until it was adopted by Congress on July 2. Once the resolution passed, independence became inevitable, though it still had to be declared formally. The commitment was, as Adams put it, "independence itself."[60]
Prior to independence being declared, a Committee of Five was charged with drafting the Declaration, and included Adams, along with Thomas Jefferson, Benjamin Franklin, Robert R. Livingston and Roger Sherman.[61] The Committee, after discussing the general outline that the document should follow, decided that Jefferson would write the first draft.[62] Jefferson particularly thought Adams should write the document; but Adams persuaded the Committee to choose Jefferson while agreeing to consult with Jefferson personally. Adams recorded his exchange with Jefferson on the question: Jefferson asked, "Why will you not? You ought to do it." To which Adams responded, "I will not – reasons enough." Jefferson replied, "What can be your reasons?" And Adams responded, "Reason first, you are a Virginian, and a Virginian ought to appear at the head of this business. Reason second, I am obnoxious, suspected, and unpopular. You are very much otherwise. Reason third, you can write ten times better than I can." "Well," said Jefferson, "if you are decided, I will do as well as I can." Adams concluded, "Very well. When you have drawn it up, we will have a meeting."[63] The Committee left no minutes, and the drafting process itself is uncertain – accounts written many years later by Jefferson and Adams, although frequently cited, are otherwise contradictory.[64] Although the first draft was written primarily by Jefferson, Adams assumed a primary role in its completion. After editing the document further, Congress approved it on July 4.[65] Many years later Jefferson hailed Adams as "the pillar of [the Declaration's] support on the floor of Congress, [its] ablest advocate and defender against the multifarious assaults it encountered."[66]
Government during revolution




Adams (left)–Staten Island Conference by Chappel


After defeating the Continental Army at the Battle of Long Island on August 27, 1776, British Admiral Richard Howe mistakenly assumed a strategic advantage to be at hand, and requested the Second Continental Congress send representatives in an attempt to negotiate peace. A delegation, including Adams and Benjamin Franklin, met with Howe at the Staten Island Peace Conference on September 11.[67] Howe's authority was premised on the Colonists' submission, so no common ground was to be found. When Lord Howe unhappily stated he could view the American delegates only as British subjects, Adams replied, "Your lordship may consider me in what light you please, ...except that of a British subject."[68] Adams learned many years later that his name was on a list of people specifically excluded from Howe's pardon-granting authority.[69] Being quite unimpressed with General Howe, and also after payments to colonial volunteers were increased, Adams in September 1776 said about the war, "We shall do well enough." Indeed, if Washington got his men, the British would be "ruined."[70]
In 1777, Adams began serving as the head of the Board of War and Ordnance; in fact, he sat on no less than ninety committees, chairing twenty-five. No other congressman approached the assumption of such a work load. As Benjamin Rush reported, he was acknowledged "to be the first man in the House."[71] He was also referred to as a "one man war department",[72] working eighteen-hour days and mastering the details of raising, equipping and fielding an army under civilian control. He also authored the "Plan of Treaties," laying out the Congress's requirements for the crucial treaty with France.[73]
Diplomat in Europe
Commissioner to France and Minister Plenipotentiary
In the spring of 1776 Adams advocated in Congress that independence was necessary in order to establish trade, and conversely trade was essential for the attainment of independence; he specifically urged negotiation of a commercial treaty with France. He was then appointed, along with Franklin, Dickinson, Benjamin Harrison V of Virginia and Robert Morris of Pennsylvania, "to prepare a plan of treaties to be proposed to foreign powers." Indeed, while Jefferson was laboring over the Declaration of Independence, Adams worked on the Model Treaty.[74]
On November 27, 1777 Adams was named as commissioner to France, replacing Silas Deane. He accepted at once. He was to join Franklin and Arthur Lee in Paris to negotiate an alliance with the French, who were debating whether or not to recognize and aid the United States. Abigail was left in Massachusetts to manage their home. However, it was agreed that 10-year-old John Quincy would go, for the experience was "of inestimable value."[75] On February 17, Adams set sail aboard the frigate Boston, commanded by Captain Samuel Tucker.[76] The stormy trip was treacherous, with lightning injuring 19 sailors and killing one. Adams' ship was later pursued by several British frigates in the mid-Atlantic, but evaded them. Near the coast of Spain, Adams himself took up arms to help capture a heavily armed British merchantman ship, the Martha. Later, a cannon malfunction killed one and injured five more of the crew.[77] On April 1, the men arrived in Spain, where Adams learned that France had already agreed to an alliance with the United States on February 6.[78] Shortly after, they arrived in France.[79] Adams was annoyed by the other two commissioners: Lee, whom he thought paranoid and cynical, and the popular and influential Franklin, whom he found irritating, lethargic, and overly deferential and accommodating to the French.[80] He took a disliking to Dr. Edward Bancroft, Franklin's aid, who, unbeknownst to him, was a British spy.[81] Adams did not speak French, the international language of diplomacy at the time.[82] He therefore assumed a less visible role, but emerged as the commission's chief administrator, imposing order and methods lacking in his delegation's finances and record-keeping affairs.[83] He was frustrated by the lack of commitment on the part of the French to helping the United States. In December, Adams wrote a letter to French foreign minister, the comte de Vergennes arguing for French naval support in North America. Franklin toned down the letter, but Vergennes ignored it.[84]
In September 1778, Franklin was named minister plenipotentiary to France while Lee was sent to serve in Spain. To his disappointment, Congress gave Adams no instructions on where to go or what to do next. Disgusted by the apparent slight, he departed France with John Quincy on March 8, 1779.[85] On August 2, they arrived back in Braintree.[86] Adams was elected to the Massachusetts Constitutional Convention with the purpose of establishing a new constitution for Massachusetts. He served on a committee of three, also including Samuel Adams and James Bowdoin, to draft the constitution. The task of writing it fell primarily to John Adams. The resulting Constitution of Massachusetts was approved in 1780. It was the first constitution written by a special committee, then ratified by the people; and was also the first to feature a bicameral legislature. Included were a distinct executive – though restrained by an executive council – with a partial (two-thirds) veto, and a separate judicial branch.[57] Adams became one of the founders and charter members of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1780.[87][88]
In the fall of 1779 Adams was unanimously appointed a minister Plenipotentiary, charged with negotiating a "treaty of peace, amity and commerce" with peace commissioners from Britain.[57] Following the conclusion of the Massachusetts constitutional convention, he departed for Europe in November[89] aboard the French frigate Sensible – accompanied by John Quincy and 9-year-old son Charles. In France, constant disagreement between Lee and Franklin eventually resulted in Adams assuming the role of tie-breaker in almost all votes on commission business; Adams also increased his usefulness by mastering the French language. In time Lee was recalled and Adams later developed his own enmity towards the older Franklin.[74]
The comte de Vergennes disapproved of Adams, so Franklin, Thomas Jefferson, John Jay, and Henry Laurens were appointed to collaborate with Adams; nevertheless, Jefferson did not go to Europe and Laurens was posted to the Dutch Republic. Jay, Adams, and Franklin played the major part in the final negotiations. Overruling Franklin and distrustful of Vergennes, Jay and Adams decided not to consult with France; instead, they dealt directly with the British commissioners.[90]
Throughout the negotiations, Adams successfully demanded that the right of the United States to the fisheries along the Atlantic coast be recognized. The American negotiators were able to secure a favorable treaty securing most lands east of the Mississippi, and the document was signed on September 3, 1783.[57]
Ambassador to Holland




Medallion given to John Adams in 1782 by Johann Georg Holtzhey to mark United States as an independent nation by the Netherlands


In July 1780 Adams replaced Laurens as the ambassador to the Dutch Republic, then one of the few other republics in the world. With the aid of the Dutch Patriot leader Joan van der Capellen tot den Pol, Adams secured the recognition of the United States as an independent government at The Hague on April 19, 1782. In February 1782 the Frisian states was the first Dutch province to recognize the United States, while France had been the first European country to grant diplomatic recognition in 1778. He also negotiated a loan of five million guilders financed by Nicolaas van Staphorst and Wilhelm Willink. By 1794 a total of eleven loans were granted in Amsterdam to the United States with a value of 29 million guilders. In October 1782, he negotiated with the Dutch a treaty of amity and commerce, the first such treaty between the United States and a foreign power following the 1778 treaty with France.[91] The house that Adams bought during this stay in the Netherlands became the first American-owned embassy on foreign soil.[92]
In 1784 and 1785, he was one of the architects of extensive trade relations between the United States and Prussia. The Prussian ambassador in The Hague, Friedrich Wilhelm von Thulemeyer, was involved, as were Jefferson and Franklin, who were in Paris.[93]
Ambassador to Great Britain
Adams was appointed in 1785 the first American minister to the Court of St James's (ambassador to Great Britain), and he prepared to travel from Paris to London to begin his new assignment. When a counterpart seemed to assume that Adams had some family members in England, Adams replied, "Neither my father or mother, grandfather or grandmother, great grandfather or great grandmother, nor any other relation that I know of, or care a farthing for, has been in England these one hundred and fifty years; so that you see I have not one drop of blood in my veins but what is American."[94]
Adams had his first audience with King George III on June 1, and recorded the event as he saw it in great detail in a letter to Foreign Minister John Jay on June 2. Adams approached the King, telling him that he felt greatly honored by his appointment, and promised to do all that he could to restore friendship and cordiality "between People who, tho Seperated [sic] by an Ocean and under different Governments have the Same Language, a Similar Religion and kindred Blood." After hearing this, King George, promised to "receive with Pleasure, the Assurances of the friendly Dispositions of the United States." He added that "while he had been the last to consent" to American independence, he wished Adams to know that he had always done what he thought right and proper. Towards the end of the interview, the King said, which to Adams appeared very sudden, "There is an Opinion, among Some People, that you are not the most attached of all Your Countrymen, to the manners of France." Adams replied, "That Opinion sir, is not mistaken, I must avow to your Majesty, I have no Attachments but to my own Country." To this King George responded, "An honest Man will never have any other."[95]
During her visit to Washington to mark the bicentennial of American independence in 1976, Queen Elizabeth II of the United Kingdom gave historical perspective to Adams' service: "John Adams, America's first ambassador, said to my ancestor, King George III, that it was his desire to help with the restoration of 'the old good nature and the old good humour between our peoples.' That restoration has long been made, and the links of language, tradition, and personal contact have maintained it."[96]
Adams was joined by his wife while in London; they suffered the stares and hostility of the Court, and chose to escape it when they could by seeking out Richard Price, minister of Newington Green Unitarian Church and instigator of the Revolution Controversy.[97]
Conceptions of constitutional government




Adams – 1785 Mather Brown Portrait


Adams' preoccupation with political and governmental affairs–which caused considerable separation from his wife and children–ironically had a distinct familial context, which he articulated in 1780: "I must study Politicks and War that my sons may have the liberty to study Mathematicks and Philosophy. My sons ought to study Geography, natural History, Naval Architecture, navigation, Commerce and Agriculture, in order to give their children a right to study Painting, Poetry, Musick, Architecture, Statuary, Tapestry, and Porcelaine."[98]
While in London, Adams published a work entitled A Defence of the Constitutions of Government of the United States (1787).[99] In it he repudiated the views of Turgot and other European writers as to the viciousness of state government frameworks. In the book, Adams suggested that "the rich, the well-born and the able" should be set apart from other men in a senate – that would prevent them from dominating the lower house. Adams' Defence is described as an articulation of the classical republican theory of mixed government. Adams contended that social classes exist in every political society, and that a good government must accept that reality. For centuries, dating back to Aristotle, a mixed regime balancing monarchy, aristocracy, and democracy – that is, the king, the nobles, and the people – was required to preserve order and liberty.[100]
Wood (2006) has maintained that Adams' political philosophy had become irrelevant by the time the Federal Constitution was ratified. By then, American political thought, transformed by more than a decade of vigorous debate as well as formative experiential pressures, had abandoned the classical perception of politics as a mirror of social estates. Americans' new understanding of popular sovereignty was that the citizenry were the sole possessors of power in the nation. Representatives in the government enjoyed mere portions of the people's power and only for a limited time. Adams was thought to have overlooked this evolution and revealed his continued attachment to the older version of politics.[101] Yet Wood ignored Adams' peculiar definition of the term "republic," and his support for a constitution ratified by the people.[102] He also underestimated Adams' belief in checks and balances, such as Adams' statement that, "Power must be opposed to power, and interest to interest." This sentiment was later echoed by James Madison's famous statement that, "[a]mbition must be made to counteract ambition", in The Federalist No. 51, explaining the separation of powers established under the new Constitution.[103][104] Adams was unsurpassed in his dedication to establishing checks and balances as a governing strategem.
On the government's role in education Adams offered unambiguously that, "The whole people must take upon themselves the education of the whole people and be willing to bear the expenses of it. There should not be a district of one mile square, without a school in it, not founded by a charitable individual, but maintained at the public expense of the people themselves.[105]
Vice Presidency, 1789–97
Election
Each state's presidential electors gathered in their state's capital on February 4, 1789 to cast their votes for the president. As originally prescribed by Article II of the Constitution, each state chose a number of electors equal to its representation in Congress. Each elector then cast two votes for president, though the electors were not allowed to cast both votes for the same person, and were prohibited from casting both their ballots for persons from their own state. The individual who won the most electoral votes would become president while the individual with the second-most electoral votes would become vice president. Each state's votes were sealed and delivered to Congress to be counted.[106] Adams received 34 electoral college votes in the presidential election of 1789, finishing in second place behind George Washington, who garnered 69 votes. As a result, Washington became the nation's first president, and Adams became the its first vice president.




John Adams by Gilbert Stuart, c. 1815, oil on canvas – National Gallery of Art, Washington DC


The first presidential term and the first vice presidential term both officially started on March 4, 1789, the date set by the Congress of the Confederation for the beginning of operations of the federal government under the new U.S. Constitution.[107] However, due to a delay in the counting and certification of the electoral votes, which was not done until April 6 (because although the Senate of the 1st Congress initially convened on March 4, it did not achieve a quorum until April 6, and so could not conduct business),[108][109] they commenced several weeks late. Adams first presided over the Senate on April 21.[110] Washington was inaugurated into office on April 30.[108]
President of the Senate
Primarily established to provide a successor in the event of the president's death, disability, or resignation,[111] The vice president's sole constitutionally prescribed responsibility is to preside over the U.S. Senate as its president. The vice president also has the authority (ex officio, for he is not an elected member of the Senate) to cast a tie-breaking vote. Adams played an active role in the Senate's deliberations, particularly during his first term. On at least one occasion, he persuaded senators to vote against legislation he opposed, and he frequently lectured the body on procedural and policy matters. At the start of Washington's presidency, Adams became deeply involved in a month-long Senate controversy over the official titles for the president and executive officers of the new government. Although the House of Representatives agreed in short order that the president should be addressed simply as "George Washington, President of the United States," the Senate debated the issue at some length.[111] Adams favored the adoption of the style of Highness (as well as the title of Protector of Their [the United States'] Liberties) for the president.[112] Others favored the variant of Electoral Highness or the lesser Excellency."[113] Anti-federalists in the Senate objected to the monarchical sound of them all; Jefferson described them as "superlatively ridiculous."[114] In the end, Adams yielded to their objections and the House decided that the title of "Mr. President" would be used.[115]
He supported Washington's policies by casting 29 tie-breaking votes.[111] In doing so, he protected the president's sole authority over the removal of appointees and influenced the location of the nation's capital. But his views did not always align with Washington, who joined Franklin as the object of Adams' ire, as shown in this quote: "The History of our Revolution will be one continued lie. . . . The essence of the whole will be that Dr. Franklin's electrical Rod smote the Earth and out sprung General Washington. That Franklin electrified him with his Rod – and henceforth these two conducted all the Policy, Negotiations, Legislatures and War." On at least one occasion, he persuaded senators to vote against legislation that he opposed, and he frequently lectured the Senate on procedural and policy matters. Adams' political views and his attempt to assume a more active role in the Senate made him a natural target for critics of the Washington administration. Toward the end of his first term, as a result of a threatened resolution that would have silenced him except for procedural and policy matters, he began to exercise more restraint. When the nation's first two opposing political parties formed, he joined the Federalist Party, though he was consistently in opposition to its dominant leader Alexander Hamilton.[97]
Other activities
Beyond his role in the Senate, Adams played a minor role in the politics of the early 1790s. During his two vice-presidential terms, Adams attended few cabinet meetings, and the president sought his counsel only infrequently. Nonetheless, the two men, according to Ferling, "jointly executed many more of the executive branch's ceremonial undertakings than would be likely for a contemporary president and vice-president."[111] Overall, while Adams brought energy and dedication to the office,[116] he found the task "not quite adapted to my character...too inactive, and mechanical."[117] He often lamented what he viewed as the "complete insignificance" of his situation. To his wife Abigail he once wrote, "My country has in its wisdom contrived for me the most insignificant office that ever the invention of man . . . or his imagination contrived or his imagination conceived; and as I can do neither good nor evil, I must be borne away by others and met the common fate."[118]
Presidential election of 1796
Main article: United States presidential election, 1796


1796 electoral vote totals


Name
Party
Votes


John Adams

07 !Federalist
71


Thomas Jefferson

01 !Democratic-Republican
68


Thomas Pinckney

08 !Federalist
59


Aaron Burr

02 !Democratic-Republican
30


Samuel Adams

03 !Democratic-Republican
15


Oliver Ellsworth

04 !Democratic-Republican
11


George Clinton

05 !Democratic-Republican
7


John Jay

09 !Federalist
5


James Iredell

10 !Federalist
3


John Henry

06 !Democratic-Republican
2


Samuel Johnston

11 !Federalist
2


George Washington

13 !None
2


C. C. Pinckney

12 !Federalist
1


The election of 1796 was the first contested American presidential election.[119] Twice, George Washington had been elected to office unanimously; however, during his presidency, deep philosophical differences between the two leading figures in the administration – Alexander Hamilton and Thomas Jefferson – regarding domestic economic policy and U.S. foreign policy caused a rift between them,[120][121] and led to the founding of the Federalist Party and the Democratic-Republican Party. Thus, when Washington announced that he would not be a candidate for a third term, an intense partisan struggle for control of Congress and the presidency began.
Like the previous two presidential elections, no candidates were put forward for voters to choose between in 1796. The Constitution provided for the selection of electors who would then elect a president.[122] In seven states voters chose the presidential electors. In the remaining nine states, they were chosen by the state's legislature.[123] The clear favorite of Democratic–Republicans was Jefferson, although he was very reluctant to run.[124] There was little doubt that Adams would be the choice of a great majority of the Federalists.[122] Even so, Hamilton also had hoped to lead the party.[125]
The Democratic-Republicans in Congress held a nominating caucus and named Jefferson and Aaron Burr as their presidential choices.[125] Jefferson at first declined the nomination, but he finally agreed to run a few weeks later. Federalist members of Congress held an informal nominating caucus and named Adams and Thomas Pinckney as their candidates for president.[124][126] The campaign, was, for the most part, unorganized and sporadic, confined to newspaper attacks, pamphlets and political rallies;[122] of the four contenders, only Burr actively campaigned. The practice of not campaigning for office would remain for many decades.[123] Adams specifically stated that he wanted to stay out of what he called the "silly and wicked game" of campaigning for office.[127]
As the campaign progressed, fears grew among Hamilton and his supporters that Adams was too vain, opinionated, unpredictable and stubborn to follow their directions once elected.[128] Desiring "a more pliant president than Adams," Hamilton maneuvered to tip the election to Pinckney. He coerced South Carolina Federalist electors, pledged to vote for "favorite son" Pinckney, to scatter their second votes among candidates other than Adams. Hamilton's scheme was undone, however, when several New England state electors heard of it, conferred, and agreed not to vote for Pinckney.[129] Adams was nonetheless angered, writing shortly after the election that Hamilton was a "proud Spirited, conceited, aspiring Mortal always pretending to Morality, with as debauched Morals as old Franklin who is more his Model than any one I know."[130]
In the end, Adams won the presidency by a narrow margin, receiving 71 electoral votes to 68 for Jefferson, who became the vice president; Pinckney finished in third with 59 votes, and Burr came in fourth with 30. The balance of the Electoral College votes were dispersed among nine other candidates.[131] This is the only election to date in which a president and vice president were elected from opposing tickets.[132]
Presidency, 1797–1801
Main article: Presidency of John Adams




President's House, Philadelphia. Adams occupied this Philadelphia mansion from March 1797 to May 1800.


Adams was sworn into office as the nation's second president on March 4, 1797, by Chief Justice Oliver Ellsworth.[133] As president, he followed Washington's lead in using the presidency to exemplify republican values and civic virtue; and his service was free of scandal. He continued to strengthen the central government by expanding the Navy and Army. In July 1798 Adams signed into law the Act for the Relief of Sick and Disabled Seamen, which authorized the establishment of a government-operated marine hospital service.[134]
Historians debate his decision to retain en masse the members of Washington's cabinet. Many felt he was oblivious to the political danger of such a decision, in light of the cabinet's loyalty to Hamilton. The "Hamiltonians who surround him," Jefferson soon remarked, "you are only a little less hostile to him than to me."[135] Although aware of the Hamilton factor, Adams was convinced their retention ensured a smoother succession.[136] Adams' economic programs maintained those of Hamilton, who indeed had regularly consulted with key cabinet members, especially the powerful Secretary of the Treasury, Oliver Wolcott Jr.[137] Adams was in other respects quite independent of his cabinet, often making decisions despite strong opposition from it. Such self-reliance enabled him to avoid war with France, despite a strong desire among his cabinet secretaries for the conflict. The Quasi-War with France resulted in the detachment from European affairs that Washington had sought. It also had psychological benefits, allowing America to view itself as holding its own against a European power.[135]
Historian George Herring argues that Adams was the most independent-minded of the founders.[138] Though he aligned with the Federalists, he was somewhat a party unto himself, disagreeing with the Federalists as much as he did the Democratic-Republicans.[139] He was often described as "prickly", but his tenacity was fed by good decisions made in the face of universal opposition.[138] Adams was often combative, which diminished presidential decorum, as Adams himself admitted in his old age: "[As president] I refused to suffer in silence. I sighed, sobbed, and groaned, and sometimes screeched and screamed. And I must confess to my shame and sorrow that I sometimes swore."[140] Adams' resolve to advance peace with France, rather than to continue hostilities, especially reduced his popularity.[141] This played an important role in his reelection defeat, however he was so pleased with the outcome that he had it engraved on his tombstone. Adams spent much of his term at home in Massachusetts, ignoring the details of political patronage nursed by other office holders.[142]
Quasi-War and peace with France (1798–1800)
See also: XYZ Affair, Quasi-War, and Fries Rebellion
The president's term was marked by disputes concerning the country's role, if any, in the expanding conflict in Europe, where Britain and France were at war. Hamilton and the Federalists supported Britain, while Jefferson and the Democratic-Republicans favored France.[143] The French had supported Jefferson for president and became even more belligerent at his loss.[144] When Adams entered office, he decided to continue Washington's policy of staying out of the European war. The intense battle over the Jay Treaty in 1795 had previously polarized politics throughout the nation.[145] The French saw America as Britain's junior partner and began seizing American merchant ships that were trading with the British. Nevertheless, most Americans were initially pro-French due to France's assistance during the Revolutionary War, and would not have sufficiently rallied behind anyone to stop France.[146][147] On May 16, Adams gave a speech to the House and Senate in which he called for increasing defense capabilities in case of war with France.[148] For this he was roundly derided in the Republican press.[149]




A political cartoon depicts the XYZ Affair – America is a female being plundered by Frenchmen. (1798)


Sentiments changed with the XYZ Affair. Adams appointed a three-member commission to represent the United States to negotiate with France. The commission consisted of John Marshall, Charles Cotesworth Pinckney and Elbridge Gerry. However, when the envoys arrived in October 1797, they were kept waiting for several days, and then granted only a 15-minute meeting with French Foreign Minister Talleyrand. After this, the diplomats were met by three of Talleyrand's agents. Each refused to conduct diplomatic negotiations unless the United States paid enormous bribes, one to Talleyrand personally, and another to the Republic of France.[150] Supposedly this was to make up for offenses given to France by Adams in his speech.[151] The Americans refused to negotiate on such terms.[152] Marshall and Pinckney returned home, while Gerry remained.[153]
The affair substantially weakened popular American support of France. The pro-French Jeffersonians lost support and quickly became the minority as many began to demand full-scale war. The affair heightened fears of sedition by the administration's opponents and legislation was introduced in response. The president knew that America would be unable to win a conflict, as France at the time was dominating the fight in most of Europe. Adams therefore pursued a strategy whereby American ships harassed French ships in an effort sufficient to stem the French assaults on American interests. This was the undeclared naval war between the U.S. and France – the Quasi-War which broke out in 1798.[145]
There was danger of invasion from the more powerful French forces, so Adams and the Federalist congress built up the army, bringing back Washington as its commander. Washington wanted Hamilton to be his second-in-command and Adams reluctantly accommodated.[154] It became apparent that Hamilton was truly in charge due to Washington's advanced years.[145]
Adams also rebuilt the Navy, adding six fast, powerful frigates, most notably the USS Constitution. To pay for the military buildup, Congress imposed new taxes on property: the Direct Tax of 1798.[146] It was the first (and last) such federal tax. Taxpayers were angered, especially in southeast Pennsylvania, where the bloodless Fries's Rebellion broke out among rural German-speaking farmers who protested what they saw as a threat to their republican liberties and to their churches.[155][156]
Hamilton assumed control in the War department, and the rift between Adams' and Hamilton's supporters widened. Many sought to vest Hamilton with command authority over the army, and they also resisted giving prominent Democratic-Republicans positions in the army, which Adams wanted to do in order to gain bipartisan support. By building a large standing army, Hamilton's supporters raised popular alarms and played into the hands of the Democratic-Republicans. They also alienated Adams and his large personal following. They shortsightedly viewed the Federalist party as their own tool and ignored the need to pull together the entire nation in the face of war with France. Overall, however, patriotic sentiments and a series of naval victories, popularized the war as well as the president.[157]
In February 1799, Adams surprised many by sending diplomat William Vans Murray on a peace mission to France. Napoleon, realizing that the conflict was pointless, signaled his readiness for friendly relations. At the Convention of 1800, the two sides agreed to return any captured ships and to allow for the peaceful transfer of non-military goods to an enemy of the nation. The Treaty of Alliance of 1778 was superseded and the United States was then free of foreign entanglements, as Washington had advised in his farewell address. Adams brought in John Marshall as Secretary of State and demobilized the emergency army.[158] Adams proudly avoided war, but deeply split his party in the process.[159]
Alien and Sedition Acts
Main article: Alien and Sedition Acts






File:ADAMS,John-President (BEP engraved portrait).jpg
BEP engraved portrait of Adams as President


Despite the discredit of the XYZ Affair, the Democratic–Republicans' opposition persisted. In the midst of war, which included the "reign of terror" during the French Revolution, political tensions were incendiary. Some pro-French Democratic-Republicans even fostered a movement in America, similar to the French Revolution, to overthrow the Federalists.[160] When Democratic-Republicans in some states refused to enforce federal laws, some Federalists voiced the intention to send in an army and force them to capitulate. As the hostility sweeping Europe bled over into America, calls for secession began to reach new heights.[161] Some Federalists accused the French and their associated immigrants of provoking civil unrest. In an attempt to quell the uprising, the Federalists introduced, and the Congress passed, a series of laws collectively referred to as the Alien and Sedition Acts, which were signed by Adams in 1798.[145]
Congress specifically passed four measures – the Naturalization Act, the Alien Friends Act, the Alien Enemies Act and the Sedition Act. These statutes were designed to mitigate the threat of secessionists by disallowing their most extreme firebrands. The Naturalization Act increased to 14 years the period of residence required for an immigrant to attain American citizenship (naturalized citizens tended to vote for the Democratic-Republicans.) The Alien Friends Act and the Alien Enemies Act allowed the president to deport any foreigner (from friendly and hostile nations, respectively) which he considered dangerous to the country. The Sedition Act made it a crime to publish "false, scandalous, and malicious writing" against the government or its officials. Punishments included 2–5 years in prison and fines of up to $5,000. Although Adams had not promoted any of these acts, he signed them into law.[135]
The acts became controversial from prosecution thereunder of a Congressman and a number of newspaper editors. Indeed, the Federalist administration initiated fourteen or more indictments under the Sedition Act, as well as suits against five of the six most prominent Democratic–Republican newspapers. The majority of the legal actions began in 1798 and 1799, and went to trial on the eve of the 1800 presidential election – timing that hardly appeared coincidental, according to biographer Ferling. Other historians have cited evidence that the Alien and Sedition Acts were rarely enforced, namely: 1) only 10 convictions under the Sedition Act have been identified; 2) Adams never signed a deportation order; and 3) the sources of expressed furor over the acts were Democratic–Republicans. However, other historians have emphasized that the Acts were employed for political targeting from the outset, causing many aliens to leave the country. The Acts as well allowed for prosecution of many who opposed the Federalists, even on the floor of Congress.[162] In any case, the election of 1800 in fact became a bitter and volatile contest, with each side expressing extraordinary fear of the other and its policies; after Democratic–Republicans prevailed in the elections of 1800, they used the acts against Federalists before the laws finally expired.[145]
Move to Washington
Adams made his first official visit to the nation's new seat of government in early June 1800. Amid the "raw and unfinished" cityscape, the president found the public buildings "in a much greater forwardness of completion than expected."[163] He moved into the nearly completed President's Mansion (later known as the White House) on November 1. Abigail arrived a few weeks later. Upon arriving, Adams wrote to her, "Before I end my letter, I pray Heaven to bestow the best of Blessings on this House and all that shall hereafter inhabit it. May none but honest and wise Men ever rule under this roof."[164][165] The Senate of the Sixth Congress met for the first time in the new Congress House (later known as the Capitol building) on November 17, 1800. Several days later, on November 22, Adams delivered his fourth State of the Union Address to a joint session of Congress in the Senate chamber.[166] This would be the last annual message any president would personally deliver to Congress for the next 113 years.[167]
Election of 1800
Main article: United States presidential election, 1800
With the Federalist Party was deeply split over his negotiations with France, and the opposition Democratic–Republicans enraged over the Alien and Sedition Acts, and the expansion of the military, Adams faced a daunting reelection campaign in 1800.[123] As in 1796, the Federalist members of Congress caucused in the spring of 1800 and nominated Adams and Charles C. Pinckney. The Democratic–Republicans meanwhile nominated Jefferson and Burr, their candidates in the previous election.[168]
The campaign was bitter and characterized by malicious personal attacks. Federalists spread rumors that the Democratic–Republicans were radicals who would ruin the country through revolution. They in turn accused Federalists of subverting republican principles through punitive federal laws, and of favoring Britain and the other coalition countries in their war with France in order to promote aristocratic, anti-republican values. Additionally, Hamilton was hard at work, attempting to sabotage the president's reelection. In October, he published a pamphlet in which he charged that Adams was "emotionally unstable, given to impulsive and irrational decisions, unable to coexist with his closest advisers, and generally unfit to be president." He also worked at persuading Federalist presidential electors in New England to withhold their vote from Adams, hoping to boosting Pinckney's chances of winning the presidency.[123][168]


1800 electoral vote totals


Name
Party
Votes


Thomas Jefferson

01 !Democratic-Republican
73


Aaron Burr

02 !Democratic-Republican
73


John Adams

03 !Federalist
65


C. C. Pinckney

04 !Federalist
64


John Jay

05 !Federalist
1


When the electoral votes were counted, Adams finished in third place with 65 votes, and Pinckney came in fourth with 64 votes (one New England Federalist elector voted for John Jay instead). Jefferson and Burr tied for first place with 73 votes each. Because of the tie, the election devolved upon the House of Representatives. As specified by the Constitution, each state's delegation voted en bloc, with each state having a single vote; an absolute majority (nine, as there were 16 states at the time) was required for victory. On February 17, 1801 – on the 36th ballot – Jefferson was elected by a vote of 10 to 4 (two states abstained).[123][131]
Historian John E. Ferling attributes Adams' defeat to five factors: the stronger organization of the Democratic–Republicans; Federalist disunity; the controversy surrounding the Alien and Sedition Acts; the popularity of Jefferson in the south; and, the effective politicking of Aaron Burr in New York, where the State Legislature shifted from Federalist to Democratic–Republican on the basis of a few wards in New York City controlled by Burr's political machine.[168] Analyzing the causes of the party's trouncing, Adams wrote, "No party that ever existed knew itself so little or so vainly overrated its own influence and popularity as ours. None ever understood so ill the causes of its own power, or so wantonly destroyed them."[169]
To compound the agony of his defeat, Adams' son Charles, a long-time alcoholic, died in late November. Anxious to rejoin Abigail, who had already left for Massachusetts, Adams departed the White House in the predawn hours of March 4, 1801, and did not attend Jefferson's inauguration. Since him, only three out-going presidents (having served a full term) have not attended their successor's inauguration.[168]
The complications arising out of the 1796 and 1800 elections prompted Congress and the states to refine the process whereby the Electoral College elects a president and a vice president. The new procedure was enacted through the 12th Amendment, which became a part of the Constitution in June 1804, and was first followed in that year's presidential election.[170]
Cabinet


The Adams Cabinet


Office
Name
Term





President
John Adams
1797–1801





Vice President
Thomas Jefferson
1797–1801





Secretary of State
Timothy Pickering
1797–1800


John Marshall
1800–1801





Secretary of Treasury
Oliver Wolcott Jr.
1797–1801


Samuel Dexter
1801





Secretary of War
James McHenry
1797–1800


Samuel Dexter
1800–1801





Attorney General
Charles Lee
1797–1801





Secretary of the Navy
Benjamin Stoddert
1798–1801


Judicial appointments
Main article: List of federal judges appointed by John Adams




John Marshall, 4th Chief Justice of the U.S. Supreme Court




Supreme Court Appointments by President Adams


Position
Name
Term





Chief Justice
John Marshall
1801–1835





Associate Justice
Bushrod Washington
1799–1829


Alfred Moore
1800–1804


Adams appointed two U.S. Supreme Court associate justices during his term in office: Bushrod Washington, the nephew of American founding father and President George Washington, to succeed James Wilson; and Alfred Moore, who succeeded James Iredell. He also named John Marshall as the fourth Chief Justice of the United States, replacing Oliver Ellsworth, who had retired due to ill health. Marshall's long tenure represents the most lasting influence of the Federalists, as he infused the Constitution with a judicious and carefully reasoned nationalistic interpretation and established the Judicial Branch as the equal of the Executive and Legislative branches.[168]
After the Federalists lost control of both houses of Congress along with the White House in the election of 1800, the lame-duck session of the 6th Congress in February 1801 approved a judiciary act, commonly known as the Midnight Judges Act, which created a set of federal appeals courts between the district courts and the Supreme Court. Adams filled the vacancies created in this statute by appointing a series of judges, whom his opponents called the "Midnight Judges" the appointments were issued just days before his presidential term expired. Most of these judges lost their posts when the 7th Congress, with a solid Democratic-Republican majority, approved the Judiciary Act of 1802, abolishing the newly created courts.[171]

Retirement




John Adams, ca 1816, by Samuel Morse (Brooklyn Museum)


Adams resumed farming at his home Peacefield in the town of Quincy; he also began work on an autobiography (which he never finished) and resumed correspondence with such old friends as Benjamin Waterhouse and Benjamin Rush.[172]
Aside from this, Adams generally stayed quiet. He did not publicly criticize Jefferson's actions as president,[173] believing that "instead of opposing Systematically any Administration, running down their Characters and opposing all their Measures right or wrong, We ought to Support every Administration as far as We can in Justice." He did, however, privately attack the president over his Embargo Act,[174] despite the fact that it was voted for by his son John Quincy, a U.S. senator.[175] Another incident began in relation to Mercy Otis Warren in 1806. Warren, an old friend, had attacked Adams in a pamphlet for his "partiality for monarchy" and "pride of talents and much ambition." A tempestuous correspondence ensued. In time, the friendship healed.[176]
After Jefferson's retirement from public life in 1809, Adams became more vocal. He published a three-year marathon of letters in the Boston Patriot newspaper, refuting line-by-line an 1800 pamphlet by Hamilton which attacked his conduct and character. Though Hamilton had died in 1804 in a duel with Aaron Burr, Adams felt the need to vindicate his character against the New Yorker's vehement charges.[172]
The years of retirement in the Adams' household were not without some temporary financial adversity; in 1803 the bank holding his cash reserves of about $13,000 collapsed. John Quincy came to the rescue by purchasing from him his properties in Weymouth and Quincy, including Peacefield, for the sum of $12,800.[172]
Daughter Abigail ("Nabby") was married to Representative William Stephens Smith, but she returned to her parents' home after the failure of the marriage; she died of breast cancer in 1813. His wife Abigail died of typhoid on October 28, 1818. His son Thomas and wife Ann, along with seven children, lived with Adams to the end of Adams' life, as well as Louisa Smith (Abigail's niece by her brother William).[172] Sixteen months before John Adams' death, John Quincy became the sixth president of the United States in 1825, the only son to succeed his father as President until George W. Bush in 2001.[177]
Correspondence with Jefferson
In early 1801, Adams had sent Thomas Jefferson a brief note after returning to Quincy to which Jefferson did not respond. In 1804, Abigail wrote to Jefferson to express her condolences upon the death of his daughter Polly, who had stayed with the Adamses is London in 1787. This initiated a brief correspondence which quickly descended into political rancor. Jefferson terminated it by not replying to Abigail's fourth letter. Aside from that, there had been no communication between Peacefield and Monticello since Adams left office.[178]
In early 1812, Adams reconciled with Jefferson. Their mutual friend Benjamin Rush, a fellow signer of the Declaration of Independence who had been corresponding with both, encouraged them to reach out to each other. On New Year's Day Adams sent a brief, friendly note to Jefferson to accompany the delivery of "two pieces of homespun," a two-volume collection of lectures on rhetoric by John Quincy Adams. Jefferson replied immediately with a cordial letter, and the two men revived their friendship, which they sustained by mail. The correspondence that they resumed in 1812 lasted the rest of their lives, and has been hailed as among their great legacies of American literature.[172] Their letters represent an insight into both the period and the minds of the two revolutionary leaders and presidents. The missives lasted fourteen years, and consisted of 158 letters – 109 from Adams and 49 from Jefferson.[178]
Early on, Adams repeatedly tried to turn the correspondence to a discussion of their actions in the political arena.[179] Jefferson refused to oblige him, saying that "nothing new can be added by you or me to what has been said by others and will be said in every age."[180] Adams made one more attempt, writing that "You and I ought not to die before we have explained ourselves to each other.[181] Still, Jefferson declined to engage Adams in this sort of discussion. Adams accepted this, and the correspondence turned to other matters.[182]
The two men discussed "natural aristocracy." Jefferson said, "The natural aristocracy I consider as the most precious gift of nature for the instruction, the trusts, and government of society. And indeed it would have been inconsistent in creation to have formed man for the social state, and not to have provided virtue and wisdom enough to manage the concerns of society. May we not even say that the form of government is best which provides most effectually for a pure selection of these natural [aristocrats] into the offices of government?"[183] Adams wondered if it ever would be so clear who these people were, "Your distinction between natural and artificial aristocracy does not appear to me well founded. Birth and wealth are conferred on some men as imperiously by nature, as genius, strength, or beauty. ... When aristocracies are established by human laws and honour, wealth, and power are made hereditary by municipal laws and political institutions, then I acknowledge artificial aristocracy to commence." It would always be true, Adams argued, that fate would bestow influence on some men for reasons other than true wisdom and virtue. That being the way of nature, he thought such "talents" were natural. A good government, therefore, had to account for that reality.[184]
As the two grew older, the letters became fewer and farther between. There was also a great deal that they kept to themselves. Jefferson said nothing about his construction of a new house, domestic turmoil, slave ownership, or poor financial situation, while Adams did not mention the troublesome behavior of his son Thomas, who had failed as a lawyer and become an alcoholic, resorting afterwards to living primarily as a caretaker at Peacefield.[185]
Death




Tombs of John Adams (far) and John Quincy Adams (near), in family crypt at United First Parish Church


Less than a month before his death, Adams issued a statement about the destiny of the United States, which historians such as Joy Hakim have characterized as a "warning" for his fellow citizens: "My best wishes, in the joys, and festivities, and the solemn services of that day on which will be completed the fiftieth year from its birth, of the independence of the United States: a memorable epoch in the annals of the human race, destined in future history to form the brightest or the blackest page, according to the use or the abuse of those political institutions by which they shall, in time to come, be shaped by the human mind."[186]
On July 4, 1826, the fiftieth anniversary of the adoption of the Declaration of Independence, Adams died at his home in Quincy, at approximately 6:20 PM.[187] Adams' crypt lies at United First Parish Church in Quincy, Massachusetts, with his wife Abigail and son John Quincy Adams.[188] When Adams died, his last words included an acknowledgement of his longtime friend and rival: "Thomas Jefferson survives." Adams was, in fact, unaware that Jefferson had died several hours before.[189][190]
Political philosophy and views
Slavery
Adams never bought a slave and declined on principle to utilize slave labor, saying, "I have, through my whole life, held the practice of slavery in such abhorrence, that I have never owned a negro or any other slave, though I have lived for many years in times, when the practice was not disgraceful, when the best men in my vicinity thought it not inconsistent with their character, and when it has cost me thousands of dollars for the labor and subsistence of free men, which I might have saved by the purchase of negroes at times when they were very cheap."[191] Adams generally tried to keep the issue out of national politics, because of the anticipated southern response during a time when unity was needed to achieve independence.[192] He spoke out in 1777 against a bill to emancipate slaves in Massachusetts, saying that the issue was presently too divisive, and so the legislation should "sleep for a time."[192] He also was against use of black soldiers in the Revolution, due to opposition from southerners.[192] Slavery was abolished in Massachusetts about 1780, when it was forbidden by implication in the Declaration of Rights that John Adams wrote into the Massachusetts Constitution.[193] Abigail Adams vocally opposed slavery.[4]
Accusations of monarchism
Throughout his lifetime Adams expressed controversial and shifting views regarding the virtues of monarchical and hereditary political institutions.[194] At times he conveyed substantial support for these approaches,[195] suggesting for example that "hereditary monarchy or aristocracy" are the "only institutions that can possibly preserve the laws and liberties of the people."[195] Yet at other times he distanced himself from such ideas, calling himself "a mortal and irreconcilable enemy to Monarchy" and "no friend to hereditary limited monarchy in America."[114] Such denials did not assuage his critics, and Adams was often accused of being a monarchist.[196]




John Adams by Gilbert Stuart (1823). This portrait was the last ever made of Adams, done at the request of John Quincy.


Many of these attacks are considered to have been scurrilous, including suggestions that he was planning to "crown himself king" and "grooming John Quincy as heir to the throne."[196] However, Peter Shaw has argued that: "[T]he inevitable attacks on Adams, crude as they were, stumbled on a truth that he did not admit to himself. He was leaning toward monarchy and aristocracy (as distinct from kings and aristocrats) at the time he wrote 'Davila', though he did not directly reveal this in its essays. Decidedly, sometime after he became vice-president, Adams concluded that the United States would have to adopt a hereditary legislature and a monarch... and he outlined a plan by which state conventions would appoint hereditary senators while a national one appointed a president for life."[197] In contradiction to such notions, Adams asserted in a letter to Thomas Jefferson: "If you suppose that I have ever had a design or desire of attempting to introduce a government of King, Lords and Commons, or in other words an hereditary Executive, or an hereditary Senate, either into the government of the United States, or that of any individual state, in this country, you are wholly mistaken. There is not such a thought expressed or intimated in any public writing or private letter of mine, and I may safely challenge all of mankind to produce such a passage and quote the chapter and verse."[198]
Religious views
Adams was raised a Congregationalist, since his ancestors were Puritans. According to biographer David McCullough, "as his family and friends knew, Adams was both a devout Christian, and an independent thinker".[199] In a letter to Benjamin Rush, Adams credited religion with the success of his ancestors since their migration to the New World in the 1630s.[200] Adams was educated at Harvard when the influence of deism was growing there, and sometimes used deistic terms in his speeches and writing.[172] He also believed that regular church service was beneficial to man's moral sense. Everett (1966) concludes that "Adams strove for a religion based on a common sense sort of reasonableness" and maintained that religion must change and evolve toward perfection.[201] Fielding (1940) argues that Adams' beliefs synthesized Puritan, deist, and humanist concepts. Adams at one point said that Christianity had originally been revelatory, but was being misinterpreted and misused in the service of superstition, fraud, and unscrupulous power.[202] Goff (1993) acknowledges Fielding's "persuasive argument that Adams never was a deist because he allowed the suspension of the laws of nature and believed that evil was internal, not the result of external institutions."[203]
Frazer (2004) notes that while Adams shared many perspectives with deists, "Adams clearly was not a deist. Deism rejected any and all supernatural activity and intervention by God; consequently, deists did not believe in miracles or God's providence....Adams, however, did believe in miracles, providence, and, to a certain extent, the Bible as revelation."[204] Frazer further argues that Adams' "theistic rationalism, like that of the other Founders, was a sort of middle ground between Protestantism and deism."[205] By contrast, David L. Holmes has argued that Adams, beginning as a Congregationalist, ended his days as a Christian Unitarian, accepting central tenets of the Unitarian creed, but also accepting Jesus as the redeemer of humanity and the biblical account of his miracles as true.[206] Like many of his Protestant contemporaries, Adams criticized the claims to universal authority made by the Catholic Church.[135] In 1796, Adams denounced political opponent Thomas Paine's deistic criticisms of Christianity in The Age of Reason, saying, "The Christian religion is, above all the religions that ever prevailed or existed in ancient or modern times, the religion of wisdom, virtue, equity and humanity, let the Blackguard Paine say what he will."[207]

Legacy
Historical reputation
See also: Bibliography of John Adams
Adams has left behind a mixed legacy. Most historians applaud him for avoiding an all-out war with France during his presidency. His signing of the Alien and Sedition Acts is almost always condemned.[208]
Adams is generally less well known than many of America's other founding fathers. McCullough argued that "[t]he problem with Adams is that most Americans know nothing about him." Todd Leopold of CNN added in 2001 that Adams is "remembered as that guy who served a single term as president between Washington and Jefferson, and as a short, vain, somewhat rotund man whose stature seems to have been dwarfed by his lanky colleagues."[209] He has always been seen, Ferling says, as "honest and dedicated," but despite his lengthy career in public service, is still overshadowed by the dramatic explanations and strong personalities of his contemporaries.[210] Gilbert Chinard, in his 1933 biography of Adams, described the man as "staunch, honest stubborn and somewhat narrow."[211] In his 1962 biography, Page Smith lauds Adams for his fight against radicals such as Thomas Paine, whose promised reforms portended anarchy and misery. In 1995, Peter Shaw published The Character of John Adams. Ferling says that the man who emerges is one "perpetually at war with himself," whose desire for fame and recognition leads to changes of vanity. Ferling, in his 1992 biography, writes that "Adams was his own worst enemy." He criticizes Adams for his "pettiness...jealousy, and vanity," and finds fault with him for his frequent separations from his wife and children. However, he praises Adams for his willingness to acknowledge his deficiencies and for striving to overcome them.[212] In 2001, David McCullough published a biography of the president entitled John Adams. McCullough lauds Adams for consistency and honesty, "plays down or explains away" his more controversial actions, such as the dispute over presidential titles and the predawn flight from the White House, and criticizes his friend and rival, Jefferson. The book was very favorably received and, along with other biographies published not long before, contributed to a rapid surge in Adams' reputation.[213]
In memoriam
Main article: List of memorials to John Adams
Adams is commemorated as the namesake of various counties, buildings, and other items.
Unlike many other American founders, Adams does not have a monument dedicated to himself in Washington D.C.[214] This has been the cause of some discontent. According to McCullough, "Popular symbolism has not been very generous toward Adams. There is no memorial, no statue...in his honor in our nation's capital, and to me that is absolutely inexcusable. It's long past time when we should recognize what he did, and who he was."[215]
Records
John Adams held the record for longest-lived president for 7004723700000000000♠198 years, 51 days from when he surpassed George Washington's lifespan on August 22, 1803 until Ronald Reagan surpassed his lifespan on October 12, 2001, he held the record for longest-lived vice president for 7004459270000000000♠125 years, 273 days from his inauguration on April 21, 1789 until Levi Morton surpassed his lifespan on January 19, 1915, he held the record for longest-married president for 7004709560000000000♠194 years, 99 days from when he surpassed George Washington's length of marriage on October 3, 1805 until George H.W. Bush surpassed his length of marriage on January 10, 2000, and he held the record for longest-married vice president for 7004597960000000000♠163 years, 262 days from his inauguration on April 21, 1789 until Charles G. Dawes surpassed his length of marriage on January 8, 1953. He is the only one to hold all four of these records.
See also





Book: Presidents of the United States (1789–1860)





John Adams Building of the Library of Congress
Suffolk County Courthouse, also known as the "John Adams Courthouse"

Notes


^ "John Adams". USA.gov. Archived from the original on October 18, 2013. Retrieved October 15, 2013. 
^ a b Adams, John (December 1770). Argument in Defense of the Soldiers in the Boston Massacre Trials. 
^ "John Adams I (Frigate) 1799–1867". USA.gov. Archived from the original on September 9, 2015. Retrieved August 22, 2015. 
^ a b c d e f Ferling, ch. 1.
^ McCullough 2001, pp. 29–30.
^ a b Brookhiser, Richard. (2002). America's First Dynasty. The Adamses, 1735–1918. The Free Press. p. 13. ISBN 0736685545
^ Ferling 1992, p. 11.
^ McCullough 2001, p. 35.
^ Ferling 1992, pp. 17–18.
^ Ferling 1992, p. 21.
^ Ferling 1992, p. 19.
^ "Obama joins list of seven presidents with Harvard degrees". Harvard.edu. Archived from the original on August 1, 2016. Retrieved December 5, 2011. 
^ McCullough 2001, p. 44.
^ Ferling 1992, p. 46.
^ Ferling 1992, pp. 36-39.
^ Ferling 1992, p. 16.
^ Kathryn Cullen-DuPont. "Encyclopedia of Women's History in America". Infobase Publishing. pp. 3–4. ISBN 978-0-8160-4100-8. Archived from the original on April 7, 2016. Retrieved November 28, 2011. 
^ McCullough 2001, p. 58.
^ a b Ferling 1992, p. 57.
^ a b Ferling 1992, p. 71.
^ a b McCullough 2001, pp. 171–72.
^ McCullough 2001, pp. 634-635.
^ a b Ferling, ch. 3.
^ Ferling 1992, p. 36.
^ McCullough 2001, pp. 59–61.
^ Mayhew, Rev. Jonathan (1750). "Discourse Concerning Unlimited Submission and Non-resistance to the Higher Powers". Ashbrook Center. Archived from the original on April 15, 2013. Retrieved August 22, 2015. 
^ McCullough 2001, p. 63.
^ “Stamp Act and the beginning of political activism,” John Adams Historical Society, accessed 2016. "Archived copy". Archived from the original on June 14, 2016. Retrieved July 5, 2016. 
^ “The Declaration of Independence,” Independence Hall Association, 2016.
^ a b Ferling, ch. 4.
^ Williamson, Hugh P. (1968). John Adams: Counsellor of Courage. American Bar Association Journal. Archived from the original on April 7, 2015. 
^ "Private Thoughts of a Founding Father" Archived April 7, 2015, at the Wayback Machine.. Life. June 30, 1961. p. 82.
^ Ferling 1992, p. 69.
^ Ferling 1992, pp. 67-68.
^ Ferling 1992, p. 74.
^ "American Experience – John & Abigail Adams – Timeline". pbs.org. Archived from the original on September 6, 2015. Retrieved September 7, 2015. 
^ Ferling, ch. 6.
^ Full text of essays  .
^ Ferling 1992, pp. 92-94.
^ "1773. Decr. 17th. [from the Diary of John Adams]". Adams Papers, Massachusetts Historical Society. Retrieved November 15, 2017. 
^ Ferling 1992, pp. 128-130.
^ Ferling 1992, pp. 95–97.
^ McCullough 2001, p. 71.
^ Elrod, Jennifer. “W(h)ither the Jury? The Diminishing Role of the Jury Trial in Our Legal System,” 68 WASH. & LEE L. REV. 3, 8 (2011) (quoting Thomas J. Methvin, Alabama – The Arbitration State, 62 ALA. LAW. 48, 49 (2001)). "Archived copy" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on August 6, 2016. Retrieved July 5, 2016. 
^ "John Adams to Abigail Adams, 9 October 1774". Adams Papers, Massachusetts Historical Society. Retrieved October 8, 2017. 
^ “The First Continental Congress,”John Adams Historical Society, accessed 2016. "Archived copy". Archived from the original on June 24, 2016. Retrieved July 5, 2016. 
^ "Abigail Adams to John Adams, 16 October 1774". Adams Papers, Massachusetts Historical Society. Retrieved September 22, 2017. 
^ McCullough 2001, pp. 87–88.
^ McCullough 2001, p. 90.
^ a b Ferling 1992, p. 136.
^ McCullough 2001, pp. 94–95.
^ "From John Adams to Moses Gill, 10 June 1775". Adams Papers, Massachusetts Historical Society. Retrieved October 11, 2017. 
^ a b "Adams Time Line". Massachusetts Historical Society. Archived from the original on March 24, 2009. Retrieved August 22, 2015. 
^ a b Ferling, ch. 9.
^ McCullough 2001, p. 97.
^ Adams, Vol. IV, p. 195, "Thoughts on Government"
^ a b c d Ferling, ch. 12.
^ Maier 1998, p. 37.
^ Ferling 1992, p. 146.
^ McCullough 2001, p. 109.
^ Boyd & Gawalt 1999, p. 21.
^ Boyd & Gawalt 1999, p. 22.
^ McCullough 2001, p. 119.
^ Maier 1998, pp. 97–105.
^ McCullough 2001, pp. 130–36.
^ Jefferson, Thomas. To William P. Gardner. The Works of Thomas Jefferson. Federal Edition (New York and London, G.P. Putnam's Sons, 1904–05). Vol. 11.
^ McCullough 2001, pp. 153–57.
^ McCullough 2001, p. 157.
^ McCullough 2001, p. 158.
^ Ferling 1992, pp. 164–65.
^ McCullough 2001, p. 163.
^ Ellis 1993, p. 42.
^ Ellis 1993, pp. 41–42.
^ a b Ferling, ch. 11.
^ McCullough 2001, pp. 174-176.
^ McCullough 2001, pp. 177-179.
^ McCullough 2001, p. 186.
^ McCullough 2001, p. 187.
^ McCullough 2001, p. 189.
^ McCullough 2001, pp. 198; 209.
^ McCullough 2001, p. 201.
^ McCullough 2001, p. 179.
^ Ferling 1992, p. 199.
^ McCullough 2001, p. 210.
^ McCullough 2001, pp. 210-213.
^ McCullough 2001, p. 218.
^ The National Academy of Sciences: The First Hundred Years, 1863–1963. National Academies Press. 1978. p. 7. ISBN 0309557453. Archived from the original on April 7, 2015. Retrieved July 28, 2014. 
^ "Charter of Incorporation of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences". American Academy of Arts and Sciences. Retrieved July 28, 2014. 
^ Smith 1962, p. 451.
^ Ferling, ch. 11–12.
^ Ferling, ch. 13.
^ "Dutch American Friendship Day / Heritage Day – U.S. Embassy The Hague, Netherlands". U.S. Embassy. November 16, 1991. Archived from the original on May 27, 2010. Retrieved 2010-03-02. 
^ United States. Dept. of State (1833). The Diplomatic Correspondence of the United States of America: From the Signing of the Definitive Treaty of Peace, 10th September, 1783, to the Adoption of the Constitution, March 4, 1789. F.P. Blair. pp. 218ff. Archived from the original on April 7, 2015. 
^ Adams & Adams, p. 392.
^ "From John Adams to John Jay, 2 June 1785". Adams Papers, Massachusetts Historical Society. Retrieved September 18, 2017. 
^ Ford, Gerald R. "Remarks of Welcome to Queen Elizabeth II of the United Kingdom". presidency.ucsb.edu. Archived from the original on September 24, 2015. Retrieved August 22, 2015. 
^ a b Ferling, ch. 15.
^ Ferling 1992, pp. 174–75.
^ "John Adams: Defence of the Constitutions, 1787". Constitution.org. Archived from the original on January 25, 2010. Retrieved March 2, 2010. 
^ Peek, Jr., George A., ed. (2003). "The Political Writings of John Adams: Representative Selections". Hackett Publishing. p. xvii. ISBN 0872206998. Archived from the original on April 7, 2016. 
^ Wood 2006, pp. 173–202.
^ Thompson, C. Bradley (2002). John Adams and the Spirit of Liberty. University Press of Kansas. ISBN 0700611819. 
^ Works of John Adams, IV:557
^ Madison, James. "The Federalist No. 51". 
^ Adams, Letter to John Jebb, Vol. 9, p. 540.
^ Ferling, John (2009). The Ascent of George Washington: The Hidden Political Genius of an American Icon. New York: Bloomsbury Press. pp. 270–74. ISBN 1-59691-465-3. 
^ Maier, Pauline (2010). Ratification: The People Debate the Constitution, 1787–1788. New York: Simon & Schuster. p. 429. ISBN 978-0-684-86854-7. 
^ a b "First Inaugural Address". Washington, D.C.: National Archives and Records Administration. July 17, 2017. Retrieved July 18, 2017. 
^ "Journal of the First Session of the Senate of The United States of America, Begun and Held at the City of New York, March 4, 1789, And In The Thirteenth Year of the Independence of the Said States". Journal of the Senate of the United States of America, Volume 1. Gales & Seaton. 1820. pp. 7–8. Archived from the original on February 4, 2010. Retrieved July 17, 2017. 
^ "Vice Presidential Inaugurations". Washington, D.C.: Architect of the Capitol. Retrieved July 15, 2017. 
^ a b c d  This article incorporates public domain material from the United States Senate document "Vice President of the United States (President of the Senate)". Retrieved on July 23, 2017.
^ Hutson, James H. (March 1968). "John Adams' Title Campaign". The New England Quarterly. 41 (1): 30–39. doi:10.2307/363331. JSTOR 363331. 
^ Bartoloni-Tuazon, Kathleen (2014). For Fear of an Elective King: George Washington and the Presidential Title Controversy of 1789. Ithaca, New York: Cornell University Press. p. 86. ISBN 978-0-8014-5298-7. 
^ a b McCullough 2001, p. 410.
^ Wood 2006, p. 54.
^ Smith 1962, p. 769.
^ "John Adams to John Quincy Adams, 9 July 1789". Adams Papers, Massachusetts Historical Society. Retrieved September 29, 2017. 
^ Smith 1962, p. 844.
^ Bomboy, Scott (October 22, 2012). "Inside America's first dirty presidential campaign, 1796 style". Constitution Daily. Philadelphia, Pennsylvania: National Constitution Center. Retrieved August 18, 2017. 
^ Ferling, John (February 15, 2016). "How the Rivalry Between Thomas Jefferson and Alexander Hamilton Changed History". Time. Retrieved March 11, 2017. 
^ Taylor, Alan (October 17, 2016). "Our Feuding Founding Fathers". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved March 11, 2017. 
^ a b c Smith 1962, pp. 898–99.
^ a b c d e Taylor, C. James. "John Adams: Campaigns and Elections". Charlottesville, Virginia: Miller Center of Public Affairs, University of Virginia. Retrieved August 3, 2017. 
^ a b McDonald, Forrest (1974). The Presidency of George Washington. American Presidency. University Press of Kansas. pp. 178–81. ISBN 978-0-7006-0359-6. 
^ a b Diggins, pp. 83–88.
^ Hoadley 1986, p. 54.
^ "John Adams to Abigail Adams, 10 February 1796". Adams Papers, Massachusetts Historical Society. Retrieved November 13, 2017. 
^ Elkins & McKitrick 1993, pp. 513–37.
^ Smith 1962, p. 902.
^ "John Adams to Abigail Adams, 9 January 1797". Adams Papers, Massachusetts Historical Society. Retrieved September 26, 2017. 
^ a b "Electoral College Box Scores 1789–1996". College Park, Maryland: Office of the Federal Register, National Archives and Records Administration. Retrieved August 20, 2017. 
^ Amar, Vikram David (October 22, 2008). "Vice president: a split-ticket vote?". The New York Times. Retrieved October 17, 2017. 
^ "The 3rd Presidential Inauguration, John Adams, March 04, 1797". Washington, D.C.: U.S. Senate. Retrieved August 23, 2017. 
^ "Congress Passes Socialized Medicine and Mandates Health Insurance – In 1798". Forbes. Archived from the original on August 12, 2015. Retrieved August 23, 2015. 
^ a b c d Ferling, ch. 16.
^ McCullough 2001, p. 471.
^ Kurtz, ch. 12.
^ a b Herring 2008, p. 89.
^ Chernow 2004, p. 647.
^ Ellis 1993, p. 57.
^ Herring 2008, p. 90.
^ Herring 2008, p. 91.
^ Wood, Gordon S. (2009). Empire of Liberty: A history of the Early Republic, 1789–1815. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0199741093. 
^ Herring2008, p. 82.
^ a b c d e Ferling, ch. 17.
^ a b Kurtz, ch. 13.
^ Miller, ch. 12.
^ "John Adams – Special Message to the Senate and the House; May 16 1797". Avalon Project, Yale Law School. Retrieved September 22, 2017. 
^ McCullough 2001, p. 485.
^ McCullough 2001, p. 495.
^ "Epitomy, and Remarks on Actions of Ministers at Paris, 22 October 1797". Adams Papers, Massachusetts Historical Society. Retrieved August 29, 2017. 
^ McCullough 2001, pp. 495–96.
^ McCullough 2001, p. 502.
^ Elkins & McKitrick 1993, pp. 714–19.
^ Elkins and McKitrick, pp. 696–700.
^ Newman, Paul Douglas (2004). Fries's Rebellion: The Enduring Struggle for the American Revolution. University of Pennsylvania Press. ISBN 081223815X. 
^ Kurtz 1957, p. 331.
^ Ferling, ch. 18.
^ "2nd President, John Adams". Presidential Pet Museum. Archived from the original on July 24, 2011. Retrieved June 12, 2011. 
^ Jefferson, Thomas (November 13, 1787). "Letter to William Smith". loc.gov. Archived from the original on September 5, 2015. Retrieved September 8, 2015. 
^ Knott 2002, p. 48.
^ Chernow 2004, p. 668.
^ Smith 1962, p. 1036.
^ Smith 1962, p. 1049.
^ "John Adams". [First published in The Presidents of the United States of America (2006), by Frank Fridel and Hugh Sidney. Washington, D.C.: White House Historical Association.] Washington, D.C.: The White House. Archived from the original on March 8, 2015. Retrieved March 6, 2015. 
^ Smith 1962, p. 1050.
^  This article incorporates public domain material from the United States Senate document "The Senate Moves to Washington". Retrieved on August 15, 2017.
^ a b c d e Ferling, ch. 19.
^ Smith 1962, p. 1053.
^ Levinson, Sanford V. "Election of President and Vice President". Constitution Center. Retrieved September 26, 2017. 
^ Ferling, ch. 19,
^ a b c d e f Ferling, ch. 20.
^ McCullough 2001, p. 595.
^ "From John Adams to Benjamin Rush, 18 April 1808". Adams Papers, Massachusetts Historical Society. Retrieved October 7, 2017. 
^ McCullough 2001, pp. 598–99.
^ McCullough 2001, pp. 594–96.
^ "George W. Bush". USA.gov. Retrieved September 21, 2015. 
^ a b Ferling 1992, p. 431.
^ McCullough 2001, p. 607.
^ Thomas Jefferson to John Adams, June 27, 1813. Cappon p. 338.
^ John Adams to Thomas Jefferson, July 15, 1813. Cappon p. 358.
^ McCullough 2001, p. 608.
^ Thomas Jefferson to John Adams, October 28, 1813. Cappon, p. 388.
^ John Adams to Thomas Jefferson, November 15, 1813. Cappon, p. 400.
^ McCullough 2001, p. 634.
^ Hakim 2003, p. 97.
^ McCullough 2001, p. 622.
^ "History". United First Parish Church. Archived from the original on September 11, 2015. Retrieved September 25, 2015. 
^ McCullough 2001, p. 646.
^ Ellis 2003, p. 248.
^ Adams, John (June 8, 1819). "Letter to Robert J. Evans". Liberty Fund Inc. Archived from the original on February 3, 2015. Retrieved February 3, 2015. 
^ a b c Wiencek, Henry (2004). "An Imperfect God: George Washington, His Slaves, and the Creation of America". Macmillan. p. 215. ISBN 0374529515. Archived from the original on April 7, 2016. 
^ Moore, George (1866). "Notes on the history of slavery in Massachusetts". D. Appleton & Co. pp. 200–03. Archived from the original on April 7, 2016. 
^ Hatfield, Mark O. (1997). "Vice Presidents of the United States" (PDF). U.S. Government Printing Office. pp. 3–11. Archived (PDF) from the original on December 19, 2012. 
^ a b Biddle, Alexander, ed. (1892). Old Family Letters. Press of J.B. Lippincott Company. pp. 38ff. Archived from the original on April 7, 2015. 
^ a b "John & Abigail Adams". PBS online. Archived from the original on July 30, 2013. Retrieved July 17, 2013. 
^ Shaw 1975, pp. 230–37.
^ Diggins, John Patrick, ed. (2004). The Portable John Adams. Penguin Books. pp. 466ff. ISBN 978-0-14-243778-0. Archived from the original on April 7, 2015. 
^ McCullough 2001, p. 18.
^ McCullough 2001, p. 22.
^ Everett, Robert B. (1966). "The Mature Religious Thought of John Adams" (PDF). Proceedings of the South Carolina Historical Association: 49–57. ISSN 0361-6207. Retrieved March 23, 2017. 
^ Fielding, Howard (1940). "John Adams: Puritan, Deist, Humanist". Journal of Religion. 20 (1): 33–46. doi:10.1086/482479. JSTOR 1198647. 
^ Goff, Philip Kevin. (1993). The Religious World of the Revolutionary John Adams. PhD desertation. University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. p. 382.
^ Frazer, Gregg L. (2004). The Political Theology of the American Founding. PhD dissertation. Claremont Graduate University. p. 46.
^ Frazer, Gregg L. (2004). The Political Theology of the American Founding. PhD dissertation. Claremont Graduate University. p. 50.
^ Holmes 2006, pp. 73–78.
^ Adams, Vol. III, p. 421, diary entry for July 26, 1796.
^ Taylor, C. James. "John Adams: Impact and Legacy". The Miller Center. Retrieved October 30, 2016. 
^ Leopold, Todd (June 7, 2006). "David McCullough brings 'John Adams' to life". CNN. Retrieved October 30, 2016. 
^ Ferling 1992, pp. 2-3.
^ Chinard 1933, p. vi.
^ Ferling 1992, pp. 3-4.
^ Maier, Pauline (May 27, 2001). "Plain Speaking: In David McCullough's telling, the second president is reminiscent of the 33rd (Harry Truman)". The New York Times. Retrieved November 7, 2017. 
^ Heffner, Alexander. "Why doesn't John Adams have a memorial in Washington?". The Washington Post. Retrieved November 7, 2017. 
^ Cunningham, Lillian (January 17, 2016). "The case of the missing John Adams monument". The Washington Post. Retrieved November 7, 2017. 


Bibliography

Biographies

Chinard, Gilbert (1933). Honest John Adams. Boston, MA: Little, Brown, and Company. 
Diggins, John P. (2003). Schlesinger, Arthur M., ed. John Adams. The American Presidents. New York, NY: Time Books. ISBN 0-8050-6937-2. 
Ellis, Joseph J. (1993). Passionate Sage: The Character and Legacy of John Adams. New York, NY: W. W. Norton & Company. ISBN 0393311333. 
Ferling, John E. (1992). John Adams: A Life. Knoxville, TN: University of Tennessee Press. ISBN 0-87049-730-8. 
McCullough, David (2001). John Adams. New York: Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-1-4165-7588-7. 
Shaw, Peter (1975). The Character of John Adams. New York, NY: W. W. Norton & Company. ISBN 0393008568. 
Smith, Page (1962). John Adams. Volume I 1735–1784 & Volume II 1784–1826. New York, NY: Doubleday. LCCN 63-7188. 

Specialized studies

Boyd, Julian Parks; Gawalt, Gerard W. (1999). The Declaration of Independence: the evolution of the text. Library of Congress in association with the Thomas Jefferson Memorial Foundation. ISBN 978-0-8444-0980-1. 
Chernow, Ron (2004). Alexander Hamilton. London, UK: Penguin Books. ISBN 978-1-101-20085-8. 
Elkins, Stanley M.; McKitrick, Eric (1993). The Age of Federalism. Oxford, NY: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0195068904. 
Ellis, Joseph J. (2003). Founding Brothers: The Revolutionary Generation. New York, NY: Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group. ISBN 978-1-4000-7768-7. 
Hakim, Joy (2003). The New Nation. Oxford, NY: Oxford University Press. ISBN 019515326X. Archived from the original on April 7, 2015. 
Herring, George C. (2008). From colony to superpower: U.S. foreign relations since 1776. Oxford, NY: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0199743770. 
Hoadley, John F. (1986). Origins of American Political Parties: 1789–1803. Lexington, Kentucky: University Press of Kentucky. ISBN 978-0-8131-5320-9. 
Holmes, David L. (2006). The Faiths of the Founding Fathers. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-530092-5. 
Kurtz, Stephen G. (1957). The Presidency of John Adams: The Collapse of Federalism, 1795–1800. Philadelphia, PA: University of Pennsylvania Press. 
Knott, Stephen F. (2002). Alexander Hamilton and the Persistence of Myth. Lawrence, KS: University Press of Kansas. ISBN 0700611576. 
Maier, Pauline (1998). American scripture: making the Declaration of Independence. New York, NY: Vintage Books. ISBN 978-0-679-77908-7. 
Miller, John C. (1960). The Federalist Era: 1789–1801. ISBN 9780061330278. 
Vinton, John Adams (1858). The Vinton Memorial. S.K. Whipple. 
Wood, Gordon S. (2006). Revolutionary Characters: What Made the Founders Different. London, UK: Penguin Books. ISBN 1594200939. 

Primary sources

Adams, John; Adams, Charles Francis (1851). The Works of John Adams, Second President of the United States: Autobiography, continued. Diary. Essays and controversial papers of the Revolution. The Works of John Adams, Second President of the United States. 3. Little, Brown. 
Butterfield, L. H. et al., eds., The Adams Papers (1961– ). Multivolume letterpress edition of all letters to and from major members of the Adams family, plus their diaries; still incomplete. "The Adams Family Papers Editorial Project". Masshist.org. Retrieved March 2, 2010. 

"Founders Online" searchable edition


Butterfield, L. H., ed. Adams Family Correspondence. Cambridge: Harvard University Press
Cappon, Lester J., ed. (1959). The Adams-Jefferson Letters: The Complete Correspondence Between Thomas Jefferson and Abigail and John Adams. Chapel Hill, NC: The University of North Carolina Press. ISBN 0807842303. 
Carey, George W., ed. The Political Writings of John Adams. (2001)
John A. Schutz and Douglass Adair, eds. Spur of Fame, The Dialogues of John Adams and Benjamin Rush, 1805–1813 (1966) ISBN 978-0-86597-287-2
C. Bradley Thompson, ed. Revolutionary Writings of John Adams, (2001) ISBN 978-0-86597-285-8
Adams, John, (1774) Novanglus; or, A History of the Dispute with America.
Hogan, Margaret and C. James Taylor, eds. My Dearest Friend: Letters of Abigail and John Adams. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2007.
Richardson, James D. ed. A Compilation of the Messages and Papers of the Presidents (1897), reprints his major messages and reports.
Taylor, Robert J. et al., eds. Papers of John Adams. Cambridge: Harvard University Press
Wroth, L. Kinvin and Hiller B. Zobel, eds. The Legal Papers of John Adams. Cambridge: Harvard University Press


Further reading

Akers, Charles W. "John Adams" in Henry Graff, ed. The Presidents: A Reference History (3rd ed. 2002) online
Brinkley, Alan, and Davis Dyer, eds. (2004)The American Presidency. Boston: Houghton Mifflin company,
Brown, Ralph A. (2004), The Presidency of John Adams.
Freeman, Joanne B. Affairs of Honor: National Politics in the New Republic. (2001)
Grant, James. John Adams: Party of One.(2005)
Haraszti, Zoltan. (1952), John Adams and the Prophets of Progress. Incisive analysis of John Adams' political comments on numerous authors through examining his marginalia in his copies of their books.
Howe, John R., Jr. (1966), The Changing Political Thought of John Adams
Knollenberg, Bernard. (2003), Growth of the American Revolution: 1766–1775,
Ryerson, Richard Alan, ed. (2001), John Adams and the Founding of the Republic
Ryerson, Richard Alan. (2016) John Adams's Republic: The One, the Few, and the Many 555 pp
Sharp, James Roger. (1995) American Politics in the Early Republic: The New Nation in Crisis.; politics of 1790s
Visser, Michiel (2008). "Adams, John (1735–1826)". In Hamowy, Ronald. The Encyclopedia of Libertarianism. The Encyclopedia of Libertarianism. Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE; Cato Institute. pp. 5–6. doi:10.4135/9781412965811.n4. ISBN 978-1-4129-6580-4. LCCN 2008009151. OCLC 750831024. 
Waldstreicher, David, ed. 2013), A Companion to John Adams and John Quincy Adams
White, Leonard D. (1956), The Federalists: A Study in Administrative History

External links

White House biography

United States Congress. "John Adams (id: A000039)". Biographical Directory of the United States Congress. 
William Everdell, From State to Free-State: The Meaning of the Word Republic from Jean Bodin to John Adams By William R. Everdell
John Adams: A Resource Guide at the Library of Congress
Letter from John Quincy Adams describing his father John Adams' decline toward the end of the latter's life – Shapell Manuscript Foundation
The John Adams Library at the Boston Public Library
Adams Family Papers: An Electronic Archive at the Massachusetts Historical Society
The Adams Papers, subset of Founders Online from the National Archives
American President: John Adams (1735–1826) at the Miller Center of Public Affairs, University of Virginia
John Adams Papers at the Avalon Project
Works by John Adams at Project Gutenberg
Works by or about John Adams at Internet Archive
Works by John Adams at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) 
"Thoughts on Government" Adams, April 1776 at the Constitution Society
John Adams at The American Revolution website
"Life Portrait of John Adams", from C-SPAN's American Presidents: Life Portraits, March 22, 1999
Adams’ Argument for the Defense at the trial of the soldiers at the Boston Massacre, at Founders Online website. (Retrieved 10 December 2017.)







v
t
e


John Adams






2nd President of the United States, 1797–1801
1st Vice President of the United States, 1789–1797
U.S. Ambassador to the United Kingdom, 1785–1788
U.S. Ambassador to the Netherlands, 1782–1788
Delegate, Second Continental Congress, 1775–1778
Delegate, First Continental Congress, 1774





Founding of the
United States



Braintree Instructions (1765)
Boston Massacre defense
Continental Association
Novanglus; A History of the Dispute with America, From Its Origin in 1754 to the Present Time (1775)
Thoughts on Government (1776)
Declaration of Independence

May 15 preamble
Committee of Five


Model Treaty

Treaty of Amity and Commerce
Treaty of Alliance


Board of War
Chairman of the Marine Committee, 1775-1779

Continental Navy


Staten Island Peace Conference

Conference House


Constitution of Massachusetts (1780)
Treaty of Paris, 1783





Presidency



Inauguration
Quasi War with France

XYZ Affair
Commerce Protection Act
United States Marine Corps
Convention of 1800


Alien and Sedition Acts

Naturalization Act of 1798


Navy Department Library
Treaty of Tellico
Treaty of Tripoli
Midnight Judges Act

Marbury v. Madison


State of the Union Address (1797
1798
1799
1800)
Cabinet
Federal judiciary appointments





Other writings



Massachusetts Historical Society holdings





Life and
homes



Early life and education
Adams National Historical Park

John Adams Birthplace
Family home and John Quincy Adams birthplace
Peacefield
Presidential Library


Massachusetts Hall, Harvard University
Presidents House, Philadelphia
Co-founder and second president, American Academy of Arts and Sciences
United First Parish Church and gravesite





Elections



United States presidential election 1788–1789
1792
1796
1800





Legacy



Adams House at Harvard University
John Adams Building
U.S. Postage stamps
Adams Memorial





Popular culture



Profiles in Courage (1964 series)
American Primitive (1969 play)
1776 (1969 musical
1972 film)
The Adams Chronicles (1976 miniseries)
Liberty! (1997 documentary series)
Liberty's Kids (2002 animated series)
John Adams (2001 book
2008 miniseries)
Sons of Liberty (2015 miniseries)





Related



"Adams and Liberty" campaign song
Adams' personal library
American Enlightenment
Congress Hall
Federalist Party

Federalist Era
First Party System
republicanism


American Philosophical Society
Gazette of the United States
The American Museum
American Revolution

patriots







Family



Abigail Adams

wife
Quincy family


Abigail Adams Smith (daughter)
John Quincy Adams

son
presidency


Charles Adams (son)
Thomas Boylston Adams (son)
George W. Adams (grandson)
Charles Adams Sr. (grandson)
John Adams II (grandson)
John Q. Adams (great-grandson)
Henry Adams (great-grandson)
Brooks Adams (great-grandson)
John Adams Sr. (father)
Susanna Boylston (mother)
Elihu Adams (brother)
Samuel Adams (second cousin)
Louisa Adams

daughter-in-law
First Lady










← George Washington
Thomas Jefferson →


 Category










Offices and distinctions







Diplomatic posts


New office
United States Minister to Great Britain
1785–1788
Succeeded by
Thomas Pinckney


United States Minister to the Netherlands
1782–1788
Succeeded by
Charles W. F. Dumas
Acting


Political offices


New office
Vice President of the United States
1789–1797
Succeeded by
Thomas Jefferson


Preceded by
George Washington
President of the United States
1797–1801


Party political offices


New political party
Federalist nominee for
Vice President of the United States
1792¹²
Succeeded by
Thomas Pinckney²


Federalist nominee for
President of the United States
1796, 1800
Succeeded by
Charles Cotesworth Pinckney


Honorary titles


Preceded by
George Washington
Oldest living President of the United States
1799–1826
Succeeded by
James Madison


Notes and references


1. While Adams won the Vice Presidency in 1789 as well, he was not the candidate of the Federalist Party, which had not yet formed.
2. Technically, Adams was a presidential candidate in 1792 and Pinckney was a presidential candidate in 1796. Prior to the passage of the Twelfth Amendment in 1804, each presidential elector could cast two ballots; the highest vote-getter would become President and the runner-up would become Vice President. Thus, in 1792, with George Washington as the prohibitive favorite for President, the Federalist party fielded Adams as a presidential candidate, with the intention that he be elected to the Vice Presidency. Similarly, in 1796 and 1800, the Federalist party fielded two candidates, Adams and Thomas Pinckney in 1796 and Adams and Charles Pinckney in 1800, with the intention that Adams be elected President and Pinckney be elected Vice President.











Articles related to John Adams











v
t
e


Signers of the United States Declaration of Independence




Physical history of the Declaration of Independence, Memorial






J. Adams
S. Adams
Bartlett
Braxton
Carroll
Chase
Clark
Clymer
Ellery
Floyd
Franklin
Gerry
Gwinnett
Hall
Hancock
Harrison
Hart
Hewes
Heyward
Hooper
Hopkins
Hopkinson
Huntington
Jefferson
F. Lee
R. Lee
Lewis
Livingston
Lynch
McKean
Middleton
L. Morris
R. Morris
Morton
Nelson
Paca
Paine
Penn
Read
Rodney
Ross
Rush
Rutledge
Sherman
Smith
Stockton
Stone
Taylor
Thornton
Walton
Whipple
Williams
Wilson
Witherspoon
Wolcott
Wythe















v
t
e


Presidents of the United States (list)







George Washington (1789–1797)
John Adams (1797–1801)
Thomas Jefferson (1801–1809)
James Madison (1809–1817)
James Monroe (1817–1825)
John Quincy Adams (1825–1829)
Andrew Jackson (1829–1837)
Martin Van Buren (1837–1841)
William Henry Harrison (1841)
John Tyler (1841–1845)
James K. Polk (1845–1849)
Zachary Taylor (1849–1850)
Millard Fillmore (1850–1853)
Franklin Pierce (1853–1857)
James Buchanan (1857–1861)
Abraham Lincoln (1861–1865)
Andrew Johnson (1865–1869)
Ulysses S. Grant (1869–1877)
Rutherford B. Hayes (1877–1881)
James A. Garfield (1881)
Chester A. Arthur (1881–1885)
Grover Cleveland (1885–1889)
Benjamin Harrison (1889–1893)
Grover Cleveland (1893–1897)
William McKinley (1897–1901)
Theodore Roosevelt (1901–1909)
William H. Taft (1909–1913)
Woodrow Wilson (1913–1921)
Warren G. Harding (1921–1923)
Calvin Coolidge (1923–1929)
Herbert Hoover (1929–1933)
Franklin D. Roosevelt (1933–1945)
Harry S. Truman (1945–1953)
Dwight D. Eisenhower (1953–1961)
John F. Kennedy (1961–1963)
Lyndon B. Johnson (1963–1969)
Richard Nixon (1969–1974)
Gerald Ford (1974–1977)
Jimmy Carter (1977–1981)
Ronald Reagan (1981–1989)
George H. W. Bush (1989–1993)
Bill Clinton (1993–2001)
George W. Bush (2001–2009)
Barack Obama (2009–2017)
Donald Trump (2017–present)









Presidency timelines




Wilson
Harding
Coolidge
Hoover
F. D. Roosevelt

first 100 days


Truman
Eisenhower
Kennedy
L. B. Johnson
Nixon
Ford
Carter
Reagan
G. H. W. Bush
Clinton
G. W. Bush
Obama

first 100 days


Trump

first 100 days











 Book
 Category












v
t
e


Vice Presidents of the United States (list)







John Adams (1789–1797)
Thomas Jefferson (1797–1801)
Aaron Burr (1801–1805)
George Clinton (1805–1812)
Elbridge Gerry (1813–1814)
Daniel D. Tompkins (1817–1825)
John C. Calhoun (1825–1832)
Martin Van Buren (1833–1837)
Richard M. Johnson (1837–1841)
John Tyler (1841)
George M. Dallas (1845–1849)
Millard Fillmore (1849–1850)
William R. King (1853)
John C. Breckinridge (1857–1861)
Hannibal Hamlin (1861–1865)
Andrew Johnson (1865)
Schuyler Colfax (1869–1873)
Henry Wilson (1873–1875)
William A. Wheeler (1877–1881)
Chester A. Arthur (1881)
Thomas A. Hendricks (1885)
Levi P. Morton (1889–1893)
Adlai Stevenson (1893–1897)
Garret Hobart (1897–1899)
Theodore Roosevelt (1901)
Charles W. Fairbanks (1905–1909)
James S. Sherman (1909–1912)
Thomas R. Marshall (1913–1921)
Calvin Coolidge (1921–1923)
Charles G. Dawes (1925–1929)
Charles Curtis (1929–1933)
John N. Garner (1933–1941)
Henry A. Wallace (1941–1945)
Harry S. Truman (1945)
Alben W. Barkley (1949–1953)
Richard Nixon (1953–1961)
Lyndon B. Johnson (1961–1963)
Hubert Humphrey (1965–1969)
Spiro Agnew (1969–1973)
Gerald Ford (1973–1974)
Nelson Rockefeller (1974–1977)
Walter Mondale (1977–1981)
George H. W. Bush (1981–1989)
Dan Quayle (1989–1993)
Al Gore (1993–2001)
Dick Cheney (2001–2009)
Joe Biden (2009–2017)
Mike Pence (2017–present)












 Category
 Commons












v
t
e


The Age of Enlightenment








Topics










Atheism
Capitalism
Civil liberties
Counter-Enlightenment
Critical thinking
Deism
Democracy
Empiricism
Encyclopédistes
Enlightened absolutism
Free markets
Haskalah
Humanism
Human rights
Liberalism
Liberté, égalité, fraternité
Methodological skepticism
Nationalism
Natural philosophy
Objectivity
Rationality
Rationalism
Reason
Reductionism
Sapere aude
Science
Scientific method
Socialism
Universality
Weimar Classicism
















Thinkers







France



Jean le Rond d'Alembert
Étienne Bonnot de Condillac
Marquis de Condorcet
Denis Diderot
Claude Adrien Helvétius
Baron d'Holbach
Georges-Louis Leclerc
Montesquieu
François Quesnay
Jean-Jacques Rousseau
Marquis de Sade
Voltaire





Germany



Johann Wolfgang von Goethe
Johann Georg Hamann
Johann Gottfried von Herder
Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi
Immanuel Kant
Gotthold Ephraim Lessing
Moses Mendelssohn
Friedrich Schiller
Thomas Wizenmann





Greece



Neophytos Doukas
Theoklitos Farmakidis
Rigas Feraios
Theophilos Kairis
Adamantios Korais





Ireland



Robert Boyle
Edmund Burke





Italy



Cesare Beccaria
Gaetano Filangieri
Antonio Genovesi
Pietro Verri





Poland



Tadeusz Czacki
Hugo Kołłątaj
Stanisław Konarski
Ignacy Krasicki
Julian Ursyn Niemcewicz
Stanisław August Poniatowski
Jędrzej Śniadecki
Stanisław Staszic
Józef Wybicki
Andrzej Stanisław Załuski
Józef Andrzej Załuski





Portugal



Sebastião José de Carvalho e Melo





Russia



Catherine II





Spain



Charles III
Benito Jerónimo Feijóo y Montenegro





United Kingdom
(Scotland)



Francis Bacon
Jeremy Bentham
Joseph Black
James Boswell
Adam Ferguson
Edward Gibbon
Robert Hooke
David Hume
Francis Hutcheson
Samuel Johnson
John Locke
Isaac Newton
Thomas Reid
Adam Smith
Mary Wollstonecraft





United States



Benjamin Franklin
Thomas Jefferson
James Madison
George Mason
Thomas Paine


















v
t
e


Ambassadors of the United States of America to the Court of St. James's



Ministers Plenipotentiary to
the Court of St. James's
1785–1811



John Adams (1785–1788)
Thomas Pinckney (1792–1796)
Rufus King (1796–1803)
James Monroe (1803–1807)
William Pinkney (1808–1811)
Jonathan Russell (chargé d'affaires) (1811–1812)





Envoys Extraordinary and
Ministers Plenipotentiary to
the Court of St. James's
1815–1893



John Quincy Adams (1815–1817)
Richard Rush (1818–1825)
Rufus King (1825–1826)
Albert Gallatin (1826–1827)
James Barbour (1828–1829)
Louis McLane (1829–1831)
Martin Van Buren (1831–1832)
Aaron Vail (chargé d'affaires) (1832–1836)
Andrew Stevenson (1836–1841)
Edward Everett (1841–1845)
Louis McLane (1845–1846)
George Bancroft (1846–1849)
Abbott Lawrence (1849–1852)
Joseph R. Ingersoll (1852–1853)
James Buchanan (1853–1856)
George M. Dallas (1856–1861)
Charles Adams Sr. (1861–1868)
Reverdy Johnson (1868–1869)
John Lothrop Motley (1869–1870)
Robert C. Schenck (1871–1876)
Edwards Pierrepont (1876–1877)
John Welsh (1877–1879)
James Russell Lowell (1880–1885)
Edward J. Phelps (1885–1889)
Robert Todd Lincoln (1889–1893)





Ambassadors Extraordinary
and Plenipotentiary to
the Court of St. James's
1893–present



Thomas F. Bayard Sr. (1893–1897)
John Hay (1897–1898)
Joseph Choate (1899–1905)
Whitelaw Reid (1905–1912)
Walter Page (1913-1918)
John W. Davis (1918–1921)
George Harvey (1921–1923)
Frank B. Kellogg (1924–1925)
Alanson B. Houghton (1925–1929)
Charles G. Dawes (1929–1931)
Andrew W. Mellon (1932–1933)
Robert Bingham (1933–1937)
Joseph P. Kennedy (1938–1940)
John G. Winant (1941–1946)
W. Averell Harriman (1946)
Lewis W. Douglas (1947–1950)
Walter S. Gifford (1950–1953)
Winthrop W. Aldrich (1953–1957)
John Hay Whitney (1957–1961)
David K. E. Bruce (1961–1969)
Walter H. Annenberg (1969–1974)
Elliot L. Richardson (1975–1976)
Anne Armstrong (1976–1977)
Kingman Brewster Jr. (1977–1981)
John J. Louis Jr. (1981–1983)
Charles H. Price II (1983–1989)
Henry E. Catto Jr. (1989–1991)
Raymond G. H. Seitz (1991–1994)
William J. Crowe (1994–1997)
Philip Lader (1997–2001)
William Stamps Farish III (2001–2004)
Robert H. Tuttle (2005–2009)
Louis Susman (2009–2013)
Matthew Barzun (2013–2017)
Woody Johnson (2017– )












v
t
e


Cabinet of President John Adams (1797–1801)



Secretary of State



Timothy Pickering (1797–1800)
John Marshall (1800–01)








Secretary of the Treasury



Oliver Wolcott Jr. (1797–1801)
Samuel Dexter (1801)





Secretary of War



James McHenry (1796–1800)
Samuel Dexter (1800–01)





Attorney General



Charles Lee (1797–1801)





Postmaster General



Joseph Habersham (1797–1801)





Secretary of the Navy



Benjamin Stoddert (1798–1801)












v
t
e


John Quincy Adams






United States House of Representatives, 1831–1848
6th President of the United States, 1825–1829
8th U.S. Secretary of State, 1817–1825
U.S. Ambassador to the United Kingdom, 1814–1817
1st U.S. Minister to Russia, 1809–1814
Massachusetts State Senate, 1803–1808
U.S. Minister to Prussia, 1797–1801
U.S. Ambassador to the Netherlands, 1794–1797





Presidency



Inauguration
American System
Internal improvements
Tariff of 1828
First Treaty of Prairie du Chien
Treaty of Fond du Lac
Treaty of Limits
United States Naval Observatory
Abdulrahman Ibrahim Ibn Sori
State of the Union Address, 1825
1827
1828
Federal judiciary appointments





Other
events



Monroe Doctrine, author
Treaty of Ghent
Adams–Onís Treaty
Treaty of 1818
Smithsonian Institution
United States v. The Amistad

Mendi Bible


President, American Academy of Arts and Sciences
President, Columbian Institute for the Promotion of Arts and Sciences





Writings



Lifelong diary
Massachusetts Historical Society holdings





Life and
homes



Early life
Abigail Adams Cairn
John Quincy Adams and abolitionism
Adams National Historical Park

Birthplace and family home
Peacefield
Presidential Library


United First Parish Church and gravesite





Elections



United States presidential election, 1824

Corrupt Bargain


United States presidential election, 1828





Legacy



Adams Memorial
Adams House at Harvard University
U.S. Postage stamps
Monroe Doctrine Centennial half dollar





Popular
culture



Profiles in Courage (1957 book
1965 television series)
The Adams Chronicles (1976 miniseries)
Mutiny on the Amistad (1987 book)
Amistad (1997 film)
John Adams (2001 book
2008 miniseries)





Adams family
Quincy family



Louisa Adams (wife)
George W. Adams (son)
Charles Adams Sr. (son)
John Adams II (son)
Henry Adams (grandson)
Brooks Adams (grandson)
John Quincy Adams II (grandson)
John Adams

father
presidency


Abigail Adams

mother
First Lady
Quincy family


Abigail Adams Smith (sister)
Charles Adams (brother)
Thomas Boylston Adams (brother)
John Adams Sr. (paternal grandfather)
Susanna Boylston (paternal grandmother)
Elihu Adams (paternal uncle)
John Quincy (great-grandfather)





Related



National Republican Party
Republicanism
Quincy Patriot








← James Monroe
Andrew Jackson →


 Category












v
t
e


Hall of Fame for Great Americans






John Adams
John Quincy Adams
Jane Addams
Louis Agassiz
Susan B. Anthony
John James Audubon
George Bancroft
Clara Barton
Henry Ward Beecher
Alexander Graham Bell
Daniel Boone
Edwin Booth
Louis Brandeis
Phillips Brooks
William Cullen Bryant
Luther Burbank
Andrew Carnegie
George Washington Carver
William Ellery Channing
Rufus Choate
Henry Clay
Grover Cleveland
James Fenimore Cooper
Peter Cooper
Charlotte Cushman
James Buchanan Eads
Thomas Alva Edison
Jonathan Edwards
Ralph Waldo Emerson
David Farragut
Stephen Foster
Benjamin Franklin
Robert Fulton
Josiah W. Gibbs
William C. Gorgas
Ulysses S. Grant
Asa Gray
Alexander Hamilton
Nathaniel Hawthorne
Joseph Henry
Patrick Henry
Oliver Wendell Holmes Sr.
Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr.
Mark Hopkins
Elias Howe
Washington Irving
Andrew Jackson
Thomas J. Jackson
Thomas Jefferson
John Paul Jones
James Kent
Sidney Lanier
Robert E. Lee
Abraham Lincoln
Henry Wadsworth Longfellow
James Russell Lowell
Mary Lyon
Edward MacDowell
James Madison
Horace Mann
John Marshall
Matthew Fontaine Maury
Albert A. Michelson
Maria Mitchell
James Monroe
Samuel F. B. Morse
William T. G. Morton
John Lothrop Motley
Simon Newcomb
Thomas Paine
Alice Freeman Palmer
Francis Parkman
George Peabody
William Penn
Edgar Allan Poe
Walter Reed
Franklin D. Roosevelt
Theodore Roosevelt
Augustus Saint-Gaudens
William Tecumseh Sherman
John Philip Sousa
Joseph Story
Harriet Beecher Stowe
Gilbert Stuart
Sylvanus Thayer
Henry David Thoreau
Mark Twain
Lillian Wald
Booker T. Washington
George Washington
Daniel Webster
George Westinghouse
James McNeill Whistler
Walt Whitman
Eli Whitney
John Greenleaf Whittier
Emma Willard
Frances E. Willard
Roger Williams
Woodrow Wilson
Orville Wright
Wilbur Wright














Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 95296943
LCCN: n79105675
ISNI: 0000 0001 2144 2412
GND: 118500597
SUDOC: 02737470X
BNF: cb12186797v (data)
BIBSYS: 90845244
ULAN: 500353261
NLA: 35001112
NDL: 01133474
NKC: jn20000720003
RLS: 000025438
US Congress: A000039
BNE: XX1699071
IATH: w6mb0zk2











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=John_Adams&oldid=818372362"					Categories: 1735 births1826 deaths18th-century American politicians18th-century American writers18th-century Congregationalists18th-century Unitarians19th-century American politicians19th-century UnitariansAdams political familyAmbassadors of the United States to Great BritainAmbassadors of the United States to the NetherlandsAmerican CongregationalistsAmerican people of English descentAmerican people of Welsh descentAmerican tax resistersAmerican UnitariansBurials in MassachusettsContinental Congressmen from MassachusettsFathers of Presidents of the United StatesFellows of the American Academy of Arts and SciencesHall of Fame for Great Americans inducteesHarvard University alumniHistory of the United States (1789–1849)John AdamsMassachusetts FederalistsMassachusetts lawyersMembers of the American Antiquarian SocietyMembers of the American Philosophical SocietyMembers of the Massachusetts House of RepresentativesPeople of Massachusetts in the American RevolutionPeople of the Quasi-WarPoliticians from Braintree, MassachusettsPoliticians from Quincy, MassachusettsPresidents of the United StatesSigners of the United States Declaration of IndependenceUnited States presidential candidates, 1789United States presidential candidates, 1792United States presidential candidates, 1796United States presidential candidates, 1800Vice Presidents of the United StatesWashington administration cabinet membersAmerican expatriates in the Dutch RepublicAmerican lawyers admitted to the practice of law by reading lawHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksWikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pagesWikipedia indefinitely move-protected pagesGood articlesUse mdy dates from April 2011Pages using infobox officeholder with ambassador from or minister fromPages using infobox officeholder with an atypical party valueArticles with Project Gutenberg linksArticles with Internet Archive linksArticles with LibriVox linksArticles containing French-language textArticles containing Hebrew-language textArticles containing Latin-language textAC with 15 elementsWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersWikipedia articles with BIBSYS identifiersWikipedia articles with ULAN identifiersWikipedia articles with NLA identifiersWikipedia articles with SNAC-ID identifiers