"JFK", "John Kennedy", and "Jack Kennedy" redirect here. For other uses, see JFK (disambiguation), John Kennedy (disambiguation), and Jack Kennedy (disambiguation).


John F. Kennedy



John F. Kennedy in February 1961






35th President of the United States


In office
January 20, 1961 – November 22, 1963


Vice President
Lyndon B. Johnson


Preceded by
Dwight D. Eisenhower


Succeeded by
Lyndon B. Johnson


United States Senator
from Massachusetts


In office
January 3, 1953 – December 22, 1960


Preceded by
Henry Cabot Lodge Jr.


Succeeded by
Benjamin A. Smith II


Member of the U.S. House of Representatives
from Massachusetts's 11th district


In office
January 3, 1947 – January 3, 1953


Preceded by
James Michael Curley


Succeeded by
Tip O'Neill





Personal details


Born
John Fitzgerald Kennedy
(1917-05-29)May 29, 1917
Brookline, Massachusetts, U.S.


Died
November 22, 1963(1963-11-22) (aged 46)
Dallas, Texas, U.S.


Cause of death
Assassination


Resting place
Arlington National Cemetery


Political party
Democratic


Spouse(s)
Jacqueline Lee Bouvier (m. 1953)


Relations
See Kennedy family


Children
Arabella Kennedy
Caroline Bouvier Kennedy
John Fitzgerald Kennedy Jr.
Patrick Bouvier Kennedy


Parents



Joseph P. Kennedy, Sr.
Rose Fitzgerald Kennedy





Alma mater
Harvard College


Profession
Politician


Signature



Military service


Allegiance
 United States of America


Service/branch
 United States Navy


Years of service
1941–1945


Rank
 Lieutenant


Unit



Motor Torpedo Squadron 2

Patrol Torpedo Boat 109
Patrol Torpedo Boat 59







Battles/wars



World War II

Solomon Islands campaign







Awards



 Navy and Marine Corps Medal
 Purple Heart Medal
 American Defense Service Medal
 American Campaign Medal
 Asiatic-Pacific Campaign Medal w/ three ​3⁄16 inch bronze stars
 World War II Victory[1]











This article is part of
a series about
John F. Kennedy







Service in WWII
Electoral history


Why England Slept
Profiles in Courage
A Nation of Immigrants


Family


President of the United States

Presidency

Timeline





1960 Campaign

Election




Inauguration


New Frontier
Foreign Policy

Doctrine




"A Strategy of Peace"
Bay of Pigs


Cuban Missile Crisis
Civil Rights Address


Partial Nuclear Test Ban Treaty


Clean Air
Peace Corps


"We choose to go to the Moon"


Space programs

Mercury
Gemini
Apollo




Assassination and legacy

November 22, 1963
State Funeral
Eternal Flame
Memorials
Library
Legacy
Cultural depictions









v
t
e





John Fitzgerald Kennedy (May 29, 1917 – November 22, 1963), commonly referred to by his initials JFK, was an American politician who served as the 35th President of the United States from January 1961 until his assassination in November 1963. Kennedy served at the height of the Cold War, and much of his presidency focused on managing relations with the Soviet Union. He was a member of the Democratic Party who represented Massachusetts in the United States House of Representatives and the United States Senate prior to becoming president.
Kennedy was born in Brookline, Massachusetts, to Joseph P. Kennedy, Sr. and Rose Kennedy. A scion of the Kennedy family, he graduated from Harvard University in 1940 before joining the United States Naval Reserve the following year. During World War II, Kennedy commanded a series of PT boats in the Pacific theater and earned the Navy and Marine Corps Medal for his service. After the war, Kennedy represented Massachusetts's 11th congressional district in the United States House of Representatives from 1947 until 1953. He was subsequently elected to the U.S. Senate and served as the junior Senator from Massachusetts from 1953 until 1960. While serving in the Senate, he published Profiles in Courage, which won the Pulitzer Prize for Biography. In the 1960 presidential election, Kennedy narrowly defeated Republican opponent Richard Nixon, who was the incumbent Vice President.
Kennedy's time in office was marked by high tensions with Communist states in the Cold War. He increased the number of American military advisers in South Vietnam by a factor of 18 over President Dwight D. Eisenhower. In April 1961, he authorized a failed joint-CIA attempt to overthrow the Cuban government of Fidel Castro in the Bay of Pigs Invasion.[2] He subsequently rejected plans by the Joint Chiefs of Staff to orchestrate false-flag attacks on American soil in order to gain public approval for a war against Cuba. In October 1962, U.S. spy planes discovered that Soviet missile bases had been deployed in Cuba; the resulting period of tensions, termed the Cuban Missile Crisis, nearly resulted in the breakout of a global thermonuclear conflict. This situation can be referred to Brinkmanship. Domestically, Kennedy presided over the establishment of the Peace Corps and supported the Civil Rights Movement, but he was largely unsuccessful in passing his New Frontier domestic policies. Kennedy continues to rank highly in historians' polls of U.S. presidents and with the general public. His average approval rating of 70% is the highest of any president in Gallup's history of systematically measuring job approval.[3]
On November 22, 1963, Kennedy was assassinated in Dallas, Texas. Lee Harvey Oswald was arrested for the state crime, but he was never prosecuted due to his murder by Jack Ruby two days later. Pursuant to the Presidential Succession Act, Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson was sworn in as president later that day. The FBI and the Warren Commission officially concluded that Oswald was the lone assassin, but various groups challenged the findings of the Warren Report and believed that Kennedy was the victim of a conspiracy. After Kennedy's death, Congress enacted many of his proposals, including the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and the Revenue Act of 1964.



Contents


1 Early life and education
2 U.S. Navy Reserve (1941–1945)

2.1 PT-109 and PT-59
2.2 Military awards

2.2.1 Navy and Marine Corps Medal citation




3 Post-naval service
4 Congressional career

4.1 House of Representatives (1947–1953)
4.2 Senate (1953–1960)


5 1960 presidential election
6 Presidency (1961–1963)

6.1 Foreign policy

6.1.1 Cuba and the Bay of Pigs Invasion
6.1.2 Cuban Missile Crisis
6.1.3 Latin America and communism
6.1.4 Peace Corps
6.1.5 Southeast Asia
6.1.6 American University speech
6.1.7 West Berlin speech
6.1.8 Israel
6.1.9 Iraq
6.1.10 Ireland
6.1.11 Nuclear Test Ban Treaty


6.2 Domestic policy

6.2.1 Economy
6.2.2 Federal and military death penalty
6.2.3 Civil Rights Movement


6.3 Civil liberties
6.4 Immigration
6.5 Native American relations
6.6 Space policy
6.7 Administration, Cabinet, and judicial appointments

6.7.1 Judicial appointments

6.7.1.1 Supreme Court
6.7.1.2 Other courts






7 Assassination

7.1 Funeral


8 Personal life, family, and reputation

8.1 Wife and children
8.2 Popular image
8.3 "Camelot Era"
8.4 Health
8.5 Personal tragedies
8.6 Affairs and extramarital relationships


9 Historical evaluations and legacy

9.1 Effect of assassination
9.2 Memorials and eponyms


10 Media
11 See also
12 Notes
13 References

13.1 Citations
13.2 Publications


14 Further reading

14.1 Primary sources
14.2 Historiography and memory


15 External links



Early life and education
John Fitzgerald Kennedy was born on May 29, 1917, at 83 Beals Street in Brookline, Massachusetts,[4] to businessman/politician Joseph Patrick "Joe" Kennedy and philanthropist/socialite Rose Elizabeth Fitzgerald Kennedy. His grandfathers P. J. Kennedy and Boston Mayor John F. Fitzgerald were both Massachusetts politicians. All four of his grandparents were children of Irish immigrants.[1] Kennedy had an elder brother, Joseph Jr., and seven younger siblings; Rosemary, Kathleen, Eunice, Patricia, Robert, Jean, and Ted.




Kennedy's birthplace in Brookline, Massachusetts


Kennedy lived in Brookline for the first decade of his life and attended the Edward Devotion School, the Noble and Greenough Lower School, and the Dexter School through 4th grade. Joe Kennedy's business had kept him away from the family for long stretches of time, and his ventures were concentrated on Wall Street and Hollywood. In September 1927, the family moved from Boston to Riverdale, Bronx, New York.[5][6] Young John attended the lower campus of Riverdale Country School, a private school for boys, from 5th to 7th grade. Two years later, the family moved to suburban Bronxville, New York, where Kennedy was a member of Boy Scout Troop 2 and attended St. Joseph's Church.[1][7] The Kennedy family spent summers and early autumns[8] at their home (rented in 1926, then purchased in 1929)[9] in Hyannis Port, Massachusetts, and Christmas and Easter holidays at their winter home in Palm Beach, Florida, later purchased in 1933. In September 1930, Kennedy—then 13 years old—attended the Canterbury School in New Milford, Connecticut, for 8th grade. In April 1931, he had an appendectomy, after which he withdrew from Canterbury and recuperated at home.[10]




The Kennedy family at Hyannis Port, Massachusetts, in 1931 with Jack at top left in white shirt. Ted was born the following year.


In September 1931, Kennedy attended Choate, a boarding school in Wallingford, Connecticut, for 9th through 12th grade. His older brother Joe Jr. had already been at Choate for two years and was a football player and leading student. He spent his first years at Choate in his older brother's shadow, and compensated with rebellious behavior that attracted a coterie. They carried out their most notorious stunt by exploding a toilet seat with a powerful firecracker. In the ensuing chapel assembly, the strict headmaster, George St. John, brandished the toilet seat and spoke of certain "muckers" who would "spit in our sea". The defiant Kennedy took the cue and named his group "The Muckers Club", which included roommate and friend Kirk LeMoyne "Lem" Billings.[11]
During his years at Choate, Kennedy was beset by health problems that culminated with his emergency hospitalization in 1934 at New Haven Hospital, where doctors thought he might have had leukemia.[12] In June 1934, he was admitted to the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minnesota; the ultimate diagnosis there was colitis.[12] Kennedy graduated from Choate in June of the following year, finishing 64th in a class of 112 students.[6] He had been the business manager of the school yearbook and was voted the "most likely to succeed".[11]
In September 1935, Kennedy made his first trip abroad when he traveled to London with his parents and his sister Kathleen. He intended to study under Harold Laski at the London School of Economics (LSE), as his older brother had done. Ill-health forced his return to America in October of that year, when he enrolled late and spent six weeks at Princeton University.[13] He was then hospitalized for observation at Peter Bent Brigham Hospital in Boston. He convalesced further at the Kennedy winter home in Palm Beach, then spent the spring of 1936 working as a ranch hand on the 40,000-acre (160 km2) Jay Six cattle ranch outside Benson, Arizona.[14] It is reported that ranchman Jack Speiden worked both brothers "very hard".[15][16]
In 1935, Kennedy briefly attended Princeton University, but had to leave after two months due to a gastrointestinal illness. Later, in September 1936, Kennedy enrolled at Harvard College and his application essay stated: "The reasons that I have for wishing to go to Harvard are several. I feel that Harvard can give me a better background and a better liberal education than any other university. I have always wanted to go there, as I have felt that it is not just another college, but is a university with something definite to offer. Then too, I would like to go to the same college as my father. To be a 'Harvard man' is an enviable distinction, and one that I sincerely hope I shall attain."[17] He produced that year's annual "Freshman Smoker", called by a reviewer "an elaborate entertainment, which included in its cast outstanding personalities of the radio, screen and sports world."[18] He tried out for the football, golf, and swimming teams and earned a spot on the varsity swimming team.[19] Kennedy also sailed in the Star class and won the 1936 Nantucket Sound Star Championship.[20] In July 1937, Kennedy sailed to France—taking his convertible—and spent ten weeks driving through Europe with Billings.[21] In June 1938, Kennedy sailed overseas with his father and older brother to work at the American embassy in London, where his father was President Franklin D. Roosevelt's U.S. Ambassador to the Court of St. James's.[22]
In 1939, Kennedy toured Europe, the Soviet Union, the Balkans, and the Middle East in preparation for his Harvard senior honors thesis. He then went to Czechoslovakia and Germany before returning to London on September 1, 1939, the day that Germany invaded Poland to mark the beginning of World War II. Two days later, the family was in the House of Commons for speeches endorsing the United Kingdom's declaration of war on Germany. Kennedy was sent as his father's representative to help with arrangements for American survivors of the SS Athenia before flying back to the U.S. from Foynes, Ireland, to Port Washington, New York, on his first transatlantic flight.
When Kennedy was an upperclassman at Harvard, he became a more serious student and developed an interest in political philosophy. He made the Dean's List in his junior year.[23] In 1940, Kennedy completed his thesis, "Appeasement in Munich", about British participation in the Munich Agreement. The thesis became a bestseller under the title Why England Slept.[24] In addition to addressing Britain's failure to strengthen its military in the lead-up to World War II, the book also called for an Anglo-American alliance against the rising totalitarian powers. While Kennedy became increasingly supportive of U.S. intervention in World War II, his father's isolationist beliefs resulted in the latter's dismissal as ambassador to the United Kingdom, creating a split between the Kennedy and Roosevelt families.[25]
In 1940, Kennedy graduated cum laude from Harvard College with a Bachelor of Arts in government, concentrating on international affairs. That fall, he enrolled at the Stanford Graduate School of Business and audited classes there.[26] In early 1941, Kennedy left and helped his father write a memoir of his three years as an American ambassador. He then traveled throughout South America; his itinerary included Colombia, Ecuador and Peru.[27][28]
U.S. Navy Reserve (1941–1945)
Main article: Motor Torpedo Boat PT-109
In 1940, Kennedy attempted to enter the army's Officer Candidate School, but he was medically disqualified due to his chronic lower back problems. He exercised for months to straighten his back. On September 24, 1941, with the help of the director of the Office of Naval Intelligence (ONI)—who was the former naval attaché to Joseph Kennedy—Kennedy joined the United States Naval Reserve. He was commissioned an ensign on October 26, 1941,[29] and joined the staff of the Office of Naval Intelligence in Washington, D.C.[30][31][32]




Lieutenant (junior grade) Kennedy (standing at right) with his PT-109 crew, 1943


In January 1942, Kennedy was assigned to the ONI field office at Headquarters, Sixth Naval District, in Charleston, South Carolina.[31] He attended the Naval Reserve Officer Training School at Northwestern University in Chicago, Illinois, from July 27 to September 27 [30] and then voluntarily entered the Motor Torpedo Boat Squadrons Training Center in Melville, Rhode Island.[31][33] On October 10, he was promoted to lieutenant junior grade.[31] He completed his training on December 2 and was assigned to Motor Torpedo Squadron FOUR.[30]
His first command was PT-101 from December 7, 1942, until February 23, 1943:[31] It was a PT boat used for training while Kennedy was an instructor at Melville.[34] He then led three Huckins PT boats—PT-98, PT-99, and PT-101, which were being relocated from MTBRON 4 in Melville, Rhode Island, back to Jacksonville, Florida, and the new MTBRON 14 (formed February 17, 1943). During the trip south, he was hospitalized briefly in Jacksonville after diving into the cold water to unfoul a propeller. Thereafter, Kennedy was assigned duty in Panama and later in the Pacific theater, where he eventually commanded two more patrol torpedo (PT) boats.[35]
PT-109 and PT-59




Kennedy on his navy patrol boat, the PT-109, 1943


In April 1943, Kennedy was assigned to Motor Torpedo Squadron TWO.[30] On April 24, he took command of PT-109,[36] which was based at Tulagi Island in the Solomon Islands.[31] On the night of August 1–2, PT-109 was on its 31st mission and performing nighttime patrols near New Georgia in the Solomon Islands with PT-162 and PT-169.[37] Kennedy spotted a Japanese destroyer nearby and attempted to turn to attack, when PT-109 was rammed suddenly at an angle and cut in half by the destroyer Amagiri, costing two PT-109 crew members[38] their lives.[39][31] Kennedy gathered around the wreckage his surviving ten crew members including those injured, to vote on whether to "fight or surrender". Kennedy stated: "There's nothing in the book about a situation like this. A lot of you men have families and some of you have children. What do you want to do? I have nothing to lose." Shunning surrender, the men swam towards a small island three miles away.[31][40] Despite re-injuring his back in the collision, Kennedy towed a badly burned crewman through the water to the island with a life jacket strap clenched between his teeth,[41] and later to a second island, where his crew was subsequently rescued[31][42] on August 8.[29] Kennedy and Ensign Leonard Thom,[43][44] his executive officer on PT-109, were both later awarded the Navy and Marine Corps Medal for heroism and the Purple Heart Medal for injuries.[45]
On September 1, 1943, Kennedy returned to duty and took command of the PT-59, a PT boat that had been converted into a gunboat.[30][46] In October, Kennedy was promoted to lieutenant. On November 2, PT-59, which included three former PT-109 crew members, took part with another boat in the successful rescue of 87 marines stranded on two rescue landing craft on the Warrior River at Choiseul Island, which was held by the Japanese.[47] Under doctor's orders, Kennedy was relieved of his command of PT-59 on November 18, and he returned to the United States in early January 1944. After receiving treatment for his back injury, he was released from active duty in late 1944.[48] Beginning in January 1945, Kennedy spent three more months recovering from his back injury at Castle Hot Springs, a resort and temporary military hospital in Arizona.[49][50]
Kennedy was in Chelsea Naval Hospital from May to December 1944.[30] On June 12, he was presented the Navy and Marine Corps Medal (the Navy's highest noncombat decoration for heroism) for his heroic actions on August 1–2, 1943, and the Purple Heart Medal for his back injury on PT-109, on August 1, 1943 (injured on August 2).[51] After the war, Kennedy felt that the medal he had received for heroism was not a combat award and asked that he be reconsidered for the Silver Star Medal for which he had been recommended initially. (His father also requested the Silver Star, which is awarded for gallantry in action, for his son). In 1950, The Department of the Navy offered Kennedy a Bronze Star Medal in recognition of his meritorious service, but he would have to return his Navy and Marine Corps Medal in order to receive it. He declined the medal. In 1959, the Navy again offered him the Bronze Star. Kennedy responded, repeating his original request concerning the award. He received the same response from the Navy as he had in 1950. The Navy said his actions were a lifesaving case.[46] Kennedy's two original medals are currently on display at the John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum.[52]
On August 12, 1944, Kennedy's older brother, Joe Jr., a Navy pilot, was killed while volunteering for a special and hazardous air mission. His explosive-laden plane blew up when the plane's bombs detonated prematurely while the aircraft was flying over the English Channel.[53]
On March 1, 1945, Kennedy retired from the Navy Reserve on physical disability and was honorably discharged with the full rank of lieutenant.[51] When later asked how he became a war hero, Kennedy joked: "It was easy. They cut my PT boat in half."[54]
Military awards
Kennedy's military decorations and awards include the Navy and Marine Corps Medal; Purple Heart Medal; American Defense Service Medal; American Campaign Medal; Asiatic-Pacific Campaign Medal with three ​3⁄16" bronze stars; and the World War II Victory Medal.[1]






















Navy and Marine Corps Medal
Purple Heart
American Defense Service Medal


American Campaign Medal
Asiatic-Pacific Campaign Medal
with three stars
World War II Victory Medal


Navy and Marine Corps Medal citation

For extremely heroic conduct as Commanding Officer of Motor Torpedo Boat 109 following the collision and sinking of that vessel in the Pacific War area on August 1–2, 1943. Unmindful of personal danger, Lieutenant (then Lieutenant, Junior Grade) Kennedy unhesitatingly braved the difficulties and hazards of darkness to direct rescue operations, swimming many hours to secure aid and food after he had succeeded in getting his crew ashore. His outstanding courage, endurance and leadership contributed to the saving of several lives and were in keeping with the highest traditions of the United States Naval Service.
— James Forrestal, Secretary of the Navy[55]

Post-naval service
In April 1945, Kennedy's father, who was a friend of William Randolph Hearst, arranged a position for his son as a special correspondent for Hearst Newspapers; the assignment kept Kennedy's name in the public eye and "expose[d] him to journalism as a possible career."[56] He worked as a correspondent that May, covering the Potsdam Conference and other events.[57]
Congressional career
JFK's elder brother Joe had been the family's political standard-bearer and had been tapped by their father to seek the Presidency. Joe's death during the war in 1944 changed that course and the task now fell to the second eldest of the Kennedy siblings – John F. Kennedy.[58]
House of Representatives (1947–1953)
At the urging of Kennedy's father, U.S. Representative James Michael Curley vacated his seat in the strongly Democratic 11th Congressional district in Massachusetts to become mayor of Boston in 1946. With his father financing and running his campaign, Kennedy won the Democratic primary with 12 percent of the vote, defeating ten other candidates. Though Republicans took control of the House in the 1946 elections, Kennedy defeated his Republican opponent in the general election, taking 73 percent of the vote. Along with Richard Nixon and Joseph McCarthy, Kennedy was one of several World War II veterans first elected to Congress that year.[59]
He served in the House for six years, joining the influential Education and Labor Committee and the Veterans' Affairs Committee. He concentrated his attention on international affairs, supporting the Truman Doctrine as the appropriate response to the emerging Cold War. He also supported public housing and opposed the Labor Management Relations Act of 1947, which restricted the power of labor unions. Though not as vocal an anticommunist as McCarthy, Kennedy supported the Immigration and Nationality Act of 1952, which required Communists to register with the government, and he deplored the "Loss of China."[60]
Senate (1953–1960)
See also: United States Senate election in Massachusetts, 1952




Kennedy lying on a gurney following spinal surgery, accompanied by Jackie, December 1954






Kennedy endorsing Adlai Stevenson II for the presidential nomination at the 1956 Democratic National Convention in Chicago


As early as 1949, Kennedy began preparing to run for the Senate in 1952 against Republican three-term incumbent Henry Cabot Lodge Jr. Joseph Kennedy again financed and managed his son's candidacy, while John Kennedy's younger brother Robert Kennedy emerged as an important member of the campaign.[61] In the presidential election, General Dwight D. Eisenhower carried Massachusetts by a margin of 208,000 votes, but Kennedy defeated Lodge by 70,000 votes for the Senate seat.[62] The following year, he married Jacqueline Bouvier.[63]
Kennedy underwent several spinal operations over the next two years. Often absent from the Senate, he was at times critically ill and received Catholic last rites. During his convalescence in 1956, he published Profiles in Courage, a book about U.S. senators who risked their careers for their personal beliefs, for which he won the Pulitzer Prize for Biography in 1957.[64] Rumors that this work was co-written by his close adviser and speechwriter, Ted Sorensen, were confirmed in Sorensen's 2008 autobiography.[65]
At the 1956 Democratic National Convention, Kennedy gave the nominating speech for the party's presidential nominee, Adlai Stevenson II.[66] Stevenson let the convention select the Vice Presidential nominee. Kennedy finished second in the balloting, losing to Senator Estes Kefauver of Tennessee but receiving national exposure as a result.[67]
One of the matters demanding Kennedy's attention in the Senate was President Eisenhower's bill for the Civil Rights Act of 1957.[68] Kennedy cast a procedural vote on this, which was considered by some as an appeasement of Southern Democratic opponents of the bill.[68] Kennedy did vote for Title III of the act, which would have given the Attorney General powers to enjoin, but Majority Leader Lyndon B. Johnson agreed to let the provision die as a compromise measure.[69] Kennedy also voted for Title IV, termed the "Jury Trial Amendment". Many civil rights advocates at the time criticized that vote as one which would weaken the act.[70] A final compromise bill, which Kennedy supported, was passed in September 1957.[71]




Jack Paar interviews Senator Kennedy on The Tonight Show (1959).


In 1958, Kennedy was re-elected to a second term in the Senate, defeating his Republican opponent, Boston lawyer Vincent J. Celeste, by a wide margin of 874,608 votes; this represented the largest ever margin in Massachusetts politics.[62] It was during his re-election campaign that Kennedy's press secretary at the time, Robert E. Thompson, put together a film entitled The U.S. Senator John F. Kennedy Story, which exhibited a day in the life of the Senator and showcased his family life as well as the inner workings of his office. It was the most comprehensive film produced about Kennedy up to that time.[72] In the aftermath of his re-election, Kennedy began preparing to run for president in 1960.[73]
While Kennedy's father was a strong supporter of Senator Joseph McCarthy, McCarthy was also a friend of the Kennedy family. As well, Bobby Kennedy worked for McCarthy's subcommittee, and McCarthy dated Kennedy sister Patricia. In 1954, the Senate voted to censure McCarthy and Kennedy drafted a speech supporting the censure. However, it was not delivered because Kennedy was hospitalized at the time. The speech had the potential of putting Kennedy in the position of participating procedurally by "pairing" his vote against that of another senator. Although Kennedy never indicated how he would have voted, the episode damaged his support among members of the liberal community, including Eleanor Roosevelt, in the 1956 and 1960 elections.[74]
1960 presidential election
Main articles: Democratic Party (United States) presidential primaries, 1960 and United States presidential election, 1960




Kennedy campaigns with his wife Jacqueline in Appleton, Wisconsin, March 1960


On January 2, 1960, Kennedy announced his candidacy for the Democratic presidential nomination. Though some questioned Kennedy's youth and experience, his charisma and eloquence earned him numerous supporters. His greatest obstacle to winning the nomination may have been his religion. Many Americans held anti-Catholic attitudes, but his vocal support of the separation of church and state helped to defuse the issue. His religion also helped him win a devoted following among many Catholic voters. Kennedy faced several potential challengers for the Democratic nomination, including Senate Majority Leader Lyndon B. Johnson, Adlai Stevenson, and Senator Hubert Humphrey. Kennedy traveled extensively to build his support among Democratic elites and voters. At the time, party officials controlled most of the delegates, but several states also held primaries, and Kennedy sought to win several primaries to boost his chances of winning the nomination. In his first major test, Kennedy won the Wisconsin primary, effectively ending Humphrey's hopes of winning the presidency. Nonetheless, Kennedy and Humphrey faced each other in a competitive West Virginia primary in which Kennedy could not benefit from a Catholic bloc, as he had in Wisconsin. Kennedy won the West Virginia primary, impressing many in the party, but at the start of the 1960 Democratic National Convention, it was unclear whether he would win the nomination.[75]




Kennedy and Richard Nixon participate in the nation's first televised presidential debate, Washington, D.C., 1960.


When Kennedy entered the convention, he had the most delegates, but not enough to ensure he would win the nomination. Stevenson—the 1952 and 1956 presidential nominee—remained very popular in the party, while Johnson also hoped to win the nomination with the support of party leaders. Kennedy's candidacy also faced opposition from former president Harry S. Truman, who worried about Kennedy's lack of experience. Kennedy knew that a second ballot could result in the nomination of Johnson or another candidate, and his well-organized campaign was able to earn the support of just enough delegates to win the presidential nomination on the first ballot.[76] Kennedy ignored the opposition of his brother and some of his liberal supporters when he chose Johnson as his vice presidential nominee. He believed that the Texas Senator could help him win support in the South.[77] In accepting the presidential nomination, Kennedy gave his well-known "New Frontier" speech, saying: "For the problems are not all solved and the battles are not all won—and we stand today on the edge of a New Frontier.... But the New Frontier of which I speak is not a set of promises—it is a set of challenges. It sums up not what I intend to offer the American people, but what I intend to ask of them."[78]




Outgoing President Dwight D. Eisenhower meets with President-elect John F. Kennedy on December 6, 1960


At the start of the fall general election campaign, Republican nominee Richard Nixon, the incumbent vice president, held a six-point lead in the polls.[79] Major issues included how to get the economy moving again, Kennedy's Roman Catholicism, the Cuban Revolution, and whether the Soviet space and missile programs had surpassed those of the U.S. To address fears that his being Catholic would impact his decision-making, he famously told the Greater Houston Ministerial Association on September 12, 1960: "I am not the Catholic candidate for president. I am the Democratic Party candidate for president who also happens to be a Catholic. I do not speak for my Church on public matters – and the Church does not speak for me."[80] Kennedy questioned rhetorically whether one-quarter of Americans were relegated to second-class citizenship just because they were Catholic, and once stated that: "No one asked me my religion [serving the Navy] in the South Pacific."[81]
In September and October, Kennedy squared off against Nixon in the first televised presidential debates in U.S. history. During these programs, Nixon had a sore, injured leg, and his "five o'clock shadow" was perspiring as he looked tense and uncomfortable. Kennedy, on the other hand, chose to avail himself of makeup services and appeared relaxed, which led the huge television audience to favor him as the winner. Radio listeners either thought that Nixon had won or that the debates were a draw.[82] The debates are now considered a milestone in American political history—the point at which the medium of television began to play a dominant role in politics.[64]




1960 electoral vote results


Kennedy's campaign gained momentum after the first debate, and he pulled slightly ahead of Nixon in most polls. On Election Day, Kennedy defeated Nixon in one of the closest presidential elections of the 20th century. In the national popular vote, by most accounts, Kennedy led Nixon by just two-tenths of one percent (49.7% to 49.5%), while in the Electoral College, he won 303 votes to Nixon's 219 (269 were needed to win).[83] Fourteen electors from Mississippi and Alabama refused to support Kennedy because of his support for the civil rights movement; they voted for Senator Harry F. Byrd of Virginia, as did an elector from Oklahoma.[83] Kennedy became the youngest person (43) ever elected to the presidency, though Theodore Roosevelt was a year younger at 42 when he automatically assumed the office after William McKinley's assassination in 1901.[84]
Presidency (1961–1963)



Wikisource has original text related to this article:
John F. Kennedy's Inaugural Address



Main article: Presidency of John F. Kennedy
For a chronological guide to this subject, see Timeline of the presidency of John F. Kennedy.




John F. Kennedy takes the Presidential oath of office administered by Chief Justice Earl Warren on January 20, 1961, at the Capitol.


John F. Kennedy was sworn in as the 35th president at noon on January 20, 1961. In his inaugural address, he spoke of the need for all Americans to be active citizens, famously saying: "Ask not what your country can do for you; ask what you can do for your country." He asked the nations of the world to join together to fight what he called the "common enemies of man: tyranny, poverty, disease, and war itself."[85]
He added:

All this will not be finished in the first one hundred days. Nor will it be finished in the first one thousand days, nor in the life of this Administration, nor even perhaps in our lifetime on this planet. But let us begin." In closing, he expanded on his desire for greater internationalism: "Finally, whether you are citizens of America or citizens of the world, ask of us here the same high standards of strength and sacrifice which we ask of you.[85]

The address reflected Kennedy's confidence that his administration would chart an historically significant course in both domestic policy and foreign affairs. The contrast between this optimistic vision and the pressures of managing daily political realities at home and abroad would be one of the main tensions running through the early years of his administration.[86]




John F. Kennedy speaking at Rice University in Houston on September 12, 1962. Lyndon Johnson can be seen behind him.


Kennedy brought to the White House a contrast in organization compared to the decision-making structure of former-General Eisenhower; and he wasted no time in scrapping Eisenhower's methods.[87] Kennedy preferred the organizational structure of a wheel with all the spokes leading to the president. He was ready and willing to make the increased number of quick decisions required in such an environment. He selected a mixture of experienced and inexperienced people to serve in his cabinet. "We can learn our jobs together", he stated.[88]
Much to the chagrin of his economic advisors who wanted him to reduce taxes, Kennedy quickly agreed to a balanced budget pledge. This was needed in exchange for votes to expand the membership of the House Rules Committee in order to give the Democrats a majority in setting the legislative agenda.[89] Kennedy focused on immediate and specific issues facing the administration, and quickly voiced his impatience with pondering of deeper meanings. Deputy National Security Advisor Walt Whitman Rostow once began a diatribe about the growth of communism, and Kennedy abruptly cut him off, asking, "What do you want me to do about that today?"[90]
Kennedy approved Defense Secretary Robert McNamara's controversial decision to award the contract for the F-111 TFX (Tactical Fighter Experimental) fighter-bomber to General Dynamics (the choice of the civilian Defense department) over Boeing (the choice of the military).[91] At the request of Senator Henry Jackson, Senator John McClellan held 46 days of mostly closed-door hearings before the Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations investigating the TFX contract from February to November 1963.[92]
During the summer of 1962, Kennedy had a secret taping system set up in the White House, most likely to aid his future memoir. It recorded many conversations with Kennedy and his Cabinet members, including those in relation to the "Cuban Missile Crisis".[93]
Foreign policy
Main article: Foreign policy of the John F. Kennedy administration




Foreign trips of John F. Kennedy during his presidency


President Kennedy's foreign policy was dominated by American confrontations with the Soviet Union, manifested by proxy contests in the early stage of the Cold War. In 1961, Kennedy anxiously anticipated a summit with Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev. He started off on the wrong foot by reacting aggressively to a routine Khrushchev speech on Cold War confrontation in early 1961. The speech was intended for domestic audiences in the Soviet Union, but Kennedy interpreted it as a personal challenge. His mistake helped raise tensions going into the Vienna Summit of June 1961.[94]




Kennedy with Kwame Nkrumah, the first head of an independent Ghana, March 1961


On the way to the summit, Kennedy stopped in Paris to meet Charles de Gaulle, who advised him to ignore Khrushchev's abrasive style. The French president feared the United States' presumed influence in Europe. Nevertheless, de Gaulle was quite impressed with the young president and his family. Kennedy picked up on this in his speech in Paris, saying that he would be remembered as "the man who accompanied Jackie Kennedy to Paris."[95]
On June 4, 1961, the president met with Khrushchev in Vienna and left the meetings angry and disappointed that he had allowed the premier to bully him, despite the warnings he had received. Khrushchev, for his part, was impressed with the president's intelligence, but thought him weak. Kennedy did succeed in conveying the bottom line to Khrushchev on the most sensitive issue before them, a proposed treaty between Moscow and East Berlin. He made it clear that any such treaty which interfered with U.S access rights in West Berlin would be regarded as an act of war.[96]
Shortly after the president returned home, the U.S.S.R. announced its intention to sign a treaty with East Berlin, abrogating any third-party occupation rights in either sector of the city. Kennedy, depressed and angry, assumed that his only option was to prepare the country for nuclear war, which he personally thought had a one-in-five chance of occurring.[97]
In the weeks immediately after the Vienna summit, more than 20,000 people fled from East Berlin to the western sector in reaction to statements from the USSR. Kennedy began intensive meetings on the Berlin issue, where Dean Acheson took the lead in recommending a military buildup alongside NATO allies.[98] In a July 1961 speech, Kennedy announced his decision to add $3.25 billion to the defense budget, along with over 200,000 additional troops, stating that an attack on West Berlin would be taken as an attack on the U.S. The speech received an 85% approval rating.[99]




Kennedy with the Italian Prime Minister Amintore Fanfani, at the White House, in 1963


The following month, the Soviet Union and East Berlin began blocking any further passage of East Berliners into West Berlin and erected barbed wire fences across the city, which were quickly upgraded to the Berlin Wall. Kennedy's initial reaction was to ignore this, as long as free access from West to East Berlin continued. This course was altered when it was learned that West Berliners had lost confidence in the defense of their position by the United States. Kennedy sent Vice President Johnson, along with a host of military personnel, in convoy through West Germany, including Soviet-armed checkpoints, to demonstrate the continued commitment of the U.S. to West Berlin.[100]
Kennedy gave a speech at Saint Anselm College on May 5, 1960, regarding America's conduct in the emerging Cold War. The address detailed how American foreign policy should be conducted towards African nations, noting a hint of support for modern African nationalism by saying that: "For we, too, founded a new nation on revolt from colonial rule."[101]
Cuba and the Bay of Pigs Invasion
Main article: Bay of Pigs Invasion




The President and Vice President take a leisurely stroll on the White House grounds


The prior Eisenhower administration had created a plan to overthrow Fidel Castro's regime in Cuba. The plan, led by the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), with help from the U.S. military, was for an invasion of Cuba by a counter-revolutionary insurgency composed of U.S.-trained, anti-Castro Cuban exiles[102][103] led by CIA paramilitary officers. The intention was to invade Cuba and instigate an uprising among the Cuban people in hopes of removing Castro from power.[104] Kennedy approved the final invasion plan on April 4, 1961.
The Bay of Pigs Invasion began on April 17, 1961. Fifteen hundred U.S.-trained Cubans, called Brigade 2506, landed on the island. No U.S. air support was provided. Allen Dulles, director of the CIA, later stated that they thought the president would authorize any action required for success once the troops were on the ground.[105]
By April 19, 1961, the Cuban government had captured or killed the invading exiles, and Kennedy was forced to negotiate for the release of the 1,189 survivors. After twenty months, Cuba released the captured exiles in exchange for $53 million worth of food and medicine.[106] The incident made Castro wary of the U.S. and led him to believe that another invasion would occur.[107]
According to biographer Richard Reeves, Kennedy focused primarily on the political repercussions of the plan rather than military considerations. When it failed, he was convinced that the plan was a setup to make him look bad.[108] He took responsibility for the failure, saying: "We got a big kick in the leg and we deserved it. But maybe we'll learn something from it."[109]
In late 1961, the White House formed the Special Group (Augmented), headed by Robert Kennedy and including Edward Lansdale, Secretary Robert McNamara, and others. The group's objective—to overthrow Castro via espionage, sabotage, and other covert tactics—was never pursued.[110]
Cuban Missile Crisis
Main article: Cuban Missile Crisis




Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev and Kennedy confer in Vienna, 1961


On October 14, 1962, CIA U-2 spy planes took photographs of intermediate-range ballistic missile sites being built in Cuba by the Soviets. The photos were shown to Kennedy on October 16; a consensus was reached that the missiles were offensive in nature and thus posed an immediate nuclear threat.[111]
Kennedy faced a dilemma: if the U.S. attacked the sites, it might lead to nuclear war with the U.S.S.R., but if the U.S. did nothing, it would be faced with the increased threat from close-range nuclear weapons. The U.S. would also appear to the world as less committed to the defense of the hemisphere. On a personal level, Kennedy needed to show resolve in reaction to Khrushchev, especially after the Vienna summit.[112]









Address on the Buildup of Arms in Cuba






Kennedy addressing the nation on October 22, 1962, about the buildup of arms on Cuba






Problems playing this file? See media help.





Wikisource has original text related to this article:
Cuban Missile Crisis



More than a third of the members of the National Security Council (NSC) favored an unannounced air assault on the missile sites, but for some of them this conjured up an image of "Pearl Harbor in reverse".[113] There was also some concern from the international community (asked in confidence), that the assault plan was an overreaction in light of the fact that PGM-19 Jupiter missiles had been placed in Italy and Turkey by Eisenhower in 1958. There could also be no assurance that the assault would be 100% effective.[114] In concurrence with a majority-vote of the NSC, Kennedy decided on a naval quarantine. On October 22 he dispatched a message to Khrushchev and announced the decision on TV.[115]
The U.S. Navy would stop and inspect all Soviet ships arriving off Cuba, beginning October 24. The Organization of American States gave unanimous support to the removal of the missiles. The president exchanged two sets of letters with Khrushchev, to no avail.[116] United Nations (UN) Secretary General U Thant requested that both parties reverse their decisions and enter a cooling-off period. Khrushchev agreed, Kennedy did not.[117]
One Soviet-flagged ship was stopped and boarded. On October 28 Khrushchev agreed to dismantle the missile sites, subject to UN inspections.[118] The U.S. publicly promised never to invade Cuba and privately agreed to remove its Jupiter missiles from Italy and Turkey, which were by then obsolete and had been supplanted by submarines equipped with UGM-27 Polaris missiles.[119]
This crisis brought the world closer to nuclear war than at any point before or since. In the end, "the humanity" of the two men prevailed.[120] The crisis improved the image of American willpower and the president's credibility. Kennedy's approval rating increased from 66% to 77% immediately thereafter.[121]
Latin America and communism
Main article: Foreign policy of the John F. Kennedy administration § Latin America




Kennedy with Chilean President Jorge Alessandri, on an official visit in December 1962


Arguing that "those who make peaceful revolution impossible, will make violent revolution inevitable,"[122] Kennedy sought to contain the perceived threat of communism in Latin America by establishing the Alliance for Progress, which sent aid to some countries and sought greater human rights standards in the region.[123] He worked closely with Governor of Puerto Rico Luis Muñoz Marín for the development of the Alliance of Progress, and began working towards the autonomy of the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico.
When the president took office, the Eisenhower administration, through the CIA, had begun formulating plans for the assassination of Castro in Cuba and Rafael Trujillo in the Dominican Republic. Kennedy privately instructed the CIA that any such planning must include plausible deniability by the U.S. His public position was in opposition.[124] In June 1961 the Dominican Republic's leader was assassinated; in the days following the event, Undersecretary of State Chester Bowles led a cautious reaction by the nation. Robert Kennedy, who saw an opportunity for the U.S., called Bowles "a gutless bastard" to his face.[125]
Peace Corps







Executive Order 10924





Establishment of the Peace Corps





John F. Kennedy's announcement of the establishment of the Peace Corps






Problems playing this file? See media help.


In one of his first presidential acts, Kennedy asked Congress to create the Peace Corps. His brother-in-law, Sargent Shriver, was its first director.[126] Through this program, Americans volunteered to help underdeveloped nations in areas such as education, farming, health care, and construction. The organization grew to 5,000 members by March 1963 and 10,000 the following year.[127] Since 1961, over 200,000 Americans have joined the Peace Corps, serving in 139 countries.[128][129]
Southeast Asia
Main articles: Laotian Civil War, 1963 South Vietnamese coup, Arrest and assassination of Ngo Dinh Diem, Reaction to the 1963 South Vietnamese coup, Cable 243, Buddhist crisis, Thích Quảng Đức, Xá Lợi Pagoda raids, Krulak Mendenhall mission, and McNamara Taylor mission
When briefing Kennedy, Eisenhower emphasized that the communist threat in Southeast Asia required priority; Eisenhower considered Laos to be "the cork in the bottle" in regards to the regional threat. In March 1961, Kennedy voiced a change in policy from supporting a "free" Laos to a "neutral" Laos, indicating privately that Vietnam, and not Laos, should be deemed America's tripwire for communism's spread in the area.[130] In May, he dispatched Lyndon Johnson to meet with South Vietnam's President Ngo Dinh Diem. Johnson assured Diem more aid to mold a fighting force that could resist the communists.[131] Kennedy announced a change of policy from support to partnership with Diem to defeat of communism in South Vietnam.[132]
During his administration, Kennedy continued policies that provided political and economic support, and military advice and support, to the South Vietnamese government.[133] Late in 1961, the Viet Cong began assuming a predominant presence, initially seizing the provincial capital of Phuoc Vinh.[134] Kennedy increased the number of military advisors and special forces in the area, from 11,000 in 1962 to 16,000 by late 1963, but he was reluctant to order a full-scale deployment of troops.[135][136] A year and three months later on March 8, 1965, his successor, President Lyndon Johnson, committed the first combat troops to Vietnam and greatly escalated U.S. involvement, with forces reaching 184,000 that year and 536,000 in 1968.[137]
In late 1961, President Kennedy sent Roger Hilsman, then director of the State Department's Bureau of Intelligence and Research, to assess the situation in Vietnam. There, Hilsman met Sir Robert Thompson, head of the British Advisory Mission to South Vietnam and the Strategic Hamlet Program was formed. It was approved by Kennedy and South Vietnam President Ngo Dinh Diem. It was implemented in early 1962 and involved some forced relocation, village internment, and segregation of rural South Vietnamese into new communities where the peasantry would be isolated from Communist insurgents. It was hoped that these new communities would provide security for the peasants and strengthen the tie between them and the central government. By November 1963 the program waned and officially ended in 1964.[138]
In early 1962, Kennedy formally authorized escalated involvement when he signed the National Security Action Memorandum – "Subversive Insurgency (War of Liberation)".[139] "Operation Ranch Hand", a large-scale aerial defoliation effort, began on the roadsides of South Vietnam.[140]. Depending on which assessment Kennedy accepted (Department of Defense or State) there had been zero or modest progress in countering the increase in communist aggression in return for an expanded U.S. involvement.[141]




Kennedy with future Australian Prime Minister Harold Holt in the Oval Office in 1963


In April 1963, Kennedy assessed the situation in Vietnam: "We don't have a prayer of staying in Vietnam. Those people hate us. They are going to throw our asses out of there at any point. But I can't give up that territory to the communists and get the American people to re-elect me."[142]
On August 21, just as the new U.S. Ambassador Henry Cabot Lodge, Jr. arrived, Diem and his brother Ngo Dinh Nhu ordered South Vietnam forces, funded and trained by the CIA, to quell Buddhist demonstrations. The crackdowns heightened expectations of a coup d'état to remove Diem with (or perhaps by) his brother, Nhu.[143] Lodge was instructed to try to get Diem and Nhu to step down and leave the country. Diem would not listen to Lodge.[144] Cable 243 (DEPTEL 243), dated August 24, followed, declaring Washington would no longer tolerate Nhu's actions, and Lodge was ordered to pressure Diem to remove Nhu.[145] Lodge concluded that the only option was to get the South Vietnamese generals to overthrow Diem and Nhu.[146] At week's end, orders were sent to Saigon and throughout Washington to "destroy all coup cables".[147] At the same time, the first formal anti-Vietnam war sentiment was expressed by U.S. clergy from the Ministers' Vietnam Committee.[148]
A White House meeting in September was indicative of the different ongoing appraisals; the president was given updated assessments after personal inspections on the ground by the Department of Defense (General Victor Krulak) and the State Department (Joseph Mendenhall). Krulak said that the military fight against the communists was progressing and being won, while Mendenhall stated that the country was civilly being lost to any U.S. influence. Kennedy reacted, saying: "Did you two gentlemen visit the same country?" The president was unaware that the two men were at such odds that they had not spoken to each other on the return flight.[149]
In October 1963, the president appointed Defense Secretary McNamara and General Maxwell D. Taylor to a Vietnam mission in another effort to synchronize the information and formulation of policy. The objective of the McNamara Taylor mission "emphasized the importance of getting to the bottom of the differences in reporting from U.S. representatives in Vietnam."[150] In meetings with McNamara, Taylor, and Lodge, Diem again refused to agree to governing measures, helping to dispel McNamara's previous optimism about Diem.[151] Taylor and McNamara were enlightened by Vietnam's vice president, Nguyen Ngoc Tho (choice of many to succeed Diem), who in detailed terms obliterated Taylor's information that the military was succeeding in the countryside.[152] At Kennedy's insistence, the mission report contained a recommended schedule for troop withdrawals: 1,000 by year's end and complete withdrawal in 1965, something the NSC considered a strategic fantasy.[153]
In late October, intelligence wires again reported that a coup against the Diem government was afoot. The source, Vietnamese General Duong Van Minh (also known as "Big Minh"), wanted to know the U.S. position. Kennedy instructed Lodge to offer covert assistance to the coup, excluding assassination.[154] On November 1, 1963, South Vietnamese generals, led by "Big Minh", overthrew the Diem government, arresting and then killing Diem and Nhu. Kennedy was shocked by the deaths.[155]
News of the coup led to renewed confidence initially—both in America and in South Vietnam—that the war might be won.[156] McGeorge Bundy drafted a National Security Action Memo to present to Kennedy upon his return from Dallas. It reiterated the resolve to fight communism in Vietnam, with increasing military and economic aid and expansion of operations into Laos and Cambodia. Before leaving for Dallas, Kennedy told Michael Forrestal that "after the first of the year ... [he wanted] an in depth study of every possible option, including how to get out of there ... to review this whole thing from the bottom to the top." When asked what he thought the president meant, Forrestal said, "it was devil's advocate stuff."[157]
Historians disagree on whether Vietnam would have escalated if Kennedy not been assassinated and had won re-election in 1964.[158] Fueling the debate were statements made by Secretary of Defense McNamara in the film "The Fog of War" that Kennedy was strongly considering pulling the United States out of Vietnam after the 1964 election.[159] The film also contains a tape recording of Lyndon Johnson stating that Kennedy was planning to withdraw, a position in which Johnson disagreed.[160] Kennedy had signed National Security Action Memorandum (NSAM) 263, dated October 11, which ordered the withdrawal of 1,000 military personnel by the end of the year, and the bulk of them out by 1965.[161][162] Such an action would have been a policy reversal, but Kennedy was moving in a less hawkish direction since his speech about world peace at American University on June 10, 1963.[163]
At the time of Kennedy's death, no final policy decision had been made as to Vietnam.[164] In 2008, Theodore Sorensen wrote: "I would like to believe that Kennedy would have found a way to withdraw all American instructors and advisors [from Vietnam]. But... I do not believe he knew in his last weeks what he was going to do."[165] Sorensen added that, in his opinion, Vietnam "was the only foreign policy problem handed off by JFK to his successor in no better, and possibly worse, shape than it was when he inherited it."[165] U.S. involvement in the region escalated until his successor Lyndon Johnson directly deployed regular U.S. military forces for fighting the Vietnam War.[166][167] After Kennedy's assassination, President Johnson signed NSAM 273 on November 26, 1963. It reversed Kennedy's decision to withdraw 1,000 troops, and reaffirmed the policy of assistance to the South Vietnamese.[168][169]
American University speech




Kennedy delivers the commencement speech at American University, June 10, 1963





Wikisource has original text related to this article:
A Strategy of Peace












World Peace Speech





Speech from American University by John F. Kennedy, June 10, 1963 (duration 26:47)






Problems playing this file? See media help.


On June 10, 1963, Kennedy, at the high point of his rhetorical powers,[170] delivered the commencement address at American University in Washington, D.C. Also known as "Strategy of Peace", Kennedy not only outlined a plan to curb nuclear arms, but also "laid out a hopeful, yet realistic route for world peace at a time when the U.S. and Soviet Union faced the potential for an escalating nuclear arms race."[171] The President wished:

to discuss a topic on which too often ignorance abounds and the truth is too rarely perceived—yet it is the most important topic on earth: world peace ... I speak of peace because of the new face of war...in an age when a singular nuclear weapon contains ten times the explosive force delivered by all the allied forces in the Second World War ... an age when the deadly poisons produced by a nuclear exchange would be carried by wind and air and soil and seed to the far corners of the globe and to generations yet unborn ... I speak of peace, therefore, as the necessary rational end of rational men ... world peace, like community peace, does not require that each man love his neighbor—it requires only that they live together in mutual tolerance ... our problems are man-made—therefore they can be solved by man. And man can be as big as he wants.[172]

The president also made two announcements—that the Soviets had expressed a desire to negotiate a nuclear test ban treaty, and that the U.S had postponed planned atmospheric tests.[173]
West Berlin speech









Ich bin ein Berliner (I am a Berliner) speech

Play media

Ich bin ein Berliner speech from the Rathaus Schöneberg by John F. Kennedy, June 26, 1963 (duration 9:01)



Ich bin ein Berliner (I am a Berliner) speech (audio)






Audio-only version (duration 9:22)








Kennedy delivering his speech in West Berlin





Wikisource has original text related to this article:
JFK's Ich bin ein Berliner speech



In 1963, Germany was enduring a time of particular vulnerability due to Soviet aggression to the east, and the impending retirement of West German Chancellor Adenauer.[174] At the same time, French President Charles de Gaulle was trying to build a Franco-West German counterweight to the American and Soviet spheres of influence.[175][176][177] To Kennedy's eyes, this Franco-German cooperation seemed directed against NATO's influence in Europe.[178]
On June 26, President Kennedy gave a public speech in West Berlin; he reiterated the American commitment to Germany and criticized communism. He was met with an ecstatic response from a massive audience.[179] Kennedy used the construction of the Berlin Wall as an example of the failures of communism: "Freedom has many difficulties, and democracy is not perfect. But we have never had to put a wall up to keep our people in, to prevent them from leaving us." The speech is known for its famous phrase "Ich bin ein Berliner" ("I am a citizen of Berlin"). A million people were on the street for the speech.[179] He remarked to Ted Sorensen afterwards: "We'll never have another day like this one, as long as we live."[180]
See also: Tear down this wall!
Israel
In 1960, Kennedy stated: "Israel will endure and flourish. It is the child of hope and the home of the brave. It can neither be broken by adversity nor demoralized by success. It carries the shield of democracy and it honors the sword of freedom."[181]
Subsequently, as president, Kennedy initiated the creation of security ties with Israel, and he is credited as the founder of the US-Israeli military alliance (which would be continued under subsequent presidents). Kennedy ended the arms embargo that the Eisenhower and Truman administrations had enforced on Israel. Describing the protection of Israel as a moral and national commitment, he was the first to introduce the concept of a 'special relationship' (as he described it to Golda Meir) between the US and Israel.[182]




Kennedy with Israeli Foreign Minister Golda Meir, December 27, 1962


Kennedy extended the first informal security guarantees to Israel in 1962 and, beginning in 1963, was the first US president to allow the sale to Israel of advanced US weaponry (the MIM-23 Hawk), as well as to provide diplomatic support for Israeli policies which were opposed by Arab neighbors; such as its water project on the Jordan River.[183]
As result of this newly created security alliance, Kennedy also encountered tensions with the Israeli government over the production of nuclear materials in Dimona which he believed could instigate a nuclear arms-race in the Middle East. After the existence of a nuclear plant was initially denied by the Israeli government, David Ben-Gurion stated in a speech to the Israeli Knesset on December 21, 1960, that the purpose of the nuclear plant at Beersheba was for "research in problems of arid zones and desert flora and fauna."[184] When Ben-Gurion met with Kennedy in New York, he claimed that Dimona was being developed to provide nuclear power for desalinization and other peaceful purposes "for the time being."[184]
In a May 1963 letter to Ben-Gurion, Kennedy wrote that he was skeptical and stated that American support to Israel could be in jeopardy if reliable information on the Israeli nuclear program was not forthcoming, Ben-Gurion repeated previous reassurances that Dimona was being developed for peaceful purposes. The Israeli government resisted American pressure to open its nuclear facilities to International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) inspections. In 1962, the US and Israeli governments had agreed to an annual inspection regime. A science attaché at the embassy in Tel Aviv concluded that parts of the Dimona facility had been shut down temporarily to mislead American scientists when they visited.[185]
According to Seymour Hersh, the Israelis set up false control rooms to show the Americans. Israeli lobbyist Abe Feinberg stated: "It was part of my job to tip them off that Kennedy was insisting on [an inspection]."[185] Hersh contends the inspections were conducted in such a way that it "guaranteed that the whole procedure would be little more than a whitewash, as the president and his senior advisors had to understand: the American inspection team would have to schedule its visits well in advance, and with the full acquiescence of Israel."[186] Marc Trachtenberg argued: "Although well aware of what the Israelis were doing, Kennedy chose to take this as satisfactory evidence of Israeli compliance with America's non-proliferation policy."[187] The American who led the inspection team stated that the essential goal of the inspections was to find "ways to not reach the point of taking action against Israel's nuclear weapons program."[188]
Rodger Davies, the director of the State Department's Office of Near Eastern Affairs, concluded in March 1965 that Israel was developing nuclear weapons. He reported that Israel's target date for achieving nuclear capability was 1968–1969.[189] On May 1, 1968, Undersecretary of State Nicholas Katzenbach told President Johnson that Dimona was producing enough plutonium to produce two bombs a year. The State Department argued that if Israel wanted arms, it should accept international supervision of its nuclear program.[185] Dimona was never placed under IAEA safeguards. Attempts to write Israeli adherence to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) into contracts for the supply of U.S. weapons continued throughout 1968.[190]
Iraq
Main article: Foreign policy of the John F. Kennedy administration § Iraq




Mohammad Reza Pahlavi, Shah of Iran, Kennedy, and U.S. Defense Secretary Robert McNamara in the White House Cabinet Room on April 13, 1962


Relations between the United States and Iraq became strained following the overthrow of the Iraqi monarchy on July 14, 1958, which resulted in the declaration of a republican government led by Brigadier Abd al-Karim Qasim.[191] On June 25, 1961, Qasim mobilized troops along the border between Iraq and Kuwait, declaring the latter nation "an indivisible part of Iraq" and causing a short-lived "Kuwait Crisis". The United Kingdom—which had just granted Kuwait independence on June 19, and whose economy was heavily dependent on Kuwaiti oil—responded on July 1 by dispatching 5,000 troops to the country to deter an Iraqi invasion. At the same time, Kennedy dispatched a U.S. Navy task force to Bahrain, and the UK (at the urging of the Kennedy administration) brought the dispute to United Nations Security Council, where the proposed resolution was vetoed by the Soviet Union. The situation was resolved in October, when the British troops were withdrawn and replaced by a 4,000-strong Arab League force.[192]
In December 1961, Qasim's government passed Public Law 80, which restricted the British- and American-owned Iraq Petroleum Company (IPC)'s concessionary holding to those areas in which oil was actually being produced, effectively expropriating 99.5% of the IPC concession. U.S. officials were alarmed by the expropriation as well as the recent Soviet veto of an Egyptian-sponsored UN resolution requesting the admittance of Kuwait as UN member state, which they believed to be connected. Senior National Security Council adviser Robert Komer worried that if the IPC ceased production in response, Qasim might "grab Kuwait" (thus achieving a "stranglehold" on Middle Eastern oil production), or "throw himself into Russian arms." Komer also made note of widespread rumors that a nationalist coup against Qasim could be imminent, and had the potential to "get Iraq back on [a] more neutral keel."[193]
In April 1962, the State Department issued new guidelines on Iraq that were intended to increase American influence there. Meanwhile, Kennedy instructed the CIA—under the direction of Archibald Bulloch Roosevelt Jr.—to begin making preparations for a military coup against Qasim.[194]
The anti-imperialist and anti-communist Iraqi Ba'ath Party overthrew and executed Qasim in a violent coup on February 8, 1963. While there have been persistent rumors that the CIA orchestrated the coup, declassified documents and the testimony of former CIA officers indicate that there was no direct American involvement, although the CIA was actively seeking a suitable replacement for Qasim within the Iraqi military and had been informed of an earlier Ba'athist coup plot.[195] The Kennedy administration was pleased with the outcome and ultimately approved a $55-million arms deal for Iraq.[196]
Ireland




John F. Kennedy visiting the John Barry Memorial at Crescent Quay in Wexford, Ireland






President Kennedy in motorcade in Patrick Street, Cork, in Ireland on June 28, 1963


During his four-day visit to his ancestral home of Ireland in June 1963,[197] Kennedy accepted a grant of armorial bearings from the Chief Herald of Ireland and received honorary degrees from the National University of Ireland and Trinity College, Dublin.[198] He visited the cottage at Dunganstown, near New Ross, County Wexford where his ancestors had lived before emigrating to America.[199]
He also became the first foreign leader to address the Houses of the Oireachtas (the Irish parliament).[200] On December 22, 2006, the Irish Department of Justice released declassified police documents indicating that security was heightened as Kennedy was the subject of three death threats during this visit.[201]
Nuclear Test Ban Treaty
Main article: Partial Nuclear Test Ban Treaty
Troubled by the long-term dangers of radioactive contamination and nuclear weapons proliferation, Kennedy and Khrushchev agreed to negotiate a nuclear test ban treaty, originally conceived in Adlai Stevenson's 1956 presidential campaign.[202] In their Vienna summit meeting in June 1961, Khrushchev and Kennedy reached an informal understanding against nuclear testing, but the Soviet Union began testing nuclear weapons that September. The United States responded by conducting tests five days later.[203] Shortly thereafter, new U.S. satellites began delivering images which made it clear that the Soviets were substantially behind the U.S. in the arms race.[204] Nevertheless, the greater nuclear strength of the U.S. was of little value as long as the U.S.S.R. perceived itself to be at parity.[205]
In July 1963, Kennedy sent W. Averell Harriman to Moscow to negotiate a treaty with the Soviets.[206] The introductory sessions included Khrushchev, who later delegated Soviet representation to Andrei Gromyko. It quickly became clear that a comprehensive test ban would not be implemented, due largely to the reluctance of the Soviets to allow inspections that would verify compliance.[207]
Ultimately, the United States, the United Kingdom, and the Soviet Union were the initial signatories to a limited treaty, which prohibited atomic testing on the ground, in the atmosphere, or underwater, but not underground. The U.S. Senate ratified this and Kennedy signed it into law in October 1963. France was quick to declare that it was free to continue developing and testing its nuclear defenses.[208]
Domestic policy




President Kennedy in Fort Worth, Texas, on Friday morning, November 22, 1963


Kennedy called his domestic program the "New Frontier". It ambitiously promised federal funding for education, medical care for the elderly, economic aid to rural regions, and government intervention to halt the recession. Kennedy also promised an end to racial discrimination,[209] though his agenda, which included the endorsement of the Voter Education Project (VEP) in 1962, produced little progress in areas such as Mississippi where the "VEP concluded that discrimination was so entrenched".[210][211]
In his 1963 State of the Union address, he proposed substantial tax reform, and a reduction in income tax rates from the current range of 20–90% to a range of 14–65%; he proposed a reduction in the corporate tax rates from 52 to 47%. Kennedy added that the top rate should be set at 70% if certain deductions were not eliminated for high income earners.[209] Congress did not act until 1964, after his death, when the top individual rate was lowered to 70%, and the top corporate rate was set at 48% (see Revenue Act of 1964).[212]
To the Economic Club of New York, he spoke in 1963 of "... the paradoxical truth that tax rates are too high and revenues too low; and the soundest way to raise revenue in the long term is to lower rates now."[213] Congress passed few of Kennedy's major programs during his lifetime, but did vote them through in 1964 and 1965 under his successor Johnson.[214]
Economy
Kennedy ended a period of tight fiscal policies, loosening monetary policy to keep interest rates down and to encourage growth of the economy.[215] He presided over the first government budget to top the $100 billion mark, in 1962, and his first budget in 1961 led to the country's first non-war, non-recession deficit.[216] The economy, which had been through two recessions in three years, and was in one when Kennedy took office, accelerated notably during his presidency. Despite low inflation and interest rates, GDP had grown by an average of only 2.2% per annum during the Eisenhower presidency (scarcely more than population growth at the time), and had declined by 1% during Eisenhower's last twelve months in office.[217]
The economy turned around and prospered during the Kennedy administration. GDP expanded by an average of 5.5% from early 1961 to late 1963,[217] while inflation remained steady at around 1% and unemployment eased.[218] Industrial production rose by 15% and motor vehicle sales rose by 40%.[219] This rate of growth in GDP and industry continued until around 1969, and has yet to be repeated for such a sustained period of time.[217]
Robert Kennedy took the position that the steel executives had illegally colluded to fix prices. He stated: "We're going for broke..... their expense accounts, where they've been and what they've been doing..... the FBI is to interview them all..... we can't lose this."[220]
The administration's actions influenced U.S. Steel to rescind the price increase.[221] The Wall Street Journal wrote that the administration had acted "by naked power, by threats, by agents of the state security police."[222] Yale law professor Charles Reich opined in The New Republic that the administration had violated civil liberties by calling a grand jury to indict U.S. Steel for collusion so quickly.[222]
A New York Times editorial praised Kennedy's actions and said that the steel industry's price increase "imperils the economic welfare of the country by inviting a tidal wave of inflation."[223] Nevertheless, the administration's Bureau of Budget reported the price increase would have resulted in a net gain for GDP as well as a net budget surplus.[224] The stock market, which had steadily declined since Kennedy's election, dropped 10% shortly after the administration's action on the steel industry.[225]
Federal and military death penalty
As president, Kennedy oversaw the last federal execution prior to Furman v. Georgia, a 1972 case that led to a moratorium on federal executions.[226] Victor Feguer was sentenced to death by a federal court in Iowa and was executed on March 15, 1963.[227] Kennedy commuted a death sentence imposed by a military court on seaman Jimmie Henderson on February 12, 1962, changing the penalty to life in prison.[228]
On March 22, 1962, Kennedy signed into law HR5143 (PL87-423), abolishing the mandatory death penalty for first degree murder in the District of Columbia, the only remaining jurisdiction in the United States with such a penalty.[229] The death penalty has not been applied in the District of Columbia since 1957, and has now been abolished.[230]
Civil Rights Movement




Thurgood Marshall, appointed to the federal bench by Kennedy in May 1961


The turbulent end of state-sanctioned racial discrimination was one of the most pressing domestic issues of the 1960s. Jim Crow segregation was the established law in the Deep South.[231] The Supreme Court of the United States had ruled in 1954 in Brown v. Board of Education that racial segregation in public schools was unconstitutional. Many schools, especially in southern states, did not obey the Supreme Court's decision. The Court also prohibited segregation at other public facilities (such as buses, restaurants, theaters, courtrooms, bathrooms, and beaches) but it continued nonetheless.[232]
Kennedy verbally supported racial integration and civil rights; during the 1960 campaign he telephoned Coretta Scott King, wife of the Reverend Martin Luther King, Jr., who had been jailed while trying to integrate a department store lunch counter. Robert Kennedy called Georgia governor Ernest Vandiver and obtained King's release from prison, which drew additional black support to his brother's candidacy.[232] Upon taking office in 1961, Kennedy postponed promised civil rights legislation he made while campaigning in 1960, recognizing that conservative Southern Democrats controlled congressional legislation.[233] Historian Carl M. Brauer concluded that passing any civil rights legislation in 1961 would have been futile.[233] During his first year in office Kennedy appointed many blacks to office including his May appointment of civil rights attorney Thurgood Marshall to the federal bench. [234]
In his first State of the Union Address in January 1961, President Kennedy said: "The denial of constitutional rights to some of our fellow Americans on account of race – at the ballot box and elsewhere – disturbs the national conscience, and subjects us to the charge of world opinion that our democracy is not equal to the high promise of our heritage."[235] Kennedy believed the grassroots movement for civil rights would anger many Southern whites and make it more difficult to pass civil rights laws in Congress, including anti-poverty legislation, and he distanced himself from it.[236]
Kennedy was concerned with other issues early in his presidency, such as the Cold War, Bay of Pigs fiasco and the situation in Southeast Asia. As articulated by brother Robert, the administration's early priority was to "keep the president out of this civil rights mess." Civil rights movement participants, mainly those on the front line in the South, viewed Kennedy as lukewarm, [234] especially concerning the Freedom Riders, who organized an integrated public transportation effort in the south, and who were repeatedly met with white mob violence, including by law enforcement officers, both federal and state. Kennedy assigned federal marshals to protect the Freedom Riders rather than using federal troops or uncooperative FBI agents.[234] Robert Kennedy, speaking for the president, urged the Freedom Riders to "get off the buses and leave the matter to peaceful settlement in the courts."[237] Kennedy feared sending federal troops would stir up "hated memories of Reconstruction" after the Civil War among conservative Southern whites.[234]
On March 6, 1961, Kennedy signed Executive Order 10925 which required government contractors to "take affirmative action to ensure that applicants are employed and that employees are treated during employment without regard to their race, creed, color, or national origin."[238] It established the President's Committee on Equal Employment Opportunity. Displeased with Kennedy's pace addressing the issue of segregation, Martin Luther King, Jr. and his associates produced a document in 1962 calling on the president to follow in the footsteps of Abraham Lincoln and use an Executive Order to deliver a blow for Civil Rights as a kind of Second Emancipation Proclamation. Kennedy did not execute the order.[239]
In September 1962, James Meredith enrolled at the University of Mississippi but was prevented from entering. Attorney General Robert Kennedy responded by sending 400 federal marshals, while President Kennedy reluctantly sent 3,000 troops after the situation on campus turned violent.[240] The Ole Miss riot of 1962 left two dead and dozens injured, but Meredith did finally enroll for class. Kennedy regretted not sending in troops earlier and he began to doubt whether the "evils of Reconstruction" of the 1860s and 1870s he had been taught or believed in were true.[234] The instigating subculture at the Old Miss riot, and at many other racially ignited events, was the Ku Klux Klan.[241] On November 20, 1962, Kennedy signed Executive Order 11063, prohibiting racial discrimination in federally supported housing or "related facilities".[242]
Both the President and the Attorney General were concerned about King's ties to suspected Communists Jack O'Dell and Stanley Levison. After the President and his civil rights expert Harris Wofford pressed King to ask both men to resign from the SCLC, King agreed to ask only O'Dell to resign from the organization and allowed Levison, whom he regarded as a trusted advisor, to remain.[243]
In early 1963, Kennedy related to Martin Luther King, Jr., his thoughts on the prospects for civil rights legislation: "If we get into a long fight over this in Congress, it will bottleneck everything else, and we will still get no bill."[244] Civil rights clashes were on the rise that year.[245] Brother Robert and Ted Sorenson pressed Kennedy to take more initiative on the legislative front.[246]




Kennedy's Report to the American People on Civil Rights, June 11, 1963


On June 11, 1963, President Kennedy intervened when Alabama Governor George Wallace blocked the doorway to the University of Alabama to stop two African American students, Vivian Malone and James Hood, from attending. Wallace moved aside only after being confronted by Deputy Attorney General Nicholas Katzenbach and the Alabama National Guard, which had just been federalized by order of the president. That evening Kennedy gave his famous Report to the American People on Civil Rights on national television and radio, launching his initiative for civil rights legislation—to provide equal access to public schools and other facilities, and greater protection of voting rights.[247][248]
His proposals became part of the Civil Rights Act of 1964. The day ended with the murder of a NAACP leader, Medgar Evers, in front of his home in Mississippi.[249] As the president had predicted, the day after his TV speech, and in reaction to it, House Majority leader Carl Albert called to advise him that his two-year signature effort in Congress to combat poverty in Appalachia (Area Redevelopment Administration) had been defeated, primarily by the votes of Southern Democrats and Republicans.[250] When Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr. complemented Kennedy on his remarks, the latter bitterly replied, "Yes, and look at what happened to area development the very next day in the House." He then added, "But of course, I had to give that speech, and I'm glad that I did."[251] On June 16 The New York Times published an editorial which argued that while the president had initially "moved too slowly and with little evidence of deep moral commitment" in regards to civil rights he "now demonstrate[d] a genuine sense of urgency about eradicating racial discrimination from our national life."[252]
Earlier, Kennedy had signed the executive order creating the Presidential Commission on the Status of Women on December 14, 1961.[253] Former First Lady Eleanor Roosevelt led the commission. The Commission statistics revealed that women were also experiencing discrimination; its final report, documenting legal and cultural barriers, was issued in October 1963.[254] Further, on June 10, 1963, Kennedy signed the Equal Pay Act of 1963, a federal law amending the Fair Labor Standards Act, aimed at abolishing wage disparity based on sex.[255]




Kennedy meets with leaders of the March on Washington in the Oval Office, August 28, 1963


Over a hundred thousand, predominantly African Americans, gathered in Washington for the civil rights March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom on August 28, 1963. Kennedy feared the March would have a negative effect on the prospects for the civil rights bills in Congress, and declined an invitation to speak. He turned over some of the details of the government's involvement to the Dept. of Justice, which channelled hundreds of thousands of dollars to the six sponsors of the March, including the N.A.A.C.P. and Martin Luther King's Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC).[256]
To ensure a peaceful demonstration, the organizers and the president personally edited speeches which were inflammatory and agreed the March would be held on a Wednesday and would be over at 4:00 pm. Thousands of troops were placed on standby. Kennedy watched King's speech on TV and was very impressed. The March was considered a "triumph of managed protest", and not one arrest relating to the demonstration occurred. Afterwards, the March leaders accepted an invitation to the White House to meet with Kennedy and photos were taken. Kennedy felt that the March was a victory for him as well and bolstered the chances for his civil rights bill.[256]
Nevertheless, the struggle was far from over. Three weeks later, a bomb exploded on Sunday, September 15, at the 16th Street Baptist Church in Birmingham; by the end of the day, four African American children had died in the explosion, and two other children were shot to death in the aftermath.[257] Due to this resurgent violence, the civil rights legislation underwent some drastic amendments that critically endangered any prospects for passage of the bill, to the outrage of the president. Kennedy called the congressional leaders to the White House and by the following day the original bill, without the additions, had enough votes to get it out of the House committee.[258] Gaining Republican support, Senator Everett Dirksen promised the legislation would be brought to a vote preventing a Senate filibuster.[259] The legislation was enacted by Kennedy's successor President Lyndon B. Johnson, prompted by Kennedy's memory, after his assassination in November, enforcing voting rights, public accommodations, employment, education, and the administration of justice.[259]
Civil liberties
In February 1962,[260] FBI Director J. Edgar Hoover, who was suspicious of civil-rights leader Martin Luther King, Jr. and viewed him as an upstart troublemaker,[261] presented the Kennedy Administration with allegations that some of King's close confidants and advisers were communists. Concerned by these allegations, the FBI deployed agents to monitor King in the following months.[260] Robert Kennedy and the president also both warned King to discontinue the suspect associations. After the associations continued, Robert Kennedy issued a written directive authorizing the FBI to wiretap King and other leaders of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference, King's civil rights organization, in October 1963.[260]
Although Kennedy only gave written approval for limited wiretapping of King's phones "on a trial basis, for a month or so",[262] Hoover extended the clearance so his men were "unshackled" to look for evidence in any areas of King's life they deemed worthy.[263] The wiretapping continued through June 1966 and was revealed in 1968.[264]
Immigration
During the 1960 campaign Kennedy proposed an overhaul of American immigration and naturalization laws to ban discrimination based on national origin. He saw this proposal as an extension of his planned civil rights agenda as president.[265] These reforms later became law through the Immigration and Nationality Act of 1965, which dramatically shifted the source of immigration from Northern and Western European countries towards immigration from Latin America and Asia. The policy change also shifted the emphasis in the selection of immigrants in favor of family reunification. The late-president's brother, Senator Edward Kennedy helped steer the legislation through the Senate.[266]
Native American relations
Further information: Kinzua Dam § Native Americans, and Seneca nation § Kinzua Dam
Construction of the Kinzua Dam flooded 10,000 acres (4,047 ha) of Seneca nation land that they had occupied under the Treaty of 1794, and forced 600 Seneca to relocate to Salamanca, New York. Kennedy was asked by the American Civil Liberties Union to intervene and to halt the project, but he declined, citing a critical need for flood control. He expressed concern about the plight of the Seneca, and directed government agencies to assist in obtaining more land, damages, and assistance to help mitigate their displacement.[267][268]
Space policy
Further information: Space Race and Space policy of the United States
The Apollo program was conceived early in 1960, during the Eisenhower administration, as a follow-up to Project Mercury, to be used as a shuttle to an Earth-orbital space station, flights around the Moon, or landing on it. While NASA went ahead with planning for Apollo, funding for the program was far from certain, given Eisenhower's ambivalent attitude to manned spaceflight.[269] As senator, Kennedy had been opposed to the space program and wanted to terminate it.[270]
In constructing his Presidential administration, Kennedy elected to retain Eisenhower's last science advisor Jerome Wiesner as head of the President's Science Advisory Committee. Wiesner was strongly opposed to manned space exploration,[271] having issued a report highly critical of Project Mercury.[272][273] Kennedy was turned down by seventeen candidates for NASA administrator before the post was accepted by James E. Webb, an experienced Washington insider who served President Harry S. Truman as budget director and undersecretary of state. Webb proved to be adept at obtaining the support of Congress, the President, and the American people.[274] Kennedy also persuaded Congress to amend the National Aeronautics and Space Act to allow him to delegate his chairmanship of the National Aeronautics and Space Council to the Vice President, [274][275] both because of the knowledge of the space program Johnson gained in the Senate working for the creation of NASA, and to help keep the politically savvy Johnson occupied.[274]
In Kennedy's January 1961 State of the Union address, he had suggested international cooperation in space. Khrushchev declined, as the Soviets did not wish to reveal the status of their rocketry and space capabilities.[276] Early in his presidency, Kennedy was poised to dismantle the manned space program, but postponed any decision out of deference to Johnson, who had been a strong supporter of the space program in the Senate.[270] Kennedy's advisors speculated that a Moon flight would be prohibitively expensive,[277] and he was considering plans to dismantle the Apollo program due to its cost.[278]




Kennedy proposing a program to Congress that will land men on the Moon, May 1961. Johnson and Sam Rayburn are seated behind him.


However, this quickly changed on April 12, 1961, when Soviet cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin became the first person to fly in space, reinforcing American fears about being left behind in a technological competition with the Soviet Union.[279] Kennedy now became eager for the U.S. to take the lead in the Space Race, for reasons of strategy and prestige. On April 20, he sent a memo to Johnson, asking him to look into the status of America's space program, and into programs that could offer NASA the opportunity to catch up.[280][281] After consulting with Wernher von Braun, Johnson responded approximately one week later, concluding that "we are neither making maximum effort nor achieving results necessary if this country is to reach a position of leadership."[282][283] His memo concluded that a manned Moon landing was far enough in the future that it was likely the United States would achieve it first.[282] Kennedy's advisor Ted Sorensen advised him to support the Moon landing, and on May 25, Kennedy announced the goal in a speech titled "Special Message to the Congress on Urgent National Needs":

... I believe that this nation should commit itself to achieving the goal, before this decade is out, of landing a man on the Moon and returning him safely to the Earth. No single space project in this period will be more impressive to mankind, or more important for the long-range exploration of space; and none will be so difficult or expensive to accomplish.[284] Full text 



Play media


Kennedy speaks at Rice University, September 12, 1962 (duration 17:47)


After Congress authorized the funding, Webb began reorganizing NASA, increasing its staffing level, and building two new centers: a Launch Operations Center for the large Moon rocket northwest of Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, and a Manned Spacecraft Center on land donated through Rice University in Houston, Texas. Kennedy took the latter occasion as an opportunity to deliver another speech at Rice to promote the space effort on September 12, 1962, in which he said:

No nation which expects to be the leader of other nations can expect to stay behind in this race for space. ... We choose to go to the Moon in this decade and do the other things, not because they are easy, but because they are hard.[285] Full text 

On November 21, 1962, in a cabinet meeting with NASA administrator Webb and other officials, Kennedy explained that the Moon shot was important for reasons of international prestige, and that the expense was justified.[286] Johnson assured him that lessons learned from the space program had military value as well. Costs for the Apollo program were expected to reach $40 billion.[287]
In a September 1963 speech before the United Nations, Kennedy urged cooperation between the Soviets and Americans in space, specifically recommending that Apollo be switched to "a joint expedition to the Moon".[288] Khrushchev again declined, and the Soviets did not commit to a manned Moon mission until 1964.[289] On July 20, 1969, almost six years after Kennedy's death, Apollo 11 landed the first manned spacecraft on the Moon.
Administration, Cabinet, and judicial appointments


The Kennedy Cabinet


Office
Name
Term





President
John F. Kennedy
1961–1963





Vice President
Lyndon B. Johnson
1961–1963





Secretary of State
Dean Rusk
1961–1963





Secretary of Treasury
C. Douglas Dillon
1961–1963





Secretary of Defense
Robert McNamara
1961–1963





Attorney General
Robert F. Kennedy
1961–1963





Postmaster General
J. Edward Day
1961–1963


John A. Gronouski
1963





Secretary of the Interior
Stewart Udall
1961–1963





Secretary of Agriculture
Orville Freeman
1961–1963





Secretary of Commerce
Luther H. Hodges
1961–1963





Secretary of Labor
Arthur Goldberg
1961–1962


W. Willard Wirtz
1962–1963





Secretary of Health,
Education, and Welfare
Abraham A. Ribicoff
1961–1962


Anthony J. Celebrezze
1962–1963






The official White House portrait of John F. Kennedy, painted by Aaron Shikler



Judicial appointments
Supreme Court
Main article: John F. Kennedy Supreme Court candidates
Further information: List of nominations to the Supreme Court of the United States
Kennedy appointed the following Justices to the Supreme Court of the United States:

Byron White – 1962
Arthur Goldberg – 1962

Other courts
Main article: List of federal judges appointed by John F. Kennedy
In addition to his two Supreme Court appointments, Kennedy appointed 21 judges to the United States Courts of Appeals, and 102 judges to the United States district courts.
Assassination
Main article: Assassination of John F. Kennedy




The Kennedys and the Connallys in the presidential limousine moments before the assassination in Dallas


President Kennedy was assassinated in Dallas, Texas, at 12:30 pm Central Standard Time on Friday, November 22, 1963, while on a political trip to Texas to smooth over frictions in the Democratic Party between liberals Ralph Yarborough and Don Yarborough (no relation) and conservative John Connally.[290] Traveling in a presidential motorcade through downtown Dallas, he was shot once in the back, the bullet exiting via his throat,[291] and once in the head.[291]
Kennedy was taken to Parkland Hospital for emergency medical treatment, where he was pronounced dead 30 minutes later. He was 46 years old and had been in office for 1,036 days. Lee Harvey Oswald, an order filler at the Texas School Book Depository from which the shots were suspected to have been fired, was arrested for the murder of police officer J.D. Tippit, and was subsequently charged with Kennedy's assassination. He denied shooting anyone, claiming he was a patsy,[292][293] and was killed by Jack Ruby on November 24, before he could be prosecuted. Ruby was arrested and convicted for the murder of Oswald. Ruby successfully appealed his conviction and death sentence but became ill and died of cancer on January 3, 1967, while the date for his new trial was being set.
President Johnson quickly issued an executive order to create the Warren Commission—chaired by Chief Justice Earl Warren—to investigate the assassination. The commission concluded that Oswald acted alone in killing Kennedy and that Oswald was not part of any conspiracy.[294] The results of this investigation are disputed by many.[295] The assassination proved to be a pivotal moment in U.S. history because of its impact on the nation, and the ensuing political repercussions. A 2004 Fox News poll found that 66% of Americans thought there had been a conspiracy to kill President Kennedy, while 74% thought that there had been a cover-up.[296] A Gallup Poll in mid-November 2013, showed 61% believed in a conspiracy, and only 30% thought that Oswald did it alone.[297] In 1979, the U.S. House Select Committee on Assassinations concluded that it believed "that Kennedy was probably assassinated as a result of a conspiracy. The committee was unable to identify the other gunmen or the extent of the conspiracy."[298] In 2002, historian Carl M. Brauer concluded that the public's "fascination with the assassination may indicate a psychological denial of Kennedy's death, a mass wish...to undo it."[294]
Funeral
Main article: State funeral of John F. Kennedy




President Kennedy's family leaving his funeral at the U.S. Capitol Building


A Requiem Mass was celebrated for Kennedy at the Cathedral of St. Matthew the Apostle on November 25, 1963. The funeral was officiated by Father John J. Cavanaugh.[299] Afterwards, Kennedy was interred in a small plot, (20 by 30 ft.), in Arlington National Cemetery. Over a period of three years (1964–1966), an estimated 16 million people visited his grave. On March 14, 1967, Kennedy's remains were disinterred and moved only a few feet away to a permanent burial plot and memorial. It was from this memorial that the graves of both Robert and Ted Kennedy were modeled.
The honor guard at Kennedy's graveside was the 37th Cadet Class of the Irish Army. Kennedy was greatly impressed by the Irish Cadets on his last official visit to Ireland, so much so that Jackie Kennedy requested the Irish Army to be the honor guard at her husband's funeral.[300]
Kennedy's wife Jacqueline and their two deceased minor children were later interred in the same plot. JFK's brother Robert was buried nearby in June 1968. In August 2009, Ted was also buried near his two brothers. John F. Kennedy's grave is lit with an "Eternal Flame". Kennedy and William Howard Taft are the only two U.S. presidents buried at Arlington.[301][302] According to the JFK Library, "I Have a Rendezvous with Death", by Alan Seeger "was one of John F. Kennedy's favorite poems and he often asked his wife to recite it".[303]
Personal life, family, and reputation
Further information: Kennedy family




The Kennedy family in Hyannis Port, Massachusetts, in 1963


The Kennedy family is one of the most established political families in the United States, having produced a president, three senators, an ambassador, and multiple other representatives, both at the federal and state level. While a Congressman, Kennedy embarked on a seven-week trip to India, Japan, Vietnam, and Israel in 1951, at which point he became close with his then 25-year-old brother Bobby, as well as his 27-year-old sister Pat. Because they were several years apart in age, the brothers had previously seen little of each other. This 25,000-mile (40,000 km) trip was the first extended time they had spent together and resulted in their becoming best friends.[304] Robert would play a major role in his brother's career, and he served as his brother's Attorney General and presidential advisor.[304] Robert would later run for president in 1968 before his assassination, while another Kennedy brother, Ted, ran for president in 1980.
Kennedy came in third (behind Martin Luther King, Jr. and Mother Teresa) in Gallup's List of Widely Admired People of the 20th century.[305][306] Kennedy was a life member of the National Rifle Association.[307][308]
Wife and children




The First Family in 1962


Kennedy met his future wife, Jacqueline Lee "Jackie" Bouvier (1929–1994), when he was a congressman. Charles L. Bartlett, a journalist, introduced the pair at a dinner party.[309] They were married a year after he was elected senator, on September 12, 1953.[310] Their second child Caroline was born in 1957 and is the only surviving member of JFK's immediate family. John Fitzgerald Kennedy Jr., nicknamed "John-John" by the press as a child, was born in late November 1960, 17 days after his father was elected. John Jr., a graduate of Brown University, died in 1999 when the small plane he was piloting crashed en route to Martha's Vineyard.[311]
Popular image




The Kennedy brothers: Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy, Senator Ted Kennedy, and President John F. Kennedy in 1963


Kennedy and his wife were younger in comparison to the presidents and first ladies who preceded them, and both were popular in the media culture in ways more common to pop singers and movie stars than politicians, influencing fashion trends and becoming the subjects of numerous photo spreads in popular magazines. Although Eisenhower had allowed presidential press conferences to be filmed for television, Kennedy was the first president to ask for them to be broadcast live and made good use of the medium.[312] In 1961 the Radio-Television News Directors Association presented Kennedy with its highest honor, the Paul White Award, in recognition of his open relationship with the media.[313]
Mrs. Kennedy brought new art and furniture to the White House, and directed its restoration. They invited a range of artists, writers and intellectuals to rounds of White House dinners, raising the profile of the arts in America. On the White House lawn, the Kennedys established a swimming pool and tree house, while Caroline attended a preschool along with 10 other children inside the home.
The president was closely tied to popular culture, emphasized by songs such as "Twisting at the White House". Vaughn Meader's First Family comedy album, which parodied the president, the first lady, their family, and the administration, sold about four million copies. On May 19, 1962, Marilyn Monroe sang "Happy Birthday, Mr. President" at a large party in Madison Square Garden, celebrating Kennedy's upcoming forty-fifth birthday.
"Camelot Era"
For other uses, see Camelot and King Arthur.
The term "Camelot" came to be used retrospectively as iconic of the Kennedy administration, and the charisma of Kennedy and his family. The term was first publicly used by his wife in a post-assassination Life magazine interview with Theodore H. White, in which she revealed his affection for the contemporary Broadway musical of the same name, particularly the closing lines of the title song:[314]

Don't let it be forgot, that once there was a spot, for one brief, shining moment that was known as Camelot.
"There'll be great presidents again ... but there will never be another Camelot."
— Jacqueline Kennedy[315]

Health
In 2002 Robert Dallek wrote an extensive history of Kennedy's health. Dallek was able to consult a collection of Kennedy-associated papers from the years 1955–1963, including X-rays and prescription records from the files of White House physician Dr. Janet Travell. According to Travell's records, during his presidential years Kennedy suffered from high fevers; stomach, colon, and prostate issues; abscesses; high cholesterol; and adrenal problems. Travell kept a "Medicine Administration Record," cataloguing Kennedy's medications: "injected and ingested corticosteroids for his adrenal insufficiency; procaine shots and ultrasound treatments and hot packs for his back; Lomotil, Metamucil, paregoric, phenobarbital, testosterone, and trasentine to control his diarrhea, abdominal discomfort, and weight loss; penicillin and other antibiotics for his urinary-tract infections and an abscess; and Tuinal to help him sleep."[12]
Years after Kennedy's death, it was revealed that in September 1947, while Kennedy was 30 and in his first term in Congress, he was diagnosed by Sir Daniel Davis at The London Clinic with Addison's disease, a rare endocrine disorder. In 1966 Dr. Travell revealed that Kennedy also had hypothyroidism. The presence of two endocrine diseases raises the possibility that Kennedy had autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type 2 (APS 2).[316]
Kennedy also suffered from chronic and severe back pain, for which he had surgery and was written up in the American Medical Association's Archives of Surgery. Kennedy's condition may have had diplomatic repercussions, as he appears to have been taking a combination of drugs to treat severe back pain during the 1961 Vienna Summit with Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev. The combination included hormones, animal organ cells, steroids, vitamins, enzymes, and amphetamines, and possible potential side effects included hyperactivity, hypertension, impaired judgment, nervousness, and mood swings.[317] Kennedy at one time was regularly seen by no fewer than three doctors, one of whom, Max Jacobson, was unknown to the other two, as his mode of treatment was controversial[318] and used for the most severe bouts of back pain.[319]
Into late 1961, there were disagreements among Kennedy's doctors concerning his proper balance of medication and exercise. The president preferred the former, because he was short on time and desired immediate relief.[205] During that time frame, the president's physician, George Burkley, did set up some gym equipment in the White House basement, where Kennedy did stretching exercises for his back three times a week.[320] Details of these and other medical problems were not publicly disclosed during Kennedy's lifetime.[321] The President's primary White House physician, George Burkley, realized that treatments by Jacobson and Travell, including the excessive use of steroids and amphetamines, were medically inappropriate, and took effective action to remove the president from their care.[322] It was later observed that President Kennedy's leadership (e.g. the 1962 Cuban Missile crisis and other events during 1963) improved greatly once the treatments of Jacobson had been discontinued and been replaced by a medically appropriate regimen under Burkley. Dr. Ghaemi, who studied Kennedy's medical records, concluded there was a "correlation; it is not causation; but it may not be coincidence either".[322]
Personal tragedies
Main article: Kennedy curse




The newlyweds surrounded by Jack's siblings on their wedding day in Newport, Rhode Island in 1953


Kennedy experienced a number of family tragedies. His older brother Joseph P. Kennedy Jr. was killed in action in 1944 at age 29, when his plane exploded over the English Channel during a first attack execution of Operation Aphrodite during World War II.[323] Kennedy's younger sister Rose Marie "Rosemary" Kennedy was born in 1918 with intellectual disabilities and underwent a prefrontal lobotomy at age 23, leaving her permanently incapacitated. His younger sister Kathleen Agnes "Kick" Kennedy died in France as the result of a plane crash in 1948. His wife Jacqueline Kennedy suffered a miscarriage in 1955 and a stillbirth in 1956: a daughter informally named Arabella.[324] A son, Patrick Bouvier Kennedy, died two days after birth in August 1963.
Affairs and extramarital relationships




Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy, Marilyn Monroe, President Kennedy (back to camera) in 1962


Kennedy was single in the 1940s when he had affairs with Danish journalist Inga Arvad[325] and actress Gene Tierney.[326] Before and after he assumed the presidency, Kennedy reportedly had extramarital affairs with a number of women, including Marilyn Monroe,[327] Gunilla von Post,[328] Judith Campbell,[329] Mary Pinchot Meyer,[330] Marlene Dietrich,[331] Mimi Alford,[332] and his wife's press secretary, Pamela Turnure.[333]
The extent of Kennedy's relationship with Monroe is not fully known, although it has been reported that they spent a weekend together in March 1962 while he was staying at Bing Crosby's house.[334] Furthermore, people at the White House switchboard noted that Monroe had called Kennedy during 1962.[335] J. Edgar Hoover, the FBI director, received reports about Kennedy's indiscretions.[336]
Kennedy inspired affection and loyalty from the members of his team and his supporters.[337] According to Reeves, this included "the logistics of Kennedy's liaisons.....[which] required secrecy and devotion rare in the annals of the energetic service demanded by successful politicians."[338] Kennedy believed that his friendly relationship with members of the press would help protect him from public revelations about his sex life.[339]
Historical evaluations and legacy
The US Special Forces had a special bond with Kennedy. "It was President Kennedy who was responsible for the rebuilding of the Special Forces and giving us back our Green Beret," said Forrest Lindley, a writer for the US military newspaper Stars and Stripes who served with Special Forces in Vietnam.[a] This bond was shown at Kennedy's funeral. At the commemoration of the 25th anniversary of Kennedy's death, General Michael D. Healy, the last commander of Special Forces in Vietnam, spoke at Arlington Cemetery. Later, a wreath in the form of the Green Beret would be placed on the grave, continuing a tradition that began the day of his funeral when a sergeant in charge of a detail of Special Forces men guarding the grave placed his beret on the coffin.[340] Kennedy was the first of six presidents to have served in the U.S. Navy,[341] and one of the enduring legacies of his administration was the creation in 1961 of another special forces command, the Navy SEALs,[342] which Kennedy enthusiastically supported.[343]
Kennedy's civil rights proposals led to the Civil Rights Act of 1964.[344] President Lyndon B. Johnson, Kennedy's successor, took up the mantle and pushed the landmark Civil Rights Act through a bitterly divided Congress by invoking the slain president's memory.[345][346] President Johnson then signed the Act into law on July 2, 1964. This civil rights law ended what was known as the "Solid South" and certain provisions were modeled after the Civil Rights Act of 1875, signed into law by President Ulysses S. Grant.[347]




The dedication of a new forever stamp to honor what would be President John F. Kennedy's 100th birthday


Kennedy's continuation of Presidents Harry S. Truman and Dwight D. Eisenhower's policies of giving economic and military aid to South Vietnam left the door open for President Johnson's escalation of the conflict.[348] At the time of Kennedy's death, no final policy decision had been made as to Vietnam, leading historians, cabinet members, and writers to continue to disagree on whether the Vietnam conflict would have escalated to the point it did had he survived.[349][164] His agreement to the NSAM 263[161] action of withdrawing 1,000 troops by the end of 1963, and his earlier 1963 speech at American University,[163] suggest that he was ready to end the Vietnam War. The Vietnam War contributed greatly to a decade of national difficulties, amid violent disappointment on the political landscape.
Many of Kennedy's speeches (especially his inaugural address) are considered iconic; and despite his relatively short term in office, and the lack of major legislative changes coming to fruition during his term, Americans regularly vote him as one of the best presidents, in the same league as Abraham Lincoln, George Washington, and Franklin D. Roosevelt. Some excerpts of Kennedy's inaugural address are engraved on a plaque at his grave at Arlington.
He was posthumously awarded the Pacem in Terris Award (Latin: Peace on Earth). It was named after a 1963 encyclical letter by Pope John XXIII that calls upon all people of goodwill to secure peace among all nations.
Kennedy is the only president to have predeceased both his mother and father. He is also the only president to have predeceased a grandparent. His maternal grandmother, Mary Josephine "Josie" Hannon, died in August 1964, nine months after his assassination.
Throughout the English-speaking world, the given name Kennedy has sometimes been used in honor of President Kennedy, as well his brother Robert.[350]
Effect of assassination
Television became the primary source by which people were kept informed of events surrounding John F. Kennedy's assassination. In fact, television started to come of age before the assassination. On September 2, 1963, Kennedy helped inaugurate network television's first half-hour nightly evening newscast according to an interview with CBS Evening News anchor Walter Cronkite.[351]




Kennedy on a U.S. postage stamp, issue of 1967


Newspapers were kept as souvenirs rather than sources of updated information. In this sense his assassination was the first major TV news event of its kind. TV coverage united the nation, interpreting what went on, and creating memories of this space in time. All three major U.S. television networks suspended their regular schedules and switched to all-news coverage from November 22 through November 26, 1963, being on the air for 70 hours, making it the longest uninterrupted news event on American TV until 9/11.[352]
The assassination had an effect on many people, not only in the U.S. but around the world. Many vividly remember where they were when they first learned the news that Kennedy was assassinated, as with the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor on December 7, 1941, before it and the September 11 attacks after it. UN Ambassador Adlai Stevenson said of the assassination: "all of us..... will bear the grief of his death until the day of ours." Many people have also spoken of the shocking news, compounded by the pall of uncertainty about the identity of the assassin(s), the possible instigators, and the causes of the killing, as an end to innocence, and in retrospect it has been coalesced with other changes of the tumultuous decade of the 1960s, especially the Vietnam War.
Ultimately, the death of President Kennedy, and the ensuing confusion surrounding the facts of his assassination, are of political and historical importance insofar as they marked a turning point and decline in the faith of the American people in the political establishment—a point made by commentators from Gore Vidal to Arthur M. Schlesinger, Jr. and implied by Oliver Stone in several of his films, such as his landmark 1991 JFK.
Memorials and eponyms
Main article: Memorials to John F. Kennedy




John F. Kennedy Eternal Flame memorial



John F. Kennedy International Airport, American airport in New York City; nation's busiest international gateway
John F. Kennedy School of Government, part of Harvard University
John F. Kennedy Space Center, U.S. government installation that manages and operates America's astronaut launch facilities in Merritt Island, Florida
USS John F. Kennedy (CV-67), U.S. Navy aircraft carrier ordered in April 1964, launched May 1967, decommissioned August 2007; nicknamed "Big John"
USS John F. Kennedy (CVN-79), U.S. Navy aircraft carrier that began construction in 2011, and is scheduled to be placed in commission in 2020
Kennedy half dollar, a fifty-cent coin first minted in 1964

Media









Kennedy comments on the possible prevention of the Cold War





President Kennedy comments on the possible prevention of the Cold War



Kennedy's message to Turkey





Kennedy's message to Turkish President Cemal Gursel and The Turkish People on the Anniversary of the Death of Kemal Ataturk, November 10, 1963 (accompanying text)



Announcement to go to the moon





Announcement by John F. Kennedy to go to the moon (duration 11:00)



Secret Societies speech






JFK Secret Societies speech






Problems playing these files? See media help.





Play media


Newsreel footage of the inauguration ceremony and speeches



See also


Assassination of Robert F. Kennedy
Cultural depictions of John F. Kennedy
Timeline of the presidency of John F. Kennedy
Jesuit Ivy
Kennedy curse
Kennedy Doctrine
Kennedy half dollar
Lincoln–Kennedy coincidences urban legend
Operation Northwoods
Orville Nix, photographer of another film of the assassination
"Senator, you're no Jack Kennedy" retort by Senator Lloyd Bentsen, 1988 VP debate
The John F. Kennedy Memorial Park (in Ireland)
The Torch of Friendship
Abraham Zapruder, photographer of the primary film of assassination, the Zapruder film.
John F. Kennedy assassination conspiracy theories

General:

History of the United States (1945–64)
List of assassinated American politicians
List of Presidents of the United States
List of Presidents of the United States by previous experience
List of Presidents of the United States who died in office
List of United States presidential assassination attempts and plots
Presidents of the United States on U.S. postage stamps




Biography portal
United States Navy portal


Notes



^ Kennedy reversed the Defense Department rulings that prohibited the Special Forces wearing of the Green Beret. Reeves 1993, p. 116.



References
Citations


^ a b c d "John F. Kennedy Miscellaneous Information". John F. Kennedy Presidential Library & Museum. Archived from the original on August 31, 2009. Retrieved February 22, 2012. 
^ de Quesada, Alejandro The Bay of Pigs Cuba 1961 (2011) p. 17
^ "Americans Rate JFK as Top Modern President". Gallup Poll. November 15, 2013. Archived from the original on August 1, 2016. 
^ Dallek 2003, p. 20.
^ O'Brien 2005, p. 21.
^ a b "John F. Kennedy: Early Years". Retrieved April 17, 2017. 
^ Failla, Zak (November 18, 2013). "Looking Back on JFK's Time in Bronxville". The Daily Voice. Retrieved August 14, 2017. 
^ Kennedy, Edward M. (2009). True Compass: A Memoir. Twelve; First Edition edition. p. 37. ISBN 978-0446539258. 
^ "John F. Kennedy's Residences". Retrieved April 17, 2017. 
^ Dallek 2003, p. 34.
^ a b Kenney 2000, p. 11.
^ a b c Dallek, Robert (December 2002). "The Medical Ordeals of JFK". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on August 1, 2016. Retrieved March 29, 2015. 
^ "John F. Kennedy's Princeton University undergraduate alumni file". Mudd Manuscript Library Blog. Archived from the original on August 1, 2016. Retrieved December 21, 2015. 
^ Dallek 2003, p. 42.
^ Benson, Kenneth Arline (August 14, 1963). "The "House That Jack Bulit": JFK And His Late Brother Built Adobe Shack For Arizona Rancher". Retrieved August 29, 2016. 
^ Hunt, Sharon E. (May 14, 2013). "The Civilian Conservation Corps in Southern Arizona: Jack and Joe Kennedy in Arizona". The Civilian Conservation Corps in Southern Arizona. Retrieved August 29, 2016. 
^ Barkhorn, Eleanor. "JFK's Very Revealing Harvard Application Essay". 
^ "Memorial Hall Auditorium Filled to Capacity at Annual Freshman Smoker". The Harvard Crimson. May 5, 1937. Retrieved February 18, 2012. 
^ Donovan 2001, p. 7.
^ Clarke, John (May 19, 2015), "Selling J.F.K.'s Boat", The New Yorker, retrieved October 2, 2015 
^ Dallek 2003, p. 49.
^ Dallek 2003, p. 54.
^ "Obama joins list of seven presidents with Harvard degrees". Harvard Gazette. Harvard University. November 6, 2008. Archived from the original on August 1, 2016. Retrieved February 24, 2012. 
^ Dallek 2003, pp. 61–66.
^ Brinkley 2012, pp. 15–17.
^ Kenney 2000, p. 18.
^ Dallek 2003, p. 68.
^ Kenney 2000, p. 21.
^ a b "John F. Kennedy, Jr". Veteran Tributes. Archived from the original on August 1, 2016. Retrieved August 1, 2016. 
^ a b c d e f "President John Fitzgerald Kennedy (1917–1963)". Michael W. Pocock and MaritimeQuest.com. Archived from the original on August 1, 2016. Retrieved August 1, 2016. 
^ a b c d e f g h i "John Fitzgerald Kennedy 29 May 1917 – 22 November 1963". Naval History and Heritage Command. Archived from the original on August 1, 2016. Retrieved August 1, 2016. 
^ Ballard 2002, pp. 12, 36.
^ Donovan 2001, pp. 19, 20.
^ Donovan 2001, p. 20.
^ "Lieutenant John F. Kennedy, USN". Naval Historical Center. June 18, 2002. Archived from the original on September 12, 2007. Retrieved September 17, 2007. 
^ "USS PT 109". Michael W. Pocock and MaritimeQuest.com. Archived from the original on August 1, 2016. Retrieved August 1, 2016. 
^ Donovan 2001, pp. 99, 100.
^ "USS PT-109 Final Crew List". Michael W. Pocock and MaritimeQuest.com. Archived from the original on August 1, 2016. Retrieved August 1, 2016. 
^ Donovan 2001, pp. 105, 106.
^ Donovan 2001, pp. 106–107, 119.
^ Donovan 2001, p. 124.
^ Donovan 2001, pp. 125–126, 141–142, 162–164.
^ "Leonard Jay "Lenny" Thom (1917–1946)". Michael W. Pocock and MaritimeQuest.com. Archived from the original on December 8, 2015. Retrieved August 1, 2016. 
^ "The Story of Leonard Jay Thom. (Executive Officer PT 109)". petertare.org. Archived from the original on August 1, 2016. Retrieved August 1, 2016. 
^ "John F. Kennedy and PT 109". John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum. Archived from the original on August 1, 2016. Retrieved August 1, 2016. 
^ a b "John F. Kennedy Received "Non-Combat" Recognition for Wartime Action". Defense Media Network, Faircount Media Group. Archived from the original on August 1, 2016. Retrieved August 1, 2016. 
^ Donovan 2001, pp. 172–184.
^ "Record of John F. Kennedy's Naval Service". Naval History & Heritage Command. June 18, 2002. Archived from the original on May 27, 2012. Retrieved June 8, 2012. 
^ O'Brien 2005, pp. 179, 180.
^ "Peoria Open Space Master Plan: Chapter 4 - Historic and Cultural Resources" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on February 1, 2014. Retrieved January 22, 2014. 
^ a b "JFK: A Timeline of His Life 1917–1963". St. Petersburg Times. Archived from the original on August 1, 2016. Retrieved August 1, 2016. 
^ "Lt. John F. Kennedy's WWII Medals: Navy Marine Corps Medal and Purple Heart". John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum. Archived from the original on August 1, 2016. Retrieved August 1, 2016. 
^ "Joseph Kennedy Jr". A+E Networks Corp. Archived from the original on August 1, 2016. Retrieved August 1, 2016. 
^ Dallek 2003, p. 98.
^ "Citation for the Navy Marine Corps Medal". John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum. Retrieved 3 August 2016. 
^ O'Brien 2005, p. 180.
^ Dallek 2003, p. 104.
^ Dallek 2003, p. 118.
^ Brinkley 2012, pp. 24–26.
^ Brinkley 2012, pp. 26–29.
^ Brinkley 2012, pp. 29–31.
^ a b "John F. Kennedy". Retrieved January 16, 2017. 
^ Kenney 2000, p. 29.
^ a b Edward Smith, Dr. Jean (March 1967). "Kennedy and Defense The formative years". Air University Review. Retrieved September 18, 2007. 
^ Tofel, Richard J. (May 9, 2008). "Wall Street Journal, May 9, 2008, p. W3, review of Counselor, by Ted Sorensen". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved March 28, 2010. 
^ Brinkley 2012, pp. 34–35.
^ Shaw, John T. "JFK in the Senate: Pathway to the Presidency". Macmillan. Retrieved August 3, 2016. 
^ a b O'Brien 2005, p. 370.
^ O'Brien 2005, pp. 370, 371.
^ O'Brien 2005, p. 372.
^ O'Brien 2005, p. 374.
^ "The U.S. Senator John F. Kennedy Story". jfklibrary.org. Archived from the original on August 2, 2016. Retrieved August 25, 2015. 
^ Brinkley 2012, pp. 35–36.
^ O'Brien 2005, pp. 274–79, 394–99.
^ Brinkley 2012, pp. 38–45.
^ Brinkley 2012, pp. 45–47.
^ Brinkley 2012, p. 47.
^ Kennedy, John F. (July 15, 1960). "Address of Senator John F. Kennedy Accepting the Democratic Party Nomination for the Presidency of the United States". John F. Kennedy Presidential Library. Retrieved August 2, 2016. 
^ Brinkley 2012, p. 49.
^ Kennedy, John F. (June 18, 2002). "Address to the Greater Houston Ministerial Association". American Rhetoric. Archived from the original on August 2, 2016. Retrieved September 17, 2007. 
^ Reeves 1993, p. 15.
^ Tyner Allen, Erika. "The Kennedy-Nixon Presidential Debates, 1960". museum.tv. Retrieved September 18, 2007. 
^ a b Dudley & Shiraev 2008, p. 83.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 21.
^ a b Kennedy, John F. (January 20, 1961). "Inaugural Address". John F. Kennedy Presidential Library. Archived from the original on January 11, 2012. Retrieved February 22, 2012. 
^ Kempe 2011, p. 52.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 22.
^ Reeves 1993, pp. 23, 25.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 56.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 66.
^ Art, Robert J. (1968). The TFX decision; McNamara and the military. Boston: Little, Brown. pp. ix–xi. OCLC 294546. 
^ Shapley, Deborah (1993). Promise and power: the life and times of Robert McNamara. Boston: Little, Brown. pp. 202–223. ISBN 0-316-78280-7. 
^ "10 Things You May Not Know About John F. Kennedy". 
^ Kempe 2011, pp. 76–78.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 145.
^ Reeves 1993, pp. 161–171.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 175.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 185.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 201.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 213.
^ "Remarks of Senator John F. Kennedy at Saint Anselm's College, Manchester, New Hampshire, March 5, 1960". JFKlibrary.org. John F. Kennedy Presidential Library & Museum. March 5, 1960. Archived from the original on August 2, 2016. Retrieved March 28, 2010. 
^ Schlesinger 2002, pp. 233, 238.
^ Gleijeses (1995), pp. 9–19
^ Reeves 1993, pp. 69–73.
^ Reeves 1993, pp. 71, 673.
^ Schlesinger 2002, pp. 268–294, 838–839.
^ Jean Edward Smith, "Bay of Pigs: The Unanswered Questions", The Nation, April 13, 1964.
^ Reeves 1993, pp. 95–97.
^ Schlesinger 2002, pp. 290, 295.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 264.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 345.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 245.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 387.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 388.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 389.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 390.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 403.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 426.
^ Kenney 2000, pp. 184–186.
^ Kenney 2000, p. 189.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 425.
^ JFK's "Address on the First Anniversary of the Alliance for Progress", White House reception for diplomatic cors of the Latin American republics, March 13, 1962. Public Papers of the Presidents – John F. Kennedy (1962), p. 223.
^ Schlesinger 2002, pp. 788, 789.
^ Reeves 1993, pp. 140–142.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 152.
^ Dallek 2003, pp. 338–339.
^ Schlesinger 2002, pp. 606–607.
^ Meisler, Stanley (2011). When the World Calls: The Inside Story of the Peace Corps and Its First Fifty Years. Beacon Press. ISBN 978-0807050491. 
^ "Peace Corps, Fast Facts". Archived from the original on August 2, 2016. Retrieved August 2, 2016. 
^ Reeves 1993, p. 75.
^ Karnow 1991, pp. 230, 268.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 119.
^ Dunnigan & Nofi 1999, p. 257.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 240.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 242.
^ "Brief Overview of Vietnam War". Swarthmore College Peace Collection. Archived from the original on August 3, 2016. Retrieved August 2, 2016. 
^ "Vietnam War Allied Troop Levels 1960–73". The American War Library. Archived from the original on August 2, 2016. Retrieved August 2, 2016. 
^ Tucker 2011, p. 1070.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 281.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 259.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 283.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 484.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 558.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 559.
^ Reeves 1993, pp. 562–563.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 573.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 577.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 560.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 595.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 602.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 609.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 610.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 613.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 617.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 650.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 651.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 660.
^ Ellis, Joseph J. (2000). "Making Vietnam History". Reviews in American History. 28 (4): 625–629. doi:10.1353/rah.2000.0068. 
^ Talbot, David (June 21, 2007). "Warrior For Peace". Time Magazine. Retrieved March 1, 2012. 
^ Blight & Lang 2005, p. 276.
^ a b Bundy, McGeorge (October 11, 1963). "National Security Action Memorandum # 263". JFK Lancer. Archived from the original on August 3, 2016. Retrieved February 19, 2012. 
^ Dallek 2003, p. 680.
^ a b "Marking the 50th Anniversary of JFK's Speech on Campus". American University. Retrieved August 2, 2016. 
^ a b Matthews 2011, pp. 393, 394.
^ a b Sorensen 1966, p. 359.
^ Karnow 1991, pp. 339, 343.
^ "Generations Divide Over Military Action in Iraq". Pew Research Center. October 2002. Archived from the original on February 2, 2008. 
^ Bundy, McGeorge (November 26, 1963). "National Security Action Memorandum Number 273". JFK Lancer. Retrieved February 19, 2012. 
^ "NSAM 273: South Vietnam". Archived from the original on August 3, 2016. Retrieved February 19, 2012. 
^ Mufson, Steve (August 4, 2015). "Obama will echo Kennedy's American University nuclear speech from 1963". The Washington Post. Retrieved August 6, 2015. 
^ Wang, Joy Y. (August 4, 2015). "Obama to follow in John F. Kennedy's historic footsteps". msnbc.com. msnbc.com. Archived from the original on August 3, 2016. Retrieved August 6, 2015. 
^ Reeves 1993, pp. 513–514.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 514.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 534.
^ Gehler, Michael; Kaiser, Professor of European Studies Wolfram; Kaiser, Wolfram (August 2, 2004). Christian Democracy in Europe Since 19455. ISBN 9781135753856. 
^ Geis, Anna; Müller, Harald; Schörnig, Niklas (October 10, 2013). The Militant Face of Democracy. ISBN 9781107037403. 
^ Kulski, W. W (1966). De Gaulle and the World. 
^ Ninkovich, Frank (November 15, 1994). Modernity and Power. ISBN 9780226586502. 
^ a b Dallek 2003, p. 624.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 537.
^ John F. Kennedy: "Speech by Senator John F. Kennedy, Zionists of America Convention, Statler Hilton Hotel, New York, NY," August 26, 1960
^ Shannon, Vaughn P. (2003). Balancing Act: US Foreign Policy and the Arab-Israeli Conflict. Aldershot: Ashgate Publishing. p. 55. ISBN 0754635910. 
^ Walt, Stephen M. (1987). The Origins of Alliances, Cornell University Press, pp. 95–96
^ a b Salt 2008, p. 201.
^ a b c Salt 2008, p. 202.
^ Hersh, Samson Option, pp. 110–11
^ Trachtenberg, Marc (February 8, 1999). A Constructed Peace: The Making of the European Settlement, 1945–1963. Princeton University Press. p. 403, Appendix Eight (Chapter Nine, Note 134). Archived from the original on August 3, 2016. Retrieved November 20, 2012. 
^ Hersh, Samson Option, p. 112
^ Salt 2008, p. 203.
^ Salt 2008, pp. 201–205.
^ Gibson 2015, pp. 3-5.
^ Gibson 2015, pp. 36.
^ Gibson 2015, pp. 37, 40-42.
^ Gibson 2015, pp. 43-45.
^ Gibson 2015, pp. 45, 57-58.
^ Gibson 2015, pp. 60-61, 80.
^ "President John F. Kennedy on His Historic Trip to Ireland". Shapell Manuscript Collection. Shapell Manuscript Foundation. 
^ Sorensen 1966, p. 656.
^ "1963: Warm welcome for JFK in Ireland". BBC. June 27, 1963. Archived from the original on August 3, 2016. Retrieved February 23, 2012. 
^

JFK is First Foreign Leader to Address Dáil Éireann (Text and video) RTÉ Archives, June 28, 1963.
Address Before the Irish Parliament in Dublin, June 28, 1963 (Text and audio) Kennedy Library and Museum, June 28, 1963.
President Kennedy in Ireland (Text and video) RTÉ Archives. Retrieved: 2013-07-03.
JFK Homecoming Memory Project


^ Cowell, Alan (December 29, 2006). "JFK faced 3 death threats during '63 visit to Ireland". Deseret News. Salt Lake City. New York Times News Service. Archived from the original on August 3, 2016. Retrieved February 23, 2012. 
^ Reeves 1993, p. 552.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 227.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 229.
^ a b Reeves 1993, p. 243.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 542.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 548.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 550.
^ a b Jaikumar, Arjun (July 10, 2011). "On taxes, let's be Kennedy Democrats. Or Eisenhower Republicans. Or Nixon Republicans". Daily Kos. Retrieved February 23, 2012. 
^ "Voter Education Project". kingencyclopedia.stanford.edu. 
^ "Kennedy, John Fitzgerald (1917-1963)". kingencyclopedia.stanford.edu. 
^ Ippolito, Dennis (2004). Why Budgets Matter: Budget Policy and American Politics. Penn State Press. pp. 173–175. ISBN 0-271-02260-4. 
^ Reeves 1993, p. 453.
^ Barnes 2007, p. 8.
^ Frum 2000, p. 293.
^ Frum 2000, p. 324.
^ a b c "BEA: Quarterly GDP figures by sector, 1953–1964". United States Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis. Retrieved February 23, 2012. 
^ "Consumer and Gross Domestic Price Indices: 1913 to 2002" (PDF). U.S. Census Bureau. 2003. Archived from the original (PDF) on May 11, 2005. Retrieved February 23, 2012. 
^ "Statistical Abstract of the United States, 1964" (PDF). U.S. Department of Commerce. July 1964. Retrieved March 28, 2010. 
^ Reeves 1993, p. 298.
^ "The Presidency: Smiting the Foe". TIME. April 20, 1962. 
^ a b O'Brien 2005, p. 645.
^ "Inflation in Steel". New York Times. April 12, 1962. 
^ Reeves 1993, p. 300.
^ Reeves 1993, pp. 318–320.
^ "Executions 1790 to 1963". Web.archive.org. April 13, 2003. Archived from the original on April 13, 2003. Retrieved February 23, 2012. 
^ Goldberg, Carey (May 6, 2001). "Federal Executions Have Been Rare but May Increase". The New York Times. Retrieved February 23, 2012. 
^ Riechmann, Deb (July 29, 2008). "Bush: Former Army cook's crimes warrant execution". ABC News. Associated Press. Archived from the original on July 31, 2008. Retrieved February 23, 2012. 
^ "Legislative Summary: District of Columbia". John F. Kennedy Presidential Library. Retrieved June 8, 2015. 
^ "Norton Letter to U.S. Attorney Says Death Penalty Trial That Begins Today Part of Troubling and Futile Pattern". Office of Congresswoman Eleanor Holmes Norton. January 8, 2007. Retrieved February 23, 2012. 
^ Grantham (1988), The Life and Death of the Solid South: A Political History, p. 156
^ a b Dallek 2003, pp. 292–293.
^ a b Brauer 2002, p. 487.
^ a b c d e Brauer 2002, p. 490.
^ "John F. Kennedy", Urs Swharz, Paul Hamlyn, 1964
^ Bryant 2006, pp. 60, 66.
^ Reeves 1993, pp. 123–126.
^ wikisource – Executive Order No. 10925
^ "Martin Luther King, Jr. and the Global Freedom Struggle". Stanford University. 
^ Bryant 2006, p. 71.
^ Gitlin (2009), The Ku Klux Klan: A Guide to an American Subculture, p. 29
^ Dallek 2003, p. 580.
^ "Martin Luther King, Jr. and the Global Freedom Struggle". Stanford University. 
^ Reeves 1993, p. 467.
^ In the first week of June there were 160 incidents of violence. Reeves 1993, p. 515.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 515.
^ Reeves 1993, pp. 521–523.
^ Kennedy, John F. "Civil Rights Address". AmericanRhetoric.com. Retrieved September 20, 2007. 
^ Schlesinger 2002, p. 966.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 524.
^ Cohen 2016, p. 357.
^ Goduti Jr. 2012, p. 206.
^ "John F. Kennedy: Executive Order 10980". Retrieved January 25, 2011. 
^ Reeves 1993, p. 433.
^ "The Equal Pay Act Turns 40". Archive.eeoc.gov. Archived from the original on June 26, 2012. Retrieved March 26, 2011. 
^ a b Reeves 1993, pp. 580–584.
^ Reeves 1993, pp. 599–600.
^ Reeves 1993, pp. 628–631.
^ a b Brauer 2002, p. 492.
^ a b c "Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI)". Stanford University. Retrieved August 2, 2016. 
^ "The FBI's War on King". American Public Radio. Retrieved November 13, 2015. 
^ Herst 2007, p. 372.
^ Herst 2007, pp. 372–374.
^ Garrow, David J. (July 8, 2002). "The FBI and Martin Luther King". The Atlantic Monthly. 
^ Kennedy, John F. (August 6, 1960). "From Press Office: Senator John F. Kennedy, Immigration and Naturalization Laws, Hyannis Inn Motel, Hyannis, MA". Online by Gerhard Peters and John T. Woolley, The American Presidency Project. Retrieved September 20, 2007. 
^ Ludden, Jennifer. "Q&A: Sen. Kennedy on Immigration, Then & Now". NPR. Retrieved September 20, 2007. 
^ Bilharz 2002, p. 55.
^ Kennedy, John F. (August 11, 1961). "320—Letter to the President of the Seneca Nation of Indians Concerning the Kinzua Dam on the Allegheny River". The American Presidency Project. Retrieved February 25, 2012. 
^ Murray and Cox, Apollo, p. 60.
^ a b Reeves 1993, p. 138.
^ Nelson 2009, p. 145.
^ Levine, Future of the US Space Program, p. 71.
^ Levine, Anold S. (1982). Managing NASA in the Apollo Era, chapter 27, "The Lunar Landing Decision and Its Aftermath". NASA SP-4102.
^ a b c Nelson 2009, p. 146.
^ Kenney 2000, pp. 115–116.
^ Dallek 2003, p. 502.
^ Dallek 2003, p. 392.
^ Sidey, Hugh (1964), John F. Kennedy, pp. 117–118.
^ Dallek 2003, p. 393.
^ Kennedy, John F. (April 20, 1961). "Memorandum for Vice President". The White House (Memorandum). Boston, MA: John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum. Retrieved August 1, 2013. 
^ Launius, Roger D. (July 1994). "President John F. Kennedy Memo for Vice President, 20 April 1961" (PDF). Apollo: A Retrospective Analysis (PDF). Monographs in Aerospace History Number 3. Washington, D.C.: NASA. OCLC 31825096. Retrieved August 1, 2013.  Key Apollo Source Documents.
^ a b Johnson, Lyndon B. (April 28, 1961). "Memorandum for the President". Office of the Vice President (Memorandum). Boston, MA: John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum. Retrieved August 1, 2013. 
^ Launius, Roger D. (July 1994). "Lyndon B. Johnson, Vice President, Memo for the President, 'Evaluation of Space Program,' 28 April 1961" (PDF). Apollo: A Retrospective Analysis (PDF). Monographs in Aerospace History Number 3. Washington, D.C.: NASA. OCLC 31825096. Retrieved August 1, 2013.  Key Apollo Source Documents.
^ Kennedy, John F. (1961). "Apollo Expeditions to the Moon: Chapter 2". history.nasa.gov. Retrieved February 26, 2012. 
^ Kennedy, John F. (September 12, 1962). "President John F. Kennedy: The Space Effort". Rice University. Archived from the original on July 8, 2006. Retrieved February 25, 2012. 
^ Selverstone, Marc. "JFK and the Space Race". White House Tapes–Presidential Recordings Program, Miller Center of Public Affairs, University of Virginia. Archived from the original on March 5, 2012. Retrieved February 26, 2012. 
^ Dallek 2003, p. 652–653.
^ Wikisource: John F. Kennedy's Address Before the 18th General Assembly of the United Nations
^ Dallek 2003, p. 654.
^ Russ. "26, 2009#P12844 Life in Legacy". Lifeinlegacy.com. Archived from the original on May 12, 2011. Retrieved March 28, 2010. 
^ a b Parkland Hospital doctors attending to him reported
^ Lee Oswald claiming innocence (film), Youtube.com
^ Warren Commission Hearings, vol. 20, p. 366, Kantor Exhibit No. 3—Handwritten notes made by Seth Kantor concerning events surrounding the assassination
^ a b Brauer 2002, p. 497.
^ Gus Russo and Stephen Molton "Did Castro OK the Kennedy Assassination?," American Heritage, Winter 2009.
^ Dana Blanton (June 18, 2004). "Poll: Most Believe 'Cover-Up' of JFK Assassination Facts". Fox News. 
^ "Majority in U.S. Still Believe JFK Killed in a Conspiracy: Mafia, federal government top list of potential conspirators". Gallup, Inc. November 15, 2013. Archived from the original on August 1, 2016. 
^ "Report of the Select Committee on Assassinations of the U.S. House of Representatives". U.S. House of Representatives. Retrieved November 11, 2013.
^ Bugliosi 2007, p. 211.
^ Bugliosi 2007, p. 312.
^ This Day in History 1967: JFK's body moved to permanent gravesite, History.com. Retrieved April 8, 2008.
^ "Broadcast Yourself". YouTube. Retrieved January 2, 2010. 
^ "John F. Kennedy's Favorite Poems: "I Have a Rendezvous with Death" (Seeger)". jfklibrary.org. Retrieved August 25, 2015. 
^ a b Reeves 1993, p. 29.
^ The Gallup Poll 1999. Wilmington, Delaware: Scholarly Resources Inc. 1999. pp. 248–249. 
^ "Greatest of the Century". Gallup/CNN/USA Today Poll. December 20–21, 1999. Retrieved January 5, 2007. 
^ Raymond, Emilie (2006). From my cold, dead hands: Charlton Heston and American politics. University Press of Kentucky. p. 246. ISBN 978-0-8131-2408-7. 
^ "Books for Lawyers". American Bar Association Journal: 556. 1975. 
^ Cover story, Time magazine, January 20, 1961
^ Specious allegations in 1997 by UK journalist Terry O'Hanlon Golden, Andrew (July 27, 1997). "JFK The Bigamist..... The Truth At Last; Kennedy was already married when he got wed to Jackie...." Sunday Mirror. Retrieved October 31, 2010.  and by author Seymour Hersh Reingold, Joyce (March 26, 2008). "JFK 'Secret Marriage' A Story With Legs". Palm Beach Daily News. Archived from the original on May 10, 2011. Retrieved October 31, 2010.  that Kennedy had married previously have been soundly disproven. Reeves states that Ben Bradlee, then at Newsweek, inspected FBI files on it, and confirmed the falsehood. Reeves 1993, p. 348; for further refutation, see O'Brien 2005, p. 706.
^ "Kennedy Plane Found to Be Fully Functional". The Washington Post. July 31, 1999. Retrieved January 2, 2010. 
^ Rouse, Robert (March 15, 2006). "Happy Anniversary to the first scheduled presidential press conference—93 years young!". American Chronicle. Archived from the original on September 13, 2008. 
^ "RTDNA's Kennedy connections". Radio Television Digital News Association, November 26, 2013. Retrieved May 27, 2014. 
^ The Personal Papers of Theodore H. White (1915–1986): Series 11. Camelot Documents, John F. Kennedy Presidential Library & Museum quotation:

The 1963 LIFE article represented the first use of the term "Camelot" in print and is attributed with having played a major role in establishing and fixing this image of the Kennedy Administration and period in the popular mind.


^ An Epilogue, in LIFE, Dec 6, 1963, pp.158-9
^ Mandel, Lee R. (2009). "Endocrine and Autoimmune Aspects of the Health History of John F. Kennedy". Annals of Internal Medicine. 151 (151(5)): 350–354. doi:10.7326/0003-4819-151-5-200909010-00011. PMID 19721023. 
^ Kempe 2011, p. 213.
^ New York Sun September 20, 2005: "Dr. Feelgood" Retrieved July 11, 2011
^ Reeves 1993, pp. 42, 158-159.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 244.
^ Online NewsHour with Senior Correspondent Ray Suarez and physician Jeffrey Kelman, "Pres. Kennedy's Health Secrets", The NewsHour with Jim Lehrer transcript, November 18, 2002
^ a b Ghaemi M.D., M.P.H., Nassir (September 14, 2011). "What Jackie Kennedy Didn't Say—and Didn't Know". Psychology Today. Retrieved August 22, 2016. 
^ "Operation Aphrodite ‹ HistoricWings.com :: A Magazine for Aviators, Pilots and Adventurers". historicwings.com. 
^ "The Children of Jacqueline Kennedy". www.firstladies.org. Retrieved April 16, 2016. 
^ Dallek 2003, pp. 83-85.
^ Osborne 2006, p. 195.
^ Reeves 1993, pp. 315–316.
^ Bone, James (February 17, 2010), "How JFK's Riviera romance led to years of longing", The Times, London. Retrieved April 2, 2010.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 289.
^ Dallek 2003, p. 475.
^ Dallek 2003, p. 58.
^ Garrow, David J. (May 28, 2003). "Substance Over Sex In Kennedy Biography". The New York Times. Retrieved January 20, 2013. 
^ Dallek 2003, pp. 475, 476.
^ Leaming 2006, pp. 379-380.
^ Dallek 2003, p. 581.
^ Dallek 2003, p. 376.
^ Barnes 2007, p. 116.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 291.
^ Dallek 2003, p. 478.
^ "JFK's personal connection to Army's Green Berets". CBS Interactive Inc. Retrieved August 3, 2016. 
^ "Presidents Who Served in the U.S. Navy". Frequently Asked Questions. Naval History & Heritage Command. January 11, 2007. Archived from the original on May 5, 2011. Retrieved May 12, 2011. 
^ "Navy SEALs Were Launched in the JFK 'Man on the Moon' Speech". 11 Facts About Navy SEALs. Time Inc. Retrieved May 12, 2011. [dead link]
^ Salinger, Pierre (1997). John F. Kennedy: Commander in Chief: A Profile in Leadership. New York: Penguin Studio. p. 97. ISBN 978-0-670-86310-5. Archived from the original on December 20, 2012. Retrieved February 22, 2012. 
^ Dallek 2003, pp. 594-606, 644.
^ Dallek 2003, p. 708.
^ "50 years after win, Kennedy's legacy endures". USA Today. September 26, 2010. Retrieved April 4, 2013. 
^ Walton Jr. & Smith 2000, p. 205.
^ Page, Susan (October 4, 2011). "50 years after win, Kennedy's legacy endures". USA Today. Retrieved December 25, 2011. 
^ Douthat, Ross (November 26, 2011). "The Enduring Cult of Kennedy". New York Times. Retrieved December 3, 2011. 
^ Hanks, Patrick; Hardcastle, Kate; Hodges, Flavia (2006). A Dictionary of First Names. Oxford Paperback Reference (2nd ed.). Oxford: Oxford University Press. p. 157. ISBN 978-0-19-861060-1. 
^ Cronkite, Walter (1996). A Reporter's Life. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. ISBN 0-394-57879-1. 
^ Carter, Bill (September 15, 2001). "Viewers Again Return To Traditional Networks". The New York Times. p. A14. 


Publications


Alford, Mimi; Newman, Judith (2011). Once Upon A Secret: My Affair with President John F. Kennedy and its Aftermath. London: Hutchinson. ISBN 978-0-09-193175-9. 
Ballard, Robert D. (2002). Collision With History: The Search for John F. Kennedy's PT 109. Washington, DC: National Geographic. ISBN 978-0-7922-6876-5. 
Barnes, John (2007). John F. Kennedy on Leadership. AMACOM. ISBN 978-0814474556. 
Bilharz, Joy Ann (2002) [1998]. The Allegany Senecas and Kinzua Dam: Forced Relocation Through Two Generations. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press. ISBN 978-0-8032-1282-4. 
Blight, James G.; Lang, Janet M. (2005). The Fog of War: Eleven Lessons from the Life of Robert S. McNamara. Lanham, Md.: Rowman & Littlefield. ISBN 978-0-7425-4221-1. 
Brauer, Carl M. (2002). "John F. Kennedy". In Graff, Henry. The Presidents: A Reference History (7th ed.). pp. 481–498. ISBN 0-684-80551-0. 
Brinkley, Alan (2012). John F. Kennedy. Times Books. ISBN 978-0-8050-8349-1. 
Bryant, Nick (Autumn 2006). "Black Man Who Was Crazy Enough to Apply to Ole Miss". The Journal of Blacks in Higher Education (53). 
Bugliosi, Vincent (2007). Reclaiming History: The Assassination of President John F. Kennedy. New York: Norton. ISBN 978-0-393-04525-3. 
Cohen, Andrew (2016) [2014]. Two Days in June: John F. Kennedy and the 48 Hours That Changed History (illustrated, reprint ed.). McClelland & Stewart. ISBN 9780771023897. 
Dallek, Robert (2003). An Unfinished Life: John F. Kennedy, 1917–1963. Boston, MA: Little, Brown and Co. ISBN 978-0-316-17238-7. 
Donovan, Robert J. (2001) [1961]. PT-109: John F. Kennedy in WW II (40th Anniversary ed.). McGraw Hill. ISBN 978-0-07-137643-3. 
Dudley, Robert L.; Shiraev, Eric (2008). Counting Every Vote: The Most Contentious Elections in American History. Dulles, Virginia: Potomac Books. ISBN 978-1-59797-224-6. 
Dunnigan, James; Nofi, Albert (1999). Dirty Little Secrets of the Vietnam War. St. Martin's. ISBN 978-0-312-19857-2. 
Frum, David (2000). How We Got Here: The '70s. Basic Books. ISBN 978-0-465-04196-1. 
Gibson, Bryan R. (2015). Sold Out? US Foreign Policy, Iraq, the Kurds, and the Cold War. Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 978-1-137-48711-7. 
Gleijeses, Piero (February 1995). "Ships in the Night: The CIA, the White House and the Bay of Pigs". Journal of Latin American Studies. 27 (1): 1–42. ISSN 0022-216X – via JSTOR. 
Goduti Jr., Philip A. (2012). Robert F. Kennedy and the Shaping of Civil Rights, 1960-1964. McFarland. ISBN 9781476600871. 
Herst, Burton (2007). Bobby and J. Edgar: The Historic Face-Off Between the Kennedys and J. Edgar Hoover That Transformed America. Basic Books. ISBN 978-0-7867-1982-2. 
Jewell, Elizabeth (2005). U.S. Presidents Factbook. New York: Random House. ISBN 978-0-375-72073-4. 
Karnow, Stanley (1991). Vietnam, A History. Penguin. ISBN 978-0-670-74604-0. 
Kempe, Frederick (2011). Berlin 1961. New York: G.P. Putnam's Sons. ISBN 978-0-399-15729-5. 
Kenney, Charles (2000). John F. Kennedy: The Presidential Portfolio. PublicAffairs. ISBN 978-1-891620-36-2. 
Leaming, Barbara (2006). Jack Kennedy: The Education of a Statesman. W. W. Norton. ISBN 978-0-393051-61-2. 
Maier, Thomas (2004). The Kennedys: America's Emerald Kings. 
Matthews, Chris (2011). Jack Kennedy: Elusive Hero. Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-1-4516-3508-9. 
McNamara, Robert S. (2000). Argument Without End: In Search of Answers to the Vietnam Tragedy. 
Nelson, Craig (2009). Rocket Men: The Epic Story of the First Men on the Moon. New York, New York: John Murray. ISBN 978-0-670-02103-1. 
O'Brien, Michael (2005). John F. Kennedy: A Biography. Thomas Dunne. ISBN 978-0-312-28129-8. 
Osborne, Robert (2006). Leading Ladies: The 50 Most Unforgettable Actresses of the Studio Era. Chronicle Books. ISBN 978-0811852487. 
Reeves, Richard (1993). President Kennedy: Profile of Power. New York: Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-0-671-64879-4. 
Salt, Jeremey (2008). The Unmaking of the Middle East: A History of Western Disorder in Arab lands. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press. ISBN 978-0-520-25551-7. 
Schlesinger, Arthur M. Jr (2002) [1965]. A Thousand Days: John F. Kennedy in the White House. Boston: Houghton Mifflin. ISBN 978-0-618-21927-8. 
Sorensen, Theodore (1966) [1965]. Kennedy (paperback). New York: Bantam. OCLC 2746832. 
Tucker, Spencer (2011) [1998]. The Encyclopedia of the Vietnam War: A Political, Social, and Military History. ABC-CLIO. ISBN 978-1851099603. 
Walton Jr., Hanes; Smith, Robert C. (2000). American Politics and the African American Quest for Universal Freedom. Addison, Wesley, Longman. ISBN 0-321-07038-0. 


Further reading






This article lacks ISBNs for the books listed in it. Please make it easier to conduct research by listing ISBNs. If the {{Cite book}} or {{citation}} templates are in use, you may add ISBNs automatically, or discuss this issue on the talk page. (January 2017)




Brauer, Carl. J (1977). John F. Kennedy and the Second Reconstruction. Columbia University Press. ISBN 9780231083676. 
Burner, David (1988). John F. Kennedy and a New Generation. Pearson Longman. ISBN 9780205603459. 
Casey, Shaun. The Making of a Catholic President: Kennedy vs. Nixon 1960 (2009)
Collier, Peter & Horowitz, David. The Kennedys (1984)
Cottrell, John. Assassination! The World Stood Still (1964)
Douglass, James W. (2008). JFK and the Unspeakable: Why He Died and Why It Matters. Maryknoll, N.Y: Orbis Books. ISBN 978-1-57075-755-6. 
Fay, Paul B., Jr. The Pleasure of His Company (1966)
Freedman, Lawrence. Kennedy's Wars: Berlin, Cuba, Laos and Vietnam (2000)
Fursenko, Aleksandr and Timothy Naftali. One Hell of a Gamble: Khrushchev, Castro and Kennedy, 1958–1964 (1997)
Giglio, James. The Presidency of John F. Kennedy (1991)
Hamilton, Nigel. JFK: Reckless Youth (1992)
Harper, Paul, and Krieg, Joann P. eds. John F. Kennedy: The Promise Revisited (1988)
Harris, Seymour E. The Economics of the Political Parties, with Special Attention to Presidents Eisenhower and Kennedy (1962)
Heath, Jim F. Decade of Disillusionment: The Kennedy–Johnson Years (1976)
Hersh, Seymour. The Dark Side of Camelot (1997)
Kunz, Diane B. The Diplomacy of the Crucial Decade: American Foreign Relations during the 1960s (1994)
Lynch, Grayston L. Decision for Disaster Betrayal at the Bay of Pigs (2000)
Manchester, William. Portrait of a President: John F. Kennedy in Profile (1967)
Manchester, William (1967). The Death of a President: November 20–25, 1963. New York: Harper & Row. LCCN 67010496. 
Newman, John M. JFK and Vietnam: Deception, Intrigue, and the Struggle for Power (1992)
Parmet, Herbert. Jack: The Struggles of John F. Kennedy (1980)
Parmet, Herbert. JFK: The Presidency of John F. Kennedy (1983)
Parmet, Herbert. "The Kennedy Myth". In Myth America: A Historical Anthology, Volume II. Gerster, Patrick, and Cords, Nicholas. (editors.) (1997)
Piper, Michael Collins. Final Judgment (2004: sixth edition). American Free Press
Reeves, Thomas. A Question of Character: A Life of John F. Kennedy (1991); hostile biography
Sabato, Larry J. The Kennedy Half-Century: The Lasting Legacy of John F. Kennedy (forthcoming, 2013)
Schlesinger, Arthur, Jr. Robert Kennedy And His Times (2002) [1978]
Selverstone, Marc J., ed. A Companion to John F. Kennedy (Wiley-Blackwell, 2014)
Whalen, Thomas J. JFK and His Enemies: A Portrait of Power (2014)

Primary sources

Goldzwig, Steven R. and Dionisopoulos, George N., eds. In a Perilous Hour: The Public Address of John F. Kennedy (1995)
Kennedy, Jacqueline. Jacqueline Kennedy: Historic Conversations on Life with John F. Kennedy (2011). Hyperion Books. ISBN 1401324258.

Historiography and memory

Abramson, Jill. "Kennedy, the Elusive President", The New York Times Book Review October 22, 2013, notes that 40,000 books have been published about JFK
Hellmann, John. The Kennedy Obsession: The American Myth of JFK (1997)
Kazin, Michael. "An Idol and Once a President: John F. Kennedy at 100." Journal of American History 104.3 (Dec 2017): 707-726. Comprehensive coverage of political scholarship, https://doi.org/10.1093/jahist/jax315
Santa Cruz, Paul H. Making JFK Matter: Popular Memory and the 35th President (Denton: University of North Texas Press, 2015) xxiv, 363 pp.
Selverstone, Marc J., ed. A Companion to John F. Kennedy (Wiley-Blackwell, 2014), Topical essays by scholars focusing on the historiography

External links

Find more aboutJohn F. Kennedyat Wikipedia's sister projects

Definitions from Wiktionary
Media from Wikimedia Commons
Quotations from Wikiquote
Texts from Wikisource



Official


John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum
John Fitzgerald Kennedy National Historic Site
White House biography


Media coverage


"John F. Kennedy collected news and commentary". The New York Times. 
Appearances on C-SPAN

"Life Portrait of John F. Kennedy", from C-SPAN's American Presidents: Life Portraits, November 5, 1999


Radio coverage of the assassination of President Kennedy as broadcast on WCCO-AM Radio (Minneapolis) and CBS Radio


Other



United States Congress. "John F. Kennedy (id: K000107)". Biographical Directory of the United States Congress. 
John F. Kennedy: A Resource Guide - the Library of Congress
Extensive Essays on JFK with shorter essays on each member of his cabinet and First Lady - Miller Center of Public Affairs
Kennedy Administration from Office of the Historian, United States Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.
Works by or about John F. Kennedy at Internet Archive
Works by John F. Kennedy at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) 
John F. Kennedy discography at Discogs
"John F. Kennedy". Find a Grave. Retrieved November 17, 2013. 
John F. Kennedy at Curlie (based on DMOZ)
John F. Kennedy on IMDb
John F. Kennedy (Character) on IMDb







v
t
e


John F. Kennedy






35th President of the United States (1961–1963)
U.S. Senator from Massachusetts (1953–1960)
U.S. Representative for MA-11 (1947–1953)





Presidency
(timeline)



Presidential Office: Inauguration
Cabinet
Judicial appointments

Supreme Court


Presidential pardons


Domestic policy: Clean Air Act
Communications Satellite Act
Community Mental Health Act
Equal Pay Act
Federal affirmative action
Federal housing segregation ban
Fifty-mile hikes
Food for Peace
New Frontier
Pilot Food Stamp Program
Space policy
Status of Women (Presidential Commission)
University of Alabama integration
Voter Education Project


Foreign policy: Alliance for Progress
Arms Control and Disarmament Agency

Partial Nuclear Test Ban Treaty


Flexible response
Kennedy Doctrine
Peace Corps
Trade Expansion Act
USAID
Vietnam War
Cuba: Bay of Pigs Invasion
Cuban Project
Cuban Missile Crisis

ExComm


Soviet Union: Berlin Crisis
Moscow–Washington hotline
Vienna summit


White House: Presidential limousine
Presidential yacht
Resolute desk
Situation Room





Presidential
speeches



Inaugural address
American University speech
"We choose to go to the Moon"
Report to the American People on Civil Rights
"Ich bin ein Berliner"
"A rising tide lifts all boats"





Elections



U.S. States House of Representatives elections, 1946
1948
1950
U.S. Senate election in Massachusetts, 1952
1958
1960 Presidential primaries
1960 Presidential campaign
Democratic National Convention 1956
1960
U.S. presidential election, 1960

debates







Personal life



Birthplace and childhood home
Kennedy Compound
US Navy service PT-109

Biuku Gasa and Eroni Kumana
Arthur Evans
PT-59
Castle Hot Springs


Hammersmith Farm
Coretta Scott King phone call
Rocking chair
"Happy Birthday, Mr. President"





Books



Why England Slept (1940)
Profiles in Courage (1956)
A Nation of Immigrants (1958)





Death



Assassination

timeline
reactions
in popular culture


State funeral

Riderless horse
attending dignitaries


Gravesite and Eternal Flame





Legacy



John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum (Boston)
1964 Civil Rights Act
Apollo 11 Moon landing
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
Kennedy Space Center (Florida)
Kennedy Round
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
VISTA
Cultural depictions

films
Kennedy half dollar
U.S. postage stamps
U.S. five cent stamp
Lincoln–Kennedy coincidences


Operation Sail





Memorials,
namesakes



Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts (Washington DC)
JK College (Mauritius)
Kennedy Expressway (Chicago)
JFK International Airport (New York)
JFK Memorial (Dallas)
JFK Memorial Bridge (Kentucky–Indiana)
JFK School of Government (Harvard Univ.)
JFK Special Warfare Center and School (Fort Bragg, North Carolina)
JFK University (California)
JFK Memorial (Runnymede, Britain)
Yad Kennedy (Jerusalem)
USS John F. Kennedy (CV-67)
USS John F. Kennedy (CVN-79)
MV John F. Kennedy





Family



Jacqueline Bouvier (wife)
Caroline Kennedy (daughter)
John F. Kennedy Jr.

son
plane crash


Patrick Bouvier Kennedy (son)
Jack Schlossberg (grandson)
Rose Schlossberg (granddaughter)
Tatiana Schlossberg (granddaughter)
Joseph P. Kennedy Sr. (father)
Rose Fitzgerald (mother)
Joseph P. Kennedy Jr. (brother)
Rosemary Kennedy (sister)
Kathleen Cavendish, Marchioness of Hartington (sister)
Eunice Kennedy Shriver (sister)
Patricia Kennedy Lawford (sister)
Robert F. Kennedy (brother)
Jean Kennedy Smith (sister)
Ted Kennedy (brother)
P. J. Kennedy (grandfather)
John F. Fitzgerald (grandfather)








← Dwight D. Eisenhower
Lyndon B. Johnson →


 Category










Offices and distinctions







U.S. House of Representatives


Preceded by
James Michael Curley
Member of the House of Representatives
from Massachusetts's 11th congressional district
1947–1953
Succeeded by
Tip O'Neill


Party political offices


Preceded by
David I. Walsh
Democratic nominee for U.S. Senator from Massachusetts
(Class 1)
1952, 1958
Succeeded by
Ted Kennedy


Preceded by
Adlai Stevenson II
Democratic nominee for
President of the United States
1960
Succeeded by
Lyndon B. Johnson


U.S. Senate


Preceded by
Henry Cabot Lodge, Jr.
United States Senator (Class 1) from Massachusetts
1953–1960
Served alongside: Leverett Saltonstall
Succeeded by
Benjamin A. Smith II


Political offices


Preceded by
Dwight D. Eisenhower
President of the United States
1961–1963
Succeeded by
Lyndon B. Johnson


Honorary titles


Preceded by
Unknown Soldiers of World War II
and the Korean War
Persons who have
lain in state or honor
in the United States Capitol rotunda
1963
Succeeded by
Douglas MacArthur











Articles related to John F. Kennedy











v
t
e


Presidents of the United States (list)







George Washington (1789–1797)
John Adams (1797–1801)
Thomas Jefferson (1801–1809)
James Madison (1809–1817)
James Monroe (1817–1825)
John Quincy Adams (1825–1829)
Andrew Jackson (1829–1837)
Martin Van Buren (1837–1841)
William Henry Harrison (1841)
John Tyler (1841–1845)
James K. Polk (1845–1849)
Zachary Taylor (1849–1850)
Millard Fillmore (1850–1853)
Franklin Pierce (1853–1857)
James Buchanan (1857–1861)
Abraham Lincoln (1861–1865)
Andrew Johnson (1865–1869)
Ulysses S. Grant (1869–1877)
Rutherford B. Hayes (1877–1881)
James A. Garfield (1881)
Chester A. Arthur (1881–1885)
Grover Cleveland (1885–1889)
Benjamin Harrison (1889–1893)
Grover Cleveland (1893–1897)
William McKinley (1897–1901)
Theodore Roosevelt (1901–1909)
William H. Taft (1909–1913)
Woodrow Wilson (1913–1921)
Warren G. Harding (1921–1923)
Calvin Coolidge (1923–1929)
Herbert Hoover (1929–1933)
Franklin D. Roosevelt (1933–1945)
Harry S. Truman (1945–1953)
Dwight D. Eisenhower (1953–1961)
John F. Kennedy (1961–1963)
Lyndon B. Johnson (1963–1969)
Richard Nixon (1969–1974)
Gerald Ford (1974–1977)
Jimmy Carter (1977–1981)
Ronald Reagan (1981–1989)
George H. W. Bush (1989–1993)
Bill Clinton (1993–2001)
George W. Bush (2001–2009)
Barack Obama (2009–2017)
Donald Trump (2017–present)









Presidency timelines




Wilson
Harding
Coolidge
Hoover
F. D. Roosevelt

first 100 days


Truman
Eisenhower
Kennedy
L. B. Johnson
Nixon
Ford
Carter
Reagan
G. H. W. Bush
Clinton
G. W. Bush
Obama

first 100 days


Trump

first 100 days











 Book
 Category












v
t
e


United States Democratic Party



Chairpersons
of the DNC



Hallett
McLane
Smalley
Belmont
Schell
Hewitt
Barnum
Brice
Harrity
Jones
Taggart
Mack
McCombs
McCormick
Cummings
White
Hull
Shaver
Raskob
Farley
Flynn
Walker
Hannegan
McGrath
Boyle
McKinney
Mitchell
Butler
Jackson
Bailey
O'Brien
Harris
O'Brien
Westwood
Strauss
Curtis
White
Manatt
Kirk
Brown
Wilhelm
DeLee
Dodd/Fowler
Romer/Grossman
Rendell/Andrew
McAuliffe
Dean
Kaine
Wasserman Schultz
Perez





Presidential
tickets



Jackson/Calhoun
Jackson/Van Buren
Van Buren/R. Johnson
Van Buren/None
Polk/Dallas
Cass/Butler
Pierce/King
Buchanan/Breckinridge
Douglas/H. Johnson (Breckinridge/Lane, SD)
McClellan/Pendleton
Seymour/Blair
Greeley/Brown
Tilden/Hendricks
Hancock/English
Cleveland/Hendricks
Cleveland/Thurman
Cleveland/Stevenson I
W. Bryan/Sewall
W. Bryan/Stevenson I
Parker/H. Davis
W. Bryan/Kern
Wilson/Marshall (twice)
Cox/Roosevelt
J. Davis/C. Bryan
Smith/Robinson
Roosevelt/Garner (twice)
Roosevelt/Wallace
Roosevelt/Truman
Truman/Barkley
Stevenson II/Sparkman
Stevenson II/Kefauver
Kennedy/L. Johnson
L. Johnson/Humphrey
Humphrey/Muskie
McGovern/(Eagleton, Shriver)
Carter/Mondale (twice)
Mondale/Ferraro
Dukakis/Bentsen
B. Clinton/Gore (twice)
Gore/Lieberman
Kerry/Edwards
Obama/Biden (twice)
H. Clinton/Kaine





State/
Territorial
Parties



Alabama
Alaska
Arizona
Arkansas
California
Colorado
Connecticut
Delaware
Florida
Georgia
Hawaii
Idaho
Illinois
Indiana
Iowa
Kansas
Kentucky
Louisiana
Maine
Maryland
Massachusetts
Michigan
Minnesota
Mississippi
Missouri
Montana
Nebraska
Nevada
New Hampshire
New Jersey
New Mexico
New York
North Carolina
North Dakota
Ohio
Oklahoma
Oregon
Pennsylvania
Rhode Island
South Carolina
South Dakota
Tennessee
Texas
Utah
Vermont
Virginia
Washington
West Virginia
Wisconsin
Wyoming
District of Columbia
Guam
Puerto Rico





Conventions

(List)



1832 (Baltimore)
1835 (Baltimore)
1840 (Baltimore)
1844 (Baltimore)
1848 (Baltimore)
1852 (Baltimore)
1856 (Cincinnati)
1860 (Baltimore)
1864 (Chicago)
1868 (New York)
1872 (Baltimore)
1876 (Saint Louis)
1880 (Cincinnati)
1884 (Chicago)
1888 (Saint Louis)
1892 (Chicago)
1896 (Chicago)
1900 (Kansas City)
1904 (Saint Louis)
1908 (Denver)
1912 (Baltimore)
1916 (Saint Louis)
1920 (San Francisco)
1924 (New York)
1928 (Houston)
1932 (Chicago)
1936 (Philadelphia)
1940 (Chicago)
1944 (Chicago)
1948 (Philadelphia)
1952 (Chicago)
1956 (Chicago)
1960 (Los Angeles)
1964 (Atlantic City)
1968 (Chicago)
1972 (Miami Beach)
1976 (New York)
1980 (New York)
1984 (San Francisco)
1988 (Atlanta)
1992 (New York)
1996 (Chicago)
2000 (Los Angeles)
2004 (Boston)
2008 (Denver)
2012 (Charlotte)
2016 (Philadelphia)





Affiliated
groups




Fundraising



Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee
Democratic Governors Association
Democratic Legislative Campaign Committee
Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee
National Conference of Democratic Mayors





Sectional



College Democrats of America
Democrats Abroad
National Federation of Democratic Women
Stonewall Democrats
Young Democrats of America
High School Democrats of America








Related articles



History
Primaries
Debates
Party factions
Superdelegate
2005 chairmanship election
2017 chairmanship election








 Liberalism portal












v
t
e


United States Senators from Massachusetts



Class 1



Dalton
Cabot
Goodhue
Mason
Adams
Lloyd
Gore
Ashmun
Mellen
Mills
Webster
Choate
Webster
Winthrop
Rantoul
Sumner
Washburn
Dawes
Lodge, Sr.
Butler
Walsh
Lodge
J. Kennedy
Smith
E. Kennedy
Kirk
Brown
Warren








Class 2



Strong
Sedgwick
Dexter
Foster
Pickering
Varnum
Otis
Lloyd
Silsbee
Davis
Bates
Davis
Everett
Rockwell
Wilson
Boutwell
Hoar
Crane
J. Weeks
Walsh
Gillett
Coolidge
Lodge
S. Weeks
Saltonstall
Brooke
Tsongas
Kerry
Cowan
Markey












v
t
e


Members of the U.S. House of Representatives from Massachusetts



1st district



F. Ames
Dexter
Goodhue
Holten
Sedgwick
Skinner
Sedgwick
J. Bacon
Eustis
Quincy
Ward Jr.
Mason
Gorham
Webster
Gorham
N. Appleton
Gorham
A. Lawrence
Fletcher
A. Lawrence
Winthrop
N. Appleton
Winthrop
S. Eliot
W. Appleton
Scudder
T. D. Eliot
Hall
T. D. Eliot
Buffington
Crapo
R. Davis
Randall
Wright
G. Lawrence
Treadway
Heselton
Conte
Olver
Neal









2nd district



Goodhue
Foster
W. Lyman
Sedgwick
Ward Sr.
W. Lyman
Shepard
J. Crowninshield
Story
Pickman
W. Reed
Pickering
Silsbee
Barstow
B. Crowninshield
Choate
Phillips
Saltonstall
D. King
Rantoul
Fay
Crocker
Buffington
O. Ames
Harris
Long
E. Morse
Gillett
Churchill
Bowles
Kaynor
Granfield
Clason
Furcolo
Boland
Neal
McGovern





3rd district



Gerry
Bourne
Coffin
Lyman
Mattoon
Cutler
Nelson
Livermore
White
Pickering
Nelson
Varnum
Nelson
Osgood
Cushing
A. Abbott
Duncan
Edmands
Damrell
C. Adams
Thomas
A. Rice
Twichell
Whiting I
Pierce
Field
B. Dean
Field
Ranney
L. Morse
J. Andrew
Walker
J. R. Thayer
R. Hoar
C. Washburn
J. A. Thayer
Wilder
Paige
F. Foss
Casey
Philbin
Drinan
Donohue
Early
Blute
McGovern
N. Tsongas





4th district



Sedgwick
Dearborn
G. Thatcher
Wadsworth
Foster
L. Lincoln Sr.
Hastings
Varnum
W. Richardson
Dana
Stearns
Fuller
E. Everett
Sa. Hoar
Parmenter
Thompson
Palfrey
Thompson
Sabine
Walley
Comins
A. Rice
Hooper
Frost
J. Abbott
L. Morse
Collins
O'Neil
Apsley
Weymouth
Tirrell
Mitchell
Wilder
Winslow
Stobbs
P. Holmes
Donohue
Drinan
Frank
Kennedy III





5th district



Partridge
Bourne
Freeman
L. Williams
T. Dwight
Ely
Mills
Lathrop
Sibley
J. Davis
L. Lincoln Jr.
Hudson
C. Allen
W. Appleton
Burlingame
W. Appleton
Hooper
Alley
Butler
Gooch
Banks
Bowman
L. Morse
Hayden
Banks
Sh. Hoar
Stevens
Knox
B. Ames
J. Rogers
E. Rogers
B. Morse
Cronin
P. Tsongas
Shannon
Atkins
Meehan
N. Tsongas
Markey
Clark





6th district



G. Thatcher
Leonard
J. Reed Sr.
J. Smith
Taggart
S. Allen
Locke
Kendall
Grennell
Alvord
Baker
Ashmun
G. Davis
Upham
T. Davis
Alley
Gooch
Banks
Butler
Thompson
Loring
Stone
Lovering
Lodge
Cogswell
Moody
Gardner
Lufkin
A. Andrew
G. Bates
W. Bates
Harrington
Mavroules
Torkildsen
Tierney
Moulton





7th district



Leonard
Ward Sr.
Leonard
Bullock
Bishop
Mitchell
Barker
Baylies
Turner
Baylies
Hulbert
Shaw
H. Dwight
S. Allen
Grennell
Briggs
J. Rockwell
Goodrich
Banks
Gooch
Boutwell
Brooks
Esty
E. Hoar
Tarbox
Butler
W. Russell
Stone
Cogswell
W. Everett
Barrett
Roberts
Phelan
Maloney
W. Connery
L. Connery
Lane
Macdonald
Markey
Capuano





8th district



Grout
G. Thatcher
F. Ames
Otis
Eustis
L. Williams
Green
Gardner
Green
J. Reed Jr.
Baylies
Sampson
Hobart
Lathrop
Bates
Calhoun
J. Adams
Mann
Wentworth
Knapp
Train
Baldwin
G. Hoar
J. M. S. Williams
Warren
Claflin
Candler
W Russell
C. H. Allen
Greenhalge
Stevens
McCall
Deitrick
Dallinger
H. Thayer
Dallinger
Healey
Goodwin
Macdonald
O'Neill
Kennedy II
Capuano
Lynch





9th district



Varnum
Bishop
J. Dean
Wheaton
J. Reed Jr.
Folger
J. Reed Jr.
H. Dwight
Briggs
Jackson
Hastings
H. Williams
Hale
Fowler
Little
De Witt
E. Thayer
Bailey
A. Walker
W. Washburn
Crocker
G. Hoar
W. Rice
T. Lyman
Ely
Burnett
Candler
G. Williams
O'Neil
Fitzgerald
Conry
Keliher
Murray
Roberts
Fuller
Underhill
Luce
R. Russell
Luce
T. H. Eliot
Gifford
Nicholson
Keith
McCormack
Hicks
Moakley
Lynch
Keating





10th district



Goodhue
Sewall
Read
Hastings
Upham
J. Allen
Brigham
Wheaton
Morton
F Baylies
Bailey
H. A. S. Dearborn
W. Baylies
Borden
H. Williams
Borden
Burnell
Grinnell
Scudder
Dickinson
Chaffee
Delano
Dawes
Crocker
Stevens
Seelye
Norcross
W. Rice
J. E. Russell
J. Walker
McEttrick
Atwood
Barrows
Naphen
McNary
O'Connell
Curley
Murray
Tague
Fitzgerald
Tague
Douglass
Tinkham
Herter
Curtis
Martin
Heckler
Studds
Delahunt
Keating





11th district



Bradbury
Bartlett
Cutler
Stedman
A. Bigelow
Brigham
B. Adams
J. Russell
Hobart
J. Richardson
J. Adams
J. Reed Jr.
Burnell
Goodrich
Trafton
Dawes
Chapin
Robinson
Whiting II
Wallace
Coolidge
Draper
Sprague
Powers
Sullivan
Peters
Tinkham
Douglass
Higgins
Flaherty
Curley
Kennedy
O'Neill
Burke
Donnelly





12th district



H. Dearborn
I. Parker
Lee
S. Thatcher
Skinner
Larned
Bidwell
Bacon
Dewey
Hulbert
Strong
Kendall
L. Bigelow
Baylies
Hodges
J. Adams
Robinson
F. Rockwell
Crosby
E. Morse
Lovering
Powers
Weeks
Curley
Gallivan
McCormack
Keith
Studds





13th district



Wadsworth
Seaver
Ruggles
Dowse
Eustis
J. Reed Jr.
Randall
Simpkins
Greene
Weeks
Mitchell
Carter
Luce
Wigglesworth
Burke





14th district



G. Thatcher
Cutts
C. King
J. Holmes
Lovering
E. Foss
Harris
Gilmore
Olney
Frothingham
Wigglesworth
Martin





15th district



Wadsworth
Ilsley
Whitman
Widgery
Bradbury
Whitman
Greene
Leach
Martin
Gifford





16th district



S. Thatcher
Cook
Tallman
S. Davis
Brown
Orr
Hill
Thacher
Walsh
Gifford





17th district



Bruce
Chandler
Gannett
F. Carr
Wood
J. Carr
Wilson
Kinsley





18th district



Wilson
T. Rice
J. Parker





19th district



J. Parker
Conner
Gage
Cushman





20th district



Hubbard
Parris
E. Lincoln





At-large



Cobb












v
t
e


Cold War






USA
USSR
ANZUS
NATO
Non-Aligned Movement
SEATO
Warsaw Pact





1940s



Morgenthau Plan
Hukbalahap Rebellion
Dekemvriana
Percentages Agreement
Yalta Conference
Guerrilla war in the Baltic states

Forest Brothers
Operation Priboi
Operation Jungle
Occupation of the Baltic states


Cursed soldiers
Operation Unthinkable
Potsdam Conference
Gouzenko Affair
Division of Korea
Operation Masterdom
Operation Beleaguer
Operation Blacklist Forty
Iran crisis of 1946
Greek Civil War
Baruch Plan
Corfu Channel incident
Turkish Straits crisis
Restatement of Policy on Germany
First Indochina War
Truman Doctrine
Asian Relations Conference
May 1947 Crises
Marshall Plan
1948 Czechoslovak coup d'état
Tito–Stalin Split
Berlin Blockade
Western betrayal
Iron Curtain
Eastern Bloc
Western Bloc
Chinese Civil War (Second round)
Malayan Emergency
Albanian Subversion





1950s



Bamboo Curtain
Korean War
McCarthyism
1953 Iranian coup d'état
Uprising of 1953 in East Germany
Dirty War (Mexico)
Bricker Amendment
1954 Guatemalan coup d'état
Partition of Vietnam
First Taiwan Strait Crisis
Geneva Summit (1955)
Bandung Conference
Poznań 1956 protests
Hungarian Revolution of 1956
Suez Crisis
"We will bury you"
Operation Gladio
Arab Cold War

Syrian Crisis of 1957
1958 Lebanon crisis
Iraqi 14 July Revolution


Sputnik crisis
Second Taiwan Strait Crisis
Cuban Revolution
Kitchen Debate
Sino-Soviet split





1960s



Congo Crisis
1960 U-2 incident
Bay of Pigs Invasion
1960 Turkish coup d'état
Soviet–Albanian split
Berlin Wall
Portuguese Colonial War

Angolan War of Independence
Guinea-Bissau War of Independence
Mozambican War of Independence


Cuban Missile Crisis
Sino-Indian War
Communist insurgency in Sarawak
Iraqi Ramadan Revolution
Sand War
1963 Syrian coup d'état
Vietnam War
1964 Brazilian coup d'état
United States occupation of the Dominican Republic (1965–66)
South African Border War
Transition to the New Order
Domino theory
ASEAN Declaration
Laotian Civil War
1966 Syrian coup d'état
Argentine Revolution
Korean DMZ Conflict
Greek military junta of 1967–74
USS Pueblo incident
Six-Day War
War of Attrition
Dhofar Rebellion
Protests of 1968
French May
Cultural Revolution
Prague Spring
Communist insurgency in Malaysia
Invasion of Czechoslovakia
Iraqi Ba'athist Revolution
Goulash Communism
Sino-Soviet border conflict
CPP–NPA–NDF rebellion
Corrective Move





1970s



Détente
Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty
Black September in Jordan
Corrective Movement (Syria)
Cambodian Civil War
Realpolitik
Ping-pong diplomacy
1971 Turkish military memorandum
Corrective Revolution (Egypt)
Four Power Agreement on Berlin
Bangladesh Liberation War
1972 Nixon visit to China
North Yemen-South Yemen Border Conflict
1973 Chilean coup d'état
Yom Kippur War
Carnation Revolution
Strategic Arms Limitation Talks
Rhodesian Bush War
Angolan Civil War
Mozambican Civil War
Ogaden War
Ethiopian Civil War
Lebanese Civil War
Sino-Albanian split
Cambodian–Vietnamese War
Sino-Vietnamese War
Iranian Revolution
Operation Condor
Dirty War
Korean Air Lines Flight 902
Saur Revolution
New Jewel Movement
1979 Herat uprising
Seven Days to the River Rhine
Struggle against political abuse of psychiatry in the Soviet Union





1980s



Soviet–Afghan War
1980 and 1984 Summer Olympics boycotts
1980 Turkish coup d'état
Invasion of Grenada
1986 Black Sea incident
1988 Black Sea bumping incident
Solidarity

Soviet reaction


Contras
Central American crisis
RYAN
Korean Air Lines Flight 007
Able Archer 83
Star Wars
People Power Revolution
Glasnost
Perestroika
Nagorno-Karabakh War
Tiananmen Square protests of 1989
Revolutions of 1989
Fall of the Berlin Wall





1990s



Mongolian Revolution of 1990
German reunification
Yemeni unification
Fall of communism in Albania
Breakup of Yugoslavia
Dissolution of the Soviet Union
Dissolution of Czechoslovakia





Frozen conflicts



Abkhazia
China-Taiwan
Korea
Nagorno-Karabakh
South Ossetia
Transnistria
Sino-Indian border dispute
North Borneo dispute





Foreign policy



Truman Doctrine
Containment
Eisenhower Doctrine
Domino theory
Hallstein Doctrine
Kennedy Doctrine
Peaceful coexistence
Ostpolitik
Johnson Doctrine
Brezhnev Doctrine
Nixon Doctrine
Ulbricht Doctrine
Carter Doctrine
Reagan Doctrine
Rollback
Sovereignty of Puerto Rico during the Cold War





Ideologies




Capitalism



Chicago school
Keynesianism
Monetarism
Neoclassical economics
Reaganomics
Supply-side economics
Thatcherism





Communism



Marxism–Leninism
Castroism
Eurocommunism
Guevarism
Hoxhaism
Juche
Maoism
Naxalism
Stalinism
Titoism





Other



Islamism
Liberal democracy
Social democracy
Third-Worldism
White supremacy








Organizations



ASEAN
CIA
Comecon
EEC
KGB
MI6
Non-Aligned Movement
SAARC
Safari Club
Stasi





Propaganda



Active measures
Crusade for Freedom
Izvestia
Pravda
Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty
Red Scare
TASS
Voice of America
Voice of Russia





Races



Arms race
Nuclear arms race
Space Race





See also



Allied intervention in the Russian Civil War
Soviet espionage in the United States
Soviet Union–United States relations
Soviet–US summits
Russian espionage in the United States
American espionage in the Soviet Union and Russian Federation
NATO–Russia relations
Brinkmanship
CIA and the Cultural Cold War
Cold War II








Category
Commons
Portal
Timeline
List of conflicts












v
t
e


Buddhist crisis



Events



Huế Phật Đản (Vesak) shootings
Hue chemical attacks
Self-immolation of Thích Quảng Đức
Double Seven Day scuffle
Xá Lợi Pagoda raids
1963 South Vietnamese coup (reaction)
Arrest and assassination of Ngo Dinh Diem





Policy



Joint Communiqué
Cable 243
Krulak–Mendenhall mission
McNamara–Taylor mission





Political or
religious
figures



Bui Van Luong
Bửu Hội
Thích Quảng Đức
Michael Forrestal
W. Averell Harriman
Roger Hilsman
Thich Thien Hoa
John F. Kennedy
Thich Tinh Khiet
Victor H. Krulak
Henry Cabot Lodge Jr.
Robert McNamara
Joseph Mendenhall
Ngô Đình Cẩn
Ngô Đình Diệm
Ngô Đình Nhu
Ngô Đình Thục
Nguyễn Ngọc Thơ
Nguyễn Đình Thuận
Madame Nhu
Frederick Nolting
Thích Trí Quang
Maxwell D. Taylor
Trần Văn Chương
William Trueheart
Vũ Văn Mẫu





Military
figures



Lucien Conein
Đỗ Cao Trí
Đỗ Mậu
Dương Văn Minh
Huỳnh Văn Cao
Lê Quang Tung
Lê Văn Kim
Nguyễn Hữu Có
Nguyễn Khánh
Nguyễn Văn Nhung
Nguyễn Văn Thiệu
Phạm Ngọc Thảo
Tôn Thất Đính
Trần Kim Tuyến
Trần Thiện Khiêm
Trần Văn Đôn





Journalists



Peter Arnett
Malcolm Browne
David Halberstam
Marguerite Higgins
Neil Sheehan












v
t
e


PT-109



Craft



PT boat
PT-109
PT-59
Japanese destroyer Amagiri





People



John F. Kennedy
Biuku Gasa
Eroni Kumana
Arthur Evans





Media



1962 Song
1963 Film
Comic book
PT-109 (model) kit
Video game
The Search for Kennedy's PT 109 (2002 film)





Related



Kasolo Island (Kennedy Island)












v
t
e


Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis



Family



John F. Kennedy (first husband, presidency)
Caroline Kennedy (daughter)
John F. Kennedy, Jr. (son)
Patrick Bouvier Kennedy (son)
Jack Schlossberg (grandson)
Rose Schlossberg (granddaughter)
Tatiana Schlossberg (granddaughter)
Aristotle Onassis (second husband)
John Vernou Bouvier III (father)
Janet Lee Bouvier (mother)
Lee Radziwill (sister)
Hugh D. Auchincloss (stepfather)
Janet Auchincloss Rutherfurd (half-sister)
Edith Ewing Bouvier (aunt)










Life events



Hammersmith Farm
Kennedy Compound
First Lady of the United States

White House restoration
Televised White House tour
White House Historical Association
White House Curator
Committee for the Preservation of the White House


Assassination of John F. Kennedy
State funeral of John F. Kennedy
John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum
Eternal Flame and burial site





Fashion



Wedding dress of Jacqueline Bouvier
The bouffant hairstyle
Pillbox hat
Pink Chanel suit





Honors and
memorials



Jacqueline Kennedy Garden
Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis High School for International Careers
Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis Reservoir
Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis School ballet





Other



Cultural depictions
Jackie O (1997 opera)
Jackie (2016 film)












v
t
e


Robert F. Kennedy




November 20, 1925 – June 6, 1968

United States Senator from New York, 1965–1968
64th United States Attorney General, 1961–1964





Life



1948 Palestine visit
Senate Committee investigation of Labor and Management
Cuban Missile Crisis

ExComm


Civil rights

Freedom Riders
Voter Education Project


Baldwin–Kennedy meeting
1964 Democratic National Convention
Bedford Stuyvesant Restoration Corporation
Mississippi Delta tour
Kennedy Compound
Hickory Hill home










Electoral



1964 U.S. Senate election
1968 presidential campaign

primaries
Boiler Room Girls







Speeches



Law Day Address (1961)
Day of Affirmation Address (1966)
Conflict in Vietnam and at Home (1968)
University of Kansas (1968)
Ball State (1968)
On the assassination of Martin Luther King Jr. (1968)
"On the Mindless Menace of Violence" (1968)





Books



The Enemy Within (1960)
The Pursuit of Justice (1964)
To Seek a Newer World (1967)
Thirteen Days: A Memoir of the Cuban Missile Crisis (1969)





Assassination



Sirhan Sirhan
Ambassador Hotel
Conspiracy theories
Gravesite





Legacy and
memorials



Robert F. Kennedy Department of Justice Building
Robert F. Kennedy Center for Justice and Human Rights

Human Rights Award
Journalism Award
Book Award


Robert F. Kennedy Memorial Stadium
Landmark for Peace Memorial
Kennedy–King College
Robert F. Kennedy Community Schools
Robert F. Kennedy Bridge





Popular
culture



Crisis: Behind a Presidential Commitment (1963 documentary)
Robert Kennedy Remembered (1968 documentary)
"Abraham, Martin and John" (1968 song)
The Missiles of October (1974 docudrama)
Kennedy (1983 miniseries)
Blood Feud (1983 film)
Prince Jack (1985 film)
Robert Kennedy and His Times (1985 miniseries)
Hoover vs. The Kennedys (1987 miniseries)
Thirteen Days (2000 film)
RFK (2002 film)
Bobby (2006 film)
RFK Must Die (2007 documentary)
The Kennedys (2011 miniseries)
Ethel (2012 documentary)
Jackie (2016 film)





Family,
family tree



Ethel Skakel (wife)
Kathleen Kennedy (daughter)
Joseph P. Kennedy (son)
Robert F. Kennedy Jr. (son)
David Kennedy (son)
Courtney Kennedy (daughter)
Michael Kennedy (son)
Kerry Kennedy (daughter)
Chris Kennedy (son)
Max Kennedy (son)
Doug Kennedy (son)
Rory Kennedy (daughter)
Joseph P. Kennedy III (grandson)
Joseph P. Kennedy Sr. (father)
Rose Kennedy (mother)
Joseph P. Kennedy Jr. (brother)
John F. Kennedy (brother
presidency)
Rosemary Kennedy (sister)
Kathleen Kennedy Cavendish (sister)
Eunice Kennedy Shriver (sister)
Patricia Kennedy Lawford (sister)
Jean Kennedy Smith (sister)
Ted Kennedy (brother)
Patrick J. Kennedy (grandfather)
John F. Fitzgerald (grandfather)












v
t
e


Ted Kennedy




February 22, 1932 – August 25, 2009

United States Senator from Massachusetts, 1962–2009





Electoral
history



United States Senate special election in Massachusetts, 1962
United States Senate election in Massachusetts, 1964
1970
1976
1982
1988
1994
2000
2006
United States presidential election, 1980 (Democratic Party presidential primaries, 1980)








Books



My Senator and Me: A Dog's-Eye View of Washington, D.C. (2006)
True Compass (2009)





Family,
family tree



Joan Bennett Kennedy (first wife)
Victoria Reggie Kennedy (second wife, widow)
Kara Kennedy (daughter)
Edward M. Kennedy Jr. (son)
Patrick J. Kennedy II (son)
Joseph P. Kennedy Sr. (father)
Rose Kennedy (mother)
Joseph P. Kennedy Jr. (brother)
John F. Kennedy (brother
presidency)
Rosemary Kennedy (sister)
Kathleen Kennedy (sister)
Eunice Kennedy Shriver (sister)
Patricia Kennedy Lawford (sister)
Robert F. Kennedy (brother)
Jean Kennedy Smith (sister)
Patrick J. Kennedy I (grandfather)
John F. Fitzgerald (grandfather)





Related



Awards and honors
Political positions
Kennedy Compound
Edward M. Kennedy Institute for the United States Senate
Edward M. Kennedy Serve America Act
Chappaquiddick incident
The Dream Shall Never Die
Mary Jo Kopechne
Friends of Ireland
Chappaquiddick (2018 film)








 Commons
 Wikiquote
 Wikisource texts












v
t
e


Kennedy family



I.




Patrick Kennedy (c. 1823 – 1858)



Patrick Joseph 'P. J.' Kennedy











II.




P. J. Kennedy (1858–1929)



Joseph P. Kennedy Sr.








III.




Joseph P. Kennedy Sr. (1888–1969)
Rose Kennedy (1890–1995)



Joseph P. Kennedy Jr.
John F. Kennedy (m.) Jacqueline Bouvier
Rosemary Kennedy
Kathleen Kennedy (m.) William Cavendish, Marquess of Hartington
Eunice Kennedy (m.) Sargent Shriver
Patricia Kennedy (m./div.) Peter Lawford
Robert F. Kennedy (m.) Ethel Kennedy
Jean Kennedy (m.) Stephen Edward Smith
Edward M. "Ted" Kennedy (m./div. 1st) Joan Bennett; (m. 2nd) Victoria Reggie








IV.




John Fitzgerald Kennedy (1917–1963)



Caroline Kennedy (m.) Edwin Schlossberg
John F. Kennedy Jr. (m.) Carolyn Bessette
Patrick Bouvier Kennedy





Eunice Kennedy Shriver (1921–2009)



Bobby Shriver
Maria Shriver (m./sep.) Arnold Schwarzenegger
Timothy Shriver
Mark Shriver
Anthony Shriver





Patricia Kennedy Lawford (1924–2006)



Christopher Lawford





Robert F. Kennedy (1925–1968)



Kathleen Kennedy Townsend
Joseph P. Kennedy II
Robert F. Kennedy Jr. (m.) Cheryl Hines
David A. Kennedy
Courtney Kennedy Hill
Michael LeMoyne Kennedy
Kerry Kennedy (m./div.) Andrew Cuomo
Christopher G. Kennedy
Max Kennedy
Douglas Harriman Kennedy
Rory Kennedy





Jean Kennedy Smith (born 1928)



William Kennedy Smith





Ted Kennedy (1932–2009)



Kara Kennedy
Edward M. Kennedy Jr.
Patrick J. Kennedy








VI.



Rose Schlossberg
Tatiana Schlossberg (m.) George Moran
Jack Schlossberg
Katherine Schwarzenegger
Patrick Schwarzenegger
Joseph P. Kennedy III





Related topics



Hickory Hill
Kennedy Compound
Kennedy curse
Merchandise Mart
The Kennedys (museum)





Category

Kennedy family




m. = married; div. = divorced; sep. = separated.










v
t
e


(1952 ←) United States presidential election, 1956 (→ 1960)



Republican Party

Convention
Primaries






Nominee



Dwight D. Eisenhower





VP nominee



Richard Nixon








Democratic Party

Convention
Primaries






Nominee



Adlai Stevenson





VP nominee



Estes Kefauver





Candidates



John S. Battle
Happy Chandler
James C. Davis
W. Averell Harriman
Lyndon B. Johnson
Frank Lausche
George Bell Timmerman Jr.













Third party and independent candidates



American Vegetarian Party




Nominee



Herbert M. Shelton





VP nominee



Symon Gould








Prohibition Party




Nominee



Enoch A. Holtwick





VP nominee



Herbert C. Holdridge








Socialist Labor Party




Nominee



Eric Hass





VP nominee



Georgia Cozzini








Socialist Party




Nominee



Darlington Hoopes





VP nominee



Samuel H. Friedman








Socialist Workers Party




Nominee



Farrell Dobbs





VP nominee



Myra Tanner Weiss








Independents and other candidates



T. Coleman Andrews
Gerald L. K. Smith











Other 1956 elections: House
Senate












v
t
e


(1956 ←) United States presidential election, 1960 (→ 1964)



Democratic Party

Convention
Primaries





Nominee
John F. Kennedy (campaign)


VP nominee
Lyndon B. Johnson


Candidates
Ross Barnett
Pat Brown
Michael DiSalle
Paul C. Fisher
Hubert Humphrey
Lyndon B. Johnson
George H. McLain
Robert B. Meyner
Wayne Morse
Albert S. Porter
Adlai Stevenson
George Smathers
Stuart Symington





Republican Party

Convention
Primaries





Nominee
Richard Nixon


VP nominee
Henry Cabot Lodge Jr.


Candidates
Barry Goldwater
Henry Cabot Lodge Jr.
James M. Lloyd
Nelson Rockefeller










Third party and independent candidates



American Vegetarian Party



Nominee
Symon Gould





National States' Rights Party



Nominee
Orval Faubus


VP nominee
J. B. Stoner





Prohibition Party



Nominee
Rutherford Decker


VP nominee
E. Harold Munn





Socialist Labor Party



Nominee
Eric Hass


VP nominee
Georgia Cozzini





Socialist Workers Party



Nominee
Farrell Dobbs


VP nominee
Myra Tanner Weiss





Independents and other candidates



Harry F. Byrd
Merritt B. Curtis
Lar Daly
George Lincoln Rockwell
Charles L. Sullivan











Other 1960 elections: House
Senate












v
t
e


Cabinet of President John F. Kennedy (1961–63)



Vice President



Lyndon B. Johnson (1961–63)








Secretary of State



Dean Rusk (1961–63)





Secretary of the Treasury



C. Douglas Dillon (1961–63)





Secretary of Defense



Robert McNamara (1961–63)





Attorney General



Robert F. Kennedy (1961–63)





Postmaster General



J. Edward Day (1961–63)
John A. Gronouski (1963)





Secretary of the Interior



Stewart Udall (1961–1963)





Secretary of Agriculture



Orville Freeman (1961–63)





Secretary of Commerce



Luther H. Hodges (1961–63)





Secretary of Labor



Arthur Goldberg (1961–62)
W. Willard Wirtz (1962–63)





Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare



Abraham A. Ribicoff (1961–62)
Anthony J. Celebrezze (1962–63)












v
t
e


Time Persons of the Year



1927–1950



Charles Lindbergh (1927)
Walter Chrysler (1928)
Owen D. Young (1929)
Mohandas Gandhi (1930)
Pierre Laval (1931)
Franklin D. Roosevelt (1932)
Hugh S. Johnson (1933)
Franklin D. Roosevelt (1934)
Haile Selassie (1935)
Wallis Simpson (1936)
Chiang Kai-shek / Soong Mei-ling (1937)
Adolf Hitler (1938)
Joseph Stalin (1939)
Winston Churchill (1940)
Franklin D. Roosevelt (1941)
Joseph Stalin (1942)
George Marshall (1943)
Dwight D. Eisenhower (1944)
Harry S. Truman (1945)
James F. Byrnes (1946)
George Marshall (1947)
Harry S. Truman (1948)
Winston Churchill (1949)
The American Fighting-Man (1950)





1951–1975



Mohammed Mosaddeq (1951)
Elizabeth II (1952)
Konrad Adenauer (1953)
John Foster Dulles (1954)
Harlow Curtice (1955)
Hungarian Freedom Fighters (1956)
Nikita Khrushchev (1957)
Charles de Gaulle (1958)
Dwight D. Eisenhower (1959)
U.S. Scientists: George Beadle / Charles Draper / John Enders / Donald A. Glaser / Joshua Lederberg / Willard Libby / Linus Pauling / Edward Purcell / Isidor Rabi / Emilio Segrè / William Shockley / Edward Teller / Charles Townes / James Van Allen / Robert Woodward (1960)
John F. Kennedy (1961)
Pope John XXIII (1962)
Martin Luther King Jr. (1963)
Lyndon B. Johnson (1964)
William Westmoreland (1965)
The Generation Twenty-Five and Under (1966)
Lyndon B. Johnson (1967)
The Apollo 8 Astronauts: William Anders / Frank Borman / Jim Lovell (1968)
The Middle Americans (1969)
Willy Brandt (1970)
Richard Nixon (1971)
Henry Kissinger / Richard Nixon (1972)
John Sirica (1973)
King Faisal (1974)
American Women: Susan Brownmiller / Kathleen Byerly / Alison Cheek / Jill Conway / Betty Ford / Ella Grasso / Carla Hills / Barbara Jordan / Billie Jean King / Susie Sharp / Carol Sutton / Addie Wyatt (1975)





1976–2000



Jimmy Carter (1976)
Anwar Sadat (1977)
Deng Xiaoping (1978)
Ayatollah Khomeini (1979)
Ronald Reagan (1980)
Lech Wałęsa (1981)
The Computer (1982)
Ronald Reagan / Yuri Andropov (1983)
Peter Ueberroth (1984)
Deng Xiaoping (1985)
Corazon Aquino (1986)
Mikhail Gorbachev (1987)
The Endangered Earth (1988)
Mikhail Gorbachev (1989)
George H. W. Bush (1990)
Ted Turner (1991)
Bill Clinton (1992)
The Peacemakers: Yasser Arafat / F. W. de Klerk / Nelson Mandela / Yitzhak Rabin (1993)
Pope John Paul II (1994)
Newt Gingrich (1995)
David Ho (1996)
Andrew Grove (1997)
Bill Clinton / Ken Starr (1998)
Jeffrey P. Bezos (1999)
George W. Bush (2000)





2001–present



Rudolph Giuliani (2001)
The Whistleblowers: Cynthia Cooper / Coleen Rowley / Sherron Watkins (2002)
The American Soldier (2003)
George W. Bush (2004)
The Good Samaritans: Bono / Bill Gates / Melinda Gates (2005)
You (2006)
Vladimir Putin (2007)
Barack Obama (2008)
Ben Bernanke (2009)
Mark Zuckerberg (2010)
The Protester (2011)
Barack Obama (2012)
Pope Francis (2013)
Ebola Fighters: Dr. Jerry Brown / Dr. Kent Brantly / Ella Watson-Stryker / Foday Gollah / Salome Karwah (2014)
Angela Merkel (2015)
Donald Trump (2016)
The Silence Breakers (2017)






 Book










v
t
e


Pulitzer Prize for Biography or Autobiography (1951–1975)






Margaret Louise Coit (1951)
Merlo J. Pusey (1952)
David J. Mays (1953)
Charles A. Lindbergh (1954)
William S. White (1955)
Talbot Faulkner Hamlin (1956)
John F. Kennedy (1957)
Douglas S. Freeman, John Alexander Carroll and Mary Wells Ashworth (1958)
Arthur Walworth (1959)
Samuel Eliot Morison (1960)
David Donald (1961)
Leon Edel (1963)
Walter Jackson Bate (1964)
Ernest Samuels (1965)
Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr. (1966)
Justin Kaplan (1967)
George Frost Kennan (1968)
Benjamin Lawrence Reid (1969)
Thomas Harry Williams (1970)
Lawrence Thompson (1971)
Joseph P. Lash (1972)
W. A. Swanberg (1973)
Louis Sheaffer (1974)
Robert Caro (1975)








Complete list
(1917–1925)
(1926–1950)
(1951–1975)
(1976–2000)
(2001–2025)












v
t
e


National Football Foundation Gold Medal winners






1958: Dwight D. Eisenhower
1959: Douglas MacArthur
1960: Herbert Hoover & Amos Alonzo Stagg
1961: John F. Kennedy
1962: Byron "Whizzer" White
1963: Roger Q. Blough
1964: Donold B. Lourie
1965: Juan T. Trippe
1966: Earl H. "Red" Blaik
1967: Frederick L. Hovde
1968: Chester J. LaRoche
1969: Richard Nixon
1970: Thomas J. Hamilton
1971: Ronald Reagan
1972: Gerald Ford
1973: John Wayne
1974: Gerald B. Zornow
1975: David Packard
1976: Edgar B. Speer
1977: Louis H. Wilson
1978: Vincent dePaul Draddy
1979: William P. Lawrence
1980: Walter J. Zable
1981: Justin W. Dart
1982: Silver Anniversary Awards (NCAA) - All Honored Jim Brown, Willie Davis, Jack Kemp, Ron Kramer, Jim Swink
1983: Jack Kemp
1984: John F. McGillicuddy
1985: William I. Spencer
1986: William H. Morton
1987: Charles R. Meyer
1988: Clinton E. Frank
1989: Paul Brown
1990: Thomas H. Moorer
1991: George H. W. Bush
1992: Donald R. Keough
1993: Norman Schwarzkopf
1994: Thomas S. Murphy
1995: Harold Alfond
1996: Gene Corrigan
1997: Jackie Robinson
1998: John H. McConnell
1999: Keith Jackson
2000: Fred M. Kirby II
2001: Billy Joe "Red" McCombs
2002: George Steinbrenner
2003: Tommy Franks
2004: William V. Campbell
2005: Jon F. Hanson
2006: Joe Paterno & Bobby Bowden
2007: Pete Dawkins & Roger Staubach
2008: John Glenn
2009: Phil Knight & Bill Bowerman
2010: Bill Cosby
2011: Robert Gates
2012: Roscoe Brown
2013: National Football League & Roger Goodell
2014: Tom Catena & George Weiss
2015: Condoleezza Rice
2016: Archie Manning












v
t
e


Assassination of John F. Kennedy






John F. Kennedy
Lee Harvey Oswald





Assassination



Assassination rifle
Timeline
J. D. Tippit
John Connally
Nellie Connally
Jacqueline Kennedy

Pink Chanel suit


James Tague
William Greer
Roy Kellerman
Clint Hill
Zapruder film

Abraham Zapruder


Dealey Plaza
Texas School Book Depository

Sixth Floor Museum


Presidential limousine
Parkland Hospital
Witnesses





Aftermath



Autopsy
Reactions
Johnson inauguration
Jack Ruby
Ruby v. Texas
Dictabelt recording
Conspiracy theories
Single-bullet theory
1992 Assassination Records Act
In popular culture




Funeral



Foreign dignitaries
Burial site and Eternal Flame





Investigations



Warren Commission
Jim Garrison investigation
House Select Committee on Assassinations
Researchers















v
t
e


Pacem in Terris Peace and Freedom Award laureates



1960s



1964 John Howard Griffin / John F. Kennedy
1965 Martin Luther King Jr.
1966 R. Sargent Shriver
1967 A. Philip Randolph
1968 James Groppi
1969 Saul Alinsky





1970s



1971 Dorothy Day
1974 Harold Hughes
1975 Hélder Câmara
1976 Mother Teresa
1979 Thomas Gumbleton





1980s



1980 Crystal Lee Sutton / Ernest Leo Unterkoefler
1982 George F. Kennan
1983 Helen Caldicott
1985 Joseph Bernardin
1986 Maurice John Dingman
1987 Desmond Tutu
1989 Eileen Egan





1990s



1990 Mairead Maguire
1991 María Julia Hernández
1992 César Chávez
1993 Daniel Berrigan
1995 Jim Wallis
1996 Samuel Ruiz
1997 Jim and Shelley Douglass





2000s



2000 George G. Higgins
2001 Lech Wałęsa
2002 Gwen Hennessey / Dorothy Hennessey
2004 Arthur Simon
2005 Donald Mosley
2007 Salim Ghazal
2008 Marvin Mottet
2009 Hildegard Goss-Mayr





2010s



2010 John Dear
2011 Álvaro Leonel Ramazzini Imeri
2012 Kim Bobo
2013 Jean Vanier
2014 Simone Campbell
2015 Thích Nhất Hạnh
2016 Gustavo Gutiérrez
2017 Widad Akreyi






 Catholicism portal












Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 68910251
LCCN: n79055297
ISNI: 0000 0001 0911 7086
GND: 118561383
SELIBR: 66727
SUDOC: 027317390
BNF: cb121853903 (data)
ULAN: 500262206
MusicBrainz: 2966f67a-ed7a-43e7-9a6a-a14aa592b246
NLA: 35266141
NDL: 00445469
NKC: jn20000603341
US Congress: K000107
BNE: XX986535
RKD: 297126
IATH: w6862fst











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=John_F._Kennedy&oldid=818535159"					Categories: John F. Kennedy1917 births1963 deaths1963 murders in the United States20th-century American politicians20th-century American writers20th-century Roman CatholicsAlumni of the London School of EconomicsAmerican Roman CatholicsAmerican anti-communistsAmerican naval personnel of World War IIAmerican people of Irish descentAmerican people of the Vietnam WarAssassinated Presidents of the United StatesBarnstable, MassachusettsBouvier familyBurials at Arlington National CemeteryChoate Rosemary Hall alumniDeaths by firearm in TexasDemocratic Party (United States) presidential nomineesDemocratic Party Presidents of the United StatesDemocratic Party United States SenatorsDemocratic Party members of the United States House of RepresentativesHarvard University alumniIrish diaspora politiciansJames Cardinal Gibbons Medal winnersJournalists from MassachusettsKennedy familyLaetare Medal recipientsMassachusetts DemocratsMembers of the United States House of Representatives from MassachusettsMilitary personnel from MassachusettsNational Rifle Association peoplePeople associated with the Boy Scouts of AmericaPeople associated with the assassination of John F. KennedyPeople from Brookline, MassachusettsPeople murdered in TexasPeople of the Congo CrisisPoliticians from BostonPresidential Medal of Freedom recipientsPresidents of the United StatesPulitzer Prize for Biography or Autobiography winnersRecipients of the Navy and Marine Corps MedalSpace advocatesStar class sailorsUnited States Navy officersUnited States Senators from MassachusettsUnited States presidential candidates, 1960United States vice-presidential candidates, 1956Writers from BostonHidden categories: All articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from November 2015Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pagesWikipedia indefinitely move-protected pagesUse mdy dates from January 2018Articles with hAudio microformatsArticles lacking ISBNsArticles with Internet Archive linksArticles with LibriVox linksFind a Grave template with ID same as WikidataArticles with DMOZ linksAC with 16 elementsWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with SELIBR identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersWikipedia articles with ULAN identifiersWikipedia articles with MusicBrainz identifiersWikipedia articles with NLA identifiersWikipedia articles with RKDartists identifiersWikipedia articles with SNAC-ID identifiersArticles containing video clips