For the sixteenth-century English politician, see John Kerry (MP).


John Kerry








68th United States Secretary of State


In office
February 1, 2013 – January 20, 2017


President
Barack Obama


Deputy
William Joseph Burns
Wendy Sherman (Acting)
Tony Blinken


Preceded by
Hillary Clinton


Succeeded by
Rex Tillerson


Chair of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee


In office
January 6, 2009 – February 1, 2013


Preceded by
Joe Biden


Succeeded by
Bob Menendez


Chair of the Senate Small Business Committee


In office
January 4, 2007 – January 3, 2009


Preceded by
Olympia Snowe


Succeeded by
Mary Landrieu


In office
June 6, 2001 – January 3, 2003


Preceded by
Kit Bond


Succeeded by
Olympia Snowe


United States Senator
from Massachusetts


In office
January 2, 1985 – February 1, 2013


Preceded by
Paul Tsongas


Succeeded by
Mo Cowan


66th Lieutenant Governor of Massachusetts


In office
March 6, 1983 – January 2, 1985


Governor
Michael Dukakis


Preceded by
Thomas P. O'Neill III


Succeeded by
Evelyn Murphy





Personal details


Born
John Forbes Kerry
(1943-12-11) December 11, 1943 (age 74)
Aurora, Colorado, U.S.


Political party
Democratic


Spouse(s)
Julia Thorne (m. 1970;  div. 1988)
Teresa Heinz (m. 1995)


Children
Alexandra and Vanessa


Parents
Richard Kerry and Rosemary Forbes


Relatives
Cameron Kerry (brother)


Education
Yale University (BA)
Boston College (JD)


Signature



Military service


Allegiance
 United States


Service/branch
 United States Navy


Years of service
1966–1978


Rank
 Lieutenant


Unit
USS Gridley (DLG-21)
Coastal Squadron 1


Commands
PCF-44
PCF-94


Battles/wars
Vietnam War (WIA)


Awards
 Silver Star
 Bronze Star (with valor)
 Purple Heart (3)
 Combat Action Ribbon


John Forbes Kerry (/ˈkɛri/; born December 11, 1943) is an American politician who served as the 68th United States Secretary of State from 2013 to 2017. A Democrat, he previously represented Massachusetts in the United States Senate from 1985 to 2013. He was the Democratic nominee in the 2004 presidential election, losing to Republican incumbent George W. Bush.
Kerry was born in Aurora, Colorado and attended boarding school in Massachusetts and New Hampshire. He graduated from Yale University in 1966 with a major in political science. Kerry enlisted in the Naval Reserve in 1966, and between 1968 and 1969, he served an abbreviated four-month tour of duty in South Vietnam as officer-in-charge (OIC) of a Swift Boat. For that service, he was awarded combat medals that include the Silver Star Medal, Bronze Star Medal, and three Purple Heart Medals. Securing an early return to the United States, Kerry joined the Vietnam Veterans Against the War organization in which he served as a nationally recognized spokesman and as an outspoken opponent of the Vietnam War. He appeared in the Fulbright Hearings before the Senate Committee on Foreign Affairs where he deemed United States war policy in Vietnam to be the cause of war crimes.
After receiving a J.D. from Boston College Law School, Kerry worked as an Assistant District Attorney in Massachusetts. He served as Lieutenant Governor under Michael Dukakis from 1983 to 1985 and was elected to the U.S. Senate in 1984 and was sworn in the following January. On the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, he led a series of hearings from 1987 to 1989 which were a precursor to the Iran–Contra affair. Kerry was re-elected to additional terms in 1990, 1996, 2002, and 2008. On October 11, 2002, Kerry voted to authorize the President "to use force, if necessary, to disarm Saddam Hussein," but warned that the administration should exhaust its diplomatic avenues before launching war.[1]
In his 2004 presidential campaign, Kerry criticized George W. Bush for the Iraq War. He and his running mate, North Carolina Senator John Edwards, lost the election, finishing 35 electoral votes behind Bush and Vice President Dick Cheney. Kerry returned to the Senate, becoming Chairman of the Senate Committee on Small Business and Entrepreneurship in 2007 and then of the Foreign Relations Committee in 2009. In January 2013, Kerry was nominated by President Barack Obama to succeed outgoing Secretary of State Hillary Clinton and then confirmed by the U.S. Senate, assuming the office on February 1, 2013. Kerry retained the position until the end of Obama's tenure on January 20, 2017, he was eventually succeeded by Rex Tillerson.



Contents


1 Early life and education (1943–1966)
2 Military service (1966–1970)

2.1 Duty on the USS Gridley
2.2 Military honors

2.2.1 Silver Star
2.2.2 Bronze Star


2.3 Return from Vietnam
2.4 Controversy


3 Anti-war activism (1970–1971)
4 Early political career (1972–1985)

4.1 1972 Congressional election
4.2 Law career
4.3 Lieutenant Governor of Massachusetts
4.4 1984 U.S. Senate election


5 U.S. Senate (1985–2013)

5.1 Iran–Contra hearings
5.2 George H. W. Bush administration
5.3 Precursors to presidential bid
5.4 "You get stuck in Iraq" controversy
5.5 Afghanistan/Pakistan
5.6 Voting record

5.6.1 Overall
5.6.2 Iraq


5.7 Leadership
5.8 Committee assignments
5.9 Caucus memberships
5.10 Seniority


6 2004 presidential campaign
7 Later presidential election activities
8 Secretary of State (2013–2017)

8.1 Nomination
8.2 Tenure
8.3 Syria
8.4 Latin America
8.5 Environmentalism
8.6 Global Connect initiative


9 Post Obama Administration

9.1 Writing his memoirs
9.2 Homes


10 Personal and family life

10.1 Ancestry
10.2 Marriages and children
10.3 Religious beliefs
10.4 Health
10.5 Athletics and sailing


11 Foreign honors
12 Honorary Degrees
13 Electoral history
14 See also
15 References
16 Further reading
17 External links

17.1 Official
17.2 Information
17.3 Statements and interviews
17.4 Media coverage





Early life and education (1943–1966)
John Forbes Kerry was born on December 11, 1943, in Aurora, Colorado, at Fitzsimons Army Medical Center. He is the second of four children born to Richard John Kerry, a Foreign Service officer and lawyer, and Rosemary Isabel Forbes, a nurse and social activist. His father was raised Catholic (John's paternal grandparents were Austro-Hungarian Jewish immigrants who converted to Catholicism) and his mother was Episcopalian. He was raised with an elder sister named Margaret (born 1941), a younger sister named Diana (born 1947) and a younger brother named Cameron (born 1950). The children were raised in their father's faith; John Kerry served as an altar boy.[2]
Kerry grew up a military brat[3] until his father was discharged from the Army Air Corps, causing the family to settle in Washington, D.C. in 1949.[4] While in Washington, Richard took a spot in the Department of the Navy's Office of General Counsel and soon became a diplomat in the State Department's Bureau of United Nations Affairs.[5]
His extended maternal family enjoyed great wealth as members of the Forbes and Dudley–Winthrop families.[6] Kerry's parents themselves were upper-middle class, and a wealthy great aunt paid for him to attend elite boarding schools.[2]
In 1957, his father was stationed at the U.S. Embassy in Oslo, Norway, and Kerry was sent back to the United States to attend boarding school. He first attended the Fessenden School in Newton, Massachusetts, and later St. Paul's, Concord, New Hampshire, where he learned skills in public speaking and began developing an interest in politics.[2] Kerry founded the John Winant Society at St. Paul's to debate the issues of the day; the Society still exists there.[7][8]




A young John Kerry (in white) aboard the yacht of John F. Kennedy, in 1962


In 1962, Kerry entered Yale University, majoring in political science and residing in Jonathan Edwards College.[9]:35 He graduated with a Bachelor of Arts degree in 1966. Kerry played on the varsity Yale Bulldogs Men's soccer team, earning his only letter in his senior year. He also played freshman and JV hockey and, in his senior year, JV lacrosse.[10] In addition, he was a member of the psi Upsilon fraternity and took flying lessons.[9]:37, 43[11] Kerry was playing in a Harvard-Yale soccer game when he heard that President Kennedy had been assassinated. Kerry had previously been on Kennedy's yacht in 1962.
In his sophomore year, Kerry became the Chairman of the Liberal Party of the Yale Political Union, and a year later he served as President of the Union. Amongst his influential teachers in this period was Professor H. Bradford Westerfield, who was himself a former President of the Political Union.[12] His involvement with the Political Union gave him an opportunity to be involved with important issues of the day, such as the civil rights movement and the New Frontier program. He also became a member of Skull and Bones Society, and traveled to Switzerland[13] through AIESEC Yale.[14][15]
Under the guidance of the speaking coach and history professor Rollin Osterweis, Kerry won many debates against other college students from across the nation.[16] In March 1965, as the Vietnam War escalated, he won the Ten Eyck prize as the best orator in the junior class for a speech that was critical of U.S. foreign policy. In the speech he said, "It is the spectre of Western imperialism that causes more fear among Africans and Asians than communism and thus, it is self-defeating."[17]
Overall, Kerry had lackluster grades at Yale, graduating with a cumulative average of 76 over his four years. His freshman-year average was a 71, but he improved to an 81 average for his senior year. He never received an "A" during his time at Yale; his highest grade was an 89.[18]
Military service (1966–1970)
Main article: Military career of John Kerry
Duty on the USS Gridley
On February 18, 1966, Kerry enlisted in the Naval Reserve.[19] He began his active duty military service on August 19, 1966. After completing 16 weeks of Officer Candidate School at the U.S. Naval Training Center in Newport, Rhode Island, Kerry received his officer's commission on December 16, 1966. During the 2004 election, Kerry posted his military records at his website, and permitted reporters to inspect his medical records. In 2005, Kerry released his military and medical records to the representatives of three news organizations, but has not authorized full public access to those records.[20][21]
During his tour on the guided missile frigate USS Gridley, Kerry requested duty in South Vietnam, listing as his first preference a position as the commander of a Fast Patrol Craft (PCF), also known as a "Swift boat."[22] These 50-foot (15 m) boats have aluminum hulls and have little or no armor, but are heavily armed and rely on speed. "I didn't really want to get involved in the war", Kerry said in a book of Vietnam reminiscences published in 1986. "When I signed up for the swift boats, they had very little to do with the war. They were engaged in coastal patrolling and that's what I thought I was going to be doing."[23] However, his second choice of billet was on a river patrol boat, or "PBR", which at the time was serving a more dangerous duty on the rivers of Vietnam.[22]
Military honors
During the night of December 2 and early morning of December 3, 1968, Kerry was in charge of a small boat operating near a peninsula north of Cam Ranh Bay together with a Swift boat (PCF-60). According to Kerry and the two crewmen who accompanied him that night, Patrick Runyon and William Zaladonis, they surprised a group of Vietnamese men unloading sampans at a river crossing, who began running and failed to obey an order to stop. As the men fled, Kerry and his crew opened fire on the sampans and destroyed them, then rapidly left. During this encounter, Kerry received a shrapnel wound in the left arm above the elbow. It was for this injury that Kerry received his first Purple Heart Medal.[24]
Kerry received his second Purple Heart for a wound received in action on the Bồ Đề River on February 20, 1969. The plan had been for the Swift boats to be accompanied by support helicopters. On the way up the Bo De, however, the helicopters were attacked. As the Swift boats reached the Cửa Lớn River, Kerry's boat was hit by a B-40 rocket (rocket propelled grenade round), and a piece of shrapnel hit Kerry's left leg, wounding him. Thereafter, enemy fire ceased and his boat reached the Gulf of Thailand safely. Kerry continues to have shrapnel embedded in his left thigh because the doctors that first treated him decided to remove the damaged tissue and close the wound with sutures rather than make a wide opening to remove the shrapnel.[25] Though wounded like several others earlier that day, Kerry did not lose any time off from duty.[26][27]
Silver Star
Eight days later, on February 28, 1969, came the events for which Kerry was awarded his Silver Star Medal. On this occasion, Kerry was in tactical command of his Swift boat and two other Swift boats during a combat operation. Their mission on the Duong Keo River included bringing an underwater demolition team and dozens of South Vietnamese Marines to destroy enemy sampans, structures and bunkers as described in the story The Death Of PCF 43.[28] Running into heavy small arms fire from the river banks, Kerry "directed the units to turn to the beach and charge the Viet Cong positions" and he "expertly directed" his boat's fire causing the enemy to flee while at the same time coordinating the insertion of the ninety South Vietnamese troops (according to the original medal citation signed by Admiral Zumwalt). Moving a short distance upstream, Kerry's boat was the target of a B-40 rocket round; Kerry charged the enemy positions and as his boat hove to and beached, a Viet Cong ("VC") insurgent armed with a rocket launcher emerged from a spider hole and ran. While the boat's gunner opened fire, wounding the VC in the leg, and while the other boats approached and offered cover fire, Kerry jumped from the boat to pursue the VC insurgent, subsequently killing him and capturing his loaded rocket launcher.[29][30][31]
Kerry's commanding officer, Lieutenant Commander George Elliott, stated to Douglas Brinkley in 2003 that he did not know whether to court-martial Kerry for beaching the boat without orders or give him a medal for saving the crew. Elliott recommended Kerry for the Silver Star, and Zumwalt flew into An Thoi to personally award medals to Kerry and the rest of the sailors involved in the mission. The Navy's account of Kerry's actions is presented in the original medal citation signed by Zumwalt. The engagement was documented in an after-action report, a press release written on March 1, 1969, and a historical summary dated March 17, 1969.[32]
Bronze Star
On March 13, 1969, on the Bái Háp River, Kerry was in charge of one of five Swift boats that were returning to their base after performing an Operation Sealords mission to transport South Vietnamese troops from the garrison at Cái Nước and MIKE Force advisors for a raid on a Vietcong camp located on the Rach Dong Cung canal. Earlier in the day, Kerry received a slight shrapnel wound in the buttocks from blowing up a rice bunker. Debarking some but not all of the passengers at a small village, the boats approached a fishing weir; one group of boats went around to the left of the weir, hugging the shore, and a group with Kerry's PCF-94 boat went around to the right, along the shoreline. A mine was detonated directly beneath the lead boat, PCF-3, as it crossed the weir to the left, lifting PCF-3 "about 2-3 ft out of water".[33]
James Rassmann, a Green Beret advisor who was aboard Kerry's PCF-94, was knocked overboard when, according to witnesses and the documentation of the event, a mine or rocket exploded close to the boat. According to the documentation for the event, Kerry's arm was injured when he was thrown against a bulkhead during the explosion. PCF 94 returned to the scene and Kerry rescued Rassmann who was receiving sniper fire from the water. Kerry received the Bronze Star Medal with Combat "V" for "heroic achievement", for his actions during this incident; he also received his third Purple Heart.[34]
Return from Vietnam
After Kerry's third qualifying wound, he was entitled per Navy regulations to reassignment away from combat duties. Kerry's preferred choice for reassignment was as a military aide in Boston, New York City or Washington, D.C.[35] On April 11, 1969, he reported to the Brooklyn-based Atlantic Military Sea Transportation Service, where he would remain on active duty for the following year as a personal aide to an officer, Rear Admiral Walter Schlech. On January 1, 1970, Kerry was temporarily promoted to full lieutenant.[36] Kerry had agreed to an extension of his active duty obligation from December 1969 to August 1970 in order to perform Swift Boat duty.[37][38] John Kerry was on active duty in the United States Navy from August 1966 until January 1970. He continued to serve in the Naval Reserve until February 1978.[39]
Controversy
Main article: John Kerry military service controversy
With the continuing controversy that had surrounded the military service of George W. Bush since the 2000 Presidential election (when he was accused of having used his father's political influence to gain entrance to the Texas Air National Guard, thereby protecting himself from conscription into the United States Army, and possible service in the Vietnam War), John Kerry's contrasting status as a decorated Vietnam War veteran posed a problem for Bush's re-election campaign, which Republicans sought to counter by calling Kerry's war record into question. As the presidential campaign of 2004 developed, approximately 250 members of a group called Swift Boat Veterans for Truth (SBVT, later renamed Swift Vets and POWs for Truth) opposed Kerry's campaign. The group held press conferences, ran ads and endorsed a book questioning Kerry's service record and his military awards. The group included several members of Kerry's unit, such as Larry Thurlow, who commanded a swift boat alongside of Kerry's,[40] and Stephen Gardner, who served on Kerry's boat.[41] The campaign inspired the widely used political pejorative 'swiftboating', to describe an unfair or untrue political attack.[42] Most of Kerry's former crewmates have stated that SBVT's allegations are false.[43]
Anti-war activism (1970–1971)
Main article: Vietnam Veterans Against the War
After returning to the United States, Kerry joined the Vietnam Veterans Against the War (VVAW).[44] Then numbering about 20,000,[45] VVAW was considered by some (including the administration of President Richard Nixon) to be an effective, if controversial, component of the antiwar movement.[46] Kerry participated in the "Winter Soldier Investigation" conducted by VVAW of U.S. atrocities in Vietnam, and he appears in a film by that name that documents the investigation.[47] According to Nixon Secretary of Defense Melvin Laird, "I didn't approve of what he did, but I understood the protesters quite well", and he declined two requests from the Navy to court martial Reserve Lieutenant Kerry over his antiwar activity.[48]
On April 22, 1971, Kerry appeared before a U.S. Senate committee hearing on proposals relating to ending the war. The day after this testimony, Kerry participated in a demonstration with thousands of other veterans in which he and other Vietnam War veterans threw their medals and service ribbons over a fence erected at the front steps of the United States Capitol building to dramatize their opposition to the war. Jack Smith, a Marine, read a statement explaining why the veterans were returning their military awards to the government. For more than two hours, almost 1000 angry veterans tossed their medals, ribbons, hats, jackets, and military papers over the fence. Each veteran gave his or her name, hometown, branch of service and a statement. Kerry threw some of his own decorations and awards as well as some given to him by other veterans to throw. As Kerry threw his decorations over the fence, his statement was: "I'm not doing this for any violent reasons, but for peace and justice, and to try and make this country wake up once and for all."[49]
Kerry was arrested on May 30, 1971, during a VVAW march to honor American POWs held captive by North Vietnam. The march was planned as a multi-day event from Concord to Boston, and while in Lexington, participants tried to camp on the village green. At 2:30 a.m., local and state police arrested 441 demonstrators, including Kerry, for trespassing. All were given the Miranda Warning and were hauled away on school buses to spend the night at the Lexington Public Works Garage. Kerry and the other protesters later paid a $5 fine, and were released. The mass arrests caused a community backlash and ended up giving positive coverage to the VVAW.[50][51][52]
Early political career (1972–1985)
1972 Congressional election
In 1970, Kerry had considered running for Congress in the Democratic primary against hawkish Democrat Philip J. Philbin of Massachusetts's 3rd congressional district, but deferred in favor of Robert Drinan, a Jesuit priest and anti-war activist, who went on to defeat Philbin.[53] In February 1972, Kerry's wife bought a house in Worcester, with Kerry intending to run against the 4th district's aging thirteen-term incumbent Democrat, Harold Donohue.[53] The couple never moved in. After Republican Congressman F. Bradford Morse of the neighboring 5th district announced his retirement and then resignation to become Under-Secretary-General for Political and General Assembly Affairs at the United Nations. The couple instead rented an apartment in Lowell, so that Kerry could run to succeed him.[53]
Including Kerry, the Democratic primary race had 10 candidates, including attorney Paul J. Sheehy, State Representative Anthony R. DiFruscia, John J. Desmond and Robert B. Kennedy. Kerry ran a "very expensive, sophisticated campaign", financed by out-of-state backers and supported by many young volunteers.[53] DiFruscia's campaign headquarters shared the same building as Kerry's. On the eve of the September 19 primary, police found Kerry's younger brother Cameron and campaign field director Thomas J. Vallely, breaking into where the building's telephone lines were located. They were arrested and charged with "breaking and entering with the intent to commit grand larceny", but the charges were dropped a year later. At the time of the incident, DiFruscia alleged that the two were trying to disrupt his get-out-the vote efforts. Vallely and Cameron Kerry maintained that they were only checking their own telephone lines because they had received an anonymous call warning that the Kerry lines would be cut.[53]
Despite the arrests, Kerry won the primary with 20,771 votes (27.56%). Sheehy came second with 15,641 votes (20.75%), followed by DiFruscia with 12,222 votes (16.22%), Desmond with 10,213 votes (13.55%) and Kennedy with 5,632 votes (7.47%). The remaining 10,891 votes were split amongst the other five candidates, with 1970 nominee Richard Williams coming last with just 1,706 votes (2.26%).[53][54]
In the general election, Kerry was initially favored to defeat the Republican candidate, former State Representative Paul W. Cronin, and conservative Democrat Roger P. Durkin, who ran as an Independent. A week after the primary, one poll put Kerry 26-points ahead of Cronin.[53] His campaign called for a national health insurance system, discounted prescription drugs for the unemployed, a jobs program to clean up the Merrimack River and rent controls in Lowell and Lawrence. A major obstacle, however, was the district's leading newspaper, the conservative The Sun. The paper editorialized against him. It also ran critical news stories about his out-of-state contributions and his "carpetbagging", because he had only moved into the district in April. Subsequently, released "Watergate" Oval Office tape recordings of the Nixon White House showed that defeating Kerry's candidacy had attracted the personal attention of President Nixon.[55] Kerry himself asserts that Nixon sent operatives to Lowell to help derail his campaign.[53]
The race was the most expensive for Congress in the country that year[53] and four days before the general election, Durkin withdrew and endorsed Cronin, hoping to see Kerry defeated.[56] The week before, a poll had put Kerry 10 points ahead of Cronin, with Dukin on 13%.[53] In the final days of the campaign, Kerry sensed that it was "slipping away" and Cronin emerged victorious by 110,970 votes (53.45%) to Kerry's 92,847 (44.72%).[57] After his defeat, Kerry lamented in a letter to supporters that "for two solid weeks, [The Sun] called me un-American, New Left antiwar agitator, unpatriotic, and labeled me every other 'un-' and 'anti-' that they could find. It's hard to believe that one newspaper could be so powerful, but they were."[53] He later felt that his failure to respond directly to The Sun's attacks cost him the race.[53]
Law career
After Kerry's 1972 defeat, he and his wife bought a house in Belvidere, Lowell,[58] entering a decade which his brother Cameron later called "the years in exile".[53] He spent some time working as a fundraiser for the Cooperative for Assistance and Relief Everywhere (CARE), an international humanitarian organization.[59] In September 1973, he entered Boston College Law School.[60] While studying, Kerry worked as a talk radio host on WBZ and, in July 1974, was named executive director of Mass Action, a Massachusetts advocacy association.[53][61]
Kerry received his Juris Doctor (J.D.) from Boston College in 1976.[62] While in law school he had been a student prosecutor in the office of the District Attorney of Middlesex County, John J. Droney.[63] After passing the bar exam and being admitted to the Massachusetts bar in 1976, he went to work in that office as a full-time prosecutor.[64]
In January 1977, Droney promoted him to First Assistant District Attorney, essentially making Kerry his campaign and media surrogate because Droney was afflicted with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS, or Lou Gehrig's Disease). As First Assistant, Kerry tried cases, which included winning convictions in a high-profile rape case and a murder. He also played a role in administering the office, including initiating the creation of special white-collar and organized crime units, creating programs to address the problems of rape and other crime victims and witnesses, and managing trial calendars to reflect case priorities.[65] It was in this role in 1978 that Kerry announced an investigation into possible criminal charges against then Senator Edward Brooke, regarding "misstatements" in his first divorce trial.[66] The inquiry ended with no charges being brought after investigators and prosecutors determined that Brooke's misstatements were pertinent to the case, but were not material enough to have affected the outcome.[67]
Droney's health was poor and Kerry had decided to run for his position in the 1978 election should Droney drop out. However, Droney was re-elected and his health improved; he went on to re-assume many of the duties that he had delegated to Kerry.[53] Kerry thus decided to leave, departing in 1979 with assistant DA Roanne Sragow to set up their own law firm.[53][65] Kerry also worked as a commentator for WCVB-TV and co-founded a bakery, Kilvert & Forbes Ltd., with businessman and former Kennedy aide K. Dun Gifford.[53]
Lieutenant Governor of Massachusetts
In 1982, Lieutenant Governor of Massachusetts Thomas P. O'Neill III declined to seek a third term to run for Governor of Massachusetts, though he would fall foul of the state Democratic Party's rule changes and failed to make the ballot.[68] Kerry declared his candidacy, entering the primary election alongside Massachusetts Secretary of Environmental Affairs Evelyn Murphy, State Senator Samuel Rotondi, State Representative Lou Nickinello and Lois Pines.[69]
Kerry won the nomination with 325,890 votes (29%) to Murphy's 286,378 (25.48%), Rotondi's 228,086 (20.29%), Nickinello's 150,829 (13.42%) and Pines' 132,734 (11.81%).[70] In the concurrent gubernatorial primary, former Governor Michael Dukakis defeated incumbent Governor Edward J. King.[71] The Dukakis/Kerry ticket defeated the Republican ticket of John W. Sears and Leon Lombardi in the general election by 1,219,109 votes (61.92%) to 749,679 (38.08%).[72][73]
As Lieutenant Governor, Kerry led meetings of the Massachusetts Governor's Council.[74] Dukakis also delegated other tasks to Kerry, including serving as the state's liaison to the federal government.[75] He was also active on environmental issues, including combating acid rain.[76]
1984 U.S. Senate election




Kerry during his 1984 campaign


The junior U.S. Senator from Massachusetts, Paul Tsongas, announced in 1984 that he would be stepping down for health reasons.[77] Kerry ran, and as in his 1982 race for Lieutenant Governor, he did not receive the endorsement of the party regulars at the state Democratic convention.[78] Congressman James Shannon, a favorite of House Speaker Tip O'Neill, was the early favorite to win the nomination, and he "won broad establishment support and led in early polling."[79][80] Again as in 1982, however, Kerry prevailed in a close primary.[81]
In his general election campaign, Kerry promised to mix liberalism with tight budget controls. He defeated Republican Ray Shamie despite a nationwide landslide for the re-election of Republican President Ronald Reagan, for whom Massachusetts voted by a narrow margin.[82][83] In his victory speech, Kerry asserted that his win meant that the people of Massachusetts "emphatically reject the politics of selfishness and the notion that women must be treated as second-class citizens."[84]
Tsongas resigned on January 2, 1985, one day before the end of his term. Dukakis appointed Kerry to fill the vacancy, giving him seniority over other new senators who were sworn in on January 3, the scheduled start of their new terms.[85]
U.S. Senate (1985–2013)
See also: Sponsorship of legislation by John Kerry
Iran–Contra hearings
Main article: Kerry Committee report
On April 18, 1985, a few months after taking his Senate seat, Kerry and Senator Tom Harkin of Iowa traveled to Nicaragua and met the country's president, Daniel Ortega. Though Ortega had won internationally certified elections, the trip was criticized because Ortega and his leftist Sandinista government had strong ties to Cuba and the USSR and were accused of human rights abuses. The Sandinista government was opposed by the right-wing CIA-backed rebels known as the Contras. While in Nicaragua, Kerry and Harkin talked to people on both sides of the conflict. Through the senators, Ortega offered a cease-fire agreement in exchange for the U.S. dropping support of the Contras. The offer was denounced by the Reagan administration as a "propaganda initiative" designed to influence a House vote on a $14 million Contra aid package, but Kerry said "I am willing..... to take the risk in the effort to put to test the good faith of the Sandinistas." The House voted down the Contra aid, but Ortega flew to Moscow to accept a $200 million loan the next day, which in part prompted the House to pass a larger $27 million aid package six weeks later.[86]




A Senate portrait of Kerry


Meanwhile, Kerry's staff began their own investigations and, on October 14, issued a report that exposed illegal activities on the part of Lieutenant Colonel Oliver North, who had set up a private network involving the National Security Council and the CIA to deliver military equipment to right-wing Nicaraguan rebels (Contras). In effect, North and certain members of the President's administration were accused by Kerry's report of illegally funding and supplying armed militants without the authorization of Congress. Kerry's staff investigation, based on a year-long inquiry and interviews with fifty unnamed sources, is said to raise "serious questions about whether the United States has abided by the law in its handling of the contras over the past three years."[87]
The Kerry Committee report found that "the Contra drug links included..... payments to drug traffickers by the U.S. State Department of funds authorized by the Congress for humanitarian assistance to the Contras, in some cases after the traffickers had been indicted by federal law enforcement agencies on drug charges, in others while traffickers were under active investigation by these same agencies."[88] The U.S. State Department paid over $806,000 to known drug traffickers to carry humanitarian assistance to the Contras.[89] Kerry's findings provoked little reaction in the media and official Washington.[90]
The Kerry report was a precursor to the Iran–Contra affair. On May 4, 1989, North was convicted of charges relating to the Iran/Contra controversy, including three felonies. On September 16, 1991, however, North's convictions were overturned on appeal.[91]
George H. W. Bush administration
On November 15, 1988, at a businessmen's breakfast in East Lynn, Massachusetts, Kerry made a joke about then-President-elect George H. W. Bush and his running mate, saying "if Bush is shot, the Secret Service has orders to shoot Dan Quayle." He apologized the following day.[92]
During their investigation of Noriega, Kerry's staff found reason to believe that the Pakistan-based Bank of Credit and Commerce International (BCCI) had facilitated Noriega's drug trafficking and money laundering. This led to a separate inquiry into BCCI, and as a result, banking regulators shut down BCCI in 1991. In December 1992, Kerry and Senator Hank Brown, a Republican from Colorado, released The BCCI Affair, a report on the BCCI scandal. The report showed that the bank was crooked and was working with terrorists, including Abu Nidal. It blasted the Department of Justice, the Department of the Treasury, the Customs Service, the Federal Reserve Bank, as well as influential lobbyists and the CIA.[93]
Kerry was criticized by some Democrats for having pursued his own party members, including former Secretary of Defense Clark Clifford, although Republicans said he should have pressed against some Democrats even harder. The BCCI scandal was later turned over to the Manhattan District Attorney's office.[94]
Precursors to presidential bid
See also: Massachusetts United States Senate election, 1996 and United States presidential election, 2000
In 1996, Kerry faced a difficult re-election fight against Governor William Weld, a popular Republican incumbent who had been re-elected in 1994 with 71% of the vote. The race was covered nationwide as one of the most closely watched Senate races that year. Kerry and Weld held several debates and negotiated a campaign spending cap of $6.9 million at Kerry's Beacon Hill townhouse. Both candidates spent more than the cap, with each camp accusing the other of being first to break the agreement.[95] During the campaign, Kerry spoke briefly at the 1996 Democratic National Convention. Kerry won re-election with 53 percent to Weld's 45 percent.[96]
In the 2000 presidential election, Kerry found himself close to being chosen as the vice presidential running mate.[97]
A release from the presidential campaign of presumptive Democratic nominee Al Gore listed Kerry on the short list to be selected as the vice-presidential nominee, along with North Carolina Senator John Edwards, Indiana Senator Evan Bayh, Missouri Congressman Richard Gephardt, New Hampshire Governor Jeanne Shaheen and Connecticut Senator Joe Lieberman.[98]
"You get stuck in Iraq" controversy
On October 30, 2006, Kerry was a headline speaker at a campaign rally being held for Democratic California gubernatorial candidate Phil Angelides at Pasadena City College in Pasadena, California. Speaking to an audience composed mainly of college students, Kerry said, "You know, education, if you make the most of it, you study hard, you do your homework and you make an effort to be smart, you can do well. If you don't, you get stuck in Iraq."[99]
The day after the remarks were made public, leaders from both sides of the political spectrum criticized Kerry's remarks, which he said were a botched joke. Republicans including President George W. Bush, Senator John McCain and then-Speaker of the House Dennis Hastert, said that Kerry's comments were insulting to American military forces fighting in Iraq. Democratic Representative Harold Ford, Jr. called on Kerry to apologize.[100]
Kerry initially stated: "Let me make it crystal clear, as crystal clear as I know how. I apologize to no one for my criticism of the president and of his broken policy."[101] Kerry also responded to criticism from George W. Bush and Dick Cheney.[102]




Kerry actively supported an independence referendum in South Sudan, January 2011


Kerry said that he had intended the remark as a jab at President Bush, and described the remarks as a "botched joke",[103] having inadvertently left out the key word "us" (which would have been, "If you don't, you get us stuck in Iraq"), as well as leaving the phrase "just ask President Bush" off of the end of the sentence. In Kerry's prepared remarks, which he released during the ensuing media frenzy, the corresponding line was "... you end up getting us stuck in a war in Iraq. Just ask President Bush." He also said that from the context of the speech which, prior to the "stuck in Iraq" line, made several specific references to Bush and elements of his biography, that Kerry was referring to President Bush and not American troops in general.[104]
After two days of media coverage, citing a desire not to be a diversion, Kerry apologized to those who took offense at what he called the misinterpretation of his comment.[105]
Afghanistan/Pakistan




Kerry leaving the U.S. Embassy in Kabul in 2013






Kerry with Spokesman to the Prime Minister of Pakistan, Zahid Bashir, in 2009


Kerry "has emerged in the past few years as an important envoy for Afghanistan and Pakistan during times of crisis," a Washington Post report stated in May 2011, as Kerry undertook another trip to the two countries. The killing of Osama bin Laden "has generated perhaps the most important crossroads yet," the report continued, as the senator spoke at a press conference and prepared to fly from Kabul to Pakistan.[106] Among matters discussed during the May visit to Pakistan, under the general rubric of "recalibrating" the bilateral relationship, Kerry sought and retrieved from the Pakistanis the tail-section of the U.S. helicopter which had had to be abandoned at Abbottabad during the bin Laden strike.[107] In 2013, Kerry met with Pakistan's army chief Gen. Ashfaq Parvez Kayani to discuss the peace process with the Taliban in Afghanistan.[108]
Voting record
Overall
Most analyses place Kerry's voting record on the left within the Senate Democratic caucus.[109] During the 2004 presidential election he was portrayed as a staunch liberal by conservative groups and the Bush campaign, who often noted that in 2003 Kerry was rated the National Journal's top Senate liberal. However, that rating was based only upon voting on legislation within that past year. In fact, in terms of career voting records, the National Journal found that Kerry is the 11th most liberal member of the Senate. Most analyses find that Kerry is at least slightly more liberal than the typical Democratic Senator. Kerry has stated that he opposes privatizing Social Security, supports abortion rights for adult women and minors, supports same-sex marriage, opposes capital punishment except for terrorists, supports most gun control laws, and is generally a supporter of trade agreements. Kerry supported the North American Free Trade Agreement and Most Favored Nation status for China, but opposed the Central American Free Trade Agreement.[citation needed]
In July 1997 Kerry joined his Senate colleagues in voting against ratification of the Kyoto Treaty on global warming without greenhouse gas emissions limits on nations deemed developing, including India and China.[110] Since then, Kerry has attacked President Bush, charging him with opposition to international efforts to combat global warming.[111]
On October 1, 2008, Kerry voted for Emergency Economic Stabilization Act of 2008, also known as the TARP bailout.[112]
Iraq
In the lead up to the Iraq War, Kerry said on October 9, 2002; "I will be voting to give the President of the United States the authority to use force, if necessary, to disarm Saddam Hussein because I believe that a deadly arsenal of weapons of mass destruction in his hands is a real and grave threat to our security." Bush relied on that resolution in ordering the 2003 invasion of Iraq. Kerry also gave a January 23, 2003 speech to Georgetown University saying "Without question, we need to disarm Saddam Hussein. He is a brutal, murderous dictator; leading an oppressive regime he presents a particularly grievous threat because he is so consistently prone to miscalculation. So the threat of Saddam Hussein with weapons of mass destruction is real." Kerry did, however, warn that the administration should exhaust its diplomatic avenues before launching war: "Mr. President, do not rush to war, take the time to build the coalition, because it's not winning the war that's hard, it's winning the peace that's hard."[113]
After the invasion of Iraq, when no weapons of mass destruction were found, Kerry strongly criticized Bush, contending that he had misled the country: "When the President of the United States looks at you and tells you something, there should be some trust."[114]
Leadership
Kerry chaired the Senate Select Committee on POW/MIA Affairs from 1991 to 1993. The committee's report, which Kerry endorsed, stated there was "no compelling evidence that proves that any American remains alive in captivity in Southeast Asia."[115] In 1994 the Senate passed a resolution, sponsored by Kerry and fellow Vietnam veteran John McCain, that called for an end to the existing trade embargo against Vietnam; it was intended to pave the way for normalization.[116] In 1995, President Bill Clinton normalized diplomatic relations with the country of Vietnam.[117]
Kerry was the chairman of the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee from 1987 to 1989. He was reelected to the Senate in 1990, 1996 (after winning re-election against the then-Governor of Massachusetts Republican William Weld), 2002, and 2008. In January 2009, Kerry replaced Joe Biden as the chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee.[118]
As a role model for campus leaders across the nation and strong advocate for global development, Kerry was honored by the Millennium Campus Network (MCN) as a Global Generation Award winner in 2011.[119][120]
Committee assignments
During his tenure, Kerry served on four Senate committees and nine subcommittees:

Committee on Commerce, Science and Transportation

Subcommittee on Aviation Operations, Safety, and Security
Subcommittee on Communications, Technology, and the Internet (Chairman)
Subcommittee on Competitiveness, Innovation, and Export Promotion
Subcommittee on Oceans, Atmosphere, Fisheries, and Coast Guard
Subcommittee on Science and Space
Subcommittee on Surface Transportation and Merchant Marine Infrastructure, Safety, and Security


Committee on Finance

Subcommittee on Health Care
Subcommittee on Energy, Natural Resources, and Infrastructure
Subcommittee on International Trade, Customs, and Global Competitiveness


Committee on Foreign Relations (Chairman 2009-2013)
Committee on Small Business and Entrepreneurship
Commission on Security and Cooperation in Europe
Joint Select Committee on Deficit Reduction

Caucus memberships

Congressional Bicameral High-Speed and Intercity Rail Caucus
Congressional Internet Caucus
Congressional Vietnam-Era Veterans Caucus (Co-Chair)
International Conservation Caucus
Senate Prosecutors Caucus (Co-Chair)
Senate Oceans Caucus

Seniority
Main article: Seniority in the United States Senate
From the beginning of the 113th United States Congress until his resignation, Kerry ranked as the 7th most senior U.S. Senator. Due to the longevity of Ted Kennedy's service, Kerry was the most senior junior Senator in the 111th United States Congress. On Tuesday, August 25, 2009, Kerry became the senior senator from Massachusetts following Ted Kennedy's death.
2004 presidential campaign
Main articles: United States presidential election, 2004; John Kerry presidential campaign, 2004; and 2004 United States presidential election controversy and irregularities




Kerry and Teresa Heinz crossing Lake Michigan on the Lake Express during the 2004 campaign






Kerry on the campaign trail in Rochester, Minnesota


In the 2004 Democratic presidential primaries, John Kerry defeated several Democratic rivals, including Sen. John Edwards (D-North Carolina.), former Vermont Governor Howard Dean and retired Army General Wesley Clark. His victory in the Iowa caucuses is widely believed to be the tipping point where Kerry revived his sagging campaign in New Hampshire and the February 3, 2004, primary states like Arizona, South Carolina and New Mexico. Kerry then went on to win landslide victories in Nevada and Wisconsin. Kerry thus won the Democratic nomination to run for President of the United States against incumbent George W. Bush. On July 6, 2004, he announced his selection of John Edwards as his running mate. Democratic strategist Bob Shrum, who was Kerry's 2004 campaign adviser, wrote an article in Time magazine claiming that after the election, Kerry had said that he wished he had never picked Edwards, and that the two have since stopped speaking to each other.[121] In a subsequent appearance on ABC's This Week, Kerry refused to respond to Shrum's allegation, calling it a "ridiculous waste of time."[122]
During his bid to be elected president in 2004, Kerry frequently criticized President George W. Bush for starting the Iraq War.[123] While Kerry had initially voted in support of authorizing President Bush to use force in dealing with Saddam Hussein, he voted against an $87 billion supplemental appropriations bill to pay for the subsequent war. His statement on March 16, 2004, "I actually did vote for the $87 billion before I voted against it," helped the Bush campaign to paint him as a flip-flopper and has been cited as contributing to Kerry's defeat.[124]
On November 3, 2004, Kerry conceded the race. Kerry won 59.03 million votes, or 48.3 percent of the popular vote; Bush won 62.04 million votes, or 50.7 percent of the popular vote. Kerry carried states with a total of 252 electoral votes. One Kerry elector voted for Kerry's running mate, Edwards, so in the final tally Kerry had 251 electoral votes to Bush's 286.[125]
Later presidential election activities




Kerry speaking during the third night of the 2008 Democratic National Convention in Denver, Colorado


Immediately after the 2004 election, some Democrats mentioned Kerry as a possible contender for the 2008 Democratic nomination. His brother had said such a campaign was "conceivable", and Kerry himself reportedly said at a farewell party for his 2004 campaign staff, "There's always another four years."[126]
Kerry established a separate political action committee, Keeping America's Promise, which declared as its mandate "A Democratic Congress will restore accountability to Washington and help change a disastrous course in Iraq",[127] and raised money and channeled contributions to Democratic candidates in state and federal races.[128] Through Keeping America's Promise in 2005, Kerry raised over $5.5 million for other Democrats up and down the ballot. Through his campaign account and his political action committee, the Kerry campaign operation generated more than $10 million for various party committees and 179 candidates for the U.S. House, Senate, state and local offices in 42 states focusing on the midterm elections during the 2006 election cycle.[129] "Cumulatively, John Kerry has done as much if not more than any other individual senator", Hassan Nemazee, the national finance chairman of the DSCC said.[130]
On January 10, 2008, Kerry endorsed Illinois Senator Barack Obama for president.[131] He was mentioned as a possible vice presidential candidate for Senator Obama, although fellow Senator Joe Biden was eventually chosen. After Biden's acceptance of the vice presidential nomination, speculation arose that John Kerry would be a candidate for Secretary of State in the Obama administration.[132] However, Senator Hillary Clinton was offered the position.[133]
During the 2012 Obama reelection campaign, Kerry participated in one-on-one debate prep with the president, impersonating the Republican candidate Mitt Romney.[134]
Secretary of State (2013–2017)




U.S. Secretary of State John Kerry meets with Grybauskaitė in Vilnius, September 7, 2013






John Kerry is sworn in as Secretary of State by Justice Elena Kagan, February 1, 2013


Nomination
On December 15, 2012, several news outlets reported that President Barack Obama would nominate Kerry to succeed Hillary Clinton as Secretary of State,[135][136] after Susan Rice, widely seen as Obama's preferred choice, withdrew her name from consideration citing a politicized confirmation process following criticism of her response to the 2012 Benghazi attack.[137] On December 21, Obama proposed the nomination[138][139] which received positive commentary. His confirmation hearing took place on January 24, 2013, before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, the same panel where he first testified in 1971.[140][141] The committee unanimously voted to approve him on January 29, 2013, and the same day the full Senate confirmed him on a vote of 94–3.[142][143] In a letter to Massachusetts Governor Deval Patrick, Kerry announced his resignation from the Senate effective February 1.[144]




Kerry with Hossein Fereydoun and Mohammad Javad Zarif during the announcement of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action, July 14, 2015


Tenure




Ukrainian opposition leaders Vitali Klitschko, Arseniy Yatsenyuk and Petro Poroshenko meeting Kerry, February 1, 2014


Kerry was sworn in as Secretary of State on February 1, 2013.[145]
After six months of rigorous diplomacy within the Middle East, Secretary Kerry was able to have Israeli and Palestinian negotiators agree to start the 2013–14 Israeli–Palestinian peace talks. Senior U.S. officials stated the two sides were able to meet on July 30, 2013 at the State Department without American mediators following a dinner the previous evening hosted by Kerry.[146]




Kerry views the Mrajeeb al-Fhood camp for Syrian refugees


On September 27, 2013, he met with the Iranian Foreign Minister Mohammad Javad Zarif during the P5+1 and Iran summit, which eventually led to the JCPOA nuclear agreement. It was the highest-level direct contact between the United States and Iran in the last six years, and made him the first U.S. Secretary of State to have met with his Iranian counterpart since 1979 Iranian Revolution.[147][148][149]




John Kerry and Barack Obama meet with Russian President Vladimir Putin to discuss Syria, September 29, 2015






Kerry meets with Philippine President Rodrigo Duterte at Malacañang Palace in Manila, Philippines on July 26, 2016






Kerry meets with Argentine President Mauricio Macri in Buenos Aires, Argentina on August 4, 2016


In the State Department, Kerry quickly earned a reputation "for being aloof, keeping to himself, and not bothering to read staff memos." Career State Department officials have complained that power has become too centralized under Kerry's leadership, which slows department operations when Kerry is on one of his frequent overseas trips. Others in State describe Kerry as having "a kind of diplomatic attention deficit disorder" as he shifts from topic to topic instead of focusing on long-term strategy. When asked whether he was traveling too much, he responded, "Hell no. I'm not slowing down." Despite Kerry's early achievements, morale at State is lower than under Hillary Clinton according to department employees.[150] However, after Kerry's first six months in the State Department, a Gallup poll found he had high approval ratings among Americans as Secretary of State.[151] After a year, another poll showed Kerry's favorability continued to rise.[152] Less than two years into Kerry's term, the Foreign Policy Magazine's 2014 Ivory Tower survey of international relations scholars asked, "Who was the most effective U.S. Secretary of State in the past 50 years?"; John Kerry and Lawrence Eagleburger tied for 11th place out of the 15 confirmed Secretaries of State in that period.[153][154]
In January 2014, having met with Secretary of State, Archbishop Pietro Parolin, Kerry said "We touched on just about every major issue that we are both working on, that are issues of concern to all of us. First of all, we talked at great length about Syria, and I was particularly appreciative for the Archbishop’s raising this issue, and equally grateful for the Holy Father’s comments – the Pope's comments yesterday regarding his support for the Geneva II process. We welcome that support. It is very important to have broad support, and I know that the Pope is particularly concerned about the massive numbers of displaced human beings and the violence that has taken over 130,000 lives".[155]
Kerry expressed support for Israel's right to defend itself during the 2014 Israel–Gaza conflict.[156]
Kerry said the United States supported the Saudi Arabian-led intervention in Yemen because Saudi Arabia, an ally, was threatened "very directly" by the takeover of neighboring Yemen by the Houthis, but noted that the United States would not reflexively support Saudi Arabia’s proxy wars against Iran.[157]
On December 28, 2016, soon after United Nations Security Council Resolution 2334 passed 14-0 with the U.S. abstaining, Kerry joined the rest of the U.N. Security Council in strongly criticizing Israel's settlement policies in a speech.[158] His speech and criticisms met negative reactions from Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu,[159] while UK Prime Minister Theresa May distanced the UK from Kerry’s strongly worded speech in what appeared to be an attempt to build bridges with the incoming Trump administration.[160] Kerry's speech received positive reactions from Arab nations, but some criticized his remarks as too little, too late from the outgoing administration.[161]
Syria
Following the August 21, 2013, chemical weapons attack on the Ghouta suburbs of Damascus attributed to Syrian government forces, Kerry became a leading advocate for the use of military force against the Syrian government for what he called "a despot's brutal and flagrant use of chemical weapons."[162]
Kerry said on September 9 in response to a reporter's question about whether Syrian President Bashar al-Assad could avert a military strike: "He could turn over every single bit of his chemical weapons to the international community in the next week. Turn it over, all of it, without delay, and allow a full and total accounting for that. But he isn't about to do it, and it can't be done, obviously." This unscripted remark initiated a process that would lead to Syria agreeing to relinquish and destroy its chemical weapons arsenal, as Russia treated Kerry's statement as a serious proposal. Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov said Russia would work "immediately" to convince Syria relinquish and destroy its large chemical weapons arsenal.[163][164][165][166] Syria quickly welcomed this proposal and on September 14, the UN formally accepted Syria's application to join the convention banning chemical weapons, and separately, the U.S. and Russia agreed on a plan to eliminate Syria's chemical weapons by the middle of 2014, leading Kerry to declare on July 20, 2014: "we struck a deal where we got 100 percent of the chemical weapons out."[167] On September 28, the UN Security Council passed a resolution ordering the destruction of Syria's chemical weapons and condemning the August 21 Ghouta attack.[168]
Latin America
In a speech before the Organization of American States in November 2013, Kerry remarked that the era of the Monroe Doctrine was over. He went on to explain, "The relationship that we seek and that we have worked hard to foster is not about a United States declaration about how and when it will intervene in the affairs of other American states. It's about all of our countries viewing one another as equals, sharing responsibilities, cooperating on security issues, and adhering not to doctrine, but to the decisions that we make as partners to advance the values and the interests that we share."[169]
Environmentalism
Kerry has had a long-standing concern with environmentalism as a global issue. In April 2016, he signed the Paris Climate Accords at the United Nations in New York.[170]
On November 11, 2016, Kerry became the first Secretary of State and highest-ranking U.S. official to date to visit Antarctica. Kerry spent two days on the continent meeting with researchers and staying overnight at McMurdo Station.[171]
In 1994, Kerry led opposition to continued funding for the Integral Fast Reactor, which resulting in the end of funding for the project.[172] However, in light of increasing concerns regarding climate change, in 2017 Kerry reversed his position on nuclear power, saying "Given this challenge we face today, and given the progress of fourth generation nuclear: go for it. No other alternative, zero emissions."[173]
Global Connect initiative
In September 2015, the U.S. Department of State unveiled a new initiative called "Global Connect" which seeks to provide internet access to over 1.5 billion people around the world who do not have online connectivity by year 2020.[174] In 2016, in partnership with OPIC, Kerry announced an investment of $171 million to enable "a low-cost and rapidly scalable wireless broadband network in India". OPIC’s financing is aimed at helping its Indian Partner, Tikona Digital Networks, to provide Internet through wireless technology.[175][176][177]
Post Obama Administration
Kerry retired from his diplomatic work following the end of the Obama administration on January 20, 2017.[178] He did not attend Donald Trump's inauguration on that day, and the following day took part in the 2017 Women's March in Washington D.C.[179] Kerry has taken a strong stand against Trump policies and joined in filing a brief arguing against the new president's executive order banning entry of persons from seven Muslim countries.[180]
Writing his memoirs
According to news reports, Kerry intends to write his first memoir, which is due to come out in 2018.[181]
Homes
In April 2017, Kerry purchased a 18-acre property on the northwest corner of Martha's Vineyard overlooking Vineyard Sound in the town of Chilmark, Massachusetts. The property is located in Seven Gates Farm and according to property records, cost $11.75 million for the seven bedroom home.[182]
Personal and family life
Ancestry
Kerry's paternal grandparents, shoe businessman Frederick A. "Fred" Kerry and musician Ida Lowe, were immigrants from the Austro-Hungarian Empire. Fred was born as "Fritz Kohn" before he and Ida took on the "Kerry" name and moved to the United States. Fred and Ida were born Jewish, and converted to Catholicism together in Austria.[183] His maternal ancestors were of Scottish and English descent,[9][183] and his maternal grandfather James Grant Forbes II was a member of the Forbes family, while his maternal grandmother Margaret Tyndal Winthrop was a member of the Dudley–Winthrop family. Margaret's paternal grandfather Robert Charles Winthrop served as the 22nd Speaker of the U.S. House of Representatives. Robert's father was Governor Thomas Lindall Winthrop. Thomas' father John Still Winthrop was a great-great-grandson of Massachusetts Bay Colony Governor John Winthrop[6] and great-grandson of Governor Thomas Dudley.[9] Through his mother, John is a first cousin once removed of French politician Brice Lalonde.[9][184]
Marriages and children




Kerry's daughter Vanessa and grandson Alexander


Kerry was married to Julia Stimson Thorne in 1970, and they had two daughters together:

Alexandra Forbes Kerry (born September 5, 1973), documentary filmmaker
Vanessa Bradford Kerry (born December 31, 1976), physician





Kerry at the LBJ Presidential Library in 2016






Kerry at the Great Naadam in Mongolia, 2016


Alexandra was born days before Kerry began law school. In 1982, Julia asked Kerry for a separation while she was suffering from severe depression.[185] They were divorced on July 25, 1988, and the marriage was formally annulled in 1997. "After 14 years as a political wife, I associated politics only with anger, fear and loneliness" she wrote in A Change of Heart, her book about depression. Thorne later married Richard Charlesworth, an architect, and moved to Bozeman, Montana, where she became active in local environmental groups such as the Greater Yellowstone Coalition. Thorne supported Kerry's 2004 presidential run. She died of cancer on April 27, 2006.[186]
Kerry and his second wife, Mozambican-born businesswoman and philanthropist Maria Teresa Thierstein Simões Ferreira (known as Teresa), the widow of Kerry's late Pennsylvania Republican Senate colleague Henry John Heinz III, were introduced to each other by Heinz at an Earth Day rally in 1990. Early the following year, Senator Heinz was killed in a plane crash near Lower Merion. Teresa has three sons from her previous marriage to Heinz, Henry John Heinz IV, André Thierstein Heinz, and Christopher Drake Heinz.[187] Heinz and Kerry were married on May 26, 1995, in Nantucket, Massachusetts.[188]
The Forbes 400 survey estimated in 2004 that Teresa Heinz Kerry had a net worth of $750 million. However, estimates have frequently varied, ranging from around $165 million to as high as $3.2 billion, according to a study in the Los Angeles Times. Regardless of which figure is correct, Kerry was the wealthiest U.S. Senator while serving in the Senate. Independent of Heinz, Kerry is wealthy in his own right, and is the beneficiary of at least four trusts inherited from Forbes family relatives, including his mother, Rosemary Forbes Kerry, who died in 2002. Forbes magazine (named for the Forbes family of publishers, unrelated to Kerry) estimated that if elected, and if Heinz family assets were included, Kerry would have been the third-richest U.S. President in history, when adjusted for inflation.[189] This assessment was based on Heinz and Kerry's combined assets, but the couple signed a prenuptial agreement that keeps their assets separate.[190] Kerry's financial disclosure form for 2011 put his personal assets in the range of $230,000,000 to $320,000,000,[191] including the assets of his spouse and any dependent children. This included slightly more than three million dollars worth of H. J. Heinz Company assets, which increased in value by over six hundred thousand dollars in 2013 when Berkshire Hathaway announced their intention to purchase the company.[192]
Religious beliefs




Kerry touring a Chinese automobile factory in Beijing


Kerry is a Roman Catholic, and is said to carry a religious rosary, a prayer book, and a St. Christopher medal (the patron saint of travelers) when he campaigned. Discussing his faith, Kerry said, "I thought of being a priest. I was very religious while at school in Switzerland. I was an altar boy and prayed all the time. I was very centered around the Mass and the church." He also said that the Letters of Paul (Apostle Paul) moved him the most, stating that they taught him to "not feel sorry for myself."[2]
Kerry told Christianity Today in October 2004:

I'm a Catholic and I practice, but at the same time I have an open-mindedness to many other expressions of spirituality that come through different religions... I've spent some time reading and thinking about religion and trying to study it, and I've arrived at not so much a sense of the differences, but a sense of the similarities in so many ways.[193]

He said that he believed that the Torah, the Quran, and the Bible all share a fundamental story which connects with readers.[193]
Health
In 2003, Kerry was diagnosed with and successfully treated for prostate cancer.[194] On May 31, 2015, Kerry broke his right leg in a biking accident in Scionzier, France, and was flown to Boston's Massachusetts General Hospital for recovery. MGH Hip and Knee Replacement Orthopaedic Surgeon Dr. Dennis Burke,[195] who had met Kerry in France and had accompanied him in the plane from France to Boston, set Kerry's right leg on Tuesday, June 2, in a four-hour operation.[196][197]
Athletics and sailing
In addition to the sports he played at Yale, Kerry is described by Sports Illustrated, among others, as an "avid cyclist",[198][199] primarily riding on a road bike. Prior to his presidential bid, Kerry was known to have participated in several long-distance rides (centuries). Even during his many campaigns, he was reported to have visited bicycle stores in both his home state and elsewhere. His staff requested recumbent stationary bikes for his hotel rooms.[200] He has also been a snowboarder, windsurfer, and sailor.[201]
According to the Boston Herald, dated July 23, 2010, Kerry commissioned construction on a new $7 million yacht (a Friendship 75) in New Zealand and moored it in Portsmouth, Rhode Island, where the Friendship yacht company is based.[202] The article claimed this allowed him to avoid paying Massachusetts taxes on the property including approximately $437,500 in sales tax and an annual excise tax of about $500.[203][204] However, on July 27, 2010, Kerry stated he had yet to take legal possession of the boat, had not intended to avoid the taxes, and that when he took possession, he would pay the taxes whether he owed them or not.[205]
Foreign honors
John Kerry was awarded:[206]




Kerry after he received Grand Office of the Legion of Honour from French Foreign Minister Jean-Marc Ayrault.



Germany: Grand Cross 1st class of the Order of Merit of the Federal Republic of Germany
France: Grand Office of the Legion of Honour

Honorary Degrees
John Kerry has received several honorary degrees in recognition of his service to the United States, These Include:


State
Date
School
Degree


Massachusetts
May 28, 1988
University of Massachusetts Boston
Doctor of Laws [207][208]


Massachusetts
June 17, 2000
Northeastern University
Doctor of Public Service [209]


Ohio
May 2006
Kenyon College
Doctor of Laws [210]


Massachusetts
May 19, 2014
Boston College
Doctor of Laws [211]


This list is incomplete; you can help by expanding it.
Electoral history
Main article: Electoral history of John Kerry
See also


United States Navy portal
Massachusetts portal



List of foreign ministers in 2017


References


^ 107th Congress-2nd Session 237th Roll Call Vote by members of the Senate, October 11, 2002. Retrieved 9 January 2017.
^ a b c d Caldwell, Deborah. "Not a Prodigal Son". beliefnet.com. 
^ "Army Brats Soar" (PDF). Army Magazine. November 11, 2014. Archived from the original (pdf) on April 2, 2015. Retrieved July 2, 2016. 
^ "Sen. John Kerry chokes up talking about his diplomat father and gets a kiss of approval from Hillary Clinton during Secretary of State confirmation hearing". Mail Online. London. January 24, 2013. 
^ "Kerry's World: Father Knows Best". cbsnews.com. March 2, 2004. 
^ a b "'Outsider' label follows Kerry in Massachusetts despite years in office". News-Sentinel. July 6, 2004. 
^ Goldhaber, Samuel Z. (February 18, 1970). "John Kerry: A Navy Dove Runs for Congress". 
^ Kranish, Michael (June 15, 2003). "A privileged youth, a taste for risk". The Boston Globe. 
^ a b c d e Kranish, Michael; Mooney, Brian C.; Easton, Nina J. (April 27, 2004). "John Kerry: The Complete Biography by The Boston Globe Reporters Who Know Him Best". The Boston Globe. John W. Henry. 
^ "ESPN.com: Page 2 : Rink turns and big deals". go.com. Retrieved August 27, 2015. 
^ "Kerry '66: 'He was going to be president'". Yale Daily News. Retrieved August 27, 2015. 
^ Martin, Douglas. "H. Bradford Westerfield, 79, Influential Yale Professor". The New York Times. January 27, 2008.
^ "At 50, AIESEC ponders its future". Yale Daily News. January 22, 2007. Archived from the original on April 19, 2010. Retrieved March 12, 2010. 
^ "Welcome to AIESEC". Aiesec.org. Retrieved March 12, 2010. 
^ "AIESEC Yale". Yale.edu. Retrieved April 22, 2013. 
^ "Yale Debate Team, 1965–1966, Yale University Manuscripts & Archives Digital Images Database, Yale University". Images.library.yale.edu. June 18, 2013. Retrieved June 26, 2013. 
^ Leibenluft, Jacob (February 14, 2003). "Kerry '66: 'He was going to be president'". Yale Daily News. Retrieved December 22, 2012. 
^ Kranish, Michael (June 7, 2005). "Yale grades portray Kerry as a lackluster student". The Boston Globe. 
^ https://web.archive.org/web/20040723192004/http://www.johnkerry.com/pdf/jkmilservice/Request_For_History_of_Service.pdf
^ Kranish, Michael (June 7, 2005). "Kerry allows Navy release of military, medical records". The Boston Globe. 
^ Gerstein, Josh (June 21, 2005). "Kerry Grants Three Reporters Broad Access to Navy Records". 
^ a b Official Record Copy of request for duty in Vietnam. Retrieved November 4, 2009.
^ Kranish, Michael (June 16, 2003). "Heroism, and growing concern about war". The Boston Globe. 
^ Brinkley, Douglas. "John Kerry's first Purple Heart". Salon. Archived from the original on February 1, 2012. Retrieved January 3, 2007. 
^ Rasmussen, Eric (2004). "Primary Sources: John Kerry's Vietnam Medals" (PDF). Truth and Unfit for Command A Review. kerryvietnam.org. Retrieved September 5, 2013. 
^ Rasmussen, Eric (2004). "Primary Sources: John Kerry's Vietnam Medals" (PDF). Truth and Unfit for Command A Review. kerryvietnam.org. Retrieved September 5, 2013. 
^ Rasmussen, Eric (2004). "Part I: John Kerry in Vietnam" (PDF). Truth and Unfit for Command A Review. kerryvietnam.org. Retrieved September 5, 2013. 
^ "LTJG Peter N. Upton, The Death Of PCF 43". Mwweb.com. April 12, 1969. Retrieved March 12, 2010. 
^ "Silver Star Medal – John F. Kerry" (PDF). Retrieved March 12, 2010. 
^ Rasmussen, Eric (2004). "Primary Sources: John Kerry's Vietnam Medals" (PDF). Truth and Unfit for Command A Review. kerryvietnam.org. Retrieved September 5, 2013. 
^ Rasmussen, Eric (2004). "Primary Sources: John Kerry's Vietnam Medals" (PDF). Truth and Unfit for Command A Review. kerryvietnam.org. Retrieved September 5, 2013. 
^ Rasmussen, Eric (2004). "Primary Sources: John Kerry's Vietnam Medals" (PDF). Truth and Unfit for Command A Review. kerryvietnam.org. Retrieved September 5, 2013. 
^ Rasmussen, Eric (2004). "Primary Sources: John Kerry's Vietnam Medals" (PDF). Truth and Unfit for Command A Review. kerryvietnam.org. Retrieved September 5, 2013. 
^ "Bronze Star Medal – John F. Kerry" (PDF). Retrieved March 12, 2010. 
^ "Thrice wounded", Official Record Copy via findlaw.com, March 2, 1969.
^ United States Navy. "Temporary Orders and Ranks (Internet Archive mirror)" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on April 26, 2004. Retrieved September 8, 2006. 
^ http://news.findlaw.com/hdocs/docs/jkerry/rqstswiftboat.pdf
^ http://news.findlaw.com/hdocs/docs/jkerry/releaseactduty.pdf
^ Critics countered on Kerry record of inactive service – Naval Reserve tour is defended; The Boston Globe; September 10, 2004.
^ "'Hardball with Chris Matthews' for August 19". MSNBC. August 19, 2004. Retrieved April 22, 2013. 
^ Brinkley, Douglas (March 9, 2004). "The Tenth Brother". Time. 
^ Casey, Leo (Spring 2009). "No redemption song: The Case of Bill Ayers". Dissent. University of Pennsylvania Press. 56 (2): 107–111. doi:10.1353/dss.0.0041. ISSN 0012-3846. In recent elections, the patriotism and good names of Democratic war hero candidates, from John Kerry to Max Cleland, had been impugned so successfully that a neologism for such smears—to 'swift boat'—was coined out of the assault on Kerry. 
^

Coile, Zachary (August 6, 2004). "Vets group attacks Kerry; McCain defends Democrat". San Francisco Chronicle. 
Zernke, Kate (May 28, 2006). "Kerry Pressing Swift Boat Case Long After Loss". The New York Times. Retrieved May 4, 2014. 
Akers, Mary Ann (June 20, 2008). "John Kerry's Vietnam Crew Mates Still Fighting Swift Boating". The Washington Post. 
Lehigh, Scot (August 20, 2004). "Kerry comrades have credibility on their side". The Boston Globe. John W. Henry. Retrieved May 4, 2014. 


^ O’Donnell, Lawrence (2017). "Playing with Fire – The 1968 Elections and the Transformation of American Politics” (1st ed.). Penguin Press. p. 6. ISBN 9780399563140. 
^ Lembcke, Jerry (Fall 2003). "Still a Force for Peace". 
^ Williams, Brian. "Nixon targeted Kerry for anti-war views". 
^ The Washington Post, December 9, 2005, "'Winter Soldier': Cold Days in Hell," https://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2005/12/08/AR2005120801996.html
^ Jan, Tracy; Bryan Bender (December 21, 2012). "Roots of John Kerry's secretary of state ambition lie in wake of 2004 defeat". The Boston Globe. Retrieved January 12, 2012. Just three months after losing his campaign to be president 
^ Oliphant, Tom (April 27, 2004). "I watched Kerry throw his war decorations". The Boston Globe. 
^ Unfinished Symphony: Democracy and Dissent – Documentary, 2001.
^ Against the Vietnam War: Writings by Activists, Mary Susannah Robbins, pp. 78–90.
^ Lexington Minute-Man Newspaper, May 23, 1991.
^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q Brian C. Mooney (June 18, 2003). "First campaign ends in defeat". The Boston Globe. Retrieved April 9, 2016. 
^ "MA District 5 - D Primary 1972". Our Campaigns. Retrieved April 9, 2016. 
^ Todd Purdum (September 24, 2004). "Echoes of a 1972 Loss Haunt a 2004 Campaign". The New York Times. Retrieved April 9, 2016. 
^ Associated Press (November 6, 1972). "Durkin Pulls Out of Race in Effort to Defeat Kerry". Nashua Telegraph. Nashua, NH. p. 8. 
^ "MA District 5 1972". Our Campaigns. Retrieved April 9, 2016. 
^ Chris Tierney, The Lowell Sun, Remember When?, June 28, 2014
^ ProCon.org, Alternative Energy Pros and Cons: Biography, John Kerry, retrieved July 28, 2014
^ Brian C. Mooney, The Boston Globe, John Kerry, candidate in the Making: Part 4; First Campaign Ends in Defeat, June 18, 2003
^ John J. Mullins, Associated Press, Lowell Sun, For John Kerry It's Law -- For Now, October 26, 1975
^ Boston College Office of news and Public Affairs, Secretary of State John Kerry to Boston College Class of 2014: 'Pass On Your Light to Others', May 19, 2014
^ Meghan E. Irons, The Boston Globe, John Kerry Visits Mass. for Farewell Tour, January 31, 2013
^ James Rainey, Los Angeles Times, Kerry's Crime-Fighting Early Days July 18, 2004
^ a b Jeffrey Toobin (May 10, 2004). "Kerry's Trials: What the Candidate Learned as a Lawyer". The New Yorker. Retrieved April 9, 2016. 
^ "/ Photo gallery". Boston.com. June 16, 1978. Retrieved March 12, 2010. 
^ United Press International, Galveston Daily News, Sen. Brooke Not To Face Prosecution For Perjury, August 2, 1978
^ Michael Pare (December 6, 1999). "Thomas P. O'Neill, III". Providence Business News. Retrieved April 9, 2016. 
^ Stuart E. Weisberg, Barney Frank: The Story of America's Only Left-handed, Gay, Jewish Congressman, 2009, page 170
^ "MA Lt. Governor - D Primary 1982". Our Campaigns. Retrieved April 9, 2016. 
^ Katie Zezima, The New York Times, Ex-Gov. Edward J. King, 81, Who Defeated Dukakis, Dies, September 19, 2006
^ Marie Marmo Mullaney, Biographical Directory of the Governors of the United States, 1988-1994, 1994, pages 177-178
^ Stan Grossfeld, The Boston Globe, Photo caption: "Governor-elect Michael Dukakis and Lieutenant Governor-elect John Kerry celebrate their 1982 election victory.", 1982
^ Bruce L. Brager, John Kerry: Senator from Massachusetts, 2005, page 78
^ Associated Press, NBCNews.com, '82 Victory Was Key to Kerry's Career, August 9, 2004
^ Charles P. Pierce (January 29, 2007). "The Misunderestimation of John Kerry". Esquire. Retrieved April 9, 2016. 
^ Paul Duke, Jr., Harvard Crimson, Richardson to Run for Tsongas' Seat; Candidacy Fires Republican Hopes, February 14, 1984
^ George B. Merry, Christian Science Monitor, Shannon Senate Bid Gets Key Endorsement, June 11, 1984
^ Paul Duke, Jr., Harvard Crimson, Shannon Bid for Senate Seat Threatens Favorites: Congressman Joins Tough Race Against Markey, Kerry and Bartley, February 7, 1984
^ Kornacki, Steve (February 7, 2011) Will things finally, really work out for John Kerry?, Salon.com.
^ Martin F. Nolan, San Francisco Chronicle, Can't Kiss Off Kerry / He's a Hardscrabble Campaigner Who Woos Blue-Collar Voters and Fights for Life when Behind, April 4, 2004
^ Paul Duke, Jr., Harvard Crimson, Republican Stars Shine on Ray Shamie: Heckler, Fahrenkopf Plug Senate Candidate in Boston, October 2, 1984
^ Dan Payne, Salon.com, How Kerry Wins, April 13, 2004
^ Fox Butterfield, The New York Times, The 1984 Election: Each State Has its own battles; Democrat Victor in Massachusetts, November 7, 1984
^ Associated Press, Bangor Daily News, Kerry to be Sworn in to Senate One Day Early to Gain Seniority, January 2, 1985
^ Farrell, John Aloysius (June 20, 2003). "With probes, making his mark". The Boston Globe. Retrieved June 21, 2006. 
^ "White House Official Linked To Arms Deliveries to Contras". The New York Times. October 15, 1986. p. 6. 
^ "Selections from the Senate Committee Report on Drugs, Law Enforcement and Foreign Policy chaired by Senator John F. Kerry". Retrieved April 21, 2006. 
^ Cockburn, Alexander; Jeffrey St Clair (October 1, 1999). Whiteout: The CIA, Drugs and the Press. Verso. ISBN 1-85984-258-5. 
^ Corn, David (July 16, 2001). "Defining John Kerry". The Nation. (Subscription required (help)). 
^ Johnston, David (December 24, 1992). "Bush Pardons 6 In Iran Affair, Aborting A Weinberger Trial; Prosecutor Assails 'Cover-Up' Bush Diary at Issue 6-Year Inquiry Into Deal of Arms for Hostages All but Swept Away". The New York Times. 
^ "Senator repudiates 'Shoot Quayle' joke". St. Louis Post-Dispatch Archives/AP via Nl.newsbank.com. November 17, 1988. Retrieved March 12, 2010. 
^ Sirota, David; Baskin, Jonathan (September 2004). "Follow the Money". Archived from the original on September 11, 2004. 
^ "The BCCI Affair – 19 Ed Rogers and Kamal Adham". Fas.org. Retrieved March 12, 2010. 
^ Rimer, Sara (October 25, 1996). "Promises Yield to Old-Fashioned Politics". The New York Times. Retrieved March 12, 2010. 
^ Rucker, Philip; Balz, Dan (June 18, 2012). "Obama picks John Kerry to play Romney in mock debate rehearsals". The Washington Post. 
^ Battenfeld, Joe (July 14, 2000). "Kerry's stock rises in VP sweepstakes". CNN. 
^ Connolly, Ceci (August 4, 2000). "Gore Trims VP List To Six – Senators Have Inside Track / Bradley could be `wild card' pick". San Francisco Chronicle. Retrieved January 9, 2013. 
^ Ryan, Andrew (October 31, 2006). "Kerry says he "botched joke" and lashes out at GOP". The Boston Globe. Retrieved January 11, 2007. 
^ "Kerry Events Cut as Democrats Criticize Iraq Remark (Update5)". bloomberg.com. November 1, 2006. Retrieved January 12, 2013. 
^ Loven, Jennifer (November 1, 2006). "Some Democrats join Republicans in pressing Kerry for apology". Houston Chronicle. Archived from the original on April 18, 2010. 
^ "Statement of John Kerry Responding to Republican Distortions, Pathetic Tony Snow Diversions and Distractions". Friends of John Kerry. October 31, 2006. Archived from the original on December 29, 2006. Retrieved January 11, 2007. 
^ Sandalow, Marc (November 2, 2006). "'Botched joke' feeds a frenzy among Dems, GOP and media". San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on August 10, 2007. 
^ Zernike, Kate (November 1, 2006). "Flubbed Joke Makes Kerry a Political Punching Bag, Again". The New York Times. Retrieved January 11, 2007. 
^ Stout, David (November 1, 2006). "Kerry Apologizes for Iraq Remark". The New York Times. Retrieved January 11, 2007. 
^ Partlow, Joshua (May 15, 2011). "Kerry: U.S. relationship with Pakistan at 'critical moment'". The Washington Post. Retrieved May 15, 2011. 
^ Brulliard, Karin (May 17, 2011). "Pakistan to return U.S. helicopter tail, Kerry says". The Washington Post. Retrieved May 17, 2011. 
^ Kumar Sen, Ashish. "Secretary of State John Kerry meets with Pakistani army chief to discuss Taliban". The Washington Times. Retrieved March 26, 2013. 
^ How Liberal is John Kerry? FactCheck.org. Retrieved January 28, 2013.
^ "U.S. Senate: Legislation & Records Home > Votes > Roll Call Vote". Senate.gov. Retrieved March 12, 2010. 
^ "Kerry says U.S. 'a sort of international pariah'". USA TODAY. January 27, 2007. 
^ "U.S. Senate: Legislation & Records Home > Votes > Roll Call Vote". Senate.gov. Retrieved March 12, 2010. 
^ "Kerry Makes It Official". CBS. September 2, 2003. 
^ "Bush defends Iraq war in face of WMD findings". CNN. January 28, 2004. 
^ "Report of the Select Committee on POW/MIA Affairs". U.S. Senate. January 13, 1993. Retrieved January 3, 2008. 
^ Greenhouse, Steven (January 28, 1994). "Senate Urges End to U.S. Embargo Against Vietnam". The New York Times. Retrieved January 6, 2008. 
^ Walsh, James (July 24, 1995). "Good Morning, Vietnam". Time. Retrieved January 5, 2008. 
^ Bryan Bender (November 20, 2008). "Kerry poised to cap long journey". The Boston Globe. 
^ Pearlman, Alex (September 19, 2011). "Global Generation Awards Honor Gen Y's Humanitarian Heroes - The Next Great Generation". Boston.com. Retrieved April 22, 2013. 
^ Shanahan, Mark; Goldstein, Meredith (September 20, 2011). "Dushku honored at Global Generation Awards". Boston.com. Retrieved April 22, 2013. 
^ Shrum, Robert (May 30, 2007). "Kerry's Regrets About John Edwards". Time.com. Retrieved March 12, 2010. 
^ Pitney, Nico (January 13, 2008). "Kerry Disregards Bob Shrum Book: "Ridiculous Waste Of Time"". Huffingtonpost.com. Retrieved March 12, 2010. 
^ "Text of Kerry's Acceptance Speech,", NBC News, July 29, 2004. "Saying there are weapons of mass destruction in Iraq doesn't make it so. Saying we can fight a war on the cheap doesn't make it so. And proclaiming mission accomplished certainly doesn't make it so."
^ Barone, Michael; Cohen, Richard E. (2009). The Almanac of American Politics 2010. Washington, D.C.: National Journal Group. p. 731. ISBN 978-0-89234-120-7. Bush's job approval hovered under 50%, and he trailed Kerry in polls for much of the seven-month campaign. Kerry performed well in debates, being judged the winner in snap polls in all three. Yet he lost. One reason may have been encapsulated by his March 16 defense of his 2003 vote against the supplemental appropriation for Iraq: 'I actually did vote for the $87 billion before I voted against it.' The Bush campaign painted Kerry as a flip-flopper. 
^ http://www.fec.gov/pubrec/fe2004/federalelections2004.pdf
^ Johnson, Glen (November 9, 2004). "Kerry run in '08 called conceivable". The Boston Globe. 
^ "Keeping America's Promise". Keepingamericaspromise.com. July 5, 2007. Archived from the original on November 16, 2006. Retrieved March 12, 2010. 
^ Johnson, Glen (December 5, 2004). "Kerry creates PAC to back candidates". The Boston Globe. 
^ Mooney, Brain C. (October 9, 2006). "Kerry's barnstorming sparks talk of a run". The Boston Globe. 
^ Klein, Rick; Kranish, Michael (October 21, 2006). "Kerry is pressured to share campaign wealth". The Boston Globe. 
^ "Kerry endorses Obama over '04 running mate". CNN.com. January 10, 2008. Retrieved March 12, 2010. 
^ Hosenball, Mark (June 23, 2008). "A Bid for an Obama Cabinet". Newsweek. 
^ "Hillary Clinton reportedly accepts Barack Obama's Cabinet offer". Latimesblogs. November 21, 2008. Retrieved March 12, 2010. 
^ Rama, Padmananda (November 8, 2012). "Likely Suspects: Guessing Obama's Second-Term Cabinet". NPR via northcountrypublicradio.org. 
^ Tapper, Jake (December 15, 2012). "John Kerry to Be Nominated to Be Secretary of State, Sources Say". ABC News. Retrieved December 15, 2012. 
^ Lavender, Paige (December 15, 2012). "John Kerry To Get Secretary Of State Nomination, Reports ABC". Huffington Post. Retrieved December 15, 2012. 
^ "Susan Rice drops out of running for secretary of state, cites 'very politicized' confirmation process". NBC News. December 12, 2012. Retrieved December 16, 2012. 
^ Landler, Mark (December 21, 2012). "Kerry Is Pick for Secretary of State, Official Says". The New York Times. Retrieved December 21, 2012. 
^ "Remarks by the President at Nomination of Senator John Kerry as Secretary of State", The White House, December 21, 2012.
^ "Senator John Kerry's confirmation hearing to serve as U.S. Secretary of State scheduled for next week". Boston.com. January 16, 2013.
^ Nomination of John F. Kerry to be Secretary of State: Hearing Before the Committee on Foreign Relations, United States Senate, One Hundred Thirteenth Congress, First Session, January 24, 2013
^ Curry, Tom (January 29, 2013). "Senate votes to confirm Kerry as secretary of state". NBC News. Retrieved January 29, 2013. 
^ "Senate Roll Call Vote". January 29, 2013. Retrieved April 3, 2013. 
^ Kerry, John (January 29, 2013). "Letter to Deval Patrick" (PDF). boston.com. Retrieved January 30, 2013. 
^ "CLINTON OUT, KERRY IN AS SECRETARY OF STATE". Associated Press. Retrieved February 1, 2013. 
^ "Middle East Peace Talks To Resume". Huffington Post. July 30, 2013. Archived from the original on August 2, 2013. Retrieved July 30, 2013. 
^ "Diplomats hail new Iranian attitude in nuke talks". Yahoo News. September 27, 2013. 
^ "U.S., Iran voice optimism and caution after rare encounter". Yahoo News. September 27, 2013. 
^ "Remarks After the P-5+1 Ministerial on Iran". 
^ Rohde, David (November 20, 2013). "How John Kerry Could End Up Outdoing Hillary Clinton". The Atlantic. 
^ Arkin, James (September 16, 2013). "Poll: John Kerry's approval tops President Obama's". Politico. 
^ Swift, Art (March 5, 2014). "Secretary of State Kerry's Favorability Rising in the U.S". 
^ Kamen, Al (February 5, 2015). "Scholars votes put Kerry dead last in terms of effectiveness". The Washington Post. 
^ Maliniak, Daniel (February 5, 2015). "The Best International Relations Schools in the World". Foreign Policy. 
^ "Remarks After Meeting With Secretary of State of the Holy See Pietro Parolin". state.gov. Archived from the original on February 3, 2014. 
^ "After airstrikes kill dozens in Gaza, Kerry backs Israel's right to defend itself". The Times of Israel. July 20, 2014. 
^ "Quiet Support for Saudis Entangles U.S. in Yemen". The New York Times. March 13, 2016. 
^ Sanger, David E. (December 28, 2016). "Kerry Rebukes Israel, Calling Settlements a Threat to Peace". The New York Times. Retrieved January 7, 2017. 
^ "Israel-Palestinians: Netanyahu Condemns John Kerry Speech". BBC. December 29, 2016. Retrieved January 7, 2017. 
^ Stewart, Heather (December 29, 2016). "Theresa May's Criticism of John Kerry Israel Speech Sparks Blunt US Reply". The Guardian. Retrieved January 7, 2017. 
^ Hubbard, Ben (December 29, 2016). "Praise for Kerry's Israel Speech in Arab World, but Shrugs, Too". The New York Times. Retrieved January 7, 2017. 
^ Baker, Peter; Gordon, Michael R. (August 30, 2013). "Kerry Becomes Chief Advocate for U.S. Attack". The New York Times. 
^ "Syria timeline: how Kerry's gaffe became a plan". The Sydney Morning Herald. September 10, 2013. 
^ "John Kerry's Gaffe Heard Round the World". The Wire. September 9, 2013. 
^ "Kerry's Syria 'gaffe' gains swift traction". AFP. September 9, 2013. 
^ "White House's Syria gaffe offers Obama a chance to climb back from war". The Guardian. September 9, 2013. 
^ http://www.politifact.com/john-kerry-syria-archive/
^ "Timeline of events leading up to Syria chemical disarmament". AFP. October 6, 2013. 
^ Johnson, Keith (November 18, 2013). "Kerry Makes It Official: 'Era of Monroe Doctrine Is Over'". Wall Street Journal. 
^ ThinkProgress (April 22, 2016). "Alongside 174 Nations And Holding His Granddaughter, John Kerry Signs Paris Climate Accord — ThinkProgress". 
^ "John Kerry Lands in Antarctica, Highest US Official to Visit". ABC News. November 11, 2016. 
^ Charles E. Till & Yoon Il Chang (2011). "Plentiful Energy: The Story of the Integral Fast Reactor" (PDF). Self-published. 
^ Gellerman, Bruce (January 9, 2017). "Speaking At MIT, Secretary Of State John Kerry Urges Action On Climate Change". WBUR. Retrieved January 11, 2017. 
^ "U.S. State Department Launches Global Connect Initiatives at UNGA". 
^ "Why internet access is key to development - OPIC : Overseas Private Investment Corporation". 
^ "Remarks at the Global Connect Initiative Event". 
^ Growth, Catherine A. Novelli U. S. Under Secretary of State for Economic; Energy; Environment, the (April 14, 2016). "The New Road to Development: Paving the Way to Global Connectivity". 
^ John Kerry CV at State Department website
^ John Kerry shows up at Women's March with his dog, Washington Examiner, January 21, 2017
^ "Kerry, Albright urge court to uphold block on Trump travel ban"
^ "John Kerry is penning a memoir" Boston Globe, Feb. 1, 2017
^ Arsenault, Mark; Shanahan, Mark (2017-04-27). "John Kerry is switching islands". The Boston Globe. Retrieved 2017-04-27. 
^ a b Whitmore, Brian (February 22, 2004). "Hearing of roots, Czech village roots Kerry on". The Boston Globe. John W. Henry. Retrieved January 8, 2008. 
^ Reitwiesner, William Addams. "Ancestry of Senator John Forbes Kerry (b. 1943)". Retrieved September 11, 2014. 
^ McLellan, Diana, "Lunch with Diana McLellan – Madame Ex", Washingtonian, Washington Magazine Inc. (July 1996), archived from the original on November 23, 2005. 
^ "Julia Thorne, author and ex-wife of Sen. Kerry, dead at 61". boston.com. April 28, 2006. 
^ Lawrence, Jill (May 26, 2004). "USATODAY.com - With Teresa, expect an unconventional campaign". usatoday.com. 
^ "What Teresa Heinz found and what she lost". post-gazette.com. Retrieved August 27, 2015. 
^ Ackman, Dan (October 29, 2004). "Kerry Would Be Third-Richest U.S. President If Elected". Forbes. 
^ "What is George W. Bush's net worth vs. John Kerry's net worth?". Ask Yahoo!. August 23, 2004. Archived from the original on August 24, 2004. 
^ Healy, Patrick (2011). "John Kerry Personal Finance". Open Secret. Archived from the original on January 27, 2013. 
^ Julia La Roche (February 14, 2013). "John Kerry May Have Made $670,000 On Today's Heinz Deal". Business Insider. Retrieved February 18, 2013. 
^ a b Stricherz, Mark (October 1, 2004). "John Kerry's Open Mind". Christianity Today. 
^ "Sen. Kerry's Surgery A Success". CBS. February 11, 2003. 
^ "Dennis William Burke, MD - Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA". massgeneral.org. Archived from the original on August 23, 2015. Retrieved August 27, 2015. 
^ "Doctors complete surgery on Secretary Kerry for broken leg - US News". US News & World Report. Retrieved August 27, 2015. 
^ Ben Brumfield and Elise Labott, CNN (June 1, 2015). "Bike accident puts John Kerry in hospital - CNNPolitics.com". CNN. Retrieved August 27, 2015. 
^ Maloney, Tim (July 24, 2005). "Kerry Au Tour". 
^ "Politics? Armstrong has Kerry's vote..... maybe". CNN. July 23, 2005. Archived from the original on July 25, 2005. 
^ "JK hotel needs". Archived from the original on April 18, 2010. 
^ "ESPN.com: Page 2 : Rink turns and big deals". go.com. 
^ "Friendship Yacht Company". Friendship Yacht Company. Archived from the original on May 10, 2011. Retrieved August 29, 2010. 
^ Sen. John Kerry skips town on sails tax, Boston Herald, July 23, 2010.
^ Massachusetts Boat Excise Rate, cityofboston.gov.
^ "Kerry Says He Mishandled Furor Over Yacht Taxes". NPR.org. The Associated Press. July 30, 2010. Archived from the original on August 11, 2010. 
^ "Remarks at a Ceremony Awarding the Grand Cross 1st Class of the Order of Merit of the Federal Republic of Germany to Secretary Kerry". Department of State. Retrieved 5 December 2016. 
^ http://scholarworks.umb.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1080&context=university_newsandviews
^ http://openarchives.umb.edu/cdm/compoundobject/collection/p15774coll21/id/502/show/471/rec/22
^ http://library.northeastern.edu/archives-special-collections/find-collections/northeastern-history/commencement-speakers-honorary
^ http://articles.chicagotribune.com/2006-05-12/features/0605120201_1_honorary-degrees-doctorate-film-studies
^ http://www.bc.edu/publications/chronicle/FeaturesNewsTopstories/2014/topstories/secretary-of-state-kerry-to-receive-honorary-degree-from-boston-.html


Further reading


Brinkley, Douglas (2004). Tour of Duty: John Kerry and the Vietnam War. New York: William Morrow & Company. ISBN 0-06-056523-3. 
Kerry, John; Vietnam Veterans Against the War (1971). The New Soldier. New York: MacMillan Publishing. ISBN 0-02-073610-X. 
—— (1997). The New War: The Web of Crime That Threatens America's Security. New York: Simon & Schuster. ISBN 0-684-81815-9. 
—— (2003). A Call to Service: My Vision for a Better America. New York: Viking Press. ISBN 0-670-03260-3. 
—— Heinz Kerry, Teresa (2007). This Moment on Earth: Today's New Environmentalists and Their Vision for the Future. New York: PublicAffairs. ISBN 978-1-58648-431-6. 
Kranish, Michael; Mooney, Brian C.; Easton, Nina J. (2004). John F. Kerry: The Complete Biography by The Boston Globe Reporters Who Know Him Best. New York: PublicAffairs. ISBN 1-58648-273-4. 
McMahon, Kevin; Rankin, David; Beachler, Donald W.; White, John Kenneth (2005). Winning the White House, 2004. New York: Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 1-4039-6881-0. 
O'Neill, John E.; Corsi, Jerome R. (2004). Unfit for Command: Swift Boat Veterans Speak Out Against John Kerry. Washington, DC: Regnery Publishing. ISBN 0-89526-017-4. 


External links



Wikisource has original works written by or about:
John Kerry





Wikiquote has quotations related to: John Kerry





Wikimedia Commons has media related to John Kerry.


Official

Kerry's military records—from JohnKerry.com via the Internet Archive

Information


Biography at the Biographical Directory of the United States Congress
Profile at Project Vote Smart
Financial information (federal office) at the Federal Election Commission
Legislation sponsored at the Library of Congress
Appearances on C-SPAN
John Kerry Campaign material—from ArchivoElectoral.org
Political donations made by John Kerry
Snopes.com: "Service Mettle"—Snopes.com on Kerry's Vietnam service medals

Statements and interviews

John Kerry's letter to his parents about Richard Pershing's death—1968.
Statement on behalf of Vietnam Veterans Against the War—April 1971.
John Kerry's Senate hearing testimony to the Senate Committee on Foreign Relations in 1971 (PDF file)
John Kerry's complete 1971 statement before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee from National Review
Selections from John Kerry's 1971 statement before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee
The BCCI Affair, A Report to the Committee on Foreign Relations, United States Senate, by Senator John Kerry and Senator Hank Brown, December 1992
Obama rally with John Kerry and Others MP3 on February 2, 2008, in Sacramento, CA

Media coverage

John Kerry: Candidate in the making, Michael Kranish, The Boston Globe, June 15, 2003
When John Kerry's Courage Went M.I.A., Sydney H. Schanberg, The Village Voice, February 17, 2004]
Frontline: The Choice 2004, PBS, two-hour special comparing Kerry and Bush
Researcher Alleges Potential Plagiarism in 11 Passages of Kerry's Writings, Josh Gerstein, New York Sun, October 26, 2004
Profile: John Kerry, Paul Reynolds, BBC News, November 5, 2004



Political offices


Preceded by
Thomas P. O'Neill III
Lieutenant Governor of Massachusetts
1983–1985
Succeeded by
Evelyn Murphy


Preceded by
Hillary Clinton
United States Secretary of State
2013–2017
Succeeded by
Rex Tillerson


Party political offices


Preceded by
Paul Tsongas
Democratic nominee for U.S. Senator from Massachusetts
(Class 2)
1984, 1990, 1996, 2002, 2008
Succeeded by
Ed Markey


Preceded by
George J. Mitchell
Chair of the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee
1987–1989
Succeeded by
John Breaux


Preceded by
Al Gore
Democratic nominee for President of the United States
2004
Succeeded by
Barack Obama


U.S. Senate


Preceded by
Paul Tsongas
U.S. Senator (Class 2) from Massachusetts
1985–2013
Served alongside: Ted Kennedy, Paul G. Kirk, Scott Brown, Elizabeth Warren
Succeeded by
Mo Cowan


Preceded by
Dale Bumpers
Ranking Member of the Senate Small Business Committee
1997–2001
Succeeded by
Kit Bond


Preceded by
Kit Bond
Chair of the Senate Small Business Committee
2001–2003
Succeeded by
Olympia Snowe


Ranking Member of the Senate Small Business Committee
2003–2007


Preceded by
Olympia Snowe
Chair of the Senate Small Business Committee
2007–2009
Succeeded by
Mary Landrieu


Preceded by
Joe Biden
Chair of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee
2009–2013
Succeeded by
Bob Menendez






John Kerry











v
t
e


John Kerry



Career



Military career
2004 Democratic National Convention
2004 campaign
VP selection process
Kerry–Feingold Amendment
Sponsored legislation










Elections



Senate election, 1984
Senate election, 1990
Senate election, 1996
Senate election, 2002
United States presidential election, 2004
Senate election, 2008





Related



Going Upriver
The New Soldier
Military service controversy

swiftboating
Unfit for Command







Family



Forbes family
Dudley–Winthrop family
Teresa Heinz
Julia Thorne
Alexandra Kerry
Vanessa Kerry
Richard Kerry
Rosemary Forbes Kerry
Cameron Kerry












v
t
e


United States Secretaries of State



Secretary of Foreign Affairs
1781–89



R. Livingston
Jay








Secretary of State
1789–present



Jefferson
Randolph
Pickering
J. Marshall
Madison
Smith
Monroe
Adams
Clay
Van Buren
E. Livingston
McLane
Forsyth
Webster
Upshur
Calhoun
Buchanan
Clayton
Webster
Everett
Marcy
Cass
Black
Seward
Washburne
Fish
Evarts
Blaine
Frelinghuysen
Bayard
Blaine
Foster
Gresham
Olney
Sherman
Day
Hay
Root
Bacon
Knox
Bryan
Lansing
Colby
Hughes
Kellogg
Stimson
Hull
Stettinius
Byrnes
G. Marshall
Acheson
Dulles
Herter
Rusk
Rogers
Kissinger
Vance
Muskie
Haig
Shultz
Baker
Eagleburger
Christopher
Albright
Powell
Rice (tenure)
Clinton (tenure)
Kerry (tenure)
Tillerson












v
t
e


Cabinet of President Barack Obama (2009–2017)








Cabinet



Secretary of State



Hillary Clinton (2009–2013)
John Kerry (2013–2017)








Secretary of the Treasury



Timothy Geithner (2009–2013)
Jack Lew (2013–2017)





Secretary of Defense



Robert Gates (2009–2011)
Leon Panetta (2011–2013)
Chuck Hagel (2013–2015)
Ash Carter (2015–2017)





Attorney General



Eric Holder (2009–2015)
Loretta Lynch (2015–2017)





Secretary of the Interior



Ken Salazar (2009–2013)
Sally Jewell (2013–2017)





Secretary of Agriculture



Tom Vilsack (2009–2017)





Secretary of Commerce



Gary Locke (2009–2011)
John Bryson (2011–2012)
Penny Pritzker (2013–2017)





Secretary of Labor



Hilda Solis (2009–2013)
Thomas Perez (2013–2017)





Secretary of Health and Human Services



Kathleen Sebelius (2009–2014)
Sylvia Mathews Burwell (2014–2017)





Secretary of Housing and Urban Development



Shaun Donovan (2009–2014)
Julian Castro (2014–2017)





Secretary of Transportation



Ray LaHood (2009–2013)
Anthony Foxx (2013–2017)





Secretary of Energy



Steven Chu (2009–2013)
Ernest Moniz (2013–2017)





Secretary of Education



Arne Duncan (2009–2016)
John King (2016–2017)





Secretary of Veterans Affairs



Eric Shinseki (2009–2014)
Robert McDonald (2014–2017)





Secretary of Homeland Security



Janet Napolitano (2009–2013)
Jeh Johnson (2013–2017)













Cabinet-level



Vice President



Joe Biden (2009–2017)








White House Chief of Staff



Rahm Emanuel (2009–2010)
William Daley (2011–2012)
Jack Lew (2012–2013)
Denis McDonough (2013–2017)





Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency



Lisa Jackson (2009–2013)
Gina McCarthy (2013–2017)





Director of the Office of Management and Budget



Peter Orszag (2009–2010)
Jack Lew (2010–2012)
Sylvia Mathews Burwell (2013–2014)
Shaun Donovan (2014–2017)





Trade Representative



Ron Kirk (2009–2013)
Michael Froman (2013–2017)





Ambassador to the United Nations



Susan Rice (2009–2013)
Samantha Power (2013–2017)





Chair of the Council of Economic Advisers



Christina Romer (2009–2010)
Austan Goolsbee (2010–2011)
Alan Krueger (2011–2013)
Jason Furman (2013–2017)





Administrator of the Small Business Administration



Karen Mills (2012–2013)**
Maria Contreras-Sweet (2014–2017)









* Acting
** took office in 2009, raised to cabinet-rank in 2012
See also: Confirmations of Barack Obama's Cabinet











v
t
e


United States Senators from Massachusetts



Class 1



Dalton
Cabot
Goodhue
Mason
Adams
Lloyd
Gore
Ashmun
Mellen
Mills
Webster
Choate
Webster
Winthrop
Rantoul
Sumner
Washburn
Dawes
Lodge, Sr.
Butler
Walsh
Lodge
J. Kennedy
Smith
E. Kennedy
Kirk
Brown
Warren








Class 2



Strong
Sedgwick
Dexter
Foster
Pickering
Varnum
Otis
Lloyd
Silsbee
Davis
Bates
Davis
Everett
Rockwell
Wilson
Boutwell
Hoar
Crane
J. Weeks
Walsh
Gillett
Coolidge
Lodge
S. Weeks
Saltonstall
Brooke
Tsongas
Kerry
Cowan
Markey












v
t
e


Current chairs and Ranking Members of United States Senate committees







Chairs (Republican)
Ranking Members (Democratic)





Aging (Special): Susan Collins
Agriculture, Nutrition and Forestry: Pat Roberts
Appropriations: Thad Cochran
Armed Services: John McCain
Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs: Mike Crapo
Budget: Mike Enzi
Commerce, Science, and Transportation: John Thune
Energy and Natural Resources: Lisa Murkowski
Environment and Public Works: John Barrasso
Ethics (Select): Johnny Isakson
Finance: Orrin Hatch
Foreign Relations: Bob Corker
Health, Education, Labor and Pensions: Lamar Alexander
Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs: Ron Johnson
Indian Affairs: John Hoeven
Intelligence (Select): Richard Burr
International Narcotics Control (Caucus): Chuck Grassley
Judiciary: Chuck Grassley
Rules and Administration: Richard Shelby
Small Business and Entrepreneurship: Jim Risch
Veterans' Affairs: Johnny Isakson






Aging (Special): Bob Casey
Agriculture, Nutrition and Forestry: Debbie Stabenow
Appropriations: Patrick Leahy
Armed Services: Jack Reed
Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs: Sherrod Brown
Budget: Bernie Sanders
Commerce, Science, and Transportation: Bill Nelson
Energy and Natural Resources: Maria Cantwell
Environment and Public Works: Tom Carper
Ethics (Select): Chris Coons
Finance: Ron Wyden
Foreign Relations: Ben Cardin
Health, Education, Labor and Pensions: Patty Murray
Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs: Claire McCaskill
Indian Affairs: Tom Udall
Intelligence (Select): Mark Warner
International Narcotics Control (Caucus): Dianne Feinstein
Judiciary: Dianne Feinstein
Rules and Administration: Amy Klobuchar
Small Business and Entrepreneurship: Jeanne Shaheen
Veterans' Affairs: Jon Tester
















v
t
e


United States Democratic Party



Chairpersons
of the DNC



Hallett
McLane
Smalley
Belmont
Schell
Hewitt
Barnum
Brice
Harrity
Jones
Taggart
Mack
McCombs
McCormick
Cummings
White
Hull
Shaver
Raskob
Farley
Flynn
Walker
Hannegan
McGrath
Boyle
McKinney
Mitchell
Butler
Jackson
Bailey
O'Brien
Harris
O'Brien
Westwood
Strauss
Curtis
White
Manatt
Kirk
Brown
Wilhelm
DeLee
Dodd/Fowler
Romer/Grossman
Rendell/Andrew
McAuliffe
Dean
Kaine
Wasserman Schultz
Perez





Presidential
tickets



Jackson/Calhoun
Jackson/Van Buren
Van Buren/R. Johnson
Van Buren/None
Polk/Dallas
Cass/Butler
Pierce/King
Buchanan/Breckinridge
Douglas/H. Johnson (Breckinridge/Lane, SD)
McClellan/Pendleton
Seymour/Blair
Greeley/Brown
Tilden/Hendricks
Hancock/English
Cleveland/Hendricks
Cleveland/Thurman
Cleveland/Stevenson I
W. Bryan/Sewall
W. Bryan/Stevenson I
Parker/H. Davis
W. Bryan/Kern
Wilson/Marshall (twice)
Cox/Roosevelt
J. Davis/C. Bryan
Smith/Robinson
Roosevelt/Garner (twice)
Roosevelt/Wallace
Roosevelt/Truman
Truman/Barkley
Stevenson II/Sparkman
Stevenson II/Kefauver
Kennedy/L. Johnson
L. Johnson/Humphrey
Humphrey/Muskie
McGovern/(Eagleton, Shriver)
Carter/Mondale (twice)
Mondale/Ferraro
Dukakis/Bentsen
B. Clinton/Gore (twice)
Gore/Lieberman
Kerry/Edwards
Obama/Biden (twice)
H. Clinton/Kaine





State/
Territorial
Parties



Alabama
Alaska
Arizona
Arkansas
California
Colorado
Connecticut
Delaware
Florida
Georgia
Hawaii
Idaho
Illinois
Indiana
Iowa
Kansas
Kentucky
Louisiana
Maine
Maryland
Massachusetts
Michigan
Minnesota
Mississippi
Missouri
Montana
Nebraska
Nevada
New Hampshire
New Jersey
New Mexico
New York
North Carolina
North Dakota
Ohio
Oklahoma
Oregon
Pennsylvania
Rhode Island
South Carolina
South Dakota
Tennessee
Texas
Utah
Vermont
Virginia
Washington
West Virginia
Wisconsin
Wyoming
District of Columbia
Guam
Puerto Rico





Conventions

(List)



1832 (Baltimore)
1835 (Baltimore)
1840 (Baltimore)
1844 (Baltimore)
1848 (Baltimore)
1852 (Baltimore)
1856 (Cincinnati)
1860 (Baltimore)
1864 (Chicago)
1868 (New York)
1872 (Baltimore)
1876 (Saint Louis)
1880 (Cincinnati)
1884 (Chicago)
1888 (Saint Louis)
1892 (Chicago)
1896 (Chicago)
1900 (Kansas City)
1904 (Saint Louis)
1908 (Denver)
1912 (Baltimore)
1916 (Saint Louis)
1920 (San Francisco)
1924 (New York)
1928 (Houston)
1932 (Chicago)
1936 (Philadelphia)
1940 (Chicago)
1944 (Chicago)
1948 (Philadelphia)
1952 (Chicago)
1956 (Chicago)
1960 (Los Angeles)
1964 (Atlantic City)
1968 (Chicago)
1972 (Miami Beach)
1976 (New York)
1980 (New York)
1984 (San Francisco)
1988 (Atlanta)
1992 (New York)
1996 (Chicago)
2000 (Los Angeles)
2004 (Boston)
2008 (Denver)
2012 (Charlotte)
2016 (Philadelphia)





Affiliated
groups




Fundraising



Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee
Democratic Governors Association
Democratic Legislative Campaign Committee
Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee
National Conference of Democratic Mayors





Sectional



College Democrats of America
Democrats Abroad
National Federation of Democratic Women
Stonewall Democrats
Young Democrats of America
High School Democrats of America








Related articles



History
Primaries
Debates
Party factions
Superdelegate
2005 chairmanship election
2017 chairmanship election








 Liberalism portal












v
t
e


Lieutenant Governors of Massachusetts



Colony
(1629–86)



Goffe
Humphrey
T. Dudley
Ludlow
Bellingham
Winthrop
T. Dudley
Bellingham
Endecott
Winthrop
T. Dudley
Endecott
T. Dudley
Endecott
Bellingham
Willoughby
Leverett
Symonds
Bradstreet
Danforth










Dominion
(1686–89)



Stoughton
Nicholson





Province
(1692–1776)



Stoughton
Povey
Tailer
Dummer
Tailer
S. Phips
Hutchinson
A. Oliver
T. Oliver





Commonwealth
(since 1776)



T. Cushing
B. Lincoln
Adams
Gill
S. Phillips
Robbins
L. Lincoln
Cobb
Gray
W. Phillips
L. Lincoln Jr.
Morton
Winthrop
Armstrong
Hull
Childs
Reed
Cushman
Huntington
Plunkett
Brown
Benchley
Trask
Goodrich
Nesmith
Hayden
Claflin
Tucker
Talbot
Knight
Long
Weston
Ames
Brackett
Haile
Wolcott
Crane
Bates
Guild
Draper
Frothingham
Luce
Walsh
Barry
G. Cushing
C. Coolidge
Cox
Fuller
Allen
Youngman
Bacon
Hurley
Kelly
Cahill
Bradford
A. Coolidge
Sullivan
Whittier
R. Murphy
McLaughin
Bellotti
Richardson
Sargent
Dwight
O'Neill
Kerry
E. Murphy
Cellucci
Swift
Healey
Murray
Polito












v
t
e


Chairmen of the United States Senate Committee on Foreign Relations






Barbour
Macon
Brown
Barbour
R. King
Barbour
Macon
Sanford
Macon
Tazewell
Forsyth
Wilkins
Clay
Buchanan
Rives
Archer
Allen
Sevier
Hannegan
Benton
W. King
Foote
Mason
Sumner
Cameron
Hamlin
Eaton
Burnside
Edmunds
Windom
Miller
Sherman
Morgan
Sherman
Frye
Davis
Cullom
Bacon
Stone
Hitchcock
Lodge
Borah
Pittman
George
Connally
Vandenberg
Connally
Wiley
George
Green
Fulbright
Sparkman
Church
Percy
Lugar
Pell
Helms
Biden
Helms
Biden
Lugar
Biden
Kerry
Menendez
Corker















v
t
e


Chairmen of the United States Senate Committee on Small Business and Entrepreneurship



Select Committee
(1950–1981)



Sparkman
Thye
Sparkman
Smathers
Bible
Nelson








Full Committee
(1981–)



Weicker
Bumpers
Bond
Kerry
Bond
Kerry
Snowe
Kerry
Landrieu
Cantwell
Vitter
Risch












v
t
e


Chairs of the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee






Johnston
Ford
Bentsen
Mitchell
Kerry
Breaux
Robb
Graham
Kerrey
Torricelli
Murray
Corzine
Schumer
Menendez
Murray
Bennet
Tester
Van Hollen












v
t
e


(2000 ←)   United States presidential election, 2004   (→ 2008)






United States elections, 2004
Candidates
Debates
Timeline
Super Tuesday
Potomac primary
Mini-Tuesday





Republican Party

Convention
Primaries


Primary results





Nominee George W. Bush (campaign)
VP nominee Dick Cheney


Candidates John Buchanan
Jack Fellure
Tom Laughlin





Democratic Party

Convention
Primaries


Primary results





Nominee John Kerry (campaign)
VP nominee John Edwards


Candidates Carol Moseley Braun
Wesley Clark (campaign)
Howard Dean (campaign)
John Edwards (campaign)
Richard Gephardt (campaign)
Bob Graham (campaign)
Caroline Killeen
Dennis Kucinich (campaign)
Lyndon LaRouche (campaign)
Joe Lieberman (campaign)
Al Sharpton





Controversies



Moss v. Bush
Voting controversies
Kerry military service
Bush military service










Third party and independent candidates



Constitution Party

Convention





Nominee
Michael Peroutka


VP nominee
Chuck Baldwin





Green Party

Convention





Nominee
David Cobb (campaign)


VP nominee
Pat LaMarche


Candidates
Sheila Bilyeu
Peter Camejo
Paul Glover
Kent Mesplay
Lorna Salzman





Libertarian Party

Convention





Nominee
Michael Badnarik (campaign)


VP nominee
Richard Campagna


Candidates
Gary Nolan
Aaron Russo





Personal Choice Party



Nominee
Charles Jay


VP nominee
Marilyn Chambers





Prohibition Party



Nominee
Gene Amondson
Alternate nominee
Earl Dodge





Reform Party



Nominee
Ralph Nader (campaign)





Socialist Equality Party



Nominee
Bill Van Auken





Socialist Party



Nominee
Walt Brown


VP nominee
Mary Alice Herbert


Candidates
Eric Chester





Socialist Workers Party



Nominee
Róger Calero
Alternate nominee
James Harris


VP nominee
Arrin Hawkins





Workers World Party



Nominee
John Parker


VP nominee
Teresa Gutierrez





Independents and other candidates



Thomas Harens
Tom Laughlin
Ralph Nader (campaign)
Leonard Peltier











Other 2004 elections
House
Senate
Gubernatorial












v
t
e


The Dudley–Winthrop family tree











This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (October 2015) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)







 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

Adam Winthrop
(1548–1623)

 


 


 


 


 


 







 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


 


 


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

John Winthrop
(1588–1649)

 

Anne Winthrop
(1585–1618)

 

Thomas Fones
(1573–1629)



 


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


 


 


 


 

Thomas Dudley
(1576–1653)

 


 


 

John Winthrop the Younger
(1606–1676)

 

Henry Winthrop
(1608–1630)

 

Elizabeth Fones
(1610–c.1673)

 




 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 



Simon Bradstreet
(1603–1697)

 

Anne Dudley
(1612–1672)

 

Joseph Dudley
(1647–1720)

 

Wait Still Winthrop
(1642–1717)

 

Fitz-John Winthrop
(1638–1707)

 


 




 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


 


 

Paul Dudley
(1675–1751)

 

Ann Dudley
(1684–1776)

 

John Winthrop, F.R.S.
(1681–1747)

 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

John Still Winthrop
(1720–1776)

 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

Thomas Lindall Winthrop
(1760–1841)

 

Francis Bayard Winthrop
(1754–1817)

 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

Robert Charles Winthrop
(1809–1894)

 

Thomas Charles Winthrop
(1797–1873)

 


 


 


 


 

Francis B. Winthrop Jr.
(1787–1841)






 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

Robert C. Winthrop Jr.
(1834–1905)

 

Robert Winthrop
(1833–1892)

 

Katherine Wilson Taylor
(1839–1925)

 

Theodore Winthrop
(1828–1861)



 


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


 


 

James Grant Forbes
(1879–1955)

 

Margaret Tyndal Winthrop
(1880–1970)

 

Beekman Winthrop
(1874–1940)

 

Katherine Taylor Winthrop
(1866–1943)

 

Hamilton Fish Kean
(1862–1941)



 


 


 


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







 


 

Richard John Kerry

 

Rosemary Forbes
(1913–2002)

 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

Robert Winthrop Kean
(1893–1980)

 


 




 


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







 


 


 


 

John Forbes Kerry
(1943–)

 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

Thomas Howard Kean
(1935–)

 


 







 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

Thomas Kean Jr.
(1968–)

 


 











Notes














Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 85415860
LCCN: no90005472
ISNI: 0000 0001 0939 0170
GND: 129062863
SUDOC: 076083284
BNF: cb14441989j (data)
NLA: 35268176
NDL: 00962436
NKC: xx0018298
US Congress: K000148
IATH: w6474jgw











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=John_Kerry&oldid=817779451"					Categories: 1943 birthsJohn Kerry20th-century American politicians20th-century American writers20th-century Roman Catholics21st-century American politicians21st-century American writers21st-century Roman CatholicsAmerican anti–Vietnam War activistsAmerican diplomatsAmerican military personnel of the Vietnam WarAmerican people of Austrian-Jewish descentAmerican people of English descentAmerican people of Hungarian-Jewish descentAmerican people of Scottish descentAmerican people of the Vietnam WarAmerican Roman CatholicsBoston College Law School alumniCancer survivorsCounty district attorneys in MassachusettsCritics of the United NationsDemocratic Party (United States) presidential nomineesDemocratic Party United States SenatorsDudley–Winthrop familyForbes familyForeign Service bratsGrand Crosses 1st class of the Order of Merit of the Federal Republic of GermanyKerry familyLieutenant Governors of MassachusettsLiving peopleMassachusetts DemocratsMassachusetts lawyersObama administration cabinet membersPeople from Aurora, ColoradoPeople from Chilmark, MassachusettsPoliticians from BostonRecipients of the Silver StarSt. Paul's School (Concord, New Hampshire) alumniUnited States Navy officersUnited States presidential candidates, 2004United States Secretaries of StateUnited States Senators from MassachusettsVietnam War POW/MIA issuesWashington, D.C. DemocratsYale University alumniHidden categories: Pages containing links to subscription-only contentWikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pagesWikipedia indefinitely move-protected pagesUse mdy dates from November 2016All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from December 2013Incomplete lists from May 2017Articles needing additional references from October 2015All articles needing additional referencesWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersWikipedia articles with NLA identifiersWikipedia articles with SNAC-ID identifiers