This article is about the Kantō region of Japan. For other uses, see Kanto.








This article may be expanded with text translated from the corresponding article in Japanese.  (October 2013) Click [show] for important translation instructions. 


View a machine-translated version of the Japanese article.
Google's machine translation is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia.
Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article.
You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary (using German): Content in this edit is translated from the existing German Wikipedia article at [[:de:Exact name of German article]]; see its history for attribution.
You should also add the template {{Translated|ja|関東地方}} to the talk page.
For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation.













This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (December 2008) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)





Kantō region
関東地方


Region



The Kantō region in comparison to the rest of Japan




Closeup map of the areas within the Kantō region


Area


 • Total
32,423.90 km2 (12,518.94 sq mi)


Population (April 1, 2012)


 • Total
42,598,300


 • Density
1,300/km2 (3,400/sq mi)


GDP (nominal; 2012)[1][2]


 • Total
$2.5 trillion


 • Per capita
$60,000


Time zone
JST (UTC+9)


The Kantō region (関東地方, Kantō-chihō) is a geographical area of Honshu, the largest island of Japan.[3] The region includes the Greater Tokyo Area and encompasses seven prefectures: Gunma, Tochigi, Ibaraki, Saitama, Tokyo, Chiba, and Kanagawa. Within its boundaries, slightly more than 45 percent of the land area is the Kantō Plain. The rest consists of the hills and mountains that form the land borders. In official census count on October 1, 2010 by the Japan Statistics Bureau, the population was 42,607,376[4] amounting to approximately one third of the total population of Japan.



Contents


1 History
2 Subdivisions

2.1 North and South
2.2 East and West
2.3 Inland and Coastal
2.4 Greater Kantō


3 Cities
4 In popular culture
5 See also
6 Notes
7 References



History[edit]
The heartland of feudal power during the Kamakura period and again in the Echi period, Kantō became the center of modern development. Within the Greater Tokyo Area and especially the Tokyo-Yokohama metropolitan area, Kantō houses not only Japan's seat of government but also the nation's largest group of universities and cultural institutions, the greatest population, and a large industrial zone. Although most of the Kantō plain is used for residential, commercial, or industrial construction, it is still farmed. Rice is the principal crop, although the zone around Tokyo and Yokohama has been landscaped to grow garden produce for the metropolitan market.
A watershed moment of Japan's modern history took place in the late Taisho period: the Great Kantō earthquake of 1923. The quake, which claimed more than 100,000 lives and ravaged the Tokyo and Yokohama areas, occurred at a time when Japan was still reeling from the economic recession in reaction to the high-flying years during World War I.
Operation Coronet, part of Operation Downfall, the proposed Allied invasion of Japan during World War II, was scheduled to land at the Kantō plain. Most of the United States military bases on the island of Honshū are situated on the Kantō plain. These include Naval Air Facility Atsugi, Yokota Air Base, Yokosuka Naval Base, and Camp Zama.
The name Kantō literally means "East of the Barrier". The name Kantō is nowadays generally considered to mean the region east (東) of the Hakone checkpoint (関所). An antonym of Kantō, "West of the Barrier" means Kansai region, which lies western Honshu and was the center of feudal Japan.
After the Great Kantō earthquake many people in Kantō started creating art with different varieties of colors. They made art of earthquake and small towns to symbolize the small towns destroyed in the quake.




Map of Mt. Nikkō, in the Kantō region


Subdivisions[edit]
North and South[edit]
The most often used subdivision of the region is dividing it to "North Kantō" (北関東, Kita-Kantō), consisting of Ibaraki, Tochigi, and Gunma Prefectures, and "South Kantō" (南関東, Minami-Kantō), consisting of Saitama (sometimes classified North),[citation needed][by whom?] Chiba, the Tokyo Metropolis (sometimes singulated),[citation needed] and Kanagawa Prefectures.[citation needed] South Kantō is often regarded as synonymous with the Greater Tokyo Area. As part of Japan's attempts to predict earthquakes, an area roughly corresponding to South Kantō has been designated an 'Area of Intensified Observation' by the Coordinating Committee for Earthquake Prediction.[5]
The Japanese House of Representatives' divides it into the North Kantō (北関東, Kita-Kantō) electorate which consists of Ibaraki, Tochigi, Gunma and Saitama Prefectures, Tokyo electorate, and the South Kantō (南関東, Minami-Kantō) electorate which consists of Chiba, Kanagawa and Yamanashi Prefectures. (Note that Yamanashi is out of Kantō region in the orthodox definition.)
Keirin's South Kantō (南関東, Minami-Kantō) consists of Chiba, Kanagawa and Shizuoka Prefectures.
East and West[edit]
This division is not often but sometimes used.

East Kantō (東関東, Higashi-Kantō): Ibaraki, Tochigi and Chiba Prefectures.
West Kantō (西関東, Nishi-Kantō): Gunma, Saitama, Tokyo, Kanagawa (and sometimes Yamanashi) Prefectures.

Inland and Coastal[edit]
This division is sometimes used in economics and geography. The border can be modified if the topography is taken for prefectural boundaries.

Inland Kantō (関東内陸部, Kantō nairiku-bu): Tochigi, Gunma, Saitama (and sometimes Yamanashi) Prefectures.
Coastal Kantō (関東沿岸部, Kantō engan-bu): Ibaraki, Chiba, Tokyo and Kanagawa Prefectures.

Greater Kantō[edit]
The Japanese national government defines the National Capital Region (首都圏, Shuto-ken) as Kantō region plus Yamanashi Prefecture. Japan's national public broadcaster NHK uses Kantō-kō-shin-etsu (関東甲信越) involving Yamanashi, Nagano and Niigata Prefectures for regional programming and administration.
Cities[edit]
The Kantō region is the most highly developed, urbanized, and industrialized part of Japan. Tokyo and Yokohama form a single industrial complex with a concentration of light and heavy industry along Tokyo Bay. Other major cities in the area include Kawasaki (in Kanagawa Prefecture); Saitama (in Saitama Prefecture); and Chiba (in Chiba Prefecture). Smaller cities, farther away from the coast, house substantial light and automotive industries. The average population density reached 1,192 persons per square kilometre in 1991.
In popular culture[edit]

In the Pokémon franchise, a region named and designed after Kantō is the first geographical setting of both the anime and the game series (it was featured in Pokémon Red, Green, Blue, and Yellow; FireRed and LeafGreen; Gold, Silver, and Crystal; and HeartGold and SoulSilver). It is stated several times during the anime to be the homeland of Ash Ketchum.
The anime Death Note has its main protagonist Light Yagami living in Kantō region of Japan.
The main events of Fist of the North Star prior to the Ashura arcs take place in the ruins of the Kantō region following a global nuclear war that wiped out most of humanity.
The post-apocalyptic anime Desert Punk takes place in a region known as "The Great Kantō Desert", which is assumed to be the Kantō region after a mysterious nuclear incident.
The anime Kill la Kill takes place in Kantō, with Honnō-ji being the main setting. The series makes numerous references to the Kantō region, especially in the Tri-City Schools Raid.
In James Clavell's novel Shōgun, the Kantō region is featured as a contentious territory for vying daimyos and is source for part of the novel's plot development.
The story of Initial D takes place entirely in the Kantō region. The story begins with Takumi Fujiwara delivering tofu up Mount Haruna (fictionalized as "Mount Akina" in the series) in Gunma, before being invited to a rematch with Kyoichi Sudo at Irohazaka in Tochigi, which would then be the start of the Ryosuke Takahashi-led Project D's expedition. The expedition continues to Saitama and Ibaraki, before the finale in Kanagawa.

See also[edit]


Japan portal
Tokyo portal



Geography of Japan
Kantō dialect
Kantō Fureai Trail, aka Capital Region Nature Trail, a collection of hiking trails circumnavigating the entire Kantō Region

Notes[edit]


^ https://resources.realestate.co.jp/news/international-comparison-of-gdp-of-japans-prefectures-tokyos-gdp-is-bigger-than-indonesias/
^ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 2015-03-16. Retrieved 2015-11-01. 
^ Nussbaum, Louis-Frédéric. (2005). "Kantō" in Japan Encyclopedia, pp. 478-479, p. 478, at Google Books
^ "政府統計の総合窓口". E-stat.go.jp. Retrieved 2012-12-31. 
^ Avances en prevención de desastres sísmicos en Japón. Outline of countermeasures for the Tōkai earthquake (Section B) N Honda, published March 1994, accessed 2011-03-25


References[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Kantō region.



Nussbaum, Louis-Frédéric and Käthe Roth. (2005). Japan encyclopedia. Cambridge: Harvard University Press. ISBN 978-0-674-01753-5; OCLC 58053128

 This article incorporates public domain material from the Library of Congress Country Studies document "Kanto".






v
t
e


 Regions and administrative divisions of Japan



Regions



Hokkaido
Tōhoku
Kantō

Nanpō Islands


Chūbu

Hokuriku
Kōshin'etsu
Shin'etsu
Tōkai


Kansai
Chūgoku

San'in
San'yō


Shikoku
Kyushu

Northern
Southern
Okinawa










47 Prefectures




Hokkaido



Hokkaido





Tōhoku



Aomori
Iwate
Miyagi
Akita
Yamagata
Fukushima





Kantō



Ibaraki
Tochigi
Gunma
Saitama
Chiba
Tokyo
Kanagawa





Chūbu



Niigata
Toyama
Ishikawa
Fukui
Yamanashi
Nagano
Gifu
Shizuoka
Aichi





Kansai



Mie
Shiga
Kyoto
Osaka
Hyōgo
Nara
Wakayama





Chūgoku



Tottori
Shimane
Okayama
Hiroshima
Yamaguchi





Shikoku



Tokushima
Kagawa
Ehime
Kōchi





Kyushu



Fukuoka
Saga
Nagasaki
Kumamoto
Ōita
Miyazaki
Kagoshima
Okinawa












Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 254173172
GND: 4843323-8
NDL: 00631554











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Kantō_region&oldid=814361260"					Categories: Kantō regionHidden categories: Articles to be expanded from October 2013All articles to be expandedArticles needing translation from Japanese WikipediaArticles needing additional references from December 2008All articles needing additional referencesArticles containing Japanese-language textAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from June 2014Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from June 2014Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the Library of Congress Country StudiesWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiers