





This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (January 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



The dignity of Knight Bachelor is the most basic and lowest rank of a man who has been knighted by the monarch but not as a member of one of the organised orders of chivalry; it is currently a part of the British honours system.[1] Knights Bachelor are the most ancient sort of British knight (the rank existed during the 13th century reign of King Henry III), but Knights Bachelor rank below knights of chivalric orders.
There is no female counterpart to Knight Bachelor. The lowest knightly honour that can be conferred upon a woman is Dame Commander of the Most Excellent Order of the British Empire (DBE), which is one rank higher than Knight Bachelor (being the female equivalent of 'KBE' or Knight Commander of the Most Excellent Order of the British Empire, which is the next male knightly rank above Knight Bachelor). Also, foreigners[clarification needed] are not created Knights Bachelor; instead they are generally made honorary KBEs.[2]



Contents


1 Criteria
2 Honorifics and post-nominals
3 Insignia
4 Imperial Society of Knights Bachelor
5 See also
6 Notes
7 References
8 External links



Criteria[edit]
Knighthood is usually conferred for public service; amongst its recipients are all male judges of Her Majesty's High Court of Justice in England. It is possible to be a Knight Bachelor and a junior member of an order of chivalry without being a knight of that order; this situation has become rather common, especially among those recognised for achievements in entertainment. For instance, Sir Ian Holm, Sir Michael Gambon, Sir Derek Jacobi, Sir Anthony Hopkins, Sir Elton John, Sir Michael Caine and Sir Ian McKellen are Commanders of the Most Excellent Order of the British Empire (CBEs), as were Sir Bruce Forsyth, Sir Alan Bates, Sir Robert Helpmann, Sir Nigel Hawthorne, Sir John Mills, Sir John Hurt, Sir Christopher Lee, Sir Peter Ustinov, Sir Alec Guinness, Sir Richard Attenborough, John Burns, Sir Michael Hordern and Sir Michael Redgrave. Sir Patrick Stewart, and Sir Tom Jones are Officers of the Most Excellent Order of the British Empire (OBEs), and Sir Paul McCartney is a Member of the Most Excellent Order of the British Empire (MBE). None of them would be entitled to use the honorific "Sir" by virtue of their membership of the order alone, but as they are all also Knights Bachelor, they are entitled to preface their names with that title.
Honorifics and post-nominals[edit]
Like other knights, Knights Bachelor are styled "Sir". Since they are not knights of any order of chivalry, there is no post-nominal associated with the honour.[3] When the style "Sir" is awkward or incomplete due to a subsequent appointment, recipients may sometimes use the word "Knight" or "Kt" (note the lowercase 't', which distinguishes it from "KT", the post-nominals of a Knight of the Thistle) after their name in formal documents to signify that they have the additional honour. This style is often adopted by Knights Bachelor who are also peers, baronets or knights of the various statutory orders, such as Sir William Boulton, Bt, Kt, or The Lord Olivier, Kt.[4][5]
Insignia[edit]




The insignia of a Knight Bachelor devised in 1926


Until 1926 Knights Bachelor had no insignia which they could wear, but in that year King George V issued a Warrant authorising the wearing of a badge on all appropriate occasions. The Knights Bachelor badge may be worn on all such occasions upon the left side of the coat or outer garment of those upon whom the degree of Knight Bachelor has been conferred. Measuring 2​3⁄8 inches in length and 1​3⁄8 inches in width, it is described in heraldic terms as follows:

Upon an oval medallion of vermilion, enclosed by a scroll a cross-hilted sword belted and sheathed, pommel upwards, between two spurs, rowels upwards, the whole set about with the sword belt, all gilt.

In 1974, Queen Elizabeth II issued a further warrant authorising the wearing on appropriate occasions of a neck badge, slightly smaller in size, and in miniature. In 1988 a new certificate of authentication, a knight's only personal documentation, was designed by the College of Arms.
Imperial Society of Knights Bachelor[edit]
The Imperial Society of Knights Bachelor was founded for the maintenance and consolidation of the Dignity of Knights Bachelor in 1908, and obtained official recognition from the Sovereign in 1912. The Society keeps records of all Knights Bachelor, in their interest.
See also[edit]

Bachelor
Knight banneret
Central Chancery of the Orders of Knighthood
British honours system: Knighthood

Notes[edit]


^ "The British Honours System". www.churchill-society-london.org.uk. Retrieved 2017-05-23. 
^ "Imperial Society of Knights Bachelor". www.iskb.co.uk. Retrieved 2017-05-23. 
^ "Orders of Chivalry". British Government. Archived from the original on 19 August 2007. Retrieved 30 August 2007. 
^ "Form of address". Imperial Society of Knights Bachelor. Retrieved 17 April 2014. 
^ "Knight". Forms of address. Debrett's. Archived from the original on 5 April 2014. Retrieved 17 April 2014. 


References[edit]

Insignia of knights bachelor—Website of the Imperial Society of Knights Bachelor
The UK Honours System—Website UK Government
Debrett's

External links[edit]

 Media related to Knights Bachelor at Wikimedia Commons







v
t
e


 Orders, decorations, and medals of the United Kingdom



Orders




Current



 Garter
 Thistle
 Bath
 Merit
 St Michael and St George
 Royal Victorian
 Distinguished Service
 British Empire
 Imperial Service
 Companions of Honour
 St John





Dormant



 St Patrick
 Royal Guelphic
 Crown of India
 Star of India
 Indian Empire
 Indian Merit
 British India
 Burma





Other



 Royal Victorian Chain
Hereditary peerage
Life peerage
Privy Counsellor
 Baronet
 Knight Bachelor
Aide-de-camp (ADC)
Honours of other Commonwealth realms











Current
awards




Level 1



 Victoria Cross (VC)
 George Cross (GC)





Level 2A



 Distinguished Service Order (DSO)
 Conspicuous Gallantry Cross (CGC)
 Royal Red Cross Class I (RRC)





Level 2B



 George Medal (GM)
 Queen's Police Medal, for Gallantry (QPM)
 Queen's Fire Service Medal, for Gallantry (QFSM)





Level 3A



 Distinguished Service Cross (DSC)
 Military Cross (MC)
 Distinguished Flying Cross (DFC)
 Air Force Cross (AFC)
 Royal Red Cross Class II (ARRC)





Level 3B



 Constabulary Medal (Ireland)
 Sea Gallantry Medal (SGM)
 Queen's Gallantry Medal (QGM)
 Royal Victorian Medal (RVM)
 British Empire Medal (BEM)
 Queen's Police Medal, for Distinguished Service (QPM)
 Queen's Fire Service Medal, for Distinguished Service (QFSM)
 Queen's Ambulance Service Medal (QAM)
 Queen's Volunteer Reserves Medal (QVRM)
 Polar Medal (PM)
 Imperial Service Medal (ISM)
 Overseas Territories Police Medal (CPM)
 Merchant Navy Medal for Meritorious Service





Level 4



Mentioned in Despatches
Queen's Commendation for Bravery
Queen's Commendation for Bravery in the Air
Queen's Commendation for Valuable Service





Other



 Badge of Honour








Obsolete
awards




Level 1



 Indian Order of Merit (First Class) (IOM)
  Albert Medal (1st class) (AM)
 Edward Medal (1st class) (EM)
 Empire Gallantry Medal (EGM)





Level 2A



 Indian Order of Merit (Second Class) (IOM)
 Distinguished Conduct Medal (DCM)
 Conspicuous Gallantry Medal (CGM)
 Conspicuous Gallantry Medal (Flying) (CGM)





Level 2B



  Albert Medal (2nd class) (AM)
 Edward Medal (2nd class) (EM)
 Union of South Africa King's Medal for Bravery, Gold





Level 3A



 Order of British India (First Class) (OBI)
 Order of British India (Second Class) (OBI)
 Indian Order of Merit (Third Class) (IOM)
 Royal West African Frontier Force Distinguished Conduct Medal
 King's African Rifles Distinguished Conduct Medal
 Indian Distinguished Service Medal (IDSM)
 Distinguished Service Medal (DSM)
 Military Medal (MM)
 Distinguished Flying Medal (DFM)
 Air Force Medal (AFM)
 Burma Gallantry Medal (BGM)





Level 3B



 Union of South Africa Queen's Medal for Bravery (Silver)
 Kaisar-i-Hind Medal (Gold, Silver, Bronze)
 Indian Police Medal, for Gallantry
 Ceylon Police Medal, for Gallantry
 Sierra Leone Police Medal, for Gallantry
 Sierra Leone Fire Brigades Medal, for Gallantry
 Colonial Police Medal, for Gallantry (CPM)
 Canada Medal (CM)
 Queen's Medal for Chiefs
 Indian Police Medal, for Meritorious Service
 Ceylon Police Medal, for Merit
 Sierra Leone Police Medal, for Meritorious Service
 Sierra Leone Fire Brigades Medal, for Meritorious Service





Level 4



King's/Queen's Commendation for Brave Conduct
King's/Queen's Commendation for Valuable Service in the Air








Royal Family Orders
(personal mementos)



 King George IV
 Victoria and Albert
 King Edward VII
 King George V
 King George VI
 Queen Elizabeth II








See also
British campaign medals
Revocations
Orders, decorations and medals












v
t
e


Former decorations of Australia




Australian Honours Order of Precedence prior to 6 October 1992



Orders of chivalry




Most Honourable
Order of the Bath



 Knight/Dame Grand Cross of the Order of the Bath (GCB)
 Knight/Dame Commander of the Order of the Bath (KCB/DCB)
 Companion of the Order of the Bath (CB)





Most Distinguished
Order of St Michael
and St George



 Knight/Dame Grand Cross of the Order of St Michael and St George (GCMG)
 Knight/Dame Commander of the Order of St Michael and St George (KCMG/DCMG)
 Companion of the Order of St Michael and St George (CMG)





Most Excellent Order
of the British Empire



/ Knight/Dame Grand Cross of the Order of the British Empire (GBE)
/ Knight/Dame Commander of the Order of the British Empire (KBE/DBE)
/ Commander of the Order of the British Empire (CBE)
/ Officer of the Order of the British Empire (OBE)
/ Member of the Order of the British Empire (MBE)





Imperial Service Order



 Companion of the Imperial Service Order (ISO)





Order of the
Companions of Honour



 Companion of the Order of the Companions of Honour (CH)





Miscellaneous



Hereditary peer
Life peer
 Baronet
 Knight Bachelor








Military
gallantry/bravery
decorations




In the face
of the enemy



 Victoria Cross (VC)
 Distinguished Service Order (DSO)
 Distinguished Conduct Medal (DCM)
 Conspicuous Gallantry Medal (CGM)
 Conspicuous Gallantry Medal (Flying) (CGM)
 Military Cross (MC)
 Distinguished Flying Cross (DFC)
 Military Medal (MM)
 Distinguished Flying Medal (DFM)
 Mentioned in dispatches





Not the face
of the enemy



 Air Force Cross (AFC)
 Air Force Medal (AFM)
Queen's Commendation for Brave Conduct








Distinguished
service
decorations




In the face
of the enemy



 Distinguished Service Cross (DSC)
 Distinguished Service Medal (DSM)





Not the face
of the enemy



 Queen's Police Medal for Distinguished Service (QPM)
 Queen's Fire Service Medal for Distinguished Service (QFSM)








Civil bravery
decorations



 George Cross (GC)
 Albert Medal, First Class (AM)
 Albert Medal, First Class (Sea) (AM)
 Albert Medal, Second Class (AM)
 Albert Medal, Second Class (Sea) (AM)
 George Medal (GM)
 Queen's Police Medal for Gallantry (QPM)
 Queen's Fire Service Medal for Gallantry (QFSM)
 Sea Gallantry Medal (SGM)
 Queen's Gallantry Medal (QGM)
 Edward Medal (EM)
Queen's Commendation for Brave Conduct





Nursing service



 Member of the Royal Red Cross (RRC)
 Associate of the Royal Red Cross (ARRC)





Meritorious service



/ British Empire Medal (BEM)
 Queen's Commendation for Valuable Service











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Knight_Bachelor&oldid=817670985"					Categories: Knights BachelorHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from January 2016All articles needing additional referencesUse dmy dates from February 2017EngvarB from February 2017Wikipedia articles needing clarification from July 2016