This article is about the city in India. For other uses, see Kochi (disambiguation).
"Cochin" redirects here. For other uses, see Cochin (disambiguation).


Kochi
Cochin


Metropolis



Clockwise from top: Marine Drive Skyline, Chinese Fishing Nets at Fort Kochi, Cochin Shipyard, Queen's Way, Hill Palace, InfoPark



Nickname(s): Queen of the Arabian Sea[1][2]










Kochi


Show map of Kerala








Kochi


Show map of India








Kochi


Show map of Kochi






Coordinates: 9°58′N 76°17′E﻿ / ﻿9.97°N 76.28°E﻿ / 9.97; 76.28Coordinates: 9°58′N 76°17′E﻿ / ﻿9.97°N 76.28°E﻿ / 9.97; 76.28


Country
 India


State
Kerala


District
Ernakulam


Formed
1 April 1958[3]


Government


 • Body
Kochi Municipal Corporation


 • Mayor
Soumini Jain (INC)


 • City Police Commissioner
M.P.Dinesh IPS


Area


 • Metropolis
94.88 km2 (36.63 sq mi)


 • Metro[4]
732 km2 (283 sq mi)


Elevation
0 m (0 ft)


Population (2011)[5]


 • Metropolis
601,574


 • Density
6,340/km2 (16,400/sq mi)


 • Metro[6]
2,119,724


Demonym(s)
Kochiite[7]


Languages


 • Official
Malayalam, English


Time zone
IST (UTC+5:30)


PIN code(s)
682 XXX, 683 XXX


Area code(s)
+91-484


Vehicle registration
KL-7, KL-39, KL-41, KL-42, KL-43, KL-63


Judicial Capital
High Court of Kerala


Coastline
48 kilometres (30 mi)


Sex ratio
1028 ♂/♀


Literacy
98.5%


Development Agency
GCDA, GIDA


Climate
Am (Köppen)


Precipitation
3,228.3 millimetres (127.10 in)


Website
cochinmunicipalcorporation.kerala.gov.in


Kochi ([koˈtʃːi ] ( listen)), also known as Cochin (/ˈkoʊtʃɪn/ KOH-chin), is a major port city on the south-west coast of India by the Laccadive Sea. It is part of the district of Ernakulam in the state of Kerala and is often referred to as Ernakulam. With a corporation limit population of 612,343,[8] and metropolitan population of 2.1 million, Kochi city is also a part of the Greater Cochin region,[9][10] which is the largest urban agglomeration in Kerala and is classified as a Tier-II city by the Government of India. The civic body that governs the city is the Kochi Municipal Corporation, which was constituted in the year 1967, and the statutory bodies that oversee its development are the Greater Cochin Development Authority[11] (GCDA) and the Goshree Islands Development Authority (GIDA).[12]
Called as the Queen of the Arabian Sea, Kochi was an important spice trading centre on the west coast of India from the 14th century onward, and maintained a trade network with Arab merchants from the pre-Islamic era. Occupied by the Portuguese in 1503, Kochi was the first of the European colonies in colonial India. It remained the main seat of Portuguese India until 1530, when Goa was chosen instead. The city was later occupied by the Dutch and the British, with the Kingdom of Cochin becoming a princely state. Kochi ranks first in the total number of international and domestic tourist arrivals in Kerala.[13][14] Kochi has been ranked the sixth best tourist destination in India according to a survey conducted by the Nielsen Company on behalf of the Outlook Traveller magazine.[15] Kochi was one of the 28 Indian cities found to be among the emerging 440 global cities that will contribute 50% of the world GDP by the year 2025, in a 2011 study done by the McKinsey Global Institute.[16]
Kochi is known as the financial,[17][18] commercial[19][20] and industrial[21][22] capital of Kerala. It is the home to Southern Naval Command of the Indian Navy and the state headquarters[23][24] of the Indian Coast Guard with an attached air squadron, named Air Squadron 747.[25] Commercial maritime facilities of the city include the Port of Kochi, an International Container Transshipment Terminal, the Cochin Shipyard, offshore SPM of the BPCL Kochi Refinery,[26][27] and the Kochi Marina. Kochi is also home for the Cochin Stock Exchange, International Pepper Exchange, industries like HMT, Cyber City, Kinfra Hi-Tech Park, chemical industries like the FACT, TCC, IREL, Petronet LNG, Merchem, HOCL[28] and Kochi Refineries, electrical industries like TELK,[29] and industrial parks like the Cochin Special Economic Zone, Smart City and Infopark. Kochi is home for the High Court of Kerala and Lakshadweep, Naval physical and oceanographic laboratory (NPOL), Indian Maritime University, Sree sankara Sanskrit University and the Cochin University of Science and Technology. Kochi is also home to Kerala's National Law School, The National University of Advanced Legal Studies. Kochi has been hosting India's first art biennale, the Kochi-Muziris Biennale, since 2012, which attracts international artists and tourists.[30]



Contents


1 Etymology
2 History
3 Geography and climate

3.1 Geography
3.2 Climate


4 Civic administration

4.1 Law and order
4.2 Politics


5 Economy
6 Transport

6.1 Air
6.2 Road

6.2.1 National highways
6.2.2 State highways
6.2.3 City roads


6.3 Public transport

6.3.1 Road
6.3.2 Rail
6.3.3 Metro
6.3.4 Water




7 Demographics
8 Culture
9 Healthcare
10 Education

10.1 Secondary education
10.2 Higher education


11 Social service organisations
12 Media
13 Sports
14 Navy
15 Sister cities
16 See also
17 References
18 Further reading
19 External links



Etymology
Ancient travellers and tradesmen referred to Kochi in their writings, variously alluding to it as Cocym, Cochym, Cochin, and Kochi.[31] The Cochin Jewish community called Cochin as Kogin (קוגין), which is seen in the seal of the synagogue[32] which is still owned by the community. The origin of the name "Kochi" is thought to be from the Malayalam word kochu azhi, meaning 'small lagoon'. Yet another theory is that Kochi is derived from the word Kaci, meaning "harbour".[33] The name Cochin implies "co-chin", meaning "like-China". It looked like China when the Chinese came to the region during the 14th century and installed Chinese nets. Accounts by Italian explorers Nicolo Conti (15th century), and Fra Paoline in the 17th century say that it was called Kochchi, named after the river connecting the backwaters to the sea.[34] After the arrival of the Portuguese, and later the British, the name Cochin stuck as the official appellation. The city reverted to a closer Anglicization of its original Malayalam name, Kochi, in 1996. This change in name was challenged by the city municipal corporation but court has later dismissed the plea.[35]
History
Main article: History of Kochi
See also: Kingdom of Cochin
Kochi was the centre of Indian spice trade for many centuries, and was known to the Yavanas (Greeks and Romans) as well as Jews, Syrians, Arabs, and Chinese since ancient times.[36] Kochi rose to significance as a trading centre after the port Muziris around Kodungallur (Cranganore) was destroyed by massive flooding of Periyar in 1341.[37] The earliest documented references to Kochi occur in books written by Chinese voyager Ma Huan during his visit to Kochi in the 15th century as part of Admiral Zheng He's treasure fleet.[38] There are also references to Kochi in accounts written by Italian traveller Niccolò Da Conti, who visited Kochi in 1440.[39]




Kochi City around 1635



Paradesi Synagogue Inscription



St. Francis CSI Church built in 1503, is the oldest European church in India.[40]



According to many historians, the precursor state to Kingdom of Kochi came into existence in the early 12th century, after the fall of the Chera Kingdom.[33] The reign of the Kingdom was hereditary, and the family that ruled over the region was known as the Perumpadappu Swaroopam in the local vernacular.
Portuguese navigator, Pedro Álvares Cabral founded the first European settlement in India at Kochi in 1500.[41][42] From 1503 to 1663, Fort Kochi (Fort Emmanuel) was ruled by Portugal. This Portuguese period was a harrowing time for the Saint Thomas Christians and the Jews, as the Inquisition was active in Portuguese India. Kochi hosted the grave of Vasco da Gama, the first European explorer to set sail for India, who was buried at St. Francis Church until his remains were returned to Portugal in 1539.[43] The Portuguese rule was followed by that of the Dutch who renamed Fort Immanuel as Fort Stormsburg. In meantime, the Royal Family of Kochi relocated the capital of Kochi Kingdom to Thrissur, leaving nominal authority over Islands of Kochi. In 1664, Fort Kochi Municipality was established by Dutch, making it the first municipality in Indian subcontinent, which got dissolved when Dutch authority got weaker in the 18th century. The remaining part of Kochi were governed by governors of Kochi Kingdom. By 1773, the Mysore ruler Hyder Ali extended his conquest in the Malabar region to Kochi forcing it to become a tributary of Mysore. The hereditary Prime Ministership of Kochi held by the Paliath Achans ended during this period.
Meanwhile, the Dutch, fearing an outbreak of war on the United Provinces, signed the Anglo-Dutch Treaty of 1814 with the United Kingdom, under which Kochi was ceded to the United Kingdom in exchange for the island of Bangka. However, there are evidences of English habitation in the region even before the signing of the treaty.[44] In 1866, Fort Kochi municipality was reinstalled and its first Municipal Council seating contest was conducted in 1883. In 1896, H.H. Rama Varma XV, The Maharaja of Cochin, initiated local administration by forming town councils in Mattancherry and Ernakulam. In 1907, the Governor of the Madras Presidency, Sir Arthur Lawley and his brother, Beilby Lawley, 3rd Baron Wenlock, Governor of Madras, 1891 to 1896, left for an official tour of Cochin and Travancore, which lasted from 25 January to 14 February. On 26 January, they were met by His Highness the Rajah of Cochin who gave a State Dinner in their honour at Ernakulam.[45][46][47][48] By the 1870s, the capital of Kochi Kingdom was relocated again to Kochi Suburb of Tripunithura. In 1910, Ernakulam became the administrative capital of Kochi Kingdom with establishment of Royal Secretariat and State Durbar. The Offices of Diwan and High court were soon moved into Ernakulam.
In 1925, Kochi legislative assembly was constituted due to public pressure on the state. Towards the early 20th century, trade at the port had increased substantially, and the need to develop the port was greatly felt. Harbour engineer Robert Bristow was brought to Kochi in 1920 under the direction of Lord Willingdon, then the Governor of Madras. In a span of 21 years, he transformed Kochi as one of the safest harbours in the peninsula, where ships berthed alongside the newly reclaimed inner harbour equipped with a long array of steam cranes.[49]
In 1947, when India gained independence from the British colonial rule, Cochin was the first princely state to join the Indian Union willingly.[33] In 1949, Travancore-Cochin state came into being with the merger of Cochin and Travancore. The King of Travancore was the Rajpramukh of the Travancore-Cochin Union from 1949 to 1956. Travancore-Cochin, was in turn merged with the Malabar district of the Madras State. Finally, the Government of India's States Reorganisation Act (1956) inaugurated a new state—Kerala—incorporating Travancore-Cochin (excluding the four southern Taluks which were merged with Tamil Nadu), Malabar District, and the taluk of Kasargod, South Kanara.[50] On 9 July 1960 the Mattancherry council passed a resolution—which was forwarded to the government—requesting the formation of a municipal corporation by combining the existing municipalities of Fort Kochi, Mattancherry, and Ernakulam. The government appointed a commission to study the feasibility of the suggested merger. Based on its report, the Kerala Legislative Assembly approved the corporation's formation. On 1 November 1967, exactly eleven years since the establishment of the state of Kerala, the Kochi Municipal Corporation came into existence. The merger leading to the establishment of the corporation, was between the municipalities of Ernakulam, Mattancherry and Fort Kochi, along with that of the Willingdon Island, four panchayats (Palluruthy, Vennala, Vyttila and Edappally), and the small islands of Gundu and Ramanthuruth. Kochi and Ernakulam district formed on 1 April 1958 carving areas of erstwhile Travancore-Kochi-Malabar kingdoms. Major portion of the district is from the Kochi kingdom.[3]
The city's economic growth gathered momentum after economic reforms in India introduced by the central government in the early-1990s. Since 2000, the service sector has energised the city's economy. The establishment of several industrial parks based on IT and other port based infrastructure triggered a construction and realty boom in the city. Over the years, Kochi has witnessed rapid commercialisation, and has today grown into the commercial hub of Kerala.[51]
Geography and climate




A view of Thevara from Kundannur bridge


Geography
Main article: Geography of Kochi
Kochi is located on the southwest coast of India at 9°58′N 76°13′E﻿ / ﻿9.967°N 76.217°E﻿ / 9.967; 76.217, with a corporation limit area of 94.88 km2 (36.63 sq mi).[52] Over the years, the city has expanded considerably outside the corporation limit set in 1967, although the official city limits hasn't yet been increased.[53] The city straddles the backwaters, encompassing the northern end of a peninsula, several islands and a portion of the mainland. To the west lies the Laccadive Sea, and to the east is the urbanised region in the rest of the mainland area. Much of Kochi lies at sea level, with a coastline of 48 km.[33]
The current metropolitan limits of Kochi include the mainland Ernakulam, Fort Kochi, the suburbs of Edapally, Kalamassery and Kakkanad to the northeast; Tripunithura to the southeast; and a group of islands closely scattered in the Vembanad Lake. The state government and the GCDA have plans to include Mala and Kodungallur in Thrissur district, Angamaly, Perumbavoor, Piravom and Kolenchery in Ernakulam district, Thalayolaparambu and Vaikom in Kottayam and Cherthala in Alappuzha district within Kochi metropolitan limits. The newly formed metropolis would be put under the charge of a new authority called Kochi Metropolitan Regional Development Authority.[54][55] However, The Hindu reported that the state government is yet to take any concrete steps in this regard.[56]
Soil consists of sediments such as alluvium, teris, brown sands, etc. Hydromorphic saline soils are also found in the areas surrounding the backwaters.[33]
Predominant rock types found here are Archaean-basic dykes, Charnockites and Gneisses. An ecologically sensitive area, the Mangalavanam Bird Sanctuary is located in the central part of the city. It has a wide range of mangrove species and is a nesting ground for a vast variety of migratory birds.
Kochi's water needs are entirely dependent on ground water and the two rivers flowing through the district viz., Periyar and Muvattupuzha. Periyar serves the entire northern part of the city whereas Muvattupuzha river under the JnNurm project covers the West Kochi, East Kochi and parts of Cherthala taluk under the Japan Water Project Scheme.
Climate
Under the Köppen climate classification, Kochi features a tropical monsoon climate (Am). Kochi's proximity to the equator along with its coastal location results in little seasonal temperature variation, with moderate to high levels of humidity. Annual temperatures range between 23 and 31 °C (73 and 88 °F) with the record high being 36.5 °C (97.7 °F), and record low 16.3 °C (61.3 °F).[57] From June to September, the south-west monsoon brings in heavy rains as Kochi lies on the windward side of the Western Ghats. From October to December, Kochi receives lighter (yet significant) rain from the northeast monsoon, as it lies on the leeward side. Average annual rainfall is 2,978.0 mm (117.24 in), with an annual average of 125 rainy days.[58]


Climate data for Kochi (1971–2010)


Month
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
Year


Record high °C (°F)
36.4
(97.5)
35.7
(96.3)
36.0
(96.8)
36.5
(97.7)
35.2
(95.4)
34.2
(93.6)
33.1
(91.6)
32.5
(90.5)
34.2
(93.6)
34.6
(94.3)
35.6
(96.1)
34.8
(94.6)
36.5
(97.7)


Average high °C (°F)
31.7
(89.1)
31.9
(89.4)
32.5
(90.5)
32.9
(91.2)
32.3
(90.1)
30.1
(86.2)
29.3
(84.7)
29.3
(84.7)
30.0
(86)
30.6
(87.1)
31.2
(88.2)
31.8
(89.2)
31.1
(88)


Average low °C (°F)
22.6
(72.7)
24.0
(75.2)
25.3
(77.5)
25.9
(78.6)
25.7
(78.3)
24.1
(75.4)
23.7
(74.7)
23.9
(75)
24.2
(75.6)
24.1
(75.4)
24.0
(75.2)
23.1
(73.6)
24.2
(75.6)


Record low °C (°F)
16.5
(61.7)
16.3
(61.3)
21.6
(70.9)
21.3
(70.3)
21.1
(70)
20.4
(68.7)
17.6
(63.7)
20.6
(69.1)
21.1
(70)
19.2
(66.6)
19.2
(66.6)
17.7
(63.9)
16.3
(61.3)


Average precipitation mm (inches)
23.3
(0.917)
25.9
(1.02)
30.8
(1.213)
94.8
(3.732)
282.8
(11.134)
705.8
(27.787)
593.6
(23.37)
403.1
(15.87)
279.6
(11.008)
320.3
(12.61)
174.9
(6.886)
43.2
(1.701)
2,978
(117.244)


Average rainy days
1.0
1.2
2.3
6.2
10.7
23.2
22.3
20.0
13.8
14.3
7.8
1.9
124.7


Source: India Meteorological Department (record high and low up to 2010)[57][58]


Civic administration


Kochi City officials


Mayor
Soumini Jain


Deputy Mayor
T J Vinod


Police Commissioner
M.P.Dinesh IPS






Kochi Municipal Corporation Town Hall



The High Court of Kerala located in the city is the highest court in Kerala



The city is administered by the Kochi Corporation, headed by a mayor. For administrative purposes, the city is divided into 74 wards,[59] from which the members of the corporation council are elected for five years. Earlier; Fort Kochi, Mattancherry and Ernakulam were the three Municipalities in Cochin area, which was later merged to form the Cochin Corporation. The Corporation has its headquarters in Ernakulam, and zonal offices at Fort Kochi, Mattancherry, Palluruthy, Edappally, Vaduthala and Vyttila. The general administration of the city is handled by the Personnel Department and the Council Standing committee Section.[60] Other departments include that of town planning, health, engineering, revenue and accounts. The corporation is also responsible for waste disposal and sewage management. The city produces more than 600 tons of waste per day and a large portion of waste is decomposed at Brahmapuram Soild Waste plant into organic manure.[60] The supply of potable water, sourced from the Periyar River is handled by Kerala Water Authority with support of Water works department of Kochi Corporation.[61] Electricity is provided by the Kerala State Electricity Board. The GCDA and GIDA are the government agencies initiating and monitoring the development of Greater Cochin area, mainly in developing infrastructure facilities for the city.
Law and order
Kochi is the seat of High Court of Kerala, the highest judicial body in the state of Kerala. The Kochi City Police is headed by a Police Commissioner, an Indian Police Service (IPS) officer. The city is divided into five zones and each zone under a circle officer. Apart from regular law & order, the city police comprises the Traffic Police, Narcotics Cell, Riot horse, Armed Reserve Camps, District Crime Records Bureau and a Women's Police station.[62] It operates 19 police stations functioning under the Home Ministry of Government of Kerala. An anti-corruption branch of the Central Bureau of Investigation also operates out of the city. CISF maintains 3 squadrons for providing security to various central and state heavy industries, airport and seaport zones. Other major central agencies are NIA, DRI and Indian Customs due to the presence of major port. According to National Crime Records Bureau (NCRB), Kochi reported significant increase of 193.7 per cent IPC crimes in 2010 compared to 2009, and reported a crime rate of 1,897.8 compared to the 424.1 in whole Kerala.[63] However, Kochi Police officials defended that in major crimes such as murders and kidnapping, the city registered a low crime rate[64] even behind other cities in the state.[65]
Politics
Kochi is part of the Ernakulam Lok Sabha constituency in Indian Parliament. The current elected Member of Parliament representing the constituency is Prof. K. V. Thomas of Indian National Congress.
The Ernakulam Lok Sabha constituency elects six members to the state Legislative Assembly. Out of this, five constituencies, namely Kochi, Ernakulam, Thripunithura, Thrikkakara and Kalamassery represent the city. The elected representative to the state Legislative Assembly from Kochi is K. J. Maxi, Ernakulam is Hibi Eden, Thripunithura is M. Swaraj, Thrikkakara is P. T. THOMAS and Kalamassery is V. K. Ibrahim Kunju[66]
Economy
Main article: Economy of Kochi
Kochi is widely referred to as the commercial capital of Kerala.[67] Kochi is home to Cochin Stock Exchange, the only stock exchange in Kerala. Federal Bank, the fourth-largest Private-sector bank in India is located in Aluva which is a suburb of Kochi. Being a major online trading centre in the country, Kochi has a newly opened SEBI office.[68]




The Greater Cochin Development Authority is the statutory body overseeing the development of the city



Established in 1926, the Cochin Port Trust overlooks the activities of Cochin Port



Wonderla amusement park, Kochi



Kakkanad is a major industrial center and is home to the Cochin Special Economic Zone, Infopark and Smart City



Availability of electricity, fresh water, long coastline, backwaters, good banking facilities, presence of a major port, container trans-shipment terminal, harbour terminal and an international air terminal are some of the factors which accelerated the industrial growth in the city and its adjoining district.[51] In recent years the city has witnessed heavy investment, thus making it one of the fastest-growing second-tier metro cities in India.[69][70] Sales tax income generated in the Kochi metropolitan area contributes heavily to state revenue.[71][72]




Kochi LNG Terminal



Vembanad Rail Bridge is the longest railway bridge in India



Vallarpadam Terminal is the first transshipment terminal in India



The Kochi International Marina is the only marina in India



TCS centre at Infopark



The district contributes the highest portion, 41.74%, of the state's GDP.[73] Construction and manufacturing combined contributes 37%, and trade, tourism and hospitality together provides another 20%. Major business sectors include construction, manufacturing, shipbuilding, transportation/shipping, seafood and spices exports, chemical industries, information technology (IT), tourism, health services, and banking. Kochi is recognised as one of the seventeen major industrial cities of India by World Bank, Doing Business Group. However, in the 2009 rankings of ease to start and operate a business, among the 17 Indian cities selected, Kochi was rated as the second most difficult city to start business and was ranked 16th, above Kolkata.[74]
As in most of Kerala, remittances from non-resident Indians (NRI)s is a major source of income.[75] Eloor, situated 17 kilometres (11 miles) north of the city-centre, is the largest industrial belt in Kerala, with more than 250 factories manufacturing a range of products including chemical and petrochemical products, pesticides, rare earth elements, rubber processing chemicals, fertilisers, zinc and chromium compounds, and leather products.[76] Fertilisers and Chemicals Travancore Limited (FACT), one of the oldest fertilizers and chemical industry in Kerala is located in Kochi.[77] Kochi Refineries of (BPCL) at Ambalamugal is the largest state owned refinery in India. Petronet India has now almost completed Kochi LNG Terminal, for importing and storing natural gas, for energy and fuelling needs.[78] Central Government establishments like the Coconut Development Board, the Coir Board and the Marine Products Export Development Authority (MPEDA) have head offices located in the city.
Kalamassery which is situated around 16.5 km from the City Center is one of the major Industrial areas. Leading factories like FACT, HMT and IT/Biotechnology park like KINFRA Hi-Tech Park are located here. The headquarters of Neera Development Center is located at Kalamassery . The Cochin University of Science and Technology is located at Kalamassery. Irimpanam is another major industrial area in Kochi. The Seaport-Airport Road (SPAP Road) passes through this place and oil giants like Indian Oil Corporation, Bharat Petroleum and Hindustan Petroleum have plants here.
Like elsewhere in Kerala, tourism is one of the strongest drivers of the local economy. Ernakulam district, in which Kochi is situated, ranks first in the total number of domestic tourists visiting Kerala,[14] and thus contributes to the economy of the city. The tourist enclave at Fort Kochi and presence of several historical monuments, museums etc. as well as natural attractions like the Vembanad lake and the backwaters attract large number of tourists to the city. Presence of several leading hospitality brands have been a major source of employment for locals. The Kochi Port is one of the leading ports where international cruisers call on regularly.[79] The city has the first marina facility[80] in the country Kochi Marina which attracts large number of yacht-totters. Real Estate industry is also one industry which is contributing a lot to the economy of Kochi. Many players have entered the market and have developed residential properties. Kochi is the headquarters of the Southern Naval Command, the primary training centre of the Indian Navy.[81] The Cochin Shipyard, contributes to the economy of the city.[82][83] The fishing harbour at Thoppumpady is a minor fishing port in the state and supplies fish to local and export markets. To further tap the potential of the all-season harbour at Kochi, an international cruise terminal and several marinas are being constructed.[84][85]
Exports and allied activities are also important contributors to the city's economy. The Cochin Port currently handles export and import of container cargo at its terminal at Willingdon Island. The International Container Transshipment Terminal operating out of Vallarpadam, is India's largest transshipment terminal.[86][87][88][89] Cochin Port Trust also planning to build an Outer Harbour near Puthuvype.[90] Kochi's historical reliance on trade continues into modern times, as the city is a major exporter of spices and is home to the International Pepper Exchange, where black pepper is globally traded. The Spices Board of India and World Spice Organisation are headquartered in Kochi.
The IT and ITES related industries are growing up in Kochi. Availability of cheap bandwidth through undersea cables and lower operational costs compared to other major cities in India, has been to its advantage. Various technology and industrial campuses including the government promoted InfoPark, Cochin Special Economic Zone and KINFRA Export Promotion Industrial Park operate in the outskirts of the city. Several new industrial campuses are under construction in the suburbs of the city. SmartCity at Kakkanad is the prominent project under proposal. Cyber City at Kalamassery is another integrated IT township SEZ being planned in the private sector.
Kochi has an established electronics hardware industry with companies such as V-Guard Industries, OEN India Limited, FCI OEN Connectors and SFO Technologies. The Government of Kerala has announced a project to build an industrial park named Electronic City[91] spanning an area of 340 acres (140 ha), to cater to the electronic hardware industries. The private operator NeST[92] is building a Special Economic Zone specifically for electronics hardware spanning an area of 30 acres (12 ha).
The Cochin International Airport is in the process of setting up an aerotropolis at Nedumbassery.[93][94]
Transport
Main article: Transport in Kochi





A panoramic view of Vyttila Mobility Hub



Air
The air gateway to Kochi is the Cochin International Airport (CIAL) located at Nedumbassery, which is about 28 km (17 mi) north of Kochi city, and handles both domestic and international flights.[95] It is the first international airport in India to be built without Central Government funds[96] and is the world's first fully solar energy powered airport.
The Cochin airport provides direct connectivity to popular international destinations in the Middle East, Malaysia, Thailand and Singapore and to most major Indian cities apart from tourist destinations like Lakshadweep. Kochi is also the headquarters of the Air India Express service. With a terminal area of 840,000 sq ft (78,000 m2), and a passenger capacity of 2200 (international and domestic), it is the largest and busiest airport in the state.[97] It is also the fourth busiest airport in India in terms of international passenger traffic, and seventh busiest overall.[98][99][100][101]




The Cochin International Airport is one of the busiest airports in the country and the first fully solar powered airport in the world



KURTC Volvo city service buses in Kochi



Kochi Metro is the fastest completed metro project in India



Ernakulam Boat Jetty is one of the main boat jetties in the city



Ferry Service boat at Kochi backwaters



Road
Kochi is well connected to neighbouring cities and states via several highways. It is a node in the North-South Corridor of the National Highway system.
National highways
Kochi is served by National Highway 66, National Highway 544, National Highway 966A and National Highway 966B.[102][103][104]
State highways
Several state highways also connect Kochi with other parts of Kerala.[105] SH 15, Ettumanoor-Ernakulam Road, connects the city to Kottayam, Pala, Kumily, Changanacherry, Pathanamthitta etc. SH 41, Palarivattom-Thekkady Road, provides a corridor to the eastern parts of the district. SH 63, Vypeen Pallipuram Road and SH 66, Alappuzha – Thoppumpady road are coastal roads that serve the narrow sliver of land between the backwaters and the sea.
City roads
The main arterial roads of the city are the Mahatma Gandhi Road and Sahodaran Ayyappan Road in Ernakulam, constructed in 1925 & 1962 respectively which runs parallel & perpendicular to the coast and having the proposed Metro Rail connectivity. The Seaport-Airport Road is another major road and connects the Cochin Seaport to the Cochin International Airport. The Infopark Expressway in Kakkanad is connected to the Seaport-Airport Road and stretches all the way to Infopark. Other major roads include Chittoor Road, Banerji Road, Shanmugham Road, Kochi Bypass, Kaloor-Kadavanthra Road, Park Avenue etc.
A new ring road is proposed for Kochi city by the state government for which a project study is being currently undertaken by NATPAC.[106]
Public transport
Road
The primary form of public transport within the city is largely dependent on privately owned bus networks. The state-run also operates its services in the city through the Thirukochi service. The major bus terminals in the city are Ernakulam Town, Ernakulam Jetty and the private bus terminal at Kaloor. An integrated transit terminal namely The Mobility Hub at Vytilla is under 2nd phase of construction. The terminal acts as a hub for long distance bus services away from the city centre, and also a converging point for different modes of public transport, namely bus, metro and ferry.[107]
Kochi is one of the few cities to be granted the new generation air-conditioned low floor and non-air-conditioned semi low-floor buses under the JNNURM city transport development project. KURTC and private buses operate frequent schedules to neighbouring areas of Nedumbassery, Perumbavoor, Aluva, Muvattupuzha, Kothamangalam, Cherthala and Poochakkal . Call taxis and auto rickshaws (called autos) are available for hire throughout the day.
Development of road infrastructure not keeping pace with the increase in traffic is a major problem faced by Kochi, like most other parts of Kerala.[108]
Rail
The city has four major railway stations – Ernakulam Junction, Ernakulam Town (locally known as the South and North railway stations respectively), Aluva and Tripunithura followed by smaller stations, Edapally and Kalamassery. There is also the Cochin Harbour Terminus providing rail connectivity to the southern segment of the Port of Kochi. The terminus is currently under renovation for the suburban rail networks in the city. The main rail transport system in Kochi is operated by the Southern Railway Zone of Indian Railways, and comes under Thiruvananthapuram Railway division. The South station is one of the busiest railway stations in South India, with more than 128 scheduled train services daily.[109] The North station situated on the northern side of the city, caters mostly to long distance services that bypass the South station, and also is an additional halt station for many trains.
There is also a historic station named as Ernakulam Terminus(station code:ERG) situated behind the High Court. Great personalities like Mahatma Gandhi and The British Viceroy have visited Cochin through this old railway station. Ernakulam Terminus was the first station to serve the city but had to be abandoned in the early 1960s. Now this station operates as a goods depot of Southern Railway.[110]
Metro
Main article: Kochi Metro
The Kochi Metro is a metro rapid transit system serving the city of Kochi, intended to considerably ease traffic congestion in the city and its surrounding metropolitan area.[111] It is being set up at an overall estimated cost of ₹5,146 crore (US$800 million). The Phase-1 of the metro system will have 22 stations connecting the suburban towns of Aluva and Pettah while passing through downtown.[112] The first half of the Phase-1 of Kochi Metro was inaugurated on 17 June 2017 by Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi. Currently Kochi Metro is operational from Aluva till Maharaja's College along the Kalamassery - Edappally - Kaloor - MG Road stretch, covering a total of 18.4 km with 16 operational metro stations.[113]
Water
See also: Kochi Water Metro
Kochi ranks among India's major seaports, partly due to being one of the safest harbours in the Indian Ocean.[114] The port, administered by a statutory autonomous body known as the Cochin Port Trust, offers facilities for bunkering, handling cargo and passenger ships and storage accommodation. The port is a complex of three islands, one of which is man-made.[115]
It also operates passenger ships to Colombo and Lakshadweep. Boat services are operated by Kerala Shipping and Inland Navigation Corporation, the State Water Transport Department and private firms from various boat jetties in the city. The junkar ferry for the transshipment of vehicles and passengers between the islands are operated between Ernakulam and Vypin, and between Vypin and Fort Kochi. However, with the construction of the Goshree bridges (which links Kochi's islands), ferry transport has become less essential. The main boat jetties are Ernakulam Main Boat Jetty near Park Avenue, High Court Jetty in Banerjee Road, Embarkation Jetty in Willingdon Island and Fort Kochi Jetty.
Demographics




Religions in Kochi


Religion


Percentage



Hindu

 

47%


Christian

 

35%


Muslim

 

17%


Others

 

1%




See also: Cochin Jews, Saint Thomas Christians, and Latin Church
Kochi has the second highest population density parameter in Kerala with 6340 people per km2.




The Santa Cruz Basilica at Fort Kochi is one of the eight Basilicas in India


As of 2011[update], Kochi had a metropolitan area population of 2,117,990. The female-to-male ratio is 1,028:1,000, significantly higher than the all-India average of 933:1,000. Kochi's literacy rate is 97.5%. The female literacy rate lags that of males by 1.1%, amongst the lowest such gaps in India.




Dharmanath Jain Temple at Mattancherry


Kochi's major religions are Hinduism, Christianity and Islam. Jainism, Judaism, Sikhism and Buddhism, with smaller followings, are also practised in Kochi. Though 47% practice Hinduism, Christianity's large following (35%) makes Kochi a city with one of the largest Christian populations in India.[116][117][118] The majority of the city's residents are Malayalis. However, there are significant ethnic minority communities including Tamils, Gujaratis, Jews, Anglo-Indians, Sikhs and Konkanis[119][120][121] Malayalam is the main language of communication and medium of instruction for primary education, although a number of schools do offer English medium education. The higher education is invariably in English medium, and it is the preferred language in business circles. Tamil and Hindi are widely understood—albeit rarely spoken.
Like other fast-growing cities in the developing world, Kochi suffers from major urbanisation problems. The city was ranked 10th among Indian cities in terms of house-cost and availability, urban household crowding and household incomes.[122]
The government has plans to make the city slum-free by 2016.[123] According to the National Crime Records Bureau, the city holds the fourth position in the number of recorded crimes in India.[124][125][126] In 2009, the city recorded an average crime rate of 646.3 against the national average of 181.4.[125] But Kochi City Police Commissioner later clarified that this anomaly was due to higher reporting rates of minor crimes in Kochi than in other Indian cities.[127] The State Crime Records Bureau (SCRB) report gives further credence to this as it finds that Kochi has the least number of crime against women in the state of Kerala.[128] According to the 2011 CII/Institute of Competitiveness report on Liveability,[129] Kochi stands first in the state, and 6th in the country. Kochi is ranked seventh in the list of the top ten most affluent cities in India by 2009 study by Nielsen Company.[130] Kochi was ranked the fourth cleanest city in India in the Swachch Bharat rankings for cities. It was selected as one of the hundred Indian cities to be developed as a smart city under Prime Minister Narendra Modi flagship Smart Cities Mission.[131]
Culture
Main article: Culture of Kochi
See also: Cuisine of Kerala and List of Tourist attractions in Kochi





Marine Drive, Kochi



As a result of successive waves of migration over the course of several centuries, the population of the city is a mix of people from all parts of Kerala and most of India. The pan-Indian nature is highlighted by the substantial presence of various ethnic communities from different parts of the country.[132]




Pedestrians can stroll along the Marine Drive, a waterfront promenade of Kochi



LuLu Mall is the largest shopping mall in India



The Kettuvallom Bridge at Marine Drive



Kochi has a diverse, multicultural, and secular community consisting of Malayalis, Konkanis,[133][134] Gujaratis,[119][120] Bengalis,[135] Marathis,[136] Punjabis,[121][137] Tamilians, kannadigas, Biharias, Anglo Indians and a few families of Jews among other denominations, all living in peaceful co-existence. The city once had a large Jewish community, known as the Malabar Yehuden—and now increasingly as Cochin Jews— who figured prominently in Kochi's business and economic strata [138] and owned several Synagogues across Kochi and nearby areas such as Chendamangalam, Paravur or Mala.
Kochi was one among the seven diocese of Syrian Orthodox (Jacobite Syrian Christian Church) in Kerala formed in 1876. The seat of the Bishop is at St George Cathedral, Karingachira. Also At Mary's Cathedral Elamkulam, seat of bishop of Simhasana churches of Jacobites is in the City. The seat of Roman Catholic Cathedral of Kerala's first Archdiocese Archdiocese of Verapoly and the first diocese Diocese of Cochin are located in the city. The Syro-Malabar Church, one of the 22 sui iuris Eastern Catholic Churches and a part of the Saint Thomas Christian community, has its seat at Ernakulam. Prominent places of Christian worship include the St. Mary's Syro-Malabar Catholic Cathedral Basilica, Ernakulam, St. Francis Assisi Roman Catholic Cathedral, Ernakulam, Basilica of Our Lady of Ransom, Vallarpadam-Ernakulam, Santa Cruz Basilica Roman Catholic Cathedral, Fort Kochi, St. Antony's Shrine at Kaloor, St. George Forane Church, Edappally and . Appropriate to its multi-ethnic composition, Kochi celebrates traditional Kerala festivals like Onam and Vishu along with North Indian Hindu festivals like Holi with great fervour. Christian and Islamic festivals like Christmas, Easter, Eid ul-Fitr and Milad-e-sherif are also celebrated. A merry making fest called the Cochin Carnival is celebrated at Fort Kochi during the last ten days of December.
The residents of Kochi are known as Kochiites; they are an important part of the South Indian culture. However, the city's culture is rapidly evolving with Kochiites generally becoming more cosmopolitan in their outlook.[70] The people are also increasingly fashion-conscious, often deviating from the traditional Kerala wear to western clothing.
Kochiites generally partake of Keralite cuisine, which is generally characterised by an abundance of coconut and spices. Other South Indian cuisines, as well as Chinese and North Indian cuisines are popular. Fast food culture is also very prominent.[139] Being a tourist hotspot, Fort Kochi have a number of restaurants that offer international cuisine, like Italian, French, Mexican etc. Being close to the ocean and the backwaters, Kochi has an abundance of seafood, which reflects in the cuisine. A service known as You Buy, We Cook is available at the waterfront of Fort Kochi, where the fresh seafood purchased from the nets is cooked as per the customers needs.[140] Arabian food joints that serve Shawarma and roasted chicken are a new addition to the fast food scene in the city.
Kochi also has a number of shopping malls including Oberon Mall, Gold Souk Grande, Bay Pride Mall, Centre Square Mall, Abad Nucleus Mall and LuLu Mall, which is the largest shopping mall in India in terms of total leasable area of 17 acres (7 ha).[141][142][143][144] Various shopping malls are expected to open in the city in the near future including Forum Thomsun Mall.
Kochi also has the most number of five star hotels in the state. These include international hotel brands like Crowne Plaza, Marriott, Grand Hyatt, Le Méridien, Radisson Blu, Holiday Inn, Ramada, Ibis, Vivanta By Taj, The Gateway etc.
Kochi was home to some of the most influential figures in Malayalam literature, including Changampuzha Krishna Pillai, Kesari Balakrishna Pillai, G. Sankara Kurup, and Vyloppilli Sreedhara Menon. Prominent social reformers such as Sahodaran Ayyappan and Pandit Karuppan also are from Kochi.
The Maharajas of Kochi (then Cochin) were scholars who knew the epics and encouraged the arts. The paintings at the Hill Palace and the Dutch Palace are testimony to their love for arts.
Kochiites are known for their enthusiasm in sports, especially football and cricket.[145] The Jawaharlal Nehru International Stadium in Kochi is one of the largest stadiums in India with floodlights for Cricket and Football matches.[146] The Regional Sports Centre is an important centre of sporting activity in the city. Kochi is reportedly the 6th best city in India according to the livability index of 2011.[147]
Healthcare




Aster Medcity is one of the largest hospitals in the country


With a large number of advanced tertiary/quaternary care facilities, Kochi has one of the best healthcare facilities in India. It is the prime destination for people seeking advanced healthcare facilities from across Kerala.[148][149]
In recent times, it has attracted a large number of patients from all over India, Middle East, African nations as well as from Europe and United States looking for relatively inexpensive advanced medical care. Kochi is the only city from Kerala that have carried out successful heart transplantations.[150] Amrita Institute of Medical Sciences and Research Centre, Sunrise Hospital, Specialist Hospital, Medical Trust Hospital, PVS Memorial Hospital, Renai Medicity, Lakeshore Hospital, Lisie Hospital, Aster Medcity,[151] Rajagiri Institute of Medical Sciences are some of the advanced tertiary/quaternary healthcare facilities in Kochi.[152] Other reputed institutions in the city include Ernakulam Medical Centre, KIMS Hospital, Gautham Hospital, Lourdes Hospital, Kochi Medical College, and Saraf Hospital. Some of the reputed fertility related treatment centres in India – like Vijaya Hospital, Bourn Hall Clinic[153] and CIMAR – are located in Kochi. General Hospital, Ernakulam is the only notable medical institution in the government sector in Kochi.
Education
See also: Education in India, Education in Kerala, and Educational Institutions in Ernakulam District
Secondary education




Established in 1875, the Maharaja's College is one of the oldest colleges in the state



The main building of Model Engineering College was inspired from India's first satellite, Aryabhatta



The Cochin University of Science and Technology is one of the top educational institutions in the country



Rajagiri College of Social Sciences at Kalamassery



The pattern of primary education is essentially the same all over the state. There are government owned schools and government aided schools, which are affiliated to the Kerala State Education Board. A few privately owned schools are also affiliated to the system. Most of the schools owned by private organisations or individuals are affiliated to the Central Board for Secondary Education (CBSE). Indian Certificate of Secondary Education (ICSE) have some schools affiliated to them as well. The state education board offers both Malayalam and English medium instruction, while the other boards offer English medium alone. There are a few schools that follow international curricula, such as IB and IGCSE.
There 34 government schools, 67 private aided schools and 31 unaided schools affiliated to the Kerala State Education Board in the city and suburbs.[154] There are 62 CBSE Schools, 2 IGCSE and 9 ICSE Schools as well.[155][156]
The general pattern of education is ten years of common schooling to reach the secondary level. Kindegartens are widely available, but considered separate from formal schooling, and generally unregulated. After the secondary level, three streams, namely Arts, Commerce or Science are offered for higher secondary education. After finishing the school, students can opt for higher education related to the streams they had undergone for higher secondary schooling.
The notable schools in the government sector are Sree Rama Varma High School, Edappally High School, Government School-Kochi and Govt Girls Higher Secondary School, Ernakulam. There are Kendriya Vidyalaya, Chinmaya Mission and Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan run several quasi-private charter schools within the city limits, as well as in the suburbs. There are several private schools (both aided & unaided0 that are owned by secular and religious trusts which are of particular renown, such as:St. Albert's HSS, Ernakulam, St. Teresa's CGHSS, St. Mary's CGHSS Ernakulam, St. Antony's CGHSS, Model Technical Higher Secondary School, Kaloor The Delta Study, Rajagiri Public School, Campion School, Assisi Vidyaniketan, Cochin Refineries School, Gregorian Public School, Greets Public School, Toc-H Public School, Navy Children School, Global Public School, Choice School, Vidyodaya School, Mar Thoma Public School, Nava Nirman Public School and St. Pauls International School, Kalamassery, The Charter School Kochi.
Higher education
The Cochin University of Science and Technology (CUSAT) is a major university named after the city. Most of the colleges in Kochi offering tertiary education are affiliated either with the Mahatma Gandhi University or with the Cochin University. Kochi has one of the campuses of the Indian Maritime University at Willingdon Island. Sree Sankaracharya University of Sanskrit in Kalady is a research oriented university located at the outskirts. Other national educational institutes include the Central Institute of Fisheries Nautical and Engineering Training, the National University of Advanced Legal Studies, the National Institute of Oceanography and the Central Marine Fisheries Research Institute.
Kochi has some of the leading B-Schools in the region. The Indian Institute of Management Kozhikode (IIMK) has set up its first satellite campus at Athulya building in InfoPark, Kochi.[157] Cochin University's School of Management Studies (SMS) is the first and oldest managerial education institution in South India. SCMS Cochin is one of the emerging B-Schools in the country.[158] Another major B-School XIME is opening a new campus in Kochi.[159] Other leading managerial institutions include Rajagiri Centre for Business Studies, Kochi Business School, Amrita School of Business, Albertian Institute of Management and Toc-H B school.
The city and outskirts are home to four medical schools—Amrita Institute of Medical Sciences and Research Centre at Ponekkara, Cochin Medical College at Kalamassery, Sree Narayana Institute of Medical Sciences, and M.O.S.C. Medical College, Kolenchery. Some of the prestigious general colleges are Maharaja's College, St. Albert's College, St. Teresa's College, Sacred Hearts College, Bharata Matha College, Aquina's College, De Paul Institute of Science & Technology (DIST) and Cochin College. The major Engineering and Technology colleges in the city are School of Engineering CUSAT, SCMS School of Engineering and Technology at Kalamassery, Model Engineering College, Rajagiri School of Engineering & Technology and FISAT (Federal Institute of Science & Technology).
Being the seat of the High Court of Kerala, several top legal education institutes are here. The Government Law College-Ernakulam is one of the oldest law schools in Kerala.[160] The School of Legal Studies (SLS), CUSAT is one of the leading graduate, post-graduate, and research institutes in the country. The National University of Advanced Legal Studies (NUALS) is located in the city, which is a premier law university in India and the only Law college listed in CLAT (Common Law Admission Test) in Kerala.
Social service organisations
Some of the main orphanages and rehabilitation shelters in Cochin City are Palluruthy Relief Settlement in Palluruthy Veli, Don Bosco Sneha Bhavan, Don Bosco Big Boys, Crescent Girls Orphanage, YMCA Boys Home, Bal Bhavan, Valsalya Bhavan.[161]
Palluruthy Relief Settlement is under Kochi Municipal Corporation and managed in association with Peoples Council for Social Justice. There are about 300 inmates and many of them are mentally ill.[162] The night shelter for women run by Kochi Municipal Corporation near Kerala State Road Transport Corporation bus stand provides free and safe accommodation.[163] Peoples Council for Social Justice was found in 1985 under the patronage of Justice V. R. Krishna Iyer with the aim to work for human rights protection, free legal aid and to strive for social justice.[164][165]
The orphanages for children under Don Bosco Sneha Bhavan Cochi are Sneha Bhavan Annexe, SnehaBhavan, Valsalya Bhavan, Don Bosco and Bosco Nilayam. The Childline India project in Cochin is taken in collaboration with Don Bosco. Children in distress and in need of help can contact in '1098' (toll free number).[166] Sneha Bhavan Annexe is the first point of contact with children and children can stay as a safe night shelter.[167] Sneha Bhavan is a home for the children from the streets and for those from unhealthy and risky situations. The Valsalya Bhavan centre is solely for the girls who are rescued from the streets. Runaways, street children, children of sex workers, abused children and child labourers all live here. Along with primary and high school education at a local school, the centre provides shelter, food, clothing and educational support.[168]
There are many good people doing independent social service. The Italian Sister Fabiola conducts a home at Fort Cochin known as "Ashwasa Bhavan", for young orphaned children.[169] Br. Judson run his own mobile bath in his vehicle for the abandoned: His "Mobile Bath Service" moves around Kochi mornings and in evenings to clean and clothe people living on the streets. Judson washes and cleanses their wounds, provides them new clothes and food, and takes them to shelters in the city.[170][171]
Sree Narayana Sevika Samajam, a charitable organisation situated at Thottumugham, Aluva, Ernakulam District, Kerala, India.[172][173][174] It was established in the year 1965 under Societies Registration Act, Travancore, 1955. Sreenarayana Sevika Samajam seeks to give a home to those who would otherwise have none.
Media




Akshara Mandiram at Marine Drive


Major Malayalam newspapers published in Kochi include Malayala Manorama, Mathrubhumi, Siraj Daily, Madhyamam, Deshabhimani, Deepika, Kerala Kaumudi, Janmabhumi, etc. Popular English newspapers include The Hindu, The New Indian Express, The Times of India, The Pioneer and The Deccan Chronicle. A number of evening papers are also published from the city.[175] Newspapers in other regional languages like Hindi, Kannada, Tamil and Telugu are also available.
A number of financial publications are also published in the city. These include The Economic Times, Business Line, The Business Standard and The Financial Express. Prominent magazines and religious publications like the Sathyadeepam, The Week and Vanitha are also published from the city.
Kochi houses several leading Malayalam television channels like Asianet Plus, Flowers, Jeevan TV, Mazhavil Manorama, Kairali We, Manorama News and Reporter TV as well as major news bureaus of Asianet, Kairali TV, Amrita TV and Doordarshan. Prasar Bharati maintains its earth station and broadcasting centre in Kakkanad, Kochi. Satellite television services are available through DD Direct+, Dish TV, Airtel digital TV, Reliance DTH, Sun Direct DTH and Tata Sky. FM radio channels broadcast from Kochi[176] are Rainbow FM (AIR) 101.9 MHz, AIR Kochi 102.3 MHz, Club FM 94.3 MHz,[177] Radio Mango 91.9 MHz,[178] Red FM 93.5 MHz,[179] Radio Mirchi 104.0 MHz.[180]
Kochi is considered to be the hub of the vibrant Malayalam movie industry,[181] especially new generation Malayalam movies. The rise of Kochi to the centre stage of the entertainment industry occurred coinciding with the economic boom of the last couple of decades. A large number of movies are shot in Kochi every year.[182] Kochi also has a host of state-of-the-art production and post production facilities.[183][184][185][186][187] Due to these reasons, major section of film personalities including of actors, technical experts and other related workers reside in Kochi.[188][189] There are over 50 cinema halls that screen movies in Malayalam, Tamil, English and Hindi. The city hosts Kerala's first cine multiplex, at the Oberon Mall with four screens. Gold Souk Grande also has a cine multiplex operated by Q cinemas with four screens. PVR with 9 screens is another national multiplex brand that has presence in Kochi and is based out of LuLu International Shopping Mall. Cinepolis at Centre Square Mall with 11 screens is the first international megaplex brand in the state. 16 more multiplex screens are expected in the city in the near future.
The district has the largest number of telephone connections in Kerala.[190] Telephony services are provided by various private sector players like Aircel, Airtel, Idea Cellular, Vodafone, Reliance Infocomm, Tata Docomo, Jio, Tata Indicom and the state owned BSNL. All the private sector telecom companies have their headquarters for Kerala circle located in Kochi.
Sports
Like elsewhere in Kerala, football is the most passionate sport among locals. Kochi is home to two of India's major professional football teams, FC Kochin and Chirag United Kerala and also teams like Josco FC since 2008.[191][192] In 2014, cricketer Sachin Tendulkar and PVP Ventures won the bid to own Kochi based football team, Kerala Blasters FC in the Indian Super League. Blasters reached the finals of Indian Super League in the debut season as well as in the 2016 season, finishing as runners-up on both occasions.




The Jawaharlal Nehru Stadium is one of the largest stadiums in India



The Regional Sports Centre at Kadavanthra houses the Mahesh Bhupathi Tennis Academy



India's third largest stadium and second largest cricket stadium, the Jawaharlal Nehru International Stadium located in Kaloor, is a major facility for football and cricket.[193][194] Recently, the stadium was renovated to facilitate more cricket tournaments as well as for hosting IPL Matches. Kochi was home to the Indian Premier League cricket team, the Kochi Tuskers which won franchise rights to play IPL which participated in the 2011 edition of IPL. Kochi is selected as one of the six host cities for the 2017 FIFA U-17 World Cup to be held in India.[195] Because of this selection, huge investments and business opportunities are expected to come to the city.
The Maharaja's Stadium located on MG Road in the heart of the city, is the major athletic facility in the state with synthetic tracks and turf grass as per international standards.[196] The Ambedkar stadium, maintained by GCDA, will be developed exclusively for Football with funds from Government of Kerala and FIFA.[197] Spanish club Real Madrid has proposed to set up a football school in Kochi.[198]
The Rajiv Gandhi Sports Complex at Kadavanthra is a major indoor stadium, mainly used for conducting badminton, tennis and basketball tournaments. The 25m X 10m swimming pool[199] at the centre is one of the larger water sports facility in the state, where regular swimming competitions and coaching are conducted.
The FACT Grounds at Udyogamandal, Sacred Heart's College Grounds, HMT Grounds at Kalamassery and St. Albert's College Grounds are the other major training facilities for various games like volleyball, badminton, cricket etc.
Kochi has two golf courses in the city, and one in the suburbs. The oldest golf club is located at Bolgatty Palace constructed in 1903, which is a nine-hole facility run by Cochin Golf Club society.[200] The Cochin Golf and Country Club located near to Cochin Airport, operated by CIAL, is Kerala's first 18-hole golf course with a playing area of over 7,200 yards. The first phase of the all-weather golf course comprising nine holes was opened in May 2010 for members and public. The expansion to an 18-hole course is progressing, which is scheduled to be open in September 2012.[201][202]
Being surrounded by water bodies, the city is ideal for Yachting. The Kerala Yachting Association and[203] the Cochin Yacht Club[204] are located in the city. Both organisations conduct regular yachting tournaments. Kochi was the only Indian city chosen for stopover during the Volvo Ocean Race 2008.
Navy
Main article: Southern Naval Command
The Southern Naval Command, one of the three main formations of the Indian Navy has its headquarters in Kochi at INS Venduruthy. It is commanded by the Flag Officer Commanding-in-Chief. The Southern Naval Command consists of Flag Officer Sea Training (FOST), a training squadron, training establishments and bases, and land forces and survey ships. It has a naval air station, and a ship repair yard.
The Indian Navy Day is also celebrated here. It is a week-long event showcasing warships, planes, helicopters etc. of the Indian Navy at INS Venduruthy. It is a public event attended in large numbers.
The close by located Cochin Shipyard Limited is the largest shipbuilding and maintenance facility in India.[205] Presently it is building the first indigenous aircraft carrier for the Indian Navy.
Sister cities
See also: List of twin towns and sister cities in India
Kochi is twinned with:

Norfolk, Virginia, United States[206]
Menlo Park, California, United States[207]
Pyatigorsk, Russia[208]

See also

Chilavannoor
List of tallest buildings in Kochi
List of tourist attractions in Kochi

References


^ K. C. Sivaramakrishnan (2006). People's Participation in Urban Governance. Concept Publishing Company. p. 156. ISBN 81-8069-326-0. 
^ Ganesh Kumar. Modern General Knowledge. Upkar Prakashan. p. 194. ISBN 81-7482-180-5. 
^ a b "Ernakulam_History". Retrieved 5 April 2015. 
^ http://gcda.kerala.gov.in/aboutus
^ "Provisional Figures, Kerala" (PDF). Office of The Registrar General & Census Commissioner. Retrieved 7 April 2011. 
^ http://censusindia.gov.in/2011-prov-results/paper2/data_files/india2/Million_Plus_UAs_Cities_2011.pdf
^ AbdulKader, Fathima. "Ten Signs Of A True Kochiite". WtzupCity. Retrieved 10 October 2017. 
^ "official website of Kochi Municipal Corporation". Archived from the original on 17 July 2015. Retrieved 15 December 2015. 
^ "PowerPoint Presentation" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 23 March 2012. Retrieved 12 November 2012. 
^ "Steps to control pollution in Greater Kochi area mooted". The Hindu. 20 September 2010. 
^ "GCDA - Greater Cochin Development Authority". Archived from the original on 28 March 2015. Retrieved 5 April 2015. 
^ "Indian Census 2011 list of cities" (PDF). Retrieved 5 June 2017. 
^ "DESTNATION WISE NUMBER OF FOREIGN TOURISTS VISITED KERALA DURING 2010" (PDF). Kerala Tourism Development Corporation. Retrieved 22 October 2017. 
^ a b "Tourist statistics – 2008" (PDF). Kerala Tourism Development Corporation. Retrieved 22 October 2010. 
^ "Nielsen retains top tourism destination grade for Kerala". Business Line. Retrieved 22 February 2012. 
^ "Urban world: Mapping the economic power of cities 2011". McKinsey Global Institute. Retrieved 3 February 2013. 
^ "Setting a scorching pace: the metro saga". The Hindu. Retrieved 22 October 2017. 
^ "Check out the 10 novelties onboard Kochi Metro". Malayala Manorama. Retrieved 23 October 2017. 
^ "Cochin Chronicle -- Introduction". Kerala Tourism Development Corporation. Retrieved 22 October 2017. 
^ "Kochi emerging as tier-2 destination for corporates". The Times of India. Retrieved 23 October 2017. 
^ "Industrial areas in Kochi". Kerala Tourism Development Corporation. Retrieved 22 October 2017. 
^ "LNG the answer?". The Hindu. Retrieved 23 October 2017. 
^ "Indian Coast Guard. Regions. Western Region". Indiancoastguard.nic.in. Archived from the original on 4 June 2013. Retrieved 12 November 2012. 
^ "Indian Coast Guard. Organization Structure". Indiancoastguard.nic.in. Archived from the original on 31 October 2012. Retrieved 12 November 2012. 
^ "Indian Coast Guard. Aviation". Indiancoastguard.nic.in. Archived from the original on 31 October 2012. Retrieved 12 November 2012. 
^ "BPCL Kochi Refinery Overview". Bharatpetroleum.com. Retrieved 12 November 2012. 
^ "Kochi Refinery Projects". Bharatpetroleum.com. Retrieved 12 November 2012. 
^ "HOCL official web site. Phenol Complex at Kochi in Kerala". Hocl.gov.in. Archived from the original on 10 May 2013. Retrieved 12 November 2012. 
^ "TELK official website". Telk.com. Retrieved 12 November 2012. 
^ "Facts about Kochi Biennale Foundation". Kochi Biennale Foundation. Archived from the original on 31 October 2014. Retrieved 9 January 2010. 
^ "Facts about India" (PDF). Kochi Municipal Corporation. Archived from the original (PDF) on 29 December 2009. Retrieved 9 January 2010. 
^ "Fort And Harbour". Cghearth.com. Archived from the original on 28 August 2012. Retrieved 12 November 2012. 
^ a b c d e C. M. Dinesh Mani, Mayor(2000–2005). "Cochin" (PDF). Cochin (A Monograph). Corporation of Kochi. Archived from the original (PDF) on 19 July 2011. Retrieved 11 October 2010. 
^ Academy, Students. Kochi-The Small Lagoon. Lulu Press, Inc. p. 30. 
^ https://indiankanoon.org/doc/198782201/
^ "History of Ernakulam". Ernakulam Portal. National Informatics Centre. Retrieved 23 May 2006. 
^ "History of Kochi Rajas". Centre For Heritage Studies. Archived from the original on 14 February 2009. Retrieved 12 March 2009. 
^ Ma Huan: Ying Yai Sheng Lan (1970). The Overall Survey of the Ocean's Shores. translated by J.V.G. Mills. Hakluyt Society, White Lotus Press. ISBN 974-8496-78-3. 
^ "Accounts of Nicolo de' Conti (ca. 1395–1469)". Niccolò di Conti. win.tue.nl. Archived from the original on 21 February 2013. Retrieved 23 May 2006. 
^ "Facts about India". Govt of India. Retrieved 9 January 2010. 
^ "Kochi, India". Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved 9 March 2011. 
^ "Early Voyages to the Far East". University of Calgary. Archived from the original on 1 March 2011. Retrieved 9 March 2011. 
^ Death of Vasco Da Gama in Kochi. MSN Encarta Encyclopedia. Archived from the original on 1 November 2009. Retrieved 23 May 2006. 
^ KP Padmanabha Menon. (1914). Kochi Rajyacharithram. 
^ Sir Arthur Lawley's Photo Album, Empire and Commonwealth Museum
^ The Fourth Tour of His Excellency Sir Arthur Lawley to Cochin and Travancore - 25 January to 14 February 1907. Madras Government Press.
^ Letter from Lord Wenlock to his wife Constance, 29 January 1907. Hull University. Forbes Adam Archive.
^ Sir Arthur Lawley, Eloquent Knight Errant, Chapter 5. Ruler of the Raj. Lady Lawley Cottage (Western Australian Red Cross) 2008 iBooks
^ "Cochin Harbour and Willingdon Island". Official website of Ernakulam District. Government of Kerala. Archived from the original on 7 November 2006. Retrieved 21 August 2006. 
^ Plunkett, R, Cannon, T, Davis, P, Greenway, P & Harding (2001). Lonely Planet South India. ISBN 1-86450-161-8. CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link)
^ a b "Statistical data". Govt. of Kerala. Archived from the original on 28 May 2006. Retrieved 22 August 2006. 
^ https://cochinmunicipalcorporation.kerala.gov.in/documents/10157/32ef97a6-beb2-45ab-b6c1-20c0759023fd
^ http://www.jnnurm.nic.in/wp-content/uploads/2010/12/KOCHICDP.pdf#page=7 Archived 3 August 2016 at the Wayback Machine.
^ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 26 April 2013. Retrieved 2013-02-12. 
^ "Kochi forward for Metro status". The New Indian Express. Retrieved 5 April 2015. 
^ "Metro status eludes Kochi as government drags its feet". The Hindu. 13 April 2013. 
^ a b "Ever recorded Maximum and minimum temperatures up to 2010" (PDF). India Meteorological Department. Archived from the original on 21 May 2013. Retrieved 11 April 2015. CS1 maint: Unfit url (link)
^ a b "Kochi Climatological Table Period: 1971–2000". India Meteorological Department. Retrieved 11 April 2015. 
^ "Kochi Municipal Corporation, Division Map" (PDF). Kochi Municipal Corporation. Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 November 2010. Retrieved 3 November 2010. 
^ a b Academy, Students. Kochi-The Small Lagoon. Lulu Press, Inc. p. 30. 
^ "Private firm allowed to draw Periyar water". The Hindu. 9 September 2003. Retrieved 22 August 2006. 
^ "Organisational chart". Kochi City Police. Archived from the original on 24 August 2006. Retrieved 22 August 2006. 
^ Radhakrishnan, S. Anil (28 October 2011). "Alarming crime rate in Kochi". The Hindu. 
^ "Crime yes, but no Capital- Kochi- IBNLive". Ibnlive.in.com. 29 October 2011. Retrieved 12 November 2012. 
^ Haridas, Anand (30 October 2011). "Kochi city police 'set record straight'". The Hindu. 
^ "Delimitation of Constituencies, Final Order" (PDF). Chief Electoral Officer, Kerala. Retrieved 3 March 2011. 
^ "Google Search, "kerala commercial capital"". Google Search. Retrieved 15 October 2010. 
^ Our Bureau. "SEBI opens office in Kochi". The Hindu Business Line. Retrieved 5 April 2015. 
^ George Joseph (10 June 2005). "Check out how Kochi is shining!". Rediff.com. Retrieved 6 January 2006. 
^ a b "Developing metro and quaint environs". Kerala Tourism Development Corporation. India. Retrieved 24 July 2017. 
^ Staff Reporter (20 January 2009). "Rs.620-crore rise in revenue collection in Ernakulam district". The Hindu. Retrieved 1 March 2009. 
^ Staff Reporter (23 December 2012). "Government starves the golden goose". The Hindu. Retrieved 21 January 2013. 
^ "Kerala Planning Board, Economic Review 2008–09, App 3.13" (PDF). District-wise Distribution of GSDP. Government of Kerala. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 September 2015. Retrieved 12 October 2010. 
^ "Doing Business in India 2009" (PDF). World Bank. Archived from the original (PDF) on 19 October 2010. Retrieved 8 June 2010. 
^ Director, Kerala Tourism. "Kerala, Gods Own Country: Where Business Blooms". cbcglobelink.org. Archived from the original on 17 June 2006. Retrieved 7 February 2006. 
^ CNN-IBN (27 June 2006). "Toxic curse for Kerala chemical city". IBNLive.com. Retrieved 25 August 2009. 
^ Money Control. "Fertilisers and Chemicals Travancore". Money Control. Retrieved 2 October 2010. 
^ "Petronet LNG Kochi terminal's operating capacity goes up". Business Line. 18 May 2017. Retrieved 18 May 2017. 
^ "Cochin Port Trust, the Cruise Destination". Cochin Port Trust. Archived from the original on 17 April 2010. Retrieved 3 November 2010. 
^ "Kochi marina set to start operations". Business-standard.com. 19 April 2010. Retrieved 14 October 2010. 
^ "Southern Naval Command". Bharat Rakshak. Archived from the original on 25 August 2006. Retrieved 29 August 2006. 
^ In terms of deadweight tonnage of ships built
^ "List of ship building centres in India". Shipping Ministry of India. Archived from the original on 15 September 2005. Retrieved 23 May 2006. 
^ "CPT hands over land for marina". The Hindu. 26 August 2005. Retrieved 23 May 2006. 
^ "The first cruise terminal in the country to come up in Kochi". The Hindu. 30 June 2007. Retrieved 29 August 2007. 
^ "Kochi terminal handed over to Dubai Ports International". The Hindu. 2 April 2005. Retrieved 23 May 2006. 
^ "Vallarpadam phase I by early 2009: DP World". The Hindu. 2 April 2005. Retrieved 23 May 2006. 
^ "Vallarpadam ICTT: Set to make Kochi a key hub". The Hindu Business Line. 27 October 2008. Retrieved 14 November 2008. 
^ "Statement by the Government of India" (PDF). Press Information Bureau, Govt of India. 27 October 2008. Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 February 2009. Retrieved 14 November 2008. 
^ "Cochin Port Trust" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 8 July 2011. 
^ "Kochi, the next electronic city". Kochi, the next electronic city. The New Indian Express. 31 August 2010. Retrieved 11 October 2010. 
^ The Hindu Business Line, 9 July 2010. "Kochi, the next electronic city". NeST Electronics City in Kochi soon. The Hindu. Retrieved 11 October 2010. 
^ The Hindu (5 June 2008). "CIAL presents 'Aerotropolis' roadmap". The Hindu. Retrieved 28 February 2009. 
^ The Hindu (5 June 2008). "Kochi airport presents 'Aerotropolis' roadmap". The Hindu. Retrieved 28 February 2009. 
^ "The Official Website of Cochin International Airport". Cochin-airport.in. Archived from the original on 26 March 2010. Retrieved 14 October 2010. 
^ "A novel venture in the history of Indian Aviation". Cochin International Airport. Archived from the original on 23 May 2006. Retrieved 23 May 2006. 
^ "CIAL Technical Information". Airports Authority of India. Archived from the original on 20 July 2011. Retrieved 13 October 2010. 
^ "Archived copy" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 20 July 2011. Retrieved 25 March 2011. 
^ "Archived copy" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 3 March 2016. Retrieved 4 April 2016. 
^ "Archived copy" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 20 July 2011. Retrieved 13 October 2010. 
^ "Archived copy" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 4 April 2016. 
^ "NS&EW Corridor Map". National Highway Authority of India. Retrieved 24 January 2011. 
^ "NS&EW Corridor Chainage Chart". National Highway Authority of India. Retrieved 24 January 2011. 
^ "A mammoth task achieved". The Hindu. 11 February 2011. Retrieved 22 March 2011. 
^ "State Highways in Kerala". Retrieved 17 November 2010. 
^ "Ring roads for Kochi city". MyDreamHouse.in. 17 February 2012. Archived from the original on 26 April 2013. Retrieved 12 November 2012. 
^ "Vyttila Mobility Hub". 
^ "Kochi Municipal Corporation – Urban Knowledge Base" (PDF). Kochi Municipal Corporation. Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 January 2011. Retrieved 25 October 2010. 
^ "Ernakulam Junction (South)/ERS Railway Station – Today's Train Arrival Timings – All Trains – India Rail Info – Database of Indian Railways Trains & Stations". India Rail Info. 19 June 2010. Retrieved 14 October 2010. 
^ "Cochin State Railways". Irfca.org. Retrieved 12 November 2012. 
^ "More funds for metro rail; sanction yet to be granted". The Hindu. Archived from the original on 5 August 2011. 
^ "Metro Stations". Kochi Metro Rail Ltd. Retrieved 24 February 2012. 
^ "Kochi metro inauguration in pictures". The Hindu. 
^ "Trade with India—major ports in India". National Informatics Centre. Archived from the original on 15 December 2006. Retrieved 23 May 2006. 
^ Gopal, Madan (1990). K.S. Gautam, ed. India through the ages. Publication Division, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, Government of India. p. 177. 
^ "Religious data". Census India – Household Whizmap. Census of India. Archived from the original on 3 January 2009. Retrieved 23 May 2006. 
^ Demographics of Kochi – as given in census
^ Census of India, 2001 – List of cities by population; Census of India, 2001 – Kochi : Religious demographics (Hindus 47%, Christians 35%, Muslims 17%)
^ a b "Jain Temples, Kerala". Jainsamaj. Retrieved 1 March 2011. 
^ a b "Jain Temple turns 100". The Hindu. 25 November 2004. Retrieved 1 March 2011. 
^ a b "The Punjabi part of Kochi". The Hindu. Retrieved 3 June 2002. 
^ Institute of Competitiveness (12 December 2011). "Liveability Index 2011, The Best Cities in India" (PDF). IFC. Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 April 2013. Retrieved 11 July 2012. 
^ "City Development Plan—Kochi" (PDF). Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission. Archived from the original (PDF) on 29 May 2008. Retrieved 20 March 2008. 
^ "TABLE-1.6" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 June 2011. Retrieved 14 October 2010. 
^ a b "IPC crime rate in Mega Cities: Table Table-2 (A), page-44" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 June 2011. Retrieved 9 March 2011. 
^ "Crime rate high in Kochi". Metrovaartha.com. 29 March 2010. Archived from the original on 14 July 2011. Retrieved 14 October 2010. 
^ "Kochi no crime capital, says police chief". CNN-IBN. 1 November 2011. Retrieved 2 December 2012. 
^ "Kochi is safest in Kerala for women". AsianAge. 9 October 2012. Retrieved 21 January 2013. 
^ "Liveability Index 2011, The Best Cities In India" (PDF). CII/Institute of Competitiveness. Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 April 2013. Retrieved 11 July 2012. 
^ "Top 10 affluent Indian cities ranked". Nielsen Company. Retrieved 4 November 2010. 
^ http://www.firstpost.com/business/why-only-98-cities-instead-of-100-announced-all-questions-answered-about-smart-cities-project-2410576.html
^ T S Sudhir (29 April 2006). "Kochi's 'mini-India'". NDTV. Retrieved 23 May 2006. 
^ "Konkani Akademi Library". University of Chicago. Retrieved 1 March 2011. 
^ "Konkanis in Kochi". The Hindu. 13 August 2009. Retrieved 1 March 2011. 
^ "Bengalis celebrate Durga Puja". The Hindu. 19 October 2007. Retrieved 1 March 2011. 
^ "arts, South Asian." Encyclopædia Britannica. Encyclopædia Britannica 2007 Ultimate Reference Suite.
^ "Sikhs love peace-loving Kochi". The Hindu. Retrieved 1 March 2011. 
^ "The Jews, Israel, and India". An Interview with Nathan Katz. Jerusalem Centre for public affairs. Retrieved 17 May 2006. 
^ "Fast food overtakes the spice route". The Hindu. 28 November 2005. Retrieved 23 May 2006. 
^ Bradnock, Robert; Bradnock, Roma (2000). South India handbook. Footprint Travel Guides. p. 255. 
^ "Kochi boasts of India's biggest shopping mall – Lulu Shopping Mall". Times of India. 11 March 2013. Retrieved 17 March 2013. 
^ "Biggest shopping mall in India opens in Kochi". The New Indian Express. 10 March 2013. 
^ "India's biggest shopping mall opens in Kochi". The Hindu. 11 March 2013. 
^ "Kochi boasts of Asia's largest shopping mall". Deccan Chronicle. 10 March 2013. Archived from the original on 25 May 2013. 
^ "Football and Cricket—the Most Popular Games". Sports and Games in Kerala. Information and Public relations office of Kerala. Archived from the original on 28 April 2006. Retrieved 12 June 2006. 
^ "Nehru Stadium". cricInfo. Retrieved 2 April 2010. 
^ "Archived copy" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 April 2013. Retrieved 2012-07-11. 
^ Sudha Nambudiri (19 April 2011). "Kochi, the new medical hub". Kochi, the new medical hub. Retrieved 19 March 2013. 
^ Babu K Peter (26 September 2011). "Kochi set to be hub of plush hospitals". CNN-IBN. Retrieved 19 March 2013. 
^ "Gift of life". The Hindu. 21 December 2004. 
^ "Top Angioplasty Surgery Hospital In Kerala, India, Coronary Artery Bypass Surgery Asia". Retrieved 5 April 2015. 
^ "Medical Trust Hospital". Retrieved 5 April 2015. 
^ "Best IVF, Surrogacy and Infertility treatment clinic in India". Bourn hall IVF clinic. Retrieved 5 April 2015. 
^ "List of Schools in Ernakulam District" (PDF). Government of Kerala, Education Department. Archived from the original (PDF) on 27 June 2011. Retrieved 24 November 2010. 
^ "Central Board of Secondary Education". Central Board of Secondary Education. Retrieved 24 November 2010. 
^ "Locate Affiliated Schools". Council for the Indian School Certificate Examinations. Archived from the original on 17 April 2011. Retrieved 23 November 2010. 
^ Our Bureau. "IIM-K Satellite campus in Kochi". Thehindubusinessline.com. Retrieved 12 November 2012. 
^ Our Bureau. "Award for SCMS-Cochin". Thehindubusinessline.com. Retrieved 12 November 2012. 
^ "XIME Bangalore to inaugurate Kochi campus in November 2012". Mbauniverse.com. 4 September 2012. Archived from the original on 8 October 2012. Retrieved 12 November 2012. 
^ "Education Plus Thiruvananthapuram : In the name of law". The Hindu. 28 December 2004. Retrieved 14 October 2010. 
^ url="Archived copy". Archived from the original on 20 August 2011. Retrieved 2011-04-23.  8
^ Staff Reporter (2011), "Journey home for relief centre inmates", The Hindu (20 February) 
^ "Keeping Kochi updated". The Hindu. 19 January 2004. Retrieved 2 April 2011. 
^ "Accredited Organisations". KELSA. Retrieved 12 November 2012. 
^ "Archived copy" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 January 2011. Retrieved 2011-04-23. 
^ "News » CHILDLINE Kochi unearths bonded Labor". Childlineindia.org.in. 22 September 2010. Retrieved 12 November 2012. 
^ "Palluruthy". dbbangalore.org. 26 May 1974. Archived from the original on 24 November 2012. Retrieved 12 November 2012. 
^ "Don Bosco Sneha Bhavan, Street Children, Young at Risk, Welfare, Palluruthy, Kochi". Dbsnehabhavan.org. Archived from the original on 3 November 2012. Retrieved 12 November 2012. 
^ http://www.highbeam.com/doc/1G1-232231282.html
^ Catholic Online (17 April 2006). "Indian Catholic's 'mobile bathroom' serves sick, abandoned - International - Catholic Online". Catholic.org. Archived from the original on 11 October 2012. Retrieved 12 November 2012. 
^ "'Mobile bath' serves the sick and abandoned in southern Indian city. - Free Online Library". Thefreelibrary.com. 5 May 2006. Retrieved 12 November 2012. 
^ "News Archives: The Hindu". Retrieved 5 April 2015. 
^ "In Kochi Today". The Hindu. Retrieved 5 April 2015. 
^ "The Hindu : Engagements / Kochi : In Kochi Today". Retrieved 5 April 2015. 
^ "Keeping Kochi updated". The Hindu. 15 September 2003. Retrieved 2 June 2006. 
^ "Online Radio " VIPINDAS.CO.NR". Vipinmpd08.wordpress.com. Archived from the original on 27 February 2009. Retrieved 14 October 2010. 
^ "Club FM". Club FM. Retrieved 7 March 2011. 
^ "Radio Mango Cochin". Archived from the original on 12 March 2011. Retrieved 7 March 2011. 
^ "RED FM Kochi". Kal Radio Limited. Retrieved 7 March 2011. 
^ "Radio Mirchi Kochi Launches". 
^ Subin Mananthavady (31 March – 30 April 2011). "Mollywood comes to Kochi". Passline Business Magazine. Retrieved 21 January 2013. 
^ "Kochi takes centrestage in Mollywood". The Times of India. 5 January 2013. Retrieved 21 January 2013. 
^ G. KRISHNAKUMAR (15 September 2006). "Filmmakers' hotspot". Filmmakers' hotspot. Retrieved 19 February 2013. 
^ "Megamedia Films launches post-production facility in Kochi". Post Production Buyer's Guide. 15 December 2008. Archived from the original on 16 February 2013. Retrieved 21 January 2013. 
^ "Chithranjali unit coming to city". The New Indian Express. 6 March 2010. Retrieved 21 January 2013. 
^ "Chithranjali opens studio in Kochi". The Hindu. 7 March 2010. Retrieved 21 January 2013. 
^ "Kochi sizzling onscreen". The New Indian Express. 29 January 2013. Retrieved 3 February 2013. 
^ "Making the right move". Deccan Chronicle. 10 October 2011. Retrieved 21 January 2013. 
^ "Kamal in Kochi". Malayala Manorama. 6 May 2012. Retrieved 21 January 2013. 
^ "PRD Kerala". Communications. Public Relations Department, Kerala. Archived from the original on 25 April 2013. Retrieved 19 February 2013. 
^ "First Soccer City in Kochi | Kochi Cochin News". Cochinsquare.com. 30 April 2010. Retrieved 14 October 2010. 
^ "Metro Plus Kochi : A home for Josco". The Hindu. 29 April 2010. Retrieved 14 October 2010. 
^ "Jawaharlal Nehru Stadium". 35th National Games. Archived from the original on 30 June 2017. Retrieved 11 April 2011. 
^ "Nehru Stadium". Hindustantimes.com. 11 April 2011. Archived from the original on 12 April 2011. Retrieved 11 April 2011. 
^ "Kochi to host U-17 FIFA World Cup matches". Manoramaonline. Archived from the original on 8 April 2015. 
^ "New International Stadium Confirmed To Come In Ernakulam (Cochin) – Cochin". Zimbio. Archived from the original on 23 March 2010. Retrieved 14 October 2010. 
^ "'Development should go beyond city limits'". The Hindu. 26 March 2012. 
^ "Real Madrid plan to open football school in Kerala- Football- IBNLive". Ibnlive.in.com. 30 March 2012. Archived from the original on 2 May 2012. Retrieved 12 November 2012. 
^ "Swimming pool complex". Rajiv Gandhi Sports Centre. Archived from the original on 1 August 2010. Retrieved 12 October 2010. 
^ "Kochi Golf Club and Golf Course, Bolgatty". Cochin Golf Club Society. Retrieved 24 October 2010. 
^ "18-Hole Golf Course To Be Opened Next Year". The Hindu. 5 December 2011. 
^ "Cochin Golf Cup". The Hindu. 15 March 2009. Retrieved 25 October 2010. 
^ "Kerala Yachting Association, Kochi". Kerala Yachting Association. Retrieved 12 October 2010. 
^ "Cochin Yacht Club". Cochin Yacht Club. Retrieved 12 October 2010. 
^ "Welcome to Cochin Shipyard : ISO 9001 Certified Shipyard of the Millenium". Cochinshipyard.com. Archived from the original on 14 September 2013. Retrieved 2013-08-15. 
^ "Kochi, India - Norfolk Sister City Association". 
^ "Kochi, Menlo Park sign agreement on cultural and economic exchange". 
^ "Association with Pyatigorsk". 


Further reading

Ma Huan: Ying Yai Sheng Lan, The Overall Survey of the Ocean's Shores, translated by J.V.G. Mills, 1970 Hakluyt Society, reprint 1997 White Lotus Press. ISBN 974-8496-78-3
Plunkett, R, Cannon, T, Davis, P, Greenway, P & Harding, P (2001), Lonely Planet South India, Lonely Planet, ISBN 1-86450-161-8
Manorama Yearbook 2003 (English Edition) ISBN 81-900461-8-7
Robert Charles Bristow. Cochin Saga, Paico Pub. House; 2d ed. edition (1967), OCLC 1659055
Unemployment in Kerala at the turn of the 20th century Insights from the CDS gulf migration studies by K. C. Zachariah, S. Irudaya Rajan
Kochi Rajyacharithram by KP Padmanabha Menon. P (1914)
"Akhilavijnanakosam". Malayalam Encyclopedia. D C Books Multimedia Series.

External links



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Kochi, Kerala.



Find more aboutKochiat Wikipedia's sister projects

Definitions from Wiktionary
Media from Wikimedia Commons
News from Wikinews
Quotations from Wikiquote
Texts from Wikisource
Textbooks from Wikibooks
Travel guide from Wikivoyage
Learning resources from Wikiversity



Official website (Government of Kerala)
Official website (Government of India)
The Story of India: South India, Cochin, BBC







v
t
e


Kochi



Landmarks



Marine Drive
Mattancherry Palace
Hill Palace
Durbar Hall Ground
Tourist attractions





Neighbourhoods



Ernakulam
Fort Kochi
Mattancherry
Kaloor
Palarivattom
Gandhi Nagar
Marine Drive
Edappally
Kakkanad
Kadavanthra
Vyttila
Willingdon Island





History



Kingdom of Cochin
Thoma of Villarvattom
History of Kerala
Travancore-Cochin





Transport



Cochin International Airport
Cochin Harbour Terminus
Edappally railway station
Ernakulam Junction railway station
Ernakulam Terminus railway station
Ernakulam Town railway station
Cochin Port
Cochin Shipyard
Kerala Urban Road Transport Corporation
Kerala State Road Transport Corporation
Kerala State Water Transport Department
Kochi Metro
Vyttila Mobility Hub





Government



Kochi Municipal Corporation
Kerala High Court





Organizations



Cochin Stock Exchange
Consumerfed
Fertilisers and Chemicals Travancore
Greater Cochin Development Authority
International Container Transshipment Terminal, Kochi
Kerala State Civil Supplies Corporation
Kochi Refineries





Malls



Oberon Mall
LuLu International Shopping Mall
Gold Souk Grandé
Abad Nucleus Mall
Forum Thomsun Mall
Bay Pride Mall
Q1 Mall





Culture



Cochin Jews
Saint Thomas Christians
Cuisine of Kerala
Culture of Kerala
Kalabhavan
Malayalam
Onam
Syro-Malabar Catholic Major Archeparchy of Ernakulam-Angamaly
Roman Catholic Diocese of Cochin
Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Verapoly
Vishu





Places of worship



Chottanikkara Temple
Sree Poornathrayeesa Temple
Ernakulam Shiva Temple
Thamaramkulangara Sree Dharma Sastha Temple
Paradesi Synagogue
St. Mary's Syro-Malabar Catholic Cathedral Basilica, Ernakulam
St. George Syro-Malabar Catholic Forane Church, Edappally
St. Francis Church
Vallarpadam Church





Health care



Amala Institute of Medical Sciences
Amrita Institute of Medical Sciences and Research Centre
Aster Medcity
Gautham Hospital
General Hospital
Indira Gandhi Co-operative Hospital
Lakeshore Hospital
Lisie Hospital
Lisie Heart Institute
Lourdes Heart institute
Lourdes Hospital (Kerala)
Mar Augustine Kandathil Memorial Lisie Hospital
Medical Trust Hospital
Saraf Hospital
Sunrise Hospital Kochi
Renai medicity
Rajagiri Hospital





Schools



Assissi Vidyaniketan
Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan
Chinmaya Vidyalaya
Choice School
Cochin Refineries School
Kendriya Vidyalaya
Navy Children School
Sacred Heart Higher Secondary School, Thevara
SRV High School
St.Treasas Convent Girls Higher Secondary School
Toc-H Public School
The Delta Study
Vidyodaya School





Universities



Cochin University of Science and Technology
National University of Advanced Legal Studies
Central Marine Fisheries Research Institute
Sree Sankaracharya University of Sanskrit
Model Engineering College
Government Law College, Ernakulam
School of Communication and Management Studies
Albertian Institute of Management
Rajagiri School of Engineering & Technology
Federal Institute of Science and Technology
Sacred Heart College, Thevara
SCMS School of Engineering and Technology
St. Teresa's College
Maharaja's College, Ernakulam
MES College Marampally, Aluva
Government Medical College, Ernakulam
Bharata Mata College
St. Albert's College





Roads



Mahatma Gandhi Road
Chittoor Road
Banerji Road
Shanmugham Road
Park Avenue
S.A Road
Kaloor-Kadavanthra Road
Subhash Chandra Bose Road
Kochi Bypass
Seaport-Airport Road





Sports



Jawaharlal Nehru Stadium
Regional Sports Centre
Kochi Tuskers Kerala





Press



Malayala Manorama
Mathrubhumi
Madhyamam Daily
Deshabhimani
Sathyadeepam





Television channels



Reporter TV
Indiavision












v
t
e


Neighbourhoods of Kochi






Alengad
Aluva
Ambalamugal
Angamaly
Arookutty
Azhikode
Chellanam
Chendamangalam
Chengamanad
Cherai
Cheranallur
Cherthala
Choornikkara
Chottanikkara
Chittoor
Edapally
Edathala
Elamkulam
Eloor
Ezhikkara
Fort Kochi
Gandhi Nagar
Kunnukara
Kadamakkudy
Kadavanthra
Kadungallur
Kakkanad
Kalady
Kalamassery
Kaloor
Karukutty
Kizhakkambalam
Kodungallur
Kolenchery
Kumbalam
Kumbalangy
Maliankara
Marine Drive
Moothakunnam
Mulavukad
Nedumbassery
Njarackal
North Paravur
Pachalam
Palarivattom
Palluruthy
Panampilly Nagar
Panayikulam
Pathalam
Pattimattom
Perumbavoor
Puthencruz
Puthuvype
Thiruvankulam
Thoppumpady
Thrikkakara
Thrippunithura
Thuravoor Thekku
Thuruthipuram
Vaduthala
Vallarpadam
Varapuzha
Vazhakulam
Vennala
Vypin
Vyttila
Willingdon Island












v
t
e


Million-plus agglomerations in India



States




Andhra Pradesh



Visakhapatnam
Vijayawada





Bihar



Patna





Chhattisgarh



Raipur
Bhilai





Gujarat



Ahmedabad
Surat
Vadodara
Rajkot





Haryana



Faridabad





Jammu and Kashmir



Srinagar





Jharkhand



Jamshedpur
Dhanbad
Ranchi





Karnataka



Bangalore





Kerala



Kochi
Kozhikode
Thrissur
Malappuram
Thiruvananthapuram
Kannur
Kollam





Madhya Pradesh



Indore
Bhopal
Jabalpur
Gwalior





Maharashtra



Mumbai
Pune
Nagpur
Nashik
Vasai-Virar
Aurangabad





Punjab



Ludhiana
Amritsar





Rajasthan



Jaipur
Jodhpur
Kota





Tamil Nadu



Chennai
Coimbatore
Madurai
Tiruchirappalli





Telangana



Hyderabad





Uttar Pradesh



Kanpur
Lucknow
Ghaziabad
Agra
Varanasi
Meerut
Allahabad





West Bengal



Kolkata
Asansol








Union territories



Delhi
Chandigarh












v
t
e


Populated places in Ernakulam district



Cities
and
towns



Aluva
Angamaly
Ayyampuzha
Chendamangalam
Chengamanad
Cheranallur
Choornikkara
Chottanikkara
Chowwara
Edathala
Edappally
Eloor
Ernakulam
Kadamakkudy
Kakkanad
Kalamassery
Kanayannur
Kochi
Kolenchery
Kothamangalam
Muvattupuzha
Koothattukulam
Piravom
Kalady
Kottuvally
Kumbalam
Kunnathunad
Kureekkad
Malayattoor
Maradu
Mulavukad
North Paravur
Perumbavoor
Puthuvypin
Thiruvankulam
Thrikkakara
Thrippunithura
Varappuzha
Vazhakkala
Willingdon Island





Sub-districts
and
villages




Aluva



Ayyampuzha
Karukutty
Malayattoor
Manjapra
Mookkannoor
Parakkadavu
Thuravoor





Kanayannur



Edakkattuvayal
Kaippattur
Keecherry
Kulayettikara
Thrikkakara North (Part)





Kochi



Chellanam
Edavanakkad
Kuzhuppilly
Nayarambalam
Pallippuram





Kothamangalam



Kedavoor
Keerampara
Kottappady
Kuttamangalam
Kuttampuzha
Neriamangalam
Pindimana
Pothanikkad
Thrikkariyoor (Part)
Varappetty





Kunnathunad



Aikaranad North
Aikaranad South
Arakapady
Asamannoor
Irapuram
Kizhakkambalam
Kodanad
Kombanad
Mazhuvannoor
Pattimattom
Rayamangalam
Thiruvaniyoor
Vadavukode
Vengoor West
Vengoor





Muvattupuzha



Arakuzha
Elanji
Enanalloor
Kalloorkkad
Koothattukulam
Maneed
Manjalloor
Marady (Part)
Memury
Mulavoor
Muvattupuzha (Part)
Onakkoor
Palakkuzha
Piravom
Ramamangalam
Thirumarady
Valakam





Paravur



Ezhikkara
Kunnukara















v
t
e


State of Kerala




Capital: Thiruvananthapuram



Symbols



Bird
Great hornbill
Animal
Indian elephant
Tree
Coconut
Flower
Golden shower
Fish
Karimeen





Topics



Arts
Culture
Demographics
Economy
Education
Film
Geography
Roads
Ports
History
Flora and Fauna
Government
Tourism
Sports





Districts



Thiruvananthapuram KL-01
Kollam KL-02
Pathanamthitta KL-03
Alappuzha KL-04
Kottayam KL-05
Idukki KL-06
Ernakulam KL-07
Thrissur KL-08
Palakkad KL-09
Malappuram KL-10
Kozhikode KL-11
Wayanad KL-12
Kannur KL-13
Kasaragod KL-14





Taluks



Neyyattinkara
Kattakada
Thiruvananthapuram
Nedumangad
Chirayinkeezhu
Varkala
Kollam
Karunagappalli
Kunnathur
Kottarakkara
Punalur
Pathanapuram
Adoor
Konni
Kozhencherry
Ranni
Mallapally
Tiruvalla
Chengannur
Mavelikkara
Karthikappally
Ambalappuzha
Kuttanad
Cherthala
Changanassery
Kottayam
Kanjirappally
Meenachil
Vaikom
Peermade
Udumbanchola
Idukki
Thodupuzha
Devikulam
Kothamangalam
Muvattupuzha
Kunnathunad
Kanayannur
Kochi
Aluva
North Paravur
Kodungallur
Chalakudy
Mukundapuram
Thrissur
Chavakkad
Thalapilly
Alathur
Chittur
Palakkad
Pattambi
Ottapalam
Mannarkkad
Perinthalmanna
Ponnani
Thirur
Tirurangadi
Eranad
Kondotty
Nilambur
Kozhikode
Thamarassery
Koyilandy
Vatakara
Vythiri
Sultan Bathery
Mananthavady
Iritty
Thalassery
Kannur
Taliparamba
Hosdurg
Vellarikundu
Kasaragod
Manjeshwaram





Municipal Corporations



Thiruvananthapuram
Kochi
Kozhikode
Kollam
Thrissur
Kannur





Municipalities



Adoor
Anthoor
Alappuzha
Aluva
Angamaly
Attingal
Chalakudy
Changanassery
Chavakkad
Chengannur
Cherthala
Chittur
Tattamangalam
Eloor
Guruvayur
Irinjalakuda
Iritty
Kalamassery
Kalpetta
Kanhangad
Karunagappalli
Kasaragod
Kayamkulam
Kodungallur
Kuthuparamba
Kothamangalam
Kottakkal
Kottarakkara
Kottayam
Koyilandy
Kunnamkulam
Malappuram
Manjeri
Maradu
Mattanur
Mavelikkara
Muvattupuzha
Nedumangad
Neyyattinkara
Nilambur
Nileshwaram
North Paravur
Ottapalam
Palai
Palakkad
Panoor
Paravur
Pathanamthitta
Payyanur
Perintalmanna
Perumbavoor
Ponnani
Punalur
Shoranur
Sreekandapuram
Thalassery
Taliparamba
Tiruvalla
Thodupuzha
Thrikkakkara
Thrippunithura
Tirur
Vatakara
Vaikom
Varkala





Other Towns



Parassala
Balaramapuram
Kattakkada
Chirayinkeezhu
Kilimanoor
Chathannur
Kundara
Chavara
Oachira
Sasthamkotta
Kunnathur
Anchal
Pathanapuram
Kozhencherry
Konni
Ranni
Mallapally
Kumbanad
Aranmula
Kulanada
Omalloor
Vadasserikkara
Parumala
Mannar
Charummoodu
Ambalapuzha
Mararikulam
Aroor
Kanjirapally
Erumeli
Mundakayam
Vazhoor
Karukachal
Pampady
Puthuppally
Kuravilangad
Uzhavoor
Thalayolaparambu
Kaduthuruthy
Peermade
Vandiperiyar
Kumily
Rajakkad
Munnar
Devikulam
Adimali
Kolenchery
Puthencruz
Kunnathunad
Kalady
Malayattoor
Chottanikkara
Udayamperoor
Varapuzha
Sreemoolanagaram
Nedumbassery
Mala
Kodakara
Pudukkad
Manalur
Pavaratty
Chelakkara
Vadakkencherry
Alathur
Nemmara
Puthunagaram
Malampuzha
Sreekrishnapuram
Lakkidi-Perur
Thrithala
Edappal
Tavanur
Angadipuram
Mankada
Kuttippuram
Karipur
Areekode
Wandoor
Vengara
Vallikunnu
Olavanna
Kunnamangalam
Thamarassery
Thiruvambady
Kodencheri
Balussery
Perambra
Nadapuram
Kuttiyadi
Lakkidi
Vythiri
Chundale
Meppadi
Kottappadi
Muttil
Padinharethara
Meenangadi
Panamaram
Pulpally
Peravoor
Dharmadam
Anjarakandi
Muzhappilangad
Azhikode
Pappinisseri
Kaliiasseri
Irikkur
Alakode
Trikaripur
Cheruvathur
Bekal
Udma
Vellarikundu
Parappa
Karadka
Kumbala
Mangalpady
Uppala
Manjeshwaram





Historical Regions



Malabar

North Malabar
South Malabar


Cochin
Venad Swarupam (Kingdom of Quilon)
Travancore
Travancore-Cochin






Portal: Kerala










v
t
e


Portuguese overseas empire








North Africa









15th century


1415–1640
Ceuta


1458–1550
Alcácer Ceguer (El Qsar es Seghir)


1471–1550
Arzila (Asilah)


1471–1662
Tangier


1485–1550
Mazagan (El Jadida)


1487–16th century
Ouadane


1488–1541
Safim (Safi)


1489
Graciosa




16th century


1505–1541
Santa Cruz do Cabo de Gué (Agadir)


1506–1525
Mogador (Essaouira)


1506–1525
Aguz (Souira Guedima)


1506–1769
Mazagan (El Jadida)


1513–1541
Azamor (Azemmour)


1515–1541
São João da Mamora (Mehdya)


1577–1589
Arzila (Asilah)





















Sub-Saharan Africa









15th century


1455–1633
Anguim


1462–1975
Cape Verde


1470–1975
São Tomé1


1471–1975
Príncipe1


1474–1778
Annobón


1478–1778
Fernando Poo (Bioko)


1482–1637
Elmina (São Jorge da Mina)


1482–1642
Portuguese Gold Coast


1508–15472
Madagascar3


1498–1540
Mascarene Islands




16th century


1500–1630
Malindi


1501–1975
Portuguese Mozambique


1502–1659
Saint Helena


1503–1698
Zanzibar


1505–1512
Quíloa (Kilwa)


1506–1511
Socotra


1557–1578
Accra


1575–1975
Portuguese Angola


1588–1974
Cacheu4


1593–1698
Mombassa (Mombasa)




17th century


1645–1888
Ziguinchor


1680–1961
São João Baptista de Ajudá


1687–1974
Bissau4


18th century


1728–1729
Mombassa (Mombasa)


1753–1975
Portuguese São Tomé and Príncipe


19th century


1879–1974
Portuguese Guinea


1885–1974
Portuguese Congo5








1 Part of São Tomé and Príncipe from 1753.
2 Or 1600.
3 A factory (Anosy Region) and small temporary coastal bases.
4 Part of Portuguese Guinea from 1879.
5 Part of Portuguese Angola from the 1920s.














Middle East [Persian Gulf]









16th century


1506–1615
Gamru (Bandar Abbas)


1507–1643
Sohar


1515–1622
Hormuz (Ormus)


1515–1648
Quriyat


1515–?
Qalhat


1515–1650
Muscat


1515?–?
Barka


1515–1633?
Julfar (Ras al-Khaimah)


1521–1602
Bahrain (Muharraq • Manama)


1521–1529?
Qatif


1521?–1551?
Tarut Island


1550–1551
Qatif


1588–1648
Matrah




17th century


1620–?
Khor Fakkan


1621?–?
As Sib


1621–1622
Qeshm


1623–?
Khasab


1623–?
Libedia


1624–?
Kalba


1624–?
Madha


1624–1648
Dibba Al-Hisn


1624?–?
Bandar-e Kong


















Indian subcontinent









15th century


1498–1545

Laccadive Islands
(Lakshadweep)



16th century
Portuguese India


 • 1500–1663
Cochim (Kochi)


 • 1501–1663
Cannanore (Kannur)



 • 1502–1658
 1659–1661


Quilon
(Coulão / Kollam)



 • 1502–1661
Pallipuram (Cochin de Cima)


 • 1507–1657
Negapatam (Nagapatnam)


 • 1510–1961
Goa



 • 1512–1525
 1750


Calicut
(Kozhikode)



 • 1518–1619
Portuguese Paliacate outpost (Pulicat)


 • 1521–1740
Chaul






 
(Portuguese India)


 • 1523–1662
Mylapore


 • 1528–1666

Chittagong
(Porto Grande De Bengala)



 • 1531–1571
Chaul


 • 1531–1571
Chalé


 • 1534–1601
Salsette Island


 • 1534–1661
Bombay (Mumbai)


 • 1535
Ponnani


 • 1535–1739
Baçaím (Vasai-Virar)


 • 1536–1662
Cranganore (Kodungallur)


 • 1540–1612
Surat


 • 1548–1658
Tuticorin (Thoothukudi)


 • 1559–1961
Daman and Diu


 • 1568–1659
Mangalore






 
(Portuguese India)


 • 1579–1632
Hugli


 • 1598–1610
Masulipatnam (Machilipatnam)




1518–1521
Maldives


1518–1658
Portuguese Ceylon (Sri Lanka)


1558–1573
Maldives


17th century
Portuguese India


 • 1687–1749
Mylapore


18th century
Portuguese India


 • 1779–1954
Dadra and Nagar Haveli


















East Asia and Oceania









16th century


1511–1641
Portuguese Malacca [Malaysia]


1512–1621
Maluku [Indonesia]


 • 1522–1575
 Ternate


 • 1576–1605
 Ambon


 • 1578–1650
 Tidore


1512–1665
Makassar


1557–1999
Macau [China]


1580–1586
Nagasaki [Japan]


17th century


1642–1975
Portuguese Timor (East Timor)1




19th century
Portuguese Macau


 • 1864–1999
Coloane


 • 1851–1999
Taipa


 • 1890–1999
Ilha Verde


20th century
Portuguese Macau


 • 1938–1941
Lapa and Montanha (Hengqin)








1 1975 is the year of East Timor's Declaration of Independence and subsequent invasion by Indonesia. In 2002, East Timor's independence was fully recognized.














North America & North Atlantic









15th century [Atlantic islands]


1420
Madeira


1432
Azores




16th century [Canada]


1500–1579?
Terra Nova (Newfoundland)


1500–1579?
Labrador


1516–1579?
Nova Scotia



















South America & Antilles









16th century


1500–1822
Brazil


 • 1534–1549
 Captaincy Colonies of Brazil


 • 1549–1572
 Brazil


 • 1572–1578
 Bahia


 • 1572–1578
 Rio de Janeiro


 • 1578–1607
 Brazil


 • 1621–1815
 Brazil


1536–1620
Barbados




17th century


1621–1751
Maranhão


1680–1777
Nova Colónia do Sacramento


18th century


1751–1772
Grão-Pará and Maranhão


1772–1775
Grão-Pará and Rio Negro


1772–1775
Maranhão and Piauí




19th century


1808–1822
Cisplatina (Uruguay)


1809–1817
Portuguese Guiana (Amapá)


1822
Upper Peru (Bolivia)
















Coats of arms of Portuguese colonies
Evolution of the Portuguese Empire
Portuguese colonial architecture
Portuguese colonialism in Indonesia
Portuguese colonization of the Americas
Theory of the Portuguese discovery of Australia









Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 248705323
GND: 4285343-6
BNF: cb11969178g (data)











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Kochi&oldid=818506109"					Categories: Neighbourhoods in KochiKochiCities and towns in Ernakulam districtFormer capital cities in IndiaFormer Portuguese coloniesHistoric Jewish communitiesPopulated coastal places in IndiaPort cities in IndiaHidden categories: CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors listWebarchive template wayback linksCS1 maint: Unfit urlWikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pagesUse Indian English from June 2016All Wikipedia articles written in Indian EnglishUse dmy dates from May 2014Coordinates on WikidataArticles with hAudio microformatsArticles containing potentially dated statements from 2011All articles containing potentially dated statementsOfficial website different in Wikidata and WikipediaWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiers