"KMT" redirects here. For other uses, see KMT (disambiguation).
Not to be confused with Revolutionary Committee of the Kuomintang.






This article may be too long to read and navigate comfortably. Please consider splitting content into sub-articles, condensing it, or adding or removing subheadings. (January 2016)






Kuomintang of China
中國國民黨
Zhōngguó Guómíndǎng






Chairman
Wu Den-yih


Secretary-General
Tseng Yung-chuan


Founded
24 November 1894; 123 years ago (1894-11-24)


Preceded by
Revive China Society (1894)
Tongmenghui (1905)
Nationalist Party (1912)
Chinese Revolutionary Party (1914)


Headquarters
No.232~234, Sec. 2, BaDe Rd., Zhongshan District, Taipei, Republic of China[1]


Newspaper
Central Daily News,
Kuomintang News Network


Think tank
National Policy Foundation


Youth wing
Kuomintang Youth League


Membership (2017)
1,090,000[2]


Ideology
Three Principles of the People[3][4][5]
Anti-communism
Conservatism (Taiwan)


Political position
Centre-right[6][7]


National affiliation
Pan-Blue Coalition


International affiliation
Centrist Democrat International,
International Democrat Union


Colours
     Blue


Legislative Yuan

35 / 113







Municipal Mayoralties

1 / 6







City Mayoralties and County Magistracies

5 / 16







Local Councillors

386 / 906







Township Chiefs

80 / 211







Party flag





Website


www.kmt.org.tw





Politics of the Republic of China
Political parties
Elections










Kuomintang



"Kuomintang (Guómíndǎng)" in Traditional (top) and Simplified (bottom) Chinese characters



Chinese name


Traditional Chinese
中國國民黨


Simplified Chinese
中国国民党


Literal meaning
"State and Commons’ Party of China"





Transcriptions


Standard Mandarin


Hanyu Pinyin
Zhōngguó Guómín Dǎng


Bopomofo
ㄓㄨㄥ ㄍㄨㄛˊ ㄍㄨㄛˊ ㄇㄧㄣˊ ㄉㄤˇ


Gwoyeu Romatzyh
Jong'gwo Gwomin Daang


Wade–Giles
Chung¹-kuo² Kuo²-min² Tang³


IPA
[ʈʂʊ́ŋkwǒ kwǒmǐn tàŋ]


other Mandarin


Xiao'erjing
ﺟْﻮ ﻗُﻮَع ﻗُﻮَع مٍ دْا‎


Dungan
Җунгуй Гуймин Дон


Wu


Romanization
tson平 koh入 koh入 min平 taon上


Hakka


Romanization
dung24 gued2 gued2 min11 dong31


Yue: Cantonese


Yale Romanization
Jūnggwok Gwokmàhn Dóng


IPA
[tsóŋkʷɔ̄ːk̚ kʷɔ̄ːk̚mɐ̏n tɔ̌ːŋ]


Jyutping
zung1gwok3 gwok3man4 dong2


Southern Min


Hokkien POJ
Tiong-kok Kok-bîn-tóng





Abbreviated to


Traditional Chinese
國民黨


Simplified Chinese
国民党





Transcriptions


Standard Mandarin


Hanyu Pinyin
Guómín Dǎng


Bopomofo
ㄍㄨㄛˊ ㄇㄧㄣˊ ㄉㄤˇ


Gwoyeu Romatzyh
Gwomin Daang


Wade–Giles
Kuo²-min² Tang³


IPA
[kwǒmǐn tàŋ]


Wu


Romanization
koh入min平taon上


Hakka


Romanization
gued2min11dong31


Yue: Cantonese


Yale Romanization
Gwokmàhn Dóng


IPA
[kʷɔ̄ːk̚mɐ̏n tɔ̌ːŋ]


Jyutping
gwok3man4 dong2


Southern Min


Hokkien POJ
Kok-bîn-tóng





Tibetan name


Tibetan
ཀྲུང་གོའི་གོ་མིན་ཏང





Transcriptions


Wylie
krung go'i go min tang








The Kuomintang of China[8][9] (/ˌɡwoʊmɪnˈdɑːŋ/ or /-ˈtæŋ/,[10] KMT; often translated as the Nationalist Party of China[11]) is a major political party in the Republic of China (ROC or Taiwan). It is currently the largest opposition party in the Legislative Yuan.
The predecessor of the KMT, the Revolutionary Alliance (Tongmenghui), was one of the major advocates of the overthrow of the Qing Dynasty and the establishment of the Republic of China. The KMT was founded by Song Jiaoren and Sun Yat-sen shortly after the Xinhai Revolution of 1911. Sun was the provisional president but later he ceded the presidency to Yuan Shikai. Later led by Chiang Kai-shek, the KMT formed the National Revolutionary Army and succeeded in its Northern Expedition to unify much of China in 1928, ended the chaos of Warlord Era. It was the ruling party in mainland China until 1949, when it lost the Chinese Civil War to the Communist Party of China (CPC). Despite retreating to Taiwan and losing most of its territory, the KMT remained an authoritarian government, which held onto China's UN seat (with considerable international support) until 1971. In Taiwan, the political reforms started in the 1990s, and loosened KMT grip on power. Since 1987, the Republic of China is no longer a single-party state; however, the KMT remains one of the main political parties. The KMT is currently the main opposition party in the Legislative Yuan.
The guiding ideology is the Three Principles of the People, advocated by Sun Yat-sen. Its party headquarters are located in Taipei. The KMT is a member of the International Democrat Union. The previous president, Ma Ying-jeou, elected in 2008 and re-elected in 2012, was the seventh KMT member to hold the office of the presidency.
Together with the People First Party and New Party, the KMT forms what is known as the Taiwanese Pan-Blue Coalition, which supports eventual unification with the mainland. However, the KMT has been forced to moderate its stance by advocating the political and legal status quo of modern Taiwan, as political realities make a reunification of China unlikely. The KMT accepts a "One China Principle" – it officially considers that there is only one China, but that the Republic of China rather than the People's Republic of China is its legitimate government under the 1992 Consensus. However, since 2008, in order to ease tensions with the PRC, the KMT endorses the "three noes" policy as defined by Ma Ying-jeou; no unification, no independence and no use of force.[12] Some pro-unification supporters of the KMT criticize the official position of KMT is de facto supported Taiwan independence and separations from China.



Contents


1 History

1.1 Founding and Sun Yat-sen era
1.2 Under Chiang Kai-shek in Mainland China
1.3 In Taiwan since 1945
1.4 Current issues and challenges

1.4.1 Party assets
1.4.2 Cross-strait relations




2 Supporter base
3 Organization

3.1 Leadership

3.1.1 Chairman and Vice Chairmen
3.1.2 Secretary-General and Vice secretaries-general
3.1.3 Legislative Yuan leader (Caucus leader)


3.2 Party organization and structure[38]


4 Ideology in mainland China (1920s–1950s)

4.1 Chinese nationalism
4.2 New Guangxi Clique
4.3 Socialism and anti-capitalist agitation
4.4 Confucianism and religion in ideology

4.4.1 Education


4.5 Soviet-style military


5 Parties affiliated with the Kuomintang

5.1 Malaysian Chinese Association
5.2 Tibet Improvement Party
5.3 Vietnamese Nationalist Party
5.4 Ryukyu Guomindang


6 Organizations sponsored by the Kuomintang
7 Policy on ethnic minorities
8 Stance on separatism
9 Election results

9.1 Presidential elections
9.2 Legislative elections
9.3 Local elections
9.4 National Assembly elections


10 See also
11 References

11.1 Citations
11.2 Sources


12 Further reading
13 External links



History[edit]
Main article: History of the Kuomintang
Founding and Sun Yat-sen era[edit]




The revolutionary army attacking Nanjing in 1911






The KMT revere founder Sun Yat-sen as the "Father of the Nation". Sun is pictured here in 1917.


The KMT traces its ideological and organizational roots to the work of Sun Yat-sen, a proponent of Chinese nationalism and democracy, who founded Revive China Society in Honolulu in the Republic of Hawaii on 24 November 1894.[13] In 1905, Sun joined forces with other anti-monarchist societies in Tokyo, Empire of Japan to form the Tongmenghui on 20 August 1905, a group committed to the overthrow of the Qing Dynasty and the establishment of a republican government.
The group planned and supported the Xinhai Revolution of 1911 and the founding of the Republic of China on 1 January 1912. However, Sun did not have military power and ceded the provisional presidency of the republic to Yuan Shikai, who arranged for the abdication of Puyi, the last Emperor, on February 12.
On 25 August 1912, the Nationalist Party was established at the Huguang Guild Hall in Peking, where Tongmenghui and five smaller pro-revolution parties merged to contest the first national elections.[14] Sun, the then-President of the ROC, was chosen as the party chairman with Huang Xing as his deputy.
The most influential member of the party was the third ranking Song Jiaoren, who mobilized mass support from gentry and merchants for the Nationalists to advocate a constitutional parliamentary democracy. The party opposed constitutional monarchists and sought to check the power of Yuan. The Nationalists won an overwhelming majority of the first National Assembly election in December 1912.
But Yuan soon began to ignore the parliament in making presidential decisions. Song Jiaoren was assassinated in Shanghai in 1913. Members of the Nationalists led by Sun Yat-sen suspected that Yuan was behind the plot and thus staged the Second Revolution in July 1913, a poorly planned and ill-supported armed rising to overthrow Yuan, and failed. Yuan, claiming subversiveness and betrayal, expelled adherents of the KMT from the parliament.[15][16] Yuan dissolved the Nationalists in November (whose members had largely fled into exile in Japan) and dismissed the parliament early in 1914.
Yuan Shikai proclaimed himself emperor in December 1915. While exiled in Japan in 1914, Sun established the Chinese Revolutionary Party on 8 July 1914, but many of his old revolutionary comrades, including Huang Xing, Wang Jingwei, Hu Hanmin and Chen Jiongming, refused to join him or support his efforts in inciting armed uprising against Yuan. In order tonary Party, members must take an oath of personal loyalty to Sun, which many old revolutionaries regarded as undemocratic and contrary to the spirit of the revolution.
Thus, many old revolutionaries did not join Sun's new organisation, and he was largely sidelined within the Republican movement during this period. Sun returned to China in 1917 to establish a military junta at Canton, in order to against the Beiyang government, but was soon forced out of office and exiled to Shanghai. There, with renewed support, he resurrected the KMT on 10 October 1919, under the name Kuomintang of China (中國國民黨) and established its headquarters in Canton in 1920.
In 1923, the KMT and its Canton government accepted aid from the Soviet Union after being denied recognition by the western powers. Soviet advisers - the most prominent of whom was Mikhail Borodin, an agent of the Comintern – arrived in China in 1923 to aid in the reorganization and consolidation of the KMT along the lines of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, establishing a Leninist party structure that lasted into the 1990s. The Communist Party of China (CPC) was under Comintern instructions to cooperate with the KMT, and its members were encouraged to join while maintaining their separate party identities, forming the First United Front between the two parties. Mao Zedong and early members of the CPC also joined the KMT in 1923.




Venue of the 1st National Congress of Kuomintang in 1924.


Soviet advisers also helped the KMT to set up a political institute to train propagandists in mass mobilization techniques, and in 1923 Chiang Kai-shek, one of Sun's lieutenants from the Tongmenghui days, was sent to Moscow for several months' military and political study. At the first party congress in 1924 in Kwangchow, Kwangtung, (Guanzhou, Guangdong) which included non-KMT delegates such as members of the CPC, they adopted Sun's political theory, which included the Three Principles of the People - nationalism, democracy and people's livelihood.
Under Chiang Kai-shek in Mainland China[edit]




Chiang Kai-shek, photographed in March 1945.






KMT flag displayed in Lhasa, Tibet in 1938.


When Sun Yat-sen died in 1925, the political leadership of the KMT fell to Wang Jingwei and Hu Hanmin, respectively the left wing and right wing leaders of the party. The real power, however, was in the hands of Chiang Kai-shek, who, as the superintendent of the Whampoa Military Academy, was in near complete control of the military. With their military superiority, KMT confirmed their rule on Canton, the provincial capital of Kwangtung. The Guangxi warlords pledged loyalty to the KMT. The KMT now became a rival government in opposition to the warlord Beiyang government based in Peking.[17]
Chiang assumed leadership of the KMT on 6 July 1926. Unlike Sun Yat-sen, whom he admired greatly, and who forged all his political, economic and revolutionary ideas primarily from what he had learned in Hawaii and indirectly through British Hong Kong and Empire of Japan under Meiji Restoration, Chiang knew relatively little about the West. He also studied in Japan, but he was firmly rooted in his Chinese identity and was steeped in Chinese culture. As his life progressed, he became increasingly attached to Chinese culture and traditions. His few trips to the West confirmed his pro-Chinese outlook and he studied the Chinese classics and Chinese histories assiduously.[17] In 1924, Sun Yat-sen sent Chiang to spend three months in Moscow studying the political and military system of the Soviet Union. Chiang met Leon Trotsky and other Soviet leaders, but quickly came to the conclusion that the Soviet model of government was not suitable for China. This laid the beginning of his lifelong antagonism against communism.
Chiang was also particularly committed to Sun's idea of "political tutelage". Sun believed that the only hope for a unified and better China lies in a military conquest, followed by a period of political tutelage that would culminate in the transition to democracy. Using this ideology, Chiang built himself into the dictator of the Republic of China, both in the Chinese mainland and when the national government was relocated to Taiwan.[17]
Following the death of Sun Yat-sen, Chiang Kai-shek emerged as the KMT leader and launched the Northern Expedition to defeat the northern warlords and unite China under the party. With its power confirmed in the southeast, the Nationalist Government appointed Chiang Kai-shek commander-in-chief of the National Revolutionary Army (NRA), and the Northern Expedition to suppress the warlords began. Chiang had to defeat three separate warlords and two independent armies. Chiang, with Soviet supplies, conquered the southern half of China in nine months.
A split, however, erupted between the Chinese Communist Party and the KMT, which threatened the Northern Expedition. Wang Jing Wei, who led the KMT leftist allies took the city of Wuhan in January 1927. With the support of the Soviet agent Mikhail Borodin, Wang declared the National Government as having moved to Wuhan. Having taken Nanking in March, Chiang halted his campaign and prepared a violent break with Wang and his communist allies. Chiang's expulsion of the CPC and their Soviet advisers, marked by the Shanghai massacre on April 12, led to the beginning of the Chinese Civil War. Wang finally surrendered his power to Chiang. Joseph Stalin ordered CPC to obey the KMT leadership.[citation needed] Once this split had been healed, Chiang resumed his Northern Expedition and managed to take Shanghai.[17]




The National Revolutionary Army soldiers marched into the British concessions in Hankou during the Northern Expedition.


During the Nanking Incident in March 1927, the NRA stormed the consulates of the United States, United Kingdom (UK) and Empire of Japan, looted foreign properties and almost assassinated the Japanese consul. An American, two British, one French, an Italian and a Japanese were killed.[18] These looters also stormed and seized millions of dollars worth of British concessions in Hankou, refusing to hand them back to the UK.[19] Both Nationalists and Communist soldiers within the army participated in the rioting and looting of foreign residents in Nanking.[20]
NRA took Peking in 1928. The city was the internationally recognized capital, though previously controlled by warlords. This event allowed the KMT to receive widespread diplomatic recognition in the same year. The capital was moved from Peking to Nanking, the original capital of the Ming Dynasty, and thus a symbolic purge of the final Qing elements. This period of KMT rule in China between 1927 and 1937 was relatively stable and prosperous and is still known as the Nanjing decade.
After the Northern Expedition in 1928, the Nationalist government under the KMT declared that China had been exploited for decades under unequal treaties signed between the foreign powers and the Qing Dynasty. The KMT government demanded that the foreign powers renegotiate the treaties on equal terms.[21]
Before the Northern Expedition, the KMT began as a heterogeneous group advocating American-inspired federalism and provincial autonomy. However, the KMT under Chiang's leadership aimed at establishing a centralized one-party state with one ideology. This was even more evident following Sun's elevation into a cult figure after his death. The control by one single party began the period of "political tutelage," whereby the party was to lead the government while instructing the people on how to participate in a democratic system. The topic of reorganizing the army, brought up at a military conference in 1929, sparked the Central Plains War. The cliques, some of them former warlords, demanded to retain their army and political power within their own territories. Although Chiang finally won the war, the conflicts among the cliques would have a devastating effect on the survival of the KMT. Muslim Generals in Kansu waged war against the Guominjun in favor of the KMT during the conflict in Gansu in 1927-1930.[22]




KMT in Tihwa, Sinkiang in 1942.






Nationalist soldiers during the Second Sino-Japanese War.


Although the Second Sino-Japanese War officially broke out in 1937, Japanese aggression started in 1931 when they staged the Mukden Incident and occupied Manchuria. At the same time, the CPC had been secretly recruiting new members within the KMT government and military. Chiang was alarmed by the expansion of the communist influence. He believed that in order to fight against foreign aggression, the KMT must solve its internal conflicts first, so he started his second attempt to exterminate CPC members in 1934. With the advice from German military advisors, the KMT forced the Communists to withdraw from their bases in southern and central China into the mountains in a massive military retreat known as the Long March. Less than 10% of the communist army survived the long retreat to Shaanxi province, but they re-established their military base quickly with aid from the Soviet Union.
The KMT was also known to have used terror tactics against suspected communists, through the utilization of a secret police force, who were employed to maintain surveillance on suspected communists and political opponents. In The Birth of Communist China, C.P. Fitzgerald describes China under the rule of the KMT thus: "the Chinese people groaned under a regime Fascist in every quality except efficiency."[23]
Zhang Xueliang, who believed that the Japanese invasion was a greater threat, was persuaded by the CPC to take Chiang hostage during the Xi'an Incident in 1937 and forced Chiang to agree to an alliance with them in the total war against the Japanese. However, in many situations the alliance was in name only; after a brief period of cooperation, the armies began to fight the Japanese separately, rather than as coordinated allies. Conflicts between KMT and CPC were still common during the war, and documented claims abound of CPC attacks upon the KMT forces and vice versa.
While the KMT army received heavy casualties fighting the Japanese, the CPC expanded its territory by guerrilla tactics within Japanese occupied regions, leading some[who?] claims that the CPC often refused to support the KMT troops, choosing to withdraw and let the KMT troops take the brunt of Japanese attacks.[citation needed]




The retrocession of Taiwan in Taipei on 25 October 1945.


After Japan surrendered in 1945, Taiwan was returned to the Republic of China on 25 October 1945. The brief period of celebration was soon shadowed by the possibility of a civil war between the KMT and CPC. The Soviet Union declared war on Japan just before they surrendered and occupied Manchuria, the north eastern part of China. The Soviet Union denied the KMT army to enter the region and assisted CPC to take over the Japanese factories and supplies.
Full-scale civil war between CPC and the KMT erupted in 1946. The Communist armies, People's Liberation Army (PLA), previously a minor faction, grew rapidly in influence and power due to several errors on the KMT's part. First, the KMT reduced troop levels precipitously after the Japanese surrender, leaving large numbers of able-bodied, trained fighting men who became unemployed and disgruntled with the KMT as prime recruits for PLA. Second, the KMT government proved thoroughly unable to manage the economy, allowing hyperinflation to result. Among the most despised and ineffective efforts it undertook to contain inflation was the conversion to the gold standard for the national treasury and the Gold Standard Scrip in August 1948, outlawing private ownership of gold, silver and foreign exchange, collecting all such precious metals and foreign exchange from the people and issuing the Gold Standard Scrip in exchange. As most farmland in the north were under CPC's control, the cities governed by the KMT lacked food supply and this added to the hyperinflation. The new scrip became worthless in only ten months and greatly reinforced the nationwide perception of the KMT as a corrupt or at best inept entity. Third, Chiang Kai-shek ordered his forces to defend the urbanized cities. This decision gave CPC a chance to move freely through the countryside. At first, the KMT had the edge with the aid of weapons and ammunition from the United States (US). However, with the country suffering from hyperinflation, widespread corruption and other economic ills, the KMT continued to lose popular support. Some leading officials and military leaders of the KMT hoarded material, armament and military-aid funding provided by the US. This became an issue which proved to be a hindrance of its relationship with US government. US President Harry S. Truman wrote that "the Chiangs, the Kungs and the Soongs (were) all thieves", having taken $750 million in US aid.[24]
At the same time, the suspension of American aid and tens of thousands of deserted or decommissioned soldiers being recruited to PLA cause tipped the balance of power quickly to CPC side, and the overwhelming popular support for the CPC in most of the country made it all but impossible for the KMT forces to carry out successful assaults against the Communists.
By the end of 1949, the CPC controlled almost all of mainland China, as the KMT retreated to Taiwan with a significant amount of China's national treasures and 2 million people, including military forces and refugees. Some party members stayed in the mainland and broke away from the main KMT to found the Revolutionary Committee of the Kuomintang, which still currently exists as one of the eight minor registered parties of the People's Republic of China.
In Taiwan since 1945[edit]




The former KMT headquarters in Taipei City (1949-2006); the imposing structure, directly facing the Presidential Building, was seen as a symbol of the party's wealth and dominance.






Wu Den-yih, the incumbent Chairperson of Kuomintang.


In 1895, Formosa (now called Taiwan), including the Penghu islands, became a Japanese colony via the Treaty of Shimonoseki following the First Sino-Japanese War.
After Japan's defeat at the end of World War II in 1945, General Order No. 1 instructed Japan to surrender its troops in Taiwan to Chiang Kai-shek. On October 25, 1945, KMT general Chen Yi acted on behalf of the Allied Powers to accept Japan's surrender and proclaimed that day as Taiwan Retrocession Day.
Tensions between the local Taiwanese and mainlanders from Mainland China increased in the intervening years, culminating in a flashpoint on February 27, 1947 in Taipei when a dispute between a female cigarette vendor and an anti-smuggling officer in front of Tianma Tea House triggered civil disorder and protests that would last for days. The uprising turned bloody and was shortly put down by the ROC Army in the February 28 Incident. As a result of the February 28 Incident in 1947, Taiwanese people endured what is called the "White Terror", a KMT-led political repression that resulted in the death or disappearance of over 30,000 Taiwanese intellectuals, activists, and anyone suspected of opposition to the KMT.[25]
Following the establishment of the People's Republic of China (PRC) on 1 October 1949, the commanders of the People's Liberation Army (PLA) believed that Kinmen and Matsu had to be taken before a final assault on Taiwan. The KMT fought the Battle of Guningtou on 25–27 October 1949 and stopped the PLA invasion. The KMT headquarter was set up on 10 December 1949 at No. 11 Zhongshan South Road.[26] In 1950, Chiang took office in Taipei under the Temporary Provisions Effective During the Period of Communist Rebellion. The provision declared martial law in Taiwan and halted some democratic processes, including presidential and parliamentary elections, until the mainland could be recovered from the CPC. The KMT estimated it would take 3 years to defeat the Communists. The slogan was "prepare in the first year, start fighting in the second, and conquer in the third year." Chiang also initiated the Project National Glory to retake back the mainland in 1965, but was eventually dropped in July 1972 after many unsuccessful attempts.
However, various factors, including international pressure, are believed to have prevented the KMT from militarily engaging the CPC full-scale. The KMT backed Muslim insurgents formerly belonging to the NRA during the KMT Islamic insurgency in 1950–1958 in Mainland China. A cold war with a couple of minor military conflicts was resulted in the early years. The various government bodies previously in Nanjing, that were re-established in Taipei as the KMT-controlled government, actively claimed sovereignty over all China. The Republic of China in Taiwan retained China's seat in the United Nations until 1971.
Until the 1970s, the KMT successfully pushed ahead with land reforms, developed the economy, implemented a democratic system in a lower level of the government, improved relations between Taiwan and the mainland and created the Taiwan economic miracle. However, the KMT controlled the government under a one-party authoritarian state until reforms in the late 1970s through the 1990s. The ROC in Taiwan was once referred to synonymously with the KMT and known simply as "Nationalist China" after its ruling party. In the 1970s, the KMT began to allow for "supplemental elections" in Taiwan to fill the seats of the aging representatives in the National Assembly.
Although opposition parties were not permitted, Tangwai (or, "outside the party") representatives were tolerated. In the 1980s, the KMT focused on transforming the government from a single-party system to a multi-party democratic one and embracing "Taiwanization". With the founding of the Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) on 28 September 1986, the KMT started competing against the DPP in Parliamentary elections.
In 1991, martial law ceased when President Lee Teng-hui terminated the Temporary Provisions Effective During the Period of Communist Rebellion. All parties started to be allowed to compete at all levels of elections, including the presidential election. Lee Teng-hui, the ROC's first democratically elected President and the leader of the KMT during the 1990s, announced his advocacy of "special state-to-state relations" with the PRC. The PRC associated this idea with Taiwan independence.
The KMT faced a split in 1993 that led to the formation of the New Party in August 1993, alleged to be a result of Lee's "corruptive ruling style". The New Party has, since the purging of Lee, largely reintegrated into the KMT. A much more serious split in the party occurred as a result of the 2000 Presidential election. Upset at the choice of Lien Chan as the party's presidential nominee, former party Secretary-General James Soong launched an independent bid, which resulted in the expulsion of Soong and his supporters and the formation of the People First Party (PFP) on 31 March 2000. The KMT candidate placed third behind Soong in the elections. After the election, Lee's strong relationship with the opponent became apparent. In order to prevent defections to the PFP, Lien moved the party away from Lee's pro-independence policies and became more favorable toward Chinese reunification. This shift led to Lee's expulsion from the party and the formation of the Taiwan Solidarity Union (TSU) by Lee supporters on 24 July 2001.




Pan-blue supporters at a rally during the 2004 presidential election.


Prior to this, the party's voters had defected to both the PFP and TSU, and the KMT did poorly in the December 2001 legislative elections and lost its position as the largest party in the Legislative Yuan. However, the party did well in the 2002 local government mayoral and council election with Ma Ying-jeou, its candidate for Taipei mayor, winning reelection by a landslide and its candidate for Kaohsiung mayor narrowly losing but doing surprisingly well. Since 2002, the KMT and PFP have coordinated electoral strategies. In 2004, the KMT and PFP ran a joint presidential ticket, with Lien running for president and Soong running for vice-president.
The loss of the presidential election of 2004 to DPP President Chen Shui-bian by merely over 30,000 votes was a bitter disappointment to party members, leading to large scale rallies for several weeks protesting alleged electoral fraud and the "odd circumstances" of the shooting of President Chen. However, the fortunes of the party were greatly improved when the KMT did well in the legislative elections held in December 2004 by maintaining its support in southern Taiwan achieving a majority for the Pan-Blue Coalition.
Soon after the election, there appeared to be a falling out with the KMT's junior partner, the People First Party and talk of a merger seemed to have ended. This split appeared to widen in early 2005, as the leader of the PFP, James Soong appeared to be reconciling with President Chen Shui-Bian and the Democratic Progressive Party. Many PFP members including legislators and municipal leaders have defected to the KMT, and the PFP is seen as a fading party.
In 2005, Ma Ying-jeou became KMT chairman defeating speaker Wang Jin-pyng in the first public election for KMT chairmanship. The KMT won a decisive victory in the 3-in-1 local elections of December 2005, replacing the DPP as the largest party at the local level. This was seen as a major victory for the party ahead of legislative elections in 2007. There were elections for the two municipalities of the ROC, Taipei and Kaohsiung on December 2006. The KMT won a clear victory in Taipei, but lost to the DPP in the southern city of Kaohsiung by the slim margin of 1,100 votes.
On 13 February 2007, Ma was indicted by the Taiwan High Prosecutors Office on charges of allegedly embezzling approximately NT$11 million (US$339,000), regarding the issue of "special expenses" while he was mayor of Taipei. Shortly after the indictment, he submitted his resignation as KMT chairman at the same press conference at which he formally announced his candidacy for ROC President. Ma argued that it was customary for officials to use the special expense fund for personal expenses undertaken in the course of their official duties. In December 2007, Ma was acquitted of all charges and immediately filed suit against the prosecutors. In 2008, the KMT won a landslide victory in the Republic of China Presidential Election on March 22, 2008. The KMT fielded former Taipei mayor and former KMT chairman Ma Ying-jeou to run against the DPP's Frank Hsieh. Ma won by a butt of 17% against Hsieh. Ma took office on May 20, 2008, with Vice-Presidential candidate Vincent Siew, and ended 8 years of the DPP presidency. The KMT also won a landslide victory in the 2008 legislative elections, winning 81 of 113 seats, or 71.7% of seats in the Legislative Yuan. These two elections gave the KMT firm control of both the executive and legislative yuans.
On 25 June 2009, President Ma launched his bid to regain KMT's leadership and registered as the sole candidate for the election of the KMT chairmanship. On July 26, Ma won 93.87% of the vote, becoming the new chairman of the KMT,[27] taking office on 17 October 2009. This officially allows Ma to be able to meet with Xi Jinping, the General Secretary of the Communist Party of China and other PRC delegates, as he is able to represent the KMT as leader of a Chinese political party, rather than as head-of-state of a political entity unrecognized by the PRC.[28]
On 29 November 2014, the KMT suffered a heavy loss in the local election to the DPP, winning only 6 municipalities and counties, down from 14 in the previous election in 2009 and 2010. Ma Ying-jeou subsequently resigned from the party chairmanship on 3 December and replaced by acting Chairman Wu Den-yih. Chairmanship election was held on 17 January 2015 and Eric Chu was elected to become the new chairman. He was inaugurated on 19 February.[29]
Current issues and challenges[edit]
Party assets[edit]
As the ruling party on Taiwan, the KMT amassed a vast business empire of banks, investment companies, petrochemical firms, and television and radio stations, thought to have made it the world's richest political party, with assets once estimated to be around US$2–10 billion.[30] Although this war chest appeared to help the KMT until the mid-1990s, it later led to accusations of corruption (often referred to as "black gold").
After 2000, the KMT's financial holdings appeared to be more of a liability than a benefit, and the KMT started to divest itself of its assets. However, the transactions were not disclosed and the whereabouts of the money earned from selling assets (if it has gone anywhere) is unknown. There were accusations in the 2004 presidential election that the KMT retained assets that were illegally acquired. During the 2000-2008 DPP presidency, a law was proposed by the DPP in the Legislative Yuan to recover illegally acquired party assets and return them to the government. However, due to the DPP's lack of control of the legislative chamber at the time, it never materialised.
The KMT also acknowledged that part of its assets were acquired through extra-legal means and thus promised to "retro-endow" them to the government. However, the quantity of the assets which should be classified as illegal are still under heated debate. DPP, in its capacity as ruling party from 2000–2008, claimed that there is much more that the KMT has yet to acknowledge. Also, the KMT actively sold assets under its title in order to quench its recent financial difficulties, which the DPP argues is illegal. Former KMT Chairman Ma Ying-Jeou's position is that the KMT will sell some of its properties at below market rates rather than return them to the government and that the details of these transactions will not be publicly disclosed.




Kuomintang public service centre, Shilin, Taipei


In 2006, the KMT sold its headquarters at 11 Zhongshan South Road in Taipei to Evergreen Group for NT$2.3 billion (US$96 million). The KMT moved into a smaller building on Bade Road in the eastern part of the city.[31]
In July 2014, the KMT reported total assets of NT$26.8 billion (US$892.4 million) and interest earnings of NT$981.52 million for the year of 2013, making it one of the richest political parties in the world.[32]
In August 2016, the Ill-gotten Party Assets Settlement Committee is set up by the ruling DPP government to investigate KMT party assets acquired during the martial law period and recover those that were determined to be illegally acquired.[33]
Cross-strait relations[edit]
In December 2003, then-KMT chairman (present chairman emeritus) and presidential candidate Lien Chan initiated what appeared to some to be a major shift in the party's position on the linked questions of Chinese reunification and Taiwan independence. Speaking to foreign journalists, Lien said that while the KMT was opposed to "immediate independence", it did not wish to be classed as "pro-reunificationist" either.
At the same time, Wang Jin-pyng, speaker of the Legislative Yuan and the Pan-Blue Coalition's campaign manager in the 2004 presidential election, said that the party no longer opposed Taiwan's "eventual independence". This statement was later clarified as meaning that the KMT opposes any immediate decision on unification and independence and would like to have this issue resolved by future generations. The KMT's position on the cross-strait relations was redefined as hoping to remain in the current neither-independent-nor-united situation.
However, there had been a warming of relations between the Pan-Blue Coalition and the PRC, with prominent members of both the KMT and PFP in active discussions with officials on the mainland. In February 2004, it appeared that KMT had opened a campaign office for the Lien-Soong ticket in Shanghai targeting Taiwanese businessmen. However, after an adverse reaction in Taiwan, the KMT quickly declared that the office was opened without official knowledge or authorization. In addition, the PRC issued a statement forbidding open campaigning in the mainland and formally stated that it had no preference as to which candidate won and cared only about the positions of the winning candidate.
In 2005, then-party chairman Lien Chan announced that he was to leave his office. The two leading contenders for the position included Ma Ying-jeou and Wang Jin-pyng. On 5 April 2005, Taipei Mayor Ma Ying-jeou said he wished to lead the opposition KMT with Wang Jin-pyng. On 16 July 2005, Ma was elected as KMT Chairman in the first contested leadership in KMT's 93-year history. Some 54% of the party's 1.04 million members cast their ballots. Ma garnered 72.4% of vote share, or 375,056 votes, against Wang's 27.6%, or 143,268 votes. After failing to convince Wang to stay on as a vice chairman, Ma named holdovers Wu Po-hsiung, Chiang Pin-kung and Lin Cheng-chi (林澄枝), as well as long-time party administrator and strategist John Kuan as vice-chairmen. All appointments were approved by a hand count of party delegates.




Lien Chan [middle] and Wu Po-hsiung [second left] and the KMT touring the Sun Yat-sen Mausoleum in Nanjing, the People's Republic of China. The Pan-Blue coalition visited the mainland in 2005.


On March 28, 2005, thirty members of the KMT, led by Vice Chairman Chiang Pin-kung, arrived in mainland China. This marked the first official visit by the KMT to the mainland since it was defeated by communist forces in 1949 (although KMT members including Chiang had made individual visits in the past). The delegates began their itinerary by paying homage to the revolutionary martyrs of the Tenth Uprising at Huanghuagang. They subsequently flew to the former ROC capital of Nanjing to commemorate Sun Yat-sen. During the trip, the KMT signed a 10-points agreement with the CPC. The opponents regarded this visit as the prelude of the third KMT-CPC cooperation, after the First and Second United Front. Weeks afterwards, in May 2005, Chairman Lien Chan visited the mainland and met with Hu Jintao, General Secretary of the Communist Party of China. This marked the first meeting between leaders of the KMT and CPC after the end of Chinese Civil War in 1949. No agreements were signed because incumbent Chen Shui-bian's government threatened to prosecute the KMT delegation for treason and violation of ROC laws prohibiting citizens from collaborating with CPC.
Supporter base[edit]
Support for the KMT in Taiwan encompasses a wide range of groups. KMT support tends to be higher in northern Taiwan and in urban areas, where it draws its backing from big businesses due to its policy of maintaining commercial links with mainland China.
The KMT also has strong support in the labor sector because of the many labor benefits and insurance implemented while the KMT was in power. The KMT traditionally has strong cooperation with military officers, teachers, and government workers. Among the ethnic groups in Taiwan, the KMT has solid support among mainlanders and their descendants, for ideological reasons, and among Taiwanese aboriginals.
The deep-rooted hostility between Aboriginals and (Taiwanese) Hoklo, and the Aboriginal communities effective KMT networks, contribute to Aboriginal skepticism towards the Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) and the Aboriginals' tendency to vote for the KMT.[34] Aboriginals have criticized politicians for abusing the "indigenization" movement for political gains, such as aboriginal opposition to the DPP's "rectification" by recognizing the Taroko for political reasons, with the majority of mountain townships voting for Ma Ying-jeou.[35] In 2005 the Kuomintang displayed a massive photo of the anti-Japanese Aboriginal leader Mona Rudao at its headquarters in honor of the 60th anniversary of Taiwan's retrocession from Japan to the Republic of China.[36]
Traditional opponents of the KMT included strong supporters of Taiwan independence and rural residents, particularly in southern Taiwan.
For social issues, the KMT does not take an official position on same-sex marriage, though opposition to same-sex marriage comes mostly from Christian groups, who wield significant political influence especially within the KMT.[37]
Organization[edit]




KMT headquarters in Taipei City. In June 2006, the KMT Central Committee moved to Bade building, a much more modest building, and has sold the original headquarters to private investors of the EVA Airways Corporation.






KMT Kinmen headquarters office in Jincheng Township, Kinmen County.






KMT Building in Vancouver's Chinatown, BC, Canada.






KMT branch office in Pingzhen District, Taoyuan City.






The KMT maintains offices in some of the Chinatowns of the world. Its United States party headquarters are located in San Francisco Chinatown, on Stockton Street directly across the Chinese Six Companies.






KMT Eastern U.S. headquarters is in New York Chinatown.


Leadership[edit]
Chairman and Vice Chairmen[edit]
Main article: List of leaders of the Kuomintang

Chairman


Current Chairman: Wu Den-yih (since 20 August 2017)


Vice chairpersons


Current Vice Chairpersons: Hau Lung-pin, Tseng Yung-chuan (since 20 August 2017)

Secretary-General and Vice secretaries-general[edit]
Main article: List of Secretaries-General of the Kuomintang

Secretary-General


Current Secretary-General: Tseng Yung-chuan [曾永權] (since 20 August 2017)


Vice Secretaries-General


Current Vice Secretaries-General: Tu Chien-te [杜建德], Lin Te-fu [林德福]

Legislative Yuan leader (Caucus leader)[edit]

Hong Yuh-chin [洪玉欽] (1 February 1999 – 1 February 2004)
Tseng Yung-chuan (1 February 2004 – 1 December 2008)
Lin Yi-shih (1 December 2008 – 1 February 2012)
Lin Hung-chih (1 February 2012 – 31 July 2014)
Alex Fai [費鴻泰] (31 July 2014 – 7 February 2015)
Lai Shyh-bao (7 February 2015 – 7 July 2016)
Liao Kuo-tung (7 July 2016 – 29 June 2017)
Lin Te-fu (since 29 June 2017)

Party organization and structure[38][edit]

National Congress

Party Chairman

Vice-Chairmen


Central Committee

Central Steering Committee for Women


Central Standing Committee
Secretary-General

Deputy Secretaries-General


Executive Director

Policy Committee

Policy Coordination Department
Policy Research Department
Mainland Affairs Department


National Development Institute

Administrative Division
Research Division
Education and Counselling Division


Party Disciplinary Committee

Evaluation and Control Office
Audit Office


Culture and Communications Committee

Cultural Department
Communications Department
KMT Party History Institute


Administration Committee

Personnel Office
General Office
Finance Office
Accounting Office
Information Center


Organizational Development Committee

Organization and Operations Department
Elections Mobilization Department
Community Volunteers Department
Overseas Department
Youth Department
Women's Department







Ideology in mainland China (1920s–1950s)[edit]
Chinese nationalism[edit]
KMT was a nationalist revolutionary party, which had been supported by the Soviet Union. It was organized on the Leninist principle of organisation, democratic centralism.[39]
KMT had several influences upon its ideology by revolutionary thinking. KMT and Chiang Kai-shek used the words feudal and counterrevolutionary as synonyms for evil and backwardness, and proudly proclaimed themselves to be revolutionary.[40][41] Chiang called the warlords feudalists, and called for feudalism and counterrevolutionaries to be stamped out by KMT.[42][43][44][45] Chiang showed extreme rage when he was called a warlord, because of its negative, feudal connotations.[46] Ma Bufang was forced to defend himself against the accusations, and stated to the news media that his army was a part of "National army, people's power".[47]
Chiang Kai-shek, the head of KMT, warned the Soviet Union and other foreign countries about interfering in Chinese affairs. He was personally angry at the way China was treated by foreigners, mainly by the Soviet Union, Britain, and the United States.[43][48] He and his New Life Movement called for the crushing of Soviet, Western, American and other foreign influences in China. Chen Lifu, a CC Clique member in the KMT, said "Communism originated from Soviet imperialism, which has encroached on our country." It was also noted that "the white bear of the North Pole is known for its viciousness and cruelty."[45]
The Blue Shirts Society, a fascist paramilitary organization within KMT modeled after Mussolini's blackshirts, was anti-foreign and anticommunist, and stated that its agenda was to expel foreign (Japanese and Western) imperialists from China, crush Communism, and eliminate feudalism.[49] In addition to being anticommunist, some KMT members, like Chiang Kai-shek's right-hand man Dai Li were anti-American, and wanted to expel American influence.[50]
KMT leaders across China adopted nationalist rhetoric. The Chinese Muslim general Ma Bufang of Qinghai presented himself as a Chinese nationalist to the people of China, fighting against British imperialism, to deflect criticism by opponents that his government was feudal and oppressed minorities like Tibetans and Buddhist Mongols. He used his Chinese nationalist credentials to his advantage to keep himself in power.[51][52]
KMT pursued a sinicization policy, it was stated that "the time had come to set about the business of making all natives either turn Chinese or get out" by foreign observers of KMT policy. It was noted that "Chinese colonization" of "Mongolia and Manchuria" led "to a conviction that the day of the barbarian was finally over."[53][54][55]
New Guangxi Clique[edit]
KMT branch in Guangxi province, led by the New Guangxi Clique of Bai Chongxi and Li Zongren, implemented anti-imperialist, anti-religious, and anti-foreign policies. During the Northern Expedition, in 1926 in Guangxi, Muslim General Bai Chongxi led his troops in destroying most of the Buddhist temples and smashing idols, turning the temples into schools and KMT headquarters. Bai led an anti-foreign wave in Guangxi, attacking American, European, and other foreigners and missionaries, and generally making the province unsafe for non-natives. Westerners fled from the province, and some Chinese Christians were also attacked as imperialist agents.[56]
The leaders clashed with Chiang Kai-shek, which led to the Central Plains War where Chiang defeated the clique.
Socialism and anti-capitalist agitation[edit]
Main articles: Socialist ideology of the Kuomintang and Canton Merchant Volunteers Corps Uprising
KMT had a left wing and a right wing, the left being more radical in its pro Soviet policies, but both wings equally persecuted merchants, accusing them of being counterrevolutionaries and reactionaries. The right wing under Chiang Kaishek prevailed, and continued radical policies against private merchants and industrialists, even as they denounced communism.[citation needed]
One of the Three Principles of the People of KMT, Mínshēng, was defined as socialism by Dr. Sun Yatsen. He defined this principle of saying in his last days "it's socialism and it's communism.". The concept may be understood as social welfare as well. Sun understood it as an industrial economy and equality of land holdings for the Chinese peasant farmers. Here he was influenced by the American thinker Henry George (see Georgism) and German thinker Karl Marx; the land value tax in Taiwan is a legacy thereof. He divided livelihood into four areas: food, clothing, housing, and transportation; and planned out how an ideal (Chinese) government can take care of these for its people.[citation needed]
KMT was referred to having a socialist ideology. "Equalization of land rights" was a clause included by Dr. Sun in the original Tongmenhui. KMT's revolutionary ideology in the 1920s incorporated unique Chinese Socialism as part of its ideology.[57][58]
The Soviet Union trained KMT revolutionaries in the Moscow Sun Yat-sen University. In the West and in the Soviet Union, Chiang was known as the "Red General".[59] Movie theaters in the Soviet Union showed newsreels and clips of Chiang, at Moscow Sun Yat-sen University Portraits of Chiang were hung on the walls, and in the Soviet May Day Parades that year, Chiang's portrait was to be carried along with the portraits of Karl Marx, Lenin, Stalin, and other socialist leaders.[60]
KMT attempted to levy taxes upon merchants in Canton, and the merchants resisted by raising an army, the Merchant's volunteer corps. Dr. Sun initiated this anti merchant policy, and Chiang Kai-shek enforced it, Chiang led his army of Whampoa Military Academy graduates to defeat the merchant's army. Chiang was assisted by Soviet advisors, who supplied him with weapons, while the merchants were supplied with weapons from the Western countries.[61][62]
KMT were accused of leading a "Red Revolution" in Canton. The merchants were conservative and reactionary, and their Volunteer Corp leader Chen Lianbao was a prominent comprador trader.[61]
The merchants were supported by the foreign, western Imperialists such as the British, who led an international flotilla to support them against Dr. Sun.[62] Chiang seized the western supplied weapons from the merchants, and battled against them. A KMT General executed several merchants, and KMT formed a Soviet inspired Revolutionary Committee.[63] The British Communist party congratulated Dr. Sun for his war against foreign imperialists and capitalists.[64]
In 1948, KMT again attacked the merchants of Shanghai, Chiang Kai-shek sent his son Chiang Ching-kuo to restore economic order. Ching-kuo copied Soviet methods, which he learned during his stay there, to start a social revolution by attacking middle-class merchants. He also enforced low prices on all goods to raise support from the Proletariat.[65]
As riots broke out and savings were ruined, bankrupting shopowners, Ching-kuo began to attack the wealthy, seizing assets and placing them under arrest. The son of the gangster Du Yuesheng was arrested by him. Ching-kuo ordered KMT agents to raid the Yangtze Development Corporation's warehouses, which was privately owned by H.H. Kung and his family. H.H. Kung's wife was Soong Ai-ling, the sister of Soong Mei-ling who was Ching-kuo's stepmother. H.H. Kung's son David was arrested, the Kung's responded by blackmailing the Chiang's, threatening to release information about them, eventually he was freed after negotiations, and Ching-kuo resigned, ending the terror on the Shanghainese merchants.[66]
KMT also promotes Government-owned corporations. KMT founder Sun Yat-sen, was heavily influenced by the economic ideas of Henry George, who believed that the rents extracted from natural monopolies or the usage of land belonged to the public. Dr. Sun argued for Georgism and emphasized the importance of a mixed economy, which he termed "The Principle of Minsheng" in his Three Principles of the People.
"The railroads, public utilities, canals, and forests should be nationalized, and all income from the land and mines should be in the hands of the State. With this money in hand, the State can therefore finance the social welfare programs."[67]
KMT Muslim Governor of Ningxia, Ma Hongkui promoted state owned monopoly companies. His government had a company, Fu Ning Company, which had a monopoly over commercial and industry in Ningxia.[68]
Corporations such as CSBC Corporation, Taiwan, CPC Corporation, Taiwan and Aerospace Industrial Development Corporation are owned by the state in the Republic of China.
Marxists also existed in KMT. They viewed the Chinese revolution in different terms than the CPC, claiming that China already went past its feudal stage and in a stagnation period rather than in another mode of production. These Marxists in KMT opposed the CPC ideology.[69]
Confucianism and religion in ideology[edit]




KMT members pay tribute to the Sun Yat-sen Mausoleum in Beijing in 1928 after the success of the Northern Expedition. From right to left, are Generals Cheng Jin, Zhang Zuobao, Chen Diaoyuan, Chiang Kai-shek, Woo Tsin-hang, Yan Xishan, General Ma Fuxiang, Ma Sida, and General Bai Chongxi.


KMT used traditional Chinese religious ceremonies, the souls of Party martyrs who died fighting for KMT and the revolution and the party founder Dr. Sun Yat-sen were sent to heaven according to KMT. Chiang Kai-shek believed that these martyrs witnessed events on earth from heaven.[70][71][72][73]
The KMT backed the New Life Movement, which promoted Confucianism, and it was also against westernization. KMT leaders also opposed the May Fourth Movement. Chiang Kai-shek, as a nationalist, and Confucianist, was against the iconoclasm of the May Fourth Movement. He viewed some western ideas as foreign, as a Chinese nationalist, and that the introduction of western ideas and literature that the May Fourth Movement wanted was not welcome. He and Dr. Sun Yat-sen criticized these May Fourth intellectuals for corrupting morals of youth.[74]
KMT also incorporated Confucianism in its jurisprudence. It pardoned Shi Jianqiao for murdering Sun Chuanfang, because she did it in revenge since Sun executed her father Shi Congbin, which was an example of Filial piety to one's parents in Confucianism.[75] KMT encouraged filial revenge killings and extended pardons to those who performed them.[76]
Education[edit]
KMT purged China's education system of western ideas, introducing Confucianism into the curriculum. Education came under the total control of state, which meant, in effect, the KMT, via the Ministry of Education. Military and political classes on KMT's Three Principles of the People were added. Textbooks, exams, degrees and educational instructors were all controlled by the state, as were all universities.[77]
Soviet-style military[edit]
Chiang Ching-kuo, appointed as KMT director of Secret Police in 1950, was educated in the Soviet Union, and initiated Soviet style military organization in the Republic of China Military, reorganizing and Sovietizing the political officer corps, surveillance, and KMT activities were propagated throughout the military. Opposed to this was Sun Li-jen, who was educated at the American Virginia Military Institute.[78] Chiang Ching-kuo then arrested Sun Li-jen, charging him of conspiring with the American CIA of plotting to overthrow Chiang Kai-shek and KMT, Sun was placed under house arrest in 1955.[79][80]
Parties affiliated with the Kuomintang[edit]
Malaysian Chinese Association[edit]




Malaysian Chinese Association


The Malaysian Chinese Association (MCA) was initially pro-ROC and mainly consisted of KMT members who joined as an alternative and were also in opposition to the Malayan Communist Party, supporting the KMT in China by funding them with the intention of reclaiming the Chinese mainland from the communists.[81]
Tibet Improvement Party[edit]
Main article: Tibet Improvement Party
The Tibet Improvement Party was founded by Pandatsang Rapga, a pro-ROC and pro-KMT Khampa revolutionary, who worked against the 14th Dalai Lama's Tibetan Government in Lhasa. Rapga borrowed Sun Yat-sen's Three Principles of the People doctrine and translated his political theories into the Tibetan language, hailing it as the best hope for Asian peoples against imperialism. Rapga stated that "the Sanmin Zhuyi was intended for all peoples under the domination of foreigners, for all those who had been deprived of the rights of man. But it was conceived especially for the Asians. It is for this reason that I translated it. At that time, a lot of new ideas were spreading in Tibet", during an interview in 1975 by Dr. Heather Stoddard.[82] He wanted to destroy the feudal government in Lhasa, in addition to modernizing and secularizing Tibetan society. The ultimate goal of the party was the overthrow of the Dalai Lama's regime, and the creation of a Tibetan Republic which would be an autonomous Republic within the ROC.[83] Chiang Kai-shek and the KMT funded the party and their efforts to build an army to battle the Dalai Lama's government.[84] KMT was extensively involved in the Kham region, recruiting the Khampa people to both oppose the Dalai Lama's Tibetan government, fight the Communist Red Army, and crush the influence of local Chinese warlords who did not obey the central government.
Vietnamese Nationalist Party[edit]
Main article: Viet Nam Quoc Dan Dang




Vietnamese Kuomintang


KMT assisted the Viet Nam Quoc Dan Dang party, which translates literally into Chinese as Yuenan Kuomintang (越南國民黨), meaning "Vietnamese Nationalist Party".[85][86] When it was established, it was based on the Chinese KMT and was pro Chinese.[87][88] The Chinese KMT helped the party, known as the VNQDD, set up headquarters in Canton and Yunnan, to aid their anti imperialist struggle against the French occupiers of Indo China and against the Vietnamese Communist Party. It was the first revolutionary nationalist party to be established in Vietnam, before the communist party. The KMT assisted VNQDD with funds and military training.
The VNQDD was founded with KMT aid in 1925, they were against Ho Chi Minh's Viet Nam Revolutionary Youth League.[89] When the VNQDD fled to China after the failed uprising against the French, they settled in Yunnan and Canton, in two different branches.[90][91] The VNQDD existed as a party in exile in China for 15 years, receiving help, militarily and financially, and organizationally from the Chinese KMT.[92] The two VNQDD parties merged into a single organization, the Canton branch removed the word "revolutionary" from the party name. Lu Han, a KMT official in Nanjing, who was originally from Yunnan, was contacted by the VNQDD, and the KMT Central Executive Committee and Military made direct contact with VNQDD for the first time, the party was reestablished in Nanjing with KMT help.[89]
The Chinese KMT used the VNQDD for its own interests in south China and Indo China. General Zhang Fakui (Chang Fa-kuei), who based himself in Guangxi, established the Viet Nam Cach Menh Dong Minh Hoi meaning "Viet Nam Revolutionary League" in 1942, which was assisted by the VNQDD to serve the KMT's aims. The Chinese Yunnan provincial army, under the KMT, occupied northern Vietnam after the Japanese surrender in 1945, the VNQDD tagging alone, opposing Ho Chi Minh's communist party.[93] The Viet Nam Revolutionary League was a union of various Vietnamese nationalist groups, run by the pro Chinese VNQDD. Its stated goal was for unity with China under the Three Principles of the People, created by KMT founder Dr. Sun and opposition to Japanese and French Imperialists.[94][95] The Revolutionary League was controlled by Nguyen Hai Than, who was born in China and could not speak Vietnamese. General Zhang shrewdly blocked the Communists of Vietnam, and Ho Chi Minh from entering the league, as his main goal was Chinese influence in Indo China.[96] The KMT utilized these Vietnamese nationalists during World War II against Japanese forces.[97]
A KMT left winger, General Chang Fa-kuei worked with Nguyen Hai Than, a VNQDD member, against French Imperialists and Communists in Indo China.[98] General Chang Fa-kuei planned to lead a Chinese army invasion of Tonkin in Indochina to free Vietnam from French control, and to get Chiang Kai-shek's support.[99] The VNQDD opposed the government of Ngo Dinh Diem during the Vietnam War.[100]
Ryukyu Guomindang[edit]
On 30 November 1958 the establishment of the Ryukyu Guomindang took place. Tsugumasa Kiyuna headed its predecessor party, the Ryukyuan separatist Ryukyu Revolutionary Party which was backed by the Kuomintang in Taiwan.[101]
Organizations sponsored by the Kuomintang[edit]




Taipei Grand Mosque


Ma Fuxiang founded Islamic organizations sponsored by KMT, including the China Islamic Association (中國回教公會).[102]
KMT Muslim General Bai Chongxi was Chairman of the Chinese Islamic National Salvation Federation.[103] The Muslim Chengda school and Yuehua publication were supported by the Nationalist Government, and they supported KMT.[104]
The Chinese Muslim Association was also sponsored by KMT, and it evacuated from the mainland to Taiwan with the party. The Chinese Muslim Association owns the Taipei Grand Mosque which was built with funds from KMT.[105]
The Yihewani (Ikhwan al Muslimun a.k.a. Muslim brotherhood) was the predominant Muslim sect backed by KMT. Other Muslim sects, like the Xidaotang were also supported by the KMT. The Chinese Muslim brotherhood became a Chinese nationalist organization and supported KMT rule. Brotherhood Imams like Hu Songshan ordered Muslims to pray for the Nationalist Government, salute KMT flags during prayer, and listen to nationalist sermons.
Policy on ethnic minorities[edit]
KMT considers all minorities to be members of the Chinese Nation. Former KMT leader Chiang Kai-shek considered all the minority peoples of China, including the Hui, as descendants of Yellow Emperor, the Yellow Emperor and semi mythical founder of the Chinese nation. Chiang considered all the minorities to belong to the Chinese Nation Zhonghua Minzu and he introduced this into KMT ideology, which was propagated into the educational system of the Republic of China, and the Constitution of the ROC considered Chiang's ideology to be true.[106][107][108] In Taiwan, the President performs a ritual honoring the Yellow Emperor, while facing west, in the direction of the Chinese mainland.[109]
KMT kept the Mongolian and Tibetan Affairs Commission for dealing with Mongolian And Tibetan affairs. A Muslim, Ma Fuxiang, was appointed as its Chairman.[110]
KMT was known for sponsoring Muslim students to study abroad at Muslim universities like Al Azhar and it established schools especially for Muslims, Muslim KMT warlords like Ma Fuxiang promoted education for Muslims.[111] KMT Muslim Warlord Ma Bufang built a girls' school for Muslim girls in Linxia City which taught modern secular education.[112]
Tibetans and Mongols refused to allow other ethnic groups like Kazakhs to participate in the Kokonur ceremony in Qinghai, but the KMT Muslim General Ma Bufang allowed them to participate.[113]
Chinese Muslims were among the most hardline KMT members. Ma Chengxiang was a Muslim and a KMT member, and refused to surrender to the Communists.[114][115]
KMT incited anti Yan Xishan and Feng Yuxiang sentiments among Chinese Muslims and Mongols, encouraging for them to topple their rule during the Central Plains War.[116]
Masud Sabri, a Uyghur was appointed as Governor of Xinjiang by KMT, as was the Tatar Burhan Shahidi and the Uyghur Yulbars Khan.[117]
The Muslim General Ma Bufang also put KMT symbols on his mansion, the Ma Bufang Mansion along with a portrait of party founder Dr. Sun Yatsen arranged with KMT flag and the Republic of China flag.
General Ma Bufang and other high ranking Muslim Generals attended the Kokonuur Lake Ceremony where the God of the Lake was worshipped, and during the ritual, the Chinese national anthem was sung, all participants bowed to a Portrait of KMT founder Dr. Sun Yat-sen, and the God of the Lake was also bowed to, and offerings were given to him by the participants, which included the Muslims.[118] This cult of personality around KMT leader and KMT was standard in all meetings. Sun Yat-sen's portrait was bowed to three times by KMT party members.[119] Dr. Sun's portrait was arranged with two flags crossed under, the KMT flag and the flag of the Republic of China.
KMT also hosted conferences of important Muslims like Bai Chongxi, Ma Fuxiang, and Ma Liang. Ma Bufang stressed "racial harmony" as a goal when he was Governor of Qinghai.[120]
In 1939 Isa Yusuf Alptekin and Ma Fuliang were sent on a mission by KMT to the Middle Eastern countries such as Egypt, Turkey and Syria to gain support for the Chinese War against Japan, they also visited Afghanistan in 1940 and contacted Muhammad Amin Bughra, they asked him to come to Chongqing, the capital of the Nationalist Government. Bughra was arrested by the British in 1942 for spying, and KMT arranged for Bughra's release. He and Isa Yusuf worked as editors of KMT Muslim publications.[121] Ma Tianying (馬天英) (1900–1982) led the 1939 mission which had 5 other people including Isa and Fuliang.[122]
Stance on separatism[edit]
KMT is anti-separatist; during its rule on mainland China, it crushed Uyghur and Tibetan separatist uprisings. KMT claims sovereignty over Mongolia and Tuva as well as the territories of the modern People's Republic and Republic of China.[citation needed]
KMT Muslim General Ma Bufang waged war on the invading Tibetans during the Sino-Tibetan War with his Muslim army, and he repeatedly crushed Tibetan revolts during bloody battles in Qinghai provinces. Ma Bufang was fully supported by President Chiang Kai-shek, who ordered him to prepare his Muslim army to invade Tibet several times and threatened aerial bombardment on the Tibetans. With support from KMT, Ma Bufang repeatedly attacked the Tibetan area of Golog seven times during the KMT Pacification of Qinghai, eliminating thousands of Tibetans.[123]
General Ma Fuxiang, the chairman of the Mongolian and Tibetan Affairs Commission stated that Mongolia and Tibet were an integral part of the Republic of China.

Our party (KMT) takes the development of the weak and small and resistance to the strong and violent as our sole and most urgent task. This is even more true for those groups which are not of our kind [Ch. fei wo zulei zhe]. Now the people of Mongolia and Tibet are closely related to us, and we have great affection for one another: our common existence and common honor already have a history of over a thousand years.... Mongolia and Tibet's life and death are China's life and death. China absolutely cannot cause Mongolia and Tibet to break away from China's territory, and Mongolia and Tibet cannot reject China to become independent. At this time, there is not a single nation on earth except China that will sincerely develop Mongolia and Tibet.[124]

Under orders from Nationalist Government of Chiang Kai-shek, the Hui General Ma Bufang, Governor of Qinghai (1937–1949), repaired Yushu airport to prevent Tibetan separatists from seeking independence.[citation needed] Ma Bufang also crushed Mongol separatist movements, abducting the Genghis Khan Shrine and attacking Tibetan Buddhist Temples like Labrang, and keeping a tight control over them through the Kokonur God ceremony.[118][125]
During the Kumul Rebellion, KMT 36th Division (National Revolutionary Army) crushed a separatist Uyghur First East Turkestan Republic, delivering it a fatal blow at the Battle of Kashgar (1934). The Muslim General Ma Hushan pledged allegiance to KMT and crushed another Uyghur revolt at Charkhlik Revolt.[citation needed]
KMT also fought against a Soviet and White Russian invasion during the Soviet invasion of Xinjiang.[citation needed]
During the Ili Rebellion, KMT fought against Uyghur separatists and the Soviet Union, and against Mongolia.[citation needed]
Election results[edit]
Presidential elections[edit]


Election
Candidate
Running mate
Total votes
Share of votes
Outcome


1996
Lee Teng-hui
Lien Chan
5,813,699
54.0%
Elected Y


2000
Lien Chan
Vincent Siew
2,925,513
23.1%
Defeated N


2004
Lien Chan
James Soong (PFP)
6,423,906
49.8%
Defeated N


2008
Ma Ying-jeou
Vincent Siew
7,658,724
58.4%
Elected Y


2012
Ma Ying-jeou
Wu Den-yih
6,891,139
51.6%
Elected Y


2016
Eric Chu
Wang Ju-hsuan ( Ind.)
3,813,365
31.0%
Defeated N


Legislative elections[edit]


Election
Total seats won
Total votes
Share of votes
Government/Opposition
Seat changes
Election leader


1992

95 / 161





5,030,725
53.0%
Majority government
 7 seats
Lee Teng-hui


1995

85 / 164





4,349,089
46.1%
Majority government
 12 seats
Lee Teng-hui


1998

123 / 225





4,659,679
46.4%
Majority government
 7 seats (adjusted)
Lee Teng-hui


2001

68 / 225





2,949,371
31.3%
Opposition
 46 seats
Lien Chan


2004

79 / 225





3,190,081
34.9%
Opposition
 11 seats
Lien Chan


2008

81 / 113





5,291,512
53.5%
Majority government
 41 seats (adjusted)
Wu Po-hsiung


2012

64 / 113





5,863,379
44.5%
Majority government
 17 seats
Ma Ying-jeou


2016

35 / 113





3,280,949
26.9%
Opposition
 29 seats
Eric Chu


Local elections[edit]


Election
Mayors &
Magistrates
Councils
Third-level
Municipal heads
Third-level
Municipal councils
Fourth-level
Village heads
Election Leader


1994
province-level only

2 / 3






91 / 175





N/A
N/A
N/A
Lee Teng-hui


1997-1998

8 / 23






522 / 886






236 / 319





N/A
N/A
Lee Teng-hui


1998
municipalities only

1 / 2






48 / 96





N/A
N/A
N/A
Lee Teng-hui


2001-2002

9 / 23






382 / 897






195 / 319





N/A
N/A
Lien Chan


2002
municipalities only

1 / 2






32 / 96





N/A
N/A
N/A
Lien Chan


2005

14 / 23






408 / 901






173 / 319





N/A
N/A
Ma Ying-jeou


2006
municipalities only

1 / 2






41 / 96





N/A
N/A
N/A
Ma Ying-jeou


2009

12 / 17






289 / 587






121 / 211





N/A
N/A
Ma Ying-jeou


2010
municipalities only

3 / 5






130 / 314





N/A
N/A

1,195 / 3,757





Ma Ying-jeou


2014
unified

6 / 22






291 / 906






54 / 204






194 / 2,137






390 / 7,836





Ma Ying-jeou


National Assembly elections[edit]


Election
Total seats won
Total votes
Share of votes
Outcome of election
Election leader


1991

254 / 325





6,053,366
69.1%
186 seats
Lee Teng-hui


1996

183 / 334





5,180,829
49.7%
71 seats
Lee Teng-hui


2005

117 / 300





1,508,384
38.92%
66 seats
Lien Chan


See also[edit]


Conservatism portal
Taiwan portal
China portal
Politics portal



Whampoa Military Academy
National Revolutionary Army
Nationalist government
History of the Republic of China
Politics of the Republic of China
Military of the Republic of China
Elections in Taiwan
Administrative divisions of the Republic of China
Political status of Taiwan
History of the Kuomintang cultural policy
Index of Taiwan-related articles
Outline of Taiwan
Revolutionary Committee of the Chinese Kuomintang
New Kuomintang Alliance
Campaign at the China–Burma border
Kuomintang Islamic insurgency in China (1950–58)
Joseph Stilwell
February 28 Incident
White Terror (Taiwan)

References[edit]
Citations[edit]


^ "Kuomintang Official Website". Kmt.org.tw. Retrieved 2011-09-13. 
^ Hsu, Stacy (16 January 2017). "Hung urges for scrutiny of KMT leader elections". Taipei Times. Retrieved 16 January 2017. 
^ "政策綱領". Kmt.org.tw. Retrieved 2016-06-19. 
^ The Editors of Encyclopædia Britannica. "Three Principles of the People". Encyclopædia Britannica. 
^ Mary C. Wright (1955). From Revolution to Restoration: The Transformation of Kuomintang Ideology. Association for Asian Studies. pp. 515–532. 
^ ISBN 0252090810
^ "Missionaries of Revolution". Retrieved July 4, 2015. 
^ "Party Charter". Kuomintang. Retrieved 2013-03-06. 
^ "Introduction of the KMT". Kuomintang. Archived from the original on 12 January 2011. Retrieved 15 February 2011. 
^ "kuomintang - Definitions". Dictionary.reference.com. Retrieved 2011-09-13. 
^ Or translated as Chinese Nationalists Party, also sometimes as Chinese National People's Party, see e.g., Derek Heater (1987-04-23). Our World This Century: New Edition for GCSE. Oxford University Press. p. 116. ISBN 978-0-19-913324-6.  and "Generalissimo and Madame Chiang Kai-Shek". Time. 1938-01-03. Retrieved 2011-05-22. 
^ Ralph Cossa (2008-01-21). "Looking behind Ma's 'three noes'". Taipei Times. Retrieved 2010-02-15. 
^ See (Chinese) "Major Events in KMT" History Official Site of the KMT last accessed Aug. 30, 2009
^ Strand (2002), pp. 59-60.
^ Hugh Chisholm (1922). Hugh Chisholm, ed. The Encyclopædia Britannica. The Encyclopædia Britannica, Company ltd. p. 658. Retrieved 2011-06-13. 
^ Hugh Chisholm (1922). The Encyclopædia Britannica: Abbe to English history ("The first of the new volumes"). The Encyclopædia Britannica, Company ltd. p. 658. Retrieved 2011-06-13. 
^ a b c d "Nationalist China". Washington State University. 6 June 1996. Archived from the original on 6 September 2006. 
^ "Foreign News: NANKING". Time. Apr 4, 1927. Retrieved 2011-04-11. 
^ "CHINA: Japan & France". Time. Apr 11, 1927. Retrieved 2011-04-11. 
^ Beede, R. Benjamin (1994). The War of 1898, and U.S. interventions, 1898–1934: an encyclopedia. Taylor & Francis Publishing. p. 355. ISBN 0-8240-5624-8. 
^ "CHINA: Nationalist Notes". Time. June 25, 1928. Retrieved 2011-04-11. 
^ Andrew D. W. Forbes (1986). Warlords and Muslims in Chinese Central Asia: a political history of Republican Sinkiang 1911-1949. Cambridge, England: CUP Archive. p. 108. ISBN 978-0-521-25514-1. Retrieved 2010-06-28. 
^ C.P. Fitzgerald, The Birth of Communist China, Penguin Books, 1964, pp.106. (ISBN 978-0-14-020694-4 / ISBN 978-0-14-020694-4)
^ Wesley Marvin Bagby (1992). The Eagle-Dragon Alliance: America's Relations With China in World War II. p. 65. ISBN 978-0-87413-418-6. 
^ "Ceremonies held to commemorate 228 Incident victims (2014/02/28)". englishnews.ftv.com.tw.
^ "- 中國國民黨全球資訊網 KMT Official Website". 
^ President Ma elected KMT chairman – CNA ENGLISH NEWS
^ Taiwan President Ma Ying-jeou registers for KMT leadership race – eTaiwan News
^ "Polls open for 9-in-1 local government elections". Retrieved July 4, 2015. 
^ "Taiwan's Kuomintang On the brink". Economist. 2001-12-06. 
^ Mo, Yan-chih. "KMT headquarters sold for NT$2.3bn." Taipei Times. Thursday March 23, 2006. Page 1. Retrieved on September 29, 2009.
^ 2014-07-24, KMT is again ‘world’s richest party’, Taipei Times
^ Tai, Ya-chen; Hsieh, Chia-chen; Hsu, Elizabeth (31 August 2016). "Commission to investigate KMT assets launched". Central News Agency. Retrieved 31 August 2016. 
^ Damm, Jens (2012). "Multiculturalism in Taiwan and the Influence of Europe". In Damm, Jens; Lim, Paul. European perspectives on Taiwan. Wiesbaden: Springer VS. p. 95. ISBN 9783531943039. 
^ Simon 2011, p. 28.
^ 記者舞賽台北報導 (2005-10-26). "國民黨紀念光復稱莫那魯道抗日英雄". 台灣立報 lih pao. 
^ Agence France-Presse in Taipei (2015-12-18). "Taiwan pins same-sex marriage hopes on political change". South China Morning Post. Retrieved 2015-12-17. 
^ "Kuomintang News Network". Kmt.org.tw. 2009-02-26. Retrieved 2011-09-13. 
^ Jonathan Fenby (2005). Chiang Kai Shek: China's Generalissimo and the Nation He Lost. Carroll & Graf Publishers. p. 504. ISBN 978-0-7867-1484-1. Retrieved 2010-06-28. 
^ Edgar Snow (2008). Red Star Over China - The Rise of the Red Army. READ BOOKS. p. 89. ISBN 978-1-4437-3673-2. Retrieved 2010-06-28. 
^ Jieru Chen, Lloyd E. Eastman; Lloyd E. Eastman (1993). Chiang Kai-shek's Secret Past: The Memoir of His Second Wife, Ch'en Chieh-ju. Westview Press. p. 19. ISBN 978-0-8133-1825-7. Retrieved 2010-06-28. 
^ Kai-shek Chiang; Philip Jacob Jaffe (1947). Philip Jacob Jaffe, ed. China's Destiny & Chinese Economic Theory. Roy Publishers. p. 225. Retrieved 2010-06-28. 
^ a b Simei Qing (2007). From Allies to Enemies: Visions of Modernity, Identity, and U.S.–China Diplomacy, 1945–1960. Harvard University Press. p. 65. ISBN 978-0-674-02344-4. Retrieved 2010-06-28. 
^ Kai Shew Chiang Kai Shew (2007). China's Destiny and Chinese Economic Theory. READ BOOKS. p. 225. ISBN 978-1-4067-5838-2. Retrieved 2010-06-28. 
^ a b Hongshan Li, Zhaohui Hong; Zhaohui Hong (1998). Image, Perception, and the Making of U.S.–China Relations. University Press of America. p. 268. ISBN 978-0-7618-1158-9. Retrieved 2010-06-28. 
^ Jieru Chen, Lloyd E. Eastman; Lloyd E. Eastman (1993). Chiang Kai-shek's Secret Past: The Memoir of His Second Wife, Ch'en Chieh-ju. Westview Press. p. 226. ISBN 978-0-8133-1825-7. Retrieved 2010-06-28. 
^ Uradyn Erden Bulag (2002). Dilemmas The Mongols at China's Edge: History and the Politics of National Unity. Rowman & Littlefield. p. 50. ISBN 978-0-7425-1144-6. Retrieved 2010-06-28. 
^ Jonathan Fenby (2005). Chiang Kai Shek: China's Generalissimo and the Nation He Lost. Carroll & Graf Publishers. p. 413. ISBN 978-0-7867-1484-1. Retrieved 2010-06-28. 
^ Frederic E. Wakeman (2003). Spymaster: Dai Li and the Chinese Secret Service. University of California Press. p. 75. ISBN 978-0-520-23407-9. Retrieved 2010-06-28. 
^ Jonathan Fenby (2005). Chiang Kai Shek: China's Generalissimo and the Nation He Lost. Carroll & Graf Publishers. p. 414. ISBN 978-0-7867-1484-1. Retrieved 2010-06-28. 
^ Uradyn Erden Bulag (2002). Dilemmas The Mongols at China's edge: history and the politics of national unity. Rowman & Littlefield. p. 48. ISBN 978-0-7425-1144-6. Retrieved 2010-06-28. 
^ Uradyn Erden Bulag (2002). Dilemmas The Mongols at China's edge: history and the politics of national unity. Rowman & Littlefield. p. 49. ISBN 978-0-7425-1144-6. Retrieved 2010-06-28. 
^ The New Orient: A Series of Monographs on Oriental Culture. New Orient Society of America. 1933. p. 116. Retrieved 2011-05-29. 
^ Paul Carus (1934). Paul Carus, ed. The Open court, Volume 47. The Open Court Pub. Co. p. 116. Retrieved 2011-05-29. 
^ Owen Lattimore (1962). Frontier History. Oxford University Press. p. 197. Retrieved 2011-05-29. 
^ Diana Lary (1974). Region and Nation: The Kwangsi Clique in Chinese Politics, 1925–1937. Cambridge University Press. pp. 98–99. ISBN 978-0-521-20204-6. Retrieved 2010-06-28. 
^ Arif Dirlik (2005). The Marxism in the Chinese Revolution. Rowman & Littlefield. p. 20. ISBN 978-0-7425-3069-0. Retrieved 2010-06-28. 
^ Von KleinSmid Institute of International Affairs, University of Southern California. School of Politics and International Relations (1988). Studies in comparative communism, Volume 21. Butterworth-Heinemann. p. 134. Retrieved 2010-06-28. 
^ Hannah Pakula (2009). The Last Empress: Madame Chiang Kai-Shek and the Birth of Modern China. Simon and Schuster. p. 346. ISBN 978-1-4391-4893-8. Retrieved 2010-06-28. 
^ Jay Taylor (2000). The Generalissimo's son: Chiang Ching-kuo and the Revolutions in China and Taiwan. Harvard University Press. p. 42. ISBN 978-0-674-00287-6. Retrieved 2010-06-28. 
^ a b Jonathan Fenby (2005). Chiang Kai Shek: China's Generalissimo and the Nation He Lost. Carroll & Graf Publishers. p. 71. ISBN 978-0-7867-1484-1. Retrieved 2010-06-28. 
^ a b Hannah Pakula (2009). The Last Empress: Madame Chiang Kai-Shek and the Birth of Modern China. Simon and Schuster. p. 128. ISBN 978-1-4391-4893-8. Retrieved 2010-06-28. 
^ Jonathan Fenby (2005). Chiang Kai Shek: China's Generalissimo and the Nation He Lost. Carroll & Graf Publishers. p. 72. ISBN 978-0-7867-1484-1. Retrieved 2010-06-28. 
^ Jonathan Fenby (2005). Chiang Kai Shek: China's Generalissimo and the Nation He Lost. Carroll & Graf Publishers. p. 73. ISBN 978-0-7867-1484-1. Retrieved 2010-06-28. 
^ Jonathan Fenby (2005). Chiang Kai Shek: China's Generalissimo and the Nation He Lost. Carroll & Graf Publishers. p. 485. ISBN 978-0-7867-1484-1. Retrieved 2010-06-28. 
^ Jonathan Fenby (2005). Chiang Kai Shek: China's Generalissimo and the Nation He Lost. Carroll & Graf Publishers. p. 486. ISBN 978-0-7867-1484-1. Retrieved 2010-06-28. 
^ Simei Qing "From Allies to Enemies", 19
^ A. Doak Barnett (1968). China on the Eve of Communist Takeover. Praeger. p. 190. Retrieved 2010-06-28. 
^ T. J. Byres, Harbans Mukhia; Harbans Mukhia (1985). Feudalism and non-European Societies. Psychology Press. p. 207. ISBN 978-0-7146-3245-2. Retrieved 2010-11-28. 
^ Jieru Chen, Lloyd E. Eastman; Lloyd E. Eastman (1993). Chiang Kai-shek's Secret Past: The Memoir of His Second Wife, Chʻen Chieh-ju. Westview Press. p. 236. ISBN 978-0-8133-1825-7. Retrieved 2010-06-28. 
^ Hans J. Van de Ven (2003). War and Nationalism in China, 1925–1945. Psychology Press. p. 100. ISBN 978-0-415-14571-8. Retrieved 2010-06-28. 
^ Linda Chao, Ramon H. Myers; Ramon H. Myers (1998). The First Chinese Democracy: Political Life in the Republic of China on Taiwan. Johns Hopkins University Press. p. 45. ISBN 978-0-8018-5650-1. Retrieved 2010-06-28. 
^ Kai-shek Chiang (1946). President Chiang Kai-shek's Selected Speeches and Messages, 1937–1945. China Cultural Service. p. 137. Retrieved 2010-06-28. 
^ Joseph T. Chen (1971). The May Fourth Movement in Shanghai: The Making of a Social Movement in Modern China. Brill Archive. p. 13. Retrieved 2010-06-28. 
^ Eugenia Lean (2007). Public Passions: The Trial of Shi Jianqiao and the Rise of Popular Sympathy in Republican China. University of California Press. p. 148. ISBN 978-0-520-24718-5. Retrieved 2010-06-28. 
^ Eugenia Lean (2007). Public Passions: The Trial of Shi Jianqiao and the Rise of Popular Sympathy in Republican China. University of California Press. p. 150. ISBN 978-0-520-24718-5. Retrieved 2010-06-28. 
^ Werner Draguhn, David S. G. Goodman; David S.G. Goodman (2002). China's Communist Revolutions: Fifty Years of the People's Republic of China. Psychology Press. p. 39. ISBN 978-0-7007-1630-2. Retrieved 2011-04-09. 
^ Jay Taylor (2000). The Generalissimo's Son: Chiang Ching-kuo and the Revolutions in China and Taiwan. Harvard University Press. p. 195. ISBN 978-0-674-00287-6. Retrieved 2010-06-28. 
^ Peter R. Moody (1977). Opposition and Dissent in Contemporary China. Hoover Press. p. 302. ISBN 978-0-8179-6771-0. Retrieved 2010-11-30. 
^ Nançy Bernkopf Tucker (1983). Patterns in the dust: Chinese–American Relations and the Recognition Controversy, 1949–1950. New York: Columbia University Press. p. 181. ISBN 0231053622. Retrieved 2010-06-28. 
^ Ching Fatt Yong; R. B. McKenna (1990). The Kuomintang Movement in British Malaya, 1912–1949. NUS Press. p. 1. ISBN 978-9971-69-137-0. 
^ Gray Tuttle (2007). Tibetan Buddhists in the Making of Modern China (illustrated ed.). Columbia University Press. p. 152. ISBN 978-0-231-13447-7. Retrieved 2011-12-27. 
^ Melvyn C. Goldstein (1991). A History of Modern Tibet, 1913–1951: The Demise of the Lamaist state. Volume 1 of A History of Modern Tibet (reprint, illustrated ed.). University of California Press. p. 450. ISBN 978-0-520-07590-0. Retrieved 2011-12-27. 
^ Hsiao-ting Lin (2010). Modern China's Ethnic Frontiers: A Journey to the West. Volume 67 of Routledge studies in the modern history of Asia (illustrated ed.). Taylor & Francis. p. 95. ISBN 978-0-415-58264-3. Retrieved 2011-12-27. 
^ Frances FitzGerald (1972). Fire in the lake: the Vietnamese and the Americans in Vietnam. Volume 927. Little, Brown. p. 238. Retrieved 2011-12-27. 
^ Frances Fitzgerald (2002). Fire in the lake: the Vietnamese and the Americans in Vietnam (illustrated ed.). Hachette Digital, Inc. ISBN 978-0-316-28423-3. Retrieved 2011-12-27. 
^ Archimedes L. A. Patti (1980). Why Viet Nam?: Prelude to America's Albatross. University of California Press. p. 530. ISBN 978-0-520-04156-1. Retrieved 2010-11-30. 
^ Keat Gin Ooi (2004). Keat Gin Ooi, ed. Southeast Asia: a historical encyclopedia, from Angkor Wat to East Timor, Volume 2. ABC-CLIO. p. 37. ISBN 978-1-57607-770-2. Retrieved 2010-11-30. 
^ a b Archimedes L. A. Patti (1980). Why Viet Nam?: Prelude to America's Albatross. University of California Press. p. 532. ISBN 978-0-520-04156-1. Retrieved 2010-11-30. 
^ Ellen J. Hammer (1955). Struggle for Indochina, 1940–1955. Stanford University Press. p. 84. ISBN 978-0-8047-0458-8. Retrieved 2010-11-30. 
^ Berch Berberoglu (2007). The State and Revolution in the Twentieth Century: Major Social Transformations of Our Time. Rowman & Littlefield. p. 53. ISBN 978-0-7425-3884-9. Retrieved 2010-11-30. 
^ Britannica Educational Publishing (2009). The Korean War and the Vietnam War: People, Politics, and Power. The Rosen Publishing Group. p. 98. ISBN 978-1-61530-047-1. Retrieved 2010-11-30. 
^ Archimedes L. A. Patti (1980). Why Viet Nam?: Prelude to America's Albatross. University of California Press. p. 533. ISBN 978-0-520-04156-1. Retrieved 2010-11-30. 
^ James P. Harrison (1989). The Endless War: Vietnam's Struggle for Independence. Columbia University Press. p. 81. ISBN 978-0-231-06909-0. Retrieved 2010-11-30. 
^ United States. Joint Chiefs of Staff. Historical Division (1982). The History of the Joint Chiefs of Staff: History of the Indochina incident, 1940–1954. Michael Glazier. p. 56. Retrieved 2010-11-30. 
^ Oscar Chapuis (2000). The Last Emperors of Vietnam: From Tu Duc to Bao Dai. Greenwood Publishing Group. p. 106. ISBN 978-0-313-31170-3. Retrieved 2010-11-30. 
^ William J. Duiker (1976). The Rise of Nationalism in Vietnam, 1900–1941. Cornell University Press. p. 272. ISBN 978-0-8014-0951-6. Retrieved 2010-11-30. 
^ N. Khac Huyen (1971). Vision Accomplished?: The Enigma of Ho Chi Minh. Macmillan. p. 61. Retrieved 2010-11-30. 
^ James Fitzsimmons (1975). Lugano Review, Volume 2, Issues 4–6. J. Fitzsimmons. p. 6. Retrieved 2010-11-30. 
^ Frances FitzGerald (1972). Fire in the Lake: the Vietnamese and the Americans in Vietnam. Volume 927. Little, Brown. p. 239. Retrieved 2011-12-27. 
^ 石井, 明 (2010-10-29). "中国の琉球・沖縄政策 : 琉球・沖縄の帰属問題を中心に" (PDF). 境界研究 = JAPAN BORDER REVIEW. 1: 196. doi:10.14943/jbr.1.71. 
^ Jonathan Neaman Lipman (2004). Familiar Strangers: A History of Muslims in Northwest China. Seattle: University of Washington Press. p. 266. ISBN 978-0-295-97644-0. Retrieved 2010-06-28. 
^ Michael Dillon (1999). China's Muslim Hui Community: Migration, Settlement and Sects. Richmond: Curzon Press. p. 208. ISBN 978-0-7007-1026-3. Retrieved 2010-06-28. 
^ Stéphane A. Dudoignon, Hisao Komatsu, Yasushi Kosugi; Hisao Komatsu; Yasushi Kosugi (2006). Intellectuals in the Modern Islamic World: Transmission, Transformation, Communication. Taylor & Francis. p. 375. ISBN 978-0-415-36835-3. Retrieved 2010-06-28. CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link)
^ Peter G. Gowing (July–August 1970). "Islam in Taiwan". SAUDI ARAMCO World. 
^ Murray A. Rubinstein (1994). The Other Taiwan: 1945 to the present. M.E. Sharpe. p. 416. ISBN 978-1-56324-193-2. Retrieved 2010-06-28. 
^ James A. Millward (2007). Eurasian crossroads: a history of Xinjiang. Columbia University Press. p. 208. ISBN 978-0-231-13924-3. Retrieved 2010-06-28. 
^ Paul Hibbert Clyde, Burton F. Beers; Burton F. Beers (1971). The Far East: a history of the Western impact and the Eastern response (1830-1970). Prentice-Hall. p. 409. Retrieved 2010-06-28. 
^ Cheong Ching (2001). Will Taiwan break away: the rise of Taiwanese nationalism. World Scientific. p. 188. ISBN 978-981-02-4486-6. Retrieved 2010-06-28. 
^ Jonathan Neaman Lipman (2004). Familiar strangers: a history of Muslims in Northwest China. Seattle: University of Washington Press. p. 266. ISBN 978-0-295-97644-0. Retrieved 2010-06-28. 
^ Masumi, Matsumoto. "The Completion of the Idea of Dual Loyalty towards China and Islam". Archived from the original on 24 July 2011. Retrieved 2010-06-28. 
^ Maria Jaschok, Jingjun Shui; Jingjun Shui (2000). The History of Women's Mosques in Chinese Islam: A Mosque of Their Own. Routledge. p. 361. ISBN 978-0-7007-1302-8. Retrieved 2010-06-29. 
^ Uradyn Erden Bulag (2002). Dilemmas The Mongols at China's edge: history and the politics of national unity. Rowman & Littlefield. p. 273. ISBN 978-0-7425-1144-6. Retrieved 2010-06-28. 
^ Jeremy Brown, Paul Pickowicz; Paul Pickowicz (2007). Dilemmas of Victory: The Early years of the People's Republic of China. Harvard University Press. p. 462. ISBN 978-0-674-02616-2. Retrieved 2010-06-28. 
^ David D. Wang (1999). Under the Soviet Shadow: The Yining Incident: Ethnic Conflicts and International Rivalry in Xinjiang, 1944–1949. Hong Kong: The Chinese University Press. p. 577. ISBN 978-962-201-831-0. Retrieved 2010-06-28. 
^ Hsiao-ting Lin (2010). Modern China's Ethnic Frontiers: A Journey to the West. Taylor & Francis. p. 22. ISBN 978-0-415-58264-3. Retrieved 2010-06-28. 
^ Andrew D. W. Forbes (1986). Warlords and Muslims in Chinese Central Asia: A Political History of Republican Sinkiang, 1911–1949. Cambridge, England: CUP Archive. p. 376. ISBN 978-0-521-25514-1. Retrieved 2010-06-28. 
^ a b Uradyn Erden Bulag (2002). Dilemmas The Mongols at China's Edge: History and the Politics of National Unity. Rowman & Littlefield. p. 51. ISBN 978-0-7425-1144-6. Retrieved 2010-06-28. 
^ Jonathan Fenby (2005). Chiang Kai Shek: China's Generalissimo and the Nation He Lost. Carroll & Graf Publishers. p. 325. ISBN 978-0-7867-1484-1. Retrieved 2010-06-28. 
^ Nihon Gaiji Kyōkai (1942). Chiang Contemporary Japan: A Review of Japanese affairs, Volume 11. The Foreign Affairs Association of Japan. p. 1626. Retrieved 2010-06-28. 
^ Hsiao-ting Lin (2010). Modern China's Ethnic Frontiers: A Journey to the West. Taylor & Francis. p. 90. ISBN 978-0-415-58264-3. Retrieved 2010-06-28. 
^ Aliya Ma Lynn (2007). Muslims in China. University Press. p. 45. ISBN 978-0-88093-861-7. Retrieved 2010-06-28. 
^ Uradyn Erden Bulag (2002). Dilemmas The Mongols at China's Edge: History and the Politics of National Unity. Rowman & Littlefield. p. 273. ISBN 978-0-7425-1144-6. Retrieved 2010-06-28. 
^ Jonathan Neaman Lipman (2004). Familiar Strangers: A History of Muslims in Northwest China. Seattle: University of Washington Press. p. 266. ISBN 978-0-295-97644-0. Retrieved 2010-06-28. 
^ Paul Kocot Nietupski (1999). Labrang: a Tibetan Buddhist Monastery at the Crossroads of Four Civilizations. Snow Lion Publications. p. 35. ISBN 978-1-55939-090-3. Retrieved 2010-06-28. 


Sources[edit]


Bergere, Marie-Claire; Lloyd, Janet (2000). Sun Yat-sen. Stanford, California: Stanford University Press. ISBN 978-0-8047-4011-1. 
Strand, David (2002). "Chapter 2: Citizens in the Audience and at the Podium". In Goldman, Merle; Perry, Elizabeth. Changing Meanings of Citizenship in Modern China. Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States: Harvard University Press. ISBN 978-0-674-00766-6. 
Roy, Denny (2003). Taiwan: A Political History. Ithaca, New York: Cornell University Press. ISBN 978-0-8014-8805-4. 


Further reading[edit]

John F. Copper. The KMT Returns to Power: Elections in Taiwan, 2008 to 2012 (Lexington Books; 2013) 251 pages; A study of how Taiwan's Nationalist Party regained power after losing in 2000
Chris Taylor, "Taiwan's Seismic shift", Asian Wall Street Journal, February 4, 2004 (not available online)

External links[edit]

Find more aboutKuomintangat Wikipedia's sister projects

Definitions from Wiktionary
Media from Wikimedia Commons
News from Wikinews
Quotations from Wikiquote
Texts from Wikisource
Textbooks from Wikibooks
Learning resources from Wikiversity



Kuomintang Official Website (in Chinese)

Kuomintang News Network


The History of Kuomintang (Archived 2009-10-31)







v
t
e


Leaders of the Kuomintang






Song Jiaoren
Sun Yat-sen
Zhang Renjie
Hu Hanmin
Wang Jingwei
Chiang Kai-shek
Chiang Ching-kuo
Lee Teng-hui
Lien Chan
Ma Ying-jeou
Wu Po-hsiung (acting)
Chiang Pin-kung (acting)
Wu Po-hsiung
Ma Ying-jeou
Wu Den-yih (acting)
Eric Chu
Huang Min-hui (acting)
Hung Hsiu-chu
Lin Junq-tzer (acting)
Wu Den-yih















v
t
e


Warlord Era







1915–1922
1923–1932
Northern factions
Southern factions






1915–1916
Empire of China (Yuan Shikai)
National Protection War


1916
Death of Yuan Shikai


1917
Manchu Restoration


1917–1922
Constitutional Protection Movement


1918–1920
Siberian Intervention


1919
Paris Peace Conference
May Fourth Movement


1919–1921
Occupation of Outer Mongolia


1920
Zhili–Anhui War


1920–1921
Guangdong–Guangxi War


1921
1st National CPC Congress


1922
First Zhili–Fengtian War








1923–1927
First United Front


1924
Second Zhili–Fengtian War
Beijing Coup


1925
Yunnan–Guangxi War
May Thirtieth Movement


1925–1926
Anti-Fengtian War


1926
Zhongshan Warship Incident


1926–1928
Northern Expedition


1928
Jinan Incident
Huánggūtun Incident
Looting of the Eastern Mausoleum
Flag Replacement of the Northeast


1929
Warlord Rebellion in northeastern Shandong
Sino-Soviet conflict


1930
Central Plains War


1932
Han–Liu War







Beiyang Army

Yuan Shikai
Anhui
Zhili
Communications
Research


Regional

Fengtian (Zhili)
Shanxi
Guominjun
Ma
Xinjiang








Yunnan
Old Guangxi
New Guangxi
Guangdong (Chen Jitang)
Kuomintang (KMT)
Communist Party (CPC)
Sichuan










Republic of China (1912–1949)










v
t
e


Chinese Civil War






Principal belligerents and campaigns

 Nationalist Party /  Republic of China ( National Revolutionary Army → Republic of China Armed Forces)

 Communist Party /  People's Republic of China ( Red Army →  8th Route Army, N4A, etc. →  People's Liberation Army)








Pre-1945
Post-1945
Current issues






1924
First United Front


1927
Shanghai massacre
Nanchang uprising
Autumn Harvest Uprising
Guangzhou Uprising


1929
Sino-Soviet conflict


1930–1934
Encirclement Campaigns


1931–1934
Chinese Soviet Republic


1933–1934
Fujian People's Government


1934–1936
Long March


1936
Xi'an Incident


1937–1946
Second United Front








1945–1949
Operation Beleaguer


1946–1949
Revolution


1950–1958
Kuomintang Islamic insurgency


1955
First Taiwan Strait Crisis


1958
Second Taiwan Strait Crisis


1960–1961
China–Burma Border


1996
Third Taiwan Strait Crisis


2005–present
Pan-Blue visits







Political status of Taiwan
Chinese unification
Taiwan independence movement
Cross-Strait relations
















v
t
e


Cold War






USA
USSR
ANZUS
NATO
Non-Aligned Movement
SEATO
Warsaw Pact





1940s



Morgenthau Plan
Hukbalahap Rebellion
Dekemvriana
Percentages Agreement
Yalta Conference
Guerrilla war in the Baltic states

Forest Brothers
Operation Priboi
Operation Jungle
Occupation of the Baltic states


Cursed soldiers
Operation Unthinkable
Potsdam Conference
Gouzenko Affair
Division of Korea
Operation Masterdom
Operation Beleaguer
Operation Blacklist Forty
Iran crisis of 1946
Greek Civil War
Baruch Plan
Corfu Channel incident
Turkish Straits crisis
Restatement of Policy on Germany
First Indochina War
Truman Doctrine
Asian Relations Conference
May 1947 Crises
Marshall Plan
1948 Czechoslovak coup d'état
Tito–Stalin Split
Berlin Blockade
Western betrayal
Iron Curtain
Eastern Bloc
Western Bloc
Chinese Civil War (Second round)
Malayan Emergency
Albanian Subversion





1950s



Bamboo Curtain
Korean War
McCarthyism
1953 Iranian coup d'état
Uprising of 1953 in East Germany
Dirty War (Mexico)
Bricker Amendment
1954 Guatemalan coup d'état
Partition of Vietnam
First Taiwan Strait Crisis
Geneva Summit (1955)
Bandung Conference
Poznań 1956 protests
Hungarian Revolution of 1956
Suez Crisis
"We will bury you"
Operation Gladio
Arab Cold War

Syrian Crisis of 1957
1958 Lebanon crisis
Iraqi 14 July Revolution


Sputnik crisis
Second Taiwan Strait Crisis
Cuban Revolution
Kitchen Debate
Sino-Soviet split





1960s



Congo Crisis
1960 U-2 incident
Bay of Pigs Invasion
1960 Turkish coup d'état
Soviet–Albanian split
Berlin Wall
Portuguese Colonial War

Angolan War of Independence
Guinea-Bissau War of Independence
Mozambican War of Independence


Cuban Missile Crisis
Sino-Indian War
Communist insurgency in Sarawak
Iraqi Ramadan Revolution
Sand War
1963 Syrian coup d'état
Vietnam War
1964 Brazilian coup d'état
United States occupation of the Dominican Republic (1965–66)
South African Border War
Transition to the New Order
Domino theory
ASEAN Declaration
Laotian Civil War
1966 Syrian coup d'état
Argentine Revolution
Korean DMZ Conflict
Greek military junta of 1967–74
USS Pueblo incident
Six-Day War
War of Attrition
Dhofar Rebellion
Protests of 1968
French May
Cultural Revolution
Prague Spring
Communist insurgency in Malaysia
Invasion of Czechoslovakia
Iraqi Ba'athist Revolution
Goulash Communism
Sino-Soviet border conflict
CPP–NPA–NDF rebellion
Corrective Move





1970s



Détente
Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty
Black September in Jordan
Corrective Movement (Syria)
Cambodian Civil War
Realpolitik
Ping-pong diplomacy
1971 Turkish military memorandum
Corrective Revolution (Egypt)
Four Power Agreement on Berlin
Bangladesh Liberation War
1972 Nixon visit to China
North Yemen-South Yemen Border Conflict
1973 Chilean coup d'état
Yom Kippur War
Carnation Revolution
Strategic Arms Limitation Talks
Rhodesian Bush War
Angolan Civil War
Mozambican Civil War
Ogaden War
Ethiopian Civil War
Lebanese Civil War
Sino-Albanian split
Cambodian–Vietnamese War
Sino-Vietnamese War
Iranian Revolution
Operation Condor
Dirty War
Korean Air Lines Flight 902
Saur Revolution
New Jewel Movement
1979 Herat uprising
Seven Days to the River Rhine
Struggle against political abuse of psychiatry in the Soviet Union





1980s



Soviet–Afghan War
1980 and 1984 Summer Olympics boycotts
1980 Turkish coup d'état
Invasion of Grenada
1986 Black Sea incident
1988 Black Sea bumping incident
Solidarity

Soviet reaction


Contras
Central American crisis
RYAN
Korean Air Lines Flight 007
Able Archer 83
Star Wars
People Power Revolution
Glasnost
Perestroika
Nagorno-Karabakh War
Tiananmen Square protests of 1989
Revolutions of 1989
Fall of the Berlin Wall





1990s



Mongolian Revolution of 1990
German reunification
Yemeni unification
Fall of communism in Albania
Breakup of Yugoslavia
Dissolution of the Soviet Union
Dissolution of Czechoslovakia





Frozen conflicts



Abkhazia
China-Taiwan
Korea
Nagorno-Karabakh
South Ossetia
Transnistria
Sino-Indian border dispute
North Borneo dispute





Foreign policy



Truman Doctrine
Containment
Eisenhower Doctrine
Domino theory
Hallstein Doctrine
Kennedy Doctrine
Peaceful coexistence
Ostpolitik
Johnson Doctrine
Brezhnev Doctrine
Nixon Doctrine
Ulbricht Doctrine
Carter Doctrine
Reagan Doctrine
Rollback
Sovereignty of Puerto Rico during the Cold War





Ideologies




Capitalism



Chicago school
Keynesianism
Monetarism
Neoclassical economics
Reaganomics
Supply-side economics
Thatcherism





Communism



Marxism–Leninism
Castroism
Eurocommunism
Guevarism
Hoxhaism
Juche
Maoism
Naxalism
Stalinism
Titoism





Other



Islamism
Liberal democracy
Social democracy
Third-Worldism
White supremacy








Organizations



ASEAN
CIA
Comecon
EEC
KGB
MI6
Non-Aligned Movement
SAARC
Safari Club
Stasi





Propaganda



Active measures
Crusade for Freedom
Izvestia
Pravda
Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty
Red Scare
TASS
Voice of America
Voice of Russia





Races



Arms race
Nuclear arms race
Space Race





See also



Allied intervention in the Russian Civil War
Soviet espionage in the United States
Soviet Union–United States relations
Soviet–US summits
Russian espionage in the United States
American espionage in the Soviet Union and Russian Federation
NATO–Russia relations
Brinkmanship
CIA and the Cultural Cold War
Cold War II








Category
Commons
Portal
Timeline
List of conflicts












v
t
e


Political parties in Taiwan 



Nationally represented
(Legislative Yuan seats)



Democratic Progressive Party (68)
Kuomintang (35)
New Power Party (5)
People First Party (3)
Non-Partisan Solidarity Union (1)








Locally represented



Taiwan Solidarity Union
Minkuotang
Green Party Taiwan
New Party
Labor Party
Taiwan First Nations Party
Trees Party





Minor parties



Faith And Hope League
Chinese People's Party
People's Democratic Front
National Health Service Alliance
Civil Party
Hakka Party
Home Party
Taiwan Independence Party
Free Taiwan Party
Social Democratic Party
Third Society Party
Peasant Party








Politics of the Republic of China
Politics portal
List of political parties












v
t
e


International Democrat Union







Alliance of European Conservatives and Reformists
Asia Pacific Democrat Union
Caribbean Democrat Union
Democrat Union of Africa
European Democrat Union
European People's Party
International Women's Democrat Union
International Young Democrat Union
Union of Latin American Parties











Member parties











 
 
 





 Democratic Party
 Liberal Party
 Austrian People's Party
 National Independence Party
 Social Democrat Movement
 Party of Democratic Action
 Democrats
 Union of Democratic Forces
 Conservative Party
 Independent Democratic Union
 National Renewal
 Kuomintang
 Conservative Party
 Democratic Union
 Democratic Rally
 Civic Democratic Party
 Conservative People's Party
 National Progressive Force






 Social Christian Party
 Nationalist Republican Alliance
 Pro Patria and Res Publica Union
 National Coalition Party
 The Republicans
 Christian-Democratic Movement
 United National Movement
 Christian Democratic Union
 Christian Social Union in Bavaria
 New Patriotic Party
 New Democracy
 Unionist Party
 National Party
 Fidesz
 Independence Party
 Bharatiya Janata Party
 National Awakening Party
 Jamaica Labour Party
 VMRO–DPMNE






 Maldivian Democratic Party
 Liberal Democratic Party
 Democratic Party
 National Party
 Conservative Party
 Conservative Party
 Christian People's Party
 CDS–PP
 Democratic Party of Serbia
 Slovenian Democratic Party
 Liberty Korea Party
 People's Party
 United National Party
 Moderate Party
 Forum for Democratic Change
 Conservative Party
 Republican Party
 Project Venezuela





















						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Kuomintang&oldid=818193537"					Categories: KuomintangPolitical parties in TaiwanPolitical parties in ChinaHistory of ChinaHistory of the Republic of ChinaHistory of TaiwanInternational Democrat Union member partiesPolitical parties established in 1912Organizations based in TaipeiRepublic of China (1912–49)Parties of one-party systems1912 establishments in ChinaNationalist parties in AsiaHidden categories: CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors listUse dmy dates from August 2012Articles that may be too long from January 2016Pages using deprecated image syntaxArticles containing Chinese-language textArticles containing traditional Chinese-language textAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from December 2016All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrasesArticles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from February 2016Articles with unsourced statements from February 2016Articles with unsourced statements from January 2013Articles with unsourced statements from June 2013Articles with unsourced statements from September 2012Articles with Chinese-language external links