

Kurdish


Kurdî / کوردی‬





Native to
Turkey, Iraq, Iran, Syria, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Georgia


Region
Kurdistan, Anatolia, Khorasan


Ethnicity
Kurds



Native speakers

C. 20–30 million (2000–2010 est.)[1]



Language family


Indo-European

Indo-Iranian

Iranian

Western

Northwestern

Kurdish













Dialects


Northern Kurdish (Kurmanji)
Central Kurdish (Sorani)
Southern Kurdish (Palewani)





Writing system

In use:
Hawar alphabet (Latin script; used mostly in Turkey and Syria)
Sorani alphabet
(Perso-Arabic script; used mostly in Iraq and Iran)
Not used:
Cyrillic alphabet (former Soviet Union)


Official status



Official language in


 Iraq

 Iraqi Kurdistan





Recognised minority
language in


 Armenia[2]



Language codes


ISO 639-1
ku


ISO 639-2
kur


ISO 639-3
kur – inclusive code
Individual codes:
ckb – Central Kurdish
kmr – Northern Kurdish
sdh – Southern Kurdish


Glottolog
kurd1259[3]


Linguasphere
58-AAA-a (North Kurdish incl. Kurmanji & Kurmanjiki) + 58-AAA-b (Central Kurdish incl. Dimli/Zaza & Gurani) + 58-AAA-c (South Kurdish incl. Kurdi)




Map of Kurdish-speaking areas of the Middle East






Geographic distribution of Kurdish and other Iranian languages spoken by Kurds




  Northern
  Central
  Southern


  Zaza
  Gorani
  mixed areas








This article contains IPA phonetic symbols. Without proper rendering support, you may see question marks, boxes, or other symbols instead of Unicode characters. For an introductory guide on IPA symbols, see Help:IPA.




Part of a series on
Kurdish history and Kurdish culture







People


List of Kurds








Population


Homeland


Kurdistan
Turkey (Northern Kurdistan)
Iran (Eastern Kurdistan)
Iraq (Southern Kurdistan)
Syria (Western Kurdistan)


Diaspora


Armenia
Australia
Azerbaijan
Canada
France
Georgia
Germany
Israel
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Lebanon
Netherlands
New Zealand
Pakistan
Russia
Sweden
Turkmenistan
United Kingdom
United States








History


History of the Kurds








Culture


Kurdish culture
Clothing
Cuisine
Celebrations
Dance
Flag
Historical sites
Language
Folklore
Literature
Music
Kurdish philosophers








Ancient history


Karduchian dynasties

Corduene
Zabdicene
Cyrtians
Moxoene


Kayusids








Medieval history


Shahrizor
Sadakiyans
Mir Jafar Dasni
Aishanids
Daisam
Shaddadids
Rawadids
Hasanwayhids
Annazids
Marwanids
Hadhabani
Hazaraspids
Ayyubids
Zands
Badlis
Ardalan
Badinan
Soran
Mokryan
Baban








Modern history


Simko Shikak revolt
Koçgiri Rebellion
Ararat rebellion
Dersim Rebellion
Kingdom of Kurdistan
Kurdish Republic of Ararat
Republic of Mahabad
Al-Anfal campaign
Iraqi Kurdistan (KRG)
Iranian Kurdistan
Turkish Kurdistan
Syrian Kurdistan
Kurds in Iraq
Kurds in Iran
Kurds in Turkey
Kurds in Syria








Languages


Kurmanci
Sorani
Zazaki
Pehlewani
Gorani








Religion


Islam
Christianity
Judaism
Yarsanism
Yazdânism
Yazidism
Zoroastrianism









v
t
e





Kurdish (Kurdî, کوردی‬; pronounced [ˈkuɾdiː]) is a continuum of Northwestern Iranian languages spoken by the Kurds in Western Asia. Kurdish forms three dialect groups known as Northern Kurdish (Kurmanji), Central Kurdish (Sorani), and Southern Kurdish (Palewani). A separate group of non-Kurdish Northwestern Iranian languages, the Zaza–Gorani languages, are also spoken by several million Kurds.[4][5][6][7] Studies as of 2009 estimate between 8 and 20 million native Kurdish speakers in Turkey.[8] The majority of the Kurds speak Northern Kurdish ("Kurmanji").[9][10]
The literary output in Kurdish was mostly confined to poetry until the early 20th century, when more general literature began to be developed. Today, there are two principal written Kurdish dialects, namely Northern Kurdish in the northern parts of the geographical region of Kurdistan and Central Kurdish further east and south. Central Kurdish is, along with Arabic, one of the two official languages of Iraq and is in political documents simply referred to as "Kurdish".[11][12]



Contents


1 Classification and origin
2 Subdivisions
3 Zazaki and Gorani
4 History
5 Current status
6 Phonology
7 Indo-European linguistic comparison
8 Grammar
9 Vocabulary
10 Writing system
11 See also
12 References
13 External links



Classification and origin
The Kurdish languages belong to the Iranian branch of the Indo-European family. They are generally classified as Northwestern Iranian languages, or by some scholars as intermediate between Northwestern and Southwestern Iranian.[13] Martin van Bruinessen notes that "Kurdish has a strong south-western Iranian element", whereas "Zaza and Gurani [...] do belong to the north-west Iranian group".[14]
Ludwig Paul concludes that Kurdish seems to be a Northwestern Iranian language in origin,[15] but acknowledges that it shares many traits with Southwestern Iranian languages like Persian, apparently due to longstanding and intense historical contacts.
Windfuhr identified Kurdish dialects as Parthian, albeit with a Median substratum. Windfuhr and Frye assume an eastern origin for Kurdish and consider it as related to eastern and central Iranian dialects[16][17].
The present state of knowledge about Kurdish allows, at least roughly, drawing the approximate borders of the areas where the main ethnic core of the speakers of the contemporary Kurdish dialects was formed. The most argued hypothesis on the localisation of the ethnic territory of the Kurds remains D.N. Mackenzie's theory, proposed in the early 1960s (Mackenzie 1961). Developing the ideas of P. Tedesco (1921: 255) and regarding the common phonetic isoglosses shared by Kurdish, Persian, and Baluchi, Mackenzie concluded that the speakers of these three languages may once have been in closer contact.
He has tried to reconstruct the alleged Persian-Kurdish-Baluchi linguistic unity presumably in the central parts of Iran. According to Mackenzie's theory, the Persians (or Proto-Persians) occupied the province of Fars in the southwest (proceeding from the assumption that the Achaemenids spoke Persian), the Baluchis (Proto-Baluchis) inhabited the central areas of Western Iran, and the Kurds (Proto-Kurds), in the wording of G. Windfuhr (1975: 459), lived either in northwestern Luristan or in the province of Isfahan.[18]
Subdivisions
Kurdish is divided into three groups, where dialects from different groups are not mutually intelligible without acquired bilingualism.[19][20]

Northern Kurdish (Kurmanji) is the largest dialect group, spoken by an estimated 15 to 20 million Kurds in Turkey, Syria, northern Iraq and northwestern Iran.
Central Kurdish (Sorani) is spoken by an estimated 6 to 7 million Kurds in much of Iraqi Kurdistan and the Iranian Kurdistan Province.[21] Sorani is a written standard of Central Kurdish developed in the 1920s (named after the historical Soran Emirate) and was later adopted as the standard orthography of Kurdish as an official language of Iraq.[22]
Southern Kurdish (Pehlewani) is spoken by about 3 million Kurds in Kermanshah and Ilam provinces of Iran and in the Khanaqin district of eastern Iraq.[23]

In historical evolution terms, Kurmanji is less modified than Sorani and Pehlewani in both phonetic and morphological structure. The Sorani group has been influenced by among other things its closer cultural proximity to the other languages spoken by Kurds in the region including the Gorani language in parts of Iranian Kurdistan and Iraqi Kurdistan.[21][24] The Kermanshahi group has been influenced by among other things its closer cultural proximity to Persian.[23]
Philip G. Kreyenbroek, an expert writing in 1992, says:[21]

Since 1932 most Kurds have used the Roman script to write Kurmanji.... Sorani is normally written in an adapted form of the Arabic script.... Reasons for describing Kurmanji and Sorani as 'dialects' of one language are their common origin and the fact that this usage reflects the sense of ethnic identity and unity among the Kurds. From a linguistic or at least a grammatical point of view, however, Kurmanji and Sorani differ as much from each other as English and German, and it would seem appropriate to refer to them as languages. For example, Sorani has neither gender nor case-endings, whereas Kurmanji has both.... Differences in vocabulary and pronunciation are not as great as between German and English, but they are still considerable.

According to Encyclopaedia of Islam, although Kurdish is not a unified language, its many dialects are interrelated and at the same time distinguishable from other Western Iranian languages. The same source classifies different Kurdish dialects as two main groups, northern and central.[24] The reality is that the average Kurmanji speaker does not find it easy to communicate with the inhabitants of Suleymania or Halabja.[20]
Some linguistic scholars assert that the term "Kurdish" has been applied extrinsically in describing the language the Kurds speak, whereas ethnic Kurds have used the word term to simply describe their ethnic or national identity and refer to their language as Kurmanji, Sorani, Hewrami, Kermanshahi, Kalhori or whatever other dialect or language they speak. Some historians have noted that it is only recently that the Kurds who speak the Sorani dialect have begun referring to their language as Kurdî, in addition to their identity, which is translated to simply mean Kurdish.[25]
Mokriani dialect of Central Kurdish is widely spoken in Mokrian. Piranshahr and Mahabad are two principal cities of the Mokrian dialect area.[26]
Zazaki and Gorani
Main articles: Zaza language and Gorani language (Zaza-Gorani)
Zaza–Gorani languages, which are spoken by communities in the wider area who identify as ethnic Kurds, are not linguistically classified as Kurdish.[4][5][6][7] Zaza-Gorani is classified as adjunct to Kurdish, although authorities differ in the details. Windfuhr 2009[page needed] groups Kurdish with Zaza Gorani within a "Northwestern I" group, while Glottolog based on Encyclopædia Iranica prefers an areal grouping of "Central dialects" (or "Kermanic") within Northwest Iranic, with Kurdish but not Zaza-Gorani grouped with "Kermanic".[27]
Gorani is distinct from Northern and Central Kurdish, yet shares vocabulary with both of them and there are some grammatical similarities with Central Kurdish.[28] The Hawrami dialects of Gorani includes a variety that was an important literary language since the 14th century, but it was replaced by Central Kurdish in the 20th century.[29]
European scholars have maintained that Gorani is separate from Kurdish and that Kurdish is synonymous with the Northern Kurdish group, whereas ethnic Kurds maintain that Kurdish encompasses any of the unique languages or dialects spoken by Kurds that are not spoken by neighbouring ethnic groups.[30]
Gorani is classified as part of the Zaza–Gorani branch of Indo-Iranian languages.[31] The Zaza language, spoken in the northernmost parts of Kurdistan, differs both grammatically and in vocabulary and is generally not understandable by Gorani speakers but it is considered related to Gorani. Almost all Zaza-speaking communities,[32] as well as speakers of the closely related Shabaki dialect spoken in parts of Iraqi Kurdistan, identify themselves as ethnic Kurds.[4][33][34][35][36][37]
Geoffrey Haig and Ergin Öpengin in their recent study suggest grouping the Kurdish languages into Northern Kurdish, Central Kurdish, Southern Kurdish, Zaza, and Gorani, and avoid the subgrouping Zaza–Gorani.[citation needed]
The notable professor Zare Yusupova, has carried out a lot of work and research into the Gorani dialect (as well as many other minority/ancient Kurdish dialects).[38]
History
During his stay in Damascus, historian Ibn Wahshiyya came across two books on agriculture written in Kurdish, one on the culture of the vine and the palm tree, and the other on water and the means of finding it out in unknown ground. He translated both from Kurdish into Arabic in the early 9th century AD.[39]
Among the earliest Kurdish religious texts is the Yazidi Black Book, the sacred book of Yazidi faith. It is considered to have been authored sometime in the 13th century AD by Hassan bin Adi (b. 1195 AD), the great-grandnephew of Sheikh Adi ibn Musafir (d. 1162), the founder of the faith. It contains the Yazidi account of the creation of the world, the origin of man, the story of Adam and Eve and the major prohibitions of the faith.[40] From the 15th to 17th centuries, classical Kurdish poets and writers developed a literary language. The most notable classical Kurdish poets from this period were Ali Hariri, Ahmad Khani, Malaye Jaziri and Faqi Tayran.
The Italian priest Maurizio Garzoni published the first Kurdish grammar titled Grammatica e Vocabolario della Lingua Kurda in Rome in 1787 after eighteen years of missionary work among the Kurds of Amadiya.[41] This work is very important in Kurdish history as it is the first acknowledgment of the widespread use of a distinctive Kurdish language. Garzoni was given the title Father of Kurdology by later scholars.[42] The Kurdish language was banned in a large portion of Kurdistan for some time. After the 1980 Turkish coup d'état until 1991 the use of the Kurdish language was illegal in Turkey.[43]
Current status




Road signs near Diyarbakır showing the place names in Turkish and Kurdish


Today, Central Kurdish is an official language in Iraq. In Syria, on the other hand, publishing materials in Kurdish is forbidden,[44] though this prohibition is not enforced any more due to the civil war.[45]
Before August 2002, the Turkish government placed severe restrictions on the use of Kurdish, prohibiting the language in education and broadcast media.[46][47] The Kurdish alphabet is not recognized in Turkey, and the use of Kurdish names containing the letters X, W, and Q, which do not exist in the Turkish alphabet, is not allowed.[48] In 2012, Kurdish-language lessons became an elective subject in public schools. Previously, Kurdish education had only been possible in private institutions.[49]
In Iran, though it is used in some local media and newspapers, it is not used in public schools.[50][51] In 2005, 80 Iranian Kurds took part in an experiment and gained scholarships to study in Kurdish in Iraqi Kurdistan.[52]
In March 2006, Turkey allowed private television channels to begin airing programming in Kurdish. However, the Turkish government said that they must avoid showing children's cartoons, or educational programs that teach Kurdish, and could broadcast only for 45 minutes a day or four hours a week.[53] However, most of these restrictions on private Kurdish television channels were relaxed in September 2009.[54]
In 2010, Kurdish municipalities in the southeast decided to begin printing water bills, marriage certificates and construction and road signs, as well as emergency, social and cultural notices in Kurdish alongside Turkish. Friday sermons by Imams began to be delivered in the language, and Esnaf provided Kurdish price tags.[55]
The state-run Turkish Radio and Television Corporation (TRT) started its 24-hour Kurdish television station on 1 January 2009 with the motto "we live under the same sky".[56] The Turkish Prime Minister sent a video message in Kurdish to the opening ceremony, which was attended by Minister of Culture and other state officials. The channel uses the X, W, and Q letters during broadcasting.
In Kyrgyzstan, 96.4% of the Kurdish population speak Kurdish as their native language.[57] In Kazakhstan, the corresponding percentage is 88.7%.[58]
Phonology
Further information: Kurdish phonology
Indo-European linguistic comparison
See also: Iranian languages word table
Because Kurdish is an Indo-European language, there are many words that are cognates in Kurdish and other Indo-European languages such as Avestan, Persian, Sanskrit, German, English, Norwegian, Latin and Greek. (Source: Altiranisches Wörterbuch (1904) for the first two and last six.)


Kurdish
Avestan
Persian
Sanskrit
Greek
English
German
Swedish
Latin
Lithuanian
Russian
PIE


ez "I"
azəm
adam [Old Persian]
aham
egō
I ( < OE ić)
ich
jag
ego
aš
ja (related to OCS azŭ)
*h₁eĝh₂om


lep "paw"



palāme "palm"
(OE lōf "fillet, band") to lob
(OHG lappo "palm (of the hand)")
(hand)love "palm (of the hand)"
labor (hand)work
lṓpa "paw, claw"
lápa "paw"
*tlāp-


jin "woman"
ɣənā- "woman"
zan
janay-
gynē
queen
(OHG quena)
kvinna
genus "birth, origin"
(OPruss. genna)
žená "wife"
*gʷenh₂-


leystin (bileyzim) "to play (I play)"

ley ley kardan(to jump with one foot)
réjati
ālma "jump"
(OE lācan "to play")
leich
leka

láigyti

*(e)leig'- "to jump, to spring, to play"


mezin, gewre "great"
maz-, mazant
masan (middle Persian), gošn "numerous"
mah(ī)-/mahānt-
megas
much ( < OE mićil, myćil)
(OHG mihhil)
mycket "much"
magnus

moshch "power"
*meĝh₂- "big, great"


mêzer "headband/turban"
Miθra "binding", "god name"
*Miça "god name"(Old Persian)

mitra "headband, turban",
mitre "bishop's hat"
mitre "belt, turban"

mitra "cap"

metat' "to sew, to tack"
*mei- "to tie"


pez "sheep"
pasu- "sheep, goat"
boz "goat"
paśu "animal"
poemne "herd"
fee ( < OE feoh "cattle")
Vieh "cattle"
får "sheep" fä "domestic animal"
pecus "cattle"
pekus "ox"
pasti "to herd"
*pek̂-u- "sheep"


çiya چيا),[59] kash[60] کاش) "mountain"

kūh, chakād "peak/summit"
kakúd-, kakúbh- "peak/summit"
koryfē "top"

kupfa[61][62] Gipfel "peak/summit"

cacūmen

kucha "pile"
*kak-, *kakud- "top"


jîyar "alive" jiyan "to live"
gaêm [gaya]
zend[e] "alive", zî[stan] "to live", zaideh "child"
jīv-
zoi "life", zō "live"
quick
quick "bright"
kvick "quick"
vīvus "alive", vīvō "live", vīta "life"
gývas
žyzn' "life", žyvój "living, alive"
*gʷih₃(u̯)-


[di] [a]zan[im] "I know" zan[în] "to know"
zan-
[mi]dān[am] "I know", dān[estan] "to know"
jān-
[gi]gnō[skō]
know
kennen
kunna "to be able to", "to know"
nō[scō], [co]gn[itus]
žin[au]"I know" žin[oti] "to know"
znat' "to know"
*ĝneh₃-


Grammar
Main article: Kurdish grammar
Vocabulary
The bulk of the vocabulary in Kurdish is of Iranian origin, especially of northwestern Iranian. A considerable number of loanwords come from Semitic, mainly Arabic, which entered through Islam and historical relations with Arab tribes. Yet, a smaller group of loanwords which are of Armenian, Caucasian, and Turkic origins are used in Kurdish, besides some European words. There are also Kurdish words with no clear etymology.
Writing system
Main article: Kurdish alphabets




Kurdish restaurant sign in West Yorkshire, England written in Arabic script


The Kurdish language has been written using four different writing systems. In Iraq and Iran it is written using an Arabic script, composed by Sa'id Kaban Sedqi. More recently, it is sometimes written with a Latin alphabet in Iraq. In Turkey, Syria, and Armenia, it is now written using a Latin script. Kurdish was also written in the Arabic script in Turkey and Syria until 1932. There is a proposal for a unified international recognized Kurdish alphabet based on ISO-8859-1[63] called Yekgirtú. Kurdish in the former USSR is written with a Cyrillic alphabet. Kurdish has even been written in the Armenian alphabet in Soviet Armenia and in the Ottoman Empire (a translation of the Gospels in 1857[64] and of all New Testament in 1872).
See also


Kurdistan portal
Language portal



Kurdish culture
Kurdish Institute of Paris
Kurdish Institute of Istanbul
List of countries by Kurdish-speaking population
University of Kurdistan (Iran)
University of Kurdistan - Hawler

References


^ Only very rough estimates are possible. SIL Ethnologue gives estimates, broken down by dialect group, totalling 31 million, but with the caveat of "Very provisional figures for Northern Kurdish speaker population". Ethnologue estimates for dialect groups: Northern: 20.2M (undated; 15M in Turkey for 2009), Central: 6.75M (2009), Southern: 3M (2000), Laki: 1M (2000). The Swedish Nationalencyklopedin listed Kurdish in its "Världens 100 största språk 2007" (The World's 100 Largest Languages in 2007), citing an estimate of 20.6 million native speakers.
^ Pavlenko, Aneta (2008). Multilingualism in post-Soviet countries. Bristol, UK: Multilingual Matters. pp. 18–22. ISBN 978-1-84769-087-6. 
^ Hammarström, Harald; Forkel, Robert; Haspelmath, Martin, eds. (2017). "Kurdish". Glottolog 3.0. Jena, Germany: Max Planck Institute for the Science of Human History. 
^ a b c Kaya, Mehmet. The Zaza Kurds of Turkey: A Middle Eastern Minority in a Globalised Society. ISBN 1-84511-875-8
^ a b http://belfercenter.ksg.harvard.edu/files/Dargin_-_Working_Paper_-_FINAL.pdf
^ a b "Languages of the Middle East". Archived from the original on 18 January 2012. Retrieved 23 December 2011. 
^ a b A Modern History of the Kurds: Third Edition - David McDowall - Google Books. Books.google.com. 2004-05-14. Retrieved 2012-12-18. 
^ Demographic data is unreliable especially in Turkey, where the largest number of Kurds reside, as Turkey has not permitted gathering ethnic or linguistic census data since 1965; estimates of ethnic Kurds in Turkey range from 10% to 25%, or 8 to 20 million people.
^ "Kurmanji". Retrieved 24 February 2016. 
^ "Kurmanji Kurdish" (PDF). Retrieved 24 February 2016. 
^ Allison, Christine. The Yezidi oral tradition in Iraqi Kurdistan. 2001. "However, it was the southern dialect of Kurdish, Sorani, the majority language of the Iraqi Kurds, which received sanction as an official language of Iraq."
^ "Kurdish language issue and a divisive approach - Kurdish Academy of Language". 
^ Gernot Windfuhr, ed., 2009. The Iranian Languages. Routledge.
^ Bruinessen, M.M. van. (1994). Kurdish nationalism and competing ethnic loyalties
^ Paul, Ludwig (2008). "Kurdish language I. History of the Kurdish language". In Yarshater, Ehsan. Encyclopædia Iranica. London and New York: Routledge. Retrieved 28 August 2013. 
^ Windfuhr, Gernot (1975), "Isoglosses: A Sketch on Persians and Parthians, Kurds and Medes", Monumentum H.S. Nyberg II (Acta Iranica-5), Leiden: 457-471
^ Frye, Richard N. (1984). Handbuch der Altertumswissenschaft: Alter Orient-Griechische Geschichte-Römische Geschichte. Band III,7: The History of Ancient Iran. C.H.Beck. p. 29. ISBN 9783406093975. 
^ Professor Garnik Asatrian (Yerevan University) (2009)."Prolegomena to the Study of the Kurds", Iran and the Caucasus, Vol.13, pp. 1–58, 2009 Published in 2009, Iran and the Caucasus, 13, pp.1-58.
^ Hassanpour, A. (1992). Nationalism and language in Kurdistan. San Francisco: Mellon Press. Also mentioned in: kurdishacademy.org
^ a b Postgate, J.N., Languages of Iraq, ancient and modern, [Iraq]: British School of Archaeology in Iraq, 2007, ISBN 978-0-903472-21-0, p.139
^ a b c Philip G. Kreyenbroek, "On the Kurdish Language", a chapter in the book The Kurds: A Contemporary Overview. The book is previewable at Google Book Search.
^ Joyce Blau, Methode de Kurde: Sorani, Editions L'Harmattan (2000), p. 20
^ a b Ranjbar, Vahid. Dastur-e Zaban-e Kurdi-ye Kermanshahi. Kermanshah: Taq-Bostan. 1388
^ a b D.N. MacKenzie, Language in Kurds & Kurdistan, Encyclopaedia of Islam.
^ [1] Archived 1 May 2008 at the Wayback Machine.
^ "BACKGROUND TO THE LANGUAGE, COMMUNITY, AND FIELDWORK 1.1 Introduction The present work is a grammatical description of the Mukri variety of Central". www.dissertation.xlibx.info. 
^ Glottolog 2.3, Subfamily: Central Iran Kermanic. "The Central dialects thus constitute the southernmost group of the so-called Northwest Iranian dialects," Central Dialects (iranicaonline.org)
^ Philip G. Kreyenbroek, "On the Kurdish Language", a chapter in the book The Kurds: A Contemporary Overview.
^ Meri, Josef W. Medieval Islamic Civilization: A-K, index. p444
^ Edmonds, Cecil. Kurds, Turks, and Arabs: politics, travel, and research in north-eastern Iraq, 1919–1925. Oxford University Press, 1957.
^ J. N. Postgate, Languages of Iraq, ancient and modern, British School of Archaeology in Iraq, [Iraq]: British School of Archaeology in Iraq, 2007, p. 138.
^ http://www.let.uu.nl/~martin.vanbruinessen/personal/publications/Bruinessen_Ethnic_identity_Kurds.pdf
^ Abd al-Jabbar, Falih. Ayatollahs, sufis and ideologues: state, religion and social movements in Iraq. University of Virginia 2008.
^ Sykes, Mark. The Caliphs' last heritage: a short history of the Turkish Empire
^ O'Shea, Maria. Trapped between the map and reality: geography and perceptions of Kurdistan. ISBN 0-415-94766-9.
^ Library Information and Research Service. The Middle East, abstracts and index
^ Meiselas, Susan. Kurdistan: in the shadow of history. Random House, 1997.
^ Leezenberg, M. (Jun 15, 2016). Soviet Kurdology and Kurdish Orientalism. researchgate.net. p. 10. Retrieved 24 Nov 2017. 
^ Ibn-Waḥšīya, Aḥmad Ibn-ʿAlī (1806). Ancient Alphabets and Hieroglyphic Characters Explained: With an Account of the Egyptian Priests, Their Classes, Initiation, and Sacrifices. Translated by Joseph von Hammer-Purgstall. Bulmer. p. 53. Retrieved March 28, 2013. 
^ Jonh S. Guest, The Yazidis: A Study In Survival, Routledge Publishers, 1987, ISBN 0-7103-0115-4, ISBN 978-0-7103-0115-4, 299 pp. (see pages 18, 19, 32)
^ Ernest R. McCarus, Kurdish Language Studies, The Middle East Journal, Published by Middle East Institute, Washington, 1960, p.325
^ Kurdistan and Its Christians, Mirella Galetti, World Congress of Kurdish Studies, 6–9 September 2006
^ Ross, Michael. The Volunteer (chapter: The Road to Ankara)
^ Repression of Kurds in Syria is widespread Archived 15 October 2007 at the Wayback Machine., Amnesty International Report, March 2005.
^ "After 52-year ban, Syrian Kurds now taught Kurdish in schools". 6 November 2015. 
^ "Special Focus Cases: Leyla Zana, Prisoner of Conscience". Amnestyusa.org. Archived from the original on 10 May 2005. Retrieved 2 December 2011. 
^ "Kurdish performers banned, Appeal from International PEN". Freemuse.org. Retrieved 2 December 2011. 
^ Karakaş, Saniye (March 2004). "Submission to the Sub-Commission on Promotion and Protection of Human Rights: Working Group of Minorities; Tenth Session, Agenda Item 3 (a)". United Nations Commission on Human Rights. Archived from the original (MS Word) on 2007-06-28. Retrieved 2006-11-07. Kurds have been officially allowed since September 2003 to take Kurdish names, but cannot use the letters x, w, or q, which are common in Kurdish but do not exist in Turkey's version of the Latin alphabet. [...] Those letters, however, are used in Turkey in the names of companies, TV and radio channels, and trademarks. For example Turkish Army has company under the name of AXA OYAK and there is SHOW TV television channel in Turkey. 
^ "Turkey to allow Kurdish lessons in schools". Aljazeera. 12 June 2012. Retrieved 12 June 2013. 
^ The Kurdish Language and Literature, by Joyce Blau, Professor of Kurdish language and civilization at the National Institute of Oriental Language and Civilization of the University of Paris (INALCO)
^ The language policy of Iran from State policy on the Kurdish language: the politics of status planning by Amir Hassanpour, University of Toronto
^ "Neighboring Kurds Travel to Study in Iraq". Npr.org. 9 March 2005. Retrieved 2 December 2011. 
^ Turkey to get Kurdish television Archived 13 May 2006 at the Wayback Machine.
^ "TRT HABER - Özel Kürtçe Kanala Yeşil Işık". Trt.net.tr. 28 November 2011. Retrieved 2 December 2011. 
^ "On trial for speaking Kurdish". ANF-Firatnews. 11 May 2011. Archived from the original on 15 June 2013. Retrieved 12 June 2013. 
^ "Kurdish TV starts broadcasting in Turkey". Kurdmedia.com. Retrieved 2 December 2011. 
^ ". Number of resident population by selected nationality, mother tongue in 2009" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 July 2012. Retrieved 9 April 2015. 
^ "Table 4.1.1 Population by individual ethnic groups" (PDF). Government of Kazakhstan. stat.kz. Archived from the original (PDF) on 27 February 2012. Retrieved 9 July 2012. 
^ Feryad fazil Omar: Kurdisch-Deutsches Wörterbuch (Soranî), Institut für Kurdische Studien e.V., Berlin 2005, p.332 ISBN 978-3-932574-10-8
^ Abdul Rahman Sharafkondi Hazhar: (1st ed. 1990) Farhang Kurdi-Farsi, Tehran, 4th ed. 2005, p. 601 ISBN 964-435-701-9 and ISBN 964-376-341-2
^ kupfa is Old High German; Kuppel is Middle High German, Kopf is head, Oskar Schade (1866)
^ Georg Scherer (1588)
^ "The Kurdish Unified Alphabet". www.kurdishacademy.org. Retrieved 2 December 2011. 
^ "The Gospels in Kurdish in Armenian characters, 1857, Constantinople". Google.com. 2010-02-18. Retrieved 2014-03-02. 


External links



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Kurdish language.





Kurmanji Kurdish edition of Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia





Sorani Kurdish edition of Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia





Southern Kurdish test of Wikipedia at Wikimedia Incubator





Laki test of Wikipedia at Wikimedia Incubator





Wikivoyage has phrasebook for Kurdish.



Wîkîferheng (Kurdish Wiktionary)
inKurdish: English–Kurdish Translation
Online English Kurdish Translation
Dictio: English–Kurdish Dictionary
The Kurdish Institute of Paris: Language and Literature
Kurdish Language and Linguistics, at Encyclopedia Iranica (article written by Ludwig Paul)
History of Kurdish Written Literature, at Encyclopedia Iranica (article written by Philip G. Kryeenbroek)
Kurdish Language Initiative of Seywan Institute
Kurdish Institute of Istanbul
KAL: The Kurdish Academy of Language
Kurdish Language Academy in Iran
Kurdish Kurdish links and language information, dictionary etc.
Kurdish languages at Curlie (based on DMOZ)
Grammar of a Less Familiar Language (MIT OpenCourseWare)
Southern Kurdish phonetic
Gorani Influence on Central Kurdish
Reference Grammar with Selected Readings both for Sorani and Kurmanji written by W. M. Thackston





Links to related articles











v
t
e


Kurdish languages






Alphabets
Grammar
Literature





Languages



Northern Kurdish
Laki
Central Kurdish
Southern Kurdish












v
t
e


 Languages of Iraq



Official languages



Standard Arabic

Mesopotamian Arabic (Main)
Bedawi


Kurdish





Minority languages



Kurdish (Main)
Neo-Aramaic

Assyrian Neo-Aramaic


Armenian
South Azerbaijani
Luri
Persian





Sign languages



Iraqi Sign Language












v
t
e


 Languages of Iran



Official languages



Persian





Regional languages



Azerbaijani
Kurdish
Luri
Gilaki
Mazanderani
Arabic
Balochi
Talysh
Tati
Qashqai
Turkmen
Semnani





Minority languages



Armenian
Assyrian
Circassian
Georgian
Hebrew
Domari





Sign languages



Persian Sign Language












v
t
e


 Languages of Syria



Official language



Standard Arabic





Minority languages



Adyghe
Afshar
Armenian
Azerbaijani
Domari
Kurdish

Kurmanji


Turoyo
Western Neo-Aramaic





Varieties of Arabic



Bedawi
Levantine
Mesopotamian
Najdi
North Syrian





Sign languages



Levantine Arabic Sign Language












v
t
e


 Languages of Turkey



Official language



Turkish





Minority languages



Arabic
Armenian
Bulgarian
Georgian
Greek
Kurdish (Kurmanji)
Laz
Zaza(ki)





Sign languages



Turkish Sign Language
Mardin Sign Language












v
t
e


 Languages of Armenia



Official language



Armenian





Minority languages



Assyrian
Greek
Kurdish
Russian





Sign languages



Armenian Sign Language












v
t
e


Languages of the Caucasus



Caucasian
(areal)




Caspian




Avar–Andic



Andic

Akhvakh
Bagvalal–Tindi
Botlix–Godoberi
Chamalal
Karata
Literary Andi


Avar





Dargic



Literary Dargwa and dialects

Chirag
Itsari
Kajtak
Kubachi







Didoic



Bezhta–Hunzib–Khwarshi
Hinukh–Literary Tsez





Lezgic



Aghul
Archi
Budukh
Kryts
Lezgian
Rutul
Tabasaran
Tsakhur
Udi





Nakh



Bats
Chechen–Ingush





Other



Khinalug
Lak








Kartvelian




Karto-Zan–Svan



Georgian
Svan
Zan

Laz
Mingrelian










Pontic




Abazgi–Adyghe



Abkhaz–Abaza
Circassian














Indo-European




Armenian



Armenian





Germanic



German





Hellenic



Pontic Greek





Iranic




Northern



Ossetian





Western



Judæo-Tat
Kurdish
Persian
Talysh
Tat








Slavic



Russian
Ukrainian








Mongolic



Kalmyk





Turkic




Kipchak–Cuman



Karachay–Balkar
Kumyk
Urum





Kipchak–Nogai



Nogai





Oghuz



Azerbaijani
Turkish
Turkmen








Afro-Asiatic




Semitic



Assyrian Neo-Aramaic
Bohtan Neo-Aramaic











 See also: Languages of Armenia
 Languages of Azerbaijan
 Languages of Georgia
 Languages of Russia












v
t
e


Iranian languages



Old




Western



Old Persian
Median





Eastern



Avestan
Old Scythian








Middle




Western



Middle Persian
Parthian





Eastern



Bactrian
Khwarezmian
Ossetic

Jassic


Saka
Scythian
Sogdian








Modern




North



Old Azari
Balochi
Central Iran
Zoroastrian Dari
Fars
Gilaki
Gorani
Kurdic

Sorani
Kurmanji
Southern group
Laki


Mazandarani
Semnani
Taleshi
Deilami
Tati
Zazaki





Eastern




Pamir



Ishkashimi
Sanglechi
Wakhi
Munji
Yidgha
Vanji
Yazghulami
Shughni
Roshani
Khufi
Bartangi
Sarikoli





Others



Ossetian

Digor
Iron


Pashto

Central
Northern
Southern
Wanetsi


Yaghnobi
Ormuri
Parachi








Western




South



Persian

Caucasian Tat
Dari
Tajik


Luri

Feyli
Bakhtiari
Kumzari


Larestani
Bashkardi












Italics indicate extinct languages.










v
t
e


Iraq articles



History




Ancient



Sumer
Akkadian Empire
Babylonia
Assyria
Neo-Assyrian Empire
Neo-Babylonian Empire
Achaemenid Assyria
Seleucid Babylonia
Parthian Babylonia
Sassanid Asorestan





638–1958



Muslim conquest of Persia
Abbasid Caliphate
Buyid dynasty
Kara Koyunlu
Ak Koyunlu
Safavids
Ottoman Iraq (Mamluk dynasty)
Mandatory Iraq
Kingdom of Iraq
Arab Federation





Republic



1958–68
1968–2003
2003–11
2011–present


Arab Socialist Ba'ath Party – Iraq Region (National Command)
Saddam Hussein
Iran–Iraq War
Invasion of Kuwait
Gulf War
Sanctions
Iraq War

U.S. invasion
Iraqi insurgency
U.S. troop withdrawal


Insurgency (2011–2013)
Civil War (2014–present)

Mosul liberation










Geography











Al-Faw Peninsula
Al-Jazira
Euphrates
Hamrin Mountains
Persian Gulf
Islands
Mesopotamia
Mesopotamian Marshes
Places
Lakes
Shatt al-Arab
Syrian Desert
Tigris
Umm Qasr
Zagros Mountains











Politics







Administrative divisions
Constitution
Council of Representatives (legislative)
Elections
Foreign aid
Foreign relations
Government

Council of Ministers
Presidency Council
President
Prime Minister


Human rights

in pre-Saddam Iraq
in Saddam Hussein's Iraq
in post-invasion Iraq

in ISIL-controlled territory


LGBT
Freedom of religion
Women


Law
Military
Police
Political parties
Judiciary
Wars and conflicts








Economy







Central Bank
Dinar (currency)
Infrastructure
Oil Industry
Oil reserves
Reconstruction
Stock Exchange
Telecommunications
Transportation








Society







Cuisine
Culture
Education
Health
Media
Music
Smoking
Sports





Demographics



Iraqis

diaspora
refugees


Languages

Arabic
Aramaic
Kurdish
Persian
Iraqi Turkmen dialect


Minorities

Armenians
Assyrians
Circassians
Kurds
Mandaeans
Marsh Arabs
Persians
Solluba
Turkmen/Turcoman
Jews


Religion

Islam
Christianity
Mandaeism
Yazidis














Outline
Index



Category
Portal














Authority control



GND: 4120233-8
NDL: 00567049











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Kurdish_languages&oldid=817031211"					Categories: Articles containing Kurmanji Kurdish-language textArticles containing Sorani Kurdish-language textKurdish languageLanguages of ArmeniaLanguages of AzerbaijanLanguages of TurkeyLanguages of IranLanguages of IraqLanguages of IsraelLanguages of LebanonLanguages of SyriaSubject–object–verb languagesIranian languagesHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksWikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pagesLanguages with ISO 639-2 codeLanguages with ISO 639-1 codeISO language articles citing sources other than EthnologueWikipedia articles needing page number citations from December 2014All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from March 2017Articles with DMOZ linksUse dmy dates from February 2011Wikipedia articles with GND identifiersArticles citing Nationalencyklopedin