
Kyushu

Native name: 九州



Kyushu region of Japan and the current prefectures on the island of Kyushu



Geography


Location
East Asia


Archipelago
Japanese Archipelago


Area
36,782 km2 (14,202 sq mi)


Area rank
37th


Highest elevation
1,791 m (5,876 ft)


Highest point
Mount Kujū[1]


Administration



 Japan



Prefectures
 Fukuoka Prefecture
 Kagoshima Prefecture
 Kumamoto Prefecture
 Miyazaki Prefecture
 Nagasaki Prefecture
 Ōita Prefecture
 Okinawa Prefecture
 Saga Prefecture


Largest settlement
Fukuoka


Demographics


Population
12,970,479 (2016)


Pop. density
307.13 /km2 (795.46 /sq mi)


Ethnic groups
Japanese


Kyushu (九州, Kyūshū, literally "Nine Provinces"; Japanese: [kʲɯːꜜɕɯː]) is the third largest island of Japan and most southwesterly of its four main islands.[2] Its alternative ancient names include Kyūkoku (九国, "Nine Provinces"), Chinzei (鎮西, "West of the Pacified Area"), and Tsukushi-no-shima (筑紫島, "Island of Tsukushi"). The historical regional name Saikaidō (西海道, lit. West Sea Circuit) referred to Kyushu and its surrounding islands.
In the 8th century Taihō Code reforms, Dazaifu was established as a special administrative term for the region.[3]
As of 2016[update], Kyushu has a population of 12,970,479 and covers 36,782 square kilometres (14,202 sq mi).[citation needed]



Contents


1 Geography
2 Demography
3 Economy and environment
4 Education
5 Transportation
6 See also
7 Notes
8 References



Geography[edit]






This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (March 2011) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



The island is mountainous, and Japan's most active volcano, Mt Aso at 1,591 metres (5,220 ft), is on Kyushu. There are many other signs of tectonic activity, including numerous areas of hot springs. The most famous of these are in Beppu, on the east shore, and around Mt. Aso, in central Kyushu. The island is separated from Honshu by the Kanmon Straits.
The name Kyūshū comes from the nine ancient provinces of Saikaidō situated on the island: Chikuzen, Chikugo, Hizen, Higo, Buzen, Bungo, Hyūga, Osumi, and Satsuma.
Today's Kyushu Region (九州地方, Kyūshū-chihō) is a politically defined region that consists of the seven prefectures on the island of Kyushu (which also includes the former Tsushima and Iki as part of Nagasaki), plus Okinawa Prefecture to the south:

Northern Kyushu

Fukuoka Prefecture
Kumamoto Prefecture
Nagasaki Prefecture
Ōita Prefecture
Saga Prefecture


Southern Kyushu

Kagoshima Prefecture
Miyazaki Prefecture
Okinawa Prefecture



Demography[edit]
Most of Kyushu's population is concentrated along the northwest, in the cities of Fukuoka and Kitakyushu, with population corridors stretching southwest into Sasebo and Nagasaki and south into Kumamoto and Kagoshima. Excepting Oita and Miyazaki cities, the eastern seaboard shows a general decline in population.
Kyushu is described as a stronghold of the LDP political party.[4]

Designated cities


Fukuoka (population: 1,460,000)
Kitakyushu (population: 977,000)
Kumamoto (population: 730,000)


Core cities


Kagoshima
Ōita
Nagasaki
Miyazaki
Naha
Kurume
Saga

Economy and environment[edit]




Map of Kyushu region with prefectures






JMSDF District Forces, including the Sasebo District Force


Parts of Kyushu have a subtropical climate, particularly Miyazaki prefecture and Kagoshima prefecture. Major agricultural products are rice, tea, tobacco, sweet potatoes, and soy; silk is also widely produced. The island is noted for various types of porcelain, including Arita, Imari, Satsuma, and Karatsu. Heavy industry is concentrated in the north around Fukuoka, Kitakyushu, Nagasaki, and Oita and includes chemicals, automobiles, semiconductors, and metal processing.
In 2010, the graduate employment rate in the region was the lowest nationwide, at 88.9%.[5]
Besides the volcanic area of the south, there are significant mud hot springs in the northern part of the island, around Beppu. These springs are the site of occurrence of certain extremophile micro-organisms, that are capable of surviving in extremely hot environments.[6]
Japanese motor manufacturer Lexus has a large, state of the art, manufacturing plant in Kyushu.
Education[edit]
Major universities and colleges in Kyushu:

National universities

Kyushu University - One of seven former "Imperial Universities"
Kyushu Institute of Technology
Saga University
Nagasaki University
Kumamoto University
Fukuoka University of Education
Oita University
Miyazaki University
Kagoshima University
National Institute of Fitness and Sports in Kanoya
University of the Ryukyus


Universities run by local governments

University of Kitakyushu
Kyushu Dental College
Fukuoka Women's University
Fukuoka Prefectural University
Nagasaki Prefectural University
Oita University of Nursing and Health Sciences
Prefectural University of Kumamoto
Miyazaki Municipal University
Miyazaki Prefectural Nursing University
Okinawa Prefectural University of Arts


Major private universities

Fukuoka University - University with the largest number of students in Kyushu
Kumamoto Gakuen University
Ritsumeikan Asia Pacific University
Seinan Gakuin University
Kyushu Sangyo University - Baseball team won the Japanese National Championship in 2005
University of Occupational and Environmental Health
Kurume University



Transportation[edit]
The island is linked to the larger island of Honshu by the Kanmon Tunnels, which carry both the San'yō Shinkansen and non-Shinkansen trains of the Kyushu Railway Company, as well as vehicular, pedestrian, and bicycle traffic. The Kanmon Bridge also connects the island with Honshu. Railways on the island are operated by the Kyushu Railway Company, and Nishitetsu Railway.
See also[edit]



Look up Kyushu or Islands in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.




Japan portal
Islands portal
Geography portal



Azumi people, an ancient group of people who inhabited parts of northern Kyūshū
Geography of Japan
Group Kyushu
Western Army (Japan)
United States Fleet Activities Sasebo
Hoenn, a fictional region in the Pokémon franchise which is based on Kyushu
Kanmonkyo Bridge, that connects Kyūshū with Honshū
Kyushu National Museum
List of regions in Japan
Kyushu dialects
Hichiku dialect, Hōnichi dialect and Kagoshima dialect

Notes[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to:
Kyushu (category)






Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Kyushu.





^ "Kujū-san, Japan". Peakbagger.com. 
^ Nussbaum, Louis-Frédéric. (2005). "Kyūshū" in Japan Encyclopedia, p. 588, p. 588, at Google Books
^ Nussbaum, "Dazaifu" in p. 150, p. 150, at Google Books; Dazaifu
^ "Japanese voters want a plan to handle a declining population". The Economist. 5 October 2017. 
^ "Grads landing jobs near all-time low". The Japan Times. May 22, 2010. Retrieved 22 October 2010. 
^ C.Michael Hogan. 2010. Extremophile. eds. E.Monosson and C.Cleveland. Encyclopedia of Earth. National Council for Science and the Environment, Washington DC



References[edit]

Nussbaum, Louis-Frédéric and Käthe Roth. (2005). Japan encyclopedia. Cambridge: Harvard University Press. ISBN 978-0-674-01753-5; OCLC 58053128







v
t
e


 Regions and administrative divisions of Japan



Regions



Hokkaido
Tōhoku
Kantō

Nanpō Islands


Chūbu

Hokuriku
Kōshin'etsu
Shin'etsu
Tōkai


Kansai
Chūgoku

San'in
San'yō


Shikoku
Kyushu

Northern
Southern
Okinawa










47 Prefectures




Hokkaido



Hokkaido





Tōhoku



Aomori
Iwate
Miyagi
Akita
Yamagata
Fukushima





Kantō



Ibaraki
Tochigi
Gunma
Saitama
Chiba
Tokyo
Kanagawa





Chūbu



Niigata
Toyama
Ishikawa
Fukui
Yamanashi
Nagano
Gifu
Shizuoka
Aichi





Kansai



Mie
Shiga
Kyoto
Osaka
Hyōgo
Nara
Wakayama





Chūgoku



Tottori
Shimane
Okayama
Hiroshima
Yamaguchi





Shikoku



Tokushima
Kagawa
Ehime
Kōchi





Kyushu



Fukuoka
Saga
Nagasaki
Kumamoto
Ōita
Miyazaki
Kagoshima
Okinawa









Coordinates: 33°N 131°E﻿ / ﻿33°N 131°E﻿ / 33; 131



Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 246095633
GND: 4073463-8
BNF: cb11961725m (data)
NDL: 00632981











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Kyushu&oldid=810987190"					Categories: Kyushu regionIslands of JapanJapanese archipelagoHidden categories: Articles containing Japanese-language textArticles containing potentially dated statements from 2016All articles containing potentially dated statementsAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from February 2017Articles needing additional references from March 2011All articles needing additional referencesCoordinates on WikidataWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiers