Labour law (also known as labor law or employment law) mediates the relationship between workers, employing entities, trade unions and the government. Collective labour law relates to the tripartite relationship between employee, employer and union. Individual labour law concerns employees' rights at work and through the contract for work. Employment standards are social norms (in some cases also technical standards) for the minimum socially acceptable conditions under which employees or contractors are allowed to work. Government agencies (such as the former US Employment Standards Administration) enforce labour law (legislative, regulatory, or judicial).



Contents


1 History

1.1 Child labour
1.2 Working conditions


2 Individual labour law

2.1 Employment terms
2.2 Minimum wage
2.3 Living wage
2.4 Hours
2.5 Health and safety
2.6 Discrimination
2.7 Dismissal
2.8 Child labour


3 Collective labour law

3.1 Trade unions
3.2 Workplace participation
3.3 Information and consultation
3.4 Collective bargaining
3.5 Collective action


4 International labour law

4.1 International Labour Organization
4.2 World Trade Organization
4.3 Work in multiple countries
4.4 EU law


5 National labour laws

5.1 Australia
5.2 Canada
5.3 China
5.4 France
5.5 India
5.6 Iran
5.7 Japan
5.8 Mexico
5.9 Sweden
5.10 Switzerland
5.11 United Kingdom
5.12 United States
5.13 Halakhah (Jewish religious law)


6 See also
7 Notes
8 References
9 Further reading
10 External links



History[edit]
Main article: History of labour law
Labour law arose in parallel with the Industrial Revolution as the relationship between worker and employer changed from small-scale production studios to large-scale factories. Workers sought better conditions and the right to join (or avoid joining) a labour union, while employers sought a more predictable, flexible and less costly workforce. The state of labour law at any one time is therefore both the product of, and a component of struggles between various social forces.
As England was the first country to industrialise, it was also the first to face the often appalling consequences of industrial revolution in a less regulated economic framework. Over the course of the late 18th and early to mid-19th century the foundation for modern labour law was slowly laid, as some of the more egregious aspects of working conditions were steadily ameliorated through legislation. This was largely achieved through the concerted pressure from social reformers, notably Anthony Ashley-Cooper, 7th Earl of Shaftesbury, and others.
Child labour[edit]
A serious outbreak of fever in 1784 in cotton mills near Manchester drew widespread public opinion against the use of children in dangerous conditions. A local inquiry, presided over by Dr Thomas Percival, was instituted by the justices of the peace for Lancashire, and the resulting report recommended the limitation of children's working hours.[1] In 1802, the first major piece of labour legislation was passed − the Health and Morals of Apprentices Act. This was the first, albeit modest, step towards the protection of labour. The act limited working hours to twelve a day and abolished night work. It required the provision of a basic level of education for all apprentices, as well as adequate sleeping accommodation and clothing.
The rapid industrialisation of manufacturing at the turn of the 19th century led to a rapid increase in child employment, and public opinion was steadily made aware of the terrible conditions these children were forced to endure. The Factory Act of 1819 was the outcome of the efforts of the industrialist Robert Owen and prohibited child labour under nine years of age and limited the working day to twelve. A great milestone in labour law was reached with the Factory Act of 1833, which limited the employment of children under eighteen years of age, prohibited all night work and, crucially, provided for inspectors to enforce the law. Pivotal in the campaigning for and the securing of this legislation were Michael Sadler and the Earl of Shaftesbury. This act was an important step forward, in that it mandated skilled inspection of workplaces and a rigorous enforcement of the law by an independent governmental body.
A lengthy campaign to limit the working day to ten hours was led by Shaftesbury, and included support from the Anglican Church.[2] Many committees were formed in support of the cause and some previously established groups lent their support as well.[3] The campaign finally led to the passage of the Factory Act of 1847, which restricted the working hours of women and children in British factories to effectively 10 hours per day.[4]
Working conditions[edit]
These early efforts were principally aimed at limiting child labour. From the mid-19th century, attention was first paid to the plight of working conditions for the workforce in general. In 1850, systematic reporting of fatal accidents was made compulsory, and basic safeguards for health, life and limb in the mines were put in place from 1855. Further regulations, relating to ventilation, fencing of disused shafts, signalling standards, and proper gauges and valves for steam-boilers and related machinery were also set down.
A series of further Acts, in 1860 and 1872 extended the legal provisions and strengthened safety provisions. Steady development of the coal industry, increasing association among miners, and increased scientific knowledge paved the way for the Coal Mines Act of 1872, which extended the legislation to similar industries. The same Act included the first comprehensive code of regulation to govern legal safeguards for health, life and limb. The presence of a more certified and competent management and increased levels of inspection were also provided for.
By the end of the century, a comprehensive set of regulations was in place in England that affected all industries. A similar system (with certain national differences) was implemented in other industrializing countries in the latter part of the 19th century and the early 20th century.
Individual labour law[edit]
Employment terms[edit]
Main articles: Employment contract and At-will employment
The basic feature of labour law in almost every country is that the rights and obligations of the worker and the employer are mediated through a contract of employment between the two. This has been the case since the collapse of feudalism. Many contract terms and conditions are covered by legislation or common law. In the US for example, the majority of state laws allow for employment to be "at will", meaning the employer can terminate an employee from a position for any reason, so long as the reason is not explicitly prohibited,[a] and, conversely, an employee may quit at any time, for any reason (or for no reason), and is not required to give notice.
One example of employment terms in many countries[5] is the duty to provide written particulars of employment with the essentialia negotii (Latin for "essential terms") to an employee. This aims to allow the employee to know concretely what to expect and what is expected. It covers items including compensation, holiday and illness rights, notice in the event of dismissal and job description.
The contract is subject to various legal provisions. An employer may not legally offer a contract that pays the worker less than a minimum wage. An employee may not agree to a contract that allows an employer to dismiss them for illegal reasons.[b]
Minimum wage[edit]
Main article: Minimum wage
Many jurisdictions define the minimum amount that a worker can be paid per hour. Algeria, Australia, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, China, France, Greece, Hungary, India, Ireland, Japan,South Korea, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Paraguay, Portugal, Poland, Romania, Spain,Taiwan, the United Kingdom, the United States, Vietnam, Germany (in 2015[6]) and others have laws of this kind.[citation needed] The minimum wage is set usually higher than the lowest wage as determined by the forces of supply and demand in a free market and therefore acts as a price floor. Each country sets its own minimum wage laws and regulations, and while a majority of industrialized countries has a minimum wage, many developing countries do not.
Minimum wages are regulated and stipulated in some countries that lack explicit laws. In Sweden minimum wages are negotiated between the labour market parties (unions and employer organizations) through collective agreements that also cover non-union workers at workplaces with collective agreements. At workplaces without collective agreements there exist no minimum wages. Non-organized employers can sign substitute agreements directly with trade unions but far from all do. The Swedish case illustrates that in countries without statutory regulation will part of the labour market do not have regulated minimum wages, as self-regulation only applies to workplaces and employees covered by collective agreements (in Sweden about 90 per cent of employees).[7][8]
National minimum wage laws were first introduced in the United States in 1938,[9] Brazil in 1940[10] India in 1948,[11] France in 1950[12] and in the United Kingdom in 1998.[13] In the European Union, 18 out of 28 member states have national minimum wages as of 2011.[14]
Living wage[edit]
Main article: Living wage
The living wage is higher than the minimum wage and is designed that a full-time worker would be able to support themselves and a small family at that wage.[15]
Hours[edit]
See also: Eight-hour day
The maximum number of hours worked per day or other time interval are set by law in many countries. Such laws also control whether workers who work longer hours must be paid additional compensation.
Before the Industrial Revolution, the workday varied between 11 and 14 hours. With the growth of industrialism and the introduction of machinery, longer hours became far more common, reaching as high as 16 hours per day.
The eight-hour movement led to the first law on the length of a working day, passed in 1833 in England. It limited miners to 12 hours and children to 8 hours. The 10-hour day was established in 1848, and shorter hours with the same pay were gradually accepted thereafter. The 1802 Factory Act was the first labour law in the UK.
Germany was the next European country to pass labour laws; Chancellor Otto von Bismarck's main goal was to undermine the Social Democratic Party of Germany. In 1878, Bismarck instituted a variety of anti-socialist measures, but despite this, socialists continued gaining seats in the Reichstag. To appease the working class, he enacted a variety of paternalistic social reforms, which became the first type of social security. In 1883 the Health Insurance Act was passed, which entitled workers to health insurance; the worker paid two-thirds and the employer one-third of the premiums. Accident insurance was provided in 1884, while old age pensions and disability insurance followed in 1889. Other laws restricted the employment of women and children. These efforts, however, were not entirely successful; the working class largely remained unreconciled with Bismarck's conservative government.[citation needed]
In France, the first labour law was voted in 1841. It limited under-age miners' hours. In the Third Republic labour law was first effectively enforced, in particular after Waldeck-Rousseau 1884 law legalising trade unions. With the Matignon Accords, the Popular Front (1936–38) enacted the laws mandating 12 days each year of paid vacations for workers and the law limiting the standard workweek to 40 hours.
Health and safety[edit]
Main article: Occupational safety and health
Other labour laws involve safety concerning workers. The earliest English factory law was passed in 1802 and dealt with the safety and health of child textile workers.
Discrimination[edit]
Main article: Anti-discrimination law
Such laws prohibited discrimination against employees as morally unacceptable and illegal, in particular racial discrimination or gender discrimination.
Dismissal[edit]
Main articles: Unfair dismissal, Wrongful dismissal, and At-will employment
Convention no. 158 of the International Labour Organization states that an employee "can't be fired without any legitimate motive" and "before offering him the possibility to defend himself". Thus, on April 28, 2006, after the unofficial repeal of the French First Employment Contract, the Longjumeau (Essonne) conseil des prud'hommes (labour law court) judged the New Employment Contract contrary to international law and therefore "illegitimate" and "without any juridical value". The court considered that the two-years period of "fire at will" (without any legal motive) was "unreasonable", and contrary to convention.[16][17]
Child labour[edit]
Main article: Child labour




Two girls wearing banners in Yiddish and English with the slogan "Abolish child slavery!!" at the 1909 International Workers' Day parade in New York City


Child labour was not seen as a problem throughout most of history, only disputed with the beginning of universal schooling and the concepts of labourers' and children's rights. Use of child labour was commonplace, often in factories. In England and Scotland in 1788, about two-thirds of persons working in water-powered textile factories were children.[18] Child labour can be factory work, mining or quarrying, agriculture, helping in the parents' business, operating a small business (such as selling food), or doing odd jobs. Children work as guides for tourists, sometimes combined with bringing in business for shops and restaurants (where they may also work). Other children do jobs such as assembling boxes or polishing shoes. However, rather than in factories and sweatshops, most child labour in the twenty-first century occurs in the informal sector, "selling on the street, at work in agriculture or hidden away in houses — far from the reach of official inspectors and from media scrutiny."[19]
Collective labour law[edit]
Main article: Freedom of association
Collective labour law concerns the relationship between employer, employee and trade unions. Trade unions (also "labor unions" in the US) are organizations which generally aim to promote the interests of their members.
Trade unions[edit]
Main article: Trade union
Trade unions are organized groups of workers who engage in collective bargaining with employers. Some countries require unions and/or employers to follow particular procedures in pursuit of their goals. For example, some countries require that unions poll the membership to approve a strike or to approve using members' dues for political projects. Laws may govern the circumstances and procedures under which unions are formed. They may guarantee the right to join a union (banning employer discrimination), or remain silent in this respect. Some legal codes allow unions to obligate their members, such as the requirement to comply with a majority decision in a strike vote. Some restrict this, such as "right to work" legislation in parts of the United States.
In the different organization in the different countries trade union discuses with the employee on behalf of employer. At that time trade union discussed or talk with the manpower of the organization. At that time trade union perform his role like a bridge between the employee and employer.
Workplace participation[edit]
Main articles: Co-determination and Industrial democracy
A legally binding right for workers as a group to participate in workplace management is acknowledged in some form in most developed countries. In a majority of EU member states (for example, Germany, Sweden, and France) the workforce has a right to elect directors on the board of large corporations. This is usually called "codetermination" and currently most countries allow for the election of one third of the board, though the workforce can have the right to elect anywhere from a single director, to just under a half in Germany. However, German company law uses a split board system, in which a "supervisory board" appoints an "executive board". Under the Mitbestimmunggesetz 1976, shareholders and employees elect the supervisory board in equal numbers, but the head of the supervisory board with a casting vote is a shareholder representative. The first statutes to introduce board level codetermination were in Britain, however most of these measures, except in universities, were removed in 1948 and 1979. The oldest surviving statute is found in the United States, in the Massachusetts Laws on manufacturing corporations, introduced in 1919, however this was always voluntary.
In the United Kingdom, similar proposals were drawn up, and a command paper produced named the Bullock Report (Industrial democracy) was released in 1977 by the James Callaghan Labour Party government. Unions would have directly elected half of the board. An "independent" element would also be added. However, the proposal was not enacted. The European Commission offered proposals for worker participation in the "fifth company law directive", which was also not implemented.
In Sweden, participation is regulated through the "Law on board representation". The law covers all private companies with 25 or more employees. In these companies, workers (usually through unions) have a right to appoint two board members and two substitutes. If the company has more than 1,000 employees, this rises to three members and three substitutes. It is common practice to allocate them among the major union coalitions.
Information and consultation[edit]
Workplace statutes in many countries require that employers consult their workers on various issues.
Collective bargaining[edit]
Main article: Collective bargaining
Collective action[edit]
Main articles: Strike action and Picketing (protest)




Strikers gathering in Tyldesley, Greater Manchester in the 1926 General Strike in the U.K.


Strike action is the worker tactic most associated with industrial disputes. In most countries, strikes are legal under a circumscribed set of conditions. Among them may be that:

The strike is decided on by a prescribed democratic process (wildcat strikes are illegal).
Sympathy strikes, against a company by which workers are not directly employed, may be prohibited.
General strikes may be forbidden for example, among public safety workers, to maintain public order.

A boycott is a refusal to buy, sell, or otherwise trade with an individual or business. Other tactics include go-slow, sabotage, work-to-rule, sit-in or en-masse not reporting to work.[20] Some labour law explicitly bans such activity, none explicitly allows it.
Picketing is often used by workers during strikes. They may congregate near the business they are striking against to make their presence felt, increase worker participation and dissuade (or prevent) strike breakers from entering the workplace. In many countries, this activity is restricted by law, by more general law restricting demonstrations, or by injunctions on particular pickets. For example, labour law may restrict secondary picketing (picketing a business connected with the company not directly with the dispute, such as a supplier), or flying pickets (mobile strikers who travel to join a picket). Laws may prohibit obstructing others from conducting lawful business; outlaw obstructive pickets allow court orders to restrict picketing locations or behaving in particular ways (shouting abuse, for example).
International labour law[edit]






v
t
e


International labour cases




ILO Declaration of Fundamental Rights of 1998




Singapore Ministerial Declaration (13 December 1996)




Procurement Regulation (EC) No 732/2008 arts 7-8, 15 and 27




Brussels I Regulation (EC) 44/2001, recital 13, arts 18-20




Rome I Regulation (EC) 593/2008, recitals 34-5, art 8




Lawson v Serco Ltd [2006] UKHL 3




Duncombe v Secretary for Children [2011] UKSC 14




Ravat v Halliburton Ltd [2012] UKSC 1




Posted Workers Directive 96/71/EC art 3




Laval Ltd v Swedish Builders Union (2008) C-319/05




The Rosella (2008) C-438/05




see Labour law




See also: International Labour Organisation, World Trade Organization, and Private international law
The labour movement has long been concerned that economic globalization would weaken worker bargaining power, as their employers could hire workers abroad to avoid domestic labour standards. Karl Marx said:

The extension of the principle of free trade, which induces between nations such a competition that the interest of the workman is liable to be lost sight of and sacrificed in the fierce international race between capitalists, demands that such organizations [unions] should be still further extended and made international.[21]

The International Labour Organization and the World Trade Organization have been a primary focus among international bodies for regulating labour markets. Conflicts arise when people work in more than one country. EU law has a growing body of workplace rules.
International Labour Organization[edit]
Main articles: International Labour Organization and ILO Conventions
Following World War One, the Treaty of Versailles contained the first constitution of a new International Labour Organization (ILO) founded on the principle that "labour is not a commodity", and for the reason that "peace can be established only if it is based upon social justice".[22] ILO's primary role has been to coordinate international labour law by issuing Conventions. ILO members can voluntarily adopt and ratify the Conventions. For instance, the first Hours of Work (Industry) Convention, 1919 required a maximum of a 48-hour week, and has been ratified by 52 out of 185 member states. The UK ultimately refused to ratify the Convention, as did many current EU members, although the Working Time Directive adopts its principles, subject to individual opt-out.[c] ILO's constitution comes from the 1944 Declaration of Philadelphia and under the 1998 Declaration on Fundamental Principles and Rights at Work classified eight conventions[d] as core.
These require freedom to join a union, bargain collectively and take action (Conventions No. 87 and 98), abolition of forced labour (29 and 105), abolition of labour by children before the end of compulsory school (138 and 182), and no discrimination at work (No. 100 and 111). Member compliance with the core Conventions is obligatory, even if the country has not ratified the Convention in question. To ensure compliance, the ILO is limited to gathering evidence and reporting on member states' progress, relying on publicity to create pressure to reform. Global reports on core standards are produced yearly, while individual reports on countries who have ratified other Conventions are compiled on a bi-annual or less frequent basis.
World Trade Organization[edit]




As one of the only international organizations with real enforcement power through trade sanctions, the WTO has been the target for calls by labour lawyers to incorporate global standards of the International Labour Organization.


Because the ILO's enforcement mechanisms are weak,[citation needed] incorporating labour standards in the World Trade Organization's (WTO) operation has been proposed. WTO oversees, primarily, the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade treaty aimed at reducing customs, tariffs and other barriers to import and export of goods, services and capital between its 157 member countries. Unlike for the ILO, contravening WTO rules as recognized by the dispute settlement procedures opens a country to retaliation through trade sanctions. This could include reinstatement of targeted tariffs against the offender.
Proponents have called for a "social clause" to be inserted into the GATT agreements, for example, by amending Article XX, which provides an exception that allows imposition of sanctions for breaches of human rights. An explicit reference to core labour standards could allow comparable action where a WTO member state breaches ILO standards. Opponents argue that such an approach could undermine labour rights, because industries, and therefore workforces could be harmed with no guarantee of reform. Furthermore, it was argued in the 1996 Singapore Ministerial Declaration 1996 that "the comparative advantage of countries, particularly low-age developing countries, must in no way be put into question."[23] Some countries want to take advantage of low wages and fewer rules as a comparative advantage to boost their economies. Another contested point is whether business moves production from high wage to low wage countries, given potential differences in worker productivity.[24] Since GATT, most trade agreements have been bilateral. Some of these protect core labour standards.[citation needed][e] Moreover, in domestic tariff regulations, some countries give preference to countries that respect core labour rights, for example under the EC Tariff Preference Regulation, articles 7 and 8.[25]
Work in multiple countries[edit]
Main article: Conflict of laws
Conflicts of laws (or private international law) issues arise where workers work in multiple jurisdictions. If a US worker performs part of her job in Brazil, China and Denmark (a "peripatetic" worker) an employer may seek to characterize the employment contract as governed by the law of the country where labour rights are least favourable to the worker, or seek to argue that the most favourable system of labour rights does not apply. For example, in a UK labour law case, Ravat v Halliburton Manufacturing and Services Ltd[26] Ravat was from the UK but was employed in Libya by a German company that was part of Halliburton. He was dismissed by a supervisor based in Egypt. He was told he would be hired under UK law terms and conditions, and this was arranged by a staffing department in Aberdeen. Under the UK Employment Rights Act 1996 he would have a right to claim unfair dismissal, but the Act left open the question of the statute's territorial scope. The UK Supreme Court held that the principle would be that an expatriate worker, would be subject to UK rules if the worker could show a "close connection" to the UK, which was found in Rabat's case.[f]
This fits within the general framework in the EU. Under EU Rome I Regulation article 8,[27] workers have employment rights of the country where they habitually work. They may have a claim in another country if they can establish a close connection to it. The Regulation emphasises that the rules should be applied with the purpose of protecting the worker.[28]
It is also necessary that a court has jurisdiction to hear a claim. Under the Brussels I Regulation article 19,[29] this requires the worker habitually works in the place where the claim is brought, or is engaged there.
EU law[edit]






This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (October 2013) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Main articles: EU law, European labour law, and Directive on services in the internal market
The European Union has extensive labour laws that officially exclude (according to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union) matters around direct wage regulation (e.g. setting a minimum wage), fairness of dismissals and collective bargaining. A series of Directives regulate almost all other issues, for instance the Working Time Directive guarantees 28 days of paid holiday, the Equality Framework Directive prohibits all forms of discrimination and the Collective Redundancies Directive requires that proper notice is given and consultation takes place on decisions about economic dismissals.
However, the European Court of Justice has recently extended the Treaties provisions via case law. Trade unions have sought to organize across borders in the same way that multinational corporations have organized production globally. Unions have sought to take collective action and strikes internationally. However, this coordination was challenged in the European Union in two controversial decisions. In Laval Ltd v Swedish Builders Union[30] a group of Latvian workers were sent to a construction site in Sweden. The local union took industrial action to make Laval Ltd sign up to the local collective bargaining agreement. Under the Posted Workers Directive, article 3 lays down minimum standards for foreign workers so that workers receive at least the minimum rights that they would have in their home country in case their place of work has lower minimum rights. Article 3(7) says that this "shall not prevent application of terms and conditions of employment which are more favourable to workers". Most people thought this meant that more favourable conditions could be given than the minimum (e.g., in Latvian law) by the host state's legislation or a collective agreement. However the European Court of Justice (ECJ) said that only the local state could raise standards beyond its minimum for foreign workers. Any attempt by the host state, or a collective agreement (unless the collective agreement is declared universal under article 3(8)) would infringe the business' freedom under TFEU article 56. This decision was implicitly reversed by the European Union legislature in the Rome I Regulation, which makes clear in recital 34 that the host state may allow more favourable standards. However, in The Rosella, the ECJ held that a blockade by the International Transport Workers Federation against a business that was using an Estonian flag of convenience (i.e., saying it was operating under Estonian law to avoid labour standards of Finland) infringed the business' right of free establishment under TFEU article 49. The ECJ said that it recognized the workers' "right to strike" in accordance with ILO Convention 87, but said that its use must be proportionately to the right of the business' establishment.
National labour laws[edit]
Australia[edit]
Main article: Australian Labour Law
The Fair Work Act of 2009 provides the regulations governing Australian workplaces and employers. Australia has a minimum wage and workplace conditions overseen by the Fair Work Commission.[31]
Canada[edit]
Main article: Canadian labour and employment law




This section needs expansion. You can help by adding to it. (October 2013)



In Canadian law, "labour law" refers to matters connected with unionized workplaces, while "employment law" deals with non-unionized employees.
In 2017, Premier Brad Wall announced that Saskatchewan's government is to cut 3.5 percent from its workers and officers' wages in 2018. This salary cut includes MLA ministers and the Premier's office staff along all people employed by the government. Unpaid days off, will also be implemented as well as limiting overtime to assist the wage cut.[32][33]
China[edit]
Main article: Chinese labour law
In the People's Republic of China the basic labour laws are the Labour Law of People's Republic of China (promulgated on 5 July 1994) and the Law of the People's Republic of China on Employment Contracts (adopted at the 28th Session of the Standing Committee of the 10th National People's Congress on June 29, 2007, effective from January 1, 2008). The administrative regulations enacted by the State Council, the ministerial rules and the judicial explanations of the Supreme People's Court stipulate detailed rules concerning various aspects of employment. The government-controlled All China Federation of Trade Unions is the sole legal labour union. Strikes are formally legal, but in practice are discouraged.
France[edit]
Main article: French labour law
In France, the first labour laws were Waldeck Rousseau's laws passed in 1884. Between 1936 and 1938 the Popular Front enacted a law mandating 12 days (2 weeks) each year of paid vacation for workers, and a law limited the work week to 40 hours, excluding overtime. The Grenelle accords negotiated on May 25 and 26th in the middle of the May 1968 crisis, reduced the working week to 44 hours and created trade union sections in each enterprise.[34] The minimum wage was increased by 25%.[35] In 2000, Lionel Jospin's government enacted the 35-hour workweek, reduced from 39 hours. Five years later, conservative prime minister Dominique de Villepin enacted the New Employment Contract (CNE). Addressing the demands of employers asking for more flexibility in French labour laws, the CNE sparked criticism from trade unions and opponents claiming it favoured contingent work. In 2006, he then attempted to pass the First Employment Contract (CPE) through a vote by emergency procedure, but that was met by students and unions' protests. President Jacques Chirac finally had no choice but to repeal it.
India[edit]
Main article: Indian labour law
Over fifty national and many more state-level laws govern work in India. So for instance, a permanent worker can be terminated only for proven misconduct or habitual absence.[36] In the Uttam Nakate case, the Bombay High Court held that dismissing an employee for repeated sleeping on the factory floor was illegal – the decision was overturned by the Supreme Court of India two decades later. In 2008, the World Bank criticized the complexity, lack of modernization and flexibility in Indian regulations.[37][38]
Iran[edit]
Main article: Iranian labour law




This section needs expansion. You can help by adding to it. (June 2008)



Iran has not ratified the two basic Conventions of the International Labour Organization on freedom of association and collective bargaining and one abolishing child labour.[39]
Japan[edit]
Main article: Japanese labor law
Mexico[edit]
Main article: Mexican labor law
Mexican labour law reflects the historic interrelation between the state and the Confederation of Mexican Workers. The confederation is officially aligned with the Institutional Revolutionary Party (the Institutional Revolutionary Party, or PRI). While the law promises workers the right to strike and to organize, in practice it is difficult or impossible for independent unions to organize.
Sweden[edit]
See also: Swedish labour movement
In Sweden many workplace issues such as working hours, minimum wage and right to overtime compensation are regulated through collective bargaining agreements in accordance with the Swedish model of self-regulation, i.e. regulation by the labour market parties themselves in contrast to state regulation (labour laws).[40][7] A notable exception is the Employment Protection act which regulates employment contracts and extensive employees' rights to employment under certain conditions.[41]
Switzerland[edit]
Main article: Swiss labour law
The labour law of Switzerland covers all standards governing the employment of some kind. The regulation of the employment by private employers is largely harmonized at the federal level, while public-sector employment still prevails a variety of cantonal laws. In particular, the civil standardization is distributed to a variety of laws. Of greater importance, particularly the new Federal Constitution of 1999, the Code of Obligations , the Labour Code as well as in the public sector, the Federal Personnel Act.[42]
United Kingdom[edit]
Main article: UK labour law
The Factory Acts (first one in 1802, then 1833) and the 1823 Master and Servant Act were the first laws regulating labour relations in the United Kingdom. Most employment law before 1960 was based upon the Law of Contract. Since then there has been a significant expansion primarily due to the "equality movement"[43] and the European Union.[citation needed] Laws are either Acts of Parliament called Statutes, Statutory Regulations (made by a Secretary of State under an Act of Parliament) or Case Law (developed by various courts).
The first significant expansion was the Equal Pay Act of 1970. This act was introduced to bring about pay equality for women in the workplace. Since 1997, changes in UK employment law include enhanced maternity and paternity rights,[44] the introduction of a National Minimum Wage[45] and the Working Time Regulations,[46] which covers working time, rest breaks and the right to paid annual leave. Discrimination law has been tightened, with protection from discrimination now available on the grounds of age, religion or belief and sexual orientation as well as gender, race and disability.
United States[edit]
Main article: United States labor law




An American builder


The Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 set the maximum standard work week to 44 hours. In 1950 this was reduced to 40 hours. A green card entitles immigrants to work, without requirement a separate work permit. Despite the 40-hour standard maximum work week,[47] some lines of work require more than 40 hours. For example, farm workers may work over 72 hours a week, followed by at least 24 hours off.[citation needed] Exceptions to the break period exist for certain harvesting employees, such as those involved in harvesting grapes, tree fruits and cotton.
Professionals, clerical (administrative assistants), technical, and mechanical employees cannot be terminated for refusing to work more than 72 hours in a work week.[48] These ceilings, combined with a competitive job market, often motivate American workers to work more hours. American workers on average take the fewest days off of any developed country.[49]
The Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments of the United States Constitution limit the power of the federal and state governments to discriminate. The private sector is not directly constrained by the Constitution, but several laws, particularly the Civil Rights Act of 1964, limit the private sector discrimination against certain groups. The Fifth Amendment[50] has an explicit requirement that the Federal Government not deprive individuals of "life, liberty, or property", without due process of law and an implicit guarantee that each person receive equal protection of the law. The Fourteenth Amendment[50] explicitly prohibits states from violating an individual's rights of due process and equal protection. Equal protection limits the State and Federal governments' power to discriminate in their employment practices by treating employees, former employees, or job applicants unequally because of membership in a group, like a race, religion or sex. Due process protection requires that employees have a fair procedural process before they are terminated if the termination is related to a "liberty", like the right to free speech, or a property interest.
The National Labor Relations Act, enacted in 1935 as part of the New Deal legislation, guarantees workers the right to form unions and engage in collective bargaining.
The Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967 prohibits employment discrimination based on age with respect to employees 40 years of age or older.
Title VII of the Civil Rights Act is the principal federal statute with regard to employment discrimination, prohibiting unlawful employment discrimination by public and private employers, labour organizations, training programmes and employment agencies based on race or colour, religion, sex and national origin. Retaliation is also prohibited by Title VII against any person for opposing any practice forbidden by statute, or for making a charge, testifying, assisting, or participating in a proceeding under the statute. The Civil Rights Act of 1991 expanded the damages available to Title VII cases and granted Title VII plaintiffs the right to jury trial.[51]
Halakhah (Jewish religious law)[edit]
The beginnings of halakhic labour law are in the Bible, in which two commandments refer to this subject: The law against delayed wages (Lev. 19:13; Deut. 24:14-15) and the worker's right to eat the employer's crops (Deut. 23:25-26). The Talmudic law—in which labour law is called "laws of worker hiring"—elaborates on many more aspects of employment relations, mainly in Tractate Baba Metzi'a. In some issues the Talamud, following the Tosefta, refers the parties to the customary law: "All is as the custom of the region [postulates]". Modern halakhic labour law developed very slowly. Rabbi Israel Meir Hacohen (the Hafetz Hayim) interprets the worker's right for timely payment in a tendency that clearly favours the employee over the employer, but does not refer to new questions of employment relations. Only in the 1920s we find the first halakhic authority to tackle the questions of trade unions (that could easily be anchored in Talmudic law) and the right of strike (which is quite problematic in terms of Talmudic law). Rabbis A.I Kook and B.M.H. Uziel tend to corporatist settling of labour conflicts, while Rabbi Moshe Feinstein clearly adopts the liberal democratic collective bargaining model. Since the 1940s the halakhic literature on labour law was enriched by books and articles that referred to growing range of questions and basically adopted the liberal democratic approach.
See also[edit]


Organized labour portal




Employee benefits
Benefit incidence
Profit sharing
Novated lease
Family economics
Family wage
Living Wage
Basic income
Distributism
Guaranteed Minimum Income
Human rights
Labor market
Maximum wage
Minimum wage
Positive rights
Precarious work
Supply and demand
Trade Boards Act 1909
Working poor
Collective bargaining
Contingent work
Employment contract
Industrial relations
Journal of Individual Employment Rights
Labour market flexibility
Labour movement
Legal working age and child labour
Master and Servant Act
Occupational licensing
Protective laws (on gender)
Right-to-work law
Social security
Sweat shops
Swiss labour law
Union Organizer
Vicarious liability
Weekends
WorkChoices
Workplace Fairness


Notes[edit]



^ For example, an employee's refusal to violate law or an employee's assertion of rights.
^ In the US, under the National Labor Relations Act, a worker has no right to organize where he is considered a manager, see NLRB v. Kentucky River Community Care, 532 U.S. 706 (2001)
^ Two further general working time conventions are the Forty-Hour Week Convention (No. 51) and the Holidays with Pay Convention (No. 52). For general information, see Ewing, Keith (1994). Britain and the ILO (2nd ed.). London: Institute of Employment Rights. p. 16. ISBN 9781873271339. 
^ There are 189 Conventions, however some have been superseded by others. For instance, Conventions No. 2, 34, 96, and 181 all concern private employment agencies, but only Convention 181 is in force.
^ e.g. European Union–South Korea Free Trade Agreement (14 May 2011) OJ 2011 L127, Article 13.
^ See also Lawson v Serco Ltd (2006 UKHL 3) and Duncombe v Secretary of State for Children, Schools and Families (2011 UKSC 36)



References[edit]



^ From an " Essay on Trade " (1770), quoted in History of Factory Legislation, by B. Leigh Hutchins and Amy Harrison (1903), pp. 5, 6.
^ "The Ten Hours' Bill", The Times (19449), p. 7, 18 January 1847, retrieved 19 August 2011  (subscription required)
^ Yale University Library holds full text versions of the Ten Hours' Advocate in its microfilm department
^ Bloy, Marjorie http://www.historyhome.co.uk/peel/factmine/factory.htm "The Factory Question" accessed 20 March 2009
^ e.g. In the European Union, Directive 91/533
^ "Minimum Wage Act in Germany with effect from 01-01-2015". Dr. Mayer & Kügler Rechtsanwälte PartG mbB - Arbeitsrecht. Lawyer Michael Kügler. Retrieved 27 January 2016. 
^ a b Anders Kjellberg (2017) ”Self-regulation versus State Regulation in Swedish Industrial Relations” In Mia Rönnmar and Jenny Julén Votinius (eds.) Festskrift till Ann Numhauser-Henning. Lund: Juristförlaget i Lund 2017, pp. 357-383
^ Anders Kjellberg Kollektivavtalens täckningsgrad samt organisationsgraden hos arbetsgivarförbund och fackförbund, Department of Sociology, Lund University. Studies in Social Policy, Industrial Relations, Working Life and Mobility. Research Reports 2017:1, Appendix 3 (in English) Tables F-G
^ "History of Federal Minimum Wage Rates Under the Fair Labor Standards Act, 1938 – 1996". Department of Labor. January 31, 2015. 
^ "DECRETO-LEI" [Law Decree] (in Portuguese) (2.162). Senado Federal [Brazilian Senate]. 1 May 1940. Archived from the original on 16 January 2013. 
^ The Minimum Wages Act, 1948
^ "Minimum wage (guaranteed)". European Foundation for the Improvement of Living and Working Conditions. March 31, 2006. Archived from the original on 2013-10-29. 
^ "National Minimum Wage". Department of Trade and Industry. March 31, 2006. Archived from the original on 2009-01-29. 
^ "Minimum Wages 2005: Major Differences between EU Member States" (PDF). Eurostat. 2005. Archived from the original (PDF) on 18 July 2011. 
^ Clain, S. (2008). "How Living Wage Legislation Affects U.S. Poverty Rates". Journal of Labor Research. 29 (3): 205–218. doi:10.1007/s12122-007-9028-8. 
^ "Un contrat en CNE jugé contraire au droit international" (in French). Reuters. April 28, 2006. Archived from the original on May 24, 2006. Retrieved 2006-05-05. 
^ "Bernard Thibault au plus haut". L'Express (in French). April 28, 2006. Archived from the original on 2009-10-01. Retrieved 2006-05-05. 
^ Galbi, Douglas A. (13 June 1994). "Child Labor and the Division of Labor in the Early English Cotton Mills". Galbi Think!. 
^ "The State of the World's Children 1997". UNICEF. Retrieved 2007-04-15. 
^ Weller, Ken. "The Lordstown Struggle and the Real Crisis in Production". Archived from the original on February 13, 2006. 
^ Marx, Karl (September 1869). "Report of the General Council to the Fourth Annual Congress". Basle, Switzerland. 
^ Treaty of Versailles (1919) Part XIII, Section I, and Article 427
^ "Singapore Ministerial Declaration". World Trade Organization. 13 December 1996. 
^ Elliot, Kimberly Ann (2003). Freeman, Richard B., ed. Can Labor Standards Improve Under Globalization?. Washington, DC: Institute for International Economics. ISBN 9780881323320. 
^ Tariff Preference Regulation (EC) No. 732/2008 Articles 7, 8, 15, and Annex II and III
^ Ravat v Halliburton Manufacturing and Services Ltd (United Kingdom Supreme Court 8 February 2012). Text ([2012] UKSC 1)
^ Rome I Regulation (Regulation (EC) No 593/2008) Full text
^ Rome I, recital 23 and Brussels I, recital 13
^ Brussels I Regulation (EC) No 44/2001
^ Laval Ltd v Swedish Builders Union C-319/05 (2008) Case text
^ "Fair Work Commission". Fair Work Commission. Retrieved 2016-07-28. 
^ "Sask. premier wants to cut overall public sector worker compensation by 3.5%". CBC News. Retrieved 2017-06-28. 
^ "Labour law prof says layoffs likely as Sask. gov't rolls back wages 3.5 per cent". Global News. Retrieved 2017-06-28. 
^ (in French) Section syndicale d'entreprise December 27, 1968 law
^ (in French) SMIG
^ Parul Sharma (February 2007). "Split Legal Regime in India's Labour Laws" (PDF). [dead link]
^ "India Country Overview 2008". World Bank. 2008. Archived from the original on May 22, 2011. 
^ "World Bank criticizes India's labor laws". 
^ "Ratification of basic Conventions". Archived from the original on 2012-05-24. 
^ Kjellberg, Anders (2009) "The Swedish Model of Industrial Relations: Self-Regulation and Combined Centralisation-Decentralisation", in Craig Phelan (ed.) Trade Unionism since 1945: Towards a Global History. Oxford: Peter Lang, pp. 155-198. Volume 1 (Western Europe, Eastern Europe, Africa and the Middle East). ISBN 978-3-03911-410-8
^ "Lagen om Anställningsskydd SFS 1982:80". Retrieved 10 April 2017. 
^ J. Brühwiler: Arbeitsrecht in der Schweiz
^ "Equality In British Employment Law". Sarah Edmunds Legal. 2013-03-28. Archived from the original on 2013-03-13. 
^ "Employers Maternity Leave Policy, Maternity & Paternity Allowance Policy". Citation.co.uk. Archived from the original on 2013-10-16. Retrieved 2013-08-18. 
^ "Statutory Regulations In British Employment Law". Access Solicitor. 2013-10-01. Archived from the original on 2013-02-18. 
^ "Employers Working Time Regulations 1998 2009, Working Time Directive". Citation.co.uk. Retrieved 2013-08-18. 
^ "Working More than 72 Hours in a Week Cannot be Required". Deskin Law Firm. 
^ Aguilar, Victoria. "Remember Exemptions to the FLSA", The AR Group, LLP, Colorado, 13 January 2015. Retrieved on 15 January 2015.
^ "Paid Vacation Around the World". infoplease. Pearson Education. 
^ a b "US Constitution – 5th and 14th Amendments". findUSlaw. 
^ "Civil Rights Act of 1964". findUSlaw. 



Further reading[edit]

Stephen F. Befort and John W. Budd, Invisible Hands, Invisible Objectives: Bringing Workplace Law and Public Policy Into Focus (2009) Stanford University Press
Blanpain, Prof. R., (University of Leuven, Belgium), Editor. The International Encyclopaedia for Labour Law and Industrial Relations. Archived from the original on June 9, 2014. Retrieved June 26, 2014. CS1 maint: Extra text: authors list (link)
E McGaughey, 'Behavioural Economics and Labour Law' (2014) LSE Legal Studies Working Paper No. 20/2014
Keith Ewing, Aileen McColgan and Hugh Collins, Labour Law, Cases, Texts and Materials (2005) Hart Publishing
Simon Deakin and Gillian Morris, Labour Law (2005) Hart Publishing ISBN 978-1-84113-560-1
Keshawn Walker and Arn Morell, "Labor and Employment: Workplace Warzone", Georgetown University Thesis (2005)
P. L. Malik's Industrial Law (Covering Labour Law in India) (2 Volumes with Free CD-ROM) (2015 ed.). Eastern Book Company. pp. 1–3656. ISBN 9789351451808. 
Labour Laws - A Primer (2011 ed.). Eastern Book Company. pp. 1–224. ISBN 9789350281437. 

External links[edit]



Look up labour law in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.



 "Labor Legislation". New International Encyclopedia. 1905. 







v
t
e


Employment



Classifications



Casual
Contingent
Full-time
Part-time
Self-employed
Skilled
Independent contractor
Temporary
Tenure
Unskilled
Wage labour





Hiring



Application
Background check
Business networking
Contract
Cover letter
Curriculum Vitae (CV)
Drug testing
e-recruitment
Employment counsellor
Executive search
Induction programme
Job fair
Job fraud
Job hunting
Job interview
Labour brokering
Overqualification
Onboarding
Personality-job fit theory
Person-environment fit
Probation
Reference
Résumé
Simultaneous recruiting of new graduates
Underemployment
Work-at-home scheme





Roles



Co-op
Employee
Employer
Internship
Job
Permanent
Permatemp
Supervisor
Volunteer





Worker class



Blue-collar
Gold-collar
Green-collar
Grey-collar
Pink-collar
White-collar





Career and training



Apprenticeship
Avocation
Career assessment
Career counseling
Career development
Coaching
Creative class
Education

Continuing education
Continuing professional development
E-learning
Employability
Further education
Graduate school
Induction training
Initial Professional Development
Knowledge worker
Licensure
Lifelong learning
Practice-based professional learning
Professional association
Professional certification
Professional development
Professional school
Reflective practice
Retraining
Vocational education
Vocational school
Vocational university


Mentorship
Occupational Outlook Handbook
Practice firm
Profession
Tradesman
Vocation





Attendance



Break
Career break
Furlough
Gap year
Leave of absence
Long service leave
No call, no show
Sabbatical
Sick leave
Time clock





Schedules



Four-day week
Eight-hour day
Flextime
Overtime
Retroactive overtime
Shift work
Telecommuting
Working time
Workweek and weekend





Wages and salaries



Income bracket
Income tax
Living wage
Maximum wage
National average salary

World
Europe


Minimum wage

Canada
Hong Kong
Europe
United States


Progressive wage

Singapore


Overtime rate
Paid time off
Performance-related pay
Salary
Salary cap
Working poor





Benefits



Annual leave
Casual Friday
Day care
Disability insurance
Health insurance
Life insurance
Parental leave
Pension
Sick leave
Take-home vehicle





Safety and health



Epilepsy and employment
Human factors and ergonomics
Industrial noise
Karōshi
Protective clothing
Occupational burnout
Occupational disease
Occupational exposure limit
Occupational health psychology
Occupational injury
Occupational stress
Repetitive strain injury
Sick building syndrome
Work accident

Occupational fatality


Workers' compensation
Workplace phobia
Workplace wellness





Equality



Affirmative action
Equal pay for women
Gender pay gap
Glass ceiling





Infractions



Corporate abuse

Accounting scandals
Corporate behaviour
Corporate crime
Control fraud
Corporate scandals


Discrimination
Dress code
Employee handbook
Employee monitoring
Evaluation
Labour law
Sexual harassment
Sleeping while on duty
Wage theft
Whistleblower
Workplace bullying
Workplace harassment
Workplace incivility





Willingness



Boreout
Civil conscription
Conscription
Dead-end job
Extreme careerism
Job satisfaction
Organizational commitment
McJob
Refusal of work
Slavery

Bonded labour
Human trafficking
Labour camp
Penal labour
Peonage
Truck system
Unfree labour
Wage slavery


Workaholic
Work aversion
Work ethic
Work–life balance

Downshifting
Slow living







Termination



At-will employment
Dismissal

Banishment room
Constructive dismissal
Wrongful dismissal


Employee exit management
Exit interview
Layoff
Notice period
Pink slip
Resignation

Letter of resignation


Restructuring
Retirement

Mandatory retirement
Retirement age


Severance package

Golden handshake
Golden parachute


Turnover





Unemployment



Barriers to Employment
Depression

Great Depression
Long Depression


Discouraged worker
Frictional unemployment
Full employment
Graduate unemployment
Involuntary unemployment
Jobless recovery
Phillips curve
Recession

Great Recession
Great Recession job losses
List of recessions
Recession-proof job


Reserve army of labour
Types of unemployment
Unemployment Convention
Unemployment benefits
Unemployment extension
Unemployment insurance
Unemployment rates

Employment rates
Employment-to-population ratio


Structural unemployment
Technological unemployment
Wage curve
Youth unemployment








 See also templates


Aspects of corporations
Aspects of jobs
Aspects of occupations
Aspects of organizations
Aspects of workplaces
Corporate titles
Organized labor












v
t
e


Law



Core subjects



Administrative law
Constitutional law
Contract
Criminal law
Deed
Equity
Evidence
International law
Law of obligations
Procedure

Civil
Criminal


Property law
Public law
Restitution
Statutory law
Tort





Other subjects



Agricultural law
Aviation law
Banking law
Bankruptcy
Commercial law
Competition law
Conflict of laws
Construction law
Consumer protection
Corporate law
Cyberlaw
Election law
Energy law
Entertainment law
Environmental law
Family law
Financial regulation
Health law
Immigration law
Intellectual property
International criminal law
International human rights
International slavery laws
Labour
Law of war
Legal archaeology
Legal fiction
Maritime law
Media law
Military law
Probate

Estate
Will and testament


Product liability
Public international law
Space law
Sports law
Tax law
Transport law
Trust law
Women in law





Sources of law



Charter
Constitution
Custom
Divine right
Human rights
Natural and legal rights
Case law

Precedent







Law making



Ballot measure
Codification
Decree

Edict
Executive order
Proclamation


Legislation

Delegated legislation
Regulation
Rulemaking


Promulgation
Repeal
Treaty
Statutory law

Statute
Act of Parliament
Act of Congress (US)







Legal systems



Civil law
Common law
Chinese law
Legal pluralism
Religious law

Canon law
Hindu law
Jain law
Jewish law
Sharia


Roman law
Socialist law
Statutory law
Xeer
Yassa





Legal theory



Critical legal studies
Comparative law
Feminist
Law and economics
Legal formalism
History
Natural law
International legal theory
Principle of legality
Rule of law
Sociology





Jurisprudence



Adjudication
Administration of justice
Criminal justice
Court-martial
Dispute resolution
Fiqh
Lawsuit/Litigation
Legal opinion
Legal remedy
Judge

Justice of the peace
Magistrate


Judgment
Judicial review
Jurisdiction
Jury
Justice
Practice of law

Attorney
Barrister
Counsel
Lawyer
Legal representation
Prosecutor
Solicitor


Question of fact
Question of law
Trial
Trial advocacy
Trier of fact
Verdict





Legal institutions



Bureaucracy
The bar
The bench
Civil society
Court
Election commission
Executive
Judiciary
Law enforcement
Legal education

Law school


Legislature
Military
Police
Political party
Tribunal








Category
Index
Outline
Portal












v
t
e


Trade unions and organized labour






Trade union (public sector)
Labour history
Labour rights
Labour movement





Formation




Structure



Labour council
Union organizer
National trade union centre
Global union federation
Union representative
Clerk of the Chapel
Father of the Chapel
Local union
Union dues
Vigilance committee
Union label
Salt
Trades Hall
Duty of fair representation





Models



Organizing model
Service model
Social Movement Unionism
Community unionism
Members-only unionism
One Big Union
Open-source unionism
Business unionism
Dual unionism
Solidarity unionism
Syndicalism





Types



Company union
Independent union
General union
Craft unionism
Industrial unionism








Industrial
relations




Shops and hiring



Closed shop
Open shop
Agency shop
Union shop
Hiring hall
Bump
Scope clause





Actions



Unfair list
Strike action

recognition
secondary action


Strike notice
Occupation of factories
Precarious work
Precarity
General strike
Sitdown strike
Slowdown
Bossnapping
Stay-away
Labour unrest
Grievance
Organizational dissent
Overtime ban
Industrial action
Walkout
Contingent work
Whipsaw strike
Wildcat strike action
Work-to-rule
Green ban
Picketing





Bargaining



Collective bargaining
Collaborative bargaining
Mutual gains bargaining
Pattern bargaining
Bargaining unit
Union security agreement
Master contract
Enterprise bargaining agreement





Compensation



Strike pay
Union wage premium
Workers' compensation








Reactions



Opposition to trade unions
Labour spies in the United States
Union busting
Givebacks
Churn and burn
Paper local
Anti-union violence
Anti-union violence in the United States
Union violence
Big labour
Demarcation dispute
Strikebreaker
Goon squad
Featherbedding





Other topics



International comparisons of labour unions
Labour code
Labour law
Eight-hour day
Worker centre









Authority control



GND: 4002769-7
NDL: 00569596











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Labour_law&oldid=816244092"					Categories: Labour lawLabour relationsSocial programsEmployment compensationWorking conditionsWorking timeHidden categories: Pages containing links to subscription-only contentCS1 Portuguese-language sources (pt)CS1 French-language sources (fr)Articles with French-language external linksAll articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from October 2013Use British English Oxford spelling from January 2014All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from April 2013Articles with unsourced statements from October 2012Articles with unsourced statements from October 2013Articles needing additional references from October 2013All articles needing additional referencesArticles to be expanded from October 2013All articles to be expandedArticles using small message boxesArticles to be expanded from June 2008Articles with unsourced statements from April 2008Articles with unsourced statements from November 2011CS1 maint: Extra text: authors listWikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the New International EncyclopediaWikipedia articles with GND identifiers