





This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (April 2012) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)







This conical hill in Salar de Arizaro, Salta, Argentina called Cono de Arita constitutes a landform.


A landform is a natural feature of the solid surface of the Earth or other planetary body. Landforms together make up a given terrain, and their arrangement in the landscape is known as topography. Typical landforms include hills, mountains, plateaus, canyons, and valleys, as well as shoreline features such as bays, peninsulas, and seas,[citation needed] including submerged features such as mid-ocean ridges, volcanoes, and the great ocean basins.



Contents


1 Physical characteristics
2 Hierarchy of classes
3 Recent developments
4 See also
5 References
6 External links



Physical characteristics
Landforms are categorized by characteristic physical attributes such as elevation, slope, orientation, stratification, rock exposure, and soil type. Gross physical features or landforms include intuitive elements such as berms, mounds, hills, ridges, cliffs, valleys, rivers, peninsulas, volcanoes, and numerous other structural and size-scaled (i.e. ponds vs. lakes, hills vs. mountains) elements including various kinds of inland and oceanic waterbodies and sub-surface features.





This panorama in Great Smoky Mountains National Park has the readily identifiable physical features of a rolling plain, actually part of a broad valley, distant foothills, and a backdrop of the old, much weathered Appalachian mountain range


Hierarchy of classes




Karst towers landforms along Lijiang River, Guilin, China


Oceans and continents exemplify the highest-order landforms. Landform elements are parts of a high-order landforms that can be further identified and systematically given a cohesive definition such as hill-tops, shoulders, saddles, foreslopes and backslopes.
Some generic landform elements including: pits, peaks, channels, ridges, passes, pools and plains.
Terrain (or relief) is the third or vertical dimension of land surface. Topography is the study of terrain, although the word is often used as a synonym for relief itself. When relief is described underwater, the term bathymetry is used. In cartography, many different techniques are used to describe relief, including contour lines and TIN (Triangulated irregular network).
Elementary landforms (segments, facets, relief units) are the smallest homogeneous divisions of the land surface, at the given scale/resolution. These are areas with relatively homogeneous morphometric properties, bounded by lines of discontinuity. A plateau or a hill can be observed at various scales ranging from few hundred meters to hundreds of kilometers. Hence, the spatial distribution of landforms is often scale-dependent as is the case for soils and geological strata.
A number of factors, ranging from plate tectonics to erosion and deposition, can generate and affect landforms. Biological factors can also influence landforms— for example, note the role of vegetation in the development of dune systems and salt marshes, and the work of corals and algae in the formation of coral reefs.
Landforms do not include man-made features, such as canals, ports and many harbors; and geographic features, such as deserts, forests, and grasslands. Many of the terms are not restricted to refer to features of the planet Earth, and can be used to describe surface features of other planets and similar objects in the Universe. Examples are mountains, hills, polar caps, and valleys, which are found on all of the terrestrial planets.
The scientific study of landforms is known as geomorphology.
Recent developments
Landforms may be extracted from a digital elevation model using some automated techniques where the data has been gathered by modern satellites and stereoscopic aerial surveillance cameras.[1] Until recently, compiling the data found in such data sets required time consuming and expensive techniques involving many man-hours. The most detailed DEMs available are measured directly using LIDAR techniques.
See also


Environment portal



Geomorphology
Land
List of landforms
Open-geomorphometry project
Terrain

References



^ Robert A. MacMillan; David H. McNabb; R. Keith Jones (September 2000). "Conference paper: "Automated landform classification using DEMs"". Retrieved 2008-06-26. 



External links



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Landforms.





Look up landform in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.



Open-Geomorphometry Project







v
t
e


Earth's landforms




List of landforms



Mountainous



Table

Butte


Flat
Hill
Mountain
Mountain range
Plateau
Ridge
Valley





Continental plain



Ice sheet
Plain
Steppe
Tundra





Fluvial



Alluvial fan
Beach
Canyon
Cave
Channel
Cliff
Floodplain
Lake
Levee
Meander
Oasis
Pond
Rapids
River
River delta
River mouth
River valley
Strait
Swamp
Waterfall





Glacial



Arête
Cirque
Esker
Fjord
Glacier
Tunnel valley





Oceanic and
coastal landforms



Atoll
Bay
Cape
Channel
Coast
Continental shelf
Coral reef
Estuary
High island
Island
Isthmus
Lagoon
Mid-ocean ridge
Oceanic trench
Peninsula
Seamount





Volcanic



Caldera
Crater lake
Geyser
High island
Mid-ocean ridge
Lava dome
Lava field
Lava plateau
Submarine volcano

Guyot


Volcanic crater
Volcanic plug
Volcano
Wall rock





Aeolian



Desert
Dry lake
Dune
Sandhill
Tundra





Artificial



Artificial island
Artificial reef
Bridge
Building
Canal (man-made)
Dam
Ditch
Land reclamation
Levee
Polder
Quarry
Reservoir
Road
Tunnel









See also: Geographical feature










Authority control



NDL: 01066586











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Landform&oldid=817859356"					Categories: LandformsLandscapeHidden categories: Wikipedia pages semi-protected against vandalismArticles needing additional references from April 2012All articles needing additional referencesAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from December 2017