



The traditional language families spoken in Africa:
  Afroasiatic
  Nilo-Saharan
  Niger–Congo
     Bantu
  Khoisan
  Indo-European
  Austronesian



The languages of Africa are divided into six major language families:

Afroasiatic languages are spread throughout Western Asia, North Africa, the Horn of Africa and parts of the Sahel.
Austronesian languages are spoken in Madagascar.
Indo-European languages are spoken in South Africa and Namibia (Afrikaans, English, German) and are used as lingua francas in the former colonies of Britain (English), former colonies of France (French), former colonies of Portugal (Portuguese), former colonies of Spain (Spanish) and the current Spanish territories of Ceuta, Melilla and the Canary Islands (Spanish).
Khoe languages are concentrated in the Kalahari Desert of Namibia and Botswana.
Niger–Congo languages (Bantu and non-Bantu) cover West, Central, Southeast and Southern Africa.
Nilo-Saharan languages (unity debated) are spoken from Tanzania to Sudan and from Chad to Mali.

There are several other small families and language isolates, as well as languages that have yet to be classified. In addition, Africa has a wide variety of sign languages, many of which are language isolates (see below).
The total number of languages natively spoken in Africa is variously estimated (depending on the delineation of language vs. dialect) at between 1,250 to 2,100,[1] and by some counts at "over 3,000",[2] Nigeria alone has over 500 languages (according to the count of SIL Ethnologue),[3] one of the greatest concentrations of linguistic diversity in the world.
Around a hundred languages are widely used for inter-ethnic communication. Arabic, Somali, Berber, Amharic, Oromo, Igbo, Swahili, Hausa, Manding, Fulani and Yoruba are spoken by tens of millions of people. Twelve dialect clusters (which may group up to a hundred linguistic varieties) are spoken by 75 percent, and fifteen by 85 percent, of Africans as a first or additional language.[4] Although many mid-sized languages are used on the radio, in newspapers and in primary-school education, and some of the larger ones are considered national languages, only a few are official at the national level. The African Union declared 2006 the "Year of African Languages".[5]



Contents


1 Language groups

1.1 Afroasiatic languages
1.2 Nilo-Saharan languages
1.3 Niger–Congo languages
1.4 Other language families

1.4.1 Austronesian
1.4.2 Indo-European
1.4.3 Small families
1.4.4 Creole languages
1.4.5 Unclassified languages
1.4.6 Sign languages




2 Language in Africa

2.1 Official Languages
2.2 Cross-border languages
2.3 Language change and planning
2.4 Demographics


3 Linguistic features

3.1 Phonological
3.2 Syntactic
3.3 Semantic


4 Number of speakers
5 See also

5.1 General
5.2 Works
5.3 Classifiers


6 Notes
7 References
8 External links



Language groups[edit]




Clickable map showing the traditional language families, subfamilies and major languages spoken in Africa


Most languages spoken in Africa belong to one of three large language families: Afroasiatic, Nilo-Saharan and Niger–Congo. Another hundred belong to small families such as Ubangian (sometimes grouped within Niger-Congo) and the various families called Khoisan, or the Indo-European and Austronesian language families mainly spoken outside Africa; the presence of the latter two dates to 2,600 and 1,500 years ago, respectively. In addition, the languages of Africa languages include several unclassified languages and sign languages.
The earliest Afroasiatic languages are associated with the Capsian culture, the Nilo-Saharan languages are linked with the Khartoum Mesolithic/Neolithic, the Niger-Congo languages are correlated with the west and central African hoe-based farming traditions and the Khoisan languages are matched with the south and southeastern Wilton industries.[6] More broadly, the Afroasiatic family is tentatively grouped within the Nostratic superfamily, and the Nilo-Saharan and Niger-Congo phyla form the Niger-Saharan macrophylum.[7]
Afroasiatic languages[edit]
Main article: Afroasiatic languages
Afroasiatic languages are spoken throughout North Africa, the Horn of Africa, West Asia and parts of the Sahel. There are approximately 375 Afroasiatic languages spoken by over 350 million people. The main subfamilies of Afroasiatic are the Berber languages, Semitic languages, Chadic languages and the Cushitic languages. The Afroasiatic Urheimat is uncertain. However, its most extensive sub-branch, the Semitic languages (including Arabic, Amharic and Hebrew among others), seems to have developed in the Arabian peninsula. The Semitic languages are the only branch of the Afroasiatic family of languages that is spoken outside Africa.
Some of the most widely spoken Afroasiatic languages include Arabic (a Semitic language, and a recent arrival from West Asia), Somali (Cushitic), Berber (Berber), Hausa (Chadic), Amharic (Semitic) and Oromo (Cushitic). Of the world's surviving language families, Afroasiatic has the longest written history, as both the Akkadian language of Mesopotamia and Ancient Egyptian are members.
Nilo-Saharan languages[edit]
Main article: Nilo-Saharan languages
Nilo-Saharan languages consist of a hundred diverse languages. The family has a speech area that stretches from the Nile Valley to northern Tanzania and into Nigeria and DR Congo, with the Songhay languages along the middle reaches of the Niger River as a geographic outlier. Genetic linkage between these languages has not been conclusively demonstrated, and among linguists, support for the proposal is sparse.[8][9] The languages share some unusual morphology, but if they are related, most of the branches must have undergone major restructuring since diverging from their common ancestor. The inclusion of the Songhay languages is questionable, and doubts have been raised over the Koman, Gumuz and Kadu branches.
Some of the better known Nilo-Saharan languages are Kanuri, Fur, Songhay, Nobiin and the widespread Nilotic family, which includes the Luo, Dinka and Maasai. The Nilo-Saharan languages are tonal.
Niger–Congo languages[edit]
Main article: Niger–Congo languages
The Niger–Congo languages constitute the largest language family spoken in Africa and perhaps the world in terms of the number of languages. One of its salient features is an elaborate noun class system with grammatical concord. A large majority of languages of this family are tonal such as Yoruba and Igbo, Ashanti and Ewe language. A major branch of Niger–Congo languages is the Bantu phylum, which has a wider speech area than the rest of the family (see Niger–Congo B (Bantu) in the map above).
The Niger–Kordofanian language family, joining Niger–Congo with the Kordofanian languages of south-central Sudan, was proposed in the 1950s by Joseph Greenberg. Today, linguists often use "Niger–Congo" to refer to this entire family, including Kordofanian as a subfamily. One reason for this is that it is not clear whether Kordofanian was the first branch to diverge from rest of Niger–Congo. Mande has been claimed to be equally or more divergent. Niger–Congo is generally accepted by linguists, though a few question the inclusion of Mande and Dogon, and there is no conclusive evidence for the inclusion of Ubangian.
Other language families[edit]
Several languages spoken in Africa belong to language families concentrated or originating outside the African continent.
Austronesian[edit]
Malagasy belongs to the Austronesian family. It is the national language of Madagascar.
Indo-European[edit]
Afrikaans is Indo-European, as is most of the vocabulary of most African creole languages. Afrikaans evolved from the Dutch vernacular[10][11] of South Holland (Hollandic dialect)[12][13] spoken by the mainly Dutch settlers of what is now South Africa, where it gradually began to develop distinguishing characteristics in the course of the 18th century.[14] Most Afrikaans speakers live in South Africa. In Namibia it is the lingua franca and in Botswana and Zimbabwe it is a minority language of roughly several ten thousand people. Overall 15 to 20 million people are estimated to speak Afrikaans.
Since the colonial era, Indo-European languages such as Afrikaans, English, French, Italian, Portuguese and Spanish have held official status in many countries, and are widely spoken, generally as lingua francas. (See African French and African Portuguese.) German was once used in Germany's colonies there from the late 1800s until World War I, when Britain and France took over and revoked German's official status. Despite this, German is still spoken in Namibia, mostly among the white population. Although it lost its official status in the 1990s, it has been redesignated as a national language. Indian languages such as Gujarati are spoken by South Asian expatriates exclusively. In earlier historical times, other Indo-European languages could be found in various parts of the continent, such as Old Persian and Greek in Egypt, Latin and Vandalic in North Africa and Modern Persian in the Horn of Africa.
Small families[edit]
The three small Khoisan families of southern Africa have not been shown to be closely related to any other major language family. In addition, there are various other families that have not been demonstrated to belong to one of these families. (The questionable branches of Nilo-Saharan were covered above, and are not repeated here.)

Mande, some 70 languages, including the major languages of Mali and Guinea. These are generally thought to be divergent Niger–Congo, but debate persists.
Ubangian, some 70 languages, centered on the languages of the Central African Republic; may be Niger–Congo
Khoe, around 10 languages, the primary family of Khoisan languages of Namibia and Botswana
Sandawe, an isolate of Tanzania, possibly related to Khoe
Kx'a, a language of Southern Africa
Tuu, or Taa-ǃKwi, two surviving languages
Hadza, an isolate of Tanzania
Bangime, a likely isolate of Mali
Jalaa, a likely isolate of Nigeria
Laal, a possible isolate of Chad

Khoisan is a term of convenience covering some 30 languages spoken by around 300,000–400,000 people. There are five Khoisan families that have not been shown to be related to each other: Khoe, Tuu and Kx'a, which are found mainly in Namibia and Botswana, as well as Sandawe and Hadza of Tanzania, which are language isolates. A striking feature of Khoisan languages, and the reason they are often grouped together, is their use of click consonants. Some neighbouring Bantu languages (notably Xhosa and Zulu) have clicks as well, but these were adopted from Khoisan languages. The Khoisan languages are also tonal.
Creole languages[edit]
Due partly to its multilingualism and its colonial past, a substantial proportion of the world's creole languages are to be found in Africa. Some are based on Indo-European languages (e.g. Krio from English in Sierra Leone and the very similar Pidgin in Nigeria and parts of Cameroon; Cape Verdean Creole in Cape Verde and Guinea-Bissau Creole in Guinea-Bissau and Senegal, both from Portuguese; Seychellois Creole in the Seychelles and Mauritian Creole in Mauritius, both from French); some are based on Arabic (e.g. Juba Arabic in the southern Sudan, or Nubi in parts of Uganda and Kenya); some are based on local languages (e.g. Sango, the main language of the Central African Republic); while in Cameroon a creole based on French, English and local African languages known as Camfranglais has started to become popular.
Unclassified languages[edit]
Further information: Category:Unclassified languages of Africa
A fair number of unclassified languages are reported in Africa. Many remain unclassified simply for lack of data; among the better-investigated ones that continue to resist easy classification are:

possibly Afroasiatic: Ongota, Gomba
possibly Nilo-Saharan: Shabo
possibly Niger–Congo: Jalaa, Mbre, Bayot
possibly Khoe: Kwadi
unknown: Laal, Mpre

Of these, Jalaa is perhaps the most likely to be an isolate.
Less-well investigated languages include Irimba, Luo, Mawa, Rer Bare (possibly Bantu), Bete (evidently Jukunoid), Bung (unclear), Kujarge (evidently Chadic), Lufu (Jukunoid), Meroitic (possibly Afroasiatic), Oropom (possibly spurious) and Weyto (evidently Cushitic). Several of these are extinct, and adequate comparative data is thus unlikely to be forthcoming. Hombert & Philippson (2009)[15] list a number of African languages that have been classified as language isolates at one point or another. Many of these are simply unclassified, but Hombert & Philippson believe Africa has about twenty language families, including isolates. Beside the possibilities listed above, there are:

Aasax or Aramanik (Tanzania) (South Cushitic? contains non-Cushitic lexicon)
Imeraguen (Mauritania) - Hassaniyya Arabic restructured on an Azêr (Soninke) base
Kara (Fer?) (Central African Republic)
Oblo (Cameroon) (Adamawa? Extinct?)

Roger Blench notes a couple additional possibilities:

Defaka (Nigeria)
Dompo (Ghana)

Sign languages[edit]
See also: List of sign languages § Africa
Many African countries have national sign languages, such as Algerian Sign Language, Tunisian Sign Language, Ethiopian Sign Language. Other sign languages are restricted to small areas or single villages, such as Adamorobe Sign Language in Ghana. Tanzania has seven, one for each of its schools for the Deaf, all of which are discouraged. Not much is known, since little has been published on these languages
Sign language systems extant in Africa include the Paget Gorman Sign System used in Namibia and Angola, the Sudanese Sign languages used in Sudan and South Sudan, the Arab Sign languages used across the Arab Mideast, the Francosign languages used in Francophone Africa and other areas such as Ghana and Tunisia, and the Tanzanian Sign languages used in Tanzania.
Language in Africa[edit]
Throughout the long multilingual history of the African continent, African languages have been subject to phenomena like language contact, language expansion, language shift and language death. A case in point is the Bantu expansion, in which Bantu-speaking peoples expanded over most of Sub-Equatorial Africa, displacing Khoi-San speaking peoples from much of Southeast Africa and Southern Africa and other peoples from Central Africa. Another example is the Arab expansion in the 7th century, which led to the extension of Arabic from its homeland in Asia, into much of North Africa and the Horn of Africa.
Trade languages are another age-old phenomenon in the African linguistic landscape. Cultural and linguistic innovations spread along trade routes and languages of peoples dominant in trade developed into languages of wider communication (lingua franca). Of particular importance in this respect are Berber (North and West Africa), Jula (western West Africa), Fulfulde (West Africa), Hausa (West Africa), Lingala (Congo), Swahili (Southeast Africa), Somali (Horn of Africa) and Arabic (North Africa and Horn of Africa).
After gaining independence, many African countries, in the search for national unity, selected one language, generally the former colonial language, to be used in government and education. However, in recent years, African countries have become increasingly supportive of maintaining linguistic diversity. Language policies that are being developed nowadays are mostly aimed at multilingualism.
Official Languages[edit]




Official languages in Africa:



  Afrikaans


  Portuguese




  Arabic


  Spanish




  English


  Swahili




  French


  other languages






Besides the former colonial languages of English, French, Portuguese and Spanish, the following languages are official at the national level in Africa (non-exhaustive list):

Afroasiatic


Arabic in Comoros, Chad, Djibouti, Egypt, Eritrea, Mauritania,[16] Somalia,[17] Sudan, Tunisia, Algeria, Libya and Morocco
Berber in Morocco and Algeria
Amharic in Ethiopia
Somali in Somalia
Tigrinya in Eritrea


Austronesian


Malagasy in Madagascar


Indo-European


Afrikaans


Niger-Congo


Chewa in Malawi and Zimbabwe
Comorian in the Comoros
Kinyarwanda in Rwanda
Kirundi in Burundi
Sesotho in Lesotho, South Africa and Zimbabwe
Setswana/Tswana in Botswana and South Africa
Shona, Sindebele in Zimbabwe
Sepedi in South Africa
Ndebele in South Africa[18]
Swahili in Tanzania, Kenya, Rwanda and Uganda
Swati in Swaziland and South Africa
Tsonga in South Africa
Venda in South Africa
Xhosa in South Africa
Zulu in South Africa


Creoles


Mauritian Creole in Mauritius
Sango in the Central African Republic
Seychellois Creole in the Seychelles

Cross-border languages[edit]
The colonial borders established by European powers following the Berlin Conference in 1884–1885 divided a great many ethnic groups and African language speaking communities. In a sense, "cross-border languages" is a misnomer[citation needed]—the speakers did not divide themselves. Nevertheless, it describes the reality of many African languages, which has implications for divergence of language on either side of a border (especially when the official languages are different), standards for writing the language, etc. Some notable cross-border languages include Berber (which stretches across much of North Africa and some parts of West Africa), Somali (stretches across most of the Horn of Africa), Swahili (spoken in the African Great Lakes region), Fula (in the Sahel and West Africa) and Luo languages (in Democratic Republic of the Congo, Ethiopia, Kenya, Tanzania, Uganda, South Sudan and Sudan).
Some prominent Africans such as former Malian president and former Chairman of the African Commission, Alpha Oumar Konaré, have referred to cross-border languages as a factor that can promote African unity.[19]
Language change and planning[edit]
Language is not static in Africa any more than on other continents. In addition to the (likely modest) impact of borders, there are also cases of dialect levelling (such as in Igbo and probably many others), koinés (such as N'Ko and possibly Runyakitara) and emergence of new dialects (such as Sheng). In some countries, there are official efforts to develop standardized language versions.
There are also many less widely spoken languages that may be considered endangered languages.
Demographics[edit]
Further information: Demographics of Africa
Of the 1 billion Africans (in 2009), about 17 percent speak an Arabic dialect[citation needed]. About 10 percent speak Swahili[citation needed], the lingua franca of Southeast Africa; about 5 percent speak a Berber dialect[citation needed]; and about 5 percent speak Hausa, which serves as a lingua franca in much of the Sahel. Other important West African languages are Yoruba, Igbo and Fula. Major Horn of Africa languages are Amharic, Oromo and Somali. Important South African languages are Zulu, Xhosa and Afrikaans.[20]
English, French and Portuguese are important languages in Africa. About 130 million, 115 million and 30 million Africans, respectively, speak them as either native or secondary languages. Portuguese has become the national language of Angola.[21] Through (among other factors) sheer demographic weight, Africans are increasingly taking ownership[citation needed] of these three world languages and having an ever greater influence on their development and growth.
Linguistic features[edit]
Some linguistic features are particularly common among languages spoken in Africa, whereas others are less common. Such shared traits probably are not due to a common origin of all African languages. Instead, some may be due to language contact (resulting in borrowing) and specific idioms and phrases may be due to a similar cultural background.
Phonological[edit]
Some widespread phonetic features include:

certain types of consonants, such as implosives (/ɓa/), ejectives (/kʼa/), the labiodental flap and in southern Africa, clicks (/ǂa/, /ᵑǃa/). True implosives are rare outside Africa, and clicks and the flap almost unheard of.
doubly articulated labial-velar stops like /k͡pa/ and /ɡ͡ba/ are found in places south of the Sahara.
prenasalized consonants, like /mpa/ and /ŋɡa/, are widespread in Africa but not common outside it.
sequences of stops and fricatives at the beginnings of words, such as /fsa/, /pta/ and /dt͡sk͡xʼa/.
nasal stops which only occur with nasal vowels, such as [ba] vs. [mã] (but both [pa] and [pã]), especially in West Africa.
vowels contrasting an advanced or retracted tongue, commonly called "tense" and "lax".
simple tone systems which are used for grammatical purposes.

Sounds that are relatively uncommon in African languages include uvular consonants, diphthongs and front rounded vowels
Tonal languages are found throughout the world but are predominantly used in Africa. Both the Nilo-Saharan and the Khoi-San phyla are fully tonal. The large majority of the Niger–Congo languages is also tonal. Tonal languages are also found in the Omotic, Chadic and South & East Cushitic branches of Afroasiatic. The most common type of tonal system opposes two tone levels, High (H) and Low (L). Contour tones do occur, and can often be analysed as two or more tones in succession on a single syllable. Tone melodies play an important role, meaning that it is often possible to state significant generalizations by separating tone sequences ("melodies") from the segments that bear them. Tonal sandhi processes like tone spread, tone shift, downstep and downdrift are common in African languages.
Syntactic[edit]
Widespread syntactical structures include the common use of adjectival verbs and the expression of comparison by means of a verb 'to surpass'. The Niger–Congo languages have large numbers of genders (noun classes) which cause agreement in verbs and other words. Case, tense and other categories may be distinguished only by tone.
Semantic[edit]
Quite often, only one term is used for both animal and meat; the word nama or nyama for animal/meat is particularly widespread in otherwise widely divergent African languages.
Number of speakers[edit]
The following is a table displaying the number of speakers of given languages within Africa:


Language
Family
Native speakers (L1)
Official status per country


Afrikaans
Indo-European
7,200,000[22]
 South Africa


Akan
Niger–Congo
11,000,000[23]
None. Government sponsored language of  Ghana


Amharic
Afroasiatic
21,800,000[24]
 Ethiopia


Arabic
Afroasiatic
150,000,000[25] but with separate mutually unintelligible varieties
 Algeria,  Chad,  Comoros,  Djibouti,  Egypt,  Eritrea,  Libya,  Mauritania,  Morocco,  Somalia,  Sudan,  Tunisia


Berber
Afroasiatic
56,000,000[26] (estimated) (including separate unintelligible varieties)
 Morocco,  Algeria


Chewa
Niger–Congo
9,700,000[27]
 Malawi,  Zimbabwe


English
Indo-European
6,500,000[28] (estimated)
see List of territorial entities where English is an official language


French
Indo-European
700,330[29][30] (estimated)
see List of territorial entities where French is an official language


Fulani
Niger–Congo
25,000,000[23]



Gikuyu
Niger–Congo
6,600,000[31]



Hausa
Afroasiatic
34,000,000[32]
 Nigeria,  Niger


Igbo
Niger–Congo
18,000,000[33]



Kinyarwanda
Niger–Congo
9,800,000[23]
 Rwanda


Kirundi
Niger–Congo
8,800,000[23]
 Burundi


Kongo
Niger–Congo
5,600,000[34]
recognised national language of  Angola


Lingala
Niger–Congo
5,500,000[23]
national language of  Democratic Republic of the Congo


Luganda
Niger-Congo
4,130,000[35]
native language of  Uganda


Dholuo
Nilo-Saharan (probable)
4,200,000[36]



Malagasy
Austronesian
18,000,000[37]
 Madagascar


Mauritian Creole
Indo-European
1,135,000[38]
native language of  Mauritius


Mossi
Niger–Congo
7,600,000[23]
Recognised regional language in  Burkina Faso


Ndebele
Niger–Congo
1,090,000[39]
Statuatory national language in  South Africa


Northern Sotho
Niger–Congo
4,600,000[40]
 South Africa


Oromo
Afroasiatic
26,000,000[23]
 Ethiopia


Portuguese
Indo-European
13,700,000[41] (estimated)
 Angola,  Cape Verde,  Guinea-Bissau,  Equatorial Guinea,  Mozambique,  São Tomé and Príncipe


Sesotho
Niger–Congo
5,600,000[42]
 Lesotho,  South Africa,  Zimbabwe


Shona
Niger–Congo
14,200,000 incl. Manyika, Ndau (2000–2006)[43]
 Zimbabwe


Somali
Afroasiatic
16,600,000[44]
 Somalia


Swahili
Niger–Congo
15,000,000[45]
official in  Tanzania,  Kenya,  Uganda,  Rwanda national language of  Democratic Republic of Congo


Tigrinya
Afroasiatic
7,000,000[46]
 Eritrea


Tshiluba
Niger–Congo
6,300,000[47] (1991)
national language of  Democratic Republic of the Congo


Tswana
Niger–Congo
5,800,000[48]
 South Africa,  Botswana


Umbundu
Niger–Congo
6,000,000[49]
recognised national language of  Angola


Xhosa
Niger–Congo
7,600,000[23]
 South Africa,  Zimbabwe


Yoruba
Niger–Congo
28,000,000[23]


Zulu
Niger–Congo
10,400,000[23]
 South Africa


See also[edit]


Africa portal
Language portal


General[edit]

Languages of the African Union
Writing systems of Africa
Journal of West African Languages

Works[edit]

Polyglotta Africana
The Languages of Africa

Classifiers[edit]

Karl Lepsius
Wilhelm Bleek
Carl Meinhof
Diedrich Westermann
Joseph Greenberg

Notes[edit]



^ Heine, Bernd; Heine, Bernd, eds. (2000). African Languages: an Introduction. Cambridge University Press. 
^ Epstein, Edmund L.; Kole, Robert, eds. (1998). The Language of African Literature. Africa World Press. p. ix. ISBN 0-86543-534-0. Retrieved 2011-06-23. Africa is incredibly rich in language—over 3,000 indigenous languages by some counts, and many creoles, pidgins, and lingua francas. 
^ "Ethnologue report for Nigeria". Ethnologue Languages of the World. 
^ "HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004" (PDF). United Nations Development Programme. 2004. 
^ African Union Summit 2006 Khartoum, Sudan. SARPN.
^ Language, Volume 61, Issues 3-4. Linguistic Society of America. 1985. p. 695. Retrieved 31 January 2017. 
^ Blench, Roger (2006). Archaeology, Language, and the African Past. Rowman Altamira. p. 108. ISBN 0759104662. Retrieved 31 January 2017. 
^ Lyle Campbell & Mauricio J. Mixco, A Glossary of Historical Linguistics (2007, University of Utah Press)
^ P.H. Matthews, Oxford Concise Dictionary of Linguistics (2007, 2nd edition, Oxford)
^ K. Pithouse, C. Mitchell, R. Moletsane, Making Connections: Self-Study & Social Action, p.91
^ J. A. Heese (1971). Die herkoms van die Afrikaner, 1657–1867 [The origin of the Afrikaner] (in Afrikaans). Cape Town: A. A. Balkema. OCLC 1821706. OL 5361614M. 
^ Herkomst en groei van het Afrikaans - G.G. Kloeke (1950)
^ The origin of Afrikaans pronunciation: a comparison to west Germanic languages and Dutch dialects - Wilbert Heeringa, Febe de Wet (2007)
^ Standaard Afrikaans (PDF). Abel Coetzee. Afrikaner Pers. 1948. Retrieved 2014-09-17. 
^ Jean-Marie Hombert & Gérard Philippson. 2009. "The linguistic importance of language isolates: the African case." In Peter K. Austin, Oliver Bond, Monik Charette, David Nathan & Peter Sells (eds). Proceedings of Conference on Language Documentation and Linguistic Theory 2. London: SOAS.
^ CIA – The World Factbook.
^ According to article 7 of The Transitional Federal Charter of the Somali Republic Archived 18 December 2008 at the Wayback Machine.: “The official languages of the Somali Republic shall be Somali (Maay and Maxaatiri) and Arabic. The second languages of the Transitional Federal Government shall be English and Italian.”
^ "The languages of South Africa". southafrica.info.
^ African languages for Africa's development ACALAN (French & English).
^ The Economist, "Tongues under threat", 22 January 2011, p. 58.
^ "The Embassy of the Republic of Angola - Culture". 
^ "Census 2011 – Home language" (PDF). Statistics South Africa. Retrieved 2 February 2010. 
^ a b c d e f g h i j Nationalencyklopedin "Världens 100 största språk 2007" The World's 100 Largest Languages in 2007
^ "Amharic". 
^ "Arabic". 
^ "Berber". 
^ "Chichewa". 
^ "English". 
^ "French". Ethnologue.com. Retrieved 2017-07-11. 
^ William Edmiston; Annie Dumenil (2015-01-01). La France contemporaine. Cengage Learning. p. 90. ISBN 978-1-305-80441-8. 
^ "Gikuyu". 
^ Ethnologue (2009) cites 18,5 million L1 and 15 million L2 speakers in Nigeria in 1991; 5.5 million L1 speakers and half that many L2 speakers in Niger in 2006, 0.8 million in Benin in 2006, and just over 1 million in other countries.
^ "Ibo - Language Information & Resources". 
^ "Kongo". 
^ "Luganda". 
^ "Dholuo". 
^ "Malagasy". 
^ "Morisyen". 
^ "Ndebele". Ethnologue. Retrieved 20 September 2016. 
^ "Sotho, Northern". 
^ "The Future of Portuguese - The Translation Company". 
^ "Sotho, Southern". 
^ "Ethnologue report for Shona (S.10)". 
^ "Somali". SIL International. 2013. Retrieved May 4, 2013. 
^ Peek, Philip M.; Kwesi Yankah (2004). African folklore: an encyclopedia. Taylor & Francis. p. 699. ISBN 0-415-93933-X. 
^ "Tigrigna". 
^ "Luba-Kasai". 
^ "Tswana". 
^ "Umbundu". 



References[edit]

Childs, G. Tucker (2003). An Introduction to African Languages. Amsterdam: John Benjamin.
Chimhundu, Herbert (2002). Language Policies in Africa. (Final report of the Intergovernmental Conference on Language Policies in Africa.) Revised version. UNESCO.
Cust, Robert Needham (1883). Modern Languages of Africa.
Ellis, Stephen (ed.) (1996). Africa Now: People - Policies - Institutions. The Hague: Ministry of Foreign Affairs (DGIS).
Elugbe, Ben (1998) "Cross-border and major languages of Africa." In K. Legère (editor), Cross-border Languages: Reports and Studies, Regional Workshop on Cross-Border Languages, National Institute for Educational Development (NIED), Okahandja, 23–27 September 1996. Windhoek: Gamsberg Macmillan.
Ethnologue.com's Africa: A listing of African languages and language families.
Greenberg, Joseph H. (1983). 'Some areal characteristics of African languages.' In Ivan R. Dihoff (editor), Current Approaches to African Linguistics, Vol. 1 (Publications in African Languages and Linguistics, Vol. 1), Dordrecht: Foris, 3-21.
Greenberg, Joseph H. (1966). The Languages of Africa (2nd edition with additions and corrections). Bloomington: Indiana University.
Heine, Bernd and Derek Nurse (editors) (2000). African Languages: An Introduction. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Webb, Vic and Kembo-Sure (editors) (1998). African Voices: An Introduction to the Languages and Linguistics of Africa. Cape Town: Oxford University Press Southern Africa.
Wedekind, Klaus ( Oxford University Press.

External links[edit]

African language resources for children
Web resources for African languages
Linguistic maps of Africa from Muturzikin.com
Online Dictionaries, e-books and other online fulltexts in or on African languages





Links to related articles











v
t
e


Languages of Africa



Sovereign states



Algeria
Angola
Benin
Botswana
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cameroon
Cape Verde (Cabo Verde)
Central African Republic
Chad
Comoros
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Republic of the Congo
Djibouti
Egypt
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Ethiopia
Gabon
The Gambia
Ghana
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Ivory Coast (Côte d'Ivoire)
Kenya
Lesotho
Liberia
Libya
Madagascar
Malawi
Mali
Mauritania
Mauritius
Morocco
Mozambique
Namibia
Niger
Nigeria
Rwanda
São Tomé and Príncipe
Senegal
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Somalia
South Africa
South Sudan
Sudan
Swaziland
Tanzania
Togo
Tunisia
Uganda
Zambia
Zimbabwe






States with limited
recognition




Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic
Somaliland






Dependencies and
other territories





Canary Islands / Ceuta / Melilla / (see also plazas de soberanía) (Spain)
Madeira (Portugal)
Mayotte / Réunion (France)
Saint Helena / Ascension Island / Tristan da Cunha (United Kingdom)
Western Sahara













v
t
e


Africa articles



History




Chronology



Antiquity

North Africa


Archaeology
Pre-colonial kingdoms
Bantu expansion
Arab conquest
Exploration
European colonisation
Slavery

Atlantic
Arab


Scramble for Africa
Decolonisation





By topic



Economy
Empires
Historiography
Military

conflicts







By region



Central
East
North
South
West








Geography







Countries and territories
Highest points
Impact craters
Islands
Natural history
Regions

Central
East
North
South
West


Rivers








Politics







African Union
Elections
Heads of government
Heads of state
Human rights

LGBT rights
Linguistic rights
Religious rights
Women's rights


International organisations
Pan-African Parliament
Pan-Africanism
Politics

parties


United States of Africa








Economy







Central banks and currencies
Countries by GDP (nominal)
Countries by GDP (PPP)
Countries by HDI
Education
Internet
Millionaires
Natural resources
Poverty
Renewable energy
Stock exchanges








Society







Caste systems
Etiquette
Health

Circumcision


Infrastructure
Languages
Philosophy





Culture







Architecture
Art

contemporary


Cinema

films
film festivals


Cuisine
Literature

writers by country


Media

Newspapers
Radio
TV


Music

musicians

guitarists




Religion

Irreligion


World Heritage Sites





Sport



African Cricket Association
African Games
Afro-Asian Games
Australian-rules football
Confederation of African Football

Africa Cup of Nations


FIBA Africa
Rugby Africa

Africa Cup


Stadiums by capacity
Tour d'Afrique








Demographics



Countries by population

density


Emigration
Ethnic groups
HIV/AIDS
Urbanization

cities
metropolitan areas










By year



2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017









Outline
Index



Book
Category
Portal












v
t
e


Countries and languages lists








Countries







By languages




Spoken



Countries by spoken languages





Official



Countries by the number of recognized official languages
Arabic
Chinese
Dutch/Afrikaans
English
French
German
Malay
Portuguese
Romanian
Russian
Spanish
Tamil








Endonyms



Countries and capitals in native languages





Exonyms



Country names in various languages

A–C
D–I
J–P
Q–Z


Languages of the European Union
















Languages







By continent



Africa
Americas

North
South


Asia

East
South


Europe
Oceania





By country



Official languages

by state


List of languages without official status
Countries by the number of recognized official languages
Languages by the number of countries in which they are recognized as an official language





By population



By number of native speakers
By number of total speakers
Languages in censuses





By family



Language families






Language-based
geopolitical
organizations




Arab League (Arabic)
Dutch Language Union (Dutch)
English Speaking Union
Francophonie (French)
Community of Portuguese Language Countries (Portuguese)
Países Africanos de Língua Oficial Portuguesa (Portuguese)
Latin Union (Romance)
Hispanidad (Spanish)
Turkic Council (Turkic)
International Organization of Turkic Culture (Turkic)





See also



Lists of languages
Category:Languages




















Authority control



LCCN: sh85001729
GND: 4120108-5
SUDOC: 027235920
BNF: cb119321874 (data)











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Languages_of_Africa&oldid=818051664"					Categories: Languages of AfricaHidden categories: CS1 Afrikaans-language sources (af)Webarchive template wayback linksAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from June 2016Articles with unsourced statements from February 2015Articles with unsourced statements from December 2015Use dmy dates from May 2011Wikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiers