For other uses, see Larva (disambiguation).






This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (February 2015) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)







Larva of Papilio xuthus, butterfly


A larva (plural: larvae /ˈlɑːrviː/) is a distinct juvenile form many animals undergo before metamorphosis into adults. Animals with indirect development such as insects, amphibians, or cnidarians typically have a larval phase of their life cycle.
The larva's appearance is generally very different from the adult form (e.g. caterpillars and butterflies). A larva often has unique structures and organs that do not occur in the adult form. Their diet may also be considerably different.
Larvae are frequently adapted to environments separate from adults. For example, some larvae such as tadpoles live almost exclusively in aquatic environments, but can live outside water as adult frogs. By living in a distinct environment, larvae may be given shelter from predators and reduce competition for resources with the adult population.
Animals in the larval stage will consume food to fuel their transition into the adult form. In some species like barnacles, adults are immobile but their larvae are mobile, and use their mobile larval form to distribute themselves.
Some larvae are dependent on adults to feed them. In many eusocial Hymenoptera species, the larvae are fed by female workers. In Ropalidia marginata (a paper wasp) the males are also capable of feeding larvae but they are much less efficient, spending more time and getting less food to the larvae.[1]
The larvae of some species (for example, some newts) can become pubescent and do not develop further into the adult form. This is a type of neoteny.




Eurosta solidaginis Goldenrod Gall Fly larva


It is a misunderstanding that the larval form always reflects the group's evolutionary history. This could be the case, but often the larval stage has evolved secondarily, as in insects. In these cases the larval form may differ more than the adult form from the group's common origin.[citation needed]



Contents


1 Selected types of larvae
2 Insect Larva
3 See also
4 References
5 External links
6 Bibliography



Selected types of larvae[edit]


Animal
Name of larvae


Porifera (sponges)
coeloblastula (= blastula, amphiblastula), parenchymula (= parenchymella, stereogastrula)


Heterocyemida
Wagener's larva


Dicyemida
infusoriform larva


Cnidarians
planula (= stereogastrula), actinula


Ctenophora
cydippid larvae


Platyhelminthes
Turbellaria: Müller's larva, Götte’s larva;
Trematoda: miracidium, sporocyst, redia, cercaria;
Monogenea: oncomiracidium;
Cestoda: cysticercus, cysticercoid, oncosphere (or hexacanth), coracidium, plerocercoid


Annelida
nectochaeta, polytroch


Nematoda
Dauer larva, microfilaria


Sipuncula
pelagosphera larva


Ectoprocta
cyphonautes, vesiculariform larvae


Nematomorpha
nematomorphan larva


Phoronids
actinotroch


Cycliophora
pandora, chordoid larva


Nemertea
pilidium, Iwata larva, Desor larva


Acanthocephala
acanthor


Locifera
Higgins larva


Brachiopoda
lobate larva


Priapula
loricate larva


Certain molluscs, annelids, nemerteans and sipunculids
trochophore


Certain molluscs
veliger


Mollusca: freshwater Bivalvia (mussels)
glochidium


Arthropoda: †Trilobita
protaspis (unjointed), meraspis (increasing number of joints, but 1 less than the holaspis), holaspis (=adult)[2]


Arthropoda: Xiphosura
euproöps larva ("trilobite larva")


Arthropoda: Pycnogonida
protonymphon


Crustaceans
General: nauplius, metanauplius, protozoea, antizoea, pseudozoea, zoea, postlarva, cypris, primary larva, mysis
Decapoda: zoea
Rhizocephala: kentrogon


Insecta: Lepidoptera (butterflies and moths)
caterpillar


Insecta: Beetles
grub


Insecta: Flies, Bees, Wasps
maggot


Insecta: Mosquitoes
wriggler


Deuterostomes
dipleurula (hypothetical larva)


Echinodermata
bipinnaria, vitellaria, brachiollaria, pluteus, ophiopluteus, echinopluteus, auricularia


Hemichordata
tornaria


Urochordata
tadpole (does not feed, technically a "swimming embryo")


Fish (generally)
larva


Fish: Petromyzontiformes (lamprey)
ammocoete


Fish: Anguilliformes (eels)
leptocephalus


Amphibians
tadpole, polliwog


Mammal
Monotremes: puggle
Marsupials: joey


Insect Larva[edit]
Within Insects, only Endopterygotes show different types of larvae.[3] Several classifications have been suggested by many entomologists,[4] and following classification is based on Antonio Berlese classification in 1913. There are four main types of endopterygote larvae types:[5]

Apodous larvae – no legs at all and are poorly sclerotized. Based on sclerotization, three apodous forms are recognized.

Eucephalous – with well sclerotized head capsule. Found in Nematocera, Buprestidae and Cerambycidae families.
Hemicephalus – with a reduced head capsule, retractable in to the thorax. Found in Tipulidae and Brachycera families.
Acephalus – without head capsule. Found in Cyclorrhapha


Protopod larvae – larva have many different forms and often unlike a normal insect form. They hatch from eggs which contains very little yolk. Ex. first instar larvae of parasitic hymenoptera.
Polypod larvae – also known as eruciform larvae, these larva have abdominal prolegs, in addition to usual thoracic legs. They poorly sclerotized and relatively inactive. They live in close contact with the food. Best example is caterpillars of lepidopterans.
Oligopod larvae – have well developed head capsule and mouthparts are similar to the adult, but without compound eyes. They have six legs. No abdominal prolegs. Two types can be seen:

Campodeiform – well sclerotized, dorso-ventrally flattened body. Usually long legged predators with prognathos mouthparts. (lacewing, trichopterans, mayflies and some coleopterans).
Scarabeiform – poorly sclerotized, flat thorax and abdomen. Usually short legged and inactive burrowing forms. (Scarabaeoidea and other coleopterans).



See also[edit]

Crustacean larvae
Ichthyoplankton
Spawn (biology)
Non-larval animal juvenile (immature) stages and other life cycle stages:

In Porifera: olynthus, gemmule
In Cnidaria: ephyra, scyphistoma, strobila, gonangium, hydranth, polyp, medusa
In Mollusca: paralarva, young cephalopods
In Platyhelminthes: hydatid cyst
In Bryozoa: avicularium
In Acanthocephala: cystacanth
In Insecta:

Nymphs and naiads, immature forms in hemimetabolous insects
Subimago, a juvenile that resembles the adult in Ephemeroptera
Instar, intermediate between each ecdysis
Pupa and chrysalis, intermediate stages between larva and imago (the adult stage)




Protozoan life cycle stages

Apicomplexan life cycle


Algal life cycle stages:

Codiolum-phase
Conchocelis-phase


Marine larval ecology

References[edit]



^ Sen, R; Gadagkar, R (2006). "Males of the social wasp Ropalidia marginata can feed larvae, given an opportunity". Animal Behaviour. 71: 345–350. doi:10.1016/j.anbehav.2005.04.022. 
^ Moore, R.C. (1959). Arthropoda I – Arthropoda General Features, Proarthropoda, Euarthropoda General Features, Trilobitomorpha. Treatise on Invertebrate Paleontology. Part O. Boulder, Colorado/Lawrence, Kansas: Geological Society of America/University of Kansas Press. pp. O121, O122, O125. ISBN 0-8137-3015-5. 
^ "Recognizing Insect Larval Types". University of Kentucky. Retrieved 28 April 2016. 
^ "Insect Larval Forms". About.com. Retrieved 28 April 2016. 
^ "Types of Insect Larva". Agri info. Retrieved 28 April 2016. 



External links[edit]



Wikisource has the text of the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica article Larval Forms.



 Media related to Larva at Wikimedia Commons
 The dictionary definition of larva at Wiktionary
Arenas-Mena, C. (2010) Indirect development, transdifferentiation and the macroregulatory evolution of metazoans. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences. Feb 27, 2010 Vol.365 no.1540 653-669

Bibliography[edit]

Brusca, R. C. & Brusca, G. J. (2003). Invertebrates (2nd ed.). Sunderland, Mass. : Sinauer Associates.
Hall, B. K. & Wake, M. H., eds. (1999). The Origin and Evolution of Larval Forms. San Diego: Academic Press.
Leis, J. M. & Carson-Ewart, B. M., eds. (2000). The Larvae of Indo-Pacific Coastal Fishes. An Identification Guide to Marine Fish Larvae. Fauna Malesiana handbooks, vol. 2. Brill, Leiden.
Shanks, A. L. (2001). An Identification Guide to the Larval Marine Invertebrates of the Pacific Northwest. Oregon State University Press, Corvallis. 256 pp.
Smith, D. & Johnson, K. B. (1977). A Guide to Marine Coastal Plankton and Marine Invertebrate Larvae. Kendall/Hunt Plublishing Company.
Stanwell-Smith, D., Hood, A. & Peck, L. S. (1997). A field guide to the pelagic invertebrates larvae of the maritime Antarctic. British Antarctic Survey, Cambridge.
Thyssen, P.J. (2010). Keys for Identification of Immature Insects. In: Amendt, J. et al. (ed.). Current Concepts in Forensic Entomology, chapter 2, pp. 25–42. Springer: Dordrecht, [1].






						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Larva&oldid=809665843"					Categories: LarvaeHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from February 2015All articles needing additional referencesAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from June 2013Commons category with page title different than on Wikidata