This article is about the liturgical rites of the Latin Church. For the church itself, see Latin Church. For the most common rite, see Roman Rite.




Roman Catholic church in Stupava (Slovakia).


Latin liturgical rites, or Western liturgical rites, are the Catholic liturgical rites used within the Latin Church, that part of Catholic Church originating in the area where the Latin language once dominated.
The Latin rites were for many centuries no less numerous than the liturgical rites of the Eastern autonomous particular Churches. Their number is now much reduced. In the aftermath of the Council of Trent, in 1568 and 1570 Pope Pius V suppressed the Breviaries and Missals that could not be shown to have an antiquity of at least two centuries (see Tridentine Mass and Roman Missal). Many local rites that remained legitimate even after this decree were abandoned voluntarily, especially in the 19th century. In the second half of the 20th century, most of the religious orders that had a distinct liturgical rite chose to adopt in its place the Roman Rite as revised in accordance with the decrees of the Second Vatican Council (see Mass of Paul VI). A few such liturgical rites persist today for the celebration of Mass, since 1965-1970 in revised forms, but the distinct liturgical rites for celebrating the other sacraments have been almost completely abandoned.



Contents


1 Liturgical rites currently in use within the Latin Church

1.1 Roman Rite

1.1.1 Anglican Use
1.1.2 Algonquian and Iroquoian Uses
1.1.3 Zaire Use


1.2 Western Rites of "Gallican" type

1.2.1 Ambrosian Rite
1.2.2 Rite of Braga
1.2.3 Mozarabic Rite
1.2.4 Carthusian Rite


1.3 Western Rite of sui generis type

1.3.1 Benedictine Rite




2 Defunct Catholic Western liturgical rites

2.1 African Rite
2.2 Celtic Rite
2.3 Gallican Rite
2.4 Regional Latin rites or uses


3 Rites of religious orders
4 See also
5 References
6 External links



Liturgical rites currently in use within the Latin Church[edit]





Part of a series on


Particular churches sui iuris
of the Catholic Church


 
Latin cross and Byzantine Patriarchal cross



Particular churches are grouped by rite.


Latin Rite




Latin




Alexandrian Rite




Coptic
Ethiopian
Eritrean




Armenian Rite




Armenian




Byzantine Rite




Albanian
Belarusian
Bulgarian
Croatian and Serbian
Greek
Hungarian
Italo-Albanian
Macedonian
Melkite
Romanian
Russian
Ruthenian
Slovak
Ukrainian




East Syrian Rite




Chaldean
Syro-Malabar




West Syrian Rite




Maronite
Syriac
Syro-Malankara




 Catholicism portal
 Eastern Christianity portal





v
t
e





Roman Rite[edit]
The Roman Rite is by far the most widely used. Like other liturgical rites, it developed over time, with newer forms replacing the older. It underwent many changes in the first millennium and a half of its existence (see Pre-Tridentine Mass). The forms that Pope Pius V, as requested by the Council of Trent, established in the 1560s and 1570s underwent repeated minor variations in the centuries immediately following. Each new typical edition (the edition to which other printings are to conform) of the Roman Missal (see Tridentine Mass) and of the other liturgical books superseded the previous one.
The 20th century saw more profound changes. Pope Pius X radically rearranged the Psalter of the Breviary and altered the rubrics of the Mass. Later Popes continued to make such changes, beginning with Pope Pius XII, who significantly revised the Holy Week ceremonies and certain other aspects of the Roman Missal in 1955.
The Second Vatican Council (1962–1965) was followed by a general revision of the rites of all the Roman Rite sacraments, including the Eucharist. As before, each new typical edition of an official liturgical book supersedes the previous one. Thus, the 1970 Roman Missal, which superseded the 1962 edition, was superseded by the edition of 1975. The 2002 edition in turn supersedes the 1975 edition both in Latin and, as official translations into each language appear, also in the vernacular languages. Under the terms of Summorum Pontificum by Pope Benedict XVI, the Mass of Paul VI is known as the Ordinary Form of the Roman Rite.
The Tridentine Mass, as in the 1962 Roman Missal, is still authorized for use as an extraordinary form of the Roman Rite under the conditions indicated in the document Summorum Pontificum.
Anglican Use[edit]
The Anglican Use is a use (variation) of the Roman Rite, rather than a unique rite itself. During the Liturgy of the Eucharist, especially the Eucharistic Prayer, it is closest to the Roman Rite, while it differs more during the Liturgy of the Word and the Penitential Rite. The language used, which differs from that of the ICEL translation of the Roman Rite of Mass, is based upon the Book of Common Prayer, originally written in the 16th century. Anglican Use parishes originally used the Book of Divine Worship, an adaptation of the Book of Common Prayer. The Book of Divine Worship has been replaced with the similar Divine Worship: The Missal for use in the Ordinariates. Anglican liturgical rituals, whether those used in the Anglican Use of the Catholic Church or in the various prayer books and missals of the Anglican Communion and other denominations trace their origin back to the Sarum rite, which was a variation of the Latin Rite used in England before introduction the 1549 Book of Common Prayer, following the break from the Roman church under the previous monarch Henry VIII.[1]
An early version of the Anglican Use was introduced in the United States under a Pastoral Provision in 1980, establishing personal parishes that introduced adapted Anglican traditions to the Catholic Church from members' former Episcopal parishes. That provision also permitted, as an exception and on a case by case basis, the ordination of married former Episcopal ministers as Catholic priests. As personal parishes, these parishes were part of the local Roman Catholic diocese, but accepted as members any Anglican convert who wished to make use of the provision.
On 9 November 2009, Pope Benedict XVI established a worldwide provision for Anglicans who joined the church. This process set up personal Ordinariates for former Anglicans and other converts. These Ordinariates would be similar to dioceses, but encompassing entire regions or nations. Parishes belonging to an Ordinariate would not be part of the local diocese. These Ordinariates are charged with maintaining the Anglican liturgical, spiritual and pastoral traditions and they have full faculties to celebrate the Eucharist and the other sacraments, the Liturgy of the Hours and other liturgical functions in accordance with the liturgical books proper to Anglican tradition, in revisions approved by the Holy See. This faculty does not exclude liturgical celebrations according to the Roman Rite.[2]
The Personal Ordinariate of Our Lady of Walsingham was set up for England and Wales on 15 January 2011, and the Personal Ordinariate of the Chair of Saint Peter for the United States and Canada on 1 January 2012, and the Personal Ordinariate of Our Lady of the Southern Cross for Australia on 15 June 2012. As of 2017 it was decreed that all parishes in the United States established under the Pastoral Provision be transferred to the Ordinariate.
Algonquian and Iroquoian Uses[edit]
Also called "Indian Masses", a number of variations on the Roman Rite developed in the Indian missions of Canada and the United States. These originated in the 17th century, and some remained in use until the Second Vatican Council. The priest's parts remained in Latin, while the ordinaries sung by the schola were translated into the vernacular (e.g., Mohawk, Algonquin, Micmac, and Huron). They also generally featured a reduced cycle of native-language propers and hymns. At present they are rarely used.[3]
Zaire Use[edit]
The Zaire Use is an inculturated variation of the Ordinary Form of the Roman Rite of the Roman Catholic Church. It is used to a very limited extent in some African countries since the late 1970s
Western Rites of "Gallican" type[edit]
Ambrosian Rite[edit]
The Ambrosian Rite is celebrated in most of the Archdiocese of Milan, Italy and in parts of some neighbouring dioceses in Italy and Switzerland. The language used is now usually Italian, rather than Latin. With some variant texts and minor difference in the order of readings, it is similar in form to the Roman Rite. Its classification as Gallican-related is disputed.[4]
Rite of Braga[edit]
The Rite of Braga is used, but since 18 November 1971 only on an optional basis, in the Archdiocese of Braga in northern Portugal.[5][6]
Mozarabic Rite[edit]
The Mozarabic Rite, which was prevalent throughout Spain in Visigothic times, is now celebrated only in limited locations, principally the cathedral of Toledo.
Carthusian Rite[edit]
The Carthusian rite is in use in a version revised in 1981.[7] Apart from the new elements in this revision, it is substantially the rite of Grenoble in the 12th century, with some admixture from other sources.[8] Among other differences from the Roman Order of Mass, the deacon prepares the gifts while the Epistle is being sung, the celebrating priest washes his hands twice at the offertory and says the eucharistic prayer with arms extended in the form of a cross except when using his hands for some specific action, and there is no blessing at the end of Mass.[9]
This is now the only extant Mass rite of a Catholic religious order; but by virtue of the Ecclesia Dei indult some individuals or small groups are authorized to use some now defunct rites.
Western Rite of sui generis type[edit]
Benedictine Rite[edit]
The Order of Saint Benedict has never had a rite of the Mass peculiar to it, but it keeps its very ancient Benedictine Rite of the Liturgy of the Hours.
Defunct Catholic Western liturgical rites[edit]
African Rite[edit]
In Africa Proconsulare, located in present-day Tunisia (of which Carthage was the capital), the African Rite was used before the 8th-century Arab conquest. It was very close to the Roman Rite; so much so that Western liturgical traditions have been classified as belonging to two streams, the North African-Rome tradition, and the Gallican (in the broad sense) tradition encompassing the rest of the Western Roman Empire, including northern Italy.[10]
Celtic Rite[edit]
The ancient Celtic Rite was a composite of non-Roman ritual structures (possibly Antiochian) and texts not exempt from Roman influence, that was similar to the Mozarabic Rite in many respects and would have been used at least in parts of Ireland, Scotland, the northern part of England and perhaps even Wales, Cornwall and Somerset, before being authoritatively replaced by the Roman Rite in the early Middle Ages. "Celtic" is possibly a misnomer and it may owe its origins to Augustine's re-evangelisation of the British Isles in the 6th century. Little is known of it, though several texts and liturgies survive.
Some Christians–typically groups not in communion with the Roman Catholic Church, especially some Western Orthodox Christian communities in communion with Eastern Orthodox Churches, e.g. Celtic Orthodoxy–have attempted to breathe life into a reconstruction of the Celtic Rite the historical accuracy of which is debated. Historical evidence of this rite is found in the remnants of the Stowe (Lorrha) Missal.
Gallican Rite[edit]
The Gallican Rite is a retrospective term applied to the sum of the local variants, on similar lines to that designated elsewhere as the Celtic Rite (above) and the Mozarabic Rite, which faded from use in France by the end of the first millennium. It should not be confused with the so-called Neo-Gallican liturgical books published in various French dioceses after the Council of Trent, which had little or nothing to do with it.[11]
Regional Latin rites or uses[edit]
Several local rites (more properly uses or variants of the Roman Rite (most with Galican elements some with Byzantine liturgical and tradition elements) of limited scope existed, but are now defunct.

The Sarum Rite (more properly Sarum Use), a defunct variant on the Roman rite originating in the Diocese of Salisbury, which had come to be widely practised in England and Scotland around the 1530s, while the Protestant Reformation swept across continental Europe; practised alongside limited other variants such as the Use of York, Lincoln Use, Bangor Use, and Hereford Use.
The Cologne Use, used in the diocese of Cologne (German: Köln) prior to 1570.
The Metz Use, created by Arnulf of Metz and Amalarius of Metz in the ninth century–used in Alsace-Lorraine, the Netherlands, and Flemish and Wallonian lands until the beginning of the twentieth century.[citation needed]
The Lyonese Rite of the Diocese of Lyon, France, which some consider to have been (rather than Milan) the centre of diffusion of the Gallican liturgy; it is maintained in a few parishes in Lyon.[12]
The Nidaros Use, long defunct, based mainly on imported English liturgical books, used in pre-Reformation Norway.[1]
The Uppsala Use, suppressed during the Reformation, formerly the dominant variant of the Roman Rite used in northern Sweden.
The Aquileian Rite, a defunct rite originating in the former patriarchate of Aquileia in northern Italy.
The Benevento Rite, a defunct Latin rite originated in this city in Italy.
The Durham Rite (defunct: Durham, England)
The Esztergom Use (defunct: Archdiocese of Esztergom, used between the 12th and 17th centuries primarily in the Archdiocese of Esztergom, and in its suffragan dioceses. Similar rites where also in Slovakia and in southern, central, and western Poland. These usages of Roman liturgy was the closest to Roman (today Vatican) rites with some small Byzantine-Slavic elements.

Rites of religious orders[edit]
Main article: Catholic Order Rites
Some religious orders celebrated Mass according to rites of their own, dating from more than 200 years before the papal bull Quo primum. These rites were based on local usages and combined elements of the Roman and Gallican Rites. Following the Second Vatican Council, they have mostly been abandoned, except for the Carthusian Rite (see above). Religious orders of more recent origin have never had special rites.
The following previously existing rites of Mass, distinct from the Roman Rite, continue to be used on a limited basis by the permission of ecclesiastical superiors:[13]

Carmelite Rite
Cistercian Rite
Dominican Rite
Premonstratensian or Norbertine Rite

The Catholic Encyclopedia applied the word "rite" also to the practices followed (to some extent even now, a century later) by certain Catholic religious orders, while at the same time stating that they in fact followed the Roman Rite:[13]

Franciscan Rite
Friars Minor Capuchin Rite
Servite Rite

See also[edit]

Alexandrian Rite
Antiochene Rite
Armenian Rite
Byzantine Rite
East Syrian Rite
West Syrian Rite
List of Catholic rites and churches
General Roman Calendar

References[edit]


^ "Catholic Encyclopedia: Sarum Rite". Newadvent.org. 1912-02-01. Retrieved 2010-04-02. 
^ Apostolic Constitution Anglicanorum coetibus, art. III
^ Salvucci, Claudio R. 2008. The Roman Rite in the Algonquian and Iroquoian Missions. Merchantville, NJ:Evolution Publishing. See also http://mysite.verizon.net/driadzbubl/IndianMasses.html
^ Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church (Oxford University Press 2005 ISBN 978-0-19-280290-3), article Ambrosian rite
^ (in Portuguese) Braga - Capital de Distrito Archived September 16, 2006, at the Wayback Machine.
^ "New Liturgical Movement: Rádio Renascença: Fr. Joseph Santos and the Rite of Braga". newliturgicalmovement.org. 
^ The text of the Carthusian Missal and the Order's other liturgical books is available at Carthusian Monks and Carthusian nuns Archived 2006-12-05 at the Wayback Machine.
^ The Carthusian Order in Catholic Encyclopedia. The text of the former Ordo Missae of the Carthusian Missal is available at this site.
^ Non-Roman Latin or Western Rites Archived 2011-09-27 at the Wayback Machine.
^ "Liturgica.com - Liturgics - Western Roman Liturgics - Early Western Liturgics". liturgica.com. Archived from the original on 2015-05-21. 
^ Anscar J. Chupungco (1997), Handbook for Liturgical Studies: Introduction to the liturgy, Liturgical Press, ISBN 9780814661611 
^ See the section Liturgy of the article Lyons in the Catholic Encyclopedia
^ a b  Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913). "Rites". Catholic Encyclopedia. New York: Robert Appleton Company. 


External links[edit]

Dom Fernand Cabrol's The Mass of the Western Rites
Non-Roman Latin or Western Rites
An African Interpretation of Liturgical Inculturation: The Rite Zairois







v
t
e


Sacraments, rites, and liturgies of the Catholic Church



Sacraments



Baptism
Confirmation
Eucharist
Penance
Anointing of the Sick
Holy Orders
Matrimony








Mass



Low Mass
Missa Cantata
Solemn Mass
Pontifical High Mass
Papal Mass





Canonical
liturgical hours



Matins (nighttime)
Lauds (early morning)
Prime (first hour of daylight)
Terce (third hour)
Sext (noon)
Nones (ninth hour)
Vespers (sunset evening)
Compline (end of the day)





Other liturgical services



Asperges
Benediction of the Blessed Sacrament
Exorcism
Funeral

Requiem


Liturgy of the Hours





Liturgical literature



Antiphonary
Book of hours
Breviary
Gospel Book
Gradual
Lectionary
Martyrology
Psalter
Roman Missal
Roman Ritual
Sacramentary





Liturgical
rites




Latin



Ambrosian Rite
Rite of Braga
Mozarabic Rite
Roman Rite

Mass of Paul VI
Extraordinary form
Anglican Use
Zaire Use







Eastern



Alexandrian Rite
Armenian Rite
Antiochene Rite
Byzantine Rite
East Syrian Rite
West Syrian Rite: Malankara Rite





Orders



Benedictine Rite
Carmelite Rite
Carthusian Rite
Cistercian Rite
Dominican Rite
Norbertine Rite





Defunct rites
and liturgies



African Rite
Aquileian Rite
Celtic Rite
Durham Rite
Gallican Rite
Use of Hereford
Missa Nautica
Missa Sicca
Missa Venatoria
Pre-Tridentine Mass
Use of York
Sarum Rite











 Catholicism portal












v
t
e


Catholic Church






Index
Outline





History
(Timeline)



Jesus
Holy Family

Mary
Joseph


Apostles
Early Christianity
History of the papacy
Ecumenical councils
Missions
Great Schism of East
Crusades
Great Schism of West
Protestant Reformation
Council of Trent
Counter-Reformation
Catholic Church by country
Vatican City

index






Vatican II



Definition of the Church
Ecumenism
Dei verbum
Dignitatis humanae
Gaudium et spes
Lumen gentium
Nostra aetate
Sacrosanctum concilium











Hierarchy
(Precedence)




Pope (List)



Pope Francis (2013–)

conclave
inauguration
theology
canonizations
visits


Pope Emeritus Benedict XVI (2005–2013)







Roman Curia
College of Cardinals

Cardinal


Patriarchate
Episcopal conference
Patriarch
Major archbishop
Primate
Metropolitan
Archbishop
Diocesan bishop
Coadjutor bishop
Auxiliary bishop
Titular bishop
Bishop emeritus
Abbot
Abbess
Superior general
Provincial superior
Grand Master
Prior (-ess)
Priest
Brother

Friar


Sister
Monk
Nun
Hermit
Master of novices
Novice
Oblate
Postulant
Laity





Theology



Body and soul
Bible
Catechism
Divine grace
Dogma
Ecclesiology

Four Marks of the Church


Original sin

List


Salvation
Sermon on the Mount
Ten Commandments
Trinity
Worship




Mariology



Assumption
History
Immaculate Conception
Mariology of the popes
Mariology of the saints
Mother of God
Perpetual virginity
Veneration








Philosophy



Natural law
Moral theology
Personalism
Social teaching
Philosophers





Sacraments



Baptism
Confirmation
Eucharist
Penance
Anointing of the Sick

Last rites


Holy orders
Matrimony





Saints



Mary
Apostles
Archangels
Confessors
Disciples
Doctors of the Church
Evangelists
Church Fathers
Martyrs
Patriarchs
Prophets
Virgins





Doctors
of the
Church







Gregory the Great
Ambrose
Augustine of Hippo
Jerome
John Chrysostom
Basil of Caesarea
Gregory of Nazianzus
Athanasius of Alexandria
Cyril of Alexandria
Cyril of Jerusalem
John of Damascus
Bede the Venerable
Ephrem the Syrian
Thomas Aquinas
Bonaventure
Anselm of Canterbury
Isidore of Seville
Peter Chrysologus
Leo the Great
Peter Damian
Bernard of Clairvaux
Hilary of Poitiers
Alphonsus Liguori
Francis de Sales
Peter Canisius
John of the Cross
Robert Bellarmine
Albertus Magnus
Anthony of Padua
Lawrence of Brindisi
Teresa of Ávila
Catherine of Siena
Thérèse of Lisieux
John of Ávila
Hildegard of Bingen
Gregory of Narek








Institutes,
orders,
and societies



Assumptionists
Annonciades
Augustinians
Basilians
Benedictines
Bethlehemites
Blue nuns
Camaldoleses
Camillians
Carmelites
Carthusians
Cistercians
Clarisses
Conceptionists
Crosiers
Dominicans
Franciscans
Good Shepherd Sisters
Hieronymites
Jesuits
Mercedarians
Minims
Olivetans
Oratorians
Piarists
Premonstratensians
Redemptorists
Servites
Theatines
Trappists
Trinitarians
Visitandines





Associations
of the faithful



International Federation of Catholic Parochial Youth Movements
International Federation of Catholic Universities
International Kolping Society
Schoenstatt Apostolic Movement
International Union of Catholic Esperantists
Community of Sant'Egidio





Charities



Aid to the Church in Need
Caritas Internationalis
Catholic Home Missions
Catholic Relief Services
CIDSE





Particular
churches
(By country)



Latin Church
Eastern Catholic Churches: Albanian
Armenian
Belarusian
Bulgarian
Chaldean
Coptic
Croatian and Serbian
Eritrean
Ethiopian
Georgian
Greek
Hungarian
Italo-Albanian
Macedonian
Maronite
Melkite
Romanian
Russian
Ruthenian
Slovak
Syriac
Syro-Malabar
Syro-Malankara
Ukrainian




Liturgical rites



Alexandrian
Antiochian
Armenian
Byzantine
East Syrian
Latin

Anglican Use
Ambrosian
Mozarabic
Roman


West Syrian











 Catholicism portal
 Pope portal
 Vatican City portal


 Book
Name
 Media

 Category
 Templates
 WikiProject













						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Latin_liturgical_rites&oldid=815992859"					Categories: Catholic liturgical ritesHidden categories: Articles with Portuguese-language external linksWebarchive template wayback linksArticles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource referenceArticles containing German-language textAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from July 2017