"Latin American" and "Latinoamérica" redirect here. For Latin American people, see Latin Americans. For the song, see Latinoamérica (song).

Latin America[a]




Area
19,197,000 km2 (7,412,000 sq mi)[1]


Population
639,048,639 (2016 est.)[2][b]


Population density
31/km2 (80/sq mi)


Demonym
Latin American


Countries
20[c]


Dependencies
13


Largest cities
(Metro areas)[3][4]
1. Mexico City
2. São Paulo
3. Buenos Aires
4. Rio de Janeiro
5. Bogotá
6. Lima
7. Santiago
8. Caracas
9. Guadalajara
10. Monterrey


Latin America[a] is a group of countries and dependencies in the Americas where Spanish, French and Portuguese are predominant including Argentina, Belize, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, French Guiana, Guadeloupe, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Martinique, Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Puerto Rico, and Saint Barthelemy. The term originated in 19th century France as Amérique latine to consider French-speaking territories in the Americas (Haiti, French Guiana, Martinique, Guadeloupe, Saint Martin, Saint Barthélemy) along with the larger group of countries where Spanish and Portuguese languages prevailed. It is therefore broader than the terms Ibero-America or Hispanic America—though it usually excludes French Canada and modern French Louisiana.
Latin America consists of nineteen sovereign states and several territories and dependencies which cover an area that stretches from the northern border of Mexico to the southern tip of South America, including the Caribbean. It has an area of approximately 19,197,000 km2 (7,412,000 sq mi),[1] almost 13% of the Earth's land surface area. As of 2016, its population was estimated at more than 639 million[2][b] and in 2014, Latin America had a combined nominal GDP of 5,573,397 million USD[5] and a GDP PPP of 7,531,585 million USD.[5][6]
The term "Latin America" was first used in an 1856 conference with the title "Initiative of the America. Idea for a Federal Congress of Republics" (Iniciativa de la América. Idea de un Congreso Federal de las Repúblicas),[7] by the Chilean politician Francisco Bilbao. In such conference, he called for the creation of a confederation of Latin American republics to better search for their common defense and prosperity, without political or economic barriers between them. In the same work, he also detailed the principles under which such a confederation should work.



Contents


1 Etymology and definitions

1.1 Origins
1.2 Contemporary definitions
1.3 Subregions and countries


2 History

2.1 Pre-Columbian history
2.2 European colonization

2.2.1 Slavery and forced labor in colonial Latin America


2.3 Independence (1804–25)

2.3.1 Independent Empire of Brazil


2.4 Conservative-liberal conflicts in the 19th Century
2.5 British influence in Latin America during the 19th century
2.6 French involvement in Latin America during the 19th century
2.7 United States involvement in Latin America during the 19th Century

2.7.1 Monroe Doctrine
2.7.2 Mexican–American War (1846–48)


2.8 World wars (1914–45)

2.8.1 World War I and the Zimmermann Telegram
2.8.2 Brazil's participation in World War II
2.8.3 Involvement in World War II


2.9 Cold War (1946–90)

2.9.1 Economy
2.9.2 Reforms
2.9.3 Bureaucratic authoritarianism
2.9.4 US relations
2.9.5 Cuban Revolution
2.9.6 Bay of Pigs Invasion
2.9.7 Alliance for Progress
2.9.8 Nicaraguan Revolution


2.10 Washington Consensus
2.11 Turn to the left
2.12 Return of social movements
2.13 Modern era


3 Demographics

3.1 Largest cities
3.2 Ethnic groups
3.3 Language
3.4 Religion
3.5 Migration
3.6 Education
3.7 Crime and violence


4 Economy

4.1 Size
4.2 Development
4.3 Standard of living
4.4 Environment


5 Inequality
6 Trade blocs
7 Tourism
8 Culture

8.1 Art
8.2 Film
8.3 Literature
8.4 Music and dance
8.5 World Heritage Sites


9 See also
10 Notes
11 References
12 Further reading
13 External links



Etymology and definitions[edit]
Origins[edit]




Presencia de América Latina (Presence of Latin America, 1964–65) is a 300 square meters (3,200 sq ft) mural at the hall of the Arts House of the University of Concepción, Chile. It is also known as Latin America's Integration.


The idea that a part of the Americas has a linguistic affinity with the Romance cultures as a whole can be traced back to the 1830s, in the writing of the French Saint-Simonian Michel Chevalier, who postulated that this part of the Americas was inhabited by people of a "Latin race", and that it could, therefore, ally itself with "Latin Europe", ultimately overlapping the Latin Church, in a struggle with "Teutonic Europe", "Anglo-Saxon America" and "Slavic Europe".[8] Further investigations of the concept of Latin America are by Michel Gobat in the American Historical Review[9] and the monograph by Mauricio Tenorio-Trillo, Latin America: The Allure and Power of an Idea (2017).[10]
The idea of a "Latin race" was later taken up by Latin American intellectuals and political leaders of the mid- and late-nineteenth century, who no longer looked to Spain or Portugal as cultural models, but rather to France.[11] However, it is important to clarify that the idea of a "Latin race" is not the same as the idea of "Latin America," even when they are somewhat related among themselves. Though the origin of the idea of a "Latin race" was French, and it was later used to support the French invasion of Mexico in 1862, the term "Latin America" itself was used first by two Latin American intellectuals in two independent works, though both written in 1856 as a direct reaction to events related with U.S. policies toward Latin American countries, which are explicitly mentioned in both works.
The term "Latin America" was first used in 1856 in a conference by the Chilean politician Francisco Bilbao in Paris.[12] The conference had the title "Initiative of the America. Idea for a Federal Congress of Republics."[13] The same year the Colombian writer José María Torres Caicedo also used the term in his poem "The Two Americas."[14] Two events related with the U.S. played a central role in both works. The first event happened less than a decade before the publication of Bilbao's and Torres Caicedo's works: the Mexican–American War, after which Mexico lost a third of its territory. The second event happened the same year both works were written, when U.S. president Franklin Pierce decided "to recognize the 'piratical' regime recently established in Nicaragua by William Walker and his band of U.S. filibusters."[9] Given that the intention of William Walker was to create an English-speaking colony in Nicaragua and reinstate slavery (already abolished in Central America), Pierce's decision was considered openly hostile by many Latin American intellectuals, among them the two first users of the term "Latin America."
In both Bilbao's and Torres Caicedo's works, the U.S.-Mexico war and Walker's expedition to Nicaragua are explicitly mentioned as examples of dangers for the region. Both authors also ask for the union of all Latin American countries as the only way to defend their territories against further foreign U.S. interventions. Both rejected also European imperialism, claiming that the return of European countries to non-democratic forms of government was another danger for Latin American countries, and used the same word to describe the state of European politics at the time: "despotism." Several years later, during the French invasion of Mexico, Bilbao wrote another work, "Emancipation of the Spirit in America," where he asked all Latin American countries to support the Mexican cause against France, and rejected French imperialism in Asia, Africa, Europe and the Americas. He asked Latin American intellectuals to search for their "intellectual emancipation" by abandoning all French ideas, claiming that France was: "Hypocrite, because she [France] calls herself protector of the Latin race just to subject it to her exploitation regime; treacherous, because she speaks of freedom and nationality, when, unable to conquer freedom for herself, she enslaves others instead!"[15] Therefore, as Michel Gobat puts it, the term Latin America itself had an "anti-imperial genesis," and their creators were far from supporting any form of imperialism in the region, or in any other place of the globe.
However, in France the term Latin America was used with the opposite intention. It was supported by the French Empire of Napoleon III during the French invasion of Mexico as a way to include France among countries with influence in the Americas and to exclude Anglophone countries. It played a role in his campaign to imply cultural kinship of the region with France, transform France into a cultural and political leader of the area, and install Maximilian of Habsburg as emperor of the Second Mexican Empire.[16] This term was also used in 1861 by French scholars in La revue des races Latines, a magazine dedicated to the Pan-Latinism movement.[17]
Contemporary definitions[edit]




The 4 common subregions in Latin America



Latin America generally refers to territories in the Americas where the Spanish or Portuguese languages prevail: Mexico, most of Central and South America, and in the Caribbean, Cuba, the Dominican Republic, and Puerto Rico. Latin America is, therefore, defined as all those parts of the Americas that were once part of the Spanish and Portuguese Empires.[18] By this definition, Latin America is coterminous with Ibero-America ("Iberian America").[19]
The term is sometimes used more broadly to refer to all of the Americas south of the United States,[20] thus including the Guianas, the Anglophone Caribbean (and Belize); the Francophone Caribbean; and the Dutch-speaking Caribbean. This definition emphasizes a similar socioeconomic history of the region, which was characterized by formal or informal colonialism, rather than cultural aspects (see, for example, dependency theory).[21] As such, some sources avoid this oversimplification by using the phrase "Latin America and the Caribbean" instead, as in the United Nations geoscheme for the Americas.[22][23][24]
In a more literal definition, which is close to the semantic origin, Latin America designates countries in the Americas where a Romance language (a language derived from Latin) predominates: Spanish, Portuguese, French, and the creole languages based upon these.[20] In this definition, Quebec would be classified as part of Latin America.

The distinction between Latin America and Anglo-America is a convention based on the predominant languages in the Americas by which Romance-language and English-speaking cultures are distinguished. Neither area is culturally or linguistically homogeneous; in substantial portions of Latin America (e.g., highland Peru, Bolivia, Mexico, Guatemala), Native American cultures and, to a lesser extent, Amerindian languages, are predominant, and in other areas, the influence of African cultures is strong (e.g., the Caribbean basin – including parts of Colombia and Venezuela).
The term is not without controversy. Historian Mauricio Tenorio-Trillo explores at length the "allure and power" of the idea of Latin America. He remarks at the outset, "The idea of 'Latin America' ought to have vanished with the obsolescence of racial theory... But it is not easy to declare something dead when it can hardly be said to have existed," going on to say, "The term is here to stay, and it is important."[25] Following in the tradition of Chilean writer Francisco Bilbao, who excluded Brazil, Argentina and Paraguay from his early conceptualization of Latin America,[26] Chilean historian Jaime Eyzaguirre has criticized the term Latin America for "disguising" and "diluting" the Spanish character of a region (i.e. Hispanic America) with the inclusion of nations that according to him do not share the same pattern of conquest and colonization.[vague][27]
Subregions and countries[edit]
Latin America can be subdivided into several subregions based on geography, politics, demographics and culture. If defined as all of the Americas south of the United States, the basic geographical subregions are North America, Central America, the Caribbean and South America;[28] the latter contains further politico-geographical subdivisions such as the Southern Cone, the Guianas and the Andean states. It may be subdivided on linguistic grounds into Hispanic America, Portuguese America and French America.


Flag
Arms
Name
Area
(km²)
Population[2]
(2016)
Population density
(per km²)
Capital
Name(s) in official language(s)
Time(s) zone(s)




Argentina
2,780,400
43,847,430
14.4
Buenos Aires
Argentina
UTC/GMT -3 hours




Bolivia
1,098,581
10,887,882
9
Sucre and La Paz
Bolivia; Buliwya; Wuliwya; Volívia
UTC/GMT -4 hours




Brazil
8,515,767
207,652,865
23.6
Brasília
Brasil
UTC/GMT -2 hours (Fernando de Noronha)
UTC/GMT -3 hours (Brasília)
UTC/GMT -4 hours (Amazon)
UTC/GMT -5 hours (Acre)




Chile
756,096
17,909,754
23
Santiago
Chile
UTC/GMT -3 hours




Colombia
1,141,748
48,653,419
41.5
Bogotá
Colombia
UTC/GMT -5 hours




Costa Rica
51,100
4,857,274
91.3
San José
Costa Rica
UTC/GMT -6 hours




Cuba
109,884
11,475,982
100.6
Havana
Cuba
UTC/GMT -4 hours




Dominican Republic
48,442
10,648,791
210.9
Santo Domingo
República Dominicana
UTC/GMT -4 hours




Ecuador
283,560
16,385,068
54.4
Quito
Ecuador
UTC/GMT -5 hours




El Salvador
21,040
6,344,722
290.3
San Salvador
El Salvador
UTC/GMT -6 hours




French Guiana*
83,534
275,713
3
Cayenne
Guyane
UTC/GMT -3 hours




Guadeloupe*
1,628
449,975
250
Basse-Terre
Guadeloupe
UTC/GMT -4 hours




Guatemala
108,889
16,582,469
129
Guatemala City
Guatemala
UTC/GMT -6 hours




Haiti
27,750
10,847,334
350
Port-au-Prince
Haïti; Ayiti
UTC/GMT -4 hours




Honduras
112,492
9,112,867
76
Tegucigalpa
Honduras
UTC/GMT -6 hours




Martinique*
1,128
385,103
340
Fort-de-France
Martinique
UTC/GMT -4 hours




Mexico
1,964 375
127,540,423
57
Mexico City
México
UTC/GMT -5 hours (Zona Sureste)
UTC/GMT -6 hours (Zona Centro)
UTC/GMT -7 hours (Zona Pacífico)
UTC/GMT -8 hours (Zona Noroeste)




Nicaragua
130,375
6,149,928
44.3
Managua
Nicaragua
UTC/GMT -6 hours




Panama
75,517
4,034,119
54.2
Panama City
Panamá
UTC/GMT -5 hours




Paraguay
406,752
6,725,308
14.2
Asunción
Paraguay; Tetã Paraguái
UTC/GMT -4 hours




Peru
1,285,216
31,773,839
23
Lima
Perú; Piruw
UTC/GMT -4 hours




Puerto Rico*
9,104
3,667,903
397
San Juan
Puerto Rico
UTC/GMT -4 hours




Saint Barthélemy*
53.2
9,000[29]
682
Gustavia
Saint-Barthélemy
UTC/GMT -4 hours




Saint Martin*
25
39,000
361
Marigot
Saint-Martin
UTC/GMT -4 hours




Uruguay
176,215
3,444,006
18.87
Montevideo
Uruguay
UTC/GMT -3 hours




Venezuela
916,445
31,568,179
31.59
Caracas
Venezuela
UTC/GMT – 4:00 hours


Total


20,111,457
626,741,000


*: Not a sovereign state
History[edit]
Main article: History of Latin America
See also: History of North America, History of South America, History of Central America, and History of the Caribbean
Pre-Columbian history[edit]
Main articles: Settlement of the Americas, Population history of indigenous peoples of the Americas, and Pre-Columbian era




A view of Machu Picchu, a pre-Columbian Inca site in Peru.






Mayan archeological site Chichen Itza.


The earliest known settlement was identified at Monte Verde, near Puerto Montt in Southern Chile. Its occupation dates to some 14,000 years ago and there is some disputed evidence of even earlier occupation. Over the course of millennia, people spread to all parts of the continents. By the first millennium CE, South America's vast rainforests, mountains, plains and coasts were the home of tens of millions of people. The earliest settlements in the Americas are of the Las Vegas Culture[30] from about 8000 BCE and 4600 BCE, a sedentary group from the coast of Ecuador, the forefathers of the more known Valdivia culture, of the same era. Some groups formed more permanent settlements such as the Chibcha (or "Muisca" or "Muysca") and the Tairona groups. These groups are in the circum Caribbean region. The Chibchas of Colombia, the Quechuas and Aymaras of Bolivia and Perú were the three indigenous groups that settled most permanently.
The region was home to many indigenous peoples and advanced civilizations, including the Aztecs, Toltecs, Maya, and Inca. The golden age of the Maya began about 250, with the last two great civilizations, the Aztecs and Incas, emerging into prominence later on in the early fourteenth century and mid-fifteenth centuries, respectively. The Aztec empire was ultimately the most powerful civilization known throughout the Americas, until its downfall in part by the Spanish invasion.
European colonization[edit]
Main articles: European colonization of the Americas, Spanish colonization of the Americas, and Portuguese colonization of the Americas




Romantic painting of Christopher Columbus arriving to the Americas (Primer desembarco de Cristóbal Colón en América), by Dióscoro Puebla (1862).






Cristóbal de Olid leads Spanish soldiers with Tlaxcalan allies against indigenous warriors during the European colonization of the Americas.


With the arrival of the Europeans following Christopher Columbus' voyages, the indigenous elites, such as the Incas and Aztecs, lost power to the heavy European invasion. Hernándo Cortés seized the Aztec elite's power with the help of local groups who had favored the Aztec elite, and Francisco Pizarro eliminated the Incan rule in Western South America. The European powers of Spain and Portugal colonized the region, which along with the rest of the uncolonized world, was divided into areas of Spanish and Portuguese control by the line of demarcation in 1494, which gave Spain all areas to the west, and Portugal all areas to the east (the Portuguese lands in South America subsequently becoming Brazil). By the end of the sixteenth century Spain and Portugal had been joined by others, including France, in occupying large areas of North, Central and South America, ultimately extending from Alaska to the southern tips of the Patagonia. European culture, customs and government were introduced, with the Roman Catholic Church becoming the major economic and political power to overrule the traditional ways of the region, eventually becoming the only official religion of the Americas during this period.
Epidemics of diseases brought by the Europeans, such as smallpox and measles, wiped out a large portion of the indigenous population. Historians cannot determine the number of natives who died due to European diseases, but some put the figures as high as 85% and as low as 25%. Due to the lack of written records, specific numbers are hard to verify. Many of the survivors were forced to work in European plantations and mines. Intermixing between the indigenous peoples and the European colonists was very common, and, by the end of the colonial period, people of mixed ancestry (mestizos) formed majorities in several colonies.
Slavery and forced labor in colonial Latin America[edit]
See also: Slavery among the indigenous peoples of the Americas and Atlantic slave trade
Indigenous peoples of the Americas in various European colonies were forced to work in European plantations and mines; along with African slaves who were also introduced in the proceeding centuries.
The Mita of Colonial Latin America was a system of forced labor imposed on the natives. First established by Viceroy Francisco de Toledo (1569–1581), the Mita was upheld by laws that designated how large draft levies were and how much money the workers would receive that was based on how many shifts each individual worker performed. Toledo established Mitas at Potosi and Huancavelica, where the Mitayos—the workers—would be reduced in number to a fraction of how many were originally assigned before the 1700s. While several villages managed to resist the Mita, others offered payment to colonial administrators as a way out. In exchange, free labor became available through volunteers, though the Mita was kept in place as workers like miners for example were paid low wages. The Spanish Crown had not made any ruling on the Mita or approved of it when Toledo first established it in spite of the uncertainty of the practice since the Crown could have gained benefits from it. However, the cortes of Spain later abolished it in 1812 once complaints of the Mita violating humanitarian rights were made. Yet complaints also came from: governors; landowners; native leaders known as Kurakas; and even priests, each of whom preferred other methods of economic exploitation. Despite its fall, the Mita made it to the 1800s.[31]
Independence (1804–25)[edit]
Main articles: Latin American wars of independence and Spanish American wars of independence




Miguel Hidalgo y Costilla was the first leader of the Mexican War of Independence.






Simón Bolívar, Liberator of Venezuela, Colombia, Ecuador, Bolivia, Peru and Panama.






José de San Martín, The Liberator of Argentina, Chile and Peru.


In 1804, Haiti became the first Latin American nation to gain independence, following a violent slave revolt led by Toussaint L'ouverture on the French colony of Saint-Domingue. The victors abolished slavery. Haitian independence inspired independence movements in Spanish America.
By the end of the eighteenth century, Spanish and Portuguese power waned on the global scene as other European powers took their place, notably Britain and France. Resentment grew among the majority of the population in Latin America over the restrictions imposed by the Spanish government, as well as the dominance of native Spaniards (Iberian-born Peninsulares) in the major social and political institutions. Napoleon's invasion of Spain in 1808 marked a turning point, compelling Criollo elites to form juntas that advocated independence. Also, the newly independent Haiti, the second oldest nation in the New World after the United States, further fueled the independence movement by inspiring the leaders of the movement, such as Miguel Hidalgo y Costilla of Mexico, Simón Bolívar of Venezuela and José de San Martín of Argentina, and by providing them with considerable munitions and troops.
Fighting soon broke out between juntas and the Spanish colonial authorities, with initial victories for the advocates of independence. Eventually these early movements were crushed by the royalist troops by 1810, including those of Miguel Hidalgo y Costilla in Mexico in the year 1810. Later on Francisco de Miranda in Venezuela by 1812. Under the leadership of a new generation of leaders, such as Simón Bolívar "The Liberator", José de San Martín of Argentina, and other Libertadores in South America, the independence movement regained strength, and by 1825, all Spanish America, except for Puerto Rico and Cuba, had gained independence from Spain. In the same year in Mexico, a military officer, Agustín de Iturbide, led a coalition of conservatives and liberals who created a constitutional monarchy, with Iturbide as emperor. This First Mexican Empire was short-lived, and was followed by the creation of a republic in 1823.




Pedro I of Brazil, was the founder and first ruler of the Empire of Brazil.


Independent Empire of Brazil[edit]
Main articles: Independence of Brazil and Empire of Brazil




Declaration of the Brazilian independence by the later Emperor Pedro I on September 7, 1822.


During the invasion of Portugal (1807), the Portuguese royal family fled to Brazil, establishing Rio de Janeiro as the de facto capital of Portugal. This had the side effect of creating within Brazil many of the institutions required to exist as an independent state; most importantly, it freed Brazil to trade with other nations at will. After Napoleon's army was finally defeated in 1815, in order to maintain the capital in Brazil and allay Brazilian fears of being returned to colonial status, King John VI of Portugal raised the de jure status of Brazil to an equal, integral part of a United Kingdom of Portugal, Brazil, and the Algarves, rather than a mere colony, a status which it enjoyed for the next seven years.
Tensions between Portuguese and Brazilians increased, and the Portuguese Cortes, guided by the new political regime imposed by the 1820 Liberal Revolution, tried to re-establish Brazil as a colony.[32] The Brazilians refused to yield, and Prince Pedro decided to stand with them, declaring the country's independence from Portugal on 7 September 1822.[33] A month later, Prince Pedro was declared the first Emperor of Brazil, with the regnal title of Dom Pedro I, resulting in the foundation of the Empire of Brazil.[34]
The Brazilian War of Independence, which had already begun along this process, spread through northern, northeastern regions and in Cisplatina province.[35] With the last Portuguese soldiers surrendering on 8 March 1824,[36] Portugal officially recognized Brazil on 29 August 1825.[37]
On 7 April 1831, worn down by years of administrative turmoil and political dissensions with both liberal and conservative sides of politics, including an attempt of republican secession,[38] as well as unreconciled with the way that absolutists in Portugal had given to the succession of King John VI, Pedro I went to Portugal to reclaim his daughter's crown, abdicating the Brazilian throne in favor of his five-year-old son and heir (who thus became the Empire's second monarch, with the regnal title of Dom Pedro II).[39]




Pedro II, Emperor of Brazil between 1831 and 1889.


As the new Emperor could not exert his constitutional powers until he became of age, a regency was set up by the National Assembly.[40] In the absence of a charismatic figure who could represent a moderate face of power, during this period a series of localized rebellions took place, as the Cabanagem, the Malê Revolt, the Balaiada, the Sabinada, and the Ragamuffin War, which emerged from the dissatisfaction of the provinces with the central power, coupled with old and latent social tensions peculiar of a vast, slaveholding and newly independent nation state.[41] This period of internal political and social upheaval, which included the Praieira revolt, was overcome only at the end of the 1840s, years after the end of the regency, which occurred with the premature coronation of Pedro II in 1841.[42]
During the last phase of the monarchy, internal political debate was centered on the issue of slavery. The Atlantic slave trade was abandoned in 1850,[43] as a result of the British' Aberdeen Act, but only in May 1888 after a long process of internal mobilization and debate for an ethical and legal dismantling of slavery in the country, was the institution formally abolished.[44]
The foreign affairs in the monarchy were basically related issues with the countries of the Southern Cone with which Brazil has borders. Long after the Cisplatine War that resulted in independence for Uruguay,[45] Brazil won three international wars during the 58-year reign of Pedro II. These were the Platine War, the Uruguayan War and the devastating Paraguayan War, the largest war effort in Brazilian history.[46][47]
On 15 November 1889, worn out by years of economic stagnation, in attrition with the majority of Army officers, as well as with rural and financial elites (for different reasons), the monarchy was overthrown by a military coup.[48]
Conservative-liberal conflicts in the 19th Century[edit]





Development of Spanish American Independence
  Government under traditional Spanish law
  Loyal to Supreme Central Junta or Cortes
  American junta or insurrection movement
  Independent state declared or established
  Height of French control of the Peninsula



After the independence of many Latin American countries, there was conflict between the people and the government, much of which can be reduced to the contrasting ideologies between liberalism and conservatism.[49] Conservatism was the dominant system of government prior to the revolutions and it was founded on having social classes, including governing by kings. Liberalists wanted to see a change in the ruling systems, and to move away from monarchs and social classes in order to promote equality.
When liberal Guadalupe Victoria became the first president of Mexico in 1824, conservatists relied on their belief that the state had been better off before the new government came into power, so, by comparison, the old government was better in the eyes of the Conservatives. Following this sentiment, the conservatives pushed to take control of the government, and they succeeded. General Santa Anna was elected president in 1833. The following decade, the Mexican–American War (1846–48) caused Mexico to lose a significant amount of territory to the United States. This loss led to a rebellion by the enraged liberal forces against the conservative government.
In 1837, conservative Rafael Carrera conquered Guatemala and separated from the Central American Union. The instability that followed the disintegration of the union led to the independence of the other Central American countries.
In Brazil, rural aristocrats were in conflict with the urban conservatives. Portuguese control over Brazilian ports continued after Brazil's independence. Following the conservative idea that the old government was better, urbanites tended to support conservatism because more opportunities were available to them as a result of the Portuguese presence.
Simón Bolívar became president of Gran Colombia in 1819 after the region gained independence from Spain. He led a military-controlled state. Citizens did not like the government's position under Bolívar: The people in the military were unhappy with their roles, and the civilians were of the opinion that the military had too much power. After the dissolution of Gran Colombia, New Grenada continued to have conflicts between conservatives and liberals. These conflicts were each concentrated in particular regions, with conservatives particularly in the southern mountains and the Valley of Cauca. In the mid-1840s some leaders in Caracas organized a liberal opposition. Antonio Leocadio Guzman was an active participant and journalist in this movement and gained much popularity among the people of Caracas.[50]
In Argentina, the conflict manifested itself as a prolongued civil war between unitarianas (i.e. centralists) and federalists, which were in some aspects respectively analogous to liberals and conservatives in other countries. Between 1832 and 1852, the country existed as a confederation, without a head of state, although the federalist governor of Buenos Aires province, Juan Manuel de Rosas, was given the powers of debt payment and international relations and exerted a growing hegemony over the country. A national constitution was only enacted in 1853, reformed in 1860, and the country reorganized as a federal republic led by a liberal-conservative elite.[51] After Uruguay achieved its independence, in 1828, a similar polarization cristallized between blancos and colorados, where the agrarian conservative interests were pitted against the liberal commercial interests based in Montevideo, and which eventually resulted in the Guerra Grande civil war (1839–1851).[52]
British influence in Latin America during the 19th century[edit]




British invasions of the Río de la Plata. Beresford surrenders to Santiago de Liniers (1806).


Losing the North American colonies at the end of the 18th century left Great Britain in need of new markets to supply resources in the early 19th century.[53] In order to solve this problem, Great Britain turned to the Spanish colonies in South America for resources and markets. In 1806 a small British force surprise attacked the capitol of the viceroyalty in Río de la Plata.[54] As a result, the local garrison protecting the capitol was destroyed in an attempt to defend against the British conquest. The British were able to capture numerous amounts of precious metals, before a French naval force intervened on behalf of the Spanish King and took down the invading force. However, this caused much turmoil in the area as militia took control of the area from the viceroy. The next year the British attacked once again with a much larger force attempting to reach and conquer Montevideo.[55] They failed to reach Montevideo but succeeded in establishing an alliance with the locals. As a result, the British were able to take control of the Indian markets.
This newly gained British dominance hindered the development of Latin American industries and strengthened the dependence on the world trade network.[56] Britain now replaced Spain as the region's largest trading partner.[57] Great Britain invested significant capital in Latin America in order to develop the area as a market for processed goods.[58] From the early 1820s to 1850, the post-independence economies of Latin American countries were lagging and stagnant.[53] Eventually, enhanced trade among Britain and Latin America led to state development such as infrastructure improvements. These improvements included roads and railroads which grew the trades between countries and outside nations such as Great Britain.[59] By 1870, exports dramatically increased, attracting capital from abroad (including Europe and USA).[60]
French involvement in Latin America during the 19th century[edit]




Maximilian receiving a Mexican delegation at Miramar Castle in Trieste, Italy.


Between 1821 and 1910, Mexico battled through various civil wars between the established Conservative government and the Liberal reformists ("Mexico Timeline- Page 2)". On May 8, 1827 Baron Damas, the French Minister of Foreign Affairs, and Sebastián Camacho, a Mexican diplomat, signed an agreement called "The Declarations" which contained provisions regarding commerce and navigation between France and Mexico. At this time the French government did not recognise Mexico as an independent entity.[61] It was not until 1861 that the liberalist rebels, led by Benito Juárez, took control of Mexico City, consolidating liberal rule. However, the constant state of warfare left Mexico with a tremendous amount of debt owed to Spain, England, and France, all of whom funded the Mexican war effort (Neeno). As newly appointed president, Benito Juárez suspended payment of debts for next two years, to focus on a rebuilding and stabilization initiative in Mexico under the new government. On December 8, 1861, Spain, England and France landed in Veracruz in order to seize unpaid debts from Mexico. However, Napoleon III, with intentions of establishing a French client state to further push his economic interests, pressured the other two powers to withdraw in 1862 (Greenspan; "French Intervention in Mexico…").




Painting depicting the Battle of Puebla in 1862


France under Napoleon III remained and established Maximilian of Habsburg, Archduke of Austria, as Emperor of Mexico.[62] The march by the French to Mexico City enticed heavy resistance by the Mexican government, it resulted in open war-fare. The Battle of Puebla in 1862 in particular presented an important turning point in which Ignacio Zaragoza led the Mexican army to victory as they pushed back the French offensive ("Timeline of the Mexican Revolution"). The victory came to symbolize Mexico's power and national resolve against foreign occupancy and as a result delayed France's later attack on Mexico City for an entire year (Cinco de Mayo (Mexican History)). With heavy resistance by Mexican rebels and the fear of United States intervention against France, forced Napoleon III to withdraw from Mexico, leaving Maximilian to surrender, where he would be later executed by Mexican troops under the rule of Porfirio Díaz.[63] Napoleon III's desire to expand France's economic empire influenced the decision to seize territorial domain over the Central American region. The port city of Veracruz, Mexico and France's desire to construct a new canal were of particular interest. Bridging both New World and East Asian trade routes to the Atlantic were key to Napoleon III's economic goals to the mining of precious rocks and the expansion of France's textile industry. Napoleon's fear of the United States' economic influence over the Pacific trade region, and in turn all New World economic activity, pushed France to intervene in Mexico under the pretense of collecting on Mexico's debt. Eventually France began plans to build the Panama Canal in 1881 until 1904 when the United States took over and proceeded with its construction and implementation ("Read Our Story").
United States involvement in Latin America during the 19th Century[edit]
Monroe Doctrine[edit]
The Monroe Doctrine was included in President James Monroe's 1823 annual message to Congress. The doctrine warns European nations that the United States will no longer tolerate any new colonization of Latin American countries. It was originally drafted to meet the present major concerns, but eventually became the precept of U.S. foreign policy in the Western Hemisphere. The doctrine was put into effect in 1865 when the U.S. government supported Mexican president, Benito Juárez, diplomatically and militarily. Some Latin American countries viewed the U.S. interventions, allowed by the Monroe Doctrine when the U.S. deems necessary, with suspicion.[64]
Another important aspect of United States involvement in Latin America is the case of the filibuster William Walker. In 1855, he traveled to Nicaragua hoping to overthrow the government and take the land for the United States. With only the aid of 56 followers, he was able to take over the city of Granada, declaring himself commander of the army and installing Patricio Rivas as a puppet president. However, Rivas's presidency ended when he fled Nicaragua; Walker rigged the following election to ensure that he became the next president. His presidency did not last long, however, as he was met with much opposition from political groups in Nicaragua and neighbouring countries. On May 1, 1857, Walker was forced by a coalition of Central American armies to surrender himself to a United States Navy officer who repatriated him and his followers. When Walker subsequently returned to Central America in 1860, he was apprehended by the Honduran authorities and executed.
Mexican–American War (1846–48)[edit]




American occupation of Mexico City.


The Mexican–American War, another instance of U.S. involvement in Latin America, was a war between the United States and Mexico that started in April 1846 and lasted until February 1848. The main cause of the war was the United States' annexation of Texas in 1845 and a dispute afterwards about whether the border between Mexico and the United States ended where Mexico claimed, at the Nueces River, or ended where the United States claimed, at the Rio Grande. Peace was negotiated between the United States and Mexico with the Treaty of Guadalupe-Hidalgo, which stated that Mexico was to cede land which would later become part of California and New Mexico as well as give up all claims to Texas, for which the United States would pay $15,000,000. However, tensions between the two countries were still high and over the next six years things only got worse with raids along the border and attacks by Native Americans against Mexican citizens. To defuse the situation, the United States agreed to purchase 29,670 squares miles of land from Mexico for $10,000,000 so a southern railroad could be built to connect the Pacific and Atlantic coasts. This would become known as the Gadsden Purchase. A critical component of U.S. intervention in Latin American affairs took form in the Spanish–American War, which drastically affected the futures of Cuba and Puerto Rico in the Americas, as well as Guam and the Philippines, by dismantling some of the last remaining Spanish colonial possessions throughout the world.
World wars (1914–45)[edit]






v
t
e


United States involvement
in the Mexican Revolution






Mexican Revolution


Tampico Affair
Ypiranga incident
Veracruz


Border War


1st Agua Prieta
1st Ciudad Juarez
Bandit War
Norias Ranch
Ojo de Agua
2nd Nogales
Santa Isabel
Columbus
Mexican Expedition
Guerrero
Agua Caliente
Parral
Tomochic
Ojos Azules
Glenn Springs
Rubio Ranch
Castillon
Las Varas Pass
San Ygnacio
Carrizal
Zimmermann Affair
Brite Ranch
1st Pilares
Neville Ranch
2nd Pilares
Porvenir
3rd Nogales
3rd Ciudad Juárez
Ruby






See also: Pan-Americanism
World War I and the Zimmermann Telegram[edit]




The Zimmermann Telegram as it was sent from Washington to Ambassador Heinrich von Eckardt (who was the German ambassador to Mexico).


The Zimmermann Telegram was a 1917 diplomatic proposal from the German Empire for Mexico to join an alliance with Germany in the event of the United States entering World War I against Germany. The proposal was intercepted and decoded by British intelligence. Revelation of the contents outraged the American public and swayed public opinion. President Woodrow Wilson moved to arm American merchant ships in order to defend themselves against German submarines, which had started to attack them. The news helped generate support for the United States declaration of war on Germany in April of that year.[65]
The message came as a coded telegram dispatched by the Foreign Secretary of the German Empire, Arthur Zimmermann, on January 16, 1917. The message was sent to the German ambassador of Mexico, Heinrich von Eckardt. Zimmermann sent the telegram in anticipation of the resumption of unrestricted submarine warfare by Germany on 1 February, an act which Germany presumed would lead to war. The telegram instructed Ambassador Eckardt that if the U.S. appeared certain to enter the war, he was to approach the Mexican Government with a proposal for military alliance, with funding from Germany. As part of the alliance, Germany would assist Mexico in reconquering Texas and the Southwest. Eckardt was instructed to urge Mexico to help broker an alliance between Germany and Japan. Mexico, in the middle of the Mexican Revolution, far weaker militarily, economically and politically than the U.S., ignored the proposal; after the U.S. entered the war, it officially rejected it.
Brazil's participation in World War II[edit]
After World War I, in which Brazil was an ally of the United States, Great Britain, and France, the country realized it needed a more capable army but didn't have the technology to create it. In 1919, the French Military Mission was established by the French Commission in Brazil. Their main goal was to contain the inner rebellions in Brazil. They tried to assist the army by bringing them up to the European military standard but constant civil missions did not prepare them for World War II.
Brazil's President, Getúlio Vargas, wanted to industrialize Brazil, allowing it to be more competitive with other countries. He reached out to Germany, Italy, France, and the United States to act as trade allies. Many Italian and German people immigrated to Brazil many years before World War II began thus creating a Nazi influence. The immigrants held high positions in government and the armed forces. It was recently found that 9,000 war criminals escaped to South America, including Croats, Ukrainians, Russians and other western Europeans who aided the Nazi war machine. Most, perhaps as many as 5,000, went to Argentina; between 1,500 and 2,000 are thought to have made it to Brazil; around 500 to 1,000 to Chile; and the rest to Paraguay and Uruguay.[66] It was not a secret that Vargas had an admiration for Hitler's Nazi Germany and its Führer. He even let German Luftwaffe build secret air forces around Brazil. This alliance with Germany became Brazil's second best trade alliance behind the United States.




Brazilian soldiers greet Italian civilians in the city of Massarosa, September 1944. Brazil was the only independent Latin American country to send ground troops to fight in WWII.


Brazil continued to try to remain neutral to the United States and Germany because it was trying to make sure it could continue to be a place of interest for both opposing countries. Brazil attended continental meetings in Buenos Aires, Argentina (1936); Lima, Peru (1938); and Havana, Cuba (1940) that obligated them to agree to defend any part of the Americas if they were to be attacked. Eventually Brazil decided to stop trading with Germany once Germany started attacking offshore trading ships resulting in Germany declaring a blockade against the Americas in the Atlantic Ocean. Furthermore, Germany also ensured that they would be attacking the Americas soon.
Once the German submarines attacked unarmed Brazilian trading ships, President Vargas met with United States President Franklin D. Roosevelt to discuss how they could retaliate. On January 22, 1942, Brazil officially ended all relations with Germany, Japan, and Italy, becoming a part of the Allies.
The Brazilian Expeditionary Force was sent to Naples, Italy to fight for democracy. Brazil was the only Latin American country to send troops to Europe. Initially, Brazil wanted to only provide resources and shelter for the war to have a chance of gaining a high postwar status but ended up sending 25,000 men to fight.[67]
After World War II, the United States and Latin America continued to have a close relationship. For example, USAID created family planning programs in Latin America combining the NGOs already in place, providing the women in largely Catholic areas access to contraception.[68]
Involvement in World War II[edit]
There was Nazi influence in certain parts of the region, but Jewish migration from Europe during the war continued. Only a few people recognized or knew about the Holocaust.[69] Furthermore, numerous military bases were built during the war by the United States, but some also by the Germans. Even now, unexploded bombs from the second world war that need to be made safe still remain.[70]
Cold War (1946–90) [edit]
See also: Operation Condor, Organization of American States, Inter-American Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance, and Alliance for Progress
Economy[edit]




Burning forest in Brazil. The removal of forest to make way for cattle ranching was the leading cause of deforestation in the Brazilian Amazon rainforest from the mid-1960s. Soybeans have become one of the most important contributors to deforestation in the Brazilian Amazon.[71]


The Great Depression caused Latin America to grow at a slow rate, separating it from leading industrial democracies. The two world wars and U.S. Depression also made Latin American countries favor internal economic development, leading Latin America to adopt the policy of import substitution industrialization.[72] Countries also renewed emphasis on exports. Brazil began selling automobiles to other countries, and some Latin American countries set up plants to assemble imported parts, letting other countries take advantage of Latin America's low labor costs. Colombia began to export flowers, emeralds and coffee grains and gold, becoming the world's second leading flower exporter.
Economic integration was called for, to attain economies that could compete with the economies of the United States or Europe. Starting in the 1960s with the Latin American Free Trade Association and Central American Common Market, Latin American countries worked toward economic integration.
In efforts to help regain global economic strength the U.S. began to heavily assist countries involved in World War II at the expense of Latin America. Markets that were previously unopposed as a result of the war in Latin America grew stagnant as the rest of the world no longer needed their goods.
Reforms[edit]
Large countries like Argentina called for reforms to lessen the disparity of wealth between the rich and the poor, which has been a long problem in Latin America that stunted economic growth.[73]
Advances in public health caused an explosion of population growth, making it difficult to provide social services. Education expanded, and social security systems introduced, but benefits usually went to the middle class, not the poor. As a result, disparity of wealth increased. Increasing inflation and other factors caused countries to be unwilling to fund social development programs to help the poor.
Bureaucratic authoritarianism[edit]
Bureaucratic authoritarianism was practiced in Brazil after 1964, in Argentina, and in Chile under Augusto Pinochet, in a response to harsh economic conditions. It rested on the conviction that no democracy could take the harsh measures to curb inflation, reassure investors, and quicken economic growth quickly and effectively. Though inflation fell sharply, industrial production dropped with the decline of official protection.[73]
US relations[edit]
See also: Latin America–United States relations
After World War II and the beginning of a Cold War between the United States and the Soviet Union, US diplomats became interested in Asia, Africa, and Latin America, and frequently[vague] waged proxy wars against the Soviet Union in these countries. The US sought to stop the spread of communism. Latin American countries generally sided with the US in the Cold War period, even though they were neglected since the US's concern with communism were focused in Europe and Asia, not Latin America. Between 1946 and 1959 Latin America received only 2% of the United States foreign aid despite having poor conditions similar to the main recipients of The Marshall Plan.[74] Some Latin American governments also complained of the US support in the overthrow of some nationalist governments, and intervention through the CIA. In 1947, the US Congress passed the National Security Act, which created the National Security Council in response to the United States's growing obsession with anti-communism.[75]
In 1954, when Jacobo Arbenz of Guatemala accepted the support of communists and attacked holdings of the United Fruit Company, the US decided to assist Guatemalan counter-revolutionaries in overthrowing Arbenz.[76] These interventionist tactics featured use of the CIA rather than the military, which was used in Latin America for the majority of the Cold War in events including the overthrow of Salvador Allende. Latin America was more concerned with issues of economic development, while the United States focused on fighting communism, even though the presence of communism was small in Latin America.[75]
Cuban Revolution[edit]
By 1959, Cuba was afflicted with a corrupt dictatorship under Batista, and Fidel Castro ousted Batista that year and set up the first communist state in the hemisphere. The United States imposed a trade embargo on Cuba, and combined with Castro's expropriation of private enterprises, this was detrimental to the Cuban economy.[72] Around Latin America, rural guerrilla conflict and urban terrorism increased, inspired by the Cuban example. The United States put down these rebellions by supporting Latin American countries in their counter guerrilla operations through the Alliance for Progress launched by President John F. Kennedy. This thrust appeared to be successful. A Marxist, Salvador Allende, became president of Chile in 1970, but was overthrown three years later in a military coup backed by the United States. Despite civil war, high crime and political instability, most Latin American countries eventually adopted bourgeois liberal democracies while Cuba maintained its socialist system.
Bay of Pigs Invasion[edit]
Main article: Bay of Pigs Invasion




Che Guevara (left) and Castro, photographed by Alberto Korda in 1961.


Encouraged by the success of Guatemala in the 1954 Guatemalan coup d'état,[77] in 1960, the U.S. decided to support an attack on Cuba by anti-Castro rebels. The Bay of Pigs invasion was an unsuccessful invasion of Cuba in 1961, financed by the U.S. through the CIA, to overthrow Fidel Castro. The incident proved to be very embarrassing for the new Kennedy administration.[78]
Alliance for Progress[edit]
President John F. Kennedy initiated the Alliance for Progress in 1961, to establish economic cooperation between the U.S. and Latin America. The Alliance would provide $20 billion for reform in Latin America, and counterinsurgency measures. Instead, the reform failed because of the simplistic theory that guided it and the lack of experienced American experts who could understand Latin American customs.[79]
Nicaraguan Revolution[edit]
Following the American occupation of Nicaragua in 1912, as part of the Banana Wars, the Somoza family political dynasty came to power, and would rule Nicaragua until their ouster in 1979 during the Nicaraguan Revolution. The era of Somoza family rule was characterized by strong U.S. support for the government and its military[15] as well as a heavy reliance on U.S. based multi-national corporations. The Nicaraguan Revolution (Spanish: Revolución Nicaragüense or Revolución Popular Sandinista) encompassed the rising opposition to the Somoza dictatorship in the 1960s and 1970s, the campaign led by the Sandinista National Liberation Front (FSLN) to violently oust the dictatorship in 1978–79, the subsequent efforts of the FSLN to govern Nicaragua from 1979 until 1990 and the Contra War which was waged between the FSLN and the Contras from 1981–1990.
The Revolution marked a significant period in Nicaraguan history and revealed the country as one of the major proxy war battlegrounds of the Cold War with the events in the country rising to international attention. Although the initial overthrow of the Somoza regime in 1978–79 was a bloody affair, the Contra War of the 1980s took the lives of tens of thousands of Nicaraguans and was the subject of fierce international debate.[80] During the 1980s both the FSLN (a Leftist collection of political parties) and the Contras (a rightist collection of counter-revolutionary groups) received large amounts of aid from the Cold War super-powers (respectively, the Soviet Union and the United States).
Washington Consensus[edit]
Main article: Washington Consensus
See also: Free Trade Area of the Americas




Roll-on/roll-off ships, such as this one pictured here at Miraflores locks, are among the largest ships to pass through the Panama Canal. The canal cuts across the Isthmus of Panama and is a key conduit for international maritime trade.


The set of specific economic policy prescriptions that were considered the "standard" reform package were promoted for crisis-wracked developing countries by Washington, D.C.-based institutions such as the International Monetary Fund (IMF), World Bank, and the US Department of the Treasury during the 1980s and 1990s.
In recent years, several Latin American countries led by socialist or other left wing governments – including Argentina and Venezuela – have campaigned for (and to some degree adopted) policies contrary to the Washington Consensus set of policies. (Other Latin countries with governments of the left, including Brazil, Chile and Peru, have in practice adopted the bulk of the policies.) Also critical of the policies as actually promoted by the International Monetary Fund have been some US economists, such as Joseph Stiglitz and Dani Rodrik, who have challenged what are sometimes described as the "fundamentalist" policies of the International Monetary Fund and the US Treasury for what Stiglitz calls a "one size fits all" treatment of individual economies.
The term has become associated with neoliberal policies in general and drawn into the broader debate over the expanding role of the free market, constraints upon the state, and US influence on other countries' national sovereignty.
This politico-economical initiative was institutionalized in North America by the 1994 NAFTA, and elsewhere in the Americas through a series of like agreements. The comprehensive Free Trade Area of the Americas project, however, was rejected by most South American countries at the 2005 4th Summit of the Americas.
Turn to the left[edit]
See also: Pink tide




UNASUR summit in the Palacio de la Moneda, Santiago de Chile.


In most countries, since the 2000s left-wing political parties have risen to power.[citation needed] The presidencies of Hugo Chávez in Venezuela, Ricardo Lagos and Michelle Bachelet in Chile, Lula da Silva and Dilma Rousseff in Brazil, Néstor Kirchner and his wife Cristina Fernández in Argentina, Tabaré Vázquez and José Mujica in Uruguay, Evo Morales in Bolivia, Daniel Ortega in Nicaragua, Rafael Correa in Ecuador, Fernando Lugo in Paraguay, Manuel Zelaya in Honduras (removed from power by a coup d'état), Mauricio Funes and Salvador Sánchez Cerén in El Salvador are all part of this wave of left-wing politicians who often declare themselves socialists, Latin Americanists, or anti-imperialists (often implying opposition to US policies towards the region). A development of this has been the creation of the eight-member ALBA alliance, or "The Bolivarian Alliance for the Peoples of Our America" (Spanish: Alianza Bolivariana para los Pueblos de Nuestra América) by some of the countries already mentioned. By June 2014, Honduras (Juan Orlando Hernández), Guatemala (Otto Pérez Molina), and Panama (Ricardo Martinelli) had right-wing governments.
Return of social movements[edit]




A view on globalization, titled Somos cultura que camina en un mundo globalizado ("We are a culture walking in a globalised world"). The mural is located in Humahuaca in the north of Argentina


In 1982, Mexico announced that it could not meet its foreign debt payment obligations, inaugurating a debt crisis that would "discredit" Latin American economies throughout the decade.[81] This debt crisis would lead to neoliberal reforms that would instigate many social movements in the region. A "reversal of development" reigned over Latin America, seen through negative economic growth, declines in industrial production, and thus, falling living standards for the middle and lower classes.[82] Governments made financial security their primary policy goal over social security, enacting new neoliberal economic policies that implemented privatization of previously national industries and informalization of labor.[81] In an effort to bring more investors to these industries, these governments also embraced globalization through more open interactions with the international economy.
Significantly, as democracy spread across much of Latin America, the realm of government more inclusive (a trend that proved conductive to social movements), the economic ventures remained exclusive to a few elite groups within society. Neoliberal restructuring consistently redistributed income upward while denying political responsibility to provide social welfare rights, and though development projects took place throughout the region, both inequality and poverty increased.[81] Feeling excluded from these new projects, the lower classes took ownership of their own democracy through a revitalization of social movements in Latin America.
Both urban and rural populations had serious grievances as a result of the above economic and global trends and have voiced them in mass demonstrations. Some of the largest and most violent of these have been protests against cuts in urban services, such as the Caracazo in Venezuela and the Argentinazo in Argentina.[83]




Children singing the Internationale, 20th Anniversary of MST.


Rural movements have made diverse demands related to unequal land distribution, displacement at the hands of development projects and dams, environmental and indigenous concerns, neoliberal agricultural restructuring, and insufficient means of livelihood. These movements have benefited considerably from transnational support from conservationists and INGOs. The Movement of Rural Landless Workers (MST) is perhaps the largest contemporary Latin American social movement.[83] As indigenous populations are primarily rural, indigenous movements account for a large portion of rural social movements, including the Zapatista rebellion in Mexico, the Confederation of Indigenous Nationalities of Ecuador (CONAIE), indigenous organizations in the Amazon region of Ecuador and Bolivia, pan-Mayan communities in Guatemala, and mobilization by the indigenous groups of Yanomami peoples in the Amazon, Kuna peoples in Panama, and Altiplano Aymara and Quechua peoples in Bolivia.[83] Other significant types of social movements include labor struggles and strikes, such as recovered factories in Argentina, as well as gender-based movements such as the Mothers of the Plaza de Mayo in Argentina and protests against maquila production, which is largely a women's issue because of how it draws on women for cheap labor.[83]
Modern era[edit]
The 2000s commodities boom caused positive effects for many Latin American economies. Another trend is the rapidly increasing importance of the relations with China.[84]
With the end of the commodity boom in the 2010s, economic stagnation or recession resulted in some countries. As a result, the left-wing governments of the Pink Tide lost support. The worst hit was Venezuela, which is facing severe social and economic upheaval.
The corruption scandal of Odebrecht, a Brazilian conglomerate, has raised allegations of corruption across the region's governments (see Operation Car Wash). The bribery ring has become the largest corruption scandal in Latin American history.[85] As of July 2017, the highest ranking politicians charged were former Brazilian President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva (sentenced)[86] and former Peruvian Presidents Ollanta Humala (arrested) and Alejandro Toledo (fugitive, fled to the US).[87]
Demographics[edit]




Mexico City – Mexico.






São Paulo – Brazil




Historical populations


Year
Pop.
±%


1750
16,000,000
—    


1800
24,000,000
+50.0%


1850
38,000,000
+58.3%


1900
74,000,000
+94.7%


1950
167,000,000
+125.7%


1999
511,000,000
+206.0%


2013
603,191,486
+18.0%


Source: "UN report 2004 data" (PDF).


Main article: Latin Americans
See also: Demographics of South America
Largest cities[edit]
The following is a list of the ten largest metropolitan areas in Latin America.[3]



City
Country
Metropolitan population
(2017)
Gross Domestic Product (PPP, $Million)
(USD, 2014)
GDP per capita
(USD, 2014)


1.
Mexico City
 Mexico
23,655,355
$403,561
$19,239


2.
São Paulo
 Brazil
23,467,354
$430,510
$20,650


3.
Buenos Aires
 Argentina
15,564,354
$315,885
$23,606


4.
Rio de Janeiro
 Brazil
14,440,345
$176,630
$14,176


5.
Bogotá
 Colombia
9,900,800
$159,150
$17,497


6.
Lima
 Peru
9,752,000
$176,447
$16,530


7.
Santiago
 Chile
7,164,400
$171,436
$23,929


8.
Belo Horizonte
 Brazil
6,145,800
$95,686
$17,635


9.
Guadalajara
 Mexico
4,687,700
$80,656
$17,206


10.
Monterrey
 Mexico
4,344,200
$122,896
$28,290


Ethnic groups[edit]
Main article: Ethnic groups in Latin America




The Mexican mestizo population is the most diverse in Latin America, with people being either largely European or Amerindian rather than having a uniform admixture.[88]


The inhabitants of Latin America are of a variety of ancestries, ethnic groups, and races, making the region one of the most diverse in the world. The specific composition varies from country to country: many have a predominance of European-Amerindian or more commonly referred to as Mestizo or Castizo depending on the admixture, population; in others, Amerindians are a majority; some are dominated by inhabitants of European ancestry; and some countries' populations are primarily Mulatto. Asian and Afro-Amerindian (historically sometimes called Zambo) minorities are also identified regularly. People with European ancestry are the largest single group, and along with people of part-European ancestry, they combine to make up approximately 80% of the population,[89] or even more.[90]
Language[edit]




Linguistic map of Latin America. Spanish in green, Portuguese in orange, and French in blue.


Spanish and Portuguese are the predominant languages of Latin America. Spanish is spoken as first language by about 60% of the population, Portuguese is spoken by about 34% of the population and about 6% of the population speak other languages such as Quechua, Mayan languages, Guaraní, Aymara, Nahuatl, English, French, Dutch and Italian. Portuguese is spoken only in Brazil (Brazilian Portuguese), the biggest and most populous country in the region. Spanish is the official language of most of the rest of the countries on the Latin American mainland (Spanish language in the Americas), as well as in Cuba, Puerto Rico (where it is co-official with English), and the Dominican Republic. French is spoken in Haiti and in the French overseas departments of Guadeloupe, Martinique and Guiana, and the French overseas collectivity of Saint Pierre and Miquelon; it is also spoken by some Panamanians of Afro-Antillean descent. Dutch is the official language in Suriname, Aruba, and the Netherlands Antilles. (As Dutch is a Germanic language, these territories are not necessarily considered part of Latin America.)




quechua, guaraní, aymara, náhuatl, lenguas mayas, mapudungun.


Native American languages are widely spoken in Peru, Guatemala, Bolivia, Paraguay and Mexico, and to a lesser degree, in Panama, Ecuador, Brazil, Colombia, Venezuela, Argentina, and Chile amongst other countries. In Latin American countries not named above, the population of speakers of indigenous languages tend to be very small or even non-existent (e.g. Uruguay). Mexico is possibly the only country that contains a wider variety of indigenous languages than any Latin American country, but the most spoken language is Nahuatl.
In Peru, Quechua is an official language, alongside Spanish and any other indigenous language in the areas where they predominate. In Ecuador, while holding no official status, the closely related Quichua is a recognized language of the indigenous people under the country's constitution; however, it is only spoken by a few groups in the country's highlands. In Bolivia, Aymara, Quechua and Guaraní hold official status alongside Spanish. Guaraní, along with Spanish, is an official language of Paraguay, and is spoken by a majority of the population (who are, for the most part, bilingual), and it is co-official with Spanish in the Argentine province of Corrientes. In Nicaragua, Spanish is the official language, but on the country's Caribbean coast English and indigenous languages such as Miskito, Sumo, and Rama also hold official status. Colombia recognizes all indigenous languages spoken within its territory as official, though fewer than 1% of its population are native speakers of these languages. Nahuatl is one of the 62 native languages spoken by indigenous people in Mexico, which are officially recognized by the government as "national languages" along with Spanish.
Other European languages spoken in Latin America include: English, by some groups in Puerto Rico, as well as in nearby countries that may or may not be considered Latin American, like Belize and Guyana; German, in southern Brazil, southern Chile, portions of Argentina, Venezuela and Paraguay; Italian, in Brazil, Argentina, Venezuela, and Uruguay; Ukrainian, Polish and Russian in southern Brazil, and Welsh, in southern Argentina.[91][92][93][94][95][96] Yiddish and Hebrew are possible to be heard around Buenos Aires and São Paulo especially.[97] Non-European or Asian languages include Japanese in Brazil and Peru, Korean in Brazil, Arabic in Argentina, Brazil, Colombia, Venezuela and Chile and Chinese throughout South America.
In several nations, especially in the Caribbean region, creole languages are spoken. The most widely spoken creole language in Latin America and the Caribbean is Haitian Creole, the predominant language of Haiti; it is derived primarily from French and certain West African tongues with Amerindian, English, Portuguese and Spanish influences as well. Creole languages of mainland Latin America, similarly, are derived from European languages and various African tongues.
The Garifuna language is spoken along the Caribbean coast in Honduras, Guatemala, Nicaragua and Belize mostly by the Garifuna people a mixed race Zambo people who were the result of mixing between Indigenous Caribbeans and escaped Black slaves. Primarily an Arawakan language, it has influences from Caribbean and European languages.
Archaeologists have deciphered over 15 pre-Columbian distinct writing systems from mesoamerican societies. the ancient Maya had the most sophisticated textually written language, but since texts were largely confined to the religious and administrative elite, traditions were passed down orally. oral traditions also prevailed in other major indigenous groups including, but not limited to the Aztecs and other Nahuatl speakers, Quechua and Aymara of the Andean regions, the Quiché of Central America, the Tupi-Guaraní in today's Brazil, the Guaraní in Paraguay and the Mapuche in Chili [98]
Religion[edit]
Main article: Religion in Latin America




Basilica of Our Lady of the Angels located in Cartago, Costa Rica.


The vast majority of Latin Americans are Christians (90%),[99] mostly Roman Catholics belonging to the Latin Church.[100] About 70% of the Latin American population consider themselves Catholic.[101]
According to the detailed Pew multi-country survey in 2014, 69% of the Latin American population is Catholic and 19% is Protestant. Protestants are 26% in Brazil and over 40% in much of Central America. More than half of these are converts from Roman Catholicism.[102][103]
Migration[edit]
Due to economic, social and security developments that are affecting the region in recent decades, the focus is now the change from net immigration to net emigration. About 10 million Mexicans live in the United States.[104] 31.7 million Americans listed their ancestry as Mexican as of 2010, or roughly 10% of the population.[105] According to the 2005 Colombian census or DANE, about 3,331,107 Colombians currently live abroad.[106] The number of Brazilians living overseas is estimated at about 2 million people.[107] An estimated 1.5 to two million Salvadorans reside in the United States.[108] At least 1.5 million Ecuadorians have gone abroad, mainly to the United States and Spain.[109] Approximately 1.5 million Dominicans live abroad, mostly in the United States.[110] More than 1.3 million Cubans live abroad, most of them in the United States.[111] It is estimated that over 800,000 Chileans live abroad, mainly in Argentina, the United States, Canada, Australia and Sweden.[112] An estimated 700,000 Bolivians were living in Argentina as of 2006 and another 33,000 in the United States.[113] Central Americans living abroad in 2005 were 3,314,300,[114] of which 1,128,701 were Salvadorans,[115] 685,713 were Guatemalans,[116] 683,520 were Nicaraguans,[117] 414,955 were Hondurans,[118] 215,240 were Panamanians[119] and 127,061 were Costa Ricans.[120]
For the period 2000–2005, Chile, Costa Rica, Panama, and Venezuela were the only countries with global positive migration rates, in terms of their yearly averages.[121]
As a result of the 2010 Haiti Earthquake and its social and economic impact, there was a significant migration of Haitians to other Latin American countries. During the presidency of Hugo Chávez and his successor Nicolás Maduro, over 1.5 million people fled Venezuela in what was called the "Bolivarian diaspora" as socioeconomic conditions and the quality of life worsened.[122][123][124]
Education[edit]
See also: Education in Latin America




World map indicating literacy rate by country in 2015 (2015 CIA World Factbook) Grey = no data


Despite significant progress, education access and school completion remains unequal in Latin America. The region has made great progress in educational coverage; almost all children attend primary school and access to secondary education has increased considerably. Quality issues such as poor teaching methods, lack of appropriate equipment and overcrowding exist throughout the region. These issues lead to adolescents dropping out of the educational system early.[125] Most educational systems in the region have implemented various types of administrative and institutional reforms that have enabled reach for places and communities that had no access to education services in the early 1990s. Compared to prior generations, Latin American youth have seen an increase in their levels of education. On average, they have completed two years schooling more than their parents.[125]
However, there are still 23 million children in the region between the ages of 4 and 17 outside of the formal education system. Estimates indicate that 30% of preschool age children (ages 4–5) do not attend school, and for the most vulnerable populations, the poor and rural, this calculation exceeds 40 percent. Among primary school age children (ages 6 to 12), coverage is almost universal; however there is still a need to incorporate 5 million children in the primary education system. These children live mostly in remote areas, are indigenous or Afro-descendants and live in extreme poverty.[126]
Among people between the ages of 13 and 17 years, only 80% are full-time students in the education system; among them only 66% advance to secondary school. These percentages are lower among vulnerable population groups: only 75% of the poorest youth between the ages of 13 and 17 years attend school. Tertiary education has the lowest coverage, with only 70% of people between the ages of 18 and 25 years outside of the education system. Currently, more than half of low income children or living in rural areas fail to complete nine years of education.[126]
Crime and violence[edit]
Main article: Crime and violence in Latin America
Latin America and the Caribbean have been cited by numerous sources to be the most dangerous regions in the world.[127][128] Studies have shown that Latin America contains the majority of the world's most dangerous cities. Many analysts attribute the reason to why the region has such an alarming crime rate and criminal culture is largely due to social and income inequality within the region, they say that growing social inequality is fueling crime in the region.[129] Many agree that the prison crisis will not be resolved until the gap between the rich and the poor is addressed.




2012 map of countries by homicide rate. As of 2015, the Latin American countries with the highest rates were El Salvador (108.64 per 100,000 people), Honduras (63.75) and Venezuela (57.15). The countries with the lowest rates were Chile (3.59), Cuba (4.72) and Argentina (6.53).


Crime and violence prevention and public security are now important issues for governments and citizens in Latin America and the Caribbean region. Homicide rates in Latin America are the highest in the world. From the early 1980s through the mid-1990s, homicide rates increased by 50 percent. The major victims of such homicides are young men, 69 percent of whom are between the ages of 15 and 19 years old. Countries with the highest homicide rate per year per 100,000 inhabitants as of 2015 were: El Salvador 109, Honduras 64, Venezuela 57, Jamaica 43, Belize 34.4, St. Kitts and Nevis 34, Guatemala 34, Trinidad & Tobago 31, the Bahamas 30, Brazil 26.7, Colombia 26.5, the Dominican Republic 22, St Lucia 22, Guyana 19, Mexico 16, Puerto Rico 16, Ecuador 13, Grenada 13, Costa Rica 12, Bolivia 12, Nicaragua 12, Panama 11, Antigua and Barbuda 11, and Haiti 10.[130] Most of the top countries with the highest homicide rates are in Africa and Latin America. Countries in Central America like El Salvador and Honduras top the list of homicides in the world.[131]
Brazil has more overall homicides than any country in the world, at 50,108, accounting for one in 10 globally. Crime-related violence in Latin America represents the most threat to public health, striking more victims than HIV/AIDS or other infectious diseases.[132] Countries with lowest homicide rate per year per 100,000 inhabitants as of 2015 were: Chile 3, Peru 7, Argentina 7, Uruguay 8 and Paraguay 9.[130][133]
Economy[edit]
Main article: Latin American economy
Size[edit]
According to Goldman Sachs' BRICS review of emerging economies, by 2050 the largest economies in the world will be as follows: China, United States, India, Japan, Germany, United Kingdom, Brazil and Mexico.[134]




 Brazil, São Paulo.






 Mexico, Mexico City.






 Argentina, Buenos Aires.






 Colombia, Bogotá.



Population and economy size for Latin American countries

Country
Population[2]
(2016, millions)
2015 GDP (Nominal)[135]
In Billions US$
2015 GDP (PPP)
In Billions US$


 Argentina
43.8
601.7
972.3


 Bolivia
10.9
33.5
73.9


 Brazil
207.7
1,799.6
3,207.9


 Chile
17.9
240.0
424.3


 Colombia
48.7
300.98
724.16


 Costa Rica
4.9
51.6
74.1


 Cuba
11.5
N/A
N/A


 Dominican Republic
10.6
66.6
147.6


 Ecuador
16.4
98.9
181.8


 El Salvador
6.3
25.7
52.9


 Guatemala
16.6
63.2
125.6


 Haiti
10.8
8.8
19.0


 Honduras
9.1
19.9
41.0


 Mexico
127.5
1,161.0
2,220.1


 Nicaragua
6.1
12.3
31.2


 Panama
4
47.5
82.2


 Paraguay
6.7
29.1
60.8


 Peru
31.8
179.9
385.4


 Uruguay
3.4
55.0
74.2


 Venezuela
31.6
131.9
491.6


Total
577.8
N/A
N/A


[135]
Development[edit]
Over the past two centuries, Latin America’s GDP per capita has fluctuated around world average. However, there is a substantial gap between Latin America and the western economies. Between 1820 and 2008, this gap widened from 0.8 to 2.7 times.[136] Since 1980, Latin America also lost growth versus the world average. Many nations such as Asia joined others on a rapid economic growth path, but Latin America has grown at slower pace and its share of world output declined from 9.5% in 1980 to 7.8% in 2008.[137]
Standard of living[edit]
Latin America is the region with the highest levels of income inequality in the world.[138] The following table lists all the countries in Latin America indicating a valuation of the country's Human Development Index, GDP at purchasing power parity per capita, measurement of inequality through the Gini index, measurement of poverty through the Human Poverty Index, measurement of extreme poverty based on people living under 1.25 dollars a day, life expectancy, murder rates and a measurement of safety through the Global Peace Index. Green cells indicate the best performance in each category while red indicates the lowest.

Social and Economic Indicators for Latin American countries

Country
HDI
2015 Estimates
GDP (PPP) 2015
Per Capita In US$[139]
Real GDP
2015 Growth %
Income
inequality[140]
(2015)
Gini
Extreme
Poverty[141]
(2011)
<1.25 US$
 %
Youth Literacy[142]
2015%
2016 Life
Expectancy[143]
Murder[144]
(2014)
Rate per
100,000
Peace[145]
(2016)
GPI


 Argentina
0.827
20,170
5.4[dubious – discuss]
43.6
0.9
99.2
78
8
1.957


 Bolivia
0.662
6,421
4.1
46.6
14.0
99.4
69
12 2012
2.038


 Brazil
0.755
15,690
−3.0
52.7
0.3
97.5
74
25
2.176


 Chile
0.847
23,564
2.3
50.8
0.8
98.9
79
4
1.635[146]


 Colombia
0.720
13,794
2.5
52.2[147]
8.2
98.2
76
28
2.764


 Costa Rica
0.766
15,318
3.0
48.6
0.7
98.3
79
10
1.699


 Cuba
0.769
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
100.0
79

2.057


 Dominican Republic
0.702
15,777
5.5
45.7
4.3
97.0
78
17
2.143


 Ecuador
0.732
11,168
−0.6
46.6
5.1
98.7
77
8
2.020


 El Salvador
0.666
8,293
2.3
41.8
15.1
96.0
75
64
2.237


 Guatemala
0.627
7,721
3.8
52.4
16.9
87.4
72
31
2.270


 Haiti
0.483
1,794
2.5
59.2
54.9
72.3
64
102012
2.066


 Honduras
0.606
4,861
3.5
57.4
23.3
95.9
71
75
2.237


 Mexico
0.756
18,335
2.3
48.1
8.4
98.5
77
16
2.557


 Nicaragua
0.631
4,972
4.0
45.7
15.8
87.0
73
122012
1.975


 Panama
0.780
20,512
6.0
51.9
9.5
97.6
79
182012
1.837


 Paraguay
0.679
8,671
3.0
48.0
5.1
98.6
77
9
2.037


 Peru
0.734
12,077
2.4
45.3
5.9
97.4
74
7
2.057


 Uruguay
0.793
21,719
2.5
41.3
0.0
98.8
77
8
1.726


 Venezuela
0.762
15,892
−10.0
44.8
3.5
98.5
75
62
2.651


Environment[edit]

























Angel Falls, the highest waterfall in the world, is located in Venezuela.






Glaucous macaw (behind hyacinth macaw) and other macaws. Macaws are long-tailed, often colourful New World parrots.[148]



Environmental indicators for Latin American countries

Country
Environmental
performance[149]
(2012)
EPI
CO2 emissions[150]
(2009)
(tons of CO2
per capita)


 Argentina
56.48
4.14


 Bolivia
54.57
1.31


 Brazil
60.90
1.74


 Chile
55.34
3.84


 Colombia
62.33
1.33


 Costa Rica
69.03
1.37


 Cuba
56.48
2.40


 Dominican Republic
52.44
1.79


 Ecuador
60.55
2.09


 El Salvador
52.08
1.10


 Guatemala
51.88
1.03


 Haiti
41.15
0.24


 Honduras
52.54
0.96


 Mexico
49.11
3.72


 Nicaragua
59.23
0.73


 Panama
57.94
2.10


 Paraguay
52.40
0.64


 Peru
50.29
1.32


 Uruguay
57.06
2.31


 Venezuela
55.62
5.45


Inequality[edit]
Main article: Wealth inequality in Latin America
Wealth inequality in Latin America and the Caribbean remains a serious issue despite strong economic growth and improved social indicators observed over the past decade. A report release in 2013 by the UN Department of Economic and Social Affairs entitled Inequality Matters. Report of the World Social Situation, observed that: ‘Declines in the wage share have been attributed to the impact of labour-saving technological change and to a general weakening of labour market regulations and institutions.[151] Such declines are likely to affect individuals in the middle and bottom of the income distribution disproportionately, since they rely mostly on labour income.’ In addition, the report noted that ‘highly-unequal land distribution has created social and political tensions and is a source of economic inefficiency, as small landholders frequently lack access to credit and other resources to increase productivity, while big owners may not have had enough incentive to do so.[151][152]
Trade blocs[edit]




Native New World crops exchanged globally: Maize, tomato, potato, vanilla, rubber, cacao, tobacco






Rafael Correa, Evo Morales, Néstor Kirchner, Cristina Fernández, Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, Nicanor Duarte, and Hugo Chávez at the signing of the founding charter of the Bank of the South.


The major trade blocs (or agreements) in the region are the Pacific Alliance and Mercosur. Minor blocs or trade agreements are the G3 Free Trade Agreement, the Dominican Republic – Central America Free Trade Agreement (DR-CAFTA), the Caribbean Community (CARICOM) and the Andean Community of Nations (CAN). However, major reconfigurations are taking place along opposing approaches to integration and trade; Venezuela has officially withdrawn from both the CAN and G3 and it has been formally admitted into the Mercosur (pending ratification from the Paraguayan legislature). The president-elect of Ecuador has manifested his intentions of following the same path. This bloc nominally opposes any Free Trade Agreement (FTA) with the United States, although Uruguay has manifested its intention otherwise. Chile, Peru, Colombia and Mexico are the only four Latin American nations that have an FTA with the United States and Canada, both members of the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA).
Tourism[edit]




Aerial view of Cancún. Mexico is the most visited country in Latin America.


Income from tourism is key to the economy of several Latin American countries.[153] Mexico is the only Latin American country to be ranked in the top 10 worldwide in the number of tourist visits. It received by far the largest number of international tourists, with 35 million visitors in 2016, followed by Brazil, with 6.6 million; the Dominican Republic, with 6 million; Chile, with 5.6 million; Argentina, with 5.5 million; Cuba with 4 million; Puerto Rico with 3.7 million; Peru with 3.7 million; and Colombia, with 3.3 million. The World Tourism Organization reports the following destinations as the top six tourism earners for the year 2016: Mexico, with US$19,571 million; the Dominican Republic, with US$6,723 million; Brazil, with US$6,024 million; Colombia, with US$4,773 million; Argentina, with US$4,687 million; and Panama, with US$4,258 million.[154]
Places such as Ouro Preto and others Minas Gerais historical cities, Cancún, Galápagos Islands, Machu Picchu, Chichen Itza, Cartagena de Indias, Cabo San Lucas, Acapulco, Rio de Janeiro, Salvador, Margarita Island, San Ignacio Miní, Buenos Aires, São Paulo, Salar de Uyuni, Punta del Este, Santo Domingo, Labadee, San Juan, La Habana, Panama City, Iguazú Falls, Puerto Vallarta, Poás Volcano National Park, Punta Cana, Viña del Mar, Mexico City, Quito, Bogotá, Santa Marta, San Andrés, Lima, Maceió, Fortaleza, Florianópolis, Cuzco, Ponce, Perito Moreno Glacier and Patagonia are popular among international visitors in the region.[citation needed]

Performance indicators for international tourism in Latin America

Country
International tourist
arrivals[154]
(2016)
(1000s)
International tourism
receipts[154]
(2016)
(Millions
of US$)
Tourism
receipts
(2011)
(US$
per arrival)
Tourism
receipts
(2011)
(US$
per capita)
Tourism
receipts[155]
(2003)
(as %
of exports)
Tourism
receipts[156]
(2003)
(as %
of GDP)
Direct and
indirect
employment[157]
in tourism
(2005)
(%)
Tourism
competitiveness[158]
(2011)
(TTCI)


 Argentina
5,559
4,687
945
133
7.4
1.8
9.1
4.20


 Bolivia
882 2015 arrivals
687
31
9.4
2.2
7.6
3.35


 Brazil
6,578
6,024
1,207
34
3.2
0.5
7.0
4.36


 Chile
5,641
2,737
596
107
5.3
1.9
6.8
4.27


 Colombia
3,317
4,773
873
45
6.6
1.4
5.9
3.94


 Costa Rica
2,925
3,879
982
459
17.5
8.1
13.3
4.43


 Cuba
3,968
2,907
872
194
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A


 Dominican Republic
5,959
6,723
1,011
440
36.2
18.8
19.8
3.99


 Ecuador
1,418
1,444
734
58
6.3
1.5
7.4
3.79


 El Salvador
1,434
829
351
67
12.9
3.4
6.8
3.68


 Guatemala
1,585
1,550
1,102
94
16.0
2.6
6.0
3.82


 Haiti
516 2015 arrivals
504
655
17
19.4
3.2
4.7
N/A


 Honduras
908
686
753
92
13.5
5.0
8.5
3.79


 Mexico
34,961
19,571
507
105
5.7
1.6
14.2
4.43


 Nicaragua
1,504
642
356
65
15.5
3.7
5.6
3.56


 Panama
2,007
4,258
1,308
550
10.6
6.3
12.9
4.30


 Paraguay
1,206
481
460
37
4.2
1.3
6.4
3.26


 Peru
3,744
3,501
908
81
9.0
1.6
7.6
4.04


 Uruguay
3,037
1,835
765
643
14.2
3.6
10.7
4.24


 Venezuela
789 2015 arrivals
575 2015 receipts
1,449
25
1.3
0.4
8.1
3.46


Culture[edit]
Main article: Latin American culture




Roman Catholic Easter procession in Comayagua, Honduras.






Nicaraguan women wearing the Mestizaje costume, which is a traditional costume worn to dance the Mestizaje dance. The costume demonstrates the Spanish influence upon Nicaraguan clothing.[159]


Latin American culture is a mixture of many cultural expressions worldwide. It is the product of many diverse influences:

Indigenous cultures of the people who inhabited the continent prior to European Colonization. Ancient and very advanced civilizations developed their own political, social and religious systems. The Mayas, the Aztecs and the Incas are examples of these. Indigenous legacies in music, dance, foods, arts and crafts, clothing, folk culture and traditions are very strong in Latin America. Linguistic effects on Spanish and Portuguese are also marked, such as in terms like pampa, taco, tamale, cacique.
Western civilization, in particular the culture of Europe, was brought mainly by the colonial powers – the Spanish, Portuguese and French – between the 16th and 19th centuries. The most enduring European colonial influence is language and Roman Catholicism. More recently, additional cultural influences came from the United States and Europe during the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, due to the growing influence of the former on the world stage and immigration from the latter. The influence of the United States is particularly strong in northern Latin America, especially Puerto Rico, which is an American territory. Prior to 1959, Cuba, who fought for its independence along American soldiers in the Spanish–American War, was also known to have a close socioeconomic relation with the United States. In addition, the United States also helped Panama become an independent state from Colombia and built the twenty-mile-long Panama Canal Zone in Panama which held from 1903 (the Panama Canal opened to transoceanic freight traffic in 1914) to 1999, when the Torrijos-Carter Treaties restored Panamanian control of the Canal Zone. South America experienced waves of immigration of Europeans, especially Italians, Spaniards, Portuguese, Germans, Austrians, Poles, Ukrainians, French, Dutch, Russians, Croatians, Lithuanians and Ashkenazi Jews. With the end of colonialism, French culture was also able to exert a direct influence in Latin America, especially in the realms of high culture, science and medicine.[160] This can be seen in any expression of the region's artistic traditions, including painting, literature and music, and in the realms of science and politics.

Due to the impact of Enlightenment ideals after the French revolution, a certain number of Iberian-American countries decriminalized homosexuality after France and French territories in the Americas in 1791. Some of the countries that abolished sodomy laws or banned any reference to state interference in consensual adult sexuality in the 19th century were Dominican Republic (1822), Brazil (1824), Peru (1836), Mexico (1871), Paraguay (1880), Argentina (1887), Honduras (1899), Guatemala and El Salvador. Today gay marriage is legal in Argentina, Brazil, Colombia, Uruguay, and French overseas departments, as well as in some states of Mexico. Civil unions can be held in Ecuador, Chile and one administrative region of Venezuela.

African cultures, whose presence derives from a long history of New World slavery. Peoples of African descent have influenced the ethno-scapes of Latin America and the Caribbean. This is manifested for instance in music, dance and religion, especially in countries like Belize, Brazil, Uruguay, Honduras, Puerto Rico, Venezuela, Colombia, Panama, Haiti, Costa Rica, Dominican Republic, and Cuba.
Asian cultures, whose part of the presence derives from the long history of the Coolie trade mostly arriving during the 19th and 20th centuries, and most commonly Chinese workers in Peru and Venezuela. But also from Japanese and Korean immigration especially headed to Brazil. This has largely effected the cuisine, traditions including literature, art and lifestyles and politics. The effects of Asian influences have especially and mostly effected the nations of Belize, Brazil, Cuba, Panama and Peru.

Art[edit]
Main article: Latin American art
See also: List of Latin American artists




Diego Rivera's mural depicting Mexico's history at the National Palace in Mexico City.


Beyond the rich tradition of indigenous art, the development of Latin American visual art owed much to the influence of Spanish, Portuguese and French Baroque painting, which in turn often followed the trends of the Italian Masters. In general, this artistic Eurocentrism began to fade in the early twentieth century, as Latin Americans began to acknowledge the uniqueness of their condition and started to follow their own path.




Mural by Santiago Martinez Delgado in the Colombian Congress.


From the early twentieth century, the art of Latin America was greatly inspired by the Constructivist Movement.[citation needed] The Movement quickly spread from Russia to Europe and then into Latin America. Joaquín Torres García and Manuel Rendón have been credited with bringing the Constructivist Movement into Latin America from Europe.[citation needed]
An important artistic movement generated in Latin America is muralism represented by Diego Rivera, David Alfaro Siqueiros, José Clemente Orozco and Rufino Tamayo in Mexico, Santiago Martinez Delgado and Pedro Nel Gómez in Colombia and Antonio Berni in Argentina. Some of the most impressive Muralista works can be found in Mexico, Colombia, New York City, San Francisco, Los Angeles and Philadelphia.
Painter Frida Kahlo, one of the most famous Mexican artists, painted about her own life and the Mexican culture in a style combining Realism, Symbolism and Surrealism. Kahlo's work commands the highest selling price of all Latin American paintings.[161]
Colombian sculptor and painter Fernando Botero is also widely known[162][163][164][by whom?] by his works which, on first examination, are noted for their exaggerated proportions and the corpulence of the human and animal figures.
Film[edit]
Main article: Latin American cinema




The Guadalajara International Film Festival is considered the most prestigious film festival in Latin America.






In 2015, Alejandro González Iñárritu became the second Mexican director in a row to win both the Academy Award and the Directors Guild of America Award for Best Director. He won his second Oscar in 2016 for The Revenant.


Latin American film is both rich and diverse. Historically, the main centers of production have been Mexico, Argentina, Brazil, and Cuba. Latin American film flourished after sound was introduced in cinema, which added a linguistic barrier to the export of Hollywood film south of the border.[165]
Mexican cinema started out in the silent era from 1896 to 1929 and flourished in the Golden Era of the 1940s. It boasted a huge industry comparable to Hollywood at the time with stars such as María Félix, Dolores del Río, and Pedro Infante. In the 1970s, Mexico was the location for many cult horror and action movies. More recently, films such as Amores Perros (2000) and Y tu mamá también (2001) enjoyed box office and critical acclaim and propelled Alfonso Cuarón and Alejandro González Iñárritu to the front rank of Hollywood directors. Alejandro González Iñárritu directed in 2010 Biutiful and Birdman (2014), Alfonso Cuarón directed Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban in 2004 and Gravity (2013). Close friend of both, Guillermo del Toro, a top rank Hollywood director in Hollywood and Spain, directed Pan's Labyrinth (2006) and produced El Orfanato (2007). Carlos Carrera (The Crime of Father Amaro), and screenwriter Guillermo Arriaga are also some of the most known present-day Mexican film makers. Rudo y Cursi released in December (2008) in Mexico was directed by Carlos Cuarón.




President Cristina Fernández with the film director Juan José Campanella and the cast of The Secret in Their Eyes (2009) with the Oscar for Best Foreign Language Film.


Argentine cinema has also been prominenent since the first half of the 20th century and today averages over 60 full-length titles yearly. The industry suffered during the 1976–1983 military dictatorship; but re-emerged to produce the Academy Award winner The Official Story in 1985. A wave of imported U.S. films again damaged the industry in the early 1990s, though it soon recovered, thriving even during the Argentine economic crisis around 2001. Many Argentine movies produced during recent years have been internationally acclaimed, including Nueve reinas (2000), Son of the Bride (2001), El abrazo partido (2004), El otro (2007), the 2010 Foreign Language Academy Award winner El secreto de sus ojos and Wild Tales (2014).
In Brazil, the Cinema Novo movement created a particular way of making movies with critical and intellectual screenplays, a clearer photography related to the light of the outdoors in a tropical landscape, and a political message. The modern Brazilian film industry has become more profitable inside the country, and some of its productions have received prizes and recognition in Europe and the United States, with movies such as Central do Brasil (1999), Cidade de Deus (2002) and Tropa de Elite (2007).
Puerto Rican cinema has produced some notable films, such as Una Aventura Llamada Menudo, Los Diaz de Doris and Casi Casi. An influx of Hollywood films affected the local film industry in Puerto Rico during the 1980s and 1990s, but several Puerto Rican films have been produced since and it has been recovering.
Cuban cinema has enjoyed much official support since the Cuban revolution and important film-makers include Tomás Gutiérrez Alea.
Literature[edit]
Main article: Latin American literature
See also: List of Latin American writers




Sor Juana Inés de la Cruz in 1772 by Andrés de Islas.


Pre-Columbian cultures were primarily oral, though the Aztecs and Mayans, for instance, produced elaborate codices. Oral accounts of mythological and religious beliefs were also sometimes recorded after the arrival of European colonizers, as was the case with the Popol Vuh. Moreover, a tradition of oral narrative survives to this day, for instance among the Quechua-speaking population of Peru and the Quiché (K'iche') of Guatemala.
From the very moment of Europe's discovery of the continents, early explorers and conquistadores produced written accounts and crónicas of their experience – such as Columbus's letters or Bernal Díaz del Castillo's description of the conquest of Mexico. During the colonial period, written culture was often in the hands of the church, within which context Sor Juana Inés de la Cruz wrote memorable poetry and philosophical essays. Towards the end of the 18th Century and the beginning of the 19th, a distinctive criollo literary tradition emerged, including the first novels such as Lizardi's El Periquillo Sarniento (1816).
The 19th century was a period of "foundational fictions" (in critic Doris Sommer's words), novels in the Romantic or Naturalist traditions that attempted to establish a sense of national identity, and which often focussed on the indigenous question or the dichotomy of "civilization or barbarism" (for which see, say, Domingo Sarmiento's Facundo (1845), Juan León Mera's Cumandá (1879), or Euclides da Cunha's Os Sertões (1902)). The 19th century also witnessed the realist work of Machado de Assis, who made use of surreal devices of metaphor and playful narrative construction, much admired by critic Harold Bloom.
At the turn of the 20th century, modernismo emerged, a poetic movement whose founding text was Nicaraguan poet Rubén Darío's Azul (1888). This was the first Latin American literary movement to influence literary culture outside of the region, and was also the first truly Latin American literature, in that national differences were no longer so much at issue. José Martí, for instance, though a Cuban patriot, also lived in Mexico and the United States and wrote for journals in Argentina and elsewhere.




Chilean Poet Gabriela Mistral, first Latin American to win a Nobel Prize in Literature, in 1945.






Argentine Jorge Luis Borges in L'Hôtel, Paris in 1969.


However, what really put Latin American literature on the global map was no doubt the literary boom of the 1960s and 1970s, distinguished by daring and experimental novels (such as Julio Cortázar's Rayuela (1963)) that were frequently published in Spain and quickly translated into English. The Boom's defining novel was Gabriel García Márquez's Cien años de soledad (1967), which led to the association of Latin American literature with magic realism, though other important writers of the period such as the Peruvian Mario Vargas Llosa and Carlos Fuentes do not fit so easily within this framework. Arguably, the Boom's culmination was Augusto Roa Bastos's monumental Yo, el supremo (1974). In the wake of the Boom, influential precursors such as Juan Rulfo, Alejo Carpentier, and above all Jorge Luis Borges were also rediscovered.
Contemporary literature in the region is vibrant and varied, ranging from the best-selling Paulo Coelho and Isabel Allende to the more avant-garde and critically acclaimed work of writers such as Diamela Eltit, Giannina Braschi, Ricardo Piglia, or Roberto Bolaño. There has also been considerable attention paid to the genre of testimonio, texts produced in collaboration with subaltern subjects such as Rigoberta Menchú. Finally, a new breed of chroniclers is represented by the more journalistic Carlos Monsiváis and Pedro Lemebel.
The region boasts six Nobel Prize winners: in addition to the two Chilean poets Gabriela Mistral (1945) and Pablo Neruda (1971), there is also the Guatemalan novelist Miguel Angel Asturias (1967), the Colombian writer Gabriel García Márquez (1982), the Mexican poet and essayist Octavio Paz (1990), and the Peruvian novelist Mario Vargas Llosa (2010).
Music and dance[edit]
See also: Music of Latin America, Latin pop, and Latin dance




Salsa dancing in Cali, Colombia


Latin America has produced many successful worldwide artists in terms of recorded global music sales. Among the most successful have been Gloria Estefan (Cuba), Mercedes Sosa (Argentina), Roberto Carlos (Brazil), Carlos Santana (Mexico) of whom have sold over 90 million records, Luis Miguel (Mexico), Shakira (Colombia) and Vicente Fernández (Mexico) with over 50 million records sold worldwide. Enrique Iglesias, although not a Latin American, has also contributed for the success of Latin music.
Other notable successful mainstream acts through the years, include Soda Stereo, Celia Cruz, Thalía, Ricky Martin, Marc Anthony, Selena, Lynda Thomas and Menudo.
Caribbean Hispanic music, such as merengue, bachata, salsa, and more recently reggaeton, from such countries as the Dominican Republic, Puerto Rico, Trinidad and Tobago, Cuba, and Panama, has been strongly influenced by African rhythms and melodies. Haiti's compas is a genre of music that is influenced by its Caribbean Hispanic counterparts, along with elements of jazz and modern sounds.[166][167]




Traditional Mexican dance Jarabe Tapatío.


Another well-known Latin American musical genre includes the Argentine and Uruguayan tango (with Carlos Gardel as the greatest exponent), as well as the distinct nuevo tango, a fusion of tango, acoustic and electronic music popularized by bandoneón virtuoso Ástor Piazzolla. Samba, North American jazz, European classical music and choro combined to form bossa nova in Brazil, popularized by guitarist João Gilberto with singer Astrud Gilberto and pianist Antonio Carlos Jobim.
Other influential Latin American sounds include the Antillean soca and calypso, the Honduras (Garifuna) punta, the Colombian cumbia and vallenato, the Chilean cueca, the Ecuadorian boleros, and rockoleras, the Mexican ranchera and the mariachi which is the epitome of Mexican soul, the Nicaraguan palo de Mayo, the Peruvian marinera and tondero, the Uruguayan candombe, the French Antillean zouk (derived from Haitian compas) and the various styles of music from pre-Columbian traditions that are widespread in the Andean region.




Brazilian actress Carmen Miranda helped popularize samba internationally.


The classical composer Heitor Villa-Lobos (1887–1959) worked on the recording of native musical traditions within his homeland of Brazil. The traditions of his homeland heavily influenced his classical works.[168] Also notable is the recent work of the Cuban Leo Brouwer and guitar work of the Venezuelan Antonio Lauro and the Paraguayan Agustín Barrios. Latin America has also produced world-class classical performers such as the Chilean pianist Claudio Arrau, Brazilian pianist Nelson Freire and the Argentine pianist and conductor Daniel Barenboim. Brazilian opera soprano Bidu Sayão, one of Brazil's most famous musicians, was a leading artist of the Metropolitan Opera in New York City from 1937 to 1952.




A couple dances Tango.


Arguably, the main contribution to music entered through folklore, where the true soul of the Latin American and Caribbean countries is expressed. Musicians such as Yma Súmac, Chabuca Granda, Atahualpa Yupanqui, Violeta Parra, Víctor Jara, Jorge Cafrune, Facundo Cabral, Mercedes Sosa, Jorge Negrete, Luiz Gonzaga, Caetano Veloso, Susana Baca, Chavela Vargas, Simon Diaz, Julio Jaramillo, Toto la Momposina, Gilberto Gil, Maria Bethânia, Nana Caymmi, Nara Leão, Gal Costa, Ney Matogrosso as well as musical ensembles such as Inti Illimani and Los Kjarkas are magnificent examples of the heights that this soul can reach.
Latin pop, including many forms of rock, is popular in Latin America today (see Spanish language rock and roll).[169] A few examples are Café Tacuba, Soda Stereo, Maná, Rita Lee, Mutantes, Secos e Molhados Legião Urbana, Titãs, Paralamas do Sucesso, Cazuza, Barão Vermelho, Skank, Miranda!, Cansei de Ser Sexy or CSS, and Bajo Fondo.
More recently, Reggaeton, which blends Jamaican reggae and dancehall with Latin America genres such as bomba and plena, as well as that of hip hop, is becoming more popular, in spite of the controversy surrounding its lyrics, dance steps (Perreo) and music videos. It has become very popular among populations with a "migrant culture" influence – both Latino populations in the United States, such as southern Florida and New York City, and parts of Latin America where migration to the United States is common, such as Puerto Rico, Trinidad and Tobago, Dominican Republic, Colombia, Ecuador, El Salvador, and Mexico.[170]
World Heritage Sites[edit]
The following is a list of the ten countries with the most World Heritage Sites in Latin America.[171]



Country
Natural Sites
Cultural Sites
Mixed Sites
Total Sites


1.
 Mexico
6
28
1
35


2.
 Brazil
7
13
0
20


3.
 Peru
2
8
2
12


4.
 Argentina
4
6
0
10


5.
 Cuba
2
7
0
9


6.
 Colombia
2
6
0
8


7.
 Bolivia
1
6
0
7


8.
 Chile
0
6
0
6


9.
 Panama
3
2
0
5


10.
 Ecuador
2
3
0
5


See also[edit]


Latin America portal
North America portal







Latin Americans (Amerindians, Criollo, Afro-Latin American, Asian Latin American, Mestizos, Mulatto, White Latin American, Zambo)
Diaspora (Latin American Australian, Latin American British, Latin American Canadian, Hispanic and Latino Americans, Hispanic, Latino)
List of Latin Americans
Latin American studies
Agroecology in Latin America
Latin America and the League of Nations
Romance-speaking world
Latin Africa (United States of Latin Africa)
Water supply and sanitation in Latin America




Latin American integration


Americas (terminology) – Use of the word American

Latin America–United States relations


Caribbean

Association of Caribbean States
Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States


Central American Integration System





Notes[edit]



^ a b In the main Latin American languages:

Spanish: América Latina
Portuguese: América Latina
French: Amérique Latine


^ a b Includes the population estimates for South American and Central American countries excluding Belize, Guyana, the United States, and Spanish and French speaking Caribbean countries and territories, as listed under "Sub-regions and countries"
^ Not including Anglophone, Francophone or Dutch-speaking countries, such as Belize, Guyana, Suriname and Jamaica; see Contemporary Definitions section



References[edit]


^ a b "World Development Indicators: Rural environment and land use". World Development Indicators, The World Bank. World Bank. Retrieved September 12, 2013. 
^ a b c d "World Population Prospects: The 2017 Revision". ESA.UN.org (custom data acquired via website). United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division. Retrieved 10 September 2017. 
^ a b "Global Metro Monitor 2014". Brookings Institution. Retrieved 22 January 2015. 
^ Geography Department at Loughborough University, The World According to GaWC 2012, Table 4
^ a b "GDP Current and PPP estimates for 2014". Imf.org. 2014. Retrieved 2014-08-14. 
^ "GDP Current and PPP estimates for 2014". Imf.org. 2014. Retrieved 2014-08-14. 
^ Bilbao, Francisco. "Francisco Bilbao, Iniciativa de la América. Idea de un Congreso Federal de las Repúblicas, París 22 junio 1856". Retrieved 16 July 2017. 
^ Mignolo, Walter (2005). The Idea of Latin America. Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell. pp. 77–80. ISBN 978-1-4051-0086-1. 
^ a b Michel Gobat, "The Invention of Latin America: A Transnational History of Anti-Imperialism, Democracy, and Race," American Historical Review Vol. 118, no. 3 (December 2013), pp. 1345–1375.
^ Mauricio Tenorio-Trillo, Latin America: The Allure and Power of an Idea. Chicago: University of Chicago Press 2017.
^ McGuiness, Aims (2003). "Searching for 'Latin America': Race and Sovereignty in the Americas in the 1850s" in Appelbaum, Nancy P. et al. (eds.). Race and Nation in Modern Latin America. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 87–107. ISBN 978-0-8078-5441-9
^ "''América latina o Sudamérica?'', por Luiz Alberto Moniz Bandeira, Clarín, 16 de mayo de 2005". Clarin.com. 2005-05-16. Retrieved 2013-04-23. 
^ Bilbao, Francisco. "Francisco Bilbao, Iniciativa de la América. Idea de un Congreso Federal de las Repúblicas, París 22 junio 1856". Retrieved 16 July 2017. 
^ "Torres Caicedo, José María (1856). ''Las dos Américas'' (poema)". Filosofia.org. Retrieved 2013-04-23. 
^ Bilbao, Francisco. "Emancipación del espíritu de América". Francisco Bilbao Barquín, 1823–1865, Chile. Retrieved 16 July 2017. 
^ Chasteen, John Charles (2001). "6. Progress". Born in Blood and Fire: A Concise History of Latin America. W. W. Norton & Company. p. 156. ISBN 978-0-393-97613-7. Retrieved 4 July 2010. 
^ Phelan, J.L. (1968). Pan-latinisms, French Intervention in Mexico (1861–1867) and the Genesis of the Idea of Latin America. Universidad Nacional Autonónoma de México, Mexico City. 
^ Rangel, Carlos (1977). The Latin Americans: Their Love-Hate Relationship with the United States. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. pp. 3–5. ISBN 978-0-15-148795-0.  Skidmore, Thomas E.; Peter H. Smith (2005). Modern Latin America (6 ed.). Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press. pp. 1–10. ISBN 978-0-19-517013-9. 
^ RAE (2005). Diccionario Panhispánico de Dudas. Madrid: Santillana Educación. ISBN 8429406239. 
^ a b Torres, George (2013). Encyclopedia of Latin American Popular Music. ABC-CLIO. p. xvii. ISBN 9780313087943. 
^ Butland, Gilbert J. (1960). Latin America: A Regional Geography. New York: John Wiley and Sons. pp. 115–188. ISBN 978-0-470-12658-5.  Dozer, Donald Marquand (1962). Latin America: An Interpretive History. New York: McGraw-Hill. pp. 1–15. ISBN 0-87918-049-8.  Szulc, Tad (1965). Latin America. New York Times Company. pp. 13–17. ISBN 0-689-10266-6.  Olien, Michael D. (1973). Latin Americans: Contemporary Peoples and Their Cultural Traditions. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston. pp. 1–5. ISBN 978-0-03-086251-9.  Black, Jan Knippers (ed.) (1984). Latin America: Its Problems and Its Promise: A Multidisciplinary Introduction. Boulder: Westview Press. pp. 362–378. ISBN 978-0-86531-213-5. CS1 maint: Extra text: authors list (link) Burns, E. Bradford (1986). Latin America: A Concise Interpretive History (4 ed.). New York: Prentice-Hall. pp. 224–227. ISBN 978-0-13-524356-5.  Skidmore, Thomas E.; Peter H. Smith (2005). Modern Latin America (6 ed.). Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press. pp. 351–355. ISBN 978-0-19-517013-9. 
^ Composition of macro geographical (continental) regions, geographical sub-regions, and selected economic and other groupings, UN Statistics Division. Accessed on line 23 May 2009. (French)
^ Latin America and the Caribbean. The World Bank. Retrieved on 17 July 2009.
^ "Country Directory. Latin American Network Information Center-University of Texas at Austin". Lanic.utexas.edu. Retrieved 2013-12-09. 
^ Mauricio Tenorio-Trillo, Latin America: The Allure and Power of an Idea. Chicago: University of Chicago Press 2017, 1, 3.
^ Francisco Bilbao, La América en peligro, Buenos Aires: Impr. de Berheim y Boeno 1862, 14, 23, quoted in Tenorio-Trillo, Latin America, p. 5.
^ Gongóra, Alvaro; de la Taille, Alexandrine; Vial, Gonzalo. Jaime Eyzaguirre en su tiempo (in Spanish). Zig-Zag. p. 223. 
^ María Alejandra Acosta García; Sheridan González, Ma. de Lourdes Romero, Luis Reza, Araceli Salinas (June 2011). "Three". In CONALITEG. Geografía, Quinto Grado (Geography, Fifth Grade) (Second ed.). Mexico City: Secretaría de Educación Pública (Secretariat of Public Education). pp. 75–83. CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link)
^ "Insee – Populations légales 2011 – Populations légales 2011 des départements et des collectivités d'outre-mer". www.insee.fr. Retrieved 2016-01-02. 
^ The preceramic Las Vegas culture of coastal Ecuador https://www.jstor.org/pss/280325
^ Brown, K. W. (2008). Mita. In J. Kinsbruner & E. D. Langer (Eds.), Encyclopedia of Latin American History and Culture (2nd ed., Vol. 4, pp. 635–636). Detroit: Charles Scribner's Sons.
^ Lustosa, pp. 117–119
^ Lustosa, pp. 150–153
^ Vianna, p. 418
^ Diégues 2004, pp. 168, 164, 178
^ Diégues 2004, pp. 179–180
^ Lustosa, p. 208
^ Ibidem Fausto 1999, pages 82–83
^ Lyra (v.1), p. 17
^ Carvalho 2007, p. 21
^ Ibidem Fausto 1999, Chapter 2, 2.1 to 2.3
^ Ibidem Fausto 1999
^ Bethell, Leslie "The Abolition of the Brazilian Slave Trade: Britain, Brazil and the Slave Trade" Cambridge University Press 1970, "Cambridge Latin American Studides", Chapters 9 to 12. View on Google Books
^ Scott, Rebecca and others, The Abolition of Slavery and the Aftermath of Emancipation in Brazil, Duke University Press 1988 ISBN 0822308886 Seymour Drescher, Chap. 2: "Brazilian Abolition in Comparative Perspective"
^ Robert M. Levine (1999). The History of Brazil. Greenwood Publishing Group. pp. 62–. ISBN 978-0-313-30390-6. 
^ Lyra (v.1), pp. 164, 225, 272
^ Ibidem Fausto 1999, Chapter 2, page 83, and 2.6 "The Paraguayan War"
^ Smallman; Shall C. Fear in Memory in the Brazilian Army and Society, University of North Carolina Press 2002 ISBN 0-8078-5359-3 Chapter 1, "The Overthrow of the Empire," pp. 16–18
^ Pozas, Mario A. El liberalismo hispanoamericano en el siglo XIX. pg2
^ Halperín Donghi, T. (2013). Historia contemporánea de América latina. Madrid: Alianza.
^ Galasso, N. (2011). Historia de la Argentina (Vol. 1).
^ Hudson, R., & Meditz, S. (1990). Uruguay: A Country Study.
^ a b Donghi, T. (1970). Historia contemporánea de América Latina (2. ed.). Madrid: Alianza Editorial. 148–149
^ Donghi, 88
^ Donghi, 89
^ Engerman, Stanley L., and Kenneth L. Sokoloff. "History Lessons: Institutions, Factors Endowments, and Paths of Development in the New World." The Journal of Economic Perspectives Vol. 14(3) pp. 217–232 (2000): pp. 217–232. Print. 219
^ "Latin American History from 1800 to 1914." Woodville. Colegio Woodville, n.d. Web. 24 Oct. 2013. [1]. 1–3
^ "Latin American History from 1800 to 1914." Woodville. Colegio Woodville, n.d. Web. 24 Oct. 2013. [2]. 1
^ Racine, K. (Aug2010). "This England and This Now: British Cultural and Intellectual Influence in the Spanish American Independence Era." Hispanic American Historical Review, Vol. 90(Issue 3), p423–454.
^ "Latin American History from 1800 to 1914." Woodville. Colegio Woodville, n.d. Web. 24 Oct. 2013. [3]. 2
^ Robertson, William Spence (1944). French Intervention in Mexico in 1838. Duke University Press. pp. 222–223. JSTOR 2507834. 
^ "French Intervention in Mexico and the American Civil War, 1862–1867". U.S Department of State Office of the Historian. 
^ Ridge Jr., Michael Allen. "A country in need of American instruction : The U.S. mission to shape and transform Mexico, 1848–1911". Iowa Research Online. University of Iowa. 
^ Bakewell, Peter. A History of Latin America. pg 491
^ Andrew, p. 42.
^ Hall, Allan (2012-03-19). "Secret Files Reveal 9,000 Nazi War Criminals Fled to South America after WWII". London: Mail Online. Retrieved 24 May 2012. 
^ Penteado, Carlos Joes A. "Hyper War: The Brazilian Participation in World War II". Retrieved 24 May 2012. 
^ "Health in Latin America and the Caribbean" (PDF). Center for Strategic and International Studies. Retrieved 22 May 2012. 
^ Stavans, IIan. "The Impact Of The Holocaust In Latin America".  Missing or empty |url= (help)
^ "WWII Bombs Destroyed in the Galapagos Islands". BBC News. 2012-01-18. Retrieved 2012-05-24. 
^ "Brazil Amazon deforestation soars". BBC News. 24 January 2008.
^ a b "History of Latin America". Encyclopædia Britannica.  Missing or empty |url= (help)
^ a b Kaufman, Robert. "The Political Effects of Inequality: Some Inconvenient Facts". Rutgers University.  Missing or empty |url= (help)
^ Chasteen, John (2011). Born Into Blood and Fire, A Concise History of Latin America. W.W. Norton & Company Inc. p. 253. 
^ a b Dominguez, Jorge. "US-Latin American Relations During the Cold War and its Aftermath". Institute of Latin American Studies.  Missing or empty |url= (help)
^ Schneider, Ronald M. Latin American Political History: Patterns and Personalities. pg 274–275
^ Schneider, Ronald M. Latin American Political History: Patterns and Personalities. pg 376–377
^ "Bay of Pigs Invasion". Encyclopædia Britannica.  Missing or empty |url= (help)
^ "Kennedy proposes Alliance for Progress - Mar 13, 1961 - HISTORY.com". HISTORY. Retrieved 10 September 2017. 
^ Bakewell, Peter. A history of Latin America. pg541-542
^ a b c Hershberg, Eric, and Fred Rosen, eds. Latin America after Neoliberalism. New York: North American Congress on Latin America, 2006. Print.
^ Escobar, Arturo, and Sonia E. Alvarez, eds. The Making of Social Movements in Latin America. Boulder: Westview, 1992. Print.
^ a b c d Johnston, Hank, and Paul Almeida, eds. Latin American Social Movements. Lanham: Rowman & Littlefield, 2006. Print.
^ Jordi Zamora. "China's double-edged trade with Latin America." Sep 3, 2011. AFP. https://www.google.com/hostednews/afp/article/ALeqM5ggNqQ5G8UFErmAEw71Y-u51P8_Eg?docId=CNG.e829052752a5436e909ab280ad561af6.671
^ Casey, Nicholas; Zarate, Andrea (13 February 2017). "Corruption Scandals With Brazilian Roots Cascade Across Latin America". The New York Times. Retrieved 16 June 2017. 
^ "The conviction of Lula and the future of Brazil's political purge". The Economist. Retrieved 14 July 2017. 
^ "Another former Peruvian president is sent to jail, this time as part of growing corruption scandal". Los Angeles Times. 14 July 2017. Retrieved 14 July 2017. 
^ "Geographic Patterns of Genome Admixture in Latin American Mestizos". Plos genetics. 2008-03-21. Retrieved 2013-09-09. 
^ "CIA – The World Factbook – Field Listing – Ethnic groups". Retrieved 2008-02-20. 
^ Lizcano Fernández, Francisco (May–August 2005). "Composición Étnica de las Tres Áreas Culturales del Continente Americano al Comienzo del Siglo XXI" (PDF). Convergencia (in Spanish). Mexico: Universidad Autónoma del Estado de México, Centro de Investigación en Ciencias Sociales y Humanidades. 38: 185–232; table on p. 218. ISSN 1405-1435. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2008-09-20. 
^ "Reference for Welsh language in southern Argentina, Welsh immigration to Patagonia". Bbc.co.uk. 2008-07-22. Retrieved 2013-04-23. 
^ "The Welsh Immigration to Argentina". 1stclassargentina.com. 
^ Jeremy Howat. "Reference for Welsh language in southern Argentina, Welsh immigration to Patagonia". Argbrit.org. Retrieved 2013-04-23. 
^ "Reference for Welsh language in southern Argentina, Welsh immigration to Patagonia". Patagonline.com. Retrieved 2013-04-23. 
^ "Reference for Welsh language in southern Argentina, Welsh immigration to Patagonia". Andesceltig.com. 2009-09-29. Retrieved 2013-04-23. 
^ "Reference for Welsh language in southern Argentina, Welsh immigration to Patagonia". Glaniad.com. Retrieved 2013-04-23. 
^ "Brazil – Modern-Day Community". www.jewishvirtuallibrary.org/. 2013. Retrieved 2013-12-22. 
^ Meade, Teresa A. History of Modern Latin America: 1800 to the Present. Wiley Blackwell, 2016.
^ "Christians". Pew Research Center's Religion & Public Life Project. 18 December 2012. Retrieved 13 May 2016. 
^ "CIA – The World Factbook – Field Listing – Religions". Retrieved 2009-03-17. 
^ Fraser, Barbara J., In Latin America, Catholics down, church's credibility up, poll says Archived 2005-06-28 at the Library of Congress Catholic News Service June 23, 2005
^ Alec Ryrie, "The World's Local Religion" History Today (2017) online
^ "Religion in Latin America: Widespread Change in a Historically Catholic Region" Pew Research Center: Religion & Public Life Nov 13, 2014
^ Watching Over Greater Mexico: Mexican Migration Policy and Governance of Mexicanos Abroad Archived December 10, 2008, at the Wayback Machine.
^ United States Census Bureau. "American Factfinder: Hispanic or Latino by Type: 2010 Census Summary File 1 (QT-P3)". American Factfinder. Retrieved 2016-01-17. 
^ [4] Archived January 31, 2009, at the Wayback Machine.
^ Brasileiros no Exterior – Portal da Câmara dos Deputados Archived July 21, 2009, at the Wayback Machine.
^ Country Overview: El Salvador, United States Agency for International Development Archived January 1, 2010, at the Wayback Machine.
^ Chavistas in Quito, Forbes.com, January 7, 2008 Archived December 7, 2008, at the Wayback Machine.
^ "Dominican Republic: Remittances for Development". Ipsnews.net. Archived from the original on 2011-06-10. Retrieved 2013-04-23. 
^ Business With Cuba: The Complete Guide Archived 2016-03-14 at the Wayback Machine., Jan 12, 2015, Patricia Maroday
^ Chile: Moving Towards a Migration Policy, Migration Information Source
^ "Migration News". Migration.ucdavis.edu. Retrieved 2013-04-23. 
^ "WorldBank Migration and Remittances Factbook 2008". Econ.worldbank.org. Retrieved 2013-04-23. 
^ http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTPROSPECTS/Resources/334934-1199807908806/ElSalvador.pdf
^ http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTPROSPECTS/Resources/334934-1199807908806/Guatemala.pdf
^ http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTPROSPECTS/Resources/334934-1199807908806/Nicaragua.pdf
^ http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTPROSPECTS/Resources/334934-1199807908806/Honduras.pdf
^ http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTPROSPECTS/Resources/334934-1199807908806/Panama.pdf
^ http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTPROSPECTS/Resources/334934-1199807908806/CostaRica.pdf
^ "International Migration Report 2006: A Global Assessment; VII. Profiles by Country or Area". United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs/Population Division.
^ Olivares, Francisco (13 September 2014). "Best and brightest for export". El Universal. Retrieved 24 September 2014. 
^ "Hugo Chavez is Scaring Away Talent". Newsweek. 30 June 2009. Retrieved 24 September 2014. 
^ "Ten percent of Venezuelans are taking steps for emigrating". El Universal. 16 August 2014. Retrieved 26 April 2015. 
^ a b Welti, Carlos (2002). "Adolescents in Latin America: Facing the Future with Skepticism". In Brown, B. The World's Youth: Adolescence in Eight Regions of the Globe ([Online-Ausg.]. ed.). Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0521006058. 
^ a b [BID/EDU Stakeholder Survey 1993/2003, February 8, 2011]
^ Latin America the Most Dangerous Region in terms of Violence, retrieved 28 August 2013 
^ Latin America Is the Most Dangerous Region in the World (By Far), archived from the original on 3 December 2013, retrieved 28 August 2013 
^ "Latin America: Crisis behind bars". BBC News. 2005-11-16. Retrieved 2010-05-07. 
^ a b "Intentional homicides (per 100,000 people)". UN Office on Drugs and Crime's International Homicide Statistics database. Retrieved September 21, 2017. 
^ "Map: Here are countries with the world's highest murder rates". UN Office on Drugs and Crime's International Homicide Statistics database. Retrieved February 1, 2017. 
^ "Crime Hinders Development, Democracy in Latin America, U.S. Says – US Department of State". Archived from the original on 2008-02-13. 
^ "Understanding the uneven distribution of the incidence of homicide in Latin America" International Journal of Epidemiology
^ "The N-11: More Than an Acronym" (PDF). Appendix II: Projections in Detail. Goldman Sachs Economic Research. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2010-03-31. 
^ a b "World GDP Ranking 2015 – Data and Charts". Knoema. Retrieved 13 May 2016. 
^ Baten, Jörg (2016). A History of the Global Economy. From 1500 to the Present. Cambridge University Press. p. 123. ISBN 9781107507180. 
^ Baten, Jörg (2016). A History of the Global Economy. From 1500 to the Present. Cambridge University Press. p. 138. ISBN 9781107507180. 
^ Baten, Jörg (2016). A History of the Global Economy. From 1500 to the Present. Cambridge University Press. p. 148f. ISBN 9781107507180. 
^ "GDP per Capita Ranking 2015 – Data and Charts". Knoema. Retrieved 13 May 2016. 
^ "Human Development Report 2011" (PDF). Table 3: Inequality-adjusted Human Development Index. United Nations Development Programme (UNDP). 
^ "Human Development Report 2011" (PDF). Table 5: Multidimensional Poverty Index. United Nations Development Programme (UNDP). 
^ http://www.uis.unesco.org/Education/Documents/literacy-statistics-trends-1985-2015.pdf
^ "Geoba.se: Gazetteer – The World – Life Expectancy – Top 100+ By Country (2016)". Retrieved 13 May 2016. 
^ "Homicide Statistics 2014". Murder rate per 100,000 inhabitants. United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC). 
^ "Global Peace Index 2016". Global Peace Index rankings. Institute for Economics and Peace (IEP). 
^ http://visionofhumanity.org/#page/indexes/global-peace-index/2016/CHL/OVER.  Missing or empty |title= (help)
^ "socio-economic policies" (PDF). dane.gov.co. Retrieved 2 March 2016. 
^ "macaw". Oxford English Dictionary (3rd ed.). Oxford University Press. September 2005.  (Subscription or UK public library membership required.)
^ "Environmental Performance Index 2012". Environmental Performance Index 2012 rankings. Yale University. Archived from the original on 2012-05-05. 
^ "CO2 Emissions from Fuel Combustion 2011" (PDF). CO2 emissions / population. International Energy Agency (IEA). 
^ a b Rethinking Education: Towards a global common good? (PDF). UNESCO. 2015. pp. 24, Box 1. ISBN 978-92-3-100088-1. 
^ Report on World Social Situation 2013: Inequality Matters. United Nations. 2013. ISBN 978-92-1-130322-3. 
^ Carmen Altés. "El turismo en América Latina y el Caribe y la experiencia del BID" [Tourism in Latin America and the Caribbean and the experience of the IDB]. Ingresos directos por turismo internacional. Inter-American Development Bank (IDB). 
^ a b c WTO Tourism Highlights 2017
^ Carmen Altés. "El turismo en América Latina y el Caribe y la experiencia del BID" [Tourism in Latin America and the Caribbean and the experience of the IDB]. Figura 1: Ingresos por turismo internacional (% de exportaciones). Inter-American Development Bank (IDB). 
^ Carmen Altés. "El turismo en América Latina y el Caribe y la experiencia del BID" [Tourism in Latin America and the Caribbean and the experience of the IDB]. Figura 2: Ingresos por turismo internacional (% del PIB). Inter-American Development Bank (IDB). 
^ Carmen Altés. "El turismo en América Latina y el Caribe y la experiencia del BID" [Tourism in Latin America and the Caribbean and the experience of the IDB]. Figura 3: Empleo en turismo (% del empleo total). Inter-American Development Bank (IDB). 
^ "The Travel & Tourism Competitiveness Report 2011" (PDF). Table 1: Travel & Tourism Competitiveness Index 2011 and 2009 comparison. World Economic Forum (WEF). 
^ "Traditional Nicaraguan Costumes: Mestizaje Costume". ViaNica.com. Retrieved 2007-11-21. 
^ Stepan, Nancy Leys (1991). "The Hour of Eugenics": Race, Gender, and Nation in Latin America. Ithaca: Cornell University Press. in passim. ISBN 978-0-8014-9795-7. 
^ "Frida Kahlo "Roots" Sets $5.6 Million Record at Sotheby's". Art Knowledge News. Archived from the original on June 20, 2007. Retrieved 2007-09-23. 
^ Notimex / El Siglo De Torreón (2012-04-01). "Fernando Botero, el gran artista de Latinoamérica". Elsiglodetorreon.com.mx. Retrieved 2013-12-09. 
^ "Fernando Botero, el aprendiz eterno". Revistaenie.clarin.com. 2013-10-06. Retrieved 2013-12-09. 
^ Forero, Juan (2005-05-08). "'Great Crime' at Abu Ghraib Enrages and Inspires an Artist". The New York Times. 
^ Paul A. Schroeder Rodriguez. Latin American Cinema: A Comparative History (University of California Press; 2016) studies 50 films since the silent era.
^ Christopher Washburne. "Clave: The African Roots of Salsa". University of Salsa. Retrieved 2006-05-23. 
^ "Guide to Latin Music". Caravan Music. Retrieved 2006-05-23. 
^ "Heitor Villa-Lobos". Leadership Medica. Retrieved 2006-05-23. 
^ The Baltimore Sun. "Latin music returns to America with wave of new pop starlets". The Michigan Daily. Archived from the original on August 30, 2005. Retrieved 2006-05-23. 
^ "Daddy Yankee leads the reggaeton charge". Associated Press. Retrieved 2006-05-23. 
^ World Heritage List, UNESCO World Heritage Sites official sites.


Further reading[edit]


Ardao, Arturo. Génesis de la idea y nombre de América Latina. Caracas: Centro de Estudios Latinoamericanos Rómulo Gallegos, 1980.
Ayala Mora, Enrique. "El origen del nombre América Latina y la tradición católica del siglo XIX." Anuario Colombiano de Historia Social y de la Cultura 40, no. 1 (2013), 213–41.
Azevedo, Aroldo. O Brasil e suas regiões. São Paulo: Companhia Editora Nacional, 1971. (in Portuguese)
Enciclopédia Barsa. Volume 4: Batráquio – Camarão, Filipe. Rio de Janeiro: Encyclopædia Britannica do Brasil, 1987. (in Portuguese)
Bomfim, Manoel. A América latina: Males de origem. Rio de Janeiro: H. Garnier 1905.
Braudel, Fernand. "Y a-t-il une Amérique latine?" Annales ESC 3 (1948), 467–71.
Castro-Gómez, Santiago. Crítica de la razón latinoamericana. Barcelona: Puvil Libros 1996.
Coatsworth, John H., and Alan M. Taylor, eds. Latin America and the World Economy Since 1800. Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press 1998.
Coelho, Marcos Amorim. Geografia do Brasil. 4th ed. São Paulo: Moderna, 1996. (in Portuguese)
Edwards, Sebastián. Left Behind: Latin America and the False Promise of Populism. University of Chicago Press, 2010.
Sebastian Edwards; Gerardo Esquivel; Graciela Márquez (15 February 2009). The Decline of Latin American Economies: Growth, Institutions, and Crises. University of Chicago Press. ISBN 978-0-226-18503-3. 
Galeano, Eduardo. Open Veins of Latin America: Five Centuries of the Pillage of a Continent. 1973
Gobat, Michel, "The Invention of Latin America: A Transnational History of Anti-Imperialism, Democracy, and Race," American Historical Review Vol. 118, no. 3 (December 2013), pp. 1345–1375.
Halperin Donghi, Tulio. (1970). Historia contemporánea de América Latina (2. ed.). Madrid: Alianza Editorial.
Leonard, Thomas et al. (2010). Encyclopedia of Latin America. Facts on File. ISBN 9780816073597
Mariátegui, José Carlos. Temas de nuestra América. Vol. 12 of Obras completas de Mariátegui. Lima: Biblioteca Amauta 1960.
Martínez Estrada, Ezequiel. Diferencias y semejanzas entre los países de América Latina. Mexico" Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México 1962.
Maurer Queipo, Isabel (ed.): "Directory of World Cinema: Latin America", intellectbooks, Bristol 2013, ISBN 9781841506180
McGinnes, Aims. "Searching for 'Latin America': Race and Sovereignty in the Americas in the 1850s." In Race and Nation in Modern Latin America, edited by Nancy P. Appelbaum, Anne S. Macpherson, and Karin alejandra Rosemblatt. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press 2003, pp, 87–107.
Mignolo, Walter, The Idea of Latin America. Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell 2005.
Moraña, Mabel, Enrique Dussel, and Carlos A. Jáuregui, eds. Coloniality at Large: Latin America and the Postcolonial Debate. Durham: Duke University Press 2008.
Moreira, Igor A. G. O Espaço Geográfico, geografia geral e do Brasil. 18. Ed. São Paulo: Ática, 1981. (in Portuguese)
Phelan, John Leddy. (1968). Pan-latinisms, French Intervention in Mexico (1861–1867) and the Genesis of the Idea of Latin America. Mexico City: Universidad Nacional Autonónoma de México 1968.
Vesentini, José William. Brasil, sociedade e espaço – Geografia do Brasil. 7th Ed. São Paulo: Ática, 1988. (in Portuguese)
Tenenbaum, Barbara A. ed. Encyclopedia of Latin American History and Culture. 5 vols. New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons 1996
Tenorio-Trillo, Mauricio. Latin America: The Allure and Power of an Idea. Chicago: University of Chicago Press 2017.
Vasconcelos, José. Indología: Una interpretación de la cultura ibero-americana. Barcelona: Agencia Mundial de Librería 1927.
Werncek vianna, Luiz. A revolução passive: Iberismo e americanismo no Brasil. Rio de Janeiro: Editora Revan 1997.
Zea, Leopoldo. Filosofía de la historia americana. Mexico City: Fondo de Cultura Económico 1978.
Zea, Leopoldo, ed. Fuentes de la cultura latinoamericana. 2 vols. Mexico City: Fondo de Cultura Económica 1993.


External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to:
Latin America (category)






Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Latin America.



IDB Education Initiative
Latin American Network Information Center
Latin America Data Base
Washington Office on Latin America
Council on Hemispheric Affairs
Codigos De Barra
Infolatam. Information and analysis of Latin America
Map of Land Cover: Latin America and Caribbean (FAO)
Lessons From Latin America by Benjamin Dangl, The Nation, March 4, 2009
Keeping Latin America on the World News Agenda – Interview with Michael Reid of The Economist
Cold War in Latin America, CSU Pomona University
Latin America Cold War Resources, Yale University
Latin America Cold War, Harvard University
http://larc.ucalgary.ca/ Latin American Research Centre, University of Calgary
The war on Democracy, by John Pilger







v
t
e


Latin America articles



History




Timeline



Spanish colonization
Portuguese colonization
French colonization
Wars of independence
Latin American integration
World War II
Debt crisis





By topic



Catholic Church
Constitutional
Crown and independence
Economic
Former colonies and territories
Immigration
Jewish
Libraries
Military
Monarchical
National Historic Sites
Persons of significance
Slavery
Territorial evolution





Foreign relations



Canada
China
Italy
League of Nations
United States








Geography









Regions
(west to east)




Mountains in Latin America
Latin American Lakes





By topics



Animals
Cities
Extreme communities
Islands
Mountains
National parks
Plants
Regions
Rivers
Volcanoes











Politics




Governance



Constitution
Courts

Supreme Courts


Drug legalization
Elections
Foreign relations
Government
Gun politics
Human rights

LGBT


International peacekeeping
Law
Law enforcement
Liberalism and conservatism
Local government
Military
Politics








Economy







Economy
Agriculture
Banking

Banks
Central banks and currencies


Companies
Energy
Fishing
Social programs
Stock exchanges
Oil
Taxation
Telecommunications
Tourism
Transportation
Wealth inequality








Society







Crime

illegal drug trade


Education

Latin American studies


Etiquette
Feminism
Health care

HIV/AIDS
Obesity


Poverty
Public holidays
Race and ethnicity





Culture



Architecture
Art
Cinema
Cuisine
Cultural protectionism
Dance
Identity
Literature
Media
Music
Nationalism
Religion
Sport
Television

Telenovela


Theatre
Video games
Visitor attractions





Demographics







Countries by population
Ethnic groups
Immigration
Languages

Spanish


Latin Americans

List


Population by year





Largest 100s



Metro areas
Municipalities
Urban areas








Symbols



Coats of arms
Flags
Heraldry
Provincial and territorial symbols
Regional dress
Royal symbols











Category
Portal












v
t
e


Regions of the world











v
t
e


Regions of Africa



Central Africa



Guinea region

Gulf of Guinea


Cape Lopez
Mayombe
Igboland

Mbaise


Maputaland
Pool Malebo
Congo Basin
Chad Basin
Congolese rainforests
Ouaddaï highlands
Ennedi Plateau





East Africa



African Great Lakes

Albertine Rift
East African Rift
Great Rift Valley
Gregory Rift
Rift Valley lakes
Swahili coast
Virunga Mountains
Zanj


Horn of Africa

Afar Triangle
Al-Habash
Barbara
Danakil Alps
Danakil Desert
Ethiopian Highlands
Gulf of Aden
Gulf of Tadjoura


Indian Ocean islands

Comoros Islands







North Africa



Maghreb

Barbary Coast
Bashmur
Ancient Libya
Atlas Mountains


Nile Valley

Cataracts of the Nile
Darfur
Gulf of Aqaba
Lower Egypt
Lower Nubia
Middle Egypt
Nile Delta
Nuba Mountains
Nubia
The Sudans
Upper Egypt


Western Sahara





West Africa



Pepper Coast
Gold Coast
Slave Coast
Ivory Coast
Cape Palmas
Cape Mesurado
Guinea region

Gulf of Guinea


Niger Basin
Guinean Forests of West Africa
Niger Delta
Inner Niger Delta





Southern Africa



Madagascar

Central Highlands (Madagascar)
Northern Highlands


Rhodesia

North
South


Thembuland
Succulent Karoo
Nama Karoo
Bushveld
Highveld
Fynbos
Cape Floristic Region
Kalahari Desert
Okavango Delta
False Bay
Hydra Bay





Macro-regions



Aethiopia
Arab world
Commonwealth realm
East African montane forests
Eastern Desert
Equatorial Africa
Françafrique
Gibraltar Arc
Greater Middle East
Islands of Africa
List of countries where Arabic is an official language
Mediterranean Basin
MENA
MENASA
Middle East
Mittelafrika
Negroland
Northeast Africa
Portuguese-speaking African countries
Sahara
Sahel
Sub-Saharan Africa
Sudan (region)
Sudanian Savanna
Tibesti Mountains
Tropical Africa












v
t
e


Regions of Asia



Central



Greater Middle East
Aral Sea

Aralkum Desert
Caspian Sea
Dead Sea
Sea of Galilee


Transoxiana

Turan


Greater Khorasan
Ariana
Khwarezm
Sistan
Kazakhstania
Eurasian Steppe

Asian Steppe
Kazakh Steppe
Pontic–Caspian steppe


Mongolian-Manchurian grassland
Wild Fields

Yedisan
Muravsky Trail


Ural

Ural Mountains


Volga region
Idel-Ural
Kolyma
Transbaikal
Pryazovia
Bjarmaland
Kuban
Zalesye
Ingria
Novorossiya
Gornaya Shoriya
Tulgas
Iranian Plateau
Altai Mountains
Pamir Mountains
Tian Shan
Badakhshan
Wakhan Corridor
Wakhjir Pass
Mount Imeon
Mongolian Plateau
Western Regions
Taklamakan Desert
Karakoram

Trans-Karakoram Tract


Siachen Glacier





North



Inner Asia
Northeast
Far East

Russian Far East
Okhotsk-Manchurian taiga


Extreme North
Siberia

Baikalia (Lake Baikal)
Transbaikal
Khatanga Gulf
Baraba steppe


Kamchatka Peninsula
Amur Basin
Yenisei Gulf
Yenisei Basin
Beringia
Sikhote-Alin





East



Japanese archipelago

Northeastern Japan Arc
Sakhalin Island Arc


Korean Peninsula
Gobi Desert
Taklamakan Desert
Greater Khingan
Mongolian Plateau
Inner Asia
Inner Mongolia
Outer Mongolia
China proper
Manchuria

Outer Manchuria
Inner Manchuria
Northeast China Plain
Mongolian-Manchurian grassland


North China Plain

Yan Mountains


Kunlun Mountains
Liaodong Peninsula
Himalayas
Tibetan Plateau

Tibet


Tarim Basin
Northern Silk Road
Hexi Corridor
Nanzhong
Lingnan
Liangguang
Jiangnan
Jianghuai
Guanzhong
Huizhou
Wu
Jiaozhou
Zhongyuan
Shaannan
Ordos Loop

Loess Plateau
Shaanbei


Hamgyong Mountains
Central Mountain Range
Japanese Alps
Suzuka Mountains
Leizhou Peninsula
Gulf of Tonkin
Yangtze River Delta
Pearl River Delta
Yenisei Basin
Altai Mountains
Wakhan Corridor
Wakhjir Pass





West



Greater Middle East

MENA
MENASA
Middle East


Red Sea
Caspian Sea
Mediterranean Sea
Zagros Mountains
Persian Gulf

Pirate Coast
Strait of Hormuz
Greater and Lesser Tunbs


Al-Faw Peninsula
Gulf of Oman
Gulf of Aqaba
Gulf of Aden
Balochistan
Arabian Peninsula

Najd
Hejaz
Tihamah
Eastern Arabia
South Arabia

Hadhramaut
Arabian Peninsula coastal fog desert




Tigris–Euphrates
Mesopotamia

Upper Mesopotamia
Lower Mesopotamia
Sawad
Nineveh plains
Akkad (region)
Babylonia


Canaan
Aram
Eber-Nari
Suhum
Eastern Mediterranean
Mashriq
Kurdistan
Levant

Southern Levant
Transjordan
Jordan Rift Valley


Levantine Sea
Golan Heights
Hula Valley
Gaza Strip
West Bank
Galilee
Gilead
Judea
Samaria
Arabah
Anti-Lebanon Mountains
Sinai Peninsula
Arabian Desert
Syrian Desert
Fertile Crescent
Azerbaijan
Syria
Palestine
Iranian Plateau
Armenian Highlands
Caucasus

Caucasus Mountains

Greater Caucasus
Lesser Caucasus


North Caucasus
South Caucasus

Kur-Araz Lowland
Lankaran Lowland
Alborz
Absheron Peninsula




Anatolia
Cilicia
Cappadocia
Alpide belt





South



Greater India
Indian subcontinent
Himalayas
Hindu Kush
Western Ghats
Eastern Ghats
Ganges Basin
Ganges Delta
Pashtunistan
Punjab
Balochistan
Kashmir

Kashmir Valley
Pir Panjal Range


Thar Desert
Indus Valley
Indus River Delta
Indus Valley Desert
Indo-Gangetic Plain
Eastern coastal plains
Western Coastal Plains
Meghalaya subtropical forests
MENASA
Lower Gangetic plains moist deciduous forests
Northwestern Himalayan alpine shrub and meadows
Doab
Bagar tract
Great Rann of Kutch
Little Rann of Kutch
Deccan Plateau
Coromandel Coast
Konkan
False Divi Point
Hindi Belt
Ladakh
Aksai Chin
Gilgit-Baltistan

Baltistan
Shigar Valley


Karakoram

Saltoro Mountains


Siachen Glacier
Bay of Bengal
Gulf of Khambhat
Gulf of Kutch
Gulf of Mannar
Trans-Karakoram Tract
Wakhan Corridor
Wakhjir Pass
Lakshadweep
Andaman and Nicobar Islands

Andaman Islands
Nicobar Islands


Maldive Islands
Alpide belt





Southeast



Mainland

Indochina
Malay Peninsula


Maritime

Peninsular Malaysia
Sunda Islands
Greater Sunda Islands
Lesser Sunda Islands


Indonesian Archipelago
Timor
New Guinea

Bonis Peninsula
Papuan Peninsula
Huon Peninsula
Huon Gulf
Bird's Head Peninsula
Gazelle Peninsula


Philippine Archipelago

Luzon
Visayas
Mindanao


Leyte Gulf
Gulf of Thailand
East Indies
Nanyang
Alpide belt








Asia-Pacific
Tropical Asia
Ring of Fire












v
t
e


Regions of Europe



North



Nordic
Northwestern
Scandinavia
Scandinavian Peninsula
Fennoscandia
Baltoscandia
Sápmi
West Nordic
Baltic
Baltic Sea
Gulf of Bothnia
Gulf of Finland
Iceland
Faroe Islands





East



Danubian countries
Prussia
Galicia
Volhynia
Donbass
Sloboda Ukraine
Sambia Peninsula

Amber Coast


Curonian Spit
Izyum Trail
Lithuania Minor
Nemunas Delta
Baltic
Baltic Sea
Vyborg Bay
Karelia

East Karelia
Karelian Isthmus


Lokhaniemi
Southeastern

Balkans
Aegean Islands
Gulf of Chania
North Caucasus
Greater Caucasus
Kabardia
European Russia

Southern Russia









Central



Baltic
Baltic Sea
Alpine states
Alpide belt
Mitteleuropa
Visegrád Group





West



Benelux
Low Countries
Northwest
British Isles
English Channel
Channel Islands
Cotentin Peninsula
Normandy
Brittany
Gulf of Lion
Iberia

Al-Andalus
Baetic System


Pyrenees
Alpide belt





South



Italian Peninsula
Insular Italy
Tuscan Archipelago
Aegadian Islands
Iberia

Al-Andalus
Baetic System


Gibraltar Arc
Southeastern
Mediterranean
Crimea
Alpide belt








Germanic
Celtic
Slavic countries
Uralic
European Plain
Eurasian Steppe
Pontic–Caspian steppe
Wild Fields
Pannonian Basin

Great Hungarian Plain
Little Hungarian Plain
Eastern Slovak Lowland














v
t
e


Regions of North America



Canada



Eastern Canada
Western Canada
Canadian Prairies
Central Canada
Northern Canada
Atlantic Canada
The Maritimes
French Canada
English Canada
Acadia

Acadian Peninsula


Quebec City–Windsor Corridor
Peace River Country
Cypress Hills
Palliser's Triangle
Canadian Shield
Interior Alaska-Yukon lowland taiga
Newfoundland (island)
Vancouver island
Gulf Islands
Strait of Georgia
Canadian Arctic Archipelago
Labrador Peninsula
Gaspé Peninsula
Avalon Peninsula

Bay de Verde Peninsula


Brodeur Peninsula
Melville Peninsula
Bruce Peninsula
Banks Peninsula (Nunavut)
Cook Peninsula
Gulf of Boothia
Georgian Bay
Hudson Bay
James Bay
Greenland





United States



Pacific Northwest
Inland Northwest
Northeast

New England
Mid-Atlantic
Commonwealth


West

Midwest
Upper Midwest
Mountain States
Intermountain West
Basin and Range Province


Oregon Trail
Mormon Corridor
Calumet Region
Southwest

Old Southwest


Llano Estacado
Central United States

Tallgrass prairie


South

South Central
Deep South
Upland South


Four Corners
East Coast
West Coast
Gulf Coast
Third Coast
Coastal states
Eastern United States

Appalachia


Trans-Mississippi
Great North Woods
Great Plains
Interior Plains
Great Lakes
Great Basin

Great Basin Desert


Acadia
Ozarks
Ark-La-Tex
Waxhaws
Siouxland
Twin Tiers
Driftless Area
Palouse
Piedmont
Atlantic coastal plain
Outer Lands
Black Dirt Region
Blackstone Valley
Piney Woods
Rocky Mountains
Mojave Desert
The Dakotas
The Carolinas
Shawnee Hills
San Fernando Valley
Tornado Alley
North Coast
Lost Coast
Emerald Triangle
San Francisco Bay Area

San Francisco Bay
North Bay (San Francisco Bay Area)
East Bay (San Francisco Bay Area)
Silicon Valley


Interior Alaska-Yukon lowland taiga
Gulf of Mexico
Lower Colorado River Valley
Sacramento–San Joaquin River Delta
Yukon–Kuskokwim Delta
Colville Delta
Arkansas Delta
Mobile–Tensaw River Delta
Mississippi Delta
Mississippi River Delta
Columbia River Estuary
Great Basin
High Desert
Monterey Peninsula
Upper Peninsula of Michigan
Lower Peninsula of Michigan
Virginia Peninsula
Keweenaw Peninsula
Middle Peninsula
Delmarva Peninsula
Alaska Peninsula
Kenai Peninsula
Niagara Peninsula
Beringia
Belt regions

Bible Belt
Black Belt
Corn Belt
Cotton Belt
Frost Belt
Rice Belt
Rust Belt
Sun Belt
Snow Belt







Mexico



Northern Mexico
Baja California Peninsula
Gulf of California

Colorado River Delta


Gulf of Mexico
Soconusco
Tierra Caliente
La Mixteca
La Huasteca
Bajío
Valley of Mexico
Mezquital Valley
Sierra Madre de Oaxaca
Yucatán Peninsula
Basin and Range Province





Central



Western Caribbean Zone
Isthmus of Panama
Gulf of Panama

Pearl Islands


Azuero Peninsula
Mosquito Coast





Caribbean



West Indies
Antilles

Greater Antilles
Lesser Antilles

Leeward
Leeward Antilles
Windward




Lucayan Archipelago
Southern Caribbean








Aridoamerica
Mesoamerica
Oasisamerica
Northern
Middle
Anglo
Latin

French
Hispanic


American Cordillera
Ring of Fire
LAC












v
t
e


Regions of Oceania



Australasia



Gulf of Carpentaria
New Guinea

Bonis Peninsula
Papuan Peninsula
Huon Peninsula
Huon Gulf
Bird's Head Peninsula
Gazelle Peninsula


New Zealand

South Island
North Island

Coromandel Peninsula




Zealandia
New Caledonia
Solomon Islands (archipelago)
Vanuatu

Kula Gulf


Australia
Capital Country
Eastern Australia
Lake Eyre basin
Murray–Darling basin
Northern Australia
Nullarbor Plain
Outback
Southern Australia

Maralinga


Sunraysia
Great Victoria Desert
Gulf of Carpentaria
Gulf St Vincent
Lefevre Peninsula
Fleurieu Peninsula
Yorke Peninsula
Eyre Peninsula
Mornington Peninsula
Bellarine Peninsula
Mount Henry Peninsula





Melanesia



Islands Region

Bismarck Archipelago
Solomon Islands Archipelago


Fiji
New Caledonia
Papua New Guinea
Vanuatu





Micronesia



Caroline Islands

Federated States of Micronesia
Palau


Guam
Kiribati
Marshall Islands
Nauru
Northern Mariana Islands
Wake Island





Polynesia



Easter Island
Hawaiian Islands
Cook Islands
French Polynesia

Austral Islands
Gambier Islands
Marquesas Islands
Society Islands
Tuamotu


Kermadec Islands
Mangareva Islands
Samoa
Tokelau
Tonga
Tuvalu








Ring of Fire












v
t
e


Regions of South America



East



Amazon basin
Atlantic Forest
Caatinga
Cerrado





North



Caribbean South America
West Indies
Los Llanos
The Guianas
Amazon basin

Amazon rainforest


Gulf of Paria
Paria Peninsula
Paraguaná Peninsula
Orinoco Delta





South



Tierra del Fuego
Patagonia
Pampas
Pantanal
Gran Chaco
Chiquitano dry forests
Valdes Peninsula





West



Andes

Tropical Andes
Wet Andes
Dry Andes
Pariacaca mountain range


Altiplano
Atacama Desert








Latin
Hispanic
American Cordillera
Ring of Fire
LAC












v
t
e


Polar regions



Antarctic



Antarctic Peninsula
East Antarctica
West Antarctica
Eklund Islands
Ecozone
Extreme points
Islands





Arctic



Arctic Alaska
British Arctic Territories
Canadian Arctic Archipelago
Finnmark
Greenland
Northern Canada
Northwest Territories
Nunavik
Nunavut
Russian Arctic
Sakha
Sápmi
Yukon
North American Arctic












v
t
e


Earth's oceans and seas



Arctic Ocean



Amundsen Gulf
Barents Sea
Beaufort Sea
Chukchi Sea
East Siberian Sea
Greenland Sea
Gulf of Boothia
Kara Sea
Laptev Sea
Lincoln Sea
Prince Gustav Adolf Sea
Pechora Sea
Queen Victoria Sea
Wandel Sea
White Sea





Atlantic Ocean



Adriatic Sea
Aegean Sea
Alboran Sea
Archipelago Sea
Argentine Sea
Baffin Bay
Balearic Sea
Baltic Sea
Bay of Biscay
Bay of Bothnia
Bay of Campeche
Bay of Fundy
Black Sea
Bothnian Sea
Caribbean Sea
Celtic Sea
English Channel
Foxe Basin
Greenland Sea
Gulf of Bothnia
Gulf of Finland
Gulf of Lion
Gulf of Guinea
Gulf of Maine
Gulf of Mexico
Gulf of Saint Lawrence
Gulf of Sidra
Gulf of Venezuela
Hudson Bay
Ionian Sea
Irish Sea
Irminger Sea
James Bay
Labrador Sea
Levantine Sea
Libyan Sea
Ligurian Sea
Marmara Sea
Mediterranean Sea
Myrtoan Sea
North Sea
Norwegian Sea
Sargasso Sea
Sea of Åland
Sea of Azov
Sea of Crete
Sea of the Hebrides
Thracian Sea
Tyrrhenian Sea
Wadden Sea





Indian Ocean



Andaman Sea
Arabian Sea
Bali Sea
Bay of Bengal
Flores Sea
Great Australian Bight
Gulf of Aden
Gulf of Aqaba
Gulf of Khambhat
Gulf of Kutch
Gulf of Oman
Gulf of Suez
Java Sea
Laccadive Sea
Mozambique Channel
Persian Gulf
Red Sea
Timor Sea





Pacific Ocean



Arafura Sea
Banda Sea
Bering Sea
Bismarck Sea
Bohai Sea
Bohol Sea
Camotes Sea
Celebes Sea
Ceram Sea
Chilean Sea
Coral Sea
East China Sea
Gulf of Alaska
Gulf of Anadyr
Gulf of California
Gulf of Carpentaria
Gulf of Fonseca
Gulf of Panama
Gulf of Thailand
Gulf of Tonkin
Halmahera Sea
Koro Sea
Mar de Grau
Molucca Sea
Moro Gulf
Philippine Sea
Salish Sea
Savu Sea
Sea of Japan
Sea of Okhotsk
Seto Inland Sea
Shantar Sea
Sibuyan Sea
Solomon Sea
South China Sea
Sulu Sea
Tasman Sea
Visayan Sea
Yellow Sea





Southern Ocean



Amundsen Sea
Bellingshausen Sea
Cooperation Sea
Cosmonauts Sea
Davis Sea
D'Urville Sea
King Haakon VII Sea
Lazarev Sea
Mawson Sea
Riiser-Larsen Sea
Ross Sea
Scotia Sea
Somov Sea
Weddell Sea





Landlocked seas



Aral Sea
Caspian Sea
Dead Sea
Salton Sea








  Book
  Category

















v
t
e


Pan-Americanism



History



Spanish American wars of independence
Latin American wars of independence
Latin American integration
North American integration
Patria Grande
Simón Bolívar
José de San Martín
Lucas Alamán
Inter-American Commission of Women





Organizations



Amazon Cooperation Treaty Organization (ACTO)
Andean Community of Nations (CAN)
Association of Caribbean States (ACS)
Bolivarian Alliance for the Americas (ALBA)
Caribbean Community (CARICOM)
Central American Integration System (SICA)
Community of Latin American and Caribbean States (CELAC)
Contadora group
Contadora support group
Latin American Economic System (SELA)
Latin American Integration Association (ALADI)
Mercosur
Organization of American States (OAS)
Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States (OECS)
Organization of Ibero-American States (OEI)
Pacific Alliance
Petrocaribe
Rio Group
Union of South American Nations (Unasur)
United Nations Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC, CEPAL)





Projects



Andean passport
CARICOM passport
CARICOM Single Market and Economy
CARIPASS
Central America-4 Border Control Agreement
Central America-4 passport
Eastern Caribbean Currency Union
Initiative for the Integration of the Regional Infrastructure of South America (IIRSA)
Interoceanic Highway
SUCRE





Institutions



Andean Parliament
Bank of the South
Caribbean Court of Justice
Caribbean Development Bank
Central American Parliament
Development Bank of Latin America
Inter-American Development Bank
Latin American Parliament
Mercosur Parliament
South American Parliament





Free trade areas



Caribbean Free Trade Association (CARIFTA)
CARIFORUM
Dominican Republic–Central America Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA-DR)
Economic Partnership Agreements
Free Trade Area of the Americas
G3 Free Trade Agreement
North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA)









Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 252087629
GND: 4074032-8
HDS: 28923
NDL: 00569304











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Latin_America&oldid=817830751"					Categories: Latin AmericaCountry classificationsHidden categories: Articles containing Spanish-language textArticles containing Portuguese-language textArticles containing French-language textCS1 maint: Extra text: authors listCS1 Spanish-language sources (es)CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors listPages using web citations with no URLWebarchive template other archivesWebarchive template wayback linksPages with citations lacking titlesPages with citations having bare URLsPages using deprecated image syntaxAll Wikipedia articles needing clarificationWikipedia articles needing clarification from May 2017Wikipedia articles needing clarification from June 2014All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from September 2017All accuracy disputesArticles with disputed statements from February 2017Articles with unsourced statements from January 2009Articles with unsourced statements from May 2013Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from May 2013Articles with Portuguese-language external linksWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiers