Not to be confused with Learning society.






This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (May 2013) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



A learned society (pronounced "learnèd", /ˌlɜːrˈnɪd/; also known as a learned academy, scholarly society, or academic association) is an organisation that exists to promote an academic discipline, profession, or a group of related disciplines such as the arts.[1] Membership may be open to all, may require possession of some qualification, or may be an honour conferred by election.[2]
Most learned societies are non-profit organisations, and many are professional associations. Their activities typically include holding regular conferences for the presentation and discussion of new research results and publishing or sponsoring academic journals in their discipline. Some also act as professional bodies, regulating the activities of their members in the public interest or the collective interest of the membership.



Contents


1 History
2 Significance
3 Structure
4 Membership and fellowship
5 Online academic communities
6 See also
7 Notes and references
8 External links



History[edit]
Some of the oldest learned societies are the Académie des Jeux floraux (founded 1323), the Sodalitas Litterarum Vistulana (founded 1488), the Accademia della Crusca (founded 1585), the Accademia dei Lincei (founded 1603), the Académie Française (founded 1635), the Academy of Sciences Leopoldina (founded 1652), the Royal Society of London (founded 1660) and the French Academy of Sciences (founded 1666).
Significance[edit]
Scholars in the sociology of science[who?] argue that learned societies are of key importance and their formation assists in the emergence and development of new disciplines or professions.
Structure[edit]
Societies can be very general in nature, such as the American Association for the Advancement of Science, specific to a given discipline, such as the Modern Language Association, or specific to a given area of study, such as the Royal Entomological Society.
Most are either specific to a particular country (e.g. the Entomological Society of Israel), though they generally include some members from other countries as well, often with local branches, or are international, such as the International Federation of Library Associations (IFLA) or the Regional Studies Association, in which case they often have national branches. But many are local, such as the Massachusetts Medical Society, the publishers of the internationally known New England Journal of Medicine.
Some learned societies (such as the Royal Society of New Zealand) have been rechartered by legislation to form quasi-autonomous non-governmental organizations.
Membership and fellowship[edit]
Membership may be open to all, may require possession of some qualification, or may be an honor conferred by election.[2] This is the case[clarification needed] with some learned societies, such as the Polish Sodalitas Litterarum Vistulana (founded 1488), the Italian Accademia dei Lincei, the Académie Française, the German Academy of Sciences Leopoldina, the UK's Royal Society and Royal Academy of Engineering or the French Academy of Sciences.
Some societies offer membership to those who have an interest in a particular subject or discipline, provided they pay their membership fees. Older and more academic/professional societies may offer associateships and/or fellowships to fellows who are appropriately qualified by honoris causa, or by submission of a portfolio of work or an original thesis. A benefit of membership may be discounted subscription rates for the publications of the society. Many of these societies award post-nominal letters to their memberships.
Online academic communities[edit]
Following the globalization and the development of information technology, certain scholarly societies—such as the Modern Language Association—have created virtual communities for their members. In addition to established academic associations, academic virtual communities have been so organized that, in some cases, they have become more important platforms for interaction and scientific collaborations among researchers and faculty than have traditional scholarly societies.[citation needed] Members of these online academic communities, grouped by areas of interests, use for their communication shared and dedicated listservs (for example JISCMail), social networking services (like Facebook, Linkedin) and academic oriented social networks (like Mendeley, Academia.edu).[3][4]
See also[edit]
Main category: Learned societies

Academic conferences
List of learned societies
National academy
Professional association
Text publication society

Notes and references[edit]


^ "The Environmental Studies Association of Canada - What is a Learned Society?". Archived from the original on 29 May 2013. Retrieved 10 May 2013. 
^ a b "Learned societies & academies". Archived from the original on 3 June 2014. Retrieved 10 May 2013. 
^ "How virtual science communities are transforming academic research". Retrieved 10 May 2013. 
^ "Participation in virtual academic communities of practice under the influence of technology acceptance and community factors". doi:10.1016/j.chb.2013.10.051. Retrieved 10 May 2013. 


External links[edit]



Wikisource has the text of a 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica article about Learned society.



Scholarly Societies Project from the University of Waterloo Libraries—database of hundreds of scholarly societies in various fields, including some of the oldest societies
Eclectica, virtual exhibit on the history of Canadian learned societies.
https://commons.mla.org The online scholarly network of the Modern Language Association.




Authority control



LCCN: sh85075516
SUDOC: 027411575
BNF: cb119458948 (data)
NDL: 00562213
BNE: XX528120








Science portal







						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Learned_society&oldid=817077791"					Categories: Learned societiesTypes of organizationClubs and societiesHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from May 2013All articles needing additional referencesAll articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrasesArticles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from September 2014Wikipedia articles needing clarification from September 2014All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from September 2014Wikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiers