A least concern (LC) species is a species which has been categorized by the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) as evaluated but not qualified for any other category. As such they do not qualify as threatened, near threatened, or (before 2001) conservation dependent.
Species cannot be assigned the Least Concern category unless they have had their population status evaluated. That is, adequate information is needed to make a direct, or indirect, assessment of its risk of extinction based on its distribution or population status.
Since 2001 the category has had the abbreviation "LC", following the IUCN 2001 Categories & Criteria (version 3.1).[1] However, around 20% of least concern taxa (3261 of 15636) in the IUCN database use the code "LR/lc", which indicates they have not been re-evaluated since 2000. Before 2001 "least concern" was a subcategory of the "Lower Risk" category and assigned the code "LR/lc" or lc.
While "least concern" is not considered a red listed category by the IUCN, the 2006 IUCN Red List still assigns the category to 15636 taxa. The number of animal species listed in this category totals 14033 (which includes several undescribed species such as a frog from the genus Philautus[2]). There are also 101 animal subspecies listed and 1500 plant taxa (1410 species, 55 subspecies, and 35 varieties). There are also two animal subpopulations listed: the Australasian and Southern African subpopulations of spiny dogfish. No fungi or protista have the classification, though only four species in those kingdoms have been evaluated by the IUCN. Humans qualify for this category, and in 2008 were formally assessed[3] as such by the IUCN.
Notes and references[edit]


^ "2001 Categories & Criteria (version 3.1)" (PDF). The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2016-01-28. Retrieved 2015-05-22. 
^ "Philautus sp. nov. 'Kalpatta'". The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species. Retrieved 2006-12-19. 
^ "IUCN Red List - Homo sapiens". The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species. Retrieved 2008-10-12. 


External links[edit]

List of Least Concern species as identified by the IUCN Red List of Threatened Species







v
t
e


Threatened species




Template: Threatened species by region



IUCN Red List




Categories1




Extinct



Extinct (EX)
Extinct in the Wild (EW)





Threatened



Critically Endangered (CR)
Endangered (EN)
Vulnerable (VU)





Lower risk



Near Threatened (NT)
Least Concern (LC)
Lower Risk (LR)
Conservation Dependent (LR/cd)





Not fully assessed



Data Deficient (DD)
Not Evaluated (NE)








Species




Lists



Extinct
Extinct in the Wild
Critically Endangered
Endangered
Vulnerable
Near Threatened
Least Concern
Data Deficient





 WP categories



Extinct
Extinct in the Wild
Critically Endangered
Endangered
Vulnerable
Near Threatened
Least Concern
Data Deficient





CITES



Appendix I
Appendix II
Appendix III














By taxa



Endangered arthropods / spiders
Threatened Banksia / rays / sharks / Fungi / Chromista
The World's 25 Most Endangered Primates
The world's 100 most threatened species





Conservation



Biodiversity action plan
Biodiversity threats
Conservation biology
CITES
ARKive
Bird conservation
Conservation status
Conservation-reliant species
Ecoregion conservation status
Habitat destruction
Latent extinction risk
Rare species
Vulnerability and susceptibility






1 Pre-2001 categories and subcategories shown in italics.










v
t
e


Threatened species by region



By region



Blue-listed
Environmental Vulnerability Index
Regional Red List











Australasia



Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999
ROTAP
Threatened Species Protection Act 1995
Threatened ecological community
Trade in Endangered Species Act 1989





Canada



Species at Risk Act
Committee on the Status of Endangered Wildlife in Canada





Europe



European Endangered Species Programme
Funds for Endangered Parrots





South Africa



Endangered Wildlife Trust





United
States



Distinct population segment
Endangered Species Act of 1973
Endangered Species Act Amendments of 1978
Endangered species recovery plan
Endangered Wolf Center
National Wildlife Refuge
NatureServe conservation status
The Nature Conservancy





Lists




Asia



List of endangered and protected species of China
Endangered mammals of India
List of endangered animals in India
List of endangered species in Pakistan
List of threatened species of the Philippines
List of endangered species in Vietnam





Europe



Threatened mammals of Europe
Endangered plants of Europe
List of United Kingdom Biodiversity Action Plan species
List of extinct and endangered species of Italy
List of extinct and endangered species of Lithuania





North
America



List of endangered plants in North America
List of endangered species in North America
Endangered mammals and birds of the United States
List of threatened mammals of the United States
List of threatened birds of the United States
List of threatened reptiles and amphibians of the United States





Elsewhere



Threatened fauna of Australia
List of threatened flora of Australia
List of endangered flora of Brazil
List of threatened mammals of Brazil
List of threatened birds of Brazil











Ecology portal
Extinct and endangered species portal







						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Least-concern_species&oldid=818364533"					Categories: IUCN Red List least concern speciesLeast concern plantsBiota by conservation statusIUCN Red List