"Legion of Honor" redirects here. For other uses, see Legion of Honor (disambiguation).






This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (May 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)





National Order of the Legion of Honour
French: Légion d'honneur



Chevalier (Knight) medal insignia.



Awarded by France


Type
Order of merit


Established
19 May 1802; 215 years ago (1802-05-19)


Motto
Honneur et patrie ("Honour and Fatherland")


Awarded for

Excellent civil or military conduct
delivered, upon official investigation



Founder
Napoleon Bonaparte


Grand Master
President of France


Grand chancelier
Benoît Puga


Secretary-General
Luc Fons


Classes



00,0  1  Grand Maître
00,067  Grand(s)-Croix
00,314  Grand Officier(s)
03,009  Commandeur(s)
17,032  Officier(s)
74,384  Chevalier(s; plural form)





Statistics


First induction
14 July 1804


Precedence


Next (higher)
None


Next (lower)



Order of Liberation
(ceased 24 January 1946)[1]
National Order of Merit










Order's streamer



Grand-Croix



Grand Officier



Commandeur



Officier



Chevalier




Ribbon bars of the order


The Legion of Honour, full name, National Order of the Legion of Honour (French: Ordre national de la Légion d'honneur),[2] is the highest French order of merit for military and civil merits, established in 1802 by Napoléon Bonaparte.
The order's motto is "Honneur et Patrie" ("Honour and Fatherland") and its seat is the Palais de la Légion d'Honneur next to the Musée d'Orsay, on the left bank of the River Seine in Paris.[3]
The order is divided into five degrees of increasing distinction: Chevalier (Knight), Officier (Officer), Commandeur (Commander), Grand Officier (Grand Officer) and Grand-Croix (Grand Cross).



Contents


1 History

1.1 Consulat
1.2 First Empire
1.3 Restoration of the Bourbon kings in 1814
1.4 July Monarchy
1.5 Second Republic
1.6 Second Empire
1.7 Third Republic
1.8 Fourth Republic


2 Organization

2.1 Legal status and leadership

2.1.1 Grand Master
2.1.2 The Grand Chancery


2.2 Membership

2.2.1 French nationals
2.2.2 Non-French recipients
2.2.3 Collective awards
2.2.4 Military awards

2.2.4.1 French service-members
2.2.4.2 Collective military awards






3 Classes and insignia
4 Gallery
5 See also
6 References and notes
7 External links



History[edit]
Consulat[edit]
In the French Revolution, all of the French orders of chivalry were abolished, and replaced with Weapons of Honour. It was the wish of Napoleon Bonaparte, the First Consul, to create a reward to commend civilians and soldiers and from this wish was instituted a Légion d'Honneur,[4] a body of men that was not an order of chivalry, for Napoleon believed France wanted a recognition of merit rather than a new system of nobility. The Légion however did use the organization of old French orders of chivalry for example the Ordre de Saint-Louis. The badges of the legion also bear a resemblance to the Ordre de Saint-Louis, which also used a red ribbon.
Napoleon originally created this to ensure political loyalty. The organization would be used as a facade to give political favours, gifts, and concessions.[5] The Légion was loosely patterned after a Roman legion, with legionaries, officers, commanders, regional "cohorts" and a grand council. The highest rank was not a grand cross but a Grand Aigle (grand eagle), a rank that wore all the insignia common to grand crosses. The members were paid, the highest of them extremely generously:

5,000 francs to a grand officier,
2,000 francs to a commandeur,
1,000 francs to an officier,
250 francs to a légionnaire.

Napoleon famously declared, "You call these baubles, well, it is with baubles that men are led... Do you think that you would be able to make men fight by reasoning? Never. That is good only for the scholar in his study. The soldier needs glory, distinctions, rewards."[6] This has been often quoted as "It is with such baubles that men are led."
The order was the first modern order of merit. Under the monarchy, such orders were often limited to Roman Catholics, and all knights had to be noblemen. The military decorations were the perks of the officers. The Légion, however, was open to men of all ranks and professions—only merit or bravery counted. The new legionnaire had to be sworn in the Légion.
It is noteworthy that all previous orders were crosses or shared a clear Christian background, whereas the Légion is a secular institution. The badge of the Légion has five arms.
First Empire[edit]
In a decree issued on the 10 Pluviôse XIII (30 January 1805), a grand decoration was instituted. This decoration, a cross on a large sash and a silver star with an eagle, symbol of the Napoleonic Empire, became known as the Grand Aigle ("Grand Eagle"), and later in 1814 as the Grand Cordon (big sash, literally big ribbon). After Napoleon crowned himself Emperor of the French in 1804 and established the Napoleonic nobility in 1808, award of the Légion gave right to the title of "Knight of the Empire" (Chevalier de l'Empire). The title was made hereditary after three generations of grantees.
Napoleon had dispensed 15 golden collars of the legion among his family and his senior ministers. This collar was abolished in 1815.
Although research is made difficult by the loss of the archives, it is known that three women who fought with the army were decorated with the order: Virginie Ghesquière, Marie-Jeanne Schelling and a nun, Sister Anne Biget.[7]
The Légion d'honneur was prominent and visible in the French Empire. The Emperor always wore it and the fashion of the time allowed for decorations to be worn most of the time. The king of Sweden therefore declined the order; it was too common in his eyes. Napoleon's own decorations were captured by the Prussians and were displayed in the Zeughaus (armoury) in Berlin until 1945. Today, they are in Moscow.


The Legion of Honour under the Empire













A depiction of Napoleon making some of the first awards of the Legion of Honour, at a camp near Boulogne on 16 August 1804. 













As Emperor, Napoleon always wore the Cross and Grand Eagle of the Legion of Honour. 













Embroided insignia of the Legion of Honour, detail of Napoleon's uniform of colonel of the Chasseurs à cheval of the Imperial Guard. 






Restoration of the Bourbon kings in 1814[edit]




First Légion d'Honneur investiture, 15 July 1804, at Saint-Louis des Invalides by Jean-Baptiste Debret (1812)


Louis XVIII changed the appearance of the order, but it was not abolished. To have done so would have angered the 35,000 to 38,000 members. The images of Napoleon and his eagle were removed and replaced by the image of King Henry IV, the popular first king of the Bourbon line. Three Bourbon fleurs-de-lys replaced the eagle on the reverse of the order. A king's crown replaced the imperial crown. In 1816, the grand cordons were renamed grand crosses and the legionnaires became knights. The king decreed that the commandants were now commanders. The Légion became the second order of knighthood of the French monarchy, after the Order of the Holy Spirit.
July Monarchy[edit]




Louis Philippe I, King of the French, wearing the sash of the order


Following the overthrow of the Bourbons in favour of King Louis-Philippe of the House of Orleans, the Bourbon monarchy's orders were once again abolished and the order of the Légion d'honneur in 1830 was restored as the paramount decoration of the French nation. The insignia were drastically altered. The cross now displayed tricolour flags. In 1847, there were 47,000 members.
Second Republic[edit]
Yet another revolution in Paris (1848) brought a new republic (the second) and a new design to the Légion d'honneur. A nephew of the founder, Prince Louis-Napoléon Bonaparte was elected president and he restored the image of his uncle on the crosses of the order. In 1852, the first recorded woman, Angélique Duchemin, an old revolutionary of the 1789 uprising against the absolute monarchy, was admitted into the order. On 2 December 1851, President Louis-Napoléon Bonaparte staged a coup d'état with the help of the armed forces. He made himself Emperor of the French exactly one year later on 2 December 1852, after a successful plebiscite.
Second Empire[edit]
An Imperial crown was added. During Napoleon III's reign, the first American was admitted: Dr. Thomas Wiltberger Evans, dentist of Napoleon III.
Third Republic[edit]
In 1870 the defeat of the French Imperial Army in the Franco-Prussian War brought the end of the Empire and the creation of the Third Republic (1871–1940). As France changed, the Légion d'honneur changed as well. The crown was replaced by a laurel and oak wreath. In 1871, during the Paris Commune uprising, the Hôtel de Salm, headquarters of the Légion d'Honneur, was burned to the ground in fierce street combats; the archives of the order were lost.
In the second term of President Jules Grévy which started in 1885, newspaper journalists brought to light the trafficking of Grévy's son-in-law, Daniel Wilson, in the awarding of decorations of the Légion d'Honneur. Grévy was not accused of personal participation in this scandal, but he was slow to accept his indirect political responsibility, which caused his eventual resignation on 2 December 1887.
During World War I, some 55,000 decorations were conferred, 20,000 of which went to foreigners. The large number of decorations resulted from the new posthumous awards authorised in 1918. Traditionally membership in the Légion d'Honneur could not be awarded posthumously.
Fourth Republic[edit]
The establishment of the Fourth Republic in 1946 brought about the latest change in the design of the Legion of Honour. The date "1870" on the obverse was replaced by a single star.
Organization[edit]
Legal status and leadership[edit]
The Legion of Honour is a national order of France, meaning a public incorporated body. The Legion is regulated by a civil law code, the Code of The Legion of Honour and of the Military Medal. While the President of the French Republic is the Grand Master of the Order, day-to-day running is entrusted to the Grand Chancery (Grande Chancellerie de la Légion d'Honneur).
Grand Master[edit]
Since the establishment of the Legion, the Grand Master of the order has always been the Emperor, King or President of France. President Emmanuel Macron became the Grand Master of the Legion on 14 May 2017.
The Grand Master appoints all other members of the order, on the advice of the Government. The Grand Master's insignia is the Grand Collar of the Legion, worn only by the President of the Republic, as Grand Master of the Order.
The Grand Chancery[edit]
The Grand Chancery is headed by the Grand Chancellor, usually a retired general, and the Secretary General, a civilian administrator.

Grand Chancellor: General Benoît Puga since 23 August 2016
Secretary-General: Luc Fons since 2007

The Grand Chancery also regulates the National Order of Merit and the médaille militaire (Military Medal). There are several structures funded by and operated under the authority of the Grand Chancery, like the Legion of Honour Schools (Maisons d'éducation de la Légion d'Honneur) and the Legion of Honour Museum (Musée de la Légion d'Honneur). The Legion of Honour Schools are élite boarding schools in Saint-Denis and Les Loges in the forest of Saint-Germain-en-Laye. Study there is restricted to daughters, granddaughters, and great-granddaughters of members of the order, the médaille militaire or the ordre national du Mérite.[8]
Membership[edit]
There are five classes in the Legion of Honour:

Chevalier (Chev. L.H.) (Knight): minimum 20 years of public service or 25 years of professional activity with "eminent merits"
Officier (O.L.H.) (Officer): minimum 8 years in the rank of Chevalier
Commandeur (Cdr L.H.) (Commander): minimum 5 years in the rank of Officier
Grand Officier (G.O.L.H.) (Grand Officer): minimum 3 years in the rank of Commandeur
Grand Croix (G.C.L.H.) (Grand Cross): minimum 3 years in the rank of Grand Officier

The "eminent merits" required to be awarded the order require the flawless performance of one's trade as well as doing more than ordinarily expected, such as being creative, zealous and contributing to the growth and well-being of others.
The order has a maximum quota of 75 Grand Cross, 250 Grand Officers, 1,250 Commanders, 10,000 Officers, and 113,425 (ordinary) Knights. As of 2010, the actual membership was 67 Grand Cross, 314 Grand Officers, 3,009 Commanders, 17,032 Officers and 74,384 Knights. Appointments of veterans of World War II, French military personnel involved in the North African Campaign and other foreign French military operations, as well as wounded soldiers, are made independently of the quota.
Members convicted of a felony (crime in French) are automatically dismissed from the order. Members convicted of a misdemeanour (délit in French) can be dismissed as well, although this is not automatic.
Wearing the decoration of the Légion d'honneur without having the right to do so is a serious offence. Wearing the ribbon or rosette of a foreign order is prohibited if that ribbon is mainly red, like the ribbon of the Legion of Honour. French military personnel in uniform must salute other military members in uniform wearing the medal, whatever the Légion d'honneur rank and the military rank of the bearer. This is not mandatory with the ribbon. In practice, however, this is rarely done.
There is not a single, complete list of all the members of the Legion in chronological order. The number is estimated at one million, including about 2,900 Grand Cross.[9]
French nationals[edit]
French nationals, men and women, can be received into the Légion, for "eminent merit" (mérites éminents) in military or civil life. In practice, in current usage, the order is conferred to entrepreneurs, high-level civil servants, scientists, artists including famous actors and actresses, sport champions[10] as well as others with connections in the executive. Members of the French Parliament cannot receive the order, except for valour in war,[11] and ministers are not allowed to nominate their accountants.
Until 2008, French nationals could only enter the Legion of Honour at the class of Chevalier (Knight). To be promoted to a higher class, one had to perform new eminent services in the interest of France and a set number of years had to pass between appointment and promotion. This was however amended in 2008 when entry became possible at Officer, Commander and Grand Officer levels, as a recognition of "extraordinary careers" (carrières hors du commun). In 2009, Simone Veil became the first person to enter the Order at Grand Officer level.[12] Veil is a member of the Académie française, a former Health Minister and President of the European Parliament, as well as an Auschwitz survivor. She was promoted to Grand Cross in 2012.
The acceptance of being awarded the Legion of Honour is not mandatory. The composers Maurice Ravel[13] and Charles Koechlin, for example, declined the award when it was offered to them.[citation needed]
Non-French recipients[edit]
Main article: List of foreign recipients of the Légion d'Honneur
While membership in the Légion is technically restricted to French nationals,[14] foreign nationals who have served France or the ideals it upholds[15] may receive the honour.[16] Foreign nationals who live in France are subject to the same requirements as the French. Foreign nationals who live abroad may be awarded a distinction of any rank or dignity in the Légion. Foreign heads of state and the wives or consorts of monarchs are made Grand Cross as a courtesy. American World War II veterans who served in a French campaign, and received a medal for valor during that operation, may be eligible for the Legion of Honor.[17] British Veterans of the D-Day campaign of World War II may also be eligible for the Legion of Honour (Chevalier) regardless of any other decorations earned and provided that they are still living when application for the honour is approved. The Legion of Honour is not awarded posthumously.
Collective awards[edit]
Collective appointments can be made to cities, institutions or companies. A total of 64 settlements in France have been decorated, as well as five foreign cities: Liège in 1914, Belgrade in 1920, Luxembourg City in 1957, Volgograd in 1984, and Algiers in 2004. French towns display the decoration in their municipal coat of arms.
Organisations to receive the honour include the French Red Cross (Croix-Rouge Française), the Abbaye de Nôtre-Dame des Dombes (Abbey of Notre-Dame des Dombes), the French National Railway Company (SNCF, Société Nationale des Chemins de fer Français), the Préfecture de Police de la Ville de Paris (Prefecture of Police of Paris), and various Grandes Écoles (National (Elite) Colleges) and other educational establishments.
Military awards[edit]




Notice of posthumous award of the Croix de Chevalier to lieutenant Tessier—Mort pour la France ("Died for France") in World War I


The military distinctions (Légion d'honneur à titre militaire) are awarded for bravery (actions de guerre) or for service.

award for extreme bravery: the Légion d'Honneur is awarded jointly with a mention in dispatches. This is the top valour award in France. It is rarely awarded, mainly to soldiers who have died in battle.
award for service: the Légion is awarded without any citation.

French service-members[edit]
For active-duty commissioned officers, the Legion of Honour award for service is achieved after 20 years of meritorious service, having been awarded the rank of Chevalier of the Ordre National du Mérite. Bravery awards lessen the time needed for the award—in fact decorated servicemen become directly chevaliers of the Légion d'Honneur, skipping the Ordre du Mérite. NCOs almost never achieve that award, except for the most heavily decorated service members.
Collective military awards[edit]
Collective appointments can be made to military units. In the case of a military unit, its flag is decorated with the insignia of a knight, which is a different award than the fourragère. Twenty-one schools, mainly schools providing reserve officers during the World Wars, were awarded the Légion d'Honneur. Foreign military units can be decorated with the order, such as the U.S. Military Academy.
The Flag or Standard of the following units was decorated with the Cross of a Knight of the Legion of Honour:[18]


1st Foreign Regiment
1st Marine Artillery Regiment
1st Marine Infantry Regiment
1st Marine Infantry Parachute Regiment
1st Parachute Chasseur Regiment
1st Regiment of African Chasseurs
1st Regiment of Algerian Tirailleurs
1st Regiment of Riflemen
1st Regiment of Senegalese Tirailleurs
1st Train Regiment
2nd Foreign Parachute Regiment
2nd Marine Infantry Regiment
2nd Regiment of Algerian Tirailleurs
2nd Regiment of Zouaves
3rd Algerian Infantry Regiment
3rd Foreign Infantry Regiment (Regiment walk from the Foreign Legion)
3rd Regiment of Zouaves
4th Regiment of Tunisian Tirailleurs
4th Regiment of Zouaves
Joint 4th Regiment of Zouaves and Tirailleurs
7th Algerian Infantry Regiment
8th Infantry Regiment
8th Regiment of Zouaves
9th Regiment of Zouaves
11th Marine Artillery Regiment
23rd Infantry Regiment
23rd Marine Infantry Regiment
24th Marine Infantry Regiment
26th Infantry Regiment
30th Battalion of Chasseurs
43rd Marine Infantry Regiment
51st Infantry Regiment
57th Infantry Regiment
112th Line Infantry Regiment (French infantry regiment consisting of mostly Belgians, known as "The Victors of Raab")
137th Infantry Regiment
152nd Infantry Regiment
153rd Infantry Regiment
298th Infantry Regiment
324th Intelligence Squadron (USAF Forward Deployed Intelligence Operations Unit)
Fighter Squadron 1/30 Normandie-Niemen
Fusiliers Marins (Naval Infantry)
Moroccan Goumier
Paris Fire Brigade
Régiment d'infanterie-chars de marine (Colonial Infantry Regiment of Morocco). Book of the regiment will be fighting its most decorated emblem of the French army.


Classes and insignia[edit]





The five classes wearing their respective insignia (gentlemen): 1: Chevalier; 2: Officier; 3: Commandeur; 4: Grand Officier; 5: Grand'Croix.



The order has had five levels since the reign of King Louis XVIII, who restored the order in 1815. Since the reform, the following distinctions have existed:

Three ranks:

Chevalier (knight): badge worn on left breast suspended from ribbon.
Officier (Officer): badge worn on left breast suspended from a ribbon with a rosette.
Commandeur (Commander): badge around neck suspended from ribbon necklet.


Two dignities:

Grand Officier (Grand Officer): badge worn on left breast suspended from a ribbon, with star displayed on right breast.
Grand-Croix (Grand Cross) formerly grande décoration, grand aigle or grand cordon: the highest level; badge affixed to sash worn over the right shoulder, with star displayed on left breast.



The badge of the Légion is a five-armed "Maltese Asterisk" (for want of a better description—see Maltese Cross) in gilt (in silver for chevalier) enamelled white, with an enamelled laurel and oak wreath between the arms. The obverse central disc is in gilt, featuring the head of Marianne, surrounded by the legend République Française on a blue enamel ring. The reverse central disc is also in gilt, with a set of crossed tricolores, surrounded by the Légion's motto Honneur et Patrie (Honour and Fatherland) and its foundation date on a blue enamel ring. The badge is suspended by an enamelled laurel and oak wreath.
The star (or plaque) is worn by the Grand Cross (in gilt on the left chest) and the Grand Officer (in silver on the right chest) respectively; it is similar to the badge, but without enamel, and with the wreath replaced by a cluster of rays in between each arm. The central disc features the head of Marianne, surrounded by the legend République Française (French Republic) and the motto Honneur et Patrie.[19]
The ribbon for the medal is plain red.
The badge or star is not usually worn, except at the time of the decoration ceremony or on a dress uniform or formal wear. Instead, one normally wears the ribbon or rosette on one's suit.
Gallery[edit]







Original Légionnaire insignia (1804).









Late Empire Légionnaire insignia: the front features Napoleon's profile and the rear, the imperial Eagle. An imperial crown joins the cross and the ribbon.









Louis XVIII era (1814) Knight insignia: the front features Henry IV's profile and the rear, the arms of the French Kingdom (three fleurs-de-lis). A royal crown joins the cross and the ribbon.









Rear of a Republican cross, with two crossed French flags.









Fifth Republic Knight insignia: the centre features Marianne's head. A crown of laurels joins the cross and the ribbon.









Current medal for the officer class, decorated with a rosette.









Chiang Kai-shek's Légion d'honneur plaque. In his day, the plaque was made of silver.









Chiang Kai-shek's Légion d'honneur. This is the reverse of his Grand Cross.









The insignia of a Grand Cross. Nowadays the star of a Grand Cross is gilt. The silver star is the Grand Officer's badge.









Charles Lindbergh's Legion of Honour









Insignia with figure of Henry IV









Certificate









Commander of the Order of the Legion of Honour




See also[edit]

List of Légion d'honneur recipients by name
List of British recipients of the Légion d'Honneur for the Crimean War
List of foreign recipients of the Légion d'Honneur
Musée national de la Légion d'honneur et des ordres de chevalerie
Ribbons of the French military and civil awards



France portal
War portal
Military history of France portal


References and notes[edit]


^ le petit Larousse 2013 p1567
^ Formerly the Royal Order of the Legion of Honour (Ordre royal de la Légion d'honneur)
^ The award for the French Legion of Hono(u)r is known by many titles, also depending on the five levels of degree: Knight of the Legion of Honour; Chevalier de la Légion d'honneur; Officer of the Legion of Honour; Officier de la Légion d'honneur; Commander of the Legion of Honour; Commandeur de la Légion d'honneur; Grand Officer of the Legion of Honour; Grand Officier de la Légion d'honneur; Grand Cross of the Legion of Honour; Grand'Croix de la Légion d'honneur. The word honneur is often capitalised, as in the name of the palace Palais de la Légion d'Honneur.
^ Pierre-Louis Roederer, "Speech Proposing the Creation of a Legion of Honour", Napoleon: Symbol for an Age, A Brief History with Documents, ed. Rafe Blaufarb (New York: Bedford/St. Martin's, 2008), 101–102.
^ Jones, Colin. The Cambridge Illustrated History of France (1st ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 196. ISBN 0-521-43294-4. 
^ Antoine Claire Thibaudeau (1827). Mémoires sur le Consulat. 1799 à 1804 [Memories of the Consulate, 1799–1804] (in French). Paris: Chez Ponthieu et Cie. pp. 83–84. 
^ The first recorded women's award is 1851, under Louis-Napoleon Bonaparte.
^ Melh.info
^ Wattel, Michel; Wattel, Béatrice (2009). Les Grand'Croix de la Légion d'honneur. De 1805 à nos jours, titulaires français et étrangers. Archives et Culture. 
^ All Olympic Gold Medal winners are awarded the Légion.
^ Légion Code, article R22
^ "Simone Veil grand officier de la légion d'honneur". Le Nouvel Observateur (in French). Paris. 31 December 2008. Retrieved 25 August 2015. 
^ 1927-, Watkins, Glenn, (2003-01-01). Proof through the night music and the great war. University of California Press. ISBN 9780520927896. OCLC 937278246. 
^ Légion Code, article 16
^ "Les étrangers qui se seront signalés par les services qu’ils ont rendus à la France ou aux causes qu’elle soutient", Légion Code, article 128
^ "5 Things to Know about the Legion of Honor". US News and World Report. Retrieved 24 August 2015. 
^ The Legion d’Honneur for US veterans
^ Officially military units are not members of the Legion of Honour, which include only individuals. As for foreign Legionnaires, they are "decorated with the Legion of Honour insignia", not "member of the Legion of Honour". Do not confuse military units that received the fourragère to the colour of the ribbon of the Legion of Honour (units quoted at six, seven or eight times in the order of the army with military units whose flag is decorated with the Cross of the Legion of Honour
^ "The Legion of Honor in 10 questions". The Grand Chancery of the Legion of Honor. Retrieved 18 September 2017. 


External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to National Order of the Legion of Honour.



Legiondhonneur.fr
Code de la légion d'honneur et de la médaille militaire, legifrance.gouv.fr
Base Léonore, recensement des récipiendaires de la Légion d’honneur (décédés avant 1977), on the website of the French Ministry of Culture (in French)
 "Legion of Honor". New International Encyclopedia. 1905. 







v
t
e


 Orders, decorations and medals of France



Orders




National



 Legion of Honour
 Order of Liberation
 National Order of Merit
 National Recognition Medal for Victims of Terrorism





Ministerial



 Ordre des Palmes Académiques
 Order of Agricultural Merit
 Ordre du Mérite Maritime
 Ordre des Arts et des Lettres








Civilian
decorations



 Honour medal for courage and devotion
 Médaille d'honneur de l'Aéronautique
 Honour medal of Foreign Affairs
 Médaille d'honneur agricole
 Honour medal of railroads
 Regional, departmental and municipal honour medal
 Honour medal of customs
 Médaille d'honneur des Eaux et Forêts
 Médaille d'honneur de l'Enseignement du 1er degré
 Médaille d'honneur Pénitentiaire
 Honour medal for civilian personnel of the defense ministry
 Honour medal of the National Police
  Honour medal for firefighters
 Medal for internal security
 Médaille d'honneur de Sociétés musicales et Chorales
 Médaille d'honneur de la protection judiciaire de la jeunesse
 Honour medal for work
 Médaille d'honneur des Travaux publics
 Insignia for wounded civilians
 Médaille de la Famille française
 Honour medal for youth, sports and associative engagements
 Médaille des Mines
 Médaille du Tourisme
 Ordre de Tahiti Nui





Military
decorations



 Military Medal
 1914–1918 War Cross
 1939–1945 War Cross
 War Cross for foreign operational theaters
 Cross for Military Valour
 Médaille de la Gendarmerie nationale
 Resistance Medal
 Escapees' Medal
 Volunteer combatant's cross 1914–1918
 Volunteer combatant's cross
 Cross of the resistance volunteer combatant
 Combatant's Cross
 Aeronautical Medal
 Overseas Medal
 National Defence Medal
 Medal for voluntary military service
 Medal of the Nation's Recognition
 Medal for the War Wounded
See also:  Military Health Service honour medal





Com-
memorative
medals




19th
century



 Saint Helena Medal
 Commemorative medal of the 1859 Italian Campaign
 Commemorative medal of the 1860 China Expedition
 Commemorative medal of the Mexico Expedition
 Commemorative medal of the 1870–1871 War
 Tonkin Expedition commemorative medal
 Dahomey Expedition commemorative medal 1892
 Madagascar commemorative medal
 Colonial Medal





1900–1914



 1901 China expedition commemorative medal
 Morocco commemorative medal (1909)





1914–1918: World War I



 1914–1918 Inter-Allied Victory medal
 Dardanelles campaign medal
 Orient campaign medal
 1914–1918 Commemorative war medal
 Medal of French Gratitude
 Medal for Victims of the Invasion
 Medal for civilian prisoners, hostages and prisoners of the 1914-1918 Great War





1918–1939 (Interwar period)



 Syria-Cilicia commemorative medal





1939–1945: World War II



 Commemorative medal for voluntary service in Free France
 1943-1944 Italian Campaign medal
  Medal for deportation and internment for acts of resistance
  Political deportation and internment medal
 Médaille commémorative de la guerre 1939–1945
 Medal of a liberated France
 Recusant's insignia





Since 1945



 Commemorative medal for United Nations operations in Korea
 Indochina Campaign commemorative medal
 Middle East operations commemorative medal (1956)
 North Africa Security and Order Operations Commemorative Medal
 North Africa medal
 United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon medal
 French commemorative medal
 Medal for the Military Protection of the Territory








Defunct
orders




Ministry
orders



 Ordre du Mérite combattant
 Ordre du Mérite militaire
 Ordre du Mérite civil
 Ordre du Mérite social
 Ordre du Mérite du Travail
 Ordre du Mérite touristique
 Ordre de l'Économie nationale
 Ordre du Mérite commercial et industriel
 Ordre du Mérite artisanal
 Ordre de la Santé publique
 Ordre du Mérite postal
 Ordre du Mérite sportif





Colonial
orders



 Ordre du Mérite indochinois
 Ordre du Mérite saharien
 Ordre de l'Étoile Noire
 Ordre de l'Étoile d'Anjouan
 Ordre du Nichan el Anouar
 Ordre impérial du Dragon d'Annam
 Ordre royal du Cambodge











 France portal










Highest military awards for gallantry




List of highest military decorations



Current



Argentine Nation to the Heroic Valour in Combat Cross (Argentina)
National Hero of Armenia (Armenia)
National Hero of Azerbaijan title (Azerbaijan)
Bir Sreshtho (Bangladesh)
Hero of Belarus title (Belarus)
Order of Bravery (Bulgaria)
Order of Heroic Exemplar (China)
Valour Cross (Denmark)
Cross of Liberty (Estonia)
Mannerheim Cross (Finland)
Légion d'honneur (France)
Cross of Honour for Valour (Germany)
Cross of Valour (Greece)
Param Vir Chakra (India)
Military Medal for Gallantry (Ireland)
Medal of Valor (Israel)
Gold Medal of Military Valour (Italy)
Seri Pahlawan Gagah Perkasa (Malaysia)
Military William Order (Netherlands)
War Cross (Norway)
Nishan-e-Haider (Pakistan)
Medal of Valor (Philippines)
War Order Virtuti Militari (wartime) / Order Krzyża Wojskowego peacetime (Poland)
Order of the Tower and Sword (Portugal)
Order of Michael the Brave (Romania)
Hero of the Russian Federation title (Russian Federation)
Nkwe ya Gauta (South Africa)
Laureate Cross of St. Ferdinand (Spain)
Parama Weera Vibhushanaya (Sri Lanka)
Knight Grand Cross of the Order of the Sword (Sweden)
Order of Rama (Thailand)
Order of Katonga (Uganda)
Order of the Gold Star (Ukraine)
Victoria Cross (United Kingdom
Australia
Canada
New Zealand)
Medal of Honor (United States)





Obsolete



Southern Cross of Honor (Confederate States of America)
Order of Saint Louis (Kingdom of France)
Military Order of Maria Theresa (Austria-Hungary)
Medal of Bravery (Kingdom of Hungary)
Pour le Mérite (Kingdom of Prussia)
Military Order of Max Joseph (Kingdom of Bavaria)
Military Order of St. Henry (Kingdom of Saxony)
Military Merit Order (Kingdom of Württemberg)
Knight's Cross of the Iron Cross (Nazi Germany)
Order of the Golden Kite (Empire of Japan)
Order of Lāčplēsis (Latvia)
Grand Cross of Valour (Rhodesia)
Laureate Plate of Madrid (Second Spanish Republic)
Castle of Good Hope Decoration (South Africa)
Vietnam Military Merit Medal (South Vietnam)
Hero of the Soviet Union (Soviet Union)
Order of the Karađorđe's Star with Swords (Kingdom of Yugoslavia)
Order of Freedom (SFR Yugoslavia)






Coordinates: 48°51′37″N 2°19′29″E﻿ / ﻿48.8602°N 2.3247°E﻿ / 48.8602; 2.3247





						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Legion_of_Honour&oldid=816302600"					Categories: Legion of HonourFrench awardsCivil awards and decorations of FranceMilitary awards and decorations of FranceOrders of knighthood of FranceAwards established in 18021802 establishments in FranceHidden categories: Articles containing French-language textCS1 French-language sources (fr)Articles needing additional references from May 2016All articles needing additional referencesUse dmy dates from August 2013Pages using deprecated image syntaxArticles containing German-language textAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from January 2016Articles with French-language external linksWikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the New International EncyclopediaCoordinates not on Wikidata