
Leiden University

Universiteit Leiden





Latin: Academia Lugduno-Batava



Former names

Rijksuniversiteit Leiden


Motto
Libertatis Praesidium (Latin)



Motto in English

Bastion of Freedom


Type
Public research university


Established
8 February 1575[1]


Budget
€588 million (2016)[2]


Rector
Carel Stolker



Academic staff

1,352[3]



Administrative staff

1,142[3]


Students
26,900 (2017)[3]


Location
Leiden and The Hague, South Holland, Netherlands


Campus
Urban/College town


Colours
     Dark Blue[4]


Website
www.universiteitleiden.nl





Leiden University (abbreviated as LEI; Dutch: Universiteit Leiden), founded in the city of Leiden, is the oldest university in the Netherlands.[5] The university was founded in 1575 by William, Prince of Orange, leader of the Dutch Revolt in the Eighty Years' War. The Dutch Royal Family and Leiden University still have a close relationship; Queens Juliana and Beatrix and King Willem-Alexander are former students. The university came into particular prominence during the Dutch Golden Age, when scholars from around Europe were attracted to the Dutch Republic due to its climate of intellectual tolerance and Leiden's international reputation. During this time Leiden was home to such figures as René Descartes, Rembrandt, Christiaan Huygens, Hugo Grotius, Baruch Spinoza and Baron d'Holbach.
Leiden University has seven faculties, over 50 departments. The university is a member of the Coimbra Group, the Europaeum and the League of European Research Universities. Leiden University houses more than 40 national and international research institutes.
The University is associated with ten leaders and Prime Ministers of the Netherlands including the current Prime Minister Mark Rutte, nine foreign leaders, among them the 6th President of the United States John Quincy Adams, a Secretary General of NATO, a President of the International Court of Justice, a Prime Minister of the United Kingdom and sixteen recipients of the Nobel Prize (including renowned physicists Albert Einstein[6][7] and Enrico Fermi).



Contents


1 History

1.1 Foundation and early history
1.2 Modern day


2 Campus
3 Organisation
4 Education

4.1 Undergraduate programmes
4.2 Graduate studies
4.3 Doctorate programmes


5 Research schools and affiliated institutes
6 Rankings and reputation
7 Notable alumni and professors

7.1 Nobel laureates


8 See also
9 References
10 Further reading
11 External links



History[edit]
Foundation and early history[edit]




The Academy building of Leiden University


In 1575, the emerging Dutch Republic did not have any universities in its northern heartland. The only other university in the Habsburg Netherlands was the University of Leuven in southern Leuven, firmly under Spanish control. The scientific renaissance had begun to highlight the importance of academic study, so Prince William founded the first Dutch university in Leiden, to give the Northern Netherlands an institution that could educate its citizens for religious purposes, but also to give the country and its government educated men in other fields.[8] It is said the choice fell on Leiden as a reward for the heroic defence of Leiden against Spanish attacks in the previous year. Ironically, the name of Philip II of Spain, William's adversary, appears on the official foundation certificate, as he was still the de jure count of Holland. Philip II replied by forbidding any subject to study in Leiden. Originally located in the convent of St Barbara, the university moved to the Faliede Bagijn Church in 1577 (now the location of the University museum) and in 1581 to the convent of the White Nuns, a site which it still occupies, though the original building was destroyed by fire in 1616.[8]
The presence within half a century of the date of its foundation of such scholars as Justus Lipsius, Joseph Scaliger, Franciscus Gomarus, Hugo Grotius, Jacobus Arminius, Daniel Heinsius and Gerhard Johann Vossius, rapidly made Leiden university into a highly regarded institution that attracted students from across Europe in the 17th century.[9] Renowned philosopher Baruch Spinoza was based close to Leiden during this period and interacted with numerous scholars at the university. The learning and reputation of Jacobus Gronovius, Herman Boerhaave, Tiberius Hemsterhuis and David Ruhnken, among others, enabled Leiden to maintain its reputation for excellence down to the end of the 18th century.
At the end of the nineteenth century, Leiden University again became one of Europe's leading universities. At the world’s first university low-temperature laboratory, professor Heike Kamerlingh Onnes achieved temperatures of only one degree above absolute zero of −273 degrees Celsius. In 1908 he was also the first to succeed in liquifying helium and can be credited with the discovery of the superconductivity in metals.[10]
Modern day[edit]
In 2005 the manuscript of Einstein on the quantum theory of the monatomic ideal gas (the Einstein-Bose condensation) was discovered in one of Leiden's libraries.[11]
The portraits of many famous professors since the earliest days hang in the university aula, one of the most memorable places, as Niebuhr called it, in the history of science.[citation needed]
In 2012 Leiden entered into a strategic alliance with Delft University of Technology and Erasmus University Rotterdam in order for the universities to increase the quality of their research and teaching. The university is also the unofficial home of the Bilderberg Group, a meeting of high-level political and economic figures from North America and Europe.
Campus[edit]




Gorlaeus building






The Leiden University Medical Centre






Faculty of Law






A new professor's inauguration lecture in the Academiegebouw, 2008






The 'Academiegebouw'


The university has no central campus; its buildings are spread over the city. Some buildings, like the Gravensteen, are very old, while buildings like Lipsius and Gorlaeus are much more modern.
In recent years the university has also expanded to The Hague which has become home to Leiden University College The Hague a liberal arts and sciences college and the departments of Public Administration, International Relations and Politics. It occupies a number of buildings in the historic centre of the city including a college building in Lange Voorhout.
The University Library, which has more than 5.2 million books and fifty thousand journals, also has a number of internationally renowned special collections of western and oriental manuscripts, printed books, archives, prints, drawings, photographs, maps, and atlases. It houses the largest collections worldwide on Indonesia and the Caribbean. The research activities of the Scaliger Institute focus on these special collections and concentrate particularly on the various aspects of the transmission of knowledge and ideas through texts and images from antiquity to the present day.
Among the institutions affiliated with the university are The KITLV or Royal Netherlands Institute of Southeast Asian and Caribbean Studies (founded in 1851), the observatory 1633; the natural history museum, with a very complete anatomical cabinet; the Rijksmuseum van Oudheden (National Museum of Antiquities), with specially valuable Egyptian and Indian departments; a museum of Dutch antiquities from the earliest times; and three ethnographical museums, of which the nucleus was Philipp Franz von Siebold's Japanese collections. The anatomical and pathological laboratories of the university are modern, and the museums of geology and mineralogy have been restored.
The Hortus Botanicus (botanical garden) is the oldest botanical garden in the Netherlands, and one of the oldest in the world. Plants from all over the world have been carefully cultivated here by experts for more than four centuries. The Clusius garden (a reconstruction), the 18th century Orangery with its monumental tub plants, the rare collection of historical trees hundreds of years old, the Japanese Siebold Memorial Museum symbolising the historical link between East and West, the tropical greenhouses with their world class plant collections, and the central square and Conservatory exhibiting exotic plants from South Africa and southern Europe.
Organisation[edit]
The university is divided into seven major faculties which offer approximately 50 undergraduate degree programmes and over 100 graduate programmes.

Humanities
Law
Medicine / LUMC
Mathematics and Natural Sciences
Social and Behavioural sciences
Archaeology
Governance and Global Affairs

Education[edit]
Undergraduate programmes[edit]
Most of the university's departments offer their own degree programme(s). Undergraduate programmes lead to either a B.A., B.Sc. or LL.B. degree. Other degrees, such as the B.Eng. or B.F.A., are not awarded at Leiden University.
Graduate studies[edit]
Students can choose from a range of graduate programmes. Most of the above-mentioned undergraduate programmes can be continued with either a general or a specialised graduate program. Leiden University offers more than 100 graduate programs leading to either MA, MSc, MPhil, or LLM degrees. The MPhil. is a special research degree and only awarded by selected departments of the university (mostly in the fields of Arts, Social Sciences, Archeology, Philosophy, and Theology). Admission to these programmes is highly selective and primarily aimed at those students opting for an academic career.




The Pieter de la Court-building, the main building of the Faculty of Social and Behavioural Sciences


Doctorate programmes[edit]
In addition, most departments, affiliated (research) institutes or faculties offer doctorate programmes or positions, leading to the PhD degree. Most of the PhD programmes offered by the university are concentrated in several research schools or institutes.
Research schools and affiliated institutes[edit]




Research building of the Leiden University Medical Centre






logo of the Leiden academy, founded in 2008.


Leiden University has more than 50 research and graduate schools and institutes. Some of them are fully affiliated with one faculty of the university, while others are interfaculty institutes or even interuniversity institutes.


Institute



ACPA
Academy of Creative and Performing Arts


ASC
African Studies Centre Leiden


CML
Institute of Environmental Sciences (CML)[12]


CRC
Crisis Research Centre[13]


CTI
Centre for Language and Identity


CWTS
Centre for Science and Technology Studies


The Meijers Research Institute
Research School for Legal Studies


eLaw@Leiden
Centre for Law in the Information Society


Grotius Centre
Research Centre for International Legal Studies


GSS
Leiden Graduate School of Science


Historical Institute
Leiden University Institute for History


Huizinga Instituut
Research Institute and Graduate School for Cultural History


IBL
Institute of Biology Leiden


IIAS
International Institute for Asian Studies


IIASL
International Institute of Air and Space Law


IOPS
Interuniversity Graduate School of Psychometrics and Sociometrics


ITC
International Tax Centre (ITC)[14]


LACDR
The Leiden Academic Centre for Drug Research


LCMBS
Leiden Centre for Molecular BioScience


LEAD
Leiden Ethnosystems and Development Programme, Faculty of Science[15]


Leyden Academy
Leyden Academy on Vitality and Ageing[16]


LGSAS
Leiden Graduate School for Archeology


LIACS
Leiden Institute of Advanced Computer Science[17]


LIAS
Leiden Institute for Area Studies


LIBC
Leiden Institute for Brain and Cognition[18]


LIC
Leiden Institute of Chemistry


LION
Leiden Institute of Physics


LISOR
Leiden Institute for the Study of Religion


LUCAS
Leiden University Centre for the Arts in Society


LUCL
Leiden University Centre for Linguistics


LUMC
Leiden University Medical Centre


LUMI
Mathematical Institute of Leiden University


Mediëvistiek
Netherlands Research School for Medieval Studies


NIG
Netherlands Institute of Government


NINO
Netherlands Institute for the Near East


NOVA
Netherlands Research School for Astronomy


N.W. Posthumus Instituut
Netherlands Research Institute and School for Economic and Social History


OIKOS
National Research School in Classical Studies


Onderzoekschool Kunstgeschiedenis
Dutch Postgraduate School for Art History


OSL
Netherlands Research School for Literary Studies


PALLAS
Pallas Institute for Cultural Disciplines


Sterrewacht Leiden
Leiden Astronomical Observatory


The Europa Institute
Leiden Law School


Van Vollenhoven Institute
Research Institute for Law, Governance and Society


Rankings and reputation[edit]


University rankings


Global


ARWU World[19]
88


Times World[21]
67


QS World[20]
109


In the 2009 THE–QS World University Rankings list the University of Leiden was ranked inside the top 100 for the fourth consecutive year. However, in 2010 it dropped 22 places in the QS World University Rankings[22] to 82nd from its position of 60th in the 2009 THE-QS Rankings (in 2010 Times Higher Education World University Rankings and QS World University Rankings parted ways to produce separate rankings). In the 2012 QS World University Rankings Leiden was named in 75th place. In the Academic Ranking of World Universities compiled by Shanghai Jiaotong University, Leiden has been in the top hundred universities worldwide since the table's inception in 2003 and in 2012 was ranked 73rd overall.
An overview of the QS World University Rankings by subjects:


Year
Rank (Change)


Archaeology
History
Pharmacology
Law
Politics
Linguistics
Modern Languages


2013
28
N/A
11
26
35
23
51


2014
28 ()
N/A
20 ( 9)
23 ( 3)
34 ( 1)
26 ( 3)
51 ()


2015
28 ()
N/A
9 ( 11)
23 ()
23 ( 11)
29 ( 3)
51 ()


2016
10 ( 18)
19
21 ( 12)
24 ( 1)
25 ( 2)
28 ( 1)
45 ( 6)


2017
9 ( 1)
17 ( 2)
17 ( 4)
32 ( 8)
26 ( 1)
51 ( 23)
51 ( 6)


At present, Leiden has a firmly established international position among the top research institutes in many fields, including the natural sciences, medicine, social and behavioural sciences, law, arts and letters. Of the eighty-five Spinozapremie (the highest scientific award of The Netherlands), twenty-one were granted to professors of the Universiteit Leiden. Literary historian Frits van Oostrom was the first professor of Leiden to be granted the Spinoza award for his work on developing the NLCM centre (Dutch literature and culture in the Middle Ages) into a top research centre. Other Spinozapremie winners are linguists Frederik Kortlandt and Pieter Muysken, mathematician Hendrik Lenstra, physicists Carlo Beenakker, Jan Zaanen and Dirk Bouwmeester, astromers Ewine van Dishoeck, Marijn Franx and Alexander Tielens, transplantation biologist Els Goulmy, clinical epidemiologist Frits Rosendaal, pedagogue Marinus van IJzendoorn, archeologists Wil Roebroeks and Corinne Hofman, neurologist Michel Ferrari, classicist Ineke Sluiter, social psychologist Naomi Ellemers, statistician Aad van der Vaart, cognitive psychologist Eveline Crone, physicist Michel Orrit.[23] Among other leading professors are Wim Blockmans, professor of Medieval History, and Willem Adelaar, professor of Amerindian Languages.
Notable alumni and professors[edit]
Main article: List of Leiden University people
Nobel laureates[edit]
Kamerlingh Onnes was awarded the Nobel Prize for Physics in 1913. Three other professors received the Nobel Prize for their research performed at Universiteit Leiden: Hendrik Antoon Lorentz and Pieter Zeeman received the Nobel Prize for their pioneering work in the field of optical and electronic phenomena, and the physiologist Willem Einthoven for his invention of the string galvanometer, which among other things, enabled the development of electrocardiography.
Nobel laureates associated with Leiden include: the physicists Albert Einstein, Enrico Fermi and Paul Ehrenfest, the Arabist and Islam expert Christiaan Snouck Hurgronje, the law expert Cornelis van Vollenhoven and historian Johan Huizinga, all during the 1920s and 1930s.
Also, Jacobus van 't Hoff, Johannes Diderik van der Waals, Tobias Asser, Albert Szent-Györgyi, Gerrit Jan van Heuven Goedhart, Igor Tamm, Jan Tinbergen, Nikolaas Tinbergen, Tjalling Koopmans, Nicolaas Bloembergen[24]
Another notable alumni is Freek Vonk, a well-known Dutch biologist specialised in snakes.[25][26][better source needed]
See also[edit]

Leiden school
Leiden University College The Hague
List of early modern universities in Europe
List of rectores magnifici of Leiden University

References[edit]


^ "De Tachtigjarige Oorlog en het ontstaan van universiteiten in de Noordelijke Nederlanden". Historiek (in Dutch). 16 May 2017. Retrieved 19 May 2017. 
^ "The University at a glance". Leiden University. Retrieved 2017-05-08. 
^ a b c "The University in figures". Leiden University. Retrieved 2016-01-29. 
^ "Universiteit Leiden Kleurgebruik". Leiden University. Retrieved 2013-02-07. 
^ Technically the University of Leuven, currently in Belgium but in the year of its foundation (1425) located in the Netherlands, is the oldest university ever founded in the Netherlands, but Leuven is no longer part of the Netherlands.
^ Albert Einstein was known as a professor at Leiden University. Einstein regularly taught Leiden students for a few weeks per year. His first lecture at Leiden was about "Ether and Relativity Theory".
^ University, Leiden. "Einstein in Leiden". Leiden University. Retrieved 9 May 2014. 
^ a b Otterspeer, Willem (2000). Groepsportret met Dame: de Leidse universiteit, 1575-1672. ISBN 978-90-351-2240-6. 
^ Schnappen, H. (1960). Niederländische Universitäten und deutsches Geistesleben von der Gründung der Universität Leiden bis ins späte 18. Jahrhundert. Neue Münstersche Beiträge zur Geschichtsforschung. 6. Münster. OCLC 3783378. 
^ [http://www.nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/physics/laureates/1913/onnes-facts.html Website Nobel Prizes
^ BBC NEWS | Europe | Student unearths Einstein paper.
^ "Institute of Environmental Sciences". Cml.leiden.edu. 2012-09-20. Retrieved 2012-09-26. 
^ "Crisis and Security Management". En.mastersinleiden.nl. Retrieved 2012-09-26. 
^ "International Tax Centre". Itc-leiden.nl. Retrieved 2012-09-26. 
^ Leiden Ethnosystems and Development Programme, [http://science.leidenuniv.nl/index.php/lead/index/ LEAD]
^ "Leiden Academy on Vitality and Ageing". Leydenacademy.nl. Retrieved 2015-07-16. 
^ "LIACS (Advanced Computer Science)". Liacs.nl. Retrieved 2012-09-26. 
^ "Brain & Cognition". Libc-leiden.nl. Retrieved 2012-09-26. 
^ Academic Ranking of World Universities 2017
^ QS World University Rankings 2018
^ World University Rankings 2018
^ "QS World University Rankings 2010 Results". Archived from the original on 2010-09-16. 
^ "Spinoza Prize". Leiden University. 20 July 2015. Retrieved 1 August 2015. 
^ Leiden's Nobel Laureates - website of the Leiden University
^ [1]
^ Freek Vonk


Further reading[edit]

Otterspeer, Willem (2008). The Bastion of Liberty. Leiden University Today and Yesterday. Amsterdam University Press. ISBN 978-90-8728-030-7.  Online version: The Bastion of Liberty - (Open Access)
Willem Otterspeer: Good, gratifying and renowned. A concise history of Leiden University. Transl. by John R.J. Eyck. Leiden, 2015. ISBN 978-90-8728-235-6
Th. Lunsingh Scheurleer & G.H.M. Posthumus Meyjes (ed.) (1975). Leiden University in the seventeenth century: an exchange of learning. ISBN 90-04-04267-9. CS1 maint: Extra text: authors list (link)
Heinz Schneppen: Niederländische Universitäten und deutsches Geistesleben. Von der Gründung der Universität Leiden bis ins späte 18. Jahrhundert, Münster 1960. Neue Münstersche Beiträge zur Geschichtsforschung Bd. 6

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Leiden University.



(in English) Official website
(in Dutch) Official website







v
t
e


Leiden University



Academics



Campus The Hague





Facilities



African Studies Centre
Bibliotheca Thysiana
Homunculus loxodontus
Hortus Botanicus Leiden
Institute of Environmental Sciences
Leiden Bio Science Park
Leiden Observatory

Einstein's Chair


Leiden University College The Hague
Leiden University Library
Leiden University Medical Center
The Netherlands Institute for the Near East
Parlementair Documentatie Centrum
Royal Netherlands Institute of Southeast Asian and Caribbean Studies





Media



Leiden Aratea
Leiden Glossary
Leiden Jerusalem Talmud
Psalter of Saint Louis





Related



List of Leiden University people

Rectores magnifici


Crayenborgh College
Himalayan Languages Project
Japan Prizewinners Programme








 Category
 Commons










Links to related articles











v
t
e


 Universities in the Netherlands



State



University of Amsterdam
Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam
Delft University of Technology
Eindhoven University of Technology
University of Groningen
Protestant Theological University
Leiden University
Maastricht University
Nijmegen Radboud University
Open University
Erasmus University Rotterdam
Tilburg University
University of Twente
Utrecht University
Wageningen University





Private



Nyenrode Business University
Kampen Theological University
Theological University of the Reformed Churches
University of Humanistic Studies





Defunct



Catholic University of Utrecht
University of Harderwijk
University of Franeker












v
t
e


League of European Research Universities






Amsterdam
Barcelona
Cambridge
Copenhagen
Dublin
Edinburgh
Freiburg
Geneva
Heidelberg
Helsinki
Imperial College
Leiden
Leuven
Lund
Milan
LMU Munich
Oxford
Paris VI
Paris XI
Strasbourg
University College London
Utrecht
Zürich












v
t
e


Europaeum






Barcelona (Pompeu Fabra)
Geneva (IHEID)
Helsinki
Kraków (Jagiellonian)
Leiden
Luxembourg
Madrid (Complutense)
Munich (LMU)
Oxford
Paris I
Prague
St Andrews












v
t
e


Coimbra Group of European research universities






Aarhus
Barcelona
Bergen
Bologna
Bristol
Budapest
Coimbra
Dublin
Durham
Edinburgh
Galway
Geneva
Göttingen
Granada
Graz
Groningen
Heidelberg
Iași
Istanbul
Jena
Kraków
Leiden
Leuven
Louvain-la-Neuve
Lyon
Montpellier
Padua
Pavia
Poitiers
Prague
St. Petersburg
Salamanca
Siena
Tartu
Turku I
Turku II
Uppsala
Vilnius
Würzburg












v
t
e


European Master of Public Administration Consortium






Corvinus University of Budapest
University of Geneva
Leiden University
KU Leuven
University of Limerick
University of Liverpool
Université catholique de Louvain
Institut d'Études Politiques de Lyon
Sciences Po Paris
Erasmus University Rotterdam
German University of Administrative Sciences Speyer
Tallinn University of Technology
University of Vaasa












v
t
e


Transatlantic Policy Consortium



North America



Monterey Institute of International Studies
USC Sol Price School of Public Policy
University of Georgia School of Public and International Affairs
Indiana University Maurer School of Law
Indiana University School of Public and Environmental Affairs
University of Maryland School of Public Policy
Suffolk University Law School
Rutgers University School of Public Affairs and Administration
Robert F. Wagner Graduate School of Public Service
Maxwell School of Citizenship and Public Affairs
Rockefeller College of Public Affairs & Policy
University of Pittsburgh Graduate School of Public and International Affairs
Lyndon B. Johnson School of Public Affairs
George Mason University School of Public Policy
American University School of Public Affairs





Europe



Katholieke Universiteit Leuven
Danish School of Public Administration
École Nationale d'Administration
Paris-Sorbonne University
University of Reims Champagne-Ardenne
German Research Institute for Public Administration
German University of Administrative Sciences Speyer
Hertie School of Governance
Karlsruhe Institute for Technology Assessment and Systems Analysis
Max Planck Institute of Economics
Potsdam University
University of Bremen
Willy Brandt School of Public Policy
Zeppelin University
Delft University of Technology
Erasmus University Rotterdam
Leiden University
Tilburg University
Utrecht University
Polish Institute of International Affairs
Instituto Superior Técnico
King Juan Carlos University
Pompeu Fabra University
Jönköping University
University of Birmingham
University of Glasgow











Coordinates: 52°09′22″N 4°29′13″E﻿ / ﻿52.156071°N 4.486949°E﻿ / 52.156071; 4.486949



Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 138979529
LCCN: n79058414
ISNI: 0000 0001 2013 2535
GND: 1025656059
SUDOC: 027370208
BNF: cb118690185 (data)
NLA: 36532304
NKC: ko2002162130
BNE: XX134820











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Leiden_University&oldid=814801281"					Categories: Leiden UniversityUniversities in the NetherlandsBuildings and structures in LeidenEducational institutions established in the 1570s1575 establishments in EuropeEducation in South HollandEducation in the Dutch RepublicScience and technology in the Dutch RepublicWilliam the SilentHidden categories: CS1 Dutch-language sources (nl)Articles containing Latin-language textInstances of Infobox university using image sizeArticles containing Dutch-language textAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from July 2017All articles lacking reliable referencesArticles lacking reliable references from December 2017CS1 maint: Extra text: authors listOfficial website different in Wikidata and WikipediaArticles with Dutch-language external linksCoordinates on WikidataWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersWikipedia articles with NLA identifiers