
Leipzig University

Universität Leipzig





Latin: Alma mater Lipsiensis


Motto
Aus Tradition Grenzen überschreiten



Motto in English

A tradition of crossing boundaries


Type
Public


Established
2 December 1409


Budget
€ 408.9 million[1]



Academic staff

3,234[1]



Administrative staff

1,962[1]


Students
29,459[2]


Location
Leipzig, Saxony, Germany


Campus
Urban


Website
www.uni-leipzig.de





Leipzig University (German: Universität Leipzig), in Leipzig in the Free State of Saxony, Germany, is one of the world's oldest universities and the second-oldest university (by consecutive years of existence) in Germany. The university was founded on December 2, 1409 by Frederick I, Elector of Saxony and his brother William II, Margrave of Meissen, and originally comprised the four scholastic faculties. Since its inception, the university has engaged in teaching and research for over 600 years without interruption.
Famous alumni include Leibniz, Goethe, Ranke, Nietzsche, Wagner, Tycho Brahe, Georgius Agricola, Angela Merkel, and nine Nobel laureates are associated with the university.



Contents


1 History

1.1 Founding and development until 1900
1.2 Nazi period
1.3 The University under the German Democratic Republic
1.4 After the reunification of Germany


2 Campus
3 Library
4 Faculties

4.1 Faculty of Theology
4.2 Faculty of Law
4.3 Faculty of History, Art and Oriental Studies
4.4 Faculty of Philology
4.5 Faculty of Education
4.6 Faculty of Social Sciences and Philosophy
4.7 Faculty of Economics and Management Science
4.8 Faculty of Sports Science
4.9 Faculty of Medicine (with a University Hospital)
4.10 Faculty of Mathematics and Computer Science
4.11 Faculty of Biosciences, Pharmacy and Psychology
4.12 Faculty of Physics and Earth Science
4.13 Faculty of Chemistry and Mineralogy
4.14 Faculty of Veterinary Medicine
4.15 Institutes affiliated with the university


5 Academics

5.1 Rankings


6 Student life
7 People associated with the Leipzig University
8 See also
9 References
10 External links



History[edit]






This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (December 2011) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Founding and development until 1900[edit]




Leipzig University main building (1917). It was demolished by the socialist administration in 1968.


The university was modelled on the University of Prague, from which the German-speaking faculty members withdrew to Leipzig after the Jan Hus crisis and the Decree of Kutná Hora. The Alma mater Lipsiensis opened in 1409, after it had been officially endorsed by Pope Alexander V in his Bull of Acknowledgment on (September 9 of that year). Its first rector was Johann von Münsterberg. From its foundation, the Paulinerkirche served as the university church. After the Reformation, the church and the monastery buildings were donated to the university in 1544.
As many European universities, the university of Leipzig was structured into colleges (Collegia) responsible for organising accommodation and collegiate lecturing. Among the colleges of Leipzig were the Small College, the Large College, the Red College (also known as the New College), the College of our Lady and the Pauliner-College. There were also private residential halls (Bursen, see engl. bursaries). The colleges had jurisdiction over their members. The college structure was abandoned later [timeframe?] and today only the names survive.
During the first centuries, the university grew slowly and was a rather regional institution. This changed, however, during the 19th century when the university became a world-class institution of higher education and research.[citation needed] At the end of the 19th century, important scholars such as Bernhard Windscheid (one of the fathers of the German Civil Code) and Wilhelm Ostwald (viewed as a founder of modern physical chemistry) taught at Leipzig.




Formerly organized as a collegiate university, the Red College of Leipzig University was established in the 16th century.


Leipzig University was one of the first German universities to allow women to register as "guest students".[3] At its general assembly in 1873, the Allgemeiner Deutscher Frauenverein thanked the University of Leipzig and Prague for allowing women to attend as guest students. This was the year that the first woman in Germany obtained her JD, Johanna von Evreinov.
Until the beginning of the Second World War, Leipzig University attracted a number of renowned scholars and later Nobel Prize laureates, including Paul Ehrlich, Felix Bloch, Werner Heisenberg and Sin-Itiro Tomonaga. Many of the university's alumni became important scientists.
Nazi period[edit]
Under Nazi rule many Jews' degrees were cancelled;[4] some were later reinstated as Karl-Marx University degrees by the GDR.
The university was kept open throughout World War II, even after the destruction of its buildings. During the war the acting rector, Erich Maschke, described the continuation of the university in a memo on May 11, 1945, announcing the vote for a new rector:

Since 4 December 1943 a fixed determination not to abandon the Leipzig University in the most difficult hour of its more than five-hundred-year history has bonded the professors with each other and with the students. The special task of repairing the damage caused by air attacks has now broadened out to the more general duty to save the continuity of our university and preserve its substance, at the very least its indestructible kernel, through the crisis that has now reached its fullest stage. After the destruction of most of the buildings and the majority of its libraries, this kernel is represented by the professoriate alone. This is what must be preserved as the great repository of value in the university.[5]

By the end of the war 60 per cent of the university's buildings and 70 per cent of its books had been destroyed.
The University under the German Democratic Republic[edit]
The university reopened after the war on February 5, 1946, but it was affected by the uniformity imposed on social institutions in the Soviet occupation zone. In 1948 the freely elected student council was disbanded and replaced by Free German Youth members. The chairman of the Student Council, Wolfgang Natonek, and other members were arrested and imprisoned, but the university was also a nucleus of resistance. Thus began the Belter group, with flyers for free elections. The head of the group, Herbert Belter, was executed in 1951 in Moscow. The German Democratic Republic was created in 1949, and in 1953 the University was renamed by its government the Karl Marx University, Leipzig after the German communist Karl Marx. In 1968, the partly damaged Augusteum, including Johanneum and Albertinum and the intact Paulinerkirche, were demolished to make way for a redevelopment of the university, carried out between 1973 and 1978. The dominant building of the university was the University Tower (now City-Hochhaus Leipzig), built between 1968 and 1972 in the form of an open book.
After the reunification of Germany[edit]




Main building of Leipzig University since 2012, the Augusteum at Augustusplatz.






Leipzig's classicist university library, the Bibliotheca Albertina.


In 1991, following the reunification of Germany, the University's name was restored to the original Leipzig University (Alma mater lipsiensis). The reconstruction of the University Library, which was heavily damaged during the war and in the GDR barely secured, was completed in 2002.
With the delivery of the University Tower to a private user, the university was forced to spread some faculties over several locations in the city. It controversially redesigned its historical centre at the Augustusplatz. In 2002, Behet Bonzio received the second prize in the architectural competition; a first prize was not awarded by the jury. A lobby with partial support of the provincial government called for the rebuilding of St. Paul's Church and Augusteum. This caused the resistance of the university leadership, the majority of the students and population of Leipzig. On March 24, 2004 a jury chose a design by Dutch architect Erick van Egeraat, which was well received by almost all parties. He recalls the outer form of the St. Paul's Church and Augusteum, and abstracted the original building complex. Renovations began in the summer of 2005.
In 2008 the university was able to prevail in the nationwide "Initiative of Excellence" of Germany and it was granted the graduate school "BuildMoNa: Leipzig School of Natural Sciences – Building with Molecules and Nano-objects".[6] In addition the university was able to receive grants from the Saxon excellence initiative for the "Life" project – a project that tries to explore common diseases more effectively. Also in 2008 the "Bach Archive" was associated with the university. In 2009, the Leipzig University celebrated its 600th anniversary with over 300 scientific and cultural lectures and exhibitions,[7] reflecting the role of the university's research and teaching from its beginning.
Campus[edit]
The university's urban campus comprises several locations. All in all, the university is spread across 38 locations in Leipzig. The main buildings in the city center are still located on the same land plots as the earliest university buildings in 1409. The university's buildings in the center of Leipzig underwent substantial reconstruction from 2005, the new university's main building being drafted by Dutch architect Erick van Egeraat. The estimated total cost for the renovation project is 140 million euros. The new buildings were scheduled to be completed in 2009/2010, in time for the university's 600th anniversary celebrations.
Besides the faculties and other teaching institutions, several other bodies serve the university: the University Library, a university archive and administration, numerous museums (e.g. the Museum for Music Instruments and the Museum of Ancient Egypt) and the university hospital. The university's Leipzig Botanical Garden, the second-oldest botanical garden in Europe. was established in 1542. The University's Musical Instrument Museum includes one of the world's three surviving pianos built by Bartolomeo Cristofori, the piano's inventor. Five other Cristofori instruments are included in the Museum's collections.[8]
Key Central institutions[9] of the university are


Centre for Biotechnology and Biomedicine
Career Service
Deutsches Literaturinstitut Leipzig/DLL
German Centre for Integrative Biodiversity Research (iDiv) Halle-Jena-Leipzig
Higher Education Didactics Centre Saxony
Kustodie (Art Collection)
Leipzig University Music
Research Academy Leipzig
Language Centre
Saxon Preparatory Courses (Studienkolleg Sachsen)
Translational Centre for Regenerative Medicine Leipzig
University Archive
University Library
University Computer Centre
Centre for University Sport
Centre for Teacher Training and School Research
Centre for Media and Communikation


Library[edit]
The University Library of Leipzig was established in 1543. It is one of the oldest German university libraries and it serves as a source of literature and information for the Leipzig University as well as the general public in the region. Its extensive historical and special collections are nationally and internationally recognized. The library consists of the main building "Bibliotheca Albertina" and forty branches situated near their respective academic institutions. The current stock comprises 5 million volumes and about 7,700 periodicals. Collections range from important medieval and modern manuscripts to incunabula, papyri, autographs, ostraka and coins. The Apel Codex, a manuscript of 16th century music, is housed in the Leipzig University library,[10] as well as the Papyrus Ebers.
Some of the University Library locations [11] in Leipzig are:

Bibliotheca Albertina at Beethovenstraße 6
Campus Library at Universitätsstr. 3
Library of Deutsches Literaturinstitut at Wächterstr. 34
Library of Arts at Dittrichring 18–20
Library of Musicology at Neumarkt 9–19
Library of Law at Burgstr. 27
Library of Medicine at Johannisallee 34
Library of Medicine at Käthe-Kollwitz-Str. 82
Library of Veterinary Medicine at the Tierkliniken 5
Library of Biosciences at Talstr. 35
Library of Chemistry and Physics at Johannisallee 29
Library of Earth Sciences at Talstr. 35
Library of Geography at Johannisallee 19
Library of Archaeology, Prehistory and Ancient History at Ritterstr. 14
Library of Oriental Studies at Schillerstr. 6
Library of Sports Science at Jahnallee 59

Faculties[edit]
The original four facilities were the Faculty of Arts, Theology, Medicine, and Law. Today, the university comprises the following 14 faculties and institutes associated with it.

Faculty of Theology[edit]

Institute of Old Testament Studies
Institute of New Testament Studies
Institute of Church History
Institute of Systematic Theology
Institute of Practical Theology
Institute of Religious Education
Teaching Unit for Classical Languages
Liturgical Institute of the VELKD at the Faculty of Theology

Faculty of Law[edit]

Ernst Jaeger Institute for Corporate Restructuring and Insolvency Law
Institute for the Legal Profession
Institute for Labour and Social Law
Institute for Foreign and European Private and Procedural Law
Institute for German and International Law of Banking and Capital Markets
Institute for Broadcasting Law
Institute for State and Administrative Law
Institute for Environmental and Planning Law
Institute for Public International Law, European Law and Foreign Public Law
Institute for the Foundations of Law

Faculty of History, Art and Oriental Studies[edit]

Department of History
Institute of Egyptology
Institute of Ancient Near Eastern Studies
Institute of African Studies
Institute of Anthropology
Institute for South and Central Asian Studies
Institute of Oriental Studies
Institute of East Asian Studies
Institute for the Study of Religions
Institute of Classical Archaeology
Institute of Art History
Institute of Art Education
Institute of Musicology
Institute of Theatre Studies

Faculty of Philology[edit]

Institute for American Studies
Institute of Applied Linguistics and Translatology
Institute of British Studies
Institute of German Language and Literature
Herder-Institute (German as a Foreign Language)
Institute of Classical Studies and Comparative Literature
Institute of Linguistics
Institute of Romance Studies
Institute of Slavonic Studies
Institute of Sorbian Studies

Faculty of Education[edit]

Institute of Educational Sciences
Institute of Pre-Primary and Primary Education
Institute of Special and Inclusive Education

Faculty of Social Sciences and Philosophy[edit]

Institute of Communication and Media Studies
Institute for the Study of Culture
Institute of Philosophy
Institute of Political Science
Institute of Sociology
Global and European Studies Institute
Centre for Area Studies (CAS)

Faculty of Economics and Management Science[edit]

Institute of Empirical Economic Research (IEW)
Institute of Public Finance and Public Management (PFPM)
Institute for Theoretical Economics (ITVWL)
Institute of Accounting, Finance and Taxation (IUFB)
Institute of Trade and Banking (IHB)
Institute of Service and Relationship Management (ISRM)
Information Systems Institute (IWI)
Institute of Economic Policy (IWP)
Institute of Business Education and Management Training (IFW)
Institute of Urban Development and Construction Management (ISB)
Institute of Real Estate Management (IIM)
Institute for Infrastructure and Resource Management (IIRM)
Institute of Building Design and Management (IGB)
Institute of Insurance Science (IVL)
Centre for International Economics

Faculty of Sports Science[edit]

Institute of Sport Psychology and Physical Education
Institute of Sport Medicine and Prevention
Institute of Exercise and Public Health
Institute of General Kinesiology and Athletics Training
Institute of Movement and Training Science in Sports I
Institute of Movement and Training Science in Sports II

Faculty of Medicine (with a University Hospital)[edit]

Institute of Anatomy
Institute for Social Medicine, Occupational Health and Public Health
Institute of Biochemistry (medicine)
Carl Ludwig Institute of Physiology
Karl-Sudhoff-Institute of History of Medicine and Science
Clinical Pharmacology
Institute of Medical Informatics, Statistics and Epidemiology
Institute for Medical Physics and Biophysics
Paul Flechsig Institute for Brain Research
Rudolf Boehm Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology
Institute of Legal Medicine
General Medicine Unit
Experimental Centre of the Faculty of Medicine
Interdisciplinary Centre for Clinical Research
Centre for Clinical Trials Leipzig
Centre for Environmental Medicine and Environmental Epidemiology
Innovation Center Computer Assisted Surgery (ICCAS)
Integrated Research and Treatment Center (IFB) AdiposityDiseases
LIFE Forschungszentrum für Zivilisationserkrankungen (LIFE)
Heart Center Leipzig GmbH
Neurological Rehabilitation Centre

Faculty of Mathematics and Computer Science[edit]

Institute of Mathematics
Institute of Computer Science

Faculty of Biosciences, Pharmacy and Psychology[edit]

Institute of Biology
Institute of Biochemistry
Institute of Pharmacy
Institute of Psychology

Faculty of Physics and Earth Science[edit]

Institute of Theoretical Physics
Peter Debye Institute for Soft Matter Physics
Felix Bloch Institute for Solid State Physics
Institute for Meteorology
Institute of Geophysics and Geology
Institute for Geography
Didactics of Physics

Faculty of Chemistry and Mineralogy[edit]

Institute of Analytical Chemistry
Institute of Inorganic Chemistry
Institute of Mineralogy, Crystallography and Materials Science
Institute of Organic Chemistry
Wilhelm Ostwald Institute of Physical and Theoretical Chemistry
Institute of Chemical Technology
Chemistry Didactics
Institute of Bioanalytical Chemistry

Faculty of Veterinary Medicine[edit]

Institute of Anatomy, Histology and Embryology
Institute of Physiology
Institute of Physiological Chemistry
Institute of Pharmacology, Pharmacy and Toxicology
Institute of Animal Nutrition, Nutrition Diseases and Dietetics
Institute of Virology
Institute of Immunology
Institute of Animal Hygiene and Veterinary Public Health
Institute of Parasitology
Institute of Bacteriology and Mycology
Institute of Food Hygiene
Institute of Pathology
Department of Small Animal Medicine
Clinic for Birds and Reptiles
Large Animal Clinic for Internal Medicine
Large Animal Clinic for Surgery
Large Animal Clinic for Theriogenology and Ambulatory Services
Oberholz Farm for Teaching and Research

Institutes affiliated with the university[edit]

Translational Centre for Regenerative Medicine
German Centre for Integrative Biodiversity Research (iDiv)
Institute of East Asian Studies of the Leipzig University
Institute for the Study of Religions of the Leipzig University
Institute of Classical Archaeology of the Leipzig University
Institute for International Law, European Law and Foreign Public Law (InVEA) of the Leipzig University
Leipzig School of Human Origins (a cooperation with the Max Planck Institute of Evolutionary Anthropology)


Academics[edit]
Today, the university has 14 faculties. With over 29,000 students, it is Saxony's second-largest university. There are now more than 150 institutes and the university offers 190 study programs leading to Bachelor's degrees, Master's degrees, Staatsexamen, Diplom[12] and Ph.D.s, for which there are no charges for tuition.
The university offers a number of courses in English and other foreign languages, and there are several programs allowing foreign students to study at the university. Exchange partner universities include the universities of Arizona, Oklahoma, Houston, Alberta, Ohio, and Edinburgh. Traditionally contacts to universities in Eastern Europe and the Far East are strong as well, e.g. there are cooperations with leading institutions such as Moscow's Lomonosov University and Renmin University in Beijing.




Anatomy auditorium of the Faculty of Medicine


There are several International Master's programs: American Studies, Global Studies, SEPT[13] (MBA in SME Promotion)[14] and one Bachelor/Master's/Ph.D. program (International Physics Studies Program[15]) taught in English. American Studies Leipzig was awarded three international professorships: The Fulbright-Leipzig Chair for American Studies, the DAAD Professorship for American and International Studies, and the Picador Guest Professorship for Literature.[16] It is also the home of aspeers:emerging voices in american studies, a graduate-level peer-reviewed scholarly journal for American studies. Erasmus Mundus Global Studies is an interdisciplinary, research-based Master offered by a consortium of five European universities: Leipzig University, the London School of Economics, University of Vienna, University of Wroclaw and Roskilde University. In the field of anthropology, the university is cooperating with the Leipzig Max Planck Institute. Since 2008 the university is also home to one of Germany's few Confucius Institutes. The Institute is based on an agreement of June 2006 between the university administration and representatives of the Chinese Embassy to establish a Confucius Institute in cooperation with the Renmin University and the "National Office for Teaching Chinese as a Foreign Language". Leipzig University has been the home of the first German chair for Chinese and East Asian Languages in the 19th century, which later became the Institute of East Asian Studies, which still exists today (see Georg von der Gabelentz).
Rankings[edit]


University rankings


Global


ARWU World[17]
151-200


QS World[18]
501-550


The university is ranked second in Germany, twentieth in Europe, and 105th in the world by the web-based Webometrics Ranking of World Universities, a ranking evaluating universities' scientific online publications. The 2016 ARWU ranking sees Leipzig climbing up to the 151-200 tier being among the top 14 German universities. Leipzig has constantly been ranked among the German top 10 in various university sport disciplines over the past decades.[citation needed]
Student life[edit]
Leipzig has a thriving student life with a large number of student run bars, sports clubs and recreational facilities for students. The student body in Leipzig is diverse, not only due to the broad spectrum of subjects at the university but also because of the other higher education institutions in the city. The Moritzbastei is the largest student club in Germany, it is part of the historic city fortifications of Leipzig and is famous for its atmosphere and large number of cultural events.
The university is home to the Leipzig Academic Orchestra and the University Choir of Leipzig. There are numerous courses offered in performing arts every semester and a dance festival is organised by students once a year. In the field of sports, the university offers training opportunities and courses in almost all disciplines. During the annual Leipzig book fair, the university library and other university institutions organise public events for authors.
People associated with the Leipzig University[edit]
Main article: List of Leipzig University people




Johann Sebastian Bach






Tycho Brahe






Johann Wolfgang von Goethe






Gottfried Leibniz






Angela Merkel






Friedrich Nietzsche


Leipzig University has produced many notable individuals. Some famous people affiliated with Leipzig include:

Johann Christoph Altnickol, German composer, son-in-law to Johann Sebastian Bach
Johann Friedrich Agricola, German composer, pupil of Johann Sebastian Bach
Carl Philipp Emanuel Bach, German composer, second famous son of Johann Sebastian Bach
Johann Christoph Friedrich Bach, German composer, 3rd famous son of Johann Sebastian Bach
Wilhelm Friedemann Bach, German composer, first famous son of Johann Sebastian Bach
Lorenz Christoph Mizler, German composer and music theorist, pupil of Johann Sebastian Bach
Friedrich Blume, German music theorist
Christoph Graupner, German composer
Johann Kuhnau, German composer, Thomaskantor
Johann David Heinichen, German composer and music theorist, Royal Polish and Electoral Saxon Kapellmeister
Richard Wagner, German composer
Georg Philipp Telemann, German composer, godfather to Carl Philipp Emanuel Bach
Theodor Mommsen, German historian, Nobel Prize in Literature
Friedrich Nietzsche, German philosopher
Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, German poet and polymath
Gottfried Wilhelm von Leibniz, German Mathematician who developed calculus, philosopher, polymath
Werner Heisenberg, German physicist, Nobel Prize in Physics
Felix Bloch, Swiss physicist, Nobel Prize in Physics
Friedrich Hund, German physicist, discovered quantum tunnelling and is known for Hund's rules
Julius Edgar Lilienfeld, Austro-Hungarian Physicist, inventor of the transistor
Ludwig Boltzmann, Austrian physicist
Tycho Brahe,[19] Danish astronomer
Gustav Hertz, German physicist, Nobel Prize in Physics
Sin-Itiro Tomonaga, Japanese physicist, Nobel Prize in Physics
William Vermillion Houston, American physicist
Edward Teller, Hungaro-American nuclear scientist, member of the Manhattan Project
Bartel Leendert van der Waerden, Dutch mathematician
Edgar Odell Lovett, American mathematician
Peter Debye, Dutch-American physicist and chemist, Nobel Prize in Chemistry
Wilhelm Ostwald, German chemist, Nobel Prize in Chemistry
Raila Odinga,Kenya's second Prime Minister and the father of Africa's modern democracy.
Paul Ehrlich, German doctor, Nobel Prize in Medicine
Gustav Theodor Fechner, German psychologist, founder of Psychophysics
Maximilian von Frey, physiologist, inventor of the esthesiometer
Ernst Heinrich Weber, German physician and professor whose studies paved the way for the founding of Psychology
Wilhelm Wundt, German psychologist, founded the first formal laboratory for psychological research
Friedrich Trendelenburg, German surgeon, described surgical removal of pulmonary emboli[20]
Hans-Georg Gadamer, German philosopher and rector of the university
Johann Christoph Gottsched, German poet, author, and critic
Christian Friedrich Henrici, German poet, Saxon Actuary, Postal clerk, Postal Commissioner, and Wine inspector
Gotthold Ephraim Lessing, German philosopher and writer
Luo Gan, Chinese Politician, Member of the Politburo Standing Committee
Johann Major, German Lutheran theologian, a principal author of the so-called Leipzig Interim, and author of the Majoristic Controversy
Angela Merkel, first female German Chancellor
Hans-Dietrich Genscher, German politician, Foreign Minister and Vice Chancellor
Ferdinand de Saussure, linguist, founder of structuralism
Rudolph Sohm, lawyer and Church historian
Nathan Söderblom, Swedish clergyman, Nobel Peace Prize
C. F. W. Walther, first President of the Lutheran Church–Missouri Synod and its most influential theologian.
Cai Yuanpei, president of Peking University and leading thinker in the early Chinese communist movement
Michelle Bachelet, first female President of Chile between 2006 and 2010
Luz Long, German Olympic long-jumper, noted for his sportsmanship

See also[edit]

Handelshochschule Leipzig (HHL)
Leipzig school (sociology)
List of medieval universities
List of universities in Germany
Nobel laureates by university affiliation

References[edit]






This article has an unclear citation style. The references used may be made clearer with a different or consistent style of citation, footnoting, or external linking. (March 2015) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)





^ a b c "Jahresbericht 2015" (PDF). Leipzig University (in German). pp. 53–59. Retrieved 2017-06-18. 
^ "Zahlen und Fakten". Leipzig University (in German). Retrieved 2017-06-18. 
^ MargritTwellmann, Wolfgang Abendroth, ed. (1972). "Louise Otto Peters. Das erste Vierteljahrhundert. S. 30". Die deutsche Frauenbewegung1843-1889 (Marburger Abhandlungen zur Politischen Wissenschaft)|format= requires |url= (help) (in German) (1 ed.). Berlin: Hain. p. 112. "Auf der Generalversammlung des Allgemeinen deutschen Frauenvereins 1873 dankt eine Referentin den Universitäten in Leipzig und Prag für die Zulassung der Frauen als Gasthörerinnen.  |access-date= requires |url= (help)
^ "A Jewish Palestinian's quest to receive his degree, from Nazi Germany". wn.com. Retrieved December 31, 2013. 
^ Universitätsarchiv Leipzig, Rectorate 50. Quoted in Grondin, Jean (2003). Hans-Georg Gadamer: A Biography. New Haven: Yale University Press. p. 234. ISBN 0-300-09841-3. 
^ Dr. Alexander Weber (May 17, 2013). "Graduate School BuildMoNa". Buildmona.de. Retrieved December 31, 2013. 
^ Universität Leipzig 600th Anniversary Archived July 19, 2011, at the Wayback Machine.
^ Museum of Musical Instruments Archived September 25, 2008, at the Wayback Machine.
^ https://www.uni-leipzig.de/en/university/faculties-and-central-institutions/institutions.html
^ Sadie, Stanley; Latham, Alison (1994). "The Grove Concise Dictionary of Music".  Missing or empty |url= (help)
^ https://www.ub.uni-leipzig.de/locations/?L=1
^ Since the adoption of the Bachelor's degree and Master's degree only three study programs leading to Diplom have remained: Maths, Mathematical economics and Protestant Christian Theology.
^ SEPT, the international Program of the University of Leipzig for Small and Medium-Sized Enterprise promotion and training http://www.sept.uni-leipzig.de/
^ "SEPT – MBA program at glance". Sept.uni-leipzig.de. Archived from the original on October 14, 2007. Retrieved December 31, 2013. 
^ "Homepage of the International Physics Studies Program at Leipzig". Uni-leipzig.de. Archived from the original on February 12, 2012. Retrieved December 31, 2013. 
^ "The Picador Guest Professorship for Literature | American Studies Leipzig". Americanstudies.uni-leipzig.de. Retrieved December 31, 2013. 
^ Academic Ranking of World Universities 2017
^ QS World University Rankings 2018
^ John Louis Emil Dreyer, Tycho Brahe: a Picture of Scientific Life and Work in the Sixteenth Century, Cambridge UP (2014 [1890]), p. 16.
^ Arch Klin Chir 86:686, 2908, 1908


External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Universität Leipzig.



Leipzig University Website
History of the Leipzig University (English, German)
 Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913). "University of Leipzig". Catholic Encyclopedia. New York: Robert Appleton Company. 







v
t
e


Leipzig University



Schools and Institutes



American Studies Leipzig
BuildMoNa (Natural Sciences)
Carl Ludwig Institute of Physiology
German Institute for Literature





Buildings



Augusteum
Grassi Museum
Leipzig Botanical Garden
Leipzig University Library
Museum of Antiquities
Museum of Musical Instruments
Paulinum





Miscellaneous



Ackermann–Teubner Memorial Award
Bach Archive
Decree of Kutná Hora
Leipzig University internship controversy





Categories and lists



Leipzig University
List of Leipzig University people
Presidents of Leipzig University












v
t
e


 Universities in Germany



North



Bremen
Jacobs University Bremen
Flensburg
Göttingen
Greifswald
Hamburg
University of Fine Arts of Hamburg
Helmut Schmidt University
Kühne Logistics University
University of Music and Theatre Hamburg
Hannover
Hildesheim
Kiel
Lübeck
Lüneburg
Oldenburg
Osnabrück
Rostock
Vechta





East



Berlin University of the Arts
Free University of Berlin
Humboldt University of Berlin
Erfurt
Viadrina European University
Hertie School of Governance
Halle-Wittenberg
Jena
Leipzig
Magdeburg
Potsdam
Bauhaus University Weimar





South



Augsburg
Bamberg
Bayreuth
Catholic University of Eichstätt-Ingolstadt
Erlangen-Nuremberg
Freiburg
Heidelberg
Hohenheim
Konstanz
Mannheim
Munich
Bundeswehr University Munich
Ukrainian Free University
Passau
Regensburg
Tübingen
Ulm
Würzburg
Zeppelin





West



Bielefeld
Ruhr University Bochum
Bonn
Cologne
Duisburg-Essen
Düsseldorf
Frankfurt am Main
Giessen
Hagen
Kassel
Koblenz and Landau
Mainz
Marburg
Münster
Paderborn
Saarland
Siegen
German University of Administrative Sciences Speyer
Trier
Witten/Herdecke
Wuppertal





Technical universities



RWTH Aachen
TU Berlin
Brandenburg University of Technology
Braunschweig University of Technology
Chemnitz University of Technology
Clausthal University of Technology
TU Darmstadt
TU Dortmund
TU Dresden
Freiberg University of Mining and Technology
Hamburg University of Technology
HafenCity University Hamburg
University of Hanover
Technische Universität Ilmenau
Kaiserslautern
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology
TU Munich
Stuttgart












v
t
e


 German U15







Freie Universität Berlin (FU Berlin)
Humboldt University Berlin (HU Berlin)
University of Bonn
University of Cologne
University of Freiburg
Goethe University of Frankfurt
University of Göttingen
University of Hamburg (UHH)
Heidelberg University
Leipzig University
University of Mainz
Ludwig Maximilian University of Munich (LMU Munich)
University of Münster
University of Tübingen
University of Würzburg












v
t
e


Utrecht Network of European inter-university cooperations






Austria
University of Graz
Belgium
University of Antwerp
Czech Republic
Masaryk University
Denmark
Aarhus University
Estonia
University of Tartu
Finland
University of Helsinki
France
Université Lille Nord de France
University of Strasbourg
Germany
University of Bochum
University of Leipzig
Greece
Aristotle University of Thessaloniki
Hungary
Eötvös Loránd University
Ireland
University College Cork
Italy
University of Bologna
Latvia
University of Latvia
Lithuania
Vilnius University
Malta
University of Malta
Netherlands
Utrecht School of the Arts
Utrecht University
Norway
University of Bergen
Poland
Jagiellonian University
Portugal
University of Coimbra
Romania
Alexandru Ioan Cuza University
Slovakia
Comenius University in Bratislava
Slovenia
University of Ljubljana
Spain
Complutense University of Madrid
Valencia
Sweden
Lund
Switzerland
University of Basel
Turkey
Boğaziçi
United Kingdom
Queen's University Belfast
University of Hull








European University Association
Networks of European universities
ERASMUS programme






Coordinates: 51°20′20″N 12°22′44″E﻿ / ﻿51.339°N 12.379°E﻿ / 51.339; 12.379



Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 124811066
LCCN: n80005116
ISNI: 0000 0001 1009 7772
GND: 2024343-1
SELIBR: 359946
ULAN: 500301325
NLA: 36514426
NKC: ko20010092638











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Leipzig_University&oldid=817561871"					Categories: Leipzig University1409 establishments in the Holy Roman EmpireEducational institutions established in the 15th centuryUniversities and colleges in SaxonyTourist attractions in LeipzigHidden categories: CS1 German-language sources (de)Pages using citations with format and no URLPages using citations with accessdate and no URLWebarchive template wayback linksPages using web citations with no URLArticles containing Latin-language textPages using deprecated image syntaxPages using infobox university with unknown parametersArticles containing German-language textArticles needing additional references from December 2011All articles needing additional referencesAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from May 2014Articles with unsourced statements from May 2017Wikipedia references cleanup from March 2015All articles needing references cleanupArticles covered by WikiProject Wikify from March 2015All articles covered by WikiProject WikifyUse mdy dates from August 2014Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource referenceCoordinates on WikidataWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with SELIBR identifiersWikipedia articles with ULAN identifiersWikipedia articles with NLA identifiers