"Trotsky", "Trotski", "Trotskiy", "Trotskii", and "Trotskij" redirect here. For other uses, see Trotski (disambiguation).


Leon Trotsky


Лев Троцкий



Trotsky in 1929






People's Commissar of Military and Naval Affairs of the Soviet Union


In office
13 March 1918 – 6 January 1925


Premier
Vladimir Lenin
Alexei Rykov


Preceded by
Nikolai Podvoisky


Succeeded by
Mikhail Frunze


People's Commissar of Foreign Affairs of the RSFSR


In office
8 November 1917 – 13 March 1918


Premier
Vladimir Lenin


Preceded by
Mikhail Tereshchenko


Succeeded by
Georgy Chicherin


President of the Petrograd Soviet


In office
8 October – 8 November 1917


Full member of the 6th, 7th, 8th, 9th, 10th, 11th, 12th, 13th, 14th Politburo


In office
10 October 1917 – 23 October 1926





Personal details


Born
Lev Davidovich Bronstein
(1879-11-07)7 November 1879
near Yelizavetgrad, Kherson Governorate, Russian Empire (now in Ukraine)


Died
21 August 1940(1940-08-21) (aged 60)
Coyoacán, Mexico City, Mexico


Cause of death
Assassination


Citizenship
Soviet


Political party
RSDLP
SDPS
Mezhraiontsy
CPSU
Fourth International


Spouse(s)
Aleksandra Sokolovskaya
Natalia Sedova


Children
Zinaida Volkova
Nina Nevelson
Lev Sedov
Sergei Sedov


Signature



Leon Trotsky (/ˈtrɒtski/;[1][a] born Lev Davidovich Bronstein;[b] 7 November [O.S. 26 October] 1879 – 21 August 1940) was a Marxist revolutionary, theorist, and Soviet politician. Initially supporting the Menshevik Internationalists faction within the Russian Social Democratic Labour Party, he joined the Bolsheviks ("majority") just before the 1917 October Revolution, immediately becoming a leader within the Communist Party. He would go on to become one of the seven members of the first Politburo, founded in 1917 to manage the Bolshevik Revolution.[2] During the early days of the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic (RSFSR) and the Soviet Union, he served first as People's Commissar for Foreign Affairs and later as the founder and commander of the Red Army, with the title of People's Commissar of Military and Naval Affairs. He became a major figure in the Bolshevik victory in the Russian Civil War (1918–1923).
After leading a failed struggle of the Left Opposition against the policies and rise of Joseph Stalin in the 1920s and against the increasing role of bureaucracy in the Soviet Union, Trotsky was removed as Commissar for Military and Naval Affairs (January 1925), removed from the Politburo (October 1926), removed from the Central Committee (October 1927), expelled from the Communist Party (November 1927), exiled to Alma–Ata (January 1928), and exiled from the Soviet Union (February 1929). As the head of the Fourth International, Trotsky continued from exile to oppose the Stalinist bureaucracy in the Soviet Union. On 20 August 1940, Trotsky was assassinated by Ramón Mercader, a Spanish-born NKVD agent, passing away the next day in a hospital. Mercader, who attacked Trotsky with an ice axe, acted upon instruction from Stalin and was nearly beaten to death by Trotsky's bodyguards, with Mercader spending 20 years in a Mexican prison for murdering Trotsky. Stalin presented Mercader with an Order of Lenin in absentia.[3]
Trotsky's ideas formed the basis of Trotskyism, a major school of Marxist thought that opposes the theories of Stalinism. He was written out of the history books under Stalin, and was one of the few Soviet political figures who was not rehabilitated by the government under Nikita Khrushchev in the 1950s. It was not until the late 1980s that his books were released for publication in the Soviet Union, which dissolved a short time later.



Contents


1 Childhood and family (1879-1895)
2 Early political activities and life (1896–1917)

2.1 Revolutionary activity and imprisonment (1896–1898)
2.2 First marriage and Siberian exile (1899–1902)
2.3 First emigration and second marriage (1902–1903)
2.4 Split with Lenin (1903–1904)
2.5 1905 revolution and trial (1905–1906)
2.6 Second emigration (1907–1914)
2.7 World War I (1914–1917)


3 Russian Revolution and aftermath

3.1 Commissar for Foreign Affairs and Brest-Litovsk (1917–1918)
3.2 Head of the Red Army (spring 1918)
3.3 Civil War (1918–1920)

3.3.1 1918
3.3.2 1919
3.3.3 1920


3.4 Trade union debate (1920–1921)
3.5 Trotsky's contribution to the Russian Revolution
3.6 Lenin's illness (1922–1923)
3.7 Left opposition (1923–1924)
3.8 After Lenin's death (1924)
3.9 A year in the wilderness (1925)
3.10 United Opposition (1926–1927)
3.11 Defeat and exile (1927–1928)
3.12 Fate of Left Oppositionists after Trotsky's exile (1929–1941)


4 Exile (1929–1940)

4.1 Moscow show trials
4.2 Fourth International
4.3 Dies Committee
4.4 Final months


5 Assassination

5.1 Legacy


6 Contributions to theory

6.1 Permanent Revolution
6.2 The United Front


7 See also
8 Notes
9 References
10 Further reading
11 External links

11.1 Works





Childhood and family (1879-1895)[edit]




8-year-old Lev Bronstein, 1888


Leon Trotsky was born Lev Davidovich Bronstein on 7 November 1879, the fifth child of a Ukrainian Jewish family[4], of wealthy farmers in Yanovka or Yanivka, in the Kherson governorate of the Russian Empire (now Bereslavka, in Ukraine), a small village 24 kilometres (15 mi) from the nearest post office. His parents were David Leontyevich Bronstein (1847–1922) and his wife Anna Lvovna (née Zhivotovskaya) (1850–1910). Trotsky's father was born in Poltava, and later moved to Bereslavka as it had a large Jewish community.[5] The family was of Jewish origin,[6] but reportedly not religious.[7] The language spoken at home was a mixture of Russian and Ukrainian (known as Surzhyk).[8] Trotsky's younger sister, Olga, who also grew up to be a Bolshevik and a Soviet politician, married the prominent Bolshevik Lev Kamenev.
Many anti-Communists, anti-semites, and anti-Trotskyists have noted Trotsky's original surname, stressing the political and historical significance of the surname Bronstein.[9][10] Some authors, notably Robert Service, have also claimed that Trotsky's childhood first name was the Yiddish "Leiba." The American Trotskyist David North said that this was an apparent attempt to emphasize Trotsky's Jewish origins but, contrary to Service's claims, there is no documentary evidence to support it. He says that it is highly improbable that the family was Jewish, as they did not speak Yiddish, the common language among eastern European Jews.[9] Both North and Walter Laqueur in their books say that Trotsky's childhood name was Lyova, a standard Russian diminutive of the name "Lev."[10]
When Trotsky was eight[11], his father sent him to Odessa to be educated. He was enrolled in a German-language school, which became Russified during his years in Odessa as a result of the Imperial government's policy of Russification.[12] As Isaac Deutscher notes in his biography of Trotsky, Odessa was then a bustling cosmopolitan port city, very unlike the typical Russian city of the time. This environment contributed to the development of the young man's international outlook.[13] Although Trotsky spoke French, English and German to a good standard, he said in his autobiography My Life that he was never perfectly fluent in any language but Russian and Ukrainian, while Raymond Molinier wrote that Trotsky spoke French fluently.[14]
Early political activities and life (1896–1917)[edit]
Revolutionary activity and imprisonment (1896–1898)[edit]




Lev Davidovich Bronstein, 1897


Trotsky became involved in revolutionary activities in 1896 after moving to the harbor town of Nikolayev (now Mykolaiv) on the Ukrainian coast of the Black Sea.[15] At first a narodnik (revolutionary populist), he initially opposed Marxism but was won over to Marxism later that year by his future first wife, Alexandra Sokolovskaya. Instead of pursuing a mathematics degree, Trotsky helped organize the South Russian Workers' Union in Nikolayev in early 1897. Using the name 'Lvov,'[16] he wrote and printed leaflets and proclamations, distributed revolutionary pamphlets, and popularized socialist ideas among industrial workers and revolutionary students.
In January 1898, more than 200 members of the union, including Trotsky, were arrested. He was held for the next two years in prison awaiting trial, first in Nikolayev, then Kherson, then Odessa, and finally in Moscow.[17] In the Moscow prison he came into contact with other revolutionaries. There he first heard about Lenin and read Lenin's book, The Development of Capitalism in Russia.[18] Two months into his imprisonment, on 1 – 3 March 1898, the first Congress of the newly formed Russian Social Democratic Labor Party (RSDLP) was held.[19] From then on Trotsky identified as a member of the party.
First marriage and Siberian exile (1899–1902)[edit]
Main article: First exile of Trotsky
While in the prison in Moscow, in the summer of 1899, Trotsky married Aleksandra Sokolovskaya (1872–1938), a fellow Marxist. The wedding ceremony was performed by a Jewish chaplain.[20]
In 1900, he was sentenced to four years in exile in Siberia. Because of their marriage, Trotsky and his wife were allowed to be exiled to the same location in Siberia. They were exiled to Ust-Kut and the Verkholensk in the Baikal Lake region of Siberia. They had two daughters, Zinaida (1901 – 5 January 1933) and Nina (1902 – 9 June 1928), both born in Siberia.
In Siberia, Trotsky studied philosophy.[21] He became aware of the differences within the party, which had been decimated by arrests in 1898 and 1899. Some social democrats known as "economists" argued that the party should focus on helping industrial workers improve their lot in life and were not so worried about changing the government.[22] They believed that societal reforms would grow out of the worker's struggle for higher pay and better working conditions. Others argued that overthrowing the monarchy was more important and that a well-organized and disciplined revolutionary party was essential. The latter position was expressed by the London-based newspaper Iskra, or in English, The Spark, which was founded in 1900. Trotsky quickly sided with the Iskra position and began writing for the paper.[23]
In the summer of 1902, at the urging of his wife, Trotsky escaped from Siberia hidden in a load of hay on a wagon.[24] Aleksandra later escaped from Siberia with their daughters.[25]
Leon and Alexandra soon separated and divorced, but maintained a friendly relationship. Their children were later raised by Trotsky's parents in Ukraine.[citation needed] Both daughters married and Zinaida had children, but the daughters died before their parents. Nina Nevelson died from tuberculosis, cared for in her last months by her older sister. Zinaida Volkova died after following her father into exile in Berlin. She had taken her son by her second marriage, and left her daughter in Russia. Suffering also from tuberculosis, then a fatal disease, and depression, Volkova committed suicide. Their mother Aleksandra disappeared in 1935 during the Great Purges in the Soviet Union under Stalin, and was murdered by Stalinist forces three years later.[26]
First emigration and second marriage (1902–1903)[edit]


Part of a series on


Socialism







Development


History of socialism
Socialist calculation debate
Socialist economics








Ideas


Calculation in kind
Collective ownership
Cooperative
Common ownership
Economic democracy
Economic planning
Equal opportunity
Free association
Industrial democracy
Input–output model
Internationalism
Labour voucher
Material balance planning
Peer‑to‑peer economics
(Sharing economy)
Production for use
Social dividend
Social ownership
Socialism in One Country
Socialist mode of production
State ownership

To each according
to his contribution / needs

Workplace democracy
Workers' self-management








Models



Decentralized planning
Participatory economics


Market socialism


Economic democracy




Lange model
Mutualism
Ricardian socialism





Planned economy
Soviet-type
Project Cybersyn


Socialist market economy
Socialist-oriented market









Variants



African
Arab
Agrarian
Anarchist
Anarcho-communism
Anarcho-syndicalism
Authoritarian
Blanquism
Communism
Democratic
Ethical
Ecological
Feminist
Gandhian
Guild
Impossibilism
Leninism
Liberal
Libertarian
Market
Marhaenism
Marxism
Maoism
Municipal
Owenism
Platformism
Reformism
Religious
Revisionism
Revolutionary
Ricardian
Scientific
Social democracy
Socialist nationalism
State
Syndicalism
Technocracy
Third World
Trotskyism
Utopian
with Chinese characteristics
Zionist
21st-century









History by country



Australia
Bangladesh
Brazil
Canada
Estonia
Hong Kong
India
Iran
Netherlands
New Zealand
Pakistan
Tunisia
United Kingdom
United States









People



Charles Hall
Henri de Saint-Simon
François-Noël Babeuf
Robert Owen
Charles Fourier
William Thompson
Thomas Hodgskin
Pierre-Joseph Proudhon
Louis Blanc
Mikhail Bakunin
Karl Marx
Friedrich Engels
Ferdinand Lassalle
William Morris
Mary Harris Jones
Peter Kropotkin
Eduard Bernstein
Errico Malatesta
Fred M. Taylor
Eugene Debs
Georgi Plekhanov
John Dewey
Enrico Barone
W. E. B. Du Bois
Emma Goldman
Rosa Luxemburg
Léon Blum
Antonie Pannekoek
Bertrand Russell
Luis Emilio Recabarren
Albert Einstein
Clement Attlee
Karl Polanyi
Nestor Makhno
G. D. H. Cole
Imre Nagy
Einar Gerhardsen
George Orwell
Léopold Sédar Senghor
Salvador Allende
François Mitterrand
Nelson Mandela
Gamal Abdel Nasser
Murray Bookchin
Alexander Dubček
Howard Zinn
Noam Chomsky
Martin Luther King Jr.
Mikhail Gorbachev
Bernie Sanders
Tariq Ali
Abdullah Öcalan
Slavoj Žižek
Jeremy Corbyn
Cornel West
Jack Layton
Hugo Chávez
Chris Hedges
Yanis Varoufakis
Pablo Iglesias









Organizations



First International
(International Workingmen's Association)

Second International

Third International
(Comintern)

Fourth International
Fifth International
Labour and Socialist International
Socialist International

World Federation of
Democratic Youth


International Union of
Socialist Youth

World Socialist Movement

International Committee
of the Fourth International

Progressive Alliance








Related topics



Anarchism
Capitalism
Communist society
Criticism of capitalism
Economic system
French Left
List of socialist economists
Nanosocialism
Progressivism
Right-wing socialism
Socialism and LGBT rights
Socialist Party
Socialist state









Socialism portal
Economics portal
Politics portal







v
t
e





Until this point in his life, Trotsky had used his birth name—Lev or Leon Bronstein.[27] He changed his surname to "Trotsky"—the name he would use for the rest of his life. It is said he adopted the name of a jailer of the Odessa prison in which he had earlier been held.[28] This became his primary revolutionary pseudonym. After his escape from Siberia, Trotsky moved to London, joining Georgi Plekhanov, Vladimir Lenin, Julius Martov and other editors of Iskra. Under the pen name Pero ("feather" or "pen" in Russian), Trotsky soon became one of the paper's leading writers.
Unknown to Trotsky, the six editors of Iskra were evenly split between the "old guard" led by Plekhanov and the "new guard" led by Lenin and Martov. Plekhanov's supporters were older (in their 40s and 50s), and had spent the previous 20 years together in exile in Europe. Members of the new guard were in their early 30s and had only recently emigrated from Russia. Lenin, who was trying to establish a permanent majority against Plekhanov within Iskra, expected Trotsky, then 23, to side with the new guard.
In March 1903 Lenin wrote:[29]

I suggest to all the members of the editorial board that they co-opt 'Pero' as a member of the board on the same basis as other members. [...] We very much need a seventh member, both as a convenience in voting (six being an even number), and as an addition to our forces. 'Pero' has been contributing to every issue for several months now; he works in general most energetically for the Iskra; he gives lectures (in which he has been very successful). In the section of articles and notes on the events of the day, he will not only be very useful, but absolutely necessary. Unquestionably a man of rare abilities, he has conviction and energy, and he will go much farther.

Because of Plekhanov's opposition, Trotsky did not become a full member of the board. But, from then on he participated in its meetings in an advisory capacity, which earned him Plekhanov's enmity.
In late 1902, Trotsky met Natalia Ivanovna Sedova, who soon became his companion. They married in 1903 and she was with him until his death. They had two children together, Lev Sedov (24 February 1906 – 16 February 1938) and Sergei Sedov (21 March 1908 – 29 October 1937), both of whom would predecease their parents. Regarding his sons' surnames, Trotsky later explained that[30] after the 1917 revolution:

In order not to oblige my sons to change their name, I, for "citizenship" requirements, took on the name of my wife.

Trotsky never used the name "Sedov" either privately or publicly. Natalia Sedova sometimes signed her name "Sedova-Trotskaya".
Split with Lenin (1903–1904)[edit]
In the meantime, after a period of secret police repression and internal confusion that followed the first party Congress in 1898, Iskra succeeded in convening the party's 2nd congress in London in August 1903. Trotsky and other Iskra editors attended. The first congress went as planned, with Iskra supporters handily defeating the few "economist" delegates. Then the congress discussed the position of the Jewish Bund, which had co-founded the RSDLP in 1898 but wanted to remain autonomous within the party.[31]
Shortly thereafter, the pro-Iskra delegates split into two factions. Lenin and his supporters, the Bolsheviks, argued for a smaller but highly organized party, while Martov and his supporters, the Mensheviks, argued for a larger and less disciplined party.[32] In a surprise development, Trotsky and most of the Iskra editors supported Martov and the Mensheviks, while Plekhanov supported Lenin and the Bolsheviks. During 1903 and 1904, many members changed sides in the factions. Plekhanov soon parted ways with the Bolsheviks. Trotsky left the Mensheviks in September 1904 over their insistence on an alliance with Russian liberals and their opposition to a reconciliation with Lenin and the Bolsheviks.
From 1904 until 1917, Trotsky described himself as a "non-factional social democrat". He worked between 1904 and 1917 trying to reconcile different groups within the party, which resulted in many clashes with Lenin and other prominent party members. Trotsky later maintained that he had been wrong in opposing Lenin on the issue of the party. During these years, Trotsky began developing his theory of permanent revolution, and developed a close working relationship with Alexander Parvus in 1904–1907.[33]
During their split, Lenin referred to Trotsky as a "Judas",[34] a "scoundrel"[35] and a "swine".[36]
1905 revolution and trial (1905–1906)[edit]
The unrest and agitation against the Russian government came to a head in Saint Petersburg on 3 January 1905 (Julian Calendar), when a strike broke out at the Putilov Works in the city. This single strike grew into a general strike and by 7 January 1905, there were 140,000 strikers in Saint Petersburg.[37] On Sunday, 9 January 1905, Father Georgi Gapon led a peaceful procession of citizens through the streets to the Winter Palace to beseech the Tsar for food and relief from the oppressive government. The Palace Guard fired on the peaceful demonstration, resulting in the deaths of 1,000 demonstrators. Sunday, 9 January 1905, became known as Bloody Sunday.
Following the events of Bloody Sunday, Trotsky secretly returned to Russia in February 1905, by way of Kiev.[38] At first he wrote leaflets for an underground printing press in Kiev, but soon moved to the capital, Saint Petersburg. There he worked with both Bolsheviks, such as Central Committee member Leonid Krasin, and the local Menshevik committee, which he pushed in a more radical direction. The latter, however, were betrayed by a secret police agent in May, and Trotsky had to flee to rural Finland. There he worked on fleshing out his theory of permanent revolution.[39]
On 19 September 1905, the typesetters at the Sytin Print Works in Moscow went out on strike for shorter hours and higher pay. By the evening of 24 September, the workers at 50 other printing shops in Moscow were also on strike. On 2 October 1905, the typesetters in printing shops in Saint Petersburg decided to strike in support of the Moscow strikers. On 7 October 1905, the railway workers of the Moscow–Kazan Railway went out on strike.[40] Amid the resulting confusion, Trotsky returned from Finland to Saint Petersburg on 15 October 1905. On that day, Trotsky spoke before the Saint Petersburg Soviet Council of Workers Deputies, which was meeting at the Technological Institute in the city. Also attending were some 200,000 people crowded outside to hear the speeches—about 50% of all workers in Saint Petersburg.[41]
After his return, Trotsky and Parvus took over the newspaper Russian Gazette, increasing its circulation to 500,000. Trotsky also co-founded, together with Parvus and Julius Martov and other Mensheviks, Nachalo ("The Beginning"), which also proved to be a very successful newspaper in the revolutionary atmosphere of Saint Petersburg in 1905.[42]




Trotsky with Alexander Parvus (left) and Leo Deutsch (right) in prison in 1906


Just before Trotsky's return, the Mensheviks had independently come up with the same idea that Trotsky had: an elected non-party revolutionary organization representing the capital's workers, the first Soviet ("Council") of Workers. By the time of Trotsky's arrival, the Saint Petersburg Soviet was already functioning headed by Khrustalyev-Nosar (Georgy Nosar, alias Pyotr Khrustalyov). Khrustalyev-Nosar had been a compromise figure when elected as the head of the Saint Petersburg Soviet. Khrustalev-Nosar was a lawyer that stood above the political factions contained in the Soviet.[43] However, since his election, he proved to be very popular with the workers in spite of the Bolsheviks' original opposition to him. Khrustalev-Nosar became famous in his position as spokesman for the Saint Petersburg Soviet.[44] Indeed, to the outside world, Khrustalev-Nosar was the embodiment of the Saint Petersburg Soviet.[45] Trotsky joined the Soviet under the name "Yanovsky" (after the village he was born in, Yanovka) and was elected vice-chairman. He did much of the actual work at the Soviet and, after Khrustalev-Nosar's arrest on 26 November 1905, was elected its chairman. On 2 December, the Soviet issued a proclamation which included the following statement about the Tsarist government and its foreign debts:[46]

The autocracy never enjoyed the confidence of the people and was never granted any authority by the people. We have therefore decided not to allow the repayment of such loans as have been made by the Tsarist government when openly engaged in a war with the entire people.

The following day, the Soviet was surrounded by troops loyal to the government and the deputies were arrested.[47] Trotsky and other Soviet leaders were tried in 1906 on charges of supporting an armed rebellion. On 4 October 1906 he was convicted and sentenced to internal exile to Siberia.
Second emigration (1907–1914)[edit]
While en route to exile in Obdorsk, Siberia, in January 1907, Trotsky escaped at Berezov[48] and once again made his way to London. He attended the 5th Congress of the RSDLP. In October, he moved to Vienna, Austria-Hungary. For the next seven years, he often took part in the activities of the Austrian Social Democratic Party and, occasionally, of the German Social Democratic Party.
In Vienna, Trotsky became close to Adolph Joffe, his friend for the next 20 years, who introduced him to psychoanalysis.[49] In October 1908 he was asked to join the editorial staff of Pravda ("Truth"), a bi-weekly, Russian-language social democratic paper for Russian workers, which he co-edited with Joffe, Matvey Skobelev and Victor Kopp. It was smuggled into Russia.[50] The paper appeared very irregularly; only five issues were published in its first year.[50] Avoiding factional politics, the paper proved popular with Russian industrial workers. Both the Bolsheviks and the Mensheviks split multiple times after the failure of the 1905–1907 revolution. Money was very scarce for publication of Pravda. Trotsky approached the Russian Central Committee to seek financial backing for the newspaper throughout 1909.[51]
The Central Committee in 1910 was controlled by a majority of Bolsheviks. Lenin agreed to the financing of Pravda, but required a Bolshevik be appointed as co-editor of the paper.[52] When various Bolshevik and Menshevik factions tried to re-unite at the January 1910 RSDLP Central Committee meeting in Paris over Lenin's objections,[53] Trotsky's Pravda was made a party-financed 'central organ'. Lev Kamenev, Trotsky's brother-in-law, was added to the editorial board from the Bolsheviks, but the unification attempts failed in August 1910. Kamenev resigned from the board amid mutual recriminations. Trotsky continued publishing Pravda for another two years until it finally folded in April 1912.
The Bolsheviks started a new workers-oriented newspaper in Saint Petersburg on 22 April 1912, and also called it Pravda. Trotsky was so upset by what he saw as a usurpation of his newspaper's name that in April 1913 he wrote a letter to Nikolay Chkheidze, a Menshevik leader, bitterly denouncing Lenin and the Bolsheviks. Though he quickly got over the disagreement, the letter was intercepted by the Russian police, and a copy was put into their archives. Shortly after Lenin's death in 1924, the letter was found and publicized by Trotsky's opponents within the Communist Party to portray him as Lenin's enemy.
The 1910s was a period of heightened tension within the RSDLP, leading to numerous frictions between Trotsky, the Bolsheviks and the Mensheviks. The most serious disagreement that Trotsky and the Mensheviks had with Lenin at the time was over the issue of "expropriations",[54] i.e., armed robbery of banks and other companies by Bolshevik groups to procure money for the Party. These actions had been banned by the 5th Congress, but were continued by the Bolsheviks.
In January 1912, the majority of the Bolshevik faction, led by Lenin, as well as a few defecting Mensheviks, held a conference in Prague and decided to break away from the Russian Social Democratic Labour Party, and formed a new party, the Russian Social Democratic Labour Party (Bolsheviks). In response, Trotsky organized a "unification" conference of social democratic factions in Vienna in August 1912 (a.k.a. "The August Bloc") and tried to re-unite the Bolsheviks and Mensheviks into one party. The attempt was generally unsuccessful.
In Vienna, Trotsky continuously published articles in radical Russian and Ukrainian newspapers, such as Kievskaya Mysl, under a variety of pseudonyms, often using "Antid Oto". In September 1912, Kievskaya Mysl sent him to the Balkans as its war correspondent, where he covered the two Balkan Wars for the next year and became a close friend of Christian Rakovsky. The latter was later a leading Soviet politician and Trotsky's ally in the Soviet Communist Party. On 3 August 1914, at the outbreak of World War I, in which Austria-Hungary fought against the Russian Empire, Trotsky was forced to flee Vienna for neutral Switzerland to avoid arrest as a Russian émigré.
World War I (1914–1917)[edit]






This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (November 2010) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)







Leon Trotsky with his daughter Nina in 1915


The outbreak of World War I caused a sudden realignment within the RSDLP and other European social democratic parties over the issues of war, revolution, pacifism and internationalism. Within the RSDLP, Lenin, Trotsky and Martov advocated various internationalist anti-war positions, while Plekhanov and other social democrats (both Bolsheviks and Mensheviks) supported the Russian government to some extent. In Switzerland, Trotsky briefly worked within the Swiss Socialist Party, prompting it to adopt an internationalist resolution. He wrote a book opposing the war, The War and the International,[55] and the pro-war position taken by the European social democratic parties, primarily the German party. As a war correspondent for the Kievskaya Mysl, Trotsky moved to France on 19 November 1914. In January 1915 in Paris, he began editing (at first with Martov, who soon resigned as the paper moved to the left) Nashe Slovo ("Our Word"), an internationalist socialist newspaper. He adopted the slogan of "peace without indemnities or annexations, peace without conquerors or conquered." Lenin advocated Russia's defeat in the war and demanded a complete break with the Second International.
Trotsky attended the Zimmerwald Conference of anti-war socialists in September 1915 and advocated a middle course between those who, like Martov, would stay within the Second International at any cost and those who, like Lenin, would break with the Second International and form a Third International. The conference adopted the middle line proposed by Trotsky. At first opposed, in the end Lenin voted for Trotsky's resolution to avoid a split among anti-war socialists.[56]
On 31 March 1916, Trotsky was deported from France to Spain for his anti-war activities. Spanish authorities did not want him and deported him to the United States on 25 December 1916. He arrived in New York City on 13 January 1917. He stayed for nearly three months at 1522 Vyse Avenue in The Bronx. In New York he wrote articles for the local Russian language socialist newspaper, Novy Mir, and the Yiddish-language daily, Der Forverts (The Jewish Daily Forward), in translation. He also made speeches to Russian émigrés. He was officially earning some $15 a week.[citation needed]
Trotsky was living in New York City when the February Revolution of 1917 overthrew Tsar Nicholas II. He left New York on 27 March 1917, but his ship, the SS Kristianiafjord, was intercepted by British naval officials in Canada at Halifax, Nova Scotia. He was detained for a month at Amherst Internment Camp in Nova Scotia. While imprisoned in the camp, Trotsky established an increasing friendship with the workers and sailors amongst his fellow inmates, describing his month at the camp as "one continual mass meeting".[57] Trotsky's speeches and agitation incurred the wrath of German officer inmates who complained to the British camp commander, Colonel Morris, about Trotsky's "anti-patriotic" attitude.[57] Morris then forbade Trotsky to make any more public speeches, leading to 530 prisoners protesting and signing a petition against Morris' order.[57] Back in Russia, after initial hesitation and facing pressure from the workers' and peasants' soviets, the Russian foreign minister Pavel Milyukov was compelled to demand the release of Trotsky as a Russian citizen, and the British government freed him on 29 April 1917.[57]
He reached Russia on 17 May 1917. After his return, Trotsky substantially agreed with the Bolshevik position, but did not join them right away. Russian social democrats were split into at least six groups, and the Bolsheviks were waiting for the next party Congress to determine which factions to merge with. Trotsky temporarily joined the Mezhraiontsy, a regional social democratic organization in Saint Petersburg, and became one of its leaders. At the First Congress of Soviets in June, he was elected a member of the first All-Russian Central Executive Committee ("VTsIK") from the Mezhraiontsy faction.[citation needed]
After an unsuccessful pro-Bolshevik uprising in Petrograd, Trotsky was arrested on 7 August 1917. He was released 40 days later in the aftermath of the failed counter-revolutionary uprising by Lavr Kornilov. After the Bolsheviks gained a majority in the Petrograd Soviet, Trotsky was elected chairman on 25 September [O.S. 8 October] 1917.[58] He sided with Lenin against Grigory Zinoviev and Lev Kamenev when the Bolshevik Central Committee discussed staging an armed uprising, and he led the efforts to overthrow the Provisional Government headed by Aleksandr Kerensky.




Leon Trotsky in 1918.


The following summary of Trotsky's role in 1917 was written by Stalin in Pravda, 10 November 1918.[citation needed] Although this passage was quoted in Stalin's book The October Revolution (1934), it was expunged from Stalin's Works (1949).[citation needed]

All practical work in connection with the organization of the uprising was done under the immediate direction of Comrade Trotsky, the President of the Petrograd Soviet. It can be stated with certainty that the Party is indebted primarily and principally to Comrade Trotsky for the rapid going over of the garrison to the side of the Soviet and the efficient manner in which the work of the Military Revolutionary Committee was organized.

After the success of the uprising on 7–8 November 1917, Trotsky led the efforts to repel a counter-attack by Cossacks under General Pyotr Krasnov and other troops still loyal to the overthrown Provisional Government at Gatchina. Allied with Lenin, he defeated attempts by other Bolshevik Central Committee members (Zinoviev, Kamenev, Rykov, etc.) to share power with other socialist parties. By the end of 1917, Trotsky was unquestionably the second man in the Bolshevik Party after Lenin. He overshadowed the ambitious Zinoviev, who had been Lenin's top lieutenant over the previous decade, but whose star appeared to be fading. This reversal of position contributed to continuing competition and enmity between the two men, which lasted until 1926 and did much to destroy them both.[citation needed]
Russian Revolution and aftermath[edit]
Commissar for Foreign Affairs and Brest-Litovsk (1917–1918)[edit]
After the Bolsheviks came to power, Trotsky became the People's Commissar for Foreign Affairs and published the secret treaties previously signed by the Triple Entente that detailed plans for post-war reallocation of colonies and redrawing state borders.




White Army propaganda poster depicting Trotsky as Satan wearing a Pentagram, and portraying the Bolsheviks' Chinese supporters as mass murderers. The caption reads, "Peace and Liberty in Sovdepiya".


Trotsky led the Soviet delegation during the peace negotiations in Brest-Litovsk from 22 December 1917 to 10 February 1918. At that time the Soviet government was split on the issue. Left Communists, led by Nikolai Bukharin, continued to believe that there could be no peace between a Soviet republic and a capitalist country and that only a revolutionary war leading to a pan-European Soviet republic would bring a durable peace. They cited the successes of the newly formed (15 January 1918) voluntary Red Army against Polish forces of Gen. Józef Dowbor-Muśnicki in Belarus, White forces in the Don region, and newly independent Ukrainian forces as proof that the Red Army could repel German forces, especially if propaganda and asymmetrical warfare were used. They did not mind holding talks with the Germans as a means of exposing German imperial ambitions (territorial gains, reparations, etc.) in the hope of accelerating the hoped−for Soviet revolution in the West, but they were dead set against signing any peace treaty. In case of a German ultimatum, they advocated proclaiming a revolutionary war against Germany in order to inspire Russian and European workers to fight for socialism. This opinion was shared by Left Socialist Revolutionaries, who were then the Bolsheviks' junior partners in a coalition government.
Lenin, who had earlier hoped for a speedy Soviet revolution in Germany and other parts of Europe, quickly decided that the imperial government of Germany was still firmly in control and that, without a strong Russian military, an armed conflict with Germany would lead to a collapse of the Soviet government in Russia. He agreed with the Left Communists that ultimately a pan-European Soviet revolution would solve all problems, but until then the Bolsheviks had to stay in power. Lenin did not mind prolonging the negotiating process for maximum propaganda effect, but, from January 1918 on, advocated signing a separate peace treaty if faced with a German ultimatum. Trotsky's position was between these two Bolshevik factions. Like Lenin, he admitted that the old Russian military, inherited from the monarchy and the Provisional Government and in advanced stages of decomposition, was unable to fight:[59]

That we could no longer fight was perfectly clear to me and that the newly formed Red Guard and Red Army detachments were too small and poorly trained to resist the Germans.

But he agreed with the Left Communists that a separate peace treaty with an imperialist power would be a terrible morale and material blow to the Soviet government, negate all its military and political successes of 1917 and 1918, resurrect the notion that the Bolsheviks secretly allied with the German government, and cause an upsurge of internal resistance. He argued that any German ultimatum should be refused, and that this might well lead to an uprising in Germany, or at least inspire German soldiers to disobey their officers since any German offensive would be a naked grab for territories. He wrote in 1925:[60]

We began peace negotiations in the hope of arousing the workmen's party of Germany and Austria-Hungary as well as of the Entente countries. For this reason we were obliged to delay the negotiations as long as possible to give the European workman time to understand the main fact of the Soviet revolution itself and particularly its peace policy. But there was the other question: Can the Germans still fight? Are they in a position to begin an attack on the revolution that will explain the cessation of the war? How can we find out the state of mind of the German soldiers, how to fathom it?





Soviet delegation with Trotsky greeted by German officers at Brest-Litovsk, 8 January 1918


Throughout January and February 1918, Lenin's position was supported by 7 members of the Bolshevik Central Committee and Bukharin's by 4. Trotsky had 4 votes (his own, Felix Dzerzhinsky's, Nikolai Krestinsky's and Adolph Joffe's) and, since he held the balance of power, he was able to pursue his policy in Brest-Litovsk. When he could no longer delay the negotiations, he withdrew from the talks on 10 February 1918, refusing to sign on Germany's harsh terms. After a brief hiatus, the Central Powers notified the Soviet government that they would no longer observe the truce after 17 February. At this point Lenin again argued that the Soviet government had done all it could to explain its position to Western workers and that it was time to accept the terms. Trotsky refused to support Lenin since he was waiting to see whether German workers would rebel and whether German soldiers would refuse to follow orders.[citation needed]
Germany resumed military operations on 18 February. Within a day, it became clear that the German army was capable of conducting offensive operations and that Red Army detachments, which were relatively small, poorly organized and poorly led, were no match for it. In the evening of 18 February 1918, Trotsky and his supporters in the committee abstained and Lenin's proposal was accepted 7–4. The Soviet government sent a radiogram to the German side accepting the final Brest-Litovsk peace terms.[61]
Germany did not respond for three days, and continued its offensive encountering little resistance. The response arrived on 21 February, but the proposed terms were so harsh that even Lenin briefly thought that the Soviet government had no choice but to fight. But in the end, the committee again voted 7–4 on 23 February 1918; the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk was signed on 3 March and ratified on 15 March 1918. Since Trotsky was so closely associated with the policy previously followed by the Soviet delegation at Brest-Litovsk, he resigned from his position as Commissar for Foreign Affairs in order to remove a potential obstacle to the new policy.
Head of the Red Army (spring 1918)[edit]




Trotsky with Vladimir Lenin and Klim Voroshilov among soldiers in Petrograd in 1921.


The failure of the recently formed Red Army to resist the German offensive in February 1918 revealed its weaknesses: insufficient numbers, lack of knowledgeable officers, and near absence of coordination and subordination. Celebrated and feared Baltic Fleet sailors, one of the bastions of the new regime led by Pavel Dybenko, fled from the German army at Narva. The notion that the Soviet state could have an effective voluntary or militia type military was seriously undermined.[citation needed]
Trotsky was one of the first Bolshevik leaders to recognize the problem, and he pushed for the formation of a military council of former Russian generals that would function as an advisory body. Lenin and the Bolshevik Central Committee agreed on 4 March to create the Supreme Military Council, headed by former chief of the imperial General Staff Mikhail Bonch-Bruevich.
The entire Bolshevik leadership of the Red Army, including People's Commissar (defense minister) Nikolai Podvoisky and commander-in-chief Nikolai Krylenko, protested vigorously and eventually resigned. They believed that the Red Army should consist only of dedicated revolutionaries, rely on propaganda and force, and have elected officers. They viewed former imperial officers and generals as potential traitors who should be kept out of the new military, much less put in charge of it. Their views continued to be popular with many Bolsheviks throughout most of the Russian Civil War and their supporters, including Podvoisky, who became one of Trotsky's deputies, were a constant thorn in Trotsky's side. The discontent with Trotsky's policies of strict discipline, conscription and reliance on carefully supervised non-Communist military experts eventually led to the Military Opposition (Russian: Военная оппозиция), which was active within the Communist Party in late 1918–1919.[62]
On 13 March 1918, Trotsky's resignation as Commissar for Foreign Affairs was officially accepted, and he was appointed People's Commissar of Army and Navy Affairs – in place of Podvoisky – and chairman of the Supreme Military Council. The post of commander-in-chief was abolished, and Trotsky gained full control of the Red Army, responsible only to the Communist Party leadership, whose Left Socialist Revolutionary allies had left the government over Brest-Litovsk. With the help of his deputy Ephraim Sklyansky, Trotsky spent the rest of the Civil War transforming the Red Army from a ragtag network of small and fiercely independent detachments into a large and disciplined military machine, through forced conscription, party-controlled blocking squads, compulsory obedience and officers chosen by the leadership instead of the rank and file. He defended these positions throughout his life.
Civil War (1918–1920)[edit]
Main article: Russian Civil War
1918[edit]
The military situation soon tested Trotsky's managerial and organization-building skills. In May–June 1918, the Czechoslovak Legions en route from European Russia to Vladivostok rose against the Soviet government. This left the Bolsheviks with the loss of most of the country's territory, an increasingly well-organized resistance by Russian anti-Communist forces (usually referred to as the White Army after their best-known component) and widespread defection by the military experts whom Trotsky relied on.
Trotsky and the government responded with a full-fledged mobilization, which increased the size of the Red Army from fewer than 300,000 in May 1918 to one million in October, and an introduction of political commissars into the army. The latter had the task of ensuring the loyalty of military experts (mostly former officers in the imperial army) and co-signing their orders. Trotsky regarded the organization of the Red Army as built on the ideas of the October Revolution. As he later wrote in his autobiography:[63]

An army cannot be built without reprisals. Masses of men cannot be led to death unless the army command has the death-penalty in its arsenal. So long as those malicious tailless apes that are so proud of their technical achievements—the animals that we call men—will build armies and wage wars, the command will always be obliged to place the soldiers between the possible death in the front and the inevitable one in the rear. And yet armies are not built on fear. The Tsar's army fell to pieces not because of any lack of reprisals. In his attempt to save it by restoring the death-penalty, Kerensky only finished it. Upon the ashes of the great war, the Bolsheviks created a new army. These facts demand no explanation for any one who has even the slightest knowledge of the language of history. The strongest cement in the new army was the ideas of the October revolution, and the train supplied the front with this cement.

In response to Fanya Kaplan's failed assassination of Lenin on 30 August 1918, and to the successful assassination of the Petrograd Cheka chief Moisei Uritsky on 17 August 1918, the Bolsheviks instructed Felix Dzerzhinsky to commence a Red Terror, announced in the 1 September 1918 issue of the Krasnaya Gazeta (Red Gazette).[64] Regarding the Red Terror Trotsky wrote:

The bourgeoisie today is a falling class... We are forced to tear it off, to chop it away. The Red Terror is a weapon utilized against a class, doomed to destruction, which does not wish to perish. If the White Terror can only retard the historical rise of the proletariat, the Red Terror hastens the destruction of the bourgeoisie.[65]

In dealing with deserters, Trotsky often appealed to them politically, arousing them with the ideas of the Revolution.

In the provinces of Kaluga, Voronezh, and Ryazan, tens of thousands of young peasants had failed to answer the first recruiting summons by the Soviets ... The war commissariat of Ryazan succeeded in gathering in some fifteen thousand of such deserters. While passing through Ryazan, I decided to take a look at them. Some of our men tried to dissuade me. "Something might happen," they warned me. But everything went off beautifully. The men were called out of their barracks. "Comrade-deserters – come to the meeting. Comrade Trotsky has come to speak to you." They ran out excited, boisterous, as curious as schoolboys. I had imagined them much worse, and they had imagined me as more terrible. In a few minutes, I was surrounded by a huge crowd of unbridled, utterly undisciplined, but not at all hostile men. The "comrade-deserters" were looking at me with such curiosity that it seemed as if their eyes would pop out of their heads. I climbed on a table there in the yard, and spoke to them for about an hour and a half. It was a most responsive audience. I tried to raise them in their own eyes; concluding, I asked them to lift their hands in token of their loyalty to the revolution. The new ideas infected them before my very eyes. They were genuinely enthusiastic; they followed me to the automobile, devoured me with their eyes, not fearfully, as before, but rapturously, and shouted at the tops of their voices. They would hardly let me go. I learned afterward, with some pride, that one of the best ways to educate them was to remind them: "What did you promise Comrade Trotsky?" Later on, regiments of Ryazan "deserters" fought well at the fronts.

Given the lack of manpower and the 16 opposing foreign armies, Trotsky also insisted on the use of former Tsarist officers as military specialists within the Red Army, in combination with Bolshevik political commissars to ensure the revolutionary nature of the Red Army. Lenin commented on this:

When Comrade Trotsky informed me recently that the number of officers of the old army employed by our War Department runs into several tens of thousands, I perceived concretely where the secret of using our enemy lay, how to compel those who had opposed communism to build it, how to build communism with the bricks which the capitalists had chosen to hurl against us! We have no other bricks! And so, we must compel the bourgeois experts, under the leadership of the proletariat, to build up our edifice with these bricks. This is what is difficult; but this is the pledge of victory.[66]

In September 1918, the Bolshevik government, facing continuous military difficulties, declared what amounted to martial law and reorganized the Red Army. The Supreme Military Council was abolished and the position of commander-in-chief was restored, filled by the commander of the Latvian Riflemen, Ioakim Vatsetis (a.k.a. Jukums Vācietis), who had formerly led the Eastern Front against the Czechoslovak Legions. Vatsetis took charge of day-to-day operations of the army while Trotsky became chairman of the newly formed Revolutionary Military Council of the Republic and retained overall control of the military. Trotsky and Vatsetis had clashed earlier in 1918, while Vatsetis and Trotsky's adviser Mikhail Bonch-Bruevich were also on unfriendly terms. Nevertheless, Trotsky eventually established a working relationship with the often prickly Vatsetis.
The reorganization caused yet another conflict between Trotsky and Stalin in late September. Trotsky appointed former imperial general Pavel Pavlovich Sytin to command the Southern Front, but in early October 1918 Stalin refused to accept him and so he was recalled[by whom?] from the front. Lenin and Yakov Sverdlov tried to make Trotsky and Stalin reconcile, but their meeting proved unsuccessful.
1919[edit]




Trotsky with troops at the Polish front, 1919.


Throughout late 1918 and early 1919, there were a number of attacks on Trotsky's leadership of the Red Army, including veiled accusations in newspaper articles inspired by Stalin and a direct attack by the Military Opposition at the VIIIth Party Congress in March 1919. On the surface, he weathered them successfully and was elected one of only five full members of the first Politburo after the Congress. But he later wrote:[62]

It is no wonder that my military work created so many enemies for me. I did not look to the side, I elbowed away those who interfered with military success, or in the haste of the work trod on the toes of the unheeding and was too busy even to apologize. Some people remember such things. The dissatisfied and those whose feelings had been hurt found their way to Stalin or Zinoviev, for these two also nourished hurts.

In mid-1919 the dissatisfied had an opportunity to mount a serious challenge to Trotsky's leadership: the Red Army grew from 800,000 to 3,000,000, and fought simultaneously on sixteen fronts.[67] The Red Army had defeated the White Army's spring offensive in the east and was about to cross the Ural Mountains and enter Siberia in pursuit of Admiral Alexander Kolchak's forces. But in the south, General Anton Denikin's White Russian forces advanced, and the situation deteriorated rapidly. On 6 June commander-in-chief Vatsetis ordered the Eastern Front to stop the offensive so that he could use its forces in the south. But the leadership of the Eastern Front, including its commander Sergey Kamenev (a former colonel of the Imperial army), and Eastern Front Revolutionary Military Council members Ivar Smilga, Mikhail Lashevich and Sergey Gusev vigorously protested and wanted to keep the emphasis on the Eastern Front. They insisted that it was vital to capture Siberia before the onset of winter and that once Kolchak's forces were broken, many more divisions would be freed up for the Southern Front. Trotsky, who had earlier had conflicts with the leadership of the Eastern Front, including a temporary removal of Kamenev in May 1919, supported Vatsetis.
At the 3–4 July Central Committee meeting, after a heated exchange the majority supported Kamenev and Smilga against Vatsetis and Trotsky. Trotsky's plan was rejected and he was much criticized for various alleged shortcomings in his leadership style, much of it of a personal nature. Stalin used this opportunity to pressure Lenin[68] to dismiss Trotsky from his post. But when Trotsky offered his resignation on 5 July, the Politburo and the Orgburo of the Central Committee unanimously rejected it.
However, some significant changes to the leadership of the Red Army were made. Trotsky was temporarily sent to the Southern Front, while the work in Moscow was informally coordinated by Smilga. Most members of the Revolutionary Military Council who were not involved in its day-to-day operations were relieved of their duties on 8 July, and new members, including Smilga, were added. The same day, while Trotsky was in the south, Vatsetis was suddenly arrested by the Cheka on suspicion of involvement in an anti-Soviet plot, and replaced by Sergey Kamenev. After a few weeks in the south, Trotsky returned to Moscow and resumed control of the Red Army. A year later, Smilga and Tukhachevsky were defeated during the Battle of Warsaw, but Trotsky refused this opportunity to pay Smilga back, which earned him Smilga's friendship and later support during the intra-Party battles of the 1920s.[69]
By October 1919, the government was in the worst crisis of the Civil War: Denikin's troops approached Tula and Moscow from the south, and General Nikolay Yudenich's troops approached Petrograd from the west. Lenin decided that since it was more important to defend Moscow, Petrograd would have to be abandoned. Trotsky argued[70] that Petrograd needed to be defended, at least in part to prevent Estonia and Finland from intervening. In a rare reversal, Trotsky was supported by Stalin and Zinoviev and prevailed against Lenin in the Central Committee. He immediately went to Petrograd, whose leadership headed by Zinoviev he found demoralized, and organized its defense, sometimes personally stopping fleeing soldiers. By 22 October the Red Army was on the offensive and in early November, Yudenich's troops were driven back to Estonia, where they were disarmed and interned. Trotsky was awarded the Order of the Red Banner for his actions in Petrograd.
1920[edit]




A Polish poster depicts Trotsky on a pile of skulls and holding a bloody knife, during the Polish-Soviet War of 1920


With the defeat of Denikin and Yudenich in late 1919, the Soviet government's emphasis shifted to the economy. Trotsky spent the winter of 1919–1920 in the Urals region trying to restart its economy. Based on his experiences, he proposed abandoning the policies of War Communism,[71] which included confiscating grain from peasants, and partially restoring the grain market. Still committed to War Communism, Lenin rejected his proposal. He put Trotsky in charge of the country's railroads (while retaining overall control of the Red Army), which he directed should be militarized in the spirit of War Communism. It was not until early 1921, due to economic collapse and social uprisings, that Lenin and the rest of the Bolshevik leadership abandoned War Communism in favor of the New Economic Policy.
In early 1920, Soviet–Polish tensions eventually led to the Polish–Soviet War. In the run-up and during the war, Trotsky argued[68] that the Red Army was exhausted and the Soviet government should sign a peace treaty with Poland as soon as possible. He did not believe that the Red Army would find much support in Poland proper. Lenin later wrote that he and other Bolshevik leaders believed the Red Army's successes in the Russian Civil War and against the Poles meant "The defensive period of the war with worldwide imperialism was over, and we could, and had the obligation to, exploit the military situation to launch an offensive war."[72]
The Red Army was defeated by Poland and the offensive was turned back during the Battle of Warsaw in August 1920, in part because of Stalin's failure to obey Trotsky's orders in the run-up to the decisive engagements. Back in Moscow, Trotsky again argued for a peace treaty and this time prevailed.
Trade union debate (1920–1921)[edit]
In late 1920, after the Bolsheviks won the Civil War and before the Eighth and Ninth Congress of Soviets, the Communist Party had a heated and increasingly acrimonious debate over the role of trade unions in the Soviet Union. The discussion split the party into many "platforms" (factions), including Lenin's, Trotsky's and Bukharin's; Bukharin eventually merged his with Trotsky's. Smaller, more radical factions like the Workers' Opposition (headed by Alexander Shlyapnikov) and the Group of Democratic Centralism were particularly active.
Trotsky's position formed while he led a special commission on the Soviet transportation system, Tsektran. He was appointed there to rebuild the rail system ruined by the Civil War. Being the Commissar of War and a revolutionary military leader, he saw a need to create a militarized "production atmosphere" by incorporating trade unions directly into the State apparatus. His unyielding stance was that in a worker's state the workers should have nothing to fear from the state, and the State should fully control the unions. In the Ninth Party Congress he argued for "such a regime under which each worker feels himself to be a soldier of labor who cannot freely dispose of himself; if he is ordered transferred, he must execute that order; if he does not do so, he will be a deserter who should be punished. Who will execute this? The trade union. It will create a new regime. That is the militarization of the working class."[citation needed] Lenin sharply criticised Trotsky and accused him of "bureaucratically nagging the trade unions" and of staging "factional attacks". His view did not focus on State control as much as the concern that a new relationship was needed between the State and the rank-and-file workers. He said, "Introduction of genuine labor discipline is conceived only if the whole mass of participants in productions take a conscious part in the fulfillment of these tasks. This cannot be achieved by bureaucratic methods and orders from above." This was a debate that Lenin thought the party could not afford. His frustration with Trotsky was used by Stalin and Zinoviev with their support for Lenin's position, to improve their standing within the Bolshevik leadership at Trotsky's expense.
Disagreements threatened to get out of hand, and many Bolsheviks, including Lenin, feared that the party would splinter. The Central Committee was split almost evenly between Lenin's and Trotsky's supporters, with all three Secretaries of the Central Committee (Krestinsky, Yevgeny Preobrazhensky and Leonid Serebryakov) supporting Trotsky.




Red Army troops attack Kronstadt sailors in March 1921.


At a meeting of his faction at the Tenth Party Congress in March 1921, Lenin's faction won a decisive victory, and a number of Trotsky's supporters (including all three secretaries of the Central Committee) lost their leadership positions. Krestinsky was replaced as a member of the Politburo by Zinoviev, who had supported Lenin. Krestinsky's place in the secretariat was taken by Vyacheslav Molotov. The congress also adopted a secret resolution on "Party unity", which banned factions within the Party except during pre-Congress discussions. The resolution was later published and used by Stalin against Trotsky and other opponents. At the end of the Tenth Congress, after peace negotiations had failed, Trotsky gave the order for the suppression of the Kronstadt rebellion, the last major revolt against Bolshevik rule.[73]
Years later, anarchist Emma Goldman and others criticized Trotsky's actions as Commissar for War for his role in the suppression of the rebellion, and argued that he ordered unjustified incarcerations and executions of political opponents such as anarchists, although Trotsky did not participate in the actual suppression.[74][75] Some Trotskyists, most notably Abbie Bakan, have argued that the claim that the Kronstadt rebels were "counterrevolutionary" has been supported by evidence of White Army and French government support for the Kronstadt sailors' March rebellion.[76] Other historians, most notably Paul Avrich, claimed the evidence did not point towards this conclusion, and saw the Kronstadt Rebellion as spontaneous.[77]
Trotsky's contribution to the Russian Revolution[edit]
Vladimir Cherniaev, a leading Russian historian, sums up Trotsky's main contributions to the Russian Revolution:

Trotsky bears a great deal of responsibility both for the victory of the Red Army in the civil war, and for the establishment of a one-party authoritarian state with its apparatus for ruthlessly suppressing dissent... He was an ideologist and practitioner of the Red Terror. He despised 'bourgeois democracy'; he believed that spinelessness and soft-heartedness would destroy the revolution, and that the suppression of the propertied classes and political opponents would clear the historical arena for socialism. He was the initiator of concentration camps, compulsory 'labour camps,' and the militarization of labour, and the state takeover of trade unions. Trotsky was implicated in many practices which would become standard in the Stalin era, including summary executions.[78]

Historian Geoffrey Swain argues that:

The Bolsheviks triumphed in the Civil War because of Trotsky's ability to work with military specialists, because of the style of work he introduced where widescale consultation was followed through by swift and determined action.[79]

Lenin said in 1921 that Trotsky was "in love with organization," but in working politics, "he has not got a clue." Swain explains the paradox by arguing that Trotsky was not good at teamwork; he was a loner who had mostly worked as a journalist, not as a professional revolutionary like the others.[80]
Lenin's illness (1922–1923)[edit]
In late 1921, Lenin's health deteriorated, he was absent from Moscow for longer periods of time. He had three strokes between 25 May 1922 and 9 March 1923, which caused paralysis, loss of speech and finally death on 21 January 1924. With Lenin increasingly sidelined throughout 1922, Stalin was elevated to the newly created position of the Central Committee general secretary.[c] Zinoviev and Lev Kamenev[d] became part of the troika (triumvirate) formed by Stalin to ensure that Trotsky, publicly the number-two man in the country and Lenin's heir presumptive, would not succeed Lenin.
The rest of the recently expanded Politburo (Rykov, Mikhail Tomsky, Bukharin) was at first uncommitted, but eventually joined the troika. Stalin's power of patronage[e] in his capacity as general secretary clearly played a role, but Trotsky and his supporters later concluded that a more fundamental reason was the process of slow bureaucratization of the Soviet regime once the extreme conditions of the Civil War were over. Much of the Bolshevik elite wanted 'normalcy,' while Trotsky was personally and politically personified as representing a turbulent revolutionary period that they would much rather leave behind.
Although the exact sequence of events is unclear, evidence suggests that at first the troika nominated Trotsky to head second-rate government departments (e.g., Gokhran, the State Depository for Valuables.)[81]) When Trotsky predictably refused, they tried to use this as an excuse to oust him. At this time there was speculation about Trotsky's health and whether he had epilepsy.[citation needed]
When, in mid-July 1922, Kamenev wrote a letter to the recovering Lenin to the effect that "(the Central Committee) is throwing or is ready to throw a good cannon overboard," Lenin was shocked and responded:[82]

Throwing Trotsky overboard – surely you are hinting at that, it is impossible to interpret it otherwise – is the height of stupidity. If you do not consider me already hopelessly foolish, how can you think of that????

From then until his final stroke, Lenin spent much of his time trying to devise a way to prevent a split within the Communist Party leadership, which was reflected in Lenin's Testament. As part of this effort, on 11 September 1922 Lenin proposed that Trotsky become his deputy at the Council of People's Commissars (Sovnarkom). The Politburo approved the proposal, but Trotsky "categorically refused".[83]
In late 1922, Trotsky secured an alliance with Lenin against Stalin and the emerging Soviet bureaucracy.[84] Stalin had recently engineered the creation of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (USSR), further centralizing state control. The alliance proved effective on the issue of foreign trade[f] but was hindered by Lenin's progressing illness.
In January 1923, Lenin amended his Testament to suggest that Stalin should be removed as the party's general secretary, while also mildly criticizing Trotsky and other Bolshevik leaders. The relationship between Stalin and Lenin had broken down completely by this time, as was demonstrated during an event where Stalin crudely insulted Lenin's wife, Nadezhda Krupskaya. In March 1923, days before his third stroke, Lenin asked Trotsky to denounce Stalin and his so-called "Great-Russian nationalistic campaign" at the XIIth Party Congress.
At the XIIth Party Congress in April 1923, however, just after Lenin's final stroke, Trotsky did not raise the issue.[85] Instead, he made a speech about intra-party democracy while avoiding any direct confrontation of the troika.[g] Stalin had prepared for the congress by replacing many local party delegates with those loyal to him, mostly at the expense of Zinoviev and Kamenev's backers.[86] The delegates, most of whom were unaware of the divisions within the Politburo, gave Trotsky a standing ovation. This upset the troika, already infuriated by Karl Radek's article, "Leon Trotsky – Organizer of Victory"[h] published in Pravda on 14 March 1923. Stalin delivered the key reports on organizational structure and questions of nationality; while Zinoviev delivered the Central Committee political report, traditionally Lenin's prerogative. Among the resolutions adopted by the XIIth Congress were those calling for greater democracy within the Party, but these were vague and remained unimplemented.
In mid-1923 the troika had Trotsky's friend and supporter Christian Rakovsky removed from his post as head of the Ukrainian government (USSR Radnarkom) and sent to London as ambassador. When regional leaders in Ukraine protested against Rakovsky's reassignment, they too were reassigned to various posts all over the Soviet Union.[citation needed]
Left opposition (1923–1924)[edit]




Trotsky in a 1922 cubist portrait by Yury Annenkov, a version of this appeared on one of the earliest covers of Time magazine.


Starting in mid-1923, the Soviet economy ran into significant difficulties, which led to numerous strikes countrywide. Two secret groups within the Communist Party, "Workers' Truth" and "Workers' Group", were uncovered and suppressed by the Soviet secret police. On 8 October 1923 Trotsky sent a letter to the Central Committee and the Central Control Commission, attributing these difficulties to lack of intra-Party democracy. Trotsky wrote:

In the fiercest moment of War Communism, the system of appointment within the party did not have one tenth of the extent that it has now. Appointment of the secretaries of provincial committees is now the rule. That creates for the secretary a position essentially independent of the local organization. [...] The bureaucratization of the party apparatus has developed to unheard-of proportions by means of the method of secretarial selection. [...] There has been created a very broad stratum of party workers, entering into the apparatus of the government of the party, who completely renounce their own party opinion, at least the open expression of it, as though assuming that the secretarial hierarchy is the apparatus which creates party opinion and party decisions. Beneath this stratum, abstaining from their own opinions, there lies the broad mass of the party, before whom every decision stands in the form of a summons or a command.[88]

Other senior communists who had similar concerns sent The Declaration of 46 to the Central Committee on 15 October in which they wrote:

[...] we observe an ever progressing, barely disguised division of the party into a secretarial hierarchy and into "laymen", into professional party functionaries, chosen from above, and the other party masses, who take no part in social life. [...] free discussion within the party has virtually disappeared, party public opinion has been stifled. [...] it is the secretarial hierarchy, the party hierarchy which to an ever greater degree chooses the delegates to the conferences and congresses, which to an ever greater degree are becoming the executive conferences of this hierarchy.

Although the text of these letters remained secret at the time, they had a significant effect on the Party leadership and prompted a partial retreat by the troika and its supporters on the issue of intra-Party democracy, notably in Zinoviev's Pravda article published on 7 November. Throughout November, the troika tried to come up with a compromise to placate, or at least temporarily neutralize, Trotsky and his supporters. (Their task was made easier by the fact that Trotsky was sick in November and December.) The first draft of the resolution was rejected by Trotsky, which led to the formation of a special group consisting of Stalin, Trotsky and Kamenev, which was charged with drafting a mutually acceptable compromise. On 5 December, the Politburo and the Central Control Commission unanimously adopted the group's final draft as its resolution. On 8 December Trotsky published an open letter, in which he expounded on the recently adopted resolution's ideas. The troika used his letter as an excuse to launch a campaign against Trotsky, accusing him of factionalism, setting "the youth against the fundamental generation of old revolutionary Bolsheviks"[89] and other sins. Trotsky defended his position in a series of seven letters which were collected as The New Course in January 1924.[90] The illusion of a "monolithic Bolshevik leadership" was thus shattered and a lively intra-Party discussion ensued, both in local Party organizations and in the pages of Pravda. The discussion lasted most of December and January until the XIIIth Party Conference of 16–18 January 1924. Those who opposed the Central Committee's position in the debate were thereafter referred to as members of the Left Opposition.
Since the troika controlled the Party apparatus through Stalin's Secretariat and Pravda through its editor Bukharin, it was able to direct the discussion and the process of delegate selection. Although Trotsky's position prevailed within the Red Army and Moscow universities and received about half the votes in the Moscow Party organization, it was defeated elsewhere, and the Conference was packed with pro-troika delegates. In the end, only three delegates voted for Trotsky's position, and the Conference denounced "Trotskyism"[i] as a "petty bourgeois deviation". After the Conference, a number of Trotsky's supporters, especially in the Red Army's Political Directorate, were removed from leading positions or reassigned. Nonetheless, Trotsky kept all of his posts, and the troika was careful to emphasize that the debate was limited to Trotsky's "mistakes" and that removing Trotsky from the leadership was out of the question. In reality, Trotsky had already been cut off from the decision-making process.
Immediately after the Conference, Trotsky left for a Caucasian resort to recover from his prolonged illness. On his way, he learned about Lenin's death on 21 January 1924. He was about to return when a follow up telegram from Stalin arrived, giving an incorrect date of the scheduled funeral, which would have made it impossible for Trotsky to return in time. Many commentators speculated after the fact that Trotsky's absence from Moscow in the days following Lenin's death contributed to his eventual loss to Stalin, although Trotsky generally discounted the significance of his absence.
After Lenin's death (1924)[edit]






This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (July 2010) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



There was little overt political disagreement within the Soviet leadership throughout most of 1924. On the surface, Trotsky remained the most prominent and popular Bolshevik leader, although his "mistakes" were often alluded to by troika partisans. Behind the scenes, he was completely cut off from the decision-making process. Politburo meetings were pure formalities since all key decisions were made ahead of time by the troika and its supporters. Trotsky's control over the military was undermined by reassigning his deputy, Ephraim Sklyansky, and appointing Mikhail Frunze, who was being groomed to take Trotsky's place.
At the thirteenth Party Congress in May, Trotsky delivered a conciliatory speech:[91]

None of us desires or is able to dispute the will of the Party. Clearly, the Party is always right... We can only be right with and by the Party, for history has provided no other way of being in the right. The English have a saying, "My country, right or wrong", whether it is in the right or in the wrong, it is my country. We have much better historical justification in saying whether it is right or wrong in certain individual concrete cases, it is my party... And if the Party adopts a decision which one or other of us thinks unjust, he will say, just or unjust, it is my party, and I shall support the consequences of the decision to the end.[92]

The attempt at reconciliation, however, did not stop troika supporters from taking potshots at him.
In the meantime, the Left Opposition, which had coagulated somewhat unexpectedly in late 1923 and lacked a definite platform aside from general dissatisfaction with the intra-Party "regime", began to crystallize. It lost some less dedicated members to the harassment by the troika, but it also began formulating a program. Economically, the Left Opposition and its theoretician Yevgeni Preobrazhensky came out against further development of capitalist elements in the Soviet economy and in favor of faster industrialization. That put them at odds with Bukharin and Rykov, the "Right" group within the Party, who supported the troika at the time. On the question of world revolution, Trotsky and Karl Radek saw a period of stability in Europe while Stalin and Zinoviev confidently predicted an "acceleration" of revolution in Western Europe in 1924. On the theoretical plane, Trotsky remained committed to the Bolshevik idea that the Soviet Union could not create a true socialist society in the absence of the world revolution, while Stalin gradually came up with a policy of building 'Socialism in One Country'. These ideological divisions provided much of the intellectual basis for the political divide between Trotsky and the Left Opposition on the one hand and Stalin and his allies on the other.
At the thirteenth Congress Kamenev and Zinoviev helped Stalin defuse Lenin's Testament, which belatedly came to the surface. But just after the congress, the troika, always an alliance of convenience, showed signs of weakness. Stalin began making poorly veiled accusations about Zinoviev and Kamenev. Yet in October 1924, Trotsky published Lessons of October,[93] an extensive summary of the events of the 1917 revolution. In it, he described Zinoviev's and Kamenev's opposition to the Bolshevik seizure of power in 1917, something that the two would have preferred left unmentioned. This started a new round of intra-party struggle, which became known as the Literary Discussion, with Zinoviev and Kamenev again allied with Stalin against Trotsky. Their criticism of Trotsky was concentrated in three areas:

Trotsky's disagreements and conflicts with Lenin and the Bolsheviks prior to 1917.
Trotsky's alleged distortion of the events of 1917 in order to emphasize his role and diminish the roles played by other Bolsheviks.
Trotsky's harsh treatment of his subordinates and other alleged mistakes during the Russian Civil War.

Trotsky was again sick and unable to respond while his opponents mobilized all of their resources to denounce him. They succeeded in damaging his military reputation so much that he was forced to resign as People's Commissar of Army and Fleet Affairs and Chairman of the Revolutionary Military Council on 6 January 1925. Zinoviev demanded Trotsky's expulsion from the Communist Party, but Stalin refused to go along and played the role of a moderate. Trotsky kept his Politburo seat, but was effectively put on probation.
A year in the wilderness (1925)[edit]
1925 was a difficult year for Trotsky. After the bruising Literary Discussion and losing his Red Army posts, he was effectively unemployed throughout the winter and spring. In May 1925, he was given three posts: chairman of the Concessions Committee, head of the electro-technical board, and chairman of the scientific-technical board of industry. Trotsky wrote in My Life[94] that he "was taking a rest from politics" and "naturally plunged into the new line of work up to my ears"[95] but some contemporary accounts paint a picture of a remote and distracted man.[96] Later in the year, Trotsky resigned his two technical positions (maintaining Stalin-instigated interference and sabotage) and concentrated on his work in the Concessions Committee.
In one of the few political developments that affected Trotsky in 1925, the circumstances surrounding the controversy around Lenin's Testament were described by American Marxist Max Eastman in his book Since Lenin Died (1925). The Soviet leadership denounced Eastman's account and used party discipline to force Trotsky to write an article denying Eastman's version of the events.[citation needed]
In the meantime, the troika finally broke up. Bukharin and Rykov sided with Stalin while Krupskaya and Soviet Commissar of Finance Grigory Sokolnikov aligned with Zinoviev and Kamenev. The struggle became open at the September 1925 meeting of the Central Committee and came to a head at the XIVth Party Congress in December 1925. With only the Leningrad Party organization behind them, Zinoviev and Kamenev, dubbed The New Opposition, were thoroughly defeated while Trotsky refused to get involved in the fight and didn't speak at the Congress.
United Opposition (1926–1927)[edit]




Trotsky and Stalin bearing the coffin of Felix Dzerzhinsky on 30 July 1926.


In early 1926, Zinoviev, Kamenev and their supporters in the "New Opposition" gravitated closer to Trotsky's supporters, and the two groups soon formed an alliance, which also incorporated some smaller opposition groups within the Communist Party. The alliance became known as the United Opposition.
The United Opposition was repeatedly threatened with sanctions by the Stalinist leadership of the Communist Party, and Trotsky had to agree to tactical retreats, mostly to preserve his alliance with Zinoviev and Kamenev. The opposition remained united against Stalin throughout 1926 and 1927, especially on the issue of the Chinese Revolution. The methods used by the Stalinists against the Opposition became more and more extreme. At the XVth Party Conference in October 1926, Trotsky could barely speak because of interruptions and catcalls, and at the end of the Conference he lost his Politburo seat. In 1927, Stalin started using the GPU (Soviet secret police) to infiltrate and discredit the opposition. Rank-and-file oppositionists were increasingly harassed, sometimes expelled from the Party and even arrested.
Soviet policy toward the Chinese Revolution became the ideological line of demarcation between Stalin and the United Opposition. The Chinese Revolution began on 10 October 1911,[97] resulting in the abdication of the Chinese Emperor, Puyi, on 12 February 1912.[98] Sun Yat-sen established the Republic of China. In reality, however, the Republic controlled very little of the country. Much of China was divided between various regional warlords. The Republican government established a new "nationalist people's army and a national people's party" — the Kuomintang. In 1920, the Kuomintang opened relations with Soviet Russia. With Soviet help, the Republic of China built up the nationalist people's army. With the development of the nationalist army, a Northern Expedition was planned to smash the power of the warlords of the northern part of the country. This Northern Expedition became a point of contention over foreign policy by Stalin and Trotsky. Stalin tried to persuade the small Chinese Communist Party to merge with the Kuomintang (KMT) Nationalists to bring about a bourgeois revolution before attempting to bring about a Soviet-style working class revolution.[99] Stalin believed that the KMT bourgeoisie, together with all patriotic national liberation forces in the country, would defeat the western imperialists in China.
Trotsky wanted the Communist Party to complete an orthodox proletarian revolution and have clear class independence from the KMT. Stalin funded the KMT during the expedition.[100] Stalin countered Trotskyist criticism by making a secret speech in which he said that Chiang's right-wing Kuomintang were the only ones capable of defeating the imperialists, that Chiang Kai-shek had funding from the rich merchants, and that his forces were to be utilized until squeezed for all usefulness like a lemon before being discarded. However, Chiang quickly reversed the tables in the Shanghai massacre of 12 April 1927 by massacring the Communist Party in Shanghai midway through the Northern Expedition.[101][102]
While the catastrophic events in China completely vindicated Trotsky's criticism of Stalin's approach towards the Chinese Revolution, this paled in significance compared to the demoralization that the Soviet masses felt at such a big setback for socialist revolution in China, with this demoralization aiding Stalin and his allies in the Communist Party and the Soviet state. Attacks against the United Opposition quickly increased in volatility and ferocity afterwards.
Defeat and exile (1927–1928)[edit]
In October 1927, Trotsky and Zinoviev were expelled from the Central Committee. When the United Opposition tried to organize independent demonstrations commemorating the 10th anniversary of the Bolshevik seizure of power in November 1927, the demonstrators were dispersed by force and Trotsky and Zinoviev were expelled from the Communist Party on 12 November. Their leading supporters, from Kamenev down, were expelled in December 1927 by the XVth Party Congress, which paved the way for mass expulsions of rank-and-file oppositionists as well as internal exile of opposition leaders in early 1928.
When the XVth Party Congress made United Opposition views incompatible with membership in the Communist Party, Zinoviev, Kamenev and their supporters capitulated and renounced their alliance with the Left Opposition. Trotsky and most of his followers, on the other hand, refused to surrender and stayed the course. Trotsky was exiled to Alma Ata in Kazakhstan on 31 January 1928. He was expelled from the Soviet Union to Turkey in February 1929, accompanied by his wife Natalia Sedova and his eldest son Lev Sedov.
Fate of Left Oppositionists after Trotsky's exile (1929–1941)[edit]
After Trotsky's expulsion from the Soviet Union, Trotskyists within the Soviet Union began to waver. Between 1929 and 1932, most leading members of the Left Opposition surrendered to Stalin, "admitted their mistakes" and were reinstated in the Communist Party. One initial exception to this was Christian Rakovsky, who inspired Trotsky between 1929 and 1934 with his refusal to capitulate as state suppression of any remaining opposition to Stalin increased by the year. In late 1932, Rakovsky had failed with an attempt to flee the Soviet Union, and was exiled to Yakutia in March 1933. Answering Trotsky's request, the French mathematician and Trotskyist Jean Van Heijenoort, together with his fellow activist Pierre Frank, unsuccessfully called on the influential Soviet author Maxim Gorky to intervene in favor of Christian Rakovsky, and boarded the ship he was traveling on near Constantinople.[103] According to Heijenoort, they only managed to meet Gorky's son, Maxim Peshkov, who reportedly told them that his father was indisposed, but promised to pass on their request.[103] Rakovsky was the last prominent Trotskyist to capitulate to Stalin in April 1934, when Rakovsky formally "admitted his mistakes" (his letter to Pravda, titled There Should Be No Mercy, depicted Trotsky and his supporters as "agents of the German Gestapo").[104] Rakovsky was appointed to high office in the Commissariat for Health and allowed to return to Moscow, also serving as Soviet ambassador to Japan in 1935.[105] However, Rakovsky was cited in allegations involving the killing of Sergey Kirov, and was arrested and imprisoned in late 1937, during the Great Purge.
Almost all Trotskyists who were still within the Soviet Union's borders were executed in the Great Purges of 1936–1938, although Rakovsky survived until the Medvedev Forest massacre of September 1941, where he was shot dead along with 156 other prisoners on Stalin's orders, less than three months into the Nazi invasion of the Soviet Union. Also among the Medvedev Forest victims was Trotsky's sister and Kamenev's first wife, Olga Kameneva.
Exile (1929–1940)[edit]




Trotsky's house, the Yanaros mansion on the island of Büyükada in Turkey as it appears today. Trotsky lived at the house from April 1929 until July 1933.


In February 1929, Trotsky was deported from the Soviet Union to his new exile in Turkey. During his first two months in Turkey, Trotsky lived with his wife and eldest son at the Soviet Union Consulate in Constantinople and then at a nearby hotel in the city. In April 1929, Trotsky, his wife and son were moved to the island of Büyükada (aka Prinkipo) by the Turkish authorities. On Prinkipo, they were moved into a house called the Yanaros mansion, where Trotsky and his wife lived until July 1933.[106] During his exile in Turkey, Trotsky was under the surveillance of the Turkish Police forces of Mustafa Kemal Pasha. Trotsky was also at risk from the many former White Army officers who lived on Prinkipo, officers who had opposed the October Revolution and who had been defeated by Trotsky and the Red Army in the Russian Civil War. However, Trotsky's European supporters volunteered to serve as bodyguards and assured his safety.[107]
In July 1933, Trotsky was offered asylum in France by Prime Minister Édouard Daladier. Trotsky accepted the offer, but he was forbidden to live in Paris and soon found himself under the surveillance of the French Police. From July 1933 to February 1934, Trotsky and his wife lived in Royan. The philosopher and activist Simone Weil also arranged for Trotsky and his bodyguards to stay for a few days at her parents' house.[107] Following the 6 February 1934 crisis in France, the French Minister of Internal Affairs, Albert Sarraut, signed a decree to deport Trotsky from France.[107] However, no foreign government was found willing to accept Trotsky within its borders. As a result, the French authorities instructed Trotsky to move to a residence in the tiny village of Barbizon under the strict surveillance of the French Police, where Trotsky found his contact with the outside world to be even worse than what it had been during his exile in Turkey.[107]
In May 1935, soon after the French government had agreed the Franco-Soviet Treaty of Mutual Assistance with the Soviet Union government, Trotsky was officially told that he was no longer welcome in France. After weighing up his options, Trotsky applied to move to Norway. After obtaining permission from then Justice Minister Trygve Lie to enter the country, Trotsky and his wife became a guest of Konrad Knudsen at Norderhov, near Hønefoss, and spent over a year living at Knudsen's house from 18 June 1935 to 2 September 1936, although Trotsky was hospitalized for a few weeks at the nearby Oslo Community Hospital from 19 September 1935.[108] 
Following French media complaints about Trotsky's role in encouraging the mass strikes in France in May and June 1936 with his articles, the Johan Nygaardsvold-led Norwegian government began to exhibit disquiet about Trotsky's actions. In the summer of 1936, Trotsky's asylum was increasingly made a political issue by the fascist Nasjonal Samling, led by Vidkun Quisling,[108]  along with a big increase in pressure from the Joseph Stalin-led Soviet government on the Norwegian authorities. On 5 August 1936, Knudsen's house was burgled by fascists from the Nasjonal Samling while Trotsky and his wife were out on a seashore trip with Knudsen and his wife. The fascist burglars targeted Trotsky's works and archives for vandalism. The raid was largely thwarted by Knudsen's daughter, Hjørdis, although the burglars did take a few papers from the nearest table as they left.[109] Although the fascist perpetrators were caught and put on trial, the "evidence" obtained in the burglary was used by the government to make claims against Trotsky.[108] 
On 14 August 1936, the Soviet Press Agency TASS announced the discovery of a "Trotskyist–Zinovievist" plot, and that the Trial of the Sixteen accused would soon commence. Trotsky demanded a complete and open enquiry into Moscow's accusations. The accused were sentenced to death, including Grigory Zinoviev and Lev Kamenev, executed on 25 August 1936. On 26 August 1936, eight policemen arrived at Knudsen's house demanding that Trotsky sign new conditions for residing in Norway. These conditions included agreeing to write no more about current political matters and to give no interviews, and agreeing to have all his correspondence (incoming and outgoing) inspected by the police. Trotsky categorically refused the conditions, and Trotsky was then told that he and his wife would soon be moved to another residence.[110] The following day saw Trotsky interrogated by the police about his political activities, with the police officially citing Trotsky as a "witness" regarding the fascist raid of 5 August 1936.[111]
On 2 September 1936, four weeks after the fascist break-in at Knudsen's house, Trygve Lie ordered that Trotsky and his wife be transferred to a farm in Hurum,[112] where they were under house arrest.[108]  The treatment of Trotsky and his wife at Hurum was harsh, as they were forced to stay indoors for 22 hours per day under the constant guard of thirteen policemen, with only 1 hour permitted twice a day for a walk on the farm.[108]  Trotsky was prevented from posting any letters and prevented from arguing back against his critics in Norway and beyond. Only Trotsky's lawyers and the Norwegian Labour Party Parliamentary leader, Olav Scheflo, were permitted to visit.[108]  From October 1936, even the outdoor walks were prohibited for Trotsky and his wife.[108]  Trotsky did eventually manage to smuggle out one letter on 18 December 1936, titled The Moscow "Confessions".[113] On 19 December 1936, Trotsky and his wife were deported from Norway after being put on the Norwegian oil tanker Ruth, under guard by Jonas Lie. When later living in Mexico, Trotsky was utterly scathing about the treatment he received during his 108 days at Hurum, and accused the Norwegian government of trying to prevent him from publicly voicing his strong opposition to the Trial of the Sixteen and other show trials, saying:

When I look back today on this period of internment, I must say that never, anywhere, in the course of my entire life — and I have lived through many things — was I persecuted with as much miserable cynicism as I was by the Norwegian "Socialist" government. For four months, these ministers, dripping with democratic hypocrisy, gripped me in a stranglehold to prevent me from protesting the greatest crime history may ever know.[108] 

The Ruth oil tanker that Trotsky and his wife were put on arrived in Mexico on 9 January 1937.[108]  On Trotsky's arrival, the Mexican president, Lázaro Cárdenas, welcomed Trotsky to Mexico and arranged for his special train The Hidalgo to bring Trotsky to Mexico City from the port of Tampico.[114]




Trotsky's house in Mexico City from April 1939 until his assassination in August 1940.


From January 1937 to April 1939, Trotsky and his wife lived in the Coyoacán area of Mexico City at La Casa Azul (The Blue House), the home of the painter Diego Rivera and Rivera's wife and fellow painter, Frida Kahlo, with whom Trotsky had an affair.[115][116] His final move was a few blocks away to a residence on Avenida Viena in April 1939, following a break with Rivera.[116]
He wrote prolifically in exile, penning several key works, including his History of the Russian Revolution (1930) and The Revolution Betrayed (1936), a critique of the Soviet Union under Stalinism. Trotsky argued that the Soviet state had become a "degenerated workers' state" controlled by an undemocratic bureaucracy, which would eventually either be overthrown via a political revolution establishing a workers' democracy, or degenerate into a capitalist class.
While in Mexico, Trotsky also worked closely with James P. Cannon, Joseph Hansen, and Farrell Dobbs of the Socialist Workers Party of the United States, and other supporters.




James Cannon and Felix Morrow, with a bust of Trotsky.


Cannon, a long-time leading member of the American communist movement, had supported Trotsky in the struggle against Stalinism since he first read Trotsky's criticisms of the Soviet Union in 1928. Trotsky's critique of the Stalinist regime, though banned, was distributed to leaders of the Comintern. Among his other supporters was Chen Duxiu, founder of the Chinese Communist Party. [117]
Moscow show trials[edit]
In August 1936, the first Moscow show trial of the so-called "Trotskyite–Zinovievite Terrorist Center" was staged in front of an international audience. During the trial, Zinoviev, Kamenev and 14 other accused, most of them prominent Old Bolsheviks, confessed to having plotted with Trotsky to kill Stalin and other members of the Soviet leadership. The court found everybody guilty and sentenced the defendants to death, Trotsky in absentia. The second show trial, of Karl Radek, Grigori Sokolnikov, Yuri Pyatakov and 14 others, took place in January 1937, during which more alleged conspiracies and crimes were linked to Trotsky. In April 1937, an independent "Commission of Inquiry" into the charges made against Trotsky and others at the "Moscow Trials" was held in Coyoacán, with John Dewey as chairman.[118] The findings were published in the book Not Guilty.[119]

"The Moscow trials are perpetuated under the banner of socialism. We will not concede this banner to the masters of falsehood! If our generation happens to be too weak to establish Socialism over the earth, we will hand the spotless banner down to our children. The struggle which is in the offing transcends by far the importance of individuals, factions and parties. It is the struggle for the future of all mankind. It will be severe, it will be lengthy. Whoever seeks physical comfort and spiritual calm let him step aside. In time of reaction it is more convenient to lean on the bureaucracy than on the truth. But all those for whom the word 'Socialism' is not a hollow sound but the content of their moral life – forward! Neither threats nor persecutions nor violations can stop us! Be it even over our bleaching bones the future will triumph! We will blaze the trail for it. It will conquer! Under all the severe blows of fate, I shall be happy as in the best days of my youth; because, my friends, the highest human happiness is not the exploitation of the present but the preparation of the future."
— Leon Trotsky, 'I Stake My Life', opening address to the Dewey Commission, 9 February 1937[120][121]

Fourth International[edit]
Main article: Fourth International
For fear of splitting the Communist movement, Trotsky initially opposed the idea of establishing parallel Communist parties or a parallel international Communist organization that would compete with the Third International. In mid-1933, after the Nazi takeover in Germany and the Comintern's response to it, he changed his mind. He said,[122] that:

An organization which was not roused by the thunder of fascism and which submits docilely to such outrageous acts of the bureaucracy demonstrates thereby that it is dead and that nothing can ever revive it... In all our subsequent work it is necessary to take as our point of departure the historical collapse of the official Communist International.[123]

In 1938, Trotsky and his supporters founded the Fourth International, which was intended to be a revolutionary and internationalist alternative to the Stalinist Comintern.
Dies Committee[edit]
Towards the end of 1939, Trotsky agreed to go to the United States to appear as a witness before the Dies Committee of the House of Representatives, a forerunner of the House Committee on Un-American Activities. Representative Martin Dies, chairman of the committee, demanded the suppression of the American Communist Party. Trotsky intended to use the forum to expose the NKVD's activities against him and his followers.
He made it clear that he also intended to argue against the suppression of the American Communist Party, and to use the committee as a platform for a call to transform World War II into a world revolution. Many of his supporters argued against his appearance. When the committee learned the nature of the testimony Trotsky intended to present, it refused to hear him, and he was denied a visa to enter the United States. On hearing about it, the Communist Party of the Soviet Union immediately accused Trotsky of being in the pay of the oil magnates and the Federal Bureau of Investigation.[124]
Final months[edit]




Trotsky with American comrades, including Harry DeBoer (left) in Mexico, shortly before his assassination, 1940


After quarreling with Diego Rivera, Trotsky moved to his final residence on Avenida Viena in April 1939.[125]
On 27 February 1940, Trotsky wrote a document known as "Trotsky's Testament", in which he expressed his final thoughts and feelings for posterity. He was suffering from high blood pressure, and feared that he would suffer a cerebral haemorrhage.[126] After forcefully denying Stalin's accusations that he had betrayed the working class, he thanked his friends and above all his wife, Natalia Sedova, for their loyal support:

In addition to the happiness of being a fighter for the cause of socialism, fate gave me the happiness of being her husband. During the almost forty years of our life together she remained an inexhaustible source of love, magnanimity, and tenderness. She underwent great sufferings, especially in the last period of our lives. But I find some comfort in the fact that she also knew days of happiness.

For forty-three years of my conscious life I have remained a revolutionist; for forty-two of them I have fought under the banner of Marxism. If I had to begin all over again I would of course try to avoid this or that mistake, but the main course of my life would remain unchanged. I shall die a proletarian revolutionist, a Marxist, a dialectical materialist, and, consequently, an irreconcilable atheist. My faith in the communist future of mankind is not less ardent, indeed it is firmer today, than it was in the days of my youth.
Natasha has just come up to the window from the courtyard and opened it wider so that the air may enter more freely into my room. I can see the bright green strip of grass beneath the wall, and the clear blue sky above the wall, and sunlight everywhere. Life is beautiful. Let the future generations cleanse it of all evil, oppression and violence, and enjoy it to the full.
L. Trotsky
27 February 1940
Coyoacán.[126]

Assassination[edit]




The Study where Leon Trotsky was assassinated with an ice axe on 20 August 1940.


After an ineffectual attempt to have Trotsky murdered, in March 1939, Stalin assigned the overall organisation of implementing the task to the NKVD officer Pavel Sudoplatov who in turn co-opted Nahum Eitingon. According to Sudoplatov's Special Tasks, the NKVD proceeded to set up three NKVD agent networks to carry out the murder, one of which relied on Ramón Mercader. According to Sudoplatov, all of the three networks were designed to operate entirely autonomously from the NKVD's hitherto established spy networks in the U.S. and Mexico.[127]
On 24 May 1940, Trotsky survived a raid on his villa by armed assassins led by the NKVD agent Iosif Grigulevich and Mexican painter David Alfaro Siqueiros.[128] Trotsky's 14-year-old grandson, Vsevolod Platonovich "Esteban" Volkov (born 7 March 1926), was shot in the foot, and a young assistant and bodyguard of Trotsky, Robert Sheldon Harte, was abducted and later murdered, but other guards defeated the attack.[129] Following the failed assassination attempt, Trotsky wrote an article titled "Stalin Seeks My Death" on 8 June 1940, where Trotsky states that another assassination attempt is certain.[130]
On 20 August 1940, in his study, Trotsky was attacked by Ramón Mercader who used an ice axe as a weapon.[131] The blow to his head was bungled and failed to kill Trotsky instantly, as Mercader had intended. Witnesses stated that Trotsky spat on Mercader and began struggling fiercely with him, which resulted in Mercader's hand being broken. Hearing the commotion, Trotsky's bodyguards burst into the room and nearly killed Mercader, but Trotsky stopped them, laboriously stating that the assassin should be made to answer questions.[132] Trotsky was taken to a hospital, operated on, and survived for more than a day, dying at the age of 60 on 21 August 1940 as a result of loss of blood and shock.[133][134] Mercader later testified at his trial:

I laid my raincoat on the table in such a way as to be able to remove the ice axe which was in the pocket. I decided not to miss the wonderful opportunity that presented itself. The moment Trotsky began reading the article, he gave me my chance; I took out the ice axe from the raincoat, gripped it in my hand and, with my eyes closed, dealt him a terrible blow on the head.[132] 

According to James P. Cannon, the secretary of the Socialist Workers Party (USA), Trotsky's last words were "I will not survive this attack. Stalin has finally accomplished the task he attempted unsuccessfully before."[135]




Leon Trotsky's grave in Coyoacán, where his ashes are buried


Legacy[edit]
Trotsky's house in Coyoacán was preserved in much the same condition as it was on the day of the assassination and is now a museum run by a board which includes his grandson Esteban Volkov. The current director of the museum is Carlos Ramírez Sandoval. Trotsky's grave is located on its grounds. A new foundation (International Friends of the Leon Trotsky Museum) has been organized to raise funds to further improve the museum.
Trotsky was never formally rehabilitated during the rule of the Soviet government, despite the Glasnost-era rehabilitation of most other Old Bolsheviks killed during the Great Purges. His son, Sergei Sedov, killed in 1937, was rehabilitated in 1988, as was Nikolai Bukharin. Beginning in 1989, Trotsky's books, forbidden until 1987, were published in the Soviet Union.
Trotsky was rehabilitated on 16 June 2001 by a decision of the General Prosecutor's Office (Certificates of Rehabilitation № 13/2182-90, № 13-2200-99 in Archives Research Center "Memorial").[136]
Trotsky's grandson, Esteban Volkov, who lives in Mexico, is an active promoter of his grandfather.[137] Trotsky's great-granddaughter, Mexican-born Nora Volkow (Volkov's daughter), is currently head of the U.S. National Institute on Drug Abuse.
Contributions to theory[edit]
Main article: Trotskyism




A Diego Rivera mural depicts Trotsky with Marx and Engels as a true champion of the workers' struggle.


Trotsky considered himself a "Bolshevik-Leninist", arguing for the establishment of a vanguard party. He considered himself an advocate of orthodox Marxism. His politics differed in many respects from those of Stalin or Mao Zedong, most importantly in his rejection of the theory of Socialism in One Country and his declaring the need for an international "permanent revolution". Numerous Fourth Internationalist groups around the world continue to describe themselves as Trotskyist and see themselves as standing in this tradition, although they have different interpretations of the conclusions to be drawn from this. Supporters of the Fourth International echo Trotsky's opposition to Stalinist totalitarianism, advocating political revolution, arguing that socialism cannot sustain itself without democracy.
Permanent Revolution[edit]
Main article: Permanent revolution
Permanent Revolution is the theory that the bourgeois democratic tasks in countries with delayed bourgeois democratic development can only be accomplished through the establishment of a workers' state, and that the creation of a workers' state would inevitably involve inroads against capitalist property. Thus, the accomplishment of bourgeois democratic tasks passes over into proletarian tasks. Although most closely associated with Leon Trotsky, the call for Permanent Revolution is first found in the writings of Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels in March 1850, in the aftermath of the 1848 Revolution, in their Address of the Central Committee to the Communist League:

It is our interest and our task to make the revolution permanent until all the more or less propertied classes have been driven from their ruling positions, until the proletariat has conquered state power and until the association of the proletarians has progressed sufficiently far – not only in one country but in all the leading countries of the world – that competition between the proletarians of these countries ceases and at least the decisive forces of production are concentrated in the hands of the workers. ... Their battle-cry must be: "The Permanent Revolution".

Trotsky's conception of Permanent Revolution is based on his understanding, drawing on the work of the founder of Russian Marxism Georgy Plekhanov, that in 'backward' countries the tasks of the Bourgeois Democratic Revolution could not be achieved by the bourgeoisie itself. This conception was first developed by Trotsky in collaboration with Alexander Parvus in late 1904–1905. The relevant articles were later collected in Trotsky's books 1905 and in Permanent Revolution, which also contains his essay "Results and Prospects".
According to Trotskyists, the October Revolution (which Trotsky directed) was the first example of a successful Permanent Revolution. The proletarian, socialist October Revolution took place precisely because the bourgeoisie, which took power in February, had not been able to solve any of the tasks of the bourgeois-democratic revolution. It had not given the land to the peasants (which the Bolsheviks did on 25 October), nor given freedom to the oppressed minority nations, nor emancipated Russia from foreign domination by ending the war which, at that point, was fought mainly to please the English and French creditors.[citation needed] Trotskyists today argue that the state of the Third World shows that capitalism offers no way forward for underdeveloped countries, thus again proving the central tenet of the theory.[138] In contrast, Stalinist policy in the former colonial countries has been characterized by the so-called Two-stage theory, which argues that the working class must fight for "progressive capitalism" along with the "progressive national bourgeoisie" before any attempts at socialism can be made.[citation needed]
The United Front[edit]
Main article: United Front
Trotsky was a central figure in the Comintern during its first four congresses. During this time he helped to generalise the strategy and tactics of the Bolsheviks to newly formed Communist parties across Europe and further afield. From 1921 onwards the united front, a method of uniting revolutionaries and reformists in common struggle while winning some of the workers to revolution, was the central tactic put forward by the Comintern after the defeat of the German revolution.
After he was exiled and politically marginalised by Stalinism, Trotsky continued to argue for a united front against fascism in Germany and Spain. According to Joseph Choonara of the British Socialist Workers Party in International Socialism, his articles on the united front represent an important part of his political legacy.[139]
See also[edit]


Biography portal
Politics portal
Philosophy portal
History portal
Russia portal
Ukraine portal
Soviet Union portal
Mexico portal
Communism portal
Socialism portal
Atheism portal



Ash heap of history
Fourth International
Group of Democratic Centralism
Labor army
List of books by Leon Trotsky
List of Trotskyist internationals
List of Trotskyist organizations by country
Variations on the Death of Trotsky

Notes[edit]



^ Russian: Лев Дави́дович Тро́цкий, IPA: [ˈlʲɛf ˈtrotskʲɪj] ( listen); Ukrainian: Лев Дави́дович Тро́цький; also transliterated Lyev, Trotski, Trotskij, Trockij and Trotzky.
^ Russian and Ukrainian: Лев (Лейба) Дави́дович Бронште́йн
^ Yakov Sverdlov was the Central Committee's senior secretary responsible for personnel affairs from 1917 and until his death in March 1919. He was replaced by Elena Stasova, and in November 1919 by Nikolai Krestinsky. After Krestinsky's ouster in March 1921, Vyacheslav Molotov became the senior secretary, but he lacked Krestinsky's authority, since he was not a full Politburo member. Stalin took over the position as senior secretary, which was formalized at the XIth Party Congress in April 1922, with Molotov becoming second secretary.
^ It is not clear why Kamenev, a mild-mannered man with few leadership ambitions and who was the brother-in-law of Trotsky, sided with Zinoviev and Stalin against Trotsky in 1922. Trotsky later speculated that it may have been due to Kamenev's love of comfort, which Trotsky found "repelled me." He expressed his feelings to Kamenev in late 1920 or early 1921:

Our relations with Kamenev, which were very good in the first period after the insurrection, began to become more distant from that day.


^ The Central Committee's Secretariat became increasingly important during the Civil War and especially in its aftermath, as the Party switched from elected officials to appointed ones. The change was prompted by the need to allocate manpower quickly during the Civil War as well as by the transformation of the party from a small group of revolutionaries into the country's ruling party, with a corresponding increase in membership. New members included career seekers and former members of banned socialist parties, who were viewed with apprehension by Old Bolsheviks. To prevent a possible degeneration of the party, various membership requirements were instituted for party officials, and the ultimate power of appointment of local officials was reserved for the Secretariat of the Central Committee. This put enormous power in the general secretary's hands.
^ Lenin's letter to Stalin dictated on 15 December 1922: "I am sure Trotsky will uphold my views as well as I." Faced with a united opposition by Lenin and Trotsky, the Central Committee reversed its previous decision and adopted the Lenin-Trotsky proposal.
^ Trotsky explained in Chapter 12 of his unfinished book Stalin that he refused to deliver the report because "it seemed to me equivalent to announcing my candidacy for the role of Lenin's successor at a time when Lenin was fighting a grave illness".
^ Radek wrote:[87]

The need of the hour was for a man who would incarnate the call to struggle, a man who, subordinating himself completely to the requirements of the struggle, would become the ringing summons to arms, the will which exacts from all unconditional submission to a great, sacrificial necessity. Only a man with Trotsky's capacity for work, only a man so unsparing of himself as Trotsky, only a man who knew how to speak to the soldiers as Trotsky did—only such a man could have become the standard bearer of the armed toilers. He was all things rolled into one.


^ The term "Trotskyism" was first coined by the Russian liberal politician Pavel Milyukov, the first foreign minister in the Provisional Government who, in April 1917, was forced to demand that the British government release Trotsky.



References[edit]


^ "Trotsky". Random House Webster's Unabridged Dictionary.
^ Dmitri Volkogonov, Lenin. A New Biography, translated and edited by Harold Shukman (New York: The Free Press, 1994), p. 185.
^ The murder weapon was a cut-down ice axe, not an ice pick. Many history and reference books have confused the two. See Robert Conquest, The Great Terror: A Reassessment, Oxford University Press, 1991, ISBN 0-19-507132-8, p. 418 for a detailed account
^ https://web.archive.org/web/20120306113431/http://2001.ukrcensus.gov.ua/eng/results/general/nationality/
^ https://focus.ua/news/9045/
^ Deutscher, Isaac (1970). The Prophet Armed Trotsky: 1879–1921. Oxford University Press. pp. 6–7. ISBN 0-19-281064-2. 
^ Deutscher, Isaac (1970). The Prophet Armed Trotsky:1869-1921. London: Oxford University Press. pp. 6–7. ISBN 0192810642. 
^ North, David (2010). In Defense of Leon Trotsky, Mehring Books, p. 145
^ a b David North, In Defence of Leon Trotsky (2010) ISBN 978-1-893638-05-1, pp.144-146.
^ a b Walter Laqueur, Stalin: The Glasnost Revelations, pp. 59-60
^ https://www.britannica.com/biography/Leon-Trotsky
^ Albert S. Lindemann (4 December 2000). Esau's Tears: Modern Anti-Semitism and the Rise of the Jews. Cambridge University Press. p. 446. ISBN 978-0-521-79538-8. Retrieved 26 September 2013. 
^ Isaac Deutscher, The Prophet Armed, 1879–1921, ch. 1
^ "On Meeting with Trotsky" Archived 4 June 2007 at the Wayback Machine., Revolutionary History Website
^ Isaac Deutscher, The Prophet Armed: Trotsky, 1879–1921, p. 36.
^ chapter VII of his autobiography, My Life, Marxist Internet Archive
^ Commission of Inquiry into the Charges Made Against Leon Trotsky in the Moscow Trials, The Case of Leon Trotsky (1937, reprinted 1968).
^ Isaac Deutscher, The Prophet Armed, 1879–1921, p. 40.
^ Leonard Shapiro, The Communist Party of the Soviet Union (Vintage Books: New York, 1971) p. 645.
^ Isaac Deutscher, The Prophet Armed: Trotsky, 1879–1921, p. 42.
^ Robert D. Warth, Leon Trotsky (1977).
^ Leonard Shapiro, The Communist Party of the Soviet Union, pp. 31–32.
^ Isaac Deutscher, The Prophet Armed: Trotsky, 1879–1921 (Vintage Books: New York, 1965) p. 67.
^ Isaac Deutscher, The Prophet Armed: Trotsky, 1879–1921, p. 55.
^ Robert D. Warth, Leon Trotsky (1977).
^ Thatcher, Ian D. Trotsky. Routledge, 2005.
^ Isaac Deutscher, The Prophet Armed: Trotsky 1879–1921, p. 7.
^ cf, for instance, "Leon Trotsky" Archived 14 March 2009 at the Wayback Machine., The Columbia Encyclopedia
^ Quoted in chapter XII of 'My Life', Marxist Internet Archive
^ Trotsky's 'Thermidor and anti-Semitism' (1937)
^ Trotsky, Leon. My life: an attempt at an autobiography. Courier Corporation, 2007.
^ Cavendish, Richard (2003). "The Bolshevik–Menshevik Split". History Today. 53 (11). Retrieved 22 October 2014. 
^ Weber, Nicholas (1975). "Parvus, Luxemburg and Kautsky on the 1905 Russian Revolution: The Relationship with Trotsky". Australian Journal of Politics and History. 
^ Lenin: "Judas Trotsky's Blush of Shame", Marxists Internet Archive; Retrieved on 26 July 2013.
^ CPGB: Stalin: "Slander and Truth", Marxists Internet Archive; Retrieved on 26 July 2013.
^ Lenin: 123. TO ALEXANDRA KOLLONTAI, Marxists Internet Archive, (9 June 2006); Retrieved on 26 July 2013.
^ Leon Trotsky, 1905 (Vintage Books: New York, 1971) p. 73.
^ Isaac Deutscher, The Prophet Armed: Trotsky 1879–1921 p. 117.
^ Leon Trotsky, "Results and Prospects," in Permanent Revolution (Pathfinder Press: New York, 1969) pp. 27–122.
^ Leon Trotsky, 1905, p. 85–88.
^ Isaac Deutscher, The Prophet Armed: Trotsky, 1879–1921, p. 126.
^ Isaac Deutscher, The Prophet Armed: Trotsky, 1879–1921, p. 138–139.
^ Isaac Deutscher, The Prophet Armed: Trotsky, 1879–1921 p. 131.
^ Leon Trotsky, 1905, p. 218.
^ Isaac Deutscher, The Prophet Armed: Trotsky, 1879–1921, p. 131.
^ Quoted in Chapter XIV of My Life
^ Leon Trotsky, 1905, pp.231–233.
^ Chapter XXIII of 1905
^ Chapter XVII of My Life, Marxist Internet Archive
^ a b Isaac Deutscher, The Prophet Armed: Trotsky, 1879–1921, p. 191.
^ Isaac Deutscher, The Prophet Armed: Trotsky 1879–1921, p. 192.
^ Isaac Deutscher, The Prophet Armed: Trotsky, 1879–1921, p. 192.
^ V. I. Lenin, "Towards Unity," in Lenin Collected Works: Volume 16, (Progress Publishers: Moscow, 1974) pp. 147–155.
^ Chapter XVI of My Life
^ Marxists.org, The War and the International
^ Christian Rakovsky's biography by Gus Fagan for details
^ a b c d ns1758.ca, Leon Trotsky: My Life - In a Concentration Camp
^ Wade 2004, p. xxi
^ the "Brest-Litovsk" chapter in Trotsky's 1925 book Lenin
^ Lenin
^ Felshtinsky, Yuri (October 26, 2010). Lenin and His Comrades: The Bolsheviks Take Over Russia 1917–1924. New York: Enigma Books. ISBN 978-1-929631-95-7. 
^ a b Trotsky, Leon (1930). "XXXVI". My Life. Retrieved 23 July 2011. 
^ Chapter XXXIV of My Life
^ "Red Terror". Spartacus.schoolnet.co.uk. Retrieved 22 May 2012. 
^ Terrorism and Communism : A Reply to Karl Kautsky (1975), p. 83
^ Lenin, Vladimir Ilych (1919). "Achievements and Difficulties of the Soviet Government". marxists.org. Progress Publishers. Retrieved 6 November 2015. 
^ "Lost leaders: Leon Trotsky". The New Statesman. UK. 
^ a b Chapter XXXVII of My Life
^ Isai Abramovich's memoirs re: the Smilga episode. Abramovich (1900–1985), a friend of Smilga's, was one of the few Trotskyists who survived the Great Purges and returned from Stalin's camps in the late 1950s.
^ Chapter XXXV of My Life
^ Chapter XXXVIII of My Life
^ Political Report of the Central Committee of the RKP(b) to the Ninth All-Russian Conference of the Communist Party delivered by Lenin on 20 September 1920, Document 59 in The Unknown Lenin, ed. Richard Pipes, Yale University Press, 1996, ISBN 0-300-06919-7
^ "More on the Suppression of Kronstadt" by Leon Trotsky
^ "Hue and Cry Over Kronstadt" by Leon Trotsky
^ "Trotsky Protests too Much" by Emma Goldman
^ "Kronstadt – A Tragic Necessity" – by Abbie Bakan
^ "What was the Kronstadt Rebellion? - Anarchist Writers". 
^ V. I͡U. Cherni͡aev, "Trotsky," in Edward Acton, V. I͡U. Cherni͡aev, and William G. Rosenberg, eds. (1997). Critical Companion to the Russian Revolution, 1914–1921. Indiana University Press. p. 191. CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link) CS1 maint: Extra text: authors list (link)
^ Geoffrey Swain (2014). Trotsky. Routledge. p. 210. 
^ Swain (2014) p 211
^ Document 103 (22 May 1922) in The Unknown Lenin
^ Document 106 in The Unknown Lenin
^ Document 109 in The Unknown Lenin
^ Chapter XXXIX of My Life, Marxist Internet Archive
^ Chapter 11 of Trotsky's unfinished book, entitled Stalin
^ Chapter 12 of Trotsky's unfinished book, entitled Stalin
^ [1]
^ Leon Trotsky, "The First Letter to the Central Committee" contained in the Challenge of the Left Opposition: 1923–1925 (Pathfinder Press: New York, 1975) pp. 55–56.
^ Quoted in Max Shachtman. The Struggle for the New Course, New York, New International Publishing Co., 1943. The Campaign Against "Trotskyism"
^ Leon Trotsky, "The New Course" contained in The Challenge of the Left Opposition: 1923–1925, pp. 63–144.
^ Chapter VIII of Boris Souvarine's Stalin: A Critical Survey of Bolshevism
^ Leon Trotsky, "Speech to the Thirteenth Party Congress on May 26, 1924" contained in The Challenge of the Left Opposition: 1923–1925, pp161-162.
^ Leon Trotsky "Lessons of October" contained in Challenge of the Left Opposition: 1923–1925, pp. 199–258.
^ Chapter 42 of My Life
^ Leon Trotsky, My Life (Pathfinder Press: New York, 1970) p. 520.
^ Nikolai Valentinov-Volsky's account of his work with Trotsky in 1925 in Novaia Ekonomicheskaia Politika i Krizis Partii Posle Smerti Lenina: Gody Raboty v VSNKh vo Vremia NEP, Moscow, Sovremennik, 1991. No English translation currently available.
^ Sterling Seagrave, Dragon Lady (Alfred A. Knopf Inc.: New York, 1992) p. 454.
^ Compilation Group for the "History of Modern China Series, The Revolution of 1911 (Foreign Languages Press: Peking, 1976) p. 153.
^ Joseph Stalin, "The Prospects of Revolution in China" a speech to the Chinese Commission of the Executive Committee of the Communist International on 30 November 1926" contained in J. Stalin on Chinese Revolution (Suren Dutt Publishers: Calcutta, India, 1970) pp. 5–21.
^ Peter Gue Zarrow (2005). China in war and revolution, 1895–1949. Volume 1 of Asia's transformations (illustrated ed.). Psychology Press. p. 233. ISBN 0-415-36447-7. Retrieved 1 January 2011. 
^ Robert Carver North (1963). Moscow and Chinese Communists (2 ed.). Stanford University Press. p. 96. ISBN 0-8047-0453-8. Retrieved 1 January 2011. 
^ Walter Moss (2005). A history of Russia: Since 1855. Volume 2 of A History of Russia (2, illustrated ed.). Anthem Press. p. 282. ISBN 1-84331-034-1. Retrieved 1 January 2011. 
^ a b Tova Yedlin, Maxim Gorky: A Political Biography, Praeger/Greenwood, Westport, 1992, p.201-202. ISBN 978-0-275-96605-8
^ Medvedev, p.169
^ Feofanov & Barry, p.22
^ Oxley, Greg (1 February 2004). "Esteban Volkov: Return to Prinkipo" – via Marxist.com. 
^ a b c d 1935, Marxists.org (10 June 1935). "Leon Trotsky: An Open Letter to the French Workers" – via Marxists.org. 
^ a b c d e f g h i Oddvar Høidal's Trotsky in Norway: Exile, 1935–1937.
^ 1937, Marxists.org (January 1937). "Leon Trotsky in Norway (1936)" – via Marxists.org. 
^ 1937, Marxists.org (January 1937). "Leon Trotsky in Norway (1936)" – via Marxists.org. 
^ 1937, Marxists.org (January 1937). "Leon Trotsky in Norway (1936)" – via Marxists.org. 
^ En sensasjonell rettssak
^ 1936, Marxists.org (18 December 1936). "The Moscow "Confessions"" – via Marxists.org. 
^ Woods, Alan (30 June 2003). "The House in Coyoacán - Reflection on Trotsky's last years" – via Marxist.com. 
^ Herrera, Hayden (1983). A Biography of Frida Kahlo. New York: HarperCollins. ISBN 978-0-06-008589-6.
^ a b Patenaude, Bertrand M. (2009) Trotsky: Downfall of a Revolutionary New York: HarperCollins. ISBN 978-0-06-082068-8
^ Chen, Duxiu. “The Unification of the Chinese Opposition.” The Militant, 15 June 1931. https://www.marxistsfr.org/archive/chen-duxiu/1931/05/chinlo.htm
^ Marxists.org
^ Not Guilty; Report of the Commission of Inquiry into the Charges Made Against Leon Trotsky in the Moscow Trials, John Dewey, chairman, New York, London, Harper & brothers, 1938, xv, 422 pp. 2nd edition New York, Monad Press, distributed by Pathfinder Press 1973, c. 1972 xxiii, 422 pp.
^ In Defense of Leon Trotsky, by David North, Mehring Books, 2010, ISBN 1-893638-05-7, pg viii
^ Full text of ~ "I Stake My Life!" – Leon Trotsky's telephone address to the N.Y. Hippodrome Meeting for the opening event of the Dewey Commission on the Moscow Trial, delivered on 9 February 1937
^ Marxists.org
^ Leon Trotsky. To Build Communist Parties and an International Anew, 15 July 1933.
^ Isaac Deutscher. The Prophet Outcast: Trotsky, 1929–1940, London, New York, Oxford University Press, 1963, p. 482
^ Patenaude, Bertrand M. (2009) Trotsky: Downfall of a Revolutionary New York: HarperCollins. ISBN 978-0-06-082068-8, pp. 171–173.
^ a b "Trotsky's Testament" (27 February 1940) Retrieved 12 June 2011
^ Pavel Sudoplatov; Anatoli Sudoplatov; Jerrold L. Schecter; Leona P. Schecter (1994). Special Tasks: The Memoirs of an Unwanted Witness—A Soviet Spymaster. Boston: Little, Brown and Company. ISBN 0-316-77352-2. 
^ 1939, Times Wide World (25 May 1940). "TROTSKY INJURED IN ATTACK ON HOME; LEON TROTSKY AND HOME IN MEXICO WHERE HE WAS ATTACKED" – via NYTimes.com. 
^ Trotsky's grandson recalls ice pick killing, BBC News, Mike Lanchin, 28 August 2012
^ 1940, Marxists.org (8 June 1940). "Leon Trotsky: Stalin Seeks My Death" – via Marxists.org. 
^ The mind of an assassin, Isaac Don Levine, New York, 1960
^ a b Volkogonov, Dmitri (1996). Trotsky: The Eternal Revolutionary. Free Press. ISBN 0-684-82293-8; p. 466
^ Walsh, Lynn, The Assassination of Trotsky, Militant International Review, Summer 1980; retrieved 29 July 2007
^ Enrique Soto-Perez-de-Celis MD, The Death of Leon Trotsky, Neurosurgery 67: 417–423, 2010 [2]
^ Australian Associated Press, Death of Leon Trotsky Archived 2 September 2007 at the Wayback Machine., The Age 150th Anniversary edition reprint, 23 August 1940; retrieved 22 March 2007
^ В. В. Иофе. Осмысление Гулага. НИЦ «Мемориал»
^ https://www.nytimes.com/2011/06/14/science/14volkow.html
^ Editorial Board. "The mass uprising in Tunisia and the perspective of permanent revolution". World Socialist Web Site. International Committee of the Fourth International. Retrieved 3 June 2013. 
^ Joseph Choonara, "The United Front", International Socialism, 117


Further reading[edit]


Blackledge, Paul (2006). "Leon Trotsky's Contribution to the Marxist Theory of History". Studies in East European Thought. 58 (1). 
Brouè, Pierre (1988). Fayard, ed. Trotsky. Paris. 
Cliff, Tony (1989–93). Trotsky. 4 Vols. London: Bookmarks. 
Isaac Deutscher (1954). Trotsky: The Prophet Armed. 
Isaac Deutscher:

(1959) Trotsky: The Prophet Unarmed
(1963) Trotsky: The Prophet Outcast


Isaac Deutscher (1966) Ironies of History.
Daniels, Robert V (1991) Trotsky, Stalin & Socialism. Westview Press. ISBN 0-8133-1223-X
Dunn, Bill & Radice, Hugo eds. Permanent Revolution – Results and Prospects 100 Years On London: Pluto Press
Dimitri Volkogonov (1996) Trotsky, the Eternal Revolutionary. Free Press.
Gilbert, Helen (2003) Leon Trotsky: His Life and Ideas. Red Letter Press [3] ISBN 0-932323-17-0
Hallas, Duncan (1979) Trotsky's Marxism London: Pluto Press
Hansen, Joseph, ed. (1969) Leon Trotsky: the Man and His Work. Reminiscences and Appraisals. New York: Merit Publishers.
Heijenoort, Jean van (2013). With Trotsky in Exile: From Prinkipo to Coyoacan. Harvard University Press. ISBN 9780674436688.  - Total pages: 200
Levine, Isaac Don (1960) The Mind of an Assassin. New York: New American Library/Signet Book.
Maitan, Livio (1985) Destino di Trotsky, Milano, ed. Rizzoli.
Mandel, Ernest (1980) La pensée politique de Leon Trotsky
Molyneux, John (1981) Leon Trotsky's Theory of Revolution, Brighton: Harvester Press
Patenaude, Bertrand M. (2009) Trotsky: Downfall of a Revolutionary (New York: HarperCollins) 370pp; scholarly study of 1937–40 period
Paul Le Blanc, 2015 Leon Trotsky London: Reaktion Books, ISBN 978-1-78023-430-4
Pipes, Richard, ed. (1996) The Unknown Lenin. Yale University Press. ISBN 0-300-06919-7
Renton, David (2004) Trotsky.
Rogovin, Vadim Z. (1998). 1937 Stalin's Year of Terror. Oak Park, MI: Mehring Books, Inc. ISBN 0-929087-77-1
Service, Robert (2005). Stalin: A Biography. Cambridge: Belknap Press. ISBN 0-674-01697-1.
Swain, Geoffrey. Trotsky (2006) Routledge, excerpt and text search
Swain, Geoffrey (2014). Trotsky and the Russian Revolution. New York: Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-73667-1. 
Thatcher, Ian D. (2003) Trotsky. ISBN 0-415-23251-1
Wade, Rex A. (Editor) (2004). Revolutionary Russia: New Approaches. Psychology Press. ISBN 9780415307482. CS1 maint: Extra text: authors list (link) - Total pages: 275
Wistrich, Robert S. (1982). Trotsky: Fate of a Revolutionary. New York: Stein & Day. ISBN 0-8128-2774-0. 
The Modern Encyclopedia of Russian and Soviet History, Volume 39, Academic International Press


External links[edit]

Find more aboutLeon Trotskyat Wikipedia's sister projects

Media from Wikimedia Commons
Quotations from Wikiquote
Texts from Wikisource



Leon Trotsky at Encyclopædia Britannica
Trotsky speaks about the Moscow Trials on YouTube
Trotsky in Havana by Dimitri Prieto from Havana Times
65 years since Trotsky's Death an essay by Rob Sewell
FBI records relating to Trotsky's murder
'Ice-pick that killed Trotsky' found in Mexico which is stained with his blood
Dossier on Trotsky, International Viewpoint
January 2006 images of Trotsky House, Mexico City
Lenin and Trotsky— What they Really Stood For by Alan Woods and Ted Grant
The Contradiction of Trotsky by Claude Lefort
The Leon Trotsky Internet Archive at Marxists.org (under GNU Free Documentation License)
The Lubitz TrotskyanaNet, dealing with Leon Trotsky, Trotskyism and Trotskyists
In The Service of Historical Falsification: A Review of Robert Service's Trotsky by David North
Historians in the Service of the "Big Lie": An Examination of Professor Robert Service's Biography of Trotsky
[4] Leon Trotsky—The Transitional Program—1938
"Leon Trotsky, Soviet Historiography, and the Fate of Classical Marxism". wsws.org. 
[5] Uncommon Knowledge Interview with Christopher Hitchens and Robert Service on Leon Trotsky
Leon Trotsky: Jews on the Left, Video Lecture by Dr. Henry Abramson

Works[edit]

Works by Leon Trotsky at Project Gutenberg
Works by Leon Trotsky at Faded Page (Canada)
Works by or about Leon Trotsky at Internet Archive
Works by Leon Trotsky at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) 



Political offices


Preceded by
Mikhail Tereshchenko
(Minister of Foreign Affairs)
People's Commissar for Foreign Affairs
1917–1918
Succeeded by
Georgy Chicherin


Preceded by
Nikolai Podvoisky
People's Commissar for Army and Navy Affairs
1918–1925
Succeeded by
Mikhail Frunze


Awards and achievements


Preceded by
Winston Churchill
Cover of Time Magazine
18 May 1925
Succeeded by
Thomas A. Edison


Preceded by
Newton D. Baker
Cover of Time Magazine
21 Nov 1927
Succeeded by
Frank Orren Lowden


Preceded by
William S. Knudsen
Cover of Time Magazine
25 Jan 1937
Succeeded by
Thomas E. Dewey








v
t
e


Russian Revolution/Russian Civil War



Events




Revolution



February Revolution
July Days
Kornilov affair
October Revolution
Kerensky–Krasnov uprising
Junker mutiny





Civil War



Russian Civil War
Ukrainian War of Independence

Ukrainian–Soviet War
Kiev Bolshevik Uprising
Polish–Ukrainian War


Finnish Civil War
Heimosodat
Polish–Soviet War
Estonian War of Independence
Latvian War of Independence
Lithuanian Wars of Independence
Red Army invasion of Georgia
Armenian–Azerbaijani War
Left-wing uprisings against the Bolsheviks
Allied intervention in the Russian Civil War
Siberian Intervention








Groups



Provisional Committee of the State Duma
Russian Provisional Government
White movement
Pro-independence movements
Petrograd Soviet
Council of the People's Commissars
Military Revolutionary Committee
Russian Constituent Assembly

elections


Black Guards
Red Guards
Group of forces in battle with the counterrevolution in the South of Russia
Tsentralna Rada

Ukrainian People's Republic







Parties



Kadets
Russian Social Democratic Labour Party

Bolsheviks
Mensheviks


Socialist Revolutionary Party

Left SRs


Union of October 17





Figures




Monarchists



Nicholas II of Russia





Provisional Government



Georgy Lvov
Pavel Milyukov
Alexander Guchkov





White movement



Pyotr Nikolayevich Wrangel
Alexander Kolchak
Anton Denikin
Pyotr Krasnov
Nikolai Yudenich





Bolsheviks



Vladimir Lenin
Lev Kamenev
Grigory Zinoviev
Leon Trotsky
Mikhail Frunze
Joseph Stalin
Semyon Budyonny





Right SRs



Alexander Kerensky
Stepan Petrichenko
Boris Savinkov








International



Revolutions of 1917–23
German Revolution of 1918–1919
Bavarian Soviet Republic
Hungarian Soviet Republic
Hungarian–Romanian War
Workers' Councils in Poland
Polish–Ukrainian War
Polish–Soviet War
Slovak Soviet Republic
Finnish Civil War
Finnish Socialist Workers' Republic












v
t
e


 Soviet dissidents






Human rights movement in the Soviet Union: Initiative Group for the Defense of Human Rights in the USSR
Committee on Human Rights in the USSR
Solzhenitsyn Aid Fund
Moscow Helsinki Group
Ukrainian Helsinki Group
Lithuanian Helsinki Group‎
Working Commission to Investigate the Use of Psychiatry for Political Purposes
Helsinki-86
Memorial








Mikhail Agursky
Vasily Aksyonov
Lyudmila Alexeyeva
Andrei Amalrik
Chabua Amirejibi
Anton Antonov-Ovseyenko
Gunārs Astra
Mykola Bakay
Anna Barkova
Vasile Bătrânac
Arkadiy Belinkov
Nikolai Berdyaev
Yuri Bezmenov
Larisa Bogoraz
Alexander Bolonkin
Yelena Bonner
Leonid Borodin
Vladimir Bougrine
Joseph Brodsky
Vladimir Bukovsky
Valery Chalidze
Lev Chernyi
Boris Chichibabin
Viacheslav Chornovil
Lydia Chukovskaya
Yuli Daniel
Vadim Delaunay
Andrey Derevyankin
David Devdariani
Ivan Drach
Yuri Druzhnikov
Mustafa Dzhemilev
Ivan Dziuba
Abulfaz Elchibey
Alexander Esenin-Volpin
Eliyahu Essas
Efim Etkind
Benjamin Fain
Viktor Fainberg
Moysey Fishbein
Ilya Gabay
Balys Gajauskas
Yuri Galanskov
Alexander Galich
Sultan Galiev
Zviad Gamsakhurdia
Vladimir Gershuni
Alexander Ginzburg
Yevgenia Ginzburg
Anatoly Gladilin
Semyon Gluzman
Natalya Gorbanevskaya
Pyotr Grigorenko
Sergei Grigoryants
Vasily Grossman
Igor Guberman
Tengiz Gudava
Paruyr Hayrikyan
Ivan Hel
Oleksa Hirnyk
Mykola Horbal
Bohdan Horyn
Mykhailo Horyn
Grigory Isayev
Boris Kagarlitsky
Romas Kalanta
Sofiya Kalistratova
Ihor Kalynets
Iryna Kalynets
Vitaliy Kalynychenko
Dina Kaminskaya
Ivan Kandyba
Ephraim Kholmyansky
Yuliy Kim
Nikolai Klyuev
Lev Kopelev
Boris Korczak
Anatoly Koryagin
Nahum Korzhavin
Merab Kostava
Lina Kostenko
Sergei Kovalev
Zoya Krakhmalnikova
Victor Krasin
Yuri Kublanovsky
Jüri Kukk
Anatoly Kuznetsov
Eduard Kuznetsov
Alexander Lavut
Mikhail Leontovich
Alexander Lerner
Yaroslav Lesiv
Eugene Levich
Veniamin Levich
Eduard Limonov
Pavel Litvinov
Levko Lukyanenko
Nikolay Lossky
Kronid Lyubarsky
Michail J. Makarenko
Vasyl Makukh
Guram Mamulia
Nadezhda Mandelstam
Anatoly Marchenko
Valeriy Marchenko
Myroslav Marynovych
Gregori Maximoff
Roy Medvedev
Zhores Medvedev
Naum Meiman
Mykhailo Melnyk
Alexander Men
Yosef Mendelevitch
Vazif Meylanov
Andrei Mironov
Ion Moraru
Viktor Nekipelov
Viktor Nekrasov
Alexander Nekrich
Valeriya Novodvorskaya
Vasile Odobescu
Alexander Ogorodnikov
Yuri Orlov
Raisa Orlova
Lagle Parek
Boris Pasternak
Konstantin Paustovsky
Gleb Pavlovsky
Yekaterina Peshkova
Viktoras Petkus
Alexander Piatigorsky
Leonid Plyushch
Alexandr Podrabinek
Grigory Pomerants
Vladimir Pribylovsky
Dmitri Prigov
Anatoly Pristavkin
Boris Pustyntsev
Irina Ratushinskaya
Eliyahu Rips
Arseny Roginsky
Maria Rozanova
Mykola Rudenko
Yuly Rybakov
Ain Saar
Valery Sablin
Andrei Sakharov
Dmitri Savitski
Shmuel Schneurson
Victor Serge
Efraim Sevela
Igor Shafarevich
Varlam Shalamov
Avital Sharansky
Natan Sharansky
Vladimir Shelkov
Yuriy Shukhevych
Danylo Shumuk
Andrei Sinyavsky
Vladimir Slepak
Victor Sokolov
Sergei Soldatov
Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn
Pitirim Sorokin
Vladimir Strelnikov
Aleksandras Štromas
Vasyl Stus
Nadiya Svitlychna
Ivan Svitlichny
Vasyl Symonenko
Les Tanyuk
Alexander Tarasov
Valery Tarsis
Enn Tarto
Lev Timofeev
Valentin Turchin
Andrei Tverdokhlebov
Tatyana Velikanova
Tomas Venclova
Georgi Vins
Georgi Vladimov
Vladimir Voinovich
Michael Voslenski
Anatoly Yakobson
Gleb Yakunin
Venedikt Yerofeyev
Yevgeny Zamyatin
Alexander Zinoviev
Yosyf Zisels












v
t
e


Foreign ministers of Russia and the Soviet Union



Tsardom of Russia



Ivan Viskovatyi
Vasily and Andrey Shchelkalov
Ivan Gramotin
Pyotr Tretyakov
Almaz Ivanov
Afanasy Ordin-Nashchokin
Artamon Matveyev
Vasily Golitsyn
Yemelyan Ukraintsev
Lev Naryshkin
Fyodor Golovin
Peter Shafirov





Russian Empire



Gavrila Golovkin
Andrey Osterman
Aleksey Tcherkassky
Alexey Bestuzhev-Ryumin
Mikhailo Vorontsov
Nikita I. Panin
Ivan Osterman
Alexander Bezborodko
Fyodor Rostopchin
Nikita P. Panin
Viktor Kochubey
Alexander Vorontsov
Adam Jerzy Czartoryski
Andrei Budberg
Nikolay Rumyantsev
Ioannis Kapodistrias
Karl Robert Nesselrode
Alexander Gorchakov
Nikolay Girs
Alexei Lobanov-Rostovsky
Nikolay Shishkin
Mikhail Muravyov
Vladimir Lamsdorf
Alexander Izvolsky
Sergey Sazonov
Boris Stürmer
Nikolai Pokrovsky





Provisional Government



Pavel Milyukov
Mikhail Tereshchenko





Soviet Russia and
the Soviet Union



Leon Trotsky
Georgy Chicherin
Maxim Litvinov
Vyacheslav Molotov
Andrey Vyshinsky
Dmitri Shepilov
Andrei Gromyko
Eduard Shevardnadze
Aleksandr Bessmertnykh
Boris Pankin
Eduard Shevardnadze





Russian Federation



Andrey Kozyrev
Yevgeny Primakov
Igor Ivanov
Sergey Lavrov









Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 19685134
LCCN: n79054261
ISNI: 0000 0001 2277 1584
GND: 118642979
SELIBR: 97670
SUDOC: 027170136
BNF: cb119271514 (data)
ULAN: 500327186
HDS: 28391
NLA: 35556422
NDL: 00459140
NKC: jn19981002250
BNE: XX1141378
IATH: w6qj7fs6











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Leon_Trotsky&oldid=817961413"					Categories: Leon Trotsky1879 births1940 deathsPeople from Bobrynets RaionPeople from Kherson GovernorateUkrainian atheistsUkrainian historiansUkrainian JewsOld BolsheviksTrotskyistsAnti-fascistsAnti-capitalistsRussian anti–World War I activistsAssassinated JewsRussian atheism activistsRussian autobiographersRussian historiansRussian communistsRussian socialistsRussian MarxistsComintern peoplePolitburo of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union membersCommunist writersExpelled members of the Communist Party of the Soviet UnionForeign ministers of RussiaJewish atheistsJewish Mexican historyJewish socialistsHistorians of communismIndividuals purged from the government of the Soviet UnionSoviet Marxist historians20th-century historiansMarxist theoristsMarxist writersOrthodox MarxistsPeople excommunicated by synagoguesPeople of the 1905 Russian RevolutionPeople of the Russian RevolutionPeople of the Russian Civil WarTreaty of Brest-LitovskPeople's Commissars and Ministers of the Soviet UnionRecipients of the Order of the Red BannerRefugees in MexicoRefugees in NorwaySoviet expelleesSoviet JewsSoviet Ministers of DefenceUnpersons in the Eastern BlocMensheviksSoviet dissidentsAnti-nationalistsRussian Social Democratic Labour Party members20th-century Russian writers20th-century atheistsWar correspondents of the Balkan WarsPeople with epilepsyAssassinated Soviet peopleAssassinated Russian politiciansPeople murdered in MexicoDeaths by stabbing in MexicoAshkenazi JewsPeople of the Polish–Soviet WarPeople forcibly stripped of Soviet citizenshipSoviet emigrants to MexicoSoviet emigrants to TurkeySoviet emigrants to FranceSoviet emigrants to NorwayImperial Russian emigrants to SwitzerlandImperial Russian emigrants to the United StatesImperial Russian emigrants to Austria-HungaryContributors to the Encyclopædia BritannicaAtheist writersAtheist socialistsMurdered male writersUkrainian people murdered abroadRussian people murdered abroadAnti-Stalinist leftSoviet people murdered abroadHidden categories: Articles containing Russian-language textArticles with hAudio microformatsArticles containing Ukrainian-language textWebarchive template wayback linksCS1 maint: Multiple names: authors listCS1 maint: Extra text: authors listWikipedia indefinitely move-protected pagesUse dmy dates from November 2013Pages using infobox officeholder with an atypical party valueAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from August 2014Articles needing additional references from November 2010All articles needing additional referencesArticles with unsourced statements from February 2010Articles with unsourced statements from March 2011Articles with unsourced statements from September 2011Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from February 2014Articles with unsourced statements from March 2007Articles with unsourced statements from July 2013Articles needing additional references from July 2010Articles with unsourced statements from February 2007Articles with Encyclopædia Britannica linksArticles with Project Gutenberg linksArticles with Internet Archive linksArticles with LibriVox linksAC with 14 elementsWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with SELIBR identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersWikipedia articles with ULAN identifiersWikipedia articles with NLA identifiersWikipedia articles with SNAC-ID identifiers