For other uses, see Liberty (disambiguation).




Crossing of Red Sea by Jan van Orley and Augustin Coppens, between circa 1729 and circa 1745


Liberty, in philosophy, involves free will as contrasted with determinism.[1] In politics, liberty consists of the social and political freedoms to which all community members are entitled.[2] In theology, liberty is freedom from the effects of, "sin, spiritual servitude, [or] worldly ties."[3]
Generally, liberty is distinctly differentiated from freedom in that freedom is primarily, if not exclusively, the ability to do as one wills and what one has the power to do; whereas liberty concerns the absence of arbitrary restraints and takes into account the rights of all involved. As such, the exercise of liberty is subject to capability and limited by the rights of others.[4]



Contents


1 Philosophy
2 Politics

2.1 History
2.2 Social contract


3 Origins of political freedom

3.1 England and Great Britain
3.2 United States
3.3 France


4 Ideologies

4.1 Liberalism
4.2 Libertarianism
4.3 Republican liberty
4.4 Socialism and Marxism


5 Cultural prerequisites
6 Historical writings on liberty
7 See also
8 References
9 Bibliography
10 External links



Philosophy[edit]
Main article: Free will
Philosophers from earliest times have considered the question of liberty. Roman Emperor Marcus Aurelius (121–180 AD) wrote of "a polity in which there is the same law for all, a polity administered with regard to equal rights and equal freedom of speech, and the idea of a kingly government which respects most of all the freedom of the governed."[5] According to Thomas Hobbes (1588–1679), "a free man is he that in those things which by his strength and wit he is able to do is not hindered to do what he hath the will to do" (Leviathan, Part 2, Ch. XXI).
John Locke (1632–1704) rejected that definition of liberty. While not specifically mentioning Hobbes, he attacks Sir Robert Filmer who had the same definition. According to Locke:

"In the state of nature, liberty consists of being free from any superior power on Earth. People are not under the will or lawmaking authority of others but have only the law of nature for their rule. In political society, liberty consists of being under no other lawmaking power except that established by consent in the commonwealth. People are free from the dominion of any will or legal restraint apart from that enacted by their own constituted lawmaking power according to the trust put in it. Thus, freedom is not as Sir Robert Filmer defines it: 'A liberty for everyone to do what he likes, to live as he pleases, and not to be tied by any laws.' Freedom is constrained by laws in both the state of nature and political society. Freedom of nature is to be under no other restraint but the law of nature. Freedom of people under government is to be under no restraint apart from standing rules to live by that are common to everyone in the society and made by the lawmaking power established in it. Persons have a right or liberty to (1) follow their own will in all things that the law has not prohibited and (2) not be subject to the inconstant, uncertain, unknown, and arbitrary wills of others."[6]





John Stuart Mill.


John Stuart Mill (1806–1873), in his work, On Liberty, was the first to recognize the difference between liberty as the freedom to act and liberty as the absence of coercion.[7] In his book Two Concepts of Liberty, Isaiah Berlin formally framed the differences between these two perspectives as the distinction between two opposite concepts of liberty: positive liberty and negative liberty. The latter designates a negative condition in which an individual is protected from tyranny and the arbitrary exercise of authority, while the former refers to the liberty that comes from self-mastery, the freedom from inner compulsions such as weakness and fear.
Politics[edit]
Main article: Political freedom




The Magna Carta (originally known as the Charter of Liberties) of 1215, written in iron gall ink on parchment in medieval Latin, using standard abbreviations of the period. This document is held at the British Library and is identified as "British Library Cotton MS Augustus II.106".


History[edit]




A romanticised 19th-century recreation of King John signing the Magna Carta






Liberty Enlightening the World, known as the Statue of Liberty, was donated to the US by France and is an artistic personification of liberty.


The modern concept of political liberty has its origins in the Greek concepts of freedom and slavery.[8] To be free, to the Greeks, was not to have a master, to be independent from a master (to live as one likes).[9] That was the original Greek concept of freedom. It is closely linked with the concept of democracy, as Aristotle put it:

"This, then, is one note of liberty which all democrats affirm to be the principle of their state. Another is that a man should live as he likes. This, they say, is the privilege of a freeman, since, on the other hand, not to live as a man likes is the mark of a slave. This is the second characteristic of democracy, whence has arisen the claim of men to be ruled by none, if possible, or, if this is impossible, to rule and be ruled in turns; and so it contributes to the freedom based upon equality."[10]

This applied only to free men. In Athens, for instance, women could not vote or hold office and were legally and socially dependent on a male relative.[11]
The populations of the Persian Empire enjoyed some degree of freedom. Citizens of all religions and ethnic groups were given the same rights and had the same freedom of religion, women had the same rights as men, and slavery was abolished (550 BC). All the palaces of the kings of Persia were built by paid workers in an era when slaves typically did such work.[12]
In the Buddhist Maurya Empire of ancient India, citizens of all religions and ethnic groups had some rights to freedom, tolerance, and equality. The need for tolerance on an egalitarian basis can be found in the Edicts of Ashoka the Great, which emphasize the importance of tolerance in public policy by the government. The slaughter or capture of prisoners of war also appears to have been condemned by Ashoka.[13] Slavery also appears to have been non-existent in the Maurya Empire.[14] However, according to Hermann Kulke and Dietmar Rothermund, "Ashoka's orders seem to have been resisted right from the beginning."[15]
Roman law also embraced certain limited forms of liberty, even under the rule of the Roman Emperors. However, these liberties were accorded only to Roman citizens. Many of the liberties enjoyed under Roman law endured through the Middle Ages, but were enjoyed solely by the nobility, rarely by the common man.[citation needed] The idea of inalienable and universal liberties had to wait until the Age of Enlightenment.
Social contract[edit]




Eugène Delacroix – Liberty Leading the People (La liberté guidant le people) (1830)






In French Liberty. British Slavery (1792), James Gillray caricatured French "liberty" as the opportunity to starve and British "slavery" as bloated complaints about taxation.


The social contract theory, most influentially formulated by Hobbes, John Locke and Rousseau (though first suggested by Plato in The Republic), was among the first to provide a political classification of rights, in particular through the notion of sovereignty and of natural rights. The thinkers of the Enlightenment reasoned that law governed both heavenly and human affairs, and that law gave the king his power, rather than the king's power giving force to law. This conception of law would find its culmination in the ideas of Montesquieu. The conception of law as a relationship between individuals, rather than families, came to the fore, and with it the increasing focus on individual liberty as a fundamental reality, given by "Nature and Nature's God," which, in the ideal state, would be as universal as possible.
In On Liberty, John Stuart Mill sought to define the "...nature and limits of the power which can be legitimately exercised by society over the individual," and as such, he describes an inherent and continuous antagonism between liberty and authority and thus, the prevailing question becomes "how to make the fitting adjustment between individual independence and social control".[4]
Origins of political freedom[edit]
England and Great Britain[edit]
England and following the Act of Union 1707 Great Britain, laid down the cornerstones to the concept of individual liberty.
In 1166 Henry II of England transformed English law by passing the Assize of Clarendon act. The act, a forerunner to trial by jury, started the abolition of trial by combat and trial by ordeal.[16]
In 1215 the Magna Carta was drawn up, it became the cornerstone of liberty in first England, Great Britain and later, the world.[17][18]
In 1689 the Bill of Rights grants 'freedom of speech in Parliament', which lays out some of the earliest civil rights.[19]
In 1859 an essay by the philosopher John Stuart Mill, entitled On Liberty argues for toleration and individuality. If any opinion is compelled to silence, that opinion may, for aught we can certainly know, be true. To deny this is to assume our own infallibility.[20][21]
In 1958 Two Concepts of Liberty, by Isaiah Berlin, determines 'negative liberty' as an obstacle, as evident from 'positive liberty' which promotes self-mastery and the concepts of freedom.[22]
In 1948 British representatives attempt to and are prevented from adding a legal framework to the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. (It was not until 1976 that the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights came into force, giving a legal status to most of the Declaration.) [23]
United States[edit]
According to the 1776 United States Declaration of Independence, all men have a natural right to "life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness". But this declaration of liberty was troubled from the outset by the presence of slavery. Slave owners argued that their liberty was paramount, since it involved property, their slaves, and that the slaves themselves had no rights that any White man was obliged to recognize. The Supreme Court, in the Dred Scott decision, upheld this principle. It was not until 1866, following the Civil War, that the US Constitution was amended to extend these rights to persons of color, and not until 1920 that these rights were extended to women.[24]
By the later half of the 20th century, liberty was expanded further to prohibit government interference with personal choices. In the United States Supreme Court decision Griswold v. Connecticut, Justice William O. Douglas argued that liberties relating to personal relationships, such as marriage, have a unique primacy of place in the hierarchy of freedoms.[25] Jacob M. Appel has summarized this principle:

I am grateful that I have rights in the proverbial public square – but, as a practical matter, my most cherished rights are those that I possess in my bedroom and hospital room and death chamber. Most people are far more concerned that they can control their own bodies than they are about petitioning Congress.[26]

In modern America, various competing ideologies have divergent views about how best to promote liberty. Liberals in the original sense of the word see equality as a necessary component of freedom. Progressives stress freedom from business monopoly as essential. Libertarians disagree, and see economic freedom as best. The Tea Party movement sees big government as the enemy of freedom.[27][28]
France[edit]
France supported the Americans in their revolt against English rule and, in 1789, overthrew their own monarchy, with the cry of "Liberté, égalité, fraternité". The bloodbath that followed, known as the reign of terror, soured many people on the idea of liberty. Edmund Burke, considered one of the fathers of conservatism, wrote "The French had shewn themselves the ablest architects of ruin that had hitherto existed in the world."[29]
Ideologies[edit]
Liberalism[edit]
Main article: Liberalism


Part of a series on


Liberalism







Schools



History of liberalism
Contributions to liberal theory









Ideas



Civil and political rights
Cultural liberalism
Democracy

Liberal democracy


Economic liberalism
Egalitarianism
Free market
Free trade
Freedom of the press
Freedom of religion
Freedom of speech
Gender equality
Harm principle
Internationalism
Laissez-faire
Liberty
Market economy
Natural and legal rights
Negative / positive liberty
Open society
Permissive society
Private property
Rule of law
Secularism
Separation of church and state
Social contract
Welfare state









Variants



Anarcho-capitalism
Civic nationalism
Classical liberalism
Conservative liberalism
Democratic liberalism
Geolibertarianism
Green liberalism
Liberal feminism

Equity feminism


Liberal internationalism
Liberal socialism
Libertarianism
Muscular liberalism
Neoliberalism
Ordoliberalism
Radical centrism
Radicalism
Religious liberalism

Christian
Islamic


Secular liberalism
Social liberalism
Technoliberalism









People



Rifa'a al-Tahtawi
Juan Bautista Alberdi
Chu Anping
Matthew Arnold
Raymond Aron
Frédéric Bastiat
Simone de Beauvoir
Jeremy Bentham
Isaiah Berlin
Eduard Bernstein
William Beveridge
Norberto Bobbio
Ludwig Joseph Brentano
John Bright
Edmund Burke
Thomas Carlyle
Anders Chydenius
Richard Cobden
Marquis de Condorcet
Benjamin Constant
Benedetto Croce
Jean le Rond d'Alembert
Ralf Dahrendorf
John Dewey
Charles Dickens
Denis Diderot
Zhang Dongsun
Ronald Dworkin
Ahmed Lutfi el-Sayed
Ralph Waldo Emerson
Karl-Hermann Flach
Milton Friedman
John Kenneth Galbraith
William Lloyd Garrison
José Ortega y Gasset
David Lloyd George
William Gladstone
Friedrich Hayek
Auberon Herbert
Thomas Hobbes
Leonard Trelawny Hobhouse
John A. Hobson
Qin Hui
Wilhelm von Humboldt
Piero Gobetti
Francisco Luís Gomes
John Gray
Thomas Hill Green
Thomas Jefferson
Zef Jubani
Immanuel Kant
Namık Kemal
John Maynard Keynes
Will Kymlicka
John Locke
Salvador de Madariaga
James Madison
Harriet Martineau
Minoo Masani
James Mill
John Stuart Mill
John Milton
Ludwig von Mises
Donald Barkly Molteno
Leo Chiozza Money
Charles de Montesquieu
José María Luis Mora
Chantal Mouffe
Dadabhai Naoroji
Friedrich Naumann
Robert Nozick
Bertil Ohlin
Thomas Paine
Alan Paton
Karl Raimund Popper
Richard Price
Joseph Priestley
Guillermo Prieto
François Quesnay
Ignacio Ramírez
Ayn Rand
Walther Rathenau
John Rawls
Joseph Raz
David Ricardo
Wilhelm Röpke
Richard Rorty
Carlo Rosselli
Murray Rothbard
Jean-Jacques Rousseau
Jean-Baptiste Say
Amartya Sen
Li Shenzhi
Hu Shih
Algernon Sidney
Emmanuel Sieyès
İbrahim Şinasi
Adam Smith
Hernando de Soto
Herbert Spencer
Baruch Spinoza
Anne Louise Germaine de Staël
William Graham Sumner
R. H. Tawney
Johan Rudolf Thorbecke
Henry David Thoreau
Alexis de Tocqueville
Antoine Destutt de Tracy
Anne Robert Jacques Turgot
Voltaire
Lester Frank Ward
Max Weber
Mary Wollstonecraft
Tao Xingzhi
Gu Zhun









Organizations



Liberal parties
Africa Liberal Network (ALN)

Alliance of Liberals and
Democrats for Europe (ALDE)


Alliance of Liberals and Democrats
for Europe Party (ALDEP)


Arab Liberal Federation (ALF)


Council of Asian Liberals
and Democrats (CALD)

European Democratic Party (EDP)
European Liberal Youth (LYMEC)
European Party for Individual Liberty (EPIL)

International Alliance of
Libertarian Parties (IALP)


International Federation of
Liberal Youth (IFLRY)

Liberal International

Liberal Network for
Latin America (RELIAL)


Liberal South East
European Network (LIBSEEN)










Regional variants



Europe
Latin America
Albania
Armenia
Australia
Austria
Belgium
Bolivia
Brazil
Bulgaria
Canada
China
Chile
Colombia
Croatia
Cuba
Cyprus
Czech lands
Denmark
Ecuador
Egypt
Estonia
Finland
France
Germany
Greece
Honduras
Hong Kong
Hungary
Iceland
India
Iran
Israel
Italy
Japan
Latvia
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Macedonia
Mexico
Moldova
Montenegro
Netherlands
New Zealand
Nicaragua
Nigeria
Norway
Panama
Paraguay
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russia
Senegal
Serbia
Slovakia
Slovenia
Spain
South Africa
South Korea
Sweden
Switzerland
Taiwan
Thailand
Tunisia
Turkey
Ukraine
United Kingdom
United States
Uruguay
Venezuela
Zimbabwe









Related topics



Democratic capitalism
Democratic education
Liberal bias in academia
Liberal conservatism
Liberal socialism
National liberalism
Regressive left









 Liberalism portal
 Politics portal







v
t
e





According to the Concise Oxford Dictionary of Politics, liberalism is "the belief that it is the aim of politics to preserve individual rights and to maximize freedom of choice". But they point out that there is considerable discussion about how to achieve those goals. Every discussion of freedom depends on three key components: who is free, what they are free to do, and what forces restrict their freedom.[30] John Gray argues that the core belief of liberalism is toleration. Liberals allow others freedom to do what they want, in exchange for having the same freedom in return. This idea of freedom is personal rather than political.[31] William Safire points out that liberalism is attacked by both the Right and the Left: by the Right for defending such practices as abortion, homosexuality, and atheism, by the Left for defending free enterprise and the rights of the individual over the collective.[32]
Libertarianism[edit]
Main articles: Libertarianism, Minarchism, Libertarian Socialism, and Anarcho-capitalism


Part of a series on


Libertarianism




Origins


Age of Enlightenment
Aristotelianism
Classical liberalism








Concepts


Anti-authoritarianism
Antimilitarism
Anti-statism
Anti-war
Argumentation ethics
Class struggle
Communes
Counter-economics
Crypto-anarchism
Decentralization
Direct action
Dispute resolution organization
Economic freedom
Egalitarianism
Expropriative anarchism
Free market
Free-market environmentalism
Free migration
Free society
Free trade
Free will
Freedom of association
Freedom of contract
Gift economy
Homestead principle
Illegalism
Individuality
Individualism
Individual reclamation
Laissez-faire
Liberty
Limited government
Localism
Marriage privatization
Natural and legal rights
Night-watchman state
Non-aggression principle
Non-interventionism
Non-politics
Non-voting
Participatory economics
Polycentric law
Private defense agency
Propaganda of the deed
Property
Really Really Free Market
Refusal of work
Restorative justice
Self-governance
Self-ownership
Single tax
Spontaneous order
Squatting
Stateless society
Tax resistance
Title-transfer theory of contract
Voluntary association
Voluntary society
Wage slavery
Workers' self-management








Schools


Agorism
Anarchism
Anarcho-capitalism
Autarchism

Christian libertarianism
Collectivist anarchism
Consequentialist libertarianism
Free-market anarchism
Fusionism
Geolibertarianism
Georgism
Green anarchism
Green libertarianism
Individualist anarchism
Insurrectionary anarchism
Left-libertarianism
Left-wing market anarchism
Libertarian communism
Libertarian Marxism
Libertarian socialism
Libertarian transhumanism
Minarchism
Mutualism
Natural-rights libertarianism
Paleolibertarianism
Panarchism
Right-libertarianism
Social anarchism
Voluntaryism








People


Émile Armand
Mikhail Bakunin
Frédéric Bastiat
Alexander Berkman
Walter Block
Murray Bookchin
Jason Brennan
Bryan Caplan
Kevin Carson
Voltairine de Cleyre
Joseph Déjacque
Buenaventura Durruti
Francesc Ferrer i Guàrdia
Ricardo Flores Magón
David D. Friedman
Milton Friedman
Luigi Galleani
Henry George
William Godwin
Emma Goldman
Paul Goodman
Friedrich Hayek
Henry Hazlitt
Auberon Herbert
Karl Hess
Thomas Hodgskin
Hans-Hermann Hoppe
Samuel Edward Konkin III
Peter Kropotkin
Étienne de La Boétie
Gustav Landauer
Rose Wilder Lane
Roderick T. Long
Tibor R. Machan
Nestor Makhno
Errico Malatesta
Wendy McElroy
Carl Menger
Louise Michel
John Stuart Mill
Ludwig von Mises
Tim Moen
Gustave de Molinari
Johann Most
Albert Jay Nock
Robert Nozick
Marco Pannella
Isabel Paterson
Ron Paul
Francesc Pi i Margall
Pierre-Joseph Proudhon
Ayn Rand
Rudolf Rocker
Murray Rothbard
Jean-Baptiste Say
J. Neil Schulman
Herbert Spencer
Lysander Spooner
Max Stirner
Henry David Thoreau
Leo Tolstoy
Benjamin Tucker
Voline
Josiah Warren
Thomas Woods








Aspects



Anarcho-capitalism and
minarchism

Criticisms
Intellectual property
Internal debates
LGBT rights
Objectivism
Political parties
Theories of law








Organizations


International Alliance of Libertarian Parties
Students For Liberty








Related topics


Austrian School of economics
Civil libertarianism
Constitutionalism
Libertarian conservatism
Libertarian Democrat
Libertarian hip hop
Libertarian Republican
Libertarian science fiction
Libertarian transhumanism
Libertarianism in the United States
Market liberalism
Objectivism
Public choice theory
Small government
Technolibertarianism








Outline of libertarianism
Libertarianism portal







v
t
e





According to the Encyclopædia Britannica, Libertarians hold liberty as their primary political value.[33] Their approach to implementing liberty involves opposing any governmental coercion, aside from that which is necessary to prevent individuals from coercing each other.[34]
Republican liberty[edit]


Part of the Politics series on


Republicanism




Central concepts


Anti-monarchism
Popular sovereignty
Republic
Res publica
Social contract








Schools


Classical republicanism
Neo-republicanism








Important thinkers


Hannah Arendt
Cicero
James Harrington
Thomas Jefferson
John Locke
James Madison
Montesquieu
Philip Pettit
Polybius
Jean Jacques Rousseau
Michael Sandel
Algernon Sidney
Quentin Skinner
Cass Sunstein
Mary Wollstonecraft








History


Roman Republic
Gaṇa sangha
Classical Athens
Republic of Venice
Republic of Genoa
Republic of Florence
Dutch Republic
American Revolution
French Revolution
Spanish American wars of independence
Trienio Liberal
French Revolution of 1848
5 October 1910 revolution
Xinhai Revolution
Russian Revolution
German Revolution of 1918–19
Turkish War of Independence
Mongolian Revolution of 1921
11 September 1922 Revolution
Spanish Civil War
Birth of the Italian Republic
Egyptian Revolution of 1952
14 July Revolution
North Yemen Civil War
Zanzibar Revolution
1969 Libyan coup d'état
Cambodian coup of 1970
Third Hellenic Republic
Iranian Revolution
1987 Fijian coups d'état
Nepalese Civil War








By country


Australia
Barbados
Canada
Ireland
Jamaica
Morocco
Netherlands
New Zealand
Spain
Sweden
Turkey
United Kingdom
United States








Related topics


Communitarianism
Liberalism
Monarchism






Politics portal





v
t
e





According to republican theorists of freedom, like the historian Quentin Skinner[35][36] or the philosopher Philip Pettit,[37] one's liberty should not be viewed as the absence of interference in one's actions, but as non-domination. According to this view, which originates in the Roman Digest, to be a liber homo, a free man, means not being subject to another's arbitrary will, that is to say, dominated by another. They also cite Machiavelli who asserted that you must be a member of a free self-governing civil association, a republic, if you are to enjoy individual liberty.[38]
The predominance of this view of liberty among parliamentarians during the English Civil War resulted in the creation of the liberal concept of freedom as non-interference in Thomas Hobbes' Leviathan.[citation needed]
Socialism and Marxism[edit]
Main articles: Socialism and Marxism


Part of a series on


Socialism







Development


History of socialism
Socialist calculation debate
Socialist economics








Ideas


Calculation in kind
Collective ownership
Cooperative
Common ownership
Economic democracy
Economic planning
Equal opportunity
Free association
Industrial democracy
Input–output model
Internationalism
Labour voucher
Material balance planning
Peer‑to‑peer economics
(Sharing economy)
Production for use
Social dividend
Social ownership
Socialism in One Country
Socialist mode of production
State ownership

To each according
to his contribution / needs

Workplace democracy
Workers' self-management








Models



Decentralized planning
Participatory economics


Market socialism


Economic democracy




Lange model
Mutualism
Ricardian socialism





Planned economy
Soviet-type
Project Cybersyn


Socialist market economy
Socialist-oriented market









Variants



African
Arab
Agrarian
Anarchist
Anarcho-communism
Anarcho-syndicalism
Authoritarian
Blanquism
Communism
Democratic
Ethical
Ecological
Feminist
Gandhian
Guild
Impossibilism
Leninism
Liberal
Libertarian
Market
Marhaenism
Marxism
Maoism
Municipal
Owenism
Platformism
Reformism
Religious
Revisionism
Revolutionary
Ricardian
Scientific
Social democracy
Socialist nationalism
State
Syndicalism
Technocracy
Third World
Trotskyism
Utopian
with Chinese characteristics
Zionist
21st-century









History by country



Australia
Bangladesh
Brazil
Canada
Estonia
Hong Kong
India
Iran
Netherlands
New Zealand
Pakistan
Tunisia
United Kingdom
United States









People



Charles Hall
Henri de Saint-Simon
François-Noël Babeuf
Robert Owen
Charles Fourier
William Thompson
Thomas Hodgskin
Pierre-Joseph Proudhon
Louis Blanc
Mikhail Bakunin
Karl Marx
Friedrich Engels
Ferdinand Lassalle
William Morris
Mary Harris Jones
Peter Kropotkin
Eduard Bernstein
Errico Malatesta
Fred M. Taylor
Eugene Debs
Georgi Plekhanov
John Dewey
Enrico Barone
W. E. B. Du Bois
Emma Goldman
Rosa Luxemburg
Léon Blum
Antonie Pannekoek
Bertrand Russell
Luis Emilio Recabarren
Albert Einstein
Clement Attlee
Karl Polanyi
Nestor Makhno
G. D. H. Cole
Imre Nagy
Einar Gerhardsen
George Orwell
Léopold Sédar Senghor
Salvador Allende
François Mitterrand
Nelson Mandela
Gamal Abdel Nasser
Murray Bookchin
Alexander Dubček
Howard Zinn
Noam Chomsky
Martin Luther King Jr.
Mikhail Gorbachev
Bernie Sanders
Tariq Ali
Abdullah Öcalan
Slavoj Žižek
Jeremy Corbyn
Cornel West
Jack Layton
Hugo Chávez
Chris Hedges
Yanis Varoufakis
Pablo Iglesias









Organizations



First International
(International Workingmen's Association)

Second International

Third International
(Comintern)

Fourth International
Fifth International
Labour and Socialist International
Socialist International

World Federation of
Democratic Youth


International Union of
Socialist Youth

World Socialist Movement

International Committee
of the Fourth International

Progressive Alliance








Related topics



Anarchism
Capitalism
Communist society
Criticism of capitalism
Economic system
French Left
List of socialist economists
Nanosocialism
Progressivism
Right-wing socialism
Socialism and LGBT rights
Socialist Party
Socialist state









Socialism portal
Economics portal
Politics portal







v
t
e





Socialists view freedom as a concrete situation as opposed to a purely abstract ideal. Freedom involves agency to pursue one's creative interests unhindered by coercive social relationships that one is forced to engage in in order to survive under a given social system. From this perspective, freedom requires both the material economic conditions that make freedom possible alongside the social relationships and institutions conducive to freedom. As such, the socialist concept of freedom is a specific interpretation of the liberal concept of freedom.[39]
The socialist conception of freedom is closely related to the socialist view of creativity and individuality. Influenced by Karl Marx's concept of alienated labor, socialists understand freedom to be the ability for an individual to engage in creative work in the absence of alienation, where alienated labor refers to work people are forced to perform and un-alienated work refers to individuals pursuing their own creative interests.[40]
For Karl Marx, meaningful freedom is only attainable in a communist society characterized by superabundance and free access, would eliminate the need for alienated labor and enable individuals to pursue their own creative interests, leaving them to develop their full potentialities. This goes alongside Marx's emphasis on the reduction of the average length of the workday to expand the "realm of freedom" for each person.[41][42] Marx's notion of communist society and human freedom is thus radically individualistic.[43]
Cultural prerequisites[edit]
Some authors have suggested that a virtuous culture must exist as a prerequisite for liberty. Benjamin Franklin stated that "only a virtuous people are capable of freedom. As nations become corrupt and vicious, they have more need of masters."[44] Madison likewise declared: "To suppose that any form of government will secure liberty or happiness without any virtue in the people, is a chimerical idea."[45] John Adams acknowledged: "Our constitution was made only for a moral and religious people. It is wholly inadequate to the government of any other."[46]
Historical writings on liberty[edit]

John Locke (1689). Two Treatises of Government: In the Former, the False Principles, and Foundation of Sir Robert Filmer, and His Followers, Are Detected and Overthrown. the Latter Is an Essay Concerning the True Original, Extent, and End of Civil Government. London: Awnsham Churchill. 
Frédéric Bastiat (1850). The Law. Paris: Guillaumin & Co. 
John Stuart Mill (1859). On Liberty. London: John W Parker and Son. 
James Fitzjames Stephen (1874). Liberty, Equality, Fraternity. London: Smith, Elder, & Co. 

See also[edit]


Civil liberties
Free will
Gratis versus Libre
Liberté, égalité, fraternité
Liberty (goddess)
List of freedom indices
Political freedom
Real freedom
Rule according to higher law


References[edit]


^ "The fact of not being controlled by or subject to fate; freedom of will." Oxford English Dictionary.[1]
^ "Each of those social and political freedoms which are considered to be the entitlement of all members of a community; a civil liberty." Oxford English Dictionary.[2]
^ "Freedom from the bondage or dominating influence of sin, spiritual servitude, worldly ties." Oxford English Dictionary.[3]
^ a b Mill, J.S. (1869)., "Chapter I: Introductory", On Liberty. http://www.bartleby.com/130/1.html
^ Marcus Aurelius, "Meditations", Book I, Wordsworth Classics of World Literature, ISBN 1853264865
^ Two Treatises on Government: A Translation into Modern English, ISR, 2009, p. 76
^ Westbrooks, Logan Hart (2008) "Personal Freedom" p. 134 In Owens, William (compiler) (2008) Freedom: Keys to Freedom from Twenty-one National Leaders Main Street Publications, Memphis, Tennessee, p3–38, ISBN 978-0-9801152-0-8
^ Rodriguez, Junius P. (2007) The Historical Encyclopedia of World Slavery: A–K ; Vol. II, L–Z,
^ Mogens Herman Hansen, 2010, Democratic Freedom and the Concept of Freedom in Plato and Aristotle
^ Aristotle, Politics 6.2
^ Mikalson, Jon (2009). Ancient Greek Religion (2nd ed.). Wiley-Blackwell. p. 129. ISBN 978-1405181778. 
^ Arthur Henry Robertson, John Graham Merrills (1996). Human Rights in the World: An Introduction to the Study of the International Protection of Human Rights. Manchester University Press. ISBN 0-7190-4923-7.
^ Amartya Sen (1997). Human Rights and Asian Values. ISBN 0-87641-151-0.
^ Arrian, Indica:

"This also is remarkable in India, that all Indians are free, and no Indian at all is a slave. In this the Indians agree with the Lacedaemonians. Yet the Lacedaemonians have Helots for slaves, who perform the duties of slaves; but the Indians have no slaves at all, much less is any Indian a slave."


^ Hermann Kulke, Dietmar Rothermund (2004). A history of India. Routledge. p. 66. ISBN 0-415-32920-5
^ "The History of Human Rights". Liberty. Retrieved 17 August 2015. 
^ Danziger & Gillingham 2004, p. 278.
^ Breay 2010, p. 48.
^ "Bill of Rights". British Library. Retrieved 23 June 2015. 
^ Mill, John Stuart (1859). On Liberty (2 ed.). London: John W.Parker & Son. 
^ Mill, John Stuart (1864). On Liberty (3 ed.). London: Longman, Green, Longman Roberts & Green. 
^ Carter, Ian (5 March 2012). "Positive and Negative Liberty". Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Retrieved 16 August 2015. 
^ Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Final authorized text. The British Library. September 1952. Retrieved 16 August 2015. 
^ The Constitution of the United States of America, The World Almanac and book of facts (2012), pp. 485–86, Amendment XIV "Citizenship Rights not to be abridged.", Amendment XV "Race no bar to voting rights.", Amendment XIX, "Giving nationwide suffrage to women.". World Almanac Books, ISBN 978-1-60057-147-3.
^ Griswold v. Connecticut. 381 U.S. 479 (1965) Decided June 7, 1965
^ "A Culture of Liberty". The Huffington Post. 21 July 2009. 
^ Iain McLean and Alistair McMillan, Concise Oxford Dictionary of Politics, 3rd edition, Oxford University Press, 2009, ISBN 978-0-19-920516-5.
^ Capitol Reader (21 June 2013). Summary of Give Us Liberty: A Tea Party Manifesto – Dick Armey and Matt Kibbe. Primento. pp. 9–10. ISBN 978-2-511-00084-7. 
Haidt, Jonathan (16 October 2010). "What the Tea Partiers Really Want". Wall Street Journal. Dow Jones & Company, Inc. Retrieved 17 March 2015. 
Ronald P. Formisano (4 April 2012). The Tea Party: A Brief History. JHU Press. p. 72. ISBN 978-1-4214-0596-4. 
^ Clark, J. C. D., Edmund Burke: Reflections on the Revolution in France: a Critical Edition, 2001, Stanford. pp. 66–67, ISBN 0-8047-3923-4.
^ Concise Oxford Dictionary of Politics, Oxford University Press, 2009, ISBN 978-0-19-920516-5.
^ John Gray, Two Faces of Liberalism, The New Press, 1990, ISBN 1-56584-589-7.
^ William Safire, Safire's Political Dictionary, "Liberalism takes criticism from both the right and the left,...", p. 388, Oxford University Press, 2008, ISBN 978-0-19534334-2.
^ "Libertarianism". Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved 2014-05-20. libertarianism, political philosophy that takes individual liberty to be the primary political value 
^ David Kelley, "Life, liberty, and property." Social Philosophy and Policy (1984) 1#2 pp. 108–18.
^ Quentin Skinner, contributor and co-editor, Republicanism: A Shared European Heritage, Volume I: Republicanism and Constitutionalism in Early Modern Europe, Cambridge University Press, 2002, ISBN 978-0-521-67235-1
^ Quentil Skinner, contributor and co-editor, Republicanism: A Shared European Heritage, Volume II: The Values of Republicanism in Early Modern Europe Cambridge University Press, 2002, ISBN 978-0-521-67234-4
^ Philip Pettit, Republicanism: a theory of freedom and government, 1997
^ Niccolò Machiavelli, Discourses on Livy, Harvey C. Mansfield & Nathan Tarcov, translators, University of Chicago Press, 1996, ISBN 0-226-50036-5
^ Bhargava, Rajeev (2008). Political Theory: An Introduction. Pearson Education India. p. 255. Genuine freedom as Marx described it, would become possible only when life activity was no longer constrained by the requirements of production or by the limitations of material scarcity…Thus, in the socialist view, freedom is not an abstract ideal but a concrete situation that ensues only when certain conditions of interaction between man and nature (material conditions), and man and other men (social relations) are fulfilled. 
^ Goodwin, Barbara (2007). Using Political Ideas. Wiley. pp. 107–09. ISBN 978-0470025529. Socialists consider the pleasures of creation equal, if not superior, to those of acquisition and consumption, hence the importance of work in socialist society. Whereas the capitalist/Calvinist work ethic applauds the moral virtue of hard work, idealistic socialists emphasize the joy. This vision of 'creative man', Homo Faber, has consequences for their view of freedom...Socialist freedom is the freedom to unfold and develop one's potential, especially through unalienated work. 
^ Wood, John Cunningham (1996). Karl Marx's Economics: Critical Assessments I. Routledge. pp. 248–49. ISBN 978-0415087148. Affluence and increased provision of free goods would reduce alienation in the work process and, in combination with (1), the alienation of man's 'species-life'. Greater leisure would create opportunities for creative and artistic activity outside of work. 
^ Peffer, Rodney G. (2014). Marxism, Morality, and Social Justice. Princeton University Press. p. 73. ISBN 9780691608884. Marx believed the reduction of necessary labor time to be, evaluatively speaking, an absolute necessity. He claims that real wealth is the developed productive force of all individuals. It is no longer the labor time but the disposable time that is the measure of wealth. 
^ Karl Marx on Equality, by Woods, Allen. http://philosophy.fas.nyu.edu/docs/IO/19808/Allen-Wood-Marx-on-Equality.pdf: "A society that has transcended class antagonisms, therefore, would not be one in which some truly universal interest at last reigns, to which individual interests must be sacrificed. It would instead be a society in which individuals freely act as the truly human individuals they are. Marx's radical communism was, in this way, also radically individualistic."
^ The Writings of Benjamin Franklin 569 (Albert H. Smyth ed., 1970).
^ The Writings of James Madison 223 (Gaillard Hunt ed., 1904).
^ John R. Howe, Jr., The Changing Political Thought of John Adams 165 (1966) (quoting from John Adams' "Reply to the Massachusetts Militia," Oct. 11, 1789).


Bibliography[edit]

Breay, Claire (2010). Magna Carta: Manuscripts and Myths. London, UK: The British Library. ISBN 978-0-7123-5833-0. 
Breay, Claire; Harrison, Julian, eds. (2015). Magna Carta: Law, Liberty, Legacy. London: The British Library. ISBN 978-0-7123-5764-7. 
Danziger, Danny; Gillingham, John (2004). 1215: The Year of Magna Carta. Hodder Paperbacks. ISBN 978-0340824757. 

External links[edit]


Library resources about
Liberty





Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries





 Media related to Liberty at Wikimedia Commons







v
t
e


Liberty



Concepts



Positive liberty
Negative liberty
Cognitive liberty
Social liberty
Rights
Free will
Moral responsibility
Goddess of Liberty





By type



Academic
Civil
Economic
Intellectual
Morphological
Political





By right



Assembly
Association
Choice
Education
Information
Movement
Press
Religion
Public speech
Thought












v
t
e


Substantive human rights




Note: What is considered a human right is controversial and not all the topics listed are universally accepted as human rights.



Civil and political



Cannabis rights
Equality before the law
Freedom from arbitrary arrest and detention
Freedom of assembly
Freedom of association
Freedom from cruel and unusual punishment
Freedom from discrimination
Freedom from exile
Freedom of information
Freedom of movement
Freedom of religion
Freedom from slavery
Freedom of speech
Freedom of thought
Freedom from torture
Legal aid
Liberty
LGBT rights
Nationality
Personhood
Presumption of innocence
Right of asylum
Right to die
Right to a fair trial
Right to family life
Right to keep and bear arms
Right to life
Right to petition
Right to privacy
Right to protest
Right to refuse medical treatment
Right of self-defense
Security of person
Universal suffrage






Economic, social
and cultural




Digital rights
Equal pay for equal work
Fair remuneration
Labor rights
Right to an adequate standard of living
Right to clothing
Right to development
Right to education
Right to food
Right to health
Right to housing
Right to Internet access
Right to property
Right to public participation
Right of reply
Right of return
Right to science and culture
Right to social security
Right to water
Right to work
Trade union membership





Sexual and
reproductive



Abortion
Family planning
Freedom from involuntary female genital mutilation
Intersex human rights
LGBT rights
Reproductive health
Right to sexuality





Violations



Corporal punishment





War and conflict



Civilian
Combatant
Freedom from genocide
Prisoner of war
War rape









Authority control



LCCN: sh85076480
GND: 4018326-9
HDS: 17468
NDL: 00574899











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Liberty&oldid=817425767"					Categories: Social conceptsLiberty symbolsPolitical conceptsLibertarian theoryVirtueHidden categories: All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from July 2016Articles with unsourced statements from August 2015Wikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiers