


Liberal Party of Canada
Parti libéral du Canada






Leader
Justin Trudeau


President
Anna Gainey


Deputy Leader
Ralph Goodale


Founder
George Brown


Founded
1867 (151 years ago) (1867)


Preceded by
Clear Grits,
Parti rouge


Headquarters
Constitution Square, Ottawa, Ontario


Youth wing
Young Liberals of Canada


Ideology
Liberalism
Social liberalism[1][2][3][4]


Political position
Centre to centre-left[5][6][7]


International affiliation
Liberal International[8]


Colours
     Red


Party members in the Senate[a]

16 / 105







Seats in the House of Commons

183 / 338







Website


liberal.ca





Politics of Canada
Political parties
Elections





The Liberal Party of Canada (French: Parti libéral du Canada), colloquially known as the Grits, is the oldest federal political party in Canada. The party espouses the principles of liberalism and generally sits at the centre of the Canadian political spectrum.[10][11][12] The Liberal Party is traditionally positioned to the left of the Conservative Party of Canada and to the right of the New Democratic Party (NDP).[13]
The party has dominated federal politics for much of Canada's history, holding power for almost 69 years in the 20th century—more than any other party in a developed country—and as a result, it is sometimes referred to as Canada's "natural governing party".[14][15] The Liberals' signature policies and legislative decisions include universal health care, the Canada Pension Plan, Canada Student Loans, peacekeeping, multilateralism, official bilingualism, official multiculturalism, patriating the Canadian constitution and the entrenchment of Canada's Charter of Rights and Freedoms, the Clarity Act, and making same-sex marriage legal nationwide.[10][16]
During the beginning of the 21st century, the party lost a significant amount of support, to the benefit of both the Conservatives and the NDP. In the 2011 federal election, the Liberals had the worst showing in its history, capturing only 19 percent of the popular vote and 34 seats—becoming the third-place party in the House of Commons for the first time.[17] In the 2015 federal election, the Liberal Party under Justin Trudeau returned to prominence with its best showing since the 2000 election, winning 39.5 percent of the popular vote and 184 seats, thus regaining a majority of seats in the House of Commons.



Contents


1 Principles, beliefs, politics and policies

1.1 Current policies


2 History

2.1 19th century

2.1.1 Origins
2.1.2 Confederation
2.1.3 Laurier era


2.2 20th century

2.2.1 Party organization
2.2.2 Canadian sovereignty
2.2.3 Liberals and the social safety net
2.2.4 Pierre Elliott Trudeau era
2.2.5 Post-Trudeau party in opposition
2.2.6 Liberals under Chrétien


2.3 Into the 21st century

2.3.1 Martin succeeds Chrétien
2.3.2 2006 Convention and Dion
2.3.3 Leadership campaign and coalition
2.3.4 Ignatieff and the 2011 election
2.3.5 Justin Trudeau


2.4 Party systems and realignment model


3 Regional Liberal parties
4 Electoral performance
5 History of leaders
6 Presidents of the National Liberal Federation/Liberal Party of Canada
7 See also
8 Notes
9 References
10 Further reading

10.1 Archival holdings


11 External links



Principles, beliefs, politics and policies[edit]


Part of a series on


Liberalism







Schools



History of liberalism
Contributions to liberal theory









Ideas



Civil and political rights
Cultural liberalism
Democracy

Liberal democracy


Economic liberalism
Egalitarianism
Free market
Free trade
Freedom of the press
Freedom of religion
Freedom of speech
Gender equality
Harm principle
Internationalism
Laissez-faire
Liberty
Market economy
Natural and legal rights
Negative / positive liberty
Open society
Permissive society
Private property
Rule of law
Secularism
Separation of church and state
Social contract
Welfare state









Variants



Anarcho-capitalism
Civic nationalism
Classical liberalism
Conservative liberalism
Democratic liberalism
Geolibertarianism
Green liberalism
Liberal feminism

Equity feminism


Liberal internationalism
Liberal socialism
Libertarianism
Muscular liberalism
Neoliberalism
Ordoliberalism
Radical centrism
Radicalism
Religious liberalism

Christian
Islamic


Secular liberalism
Social liberalism
Technoliberalism









People



Rifa'a al-Tahtawi
Juan Bautista Alberdi
Chu Anping
Matthew Arnold
Raymond Aron
Frédéric Bastiat
Simone de Beauvoir
Jeremy Bentham
Isaiah Berlin
Eduard Bernstein
William Beveridge
Norberto Bobbio
Ludwig Joseph Brentano
John Bright
Edmund Burke
Thomas Carlyle
Anders Chydenius
Richard Cobden
Marquis de Condorcet
Benjamin Constant
Benedetto Croce
Jean le Rond d'Alembert
Ralf Dahrendorf
John Dewey
Charles Dickens
Denis Diderot
Zhang Dongsun
Ronald Dworkin
Ahmed Lutfi el-Sayed
Ralph Waldo Emerson
Karl-Hermann Flach
Milton Friedman
John Kenneth Galbraith
William Lloyd Garrison
José Ortega y Gasset
David Lloyd George
William Gladstone
Friedrich Hayek
Auberon Herbert
Thomas Hobbes
Leonard Trelawny Hobhouse
John A. Hobson
Qin Hui
Wilhelm von Humboldt
Piero Gobetti
Francisco Luís Gomes
John Gray
Thomas Hill Green
Thomas Jefferson
Zef Jubani
Immanuel Kant
Namık Kemal
John Maynard Keynes
Will Kymlicka
John Locke
Salvador de Madariaga
James Madison
Harriet Martineau
Minoo Masani
James Mill
John Stuart Mill
John Milton
Ludwig von Mises
Donald Barkly Molteno
Leo Chiozza Money
Charles de Montesquieu
José María Luis Mora
Chantal Mouffe
Dadabhai Naoroji
Friedrich Naumann
Robert Nozick
Bertil Ohlin
Thomas Paine
Alan Paton
Karl Raimund Popper
Richard Price
Joseph Priestley
Guillermo Prieto
François Quesnay
Ignacio Ramírez
Ayn Rand
Walther Rathenau
John Rawls
Joseph Raz
David Ricardo
Wilhelm Röpke
Richard Rorty
Carlo Rosselli
Murray Rothbard
Jean-Jacques Rousseau
Jean-Baptiste Say
Amartya Sen
Li Shenzhi
Hu Shih
Algernon Sidney
Emmanuel Sieyès
İbrahim Şinasi
Adam Smith
Hernando de Soto
Herbert Spencer
Baruch Spinoza
Anne Louise Germaine de Staël
William Graham Sumner
R. H. Tawney
Johan Rudolf Thorbecke
Henry David Thoreau
Alexis de Tocqueville
Antoine Destutt de Tracy
Anne Robert Jacques Turgot
Voltaire
Lester Frank Ward
Max Weber
Mary Wollstonecraft
Tao Xingzhi
Gu Zhun









Organizations



Liberal parties
Africa Liberal Network (ALN)

Alliance of Liberals and
Democrats for Europe (ALDE)


Alliance of Liberals and Democrats
for Europe Party (ALDEP)


Arab Liberal Federation (ALF)


Council of Asian Liberals
and Democrats (CALD)

European Democratic Party (EDP)
European Liberal Youth (LYMEC)
European Party for Individual Liberty (EPIL)

International Alliance of
Libertarian Parties (IALP)


International Federation of
Liberal Youth (IFLRY)

Liberal International

Liberal Network for
Latin America (RELIAL)


Liberal South East
European Network (LIBSEEN)










Regional variants



Europe
Latin America
Albania
Armenia
Australia
Austria
Belgium
Bolivia
Brazil
Bulgaria
Canada
China
Chile
Colombia
Croatia
Cuba
Cyprus
Czech lands
Denmark
Ecuador
Egypt
Estonia
Finland
France
Germany
Greece
Honduras
Hong Kong
Hungary
Iceland
India
Iran
Israel
Italy
Japan
Latvia
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Macedonia
Mexico
Moldova
Montenegro
Netherlands
New Zealand
Nicaragua
Nigeria
Norway
Panama
Paraguay
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russia
Senegal
Serbia
Slovakia
Slovenia
Spain
South Africa
South Korea
Sweden
Switzerland
Taiwan
Thailand
Tunisia
Turkey
Ukraine
United Kingdom
United States
Uruguay
Venezuela
Zimbabwe









Related topics



Democratic capitalism
Democratic education
Liberal bias in academia
Liberal conservatism
Liberal socialism
National liberalism
Regressive left









 Liberalism portal
 Politics portal







v
t
e





The principles of the party are based on liberalism as defined by various liberal theorists and include individual freedom for present and future generations, responsibility, human dignity, a just society, political freedom, religious freedom, national unity, equality of opportunity, cultural diversity, bilingualism, and multilateralism.[18][19] In the present times, the Liberal party has favoured a variety of "big tent" policies from both right and left of the political spectrum.[15] When it formed the government from 1993 to 2006, it championed balanced budgets, and eliminated the budget deficit completely from the federal budget in 1995 by reducing spending on social programs or delegating them to the provinces, and promised to replace the Goods and Services Tax in the party's famous Red Book.[20] It also legalized same-sex marriage and allowed the use of cannabis for medical purposes, and proposed complete decriminalization of possession of small amounts of it.
Current policies[edit]
During the 2015 election, the Liberal party's proposed policies included:[21]

Cut the middle class tax bracket ($45,000–$90,000) from 22% to 20.5% and create a new tax bracket for income above $200,000 taxed at 33%[22]
Set national targets to lower greenhouse gas emissions through cooperation with provinces, support Keystone XL with a stricter environmental review process, spend $20 billion over 10 years on "greener infrastructure"[22]
Run three years of deficits that will not exceed $10 billion to finance infrastructure projects and balance the budget in 2019[22]
Spend $60 billion in new infrastructure spending, including $20 billion in transit infrastructure and quadrupling federal funding for public transit, all over three years[22]
Invest $300 million annually to fund a Youth Employment Strategy[22]
Reduce employment insurance (EI) premiums from $1.88 per $100 to $1.65 per $100[22]
Replace the Universal Child Care Benefit with a Canada Child Benefit that would provide $2,500 more to an average family of four[22]
Support training efforts in Ukraine and sanctions against Russia; end the bombing mission against ISIS but increase humanitarian aid and training of local ground troops[22]
Take in 25,000 Syrian refugees and spend $100 million for refugee processing and settlement[22]
Negotiate a new health accord with the provinces to guarantee long-term funding, including a national plan for lower prescription drug prices[22]
Invest $3 billion over four years to improve home care[22]
Set up an all-party committee to pass legislation implementation of physician assisted death[22]
Full legalization of marijuana[23]
Implement electoral reform to move from a first-past-the-post electoral system to a system in which the seat count more closely match the popular vote[24]
Implementing a non-partisan appointment process for the Senate modeled on that of the Order of Canada, after having removed Liberal senators from the party caucus in 2014[25]

History[edit]
Main article: History of the Liberal Party of Canada
19th century[edit]
Origins[edit]
See also: Rebellions of 1837
The Liberals are descended from the mid-19th century Reformers who agitated for responsible government throughout British North America.[26] These included George Brown, Alexander Mackenzie, Robert Baldwin, William Lyon Mackenzie and the Clear Grits in Upper Canada, Joseph Howe in Nova Scotia, and the Patriotes and Rouges in Lower Canada led by figures such as Louis-Joseph Papineau. The Clear Grits and Parti rouge sometimes functioned as a united bloc in the legislature of the Province of Canada beginning in 1854, and a united Liberal Party combining both English and French Canadian members was formed in 1861.[26]
Confederation[edit]
At the time of confederation of the former British colonies of Canada (now Ontario and Quebec), New Brunswick and Nova Scotia, the radical Liberals were marginalized by the more pragmatic Conservative coalition assembled under Sir John A. Macdonald. In the 29 years after Canadian confederation, the Liberals were consigned to opposition, with the exception of one stint in government.[26] Alexander Mackenzie was the de facto leader of the Official Opposition after Confederation and finally agreed to become the first official leader of the Liberal Party in 1873. He was able to lead the party to power for the first time in 1873, after the MacDonald government lost a vote of no confidence in the House of Commons due to the Pacific Scandal. Mackenzie subsequently won the 1874 election, and served as Prime Minister for an additional four years. During the five years the Liberal government brought in many reforms, which include the replacement of open voting by secret ballot, confining elections to one day and the creation of the Supreme Court of Canada, the Royal Military College of Canada, and the Office of the Auditor General. However the party was only able to build a solid support base in Ontario, and in 1878 lost the government to MacDonald.[26] The Liberals would spend the next 18 years in opposition.
Laurier era[edit]




Sir Wilfrid Laurier, Prime Minister of Canada (1896–1911)


In their early history, the Liberals were the party of continentalism and opposition to imperialism. The Liberals also became identified with the aspirations of Quebecers as a result of the growing hostility of French Canadians to the Conservatives. The Conservatives lost the support of French Canadians because of the role of Conservative governments in the execution of Louis Riel and their role in the Conscription Crisis of 1917, and especially their opposition to French schools in provinces besides Quebec.
It was not until Wilfrid Laurier became leader that the Liberal Party emerged as a modern party. Laurier was able to capitalize on the Tories' alienation of French Canada by offering the Liberals as a credible alternative. Laurier was able to overcome the party's reputation for anti-clericalism that offended the still-powerful Quebec Roman Catholic Church. In English-speaking Canada, the Liberal Party's support for reciprocity made it popular among farmers, and helped cement the party's hold in the growing prairie provinces.[27]
Laurier led the Liberals to power in the 1896 election (in which he became the first Francophone Prime Minister), and oversaw a government that increased immigration in order to settle Western Canada. Laurier's government created the provinces of Saskatchewan and Alberta out of the North-West Territories, and promoted the development of Canadian industry.[27]
20th century[edit]
Party organization[edit]




William Lyon Mackenzie King, Prime Minister of Canada (1921–1926, 1926–1930, 1935–1948)


Until the early part of the century, the Liberal Party was a loose, informal coalition of local, provincial and regional bodies with a strong national party leader and caucus (and when in power, the national cabinet) but with an informal and regionalized extra-parliamentary organizational structure. There was no national membership of the party, an individual became a member by joining a provincial Liberal party. Laurier called the party's first national convention in 1893 in order to unite Liberal supporters behind a programme and build the campaign that successfully brought the party to power in 1896; however, once in power, no efforts were made to create a formal national organization outside of parliament.
As a result of the party's defeats in the 1911 and 1917 federal elections, Laurier attempted to organize the party on a national level by creating three bodies: the Central Liberal Information Office, the National Liberal Advisory Committee, and the National Liberal Organization Committee. However, the advisory committee became dominated by members of parliament and all three bodies were underfunded and competed with both local and provincial Liberal associations and the national caucus for authority. The party did organize the national party's second convention in 1919 to elect William Lyon Mackenzie King as Laurier's successor (Canada's first ever leadership convention), yet following the party's return to power in the 1921 federal election the nascent national party organizations were eclipsed by powerful ministers and local party organizations largely driven by patronage.
As a result of both the party's defeat in the 1930 federal election, and the Beauharnois bribery scandal which highlighted the need for distance between the Liberal Party's political wing and campaign fundraising,[28] a central coordinating organization, the National Liberal Federation, was created in 1932 with Vincent Massey as its first president. The new organization allowed individuals to directly join the national Liberal Party for the first time. With the Liberals return to power the national organization languished except for occasional national committee meetings, such as in 1943 when Mackenzie King called a meeting of the federation (consisting of the national caucus and up to seven voting delegates per province) to approve a new platform for the party in anticipation of the end of World War II and prepare for a post-war election.[29] No national convention was held, however, until 1948; the Liberal Party held only three national conventions prior to the 1950s – in 1893, 1919 and 1948[30]. The National Liberal Federation remained largely dependent on provincial Liberal parties and was often ignored and bypassed the parliamentary party in the organization of election campaigns and the development of policy. With the defeat of the Liberals in the 1957 federal election and in particular 1958, reformers argued for the strengthening of the national party organization so it would not be dependent on provincial Liberal parties and patronage. A national executive and Council of presidents, consisting of the presidents of each Liberal riding association, were developed to give the party more co-ordination and national party conventions were regularly held in biennially where previously they had been held infrequently. Over time, provincial Liberal parties in most province's were separated from provincial wings of the federal party and in a number of cases disaffiliated. By the 1980s, the National Liberal Federation was officially known as the Liberal Party of Canada.[31]
Canadian sovereignty[edit]




Louis St. Laurent, Prime Minister of Canada (1948–1957)


Under Laurier, and his successor William Lyon Mackenzie King, the Liberals promoted Canadian sovereignty and greater independence within the British Commonwealth. In Imperial Conferences held throughout the 1920s, Canadian Liberal governments often took the lead in arguing that the United Kingdom and the dominions should have equal status, and against proposals for an 'imperial parliament' that would have subsumed Canadian independence. After the King–Byng Affair of 1926, the Liberals argued that the Governor General of Canada should no longer be appointed on the recommendation of the British government. The decisions of the Imperial Conferences were formalized in the Statute of Westminster, which was actually passed in 1931, the year after the Liberals lost power.
The Liberals also promoted the idea of Canada being responsible for its own foreign and defence policy. Initially, it was Britain which determined external affairs for the dominion. In 1905, Laurier created the Department of External Affairs, and in 1909 he advised Governor General Earl Grey to appoint the first Secretary of State for External Affairs to Cabinet. It was also Laurier who first proposed the creation of a Canadian Navy in 1910. Mackenzie King recommended the appointment by Governor General Lord Byng of Vincent Massey as the first Canadian ambassador to Washington in 1926, marking the Liberal government's insistence on having direct relations with the United States, rather than having Britain act on Canada's behalf.
Liberals and the social safety net[edit]




Lester B. Pearson, Prime Minister of Canada (1963–1968)


In the period just before and after the Second World War, the party became a champion of 'progressive social policy'.[32] As Prime Minister for most of the time between 1921 and 1948, King introduced several measures that led to the creation of Canada's social safety net. Bowing to popular pressure, he introduced the mother's allowance, a monthly payment to all mothers with young children. He also reluctantly introduced old age pensions when J. S. Woodsworth required it in exchange for his Co-operative Commonwealth Federation party's support of King's minority government.
Louis St. Laurent succeeded King as Liberal leader and Prime Minister on November 15, 1948. In the 1949 and 1953 federal elections, St. Laurent led the Liberal Party to two large majority governments. As Prime Minister he oversaw the joining of Newfoundland in Confederation as Canada's tenth province, he established equalization payments to the provinces, and continued with social reform with improvements in pensions and health insurance. In 1956, Canada played an important role in resolving the Suez Crisis, and contributed to the United Nations force in the Korean War. Canada enjoyed economic prosperity during St. Laurent's premiership and wartime debts were paid off. The Pipeline Debate proved the Liberal Party's undoing. Their attempt to pass legislation to build a natural gas pipeline from Alberta to central Canada was met with fierce disagreement in the House of Commons. In 1957, John Diefenbaker's Progressive Conservatives won a minority government and St. Laurent resigned as Prime Minister and Liberal leader.[33]
Lester B. Pearson was easily elected Liberal leader at the party's 1958 leadership convention. However, only months after becoming Liberal leader, Pearson led the party into the 1958 federal election that saw Diefenbaker's Progressive Conservatives win the largest majority government, by percentage of seats, in Canadian history.[34] The Progressive Conservatives won 206 of the 265 seats in the House of Commons, while the Liberals were reduced to just 48 seats. Pearson remained Liberal leader during this time and in the 1962 election managed to reduce Diefenbaker to a minority government. In the 1963 election Pearson led the Liberal Party back to victory, forming a minority government. Pearson served as Prime Minister for five years, winning a second election in 1965. While Pearson's leadership was considered poor and the Liberal Party never held a majority of the seats in parliament during his premiership, he left office in 1968 with an impressive legacy.[35] Pearson's government introduced Medicare, a new immigration act, the Canada Pension Plan, Canada Student Loans, the Canada Assistance Plan, and adopted the Maple Leaf as Canada's national flag.[36]
Pierre Elliott Trudeau era[edit]




Pierre Elliott Trudeau, Prime Minister of Canada (1968–1979, 1980–1984)


Under Pierre Trudeau, the mission of a progressive social policy evolved into the goal of creating a "just society".[37]
The Liberal Party under Trudeau promoted official bilingualism and passed the Official Languages Act, which gave French and English languages equal status in Canada.[26] Trudeau hoped that the promotion of bilingualism would cement Quebec's place in Confederation, and counter growing calls for an independent Quebec. The party hoped the policy would transform Canada into a country where English and French Canadians could live together, and allow Canadians to move to any part of the country without having to lose their language. Although this vision has yet to fully materialize, official bilingualism has helped to halt the decline of the French language outside of Quebec, and to ensure that all federal government services (including radio and television services provided by the government-owned Canadian Broadcasting Corporation/Radio-Canada) are available in both languages throughout the country.[38]
The Trudeau Liberals are also credited with support for state multiculturalism as a means of integrating immigrants into Canadian society without forcing them to shed their culture,[39] leading the party to build a base of support among recent immigrants and their children.[40] This marked the culmination of a decades-long shift in Liberal immigration policy, a reversal of pre-war racial attitudes that spurred discriminatory policies such as the Chinese Immigration Act of 1923[41] and the MS St. Louis incident.[42]
The most lasting effect of the Trudeau years has been the patriation of the Canadian constitution and the creation of Canada's Charter of Rights and Freedoms.[43][44] Trudeau's Liberals supported the concept of a strong, central government, and fought Quebec separatism, other forms of Quebec nationalism, and the granting of "distinct society" status to Quebec. Such actions, however, served as rallying cries for sovereigntists and alienated many Francophone Quebeckers.
The other primary legacy of the Trudeau years has been financial. Net federal debt in fiscal 1968, just before Trudeau became Prime Minister, was about $18 billion CAD, or 26 percent of gross domestic product; by his final year in office, it had ballooned to over 200 billion—at 46 percent of GDP, nearly twice as large relative to the economy.[45]




Trudeau-era wordmark and logo


Post-Trudeau party in opposition[edit]
After Trudeau's retirement in 1984, many Liberals, such as Jean Chrétien and Clyde Wells, continued to adhere to Trudeau's concept of federalism. Others, such as John Turner, supported the failed Meech Lake and Charlottetown Constitutional Accords, which would have recognized Quebec as a "distinct society" and would have increased the powers of the provinces to the detriment of the federal government.
Trudeau stepped down as Prime Minister and party leader in 1984, as the Liberals were slipping in polls. At that year's leadership convention, Turner defeated Chrétien on the second ballot to become Prime Minister.[46] Immediately, upon taking office, Turner called a snap election, citing favourable internal polls. However, the party was hurt by numerous patronage appointments, many of which Turner had made supposedly in return for Trudeau retiring early. Also, they were unpopular in their traditional stronghold of Quebec because of the constitution repatriation which excluded that province. The Liberals lost power in the 1984 election, and were reduced to only 40 seats in the House of Commons. The Progressive Conservatives won a majority of the seats in every province, including Quebec. The 95-seat loss was the worst defeat in the party's history, and the worst defeat at the time for a governing party at the federal level. What was more, the New Democratic Party, successor to the Co-operative Commonwealth Federation, won only ten fewer seats than the Liberals, and some thought that the NDP under Ed Broadbent would push the Liberals to third-party status.[47]
The party began a long process of reconstruction.[26] A small group of young Liberal MPs, known as the Rat Pack, gained fame by criticizing the Tory government of Brian Mulroney at every turn. Also, despite public and backroom attempts to remove Turner as leader, he managed to consolidate his leadership at the 1986 review.
The 1988 election was notable for Turner's strong opposition to the Canada-U.S. Free Trade Agreement negotiated by Progressive Conservative Prime Minister Brian Mulroney. Although most Canadians voted for parties opposed to free trade, the Tories were returned with a majority government, and implemented the deal. The Liberals recovered from their near-meltdown of 1984, however, winning 83 seats and ending much of the talk of being eclipsed by the NDP, who won 43 seats.[26]
Liberals under Chrétien[edit]




Jean Chrétien, Prime Minister of Canada (1993–2003)


Turner announced that he would resign as leader of the Liberal Party on May 3, 1989. The Liberal Party set a leadership convention for June 23, 1990, in Calgary. Five candidates contested the leadership of the party and former Deputy Prime Minister Jean Chrétien, who had served in every Liberal cabinet since 1965, won on the first ballot.[48] Chrétien's Liberals campaigned in the 1993 election on the promise of renegotiating the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), and eliminating the Goods and Services Tax (GST). Just after the writ was dropped for the election, they issued the Red Book, an integrated and coherent approach to economic, social, environmental and foreign policy. This was unprecedented for a Canadian party.[26] Taking full advantage of the inability of Mulroney's successor, Kim Campbell, to overcome a large amount of antipathy toward Mulroney, they won a strong majority government with 177 seats—the third-best performance in party history, and their best since 1949. The Progressive Conservatives were cut down to only two seats, suffering a defeat even more severe than the one they had handed the Liberals nine years earlier. The Liberals were re-elected with a considerably reduced majority in 1997, but nearly tied their 1993 total in 2000.
For the next decade, the Liberals dominated Canadian politics in a fashion not seen since the early years of Confederation. This was because of the destruction of the "grand coalition" of Western socially conservative populists, Quebec nationalists, and fiscal conservatives from Ontario that had supported the Progressive Conservatives in 1984 and 1988. The Progressive Conservatives Western support, for all practical purposes, transferred en masse to the Western-based Reform Party, which replaced the PCs as the major right-wing party in Canada. However, the new party's agenda was seen as too conservative for most Canadians. It only won one seat east of Manitoba in an election (but gained another in a floor-crossing). Even when Reform restructured into the Canadian Alliance, the party was virtually non-existent east of Manitoba, winning only 66 seats in 2000. Reform/Alliance was the official opposition from 1997 to 2003, but was never able to overcome wide perceptions that it was merely a Western protest party. The Quebec nationalists who had once supported the Tories largely switched their support to the sovereigntist Bloc Québécois, while the Tories' Ontario support largely moved to the Liberals. The PCs would never be a major force in Canadian politics again; while they rebounded to 20 seats in the next election, they won only two seats west of Quebec in the next decade.
Ontario and Quebec combine for a majority of seats in the House of Commons by virtue of Ontario's current population and Quebec's historic population (59 percent of the seats as of 2006[update]). As a result, it is very difficult to form even a minority government without substantial support in Ontario and/or Quebec. No party has ever formed a majority government without winning the most seats in either Ontario or Quebec. It is mathematically possible to form a minority government without a strong base in either province, but such an undertaking is politically difficult. The Liberals were the only party with a strong base in both provinces, thus making them the only party capable of forming a government.
There was some disappointment as Liberals were not able to recover their traditional dominant position in Quebec, despite being led by a Quebecer from a strongly nationalist region of Quebec. The Bloc capitalized on discontent with the failure of the 1990 Meech Lake Accord and Chrétien's uncompromising stance on federalism (see below) to win the most seats in Quebec in every election from 1993, onward, even serving as the official opposition from 1993 to 1997. Chrétien's reputation in his home province never recovered after the 1990 leadership convention when rival Paul Martin forced him to declare his opposition to the Meech Lake Accord. However, the Liberals did increase their support in the next two elections because of infighting within the Bloc. In the 1997 election, although the Liberals finished with a thin majority, it was their gains in Quebec which were credited with offsetting their losses in the Maritime provinces. In particular, the 2000 election was a breakthrough for the Liberals after the PQ government's unpopular initiatives regarding consolidation of several Quebec urban areas into "megacities". Many federal Liberals also took credit for Charest's provincial election victory over the PQ in spring 2003. A series of by-elections allowed the Liberals to gain a majority of Quebec ridings for the first time since 1984.




Liberal Party logo, 1992–2004


The Chrétien Liberals more than made up for their shortfall in Quebec by building a strong base in Ontario. They reaped a substantial windfall from the votes of fiscally conservative and socially liberal voters who had previously voted Tory, as well as rapid growth in the Greater Toronto Area. They were also able to take advantage of massive vote splitting between the Tories and Reform/Alliance in rural areas of the province that had traditionally formed the backbone of provincial Tory governments. Combined with their historic dominance of Metro Toronto and northern Ontario, the Liberals dominated the province's federal politics even as the Tories won landslide majorities at the provincial level. In 1993, for example, the Liberals won all but one seat in Ontario, and came within 123 votes in Simcoe Centre of pulling off the first clean sweep of Canada's most populated province. They were able to retain their position as the largest party in the House by winning all but two seats in Ontario in the 1997 election. The Liberals were assured of at least a minority government once the Ontario results came in, but it was not clear until later in the night that they would retain their majority. In 2000, the Liberals won all but three seats in Ontario.
While the Chrétien Liberals campaigned from the left, their time in power is most marked by the cuts made to many programs in order to balance the federal budget. Chrétien had supported the Charlottetown Accord while in opposition, but in power opposed major concessions to Quebec and other provincialist factions. In contrast to their promises during the 1993 campaign, they implemented only minor changes to NAFTA, embraced the free trade concept and—with the exception of the replacement of the GST with the Harmonized Sales Tax in some Atlantic provinces—broke their promise to replace the GST.
After a proposal for Quebec independence was narrowly defeated in the 1995 Quebec referendum, the Liberals passed the "Clarity Act", which outlines the federal government's preconditions for negotiating provincial independence.[49] In Chrétien's final days, he supported same-sex marriage and decriminalizing the possession of small quantities of marijuana.[50][51] Chrétien displeased the United States government when he pledged on March 17, 2003, that Canada would not support the 2003 invasion of Iraq.[52] A poll released shortly after showed widespread approval of Chrétien's decision by the Canadian public. The poll, which was conducted by EKOS for the Toronto Star and La Presse, found 71 percent of those questioned approved of the government's decision to not enter the United States-led invasion, with 27 percent expressing disapproval.[53]
Into the 21st century[edit]
Several trends started in 2003 which suggested the end of the Liberal Party's political dominance. Notably, there would be a high turnover of permanent party leaders, in contrast to their predecessors who usually served over two or more elections, particularly Trudeau and Chrétien who each led for over a decade.[54] The Liberals were also hampered by their inability to raise campaign money competitively after Chrétien passed a bill in 2003 which banned corporate donations, even though the Liberals had enjoyed by far the lion's share of this funding because of the then-divided opposition parties. It has been suggested that Chrétien, who had done nothing about election financing for his 10 years in office, could be seen as the idealist as he retired, while his rival and successor Paul Martin would have the burden of having to fight an election under the strict new rules.[55] Simon Fraser University professor Doug McArthur has noted that Martin's leadership campaign used aggressive tactics for the 2003 leadership convention, in attempting to end the contest before it could start by giving the impression that his bid was too strong for any other candidate to beat. McArthur blamed Martin's tactics for the ongoing sag in Liberal fortunes, as it discouraged activists who were not on side.[56]
Martin succeeds Chrétien[edit]
Paul Martin succeeded Chrétien as party leader and prime minister in 2003. Despite the personal rivalry between the two, Martin was the architect of the Liberals' economic policies as Minister of Finance during the 1990s. Chrétien left office with a high approval rating and Martin was expected to make inroads into Quebec and Western Canada, two regions of Canada where the Liberals had not attracted much support since the 1980s and 1990s, respectively. While his cabinet choices provoked some controversy over excluding many Chrétien supporters, it at first did little to hurt his popularity.
However, the political situation changed with the revelation of the sponsorship scandal, in which advertising agencies supporting the Liberal Party received grossly inflated commissions for their services. Having faced a divided conservative opposition for the past three elections, Liberals were seriously challenged by competition from the newly united Conservative Party led by Stephen Harper. The infighting between Martin and Chrétien's supporters also dogged the party. Nonetheless, by criticizing the Conservatives' social policies, the Liberals were able to draw progressive votes from the NDP which made the difference in several close races. On June 28, 2004 federal election, the Martin Liberals retained enough support to continue as the government, though they were reduced to a minority.
In the ensuing months, testimony from the Gomery Commission caused public opinion to turn sharply against the Liberals for the first time in over a decade. Despite the devastating revelations, only two Liberal MPs—David Kilgour (who had crossed the floor from the PC Party in 1990) and Pat O'Brien—left the party for reasons other than the scandal. Belinda Stronach, who crossed the floor from the Conservatives to the Liberals, gave Martin the number of votes needed, although barely, to hold onto power when an NDP-sponsored amendment to his budget was passed only by the Speaker's tiebreaking vote on May 19, 2005.
In November, the Liberals dropped in polls following the release of the first Gomery Report. Nonetheless, Martin turned down the NDP's conditions for continued support, as well as rejected an opposition proposal which would schedule a February 2006 election in return for passing several pieces of legislation. The Liberals thus lost the no-confidence vote on November 28; Martin thus became only the fifth prime minister to lose the confidence of the House, but the first to lose on a straight no-confidence motion. Because of the Christmas holiday, Martin advised Governor General Michaëlle Jean to dissolve Parliament and call an election for January 2006.




Liberal Party logo, 2004–2009


The Liberal campaign was dogged from start to finish by the sponsorship scandal, which was brought up by a Royal Canadian Mounted Police (RCMP) criminal investigation into the leak of the income trust announcement. Numerous gaffes, contrasting with a smoothly run Conservative campaign, put Liberals as many as ten points behind the Conservatives in opinion polling. They managed to recover some of their momentum by election night, but not enough to retain power. They won 103 seats, a net loss of 30 from when the writs were dropped, losing a similar number of seats in Ontario and Quebec to the Tories. However, the Liberals managed to capture the most seats in Ontario for the fifth straight election (54 to the Tories' 40), holding the Conservatives to a minority government. While the Conservatives captured many of Ontario's rural ridings, the Liberals retained most of the population-rich Greater Toronto Area. Many of these ridings, particularly the 905 region, had historically been bellwethers (the Liberals were nearly shut out of this region in 1979 and 1984), but demographic changes have resulted in high Liberal returns in recent years.
Martin resigned as parliamentary leader after the election and stepped down as Liberal leader on March 18, having previously promised to step down if he did not win a plurality.
On May 11, 2006, La Presse reported that the Government of Canada would file a lawsuit against the Liberal Party to recover all the money missing in the sponsorship program. Scott Brison told reporters that same day that the Liberals has already paid back the $1.14 million into the public purse; however, the Conservatives believed that there was as much as $40 million unaccounted for in the sponsorship program.[57]
2006 Convention and Dion[edit]
Main article: Liberal Party of Canada leadership election, 2006




Stéphane Dion makes a speech on October 10, 2008 in Brampton West. Former Prime Minister Jean Chrétien was among notable Liberals at this rally; this was his first time campaigning for anyone since retirement.


After their election defeat Martin chose not to take on the office of Leader of the Opposition. He stepped down as parliamentary leader of his party on February 1, and the Liberal caucus appointed Bill Graham, MP for Toronto Centre and outgoing Defence Minister, as his interim successor.[58] Martin officially resigned as leader in March, with Graham taking over on an interim basis.
The leadership election was set for December 2, 2006 in Montreal; however, a number of prominent members such as John Manley, Frank McKenna, Brian Tobin, and Allan Rock had already announced they would not enter the race to succeed Martin.[59] Throughout the campaign 12 candidates came forward to lead the party, but by the time of the leadership convention only eight people remained in the race; Martha Hall Findlay, Stéphane Dion, Michael Ignatieff, Gerard Kennedy, Bob Rae, Scott Brison, Ken Dryden, Joe Volpe.
Throughout the campaign Ignatieff, Rae, Dion and Kennedy were considered to be the only candidates with enough support to be able to win the leadership, with Ignatieff and Rae being considered the two front-runners.[60][61] However polling showed Ignatieff had little room to grow his support, while Dion was the second and third choice among a plurality of delegates.[62] At the leadership convention Ignatieff came out on top on the first ballot with 29.3 percent, followed by Rae with 20.3 percent, Dion with 17.8 percent, Kennedy with 17.7 percent, Dryden with 4.9 percent, Brison with 3.9 percent, Volpe with 3.2 percent and Hall Findlay with 2.7 percent. Brison and Volpe voluntarily dropped out before the second ballot while Hall Findlay was eliminated. Dryden was eliminated after the second ballot and while the order of the other candidates remained the same the gap between Dion and Kennedy grew. In what was believed to be a pre-arranged agreement Kennedy dropped off after the second ballot and threw his support behind Dion.[63] With Kennedy's support Dion was able to leapfrog both Rae and Ignatieff on the third ballot, eliminating Rae. On the fourth and final ballot Dion defeated Ignatieff to become leader of the Liberal Party.[64]
Following the leadership race the Liberal Party saw a bounce in support and surpassed the Conservative Party as the most popular party in Canada.[65] However, in the months and years to come the party's support gradually fell.[66] Dion's own popularity lagged considerably behind that of Prime Minister Harper's, and he often trailed NDP leader Jack Layton in opinion polls when Canadians were asked who would make the best Prime Minister.[66][67]
Dion campaigned on environmental sustainability during the leadership race, and created the "Green Shift" plan following his election as leader. The Green Shift proposed creating a carbon tax that would be coupled with reductions to income tax rates. The proposal was to tax greenhouse gas emissions, starting at $10 per tonne of CO2 and reaching $40 per tonne within four years.[68] The plan was a key policy for the party in the 2008 federal election, but it was not well received and was continuously attacked by both the Conservatives and NDP.[69][70][71][72] On election night the Liberal Party won 26.26 percent of the popular vote and 77 of the 308 seats in the House of Commons. At that time their popular support was the lowest in the party's history, and weeks later Dion announced he would step down as Liberal leader once his successor was chosen.[73]
Leadership campaign and coalition[edit]
See also: Liberal Party of Canada leadership election, 2009 and 2008–2009 Canadian parliamentary dispute
New Brunswick Member of Parliament Dominic LeBlanc was the first candidate to announce he would seek the leadership of the Liberal Party on October 27, 2008. Days later Bob Rae, who had finished third in 2006, announced he would also be a candidate for the leadership. The party executive met in early November and chose May 2, 2009, as the date to elect the next leader.[74] On November 13 Michael Ignatieff, who finished second in 2006, announced he would also be a candidate.




Michael Ignatieff speaks during a news conference in Toronto


On November 27, 2008, Minister of Finance Jim Flaherty provided the House of Commons with a fiscal update, within which were plans to cut government spending, suspend the ability of civil servants to strike until 2011, sell off some Crown assets to raise capital, and eliminate the existing $1.95 per vote subsidy parties garner in an election.[75][76] The opposition parties criticized the fiscal update, and announced they would not support it because it contained no stimulus money to spur Canada's economy and protect workers during the economic crisis.[77] With the Conservative Party only holding a minority of the seats in the House of Commons the government would be defeated if the opposition parties voted against the fiscal update.[77] With the Conservatives unwilling to budge on the proposals outlined in the fiscal update the Liberals and NDP signed an agreement to form a coalition government, with a written pledge of support from the Bloc Québécois.[78] Under the terms of the agreement Dion would be sworn in as Prime Minister, however he would only serve in the position until the next Liberal leader was chosen. Dion contacted Governor General Michaëlle Jean and advised her that he had the confidence of the House of Commons if Prime Minister Harper's government was to fall.[78] However, before the fiscal update could be voted on in the House of Commons Prime Minister Harper requested the Governor General to prorogue parliament till January 26, 2009, which she accepted.[79]
While polls showed Canadians were split on the idea of having either a coalition government or having the Conservatives continue to govern, it was clear that because of Dion's personal popularity they were not comfortable with him becoming Prime Minister.[80] Members of the Liberal Party therefore called on Dion to resign as leader immediately and for an interim leader to be chosen, this person would become the Prime Minister in the event that the Conservatives were defeated when parliament resumed in January.[81] With an estimated 70 percent of the Liberal caucus wanting Ignatieff to be named interim leader, Dion resigned the post on December 8, 2008 (effective December 10, upon Ignatieff's becoming interim leader).[81][82] LeBlanc announced on the same day that he was abandoning the Liberal leadership race and endorsing Ignatieff as the next leader.[83] The following day Rae announced he was also dropping out of the race and was placing his "full and unqualified" support to Ignatieff.[84]
Ignatieff and the 2011 election[edit]
With Ignatieff named interim leader of the party (on December 10), the Liberal's poll numbers saw significant gains, after they plummeted with the signing of the coalition agreement.[85][86] When parliament resumed on January 28, 2009, the Ignatieff Liberals agreed to support the budget as long as it included regular accountability reports, which the Conservatives accepted. This ended the possibility of the coalition government with the New Democrats.[87]




Graph of opinion polls conducted between the 2008 and 2011 elections


Throughout the Winter of 2008–09, opinion polls showed that while the Ignatieff led Liberals still trailed the Conservatives their support had stabilized in the low 30 percent range. However, by the time Ignatieff was confirmed as party leader on May 2, 2009, the Liberal Party had a comfortable lead over the governing Conservatives.[88][89][90] After a Summer where he was accused of being missing in action, Ignatieff announced on August 31, 2009, that the Liberals would not support the minority Conservative government.[91][92][93] After this announcement the Liberal Party's poll numbers, which had already declined over the summer, started to fall further behind the Conservatives.[94] On October 1, 2009, the Liberals put forth a non-confidence motion with the hope of defeating the government. However, the NDP abstained from voting and the Conservatives survived the confidence motion.[95]




Liberal Party logo, 2010–2014


The Liberal Party's attempt to force an election, just a year after the previous one, was reported as a miscalculation, as polls showed that most Canadians did not want another election.[96] Even after the government survived the confidence motion popularity for Ignatieff and his party continued to fall.[97] Over the next year and a half, with the exception of a brief period in early 2010, support for the Liberals remained below 30 percent, and behind the Conservatives.[98] While his predecessor Dion was criticized by the Conservatives as a "weak leader", Ignatieff was attacked as a "political opportunist".[54]
On March 25, 2011, Ignatieff introduced a motion of non-confidence against the Harper government to attempt to force a May 2011, federal election after the government was found to be in Contempt of Parliament, the first such occurrence in Commonwealth history. The House of Commons passed the motion by 156–145.[99]
The Liberals had considerable momentum when the writ was dropped, and Ignatieff successfully squeezed NDP leader Jack Layton out of media attention, by issuing challenges to Harper for one-on-one debates.[100][101][102] In the first couple weeks of the campaign, Ignatieff kept his party in second place in the polls, and his personal ratings exceeded that of Layton for the first time.[103] However opponents frequently criticized Ignatieff's perceived political opportunism, particularly during the leaders debates when Layton criticized Ignatieff for having a poor attendance record for Commons votes saying "You know, most Canadians, if they don't show up for work, they don't get a promotion". Ignatieff failed to defend himself against these charges, and the debates were said to be a turning point for his party's campaign.[104] Near the end of the campaign, a late surge in support for Layton and the NDP relegated Ignatieff and the Liberals to third in opinion polls.[105][106][107]
The Liberals suffered their worst defeat in history in the May 2, 2011, federal election. The result was a third-place finish, with only 19 percent of the vote and returning 34 seats in the House of Commons. Notably, their support in Toronto and Montreal, their power bases for the last two decades, all but vanished. All told, the Liberals won only 11 seats in Ontario (seven of which were in Toronto) and seven in Quebec (all in Montreal)—their fewest totals in either province. Newfoundland and Labrador was the only province with majority Liberal seats at 4 out of 7. They also won only four seats west of Ontario. The Conservatives won 40 percent of the vote and formed a majority government, while the NDP formed the Official Opposition winning 31 percent of the vote.[108]
This election marked the first time the Liberals were unable to form either government or the official opposition. Ignatieff was defeated in his own riding, and announced his resignation as Liberal leader shortly after. Bob Rae was chosen as the interim leader on May 25, 2011.[109]
Justin Trudeau[edit]




Justin Trudeau, Prime Minister of Canada (2015–present)


On April 14, 2013 Justin Trudeau, son of former Prime Minister Pierre Trudeau, was elected leader of the Liberal Party on the first ballot, winning 80% of the vote.[110] Following his win, support for the Liberal Party increased considerably, and the party moved into first place in public opinion polls.[111][112]
An initial surge in support in the polls following Trudeau's election wore off in the following year, in the face of Conservative ad campaign after Trudeau's win attempting to "[paint] him as a silly dilettante unfit for public office."[113]
In 2014, Trudeau removed all Liberal senators from the Liberal Party caucus. In announcing this, Trudeau said the purpose of the unelected upper chamber is to act as a check on the power of the prime minister, but the party structure interferes with that purpose.[9] Following this move, Liberal senators chose to keep the designation "Liberal" and sit together as a caucus, albeit not one supported by the Liberal Party of Canada. This independent group still refers to itself in publications as the Senate Liberal Caucus.[114]
By the time the 2015 federal election was called, the Liberals had been knocked back into third place. Trudeau and his advisors planned to mount a campaign based on economic stimulus in the hopes of regaining the mantle of being the party that best represented change from the New Democrats.[115]




Results of the 2015 Canadian federal election showing support for Liberal candidates by riding


Justin Trudeau's Liberals would win the 2015 election in dramatic fashion: becoming the first party to win a parliamentary majority after being reduced to third party status in a previous general election, besting Brian Mulroney's record for the largest seat increase by a party in a single election (111 in 1984), and winning the most seats in Quebec for the first time since 1980.[116][117][118] Chantal Hébert deemed the result "a Liberal comeback that is headed straight for the history books",[119] while Bloomberg's Josh Wingrove and Theophilos Argitis similarly described it as "capping the biggest political comeback in the country’s history."[120]
Party systems and realignment model[edit]
Scholars and political experts have recently used a realignment model to explain what was considered a collapse of a dominant party, and put its condition in long-term perspective. According to recent scholarship there have been four party systems in Canada at the federal level since Confederation, each with its own distinctive pattern of social support, patronage relationships, leadership styles, and electoral strategies. Steve Patten identifies four party systems in Canada's political history:[121]

The first party system emerged from pre-Confederation colonial politics, had its "heyday" from 1896 to 1911 and lasted until the Conscription Crisis of 1917, and was characterized by local patronage administered by the two largest parties, the Liberals and the Conservatives.
The second system emerged following the First World War, and had its heyday from 1935 and 1957, was characterized by regionalism and saw the emergence of several protest parties, such as the Progressives, the Social Credit Party, and the Co-operative Commonwealth Federation.
The third system emerged in 1963 and had its heyday from 1968 to 1983 and began to unravel thereafter. The two largest parties were challenged by a strong third party, the New Democratic Party (successor to the CCF). Campaigns during this era became more national in scope because of electronic media, and involved a greater focus on leadership. The dominant policy of the era was Keynesian economics.
The fourth party system has involved the rise of the Reform Party, the Bloc Québécois, and the merger of the Canadian Alliance with the Progressive Conservatives. Most parties moved to one-member-one-vote leadership contests, and campaign finance laws were reformed in 2004. The fourth party system has been characterized by market-oriented policies that generally abandoned Keynesian policies, but maintained the welfare state.

Stephen Clarkson (2005) shows how the Liberal Party has dominated all the party systems, using different approaches. It began with a "clientelistic approach" under Laurier, which evolved into a "brokerage" system of the 1920s, 1930s and 1940s under Mackenzie King. The 1950s saw the emergence of a "pan-Canadian system", which lasted until the 1990s. The 1993 election – categorized by Clarkson as an electoral "earthquake" which "fragmented" the party system, saw the emergence of regional politics within a four party-system, whereby various groups championed regional issues and concerns. Clarkson concludes that the inherent bias built into the first-past-the-post system, has chiefly benefited the Liberals.[122]
Pundits in the wake of the 2011 election widely believed in a theme of major realignment. Lawrence Martin, commentator for the Globe and Mail, claimed that "Harper has completed a remarkable reconstruction of a Canadian political landscape that endured for more than a century. The realignment sees both old parties of the moderate middle, the Progressive Conservatives and the Liberals, either eliminated or marginalized."[123] Maclean's said that the election marked "an unprecedented realignment of Canadian politics" as "the Conservatives are now in a position to replace the Liberals as the natural governing party in Canada"; Andrew Coyne proclaimed "The West is in and Ontario has joined it," noting that the Conservatives accomplished the rare feat of putting together a majority by winning in both Ontario and the western provinces (difficult because of traditionally conflicting interests), while having little representation in Quebec.[124] Books such as The Big Shift by John Ibbitson and Darrell Bricker, and Peter C. Newman's When the Gods Changed: The Death of Liberal Canada, provocatively asserted that the Liberals had become an "endangered species" and that an NDP-led opposition would mean that "fortune favours the Harper government" in subsequent campaigns.[125][126]
The Liberal victory in 2015, leaving Alberta and Saskatchewan as the only provinces represented by a majority of Conservative MPs, has now challenged that narrative.[127][128]
Regional Liberal parties[edit]
Each province and one territory in Canada has its own Liberal Party. However, only those in New Brunswick, Newfoundland and Labrador, Nova Scotia, and Prince Edward Island are politically and organizationally affiliated with the federal Liberal Party. While other provincial Liberal parties may align ideologically with the federal party, they operate as completely separate entities. The provincial parties have separate policies, finances, memberships, constituency associations, executives, conventions and offices.[11]

Affiliated provincial parties, current seats, and leaders

Party
Seats/Total
Leader
Status


New Brunswick Liberal Association

26 / 49





Brian Gallant
Majority government


Liberal Party of Newfoundland and Labrador

30 / 40





Dwight Ball
Majority government


Nova Scotia Liberal Party

27 / 51





Stephen McNeil
Majority government


Prince Edward Island Liberal Party

18 / 27





Wade MacLauchlan
Majority government


Electoral performance[edit]


Election
Leader
Votes
 %
Seats
+/–
Position
Government


1867
George Brown
60,818
22.6

62 / 180





 62
 2nd
Opposition


1872
Edward Blake
110,556
34.7

95 / 200





 33
 2nd
Opposition


1874
Alexander Mackenzie
128,455
39.4

129 / 206





 34
 1st
Majority


1878
Alexander Mackenzie
180,074
33.0

63 / 206





 66
 2nd
Opposition


1882
Edward Blake
160,547
31.1

73 / 211





 10
 2nd
Opposition


1887
Edward Blake
312,736
43.1

80 / 215





 7
 2nd
Opposition


1891
Wilfrid Laurier
350,512
45.2

90 / 215





 10
 2nd
Opposition


1896
Wilfrid Laurier
350,512
45.2

117 / 213





 27
 1st
Majority


1900
Wilfrid Laurier
477,758
50.2

128 / 213





 11
 1st
Majority


1904
Wilfrid Laurier
521,041
50.8

137 / 214





 9
 1st
Majority


1908
Wilfrid Laurier
570,311
48.8

133 / 221





 4
 1st
Majority


1911
Wilfrid Laurier
596,871
45.8

85 / 221





 48
 2nd
Opposition


1917
Wilfrid Laurier
729,756
38.8

82 / 235





 3
 2nd
Opposition


1921
Mackenzie King
1,285,998
41.1

118 / 235





 36
 1st
Majority


1925
Mackenzie King
1,252,684
39.7

100 / 245





 18
 2nd
Minority


1926
Mackenzie King
1,397,031
42.9

116 / 245





 16
 1st
Minority


1930
Mackenzie King
1,716,798
44.0

89 / 245





 27
 2nd
Opposition


1935
Mackenzie King
1,967,839
44.6

173 / 245





 84
 1st
Majority


1940
Mackenzie King
2,365,979
51.3

179 / 245





 6
 1st
Majority


1945
Mackenzie King
2,086,545
39.7

118 / 245





 61
 1st
Minority


1949
Louis St. Laurent
2,874,813
49.1

191 / 262





 73
 1st
Majority


1953
Louis St. Laurent
2,731,633
48.4

169 / 265





 22
 1st
Majority


1957
Louis St. Laurent
2,702,573
40.5

105 / 265





 64
 2nd
Opposition


1958
Lester Pearson
2,432,953
33.4

48 / 265





 67
 2nd
Opposition


1962
Lester Pearson
2,846,589
36.9

99 / 265





 51
 2nd
Opposition


1963
Lester Pearson
3,276,996
41.4

128 / 265





 29
 1st
Minority


1965
Lester Pearson
3,099,521
40.1

131 / 265





 3
 1st
Minority


1968
Pierre Trudeau
3,686,801
45.3

154 / 264





 23
 1st
Majority


1972
Pierre Trudeau
3,717,804
38.4

109 / 264





 46
 1st
Minority


1974
Pierre Trudeau
4,102,853
43.1

141 / 264





 32
 1st
Majority


1979
Pierre Trudeau
4,595,319
40.1

114 / 282





 27
 2nd
Opposition


1980
Pierre Trudeau
4,855,425
44.3

147 / 282





 33
 1st
Majority


1984
John Turner
3,516,486
28.0

40 / 282





 107
 2nd
Opposition


1988
John Turner
4,205,072
31.9

83 / 295





 43
 2nd
Opposition


1993
Jean Chrétien
5,647,952
41.2

177 / 295





 94
 1st
Majority


1997
Jean Chrétien
4,994,277
38.4

155 / 301





 22
 1st
Majority


2000
Jean Chrétien
5,252,031
40.8

172 / 301





 17
 1st
Majority


2004
Paul Martin
4,982,220
36.7

135 / 308





 37
 1st
Minority


2006
Paul Martin
4,479,415
30.2

103 / 308





 32
 2nd
Opposition


2008
Stéphane Dion
3,633,185
26.2

77 / 308





 26
 2nd
Opposition


2011
Michael Ignatieff
2,783,175
18.9

34 / 308





 43
 3rd
Third party


2015
Justin Trudeau
6,928,055
39.5

184 / 338





 150
 1st
Majority


History of leaders[edit]
Of the list of leaders only 7 never served as Prime Minister and most were interim leaders.


Picture
Name
Term
start
Term
end
Date of birth
Date of death
Notes



George Brown
1867
1867
November 29, 1818
May 9, 1880
Unofficial
(actually leader of the Clear Grits, a forerunner of the federal Liberal Party)



Edward Blake
1869
1870
October 13, 1833
March 1, 1912
Unofficial



Alexander Mackenzie
March 6, 1873
April 27, 1880
January 28, 1822
April 17, 1892
2nd Prime Minister (1st Liberal Prime Minister)



Edward Blake
May 4, 1880
June 2, 1887
October 13, 1833
March 1, 1912




Wilfrid Laurier
June 23, 1887
February 17, 1919
November 20, 1841
February 17, 1919
7th Prime Minister



Daniel Duncan McKenzie
February 17, 1919
August 7, 1919
January 8, 1859
June 8, 1927
(Interim)



William Lyon
Mackenzie King
August 7, 1919
August 6, 1948
December 17, 1874
July 22, 1950
10th Prime Minister



Louis St. Laurent
August 7, 1948
January 15, 1958
February 1, 1882
July 25, 1973
12th Prime Minister



Lester B. Pearson
January 16, 1958
April 5, 1968
April 23, 1897
December 27, 1972
14th Prime Minister



Pierre Trudeau
April 6, 1968
June 15, 1984
October 18, 1919
September 28, 2000
15th Prime Minister



John Turner
June 16, 1984
June 22, 1990
June 7, 1929
living
17th Prime Minister



Jean Chrétien
June 23, 1990
November 13, 2003
January 11, 1934
living
20th Prime Minister



Paul Martin
November 14, 2003
March 19, 2006
August 28, 1938
living
21st Prime Minister



Bill Graham
March 19, 2006
December 1, 2006
March 17, 1939
living
(Interim)



Stéphane Dion
December 2, 2006
December 9, 2008
September 28, 1955
living




Michael Ignatieff
December 10, 2008
May 24, 2011
May 12, 1947
living
Interim leader until May 2, 2009 (when ratified as permanent leader)



Bob Rae
May 25, 2011
April 13, 2013
August 2, 1948
living
(Interim)



Justin Trudeau
April 14, 2013
Incumbent
December 25, 1971
living
23rd Prime Minister


Presidents of the National Liberal Federation/Liberal Party of Canada[edit]

Vincent Massey 1932–1935
Norman Platt Lambert 1936–1941
vacant 1941–1943
Norman Alexander McLarty 1943 (acting)
Wishart McLea Robertson 1943–1945
James Gordon Fogo 1946–1952
Duncan Kenneth MacTavish 1952–1958
Bruce Matthews 1958–1961
John Joseph Connolly 1961–1964
John Lang Nichol 1964–1968
Richard Stanbury 1968–1973
Gildas Molgat 1973–1976
Alasdair Graham 1976–1980
Norman MacLeod 1980–1982
Iona Campagnolo 1982–1986
J. J. Michel Robert 1986–1990
Don Johnston 1990–1994
Dan Hays 1994–1998
Stephen LeDrew 1998–2003
Michael Eizenga 2003–2006
Marie Poulin 2006–2008
Doug Ferguson 2008–2009
Alfred Apps 2009–2012
Mike Crawley 2012–2014
Anna Gainey 2014–present

See also[edit]


Canadian politics portal
Liberalism portal



Liberal Party of Canada leadership elections
Liberalism in Canada
List of political parties in Canada
Senate Liberal Caucus
Trudeauism

Notes[edit]



^ All Liberal senators were expelled from the party's parliamentary caucus in 2014. Remaining senators appointed by Liberal prime ministers sit as the Senate Liberal Caucus, which is not affiliated to or recognized by the Liberal Party.[9]



References[edit]


^ The party became infused with social liberalism in the 1940s and 1950s. Law Commission of Canada (2011). Law and Citizenship. UBC Press. p. 6. 
^ Susan Prentice, "Manitoba's childcare regime: Social liberalism in flux". Canadian Journal of Sociology 29.2 (2004): 193-207.
^ Michael J. Prince, "Canadian disability activism and political ideas: In and between neo-liberalism and social liberalism". Canadian Journal of Disability Studies 1.1 (2012): 1-34.
^ Miriam Smith says, "The Liberal Party of Canada, the party that championed the Charter, is strongly identified with the document and uses the social liberalism of the Charter as a distinctive badge of party identification." "Social movements and judicial empowerment: Courts, public policy, and lesbian and gay organizing in Canada". Politics & Society 33#2 (2005): 327-353.
^ Andrea Olive (2015). The Canadian Environment in Political Context. University of Toronto Press. p. 55. ISBN 978-1-4426-0871-9. 
^ David Rayside (2011). Faith, Politics, and Sexual Diversity in Canada and the United States. UBC Press. p. 22. ISBN 978-0-7748-2011-0. 
^ Richard Collin; Pamela L. Martin (2012). An Introduction to World Politics: Conflict and Consensus on a Small Planet. Rowman & Littlefield. p. 138. ISBN 978-1-4422-1803-1. 
^ "Liberal Party of Canada Welcomes Liberal International to 2009 Convention". Liberal Party of Canada. March 6, 2009. Archived from the original on August 5, 2012. Retrieved 2012-08-28. 
^ a b Spencer, Christina (29 January 2014). "Justin Trudeau kicks all 32 Liberal senators out of caucus in bid for reform". National Post. Retrieved 18 October 2015. 
^ a b McCall, Christina; Stephen Clarkson. "Liberal Party". The Canadian Encyclopedia.
^ a b Dyck, Rand (2012). Canadian Politics: Concise Fifth Edition. Nelson Education. pp. 217, 229. ISBN 0176503439. 
^ Delacourt, Susan (June 17, 2010). "Ignatieff: Liberal party is a 'coalition of the centre', Ignatieff says 'big red tent' needs left and right votes". Toronto Star. We have to stand in the centre, drawing people from both sides of the political spectrum. 
^ Puddington, Arch (2007). Freedom in the World: The Annual Survey of Political Rights and Civil Liberties. Rowman & Littlefield. p. 142. ISBN 978-0-7425-5897-7. 
^ "Canada's 'natural governing party'". CBC News in Depth, 4 December 2006. Retrieved 2012-08-10.
^ a b R. Kenneth Carty (2015). Big Tent Politics: The Liberal Party's Long Mastery of Canada's Public Life. UBC Press. ISBN 978-0-7748-2999-1. Archived from the original on October 16, 2015. 
^ "Liberal Party of Canada". Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved 2013-04-19. 
^ Fitzpatrick, Meagan (May 3, 2011). "Ignatieff's Liberals lose Official Opposition status". Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. Retrieved 2011-11-07. 
^ Apps, Alfred. "Building a Modern Liberal Party" (PDF). Liberal Party of Canada. pp. 5–9. Retrieved 2011-11-24. 
^ "2009 Constitution" (PDF). Liberal Party of Canada. Retrieved 2011-11-24. 
^ Egan, Louise; Palmer, Randall (November 21, 2011). "The lesson from Canada on cutting deficits". The Globe and Mail. Archived from the original on November 26, 2011. Retrieved November 24, 2011. 
^ "What does real change mean to you?". Liberal Party of Canada. 5 October 2015. Retrieved 17 October 2015. 
^ a b c d e f g h i j k l Quadri, Omair (13 October 2015). "Platform comparison: Where the parties stand on the top campaign issues". The Globe and Mail. Retrieved 17 October 2015. 
^ Elliot, Josh (30 September 2015). "Liberals 'committed' to legalizing marijuana: Trudeau". CTV News. Retrieved 17 October 2015. 
^ Bryden, Joan (17 June 2015). "Trudeau announces plan to kill first-past-the-post by the next election". National Post. Retrieved 17 October 2015. 
^ "The road taken by Justin Trudeau to his Senate reform decision". CBC News. The Canadian Press. 30 January 2014. Retrieved 17 October 2015. 
^ a b c d e f g h "Liberal Party of Canada – History" (PDF). Newmarket-Aurora Federal Liberal Association. Archived from the original (PDF) on April 26, 2012. Retrieved 2012-04-26. 
^ a b "Sir Wilfrid Laurier Biography". Library and Archives Canada. Retrieved 2011-11-24. 
^ Beauharnois Scandal Archived May 14, 2007, at the Wayback Machine. at The Canadian Encyclopedia
^ "Federal Election Question May Be Settled Shortly". Ottawa Citizen. 20 Sep 1943. Retrieved 18 Oct 2015. 
^ John W. Lederle. "The Liberal Convention of 1893". The Canadian Journal of Economics and Political Science. Vol. 16, No. 1 (Feb., 1950), pp. 42–52.
^ Koop, Ryan. "The Elusive Nature of National Party Organization in Canada and Australia". Paper presented at the Canadian Political Science Association Annual Conference. University of British Columbia, Vancouver BC. 4–6 June 2008. Retrieved 2012-06-17. 
^ David Johnson (2006). Thinking Government: Public Sector Management in Canada. University of Toronto Press. pp. 99–103. ISBN 978-1-5511-1779-9. 
^ "Louis St. Laurent Biography". Library and Archives Canada. Retrieved 2011-11-23. 
^ "John Diefenbaker Biography". Library and Archives Canada. Retrieved 2011-11-23. 
^ "Lester Pearson Biography". Library and Archives Canada. Retrieved 2011-11-23. 
^ Andrew Cohen (2008). Extraordinary Canadians: Lester B. Pearson. Penguin Canada. ISBN 978-0-1431-7269-7. 
^ Calwell, Allison (29 September 2000). "Former Canadian PM dies". Australian Broadcasting Corporation. Retrieved 13 November 2015. 
^ Baluja, Tamara; Bradshaw, James (22 June 2012). "Is bilingualism still relevant in Canada?". The Globe and Mail. Retrieved 13 November 2015. 
^ Stephen Tierney; Hugh Donald Forbes (2007). Multiculturalism and the Canadian Constitution (PDF). UBC Press. pp. 27–41. ISBN 978-0-7748-1445-4. Archived from the original (PDF) on November 17, 2015. 
^ Blais, André. "Accounting for the Electoral Success of the Liberal Party in Canada". Journal of Political Science, Dec 2005, Vol. 38#4. pp 821–840.
^ "Chinese Immigration Act, 1923". Canadian Museum of Immigration at Pier 21. Retrieved 2017-04-30. 
^ Stephanie Levitz (2016-09-27). "Liberals working on apology for 1939 decision to turn away Jewish refugees". The Globe and Mail. Retrieved 2017-09-28. 
^ Lois Harder; Steve Patten (2015). Patriation and Its Consequences: Constitution Making in Canada (PDF). UBC Press. pp. 3–23. ISBN 978-0-7748-2861-1. Archived from the original (PDF) on November 17, 2015. 
^ McKay-Panos, Linda (1 January 2013). "The Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms: An Integral Part of our Constitution". LawNow. Retrieved 12 November 2015. 
^ Soucy, Jean; Wrobel, Marion G. (11 April 2000). "Federal Deficit: Changing Trends". Parliamentary Research Branch, Economics Division, Library of Parliament. Retrieved 12 November 2015. 
^ Terence McKenna. "Jean Chrétien: Losing the Liberal leadership". CBC's The Journal, 27 February 1986. Retrieved 12 November 2015.
^ Brooke Jeffrey (2010). Divided Loyalties: The Liberal Party of Canada, 1984–2008. University of Toronto Press. ISBN 978-1-4426-6019-9. 
^ "Jean Chrétien Bio". Library and Archives Canada. Retrieved 2011-11-09. 
^ "Clarity Act". Government of Canada Privy Council Office. Retrieved 2011-11-09. 
^ Melissa Cheung (June 18, 2003). "Canada Will Legalize Gay Marriage". CBS News. Retrieved 2011-11-09. 
^ Krauss, Clifford (June 18, 2003). "Canadian leaders agree to propose gay marriage law". The New York Times. Retrieved 2011-11-09. 
^ "Chrétien restates opposition to Iraq war". Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. March 18, 2003. Retrieved 2011-11-09. 
^ Harper, Tim (March 22, 2003). "Canadians back Chrétien on war, poll finds". Toronto Star. Archived from the original on July 6, 2011. Retrieved November 9, 2011. 
^ a b Wells, Paul (May 4, 2011). "The untold story of the 2011 election: Introduction and Chapter 1". Maclean's. Retrieved 2011-11-09. 
^ Gray, John (13 June 2006). "Realists and idealists and a bag of hammers". CBC News. Archived from the original on October 8, 2010. Retrieved 1 Jan 2016. 
^ Mickleburgh, Rod (September 26, 2011). "Topp's NDP campaign tactics border on bullying, professor warns". The Globe and Mail. Retrieved 2011-11-09. 
^ St. Martin, Romeo (May 11, 2006). "Possible lawsuit resurrects Adscam for the Liberals". PoliticsWatch. Retrieved 2010-04-28. 
^ "Martin to split duties with interim leader Bill Graham". Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. February 1, 2006. Retrieved 2011-11-12. 
^ "Rock says no to Liberal leadership". Ottawa Citizen. February 3, 2006. Archived from the original on February 14, 2012. Retrieved 2011-11-12. 
^ "Canadians Place Rae as Best Liberal Leader". Angus Reid. October 20, 2006. Archived from the original on January 21, 2012. Retrieved November 12, 2011. 
^ "Rae Seen as Best Future Liberal PM in Canada". Angus Reid. October 23, 2006. Archived from the original on January 21, 2012. Retrieved November 12, 2011. 
^ "LPC Delegates Poll" (PDF). EKOS. November 4, 2006. Archived from the original (PDF) on April 4, 2012. Retrieved November 12, 2011. 
^ "Kennedy, Dion meet behind closed doors". Toronto Star. November 30, 2006. Retrieved 2011-11-12. [permanent dead link]
^ "The Liberal Leadership Race". Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. Retrieved 2011-11-12. 
^ "Liberal popularity peaking with Dion: poll". Canwest News Service. December 8, 2006. Archived from the original on November 21, 2011. Retrieved November 13, 2011. 
^ a b "Political parties stuck in neutral". Montreal Gazette. February 14, 2008. Archived from the original on February 14, 2012. Retrieved November 13, 2011. 
^ "Harper Advantage Continues" (PDF). Nanos Research. February 7, 2008. Archived from the original (PDF) on October 4, 2011. Retrieved November 13, 2011. 
^ "The Green Shift" (PDF). Liberal Party of Canada. Retrieved 2011-11-13. 
^ Morris, Chris (August 14, 2008). "Liberal Green Shift is 'green shaft,' says Harper". Toronto Star. Retrieved 2011-11-13. 
^ "Harper hopes Green Shift will turn Liberal voters Tory blue". Canwest News Service. October 5, 2008. Archived from the original on February 14, 2012. Retrieved November 13, 2011. 
^ Galloway, Gloria (September 11, 2008). "Layton lays into Green Shift". The Globe and Mail. Retrieved 2011-11-13. [permanent dead link]
^ "Green Shift touted as both saviour and damnation". The Globe and Mail. September 11, 2008. Archived from the original on November 27, 2015. Retrieved 2011-11-13. 
^ Campion-Smith, Bruce; Whittington, Les (October 20, 2008). "Dion resigns but will remain as leader for now". Toronto Star. Retrieved 2011-11-13. 
^ "Federal Liberals to pick new leader May 2 in Vancouver". The Vancouver Province. November 8, 2008. Archived from the original on February 14, 2012. Retrieved 2011-11-13. 
^ "The Economic and Fiscal Statement 2008". Department of Finance Canada. November 27, 2008. Retrieved 2011-11-13. 
^ "Flaherty to slash public funding for federal parties". CTV News. November 26, 2008. 
^ a b "Opposition parties won't support Tory economic update". Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. November 27, 2008. Retrieved 2011-11-14. 
^ a b "Liberals, NDP, Bloc sign deal on proposed coalition". Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. December 1, 2011. Retrieved 2011-11-14. 
^ "GG agrees to suspend Parliament until January". Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. December 4, 2011. Retrieved 2011-11-14. 
^ "Results of CBC News Survey" (PDF). EKOS Research. December 4, 2008. Archived from the original (PDF) on December 9, 2008. Retrieved 2011-11-14. 
^ a b Valpy, Michael; Leblanc, Daniel; Taber, Jane (December 8, 2008). "Ignatieff makes his move". The Globe and Mail. Archived from the original on April 13, 2012. Retrieved November 14, 2011. 
^ Smith, Joanna (December 8, 2009). "Dion out; Ignatieff and Rae vie for leadership". Toronto Star. Retrieved 2011-11-14. 
^ "LeBlanc drops out of Liberal leadership race". Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. December 8, 2008. Retrieved 2011-11-14. 
^ "Rae bows out, offers 'unqualified' support for Ignatieff as Liberal leader". Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. December 9, 2009. Retrieved 2011-11-14. 
^ "Leadership Change Would Benefit Liberals in the Next Federal Election" (PDF). Angus Reid. December 7, 2008. Archived from the original (PDF) on January 21, 2012. Retrieved November 14, 2011. 
^ "Conservative Lead Dwindles After Liberals Settle on New Leader" (PDF). Angus Reid. December 13, 2008. Archived from the original (PDF) on January 21, 2012. Retrieved November 14, 2011. 
^ Clark, Campbell; Taber, Jane (January 28, 2009). "Ignatieff okays budget, with conditions". The Globe and Mail. Archived from the original on January 26, 2011. Retrieved November 14, 2011. 
^ "Ignatieff slams Harper for 'failure to unite Canada'". CBC News. May 2, 2009. Retrieved 2011-11-09. 
^ "Close Federal Race Continues – Tories Down in Quebec Up in Ontario" (PDF). Nanos Research. May 2, 2009. Archived from the original (PDF) on October 16, 2011. Retrieved November 14, 2011. 
^ "Close federal race continues" (PDF). Nanos Research. June 27, 2009. Archived from the original (PDF) on October 16, 2011. Retrieved November 14, 2011. 
^ Siddiqui, Haroon (September 3, 2009). "If Harper is Bush, then Ignatieff is John Kerry". Toronto Star. Retrieved 2011-11-14. 
^ Hebert, Chantal (August 26, 2009). "Absent opposition gives the PM a holiday". Toronto Star. Retrieved 2011-11-14. 
^ "Liberals won't raise taxes: Ignatieff". Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. September 2, 2009. Retrieved 2011-11-09. 
^ "Conservative lead widens in poll". Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. September 2009. Retrieved 2011-11-14. 
^ "Canada's government survives non-confidence motion | Canada". Reuters. October 1, 2009. Retrieved 2010-04-28. 
^ "Parties Virtually Tied as Election Nears in Canada". Angus Reid. September 4, 2009. Archived from the original on January 21, 2012. Retrieved November 14, 2011. 
^ MacDonald, Ian (October 9, 2009). "Harper tickles while Ignatieff burns". Montreal Gazette. Archived from the original on March 14, 2013. Retrieved November 9, 2011. 
^ "Conservatives retain 7-point lead as parties enter election campaign" (PDF). EKOS Politics. March 25, 2011. Retrieved 2011-11-15. 
^ Austen, Ian (25 March 2011). "Canadian Government, Beset by Scandal, Collapses". The New York Times. Retrieved 18 Oct 2015. 
^ "Chance of Harper vs. Ignatieff debate fades". CTV News. March 31, 2011. Retrieved 2011-11-14. 
^ Whittington, Les (April 7, 2011). "Ignatieff's appeal improving but Harper still leads, poll says". Toronto Star. Retrieved 2011-11-14. 
^ Galloway, Gloria (April 8, 2011). "Layton remains game despite polls showing he's the odd man out". The Globe and Mail. Archived from the original on April 12, 2011. Retrieved November 14, 2011. 
^ "Layton score jumps, Harper score drops, Ignatieff flat" (PDF). Nanos Research. April 27, 2011. Archived from the original (PDF) on April 4, 2012. Retrieved November 14, 2011. 
^ "Ignatieff's Liberals lose Official Opposition status". Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. May 3, 2011. 
^ "NDP surge overtakes Liberals, poll finds". Edmonton Journal. April 26, 2011. Archived from the original on March 14, 2013. Retrieved November 9, 2011. 
^ Fowlie, Jonathan. "NDP overtake Liberals for second place: poll". The Vancouver Sun. Retrieved 2011-11-09. 
^ "NDP surge dominates talk on federal campaign trail". The Vancouver Sun. April 27, 2011. Retrieved 2011-11-09. 
^ "Official Voting Results – Forty-First General Election 2011". Elections Canada. Retrieved 2012-05-21. 
^ Bryden, Joan (June 19, 2011). "Federal Liberals won't pick new leader for full two years". The Globe and Mail. Retrieved 2011-06-19. 
^ "Justin Trudeau sweeps Liberal leadership with 80% support". Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. April 14, 2013. Retrieved 2013-04-15. 
^ Berthiaume, Lee (7 May 2013). "Tory attack ads may be backfiring in favour of Trudeau's Liberals as support rises, new poll shows". National Post. Retrieved 7 June 2013. 
^ Visser, Josh (23 May 2013). "Trudeau's Liberals hit historic highs as senate scandal has 'drastic effect' on Tories: poll". National Post. Retrieved 7 June 2013. 
^ Warnica, Richard (23 Oct 2015). "The Liberal Resurrection: How a Liberal 'lightweight' faced with the longest election campaign in history beat down a Tory majority". National Post. Retrieved 25 Oct 2015. 
^ Crawford, Allison (3 Dec 2015). "Senate Liberals unsure how to work with Trudeau government". CBC News. Retrieved 1 Jan 2016. 
^ Raj, Althia (25 Oct 2015). "Justin Trudeau's Liberals: 'We Had A Plan And We Stuck To It.' And They Won". Huffington Post. Retrieved 31 Oct 2015. 
^ "Canada election: Liberals sweep to power". BBC News. 20 Oct 2015. Retrieved 20 Oct 2015. 
^ "Canada election: Liberals win sweeping victory over Conservatives". The Daily Telegraph. 20 Oct 2015. Retrieved 20 Oct 2015. 
^ "Stunning Liberal gains in Quebec as Trudeau wins majority government". CBC News. 19 Oct 2015. Retrieved 20 Oct 2015. 
^ "Liberal comeback headed for history books". Toronto Star. 20 Oct 2015. Retrieved 25 Oct 2015. 
^ Argitis, Theophilos; Wingrove, Josh (19 Oct 2015). "Trudeau's Liberals Oust Harper With Surprise Canada Majority". Bloomberg News. Retrieved 27 Oct 2015. 
^ Steve Patten, "The Evolution of the Canadian Party System". in Gagnon, and Tanguay, eds. Canadian Parties in Transition pp. 57–58
^ Stephen Clarkson, The Big Red Machine: How the Liberal Party Dominates Canadian Politics Archived January 3, 2016, at the Wayback Machine. (2005).
^ Martin, Lawrence (May 4, 2011). "Harper's triumph: a realignment of historic proportion". The Globe and Mail. Retrieved 2011-11-09. 
^ Coyne, Andrew (May 6, 2011). "The West is in and Ontario has joined it". Maclean's. Retrieved 2011-11-09. 
^ McLeod, Paul (22 Oct 2015). "Book Review: The Big Shift Explains Why Stephen Harper Will Keep Winning". Buzzfeed. Retrieved 22 Oct 2015. 
^ Valpy, Michael (25 Nov 2011). "Is a Liberal comeback mission impossible?". The Globe and Mail. Retrieved 22 Oct 2015. 
^ Nadelli, Alberto; Swann, Glenn (20 Oct 2015). "Three maps that explain the Liberals' great comeback in Canada's election". The Guardian. Retrieved 21 Oct 2015. 
^ Paikin, Steve (19 Oct 2015). "Who says Canadian politics are boring?". TVO. Retrieved 21 Oct 2011. 


Further reading[edit]

Bickerton, James, and Alain G. Gagnon. Canadian Politics (5th ed. 2009), 415pp; university textbook
Bliss, Michael. Right Honourable Men: The Descent of Canadian Politics from Macdonald to Mulroney (1994), essays on Prime Ministers
Clarkson, Stephen. The Big Red Machine: How the Liberal Party Dominates Canadian Politics (2005)
Cohen, Andrew, and J. L. Granatstein, eds. Trudeau's Shadow: the life and legacy of Pierre Elliott Trudeau (1999).
Gagnon, Alain G., and Brian Tanguay. Canadian Parties in Transition (3rd ed. 2007), 574pp; university textbook
Granatstein, J.L. Mackenzie King: His Life and World (1977).
Hillmer, Norman, and Steven Azzi. "Canada's Best Prime Ministers", Maclean's June 20, 2011 online
Jeffrey, Brooke. Divided Loyalties: The Liberal Party of Canada, 1984–2008 (2010) excerpt and text search
Koop, Royce. "Professionalism, Sociability and the Liberal Party in the Constituencies." Canadian Journal of Political Science (2010) 43#04 pp: 893–913.
McCall, Christina; Stephen Clarkson. "Liberal Party". The Canadian Encyclopedia. 
McCall, Christina. Grits: an intimate portrait of the Liberal Party (Macmillan of Canada, 1982)
Neatby, H. Blair. Laurier and a Liberal Quebec: A Study in Political Management (1973)
Whitaker, Reginald. The Government Party: Organizing and Financing the Liberal Party of Canada, 1930–1958 (1977)
Wallace, W.S. (1948). "History of the Liberal Party of Canada". The Encyclopedia of Canada. IV. Toronto: University Associates of Canada. pp. 75–76. 
Wearing, Joseph. The L-Shaped Party: The Liberal Party of Canada, 1958–1980 (McGraw-Hill Ryerson, 1981)

Archival holdings[edit]

Liberal Party of Canada - Canadian Political Parties and Political Interest Groups - Web Archive created by the University of Toronto Libraries

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Liberal Party of Canada.



Official website
Liberal Party of Canada - Canadian Political Parties and Political Interest Groups - Web Archive created by the University of Toronto Libraries
The Liberal Party of Canada Constitution
Canadian Encyclopedia entry on the Liberal Party







v
t
e


Liberal Party of Canada



Provincial wings




Affiliated provincial parties



New Brunswick
Newfoundland and Labrador
Nova Scotia
Prince Edward Island





Formerly affiliated parties



Alberta (1905–76)
British Columbia (1903–late 1980s)
Manitoba
Northwest Territories (1898–1905)
Ontario
Quebec (1867–1964)
Saskatchewan (1905–2009)
Yukon











National leaders




Leaders



Brown
Mackenzie
Blake
Laurier
McKenzie
King
St. Laurent
Pearson
P. E. Trudeau
Turner
Gray
Chrétien
Martin
Graham
Dion
Ignatieff
Rae
J. Trudeau





Deputy Leaders



Copps
Gray
Manley
McLellan
Robillard
Ignatieff
Goodale








Leadership elections



1919
1948
1958
1968
1980
1984
1990
2003
2006
2009
2013





Parliamentary election
candidates



1867
1878
1887
1891
1896
1900
1904
1908
1911
1917
1921
1925
1926
1930
1935
1940
1945
1949
1957
1958
1962
1963
1965
1968
1972
1974
1979
1980
1984
1988
1993
1997
2000
2004
2006
2008
2011
2015





Predecessors



History
Clear Grits (circa 1850–58)
Institut canadien de Montréal (1844–80)
Parti canadien (circa 1800–38)
Parti rouge (1848–61)
Reformers (circa 1830–54)
in Newfoundland





Related parties



Liberal Protectionist
Liberal-Progressive
Liberal-Labour
Laurier Liberals
Liberal–Unionist
National Liberal Progressive












v
t
e


Federal political parties and parliamentary groups in Canada



House of Commons



Liberal (183)
Conservative (97)
New Democratic (44)
Bloc Québécois (10)
Green (1)
Independent (2)
Vacant (1)





Senate



Independent Senators Group (39)
Conservative (34)
Senate Liberal Caucus (15)
Non-affiliated (5)
Vacant (12)





Other registered parties



Alliance of the North
Animal Protection
Christian Heritage
Communist
Libertarian
Marijuana
Marxist–Leninist
National Advancement
Pirate
Progressive Canadian
Rhinoceros





Notable historical parties and groups



Anti-Confederate
Bloc populaire
Canadian Alliance
Conservative (historical)
Co-operative Commonwealth
Democratic Representative Caucus
Labour
Labor-Progressive
New Democracy
Progressive Conservative
Progressive/United Farmers
Ralliement créditiste
Reform
Social Credit
Strength in Democracy
Unionist








Portal:Canadian politics
List of political parties
Politics of Canada











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Liberal_Party_of_Canada&oldid=818050028"					Categories: 1867 establishments in CanadaFederal political parties in CanadaLiberal Party of CanadaLiberal parties in CanadaOrganizations based in OttawaPolitical parties established in 1867Centrist parties in CanadaSocial liberal partiesHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksAll articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from December 2017Articles with permanently dead external linksUse mdy dates from May 2012Articles containing French-language textArticles containing potentially dated statements from 2006All articles containing potentially dated statementsOfficial website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia