





This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (March 2012) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)







A library book shelf in Hong Kong arranged using the Dewey classification


A library classification is a system of knowledge organization by which library resources are arranged according to subject.[1] Library classifications use a notational system that represents the order of topics in the classification and allows items to be stored in that order. Library classification systems group related materials together, typically arranged in a hierarchical tree structure. A different kind of classification system, called a faceted classification system, is also widely used which allows the assignment of multiple classifications to an object, enabling the classifications to be ordered in multiple ways. The library classification numbers can be considered identifiers for resources but are distinct from the International Standard Book Number (ISBN) or International Standard Serial Number (ISSN) system.



Contents


1 Description
2 History
3 Types
4 Methods or systems

4.1 English language universal classification systems
4.2 Non-English universal classification systems
4.3 Universal classification systems that rely on synthesis (faceted systems)


5 The practice of classifying
6 Comparing classification systems
7 See also
8 Notes
9 References



Description[edit]
Library classification is an aspect of library and information science. It is distinct from scientific classification in that it has as its goal to provide a useful ordering of documents rather than a theoretical organization of knowledge.[2] Although it has the practical purpose of creating a physical ordering of documents, it does generally attempt to adhere to accepted scientific knowledge.[3]
Library classification is distinct from the application of subject headings in that classification organizes knowledge into a systematic order, while subject headings provide access to intellectual materials through vocabulary terms that may or may not be organized as a knowledge system.[4] The characteristics that a bibliographic classification demands for the sake of reaching these purposes are: a useful sequence of subjects at all levels, a concise memorable notation, and a host of techniques and devices of number synthesis[5]
History[edit]
Library classifications were preceded by classifications used by bibliographers such as Conrad Gessner. The earliest library classification schemes organized books in broad subject categories. The increase in available printed materials made such broad classification unworkable, and more granular classifications for library materials had to be developed in the nineteenth century.[6]
Although libraries created order within their collections from as early as the fifth century B.C.,[6] the Paris Bookseller's classification, developed in 1842 by Jacques Charles Brunet, is generally seen as the first of the modern book classifications. Brunet provided five major classes: theology, jurisprudence, sciences and arts, belles-lettres, and history.[7]
Types[edit]
There are many standard systems of library classification in use, and many more have been proposed over the years. However, in general, classification systems can be divided into three types depending on how they are used:

Universal schemes which cover all subjects, for example the Dewey Decimal Classification, Universal Decimal Classification and Library of Congress Classification
Specific classification schemes which cover particular subjects or types of materials, for example Iconclass, British Catalogue of Music Classification, and Dickinson classification, or the NLM Classification for medicine.
National schemes which are specially created for certain countries, for example the Swedish library classification system, SAB (Sveriges Allmänna Biblioteksförening).

In terms of functionality, classification systems are often described as:

enumerative: subject headings are listed alphabetically, with numbers assigned to each heading in alphabetical order.
hierarchical: subjects are divided hierarchically, from most general to most specific.
faceted or analytico-synthetic: subjects are divided into mutually exclusive orthogonal facets.

There are few completely enumerative systems or faceted systems; most systems are a blend but favouring one type or the other. The most common classification systems, LCC and DDC, are essentially enumerative, though with some hierarchical and faceted elements (more so for DDC), especially at the broadest and most general level. The first true faceted system was the Colon classification of S. R. Ranganathan.
Methods or systems[edit]
Classification types denote the classification or categorization according the form or characteristics or qualities of a classification scheme or schemes. Method and system has similar meaning. Method or methods or system means the classification schemes like Dewey Decimal Classification or Universal Decimal Classification. The types of classification is for identifying and understanding or education or research purposes while classification method means those classification schemes like DDC, UDC.
English language universal classification systems[edit]
The most common systems in English-speaking countries are:

Dewey Decimal Classification (DDC)
Library of Congress Classification (LCC)
Colon classification (CC)
Universal Decimal Classification (UDC)

Other systems include:

Harvard-Yenching Classification, an English classification system for Chinese language materials.
V-LIB 1.2 (2008 Vartavan Library Classification for over 700 fields of knowledge, currently sold under license in the UK by Rosecastle Ltd. (see http://rosecastle.atspace.com/index_files/VartavanLibrary.htm)).

Non-English universal classification systems[edit]

A system of book classification for Chinese libraries (Liu's Classification) library classification for user

New Classification Scheme for Chinese Libraries


Nippon Decimal Classification (NDC)
Chinese Library Classification (CLC)
Korean Decimal Classification (KDC)
Russian Library-Bibliographical Classification (BBK)

Universal classification systems that rely on synthesis (faceted systems)[edit]

Bliss bibliographic classification
Colon classification
Cutter Expansive Classification
Universal Decimal Classification

Newer classification systems tend to use the principle of synthesis (combining codes from different lists to represent the different attributes of a work) heavily, which is comparatively lacking in LC or DDC.
The practice of classifying[edit]
Library classification is associated with library (descriptive) cataloging under the rubric of cataloging and classification, sometimes grouped together as technical services. The library professional who engages in the process of cataloging and classifying library materials is called a cataloger or catalog librarian. Library classification systems are one of the two tools used to facilitate subject access. The other consists of alphabetical indexing languages such as Thesauri and Subject Headings systems.
Library classification of a piece of work consists of two steps. Firstly, the "aboutness" of the material is ascertained. Next, a call number (essentially a book's address) based on the classification system in use at the particular library will be assigned to the work using the notation of the system.
It is important to note that unlike subject heading or thesauri where multiple terms can be assigned to the same work, in library classification systems, each work can only be placed in one class. This is due to shelving purposes: A book can have only one physical place. However, in classified catalogs one may have main entries as well as added entries. Most classification systems like the Dewey Decimal Classification (DDC) and Library of Congress Classification also add a cutter number to each work which adds a code for the author of the work.
Classification systems in libraries generally play two roles. Firstly, they facilitate subject access by allowing the user to find out what works or documents the library has on a certain subject.[8] Secondly, they provide a known location for the information source to be located (e.g. where it is shelved).
Until the 19th century, most libraries had closed stacks, so the library classification only served to organize the subject catalog. In the 20th century, libraries opened their stacks to the public and started to shelve library material itself according to some library classification to simplify subject browsing.
Some classification systems are more suitable for aiding subject access, rather than for shelf location. For example, Universal Decimal Classification, which uses a complicated notation of pluses and colons, is more difficult to use for the purpose of shelf arrangement but is more expressive compared to DDC in terms of showing relationships between subjects. Similarly faceted classification schemes are more difficult to use for shelf arrangement, unless the user has knowledge of the citation order.
Depending on the size of the library collection, some libraries might use classification systems solely for one purpose or the other. In extreme cases, a public library with a small collection might just use a classification system for location of resources but might not use a complicated subject classification system. Instead all resources might just be put into a couple of wide classes (travel, crime, magazines etc.). This is known as a "mark and park" classification method, more formally called reader interest classification.[9]
Comparing classification systems[edit]
As a result of differences in notation, history, use of enumeration, hierarchy, and facets, classification systems can differ in the following ways:

Type of Notation: Notation can be pure (consisting of only numerals, for example) or mixed (consisting of letters and numerals, or letters, numerals, and other symbols).
Expressiveness: This is the degree to which the notation can express relationship between concepts or structure.
Whether they support mnemonics: For example, the number 44 in DDC notation often means it concerns some aspect of France. For example, in the Dewey classification 598.0944 concerns "Birds in France", the 09 signifies geographical division, and 44 represents France.
Hospitality: The degree to which the system is able to accommodate new subjects.
Brevity: The length of the notation to express the same concept.
Speed of updates and degree of support: The better classification systems are frequently being reviewed.
Consistency
Simplicity
Usability

See also[edit]





Book: Library classification





Attribute-value system
Categorization
Document classification
Knowledge organization
Library management
Library of Congress Subject Headings

Notes[edit]



^ "New World Encyclopædia : Library classification". 2014. Retrieved 2017-03-22. 
^ Bhattacharya, Ganesh; Ranganathan, S R (1974), Wojciechowski, Jerzy A., ed., From knowledge classification to library classification, Ottawa Conference on the Conceptual Basis of the Classification of Knowledge, 1971, Munich: Verlag Dokumentation, pp. 119–143 
^ Bliss, Henry Evelyn (1933). The organization of knowledge in libraries. New Yorka: H. W. Wilson. 
^ Lois Mai Chan (September 28, 2007), Cataloging and classification (Cataloging and Classification ed.), The Scarecrow Press, Inc., ISBN 9780810859449, 0810859440 
^ Satija, M P (2015). "Features, Functions and Components of a Library Classification System in the LIS tradition for the e-Environment". Information Science Theory and Practice (3(4)): 62–77. 
^ a b Shera, Jesse H (1965). Libraries and the organization of knowledge. Hamden, Conn.: Archon Books. 
^ Sayers, Berwick (1918). An introduction to library classification. New York: H. W. Wilson. 
^ "Subject access points". iva.dk. 
^ Lynch, Sarah N., and Eugene Mulero. "Dewey? At This Library With a Very Different Outlook, They Don't" The New York Times, July 14, 2007.



References[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Library cataloging and classification.



Chan, Lois Mai. (1994)Cataloging and Classification: An Introduction, second ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, . ISBN 978-0-07-010506-5, ISBN 978-0-07-113253-4.







v
t
e


Library classification systems






Bliss (BC)
Brian Deer
Chinese Library (CLC/CCL)
Colon (CC)
Cutter Expansive
Dewey Decimal (DDC)
Harvard–Yenching
Korean decimal (KDC)
Library of Congress (LCC)
New Classification Scheme for Chinese Libraries
Nippon Decimal (NDC)
Swedish library system (SAB)
Universal Decimal (UDC)









See also: Knowledge organization









 Category
 Commons
 Portal












v
t
e


Computable knowledge



Topics and
concepts



Alphabet of human thought
Authority control
Automated reasoning
Commonsense knowledge
Commonsense reasoning
Computability
Formal system
Inference engine
Knowledge base
Knowledge-based systems
Knowledge engineering
Knowledge extraction
Knowledge representation
Knowledge retrieval
Library classification
Logic programming
Ontology
Personal knowledge base
Question answering
Semantic reasoner





Proposals and
implementations



Zairja
Ars Magna (1300)
An Essay towards a Real Character and a Philosophical Language (1688)
Calculus ratiocinator & Characteristica universalis (1700)
Dewey Decimal Classification (1876)
Begriffsschrift (1879)
Mundaneum (1910)
Logical atomism (1918)
Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus (1921)
Hilbert's program (1920s)
Incompleteness theorem (1931)
World Brain (1938)
Memex (1945)
General Problem Solver (1959)
Prolog (1972)
Cyc (1984)
Semantic Web (2001)
Evi (2007)
Wolfram Alpha (2009)
Watson (2011)
Siri (2011)
Knowledge Graph (2012)
Wikidata (2012)
Cortana (2014)
Viv (2016)





In fiction



The Engine (Gulliver's Travels, 1726)
Joe ("A Logic Named Joe", 1946)
The Librarian (Snow Crash, 1992)
Dr. Know (A.I. Artificial Intelligence, 2001)
Waterhouse (The Baroque Cycle, 2003)

See also: Logic machines in fiction and List of fictional computers








Authority control



LCCN: sh85026721
BNF: cb126474572 (data)
NDL: 00573383











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Library_classification&oldid=817362260"					Categories: Library cataloging and classificationKnowledge representationHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from March 2012All articles needing additional referencesCommons category without a link on WikidataWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiers