The Library of Congress Classification (LCC) is a system of library classification developed by the Library of Congress. It is used by most research and academic libraries in the U.S. and several other countries.[1]
LCC should not be confused with LCCN, the system of Library of Congress Control Numbers assigned to all books (and authors), which also defines URLs of their online catalog entries, such as "82006074" and "http://lccn.loc.gov/82006074".[a] The Classification is also distinct from Library of Congress Subject Headings, the system of labels such as "Boarding schools" and "Boarding schools—Fiction" that describe contents systematically.[b] Finally, the classifications may be distinguished from the call numbers assigned to particular copies of books in the collection, such as "PZ7.J684 Wj 1982 FT MEADE Copy 1" where the classification is "PZ7.J684 Wj 1982".[c]
The classification was invented by Herbert Putnam in 1897, just before he assumed the librarianship of Congress. With advice from Charles Ammi Cutter, it was influenced by his Cutter Expansive Classification, the Dewey Decimal System, and the Putnam Classification System (developed while Putnam was head librarian at the Minneapolis Public Library).[2][3] It was designed specifically for the purposes and collection of the Library of Congress to replace the fixed location system developed by Thomas Jefferson. By the time Putnam departed from his post in 1939, all the classes except K (Law) and parts of B (Philosophy and Religion) were well developed.
LCC has been criticized for lacking a sound theoretical basis; many of the classification decisions were driven by the practical needs of that library rather than epistemological considerations.[4] Although it divides subjects into broad categories, it is essentially enumerative in nature. That is, it provides a guide to the books actually in one library's collections, not a classification of the world.
In 2007 The Wall Street Journal reported that in the countries it surveyed most public libraries and small academic libraries used the older Dewey Decimal Classification system.[1]
The National Library of Medicine classification system (NLM) uses the initial letters W and QS–QZ, which are not used by LCC. Some libraries use NLM in conjunction with LCC, eschewing LCC's R for Medicine. Others use LCC's QP–QR schedules and include Medicine R.[clarification needed][5][6]



Contents


1 Classification

1.1 Class A – General Works
1.2 Class B – Philosophy, Psychology, Religion
1.3 Class C – Auxiliary Sciences of History (General)
1.4 Class D – World History (except American History)
1.5 Class E – American History
1.6 Class F – Local History of the United States and British, Dutch, French, and Latin America
1.7 Class G – Geography, Anthropology, Recreation
1.8 Class H – Social Sciences
1.9 Class J – Political Science
1.10 Class K – Law
1.11 Class L – Education
1.12 Class M – Music
1.13 Class N – Fine Arts
1.14 Class P – Language and Literature
1.15 Class Q – Science
1.16 Class R – Medicine
1.17 Class S – Agriculture
1.18 Class T – Technology
1.19 Class U – Military Science
1.20 Class V – Naval Science
1.21 Class Z – Bibliography, Library Science


2 See also
3 Notes
4 References
5 External links



Classification[edit]




Java programming books in the QA subclass.




Letter
Subject area


A
General Works


B
Philosophy, Psychology, and Religion


C
Auxiliary Sciences of History


D
General and Old World History


E
History of America


F
History of the United States and British, Dutch, French, and Latin America


G
Geography, Anthropology, and Recreation


H
Social Sciences


J
Political Science


K
Law


L
Education


M
Music


N
Fine Arts


P
Language and Literature


Q
Science


R
Medicine


S
Agriculture


T
Technology


U
Military Science


V
Naval Science


Z
Bibliography, Library Science, and General Information Resources


Class A – General Works[edit]
Main article: Library of Congress Classification:Class A -- General Works

Subclass AC – Collections. Series. Collected works
Subclass AE – Encyclopedias
Subclass AG – Dictionaries and other general reference works
Subclass AI – Indexes
Subclass AM – Museums. Collectors and collecting
Subclass AN – Newspapers
Subclass AP – Periodicals
Subclass AS – Academies and learned societies
Subclass AY – Yearbooks. Almanacs. Directories
Subclass AZ – History of scholarship and learning. The humanities

Class B – Philosophy, Psychology, Religion[edit]
Main article: Library of Congress Classification:Class B -- Philosophy, Psychology, Religion

Subclass B – Philosophy (General)
Subclass BC – Logic
Subclass BD – Speculative philosophy
Subclass BF – Psychology
Subclass BH – Aesthetics
Subclass BJ – Ethics
Subclass BL – Religions. Mythology. Rationalism
Subclass BM – Judaism
Subclass BP – Islam. Bahaism. Theosophy, etc.
Subclass BQ – Buddhism
Subclass BR – Christianity
Subclass BS – The Bible
Subclass BT – Doctrinal theology
Subclass BV – Practical Theology
Subclass BX – Christian Denominations

Class C – Auxiliary Sciences of History (General)[edit]
Main article: Library of Congress Classification:Class C -- Auxiliary Sciences of History

Subclass CB – History of Civilization
Subclass CC – Archaeology
Subclass CD – Diplomatics. Archives. Seals
Subclass CE – Technical Chronology. Calendar
Subclass CJ – Numismatics
Subclass CN – Inscriptions. Epigraphy
Subclass CR – Heraldry
Subclass CS – Genealogy
Subclass CT – Biography

Class D – World History (except American History)[edit]
Main article: Library of Congress Classification:Class D -- History, General and Old World

Subclass D – History (General)
Subclass DA – Great Britain
Subclass DAW – Central Europe
Subclass DB – Austria – Liechtenstein – Hungary – Czechoslovakia
Subclass DC – France – Andorra – Monaco
Subclass DD – Germany
Subclass DE – Greco-Roman World
Subclass DF – Greece
Subclass DG – Italy – Malta
Subclass DH – Low Countries – Benelux Countries
Subclass DJ – Netherlands (Holland)
Subclass DJK – Eastern Europe (General)
Subclass DK – Russia. Soviet Union. Former Soviet Republics – Poland
Subclass DL – Northern Europe. Scandinavia
Subclass DP – Spain – Portugal
Subclass DQ – Switzerland
Subclass DR – Balkan Peninsula
Subclass DS – Asia
Subclass DT – Africa
Subclass DU – Oceania (South Seas)
Subclass DX – History of the Romani people

Class E – American History[edit]
Main article: Library of Congress Classification:Class E -- History of America
Class F – Local History of the United States and British, Dutch, French, and Latin America[edit]
Main article: Library of Congress Classification:Class F -- Local History of the United States and British, Dutch, French, and Latin America
Class G – Geography, Anthropology, Recreation[edit]
Main article: Library of Congress Classification:Class G -- Geography. Anthropology. Recreation

Subclass G – Geography (General). Atlases. Maps
Subclass GA – Mathematical geography. Cartography
Subclass GB – Physical geography
Subclass GC – Oceanography
Subclass GE – Environmental Sciences
Subclass GF – Human ecology. Anthropogeography
Subclass GN – Anthropology
Subclass GR – Folklore
Subclass GT – Manners and customs (General)
Subclass GV – Recreation. Leisure

Class H – Social Sciences[edit]
Main article: Library of Congress Classification:Class H -- Social sciences

Subclass H – Social sciences (General)
Subclass HA – Statistics
Subclass HB – Economic theory. Demography
Subclass HC – Economic history and conditions
Subclass HD – Industries. Land use. Labor
Subclass HE – Transportation and communications
Subclass HF – Commerce
Subclass HG – Finance
Subclass HJ – Public finance
Subclass HM – Sociology (General)
Subclass HN – Social history and conditions. Social problems. Social reform
Subclass HQ – The family. Marriage, Women and Sexuality
Subclass HS – Societies: secret, benevolent, etc.
Subclass HT – Communities. Classes. Races
Subclass HV – Social pathology. Social and public welfare. Criminology
Subclass HX – Socialism. Communism. Anarchism

Class J – Political Science[edit]
Main article: Library of Congress Classification:Class J -- Political science

Subclass J – General legislative and executive papers
Subclass JA – Political science (General)
Subclass JC – Political theory
Subclass JF – Political institutions and public administration
Subclass JJ – Political institutions and public administration (North America)
Subclass JK – Political institutions and public administration (United States)
Subclass JL – Political institutions and public administration (Canada, Latin America, etc.)
Subclass JN – Political institutions and public administration (Europe)
Subclass JQ – Political institutions and public administration (Asia, Africa, Australia, Pacific Area, etc.)
Subclass JS – Local government. Municipal government
Subclass JV – Colonies and colonization. Emigration and immigration. International migration
Subclass JX – International law, see JZ and KZ (obsolete)
Subclass JZ – International relations

Class K – Law[edit]
Main article: Library of Congress Classification:Class K -- Law

Subclass K – Law in general. Comparative and uniform law. Jurisprudence
Subclass KB – Religious law in general. Comparative religious law. Jurisprudence
Subclass KBM – Jewish law
Subclass KBP – Islamic law
Subclass KBR – History of canon law
Subclass KBS – Canon law of Eastern churches
Subclass KBT – Canon law of Eastern Rite Churches in Communion with the Holy See of Rome
Subclass KBU – Law of the Roman Catholic Church. The Holy See
Subclasses – KD/KDK - United Kingdom and Ireland
Subclass KDZ – America. North America
Subclass KE – Canada
Subclass KF – United States
Subclass KG – Latin America – Mexico and Central America – West Indies. Caribbean area
Subclass KH – South America
Subclasses KJ-KKZ – Europe
Subclasses KL-KWX – Asia and Eurasia, Africa, Pacific Area, and Antarctica
Subclass KU/KUQ – Law of Australia and New Zealand
Subclass KZ – Law of nations

Class L – Education[edit]
Main article: Library of Congress Classification:Class L -- Education

Subclass L – Education (General)
Subclass LA – History of education
Subclass LB – Theory and practice of education
Subclass LC – Special aspects of education
Subclass LD – Individual institutions – United States
Subclass LE – Individual institutions – America (except United States)
Subclass LF – Individual institutions – Europe
Subclass LG – Individual institutions – Asia, Africa, Indian Ocean islands, Australia, New Zealand, Pacific islands
Subclass LH – College and school magazines and papers
Subclass LJ – Student fraternities and societies, United States
Subclass LT – Textbooks

Class M – Music[edit]
Main article: Library of Congress Classification:Class M -- Music

Subclass M – Music
Subclass ML – Literature on music
Subclass MT – Instruction and study

Class N – Fine Arts[edit]
Main article: Library of Congress Classification:Class N -- Fine Arts

Subclass N – Visual arts
Subclass NA – Architecture
Subclass NB – Sculpture
Subclass NC – Drawing. Design. Illustration
Subclass ND – Painting
Subclass NE – Print media
Subclass NK – Decorative arts
Subclass NX – Arts in general

Class P – Language and Literature[edit]
Main article: Library of Congress Classification:Class P -- Language and Literature




The PN-subclass shelf.



Subclass P – Philology. Linguistics
Subclass PA – Greek language and literature. Latin language and literature
Subclass PB – Modern languages. Celtic languages and literature
Subclass PC – Romanic languages
Subclass PD – Germanic languages. Scandinavian languages
Subclass PE – English language
Subclass PF – West Germanic languages
Subclass PG – Slavic languages and literatures. Baltic languages. Albanian language
Subclass PH – Uralic languages. Basque language
Subclass PJ – Oriental languages and literatures
Subclass PK – Indo-Iranian languages and literatures
Subclass PL – Languages and literatures of Eastern Asia, Africa, Oceania
Subclass PM – Hyperborean, Native American, and artificial languages
Subclass PN – Literature (General)
Subclass PQ – French literature – Italian literature – Spanish literature – Portuguese literature
Subclass PR – English literature
Subclass PS – American literature
Subclass PT – German literature – Dutch literature – Flemish literature since 1830 – Afrikaans literature -Scandinavian literature – Old Norse literature: Old Icelandic and Old Norwegian – Modern Icelandic literature – Faroese literature – Danish literature – Norwegian literature – Swedish literature
Subclass PZ – Fiction and juvenile belles lettres

Class Q – Science[edit]
Main article: Library of Congress Classification:Class Q -- Science

Subclass Q – Science (General)
Subclass QA – Mathematics
Subclass QB – Astronomy
Subclass QC – Physics
Subclass QD – Chemistry
Subclass QE – Geology
Subclass QH – Natural history – Biology
Subclass QK – Botany
Subclass QL – Zoology
Subclass QM – Human anatomy
Subclass QP – Physiology
Subclass QR – Microbiology

Class R – Medicine[edit]
Main article: Library of Congress Classification:Class R -- Medicine

Subclass R – Medicine (General)
Subclass RA – Public aspects of medicine
Subclass RB – Pathology
Subclass RC – Internal medicine
Subclass RD – Surgery
Subclass RE – Ophthalmology
Subclass RF – Otorhinolaryngology
Subclass RG – Gynecology and Obstetrics
Subclass RJ – Pediatrics
Subclass RK – Dentistry
Subclass RL – Dermatology
Subclass RM – Therapeutics. Pharmacology
Subclass RS – Pharmacy and materia medica
Subclass RT – Nursing
Subclass RV – Botanic, Thomsonian, and Eclectic medicine
Subclass RX – Homeopathy
Subclass RZ – Other systems of medicine

Class S – Agriculture[edit]
Main article: Library of Congress Classification:Class S -- Agriculture

Subclass S – Agriculture (General)
Subclass SB – Horticulture. Plant propagation. Plant breeding
Subclass SD – Forestry. Arboriculture. Silviculture
Subclass SF – Animal husbandry. Animal science
Subclass SH – Aquaculture. Fisheries. Angling
Subclass SK – Hunting

Class T – Technology[edit]
Main article: Library of Congress Classification:Class T -- Technology

Subclass T – Technology (General)
Subclass TA – Engineering Civil engineering (General).
Subclass TC – Hydraulic engineering. Ocean engineering
Subclass TD – Environmental technology. Sanitary engineering
Subclass TE – Highway engineering. Roads and pavements
Subclass TF – Railroad engineering and operation
Subclass TG – Bridges
Subclass TH – Building construction
Subclass TJ – Mechanical engineering and machinery
Subclass TK – Electrical engineering. Electronics. Nuclear engineering
Subclass TL – Motor vehicles. Aeronautics. Astronautics
Subclass TN – Mining engineering. Metallurgy
Subclass TP – Chemical technology
Subclass TR – Photography
Subclass TS – Manufacturing engineering. Mass production
Subclass TT – Handicrafts. Arts and crafts
Subclass TX – Home economics

Class U – Military Science[edit]
Main article: Library of Congress Classification:Class U -- Military Science

Subclass U – Military science (General)
Subclass UA – Armies: Organization, distribution, military situation
Subclass UB – Military administration
Subclass UC – Military maintenance and transportation
Subclass UD – Infantry
Subclass UE – Cavalry. Armor
Subclass UF – Artillery
Subclass UG – Military engineering. Air forces
Subclass UH – Other military services

Class V – Naval Science[edit]
Main article: Library of Congress Classification:Class V -- Naval Science

Subclass V – Naval science (General)
Subclass VA – Navies: Organization, distribution, naval situation
Subclass VB – Naval administration
Subclass VC – Naval maintenance
Subclass VD – Naval seamen
Subclass VE – Marines
Subclass VF – Naval ordnance
Subclass VG – Minor services of navies
Subclass VK – Navigation. Merchant marine
Subclass VM – Naval architecture. Shipbuilding. Marine engineering

Class Z – Bibliography, Library Science[edit]
Main article: Library of Congress Classification:Class Z -- Bibliography. Library Science. Information resources

Subclass Z – Books (General). Writing. Paleography. Book industries and trade. Libraries. Bibliography
Subclass ZA – Information resources/materials

See also[edit]

ACM Computing Classification System
Brinkler classification
Chinese Library Classification
Comparison of Dewey and Library of Congress subject classification
Harvard–Yenching Classification
ISBN
Minnie Earl Sears, formulated Sears Subject Headings, simplified for use by small libraries
Database of Recorded American Music
Books in the United States

Notes[edit]



^ LCCN also covers authors, which LCC does not. For authors (people), the letter 'n' accompanies the number, and they too define URLs in a parallel catalog, such as "n83160096" and "http://lccn.loc.gov/n83160096". (So LCCN may be called alphanumeric.)
^ LCSH too is developed by the Library and assigns alphanumeric IDs. A closer look at this example shows refinements defined in 2004, 2007, and 2009. LCSH: Boarding schools.
^ "FT MEADE" and "Copy 1" are specific to the Library of Congress collection, where FT MEADE refers to a facility located at Fort George G. Meade. All libraries that use LCC assign call numbers that begin "PZ7.J684 Wj 1982" to their copies of the 1982 edition of this book.



References[edit]



^ a b Lavallee, Andrew (July 20, 2007). "Discord Over Dewey: A New Library in Arizona Fans a Heated Debate Over What Some Call the 'Googlization' of Libraries". Wall Street Journal. Retrieved 25 May 2013. Some 95% of U.S. public libraries use Dewey, and nearly all of the others, the OCLC says, use a closely related Library of Congress system. 
^ Claire Kelley. "A library classification system that’s older than the Dewey Decimal and Library of Congress models".
^ Andy Sturdevant. "Cracking the spine on Hennepin County Library's many hidden charms". MinnPost, 02/05/14.
^ Hickey, Doralyn J. (1969). "The Library Quarterly: Information, Community, Policy". 
^ Taylor, A. G., & Joudrey, D.N. (2009). The organization of information. 3rd ed. Englewood: Libraries Unlimited.
^ Chan, L. M.(2007). Cataloguing and classification: An introduction. 3rd ed. Scarecrow Press.



External links[edit]



Wikisource has original text related to this article:
Library of Congress Classification






Wikidata has the property: Library of Congress Classification (P1149) (see uses)



Library of Congress classification outline, loc.gov
Library of Congress – classification, loc.gov
Cataloging Distribution Services – source of Library of Congress Classification schedules. loc.gov
Classification outline, loc.gov
How to read LCC call numbers, geography.about.com (via The Wayback Machine)
How to use LCC to organize a home library, zackgrossbart.com



Content listings
Types


Overviews
Featured content
Outlines
Lists
Portals
Glossaries
Categories
Indices



Topics

Current events
Reference
Culture
Geography
Health
History
Mathematics
Nature
People
Philosophy
Religion
Society
Technology



Places, people and times

Academic disciplines
Anniversaries

today


Countries and territories
People

deaths this year


Timelines

centuries
decades




Indices


A–Z index
Categories
Dewey Decimal classes
Library of Congress Classification
Roget's Thesaurus
Spoken articles
Wikipedia books










v
t
e


Library classification systems






Bliss (BC)
Brian Deer
Chinese Library (CLC/CCL)
Colon (CC)
Cutter Expansive
Dewey Decimal (DDC)
Harvard–Yenching
Korean decimal (KDC)
Library of Congress (LCC)
New Classification Scheme for Chinese Libraries
Nippon Decimal (NDC)
Swedish library system (SAB)
Universal Decimal (UDC)









See also: Knowledge organization









 Category
 Commons
 Portal









Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 203733980
GND: 4330113-7











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Library_of_Congress_Classification&oldid=817669741"					Categories: Library of Congress ClassificationHidden categories: Use mdy dates from April 2013Wikipedia articles needing clarification from May 2012Wikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiers