

Law enforcement
in the United Kingdom




Law
Courts
Prisons




Topics




Agencies

police forces
defunct


Firearms use
History
Ranks




Equipment




Aviation
Firearms
Uniform and equipment
Vehicles




Types of agency




Territorial police forces
Special police forces
Port police
Park police
Service police
Non-police
Other




Types of agent




Accredited Person
Bailiff
Civil enforcement officer
Civilian Security Officer
Special Constable
War Reserve Constable
Constable
Chief Constable
Court security officer
Customs officer
Traffic officer
Immigration officer
Police Community Support Officer
Police Custody and Security Officer
Tipstaff
Traffic warden
Water bailiff
Wildlife inspector






Concepts


Chief police officer
Police and crime commissioner
Emergency Control Centre
Home Office
Neighbourhood Policing Teams
Police area
Police Authority
Initial Police Learning and Development Programme
Police Cadets
Police Federation of England and Wales
Police Federation for Northern Ireland
Scottish Police Federation
Police Information Point
Police Oath
Police powers in: England and Wales - Scotland
Police Support Volunteer
Scotland Yard
Police 101 number
Policing by consent
Warrant Card








Acts


Highway Act 1835
Police Act 1964
Police (Scotland) Act 1967
The Functions of Traffic Wardens Order 1970
Misuse of Drugs Act 1971
Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984
Road Traffic Regulation Act 1984
Removal and Disposal of Vehicles Regulations 1986
Road Traffic Act 1988
Road Traffic Offenders Act 1988
Protection of Children Act 1989
Environmental Protection Act 1990
Police Act 1996
Terrorism Act 2000
Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001
Police Reform Act 2002
Anti-social Behaviour Act 2003
Licensing Act 2003
Railways and Transport Safety Act 2003
Clean Neighbourhoods and Environment Act 2005
Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005
Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011
Anti-Social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014
Policing and Crime Act 2017








Statutory Instruments


Police and Criminal Evidence (Northern Ireland) Order 1989








Crime
Terrorism







v
t
e









Metropolitan Police officers on crowd control after England loses to Portugal, 1 July 2006.


This is a list of law enforcement agencies in the United Kingdom, Crown dependencies and British Overseas Territories. There are a number of agencies that participate in law enforcement in the United Kingdom which can be grouped into three general types:

Territorial police forces, who carry out the majority of policing. These are police forces that cover a police area (a particular region) and have an independent police authority. Current police forces have their grounding in the Police Act 1996 (in England and Wales), a combination of Police (Scotland) Act 1967 and Police and Fire Reform (Scotland) Act 2012 (in Scotland) and the Police (Northern Ireland) Act 2000 (in Northern Ireland), which prescribe a number of issues such as appointment of a chief constable, jurisdiction and responsibilities.
National law enforcement bodies, including the National Crime Agency and national police forces that have a specific, non-regional jurisdiction, such as the British Transport Police. The Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 refers to these as 'special police forces'. In addition, there are non-police law enforcement agencies, whose officers are not police officers, but still enforce laws, and other bodies with solely investigatory powers.
Miscellaneous police forces, mostly having their foundations in older legislation or common law. These are responsible for policing specific local areas or activities, such as ports and parks. Before the passing of recent legislation such as the Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005, they were often referred to as 'special police forces'; care must therefore be taken in interpreting historical use of that phrase. These constabularies are not within the scope of the legislation applicable to the previously-mentioned organisations but can still be the subject of statutes applicable to, for example, docks, harbours or railways. Until the passing of Railways and Transport Safety Act 2003, the British Transport Police was such a force.

The majority of law enforcement in the United Kingdom is carried out by territorial police forces that police the general public and their activities. The other types of agencies are concerned with policing of more specific matters.
Over the centuries there has been a wide variation in the number of police forces in the United Kingdom, with a large number now no longer in existence.



Contents


1 Territorial police forces

1.1 England and Wales
1.2 Scotland
1.3 Northern Ireland
1.4 Naming


2 National law enforcement

2.1 Bodies with police powers
2.2 Bodies with limited executive powers
2.3 Bodies with solely investigatory powers


3 Miscellaneous police forces

3.1 Ports police
3.2 Parks police
3.3 Other


4 Service police
5 Crown dependencies

5.1 Isle of Man
5.2 Bailiwick of Jersey
5.3 Bailiwick of Guernsey


6 Overseas Territories

6.1 Ministry of Defence overseas police
6.2 Overseas service police


7 Overseas law enforcement in the UK
8 Fictional police forces
9 See also
10 References
11 Further reading
12 External links



Territorial police forces[edit]
See also: List of police forces of the United Kingdom
England and Wales[edit]

Except in Greater London, each territorial police force covers one or more of the local government areas (counties) established in the 1974 local government reorganisations (although with subsequent modifications), in an area known in statute as a police area. These forces provide the majority of policing services to the public of England and Wales. These forces have been known historically as "Home Office police forces" due to the Acts of Parliament[citation needed] that established them although use of that description was only correct for the Metropolitan Police and in that case ceased to be so when local control was transferred from the Home Office to the Metropolitan Police Authority. Despite the implication of the term, all police forces are independent, with operational control resting solely with the chief officer of each force (the Chief Constable or with regard to the Metropolitan Police and City of London Police forces, their respective Commissioners); each force was overseen by a Police authority until these were replaced by Police and Crime Commissioners in 2012.
The Police Act 1996 is the most recent piece of legislation, which outlines the areas of responsibility for the 43 territorial forces of England and Wales (found in Schedule 1 of the Act).
Constable is the lowest rank in the police service, but all officers, whatever their rank are "constables" in terms of legal powers and jurisdiction. Police officers in territorial police forces in England and Wales derive their jurisdiction from Section 30 of the Police Act 1996. This section outlines that such officers have jurisdiction throughout England and Wales and also the adjacent United Kingdom waters. Special Constables, who are part-time, volunteer officers of these forces, used to have a more limited jurisdiction – limited solely to their own force areas and adjacent forces (collectively, their "constablewick"). Since 1 April 2007, however Special Constables of England & Wales have full police powers throughout those two countries. This means that, in contrast to the majority of countries, all UK volunteer police officers now have exactly the same powers as their full-time colleagues. There are a number of situations in which the jurisdiction of a constable extends to one of the other countries – see the main article for details.
  Police of England and Wales
As of March 2010 police numbers in England and Wales were:[1]

Police officers: 143,734
Police community support officers: 16,918
Other staff: 79,596


England


  Police of England


Avon and Somerset Constabulary
Bedfordshire Police
Cambridgeshire Constabulary
Cheshire Constabulary[2]
City of London Police (not shown)
Cleveland Police
Cumbria Constabulary
Derbyshire Constabulary
Devon and Cornwall Police
Dorset Police
Durham Constabulary
Essex Police
Gloucestershire Constabulary
Greater Manchester Police
Hampshire Constabulary
Hertfordshire Constabulary
Humberside Police
Kent Police
Lancashire Constabulary[2]
Leicestershire Police
Lincolnshire Police
Merseyside Police[2]
Metropolitan Police Service
Norfolk Constabulary
Northamptonshire Police
Northumbria Police
North Yorkshire Police
Nottinghamshire Police
South Yorkshire Police
Staffordshire Police[3]
Suffolk Constabulary
Surrey Police
Sussex Police
Thames Valley Police
Warwickshire Police
West Mercia Police[3]
West Midlands Police[3]
West Yorkshire Police
Wiltshire Police


As of March 2010 police numbers in England:[1]

Police officers: 136,365
Police community support officers: 16,200
Other staff: 75,408


Wales


  Police of Wales

Dyfed-Powys Police (Heddlu Dyfed Powys)
Gwent Police (Heddlu Gwent)
North Wales Police (Heddlu Gogledd Cymru)
South Wales Police (Heddlu De Cymru)

As of March 2010 police numbers in Wales were:[1]

Police officers: 7,369
Police community support officers: 718
Other staff: 4,188


Collaborative units


South East Counter Terrorism Unit
South West Counter Terrorism Unit
East Counter Terrorism Intelligence Unit
East Midlands Counter Terrorism Intelligence Unit
West Midlands Police Counter Terrorism Unit
North West Counter Terrorism Unit
North East Counter Terrorism Unit
Welsh Extremism and Counter Terrorism Unit

Scotland[edit]

Most police powers and functions have been inherited by the Scottish Government and Scottish Parliament from the Scottish Office. Areas for which legislative responsibility remains with the UK Government include national security, terrorism, firearms and drugs. The Police (Scotland) Act 1967, as amended, was the basis for the organisation and jurisdiction of the eight former territorial forces in Scotland that were formed in 1975. These forces covered one or more of the areas of the local government regions established in the 1975 local government reorganisation (and since abolished), with minor adjustments to align with the post-1996 council area borders. These forces provided the majority of police services to the public of Scotland, although Scottish police officers also have limited jurisdiction throughout the rest of the United Kingdom as required (See above comments under English and Welsh forces).
In 2011, the Scottish Government announced that it planned to amalgamate the eight territorial forces in Scotland, along with the Scottish Crime and Drug Enforcement Agency, into a single agency. The Police and Fire Reform (Scotland) Act 2012, an Act of the Scottish Parliament, codified this amalgamation and brought about the new Police Service of Scotland (to be known as "Police Scotland"). The new force was established on 1 April 2013.
  Police Scotland
In 2017, plans were being debated in the Scottish Parliament to merge railway policing with Police Scotland.
As of December 2012, police numbers in Scotland were:[4]

Police officers: 17,436
Special constables: 1,404
Other staff: 6,168

Community Support Officers, commonly referred to as "Police Community Support Officers", were established by Section 38(2) of the Police Reform Act 2002, which applies only to England and Wales. There are therefore no Community Support Officers in Scotland.
Northern Ireland[edit]

County and borough based police forces were not formed in Ireland as they were in Great Britain, with instead a single Royal Irish Constabulary covering most of Ireland (the exceptions being the Dublin Metropolitan Police, which was responsible for policing in Dublin, and the Belfast Town Police force, which was replaced by the RIC in the 1880s). The Royal Ulster Constabulary was formed in 1922 after the establishment of the Irish Free State, and served until the reforms of the police under the terms established initially by the Good Friday Agreement of 1998 undertaken by the Patten Commission, which led to the renaming of the RUC in 2001. The Police (Northern Ireland) Act 2000 sets out the basis for the organisation and function of the police force in the province. Until 2010, police powers were not transferred to the devolved Northern Ireland Executive, unlike Scotland, instead remaining with the Northern Ireland Office. However, in January 2010 agreement was reached between the two largest parties in the Assembly, the DUP and Sinn Féin, over a course that would see them assume responsibility for policing and justice from April.[5]
  Police Service of Northern Ireland
As of April 2007 police numbers in Northern Ireland were:[1]

Police officers: 7,216
Full-time reserve police officers: 335
Part-time police officers: 684
Other staff: 2,265

Police in Northern Ireland do not employ Police Community Support Officers
Naming[edit]
County police forces traditionally bore the name "constabulary" upon their formation (as a derivation of "constable"). The reorganisation of police forces over the years has seen this name dropped in favour of "police" as a name, as many have decided that the word "constabulary" is confusing for people more used to searching for the word "police".[6] However, a number of police forces in the areas overseen by the United Kingdom retain the name "constabulary":

12 territorial forces in England
1 special police force
1 territorial force in the crown dependencies
1 parks police force (under the terms of the Parks Regulation Act 1872)[7]

National law enforcement[edit]
Bodies with police powers[edit]
These bodies operate in more than one country of the United Kingdom. The remit of some of the forces is further limited to the areas that they police, such as railway infrastructure. The Anti-terrorism, Crime and Security Act 2001 gave the British Transport Police and Ministry of Defence Police a limited, conditional authority to act outside of their primary jurisdiction if the situation requires urgent police action and the local force are not readily available, or if they believe that there is risk to life or limb, or where they are assisting the local force.

Government agencies


National Crime Agency (NCA) – An agency that leads UK-wide activities to combat high-level crime such as organised crime. In addition, the NCA acts as the UK point of contact for foreign law enforcement agencies. It replaced the Serious Organised Crime Agency in 2013.

 Additionally, the following three government agencies are defined in legislation as "special police forces". As these forces are responsible to specific areas of infrastructure, they do not answer to the Home Office, but instead to the government department responsible for the area they police. All three forces do voluntarily submit themselves to HMIC inspection:

Ministry of Defence Police – A police force tasked with providing armed security, uniformed policing, and investigative services to Ministry of Defence installations throughout the United Kingdom.[8]
Civil Nuclear Constabulary – A police force responsible for providing law enforcement and security at or within 5 km of any relevant nuclear site and for nuclear materials in transit within the United Kingdom.[9]
British Transport Police (Great Britain) – A police force responsible for providing law enforcement at certain railways and light-rail systems in Great Britain.[1]


Bodies hosted by the Association of Chief Police Officers


National Wildlife Crime Unit – A police unit run by the ACPO that gathers intelligence on wildlife crime and provides analytical and investigative support to law enforcement agencies across the United Kingdom.
National Counter Terrorism Security Office – A police unit run by the ACPO, which advises the British government on its counter terrorism strategy.
National Vehicle Crime Intelligence Service – A police unit run by the ACPO, tasked with combating organised vehicle crime and the use of vehicles in crime.


Bodies hosted by territorial police forces


National Domestic Extremism and Disorder Intelligence Unit – A police unit that is part of the Metropolitan Police Service Specialist Operations Directorate, tasked with coordinating police response to domestic extremism across the United Kingdom.
Protection Command – A police unit that is part of the Metropolitan Police Service Specialist Operations Directorate, responsible for providing protective security to the government/diplomatic community and the Royal Family within the United Kingdom.
National Fraud Intelligence Bureau – A police unit hosted by the City of London Police, tasked with combating economic crime throughout the United Kingdom.
National Ballistics Intelligence Service (Great Britain) – A police unit hosted by West Midlands Police, tasked with gathering and disseminating fast time intelligence on the criminal use of firearms across Great Britain.
National Police Air Service (England and Wales) – A police aviation service hosted by West Yorkshire Police, that provides centralised air support to the 43 territorial police forces in England and Wales.

Bodies with limited executive powers[edit]
These organisations are not police forces but do have similar powers to that of the police with the exception that they cannot arrest a person nor make forcible entry without a warrant.

Border Force is a part of the Home Office, responsible for frontline border control operations at air, sea and rail ports in the United Kingdom. Employees of Border Force may be Immigration Officers and/or customs officers. They hold certain powers of arrest, detention and search in addition to those available to Any person[10] in England and Wales or to any person in Scotland and Northern Ireland. Police-like powers are exercised by border officers and inland immigration enforcement officers. The agency also has a specialist criminal investigations directorate.
Immigration Enforcement
Her Majesty's Revenue and Customs. Since the creation of the UK Border Agency (now Border Force), staff of HMRC no longer perform frontline duties at ports of entry. The remainder of the staff with law enforcement powers employed by HMRC consists of the Criminal Investigation Branch, who, as customs officers, continue to exercise the powers granted under the Customs Management Acts and the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 including arrest.
Driver and Vehicle Standards Agency (Great Britain)
Driver and Vehicle Agency (Northern Ireland)
The Independent Police Complaints Commission (England and Wales) investigates complaints against police officers and staff of the police forces in England and Wales,[11] and staff of HM Revenue and Customs, the National Crime Agency in England and Wales and the UK Border Agency. Certain investigators of the IPCC, for the purposes of the carrying out of an investigation and all purposes connected with it, have all the powers and privileges of constables throughout England and Wales and the territorial waters.[12]

Bodies with solely investigatory powers[edit]
Main article: Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act 2000
The use of investigatory powers is controlled by the Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act 2000. Up to 792 public authorities have powers that are restricted by RIPA.[13]

Office for Security and Counter-Terrorism
Security Service
Serious Fraud Office (England and Wales and Northern Ireland)

Miscellaneous police forces[edit]
These police forces generally come under the control of a local authority, public trusts or even private companies; examples include some ports police and the Mersey Tunnels Police. They could have been established by individual Acts of Parliament or under common law powers. Jurisdiction is generally limited to the relevant area of private property alone and in some cases (e.g. docks and harbours) the surrounding area. This, together with the small size of the police forces, means they are often reliant on the territorial force for the area under whose jurisdiction they fall to assist with any serious matter. The statutory responsibility for law and order sits with the territorial police forces even if there is a specialist police force in the locality. These police forces do not have independent Police Authorities and their founding statutes (if any) do not generally prescribe their structure and formation.
Ports police[edit]
There are two types of port police in the United Kingdom — most are sworn in under the 1847 Act, but a few have Acts specific to their port.

Ports police operating under the Harbours, Docks, and Piers Clauses Act 1847

For every port/harbour, an individual Act of Parliament (or, more recently, a Harbour (Revision) Order) can incorporate parts of the Harbours, Docks, and Piers Clauses Act 1847 (HDPCA) and apply them to that specific port/harbour. Officers of port police forces are sworn in as "special constables" under section 79 of the 1847 Act, as incorporated by the individual local Act. As a result, officers have the full powers of a constable on any land owned by the harbour, dock, or port and at any place within one mile of any owned land.
The Marine Navigation Act 2013 has potentially enabled ports contables in England & Wales to act as constables beyond this one mile limit, in relation to policing purposes connected with the port only, in a police area where consent has been obtained from the relevant Chief Constable.[14] This act does not however give general police powers to ports constables beyond their core jurisdiction as set out in the 1847 act, merely in relation to policing purposes connected to the port as set out in the Act. As of 2014, 3 ports police forces (Dover, Teesport and Bristol) have sought and received consent from the local Chief Constable, with a fourth (Liverpool) in the process of applying for it. This has enabled these 3 ports forces to act as constables, in relation to policing purposes connected to the port, throughout the police area in which they are geographically located.[15] There are 224 constables sworn in under the 1847 Act.[16] Serious or major incidents or crime generally become the responsibility of the local territorial police force.

Belfast Harbour Police — Belfast Harbour, Belfast: HDPCA incorporated by section 5 of the Belfast Harbour Act 1847.[17]
Larne Harbour Police — Larne Harbour Ltd, Larne.
Port of Bristol Police — Port of Bristol, Bristol. Includes Avonmouth Dock, Bristol, Royal Portbury Dock, North Somerset, and 3 islands in the Bristol Channel: Denny Island, Flat Holme, Steep Holme.
Port of Felixstowe Police — Port of Felixstowe, Suffolk: HDPCA incorporated by section 3(1)(e) of the Felixstowe Dock and Railway Act 1956.[18]
Port of Portland Police — Portland Harbour, Isle of Portland: HDPCA incorporated by section 3 of the Portland Harbour Revision Order 1997.
Falmouth Docks Police — Falmouth Docks, Falmouth, Cornwall: HDPCA incorporated by section 3 of the Falmouth Docks Act 1959.[19]
Port of Dover Police — Port of Dover, Dover: HDPCA incorporated by section 3 of the Dover Harbour Consolidation Act 1954, and incorporation amended by part 4 of the Dover Harbour Revision Order 2006. Given the large amount of property owned by the port, their jurisdiction effectively extends to all of Dover and now throughout Kent in order to be able to take arrested persons to Custody Suites.


Other ports police


Port of Liverpool Police — Port of Liverpool, Liverpool: current authority derives from article 3 of the Mersey Docks and Harbour (Police) Order 1975. Port of Liverpool police officers are Crown police officers and not special constables.
Port of Tilbury Police (formerly the Port of London Authority Police) — Port of Tilbury, Essex: current authority derives from section 154 of the Port of London Act 1968
Tees and Hartlepool Port Authority Harbour Police — Tees and Hartlepool: current authority derives from section 103 of the Tees and Hartlepool Port Authority Act 1966
A large, new port on the Thames Estuary (and within the Port of London area) called "London Gateway" is currently under construction, and the owners have the authority to create their own police force for the port.

Parks police[edit]

Parks not controlled by local authorities

These small constabularies are responsible for policing specific land and parks. Officers of these forces have the powers of a constable within their limited jurisdiction. They are not constables as dealt with in the general Police Acts.

Epping Forest Keepers

Current powers derive from regulations made under Epping Forest Act 1878


Kew Constabulary (formerly Royal Botanic Gardens Constabulary)

Constables of this force have full police powers whilst on land belonging to the Royal Botanical Gardens as per the Parks Regulation Act 1872 as amended by section 3 (a) of the Parks Regulation (Amendment) Act 1974.



The Parks Regulation Act 1872 provides for the attestation of parks constables.

Parks controlled by local authorities





A photograph of officers of the Birmingham Parks Police, taken between c. 1900 and 1910.


Over history, a number of local authorities outside London have maintained their own parks police forces, the most notable being Liverpool (Liverpool Parks Police) and Birmingham (Birmingham Parks Police). No local authority parks police forces currently exist outside London, although the legal powers for them to do so (granted by various local Acts of Parliament) survive in a limited number of cases.
In London, these constabularies are responsible for enforcing byelaws within the parks and open spaces of their respective local authorities. Members of the constabularies are sworn as constables under article 18 of the Greater London Parks and Open Spaces Order 1967.[20] Members of the constabularies are constables only in relation to the enforcement of the parks byelaws (which, by definition, apply only in the parks).[21]

Parks Police Service, created through the merger of Hammersmith and Fulham Parks Constabulary and Royal Borough of Kensington and Chelsea Parks Police in 2013.[22]
Hampstead Heath Constabulary, also appointed under the Corporation of London opens spaces act sec 16, 1878 with the full powers and privileges of a Police Constable.
Hillingdon Parks Patrol Service

Some of these constables have (or have had) a shared role as security staff for their own local authority's buildings and housing estates with appropriate changes of badges and/or uniform being made when changing to/from park duties.
Other[edit]

Belfast International Airport Constabulary – attested under article 19(3) of the Airports (Northern Ireland) Order 1994 as constables for the airport, which employs them.
Cambridge University Constabulary – attested under the Universities Act 1825 as constables within the university precincts and up to four miles from them.
Mersey Tunnels Police – attested under section 105 of the County of Merseyside Act 1980 as constables in and around the tunnels.
Northern Ireland Security Guard Service – Civilian Security Officers belonging to the Northern Ireland Security Guard Service are attested as Special Constables.[23]
Cathedral constable - Attested under common law since the 13th Century

Service police[edit]
Main article: Military police of the United Kingdom
Each branch of the military has its own police service, though the powers of a service police officer are identical and recipricol across all three services. The service police is made up of the:

Royal Navy Police
Royal Military Police
Royal Air Force Police

In the UK, the service police exercise jurisdiction over those serving in the military in any capacity and those civilians subject to service discipline as defined by the Armed Forces Act 2006.[24] They are not 'constables' and do not have any policing powers in relation to the general public in normal circumstances.[25] In British Forces Germany, under the Status Of Forces Act, military police have jurisdiction over British Forces personnel, their families, MOD contractors, and NAAFI staff.
Service Police are PACE trained and all investigations are PACE compliant. They make regular use of civilian police facilities often conducting joint investigations where necessary. The Service Police are able to investigate all crime within their jurisdiction, up to and including Murder, however within the UK, offences of murder and sudden deaths are passed to the local police force as per national jurisdiction agreements.
Whilst operating in conflict zones the military police will conduct the full range of policing including murder investigations as evidenced by the Sgt Blackman investigation.[26]
Crown dependencies[edit]
Isle of Man[edit]

The Isle of Man Constabulary (Meoiryn-Shee Ellan Vannin) is the police service of the Isle of Man.
The Isle of Man Airport Police polices the main Isle of Man Airport (in Ronaldsway), with officers who are "warranted constables" under the Isle of Man Airports and Civil Aviation Act.

Bailiwick of Jersey[edit]

The States of Jersey Police (Police d'États de Jersey) is the police service of Jersey. It was established in its current form by the Police Force (Jersey) Law, 1974 and consists of around 240 officers.





A recruiting banner for the Honorary Police showing the arms of each parish: (from left to right) Grouville, St Brelade, St John, Trinity, St Saviour, St Ouen, St Helier, St Mary, St Lawrence, St Clement, St Peter, St Martin



States of Jersey Customs and Immigration Service
Honorary Police – There is an Honorary Police (French: Police Honorifique) force in each parish in Jersey. Honorary Police officers have, for centuries, been elected by parishioners to assist the Connétable of the Parish to maintain law and order, and to this day the only person who may charge a person with an offence is the Centenier of the parish in which the offence allegedly took place. Officers are elected as Centeniers, Vingteniers or Constable's Officers, each with various duties and responsibilities.

Bailiwick of Guernsey[edit]

The States of Guernsey Police Service (États de Guernesey Service de police) is the local police force for the Crown dependency of Guernsey. In addition to providing police for the island of Guernsey itself, the Guernsey Police also provides detachments for the islands of Alderney, Herm and Sark.
Guernsey Border Agency, responsible with policing cross border and financial crime, customs and immigration.

Overseas Territories[edit]

Bermuda Police Service
Bermuda Airport Security Police
British Indian Ocean Territory Police
Pitcairn Islands Police
Royal Cayman Islands Police Service
Royal Falkland Islands Police
Royal Montserrat Police Force
Royal Virgin Islands Police Force
Saint Helena Police Service
Royal Gibraltar Police

Ministry of Defence overseas police[edit]

Sovereign Base Areas Police
Gibraltar Defence Police

Overseas service police[edit]

British Indian Ocean Territory Joint Service Police Unit
Cyprus Joint Police Unit
Falkland Islands Joint Service Police Security Unit
Gibraltar Joint Provost and Security Unit

Overseas law enforcement in the UK[edit]
Main article: Law enforcement in the United Kingdom § Overseas police forces in the UK
There are certain instances where police forces of other nations operate in a limited degree in the United Kingdom:

Garda Síochána – Under an agreement between the British Government and the Irish Government and under the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, the Garda Síochána and the Radiological Protection Institute of Ireland are allowed to inspect the Sellafield nuclear facility in Cumbria.
Police aux Frontières – As part of the Channel Tunnel agreement between the British and French governments, the Police aux Frontières maintains a presence at St. Pancras International, Ebbsfleet International and Ashford International railway stations and on Eurostar trains. The British Transport Police have a reciprocal arrangement at the Gare du Nord in Paris. The Police aux Frontieres also maintain a presence at passport control at the Eurotunnel terminal in Folkestone and at Dover port, whilst Kent Police maintains a presence at Coquelles on the French side of the tunnel. Similar arrangements allow the Border Force to operate juxtaposed controls in France and Belgium.
Military Police of visiting forces while present within the terms of the Visiting Forces Act 1952.

Fictional police forces[edit]
In the majority of crime fiction, in print or on screen, set in the UK, real police forces are often used as the basis of the drama (though often set in fictional locations). However, there have been some works of fiction that have created their own police forces:

Bradfield Police - police force in Wire in the Blood, which in reality would be the West Yorkshire Police.
Brazen Gate Police- police force in 2012 BBC television film Blood. Unlike most UK police services, it utilises dark green and yellow as its primary uniform colours.
Cardiff Police / Caerdydd Heddlu - police service in the Sky Living television series Talking to the Dead covering the Welsh capital city of Cardiff. In reality it would be South Wales Police.
County Police / County Constabulary – a non-specific identity occasionally used for police dramas and sketches set in fictional or unspecified places on television, sometimes with matching uniforms and badges. The ITV police series A Touch of Frost, set in the fictional town of Denton in the south Midlands, utilises this identity.
Central Police - police force in the BBC 2 series Line of Duty and the Netflix miniseries Residue. In Line of Duty it is located in an unspecified city in the Midlands, and is home to the AC-12 anti corruption unit, the focus of the show. In Residue it is the police force in an unnamed futuristic metropolis in the UK.
Chiltern Police - police service in the ITV1 series Case Sensitive, responsible for policing the Chiltern district and surrounding areas of Buckinghamshire. In reality the area is covered by Thames Valley Police.
City of Town Constabulary - the police force in the Sky 1 comedy police procedural series A Touch of Cloth.
City of Manchester Police - police service in the ITV1 series Cold Blood. In reality it would be Greater Manchester Police.
Criminal Intelligence 5 - national law enforcement agency in the ITV television series The Professionals. It deals with serious crimes beyond the capacity of the police, but below the capacity of the security services and military.
Dee Valley Police– the local force in the Channel 4 television series Hollyoaks, which in reality would be Cheshire Constabulary.
Eastlands Constabulary – the local force in Anglia TV's The Chief, about a fictional Chief Constable, played initially by Tim Pigott-Smith, and latterly, Martin Shaw.
East Central Police - police service in the ITV documentary style police drama Crime Stories.
East London Constabulary - police service mentioned in the Doctor Who episode Fear Her, which in reality would be the Metropolitan Police.
East Midlands Constabulary- police service in BBC 2's Line of Duty and ITV1's Undeniable. In Line of Duty it neighbours the jurisdiction of Central Police, with one area it covers being the Leicester area. In Undeniable it is shown to have jurisdiction in Derbyshire, which in reality is covered by the Derbyshire Constabulary
East Sussex Police - police service in the ITV drama The Level, covering East Sussex and the city of Brighton. In reality the area would be covered by Sussex Police.
East Tyne Police – the local force in the ITV1 legal drama Close and True, covering the area of Newcastle upon Tyne. In reality it would be Northumbria Police.
Edinburgh Metropolitan Police - police service in One of Us, a BBC One drama miniseries . In reality it would be Police Scotland.
Fylde Police - the service responsible for policing Blackpool and the surrounding areas in the second series of the ITV police drama Prey. In reality, it would be the jurisdiction of the Lancashire Constabulary.
Greater London Police - the police force in the BBC drama series Silent Witness, New Blood and Rellik, the Channel 5 series Suspects and the Freeform series Guilt. It would be the Metropolitan Police in reality.
Greater Yorkshire Police - the police force in the ITV miniseries Black Work. The setting of the show (Leeds and the surrounding areas) would in reality be covered by West Yorkshire Police.
Heddlu Cambria / Cambria Police - police service in the BBC Wales noir series Hinterland. Cambria is the Latinised form of Cymru, the Welsh name for the country, suggesting it is a national police force. The show takes place in Aberystwyth, which in real life would be covered by Dyfed–Powys Police.
Heddlu Valleys / Valleys Police – the local police force in the BBC Wales television series High Hopes
Liverpool Metropolitan Police - police force seen in the BBC One police procedural Good Cop. In reality it would be Merseyside Police.
London City Force - police service covering the city of London in the BBC One Scotland comedy series Scot Squad, which in reality would be the Metropolitan Police.
London East Police - police service in the Sky1 drama Thorne, which would be the Metropolitan Police in reality.
London Police - the police force in the Sky1 series Stan Lee's Lucky Man and the 2011 crime film Blitz, which would be the Metropolitan Police in reality.
Manchester & Salford Police Authority - another police service mentioned in the 2012 BBC television film Blood.
Manchester Metropolitan Police - police service used Scott & Bailey, Prey, No Offence and In the Dark. In reality it would be Greater Manchester Police.
Middlesex Police - police service in the Channel 4 series National Treasure. Its jurisdiction is never specified, but can be assumed to be the former Middlesex area on the outskirts of urban London.
Midlands Police - police service in the BBC One series WPC 56 covering Birmingham and the surrounding areas, including the fictional town of Brinford. In reality the area would be covered by Birmingham City Police (at the time the show is set in 1965) and West Midlands Police (in the present day).
Midlands Central Police – the police service used in BBC Birmingham soap Doctors, it would in reality be West Midlands Police but due to copyright issues surrounding the use of force logos the BBC renamed it Midlands Central Police.
Midsomer Constabulary – the local police force for the fictional county of Midsomer in the Midsomer Murders book and television series.
National Crime Division - a national law enforcement agency in the ITV crime drama The Level. It is a fictional version of the National Crime Agency.
Newtown and Seaport – the towns patrolled by the characters in Z-Cars, a UK television series from the 1960s. Set somewhere in Northern England to the north of Liverpool but possibly with no police force name actually mentioned.
North Berkshire Police - police service in the E4 drama Glue, responsible for policing the rural northern area of Berkshire including the fictional village of Overton. In reality the area would be covered by Thames Valley Police.
Northbourne Constabulary- the British police force that liaises with the French DCPJ in the Sky Atlantic series The Tunnel, which in reality would be Kent Police.
North Counties Constabulary – the local police force in series two of the BBC-HBO series Five Days, set in the fictitious city of Castlebury, Yorkshire. Within the plot-line, both North Counties Constabulary and the British Transport Police are housed within the same building.
North Derbyshire Police - police service in the BBC One crime drama Into the Dark. Its jurisdiction is over the northern part of Derbyshire, including the fictional town of Polesford. In reality the area would be covered by Derbyshire Constabulary.
Northumberland & City / Northumbria & City Police - the fictitious police force in Vera whose name changes inexplicably throughout the series. The force area covers Newcastle upon Tyne, North Tyneside and Northumberland, which in reality is covered by Northumbria Police.
North West Police - The police force used in the BBC One series Paradox and occasionally the ITV soap opera Coronation Street (although continuity errors sometimes have it called Weatherfield Police instead). In reality it would be Greater Manchester Police.
Sandford Police Service / Sandford Constabulary – the local police force for the fictional village of Sanford seen in the 2007 British film Hot Fuzz. Interestingly Sandford is also the fictional town used for training scenarios by most police forces and is also the name of the real life police training ground. Hence most UK police officers were already familiar with the name before the film was released. Due to the villages location in the movie, Gloucestershire Constabulary would have jurisdiction in real life.
Scottish Highland Police - rural police service in the ITV1 series The Loch covering the Scottish Highlands, including Loch Ness and the fictional town of Lochnafoy. In reality it would be Police Scotland.
Scottish National Police - mainland police service in the BBC Scotland TV series Shetland, which in real life would be Police Scotland.
Scottish Police Force - national police service in the BBC One Scotland comedy series Scot Squad. It is a parody of Police Scotland, which would have jurisdiction in real life.
Shetland Constabulary - island police service in the BBC Scotland TV series Shetland. Its force logo is very similar to that of the now defunct Northern Constabulary, which had jurisdiction in the Shetland Islands until 2013. The real life police service covering this area would be Police Scotland.
South Dart Police - police service in the BBC Birmingham series The Coroner, covering the South Hams area of Devon including the fictional town of Lighthaven. In real life the area would be covered by Devon & Cornwall Police.
South Hertfordshire Police - police service in series one of the BBC-HBO series Five Days and its subsequent spinoff Hunter. Its jurisdiction in the show would be covered by Hertfordshire Constabulary in reality.
South Mercia Constabulary - the police service that neighbours the jurisdiction of Wessex Police in ITV1's Broadchurch.
South Sussex Police - police service in the BBC1 series Cuffs covering Brighton and the surrounding areas. In reality, the area is covered by Sussex Police.
South West Constabulary - police force in the ITV series Wycliffe, covering mainly central and west Cornwall (including Newquay and Camborne), and parts of Devon. In real life these areas are covered by Devon & Cornwall Police.
Successville Police Department - police service in the BBC Three improvisational comedy Murder in Successville. It covers the fictional city of Successville, which is populated entirely by celebrities.
Oxfordshire Police Force - the local police force in the television series Lewis due to problems[27] between the producers and Thames Valley Police, who had previously cooperated with the preceding Morse series
Tatshire Blues – the local police force in The Box of Delights
Thamesford Constabulary – the local police force for the fictional county of Thamesford in the television series Softly, Softly: Taskforce.
Thanet & Dover Police - police service in the ITV thriller Liar, covering the Thanet and Dover districts of Kent. In real life the areas would be under the jurisdiction of Kent Police.
Tyneside Police – the police force for Tyneside used in 55 Degrees North police drama. The badge and uniforms were very similar to Northumbria Police, the actual police force for Tyneside. Throughout the series most of the paperwork and signage read 'Tyneside Police' however some paperwork still reads 'Northumbria Police'.
Wyvern Constabulary – the local police force for the fictional county of Wyvern originally seen during 1967 in the television series Softly, Softly and now featuring in the series Casualty, Holby City and HolbyBlue.
Weatherfield Police / Weatherfield Central Police - police service in the ITV soap opera Coronation Street covering the fictional town of Weatherfield, although occasional continuity errors result in it sometimes being called North West Police instead. In reality would be Greater Manchester Police.
Wessex Police - the police force in ITV1's Broadchurch, which polices the county of Dorset, the setting of the series. In reality Dorset Police would be responsible.
Westbridge Police - police service in Sky1's crime drama The Five.
Woodmere Police - police service in the ITV1 and Netflix series Paranoid. The fictional town of Woodmere is stated to be in Cheshire, so would be covered by Cheshire Constabulary in reality.
Yorkshire Police - the police force in the television series Emmerdale, DCI Banks, Happy Valley, The Moorside and the third series of The Syndicate. In regards to Emmerdale, the two forces covering this area would be West Yorkshire Police and North Yorkshire Police. The areas featured within DCI Banks (the cities of Leeds and Bradford), Happy Valley (Halifax and the Calderdale area) and The Moorside (Dewsbury) are covered by West Yorkshire Police. Scarborough, the setting of series three of The Syndicate would be covered by North Yorkshire Police.

See also[edit]

Battenburg markings
Sillitoe Tartan
Jam sandwich (slang)
List of defunct law enforcement agencies in the United Kingdom
List of law enforcement agencies in England and Wales
List of law enforcement agencies in Northern Ireland
List of law enforcement agencies in Scotland
Policing in the United Kingdom
Table of police forces in the United Kingdom
Shoulder Number
Warrant card
Royal Hong Kong Police Force

References[edit]



^ a b c d e APA Police Service Strength Map Update Archived 7 October 2011 at the Wayback Machine., Association of Police Authorities, 28 August 2010.
^ a b c Cheshire, Lancashire and Merseyside participate in a partnership called the North West Motorway Police Group
^ a b c Staffordshire, West Mercia and West Midlands participate in a partnership called the Central Motorway Police Group
^ Authority, Scottish Police Services. "Police Scotland - Police Scotland". www.scotland.police.uk. 
^ What will happen when policing and justice is devolved? – BBC News, 05/02/10
^ "Name change for police force". This is Cornwall. 8 March 2010. Retrieved 26 September 2011. 
^ "An Act for the regualtion of Royal Parks and Gardens" (PDF). UK Government. 27 June 1872. Retrieved 25 April 2015. 
^ "Ministry of Defence Police and Guarding Agency Annual Report 2005-2006" (PDF). 
^ CNPA/CNC Annual Review 2006–07 Archived 26 September 2007 at the Wayback Machine.
^ Part III Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984
^ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 1 October 2012. Retrieved 9 August 2011. 
^ "Police Reform Act 2002 (c. 30)". Opsi.gov.uk. Retrieved 2009-06-21. 
^ Rayner, Gordon (2008-04-12). "Council spy cases hit 1,000 a month". Telegraph. Retrieved 2009-06-21. 
^ "Marine Navigation Act 2013". www.legislation.gov.uk. Retrieved 2017-12-16. 
^ "Police: Ports:Written question - 203891". UK Parliament. Retrieved 2017-12-16. 
^ "Accountability and Standards of the Port Police Forces". Dft.gov.uk. Archived from the original on 6 April 2009. Retrieved 2009-06-21. 
^ section 5, Belfast Harbour Act 1847.
^ "Port of Felixstowe :: Page Not Found". www.portoffelixstowe.co.uk. 
^ section 3(d), Falmouth Docks Act 1959.
^ The 1967 order is scheduled to the Ministry of Housing and Local Government Provisional Order Confirmation (Greater London Parks and Open Spaces) Act 1967
^ Kelly, Amanda. "THE MANAGEMENT AND OPERATION OF THE RESPONSE BRANCH OF THE COUNCIL'S CRIME AND ANTI-SOCIAL BEHAVIOUR SERVICE" (PDF). Website of London Borough of Newham Council. London Borough of Newham Council. Retrieved 26 December 2011. 
^ http://www.lbhf.gov.uk/Directory/News/West_London_Parks_Police_join_forces.asp
^ "Northern Ireland Security Guard Service - PoliceSpecials.com Forum". Retrieved 2012-03-16. 
^ "Armed Forces Act 2006". www.legislation.gov.uk. Retrieved 2017-12-20. 
^ "A protocol between police forces and the Ministry of Defence police | Home Office". webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk. Archived from the original on 25 January 2013. Retrieved 20 December 2017. CS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknown (link)
^ "Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984". www.legislation.gov.uk. 
^ "Inspector Lewis" – via www.imdb.com. 



Further reading[edit]

Helen Gough, Police and Constabulary Almanac (Police & Constabulary Almanac), Shaw & Sons (21 February 2007), 500 pages, ISBN 0-7219-1662-7, ISBN 978-0-7219-1662-0 [1]

External links[edit]

Scottish Police Forces Website
The UK Police Service – Forces







v
t
e


 Law enforcement agencies of the United Kingdom








Police forces











Territorial police forces




England



Avon & Somerset
Bedfordshire
Cambridgeshire
Cheshire
City of London
Cleveland
Cumbria
Derbyshire
Devon & Cornwall
Dorset
Durham
Essex
Gloucestershire
Greater Manchester
Hampshire
Hertfordshire
Humberside
Kent
Lancashire
Leicestershire
Lincolnshire
Merseyside
Metropolitan
Norfolk
North Yorkshire
Northamptonshire
Northumbria
Nottinghamshire
South Yorkshire
Staffordshire
Suffolk
Surrey
Sussex
Thames Valley
Warwickshire
West Mercia
West Midlands
West Yorkshire
Wiltshire





Wales



Dyfed–Powys
Gwent
North Wales
South Wales





Scotland



Police Scotland





Northern Ireland



Police Service of Northern Ireland








Regional motorway policing



Central Motorway Police Group
North West Motorway Police Group





Regional counter terrorism



South East Counter Terrorism Unit
South West Counter Terrorism Unit
Metropolitan Police Service Counter Terrorism Command
East Counter Terrorism Intelligence Unit
East Midlands Counter Terrorism Intelligence Unit
West Midlands Counter Terrorism Unit
Welsh Extremism and Counter Terrorism Unit
North West Counter Terrorism Unit
North East Counter Terrorism Unit
Police Scotland Organised Crime and Counter Terrorism Unit
Police Service of Northern Ireland Crime Operations Department
National Counter Terrorism Policing Network





Regional organised crime



South East Region Organised Crime Unit
South West Region Organised Crime Unit
Metropolitan Police Service Specialist, Organised and Economic Crime Command
Eastern Region Special Operations Unit
East Midlands Special Operations Unit
West Midland Regional Organised Crime Unit
Southern Wales Regional Organised Crime Unit
North West Regional Organised Crime Unit
North East Region Special Operations Unit
Police Scotland Organised Crime and Counter Terrorism Unit
Police Service of Northern Ireland Crime Operations Department





National




Special police forces



British Transport
Civil Nuclear
Ministry of Defence





Home Office



National Ballistics Intelligence Service
National Fraud Intelligence Bureau
National Police Air Service
National Wildlife Crime Unit





Intellectual Property Office



Police Intellectual Property Crime Unit





NPCC (formerly ACPO)



National Domestic Extremism and Disorder Intelligence Unit
National Counter Terrorism Security Office
National Counter Terrorism Policing Headquarters
National Counter Terrorism Policing Operations Centre
National Vehicle Crime Intelligence Service
Counter Terrorism Internet Referral Unit















Airports



Belfast International
British Airports Authority
Birmingham
Liverpool
Manchester
Ministry of Civil Aviation





Markets



City of London (Billingsgate, Smithfields and Spitalfields)
Birmingham
Liverpool





Miscellaneous



Cambridge University
Liverpool Cathedral
Mersey Tunnels
Oxford University
Salisbury Cathedral
York Minster
Northern Ireland Security Guard Service
Canterbury Cathedral Close Constables
Chester Cathedral Constables





Parks




London



Barking and Dagenham
Brent
Epping Forest
Greenwich
Hammersmith and Fulham
Hampstead Heath
Haringey
Hillingdon
Kew

Newham
Redbridge
Royal Borough of Kensington and Chelsea
Royal Parks

Sutton
Wandsworth





Non-London



Brighton
Birmingham
Liverpool









Ports



Belfast Harbour
Bute Docks
Falmouth Docks
Larne Harbour
Port of Bristol
Port of Dover
Port of Felixstowe
Port of Liverpool
Port of Portland
Port of Tilbury
Southampton Harbour
Tees and Hartlepool Harbour





Rivers & canals



Lee Conservancy
Manchester Ship Canal
Marine Police Force (River Thames)
River Clyde
River Tyne
Tyne Improvement Commission





Service police



Royal Air Force Police
Royal Marines Police
Royal Military Police
Royal Navy Police






Italics indicate defunct agencies










Crown dependencies



Guernsey
Isle of Man
Isle of Man (airport)
Jersey (States)
Jersey (Honorary)





Overseas territories



Anguilla
Bermuda
British Indian Ocean Territory
British Virgin Islands
Cayman Islands
Falkland Islands
Gibraltar (civilian police)
Gibraltar (defence police)
Montserrat
Pitcairn Islands
St. Helena
Sovereign Base Areas
Turks & Caicos





Former dependent territories



Barbados
Hong Kong



















Non-police agencies







National



Border Force
National Crime Agency
HM Revenue and Customs
Joint Terrorism Analysis Centre
UK Visas and Immigration





England and Wales



Environment Agency
Health and Safety Executive
Her Majesty's Prison Service
Marine Management Organisation
Serious Fraud Office (SFO)
Vehicle and Operator Services Agency





Scotland



Health and Safety Executive
Marine Scotland
Scottish Environment Protection Agency
Scottish Prison Service
Vehicle and Operator Services Agency





Northern Ireland



Health and Safety Executive for Northern Ireland
Northern Ireland Prison Service
Organised Crime Task Force
Serious Fraud Office (SFO)


















v
t
e


Lists of law enforcement agencies by country






Argentina
Australia
Brazil
Canada
Germany
India
Italy
Japan
Pakistan
South Africa
South Korea
United Kingdom
United States of America: (federal • state & local)












v
t
e


Police forces by country



Africa



Algeria
Angola
Benin
Botswana
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cameroon
Cape Verde
Central African Republic
Chad
Comoros
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Republic of the Congo
Djibouti
Egypt
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Ethiopia
Gabon
The Gambia
Ghana
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Ivory Coast (Côte d'Ivoire)
Kenya
Lesotho
Liberia
Libya
Madagascar
Malawi
Mali
Mauritania
Mauritius
Morocco
Mozambique
Namibia
Niger
Nigeria
Rwanda
São Tomé and Príncipe
Senegal
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Somalia
South Africa
South Sudan
Sudan
Swaziland
Tanzania
Togo
Tunisia
Uganda
Zambia
Zimbabwe





Asia



Afghanistan
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Bhutan
Brunei
Burma (Myanmar)
Cambodia
China




Hong Kong
Macau, China




India
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Israel
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
North Korea
South Korea
Kuwait
Kyrgyzstan
Laos
Lebanon
Malaysia
Mongolia
Nepal
Oman
Pakistan
Palestine
Philippines
Qatar
Saudi Arabia
Singapore
Sri Lanka
Syria
Republic of China (Taiwan)
Thailand
Tajikistan
East Timor (Timor-Leste)
Turkmenistan
United Arab Emirates




Abu Dhabi Police
Dubai Police Force




Uzbekistan
Vietnam
Yemen





Europe



Albania
Andorra
Armenia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Belarus
Belgium
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bulgaria
Croatia
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Estonia
Faroe Islands
Finland
France
Georgia
Germany
Gibraltar
Greece
Hungary
Iceland
Ireland
Italy
Latvia
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Macedonia
Malta
Moldova
Monaco
Montenegro
Netherlands
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Romania
|Russia
San Marino
Serbia
Slovakia
Slovenia
Spain




National Police Corps (National)
Catalonian Police Force
Euskadi Police Force
Chartered Police of Navarra




Sweden
Switzerland
Turkey
Ukraine
United Kingdom





North America



Canada
United States
Mexico





Caribbean



Antigua and Barbuda
Bahamas
Barbados
Cuba
Dominica
Dominican Republic
Grenada
Haiti
Jamaica
St. Kitts and Nevis
Saint Lucia
St. Vincent and the Grenadines
Trinidad and Tobago





Central America



Belize
Costa Rica
El Salvador
Guatemala
Honduras
Nicaragua
Panama





South America



Argentina
Bolivia
Brazil
Chile




Chilean National Police
Chilean Investigations Police




Colombia
Ecuador
Guyana
Paraguay
Peru
Suriname
Uruguay
Venezuela





Oceania



Australia
New Zealand





Non-recognized



Kosovo
Northern Cyprus





Defunct



Czechoslovakia
East Germany
Serbia and Montenegro
Soviet Union
Yugoslavia











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=List_of_law_enforcement_agencies_in_the_United_Kingdom,_Crown_dependencies_and_British_Overseas_Territories&oldid=817978041"					Categories: Law enforcement agencies of the United KingdomPolice forces of British Overseas Territories and Crown DependenciesLists of law enforcement agenciesHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksCS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknownUse dmy dates from January 2015Use British English from January 2015All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from November 2008