



The main cast of Dragon Ball at the end of the manga.


The Dragon Ball manga series features an extensive cast of characters created by Akira Toriyama. The series takes place in a fictional universe, the same as Toriyama's previous series Dr. Slump, and follows the adventures of Son Goku from his childhood through adulthood as he trains in martial arts and explores the world in search of the seven orbs known as the Dragon Balls that are used to summon a wish-granting dragon. During the course of the story, he encounters allies such as Bulma, Kuririn, and Trunks, rivals such as Tenshinhan, Piccolo, and Vegeta, and enemies such as Freeza, Cell, Majin Boo and Zamasu. The manga's anime and film adaptations feature some original characters not created by Toriyama but by the animation staff.
While many of the characters are humans with superhuman strength and/or supernatural abilities, the cast also includes anthropomorphic animals and extraterrestrial lifeforms. The series also includes depictions of the afterlife, where several characters are gods that govern the universe, and parallel universes as well.



Contents


1 Creation and conception
2 Main characters

2.1 Son Goku
2.2 Bulma
2.3 Kame-Sennin
2.4 Yamcha
2.5 Kuririn
2.6 Tenshinhan
2.7 Piccolo
2.8 Son Gohan
2.9 Vegeta
2.10 Trunks
2.11 Son Goten
2.12 Pan


3 Supporting characters

3.1 Android 17
3.2 Android 18
3.3 Beerus
3.4 Chaozu
3.5 Chi-Chi
3.6 Lunch
3.7 Mr. Satan
3.8 Oolong
3.9 Pu'ar
3.10 Videl
3.11 Whis
3.12 Yajirobe
3.13 Zenō


4 Major antagonists

4.1 Piccolo Daimao
4.2 Freeza
4.3 Cell
4.4 Majin Boo
4.5 Goku Black / Zamasu


5 Other characters

5.1 Android 16
5.2 Arale Norimaki
5.3 Baba Uranai
5.4 Bobbidi
5.5 Bra
5.6 Bardock
5.7 Champa
5.8 Dende
5.9 Dr. Briefs
5.10 Doctor Gero
5.11 Ginyu Force
5.12 Grandpa Son Gohan
5.13 Hit
5.14 Jaco
5.15 Kaiō-sama
5.16 Kaiō-shin
5.17 Kami
5.18 Karin
5.19 Mr. Popo
5.20 Nappa
5.21 Oob
5.22 Pilaf
5.23 Raditz
5.24 Red Ribbon Army
5.25 Shenlong
5.26 Sorbet
5.27 Taopaipai
5.28 Vados
5.29 Zarbon


6 Anime-only characters

6.1 Garlic Jr.
6.2 King Vegeta
6.3 Dragon Ball GT

6.3.1 Baby
6.3.2 Shadow Dragons


6.4 Films

6.4.1 Broly
6.4.2 Cooler




7 Merchandise
8 Reception
9 See also
10 References

10.1 Dragon Ball manga
10.2 Other sources





Creation and conception
Akira Toriyama initially based most of the characters on those of the Chinese novel Journey to the West,[1][2] Goku being Sun Wukong, Bulma as Xuanzang, Oolong as Zhu Bajie and Yamcha being Sha Wujing, and redeveloped one of his earlier one-shot manga series, Dragon Boy.[3] To be creative with the character, Toriyama stated in 1995 that he designed Goku not as a monkey like the Journey to the West character, but as a human-looking boy with a monkey's tail to give him a distinguishing feature.[4] However, in 2003 he elaborated saying he added the tail because his editor told him without it Goku had no distinguishing features, even though this was probably a joke, he went ahead and did it.[5] Toriyama later stated that the tail was a pain to draw, hence why he had it get cut off early on,[6] and that he never thought of making Goku an alien until Vegeta appeared.[7]
Going against the normal convention that the strongest characters should be the largest in terms of physical size, he designed many of Dragon Ball's most powerful characters with small statures.[8] He later explained that he had Goku grow up as a means to make drawing fight scenes easier, even though his editor was initially against it because it was rare to have the main character of a manga series change drastically.[9] The reason there are many anthropomorphic characters is simply that he finds it easier to make them look different if they are animals rather than humans.[10] For the female characters, Toriyama created women he deemed "beautiful and sexy", but also "strong".[8] He did however state that he has trouble drawing females and this is the reason there are very few women in Dragon Ball.[5] During the second half of the series, Toriyama placed less emphasis on the imagery, simplifying the lines and sometimes making things "too square"; found problems determining the colors; and sometimes altered them mid-story.[3]
Additional characters (such as Kame-Sennin and Kuririn) and martial arts tournaments were added to give the manga a greater emphasis on fighting.[4] Knowing readers would expect Goku to win the tournaments, Toriyama had him lose the first two while continuing to plan an eventual victory.[4] When having fights in the manga, he had the characters go to a place where nobody lived to avoid difficulties in drawing destroyed buildings.[11] Toriyama came up with the Red Ribbon Army, particularly its Muscle Tower, from the video game Spartan X, in which enemies tend to appear very fast.[4] He said he created Piccolo Daimao because all his villains up to that point had something "likeable" about them, so the character was born in an attempt to have a truly evil opponent.[4] The Ginyu Force and their poses were influenced from the sentai and tokusatsu television shows he watched with his children.[4][12] Toriyama created Androids 17 and 18 after Kazuhiko Torishima, his former editor, was disappointed with Androids 19 and 20 as villains.[13] When Torishima belittled them as well, he then created Cell.[13] Cell was also altered due to outside opinion, being given the ability to transform when Toriyama's then-current editor, Yū Kondō, said he was "ugly".[13] Toriyama also designed some characters that are exclusive to the animated movies, such as Bojack, Broly, Tapion and Minoshia, but more recently Beerus and Whis.[14][15]
Many of Dragon Ball's characters have names that are puns, and which match those of characters related to them. For example, Bulma and her family are named after undergarments, Saiyans are named after vegetables, and because Freeza is a pun on freezer, the Ginyu Force are named after products that one keeps in a refrigerator.[7] In order to advance the story quickly, he introduced Goku's signature flying cloud, then gave most fighters the ability to fly, and later granted Goku teleportation.[11] Toriyama explained that he does not like giving names to techniques, but did so at his editor's opinion.[11] His wife was the one who named the series' signature Kamehameha (かめはめ波, lit. "Kamehame Wave"), but he named all the others, even selecting them specifically for each character; saying someone like Vegeta would use names in English, and using kanji for the more sophisticated Piccolo.[11] The idea to have two characters "fuse" together was suggested by his long-time friend and fellow manga artist Masakazu Katsura, leading to the Fusion (フュージョン, Fyūjon) technique.[14][16]
Main characters




Several of the main characters, from left to right; Vegeta, Tenshinhan, Chaozu, Yamcha, Kuririn, Goku, Gohan, Piccolo and Trunks.


Son Goku
Main article: Goku
Son Goku (孫悟空, Son Gokū) is the protagonist of the Dragon Ball series. He is immensely strong, pure of heart, and extremely competitive, but dedicated to defending the Earth from evil. First introduced as a young boy, Goku was originally conceived by creator Akira Toriyama as a variation of Sun Wukong, protagonist of the Chinese novel Journey to the West; wherefore Goku also sported a prehensile tail until later. Upon meeting Bulma at the beginning of the series, the two then embark on an adventure to gather the seven Dragon Balls.[ch. 1] After, Goku receives martial arts training from Kame-Sennin, meeting his lifelong friend Kuririn and learning the famous Kamehameha technique, and enters the Tenka'ichi Budōkai to fight the strongest warriors on the planet. When the evil Piccolo Daimao, and later his offspring Piccolo, tries to rule the world, Goku receives training from "gods" to defeat them.
Though he appears human, it is later revealed that Goku is descended from an alien warrior race known as the Saiyans, who sent him, originally named Kakarrot, to Earth to prepare it for conquest.[ch. 197] Goku sacrifices his life to save the planet from his brother Raditz,[ch. 205] but must quickly get stronger in the afterlife under the tutelage of Kaiō-sama, to save it from the other incoming Saiyans Nappa and Vegeta. He later becomes a Super Saiyan and defeats a powerful tyrant Freeza. This sets the tone of the rest of the series, with each enemy the characters face becoming stronger than the last, requiring them to attain further training. The last battle of the original manga, against Majin Boo, has the entire universe at stake, and as such, has Goku and friends being asked for help from the gods of the universe, Kaiō-shin.
Bulma
Main article: Bulma
Bulma (ブルマ, Buruma) first appears as a teenager, using the Dragon Radar, a fictional device she created to detect the energy signal emitted by a Dragon Ball, she is led to Goku and ends up recruiting him as a body guard while hoping to get his four-star ball to grant her wish for a boyfriend.[ch. 1] She gives up on the wish after meeting Yamcha,[ch. 23] and much later in the series, she ends up forming a relationship with Vegeta, having a son and a daughter with him. Inventor also becomes Bulma's main role, as in the creations of a microband that could make her shrink and the time machine that brought her son Trunks to the past.
Kame-Sennin
Kame-Sennin (亀仙人, "Turtle Hermit"), also known as Muten-Rōshi (武天老師, "Old Master Muten"), or Master Roshi in the English anime dub, is a perverted elderly martial arts master instructor that lives on a small island and is the inventor of the Kamehameha technique. Though he seems frail, he is a mighty warrior, having trained Grandpa Gohan and Gyū-Maō,[ch. 12] Goku and Kuririn,[ch. 28] and a few others. Despite his lechery and occasional whimsy or foolishness he is often depicted as wise, cantankerous, and perceptive. He is often accompanied by his talking sea turtle companion, referred to as Umigame (ウミガメ, "Sea Turtle"), who often tries to point out his faulty ways. He is bald, sports a thick van dyke beard, and wears sunglasses, beach clothes, or martial arts suits. He usually wields a walking stick and, in early appearances, wears a turtle's shell on his back. When wishing to appear anonymously in the Tenka'ichi Budōkai, Kame-Sennin uses the name "Jackie Chun" (ジャッキー・チュン, Jakkī Chun), wears a wig and discards his sunglasses.[ch. 46] He was trained by Mutaito, who sealed away Piccolo Daimao, alongside Tsuru-Sennin, and also by Karin.[ch. 135, 88]
Kame-Sennin's design was inspired by the character of Kami-sama from Toriyama's previous manga Dr. Slump,[vol. 2:afterword] and accordingly was originally voiced by Kōhei Miyauchi,[17] who also voiced Kami-sama in the original Dr. Slump anime. Miyauchi's final acting session before he died was for episode 260 of Dragon Ball Z, which he recorded only 3 months before his death. Kame-Sennin is voiced by Hiroshi Masuoka from episode 288 of Dragon Ball Z onward,[18] in Dragon Ball GT and the 2008 Jump Super Anime Tour film. He is voiced by Kinya Aikawa in the 10th anniversary movie,[19] and by Masaharu Satō in the thirteenth Dragon Ball Z movie and all media following Dragon Ball Kai.[20] In the Ocean dub, he is voiced by Michael Donovan, Ian James Corlett, Peter Kelamis, Don Brown, and Terry Klassen at various points. Dean Galloway voices him in the Blue Water dub, while Mike McFarland voices him in the Funimation dub. He is portrayed by Chow Yun-fat in the American live-action film Dragonball Evolution; his voice was dubbed over by Tsutomu Isobe in the Japanese version.
Yamcha
Main article: Yamcha
Yamcha (ヤムチャ, Yamucha), known as Zedaki in the Harmony Gold dub, is introduced as a desert bandit alongside his constant companion Pu'ar, trying to steal Goku and Bulma's Dragon Balls and wish not to feel nervous when near women.[ch. 8, 9] He eventually becomes Goku's ally and begins a relationship with Bulma, and later becomes a pupil of Kame-Sennin.[ch. 23, 112] His signature attack is the Rōgafūfūken (狼牙風風拳, "Fist of the Wolf Fang", rearranged as "Wolf Fang Fist" in the Funimation dub), a physical barrage of punches and palm strikes, ending with a double palm strike.[ch. 8] As a result of training under Kame-Sennin, Yamcha is able to perform the Kamehameha and develops the Sōkidan (繰気弾, "Spinning Chi Bullet"), an energy sphere directed by psychokinesis.[ch. 117, 175] He also later trains under Kami for the battle against the Saiyans, but dies against one of their Saibamen.[ch. 209, 215] Before being wished back to life by the Namekian Dragon Balls, he trained under Kaiō-sama in the afterlife.[ch. 261, 329] He then helps out during the battles with the Androids and Cell, but for the most part does not participate in fighting.
Kuririn
Main article: Kuririn
Kuririn (クリリン), Krillin in the English anime dub, is a bald martial artist and one of Goku's best friends. He is the classmate of Goku under Kame-Sennin's tutelage;[ch. 28] initially his rival but later a friend, and a loyal companion in adventures thereafter. He is killed by Piccolo Daimao's mercenary Tambourine, but later revived by Shenlong.[ch. 135, 165] After the fight with the Saiyans, he travels to the planet Namek, where, after several battles, he is killed by Freeza.[ch. 317] After once again being brought back to life, this time by the Namekian Dragon Balls,[ch. 329] he helps out during the Android and Cell arcs. He then forms a relationship with Android 18 and has a daughter, Marron (マーロン, Māron).[ch. 426, 431]
Tenshinhan
Main article: Tenshinhan
Tenshinhan (天津飯 (テンシンハン)), named Tien Shinhan in the Funimation anime dub and also known as Shinto in the Harmony Gold dub, is first introduced, having been trained by Kame-Sennin's rival Tsuru-Sennin, trying to kill Goku and his fellow-students.[ch. 113, 129] Later, he and his friend and fellow student Chaozu become their allies; holding out against Piccolo Daimao's minion until Goku arrives.[ch. 147, 154] In the fight with the Saiyans, Tenshinhan dies of exhaustion against Nappa.[ch. 218] He trains in the afterlife under Kaiō-sama before being revived by the Namekian Dragon Balls.[ch. 261, 329] Tenshinhan continues to train and helps out during the battles with the Androids and Cell, but for the most part does not participate in fighting until the return of Freeza and the Tournament of Power.
Piccolo
Main article: Piccolo
Piccolo (ピッコロ, Pikkoro) is the spawn of Piccolo Daimao, created to get revenge on Goku in the wake of his death, subsequently assuming the role as the "evil half" of Kami.[ch. 161, 165] However, after just narrowly being defeated by Goku, he has to team up with him and his friends when opposing the invading Saiyans, including training Goku's son Gohan.[ch. 193, 198, 205] He is later revealed to be a Namekian – a green-skinned, four-fingered, hairless humanoid species who create the series' titular Dragon Balls.[ch. 214] He dies sacrificing himself to protect Gohan during the fight against the Saiyan Nappa, and trains in the afterlife under Kaiō-sama before being wished back to life by the Namekian Dragon Balls.[ch. 223, 261, 293] While during the fights with Freeza and the Androids he maintains the partnership is temporary, by the time of the Cell and Majin Boo arcs he accepts the fact they are allies.
Son Gohan
Main article: Gohan
Son Gohan (孫悟飯) is Goku's first son with Chi-Chi, who first appears at the age of four years.[ch. 196] He is then kidnapped by Goku's brother, Raditz, and locked up in a space pod. However, his temper flares and he bursts out of the space pod, dealing a blow to Raditz, but also knocking himself out. After the battle, Piccolo takes and trains him for a year as he realizes Gohan's potential.[ch. 205] Gohan slowly becomes one of the strongest characters in the series, at one point holding his own against Freeza and eventually defeats Cell. During the Majin Boo arc he forms a relationship with Videl, with whom at the end of the original manga he has a daughter named Pan.[ch. 518]
Vegeta
Main article: Vegeta
Vegeta (ベジータ, Bejīta) is a Saiyan, and the prince of the entire race, first shown conquering a planet with his partner Nappa by listening to Raditz's fight on Earth using their scouters.[ch. 204] The two of them travel to Earth in search of the Dragon Balls. He ends up fighting a newly revived Goku, but retreats after persistent attacks by Yajirobe, Kuririn and Gohan.[ch. 235–240] He flees to recuperate before heading off to planet Namek to get its Dragon Balls before Freeza.[ch. 246]
On Namek, Vegeta ends up having to team up with Kuririn and Gohan, and after Freeza is defeated, lives on Earth and forms a relationship with Bulma. When the Androids arrive, it is revealed he has fathered a son with Bulma, Trunks.[ch. 337] Throughout the rest of the series, Vegeta fights alongside Goku and friends to defeat their enemies, but still maintains to be his rival. At the end of the series, he and Bulma have a daughter named Bra, who, unlike Trunks and despite being half Saiyan, is not a fighter.[ch. 518]
Trunks
Main article: Trunks
Trunks (トランクス, Torankusu) first appears as an unknown young man who easily defeats Freeza and his father, before Goku arrives back on Earth after fighting on Namek.[ch. 331, 332] It is then revealed that he is Vegeta and Bulma's future child, who has traveled back in time to inform Goku of the coming of the Androids that in his time have killed everyone besides Goku, who died of a heart disease around the same time.[ch. 334, 335] He helps fight against the Androids, Cell and later Zamasu, before returning to the future.
Just as the Androids arrived, the Trunks from the series' main timeline was born.[ch. 337] Seven years later as a young kid, Trunks, already able to turn Super Saiyan despite his age,[ch. 429] fights against Majin Boo by using the fusion technique with Goten to form the single being Gotenks (ゴテンクス, Gotenkusu).[ch. 480] In Dragon Ball GT he is a major character as a young man, traveling through space with Goku and Pan.
Son Goten
Son Goten (孫悟天) is the second child of Goku and Chi-Chi. When first introduced, Goten strongly resembles his father in appearance, with the same hair-style and similar clothing.[ch. 424] However, as a teenager at the end of the series his appearance has changed to include a shirt bearing his name and a longer, shaggier hairstyle.[ch. 518] Goten was trained by his older brother Gohan in preparation for the 25th Tenka'ichi Budōkai, which their father would be attending. During the training, Gohan discovers Goten is already quite strong, due to the fact that he has been training with their mother (in stark contrast to Gohan's childhood), and can become a Super Saiyan despite still being a child.[ch. 427] Like several characters in the series, he can also perform the Kamehameha technique.[ch. 434]
In order to save the world from Majin Boo, Goku and Piccolo teach Goten and Trunks the fusion technique which allows them to form the single being Gotenks (ゴテンクス, Gotenkusu).[ch. 480] Gotenks battles Boo multiple times but even when he transforms into a Super Saiyan 3 he is unable to defeat Boo. Boo temporarily absorbs Gotenks, increasing his own power, but Vegeta and Goku are able to retrieve them from Boo. When Boo destroys the Earth, Goten and Trunks are killed.[ch. 506] The Dragon Balls later bring Goten back to life along with the rest of the Earth in order to give energy to Goku's Genki-Dama attack, which defeats Boo.[ch. 514] Masako Nozawa voices Goten in Japanese,[21] while he is voiced by Kara Edwards (as a child) and Robert McCollum (as a teen) in the Funimation dub. He is also voiced by Dana Hayes in the Bang Zoom! Entertainment dub.[22]
Pan
Pan (パン) is the granddaughter of Goku and daughter of Gohan and Videl,[ch. 518] as such her ancestry comes from both humans and the extraterrestrials called the Saiyans, making her one of two female Saiyans in the original manga series (although the only one interested in fighting). Pan shows signs of being a prodigy, able to fly while still not yet a toddler. While she only appears as a young child in the last two chapters of the manga, she is a major character in Dragon Ball GT. In the fourteenth Dragon Ball Z movies and Dragon Ball Super, wherein a sixth Saiyan is needed for Goku to become a Super Saiyan God; Videl, pregnant with Pan, joins in the ceremony with her hair briefly becoming golden like that of a Super Saiyan. In Japanese media she is voiced by Yūko Minaguchi.[23] In the English versions of Dragon Ball Z, she is voiced by Brenna O'Brien in the Ocean dub and Kate Bristol in the Funimation dub. In the English versions of Dragon Ball GT, she is voiced by Elise Baughman in the Funimation dub and by Caitlynne Medrek in the Blue Water dub. In the English version of Dragon Ball GT: Final Bout, she is voiced by Lia Sargent.
Supporting characters
Android 17 
Main article: Android 17
Android 17 (人造人間17号, Jinzōningen Jū Nana Gō, lit. "Artificial Human #17") is a human forcibly turned into a cyborg by Doctor Gero.[ch. 351] He has jet-black hair, unlike his sister, Android 18, who has blonde hair. He and Android 18 are released by Doctor Gero as a last resort, but they turn on their creator and quickly kill him instead.[ch. 349, 350] With nothing better to do, they begin to travel in order to find and kill Goku, coming into contact with the main characters several times. 17 is eventually absorbed by Cell,[ch. 372] but is brought back to life when those killed by Cell are revived with the Dragon Balls and is seen at the end of the series giving energy for Goku's Genki-Dama to destroy Majin Boo.[ch. 418, 515] In Future Trunks' timeline, he is a mass murdering android who is eventually killed by Trunks.[ch. 419] Android 17 returns in Dragon Ball Super to participate in the Tournament of Power as one of the representatives for Universe 7 to prevent the universe to get erased by Zenō.
In Dragon Ball GT, when he fuses with a new 17 created by Doctor Gero and Doctor Myu in order to become Super 17 (超１７号, Chō Jū Nana-Gō), who is finally defeated by Goku and 18. In 2014, Toriyama revealed his real name to be Lapis (ラピス, Rapisu).[24] He is voiced by Shigeru Nakahara in Japanese, Ted Cole in the Ocean dub, and Chuck Huber in the Funimation dub.
Android 18
Main article: Android 18
Android 18 (人造人間18号, Jinzōningen Jū Hachi Gō, lit. "Artificial Human #18") is a blonde-haired human forcefully turned into a cyborg by Doctor Gero.[ch. 351] After being released, she travels with Androids 16 and 17 in order to kill Goku, though they are interrupted by Cell and the main characters several times. She and 17 are eventually absorbed by Cell, but later during the Cell Games, a hard blow from Gohan causes Cell to regurgitate her. Though Kuririn is unable to wish for her to be turned into a human, he is able to have her self-destruct device removed.[ch. 418] Kuririn later pursues 18 and, at some point, they have a daughter named Marron (マーロン, Māron).[ch. 426, 431] In Future Trunks' timeline, she is a mass murdering android who is eventually killed by Trunks.[ch. 419] In 2014, Toriyama revealed her real name to be Lazuli (ラズリ, Razuri).[24] She is voiced by Miki Itō in all Japanese media.[25] In the Westwood Media English dub, she is voiced by Enuka Okuma and in the Funimation English dub, her voice is supplied by Meredith McCoy, except in Dragon Ball Z Kai and several video games since 2006, where Colleen Clinkenbeard instead provides her voice.
Beerus
Main article: Beerus
Beerus, the God of Destruction (破壊神ビルス, Hakaishin Birusu) is a supporting character who appears as both an antagonist and protagonist in the fourteenth and fifteenth Dragon Ball Z movies, as well as in Dragon Ball Super. Involved in events previously left unexplained, preceding the events depicted in the manga, Beerus is revealed to be the one who sealed Old Kaiō-shin into the Z Sword and destroyed North Kaiō's planet, with only the small planet where he now lives remaining, both acts done out of anger over squabbles. He is a purple catlike being seen wearing traditional Egyptian clothing and ornaments, whose occupation is to maintain balance by destroying planets, in contrast to the Kaiō-shin who create and preserve them. Often seen destroying planets at a whim, Beerus' two sole desires are, being quite a gourmet, enjoying the Universe's finest cooking and fighting opponents who he considers to be worthy. The latter ultimately leads him to look for the Super Saiyan God (超サイヤ人ゴッド, Sūpā Saiyajin Goddo) who turns out to be one of the Saiyans now living on Earth. Eventually, Son Goku, with the help of other Saiyans, transforms into the Super Saiyan God and fights Beerus, just to be defeated by the God of Destruction. Having enjoyed the match, Beerus spares both Goku and the Earth, saying that Goku was the second strongest opponent he ever faced; first being his caretaker and martial arts teacher, Whis. Beerus was modeled after Toriyama's Cornish Rex cat.[26] Beerus is voiced by Kōichi Yamadera in Japanese media,[20] Jason Douglas in the Funimation dub, and John DeMita in the Bang Zoom! Entertainment dub.[22]
Chaozu
Chaozu (餃子 (チャオズ)), Chiaotzu in the English anime dub, is a small human that resembles a Jiangshi with white skin, red cheeks, and has one hair under his hat. Though he is not physically strong, Chaozu is skilled with psychokinesis and telepathy.[ch. 116, 121] Chaozu is first introduced at the 22nd Tenka'ichi Budōkai, having been trained by Kame-Sennin's rival Tsuru-Sennin, trying to kill Goku and his fellow-students.[ch. 113] After his friend and fellow student Tenshinhan decides that Tsuru-Sennin's teachings are wrong, the two leave him and join with Goku and his companions to defeat Piccolo Daimao. After assisting Tenshinhan and Kame-Sennin in finding the Dragon Balls, Chaozu is killed by Piccolo Daimao while trying to thwart his wish for eternal youth, but is later revived using the Dragon Balls.[ch. 147, 165] In the battle against the Saiyans, he self-destructs on Nappa in order to save Tenshinhan, but it is ineffective.[ch. 217] He trains in the afterlife under Kaiō-sama before being revived, this time by the Namekian Dragon Balls.[ch. 261, 329] Chaozu then joins the other characters when they gather for the return of Freeza, but Trunks kills the tyrant before a fight ensues. From then on, Chaozu is generally no longer involved in battle, although he continues to train with Tenshinhan. He is voiced by Hiroko Emori in Japanese,[27] by Rebecca Forstadt in the Harmony Gold dub, by Cathy Weseluck in the Ocean dub, and by Monika Antonelli in Funimation's dubs, except in Kai onwards where Brina Palencia voices him.
Chi-Chi
 Chi-Chi (チチ) is the wife of Goku and the mother of Gohan and Goten. She is very protective over the well being of her family, wishing to remove Gohan from Goku's lifestyle of fighting and constant conflict, but this is interrupted by the constant threats to Earth. She later relaxes with Goten, even training him herself.[ch. 427] As the daughter of Gyū-Maō (牛魔王, "Ox King"), who trained under Kame-Sennin,[ch. 12] she is very strong in her own right. She and Goku first meet as children when Gyū-Maō asked Goku to take her to Kame-Sennin's house.[ch. 12] In a misunderstanding, Goku promises to marry her.[ch. 15] Years later, she confronts him to have him fulfill the promise in the quarter-finals of the 23rd Tenka'ichi Budōkai, despite the misunderstanding.[ch. 171] She is voiced by Mayumi Shō in the Japanese version of the series up until Dragon Ball Z episode 88,[28] from which point she is voiced by Naoko Watanabe.[29][30] In the Ocean dub, she was voiced by Andrea Libman as a child and by Laara Sadiq and Lisa Ann Beley respectively as an adult. In the Funimation dub, she is voiced by Laura Bailey as a child and by Cynthia Cranz as an adult. In the Bang Zoom! Entertainment dub, she is voiced by Michelle Ruff.[22] Chi-Chi is portrayed by Jamie Chung in the American live-action film Dragonball Evolution; her voice was dubbed over by Ami Koshimizu in the Japanese version of the film.
Lunch
Lunch (ランチ, Ranchi), named Launch in the Funimation dub and Marilynn in the Harmony Gold dub, is a woman who Goku and Kuririn rescue and bring to Kame-Sennin in exchange for him to train them.[ch. 26, 27] She has a strange disorder which makes her personality change from a nice, polite, blue-haired woman into a trigger-happy blonde bad girl every time she sneezes.[ch. 26,] Since her bad form is a known criminal, she decided to stay with Kame-Sennin, becoming their maid. Lunch's blonde persona develops an attraction towards Tenshinhan's fierce attitude. She is not seen after the 23rd Tenka'ichi Budōkai, but is said to be chasing after Tenshinhan.[ch. 196] However, in the anime she is seen in a few Dragon Ball Z filler episodes during the fight with the Saiyans, and is seen again at the series' end helping contribute energy to Goku's Genki-Dama to defeat Boo. She is voiced by Mami Koyama in Japanese,[31] Edie Mirman in the Harmony Gold dub, and Meredith McCoy in the Funimation dub.
Mr. Satan
"Mr. Satan" redirects here. For the 1938 British spy thriller, see Mr. Satan (film).
Mr. Satan (ミスター・サタン, Misutā Satan), known as Hercule in some of Funimation's dub and in Viz's English manga, is a flamboyant martial artist that becomes a world-renowned hero after the Cell Games. After Goku and his companions stop attending the Tenka'ichi Budōkai, Mr. Satan starts winning them and becomes the reigning champion for many years. During the Cell Games, he attempts to fight Cell, but even after being swatted away, he is given credit for Cell's death by the media.[ch. 421] He is soon called a world hero, gaining great wealth and a city named after him. Though Goku and his companions find his inflated ego and arrogance very annoying, he becomes their trusted friend after befriending the good Majin Boo, helping defeat evil Boo by using his appeal to get energy from all of the individuals on Earth for the Genki-Dama, and his daughter Videl pairs up with Gohan.
In their initial dub of the series, Funimation changed his name to "Hercule". However, when they recorded a new dub for uncut home video releases, they switched to using the original Mr. Satan.[32] In 2009, Toriyama revealed his real name to be Mark (マーク, Māku), a pun on the Japanese word akuma, which means devil or demon.[33] He was voiced by Daisuke Gōri in Japan until his death,[34] with Unshou Ishizuka taking over the role afterward,[29] while in English he is voiced by Don Brown in the Ocean dub, and Chris Rager in the Funimation dub. In Filipino dub, in order to censor his name, he was given the name Master Pogi.
Oolong
Oolong (ウーロン, Ūron), named Mao-Mao in the Harmony Gold dub, is a shapeshifting, anthropomorphic pig that uses his abilities for his own greedy desires. He and Puar went to the same shapeshifting school together, before he was expelled for stealing the teacher's panties.[ch. 8] This is the reason he can only change his form for five minutes at a time, requiring a one-minute break. Oolong joins Goku and Bulma in the search for the Dragon Balls to eventually steal them, but abandons this plan. He does however make the first shown wish with the Dragon Balls, wishing for a girl's pair of panties.[ch. 20] Later in the series, he is often in the company of Kame-Sennin. He is voiced by Naoki Tatsuta in Japanese,[35] and by Alec Willows and Richard Newman in the Ocean dub. In Funimation's dubs he is voiced by Bradford Jackson, except in Dragon Ball Z Kai, where Bryan Massey voices him.
Pu'ar
Pu'ar (プーアル, Pūaru), Puar in the Funimation anime dub, Pu-erh in their subtitles, and named Squeakers in the Harmony Gold dub, is a soft-spoken blue creature and the constant companion of Yamcha. Pu'ar's abilities consist of transvection and shapeshifting. He and Oolong went to the same shapeshifting school together, where he was constantly mocked by Oolong.[ch. 8] When first introduced, he and Yamcha survive in a desert as bandits, where they encounter Goku, Bulma, and Oolong. They initially tail and assist the group in order to steal the Dragon Balls they are collecting, though they later reform and befriend the trio. When Goku transforms into a giant ape for the first time in the series, Pu'ar transforms into a pair of scissors and cuts off his tail to revert him back to his regular state.[ch. 22] Together with Upa, Pu'ar defeats Dracula Man while competing in Baba Uranai's tournament.[ch. 99] The character's name is a pun on pu-erh tea and was designed to slightly resemble a cat.[vol. 2:afterword] When questioned about gender, Toriyama disclosed that he looked at the character as male during illustrations.[36] Puar is voiced by Naoko Watanabe in Japanese,[30] by Cheryl Chase in the Harmony Gold dub, and by Kathy Morse and Cathy Weseluck in the Ocean dub. In Funimation's dubs he is voiced by Monika Antonelli, up until Dragon Ball Z Kai onwards, where Brina Palencia voices him.
Videl
Videl (ビーデル, Bīderu) is the daughter of Mr. Satan. Like her father, she trains in martial arts, even surpassing him in strength. She uses her abilities to fight crime in the city, and after Gohan appears as the Great Saiyaman, she quickly figures out his identity. She uses that to blackmail him into teaching her how to fly. After Boo is defeated, the two form a relationship, eventually having a daughter named Pan.[ch. 518] When the two fight crime together afterwards, she takes on the role of the "Great Saiyaman 2" or "Great Saiyawoman". Her name is an anagram of "Devil", a play on words with her father's name, Mr. Satan. She is voiced by Yūko Minaguchi in Japanese, with the exception of Kai where she is voiced by Shino Kakinuma,[37] by Moneca Stori in the Ocean dub, Kara Edwards in the Funimation dub, and Erika Harlacher in the Bang Zoom! Entertainment dub.[22]
Whis
Whis (ウイス, Uisu) is a supporting character who appears in the fourteenth and fifteenth Dragon Ball Z movies, as well as in Dragon Ball Super. A tall teal humanoid with pronounced effeminate features, Whis is Beerus' attendant and martial arts master who always accompanies the God of Destruction wherever he goes. He is unmatched in power and possesses tremendous speed. In the fifteenth movie, Whis is seen training Goku and Vegeta for the fight against the resurrected Freeza; effortlessly defending himself against the two. The character's name stems from a misunderstanding. Toriyama incorrectly believed that Beerus' name was a pun on the word "beer" and so decided to follow the same rule to name the character's assistant. Thus, he ended up naming the character Whis, a pun on "whisky" (ウイスキー, uisukī).[38] Whis is voiced by Masakazu Morita in Japanese media[20] and Ian Sinclair in the Funimation dub.
Yajirobe
Yajirobe (ヤジロベー, Yajirobē) is an overweight samurai that is often considered to be rude, unmannered, timid, lazy, and cowardly. During their first meeting, Yajirobe gets mad at Goku for stealing his fish, and hates him.[ch. 138] However, he has a change of heart and helps Goku after he is defeated by Piccolo Daimao, taking him to Karin's to be healed.[ch. 50] Yagirobe continues to support Goku and his companions from then on, though often from the sidelines. Originally he was a wanderer that lived off the land, but after meeting Karin and discovering the Senzu Beans, which provide the nutrients of ten days worth of meals, restore energy and heal wounds, he lives with Karin. He begins growing the beans with him, and often delivers them to Goku and his companions. He plays an integral part in Goku's first fight with Vegeta; although simply planning to watch while hidden, when Vegeta stares at a full moon and transforms into a giant ape, Yajirobe uses his sword to cut off his tail and turn him back to normal.[ch. 235] When Kuririn died, Toriyama requested that Yajirobe be voiced by his voice actress Mayumi Tanaka. When Yajirobe and Kuririn later appeared in the same scene together, Tanaka gave the former a Nagoya dialect in order to distinguish them.[39] He is voiced by Brian Drummond in the Ocean dub, Lucas Gilbertson in the Blue Water dub, and by Mike McFarland in the Funimation dub.
Zenō
Zenō (全王) is known as the king of all universes, ranking above all other mortals and deities in the Dragon Ball canon. Depicted as a childlike humanoid figure, Zenō has the power to erase entire universes from existence at his will. First appearing after the tournament between Universes 6 and 7, Zenō is treated with utmost reverence and fear by the other gods and mortals, with one exception being Goku, whom he befriends. Part of the caution others have around Zenō comes from the fact that he acts and behaves like a child, destroying entire planets and universes out of amusement or dismay. An instance of Zenō from an alternate timeline called Future Zenō (未来の全王, Mirai no Zenō) accompanies Goku back to the present after he erases the entire existence where he lived to destroy Zamasu, becoming a friend of his counterpart. Both Zenōs are voiced by Satomi Kōrogi in Japanese media.
Major antagonists
Piccolo Daimao
Piccolo Daimao (ピッコロ大魔王, Pikkoro Daimaō, "The Great Demon King Piccolo") is the evil half of the Namekian that removed his evil in order to become the god of the Earth; this negative energy took on a physical form, becoming a cast-off being.[ch. 164] He and the good half, Kami, are linked, so if one dies, the other will as well.[ch. 165] After being formed, he designates himself as the Great Demon King and begins to terrorize the world. He is eventually imprisoned by Mutaito, the master of Kame-Sennin and Tsuru-Sennin, in a rice cooker by the suicidal Mafū-ba (魔封波, "Demon Seal" or "Evil Containment Wave") technique.[ch. 135] After being released by Pilaf, he attempts to kill anyone that could possibly seal him again (including Kame-Sennin and Chaozu) and uses the Dragon Balls to restore his youth before destroying Shenlong, rendering them useless.[ch. 135, 148] He then takes over the King of the World's palace and has the King announce him as his successor, before being confronted by Goku, who, in their second battle, punches a large hole through his abdomen.[ch. 152, 161] Before dying, he regurgitates the egg containing his reincarnation, Piccolo Jr., in order to pursue his revenge.[ch. 161] He is voiced by Takeshi Aono in Japanese,[40] Scott McNeil in the Ocean dub, and Christopher Sabat in the Funimation dub. Piccolo Daimao also appears as the main antagonist of the American live-action film Dragonball Evolution, where he is portrayed by James Marsters; his voiced was dubbed over by Hōchū Ōtsuka in the Japanese version of the film.
Prior to Piccolo Jr., Piccolo Daimao created several offspring in order to help him with his plans. His first shown offspring, Piano (ピアノ), helps him formulate his plan until he is killed when Goku knocks Piccolo Daimao into him.[ch. 156] He also creates Tambourine (タンバリン, Tanbarin) to hunt down the contenders of the Tenka'ichi Budōkai to keep the sealing technique from resurfacing.[ch. 136] Tambourine kills Kuririn and beats a weakened Goku, but Goku's Kamehameha vaporizes him in a rematch.[ch. 135, 136, 141] The third, Cymbal (シンバル, Shinbaru), is created to find Dragon Balls, but he is killed and eaten by Yajirobe.[ch. 137, 139] The fourth, Drum (ドラム, Doramu), is created to battle Tenshinhan, who he easily defeats until Goku appears and crushes his head in one blow.[ch. 153, 154] Piano is voiced by Masato Hirano in Japan[41] and Sonny Strait in the Funimation dub; Tambourine is voiced by Ryūsei Nakao in Japan and Dameon Clarke in the Funimation dub; Cymbal is voiced by Daisuke Gōri in Japan and Mark Orvik in the Funimation dub; and Drum is voiced by Daisuke Gōri in Japan and Bob Carter in the Funimation dub.
Freeza
Main article: Freeza
Freeza (フリーザ, Furīza), Frieza in the English anime dub, is a galactic tyrant that wants the Dragon Balls so he can wish for eternal life.[ch. 249] It is revealed that Freeza had feared the power of the Saiyans, so he destroyed the Saiyan planet Vegeta, killing all but four Saiyans.[ch. 257] He recruits three of them, Vegeta, Nappa and Raditz, as some of his workers. On planet Namek, Freeza systematically kills off nearly the entire Namekian race in his quest to obtain the Dragon Balls. He engages in a fight with Goku and the others, with Goku becoming a Super Saiyan after Freeza murders Kuririn.[ch. 317] Out of anger at his helplessness to Goku's new power, Freeza blasted a hole into Namek's core in order to destroy the planet.[ch. 320] Freeza is then sliced in half by his own attack and begs for mercy, with Goku giving him some of his surplus energy.[ch. 326] After he uses that energy to attack, Goku then seemingly kills Freeza.[ch. 327] However, he was rebuilt into a cyborg and comes to Earth with his father King Cold (コルド大王, Korudo Daiō), but they are both easily killed by Trunks.[ch. 331, 332] In the fifteenth Dragon Ball Z movie and Dragon Ball Super, he is revived by the Earth's Dragon Balls and swore revenge against Son Goku. Although he gains a new form, Goku defeats Freeza and sends him back to Hell. In Dragon Ball Super, Goku chooses Freeza as one of the warriors representing Universe 7 in the Tournament of Power, but he only accepts upon the promise of being fully revived in exchange of his cooperation.
Cell
Main article: Cell
Cell (セル, Seru) is the ultimate creation of Doctor Gero, former chief scientist of the Red Ribbon Army, to get revenge on Goku. He is an artificial life form created using the cells of several characters from the series, including Goku, Piccolo and Freeza. As a result, Cell is able to perform techniques such as the Kamehameha, which he gains from the cells of Goku.[ch. 363] Cell evolves several times throughout his appearances; he originally evolves from a cicada-like form into his Imperfect form, which is still insect-like in appearance. Both his first form and his second Semi-Perfect form have a long tail that ends in a stinger-like appendage and allows it to absorb other organisms.[ch. 361] The tail recedes under his wings in his final Perfect form, and he can use it to spawn Cell Juniors, minuscule childlike versions of himself. Requiring the androids #17 and #18 to evolve, he finds out that they are already dead in his timeline, so he kills the Trunks of his timeline and uses Trunks' time machine to travel back in time. He eventually absorbs both after many battles and ascends to his perfect form.[ch. 372, 380, 381] He decides to hold the Cell Games (セルゲーム, Seru Gēmu), a tournament in which he fights against Earth's strongest fighters.[ch. 389] Cell manages to defeat Goku, but he is eventually killed by Gohan.[ch. 416]
Majin Boo
Main article: Majin Boo
Majin Boo (魔人ブウ, Majin Bū), written as "Majin Buu" in the English anime dub and translated as "Djinn-Boo" in the English manga, is a magical life form created by the warlock Bibbidi (ビビディ), eons before the events of Dragon Ball took place.[ch. 445] He was temporarily sealed by Bibbidi and brought to Earth, their next target, but Bibbidi was killed by the last surviving Kaiō-shin.[ch. 445] However, Bibbidi's son, Bobbidi makes it his goal to revive Boo.[ch. 445] After being released, Boo appears as an innocent looking pudgy pink genie-like creature.[ch. 460] After Boo kills Bobbidi, he becomes close friends with Mr. Satan, which eventually causes him to expel his evil side.[ch. 476, 483, 484] This evil manifests into a taller and much skinnier, almost frail, form that absorbs the fat Boo, becoming yet another new form that is muscular and much stronger.[ch. 485, 485] This Majin Boo is interested in a challenge, and later goes on to absorb Goten and Trunks (as Gotenks), Piccolo, and Gohan.[ch. 499, 502] It is revealed by the last surviving Kaiō-shin that the fat form of Boo is actually the result of the original absorbing the Dai Kaiō-shin into his body.[ch. 508] The original Majin Boo is a sleek, child-sized being who is obsessed with chaos and destruction, and is restored after Goku and Vegeta remove the good side (fat Boo) from his body.[ch. 507, 508] The good side is later spit out by the original and goes on to live with Mr. Satan on Earth under the name Mr. Boo, while the original is killed by Goku, who wishes for him to be reincarnated as a good person.[ch. 512, 516–518] He is reincarnated into a child named Oob, whom, ten years later, Goku begins to train as his successor.[ch. 518, 519]
Goku Black / Zamasu
Main article: Zamasu
Goku Black (ゴクウブラック, Gokū Burakku), or simply Black, is an entity that resembles Son Goku who wreaks havoc in Future Trunks' timeline, bringing humanity to the brink of extinction. The character is unique to Dragon Ball Super series as well as its first original villain. It is revealed that prior the Future Trunks saga, Black traveled to many worlds and destroyed them "for the sake of justice" whilst calling himself Son Goku. He eventually arrives on Earth, where he faces Future Trunks. A year and half later, Future Trunks manages to go into the present timeline using the Time Machine. However, Goku Black also finds a way to follow Trunks into the same timeline using the Time Ring. In the present timeline, Black meets Son Goku, but also recognizes Vegeta and Beerus. Wanting to get rid of him, Black challenges Son Goku to a duel. However, he proves to be no match for Son Goku at his full power. In order to safely escape Future Trunks' retribution for what he had done, Black destroys Trunks' Time Machine and travels back into their future timeline. Goku and the others later discover that Goku Black is actually Zamasu (ザマス), an apprentice Kaiō-shin from Universe 10, who hijacked Goku's body from an alternate timeline as part of his plan to wipe out all mortals teaming up with his counterpart from Future Trunks' timeline, Future Zamasu (未み来らいのザマス) who choses to retain his original body and instead uses the Super Dragon Balls to attain immortality. After multiple battles and transforming into a new Super Saiyan state titled Rose, he eventually fuses with Future Zamasu and becomes Fusion Zamasu. He ends up sliced in half by Future Trunks, but in a last effort, Zamasu discards his physical body and becomes a mass of pure energy determined to envelop the entire universe. In desperation, Goku summons Future Zenō-sama, who completely obliterates him.
Other characters
Android 16
Android 16 (人造人間16号, Jinzōningen Jū Roku Gō, lit. "Artificial Human #16") is a large fully mechanical android developed by Dr. Gero. He is deemed a failure, and is deactivated until Android 18 reactivates and releases him.[ch. 350, 351][42] Despite the other Androids enjoying fighting, 16 refrains from battle, only showing interest in following his orders to search for and kill Goku, who, along with Cell, is the only character he shows animosity towards. Unlike the other two, 16 processes a sophisticated mechanism to sense and track power levels in real time.[ch. 362][43][44] While trying to protect Android 17 and 18 from Cell, he is greatly damaged,[ch. 371–373][45] though Bulma and her father later repair him.[ch. 394] After he is repaired, he temporarily ignores his orders to kill Goku to focus on the fight against Cell. He was designed with the ability to self-destruct, but the device was removed during his repairs. This is made known only when 16 tries to self-destruct and destroy Cell, with Cell retaliating and destroying him.[ch. 406][46] However, his head and consciousness survive, but later is destroyed by Cell, which pushes Gohan over the edge to Super Saiyan 2.[ch. 407, 408][47] He is voiced Hikaru Midorikawa in Japanese media, Scott McNeil in the Ocean dub, and Jeremy Inman in the Funimation dub.
Arale Norimaki
Main article: Arale Norimaki
Arale Norimaki (則巻アラレ, Norimaki Arare) is a little girl who is actually an android built by the Penguin Village (ペンギン村, Pengin Mura) scientist Senbei Norimaki (則巻千兵衛, Norimaki Senbei). She is very naive and fights as if she is simply playing around possessing the ability to run at mach speed and unbelievable strength. Arale is often accompanied by two cherubs known as the Gatchan (ガッちゃん) that are capable of eating anything and shooting lasers from their antennas. Goku meets her during his final encounter against General Blue of the Red Ribbon Army and easily does away with him when Goku was unable to defeat him.[ch. 81–83] In Dragon Ball Super, she easily defeats Vegeta when being controlled by her creators archenemy Dr. Mashirito (ドクターマシリト, Dokutā Mashirito) and has a seemingly even match against Goku. Arale also appears in the film Dragon Ball: Mystical Adventure where she defeats Taopaipai.
Arale was originally from Toriyama's previous manga, a gag series named Dr. Slump. Vegeta breaks the Fourth wall by pointing out that her power comes from the fact that she is a gag manga character given her comical capability of splitting the Earth in half by punching the ground.
Baba Uranai
Baba Uranai (占いババ, Uranai-baba, lit. "All-seeing Crone"), Fortuneteller Baba in the English anime dub, is an old "witch" and Kame-Sennin's older sister.[ch. 101] She possesses a magic floating crystal ball that she rides on top of, which she can use to see the location of any lost item,[ch. 97] and to have a limited view of the future. She is also able to travel to the afterlife, where she recruits deceased individuals and brings them back to the living world to fight for her, albeit only for one day.[ch. 108] She lives in a big palace located over an oasis in the desert. She normally charges a very high price for her services unless her team of fighters are defeated.[ch. 98] Her regular fighters are Dracula Man (ドラキュラマン, Dorakyura Man, "Count Dracula" in Viz's manga and "Fangs" in the English anime dub), a boxing vampire; Suke-san (スケさん, "Invisible Man" in Viz's manga and "See-Through" in the English anime dub), an invisible man who is weak with his only advantage being that he can not be seen; Mummy-kun (ミイラくん, Miira-kun, "Mummy" in Viz's manga and "Bandages" in the English anime dub), a mummy with brute strength; and Devilman (アックマン, Akkuman, "Devil" in Viz's manga and "Spike" in the English anime dub), a humanoid devil who can destroy people using the evil in their hearts.[ch. 99–104] During the time Goku and his friends visit in order for her to find the last Dragon Ball after the defeat of the Red Ribbon Army, his adoptive grandfather Son Gohan was the last of her fighters, temporarily brought back to the real world to see his grandson.[ch. 108] She later makes many recurring appearances from time to time, including bringing Goku back to life for one day for the 25th Tenka'ichi Budōkai.[ch. 230] In Japanese she is voiced by Junpei Takiguchi in Dragon Ball and early Dragon Ball Z,[48] and by Mayumi Tanaka during the later half of Dragon Ball Z and during Dragon Ball Kai. In English she is voiced by Ellen Kennedy in the Ocean dub, and by Linda Chambers-Young in the Funimation dub.
Bobbidi
Bobbidi (バビディ, Babidi), Babidi in the English anime dub, is a madōshi (魔導師) or warlock and son of Bibbidi, the creator of Majin Boo.[ch. 445] After Boo is sealed and his father is dead, he sets out to resurrect Boo to help him conquer the universe. Bobbidi manages to take over the minds of many strong warriors in order to help him achieve his goal, including Dabra, King of the Demon World (暗黒魔界の王ダーブラ, Ankoku Makai no Ō Dābra, "Dabura" in the English anime dub),[ch. 447] alien warrior Pui Pui (プイプイ, "Pocus" in the English manga),[ch. 449] light-devouring monster Yakon (ヤコン),[ch. 451] and two muscle-bound humans, Yamu (ヤムー, Yamū) and Spopovitch (スポポビッチ, Supopobitchi). Bobbidi uses them to collect energy for Boo's revival, and later enlists Vegeta to help him, though Vegeta is able to ignore his orders.[ch. 457] After Boo is revived, Bobbidi manages to control him with the threat of resealing him,[ch. 462] though after being manipulated by Goku,[ch. 473] Boo turns on him and shatters his head with a single punch.[ch. 475, 476] In the anime, he later appears in Hell, cheering Goku and Vegeta on during their fight with Boo, and then in Dragon Ball GT, when various villains escape from Hell. Bobbidi is voiced by Jōji Yanami in the original series and by Bin Shimada in Kai,[29] Terry Klassen in the Ocean dub, and Duncan Brannan in the Funimation dub.
Bra
Bra (ブラ, Bura), Bulla in the English anime dub, is the daughter of Vegeta and Bulma and sister of Trunks,[ch. 518] as such her genes come from both humans and Saiyans, making her one of two female Saiyans in the original manga series. She does not seem to have any interest in fighting, unlike Pan. She appears as a young child in the last two chapters of the manga and makes some appearances in Dragon Ball GT. In Japanese media she is voiced by Hiromi Tsuru. She is voiced by Cathy Weseluck in the Ocean dub, by Megan Woodall in the Funimation dub of Dragon Ball Z, by Parisa Fakhri in the Funimation dub of Dragon Ball GT, by Leda Davies in the Blue Water dub, and by Brina Palencia in the English version of Dragon Ball Z: Budokai Tenkaichi 2.
Bardock
Bardock (バーダック, Bādakku), Burdock in Viz's translation, is the father of Raditz and Kakarrot (Goku). Bardock's story is shown in the 1990 Dragon Ball Z TV special and in Toriyama's 2014 Dragon Ball Minus: The Departure of the Fated Child special. In the TV special, during a routine planet conquering mission on the planet Kanassa, one of the surviving inhabitants strikes Bardock, giving him its native ability to see into the future in the process. Soon, Bardock began to see visions of Freeza's plan to destroy Planet Vegeta and all of the Saiyans, as well as Goku's future on Earth. Bardock attempts to prevent the destruction of his race by challenging Freeza in orbit of planet Vegeta, but is unsuccessful, and becomes the first of the Saiyans to be obliterated by Freeza. Before his death, however, Bardock has one final vision of Goku challenging Freeza, and is able to die pleased knowing his son would avenge their race. In Dragon Ball Minus, which takes place a month before the destruction of Planet Vegeta, Bardock has a strong feeling that Freeza is up to something when they receive an order for all Saiyans to return home, so he convinces Gine (ギネ) to send their infant son, Kakarrot, to Earth.[49]
Bardock's basic design was originally conceived for the TV special by the anime staff, with Toriyama slightly altering it.[5] His armor was based on that of Toshiro Mifune's character in Seven Samurai, at the insistence of director Mitsuo Hashimoto.[5] Toriyama stated that Bardock's tragic story moved him and so decided to include him in the manga;[5] Bardock appears in two panels during Goku's first confrontation with Freeza, when Freeza comments that Goku looks just like that Saiyan who resisted when he destroyed planet Vegeta and the narrator informs the reader that he was Goku's father.[ch. 307] He is voiced by Masako Nozawa in Japanese,[21] and by Sonny Strait in the Funimation dub. Bardock also stars in the 2011 spin-off manga Dragon Ball: Episode of Bardock by Naho Ōishi, and its subsequent animated short film adaptation.[50]
Champa
Champa (シャンパ, Shanpa) is Beerus' twin brother and the God of Destruction from Universe 6 that appears in Dragon Ball Super. He looks like a fat version of Beerus and wears a variation of the traditional Egyptian clothing and ornaments Beerus is wearing and his name also derives from an alcoholic drink, Champagne (シャンパン, Shanpan). He is competing with Beerus to see who can find the best food in both their Universes. He is accompanied by Vados who is the older sister of Whis. Champa holds a tournament challenging Beerus' universe and has a team consisting of the strongest fighters in his universe with them being Botamo (ボタモ) a large bear-like fighter, Frost (フロスト, Furosuto) who is a member of Freeza's race that is viewed as hero in his universe, Otta Magetta (オッタ マゲッタ) a giant metal man, Hit (ヒット, Hitto) a legendary hitman and Cabba (キャベ, Kyabe) a Saiyan warrior from the original Saiyan homeland which still exists in their universe. They reappear in the Tournament of Power, accompanied by the Saiyan females Caulifla (カリフラ, Karifura) and Kale (ケール, Kēru). Champa is voiced by Mitsuo Iwata in the Japanese version of the series. In the Funimation English Dub, his voice is supplied by Jason Liebrecht.
Dende
Dende (デンデ) is a Namekian child saved from Freeza's henchman Dodoria by Gohan and Kuririn.[ch. 255] He is taken into Gohan and Kuririn's care, and guides Kuririn to Namek's Great Elder to tap into vast-hidden reserves of his power.[ch. 265] He also makes the Earthlings' wishes utilizing the Namekian Dragon Balls for them, as they must be said in the native language.[ch. 292, 293, 324] Dende later gains the power to heal injuries after having his own power unlocked, which he uses to aid the warriors fighting Freeza until he is killed by the tyrant for being disruptive and helping the Earthlings.[ch. 299, 304] After being resurrected,[ch. 323] he lives on New Namek until he is asked by Goku to replace Kami as Earth's god and revive the Dragon Balls.[ch. 393, 394] He accepts and continues to serve as the guardian throughout the rest of the series. He has a close relationship with Piccolo, as he fused with fellow Namekian Nail, whom Dende was close to. Dende is voiced by Tomiko Suzuki in the original Japanese series up to episode 288 of Dragon Ball Z,[51] by Hiro Yuuki in episodes 290-291 of Z and Dragon Ball GT,[52] and by Aya Hirano in Dragon Ball Kai and all media since.[53] In the Funimation dubs of the series, he is voiced by Ceyli Delgadillo as a child, Justin Cook as an adult, Laura Bailey in the redub, and by Maxey Whitehead in Kai.
Dr. Briefs
Dr. Briefs (ブリーフ博士, Burīfu-hakase), sometimes written as Dr. Brief, is the father of Bulma and grandfather of Trunks and Bra. He is an elderly, brilliant and eccentric scientist and is one of the smartest and richest men in the world. Dr. Briefs is the founder and President of Capsule Corporation (カプセルコーポレーション, Kapuseru Kōporēshon) (the largest company on Earth)[54] and the man responsible for the invention of the Hoi-Poi Capsules (ホイ ポイ カプセル, Hoi Poi Kapuseru), which can shrink inanimate objects down to pocket sized capsule of namesake.[55] He is responsible for modifying the Namekian spaceship that Bulma, Kuririn and Gohan use on their journey to the Planet Namek, in a search for its Dragon Balls. He also creates Goku his own spaceship to journey to Namek, while allowing him to train in 100x Earth's gravity. Following their return to Earth and in preparation for the battle with the Androids, Vegeta forces him into creating him a ship to allow him to train under 300x Earth's gravity, which he reluctantly complies with. He later is essential in repairing the damaged Android 16 in preparation for the Cell Games, alongside his daughter. Dr. Briefs spends the majority of his time in his large home in West City (西の都, Nishi no Miyako), where he lives with his wife and daughter, along with their numerous pets. His favorite pet is a small black cat, named Tama (タマ) in the original anime and "Scratch" in the Funimation dub. He is voiced by Joji Yanami in Japanese. In English, he is voiced by Paul Dobson and Scott McNeil in Ocean dubs, and by Chris Forbis in the Funimation dub. Dr. Briefs appears in the final chapter of Toriyama's 2013 manga series Jaco the Galactic Patrolman, which is set before Dragon Ball.[56]
Doctor Gero
"Dr. Gero" redirects here. For the football competition, see Dr. Gerö Cup. For other uses, see Gero (disambiguation).
Doctor Gero (ドクター・ゲロ, Dokutā Gero) is the chief scientist of the former Red Ribbon Army.[ch. 335] After the destruction of the organization, he begins using his development of androids to aid in destroying Goku for revenge. While creating a series of androids, he eventually implants his own brain into an exact replica of his body, becoming Android 20 (人造人間20号, Jinzōningen Ni Jū Gō, lit. "Artificial Human #20").[ch. 348] Both he and Android 19 (人造人間１９号, Jinzōningen Jū Kyū Gō, lit. "Artificial Human #19"), a round, pale android and the most loyal of Gero's creations, are able to absorb the energy of others using small devices on their hands.[ch. 341, 345] The two eventually attack Goku and his friends. 19 successfully drains Goku of his energy while Goku is affected by his heart virus, but is destroyed by Vegeta afterwards.[ch. 342, 344] Doctor Gero flees in order to release Androids 17 and 18 as a last resort, although 17 quickly kills him.[ch. 349, 350] Doctor Gero appears once more in Dragon Ball GT, planning to return to Earth along with Doctor Myu by creating another Android 17. They succeed, though Doctor Myu betrays Doctor Gero and has the newly formed Super 17 kill him once again. He is voiced by Kōji Yada in Japanese,[57] Brian Dobson in the Ocean dub, and Kent Williams in the Funimation dub.
Ginyu Force
The Ginyu Force (ギニュー特戦隊, Ginyū Tokusentai, lit. "Ginyu Special Squadron") is a team of five mercenaries who are hired by Freeza. Though physically some of the strongest individuals in the universe, the Ginyu Force's members delight in coming up with strange poses, betting candy on fights, and playing Janken. Freeza calls upon them to assist in the defeat of Vegeta and help obtain the Dragon Balls on Planet Namek.[ch. 272] In the anime, they (sans the surviving Ginyu) appear at Kaiō-sama's planet in the afterlife and battle Tenshinhan, Yamcha and Chaozu, who defeat and knock them down to Hell. Tenshinhan defeats Jheese and Butta, Yamcha defeats Reacoom, and Chaozu defeats Gurd. Kaiō-sama reveals that he actually invited the Ginyu Force there in order to test their new strength.
Gurd (グルド, Gurudo), named Guldo in the English anime dub, is a fat, short, four-eyed, green-skinned humanoid who, although physically weak, has psychic powers, including the ability to freeze time for as long as he can hold his breath.[ch. 273] He can also immobilize opponents and control objects with telekinesis.[ch. 274] He is the first one killed when Vegeta interrupts his fight with Kuririn and Gohan and decapitates him.[ch. 274] Gurd is voiced by Kōzō Shioya in the original series and Yasuhiro Takato in Kai. In English, he is voiced by Terry Klassen in the Ocean dub, Dylan Thompson in Funimation's original dub, Bill Townsley in their redub, and by Greg Ayres in Kai.
Reacoom (リクーム, Rikūmu), or Recoome in the English anime dub, is a sadistic, orange-haired humanoid who names his attacks after himself.[ch. 275] He uses Vegeta like a plaything in their fight, defeats Kuririn in one blow, and nearly kills Gohan.[ch. 276–278] However, when Goku arrives, Reacoom is the one defeated in a single blow, before being finished off by Vegeta.[ch. 280, 282] Reacoom is voiced by Kenji Utsumi in the original series and Seiji Sasaki in Kai. In English, he is voiced by David Kaye in the Ocean dub and Christopher Sabat in the Funimation dubs.
Butta (バータ, Bāta), named Burter in the English anime dub, is a blue-skinned reptile-like humanoid, who claims to be the fastest being in the universe.[ch. 273] He and Jheese attack Goku together, but neither of them get a single hit on him, and Butta is incapacitated, before Vegeta mercilessly kills him.[ch. 281, 282] Butta is voiced by Yukimasa Kishino in the original series and Masaya Onosaka in Kai.[58] In English, he is voiced by Alec Willows in the Ocean dub, Mark Britten in Funimation's original dub, Christopher Sabat in their redub, and by Vic Mignogna in Kai.
Jheese (ジース, Jīsu), named Jeice in the English anime dub, is a white-haired, red-skinned humanoid, though he resembles a normal human. He and Butta attack Goku together, but when Butta is incapacitated, he flees to fetch Captain Ginyu.[ch. 281, 282] After Ginyu switches bodies with Goku, they chase after Kuririn, Gohan and Vegeta, where Jheese begins a fight with Vegeta and is killed.[ch. 289] Jheese is voiced by Kazumi Tanaka in the original series and Daisuke Kishio in Kai.[59] In English, he is voiced by Scott McNeil in the Ocean dub, Christopher Sabat in the Funimation dub, and by Jason Liebrecht in Kai.
Captain Ginyu (ギニュー隊長, Ginyū-Taichō) is a horned purple-skinned humanoid who is the leader of the Ginyu Force. He is shown to be the most tactically skilled, as he deduced that Goku was masking his true power level by simply watching him fight. After seeing Goku's increased power level when using the Kaiō-ken, Ginyu inflicts a near fatal injury on himself.[ch. 285, 286] He then uses his unique technique that allows him to switch bodies with anyone, leaving Goku with Ginyu's nearly dead body.[ch. 286, 287] Ginyu (as Goku) momentarily deceives Kuririn, but has trouble fighting Kuririn and Gohan when he realizes that he can not fully control Goku's power.[ch. 288, 289] Ginyu then tries to switch into Vegeta's body, but Goku intervenes getting his body back, and when Ginyu tries again, he inadvertently switches bodies with a Namekian frog Goku throws in the way.[ch. 290] In Dragon Ball Super, he is shown to have been able to escape to Earth before Namek was destroyed, although he is later killed. He is briefly seen among several escapees from Hell as they return to there after they're defeated by Goku and the others in Dragon Ball GT. Ginyu is voiced by Hideyuki Hori in the original series and Katsuyuki Konishi in Kai. In English, he is voiced by Richard Newman in the Ocean dub, Dale Kelly in Funimation's original dub, Brice Armstrong in their redub, and by Robert Bruce Elliott in Kai.
Grandpa Son Gohan
Grandpa Son Gohan (孫悟飯じいさん, Son Gohan Jīsan) is the adoptive grandfather of Goku, whom he found in a crashed spaceship.[ch. 197] He teaches Goku martial arts, having originally studied under Kame-Sennin with Gyū-Maō and also knows the Kamehameha technique.[ch. 12, 106] He warns Goku not to look at the full moon, but Goku disobeys him and accidentally kills him while on a rampage in his giant ape form.[ch. 21, 233] Goku does not learn this until Vegeta turns into an ape and tells Goku about the transformations.[ch. 233] He is brought back to life for one day by Baba Uranai in order to fight Goku and see his growth as a martial artist.[ch. 108] In the anime only, he later appears as an assistant to Annin (アンニン), the ruler of the "magical furnace". He is voiced by Osamu Saka in the Japanese version of the original series, by Kinpei Azusa in Bardock: The Father of Goku and by Shigeru Chiba in Dragon Ball Kai. In the Funimation dub of the series, he is voiced by Christopher Sabat. He is portrayed by Randall Duk Kim in the American live-action film Dragonball Evolution; his voice was dubbed by Hiroya Ishimaru in the Japanese version. Grandpa Son Gohan briefly appears in the final chapter of Toriyama's 2013 manga series Jaco the Galactic Patrolman, which is set before Dragon Ball.[56]
Hit
Hit (ヒット, Hitto), also known as Hit the Infallible (百発百中のヒット, Hyappatsuhyakuchuu no Hitto) and as the Legendary Assassin (伝説の殺し屋, Densetsu no Koroshi-ya), is an assassin from Universe 6 and the strongest member of his team led by Champa. He is over 1,000 years old. Hit is known for the ability to manipulate time by using Time-Skip (時とばし, Toki-Tobashi). In Japan, Hit is voiced by Kazuhiro Yamaji. In the English dub, he is voiced Aaron Roberts in Dragon Ball Xenoverse 2 and by Matthew Mercer in all subsequent appearances.
Jaco
Jaco Teirimentenpibosshi (ジャコ・ティリメンテンピボッシ, Jako Tirimentenpibosshi) is an alien galactic patrolman who is the main character of Jaco the Galactic Patrolman, a one-volume manga by Toriyama set before the events of the main series, in which Jaco arrives at Earth to prevent it from being threatened by an evil alien, becoming friends with Bulma's older sister Tights (タイツ, Taitsu) in the occasion. In the end, Jaco fails to track down the alien, unaware that he was Son Goku, who is not a threat anymore and was adopted by Grandpa Son Gohan, and returns to space. Jaco reappears in the movie Resurrection 'F', and becomes a recurrent character in Dragon Ball Super. In Japan, he is voiced by Tsubasa Yonaga in the Vomic and by Natsuki Hanae in his other appearances. For the English dubs, he is voiced by Todd Haberkorn.
Kaiō-sama 
The Kaiō (界王, "Lord of Worlds"), referred to as Kais in the English anime dub, are upper-level gods of the Dragon Ball universe.[ch. 205] There are five at a time; one presiding over each of the four quadrants in the galaxy and the last, the Dai Kaiō (大界王, "Great Lord of Worlds"), overseeing them all.[ch. 440] The Kaiō reside in the heavens and are responsible for the lower-level gods who rule over individual planets. There is a sense of competition among the Kaiō over whose quadrant has the best fighters. Later in the series it is revealed that Kaiō-shin (界王神, "Lords of Lords") exist and are themselves in charge of the Kaiō.[ch. 440]
The North Kaiō (北の界王, Kita no Kaiō), named King Kai in the English anime dub, trains Goku after his self-sacrifice to defeat Raditz, and eventually trains Yamcha, Tenshinhan, Chaozu and Piccolo. He is the only Kaiō to appear in the original manga, besides a brief appearance of the South Kaiō,[ch. 428] and as such is usually simply referred to as Kaiō-sama (界王様). Kaiō-sama trains dead fighters that were allowed to keep their bodies, if they manage to reach his small planet at the end of Serpent Road (蛇の道, Hebi no Michi, "Snake Way" in the English anime dub).[ch. 205] Before training any students, he forces them to appeal to his strange sense of humor and catch his pet monkey Bubbles (バブルス).[ch. 210, 211] In the anime, they must also hit the flying cricket Gregory (グレゴリー) with a mallet. Kaiō-sama provides Goku with martial arts training and two of his own techniques, the Genki-Dama (元気玉) and the Kaiō-ken (界王拳), which he himself was never able to master.[ch. 212, 227] He continues to help Goku and his friends throughout the series, lending his planet locating and telecommunicating abilities for their use. When Goku brings a self-destructing Cell to his planet, the explosion kills Kaiō-sama and Bubbles and destroys his planet.[ch. 412, 413] As he is already in the afterlife, he only gains a halo, and in the anime appears to settle down on the Dai Kaiō's planet. He is voiced by Jōji Yanami in Japanese media until episode twelve of Dragon Ball Super, where Naoki Tatsuta took over the role,[60] Don Brown and Dave Ward in the Ocean dub, Sean Schemmel in the Funimation dub, and Michael McConnohie in the Bang Zoom! Entertainment dub.[22]
Kaiō-shin 
The Kaiō-shin (界王神, "Lord of Lords"), named Supreme Kais in the English anime dub, are the highest-level gods in the Dragon Ball universe. Similar to the Kaiō whom they govern, there were originally five, one to rule over each of the four quadrants of the universe and one, the Dai Kaiō-shin (大界王神, "Great Lord of Lords"), to rule over them.[ch. 445] However, before the events depicted in Dragon Ball, all but one were defeated by Boo.[ch. 445]
The East Kaiō-shin (東の界王神, Higashi no Kaiōshin), named Supreme Kai in the English anime dub, was originally the ruler of the eastern quadrant of the universe but due to his fellow Kaiō-shin's being defeated by Boo is now the de facto ruler of the entire universe.[ch. 445, 440] He is the only Kaiō-shin to appear in the original manga, besides very brief appearances of the South Kaiō-shin and Dai Kaiō-shin in single panels.[ch. 508] He has purple skin and a white mohawk and is always accompanied by his larger, reddish-pink skinned, loyal bodyguard Kibito (キビト). He came to Earth, originally under the alias "Shin" (シン), to meet Goku and his friends and try to help prevent Bobbidi from resurrecting Boo but ends up failing.[ch. 438, 446, 460] Kaiō-shin takes Gohan to his own private planet where he has him train using the Zeta Sword (ゼットソード, Zetto Sōdo) (Z Sword in the English anime dub) but instead the sword is broken releasing Kaiō-shin's ancestor, referred to as Old Kaiō-shin (老界王神, Rō Kaiōshin), who uses his power to increase Gohan's.[ch. 471, 479] Kaiō-shin and Kibito later get permanently fused into one being, referred to as Kibito-shin (キビト神), when they each remove one of their Potara (ポタラ) earrings.[ch. 501] Kaiō-shin later assists in the final battle with Boo by teleporting Goku and the last survivors on Earth onto his planet and helps take Dende to the new planet Namek to use its Dragon Balls to revive Earth and its people.[ch. 508, 513] In Dragon Ball Super, Kibito-shin uses a wish on the Namekian Dragon Balls to defuse himself back into Kaiō-shin and Kibito. In Japanese he is voiced by Yūji Mitsuya,[29] and by Kent Williams in Funimation's English dub.
Kami
Kami (神様, Kami-sama, lit. "God") is God, or the guardian residing over Earth for much of the series, and creator of the Earth's Dragon Balls. Originally he and Piccolo Daimao were one being (later revealed to be a Namekian), but in order to become Earth's God he had to expel the evil inside him.[ch. 164] The evil half, Piccolo Daimao, then went on to terrorize Earth until being sealed away by Kame-Sennin's master, Mutaito. Because they are one, if either Kami or Piccolo Daimao dies, then the other will as well and the Dragon Balls cease to exist.[ch. 165, 207] After Piccolo Daimao is unleashed and killed by Goku, he spawns a much stronger reincarnation, Piccolo, who takes over these same traits. Kami decides to attempt to seal away the new Piccolo himself using the same technique as Mutaito, which sacrifices the user's own life, and enters the 23rd Tenka'ichi Budōkai, possessing a human named Shen (シェン, "Hero" in the English anime dub) as a guise.[ch. 175, 181] But Piccolo has learned to reverse the technique and traps Kami in a water jug instead and swallows it, later being released thanks to Goku.[ch. 181, 182, 187] During the fight against the Saiyans, Kami dies when Piccolo is killed by Nappa, but by using the Namekian Dragon Balls they both are wished back to life.[ch. 223, 293] During the fight with the Androids, Kami agrees to re-merge with Piccolo, with Piccolo being in control, so as to boost his power.[ch. 356, 360] He is voiced by Takeshi Aono in Japanese,[40] who would do so up until the Freeza arc in Dragon Ball Kai. After Aono suffered a stroke, Bin Shimada voiced the character for his final appearance during the Cell saga. In English he is voiced by Michael Dobson and Dale Wilson in the Ocean dub, and Christopher Sabat in the Funimation dub.
Karin
Karin (カリン), Korin in the Ocean and Funimation dub and known as Whiskers the Wonder Cat in the Harmony Gold dub, is a cat that lives at the top of the extremely high Karin Tower (カリン塔, Karin-tō) below Kami's.[ch. 88, 162] He trained Kame-Sennin at one point back in the past for three years and gave him the Kinto'un (筋斗雲) and the Nyoi-bō (如意棒) ("Nimbus" and "Power Pole" in the English anime dub respectively), both of which are later passed on to Goku.[ch. 88, 152, 162] Karin trains Goku after his defeat by Taopaipai and, later, gives him a poisoned water from the Gods to make him strong enough to beat Piccolo Daimao.[ch. 88, 151] He is also the one in charge of deeming people worthy of meeting "God" (Kami); Goku being the first human he has ever deemed worthy.[ch. 162] He continues to help Goku and his friends by growing Senzu Beans (仙豆), which can fully heal any injuries and fatigue instantly, and is often accompanied by Yajirobe. Karin was modeled after the pet cat that Toriyama had at the time.[26] He is voiced by Ichirō Nagai[61] and Naoki Tatsuta in Japanese, Paul Dobson and Ted Cole in the Ocean dub, and Mark Britten and Chris Sabat in the Funimation dub.
Mr. Popo
Mr. Popo (ミスター・ポポ, Misutā Popo) is a genie-like entity who serves as the caretaker to "God";[ch. 163] Kami and later Dende, after he takes Kami's place as the guardian of Earth. When he first appears, he easily gets the best of Goku in a skirmish.[ch. 163] He then assists Kami in training Goku for three years in preparation for his battle against Piccolo at the 23rd Tenka'ichi Budōkai as well as later training Kuririn, Yamcha, Tenshinhan, Chaozu and Yajirobe during their preparation against the Saiyans.[ch. 165, 209] Mr. Popo is voiced by Toku Nishio in the original series and Yasuhiko Kawazu in Kai. In English, he is voiced by Alvin Sanders and French Tickner in the Ocean dubs, and by Chris Cason and Christopher Sabat in the Funimation dubs.
Mr. Popo's appearance has been considered an offensive racist stereotype related to Sambo or blackface by some,[62] such as Carole Boston Weatherford in an article she wrote in The Christian Science Monitor in May 2000.[63] While discussing the controversy, IGN suggested it is easy to see why by describing the character as "the black-skinned, red-lipped, turban-wearing servant of Kami.", but noted that Japan does not have "the kinds of racial sensitivities that the Western world has."[62] The Jim Crow Museum at Ferris State University listed Mr. Popo as an example of racism in modern material.[64] The North American English releases of the manga by Viz Media censor Mr. Popo's lips by shading them in completely.[62][65] In the US airing of Dragon Ball Z Kai on the CW4kids/Toonzai block, Mr. Popo's skin was changed from black to blue.
Nappa
Nappa (ナッパ) is one of the four remaining Saiyans that were known to survive the destruction of their home planet, Vegeta.[ch. 197] An elite Saiyan warrior, he accompanies Vegeta to Earth in search of the Dragon Balls. He survives Chaozu's self-destructing attack, causes Tenshinhan to die of exhaustion and kills Piccolo.[ch. 217, 218, 223] But he is powerless against Goku who had returned to Earth with new training from Kaiō-sama. Vegeta orders Nappa to stop fighting due to Goku's clear dominance over him, but he refuses and is incapacitated by Goku.[ch. 226] Seeing that Nappa has been defeated, Vegeta mercilessly kills him himself.[ch. 227] In Dragon Ball GT, Nappa briefly returned as one of the escapees from Hell, only to be killed by Vegeta once more. In Japanese he is voiced by Shōzō Iizuka in Dragon Ball Z, Kiyoyuki Yanada in Dragon Ball GT, and Tetsu Inada in Dragon Ball Kai. In English he is voiced by Michael Dobson in the Ocean dub, and by Christopher Sabat and Phil Parsons in the Funimation dubs.
Oob 
Oob (ウーブ, Ūbu), known as Uub in the English anime dub, is the human reincarnation of the evil Majin Boo. After Boo was destroyed, Goku asked for him to be reincarnated as a good person, so they may battle again.[ch. 518] Goku eventually senses Oob's hidden power and seeks him out ten years later, when Oob attends the tournament to gain money for his village.[ch. 518] Goku ends up deciding to train him to be Earth's new guardian and as an opponent that he can battle.[ch. 519] In Dragon Ball GT, Mr. Boo merges with Oob's body, slightly altering his appearance, transforming him into "Majoob" ("Majuub" in the English dub) or Super Oob (スーパーウーブ, Sūpā Ūbu) to face threats such as Baby, Super #17, and Omega Shenron. He is voiced by Megumi Urawa in Dragon Ball Z and Atsushi Kisaichi in GT, and by Kara Edwards and Sean Teague in the Funimation dub.
Pilaf
Pilaf (ピラフ, Pirafu), Emperor Pilaf in the English anime dub, is a small impish man who dreams of ruling the world. Along with his two minions, Mai (マイ), a woman that wears a trench coat, and Shu (シュウ, Shū), a humanoid dog in a ninja outfit, he seeks out the Dragon Balls to wish for world domination. After obtaining the Dragon Balls, he is foiled by Goku and his companions after Oolong's wish is granted just before he can speak his fully.[ch. 20] He returns to antagonize Goku a couple more times throughout the series; while attempting to obtain the Dragon Balls again and when they release Piccolo Daimao from his confinement.[ch. 109, 135] In the first case, their attempt is quickly cut short when they are defeated by Goku again, and in the second, Piccolo Daimao betrays them after they become useless to him.[ch. 110, 148] They appear again in Dragon Ball GT, where they obtain the Black Star Dragon Balls and accidentally wish Goku to be a child again.
In Battle of Gods and Dragon Ball Super, Pilaf and his minions use the Dragon Balls to wish for youth only to be transformed into children. They then infiltrate Bulma's birthday party in an attempt to claim the Dragon Balls again, with Pilaf being mistaken for a monkey while Trunks claims that Mai is his girlfriend. Their true identities are then exposed but they are not taken seriously by the heroes due to their children state; they then end up as classmates of Trunks. Later in Dragon Ball Super, a once again adult Mai is revealed to be leader of the resistance forces on Earth against the evil Goku Black and an ally of Future Trunks, having apparently become a reformed character. She is seemingly killed by Goku Black but later revealed to be alive, and works together with Trunks and the heroes of the past in an effort to defeat Goku Black.
Shu was originally named "Soba" (ソバ) when he first appeared, however, when the series was being adapted into an anime, the staff asked Toriyama what his name was and he instead replied with Shu, forgetting that he had already named him.[ch. 18][vol. 12:afterword] By the time he realized the mistake, the anime had already aired, so he decided to use Shu in the manga when the character reappeared.[vol. 12:afterword] Pilaf is voiced by Shigeru Chiba in Japanese,[66] Don Brown in the Ocean dub, Mike McFarland in the third Dragon Ball movie, and by Chuck Huber in the Funimation dub. Shu is voiced by Tesshō Genda in Japanese,[67] Doug Parker in the Ocean dub, Justin Cook in the third movie, and by Chris Cason in the Funimation dub. Mai is voiced by Eiko Yamada in Japanese,[67] Teryl Rothery in the Ocean dub, Cynthia Cranz in the third movie, Colleen Clinkenbeard in the eighteenth and nineteenth movies, and by Julie Franklin in the Funimation dub. She was portrayed by Eriko Tamura in the American live-action film Dragonball Evolution; her voice was dubbed over by Yūko Kaida in the Japanese version.
Raditz
Raditz (ラディッツ, Radittsu) is a Saiyan warrior and the older brother of Goku.[ch. 197] Along with Goku, Vegeta, and Nappa, Raditz is one of the four remaining Saiyans following the destruction of their home planet, Vegeta.[ch. 197] He arrives on Earth, searching for his long-lost brother in order to recruit him in conquering other planets.[ch. 196] But when Goku refuses, Raditz kidnaps his nephew, Gohan, and orders Goku to kill 100 Earthlings within a day if he wants his son back.[ch. 197] Instead, Goku and Piccolo team up to defeat Raditz, though not even their combined powers are enough.[ch. 198, 200] However, Goku makes the ultimate sacrifice by grappling with Raditz and allowing Piccolo to kill them both with his Makankosappo technique.[ch. 205] Before Raditz dies, Piccolo taunts him by explaining that Goku will be revived by the Dragon Balls, though Raditz manages to send one final transmission to inform Vegeta and Nappa of this, believing that his Saiyan comrades will come to Earth and use the Dragon Balls to revive him.[ch. 204] However, Vegeta and Nappa travel to Earth to use the Dragon Balls for their own purposes instead. In the anime, Raditz later makes a minor appearance in Dragon Ball GT along with many of the other villains who escaped Hell. He also makes a single panel appearance in Toriyama's 2014 Dragon Ball Minus: The Departure of the Fated Child special.[49] He is voiced by Shigeru Chiba in Japanese,[66] Jason Gray-Stanford in the Ocean dub, and Justin Cook in the Funimation dub.
Red Ribbon Army
"Android 8" redirects here. For the operating system, see Android Oreo.
The Red Ribbon Army (レッドリボン軍, Reddo Ribon Gun) is a paramilitary organization led by Commander Red (レッド総帥, Reddo-Sōsui), a short man who has his forces raid towns in search for the Dragon Balls on a quest for world domination. However, the plan is secretly a ruse, so he can really use the power of the Dragon Balls to become taller.[ch. 95] The second in command, Adjutant Black (ブラック参謀, Burakku-Sanbō), who loyally obeys Red, shoots him after hearing the real plan and attempts to take command of the army, only to be killed by Goku after he was able to easily wipe out most of their forces.[ch. 95, 96]
The many operatives of the army serve as obstacles for Goku during his second quest for the Dragon Balls. Goku quickly becomes the top of their hit list when he first comes into contact with them by easily defeating Colonel Silver (シルバー大佐, Shirubā-Taisa), who is sentenced to death for losing to a little boy.[ch. 55, 56] Though they first believe it was only a fluke, they then realize the threat Goku is when he defeats the forces under General White (ホワイト将軍, Howaito-Shōgun) in their northern stronghold known as Muscle Tower (マッスルタワー, Massuru Tawā). Among the forces under General White is the android brute Sergeant Metallic (メタリック軍曹, Metarriku-Gunsō, "Full Metal Jacket" in Viz's English manga and "Major Metallitron" in the English anime), the ninja Sergeant Major Purple (ムラサキ曹長, Murasaki-Sōchō, simply "Murasaki" in the English anime) and his four identical brothers, and the large monster Buyon (ブヨン, "Jiggler" in Viz's English manga).[ch. 58, 60, 62, 64] Mechanical Man Number 8 (人造人間8号, Jinzōningen Hachi-gō, "Artificial Human #8" or "Android #8"), one of the army's defunct androids who is kindhearted and dislikes fighting, befriends Goku and later lives peacefully with the locals of Jingle Village (ジングル村, Jinguru Mura), and is seen at the end of the series giving energy for Goku's Genki-Dama to destroy Majin Boo.[ch. 63, 67, 515]
General Blue (ブルー将軍, Burū-Shōgun), seemingly the most powerful member of the army, is next to go after Goku. He has special telekinesis abilities, that allow him to paralyze other individuals and can also be used to control objects.[ch. 77, 80] He is a neat freak, and when he does not enjoy Bulma's attempts at seduction, she states that he is gay.[ch. 76] He manages to steal the Dragon Radar during their final encounter but after returning to the army's headquarters is set to be executed for not obtaining any of the Dragon Balls after multiple failures.[ch. 81, 85] He is allowed to fight the recently hired Taopaipai to redeem himself, though Taopaipai easily kills Blue using only his tongue.[ch. 85] He is voiced by Toshio Furukawa in Japanese, who said it was a difficult role to play because the character is gay,[68] and Sonny Strait in the Funimation dub.
Other members include Colonel Yellow (イエロー大佐, Ierō-Taisa, "Captain Yellow" in the English anime) an anthropomorphic tiger whom Goku defeated when arriving at the land of Karin, and Colonel Violet (バイオレット大佐, Baioretto-Taisa), the only known female operative of the army.[ch. 84, 93] A General Copper (カッパ将軍, Kappa-Shōgun) is referred to once by Commander Red, but is never seen.[ch. 93] In the aftermath of the Red Ribbon Army's defeat, Doctor Gero who previously worked for them, continues creating androids and uses them in a plotted revenge on Goku which he attempts to go through with later in the series.
In the film Dragon Ball: Mystical Adventure, General Blue and Sergeant Metallic appear as soldiers in Chaozu's army. The Red Ribbon Army appears in the alternate-retelling film Dragon Ball: The Path to Power, where many of them get altered character designs. Sergeant Major Purple and General Blue appear in the 1990s Dr. Slump anime, where they attempt to take the Dragon Balls from Goku and Arale. In the unofficial live-action Korean film, Dragon Ball: Ssawora Son Goku, Igyeora Son Goku, Purple appears as one of Pilaf's subordinates. The North American English releases of the manga by Viz Media have edited Adjutant Black's lips by shading them in, possibly to downplay racist stereotypes, similar to their censorship of Mr. Popo.
Shenlong
Shenlong (神龍 (シェンロン), Shenron, lit. "Dragon God"), Shenron in Funimation's anime dub, also known as the Eternal Dragon in the Ocean and Funimation dubs and as the Dragon God in the Harmony Gold dub, is the wish granting dragon summoned when all seven of Earth's Dragon Balls are gathered together.[ch. 1] Throughout the series, several rules on the Dragon Balls' use and limitations on Shenlong's power are explained. After the wish is granted the balls scatter across the planet, turn to stone and are useless for a year, meaning, during this year they can not be detected by Bulma's Dragon Radar.[ch. 1, 20] The Dragon Balls also become useless if Shenlong is destroyed, in this case they must be recreated by their creator, or if their creator is killed.[ch. 148, 165, 194] Shenlong can not bestow a wish that exceeds the power of his creator, this is why Shenlong couldn't destroy the Saiyans before they came to earth.[ch. 243] Midway through the series, it is learned that the Dragon Balls are created by the extraterrestrials named Namekians, Earth's Kami being one of them.[ch. 242] A person can only be brought back to life once, and only if that person did not die of natural causes.[ch. 218, 321] Earth is without Dragon Balls for a period, when Kami re-merges with Piccolo, until Dende takes over the position of God.[ch. 355, 360, 393] When Dende recreates Earth's Dragon Balls, he makes them so that you can now have two wishes, but are still able to wish multiple people back at once.[ch. 394] Shenlong is voiced by Kenji Utsumi in the Japanese version of the series until his death in 2013 with the exclusion of episodes 192 and 193 in the series and the films, in which he is voiced by Masaharu Satō; he is voiced by Daisuke Gōri in Dragon Ball GT, by Kōji Yada in the Dr. Slump remake and by Ryūzaburō Ōtomo since episode 97 of Kai. In the English versions of the series, he is voiced by Don Brown in the Ocean dub, and by Christopher Sabat in the Funimation dub.
Shenlong's Namekian counterpart is Porunga (ポルンガ, Namekian for "God of Dreams").[ch. 292] Porunga has a large, muscular humanoid upper body and something similar to a dorsal fin down his back and the Dragon Balls are much larger than Earth's. Unlike Shenlong, he can only bring a single person back to life at a time, but he can bring that person back multiple times which Shenlong can not.[ch. 292, 327] He can also grant three wishes instead of one, additionally the user must speak in the Namekian language.[ch. 292] Porunga and the Namekian Dragon Balls were created by the planet's Great Elder (最長老, Saichōrō) (Guru in the English anime), the parent of every Namekian on the planet, who kept one and gave each of the other six to a different elder.[ch. 252, 260] When the Great Elder dies he passes his position on to Muri (ムーリ, Mūri).[ch. 327] When the Namekian Dragon Balls are used again during the fight with Majin Boo, Porunga had been upgraded to be able to wish back multiple people at once and still grant three wishes.[ch. 513] Porunga is voiced by Junpei Takiguchi in the Japanese version of the series with the exclusion of episode 283, in which he is voiced by Daisuke Gōri; he is voiced by Masaharu Satō in the video games. In Dragon Ball Kai Daisuke Gōri originally performed the role; after his death, Ryūzaburō Ōtomo took over. He is voiced by Christopher Sabat in the Funimation dub of the series.
Dragon Ball GT introduces Ultimate Shenlong (究極神龍, Kyūkyoku Shenron), a much larger red Shenlong made by Kami when he and Piccolo Daimao were still one entity. He is summoned when the Dark Dragon Balls, Black Star Dragon Balls in the Funimation dub, are gathered, and can grant any single wish, regardless of any restrictions placed on the other dragons. Ultimate Shenlong is voiced by Kenji Utsumi in Japanese, and by Christopher Sabat in the Funimation dub. GT also introduces Black Smoke Shenlong (黒煙の龍, Kokuen no Ryū, lit. "Black Smoke Dragon"), named Black Smoke Shenron in the Funimation dub, a cigar-smoking dragon who forms from all the negative energy accumulated from the selfish wishes granted throughout the series using the Dragon Balls. Summoned from the same Earth Dragon Balls, he splits into the seven Evil Dragons and they spread out over the Earth, causing the heroes to defeat each one. Daisuke Gōri voices Evil Shenlong in Japanese, and Christopher Sabat voices him in the Funimation dub.
Sorbet
Sorbet (ソルベ, Sorube) is one of Freeza's remaining soldiers introduced in the 2015 film Dragon Ball Z: Resurrection 'F' and the anime Dragon Ball Super.[69] He is a short blue alien with a large black koala-like nose wearing a green and black armor, a red robe golden rings around his wrists, a black head apparel with an orange stripe down the middle, and has a blue scouter. During the events of the film, Sorbet and his bodyguard, Tagoma (タゴマ) who is a tall, light purple bald alien, heads to Earth to resurrect his master Freeza using their Dragon Balls to summon Shenlong. After his revival, he along with Freeza and a red-horned, tough looking alien soldier named Shisami (タゴマ) went to Earth accompanied by Freeza's one-thousand soldiers. Near the end of the battle, Sorbet was killed by his own master's ki blast after Vegeta deflected it who originally intended to target Kuririn. Sorbet is voiced by Shirō Saitō in the Japanese dub and Jeremy Schwartz voices the character in the English Funimation dub.
Taopaipai
Taopaipai (桃白白 (タオパイパイ)), Mercenary Tao or General Tao in English anime dubs, is the number-one assassin for hire and younger brother of Tsuru-Sennin, Kame-Sennin's lifelong rival.[ch. 120] He wears a custom made pink gi with the kanji for "kill" (殺, satsu) on the front and the English phrase "KILL YOU!" on the back. He is first introduced in the series by being hired by the Red Ribbon Army to take out Goku and retrieve the Dragon Balls he possesses.[ch. 85] He kills General Blue with only his tongue, and seemingly kills Goku.[ch. 85, 87] After succeeding in the first battle, he later had to go back after forgetting one of the Dragon Balls where Goku challenges him again with his newfound power from Karin.[ch. 90] He gets caught in the explosion of his own grenade and is assumed dead, his older brother Tsuru-Sennin then enters his disciples in the 22nd Tenka'ichi Budōkai and when he finds out, attempts to get revenge on Goku and Kame-Sennin's other students.[ch. 92, 113, 120] It is later revealed that Taopaipai survived and was modified into a cyborg using all the money he gained from his previous assassination jobs.[ch. 168] He enters the 23rd Tenka'ichi Budōkai seeking his own revenge, but is easily defeated by his former student Tenshinhan.[ch. 168, 170] In the anime he appears once again, in filler episodes of Dragon Ball Z during the Cell arc.
In Japanese, he is voiced by Chikao Ōtsuka in Dragon Ball and Yukimasa Kishino in Dragon Ball Z. In the Ocean dub, he is voiced by Scott McNeil, while in the Funimation dub, he is voiced by Kent Williams. Taopaipai was the model for the character Uonuma Usui in Nobuhiro Watsuki's Rurouni Kenshin manga. Watsuki stated that as the first villain to defeat Goku, Taopaipai made "a strong impression" on him.[70]
Vados
Vados (ヴァドス, Vadosu) is the attendant and martial arts teacher of the God of Destruction of Universe 6, Champa. She is the daughter of Grand Priest and the elder sister of Whis. Like Whis, her name also derives from an alcoholic drink, calvados (カルヴァドス, Karuvadosu). Long ago, Champa and Beerus got into a fight because Beerus ate the Puff-Puff fruit on their birthday cake. While they were fighting, Vados is questioned by her brother, Whis, wondering if she intentionally set off the situation by putting one Puff-Puff fruit on their cake. Vados and Whis decide to end their fight by chopping their necks because they could destroy the universe at the rate they were going. Champa and Beerus decide never to fight one-on-one again but have food showdowns instead. For decades, Champa has been looking for the Super Dragon Balls. In all of his searches, he was able to find six of the Super Dragon Balls. She is voiced by Yuriko Yamaguchi in Japanese, and by Caitlin Glass in the Funimation English Dub.
Zarbon
Zarbon (ザーボン, Zābon) is one of Freeza's top henchmen. He has the ability to transform from a handsome, long-haired humanoid alien into a powerful reptilian beast.[ch. 263] Due to his uncommon physical beauty, Bulma is blinded by her attraction to him and at first mistakes him as an ally. Zarbon travels to Namek alongside Freeza and Dodoria to help collect the Dragon Balls. He eventually comes into contact with Vegeta, whom Zarbon manages to easily defeat and capture after transforming.[ch. 263] After Zarbon retrieves Vegeta's battered body and brings him to Freeza's ship in order to heal him for interrogation, Vegeta manages to escape and steal Freeza's Dragon Balls.[ch. 264–266] Zarbon sets out to find him once again, but Vegeta, having become stronger after healing, kills Zarbon in his monster form.[ch. 268] Zarbon also appears in Bardock - The Father of Goku, where he advises Freeza to destroy the Saiyan planet and briefly appears in Dragon Ball GT when he escapes from Hell with other villains. He is voiced by Shō Hayami in the original Japanese series and by Hiroaki Miura in Dragon Ball Kai. In the English versions of the series, he is voiced by Paul Dobson in the Ocean dub, by Christopher Sabat in the Funimation dub and by J. Michael Tatum in Dragon Ball Z Kai.
In an issue of Beckett Anime, a Beckett magazine publication, Zarbon was voted as one of the top five greatest henchmen of all anime, and was the only character from Dragon Ball on the list.[71]
Anime-only characters
The following characters appear and are featured within original arcs of the Dragon Ball anime series, which are not featured on the original manga.
Garlic Jr.
Garlic Jr. (ガーリック・ジュニア, Gārikku Junia) is an anime-only character that first appears in the first Dragon Ball Z movie. His father was imprisoned by Kami in the realm of darkness, leaving Garlic Jr. with a deep feeling of resentment and desire for revenge. He manages to obtain the seven Dragon Balls, wish for immortality, and begin his quest for revenge. He is defeated when faced with an angry Gohan, who pushes Garlic Jr. into the Dead Zone (デッド ゾーン, Deddo Zōn), an alternate dimension he can freely open. Garlic Jr. is one of the few original characters from the movies to appear in the TV series. In the TV series, he breaks free using the Makyo Star (魔凶星, Makyō-sei, "Planet Makyo") as a power source, leading to the events of the Garlic Jr. arc. After brainwashing and transforming all living creatures of the world with the Black Water Mist (アクアミスト, lit. "Aqua Mist"), he is once again trapped in the Dead Zone after the destruction of the Makyo Star. In the original Japanese versions, Garlic Jr. is voiced by Akira Kamiya in the movie and by Shigeru Chiba in the anime. He is voiced by Don Brown in the Ocean dub of the film, while Chuck Huber voices Garlic Jr. in the Funimation dub of both the film and anime.
In the movie, Garlic Jr. has three henchmen named Nicky (ニッキー, Nikkī), Sansho (サンショ) and Ginger (ジンジャー, Jinjā). They accompany him to kidnap Gohan, and attack and defeat Piccolo before fighting him again alongside Goku. Nicky and Ginger are killed together by Goku's Kamehamaha, while Sansho is killed by Piccolo. When he returns in the anime, Garlic is accompanied by a new group of henchmen known as the "Spice Boys", or the Four Monarchs (魔族四天王, Mazoku Shiten'nō, lit. "Four Heavenly Kings of the Demon Clan"). Spice (ガッシュ, Gasshu, Gash) is their leader, with aqua skin and white hair in a similar style to Vegeta. Vinegar (ビネガー, Binegā) is a big light purple muscleman with long hair and horns. Mustard (タード, Tādo, Tard) is also a muscleman but with brown skin, long red hair, and bull horns. Salt (ゾルド, Zorudo, Zald) is the smallest, with red skin. They help Garlic Jr. take over Kami's, and fight Kuririn and Gohan, but in the end, all four are killed by Gohan.
King Vegeta
King Vegeta (ベジータ王, Bejīta Ō) was the King of the Saiyan race,[72] the father of the prince Vegeta, as well as the strongest Saiyan warrior in his time.[73] While he is briefly referred to, he is never named, nor does he actually appear in the original manga, though he does appear briefly in a flashback in the manga adaption of Dragon Ball Super by Toyotarou. He led the Saiyans (サイヤ人, Saiya-jin) to victory in the ten-year war against the Tuffles (ツフル人, Tsufuru-jin), after which the Tuffles' home planet was renamed Planet Vegeta (惑星ベジータ, Wakusei Bejīta) in his honor.[73] Similar to his son Vegeta in nature and appearance, he is ruthless in dealing with his subordinates and delights in the death of others. After the Saiyans were annexed by Freeza, he had no choice but to pledge alliance to him while at the same time retaining power over his own people. King Vegeta is killed by Freeza when he leads a rebellion against him and boards his spaceship to retrieve his son. After his death, Freeza destroys his home planet and commits genocide of the entire Saiyan race. In Japanese, he is voiced by Banjō Ginga in episode 78, Yukimasa Kishino in episode 124 and Masaharu Satō in the eighth Dragon Ball Z movie. Terry Klassen voices him in the Ocean dub, while Chris Sabat voices him in the Funimation dub.
Dragon Ball GT
The following characters only appear on Dragon Ball GT
Baby
Baby (ベビー, Bebī) is an anime-only character that first appears in the 22nd episode of Dragon Ball GT. He is a parasitic alien created by combining the DNA of the king of the Tuffles (ツフル人, Tsufuru-jin) with a cybernetic body. Baby desires to destroy all of the Saiyans to avenge his people, who stole their home planet from them. Baby is first reactivated from a sleep state by his creator, Doctor Myu (ドクター・ミュー, Dokutā Myū) though it is later revealed that Doctor Myu was actually created by Baby and made to believe that he had created him. He attempts to fight Goku, Trunks, and Pan, but is easily defeated. To boost his power, Baby infects various people with his DNA and begins gathering energy from them.
After a second defeat at the hands of the three Saiyans, Baby infects Trunks and then goes to Earth. On Earth he battles Goten and Gohan, infects them both, and is able to infect Vegeta and make him his primary host. Goku, Trunks, and Pan return to Earth to find the entire population is now under Baby's control. Baby is able to defeat Goku, then he begins using the Black Star Dragon Balls to restore the planet Tuffle and transport the Earth population to it. During this time, Baby evolves into an even more powerful form and defeats Goku again. This causes Goku to transform into a Golden Great Ape and then into a Super Saiyan 4. In this new form, Goku is able to defeat "Baby-Vegeta". He has Bulma, also under his control, fire a radiation beam at him from her Blutz Wave Generator which enables him to transform into a Golden Great Ape as well. After a lengthy battle, Baby separates from Vegeta and attempts to escape in a spaceship, vowing to return to destroy the Saiyans. Goku blasts the spaceship with a 10x Kamehameha attack, sending it into the sun. The ship is destroyed and Baby is obliterated. He is voiced by Yusuke Numata in Japanese media and by Mike McFarland in the Funimation anime dub.
Shadow Dragons
The Shadow Dragons, known as Evil Dragons (邪悪龍, Jaakuryū) in the original Japanese, are an anime-only group of evil beings born from the evil energy caused by overuse of the Dragon Balls in Dragon Ball GT. When attempting to repair the damage caused by Super #17, the cigar-smoking Black Smoke Shenron, Evil Shenlong in Japanese, is summoned from the Dragon Balls instead of the regular Shenlong. He splits out the tainted Dragon Balls before fading away, each manifesting into one of the seven dragons as they proceed to cause chaos across the world. They are named after the One-Star through Seven-Star Dragon Balls; One-Star Dragon (一星龍, Īshinron, Chinese: Yī Xīng Lóng), Two-Star Dragon (二星龍, Ryanshinron, Chinese: Èr Xīng Lóng), Three-Star Dragon (三星龍, Sanshinron, Chinese: Sān Xīng Lóng), Four-Star Dragon (四星龍, Sūshinron, Chinese: Sì Xīng Lóng), Five-Star Dragon (五星龍, Ūshinron, Chinese: Wǔ Xīng Lóng), Six-Star Dragon (六星龍, Ryūshinron, Chinese: Liù Xīng Lóng), and Seven-Star Dragon (七星龍, Chīshinron, Chinese: Qī Xīng Lóng). In the English dubs their names are changed to Syn Shenron, Haze Shenron, Eis Shenron, Nuova Shenron, Rage Shenron, Oceanus Shenron, and Naturon Shenron respectively. Goku and Pan manage to kill the other dragons before encountering Eis and Nuova Shenron. Being much more honorable than his siblings, Nuova helps Goku defeat Eis. However, Syn Shenron kills Nuova before absorbing both his Dragon Ball and the others as well to increase his power.
Syn Sheron, or the One-Star Dragon, was created as the result of Mr. Popo's wish with Earth's Dragon balls to revive everyone on Namek that died at the hands of Freeza and his forces. The nature of the wish in turn made Syn Sheron both the most powerful and most evil of the Shadow Dragons. Making himself known after the death of Eis Shenron, killing Nuova Shenron in the process, Syn Shenron manages to swallow the other six Dragon Balls to become Omega Sheron, Super One-Star Dragon (超一星龍, Sūpā Īshinron) in Japanese, with access to all of the abilities of his Shadow Dragon brethren. After a long battle, he is killed by Goku's Super Genki-Dama, and the Dragon Balls are purified. Syn/Omega Shenron is voiced by Hidekatsu Shibata in Japanese. Bob Carter and Christopher R. Sabat respectively voicing Syn Shenron and Omega Shenron in the Funimation dub, while Victor Atelevich voices them both in the Blue Water dub.
Films
The following characters only appear on anime films, which don't follow the continuity of Dragon Ball.
Broly
Broly (ブロリー, Burorī) is an anime-only character that appears in the eighth, tenth, and eleventh Dragon Ball Z movies as the main villain. He was born with a power greater than most elite adult Saiyans, and is mentally unsettled as an adult, partially due to the crying of the infant Goku in the incubator next to him when they were born, partially because of traumatic events during his childhood (including nearly being executed for his power as well as Freeza's genocide) and partially because his power was so extreme. He eventually becomes the "Legendary Super Saiyan" (伝説の超サイヤ人, Densetsu no Chō Saiya-jin) told of in legends, with his destructive tendencies only being quelled by a special controlling device created by scientists for his father, Paragus (パラガス, Paragasu). In movie eight, after Paragus lures Vegeta, Goku, and their companions to another planet, Broly recalls Goku and goes into a rage, destroying the control device and becoming the unstoppable Legendary Super Saiyan. He effortlessly pummels Super Saiyan Goku, Vegeta, Gohan, and Future Trunks as well as Piccolo before killing his father. He is eventually defeated by Goku, but somehow manages to make his way into an escape pod. In movie ten, he lands on Earth and goes into a frozen state until the crying of Goku's son Goten awakens him. He is killed by Goku, Gohan and Goten by their combined Kamehameha attack after being blasted through the sun. Though in movie eleven, blood samples make their way into the hands of an industrialist, who creates a clone, "Bio-Broly" (バイオブロリー, Baio Burorī). The clone eventually wakes up and becomes mixed with bio-liquid, transforming him into a bio-mutant of sorts. He is eventually killed by Goten, Trunks, and Kuririn. He is voiced by Bin Shimada in the Japanese films, and Vic Mignogna in the Funimation dub.
Cooler
Cooler (クウラ, Kūra) is an anime-only character that appears in the fifth and sixth Dragon Ball Z movies as the main villain. He is the brother of Freeza who travels to Earth to seek revenge on Goku. While he admitted that he never liked his brother, he felt that he needed to punish the one who had ruined his family's honor. Despite transforming into his final form, which is one transformation higher than his brother, he is defeated by Super Saiyan Goku. He returns in the sixth movie, his remains having combined with the Big Gete Star (ビッグゲテスター, Biggu Gete Sutā), a sentient planet-sized machine. This gives him the ability to create an indefinite amount of "Meta-Coolers" (メタルクウラ, Metaru Kūra), which have the ability to constantly repair and improve upon themselves. He tries to consume the planet New Namek, but is eventually destroyed by the efforts of Goku and Vegeta. Cooler also makes a brief appearance in Dragon Ball GT and appears in the Dragon Ball Z Side Story: Plan to Eradicate the Saiyans OVA. He is voiced by Ryūsei Nakao in Japanese media, and Andrew Chandler in the Funimation dub.
Merchandise
Several pieces of merchandise were released based on the characters from the series. These include key chains, action-figures and plush.[74][75][76] Other merchandise featuring characters include T-shirts, tumblers and trading card games.[77][78][79] Characters are also featured in video games from the series. While initial games were role-playing games (RPG), the following became fighting games.[80]
Reception
Carl Kimlinger of Anime News Network (ANN) stated "Few anime series have mainstreamed it the way Dragon Ball Z has. To a certain generation of television consumers its characters are as well known as any in the animated realm, and for many it was the first step into the wilderness of anime fandom."[81] He praised the story and humor of the manga for being very good at conveying all of the characters' personalities.[82] Carlo Santos, also of ANN, commented that the Dragon Ball cast "may not be as stylish-looking as today's shonen adventure protagonists, but every character has a distinctive set of physical features, making them identifiable at any moment."[83] DVD Talk's Todd Douglass had strong praise for the "deep, insightful, and well-developed" characters, writing "Few shows can claim to have a cast quite like Dragon Ball's, and that's a testament to the creative genius of Toriyama."[84] However, he felt the Red Ribbon Army was "hit or miss."[85] Tim Jones of T.H.E.M. Anime Reviews praised the series for having good characterization, saying "You do care about them, and want to get to know more about them."[86] He considered them to be different from stereotypical stock characters, but noted that they have much more development early on than when compared to later in the series.[87]
Theron Martin, also of ANN, wrote that while the characters are not complicated, they are "easy to love, hate, and respect" and are a major reason for the series popularity. "The immense pride of Vegeta, and how that can be a fatal flaw, especially shines through, as do the freewheeling spirits of Goten and Trunks, the naiveté of Boo and Mr. Satan's attention-loving, glory-hound nature, while Number 18 shows an unexpectedly cunning side.", "On the downside, Videl is entirely too under-used to make much of an impact and Bulma loses something just sitting around acting like a worried mother/wife."[88] He also praised the themes from the warriors, saying they speak to "basic yet powerful themes like faith, confidence, heroism, sacrifice, love, and understanding what is truly worth fighting for", and the ways they react while fighting, although the fights can sometimes become very long with little plot development.[89] He criticized how the series overused the plot device of having characters "grow seemingly untouchably powerful, only to be put out when eventually upstaged."[89] In a review of Dragon Ball GT, Jeffrey Harris of IGN commented that the material and characters had lost their novelty and fun, and also criticized the character designs of Trunks and Vegeta as being goofy.[90]
See also


Dragon Ball portal



Dragon Ball


References
Dragon Ball manga
Entire series

Toriyama, Akira. ドラゴンボール [Dragon Ball] (in Japanese). 42 vols. Tokyo: Shueisha, 1985–1995.
Toriyama, Akira. Dragon Ball. 16 vols. San Francisco: Viz Media, 2003–2004.
Toriyama, Akira. Dragon Ball Z. 26 vols. San Francisco: Viz Media, 2003–2006.

Individual volumes


Vol. 1 (ch. 1–11): The Monkey King. March 2003. ISBN 978-1-56931-920-8. and 孫悟空と仲間たち (in Japanese). November 1985. ISBN 978-4-08-851831-2.
Vol. 2 (ch. 12–24): Wish Upon a Dragon. March 2003. ISBN 978-1-56931-921-5. and ドラゴンボール危機一髪 (in Japanese). January 1986. ISBN 978-4-08-851832-9.
Vol. 3 (ch. 25–36): The Training of Kame-sen'nin. March 2003. ISBN 978-1-56931-922-2. and 天下一武道会はじまる！！ (in Japanese). June 1986. ISBN 978-4-08-851833-6.
Vol. 4 (ch. 37–48): Strongest Under the Heavens. March 2003. ISBN 978-1-56931-923-9. and 大決勝戦 (in Japanese). October 1986. ISBN 978-4-08-851834-3.
Vol. 5 (ch. 49–60): The Red Ribbon Army. March 2003. ISBN 978-1-56931-924-6. and マッスルタワーの恐怖 (in Japanese). January 1987. ISBN 978-4-08-851835-0.
Vol. 6 (ch. 61–72): Bulma Returns!. March 2003. ISBN 978-1-56931-925-3. and ブルマの大失敗!! (in Japanese). March 1987. ISBN 978-4-08-851836-7.
Vol. 7 (ch. 73–84): General Blue and the Pirate Treasure. March 2003. ISBN 978-1-56931-926-0. and 追跡！！ブルー将軍 (in Japanese). May 1987. ISBN 978-4-08-851837-4.
Vol. 8 (ch. 85–96): Taopaipai and Master Karin. May 2003. ISBN 978-1-56931-927-7. and 孫悟空突撃 (in Japanese). July 1987. ISBN 978-4-08-851838-1.
Vol. 9 (ch. 97–108): Test of the All-Seeing Crone. May 2003. ISBN 978-1-56931-928-4. and こまったときの占いババ (in Japanese). September 1987. ISBN 978-4-08-851839-8.
Vol. 10 (ch. 109–120): Return to the Tournament. May 2003. ISBN 978-1-56931-929-1. and 第２２回天下一武道会 (in Japanese). November 1987. ISBN 978-4-08-851840-4.
Vol. 11 (ch. 121–132): The Eyes of Tenshinhan. May 2003. ISBN 978-1-56931-919-2. and 天下一のスーパーバトル！！ (in Japanese). February 1988. ISBN 978-4-08-851608-0.
Vol. 12 (ch. 133–144): The Demon King Piccolo. September 2003. ISBN 978-1-59116-155-4. and ピッコロ大魔王の恐怖！ (in Japanese). April 1988. ISBN 978-4-08-851609-7.
Vol. 13 (ch. 145–156): Piccolo Conquers the Earth. November 2003. ISBN 978-1-59116-148-6. and 孫悟空の逆襲！？ (in Japanese). June 1988. ISBN 978-4-08-851610-3.
Vol. 14 (ch. 157–168): Heaven and Earth. February 2004. ISBN 978-1-59116-169-1. and さらなる飛躍 (in Japanese). August 1988. ISBN 978-4-08-851611-0.
Vol. 15 (ch. 169–180): The Titanic Tournament. May 2004. ISBN 978-1-59116-297-1. and 群雄割拠！ (in Japanese). December 1988. ISBN 978-4-08-851612-7.
Vol. 16 (ch. 181–192): Goku vs. Piccolo. August 2004. ISBN 978-1-59116-457-9. and 龍虎相討つ！ (in Japanese). February 1989. ISBN 978-4-08-851613-4.
Vol. 17 (ch. 193–204): The World's Greatest Team. March 2003. ISBN 978-1-56931-930-7. and かつてない恐怖 (in Japanese). May 1989. ISBN 978-4-08-851614-1.
Vol. 18 (ch. 205–216): The Lord of Worlds. March 2003. ISBN 978-1-56931-931-4. and 孫悟空とピッコロ大魔王 (in Japanese). July 1989. ISBN 978-4-08-851615-8.
Vol. 19 (ch. 217–228): Earth vs. the Saiyans. March 2003. ISBN 978-1-56931-932-1. and いそげ！孫悟空 (in Japanese). November 1989. ISBN 978-4-08-851616-5.
Vol. 20 (ch. 229–240): Goku vs. Vegeta. March 2003. ISBN 978-1-56931-933-8. and 天下分け目の超決戦 (in Japanese). January 1990. ISBN 978-4-08-851617-2.
Vol. 21 (ch. 241–252): Dragon Ball in Space. March 2003. ISBN 978-1-56931-934-5. and めざせ！ナメックの星 (in Japanese). April 1990. ISBN 978-4-08-851618-9.
Vol. 22 (ch. 253–264): Battlefield Namek. March 2003. ISBN 978-1-56931-935-2. and ナメック星人の抵抗 (in Japanese). July 1990. ISBN 978-4-08-851619-6.
Vol. 23 (ch. 265–276): The Ginyu Force. March 2003. ISBN 978-1-56931-936-9. and 恐怖のギニュー特戦隊 (in Japanese). October 1990. ISBN 978-4-08-851620-2.
Vol. 24 (ch. 277–288): Goku vs. Ginyu. May 2003. ISBN 978-1-56931-937-6. and 悟空か！？ギニューか！？ (in Japanese). January 1991. ISBN 978-4-08-851414-7.
Vol. 25 (ch. 289–300): The Wrath of Freeza. May 2003. ISBN 978-1-56931-938-3. and フリーザ超変身！！ (in Japanese). March 1991. ISBN 978-4-08-851415-4.
Vol. 26 (ch. 301–313): Goku vs. Freeza. May 2003. ISBN 978-1-56931-939-0. and 孫悟空...復活！！ (in Japanese). June 1991. ISBN 978-4-08-851416-1.
Vol. 27 (ch. 314–325): The Super Saiyan. May 2003. ISBN 978-1-56931-807-2. and 伝説の超サイヤ人 (in Japanese). August 1991. ISBN 978-4-08-851417-8.
Vol. 28 (ch. 326–337): Enter Trunks. August 2003. ISBN 978-1-56931-985-7. and 未来から来た少年 (in Japanese). November 1991. ISBN 978-4-08-851418-5.
Vol. 29 (ch. 338–349): The Red Ribbon Androids. October 2003. ISBN 978-1-56931-986-4. and 悟空、敗れる！ (in Japanese). March 1992. ISBN 978-4-08-851419-2.
Vol. 30 (ch. 350–361): Rise of the Machines. December 2003. ISBN 978-1-59116-180-6. and 邪悪な予感 (in Japanese). June 1992. ISBN 978-4-08-851420-8.
Vol. 31 (ch. 362–373): The Terror of Cell. April 2004. ISBN 978-1-59116-186-8. and 忍びよるセル (in Japanese). August 1992. ISBN 978-4-08-851686-8.
Vol. 32 (ch. 374–385): The Room of Spirit and Time. July 2004. ISBN 978-1-59116-328-2. and セルの完全体 完成！！ (in Japanese). November 1992. ISBN 978-4-08-851687-5.
Vol. 33 (ch. 386–396): The Cell Game. October 2004. ISBN 978-1-59116-505-7. and セルゲーム始まる (in Japanese). December 1992. ISBN 978-4-08-851688-2.
Vol. 34 (ch. 397–408): Gohan vs. Cell. January 2005. ISBN 978-1-59116-637-5. and 悟空を越えた戦士 (in Japanese). June 1993. ISBN 978-4-08-851689-9.
Vol. 35 (ch. 409–420): Death of a Warrior. April 2005. ISBN 978-1-59116-751-8. and さようなら戦士たち (in Japanese). September 1993. ISBN 978-4-08-851700-1.
Vol. 36 (ch. 421–432): The New Generation. May 2005. ISBN 978-1-59116-808-9. and ニューヒーロー誕生！！ (in Japanese). November 1993. ISBN 978-4-08-851495-6.
Vol. 37 (ch. 433–445): Tournament of the Heavens. August 2005. ISBN 978-1-59116-873-7. and 動き始めた作戦 (in Japanese). April 1994. ISBN 978-4-08-851496-3.
Vol. 38 (ch. 446–459): Mark of the Warlock. October 2005. ISBN 1-4215-0051-5. and 宿命の対決 孫悟空対ベジータ (in Japanese). August 1994. ISBN 978-4-08-851497-0.
Vol. 39 (ch. 460–472): Boo Unleashed!. December 2005. ISBN 978-1-4215-0148-2. and さらば誇り高き戦士 (in Japanese). December 1994. ISBN 978-4-08-851498-7.
Vol. 40 (ch. 473–485): Hercule to the Rescue. February 2006. ISBN 978-1-4215-0273-1. and 地球軍、最後の秘密兵器！！ (in Japanese). March 1995. ISBN 978-4-08-851499-4.
Vol. 41 (ch. 486–502): Last Hero Standing!. April 2006. ISBN 1-4215-0404-9. and がんばれ 超ゴテンクスくん (in Japanese). June 1995. ISBN 978-4-08-851500-7.
Vol. 42 (ch. 503–519): Goodbye, Dragon World!. June 2006. ISBN 978-1-4215-0636-4. and バイバイ ドラゴンワールド (in Japanese). August 1995. ISBN 978-4-08-851090-3.


Other sources


^ Wiedemann, Julius (2004-09-25). "Akira Toriyama". In Amano Masanao (ed.). Manga Design. Taschen. p. 372. ISBN 3-8228-2591-3. CS1 maint: Extra text: editors list (link)
^ Clements, Jonathan; Helen McCarthy (2001-09-01). The Anime Encyclopedia: A Guide to Japanese Animation Since 1917 (1st ed.). Berkeley, California: Stone Bridge Press. pp. 101–102. ISBN 1-880656-64-7. OCLC 47255331. 
^ a b DRAGON BALL　大全集 1 COMPLETE　ILLUSTRATIONS. Shueisha. 1995. pp. 206–207. ISBN 4-08-782751-8. 
^ a b c d e f DRAGON　BALL　大全集 2 STORY　GUIDE. Shueisha. 1995. pp. 261–265. ISBN 4-08-782752-6. 
^ a b c d e DRAGON　BALL　Z 孫悟空伝説 (in Japanese). Shueisha. 2003. pp. 90–102. ISBN 4-08-873546-3. 
^ DRAGON BALL フルカラー フリーザ編 5 (in Japanese). Shueisha. 2013. pp. 240–245. ISBN 978-4-08-870716-7. 
^ a b DRAGON BALL 天下一伝説 (in Japanese). Shueisha. 2004. pp. 80–91. ISBN 4-08-873705-9. 
^ a b "Interview with the Majin! Revisited". Shonen Jump. 5 (11): 388. November 2007. ISSN 1545-7818. 
^ DRAGON BALL 超画集 (in Japanese). Shueisha. 2013. pp. 224–225. ISBN 978-4-08-782520-6. 
^ "ドラゴンボール 冒険SPECIAL". Weekly Shōnen Jump (in Japanese). Shueisha: 138–140. 1987-12-01. 
^ a b c d DRAGON　BALL　大全集 4 WORLD　GUIDE. Shueisha. 1995. pp. 164–169. ISBN 4-08-782754-2. 
^ DRAGON　BALL　大全集　3 TV ANIMATION PART 1. Shueisha. 1995. pp. 202–207. ISBN 4-08-782753-4. 
^ a b c "Shenlong Times 2". DRAGON BALL 大全集 2: STORY GUIDE (in Japanese). Shueisha: 6. 1995. 
^ a b DRAGON BALL 大全集 6 MOVIES & TV SPECIALS (in Japanese). Shueisha. 1995. pp. 212–216. ISBN 4-08-782756-9. 
^ DRAGON BALL フルカラー フリーザ編 4 (in Japanese). Shueisha. 2013. pp. 240–245. ISBN 978-4-08-870715-0. 
^ Kido, Misaki C.; Bae, John. "EXCLUSIVE: Masakazu Katsura Spotlight". Viz Media. Archived from the original on 2014-07-12. Retrieved 2015-03-10. 
^ "青二プロダクション　宮内幸平" (in Japanese). Aoni Production. Retrieved 2015-03-07. 
^ DRAGON BALL 天下一伝説 (in Japanese). Shueisha. 2004. pp. 168–169. ISBN 4-08-873705-9. 
^ "Actor Kinya Aikawa Passes Away". Anime News Network. 2015-04-16. Retrieved 2015-04-17. 
^ a b c "Dragon Ball Super Main Visual Reveals 2 New Characters". Anime News Network. 2015-06-15. Retrieved 2015-06-15. 
^ a b "Kawaii Kon's Guest Announcement, Nozawa Masako, for the 2014 Show". Anime News Network. 2014-03-13. Retrieved 2015-03-07. 
^ a b c d e "Toonami Asia Reveals More Dub Cast for Dragon Ball Super Anime". Anime News Network. 2017-01-07. Retrieved 2017-03-31. 
^ "N. Carolina's Animazement to Host Madhouse Co-Founder Masao Murayama". Anime News Network. 2013-04-08. Retrieved 2015-03-07. 
^ a b Green, Scott. ""Dragon Ball" Creator Reveals Android No. 17 and 18's Names". Crunchyroll. Retrieved 2014-05-03. 
^ "伊藤　美紀" (in Japanese). Office Osawa. Retrieved 2015-03-07. 
^ a b DRAGON　BALL　超全集 1 STORY & WORLD GUIDE. Shueisha. 2013. pp. 28–31. ISBN 978-4-08-782496-4. 
^ "青二プロダクション　江森浩子" (in Japanese). Aoni Production. Retrieved 2015-03-07. 
^ DRAGON BALL 天下一伝説 (in Japanese). Shueisha. 2004. pp. 166–167. ISBN 4-08-873705-9. 
^ a b c d "Shino Kakinuma Replaces Yuko Minaguchi as Videl in Dragon Ball Z Kai". Anime News Network. 2014-03-10. Retrieved 2014-03-10. 
^ a b "青二プロダクション　渡辺菜生子" (in Japanese). Aoni Production. Retrieved 2015-03-07. 
^ "悟空ＶＳアラレ 野沢雅子さん＆小山茉美さん スペシャル対談＜後編＞" (in Japanese). Toei Animation. Retrieved 2016-12-07. 
^ "Dragon Ball Z DVD Season 6 - Review". Anime News Network. 2008-11-25. Retrieved 2013-07-11. 
^ DRAGON BALL 超エキサイティングガイド キャラクター編 (in Japanese). Shueisha. 2009. ISBN 978-4-08-874804-7. 
^ Martin, Theron (2010-01-18). "Dragon Ball Actor Daisuke Gouri Passes Away". Anime News Network. Retrieved 2015-03-07. 
^ "青二プロダクション　龍田直樹" (in Japanese). Aoni Production. Retrieved 2015-03-07. 
^ Pojo's Dragonball - Section Title Here
^ "Voice Actress Yuko Minaguchi Returns From Studying in U.S". Anime News Network. 2014-05-06. Retrieved 2015-03-07. 
^ "新作映画「原作者の意地」　鳥山明さん独占インタビュー" [New film by the "stubborn manga writer" Akira Toriyama; exclusive interview]. Asahi Shimbun (in Japanese). March 30, 2013. Archived from the original on May 1, 2013. Retrieved July 22, 2015. 
^ DRAGON BALL 天下一伝説 (in Japanese). Shueisha. 2004. pp. 110–112. ISBN 4-08-873705-9. 
^ a b "Voice Actor Takeshi Aono Passes Away". Anime News Network. 2012-04-09. Retrieved 2015-03-07. 
^ "青二プロダクション　平野正人" (in Japanese). Aoni Production. Retrieved 2015-03-07. 
^ "Goku's Assassin". Dragon Ball Z. Episode 134. 1992-04-08. 
^ "Borrowed Powers". Dragon Ball Z. Episode 142. 1992-06-03. 
^ "Time Chamber". Dragon Ball Z. Episode 147. 1992-07-08. 
^ "Say Goodbye, 17". Dragon Ball Z. Episode 152. 1992-08-12. 
^ "Android Explosion". Dragon Ball Z. Episode 183. 1993-04-28. 
^ "Cell Juniors Attack!". Dragon Ball Z. Episode 184. 1993-05-05. 
^ "Voice Actor/Narrator Junpei Takiguchi Passes Away". Anime News Network. 2011-08-29. Retrieved 2015-03-07. 
^ a b Toriyama, Akira (2015-01-06). Jaco the Galactic Patrolman. Viz Media. pp. 232–247. ISBN 978-1-4215-6630-6. 
^ "Dragon Ball Episode of Bardock Spinoff Manga Gets Anime". Anime News Network. 2011-11-21. Retrieved 2012-12-15. 
^ "青二プロダクション　鈴木富子" (in Japanese). Aoni Production. Retrieved 2015-03-07. 
^ "Biography 代表作". Hiro-Yuuki Official Web Site (in Japanese). Retrieved 2015-03-07. 
^ "Aya Hirano to Sing Dragon Ball Kai Character Song". Anime News Network. 2009-09-15. Retrieved 2015-05-06. 
^ Gill, Bill (2003). Pojo's Unofficial Dragon Ball Z: A Player's Guide. Triumph Books. ISBN 9781572436008. 
^ DH Publishing. The Dragon Ball Z Legend: The Quest Continues, Volume 2 of Mysteries and Secrets Revealed!. DH Publishing Inc, 2004. p. 168. ISBN 9780972312493. 
^ a b Toriyama, Akira (2015-01-06). Jaco the Galactic Patrolman. Viz Media. pp. 201–231. ISBN 978-1-4215-6630-6. 
^ "One Piece Voice Actor Kouji Yada Passes Away". Anime News Network. 2014-05-01. Retrieved 2015-03-07. 
^ "青二プロダクション　岸野幸正" (in Japanese). Aoni Production. Retrieved 2015-03-07. 
^ "青二プロダクション　田中和実" (in Japanese). Aoni Production. Retrieved 2015-03-07. 
^ "Naoki Tatsuta Temporarily Replaces Jouji Yanami as Kaiō/Narrator in Dragon Ball Super Anime". Anime News Network. 2015-09-25. Retrieved 2015-09-25. 
^ "Ranma 1/2's Happōsai Voice Actor Ichirô Nagai Passes Away". Anime News Network. 2014-01-27. Retrieved 2015-03-07. 
^ a b c Isler, Ramsey (2008-04-11). "What's Wrong With Dragon Ball Z Part Two". IGN. 
^ Weatherford, Carole Boston (2000-05-04). "Japan's bigoted exports to kids". Christian Science Monitor. 
^ Pilgrim, David. "New Racist Forms". Ferris State University. Retrieved 2013-06-28. 
^ "Q. I know you're not exactly a manga expert.." Daizenshuu Ex. 
^ a b "千葉繁：所属俳優：81produce" (in Japanese). 81 Produce. Retrieved 2015-03-07. 
^ a b "Pilaf Gang Cast Records for Dragon Ball Z: Fukkatsu no F Film". Anime News Network. 2015-01-26. Retrieved 2015-03-07. 
^ DRAGON BALL 天下一伝説 (in Japanese). Shueisha. 2004. pp. 102–105. ISBN 4-08-873705-9. 
^ "1st Key Visual For 2015 Dragon Ball Z Film Reveals Frieza". Anime News Network. November 17, 2014. Retrieved November 17, 2014. 
^ Watsuki, Nobuhiro. "The Secret Life of Characters (35) Uonuma Usui," Rurouni Kenshin Volume 14. Viz Media. 66.
^ Chan, Pan; Doug Kale; Richard Strickland (October 2004). "Beckett". Beckett Anime Unofficial Collector. Beckett Media. 6 (10): 88. Top 5 Evil Henchmen 
^ Mylonas, Eric 'ECM' (2004). Dragonball Z: Supersonic Warriors: Prima's Official Strategy Guide. Prima Games. p. 32. ISBN 9780761546757. 
^ a b Padula, Derek (2012). "2.2 Vegeta's Perspective - Through the Lens of a Scouter, 2.5.5 History Repeats Itself". Dragon Ball Z "It's Over 9,000!": When Worldviews Collide. Derek Padula. ISBN 9780983120520. 
^ "Dragonball Goku Bulma Roshi Key Chain Set". Asia Finest. Archived from the original on March 19, 2015. Retrieved 2015-11-01. 
^ "Dragon Ball Z Hybrid Action Vegeto Figure". Amazon.com. Retrieved 2008-12-26. 
^ "Korin Plush". Amazon.com. Retrieved 2008-12-26. 
^ "Dragon Ball Z Tumbler". Amazon.com. Retrieved 2015-11-01. 
^ "Dragon Ball Z: Goku Fired Up Black T Shirt". Amazon.com. Retrieved 2008-12-26. 
^ "Dragon Ball Z World Games Saga Starter Box". Amazon.com. Retrieved 2008-12-26. 
^ Mueller, Greg (2005-08-15). "Dragon Ball Z: Budokai Tenkaichi Hands-On". GameSpot. Retrieved 2008-09-26. 
^ Kimlinger, Carl (2010-03-08). "Dragon Box Z Set 2". Anime News Network. Retrieved 2013-07-11. 
^ Divers, Allen (2001-11-18). "Dragon Ball GN 5". Anime News Network. Retrieved 2008-09-27. 
^ Theron, Martin (2013-08-11). "Dragon Ball [3-in-1 Edition] GN 1 - Review". Anime News Network. Retrieved 2015-03-12. 
^ Douglass Jr., Todd (2009-09-15). "Dragon Ball: Season One". DVD Talk. Retrieved 2015-03-10. 
^ Douglass Jr., Todd (2009-11-10). "Dragon Ball: Season Two". DVD Talk. Retrieved 2015-03-10. 
^ Jones, Tim. "Dragon Ball Z anime review". themanime.org. Retrieved 2013-07-11. 
^ Jones, Tim. "Dragon Ball anime review". themanime.org. Retrieved 2008-10-03. 
^ Theron, Martin (2009-03-04). "Dragon Ball Z Season 6 DVD Set". Anime News Network. Retrieved 2013-07-11. 
^ a b Theron, Martin (2008-11-25). "Dragon Ball Z DVD Season 6 - Review". Anime News Network. Retrieved 2008-12-27. 
^ Harris, Jeffrey (2007-11-12). "Dragon Ball GT - The Lost Episodes DVD Box Set Review". IGN. Retrieved 2013-07-11. 








v
t
e


Dragon Ball by Akira Toriyama



Media



Manga

chapters

Dragon Ball
Z




Dragon Ball

episodes


Z

episodes

season 1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9




GT

episodes


Kai

episodes


Super

episodes


Films and TV specials
Video games
Soundtracks





Characters



Goku
Bulma
Yamcha
Krillin
Tien Shinhan
Piccolo
Gohan
Vegeta
Frieza
Trunks
Android 17
Android 18
Cell
Majin Buu
Beerus
Zamasu





Related



Dr. Slump
Neko Majin
Episode of Bardock
Jaco the Galactic Patrolman








 Category
 Portal











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=List_of_Dragon_Ball_characters&oldid=818394621"					Categories: Dragon Ball charactersLists of anime and manga charactersDragon Ball listsHidden categories: CS1 maint: Extra text: editors listCS1 Japanese-language sources (ja)Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pagesArticles containing Japanese-language text