See also: List of Star Wars Legends characters, List of Star Wars Rebels characters, List of Star Wars cast members, List of Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic characters, and List of Star Wars: The Clone Wars cast members




Star Wars logo


This list of characters from the Star Wars franchise contains only those which are considered part of the official Star Wars canon. Some of these characters have additional and alternate plotlines in the Star Wars Legends continuity, and characters found in that body of works are compiled in the list of Star Wars Legends characters.



Contents


1 #
2 A
3 B
4 C
5 D
6 E
7 F
8 G
9 H
10 I
11 J
12 K
13 L
14 M
15 N
16 O
17 P
18 Q
19 R
20 S
21 T
22 U
23 V
24 W
25 Y
26 Z
27 See also
28 References




#[edit]


Name
Portrayal
Description


2-1B
Voice: Randy Thom (The Empire Strikes Back), Denny Delk (Revenge of the Sith)
Medical droid in The Empire Strikes Back that tends to Luke Skywalker in the bacta tank after the Wampa attack on Hoth, and replaces Luke's hand.[1] A 2-1B droid also serves as medical droid to Anakin Skywalker in Revenge of the Sith, and can be seen in the Star Wars Rebels animated series.[2]


4-LOM
Chris Parsons (The Empire Strikes Back)
Protocol droid with insectoid features, 4-LOM is among the Bounty Hunters who answer Darth Vader's call to capture the Millennium Falcon in The Empire Strikes Back.[3] In the Legends continuity it is Jabba the Hutt that upgrades 4-LOM's programming, turning him into a full fledged bounty hunter, and partners him with fellow bounty hunter Zuckuss.[4] Teaming up for many years, 4-LOM and Zuckuss join the Rebel Alliance for a time, even having aspirations of mastering the Force.[5] 4-LOM would lose these aspirations and affiliations after being badly damaged by Boba Fett and having his memory erased, restoring him to a cold calculating bounty hunter.[4][6] The first 4-LOM action figure was misidentified as "Zuckuss" in Kenner's original Star Wars action figure line.[7]


8D8
N/A
Torture droid working for Jabba the Hutt in Return of the Jedi.[3][8] A Kenner action figure was created for this droid during their original Return of the Jedi line.[9]


Clone 99
Voice: Dee Bradley Baker (The Clone Wars)[10]
Deformed clone trooper who helps the Domino Squad in the Clone Wars. He is killed during one of the Battles of Kamino.[11][12]


0-0-0 (a.k.a. Triple-Zero)
N/A
Protocol droid designed to specialize in etiquette, customs, translation and torture. Structurally similar to C-3PO. An associate of Doctor Aphra and BT-1, the droid is first featured in the Marvel Comics series Star Wars: Darth Vader and is now heavily featured in the ongoing Doctor Aphra series.[13]


A[edit]


Name
Portrayal
Description


A'Koba
Peter Diamond (A New Hope)
Tusken Raider leader in A New Hope who attacks Luke Skywalker and raises his gaderffii stick in the air repeatedly over his head. Also known as "URoRRuR'R'R", this sandperson is featured in the short story "Rites" from the 2017 anthology From a Certain Point of View.[14]


Admiral Gial Ackbar
Timothy D. Rose (Return of the Jedi, The Force Awakens and The Last Jedi)
Voice: Erik Bauersfeld (Return of the Jedi and The Force Awakens), Art Butler (The Clone Wars)
Commands the Rebel fleet in their attack against the second Death Star in Return of the Jedi. Ackbar is a Mon Calamari leader and military commander who fought in the Clone Wars. He devotes himself to the cause of galactic freedom and becomes the foremost military commander of the Rebel Alliance, and later the New Republic. He later works alongside General Leia Organa as part of the Resistance in The Force Awakens. He is killed along with many Resistance leaders in The Last Jedi.


Sim Aloo ("Imperial Dignitary")
Anthony Lang (Return of the Jedi)
Member of the Imperial Ruling Council and one of Emperor Palpatine's advisors, he appears alongside other councilors to the Emperor on the second Death Star, and is killed when it is destroyed over the forest moon of Endor in Return of the Jedi.[15] An action figure of this character, entitled "Imperial Dignitary", was created in Kenner's 1985 Power of the Force line.[16]


Almec
Voice: Julian Holloway (The Clone Wars)
Mandalorian politician who serves as Prime Minister of Mandalore during the Clone Wars. A prominent supporter of Satine Kryze and her New Mandalorian government, he is imprisoned for his involvement in an illegal smuggling ring, but is later freed and reinstated as Prime Minister after Darth Maul takes over the New Mandalorian capital city of Sundari. Later when Darth Maul is captured by Darth Sidious, Almec sends two Mandalorian warriors to rescue him.


Mas Amedda
Jerome Blake (The Phantom Menace and Revenge of the Sith), David Bowers (Attack of the Clones and Revenge of the Sith)[17]
Voice: Stephen Stanton (The Clone Wars)
Vice chair of the Galactic Senate.[17] He is Grand Vizier and head of the Imperial Ruling Council in Aftermath: Life Debt, installed by Gallius Rax as the puppet leader of the Empire following Palpatine's death. Amedda formally surrenders the Empire to the New Republic in Aftermath: Empire's End.


Amee
Katie Lucas (The Phantom Menace)
Human friend of Anakin Skywalker in The Phantom Menace. Lucas, the daughter of George Lucas, was credited as Jenna Green.


Padmé Amidala
Natalie Portman (Episodes I–III)
Voice: Catherine Taber (The Clone Wars and Forces of Destiny)
Teenage queen, and later Senator of Naboo, born Padme Naberrie, who marries Anakin Skywalker and dies giving birth to Luke Skywalker and Leia Organa.[18]


Cassian Andor
Diego Luna (Rogue One)[19]
Captain and intelligence officer of the Rebel Alliance who helps steal the plans for the Death Star in Rogue One.


Fodesinbeed Annodue
Voice: Greg Proops and Scott Capurro (The Phantom Menace)
Two-headed Troig in The Phantom Menace who commentates in both Basic and Huttese for the Boonta Eve Classic pod race.[20] The actor/comedians Greg Proops and Scott Capurro were originally supposed to appear in full prosthetic makeup, but the design was switched to a somewhat unpopular fully CG character.[21]


Raymus Antilles
Peter Geddis (A New Hope),[22] Rohan Nichol (Revenge of the Sith),[22] Tim Beckmann (Rogue One)
Captain of the Tantive IV in A New Hope, he is choked to death by Darth Vader.[1] Antilles is the last master of C-3PO and R2-D2 before they fall under the ownership of Luke Skywalker, and captain of the Sundered Heart in Revenge of the Sith. No relation to any other character named Antilles.


Wedge Antilles
Denis Lawson (Episodes IV–VI),[22] Colin Higgins (A New Hope)[22]
Voice: David Ankrum (A New Hope and Rogue One),[22] Nathan Kress (Rebels)
A Rebel and New Republic starfighter pilot, who was in the battles of Yavin, Hoth, and Endor and is the only survivor of those battles besides Luke Skywalker.[23]


AP-5
Voice: Stephen Stanton (Rebels)
An RA-7 protocol droid from the Clone Wars, serving with the Galactic Republic as a navigator; later tasked with inventory duties by the Empire, before C1-10P/Chopper encounters him in the Rebels episode "The Forgotten Droid". Acts as a C-3PO-like counterpart to Chopper in Rebel service, and assists Phoenix Squadron in finding a new base on Atollon, before The Bendu forces both Rebels and Imperials off Atollon in the episode "Zero Hour".[24]


Queen Apailana
Keisha Castle-Hughes (Revenge of the Sith)
Queen of Naboo during the last year of the Clone Wars in Revenge of the Sith. She is assassinated by stormtroopers of the Imperial 501st Legion for harboring fugitive Jedi in Star Wars: Battlefront II.


Commander Appo
Voice: Temuera Morrison (Revenge of the Sith), Dee Bradley Baker (The Clone Wars)
Clone Commander of the 501st Legion in Revenge of the Sith.


Doctor Aphra
N/A
A human female archaeologist, full name Chelli Lona Aphra, recruited by Darth Vader, along with her two assassin droid companions, 0-0-0 (Triple-Zero) and BT-1 (Beetee) for several covert missions outside the knowledge of the Empire. She is first featured in the Marvel comic series Star Wars: Darth Vader, before getting her own ongoing titular comic series.[13]


Faro Argyus
Voice: James Marsters (The Clone Wars)
Captain of the Senate Commandos who is bribed by Count Dooku to free Viceroy Nute Gunray from Republic captivity. He is later betrayed and killed by Asajj Ventress.


Aiolin and Morit Astarte
N/A
Specially engineered humans, brother and sister, skilled with lightsabers and working under Dr. Cylo as possible replacements for Darth Vader. They first appear in the Star Wars: Darth Vader Marvel comic book series.[25]


Ello Asty
Paul Kasey (The Force Awakens)
Voice: Matthew Wood (The Force Awakens)
Abednedo X-wing pilot for the Resistance that perished during the attack on Starkiller Base in The Force Awakens. Asty's name is a reference by director J.J. Abrams to the album Hello Nasty by the Beastie Boys, and the inscription on Asty's helmet, "Born to Ill", references the band's debut album Licensed to Ill.[26]


AZI-3
Voice: Ben Diskin (The Clone Wars)
Medical droid serving the cloners of Kamino who helps uncover the secret of Order 66 in The Clone Wars.[27]


B[edit]


Name
Portrayal
Description


Ponda Baba ("Walrus Man")
Tommy Isley (A New Hope)
Aqualish mercenary who in A New Hope attacks Luke Skywalker in the Mos Eisley Cantina, and then gets his arm cut off by Obi-Wan Kenobi's lightsaber. He is an associate of Dr. Cornelius Evazan who also antagonizes Luke Skywalker in the Cantina.[28] When the original Kenner action figure for Baba was released, the then-unnamed alien was called simply "Walrus Man".[29] He can also be seen with Dr. Evazan on the streets of Jedha in Rogue One.[30]


Kitster Banai
Dhruv Chanchani (The Phantom Menace)
Tatooine slave boy and Anakin Skywalker's childhood friend. Banai is supportive to Anakin's pod-racing endeavors, which is in contrast to Anakin's other friends Wald, Amee, Melee and Seek in The Phantom Menace. As the most prominent of Anakin's childhood friends, there has been much speculation as to Banai's fate after The Phantom Menace.[31]


Cad Bane
Voice: Corey Burton (The Clone Wars)
Ruthless bounty hunter in season 2 of The Clone Wars who also appears in the game Star Wars: The Clone Wars – Republic Heroes.[32]


Darth Bane
Voice: Mark Hamill (The Clone Wars)
Dark Lord of the Sith who is responsible regaining the "Rule of Two" that states there shall only ever be two Sith at a time, a Master and an Apprentice, during the Old Republic. An illusion of him appeared during the final episode of The Clone Wars to confront Yoda on Moraband and offer him the chance to join the dark side, but is rejected by Yoda.


Barada
Dirk Yohan Beer (Return of the Jedi)
Klatooinian employed as one of Jabba the Hutt's skiff guards in Return of the Jedi. Released in action figure form as part of Kenner's final Power of the Force line in 1985.[33]


Jom Barell
N/A
SpecForces officer introduced in Star Wars: Aftermath who becomes part of the main team in Aftermath: Life Debt.[34]


Moradmin Bast
Leslie Schofield (A New Hope)
Imperial general who serves aboard the first Death Star who warns Grand Moff Tarkin that they should evacuate due to the Rebel threat in A New Hope.


BB-8
Dave Chapman and Brian Herring (puppeteers) (The Force Awakens and The Last Jedi)
Voice: Bill Hader and Ben Schwartz (consultants) (The Force Awakens and The Last Jedi)
Poe Dameron's astromech droid in The Force Awakens and The Last Jedi.


BB-9E
N/A
Black plated BB-series astromech droid in the service of the First Order in The Last Jedi.


Shara Bey
N/A
A-wing pilot for the Rebel Alliance and mother of Poe Dameron, featured in the 2015 Marvel Comics limited series Star Wars: Shattered Empire.[35]


The Bendu
Voice: Tom Baker (Rebels)
An ancient Force-wielder whose philosophy predates the Jedi Order; encountered by the main characters of Star Wars Rebels on the planet Atollon, where he describes himself as being "the middle" between the ashla, light-wielding Jedi and the bogan, dark-wielding Sith.


Sio Bibble
Oliver Ford Davies (Episodes I–III)
Governor of Naboo in the prequel trilogy, who also appears in two episodes of Star Wars: the Clone Wars.[36]


Depa Billaba
Dipika O'Neill Joti (The Phantom Menace)
Jedi Master on the Jedi High Council who falls into a six-month coma after an encounter with General Grievous on Haruun Kal, but recovers and becomes the master of Padawan Caleb Dume, who is later known as Kanan Jarrus.


Jar Jar Binks
Ahmed Best (Episodes I–III)
Voice: Ahmed Best (The Clone Wars), B.J. Hughes (Three episodes of The Clone Wars)
Hapless but good-natured Gungan who journeys with Qui-Gon Jinn to Coruscant.[37]


Temiri Blagg
Temirlan Blaev (The Last Jedi)
A young boy and Force-sensitive slave on Cantonica. Temiri and his friends, Oniho Zaya and Arashell Sar, work for Bargwill Tomder in the Fathier stables in Canto Bight. Temiri is given a resistance ring by Rose Tico, and is shown Force-pulling a broom towards himself near the conclusion of The Last Jedi.[38]


Commander Bly
Voice: Dee Bradley Baker (The Clone Wars)
A clone commander who leads the 327th Star Corps under Jedi General Aayla Secura in Revenge of the Sith and The Clone Wars. When Order 66 is issued, Bly executes Aayla Secura on Felucia.


Bobbajo
Aidan Cook (The Force Awakens)
Nu-Cosian storyteller seen carrying his menagerie of caged animals on Jakku in The Force Awakens. Bobbajo, although having a very minor role, was one of the very first new characters from The Force Awakens to have been shown in promotional materials for the film.[39] Bobbajo is also featured in the short story "All Creatures Great and Small".[40]


Dud Bolt

Vulptereen podracer who participates in the Boonta Eve Classic podrace in The Phantom Menace. A puppet of Bolt was one of the few practical effects created for the podrace sequence, rather than solely CG.[41] Bolt is also featured in several non-canon video games such as Star Wars: Episode I Racer.[42]


Mister Bones
N/A
Rebuilt B1 battle droid introduced in Aftermath, serves as loyal—if homicidal—bodyguard to Temmin "Snap" Wexley.[43][44] In the comic Poe Dameron #13, Snap carries Mister Bones' "personality template" with him for good luck, and temporarily loads it into another droid to protect Poe Dameron.[45]


Lux Bonteri
Voice: Jason Spisak (The Clone Wars)
Son of Mina Bonteri and freedom fighter in the Clone Wars; love interest of Ahsoka Tano.


Mina Bonteri
Voice: Kath Soucie (The Clone Wars)
Mother of Lux Bonteri and Separatist senator in the Clone Wars.


Borvo the Hutt
Voice: Clint Bajakian (The Phantom Menace)
Hutt smuggler on Tatooine in The Phantom Menace.


Bossk
Alan Harris (The Empire Strikes Back and Return of the Jedi)
Voice: Dee Bradley Baker (The Clone Wars)
Trandoshan bounty hunter with a vendetta against Chewbacca who appears in The Empire Strikes Back and Return of the Jedi.[46] Bossk also appears in many episodes of The Clone Wars, Star Wars Rebels and in the Shadows and Secrets story-line hired by Dr. Aphra along with other bounty hunters in the Darth Vader Marvel comics series.


Ezra Bridger
Voice: Taylor Gray (Rebels)
Fourteen-year-old con artist, thief, and pickpocket living on the Outer Rim world of Lothal as the Empire strip mines the resources of his homeworld for Sienar's TIE fighter production. He is able to use the Force, and has used it to get out of certain predicaments. Stealing to survive, he had no real loyalty to anyone until he met the crew of the Ghost. His master is Kanan Jarrus.[47]


BT-1 (a.k.a. Bee-Tee)
N/A
Astromech droid modified to be a homicidal assassin, with a variety of built-in assault weapons. An associate of Doctor Aphra and 0-0-0, the droid is first featured in the Marvel comic series Star Wars: Darth Vader and is now heavily featured in the ongoing Dr. Aphra series.[13]


Sora Bulq

Weequay Jedi Master and friend of Mace Windu who is turned to the dark side of the Force by Count Dooku.


C[edit]


Name
Portrayal
Description


C1-10P (a.k.a. "Chopper")
Matt Martin (Rogue One)[citation needed]
Obsolete-looking astromech droid with a cantankerous, "pranking" form of behavior aboard the rebel freighter Ghost in Star Wars Rebels.[3][48] Chopper later reappears in Rogue One out of the Great Temple of Masassi on Yavin IV, like the Ghost itself and Hera Syndulla (who is mentioned only as a General of the Rebellion).[citation needed]


C-3PO
Anthony Daniels (Episodes I-VIII and Rogue One)
Voice: Anthony Daniels (The Clone Wars and Rebels)
Protocol droid who appears throughout the Star Wars films.[3][49]


Lando Calrissian
Billy Dee Williams (The Empire Strikes Back and Return of the Jedi), Donald Glover (Solo: A Star Wars Story)
Voice: Billy Dee Williams (Rebels)
Longtime friend of Han Solo. Businessman and scoundrel who leads the Rebels' space attack against the Death Star in Return of the Jedi.[50]


Captain Moden Canady
Mark Lewis Jones (The Last Jedi)
First Order captain of the Dreadnought Fulminatrix, destroyed by Paige Tico's Resistance StarFortress bomber during the attack on D'Qar in The Last Jedi.


Ransolm Casterfo
N/A
Centrist senator from Riosa who opposes, and then befriends, Princess Leia in the novel Star Wars: Bloodline.[51][52][53]


Chewbacca
Peter Mayhew (Episodes III–VIII), Joonas Suotamo (Solo: A Star Wars Story)
Voice: Peter Mayhew (The Clone Wars)
Han Solo's Wookiee partner and co-pilot of the Millennium Falcon.[54]


Chief Chirpa
Jane Busby (Return of the Jedi)
An Ewok that served as the chief of the Ewok tribe that appears in Return of the Jedi.[55]


Rush Clovis
Voice: Robin Atkin Downes (The Clone Wars)
Senator who represents the planet Scipio in the Galactic Senate, as well as a former love interest of Padmé Amidala. When the Clone Wars break out, he becomes a delegate of the InterGalactic Banking Clan. During the Battle of Scipio he sacrifices himself to save Padmé.


Commander Cody
Temuera Morrison (Revenge of the Sith)
Voice: Dee Bradley Baker (The Clone Wars)[10]
Serves directly under Obi-Wan Kenobi in Revenge of the Sith and during the Clone Wars. He helps Obi-Wan at Utapau against General Grievous, and then turns on him when Emperor Palpatine orders him to "Execute Order 66".[11]


Lieutenant Kaydel Ko Connix
Billie Lourd (The Force Awakens and The Last Jedi)[56]
Human female serving as a junior controller in the Resistance during their conflict with the First Order in The Force Awakens.[56] Actress Lourd is the daughter of Carrie Fisher (Princess Leia).[56] Though Lourd is credited as Lieutenant Connix in the film's credits, StarWars.com gives her full name as Kaydel Ko Connix.[57]


Captain Jeremoch Colton
Jeremy Bulloch (Revenge of the Sith)
Pilot of the Tantive IV in Revenge of the Sith


Cordé
Veronica Segura (Attack of the Clones)
Padmé Amidala's handmaiden and decoy in Attack of the Clones. She is killed by Zam Wessel in her attempt to assassinate Senator Amidala.


Salacious B. Crumb
Tim Rose (puppeteer) (Return of the Jedi)
Voice: Mark Dodson (Return of the Jedi)
Kowakian monkey-lizard in Jabba the Hutt's court.[58] Rose's antics controlling the Crumb puppet led to an increase in the character's prominence.[58]


Arvel Crynyd
Hilton McRae (Return of the Jedi)
A-wing pilot who crashes into the Star Dreadnought Executor, causing its fall and destruction on the surface of the Second Death Star, in Return of the Jedi.


Dr. Cylo
N/A
Cybernetically enhanced human, able to assume other clones of himself once his current form has died. First appearing in the Star Wars: Darth Vader Marvel comic book series, Cylo is presented as a rival to Darth Vader; pitting Vader against many of his Cybernetically enhanced beings, to gain favour under Emperor Palpatine.[59]


D[edit]


Name
Portrayal
Description


Commander Larma D'Acy
Amanda Lawrence (The Last Jedi)
Human female Resistance commander and advisor to Leia Organa and Amilyn Holdo in The Last Jedi.


Figrin D'an
Rick Baker (A New Hope)
Leader of the Bith band Figrin D'an and the Modal Nodes, playing in the Mos Eisley Cantina in A New Hope.[60]


Kes Dameron
N/A
Special forces soldier for the Rebel Alliance and father of Poe, featured in the 2015 Marvel Comics limited series Star Wars: Shattered Empire.[35]


Poe Dameron
Oscar Isaac (The Force Awakens and The Last Jedi)
X-wing fighter pilot introduced in The Force Awakens, called "the best pilot in the Resistance".[61][62]


Vober Dand
Derek Arnold (The Force Awakens and The Last Jedi)
Tarsunt from the planet Suntilla who serves as a logistics controller for the Resistance during the attack on Starkiller Base in The Force Awakens. He also appears at the Resistance base on D'Qar in The Last Jedi.[63]


Joclad Danva
Kyle Rowling (Attack of the Clones)
Human Jedi Knight from Attack of the Clones who uses a green lightsaber in the Battle of Geonosis, where he is killed.


Dapp
Voice: Steven Blum (Uprising)
"Happy" Dapp is a man that an unnamed smuggler and his sister Riley worked for during the Galactic Empire's Iron Blockade.


Biggs Darklighter
Garrick Hagon (A New Hope)
A friend of Luke Skywalker's from Tatooine and a Rebel Alliance X-wing pilot. As 'Rogue Three', he is a member of Red Squadron, part of the Rebel attack on the Death Star in Star Wars: A New Hope.[64] Luke and Biggs' reunion at the Rebel base on Yavin IV was originally cut from the theatrical release of the film; but was restored for the Special Edition release. Further scenes of Darklighter meeting with Luke, earlier on Tatooine, were also cut; but can be seen in The Star Wars Storybook adaptation of A New Hope, and in the 1998 Star Wars: Behind the Magic interactive CD-ROM by LucasArts.[64][65][66]


General Oro Dassyne
Voice: Terrence Carson
Separatist General and an agent of the Corporate Alliance who commands the CIS' forces on Bomis Koori IV.


Gizor Dellso

Geonosian separatist who survives Darth Vader's slaughter of the remaining separatist leaders and creates his own droid army. He has plans to make a new battle droid until Imperial stormtroopers of the 501st Legion raid his factory on Mustafar and destroy his plans. Gizor never makes it off the planet.


Dengar
Morris Bush (The Empire Strikes Back and Return of the Jedi)
Voice: Simon Pegg (The Clone Wars)
Corellian bounty hunter who appears in The Empire Strikes Back and Return of the Jedi.[67] Dengar also appears in episodes of The Clone Wars, several issues of the 2015 Star Wars Marvel comics series and in the Aftermath novels.[68][69]


Bren Derlin
John Ratzenberger (The Empire Strikes Back)
Rebel officer in The Empire Strikes Back.[70]


Ima-Gun Di
Voice: Robin Atkin Downes (The Clone Wars)
Red Nikto Jedi Master in The Clone Wars.[71]


Rinnrivin Di
N/A
Red Nikto crime lord who heads a dangerous cartel based on the planet Bastatha in Star Wars: Bloodline.[72][73]


DJ
Benicio del Toro (The Last Jedi)
Slicer who assists and then betrays Finn and Rose Tico on their mission aboard the First Order flagship Dreadnought Supremacy in The Last Jedi.


Lott Dod
Silas Carson (The Phantom Menace)
Voice: Toby Longworth (The Phantom Menace), Gideon Emery (The Clone Wars)
Neimoidian senator of the Trade Federation, representing the trade conglomerate's interests in the Galactic Senate.


Jan Dodonna
Alex McCrindle (A New Hope), Ian McElhinney (Rogue One)
Voice: Michael Bell (Rebels)
General and leader of the Rebel base on Yavin IV who plans the starfighter attack on the first Death Star in A New Hope.[74] Dondonna also appears in Rogue One, the Rebels animated series, and in several issues of Marvel's comic series Star Wars. He is also the first character to utter the phrase, "May the Force be with you".[citation needed]


Daultay Dofine
Alan Ruscoe (The Phantom Menace)
Voice: Chris Sanders (The Phantom Menace)
Commander of the Trade Federation's droid control ship in The Phantom Menace, he is killed when Anakin destroys the ship.


Clone Trooper Dogma
Voice: Dee Bradley Baker (The Clone Wars)[10]
Clone trooper devoted to the Republic in the newest generation of the recruits fighting in the Clone Wars.[75]


Count Dooku (a.k.a. Darth Tyranus)
Christopher Lee (Attack of the Clones and Revenge of the Sith)
Voice: Christopher Lee (The Clone Wars film), Corey Burton (The Clone Wars TV series)
Separatist leader and secretly the Sith Lord Darth Tyranus.[76] Dooku severs Anakin Skywalker's right forearm in Attack of the Clones, and is decapitated by Anakin in Revenge of the Sith.[76]


Dormé
Rose Byrne (Attack of the Clones)
Handmaiden to Senator Padmé Amidala.


Cin Drallig
Nick Gillard (Revenge of the Sith)
Voice: Robin Atkin Downes (The Clone Wars)
Jedi Master who serves as the battlemaster of and head of security for the Jedi Temple in the final days of the Clone Wars. He is killed by Darth Vader during the siege of the temple in Revenge of the Sith.


Garven Dreis (a.k.a. Red Leader)
Drewe Henley (A New Hope) and (Rogue One)
Leader of the Rebel Alliance's Red Squadron during the attack on the first Death Star in the Battle of Yavin in A New Hope. Unused footage of actor Drewe Henley as Garven Dreis from A New Hope was also used during the Battle of Scarif in Rogue One.


Droidbait (CT-00-2010)
Voice: Dee Bradley Baker (The Clone Wars)
Clone trooper and member of Domino squad, nicknamed because he is always getting shot by training droids. Stationed on a remote listening post on the Rishi moon, he is killed there by confederate commando droids.


Lok Durd
Voice: George Takei (The Clone Wars)
Neimoidian weapon designer who serves as a Separatist general.


E[edit]


Name
Portrayal
Description


Eirtaé
Friday "Liz" Wilson (The Phantom Menace)
Handmaiden to Padmé Amidala seen in The Phantom Menace.


Dineé Ellberger
Celia Imrie (The Phantom Menace)
Human female pilot for the Naboo Royal Space Fighter Corps, flying with Bravo Squadron during the invasion of Naboo in The Phantom Menace.[77]


Ellé
Chantal Freer (Revenge of the Sith)
Handmaiden to Padmé Amidala in Revenge of the Sith.


Caluan Ematt
Andrew Jack (The Force Awakens and The Last Jedi)
Elderly General in the Resistance, and former lieutenant in the Rebel Alliance. Ematt appears at the Resistance base during the planning of the attack on Starkiller Base, and later appears atop the trenches in the Battle of Crait. A longtime associate of Leia Organa, Ematt also appears in the 2015 novels Moving Target: A Princess Leia Adventure and Smuggler's Run: A Han Solo & Chewbacca Adventure, as well as the 2016 novel Bloodline.


Embo
Voice: Dave Filoni (The Clone Wars)
A Clone Wars-era bounty hunter that works for the highest bidder, but has a sense of honor. His weapons include a bowcaster and his hat, which he uses as a boomerang.


Emperor's Royal Guard

Elite, red-helmeted and red-cloaked stormtroopers who serve as Emperor Palpatine's personal bodyguards.


Jas Emari
N/A
Zabrak bounty hunter introduced in Star Wars: Aftermath.[78][79]


Ebe E. Endocott
Voice: Roger L. Jackson (The Phantom Menace)
Of Triffian species, Ebe is one of the eighteen podracers seen in The Phantom Menace.


Galen Erso
Mads Mikkelsen (Rogue One)[19]
Imperial research scientist and the father of Jyn Erso in Rogue One and the prequel novel Catalyst: A Rogue One Novel. As prime designer of the Death Star, Erso supplies information on a critical weakness to the Rebellion, allowing an attack on the seemingly-invulnerable battle station.


Jyn Erso
Felicity Jones (Rogue One)[19]
Voice: Felicity Jones (Forces of Destiny)
Age 8: Beau Gadsdon (Rogue One)
Age 4: Dolly Gadsdon (Rogue One)
Former criminal who aids the Rebel Alliance in stealing the plans for the Death Star in Rogue One.


Lyra Erso
Valene Kane (Rogue One)[19]
Mother of Jyn Erso in Rogue One and the prequel novel Catalyst.


EV-9D9
Voice: Richard Marquand (Return of the Jedi)
Torture droid working in Jabba the Hutt's palace in Return of the Jedi, that assigns roles for R2-D2 and C-3PO during their brief tenure under Jabba's ownership.[3]


Moralo Eval
Voice: Stephen Stanton (The Clone Wars)
Separatist Phindian who comes up with a plan to kidnap Chancellor Palpatine.


Doctor Cornelius Evazan
Alfie Curtis (A New Hope), Michael Smiley (Rogue One)
Character who antagonizes Luke Skywalker and is subsequently attacked with a lightsaber by Obi-Wan Kenobi in the Mos Eisley Cantina in A New Hope. He is a human male with a heavily scarred face, accompanied by his Aqualish associate Ponda Baba. He also claims to be a wanted man who has the death sentence on 12 systems.[80] Evazan also bumps into Jyn Erso and threatens her on the streets of Jedha in Rogue One.[81]


F[edit]


Name
Portrayal
Description


Onaconda Farr
Voice: Dee Bradley Baker (The Clone Wars)
Senator from Rodia initially aligned with the CIS, but later returned to the Republic.


Boba Fett
Jeremy Bulloch (The Empire Strikes Back and Return of the Jedi),[22] Daniel Logan (Attack of the Clones)[22]
Voice: Jason Wingreen (The Empire Strikes Back),[22] Temuera Morrison (The Empire Strikes Back [Special Edition]),[22] Daniel Logan (The Clone Wars)[22]
Bounty hunter and nemesis of Han Solo, he is a clone of Jango Fett raised by Jango on Kamino as his son.[82] He falls into the mouth of Jabba the Hutt's Sarlacc in Return of the Jedi.


Jango Fett
Temuera Morrison (Attack of the Clones)
Bounty hunter, template for all the clones who made up the Republic's army. Boba Fett's father.[83]


Feral
Voice: Dee Bradley Baker (The Clone Wars)
Brother of Savage Opress and Darth Maul, with whom Savage lived on Dathomir into adulthood. He is among the Nightbrothers selected by Asajj Ventress as a potential candidate to assassinate Count Dooku, and survives to the final round with his brother. However, after Savage is chosen and both his mind and body are changed by the Nightsisters' magic, he murders Feral on Asajj's orders.


Commander Fil
Voice: Dee Bradley Baker (The Clone Wars)
Nadar Vebb's Clone Commander who dies while trying to kill General Grievous's pet Gor.


Finn
John Boyega (The Force Awakens and The Last Jedi)
Voice: John Boyega (Forces of Destiny)
A redeemed First Order stormtrooper originally designated as FN-2187 before joining the Resistance and being dubbed "Finn" by Poe Dameron.


Kit Fisto
Zachariah Jensen and Daniel Zizmor (Attack of the Clones), Ben Cooke (Revenge of the Sith)
Voice: Phil LaMarr (The Clone Wars)
Design of Kit Fisto was first developed as a male Sith concept by concept artist Dermot Power. When the alien Sith apprentice idea was abandoned, Power revisited the tentacle-headed alien as a Jedi, with a less malevolent face, yet still with an imposing presence.[84]


Clone Trooper Fives
Voice: Dee Bradley Baker (The Clone Wars)
Former Arc Trooper and former clone trooper, he is the only survivor of the Domino Squad. He fights alongside Captain Rex in important and clone-based missions. He is the first and only known clone to have discovered Order 66, but he is then killed by Commander Fox, who was sent by Darth Sidious.[11][85]


FN-1824
Daniel Craig (The Force Awakens)
First Order stormtrooper assigned to guard Rey, who falls victim to her Jedi mind trick. He is compelled to release her and drop his weapon in The Force Awakens.[86][87]


FN-2003 (a.k.a. "Slip")
Pip Andersen (The Force Awakens)
First Order stormtrooper that served along with FN-2187 (Finn), leaving his bloody hand print on Finn's helmet during the assault on Tuanul village on Jakku in The Force Awakens. FN-2003 also appears in the 2015 novel Before the Awakening, serving under Captain Phasma, and often falling behind the rest of his team, which leads to his nickname "Slip".[88]


FN-2199 (a.k.a. "Nines")
Liang Yang (The Force Awakens)
Voice: David Acord (The Force Awakens)
Riot baton-wielding stormtrooper who attacks Finn during the attack on Maz Kanata's castle.[89]


Bib Fortuna
Michael Carter (Return of the Jedi)[22]
Voice: Erik Bauersfeld (Return of the Jedi)[22]
Male Twi'lek from the planet Ryloth who serves as Jabba the Hutt's majordomo in Return of the Jedi and The Phantom Menace. Fortuna interrogates C3-PO and R2-D2 upon their entrance into Jabba's Palace and later falls under the Jedi mind control of Luke Skywalker.[90]


Commander Fox
Voice: Dee Bradley Baker (The Clone Wars)
Clone commander who was in charge of the Coruscant Guard in Star Wars: The Clone Wars.


FX-7

Medical droid assistant to 2-1B on Hoth.[3] An FX-7 figure was produced for Kenner's Empire Strikes Back action figure line in 1980.[91]


G[edit]


Name
Portrayal
Description


GA-97
Voice: David Acord (The Force Awakens)
Servant droid at the castle of Maz Kanata, aligned with the Resistance, that informs them of the missing BB-8's presence at the castle, allowing them to mobilize their forces.


Adi Gallia
Gin Clarke (The Phantom Menace)
Voice: Angelique Perrin (The Clone Wars)
Corellian Jedi master killed by Savage Opress. Has a blue lightsaber in Star Wars: The Clone Wars, and a red or orange lightsaber in media related to The Phantom Menace.


Gardulla the Hutt
Voice: Nika Futterman (The Clone Wars)
Hutt crime lord who at one point owns Anakin and Shmi Skywalker before losing a podrace bet to Toydarian junk dealer Watto.


Yarna d'al' Gargan
Claire Davenport (Return of the Jedi)
Askajian dancer from Jabba the Hutt's palace.


Garindan (a.k.a. Long Snoot)
Sadie Eden (A New Hope)
Kubaz who leads Imperial stormtroopers to the Millennium Falcon.[92]


Gasgano

Xexto podracer who participates in the Boonta Eve Classic podrace in The Phantom Menace, coming in second place behind Anakin Skywalker.[93]


Saw Gerrera
Forest Whitaker (Rogue One),[19]
Voice: Andrew Kishino (The Clone Wars), Forest Whitaker (Rebels)
Veteran of the Clone Wars;[94] in later life he leads a band of rebel extremists against the Galactic Empire.


Gonk droid (a.k.a. GNK power droid)
Rusty Goffe, Latin Lahr, Jack Purvis, Kenny Baker, Kiran Shah, Raymond Griffiths, Arti Shah, Ivan Manzella
Voice: Ben Burtt
Boxy, rectangular-shaped droid that walks very slowly. It is literally a bipedal, walking power generator. After appearing in the Jawa's sandcrawler in the original 1977 Star Wars film,[3] a "Power Droid" figure was produced for Kenner's Star Wars action figure line in 1978.[95] A Gonk droid is also featured in the "Blood Sisters" episode of Rebels, and Rogue One.[96]


Commander Gree
Voice: Temuera Morrison (Revenge of the Sith), Dee Bradley Baker (The Clone Wars)
Clone commander who is killed by Yoda in Revenge of the Sith during the Great Jedi Purge. He serves under Jedi master Luminara Unduli in the Clone Wars.


Greedo
Paul Blake and Maria de Aragon (A New Hope),[22]
Voice: Larry Ward (A New Hope),[22] Tom Kenny (The Clone Wars)[22]
Rodian bounty hunter who serves Jabba the Hutt. Shot and killed by Han Solo at the Mos Eisley Cantina in A New Hope.[97]


Janus Greejatus

Member of the Imperial Ruling Council and one of Emperor Palpatine's advisors, he is with the Emperor on the second Death Star when it is destroyed over the forest moon of Endor in Return of the Jedi.[15]


Captain Gregor
Voice: Dee Bradley Baker (The Clone Wars and Rebels)
Republic Commando thought to have died in the Battle of Sarrish. Stricken with amnesia and living on Abafar, he is later told by Colonel Meebur Gascon that he is a clone trooper. Gregor helps the Colonel and his droids to get off Abafar to save many Republic lives, seemingly perishing once more in the process. However, following the Clone Wars he ends up in the Seelos system with fellow retired clones Rex and Wolffe, and is shown to have developed some eccentric tendencies.


General Grievous
Voice: Matthew Wood (Revenge of the Sith and The Clone Wars)
Cyborg supreme commander of the Separatist droid armies killed by Obi-Wan Kenobi in Revenge of the Sith.[98] A Kaleesh by birth, he hunts Jedi and collects their lightsabers as trophies.


Grummgar

Large Dowutin male, seen with mercenary Bazine Netal in the castle of Maz Kanata on Takodana in The Force Awakens. Grummgar's backstory as a big game hunter and mercenary is explored in the Alan Dean Foster short story "Bait", from Star Wars Insider.[99]


Gungi

Wookiee youngling who was among the youngest to pass the Gathering. Gungi uses a wooden lightsaber with a green crystal.


Nute Gunray
Silas Carson (Episodes I–III)
Voice: Tom Kenny (The Clone Wars)
Neimoidian Viceroy of the Trade Federation killed by Darth Vader in Revenge of the Sith.[100]


Mars Guo

Bardottan podracer whose large racer is sabotaged and destroyed by Sebulba in the Boonta Eve Classic podrace in The Phantom Menace.


H[edit]


Name
Portrayal
Description


Rune Haako
Jerome Blake (The Phantom Menace), Alan Ruscoe (Attack of the Clones), Sandy Thompson (Revenge of the Sith)
Voice: James Taylor (The Phantom Menace), Chris Truswell (Attack of the Clones)
Second in command to Nute Gunray and Settlement Officer of the Trade Federation.[101]


Rako Hardeen
Voice: James Arnold Taylor (The Clone Wars)
Bounty hunter hired to kill Obi-Wan Kenobi during the Clone Wars. He is eventually captured by Kenobi, who then assumes his identity in order to uncover a plot to kidnap Chancellor Palpatine.


Gideon Hask
Voice: Paul Blackthorne (Star Wars Battlefront II)
Second-in-command of Inferno Squad. Also appears in the book Star Wars Battlefront II: Inferno Squad.


Hevy
Voice: Dee Bradley Baker (The Clone Wars)[10]
Bold clone who sacrifices himself to save a base on Kamino during the Clone Wars and works with Domino Squad. His nickname is acquired by the fact that he is the one in the squad who carries the heavy guns.[11]


San Hill
Voice: Chris Truswell (Attack of the Clones)
Chairman of the Intergalactic Banking Clan, killed by Darth Vader in Revenge of the Sith.[102]


Clegg Holdfast

Nosaurian podracer and journalist who participates in the Boonta Eve Classic podrace in The Phantom Menace.[103]


Vice Admiral Amilyn Holdo
Laura Dern (The Last Jedi)
Longtime associate of Leia Organa, and Vice Admiral of Organa's Resistance against the First Order. Holdo takes command of the Resistance after General Organa is incapacitated, and orders the evacuation to the planet Crait. She then sacrifices herself, jumping to light speed in the Resistance Star Cruiser Raddus straight into the First Order Mega Star Dreadnought Supremacy, destroying the former and severely crippling the latter.


Tey How
Voice: Amanda Lucas and Marc Silk (The Phantom Menace)
Female Neimoidian that serves as both pilot and communications officer on the Trade Federation ship, Saak'ak, in The Phantom Menace. How's cybernetic facial implants became a meme upon Red Letter Media's review of The Phantom Menace, and their Mr. Plinkett character's remark of "What's wrong with you face", each time Tey How would appear on screen.[104]


Huyang
Voice: David Tennant (The Clone Wars)
Architect droid in the service of the Jedi Order. He was stationed on board the Jedi training cruiser Crucible, where he assisted Jedi initiates in constructing their lightsabers. His voice actor, David Tennant, won an Emmy Award for this role.


Armitage Hux
Domhnall Gleeson (The Force Awakens and The Last Jedi)
General of the First Order who presides over Starkiller Base under Supreme Leader Snoke in The Force Awakens. In The Last Jedi, Hux commands the fleet chasing down the Resistance, first to the irritation and then to the approval of Snoke.


Brendol Hux
N/A
Commandant of the Galactic Empire and later General in the First Order who institutes the policy of raising stormtroopers from birth, inspired by the clone troopers of the Old Republic and the Jedi. Father of General Armitage Hux. He appears in the 2017 novel Phasma.


I[edit]


Name
Portrayal
Description


IG-88

Bounty hunter introduced in The Empire Strikes Back.[3] Ralph McQuarrie's production sketches show a sleeker design than the droid that appears in The Empire Strikes Back. The term "IG-88" is not its original name: the script calls the character a "chrome war droid", and during production it was called "Phlutdroid". The production puppet consisted of recycled props from A New Hope, including the Mos Eisley Cantina drink dispenser as its head.[citation needed]


Chirrut Îmwe
Donnie Yen (Rogue One)[19]
Blind warrior who believes in the Force and is said to be one of the Guardians of the Whills. He aids the Rebel Alliance in stealing the plans for the Death Star in Rogue One.


Inquisitors (Inquisitorius)
Various
Organization of Force-sensitives who serve Emperor Palpatine and Darth Vader by hunting down surviving Jedi and others with Force potential.


Grand Inquisitor
Voice: Jason Isaacs (Rebels)
A Pau'an Force wielder and former Jedi Temple Guard who becomes the highest-ranking Inquisitor, and who is tasked (along with his subordinates) with hunting down Force-sensitive children and preventing them from becoming Jedi. He is later assigned to hunt down Kanan Jarrus and Ezra Bridger, but is eventually defeated by Kanan in combat and chooses to commit suicide rather than face the infamous wrath of Darth Vader for his failure.


Inquisitor: Fifth Brother
Voice: Philip Anthony-Rodriguez (Rebels)
The second Inquisitor introduced in Rebels and a member of an unknown humanoid species, he is dispatched to hunt down the crew of the Ghost after the death of the Grand Inquisitor. He works closely with the Seventh Sister. He is disarmed by Ahsoka Tano and then dies on Malachor at the hands of Darth Maul.


Inquisitor: Sixth Brother
N/A
An Inquisitor of an unknown species who appears only in the novel Ahsoka. He was described as tall with unnatural-looking grey skin, piercing ice-blue eyes, broad shoulders, and distinctive scar/tattoo-like markings. He attempts to hunt down and kill Ahsoka Tano, but is defeated when she causes his lightsaber to overload and explode, killing him.


Inquisitor: Seventh Sister
Voice: Sarah Michelle Gellar (Rebels)
The first introduced female Inquisitor and a Mirialan. She employs mini probe droids in battle and works alongside the Fifth Brother. She is ultimately killed by Darth Maul on Malachor.


Inquisitor: Eighth Brother
Voice: Robert Daymond Howard (Rebels)
A masked Terellian Jango Jumper Inquisitor who is dispatched to hunt down Maul, eventually tracking him to Malachor. After battling Maul, Kanan Jarrus, Ezra Bridger, and Ahsoka Tano, he falls to his death after attempting to fly with a damaged Inquisitorial lightsaber.


Sidon Ithano
Cavin Cornwall (The Force Awakens)
Delphidian pirate, with a distinctive red Kaleesh mask. In The Force Awakens, he is seen in Maz Kanata's castle when Finn tries to buy passage to the Outer Rim from Ithano and his cohort Quiggold. Ithano's backstory is expanded upon in the short story "The Crimson Corsair and the Lost Treasure of Count Dooku".[40]


J[edit]


Name
Portrayal
Description


Jabba the Hutt
Mike Edmonds, Dave Barclay, Toby Philpott, and John Coppinger (puppeteers) (Return of the Jedi),
Voice: Larry Ward (Return of the Jedi), Scott Schumann (The Phantom Menace), Kevin Michael Richardson (The Clone Wars)
Crime boss employing bounty hunters in the A New Hope Special Edition, Return of the Jedi, The Phantom Menace, and The Clone Wars, killed by Princess Leia aboard his sail barge in Return of the Jedi.[105] His full name is Jabba Desilijic Tiure.[106]


Queen Jamillia
Ayesha Dharker (Attack of the Clones)
Queen of Naboo succeeding Padmé Amidala.[107]


Wes Janson
Ian Liston (The Empire Strikes Back)
Fighter pilot and founding member of the elite Rogue Squadron, who is featured during one scene in The Empire Strikes Back as the gunner for Wedge Antilles' T-47 airspeeder.


Kanan Jarrus
Voice: Freddie Prinze Jr. (Rebels)
De facto leader of the Ghost crew, Jedi and master of Ezra Bridger and apprentice to Depa Billaba. He carries a DL-18 blaster and a blue lightsaber that can be detached. He is uncertain of himself in training his padawan Ezra Bridger, as even he still has things to learn. His real name is Caleb Dume.


Greeata Jendowanian
Celia Fushille (Return of the Jedi)
Rodian backup singer and dancer for the Max Rebo Band in the Special Edition of Return of the Jedi.


Moff Tiaan Jerjerrod
Michael Pennington (Return of the Jedi)
The commanding officer of the second Death Star and the most prominent Imperial Officer featured in Return of the Jedi, Jerjerrod is tasked by Darth Vader to hurry the completion of the second Death Star and warned that the Emperor is not as forgiving as Vader.[108]


Commander Jet
Dee Bradley Baker (The Clone Wars)
Clone Commander of Ki-Adi-Mundi in The Clone Wars in the episode "Landing at Point Rain".


Dexter Jettster
Voice: Ronald Falk (Attack of the Clones)
Multi-armed Besalisk owner of Dex's Diner and old friend of Obi-Wan Kenobi, showed wisdom of the planet Kamino and of a poison dart originating from there to Kenobi in Attack of the Clones.[109] Often cited as one of the more unpopular characters from the prequel trilogy, due to the seemingly out-of-universe 50's diner setting that he appears in.[110]


Qui-Gon Jinn
Liam Neeson (The Phantom Menace)
Voice: Liam Neeson (Attack of the Clones and The Clone Wars)
Jedi Master trained by Count Dooku who himself trains Obi-Wan Kenobi. He finds Anakin Skywalker on Tatooine and vows to train him, but is killed by Darth Maul.[111]


Jira
Margaret Towner (The Phantom Menace)
Elderly human female and friend of Anakin Skywalker in his youth on Tatooine. An additional scene of Jira saying goodbye to Anakin was filmed, but ultimately cut from The Phantom Menace.[112]


Jubnuk
Simon Williamson (Return of the Jedi)
One of Jabba the Hutt's Gamorrean guards who is eaten alive by the Rancor.


K[edit]


Name
Portrayal
Description


K-2SO
Alan Tudyk (Rogue One)[19]
Imperial security droid stolen and reprogrammed by the Alliance in Rogue One. His appearance makes him useful when infiltrating Imperial installations and outposts, but as a result of his reprogramming, he has a tendency to speak his thoughts bluntly and tactlessly.[3] He is destroyed by stormtroopers protecting Jyn Erso and Cassian Andor during the Rebel Alliance's raid on the Imperial data storage facility at Scarif.


Tee Watt Kaa
Voice: George Coe (The Clone Wars)
Lurmen elder who leads his people away from their war-torn homeworld, eventually landing on Maridun during the Clone Wars. He is extremely devoted to the traditions of his people and a strict pacifist. Kaa cares greatly for such ideals, and firmly believes the Republic is no better than the Separatists because the two are equally responsible for the war.


Agent Kallus
Voice: David Oyelowo
Imperial who is a member of the Imperial Security Bureau in Rebels.


Harter Kalonia
Harriet Walter (The Force Awakens)
Doctor for the New Republic and later the Resistance, Harter can be seen tending to the wounds of Chewbacca after the Battle of Takodana in The Force Awakens.


Maz Kanata
Lupita Nyong'o (The Force Awakens and The Last Jedi)
Voice: Lupita Nyong'o (Forces of Destiny)
Ancient female space pirate introduced in The Force Awakens. The character was created using motion capture and computer-generated imagery.


Colonel Kaplan
Pip Torrens (The Force Awakens)
Kaplan serves with the First Order on the Star Destroyer Finalizer, and is alerted to the attempted escape of prisoner Poe Dameron in The Force Awakens.


Karbin
N/A
Cybernetically enhanced Mon Calamari, given similar abilities to General Grievous, working under Dr. Cylo as a possible replacement for Darth Vader; first appearing in the Star Wars: Darth Vader Marvel comic book series.[59]


Karina the Great
Voice: Dee Bradley Baker (The Clone Wars)
Queen of Geonosis during the Clone Wars.


Alton Kastle
Voice: Steven Blum (Rebels)
A journalist and broadcaster on HoloNet News.


King Katuunko
Voice: Brian George (The Clone Wars)
Toydarian monarch who aids the Republic during the Clone Wars, he is killed by Savage Opress after the Battle of Sullust.


Coleman Kcaj

Ongree Jedi Master on the Jedi High Council in Revenge of the Sith.


Obi-Wan Kenobi
Alec Guinness (Episodes IV–VI),[22] Ewan McGregor (Episodes I–III)[22]
Voice: James Arnold Taylor (The Clone Wars and Rebels),[22] Stephen Stanton (Rebels)
Wise and skilled Jedi Master who trains Anakin and later Luke Skywalker. A member of the Jedi Council and one of the survivors of the Great Jedi Purge, Obi-Wan is also a Jedi General during the Clone Wars. He kills General Grievous and defeated Darth Maul, and his master is Qui-Gon Jinn, who is killed by Maul. Obi-Wan is slain In A New Hope by his former apprentice Anakin, who had become Darth Vader.[113] Guinness's and McGregor's voices as Obi-Wan can be heard in The Force Awakens during a vision sequence featuring the character Rey.[114]


Ki-Adi-Mundi
Silas Carson (Episodes I–III)
Voice: Brian George (The Clone Wars)
Cerean Jedi Master and Jedi Council member in the prequel trilogy.[115] He is one of the leaders of the Jedi strike force sent to rescue Obi-Wan Kenobi, Anakin Skywalker, and Padmé Amidala on Geonosis. He is killed on Mygeeto during Order 66 by Commander Bacara and his clone troopers.


Klaatu
John Simpkin (Return of the Jedi)
Green Nikto employed as one of Jabba the Hutt's skiff guards in Return of the Jedi.[116] Two action figures of Klaatu were released in Kenner's original Star Wars action figure line; one regular version and another in 'Skiff Guard' attire.[117]


Derek "Hobbie" Klivian
Richard Oldfield (The Empire Strikes Back)
Voice: Trevor Devall (Rebels)
Rogue Squadron pilot in The Empire Strikes Back.[118]


Agen Kolar
Tux Akindoyeni (Attack of the Clones and Revenge of the Sith)
Zabrak Jedi Master who wields a green lightsaber in Attack of the Clones and a blue one in Revenge of the Sith, where he is on the Jedi High Council until killed by Darth Sidious. Also appears in The Clone Wars.


Plo Koon
Alan Ruscoe (The Phantom Menace), Matt Sloan (Attack of the Clones and Revenge of the Sith)
Voice: James Arnold Taylor (The Clone Wars)
Kel Dor Jedi Master and Jedi Council member in the prequel trilogy. He discovers Togruta padawan Ahsoka Tano and participates in many battles during the Clone Wars. In Revenge of the Sith, his ship is shot down at Cato Neimoidia by his own military escort (a squadron of ARC-170 starfighters led by Captain Jag) immediately after they receive Order 66.


Eeth Koth
Hassani Shapi (The Phantom Menace) and (Attack of the Clones)
Voice: Chris Edgerly (The Clone Wars)
Zabrak Jedi Council member in The Phantom Menace and Attack of the Clones. Koth also makes several appearances in The Clone Wars series.


Sergeant Kreel
N/A
Imperial Stormtrooper in the 501st Legion; operated undercover as the "Gamemaster" on the planet Nar Shaddaa, and then as commander of the SCAR trooper squadron. First appearing in the Star Wars Marvel comic book series.[119]


Pong Krell
Voice: Dave Fennoy (The Clone Wars)
Besalisk Jedi who serves as a temporary commander of the 501st Legion at the Battle of Umbara during the Clone Wars. He hates clones and has secret aspirations to be Count Dooku's new apprentice, but is killed by Trooper Dogma after his treachery becomes known.


Orson Krennic
Ben Mendelsohn (Rogue One)[19]
Director of Advanced Weapons Research for the Imperial military in Rogue One.


Black Krrsantan
N/A
A Wookiee bounty hunter first featured in the Marvel comic series Star Wars: Darth Vader and currently featured in the ongoing Dr. Aphra series.[120]


Bo-Katan Kryze
Voice: Katee Sackhoff (The Clone Wars and Rebels)
Female Mandalorian and member of the Death Watch, second-in-command to Pre Vizsla and sister to the Death Watch's political enemy, Duchess Satine. She opposes Vizsla's alliance with Darth Maul and Savage Opress, and later leads members of the Death Watch loyal to her against those who remain loyal to Maul and his criminal allies.


Satine Kryze
Voice: Anna Graves (The Clone Wars)
Duchess of Mandalore who wants to keep the planet out of the Clone Wars. She forms and leads the Council of Neutral Systems, much to the disgust of the Mandalorian Death Watch under Pre Vizsla. The Death Watch makes multiple attempts to eliminate Satine and reclaim Mandalore, only to be thwarted by the Jedi, particularly Satine's old friend Obi-Wan Kenobi. Kenobi had previously protected Satine in her youth, and the two had become quite close, with Obi-Wan claiming that he would have left the Jedi Order had Satine asked. Satine later watched her world fall to the Shadow Collective, which includes the Death Watch, under Darth Maul, who later murders her in front of a captured Obi-Wan.


Conder Kyl
N/A
Chandrilan splicer and love interest of Sinjir Rath Velus in Aftermath: Life Debt and Aftermath: Empire's End.


Thane Kyrell
N/A
Human male graduate from the Royal Imperial Academy on Coruscant, who later joins the Rebel Alliance in the novel Star Wars: Lost Stars.[121]


L[edit]


Name
Portrayal
Description


L'ulo L'ampar
N/A
Duros pilot for the Rebel Alliance, featured in the Marvel Comics series Shattered Empire and Poe Dameron.[122]


Beru Whitesun Lars
Shelagh Fraser (A New Hope),[22] Bonnie Piesse (Attack of the Clones and Revenge of the Sith)[22]
Aunt and adoptive parent to Luke Skywalker in A New Hope, she and her husband Owen are killed by stormtroopers at their home on Tatooine. In the prequel films, Beru is Owen's girlfriend in Attack of the Clones then wife in Revenge of the Sith, and the two take custody of the infant Luke at the end of the latter film.[123]


Cliegg Lars
Jack Thompson (Attack of the Clones)
Moisture farmer who purchases, then frees and marries Shmi Skywalker, becoming the stepfather of Anakin Skywalker, whom he meets only briefly in Attack of the Clones.[124] He loses his leg when pursuing the Sand People who had kidnapped Shmi.[124] The name Cliegg, and variations of it, have been in Star Wars drafts since 1974.[124]


Owen Lars
Phil Brown (A New Hope),[22] Joel Edgerton (Attack of the Clones and Revenge of the Sith)[22]
Uncle and adoptive parent of Luke Skywalker in A New Hope, Owen and his wife, Beru, are killed by stormtroopers at their home on Tatooine. In the prequel films, Owen is the son of Cliegg Lars and stepbrother of Anakin Skywalker. He and his wife Beru take custody of Luke at the end of Revenge of the Sith.[125]


Cut Lawquane
Voice: Dee Bradley Baker (The Clone Wars)[10]
Disillusioned clone trooper who deserts the service to live a quiet life as a farmer. He has a wife Suu and children, Jek and Shaeeah, but cannot quite escape the Clone Wars.[11][126]


Tasu Leech
Yayan Ruhian (The Force Awakens)
The leader of the Kanjiklub. In The Force Awakens, Leech confronts Han Solo aboard his freighter the Eravana, in conjunction with Bala-Tik from the Guavian Death Gang, after both gangs are swindled by Solo.


Xamuel Lennox
John Dicks (The Empire Strikes Back)
Imperial navy captain who serves in Darth Vader's Death Squadron as captain of the Star Destroyer Tyrant.


Tallissan Lintra
Hermione Corfield (The Last Jedi)
Resistance A-wing pilot and leader of Blue Squadron during the Evacuation of D'Qar in The Last Jedi.


Slowen Lo
Joseph Gordon-Levitt (The Last Jedi)
Male Abednedo residing in Canto Bight in The Last Jedi. Lo warns Rose Tico and Finn that they had illegally parked their ship on Canto Bight beach, and informs the Canto Bight Police of their indiscretion.


Lobot
John Hollis (The Empire Strikes Back)
Lando Calrissian's cyborg aide in The Empire Strikes Back.[127]


Logray
Mike Edmonds (Return of the Jedi)
Ewok medicine man in Return of the Jedi.[55]


Lumat

Ewok in Return of the Jedi, released as an action figure in the original Kenner Star Wars line. Lumat also appears in several, now non-canon, Ewoks cartoon episodes and related media.[128]


M[edit]


Name
Portrayal
Description


General Crix Madine
Dermot Crowley (Return of the Jedi)
Mastermind of the Rebel plan to destroy the shield generator for the second Death Star.[129]


Shu Mai
Voice: Chris Truswell (Attack of the Clones)
President of the Commerce Guild and member of the Separatist Council. She is killed by Darth Vader on Mustafar along with the rest of the Separatist Council in Revenge of the Sith.


Malakili ("Rancor Keeper")
Paul Brooke (Return of the Jedi)
Rancor keeper at Jabba the Hutt's palace on Tattooine in Return of the Jedi. He also appears in the novels Aftermath: Life Debt and Aftermath: Empire's End. Malakili was originally dubbed "Rancor Keeper" in Kenner's Star Wars action figure line in 1984.[130]


Baze Malbus
Jiang Wen (Rogue One)[131]
A mercenary and friend of Chirrut Îmwe who aids the Rebel Alliance in stealing the plans for the Death Star in Rogue One.


Mama the Hutt
Voice: Angelique Perrin (The Clone Wars)
Mother of Ziro, Zorba, Ebor, Pazda, and Jiliac, the grandmother of Jabba the Hutt, and great-grandmother of Rotta the Huttlet. She is confronted by Obi-Wan Kenobi when her starship is taken by Ziro and his girlfriend Sy Snootles.


Ody Mandrell
Voice: Matthew Wood (The Phantom Menace)
Er'Kit podracer who participates in the Boonta Eve Classic podrace in The Phantom Menace.


Darth Maul
Ray Park (The Phantom Menace)
Voice: Peter Serafinowicz (The Phantom Menace), Sam Witwer (The Clone Wars and Rebels)
Mother Talzin's son and the apprentice of Darth Sidious in The Phantom Menace who kills Qui-Gon Jinn but is defeated by Obi-Wan Kenobi. He later returns during the Clone Wars with his brother, Savage Opress, to get revenge on Obi-Wan. After losing to a duel with his former master, Darth Sidious (and seeing his brother get killed), Maul is captured, and although he escapes, he soon witnesses the collapse of his group, the Shadow Collective, and the death of his mother. Forced to flee, he is left in exile on the planet Malachor for many years, until he meets the young Jedi, Ezra Bridger, whom he attempts to drift to the dark side. Although he fails, Maul is able to escape aboard a TIE fighter;[132] he later returns in the third season looking to locate the long absent Obi-Wan Kenobi. He is finally killed by his old enemy on Tatooine in the episode "Twin Suns".


Saelt-Marae ("Yak Face")
Sean Crawford (Return of the Jedi)
A Yarkora seen in the background at Jabba's the Hutt's palace in the film Return of the Jedi.[133] Known as "Yak Face" this character was the final action figure created for Kenner's original Star Wars action figure line, and was never released in the United States.[134]


Mawhonic

Gran podracer at the Boonta Eve Classic in The Phantom Menace.


Droopy McCool
Deep Roy (Return of the Jedi)
Flute playing Kitonak member of the Max Rebo Band, seen in Jabba's Palace in Return of the Jedi.[135]


Pharl McQuarrie
Ralph McQuarrie (The Empire Strikes Back)
Alliance general that appears in The Empire Strikes Back.


ME-8D9

An "ancient protocol droid of unknown manufacture" that resides and works as a translator at Maz Kanata's castle on Takodana in The Force Awakens (2015).[136]


Lyn Me
Dalyn Chew (Return of the Jedi)
Twi'lek backup singer and dancer for the Max Rebo Band in the Special Edition of Return of the Jedi.


Tion Medon
Bruce Spence (Revenge of the Sith)
Local administrator on Utapau in Revenge of the Sith.[137]


Del Meeko
Voice: TJ Ramini (Star Wars Battlefront II)
A member of Inferno Squad. Also appears in the book Star Wars Battlefront II: Inferno Squad.


Aks Moe
Mark Coulier (The Phantom Menace)
Voice: Marc Silk (The Phantom Menace)
Gran serving in the Galactic Senate in The Phantom Menace. Aks Moe supports an investigation into the Trade Federation's invasion of Naboo, as claimed by Queen Amidala.


Sly Moore
Sandi Findlay (Attack of the Clones and Revenge of the Sith)
One of Palpatine's personal aides.[138]


Morley
Voice: Ben Diskin (The Clone Wars)
Snake-like Anacondan that helps Darth Maul survive on the junk world of Lotho Minor. He leads Savage Opress to his long lost brother.


Moff Delian Mors
N/A
Imperial officer introduced in Star Wars: Lords of the Sith.[139] She is a lesbian whom New York Daily News noted is the first openly gay character in the new Star Wars canon.[139][140][141]


Mon Mothma
Caroline Blakiston (Return of the Jedi),[22] Genevieve O'Reilly (Revenge of the Sith and Rogue One)[131]
Voice: Kath Soucie (The Clone Wars),[22] Genevieve O'Reilly (Rebels)[142]
Republic senator; later, co-founder and leader of the Rebel Alliance.[143] Later serves as Chancellor of the New Republic and is a major influence in relocating the galactic capital from Coruscant to Hosnian Prime following the defeat of the Empire.[144]


Admiral Conan Antonio Motti
Richard LeParmentier (A New Hope)[145]
Officer aboard the Death Star so overconfident in its power that he scoffs at Darth Vader's faith in the Force, and is then almost choked to death by Vader.[146]


N[edit]


Name
Portrayal
Description


Jobal Naberrie
Trisha Noble (Attack of the Clones and Revenge of the Sith)
Padmé Amidala's mother.


Pooja Naberrie
Hayley Mooy (Attack of the Clones and Revenge of the Sith)
Daughter of Sola Naberrie and niece of Padmé Amidala. She replaces Jar Jar Binks as Senator of the Chommell Sector.


Ruwee Naberrie
Graeme Blundell (Attack of the Clones and Revenge of the Sith)
Padmé Amidala's father.


Ryoo Naberrie
Keira Wingate (Attack of the Clones and Revenge of the Sith)
Padmé Amidala's niece, the daughter of Sola Naberrie and Pooja's older sister.


Sola Naberrie
Claudia Karvan (Attack of the Clones and Revenge of the Sith)
Padmé Amidala's older sister, the mother of Ryoo and Pooja Naberrie.


Momaw Nadon ("Hammerhead")
Jon Berg and Phil Tippett (puppeteers) (A New Hope)
Ithorian seen in the Mos Eisley cantina in A New Hope.[147] Named "Hammerhead" during the Kenner action figure runs of the 1970s and 1980s.[148]


Boss Rugor Nass
Voice: Brian Blessed (The Phantom Menace)
Gungan leader in The Phantom Menace who attends Padmé Amidala's funeral in Revenge of the Sith.[149]


Captain Lorth Needa
Michael Culver (The Empire Strikes Back)
Captain of the Star Destroyer Avenger, killed by Darth Vader for failing to capture the Millennium Falcon in The Empire Strikes Back.[150]


Queen Neeyutnee
Voice: Jameelah McMillan (The Clone Wars)
Ruler of Naboo during the Clone Wars, succeeding Queen Jamillia.


Bazine Netal
Anna Brewster (The Force Awakens)[151]
Bounty hunter and First Order spy who reports the arrival of Han Solo at Maz Kanata's castle in The Force Awakens.[152] The character is also the focus of the 2015 short story "Star Wars: The Perfect Weapon" by Delilah S. Dawson.[153]


Niima the Hutt
N/A
First appearing in Star Wars: Aftermath: Empire's End (2017), Niima is a Hutt crime lord based on the desert planet Jakku who controls her people by controlling their resources.[154] The Star Wars: The Force Awakens: The Visual Dictionary (2015 and Star Wars: Rey's Survival Guide (2016) note that the Niima Outpost on Jakku is named after her.


Jocasta Nu
Alethea McGrath (Attack of the Clones)
Voice: Flo DiRe (The Clone Wars)
Jedi librarian killed by Darth Vader during Order 66.


Po Nudo
Paul James Nicholson (Revenge of the Sith)
Aqualish Senator who became a member of the Separatist Council, representing the Hyper-Communications Cartel. He is killed along with the rest of the Separatist Council by Darth Vader on Mustafar in Revenge of the Sith.


Nien Nunb
Richard Bonehill and Mike Quinn (puppeteer) (Return of the Jedi, The Force Awakens and The Last Jedi)
Voice: Kipsang Rotich (Return of the Jedi and The Force Awakens)
Sullustan smuggler and Lando Calrissian's co-pilot on the Millennium Falcon during the Battle of Endor against the second Death Star in Return of the Jedi.[155] He returns in The Force Awakens as a member of Poe Dameron's X-wing Squadron. Nunb also appears with the Resistance in The Last Jedi, surviving the siege of D'Qar and escaping on the Millennium Falcon after the Battle of Crait.


O[edit]


Name
Portrayal
Description


Has Obbit
N/A
Dressellian smuggler in various associations with Galen and Lyra Erso, Orson Krennic and Moff Tarkin in Catalyst: A Rogue One Novel. Jyn Erso later names her toy doll "Lucky Hazz Obloobitt" after Has.[156][157]


Barriss Offee
Nalini Krishan (Attack of the Clones)
Voice: Meredith Salenger (The Clone Wars)
Jedi apprentice of Luminara Unduli and a close friend of Ahsoka Tano. She later betrays Ahsoka and orchestrates a terrorist bombing after she becomes disillusioned with the Jedi Order's wartime policies. Offee is eventually caught and imprisoned.[158]


Hondo Ohnaka
Voice: Jim Cummings (The Clone Wars and Rebels)
Weequay leader of the space pirates known as the Osaka Gang who kidnaps and attempts to ransom Obi-Wan Kenobi, Anakin Skywalker, Count Dooku and later Ahsoka Tano to the highest bidder during the Clone Wars. He follows a code of honor and respects the Jedi, but is not above using sneaky tactics and treachery if it is for "good business". Years after the Clone Wars, despite losing his crew to the Galactic Empire, Hondo continues his criminal activities while having dealings with the Rebellion crew of the Ghost.[159]


Ric Olié
Ralph Brown (The Phantom Menace)
Pilots the queen's ship while escaping Naboo and an N-1 starfighter as leader of Bravo Squadron in The Phantom Menace.[160]


Omi
N/A
The Dianoga in one of the Death Star's garbage mashers in A New Hope; also referred to as the "trash monster" by fans.[161][162] The short story "The Baptist" in the anthology From a Certain Point of View reveals that Dianogas are sentient cephalopods, with Omi in particular being Force sensitive.[163]


Ketsu Onyo
Voice: Gina Torres (Rebels and Forces of Destiny)
Mandalorian bounty hunter and former estranged friend of Sabine Wren. After she and Sabine reconcile, Ketsu aids the Rebel Alliance.


Oola
Femi Taylor (Return of the Jedi)
Young Twi'lek dancer enslaved by Jabba the Hutt and chained to his throne, she is killed by Jabba's Rancor.[164]


OOM-9

Command battle droid that lead the Trade Federation's droid army during the invasion of Naboo in The Phantom Menace.


Savage Opress
Voice: Clancy Brown (The Clone Wars)
Zabrak warrior of the Nightbrother clan on the planet Dathomir. He is hand picked by Asajj Ventress as part of her scheme to kill Count Dooku for the attempt on her life and is altered by the Nightsisters, becoming more of a berserker on Ventress' call to the point of killing Feral without remorse, Opress manages to become Dooku's new apprentice and learns only a bit in the ways of the Sith before Ventress has him help her fight Dooku, due to his actions under him getting unwanted attention from the Jedi. However, in the heat of the moment and provoked by both of them, Opress tries to kill both Dooku and Ventress before escaping the Jedi and instructed by Mother Talzin to find Maul so he can complete his training to defend himself against the numerous enemies he has made. Finding Maul a shell of his former self on a junk planet, Opress manages to stir up his fellow nightbrother's grudge with Obi-Wan to aid him in his revenge against the Jedi. Later killed by Darth Sidious on Mandalore.


Bail Prestor Organa
Jimmy Smits (Attack of the Clones, Revenge of the Sith and Rogue One)[131]
Voice: Phil LaMarr (The Clone Wars and Rebels)
Leia Organa's father, the Senator of Alderaan and one of the Rebel Alliance's founding members. He is killed in the destruction of Alderaan.[165] Adrian Dunbar portrayed Organa in scenes cut from The Phantom Menace.[165]


Queen Breha Organa
Rebecca Jackson Mendoza (Revenge of the Sith)
Ruler of Alderaan, wife of Bail Organa, and mother of Leia Organa. She is killed in the destruction of Alderaan. Breha is also featured in the short story "Eclipse" and in the 2017 novel Leia, Princess of Alderaan.[166][167]


Leia Organa
Carrie Fisher (Episodes IV–VIII), Aidan Barton (Revenge of the Sith), Ingvild Deila (Rogue One)
Voice: Julie Dolan (Rebels), Shelby Young (Forces of Destiny)
Leader in the Rebel Alliance, the New Republic, and the Resistance. She is the biological daughter of Anakin Skywalker and Padmé Amidala, as well as Luke Skywalker's twin sister, Han Solo's wife and Kylo Ren's mother.[168]


Garazeb "Zeb" Orrelios
Voice: Steven Blum (Rebels)
Lasat honor guard who rises up against the Empire and is the muscle of the Ghost crew on Star Wars Rebels.


Orrimaarko ("Prune Face")
Colin Hunt
Dressellian member of the Rebel Alliance. He appears in Return of the Jedi attending the meeting on board the Home One star cruiser, just prior to the Battle of Endor. He is also seen boarding the stolen Imperial shuttle Tydirium en route to the Moon of Endor, where he later participates in the Ewok village celebration after the destruction of the second Death Star. Orrimaarko was originally dubbed "Prune Face" in Kenner's Star Wars action figure line in 1984.[169] "Prune Face" was also featured in a stop-motion sketch comedy segment on the Robot Chicken: Star Wars Episode III special in 2010.


Admiral Kendal Ozzel
Michael Sheard (The Empire Strikes Back)
Initial commander of Darth Vader's Super Star Destroyer Executor in The Empire Strikes Back.[170] Vader kills Ozzel for his incompetence. George Lucas remarked that Sheard produced "the best screen death" he had ever seen.[171]


Odd Ball
Voice: Dee Bradley Baker (The Clone Wars)
Odd Ball is a clone trooper commander and pilot during the Clone Wars who participates in campaigns such as the Battle of Teth, the Battle of Umbara, the Battle of Coruscant, and the Battle of Utapau. A skilled pilot, Odd Ball flies an assortment of starfighters, including the V-19 Torrent and the ARC-170. During the Clone Wars, Odd Ball sometimes serves under the command of Jedi General Obi-Wan Kenobi.


P[edit]


Name
Portrayal
Description


Pablo-Jill
Unknown (Attack of the Clones)
Ongree Jedi Knight from Attack of the Clones, present at the Battle of Geonosis, where he wields a blue lightsaber.[172]


Teemto Pagalies

Veknoid podracer competing in the Boonta Eve Classic podrace in The Phantom Menace, whose podracer is shot down by Tusken Raiders.[173]


Jessika "Jess" Testor Pava
Jessica Henwick (The Force Awakens)
A Resistance X-wing pilot introduced in The Force Awakens. She is shown to idolize Luke Skywalker in the spin-off novel The Weapon of a Jedi: A Luke Skywalker Adventure.[174][175] The character also appears in the comic series Star Wars: Poe Dameron.[122]


Palpatine (a.k.a. Darth Sidious)
Ian McDiarmid (Episodes I–III, V–VI)[22]
Voice: Clive Revill (The Empire Strikes Back),[22] Ian Abercrombie and Tim Curry (The Clone Wars),[22] Sam Witwer (Rebels)
Naboo senator and later Supreme Chancellor of the Republic, later revealed to be Darth Sidious, a Dark Lord of the Sith. His machinations turn the Galactic Republic into the Galactic Empire, with himself as its emperor. He lures Anakin Skywalker to the dark side of the Force and renames him Darth Vader. He is eventually killed by a redeemed Anakin.[176]


Captain Panaka
Hugh Quarshie (The Phantom Menace)
Captain of the Queen Amidala's guard in The Phantom Menace.[177]


Casca Panzoro
N/A
Senior member of Bravo Rising group fighting the First Order on Atterra Bravo. Grandmother of Reeve Panzoro, she befriends Leia Organa in an attempt to foster Resistance support to her cause in the 2017 novel Star Wars: The Last Jedi: Cobalt Squadron.[178]


Reeve Panzoro
N/A
Youthful member of Bravo Rising Resistance group holding out on the planet Atterra Bravo against the First Order. Reeve assists Paige and Rose Tico on their first mission to the Atterra system in the 2017 novel Star Wars The Last Jedi: Cobalt Squadron.[178]


Baron Papanoida
George Lucas (Revenge of the Sith)
Voice: Corey Burton (The Clone Wars)
Pantoran Senator and Chairman of the Pantoran Assembly.


Che Amanwe Papanoida
Meredith Salenger (The Clone Wars)
One of Baron Papaoida's two daughters who serves as a representative for her home world of Pantora. She and her sister, Chi, are kidnapped by the Trade Federation following a trade blockade of Pantora.


Chi Eekway Papanoida
Katie Lucas (Revenge of the Sith)
Voice: Nika Futterman (The Clone Wars)
Daughter of Baron Papanoida who represents the planet Wroona in the Galactic Senate. She appears in scenes deleted from Revenge of the Sith as one of the senators of the Delegation of 2000.


Paploo
Kenny Baker (Return of the Jedi)
One of the more visible Ewoks in Return of the Jedi, who steals a speeder bike from the Imperial scout troopers to distract them from the Rebel mission on Endor.[55]


Captain Phasma
Gwendoline Christie (The Force Awakens and The Last Jedi)
Officer who commands the First Order's legions of stormtroopers in The Force Awakens.


Even Piell
Michaela Cottrel (The Phantom Menace)
Voice: Bair Bless (The Clone Wars)
Lannik Jedi Master and Jedi Council member in The Phantom Menace, Attack of the Clones, and The Clone Wars.[179]


Admiral Firmus Piett
Kenneth Colley (The Empire Strikes Back and Return of the Jedi)
Imperial officer, initially a captain, who is promoted to replace Admiral Ozzel as commanding officer of the Super Star Destroyer, Executor, after Vader executes Ozzel for incompetence. As the only Imperial officer to appear in more than one original trilogy film, Piett also appears in Return of the Jedi meeting his demise, when the Executor crashes into the Death Star during the Battle of Endor.[180]


Darth Plagueis
N/A
Sith Lord mentioned in Revenge of the Sith who was obsessed with finding the key to immortality. Palpatine tells Anakin Skywalker that Darth Plagueis became so powerful that he was able to create life by influencing the midi-chlorians, and had the power to save people from dying. Plagueis was killed in his sleep by his apprentice: Palpatine himself.[181]


Sarco Plank

Melitto scavenger, arms dealer, and bounty hunter seen at Niima Outpost on Jakku in The Force Awakens. Plank's backstory is significantly expanded upon in the 2015 junior novel The Weapon of a Jedi: A Luke Skywalker Adventure, in which Plank leads a young Luke Skywalker to the Temple of Eedit, and betrays him.[182]


Unkar Plutt
Simon Pegg (The Force Awakens)
Crolute junkboss on the planet Jakku who pays out portions of food in exchange for pieces of salvage. He attempts to bargain the droid BB-8 from Rey and then tries to steal it when she refuses, but Rey ends up fleeing the planet by stealing the Millennium Falcon from him.[3]


Poggle the Lesser
Voice: Marton Csokas (Attack of the Clones), Matthew Wood (The Clone Wars)
Archduke of Geonosis, part of the Techno Union and one of the Separatist leaders killed by Darth Vader on Mustafar in Revenge of the Sith.[183] Poggle also assists in the early planning and construction of the first Death Star, as revealed in Catalyst: A Rogue One Novel.[184]


Yarael Poof
Michelle Taylor (The Phantom Menace)
Long-necked Quermian Jedi Master on the Jedi High Council in The Phantom Menace.[185]


Jek Tono Porkins
William Hootkins (A New Hope)
Portly X-wing pilot codenamed "Red Six" who is killed in A New Hope in the attack on the first Death Star. Porkins has gained some comedic notoriety due to his size, manner and untimely death, which was spoofed in the Family Guy episode Blue Harvest.[186]


Nahdonnis Praji
George Roubicek (A New Hope)
Imperial Navy officer who serves as Darth Vader's aide aboard the Star Destroyer Devastator in A New Hope. He reports to Vader regarding the status of the stolen Death Star plans.


Governor Arihnda Pryce
Mary Elizabeth McGlynn (Rebels)
Imperial Governor of Lothal who appears in Rebels. Her backstory is explored in the novel Star Wars: Thrawn.


PZ-4CO
N/A
Droid introduced in the 2015 young adult novel Moving Target: A Princess Leia Adventure by Cecil Castellucci and Jason Fry to whom Leia Organa dictates her memoirs.[187][188] PZ-4CO also appears in The Force Awakens.[189]


Q[edit]


Name
Portrayal
Description


Ben Quadinaros

One of the pod-racers in The Phantom Menace. He and Anakin Skywalker's pod-racers are the only ones that do not take off. Ben's pod explodes after having trouble with its power couplings.[190]


Quarrie
Corey Burton (Rebels)
Mon Calamari starship engineer who created the Blade Wing, a prototype of the B-wing fighter. Living in isolation on Shantipole, he is later brought into the Rebel Alliance by Hera Syndulla to oversee development of more B-wings.[191]


Quiggold
Scott Richardson
Voice: Chris Clarke (The Force Awakens)
Gabdorian pirate seen in The Force Awakens in Maz Kanata's castle when Finn tries to buy passage to the Outer Rim from Quiggold and his captain Sidon Ithano. Quiggold is also featured in the short story "The Crimson Corsair and the Lost Treasure of Count Dooku".[40]


R[edit]


Name
Portrayal
Description


R2-D2
Kenny Baker (Episodes I–VI, Episodes VII–VIII; consultant)
Jimmy Vee (The Force Awakens and Rogue One; uncredited, The Last Jedi)
Astromech droid built on Naboo that appears in all eight Star Wars films and in Rogue One: A Star Wars Story.[3]


R2-KT

Pink R2 astromech droid (identical to a R2-D2 but with pink accents instead of blue) that first appears in The Clone Wars and then briefly in scenes at the Resistance base in The Force Awakens. The droid is also a playable character in the video game Lego Star Wars: The Force Awakens. R2-KT was named in honor of seven year old Star Wars fan and cancer patient Katie Johnston.[192]


R3-S6

Replacement astromech droid for Anakin when R2 is lost in The Clone Wars. He is later working as a spy for General Grievous, and subsequently destroyed by R2-D2 himself.


R4-P17

Nicknamed "Arfour", this astromech droid accompanies Obi-Wan Kenobi on his mission to Kamino in Attack of the Clones, and is assigned to Kenobi throughout much of the Clone Wars (appearing in several episodes of The Clone Wars series). R4 is decapitated by Buzz Droids in Revenge of the Sith, and is replaced by R4-G9.


R5-D4

Astromech droid originally sold to Owen Lars on Tatooine in A New Hope which immediately malfunctions and is replaced by R2-D2.[3][193] This droid also received an action figure release during the second wave of Kenner's original Star Wars action figure line.


RA-7 ("Death Star droid")

Originally appearing in the 1977 film Star Wars, these protocol droids are primarily used by Imperial officers as servants. They are also known as "Insect droids" or '"Death Star droids", due to the large numbers used aboard the Death Star. An RA-7 droid dubbed "Death Star Droid", was produced for Kenner's Star Wars action figure line in 1978.[194] The RA-7 type droid named AP-5[24] has a recurring role in Star Wars Rebels, assisting Hera Syndulla's Phoenix Squadron.


Rabé
Cristina da Silva (The Phantom Menace)
Handmaiden to Queen Amidala seen in The Phantom Menace.


Admiral Raddus
Paul Kasey (Rogue One)
Green-skinned Mon Calamari Admiral of the Rebel Alliance that perishes during the Battle of Scarif in Rogue One. He serves as the namesake of the Resistance heavy cruiser known as the Raddus in The Last Jedi.


Dak Ralter
John Morton (The Empire Strikes Back)
Luke Skywalker's snowspeeder gunner in The Empire Strikes Back. Ralter dies in the ensuing Battle of Hoth when their snowspeeder is damaged by an Imperial Walker. Dak also makes an appearance conversing before the aforementioned battle with Thane Tyrell, in the novel Lost Stars.[195][196]


Oppo Rancisis
Jerome Blake (The Phantom Menace)
Thisspiasian Jedi Master and Jedi Council member in the prequel trilogy, master of Battle Meditation.[197]


Admiral Dodd Rancit
N/A
Admiral and traitor to the Galactic Empire; rival of Moff Tarkin in the 2014 novel Tarkin.[198]


Rappertunie

Shawda Ubb Growdi player for the Max Rebo Band in the Special Edition of Return of the Jedi.


Sinjir Rath Velus
N/A
Imperial turncoat introduced in Aftermath. Anthony Breznican of Entertainment Weekly called him "the first major gay hero" in the franchise.[141]


Gallius Rax
(a.k.a. "The Operator")
N/A
Mysterious First Order admiral and manipulator from the Aftermath novel trilogy.[199]


Eneb Ray
N/A
Spy for the Rebel Alliance who went rogue after being physically and mentally disfigured; later attacking Sunspot Prison in a plot against Leia Organa. First introduced in Marvel Comics' Star Wars Annual#1.[200]


Max Rebo
Simon Williamson (Return of the Jedi)
Ortolan keyboard player and leader of the Max Rebo Band in Return of the Jedi.[201]


Ciena Ree
N/A
Human female Imperial Officer, associate of Thane Kyrell, who in the novel Star Wars: Lost Stars commands the Star Destroyer Inflictor, purposefully crashing it during the Battle of Jakku.[196]


Ree-Yees
Mike Quinn and Richard Bonehill (Return of the Jedi)
Three-eyed alien, known as a Gran, prominently seen in the background cheering at Jabba the Hutt's palace in Return of the Jedi.[202]


Kylo Ren
Adam Driver (The Force Awakens and The Last Jedi)
Alter-ego of Ben Solo after his fall to the dark side. He is a leader in the First Order and a Master of the Knights of Ren.


Captain Rex
Voice: Dee Bradley Baker (The Clone Wars and Rebels)[10]
Anakin Skywalker's second-in-command and captain of 501st in The Clone Wars;[11] as a retired clone trooper he joins the Rebellion in Star Wars Rebels.


Rey
Daisy Ridley (The Force Awakens and The Last Jedi)
Voice: Daisy Ridley (Forces of Destiny)
Scavenger who lives on the desert planet Jakku. She and Finn seek to return BB-8 to the Resistance, but she is captured by Kylo Ren. His interrogation unlocks her ability to use the Force.


General Carlist Rieekan
Bruce Boa (The Empire Strikes Back)
Rebel commanding officer on Hoth in The Empire Strikes Back.[203]


Riley
Voice: Catherine Taber (Uprising)
Riley is the sister of an unnamed smuggler. They both worked for "Happy" Dapp during the Galactic Empire's Iron Blockade.


Rogue Squadron
Various
Rebel Alliance and New Republic starfighter pilots featured in the original trilogy.


Romba
Mike Cottrell (Return of the Jedi)
Ewok in Return of the Jedi seen mourning over the death of his fellow Ewok during the Battle of Endor; he was released in action figure form during Kenner's final Power of the Force line in 1985.[204]


Bodhi Rook
Riz Ahmed (Rogue One)[19]
Imperial cargo pilot who, encouraged by Galen Erso, defects to the Rebel Alliance and helps steal the plans to the Death Star in Rogue One.


Pagetti Rook ("Weequay")
Julius LeFlore (Return of the Jedi)
Weequay guard on Jabba the Hutt's skiff that held a vibro-axe to the back of Luke Skywalker as he stood on the plank above the Sarlacc Pit in Return of the Jedi.[205] Called "Weequay" during the original Kenner action figure line in the 1980s, the name would eventually become the name of the character's species as a whole.[206]


Rotta the Hutt
Voice: David Acord (The Clone Wars)
Jabba the Hutt's son, kidnapped by Count Dooku in The Clone Wars animated film.


Rukh
Voice: Warwick Davis
A Noghri, introduced in the fourth season of Rebels, who serves Grand Admiral Thrawn.[207] The character originally appeared in the Star Wars Legends series the Thrawn trilogy, in which he assassinates Thrawn.


S[edit]


Name
Portrayal
Description


Sabé
Keira Knightley (The Phantom Menace)
One of Padmé Amidala's handmaidens in The Phantom Menace. Sabé is the queen's decoy; for parts of the movie, the Sabé character is addressed as Amidala.[208] Knightley was cast as Sabé due to her striking resemblance to Natalie Portman, who portrayed Amidala.


Saché
Sofia Coppola (The Phantom Menace)
One of the youngest of the five handmaidens of Queen Padmé Amidala of Naboo in The Phantom Menace.[209]


Sarkli
Voice: Robin Atkin Downes
Former Rebel pilot who defects to the Empire, where he serves on the second Death Star and participates in the Battle of Endor.


Admiral U.O. Satura
Ken Leung (The Force Awakens)
Resistance Admiral that helps plan the assault on Starkiller Base, correctly suggesting that they cripple its thermal oscillator. Satura also appears in the Poe Dameron comic.


Joph Seastriker
N/A
Associate of Leia Organa and Resistance pilot in the novel Star Wars: Bloodline.[210]


Queen Miraj Scintel
Voice: Rajia Baroudi (The Clone Wars)
Queen of Zygerria and member of the Separatist Council. She captures Anakin, Obi-Wan, and Ahsoka and attempts to auction them off as slaves; however, they are rescued by clone troopers, and Miraj is Force-choked to death by Count Dooku for her failure.


Admiral Terrinald Screed
N/A
Imperial admiral with a cybernetic eye from the 2014 novel Tarkin and the 2016 novel Aftermath: Life Debt.[198] Screed had a more prominent role in the non-canon Legends continuity, first created for the 1985 Droids animated series.[211]


Sebulba
Voice: Lewis MacLeod (The Phantom Menace)
Podracer who competes against Anakin Skywalker in The Phantom Menace. Once a slave, Sebulba's podracing skills bought his freedom.[212]


Aayla Secura
Amy Allen (Attack of the Clones and Revenge of the Sith)[213]
Voice: Jennifer Hale (The Clone Wars)[214]
Twi'lek Jedi who appears in Attack of the Clones, Revenge of the Sith, and The Clone Wars.[215][216]


Korr Sella
Maisie Richardson-Sellers (The Force Awakens)[217]
Human female military officer who serves under the command of General Leia Organa in The Force Awakens. She is sent to Hosnian Prime with a message for the Senate, and is present when the planet is destroyed by the First Order's superweapon, Starkiller Base. The character appears briefly in the completed film but has an increased role in the novelization.[217][218] Korr's earlier time in Leia's service is touched upon in the novel Star Wars: Bloodline.[51][52][53]


Zev Senesca
Christopher Malcolm (The Empire Strikes Back)
Member of the Rebel Alliance and Rogue Squadron pilot in The Empire Strikes Back; designated as "Rogue Two", Senesca pilots a snowspeeder and dies during the Battle of Hoth in combat against the Imperial AT-AT walkers.[219] He is also the pilot who locates Han Solo and Luke Skywalker, who are stranded in the snow away from the Rebel base on Hoth.


Echuu Shen-Jon

Former Padawan to Mace Windu who serves as a Jedi General during the Clone Wars. He goes into hiding after Order 66 is given, and re-emerges during the Galactic Civil War to fight for the Rebel Alliance.


Sifo-Dyas
Voice: Paul Nakauchi (The Clone Wars)
Jedi master who is impersonated by Count Dooku to order the creation of the clone trooper army in the prequel trilogy.


Aurra Sing
Michonne Bourriague (The Phantom Menace)
Voice: Jaime King (The Clone Wars)
Bounty hunter in The Phantom Menace and The Clone Wars.[220]


Anakin Skywalker
(Darth Vader)
Anakin:
Jake Lloyd (The Phantom Menace),[22] Hayden Christensen (Attack of the Clones, Revenge of the Sith, and Return of the Jedi [Special Edition]),[22]
Voice: Matt Lanter (The Clone Wars, Rebels and Forces of Destiny)[22]
Darth Vader:
David Prowse (Episodes IV–VI),[22] Sebastian Shaw (Return of the Jedi),[22] Spencer Wilding and Daniel Naprous (Rogue One)
Voice: James Earl Jones (Episodes III–VI, Rebels and Rogue One)[22]
Jedi whose fall and redemption are portrayed in the Star Wars films. His master was Obi-Wan Kenobi. He was married to Padmé Amidala; father of Luke and Leia. He is an excellent Pod Racer and he is the Chosen One.[221] Known as Darth Vader after his fall to the dark side.


Luke Skywalker
Mark Hamill (Episodes IV–VIII), Aidan Barton (Revenge of the Sith)
Jedi whose coming of age and rise as a Jedi are portrayed in the original Star Wars trilogy. Son of Anakin Skywalker and Padmé Amidala, and Leia Organa's twin brother.[222]


Shmi Skywalker
Pernilla August (The Phantom Menace and Attack of the Clones)
Voice: Pernilla August (The Clone Wars)
Anakin Skywalker's mother. Qui-Gon Jinn attempts to bargain for her freedom from slavery but fails. Shmi encourages Anakin to leave Tatooine with Qui-Gon to seek his destiny, but Anakin finds it hard to leave without her. A widowed moisture farmer named Cliegg Lars later falls in love with Shmi, and after he purchases her freedom from Watto, they marry. Shmi dies in Anakin's arms after being kidnapped and tortured by Tusken Raiders in Attack of the Clones.[223]


Rae Sloane
N/A
Imperial captain introduced in Star Wars: A New Dawn, later an admiral in Star Wars: Aftermath.[224][225]


The Smuggler
N/A
"The Smuggler" is an unnamed man who worked for "Happy" Dapp, along with his sister Riley, during the Galactic Empire's Iron Blockade.


Snaggletooth
Arthur Rowton
Short humanoid with protruding jaws and short fangs, based on a Snivvian character seen in the Mos Eisley Cantina in A New Hope. Two versions of Snaggletooth were produced for Kenner's Star Wars action figure line in 1978; a tall blue version and later a small red version more accurate to the character seen in the film.[226]


Supreme Leader Snoke
Andy Serkis (The Force Awakens and The Last Jedi)
Political leader of the First Order. He is Kylo Ren's master and appears to be very powerful in the dark side of the Force in The Force Awakens.[227]


Sy Snootles
Timothy M. Rose and Mike Quinn (puppeteer) (Return of the Jedi)
Voice: Annie Arbogast (Return of the Jedi), Nika Futterman (The Clone Wars)
Female Pa'lowick and lead vocalist of the Max Rebo Band in Return of the Jedi.[228]


Osi Sobeck
Voice: James Arnold Taylor (The Clone Wars)
Phidian CIS commander who serves as the warden of the prison known as "The Citadel" on the planet Lola Sayu.


Han Solo
Harrison Ford (Episodes IV–VII), Alden Ehrenreich (Solo: A Star Wars Story)[229][230]
Captain of the Millennium Falcon who joins the Rebellion and marries Leia Organa. He is murdered by his son, Kylo Ren, after a failed attempt to turn his son from the dark side.


Greer Sonnel
N/A
Assistant and pilot of Leia Organa in the novel Star Wars: Bloodline.[51][52][53] Originally from the oceanic planet Pamarthe, she is also the focus of the 2016 short story "Scorched" by Delilah S. Dawson, published in Star Wars Insider #165.[231][232]


Sana Starros
N/A
Associate of Han Solo who is dramatically introduced as Han Solo's wife but later confesses to have only posed as his spouse during a previous scam. She first appears in issue #6 of the Star Wars comic series.[233][234]


Lama Su
Voice: Anthony Phelan (Attack of the Clones)
Prime Minister of Kamino in Attack of the Clones.[235] In The Clone Wars he is revealed to be in the employ of Darth Tyrannus as part of the scheme to have the clones eliminate the Jedi.


Mercurial Swift
N/A
Bounty hunter and assassin introduced in Star Wars: Aftermath, known for his electrified batons.


Gavyn Sykes
Christian Simpson (The Phantom Menace)
Lieutenant in the Royal Naboo Security Force during the invasion of Naboo. He partners with R2-C4 to knock out the droid control ship's shield generator in The Phantom Menace, allowing young Anakin Skywalker to destroy the ship from within.[236]


Cham Syndulla
Voice: Robin Atkin Downes (The Clone Wars and Rebels)
Twi'lek freedom fighter who opposes the Separatists independently before allying with the Republic Army when the Clone Wars come to Ryloth. In the aftermath of the Clone Wars, Cham opposes the newly established Galactic Empire's occupation of his world and becomes distanced from his daughter Hera after the death of her mother due to his single-minded determination to liberate Ryloth at any cost. The pair are later reconciled after Cham and his warriors Gobi and Numa team up with Hera's crew to steal an Imperial carrier and shoot down an Imperial cruiser over Ryloth.[237]


Hera Syndulla
Voice: Vanessa Marshall (Rebels and Forces of Destiny)
Twi'lek female, and the daughter of Cham Syndulla, who leaves her homeworld to fight the Empire as a member of the rebel crew of the Ghost. She is the mother-figure of the Ghost crew, and holds the group together when they would otherwise fall apart.[238]


T[edit]


Name
Portrayal
Description


Orn Free Taa
Jerome Blake (The Phantom Menace), Matt Rowan (Attack of the Clones and Revenge of the Sith)
Voice: Phil LaMarr (The Clone Wars)
Overweight Twi'lek who represents Ryloth in the Galactic Senate during the prequel trilogy.


General Cassio Tagge
Don Henderson (A New Hope)
Imperial officer aboard the Death Star in A New Hope; Tagge expressed concern over the vulnerability of the Death Star due to the missing plans being in the hands of the Rebel Alliance.[239] Tagge is revealed in Marvel's Darth Vader comic book series as surviving the Death Star explosion during the Battle of Yavin, and is promoted by Emperor Palpatine to Grand General of the Empire.[240]


Mother Talzin
Voice: Barbara Goodson (The Clone Wars)
Dathomirian leader of the Nightsister clans of witches before and during the Clone Wars. She possesses great magical powers, ranging from mind control, manipulating matter, and turning into mist. Following General Grievous' attack on Dathomir, she is the only Nightsister left, aside from Asajj Ventress. In The Lost Missions, Talzin manipulates a cult into stealing the living Force within other beings and collect it in an orb for her. When enough is collected, Talzin intends to absorb the Force and gain great strength beyond any other Jedi or Sith. However, she is defeated by the combined efforts of Mace Windu and Jar Jar Binks. In Darth Maul: Son of Dathomir, she ultimately dies at the hands of General Grievous on Dathomir in order to allow Maul, her son, to escape.


Wat Tambor
Voice: Chris Truswell (Attack of the Clones), Matthew Wood (The Clone Wars)
Skakoan Foreman of the Techno Union and Executive of Baktoid Armor Workshop before and during the Clone Wars. He serves on the Separatist Council during the Clone Wars and helps fund and supply the Confederacy of Independent Systems.[241]


Riff Tamson
Voice: Gary Anthony Williams (The Clone Wars)
Shark-like Separatist leader, known for his ferocity and brilliant mind. He leads the forces at one of the Battles of Mon Calamari, and is killed by a bomb.


Ahsoka Tano
Voice: Ashley Eckstein (The Clone Wars and Rebels)
Anakin Skywalker's Togruta Jedi Padawan. Over time she develops greater skills and techniques, and becomes a trusted leader. Near the end of season 5 of The Clone Wars, she is framed by her friend and fellow Padawan Barriss Offee for bombing the Jedi Temple. She is subsequently expelled from the Jedi Order and turned over to the Republic for trial, but her innocence is proven when Anakin exposes Barriss. Afterwards, Ahsoka is invited to rejoin the Jedi, but she refuses and leaves because she no longer trusts them. She is later revealed to be the mysterious "Fulcrum" in Star Wars Rebels, and is hunted by Darth Vader and the Inquisitors. Her fate is left ambiguous after a duel with Vader.


Tarfful
Michael Kingma (Revenge of the Sith)
Wookiee chieftain who, along with Chewbacca, commands the Wookiee warriors during the Battle of Kashyyyk, and later helps Yoda escape the clone troopers after Order 66 is given in Revenge of the Sith.


Jova Tarkin
N/A
Paternal great-uncle to Grand Moff Tarkin, acting as a permanent guide and mentor for future Tarkin family initiates on the Carrion Plateau on their homeworld of Eriadu.[198]


Grand Moff Wilhuff Tarkin
Peter Cushing (A New Hope),[22] Wayne Pygram (Revenge of the Sith),[22] Guy Henry (Rogue One)
Voice: Stephen Stanton (The Clone Wars and Rebels)[22]
The Imperial governor of the Outer Rim territories, and the commanding officer of the Death Star in A New Hope.[242]


Captain Roos Tarpals
Steven Spiers (The Phantom Menace)
Voice: Fred Tatasciore (The Clone Wars)
Gungan captain in The Phantom Menace.[243] He later becomes a general by the time of the Clone Wars and dies trying to capture General Grievous.


TC-14
John Fensom (The Phantom Menace)
Voice: Lindsay Duncan (The Phantom Menace)
Protocol droid who appears in the beginning of The Phantom Menace, serving drinks to Obi-Wan Kenobi and Qui-Gon Jinn aboard the Trade Federation's flagship Saak'ak.[244]


Berch Teller
N/A
Former Intelligence officer in the Republic, turning against the Empire and later hijacking Moff Tarkin's personal ship, the Carrion Spike, in the 2014 novel Tarkin.[198]


Teebo
Jack Purvis (Return of the Jedi)
Leader of the group of Ewoks that captures Luke Skywalker, Han Solo, Chewbacca and the droids; later the one whom R2-D2 electrocutes upon being freed. Has a more prominent role in the novelization.[55]


Teedo
Kiran Shah (The Force Awakens)
Voice: David Acord (The Force Awakens and Forces of Destiny)
Scavenger native to Jakku, one of several of his species, known as Teedos.[245] This particular Teedo was trying to capture BB-8, before the droid was freed by Rey in The Force Awakens.


Tessek ("Squid Head")
Gerald Home (Return of the Jedi)
Jabba the Hutt's squid-like Quarren accountant in Return of the Jedi.[246] An action figure of this character was released as "Squid Head" in the Return of the Jedi line of Kenner's 1980's Star Wars action figures.[247]


Lor San Tekka
Max von Sydow (The Force Awakens)
Former explorer and a devout follower of the Church of the Force, as well as an old ally of Luke Skywalker, living on the planet Jakku. He gives Poe Dameron a fragment of the map needed to find Luke in The Force Awakens, and is subsequently executed by Kylo Ren.


Petty Officer Thanisson
Thomas Brodie-Sangster (The Force Awakens)
First Order officer aboard the Star Destroyer Finalizer. Thanisson reports the theft of the TIE fighter stolen by Poe Dameron and FN-2187 in The Force Awakens.


Inspector Thanoth
N/A
Inspector for the Galactic Empire; assigned to assist Darth Vader and investigate his actions during the events of the Star Wars: Darth Vader comic book series.[248]


Lieutenant Thire
Voice: Temuera Morrison (Revenge of the Sith)
Commander of the Clone Shock Troopers in Revenge of the Sith who tells Palpatine that they did not find Yoda's body on the Senate chamber's floor.


Grand Admiral Thrawn
Voice: Lars Mikkelsen (Rebels)
Chiss Grand Admiral of the Imperial Navy, known as a brilliant strategist.[249] He appears in the third season of Rebels, and the novel Thrawn.[250]


C'ai Threnalli
Paul Kasey (The Force Awakens and The Last Jedi)
Abednedo Resistance pilot that flies as Poe Dameron's wingman during the evacuation of D'Qar. Threnalli is also among the survivors escaping on the Millennium Falcon after the Battle of Crait in The Last Jedi.


Shaak Ti
Orli Shoshan (Attack of the Clones and Revenge of the Sith)
Voice: Tasia Valenza (The Clone Wars)
Togruta Jedi Master and member of the Jedi Council in Attack of the Clones and Revenge of the Sith who escapes The Great Jedi Purge. In a deleted scene from Revenge of the Sith, she is killed by General Grievous on the Invisible Hand.


Paige Tico
Veronica Ngo (The Last Jedi)
Older sister of Rose Tico, gunner and pilot on the StarFortress Bomber Hammer of Cobalt Squadron.[178] Paige is killed during the Battle of D'Qar after releasing the bomber's payload, destroying a First Order Dreadnaught.


Rose Tico
Kelly Marie Tran (The Last Jedi)
Resistance maintenance worker, younger sister of Paige Tico, and former crew member of Cobalt Squadron on the StarFortress Bomber Hammer.[178] She accompanies Finn in The Last Jedi to the casino city Canto Bight, infiltrates the First Order Dreadnought Supremacy, and is rendered unconscious during the Battle of Crait.


Saesee Tiin
Khan Bonfils (The Phantom Menace), Jesse Jensen (Attack of the Clones), Kenji Oates (Revenge of the Sith)
Voice: Dee Bradley Baker (The Clone Wars)
Jedi Master and member of the Jedi High Council in the prequel trilogy and The Clone Wars. He is one of the four Jedi Masters who die trying to arrest Palpatine. He uses a green lightsaber.


Bala-Tik
Brian Vernel (The Force Awakens)
Negotiator for the Guavian Death Gang, who confront Han Solo for swindling them aboard his freighter the Eravana in The Force Awakens. Bala-Tik informs the First Order that Solo is in possession of the missing BB-8 unit they are seeking.


Tikkes

Separatist Council member and Senator of the CIS-allied Quarren Isolation League on Mon Calamari. He leads one of the Separatist assaults on Mon Calamari but is killed by Darth Vader on Mustafar.


Meena Tills
Voice: Anna Graves (The Clone Wars)
Senator of Calamari Sector in Revenge of the Sith and The Clone Wars.


Bargwill Tomder

Cloddogran Fathier stable master in Canto Bight on Cantonica in The Last Jedi. Tomder first appears in the short story "Hear Nothing, See Nothing, Say Nothing" in the anthology book Canto Bight.[251]


Wag Too
Voice: Alec Medlock (The Clone Wars)
Lurmen healer and the son of village leader Tee Watt Kaa. He is more grateful than his father when Ahsoka Tano, Aayla Secura, and Anakin Skywalker return to protect their village from the Separatists.


Coleman Trebor

Vurk Jedi Master who participates in the Battle of Geonosis and is killed by Jango Fett while attempting to kill Count Dooku.


Admiral Trench
Voice: Dee Bradley Baker (The Clone Wars)
Harch Admiral of the Separatist Navy who commands the blockade of the planet Christophsis. He is one of the most skilled military tacticians at the time and supposedly has a history of being able to track cloaked ships. He seemingly dies in the episode "Cat and Mouse" of The Clone Wars, but reappears with cybernetics covering nearly half of his body in the first episode of season 6. He also appears in a 4-episode arc referred as "Bad Batch" in which he dies at the hands of Anakin Skywalker after his ship is infiltrated by the Republic.


Strono Tuggs
Aidan Cook (The Force Awakens)
Deformed Artiodac cook at the castle of Maz Kanata in The Force Awakens. Tuggs' backstory is explored in the short story "A Recipie for Death".[40]


Clone Trooper Tup
Voice: Dee Bradley Baker (The Clone Wars)[10]
Rookie clone trooper who has a teardrop tattoo on his face, and matching designs on his helmet.[252]


Letta Turmond
Voice: Kari Wahlgren (The Clone Wars)
Radical activist against Jedi involvement in the Clone Wars, incited by the Jedi Order's use of her technician husband Jackar Bowmani to arm Republic gunships.[253]


Longo Two-Guns
Voice: Tom Kane
Crime lord and rival to Jabba the Hutt, recognized as the "fastest blaster on Tatooine".


Captain Gregar Typho
Jay Laga'aia (Attack of the Clones and Revenge of the Sith)
Voice: James Mathis III (The Clone Wars)
Amidala's bodyguard in Attack of the Clones and Revenge of the Sith.[254]


Ratts Tyerell

Aleena podracer who fatally participates in the Boonta Eve Classic podrace in The Phantom Menace.[255]


U[edit]


Name
Portrayal
Description


U9-C4

Timid astromech droid sent on a mission with D-Squad, an all-droid special unit in The Clone Wars.[256]


Luminara Unduli
Mary Oyaya (Attack of the Clones), Fay David (Revenge of the Sith)
Voice: Olivia d'Abo (The Clone Wars)
Mirialan Jedi Master in Attack of the Clones and Revenge of the Sith, having Barriss Offee as a padawan. She is killed as a result of Order 66.[257] Luminara is a playable character in Lego Star Wars: The Video Game and the video game version of The Clone Wars. In Star Wars Rebels, the rebels are told Luminara is alive as a means to lure them into a trap.


V[edit]


Name
Portrayal
Description


Finis Valorum
Terence Stamp (The Phantom Menace)
Voice: Ian Ruskin (The Clone Wars)
The final legitimate Supreme Chancellor of the Galactic Republic, who is ousted from office in The Phantom Menace, allowing Palpatine to rise to power.[258] Finis valorum is Late Latin. According to performer Terence Stamp, the character was intended by George Lucas to be based on then-President of the United States Bill Clinton as a "good but beleaguered man," although Stamp noted that this had been before the Clinton impeachment trial.[259]


Eli Vanto
N/A
Trusted aide to Grand Admiral Thrawn in the novel Thrawn.[260]


Nahdar Vebb
Voice: Tom Kenny (The Clone Wars)
Male Mon Calamari who serves as the padawan of Jedi Master Kit Fisto in The Clone Wars. He is killed by the General Grievous.


General Maximilian Veers
Julian Glover (The Empire Strikes Back)
Officer who leads the Empire's attack on Hoth commanding the lead AT-AT Imperial Walker in The Empire Strikes Back.[261] Veers was released in action figure form during Kenner's original line, dubbed as 'AT-AT Commander'.[262]


Asajj Ventress
Voice: Nika Futterman (The Clone Wars)
Sith apprentice in The Clone Wars who returns to a cult called the Nightsisters (of which she was formerly a member) after being abandoned by her master, Count Dooku. She abandons the dark side and her Sith ways, and Count Dooku sends a squad to wipe out the rest of her "sisters" via a droid company led by General Grievous. Asajj then resorts to bounty hunting, but still retains her two red lightsabers as weapons. She hunts Savage Opress and in the process ends up helping Obi-Wan Kenobi escape from him. Bariss Offee later steals Asajj's lightsabers and mask, using them to pose as Asajj while framing Ahsoka for the bombing of the Jedi Temple.[263] Asajj later appears in the novel Star Wars: Dark Disciple, which was intended for a story arc in the TV series. In the novel, she teams up with Jedi Quinlan Vos to assassinate Count Dooku. Along the way, the two fall in love. However, their attempt to kill Dooku fails, and Dooku captures Vos, who turns to the dark side. Asajj successfully turns Vos back, but dies saving him from an angered Dooku. She is later buried on Dathomir, amongst her fallen sisters.


Garrick Versio
Voice: Anthony Skordi (Star Wars Battlefront II)
A commanding officer of Inferno Squad. Also appears in the book Star Wars Battlefront II: Inferno Squad.


Iden Versio
Voice: Janina Gavankar (Star Wars Battlefront II)
A commanding officer of Inferno Squad. Also appears in the book Star Wars Battlefront II: Inferno Squad.


Chancellor Lanever Villecham
Derek Arnold (The Force Awakens)
Tarsunt politician that serves as Chancellor of the New Republic, and perishes on Hosnian Prime when it is destroyed by the First Order's Starkiller Base.


Dr. Nuvo Vindi
Voice: Michael York (The Clone Wars)
Faust scientist who worked with the CIS during the Clone Wars. He rediscovers the Blue Shadow Virus and attempts to weaponize it for Separatist use.


Pre Vizsla
Voice: Jon Favreau (The Clone Wars)
Human male from Mandalore and the leader of the Mandalorian Death Watch faction during the Clone Wars.


Tulon Voidgazer
N/A
Cybernetically enhanced human scientist, working under Dr. Cylo as a possible replacement for Darth Vader; she first appeared in the Star Wars: Darth Vader Marvel comic book series.[59]


Quinlan Vos
Voice: Al Rodrigo (The Clone Wars)
Jedi Master in The Clone Wars, and the master of Jedi Aayla Secura. In the novel Star Wars: Dark Disciple, he teams up with (and later falls in love with) Asajj Ventress in an attempt to assassinate Count Dooku. This fails, and Vos falls to the dark side. He is brought back to the light side by Asajj, but is heartbroken when she dies to save him. He buries her on her homeworld, Dathomir, and is reinstated into the Jedi Council.


W[edit]


Name
Portrayal
Description


WAC-47
Voice: Ben Diskin (The Clone Wars)
Over-excitable pit droid that is assigned to a special Republic group of droids to steal an encryption module from the Separatists in The Clone Wars.[264]


Wald
Warwick Davis (The Phantom Menace)
Rodian slave boy under the ownership of Watto, and friends with Anakin Skywalker in The Phantom Menace.


Warok

Ewok in Return of the Jedi, released in action figure form during Kenner's final Power of the Force line in 1985.[265]


Wicket W. Warrick
Warwick Davis (Return of the Jedi)
Ewok who helps Princess Leia and the other Rebels in Return of the Jedi.


Watto
Voice: Andy Secombe (The Phantom Menace and Attack of the Clones)
Toydarian junk store owner and slaveholder of Anakin and Shmi Skywalker in The Phantom Menace.


Taun We
Voice: Rena Owen (Attack of the Clones)
Kaminoan administrator who guides Obi-Wan Kenobi during his visit to the cloning facility in Attack of the Clones. During filming, Owen wore a maquette of the alien's head atop a hardhat, providing her co-stars with the proper eye-line for talking with the character.[266]


Zam Wesell
Leeanna Walsman (Attack of the Clones)
Shape-shifting bounty hunter who fails in her mission to kill Padmé Amidala and is killed by Jango Fett.[267]


Norra Wexley
N/A
Rebel pilot introduced in Star Wars: Aftermath, wayward mother of Snap.[78]


Temmin "Snap" Wexley
Greg Grunberg (The Force Awakens)
Resourceful teenager introduced in the Aftermath trilogy, in which he has adventures with his mother Norra. He is a Resistance X-wing fighter pilot in The Force Awakens.[78][268][269]


General Vanden Willard
Eddie Byrne
Voice: Michael Bell (A New Hope)
Rebel Alliance General that greets Leia Organa as she returns to the Rebel base on Yavin 4 in A New Hope.


Mace Windu
Samuel L. Jackson (Episodes I–III)
Voice: Samuel L. Jackson (The Clone Wars film), Terrence Carson (The Clone Wars TV series)
Master who sits on the Jedi Council in the prequel trilogy, regarded as one of the best swordsmen in Jedi history. He serves as Master of the Jedi Order in the years leading up to the Clone Wars and is a renowned Jedi General. He is thrown out of a window, apparently to his death, during an attempt to arrest Palpatine in Revenge of the Sith.[270]


Commander Wolffe
Voice: Dee Bradley Baker (The Clone Wars and Rebels)
Clone commander who leads the 104th Battalion's Wolfpack under Jedi General Plo Koon in The Clone Wars. He ends up in the Seelos system with fellow clones Rex and Gregor following the Clone Wars.


Wollivan
Warwick Davis (The Force Awakens)
Tavern-dweller in Maz Kanata's castle in The Force Awakens.


Sabine Wren
Voice: Tiya Sircar (Rebels and Forces of Destiny)
Sixteen-year-old Mandalorian graffiti artist, Imperial Academy dropout, former bounty hunter and the Ghost crew's weapons expert.


Wuher
Ted Burnett (A New Hope)
Bartender at the Mos Eisley Cantina in A New Hope.[271]


Y[edit]


Name
Portrayal
Description


Yaddle
Phil Eason (The Phantom Menace)
Female member of Yoda's species, and a member of the Jedi Council in The Phantom Menace. Iain McCaig's concept art for a young Yoda was instead used to create Yaddle.[272]


Yoda
Frank Oz (puppeteer)
Voice: Frank Oz (Episodes I–III, V–VIII and Rebels), Tom Kane (The Clone Wars and Forces of Destiny)
Jedi master who trains Count Dooku and Luke Skywalker. He goes into exile on Dagobah after the fall of the Republic in Revenge of the Sith.[273]


Joh Yowza

Yuzzum only seen in the Special Edition of Return of the Jedi as a member and singer in the Max Rebo Band.


Wullf Yularen
Robert Clarke (A New Hope)
Voice: Tom Kane (The Clone Wars and Rebels)
Imperial officer on the first Death Star in A New Hope. The Clone Wars establishes that he was previously an admiral in the Republic Navy who serves during the Clone Wars as the leader of Anakin Skywalker's fleet. He usually speaks the second half of his sentences before the first half; however, if his sentence is short enough, he does not.[274]


Z[edit]


Name
Portrayal
Description


Ziro the Hutt
Voice: Corey Burton (The Clone Wars)
Jabba the Hutt's flamboyant uncle, and Mama the Hutt's son.


Zuckuss
Cathy Munroe (The Empire Strikes Back)
Gand bounty hunter among those who answer Darth Vader's call to capture the Millennium Falcon in The Empire Strikes Back. In the Legends continuity, Zuckuss is a famous Force-sensitive "findsman", who leaves his home planet of Gand to join the Bounty Hunter's Guild.[4][275] Zuckuss is often partnered with fellow bounty hunter and long time associate 4-LOM, but also teams with his bounty hunter rival Bossk on rare occasions.[276][277] After his ammonia breathing lungs are badly damaged, Zuckuss' life is saved by the Rebel Alliance and he joins them for a time, before finally being incarcerated due to schizophrenia.[5][278] The action figure was misidentified as "4-LOM" in Kenner's original Star Wars action figure line.[206]


Constable Zuvio

Kyuzo constable of Niima Outpost on Jakku. Although featured in early promotional material for The Force Awakens, Zuvio was largely cut from the film, with his backstory instead being told in the short story "High Noon on Jakku".[40]


See also[edit]

List of Star Wars Legends characters
List of Star Wars Rebels characters
List of Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic characters
List of Star Wars cast members
List of Star Wars: The Clone Wars cast members
List of Star Wars books

References[edit]


^ a b "Star Wars: The Series' Most Underrated Characters". NME. September 29, 2016. Retrieved March 22, 2017. 
^ "Databank: 2-1B Droid". StarWars.com. Retrieved March 16, 2017. 
^ a b c d e f g h i j k l Buxton, Marc (January 13, 2017). "Star Wars: 25 Best Droids in the Galaxy from the Movies and TV Shows". Den of Geek. Retrieved March 22, 2017. 
^ a b c Mikaelian, Michael (September 4, 2001). "How the Other Half Hunts". Star Wars Gamer. No. 6. Wizards of the Coast. 
^ a b Bell, M. Shayne (December 1996). "Of Possible Futures: The Tale of Zuckuss and 4-LOM". Tales of the Bounty Hunters. Del Rey. ISBN 0-553-56816-7. 
^ Wagner, John (w), Plunkett, Killian (p), Russell. P. Craig (i). Shadows of the Empire 2–5 (June 1, 1996), Dark Horse Comics
^ "4-LOM/Zuckuss". JediTempleArchives.com. Retrieved March 16, 2017. 
^ "Databank: 8D8". StarWars.com. Retrieved December 30, 2016. 
^ "8D8 toy". RebelScum.com. Retrieved March 16, 2017. 
^ a b c d e f g "Dee Bradley Baker: Star Wars: The Clone Wars Voicing an Army BTS Video". ToonZoneNews. YouTube. September 16, 2011. Retrieved December 30, 2016. 
^ a b c d e f "Top Ten Coolest Clones in The Clone Wars". StarWarsReport.com. January 5, 2012. Retrieved March 22, 2017. 
^ "Databank: Clone 99". StarWars.com. Retrieved December 30, 2016. 
^ a b c Johnston, Rich (January 17, 2017). "Dr Aphra, OOO And BT-1 Make Their Way Into The Wider Star Wars Universe". Bleeding Cool. Retrieved March 16, 2017. 
^ Miller, John Jackson (October 3, 2017). "Rites". From a Certain Point of View. Del Rey. ISBN 9780345511478. 
^ a b "Janus Greejatus". StarWars.com. Retrieved January 14, 2017. 
^ "Imperial Dignitary toy". RebelScum.com. Retrieved March 16, 2017. 
^ a b "Amedda, Mas". StarWars.com. Retrieved October 7, 2008. 
^ "Amidala, Padmé". StarWars.com. Retrieved October 7, 2008. 
^ a b c d e f g h i Brody, Richard (December 13, 2016). "Rogue One Reviewed: Is it Time to Abandon the Star Wars Franchise?". The New Yorker. Retrieved December 13, 2016. 
^ "OCD: Star Wars' Two-Headed Announcer". IGN. Retrieved December 27, 2017. 
^ "10 Most Annoying Star Wars Characters Ever". Screen Rant. Retrieved December 27, 2017. 
^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w x y z aa ab ac ad ae af ag ah ai aj Bray, Adam (April 2, 2015). "Split Personalities: Star Wars Movie Characters Played By Multiple Actors". StarWars.com. Retrieved December 26, 2016. 
^ "Wedge Antilles". StarWars.com. Retrieved October 7, 2008. 
^ a b "AP-5". StarWars.com. Retrieved April 25, 2017. 
^ Narcisse, Evan (March 9, 2016). "Darth Vader Doesn't Do Pep Talks". Kotaku. Retrieved March 22, 2017. 
^ "New Star Wars movie features character named after Beastie Boys album". nme.com. Retrieved December 20, 2017. 
^ "Databank: AZI-3". StarWars.com. Retrieved February 19, 2016. 
^ "Ponda Baba". StarWars.com. Retrieved January 4, 2016. 
^ "Walrus Man". RebelScum.com. Retrieved March 16, 2017. 
^ "Ponda Baba in Rogue One". geek.com. Retrieved March 16, 2017. 
^ ""Where's Kitster?" T-Shirts Are Here!". rebelforceradio.com. Retrieved December 27, 2017. 
^ "GameSpy: Clone Wars Co-Op Coming? – Page 1". Xbox360.gamespy.com. April 23, 2009. Archived from the original on September 26, 2009. Retrieved June 2, 2010. 
^ "Barada". RebelScum.com. Retrieved March 16, 2017. 
^ Keane, Sean (July 12, 2016). "Star Wars Aftermath: Life Debt is the best kind of sequel". New York Daily News. Retrieved July 26, 2016. 
^ a b Yehl, Joshua (September 9, 2015). "Star Wars: Shattered Empire Reveals Big Connection to The Force Awakens". IGN. Retrieved August 23, 2016. 
^ "Bibble, Sio". StarWars.com. Retrieved October 7, 2008. 
^ "Binks, Jar Jar". StarWars.com. Retrieved October 3, 2011. 
^ "Star Wars: The Last Jedi Gives a Name to That Orphan Boy". IGN. Retrieved December 27, 2017. 
^ "Secrets of Bobbajo: An EW Star Wars: The Force Awakens video". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved December 20, 2017. 
^ a b c d e Walker, Landry Q (April 16, 2016). Tales from a Galaxy Far, Far Away: Aliens: Volume I. Disney–Lucasfilm Press. ISBN 9781484741412. 
^ Wagner, Danny (model maker) (October 13, 2015). "Star Wars Episode I: Dud Bolt Puppet Featurette". Star Wars The Complete Saga (DVD Extra). 20th Century Fox. ASIN B013P2POSC. Retrieved December 28, 2017. 
^ Pereira, Chris (April 28, 2014). "Lucasfilm confirms all future Star Wars content to be canon, including the games". GameSpot. Retrieved December 28, 2017. 
^ Elderkin, Beth (July 6, 2016). "Mr. Bones, Star Wars: Aftermath's Lovably Terrifying Killer Droid, Revealed". Gizmodo. Retrieved February 28, 2017. 
^ Floyd, James (July 12, 2016). "The Empire, Kashyyyk, and Mr. Bones: Chuck Wendig Talks Aftermath: Life Debt". StarWars.com. Retrieved February 28, 2017. 
^ Marshall, David (April 25, 2017). "Review: Marvel's Star Wars: Poe Dameron #13". MakingStarWars.net. Retrieved July 11, 2017. 
^ Michael, Graff (Feb 1, 2017). "15 Things You Didn't Know About Bossk". Screen Rant. Retrieved March 22, 2017. 
^ He is introduced by a video on the Star Wars YouTube Channel titled Star Wars Rebels: Meet Ezra, the Street-smart Hero
^ "Databank: Chopper". StarWars.com. Retrieved October 29, 2015. 
^ "Databank: C-3PO (See-Threepio)". StarWars.com. Retrieved October 7, 2008. 
^ "Lando Calrissian". StarWars.com. Retrieved October 7, 2008. 
^ a b c Crouse, Megan (May 3, 2016). "10 Things Star Wars: Bloodline Added to the New Canon". Den of Geek. Retrieved May 31, 2016. 
^ a b c Templeton, Molly (May 4, 2016). "Star Wars: Bloodline Should Definitely Be A Movie". Tor.com. Retrieved December 31, 2016. 
^ a b c Petty, Jared (May 3, 2016). "Star Wars: Bloodline Review". IGN. Retrieved May 24, 2016. 
^ "Chewbacca". StarWars.com. October 7, 2008. 
^ a b c d "YUB YUB: MEET THE EWOKS FROM ENDOR". StarWars.com. Retrieved March 22, 2017. 
^ a b c Breznican, Anthony (December 18, 2015). "Star Wars: The Force Awakens: A collection of cameos and Easter eggs: Friend of the General". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved December 27, 2015. 
^ "Kaydel Ko Connix". StarWars.com. Retrieved January 2, 2017. 
^ a b "Salacious Crumb". StarWars.com. October 8, 2008. Archived from the original on October 3, 2008. 
^ a b c Darth Vader 5 (May 13, 2015), Marvel Comics
^ "Here's Why Figrin D'an And The Modal Nodes Are The Best Artists In The Galaxy". Creators.co. Retrieved March 22, 2017. 
^ Abrams, Natalie (April 16, 2015). "10 things we learned from the Star Wars: The Force Awakens panel". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved May 23, 2015. 
^ "Databank: Poe Dameron". StarWars.com. Retrieved December 20, 2015. 
^ Hidalgo, Pablo (Dec 18, 2015). Star Wars: The Force Awakens: The Visual Dictionary. Dorling Kindersley. ISBN 1465438165. 
^ a b "Darklighter, Biggs (Red Three)". StarWars.com. October 8, 2008. 
^ Richelson, Geraldine (April 12, 1978). The Star Wars Storybook. Scholastic Book Services. ISBN 0394837851. 
^ Star Wars: Behind the Magic (CD-ROM). Lucasarts. 1998. 
^ "Dengar". StarWars.com. April 21, 2010. 
^ White, Brett (Dec 19, 2015). "10 MOST AWESOME MOMENTS FROM MARVEL'S "STAR WARS" COMIC". cbr.com. Retrieved March 22, 2017. 
^ "9 CONNECTIONS STAR WARS: AFTERMATH MAKES TO THE KNOWN STAR WARS UNIVERSE". StarWars.com. Retrieved March 22, 2017. 
^ "Derlin, Major Bren". StarWars.com. October 8, 2008. 
^ "Databank: Ima-Gun Di". StarWars.com. Retrieved May 23, 2016. 
^ Agar, Chris (May 11, 2016). "The Biggest Revelations From Star Wars: Bloodline". Screen Rant. Retrieved May 24, 2016. 
^ Granshaw, Lisa (May 10, 2016). "Behind Star Wars: Bloodline: An interview with author Claudia Gray". Blastr. Retrieved May 24, 2016. 
^ "Dodonna, Jan". StarWars.com. Retrieved October 8, 2008. 
^ "Clone Trooper Dogma". StarWars.com. Retrieved December 30, 2016. 
^ a b "Dooku, Count". StarWars.com. Retrieved October 8, 2008. 
^ Bray, Adam; Horton, Cole; Barr, Tricia (April 4, 2017). Star Wars: The Visual Encyclopedia. Dorling Kindersley. ISBN 1465459626. 
^ a b c Truitt, Brian (March 17, 2015). "Aftermath novel adds to Star Wars saga". USA Today. Retrieved September 2, 2015. 
^ Breznican, Anthony (September 4, 2015). "How Chuck Wendig's Star Wars: Aftermath novel sets the stage for The Force Awakens". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved February 17, 2016. 
^ "Doctor Cornelius Evazan". StarWars.com. Retrieved January 4, 2017. 
^ "Dr. Evazan in Rogue One". geek.com. Retrieved March 16, 2017. 
^ "Fett, Boba". StarWars.com. Retrieved October 8, 2008. 
^ "Fett, Jango". StarWars.com. Retrieved October 8, 2008. 
^ "Fisto, Kit". StarWars.com. Retrieved April 7, 2009. [permanent dead link]
^ "Databank: ARC Trooper Fives". StarWars.com. Retrieved December 31, 2016. 
^ Robinson, Joanna (December 20, 2015). "24 Delightful Star Wars: The Force Awakens Cameos You Might Have Missed". Vanity Fair. Retrieved January 12, 2016. 
^ Pehanick, Maggie (December 17, 2015). "Daniel Craig's Star Wars: The Force Awakens cameo revealed! Here's Who He Plays". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved January 12, 2016. 
^ Rucks, Greg (December 18, 2015). Before the Awakening. Disney–Lucasfilm Press. ISBN 9781484728222. 
^ "Meet FN-2199, a.k.a. TR-8R: The Stormtrooper Behind the Meme". StarWars.com. January 7, 2016. Retrieved December 19, 2016. 
^ "Bib Fortuna". StarWars.com. Retrieved March 16, 2017. 
^ "FX-7". RebelScum.com. Retrieved March 16, 2017. 
^ "Garindan (Long Snoot)". StarWars.com. Retrieved October 8, 2008. 
^ "Gasgano)". StarWars.com. Retrieved December 26, 2017. 
^ Lussier, Germain. "Meet the Heroes, Villains, and Badass Droid of Rogue One: A Star Wars Story". Gizmodo. Retrieved October 13, 2016. 
^ "Power Droid". RebelScum.com. Retrieved March 16, 2017. 
^ "Rogue One: A Star Wars Story trailer: Felicity Jones makes a roguish, Han Solo-style heroine". The Telegraph. April 7, 2016. Retrieved December 22, 2016. 
^ "Greedo". StarWars.com. Retrieved October 8, 2008. 
^ "Grievous, General". StarWars.com. Retrieved October 8, 2008. 
^ Foster, Alan Dean (December 22, 2015). "Bait". Star Wars Insider. No. 162. Titan Magazines. 
^ "Gunray, Nute". StarWars.com. Retrieved October 8, 2008. 
^ "Haako, Rune". StarWars.com. Retrieved October 8, 2008. 
^ "Hill, San". StarWars.com. Retrieved October 8, 2008. 
^ Windham, Ryder; Barr, Tricia; Wallace, Daniel; Bray, Adam (September 1, 2015). Ultimate Star Wars. Dorling Kindersley. ISBN 9781465436016. 
^ "Red Letter Media". knowyourmeme.com. Retrieved December 26, 2017. 
^ "Jabba the Hutt". StarWars.com. Retrieved March 6, 2017. 
^ Bray, Adam; Horton, Cole; Kogge, Michael; Dougherty, Kerrie (2015). Star Wars: Absolutely Everything You Need to Know. DK Children. ISBN 978-1465437853. 
^ "Jamillia, Queen". StarWars.com. Retrieved March 25, 2009. 
^ "Jerjerrod, Moff". StarWars.com. Retrieved October 8, 2008. 
^ "Dexter-Jettster". StarWars.com. Retrieved March 23, 2017. 
^ "The Most Hated 'Star Wars' Characters". Obsev.com. Retrieved March 23, 2017. 
^ "Jinn, Qui-Gon". StarWars.com. Retrieved October 8, 2008. 
^ "Margaret Towner, Jira In The Phantom Menace, Dies At 96". starwarsunderworld.com. Retrieved December 26, 2017. 
^ "Kenobi, Obi-Wan (Ben)". StarWars.com. Retrieved October 8, 2008. 
^ "You Can Hear Alec Guinness and Ewan McGregor in The Force Awakens". Slashfilm.com. December 20, 2015. Retrieved December 19, 2016. 
^ "Ki-Adi-Mundi". StarWars.com. Retrieved October 8, 2008. 
^ "Klaatu". StarWars.com. Retrieved March 22, 2017. 
^ "Return of the Jedi: 30 Years of Plastic Memories". bensbargains.com. Retrieved March 22, 2017. 
^ "Klivian, Derek "Hobbie" (Rogue Four)". StarWars.com. Archived from the original on December 16, 2008. Retrieved October 8, 2008. 
^ Star Wars 10 (October 7, 2015), Marvel Comics
^ "Black Krrsantan". Marvel.com. Retrieved March 16, 2017. 
^ Gray, Claudia (2015). Star Wars: Lost Stars. Disney–Lucasfilm Press. ISBN 1484724984. 
^ a b Brown, Alex (May 26, 2016). "Pull List: Star Wars: Poe Dameron". Tor.com. Retrieved February 15, 2016. 
^ "Beru Lars". StarWars.com. Retrieved December 28, 2016. 
^ a b c "Cliegg Lars". StarWars.com. Retrieved December 28, 2016. 
^ "Owen Lars". StarWars.com. Retrieved December 28, 2016. 
^ "Databank: Cut Lawquane". StarWars.com. Retrieved December 30, 2016. 
^ "Lobot". StarWars.com. Retrieved October 8, 2008. 
^ "Lumat". RebelScum.com. Retrieved March 16, 2017. 
^ "Madine, General Crix". StarWars.com. Archived from the original on March 30, 2010. Retrieved December 29, 2016. 
^ "Rancor Keeper". RebelScum.com. Retrieved March 16, 2017. 
^ a b c Goldman, Eric (December 13, 2016). "Rogue One: A Star Wars Story Review". IGN. Retrieved December 14, 2016. 
^ Perry, Spencer (March 24, 2016). "Darth Maul Returns in Star Wars Rebels Season 2 Finale". Comingsoon.net. Retrieved December 19, 2016. 
^ "Yak Face". www.jeditemplearchives.com. Retrieved March 16, 2017. 
^ "Yak Face". RebelScum.com. Retrieved March 16, 2017. 
^ "Droopy McCool". StarWars.com. Retrieved March 22, 2017. 
^ "Databank: ME-8D9". StarWars.com. Retrieved February 19, 2016. 
^ "Medon, Tion". StarWars.com. Retrieved October 8, 2008. 
^ "Moore, Sly". StarWars.com. Retrieved October 8, 2008. 
^ a b Keane, Sean (April 28, 2015). "REVIEW: Star Wars: Lords of the Sith throws Darth Vader and the Emperor onto the battlefield". New York Daily News. Retrieved May 27, 2016. 
^ Hensley, Nicole (March 11, 2015). "Star Wars novelist adds first lesbian character to canon". New York Daily News. Retrieved June 6, 2016. 
^ a b Breznican, Anthony (September 4, 2015). "Star Wars: Aftermath: Gay hero introduced in new story". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved January 2, 2016. 
^ Ratcliffe, Amy (March 3, 2017). "Rogue One's Genevieve O'Reilly on Bringing Mon Mothma to Star Wars Rebels". Nerdist News. Retrieved March 4, 2017. 
^ "Mothma, Mon". StarWars.com. Retrieved October 8, 2008. 
^ Star Wars: The Force Awakens Visual Dictionary
^ Gower, Eleanor (April 16, 2013). "Star Wars actor Richard LeParmentier dies aged 66... 35 years after he was choked by Darth Vader". Daily Mail. Retrieved May 22, 2016. 
^ "Admiral Motti". StarWars.com. Archived from the original on December 16, 2008. Retrieved January 3, 2017. 
^ "Momaw Nadon". StarWars.com. Retrieved March 16, 2017. 
^ "Hammerhead". RebelScum.com. Retrieved March 16, 2017. 
^ "Nass, Boss". StarWars.com. Retrieved October 8, 2008. 
^ "Needa, Captain Lorth". StarWars.com. Retrieved October 8, 2008. 
^ "Star Wars: The Force Awakens Cast + Crew". Fandango. Retrieved December 31, 2016. 
^ "Bazine Netal". StarWars.com. Retrieved December 31, 2016. 
^ "JOURNEY TO THE FORCE AWAKENS PANEL AT NEW YORK COMIC CON – RECAP". StarWars.com. October 12, 2015. Retrieved May 7, 2016. 
^ Keane, Sean (February 21, 2017). "Star Wars Aftermath: Empire's End brings trilogy to a thrilling conclusion: book review". New York Daily News. Retrieved February 24, 2017. 
^ "Nunb, Nien". Star Wars Databank. StarWars.com. Retrieved February 8, 2015. 
^ Luceno, James (November 15, 2016). Catalyst: A Rogue One Novel. Disney–Lucasfilm Press. ISBN 978-0345511492. 
^ Hidalgo, Pablo (December 16, 2016). Star Wars: Rogue One: The Ultimate Visual Guide. Dorling Kindersley. ISBN 146545263X. 
^ "Offee, Barriss". StarWars.com. Retrieved March 10, 2009. 
^ "Hondo Ohnaka". StarWars.com. Retrieved December 29, 2016. 
^ "Olié, Ric". StarWars.com. Retrieved October 8, 2008. 
^ "Star Wars Jumbo Dianoga Trash Monster". StarWarscelebration.com. Retrieved December 21, 2017. 
^ "We Ranked the 40 Greatest Star Wars Moments". Time. May 23, 2017. Retrieved December 21, 2017. 
^ Okorafor, Nnedi (October 3, 2017). "The Baptist". From a Certain Point of View. Del Rey. ISBN 9780345511478. 
^ "Oola". StarWars.com. Retrieved October 8, 2008. 
^ a b "Organa, Bail". StarWars.com. Archived from the original on June 29, 2011. Retrieved August 23, 2016. 
^ Gray, Claudia (September 1, 2017). Leia, Princess of Alderaan. Disney–Lucasfilm Press. ISBN 9781484780787. 
^ Roux, Madeleine (October 3, 2017). "Eclipse". From a Certain Point of View. Del Rey. ISBN 9780345511478. 
^ "Leia Organa". Star Wars.com. Retrieved December 29, 2016. 
^ "Prune Face as Orrimaarko". StarWars.com. Retrieved March 16, 2017. 
^ "Ozzel, Admiral Kendal". StarWars.com. Archived from the original on June 29, 2011. Retrieved October 8, 2008. 
^ "Grange Hill favourite Sheard dies". BBC. August 31, 2005. Retrieved October 8, 2008. In Star Wars, he was memorably choked by Darth Vader—and said George Lucas told him it was 'the best screen death I've ever seen'. 
^ Veekhoven, Tim (April 21, 2015). "Meet the Genesis Jedi". StarWars.com. Retrieved January 29, 2017. 
^ "Teemto Pagalies". StarWars.com. Retrieved December 26, 2017. 
^ Ward, Jason (July 9, 2015). "Meet Star Wars: The Force Awakens' new female hotshot pilot!". Makingstarwars.net. Retrieved March 20, 2016. 
^ Ward, Jason (November 21, 2015). "New TV spot reveals Jessika Pava and Nien Nunb in Star Wars: The Force Awakens!". Makingstarwars.net. Retrieved March 20, 2016. 
^ "Palpatine". StarWars.com. Retrieved October 8, 2008. 
^ "Captain Panaka". StarWars.com. Retrieved December 29, 2016. 
^ a b c d Wren, Elizabeth (Dec 15, 2017). Star Wars: The Last Jedi: Cobalt Squadron. Disney Lucasfilm Press. ISBN 1368008372. 
^ "Piell, Even". StarWars.com. Retrieved March 10, 2009. 
^ "Piett, Admiral". StarWars.com. Retrieved March 16, 2017. 
^ Tremeer, Eleanor (December 28, 2015). "Supreme Leader Snoke's Role In Star Wars Episode 8 Revealed By John Williams?!". Moviepilot. Retrieved January 27, 2017. 
^ Fry, Jason (September 4, 2015). The Weapon of a Jedi: A Luke Skywalker Adventure. Disney–Lucasfilm Press. ISBN 9781484724965. 
^ "Poggle the Lesser". StarWars.com. Retrieved October 8, 2008. 
^ Norkey, Trevor (January 3, 2017). "Star Wars: Catalyst Reveals Poggle the Lesser's Role in the Death Star". Moviepilot. Retrieved October 20, 2017. 
^ "Poof, Yarael". StarWars.com. Retrieved October 24, 2010. [permanent dead link]
^ "Porkins, Jek (Red Six)". StarWars.com. Retrieved October 8, 2008. 
^ Sherer, Jay (November 6, 2015). "Star Wars: Moving Target: A Princess Leia Adventure by Cecil Castellucci and Jason Fry". SF Signal. Retrieved February 19, 2016. 
^ Stevenson, Freeman (December 9, 2015). "The new canon books to read before you see Star Wars: The Force Awakens". Deseret News. Retrieved February 19, 2016. 
^ Breznican, Anthony (December 18, 2015). "Star Wars: The Force Awakens: A collection of cameos and Easter eggs: Friend of the General". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved December 18, 2015. 
^ "Ben Quadrinaros". StarWars.com. Retrieved December 29, 2016. 
^ "Quarrie". StarWars.com. Retrieved June 20, 2017. 
^ "R2-KT and the Power of the Pink Side". StarWars.com. January 30, 2014. Retrieved March 18, 2017. 
^ "Databank: R5-D4". StarWars.com. Retrieved February 19, 2016. 
^ "Death Star Droid". RebelScum.com. Retrieved March 16, 2017. 
^ "Ralter, Dack". StarWars.com. Retrieved October 8, 2008. [permanent dead link]
^ a b Gray, Claudia (September 4, 2015). Star Wars: Lost Stars. Disney–Lucasfilm Press. ISBN 1484724984. 
^ "Rancisis, Oppo". StarWars.com. Retrieved March 10, 2009. 
^ a b c d Luceno, James (2015). Star Wars: Tarkin. Del Rey. ISBN 978-0-345-51152-2. 
^ Tremeer, Eleanor (August 29, 2016). "Supreme Leader Snoke Origins Revealed In Star Wars 7 Book Aftermath?". Moviepilot. Retrieved January 23, 2017. 
^ Star Wars vAnnual, 1 (December 9, 2015), Marvel Comics
^ "Rebo, Max". StarWars.com. Archived from the original on October 3, 2008. Retrieved October 8, 2008. 
^ "Gran". StarWars.com. Retrieved March 23, 2017. 
^ "Carlist Rieekan, General". StarWars.com. Retrieved October 8, 2008. 
^ "Romba". RebelScum.com. Retrieved March 16, 2017. 
^ Fry, Jason (August 18, 2014). Star Wars in 100 Scenes. Dorling Kindersley. ISBN 1465420126. 
^ a b Veekhoven, Tim (September 13, 2013). "Tessek, Sim Aloo, Pagetti Rook ... Kenner Action Names Sold Separately!". StarWars.com. Retrieved March 16, 2017. 
^ "Rukh". StarWars.com. Retrieved November 11, 2017. [permanent dead link]
^ "Sabé". StarWars.com. Retrieved December 29, 2016. 
^ "Star Wars: Blogs | Sompeetalay's Source Blog | Handmaiden ID Roster". StarWars.com. Archived from the original on October 11, 2008. Retrieved December 19, 2016. 
^ Gray, Claudia (May 3, 2016). Bloodline. Del Rey. ISBN 978-0-345-51136-2. 
^ "Star Wars: Droids Turns 30 – A Look Back at the Animated Series". IGN. Retrieved December 20, 2017. 
^ "Sebulba". StarWars.com. Archived from the original on June 4, 2011. Retrieved October 8, 2008. 
^ Hidalgo, Pablo (June 18, 2002). "From EU to Episode II: Aayla Secura". StarWars.com. Archived from the original on June 4, 2011. Retrieved December 29, 2016. 
^ Pete Vilmur (January 23, 2009). "Jennifer Hale: Twi'lek Time". StarWars.com. Archived from the original on June 4, 2011. 
^ "Aayla Secura". StarWars.com. Retrieved March 10, 2017. 
^ Tremeer, Eleanor (March 6, 2017). "From Leia Organa To Rey: 6 Most Powerful Female Jedi In Star Wars". Moviepilot. Retrieved March 10, 2017. 
^ a b Hawkes, Rebecca (January 5, 2016). "Star Wars: The Force Awakens: 12 things they cut from the film". The Telegraph. Retrieved December 29, 2016. 
^ "Korr Sella". StarWars.com. Retrieved December 29, 2016. 
^ "Senesa, Zev (Rogue Two)". StarWars.com. Archived from the original on June 4, 2011. Retrieved October 13, 2008. 
^ "Sing, Aurra". StarWars.com. Archived from the original on June 4, 2011. Retrieved October 13, 2008. 
^ "Skywalker, Anakin". StarWars.com. Archived from the original on June 4, 2011. Retrieved October 8, 2008. 
^ "Skywalker, Luke". StarWars.com. Archived from the original on September 2, 2008. Retrieved September 4, 2008. 
^ "Skywalker, Shmi". StarWars.com. Archived from the original on June 4, 2011. Retrieved October 8, 2008. 
^ Breznican, Anthony (July 16, 2015). "Star Wars: Aftermath novel reveals tragic, violent uprising after Return of the Jedi". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved September 2, 2015. 
^ Crouse, Megan (April 26, 2016). "5 of Rae Sloane's Greatest Moments". StarWars.com. Retrieved March 10, 2017. 
^ "Snaggletooth". StarWars.com. Retrieved March 16, 2017. 
^ Dyer, James (August 25, 2015). "JJ Abrams Spills Details On Kylo Ren". Empire. Retrieved August 25, 2015. 
^ "Snootles, Sy". StarWars.com. Retrieved November 13, 2008. 
^ Busch, Anita (May 5, 2016). "Alden Ehrenreich Lands The Lead In Star Wars Han Solo Film". Deadline.com. Retrieved May 5, 2016. 
^ Utichi, Joe (July 17, 2016). "Alden Ehrenreich Introduced As Han Solo Stand-Alone Pic & Episode VIII Teased At Star Wars Celebration". Deadline.com. Retrieved July 17, 2016. 
^ Wilkins, Jonathan (May 4, 2016). "Star Wars Insider #165: 10 Highlights!". StarWars.com. Retrieved May 24, 2016. 
^ Trivedi, Sachin (April 26, 2016). "Star Wars: Bloodline: New short story reveals Leia's ally Greer Sonnel". International Business Times. Retrieved December 31, 2016. 
^ Schedeen, Jesse (June 3, 2016). "Star Wars Delivers Huge Change for Han Solo". IGN. Retrieved February 9, 2017. 
^ Schedeen, Jesse (October 13, 2016). "Star Wars: Who Is Sana Solo?". IGN. Retrieved February 9, 2017. 
^ "Su, Lama". StarWars.com. Retrieved October 8, 2008. 
^ "Lucasfilm Holocron Blog Entry". StarWars.com. Archived from the original on April 15, 2012. Retrieved February 24, 2009. 
^ Star Wars: The Clone Wars, episode: "Liberty on Ryloth".
^ She is first introduced in a video on the Star Wars YouTube Channel: Star Wars Rebels: Meet Hera, the Pilot
^ "Tagge, General". StarWars.com. Retrieved October 8, 2008. 
^ Darth Vader 2 (February 25, 2015), Marvel Comics
^ "Tambor, Wat". StarWars.com. Archived from the original on June 22, 2011. Retrieved October 25, 2010. 
^ "Tarkin". StarWars.com. Retrieved September 22, 2011. 
^ "Tarpals, Captain". StarWars.com. Retrieved October 8, 2008. [permanent dead link]
^ "TC-14". StarWars.com. Retrieved February 19, 2016. 
^ Rucka, Greg (Dec 18, 2015). Before the Awakening. Disney Lucasfilm Press. ISBN 9781484728222. 
^ "Tessek". StarWars.com. Retrieved November 25, 2008. [permanent dead link]
^ "SQUID HEAD". RebelScum.com. Retrieved March 22, 2017. 
^ Darth Vader 8 (August 5, 2015), Marvel Comics
^ "Grand Admiral Thrawn". StarWars.com. Retrieved December 29, 2016. 
^ Breznican, Anthony (July 16, 2016). "Star Wars Rebels resurrects Grand Admiral Thrawn". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved July 16, 2016. 
^ Carson, Rae (December 5, 2017). "Hear Nothing, See Nothing, Say Nothing". Canto Bight. Del Rey. ISBN 9781524799533. 
^ "Clone Trooper Tup". StarWars.com. Retrieved December 30, 2016. 
^ "Letta Turmond". StarWars.com. Retrieved December 28, 2016. 
^ "Typho, Gregar". StarWars.com. Retrieved October 8, 2008. [permanent dead link]
^ "Ratts Tyerell". StarWars.com. Retrieved December 26, 2017. 
^ "Databank: U9-C4". StarWars.com. Retrieved February 19, 2016. 
^ "Unduli, Luminara". StarWars.com. Archived from the original on June 4, 2011. Retrieved August 23, 2016. 
^ "Valorum, Supreme Chancellor Finis". StarWars.com. Retrieved October 8, 2008. [permanent dead link]
^ Star Wars Insider 41, "Stamp of Approval", page 30.
^ Siegel, Lucas (January 21, 2017). "Star Wars: Thrawn Origin Novel Synopsis Released". Comicbook.com. Retrieved March 4, 2017. 
^ "Veers, General Maximilian". StarWars.com. Retrieved July 13, 2015. 
^ "AT-AT Commander". StarWars.com. Retrieved March 16, 2017. 
^ "Ventress, Asajj". StarWars.com. Archived from the original on June 4, 2011. Retrieved October 8, 2008. 
^ "Databank: WAC-47". StarWars.com. Retrieved February 19, 2016. 
^ "Warok". RebelScum.com. Retrieved March 16, 2017. 
^ "We, Taun". StarWars.com. Retrieved October 8, 2008. 
^ "Wesell, Zam". StarWars.com. Retrieved October 8, 2008. 
^ "Snap Wexley". StarWars.com. Retrieved December 26, 2015. 
^ Anderson, Tre'vell (December 16, 2015). "J.J. Abrams' good luck charm Greg Grunberg reveals his Force Awakens character Snap Wexley". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved December 16, 2015. 
^ "Windu, Mace". StarWars.com. Archived from the original on June 4, 2011. Retrieved October 8, 2008. 
^ "Wuher". StarWars.com. Retrieved November 8, 2008. 
^ "Yaddle". StarWars.com. Archived from the original on August 28, 2011. Retrieved December 29, 2016. 
^ "Yoda". StarWars.com. October 8, 2008. 
^ "Wullf Yularen Character History (Canon) – Star Wars Explained". Star Wars Explained. Retrieved March 28, 2017. 
^ Pena, Abel G.; Kaufman, Ryan (July 2006). "Underworld: A Galaxy of Scum and Villainy". Star Wars Insider. No. 89. IDG Entertainment. 
^ Cerasi, Christopher (February 26, 2003). "Bounty Hunters - Zuckuss". The Official Star Wars Fact File. No. 61. De Agostini. 
^ Jeter, K.W. (June 1998). The Mandalorian Armor. Bantam Spectra. ISBN 0553578855. 
^ Lewis, Ann Margaret (April 1, 2001). The Essential Guide to Alien Species. Del Rey. ISBN 0345442202. 








v
t
e


Star Wars characters






List of The Clone Wars characters
List of Rebels characters
List of Legends characters





Characters




Canon



Admiral Ackbar
Padmé Amidala
Cassian Andor
Wedge Antilles
Cad Bane
Darth Bane
BB-8
Jar Jar Binks
C-3PO
Lando Calrissian
Chewbacca
Lieutenant Connix
Poe Dameron
Count Dooku
Jyn Erso
Boba Fett
Jango Fett
Finn
Saw Gerrera
Greedo
Tag Greenley
General Grievous
Jabba the Hutt
General Hux
Kanan Jarrus
Qui-Gon Jinn
K-2SO
Maz Kanata
Obi-Wan Kenobi
Orson Krennic
Princess Leia
Darth Maul
Nien Nunb
Bink Otauna
Palpatine
Captain Phasma
Admiral Piett
R2-D2
Kylo Ren
Rey
Captain Rex
Bodhi Rook
Bail Organa
Luke Skywalker
Supreme Leader Snoke
Han Solo
Ahsoka Tano
Grand Moff Tarkin
Grand Admiral Thrawn
Rose Tico
Darth Vader
Asajj Ventress
Iden Versio
Watto
Wicket W. Warrick
Mace Windu
Yoda





Legends



Mara Jade
Kyle Katarn
KOTOR characters

HK-47
Kreia
Revan


Starkiller
Jacen Solo








Organizations




Force-users



Jedi
Sith





Military



Battle droid
Clone trooper
Stormtrooper
Rogue Squadron





Families



Skywalker family
Solo family





Bands



Figrin D'an and the Modal Nodes
Max Rebo Band





Species



Bantha
Ewok
Hutt
Sarlacc
Tusken Raiders
Wookiees





Other



Droid
Mandalorian









 Category










v
t
e


Star Wars



Feature films




Saga



Star Wars
The Empire Strikes Back
Return of the Jedi
The Phantom Menace
Attack of the Clones
Revenge of the Sith
The Force Awakens
The Last Jedi





Anthology



Rogue One
Solo





Other



The Clone Wars








Television series



Droids
Ewoks
Clone Wars
The Clone Wars

cast
episodes


Rebels

characters
episodes


Forces of Destiny
Detours (unaired)





Other




Television films



Holiday Special
Caravan of Courage
The Battle for Endor





Radio dramas



Star Wars








Setting




Characters



Jedi
Sith
Stormtrooper
Clone trooper





Concepts



Architecture
Languages
The Force
Physics





Species



Bantha
Ewok
Hutt
Sarlacc
Tusken Raiders
Wookiee
List of Star Wars creatures





Planets and moons



Alderaan
Bespin
Coruscant
Dagobah
Endor
Hoth
Jakku
Kashyyyk
Naboo
Tatooine
Yavin





Organizations



First Order
Galactic Empire
Galactic Republic
New Republic
Rebel Alliance
Resistance





Technology



Weapons

Blaster
Death Star
Lightsaber


Vehicles

Landspeeder
TIE fighter
X-wing fighter
Star Destroyer
Millennium Falcon







Other



Clone Wars
Galactic Civil War
Mos Eisley

Mos Eisley Cantina










Production



George Lucas
Lucasfilm
Cast
Changes in film re-releases

Han shot first


Filming locations
Music
Opening crawl
Sequel trilogy
Sources and analogues





Outside media




Attractions



A Galactic Spectacular
Jedi Training: Trials of the Temple
Star Tours

The Adventures Continue


Galaxy's Edge
Star Wars Hotel
Star Wars Hyperspace Mountain
Star Wars Launch Bay
Star Wars Weekends
Where Science Meets Imagination





Lego



List of sets
Droid Tales
The Resistance Rises
The Freemaker Adventures





Merchandise



Action figures

Kenner

list


Hasbro

Vintage Collection
Star Wars Transformers




Star Wars Pez
Manga
Force Trainer
Shepperton Design Studios
Trading cards
Vinylmation
Star Wars Rollinz toys





Television specials



The Making of Star Wars
SP FX: The Empire Strikes Back
From Star Wars to Jedi: The Making of a Saga





Other



Video games

list


Shadows of the Empire
Knights of the Old Republic
The Force Unleashed
The Old Republic
Art
Books

non-fiction


Comics

list


Expanded universe

Characters










Cultural impact



501st Legion
Comparison to Star Trek
Force for Change
Jedi census
Jediism
Rebel Legion
Star Wars Celebration
Star Wars Day
Star Wars: In Concert
Star Wars Insider
Wookieepedia
TheForce.Net
Yoda conditions








 Book
 Category
 Portal











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=List_of_Star_Wars_characters&oldid=818433783"					Categories: Star Wars charactersSpeculative fiction characters listsStar Wars listsLists of Disney charactersLists of fictional military personnelHidden categories: All articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from December 2017Articles with permanently dead external linksAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from March 2017Articles with unsourced statements from January 2017Articles with unsourced statements from April 2017