





This article's lead section does not adequately summarize key points of its contents. Please consider expanding the lead to provide an accessible overview of all important aspects of the article. Please discuss this issue on the article's talk page. (May 2017)





Lithuanian


lietuvių kalba


Native to
Lithuania



Native speakers

3.0–3.1 million (2016)[1]



Language family


Indo-European

Balto-Slavic

Baltic

Eastern Baltic

Lithuanian











Dialects


Samogitian, Aukštaitian





Writing system

Latin (Lithuanian alphabet)
Lithuanian Braille


Official status



Official language in

 Lithuania
 European Union



Recognised minority
language in


 Poland



Regulated by
Commission of the Lithuanian Language


Language codes


ISO 639-1
lt


ISO 639-2
lit


ISO 639-3
Either:
lit – Modern Lithuanian
olt – Old Lithuanian


Glottolog
lith1251[2]


Linguasphere
54-AAA-a





This article contains IPA phonetic symbols. Without proper rendering support, you may see question marks, boxes, or other symbols instead of Unicode characters. For an introductory guide on IPA symbols, see Help:IPA.


Lithuanian (lietuvių kalba) is a Baltic language spoken in the Baltic region. It is the language of Lithuanians and the official language of Lithuania as well as one of the official languages of the European Union. There are about 2.9 million[3] native Lithuanian speakers in Lithuania and about 200,000 abroad.
As a Baltic language, Lithuanian is closely related to neighboring Latvian and more distantly to Slavic and other Indo-European languages. It is written in a Latin alphabet. Lithuanian is often said to be the most conservative living Indo-European language, retaining many features of Proto-Indo-European now lost in other languages.[4]



Contents


1 History
2 Classification
3 Geographic distribution

3.1 Official status
3.2 Dialects


4 Script
5 Phonology

5.1 Consonants
5.2 Vowels
5.3 Diphthongs
5.4 Pitch accent


6 Grammar
7 Vocabulary

7.1 Indo-European vocabulary
7.2 Loanwords


8 Old Lithuanian

8.1 Pronunciation
8.2 Nouns
8.3 Adjectives
8.4 Verbs
8.5 Syntax


9 See also
10 References
11 Sources
12 External links



History[edit]




Area of the Lithuanian language in the 16th century






The oldest surviving manuscript in Lithuanian (around 1503), rewritten from 15th century original text






A map of European languages (1741) with the first verse of the Lord's Prayer in Lithuanian






Distribution of the Baltic tribes, circa 1200 (boundaries are approximate).




“
Anyone wishing to hear how Indo-Europeans spoke should come and listen to a Lithuanian peasant.
”


— Antoine Meillet


Among Indo-European languages, Lithuanian is extraordinarily conservative, retaining many archaic features otherwise found only in ancient languages such as Sanskrit[5] or Ancient Greek. For this reason, it is one of the most important sources in the reconstruction of the Proto-Indo-European language despite its late attestation (with the earliest texts dating only to c. 1500). The phonology and especially the nominal morphology of Lithuanian is almost certainly the most conservative of any living Indo-European language,[4][6] although its verbal morphology is less conservative and may be exceeded by the conservatism of Modern Greek verbs, which maintain a number of archaic features lacking in Lithuanian, such as the synthetic aorist and mediopassive forms.[7]
The Proto-Balto-Slavic languages branched off directly from Proto-Indo-European, then sub-branched into Proto-Baltic and Proto-Slavic. Proto-Baltic branched off into Proto-West Baltic and Proto-East Baltic.[8] Baltic languages passed through a Proto-Balto-Slavic stage, from which Baltic languages retain numerous exclusive and non-exclusive lexical, morphological, phonological and accentual isoglosses in common with the Slavic languages, which represent their closest living Indo-European relatives. Moreover, with Lithuanian being so archaic in phonology, Slavic words can often be deduced from Lithuanian by regular sound laws; for example, Lith. vilkas and Polish wilk ← PBSl. *wilkas (cf. PSl. *vьlkъ) ← PIE *wĺ̥kʷos, all meaning "wolf".
According to some glottochronological speculations,[9][10] the Eastern Baltic languages split from the Western Baltic ones between AD 400 and 600. The Greek geographer Ptolemy had already written of two Baltic tribe/nations by name, the Galindai and Sudinoi (Γαλίνδαι, Σουδινοί) in the 2nd century AD. The differentiation between Lithuanian and Latvian started after 800; for a long period, they could be considered dialects of a single language. At a minimum, transitional dialects existed until the 14th or 15th century and perhaps as late as the 17th century. Also, the 13th- and 14th-century occupation of the western part of the Daugava basin (closely coinciding with the territory of modern Latvia) by the German Sword Brethren had a significant influence on the languages' independent development.
The earliest surviving written Lithuanian text is a translation dating from about 1503–1525 of the Lord's Prayer, the Hail Mary, and the Nicene Creed written in the Southern Aukštaitian dialect. Printed books existed after 1547, but the level of literacy among Lithuanians was low through the 18th century, and books were not commonly available. In 1864, following the January Uprising, Mikhail Muravyov, the Russian Governor General of Lithuania, banned the language in education and publishing and barred use of the Latin alphabet altogether, although books printed in Lithuanian continued to be printed across the border in East Prussia and in the United States. Brought into the country by book smugglers despite the threat of stiff prison sentences, they helped fuel a growing nationalist sentiment that finally led to the lifting of the ban in 1904.
Jonas Jablonskis (1860–1930) made significant contributions to the formation of the standard Lithuanian language. The conventions of written Lithuanian had been evolving during the 19th century, but Jablonskis, in the introduction to his Lietuviškos kalbos gramatika, was the first to formulate and expound the essential principles that were so indispensable to its later development. His proposal for Standard Lithuanian was based on his native Western Aukštaitijan dialect with some features of the eastern Prussian Lithuanians' dialect spoken in Lithuania Minor. These dialects[clarification needed] had preserved archaic phonetics mostly intact due to the influence of the neighbouring Old Prussian language, while the other dialects had experienced different phonetic shifts. Lithuanian has been the official language of Lithuania since 1918. During the Soviet era (see History of Lithuania), it was used in official discourse along with Russian, which, as the official language of the USSR, took precedence over Lithuanian.[11]
Classification[edit]






This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (February 2014) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Lithuanian is one of two living Baltic languages, along with Latvian. An earlier Baltic language, Old Prussian, was extinct by the 18th century; the other Western Baltic languages, Curonian and Sudovian, became extinct earlier. Some theories, such as that of Jānis Endzelīns, considered that the Baltic languages form their own distinct branch of the family of Indo-European languages, but the most widely accepted opinion is the one that suggests the union of Baltic and Slavic languages into a distinct sub-family of Balto-Slavic languages amongst the Indo-European family of languages. Such an opinion was first represented by the likes of August Schleicher, and to a certain extent, Antoine Meillet. Endzelīns thought that the similarity between Baltic and Slavic was explicable through language contact while Schleicher, Meillet and others argued for a genetic kinship between the two families.
An attempt to reconcile the opposing stances was made by Jan Michał Rozwadowski. He proposed that the two language groups were indeed a unity after the division of Indo-European, but also suggested that after the two had divided into separate entities (Baltic and Slavic), they had posterior contact. The genetic kinship view is augmented by the fact that Proto-Balto-Slavic is easily reconstructible with important proofs in historic prosody. The alleged (or certain, as certain as historic linguistics can be) similarities due to contact are seen in such phenomena as the existence of definite adjectives formed by the addition of an inflected pronoun (descended from the same Proto-Indo-European pronoun), which exist in both Baltic and Slavic yet nowhere else in the Indo-European family (languages such as Albanian and the Germanic languages developed definite adjectives independently), and that are not reconstructible for Proto-Balto-Slavic, meaning that they most probably developed through language contact.[citation needed]
The Baltic hydronyms area stretches from the Vistula River in the west to the east of Moscow and from the Baltic Sea in the north to the south of Kiev.[12][13] Vladimir Toporov and Oleg Trubachyov (1961, 1962) studied Baltic hydronyms in the Russian and Ukrainian territory.[14] Hydronyms and archeology analysis show that the Slavs started migrating to the Baltic areas east and north-east directions in the 6-7th centuries, before then, the Baltic and Slavic boundary was south of the Pripyat River.[15] In the 1960s Vladimir Toporov and Vyacheslav Ivanov made the following conclusions about the relationship between the Baltic and Slavic languages: a) Proto-Slavic language formed from the peripheral-type Baltic dialects; b) Slavic linguistic type formed later from the Baltic languages structural model; c) the Slavic structural model is a result of the Baltic languages structural model transformation. These scholars’ theses do not contradict the Baltic and Slavic languages closeness and from a historical perspective specify the Baltic-Slavic languages evolution.[16][17]
Geographic distribution[edit]
Lithuanian is spoken mainly in Lithuania. It is also spoken by ethnic Lithuanians living in today's Belarus, Latvia, Poland, and the Kaliningrad Oblast of Russia, as well as by sizable emigrant communities in Argentina, Australia, Brazil, Canada, Denmark, Estonia, France, Germany, Iceland, Ireland, Norway, Russia, Sweden, the United Kingdom, the United States, Uruguay, and Spain.
2,955,200 people in Lithuania (including 3,460 Tatars), or about 80% of the 1998 population, are native Lithuanian speakers; most Lithuanian inhabitants of other nationalities also speak Lithuanian to some extent. The total worldwide Lithuanian-speaking population is about 3,200,000.
Official status[edit]
Lithuanian is the state language of Lithuania and an official language of the European Union.
Dialects[edit]




Dialects of Lithuanian.[18] Samogitian subdialects are yellow, red, and brown; Aukštaitian subdialects are green, blue, and purple.


The Lithuanian language has two dialects: Aukštaičių (Aukštaitian, Highland Lithuanian) and Žemaičių/Žemaitiu (Samogitian, Lowland Lithuanian). There are significant differences between standard Lithuanian and Samogitian. The modern Samogitian dialect formed in the 13th–16th centuries under the influence of the Curonian language. Lithuanian dialects are closely connected with ethnographical regions of Lithuania.
Dialects are divided into subdialects. Both dialects have three subdialects. Samogitian is divided into West, North and South; Aukštaitian into West (Suvalkiečiai), South (Dzūkai) and East.
Standard Lithuanian is derived mostly from Western Aukštaitian dialects, including the Eastern dialect of Lithuania Minor. Influence of other dialects is more significant in the vocabulary of standard Lithuanian.
Script[edit]



This article contains IPA phonetic symbols. Without proper rendering support, you may see question marks, boxes, or other symbols instead of Unicode characters. For an introductory guide on IPA symbols, see Help:IPA.


Main article: Lithuanian orthography
See also: Lithuanian Braille
Lithuanian uses the Latin script supplemented with diacritics. It has 32 letters. In the collation order, y follows immediately after į (called i nosinė), because both y and į represent the same long vowel [iː]:


Majuscule forms (also called uppercase or capital letters)


A
Ą
B
C
Č
D
E
Ę
Ė
F
G
H
I
Į
Y
J
K
L
M
N
O
P
R
S
Š
T
U
Ų
Ū
V
Z
Ž


Minuscule forms (also called lowercase or small letters)


a
ą
b
c
č
d
e
ę
ė
f
g
h
i
į
y
j
k
l
m
n
o
p
r
s
š
t
u
ų
ū
v
z
ž


In addition, the following digraphs are used, but are treated as sequences of two letters for collation purposes. The digraph ch represents a single sound, the velar fricative [x], while dz and dž are pronounced like straightforward combinations of their component letters (sounds):
Dz dz [dz] (dzė), Dž dž [dʒ] (džė), Ch ch [x] (cha).
The Lithuanian writing system is largely phonemic, i.e., one letter usually corresponds to a single phoneme (sound). There are a few exceptions: for example, the letter i represents either the vowel [ɪ], as in the English sit, or is silent and merely indicates that the preceding consonant is palatalized. The latter is largely the case when i occurs after a consonant and is followed by a back or a central vowel, except in some borrowed words (e.g., the first consonant in lūpa [ˈɫûːpɐ], "lip", is a velarized dental lateral approximant; on the other hand, the first consonant in liūtas [ˈlʲuːt̪ɐs̪], "lion", is a palatalized alveolar lateral approximant; both consonants are followed by the same vowel, the long [uː], and no [ɪ] can be pronounced in liūtas).
A macron (on u), an ogonek (on a, e, i, and u), and y (in place of i) are used for grammatical and historical reasons and always denote vowel length in Modern Standard Lithuanian. Acute, grave, and tilde diacritics are used to indicate pitch accents. However, these pitch accents are generally not written, except in dictionaries, grammars, and where needed for clarity, such as to differentiate homonyms and dialectal use.
Phonology[edit]
Main article: Lithuanian phonology
Consonants[edit]

Consonant phonemes of Lithuanian


Labial
Dental
Alveolar
Palatal
Velar


hard
soft
hard
soft
hard
soft
soft
hard


Nasal
m
mʲ
n
nʲ







Stop
voiceless
p
pʲ
t
tʲ



kʲ
k


voiced
b
bʲ
d
dʲ



ɡʲ
ɡ


Affricate
voiceless

t͡s
t͡sʲ
t͡ʃ
t͡ʃʲ





voiced

d͡z
d͡zʲ
d͡ʒ
d͡ʒʲ





Fricative
voiceless
(f)
(fʲ)
s
sʲ
ʃ
ʃʲ

(xʲ)
(x)


voiced
v
vʲ
z
zʲ
ʒ
ʒʲ
j
(ɣʲ)
(ɣ)


Approximant
ɫ


lʲ




Trill


r
rʲ





All Lithuanian consonants except /j/ have two variants: the non-palatalized one represented by the IPA symbols in the chart, and the palatalized one (i.e. /b/ – /bʲ/, /d/ – /dʲ/, /ɡ/ – /ɡʲ/, and so on). The consonants /f/, /x/, /ɣ/ and their palatalized variants are only found in loanwords.
Vowels[edit]
Lithuanian has six long vowels and five short ones (not including a disputed phoneme marked in brackets). Length has traditionally been considered the distinctive feature, though short vowels are also more centralized and long vowels more peripheral:



Front
Central
Back


Close
iː
ɪ

ʊ
uː


Mid
eː
ɛ, (e)

(ɔ)
oː


Open
æː

ɐ
aː




/e, ɔ/ are restricted to loanwords. Many speakers merge the former with /ɛ/.[19]

Diphthongs[edit]
Lithuanian is traditionally described as having nine diphthongs, ai, au, ei, eu, oi, ou, ui, ie, and uo. However, some approaches (i.e., Schmalstieg 1982) treat them as vowel sequences rather than diphthongs; indeed, the longer component depends on the type of stress, whereas in diphthongs, the longer segment is fixed.



stressless
or tilde
acute stress


ai
[ɐɪ̯ˑ]
[âˑɪ̯]


ei
[ɛɪ̯ˑ]
[æ̂ˑɪ̯]


au
[ɒʊ̯ˑ]
[âˑʊ̯]


eu
[ɛʊ̯ˑ]
[ɛ̂ʊ̯]


iau
[ɛʊ̯ˑ]
[ɛ̂ˑʊ̯]


ie
[iə]
[îə][20]


oi
–
[ɔ̂ɪ̯]


ou
–
[ɔ̂ʊ̯]


ui
[ʊɪ̯ˑ]
[ʊ̂ɪ̯]


uo
[uə]
[ûə][20]


Pitch accent[edit]
Main article: Lithuanian accentuation
The Lithuanian prosodic system is characterized by free accent and distinctive quantity. Its accentuation is sometimes described as a simple tone system, often called pitch accent.[21] In lexical words, one syllable will be tonically prominent. A heavy syllable—that is, a syllable containing a long vowel, diphthong, or a sonorant coda—may have one of two tones, falling tone (or acute tone) or rising tone (or circumflex tone). Light syllables (syllables with short vowels and optionally also obstruent codas) do not have the two-way contrast of heavy syllables.
Grammar[edit]
Main article: Lithuanian grammar
Lithuanian is a highly inflected language in which the relationships between parts of speech and their roles in a sentence are expressed by numerous inflections.
In Lithuanian, there are two grammatical genders for nouns – masculine and feminine, and there are three genders for adjectives, pronouns, numerals and participles: masculine, feminine and neuter. Every attribute has to follow the gender and the number of the noun. The neuter forms of other parts of speech are used with a subject of an undefined gender (a pronoun, an infinitive etc.).
There are twelve noun and five adjective declensions and one (masculine and feminine) participle declension.[22]
Nouns and other parts of nominal morphology are declined in seven cases: nominative, genitive, dative, accusative, instrumental, locative, and vocative. In older Lithuanian texts three additional varieties of the locative case are found: illative, adessive and allative. The most common are the illative, which still is used, mostly in spoken language, and the allative, which survives in the standard language in some idiomatic usages. The adessive is nearly extinct. These additional cases are probably due to the influence of Uralic languages with which Baltic languages have had a long-standing contact (Uralic languages have a great variety of noun cases, a number of which are specialised locative cases).
Lithuanian has a free, mobile stress, and is also characterized by pitch accent.
The Lithuanian verbal morphology shows a number of innovations. Namely, the loss of synthetic passive (which is hypothesized based on the more archaic though long-extinct Indo-European languages), synthetic perfect (formed via the means of reduplication) and aorist; forming subjunctive and imperative with the use of suffixes plus flexions as opposed to solely flections in, e. g., Ancient Greek; loss of the optative mood; merging and disappearing of the -t- and -nt- markers for third person singular and plural, respectively (this, however, occurs in Latvian and Old Prussian as well and may indicate a collective feature of all Baltic languages).
On the other hand, the Lithuanian verbal morphology retains a number of archaic features absent from most modern Indo-European languages (but shared with Latvian). This includes the synthetic formation of the future tense with the help of the -s- suffix; three principal verbal forms with the present tense stem employing the -n- and -st- infixes.
There are three verbal conjugations. The verb būti is the only auxiliary verb in the language. Together with participles, it’s used to form dozens of compound forms.
In the active voice, each verb can be inflected for any of the following moods:

indicative
Indirect
Imperative
Conditional / subjunctive

In the indicative mood and indirect moods, all verbs can have eleven tenses:

simple: present (nešu), past (nešiau), past iterative (nešdavau) and future (nešiu)
compound:


present perfect (esu nešęs), past perfect (buvau nešęs), past iterative perfect (būdavau nešęs), future perfect (būsiu nešęs)
past inchoative (buvau benešąs), past iterative inchoative (būdavau benešąs), future inchoative (būsiu benešąs)

The indirect mood, used only in written narrative speech, has the same tenses corresponding to the appropriate active participle in nominative case, e. g. past of the indirect mood would be nešęs, past iterative inchoative of the indirect mood would be būdavęs benešąs. Since it is a nominal form, this mood cannot be conjugated, but must match the subject’s number and gender.
The subjunctive (or conditional) and the imperative moods have three tenses. Subjunctive: present (neščiau), past (būčiau nešęs), inchoative (būčiau benešąs); imperative: present (nešk), perfect (būk nešęs) and inchoative (būk benešąs).
The infinitive has only one form (nešti). These forms, except the infinitive and indirect mood, are conjugative, having two singular, two plural persons and the third person form common both for plural and singular.
In the passive voice, the form number is not as rich as in the active voice. There are two types of passive voice in Lithuanian: present participle (type I) ant past participle (type II) (in the examples below types I and II are separated with a slash). They both have the same moods and tenses:

Indicative mood: present (esu nešamas/neštas), past (buvau nešamas/neštas), past iterative (būdavau nešamas/neštas) and future (būsiu nešamas/neštas)
Indirect mood: present (esąs nešamas/neštas), past (buvęs nešamas/neštas), past iterative (būdavęs nešamas/neštas) and future (būsiąs nešamas/neštas).
Imperative mood: present (type I only: būk nešamas), past (type II only: būk neštas).
Subjunctive / conditional mood: present (type I only: būčiau nešamas), past (type II only: būčiau neštas).

Lithuanian has the richest participle system of all Indo-European languages, having participles derived from all simple tenses with distinct active and passive forms, and two gerund forms.
In practical terms, the rich overall inflectional system makes the word order have a different meaning than in more analytic languages such as English. The English phrase "a car is coming" translates as "atvažiuoja automobilis" (the rheme first), while "the car is coming" – "automobilis atvažiuoja" (the theme first; word order inversion).
Lithuanian also has a very rich word derivation system and an array of diminutive suffixes.
The first prescriptive grammar book of Lithuanian was commissioned by the Duke of Prussia, Frederick William, for use in the Lithuanian-speaking parishes of East-Prussia. It was written in Latin and German by Daniel Klein and published in Königsberg in 1653/1654. The first scientific Compendium of Lithuanian language was published in German in 1856/57 by August Schleicher, a professor at Prague University. In it he describes Prussian-Lithuanian which later is to become the "skeleton" (Būga) of modern Lithuanian.
Today there are two definitive books on Lithuanian grammar: one in English, the "Introduction to Modern Lithuanian" (called "Beginner's Lithuanian" in its newer editions) by Leonardas Dambriūnas, Antanas Klimas and William R. Schmalstieg, and another in Russian, Vytautas Ambrazas' "Грамматика литовского языка" ("The Grammar of the Lithuanian Language"). Another recent book on Lithuanian grammar is the second edition of "Review of Modern Lithuanian Grammar" by Edmund Remys, published by Lithuanian Research and Studies Center, Chicago, 2003.
Vocabulary[edit]




The Grand Dictionary of the Lithuanian language consists of 20 volumes and contains more than half a million headwords


Indo-European vocabulary[edit]
Lithuanian retains cognates to many words found in classical languages, such as Sanskrit and Latin. These words are descended from Proto-Indo-European. A few examples are the following:

Lith. and Skt. sūnus (son)
Lith. and Skt. avis and Lat. ovis (sheep)
Lith. dūmas and Skt. dhūmas and Lat. fumus (fumes, smoke)
Lith. antras and Skt. antaras (second, the other)
Lith. vilkas and Skt. vṛkas (wolf)
Lith. ratas and Lat. rota (wheel) and Skt. rathas (carriage).
Lith. senis and Lat. senex (an old man) and Skt. sanas (old).
Lith. vyras and Lat. vir (a man) and Skt. vīras (man).
Lith. angis and Lat. anguis (a snake in Latin, a species of snakes in Lithuanian)
Lith. linas and Lat. linum (flax, compare with English 'linen')
Lith. ariu and Lat. aro (I plow)
Lith. jungiu and Lat. iungo (I join)
Lith. gentys and Lat. gentes (tribes) and Skt. jánas[clarification needed] (genus, race).
Lith. mėnesis and Lat. mensis and Skt masa (month)
Lith. dantis and Lat. dentes and Skt dantas (teeth)
Lith. naktis and Lat. noctes and Skt. naktis (night)
Lith. ugnis and Lat. ignis and Skt. agni (fire)
Lith. sėdime and Lat. sedemus (we sit) and Skt. sīdati (sits down).

This even extends to grammar, where for example Latin noun declensions ending in -um often correspond to Lithuanian -ų, with the Latin and Lithuanian fourth declensions being particularly close. Many of the words from this list share similarities with other Indo-European languages, including English.
On the one hand, the lexical and grammatical similarities between Baltic and Slavic languages suggest an affinity between these two language groups. On the other hand, there exist a number of Baltic (particularly Lithuanian) words without counterparts in Slavic languages[which?], notably those that are similar to Sanskrit or Latin[clarification needed]. This fact puzzled many linguists prior to the middle of the 19th century, but was later influential in the re-creation of the Proto Indo-European language[clarification needed]. The history of the relationship between Baltic and Slavic languages, and our understanding of the affinity between the two groups, remain in dispute (see: Balto-Slavic languages).
Loanwords[edit]
In a 1934 book entitled Die Germanismen des Litauischen. Teil I: Die deutschen Lehnwörter im Litauischen, K. Alminauskis found 2,770 loanwords, of which about 130 were of uncertain origin. The majority of the loanwords were found to have been derived from the Polish, Belarusian, and German languages, with some evidence that these languages all acquired the words from contacts and trade with Prussia during the era of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania.[23] Loanwords comprised about 20% of the vocabulary used in the first book printed in the Lithuanian language in 1547, Martynas Mažvydas's Catechism.[24] But as a result of language preservation and purging policies, Slavic loanwords currently constitute only 1.5% of the Standard Lithuanian lexicon, while German loanwords constitute only 0.5% of it.[25] The majority of loanwords in the 20th century arrived from the Russian language.[26]
Towards the end of the 20th century, a number of words and expressions related to new technologies and telecommunications were borrowed from English language. The Lithuanian government has an established language policy which encourages the development of equivalent vocabulary to replace loanwords.[27] However, despite the government's best efforts to avoid the use of loanwords in the Lithuanian language, many English words have become accepted and are now included in Lithuanian language dictionaries.[28][29] In particular, words having to do with new technologies have permeated the Lithuanian vernacular, including such words as:

Monitorius (vaizduoklis) (computer monitor)
Faksas (fax)
Kompiuteris (computer)
Failas (byla, rinkmena) (electronic file)

Other common foreign words have also been adopted by the Lithuanian language. Some of these include:

Taksi (taxi)
Pica (pizza)
Alkoholis (alcohol)
Bankas (bank)
Pasas (passport, pass)

These words have been modified to suit the grammatical and phonetic requirements of the Lithuanian language, but their foreign roots are obvious.
Old Lithuanian[edit]
The language of the earliest Lithuanian writings, in the 16th and 17th centuries, is known as Old Lithuanian and differs in some significant respects from the Lithuanian of today.
Besides the specific differences given below, it should be noted that nouns, verbs and adjectives still had separate endings for the dual number. The dual persists today in some dialects. Example:


Case
"two good friends"


Nom-Acc
dù gerù draugù


Dat
dvı̇́em gerı̇́em draugám


Inst
dviem̃ geriem̃ draugam̃


Pronunciation[edit]
The vowels written ą, ę, į, ų were still pronounced as long nasal vowels,[30] not as long oral vowels as in today's Lithuanian.
The original Baltic long ā was still retained as such, e.g. bralis "brother" (modern brólis).
Nouns[edit]
Compared to the modern language, there were three additional cases, formed under the influence of the Finnic languages. The original locative case had been replaced by four so-called postpositive cases, the inessive case, illative case, adessive case and allative case, which correspond to the prepositions "in", "into", "at" and "towards", respectively. They were formed by affixing a postposition to one of the previous cases:

The inessive added -en to the original locative.
The illative added -n(a) to the accusative.
The adessive added -pie to the original locative.
The allative added -pie to the genitive.

The inessive has become the modern locative case, while the other three have disappeared. Note, however, that the illative case is still used occasionally in the colloquial language (mostly in the singular): Lietuvon "to Lithuania", miestan "to the city". This form is relatively productive: for instance, it is not uncommon to hear "skrendame Niujorkan (we are flying to New York)".
The uncontracted dative plural -mus was still common.
Adjectives[edit]
Adjectives could belong to all four accent classes in Old Lithuanian (now they can only belong to classes 3 and 4).
Additional remnants of i-stem adjectives still existed, e.g.:

loc. sg. didimè pulkè "in the big crowd" (now didžiame)
loc. sg. gerèsnime "better" (now geresniamè)
loc. sg. mažiáusime "smallest" (now mažiáusiame)

Additional remnants of u-stem adjectives still existed, e.g. rūgštùs "sour":


Case
Newer
Older


Inst sg
rūgščiù
rūgštumı̇̀


Loc sg
rūgščiamè
rūgštumè


Gen pl
rūgščių̃
rūgštų̃


Acc pl
rū́gščius
rū́gštus


Inst pl
rūgščiaı̇̃s
rūgštumı̇̀s


No u-stem remnants existed in the dative singular and locative plural.
Definite adjectives, originally involving a pronoun suffixed to an adjective, had not merged into a single word in Old Lithuanian. Examples:

pa-jo-prasto "ordinary" (now pàprastojo)
nu-jie-vargę "tired" (now nuvar̃gusieji)

Verbs[edit]
The Proto-Indo-European class of athematic verbs still existed in Old Lithuanian:



'be'
'remain'
'give'
'save'


1st sg
esmı̇̀
liekmı̇̀
dúomi
gélbmi


2nd sg
esı̇̀
lieksı̇̀
dúosi
gélbsi


3rd sg
ẽst(i)
liẽkt(i)
dúost(i)
gélbt(i)


1st dual
esvà
liekvà
dúova
gélbva


2nd dual
està
liektà
dúosta
gélbta


1st pl
esmè
liekmè
dúome
gélbme


2nd pl
estè
liektè
dúoste
gélbte


3rd pl
ẽsti
liẽkt(i)
dúost(i)
gélbt(i)


The optative mood (i.e. the third-person imperative) still had its own endings, -ai for third-conjugation verbs and -ie for other verbs, instead of using regular third-person present endings.
Syntax[edit]
Word order was freer in Old Lithuanian. For example, a noun in the genitive case could either precede or follow the noun it modifies.
See also[edit]

Lithuanian dictionaries
Martynas Mažvydas
Samogitian dialect

References[edit]


^ Modern Lithuanian at Ethnologue (19th ed., 2016)
Old Lithuanian at Ethnologue (19th ed., 2016)
^ Hammarström, Harald; Forkel, Robert; Haspelmath, Martin, eds. (2017). "Lithuanian". Glottolog 3.0. Jena, Germany: Max Planck Institute for the Science of Human History. 
^ http://osp.stat.gov.lt/statistiniu-rodikliu-analize/?hash=ea516958-db7e-431f-931e-0f42e7f9e6bc&portletFormName=visualization
^ a b Zinkevičius, Z. (1993). Rytų Lietuva praeityje ir dabar. Vilnius: Mokslo ir enciklopedijų leidykla. p. 9. ISBN 5-420-01085-2. ...linguist generally accepted that Lithuanian language is the most archaic among live Indo-European languages... 
^ "The Origin of the Lithuanian Language". www.lituanus.org. Retrieved 2016-08-07. 
^ Lithuanian Language. Encyclopædia Britannica.
^ Dini, P.U. (2000). Baltų kalbos. Lyginamoji istorija. Vilnius: Mokslo ir enciklopedijų leidybos institutas. pp. 101–103. ISBN 5-420-01444-0. 
^ lituanus William Smalstieg, University Pennsylvania 1982
^ Girdenis A., Mažiulis V (1994). "Baltų kalbų divergencinė chronologija". Baltistica. XXVII, Nr. 2: 10. 
^ Blažek V., Novotna P (2007). "Glotochronology and its application to the Balto-Slavic languages". Baltistica. XLII, Nr. 2: 208–209. 
^ Dini, P.U. (2000). Baltų kalbos. Lyginamoji istorija. Vilnius: Mokslo ir enciklopedijų leidybos institutas. p. 362. ISBN 5-420-01444-0.  "Priešingai nei skelbė leninietiškos deklaracijos apie tautas („Jokių privilegijų jokiai tautai ir jokiai kalbai”), reali TSRS politika – kartu ir kalbų politika – buvo ne kas kita kaip rusinimas77. Ir 1940-1941 metais, iš karto po priverstinio Pabaltijo valstybių įjungimo į TSRS, ir vėliau vyraujanti kalbos politikos linija Lietuvos TSRS ir Latvijos TSRS buvo tautinių kalbų raidos derinimas su socialistinių nacijų raida78. Tokia padėtis tęsėsi penkiasdešimt metų79."
^ Mallory; Adams, J. P.; Douglas Q. (1997). Encyclopedia of Indo-European culture. London: Fitzroy Dearborn Publishers. p. 49. ISBN 9781884964985. 
^ Fortson, B. (2004). Indo-European language and culture. An Introduction. Padstow: Blackwell Publishing. pp. 378–379. 
^ Dini, P.U. (2000). Baltų kalbos. Lyginamoji istorija. Vilnius: Mokslo ir enciklopedijų leidybos institutas. p. 38. ISBN 5-420-01444-0. 
^ Smoczyński, W. (1986). Języki indoeuropejskie. Języki bałtyckie. Warszawa: PWN. 
^ Dini, P.U. (2000). Baltų kalbos. Lyginamoji istorija. Vilnius: Mokslo ir enciklopedijų leidybos institutas. p. 143. ISBN 5-420-01444-0. 
^ Бирнбаум Х. О двух направлениях в языковом развитии // Вопросы языкознания, 1985, № 2, стр. 36
^ Zinkevičius, Zigmas; Alexas Stanislovas Girdenis (1966). "Dėl lietuvių kalbos tarmių klasifikacijos". Kalbotyra (Slavistica Vilnensis). 14. ISSN 1392-1517. 
^ Ambrazas et al. (1997), p. 24.
^ a b Vadinamųjų sutaptinių dvibalsių [ie uo] garsinė ir fonologinė sudėtis | Girdenis | Baltistica
^ Phonetic invariance and phonological stability: Lithuanian pitch accents Grzegorz Dogil & Gregor Möhler, 1998 [1][dead link]
^ Dabartinės lietuvių kalbos gramatika. Vilnius, 1997
^ Ways of Germanisms into Lithuanian. N. Cepiene, Acta Baltico-Slavica, 2006 Archived 6 February 2012 at the Wayback Machine.
^ Martynas Mažvydas' Language Archived 4 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine.. Zigmas Zinkevičius, 1996. Accessed October 26, 2007.
^ Loanwords (in Lithuanian)
^ Slavic loanwords in the northern sub-dialect of the southern part of west high Lithuanian Archived 6 February 2012 at the Wayback Machine.. V. Sakalauskiene, Acta Baltico-Slavica 2006. Accessed October 26, 2007.
^ lang_de State Language Policy Guidelines 2003–2008[permanent dead link]. Seimas of Lithuania, 2003. Accessed October 26, 2007.
^ Dicts.com English to Lithuanian online dictionary Archived 28 July 2013 at the Wayback Machine.
^ Lingvozone.com, Linvozone English to Lithuanian online dictionary.
^ Ambrazas et al. (1997), p. 13.


Sources[edit]

Ambrazas, Vytautas; Geniušienė, Emma; Girdenis, Aleksas; Sližienė, Nijolė; Valeckienė, Adelė; Valiulytė, Elena; Tekorienė, Dalija; Pažūsis, Lionginas (1997), Ambrazas, Vytautas, ed., Lithuanian Grammar, Vilnius: Institute of the Lithuanian Language, ISBN 9986-813-22-0 
Leonardas Dambriūnas, Antanas Klimas, William R. Schmalstieg, Beginner's Lithuanian, Hippocrene Books, 1999, ISBN 0-7818-0678-X. Older editions (copyright 1966) called "Introduction to modern Lithuanian".
Remys, Edmund, Review of Modern Lithuanian Grammar, Lithuanian Research and Studies Center, Chicago, 2nd revised edition, 2003.
Klimas, Antanas. "Baltic and Slavic revisited". Lituanus vol. 19, no. 1, Spring 1973 . Retrieved October 23, 2007. 
Zigmas Zinkevičius, "Lietuvių kalbos istorija" ("History of Lithuanian Language") Vol.1, Vilnius: Mokslas, 1984, ISBN 5-420-00102-0.
Remys, Edmund, General distinguishing features of various Indo-European languages and their relationship to Lithuanian, Indogermanische Forschungen, Berlin, New York, 2007.

External links[edit]



Lithuanian edition of Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia





Wikivoyage has a phrasebook for Lithuanian.





Lithuanian language test of Wikinews at Wikimedia Incubator





For a list of words relating to Lithuanian language, see the Lithuanian language category of words in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.



Baltic Online (part of Early Indo-European Online) – Lithuanian and Old Lithuanian grammar
Academic Dictionary of Lithuanian
The Historical Grammar of Lithuanian language
2005 analysis of Indo-European linguistic relationships
Lithuanian verbs training
Lithuanian verbs test







v
t
e


 Languages of Lithuania



Official language



Lithuanian





Minority languages



Belarusian
Karaim
Polish
Russian
Ukrainian





Sign languages



Lithuanian Sign Language
Russian Sign Language












v
t
e


Baltic languages






Curonian
Galindian
Latgalian
Latvian
Lithuanian
Old Prussian
Samogitian
Selonian
Semigallian
Sudovian (Yotvingian)






Italics indicate extinct languages










v
t
e


Lithuania articles



History




Early



Balts
Lithuania proper
Grand Duchy

1219–95
Duchy
Kingdom
Christianization
Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth







Revival and
independence



Press ban
National Revival

Great Seimas of Vilnius


Act of Independence
Wars of Independence

Lithuanian–Soviet War
Polish–Lithuanian War


1919 Polish coup d'état attempt
First Soviet republic
1926 coup d'état





WWII and
occupations



Occupation of the Baltic states

by the Soviet Union (1940)
by Nazi Germany
by the Soviet Union (1944)


Holocaust
Resistance
Second Soviet republic
Baltic states under Soviet rule (1944–91)
Government-in-exile





Restoration



Reform Movement (Sąjūdis)
Singing Revolution
Baltic Way
Act of Re-Establishment
January Events
August Putsch











Geography







Cities

capital


Climate
Extreme points
Flora
Forests
Lakes
Regional parks
Rivers
Towns








Politics







Administrative divisions

counties
municipalities
elderships


Constitution

Constitutional Court


Elections
Foreign relations
Government

Prime Minister


Law

Law enforcement


Seimas parliament

Speaker
Political parties


President





Military



Land Force
Naval Force
Air Force
Special Operations Force








Economy







Agriculture
Banks

Central bank


Energy
Euro
Litas (former currency)
Telecommunications
Transport

airports
rail
roads
seaport


Tourism








Society







Demographics
Education

universities


Ethnic minorities
Ethnographic regions
Language
Lithuanians
Religion





Culture



Calendar
Cinema
Cuisine
Cultural history
Ethnographic Lithuania
Literature
Music
Mythology
Name
Public holidays
Sport
Symbols

anthem
coat of arms
flag














Outline
Index



Book
Category
Portal








Languages portal
Lithuania portal





Authority control



LCCN: sh85077647
NDL: 00569566











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Lithuanian_language&oldid=815383322"					Categories: Lithuanian languageLanguages of LithuaniaLanguages of PolandEast Baltic languagesHidden categories: Language articles citing Ethnologue 19All articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from February 2014Webarchive template wayback linksArticles with dead external links from September 2016Articles with permanently dead external linksWikipedia introduction cleanup from May 2017All pages needing cleanupArticles covered by WikiProject Wikify from May 2017All articles covered by WikiProject WikifyUse dmy dates from April 2015Articles containing Lithuanian-language textLanguages with ISO 639-2 codeLanguages with ISO 639-1 codeArticles with attributed pull quotesWikipedia articles needing clarification from November 2014Articles needing additional references from February 2014All articles needing additional referencesAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from January 2016Wikipedia articles needing clarification from August 2013All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrasesArticles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from August 2016Wikipedia articles needing clarification from August 2016Wikipedia articles with LCCN identifiers