





This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (July 2011) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)






Australia






This article is part of a series on the
politics and government of
Australia




Constitution



Constitution of Australia

Statute of Westminster Adoption Act

Australia Act









The Crown


Monarch: Elizabeth II

Governor-General: Sir Peter Cosgrove









Executive



Prime Minister: Malcolm Turnbull


Deputy Prime Minister: [Office Vacant]

Federal Executive Council

Ministry




Current (71st)
Cabinet















Legislature


Parliament

Senate


President: Stephen Parry



House of Representatives


Speaker: Tony Smith



Opposition


Leader: Bill Shorten

Shadow Ministry












Judiciary


High Court
Lower Courts
Laws of Australia








Elections


Federal electoral system

Electoral divisions


Political parties
Recent elections




Federal: 2016
2013
2010





Federal by-elections
Referendums








States and territories



Governors and Administrators
Premiers and Chief Ministers
Parliaments and Assemblies
State courts
State electoral systems









Local government



NSW
Vic
Qld
WA
SA
Tas
NT









Related topics



Regions
Foreign relations
Defence Force
Public holidays
Republicanism










Other countries
Atlas








v
t
e





Local government in Australia is the third tier of government in Australia administered by the states and territories, which in turn are beneath the federal tier.[1] Local government is not mentioned in the Constitution of Australia and two referenda in the 1970s and 1980s to alter the Constitution relating to local government were unsuccessful.[2] Every state government recognises local government in their respective constitutions.[3] Unlike Canada or the United States, there is only one level of local government in each state, with no distinction such as cities and counties.
The local governing body is generally referred to as a council, and the territories governed are collectively referred to as "local government areas"; however, terms such as "city" or "shire" also have a geographic interpretation. In August 2016 there were 547 local councils in Australia.[4]
Despite the single level of local government in Australia, there are a number of extensive areas with relatively low populations which are not a part of any local government area. Powers of local governments in these areas may be exercised by special purpose bodies established outside the general legislation, as with Victoria's alpine resorts, or directly by state governments. The area covered by local councils in Australia ranges from as small as 1.5 km2 (0.58 sq mi) for the Shire of Peppermint Grove in metropolitan Perth, to the Shire of East Pilbara in the Pilbara region of Western Australia, which covers 380,000 km2 (150,000 sq mi), an area larger than Germany or Japan.



Contents


1 State controlled
2 Local governments by type and state
3 Classification
4 History

4.1 Reforms


5 Types of local government
6 Constitutional position of local government
7 Powers and functions
8 Unincorporated areas

8.1 Australian Capital Territory
8.2 New South Wales
8.3 Northern Territory
8.4 South Australia
8.5 Victoria
8.6 Western Australia


9 See also
10 References
11 External links



State controlled[edit]
Local government in Australia is subject to the exclusive jurisdiction of the states or territories. The functions and practices of local government councils are similar throughout Australia, but may vary to some degree between jurisdictions.

Local government areas of New South Wales
Local government areas of the Northern Territory
Local government in Queensland (List)
Local government areas of South Australia
Local government areas of Tasmania
Local government areas of Victoria
Local government areas of Western Australia

The Australian Capital Territory is not divided into territory and local government.
State departments oversee local government councils and may intervene in their affairs, subject to relevant legislation.[5]
Local governments by type and state[edit]




Local government areas in Australia






Offices of the City of Sydney council, a local government area within Sydney






Melbourne Town Hall, the offices of the City of Melbourne council


As of January 2017[update], the following table provides a summary of local government areas by states and territories by local government area types:


Local government area types
NSW
Vic
Qld
WA
SA
Tas
NT
Total


Boroughs

1





1


Cities
26
33
7
22
21
6
2
121


Councils
28




23

51


District councils




35


35


Municipalities
6






6


Regional councils
8

29
11
4


52


Rural cities

6


1


7


Shires
58
39
24
107


10
238


Towns


1
12
2

2
17


Community government councils






2
2


Aboriginal shires


12




12


Island councils


1




1


Sub-total
126
79
74
152
63
29
16
543


Unincorporated
2
10


1

5
18


Total
128
89
74
152
64
29
21
561


Classification[edit]
The Australian Classification of Local Governments (ACLG) categorises Australian local governing authorities using the population, the population density and the proportion of the population that is classified as urban for the council.[6] The classification, at the two-digit level, is:

RA –  Rural Agricultural
RS –  Rural Significant
RT –  Rural Remote
UC –  Urban Capital
UD –  Urban Developed
UF –  Urban Fringe
UR –  Urban Regional

History[edit]
There is no mention of local government in the Constitution of Australia, though it is mentioned several times in the Annotated Constitution of Australia[7][8] namely where "Municipal institutions and local government" appears in Annotation 447, "Power of the Parliament of a Colony" under "Residuary Legislative Powers" on pages 935 and 936.
The first official local government in Australia was the Perth Town Trust, established in 1838, only three years after British settlement.[2] The Adelaide Corporation followed, created by the province of South Australia in October 1840. The City of Melbourne and the Sydney Corporation followed, both in 1842.[2][9] All of these early forms failed; it was not until the 1860s and 1870s that the various colonies established widespread stable forms of local government, mainly for the purpose of raising money to build roads in rural and outer-urban regions. Council representatives attended conventions before Federation, however local government was unquestionably regarded as outside the Constitutional realm.[2]
In the 1970s, the Whitlam Government expanded the level of funding to local governments in Australia beyond grants for road construction. General purpose grants become available for the first time.[10]
Reforms[edit]
Significant reforms took place in the 1980s and 1990s in which state governments used metrics and efficiency analysis developed within the private sector in the local government arena. Each state conducted an inquiry into the benefits of council amalgamations during the 1990s.[11] In the early 1990s, Victoria saw the number of local councils reduced from 210 to 78.[11] South Australia, Tasmania and Queensland saw some reductions in the number of local governments while Western Australia and New South Wales rejected compulsory mergers. New South Wales eventually forced the merging of some councils. The main purpose of amalgamating councils was for greater efficiency and to improve operations, but forced amalgamation of councils is sometimes seen as a dilution of representative democracy.[11]
An increase in the range of services offered by councils, but only minor cost savings of less than 10% have been noted by academics as outcomes after mergers. The council mergers have resulted in widespread job losses and lingering resentment from some whose roles have experienced a larger workload.[11]
The growth of the Regional Organisations of Councils has also been a factor in local government reform in Australia.[11] In 1995, there were 50 such agreements across the country. A 2002 study identified 55 ROCs with the largest involving 18 councils.[11]
Types of local government[edit]




Offices of the Berrigan Shire Council in Berrigan, New South Wales


Local governments are subdivisions of the states and the Northern Territory. The Australian Capital Territory has no separate local governments; and functions in Canberra and the surrounding area normally performed by state and local governments are performed there by the territorial government of the Australian Capital Territory.
Although they are all essentially identical in function, Australian local governments have a variety of names. The term "local government area" is used to refer collectively to all local governments regardless of status, whilst the local governing body itself is generally known as a council. Today, the styles "borough", "city", "district", "municipality", "region", "shire", "town", "community government", "Aboriginal shire" and "Island" are used in addition to areas/councils without a specific style.
In general, an urban or suburban LGA is called a city, as in the City of Canada Bay or City of Bunbury, and is governed by a City Council. A rural LGA covering a larger rural area is usually called a shire, as in Shire of Mornington Peninsula or Lachlan Shire, and is governed by a Shire Council.
Sometimes words other than "City" or "Shire" will be used in the names of LGAs. The word "Municipality" occurs in some states: in New South Wales, it is typically used for older urban areas and the word is also used for several rural towns in South Australia. Some rural areas in South Australia are known as "District Councils", while larger rural towns and small metropolitan centres in Queensland and Western Australia simply use the term "Town". New South Wales and Queensland have introduced a new term, "Region", for LGAs formed by the amalgamation of smaller shires and rural cities. Historically, the word "Borough" was common for small towns and metropolitan areas in Victoria, but only the Borough of Queenscliffe remains. In New South Wales, where the Local Government Act does not require a designation, some local governments are legally known simply as "Councils", such as Port Macquarie-Hastings Council, Inner West Council, or Federation Council. All the LGAs in Tasmania that were previously 'Municipalities' have been renamed 'Councils.'
Almost all local councils have the same administrative functions and similar political structures, regardless of their naming, and retain a particular designation ("Shire", "Borough", "Town", "City") for historical reasons only. They will typically have an elected council and usually a mayor or shire president responsible for chairing meetings of the council. In some councils, the mayor is a directly elected figure, but in most cases the mayor is elected by their fellow councillors from among their own number. The powers of mayors vary as well. In some states such as Queensland, the mayors have broad executive functions, whereas in New South Wales mayors are essentially ceremonial figureheads who can only exercise power at the discretion of the council.
Most of the capital city LGAs administer only the central business districts and nearby central suburbs. A notable exception is the City of Brisbane, the most populous LGA in the country, which administers a significant part of the Brisbane metropolitan area. In most cases, when a city's population statistics are used, it is the statistical division population rather than the local government area.
Constitutional position of local government[edit]
Local government powers are determined by state governments, and states have primary responsibility for funding and exclusive responsibility for supervision of local councils.
Local government is mentioned in the annotated Australian constitution, as a department of the State Governments, and they are mentioned in the constitutions of each of the six states. A 1988 referendum sought to explicitly insert mention of local government in the federal constitution but this was comprehensively defeated. A further referendum was proposed in 2013, but was cancelled due to the change in the election date.
Federal government interaction with local councils happens regularly through the provision of federal grants to help fund local government managed projects.
Powers and functions[edit]




Offices of the Caboolture Shire Council in Caboolture, Queensland


All local governments are approximately equal in their theoretical powers, although LGAs that encompass large cities such as Brisbane and the Gold Coast command more resources due to their larger population base. Unlike local governments in many other countries, services such as police, fire protection and schools are provided by state or territory government rather than by local councils.
The councils' chief responsibility in the first half of the 20th century was the provision of physical infrastructure such as roads, bridges and sewerage.[12] From the 1970s the emphasis changed to community facilities such as libraries and parks, maintenance of local roads, town planning and development approvals, and local services such as waste disposal. Child care, tourism and urban renewal were also beginning to be part of local governments' role. These are financed by collection of local land taxes known as "rates," and grants from the state and Commonwealth governments. They are caricatured as being concerned only with the "three Rs": Rates, Roads and Rubbish.
However, the roles of local government areas in Australia have recently expanded as higher levels of government have devolved activities to the third tier. Examples include the provision of community health services, regional airports and pollution control[12] as well as community safety and accessible transport.[5] The changes in services has been described as a shift from 'services to property' towards 'services to people'.[5] Community expectations of local government in Australia has risen in the 21st century partly as a result of wider participation in decision making and transparent management practices.[12]
Recent years have seen some State governments devolving additional powers onto LGAs. In Queensland and Western Australia LGAs have been granted the power to independently enact their own local subsidiary legislation, in contrast to the previous system of by-laws. Councils also have organised their own representative structures such as Local Government Associations and Regional Organisations of Councils.
Doctrines of new public management have shaped state government legislation towards increased freedoms aiming to allow greater flexibility on the part of local governments.[5]
Unincorporated areas[edit]
Unlike many other countries, Australia has only one level of local government immediately beneath state and territorial governments. Aside from very sparsely populated areas and a few other special cases, almost all of Australia is part of a local government area. Unincorporated areas are often in remote locations, cover vast areas or have very small populations.
Australian Capital Territory[edit]
The Australian Capital Territory has no municipalities and is in some sense an unincorporated area. The ACT government is directly responsible for matters normally carried out by a local government.
New South Wales[edit]
New South Wales has 2 unincorporated areas:

Unincorporated Far West Region, located in the far north west of the state is sparsely populated. A civil servant in the state capital manages such matters as are necessary.
Lord Howe Island.

Northern Territory[edit]
In the Northern Territory, 1.45% of the total area and 4.0% of the population are in unincorporated areas, including Unincorporated Top End Region (Finniss-Mary, the largest), areas covered by the Darwin Rates Act—Nhulunbuy, Alyangula on Groote Eylandt in the northern region, and Yulara in the southern region.[13]
South Australia[edit]
In South Australia, 60% of the state's area is unincorporated and communities located within receive municipal services provided by a state agency, the Outback Communities Authority.[14]
Victoria[edit]
Victoria has 10 unincorporated areas, which are either ski resorts or small islands:[13]

Falls Creek Alpine Resort
French Island and Sandstone Island [15]
Elizabeth Island
Gabo Island
Lady Julia Percy Island
Lake Mountain Alpine Resort
Mount Baw Baw Alpine Resort
Mount Buller Alpine Resort
Mount Hotham Alpine Resort
Mount Stirling Alpine Resort

Western Australia[edit]
Western Australia has 3 unincorporated areas:

Abrolhos Islands, which are officially uninhabited and controlled by the WA Department of Fisheries.
A-class reserves either in, or close to, the Perth metropolitan area, namely Rottnest Island (controlled by the Rottnest Island Authority) and Kings Park (Botanic Gardens and Parks Authority).

See also[edit]




Australia portal
Politics portal





Government of Australia
Australian Local Government Association
List of the 25 largest Local Government Areas by population
Australian Local Government Fossil Fuel Divestment

References[edit]


^ "Democracy in Australia – Australia's political system" (PDF). Australian Collaboration. Retrieved 25 January 2014. 
^ a b c d Kelly, A. H. (4–8 July 2011). The Development of Local Government in Australia, Focusing on NSW: From Road Builder to Planning Agency to Servant of the State Government and Developmentalism (Paper). World Planning Schools Congress 2011. Perth: University of Wollongong. Retrieved 1 January 2017. 
^ "Appendix G Local government in State constitutions". Expert Panel on Constitutional Recognition of Local Government. Australian Government. December 2011. Archived from the original on 10 May 2013. Retrieved 24 June 2013. 
^ "Local Government". Department of Infrastructure and Regional Development. 17 August 2016. Archived from the original on 10 October 2016. 
^ a b c d Dollery, Brian E.; Lorenzo Robotti (2008). The Theory and Practice of Local Government Reform. Edward Elgar Publishing. pp. 93–96. ISBN 1781956685. Retrieved 1 July 2013. 
^ "Local Government National Report 2013–14" (PDF). Department of Infrastructure and Regional Development. July 2015. p. Appendix F. Retrieved 27 October 2015. 
^ "The annotated constitution of the Australian Commonwealth (1901)". Retrieved 9 August 2014. 
^ "The annotated constitution of the Australian Commonwealth (1901)" (PDF). Retrieved 9 August 2014. 
^ "Council history". City of Melbourne. Retrieved 1 July 2013. 
^ Dollery, Brian E.; Marshall, Neil (1997). Australian Local Government: Reform and Renewal. Macmillan Education AU. p. 4. ISBN 0732929040. Retrieved 1 July 2013. 
^ a b c d e f Dollery, Brian E.; Joseph Garcea, Edward C. Lasage, Jr. (2008). Local Government Reform: A Comparative Analysis of Advanced Anglo-American Countries. Edward Elgar Publishing. pp. 18–19. ISBN 1782543864. Retrieved 1 July 2013. CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link)
^ a b c Brunet-Jailly, Emmanuel; John Francis Martin (2010). Local Government in a Global World: Australia and Canada in Comparative Perspective. University of Toronto Press. pp. 82–84. ISBN 0802099637. Retrieved 1 July 2013. 
^ a b "Local Government Areas and Statistical Local Areas - Alphabetic". Australian Standard Geographical Classification (ASGC), Jul 2008. Australian Bureau of Statistics. 26 September 2008. Retrieved 31 January 2011. 
^ "Welcome to the Outback Communities Authority". Government of South Australia. Archived from the original on 13 September 2015. Retrieved 9 September 2015. 
^ Department of Planning and Community Development, Government of Victoria, Australia (2013-04-19). "French Island and Sandstone Island Planning Scheme Home Page and user's guide". Planningschemes.dpcd.vic.gov.au. Retrieved 2013-04-25. CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link)


External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Local government in Australia.



Australian Bureau of Statistics: Australian Standard Geographical Classification (ASGC) 2005
"Table 1: Population growth and turnover in Local Government Areas (LGAs), 2006 to 2011". Australian Bureau of Statistics. Retrieved 10 August 2015.  – Spreadsheet of population data for local government areas in the 2006 and 2011 Australian census
Australian Government
australianpolitics.com
Local Government Focus (newspaper)
Local Government and Planning Ministers' Council
Local Government & Municipal Knowledge Base







v
t
e


Local government in Australia






New South Wales (list)
Northern Territory (list)
Queensland (list)
South Australia (list)
Tasmania (list)
Victoria (list)
Western Australia (list)












v
t
e


Politics of Australia



Commonwealth



Monarch
Governor-General
Prime Minister
Cabinet (Shadow Cabinet)
Executive Council
Ministry
Foreign relations


Parliament
House of Representatives
Senate
Opposition Leader


High Court
Lower courts


Constitution
Statute of Westminster
Australia Act








Federal elections



pre-1969
1969
1972
1974
1975
1977
1980
1983
1984
1987
1990
1993
1996
1998
2001
2004
2007
2010
2013
2016
next
by-elections





State/Territory
governments



Governors and Administrators
Premiers and Chief Ministers
Parliaments and Assemblies


NSW
Vic
Qld
WA
SA
Tas
ACT
NT





State/Territory
elections



Vic 2014
SA 2014
Tas 2014
NSW 2015
ACT 2016
NT 2016
WA 2017
Qld 2017


Vic 2018
SA 2018
Next Tas
NSW 2019
ACT 2020
NT 2020
WA 2021
Qld 2020





Local government



NSW
Vic
Qld
WA
SA
Tas
NT





Political parties



Coalition (Liberal, National, Liberal National, Country Liberal)
Conservatives
Greens
Hinch
Katter
Labor
Lambie
Liberal Democrat
One Nation
Xenophon
Other parties












v
t
e


Local government in Oceania



Sovereign states



Australia
Federated States of Micronesia
Fiji
Kiribati
Marshall Islands
Nauru
New Zealand
Palau
Papua New Guinea
Samoa
Solomon Islands
Tonga
Tuvalu
Vanuatu





Associated states
of New Zealand



Cook Islands
Niue





Dependencies
and other territories



American Samoa
Christmas Island
Cocos (Keeling) Islands
Easter Island
French Polynesia
Guam
Hawaii
New Caledonia
Norfolk Island
Northern Mariana Islands
Pitcairn Islands
Tokelau
Wallis and Futuna












v
t
e


Articles on second-level administrative divisions of Oceanian countries



 Australasia



Australia
New Zealand





 Melanesia



East Timor
Fiji
Papua New Guinea





 Micronesia



Marshall Islands
Federated States of Micronesia





 Polynesia



Tonga






Table of administrative country subdivisions by country









						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Local_government_in_Australia&oldid=817711924"					Categories: Politics of AustraliaLocal government in AustraliaLocal government areas of AustraliaSubdivisions of AustraliaLists of subdivisions of AustraliaCountry subdivisions in OceaniaSecond-level administrative country subdivisionsHidden categories: CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors listArticles needing additional references from July 2011All articles needing additional referencesEngvarB from July 2016Use dmy dates from July 2016Articles containing potentially dated statements from January 2017All articles containing potentially dated statementsCommons category without a link on Wikidata