



Comparison of geostationary, GPS, GLONASS, Galileo, Compass (MEO), International Space Station, Hubble Space Telescope and Iridium constellation orbits, with the Van Allen radiation belts and the Earth to scale.[a] The Moon's orbit is around 9 times larger than geostationary orbit.[b] (In the SVG file, hover over an orbit or its label to highlight it; click to load its article.)


A low Earth orbit (LEO) is an orbit around Earth with an altitude of 2,000 kilometres (1,200 mi) or less, and an orbital period of between about 84 and 127 minutes. Objects below approximately 160 kilometres (99 mi) will experience very rapid orbital decay and altitude loss due to atmospheric drag.[1][2]
With the exception of the 24 astronauts who flew lunar flights in the Apollo program during the four-year period spanning 1968 through 1972, all human spaceflights have taken place in LEO or below. The International Space Station conducts operations in LEO. The altitude record for a human spaceflight in LEO was Gemini 11 with an apogee of 1,374.1 kilometres (853.8 mi). All crewed space stations to date, as well as the majority of satellites, have been in LEO.



Contents


1 Orbital characteristics
2 Use of LEO

2.1 Examples


3 Space debris
4 See also
5 Notes
6 References



Orbital characteristics[edit]
Objects in LEO encounter atmospheric drag from gases in the thermosphere (approximately 80–500 km up) or exosphere (approximately 500 km and up), depending on orbit height. Due to atmospheric drag, satellites do not usually orbit below 300 km. Objects in LEO orbit Earth between the denser part of the atmosphere and below the inner Van Allen radiation belt.
GOCE orbited at about 255 km and had an aerodynamic shape and ion thrusters to reduce and compensate for atmospheric drag.
The mean orbital velocity needed to maintain a stable low Earth orbit is about 7.8 km/s, but reduces with increased orbital altitude. Calculated for circular orbit of 200 km it is 7.79 km/s and for 1500 km it is 7.12 km/s.[3] The delta-v needed to achieve low Earth orbit starts around 9.4 km/s. Atmospheric and gravity drag associated with launch typically adds 1.3–1.8 km/s to the launch vehicle delta-v required to reach normal LEO orbital velocity of around 7.8 km/s (28,080 km/h).[4]



Equatorial low Earth orbits (ELEO) are a subset of LEO. These orbits, with low inclination to the Equator, allow rapid revisit times and have the lowest delta-v requirement (i.e., fuel spend) of any orbit. Orbits with a high inclination angle to the equator are usually called polar orbits.
Higher orbits include medium Earth orbit (MEO), sometimes called intermediate circular orbit (ICO), and further above, geostationary orbit (GEO). Orbits higher than low orbit can lead to early failure of electronic components due to intense radiation and charge accumulation.
Use of LEO[edit]


Play media


Roughly half an orbit of the ISS.


Although the Earth's pull due to gravity in LEO is not much less than on the surface of the Earth, people and objects in orbit experience weightlessness because they are in free fall.
A low Earth orbit is simplest and cheapest for satellite placement. It provides high bandwidth and low communication time lag (latency), but satellites in LEO will not be visible from any given point on the Earth at all times.[5]
Examples[edit]

Earth observation satellites and spy satellites use LEO as they are able to see the surface of the Earth more clearly as they are not so far away. They are also able to traverse the surface of the Earth. A majority of artificial satellites are placed in LEO,[6] making one complete revolution around the Earth in about 90 minutes.
The International Space Station is in a LEO about 400 km (250 mi) above Earth's surface.[7] and needs reboosting a few times a year due to orbital decay.
Since it requires less energy to place a satellite into a LEO and the LEO satellite needs less powerful amplifiers for successful transmission, LEO is used for many communication applications. Because these LEO orbits are not geostationary, a network (or "constellation") of satellites is required to provide continuous coverage. (Many communication satellites require geostationary orbits, and move at the same angular velocity as the Earth. Some communications satellites including the Iridium phone system use LEO.)
Lower orbits also aid remote sensing satellites because of the added detail that can be gained. Remote sensing satellites can also take advantage of sun-synchronous LEO orbits at an altitude of about 800 km (500 mi) and near polar inclination. Envisat is one example of an Earth observation satellite that makes use of this particular type of LEO.
GOCE orbited at about 255 km (158 mi) to measure Earth's gravity field.
The Hubble Space Telescope orbits at about 540 km (340 mi) above Earth.

Space debris[edit]
The LEO environment is becoming congested with space debris due to the frequency of object launches. This has caused growing concern in recent years, since collisions at orbital velocities can easily be dangerous, and even deadly. Collisions can produce even more space debris in the process, creating a domino effect, something known as Kessler Syndrome. The Joint Space Operations Center, part of United States Strategic Command (formerly the United States Space Command), currently tracks more than 8,500 objects larger than 10 cm in LEO.[8] However, a limited Arecibo Observatory study suggested there could be approximately one million objects larger than 2 millimeters,[9] which are too small to be visible from Earth-based observatories.[10]
See also[edit]


Spaceflight portal
Astronomy portal
Solar System portal
Space portal



Van Allen radiation belt
List of orbits
Medium Earth orbit (MEO)
High Earth orbit (HEO)
Highly elliptical orbit (HEO)
Geostationary orbit (GEO)
Specific orbital energy examples
Suborbital spaceflight
Heavy lift launch vehicle
Medium-lift launch vehicle
Comparison of orbital launch systems

Notes[edit]



^ Orbital periods and speeds are calculated using the relations 4π²R³ = T²GM and V²R = GM, where R = radius of orbit in metres, T = orbital period in seconds, V = orbital speed in m/s, G = gravitational constant ≈ 6.673×10−11 Nm²/kg², M = mass of Earth ≈ 5.98×1024 kg.
^ Approximately 8.6 times (in radius and length) when the moon is nearest (363 104 km ÷ 42 164 km) to 9.6 times when the moon is farthest (405 696 km ÷ 42 164 km).



References[edit]


^ "IADC Space Debris Mitigation Guidelines" (PDF). Inter-Agency Space Debris Coordination Committee. 15 October 2002. 
^ "NASA Safety Standard 1740.14, Guidelines and Assessment Procedures for Limiting Orbital Debris" (PDF). Office of Safety and Mission Assurance. 1 August 1995. Archived from the original (PDF) on 15 February 2013. 
^ "LEO parameters". www.spaceacademy.net.au. Retrieved 2015-06-12. 
^ Swinerd, Graham (2008). How Spacecraft Fly. Praxis Publishing. pp. 103–104. ISBN 0387765727. 
^ "High Throughput Satellite Communications Systems: MEO vs. LEO vs. GEO | The Link". www.harriscaprock.com. Retrieved 2015-11-28. 
^ Holli, Riebeek, (2009-09-04). "NASA Earth Observatory :". earthobservatory.nasa.gov. Retrieved 2015-11-28. 
^ "Higher Altitude Improves Station's Fuel Economy". NASA. Retrieved 2013-02-12. 
^ Fact Sheet: Joint Space Operations Center Archived 2010-02-03 at the Wayback Machine.
^ archive of astronomy: space junk
^ ISS laser broom, project Orion Archived 2011-07-28 at the Wayback Machine.


 This article incorporates public domain material from websites or documents of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration.






v
t
e


Gravitational orbits



Types




General



Box
Capture
Circular
Elliptical / Highly elliptical
Escape
Graveyard
Horseshoe
Hyperbolic trajectory
Inclined / Non-inclined
Osculating
Parabolic trajectory
Parking
Synchronous

semi
sub


Transfer orbit





Geocentric



Geosynchronous
Geostationary
Sun-synchronous
Low Earth
Medium Earth
High Earth
Molniya
Near-equatorial
Orbit of the Moon
Polar
Tundra





About other points



Areosynchronous
Areostationary
Halo
Lissajous
Lunar
Heliocentric
Heliosynchronous








Parameters







Shape
Size






e  Eccentricity
a  Semi-major axis
b  Semi-minor axis
Q, q  Apsides





Orientation



i  Inclination
Ω  Longitude of the ascending node
ω  Argument of periapsis
ϖ  Longitude of the periapsis





Position



M  Mean anomaly
ν  True anomaly
E  Eccentric anomaly
L  Mean longitude
l  True longitude





Variation



T  Orbital period
n  Mean motion
v  Orbital speed
t0  Epoch








Maneuvers



Collision avoidance (spacecraft)
Delta-v
Delta-v budget
Bi-elliptic transfer
Geostationary transfer
Gravity assist
Gravity turn
Hohmann transfer
Low energy transfer
Oberth effect
Inclination change
Phasing
Rocket equation
Rendezvous
Transposition, docking, and extraction





Orbital mechanics



Celestial coordinate system
Characteristic energy
Escape velocity
Ephemeris
Equatorial coordinate system
Ground track
Hill sphere
Interplanetary Transport Network
Kepler's laws of planetary motion
Lagrangian point
n-body problem
Orbit equation
Orbital state vectors
Perturbation
Retrograde motion
Specific orbital energy
Specific relative angular momentum
Two-line elements








List of orbits












v
t
e


People currently in low Earth orbit



International Space Station (Expedition 54)




Soyuz MS-06



Alexander Misurkin
Mark T. Vande Hei
Joseph M. Acaba





Soyuz MS-07



Anton Shkaplerov
Norishige Kanai
Scott D. Tingle











ISS expeditions
Spaceflights to the ISS

manned
unmanned


ISS spacewalks
ISS visitors
ISS year long mission











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Low_Earth_orbit&oldid=809933355"					Categories: Earth orbitsHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksWikipedia articles incorporating text from NASAArticles containing video clips