For the theology of Martin Luther himself, see Theology of Martin Luther.




Martin Luther initiated the Protestant Reformation in 1517.




Part of a series on


Lutheranism



Luther's rose





Book of Concord



Apostles' Creed
Nicene Creed



Athanasian Creed
Augsburg Confession

Apology of the
Augsburg Confession

Luther's Small / Large Catechism
Smalcald Articles

Treatise on the Power and
Primacy of the Pope

Formula of Concord








Theology



Justification
Law and Gospel




Sola gratia
Sola scriptura




Christology
Sanctification



Two kingdoms
Two states of the Church
Priesthood of all believers



Divine Providence
Marian theology



Theology of the Cross



Sacramental Union
Homosexuality
Criticism of Protestantism












Sacraments
Liturgy






Baptism
Eucharist
Confession
Confirmation
Matrimony
Anointing of the Sick
Holy Orders
Lutheran hymn









Organization



Confessional Evangelical
Lutheran Conference

International Lutheran Council
Lutheran World Federation
Denominations
Lutheranism by region








History


Protestant Reformation (start)
Lutheran orthodoxy
Gnesio-Lutherans
Pietists
Haugeans
Laestadians
Finnish Awakening
Old Lutherans
Neo-Lutherans
High Church Lutherans
Confessional Lutheranism








Missionaries


John Campanius
Bartholomäus Ziegenbalg
Hans Egede
Johann Heinrich Callenberg
Johann Phillip Fabricius
Paul Henkel
John Christian Frederick Heyer



Karl Graul
Martti Rautanen
Wilhelm Sihler
F. C. D. Wyneken



Hans Paludan Smith Schreuder
Lars Olsen Skrefsrud
Ludwig Ingwer Nommensen



Onesimos Nesib
Paul Olaf Bodding
Johann Flierl
Christian Keyser









Bible translators



Martin Luther
Casiodoro de Reina
Kjell Magne Yri
Onesimos Nesib
Aster Ganno
Jurij Dalmatin
Kristian Osvald Viderø
Jákup Dahl
Bartholomäus Ziegenbalg



Johann Phillip Fabricius



William Tyndale
John Rogers
George Constantine
Jozef Roháček
Johannes Avetaranian
Guðbrandur Þorláksson
Ludvig Olsen Fossum
Hans Egede / Paul Egede
Otto Fabricius
Nils Vibe Stockfleth
Olaus Petri / Laurentius Petri
Martti Rautanen
Primož Trubar
Jurij Dalmatin
Ludwig Ingwer Nommensen
Joachim Stegmann
Primož Trubar
Sebastian Krelj
Mikael Agricola



Norwegian Bible Society
Samuel Ludwik Zasadius
Stanislovas Rapolionis



Victor Danielsen
Jákup Dahl
Laurentius Andreae
Hans Tausen
Olaf M. Norlie
Jonas Bretkūnas
Hans Paludan Smith Schreuder
Antonio Brucioli
Mikołaj Jakubica
Matthias Bel
Johann Ernst Glück
William F. Beck









Theologians


Martin Luther / Katharina von Bora
Philip Melanchthon
Johannes Bugenhagen



Johannes Brenz
Justus Jonas




Hans Tausen
Laurentius Petri
Olaus Petri
Mikael Agricola
Matthias Flacius
Martin Chemnitz
Johann Gerhard
Abraham Calovius
Johannes Andreas Quenstedt
Johann Wilhelm Baier
David Hollaz



Henry Muhlenberg
Lars Levi Laestadius
Charles Porterfield Krauth



C. F. W. Walther
Dietrich Bonhoeffer
Paul Tillich







 Lutheranism portal





v
t
e







Part of a series on


Protestantism







Topics


Reformation
Great Awakenings
History
Culture
Demographics
Persecution
Criticism








Major branches


Adventism
Anabaptism
Anglicanism
Baptist churches
Calvinism
Lutheranism
Methodism
Pentecostalism








Minor branches


Hussitism
Waldensianism
Plymouth Brethren
Holiness movement
Quakerism
Multiple others








Interdenominational
movements


Evangelicalism
Charismatic movement
Neo-charismatic movement








Other developments


Arminianism
Pietism
Puritanism
Neo-orthodoxy
Paleo-orthodoxy
Christian fundamentalism
Modernism and liberalism








Related movements


Nondenominational churches
House churches









v
t
e





Lutheranism is a major branch of Protestant Christianity which identifies with the theology of Martin Luther (1483–1546), a German friar, ecclesiastical reformer and theologian.
Luther's efforts to reform the theology and practice of the Catholic Church launched the Protestant Reformation in the German-speaking territories of the Holy Roman Empire. Beginning with the Ninety-Five Theses, first published in 1517, Luther's writings were disseminated internationally, spreading the early ideas of the Reformation beyond the influence and control of the Roman Curia and the Holy Roman Emperor.[1] The split between the Lutherans and the Catholics was made public and clear with the 1521 Edict of Worms: the edicts of the Diet condemned Luther and officially banned citizens of the Holy Roman Empire from defending or propagating his ideas, subjecting advocates of Lutheranism to forfeiture of all property, half of the seized property to be forfeit to the imperial government and the remaining half forfeit to the party who brought the accusation.[2] The divide centered primarily on two points: the proper source of authority in the church, often called the formal principle of the Reformation, and the doctrine of justification, often called the material principle.[a]
Lutheranism advocates a doctrine of justification "by grace alone through faith alone on the basis of Scripture alone", the doctrine that scripture is the final authority on all matters of faith. This is in contrast to the belief of the Catholic Church, defined at the Council of Trent, concerning authority coming from both the Scriptures and Tradition.[3] In addition, Lutheranism accepts the teachings of the first seven ecumenical councils of the undivided Christian Church.[4][5] The Augsburg Confession, a Lutheran statement of belief contained in the Book of Concord, teaches that "the faith as confessed by Luther and his followers is nothing new, but the true catholic faith, and that their churches represent the true catholic or universal church".[6] When the Lutherans presented the Augsburg Confession to Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor, they believe to have "showed that each article of faith and practice was true first of all to Holy Scripture, and then also to the teaching of the church fathers and the councils".[6]
Unlike Calvinism, Lutherans retain many of the liturgical practices and sacramental teachings of the pre-Reformation Church, with a particular emphasis on the Eucharist, or Lord's Supper. Lutheran theology differs from Reformed theology in Christology, the purpose of God's Law, the divine grace, the concept of perseverance of the saints, and predestination.
Today, Lutheranism is one of the largest denominations of Protestantism. With approximately 80 million adherents,[7] it constitutes the third most common Protestant denomination after historically Pentecostal denominations and Anglicanism.[8][b] The Lutheran World Federation, the largest communion of Lutheran churches, represents over 74 million people.[9] Other Lutheran organizations include the International Lutheran Council and the Confessional Evangelical Lutheran Conference, as well as independent churches.



Contents


1 Etymology
2 History

2.1 Spread into northern Europe
2.2 Schmalkaldic War and the Formula of Concord
2.3 Lutheran orthodoxy
2.4 Rationalism
2.5 Revivals


3 Doctrine

3.1 Bible

3.1.1 Inspiration
3.1.2 Clarity
3.1.3 Efficacy
3.1.4 Sufficiency
3.1.5 Law and Gospel


3.2 Lutheran confessions
3.3 Justification
3.4 Trinity
3.5 Two natures of Christ
3.6 Sacraments

3.6.1 Baptism
3.6.2 Eucharist


3.7 Conversion
3.8 Predestination
3.9 Divine providence
3.10 Good works
3.11 Judgment and eternal life
3.12 Comparison among Protestants


4 Practices

4.1 Liturgy
4.2 Missions
4.3 Education
4.4 Church fellowship


5 Throughout the world
6 Lutheran bodies
7 Notes
8 References
9 Further reading
10 External links



Etymology[edit]




Luther's rose seal, a symbol of Lutheranism


The name Lutheran originated as a derogatory term used against Luther by German Scholastic theologian Dr. Johann Maier von Eck during the Leipzig Debate in July 1519.[10] Eck and other Catholics followed the traditional practice of naming a heresy after its leader, thus labeling all who identified with the theology of Martin Luther as Lutherans.[2]
Martin Luther always disliked the term Lutheran, preferring the term Evangelical, which was derived from euangelion, a Greek word meaning "good news", i.e. "Gospel".[10] The followers of John Calvin, Huldrych Zwingli, and other theologians linked to the Reformed tradition also began to use that term. To distinguish the two evangelical groups, others began to refer to the two groups as Evangelical Lutheran and Evangelical Reformed. As time passed by, the word Evangelical was dropped. Lutherans themselves began to use the term Lutheran in the middle of the 16th century, in order to distinguish themselves from other groups such as the Philippists and Calvinists.
In 1597, theologians in Wittenberg defined the title Lutheran as referring to the true church.[2]
History[edit]
Main article: History of Lutheranism
Further information: Protestant Reformation
Lutheranism has its roots in the work of Martin Luther, who sought to reform the Western Church to what he considered a more biblical foundation.[11][12][13]
Spread into northern Europe[edit]
Lutheranism spread through all of Scandinavia during the 16th century, as the monarch of Denmark–Norway (also ruling Iceland and the Faroe Islands) and the monarch of Sweden (also ruling Finland) adopted Lutheranism. Through Baltic-German and Swedish rule, Lutheranism also spread into Estonia and Latvia.
Since 1520, regular[14] Lutheran services have been held in Copenhagen. Under the reign of Frederick I (1523–33), Denmark–Norway remained officially Catholic. Although Frederick initially pledged to persecute Lutherans, he soon adopted a policy of protecting Lutheran preachers and reformers, the most significant being Hans Tausen.[15]
During Frederick's reign, Lutheranism made significant inroads in Denmark. At an open meeting in Copenhagen attended by the king in 1536, the people shouted; "We will stand by the holy Gospel, and do not want such bishops anymore".[16] Frederick's son Christian was openly Lutheran, which prevented his election to the throne upon his father's death. However, following his victory in the civil war that followed, in 1537 he became Christian III and advanced the Reformation in Denmark–Norway.




Title page of the Swedish Gustav Vasa Bible, translated by the Petri brothers, along with Laurentius Andreae


The constitution upon which the Danish Norwegian Church, according to the Church Ordinance, should rest was "The pure word of God, which is the Law and the Gospel".[17] It does not mention the[14] Augsburg Confession. The priests had to[14] understand the Holy Scripture well enough to preach and explain the Gospel and the Epistles for their congregations.
The youths were taught[18] from Luther's Small Catechism, available in Danish since 1532. They were taught to expect at the end of life:[14] "forgiving of their sins", "to be counted as just", and "the eternal life". Instruction is still similar.[19]
The first complete Bible in Danish was based on Martin Luther's translation into German. It was published in 1550, with 3,000 copies printed in the first edition; a second edition was published in 1589.[20] Unlike Catholicism, the Lutheran Church does not believe that tradition is a carrier of the "Word of God", or that only the communion of the Bishop of Rome has been entrusted to interpret the "Word of God".[14][21]
The Reformation in Sweden began with Olaus and Laurentius Petri, brothers who took the Reformation to Sweden after studying in Germany. They led Gustav Vasa, elected king in 1523, to Lutheranism. The pope's refusal to allow the replacement of an archbishop who had supported the invading forces opposing Gustav Vasa during the Stockholm Bloodbath led to the severing of any official connection between Sweden and the papacy in 1523.[15]
Four years later, at the Diet of Västerås (sv), the king succeeded in forcing the diet to accept his dominion over the national church. The king was given possession of all church properties, as well as the church appointments and approval of the clergy. While this effectively granted official sanction to Lutheran ideas,[15] Lutheranism did not become official until 1593. At that time the Uppsala Synod declared Holy Scripture the sole guideline for faith, with four documents accepted as faithful and authoritative explanations of it: the Apostles' Creed, the Nicene Creed, the Athanasian Creed, and the unaltered Augsburg Confession of 1530.[22] Mikael Agricola's translation of the first Finnish New Testament was published in 1548.[23]
Schmalkaldic War and the Formula of Concord[edit]




The University of Jena around 1600. Jena was the center of Gnesio-Lutheran activity during the controversies leading up to the Formula of Concord.


After the death of Martin Luther in 1546, the Schmalkaldic War started out as a conflict between two German Lutheran rulers in 1547. Soon, Holy Roman Imperial forces joined the battle and conquered the members of the Schmalkaldic League, oppressing and exiling many German Lutherans as they enforced the terms of the Augsburg Interim. Religious freedom was secured for Lutherans through the Peace of Passau in 1552, and under the Cuius regio, eius religio (the religion of the ruler was to dictate the religion of those ruled) and Declaratio Ferdinandei (limited religious tolerance) clauses of the Peace of Augsburg in 1555.[24]
Religious disputes between the Crypto-Calvinists, Philippists, Sacramentarians, Ubiquitarians and Gnesio-Lutherans raged within Lutheranism during the middle of the 16th century. This finally ended with the resolution of the issues in the Formula of Concord. Large numbers of politically and religiously influential leaders met together, debated, and resolved these topics on the basis of Scripture, resulting in the Formula, which over 8,000 leaders signed. The Book of Concord replaced earlier, incomplete collections of doctrine, unifying all German Lutherans with identical doctrine and beginning the period of Lutheran Orthodoxy.
Lutheran orthodoxy[edit]
Main article: Lutheran orthodoxy
The historical period of Lutheran Orthodoxy is divided into three sections: Early Orthodoxy (1580–1600), High Orthodoxy (1600–1685), and Late Orthodoxy (1685–1730). Lutheran scholasticism developed gradually especially for the purpose of arguing with the Jesuits, and it was finally established by Johann Gerhard. Abraham Calovius represents the climax of the scholastic paradigm in orthodox Lutheranism. Other orthodox Lutheran theologians include Martin Chemnitz, Aegidius Hunnius, Leonhard Hutter, Nicolaus Hunnius, Jesper Rasmussen Brochmand, Salomo Glassius, Johann Hülsemann, Johann Conrad Dannhauer, Johannes Andreas Quenstedt, Johann Friedrich König and Johann Wilhelm Baier.
Near the end of the Thirty Years' War, the compromising spirit seen in Philip Melanchthon rose up again in Helmstedt School and especially in theology of Georgius Calixtus, causing the syncretistic controversy. Another theological issue that arose was the Crypto-Kenotic controversy.[25]
Late orthodoxy was torn by influences from rationalism, philosophy based on reason, and Pietism, a revival movement in Lutheranism. After a century of vitality, the Pietist theologians Philipp Jakob Spener and August Hermann Francke warned that orthodoxy had degenerated into meaningless intellectualism and Formalism, while orthodox theologians found the emotional and subjective focuses of Pietism to be vulnerable to Rationalist propaganda.[26]
The last famous orthodox Lutheran theologian before the rationalist Aufklärung, or Enlightenment, was David Hollatz. Late orthodox theologian Valentin Ernst Löscher took part in the controversy against Pietism. Medieval mystical traditions continued in the works of Martin Moller, Johann Arndt, and Joachim Lütkemann. Pietism became a rival of orthodoxy but adopted some orthodox devotional literature; for example, Arndt's, Christian Scriver's and Stephan Prätorius' which were all Pietistic literature.
Rationalism[edit]
Rationalist philosophers from France and England had an enormous impact during the 18th century, along with the German Rationalists Christian Wolff, Gottfried Leibniz and Immanuel Kant. Their work led to an increase in rationalist beliefs, "at the expense of faith in God and agreement with the Bible".[26]
In 1709, Valentin Ernst Löscher warned that this new Rationalist view of the world fundamentally changed society by drawing into question every aspect of theology. Instead of considering the authority of divine revelation, he explained, Rationalists relied solely on their personal understanding when searching for truth.[27]
Johann Melchior Goeze (1717–1786), pastor of St. Catherine's Church, Hamburg, wrote apologetical works against Rationalists, including a theological and historical defence against the historical criticism of the Bible.[28]
Dissenting Lutheran pastors were often reprimanded by the government bureaucracy overseeing them, for example, when they tried to correct Rationalist influences in the parish school.[29] As a result of the impact of a local form of rationalism, termed Neology, by the latter half of the 18th century, genuine piety was found almost solely in small Pietist conventicles.[26] However, some of the laity preserved Lutheran orthodoxy from both Pietism and rationalism through reusing old catechisms, hymnbooks, postils, and devotional writings, including those written by Johann Gerhard, Heinrich Müller and Christian Scriver.[30]
Revivals[edit]






A nineteenth-century Haugean conventicle.






Representing the continuation of the Finnish Awakening to the present, youth are confirmed at the site of Paavo Ruotsalainen's homestead.




A layman, Luther scholar Johann Georg Hamann (1730–1788), became famous for countering Rationalism and striving to advance a revival known as the Erweckung, or Awakening.[31] In 1806, Napoleon's invasion of Germany promoted Rationalism and angered German Lutherans, stirring up a desire among the people to preserve Luther's theology from the Rationalist threat. Those associated with this Awakening held that reason was insufficient and pointed out the importance of emotional religious experiences.[32][33]
Small groups sprang up, often in universities, which devoted themselves to Bible study, reading devotional writings, and revival meetings. Although the beginning of this Awakening tended heavily toward Romanticism, patriotism, and experience, the emphasis of the Awakening shifted around 1830 to restoring the traditional liturgy, doctrine, and confessions of the Lutheran church in the Neo-Lutheran movement.[32][33]
This Awakening swept through all of Scandinavia except for Iceland.[34] It developed from both German Neo-Lutheranism and Pietism. Danish pastor and philosopher N. F. S. Grundtvig reshaped church life throughout Denmark through a reform movement beginning in 1830. He also wrote about 1,500 hymns, including God's Word Is Our Great Heritage.[35]
In Norway, Hans Nielsen Hauge, a lay street preacher, emphasized spiritual discipline and sparked the Haugean movement.[36] Also in Norway, the Awakening drove the growth of foreign missions to non-Christians to a new height, which has never been reached since.[34] In Sweden, Lars Levi Læstadius began the Laestadian movement that emphasized moral reform.[36] In Finland, a farmer, Paavo Ruotsalainen, began the Finnish Awakening when he took to preaching about repentance and prayer.[36]
In 1817, Frederick William III of Prussia ordered the Lutheran and Reformed churches in his territory to unite, forming the Evangelical Church of the Prussian Union. The unification of the two branches of German Protestantism sparked the Schism of the Old Lutherans. Many Lutherans, called "Old Lutherans", chose to leave the state churches despite imprisonment and military force.[31] Some formed independent church bodies, or "free churches", at home while others left for the United States, Canada and Australia. A similar legislated merger in Silesia prompted thousands to join the Old Lutheran movement. The dispute over ecumenism overshadowed other controversies within German Lutheranism.[37]
Despite political meddling in church life, local and national leaders sought to restore and renew Christianity. Neo-Lutheran Johann Konrad Wilhelm Löhe and Old Lutheran free church leader Friedrich August Brünn[38] both sent young men overseas to serve as pastors to German Americans, while the Inner Mission focused on renewing the situation home.[39] Johann Gottfried Herder, superintendent at Weimar and part of the Inner Mission movement, joined with the Romantic movement with his quest to preserve human emotion and experience from Rationalism.[40]
Ernst Wilhelm Hengstenberg, though raised Reformed, became convinced of the truth of historic Lutheranism as a young man.[41] He led the Neo-Lutheran Repristination School of theology, which advocated a return to the orthodox theologians of the 17th century and opposed modern Bible scholarship.[42] As editor of the periodical Evangelische Kirchenzeitung, he developed it into a major support of Neo-Lutheran revival and used it to attack all forms of theological liberalism and rationalism. Although he received a large amount of slander and ridicule during his forty years at the head of revival, he never gave up his positions.[41]
The theological faculty at the University of Erlangen in Bavaria became another force for reform.[41] There, professor Adolf von Harless, though previously an adherent of rationalism and German idealism, made Erlangen a magnet for revival oriented theologians.[43] Termed the Erlangen School of theology, they developed a new version of the Incarnation,[43] which they felt emphasized the humanity of Jesus better than the ecumenical creeds.[44] As theologians, they used both modern historical critical and Hegelian philosophical methods instead of attempting to revive the orthodoxy of the 17th century.[45]
Friedrich Julius Stahl led the High Church Lutherans. Though raised a Jew, he was baptized as a Christian at the age of 19 through the influence of the Lutheran school he attended. As the leader of a neofeudal Prussian political party, he campaigned for the divine right of kings, the power of the nobility, and episcopal polity for the church. Along with Theodor Kliefoth and August Friedrich Christian Vilmar, he promoted agreement with the Catholic Church with regard to the authority of the institutional church, ex opere operato effectiveness of the sacraments, and the divine authority of clergy. Unlike Catholics, however, they also urged complete agreement with the Book of Concord.[44]
The Neo-Lutheran movement managed to slow secularism and counter atheistic Marxism, but it did not fully succeed in Europe.[39] It partly succeeded in continuing the Pietist movement's drive to right social wrongs and focus on individual conversion. The Neo-Lutheran call to renewal failed to achieve widespread popular acceptance because it both began and continued with a lofty, idealistic Romanticism that did not connect with an increasingly industrialized and secularized Europe.[46] At best, the work of local leaders resulted in specific areas with vibrant spiritual renewal, but people in Lutheran areas overall continued to become increasingly distant from church life.[39] By 1969, Manfried Kober complained that "unbelief is rampant" even within German Lutheran parishes.[47]
Doctrine[edit]
Bible[edit]




Luther's translation of the Bible, from 1534






Moses and Elijah point the sinner looking for God's salvation to the cross to find it (Theology of the Cross).






Law and Grace, by Lucas Cranach the Elder. The left side shows humans' condemnation under God's law, while the right side presents God's grace in Christ.


Traditionally, Lutherans hold the Bible of the Old and New Testaments to be the only divinely inspired book, the only source of divinely revealed knowledge, and the only norm for Christian teaching.[48] Scripture alone is the formal principle of the faith, the final authority for all matters of faith and morals because of its inspiration, authority, clarity, efficacy, and sufficiency.[49]
The authority of the Scriptures has been challenged during the history of Lutheranism. Martin Luther taught that the Bible was the written Word of God, and the only reliable guide for faith and practice. He held that every passage of Scripture has one straightforward meaning, the literal sense as interpreted by other Scripture.[50] These teachings were accepted during the orthodox Lutheranism of the 17th century.[51] During the 18th century, Rationalism advocated reason rather than the authority of the Bible as the final source of knowledge, but most of the laity did not accept this Rationalist position.[52] In the 19th century, a confessional revival re-emphasized the authority of the Bible and agreement with the Lutheran Confessions.
Today, Lutherans disagree about the inspiration and authority of the Bible. Theological conservatives use the historical-grammatical method of Biblical interpretation, while theological liberals use the higher critical method. The 2008 U.S. Religious Landscape Survey conducted by the Pew Research Center surveyed 1,926 adults in the United States that self-identified as Lutheran. The study found that 30% believed that the Bible was the Word of God and was to be taken literally word for word. 40% held that the Bible was the Word of God, but was not literally true word for word or were unsure if it was literally true word for word. 23% said the Bible was written by men and not the Word of God. 7% did not know, were not sure, or had other positions.[53]
Inspiration[edit]
Although many Lutherans today hold less specific views of inspiration, historically, Lutherans affirm that the Bible does not merely contain the Word of God, but every word of it is, because of plenary, verbal inspiration, the direct, immediate word of God.[54] The Apology of the Augsburg Confession identifies Holy Scripture with the Word of God[55] and calls the Holy Spirit the author of the Bible.[56] Because of this, Lutherans confess in the Formula of Concord, "we receive and embrace with our whole heart the prophetic and apostolic Scriptures of the Old and New Testaments as the pure, clear fountain of Israel."[57] The apocryphal books were not written by the prophets nor by inspiration; they contain errors[58] and were never included in the Judean Canon that Jesus used;[59] therefore they are not a part of Holy Scripture.[60] The prophetic and apostolic Scriptures are authentic as written by the prophets and apostles. A correct translation of their writings is God's Word because it has the same meaning as the original Hebrew and Greek.[60] A mistranslation is not God's word, and no human authority can invest it with divine authority.[60]
Clarity[edit]






This section's tone or style may not reflect the encyclopedic tone used on Wikipedia. See Wikipedia's guide to writing better articles for suggestions. (September 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)









This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (September 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Historically, Lutherans understand the Bible to present all doctrines and commands of the Christian faith clearly.[61] In addition, Lutherans believe that God's Word is freely accessible to every reader or hearer of ordinary intelligence, without requiring any special education.[62] A Lutheran must understand the language that scriptures are presented in, and should not be so preoccupied by error so as to prevent understanding.[63] As a result of this, Lutherans do not believe there is a need to wait for any clergy, pope, scholar, or ecumenical council to explain the real meaning of any part of the Bible.[64]
Efficacy[edit]
Lutherans confess that Scripture is united with the power of the Holy Spirit and with it, not only demands, but also creates the acceptance of its teaching.[65] This teaching produces faith and obedience. Holy Scripture is not a dead letter, but rather, the power of the Holy Spirit is inherent in it.[66] Scripture does not compel a mere intellectual assent to its doctrine, resting on logical argumentation, but rather it creates the living agreement of faith.[67] As the Smalcald Articles affirm, "in those things which concern the spoken, outward Word, we must firmly hold that God grants His Spirit or grace to no one, except through or with the preceding outward Word."[68]
Sufficiency[edit]
Lutherans are confident that the Bible contains everything that one needs to know in order to obtain salvation and to live a Christian life.[69] There are no deficiencies in Scripture that need to be filled with by tradition, pronouncements of the Pope, new revelations, or present-day development of doctrine.[70]
Law and Gospel[edit]
Lutherans understand the Bible as containing two distinct types of content, termed Law and Gospel (or Law and Promises).[71] Properly distinguishing between Law and Gospel prevents the obscuring of the Gospel teaching of justification by grace through faith alone.[72]
Lutheran confessions[edit]




Title Page from the 1580 Dresden Book of Concord


The Book of Concord, published in 1580, contains ten documents which some Lutherans believe are faithful and authoritative explanations of Holy Scripture. Besides the three Ecumenical Creeds, which date to Roman times, the Book of Concord contains seven credal documents articulating Lutheran theology in the Reformation era.
The doctrinal positions of Lutheran churches are not uniform because the Book of Concord does not hold the same position in all Lutheran churches. For example, the state churches in Scandinavia consider only the Augsburg Confession as a "summary of the faith" in addition to the three ecumenical Creeds.[73] Lutheran pastors, congregations, and church bodies in Germany and the Americas usually agree to teach in harmony with the entire Lutheran Confessions. Some Lutheran church bodies require this pledge to be unconditional because they believe the confessions correctly state what the Bible teaches. Others allow their congregations to do so "insofar as" the Confessions are in agreement with the Bible.
Justification[edit]




Lutherans believe that whoever has faith in Jesus alone will receive salvation from the grace of God and will enter eternity in heaven instead of eternity in hell after death or at the second coming of Jesus.


The key doctrine, or material principle, of Lutheranism is the doctrine of justification. Lutherans believe that humans are saved from their sins by God's grace alone (Sola Gratia), through faith alone (Sola Fide), on the basis of Scripture alone (Sola Scriptura). Orthodox Lutheran theology holds that God made the world, including humanity, perfect, holy and sinless. However, Adam and Eve chose to disobey God, trusting in their own strength, knowledge, and wisdom.[74][75] Consequently, people are saddled with original sin, born sinful and unable to avoid committing sinful acts.[76] For Lutherans, original sin is the "chief sin, a root and fountainhead of all actual sins."[77]
Lutherans teach that sinners, while capable of doing works that are outwardly "good", are not capable of doing works that satisfy God's justice.[78] Every human thought and deed is infected with sin and sinful motives.[79] Because of this, all humanity deserves eternal damnation in hell.[80] God in eternity has turned His Fatherly heart to this world and planned for its redemption because he loves all people and does not want anyone to be eternally damned.[81]
To this end, "God sent his Son Jesus Christ, our Lord, into the world to redeem and deliver us from the power of the devil, and to bring us to Himself, and to govern us as a King of righteousness, life, and salvation against sin, death, and an evil conscience," as Luther's Large Catechism explains.[82] Because of this, Lutherans teach that salvation is possible only because of the grace of God made manifest in the birth, life, suffering, death, and resurrection, and continuing presence by the power of the Holy Spirit, of Jesus Christ.[83] By God's grace, made known and effective in the person and work of Jesus Christ, a person is forgiven, adopted as a child and heir of God, and given eternal salvation.[84] Christ, because he was entirely obedient to the law with respect to both his human and divine natures, "is a perfect satisfaction and reconciliation of the human race," as the Formula of Concord asserts, and proceeds to summarize:[85]

[Christ] submitted to the law for us, bore our sin, and in going to his Father performed complete and perfect obedience for us poor sinners, from his holy birth to his death. Thereby he covered all our disobedience, which is embedded in our nature and in its thoughts, words, and deeds, so that this disobedience is not reckoned to us as condemnation but is pardoned and forgiven by sheer grace, because of Christ alone.

Lutherans believe that individuals receive this gift of salvation through faith alone.[86] Saving faith is the knowledge of,[87] acceptance of,[88] and trust[89] in the promise of the Gospel.[90] Even faith itself is seen as a gift of God, created in the hearts of Christians[91] by the work of the Holy Spirit through the Word[92] and Baptism.[93] Faith receives the gift of salvation rather than causes salvation.[94] Thus, Lutherans reject the "decision theology" which is common among modern evangelicals.
Since the term grace has been defined differently by other Christian church bodies (e.g. Roman Catholicism[95]) it is important to note that Lutheranism defines grace as entirely limited to God's gifts to us. Justification comes as a pure gift, not something we merit by changed behavior or in which we cooperate. Grace is not about our response to God's gifts, but only His gifts.
Trinity[edit]




Lutherans believe in the Trinity


Lutherans are Trinitarian. Lutherans reject the idea that the Father and the Son are merely faces of the same person, stating that both the Old Testament and the New Testament show them to be two distinct persons.[96] Lutherans believe the Holy Spirit proceeds from both the Father and the Son.[97] In the words of the Athanasian Creed: "We worship one God in Trinity, and Trinity in Unity; Neither confounding the Persons, nor dividing the Substance. For there is one Person of the Father, another of the Son, and another of the Holy Ghost. But the Godhead of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost is all one: the glory equal, the majesty coeternal."[98]
Two natures of Christ[edit]
Main article: Scholastic Lutheran Christology
Lutherans believe Jesus is the Christ, the savior promised in the Old Testament. They believe he is both by nature God and by nature man in one person, as they confess in Luther's Small Catechism that he is "true God begotten of the Father from eternity and also true man born of the Virgin Mary".[99]
The Augsburg Confession explains:[100]

[T]he Son of God, did assume the human nature in the womb of the blessed Virgin Mary, so that there are two natures, the divine and the human, inseparably enjoined in one Person, one Christ, true God and true man, who was born of the Virgin Mary, truly suffered, was crucified, dead, and buried, that He might reconcile the Father unto us, and be a sacrifice, not only for original guilt, but also for all actual sins of men.

Sacraments[edit]
Main article: Lutheran sacraments
Lutherans hold that sacraments are sacred acts of divine institution.[101] Whenever they are properly administered by the use of the physical component commanded by God[102] along with the divine words of institution,[103] God is, in a way specific to each sacrament, present with the Word and physical component.[104] He earnestly offers to all who receive the sacrament[105] forgiveness of sins[106] and eternal salvation.[107] He also works in the recipients to get them to accept these blessings and to increase the assurance of their possession.[108]




A.C. Article IX: Of Confession[109]


Lutherans are not dogmatic about the number of the sacraments.[110] In line with Luther's initial statement in his Large Catechism some speak of only two sacraments,[111] Baptism and Holy Communion, although later in the same work he calls Confession and Absolution[112] "the third sacrament."[113] The definition of sacrament in the Apology of the Augsburg Confession lists Absolution as one of them.[114] Since Absolution is a return to the forgiveness given in baptism, strictly speaking there are only two sacraments. Private Confession is not practiced among Lutherans as often as in the Catholic Church. Rather, it is expected before receiving the Eucharist for the first time.[115][non-primary source needed] Some churches also allow for individual absolution on Saturdays before the Eucharistic service.[citation needed] A general confession and absolution (known as the Penitential Rite) is proclaimed in the Eucharistic liturgy. Lutherans do not emphasize "penance" as a retribution of sin but rather the proclamation of God's forgiveness by the "called and ordained" minister of the Holy Gospel.[citation needed]
Baptism[edit]




German reformer Philipp Melanchthon baptizing an infant


Lutherans hold that Baptism is a saving work of God,[116] mandated and instituted by Jesus Christ.[117] Baptism is a "means of grace" through which God creates and strengthens "saving faith" as the "washing of regeneration"[118] in which infants and adults are reborn.[119] Since the creation of faith is exclusively God's work, it does not depend on the actions of the one baptized, whether infant or adult. Even though baptized infants cannot articulate that faith, Lutherans believe that it is present all the same.[120]
Because it is faith alone that receives these divine gifts, Lutherans confess that baptism "works forgiveness of sins, delivers from death and the devil, and gives eternal salvation to all who believe this, as the words and promises of God declare."[121] Holding fast to the Scripture cited in 1 Peter 3:21 "Baptism, which corresponds to this, now saves you, not as a removal of dirt from the body but as an appeal to God for a good conscience, through the resurrection of Jesus Christ."[122] Therefore, Lutherans administer Baptism to both infants[123] and adults.[124] In the special section on infant baptism in his Large Catechism, Luther argues that infant baptism is God-pleasing because persons so baptized were reborn and sanctified by the Holy Spirit.[125][126]
Eucharist[edit]
Main article: Eucharist in the Lutheran Church




Luther communing John the Steadfast


Lutherans hold that within the Eucharist, also referred to as the Sacrament of the Altar, the Mass, or the Lord's Supper, the true body and blood of Christ are truly present "in, with, and under the forms" of the consecrated bread and wine for all those who eat and drink it,[127] a doctrine that the Formula of Concord calls the sacramental union.[128]
Conversion[edit]




A.C. Article XII: Of Repentance


In Lutheranism, conversion or regeneration in the strict sense of the term is the work of divine grace and power by which man, born of the flesh, and void of all power to think, to will, or to do any good thing, and dead in sin is, through the gospel and holy baptism, taken from a state of sin and spiritual death under God's wrath into a state of spiritual life of faith and grace, rendered able to will and to do what is spiritually good and, especially, made to trust in the benefits of the redemption which is in Christ Jesus.[129]
During conversion, one is moved from impenitence to repentance. The Augsburg Confession divides repentance into two parts: "One is contrition, that is, terrors smiting the conscience through the knowledge of sin; the other is faith, which is born of the Gospel, or of absolution, and believes that for Christ's sake, sins are forgiven, comforts the conscience, and delivers it from terrors."[130]
Predestination[edit]




A.C. Article 18: Of Free Will[131]


Lutherans adhere to divine monergism, the teaching that salvation is by God's act alone, and therefore reject the idea that humans in their fallen state have a free will concerning spiritual matters.[132] Lutherans believe that although humans have free will concerning civil righteousness, they cannot work spiritual righteousness in the heart without the presence and aid of the Holy Spirit.[133][134] Lutherans believe Christians are "saved";[135] that all who trust in Christ alone and his promises can be certain of their salvation.[136]
According to Lutheranism, the central final hope of the Christian is "the resurrection of the body and the life everlasting" as confessed in the Apostles' Creed rather than predestination. Lutherans disagree with those who make predestination—rather than Christ's suffering, death, and resurrection—the source of salvation. Unlike some Calvinists, Lutherans do not believe in a predestination to damnation,[137] usually referencing "God our Savior, who desires all people to be saved and to come to the knowledge of the truth"[138] as contrary evidence to such a claim. Instead, Lutherans teach eternal damnation is a result of the unbeliever's sins, rejection of the forgiveness of sins, and unbelief.[139]
Divine providence[edit]
According to Lutherans, God preserves his creation, cooperates with everything that happens, and guides the universe.[140] While God cooperates with both good and evil deeds, with evil deeds he does so only inasmuch as they are deeds, but not with the evil in them. God concurs with an act's effect, but he does not cooperate in the corruption of an act or the evil of its effect.[141] Lutherans believe everything exists for the sake of the Christian Church, and that God guides everything for its welfare and growth.[142]
The explanation of the Apostles' Creed given in the Small Catechism declares that everything good that people have is given and preserved by God, either directly or through other people or things.[143] Of the services others provide us through family, government, and work, "we receive these blessings not from them, but, through them, from God."[144] Since God uses everyone's useful tasks for good, people should not look down upon some useful vocations as being less worthy than others. Instead people should honor others, no matter how lowly, as being the means God uses to work in the world.[144]
Good works[edit]




"Even though I am a sinner and deserving of death and hell, this shall nonetheless be my consolation and my victory that my Lord Jesus lives and has risen so that He, in the end, might rescue me from sin, death, and hell."—Luther[145]


Lutherans believe that good works are the fruit of faith,[146] always and in every instance.[147] Good works have their origin in God,[148] not in the fallen human heart or in human striving;[149] their absence would demonstrate that faith, too, is absent.[150] Lutherans do not believe that good works are a factor in obtaining salvation; they believe that we are saved by the grace of God—based on the merit of Christ in his suffering and death—and faith in the Triune God. Good works are the natural result of faith, not the cause of salvation. Although Christians are no longer compelled to keep God's law, they freely and willingly serve God and their neighbors.[151]
Judgment and eternal life[edit]






This section relies too much on references to primary sources. Please improve this section by adding secondary or tertiary sources. (May 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Lutherans do not believe in any sort of earthly millennial kingdom of Christ either before or after his second coming on the last day.[152] Lutherans teach that, at death, the souls of Christians are immediately taken into the presence of Jesus,[153] where they await the second coming of Jesus on the last day.[154] On the last day,[155] all the bodies of the dead will be resurrected.[156]
Their souls will then be reunited with the same bodies they had before dying.[157] The bodies will then be changed, those of the wicked to a state of everlasting shame and torment,[158] those of the righteous to an everlasting state of celestial glory.[159] After the resurrection of all the dead,[160] and the change of those still living,[161] all nations shall be gathered before Christ,[162] and he will separate the righteous from the wicked.[163]
Christ will publicly judge[164] all people by the testimony of their deeds,[165] the good works[166] of the righteous in evidence of their faith,[167] and the evil works of the wicked in evidence of their unbelief.[168] He will judge in righteousness[169] in the presence of all people and angels,[170] and his final judgment will be just damnation to everlasting punishment for the wicked and a gracious gift of life everlasting to the righteous.[171]
Comparison among Protestants[edit]
Protestant beliefs about salvation vary.[172]
This table summarizes the classical views of three Protestant beliefs about salvation.[173]



Topic
Calvinism
Lutheranism
Arminianism


Human will
Total depravity:[174] Humanity possesses "free will",[175] but it is in bondage to sin,[176] until it is "transformed".[177]
Total depravity:[174] Humanity possesses free will in regard to "goods and possessions", but is sinful by nature and unable to contribute to its own salvation. [178][179][180]
Humanity possesses freedom from necessity, but not "freedom from sin” unless enabled by "prevenient grace".[181]


Election
Unconditional election.
Unconditional election.[174][182]
Conditional election in view of foreseen faith or unbelief.[183]


Justification and atonement
Justification by faith alone. Various views regarding the extent of the atonement.[184]
Justification for all men,[185] completed at Christ's death and effective through faith alone.[186][187][188][189]
Justification made possible for all through Christ's death, but only completed upon choosing faith in Jesus.[190]


Conversion
Monergistic,[191] through the means of grace, irresistible.
Monergistic,[192][193] through the means of grace, resistible.[194]
Synergistic, resistible due to the common grace of free will.[195]


Perseverance and apostasy
Perseverance of the saints: the eternally elect in Christ will certainly persevere in faith.[196]
Falling away is possible,[197] but God gives gospel assurance.[198][199]
Preservation is conditional upon continued faith in Christ; with the possibility of a final apostasy.[200]





Practices[edit]




Luther composed hymns and hymn tunes, including "A Mighty Fortress Is Our God".


Liturgy[edit]
See also: Lutheran hymn and Lutheran chorale
Lutherans place great emphasis on a liturgical approach to worship services;[201] although there are substantial non-liturgical minorities, for example, the Haugean Lutherans from Norway. Martin Luther was a great fan of music, and this is why it forms a large part of Lutheran services; in particular, Luther admired the composers Josquin des Prez and Ludwig Senfl and wanted singing in the church to move away from the ars perfecta (Catholic Sacred Music of the late Renaissance) and towards singing as a Gemeinschaft (community).[202] Lutheran hymns are sometimes known as chorales. Lutheran hymnody is well known for its doctrinal, didactic, and musical richness. Most Lutheran churches are active musically with choirs, handbell choirs, children's choirs, and occasionally change ringing groups that ring bells in a bell tower. Johann Sebastian Bach, a devout Lutheran, composed music for the Lutheran church.
Lutherans also preserve a liturgical approach to the celebration of the Mass (or the Holy Eucharist/Communion), emphasizing the sacrament as the central act of Christian worship. Lutherans believe that the actual body and blood of Jesus Christ are present in, with and under the bread and the wine. This belief is called Real Presence or sacramental union and is different from consubstantiation and transubstantiation. Additionally Lutherans reject the idea that communion is a mere symbol or memorial. They confess in the Apology of the Augsburg Confession:

[W]e do not abolish the Mass but religiously keep and defend it. Among us the Mass is celebrated every Lord's Day and on other festivals, when the Sacrament is made available to those who wish to partake of it, after they have been examined and absolved. We also keep traditional liturgical forms, such as the order of readings, prayers, vestments, and other similar things.[203]

Besides the Holy Communion (Divine Service), congregations also hold offices, which are worship services without communion. They may include Matins, Vespers, Compline, and Easter Vigil. Private or family offices include the Morning and Evening Prayers from Luther's Small Catechism.[204] Meals are blessed with the Common Table Prayer, Psalm 145:15–16, or other prayers, and after eating the Lord is thanked, for example, with Psalm 136:1.[204] In addition, Lutherans use devotional books, from small daily devotionals, for example, Portals of Prayer, to large breviaries, including the Breviarium Lipsiensae and Treasury of Daily Prayer.
In the 1970s, many Lutheran churches began holding contemporary worship services for the purpose of evangelistic outreach. These services were in a variety of styles, depending on the preferences of the congregation. Often they were held alongside a traditional service in order to cater to those who preferred contemporary worship music. Today, few but some Lutheran congregations have contemporary worship as their sole form of worship. Outreach is no longer given as the primary motivation; rather this form of worship is seen as more in keeping with the desires of individual congregations.[205] In Finland, Lutherans have experimented with the St Thomas Mass (fi) and Metal Mass in which traditional hymns are adapted to heavy metal. The Lutheran World Federation, in its Nairobi Statement on Worship and Culture, recommended every effort be made to bring church services into a more sensitive position with regard to cultural context.[206]
In 2006, both the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America (ELCA) and the Lutheran Church–Missouri Synod (LCMS), in cooperation with certain foreign English speaking church bodies within their respective fellowships, released new hymnals: Evangelical Lutheran Worship (ELCA) and Lutheran Service Book (LCMS). Along with these, the most widely used among English speaking congregations include: Evangelical Lutheran Hymnary (1996, Evangelical Lutheran Synod), The Lutheran Book of Worship (1978, Lutheran Council in the United States of America), Lutheran Worship (1982, LCMS), Christian Worship (1993, Wisconsin Evangelical Lutheran Synod), and The Lutheran Hymnal (1941, Evangelical Lutheran Synodical Conference of North America). In the Lutheran Church of Australia, the official hymnal is the Lutheran Hymnal with Supplement of 1986, which includes a supplement to the Lutheran Hymnal of 1973, itself a replacement for the Australian Lutheran Hymn Book of 1921. Prior to this time, the two Lutheran church bodies in Australia (which merged in 1966) used a bewildering variety of hymnals, usually in the German language. Spanish-speaking ELCA churches frequently use Libro de Liturgia y Cántico (1998, Augsburg Fortress) for services and hymns.
Missions[edit]




Christ Lutheran Church, Narsapur in India


Sizable Lutheran missions arose for the first time during the 19th century. Early missionary attempts during the century after the Reformation did not succeed. However, European traders brought Lutheranism to Africa beginning in the 17th century as they settled along the coasts. During the first half of the 19th century, missionary activity in Africa expanded, including preaching by missionaries, translation of the Bible, and education.[207]
Lutheranism came to India beginning with the work of Bartholomäus Ziegenbalg, where a community totaling several thousand developed, complete with their own translation of the Bible, catechism, their own hymnal, and system of Lutheran schools. In the 1840s, this church experienced a revival through the work of the Leipzig Mission, including Karl Graul.[208] After German missionaries were expelled in 1914, Lutherans in India became entirely autonomous, yet preserved their Lutheran character. In recent years India has relaxed its anti-religious conversion laws, allowing a resurgence in missionary work.
In Latin America, missions began to serve European immigrants of Lutheran background, both those who spoke German and those who no longer did. These churches in turn began to evangelize those in their areas who were not of European background, including indigenous peoples.[209]
In 1892, the first Lutheran missionaries reached Japan. Although work began slowly and a major setback occurred during the hardships of WWII.[210] Lutheranism there has survived and become self-sustaining.[211] After missionaries to China, including those of the Lutheran Church of China, were expelled, they began ministry in Taiwan and Hong Kong, the latter which became a center of Lutheranism in Asia.[211]
The Lutheran Mission in New Guinea, though founded only in 1953, became the largest Lutheran mission in the world in only several decades. Through the work of native lay evangelists, many tribes of diverse languages were reached with the Gospel.[211]
Education[edit]




Winnebago Lutheran Academy, a Lutheran high school of the Wisconsin Evangelical Lutheran Synod (WELS)


Catechism is considered foundational in most Lutheran churches. Almost all maintain Sunday Schools, and some host or maintain Lutheran schools, at the preschool, elementary, middle, high school, folk high school, or university level. Lifelong study of the catechism is intended for all ages so that the abuses of the pre-Reformation Church will not recur.[212] Lutheran schools have always been a core aspect of Lutheran mission work, starting with Bartholomew Ziegenbalg and Heinrich Putschasu, who began work in India in year 1706.[213]
Pastors almost always have substantial theological educations, including Koine Greek and Biblical Hebrew so that they can refer to the Christian scriptures in the original language. Pastors usually teach in the common language of the local congregation. In the U.S., some congregations and synods historically taught in German, Danish, Finnish, Norwegian, or Swedish, but retention of immigrant languages has been in significant decline since the early and middle 20th century.
Church fellowship[edit]
Lutherans were divided about the issue of church fellowship for the first thirty years after Luther's death. Philipp Melanchthon and his Philippist party felt that Christians of different beliefs should join in union with each other without completely agreeing on doctrine. Against them stood the Gnesio-Lutherans, led by Matthias Flacius and the faculty at the University of Jena. They condemned the Philippist position for indifferentism, describing it as a "unionistic compromise" of precious Reformation theology. Instead, they held that genuine unity between Christians and real theological peace was only possible with an honest agreement about every subject of doctrinal controversy.[214]




Hallowed be Thy Name by Lucas Cranach the Elder illustrates a Lutheran pastor preaching Christ crucified.


Complete agreement finally came about in 1577, after the death of both Melanchthon and Flacius, when a new generation of theologians resolved the doctrinal controversies on the basis of Scripture in the Formula of Concord of 1577.[215] Although they decried the visible division of Christians on earth, orthodox Lutherans avoided ecumenical fellowship with other churches, believing that Christians should not, for example, join together for the Lord's Supper or exchange pastors if they do not completely agree about what the Bible teaches. In the 17th century, Georgius Calixtus began a rebellion against this practice, sparking the Syncretistic Controversy with Abraham Calovius as his main opponent.[216]
In the 18th century, there was some ecumenical interest between the Church of Sweden and the Church of England. John Robinson, Bishop of London, planned for a union of the English and Swedish churches in 1718. The plan failed because most Swedish bishops rejected the Calvinism of the Church of England, although Jesper Swedberg and Johannes Gezelius the younger, bishops of Skara, Sweden and Turku, Finland, were in favor.[217] With the encouragement of Swedberg, church fellowship was established between Swedish Lutherans and Anglicans in the Middle Colonies. Over the course of the 1700s and the early 1800s, Swedish Lutherans were absorbed into Anglican churches, with the last original Swedish congregation completing merger into the Episcopal Church in 1846.[218]
In the 19th century, Samuel Simon Schmucker attempted to lead the Evangelical Lutheran General Synod of the United States toward unification with other American Protestants. His attempt to get the synod to reject the Augsburg Confession in favor of his compromising Definite Platform failed. Instead, it sparked a Neo-Lutheran revival, prompting many to form the General Council, including Charles Porterfield Krauth. Their alternative approach was "Lutheran pulpits for Lutheran ministers only and Lutheran altars...for Lutheran communicants only."[219]




Stormtroopers holding German Christian propaganda during the church council elections on 23 July, 1933 at St. Mary's Church, Berlin. After that internal struggles, controversies, reorganization and splits struck the German Evangelical Church.


Beginning in 1867, confessional and liberal minded Lutherans in Germany joined together to form the Common Evangelical Lutheran Conference against the ever looming prospect of a state-mandated union with the Reformed.[220] However, they failed to reach consensus on the degree of shared doctrine necessary for church union.[39] Eventually, the fascist German Christians movement pushed the final national merger of Lutheran, Union, and Reformed church bodies into a single Reich Church in 1933, doing away with the previous umbrella German Evangelical Church Confederation (DEK), refounded in 1945 as the new umbrella Evangelical Church in Germany (EKD). In 1948 the Lutheran church bodies within EKD founded their denominational umbrella, despite being named church, the United Evangelical Lutheran Church of Germany.
Presently, Lutherans are divided over how to interact with other Christian denominations. Some Lutherans assert that everyone must share the "whole counsel of God" (Acts 20:27) in complete unity (1 Cor. 1:10)[221] before pastors can share each other's pulpits, and before communicants commune at each other's altars, a practice termed closed (or close) communion. On the other hand, other Lutherans practice varying degrees of open communion and allow preachers from other Christian denominations in their pulpits.
While not an issue in the majority of Lutheran church bodies, some of them forbid membership in Freemasonry. Partly, this is because the lodge is viewed as spreading Unitarianism, as the Brief Statement of the LCMS reads, "Hence we warn against Unitarianism, which in our country has to a great extent impenetrated the sects and is being spread particularly also through the influence of the lodges."[222] A 1958 report from the publishing house of the Wisconsin Evangelical Lutheran Synod states that, "Masonry is guilty of idolatry. Its worship and prayers are idol worship. The Masons may not with their hands have made an idol out of gold, silver, wood or stone, but they created one with their own mind and reason out of purely human thoughts and ideas. The latter is an idol no less than the former."[223]




LCMS pastor wearing a chasuble during communion


The largest organizations of Lutheran churches around the world are the Lutheran World Federation (LWF), the International Lutheran Council (ILC), and the Confessional Evangelical Lutheran Conference (CELC). These organizations together include the great majority of Lutheran denominations around the globe. The Lutheran World Federation supports the activities of Lutheran World Relief, a relief and development agency active in more than 50 countries. The LCMS and the Lutheran Church–Canada are members of the ILC. The WELS and ELS are members of the CELC. Many Lutheran churches are not affiliated with the LWF, the ILC or the CELC: The congregations of the Church of the Lutheran Confession (CLC) are affiliated with their mission organizations in Canada, India, Nepal, Myanmar, and many African nations; and those affiliated with the Church of the Lutheran Brethren, are especially active doing mission work in Africa and East Asia.
The Lutheran World Federation-aligned churches do not believe that one church is singularly true in its teachings. According to this belief, Lutheranism is a reform movement rather than a movement into doctrinal correctness. For that reason, a number of doctrinally diverse LWF denominations, now largely separated from state control, are declaring fellowship and joint statements of agreement with other Lutheran and non-Lutheran Christian denominations.
The Lutheran World Federation and the Lutheran Church–Missouri Synod engaged in a series of official dialogues with the Catholic Church since shortly after the Second Vatican Council. In 1999 the LWF and the Catholic Church jointly issued a statement, the Joint Declaration on the Doctrine of Justification, that stated that the LWF and the Catholic both agreed about certain basics of Justification and lifted certain Catholic anathemas formerly applying to the LWF member churches.The LCMS has participated in most of these talks, though not the one which produced the Joint Declaration and to which they were not invited. While some Lutheran theologians saw the Joint Declaration as a sign that the Catholics were essentially adopting the Lutheran position, other Lutheran theologians disagreed, claiming that, considering the public documentation of the Catholic position, this assertion does not hold up.[citation needed]
By contrast, the Confessional Evangelical Lutheran Conference and International Lutheran Council as well as some unaffiliated denominations such as the Church of the Lutheran Confession maintain that the orthodox confessional Lutheran churches are the only churches with completely correct doctrine. They teach that while other Christian churches teach partially orthodox doctrine and have true Christians as members, the doctrines of those churches contain significant errors. More conservative Lutherans strive to maintain historical distinctiveness while emphasizing doctrinal purity alongside Gospel-motivated outreach. They claim that LWF Lutherans are practicing "fake ecumenism" by desiring church fellowship outside of actual unity of teaching.[224]
Although not an "ecumenical" movement in the formal sense, in the 1990s influences from the megachurches of American evangelicalism have become somewhat common. Many of the largest Lutheran congregations in the United States have been heavily influenced by these "progressive Evangelicals." These influences are sharply criticized by some Lutherans as being foreign to orthodox Lutheran beliefs.[225]
The Porvoo Communion is a communion of episcopally led Lutheran and Anglican churches in Europe. Beside its membership in the Porvoo Communion, Church of Sweden also has declared full communion with the Philippine Independent Church and the United Methodist Church.[citation needed] The Evangelical Lutheran Church in America has been involved in ecumenical dialogues with several denominations. Recently, the ELCA has declared full communion with several American Churches: the American Provinces of the Moravian Church, the Episcopal Church in the United States of America, the Presbyterian Church (U.S.A.), the Reformed Church in America, the United Methodist Church, and the United Church of Christ.
Throughout the world[edit]
Main article: Lutheranism by region
See also: Protestants by country




The Arctic Cathedral is often used as a symbol of Norwegian Christianity.






Evangelical (Lutheran) church in Štrba, Slovakia


Today, millions belong to Lutheran churches, which are present on all populated continents.[226] The Lutheran World Federation estimates the total membership of its churches at approximately 72.3 million.[227] This figure undercounts Lutherans worldwide as not all Lutheran churches belong to this organization. In recent years, Lutheranism saw a slight increase in its fellowship, which continues to the present.[228][229][230][231][232] Lutheran churches in North America, Europe, Latin America and the Caribbean regions are experiencing decreases and no growth in membership, while those in Africa and Asia continue to grow. Lutheranism is the largest religious group in Denmark, the Faroe Islands, Greenland, Iceland, Norway, Sweden, Finland, Latvia, Namibia, and North Dakota. Lutheranism is also the dominant form of Christianity in the White Mountain and San Carlos Apache nations. In addition, Lutheranism is a main Protestant denomination in Germany (behind United Protestant churches; Protestants form about 26.7% of the country's total population),[233] Estonia, Poland, Austria, Slovakia, Slovenia, Croatia, Serbia, Kazakhstan, Tajikistan, Papua New Guinea, North Sumatra, and Tanzania.[234]
Although Namibia is the only country outside Europe to have a Lutheran majority, there are sizable Lutheran bodies in other African countries. In the following African countries, the total number of Lutherans exceeds 100,000: Nigeria, Central African Republic, Chad, Kenya, Malawi, Congo, Cameroon, Ethiopia, Zimbabwe, and Madagascar. In addition, the following nations also have sizable Lutheran populations: Canada, France, the Czech Republic, Poland, Hungary, Slovakia, Brazil, Malaysia, India, Indonesia, the Netherlands (within the Protestant Church of the Netherlands), South Africa, the United Kingdom, and the United States, especially in the heavily German and Scandinavian Upper Midwest.[235][236]
Lutheranism is also a state religion in Iceland, Norway, Denmark, Greenland, and the Faroe Islands. Finland has its Lutheran church established as a national church. Similarly, Sweden also has its national church, which was a state church until 2000.[237]
This map shows the global distribution of Lutheranism based on The LWF 2013 membership data.[238][c]





Lutheran World Federation membership by country in 2013.

  More than 10 million   More than 5 million   More than 1 million   More than 500 thousand   More than 100 thousand




Lutheran bodies[edit]

List of Lutheran denominations
Lutheran church bodies in North America
List of Lutheran clergy
List of Lutheran colleges and universities
List of Lutheran dioceses and archdioceses
List of Lutheran churches
List of Lutheran schools in Australia
Beta Sigma Psi National Lutheran Fraternity

Notes[edit]


^ Cf. material and formal principles in theology
^ In accordance with the classification in the provided source. Though the broadly defined Reformed faith is larger, as it constitutes Congregationalist (1%), most of the United and uniting churches (unions of different denominations) (7%) and most likely some of the other Protestant denominations (38%) (all three are distinct categories from Presbyterian or Reformed (7%) in this report).
^ One of the countries with a higher number of Lutherans is the United States. The LWF does not include the Lutheran Church–Missouri Synod and several other Lutheran bodies which together have over 2.5 million members


References[edit]



^ MSN Encarta, s.v. "Lutheranism" by George Wolfgang Forell; Christian Cyclopedia, s.v. "Reformation, Lutheran" by Lueker, E. et. al. Archived 31 October 2009.
^ a b c Fahlbusch, Erwin, and Bromiley, Geoffrey William, The Encyclopedia of Christianity, Volume 3. Grand Rapids, Michigan: Eerdmans, 2003. p. 362.
^ Canons and Decrees of the Council of Trent, Fourth Session, Decree on Sacred Scripture (Denzinger 783 [1501]; Schaff 2:79–81). For a history of the discussion of various interpretations of the Tridentine decree, see Selby, Matthew L., The Relationship Between Scripture and Tradition according to the Council of Trent, unpublished Master's thesis, University of St Thomas, July 2013.
^ The Ecumenical Councils and Authority in and of the Church. https://www.lutheranworld.org/sites/default/files/1993-Lutheran_Orthodox_Dialogue-EN.pdf: The Lutheran World Federation. 10 July 1993. The seven ecumenical councils of the early Church were assemblies of the bishops of the Church from all parts of the Roman Empire to clarify and express the apostolic faith. These councils are Nicaea (325 AD), Constantinople I (381), Ephesus (431), Chalcedon (451), Constantinople II (553), Constantinople III (680/81), and Nicaea II (787)... As Lutherans and Orthodox we affirm that the teachings of the ecumenical councils are authoritative for our churches....The Seventh Ecumenical Council, the Second Council of Nicaea in 787, which rejected iconoclasm and restored the veneration of icons in the churches, was not part of the tradition received by the Reformation. Lutherans, however, rejected the iconoclasm of the 16th century, and affirmed the distinction between adoration due to the Triune God alone and all other forms of veneration (CA 21). Through historical research this council has become better known. Nevertheless it does not have the same significance for Lutherans as it does for the Orthodox. Yet, Lutherans and Orthodox are in agreement that the Second Council of Nicaea confirms the christological teaching of the earlier councils and in setting forth the role of images (icons) in the lives of the faithful reaffirms the reality of the incarnation of the eternal Word of God, when it states: "The more frequently, Christ, Mary, the mother of God, and the saints are seen, the more are those who see them drawn to remember and long for those who serve as models, and to pay these icons the tribute of salutation and respectful veneration. Certainly this is not the full adoration in accordance with our faith, which is properly paid only to the divine nature, but it resembles that given to the figure of the honored and life-giving cross, and also to the holy books of the gospels and to other sacred objects" (Definition of the Second Council of Nicaea). 
^ Ecumenical Council. https://www.tititudorancea.net/z/ecumenical_council.htm: Titi Tudorancea Encyclopedia. 1991–2016. The Lutheran World Federation, in ecumenical dialogues with the Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople has affirmed all of the first seven councils as ecumenical and authoritative. 
^ a b Ludwig, Alan (12 September 2016). "Luther's Catholic Reformation". The Lutheran Witness. When the Lutherans presented the Augsburg Confession before Emperor Charles V in 1530, they carefully showed that each article of faith and practice was true first of all to Holy Scripture, and then also to the teaching of the church fathers and the councils and even the canon law of the Church of Rome. They boldly claim, “This is about the Sum of our Doctrine, in which, as can be seen, there is nothing that varies from the Scriptures, or from the Church Catholic, or from the Church of Rome as known from its writers” (AC XXI Conclusion 1). The underlying thesis of the Augsburg Confession is that the faith as confessed by Luther and his followers is nothing new, but the true catholic faith, and that their churches represent the true catholic or universal church. In fact, it is actually the Church of Rome that has departed from the ancient faith and practice of the catholic church (see AC XXIII 13, XXVIII 72 and other places).  Missing or empty |url= (help)
^ "About Us". Lutheran Church of New Zealand. Retrieved 5 March 2015. 
^ "Pewforum: Christianity (2010)" (PDF). Retrieved 2014-05-14. 
^ "Member Churches". The Lutheran World Federation. Retrieved 5 March 2015. 
^ a b Espín, Orlando O. and Nickoloff, James B. An introductory dictionary of theology and religious studies. Collegeville, Minnesota: Liturgical Press, p. 796.
^ "Bethany Lutheran Ministries - Home". Bethany Lutheran Ministries. Retrieved 5 March 2015. 
^ Lutherans, Biblehistory.com
^ "Martin Luther Biography". Retrieved 5 March 2015. 
^ a b c d e Rohmann, J. L (1836). Historisk fremstilling af reformationens indførelse i Danmark. Retrieved 5 March 2015. 
^ a b c Chapter 12: The Reformation In Germany And Scandinavia, Renaissance and Reformation by William Gilbert.
^ Rohmann, J. L (1836). Historisk fremstilling af reformationens indførelse i Danmark. Kjobenhavn. p. 195. Retrieved 5 March 2015. 
^ J. L. Rohmann (1836). Historisk fremstilling af reformationens indførelse i Danmark. Kjobenhavn. p. 202. Retrieved 5 March 2015. 
^ Rohmann, J. L (1836). Historisk fremstilling af reformationens indførelse i Danmark. Retrieved 5 March 2015. 
^ "Danmarks og Norges Kirke-Ritual (Kirkeritualet)". retsinformation.dk. Retrieved 5 March 2015. 
^ Hastings, James (2004-10). A Dictionary Of The Bible. ISBN 9781410217301. Retrieved 5 March 2015.  Check date values in: |date= (help)
^ "Compendium of the Catechism of the Catholic Church". Retrieved 5 March 2015. 
^ N.F. Lutheran Cyclopedia, article, "Upsala, Diet of", New York: Schrivner, 1899. pp. 528–529.
^ Lutheran Cyclopedia, article, "Agricola, Michael", New York: Schrivner, 1899. p. 5.
^ Fuerbringer, L., Concordia Cyclopedia Concordia Publishing House. 1927. p. 425
^ Lutheran Theology after 1580 article in Christian Cyclopedia
^ a b c Fuerbringer, L., Concordia Cyclopedia Concordia Publishing House. 1927. p. 426
^ Kleinig, Vernon P. "Confessional Lutheranism in Eighteenth-Century Germany." Concordia Theological Quarterly 60(1–2) Jan–April 1996: Part I, Valentin Ernst Loescher p. 102.
^ Kleinig, Vernon P. "Confessional Lutheranism in Eighteenth-Century Germany." Concordia Theological Quarterly 60(1–2) Jan–April 1996: Part II, Melchior Goeze pp. 109–112.
^ Rietschel, William C. An Introduction to the Foundations of Lutheran Education. St. Louis: Concordia, 2000. p. 25 (Although this reference specifically mentions Saxony, government promoted rationalism was a trend across Germany)
^ "Untitled Document". Archived from the original on 24 September 2015. Retrieved 5 March 2015. 
^ a b Gritsch, Eric W. A History of Lutheranism. Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 2002. p. 180.
^ a b Armin Sierszyn: 2000 Jahre Kirchengeschichte, Book.4, Die Neuzeit, p. 155
^ a b Suelflow, Roy A. Walking With Wise Men. Milwaukee: South Wisconsin District (LCMS), 1967. p. 10
^ a b Latourette, Kenneth Scott. Christianity in a Revolutionary Age, Volume II, The Nineteenth Century in Europe. Westport, Connecticut: Greenwood Press. p. 165.
^ Gritsch, Eric W. A History of Lutheranism. Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 2002. p. 182.
^ a b c Gritsch, Eric W. A History of Lutheranism. Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 2002. p. 183.
^ Benton, William, ed. (1974). "Lutheran Churches". Encyclopædia Britannica. 11 (15 ed.). Chicago: Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc. p. 198. ISBN 0-85229-290-2. 
^ Christian Cyclopedia article on Brünn
^ a b c d Gritsch, Eric W. A History of Lutheranism. Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 2002. p. 184.
^ Gritsch, Eric W. A History of Lutheranism. Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 2002. p. 187.
^ a b c Latourette, Kenneth Scott. Christianity in a Revolutionary Age, Volume II, The Nineteenth Century in Europe. Westport, Connecticut: Greenwood Press, 1959, p. 21.
^ "Repristination Theology." Encyclopædia Britannica. 2010. Encyclopædia Britannica Online. 6 Apr 2010 <http://www.britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/498536/Repristination-Theology>.
^ a b Latourette, Kenneth Scott. Christianity in a Revolutionary Age, Volume II, The Nineteenth Century in Europe. Westport, Connecticut: Greenwood Press. p. 22.
^ a b Nichols, James Hastings. History of Christianity 1650–1950: Secularization of the West. New York, Ronald Press, 1956, p. 175.
^ Gassmann, Günther, et al. Historical dictionary of Lutheranism. Augsburg Fortress, Lanham, Maryland: Scarecrow Press, 2001. p. 32.
^ Gritsch, Eric W. A History of Lutheranism. Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 2002. p. 188.
^ Detzler, Wayne A. The Changing Church in Europe. Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 1979. p. 17. Quotation from Manfred Kober, Theology in Germany, from the Reformation Review, April 1969.
^ For the traditional Lutheran view of the Bible, see Graebner, Augustus Lawrence (1910). Outlines Of Doctrinal Theology. Saint Louis, MO: Concordia Publishing House. pp. 3ff. ISBN 0-524-04891-6. Archived from the original on 12 July 2006. . For an overview of the doctrine of verbal inspiration in Lutheranism, see Inspiration, Doctrine of in the Christian Cyclopedia.
^ Graebner, Augustus Lawrence (1910). Outlines Of Doctrinal Theology. Saint Louis, MO: Concordia Publishing House. pp. 7ff. ISBN 0-524-04891-6. Archived from the original on 12 July 2006. , Engelder, Theodore E.W. (1934). Popular Symbolics: The Doctrines of the Churches of Christendom and Of Other Religious Bodies Examined in the Light of Scripture. Saint Louis, MO: Concordia Publishing House. p. 29. 
^ Braaten, Carl E. (1983). Principles of Lutheran Theology. Philadelphia: Fortress Press, p. 9
^ Preus, Robert. The Inspiration of Scripture: A Study of the Theology of the 17th Century Lutheran Dogmaticians. London: Oliver and Boyd, 1957. p. 39.
^ Benton, William, ed. (1978). "Lutheran Churches". Encyclopædia Britannica. 11 (15 ed.). Chicago: Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc. pp. 197–98. ISBN 0-85229-290-2. 
^ U.S. Religious Landscape Survey: Religious Beliefs and Practices, Diverse and Politically Relevant. Washington D.C.: Pew Forum on Religion and Public Life. June 2008. p. 127. Accessed online on 27 September 2009 at http://religions.pewforum.org/pdf/report2-religious-landscape-study-full.pdf.
^ 2 Timothy 3:16, 1 Corinthians 2:13, 1 Thessalonians 2:13, Romans 3:2, 2 Peter 1:21, 2 Samuel 23:2, Hebrews 1:1, John 10:35, John 16:13, John 17:17, Engelder, Theodore E.W. (1934). Popular Symbolics: The Doctrines of the Churches of Christendom and Of Other Religious Bodies Examined in the Light of Scripture. Saint Louis, MO: Concordia Publishing House. p. 26. 
^ "God's Word, or Holy Scripture" from the Apology of the Augsburg Confession, Article II, of Original Sin
^ "the Scripture of the Holy Ghost." Apology to the Augsburg Confession, Preface, 9
^ "The Solid Declaration of the Formula of Concord". Retrieved 5 March 2015. 
^ Divination: Tobit 6:17, Prayer to the dead: 2 Macc. 12:42, Suicide: 2 Macc. 14:41–46,
^ See Bible, Canon in the Christian Cyclopedia Archived 20 October 2009 at the Wayback Machine.
^ a b c Engelder, Theodore E.W. (1934). Popular Symbolics: The Doctrines of the Churches of Christendom and Of Other Religious Bodies Examined in the Light of Scripture. Saint Louis, MO: Concordia Publishing House. p. 27. 
^ Psalm 19:8, Psalm 119:105, Psalm 119:130, 2 Timothy 3:15, Deuteronomy 30:11, 2 Peter 1:19, Ephesians 3:3–4, John 8:31–32, 2 Corinthians 4:3–4, John 8:43–47, 2 Peter 3:15–16, Engelder, Theodore E.W. (1934). Popular Symbolics: The Doctrines of the Churches of Christendom and Of Other Religious Bodies Examined in the Light of Scripture. Saint Louis, MO: Concordia Publishing House. p. 29. , Graebner, Augustus Lawrence (1910). Outlines Of Doctrinal Theology. Saint Louis, MO: Concordia Publishing House. pp. 11–12. ISBN 0-524-04891-6. Archived from the original on 12 July 2006. 
^ Graebner, Augustus Lawrence (1910). Outlines Of Doctrinal Theology. Saint Louis, MO: Concordia Publishing House. p. 11. ISBN 0-524-04891-6. Archived from the original on 12 July 2006. , Engelder, Theodore E.W. (1934). Popular Symbolics: The Doctrines of the Churches of Christendom and Of Other Religious Bodies Examined in the Light of Scripture. Saint Louis, MO: Concordia Publishing House. p. 28. 
^ Graebner, Augustus Lawrence (1910). Outlines Of Doctrinal Theology. Saint Louis, MO: Concordia Publishing House. p. 11. ISBN 0-524-04891-6. Archived from the original on 12 July 2006. 
^ Engelder, Theodore E.W. (1934). Popular Symbolics: The Doctrines of the Churches of Christendom and Of Other Religious Bodies Examined in the Light of Scripture. Saint Louis, MO: Concordia Publishing House. p. 28. 
^ Romans 1:16, 1 Thessalonians 2:13, Graebner, Augustus Lawrence (1910). Outlines Of Doctrinal Theology. Saint Louis, MO: Concordia Publishing House. p. 11. ISBN 0-524-04891-6. Archived from the original on 12 July 2006. , Engelder, Theodore E.W. (1934). Popular Symbolics: The Doctrines of the Churches of Christendom and Of Other Religious Bodies Examined in the Light of Scripture. Saint Louis, MO: Concordia Publishing House. p. 27. 
^ Romans 1:16, 1 Thessalonians 1:5, Psalm 119:105, 2 Peter 1:19, 2 Timothy 1:16–17,Ephesians 3:3–4, Graebner, Augustus Lawrence (1910). Outlines Of Doctrinal Theology. Saint Louis, MO: Concordia Publishing House. pp. 11–12. ISBN 0-524-04891-6. Archived from the original on 12 July 2006. , Engelder, Theodore E.W. (1934). Popular Symbolics: The Doctrines of the Churches of Christendom and Of Other Religious Bodies Examined in the Light of Scripture. Saint Louis, MO: Concordia Publishing House. p. 28. 
^ John 6:63, Revelation 1:3, Ephesians 3:3–4, John 7:17, Graebner, Augustus Lawrence (1910). Outlines Of Doctrinal Theology. Saint Louis, MO: Concordia Publishing House. p. 12. ISBN 0-524-04891-6. Archived from the original on 12 July 2006. , Engelder, Theodore E.W. (1934). Popular Symbolics: The Doctrines of the Churches of Christendom and Of Other Religious Bodies Examined in the Light of Scripture. Saint Louis, MO: Concordia Publishing House. p. 28. 
^ "Smalcald Articles – Book of Concord". Retrieved 5 March 2015. 
^ 2 Timothy 3:15–17, John 5:39, John 17:20, Psalm 19:7–8, Engelder, Theodore E.W. (1934). Popular Symbolics: The Doctrines of the Churches of Christendom and Of Other Religious Bodies Examined in the Light of Scripture. Saint Louis, MO: Concordia Publishing House. p. 28. 
^ Isaiah 8:20, Luke 16:29–31, 2 Timothy 3:16–17, Graebner, Augustus Lawrence (1910). Outlines Of Doctrinal Theology. Saint Louis, MO: Concordia Publishing House. p. 13. ISBN 0-524-04891-6. Archived from the original on 7 August 2007. , Engelder, Theodore E.W. (1934). Popular Symbolics: The Doctrines of the Churches of Christendom and Of Other Religious Bodies Examined in the Light of Scripture. Saint Louis, MO: Concordia Publishing House. p. 28. 
^ "Defense of the Augsburg Confession – Book of Concord". Retrieved 5 March 2015. 
^ Walther, C. F. W. The Proper Distinction Between Law and Gospel. W. H. T. Dau, trans. St. Louis: Concordia Publishing House, 1929.
^ F.E. Mayer, The Religious Bodies of America. St. Louis: Concordia Publishing House, 1954, p. 184. For further information, see The Formula of Concord in the History of Swedish Lutheranism by Seth Erlandsson
^ Paul R. Sponheim, "The Origin of Sin", in Christian Dogmatics, Carl E. Braaten and Robert W. Jenson, eds. (Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1984), 385–407.
^ Francis Pieper, "Definition of Original Sin", in Christian Dogmatics (St. Louis: Concordia Publishing House, 1953), 1:538.
^ Krauth, C.P.,The Conservative Reformation and Its Theology: As Represented in the Augsburg Confession, and in the History and Literature of the Evangelical Lutheran Church . Philadelphia: J.B. Lippincott. 1875. pp. 335–455, Part IX The Specific Doctrines Of The Conservative Reformation: Original Sin.
^ Formula of Concord, Original Sin.
^ Rom. 7:18, 8:7 1 Cor. 2:14, Martin Chemnitz, Examination of the Council of Trent: Vol. I. Trans. Fred Kramer, St. Louis: Concordia Publishing House, 1971, pp. 639–652, "The Third Question: Whether the Good Works of the Regenerate in This Life Are So Perfect that They Fully, Abundantly, and Perfectly Satisfy the Divine Law".
^ Gen. 6:5, 8:21, Mat. 7:17, Krauth, C.P.,The Conservative Reformation and Its Theology: As Represented in the Augsburg Confession, and in the History and Literature of the Evangelical Lutheran Church . Philadelphia: J.B. Lippincott. 1875. pp. 388–390, Part IX The Specific Doctrines Of The Conservative Reformation: Original Sin, Thesis VII The Results, Section ii Positive.
^ Dt. 27:26,Rom. 5:12,2 Th. 1:9 Rom. 6:23, Engelder, T.E.W., Popular Symbolics. St. Louis: Concordia Publishing House, 1934. pp. 38–41, Part VIII. "Sin"
^ 1 Tim. 2:4, Engelder, T.E.W., Popular Symbolics. St. Louis: Concordia Publishing House, 1934. pp. 43–44, Part X. "Saving Grace", paragraph 55.
^ Triglot Concordia: The Symbolical Books of the Ev. Lutheran Church. St. Louis: Concordia, 1921. Large Catechism, The Lord's Prayer, The Second Petition, Par. 51.
^ Gal. 3:13, Engelder, T.E.W., Popular Symbolics. St. Louis: Concordia Publishing House, 1934. p. 43, Part X. "Saving Grace", paragraph 54.
^ Rom. 10:4, Gal. 4:4–5, Engelder, T.E.W., Popular Symbolics. St. Louis: Concordia Publishing House, 1934. p. 42, Part X. "Saving Grace", paragraph 52.
^ Solid Declaration of the Formula of Concord, Article III, "Concerning the Righteousness of Faith before God". par. 57–58. trans. Kolb, R., Wengert, T., and Arand, C. Minneapolis: Augsburg Fortress, 2000.
^ "Augsburg Confession – Book of Concord". Retrieved 5 March 2015. 
^ John 17:3, Luke 1:77,Galatians 4:9, Philippians 3:8, and 1 Timothy 2:4 refer to faith in terms of knowledge.
^ John 5:46 refers to acceptance of the truth of Christ's teaching, while John 3:36 notes the rejection of his teaching.
^ John 3:16,36, Galatians 2:16, Romans 4:20–25, 2 Timothy 1:12 speak of trust, confidence, and belief in Christ. John 3:18 notes belief in the name of Christ, and Mark 1:15 notes belief in the gospel.
^ Engelder, T.E.W., Popular Symbolics. St. Louis: Concordia Publishing House, 1934. pp. 54–55, Part XIV. "Sin"
^ Ps. 51:10, Engelder, T.E.W., Popular Symbolics. St. Louis: Concordia Publishing House, 1934, p. 57 Part XV. "Conversion", paragraph 78.
^ John 17:20, Rom. 10:17, Engelder, T.E.W., Popular Symbolics. St. Louis: Concordia Publishing House, 1934, p. 101 Part XXV. "The Church", paragraph 141.
^ Titus 3:5, Engelder, T.E.W., Popular Symbolics. St. Louis: Concordia Publishing House, 1934, p. 87 Part XXIII. "Baptism", paragraph 118.
^ Eph. 2:8, Engelder, T.E.W., Popular Symbolics. St. Louis: Concordia Publishing House, 1934, p. 57 Part XV. "Conversion", paragraph 78.
^ The Roman Catholic Catechism, part 3, section 1, chapter 3, article 2, II, paragraphs 2000 and 2001; downloaded February 18, 2017; defines grace as something which brings about a change in us, such that we cooperate in justification and act without sin (i.e. sanctified).
^ Is. 63:8–9, Mueller, J.T., Christian Dogmatics. St. Louis: Concordia Publishing House, 1934. pp. 158–160, section "The Doctrine of God", part 5. "The Holy Trinity Revealed in the Old Testament",Heb. 1:5, see Engelder, T.E.W., Popular Symbolics. St. Louis: Concordia Publishing House, 1934. pp. 33–36, Part VI. "The Trinity".
^ The Nicene Creed and the Filioque: A Lutheran Approach by Rev. David Webber for more information
^ Athanasian Creed – for an older Trinitarian Creed used by Lutherans, see the Nicene Creed: the version in Evangelical Lutheran Worship (2006) of the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America (ELCA) and the Evangelical Lutheran Church in Canada (ELCIC) is the 1988 ecumenical (ELLC) version. But the version in both "Lutheran Service Book" (2006) of the Lutheran Church–Missouri Synod (LCMS) and the Lutheran Church Canada (LCC) is that of the 1662 Book of Common Prayer with modernized spelling of the words "catholic" and "apostolic", with changes in capitalization of these and other words, and with "Holy Spirit" in place of "Holy Ghost".
^ Luther's Small Catechism, The Apostles' Creed, Second Article, Graebner, Augustus Lawrence (1910). Outlines Of Doctrinal Theology. Saint Louis, MO: Concordia Publishing House. pp. 100ff. ISBN 0-524-04891-6. Archived from the original on 12 July 2006. 
^ Augsburg confession, Article III. Retrieved 17 April 2010.
^ Matthew 28:19, 1 Corinthians 11:23–25, Matthew 26:26–28, Mark 14:22–24, Luke 22:19–20, Graebner, Augustus Lawrence (1910). Outlines Of Doctrinal Theology. Saint Louis, MO: Concordia Publishing House. p. 161. ISBN 0-524-04891-6. 
^ Ephesians 5:27, John 3:5, John 3:23, 1 Corinthians 10:16, Graebner, Augustus Lawrence (1910). Outlines Of Doctrinal Theology. Saint Louis, MO: Concordia Publishing House. p. 161. ISBN 0-524-04891-6. 
^ Ephesians 5:26, 1 Corinthians 10:16, 1 Corinthians 11:24–25, Graebner, Augustus Lawrence (1910). Outlines Of Doctrinal Theology. Saint Louis, MO: Concordia Publishing House. p. 161. ISBN 0-524-04891-6. 
^ Matthew 3:16–17, John 3:5, 1 Corinthians 11:19, Graebner, Augustus Lawrence (1910). Outlines Of Doctrinal Theology. Saint Louis, MO: Concordia Publishing House. p. 161. ISBN 0-524-04891-6. 
^ Luke 7:30, Luke 22:19–20, Graebner, Augustus Lawrence (1910). Outlines Of Doctrinal Theology. Saint Louis, MO: Concordia Publishing House. p. 162. ISBN 0-524-04891-6. 
^ Acts 21:16, Acts 2:38, Luke 3:3, Ephesians 5:26, 1 Peter 3:21, Galatians 3:26–27, Matthew 26:28, Graebner, Augustus Lawrence (1910). Outlines Of Doctrinal Theology. Saint Louis, MO: Concordia Publishing House. p. 163. ISBN 0-524-04891-6. 
^ 1 Peter 3:21, Titus 3:5, Graebner, Augustus Lawrence (1910). Outlines Of Doctrinal Theology. Saint Louis, MO: Concordia Publishing House. p. 163. ISBN 0-524-04891-6. 
^ Titus 3:5, John 3:5, Graebner, Augustus Lawrence (1910). Outlines Of Doctrinal Theology. Saint Louis, MO: Concordia Publishing House. p. 163. ISBN 0-524-04891-6. 
^ "Private Absolution ought to be retained in the churches, although in confession an enumeration of all sins is not necessary." Article XI: Of Confession
^ The Apology of the Augsburg Confession XIII, 2: "We believe we have the duty not to neglect any of the rites and ceremonies instituted in Scripture, whatever their number. We do not think it makes much difference if, for purposes of teaching, the enumeration varies, provided what is handed down in Scripture is preserved" (cf. Theodore G. Tappert, trans. and ed., The Book of Concord: The Confessions of the Evangelical Lutheran Church, (Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1959), 211).
^ Luther's Large Catechism IV, 1: "We have now finished the three chief parts of the common Christian doctrine. Besides these we have yet to speak of our two Sacraments instituted by Christ, of which also every Christian ought to have at least an ordinary, brief instruction, because without them there can be no Christian; although, alas! hitherto no instruction concerning them has been given" (emphasis added; cf. Theodore G. Tappert, trans. and ed., The Book of Concord: The Confessions of the Evangelical Lutheran Church, (Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1959), 733).
^ John 20:23, and Engelder, T.E.W., Popular Symbolics. St. Louis: Concordia Publishing House, 1934. pp. 112–113, Part XXVI "The Ministry", paragraph 156.
^ Luther's Large Catechism IV, 74–75: "And here you see that Baptism, both in its power and signification, comprehends also the third Sacrament, which has been called repentance, as it is really nothing else than Baptism" (emphasis added; cf. Theodore G. Tappert, trans. and ed., The Book of Concord: The Confessions of the Evangelical Lutheran Church, (Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1959), 751).
^ The Apology of the Augsburg Confession XIII, 3, 4: "If we define the sacraments as rites, which have the command of God and to which the promise of grace has been added, it is easy to determine what the sacraments are, properly speaking. For humanly instituted rites are not sacraments, properly speaking, because human beings do not have the authority to promise grace. Therefore signs instituted without the command of God are not sure signs of grace, even though they perhaps serve to teach or admonish the common folk. Therefore, the sacraments are actually baptism, the Lord's Supper, and absolution (the sacrament of repentance)" (cf. Tappert, 211). Apology of the Augsburg Confession, Article 13, Of the Number and Use of the Sacraments
^ Apology of the Augsburg Confession, article 24, paragraph 1. Retrieved 16 April 2010.
^ 1 Pet. 3:21, Mueller, J.T., Christian Dogmatics. St. Louis: Concordia Publishing House, 1934. pp. 491–496, section "The Doctrine of Baptism", part 4. "Baptism a True Means of Grace", and Engelder, T.E.W., Popular Symbolics. St. Louis: Concordia Publishing House, 1934. p. 87, Part XXIII. "Baptism", paragraph 118.
^ Martin Luther, Small Catechism 4
^ Titus 3:5
^ John 3:3–7
^ "Baptism and Its Purpose". Lutheran Church–Missouri Synod. Archived from the original on 6 February 2009. Retrieved 24 February 2009. 
^ Luther, Martin (2009) [1529]. "The Sacrament of Holy Baptism". Luther's Small Catechism. ISBN 0-89279-043-1. Retrieved 24 February 2009. 
^ 1 Peter 3:21
^ Mat. 19:14, Acts 2:38–39, Engelder, T.E.W., Popular Symbolics. St. Louis: Concordia Publishing House, 1934. p. 90, Part XXIII. "Baptism", paragraph 122.
^ 1 Cor. 1:14, Engelder, T.E.W., Popular Symbolics. St. Louis: Concordia Publishing House, 1934. p. 90, Part XXIII. "Baptism", paragraph 122.
^ Luther, Martin (2009) [1529]. "Of Infant Baptism". Luther's Large Catechism. ISBN 1-4264-3861-3. Retrieved 24 February 2009. Luther's Large Catechism – Holy Baptism
^ "Augsburg Confession – Book of Concord". Retrieved 5 March 2015. 
^ 1 Cor. 10:16, 11:20, 27, Engelder, T.E.W., Popular Symbolics. St. Louis: Concordia Publishing House, 1934. p. 95, Part XXIV. "The Lord's Supper", paragraph 131.
^ The Solid Declaration of the Formula of Concord, Article 8, The Holy Supper
^ Augustus Lawrence Graebner, Lutheran Cyclopedia p. 136, "Conversion"
^ "Augsburg Confession – Book of Concord". Retrieved 5 March 2015. 
^ See Augsburg Confession, Article XVIII: Of Free Will
^ 1 Cor. 2:14, 12:3, Rom. 8:7, Martin Chemnitz, Examination of the Council of Trent: Vol. I. Trans. Fred Kramer, St. Louis: Concordia Publishing House, 1971, pp. 409–453, "Seventh Topic, Concerning Free Will: From the Decree of the Sixth Session of the Council of Trent".
^ Augsburg Confession, Article 18, Of Free Will.
^ Acts 13:48, Eph. 1:4–11, Epitome of the Formula of Concord, Article 11, Election, Mueller, J.T., Christian Dogmatics. St. Louis: Concordia Publishing House, 1934. pp. 585–589, section "The Doctrine of Eternal Election: 1. The Definition of the Term", and Engelder, T.E.W., Popular Symbolics. St. Louis: Concordia Publishing House, 1934. pp. 124–128, Part XXXI. "The Election of Grace", paragraph 176.
^ 2 Thess. 2:13, Mueller, J.T., Christian Dogmatics. St. Louis: Concordia Publishing House, 1934. pp. 589–93, section "The Doctrine of Eternal Election: 2. How Believers are to Consider Their Election, and Engelder, T.E.W., Popular Symbolics. St. Louis: Concordia Publishing House, 1934. pp. 127–128, Part XXXI. "The Election of Grace", paragraph 180.
^ Rom. 8:33, Engelder, T.E.W., Popular Symbolics. St. Louis: Concordia Publishing House, 1934. pp. 127–128, Part XXXI. "The Election of Grace", paragraph 179., Engelder, T.E.W., The Certainty of Final Salvation. The Lutheran Witness 2(6). English Evangelical Missouri Synod: Baltimore. 1891, pp. 41ff.
^ 1 Tim. 2:4, 2 Pet. 3:9, Epitome of the Formula of Concord, Article 11, Election, and Engelder's Popular Symbolics, Part XXXI. The Election of Grace, pp. 124–128.
^ 1 Timothy 2:3–4
^ Hos. 13:9, Mueller, J.T., Christian Dogmatics. St. Louis: Concordia Publishing House, 1934. p. 637, section "The Doctrine of the Last Things (Eschatology), part 7. "Eternal Damnation", and Engelder, T.E.W., Popular Symbolics. St. Louis: Concordia Publishing House, 1934. pp. 135–136, Part XXXIX. "Eternal Death", paragraph 196.
^ Mueller, J.T., Christian Dogmatics. Concordia Publishing House. 1934. pp. 189–195 and Fuerbringer, L., Concordia Cyclopedia Concordia Publishing House. 1927. p. 635 and Christian Cyclopedia article on Divine Providence. For further reading, see The Proof Texts of the Catechism with a Practical Commentary, section Divine Providence, p. 212, Wessel, Louis, published in Theological Quarterly, Vol. 11, 1909.
^ Mueller, Steven P.,Called to Believe, Teach, and Confess. Wipf and Stock. 2005. pp. 122–123.
^ Mueller, J.T., Christian Dogmatics. Concordia Publishing House: 1934. pp. 190 and Edward. W. A.,A Short Explanation of Dr. Martin Luther's Small Catechism. Concordia Publishing House. 1946. p. 165. and Divine Providence and Human Adversity Archived 7 July 2010 at the Wayback Machine. by Markus O. Koepsell
^ "The Small Catechism". Retrieved 5 March 2015. 
^ a b Luther's Large Catechism, First Commandment
^ quoted in Scaer, David. Luther's Concept of the Resurrection Concordia Theological Quarterly 47(3) p. 219
^ John 15:5, Tit. 2:14, Engelder, T.E.W., Popular Symbolics. St. Louis: Concordia Publishing House, 1934. pp. 62–63, Part XV. "Conversion", paragraph 88 The New Obedience Is The Fruit Of Conversion, The Product Of Faith.
^ 2 Cor. 9:8, Krauth, C.P.,The Conservative Reformation and Its Theology: As Represented in the Augsburg Confession, and in the History and Literature of the Evangelical Lutheran Church . Philadelphia: J.B. Lippincott. 1875. pp. 313–314, Part D Confession of the Conservative Reformation: II, Secondary Confessions: Book of Concord, Formula of Concord, Part IV The Doctrinal Result, 2, Section iv, Of Good Works.
^ Phil 2:13, Engelder, T.E.W., Popular Symbolics. St. Louis: Concordia Publishing House, 1934. p. 74, Part XIX. "Preservation in Faith", paragraph 102.
^ Rom. 7:18 Heb 11:6, Engelder, T.E.W., Popular Symbolics. St. Louis: Concordia Publishing House, 1934. pp. 39–40, Part VIII. "Sin", paragraph 46 "Original Sin".
^ "Mat. 7:15–16; NIV – True and False Prophets". Bible Gateway. Retrieved 5 March 2015. 
^ Albrecht Beutel, "Luther's Life", tr. Katharina Gustavs, in The Cambridge Companion to Martin Luther, ed. Donald K. McKim (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2003), 11.
^ "Joh 18:36; ESV – Jesus answered, My kingdom is not of.." Bible Gateway. Retrieved 5 March 2015. 
^ Luke 23:42–43, 2 Cor. 5:8, Engelder, T.E.W., Popular Symbolics. St. Louis: Concordia Publishing House, 1934. p. 130, Part XXXIV. "The State of the Soul in the Interval Between Death and the Resurrection", paragraph 185.
^ 1 Cor. 15:22–24, Francis Pieper, Christian Dogmatics, 505–515; Heinrich Schmid, The Doctrinal Theology of the Evangelical Lutheran Church, 624–32; John Mueller, Christian Dogmatics, 616–19
^ John 6:40, John 6:54
^ John 5:21, John 5:28–29, Matthew 25:32, 2 Corinthians 5:10, Acts 24:15
^ Romans 8:11, Philippians 3:21, 2 Corinthians 5:10, Job 19:26, 1 Corinthians 15:44, 1 Corinthians 15:53, John 5:28, Revelation 20:12
^ Daniel 12:2, Matthew 25:41–46, John 5:29
^ Daniel 12:1–2, John 5:29, 1 Corinthians 15:52, 1 Corinthians 15:42–44, 1 Corinthians 15:49–53, Philippians 3:21, Matthew 13:43, Revelation 7:16
^ John 6:40, John 6:44, John 11:24
^ 1 Corinthians 15:51–52, 1 Thessalonians 4:15–17
^ Matthew 25:32, Romans 14:10, John 5:22, Acts 17:31, Revelation 1:7
^ Matthew 25:32, Mark 16:16
^ 2 Corinthians 5:10, 1 Corinthians 4:5, Romans 2:5, Romans 2:16
^ Romans 2:6, 2 Corinthians 5:10, Matthew 25:35–36, Matthew 25:42–43
^ Isaiah 43:25, Ezekiel 18:22, 1 John 2:28
^ Matthew 25:34–35, John 3:16–18, John 3:36, Revelation 14:13, Galatians 5:6, John 13:35
^ Matthew 25:42, Matthew 7:17–18, John 3:18, John 3:36
^ Romans 2:5, Acts 17:31, Romans 2:16
^ Luke 9:26, Matthew 25:31–32
^ Matthew 25:41, Matthew 25:34, Matthew 25:46, Graebner, Augustus Lawrence (1910). Outlines Of Doctrinal Theology. Saint Louis, MO: Concordia Publishing House. pp. 233–8. ISBN 0-524-04891-6. 
^ Table adapted from Lange, Lyle W. God So Loved the World: A Study of Christian Doctrine (Milwaukee: Northwestern Publishing House, 2006), 448, with the addition of specific citations.
^ Table drawn from, though not copied, from Lange, Lyle W. God So Loved the World: A Study of Christian Doctrine. Milwaukee: Northwestern Publishing House, 2006. p. 448.
^ a b c "Calvinism and Lutheranism Compared". WELS Topical Q&A. Wisconsin Evangelical Lutheran Synod. Archived from the original on 7 February 2009. Retrieved 26 January 2015. Both (Lutherans and Calvinists) agree on the devastating nature of the fall and that man by nature has no power to aid in his conversions...and that election to salvation is by grace. In Lutheranism the German term for election is Gnadenwahl, election by grace--there is no other kind. 
^ John Calvin, Institutes of the Christian Religion, trans. Henry Beveridge, III.23.2.
^ John Calvin, Institutes of the Christian Religion, trans. Henry Beveridge, II.3.5.
^ John Calvin, Institutes of the Christian Religion, trans. Henry Beveridge, III.3.6.
^ WELS Topical Q&A: WELS vs Assembly of God: "[P]eople by nature are dead in their tranbsgressions (sic) and sin and therefore have no ability to decide of Christ (Ephesians 2:1, 5). We do not choose Christ, rather he chose us (John 15:16) We believe that human beings are purely passive in conversion."
^ Augsburg Confessional, Article XVIII, Of Free Will, saying: "(M)an's will has some liberty to choose civil righteousness, and to work things subject to reason. But it has no power, without the Holy Ghost, to work the righteousness of God, that is, spiritual righteousness; since the natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God (1 Cor. 2:14); but this righteousness is wrought in the heart when the Holy Ghost is received through the Word."
^ Henry Cole, trans, Martin Luther on the Bondage of the Will (London, T. Bensley, 1823), 66. The controversial term liberum arbitrium was translated "free-will" by Cole. However Ernest Gordon Rupp and Philip Saville Watson, Luther and Erasmus: Free Will and Salvation (Westminister, 1969) chose "free choice" as their translation.
^ Keith D. Stanglin and Thomas H. McCall, Jacob Arminius: Theologian of Grace (Oxford University, 2012), 157-158.
^ The Book of Concord: The Confessions of the Lutheran Church, XI. Election. "Predestination" means "God's ordination to salvation".
^ Roger E. Olson, Arminian Theology: Myths and Realities (InterVarsity Press, 2009), 63. “Arminians accepts divine election, [but] they believe it is conditional."
^ The Westminster Confession, III:6, says that only the "elect" are "effectually called, justified, adopted, sanctified, and saved." However in his Calvin and the Reformed Tradition (Baker, 2012), 45, Richard A. Muller observes that "a sizeable body of literature has interpreted Calvin as teaching "limited atonement", but "an equally sizeable body . . . [interprets] Calvin as teaching "unlimited atonement".
^ "Justification / Salvation". WELS Topical Q&A. Wisconsin Evangelical Lutheran Synod. Archived from the original on 27 September 2009. Retrieved 29 January 2015. Romans 3:23-24, 5:9, 18 are other passages that lead us to say that it is most appropriate and accurate to say that universal justification is a finished fact. God has forgiven the sins of the whole world whether people believe it or not. He has done more than "made forgiveness possible." All this is for the sake of the perfect substitutionary work of Jesus Christ. 
^ "IV. Justification by Grace through Faith". This We Believe. Wisconsin Evangelical Lutheran Synod. Retrieved 5 February 2015. We believe that God has justified all sinners, that is, he has declared them righteous for the sake of Christ. This is the central message of Scripture upon which the very existence of the church depends. It is a message relevant to people of all times and places, of all races and social levels, for "the result of one trespass was condemnation for all men" (Romans 5:18). All need forgiveness of sins before God, and Scripture proclaims that all have been justified, for "the result of one act of righteousness was justification that brings life for all men" (Romans 5:18). We believe that individuals receive this free gift of forgiveness not on the basis of their own works, but only through faith (Ephesians 2:8–9). ... On the other hand, although Jesus died for all, Scripture says that "whoever does not believe will be condemned" (Mark 16:16). Unbelievers forfeit the forgiveness won for them by Christ (John 8:24). 
^ Becker, Siegbert W. "Objective Justification" (PDF). Wisconsin Lutheran Seminary. p. 1. Retrieved 26 January 2015. 
^ "Universal Justification". WELS Topical Q&A. Wisconsin Evangelical Lutheran Synod. Archived from the original on 27 September 2009. Retrieved 5 February 2015. Christ paid for all our sins. God the Father has therefore forgiven them. But to benefit from this verdict we need to hear about it and trust in it. If I deposit money in the bank for you, to benefit from it you need to hear about it and use it. Christ has paid for your sins, but to benefit from it you need to hear about it and believe in it. We need to have faith but we should not think of faith as our contribution. It is a gift of God which the Holy Spirit works in us. 
^ Augsburg Confession, Article V, Of Justification. People "cannot be justified before God by their own strength, merits, or works, but are freely justified for Christ's sake, through faith, when they believe that they are received into favor, and that their sins are forgiven for Christ's sake. ..."
^ "Faith is a condition of justification". Keith D. Stanglin and Thomas H. McCall, Jacob Arminius: Theologian of Grace (Oxford University, 2012), 136.
^ Paul ChulHong Kang, Justification: The Imputation of Christ's Righteousness from Reformation Theology to the American Great Awakening and the Korean Revivals (Peter Lang, 2006), 70, note 171. Calvin generally defends Augustine’s "monergistic view".
^ Diehl, Walter A. "The Age of Accountability". Wisconsin Lutheran Seminary. Retrieved 10 February 2015. In full accord with Scripture the Lutheran Confessions teach monergism. "In this manner, too, the Holy Scriptures ascribe conversion, faith in Christ, regeneration, renewal and all the belongs to their efficacious beginning and completion, not to the human powers of the natural free will, neither entirely, nor half, nor in any, even the least or most inconsiderable part, but in solidum, that is, entirely, solely, to the divine working and the Holy Ghost" (Trigl. 891, F.C., Sol. Decl., II, 25). 
^ http://www.thefreedictionary.com/Monergism
^ "Calvinism and Lutheranism Compared". WELS Topical Q&A. Wisconsin Evangelical Lutheran Synod. Archived from the original on 7 February 2009. Retrieved 9 February 2015. 
^ Roger E. Olson, Arminian Theology: Myths and Realities (InterVarsity Press, 2009), 18. "Arminian synergism" refers to "evangelical synergism, which affirms the prevenience of grace."
^ The Westminster Confession of Faith, Ch XVII, "Of the Perseverance of the Saints".
^ "Once saved always saved". WELS Topical Q&A. Wisconsin Evangelical Lutheran Synod. Archived from the original on 27 September 2009. Retrieved 7 February 2015. People can fall from faith. The Bible warns, "If you think you are standing firm, be careful that you don't fall" (! Corinthians 10:12). Some among the Galatians had believed for a while, but had fallen into soul-destroying error. Paul warned them, "You who are trying to be justified by law have been alienated from Christ; you have fallen away from grace" (Galatians 5:4). In his explanation of the parable of the sower, Jesus says, "Those on the rock are the ones who receive the word with joy when they hear it, but they have no root. They believe for a while, but in time of testing they fall away" (Luke 8:13). According to Jesus a person can believe for a while and then fall away. While they believed they possessed eternal salvation, but when they fell from faith they lost God's gracious gift. 
^ "Perseverence of the Saints (Once Saved Always Saved)". WELS Topical Q&A. Wisconsin Evangelical Lutheran Synod. Archived from the original on 27 September 2009. Retrieved 7 February 2015. We cannot contribute one speck to our salvation, but by our own arrogance or carelessness we can throw it away. Therefore, Scripture urges us repeatedly to fight the good fight of faith (Ephesians 6 and 2 Timothy 4 for example). My sins threaten and weaken my faith, but the Spirit through the gospel in word and sacraments strengthens and preserves my faith. That’s why Lutherans typically speak of God’s preservation of faith and not the perseverance of the saints. The key is not our perseverance but the Spirit’s preservation. 
^ Bruce Demarest, The Cross and Salvation: The Doctrine of Salvation (Crossway, 1997), 437-438.
^ “Many Arminians deny the doctrine of the perseverance of the saints." Bruce Demarest, The Cross and Salvation: The Doctrine of Salvation (Crossway, 1997), 35.
^ McGrath, Alister, E. Christianity: An Introduction. 2nd ed. Malden, Massachusetts: Blackwell, 2006. p. 272.
^ Taruskin, Richard. The Oxford History of Western Music – Volume I (Music in the Earliest Notations to the sixteenth century), pp. 753–758 (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2010)
^ Apology of the Augsburg Confession, Article XXIV.1
^ a b See Luther's Small Catechism, Daily Prayers
^ Principle examples of this in the ELCA include Family of God, Cape Coral FL., The Well, Charlotte NC, Hosanna! of Lakeville, Minnesota, and Church of the Apostles, Seattle WA..
^ "A given culture's values and patterns, insofar as they are consonant with the values of the Gospel, can be used to express the meaning and purpose of Christian worship. Contextualization is a necessary task for the Church's mission in the world, so that the Gospel can be ever more deeply rooted in diverse local cultures." The Nairobe Statement
^ Piepkorn, A.C. Profiles in Belief: Volume II, Protestant Denominations. San Francisco: Harper and Row, 1978. p. 31.
^ Piepkorn, A.C. , Profiles in Belief: Volume II, Protestant Denominations. San Francisco: Harper and Row, 1978. p. 32.
^ Piepkorn, A.C. , Profiles in Belief: Volume II, Protestant Denominations. San Francisco: Harper and Row, 1978. p. 35.
^ Piepkorn, A.C. , Profiles in Belief: Volume II, Protestant Denominations. San Francisco: Harper and Row, 1978. p. 33.
^ a b c Piepkorn, A.C., Profiles in Belief: Volume II, Protestant Denominations. San Francisco: Harper and Row, 1978. p. 34.
^ Preface to Luther's Large and preface to Luther's Small Catechism.
^ Fahlbusch, Erwin, and Bromiley, Geoffrey William, The Encyclopedia of Christianity, Volume 3. Grand Rapids, Michigan: Eerdmans, 2003. p. 367.
^ Klug, Eugene F. and Stahlke, Otto F. Getting into the Formula of Concord. St. Louis: Concordia, 1977. p. 16
^ Klug, Eugene F. and Stahlke, Otto F. Getting into the Formula of Concord. St. Louis: Concordia. p. 18
^ See Lutheran Orthodoxy Under Fire: An Exploratory Study of the Syncretistic Controversy And The Consensus Repetitus Fidei Vere Lutheranae and Strenuus Christi Athleta Abraham Calov (1612–1686): Sainted Doctor And Defender of the Church, both by Timothy R. Schmeling
^ (in Swedish)Svenskakyrkan.se Archived 30 September 2007 at the Wayback Machine.
^ Bente, Friedrich, 1858–1930. American Lutheranism Volume 1: Early History of American Lutheranism: Lutheran Swedes in Delaware. St. Louis: Concordia, 1919, pp. 13–16.
^ Eklund, Emmet E. (1988). His Name Was Jonas: A Biography of Jonas Swenson. Rock Island, Ill.: Augustana Historical Society. p. 99. ISBN 0910184364. Retrieved 21 September 2017. 
^ Gritsch, Eric W. A History of Lutheranism. Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 2002. p. 185.
^ For a historical example, see Robert Preus, To Join or Not To Join. North Dakota District of The Lutheran Church–Missouri Synod, 1968.
^ See Brief Statement was adopted as LCMS doctrine in 1932, and from time to time has been adopted by other Lutherans
^ Report of the Lutheran Church, The Northwestern Lutheran, p. 281, 31 August 1988.
^ see Ecumenism: Facts and Illusions by Kurt E. Marquart for a short explanation of the modern ecumenism movement from a Confessional Lutheran perspective
^ See scholarly articles on the Church Growth Movement from the Wisconsin Lutheran Seminary Library and Implications of the Church Growth Movement for Lutherans: Possibilities and Concerns by Harold L. Senkbeil as examples of criticism from confessional Lutherans
^ Lutheran World Federation, "Slight Increase Pushes LWF Global Membership to 66.2 Million", The Lutheran World Federation, http://www.lutheranworld.org/ (accessed 18 May 2006). However, some Lutherans disagree with the way the Lutheran World Federation arrives at this number, as millions of them actually come from bodies that are largely Reformed, but include some Lutherans. For more information on this, see William Schumacher, "Theological Observer: How Many Lutherans?", Concordia Journal April 2005, http://www.csl.edu/CJApril05.pdf/
^ The Lutheran World Federation – 2013 Membership Figures Lutheran World Federation
^ [1], The Lutheran World Federation
^ [2], The Lutheran World Federation
^ [3], The Lutheran World Federation
^ [4], The Lutheran World Federation
^ [5], The Lutheran World Federation
^ Zahlen und Fakte zum kirchlichen Leben 2017 Evangelische Kirche in Deutschland
^ Encyclopædia Britannica, Dominant Protestant Denomination Per Country, 1995.
^ Lutherans as a Percentage of All Residents, 2000 Archived 30 June 2006 at the Wayback Machine. (Map by county). Also see comparable maps of other religions along with specific denominations of Lutheran at the main American Ethnic Geography Archived 9 June 2007 at the Wayback Machine. site
^ 2011 World Lutheran Membership Details Archived 24 March 2013 at the Wayback Machine.
^ "Sweden Ends Designation of Lutheranism as Official Religion". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved 5 March 2015. 
^ The Lutheran World Federation 2013 Membership Figures



Further reading[edit]

ALC Historical Perspective: Nervig, Casper B. Christian Truth and Religious Delusions, Minneapolis: Augsburg Publishing House, 1941.
Arand, Charles P, and Robert Kolb, eds. The Lutheran Confessions: History and Theology of the Book of Concord (2012)
Bodensieck, Julius, ed. The encyclopedia of the Lutheran Church (3 vol 1965) vol 1 and 3 online free
Brauer, James Leonard and Fred L. Precht, eds. Lutheran Worship: History and Practice (1993)
CLC Perspective: Concerning Church Fellowship: A Statement of Principle. Eau Claire, WI: CLC Book House. 1996. 
Confessional & Historical Perspective: Günther Gassmann & Scott Hendrix. Fortress Introduction to the Lutheran Confessions. Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 1999. ISBN 0-8006-3162-5.
European Lutheran perspective: Elert, Werner. The Structure of Lutheranism: the Theology and Philosophy of Life of Lutheranism, Especially in the Sixteenth and Seventeenth Centuries, trans. by Walter A. Hansen. Saint Louis, Mo.: Concordia Publishing House, 1962. N.B.: Trans. of Morphologie des Luthertums, vol. 1 of which was published in 1931 at Munich by C.H. Beck'sche Verlagsbuchhandlung, 1931, vol. 2 in German appearing in 1932; the t.p. of this English-language ed. states "Volume One", but there has been no publication, as part of this English ed., of vol. 2.
Fellowship of Lutheran Congregations Perspective: What True Lutherans Teach. Oak Parks, Ill.: E.L.C. Tract Center, [199?]. 11 p. N.B.: There is no personal author or specific committee credited with this brochure.
General Council Historical Perspective: Krauth, Charles Porterfield (1875). The Conservative Reformation and Its Theology: As Represented in the Augsburg Confession, and in the History and Theology of the Evangelical Lutheran Church (2nd ed.). Philadelphia: J. P. Lippincott. p. 840. ISBN 0-7586-0994-9. 
Granquist, Mark. Lutherans in America: A New History (2015)
LCA Historical Perspective: Braaten, Carl E. (1983). Principles of Lutheran Theology. Philadelphia: Fortress Press. ISBN 0-8006-1689-8. 
LCA Historical Worship Perspective: Reed, Luther D. The Lutheran Liturgy: a Study [especially] of the Common Service of the Lutheran Church in America. Philadelphia, Penn.: Muhlenberg Press, 1947. N.B.: This study also includes some coverage of other Lutheran liturgical services, especially of Matins and Vespers.
LCMS Perspective: Pieper, Franz (1950–1957). Christian Dogmatics. Saint Louis, MO: Concordia Publishing House. p. 3 Volumes. ISBN 0-570-06714-6. 
LCMS Perspective: Engelder, Theodore E.W. (1934). Popular Symbolics: The Doctrines of the Churches of Christendom and Of Other Religious Bodies Examined in the Light of Scripture. Saint Louis, MO: Concordia Publishing House. p. 526. 
LCMS Perspective: Brief Statement of the Doctrinal Position of the Missouri Synod (1932). Saint Louis, Mo.: Concordia Publishing House.
LCMS Perspective: Graebner, Augustus Lawrence (1910). Outlines Of Doctrinal Theology. Saint Louis, MO: Concordia Publishing House. p. 250. ISBN 0-524-04891-6. Archived from the original on 9 July 2006. 
LCMS Perspective: Kretzschmar, Karl (198?). What Lutherans Teach. St. Louis, Mo.: Concordia Tract Mission.
LCMS Perspective: Neuhaus, Richard John (1969). The Lutherans (in "Ecumenical Series"). New York: Paulist Press. N.B.: At the time of the publication of this document, Neuhaus was still a Lutheran pastor, of the Lutheran Church–Missouri Synod.
LCR Perspective: McLaughlin, Wallace H. (1963). We All Believe in One True God: A Summary of Biblical Doctrine. Midland, Michigan: Cross of Christ Press. 
Meyer, Carl S. Moving Frontiers: Readings in the History of the Lutheran Church Missouri Synod (1986)
Neo-Lutheran Historical Perspective: Schmid, Heinrich Friedrich Ferdinand (1876). The Doctrinal Theology of the Evangelical Lutheran Church. Philadelphia: Lutheran Publication Society. ISBN 0-7905-8877-3. 
Norwegian Synod Historical Perspective: Monson, Ingvar Grøthe (1915). The Difference: A Popular Guide to Denominational History and Doctrine. Saint Louis, MO: Concordia Publishing House. 
Roeber, A. G. Palatines, Liberty, and Property: German Lutherans in Colonial British America (1998)
Slovak Synod Historical Perspective: Richter, V. W. (1913). Why Should a Lutheran Not Join Any Sectarian Church?. Streator, Illinois: Svedok Publishing House. 
WELS Perspective: Lange, Lyle W. (2006). God So Loved the World: A Study of Christian Doctrine. Northwestern Publishing House. ISBN 0-8100-1744-X. 
Comparison of about 50 Lutheran church bodies in America: Brug, John F. (2009). WELS & Other Lutherans (2nd ed.). Northwestern Publishing House. ISBN 0-8100-0543-3. 
Comparison of Catholic, Lutheran, and Protestant doctrine: Jackson, Gregory L. (2007). Catholic, Lutheran, Protestant: A Doctrinal Comparison of Three Christian Confessions (PDF). Glendale, Arizona: Martin Chemnitz Press. 

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Lutheranism.





Wikisource has the text of the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica article Lutherans.



Moldehnke, Edward F. "Was ist denn eigentlich ein Lutheraner?" Evangelish-Lutherisches Gemeinde-Blatt. Vol. 1, nos. 8–10 (1866). Trans. Nathaniel J. Biebert. "So What Actually Is a Lutheran?" Studium Excitare. Issue #12 (2010).
 "Lutherans". Collier's New Encyclopedia. 1921. 
A historical study of the Laestadian Lutheran Church, the SRK, and Conservative Laestadianism







v
t
e


Lutheranism



Luther's Small Catechism



The Ten Commandments
Apostle's Creed
Lord's Prayer
Sacrament of Holy Baptism
Confession
Sacrament of the Eucharist








Chief articles of faith
in the
Augsburg
Confession



I. God
II. Original Sin
III. The Son of God
IV. Justification By Faith
V. The Office of Preaching
VI. Of The New Obedience
VII. Of The Church
VIII. What the Church Is
IX. Of Baptism
X. Of the Lord's Supper
XI. Of Confession
XII. Of Repentance
XIII. Of the Use of the Sacraments
XIV.
XV. Ecclesiastical Usages
XVI. Of Civil Affairs
XVII. Of Christ's Return to Judgment
XVIII. Of Free Will
XIX. Of the Cause of Sin
XX. Of Good Works
XXI. Of the Worship of the Saints





Practices



Divine Service
Confirmation
Common table prayer
Sign of The Cross
Matins
Vespers
Easter Vigil
Liturgical Calendar
Wreath of Christ





Movements



Gnesio-Lutherans
Crypto-Calvinism
Philippists
Sacramentarians
Ubiquitarians
Lutheran orthodoxy
Pietism
Laestadianism
Old Lutherans
Neo-Lutheranism
High Church Lutheranism
Evangelical Catholicism
Confessional Lutherans






Lutheranism portal








Links to related articles











v
t
e


Martin Luther



Works
(hymns)



Ninety-five Theses (1517)
Sermon on Indulgences and Grace (1518)
To the Christian Nobility of the German Nation (1520)
On the Babylonian Captivity of the Church (1520)
On the Freedom of a Christian (1520)
Against Henry, King of the English (1522)
Luther Bible (1522, 1534)
The Adoration of the Sacrament (1523)
Formula missae (1523)
Hymns

First Lutheran hymnal (1524)
Erfurt Enchiridion (1524)
Eyn geystlich Gesangk Buchleyn (1524)


Against the Murderous, Thieving Hordes of Peasants (1525)
On the Bondage of the Will (1525)
The Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ—Against the Fanatics (1526)
Deutsche Messe (1526)
Confession Concerning Christ's Supper (1528)
On War Against the Turk (1529)
Small Catechism (1529)
Large Catechism (1529)
"Ein feste Burg ist unser Gott" (1529)
Smalcald Articles (1537)
On the Councils and the Church (1539)
"Christ unser Herr zum Jordan kam" (1543)
On the Jews and Their Lies (1543)
Vom Schem Hamphoras (1543)
List of hymns by Martin Luther
Luther's Table Talk (1566)
Weimar edition of Luther's works





Topics
and events



Reformation
Lutheranism
Heidelberg Disputation, 1518
Leipzig Debate, 1519
Exsurge Domine, 1520
Diet of Worms, 1521
Decet Romanum Pontificem, 1521
Marburg Colloquy, 1529
Augsburg Confession, 1530
Luther's canon
Theology of Martin Luther

Theology of the Cross
Universal priesthood
Sola scriptura
Two kingdoms
Law and Gospel
Marian theology


Eucharist in Lutheranism

Sacramental union
Words of Institution


Antisemitism
Propaganda during the Reformation
Die Lügend von S. Johanne Chrysostomo (1537 edition)





People



Hans and Margarethe Luther (parents)
Katharina von Bora (wife)
Magdalena Luther (daughter)
Paul Luther (son)
Albert of Brandenburg
Bartholomaeus Arnoldi
Erasmus
Georg Rörer
Johann Cochlaeus
Johann von Staupitz
Justus Jonas
Karl von Miltitz
Andreas Karlstadt
Philip Melanchthon
Pope Leo X
Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor
Frederick the Wise





Luther sites



All Saints' Church, Wittenberg
Lutherhaus
Lutherstädte
Martin Luther's Birth House
Martin Luther's Death House
Melanchthonhaus (Wittenberg)
St. Augustine's Monastery
Veste Coburg (Fortress)
Wartburg Castle





Film and theatre



Martin Luther (1923 film)
Luther (1928 film)
Luther (1964 film)
Martin Luther (1953 film)
Luther (1973 film)
Martin Luther, Heretic (1983 film)
Luther (2003 film)
Luther (1961 play)





Related



Martin Luther bibliography
Book:Martin Luther
Luther rose
Theologia Germanica












v
t
e


Early Lutheran controversies







Date
Controversy
Resolution a
Issues / people / publications involved


1527–56
Antinomian



V
VI





Johannes Agricola
Andreas Poach
Anton Otto
Matthias Flacius
Philippists




1533–53
Descent into Hell
IX


Descent into Hell
Johannes Aepinus




1548–55
Adiaphoristic
X


Philip Melanchthon
Matthias Flacius
Philippists
Gnesio-Lutherans




1549–66
Osiandrian
III


Andreas Osiander
Johann Funck
Francesco Stancaro
Philip Melanchthon
Matthias Flacius
Andreas Musculus
Victorinus Strigel




1551–62
Majoristic
VI


Georg Major
Justus Menius
Nicolaus von Amsdorf
Nicolaus Gallus
Philippists
Gnesio-Lutherans




1555–60
Synergistic
II


Philip Melanchthon
Johann Pfeffinger
Victorinus Strigel
Matthias Flacius
Philippists
Gnesio-Lutherans
On the Bondage of the Will




1560–75
Flacian
I


Matthias Flacius
Simon Musaeus
Victorinus Strigel




1560–75
Crypto-Calvinist
VII


Philip Melanchthon
Augsburg Confession Variata
Albert Hardenberg
Joachim Westphal
Martin Chemnitz
Maximilian Mörlin
Philippists
Sacramentarians
Ubiquitarians
Gnesio-Lutherans
The Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ




1561–63
Predestination
XI


Predestination
Johann Marbach
Girolamo Zanchi












a According to the Formula of Concord articles identified (I–XII).









Lutheranism portal












v
t
e


Lutheran history



Start of the
Reformation




Events







Ninety-five Theses
Heidelberg Disputation
Leipzig Debate
Marburg Colloquy
Diet of Speyer (1529)
Protestation at Speyer
Presentation of the Augsburg Confession





Reformation in



Denmark–Norway and Holstein
Finland
Germany
Iceland
Sweden








Reformers



Martin Luther
Katharina von Bora
Philip Melanchthon
Johannes Bugenhagen
Johannes Brenz
Justus Jonas
Argula von Grumbach
Petrus Särkilahti
Mikael Agricola
Stephan Agricola
Nicolaus von Amsdorf
Laurentius Andreae
Olaus Petri
Laurentius Petri
Stephan Praetorius
Johann Pfeffinger
Frederick the Wise








Early turmoil




Events



Dissemination of the Augsburg Confession Variata
Colloquy of Worms (1540–1541)
Diet of Regensburg
Schmalkaldic War
Augsburg Interim
Peace of Passau
Peace of Augsburg
Colloquy of Worms (1557)
Publication of the Magdeburg Centuries
Adiaphoristic controversies (first
second)
Controversy on the Descent into Hell
Presentation of the Greek Augsburg Confession
Signing of the Formula of Concord





People



Philip Melanchthon
Matthias Flacius
Nicolaus Gallus
Cyriacus Spangenberg
Joachim Westphal
Andreas Musculus
Victorinus Strigel
Johannes Agricola
Andreas Osiander
John the Magnanimous





Factions



Crypto-Calvinism
Sacramentarians
Philippists
Ubiquitarians
Gnesio-Lutherans








Orthodox and
Scholastic
periods




Early



Acceptance of the Book of Concord
Martin Chemnitz
Colloquy of Mumpelgart
Jakob Andreae
Nikolaus Selnecker
David Chytraeus
Matthias Hafenreffer
Leonhard Hutter
Aegidius Hunnius
Stephan Praetorius





High



Johann Gerhard
J. A. Quenstedt
Abraham Calovius
Georg Calixtus
Nicolaus Hunnius
Jesper Brochmand
Salomo Glassius
Johann Hülsemann
J. C. Dannhauer
J. F. König
Johannes Musaeus
J. W. Baier
Thirty Years' War





Late



David Hollatz
Christian Scriver
V. E. Löscher
J. M. Goeze








Speculative
or critical
theologies




Wolffian



Johann Salomo Semler
Johann David Michaelis
Johann Christoph Döderlein





Old Tübingen school



Gottlob Christian Storr
Friedrich Gottlieb Süskind
Johann Friedrich Flatt





Kantian



Christoph Friedrich von Ammon
Julius Wegscheider
Wilhelm Gesenius
Albrecht Ritschl
Adolf von Harnack
Wilhelm Herrmann





Hegelian



Karl Daub
Philip Marheineke
David Strauss
Ferdinand Christian Baur
Richard Adelbert Lipsius
Otto Pfleiderer





Moderate



Franz Volkmar Reinhard
Karl Gottlieb Bretschneider
Wilhelm Martin Leberecht de Wette





Transitional



Johann Gottfried Herder
Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi
Friedrich Schleiermacher








Revivals




Pietist



Martin Moller
Johann Arndt
Jakob Böhme
J. V. Andreae
P. J. Spener
J. W. Petersen
A. H. Francke
J. F. Buddeus
J. A. Bengel
G. C. Knapp





Awakening



J. G. Hamann
Hans Nielsen Hauge
Haugeanism
Paavo Ruotsalainen
Finnish Awakening
Claus Harms
Lars Levi Laestadius
Laestadianism
Carl Olof Rosenius
N. F. S. Grundtvig
August Tholuck





Neo-Lutheran




Repristination



E. W. Hengstenberg
F. A. Philippi
F. G. Hedberg
Carl Paul Caspari
C. P. Krauth
L .A. Gotwald





Erlangen



G. C. A. von Harless
J. W. F. Höfling
Gottfried Thomasius
J. C. K. von Hofmann
Franz Delitzsch
K. F. A. Kahnis
Theodosius Harnack
C. E. Luthardt
F. H. R. von Frank
Paul Althaus
Werner Elert





High Church



A. F. C. Vilmar
F. J. Stahl
A. F. O. Münchmeyer
J. K. W. Löhe
Theodor Kliefoth
Heinrich Hansen








Old Lutheran




Germany



Old Lutheran schism
Background
J. G. Scheibel
Eduard Huschke
Henrik Steffens
H. E. F. Guericke
G. P. E. Huschke
Free churches





Australia / New Guinea



August Kavel
Gotthard Fritzsche
Johann Flierl
Lutheran Church of Australia





United States



Martin Stephan
J. A. A. Grabau
Wilhelm Sihler
F. C. D. Wyneken
C. F. W. Walther
H. A. Preus
Synodical Conference of North America








Present



Confessional Lutheranism
Homosexuality









Lutheranism portal










v
t
e


Order of the Divine Service in Lutheranism



Preparatory Service



Entrance hymn and Trinitarian formula (known as the Invocation)
Penitential Rite including the Confiteor and Declaration of Grace (or Asperges on Easter)





The Service of the Word



Introit
Gloria Patri
Kýrie
Gloria
Dominus vobiscum
Oremus
Collect
Old Testament reading
gradual (or Responsorial Psalm)
Epistle
Alleluia (tract during Lent)
Gospel
Hymn of the day
Homily or Postil (Sermon)
Nicene Creed (Athanasian Creed on Trinity Sunday)
Offertory
Prayers of the Faithful





The Service of the Eucharist



Preface (Sursum corda / Sanctus / Hosanna)
Eucharistic Prayer (Epiclesis / Words of Institution / Memorial Acclamation)
Lord's Prayer
Sign of peace / pax (elevation)
Agnus Dei
Distribution
Nunc dimittis
Postcommunion
Benedicamus Domino
Benediction
Dismissal
Ite, missa est





Participants



Acolyte
bishop
cantor
choir
crucifer
deacon
elder
laity
lector
Pastor (or Priest)
usher





Parts of the Sanctuary



altar
altar bell
altar crucifix
altar rails
kneeler
piscina
processional cross
tabernacle





Candles



altar candle
paschal candle
sanctuary lamp
votive candle





Liturgical vessels



ciborium
chalice
cruet





Liturgical objects



collection basket
holy water
incense (use)
paten
sacramental bread (wafer)
sacramental wine
thurible





Vestments



alb
chasuble
dalmatic
geneva gown
humeral veil
stole
surplice
tunicle





Liturgical books and hymnals



Agenda
Christian Worship
Evangelical Lutheran Hymn-Book
Evangelical Lutheran Hymnary
Evangelical Lutheran Worship
Lutheran Book of Worship
Lutheran Hymnal
Lutheran Hymnal with Supplement
Lutheran Service Book
Lutheran Worship
Service Book and Hymnal








 Lutheranism portal












v
t
e


Lutheran hymnody



Hymnals



First Lutheran hymnal (1524)
Erfurt Enchiridion (1524)
Eyn geystlich Gesangk Buchleyn (1524)
Praxis pietatis melica (1640/47)
Becker Psalter
Evangelisches Gesangbuch
Christian Worship Hymnal
Evangelical Lutheran Worship
Hymns of Zion
Lutheran Book of Worship
Lutheran Hymnal
Lutheran Hymnal (Finland)
Lutheran Hymnal with Supplement
Lutheran Service Book
Lutheran Worship
Passion Hymns
Service Book and Hymnal





Hymnodists
and
hymnologists



Michael Altenburg
Johann Sebastian Bach
Martin Behm
Joachim a Burck
Dieterich Buxtehude
Elisabeth Cruciger
Johann Crüger
Simon Dach
Wolfgang Dachstein
Paul Eber
Paul Fleming
Johann Franck
Michael Franck
Melchior Franck
Paul Gerhardt
Bartholomäus Gesius
Johannes Gigas
N. F. S. Grundtvig
Andreas Hammerschmidt
Claus Harms
Johann Heermann
Ludwig Helmbold
Valerius Herberger
Nikolaus Herman
Johannes Hermann
Sebald Heyden
Konrad Hubert
Justus Jonas
Sigfrid Karg-Elert
Christian Keymann
Balthasar Kindermann
Johann Kolross
Johann Balthasar König
Martin Luther
Hemminki of Masku
Felix Mendelssohn
Johann Matthäus Meyfart
Georg Neumark
Philipp Nicolai
Johann Pachelbel
Hallgrímur Pétursson
Michael Praetorius
Christian Heinrich Postel
Adam Reusner
Bartholomäus Ringwaldt
Martin Rinkart
Johann von Rist
Gottfried Wilhelm Sacer
Carl Schalk
Martin Schalling
Heinrich Scheidemann
Johann Schein
Cyriakus Schneegass
Johann Schop
Heinrich Schütz
Nikolaus Selnecker
Lazarus Spengler
Paul Speratus
Paul Stockmann
Melchior Teschner
N. Samuel of Tranquebar
Jaroslav Vajda
Gottfried Vopelius
Philipp Wackernagel
Johann Walter
Michael Weiße
Catherine Winkworth
Johannes Zahn









List of hymns by Martin Luther
Lutheran hymn
Lutheran chorale
Chorale setting
Chorale cantata













v
t
e


Christianity



Jesus



Christ
Jesus in Christianity
Virgin birth
Crucifixion
Resurrection
Son of God








Foundations



Church
Creed
Gospel
New Covenant





Bible



Books
Canon
Old Testament
New Testament





Theology



God
Trinity

Father
Son
Holy Spirit


Apologetics
Baptism
Christology
Ecclesiology
History of theology
Mission
Salvation






History and
tradition




Mary
Joseph
Apostles
Peter
Paul
Fathers
Early
Constantine
Ecumenical councils
Augustine
East–West Schism
Crusades
Aquinas
Reformation
Luther






Denomi-
nations
and
traditions
(list)





Western



Adventist
Anabaptist
Anglican
Baptist
Calvinist
Catholic
Charismatic
Evangelical
Holiness
Lutheran
Methodist
Pentecostal
Protestant





Eastern



Eastern Orthodox
Oriental Orthodox (Miaphysite)
Assyrian Church of the East ("Nestorian")
Eastern Catholic Churches





Nontrinitarian



Jehovah's Witnesses
Latter Day Saint movement
Oneness Pentecostalism








Related topics



Art
Criticism
Culture
Ecumenism
Liturgy
Music
Other religions
Prayer
Sermon
Symbolism








 Category
 Christianity portal












v
t
e


Beliefs condemned as heretical by the Catholic Church



Antiquity



Adoptionism
Apollinarism
Arianism (Anomoeanism, Semi-Arianism)
Audianism
Docetism (Circumcellions)
Dualism
Ebionites
Euchites
Gnosticism (Manichaeism, Paulicianism, Priscillianism, Naassenes, Ophites, Sethianism, Valentinianism)
Iconoclasm
Luciferianism
Macedonianism
Marcionism
Melchisedechians
Modalism
Monarchianism (Athinganoi)
Monophysitism
Monothelitism
Montanism
Nestorianism
Novatianism
Patripassianism
Pelagianism (Semipelagianism)
Pneumatomachians
Psilanthropism
Sabellianism
Subordinationism
Valentinianism








Middle Ages



Bogomilism
Bosnian Church
Catharism
Conciliarism
Consubstantiation
Fraticelli
Free Spirit
Henricians
Hussites
Impanation
Lollardy
Taborites
Triclavianism
Waldensians





Early Modern



Anabaptism
Antinomianism
Febronianism
Gallicanism
Jansenism
Josephinism
Protestantism (Arminianism, Calvinism, Lutheranism)
Quietism





Modern Era



Americanism
Community of the Lady of All Nations
Feeneyism
Modernism
Positive Christianity
Reincarnationism








 Catholicism portal














Authority control



LCCN: sh85078999
GND: 4125794-7
BNF: cb119522467 (data)
NDL: 00567375











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Lutheranism&oldid=817661376"					Categories: LutheranismChristian terminology1517 in Christianity16th-century introductions16th-century neologismsHidden categories: Pages using web citations with no URLCS1 errors: datesPages with numeric Bible version referencesWebarchive template wayback linksArticles with Swedish-language external linksUse dmy dates from September 2016Interlanguage link template link numberWikipedia articles needing style editing from September 2016All articles needing style editingArticles needing additional references from September 2016All articles needing additional referencesAll pages needing factual verificationWikipedia articles needing factual verification from May 2017All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from May 2017Articles lacking reliable references from May 2017All articles lacking reliable referencesUse dmy dates from February 2015Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from Collier's EncyclopediaWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiers