

Lycaenidae





The large blue, a lycaenid butterfly


Scientific classification 


Kingdom:
Animalia


Clade:
Euarthropoda


Class:
Insecta


Order:
Lepidoptera


Superfamily:
Papilionoidea


Family:
Lycaenidae
Leach, 1815


Subfamilies




Curetinae – sunbeams
Liphyrinae
Lipteninae
Lycaeninae – coppers
Miletinae – harvesters
Polyommatinae – blues
Poritiinae
Theclinae – hairstreaks, elfins

and see text or List of lycaenid genera



Lycaenidae is the second-largest family of butterflies (behind Nymphalidae, brush-footed butterflies), with over 6,000 species worldwide,[1] whose members are also called gossamer-winged butterflies. They constitute about 30% of the known butterfly species.
The family is traditionally divided into the subfamilies of the blues (Polyommatinae), the coppers (Lycaeninae), the hairstreaks (Theclinae) and the harvesters (Miletinae).
Adults are small, under 5 cm usually, and brightly coloured, sometimes with a metallic gloss.
Larvae are often flattened rather than cylindrical, with glands that may produce secretions that attract and subdue ants. Their cuticles tend to be thickened. Some larvae are capable of producing vibrations and low sounds that are transmitted through the substrates they inhabit. They use these sounds to communicate with ants.[2][3]
Adult individuals often have hairy antenna-like tails complete with black and white annulated (ringed) appearance. Many species also have a spot at the base of the tail and some turn around upon landing to confuse potential predators from recognizing the true head orientation. This causes predators to approach from the true head end resulting in early visual detection.[4]



Contents


1 Ecology
2 Subfamilies
3 See also
4 References
5 Further reading
6 External links



Ecology[edit]




Ant tending a lycaenid larva


Lycaenids are diverse in their food habits and apart from phytophagy, some of them are entomophagous feeding on aphids, scale insects, and ant larvae. Some lycaenids even exploit their association with ants by inducing ants to feed them by regurgitation, a process called trophallaxis. Not all lycaenid butterflies need ants, but about 75% of species associate with ants,[2] a relationship called myrmecophily. These associations can be mutualistic, parasitic, or predatory depending on the species.
In some species, larvae are attended and protected by ants while feeding on the host plant, and the ants receive sugar-rich honeydew from them, throughout the larval life, and in some species during the pupal stage. In other species, only the first few instars are spent on the plant, and the remainder of the larval lifespan is spent as a predator within the ant nest. It becomes a parasite, feeding on ant regurgitations, or a predator on the ant larvae.[2] The caterpillars pupate inside the ant's nest and the ants continue to look after the pupa. Just before the adult emerges the wings of the butterfly inside the pupal case detach from it, and the pupa becomes silvery. The adult butterfly emerges from the pupa after three to four weeks, still inside the ant nest. The butterfly must crawl out of the ant nest before it can expand its wings.
Several evolutionary adaptations enable these associations and they include small glands on the skin of the caterpillars called "pore cupola organs". Caterpillars of many species, except those of the Riodininae, have a gland on the seventh abdominal segment that produces honeydew and is called the "dorsal nectary gland" (also called "Newcomer's gland"). An eversible organ called the "tentacular organ" is present on the eighth abdominal segment (third segment of thorax in the Riodininae) and this is cylindrical and topped with a ring of spikes and emits chemical signals which are believed to help in communicating with ants.[5]
Subfamilies[edit]




Mating P. semiargus






Caterpillar of the Atala (Eumaeus atala)






Leaf blue (Amblypodia anita) from Theclinae


Many taxonomists include only the Lycaeninae, Theclinae, Polyommatinae, Poritiinae, Miletinae and Curetinae under the Lycaenidae.[6][7]
The tribe Aphnaeini of the subfamily Theclinae which includes the genus Chrysoritis is sometimes listed as separate subfamily.[6]
A few authorities still include the family Riodinidae within the Lycaenidae. The monotypic former subfamily Styginae represented by Styx infernalis from the Peruvian Andes has been placed within the subfamily Euselasiinae[8] of the family Riodinidae.[9]
Other classifications notably include the Riodininae (e.g., Abisara echerius).[10]











Curetinae














Poritiinae





Pentilini








Liptenini








Poritiini












Miletinae





Lacnocnemini








Liphyrini








Miletini








Spalgini


















Lycaeninae





Aphnaeini








Lycaenini








Polyommatini








Theclini



























Phylogeny of the family[9]



Lipteninae (Afrotropical) may be ranked as a tribe of Poritiinae. (Liptenini) [11]
Poritiinae (Oriental and Afrotropical)
Liphyrinae (mostly African, some Asian) may be ranked as a tribe of Miletinae. (Liphyrini) [12] Selected species

Liphyra brassolis – moth butterfly (largest lycaenid)


Miletinae – harvesters (mostly African, or Oriental, some Holarctic). Probably all feed on aphids or their secretions.
Curetinae – sunbeams (Oriental or Palaearctic) selected species

Curetis thetis – Indian sunbeam


Theclinae – hairstreaks (usually tailed) and elfins (not tailed) (global) may be ranked as a tribe of Lycaeninae (Theclini) see the clade below right. Selected species

Satyrium pruni – black hairstreak
Atlides halesus – great purple hairstreak
Eumaeus atala – Atala
Arhopala - oakblues


Lycaeninae – coppers (Holarctic) selected species

Lycaena boldenarum – boulder copper
Lycaena epixanthe – bog copper
Lycaena rauparaha – Rauparaha's copper
Lycaena dispar – large copper
Lycaena phlaeas – small copper
Iophanus pyrrhias – Guatemalan copper
Lycaena heteronea - blue copper


Polyommatinae – blues (global) selected species

Caleta spp.
Celastrina ladon – spring azure
Talicada nyseus – red pierrot
Cupido comyntas – eastern tailed-blue
Cupido minimus – small blue
Pseudozizeeria maha – pale grass blue
Euphilotes battoides allyni – El Segundo blue
Euphilotes pallescens arenamontana – Sand Mountain blue
Chilades - jewel blues
Plebejus argus – silver-studded blue
Icaricia icarioides fenderi – Fender's blue
Polyommatus icarus – common blue
Polyommatus semiargus – mazarine blue
Glaucopsyche lygdamus – silvery blue
Glaucopsyche lygdamus palosverdesensis – Palos Verdes blue
Glaucopsyche xerces (extinct) – Xerces blue
Phengaris xiushani
Maculinea arion – large blue



The fossil genus Lithodryas is usually (but not unequivocally) placed here; Lithopsyche is sometimes placed here but sometimes in the Riodininae.
See also[edit]

List of lycaenid genera

References[edit]


^ Naomi E. Pierce, Michae, F. Braby, Alan Heath, David J. Lohman, John Mathew, Douglas B. Rand, Mark A. THE ECOLOGY AND EVOLUTION OF ANT ASSOCIATION IN THE LYCAENIDAE (LEPIDOPTERA) 47(1):259-267 [1]
^ a b c Pierce NE, Braby MF, Heath A, Lohman DJ, Mathew J, Rand DB, Travassos MA. 2002. The ecology and evolution of ant association in the Lycaenidae (Lepidoptera.) Annual Review of Entomology 47: 733-771. PDF
^ DeVries, Philip J. 1992. Singing Caterpillars, Ants and Symbiosis. Scientific American, 267:76
^ Robbins, Robert K. 1981 The "False Head" Hypothesis: Predation and Wing Pattern Variation of Lycaenid Butterflies. American Naturalist, 118(5):770-775
^ Australian Museum factsheets Accessed 4 November 2010 on the Wayback Machine.
^ a b Brower, Andrew V. Z. 2008. Lycaenidae. Version 25 April 2008 (temporary). [2] in The Tree of Life Web Project, [3]
^ Ackery, P. R., R. de Jong, and R. I. Vane-Wright. 1999. The butterflies: Hedyloidea, Hesperioidea, and Papilionoidea. Pages 264-300 in: Lepidoptera: Moths and Butterflies. 1. Evolution, Systematics, and Biogeography. Handbook of Zoology Vol. IV, Part 35. N. P. Kristensen, ed. De Gruyter, Berlin and New York.
^ Hall J.P.W. & Harvey DJ. (2002) A survey of androconial organs in the Riodinidae (Lepidoptera). Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society, 136:171-197
^ a b Brower, Andrew V. Z. 2007. Riodinidae Grote 1895. Metalmarks, Erycinidae Swainson 1827 (see nomenclature section). Version 19 May 2007 [4] in The Tree of Life Web Project, [5]
^ Scoble, MJ. 1992. The Lepidoptera: Form, Function and Diversity. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-854952-0
^ [6], Site of Markku Savela
^ [7], Site of Markku Savela


Further reading[edit]

Charles A. Bridges, 1994. Catalogue of the family-group, genus-group and species-group names of the Riodinidae & Lycaenidae (Lepidoptera) of the world Urbana, Ill. :C.A. Bridges pdf
Eliot, J.N.1973 The higher classification of the Lycaenidae] (Lepidoptera): a tentative arrangement. Bulletin of the British Museum (Natural History), entomology, 28: 371-505. 1973: [8]
Glassberg, Jeffrey Butterflies through Binoculars, The West (2001)
Guppy, Crispin S. and Shepard, Jon H. Butterflies of British Columbia (2001)
James, David G. and Nunnallee, David Life Histories of Cascadia Butterflies (2011)
Pelham, Jonathan Catalogue of the Butterflies of the United States and Canada (2008)
Pyle, Robert Michael The Butterflies of Cascadia (2002)

External links[edit]



Wikispecies has information related to Lycaenidae





Wikimedia Commons has media related to Lycaenidae.



Tree of Life
BugGuide.net
Family Lycaenidae at Lepidoptera.pro
"Lycaenidae". National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI). 
ITIS
Lycaenidae at the Encyclopedia of Life
Royal Museum for Central Africa Images of Lycaenidae [9]
Butterflies and Moths of North America
Butterflies of America







v
t
e


Extant Lepidoptera families






Kingdom: Animalia
Phylum: Arthropoda
Class: Insecta
Subclass: Pterygota
Infraclass: Neoptera
Superorder: Endopterygota










Suborder Zeugloptera







Micropterigoidea

Micropterigidae (mandibulate archaic moths)














Suborder Aglossata







Agathiphagoidea

Agathiphagidae (kauri moths)














Suborder Heterobathmiina







Heterobathmioidea

Heterobathmiidae














Suborder Glossata











Dacnonypha




Eriocranioidea



Eriocraniidae








Acanthoctesia




Acanthopteroctetoidea



Acanthopteroctetidae (archaic sun moths)








Lophocoronina




Lophocoronoidea

Lophocoronidae






Neopseustina




Neopseustoidea

Neopseustidae (archaic bell moths)






Exoporia




Hepialoidea



Anomosetidae
Hepialidae (swift moths, ghost moths)
Neotheoridae (Amazonian primitive ghost moths)
Palaeosetidae (miniature ghost moths)
Prototheoridae (African primitive ghost moths)





Mnesarchaeoidea



Mnesarchaeidae (New Zealand primitive moths)











H
e
t
e
r
o
n
e
u
r
a




M
o
n
o
t
r
y
s
i
a




Incurvarioidea



Adelidae (fairy longhorn moths)
Cecidosidae
Crinopterygidae
Heliozelidae
Incurvariidae
Prodoxidae (yucca moths)





Andesianoidea



Andesianidae (Andean endemic moths)





Nepticuloidea



Nepticulidae (pigmy, or midget moths)
Opostegidae (white eyecap moths)





Palaephatoidea



Palaephatidae (Gondwanaland moths)





Tischerioidea



Tischeriidae (trumpet leaf miner moths)








D
i
t
r
y
s
i
a








Simaethistoidea



Simaethistidae





Tineoidea



Acrolophidae (burrowing webworm moths)
Arrhenophanidae
Eriocottidae (Old World spiny-winged moths)
Lypusidae
Psychidae (bagworm moths)
Tineidae (fungus moths)





Gracillarioidea



Bucculatricidae (ribbed cocoon makers)
Douglasiidae (Douglas moths)
Gracillariidae
Roeslerstammiidae





Yponomeutoidea



Acrolepiidae (false diamondback moths)
Bedelliidae
Glyphipterigidae (sedge moths)
Heliodinidae
Lyonetiidae
Plutellidae
Yponomeutidae (ermine moths)
Ypsolophidae





Gelechioidea



Autostichidae
Batrachedridae
Blastobasidae
Coleophoridae (case-bearers, case moths)
Cosmopterigidae (cosmet moths)
Elachistidae (grass-miner moths)
Gelechiidae (twirler moths)
Lecithoceridae (long-horned moths)
Metachandidae
Momphidae (mompha moths)
Oecophoridae (concealer moths)
Pterolonchidae
Scythrididae (flower moths)
Xyloryctidae (timber moths)





Galacticoidea



Galacticidae





Zygaenoidea



Heterogynidae
Zygaenidae (burnet, forester, or smoky moths)
Himantopteridae
Lacturidae
Somabrachyidae
Megalopygidae (flannel moths)
Aididae
Anomoeotidae
Cyclotornidae
Epipyropidae (planthopper parasite moths)
Dalceridae (slug caterpillars)
Limacodidae (slug, or cup moths)





Cossoidea



Cossidae (carpenter millers, or goat moths)
Dudgeoneidae (dudgeon carpenter moths)





Sesioidea



Brachodidae (little bear moths)
Castniidae (castniid moths: giant butterfly-moths, sun moths)
Sesiidae (clearwing moths)





Choreutoidea



Choreutidae (metalmark moths)





Tortricoidea



Tortricidae (tortrix moths)





Urodoidea



Urodidae (false burnet moths)





Schreckensteinioidea



Schreckensteiniidae (bristle-legged moths)





Epermenioidea



Epermeniidae (fringe-tufted moths)





Alucitoidea



Alucitidae (many-plumed moths)
Tineodidae (false plume moths)





Pterophoroidea



Pterophoridae (plume moths)





Whalleyanoidea



Whalleyanidae





Immoidea



Immidae





Copromorphoidea



Copromorphidae (tropical fruitworm moths)
Carposinidae (fruitworm moths)





Hyblaeoidea



Hyblaeidae (teak moths)
















Pyraloidea



Pyralidae (snout moths)
Crambidae (grass moth)





Thyridoidea



Thyrididae (picture-winged leaf moths)





Mimallonoidea



Mimallonidae (sack bearer moths)





Lasiocampoidea



Lasiocampidae (eggars, snout moths, or lappet moths)





Bombycoidea



Anthelidae (Australian lappet moth)
Bombycidae (silk moths)
Brahmaeidae (Brahmin moths)
Carthaeidae (Dryandra moth)
Endromidae (Kentish glory and relatives)
Eupterotidae
Lemoniidae
Saturniidae (saturniids)
Sphingidae (hawk moths, sphinx moths and hornworms)
Phiditiidae





Noctuoidea



Doidae
Erebidae (underwing, tiger, tussock, litter, snout, owlet moths)
Euteliidae
Noctuidae (daggers, sallows, owlet moths, quakers, cutworms, darts)
Nolidae (tuft moths)
Notodontidae (prominents, kittens)
Oenosandridae





Drepanoidea



Epicopeiidae (oriental swallowtail moths)
Drepanidae (hook-tips)





Geometroidea



Sematuridae
Uraniidae
Geometridae (geometer moths)





Cimelioidea



Cimeliidae (gold moths)





Calliduloidea



Callidulidae (Old World butterfly-moths)





Superfamily unassigned



Millieriidae








Rhopalocera
(butterflies)




Hedyloidea



Hedylidae (American moth-butterflies)





Hesperioidea



Hesperiidae (skippers)





Papilionoidea
(true butterflies)



Lycaenidae (gossamer-winged butterflies: blues, coppers and relatives)
Nymphalidae (brush-footed, or four-footed butterflies)
Papilionidae (swallowtail butterflies)
Pieridae (whites, yellows, orangetips, sulphurs)
Riodinidae (metalmarks)


















Note: division Monotrysia is not a clade.












Taxonomy of the Lepidoptera
Lists by region









Taxon identifiers



Wd: Q158717
BAMONA: Lycaenidae
BugGuide: 194
EoL: 855
Fauna Europaea: 7033
Fossilworks: 136325
GBIF: 5473
ITIS: 117236
NCBI: 27544











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Lycaenidae&oldid=814417432"					Categories: LycaenidaeButterfly familiesTaxa named by William Elford LeachHidden categories: Use dmy dates from August 2013Articles with 'species' microformatsEncyclopedia of Life ID different from Wikidata