See also: Macmillan Publishers (United States)

Macmillan Publishers




Parent company
Holtzbrinck Publishing Group


Founded
1843; 174 years ago (1843)


Founder
Daniel Macmillan
Alexander Macmillan


Country of origin
United Kingdom


Headquarters location
London, England


Publication types
Books, academic journals, magazines


Official website
macmillan.com






2008 conference booth


Macmillan Publishers Ltd (occasionally known as the Macmillan Group) is an international publishing company owned by Holtzbrinck Publishing Group. It has offices in 41 countries worldwide and operates in more than thirty others.



Contents


1 History

1.1 Macmillan in the United States
1.2 E-books and price fixing charges
1.3 Corruption charges


2 Divisions
3 See also
4 Notes and references
5 Further reading
6 External links



History[edit]




This logo appeared in Leslie Stephen's biography of Alexander Pope, published by Macmillan & Co in 1880.


Macmillan was founded in 1843 by Daniel and Alexander Macmillan, two brothers from the Isle of Arran, Scotland. Daniel was the business brain, while Alexander laid the literary foundations, publishing such notable authors as Charles Kingsley (1855), Thomas Hughes (1859), Francis Turner Palgrave (1861), Christina Rossetti (1862), Matthew Arnold (1865) and Lewis Carroll (1865). Alfred Tennyson joined the list in 1884, Thomas Hardy in 1886 and Rudyard Kipling in 1890.[1]
Other major writers published by Macmillan included W. B. Yeats, Rabindranath Tagore, Nirad C. Chaudhuri, Seán O'Casey, John Maynard Keynes, Charles Morgan, Hugh Walpole, Margaret Mitchell, C. P. Snow, Rumer Godden and Ram Sharan Sharma.
Beyond literature, the company created such enduring titles as Nature (1869), the Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians (1877) and Sir Robert Palgrave's Dictionary of Political Economy (1894–99).
Macmillan established an office in New York City. It sold its American division in 1896, which published as the Macmillan Company.
Macmillan Publishers re-entered the American market in 1954 under the name St. Martin's Press.
After retiring from politics in 1964, former Prime Minister of the United Kingdom Harold Macmillan became chairman of the company, serving until his death in December 1986.[2] He had been with the family firm as a junior partner from 1920 to 1940 (when he became a junior minister), and from 1945 to 1951 while he was in the opposition in Parliament.
The company was one of the oldest independent publishing houses until 1995, when a 70% share of the company was bought by German media giant Holtzbrinck Publishing Group. Holtzbrinck purchased the remaining shares in 1999, ending the Macmillan family's ownership of the company.
In May 2015, London-based Macmillan Science and Education merged with Berlin-based Springer Science+Business Media to form Springer Nature, jointly controlled by Holtzbrinck Publishing Group and BC Partners.
Macmillan in the United States[edit]
Main article: Macmillan Publishers (United States)
George Edward Brett opened the first Macmillan office in the United States in 1869 and Macmillan sold its U.S. operations to the Brett family, George Platt Brett, Sr. and George Platt Brett, Jr. in 1896, resulting in the creation of an American company, Macmillan Publishing, also called the Macmillan Company. Even with the split of the American company from its parent company in England, George Brett, Jr. and Harold Macmillan remained close personal friends.
George P. Brett, Jr. made the following comments in a letter dated 23 January 1947 to Daniel Macmillan about his family's devotion to the American publishing industry:

For the record my grandfather was employed by Macmillan's of England as a salesman. He came to the United States with his family in the service of Macmillan's of England and built up a business of approximately $50,000 before he died. He was succeeded […] by my father, who eventually incorporated The Macmillan Company of New York and built up business of about $9,000,000. I succeeded my father, and we currently doing a business of approximately $12,000,000. So then, the name of Brett and the name of Macmillan have been and are synonymous in the United States.

Pearson acquired the Macmillan name in America in 1998, following its purchase of the Simon & Schuster educational and professional group (which included various Macmillan properties).[3] Holtzbrinck purchased it from them in 2001.[4] McGraw-Hill continues to market its pre-kindergarten through elementary school titles under its Macmillan/McGraw-Hill brand. The US operations of Georg von Holtzbrinck are now known as Macmillan.
In the 1990s several British publishing companies reached the Russian market, and the list included Macmillan, Pearson-Longman, Oxford University Press, Cambridge University Press and Express Publishing.
One of the leading companies is Macmillan, that started by selling British English dictionaries and textbooks that were adapted for Russian readers.
Macmillan has a representation in Russia since 2001 that organizes educational activities, supports the increasing demands for learning English, and collaborates with Russian authors in publishing English textbooks that conform to the requirements of the Ministry of Education and Science of the Russian Federation while being on par with world's educational standards.
Their website provides Russian teachers and students with an easy access for tests, competitions, contests and information on scheduled online seminars and live conferences.
E-books and price fixing charges[edit]
By some estimates, as of 2009 e-books account for three to five per cent of total book sales, and are the fastest growing segment of the market.[5] According to The New York Times, Macmillan and other major publishers "fear that massive discounting [of e-books] by retailers including Amazon, Barnes & Noble and Sony could ultimately devalue what consumers are willing to pay for books." In response, the publisher introduced a new boilerplate contract for its authors that established a royalty of 20 per cent of net proceeds on e-book sales, a rate five per cent lower than most other major publishers.[5]
Following the announcement of the Apple iPad on 27 January 2010—a product that comes with access to the iBookstore—Macmillan gave Amazon.com two options: continue to sell e-books based on a price of the retailer's choice (the "wholesale model"), with the e-book edition released several months after the hardcover edition is released, or switch to the agency model introduced to the industry by Apple, in which both are released simultaneously and the price is set by the publisher. In the latter case, Amazon.com would receive a 30 per cent commission.[6]
Amazon responded by pulling all Macmillan books, both electronic and physical, from their website (although affiliates selling the books were still listed). On 31 January 2010, Amazon chose the agency model preferred by Macmillan.[7]
In April 2012, the United States Department of Justice filed United States v. Apple Inc., naming Apple, Macmillan, and four other major publishers as defendants. The suit alleged that they conspired to fix prices for e-books, and weaken Amazon.com's position in the market, in violation of antitrust law.[8]
In December 2013, a federal judge approved a settlement of the antitrust claims, in which Macmillan and the other publishers paid into a fund that provided credits to customers who had overpaid for books due to the price-fixing.[9]
Corruption charges[edit]
In 2010, Macmillan Education submitted to an investigation on grounds of fraudulent practices.[10] The Macmillan division admitted to bribery in an attempt to secure a contract for an education project in southern Sudan.[10]
As stated by a spokesman for the World Bank, "Macmillan admitted engaging in bribes in an attempt to get a contract to print textbooks for the education rehabilitation project in south Sudan"[10]
As a direct result of the investigation, sanctions were applied by the World Bank Group, namely a 6-year debarment (reduced from 8 years due to an early acknowledgment of misconduct by the company) declaring the company ineligible to be awarded Bank-financed contracts.[11]
Divisions[edit]
Macmillan is currently under two divisions - Springer Nature and Macmillan Publishers.

Springer Nature was formed in May 2015 by the merger of Nature Publishing Group, Palgrave Macmillan, Macmillan Education, and Springer Science+Business Media. It is now the world's largest academic book publisher and focuses on science and education. The company numbers almost 13,000 staff in over 50 countries and has a turnover of approximately EUR 1.5 billion. Springer Nature is under the joint control of Holtzbrinck Publishing Group and BC Partners. Derk Haank is the current CEO of Springer Nature.
Macmillan Publishers focuses on fiction and non-fiction and is a global trade book publishing company. It has numerous imprints under it, such as Pan Books; Picador; St. Martin's Press; Tor Books; Farrar, Straus and Giroux; Henry Holt & Co.; Flatiron Books; Kingfisher; Priddy Books; Macmillan Children's Books; Macmillan Audio; Two Hoots; etc. Macmillan Publishers is now a division of the Holtzbrinck Publishing Group.

See also[edit]

List of largest UK book publishers

Notes and references[edit]


^ "About Pan Macmillan". Pan Macmillan UK. Retrieved 2016-09-30. 
^ "Harold Macmillan (1894 - 1986)". BBC. 
^ Publishers Weekly, Publishersweekly.com
^ Bookseller, Allbusiness.com
^ a b Rich, Motoko (28 October 2009). "Macmillan Lowers E-Book Payments for Authors". The New York Times. Retrieved 2010-02-11. 
^ Motoko Rich and Brad Stone (31 January 2010). "Publisher Wins Fight With Amazon Over E-Books". The New York Times. Retrieved 2010-02-11. 
^ The Amazon Kindle team (31 January 2010). "Macmillan E-books". Kindle Community. Amazon.com. Retrieved 2010-02-11. 
^ Mui, Ylan Q. and Hayley Tsukayama (11 April 2012). "Justice Department sues Apple, publishers over e-book prices". The Washington Post. Retrieved 2014-06-01. 
^ Molina, Brett (25 March 2014). "E-book price fixing settlements rolling out". USA Today. Retrieved 2014-06-01. 
^ a b c "Macmillan admits to bribery over World Bank Sudan aid deal". Telegraph.co.uk. Retrieved 2016-03-17. 
^ "The World Bank Group Debars Macmillan Limited for Corruption in World Bank-supported Education Project in Southern Sudan". World Bank. Retrieved 2016-03-17. 


Further reading[edit]

Macmillan – A Publishing Tradition by Elizabeth James ISBN 0-333-73517-X
 Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911). "Macmillan". Encyclopædia Britannica. 17 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 264. 

External links[edit]


Wikisource has original works published by or about:
Macmillan and Company





Wikimedia Commons has media related to Macmillan Publishers Ltd..



Official website
Macmillan Catalogue, January 1893 at Faded Page (Canada)







v
t
e


Holtzbrinck Publishing Group



Holtzbrinck




Publishers



S. Fischer
Rowohlt
Kiepenheuer & Witsch (85%)
Droemer Knaur (50%)





Newspapers
and magazines



Die Zeit (50%)
Zeit Wissen
Main-Post
Lausitzer Rundschau
Main-Post
Saarbrücker Zeitung
Südkurier
Trierischer Volksfreund
Spotlight Verlag
Lebensmittel Praxis Verlag
Prognos





Digital & Services



Digital Science
Gutefrage.net








Macmillan




United
States




Trade



Farrar, Straus and Giroux
First Second
Henry Holt
Macmillan Audio
Picador
Quick and Dirty Tips
St. Martin's Press
Tor/Forge





Education



Bedford-St. Martin's
W. H. Freeman
Worth Publishers
i>clicker
Hayden-McNeil





Children's



FSG Books for Young Readers
Feiwel and Friends
Holt Books for Young Readers
Kingfisher
Roaring Brook
Priddy
Square Fish








United
Kingdom




Pan Macmillan



Macmillan
Pan
Picador
Tor
Macmillan Children's Books
Campbell
Young Picador
Sidgwick & Jackson
Mantle
Macmillan Audio Books
Macmillan New Writing
The Collector's Library





Palgrave Macmillan



British Politics
Contemporary Political Theory
European Journal of Information Systems
European Political Science
International Abstracts in Operations Research
Journal of International Business Studies
Journal of the Operational Research Society
Journal of Public Health Policy
Journal of Simulation
Knowledge Management Research & Practice
OR Insight
Pink Book
Social Trends
The Statesman's Yearbook





Other



Macmillan Education











Nature
Publishing
Group




Nature



Nature
Nature Astronomy
Nature Biomedical Engineering
Nature Biotechnology
Nature Catalysis
Nature Cell Biology
Nature Chemical Biology
Nature Chemistry
Nature Climate Change
Nature Communications
Nature Digest
Nature Ecology & Evolution
Nature Electronics
Nature Energy
Nature Genetics
Nature Geoscience
Nature Human Behaviour
Nature Immunology
Nature Machine Intelligence
Nature Materials
Nature Medicine
Nature Metabolism
Nature Methods
Nature Microbiology
Nature Milestones
Nature Nanotechnology
Nature Neuroscience
Nature Photonics
Nature Physics
Nature Plants
Nature Protocols
Nature Structural & Molecular Biology
Nature Sustainability





Nature Reviews
life sciences



Nature Reviews Cancer
Nature Reviews Drug Discovery
Nature Reviews Genetics
Nature Reviews Immunology
Nature Reviews Microbiology
Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology
Nature Reviews Neuroscience





Nature Reviews
clinical sciences



Nature Reviews Cardiology
Nature Reviews Clinical Oncology
Nature Reviews Disease Primers
Nature Reviews Endocrinology
Nature Reviews Gastroenterology & Hepatology
Nature Reviews Nephrology
Nature Reviews Neurology
Nature Reviews Rheumatology
Nature Reviews Urology





Nature
international



Nature China
Nature India
Nature Arabic Edition





Other journals



The American Journal of Gastroenterology
BDJ Team
British Dental Journal
British Journal of Cancer
Cell Research
European Journal of Human Genetics
Heredity
Journal of Investigative Dermatology
Neuropsychopharmacology
Oncogene
Scientific Reports





Scientific
American



Scientific American
Scientific American Mind















v
t
e


The "big five" publishers in the United States



Penguin Random House



Penguin
Dutton
Puffin
Riverhead
Viking
Signet
Putnam
Ace
Dorling Kindersley
Penguin Classics
Random House
Alfred A. Knopf
Doubleday
Crown
Bantam
Ballantine
Del Rey
Dell
Everyman's Library
Pantheon
Vintage
Fodor's
Modern Library
Dial
Addison-Wesley





Simon & Schuster



Atria
Scribner
Atheneum
Pocket
Threshold





HarperCollins



Walden Pond
Harlequin
Harper Prism
Harper Perennial
Harper
Ecco





Macmillan



Farrar, Straus and Giroux
Henry Holt and Company
Picador
St. Martin's Press
Tor
Pan
Nature Publishing Group
Palgrave Macmillan





Hachette



Little, Brown and Company
Grand Central Publishing
Orbit
Yen
Center Street








List of English Language Book Publishers








Companies portal
Books portal








v
t
e


Books



Production



Authors
Binding
By date

Decade
Year


Covers

Jackets


Design
Editing
Illustration
Literature
Printing

History
Incunabula


Publishing

By country


Typesetting





Consumption



Awards
Bestsellers
Bibliography
Bibliophilia
Bibliotherapy
Bookmarks
Bookselling

Blurbs
Book towns
Shops


Censorship
Clubs
Collecting
Digitizing
Fairs
Furniture

Bookcases
Bookends


Libraries

Legislation


Lists
Print culture
Reading

Literacy


Reviews





Other



By country

Brazil
France
Germany
Italy
Pakistan
UK
US


Formats

Audiobooks
E-books


Genres

Children's
Fictional


History of books

Historians


Intellectual property
ISBN
Outline
Terminology
Types








 Category
 Commons
 Portal
 WikiProject











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Macmillan_Publishers&oldid=816938306"					Categories: Macmillan Publishers booksBook publishing companies of the United KingdomPublishing companies based in LondonHoltzbrinck Publishing Group1843 establishments in EnglandPublishing companies established in 1843Hidden categories: Use British English from May 2012Use dmy dates from May 2012Use dmy dates from August 2014Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource referenceArticles with Project Gutenberg links