





This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (October 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



This article is about the male sex. For the city, see Malé. For other uses, see Male (disambiguation).




The symbol of the Roman god Mars (god of war) is often used to represent the male sex. It also stands for the planet Mars and is the alchemical symbol for iron.


A male (♂) organism is the physiological sex that produces sperm. Each spermatozoon can fuse with a larger female gamete, or ovum, in the process of fertilization. A male cannot reproduce sexually without access to at least one ovum from a female, but some organisms can reproduce both sexually and asexually. Most male mammals, including male humans, have a Y chromosome, which codes for the production of larger amounts of testosterone to develop male reproductive organs. Not all species share a common sex-determination system. In most animals, including humans, sex is determined genetically, but in some species it can be determined due to social, environmental, or other factors. For example, Cymothoa exigua changes sex depending on the number of females present in the vicinity.[1]



Contents


1 Overview
2 Symbol
3 Sex determination

3.1 Genetic determination
3.2 Environmental determination


4 Secondary sex characteristics
5 See also
6 References



Overview[edit]
The existence of two sexes seems to have been selected independently across different evolutionary lineages (see convergent evolution). The repeated pattern is sexual reproduction in isogamous species with two or more mating types with gametes of identical form and behavior (but different at the molecular level) to anisogamous species with gametes of male and female types to oogamous species in which the female gamete is very much larger than the male and has no ability to move. There is a good argument that this pattern was driven by the physical constraints on the mechanisms by which two gametes get together as required for sexual reproduction.[2]
Accordingly, sex is defined operationally across species by the type of gametes produced (i.e.: spermatozoa vs. ova) and differences between males and females in one lineage are not always predictive of differences in another.
Male/female dimorphism between organisms or reproductive organs of different sexes is not limited to animals; male gametes are produced by chytrids, diatoms and land plants, among others. In land plants, female and male designate not only the female and male gamete-producing organisms and structures but also the structures of the sporophytes that give rise to male and female plants. As of the year 2012, the United Arab Emirates has the highest ratio of human males in the world, followed by Qatar.[3]
Symbol[edit]
A common symbol used to represent the male sex is the Mars symbol, ♂ (Unicode: U+2642 Alt codes: Alt+11)—a circle with an arrow pointing northeast. The symbol is identical to the planetary symbol of Mars. It was first used to denote sex by Carl Linnaeus in 1751. The symbol is often called a stylized representation of the Roman god Mars' shield and spear. According to Stearn, however, all the historical evidence favours that it is derived from θρ, the contraction of the Greek name for the planet, Thouros.[4]
Sex determination[edit]
Main article: Sex-determination system




Photograph of an adult male human, with an adult female for comparison. Note that both models have partially shaved body hair.


The sex of a particular organism may be determined by a number of factors. These may be genetic or environmental, or may naturally change during the course of an organism's life. Although most species with male and female sexes have individuals that are either male or female, hermaphroditic animals, such as worms, have both male and female reproductive organs.
Genetic determination[edit]
Most mammals, including humans, are genetically determined as such by the XY sex-determination system where males have an XY (as opposed to XX) sex chromosome. It is also possible in a variety of species, including humans, to be XXY or have other intersex/hermaphroditic qualities, though one would still be considered genotypically (if not necessarily phenotypically) male so long as one has a Y-chromosome. During reproduction, a male can give either an X sperm or a Y sperm, while a female can only give an X egg. A Y sperm and an X egg produce a male, while an X sperm and an X egg produce a female.
The part of the Y-chromosome which is responsible for maleness is the sex-determining region of the Y-chromosome, the SRY. The SRY activates Sox9, which forms feedforward loops with FGF9 and PGD2 in the gonads, allowing the levels of these genes to stay high enough in order to cause male development;[5] for example, Fgf9 is responsible for development of the spermatic cords and the multiplication of Sertoli cells, both of which are crucial to male sexual development.[6]
The ZW sex-determination system, where males have a ZZ (as opposed to ZW) sex chromosome may be found in birds and some insects (mostly butterflies and moths) and other organisms. Members of the insect order Hymenoptera, such as ants and bees, are often determined by haplodiploidy, where most males are haploid and females and some sterile males are diploid.[citation needed]
Environmental determination[edit]
In some species of reptiles, including alligators, sex is determined by the temperature at which the egg is incubated. Other species, such as some snails, practice sex change: adults start out male, then become female. In tropical clown fish, the dominant individual in a group becomes female while the other ones are male.[citation needed]
In some arthropods, sex is determined by infection. Bacteria of the genus Wolbachia alter their sexuality; some species consist entirely of ZZ individuals, with sex determined by the presence of Wolbachia.[citation needed]
Secondary sex characteristics[edit]
Main article: Secondary sex characteristic
In those species with two sexes, males may differ from females in ways other than the production of spermatozoa. In many insects and fish, the male is smaller than the female. In seed plants, which exhibit alternation of generations, the female and male parts are both included within the sporophyte sex organ of a single organism. In mammals, including humans, males are typically larger than females. In birds, the male often exhibits a colorful plumage that attracts females.[citation needed]
See also[edit]



Look up male in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.





Wikimedia Commons has media related to males.



Boy
Female
Gender
Male plant
Male pregnancy
Man
Masculinity
Gentleman

References[edit]


^ Creighton, Jolene. "Meet The Sex-Changing, Tongue-Eating Parasite:". From Quarks to Quasars. Retrieved 7 April 2014. 
^ Dusenbery, David B. (2009). Living at Micro Scale, Chapter 20. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Mass. ISBN 978-0-674-03116-6.
^ "Gender Statistics Highlights from 2012 World Development Report". World DataBank, a compilation of databases by the World Bank. February 2012. 
^ The Origin of the Male and Female Symbols of Biology, William T. Stearn, Taxon, Vol. 11, No. 4 (May, 1962), pp. 109-113
^ Moniot, Brigitte; Declosmenil, Faustine; Barrionuevo, Francisco; Scherer, Gerd; Aritake, Kosuke; Malki, Safia; Marzi, Laetitia; Cohen-Solal, Ann; Georg, Ina; Klattig, Jürgen; Englert, Christoph; Kim, Yuna; Capel, Blanche; Eguchi, Naomi; Urade, Yoshihiro; Boizet-Bonhoure, Brigitte; Poulat, Francis (2009). "The PGD2 pathway, independently of FGF9, amplifies SOX9 activity in Sertoli cells during male sexual differentiation". Development. 136 (11): 1813–1821. doi:10.1242/dev.032631. PMID 19429785. 
^ Kim, Y.; Kobayashi, A.; Sekido, R.; Dinapoli, L.; Brennan, J.; Chaboissier, M. C.; Poulat, F.; Behringer, R. R.; Lovell-Badge, R.; Capel, B. (2006). "Fgf9 and Wnt4 Act as Antagonistic Signals to Regulate Mammalian Sex Determination". PLoS Biology. 4 (6): e187. doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0040187. PMC 1463023 . PMID 16700629. 








v
t
e


Sex



Biological terms



Sexual dimorphism

Male
Female


Sexual differentiation

Feminization
Virilization


Sex-determination system

XY
ZW
XO
Temperature-dependent
Haplodiploidy


Heterogametic sex
Homogametic sex
Sex chromosome

X chromosome
Y chromosome


Testis-determining factor
Hermaphrodite

Sequential hermaphroditism


Intersex





Sexual reproduction



Evolution of sexual reproduction

Anisogamy
Isogamy


Germ cell
Reproductive system
Sex organ
Meiosis
Gametogenesis

Spermatogenesis
Oogenesis


Gamete

spermatozoon
ovum


Fertilization

External
Internal


Sexual selection
Plant reproduction
Fungal reproduction
Sexual reproduction in animals

Sexual intercourse
Human reproduction







Sexuality



Plant sexuality
Animal sexuality
Human sexuality

Mechanics
Differentiation
Activity










 Sex portal
 Biology portal












v
t
e


Gender and sexual identities



Gender
identities




Gender



Man
Woman
Male
Female
Androgyne
Bigender
Boi
Cisgender
Cross-dresser
Gender bender
Genderqueer
Gender neutrality
Postgenderism
Gender variance
Pangender
Transgender
Trans man
Trans woman
Transmasculine
Transfeminine
Transsexual
Trigender





Third gender,
third sex



Akava'ine
Bakla
Bissu
Calabai
Eunuch
Fa'afafine
Fakaleiti
Femminiello
Galli
Hijra
Kathoey
Khanith
Köçek
Koekchuch
Māhū
Maknyah
Mukhannathun
Muxe
Nullo
Sworn virgin
Takatāpui
Third gender
Travesti
Tumtum
Two-Spirit
Winkte





Other



Skoptsy








Sexual
orientation,
identities




Gender binary



Asexual
Bisexual
Heterosexual
Homosexual





Non-binary



Ambiphilia, Androphilia, Gynephilia
Pansexuality
Polysexuality
Third gender
Two-Spirit





Other



Antisexuality
Attraction to transgender people
Banjee
Bi-curious
Ex-gay
Ex-ex-gay
Gay
Gray asexuality
Heteroflexible
Lesbian
Kinsey scale
Monosexuality
Non-heterosexual
Queer
Questioning
Polyamorous
Romantic orientation
Same gender loving








See also



Disorders of sex development
Ego-dystonic sexual orientation
Erotic target location error
Gender roles
Hermaphrodite
Human female sexuality
Human male sexuality
Intersex
Sex and gender distinction
Sex assignment
Sex change
Sex reassignment surgery
Sexuality and gender identity-based cultures
Social construction of gender
The NeuroGenderings Network
Violence against women & Men (Gendercide)








Gender studies portal
Sexuality portal
LGBT portal











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Male&oldid=817984873"					Categories: GenderMalesMenSexHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from October 2017All articles needing additional referencesAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from January 2012Articles with unsourced statements from August 2013Commons category with local link different than on Wikidata