"Manager" redirects here. For other uses, see Management (disambiguation) and Manager (disambiguation).




An organization chart for the United States Coast Guard shows the hierarchy of managerial roles in that organization.




Business administration


Management of a business




Accounting


Management accounting
Financial accounting
Financial audit








Business entities


Cooperative
Corporation
Limited liability company
Partnership
Sole proprietorship
State-owned enterprise








Corporate governance


Annual general meeting
Board of directors
Supervisory board
Advisory board
Audit committee








Corporate law


Commercial law
Constitutional documents
Contract
Corporate crime
Corporate liability
Insolvency law
International trade law
Mergers and acquisitions








Economics


Commodity
Public economics
Labour economics
Development economics
International economics
Mixed economy
Planned economy
Econometrics
Environmental economics
Open economy
Market economy
Knowledge economy
Microeconomics
Macroeconomics
Economic development
Economic statistics








Finance


Financial statement
Insurance
Factoring
Cash conversion cycle
Insider dealing
Capital budgeting
Commercial bank
Derivative
Financial statement analysis
Financial risk
Public finance
Corporate finance
Managerial finance
International finance
Liquidation
Stock market
Financial market
Tax
Financial institution
Working capital
Venture capital








Marketing


Marketing
Marketing research
Public relations
Sales








Types of management


Asset
Brand
Business intelligence
Business development
Capacity
Change

innovation


Commercial

marketing


Communications
Configuration
Conflict
Content
Customer relationship
Distributed
Earned value
Electronic business
Enterprise resource planning 

management information system


Financial
Human resource 

development


Incident
Integrated
Knowledge
Materials
Network
Office
Operations 

services


Performance
Power
Problem
Process
Product life-cycle
Product
Project
Quality
Records
Resource
Risk 

crisis


Sales
Security
Service
Strategic
Supply chain
Systems

administrator


Talent
Technology








The Organization


Architecture
Behavior
Communication
Culture
Conflict
Development
Engineering
Hierarchy
Patterns
Space
Structure








Trade


Business analysis
Business ethics
Business plan
Business judgment rule
Consumer behaviour
Business operations
International business
Business model
International trade
Business process
Business statistics








 Business and economics portal







v
t
e





Management (or managing) is the administration of an organization, whether it is a business, a not-for-profit organization, or government body. Management includes the activities of setting the strategy of an organization and coordinating the efforts of its employees (or of volunteers) to accomplish its objectives through the application of available resources, such as financial, natural, technological, and human resources. The term "management" may also refer to those people who manage an organization.
Social scientists study management as an academic discipline, investigating areas such as social organization and organizational leadership. Some people study management at colleges or universities; major degrees in management include the Bachelor of Commerce (B.Com.) and Master of Business Administration (MBA.) and, for the public sector, the Master of Public Administration (MPA) degree. Individuals who aim to become management specialists or experts, management researchers, or professors may complete the Doctor of Management (DM), the Doctor of Business Administration (DBA), or the PhD in Business Administration or Management.
Larger organizations generally have three levels of managers, which are typically organized[by whom?] in a hierarchical, pyramid structure:

Senior managers, such as members of a Board of Directors, a Chief Executive Officer (CEO) or a President of an organization, set the strategic goals of the organization and make decisions on how the overall organization will operate. Senior managers provide direction to the middle managers who report to them.
Middle managers, examples of which would include branch managers, regional managers and section managers, provide direction to front-line managers. Middle managers communicate the strategic goals of senior management to the front-line managers.
Lower managers, such as supervisors and front-line team leaders, oversee the work of regular employees (or volunteers, in some voluntary organizations) and provide direction on their work.

In smaller organizations, an individual manager may have a much wider scope. A single manager may perform several roles or even all of the roles commonly observed in a large organization.



Contents


1 Definitions

1.1 Theoretical scope


2 Nature of work
3 History

3.1 Etymology
3.2 Early writing
3.3 19th century
3.4 20th century
3.5 21st century


4 Topics

4.1 Basics
4.2 Basic roles
4.3 Skills
4.4 Implementation of policies and strategies


5 Policies and strategies in the planning process
6 Levels

6.1 Top
6.2 Middle
6.3 Lower


7 Training

7.1 United States of America

7.1.1 Undergraduate
7.1.2 Graduate


7.2 Good practices


8 See also
9 References
10 External links



Definitions[edit]
Views on the definition and scope of management include:

According to Henri Fayol, "to manage is to forecast and to plan, to organise, to command, to co-ordinate and to control."[1]
Fredmund Malik defines it as "the transformation of resources into utility."
Management included as one of the factors of production – along with machines, materials and money.
Ghislain Deslandes defines it as “a vulnerable force, under pressure to achieve results and endowed with the triple power of constraint, imitation and imagination, operating on subjective, interpersonal, institutional and environmental levels”.[2]
Peter Drucker (1909–2005) saw the basic task of management as twofold: marketing and innovation. Nevertheless, innovation is also linked to marketing (product innovation is a central strategic marketing issue). Peter Drucker identifies marketing as a key essence for business success, but management and marketing are generally understood[by whom?] as two different branches of business administration knowledge.

Theoretical scope[edit]
Management involves identifying the mission, objective, procedures, rules and manipulation[3] of the human capital of an enterprise to contribute to the success of the enterprise.[citation needed] This implies effective communication: an enterprise environment (as opposed to a physical or mechanical mechanism) implies human motivation and implies some sort of successful progress or system outcome.[citation needed] As such, management is not the manipulation of a mechanism (machine or automated program), not the herding of animals, and can occur either in a legal or in an illegal enterprise or environment. From an individual's perspective, management does not need to be seen solely from an enterprise point of view, because management is an essential function to improve one's life and relationships.[citation needed] Management is therefore everywhere[citation needed] and it has a wider range of application.[clarification needed] Based on this, management must have humans. Communication and a positive endeavor are two main aspects of it either through enterprise or independent pursuit.[citation needed] Plans, measurements, motivational psychological tools, goals, and economic measures (profit, etc.) may or may not be necessary components for there to be management. At first, one views management functionally, such as measuring quantity, adjusting plans, meeting goals.[citation needed] This applies even in situations where planning does not take place. From this perspective, Henri Fayol (1841–1925)[4][page needed] considers management to consist of six functions:

forecasting
planning
organizing
commanding
coordinating
controlling

In another way of thinking, Mary Parker Follett (1868–1933), allegedly defined management as "the art of getting things done through people".[5] She described management as philosophy.[6][need quotation to verify]
Critics[which?], however, find this definition useful but far too narrow. The phrase "management is what managers do" occurs widely,[7] suggesting the difficulty of defining management without circularity, the shifting nature of definitions[citation needed] and the connection of managerial practices with the existence of a managerial cadre or of a class.
One habit of thought regards management as equivalent to "business administration" and thus excludes management in places outside commerce, as for example in charities and in the public sector. More broadly, every organization must "manage" its work, people, processes, technology, etc. to maximize effectiveness.[citation needed] Nonetheless, many people refer to university departments that teach management as "business schools". Some such institutions (such as the Harvard Business School) use that name, while others (such as the Yale School of Management) employ the broader term "management".
English-speakers may also use the term "management" or "the management" as a collective word describing the managers of an organization, for example of a corporation.[8] Historically this use of the term often contrasted with the term "labor" – referring to those being managed.[9]
But in the present era[when?] the concept of management is identified[by whom?] in the wide areas[which?] and its frontiers have been pushed to a broader range.[citation needed] Apart from profitable organizations even non-profitable organizations (NGOs) apply management concepts. The concept and its uses are not constrained[by whom?]. Management on the whole is the process of planning, organizing, coordinating, leading and controlling.
Nature of work[edit]
In profitable organizations, management's primary function is the satisfaction of a range of stakeholders. This typically involves making a profit (for the shareholders), creating valued products at a reasonable cost (for customers), and providing great employment opportunities for employees. In nonprofit management, add the importance of keeping the faith of donors. In most models of management and governance, shareholders vote for the board of directors, and the board then hires senior management. Some organizations have experimented with other methods (such as employee-voting models) of selecting or reviewing managers, but this is rare.
In the public sector of countries constituted as representative democracies, voters elect politicians to public office. Such politicians hire many managers and administrators; and in some countries like the United States, political appointees lose their jobs on the election of a new president/governor/mayor.
History[edit]
Some see management (by definition) as late-modern (in the sense of late modernity) conceptualization. On those terms it cannot have a pre-modern history, only harbingers (such as stewards). Others, however, detect management-like-thought back to Sumerian traders and to the builders of the pyramids of ancient Egypt. Slave-owners through the centuries faced the problems of exploiting/motivating a dependent but sometimes unenthusiastic or recalcitrant workforce, but many pre-industrial enterprises, given their small scale, did not feel compelled to face the issues of management systematically. However, innovations such as the spread of Hindu numerals (5th to 15th centuries) and the codification of double-entry book-keeping (1494) provided tools for management assessment, planning and control.
Also, Machiavelli wrote about how to make organisations efficient and effective. The principles that Machiavelli set forth in Discourses (1531) can be adapted to apply the management of organisations today:

An organisation is more stable if members have the right to express their differences and solve their conflicts within it.
While one person can begin an organisation, "it is lasting when it is left in the care of many and when many desire to maintain it."
A weak manager can follow a strong one, but not another weak one, and maintain authority.
A manager seeking to change an established organization "should retain at least a shadow of the ancient customs."[10]

With the changing workplaces of industrial revolutions in the 18th and 19th centuries, military theory and practice contributed approaches to managing the newly-popular factories.[11]
Given the scale of most commercial operations and the lack of mechanized record-keeping and recording before the industrial revolution, it made sense for most owners of enterprises in those times to carry out management functions by and for themselves. But with growing size and complexity of organizations, the split between owners (individuals, industrial dynasties or groups of shareholders) and day-to-day managers (independent specialists in planning and control) gradually became more common.
Etymology[edit]
The English verb "manage" comes from the Italian maneggiare (to handle, especially tools or a horse), which derives from the two Latin words manus (hand) and agere (to act). The French word for housekeeping, ménagerie, derived from ménager ("to keep house"; compare ménage for "household"), also encompasses taking care of domestic animals. Ménagerie is the French translation of Xenophon's famous book Oeconomicus[12] (Greek: Οἰκονομικός) on household matters and husbandry. The French word mesnagement (or ménagement) influenced the semantic development of the English word management in the 17th and 18th centuries.[13]
Early writing[edit]
Management (according to some definitions) has existed for millennia, and several writers have produced background works that have contributed to modern management theories.[14][need quotation to verify] Some theorists have cited ancient military texts as providing lessons for civilian managers. For example, Chinese general Sun Tzu in his 6th century BC work The Art of War recommends being aware of and acting on strengths and weaknesses of both a manager's organization and a foe's.[14] The writings of influential Chinese Legalist philosopher Shen Buhai may be considered[by whom?] to embody a rare premodern example of abstract theory of administration.[15]
Various ancient and medieval civilizations produced "mirrors for princes" books, which aimed to advise new monarchs on how to govern. Plato described job specialization in 350 B.C., and Alfarabi listed several leadership traits in A.D. 900.[16] Other examples include the Indian Arthashastra by Chanakya (written around 300 BCE), and The Prince by Italian author Niccolò Machiavelli (c. 1515).[17]
Further information: Mirrors for princes
Written in 1776 by Adam Smith, a Scottish moral philosopher, The Wealth of Nations discussed efficient organization of work through division of labour.[17] Smith described how changes in processes could boost productivity in the manufacture of pins. While individuals could produce 200 pins per day, Smith analyzed the steps involved in manufacture and, with 10 specialists, enabled production of 48,000 pins per day.[17][need quotation to verify]
19th century[edit]
Classical economists such as Adam Smith (1723–1790) and John Stuart Mill (1806–1873) provided a theoretical background to resource-allocation, production, and pricing issues. About the same time, innovators like Eli Whitney (1765–1825), James Watt (1736–1819), and Matthew Boulton (1728–1809) developed elements of technical production such as standardization, quality-control procedures, cost-accounting, interchangeability of parts, and work-planning. Many of these aspects of management existed in the pre-1861 slave-based sector of the US economy. That environment saw 4 million people, as the contemporary usages had it, "managed" in profitable quasi-mass production.
Salaried managers as an identifiable group first became prominent in the late 19th century.[18]
20th century[edit]
By about 1900 one finds managers trying to place their theories on what they regarded as a thoroughly scientific basis (see scientism for perceived limitations of this belief). Examples include Henry R. Towne's Science of management in the 1890s, Frederick Winslow Taylor's The Principles of Scientific Management (1911), Lillian Gilbreth's Psychology of Management (1914),[19] Frank and Lillian Gilbreth's Applied motion study (1917), and Henry L. Gantt's charts (1910s). J. Duncan wrote the first college management-textbook in 1911. In 1912 Yoichi Ueno introduced Taylorism to Japan and became the first management consultant of the "Japanese-management style". His son Ichiro Ueno pioneered Japanese quality assurance.
The first comprehensive theories of management appeared around 1920. The Harvard Business School offered the first Master of Business Administration degree (MBA) in 1921. People like Henri Fayol (1841–1925) and Alexander Church described the various branches of management and their inter-relationships. In the early 20th century, people like Ordway Tead (1891–1973), Walter Scott and J. Mooney applied the principles of psychology to management. Other writers, such as Elton Mayo (1880–1949), Mary Parker Follett (1868–1933), Chester Barnard (1886–1961), Max Weber (1864–1920), who saw what he called the "administrator" as bureaucrat[20]), Rensis Likert (1903–1981), and Chris Argyris (born 1923) approached the phenomenon of management from a sociological perspective.
Peter Drucker (1909–2005) wrote one of the earliest books on applied management: Concept of the Corporation (published in 1946). It resulted from Alfred Sloan (chairman of General Motors until 1956) commissioning a study of the organisation. Drucker went on to write 39 books, many in the same vein.
H. Dodge, Ronald Fisher (1890–1962), and Thornton C. Fry introduced statistical techniques into management-studies. In the 1940s, Patrick Blackett worked in the development of the applied-mathematics science of operations research, initially for military operations. Operations research, sometimes known as "management science" (but distinct from Taylor's scientific management), attempts to take a scientific approach to solving decision-problems, and can apply directly to multiple management problems, particularly in the areas of logistics and operations.
Some of the more recent[update] developments include the Theory of Constraints, management by objectives, reengineering, Six Sigma and various information-technology-driven theories such as agile software development, as well as group-management theories such as Cog's Ladder.
As the general recognition of managers as a class solidified during the 20th century and gave perceived practitioners of the art/science of management a certain amount of prestige, so the way opened for popularised systems of management ideas to peddle their wares. In this context many management fads may have had more to do with pop psychology than with scientific theories of management.
Towards the end of the 20th century, business management came to consist of six separate branches,[citation needed] namely:

financial management
human resource management
information technology management (responsible for management information systems)
marketing management
operations management and production management
strategic management

21st century[edit]
In the 21st century observers find it increasingly difficult to subdivide management into functional categories in this way. More and more processes simultaneously involve several categories. Instead, one tends to think in terms of the various processes, tasks, and objects subject to management.[citation needed]
Branches of management theory also exist relating to nonprofits and to government: such as public administration, public management, and educational management. Further, management programs related to civil-society organizations have also spawned programs in nonprofit management and social entrepreneurship.
Note that many of the assumptions made by management have come under attack from business-ethics viewpoints, critical management studies, and anti-corporate activism.
As one consequence, workplace democracy (sometimes referred to as Workers' self-management) has become both more common and advocated to a greater extent, in some places distributing all management functions among workers, each of whom takes on a portion of the work. However, these models predate any current political issue, and may occur more naturally than does a command hierarchy. All management embraces to some degree a democratic principle—in that in the long term, the majority of workers must support management. Otherwise, they leave to find other work or go on strike. Despite the move toward workplace democracy, command-and-control organization structures remain commonplace as de facto organization structure. Indeed, the entrenched nature of command-and-control is evident in the way that recent layoffs have been conducted with management ranks affected far less than employees at the lower levels. In some cases, management has even rewarded itself with bonuses after laying off lower-level workers.[21]
According to leadership academic Manfred F.R. Kets de Vries, a contemporary senior management team will almost inevitably have some personality disorders.[22]
Topics[edit]
Basics[edit]
According to Fayol, management operates through five basic functions: planning, organizing, coordinating, commanding, and controlling.

Planning: Deciding what needs to happen in the future and generating plans for action (deciding in advance).
Organizing (or staffing): Making sure the human and nonhuman resources are put into place.[23]
Coordinating: Creating a structure through which an organization's goals can be accomplished.
Commanding (or leading): Determining what must be done in a situation and getting people to do it.
Controlling: Checking progress against plans.

Basic roles[edit]

Interpersonal: roles that involve coordination and interaction with employees

Figurehead,leader

Informational: roles that involve handling, sharing, and analyzing information

Nerve centre, dissciminator

Decision: roles that require decision-making entrepreneur,negotiator,allocator

Skills[edit]
Management skills include:

political: used to build a power base and to establish connections
conceptual: used to analyze complex situations
interpersonal: used to communicate, motivate, mentor and delegate
diagnostic: ability to visualize appropriate responses to a situation
leadership: ability to lead and to provide guidance to a specific group
technical: expertise in one's particular functional area.

Implementation of policies and strategies[edit]

All policies and strategies must be discussed with all managerial personnel and staff.
Managers must understand where and how they can implement their policies and strategies.
A plan of action must be devised for each department.
Policies and strategies must be reviewed regularly.
Contingency plans must be devised in case the environment changes.
Top-level managers should carry out regular progress assessments.
The business requires team spirit and a good environment.
The missions, objectives, strengths and weaknesses of each department must be analyzed to determine their roles in achieving the business's mission.
The forecasting method develops a reliable picture of the business's future environment.
A planning unit must be created to ensure that all plans are consistent and that policies and strategies are aimed at achieving the same mission and objectives.

Policies and strategies in the planning process[edit]

They give mid and lower-level managers a good idea of the future plans for each department in an organization.
A framework is created whereby plans and decisions are made.
Mid and lower-level management may add their own plans to the business's strategies.

Levels[edit]
Most organizations have three management levels: first-level, middle-level, and top-level managers. First-line managers are the lowest level of management and manage the work of nonmanagerial individuals who are directly involved with the production or creation of the organization's products. First-line managers are often called supervisors, but may also be called line managers, office managers, or even foremen. Middle managers include all levels of management between the first-line level and the top level of the organization. These managers manage the work of first-line managers and may have titles such as department head, project leader, plant manager, or division manager. Top managers are responsible for making organization-wide decisions and establishing the plans and goals that affect the entire organization. These individuals typically have titles such as executive vice president, president, managing director, chief operating officer, chief executive officer, or chairman of the board.
These managers are classified in a hierarchy of authority, and perform different tasks. In many organizations, the number of managers in every level resembles a pyramid. Each level is explained below in specifications of their different responsibilities and likely job titles.[citation needed]
Top[edit]
The top or senior layer of management consists of the board of directors (including non-executive directors and executive directors), president, vice-president, CEOs and other members of the C-level executives. Different organizations have various members in their C-suite, which may include a Chief Financial Officer, Chief Technology Officer, and so on. They are responsible for controlling and overseeing the operations of the entire organization. They set a "tone at the top" and develop strategic plans, company policies, and make decisions on the overall direction of the organization. In addition, top-level managers play a significant role in the mobilization of outside resources. Senior managers are accountable to the shareholders, the general public and to public bodies that oversee corporations and similar organizations. Some members of the senior management may serve as the public face of the organization, and they may make speeches to introduce new strategies or appear in marketing.
The board of directors is typically primarily composed of non-executives who owe a fiduciary duty to shareholders and are not closely involved in the day-to-day activities of the organization, although this varies depending on the type (e.g., public versus private), size and culture of the organization. These directors are theoretically liable for breaches of that duty and typically insured under directors and officers liability insurance. Fortune 500 directors are estimated to spend 4.4 hours per week on board duties, and median compensation was $212,512 in 2010. The board sets corporate strategy, makes major decisions such as major acquisitions,[24] and hires, evaluates, and fires the top-level manager (Chief Executive Officer or CEO). The CEO typically hires other positions. However, board involvement in the hiring of other positions such as the Chief Financial Officer (CFO) has increased.[25] In 2013, a survey of over 160 CEOs and directors of public and private companies found that the top weaknesses of CEOs were "mentoring skills" and "board engagement", and 10% of companies never evaluated the CEO.[26] The board may also have certain employees (e.g., internal auditors) report to them or directly hire independent contractors; for example, the board (through the audit committee) typically selects the auditor.
Helpful skills of top management vary by the type of organization but typically include[27] a broad understanding of competition, world economies, and politics. In addition, the CEO is responsible for implementing and determining (within the board's framework) the broad policies of the organization. Executive management accomplishes the day-to-day details, including: instructions for preparation of department budgets, procedures, schedules; appointment of middle level executives such as department managers; coordination of departments; media and governmental relations; and shareholder communication.
Middle[edit]
Consist of general managers, branch managers and department managers. They are accountable to the top management for their department's function. They devote more time to organizational and directional functions. Their roles can be emphasized as executing organizational plans in conformance with the company's policies and the objectives of the top management, they define and discuss information and policies from top management to lower management, and most importantly they inspire and provide guidance to lower level managers towards better performance.
Middle management is the midway management of a categorized organization, being secondary to the senior management but above the deepest levels of operational members. An operational manager may be well-thought-out by middle management, or may be categorized as non-management operate, liable to the policy of the specific organization. Efficiency of the middle level is vital in any organization, since they bridge the gap between top level and bottom level staffs.
Their functions include:

Design and implement effective group and inter-group work and information systems.
Define and monitor group-level performance indicators.
Diagnose and resolve problems within and among work groups.
Design and implement reward systems that support cooperative behavior. They also make decision and share ideas with top managers.

Lower[edit]
Lower managers include supervisors, section leaders, forepersons and team leaders. They focus on controlling and directing regular employees. They are usually responsible for assigning employees' tasks, guiding and supervising employees on day-to-day activities, ensuring the quality and quantity of production and/or service, making recommendations and suggestions to employees on their work, and channeling employee concerns that they cannot resolve to mid-level managers or other administrators. First-level or "front line" managers also act as role models for their employees. In some types of work, front line managers may also do some of the same tasks that employees do, at least some of the time. For example, in some restaurants, the front line managers will also serve customers during a very busy period of the day.
Front-line managers typically provide:

Training for new employees
Basic supervision
Motivation
Performance feedback and guidance

Some front-line managers may also provide career planning for employees who aim to rise within the organization.
Training[edit]
Colleges and universities around the world offer bachelor's degrees, graduate degrees, diplomas and certificates in management, generally within their colleges of business, business schools or faculty of management but also in other related departments. In the 2010s, there has been an increase in online management education and training in the form of electronic educational technology ( also called e-learning). Online education has increased the accessibility of management training to people who do not live near a college or university, or who cannot afford to travel to a city where such training is available.
While some professions require academic credentials in order to work in the profession (e.g., law, medicine, engineering, which require, respectively the Bachelor of Law, Doctor of Medicine and Bachelor of Engineering degrees), management and administration positions do not necessarily require the completion of academic degrees. Some well-known senior executives in the US who did not complete a degree include Steve Jobs, Bill Gates and Mark Zuckerberg. However, many managers and executives have completed some type of business or management training, such as a Bachelor of Commerce or a Master of Business Administration degree. Some major organizations, including companies, not-for-profit organizations and governments, require applicants to managerial or executive positions to hold at minimum Bachelor's degree in a field related to administration or management, or in the case of business jobs, a Bachelor of Commerce or a similar degree.
United States of America[edit]
Undergraduate[edit]
At the undergraduate level, the most common business program is the Bachelor of Commerce (B.Com.). A B.Com. is typically a four-year program that includes courses that give students an overview of the role of managers in planning and directing within an organization. Course topics include accounting, financial management, statistics, marketing, strategy, and other related areas. There are many other undergraduate degrees that include the study of management, such as Bachelor of Arts degrees with a major in business administration or management and Bachelor of Public Administration (B.P.A), a degree designed for individuals aiming to work as bureaucrats in the government jobs. Many colleges and universities also offer certificates and diplomas in business administration or management, which typically require one to two years of full-time study.
Graduate[edit]
At the graduate level students aiming at careers as managers or executives may choose to specialize in major subareas of management or business administration such as entrepreneurship, human resources, international business, organizational behavior, organizational theory, strategic management,[28] accounting, corporate finance, entertainment, global management, healthcare management, investment management, sustainability and real estate. A Master of Business Administration (MBA) is the most popular professional master's degree and can be obtained from many universities in the United States. MBAs provide further education in management and leadership for graduate students. Other master's degrees in business and management include Master of Management (MM) and the Master of Science (M.Sc.) in business administration or management, which is typically taken by students aiming to become researchers or professors. There are also specialized master's degrees in administration for individuals aiming at careers outside of business, such as the Master of Public Administration (MPA) degree (also offered as a Master of Arts in Public Administration in some universities), for students aiming to become managers or executives in the public service and the Master of Health Administration, for students aiming to become managers or executives in the health care and hospital sector.
Management doctorates are the most advanced terminal degrees in the field of business and management. Most individuals obtaining management doctorates take the programs to obtain the training in research methods, statistical analysis and writing academic papers that they will need to seek careers as researchers, senior consultants and/or professors in business administration or management. There are three main types of management doctorates: the Doctor of Management (D.M.), the Doctor of Business Administration (D.B.A.), and the Ph.D. in Business Administration or Management. In the 2010s, doctorates in business administration and management are available with many specializations.
Good practices[edit]
While management trends can change so fast, the long term trend in management has been defined by a market embracing diversity and a rising service industry. Managers are currently being trained to encourage greater equality for minorities and women in the workplace, by offering increased flexibility in working hours, better retraining, and innovative (and usually industry-specific) performance markers. Managers destined for the service sector are being trained to use unique measurement techniques, better worker support and more charismatic leadership styles.[29] Human resources finds itself increasingly working with management in a training capacity to help collect management data on the success (or failure) of management actions with employees.[30]
See also[edit]

Outline of business management

References[edit]


^ SS Gulshan. Management Principles and Practices by Lallan Prasad and SS Gulshan. Excel Books India. pp. 6–. ISBN 978-93-5062-099-1. 
^ Deslandes G., (2014), “Management in Xenophon's Philosophy : a Retrospective Analysis”, 38th Annual Research Conference, Philosophy of Management, 2014, July 14–16, Chicago
^ Prabbal Frank attempts to make a subtle distinction between management and manipulation: Frank, Prabbal (2006). People Manipulation: A Positive Approach (2 ed.). New Delhi: Sterling Publishers Pvt. Ltd (published 2009). pp. 3–7. ISBN 9788120743526. Retrieved 2015-09-05. There is a difference between management and manipulation. The difference is thin [...] If management is handling, then manipulation is skilful handling. In short, manipulation is skilful management. [...] Manipulation is in essence leveraged management. [...] It is an alive thing while management is a dead concept. It requires a proactive approach rather than a reactive approach. [...] People cannot be managed. 
^ Administration industrielle et générale – prévoyance organization – commandment, coordination – contrôle, Paris : Dunod, 1966
^ Jones, Norman L. (2013). "Chapter Two: Of Poetry and Politics: The Managerial Culture of Sixteenth-Century England". In Kaufman, Peter Iver. Leadership and Elizabethan Culture. Jepson Studies in Leadership. Palgrave Macmillan. p. 18. ISBN 9781137340290. Retrieved 2015-08-29. Mary Parker Follett, the 'prophet of management' reputedly defined management as the 'art of getting things done through people.' [...] Whether or not she said it, Follett describes the attributes of dynamic management as being coactive rather than coercive. 
^ Vocational Business: Training, Developing and Motivating People by Richard Barrett – Business & Economics – 2003. p. 51.
^ Compare: Holmes, Leonard (2012). The Dominance of Management: A Participatory Critique. Voices in Development Management. Ashgate Publishing, Ltd. p. 20. ISBN 9781409488668. Retrieved 2015-08-29. Lupton's (1983: 17) notion that management is 'what managers do during their working hours', if valid, could only apply to descriptive conceptualizations of management, where 'management' is effectively synonymous with 'managing', and where 'managing' refers to an activity, or set of activities carried out by managers. 
^ Harper, Douglas. "management". Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved 2015-08-29.  – "Meaning 'governing body' (originally of a theater) is from 1739."
^ See for examples Melling, Joseph; McKinlay, Alan, eds. (1996). Management, Labour, and Industrial Politics in Modern Europe: The Quest for Productivity Growth During the Twentieth Century. Edward Elgar. ISBN 9781858980164. Retrieved 2015-08-29. 
^ Stoner, James A.F. (1995). Management (sixth edition). Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice Hall, Inc. p. 30. ISBN 0-13-149444-9. 
^ Giddens, Anthony (1981). A Contemporary Critique of Historical Materialism. Social and Politic Theory from Polity Press. 1. University of California Press. p. 125. ISBN 9780520044906. Retrieved 2013-12-29. In the army barracks, and in the mass co-ordination of men on the battlefield (epitomised by the military innovations of Prince Maurice of Orange and Nassau in the sixteenth century) are to be found the prototype of the regimentation of the factory – as both Marx and Weber noted. 
^ https://books.google.com/books?id=ITdXAAAAcAAJ&pg=PP21&lpg=PP21&dq=menagerie+xenophon&source=bl&ots=-xFcf4MOIt&sig=KGryxF60feNGaDW9AlgIZJIb0gU&hl=de&sa=X&ei=5V4_VfiLKZDfau-OgZgO&ved=0CCQQ6AEwAA#v=onepage&q=menagerie%20xenophon&f=false
^ "Home : Oxford English Dictionary". 
^ a b Gomez-Mejia, Luis R.; David B. Balkin; Robert L. Cardy (2008). Management: People, Performance, Change, 3rd edition. New York: McGraw-Hill. p. 19. ISBN 978-0-07-302743-2. 
^ Creel, 1974 pp. 4–5 Shen Pu-hai: A Chinese Political Philosopher of the Fourth Century B.C.
^ Griffin, Ricky W. CUSTOM Management: Principles and Practices, International Edition, 11th Edition. Cengage Learning UK, 08/2014
^ a b c Gomez-Mejia, Luis R.; David B. Balkin; Robert L. Cardy (2008). Management: People, Performance, Change (3 ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill. p. 20. ISBN 978-0-07-302743-2. 
^ Khurana, Rakesh (2010) [2007]. From Higher Aims to Hired Hands: The Social Transformation of American Business Schools and the Unfulfilled Promise of Management as a Profession. Princeton University Press. p. 3. ISBN 9781400830862. Retrieved 2013-08-24. When salaried managers first appeared in the large corporations of the late nineteenth century, it was not obvious who they were, what they did, or why they should be entrusted with the task of running corporations. 
^ Gilbreth, Lillian Moller. "The Psychology of Management: The Function of the Mind in Determining, Teaching and Installing Methods of Least Waste" – via Internet Archive. 
^ Legge, David; Stanton, Pauline; Smyth, Anne (2006). "Learning management (and managing your own learning)". In Harris, Mary G. Managing Health Services: Concepts and Practice. Marrickville, NSW: Elsevier Australia. p. 13. ISBN 9780729537599. Retrieved 2014-07-11. The manager as bureaucrat is the guardian of roles, rules and relationships; his or her style of management relies heavily on working according to the book. In the Weberian tradition managers are necessary to coordinate the different roles that contribute to the production process and to mediate communication from head office to the shop floor and back. This style of management assumes a world view in which bureaucratic role is seen as separate from, and taking precedence over, other constructions of self (including the obligations of citizenship), at least for the duration if the working day. 
^ Craig, S. (2009, January 29). Merrill Bonus Case Widens as Deal Struggles. Wall Street Journal. [1]
^ Manfred F. R. Kets de Vries The Dark Side of Leadership – Business Strategy Review 14(3), Autumn p. 26 (2003).
^ Jean-Louis Peaucelle (22 July 2015). Henri Fayol, the Manager. Routledge. pp. 55–. ISBN 978-1-317-31939-9. 
^ Board of Directors: Duties & Liabilities Archived 2014-03-24 at the Wayback Machine.. Stanford Graduate School of Business.
^ DeMars L. (2006). Heavy Vetting: Boards of directors now want to talk to would-be CFOs — and vice versa. CFO Magazine.
^ 2013 CEO Performance Evaluation Survey. Stanford Graduate School of Business.
^ Kleiman, Lawrence S. "Management and Executive Development."Reference for Business:Encyclopedia of Business(2010): n. page. 25 Mar 2011. [2].
^ "AOM Placement Presentations". 
^ "Four Ways to Be A Better Boss". www.randstadusa.com. Randstad USA. Retrieved 18 January 2015. 
^ "The Role of HR in Uncertain Times" (PDF). Economist Intelligence Unit. Economist Intelligence Unit. Retrieved 18 January 2015. 


External links[edit]

Library resources in your library and in other libraries about Management
 Media related to Management at Wikimedia Commons
 Quotations related to Management at Wikiquote







v
t
e


Management






Outline of business management
Index of management articles





By type
of organization



Academic
Association
Business

Restaurant


Healthcare
Military
Public





By focus (within
an organization)




By scope




Strategic
(top-level)



Capability
Change
Communication
Financial
Innovation
Performance
Risk
Systems





By component



Facility
Product

Product lifecycle
Brand


Program
Project

Construction










By activity or
department
managed




Line



Marketing
Operations/production

Process
Quality


Sales





Staff



Accounting
Office
Records








By aspect or
relationship



Customer relationship
Engineering
Logistics
Perception
Supply chain
Talent





By problem



Conflict
Crisis
Stress





By resource



Environmental resource
Human resources
Information
Information technology
Knowledge
Land
Materials
Skills
Stock
Technology
Time








Management
positions



Interim
Middle
Senior





Methods
and approaches



Adhocracy
Collaborative method
Distributed
Earned value management
Evidence-based management
Management by objectives
Management style
Macromanagement
Micromanagement
Scientific management
Social entrepreneurship
Team building
Virtual management





Management skills
and activities



Decision-making
Forecasting
Leadership





Pioneers and
scholars



Peter Drucker
Eliyahu M. Goldratt
Oliver E. Williamson





Education



Association of Technology, Management, and Applied Engineering
Business school
Certified Business Manager
Chartered Management Institute
Critical management studies
Degrees

Bachelor of Business Administration
Master of Business Administration
PhD in management


Organizational studies





Other



Administration
Collaboration
Corporate governance
Executive compensation
Management consulting
Management control
Management cybernetics
Management development
Management fad
Management system
Managerial economics
Managerial psychology
Managerialism
Organization development
Organizational behavior management
Pointy-haired Boss
Williamson's model of managerial discretion






 Systems science portal










v
t
e


Social sciences



Primary



Anthropology

archaeology
cultural
linguistics
social


Economics

microeconomics
macroeconomics


Geography

human
integrative


History

cultural
economic
military
political
social


Law

jurisprudence
legal history
legal systems


Political science

international relations
psephology
public administration
public policy


Psychology

abnormal
biological
cognitive
developmental
personality
social


Sociology

criminology
demography
internet
rural
urban







Interdisciplinary



Anthrozoology
Area studies
Business studies
Cognitive science
Communication studies
Community studies
Cultural studies
Development studies
Education
Environmental (social science
studies)
Food studies
Gender studies
Global studies
History of technology
Human ecology
Information science
International studies
Media studies
Philosophy of science

economics
history
psychology
social science


Planning

land use
regional
urban


Political ecology
Political economy
Public health
Regional science
Science and technology studies
Science studies

historical


Social work





Other categorizations



Humanities
Geisteswissenschaft
Human science








Index
Journals
Outline
Wikiversity








Business and economics portal







						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Management&oldid=818254906"					Categories: Management occupationsManagementOrganizational theoryLeadershipHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksArticles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from August 2017Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from June 2013All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from August 2015Wikipedia articles needing clarification from August 2015Articles with unsourced statements from September 2015Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from August 2015Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from August 2015All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrasesArticles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from August 2015All articles with vague or ambiguous timeVague or ambiguous time from August 2015Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from September 2015Articles containing Ancient Greek-language textWikipedia articles needing factual verification from August 2017Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2006All articles containing potentially dated statementsArticles with unsourced statements from July 2014Articles with unsourced statements from August 2013Articles with unsourced statements from January 2015