This article is about the region with various definitions of its extent. For the region that falls entirely within China, see Northeast China. For the region ceded to Russia during the Qing dynasty, see Outer Manchuria. For other uses, see Manchuria (disambiguation).





Manchuria





Chinese name


Simplified Chinese
满洲


Traditional Chinese
滿洲





Transcriptions


Standard Mandarin


Hanyu Pinyin
Mǎnzhōu


IPA
[màn.ʈʂóu]


Wu


Romanization
moe上tseu平


Yue: Cantonese


Jyutping
mun5 zau1





Russian name


Russian
Маньчжурия


Romanization
Man'chzhuriya





Manchuria (simplified Chinese: 满洲; traditional Chinese: 滿洲; pinyin: Mǎnzhōu) was a name first used in the 17th century by Chinese people to refer to a large geographic region in Northeast Asia. Depending on the context, Manchuria can either refer to a region that falls entirely within the People's Republic of China[1][2][3] or a larger region divided between China and Russia. The region that falls entirely within modern China is now usually referred to as Northeast China (Dongbei) (simplified Chinese: 东北; traditional Chinese: 東北; pinyin: Dōngběi) in China, although "Manchuria" is widely used outside China to denote the geographical and historical region. This region is the traditional homeland of the Xianbei, Khitan, and Jurchen (later called Manchu) peoples, who built several states within the area historically (however, no term for "Manchuria" exists in the Manchu language,[4] which originally referred to the area as the "Three Eastern Provinces").[5]



Contents


1 Definition
2 Etymology and names
3 Geography and climate
4 History

4.1 Early history
4.2 History after 1860


5 See also
6 References
7 Bibliography
8 External links



Definition[edit]




Inner Manchuria: Northeast China = red, Eastern Inner Mongolia = pink


The definition of Manchuria can be any one of several regions of various size. These are, from smallest to largest:

Northeast China (Dōngběi): consisting of Heilongjiang, Jilin, and Liaoning. This is the area referred to as "Manchuria" in the World Geographical Scheme for Recording Plant Distributions.[6]
Inner Manchuria: the above, plus parts of modern Inner Mongolia (Hulunbuir, Hinggan, Tongliao, and Chifeng divisions), plus Chengde.
The above, plus Outer Manchuria (Outer Northeast China or Russian Manchuria): the area from the Amur and Ussuri rivers to the Stanovoy Mountains and the Sea of Japan. In Russian administrative terms, Ussuri krai, southern Harbin oblast', Primorskiy kray.

These were part of the Qing dynasty China according to the Treaty of Nerchinsk (1689) that defined the border in the region between China and Russia, but were ceded to Russia by the unequal treaties of the Treaty of Aigun (1858) and the Treaty of Peking (1860).

The above, plus Sakhalin Island, which is generally included on Qing dynasty maps as part of Outer Manchuria even though it is not explicitly mentioned in the Treaty of Nerchinsk. The island was also included in Manchuria on maps made by the Japanese Shogunate and Russian Empire. Despite lines on maps and empires' political claims, the island was inhabited by Ainu people until the Soviet Union enforced an evacuation policy after 1945.


Etymology and names[edit]




One of the earliest European maps using the term "Manchuria" (Mandchouria) (John Tallis, 1851). Previously, the term "'Chinese Tartary" had been commonly applied in the West to Manchuria and Mongolia[7]



Three centuries and a half must now pass away before entering upon the next act of the Manchu drama. The Nü-chêns had been scotched, but not killed, by their Mongol conquerors, who, one hundred and thirty-four years later (1368), were themselves driven out of China, a pure native dynasty being re-established under the style of Ming, "Bright." During the ensuing two hundred years the Nü-chêns were scarcely heard of, the House of Ming being busily occupied in other directions. Their warlike spirit, however, found scope and nourishment in the expeditions organised against Japan and Tan-lo, or Quelpart, as named by the Dutch, a large island to the south of the Korean peninsula; while on the other hand the various tribes scattered over a portion of the territory known to Europeans as Manchuria, availed themselves of long immunity from attack by the Chinese to advance in civilization and prosperity. It may be noted here that "Manchuria" is unknown to the Chinese or to the Manchus themselves as a geographical expression. The present extensive home of the Manchus is usually spoken of as the Three Eastern Provinces, namely, (1) Shêngking, or Liao-tung, or Kuan-tung, (2) Kirin, and (3) Heilungchiang or Tsitsihar. – Herbert A. Giles, China and the Manchus, 1912[5]

"Manchuria" is a translation of the Japanese word Manshū, which dates from the 19th century. The name Manju (Manzhou) was invented and given to the Jurchen people by Hong Taiji in 1635 as a new name for their ethnic group; however, the name "Manchuria" was never used by the Manchus or the Qing dynasty itself to refer to their homeland. According to the Japanese scholar Junko Miyawaki-Okada, the Japanese geographer Takahashi Kageyasu was the first to use the term "満州" (Manshū) as a place name in 1809 in the Nippon Henkai Ryakuzu, and it was from that work that Westerners adopted the name.[8][9] According to Mark C. Elliott, Katsuragawa Hoshū's 1794 work, the "Hokusa bunryaku", was where "満州" (Manshū) first appeared as a place name was in two maps included in the work, "Ashia zenzu" and "Chikyū hankyū sōzu" which were also created by Katsuragawa.[10] "満州" (Manshū) then began to appear as a place names in more maps created by Japanese like Kondi Jūzō, Takahashi Kageyasu, Baba Sadayoshi and Yamada Ren, and these maps were brought to Europe by the Dutch Philipp von Siebold.[11] According to Nakami Tatsuo, Philip Franz von Siebold was the one who brought the usage of the term Manchuria to Europeans after borrowing it from the Japanese, who were the first to use it in a geographic manner in the eighteenth century although neither the Manchu nor Chinese languages had a term in their own language equivalent to "Manchuria" as a geographic place name.[12] The Manchu and Chinese languages had no such word as "Manchuria" and the word has imperialist connotations.[13] According to Bill Sewell, it was Europeans who first started using the name Manchuria to refer to the location and it is "not a genuine geographic term".[14] The historian Gavan McCormack agreed with Robert H. G. Lee's statement that "The term Manchuria or Man-chou is a modern creation used mainly by westerners and Japanese", with McCormack writing that the term Manchuria is imperialistic in nature and has no "precise meaning" since the Japanese deliberately promoted the use of "Manchuria" as a geographic name to promote its separation from China at the time they were setting up their puppet state of Manchukuo.[15] The Japanese had their own motive for deliberately spreading the usage of the term Manchuria.[16] The historian Norman Smith wrote that "The term 'Manchuria' is controversial".[17] Professor Mariko Asano Tamanoi said that she "should use the term in quotation marks" when referring to Manchuria.[18] In his 2012 dissertation on the Jurchen people to obtain a Doctor of Philosophy degree in History from the University of Washington, Professor Chad D. Garcia noted that usage of the term "Manchuria" is out of favor in "current scholarly practice" and that he had ceased using the term, instead using "the northeast" or referring to specific geographical features.[19]




Russian map of Manchuria, in yellow


In the 18th-century Europe, the region later known as "Manchuria" was most commonly referred to as "[Chinese] Tartary". However, the term Manchuria (Mantchourie, in French) started appearing by the end of the century; French missionaries used it as early as 1800.[20] The French-based geographers Conrad Malte-Brun and Edme Mentelle promoted the use of the term Manchuria (Mantchourie, in French), along with "Mongolia", "Kalmykia", etc., as more precise terms than Tartary, in their world geography work published in 1804.[21]
In current Chinese parlance, an inhabitant of "the Northeast", or Northeast China, is a "Northeasterner" (东北人; Dōngběi rén). "The Northeast" is a term that expresses the entire region, encompassing its history, culture, traditions, dialects, cuisines and so forth, as well as the "Three East Provinces" or "Three Northeast Provinces". In China, the term Manchuria (traditional Chinese: 滿洲; simplified Chinese: 满洲; pinyin: Mǎnzhōu) is rarely used today, and the term is often negatively associated with the Japanese imperial legacy in the puppet state of Manchukuo (traditional Chinese: 滿洲國; simplified Chinese: 满洲国; pinyin: Mǎnzhōuguó).[22][23]
Manchuria has also been referred to as Guandong (traditional Chinese: 關東; simplified Chinese: 关东; pinyin: Guāndōng), which literally means "east of the pass", and similarly Guanwai (關外; 关外; Guānwài; "outside the pass"), a reference to Shanhai Pass in Qinhuangdao in today's Hebei, at the eastern end of the Great Wall of China. This usage is seen in the expression Chuǎng Guāndōng (literally "Rushing into Guandong") referring to the mass migration of Han Chinese to Manchuria in the 19th and 20th centuries. The name Guandong later came to be used more narrowly for the area of the Kwantung Leased Territory on the Liaodong Peninsula. It is not to be confused with the southern province of Guangdong.
During the Qing dynasty, the region was known as the "three eastern provinces" (traditional Chinese: 東三省; simplified Chinese: 东三省; pinyin: Dōngsānshěng) (dergi ilan golo) since 1683 when Jilin and Heilongjiang were separated even though it was not until 1907 that they were turned into actual provinces.[5][24] The administrators of the three areas were the General of Heilongjiang (Sahaliyan Ula i Jiyanggiyūn), General of Jilin (Girin i Jiyanggiyūn), and General of Shengjing (Mukden i Jiyanggiyūn). The area of Manchuria was then converted into three provinces by the late Qing government in 1907. Since then, the phrase "Three Northeast Provinces" was officially used by the Qing government in China to refer to this region, and the post of Viceroy of the Three Northeast Provinces (dergi ilan goloi uheri kadalara amban) was established to take charge of these provinces. After the 1911 revolution, which resulted in the collapse of the Manchu-established Qing dynasty, the name of the region where the Manchus originated was known as "the Northeast" in official documents in the newly founded Republic of China, in addition to the "Three Northeast Provinces".
During the Ming dynasty the area where the Jurchens lived was referred to as Nurgan.[25] Nurgan was the area of modern Jilin in Manchuria.
Geography and climate[edit]
Manchuria consists mainly of the northern side of the funnel-shaped North China Craton, a large area of tilled and overlaid Precambrian rocks spanning 100 million hectares. The North China Craton was an independent continent before the Triassic period and is known to have been the northernmost piece of land in the world during the Carboniferous. The Khingan Mountains in the west are a Jurassic[26] mountain range formed by the collision of the North China Craton with the Siberian Craton, which marked the final stage of the formation of the supercontinent Pangaea.
No part of Manchuria was glaciated during the Quaternary, but the surface geology of most of the lower-lying and more fertile parts of Manchuria consists of very deep layers of loess, which have been formed by wind-borne movement of dust and till particles formed in glaciated parts of the Himalayas, Kunlun Shan and Tien Shan, as well as the Gobi and Taklamakan Deserts.[27] Soils are mostly fertile Mollisols and Fluvents except in the more mountainous parts where they are poorly developed Orthents, as well as in the extreme north where permafrost occurs and Orthels dominate.[28]
The climate of Manchuria has extreme seasonal contrasts, ranging from humid, almost tropical heat in the summer to windy, dry, Arctic cold in the winter. This pattern occurs because the position of Manchuria on the boundary between the great Eurasian continental landmass and the huge Pacific Ocean causes complete monsoonal wind reversal.
In the summer, when the land heats faster than the ocean, low pressure forms over Asia and warm, moist south to southeasterly winds bring heavy, thundery rain, yielding annual rainfall ranging from 400 mm (16 in.), or less in the west, to over 1150 mm (45 in.) in the Changbai Mountains.[29] Temperatures in the summer are very warm to hot, with July average maxima ranging from 31 °C (88 °F) in the south to 24 °C (75 °F) in the extreme north.[30] Except in the far north near the Amur River, high humidity causes major discomfort at this time of year.
In the winter, however, the vast Siberian High causes very cold, north to northwesterly winds that bring temperatures as low as −5 °C (23 °F) in the extreme south and −30 °C (−22 °F) in the north[31] where the zone of discontinuous permafrost reaches northern Heilongjiang. However, because the winds from Siberia are exceedingly dry, snow falls only on a few days every winter, and it is never heavy. This explains why corresponding latitudes of North America were fully glaciated during glacial periods of the Quaternary while Manchuria, though even colder, always remained too dry to form glaciers[32] – a state of affairs enhanced by stronger westerly winds from the surface of the ice sheet in Europe.
History[edit]



Part of a series on the



History of Manchuria




Ancient period


Early tribes
Dangun Joseon
Gija Joseon
Wiman Joseon
Yan
Han dynasty
Sushen
Donghu
Wuhuan
Xianbei state
Cao Wei
Buyeo
Goguryeo
Sima Jin dynasty
Yuwen
Former Yan
Former Qin
Later Yan
Northern Yan
Kumo Xi
Khitan
Northern Wei
Mohe
Shiwei








Medieval period


Tang dynasty
Balhae
Liao dynasty
Jurchen Jin dynasty
Yuan rule
Northern Yuan dynasty
Ming rule
Qing rule








Modern period


Republic of China
Russian Empire
Far Eastern Republic
Green Ukraine
Manchukuo
Soviet Union
P.R. China (Northeast China)
Russia (Outer Manchuria)









v
t
e





Main article: History of Manchuria
Early history[edit]




A 12th-century Jurchen stone tortoise in today's Ussuriysk


Manchuria was the homeland of several ethnic groups, including the Manchu, Ulchs and Hezhen. Various ethnic groups and their respective kingdoms, including the Sushen, Donghu, Xianbei, Wuhuan, Mohe, Khitan and Jurchens have risen to power in Manchuria. At various times, Han dynasty, Cao Wei dynasty, Western Jin dynasty, Tang dynasty and some other minor kingdoms of China established control in parts of Manchuria and in some cases tributary relations with peoples in the area.[33] Various kingdoms of Korea such as Gojoseon, Buyeo and Goguryeo were also established in parts of this area. A number of world renowned linguists, including Dr. Bang-han Kim, Dr. Alexander Vovin, and Dr. J. Marshall Unger refer to the Goguryeo language and a number of other Koreanic languages as distinctly Old Korean. However, Finnish linguist Juha Janhunen in collaboration with Chinese scholars suggests that a "Tungusic-speaking elite" may have ruled Goguryeo and Balhae, describing them as "protohistorical Manchurian states" with part of their population Tungusic, and that the area of southern Manchuria was the origin of Tungusic peoples and was inhabited continuously by them since ancient times. Janhunen is opposed to theories of Japonic origins of Goguryeo and Balhae's ethnic composition made by Christopher I. Beckwith.[34] With the Song dynasty to the south, the Khitan people of Inner Mongolia created the Liao dynasty in the region, which went on to control adjacent parts of Northern China as well. The Liao dynasty was the first state to control all of Manchuria.[35][36]
In the early 12th century the Tungusic Jurchen people, who were Liao's tributaries, overthrew the Liao and formed the Jin dynasty, which went on to control parts of Northern China and Mongolia after a series of successful military campaigns. During the Yuan dynasty (1271–1368),[37] Manchuria was administered under the Liaoyang province. In 1375, Naghachu, a Mongol official of the Mongolia-based Northern Yuan dynasty in Liaoyang province invaded Liaodong, but later surrendered to the Ming dynasty in 1387. In order to protect the northern border areas, the Ming decided to "pacify" the Jurchens in order to deal with its problems with Yuan remnants along its northern border. The Ming solidified control over Manchuria under the Yongle Emperor (1402–1424), establishing the Nurgan Regional Military Commission. Starting in the 1580s, a Jianzhou Jurchen chieftain, Nurhaci (1558–1626), started to unify Jurchen tribes of the region. Over the next several decades, the Jurchen took control of most of Manchuria. In 1616, Nurhaci founded the Later Jin dynasty, later became known as the Qing dynasty.




A Jurchen man hunting from his horse, from a 15th-century ink and color painting on silk


Chinese cultural and religious influence such as Chinese New Year, the "Chinese god", motifs such as the dragon, spirals, and scrolls, agriculture, husbandry, methods of heating, and material goods such as iron cooking pots, silk, and cotton spread among the Amur natives including the Udeghes, Ulchis, and Nanais.[38]
In 1644, after the Ming dynasty's capital of Beijing was sacked by the peasant rebels, the Jurchens (now called Manchus) allied with Ming general Wu Sangui and seized control of Beijing, overthrowing the short-lived Shun dynasty and establishing Qing dynasty rule (1644–1912) over all of China. The Willow Palisade was a system of ditches and embankments built by the Qing dynasty during the later 17th century to restrict the movement of Han civilians into Jilin and Heilongjiang.[39] Only bannermen, including Chinese bannermen, were allowed to settle in Jilin and Heilongjiang.
After conquering the Ming, the Qing often identified their state as "China" (中國, Zhongguo; "Middle Kingdom"), and referred to it as "Dulimbai Gurun" ("Middle Kingdom") in Manchu.[40][41][42] In the Qing shilu the lands of the Qing state (including Manchuria and present-day Xinjiang, Mongolia, Tibet) are thus identified "the Middle Kingdom" in both the Chinese and Manchu languages in roughly two thirds of the cases, while the term refers to the traditional Chinese provinces populated by the Han in roughly one third of the cases. It was also common to use "China" (Zhongguo, Dulimbai gurun) to refer to the Qing in official documents, international treaties, and foreign affairs. In diplomatic documents, the term "Chinese language" (Dulimbai gurun i bithe) referred to Chinese, Manchu, and Mongol languages, and the term "Chinese people" (中國人 Zhongguo ren; Manchu: Dulimbai gurun i niyalma) referred to all Han, Manchus, and Mongol subjects of the Qing. The lands in Manchuria were explicitly stated by the Qing to belong to "China" (Zhongguo, Dulimbai gurun) in Qing edicts and in the Treaty of Nerchinsk.[43]
However Qing rule saw a massively increasing amount of Han Chinese both illegally and legally streaming into Manchuria and settling down to cultivate land as Manchu landlords desired Han Chinese peasants to rent on their land and grow grain, most Han Chinese migrants were not evicted as they went over the Great Wall and Willow Palisade, during the eighteenth century Han Chinese farmed 500,000 hectares of privately owned land in Manchuria and 203,583 hectares of lands which were part of coutrier stations, noble estates, and Banner lands, in garrisons and towns in Manchuria Han Chinese made up 80% of the population.[44]
Han Chinese farmers were resettled from north China by the Qing to the area along the Liao River in order to restore the land to cultivation.[45] Wasteland was reclaimed by Han Chinese squatters in addition to other Han who rented land from Manchu landlords.[46] Despite officially prohibiting Han Chinese settlement on Manchu and Mongol lands, by the 18th century the Qing decided to settle Han refugees from northern China who were suffering from famine, floods, and drought into Manchuria and Inner Mongolia, so that Han Chinese farmed 500,000 hectares in Manchuria and tens of thousands of hectares in Inner Mongolia by the 1780s.[47] The Qianlong Emperor allowed Han Chinese peasants suffering from drought to move into Manchuria despite his having issued edicts in favor of banning them from 1740 to 1776.[48] Chinese tenant farmers rented or even claimed title to land from the "imperial estates" and Manchu Bannerlands in the area.[49] Besides moving into the Liao area in southern Manchuria, the path linking Jinzhou, Fengtian, Tieling, Changchun, Hulun, and Ningguta was settled by Han Chinese during the Qianlong Emperor's reign, and Han Chinese were the majority in urban areas of Manchuria by 1800.[50] To increase the Imperial Treasury's revenue, the Qing sold formerly Manchu-only lands along the Sungari to Han Chinese at the beginning of the Daoguang Emperor's reign, and Han Chinese filled up most of Manchuria's towns by the 1840s, according to Abbe Huc.[51]




Russian Orthodox Church building in Harbin, c. 1900


The Russian conquest of Siberia was accompanied by massacres due to indigenous resistance to colonization by the Russian Cossacks, who savagely crushed the natives. At the hands of people like Vasilii Poyarkov in 1645 and Yerofei Khabarov in 1650 some peoples like the Daur were slaughtered by the Russians to the extent that it is now considered to have been genocide.[52] The Daurs initially deserted their villages since they heard about the cruelty of the Russians the first time Khabarov came.[53] The second time he came, the Daurs decided to do battle against the Russians instead but were slaughtered by Russian guns.[54] The indigenous peoples of the Amur region were attacked by Russians who came to be known as "red-beards".[55] The Russian Cossacks were named luocha (羅剎), after Demons found in Buddhist mythology, by the Amur natives because of their cruelty towards the Amur tribes people, who were subjects of the Qing.[56] The Russian proselytization of Eastern Orthodox Christianity to the indigenous peoples along the Amur River was viewed as a threat by the Qing.[57]
In 1858, a weakening Qing Empire was forced to cede Manchuria north of the Amur to Russia under the Treaty of Aigun. In 1860, at the Treaty of Peking, the Russians managed to obtain a further large slice of Manchuria, east of the Ussuri River. As a result, Manchuria was divided into a Russian half known as "Outer Manchuria", and a remaining Chinese half known as "Inner Manchuria". In modern literature, "Manchuria" usually refers to Inner (Chinese) Manchuria.[citation needed] As a result of the Treaties of Aigun and Peking, China lost access to the Sea of Japan.

History after 1860[edit]




1940 Manchukuo visa issued at Hamburg


Inner Manchuria also came under strong Russian influence with the building of the Chinese Eastern Railway through Harbin to Vladivostok. In the Chuang Guandong movement, many Han farmers, mostly from the Shandong peninsula moved there. By 1921, Harbin, northern Manchuria's largest city, had a population of 300,000, including 100,000 Russians.[58] Japan replaced Russian influence in the southern half of Inner Manchuria as a result of the Russo-Japanese War in 1904–1905. Most of the southern branch of the Chinese Eastern Railway was transferred from Russia to Japan, and became the South Manchurian Railway. Japanese influence extended into Outer Manchuria in the wake of the Russian Revolution of 1917, but Outer Manchuria had reverted to Soviet control by 1925. Manchuria was an important region due to its rich natural resources including coal, fertile soil, and various minerals. For pre–World War II Japan, Manchuria was an essential source of raw materials. Without occupying Manchuria, the Japanese probably could not have carried out their plan for conquest over Southeast Asia or taken the risk to attack Pearl Harbor and the British Empire in 1941.[59]
It was reported that among Banner people, both Manchu and Chinese (Hanjun) in Aihun, Heilongjiang in the 1920s, would seldom marry with Han civilians, but they (Manchu and Chinese Bannermen) would mostly intermarry with each other.[60] Owen Lattimore reported that during his January 1930 visit to Manchuria, he studied a community in Jilin (Kirin), where both Manchu and Chinese bannermen were settled at a town called Wulakai, and eventually the Chinese Bannermen there could not be differentiated from Manchus since they were effectively Manchufied (assimilated). The Han civilian population was in the process of absorbing and mixing with them when Lattimore wrote his article.[61]





Map of Manchukuo (1933–1945)


Around the time of World War I, Zhang Zuolin established himself as a powerful warlord with influence over most of Manchuria. During his rule, the Manchurian economy grew tremendously, backed by immigration of Chinese from other parts of China. The Japanese assassinated him on 2 June 1928, in what is known as the Huanggutun Incident.[62] Following the Mukden Incident in 1931 and the subsequent Japanese invasion of Manchuria, the Japanese declared Inner Manchuria an "independent state", and appointed the deposed Qing emperor Puyi as puppet emperor of Manchukuo. Under Japanese control Manchuria was one of the most brutally run regions in the world, with a systematic campaign of terror and intimidation against the local Russian and Chinese populations including arrests, organised riots and other forms of subjugation.[63] Manchukuo was used as a base to invade the rest of China.
After the atomic bombing of Hiroshima, Japan in 1945, the Soviet Union invaded from Soviet Outer Manchuria as part of its declaration of war against Japan. Soon afterwards, the Communist Party of China and Chinese Nationalist Party (Kuomintang) started fighting for control over Manchuria. The communists won in the Liaoshen Campaign and took complete control over Manchuria. With the encouragement of the Soviet Union, Manchuria was then used as a staging ground during the Chinese Civil War for the Communist Party of China, which emerged victorious in 1949. Ambiguities in the treaties that ceded Outer Manchuria to Russia led to dispute over the political status of several islands. This led to armed conflict in 1969, called the Sino-Soviet border conflict, resulting in an agreement. In 2004, Russia agreed to transfer Yinlong Island and one half of Heixiazi Island to the PRC, ending an enduring border dispute.

See also[edit]

Tungusic peoples
North China
Manchukuo
Chinese Tartary
Religion in Northeast China

References[edit]



^ "Manchuria". Encyclopædia Britannica. Encyclopædia Britannica Online. Encyclopædia Britannica Inc., 2012. Web. 17 Jun. 2012
^ http://oxforddictionaries.com/view/entry/m_en_gb0496460#m_en_gb0496460
^ http://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/manchuria
^ [1]Giles 1912, p. 8.
^ a b c Clausen 1995, p. 7.
^ Brummitt, R.K. (2001). World Geographical Scheme for Recording Plant Distributions: Edition 2 (PDF). International Working Group on Taxonomic Databases For Plant Sciences (TDWG). p. 12. Retrieved 2006-11-27. 
^ E.g. Proceedings of the Royal Geographical Society, Volumes 11–12, 1867, p. 162
^ [2]Pozzi 2006, p. 159.
^ [3]Pozzi 2006, p. 167.
^ Elliot 2000, p. 626.
^ Elliot 2000, p. 628.
^ ed. Wolff & Steinberg 2007, p. 514.
^ Philippe Forêt (January 2000). Mapping Chengde: The Qing Landscape Enterprise. University of Hawaii Press. pp. 16–. ISBN 978-0-8248-2293-4. 
^ ed. Edgington 2003, p. 114.
^ McCormack 1977, p. 4.
^ Pʻan 1938, p. 8.
^ Smith 2012, p. 219.
^ Tamanoi 2000, p. 249.
^ Garcia 2012 Archived 11 September 2014 at the Wayback Machine., p. 15.
^ "Mantchourie" appearing among the name of Jesuit missionary districts in China, with 10,000 Christians, in: Annales de l'Oeuvre de la Sainte Enfance, 18, 1800, p. 161 
^ "Les provinces tributaires du nord ou la Mantchourie, la Mongolie, la Kalmouquie, le Sifan, la Petit Bucharie, et autres pays vulgairement compris sous la fausse dénomination de TARTARIE", in: Mentelle, Edme; Brun, Malte (1804), Géographie mathématique, physique & politique de toutes les parties du monde, 12, H. Tardieu, p. 144 
^ Tamanoi, Mariko (2009). Memory Maps: The State and Manchuria in Postwar Japan. University of Hawaii Press. p. 10. 
^ Nishimura, Hirokazu; Kuroda, Susumu (2009). A Lost Mathematician, Takeo Nakasawa: The Forgotten Father of Matroid Theory. Springer. p. 15. 
^ Oriental Affairs: A Monthly Review. 1935. p. 189. 
^ Crossley 1999, p. 55.
^ Bogatikov, Oleg Alekseevich (2000); Magmatism and Geodynamics: Terrestrial Magmatism throughout the Earth's History; pp. 150–151. ISBN 90-5699-168-X
^ Kropotkin, Prince P.; "Geology and Geo-Botany of Asia"; in Popular Science, May 1904; pp. 68–69
^ Juo, A. S. R. and Franzlübbers, Kathrin Tropical Soils: Properties and Management for Sustainable Agriculture; pp. 118–119; ISBN 0-19-511598-8
^ "Average Annual Precipitation in China". Retrieved 2010-05-18. 
^ Kaisha, Tesudo Kabushiki and Manshi, Minami; Manchuria: Land of Opportunities; pp. 1–2. ISBN 1-110-97760-3
^ Kaisha and Manshi; Manchuria; pp. 1–2
^ Earth History 2001[permanent dead link] (page 15)
^ The Cambridge History of China, Vol. 03: "Sui and T'ang China, 589–906, Part 1," at 32, 33.
^ Pozzi & Janhunen & Weiers 2006, p. 109
^ Ruins of Identity: Ethnogenesis in the Japanese Islands By Mark Hudson
^ Ledyard, 1983, 323
^ Patricia Ann Berger – Empire of emptiness: Buddhist art and political authority in Qing China, p.25
^ Forsyth 1994, p. 214.
^ Elliott, Mark C. "The Limits of Tartary: Manchuria in Imperial and National Geographies." Journal of Asian Studies 59, no. 3 (2000): 603–46.
^ Hauer 2007, p. 117.
^ Dvořák 1895, p. 80.
^ Wu 1995, p. 102.
^ Zhao 2006, pp. 4, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12, 13, 14.
^ Richards 2003, p. 141.
^ Reardon-Anderson 2000, p. 504.
^ Reardon-Anderson 2000, p. 505.
^ Reardon-Anderson 2000, p. 506.
^ Scharping 1998, p. 18.
^ Reardon-Anderson 2000, p. 507.
^ Reardon-Anderson 2000, p. 508.
^ Reardon-Anderson 2000, p. 509.
^ Bisher 2006, p. 6.
^ "The Amur's siren song". The Economist (From the print edition: Christmas Specials ed.). 17 December 2009. Retrieved 15 August 2014. 
^ Forsyth 1994, p. 104.
^ Stephan 1996, p. 64.
^ Kang 2013 Archived 23 May 2014 at the Wayback Machine., p. 1.
^ Kim 2012/2013, p. 169.
^ "Memories of Dr. Wu Lien-teh, plague fighter". Yu-lin Wu (1995). World Scientific. p.68. ISBN 981-02-2287-4
^ Edward Behr, The Last Emperor, 1987, p. 202
^ Rhoads 2011, p. 263.
^ Lattimore 1933, p. 272.
^ Edward Behr, ibid, p. 168
^ Edward Behr, ibid, p. 202



Bibliography[edit]

Bisher, Jamie (2006). White Terror: Cossack Warlords of the Trans-Siberian. Routledge. ISBN 1135765952. Retrieved 24 April 2014. 
Bisher, Jamie (2006). White Terror: Cossack Warlords of the Trans-Siberian. Routledge. ISBN 1135765960. Retrieved 24 April 2014. 
Clausen, Søren (1995). The Making of a Chinese City: History and Historiography in Harbin. Contributor: Stig Thøgersen (illustrated ed.). M.E. Sharpe. ISBN 1563244764. Retrieved 10 March 2014. 
Crossley, Pamela Kyle (1999). A Translucent Mirror: History and Identity in Qing Imperial Ideology. University of California Press. ISBN 0520928849. Retrieved 10 March 2014. 
Dvořák, Rudolf (1895). Chinas religionen .. Volume 12; Volume 15 of Darstellungen aus dem Gebiete der nichtchristlichen Religionsgeschichte (illustrated ed.). Aschendorff (Druck und Verlag der Aschendorffschen Buchhandlung). ISBN 0199792054. Retrieved 10 March 2014. 
Elliott, Mark C. (August 2000). "The Limits of Tartary: Manchuria in Imperial and National Geographies" (PDF). The Journal of Asian Studies. Association for Asian Studies. 59 (No. 3): 603–646. doi:10.2307/2658945. JSTOR 2658945. Archived (PDF) from the original on 17 December 2016. Retrieved 17 December 2016. 
Elliott, Mark C. "The Limits of Tartary: Manchuria in Imperial and National Geographies." Journal of Asian Studies 59, no. 3 (2000): 603–46.
Forsyth, James (1994). A History of the Peoples of Siberia: Russia's North Asian Colony 1581–1990 (illustrated, reprint, revised ed.). Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0521477719. Retrieved 24 April 2014. 
Garcia, Chad D. (2012). Horsemen from the Edge of Empire: The Rise of the Jurchen Coalition (PDF) (A dissertation submitted in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy). University of Washington. pp. 1–315. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2014-09-11. Retrieved 6 September 2014. 
Giles, Herbert A. (1912). China and the Manchus. (Cambridge: at the University Press) (New York: G. P. Putnam's Sons). Retrieved 31 January 2014. 
Hauer, Erich (2007). Corff, Oliver, ed. Handwörterbuch der Mandschusprache. Volume 12; Volume 15 of Darstellungen aus dem Gebiete der nichtchristlichen Religionsgeschichte (illustrated ed.). Otto Harrassowitz Verlag. ISBN 3447055286. Retrieved 10 March 2014. 
Jones, Francis Clifford, Manchuria Since 1931, London, Royal Institute of International Affairs, 1949
KANG, HYEOKHWEON. Shiau, Jeffrey, ed. "Big Heads and Buddhist Demons:The Korean Military Revolution and Northern Expeditions of 1654 and 1658" (PDF). Emory Endeavors in World History (2013 ed.). 4: Transnational Encounters in Asia: 1–22. Archived from the original (PDF) on March 2013. Retrieved 10 March 2014. 
Kim 金, Loretta E. 由美 (2012–2013). "Saints for Shamans? Culture, Religion and Borderland Politics in Amuria from the Seventeenth to Nineteenth Centuries". Central Asiatic Journal. Harrassowitz Verlag. 56: 169–202. JSTOR 10.13173/centasiaj.56.2013.0169. 
Lattimore, Owen (Jul–Sep 1933). "Wulakai Tales from Manchuria". The Journal of American Folklore. American Folklore Society. 46 (No. 181): 272–286. doi:10.2307/535718. JSTOR 535718. 
McCormack, Gavan (1977). Chang Tso-lin in Northeast China, 1911–1928: China, Japan, and the Manchurian Idea (illustrated ed.). Stanford University Press. ISBN 0804709459. Retrieved 10 March 2014. 
Pʻan, Chao-ying (1938). American Diplomacy Concerning Manchuria. The Catholic University of America. Retrieved 10 March 2014. 
Pozzi, Alessandra; Janhunen, Juha Antero; Weiers, Michael, eds. (2006). Tumen Jalafun Jecen Aku: Manchu Studies in Honour of Giovanni Stary. Volume 20 of Tunguso Sibirica. Contributor: Giovanni Stary. Otto Harrassowitz Verlag. ISBN 344705378X. Retrieved 1 April 2013. 
Reardon-Anderson, James (October 2000). "Land Use and Society in Manchuria and Inner Mongolia during the Qing Dynasty". Environmental History. Forest History Society and American Society for Environmental History. 5 (No. 4): 503–530. JSTOR 3985584. 
Rhoads, Edward J. M. (2011). Manchus and Han: Ethnic Relations and Political Power in Late Qing and Early Republican China, 1861–1928. University of Washington Press. ISBN 0295804122. Retrieved 10 March 2014. 
Scharping, Thomas (1998). "Minorities, Majorities and National Expansion: The History and Politics of Population Development in Manchuria 1610–1993" (PDF). Cologne China Studies Online – Working Papers on Chinese Politics, Economy and Society (Kölner China-Studien Online – Arbeitspapiere zu Politik, Wirtschaft und Gesellschaft Chinas). Modern China Studies, Chair for Politics, Economy and Society of Modern China, at the University of Cologne (1). Retrieved 14 August 2014. 
Sewell, Bill (2003). Edgington, David W., ed. Japan at the Millennium: Joining Past and Future (illustrated ed.). UBC Press. ISBN 0774808993. Retrieved 10 March 2014. 
Smith, Norman (2012). Intoxicating Manchuria: Alcohol, Opium, and Culture in China's Northeast. Contemporary Chinese Studies Series (illustrated ed.). UBC Press. ISBN 077482431X. Retrieved 10 March 2014. 
Stephan, John J. (1996). The Russian Far East: A History (illustrated, reprint ed.). Stanford University Press. ISBN 0804727015. Retrieved 24 April 2014. 
Tamanoi, Mariko Asano (May 2000). "Knowledge, Power, and Racial Classification: The "Japanese" in "Manchuria"". The Journal of Asian Studies. Association for Asian Studies. 59 (No. 2): 248–276. doi:10.2307/2658656. JSTOR 2658656. 
Tao, Jing-shen, The Jurchen in Twelfth-Century China. University of Washington Press, 1976, ISBN 0-295-95514-7.
KISHI Toshihiko, MATSUSHIGE Mitsuhiro and MATSUMURA Fuminori eds, 20 Seiki Manshu Rekishi Jiten [Encyclopedia of 20th Century Manchuria History], Tokyo: Yoshikawa Kobunkan, 2012, ISBN 978-4642014694
Wu, Shuhui (1995). Die Eroberung von Qinghai unter Berücksichtigung von Tibet und Khams 1717 – 1727: anhand der Throneingaben des Grossfeldherrn Nian Gengyao. Volume 2 of Tunguso Sibirica (reprint ed.). Otto Harrassowitz Verlag. ISBN 3447037563. Retrieved 10 March 2014. 
Wolff, David; Steinberg, John W., eds. (2007). The Russo-Japanese War in Global Perspective: World War Zero, Volume 2. Volume 2 of The Russo-Japanese War in Global Perspective (illustrated ed.). BRILL. ISBN 9004154167. Retrieved 1 April 2013. 
Zhao, Gang (January 2006). "Reinventing China Imperial Qing Ideology and the Rise of Modern Chinese National Identity in the Early Twentieth Century" (PDF). 32 (1). Sage Publications. doi:10.1177/0097700405282349. JSTOR 20062627. Archived from the original on 25 March 2014. 

External links[edit]

 Media related to Manchuria at Wikimedia Commons

Coordinates: 45°00′00″N 125°00′00″E﻿ / ﻿45.0000°N 125.0000°E﻿ / 45.0000; 125.0000



Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 126095246
NDL: 00567459












v
t
e


Regions of the world











v
t
e


Regions of Africa



Central Africa



Guinea region

Gulf of Guinea


Cape Lopez
Mayombe
Igboland

Mbaise


Maputaland
Pool Malebo
Congo Basin
Chad Basin
Congolese rainforests
Ouaddaï highlands
Ennedi Plateau





East Africa



African Great Lakes

Albertine Rift
East African Rift
Great Rift Valley
Gregory Rift
Rift Valley lakes
Swahili coast
Virunga Mountains
Zanj


Horn of Africa

Afar Triangle
Al-Habash
Barbara
Danakil Alps
Danakil Desert
Ethiopian Highlands
Gulf of Aden
Gulf of Tadjoura


Indian Ocean islands

Comoros Islands







North Africa



Maghreb

Barbary Coast
Bashmur
Ancient Libya
Atlas Mountains


Nile Valley

Cataracts of the Nile
Darfur
Gulf of Aqaba
Lower Egypt
Lower Nubia
Middle Egypt
Nile Delta
Nuba Mountains
Nubia
The Sudans
Upper Egypt


Western Sahara





West Africa



Pepper Coast
Gold Coast
Slave Coast
Ivory Coast
Cape Palmas
Cape Mesurado
Guinea region

Gulf of Guinea


Niger Basin
Guinean Forests of West Africa
Niger Delta
Inner Niger Delta





Southern Africa



Madagascar

Central Highlands (Madagascar)
Northern Highlands


Rhodesia

North
South


Thembuland
Succulent Karoo
Nama Karoo
Bushveld
Highveld
Fynbos
Cape Floristic Region
Kalahari Desert
Okavango Delta
False Bay
Hydra Bay





Macro-regions



Aethiopia
Arab world
Commonwealth realm
East African montane forests
Eastern Desert
Equatorial Africa
Françafrique
Gibraltar Arc
Greater Middle East
Islands of Africa
List of countries where Arabic is an official language
Mediterranean Basin
MENA
MENASA
Middle East
Mittelafrika
Negroland
Northeast Africa
Portuguese-speaking African countries
Sahara
Sahel
Sub-Saharan Africa
Sudan (region)
Sudanian Savanna
Tibesti Mountains
Tropical Africa












v
t
e


Regions of Asia



Central



Greater Middle East
Aral Sea

Aralkum Desert
Caspian Sea
Dead Sea
Sea of Galilee


Transoxiana

Turan


Greater Khorasan
Ariana
Khwarezm
Sistan
Kazakhstania
Eurasian Steppe

Asian Steppe
Kazakh Steppe
Pontic–Caspian steppe


Mongolian-Manchurian grassland
Wild Fields

Yedisan
Muravsky Trail


Ural

Ural Mountains


Volga region
Idel-Ural
Kolyma
Transbaikal
Pryazovia
Bjarmaland
Kuban
Zalesye
Ingria
Novorossiya
Gornaya Shoriya
Tulgas
Iranian Plateau
Altai Mountains
Pamir Mountains
Tian Shan
Badakhshan
Wakhan Corridor
Wakhjir Pass
Mount Imeon
Mongolian Plateau
Western Regions
Taklamakan Desert
Karakoram

Trans-Karakoram Tract


Siachen Glacier





North



Inner Asia
Northeast
Far East

Russian Far East
Okhotsk-Manchurian taiga


Extreme North
Siberia

Baikalia (Lake Baikal)
Transbaikal
Khatanga Gulf
Baraba steppe


Kamchatka Peninsula
Amur Basin
Yenisei Gulf
Yenisei Basin
Beringia
Sikhote-Alin





East



Japanese archipelago

Northeastern Japan Arc
Sakhalin Island Arc


Korean Peninsula
Gobi Desert
Taklamakan Desert
Greater Khingan
Mongolian Plateau
Inner Asia
Inner Mongolia
Outer Mongolia
China proper
Manchuria

Outer Manchuria
Inner Manchuria
Northeast China Plain
Mongolian-Manchurian grassland


North China Plain

Yan Mountains


Kunlun Mountains
Liaodong Peninsula
Himalayas
Tibetan Plateau

Tibet


Tarim Basin
Northern Silk Road
Hexi Corridor
Nanzhong
Lingnan
Liangguang
Jiangnan
Jianghuai
Guanzhong
Huizhou
Wu
Jiaozhou
Zhongyuan
Shaannan
Ordos Loop

Loess Plateau
Shaanbei


Hamgyong Mountains
Central Mountain Range
Japanese Alps
Suzuka Mountains
Leizhou Peninsula
Gulf of Tonkin
Yangtze River Delta
Pearl River Delta
Yenisei Basin
Altai Mountains
Wakhan Corridor
Wakhjir Pass





West



Greater Middle East

MENA
MENASA
Middle East


Red Sea
Caspian Sea
Mediterranean Sea
Zagros Mountains
Persian Gulf

Pirate Coast
Strait of Hormuz
Greater and Lesser Tunbs


Al-Faw Peninsula
Gulf of Oman
Gulf of Aqaba
Gulf of Aden
Balochistan
Arabian Peninsula

Najd
Hejaz
Tihamah
Eastern Arabia
South Arabia

Hadhramaut
Arabian Peninsula coastal fog desert




Tigris–Euphrates
Mesopotamia

Upper Mesopotamia
Lower Mesopotamia
Sawad
Nineveh plains
Akkad (region)
Babylonia


Canaan
Aram
Eber-Nari
Suhum
Eastern Mediterranean
Mashriq
Kurdistan
Levant

Southern Levant
Transjordan
Jordan Rift Valley


Levantine Sea
Golan Heights
Hula Valley
Gaza Strip
West Bank
Galilee
Gilead
Judea
Samaria
Arabah
Anti-Lebanon Mountains
Sinai Peninsula
Arabian Desert
Syrian Desert
Fertile Crescent
Azerbaijan
Syria
Palestine
Iranian Plateau
Armenian Highlands
Caucasus

Caucasus Mountains

Greater Caucasus
Lesser Caucasus


North Caucasus
South Caucasus

Kur-Araz Lowland
Lankaran Lowland
Alborz
Absheron Peninsula




Anatolia
Cilicia
Cappadocia
Alpide belt





South



Greater India
Indian subcontinent
Himalayas
Hindu Kush
Western Ghats
Eastern Ghats
Ganges Basin
Ganges Delta
Pashtunistan
Punjab
Balochistan
Kashmir

Kashmir Valley
Pir Panjal Range


Thar Desert
Indus Valley
Indus River Delta
Indus Valley Desert
Indo-Gangetic Plain
Eastern coastal plains
Western Coastal Plains
Meghalaya subtropical forests
MENASA
Lower Gangetic plains moist deciduous forests
Northwestern Himalayan alpine shrub and meadows
Doab
Bagar tract
Great Rann of Kutch
Little Rann of Kutch
Deccan Plateau
Coromandel Coast
Konkan
False Divi Point
Hindi Belt
Ladakh
Aksai Chin
Gilgit-Baltistan

Baltistan
Shigar Valley


Karakoram

Saltoro Mountains


Siachen Glacier
Bay of Bengal
Gulf of Khambhat
Gulf of Kutch
Gulf of Mannar
Trans-Karakoram Tract
Wakhan Corridor
Wakhjir Pass
Lakshadweep
Andaman and Nicobar Islands

Andaman Islands
Nicobar Islands


Maldive Islands
Alpide belt





Southeast



Mainland

Indochina
Malay Peninsula


Maritime

Peninsular Malaysia
Sunda Islands
Greater Sunda Islands
Lesser Sunda Islands


Indonesian Archipelago
Timor
New Guinea

Bonis Peninsula
Papuan Peninsula
Huon Peninsula
Huon Gulf
Bird's Head Peninsula
Gazelle Peninsula


Philippine Archipelago

Luzon
Visayas
Mindanao


Leyte Gulf
Gulf of Thailand
East Indies
Nanyang
Alpide belt








Asia-Pacific
Tropical Asia
Ring of Fire












v
t
e


Regions of Europe



North



Nordic
Northwestern
Scandinavia
Scandinavian Peninsula
Fennoscandia
Baltoscandia
Sápmi
West Nordic
Baltic
Baltic Sea
Gulf of Bothnia
Gulf of Finland
Iceland
Faroe Islands





East



Danubian countries
Prussia
Galicia
Volhynia
Donbass
Sloboda Ukraine
Sambia Peninsula

Amber Coast


Curonian Spit
Izyum Trail
Lithuania Minor
Nemunas Delta
Baltic
Baltic Sea
Vyborg Bay
Karelia

East Karelia
Karelian Isthmus


Lokhaniemi
Southeastern

Balkans
Aegean Islands
Gulf of Chania
North Caucasus
Greater Caucasus
Kabardia
European Russia

Southern Russia









Central



Baltic
Baltic Sea
Alpine states
Alpide belt
Mitteleuropa
Visegrád Group





West



Benelux
Low Countries
Northwest
British Isles
English Channel
Channel Islands
Cotentin Peninsula
Normandy
Brittany
Gulf of Lion
Iberia

Al-Andalus
Baetic System


Pyrenees
Alpide belt





South



Italian Peninsula
Insular Italy
Tuscan Archipelago
Aegadian Islands
Iberia

Al-Andalus
Baetic System


Gibraltar Arc
Southeastern
Mediterranean
Crimea
Alpide belt








Germanic
Celtic
Slavic countries
Uralic
European Plain
Eurasian Steppe
Pontic–Caspian steppe
Wild Fields
Pannonian Basin

Great Hungarian Plain
Little Hungarian Plain
Eastern Slovak Lowland














v
t
e


Regions of North America



Canada



Eastern Canada
Western Canada
Canadian Prairies
Central Canada
Northern Canada
Atlantic Canada
The Maritimes
French Canada
English Canada
Acadia

Acadian Peninsula


Quebec City–Windsor Corridor
Peace River Country
Cypress Hills
Palliser's Triangle
Canadian Shield
Interior Alaska-Yukon lowland taiga
Newfoundland (island)
Vancouver island
Gulf Islands
Strait of Georgia
Canadian Arctic Archipelago
Labrador Peninsula
Gaspé Peninsula
Avalon Peninsula

Bay de Verde Peninsula


Brodeur Peninsula
Melville Peninsula
Bruce Peninsula
Banks Peninsula (Nunavut)
Cook Peninsula
Gulf of Boothia
Georgian Bay
Hudson Bay
James Bay
Greenland





United States



Pacific Northwest
Inland Northwest
Northeast

New England
Mid-Atlantic
Commonwealth


West

Midwest
Upper Midwest
Mountain States
Intermountain West
Basin and Range Province


Oregon Trail
Mormon Corridor
Calumet Region
Southwest

Old Southwest


Llano Estacado
Central United States

Tallgrass prairie


South

South Central
Deep South
Upland South


Four Corners
East Coast
West Coast
Gulf Coast
Third Coast
Coastal states
Eastern United States

Appalachia


Trans-Mississippi
Great North Woods
Great Plains
Interior Plains
Great Lakes
Great Basin

Great Basin Desert


Acadia
Ozarks
Ark-La-Tex
Waxhaws
Siouxland
Twin Tiers
Driftless Area
Palouse
Piedmont
Atlantic coastal plain
Outer Lands
Black Dirt Region
Blackstone Valley
Piney Woods
Rocky Mountains
Mojave Desert
The Dakotas
The Carolinas
Shawnee Hills
San Fernando Valley
Tornado Alley
North Coast
Lost Coast
Emerald Triangle
San Francisco Bay Area

San Francisco Bay
North Bay (San Francisco Bay Area)
East Bay (San Francisco Bay Area)
Silicon Valley


Interior Alaska-Yukon lowland taiga
Gulf of Mexico
Lower Colorado River Valley
Sacramento–San Joaquin River Delta
Yukon–Kuskokwim Delta
Colville Delta
Arkansas Delta
Mobile–Tensaw River Delta
Mississippi Delta
Mississippi River Delta
Columbia River Estuary
Great Basin
High Desert
Monterey Peninsula
Upper Peninsula of Michigan
Lower Peninsula of Michigan
Virginia Peninsula
Keweenaw Peninsula
Middle Peninsula
Delmarva Peninsula
Alaska Peninsula
Kenai Peninsula
Niagara Peninsula
Beringia
Belt regions

Bible Belt
Black Belt
Corn Belt
Cotton Belt
Frost Belt
Rice Belt
Rust Belt
Sun Belt
Snow Belt







Mexico



Northern Mexico
Baja California Peninsula
Gulf of California

Colorado River Delta


Gulf of Mexico
Soconusco
Tierra Caliente
La Mixteca
La Huasteca
Bajío
Valley of Mexico
Mezquital Valley
Sierra Madre de Oaxaca
Yucatán Peninsula
Basin and Range Province





Central



Western Caribbean Zone
Isthmus of Panama
Gulf of Panama

Pearl Islands


Azuero Peninsula
Mosquito Coast





Caribbean



West Indies
Antilles

Greater Antilles
Lesser Antilles

Leeward
Leeward Antilles
Windward




Lucayan Archipelago
Southern Caribbean








Aridoamerica
Mesoamerica
Oasisamerica
Northern
Middle
Anglo
Latin

French
Hispanic


American Cordillera
Ring of Fire
LAC












v
t
e


Regions of Oceania



Australasia



Gulf of Carpentaria
New Guinea

Bonis Peninsula
Papuan Peninsula
Huon Peninsula
Huon Gulf
Bird's Head Peninsula
Gazelle Peninsula


New Zealand

South Island
North Island

Coromandel Peninsula




Zealandia
New Caledonia
Solomon Islands (archipelago)
Vanuatu

Kula Gulf


Australia
Capital Country
Eastern Australia
Lake Eyre basin
Murray–Darling basin
Northern Australia
Nullarbor Plain
Outback
Southern Australia

Maralinga


Sunraysia
Great Victoria Desert
Gulf of Carpentaria
Gulf St Vincent
Lefevre Peninsula
Fleurieu Peninsula
Yorke Peninsula
Eyre Peninsula
Mornington Peninsula
Bellarine Peninsula
Mount Henry Peninsula





Melanesia



Islands Region

Bismarck Archipelago
Solomon Islands Archipelago


Fiji
New Caledonia
Papua New Guinea
Vanuatu





Micronesia



Caroline Islands

Federated States of Micronesia
Palau


Guam
Kiribati
Marshall Islands
Nauru
Northern Mariana Islands
Wake Island





Polynesia



Easter Island
Hawaiian Islands
Cook Islands
French Polynesia

Austral Islands
Gambier Islands
Marquesas Islands
Society Islands
Tuamotu


Kermadec Islands
Mangareva Islands
Samoa
Tokelau
Tonga
Tuvalu








Ring of Fire












v
t
e


Regions of South America



East



Amazon basin
Atlantic Forest
Caatinga
Cerrado





North



Caribbean South America
West Indies
Los Llanos
The Guianas
Amazon basin

Amazon rainforest


Gulf of Paria
Paria Peninsula
Paraguaná Peninsula
Orinoco Delta





South



Tierra del Fuego
Patagonia
Pampas
Pantanal
Gran Chaco
Chiquitano dry forests
Valdes Peninsula





West



Andes

Tropical Andes
Wet Andes
Dry Andes
Pariacaca mountain range


Altiplano
Atacama Desert








Latin
Hispanic
American Cordillera
Ring of Fire
LAC












v
t
e


Polar regions



Antarctic



Antarctic Peninsula
East Antarctica
West Antarctica
Eklund Islands
Ecozone
Extreme points
Islands





Arctic



Arctic Alaska
British Arctic Territories
Canadian Arctic Archipelago
Finnmark
Greenland
Northern Canada
Northwest Territories
Nunavik
Nunavut
Russian Arctic
Sakha
Sápmi
Yukon
North American Arctic












v
t
e


Earth's oceans and seas



Arctic Ocean



Amundsen Gulf
Barents Sea
Beaufort Sea
Chukchi Sea
East Siberian Sea
Greenland Sea
Gulf of Boothia
Kara Sea
Laptev Sea
Lincoln Sea
Prince Gustav Adolf Sea
Pechora Sea
Queen Victoria Sea
Wandel Sea
White Sea





Atlantic Ocean



Adriatic Sea
Aegean Sea
Alboran Sea
Archipelago Sea
Argentine Sea
Baffin Bay
Balearic Sea
Baltic Sea
Bay of Biscay
Bay of Bothnia
Bay of Campeche
Bay of Fundy
Black Sea
Bothnian Sea
Caribbean Sea
Celtic Sea
English Channel
Foxe Basin
Greenland Sea
Gulf of Bothnia
Gulf of Finland
Gulf of Lion
Gulf of Guinea
Gulf of Maine
Gulf of Mexico
Gulf of Saint Lawrence
Gulf of Sidra
Gulf of Venezuela
Hudson Bay
Ionian Sea
Irish Sea
Irminger Sea
James Bay
Labrador Sea
Levantine Sea
Libyan Sea
Ligurian Sea
Marmara Sea
Mediterranean Sea
Myrtoan Sea
North Sea
Norwegian Sea
Sargasso Sea
Sea of Åland
Sea of Azov
Sea of Crete
Sea of the Hebrides
Thracian Sea
Tyrrhenian Sea
Wadden Sea





Indian Ocean



Andaman Sea
Arabian Sea
Bali Sea
Bay of Bengal
Flores Sea
Great Australian Bight
Gulf of Aden
Gulf of Aqaba
Gulf of Khambhat
Gulf of Kutch
Gulf of Oman
Gulf of Suez
Java Sea
Laccadive Sea
Mozambique Channel
Persian Gulf
Red Sea
Timor Sea





Pacific Ocean



Arafura Sea
Banda Sea
Bering Sea
Bismarck Sea
Bohai Sea
Bohol Sea
Camotes Sea
Celebes Sea
Ceram Sea
Chilean Sea
Coral Sea
East China Sea
Gulf of Alaska
Gulf of Anadyr
Gulf of California
Gulf of Carpentaria
Gulf of Fonseca
Gulf of Panama
Gulf of Thailand
Gulf of Tonkin
Halmahera Sea
Koro Sea
Mar de Grau
Molucca Sea
Moro Gulf
Philippine Sea
Salish Sea
Savu Sea
Sea of Japan
Sea of Okhotsk
Seto Inland Sea
Shantar Sea
Sibuyan Sea
Solomon Sea
South China Sea
Sulu Sea
Tasman Sea
Visayan Sea
Yellow Sea





Southern Ocean



Amundsen Sea
Bellingshausen Sea
Cooperation Sea
Cosmonauts Sea
Davis Sea
D'Urville Sea
King Haakon VII Sea
Lazarev Sea
Mawson Sea
Riiser-Larsen Sea
Ross Sea
Scotia Sea
Somov Sea
Weddell Sea





Landlocked seas



Aral Sea
Caspian Sea
Dead Sea
Salton Sea








  Book
  Category
















						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Manchuria&oldid=817527058"					Categories: ManchuriaInner AsiaNortheast AsiaRegions of ChinaHistorical regions in RussiaHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksAll articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from June 2017Articles with permanently dead external linksUse dmy dates from August 2017Articles containing Chinese-language textArticles containing Russian-language textArticles containing simplified Chinese-language textArticles containing traditional Chinese-language textAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from December 2012Coordinates on WikidataWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiers