This article is about the geopolitical entity created in Palestine under British administration. For the Mandate instrument passed by the League of Nations granting Britain a mandate over Palestine and Transjordan, see British Mandate for Palestine (legal instrument).


Mandatory Palestine


Mandate of the United Kingdom






1920–1948










Flag



Public Seal









Mandatory Palestine in 1946



Capital
Jerusalem


Languages
English, Arabic, Hebrew


Religion
Islam, Judaism, Christianity, Baha'i Faith, Druze faith


Political structure
League of Nations Mandate


High Commissioner



 • 
1920–1925 (first)
Sir Herbert L. Samuel


 • 
1945–1948 (last)
Sir Alan G. Cunningham


Historical era
Interwar period, World War II


 • 
Mandate assigned
25 April 1920


 • 
Britain officially assumes control
29 September 1923


 • 
Creation of the state of Israel declared
14 May 1948


Currency
Egyptian pound
(until 1927)
Palestine pound
(from 1927)







Preceded by
Succeeded by






Occupied Enemy Territory Administration






Israel



Jordanian annexation of the West Bank



All-Palestine Protectorate









Today part of
 Israel
 Palestine
 Governance of the Gaza Strip





Part of a series on the



History of Israel





Ancient Israel and Judah




Natufian culture
Prehistory
Canaan
Israelites
United monarchy
Northern Kingdom
Kingdom of Judah
Babylonian rule




Second Temple period (530 BC–AD 70)




Persian rule
Hellenistic period
Hasmonean dynasty
Herodian dynasty

Kingdom
Tetrarchy


Roman Judea




Middle Ages (70–1517)




Roman Palaestina
Byzantine Palaestina

Prima
Secunda


Revolt against Constantius Gallus
Samaritan revolts
Revolt against Heraclius
Caliphates

Filastin
Urdunn


Crusades
Ayyubid dynasty
Mamluk Sultanate




Modern history (1517–1948)




Ottoman rule

Eyalet
Mutasarrifate


Old Yishuv
Zionism
OETA
British mandate




State of Israel (1948–present)




Independence
Timeline
Years
Arab–Israeli conflict
Start-up Nation




History of the Land of Israel by topic




Judaism
Jerusalem
Zionism
Jewish leaders
Jewish warfare
Nationality




Related




Jewish history
Hebrew calendar
Archaeology
Museums




 Israel portal





v
t
e








Part of a series on the



History of Palestine





Prehistory




Natufian culture
Pre-Pottery
Tahunian
Ghassulian
Jericho




Ancient history




Canaan
Phoenicia
Ancient Israel and Judah
Philistia
Median Empire

Achaemenid Empire
(Yehud Medinata)





Classical period




Seleucus
Antigonus
Hasmonean dynasty
Herodian kingdom
Province of Judea
Syria Palaestina

Byzantine Empire
(Palaestina Prima / Secunda)





Islamic rule




Muslim conquest

Rashidun (Jund Filastin, Jund al-Urdunn)

Umayyad
Abbasid
Fatimid
Crusader
Ayyubid
Mamluk
Ottoman




Modern era




British Mandate
All-Palestine
Jordanian West Bank
Egyptian Gaza Strip
Israel
Military Governorate
Israeli Civil Administration

Palestinian Authority (Gaza Strip)
State of Palestine





 Palestine portal





v
t
e





Mandatory Palestine[1] (Arabic: فلسطين‎ Filasṭīn; Hebrew: פָּלֶשְׂתִּינָה (א"י)‬ Pālēśtīnā (EY), where "EY" indicates "Eretz Yisrael", Land of Israel) was a geopolitical entity under British administration, carved out of Ottoman Southern Syria after World War I. British civil administration in Palestine operated from 1920 until 1948. During its existence the territory was known simply as Palestine, but, in later years, a variety of other names and descriptors have been used, including Mandatory or Mandate Palestine, the British Mandate of Palestine and British Palestine.
During the First World War (1914–18), an Arab uprising and the British Empire's Egyptian Expeditionary Force under General Edmund Allenby drove the Turks out of the Levant during the Sinai and Palestine Campaign.[2] The United Kingdom had agreed in the McMahon–Hussein Correspondence that it would honour Arab independence if they revolted against the Ottomans, but the two sides had different interpretations of this agreement, and in the end the UK and France divided up the area under the Sykes–Picot Agreement—an act of betrayal in the eyes of the Arabs. Further complicating the issue was the Balfour Declaration of 1917, promising British support for a Jewish "national home" in Palestine. At the war's end the British and French set up a joint "Occupied Enemy Territory Administration" in what had been Ottoman Syria. The British achieved legitimacy for their continued control by obtaining a mandate from the League of Nations in June 1922. The formal objective of the League of Nations Mandate system was to administer parts of the defunct Ottoman Empire, which had been in control of the Middle East since the 16th century, "until such time as they are able to stand alone."[3] The civil Mandate administration was formalized with the League of Nations' consent in 1923 under the British Mandate for Palestine, which covered two administrative areas. The land west of the Jordan River, known as Palestine, was under direct British administration until 1948. The land east of the Jordan, a semi-autonomous region known as Transjordan, under the rule of the Hashemite family from the Hijaz, gained independence in 1946.[4]
The divergent tendencies regarding the nature and purpose of the mandate are visible already in the discussions concerning the name for this new entity[citation needed]. According to the Minutes of the Ninth Session of the League of Nations' Permanent Mandate Commission:

Colonel Symes explained that the country was described as "Palestine" by Europeans and as "Falestin" by the Arabs. The Hebrew name for the country was the designation "Land of Israel", and the Government, to meet Jewish wishes, had agreed that the word "Palestine" in Hebrew characters should be followed in all official documents by the initials which stood for that designation. As a set-off to this, certain of the Arab politicians suggested that the country should be called "Southern Syria" in order to emphasise its close relation with another Arab State.[5][non-primary source needed]

During the British Mandate period the area experienced the ascent of two major nationalist movements, one among the Jews and the other among the Arabs. The competing national interests of the Arab and Jewish populations of Palestine against each other and against the governing British authorities matured into the Arab Revolt of 1936–1939 and the Jewish insurgency in Palestine before culminating in the Civil War of 1947–1948. The aftermath of the Civil War and the consequent 1948 Arab–Israeli War led to the establishment of the 1949 cease-fire agreement, with partition of the former Mandatory Palestine between the newborn state of Israel with a Jewish majority, the Arab West Bank annexed by the Jordanian Kingdom and the Arab All-Palestine Government in the Gaza Strip under the protectorate of Egypt. 


Contents


1 History of Palestine under the British Mandate

1.1 1930s: Arab armed insurgency

1.1.1 The Arab revolt
1.1.2 Partition proposals


1.2 World War II

1.2.1 Allied and Axis activity
1.2.2 Mobilization
1.2.3 The Holocaust and immigration quotas
1.2.4 Beginning of Zionist insurgency


1.3 After World War II: Insurgency and the Partition Plan
1.4 Termination of the Mandate


2 Politics

2.1 Name
2.2 Arab community

2.2.1 Palestinian Arab leadership and national aspirations


2.3 Jewish Yishuv

2.3.1 Jewish immigration
2.3.2 Jewish national home


2.4 Land ownership

2.4.1 Land ownership by district
2.4.2 Land ownership by corporation
2.4.3 Land ownership by type
2.4.4 List of Mandatory land laws




3 Demographics

3.1 British censuses and estimations
3.2 By district


4 Government and institutions
5 Economy
6 Education
7 Gallery
8 See also
9 References
10 Quotes
11 Bibliography
12 Further reading

12.1 Primary sources


13 External links



History of Palestine under the British Mandate
Following its occupation by British troops in 1917–1918, Palestine was governed by the Occupied Enemy Territory Administration. In July 1920, the military administration was replaced by a civilian administration headed by a High Commissioner.[6] The first High Commissioner, Herbert Samuel, a Zionist recent cabinet minister, arrived in Palestine on 20 June 1920, to take up his appointment from 1 July.
Following the arrival of the British, Muslim-Christian Associations were established in all the major towns.[7] In 1919 they joined to hold the first Palestine Arab Congress in Jerusalem.[8] Its main platforms were a call for representative government and opposition to the Balfour Declaration.[9]




The formal transfer of Jerusalem to British rule. A native priest reads the proclamation from the steps of the Tower of David.






The arrival of Sir Herbert Samuel. From left to right: T. E. Lawrence, Emir Abdullah, Air Marshal Sir Geoffrey Salmond, Sir Herbert Samuel, Sir Wyndham Deedes and others.






An Arab "protest gathering" in session, in the Rawdat el Maaref hall, 1929. From left to right : unknown – Amin al-Husayni – Musa al-Husayni – Raghib al-Nashashibi – unknown


The Zionist Commission was formed in March 1918 and was active in promoting Zionist objectives in Palestine. On 19 April 1920, elections were held for the Assembly of Representatives of the Palestinian Jewish community.[10] The Zionist Commission received official recognition in 1922 as representative of the Palestinian Jewish community.[11]
One of the first actions of the newly installed civil administration in 1921 had been to grant Pinhas Rutenberg—a Jewish entrepreneur—concessions for the production and distribution of wired electricity. Rutenberg soon established an electric company whose shareholders were Zionist organizations, investors, and philanthropists. Palestinian-Arabs saw it as proof that the British intended to favor Zionism. The British administration claimed that electrification would enhance the economic development of the country as a whole, while at the same time securing their commitment to facilitate a Jewish National Home through economic—rather than political—means.[12]
Samuel tried to establish self-governing institutions in Palestine, as required by the mandate, but was frustrated by the refusal of the Arab leadership to co-operate with any institution which included Jewish participation.[13] When Grand Mufti of Jerusalem Kamil al-Husayni died in March 1921, High Commissioner Samuel appointed his half-brother Mohammad Amin al-Husseini to the position. Amin al-Husseini, a member of the al-Husayni clan of Jerusalem, was an Arab nationalist and Muslim leader. As Grand Mufti, as well as the other influential positions that he held during this period, al-Husseini played a key role in violent opposition to Zionism. In 1922, al-Husseini was elected President of the Supreme Muslim Council which had been created by Samuel in December 1921.[14][15] The Council controlled the Waqf funds, worth annually tens of thousands of pounds[16] and the orphan funds, worth annually about £50,000, as compared to the £600,000 in the Jewish Agency's annual budget.[17] In addition, he controlled the Islamic courts in Palestine. Among other functions, these courts were entrusted with the power to appoint teachers and preachers.
The 1922 Palestine Order in Council[18] established a Legislative Council, which was to consist of 23 members: 12 elected, 10 appointed, and the High Commissioner.[19] Of the 12 elected members, eight were to be Muslim Arabs, two Christian Arabs and two Jews.[20] Arabs protested against the distribution of the seats, arguing that as they constituted 88% of the population, having only 43% of the seats was unfair.[20] Elections were held in February and March 1923, but due to an Arab boycott, the results were annulled and a 12-member Advisory Council was established.[19]
In October 1923, Britain provided the League of Nations with a report on the administration of Palestine for the period 1920–1922, which covered the period before the mandate.[21]
1930s: Arab armed insurgency
In 1930, Sheikh Izz ad-Din al-Qassam arrived in Palestine from Syria and organised and established the Black Hand, an anti-Zionist and anti-British militant organisation. He recruited and arranged military training for peasants and by 1935 he had enlisted between 200 and 800 men. The cells were equipped with bombs and firearms, which they used to kill Zionist settlers in the area, as well as engaging in a campaign of vandalism of the settlers-planted trees and British constructed rail-lines.[22] In November 1935, two of his men engaged in a firefight with a Palestine police patrol hunting fruit thieves and a policeman was killed. Following the incident, British police launched a manhunt and surrounded al-Qassam in a cave near Ya'bad. In the ensuing battle, al-Qassam was killed.[22]
The Arab revolt




Arab revolt against the British






A 1930 protest in Jerusalem against the British Mandate by Arab women. The sign reads "No dialogue, no negotiations until termination [of the Mandate]".


Main article: 1936–1939 Arab revolt in Palestine
The death of al-Qassam on 20 November 1935 generated widespread outrage in the Arab community. Huge crowds accompanied Qassam's body to his grave in Haifa. A few months later, in April 1936, the Arab national general strike broke out. The strike lasted until October 1936, instigated by the Arab Higher Committee, headed by Amin al-Husseini. During the summer of that year, thousands of Jewish-farmed acres and orchards were destroyed, Jewish civilians were attacked and killed, and some Jewish communities, such as those in Beisan and Acre, fled to safer areas. (Gilbert 1998, p. 80) The violence abated for about a year while the British sent the Peel Commission to investigate. (Khalidi 2006, pp. 87–90)
During the first stages of the Arab Revolt, due to rivalry between the clans of al-Husseini and Nashashibi among the Palestinian Arabs, Raghib Nashashibi was forced to flee to Egypt after several assassination attempts ordered by Amin al-Husseini.[23]
Following the Arab rejection of the Peel Commission recommendation, the revolt resumed in autumn of 1937. Over the next 18 months, the British lost control of Nablus and Hebron. British forces, supported by 6,000 armed Jewish auxiliary police,[24] suppressed the widespread riots with overwhelming force. The British officer Charles Orde Wingate (who supported a Zionist revival for religious reasons[25]) organised Special Night Squads composed of British soldiers and Jewish volunteers such as Yigal Alon, which “scored significant successes against the Arab rebels in the lower Galilee and in the Jezreel valley”(Black 1991, p. 14) by conducting raids on Arab villages. (Shapira 1992, pp. 247, 249, 350) The Jewish militia Irgun used violence also against Arab civilians as "retaliatory acts",[26] attacking marketplaces and buses.
By the time the revolt concluded in March 1939, more than 5,000 Arabs, 400 Jews, and 200 British had been killed and at least 15,000 Arabs were wounded.[27] The Revolt resulted in the deaths of 5,000 Palestinian Arabs and the wounding of 10,000. In total, 10% of the adult Arab male population was killed, wounded, imprisoned, or exiled. (Khalidi 2001, p. 26) From 1936 to 1945, while establishing collaborative security arrangements with the Jewish Agency, the British confiscated 13,200 firearms from Arabs and 521 weapons from Jews.[28]
The attacks on the Jewish population by Arabs had three lasting effects: First, they led to the formation and development of Jewish underground militias, primarily the Haganah, which were to prove decisive in 1948. Secondly, it became clear that the two communities could not be reconciled, and the idea of partition was born. Thirdly, the British responded to Arab opposition with the White Paper of 1939, which severely restricted Jewish land purchase and immigration. However, with the advent of World War II, even this reduced immigration quota was not reached. The White Paper policy also radicalised segments of the Jewish population, who after the war would no longer cooperate with the British.
The revolt had a negative effect on Palestinian Arab leadership, social cohesion, and military capabilities and contributed to the outcome of the 1948 War because "when the Palestinians faced their most fateful challenge in 1947–49, they were still suffering from the British repression of 1936–39, and were in effect without a unified leadership. Indeed, it might be argued that they were virtually without any leadership at all".[29]
Partition proposals




Jewish demonstration against White Paper in Jerusalem in 1939


In 1937, the Peel Commission proposed a partition between a small Jewish state, whose Arab population would have to be transferred, and an Arab state to be attached to Jordan. The proposal was rejected outright by the Arabs. The two main Jewish leaders, Chaim Weizmann and David Ben-Gurion, had convinced the Zionist Congress to approve equivocally the Peel recommendations as a basis for more negotiation.[30][31][32][33][34] In a letter to his son in October 1937, Ben-Gurion explained that partition would be a first step to "possession of the land as a whole".[35][36][37] The same sentiment was recorded by Ben-Gurion on other occasions, such as at a meeting of the Jewish Agency executive in June 1938,[38] as well as by Chaim Weizmann.[37][39]
Following the London Conference (1939) the British Government published a White Paper which proposed a limit to Jewish immigration from Europe, restrictions on Jewish land purchases, and a program for creating an independent state to replace the Mandate within ten years. This was seen by the Yishuv as betrayal of the mandatory terms, especially in light of the increasing persecution of Jews in Europe. In response, Zionists organised Aliyah Bet, a program of illegal immigration into Palestine. Lehi, a small group of extremist Zionists, staged armed attacks on British authorities in Palestine. However, the Jewish Agency, which represented the mainstream Zionist leadership, still hoped to persuade Britain to allow resumed Jewish immigration, and cooperated with Britain in World War II.
World War II
Allied and Axis activity




Jewish Brigade headquarters under the Union Flag and Jewish flag.


On 10 June 1940, Italy declared war on the British Commonwealth and sided with Germany. Within a month, the Italians attacked Palestine from the air, bombing Tel Aviv and Haifa,[40] inflicting multiple casualties.
In 1942, there was a period of great concern for the Yishuv, when the forces of German General Erwin Rommel advanced east across North Africa towards the Suez Canal and there was fear that they would conquer Palestine. This period was referred to as the "200 days of dread". This event was the direct cause for the founding, with British support, of the Palmach[41] – a highly trained regular unit belonging to Haganah (a paramilitary group which was mostly made up of reserve troops).
As in most of the Arab world, there was no unanimity amongst the Palestinian Arabs as to their position regarding the belligerents in World War II. A number of leaders and public figures saw an Axis victory as the likely outcome and a way of securing Palestine back from the Zionists and the British. Even though Arabs were not highly regarded by Nazi racial theory, the Nazis encouraged Arab support as a counter to British hegemony.[42] SS-Reichsfuehrer Heinrich Himmler was keen to exploit this, going so far as to enlist the aid of the Grand Mufti of Jerusalem, Mohammad Amin al-Husseini, sending him the following telegram on 2 November 1943:

To the Grand Mufti: The National Socialist movement of Greater Germany has, since its inception, inscribed upon its flag the fight against the world Jewry. It has therefore followed with particular sympathy the struggle of freedom-loving Arabs, especially in Palestine, against Jewish interlopers. In the recognition of this enemy and of the common struggle against it lies the firm foundation of the natural alliance that exists between the National Socialist Greater Germany and the freedom-loving Muslims of the whole world. In this spirit I am sending you on the anniversary of the infamous Balfour declaration my hearty greetings and wishes for the successful pursuit of your struggle until the final victory – Reichsfuehrer S.S. Heinrich Himmler





Volunteers marching on Allenby Street in Tel Aviv in favor of enlistment into the British army, 13 July 1940


The Mufti al-Husseini would spend the rest of the war in Nazi Germany and the occupied areas in Europe.[citation needed]
Mobilization
On 3 July 1944, the British government consented to the establishment of a Jewish Brigade, with hand-picked Jewish and also non-Jewish senior officers. On 20 September 1944, an official communiqué by the War Office announced the formation of the Jewish Brigade Group of the British Army. The Jewish brigade then was stationed in Tarvisio, near the border triangle of Italy, Yugoslavia, and Austria, where it played a key role in the Berihah's efforts to help Jews escape Europe for Palestine, a role many of its members would continue after the brigade was disbanded. Among its projects was the education and care of the Selvino children. Later, veterans of the Jewish Brigade became key participants of the new State of Israel's Israel Defense Forces.




Australian soldiers in Tel Aviv in 1942


From Palestine Regiment, two platoons, one Jewish, under the command of Brigadier Ernest Benjamin, and another Arab were sent to join allied forces on the Italian Front, having taken part of final offensive there.
Besides Jews and Arabs from Palestine, in total by mid-1944 the British had assembled a multiethnic force consisting of volunteer European Jewish refugees (from German-occupied countries), Yemenite Jews and Abyssinian Jews.[43]
The Holocaust and immigration quotas
In 1939, as a consequence of the White Paper of 1939, the British reduced the number of immigrants allowed into Palestine. World War II and the Holocaust started shortly thereafter and once the 15,000 annual quota was exceeded, Jews fleeing Nazi persecution were interned in detention camps or deported to places such as Mauritius.[44]
Starting in 1939, a clandestine immigration effort called Aliya Bet was spearheaded by an organisation called Mossad LeAliyah Bet. Tens of thousands of European Jews escaped the Nazis in boats and small ships headed for Palestine. The Royal Navy intercepted many of the vessels; others were unseaworthy and were wrecked; a Haganah bomb sunk the SS Patria, killing 267 people; two more were sunk by Soviet submarines. The motor schooner Struma was torpedoed and sunk in the Black Sea by a Soviet submarine in February 1942 with the loss of nearly 800 lives.[45] The last refugee boats to try to reach Palestine during the war were the Bulbul, Mefküre and Morina in August 1944. A Soviet submarine sank the motor schooner Mefküre by torpedo and shellfire and machine-gunned survivors in the water,[46] killing between 300 and 400 refugees.[47] Illegal immigration resumed after World War II.
After the war 250,000 Jewish refugees were stranded in displaced persons (DP) camps in Europe. Despite the pressure of world opinion, in particular the repeated requests of US President Harry S. Truman and the recommendations of the Anglo-American Committee of Inquiry that 100,000 Jews be immediately granted entry to Palestine, the British maintained the ban on immigration.
Beginning of Zionist insurgency
The Jewish Lehi (Fighters for the Freedom of Israel) and Irgun (National Military Organization) movements initiated violent uprisings against the British Mandate in 1940s. On 6 November 1944, Eliyahu Hakim and Eliyahu Bet Zuri (members of Lehi) assassinated Lord Moyne in Cairo. Moyne was the British Minister of State for the Middle East and the assassination is said by some to have turned British Prime Minister Winston Churchill against the Zionist cause. After the assassination of Lord Moyne, the Haganah kidnapped, interrogated, and turned over to the British many members of the Irgun ("The Hunting Season"), and the Jewish Agency Executive decided on a series of measures against "terrorist organizations" in Palestine.[48] Irgun ordered its members not to resist or retaliate with violence, so as to prevent a civil war.




Jerusalem on VE Day, 8 May 1945


After World War II: Insurgency and the Partition Plan




The UN Partition Plan.


Main articles: 1947 UN Partition Plan and 1947–1948 Civil War in Mandatory Palestine
The three main Jewish underground forces later united to form the Jewish Resistance Movement and carry out several attacks and bombings against the British administration. In 1946, the Irgun blew up the King David Hotel in Jerusalem, the headquarters of the British administration, killing 92 people. Following the bombing, the British Government began interning illegal Jewish immigrants in Cyprus. In 1948 the Lehi assassinated the UN mediator Count Bernadotte in Jerusalem. Yitzak Shamir, future prime minister of Israel was one of the conspirators.
The negative publicity resulting from the situation in Palestine caused the Mandate to become widely unpopular in Britain, and caused the United States Congress to delay granting the British vital loans for reconstruction. The British Labour party had promised before its election to allow mass Jewish migration into Palestine but reneged on this promise once in office. Anti-British Jewish militancy increased and the situation required the presence of over 100,000 British troops in the country. Following the Acre Prison Break and the retaliatory hanging of British Sergeants by the Irgun, the British announced their desire to terminate the mandate and withdraw by no later than the beginning of August 1948.[49]
The Anglo-American Committee of Inquiry in 1946 was a joint attempt by Britain and the United States to agree on a policy regarding the admission of Jews to Palestine. In April, the Committee reported that its members had arrived at a unanimous decision. The Committee approved the American recommendation of the immediate acceptance of 100,000 Jewish refugees from Europe into Palestine. It also recommended that there be no Arab, and no Jewish State. The Committee stated that "in order to dispose, once and for all, of the exclusive claims of Jews and Arabs to Palestine, we regard it as essential that a clear statement of principle should be made that Jew shall not dominate Arab and Arab shall not dominate Jew in Palestine." U.S. President Harry S Truman angered the British Government by issuing a statement supporting the 100,000 refugees but refusing to acknowledge the rest of the committee's findings. Britain had asked for U.S assistance in implementing the recommendations. The U.S. War Department had said earlier that to assist Britain in maintaining order against an Arab revolt, an open-ended U.S. commitment of 300,000 troops would be necessary. The immediate admission of 100,000 new Jewish immigrants would almost certainly have provoked an Arab uprising.[50]
These events were the decisive factors that forced Britain to announce their desire to terminate the Palestine Mandate and place the Question of Palestine before the United Nations, the successor to the League of Nations. The UN created UNSCOP (the UN Special Committee on Palestine) on 15 May 1947, with representatives from 11 countries. UNSCOP conducted hearings and made a general survey of the situation in Palestine, and issued its report on 31 August. Seven members (Canada, Czechoslovakia, Guatemala, Netherlands, Peru, Sweden, and Uruguay) recommended the creation of independent Arab and Jewish states, with Jerusalem to be placed under international administration. Three members (India, Iran, and Yugoslavia) supported the creation of a single federal state containing both Jewish and Arab constituent states. Australia abstained.
On 29 November 1947, the UN General Assembly, voting 33 to 13, with 10 abstentions, adopted a resolution recommending the adoption and implementation of the Plan of Partition with Economic Union as Resolution 181 (II).,[51] while making some adjustments to the boundaries between the two states proposed by it. The division was to take effect on the date of British withdrawal. The partition plan required that the proposed states grant full civil rights to all people within their borders, regardless of race, religion or gender. It is important to note that the UN General Assembly is only granted the power to make recommendations, therefore, UNGAR 181 was not legally binding.[52] Both the U.S. and the Soviet Union supported the resolution. Haiti, Liberia, and the Philippines changed their votes at the last moment after concerted pressure from the U.S. and from Zionist organisations.[53][54][55] The five members of the Arab League, who were voting members at the time, voted against the Plan.
The Jewish Agency, which was the Jewish state-in-formation, accepted the plan, and nearly all the Jews in Palestine rejoiced at the news.
The partition plan was rejected out of hand by Palestinian Arab leadership and by most of the Arab population.[qt 1][qt 2] Meeting in Cairo on November and December 1947, the Arab League then adopted a series of resolutions endorsing a military solution to the conflict.
Britain announced that it would accept the partition plan, but refused to enforce it, arguing it was not accepted by the Arabs. Britain also refused to share the administration of Palestine with the UN Palestine Commission during the transitional period. In September 1947, the British government announced that the Mandate for Palestine would end at midnight on 14 May 1948.[56][57][58]
Some Jewish organisations also opposed the proposal. Irgun leader Menachem Begin announced, "The partition of the Homeland is illegal. It will never be recognized. The signature by institutions and individuals of the partition agreement is invalid. It will not bind the Jewish people. Jerusalem was and will forever be our capital. Eretz Israel will be restored to the people of Israel. All of it. And for ever."[59] These views were publicly rejected by the majority of the nascent Jewish state.[citation needed]
Termination of the Mandate




British leaving Haifa in 1948


When the UK announced the independence of Transjordan in 1946, the final Assembly of the League of Nations and the General Assembly both adopted resolutions welcoming the news.[60] The Jewish Agency objected, claiming that Transjordan was an integral part of Palestine, and that according to Article 80 of the UN Charter, the Jewish people had a secured interest in its territory.[61]
During the General Assembly deliberations on Palestine, there were suggestions that it would be desirable to incorporate part of Transjordan's territory into the proposed Jewish state. A few days before the adoption of Resolution 181 (II) on 29 November 1947, U.S. Secretary of State Marshall noted frequent references had been made by the Ad Hoc Committee regarding the desirability of the Jewish State having both the Negev and an "outlet to the Red Sea and the Port of Aqaba."[62] According to John Snetsinger, Chaim Weizmann visited President Truman on 19 November 1947 and said it was imperative that the Negev and Port of Aqaba be under Jewish control and that they be included in the Jewish state.[63] Truman telephoned the US delegation to the UN and told them he supported Weizmann's position.[64] However, the Trans-Jordan memorandum excluded territories of the Emirate of Transjordan from any Jewish settlement.[65]
Immediately after the UN resolution, the 1947-1948 Civil War in Mandatory Palestine broke out between the Arab and Jewish communities, and British authority began to break down. On December 16, 1947, the Palestine Police Force withdrew from the Tel Aviv area, home to more than half the Jewish population, and turned over responsibility for the maintenance of law and order to Jewish police.[66] As the civil war raged on, British military forces gradually withdrew from Palestine, although they occasionally intervened in favor of either side. As they withdrew, they handed over control to local authorities, and locally raised police forces were charged with maintaining law and order. The areas they withdrew from often quickly became war zones. The British maintained strong presences in Jerusalem and Haifa, even as Jerusalem came under siege by Arab forces and became the scene of fierce fighting, though the British occasionally intervened in the fighting, largely to secure their evacuation routes, including by proclaiming martial law and enforcing truces. The Palestine Police Force was largely inoperative, and government services such as social welfare, control of water supplies, and postal services were withdrawn. In April 1948, the British withdrew from most of Haifa, but retained an enclave in the port area to be used in the evacuation of British forces, and temporarily retained RAF Ramat David airbase to cover their retreat, leaving behind a volunteer police force to maintain order. The city was quickly captured by the Haganah in the Battle of Haifa. Following the victory, British forces in Jerusalem announced that they had no intention of assuming control of any local administrations, but would not permit any actions that would hamper the safe and orderly withdrawal of British forces from Palestine, and would set up military courts to try persons who interfered.[67][68][69] Although by this time British authority in most of Palestine had broken down, with most of the country in control of the Jews and Arabs, the British air and sea blockade of Palestine remained firmly in place.
The British had notified the U.N. of their intent to terminate the mandate not later than 1 August 1948.[70][71] However, early in 1948, the United Kingdom announced its firm intention to end its mandate in Palestine on 14 May. In response, President Harry S Truman made a statement on 25 March proposing UN trusteeship rather than partition, stating that "unfortunately, it has become clear that the partition plan cannot be carried out at this time by peaceful means... unless emergency action is taken, there will be no public authority in Palestine on that date capable of preserving law and order. Violence and bloodshed will descend upon the Holy Land. Large-scale fighting among the people of that country will be the inevitable result."[72]




Hoisting of the Yishuv flag in Tel Aviv, 1 January 1948


By 14 May 1948, the only British forces remaining in Palestine were in the Haifa area and in Jerusalem. On that same day, the British garrison in Jerusalem withdrew, and High Commissioner Alan Cunningham left the city for Haifa, where he was to leave the country by sea. The Jewish Leadership, led by future Prime Minister, David Ben-Gurion, declared the establishment of a Jewish State in Eretz-Israel, to be known as the State of Israel,[73] on the afternoon of 14 May 1948 (5 Iyar 5708 in the Hebrew calendar), to come into force at midnight of that day.[74][75][76] On the same day, the Provisional Government of Israel asked the US Government for recognition, on the frontiers specified in the UN Plan for Partition.[77] The United States immediately replied, recognizing "the provisional government as the de facto authority."[78]
At the same time that the state of Israel was being declared the Haganah took over formerly British-controlled areas in Jerusalem. As the mandate era came to an end, radical Jewish forces, from whose actions the Haganah distanced themselves, began to clear Palestinian Arab communities in the area which would become Israel.[79]
On 15 May 1948, the Palestine Mandate ended and the State of Israel came into being. The Palestine Government formally ceased to exist, the status of British forces still in the process of withdrawal from Haifa changed to occupiers of foreign territory, the Palestine Police Force formally stood down and was disbanded, with the remaining personnel evacuated alongside British military forces, the British blockade of Palestine was lifted, and all Mandatory Palestine passports ceased to give British protection.[68][80]
Over the next few days, approximately 700 Lebanese, 1,876 Syrian, 4,000 Iraqi, 2,800 Egyptian troops crossed over the borders and into Palestine (see 1948 Arab-Israeli War).[81] Around 4,500 Transjordanian troops, commanded partly by 38 British officers who had resigned their commissions in the British army only weeks earlier, including overall commander, General John Bagot Glubb, entered the Corpus separatum region encompassing Jerusalem and its environs (in response to the Haganah's Operation Kilshon[82]) and moved into areas designated as part of the Arab state by the UN partition plan.
Politics
Name




1927 Mandatory Palestine postage stamp



1941 Mandatory Palestine coin



1927 Mandatory Palestine revenue stamp



1927 Mandatory Palestine coin


"Palestine" is shown in English, Arabic (فلسطين) and Hebrew; the latter includes the acronym א״י for Eretz Yisrael (Land of Israel).


The name given to the Mandate's territory was "Palestine", in accordance with European traditions.[citation needed] The term Palestine was coined in the Western culture from the name of Palaestina province of the Roman (Syria-Palaestina) and later Byzantine Empire (Palaestina Prima and Palaestina Secunda).[citation needed] The Mandate charter stipulated that Mandatory Palestine would have three official languages, namely English, Arabic and Hebrew.
In 1926, the British authorities formally decided to use the traditional Arabic and Hebrew equivalents to the English name, i.e. filasţīn (فلسطين) and pālēśtīnā (פּלשׂתינה) respectively. The Jewish leadership proposed that the proper Hebrew name should be ʾĒrēts Yiśrāʾel (ארץ ישׂראל=Land of Israel). The final compromise was to add the initials of the Hebrew proposed name, Alef-Yud, within parenthesis (א״י), whenever the Mandate's name was mentioned in Hebrew in official documents. The Arab leadership saw this compromise as a violation of the mandate terms. Some Arab politicians suggested that there should be a similar Arabic concession, such as "Southern Syria" (سوريا الجنوبية). The British authorities rejected this proposal.[83]
Arab community
Further information: Arab Higher Committee




Front cover



Biographical pages


Passports from the British Mandate era.


The resolution of the San Remo Conference contained a safeguarding clause for the existing rights of the non-Jewish communities. The conference accepted the terms of the Mandate with reference to Palestine, on the understanding that there was inserted in the memorandum a legal undertaking by the Mandatory Power that it would not involve the surrender of the rights hitherto enjoyed by the non-Jewish communities in Palestine.[84] The draft mandates for Mesopotamia and Palestine, and all of the post-war peace treaties contained clauses for the protection of religious groups and minorities. The mandates invoked the compulsory jurisdiction of the Permanent Court of International Justice in the event of any disputes.[85]
Article 62 (LXII) of the Treaty of Berlin, 13 July 1878[86] dealt with religious freedom and civil and political rights in all parts of the Ottoman Empire.[87] The guarantees have frequently been referred to as "religious rights" or "minority rights". However, the guarantees included a prohibition against discrimination in civil and political matters. Difference of religion could not be alleged against any person as a ground for exclusion or incapacity in matters relating to the enjoyment of civil or political rights, admission to public employments, functions, and honours, or the exercise of the various professions and industries, "in any locality whatsoever."
A legal analysis performed by the International Court of Justice noted that the Covenant of the League of Nations had provisionally recognised the communities of Palestine as independent nations. The mandate simply marked a transitory period, with the aim and object of leading the mandated territory to become an independent self-governing State.[88] Judge Higgins explained that the Palestinian people are entitled to their territory, to exercise self-determination, and to have their own State."[89] The Court said that specific guarantees regarding freedom of movement and access to the Holy Sites contained in the Treaty of Berlin (1878) had been preserved under the terms of the Palestine Mandate and a chapter of the United Nations Partition Plan for Palestine.[90]
According to historian Rashid Khalidi, the mandate ignored the political rights of the Arabs.[91] The Arab leadership repeatedly pressed the British to grant them national and political rights, such as representative government, over Jewish national and political rights in the remaining 23% of the Mandate of Palestine which the British had set aside for a Jewish homeland. The Arabs reminded the British of President Wilson's Fourteen Points and British promises during the First World War. The British however made acceptance of the terms of the mandate a precondition for any change in the constitutional position of the Arabs. A legislative council was proposed in The Palestine Order in Council, of 1922 which implemented the terms of the mandate. It stated that: "No Ordinance shall be passed which shall be in any way repugnant to or inconsistent with the provisions of the Mandate." For the Arabs, this was unacceptable, as they felt that this would be "self murder".[92] As a result, the Arabs boycotted the elections to the Council held in 1923, which were subsequently annulled.[93] During the whole interwar period, the British, appealing to the terms of the mandate, which they had designed themselves, rejected the principle of majority rule or any other measure that would give an Arab majority control over the government of Palestine.[94]
The terms of the mandate required the establishment of self-governing institutions in both Palestine and Transjordan. In 1947, Foreign Secretary Bevin admitted that during the previous twenty-five years the British had done their best to further the legitimate aspirations of the Jewish communities without prejudicing the interests of the Arabs, but had failed to "secure the development of self-governing institutions" in accordance with the terms of the Mandate.[95]
Palestinian Arab leadership and national aspirations
Main articles: Palestinian Nationalism and Arab nationalism
Under the British Mandate, the office of "Mufti of Jerusalem", traditionally limited in authority and geographical scope, was refashioned into that of "Grand Mufti of Palestine". Furthermore, a Supreme Muslim Council (SMC) was established and given various duties, such as the administration of religious endowments and the appointment of religious judges and local muftis. In Ottoman times, these duties had been fulfilled by the bureaucracy in Istanbul.(Khalidi 2006, p. 63) In dealings with the Palestinian Arabs, the British negotiated with the elite rather than the middle or lower classes.(Khalidi 2006, p. 52) They chose Hajj Amin al-Husseini to become Grand Mufti, although he was young and had received the fewest votes from Jerusalem's Islamic leaders.(Khalidi 2006, pp. 56–57) One of the mufti's rivals, Raghib Bey al-Nashashibi, had already been appointed mayor of Jerusalem in 1920, replacing Musa Kazim, whom the British removed after the Nabi Musa riots of 1920,(Khalidi 2006, pp. 63, 69)(Segev 2000, pp. 127–144) during which he exhorted the crowd to give their blood for Palestine.(Morris 2001, p. 112) During the entire Mandate period, but especially during the latter half, the rivalry between the mufti and al-Nashashibi dominated Palestinian politics. Khalidi ascribes the failure of the Palestinian leaders to enroll mass support, because of their experiences during the Ottoman Empire period, as they were then part of the ruling elite and accustomed to their commands being obeyed. The idea of mobilising the masses was thoroughly alien to them.(Khalidi 2006, p. 81)
There had already been rioting and attacks on and massacres of Jews in 1921 and 1929. During the 1930s, Palestinian Arab popular discontent with Jewish immigration grew. In the late 1920s and early 1930s, several factions of Palestinian society, especially from the younger generation, became impatient with the internecine divisions and ineffectiveness of the Palestinian elite and engaged in grass-roots anti-British and anti-Zionist activism, organised by groups such as the Young Men's Muslim Association. There was also support for the radical nationalist Independence Party (Hizb al-Istiqlal), which called for a boycott of the British in the manner of the Indian Congress Party. Some took to the hills to fight the British and the Jews. Most of these initiatives were contained and defeated by notables in the pay of the Mandatory Administration, particularly the mufti and his cousin Jamal al-Husseini. A six-month general strike in 1936 marked the start of the great Arab Revolt.(Khalidi 2006, pp. 87–90)
Jewish Yishuv
Main article: History of Zionism
See also: History of the State of Israel
The conquest of the Ottoman Syria by the British forces in 1917, found a mixed community in the region, with Palestine, the southern part of the Ottoman Syria, containing a mixed population of Muslims, Christians, Jews and Druze. In this period, the Jewish community (Yishuv) in Palestine was composed of traditional Jewish communities in cities (the Old Yishuv), which had existed for centuries,[96] and the newly established agricultural Zionist communities (the New Yishuv), established since the 1870s. With the establishment of the Mandate, the Jewish community in Palestine formed the Zionist Commission to represent its interests.
In 1929, the Jewish Agency for Palestine took over from the Zionist Commission its representative functions and administration of the Jewish community. During the Mandate period, the Jewish Agency was a quasi-governmental organisation that served the administrative needs of the Jewish community. Its leadership was elected by Jews from all over the world by proportional representation.[97] The Jewish Agency was charged with facilitating Jewish immigration to Palestine, land purchase and planning the general policies of the Zionist leadership. It ran schools and hospitals, and formed the Haganah. The British authorities offered to create a similar Arab Agency but this offer was rejected by Arab leaders.[98]
In response to numerous Arab attacks on Jewish communities, the Haganah, a Jewish paramilitary organisation, was formed on 15 June 1920 to defend Jewish residents. Tensions led to widespread violent disturbances on several occasions, notably in 1921 (see Jaffa riots), 1929 (primarily violent attacks by Arabs on Jews—see 1929 Hebron massacre) and 1936–1939. Beginning in 1936, Jewish groups such as Etzel (Irgun) and Lehi (Stern Gang) conducted campaigns of violence against British military and Arab targets.
Jewish immigration




Jewish immigration to Mandatory Palestine from 1920 to 1945


During the Mandate, the Yishuv or Jewish community in Palestine, grew from one-sixth to almost one-third of the population. According to official records, 367,845 Jews and 33,304 non-Jews immigrated legally between 1920 and 1945.[99] It was estimated that another 50–60,000 Jews and a marginal number of Arabs, the latter mostly on a seasonal basis, immigrated illegally during this period.[100] Immigration accounted for most of the increase of Jewish population, while the non-Jewish population increase was largely natural.[101] Of the Jewish immigrants, in 1939 most had come from Germany and Czechoslovakia, but in 1940–1944 most came from Romania and Poland, with an additional 3,530 immigrants arriving from Yemen during the same period.[102]
Initially, Jewish immigration to Palestine met little opposition from the Palestinian Arabs. However, as anti-Semitism grew in Europe during the late 19th and early 20th centuries, Jewish immigration (mostly from Europe) to Palestine began to increase markedly. Combined with the growth of Arab nationalism in the region and increasing anti-Jewish sentiments the growth of Jewish population created much Arab resentment. The British government placed limitations on Jewish immigration to Palestine. These quotas were controversial, particularly in the latter years of British rule, and both Arabs and Jews disliked the policy, each for their own reasons.
Jewish immigrants were to be afforded Palestinian citizenship:

Article 7. The Administration of Palestine shall be responsible for enacting a nationality law. There shall be included in this law provisions framed so as to facilitate the acquisition of Palestinian citizenship by Jews who take up their permanent residence in Palestine.[103]

Jewish national home
In 1919, the General Secretary (and future President) of the Zionist Organization, Nahum Sokolow, published History of Zionism (1600–1918). He also represented the Zionist Organization at the Paris Peace Conference.


“
The object of Zionism is to establish for the Jewish people a home in Palestine secured by public law." ... It has been said and is still being obstinately repeated by anti-Zionists again and again, that Zionism aims at the creation of an independent "Jewish State" But this is fallacious. The "Jewish State" was never part of the Zionist programme. The Jewish State was the title of Herzl's first pamphlet, which had the supreme merit of forcing people to think. This pamphlet was followed by the first Zionist Congress, which accepted the Basle programme—the only programme in existence.
”


— Nahum Sokolow, History of Zionism[104]


One of the objectives of British administration was to give effect to the Balfour Declaration of 1917, which was also set out in the preamble of the mandate, as follows:

Whereas the Principal Allied Powers have also agreed that the Mandatory should be responsible for putting into effect the declaration originally made on November 2nd, 1917, by the Government of His Britannic Majesty, and adopted by the said Powers, in favour of the establishment in Palestine of a national home for the Jewish people, it being clearly understood that nothing should be done which might prejudice the civil and religious rights of existing non-Jewish communities in Palestine, or the rights and political status enjoyed by Jews in any other country.[105]

The United Nations Special Committee on Palestine said the Jewish National Home, which derived from the formulation of Zionist aspirations in the 1897 Basle program has provoked many discussions concerning its meaning, scope and legal character, especially since it had no known legal connotation and there are no precedents in international law for its interpretation. It was used in the Balfour Declaration and in the Mandate, both of which promised the establishment of a "Jewish National Home" without, however, defining its meaning. A statement on "British Policy in Palestine," issued on 3 June 1922 by the Colonial Office, placed a restrictive construction upon the Balfour Declaration. The statement included "the disappearance or subordination of the Arabic population, language or customs in Palestine" or "the imposition of Jewish nationality upon the inhabitants of Palestine as a whole", and made it clear that in the eyes of the mandatory Power, the Jewish National Home was to be founded in Palestine and not that Palestine as a whole was to be converted into a Jewish National Home. The Committee noted that the construction, which restricted considerably the scope of the National Home, was made prior to the confirmation of the Mandate by the Council of the League of Nations and was formally accepted at the time by the Executive of the Zionist Organization.[106]
In March 1930, Lord Passfield, the Secretary of State for the Colonies, had written a Cabinet Paper[107] which said:

In the Balfour Declaration there is no suggestion that the Jews should be accorded a special or favoured position in Palestine as compared with the Arab inhabitants of the country, or that the claims of Palestinians to enjoy self-government (subject to the rendering of administrative advice and assistance by a Mandatory as foreshadowed in Article XXII of the Covenant) should be curtailed in order to facilitate the establishment in Palestine of a National Home for the Jewish people." ... Zionist leaders have not concealed and do not conceal their opposition to the grant of any measure of self-government to the people of Palestine either now or for many years to come. Some of them even go so far as to claim that that provision of Article 2 of the Mandate constitutes a bar to compliance with the demand of the Arabs for any measure of self-government. In view of the provisions of Article XXII of the Covenant and of the promises made to the Arabs on several occasions that claim is inadmissible.

The League of Nations Permanent Mandates Commission took the position that the Mandate contained a dual obligation. In 1932 the Mandates Commission questioned the representative of the Mandatory on the demands made by the Arab population regarding the establishment of self-governing institutions, in accordance with various articles of the mandate, and in particular Article 2. The Chairman noted that "under the terms of the same article, the mandatory Power had long since set up the Jewish National Home."[108]
In 1937, the Peel Commission, a British Royal Commission headed by Earl Peel, proposed solving the Arab–Jewish conflict by partitioning Palestine into two states. The two main Jewish leaders, Chaim Weizmann and David Ben-Gurion, had convinced the Zionist Congress to approve equivocally the Peel recommendations as a basis for more negotiation.[30][31][32][109] The US Consul General at Jerusalem told the State Department that the Mufti had refused the principle of partition and declined to consider it. The Consul said that the Emir Abdullah urged acceptance on the ground that realities must be faced, but wanted modification of the proposed boundaries and Arab administrations in the neutral enclave. The Consul also noted that Nashashibi sidestepped the principle, but was willing to negotiate for favourable modifications.[110]
A collection of private correspondence published by David Ben Gurion contained a letter written in 1937 which explained that he was in favour of partition because he didn't envision a partial Jewish state as the end of the process. Ben Gurion wrote "What we want is not that the country be united and whole, but that the united and whole country be Jewish." He explained that a first-class Jewish army would permit Zionists to settle in the rest of the country with or without the consent of the Arabs.[111] Benny Morris said that both Chaim Weizmann and David Ben Gurion saw partition as a stepping stone to further expansion and the eventual takeover of the whole of Palestine.[112] Former Israeli Foreign Minister and historian Schlomo Ben Ami writes that 1937 was the same year that the "Field Battalions" under Yitzhak Sadeh wrote the "Avner Plan", which anticipated and laid the groundwork for what would become in 1948, Plan D. It envisioned going far beyond any boundaries contained in the existing partition proposals and planned the conquest of the Galilee, the West Bank, and Jerusalem.[113]
In 1942, the Biltmore Program was adopted as the platform of the World Zionist Organization. It demanded "that Palestine be established as a Jewish Commonwealth." In 1946 an Anglo-American Committee of Inquiry, also known as the Grady-Morrison Committee, noted that the demand for a Jewish State went beyond the obligations of either the Balfour Declaration or the Mandate and had been expressly disowned by the Chairman of the Jewish Agency as recently as 1932.[114] The Jewish Agency subsequently refused to accept the Grady Morrison Plan as the basis for discussion. A spokesman for the agency, Eliahu Epstein, told the US State Department that the Agency could not attend the London conference if the Grady-Morrison proposal was on the agenda. He stated that the Agency was unwilling to be placed in a position where it might have to compromise between the Grady-Morrison proposals on the one hand and its own partition plan on the other. He stated that the Agency had accepted partition as the solution for Palestine which it favoured.[115]
Land ownership
See also: Jewish land purchase in Palestine




Map of Palestine Land ownership by sub-district (1945) originally published in the Village Statistics, 1945






Palestine Index to Villages and Settlements, showing Land in Jewish Possession as at 31.12.44


After transition to the British rule, much of the agricultural land in Palestine (about one third of the whole territory) was still owned by the same landowners as under Ottoman rule, mostly powerful Arab clans and local Muslim sheikhs. Other lands had been held by foreign Christian organisations (most notably the Greek Orthodox Church), as well as Jewish private and Zionist organisations, and to lesser degree by small minorities of Bahai's, Samaritans and Circassians.
As of 1931, the territory of the British Mandate of Palestine was 26,625,600 dunams (26,625.6 km2), of which 8,252,900 dunams (8,252.9 km2) or 33% were arable.[116] Official statistics show that Jews privately and collectively owned 1,393,531 dunams (1,393.53 km2), or 5.23% of Palestine's total in 1945.[117][118] The Jewish owned agricultural land was largely located in the Galilee and along the coastal plain. Estimates of the total volume of land that Jews had purchased by 15 May 1948 are complicated by illegal and unregistered land transfers, as well as by the lack of data on land concessions from the Palestine administration after 31 March 1936. According to Avneri, Jews held 1,850,000 dunams (1,850 km2) of land in 1947, or 6.94% of the total.[119] Stein gives the estimate of 2,000,000 dunams (2,000 km2) as of May 1948, or 7.51% of the total.[120] According to Fischbach, By 1948, Jews and Jewish companies owned 20% percent of all cultivable land in the country.[121]
Nevertheless, the amount of land owned by Jews is easier to calculate than that owned by Arabs. It is difficult to reckon the total amount of land owned by Arabs (Muslim, Christian and Druze) in Mandatory Palestine.[citation needed] The 1945 UN estimate shows that Arab ownership of arable land was on average 68% of a district, ranging from 15% ownership in the Beer-Sheba district to 99% ownership in the Ramallah district. These data cannot be fully understood without comparing them to those of neighbouring countries: in Iraq, for instance, still in 1951 only 0.3 per cent of registered land (or 50 per cent of the total amount) was categorised as ‘private property’.[122]
Land ownership by district
The following table shows the 1945 land ownership of mandatory Palestine by district:

Land ownership of Palestine in 1945 by district

District
Sub-district
Arab-owned
Jewish-owned
Public / other


Haifa
Haifa
42%
35%
23%


Galilee
Acre
87%
3%
10%


Beisan
44%
34%
22%


Nazareth
52%
28%
20%


Safad
68%
18%
14%


Tiberias
51%
38%
11%


Lydda
Jaffa
47%
39%
14%


Ramle
77%
14%
9%


Samaria
Jenin
84%
<1%
16%


Nablus
87%
<1%
13%


Tulkarm
78%
17%
5%


Jerusalem
Hebron
96%
<1%
4%


Jerusalem
84%
2%
14%


Ramallah
99%
<1%
1%


Gaza
Beersheba
15%
<1%
85%


Gaza
75%
4%
21%


Data from the Land Ownership of Palestine[123]


Land ownership by corporation
The table below shows the land ownership of Palestine by large Jewish Corporations (in square kilometres) on 31 December 1945.

Land ownership of Palestine by large Jewish Corporations (in square kilometres) on 31 December 1945

Corporations
Area


JNF
660.10


PICA
193.70


Palestine Land Development Co. Ltd.
9.70


Hemnuta Ltd
16.50


Africa Palestine Investment Co. Ltd.
9.90


Bayside Land Corporation Ltd.
8.50


Palestine Kupat Am. Bank Ltd.
8.40


Total
906.80


Data is from Survey of Palestine (vol. I, p. 245).[124][125]


Land ownership by type
The land owned privately and collectively by Jews, Arabs and other non-Jews can be classified as urban, rural built-on, cultivable (farmed), and uncultivable. The following chart shows the ownership by Jews, Arabs and other non-Jews in each of the categories.

Land ownership of Palestine (in square kilometres) on 1 April 1943

Category
Arab / non-Jewish ownership
Jewish ownership
Total


Urban
76.66
70.11
146.77


Rural built-on
36.85
42.33
79.18


Cereal (taxable)
5,503.18
814.10
6,317.29


Cereal (not taxable)
900.29
51.05
951.34


Plantation
1,079.79
95.51
1,175.30


Citrus
145.57
141.19
286.76


Banana
2.30
1.43
3.73


Uncultivable
16,925.81
298.52
17,224.33


Total
24,670.46
1,514.25
26,184.70


Data is from Survey of Palestine (vol. II, p. 566).[125][126] By the end of 1946, Jewish ownership had increased to 1624 km2.[127]


List of Mandatory land laws




Land classification as prescribed in 1940.



Land Transfer Ordinance of 1920
1926 Correction of Land Registers Ordinance
Land Settlement Ordinance of 1928
Land Transfer Regulations of 1940

In February 1940, the British Government of Palestine promulgated the Land Transfer Regulations which divided Palestine into three regions with different restrictions on land sales applying to each. In Zone "A", which included the hill-country of Judea as a whole, certain areas in the Jaffa sub-District, and in the Gaza District, and the northern part of the Beersheba sub-District, new agreements for sale of land other than to a Palestinian Arab were forbidden without the High Commissioner's permission. In Zone "B", which included the Jezreel Valley, eastern Galilee, a parcel of coastal plain south of Haifa, a region northeast of the Gaza District, and the southern part of the Beersheba sub-District, sale of land by a Palestinian Arab was forbidden except to a Palestinian Arab with similar exceptions. In the "free zone", which consisted of Haifa Bay, the coastal plain from Zikhron Ya'akov to Yibna, and the neighbohood of Jerusalem, there were no restrictions. The reason given for the regulations was that the Mandatory was required to "ensur[e] that the rights and positions of other sections of the population are not prejudiced," and an assertion that "such transfers of land must be restricted if Arab cultivators are to maintain their existing standard of life and a considerable landless Arab population is not soon to be created"[128]
Demographics
Main article: Demographics of Palestine
British censuses and estimations




Population distribution at the end of the Mandate


In 1920, the majority of the approximately 750,000 people in this multi-ethnic region were Arabic-speaking Muslims, including a Bedouin population (estimated at 103,331 at the time of the 1922 census[129] and concentrated in the Beersheba area and the region south and east of it), as well as Jews (who comprised some 11% of the total) and smaller groups of Druze, Syrians, Sudanese, Circassians, Egyptians, Greeks, and Hejazi Arabs.

The first census of 1922 showed a population of 757,182, of whom 78% were Muslim, 11% Jewish and 10% Christian.
The second census, of 1931, gave a total population of 1,035,154 of whom 73.4% were Muslim, 16.9% Jewish and 8.6% Christian.

A discrepancy between the two censuses and records of births, deaths and immigration, led the authors of the second census to postulate the illegal immigration of about 9,000 Jews and 4,000 Arabs during the intervening years.[130]




Christian Arab boys at Jerusalem YMCA, 1938.


There were no further censuses but statistics were maintained by counting births, deaths and migration. By the end of 1936 the total population was approximately 1,300,000, the Jews being estimated at 384,000. The Arabs had also increased their numbers rapidly, mainly as a result of the cessation of the military conscription imposed on the country by the Ottoman Empire, the campaign against malaria and a general improvement in health services. In absolute figures their increase exceeded that of the Jewish population, but proportionally, the latter had risen from 13 per cent of the total population at the census of 1922 to nearly 30 per cent at the end of 1936.[131]
Some components such as illegal immigration could only be estimated approximately. The White Paper of 1939, which placed immigration restrictions on Jews, stated that the Jewish population "has risen to some 450,000" and was "approaching a third of the entire population of the country". In 1945, a demographic study showed that the population had grown to 1,764,520, comprising 1,061,270 Muslims, 553,600 Jews, 135,550 Christians and 14,100 people of other groups.


Year
Total
Muslim
Jewish
Christian
Other


1922
752,048
589,177
(78%)
83,790
(11%)
71,464
(10%)
7,617
(1%)


1931
1,036,339
761,922
(74%)
175,138
(17%)
89,134
(9%)
10,145
(1%)


1945
1,764,520
1,061,270
(60%)
553,600
(31%)
135,550
(8%)
14,100
(1%)


Average compounded population
growth rate per annum, 1922–1945
3.8%
2.6%
8.6%
2.8%
2.7%


By district
The following table gives the religious demography of each of the 16 districts of the Mandate in 1945.


Demography of Palestine in 1945 by district


District
Sub-District
Muslim
Percentage
Jewish
Percentage
Christian
Percentage
Total


Haifa
Haifa
95,970
38%
119,020
47%
33,710
13%
253,450


Galilee
Acre
51,130
69%
3,030
4%
11,800
16%
73,600


Beisan
16,660
67%
7,590
30%
680
3%
24,950


Nazareth
30,160
60%
7,980
16%
11,770
24%
49,910


Safad
47,310
83%
7,170
13%
1,630
3%
56,970


Tiberias
23,940
58%
13,640
33%
2,470
6%
41,470


Lydda
Jaffa
95,980
24%
295,160
72%
17,790
4%
409,290


Ramle
95,590
71%
31,590
24%
5,840
4%
134,030


Samaria
Jenin
60,000
98%
negligible
<1%
1,210
2%
61,210


Nablus
92,810
98%
negligible
<1%
1,560
2%
94,600


Tulkarm
76,460
82%
16,180
17%
380
1%
93,220


Jerusalem
Hebron
92,640
99%
300
<1%
170
<1%
93,120


Jerusalem
104,460
41%
102,520
40%
46,130
18%
253,270


Ramallah
40,520
83%
negligible
<1%
8,410
17%
48,930


Gaza
Beersheba
6,270
90%
510
7%
210
3%
7,000


Gaza
145,700
97%
3,540
2%
1,300
1%
150,540


Total
1,076,780
58%
608,230
33%
145,060
9%
1,845,560


Data from the Survey of Palestine[132]


Government and institutions




Jerusalem city hall, 1939


The Mandate territory was divided into administrative regions known as districts and administer by the office of the British High Commissioner for Palestine.
Britain continued the millet system of the Ottoman Empire whereby all matters of a religious nature and personal status were within the jurisdiction of Muslim courts and the courts of other recognised religions, called confessional communities. The High Commissioner established the Orthodox Rabbinate and retained a modified millet system which only recognised eleven religious communities: Muslims, Jews and nine Christian denominations (none of which were Christian Protestant churches). All those who were not members of these recognised communities were excluded from the millet arrangement. As a result, there was no possibility, for example, of marriages between confessional communities, and there were no civil marriages. Personal contacts between communities were nominal.
Apart from the Religious Courts, the judicial system was modelled on the British one, having a High Court with appellate jurisdiction and the power of review over the Central Court and the Central Criminal Court. The five consecutive Chief Justices were:

Thomas Haycraft (1921–1927)[133]
Michael McDonnell (1927–1936)[133]
Harry Herbert Trusted[134] (1936–1941) (afterwards Chief Justice of the Federated Malay States, 1941)
Frederick Gordon-Smith (1941–1944)[135]
William James Fitzgerald (1944–1948 [136]

Economy
Between 1922 and 1947, the annual growth rate of the Jewish sector of the economy was 13.2%, mainly due to immigration and foreign capital, while that of the Arab was 6.5%. Per capita, these figures were 4.8% and 3.6% respectively. By 1936, the Jewish sector earned 2.6 times as much as Arabs.[137] Compared to other Arab countries, the Palestinian Arab individuals earned slightly more.[138]
The Jaffa Electric Company was founded in 1923 by Pinhas Rutenberg, and was later absorbed into a newly created Palestine Electric Company. Palestine Airways was founded in 1934, Angel Bakeries in 1927, and the Tnuva dairy in 1926. Electric current mainly flowed to Jewish industry, following it to its nestled locations in Tel Aviv and Haifa. Although Tel Aviv had by far more workshops and factories, the demand for electric power for industry was roughly the same for both cities by the early 1930s.[139]
The country's largest industrial zone was in Haifa, where many housing projects were built for employees.[140]
On the scale of the UN Human Development Index determined for around 1939, of 36 countries, Palestinian Jews were placed 15th, Palestinian Arabs 30th, Egypt 33rd and Turkey 35th.[141] The Jews in Palestine were mainly urban, 76.2% in 1942, while the Arabs were mainly rural, 68.3% in 1942.[142] Overall, Khalidi concludes that Palestinian Arab society, while overmatched by the Yishuv, was as advanced as any other Arab society in the region and considerably more than several.[143]
Education
Under the British Mandate, the country developed economically and culturally. In 1919 the Jewish community founded a centralised Hebrew school system, and the following year established the Assembly of Representatives, the Jewish National Council and the Histadrut labour federation. The Technion university was founded in 1924, and the Hebrew University of Jerusalem in 1925.[144]
Literacy rates in 1932 were 86% for the Jews compared to 22% for the Palestinian Arabs, but Arab literacy rates steadily increased thereafter. Palestinian Arabs compared favorably in this respect to residents of Egypt and Turkey, but unfavourably to the Lebanese.[145]
Gallery







General Allenby's final attacks of the Palestine Campaign gave Britain control of the area









Field Marshal Allenby entering Jerusalem with British troops on 11 December 1917









General Watson meeting with the Mayor of Jerusalem in December 1917









The surrender of Jerusalem by the Ottomans to the British on 9 December 1917 following the Battle of Jerusalem









Main post office, Jaffa Road, Jerusalem









Rockefeller Museum, built in Jerusalem during the British Mandate









Main post office, Jaffa









Anglo-Palestine Bank









Western Wall, 1933









Supreme Military Tribunal of the British Mandate, Kiryat Shmuel, Jerusalem









YMCA in Jerusalem, built during the British Mandate









"Bevingrad" in Jerusalem, Russian Compound behind barbed wire









Mandate-era mailbox, Jerusalem









1941 currency coin









Movement and curfew pass, issued under the authority of the British Military Commander, East Palestine, 1946




See also

Ernest Bevin
Herbert Dowbiggin (1880–1966) – police expert
Faisal–Weizmann Agreement (1919)
Haavara Agreement (1933)
High Commissioners for Palestine and Transjordan
Israeli Declaration of Independence
List of post offices in the British Mandate of Palestine
Mandatory Palestine passport
Museum of Underground Prisoners
Palestine Command
Palestine pound
Postage stamps and postal history of Palestine
Russian Compound
Charles Tegart (1881–1946) – police expert
Tegart's Wall
The Sergeants affair
Liberal Party (Mandatory Palestine)

References


^ "League of Nations decision confirming the Principal Allied Powers' agreement on the territory of Palestine". Archived from the original on 2013-11-25. 
^ Hughes, Matthew, ed. (2004). Allenby in Palestine: The Middle East Correspondence of Field Marshal Viscount Allenby June 1917 – October 1919. Army Records Society. 22. Phoenix Mill, Thrupp, Stroud, Gloucestershire: Sutton Publishing Ltd. ISBN 978-0-7509-3841-9.  Allenby to Robertson 25 January 1918 in Hughes 2004, p. 128
^ Article 22, The Covenant of the League of Nations and "Mandate for Palestine," Encyclopedia Judaica, Vol. 11, p. 862, Keter Publishing House, Jerusalem, 1972
^ Marjorie M. Whiteman, Digest of International Law, vol. 1, US State Department (Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1963) pp. 650–652
^ League of Nations, Permanent Mandate Commission, Minutes of the Ninth Session Archived 2011-06-28 at the Wayback Machine. (Arab Grievances), Held at Geneva from June 8th to 25th, 1926,
^ Official Records of the Second Session of the General Assembly, Supplement No. 11, United Nations Special Committee on Palestine, Report to the General Assembly, Volume 1. Lake Success, NY, 1947. A/364, 3 September 1947, Chapter II.C.68. Archived 3 June 2014 at the Wayback Machine.
^ Ira M. Lapidus, A History of Islamic Societies, 2002: "The first were the nationalists, who in 1918 formed the first Muslim-Christian associations to protest against the Jewish national home" p.558
^ Tessler, A History of the Israeli-Palestinian Conflict, Second Edition, 2009: "An All-Palestine Congress, known also as the First Congress of the Muslim-Christian Societies, was organized by the MCA and convened in Jerusalem in February 1919." p.220-221
^ http://content.ecf.org.il/files/M00661_FirstArabCongress1919ParisResolutionArabic.pdf
^ "Palestine Through History: A Chronology (I)". Archived from the original on June 17, 2011. Retrieved 2016-02-14. CS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknown (link) The Palestine Chronicle
^ Israel Ministry of Foreign Affairs
^ Ronen Shamir (2013) Current Flow: The Electrification of Palestine. Stanford: Stanford University Press
^ Palestine Jewry and the Arab Question, 1917 – 1925, by Caplan, Neil. London and Totowa, NJ: F. Cass, 1978. ISBN 0-7146-3110-8. pp. 148–161.
^ Mattar, Philip (2003). "al-Husayni, Amin". In Mattar, Philip. Encyclopedia of the Palestinians (Revised ed.). New York: Facts On File. ISBN 978-0-8160-5764-1. 
^ 'It was not scholarly religious credentials that made Hajj Amin an attractive candidate for president of the SMC in the eyes of colonial officials. Rather, it was the combination of his being an effective nationalist activist and a member of one of Jerusalem's most respected notable families that made it advantageous to align his interests with those of the British administration and thereby keep him on a short tether.' Weldon C. Matthews, Confronting an Empire, Constructing a Nation: Arab Nationalists and Popular Politics in Mandate Palestine, I.B.Tauris, 2006 pp. 31–32
^ For details see Yitzhak Reiter, Islamic Endowments in Jerusalem under British Mandate, Frank Cass, London Portland, Oregon, 1996
^ Excluding funds for land purchases. Sahar Huneidi, A Broken Trust: Herbert Samuel, Zionism and the Palestinians 1920–1925, I.B. Tauris, London and New York, 2001 p. 38. The 'Jewish Agency', mentioned in article 4 of the Mandate only became the official term in 1928. At the time the organisation was called the Palestine Zionist Executive.
^ 1922 Palestine Order in Council Archived 2014-09-16 at the Wayback Machine.
^ a b "Palestine. The Constitution Suspended., Arab Boycott Of Elections., Back To British Rule" The Times, 30 May 1923, p. 14, Issue 43354
^ a b Legislative Council (Palestine) Answers.com
^ League of Nations, Official Journal, October 1923, p. 1217.
^ a b Segev, Tom (1999). One Palestine, Complete. Metropolitan Books. pp. 360–362. ISBN 0-8050-4848-0. 
^ Smith, Charles D. (2007). Palestine and the Arab–Israeli Conflict: A History with Documents (Sixth ed.). pp. 111–225. 
^ Gilbert 1998, p. 85: The Jewish Settlement Police were created and equipped with trucks and armoured cars by the British working with the Jewish Agency.
^ "The Zionism of Orde", Covenant, 3 (1), IDC 
^ Reuven Firestone (2012). Holy War in Judaism: The Fall and Rise of a Controversial Idea. Oxford University Press. p. 192. ISBN 978-0-19-986030-2. 
^ "Aljazeera: The history of Palestinian revolts". Archived from the original on December 15, 2005. Retrieved 2005-12-15. 
^ (Khalidi 1987, p. 845)
^ (Khalidi 2001)
^ a b William Roger Louis, Ends of British Imperialism: The Scramble for Empire, Suez, and Decolonization, 2006, p. 391
^ a b Benny Morris, One State, Two States: Resolving the Israel/Palestine Conflict, 2009, p. 66
^ a b Benny Morris, The Birth of the Palestinian Refugee Problem Revisited, p. 48; p. 11 "while the Zionist movement, after much agonising, accepted the principle of partition and the proposals as a basis for negotiation"; p. 49 "In the end, after bitter debate, the Congress equivocally approved—by a vote of 299 to 160—the Peel recommendations as a basis for further negotiation."
^ 'Zionists Ready To Negotiate British Plan As Basis', The Times Thursday, 12 August 1937; p. 10; Issue 47761; col B.
^ Eran, Oded. "Arab-Israel Peacemaking." The Continuum Political Encyclopedia of the Middle East. Ed. Avraham Sela. New York: Continuum, 2002, p. 122.
^ Letter from David Ben-Gurion to his son Amos, written 5 October 1937, Obtained from the Ben-Gurion Archives in Hebrew, and translated into English by the Institute of Palestine Studies, Beirut
^ Morris, Benny (2011), Righteous Victims: A History of the Zionist-Arab Conflict, 1881-1998, Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group, p. 138, ISBN 9780307788054  Quote: "No Zionist can forgo the smallest portion of the Land Of Israel. [A] Jewish state in part [of Palestine] is not an end, but a beginning ….. Our possession is important not only for itself … through this we increase our power, and every increase in power facilitates getting hold of the country in its entirety. Establishing a [small] state …. will serve as a very potent lever in our historical effort to redeem the whole country"
^ a b Finkelstein, Norman (2005), Beyond Chutzpah: On the Misuse of Anti-semitism and the Abuse of History, University of California Press, p. 280, ISBN 9780520245983 
^ Quote from a meeting of the Jewish Agency executive in June 1938: “[I am] satisfied with part of the country, but on the basis of the assumption that after we build up a strong force following the establishment of the state, we will abolish the partition of the country and we will expand to the whole Land of Israel.” in
Masalha, Nur (1992), Expulsion of the Palestinians: The Concept of "Transfer" in Zionist Political Thought, 1882–1948, Inst for Palestine Studies, p. 107, ISBN 9780887282355 ; and
Segev, Tom (2000), One Palestine, Complete: Jews and Arabs Under the British Mandate, Henry Holt and Company, p. 403, ISBN 9780805048483 
^ From a letter from Chaim Weizmann to Arthur Grenfell Wauchope, High Commissioner for Palestine, while the Peel Commission was convening in 1937: “We shall spread in the whole country in the course of time ….. this is only an arrangement for the next 25 to 30 years.” Masalha, Nur (1992), Expulsion of the Palestinians: The Concept of "Transfer" in Zionist Political Thought, 1882-1948, Inst for Palestine Studies, p. 62, ISBN 9780887282355 
^ Why Italian Planes Bombed Tel-Aviv? Archived 2011-09-21 at the Wayback Machine.
^ How the Palmach was formed (History Central)
^ Secret World War II documents released by the UK in July 2001, include documents on Operation ATLAS (See References: KV 2/400–402. A German task force led by Kurt Wieland parachuted into Palestine in September 1944. This was one of the last German efforts in the region to attack the Jewish community in Palestine and undermine British rule by supplying local Arabs with cash, arms and sabotage equipment. The team was captured shortly after landing.
^ Corrigan, Gordon. The Second World War Thomas Dunne Books, 2011 ISBN 9780312577094 p. 523, last paragraph
^ Lenk, RS (1994). The Mauritius Affair, The Boat People of 1940–41. London: R Lenk. ISBN 0951880527. 
^ Aroni, Samuel (2002–2007). "Who Perished On The Struma And How Many?". JewishGen.org. 
^ Подводная лодка "Щ-215". Черноморский Флот информационный ресурс (in Russian). 2000–2013. Retrieved 27 March 2013. 
^ "מפקורה SS Mefküre Mafkura Mefkura". Haapalah / Aliyah Bet. 27 September 2011. Retrieved 26 March 2013. 
^ The "Hunting Season" (1945) by Yehuda Lapidot (Jewish Virtual Library)
^ UN Doc A/364 Add. 1 of 3 September 1947 Archived 3 June 2014 at the Wayback Machine.
^ American Jewish History, Jeffrey S. Gurock, American Jewish Historical Society, p. 243
^ "A/RES/181(II) of 29 November 1947". United Nations. 1947. Archived from the original on 24 May 2012. Retrieved 11 January 2012. 
^ Article 11 of the United Nations Charter
^ Roosevelt, Kermit (1948). "The Partition of Palestine: A lesson in pressure politics". Middle East Journal. 2 (1): 1–16. JSTOR 4321940. 
^ Snetsinger, John (1974). Truman, the Jewish vote, and the creation of Israel. Hoover Institution. pp. 66–67. 
^ Sarsar, Saliba (2004). "The question of Palestine and United States behavior at the United Nations". International Journal of Politics, Culture and Society. 17 (3): 457–470. doi:10.1023/B:IJPS.0000019613.01593.5e. 
^ "Palestine". Encyclopædia Britannica Online School Edition, 2006. 15 May 2006.
^ Stefan Brooks (2008). "Palestine, British Mandate for". In Spencer C. Tucker. The Encyclopedia of the Arab-Israeli Conflict. 3. Santa Barbara, California: ABC-CLIO. p. 770. ISBN 978-1-85109-842-2. 
^ A. J. Sherman (2001). Mandate Days: British Lives in Palestine, 1918–1948. The Johns Hopkins University Press. ISBN 0-8018-6620-0. 
^ Menachem Begin (1977). "The Revolt". 
^ See Mandates, Dependencies and Trusteeship, by H. Duncan Hall, Carnegie Endowment, 1948, pp. 266–267.
^ "The Mandate is Indivisble". Historical Jewish Press, Tel Aviv University, Palestine Post. 9 April 1946. p. 3. Archived from the original on 29 September 2010. 
^ "The Near East and Africa". Foreign relations of the United States. 1947. p. 1255. 
^ Snetsinger, John (1974). Truman, the Jewish vote, and the creation of Israel. Hoover Press. pp. 60–61. ISBN 0-8179-3391-3. 
^ "The Near East and Africa, Volume V (1947)". United States Department of State, Foreign relations of the United States. p. 1271. 
^ The British Empire in the Middle East, 1945–1951, p. 348. William Roger Louis, Clarendon Press, 1984
^ http://www.jta.org/1947/12/16/archive/violence-ebbs-british-police-withdrawn-from-tel-aviv-and-its-environs
^ http://www.jta.org/1948/04/23/archive/british-forces-in-jerusalem-alerter-following-haifa-victory-fear-haganah-raid-on-city
^ a b http://hansard.millbanksystems.com/commons/1948/mar/10/palestine-bill
^ Herzog, Chaim and Gazit, Shlomo: The Arab-Israeli Wars: War and Peace in the Middle East from the 1948 War of Independence to the Present, p. 46
^ "'U.N. Resolution 181 (II). Future Government of Palestine, Part 1-A, Termination of Mandate, Partition and Independence". Archived from the original on February 7, 2009. Retrieved 2017-05-20. CS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknown (link)
^ U.N. Resolution 181 (II). Future Government of Palestine, Part 1-A, Termination of Mandate, Partition and Independence Archived 2006-10-29 at the Wayback Machine..
^ United States Proposal for Temporary United Nations Trusteeship for Palestine Source: Department of State Bulletin, vol. 18, No. 457, 4 April 1948, p. 451
^ Israel Ministry of Foreign Affairs: Declaration of Establishment of State of Israel: 14 May 1948: Retrieved 10 April 2012
^ Bier, Aharon, & Slae, Bracha,For the sake of Jerusalem, Mazo Publishers, 2006, p. 49
^ Declaration of the Establishment of the State of Israel, 14 May 1948.
^ J. Sussmann (1950). "Law and Judicial Practice in Israel". Journal of Comparative Legislation and International Law. 32: 29–31. 
^ "Copy of telegram from Epstein to Shertok" (PDF). Government of Israel. Retrieved 3 May 2013. 
^ Press Release Announcing U.S. Recognition of Israel (1948): Retrieved 10 April 2012
^ https://books.google.jo/books?id=pQx8u8MN13AC&pg=PA21&redir_esc=y
^ http://www.jta.org/1948/03/26/archive/palestine-passports-cease-to-give-british-protection-after-may-govt-announces
^ Appendix IX-B, 'The Arab Expeditionary Forces to Palestine, 15/5/48, Khalidi, 1971, p. 867.
^ Bayliss, 1999, p. 84.
^ League of Nations, Permanent Mandate Commission, Minutes of the Ninth Session Archived 2011-06-28 at the Wayback Machine. (Arab Grievances), Held at Geneva from 8 to 25 June 1926
^ See Papers relating to the foreign relations of the United States "The Paris Peace Conference". 1919. p. 94. 
^ See Summary of the work of the League of Nations, January 1920 – March 1922, League of Nations Union, 1922, page 4
^ See Article 62 (LXII) of the Treaty of Berlin
^ See Defending the Rights of Others, by Carol Fink, Cambridge University, 2006, ISBN 0-521-02994-5, p. 28
^ See the Statement of the Principal Accredited Representative, Hon. W. Ormsby-Gore, C.330.M.222, Mandate for Palestine – Minutes of the Permanent Mandates Commission/League of Nations 32nd session, 18 August 1937 Archived 3 June 2011 at the Wayback Machine.
^ See the Judgment in "Legal Consequences of the Construction of a Wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory" Archived 2011-01-12 at the Wayback Machine. (PDF)
^ See paragraphs 49, 70, and 129 of the International Court of Justice Advisory Opinion, Legal Consequences of the Construction of a Wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory PDF Archived 2010-07-06 at the Wayback Machine. and PAUL J. I. M. DE WAART (2005). "International Court of Justice Firmly Walled in the Law of Power in the Israeli–Palestinian Peace Process." Leiden Journal of International Law, 18, pp. 467–487, doi:10.1017/S0922156505002839
^ (Khalidi 2006, pp. 32–33)
^ (Khalidi 2006, pp. 33–34)
^ "Palestine. The Constitution Suspended., Arab Boycott Of Elections., Back To British Rule" The Times, 30 May 1923, p. 14, Issue 43354
^ (Khalidi 2006, pp. 32, 36)
^ See Foreign relations of the United States, 1947. The Near East and Africa Volume V, p. 1033
^ In June of 1947, the British Mandate Government of Palestine had published the following statistics: "It is estimated that over a quarter of the Jewish population in Palestine are Sephardic Jews of whom some 60,000 were born of families resident in Palestine for centuries. The bulk of the Sephardic community, however, consists of oriental Jews emanating from Syria, Egypt, Persia, Iraq, Georgia, Bokhara and other Eastern countries. They are confined mainly to the larger towns ..." (From: Supplement to Survey of Palestine - Notes compiled for the information of the United Nations Special Committee on Palestine - June 1947, Gov. Printer Jerusalem, pp. 150–151)
^ "Jewish Agency History". Archived from the original on February 15, 2006. Retrieved 2012-01-29. CS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknown (link)
^ Palestine Jewry and the Arab Question, 1917–1925, by Caplan, Neil. London and Totowa, NJ: F. Cass, 1978. ISBN 0-7146-3110-8. pp. 161–165.
^ A Survey of Palestine: Prepared in December 1945 and January 1946 for the Information of the Anglo-American Committee of Inquiry. 1. Palestine: Govt. printer. 1946. p. 185. 
^ A Survey of Palestine: Prepared in December 1945 and January 1946 for the Information of the Anglo-American Committee of Inquiry. 1. Palestine: Govt. printer. 1946.  p. 210: "Arab illegal immigration is mainly ... casual, temporary and seasonal". pp. 212: "The conclusion is that Arab illegal immigration for the purpose of permanent settlement is insignificant".
^ J. McCarthy (1995). The population of Palestine: population history and statistics of the late Ottoman period and the Mandate. Princeton, N.J.: Darwin Press. 
^ Supplement to Survey of Palestine - Notes compiled for the information of the United Nations Special Committee on Palestine - June 1947, Gov. Printer Jerusalem, p. 18
^ John B. Quigley (2010). The Statehood of Palestine: International Law in the Middle East Conflict. Cambridge University Press. p. 54. ISBN 978-0-521-15165-8. 
^ See History of Zionism (1600–1918), Volume I, Nahum Sokolow, 1919 Longmans, Green, and Company, London, pp. xxiv–xxv
^ The Palestine Mandate, The Avalon Project
^ See the report of the United Nations Special Committee on Palestine, UN Document A/364, 3 September 1947
^ Memorandum By The Secretary of State for the Colonies, "PALESTINE: HIGH COMMISSIONERS VIEWS ON POLICY", March 1930, UK National Archives Cabinet Paper CAB/24/211, formerly C.P. 108 (30)
^ "PERMANENT MANDATES COMMISSION MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-SECOND SESSION". LEAGUE OF NATIONS. Retrieved 8 June 2010. 
^ See Partner to Partition: The Jewish Agency's Partition Plan in the Mandate Era, by Yossi Katz, Routledge, 1998, ISBN 0-7146-4846-9
^ See Foreign relations of the United States diplomatic papers, 1937, The British Commonwealth, Europe, Near East and Africa Volume II, p. 894
^ See Letters to Paula and the Children, David Ben Gurion, translated by Aubry Hodes, University of Pittsburgh Press, 1971 pp. 153–157
^ See Righteous Victims: A History of the Zionist–Arab Conflict, 1881–1999, by Benny Morris, Knopf, 1999, ISBN 0-679-42120-3, p. 138
^ See Scars of war, Wounds of Peace: The Israeli–Arab Tragedy, by Shlomo Ben-Ami, Oxford University Press, USA, 2006, ISBN 0-19-518158-1, p. 17
^ See Anglo-American Committee of Inquiry – Chapter V, the Jewish Attitude
^ See Foreign relations of the United States, 1946, The Near East and Africa Volume VII, pp. 692–693
^ Stein 1984, p. 4
^ "Land Ownership in Palestine," CZA, KKL5/1878. The statistics were prepared by the Palestine Lands Department for the Anglo-American Committee of Inquiry, 1945, ISA, Box 3874/file 1. See (Khalaf 1991, p. 27)
^ Stein 1984, p. 226
^ Avneri 1984, p. 224
^ Stein 1984, pp. 3–4, 247
^ Michael R. Fischbach (13 August 2013). Jewish Property Claims Against Arab Countries. Columbia University Press. p. 24. ISBN 978-0-231-51781-2. By 1948, after several decades of Jewish immigration, the Jewish population of Palestine had risen to about one third of the total, and Jews and Jewish companies owned 20 percent of all cultivable land in the country 
^ Lorenzo Kamel (2014), "Whose Land? Land Tenure in Late Nineteenth- and Early Twentieth-Century Palestine", British Journal of Middle Eastern Studies, pp. 230–242. http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/pdf/10.1080/13530194.2013.878518
^ Land Ownership of Palestine Archived 2008-10-29 at the Wayback Machine. – Map prepared by the Government of Palestine on the instructions of the UN Ad Hoc Committee on the Palestine Question.
^ Table 2 showing Holdings of Large Jewish Lands Owners as of December 31st, 1945, British Mandate: A Survey of Palestine: Volume I – Page 245. Chapter VIII: Land: Section 3., prepared by the British Mandate for the United Nations Survey of Palestine Retrieved 4 July 2015
^ a b Anglo-American Committee of Inquiry on Jewish Problems in Palestine and Europe, J. V. W. Shaw, General Assembly, Special Committee on Palestine, United Nations (1991). A Survey of Palestine: Prepared in December, 1945 and January, 1946 for the Information of the Anglo-American Committee of Inquiry. 1. Institute for Palestine Studies. ISBN 0-88728-211-3. CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link)
^ Ownership of land in Palestine, Share of Palestinan Arabs and Jews as of 1 April 1943, prepared by the British Mandate for the United Nations Survey of Palestine Retrieved 25 August 2014
^ ibid, Supplement p30.
^ A Survey of Palestine (Prepared in December 1945 and January 1946 for the information of the Anglo-American Committee of Inquiry), vol. 1, chapter VIII, section 7, Government Printer of Jerusalem, pp. 260–262
^ ""Hope Simpson report, Chapter III". Zionism-israel.com. October 1930. 
^ Mills, E. Census of Palestine, 1931" (UK government, 1932), Vol I, pp. 61–65.
^ The Political History of Palestine under British Administration, Memorandum to the United Nations Special Committee
^ prepared in December 1945 and January 1946 for the information of the Anglo-American Committee of Inquiry. (1991). A Survey of Palestine: Prepared in December, 1945 and January, 1946 for the Information of the Anglo-American Committee of Inquiry. 1. Institute for Palestine Studies. pp. 12–13. ISBN 0-88728-211-3. 
^ a b Likhovski, Assaf. Law and Identity in Mandate Palestine. p. 64. 
^ "H.h. Trusted Named Chief Justice of Palestine". Jewish Telegraphic Agency. Retrieved 18 November 2015. 
^ LikHovski, Assaf. Law and Identity in Mandate Palestine. p. 74. 
^ LikHovski, Assaf. Law and Identity in Mandate Palestine. p. 75. 
^ (Khalidi 2006, pp. 13–14)
^ (Khalidi 2006, p. 27)
^ Shamir, Ronen (2013). Current Flow: The Electrification of Palestine. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
^ Noam Dvir (5 April 2012). "Haifa's glass house transparent, but still an Israeli mystery". Haaretz. 
^ (Khalidi 2006, p. 16)
^ (Khalidi 2006, p. 17)
^ (Khalidi 2006, pp. 29–30)
^ The Jewish Community under the Mandate
^ (Khalidi 2006, pp. 14, 24)


Quotes



^ UNITED NATIONS CONCILIATION COMMISSION FOR PALESTINE A/AC.25/W/19 30 July 1949: (Working paper prepared by the Secretariat) Archived 2 October 2013 at the Wayback Machine.,"The Arabs rejected the United Nations Partition Plan so that any comment of theirs did not specifically concern the status of the Arab section of Palestine under partition but rather rejected the scheme in its entirety."
^ Benny Morris (2008). 1948: a history of the first Arab-Israeli war. Yale University Press. pp. 50, 66, 67, 72. Retrieved 24 July 2013. p. 50, at 1947 "Haj Amin al-Husseini went one better: he denounced also the minority report, which, in his view, legitimized the Jewish foothold in Palestine, a "partition in disguise," as he put it."; p. 66, at 1946 "The League demanded independence for Palestine as a "unitary" state, with an Arab majority and minority rights for the Jews. The AHC went one better and insisted that the proportion of Jews to Arabs in the unitary state should stand at one to six, meaning that only Jews who lived in Palestine before the British Mandate be eligible for citizenship"; p. 67, at 1947 "The League’s Political Committee met in Sofar, Lebanon, on 16–19 September, and urged the Palestine Arabs to fight partition, which it called "aggression," "without mercy." The League promised them, in line with Bludan, assistance "in manpower, money and equipment" should the United Nations endorse partition."; p. 72, at Dec 1947 "The League vowed, in very general language, "to try to stymie the partition plan and prevent the establishment of a Jewish state in Palestine, 



Bibliography

Pappé, Ilan (15 August 1994). "Introduction". The Making of the Arab–Israeli Conflict, 1947–1951. I.B.Tauris. ISBN 978-1-85043-819-9. Retrieved 2 May 2009. 
Khalidi, Rashid (2006). The Iron Cage: The Story of the Palestinian Struggle for Statehood. Beacon Press. ISBN 0-8070-0308-5. Retrieved 2 May 2009. 
Khalidi, Rashid (2007) [1st ed. 2001]. "The Palestinians and 1948: the underlying causes of failure". In Eugene L. Rogan & Avi Shlaim. The War for Palestine: Rewriting the History of 1948 (2nd ed.). Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-69934-1. Retrieved 2 May 2009. 
Khalidi, Walid (1987) [Original in 1971]. From Haven to Conquest: Readings in Zionism and the Palestine Problem Until 1948. Institute for Palestine Studies. ISBN 0-88728-155-9. Retrieved 2 May 2009. 
Morris, Benny (2001) [1999]. Righteous Victims: A History of the Zionist–Arab Conflict, 1881–1999. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. ISBN 978-0-679-74475-7. Retrieved 2 May 2009. 
Aruri, Naseer Hasan (1972). Jordan: A Study in Political Development 1923–1965. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff Publishers. ISBN 978-90-247-1217-5. Retrieved 2 May 2009. 
Biger, Gideon (2004). The Boundaries of Modern Palestine, 1840–1947. London: Routledge. ISBN 978-0-7146-5654-0. Retrieved 2 May 2009. 
Louis, Wm. Roger (1969). "The United Kingdom and the Beginning of the Mandates System, 1919–1922". International Organization. 23 (1): 73–96. doi:10.1017/s0020818300025534. 
Segev, Tom (2001) [Original in 2000]. "Nebi Musa, 1920". One Palestine, Complete: Jews and Arabs Under the British Mandate. Trans. Haim Watzman. London: Henry Holt and Company. ISBN 978-0-8050-6587-9. Retrieved 2 May 2009. 
Stein, Kenneth W. (1987) [Original in 1984]. The Land Question in Palestine, 1917–1939. University of North Carolina Press. ISBN 978-0-8078-4178-5. Retrieved 2 May 2009. 
Gilbert, Martin (1998). Israel: a history. Doubleday. ISBN 978-0-385-40401-3. Retrieved 2 May 2009. 
Shapira, Anita (1992). Land and Power: The Zionist Resort to Force, 1881–1948. trans. William Templer. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-506104-7. Retrieved 2 May 2009. 
Black, Ian (1991). Israel's Secret Wars: A History of Israel's Intelligence Services. Morris, Benny. Grove Press. ISBN 0-8021-1159-9. 
Avneri, Aryeh L. (1984). The Claim of Dispossession: Jewish Land-Settlement and the Arabs, 1878–1948. Transaction Publishers. ISBN 978-0-87855-964-0. Retrieved 2 May 2009. 
Khalaf, Issa (1991). Politics in Palestine: Arab Factionalism and Social Disintegration, 1939–1948. State University of New York Press. ISBN 978-0-7914-0708-0. Retrieved 6 May 2009. 
Bayliss, Thomas (1999). How Israel Was Won: A Concise History of the Arab–Israeli Conflict. Lexington Books. ISBN 978-0-7391-0064-6
Bethell, Nicholas The Palestine Triangle: the Struggle Between the British, the Jews and the Arabs, 1935–48, London: Deutsch, 1979 ISBN 0-233-97069-X.
El-Eini, Roza I.M. (2006). Mandated Landscape: British Imperial Rule in Palestine, 1929–1948. London: Routledge. ISBN 978-0-7146-5426-3. Retrieved 5 May 2009. 
Hughes, Matthew, ed. (2004). Allenby in Palestine: The Middle East Correspondence of Field Marshal Viscount Allenby June 1917 – October 1919. Army Records Society. 22. Phoenix Mill, Thrupp, Stroud, Gloucestershire: Sutton Publishing Ltd. ISBN 978-0-7509-3841-9. 
Katz, Shmuel (1973). Battleground: Fact and Fantasy in Palestine. Bantam Books. ISBN 0-929093-13-5. Retrieved 2 May 2009. 
Paris, Timothy J. (2003). Britain, the Hashemites and Arab Rule, 1920–1925: The Sherifian Solution. London: Routledge. ISBN 0-7146-5451-5
Sherman, A J (1998).Mandate Days: British Lives in Palestine, 1918–1948, Thames & Hudson. ISBN 0-8018-6620-0
Vareilles, Guillaume (2010). Les frontières de la Palestine, 1914–1947, Paris, L'Harmattan. ISBN 978-2-296-13621-2

Further reading

Wright, Quincy, The Palestine Problem, Political Science Quarterly, Vol. 41, No. 3 (September, 1926), pp. 384–412, via JSTOR
Hanna, Paul Lamont, "British Policy in Palestine", Washington, D.C., American Council on Public Affairs, (1942)
Miller, Rory, ed. Britain, Palestine and Empire: The Mandate Years (2010)
Ravndal, Ellen Jenny. "Exit Britain: British Withdrawal From the Palestine Mandate in the Early Cold War, 1947–1948," Diplomacy and Statecraft, (Sept 2010) 21#3 pp. 416–433.
Roberts, Nicholas E. "Re-Remembering the Mandate: Historiographical Debates and Revisionist History in the Study of British Palestine," History Compass (March 2011) 9#3 pp. 215–230.
Kamel, Lorenzo. "Whose Land? Land Tenure in Late Nineteenth- and Early Twentieth-Century Palestine", "British Journal of Middle Eastern studies" (April 2014), 41, 2, pp. 230–242.

Primary sources

Golani, Motti, ed. The End of the British Mandate for Palestine, 1948: The Diary of Sir Henry Gurney (2009).

External links



Wikimedia Commons has media related to British Mandate of Palestine.








v
t
e


 British Empire







Legend
Current territory
Former territory
* Now a Commonwealth realm
Now a member of the Commonwealth of Nations
Historical flags of the British Empire











Europe






1542–1800 Ireland (integrated into UK)
1708–1757, 1763–1782 and 1798–1802 Minorca
Since 1713 Gibraltar
1800–1813 Malta (Protectorate)
1813–1964 Malta (Colony)
1807–1890 Heligoland
1809–1864 Ionian Islands
1878–1960 Cyprus
1921–1937 Irish Free State













North America







17th century and before
18th century
19th and 20th century





1579 New Albion
1583–1907 Newfoundland
1605–1979 *Saint Lucia
1607–1776 Virginia
Since 1619 Bermuda
1620–1691 Plymouth
1623–1883 Saint Kitts
1624–1966 *Barbados
1625–1650 Saint Croix
1627–1979 *Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
1628–1883 Nevis
1629–1691 Massachusetts Bay
1632–1776 Maryland
since 1632 Montserrat
1632–1860 Antigua
1635–1644 Saybrook
1636–1776 Connecticut
1636–1776 Rhode Island
1637–1662 New Haven






1643–1860 Bay Islands
Since 1650 Anguilla
1655–1850 Mosquito Coast
1655–1962 *Jamaica
1663–1712 Carolina
1664–1776 New York
1665–1674 and 1702–1776 New Jersey
Since 1666 Virgin Islands
Since 1670 Cayman Islands
1670–1973 *Bahamas
1670–1870 Rupert's Land
1671–1816 Leeward Islands
1674–1702 East Jersey
1674–1702 West Jersey
1680–1776 New Hampshire
1681–1776 Pennsylvania
1686–1689 New England
1691–1776 Massachusetts Bay






1701–1776 Delaware
1712–1776 North Carolina
1712–1776 South Carolina
1713–1867 Nova Scotia
1733–1776 Georgia
1754–1820 Cape Breton Island
1762–1974 *Grenada
1763–1978 Dominica
1763–1873 Prince Edward Island
1763–1791 Quebec
1763–1783 East Florida
1763–1783 West Florida
1784–1867 New Brunswick
1791–1841 Lower Canada
1791–1841 Upper Canada
Since 1799 Turks and Caicos Islands






1818–1846 Columbia District/Oregon Country1
1833–1960 Windward Islands
1833–1960 Leeward Islands
1841–1867 Canada
1849–1866 Vancouver Island
1853–1863 Queen Charlotte Islands
1858–1866 British Columbia
1859–1870 North-Western Territory
1860–1981 *British Antigua and Barbuda
1862–1863 Stickeen
1866–1871 British Columbia
1867–1931 *Dominion of Canada2
1871–1964 Honduras
1882–1983 *Saint Kitts and Nevis
1889–1962 Trinidad and Tobago
1907–1949 Newfoundland3
1958–1962 West Indies Federation












1. Occupied jointly with the United States.
2. In 1931, Canada and other British dominions obtained self-government through the Statute of Westminster. See Name of Canada.
3. Gave up self-rule in 1934, but remained a de jure Dominion until it joined Canada in 1949.













South America






1631–1641 Providence Island
1651–1667 Willoughbyland
1670–1688 Saint Andrew and Providence Islands4
1831–1966 Guiana
Since 1833 Falkland Islands5
Since 1908 South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands5








4. Now a department of Colombia.
5. Occupied by Argentina during the Falklands War of April–June 1982.













Africa







17th and 18th centuries
19th century
20th century





Since 1658 Saint Helena14
1792–1961 Sierra Leone
1795–1803 Cape Colony






Since 1815 Ascension Island14
Since 1816 Tristan da Cunha14
1806–1910 Cape of Good Hope
1807–1808 Madeira
1810–1968 Mauritius
1816–1965 The Gambia
1856–1910 Natal
1862–1906 Lagos
1868–1966 Basutoland
1874–1957 Gold Coast
1882–1922 Egypt






1884–1900 Niger Coast
1884–1966 Bechuanaland
1884–1960 Somaliland
1887–1897 Zululand
1890–1962 Uganda
1890–1963 Zanzibar
1891–1964 Nyasaland
1891–1907 Central Africa
1893–1968 Swaziland
1895–1920 East Africa
1899–1956 Sudan






1900–1914 Northern Nigeria
1900–1914 Southern Nigeria
1900–1910 Orange River
1900–1910 Transvaal
1903–1976 Seychelles
1910–1931 South Africa
1914–1960 Nigeria
1915–1931 South-West Africa
1919–1961 Cameroons6
1920–1963 Kenya
1922–1961 Tanganyika6
1923–1965 and 1979–1980 Southern Rhodesia7
1924–1964 Northern Rhodesia












6. League of Nations mandate.
7. Self-governing Southern Rhodesia unilaterally declared independence in 1965 (as Rhodesia) and continued as an unrecognised state until the 1979 Lancaster House Agreement. After recognised independence in 1980, Zimbabwe was a member of the Commonwealth until it withdrew in 2003.













Asia







17th and 18th century
19th century
20th century





1685–1824 Bencoolen
1702–1705 Pulo Condore
1757–1947 Bengal
1762–1764 Manila and Cavite
1781–1784 and 1795–1819 Padang
1786–1946 Penang
1795–1948 Ceylon
1796–1965 Maldives






1811–1816 Java
1812–1824 Banka and Billiton
1819–1826 Malaya
1824–1948 Burma
1826–1946 Straits Settlements
1839–1967 Aden
1839–1842 Afghanistan
1841–1997 Hong Kong
1841–1946 Sarawak
1848–1946 Labuan
1858–1947 India
1874–1963 Borneo






1879–1919 Afghanistan (protectorate)
1882–1963 North Borneo
1885–1946 Unfederated Malay States
1888–1984 Brunei
1891–1971 Muscat and Oman
1892–1971 Trucial States
1895–1946 Federated Malay States
1898–1930 Weihai
1878–1960 Cyprus






1907–1949 Bhutan (protectorate)
1918–1961 Kuwait
1920–1932 Mesopotamia8
1921–1946 Transjordan8
1923–1948 Palestine8
1945–1946 South Vietnam
1946–1963 North Borneo
1946–1963 Sarawak
1946–1963 Singapore
1946–1948 Malayan Union
1948–1957 Federation of Malaya
Since 1960 Akrotiri and Dhekelia (before as part of Cyprus)
Since 1965 British Indian Ocean Territory (before as part of Mauritius and the Seychelles)










8 League of Nations mandate. Iraq's mandate was not enacted and replaced by the Anglo-Iraqi Treaty











Oceania







18th and 19th centuries
20th century





1788–1901 New South Wales
1803–1901 Van Diemen's Land/Tasmania
1807–1863 Auckland Islands9
1824–1980 New Hebrides
1824–1901 Queensland
1829–1901 Swan River/Western Australia
1836–1901 South Australia
since 1838 Pitcairn Islands






1841–1907 New Zealand
1851–1901 Victoria
1874–1970 Fiji10
1877–1976 Western Pacific Territories
1884–1949 Papua
1888–1901 Rarotonga/Cook Islands9
1889–1948 Union Islands9
1892–1979 Gilbert and Ellice Islands11
1893–1978 Solomon Islands12






1900–1970 Tonga
1900–1974 Niue9
1901–1942 *Australia
1907–1953 *New Zealand
1919–1942 and 1945–1968 Nauru
1919–1949 New Guinea
1949–1975 Papua and New Guinea13












9. Now part of the *Realm of New Zealand.
10. Suspended member.
11. Now Kiribati and *Tuvalu.
12. Now the *Solomon Islands.
13. Now *Papua New Guinea.













Antarctica and South Atlantic






Since 1658 Saint Helena14
Since 1815 Ascension Island14
Since 1816 Tristan da Cunha14
Since 1908 British Antarctic Territory15
1841–1933 Australian Antarctic Territory (transferred to the Commonwealth of Australia)
1841–1947 Ross Dependency (transferred to the Realm of New Zealand)








14. Since 2009 part of Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha; Ascension Island (1922–) and Tristan da Cunha (1938–) were previously dependencies of Saint Helena.
15. Both claimed in 1908; territories formed in 1962 (British Antarctic Territory) and 1985 (South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands).















v
t
e


1948 Palestinian exodus



Main articles



1947–48 civil war
1948 Arab–Israeli War
1948 Palestine war
Causes of the exodus
Nakba Day
Palestine refugee camps
Palestinian refugee
Palestinian right of return
Present absentee
Transfer Committee
Resolution 194








Background



Mandatory Palestine
Israeli Declaration of Independence
Israeli–Palestinian conflict history
New Historians
Palestine
Plan Dalet
1947 partition plan
UNRWA





Key incidents



Battle of Haifa
Deir Yassin massacre
Exodus from Lydda and Ramle





Notable writers



Aref al-Aref
Yoav Gelber
Efraim Karsh
Walid Khalidi
Nur Masalha
Benny Morris
Ilan Pappé
Tom Segev
Avraham Sela
Avi Shlaim





Related categories/lists



Villages depopulated during the 1948 Palestinian exodus





Related templates



Palestinians
Arab–Israeli conflict
Israeli–Palestinian conflict










Authority control



GND: 14496-4
SUDOC: 028869826
BNF: cb12061574v (data)











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mandatory_Palestine&oldid=818128016"					Categories: Former countries in AsiaLeague of Nations mandatesStates and territories established in 1920States and territories disestablished in 1948Mandatory PalestineBritish EmpireFormer countries in the Middle EastHistory of IsraelHistory of JordanHistory of Palestine (region)History of ZionismPolitical entities in the Land of Israel1920s in the British Empire1930s in the British Empire1940s in the British Empire1920s establishments in AsiaSykes–Picot Agreement1948 disestablishments in Asia1920 establishments in the British Empire1948 disestablishments in the British EmpireYishuv during World War IIMandatory Palestine in World War IIHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksCS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknownCS1 uses Russian-language script (ru)CS1 Russian-language sources (ru)CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors listWikipedia pages under 30-500 editing restrictionPages using infobox former country with unknown parametersPages using infobox country or infobox former country with the symbol caption or type parametersArticles containing Arabic-language textArticles containing Hebrew-language textAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from September 2017All pages needing factual verificationWikipedia articles needing factual verification from September 2017Articles with unsourced statements from December 2013Articles with unsourced statements from January 2009Articles with unsourced statements from June 2012Articles with unsourced statements from November 2015Unclassified articles missing geocoordinate dataAll articles needing coordinatesWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiers