"Om Shanti" redirects here. For the 2010 film, see Om Shanti (film). For other uses, see Mantra (disambiguation).




The Om syllable is considered a mantra in its own right in the Vedanta school of Hinduism.






In Tibet, many Buddhists carve mantras into rocks as a form of meditation.











A Mantra Chant





A mantra chant set to Indian classical music (6 minutes 19 seconds)[1]






Problems playing this file? See media help.


A "mantra" (/ˈmæntrə, ˈmɑːn-, ˈmʌn-/ (Sanskrit: मन्त्र);[2]) is a sacred utterance, a numinous sound, a syllable, word or phonemes, or group of words in Sanskrit believed by practitioners to have psychological and spiritual powers.[3][4] Mantra meditation helps to induce an altered state of consciousness.[5] A mantra may or may not have a syntactic structure or literal meaning.[3][6]
The earliest mantras were composed in Vedic Sanskrit by Hindus in India, and are at least 3000 years old.[7] Mantras now exist in various schools of Hinduism, Buddhism, Jainism, and Sikhism.[4][8] In Japanese Shingon tradition, the word Shingon means mantra.[9] Similar hymns, chants, compositions, and concepts are found in Zoroastrianism,[10] Taoism, Christianity, and elsewhere.[3]
The use, structure, function, importance, and types of mantras vary according to the school and philosophy of Hinduism and Buddhism. Mantras serve a central role in tantra.[7][11] In this school, mantras are considered to be a sacred formula and a deeply personal ritual, effective only after initiation. In other schools of Hinduism, Buddhism, Jainism or Sikhism, initiation is not a requirement.[10][12]
Mantras come in many forms, including ṛc (verses from the Rigveda for example) and sāman (musical chants from the Sāmaveda for example).[3][7] They are typically melodic, mathematically structured meters, believed to be resonant with numinous qualities. At its simplest, the word ॐ (Aum, Om) serves as a mantra. In more sophisticated forms, mantras are melodic phrases with spiritual interpretations such as a human longing for truth, reality, light, immortality, peace, love, knowledge, and action.[3][12] Some mantras have no literal meaning, yet are musically uplifting and spiritually meaningful.[7]



Contents


1 Etymology and origins
2 Definition
3 The literal meaning of mantras
4 Hinduism

4.1 History of Hindu mantras
4.2 Function and structure of Hindu mantras
4.3 Examples


5 Jainism

5.1 Navkar Mantra
5.2 Universal Compassion
5.3 Micchami Dukkadam
5.4 Forgiveness


6 Buddhism

6.1 Theravada
6.2 Non-esoteric Buddhism
6.3 Shingon Buddhism
6.4 Indo-Tibetan Buddhism

6.4.1 Om mani padme hum
6.4.2 Some other mantras in Tibetan Buddhism


6.5 Other sects and religions
6.6 Collection


7 Bahá’í Faith
8 Sikhism
9 Taoism
10 See also
11 Notes
12 References
13 External links



Etymology and origins[edit]




Mantras written on a rock near Namche Bazaar Nepal


The Sanskrit word mantra- (m.; also n. mantram) consists of the root man- "to think" (also in manas "mind") and the suffix -tra, designating tools or r instruments, hence a literal translation would be "instrument of thought".[13][14]
Scholars[3][7] consider mantras to be older than 1000 BC. By the middle Vedic period—1000 BC to 500 BC—claims Frits Staal, mantras in Hinduism had developed into a blend of art and science.[7]
The Chinese translation is zhenyan 眞言, 真言, literally "true words", the Japanese on'yomi reading of the Chinese being shingon (which is also used as the proper name for the prominent esoteric Shingon sect).
According to Bernfried Schlerath, the concept of sātyas mantras is found in Indo-Iranian Yasna 31.6 and the Rigveda, where it is considered structured thought in conformity with the reality or poetic (religious) formulas associated with inherent fulfillment.[15]
Mantras are neither unique to Hinduism nor other Indian religions such as Buddhism; similar creative constructs developed in Asian and Western traditions as well.[7] Mantras, suggests Frits Staal, may be older than language.
Definition[edit]
There is no generally accepted definition of mantra.[16]
Renou has defined mantra as a thought.[17] Mantras are structured formulae of thoughts, claims Silburn.[18] Farquhar concludes that mantras are a religious thought, prayer, sacred utterance, but also believed to be a spell or weapon of supernatural power.[19] Zimmer defines mantra as a verbal instrument to produce something in one’s mind.[20] Bharati defines mantra, in the context of the Tantric school of Hinduism, to be a combination of mixed genuine and quasi-morphemes arranged in conventional patterns, based on codified esoteric traditions, passed on from a guru to a disciple through prescribed initiation.[21]
Jan Gonda, a widely cited scholar on Indian mantras,[22] defines mantra as general name for the verses, formulas or sequence of words in prose which contain praise, are believed to have religious, magical or spiritual efficiency, which are meditated upon, recited, muttered or sung in a ritual, and which are collected in the methodically arranged ancient texts of Hinduism.[23] There is no universally applicable uniform definition of mantra because mantras are used in different religions, and within each religion in different schools of philosophy. In some schools of Hinduism for example, suggests Gonda, a mantra is sakti (power) to the devotee in the form of formulated and expressed thought.[3] Staal clarifies that mantras are not rituals, they are what is recited or chanted during a ritual.[7]
In Oxford Living Dictionary mantra is defined as a word or sound repeated to aid concentration in meditation.[24] Cambridge Dictionary provides two different definitions.[25] The first refers to Hinduism and Buddhism: a word or sound that is believed to have a special spiritual power. The second definition is more general: a word or phrase that is often repeated and expresses a particularly strong belief. For instance, a football team can choose individual words as their own "mantra."
The literal meaning of mantras[edit]
There is a long history of scholarly disagreement on the meaning of mantras and whether they are instruments of mind, as implied by the etymological origin of the word mantra. One school suggests mantras are mostly meaningless sound constructs, while the other holds them to be mostly meaningful linguistic instruments of mind.[12] Both schools agree that mantras have melody and a well designed mathematical precision in their construction and that their influence on the reciter and listener is similar to that is observed in people around the world listening to their beloved music that is devoid of words.[3][7]
Staal[7] presents a non-linguistic view of mantras. He suggests that verse mantras are metered and harmonized to mathematical precision (for example, in the viharanam technique), which resonate, but a lot of them are a hodgepodge of meaningless constructs such as are found in folk music around the world. Staal cautions that there are many mantras that can be translated and do have spiritual meaning and philosophical themes central to Hinduism, but that does not mean all mantras have a literal meaning. He further notes that even when mantras do not have a literal meaning, they do set a tone and ambiance in the ritual as they are recited, and thus have a straightforward and uncontroversial ritualistic meaning.[7] The sounds may lack literal meaning, but they can have an effect. He compares mantras to bird songs, that have the power to communicate, yet do not have a literal meaning.[26] On that saman category of Hindu mantras, which Staal described as resembling the arias of Bach's oratorios and other European classics, he notes that these mantras have musical structure, but they almost always are completely different from anything in the syntax of natural languages. Mantras are literally meaningless, yet musically meaningful to Staal.[27] The saman chant mantras were transmitted, from one Hindu generation to next, verbally for over 1000 years, but never written, and a feat suggests Staal that was made possible by the strict mathematical principles used in constructing the mantras. These saman chant mantras are also mostly meaningless, cannot be literally translated as Sanskrit or any Indian language, but nevertheless are beautiful in their resonant themes, variations, inversions, and distribution.[7] They draw the devotee in. Staal is not the first person to view Hindu mantras in this manner. The ancient Hindu Vedic ritualist Kautsa was one of the earliest scholars to note that mantras are meaningless; their function is phonetic and syntactic, not semantic.[28]
Harvey Alper[29] and others[30] present mantras from the linguistic point view. They admit Staal's observation that many mantras do contain bits and pieces of meaningless jargon, but they question what language or text doesn't. The presence of an abracadabra bit does not necessarily imply the entire work is meaningless. Alper lists numerous mantras that have philosophical themes, moral principles, a call to virtuous life, and even mundane petitions. He suggests that from a set of millions of mantras, the devotee chooses some mantras voluntarily, thus expressing that speaker's intention, and the audience for that mantra is that speaker's chosen spiritual entity. Mantras deploy the language of spiritual expression, they are religious instruments, and that is what matters to the devotee. A mantra creates a feeling in the practicing person. It has an emotive numinous effect, it mesmerizes, it defies expression, and it creates sensations that are by definition private and at the heart of all religions and spiritual phenomena.[3][21][31]
Hinduism[edit]


Part of a series on


Hinduism







Hindu
History






Concepts


God / Highest Reality


Brahman
Ishvara
God in Hinduism
God and gender


Life


Atman
Maya
Karma
Samsara
Purusharthas

Dharma
Artha
Kama
Moksha




Ethics


Niti shastra
Yamas
Niyama
Ahimsa
Asteya
Aparigraha
Brahmacharya
Satya
Damah
Dayā
Akrodha
Ārjava
Santosha
Tapas
Svādhyāya
Shaucha
Mitahara
Dāna


Liberation


Bhakti yoga
Jnana yoga
Karma yoga








Schools


Six Astika schools


Samkhya
Yoga
Nyaya
Vaisheshika
Mimamsa
Vedanta

Advaita
Dvaita
Vishishtadvaita




Other schools


Pasupata
Saiva
Pratyabhijña
Raseśvara
Īśvara
Pāṇini Darśana
Charvaka








Deities


Trimurti


Brahma
Vishnu
Shiva



Other major Devis / Devas


Vedic
Indra
Agni
Prajapati
Rudra
Devi
Saraswati
Ushas
Varuna
Vayu


Post-Vedic
Durga
Ganesha
Hanuman
Kali
Kartikeya
Krishna
Lakshmi
Parvati
Radha
Rama
Shakti
Sita








Texts

Scriptures

Vedas


Rigveda
Yajurveda
Samaveda
Atharvaveda


Divisions


Samhita
Brahmana
Aranyaka
Upanishad


Upanishads


Rigveda:
Aitareya
Kaushitaki


Yajurveda:
Brihadaranyaka
Isha
Taittiriya
Katha
Shvetashvatara
Maitri


Samaveda:
Chandogya
Kena


Atharvaveda:
Mundaka
Mandukya
Prashna


Other scriptures


Bhagavad Gita
Agama (Hinduism)

Other texts

Vedangas


Shiksha
Chandas
Vyakarana
Nirukta
Kalpa
Jyotisha


Puranas


Vishnu Purana
Bhagavata Purana
Nāradeya Purana
Vāmana Purana
Matsya Purana
Garuda Purana
Brahma Purana
Brahmānda Purana
Brahma Vaivarta Purana
Bhavishya Purana
Padma Purana
Agni Purana
Shiva Purana
Linga Purana
Kūrma Purana
Skanda Purana
Varaha Purana
Mārkandeya Purana


Itihasas


Ramayana
Mahabharata


Upavedas


Ayurveda
Dhanurveda
Gandharvaveda
Sthapatyaveda


Shastras and Sutras


Dharma Shastra
Artha Śastra
Kamasutra
Brahma Sutras
Samkhya Sutras
Mimamsa Sutras
Nyāya Sūtras
Vaiśeṣika Sūtra
Yoga Sutras
Pramana Sutras
Charaka Samhita
Sushruta Samhita
Natya Shastra
Panchatantra
Divya Prabandha
Tirumurai
Ramcharitmanas
Yoga Vasistha
Swara yoga
Shiva Samhita
Gheranda Samhita
Panchadasi
Stotra
Sutras

Text classification

Śruti Smriti


Timeline of Hindu texts








Practices

Worship

Puja
Temple
Murti
Bhakti
Japa
Bhajana
Yajna
Homa
Vrata
Prāyaścitta
Tirtha
Tirthadana
Matha
Nritta-Nritya


Meditation and Charity


Tapa
Dhyana
Dāna


Yoga


Sadhu
Yogi
Asana
Hatha yoga
Jnana yoga
Bhakti yoga
Karma yoga
Raja yoga
Kundalini Yoga


Rites of passage

Garbhadhana
Pumsavana
Simantonayana
Jatakarma
Namakarana
Nishkramana
Annaprashana
Chudakarana
Karnavedha
Vidyarambha
Upanayana
Keshanta
Ritushuddhi
Samavartana
Vivaha
Antyeshti


Ashrama Dharma


Ashrama: Brahmacharya
Grihastha
Vanaprastha
Sannyasa

Festivals

Diwali
Holi
Shivaratri
Navaratri

Durga Puja
Ramlila
Vijayadashami-Dussehra


Raksha Bandhan
Ganesh Chaturthi
Vasant Panchami
Rama Navami
Janmashtami
Onam
Makar Sankranti
Kumbha Mela
Pongal
Ugadi
Vaisakhi

Bihu
Puthandu
Vishu


Ratha Yatra








Gurus, saints, philosophers


Ancient


Agastya
Angiras
Aruni
Ashtavakra
Atri
Bharadwaja
Gotama
Jamadagni
Jaimini
Kanada
Kapila
Kashyapa
Pāṇini
Patanjali
Raikva
Satyakama Jabala
Valmiki
Vashistha
Vishvamitra
Vyasa
Yajnavalkya


Medieval


Nayanars
Alvars
Adi Shankara
Basava
Akka Mahadevi
Allama Prabhu
Siddheshwar
Jñāneśvar
Chaitanya
Gangesha Upadhyaya
Gaudapada
Gorakshanath
Jayanta Bhatta
Kabir
Kumarila Bhatta
Matsyendranath
Mahavatar Babaji
Madhusudana
Madhva
Haridasa Thakur
Namdeva
Nimbarka
Prabhakara
Raghunatha Siromani
Ramanuja
Sankardev
Purandara Dasa
Kanaka Dasa
Ramprasad Sen
Jagannatha Dasa
Vyasaraya
Sripadaraya
Raghavendra Swami
Gopala Dasa
Śyāma Śastri
Vedanta Desika
Tyagaraja
Tukaram
Tulsidas
Vachaspati Mishra
Vallabha
Vidyaranya


Modern


Aurobindo
Bhaktivinoda Thakur
Chinmayananda
Dayananda Saraswati
Mahesh Yogi
Jaggi Vasudev
Krishnananda Saraswati
Narayana Guru
Prabhupada
Ramakrishna
Ramana Maharshi
Radhakrishnan
Sarasvati
Sivananda
U. G. Krishnamurti
Sai Baba
Vivekananda
Nigamananda
Yogananda
Ramachandra Dattatrya Ranade
Tibbetibaba
Trailanga








Society


Varna




Brahmin
Kshatriya
Vaishya
Shudra




Dalit
Jati


Denominations
Persecution
Nationalism
Hindutva








Other topics


Hinduism by country


Balinese Hinduism
Criticism
Calendar
Iconography
Mythology
Pilgrimage sites


Hinduism and Jainism / and Buddhism / and Sikhism / and Judaism / and Christianity / and Islam








Glossary of Hinduism terms
 Hinduism portal







v
t
e





History of Hindu mantras[edit]
During the early Vedic period, claims Staal,[7] Vedic poets became fascinated by the inspirational power of poems, metered verses, and music. They referred to them with the root dhi-, which evolved into dhyana (meditation) of Hinduism, and the language used to start and assist this process manifested as a mantra. By the middle vedic period (1000 BC to 500 BC), mantras were derived from all vedic compositions. They included ṛc (verses from Rigveda for example), sāman (musical chants from the Sāmaveda for example), yajus (a muttered formula from the yajurveda for example), and nigada (a loudly spoken yajus). During the Hindu Epics period and after, mantras multiplied in many ways and diversified to meet the needs and passions of various schools of Hinduism. Mantras took a center stage in the Tantric school,[32] which posited that each mantra (bijas) is a deity;[11] it is this distinct school of Hinduism and 'each mantra is a deity' reasoning that led to the perception that some Hindus have tens of millions of gods.
Function and structure of Hindu mantras[edit]
One function of mantras is to solemnize and ratify rituals.[33] Each mantra, in Vedic rituals, is coupled with an act. According to Apastamba Srauta Sutra, each ritual act is accompanied by one mantra, unless the Sutra explicitly marks that one act corresponds to several mantras. According to Gonda,[34] and others,[35] there is a connection and rationale between a Vedic mantra and each Vedic ritual act that accompanies it. In these cases, the function of mantras was to be an instrument of ritual efficacy for the priest, and a tool of instruction for a ritual act for others.
Over time, as the Puranas and Epics were composed, the concepts of worship, virtues and spirituality evolved in Hinduism. Religions such as Jainism and Buddhism branched off, and new schools were founded, each continuing to develop and refine its own mantras. In Hinduism, suggests Alper,[36] the function of mantras shifted from the quotidian to redemptive. In other words,[37] in Vedic times, mantras were recited a practical, quotidian goal as intention, such as requesting a deity's help in the discovery of lost cattle, cure of illness, succeeding in competitive sport or journey away from home. The literal translation of Vedic mantras suggests that the function of mantra, in these cases, was to cope with the uncertainties and dilemmas of daily life. In a later period of Hinduism,[38] mantras were recited with a transcendental redemptive goal as intention, such as escape from the cycle of life and rebirth, forgiveness for bad karma, and experiencing a spiritual connection with the god. The function of mantras, in these cases, was to cope with the human condition as a whole. According to Alper,[12] redemptive spiritual mantras opened the door for mantras where every part need not have a literal meaning, but together their resonance and musical quality assisted the transcendental spiritual process. Overall, explains Alper, using Śivasūtra mantras as an example, Hindu mantras have philosophical themes and are metaphorical with social dimension and meaning; in other words, they are a spiritual language and instrument of thought.[38]
According to Staal,[7] Hindu mantras may be spoken aloud, anirukta (not enunciated), upamsu (inaudible), or manasa (not spoken, but recited in the mind). In ritual use, mantras are often silent instruments of meditation.
Examples[edit]
The most basic mantra is Om, which in Hinduism is known as the "pranava mantra," the source of all mantras. The Hindu philosophy behind this is the premise that before existence and beyond existence is only One reality, Brahma, and the first manifestation of Brahma expressed as Om. For this reason, Om is considered as a foundational idea and reminder, and thus is prefixed and suffixed to all Hindu prayers. While some mantras may invoke individual gods or principles, fundamental mantras, like the 'Shanti Mantra, the 'Gayatri Mantra' and others all ultimately focus on the One reality.
Tantric school
In the Tantric school the universe is sound.[39] The supreme (para) brings forth existence through the Word (Shabda). Creation consists of vibrations at various frequencies and amplitudes giving rise to the phenomena of the world.
Buhnemann notes that deity mantras are an essential part of Tantric compendia. The tantric mantras vary in their structure and length. Mala mantras are those mantras which have an enormous number of syllables. In contrast, bija mantras are one-syllabled, typically ending in anusvara (a simple nasal sound). These are derived from the name of a deity; for example, Durga yields dum and Ganesha yields gam. Bija mantras are prefixed and appended to other mantras, thereby creating complex mantras. In the tantric school, these mantras are believed to have supernatural powers, and they are transmitted by a preceptor to a disciple in an initiation ritual.[40] Tantric mantras found a significant audience and adaptations in medieval India, Hindu Southeast Asia and numerous Asian countries with Buddhism.[41]
Majumdar and other scholars[3][42] suggest mantras are central to the Tantric school, with numerous functions. From initiating and emancipating a tantric devotee to worshiping manifested forms of the divine. From enabling heightened sexual energy in the male and the female to acquiring supernormal psychological and spiritual power. From preventing evil influences to exorcizing demons, and many others.[43] These claimed functions and other aspects of the tantric mantra are a subject of controversy among scholars.[44]
Tantra usage is not unique to Hinduism: it is also found in Buddhism both inside and outside India.[45]
Mantra japa
Main article: Japa
Mantra japa is a practice of repetitively uttering the same mantra for an auspicious number of times, the most popular being 108, and sometimes just 5, 10, 28 or 1008.[3][46][47] Japa is found in personal prayer or meditative efforts of some Hindus, as well during formal puja (group prayers). Japa is assisted by malas (bead necklaces) containing 108 beads and a head bead (sometimes referred to as the 'meru', or 'guru' bead); the devotee using his/her fingers to count each bead as he/she repeats the chosen mantra. Having reached 108 repetitions, if he/she wishes to continue another cycle of mantras, the devotee turns the mala around without crossing the head bead and repeats the cycle.[48] Japa-yajna is claimed to be most effective if the mantra is repeated silently in mind (manasah).[46]
According to this school, any shloka from holy Hindu texts like the Vedas, Upanishads, Bhagavad Gita, Yoga Sutra, even the Mahabharata, Ramayana, Durga saptashati or Chandi is a mantra, thus can be part of the japa, repeated to achieve a numinous effect.[49][50][51] The Dharmasāstra claims Gāyatri mantra derived from Rig Veda verse 3.62.10, and the Purușasūkta mantra from Rig Veda verse 10.90 are most auspicious mantras for japa at sunrise and sunset; it is claimed to purify the mind and spirit.[3]
Notable Hindu mantras




Mantra of the Hare Krishna bhakti school of Hinduism



Gayatri

Main article: Gayatri Mantra

The Gayatri mantra is considered one of the most universal of all Hindu mantras, invoking the universal Brahman as the principle of knowledge and the illumination of the primordial Sun. The mantra is extracted from the 10th verse of Hymn 62 in Book III of the Rig Veda.[52]




ॐ भूर्भुवस्व: | तत्सवितुर्वरेण्यम् | भर्गो देवस्य धीमहि | धियो यो न: प्रचोदयात्






Oṁ Bhūrbhuvaswaha Tatsaviturvarenyam bhargo devasya dhīmahi dhiyo yo naḥa prachodayāt,[53]






"Let us meditate on that excellent glory of the divine Light (Vivifier, Sun). May he stimulate our understandings (knowledge, intellectual illumination).[52]




Pavamana mantra

Main article: Pavamana Mantra



असतोमा सद्गमय । तमसोमा ज्योतिर् गमय । मृत्योर्मामृतं गमय ॥ asato mā sad gamaya, tamaso mā jyotir gamaya, mṛtyor māmṛtaṃ gamaya.






(Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad 1.3.28)[54]






"from the unreal lead me to the real, from the dark lead me to the light, from death lead me to immortality.




Shanti mantra

Main article: Shanti Mantra

Oṁ Sahanā vavatu
sahanau bhunaktu
Sahavīryam karavāvahai
Tejasvi nāvadhītamastu
Mā vidviṣāvahai
Oṁ Shāntiḥ, Shāntiḥ, Shāntiḥ.




"Om! Let the Studies that we together undertake be effulgent;
"Let there be no Animosity amongst us;
"Om! Peace, Peace, Peace.
– Taittiriya Upanishad 2.2.2



There are numerous other important mantras.[55]
Shiva sutra mantras
Apart from Shiva Sutras, which originated from Shiva's tandava dance, the Shiva Sutras of Vasugupta[56] are a collection of seventy-seven aphorisms that form the foundation of the tradition of spiritual mysticism known as Kashmir Shaivism. They are attributed to the sage Vasugupta of the 9th century C.E. Sambhavopaya (1-1 to 1-22), Saktopaya (2-1 to 2-10) and Anavopaya (3-1 to 3-45) are the main sub-divisions, three means of achieving God consciousness, of which the main technique of Saktopaya is a mantra. But "mantra" in this context does not mean incantation or muttering of some sacred formula. The word "mantra" is used here in its etymological signification.[57] That which saves one by pondering over the light of Supreme I-consciousness is a mantra. The divine Supreme I-consciousness is the dynamo of all the mantras. Deha or body has been compared to wood, "mantra" has been compared to arani—a piece of wood used for kindling fire by friction; prana has been compared to fire. Sikha or flame has been compared to atma (Self); ambara or sky has been compared to Shiva. When prana is kindled by means of mantra used as arani, fire in the form of udana arises in susumna, and then just as flame arises out of kindled fire and gets dissolved in the sky, so also atma (Self) like a flame having burnt down the fuel of the body, gets absorbed in Shiva.[58]
Transcendental Meditation
Main article: Transcendental Meditation
The Transcendental Meditation technique, also known as 'TM', uses mantras that are assigned to the practitioner to be used as thought sound only, not chanted, without connection to any meaning or idea.[59]
The spiritual exercises of Surat Shabda Yoga include simran (repetition, particularly silent repetition of a mantra given at initiation), dhyan (concentration, viewing, or contemplation, particularly on the Inner Master), and bhajan (listening to the inner sounds of the Shabda or the Shabda Master).
Repetition of a "mantram" (i.e., mantra) or holy name is Point 2 in the eight-point Passage Meditation program taught by Eknath Easwaran, who recommended using a mantram drawn from a faith tradition, east or west. The mantram is to be used frequently throughout the day, at opportune moments.[60] This method of mantram repetition, and the larger program, was developed for use in any major faith tradition, or outside all traditions.[61] Easwaran's method of mantram repetition has been the subject of scientific research at the San Diego Veterans Administration, which has suggested health benefits that include managing stress and reducing symptoms of PTSD.[62][63]
Jainism[edit]
The concept of mantras in Jainism is not focused on material aspects, rather mainly deals with seeking forgiveness, praising Arihants, or deities like Nakoda, Padmavati, Manibhadra, Saraswati, Lakshmi, and others.[citation needed] Yet some mantras are claimed to enhance intellect, prosperity, wealth or fame. There are many mantras in Jainism; most of them are in Sanskrit or Prakrit, but in the last few centuries, some have been composed in Hindi or Gujrati languages. Mantras, couplets, are either chanted or sung, either aloud or by merely moving lips or in silence by thought.[64]
Navkar Mantra[edit]
Some examples of Jain mantras are Bhaktamara Stotra, Uvasagharam Stotra, etc. But the greatest is said to be the Namokar or Navkar Mantra.[citation needed]
The Navkar Mantra (literally, "Nine Line Mantra") is a central mantra in Jainism.[65] The initial 5 lines consist of salutations to various sanctified souls, and the latter 4 lines are explanatory in nature, highlighting the benefits and greatness of this mantra.



Namo Arihantânam
I bow to the Arihantâs (Conquerors).


Namo Siddhânam
I bow to the Siddhâs (Liberated Souls).


Namo Âyariyânam
I bow to the Âchâryas (Preceptors or Spiritual Leaders).


Namo Uvajjhâyanam
I bow to the Upadhyâya (Teachers).


Namo Loe Savva Sahûnam
I bow to all the Sadhûs in the world (Saints or Sages).


Eso Panch Namokkaro,
Savva Pâvappanâsano,
Mangalanam Cha Savvesim,
Padhamam Havai Mangalam.
This fivefold salutation (mantra) destroys all sins
and of all auspicious mantras, (it) is the foremost auspicious one.



Universal Compassion[edit]
Pratikraman also contains the following prayer:[66]



Khāmemi savva-jīve savvë jive khamantu me
I ask pardon of all creatures, may all creatures pardon me.


Mitti me savva-bhūesu, veraṃ mejjha na keṇavi
May I have a friendship with all beings and enemy with none.



Micchami Dukkadam[edit]
In Jainism, forgiveness is one of the main virtues to be cultivated. Kṣamāpanā or supreme forgiveness forms part of one of the ten characteristics of dharma.[67]
In the pratikramana prayer, Jains repeatedly seek forgiveness from various creatures—even from ekindriyas or single sensed beings like plants and microorganisms that they may have harmed while eating and doing routine activities.[68] Forgiveness is asked by uttering the phrase, Micchāmi dukkaḍaṃ. Micchāmi dukkaḍaṃ is a Prakrit phrase literally meaning "may all the evil that has been done be fruitless."[69]
Forgiveness[edit]
In their daily prayers and samayika, Jains recite the following Iryavahi sutra in Prakrit, seeking forgiveness from literally all creatures while involved in routine activities:[70]

May you, O Revered One, voluntarily permit me. I would like to confess my sinful acts committed while walking. I honour your permission. I desire to absolve myself of the sinful acts by confessing them. I seek forgiveness from all those living beings which I may have tortured while walking, coming and going, treading on a living organism, seeds, green grass, dew drops, ant hills, moss, live water, live earth, spider web and others. I seek forgiveness from all these living beings, be they one sensed, two sensed, three sensed, four sensed or five sensed, which I may have kicked, covered with dust, rubbed with earth, collided with other, turned upside down, tormented, frightened, shifted from one place to another or killed and deprived them of their lives. (By confessing) may I be absolved of all these sins.

Buddhism[edit]






This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (August 2008) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)





Part of a series on


Buddhism







History


Timeline
Gautama Buddha


Councils
Later Buddhists











Dharma
Concepts





Four Noble Truths


Five Aggregates
Impermanence


Suffering
Non-self


Dependent Origination


Middle Way
Emptiness
Karma


Rebirth
Saṃsāra
Cosmology








Buddhist texts


Buddhavacana
Tripiṭaka
Mahayana Sutras
Pāli Canon
Tibetan canon
Chinese canon








Practices


Three Jewels


Buddhist Paths to liberation


Morality
Perfections
Meditation
Philosophical reasoning


Mindfulness
Wisdom


Compassion


Aids to Enlightenment
Monasticism


Laity








Nirvāṇa


Four Stages
Arhat


Buddha
Bodhisattva








Traditions


Theravāda
Pāli
Mahāyāna


Hinayana
Chinese
Vajrayāna


Tibetan
Navayana
Newar








Buddhism by country


India
China
Thailand
Japan
Myanmar
Sri Lanka
Laos
Cambodia
Korea
Taiwan
Tibet
Bhutan
Mongolia
Russia








Outline
 Buddhism portal







v
t
e





Theravada[edit]
According to Jack Kornfield,

"The use of mantra or the repetition of certain phrases in Pali is a highly common form of meditation in the Theravada tradition. Simple mantras use repetition of the Buddha’s name, “Buddho,” [as “Buddho” is actually a title rather than a name] or use the “Dhamma,” or the “Sangha,” the community, as mantra words. Other used mantras are directed toward developing loving kindness. Some mantras direct attention to the process of change by repeating the Pali phrase that means “everything changes,” while other mantras are used to develop equanimity with phrases that would be translated, “let go.”
Very often mantra practice is combined with breathing meditation so that one recites a mantra simultaneously with in-breath and out-breath to help develop tranquility and concentration. Mantra meditation is especially popular among the lay people. Like other basic concentration exercises, it can be used simply to the mind, or it can be the basis for an insight practice where the mantra becomes the focus of observation of how life unfolds, or an aid in surrendering and letting go."[71]

The "Buddho" mantra is widespread in the Thai Forest Tradition and was taught by Ajahn Chah and his students.[72] Another popular mantra in Thai Buddhism is Samma-Araham, referring to the Buddha who has 'perfectly' (samma) attained 'perfection in the Buddhist sense' (araham), used in Dhammakaya meditation.[73][74]
In the Tantric Theravada tradition of Southeast Asia, mantras are central to their method of meditation. Popular mantras in this tradition include Namo Buddhaya ("Homage to the Buddha") and Araham ("Worthy One").
Non-esoteric Buddhism[edit]
In Buddhism in China and Vietnam, ten small mantras[75] were finalized by the monk Yulin (玉琳國師), a teacher of the Shunzhi Emperor for monks, nuns, and laity to chant in the morning.
Along with the ten mantras, the Great Compassion Mantra, the Shurangama Mantra of the Shurangama, Heart Sutra and various forms of nianfo are also chanted. The Shurangama Mantra may be the longest mantra. There are Thai Buddhist amulet katha: that is, mantras to be recited while holding an amulet.[76]
Shingon Buddhism[edit]
Kūkai (774-835), a noted Buddhist monk, advanced a general theory of language based on his analysis of two forms of Buddhist ritual language: dharani (dhāra.nī) and mantra. Mantra is restricted to esoteric Buddhist practice whereas dharani is found in both esoteric and exoteric ritual. Dharanis for instance are found in the Heart Sutra. The term "shingon" (lit. true word) is the Japanese pronunciation of the Chinese term for a mantra, zhēnyán.
The word dharani derives from a Sanskrit root dh.r which means to hold or maintain. Ryuichi Abe suggests that it is generally understood as a mnemonic device which encapsulates the meaning of a section or chapter of a sutra. Dharanis are also considered to protect the one who chants them from malign influences and calamities.
The term mantra is traditionally said to be derived from two roots: man, to think; and the action-oriented suffix -tra. Thus a mantra can be considered to be a linguistic device for deepening one's thought or in the Buddhist context for developing the enlightened mind. They have also been used as magic spells for purposes such as attaining wealth and long life and eliminating enemies. In daily living, many thought the pronunciation of the mantra was not important to take its effect and the expected effect, may not happen because of fixed karma (定業), or because there appears a better way to solve the situation.
The distinction between dharani and mantra is hard to make. We can say that all mantras are dharanis but that not all dharanis are mantras. Mantras do tend to be shorter. Both tend to contain some unintelligible phonic fragments such as Om, or Hu.m, which is perhaps why some people consider them to be essentially meaningless. Kūkai made mantra a special class of dharani which showed that every syllable of a dharani was a manifestation of the true nature of reality – in Buddhist terms that all sound is a manifestation of shunyata or emptiness of self-nature. Thus rather than being devoid of meaning, Kūkai suggests that dharanis are in fact saturated with meaning – every syllable is symbolic on multiple levels.
One of Kūkai's distinctive contributions was to take this symbolic association even further by saying that there is no essential difference between the syllables of mantras and sacred texts, and those of ordinary language. If one understood the workings of mantra, then any sounds could be a representative of ultimate reality. This emphasis on sounds was one of the drivers for Kūkai's championing of the phonetic writing system, the kana, which was adopted in Japan around the time of Kūkai. He is generally credited with the invention of the kana, but there is apparently some doubt about this story amongst scholars.
This mantra-based theory of language had a powerful effect on Japanese thought and society which up until Kūkai's time had been dominated by imported Chinese culture of thought, particularly in the form of the Classical Chinese language which was used in the court and amongst the literati, and Confucianism which was the dominant political ideology. In particular, Kūkai was able to use this new theory of language to create links between indigenous Japanese culture and Buddhism. For instance, he made a link between the Buddha Mahavairocana and the Shinto sun Goddess Amaterasu. Since the emperors were thought to be descended form Amaterasu, Kūkai had found a powerful connection here that linked the emperors with the Buddha, and also in finding a way to integrate Shinto with Buddhism, something that had not happened with Confucianism. Buddhism then became essentially an indigenous religion in a way that Confucianism had not. And it was through language and mantra that this connection was made. Kūkai helped to elucidate what mantra is in a way that had not been done before: he addresses the fundamental questions of what a text is, how signs function, and above all, what language is. In this, he covers some of the same ground as modern day Structuralists and others scholars of language, although he comes to very different conclusions.
In this system of thought, all sounds are said to originate from "a" – which is the short a sound in father. For esoteric Buddhism "a" has a special function because it is associated with Shunyata or the idea that no thing exists in its own right, but is contingent upon causes and conditions. (See Dependent origination) In Sanskrit "a" is a prefix which changes the meaning of a word into its opposite, so "vidya" is understanding, and "avidya" is ignorance (the same arrangement is also found in many Greek words, like e.g. "atheism" vs. "theism" and "apathy" vs. "pathos"). The letter a is both visualised in the Siddham script and pronounced in rituals and meditation practices. In the Mahavairocana Sutra which is central to Shingon Buddhism it says: Thanks to the original vows of the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas, a miraculous force resides in the mantras, so that by pronouncing them one acquires merit without limits". [in Conze, p. 183]
A mantra is Kuji-kiri in Shugendo. The word Shingon means mantra.[9] According to Alex Wayman and Ryujun Tajima, Shingon means "true speech", has the sense of "an exact mantra which reveals the truth of the dharmas", and is the path of mantras.[77] The practice of writing mantras, and copying texts as a spiritual practice, became very refined in Japan, and some of these are written in the Japanese script and Siddham script of Sanskrit, recited in either language. There are thirteen mantras used in Shingon-Buddhism, each dedicated to a major deity. The mantra for each deity name in Japanese, its equivalent name in Sanskrit, a transliteration of mantra, and the Japanese version in Shingon tradition are as follows:[78]

Fudōmyōō (不動明王, Acala): nōmaku samanda bazaratan senda makaroshada sowataya untarata kanman (ノウマク・サマンダ・バザラダン・センダマカロシャダ・ソワタヤ・ウン・タラタ・カン・マン)
Shaka nyorai (釈迦如来, Sakyamuni): nōmaku sanmanda bodanan baku (ノウマク・サンマンダ・ボダナン・バク)
Monju bosatsu (文殊菩薩, Manjushri): on arahashanō (オン・アラハシャノウ)
Fugen bosatsu (普賢菩薩, Samantabhadra): on sanmaya satoban (オン・サンマヤ・サトバン)
Jizō bosatsu (地蔵菩薩, Ksitigarbha): on kakaka bisanmaei sowaka (オン・カカカ・ビサンマエイ・ソワカ)
Miroku bosatsu (弥勒菩薩, Maitreya): on maitareiya sowaka (オン・マイタレイヤ・ソワカ)
Yakushi nyorai (薬師如来, Bhaisajyaguru): on korokoro sendari matōgi sowaka (オン・コロコロ・センダリ・マトウギ・ソワカ)
Kanzeon bosatsu (観世音菩薩, Avalokitesvara):on arorikya sowaka (オン・アロリキャ・ソワカ)
Seishi bosatsu (勢至菩薩, Mahasthamaprapta): on san zan saku sowaka (オン・サン・ザン・サク・ソワカ)
Amida nyorai (阿弥陀如来, Amitabha): on amirita teisei kara un (オン・アミリタ・テイセイ・カラ・ウン)
Ashuku nyorai (阿閦如来, Akshobhya): on akishubiya un (オン・アキシュビヤ・ウン)
Dainichi nyorai (大日如来, Vairocana): on abiraunken basara datoban (オン・アビラウンケン・バサラ・ダトバン)
Kokūzō bosatsu (虚空蔵菩薩, Akashagarbha): nōbō akyashakyarabaya on arikya mari bori sowaka (ノウボウ・アキャシャキャラバヤ・オン・アリキャ・マリ・ボリ・ソワカ)

Indo-Tibetan Buddhism[edit]
Mantrayana (Sanskrit), which may be translated as "way of the mantra", was the original self-identifying name of those that have come to be determined 'Nyingmapa'.[citation needed] The Nyingmapa which may be rendered as "those of the ancient way", a name constructed due to the genesis of the Sarma "fresh", "new" traditions. Mantrayana has developed into a synonym of Vajrayana.
Noted translator of Buddhist texts Edward Conze (1904–1979) distinguishes three periods in the Buddhist use of mantra.
Initially, according to Conze, like their fellow Indians, Buddhists used mantra as protective spells to ward off malign influences. Despite a Vinaya rule which forbids monks engaging in the Brahminical practice of chanting mantras for material gain, there is a number of protective mantras for a group of ascetic monks. However, even at this early stage, there is perhaps something more than animistic magic at work. Particularly in the case of the Ratana Sutta the efficacy of the verses seems to be related to the concept of "truth". Each verse of the sutta ends with "by the virtue of this truth may there be happiness".
Conze notes that later mantras were used more to guard the spiritual life of the chanter, and sections on mantras began to be included in some Mahayana sutras such as the White Lotus Sutra, and the Lankavatara Sutra. The scope of protection also changed in this time. In the Sutra of Golden Light the Four Great Kings promise to exercise sovereignty over the different classes of demigods, to protect the whole of Jambudvipa (the Indian subcontinent), to protect monks who proclaim the sutra, and to protect kings who patronise the monks who proclaim the sutra. The apotheosis of this type of approach is the Nichiren school of Buddhism that was founded in the 13th century Japan, and which distilled many previously complex Buddhist practices down to the veneration of the Lotus Sutra through a recitation of the daimoku: "Nam myoho renge kyo" which translates as "Homage to the Lotus Sutra".
The third period began, according to Conze, in about the 7th century, to take center stage and become a vehicle for salvation in their own right. Tantra started to gain momentum in the 6th and 7th century, with specifically Buddhist forms appearing as early as 300CE. Mantrayana was an early name for what is now more commonly known as Vajrayana, which gives us a hint as to the place of mantra in Indo-Tibetan Buddhism. The aim of Vajrayana practice is to give the practitioner a direct experience of reality, of things as they really are. Mantras function as symbols of that reality, and different mantras are different aspects of that reality – for example wisdom or compassion. Mantras are often associated with a particular deity, one famous exception being the Prajnaparamita mantra associated with the Heart Sutra. One of the key Vajrayana strategies for bringing about a direct experience of reality is to engage the entire psycho-physical organism in the practices. In one Buddhist analysis, the person consists of 'body, speech and mind' (refer: Three Vajra). So a typical sadhana or meditation practice might include mudras, or symbolic hand gestures; the recitations of mantras; as well as the visualisation of celestial beings and visualising the letters of the mantra which is being recited. Clearly here mantra is associated with speech. The meditator may visualise the letters in front of themselves, or within their body. They may be pronounced out loud, or internally in mind only.
Om mani padme hum[edit]
Main article: Om mani padme hum




Om mani padme hum on the Gangpori (photo 1938–1939 German expedition to Tibet.


Probably the most famous mantra of Buddhism is Om mani padme hum, the six syllable mantra of the Bodhisattva of compassion Avalokiteśvara (Tibetan: Chenrezig, Chinese: Guanyin). This mantra is particularly associated with the four-armed Shadakshari form of Avalokiteśvara. The Dalai Lama is said to be an incarnation of Avalokiteshvara, and so the mantra is especially revered by his devotees.
The book Foundations of Tibetan Mysticism by Lama Anagarika Govinda, gives a classic example of how such a mantra can contain many levels of symbolic meaning.
Donald Lopez gives a good discussion of this mantra and its various interpretations in his book Prisoners of Shangri-LA: Tibetan Buddhism and the West. Lopez is an authoritative writer and challenges the stereotypical analysis of the mantra as meaning "The Jewel in the Lotus", an interpretation that is not supported by either a linguistic analysis, nor by Tibetan tradition, and is symptomatic of the Western Orientalist approach to the 'exotic' East. He suggests that Manipadma is actually the name of a bodhisattva, a form of Avalokiteshvara who has many other names in any case including Padmapani or lotus flower in hand. The Brahminical insistence on the absolutely correct pronunciation of Sanskrit broke down as Buddhism was exported to other countries where the inhabitants found it impossible to reproduce the sounds. So in Tibet, for instance, where this mantra is on the lips of many Tibetans all their waking hours, the mantra is pronounced Om mani pema hung.[citation needed]
Some other mantras in Tibetan Buddhism[edit]
The following list of mantras is from Kailash: A Journal of Himalayan Studies, Volume 1, Number 2, 1973. (pp. 168–169) (augmented by other contributors). It also includes renderings of Om mani padme hum. The mantras used in Tibetan Buddhist practice are in Sanskrit, to preserve the original mantras. Visualizations and other practices are usually done in the Tibetan language.

Om vagishvara hum This is the mantra of the Mahabodhisattva Manjusri, Tibetan: Jampelyang (Wylie "'jam dpal dbyangs")... The Buddha in his wisdom aspect.
Om mani padme hum The mantra of Avalokitesvara, Mahabodhisattva, the Buddha in his compassion aspect.
Om vajrapani namo hum The mantra of the Buddha as Protector of the Secret Teachings. i.e.: as the Mahabodhisattva Channa Dorje (Vajrapani).
Om vajrasattva hum The short mantra for White Vajrasattva, there is also a full 100-syllable mantra for Vajrasattva.
Om ah hum vajra guru padma siddhi hum The mantra of the Vajraguru Guru Padma Sambhava who established Mahayana Buddhism and Tantra in Tibet.
Om tare tuttare ture mama ayurjnana punye pushting svaha The mantra of Dölkar or White Tara, the emanation of Arya Tara [Chittamani Tara]. Variants: Om tare tuttare ture mama ayurjnana punye pushting kuru swaha (Drikung Kagyu), Om tare tuttare ture mama ayu punye jnana puktrim kuru soha (Karma Kagyu).








Om Tare Tutare Ture Soha.



Om tare tuttare ture svaha, mantra of Green Arya Tara—Jetsun Dolma or Tara, the Mother of the Buddhas: om represents Tara's sacred body, speech, and mind. Tare means liberating from all discontent. Tutare means liberating from the eight fears, the external dangers, but mainly from the internal dangers, the delusions. Ture means liberating from duality; it shows the "true" cessation of confusion. Soha means "may the meaning of the mantra take root in my mind."

According to Tibetan Buddhism, this mantra (Om tare tutare ture soha) can not only eliminate disease, troubles, disasters, and karma, but will also bring believers blessings, longer life, and even the wisdom to transcend one's circle of reincarnation. Tara representing long life and health.

oṃ amaraṇi jīvantaye svāhā (Tibetan version: oṃ ā ma ra ṇi dzi wan te ye svā hā) The mantra of the Buddha of limitless life: the Buddha Amitayus (Tibetan Tsépagmed) in celestial form.
Om dhrung svaha The purification mantra of the mother Namgyalma.
Om ami dhewa hri The mantra of the Buddha Amitabha (Hopagmed) of the Western Pureland, his skin the color of the setting sun.
Om ami dewa hri The mantra of Amitabha (Ompagme in Tibetan).
Om ah ra pa ca na dhih The mantra of the "sweet-voiced one", Jampelyang (Wylie "'jam dpal dbyangs") or Manjusri, the Bodhisattva of wisdom.
Om muni muni maha muniye sakyamuni swaha The mantra of Buddha Sakyamuni, the historical Buddha
Om gate gate paragate parasamgate bodhi svaha The mantra of the Heart of the Perfection of Wisdom Sutra (Heart Sutra)
Namo bhagavate Bhaishajya-guru vaidurya-praba-rajaya tathagataya arhate samyak-sambuddhaya tadyata *Tadyata OM bhaishajye bhaishajye maha bhaishajya raja-samudgate svaha The mantra of the 'Medicine Buddha', from Chinese translations of the Master of Healing Sutra.

There are mantras in Bön and some Chinese sects.[79][80][81]
Other sects and religions[edit]

Ye Dharma Hetu Ancient Buddhist mantra, often found in India and other countries
Om Ma Tri Mu Ye Sa Le Du A mantra of Bon[82]
Nam Myōhō Renge Kyō The mantra of the Nichiren Buddhism.
Myō Myōhō Renge Kyō (名妙法連結経) The mantra of the Tenshō Kōtai Jingūkyō
Ná Mó Běn Shī Dà Zì Zai Wáng Fó (南無本師大自在王佛)[83] The mantra of the Buddhayana sect (佛乘宗).
Námó Tiānyuán Tàibǎo Āmítuófó (南無天元太保阿彌陀佛) The mantra of the Way of Former Heaven and the T'ung-shan She.
Guān Shì Yīn Pú Sà (觀世音菩薩) The mantra of the Li-ism[84][85]
Zhēnkōngjiāxiàng, wúshēngfùmǔ (真空家鄉，無生父母) The mantra of the Luojiao[86][87]
Zhōngshùliánmíngdé, zhèngyìxìnrěngōng, bóxiàoréncíjiào, jiéjiǎnzhēnlǐhé (忠恕廉明德、正義信忍公、博孝仁慈覺、節儉真禮和) The mantra of the Tiender and the Lord of Universe Church[88]
Qīngjìng guāngmíng dàlì zhìhuì wúshàng zhìzhēn móní guāngfó (清淨光明大力智慧無上至真摩尼光佛) The mantra of the Manichaeism in China

Collection[edit]
The mantra in Chinese Buddhist Canon are collected by Qianlong Emperor into a book. Kuang-Ming Lin (林光明) amended it.
Bahá’í Faith[edit]
Bahá’ís recite the mantra "Alláh-u-Abha" 95 times a day. Many use beads.
Sikhism[edit]
In the Sikh religion, a mantar or mantra is a Shabad (Word or hymn) from the Adi Granth to concentrate the mind on God and the message of the ten Sikh Gurus.
Mantras in Sikhism are fundamentally different from the secret mantras used in other religions.[89] Unlike in other religions, Sikh mantras are open for anyone to use. They are used openly and are not taught in secret sessions but are used in front of assemblies of Sikhs.[89]
The Mool Mantar, the first composition of Guru Nanak, is the most widely known Sikh mantra.
Taoism[edit]
There are mantras in Taoism, such as the words in Dafan yinyu wuliang yin (大梵隱語無量音) and the Tibetan Buddhism mantra om (唵). There are mantras in Cheondoism, Daesun Jinrihoe, Jeung San Do and Onmyōdō.[90]
See also[edit]

Bīja
Buddhist chant
Dhikr
Khadgamala
Kirtan
Kotodama
Kuji-in
Pranava yoga
Prayer beads
Rabbit rabbit rabbit, superstition periodic mantra.
Sandhyavandanam
Dhāraṇī (to eliminate evil/demons, destroy hellish conditions, annihilate karma for many past lifetimes etc.)

Notes[edit]


^ This is a Buddhist chant. The words in Pali are: Buddham saranam gacchami, Dhammam saranam gacchami, Sangham saranam gacchami. The equivalent words in Sanskrit, according to Georg Feuerstein, are: Buddham saranam gacchâmi, Dharmam saranam gacchâmi, Sangham saranam gacchâmi. The literal meaning: I go for refuge in knowledge, I go for refuge in teachings, I go for refuge in community. In some traditions of Hinduism, the mantra is expanded to seven lines, with first word of the additional lines being Satyam (truth), Ahimsam (non-violence), Yogam (yoga) and Ekam (one universal life). For example, an additional line with Ahimsam is: Ahimsam saranam gacchâmi.
^ "mantra". Random House Webster's Unabridged Dictionary.
^ a b c d e f g h i j k l Jan Gonda (1963), The Indian Mantra, Oriens, Vol. 16, pages 244-297
^ a b Feuerstein, G. (2003), The Deeper Dimension of Yoga. Shambala Publications, Boston, MA
^ Szász Ilma (1992). States of consciousness induced by mantra meditation of some Eastern and Christian ways respectively. Archive for the Psychology of Religion, Volume 20, Issue 1, pp. 219-233, DOI: 10.1163/157361292X00167
^ James Lochtefeld, The Illustrated Encyclopedia of Hinduism, Volume 2, ISBN 0-8239-2287-1, pages 422-423
^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n Frits Staal (1996), Rituals and Mantras, Rules without meaning, ISBN 978-8120814127, Motilal Banarsidass
^ Nesbitt, Eleanor M. (2005), Sikhism: a very short introduction, Oxford University Press, ISBN 978-0-19-280601-7
^ a b Jane Marie Law (1995). Religious Reflections on the Human Body. Indiana University Press. pp. 173–174. ISBN 0-253-11544-2. 
^ a b Boyce, M. (2001), Zoroastrians: their religious beliefs and practices, Psychology Press
^ a b Teun Goudriaan (1981), Hindu Tantric and Śākta Literature, in A History of Indian Literature, Vol. 2, ISBN 978-3447020916, Chapter VIII
^ a b c d Harvey Alper (1989), Understanding Mantras, ISBN 81-208-0746-4, State University of New York
^ Macdonell, Arthur A., A Sanskrit Grammar for Students § 182.1.b, p. 162(Oxford University Press, 3rd edition, 1927).
^ Whitney, W.D., Sanskrit Grammar § 1185.c, p. 449(New York, 2003, ISBN 0-486-43136-3).
^ Schlerath, Bernfried (1987). ""Aša: Avestan Aša"". Encyclopaedia Iranica. 2. New York: Routledge. pp. 694–696. 
^ Harvey Alper (1989), Understanding Mantras, ISBN 81-208-0746-4, State University of New York, page 3-7
^ T Renou (1946), Litterature Sanskrite, Paris, page 74
^ L. Silburn (1955), Instant et cause, Paris, page 25
^ J. Farquhar (1920), An outline of the religious literature of India, Oxford, page 25
^ Heinrich Robert Zimmer (1946), Myths and symbols in Indian art and civilization, ISBN 9780691017785, Washington DC, page 72
^ a b Agehananda Bharati (1965), The Tantric Tradition, London: Rider and Co., ISBN 0-8371-9660-4
^ Harvey Alper (1989), Understanding Mantras, ISBN 81-208-0746-4, State University of New York, page 9
^ Jan Gonda (1975), Vedic Literature (Samhitäs and Brähmanas), (HIL I.I) Wiesbaden: OH; also Selected Studies, (4 volumes), Leiden: E. J. Brill
^ "Mantra". Oxford Living Dictionary.
^ "Mantra". Cambridge Dictionary.
^ Frits Staal (1985), Mantras and Bird Songs, Journal of the American Oriental Society, Vol. 105, No. 3, Indological Studies, pages 549-558
^ Harvey Alper (1989), Understanding Mantras, ISBN 81-208-0746-4, State University of New York, page 10-11
^ Frits Staal (1996), Rituals and Mantras, Rules without meaning, ISBN 978-8120814127, Motilal Banarsidass, page 112-113
^ Harvey Alper (1989), Understanding Mantras, ISBN 81-208-0746-4, State University of New York, page 10-14
^ Andre Padoux, in Understanding Mantras, ISBN 81-208-0746-4, State University of New York, page 295-317; see also Chapter 3 by Wade Wheelock
^ Harvey Alper (1989), Understanding Mantras, ISBN 81-208-0746-4, State University of New York, page 11-13
^ Frits Staal (1996), Rituals and Mantras, Rules without meaning, ISBN 978-8120814127, Motilal Banarsidass, Chapter 20
^ Jan Gonda (1963), The Indian Mantra, Oriens, Vol. 16, pages 258-259
^ Jan Gonda (1980), Vedic Ritual: The non-Solemn Rites, Amsterdam; see also Jan Gonda (1985), The Ritual Functions and Significance of Grasses in the Religion of the Veda, Amsterdam; Jan Gonda (1977), The Ritual Sutras, Wiesbaden
^ P.V. Kane (1962), History of Dharmasastra, Volume V, part II
^ Harvey Alper (1989), Understanding Mantras, ISBN 81-208-0746-4, State University of New York, see Introduction
^ Harvey Alper (1989), Understanding Mantras, ISBN 81-208-0746-4, State University of New York, pages 7-8
^ a b Harvey Alper (1989), Understanding Mantras, ISBN 81-208-0746-4, State University of New York, Chapter 10
^ Spencer, L. (2015). Flotation: A Guide for Sensory Deprivation, Relaxation, & Isolation Tanks. ISBN 1329173759, ISBN 978-1329173750, p. 57.
^ Gudrun Bühnemann, Selecting and perfecting mantras in Hindu tantrism, Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies / Volume 54 / Issue 02 / June 1991, pages 292-306
^ David Gordon White (2000), Tantra in Practice, Princeton University Press, ISBN 978-0691057798
^ Jean Herbert, Spiritualite hindoue, Paris 1947, ISBN 978-2226032980
^ Bhattāchārya, Majumdar and Majumdar, Principles of Tantra, ISBN 978-8185988146, see Introduction by Barada Kanta Majumdar
^ Brooks (1990), The Secret of the Three Cities: An Introduction to Hindu Sakta Tantrism, University of Chicago Press
^ David Gordon White (Editor) (2001), Tantra in practice (Vol. 8), Motilal Banarsidass, Princeton Readings in Religions, ISBN 978-8120817784, Chapters 21 and 31
^ a b Monier Monier-Williams (1893), Indian Wisdom, Luzac & Co., London, page 245-246, see text and footnote
^ A Dictionary of Hinduism, Margaret and James Stutley (Munshiram Manoharlal Publishers) 2002, p.126
^ Radha, Swami Sivananda (2005). Mantras: Words of Power. Canada: Timeless Books. p. 54. ISBN 1-932018-10-7. Mantra Yoga (chanting), Japa Yoga: Vaikhari Japa (speaking), Upamsu Japa (whispering or humming), Manasika Japa (mental repetition), Likhita Japa (writing) 
^ Some very common mantras, called Nama japa, are: "Om Namah (name of deity)"; for example, Om Namah Shivaya or Om Namo Bhagavate Rudraya Namah (Om and salutations to Lord Shiva); Om Namo Narayanaya or Om Namo Bhagavate Vasudevãya (Om and salutations to Lord Vishnu); Om Shri Ganeshaya Namah (Om and salutations to Shri Ganesha)
^ Meditation and Mantras, Swami Vishnu-Devananda (Motilal Banarsidass Publishers) 1981, p.66
^ A Dictionary of Hinduism, p.271; Some of the major books which are used as reference for Mantra Shaastra are: Parasurama Kalpa Sutra; Shaarada Tilakam; Lakshmi Tantra; Prapanchasara
^ a b Monier Monier-Williams (1893), Indian Wisdom, Luzac & Co., London, page 17
^ Meditation and Mantras, p.75
^ Brhadaranyaka-Upanisad (Brhadaranyakopanisad), Kanva recension; GRETIL version, input by members of the Sansknet project (formerly: www.sansknet.org) Archived 19 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine.
^ For example, see: Om Namo Narayanaya called as Narayana Ashtakshara Mantra; Om Namo Bhagavate Vasudevaya Dvadasakshari mantra; Om Sri Ram Jai Ram Jai Jai Ram; Hare Krishna Maha Mantra; Om Namah Shivaya Siva Panchakshara mantra; Sūrya namaskāra; So'ham (I am He or I am That) (See Meditation and Mantras, p.80); Ram Nam Rama Mantra; Aham Brahma Asmi (I Am Brahman); Sri Vidya Mantras - There are 3 Sri Vidya Mantras - Bala Tripurasundari Mantra, Panchadasi Mantra, Shodasi Mantra; Dakshinamoorthy Mantra; Chandi Navakshari Mantra; Santhana GopalaKrishna Mantra; Shoolini Durga Mantra; Maha Sudarshana Mantra; Maha Ganapathi Mantra; Svayamvara Kala Parvati Mantra
^ Siva Sutras: The Yoga of Supreme Identity, by Vasugupta, translation, Motilal Banarsidass, Delhi, 1979. [1]
^ Beck, G.L. (1995). Sonic Theology: Hinduism and Sacred Sound. Motilal Banarsidass Publ. p. 165.
^ Singh, J. (2012). Siva Sutras: The Yoga of Supreme Identity. ISBN 8120804074, ISBN 978-8120804074
^ Shear Jonathon (Editor), The Experience of Meditation: Experts Introduce the Major Traditions,pg.28.Paragon House. St Paul, MN.,2006.
^ In Hinduism, frequent repetition at opportune moments is a common type of japa.
^ Eknath Easwaran (2008). Mantram Handbook (see article) (5th ed.). Tomales, CA: Nilgiri Press. ISBN 1-58638-028-1 (originally published 1977).
^ Jill E. Bormann, Steven Thorp, Julie L. Wetherell, & Shahrokh Golshan (2008). A Spiritually Based Group Intervention for Combat Veterans with Posttraumatic Stress Disorder. Journal of Holistic Nursing v26 n2, pp 109-116. PMID 18356284, doi:10.1177/0898010107311276.
^ Jill E. Bormann & Doug Oman (2007). Mantram or holy name repetition: Health benefits from a portable spiritual practice. In Thomas G. Plante, & Carl E. Thoresen (Eds.), Spirit, science and health: How the spiritual mind fuels physical wellness (pp. 94-112) (table of contents), Westport, CT: Praeger. ISBN 978-0-275-99506-5
^ jaina.org
^ Jain mantras
^ Jaini, Padmanabh (2000). Collected Papers on Jaina Studies. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass Publ. ISBN 81-208-1691-9.  p.18 and 224
^ Varni, Jinendra; Ed. Prof. Sagarmal Jain, Translated Justice T.K. Tukol and Dr. K.K. Dixit (1993). Samaṇ Suttaṁ. New Delhi: Bhagwan Mahavir memorial Samiti. verse 84
^ Jaini, Padmanabh (2000). Collected Papers on Jaina Studies. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass Publ. ISBN 81-208-1691-9.  p. 285
^ Chapple. C.K. (2006) Jainism and Ecology: Nonviolence in the Web of Life Delhi:Motilal Banarasidas Publ. ISBN 978-81-208-2045-6 p.46
^ Translated from Prakrit by Nagin J. shah and Madhu Sen (1993) Concept of Pratikramana Ahmedabad: Gujarat Vidyapith pp.25–26
^ Kornfield, j. Modern Buddhist masters, pg 311.
^ Ajahn Chah, Clarity of Insight, http://www.ajahnchah.org/book/Clarity_Insight1.php
^ Stede, William (1993). Rhys Davids, TW, ed. The Pali-English dictionary (1. Indian ed.). New Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass. ISBN 8120811445. 
^ Desaransi, Phra Ajaan Thate (2 November 2013). "Buddho". Access to Insight (Legacy Edition). Translated by Thanissaro, Bhikkhu. 
^ "Pinyin of ten mantras". Web.archive.org. 2007-03-24. Archived from the original on 2007-03-24. Retrieved 2012-07-17. 
^ "A mini reference archive library of compiled Buddhist Katha/Katta". Mir.com.my. Retrieved 2012-07-17. 
^ Alex Wayman; Ryujun Tajima (1992). The Enlightenment of Vairocana. Motilal Banarsidass Publ. pp. 225, 254, 293–294. ISBN 978-81-208-0640-5. 
^ The Koyasan Shingon-shu Lay Practitioner's Daily Service, Shingon Buddhist International Institute (1999)
^ "雪域佛教". Archived from the original on 12 July 2012. Retrieved 2012-07-17. 
^ "普傳各種本尊神咒". Buddhasun.net. Archived from the original on 15 March 2012. Retrieved 2012-07-17. 
^ "Mantra - 真佛蓮花小棧(True Buddha Lotus Place)". Lotushouse.weebly.com. 2010-02-27. Retrieved 2012-07-17. 
^ Audio | Bon Shen Ling Audio | A Tibetan Bon Education Fund Archived 26 February 2014 at the Wayback Machine.
^ "本師『大自在王佛』的出處". Epaper.buddhayana.info. 2004-05-15. Retrieved 2012-07-17. 
^ 第094卷 民国宗教史
^ 《原本大学微言》09、中原文化的精品| 南怀瑾 - 劝学网
^ "畫符念咒：清代民間秘密宗教的符咒療法" (PDF). Retrieved 2012-07-17. 
^ 清代的民间宗教
^ "人生守則廿字真言感恩、知足、惜福，天帝教祝福您！". Tienti.info. Archived from the original on 1 March 2012. Retrieved 2012-07-17. 
^ a b Tālib, Gurbachan Siṅgh (1992). "MŪL MANTRA". Encyclopaedia of Sikhism. Patiala: Punjabi University. Retrieved 19 September 2010. 
^ "口遊". S.biglobe.ne.jp. Retrieved 2012-07-18. 


References[edit]

Abe, R. The weaving of mantra: Kukai and the construction of esoteric Buddhist discourse. (New York: Columbia University Press, 1999.)
Beyer, S. Magic and ritual in Tibet: the cult of Tara. (Delhi: Motilal Banarsisdass, 1996).
Conze, E. Buddhism : its essence and development. (London : Faber, c1951).
Eknath Easwaran Mantram Handbook. Nilgiri Press (4th ed. ISBN 978-0-915132-98-0) (5th ed. ISBN 978-1-58638-028-1)
David Frawley, Mantra Yoga and Primal Sound: Secrets of Seed (Bija) Mantras, Lotus Press, Twin Lakes, Wisconsin ISBN 978-0-9102-6194-4
Gelongma Karma Khechong Palmo. Mantras On The Prayer Flag. Kailash: A Journal of Himalayan Studies, Volume 1, Number 2, 1973. (pp. 168–169).
Gombrich, R. F. Theravaada Buddhism: a social history from ancient Benares to modern Colombo. (London, Routledge, 1988)
Govinda (Lama Anagarika). Foundations of Tibetan Mysticism. (London : Rider, 1959).
Khanna, Madhu. Yantra: The Tantric Symbol of Cosmic Unity. (Inner Traditions, 2003). ISBN 0-89281-132-3 & ISBN 9780-89281-132-8
Lopez, D. Prisoners of Shangri-La: Tibetan Buddhism and the West. (Chicago : University of Chicago Press, 1998)
Mullin, G.H. The Dalai Lamas on Tantra, (Ithaca : Snow Lion, 2006).
The Rider Encyclopedia of Eastern Philosophy and religion. (London : Rider, 1986).
Skilton, A. A concise history of Buddhism. (Birmingham : Windhorse Publications, 1994).
Sangharakshita. Transforming Self and World: themes from the Sutra of Golden Light. (Birmingham : Windhorse Publications, 1994).
Walsh, M. The Long discourses of the Buddha: a translation of the Digha Nikaya. (Boston : Wisdom Publications, 1987)
Durgananda, Swami. Meditation Revolution. (Agama Press, 1997). ISBN 0-9654096-0-0
Vishnu-Devananda, Swami. Meditation and Mantras. (Motilal Banarsidass Publishers, 1981). ISBN 81-208-1615-3
Ashley-Farrand, Thomas. Shakti Mantras. (Ballantine Books 2003). ISBN 0-345-44304-7
Stutley, Margaret and James. A Dictionary of Hinduism. (Munshiram Manoharlal Publishers, 2002). ISBN 81-215-1074-0

External links[edit]



Wikiquote has quotations related to: Mantra





Wikimedia Commons has media related to Mantras.







Articles related to Mantra











v
t
e


Worship in Hinduism



Main topics



Aarti
Bhajan
Darśana
Deities
Festivals
Homa (Yajna)
Kirtan
Mantra
Murti
Tilaka
Utsava
Vrata
Yatra





Rituals




Puja



Abhisheka
Bhog
Naivedhya
Panchamakara
Panchamrita
Parikrama
Pranāma
Prasad
Pushpanjali





Homa



Yajna
Agnicayana
Agnihotra
Agnikaryam
Aupasana
Dhuni
Kaamya karma
Pravargya
Purushamedha
Putrakameshti
Viraja Homa





Other



Achamana
Archana
Ashirvad
Ashvamedha
Darśana
Karmkand
Kumbhabhishekham
Nitya karma
Ngejot
Panchayatana puja
Prana pratishta
Sandhyavandanam
Shuddhi
Shrauta
Upakarma











Prayer
Meditation






Ajapa japa
Bhajan
Brahmamuhurtha
Jagran
Jai Sri Ram
Japa
Kirtan
Om
Sandhyavandanam
Shaktipat
Stotra
Third eye
Yoga





Mantras



Om
Hare Krishna
Om Namah Shivaya
Gayatri Mantra





Objects



Puja thali
Altar
Banalinga
Banana leaf
Biruda
Coconut
Dhunachi
Dhuni
Dhupa
Diya
Cāmara
Garland
Ghanta
Joss stick
Kalasha
Kamandalu
Khirapat
Kindi
Paduka
Palki
Panchamrita
Pandal
Pinda
Prayer beads
Rangoli
Shankha
Tilaka
Upanayana
Uthsavar
Yagnopaveetham





Materials



Agarwood
Alta
Camphor
Charu
Ghee
Incense
Kumkuma
Marigold
Milk
Panchagavya
Rudraksha
Sandalwood
Sindoor
Soma
Tulsi
Turmeric
Vibhuti





Instruments



Dholak
Harmonium
Karatalas
Khol
Manjira
Mridangam
Tabla





Iconography



Lingam
Murti
Om
Pindi
Shaligram
Swastika
Yoni
more...





Places



Ashram
Dwajasthambam
Ghat
Kalyani
Matha
Temple
Pilgrimage sites





Roles



Guru
Pandit
Pujari
Rishi
Sadhu
Sannyasa
Swami
Yogi
more...





Sacred animals



Nāga
Nag Panchami
Nagaradhane





Sacred plants




Trees



Akshayavat
Ashoka
Banyan
Kadamba
Kalpavriksha
Parijaat
Peepal
Sacred groves





Fruits and other plants



Bael
Kusha grass
Lotus
Tulsi (Tulasi chaura
Tulsi Vivah)








See also



Firewalking
Sanskara
Temple dance












v
t
e


Buddhism topics






Glossary
Index
Outline





Foundations



Three Jewels

Buddha
Dharma
Sangha


Four Noble Truths
Noble Eightfold Path
Nirvana
Middle Way





The Buddha



Tathāgata
Birthday
Four sights
Physical characteristics
Footprint
Relics
Iconography in Laos and Thailand
Films
Miracles
Family

Suddhodāna (father)
Māyā (mother)
Mahapajapati Gotamī (aunt, adoptive mother)
Yasodhara (wife)
Rāhula (son)
Ānanda (cousin)
Devadatta (cousin)


Places where the Buddha stayed
Buddha in world religions





Key concepts



Avidyā (Ignorance)
Bardo
Bodhicitta
Bodhisattva
Buddha-nature
Dhamma theory
Dharma
Enlightenment
Five hindrances
Indriya
Karma
Kleshas
Mind Stream
Parinirvana
Pratītyasamutpāda
Rebirth
Saṃsāra
Saṅkhāra
Skandha
Śūnyatā
Taṇhā (Craving)
Tathātā
Ten Fetters
Three marks of existence

Impermanence
Dukkha
Anatta


Two truths doctrine





Cosmology



Ten spiritual realms
Six realms

Deva (Buddhism)
Human realm
Asura realm
Hungry Ghost realm
Animal realm
Hell


Three planes of existence





Practices



Bhavana
Bodhipakkhiyādhammā
Brahmavihara

Mettā
Karuṇā
Mudita
Upekkha


Buddhābhiseka
Dāna
Devotion
Dhyāna
Faith
Five Strengths
Iddhipada
Meditation

Mantras
Kammaṭṭhāna
Recollection
Smarana
Anapanasati
Samatha
Vipassanā (Vipassana movement)
Shikantaza
Zazen
Kōan
Mandala
Tonglen
Tantra
Tertön
Terma


Merit
Mindfulness

Satipatthana


Nekkhamma
Pāramitā
Paritta
Puja

Offerings
Prostration
Chanting


Refuge
Satya

Sacca


Seven Factors of Enlightenment

Sati
Dhamma vicaya
Pīti
Passaddhi


Śīla

Five Precepts
Bodhisattva vow
Prātimokṣa


Threefold Training

Śīla
Samadhi
Prajñā


Vīrya

Four Right Exertions







Nirvana



Bodhi
Bodhisattva
Buddhahood
Pratyekabuddha
Four stages of enlightenment

Sotāpanna
Sakadagami
Anāgāmi
Arhat







Monasticism



Bhikkhu
Bhikkhuni
Śrāmaṇera
Śrāmaṇerī
Anagarika
Ajahn
Sayadaw
Zen master
Rōshi
Lama
Rinpoche
Geshe
Tulku
Householder
Upāsaka and Upāsikā
Śrāvaka

The ten principal disciples


Shaolin Monastery





Major figures



Gautama Buddha
Kaundinya
Assaji
Sāriputta
Mahamoggallāna
Mulian
Ānanda
Mahākassapa
Anuruddha
Mahākaccana
Nanda
Subhuti
Punna
Upali
Mahapajapati Gotamī
Khema
Uppalavanna
Asita
Channa
Yasa
Buddhaghoṣa
Nagasena
Angulimala
Bodhidharma
Nagarjuna
Asanga
Vasubandhu
Atiśa
Padmasambhava
Nichiren
Songtsen Gampo
Emperor Wen of Sui
Dalai Lama
Panchen Lama
Karmapa
Shamarpa
Naropa
Xuanzang
Zhiyi





Texts



Tripiṭaka
Madhyamakālaṃkāra
Mahayana sutras
Pāli Canon
Chinese Buddhist canon
Tibetan Buddhist canon





Branches



Theravada
Mahayana

Chan Buddhism

Zen
Seon
Thiền


Pure Land
Tiantai
Nichiren
Madhyamaka
Yogachara


Navayana
Vajrayana

Tibetan
Shingon
Dzogchen


Early Buddhist schools
Pre-sectarian Buddhism
Basic points unifying Theravāda and Mahāyāna





Countries



Afghanistan
Bangladesh
Bhutan
Cambodia
China
India
Indonesia
Japan
Korea
Laos
Malaysia
Maldives
Mongolia
Myanmar
Nepal
Pakistan
Philippines
Russia

Kalmykia
Buryatia


Singapore
Sri Lanka
Taiwan
Thailand
Tibet
Vietnam
Middle East

Iran


Western countries

Argentina
Australia
Brazil
France
United Kingdom
United States
Venezuela







History



Timeline
Ashoka
Buddhist councils
History of Buddhism in India

Decline of Buddhism in India


Great Anti-Buddhist Persecution
Greco-Buddhism
Buddhism and the Roman world
Buddhism in the West
Silk Road transmission of Buddhism
Persecution of Buddhists
Banishment of Buddhist monks from Nepal
Buddhist crisis
Sinhalese Buddhist nationalism
Buddhist modernism
Vipassana movement
969 Movement
Women in Buddhism





Philosophy



Abhidharma
Atomism
Buddhology
Creator
Economics
Eight Consciousnesses
Engaged Buddhism
Eschatology
Ethics
Evolution
Humanism
Logic
Reality
Secular Buddhism
Socialism
The unanswered questions





Culture



Architecture

Temple
Vihara
Wat
Stupa
Pagoda
Candi
Dzong architecture
Japanese Buddhist architecture
Korean Buddhist temples
Thai temple art and architecture
Tibetan Buddhist architecture


Art

Greco-Buddhist


Bodhi Tree
Budai
Buddharupa
Calendar
Cuisine
Funeral
Holidays

Vesak
Uposatha
Magha Puja
Asalha Puja
Vassa


Jaya Sri Maha Bodhi
Kasaya
Mahabodhi Temple
Mantra

Om mani padme hum


Mudra
Music
Pilgrimage

Lumbini
Maya Devi Temple
Bodh Gaya
Sarnath
Kushinagar


Poetry
Prayer beads
Prayer wheel
Symbolism

Dharmachakra
Flag
Bhavacakra
Swastika
Thangka


Temple of the Tooth
Vegetarianism





Miscellaneous



Abhijñā
Amitābha
Avalokiteśvara

Guanyin


Brahmā
Dhammapada
Dharma talk
Hinayana
Kalpa
Koliya
Lineage
Maitreya
Māra
Ṛddhi
Sacred languages

Pali
Sanskrit


Siddhi
Sutra
Vinaya





Comparison



Bahá'í Faith
Christianity

Influences
Comparison


East Asian religions
Gnosticism
Hinduism
Jainism
Judaism
Psychology
Science
Theosophy
Violence
Western philosophy





Lists



Bodhisattvas
Books
Buddhas

named


Buddhists
Suttas
Temples








Category
Portal












v
t
e


Meditation



Main topics



Brain activity and meditation
History of meditation
Meditation in popular culture
Mind–body interventions
Research on meditation





Traditions



Anapanasati (Buddhist breathing meditation)
Buddhist meditation
Christian meditation
Daoist meditation
Dancemeditation
Dhyāna (Buddhist meditation)
Dhyāna (Hindu meditation)
Islamic meditation
Jain meditation
Jewish meditation
Muraqaba (Sufi meditation)
New Age meditation
Naam Japo (Sikism meditation)
Neigong
Pranayama (yoga breathing practice)
Qigong
Shikantaza (Zen Buddhist seated meditation)
Silva Method
Tantra
Transcendental meditation (TM)
Vipassanā (Silent meditation)
Yoga
Zazen (Zen Buddhist seated meditation)
Zhan zhuang (Qigong standing meditation)
5Rhythms





Techniques



Biofeedback
Brainwave entrainment
Breathing
Chanting
Concentration
Emptiness
Guided meditation
Higher consciousness
Mantra
Mindfulness
Mudra
Music
Oneness
Poetry
Postures
Prayer
Relaxation
Samyama
Sexuality
Silence
Sound
Trance
Visualization








 Category
 Wikibooks
 Wikiversity












v
t
e


Yoga



Yoga physiology



Three bodies
Five sheaths
Chakra
Nadi





Hinduism




Four Yogas



Karma yoga
Bhakti yoga
Jnana yoga
Raja yoga





Classical yoga



Yoga (philosophy)
Bhagavad Gita
Yoga Vasistha





History of yoga



Yoga Sutras of Patanjali
Eight Limbs

Yama
Niyama
Āsana
Prāṇāyāma
Pratyahara
Dhāraṇā
Dhyāna
Samādhi







Mantra Yoga



Pranava yoga
Nāda yoga





Tantra



Yogi
Yogini
Siddhi
Shaiva Siddhanta
Kundalini
Chakra
Subtle body





Hatha yoga



Hatha Yoga Pradipika
Gherand Samhita
Shiva Samhita
Yoga as exercise or alternative medicine

Chair Yoga
Anti-gravity yoga


Mudras
List of asanas
List of styles





Contemporary yoga
styles and schools



Ananda Marga Yoga
Ananda Yoga
Anusara Yoga
Ashtanga vinyasa yoga
Bihar School of Yoga
Bikram Yoga
Forrest Yoga
Hot yoga
Integral yoga
Integral yoga (Satchidananda)
Isha Yoga
Iyengar Yoga
Jivamukti Yoga
Kripalu Yoga
Kriya Yoga
Kundalini Yoga
Sahaj Marg
Satyananda Yoga
Sivananda Yoga
Svādhyāya
Viniyoga
Vinyāsa








Buddhism




Theravada



Samatha
Samadhi (Buddhism)
Vipassana
Anapanasati
Visuddhimagga





Mahayana



Yogacara
Zazen





Vajrayana




Indian Buddhist Tantra



Anuttarayoga Tantra





Tibetan Buddhism



Trul khor
Six Yogas of Naropa
Tummo
Dream yoga
Ösel





China



Tangmi





Japan



Shingon Buddhism
Tendai





Indonesia



Kebatinan
Subud











Related



Yoga texts
International Yoga Day
Shinshin-tōitsu-dō








 Book
 Commons
 Wikiquote
 Wikisource texts
 Category
 Portal














Authority control



GND: 4037413-0











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mantra&oldid=818405951"					Categories: MantrasChantsHindu philosophical conceptsIndian poeticsMeditationMysticismSpiritual practicePuja (Hinduism)Sanskrit words and phrasesHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksArticles with hAudio microformatsArticles containing Sanskrit-language textAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from April 2015Articles needing additional references from August 2008All articles needing additional referencesArticles containing Japanese-language textArticles with unsourced statements from March 2010Articles with unsourced statements from June 2016Articles prone to spam from July 2012Use dmy dates from September 2010Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers