For other uses, see Manuscript (disambiguation).




Christ Pantocrator seated in a capital "U" in an illuminated manuscript from the Badische Landesbibliothek, Germany.






10th-century minuscule manuscript of Thucydides's History of the Peloponnesian War


A manuscript (abbreviated MS for singular and MSS for plural) is any document written by hand or typewritten, as opposed to being mechanically printed or reproduced in some indirect or automated way.[1] More recently, it is understood to be an author's written, typed, or word-processed copy of a work, as distinguished from the print of the same.[2] Before the arrival of printing, all documents and books were manuscripts. Manuscripts are not defined by their contents, which may combine writing with mathematical calculations, maps, explanatory figures or illustrations. Manuscripts may be in book form, scrolls or in codex format. Illuminated manuscripts are enriched with pictures, border decorations, elaborately embossed initial letters or full-page illustrations.



Contents


1 Cultural background
2 Modern variations
3 European manuscript history
4 A sample of common genres of manuscripts

4.1 Bibles
4.2 Book of hours
4.3 Liturgical books and calendars


5 Scripts
6 Parts
7 Major U.S. repositories of medieval manuscripts
8 See also
9 References
10 External links



Cultural background[edit]




Armenian Manuscript


The traditional abbreviations are MS for manuscript and MSS for manuscripts,[3][4] while the forms MS., ms or ms. for singular, and MSS., mss or mss. for plural (with or without the full stop, all uppercase or all lowercase) are also accepted.[5][6][7][8] The second s is not simply the plural; by an old convention, it doubles the last letter of the abbreviation to express the plural, just as pp. means "pages".
Before the invention of woodblock printing in China or by moveable type in a printing press in Europe, all written documents had to be both produced and reproduced by hand. Historically, manuscripts were produced in form of scrolls (volume in Latin) or books (codex, plural codices). Manuscripts were produced on vellum and other parchment, on papyrus, and on paper. In Russia birch bark documents as old as from the 11th century have survived. In India, the palm leaf manuscript, with a distinctive long rectangular shape, was used from ancient times until the 19th century. Paper spread from China via the Islamic world to Europe by the 14th century, and by the late 15th century had largely replaced parchment for many purposes.
When Greek or Latin works were published, numerous professional copies were made simultaneously by scribes in a scriptorium, each making a single copy from an original that was declaimed aloud.
The oldest written manuscripts have been preserved by the perfect dryness of their Middle Eastern resting places, whether placed within sarcophagi in Egyptian tombs, or reused as mummy-wrappings, discarded in the middens of Oxyrhynchus or secreted for safe-keeping in jars and buried (Nag Hammadi library) or stored in dry caves (Dead Sea scrolls). Manuscripts in Tocharian languages, written on palm leaves, survived in desert burials in the Tarim Basin of Central Asia. Volcanic ash preserved some of the Roman library of the Villa of the Papyri in Herculaneum.




Gharib al-Hadith, by Abu `Ubayd al-Qasim b. Sallam al-Harawi (d. 223/837). The oldest known dated Arabic manuscript on paper in Leiden University Library, (dated 319 (931 AD))






Lectionary 183






Inside the letter is a picture of a master in cathedra expounding on the Aphorisms of Hippocrates. Initial "V" rendered as "U" of "Vita brevis, ars vero longa", or "Life is short, but the art is long". "Isagoge", fol. 15b. HMD Collection, MS E 78.






Image of two facing pages of the illuminated manuscript of "Isagoge", fols. 42b and 43a. On the top of the left hand page is an illuminated letter "D" - initial of "De urinarum differencia negocium" (The matter of the differences of urines). Inside the letter is a picture of a master on bench pointing at a raised flask while lecturing on the "Book on urines" of Theophilus. The right hand page is only shown in part. On its very bottom is an illuminated letter "U" - initial of "Urina ergo est colamentum sanguinis" (Urine is the filtrate of the blood). Inside the letter is a picture of a master holding up a flask while explaining the diagnostic significance of urine to a student or a patient. HMD Collection, MS E 78.


Ironically, the manuscripts that were being most carefully preserved in the libraries of antiquity are virtually all lost. Papyrus has a life of at most a century or two in relatively moist Italian or Greek conditions; only those works copied onto parchment, usually after the general conversion to Christianity, have survived, and by no means all of those.
Originally, all books were in manuscript form. In China, and later other parts of East Asia, woodblock printing was used for books from about the 7th century. The earliest dated example is the Diamond Sutra of 868. In the Islamic world and the West, all books were in manuscript until the introduction of movable type printing in about 1450. Manuscript copying of books continued for a least a century, as printing remained expensive. Private or government documents remained hand-written until the invention of the typewriter in the late 19th century. Because of the likelihood of errors being introduced each time a manuscript was copied, the filiation of different versions of the same text is a fundamental part of the study and criticism of all texts that have been transmitted in manuscript.
In Southeast Asia, in the first millennium, documents of sufficiently great importance were inscribed on soft metallic sheets such as copperplate, softened by refiner's fire and inscribed with a metal stylus. In the Philippines, for example, as early as 900AD, specimen documents were not inscribed by stylus, but were punched much like the style of today's dot-matrix printers. This type of document was rare compared to the usual leaves and bamboo staves that were inscribed. However, neither the leaves nor paper were as durable as the metal document in the hot, humid climate. In Burma, the kammavaca, Buddhist manuscripts, were inscribed on brass, copper or ivory sheets, and even on discarded monk robes folded and lacquered. In Italy some important Etruscan texts were similarly inscribed on thin gold plates: similar sheets have been discovered in Bulgaria. Technically, these are all inscriptions rather than manuscripts.
The study of the writing, or "hand" in surviving manuscripts is termed palaeography. In the Western world, from the classical period through the early centuries of the Christian era, manuscripts were written without spaces between the words (scriptio continua), which makes them especially hard for the untrained to read. Extant copies of these early manuscripts written in Greek or Latin and usually dating from the 4th century to the 8th century, are classified according to their use of either all upper case or all lower case letters. Hebrew manuscripts, such as the Dead Sea scrolls make no such differentiation. Manuscripts using all upper case letters are called majuscule, those using all lower case are called minuscule. Usually, the majuscule scripts such as uncial are written with much more care. The scribe lifted his pen between each stroke, producing an unmistakable effect of regularity and formality. On the other hand, while minuscule scripts can be written with pen-lift, they may also be cursive, that is, use little or no pen-lift.
Modern variations[edit]
In the context of library science, a manuscript is defined as any hand-written item in the collections of a library or an archive. For example, a library's collection of hand-written letters or diaries is considered a manuscript collection. Such manuscript collections are described in finding aids, similar to an index or table of contents to the collection, in accordance with national and international content standards such as DACS and ISAD(G).
In other contexts, however, the use of the term "manuscript" no longer necessarily means something that is hand-written. By analogy a typescript has been produced on a typewriter.[9]
In book, magazine, and music publishing, a manuscript is an original copy of a work written by an author or composer, which generally follows standardized typographic and formatting rules. (The staff paper commonly used for handwritten music is, for this reason, often called "manuscript paper"). In film and theatre, a manuscript, or script for short, is an author's or dramatist's text, used by a theatre company or film crew during the production of the work's performance or filming. More specifically, a motion picture manuscript is called a screenplay; a television manuscript, a teleplay; a manuscript for the theatre, a stage play; and a manuscript for audio-only performance is often called a radio play, even when the recorded performance is disseminated via non-radio means.
In insurance, a manuscript policy is one that is negotiated between the insurer and the policyholder, as opposed to an off-the-shelf form supplied by the insurer.
European manuscript history[edit]
Main article: Illuminated manuscript




After plummeting in the Early Middle Ages, the high and late medieval period witnessed a sharp increase of manuscript production.[10]


Most surviving pre-modern manuscripts use the codex format (as in a modern book), which had replaced the scroll by Late Antiquity. Parchment or vellum, as the best type of parchment is known, had also replaced papyrus, which was not nearly so long lived and has survived to the present only in the extremely dry conditions of Egypt, although it was widely used across the Roman world. Parchment is made of animal skin, normally calf, sheep, and/or goat, but also other animals. With all skins, the quality of the finished product is based on how much preparation and skill was put into turning the skin into parchment. Parchment made from calf or sheep was the most common in Northern Europe, while civilizations in Southern Europe preferred goatskin.[11] Often, if the parchment is white or cream in color and veins from the animal can still be seen, it is calfskin. If it is yellow, greasy or in some cases shiny, then it was made from sheepskin.[11]
Vellum comes from the Latin word vitulinum which means “of calf”/ “made from calf”. For modern parchment makers and calligraphers, and apparently often in the past, the terms parchment and vellum are used based on the different degrees of quality, preparation and thickness, and not according to which animal the skin came from, and because of this, the more neutral term "membrane" is often used by modern academics, especially where the animal has not been established by testing.[11]
Because they are books, pre-modern manuscripts are best described using bibliographic rather than archival standards. The standard endorsed by the American Library Association is known as AMREMM.[12] A growing digital catalog of pre-modern manuscripts is Digital Scriptorium, hosted by the University of California at Berkeley.
A sample of common genres of manuscripts[edit]
From ancient texts to medieval maps, anything written down for study would have been done with manuscripts. Some of the most common genres were bibles, religious commentaries, philosophy, law and government texts.
Bibles[edit]
“The Bible was the most studied book of the Middle Ages.”[13] The Bible was the center of medieval religious life. Along with the Bible came scores of commentaries. Commentaries were written in volumes, with some focusing on just single pages of scripture. Across Europe, there were universities that prided themselves on their biblical knowledge. Along with universities, certain cities also had their own celebrities of biblical knowledge during the medieval period.
Book of hours[edit]




The Pentecost, from an illuminated Catholic liturgical manuscript, c.1310-1320


A book of hours is a type of devotional text which was widely popular during the Middle Ages. They are the most common type of surviving medieval illuminated manuscripts. Each book of hours contain a similar collection of texts, prayers, and psalms but decoration can vary between each and each example. Many have minimal illumination, often restricted to ornamented initials, but books of hours made for wealthier patrons can be extremely extravagant with full-page miniatures.
Liturgical books and calendars[edit]
Along with Bibles, large numbers of manuscripts made in the Middle Ages were revieved in Church[clarification needed]. Due to the complex church system of rituals and worship these books were the most elegantly written and finely decorated of all medieval manuscripts. Liturgical books usually came in two varieties. Those used during mass and those for divine office.[11]
Most liturgical books came with a calendar in the front. This served as a quick reference point for important dates in Jesus' life and to tell church officials which saints were to be honored and on what day. The format of the liturgical calendar was as follows:
an example of a medieval liturgical calendar


January, August, December
March, May, July, October
April, June, September, November
February


Kal. (1)
Kal. (1)
Kal. (1)
Kal. (1)


IV Non. (2)
VI Non. (2)
IV Non. (2)
IV Non. (2)


III Non. (3)
V Non. (3)
III Non. (3)
III Non. (3)


II Non. (4)
IV Non. (4)
II Non. (4)
II Non. (4)


Non. (5)
III Non. (5)
Non. (5)
Non. (5)


VIII Id. (6)
II Non. (6)
VIII Id. (6)
VIII Id. (6)


VII Id. (7)
Non. (7)
VII Id. (7)
VII Id. (7)


VI Id. (8)
VIII Id. (8)
VI Id. (8)
VI Id. (8)


V Id. (9)
VII Id. (9)
V Id. (9)
V Id. (9)


IV Id. (10)
VII Id. (10)
IV Id. (10)
IV Id. (10)


III Id. (11)
V Id. (11)
III Id. (11)
III Id. (11)


II Id. (12)
IV Id. (12)
II Id. (12)
II Id. (12)


Id (13)
III Id. (13)
Id. (13)
Id. (13)


XIX Kal. (14)
II Id. (14)
XVIII Kal. (14)
XVI Kal. (14)


XVIII Kal. (15)
Id. (15)
XVII Kal. (15)
XV Kal. (15)


XVII Kal. (16)
XVII Kal. (16)
XVI Kal. (16)
XIV Kal. (16)


XVI Kal. (17)
XVI Kal. (17)
XV Kal. (17)
XIII Kal. (17)


XV Kal. (18)
XV Kal. (18)
XIV Kal. (18)
XII Kal. (18)


XIV Kal. (19)
XIV Kal. (19)
XIII Kal. (19)
XI Kal. (19)


XIII Kal. (20)
XIII Kal. (20
XII Kal. (20)
X Kal. (20)


XII Kal. (21)
XII Kal. (21)
XI Kal. (21)
IX Kal. (21)


XI Kal. (22)
XI Kal. (22)
X Kal. (22)
VIII Kal. (22)


X Kal. (23)
X Kal. (23)
IX Kal. (23)
VII Kal. (23)


IX Kal. (24)
IX Kal. (24)
VIII Kal. (24)
VI Kal (the extra day in a leap year)


VIII Kal. (25)
VIII Kal. (25)
VII Kal. (25)
VI Kal. (24/25)


VII Kal. (26)
VII Kal. (26)
VI Kal. (26)
V Kal. (25/26)


VI Kal. (27)
VI Kal. (27)
V Kal. (28)
V Kal. (26/27)


V Kal. (28)
V Kal. (28)
V Kal. (28)
V Kal. (27/28)


IV Kal. (29)
IV Kal. (29)
III Kal. (29)
III Kal. (28/29)


III Kal. (30)
III Kal. (30)
II Kal. (30)



II Kal. (31)
II Kal. (31)




Almost all medieval calendars give each day's date according to the Roman method of reckoning time. In the Roman system, each month had three fixed points known as Kalends (Kal), the Nons and the Ides. The Nones fell on the fifth of the month in January, February, April, June, August, September, November and December, but on the seventh of the month in March, May, July and October. The Ides fell on the thirteenth in those months in which the Nones fell on the fifth, and the fifteenth in the other four months. All other days were dated by the number of days by which they preceded one of those fixed points.[11][14]
Scripts[edit]




Manuscript, Codex Manesse Most manuscripts were ruled with horizontal lines that served as the baselines on which the text was entered.


Merovingian script, or "Luxeuil minuscule", is named after an abbey in Western France, the Luxeuil Abbey, founded by the Irish missionary St Columba ca. 590.[15][16] Caroline minuscule is a calligraphic script developed as a writing standard in Europe so that the Latin alphabet could be easily recognized by the literate class from different regions. It was used in the Holy Roman Empire between approximately 800 and 1200. Codices, classical and Christian texts, and educational material were written in Carolingian minuscule throughout the Carolingian Renaissance. The script developed into blackletter and became obsolete, though its revival in the Italian renaissance forms the basis of more recent scripts.[11] In Introduction to Manuscript Studies, Clemens and Graham associate the beginning of this text coming from the Abby of Saint-Martin at Tours.[11]
Caroline Minuscule arrived in England in the second half of the 10th century. Its adoption there, replacing Insular script, was encouraged by the importation of continental European manuscripts by Saints Dunstan, Aethelwold, and Oswald. This script spread quite rapidly, being employed in many English centres for copying Latin texts. English scribes adapted the Carolingian script, giving it proportion and legibility. This new revision of the Caroline Minuscule was called English Protogothic Bookhand. Another script that is derived from the Caroline Minuscule was the German Protogothic Bookhand. It originated in southern Germany during the second half of the 12th century.[17] All the individual letters are Caroline; but just as with English Protogothic Bookhand it evolved. This can be seen most notably in the arm of the letter h. It has a hairline that tapers out by curving to the left. When first read the German Protogothic h looks like the German Protogothic b.[18] Many more scripts sprang out of the German Protogothic Bookhand. After those came Bastard Anglicana, which is best described as: lipi = pandu lipi pura lipi vignayani

The coexistence in the Gothic period of formal hands employed for the copying of books and cursive scripts used for documentary purposes eventually resulted in cross-fertilization between these two fundamentally different writing styles. Notably, scribes began to upgrade some of the cursive scripts. A script that has been thus formalized is known as a bastard script (whereas a bookhand that has had cursive elements fused onto it is known as a hybrid script). The advantage of such a script was that it could be written more quickly than a pure bookhand; it thus recommended itself to scribes in a period when demand for books was increasing and authors were tending to write longer texts. In England during the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, many books were written in the script known as Bastard Anglicana.

[11]
Parts[edit]

Cover
Flyleaf
Colophon
incipit
decoration; illustrations
dimensions
Shelfmark or Signature in holding library

(as opposed to printed Catalog number)

works/compositions included in same ms
codicological elements:
deletions method: erasure? overstrike? dots above letters?
headers/footers
page format/layout: columns? text and surrounding commentary/additions/glosses?
interpolations
owners' marginal notations/corrections
owner signatures
dedication/inscription
censor signatures
collation (quires)
foliation
Binding
materials: paper/vellum/papyrus/uncials
Ink
writing implement used
pastedown
page numeration
paleographic elements:
script (one or more?)
dating
line fillers
rubrication
ruled lines
leading word at bottom corner of page to indicate what first word on next page is [=catchwords?]
historical elements of ms: blood, wine etc. stains
condition: (e.g. smokiness/evidence of fire)
mold
wormed


Major U.S. repositories of medieval manuscripts[edit]

The Morgan Library & Museum = 1,300 (including papyri)
Beinecke Rare Book and Manuscript Library, Yale = 1,100
Walters Art Museum = 1,000
Houghton Library, Harvard = 850
Huntington Library = 400
Newberry Library = 260
Cornell University Library = 150

See also[edit]



Look up manuscript or handwrit in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.




Armenian Illuminated manuscript
Dead Sea Scrolls
Digital Scriptorium
Genkō yōshi
Gospel Book
List of Glagolitic manuscripts
List of Hiberno-Saxon illustrated manuscripts
Manuscript culture
Miniature (illuminated manuscript)
Music manuscript
Palm-leaf manuscript
Preservation of Illuminated Manuscripts
Printing press
Voynich manuscript
Woodblock printing


References[edit]


^ http://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/manuscript
^ "manuscript". Oxford English Dictionary (3rd ed.). Oxford University Press. September 2005.  (Subscription or UK public library membership required.)
^ Harper, Douglas. "Manuscript." Online Etymology Dictionary. November 2001. Accessed 10-11-2007.
^ "Medieval English Literary Manuscripts." www.Library.Rtruuochester.Edu. 22 June 2004. University of Rochester Libraries. Accessed 10-11-2007.
^ "Manuscript" (abbreviated ms. and mss.) in British Library Glossaries, The British Library. Accessed 12 March 2016.
^ "ms", "ms." and "MS" in The Free Dictionary (American Heritage 2011 and Random House Kernerman Webster's 2010). Accessed 12 March 2016.
^ "MSS", "mss" and "mss." in The Free Dictionary (American Heritage 2011, Collins 2014 and Random House Kernerman Webster's 2010). Accessed 12 March 2016.
^ "MSS" (MS. and ms., MSS. and mss.) in Dictionary.com LLC(Random House 2014 and Collins 2012). Accessed 12 March 2016.
^ Merriam-Webster, Merriam-Webster's Collegiate Dictionary, Merriam-Webster. 
^ Buringh, Eltjo; van Zanden, Jan Luiten: "Charting the “Rise of the West”: Manuscripts and Printed Books in Europe, A Long-Term Perspective from the Sixth through Eighteenth Centuries", The Journal of Economic History, Vol. 69, No. 2 (2009), pp. 409–445 (416, table 1)
^ a b c d e f g h Clemens, Raymond, and Timothy Graham. Introduction to Manuscript Studies. Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 2008.
^ Pass, Gregory. Descriptive Cataloging of Ancient, Medieval, Renaissance, and Early Modern Manuscripts. Chicago: Association of College and Research Libraries, 2002.
^ Beryl Smalley, The Study of the Bible in the Middle Ages. 3rd ed. (Oxford, 1983), xxvii
^ F.P. Pickering, The Calendar Pages of Medieval Service Books: An Introductory Note for Art Historians (Reading, UK., 1980.
^ Brown, Michelle P. Anglo-Saxon Manuscripts. Toronto, 1991.
^ Brown, Michelle P. A Guide to Western Historical Scripts from Antiquity to 1600. Toronto,1990.
^ Clemens, Raymond, and Timothy Graham. "English Protogothic Bookhand." In Introduction to Manuscript Studies. Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 2008. 146-147.
^ Clemens, Raymond, and Timothy Graham. "German Protogothic Bookhand." In Introduction to Manuscript Studies. Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 2008. 149-150.


External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Manuscripts.



British Library Glossary of manuscript terms, mostly relating to Western medieval manuscripts
Centre for the Studies of Manuscript Cultures, Hamburg
Centre for the History of the Book, University of Edinburgh
Chinese Codicology
Digital Scriptorium
Shapell Manuscript Foundation
Manuscripts Department, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
The Sarasvati Mahal Library, has the richest collection of manuscripts in Sanskrit, Tamil, Marathi and Telugu
The Schøyen Collection – the world's largest private collection of manuscripts of all types, with many descriptions and images
 Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913). "Manuscripts". Catholic Encyclopedia. New York: Robert Appleton Company. 
Newberry Library Manuscript Search
Getty Exhibitions
Polish manuscripts in Sweden
Medieval Manuscript Leaves, University of Colorado Boulder Libraries
Manuscripts of Lichfield Cathedral - Digital facsimile of the 8th-century St Chad Gospels and Cathedral's 15th-century Wycliffe New Testament, 2010. Includes the ability to overlay images captured with 13 different bands of light, historical images (starting in 1887), and multispectral visualizations. Also includes sixteen interactive 3D renderings. College of Arts & Sciences, University of Kentucky
Historical Image Overlays - See how an early medieval manuscript is aging







v
t
e


Historiography






Historical method
History
history
theories of history
historiography
historians





Primary sources



Historical documents
Papyri
Religious texts
Codices
Scrolls
Hieroglyphs
Manuscripts
Facsimiles
Archives
Deeds





Organizations, Institutes



Historical society
Historiographical Institute of the University of Tokyo





Concepts (choice)



Battle for Australia
Pax Sinica
Political midlife crisis
Renaissance
Translatio imperii





Methodology, Schools (choice)



Annales School

History of mentalities
Nouvelle histoire


Microhistory
Case study
Historical linguistics
Great Man theory

Heroic theory of invention and scientific development


Historic recurrence
Historical anthropology
Historical determinism
Historical realism
Historicism
Historiometry

Cliometrics


Historism
Marxist historiography

Historical materialism


Codicology
Palaeography
Intellectual history

Idea of Progress
History of modernisation theory


Historical criticism
Historical geography

Historical geographic information system







By country



Historiography of Albania
Historiography of Argentina
Historiography of Canada
Chinese historiography
Historiography of Germany
Greek historiography
Historiography of early Islam
Historiography of Japan
Roman historiography
Serbian historiography

Encyclopedia of Serbian Historiography


Historiography in the Soviet Union
Historiography of the United Kingdom
Historiography of the United States
Historiography of Scotland
Historiography of Switzerland





Others



Historiography of science
Historiography of the salon
Historiography of the May Revolution
Historiography of World War II
Functionalism versus intentionalism
Historiography of early Islam





Related



Historical fiction
Historical revisionism
Historical negationism
Historiography and nationalism
Historical marker
List of historians









Authority control



GND: 4126273-6
NDL: 00571802






thanks





						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Manuscript&oldid=813617220"					Categories: ManuscriptsBook terminologyTextual criticismTextual scholarshipLeather goodsHidden categories: Wikipedia articles needing clarification from August 2016Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource referenceUse dmy dates from March 2011Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers