Not to be confused with the political theory based in part on Mao Zedong Thought, Marxism–Leninism–Maoism.
For the ancient Chinese utilitarian philosophy, see Mohism.
"Maoist" redirects here. For the novel by Roopesh, see Maoist (novel).


Part of a series on


Maoism
(Mao Zedong Thought)







Basic concepts



Antagonistic contradiction
Anti-revisionism
Cultural Revolution
Marxism–Leninism
Mass line
New Democracy
People's war
Revolutionary base area
Self-criticism
Social imperialism









Tendencies



Deng Xiaoping Theory
Xi Jinping Thought
Maoism (Third Worldism)
Mao-Spontex
Marxism–Leninism–Maoism
Marxism–Leninism–Maoism–Prachanda Path









Prominent Maoists

Mao Zedong

Akram Yari
Chen Boda
Abimael Guzmán
İbrahim Kaypakkaya
Lin Biao
Charu Majumdar
Siraj Sikder
Pierre Mulele
Huey P. Newton
Mohan Baidya
Jiang Qing
Chin Peng
Jose Maria Sison
Yao Wenyuan
Zhang Chunqiao
Li Minqi
Charles Bettelheim
Afzal Bangash









International




Conference of Marxist-Leninist
Parties and Organizations


Revolutionary Internationalist
Movement


CCOMPOSA










Key books



Quotations from Chairman Mao
On Contradiction
On Practice
On Guerrilla Warfare
On Protracted War
A Critique of Soviet Economics
Historic Eight Documents









Related topics



Communism
Communist Party of China

Thought reform in the
People's Republic of China

CPP–NPA–NDF rebellion
Naxalite
Naxalite–Maoist insurgency

Communist insurgency in
the Philippines

Nepalese Civil War
Guevarism
Internal conflict in Peru
Maoist insurgency in Turkey
Red Guards (China)









Communism portal
Socialism portal







v
t
e









Chairman Mao Zedong


Mao Zedong Thought (simplified Chinese: 毛泽东思想; traditional Chinese: 毛澤東思想; pinyin: Máo Zédōng Sīxiǎng), or Maoism, is a political theory derived from the teachings of the Chinese political leader Mao Zedong (1893–1976), whose followers are known as Maoists. Developed from the 1950s until the Deng Xiaoping reforms in the 1970s, it was widely applied as the guiding political and military ideology of the Communist Party of China (CPC) and as theory guiding revolutionary movements around the world. The essential difference between Maoism and other forms of Marxism is that Mao said that peasants should be the bulwark of the revolutionary energy, led by the working class in China.



Contents


1 Origins

1.1 The modern Chinese intellectual tradition

1.1.1 Iconoclastic revolution/anti-Confucianism
1.1.2 Nationalism and the appeal of Marxism


1.2 The Yan'an period
1.3 Mao's intellectual Marxist development


2 Components

2.1 New Democracy
2.2 People's War
2.3 Mass Line
2.4 Cultural Revolution
2.5 Contradiction
2.6 Three Worlds Theory
2.7 Agrarian socialism


3 Maoism in China
4 Maoism after Mao

4.1 China
4.2 Internationally


5 Maoism's international impact

5.1 Afghanistan
5.2 Bangladesh
5.3 Belgium
5.4 Ecuador
5.5 Iran
5.6 Palestine
5.7 Portugal
5.8 United States
5.9 Spain
5.10 Turkey
5.11 Maoist organizations


6 Criticisms and interpretations

6.1 Populism
6.2 Nationalism


7 See also
8 References
9 Further reading
10 External links



Origins[edit]
Further information: Ideology of the Communist Party of China
The modern Chinese intellectual tradition[edit]
The modern Chinese intellectual tradition of the turn of the twentieth century is defined by two central concepts: iconoclasm and nationalism.[1]
Iconoclastic revolution/anti-Confucianism[edit]
By the turn of the twentieth century, a proportionately small yet socially significant cross-section of China's traditional elite (i.e. landlords and bureaucrats) found themselves increasingly skeptical of the efficacy and even the moral validity of Confucianism.[2] These skeptical iconoclasts formed a new segment of Chinese society, a modern intelligentsia, whose arrival, or as historian of China Maurice Meisner would label it, their defection, heralded the beginning of the destruction of the gentry as a social class in China.[3] The fall of the last imperial Chinese dynasty in 1911 marked the final failure of the Confucian moral order and it did much to make Confucianism synonymous with political and social conservatism in the minds of Chinese intellectuals. It was this association of conservatism and Confucianism which lent to the iconoclastic nature of Chinese intellectual thought during the first decades of the twentieth century.[4]
Chinese iconoclasm was expressed most clearly and vociferously by Chen Duxiu during the New Culture Movement which occurred between 1915 and 1919.[5] Proposing the "total destruction of the traditions and values of the past", the New Culture Movement was spearheaded by the New Youth, a periodical which was published by Chen Duxiu and was profoundly influential on the young Mao Zedong, whose first published work appeared on the magazine's pages.[5]
Nationalism and the appeal of Marxism[edit]
Along with iconoclasm, radical anti-imperialism dominated the Chinese intellectual tradition and slowly evolved into a fierce nationalist fervor which influenced Mao's philosophy immensely and was crucial in adapting Marxism to the Chinese model.[6] Vital to understanding Chinese nationalist sentiments of the time is the Treaty of Versailles, which was signed in 1919. The Treaty aroused a wave of bitter nationalist resentment in Chinese intellectuals as lands formerly ceded to Germany in Shandong were—without consultation with the Chinese—transferred to Japanese control rather than returned to Chinese sovereignty.[7] The negative reaction culminated in the May 4th Incident which occurred on that day in 1919. The protest began with 3,000 students in Beijing displaying their anger at the announcement of the Versailles Treaty's concessions to Japan, yet rapidly took a violent turn as protesters began attacking the homes and offices of ministers who were seen as cooperating with, or in the direct pay of the Japanese.[7] The May 4th Incident and Movement which followed, "catalyzed the political awakening of a society which had long seemed inert and dormant".[7]
Yet another international event would have a large impact not only on Mao, but also on the Chinese intelligentsia: the Bolshevik Revolution of 1917. Although the revolution did elicit interest among Chinese intellectuals, socialist revolution in China was not considered a viable option until after the May 4 Incident.[8] Afterwards, "[t]o become a Marxist was one way for a Chinese intellectual to reject both the traditions of the Chinese past and Western domination of the Chinese present".[8]
The Yan'an period[edit]
During the period immediately following the Long March, Mao and the Communist Party of China were headquartered in Yan'an, which is a prefecture-level city in Shaanxi province. During this period, Mao clearly established himself as a Marxist theoretician and he produced the bulk of the works which would later be canonized into the "thought of Mao Zedong".[9] The rudimentary philosophical base of Chinese Communist ideology is laid down in Mao's numerous dialectical treatises and it was conveyed to newly recruited party members. This period truly established ideological independence from Moscow for Mao and the CPC.[9] Although the Yan'an period did answer some of the questions, both ideological and theoretical, which were raised by the Chinese Communist Revolution, it left many of the crucial questions unresolved; including how the Communist Party of China was supposed to launch a socialist revolution while completely separated from the urban sphere.[9]
Mao's intellectual Marxist development[edit]
Mao's Intellectual Marxist development can be divided into five major periods: (1) The Initial Marxist Period from 1920–1926; (2) the formative Maoist period from 1927–1935; (3) the mature Maoist period from 1935–1940; (4) the civil war period from 1940–1949; and (5) the post-1949 period, following the revolutionary victory.

The Initial Marxist Period from 1920–1926: Marxist thinking employs imminent socioeconomic explanations and Mao's reasons were declarations of his enthusiasm. Mao did not believe that education alone would bring about the transition from capitalism to communism because of three main reasons. (1) Psychologically: the capitalists would not repent and turn towards communism on their own; (2) the rulers must be overthrown by the people; (3) "the proletarians are discontented, and a demand for communism has arisen and had already become a fact".[10] These reasons do not provide socioeconomic explanations, which usually form the core of Marxist ideology.
The Formative Maoist Period from 1927–1935: in this period, Mao avoided all theoretical implications in his literature and employed a minimum of Marxist category thought. His writings in this period failed to elaborate what he meant by the "Marxist method of political and class analysis".[11] Prior to this period, Mao was concerned with the dichotomy between knowledge and action. He was more concerned with the dichotomy between revolutionary ideology and counter-revolutionary objective conditions. There was more correlation drawn between China and the Soviet model.
The Mature Maoist Period from 1935–1940: intellectually, this was Mao's most fruitful time. The shift of orientation was apparent in his pamphlet Strategic Problems of China's Revolutionary War (December, 1936). "This pamphlet tried to provide a theoretical veneer for his concern with revolutionary practice".[12] Mao started to separate from the Soviet model since it was not automatically applicable to China. China's unique set of historical circumstances demanded a correspondingly unique application of Marxist theory, an application that would have to diverge from the Soviet approach.
The Civil-War Period from 1940–1949: unlike the Mature period, this period was intellectually barren. Mao focused more on revolutionary practice and paid less attention to Marxist theory. "He continued to emphasize theory as practice-oriented knowledge".[13] The biggest topic of theory he delved into was in connection with the Cheng Feng movement of 1942. It was here that Mao summarized the correlation between Marxist theory and Chinese practice; "The target is the Chinese revolution, the arrow is Marxism–Leninism. We Chinese communists seek this arrow for no other purpose than to hit the target of the Chinese revolution and the revolution of the east".[13] The only new emphasis was Mao's concern with two types of subjectivist deviation: (1) dogmatism, the excessive reliance upon abstract theory; (2) empiricism, excessive dependence on experience.
The post-1949 period following the revolutionary victory: the victory of 1949 was to Mao a confirmation of theory and practice. "Optimism is the keynote to Mao's intellectual orientation in the post-1949 period".[14] Mao assertively revised theory to relate it to the new practice of socialist construction. These revisions are apparent in the 1951 version of On Contradiction. "In the 1930s, when Mao talked about contradiction, he meant the contradiction between subjective thought and objective reality. In Dialectal Materialism of 1940, he saw idealism and materialism as two possible correlations between subjective thought and objective reality. In the 1940s, he introduced no new elements into his understanding of the subject-object contradiction. In the 1951 version of On Contradiction, he saw contradiction as a universal principle underlying all processes of development, yet with each contradiction possessed of its own particularity".[15]

Components[edit]


Part of a series on


Marxism–Leninism







Concepts


Anti-imperialism
Anti-revisionism
Commanding heights of the economy
Communist society
Communist state
Democratic centralism
Economic planning
Marxist–Leninist atheism
One-party state
People's democracy
Popular front
Proletarian internationalism
Socialist patriotism
Socialist state
Theory of the productive forces
Third Period
Vanguardism








Variants


Guevarism
Ho Chi Minh Thought
Hoxhaism
Husakism
Kadarism
Khrushchevism
Maoism
Marxism–Leninism–Maoism
Prachanda Path
Titoism
Stalinism
National Bolshevism








People


Joseph Stalin
Ernst Thälmann
Earl Browder
Gonchigiin Bumtsend
Mao Zedong
Abimael Guzmán
José Díaz
Josip Broz Tito
Enver Hoxha
Palmiro Togliatti
Fidel Castro
Che Guevara
Ho Chi Minh
Mathieu Kérékou
Agostinho Neto
Samora Machel
Thomas Sankara
Alfonso Cano








Literature


Wage Labour and Capital
Materialism and Empirio-criticism
Imperialism  
What Is to Be Done?
The State and Revolution

Dialectical and
Historical Materialism

Guerrilla Warfare

Fundamentals of
Marxism–Leninism









History


October Revolution
Soviet Union
Comintern
Hungarian Soviet Republic
Spanish Civil War
World War II
Warsaw Pact
Greek Civil War
Chinese Revolution
Korean War
Cuban Revolution
De-Stalinization
Non-Aligned Movement
Sino-Soviet split
Vietnam War
Portuguese Colonial War
Black Power movement
Nicaraguan Revolution
Nepalese Civil War
Naxalite insurgency
Internal conflict in Peru








Related topics


Bolshevism
Marxism
Leninism
Trotskyism








Communism portal
Socialism portal







v
t
e





New Democracy[edit]
The theory of the New Democracy was known to the Chinese revolutionaries from the late 1940s. This thesis held that for the majority of the people of the planet, the long road to socialism could only be opened by a "national, popular, democratic, anti-feudal and anti-imperialist revolution, run by the communists".[16]
People's War[edit]
Holding that "Political power grows out of the barrel of a gun",[17] Maoist Thought emphasizes the "revolutionary struggle of the vast majority of people against the exploiting classes and their state structures", which Mao termed a "People's War". Mobilizing large parts of rural populations to revolt against established institutions by engaging in guerrilla warfare, Maoist Thought focuses on "surrounding the cities from the countryside".
Maoism views the industrial-rural divide as a major division exploited by capitalism, identifying capitalism as involving industrial urban developed "First World" societies ruling over rural developing "Third World" societies.[18] Maoism identifies peasant insurgencies in particular national contexts were part of a context of world revolution, in which Maoism views the global countryside would overwhelm the global cities.[19] Due to this imperialism by the capitalist urban First World towards the rural Third World, Maoism has endorsed national liberation movements in the Third World.[19]
Mass Line[edit]
The theory of the Mass Line holds, contrary to the Leninist vanguard model employed by the Bolsheviks, that party must not be separate from the popular masses, either in policy or in revolutionary struggle. To conduct a successful revolution the needs and demands of the masses must be the most important issues.
Cultural Revolution[edit]
The theory of the Cultural Revolution states that the proletarian revolution and the dictatorship of the proletariat does not wipe out bourgeois ideology—the class-struggle continues and even intensifies during socialism, therefore a constant struggle against these ideologies and their social roots must be conducted. Cultural Revolution is directed also against traditionalism.
Contradiction[edit]
Mao Zedong drew from the writings of Karl Marx, Friedrich Engels and Vladimir Lenin in elaborating his theory. Philosophically, his most important reflections emerge on the concept of "contradiction" (maodun). In two major essays, On Contradiction and On the Correct Handling of Contradictions Among the People, he adopts the positivist-empiricist idea (shared by Engels) that contradiction is present in matter itself and thus also in the ideas of the brain. Matter always develops through a dialectical contradiction: "The interdependence of the contradictory aspects present in all things and the struggle between these aspects determine the life of things and push their development forward. There is nothing that does not contain contradiction; without contradiction nothing would exist".[20]
Furthermore, each contradiction (including class struggle, the contradiction holding between relations of production and the concrete development of forces of production) expresses itself in a series of other contradictions, some dominant, others not. "There are many contradictions in the process of development of a complex thing, and one of them is necessarily the principal contradiction whose existence and development determine or influence the existence and development of the other contradictions".[21]
Thus the principal contradiction should be tackled with priority when trying to make the basic contradiction "solidify". Mao elaborates further on this theme in the essay On Practice, "on the relation between knowledge and practice, between knowing and doing". Here, Practice connects "contradiction" with "class struggle" in the following way: Inside a mode of production, there are three realms where practice functions: economic production, scientific experimentation (which also takes place in economic production and should not be radically disconnected from the former) and finally class struggle. These may be considered the proper objects of economy, scientific knowledge and politics.[22]
These three spheres deal with matter in its various forms, socially mediated. As a result, they are the only realms where knowledge may arise (since truth and knowledge only make sense in relation to matter, according to Marxist epistemology). Mao emphasizes—like Marx in trying to confront the "bourgeois idealism" of his time—that knowledge must be based on empirical evidence.
Knowledge results from hypotheses verified in the contrast with a real object; this real object, despite being mediated by the subject's theoretical frame, retains its materiality and will offer resistance to those ideas that do not conform to its truth. Thus in each of these realms (economic, scientific and political practice), contradictions (principle and secondary) must be identified, explored and put to function to achieve the communist goal. This involves the need to know, "scientifically", how the masses produce (how they live, think and work), to obtain knowledge of how class struggle (the main contradiction that articulates a mode of production, in its various realms) expresses itself.
Mao held that contradictions were the most important feature of society and since society is dominated by a wide range of contradictions, this calls for a wide range of varying strategies. Revolution is necessary to fully resolve antagonistic contradictions such as those between labour and capital. Contradictions arising within the revolutionary movement call for ideological correction to prevent them from becoming antagonistic.
Three Worlds Theory[edit]
Three Worlds Theory states that during the Cold War two imperialist states formed the "first world"—the United States and the Soviet Union. The second world consisted of the other imperialist states in their spheres of influence. The third world consisted of the non-imperialist countries. Both the first and the second world exploit the third world, but the first world is the most aggressive party. The workers in the first and second world are "bought up" by imperialism, preventing socialist revolution. On the other hand, the people of the third world have not even a short-sighted interest in the prevailing circumstances, hence revolution is most likely to appear in third world countries, which again will weaken imperialism opening up for revolutions in other countries too.[23]
Agrarian socialism[edit]
Maoism departs from conventional European-inspired Marxism in that its focus is on the agrarian countryside, rather than the industrial urban forces—this is known as agrarian socialism. Notably, Maoist parties in Peru, Nepal and the Philippines have adopted equal stresses on urban and rural areas, depending on the country's focus of economic activity. Maoism broke with the state capitalist framework of the Soviet Union under Nikita Khrushchev, dismissing it as revisionist, a pejorative term among communists referring to those who fight for capitalism in the name of socialism and who depart from historical and dialectical materialism.
Although Maoism is critical of urban industrial capitalist powers, it views urban industrialization as a prerequisite to expand economic development and socialist reorganization to the countryside, with the goal being the achievement of rural industrialization that would abolish the distinction between town and countryside.[24]
Maoism in China[edit]
In its post-revolutionary period, Mao Zedong's thought is defined in the CPC's Constitution as "Marxism–Leninism applied in a Chinese context", synthesized by Mao and China's "first-generation leaders". It asserts that class struggle continues even if the proletariat has already overthrown the bourgeoisie and there are capitalist restorationist elements within the Communist Party itself. Maoism provided the CPC's first comprehensive theoretical guideline with regards to how to continue socialist revolution, the creation of a socialist society, socialist military construction and highlights various contradictions in society to be addressed by what is termed "socialist construction". While it continues to be lauded to be the major force that defeated "imperialism and feudalism" and created a "New China" by the Communist Party of China, the ideology survives only in name on the Communist Party's Constitution as Deng Xiaoping abolished most Maoist practices in 1978, advancing a guiding ideology called "socialism with Chinese characteristics".[25]
Maoism after Mao[edit]
China[edit]
Shortly after Mao's death in 1976, Deng Xiaoping initiated socialist market reforms in 1978, thereby beginning the radical change in Mao's ideology in the People's Republic of China (PRC).[26] Although Mao Zedong Thought nominally remains the state ideology, Deng's admonition to "seek truth from facts" means that state policies are judged on their practical consequences and in many areas the role of ideology in determining policy has thus been considerably reduced. Deng also separated Mao from Maoism, making it clear that Mao was fallible and hence the truth of Maoism comes from observing social consequences rather than by using Mao's quotations as holy writ, as was done in Mao's lifetime.[citation needed]
Contemporary Maoists in China criticize the social inequalities created by the revisionist Communist Party. Some Maoists say that Deng's Reform and Opening economic policies that introduced market principles spelled the end of Maoism in China, although Deng himself asserted that his reforms were upholding Mao Zedong Thought in accelerating the output of the country's productive forces.
In addition, the party constitution has been rewritten to give the socialist ideas of Deng prominence over those of Mao. One consequence of this is that groups outside China which describe themselves as Maoist generally regard China as having repudiated Maoism and restoring capitalism and there is a wide perception both inside and outside China that China has abandoned Maoism. However, while it is now permissible to question particular actions of Mao and talk about excesses taken in the name of Maoism, there is a prohibition in China on either publicly questioning the validity of Maoism or on questioning whether the current actions of the CPC are "Maoist".
Although Mao Zedong Thought is still listed as one of the four cardinal principles of the People's Republic of China, its historical role has been re-assessed. The Communist Party now says that Maoism was necessary to break China free from its feudal past, but it also says that the actions of Mao are seen to have led to excesses during the Cultural Revolution.[citation needed]
The official view is that China has now reached an economic and political stage, known as the primary stage of socialism, in which China faces new and different problems completely unforeseen by Mao and as such the solutions that Mao advocated are no longer relevant to China's current conditions. The official proclamation of the new CPC stance came in June 1981, when the Sixth Plenum of the Eleventh National Party Congress Central Committee took place. The 35,000-word Resolution on Certain Questions in the History of Our Party Since the Founding of the People's Republic of China reads:

Chief responsibility for the grave 'Left' error of the 'cultural revolution,' an error comprehensive in magnitude and protracted in duration, does indeed lie with Comrade Mao Zedong... [and] far from making a correct analysis of many problems, he confused right and wrong and the people with the enemy... herein lies his tragedy.[27]

Scholars outside China see this re-working of the definition of Maoism as providing an ideological justification for what they see as the restoration of the essentials of capitalism in China by Deng and his successors, who sought to "eradicate all ideological and physiological obstacles to economic reform".[28] In 1978, this led to the Sino-Albanian split when Albanian leader Enver Hoxha denounced Deng as a revisionist and formed Hoxhaism as an anti-revisionist form of Marxism.




Tiananmen with a portrait of Mao Zedong


Mao himself is officially regarded by the CPC as a "great revolutionary leader" for his role in fighting against the Japanese fascist invasion during the Second World War and creating the People's Republic of China, but Maoism as implemented between 1959 and 1976 is regarded by today's CPC as an economic and political disaster. In Deng's day, support of radical Maoism was regarded as a form of "left deviationism" and being based on a cult of personality, although these "errors" are officially attributed to the Gang of Four rather than being attributed to Mao himself.[29] Thousands of Maoists were arrested in the Hua Guofeng period after 1976. The prominent Maoists Zhang Chunqiao and Jiang Qing were sentenced to death with a two-year-reprieve while some others were sentenced to life imprisonment or imprisonment for 15 years.
Internationally[edit]
After the death of Mao in 1976 and the resulting power-struggles in China that followed, the international Maoist movement was divided into three camps. One group, composed of various ideologically nonaligned groups, gave weak support to the new Chinese leadership under Deng Xiaoping. Another camp denounced the new leadership as traitors to the cause of Marxism-Leninism-Mao Zedong Thought. The third camp sided with the Albanians in denouncing the Three Worlds Theory of the CPC (see Sino-Albanian split).
Though initially praising the Soviet Union prior to, during and shortly after the Cuban Revolution, Che Guevara later came out in support of Maoism and advocated the adoption of the ideology throughout Latin America.[citation needed] The pro-Albanian camp would start to function as an international group as well[30] (led by Enver Hoxha and the APL) and was also able to amalgamate many of the communist groups in Latin America, including the Communist Party of Brazil and the Marxist-Leninist Communist Party in Ecuador. Later, Latin American Communists such as Peru's Shining Path also embraced the tenets of Maoism.
The new Chinese leadership showed little interest in the various foreign groups supporting Mao's China. Many of the foreign parties that were fraternal parties aligned with the Chinese government before 1975 either disbanded, abandoned the new Chinese government entirely, or even renounced Marxism–Leninism and developed into non-communist, social democratic parties. What is today called the "international Maoist movement" evolved out of the second camp—the parties that opposed Deng and said they upheld the true legacy of Mao.
Maoism's international impact[edit]




Maoist leader Prachanda speaking at a rally in Pokhara, Nepal


From 1962 onwards, the challenge to the Soviet hegemony in the world communist movement made by the CPC resulted in various divisions in communist parties around the world. At an early stage,[citation needed] the Albanian Party of Labour sided with the CPC. So did many of the mainstream (non-splinter group) Communist parties in South-East Asia, like the Burmese Communist Party, Communist Party of Thailand and Communist Party of Indonesia. Some Asian parties, like the Workers Party of Vietnam and the Workers Party of Korea attempted to take a middle-ground position.
The Khmer Rouge of Cambodia is said to have been a replica of the Maoist regime. According to the BBC, the Communist Party of Kampuchea (Cambodia), better known as the "Khmer Rouge", identified strongly with Maoism and it is generally labeled a "Maoist" movement today.[31][32] Maoists (and Marxists generally) contend that the CPK strongly deviated from Marxist doctrine and the few references to Maoist China in CPK propaganda were critical of the Chinese.[33]
In the west and south, a plethora of parties and organizations were formed that upheld links to the CPC. Often they took names such as Communist Party (Marxist–Leninist) or Revolutionary Communist Party to distinguish themselves from the traditional pro-Soviet communist parties. The pro-CPC movements were in many cases based among the wave of student radicalism that engulfed the world in the 1960s and 1970s.
Only one Western classic communist party sided with the CPC, the Communist Party of New Zealand. Under the leadership of the CPC and Mao Zedong, a parallel international communist movement emerged to rival that of the Soviets, although it was never as formalized and homogeneous as the pro-Soviet tendency.
Afghanistan[edit]
The Progressive Youth Organization was a Maoist organization in Afghanistan. It was founded in 1965 with Akram Yari as its first leader, advocating the overthrow of the then-current order by means of people's war.
Bangladesh[edit]
Purba Banglar Sarbahara Party is a Maoist party in Bangladesh. It was founded in 1968 with Siraj Sikder as its first leader. The party played a role in the Bangladesh Liberation War.
Belgium[edit]
The Sino-Soviet split had an important influence on communism in Belgium. The pro-Soviet Communist Party of Belgium experienced a split of a Maoist wing under Jacques Grippa. The latter was a lower-ranking CPB member before the split, but Grippa rose in prominence as he formed a worthy internal Maoist opponent to the CPB leadership. His followers where sometimes referred to as "Grippisten/Grippistes". When it became clear that the differences between the pro-Moscow leadership and the pro-Beijing wing were too great, Grippa and his entourage decided to split from the CPB and formed the Communist Party of Belgium – Marxist–Leninist (PCBML). The PCBML had some influence, mostly in the heavily industrialized Borinage region of Wallonia, but never managed to gather more support than the CPB. The latter held most of its leadership and base within the pro-Soviet camp. However, the PCBML was the first European Maoist party that was officially recognized as a sister-party of the CPC by Beijing.[citation needed]
Though the PCBML never really gained a foothold in Flanders, there was a reasonably successful Maoist movement in this region. Out of the student unions that formed in the wake of the May 1968 protests, Alle Macht Aan De Arbeiders (AMADA) or All Power To The Workers, was formed as a vanguard party-under-construction. This Maoist group originated mostly out of students from the universities of Leuven and Ghent, but did manage to gain some influence among the striking miners during the shut-downs of the Belgian stonecoal mines in the late 1960s and early 1970s. This group became the Workers' Party of Belgium (WPB) in 1979 and still exists today, although its power base has shifted somewhat from Flanders towards Wallonia. The WPB stayed loyal to the teachings of Mao for a long time, but after a general congress held in 2008 the party formally broke with its Maoist/Stalinist past.[34]
Ecuador[edit]
The Communist Party of Ecuador – Red Sun, also known as Puka Inti, is a small Maoist guerrilla organization in Ecuador.
Iran[edit]
Main article: 1982 Amol uprising
Union of Iranian Communists (Sarbedaran) was an Iran Maoist organization. UIC (S) was formed in 1976 after the alliance of a number of Maoist groups carrying out military actions within Iran. In 1982, the UIC (S) mobilized forces in forests around Amol and launched an insurgency against the Islamist Government. The uprising was eventually a failure and many UIC (S) leaders were shot.
Palestine[edit]
The Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine is a Maoist political and military organization. The DFLP's original political orientation was based on the view that Palestinian national goals could be achieved only through revolution of the masses and people's war.
Portugal[edit]




The logo of the Portuguese Workers' Communist Party


Maoist movements in Portugal were very active during the 1970s, especially during the Carnation Revolution that led to the fall of the fascist government the Estado Novo in 1974. The largest Maoist movement in Portugal was the Portuguese Workers' Communist Party. The party was among the most active resistance movements before the Portuguese democratic revolution of 1974, especially among students of Lisbon. After the revolution, the MRPP achieved fame for its large and highly artistic mural paintings. It was intensely active during 1974 and 1975. At that time, the party had members that later came to be very important in national politics. For example, a future Prime Minister of Portugal, José Manuel Durão Barroso was active within Maoist movements in Portugal and identified as a Maoist.
In the 1980s, the Forças Populares 25 de Abril was a far-left Maoist armed organization operating in Portugal between 1980 and 1987 with the goal of creating socialism in post-Carnation Revolution Portugal.




The flag of FP-25


United States[edit]
In the United States during the late 1960s, parts of the emerging New Left rejected the Marxism espoused by the Soviet Union and instead adopted pro-Chinese communism. The Black Panther Party, especially under the leadership of Huey Newton, was influenced by Mao Zedong's ideas. Into the 1970s, Maoists in the United States formed a large part of the New Communist movement. The Revolutionary Communist Party, USA is also a Maoist movement in theory. However, Mao was a nationalist and they are pushing for a global or continent wide communist government.
Spain[edit]
The Communist Party of Spain (Reconstituted) was a Spanish clandestine Maoist party. The armed wing of the party was First of October Anti-Fascist Resistance Groups.
Turkey[edit]
See also: Maoist insurgency in Turkey
Communist Party of Turkey/Marxist–Leninist (TKP/ML) is a Maoist organization in Turkey currently waging a people's war against the Turkish government. It was founded in 1972 with İbrahim Kaypakkaya as its first leader. The armed wing of the party is named the Workers' and Peasants' Liberation Army in Turkey (TIKKO).
Maoist organizations[edit]
Various efforts have sought to regroup the international communist movement under Maoism since the time of Mao's death in 1976.
Another effort at regrouping the international communist movement is the International Conference of Marxist-Leninist Parties and Organizations (ICMLPO). Three notable parties that participate in the ICMLPO are the Marxist–Leninist Party of Germany (MLPD), the Communist Party of the Philippines (CPP) and Marxist–Leninist Communist Organization – Proletarian Way. The ICMLPO seeks to unity around Marxism-Leninism, not Maoism. However, some of the parties and organizations within the ICMLPO identify as Mao Zedong Thought or Maoist.
Criticisms and interpretations[edit]
Maoism has fallen out of favour within the Communist Party of China, beginning with Deng Xiaoping's reforms in 1978. Deng believed that Maoism showed the dangers of "ultra-leftism", manifested in the harm perpetrated by the various mass movements that characterized the Maoist era. In Chinese communism, the term "left" can be taken as a euphemism for Maoist policies. However, Deng stated that the revolutionary side of Maoism should be considered separate from the governance side, leading to his famous epithet that Mao was "70% right, 30% wrong".[35] Chinese scholars generally agree that Deng's interpretation of Maoism preserves the legitimacy of Communist rule in China, but at the same time criticizes Mao's brand of economic and political governance.
Critic Graham Young says that Maoists see Joseph Stalin as the last true socialist leader of the Soviet Union, but allows that the Maoist assessments of Stalin vary between the extremely positive and the more ambivalent.[36] Some political philosophers, such as Martin Cohen, have seen in Maoism an attempt to combine Confucianism and socialism—what one such called "a third way between communism and capitalism".[37]
Enver Hoxha critiqued Maoism from a Marxist–Leninist perspective, arguing that New Democracy halts class struggle, the theory of the three worlds is "counter-revolutionary" and questioned Mao's guerilla warfare methods.
Some say Mao departed from Leninism not only in his near-total lack of interest in the urban working class, but also in his concept of the nature and role of the party. For Lenin, the party was sacrosanct because it was the incarnation of the "proletarian consciousness" and there was no question about who were the teachers and who were the pupils. On the other hand, for Mao this question would always be virtually impossible to answer.[38]
The implementation of Maoist thought in China was responsible for as many as 70 million deaths during peacetime,[39][40] with the Cultural Revolution, Anti-Rightist Campaign of 1957–1958[41] and the Great Leap Forward. Because of Mao's land reforms during the Great Leap Forward, which resulted in famines, thirty million perished between 1958 and 1961. By the end of 1961, the birth rate was nearly cut in half because of malnutrition.[42] Active campaigns, including party purges and "reeducation" resulted in imprisonment and/or the execution of those deemed contrary to the implementation of Maoist ideals.[43] The incidents of destruction of cultural heritage, religion and art remain controversial. Some Western scholars saw Maoism specifically engaged in a battle to dominate and subdue nature and was a catastrophe for the environment.[44]
Populism[edit]
Mao also believed strongly in the concept of a unified people. These notions were what prompted him to investigate the peasant uprisings in Hunan while the rest of China's communists were in the cities and focused on the orthodox Marxist proletariat.[45] Many of the pillars of Maoism such as the distrust of intellectuals and the abhorrence of occupational specialty are typical populist ideas.[6] The concept of "People's War" which is so central to Maoist thought is directly populist in its origins. Mao believed that intellectuals and party cadres had to become first students of the masses to become teachers of the masses later. This concept was vital to the strategy of the "People's War".[6]
Nationalism[edit]
Mao's nationalist impulses also played a crucially important role in the adaption of Marxism to the Chinese model and in the formation of Maoism.[46] Mao truly believed that China was to play a crucial preliminary role in the socialist revolution internationally. This belief, or the fervor with which Mao held it, separated Mao from the other Chinese communists and led Mao onto the path of what Leon Trotsky called "Messianic Revolutionary Nationalism" which was central to his personal philosophy. German post-World World II Strasserist Michael Kühnen, himself a former Maoist, once praised Maoism as being a Chinese form of national socialism.[47]
See also[edit]

Chinese New Left
Cult of personality
Deng Xiaoping Theory
History of the People's Republic of China
Marxism–Leninism
Marxism–Leninism–Maoism
Three Represents

References[edit]


^ Meisner, Maurice. Mao's China and After. New York: Free Press, 1999. Pages 12-16.
^ Meisner, Maurice. Mao's China and After. New York: Free Press, 1999. Page 10.
^ Meisner, Maurice. Mao's China and After. New York: Free Press, 1999. Page 11.
^ Meisner, Maurice. Mao's China and After. New York: Free Press, 1999. Page 14.
^ a b Meisner, Maurice. Mao's China and After. New York: Free Press, 1999. Pages 14.
^ a b c Meisner, Maurice. Mao's China and After. New York: Free Press, 1999. Page 44.
^ a b c Meisner, Maurice. Mao's China and After. New York: Free Press, 1999. Page 17.
^ a b Meisner, Maurice. Mao's China and After. New York: Free Press, 1999. Page 18.
^ a b c Meisner, Maurice. Mao's China and After. New York: Free Press, 1999. Page 45.
^ Lowe, Donald M. The Function of "China" in Marx, Lenin, and Mao. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1966. Page 109
^ Lowe, Donald M. The Function of "China" in Marx, Lenin, and Mao. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1966. Page 111
^ Lowe, Donald M. The Function of "China" in Marx, Lenin, and Mao. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1966. Page 113
^ a b Lowe, Donald M. The Function of "China" in Marx, Lenin, and Mao. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1966. Page 117
^ Lowe, Donald M. The Function of "China" in Marx, Lenin, and Mao. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1966. Page 118
^ Lowe, Donald M. The Function of "China" in Marx, Lenin, and Mao. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1966. Page 119
^ Amin, Samir (October 2009). "The Countries of the South Must Take Their Own Independent Initiatives". The Third World Forum. Archived from the original on 2011-07-23. Retrieved 2011-02-22. 
^ "Quotations From Chairman Mao". Peking Foreign Languages Press. 
^ Alexander C. Cook, "Third World Maoism" in A Critical Introduction to Mao. Cambridge, England, UK; New York, New York, USA: Cambridge University, 2011. P. 290.
^ a b Alexander C. Cook, "Third World Maoism" in A Critical Introduction to Mao. Cambridge, England, UK; New York, New York, USA: Cambridge University Press, 2011. P. 289-290.
^ Mao Tse Tung, "On contradiction", Selected Readings from the Works of Mao Tse-Tung, Foreign Language Press, Peking, 1967, p. 75, or http://www.marxists.org/reference/archive/mao/selected-works/volume-1/mswv1_17.htm.
^ Mao Tse-Tung, "On contradiction", Selected Readings from the Works of Mao Tse-Tung, op. cit., p. 89, or http://www.marxists.org/reference/archive/mao/selected-works/volume-1/mswv1_17.htm.
^ Cfr. Mao Tse-Tung, "On practice. On the relation between knowledge and practice, between knowing and doing", Selected Readings from the Works of Mao Tse-Tung, op.cit., p. 55: "Man's social practice is not confined to activity in production, but takes many forms—class struggle, political life, scientific and artistic pursuits; in short, as a social being, man participates in all spheres of the practical life of society. Thus man, in varying degrees, comes to know the different relations between man and man, not only through his material life but also though his political and cultural life (both of which are intimately bound up with material life)", or http://www.marxists.org/reference/archive/mao/selected-works/volume-1/mswv1_16.htm.
^ Maoism Glossary of Terms, Encyclopedia of Marxism
^ John H. Badgley, John Wilson Lewis. Peasant Rebellion and Communist Revolution in Asia. Stanford, California, USA: Stanford University Press, 1974. P. 249.
^ "Xinhua: Constitution of the Communist Party of China". News.xinhuanet.com. Archived from the original on 2011-10-17. Retrieved 2011-11-10. 
^ "UC Berkeley Journalism -Faculty - Deng's Revolution". Archived from the original on January 4, 2009. Retrieved 2007-08-22. CS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknown (link)
^ "China the Four Modernizations, 1979-82". Country-studies.com. Retrieved 2011-11-10. 
^ S. Zhao, "A State-Led Nationalism: The Patriotic Education Campaign in Post-Tiananmen China", Communist and Post-Communist Studies, 1998, 31(3): pp. 288
^ For a newest expression of the official judgment, see 中国共产党历史第二卷下册，中共中央党史研究室著，中共党史出版社，第二八章对"文化大革命"十年的基本分析(History of China Communist Party, Vol. 2, Party History Research Centre (Nov. 2010), Chap 28 Analysis on Cultural Revolution)
^ Latham, Judith (19 August 2010). "Roma of the former Yugoslavia". The Journal of Nationalism and Ethnicity (of Nationalities Papers). 27, 1999 (2): 205–226. doi:10.1080/009059999109037. Retrieved 28 August 2017. 
^ "Khmer Rouge Duch trial nears end". BBC News. 2009-11-23. Retrieved 2010-05-12. 
^ [1] Archived November 29, 2009, at the Wayback Machine.
^ "What Went Wrong with the Pol Pot Regime". Aworldtowin.org. Archived from the original on August 10, 2011. Retrieved 2011-11-10. 
^ D., VAN HERREWEGEN, De verdeeldheid van radicaal-links in Vlaanderen: De strategische -en praktische breuklijnen tussen AMADA, de KPB en de RAL tussen 1969-1972, Unpublished masterpaper, Department of History, 25-29. http://www.ethesis.net/radicaal-links/radicaal-links.htm
^ http://www.ips-journal.eu/in-focus/the-politics-of-memory/article/show/70-per-cent-good-30-per-cent-bad-2216/
^ Graham Young, On Socialist Development and the Two Roads, The Australian Journal of Chinese Affairs, No. 8 (Jul., 1982), pp. 75-84, doi:10.2307/2158927
^ Political Philosophy from Plato to Mao, by Martin Cohen, page 206, published 2001 by Pluto Press, London and Sterling VA ISBN 0-7453-1603-4
^ "Meisner, Maurice. Mao's China and After. New York: Free Press, 1999. Page 44.
^ Jung Chang and Jon Halliday, Mao: The Untold Story (Jonathan Cape, 2005) Page 3.
^ policy autumn 06_Edit5.indd Archived February 16, 2010, at the Wayback Machine.
^ Teiwes, Frederick C., and Warren Sun. 1999. 'China's road to disaster: Mao, central politicians, and provincial leaders in the unfolding of the great leap forward, 1955-1959. Contemporary China papers. Armonk, N.Y.: M.E. Sharpe. pp 52-55.
^ MacFarquhar, Roderick. 1974. The origins of the Cultural Revolution. London: Published for Royal Institute of International Affairs, East Asian Institute of Columbia University and Research Institute on Communist Affairs of Columbia by Oxford University Press. p 4.
^ Link, Perry (2007-07-18). "Legacy Of a Maoist Injustice". The Washington Post. 
^ By Judith Shapiro 'Mao's War Against Nature: Politics and the Environment in Revolutionary China Published 2001 Cambridge University Press Politics / Current Events 306 pages ISBN 0521786800
^ Meisner, Maurice. Mao's China and After. New York: Free Press, 1999. Page 43.
^ Meisner, Maurice. Mao's China and After. New York: Free Press, 1999. Page 42.
^ Lee, Martin A. The Beast Reawakens: Fascism's Resurgence from Hitler's Spymasters to Today, 2013. Page 195.


Further reading[edit]

Marxism in the Chinese Revolution by Arif Dirlik.
Rethinking Mao: Explorations in Mao Zedong's Thought by Nick Knight.
The Function of "China" in Marx, Lenin, and Mao by Donald Lowe.
Li Ta-chao and the Origins of Chinese Marxism by Maurice Meisner.
Mao's China and After by Maurice Mesiner.
The Political Thought of Mao Tse-Tung by Stuart Schram.
Mao Tse-Tung, The Marxist Lord of Misrule. On Practice and Contradiction by Slavoj Zizek.
Gregor, A. James and Maria Hsia Chang. "Maoism and Marxism in Comparative Perspective." The Review of Politics. Cambridge University Press for the University of Notre Dame du Lac on behalf of Review of Politics. Vol. 40, No. 3, July 1978. 307-327. Available at Jstor.
Meisner, Maurice. "Leninism and Maoism: Some Populist Perspectives on Marxism-Leninism in China." The China Quarterly. Cambridge University Press on behalf of the School of Oriental and African Studies. No. 45, January - March 1971. p. 2-36. Available at Jstor.
Steiner, H. Arthur. "Maoism or Stalinism for Asia?" Far Eastern Survey. Institute of Pacific Relations. Vol. 22, No. 1, January 14, 1953. P. 1-5. Available at Jstor.
Lee Feigon, "Mao, A Reinterpretation" Ivan R. Dee, Publisher.
Mao Tse-Tung Unrehearsed by Stuart Schram (Pelican).

External links[edit]


Maoism at Encyclopædia Britannica.
Guiding thought of revolution: the heart of Maoism international project.
Marx2Mao.org Mao Internet Library.
The Encyclopedia of Marxism Mao Zedong Thought.
The Encyclopedia of Marxism Mao's life.
Monthly Review January 2005 Text of the leaflets distributed by the Zhengzhou Four.
World Revolution Media Maoist revolutionary film, music and art archive.
Batchelor, J. Maoism and Classical Marxism, Clio History Journal, 2009.
A new economic study says China could grow more quickly by 2036 if Chairman Mao's policies were brought back. Business Insider. August 10, 2015.





Wikimedia Commons has media related to 
Maoism.








v
t
e


Maoism



Basic concepts



Marxism–Leninism
Marxism–Leninism–Maoism
Antagonistic contradiction
One Divides Into Two
Mass line
People's war
New Democracy
Cultural Revolution
Revolutionary base area
Three Worlds Theory
Anti-revisionism





Key figures



Mao Zedong
Akram Yari
Chen Boda
Abimael Guzmán
İbrahim Kaypakkaya
Lin Biao
Charu Majumdar
Siraj Sikder
Pierre Mulele
Huey P. Newton
Prachanda
Jiang Qing
Jose Maria Sison
Yao Wenyuan
Zhang Chunqiao
Samir Amin
Li Minqi
Charles Bettelheim
Faiz Ahmad





Internationals



International Conference of Marxist–Leninist Parties and Organizations
Revolutionary Internationalist Movement
Coordination Committee of Maoist Parties and Organisations of South Asia





Key books



Quotations from Chairman Mao
On Contradiction
On Practice
On Guerrilla Warfare
On Protracted War
A Critique of Soviet Economics





Related topics



Communism
Maoism (Third Worldism)
Communist Party of China
Chinese New Left
Thought reform in the People's Republic of China
Naxalism
Naxalite–Maoist insurgency
Guevarism
Communist insurgency in the Philippines
Nepalese Civil War
Internal conflict in Peru
Maoist insurgency in Turkey








China portal
Politics portal












v
t
e


The Cultural Revolution



Major events



Socialist Education Movement
Lushan Conference
Down to the Countryside Movement
February Countercurrent
Wuhan Incident
9th Party Congress
Project 571
10th Party Congress
Criticize Lin, Criticize Confucius
Counterattack the Right-Deviationist Reversal-of-Verdicts Trend
Tiananmen Incident
3rd Plenum of the 11th Central Committee





Key figures



Mao Zedong
Liu Shaoqi
Zhou Enlai
Lin Biao
Deng Xiaoping
Gang of Four (Jiang Qing
Zhang Chunqiao
Yao Wenyuan
Wang Hongwen)
Peng Dehuai
Wu Han
Peng Zhen
Tao Zhu
Chen Boda
Wang Dongxing
Xie Fuzhi
Ji Dengkui
Wang Li
Qi Benyu
Wu Faxian
Qiu Huizuo
Yang Chengwu
Chen Zaidao
Kang Sheng
Mao Yuanxin
Hua Guofeng
Ye Jianying





Documents



Bombard the Headquarters
Quotations from Chairman Mao
Hai Rui Dismissed from Office





Concepts



Four Olds
Struggle session
Feudal fascism
Big-character poster
One Divides Into Two
Democracy Wall
Eight model plays
Capitalist roader
Learn from Daqing in industry
Learn from Dazhai in agriculture
Scar literature





Groups



Red Guards
Five Man Group
Cultural Revolution Group
Central Case Examination Group
Central Organization and Propaganda Leading Group
Revolutionary committee
Shanghai People's Commune
8341 Special Regiment
Sent-down youth
61 Renegades
Barefoot doctor
Stinking Old Ninth
Five Black Categories
Five Red Categories
Worker-Peasant-Soldier student
May Seventh Cadre School





Related topics



Maoism
Great Leap Forward
Class struggle
Sino-Soviet split
Ultra-Leftism
Peaceful Evolution theory
Two Whatevers






History portal







Authority control



GND: 4037432-4








China portal
Politics portal
History portal
Communism portal







						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Maoism&oldid=818330131"					Categories: MaoismMao ZedongIdeology of the Communist Party of ChinaMarxist schools of thoughtPeople's Republic of China culturePolitical history of China1950s in China1960s in China1970s in ChinaChinese philosophyContemporary Chinese philosophyCommunismTotalitarianismAnti-capitalismAnti-RevisionismFar-left politics1950s establishments in China1970s disestablishments in ChinaEponymous political ideologiesHidden categories: CS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknownWebarchive template wayback linksArticles containing simplified Chinese-language textArticles containing traditional Chinese-language textAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from October 2015Articles with unsourced statements from October 2017Articles with unsourced statements from May 2012Articles with unsourced statements from June 2016Articles with Encyclopædia Britannica linksWikipedia articles with GND identifiers