

Marathi


मराठी


Marathi




"Marathi" in Devanagari script




Pronunciation
[məˈɾaʈʰi]


Native to
Maharashtra


Region
Maharashtra, Goa, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Tamil Nadu, Telangana, Andhra Pradesh, Dadra and Nagar Haveli, Daman and Diu and significant minority in the countries of Israel and Mauritius[1]


Ethnicity
Marathis



Native speakers

73 million (2007)[2]



Language family


Indo-European

Indo-Iranian

Indo-Aryan

Southern Indo-Aryan

Maharashtri

Marathi–Konkani

Marathi
















Early form


Maharashtri Prakrit



Dialects


Maharashtrian Konkani, Varhadi





Writing system

Devanagari (Balbodh)[3]
Devanagari Braille
Modi (historical/traditional)[4]



Signed forms

Indian Signing System


Official status



Official language in

 India - Maharashtra, Goa, Daman and Diu,[5] and Dadra and Nagar Haveli[6]


Regulated by
Maharashtra Sahitya Parishad & various other institutions


Language codes


ISO 639-1
mr


ISO 639-2
mar


ISO 639-3
Either:
mar – Modern Marathi
omr – Old Marathi



Linguist List

omr Old Marathi


Glottolog
mara1378  Modern Marathi[7]
oldm1244  Old Marathi[8]


Linguasphere
59-AAF-o





Marathi (English: /məˈrɑːti/;[9] मराठी Marāṭhī; Marathi: [məˈɾaʈʰi] ( listen)) is an Indian language spoken predominantly by the Marathi people of Maharashtra. It is the official language and co-official language in the Maharashtra and Goa states of Western India, respectively, and is one of the 22 scheduled languages of India. There were 73 million speakers in 2007; Marathi ranks 19th in the list of most spoken languages in the world. Marathi has the fourth largest number of native speakers in India, after Hindi, Bengali and Telugu, in that order.[10] Marathi has some of the oldest literature of all modern Indo-Aryan languages, dating from about 900 AD.[11] The major dialects of Marathi are Standard Marathi and the Varhadi dialect.[12] Koli, Malvani Konkani has been heavily influenced by Marathi varieties. The earliest example of the existence of Marathi as an independent language dates back to more than 2,000 years[13][14]
Marathi distinguishes inclusive and exclusive forms of 'we' and possesses a three-way gender system that features the neuter in addition to the masculine and the feminine. In its phonology it contrasts apico-alveolar with alveopalatal affricates and, in common with Gujarati, alveolar with retroflex laterals ([l] and [ɭ], Marathi letters ल and ळ respectively).[15]



Contents


1 Geographic distribution
2 Status
3 History

3.1 Marathi literature, 12th–17th centuries
3.2 Yadava
3.3 Mahanubhava
3.4 Medieval and Deccan Sultanate period
3.5 Maratha Empire
3.6 British colonial period
3.7 Marathi since Indian independence


4 Dialects

4.1 Jhadi Boli
4.2 Southern Indian Marathi
4.3 Varhadi
4.4 Others


5 Phonology
6 Writing

6.1 Devanagari
6.2 The Modi alphabet
6.3 Consonant clusters in Devanagari


7 Grammar
8 Vocabulary

8.1 Sharing of linguistic resources with other languages
8.2 Morphology and etymology
8.3 Compounds
8.4 Counting


9 Marathi on computers and the Internet
10 Marathi Language Day
11 Marathi organisations

11.1 Outside Maharashtra state


12 See also
13 References

13.1 Bibliography


14 External links



Geographic distribution[edit]
Marathi is primarily spoken in Maharashtra (India) and parts of neighbouring states of Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh, Goa, Tamil Nadu Karnataka (Particularly the bordering districts of Belgaum, Bidar and Uttara Kannada), Telangana, Chhattisgarh, union-territories of Daman and Diu and Dadra and Nagar Haveli. The former Maratha ruled cities of Baroda, Indore, Gwalior, and Tanjore have had sizable Marathi speaking populations for centuries. Marathi is also spoken by Maharashtrian emigrants to other parts of India and overseas.[16]
Status[edit]
Marathi is the official language of Maharashtra and co-official language in the union territories of Daman and Diu[5] and Dadra and Nagar Haveli.[6] In Goa, Konkani is the sole official language; however, Marathi may also be used for some official purposes in some case. Marathi is included among the languages which stand a part of the Eighth Schedule of the Constitution of India, thus granting it the status of a "scheduled language".[17] The Government of Maharashtra has submitted an application to the Ministry of Culture to grant classical language status to Marathi.[18]




Rajya Marathi Vikas Sanstha[19] is the main regulator of Marathi


The contemporary grammatical rules described by Maharashtra Sahitya Parishad and endorsed by the Government of Maharashtra are supposed to take precedence in standard written Marathi. Traditions of Marathi Linguistics and the above-mentioned rules give special status to tatsamas, words adapted from Sanskrit. This special status expects the rules for tatsamas to be followed as in Sanskrit. This practice provides Marathi with a large treasure of Sanskrit words to cope with demands of new technical words whenever needed.
In addition to all universities in Maharashtra, Maharaja Sayajirao University of Baroda in Vadodara,[20] Osmania University in Hyderabad,[21] Karnataka University in Dharwad,[22] Gulbarga University in Kalaburagi,[23] Devi Ahilya University in Indore[24] and Goa University in Goa[25] have special departments for higher studies in Marathi linguistics. Jawaharlal Nehru University (New Delhi) has announced plans to establish a special department for Marathi.[26]
Marathi Day is celebrated on 27 February, the birthday of poet Vishnu Vaman Shirwadkar.[citation needed]
History[edit]
Indian languages, including Marathi, that belong to the Indo-Aryan language family are derived from early forms of Prakrut. Marathi is one of several languages that further descend from Mahārāshtrī Prakrut. Further change led to the Apabhraṃśa languages like Old Marathi, however this is challenged by Bloch (1970), who states that Apabhraṃśa was formed after Marathi had already separated from the Middle Indian dialect.[27]
Marathi literature, 12th–17th centuries[edit]
Main article: Marathi literature
Yadava[edit]
Marathi literature began and grew owing to the rise of the Seuna dynasty of Devgiri, who adopted Marathi as the court language and patronised Marathi scholars.[citation needed] Further growth and usage of the language was because of two religious sects – the Mahanubhava and Varkari panthans – who adopted Marathi as the medium for preaching their doctrines of devotion. Marathi had attained a venerable place in court life by the time of the Seuna kings. During the reign of the last three Seuna kings, a great deal of literature in verse and prose, on astrology, medicine, Puranas, Vedanta, kings and courtiers were created. Nalopakhyan, Rukmini swayamvar and Shripati's Jyotishratnamala (1039) are a few examples.
The oldest book in prose form in Marathi, Vivēkasindhu (विवेकसिंधु), was written by Mukundaraja, a Nath yogi and arch-poet of Marathi. Mukundaraja bases his exposition of the basic tenets of the Hindu philosophy and the yoga marga on the utterances or teachings of Shankaracharya. Mukundaraja's other work, Paramamrta, is considered the first systematic attempt to explain the Vedanta in the Marathi language
Mahanubhava[edit]
Notable examples of Marathi prose are "Līḷācarītra" (लीळाचरीत्र), events and anecdotes from the miracle filled life of Chakradhar Swami of the Mahanubhava sect compiled by his close disciple, Mahimbhatta, in 1238. The Līḷācarītra is thought to be the first biography written in the Marathi language. Mahimbhatta's second important literary work is the Shri Govindaprabhucharitra or Rudhipurcharitra, a biography of Shri Chakradhar Swami's guru, Shri Govind Prabhu. This was probably written in 1288.
The Mahanubhava sect made Marathi a vehicle for the propagation of religion and culture. Mahanubhava literature generally comprises works that describe the incarnations of gods, the history of the sect, commentaries on the Bhagavad Gita, poetical works narrating the stories of life of Krishna and grammatical and etymological works that are deemed useful to explain the philosophy of sect.
Medieval and Deccan Sultanate period[edit]
The 13th century varkari saint Dnyaneshwar(1275–1296) wrote a treatise in Marathi on Bhagawat Gita popularly called Dnyaneshwari and Amritanubhava. His contemporary, Namdev composed verses or abhang in Marathi as well as Hindi.
Mukund Raj was a poet who lived in the 13th century and is said to be the first poet who composed in Marathi.[28] He is known for the Viveka-Siddhi and Parammrita which are metaphysical, pantheistic works connected with orthodox Vedantism.
The 16th century saint-poet Eknath (1528–1599) is well known for composing the Eknāthī Bhāgavat, a commentary on Bhagavat Purana and the devotional songs called Bharud.[29] Mukteshwar translated the Mahabharata into Marathi; Tukaram (1608–49) transformed Marathi into a rich literary language. His poetry contained his inspirations. Tukaram wrote over 3000 abhangs or devotional songs.[30]
Marathi was widely used during the Sultanate period. Although the rulers were Muslims, the local feudal landlords and the revenue collectors were Hindus and so was the majority of the population. Political expediency made it important for the sultans to make use of Marathi. Nevertheless, Marathi in official documents from the era is totally persianised in its vocabulary.[31] The persian influence continues to this day with many persian derived words used in every day speech such as bāg (Garden), kārkhānā (factory), shahar (city), bāzār (market), dukān (shop), hushār (clever), kāḡaḏ (paper), khurchi (chair), jamin (land), jāhirāt (advertisement), and hazār (thousand)[32] Marathi also became language of administration during the Ahmadnagar Sultanate.[33] Adilshahi of Bijapur also used Marathi for administration and record keeping.[34]
Maratha Empire[edit]
Marathi gained prominence with the rise of the Maratha empire beginning with the reign of Chhatrapati Shivaji ( ruled 1674–1680). Under Shivaji, the language used administrative documents became less persianised. Whereas in 1630, 80% of the vocabulary was Persian, it dropped to 37% by 1677[35] Samarth Ramdas was a contemporary of Shivaji. He advocated the unity of Marathas to propagate Maharashtra dharma.[30] Unlike varkari saints, his writing has a strong militant expression to it. Subsequent Maratha rulers extended the empire northwards to Attock, eastwards to Odisha, and southwards to Thanjavur in Tamil Nadu. These excursions by the Marathas helped to spread Marathi over broader geographical regions. This period also saw the use of Marathi in transactions involving land and other business. Documents from this period, therefore, give a better picture of life of common people. There are lot of Bakharis written in Marathi and Modi script from this period. But by the late 18th century, the Maratha Empire's influence over a large part of the country was on the decline
In the 18th century during Peshwa rule, some well-known works such as Yatharthadeepika by Vaman Pandit, Naladamayanti Swayamvara by Raghunath Pandit, Pandava Pratap, Harivijay, Ramvijay by Shridhar Pandit and Mahabharata by Moropant were produced. Krishnadayarnava and Sridhar were poets during the Peshwa period. New literary forms were successfully experimented with during the period and classical styles were revived, especially the Mahakavya and Prabandha forms. The most important hagiographies of Varkari Bhakti saints was written by Mahipati in the 18th Century.[36] [30] Other well known literary scholars of the 17th century were Mukteshwar and Shridhar[37]. Mukteshwar was the grandson of Eknath and is the most distinguished poet in the ovi meter.He is most known for translating the Mahabharata and the Ramayana in Marathi but only a part of the Mahabharata translation is available and the entire Ramayana translation is lost. Shridhar Kulkarni came from the Pandharpur area and his works are said to have superseded the Sanskrit epics to a certain extent.This period also saw development of Powada (ballads sung in honor of warriors),and Lavani(romantic songs presented with dance).Major poet composers of Powada and Lavani songs of the 17th and the 18th century were Anant Phandi,Ram Joshi and Honaji Bala.[38]
British colonial period[edit]
The British colonial period starting in early 1800s saw standardisation of Marathi grammar through the efforts of the Christian missionary William Carey. Carey's dictionary had fewer entries and Marathi words were in Devanagari. Translations of the Bible were first books to be printed in Marathi.These translations by William Carey, the American Marathi mission and the Scottish missionaries led to the development of a peculiar pidginized Marathi called the "Missionary Marathi in early 1800s[39] The most comprehensive Marathi-English dictionary was compiled by Captain James Thomas Molesworth and Major Thomas Candy in 1831. The book is still in print nearly two centuries after its publication.[40] The colonial authorities also worked on standardizing Marathi under the leadership of James Thomas Molesworth and Candy.They used Brahmins of Pune for this task and adopted the Sanskrit dominated dialect spoken by elite in the city as the standard dialect for Marathi[41].,[42][43]
The first Marathi translation of an English book was published in 1817[citation needed], and the first Marathi newspaper was started in 1832[citation needed]. Newspapers provided a platform for sharing literary views, and many books on social reforms were written. The Marathi language flourished as Marathi drama gained popularity. Musicals known as Sangeet Natak also evolved[citation needed]. Keshavasut, the father of modern Marathi poetry published his first poem in 1885. First Marathi periodical Dirghadarshan was started in 1840 while first Marathi newspaper Durpan was started by Balshastri Jambhekar in 1832[citation needed].
The late-19th century in Maharashtra saw the rise of essayist Vishnushastri Chiplunkar with his periodical, Nibandhmala that had essays that criticized social reformers like Phule and Gopal Hari Deshmukh. Phule and Deshmukh also started their own periodicals, Deenbandhu and Prabhakar, that criticised the prevailing Hindu culture of the day.[44]
The first half of the 20th century was marked by new enthusiasm in literary pursuits, and socio-political activism helped achieve major milestones in Marathi literature, drama, music and film[citation needed]. Modern Marathi prose flourished through various new literary forms like the essay, the biographies, the novels, prose, drama etc. N.C.Kelkar's biographical writings, novels of Hari Narayan Apte, Narayan Sitaram Phadke and V. S. Khandekar, Vinayak Damodar Savarkar's nationalist literature and plays of Mama Varerkar and Kirloskar's are particularly worth noting.
Marathi since Indian independence[edit]




The popular Marathi language newspapers at a newsstand in Mumbai, 2006


After Indian independence, Marathi was accorded the status of a scheduled language on the national level. On 1 May 1960, Maharashtra was re-organised along linguistic lines; this added Vidarbha and Marathwada regions to its fold and thus about the socio-political unity of major portions of the Marathi speaking. With state and cultural protection, Marathi made great strides by the 1990s. A literary event called Akhil Bharatiya Marathi Sahitya Sammelan (All-India Marathi Literature Meet) is held every year. In addition, the Akhil Bharatiya Marathi Natya Sammelan (All-India Marathi Theatre Convention) is also held annually. Both events are very popular among Marathi speakers.
Notable works in Marathi in the latter half of 20th century includes Khandekar's Yayati, which won him the Jnanpith Award. Also Vijay Tendulkar's plays in Marathi have earned him a reputation beyond Maharashtra. P.L.Deshpande(PuLa), Vishnu Vaman Shirwadkar P.K.Atre & Prabodhankar Thackeray, were also known for their writings in Marathi in the field of drama, comedy and social commentary[45]
In 1958 the term "Dalit literature" was used for the first time, when the first conference of Maharashtra Dalit Sahitya Sangha (Maharashtra Dalit Literature Society) was held at Mumbai, a movement inspired by 19th century social reformer, Jyotiba Phule and eminent dalit leader, Dr. Bhimrao Ambedkar.[46] Baburao Bagul (1930–2008) was a pioneer of Dalit writings in Marathi.[47] His first collection of stories, Jevha Mi Jat Chorali (जेव्हा मी जात चोरली) (When I Concealed My Caste), published in 1963, created a stir in Marathi literature with its passionate depiction of a cruel society and thus brought in new momentum to Dalit literature in Marathi.[48][49] Gradually with other writers like, Namdeo Dhasal (who founded Dalit Panther), these Dalit writings paved way for the strengthening of Dalit movement.[50] Notable Dalit authors writing in Marathi include Arun Kamble, Shantabai Kamble, Raja Dhale, Namdev Dhasal, Daya Pawar, Annabhau Sathe, Laxman Mane, Laxman Gaikwad, Sharankumar Limbale, Bhau Panchbhai, Kishor Shantabai Kale, Narendra jadhav, and Urmila Pawar.
In recent decades there has been a trend among Marathi speaking parents of all social classes in major urban areas of sending their children to English medium schools. There is some concern, though without foundation, that this may lead to marginalisation of the language.[51]
Dialects[edit]
See also: Marathi–Konkani languages
Standard Marathi is based on dialects used by academics and the print media.
Indic scholars distinguish 42 dialects of spoken Marathi. Dialects bordering other major language areas have many properties in common with those languages, further differentiating them from standard spoken Marathi. The bulk of the variation within these dialects is primarily lexical and phonological (e.g. accent placement and pronunciation). Although the number of dialects is considerable, the degree of intelligibility within these dialects is relatively high.[52]
Jhadi Boli[edit]
Jhadi Boli or Jhadiboli is spoken in Jhadipranta (a forest rich region) of far eastern Maharashtra or eastern Vidarbha or western-central Gondvana comprising Gondia, Bhandara, Chandrapur, Gadchiroli and some parts of Nagpur and Wardha districts of Maharashtra.
Zadi Boli Sahitya Mandal and many literary figures are working for the conservation of this important and distinct dialect of Marathi.
Southern Indian Marathi[edit]
Thanjavur Marathi, Namadeva Shimpi Marathi, Arey Marathi and Bhavsar Marathi are some of the dialects of Marathi spoken by many descendants of Maharashtrians who migrated to the Southern India.
These dialects retain the 17th century basic form of Marathi and have been considerably influenced by the Dravidian languages after the migration. These dialects have speakers in various parts of Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh and Karnataka.
Varhadi[edit]
Main article: Varhadi dialect
Varhadi (Varhādi), or Vaidarbhi, is spoken in the Eastern Vidarbha region of Maharashtra. In Marathi, the retroflex lateral approximant ḷ [ɭ] is common, while in the Varhadii dialect, it corresponds to the palatal approximant y (IPA: [j]), making this dialect quite distinct. Such phonetic shifts are common in spoken Marathi and, as such, the spoken dialects vary from one region of Maharashtra to another.
Others[edit]

Thanjavur Marathi, spoken in Tanjore, Tamil Nadu
Judæo-Marathi, spoken by the Bene Israel Jews

Other Languages and dialects spoken in Maharashtra include Kokani, Konkani, Koli, Mangeli, Malvani, Ghati, Agri, Vaity, Warli, Dangi, Khandeshi, Ahirani, Vadvali, Samavedi, Deshi, and Wadvals.
Phonology[edit]
Main article: Marathi phonology
The phoneme inventory of Marathi is similar to that of many other Indo-Aryan languages. An IPA chart of all contrastive sounds in Marathi is provided below.

Consonants[53]

 
Labial
Dental
Alveolar
Retroflex
(Alveolo-)
palatal
Velar
Glottal


Nasal
plain
m
n̪

ɳ
(ɲ)
(ŋ)



murmured
mʱ
n̪ʱ

ɳʱ





Stop
voiceless
p
t̪
t͡s
ʈ
t͡ɕ~t͡ʃ
k



aspirated
pʰ
t̪ʰ

ʈʰ
t͡ɕʰ~t͡ʃʰ
kʰ



voiced
b
d̪
d͡z~z
ɖ
d͡ʑ~d͡ʒ
ɡ



murmured
bʱ
d̪ʱ
d͡zʱ~zʱ
ɖʱ
d͡ʑʱ~d͡ʒʱ
ɡʱ



Fricative


s
ʂ
ɕ~ʃ

h~ɦ


Approximant
plain
ʋ

l
ɭ
j




murmured
ʋʱ

lʱ

(jʱ)[54]




Flap/Trill
plain


ɾ
ɺ̢[55]





murmured


ɾʱ






Older aspirated *tsʰ, dzʱ have lost their onset, with *tsʰ merging with /s/ and *dzʱ being typically realised as an aspirated fricative, [zʱ]. This /ts, dz, zʱ/ series is not distinguished in writing from /tʃ, tʃʰ, dʒ, dʒʱ/.

Vowels

 
Front
Central
Back


High
i
 
u


Mid
e
ə
o


Low
 
a
 


There are two more vowels in Marathi to denote the pronunciations of English words such as of a in act and a in all. These are written as अॅ and ऑ. The IPA signs for these are [æ] and [ɒ], respectively. Maharashtri Prakrit, the ancestor of modern Marathi, is a particularly interesting case. Maharashtri was often used for poetry and as such, diverged from proper Sanskrit grammar mainly to fit the language to the meter of different styles of poetry. The new grammar stuck, which led to the unique flexibility of vowels lengths – amongst other anomalies – in Marathi. Marathi retains the original Sanskrit pronunciation of certain letters such as the anusvāra (for instance, saṃhar, compared to sanhar in Hindi). Moreover, Marathi preserves certain Sanskrit patterns of pronunciation, as in the words purṇa and rāma compared to purṇ and rām in Hindi.
Writing[edit]




Modi script was used to write Marathi


Main articles: Devanagari, Balbodh, and Modi script




An effort to conserve the "Modi Script" under India Post's My Stamp scheme. Here, the word 'Marathi' is printed in the "Modi Script".


Kadamba alphabet and its variants has been historically used to write Marathi in the form of inscriptions on stones and copper plates. The Marathi version of Devanagari, called Balbodh, is similar to the Hindi Devanagari alphabet except for its use as words in Marathi traditionally pronounce schwa making its written form differ even from other Marathi words. For example, the word 'रंग' (colour) is pronounced as 'ranga' in Marathi & 'rang' in other languages using devanagari despite same spelling, 'खरं' (true) despite the anuswara is pronounced as 'khara' as the anuswara in this case is used to avoid schwa deletion in pronunciation since most other languages using devanagari show schwa deletion in pronunciation despite the presence of schwa in the written spelling. From the 13th century until the mid-20th century, Marathi was written in the Modi script. Since 1950 it has been written in the Balbodh style of Devanagari.[56] Except for Father Stephen's Christ Puran in the Latin script in the 1600s, Marathi has mainly been printed in Devanagari because William Carey, the pioneer of printing in Indian languages, was only able to print in Devanagari. He later tried printing in Modi but by that time, Balbodh Devanagari had been accepted for printing.[57]
Devanagari[edit]
Marathi is usually written in the Balbodh[58][59][60][61] version of Devanagari script, an abugida consisting of 36 consonant letters and 16 initial-vowel letters. It is written from left to right. The Devanagari alphabet used to write Marathi is slightly different from the Devanagari alphabets of Hindi and other languages: there are a couple of additional letters in the Marathi alphabet, and Western punctuation is used.
As with a large part of India, a traditional duality existed in script usage between Devanagari by religiously educated people (most notably Brahmins) and Modi for common usage among administrators, businesspeople, and others. As observed in 1807,[62]

Although in the Mahratta country the Devanagari character is well known to men of education, yet a character is current among the men of business which is much smaller, and varies considerably in form from the Nagari, though the number and power of the letters nearly correspond.

Vowels


Devanagari
अ
आ
इ
ई
उ
ऊ
ऋ
ए
ऐ
ओ
औ
अं
अः
अॅ
अॉ


Transliterated
a
ā
i
ī
u
ū
ṛ
e
ai
o
au
aṃ
aḥ
æ
ɒ


IPA
[ə]
[a]
short[i]
[i]
short[u]
[u]
[ru]
[e]
[əi]
[o]
[əu]
[əm]
[əɦa]
[æ]
[ɒ]


Vowel ligatures with Consonant क/ka


क
का
कि
की
कु
कू
के
कै
को
कौ
कं
कः
कॅ
कॉ


ka
kā
ki
kī
ku
kū
ke
kai
ko
kau
kam
kah
kæ
kɒ


consonants
क ख ग घ ङ
च छ ज झ ञ
ट ठ ड ढ ण
त थ द ध न
प फ ब भ म
य र ल व
श ष स
ह ळ
क्ष ज्ञ

ka kha ga gha ṅa
ca cha ja jha ña
ṭa ṭha ḍa ḍha ṇa
ta tha da dha na
pa pha ba bha ma
ya ra la va
śa ṣa sa
ha ḷa
kṣa dña/jña
It is written from left to right. Devanagari used to write Marathi is slightly different than that of Hindi or other languages. It uses additional vowels and consonants that are not found in other languages that also use devanagari.
The Modi alphabet[edit]
See also: Modi alphabet
From the thirteenth century until 1950, Marathi, especially for business use, was written in the Modi alphabet — a cursive script designed for minimising the lifting of pen from paper while writing.[63]
Consonant clusters in Devanagari[edit]
In Devanagari, consonant letters by default come with an inherent schwa. Therefore, तयाचे will be 'təyāche', not 'tyāche'. To form 'tyāche', you will have to write it as त् + याचे, giving त्याचे.
When two or more consecutive consonants are followed by a vowel then a jodakshar (consonant cluster) is formed. Some examples of consonant clusters are shown below:

त्याचे - tyāche - "his"
प्रस्ताव - prastāva - "proposal"
विद्या - vidyā - "knowledge"
म्यान - myān "Sheath/scabbard"
त्वरा - tvarā "immediate/Quick"
महत्त्व - mahatttva - "importance"
फक्त - phakta - "only"
बाहुल्या - bāhulyā - "dolls"

In writing, Marathi has a few digraphs that are rarely seen in the world's languages, including those denoting the so-called "nasal aspirates" (ṇh, nh, and mh) and liquid aspirates (rh, ṟh, lh, and vh). Some examples are given below.

कण्हेरी - kaṇherī - "a shrub known for flowers"/ Oleander
न्हाणे - nhāṇe - "bathing"
म्हणून - mhaṇūna - "therefore"
तऱ्हा - taṟhā - "different way of behaving"
कोल्हा - kolhā - "fox"
केंव्हा - keṃvhā - "when"

Grammar[edit]
Main article: Marathi grammar
Marathi grammar shares similarities with other modern Indo-Aryan languages. The first modern book exclusively concerning Marathi Grammar was printed in 1805 by William Carey.
Marathi employs agglutinative, inflectional and analytical forms.[64] Unlike most other Indo-Aryan languages, Marathi preserves all three grammatical genders from Sanskrit: masculine, feminine and neuter. The primary word order of Marathi is subject–object–verb[65] Marathi follows a split-ergative pattern of verb agreement and case marking: it is ergative in constructions with either perfective transitive verbs or with the obligative ("should", "have to") and it is nominative elsewhere.[66] An unusual feature of Marathi, as compared to other Indo-European languages, is that it displays inclusive and exclusive we also found in Rajasthani and Gujarati and common to the Austronesian and Dravidian languages. Other similarities to Dravidian include the extensive use of participial constructions[64] and also to a certain extent the use of the two anaphoric pronouns swətah and apəṇ.[67] Numerous scholars have noted the existence of Dravidian linguistic patterns in the Marathi language.[68]
Vocabulary[edit]
Sharing of linguistic resources with other languages[edit]






This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (April 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)







Marathi neon signboard at Maharashtra Police headquarters in Mumbai.


Over a period of many centuries the Marathi language and people came into contact with many other languages and dialects. The primary influence of Prakrit, Maharashtri, Apabhraṃśa and Sanskrit is understandable. Marathi borrows a lot of its vocabulary from Sanskrit.[citation needed]
Marathi has also shared directions, vocabulary and grammar with languages such as Indian Dravidian languages, and foreign languages such as Persian, Arabic, English and a little from Portuguese. While recent genome studies suggest some amount of political and trade relations between the Indian subcontinent and East Africa, Middle East, Central Asia over a millennium, these studies are still not conclusive about the exact effect on linguistics.[citation needed]
Vinayak Damodar Savarkar, the noted freedom fighter and Hindutva Ideologue and also writer and poet in his own right,has contributed to Marathi language, by coining new Marathi equivalents for words from other languages, mostly English. Prior to these Marathi equivalents, words from other languages were used commonly which was unacceptable to Savarkar. He opined that intrusion of foreign words, polluted the Marathi language, while also rendering the original Marathi words, of the same meanings, obsolete.[citation needed] Following are some of the words coined and popularised by him for safeguarding cultural integrity:
Marathi has also shared directions, vocabulary and grammar with languages such as Indian Dravidian languages, and foreign languages such as Persian, Arabic, English and a little from Portuguese.
School: शाळा, College: महाविद्यालय, Academy: प्रबोधिका, Headmaster: मुख्याध्यापक, Superintendent of highschool: आचार्य, Principal: प्राचार्य, Professor: प्राध्यापक, Dispensary: औषधालय, Consulting room: चिकित्सालय, Vakil(an Urdu word): विधिज्ञ, Fauj, Lashkar(Urdu): सेना, सैन्य, Skirmish: चकमक, Camp: शिबीर, छावणी, Submarine: पाणबुडी, Telephone: दूरध्वनी, Television: दूरदर्शन, Circular: परिपत्रक, Report: अहवाल, प्रतिवृत्त, इतिवृत्त, Jindabad: की जय, जय हो, अमर हो, Legislature: विधी मंडळ, Parliamentarian: संसदपटू, Ahmedabad: कर्णावती, Arabian sea: पश्चिम समुद्र, सिंधुसागर, Hyderabad(south): भाग्यनगर, Cinema hall:चित्रपटगृह, Cinema: चित्रपट, Film: चित्रावली, चित्रपट्टिका, Interval: मध्यंतर, Studio: कलागृह, कलामंदिर, Shooting: चित्रण, Three dimension: त्रिमितीपट, Green groom: नेपथ्य, Photograph: छायाचित्र, Camera: छायिक, Portrait: व्यक्तिचित्र, Tape recorder: ध्वनिमुद्रा, Scenario: पटकथा, चित्रकथा, Trailer: परिचयपट, Music director: संगीत नियोजक, Director: दिग्दर्शक, Editor: संकलक,[citation needed]
Morphology and etymology[edit]






This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (April 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Spoken Marathi contains a high number of Sanskrit-derived (tatsama) words.[citation needed] Such words are for example nantar (from nantara or after), purṇa (purṇa or complete, full, or full measure of something), ola (ola or damp), karaṇ (karaṇa or cause), puṣkaḷ (puṣkala or much, many), satat (satata or always), vichitra (vichitra or strange), svatah (svatah or himself/herself), prayatna (prayatna or effort, attempt), bhīti (from bhīti, or fear) and bhāṇḍa (bhāṇḍa or vessel for cooking or storing food). Other words ("tadbhavas") have undergone phonological changes from their Sanskrit roots, for example dār (dwāra or door), ghar (gṛha or house), vāgh (vyāghra or tiger), paḷaṇe (palāyate or to run away), kiti (kati or how many) have undergone more modification. Examples of words borrowed from other Indian and foreign languages include:

Aḍakittā "nutcracker" directly borrowed from Kannada
Aathya "aunt" borrowed from Tamil
Akkā "elder sister" borrowed from Tamil
Hajērī Attendance from Haziri Urdu
Jāhirāta "advertisement" is derived from Arabic zaahiraat
Marjī "wish" is derived from Persian "marzi"
Shiphārasa "recommendation" is derived from Persian sefaresh

A lot of English words are commonly used in conversation, and are considered to be assimilated into the Marathi vocabulary. These include "pen" (native Marathi lekhaṇii) and "shirt" (sadaraa).
Compounds[edit]
Marathi uses many morphological processes to join words together, forming compounds. For example, ati + uttam gives the word atyuttam, miith-bhaakar ("salt-bread"), udyog-patii ("businessman"), ashṭa-bhujaa ("eight-hands", name of a Hindu goddess).
Counting[edit]
Like many other languages, Marathi uses distinct names for the numbers 1 to 20 and each multiple of 10, and composite ones for those greater than 20.
As with other Indic languages, there are distinct names for the fractions ​1⁄4, ​1⁄2, and ​3⁄4. They are paava, ardhaa, and pauṇa, respectively. For most fractions greater than 1, the prefixes savvaa-, saaḍe-, paavaṇe- are used. There are special names for ​3⁄2 (diiḍ) and ​5⁄2 (aḍich).
Powers of ten are denoted by separate specific words as depicted in below table.


Number power to 10
Marathi Number name[69][70]
In Devanagari


100
Ek
एक


101
dahaa
दहा


102
Shambhar
शंभर


103
Hazaar (Sahasra, Ayut)
सहस्र/हजार


104
Daha Hazaar (dash-sahasra)
दशसहस्र/दशहजार


105
Laakh (laksha)
लाख/लक्ष


106
DahaaLaakh (Dasha-Laksha)
दशलक्ष


107
Koti (Karoda)
कोटी


108
dasha-koti
दशकोटी


109
Abja (Arbud, Arab)
अब्ज


1010
dasha-Abja
दशअब्ज


1011
Vrund
वृंद


1012
Kharv (Kharab)
खर्व


1013
Nikharv (Neela)
निखर्व


1014
Sashastra
सशस्त्र


1015
Mahaapadm (padma)
महापद्म


1016
Kamal
कमळ


1017
Shanku (shankha)
शंकू


1017
Skand
स्कंद


1018
Suvachya
सुवाच्य


1019
jaladhi (samudra)
जलधी


1020
Krutya
कृत्य


1021
Antya
अंत्य


1022
Aajanm
आजन्म


1023
Madhy
मध्य


1024
Laxmi
लक्ष्मी


1025
paraardha
परार्ध


A positive integer is read by breaking it up from the tens digit leftwards, into parts each containing two digits, the only exception being the hundreds place containing only one digit instead of two. For example, 1,234,567 is written as 12,34,567 and read as 12 laakha 34 hazaara 5 she 67.
Every two-digit number after 18 (11 to 18 are predefined) is read backwards. For example, 21 is read एक-वीस (1-twenty). Also, a two digit number that ends with a 9 is considered to be the next tens place minus one. For example, 29 is एकुणतीस/एकोणतीस (एक-उणे-तीस)(Thirty minus one). Two digit numbers used before hazaara, etc. are written in the same way.
Marathi on computers and the Internet[edit]
Shrilipee, Shivaji, kothare 2,4,6, Kiran fonts KF-Kiran[71] and many more (about 48) are clip fonts that were used prior to the introduction of Unicode standard for Devanagari script. Clip fonts are in vogue on PCs even today since most of the computers in use are working with English Keyboard. Even today a large number of printed publications of books, newspapers and magazines are prepared using these ASCII based fonts. However, clip fonts cannot be used on internet since those did not have unicode compatibility.
Earlier Marathi suffered from weak support by computer operating systems and Internet services, as have other Indian languages. But recently, with the introduction of language localisation projects and new technologies, various software and Internet applications have been introduced. Various Marathi typing software is widely used and display interface packages are now available on Windows, Linux and macOS. Many Marathi websites, including Marathi newspapers, have become popular especially with Maharashtrians outside India. Online projects such as the Marathi language Wikipedia, with 36,000+ articles, the Marathi blogroll and Marathi blogs have gained immense popularity.[72]
Marathi Language Day[edit]
Marathi Language Day (Marathi Dina, Marathi Diwasa : मराठी दिन/मराठी दिवस is celebrated on 27 February every year across the Indian states of Maharashtra and Goa. This day is regulated by the State Government. It is celebrated on the Birthday of eminent Marathi Poet Vi. Va. Shirwadkar.[73][74]
Essay competitions and seminars are arranged in Schools and Colleges. Government officials are asked to conduct various events.[75]
Marathi organisations[edit]
Many government and semi-government organisations exist which work for the regulation, promotion and enrichment of the Marathi language. These are either initiated or funded by the government of Maharashtra. A few Marathi organisations are given below:[76]

Akhil Bharatiya keertan sanstha, Dadar, Mumbai
Akhil Bharatiya Marathi Natya Parishad
Akhil Bharatiya Marathi Sahitya Mahamandal (Central confederation of all Marathi organisations)
Maharashtra Sahitya Parishad, Pune
Marathi Kavita[77]
Marathi Vishwakosh - Marathi encyclopaedia project
Marathwada Sahitya Parishad, Aurangabad
Mumbai Marathi Sahitya Sangh
Rajya Marathi Vikas Sanstha[19]
Shodh Marathicha
Vidarbha Sahitya Sangh, Nagpur

Outside Maharashtra state[edit]

Akhil Bharatiya Marathi Mandal, Jabalpur[78]
Andhra Pradesh Marathi Sahitya Parishad, Hyderabad
Marathi Granth Sangrahalay, Hyderabad
Vivek Vardhini Shikshan Sanstha, Hyderabad
Maharashtra Mandal, Hyderabad
Vedic Dharma Prakashika High School, Hyderabad
Gomantak Marathi Academy, Goa[79]
Gomantak Sahitya Sevak mandal, Panaji, Goa[80]
Madhya Pradesh Sahitya Parishad, Jabalpur
Marathi Sahitya Parishad, Karnataka
Karnataka Sahitya Parishad, Gulbarga[80]
Chhattisgarh Marathi Sahitya Parishad, Bilaspur, Chhattisgarh[80]
Madhya Pradesh Marathi Sahitya Parishad, Bhopal[80]
Vadodara (Badode Sansthan-Gaikwad State), Gujarat Rajya, Bharat
Shri Maharashtra Sahitya Sabha, Indore
Sanand Nyas, Indore
Marathi Samaj, Indore
Maharashtra Rangayan, Delhi
Vrihanna Maharashtra Mandal, an umbrella body of all Marathis who stay outside Maharashtra
Marathi Association Sydney Incorporated, Sydney, Australia[81]
Maharashtra Mandal, London[82]
Marathi Bhashik Mandal, Toronto[83]
Lagos Nigeria

See also[edit]


Maharashtra portal



Konkani language
Languages of India
Languages with official status in India

References[edit]


^ http://marathi.com/Marathi. Retrieved 5 December 2014.  Missing or empty |title= (help)[dead link] Marathi. Retrieved on 2013-07-28.
^ Mikael Parkvall, "Världens 100 största språk 2007" (The World's 100 Largest Languages in 2007), in Nationalencyklopedin
^ Campbell, George L. (1999). Concise compendium of the world's languages ([Paperback ed., reprinted]. ed.). London: Routledge. ISBN 978-0415160490. Retrieved 8 January 2017. 
^ http://www.unicode.org/L2/L2011/11212r2-n4034-modi.pdf
^ a b The Goa, Daman and Diu Official Language Act, 1987 makes Konkani the official language, but provides that Marathi may also be used "for all or any of the official purposes". The Government also has a policy of replying in Marathi to correspondence received in Marathi. Commissioner Linguistic Minorities, [1], pp. para 11.3 Archived 19 September 2009 at the Wayback Machine.
^ a b [2] Archived 7 November 2012 at the Wayback Machine.
^ Hammarström, Harald; Forkel, Robert; Haspelmath, Martin, eds. (2017). "Modern Marathi". Glottolog 3.0. Jena, Germany: Max Planck Institute for the Science of Human History. 
^ Hammarström, Harald; Forkel, Robert; Haspelmath, Martin, eds. (2017). "Old Marathi". Glottolog 3.0. Jena, Germany: Max Planck Institute for the Science of Human History. 
^ Laurie Bauer, 2007, The Linguistics Student’s Handbook, Edinburgh
^ "Abstract of Language Strength in India: 2001 Census". Censusindia.gov.in. Archived from the original on 10 February 2013. Retrieved 2013-05-09. 
^ arts, South Asian." Encyclopædia Britannica. Encyclopædia Britannica 2007 Ultimate Reference Suite.
^ Dhoṅgaḍe, Rameśa; Wali, Kashi (2009). "Marathi". London Oriental and African language library. John Benjamins Publishing Company. 13: 101, 139. ISBN 9789027238139. 
^ "Marathi may become the sixth classical language". Indian Express. 4 July 2013. Retrieved 25 June 2017. 
^ "SUBMISSION FOR CLASSICAL STATUS OF MARATHI LANGUAGE" (PDF). November 2013: 36. Retrieved 25 June 2017. 
^ Dhongde & Wali 2009, pp. 11–15.
^ "Marathi". ethnologue.com. 
^ "SCHEDULE". constitution.org. 
^ "Marathi may become the sixth classical language". Indian Express. Retrieved 25 June 2017. 
^ a b http://rmvs.maharashtra.gov.in/
^ "Dept. of Marathi, M.S. University of Baroda". Msubaroda.ac.in. Archived from the original on 4 November 2012. Retrieved 2013-05-09. 
^ "University College of Arts and Social Sciences". osmania.ac.in. 
^ kudadmin. "Departments and Faculty". kudacademics.org. 
^ "Department of P.G. Studies and Research in Marathi". kar.nic.in. 
^ "List of statutes (Devi Ahilya University of Indore)". 
^ "Dept.of Marathi, Goa University". Unigoa.ac.in. 2012-04-27. Retrieved 2013-05-09. 
^ "01 May 1960.." www.unitedstatesofindia.com. 
^ Bloch 1970, p. 32.
^ Kher 1895, pp. 446–454.
^ Keune, Jon Milton (2011). Eknāth Remembered and Reformed: Bhakti, Brahmans, and Untouchables in Marathi Historiography. New York, NY, USA: Columbia University press. p. 32. Retrieved 9 March 2016. 
^ a b c Natarajan, ed. by Nalini (1996). Handbook of twentieth century literatures of India (1. publ. ed.). Westport, Conn. [u.a.]: Greenwood Press. p. 209. ISBN 978-0313287787. CS1 maint: Extra text: authors list (link)
^ Kulkarni, G.T. (1992). "DECCAN (MAHARASHTRA) UNDER THE MUSLIM RULERS FROM KHALJIS TO SHIVAJI : A STUDY IN INTERACTION, PROFESSOR S.M KATRE Felicitation". Bulletin of the Deccan College Research Institute. 51/52,: 501–510. JSTOR 42930434. 
^ Qasemi, S. H. "MARATHI LANGUAGE, PERSIAN ELEMENTS IN". Encyclopedia Iranica. Retrieved 17 September 2017. 
^ Gordon, Stewart (1993). Cambridge History of India: The Marathas 1600-1818. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University press. p. 16. ISBN 978-0-521-26883-7. 
^ Kamat, Jyotsna. "The Adil Shahi Kingdom (1510 CE to 1686 CE)". Kamat's Potpourri. Retrieved 4 December 2014. 
^ Eaton, Richard M. (2005). The new Cambridge history of India (1. publ. ed.). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. p. 154. ISBN 0-521-25484-1. Retrieved 25 March 2016. 
^ Callewaert,, Winand M.; Snell, Rupert; Tulpule, S G (1994). According to Tradition: Hagiographical Writing in India. Wiesbaden, Germany: Harrassowitz Verlag. p. 166. ISBN 3-447-03524-2. Retrieved 9 April 2015. 
^ Kosambi, Meera (Editor); Ranade, Ashok D. (Author) (2000). Intersections : socio-cultural trends in Maharashtra. London: Sangam. pp. 194–210. ISBN 978-0863118241. CS1 maint: Extra text: authors list (link)
^ Kosambi, Meera (Editor); Ranade, Ashok D. (Author) (2000). Intersections : socio-cultural trends in Maharashtra. London: Sangam. pp. 194–210. ISBN 978-0863118241. CS1 maint: Extra text: authors list (link)
^ Ray, Mohit K. (Editor); Sawant, Sunil (Author) (2008). Studies in translation (2nd rev. and enl. ed.). New Delhi: Atlantic Publishers & Distributors. pp. 134–135. ISBN 9788126909223. CS1 maint: Extra text: authors list (link)
^ James, Molesworth, Thomas Candy, Narayan G Kalelkar (1857). Molesworth's, Marathi-English dictionary (2nd ed.). Pune: J.C. Furla, Shubhada Saraswat Prakashan. ISBN 81-86411-57-7. CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link)
^ Chavan, Dilip (2013). Language politics under colonialism : caste, class and language pedagogy in western India. Newcastle upon Tyne: Cambridge Scholars. p. 174. ISBN 978-1443842501. 
^ Chavan, Dilip (2013). Language politics under colonialism : caste, class and language pedagogy in western India (first ed.). Newcastle upon Tyne: Cambridge Scholars. pp. 136–184. ISBN 978-1443842501. Retrieved 13 December 2016. ,
^ Natarajan, Nalini (editor); Deo, Shripad D. (1996). Handbook of twentieth century literatures of India (1. publ. ed.). Westport, Conn. [u.a.]: Greenwood Press. p. 212. ISBN 978-0313287787. CS1 maint: Extra text: authors list (link)
^ Natarajan, Nalini (editor); Deo, Shripad D. (1996). Handbook of twentieth century literatures of India (1. publ. ed.). Westport, Conn. [u.a.]: Greenwood Press. pp. 213–214. ISBN 978-0313287787. CS1 maint: Extra text: authors list (link)
^ Deshpande, G. P. (1997). "Marathi Literature since Independence: Some Pleasures and Displeasures". Economic and Political Weekly. 32. (44/45): 2885–2892. JSTOR 4406042. 
^ Natarajan, Nalini; Emmanuel Sampath Nelson (1996). "Chap 13: Dalit Literature in Marathi by Veena Deo". Handbook of twentieth-century literatures of India. Greenwood Publishing Group. p. 363. ISBN 0-313-28778-3. 
^ Issues of Language and Representation:Babu Rao Bagul Handbook of twentieth-century literatures of India, Editors: Nalini Natarajan, Emmanuel Sampath Nelson. Greenwood Publishing Group, 1996. ISBN 0-313-28778-3. Page 368.
^ Mother 1970 Indian short stories, 1900–2000, by E.V. Ramakrishnan, I. V. Ramakrishnana. Sahitya Akademi. Page 217, Page 409 (Biography).
^ Jevha Mi Jat Chorali Hoti (1963) Encyclopaedia of Indian literature vol. 2. Editors Amaresh Datta. Sahitya Akademi, 1988. ISBN 81-260-1194-7. Page 1823.
^ "Of art, identity, and politics". The Hindu. Jan 23, 2003. 
^ Assayag,, Jackie; Fuller, Christopher John (2005). Globalizing India: Perspectives from Below. London, UK: Anthem Press. p. 80. ISBN 1-84331-194-1. 
^ Khodade, 2004
^ Colin Masica, 1993, The Indo-Aryan Languages
^ In Kudali dialect
^ Masica (1991:97)
^ "Marathi language, alphabet and pronunciation". Omniglot.com. Retrieved 2013-05-09. 
^ Rao, Goparaju Sambasiva (1994). Language Change: Lexical Diffusion and Literacy. Delhi: Academic Foundation. p. 49. ISBN 81-7188-057-6. 
^ Masica, Colin P. (1993). The Indian Languages. Cambridge University Press. p. 437. ISBN 9780521299442. Archived from the original on 7 December 2014. 
^ Rao, Goparaju Sambasiva (1994). Language Change: Lexical Diffusion and Literacy. Academic Foundation. pp. 48 and 49. ISBN 9788171880577. Archived from the original on 7 December 2014. 
^ Ajmire, P.E.; Dharaskar, RV; Thakare, V M (22 March 2013). "A Comparative Study of Handwritten Marathi Character Recognition" (PDF). International Journal of Computer Applications. INTRODUCTION. Archived from the original (PDF) on 7 December 2014. 
^ Bhimraoji, Rajendra (28 February 2014). "Reviving the Modi Script" (PDF). Typoday. Archived from the original (PDF) on 7 December 2014. 
^ Carey, William. "Memoir Relative to the Translations" 1807: Serampore Mission Press.
^ [3] Archived 16 May 2008 at the Wayback Machine.
^ a b Bhosale, G.; Kembhavi, S.; Amberkar, A.; Mhatre, M.; Popale, L.; Bhattacharyya, P. (2011), "Processing of Kridanta (Participle) in Marathi" (PDF), Proceedings of ICON-2011: 9th International Conference on Natural Language Processing, MacMillan Publishers, India 
^ "Wals.info". Wals.info. Retrieved 2013-05-09. 
^ Dhongde & Wali 2009, pp. 179–80.
^ Dhongde & Wali 2009, p. 263.
^ Polomé, Edgar C. (1992-01-01). Reconstructing Languages and Cultures. Walter De Gruyter. p. 521. ISBN 9783110867923. 
^ "Indian Numbering System". Oocities.org. Retrieved 2012-09-18. 
^ Sushma Gupta, Sushma, Gupta. "Indian Numbering System". Sushmajee.com. Archived from the original on 30 April 2012. Retrieved 2012-09-18. CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link)
^ "Welcome to www.kiranfont.com". Kiranfont.com. Archived from the original on 31 October 2014. Retrieved 2012-09-18. 
^ Askari, Faiz. "Inside the Indian Blogosphere". Express Computer. Archived from the original on 4 October 2008. Retrieved 2008-10-10. 
^ "मराठी भाषा दिवस - २७ फेब्रुवारी". MarathiMati.com. Retrieved 27 February 2016. 
^ "jagatik Marathi bhasha din celebration - divyamarathi.bhaskar.com". divyabhaskar. Retrieved 27 February 2016. 
^ "आम्ही मराठीचे शिलेदार!". Loksatta. 22 February 2013. Retrieved 27 February 2016. 
^ Encyclopaedia of Indian literature Volume I, Sahitya Akademi, ISBN 8126018038
^ https://www.pudhe.com/poems/
^ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 5 July 2014. Retrieved 3 January 2015. 
^ "Welcome to Directorate of Official Language". www.dol.goa.gov.in. 
^ a b c d "3 Puneites in race for Sammelan presidentship". The Times of India. 
^ "Marathi Association Sydney Inc. (MASI)". marathisydney.org.au. 
^ ":: MML ::". www.mmlondon.co.uk. 
^ "MBM Toronto". www.mbmtoronto.com. 


Bibliography[edit]


Bloch, J (1970). Formation of the Marathi Language. Motilal Banarsidass Publ. ISBN 978-81-208-2322-8. 
Dhongde, Ramesh Vaman; Wali, Kashi (2009). Marathi. Amsterdam: John Benjamins Pub. Co. ISBN 978-90-272-38139. 
A Survey of Marathi Dialects. VIII. Gāwḍi, A. M. Ghatage & P. P. Karapurkar. The State Board for Literature and Culture, Bombay. 1972.
Marathi: The Language and its Linguistic Traditions - Prabhakar Machwe, Indian and Foreign Review, 15 March 1985.
'Atyavashyak Marathi Vyakaran' (Essential Marathi Grammar) - Dr. V. L. Vardhe
'Marathi Vyakaran' (Marathi Grammar) - Moreshvar Sakharam More.
'Marathi Vishwakosh, Khand 12 (Marathi World Encyclopedia, Volume 12), Maharashtra Rajya Vishwakosh Nirmiti Mandal, Mumbai
'Marathyancha Itihaas' by Dr. Kolarkar, Shrimangesh Publishers, Nagpur
'History of Medieval Hindu India from 600 CE to 1200 CE, by C. V. Vaidya
Marathi Sahitya (Review of the Marathi Literature up to I960) by Kusumavati Deshpande, Maharashtra Information Centre, New Delhi


External links[edit]



Marathi edition of Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia



Find more aboutMarathiat Wikipedia's sister projects

Definitions from Wiktionary
Media from Wikimedia Commons
News from Wikinews
Quotations from Wikiquote
Texts from Wikisource
Textbooks from Wikibooks
Travel guide from Wikivoyage
Learning resources from Wikiversity



भारतीय भाषा ज्योति: मराठी —a textbook for learning Marathi through Hindi from the Central Institute of Indian Languages


Dictionaries


Molesworth, J. T. (James Thomas). A dictionary, Marathi and English. 2d ed., rev. and enl. Bombay: Printed for government at the Bombay Education Society's press, 1857.
Vaze, Shridhar Ganesh. The Aryabhusan school dictionary, Marathi-English. Poona: Arya-Bhushan Press, 1911.
Tulpule, Shankar Gopal and Anne Feldhaus. A dictionary of old Marathi. Mumbai: Popular Prakashan, 1999.
Marathi Wordnet
English to Marathi and Marathi to English Dictionary







v
t
e


Marathi






Grammar
Phonology
Literature
Poetry
Samyukta Maharashtra Movement
Maharashtra State
Marathi Wikipedia





Marathi language as per location



East indians of Mumbai
Puneri
Kolhapuri
Satari
Nagari
Malvani
Thanjavur Marathi





Marathi as per Boli



Jhadi Boli
Varhadi Boli
Ahirani Boli
Khandeshi Boli
Konkani Boli
Vadvali Boli
Samavedi Boli
Southern Indian Marathi Boli
Dangii Boli
Judæo Boli
Deshi Boli





Marathi scripts



Balbodh style of Devanagari
Braille
Modi
Marathi romanization





Other



Marathi Cinema
Marathi theatre
Literature
Marathi people (List)





Language politics



Anti-Marathi agitations of Karnataka





Arts



Awards
Sahitya Akademi Award
Jnanpith Award
Writers
Poets
National Film Award
Maharashtra












v
t
e


 State of Maharashtra




Capital: Mumbai Second capital: Nagpur



Topics



History
Geography
Economy
Tourism
Highest point
Marathi language
Culture
Marathi people
Marathi literature
Marathi cinema
Maharashtrian cuisine
Sports





Regions



Desh
Khandesh
Konkan
Mumbai Metropolitan Region
Marathwada
Vidarbha





Divisions and
Districts




Amravati division



Akola
Amravati
Buldhana
Washim
Yavatmal





Konkan division



Mumbai
Mumbai Suburban
Palghar
Raigad
Ratnagiri
Sindhudurg
Thane





Aurangabad division



Aurangabad
Beed
Jalna
Osmanabad
Nanded
Latur
Parbhani
Hingoli





Nagpur division



Bhandara
Chandrapur
Gadchiroli
Gondia
Nagpur
Wardha





Nashik division



Ahmednagar
Dhule
Jalgaon
Nandurbar
Nashik





Pune division



Kolhapur
Pune
Sangli
Satara
Solapur








Million-plus cities
in Maharashtra



Mumbai
Pune
Nagpur
Aurangabad
Nashik
Solapur
Thane
Pimpri-Chinchwad
Kalyan-Dombivali
Vasai-Virar
Navi Mumbai





Other cities with
municipal corporations



Ahmednagar
Akola
Amravati
Bhiwandi-Nizampur
Chandrapur
Dhule
Jalgaon
Kolhapur
Latur
Malegaon
Mira-Bhayandar
Nanded
Panvel
Parbhani
Sangli
Ulhasnagar






Portal: Maharashtra










v
t
e


 Languages of India



Official
languages




Union-level



Hindi
English





8th schedule to the
Constitution of India



Assamese
Bengali
Bodo
Dogri
Gujarati
Hindi
Kannada
Kashmiri
Konkani
Maithili
Malayalam
Meitei (Manipuri)
Marathi
Nepali
Odia
Punjabi
Sanskrit
Sindhi
Santali
Tamil
Telugu
Urdu





State-level only



Garo
Gurung
Khasi
Kokborok
Lepcha
Limbu
Mangar
Mizo
Newari
Rai
Sherpa
Sikkimese
Sunwar
Tamang








Major
unofficial
languages




Over 1 million
speakers



Angika
Awadhi
Bagheli
Bagri
Bajjika
Bhili
Bhojpuri
Bundeli
Chhattisgarhi
Dhundhari
Garhwali
Gondi
Harauti
Haryanvi
Ho
Kangri
Khandeshi
Khortha
Kumaoni
Kurukh
Lambadi
Magahi
Malvi
Marwari
Mewari
Mundari
Nimadi
Rajasthani
Sadri
Surjapuri
Tulu
Wagdi
Varhadi





100,000 – 1 million
speakers



Adi
Angami
Ao
Dimasa
Halbi
Karbi
Kharia
Kodava
Kolami
Konyak
Korku
Koya
Kui
Kuvi
Ladakhi
Lotha
Malto
Mishing
Nishi
Phom
Rabha
Sema
Sora
Tangkhul
Thadou















v
t
e


Modern Indo-Aryan languages



Dardic



Dameli
Domaaki
Gawar-Bati
Kalami
Kalash
Kashmiri
Khowar
Kohistani
Mankiyali
Nangalami
Palula
Pashayi
Shina
Shumashti
Torwali
Ushoji





Northern




Eastern



Doteli
Jumli
Nepali
Palpa





Central



Garhwali
Kumaoni





Western



Dogri
Kangri
Mandeali








North-
western




Punjabi



Punjabi

dialects







Lahnda



Hindko
Khetrani
Pothwari
Saraiki





Sindhi



Jadgali
Kutchi
Luwati
Memoni
Sindhi








Western




Gujarati



Aer
Gujarati
Jandavra
Koli
Lisan ud-Dawat
Parkari Koli
Saurashtra
Vaghri





Bhil



Bhili
Gamit
Kalto
Vasavi





Rajasthani



Bagri
Goaria
Gujari
Jaipuri
Malvi
Marwari
Mewari
Dhatki





Others



Domari
Khandeshi
Romani








Central




Western



Braj Bhasha
Bundeli
Haryanvi
Hindustani

Hindi

Bombay Hindi


Urdu

Dakhini
Hyderabadi Urdu
Rekhta




Khari Boli
Kannauji
Sansi





Eastern



Awadhi
Bagheli
Chhattisgarhi
Fiji Hindi





Others



Danwar
Parya








Eastern




Bihari



Angika
Bhojpuri
Caribbean Hindustani
Vajjika
Magahi
Maithili
Majhi
Sadri





Bengali–
Assamese



Assamese
Bengali

dialects


Bishnupriya Manipuri
Chakma
Chittagonian
Goalpariya
Hajong
Kamrupi
Kharia Thar
Kurmukar
Rangpuri
Rohingya
Sylheti
Tanchangya





Odia



Odia
Kosli
Bodo Parja
Kupia
Reli





Halbic



Halbi
Bhatri
Kamar
Mirgan
Nahari





Others



Mal Paharia








Southern




Marathi–Konkani



Konkani
Kukna
Marathi
others..





Insular



Maldivian
Sinhalese








Pidgins/
creoles



Andaman Creole Hindi
Haflong Hindi
Nagamese
Nefamese
Vedda





See also



Old and Middle Indo-Aryan
Indo-Iranian languages
Nuristani languages
Iranian languages









Authority control



GND: 4037440-3
SUDOC: 027889173
NDL: 00567486











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Marathi_language&oldid=817361018"					Categories: Languages attested from the 11th centuryMarathi languageCulture of MaharashtraOfficial languages of IndiaLanguages written in DevanagariSouthern Indo-Aryan languagesSubject–object–verb languagesLanguages of TelanganaIndo-Aryan languagesHidden categories: Pages with citations lacking titlesPages with citations having bare URLsAll articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from June 2016Webarchive template wayback linksCS1 maint: Extra text: authors listCS1 maint: Multiple names: authors listUse dmy dates from March 2013Use Indian English from June 2016All Wikipedia articles written in Indian EnglishArticles containing Marathi-language textLanguages with ISO 639-2 codeLanguages with ISO 639-1 codeArticles citing NationalencyklopedinArticles with hAudio microformatsAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from February 2016Articles with unsourced statements from December 2017Articles with unsourced statements from April 2017Articles with unsourced statements from January 2017Articles with wanted PUA charactersArticles needing additional references from April 2016All articles needing additional referencesArticles with unsourced statements from August 2014Articles with unsourced statements from May 2016Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers