This article is about the rock. For the toy, see Marble (toy). For other uses, see Marble (disambiguation).




Marble in Carrara marble quarry, Italy






The Taj Mahal is entirely clad in marble.


Marble is a metamorphic rock composed of recrystallized carbonate minerals, most commonly calcite or dolomite. Marble may be foliated. In geology the term "marble" refers to metamorphosed limestone, but its use in stonemasonry more broadly encompasses unmetamorphosed limestone.[1] Marble is commonly used for sculpture and as a building material.



Contents


1 Etymology
2 Physical origins
3 Types
4 Uses

4.1 Sculpture
4.2 Construction marble


5 Production

5.1 Occupational safety

5.1.1 United States




6 Microbial degradation
7 Cultural associations
8 Artificial marble
9 Gallery
10 See also
11 References
12 External links



Etymology




Carlo Franzoni's sculptural marble chariot clock depicting Clio, the Greek muse of history.






Marble wall of Ruskeala. Republic of Karelia, Russia


The word "marble" derives from the Ancient Greek μάρμαρον (mármaron),[2] from μάρμαρος (mármaros), "crystalline rock, shining stone",[3][4] perhaps from the verb μαρμαίρω (marmaírō), "to flash, sparkle, gleam";[5] R. S. P. Beekes has suggested that a "Pre-Greek origin is probable."[6]




Folded and weathered marble at General Carrera Lake, Chile


This stem is also the basis for the English word marmoreal, meaning "marble-like." While the English term resembles the French marbre, most other European languages follow the original Greek.
Physical origins
Marble is a rock resulting from metamorphism of sedimentary carbonate rocks, most commonly limestone or dolomite rock. Metamorphism causes variable recrystallization of the original carbonate mineral grains. The resulting marble rock is typically composed of an interlocking mosaic of carbonate crystals. Primary sedimentary textures and structures of the original carbonate rock (protolith) have typically been modified or destroyed.
Pure white marble is the result of metamorphism of a very pure (silicate-poor) limestone or dolomite protolith. The characteristic swirls and veins of many colored marble varieties are usually due to various mineral impurities such as clay, silt, sand, iron oxides, or chert which were originally present as grains or layers in the limestone. Green coloration is often due to serpentine resulting from originally magnesium-rich limestone or dolostone with silica impurities. These various impurities have been mobilized and recrystallized by the intense pressure and heat of the metamorphism.
Types
Main article: List of types of marble
Examples of historically notable marble varieties and locations:


Marble
Color
Location
Country


Pentelic marble[7]
pure-white, fine-grained semitranslucent
Mount Pentelicus (Πεντελικό όρος), Attica (Ἀττική)
 Greece


Creole marble
white and blue/black
Pickens County, Georgia
 United States


Etowah marble
pink, salmon, rose
Pickens County, Georgia
 United States


Makrana marble
white
Makrana, Nagaur district, Rajasthan
 India


Murphy marble
white
Pickens and Gilmer Counties, Georgia
 United States


Nero Marquina marble
black
Markina, Spain
 Spain


Parian marble
pure-white, fine-grained
Island of Paros (Πάρος), South Aegean (Νοτίου Αιγαίου)
 Greece


Carrara marble
white or blue-gray
Carrara, Tuscany
 Italy


Ruskeala marble
white
near Ruskeala (Рускеала), Karelia (Карелия)
 Russia


Rușchița marble[8]
white, pinkish, reddish
Poiana Ruscă Mountains, Caraș-Severin County
 Romania


Sienna marble[9]
yellow with violet, red, blue or white veins
near Siena, Tuscany
 Italy


Bianco Sivec
white
near Prilep (Прилеп), Pelagonia (Пелагониски)
 Macedonia


Swedish green marble
green
near Kolmården, Södermanland
 Sweden


Sylacauga marble
white
Talladega County, Alabama
 United States


Vermont marble
white
Proctor, Vermont
 United States


Yule marble
uniform pure white
near Marble, Colorado
 United States


Wunsiedel marble
white
Wunsiedel, Bavaria
 Germany


Uses




Ritual amphora of veined marble from Zakros. New palace period (1500–1450 BC), Heraklion Archaeological Museum, Crete.






An 1862 monumental conical pendulum clock by Eugène Farcot with a red griotte marble pedestal






Marble Products in Romblon, Philippines.


Sculpture
White marble has been prized for its use in sculptures[10] since classical times. This preference has to do with its softness, which made it easier to carve, relative isotropy and homogeneity, and a relative resistance to shattering. Also, the low index of refraction of calcite allows light to penetrate several millimeters into the stone before being scattered out, resulting in the characteristic waxy look which gives "life" to marble sculptures of any kind, which is why many sculptors preferred and still prefer marble for sculpting.
Construction marble
Construction marble is a stone which is composed of calcite, dolomite or serpentine which is capable of taking a polish.[11] More generally in construction, specifically the dimension stone trade, the term "marble" is used for any crystalline calcitic rock (and some non-calcitic rocks) useful as building stone. For example, Tennessee marble is really a dense granular fossiliferous gray to pink to maroon Ordovician limestone that geologists call the Holston Formation.
Ashgabat, the capital city of Turkmenistan, was recorded in the 2013 Guinness Book of Records as having the world's highest concentration of white marble buildings.[12]
Production
According to the United States Geological Survey, U.S. domestic marble production in 2006 was 46,400 tons valued at about $18.1 million, compared to 72,300 tons valued at $18.9 million in 2005. Crushed marble production (for aggregate and industrial uses) in 2006 was 11.8 million tons valued at $116 million, of which 6.5 million tons was finely ground calcium carbonate and the rest was construction aggregate. For comparison, 2005 crushed marble production was 7.76 million tons valued at $58.7 million, of which 4.8 million tons was finely ground calcium carbonate and the rest was construction aggregate. U.S. dimension marble demand is about 1.3 million tons. The DSAN World Demand for (finished) Marble Index has shown a growth of 12% annually for the 2000–2006 period, compared to 10.5% annually for the 2000–2005 period. The largest dimension marble application is tile.
In 1998, marble production was dominated by 4 countries that accounted for almost half of world production of marble and decorative stone. Italy and China were the world leaders, each representing 16% of world production, while Spain and India produced 9% and 8%, respectively. Italy is the world leader in marble export, with 20% share in global marble production, followed by China with 16%, India with 10%, Spain with 6%, and Portugal with 5%.[13]
Occupational safety
Dust produced by cutting marble could cause lung disease but more research needs to be carried out on whether dust filters and other safety products reduce this risk.[14]
United States
The Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) has set the legal limit (permissible exposure limit) for marble exposure in the workplace as 15 mg/m3 total exposure and 5 mg/m3 respiratory exposure over an 8-hour workday. The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) has set a recommended exposure limit (REL) of 10 mg/m3 total exposure and 5 mg/m3 respiratory exposure over an 8-hour workday.[15]
Microbial degradation
The haloalkaliphilic methylotrophic bacterium Methylophaga murata was isolated from deteriorating marble in the Kremlin.[16] Bacterial and fungal degradation was detected in four samples of marble from Milan cathedral; black Cladosporium attacked dried acrylic resin[17] using melanin.[18]
Cultural associations




Jadwiga of Poland's sarcophagus by Antoni Madeyski, Wawel Cathedral, Cracow






Relief on the Marble Door of the Hagia Sophia in Istanbul


As the favorite medium for Greek and Roman sculptors and architects (see classical sculpture), marble has become a cultural symbol of tradition and refined taste. Its extremely varied and colorful patterns make it a favorite decorative material, and it is often imitated in background patterns for computer displays, etc.
Places named after the stone include Marblehead, Massachusetts; Marblehead, Ohio; Marble Arch, London; the Sea of Marmara; India's Marble Rocks; and the towns of Marble, Minnesota; Marble, Colorado; Marble Falls, Texas, and Marble Hill, Manhattan, New York. The Elgin Marbles are marble sculptures from the Parthenon that are on display in the British Museum. They were brought to Britain by the Earl of Elgin.
Artificial marble






This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (July 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Marble dust is combined with cement or synthetic resins to make reconstituted or cultured marble. The appearance of marble can be simulated with faux marbling, a painting technique that imitates the stone's color patterns.
Gallery













The Nike of Samothrace is made of Parian marble (c. 220–190 BC) 













Laocoön and His Sons in the Vatican 













The Praetorians Relief, made from grey veined marble, c. 51–52 AD 













Ancient marble columns in the prayer hall of the Mosque of Uqba, in Kairouan, Tunisia 













Aon Center in Chicago was the tallest structure clad in marble upon its completion. The marble however proved to be fragile, and the building was re-clad in a similarly-colored granite at an extreme financial cost. 













Cleopatra by William Wetmore Story was described and admired in Nathaniel Hawthorne's romance, The Marble Faun, and is on display at The Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York City 













As with many Brazil's government buildings in Brasília, the Palácio do Planalto, official workplace of the Brazilian President, is clad in marble 






See also

Cultured marble, marble powder with a binder.
Faux marbling, painting surfaces to look like marble.
Marble sculpture
Paper marbling
Pietra dura, inlaying with marble and other stones.
Scagliola, imitating marble with plasterwork.
Verd antique, sometimes (erroneously) called "serpentine marble".
Ruin marble, marble that contains light and dark patterns, giving the impression of a ruined cityscape.

References


^ Kearey, Philip (2001). Dictionary of Geology, Penguin Group, London and New York, p. 163. ISBN 978-0-14-051494-0
^ μάρμαρον, Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, A Greek–English Lexicon, on Perseus Digital Library
^ μάρμαρος, Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, A Greek–English Lexicon, on Perseus Digital Library
^ Marble, Compact Oxford English Dictionary. Askoxford.com. Retrieved on 2011-09-30.
^ μαρμαίρω, Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, A Greek-English Lexicon, on Perseus Digital Library
^ R. S. P. Beekes, Etymological Dictionary of Greek, Brill, 2009, p. 907.
^ Pentelic marble, Britannica Online Encyclopaedia. Britannica.com. Retrieved on 2011-09-30.
^ "RAPORT DE ȚARĂ. Domul din Milano a fost reconstruit cu marmură de Rușchița". 
^ Jameson, Robert (2011). System of Mineralogy (2 [Digital] ed.). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 9781108029742. 
^ PROCEEDINGS 4th International Congress on “Science and Technology for the Safeguard of Cultural Heritage in the Mediterranean Basin” VOL. I. Angelo Ferrari. ISBN 9788896680315. 
^ Marble Institute of America pp. 223 Glossary
^ "Turkmenistan enters record books for having the most white marble buildings | World news". London: theguardian.com. 2013-05-26. Retrieved 2013-11-24. 
^ Strategic positioning study of the marble branch. CEPI Brief N° 6. tunisianindustry.nat.tn
^ Foja, A.F. (1993) Marble industry: its socioeconomic, environmental and health effects among marble worker/producer households in Romblon. Philippines University Thesis. fao.org
^ "CDC – NIOSH Pocket Guide to Chemical Hazards – Marble". www.cdc.gov. Retrieved 2015-11-27. 
^ Doronina NV; Li TsD; Ivanova EG; Trotsenko IuA. (2005). "Methylophaga murata sp. nov.: a haloalkaliphilic aerobic methylotroph from deteriorating marble". Mikrobiologiia. 74 (4): 511–9. PMID 16211855. 
^ Cappitelli F; Principi P; Pedrazzani R; Toniolo L; Sorlini C (2007). "Bacterial and fungal deterioration of the Milan Cathedral marble treated with protective synthetic resins". Science of the Total Environment. 385 (1–3): 172–81. doi:10.1016/j.scitotenv.2007.06.022. PMID 17658586. 
^ Cappitelli F; Nosanchuk JD; Casadevall A; Toniolo L; Brusetti L; Florio S,; Principi P; Borin S; Sorlini C (Jan 2007). "Synthetic consolidants attacked by melanin-producing fungi: case study of the biodeterioration of Milan (Italy) cathedral marble treated with acrylics". Applied and Environmental Microbiology. 73 (1): 271–7. doi:10.1128/AEM.02220-06. PMC 1797126 . PMID 17071788. 


External links



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Marble.



Dimension Stone Statistics and Information – United States Geological Survey minerals information for dimension stone
USGS 2005 Minerals Yearbook: Stone, Crushed
USGS 2005 Minerals Yearbook: Stone, Dimension
USGS 2006 Minerals Yearbook: Stone, Crushed
USGS 2006 Minerals Yearbook: Stone, Dimension
Marble Institute of America







v
t
e


Stonemasonry



Types



Ashlar
Rustication
Carving
Dry stone
Letter cutting
Masonry
Monumental
Rubble
Sculpture
Slipform





Materials



List of stone
Artificial stone
Brick
Cast stone
Decorative stones
Dimension stone
Fieldstone
Flagstone
Gabion
Granite
Marble
Mortar
Sandstone
Slate





Tools



Angle grinder
Bush hammer
Ceramic tile cutter
Chisel
Diamond blade
Lewis (lifting appliance)
Non-explosive demolition agents
Plug and feather
Stonemason's hammer
Straightedge





Techniques



Brickwork
Flaming
Flushwork
Knapping
Polygonal masonry
Repointing
Scabbling
Tuckpointing





Products



Hardstone carving
Headstone (Footstone)
Mosaic
Sculpture
Stone wall





Organizations



International Union of Bricklayers and Allied Craftworkers
Master of Work to the Crown of Scotland
Mason Contractors Association of America
Operative Plasterers' and Cement Masons' International Association
Worshipful Company of Masons









Authority control



GND: 4168954-9
NDL: 00561217











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Marble&oldid=816279390"					Categories: Sculpture materialsMetamorphic rocksLimestoneMarbleStoneHidden categories: Wikipedia semi-protected pagesArticles containing Ancient Greek-language textArticles containing Greek-language textArticles containing French-language textArticles needing additional references from July 2017All articles needing additional referencesWikipedia articles with GND identifiers