For the scientific journal, see Marine Biology (journal).
"Marine biologist" redirects here. For the Seinfeld episode, see The Marine Biologist.




71 percent of the Earth's surface is covered by ocean, the home to marine life. Oceans average nearly four kilometres in depth and are fringed with coastlines that run for 360,000 kilometres.[1][2]


Marine biology is the scientific study of marine life, organisms in the sea. Given that in biology many phyla, families and genera have some species that live in the sea and others that live on land, marine biology classifies species based on the environment rather than on taxonomy.
A large proportion of all life on Earth lives in the ocean. The exact size of this large proportion is unknown, since many ocean species are still to be discovered. The ocean is a complex three-dimensional world[3] covering approximately 71% of the Earth's surface. The habitats studied in marine biology include everything from the tiny layers of surface water in which organisms and abiotic items may be trapped in surface tension between the ocean and atmosphere, to the depths of the oceanic trenches, sometimes 10,000 meters or more beneath the surface of the ocean. Specific habitats include coral reefs, kelp forests, seagrass meadows, the surrounds of seamounts and thermal vents, tidepools, muddy, sandy and rocky bottoms, and the open ocean (pelagic) zone, where solid objects are rare and the surface of the water is the only visible boundary. The organisms studied range from microscopic phytoplankton and zooplankton to huge cetaceans (whales) 30 meters (98 feet) in length. Marine ecology is the study of how marine organisms interact with each other and the environment.
Marine life is a vast resource, providing food, medicine, and raw materials, in addition to helping to support recreation and tourism all over the world. At a fundamental level, marine life helps determine the very nature of our planet. Marine organisms contribute significantly to the oxygen cycle, and are involved in the regulation of the Earth's climate.[4] Shorelines are in part shaped and protected by marine life, and some marine organisms even help create new land.[5]
Many species are economically important to humans, including both finfish and shellfish. It is also becoming understood that the well-being of marine organisms and other organisms are linked in fundamental ways. The human body of knowledge regarding the relationship between life in the sea and important cycles is rapidly growing, with new discoveries being made nearly every day. These cycles include those of matter (such as the carbon cycle) and of air (such as Earth's respiration, and movement of energy through ecosystems including the ocean). Large areas beneath the ocean surface still remain effectively unexplored.



Contents


1 History
2 Marine life

2.1 Microscopic life
2.2 Plants and algae
2.3 Invertebrates
2.4 Fungi
2.5 Vertebrates

2.5.1 Fish
2.5.2 Reptiles
2.5.3 Birds
2.5.4 Mammals




3 Marine habitats

3.1 Intertidal and near shore
3.2 Estuaries
3.3 Reefs
3.4 Open ocean
3.5 Deep sea and trenches


4 Subfields

4.1 Related fields


5 Distribution factors
6 See also
7 Lists
8 References
9 Further references
10 External links



History[edit]
Main article: History of marine biology




Aristotle recorded that the embryo of a dogfish was attached by a cord to a kind of placenta (the yolk sac).[6]


The study of marine biology dates back to Aristotle (384–322 BC), who made many observations of life in the sea around Lesbos, laying the foundation for many future discoveries.[7] In 1768, Samuel Gottlieb Gmelin (1744–1774) published the Historia Fucorum, the first work dedicated to marine algae and the first book on marine biology to use the then new binomial nomenclature of Linnaeus. It included elaborate illustrations of seaweed and marine algae on folded leaves.[8][9] The British naturalist Edward Forbes (1815–1854) is generally regarded as the founder of the science of marine biology.[10] The pace of oceanographic and marine biology studies quickly accelerated during the course of the 19th century.




HMS Challenger during its pioneer expedition of 1872–76



The observations made in the first studies of marine biology fueled the age of discovery and exploration that followed. During this time, a vast amount of knowledge was gained about the life that exists in the oceans of the world. Many voyages contributed significantly to this pool of knowledge. Among the most significant were the voyages of the HMS Beagle where Charles Darwin came up with his theories of evolution and on the formation of coral reefs.[11] Another important expedition was undertaken by HMS Challenger, where findings were made of unexpectedly high species diversity among fauna stimulating much theorizing by population ecologists on how such varieties of life could be maintained in what was thought to be such a hostile environment.[12] This era was important for the history of marine biology but naturalists were still limited in their studies because they lacked technology that would allow them to adequately examine species that lived in deep parts of the oceans.
The creation of marine laboratories was important because it allowed marine biologists to conduct research and process their specimens from expeditions. The oldest marine laboratory in the world, Station biologique de Roscoff, was established in France in 1872. In the United States, the Scripps Institution of Oceanography dates back to 1903, while the prominent Woods Hole Oceanographic Institute was founded in 1930.[13] The development of technology such as sound navigation ranging, scuba diving gear, submersibles and remotely operated vehicles allowed marine biologists to discover and explore life in deep oceans that was once thought to not exist.[14]
Marine life[edit]
Main article: Marine life
Microscopic life[edit]




Copepod



Main article: Marine microorganism
As inhabitants of the largest environment on Earth, microbial marine systems drive changes in every global system. Microbes are responsible for virtually all the photosynthesis that occurs in the ocean, as well as the cycling of carbon, nitrogen, phosphorus and other nutrients and trace elements.[15]
Microscopic life undersea is incredibly diverse and still poorly understood. For example, the role of viruses in marine ecosystems is barely being explored even in the beginning of the 21st century.[16]
The role of phytoplankton is better understood due to their critical position as the most numerous primary producers on Earth. Phytoplankton are categorized into cyanobacteria (also called blue-green algae/bacteria), various types of algae (red, green, brown, and yellow-green), diatoms, dinoflagellates, euglenoids, coccolithophorids, cryptomonads, chrysophytes, chlorophytes, prasinophytes, and silicoflagellates.
Zooplankton tend to be somewhat larger, and not all are microscopic. Many Protozoa are zooplankton, including dinoflagellates, zooflagellates, foraminiferans, and radiolarians. Some of these (such as dinoflagellates) are also phytoplankton; the distinction between plants and animals often breaks down in very small organisms. Other zooplankton include cnidarians, ctenophores, chaetognaths, molluscs, arthropods, urochordates, and annelids such as polychaetes. Many larger animals begin their life as zooplankton before they become large enough to take their familiar forms. Two examples are fish larvae and sea stars (also called starfish).

Plants and algae[edit]
Microscopic algae and plants provide important habitats for life, sometimes acting as hiding places for larval forms of larger fish and foraging places for invertebrates.
Algal life is widespread and very diverse under the ocean. Microscopic photosynthetic algae contribute a larger proportion of the world's photosynthetic output than all the terrestrial forests combined. Most of the niche occupied by sub plants on land is actually occupied by macroscopic algae in the ocean, such as Sargassum and kelp, which are commonly known as seaweeds that create kelp forests.
Plants that survive in the sea are often found in shallow waters, such as the seagrasses (examples of which are eelgrass, Zostera, and turtle grass, Thalassia). These plants have adapted to the high salinity of the ocean environment. The intertidal zone is also a good place to find plant life in the sea, where mangroves or cordgrass or beach grass might grow.

Invertebrates[edit]




Crown-of-thorns starfish



Main article: Marine invertebrates
As on land, invertebrates make up a huge portion of all life in the sea. Invertebrate sea life includes Cnidaria such as jellyfish and sea anemones; Ctenophora; sea worms including the phyla Platyhelminthes, Nemertea, Annelida, Sipuncula, Echiura, Chaetognatha, and Phoronida; Mollusca including shellfish, squid, octopus; Arthropoda including Chelicerata and Crustacea; Porifera; Bryozoa; Echinodermata including starfish; and Urochordata including sea squirts or tunicates. Invertebrates have no backbone. There are over a million species.
Fungi[edit]
Main article: Marine fungi
Over 1500 species of fungi are known from marine environments.[17] These are parasitic on marine algae or animals, or are saprobes on algae, corals, protozoan cysts, sea grasses, wood and other substrata, and can also be found in sea foam.[18] Spores of many species have special appendages which facilitate attachment to the substratum.[19] A very diverse range of unusual secondary metabolites is produced by marine fungi.[20]
Vertebrates[edit]
Fish[edit]
Main article: Fish
A reported 33,400 species of fish, including bony and cartilaginous fish, had been described by 2016,[21] more than all other vertebrates combined. About 60% of fish species live in saltwater.[22]
Reptiles[edit]




Green turtle



Main article: Marine reptile
Reptiles which inhabit or frequent the sea include sea turtles, sea snakes, terrapins, the marine iguana, and the saltwater crocodile. Most extant marine reptiles, except for some sea snakes, are oviparous and need to return to land to lay their eggs. Thus most species, excepting sea turtles, spend most of their lives on or near land rather than in the ocean. Despite their marine adaptations, most sea snakes prefer shallow waters nearby land, around islands, especially waters that are somewhat sheltered, as well as near estuaries.[23][24] Some extinct marine reptiles, such as ichthyosaurs, evolved to be viviparous and had no requirement to return to land.
Birds[edit]
Main article: Seabird
Birds adapted to living in the marine environment are often called seabirds. Examples include albatross, penguins, gannets, and auks. Although they spend most of their lives in the ocean, species such as gulls can often be found thousands of miles inland.
Mammals[edit]




Sea otters


Main article: Marine mammal
There are five main types of marine mammals, namely cetaceans (toothed whales and baleen whales); sirenians such as manatees; pinnipeds including seals and the walrus; sea otters; and the polar bear. All are air-breathing, and while some such as the sperm whale can dive for prolonged periods, all must return to the surface to breathe.[25][26]
Marine habitats[edit]


Marine habitats



Coral reefs provide marine habitats for tube sponges, which in turn become marine habitats for fish





Littoral zone
Intertidal zone
Estuaries
Kelp forests
Coral reefs
Ocean banks
Continental shelf
Neritic zone
Straits
Pelagic zone
Oceanic zone
Seamounts
Hydrothermal vents
Cold seeps
Demersal zone
Benthic zone







v
t
e





Main article: Marine habitats
Marine habitats can be divided into coastal and open ocean habitats. Coastal habitats are found in the area that extends from the shoreline to the edge of the continental shelf. Most marine life is found in coastal habitats, even though the shelf area occupies only seven percent of the total ocean area. Open ocean habitats are found in the deep ocean beyond the edge of the continental shelf. Alternatively, marine habitats can be divided into pelagic and demersal habitats. Pelagic habitats are found near the surface or in the open water column, away from the bottom of the ocean and affected by ocean currents, while demersal habitats are near or on the bottom. Marine habitats can be modified by their inhabitants. Some marine organisms, like corals, kelp and sea grasses, are ecosystem engineers which reshape the marine environment to the point where they create further habitat for other organisms.
Intertidal and near shore[edit]




Tide pools with sea stars and sea anemone


Intertidal zones, the areas that are close to the shore, are constantly being exposed and covered by the ocean's tides. A huge array of life can be found within this zone. Shore habitats span from the upper intertidal zones to the area where land vegetation takes prominence. It can be underwater anywhere from daily to very infrequently. Many species here are scavengers, living off of sea life that is washed up on the shore. Many land animals also make much use of the shore and intertidal habitats. A subgroup of organisms in this habitat bores and grinds exposed rock through the process of bioerosion.

Estuaries[edit]




Estuaries have shifting flows of sea water and fresh water.


Estuaries are also near shore and influenced by the tides. An estuary is a partially enclosed coastal body of water with one or more rivers or streams flowing into it and with a free connection to the open sea.[27] Estuaries form a transition zone between freshwater river environments and saltwater maritime environments. They are subject both to marine influences—such as tides, waves, and the influx of saline water—and to riverine influences—such as flows of fresh water and sediment. The shifting flows of both sea water and fresh water provide high levels of nutrients both in the water column and in sediment, making estuaries among the most productive natural habitats in the world.[28]

Reefs[edit]




Coral reefs form complex marine ecosystems with tremendous biodiversity.


Main article: Coral reef
Reefs comprise some of the densest and most diverse habitats in the world. The best-known types of reefs are tropical coral reefs which exist in most tropical waters; however, reefs can also exist in cold water. Reefs are built up by corals and other calcium-depositing animals, usually on top of a rocky outcrop on the ocean floor. Reefs can also grow on other surfaces, which has made it possible to create artificial reefs. Coral reefs also support a huge community of life, including the corals themselves, their symbiotic zooxanthellae, tropical fish and many other organisms.
Much attention in marine biology is focused on coral reefs and the El Niño weather phenomenon. In 1998, coral reefs experienced the most severe mass bleaching events on record, when vast expanses of reefs across the world died because sea surface temperatures rose well above normal.[29][30] Some reefs are recovering, but scientists say that between 50% and 70% of the world's coral reefs are now endangered and predict that global warming could exacerbate this trend.[31][32][33][34]

Open ocean[edit]




The open ocean is the area of deep sea beyond the continental shelves


Main article: Pelagic zone
The open ocean is relatively unproductive because of a lack of nutrients, yet because it is so vast, in total it produces the most primary productivity. The open ocean is separated into different zones, and the different zones each have different ecologies.[35] Zones which vary according to their depth include the epipelagic, mesopelagic, bathypelagic, abyssopelagic, and hadopelagic zones. Zones which vary by the amount of light they receive include the photic and aphotic zones. Much of the aphotic zone's energy is supplied by the open ocean in the form of detritus.

Deep sea and trenches[edit]
The deepest recorded oceanic trench measured to date is the Mariana Trench, near the Philippines, in the Pacific Ocean at 10,924 m (35,840 ft). At such depths, water pressure is extreme and there is no sunlight, but some life still exists. A white flatfish, a shrimp and a jellyfish were seen by the American crew of the bathyscaphe Trieste when it dove to the bottom in 1960.[36] In general, the deep sea is considered to start at the aphotic zone, the point where sunlight loses its power of transference through the water.[citation needed] Many life forms that live at these depths have the ability to create their own light known as bio-luminescence. Marine life also flourishes around seamounts that rise from the depths, where fish and other sea life congregate to spawn and feed. Hydrothermal vents along the mid-ocean ridge spreading centers act as oases, as do their opposites, cold seeps. Such places support unique biomes and many new microbes and other lifeforms have been discovered at these locations .[citation needed]
Subfields[edit]
The marine ecosystem is large, and thus there are many sub-fields of marine biology. Most involve studying specializations of particular animal groups, such as phycology, invertebrate zoology and ichthyology. Other subfields study the physical effects of continual immersion in sea water and the ocean in general, adaptation to a salty environment, and the effects of changing various oceanic properties on marine life. A subfield of marine biology studies the relationships between oceans and ocean life, and global warming and environmental issues (such as carbon dioxide displacement). Recent marine biotechnology has focused largely on marine biomolecules, especially proteins, that may have uses in medicine or engineering. Marine environments are the home to many exotic biological materials that may inspire biomimetic materials.
Related fields[edit]
Marine biology is a branch of biology. It is closely linked to oceanography and may be regarded as a sub-field of marine science. It also encompasses many ideas from ecology. Fisheries science and marine conservation can be considered partial offshoots of marine biology (as well as environmental studies). Marine Chemistry, Physical oceanography and Atmospheric sciences are closely related to this field.
Distribution factors[edit]
An active research topic in marine biology is to discover and map the life cycles of various species and where they spend their time. Technologies that aid in this discovery include pop-up satellite archival tags, acoustic tags, and a variety of other data loggers. Marine biologists study how the ocean currents, tides and many other oceanic factors affect ocean life forms, including their growth, distribution and well-being. This has only recently become technically feasible with advances in GPS and newer underwater visual devices.[citation needed]
Most ocean life breeds in specific places, nests or not in others, spends time as juveniles in still others, and in maturity in yet others. Scientists know little about where many species spend different parts of their life cycles especially in the infant and juvenile years. For example, it is still largely unknown where juvenile sea turtles and some year-1 sharks travel. Recent advances in underwater tracking devices are illuminating what we know about marine organisms that live at great Ocean depths.[37] The information that pop-up satellite archival tags give aids in certain time of the year fishing closures and development of a marine protected area. This data is important to both scientists and fishermen because they are discovering that by restricting commercial fishing in one small area they can have a large impact in maintaining a healthy fish population in a much larger area.
See also[edit]


Environment portal
Ecology portal
Earth sciences portal
Marine life portal
Water portal
Underwater diving portal




Acoustic ecology
Aquaculture
Bathymetry
Freshwater biology
Modular ocean model
Oceanic basin
Oceanic climate
Phycology
World Ocean Atlas


Lists[edit]


Glossary of ecology
Index of biology articles
Large marine ecosystem
List of ecologists
List of marine biologists
List of marine ecoregions (WWF)
Outline of biology
Outline of ecology


References[edit]


^ Charette, Matthew; Smith, Walter H. F. (2010). "The volume of Earth's ocean". Oceanography. 23 (2): 112–114. doi:10.5670/oceanog.2010.nbjhbhҪ51. Retrieved 13 January 2014. 
^ World The World Factbook, CIA. Retrieved 13 January 2014.
^ Oceanographic and Bathymetric Features Marine Conservation Institute. Uploaded 18 September 2013.
^ Foley, Jonathan A.; Taylor, Karl E.; Ghan, Steven J. (1991). "Planktonic dimethylsulfide and cloud albedo: An estimate of the feedback response". Climatic Change. 18 (1): 1. doi:10.1007/BF00142502. 
^ Sousa, Wayne P. (1986) [1985]. "7, Disturbance and Patch Dynamics on Rocky Intertidal Shores". In Pickett, Steward T. A.; White, P. S. The Ecology of Natural Disturbance and Patch Dynamics. Academic Press. ISBN 0-12-554521-5. 
^ Leroi, Armand Marie (2014). The Lagoon: How Aristotle Invented Science. Bloomsbury. pp. 72–74. ISBN 978-1-4088-3622-4. 
^ "History of the Study of Marine Biology - MarineBio.org". MarineBio Conservation Society. Web. Monday, March 31, 2014. <http://marinebio.org/oceans/history-of-marine-biology.asp>
^ Gmelin S G (1768) Historia Fucorum Ex typographia Academiae scientiarum, St. Petersburg.
^ Silva PC, Basson PW and Moe RL (1996) Catalogue of the Benthic Marine Algae of the Indian Ocean page 2, University of California Press. ISBN 9780520915817.
^ "A Brief History of Marine Biology and Oceanography". Retrieved 31 March 2014. 
^ Ward, Ritchie R. Into the ocean world; the biology of the sea. 1st ed. New York: Knopf; [distributed by Random House], 1974: 161
^ Gage, John D., and Paul A. Tyler. Deep-sea biology: a natural history of organisms at the deep-sea floor. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1991: 1
^ Maienschein, Jane. 100 years exploring life, 1888-1988: the Marine Biological Laboratory at Woods Hole. Boston: Jones and Bartlett Publishers, 1989: 189-192
^ Anderson, Genny. "Beginnings: History of Marine Science". 
^ "Functions of global ocean microbiome key to understanding environmental changes". www.sciencedaily.com. University of Georgia. December 10, 2015. Retrieved December 11, 2015. 
^ Suttle, C.A. (2005). "Viruses in the Sea". Nature. 437 (9): 356–361. doi:10.1038/nature04160. PMID 16163346. 
^ Hyde, K.D.; E.B.J. Jones; E. Leaño; S.B. Pointing; A.D. Poonyth; L.L.P. Vrijmoed (1998). "Role of fungi in marine ecosystems". Biodiversity and Conservation. 7 (9): 1147–1161. doi:10.1023/A:1008823515157. 
^ Kirk, P.M., Cannon, P.F., Minter, D.W. and Stalpers, J. "Dictionary of the Fungi". Edn 10. CABI, 2008
^ Hyde, K.D.; E.B.J. Jones (1989). "Spore attachment in marine fungi". Botanica Marina. 32: 205–218. doi:10.1515/botm.1989.32.3.205. 
^ San-Martín, A.; S. Orejanera; C. Gallardo; M. Silva; J. Becerra; R. Reinoso; M.C. Chamy; K. Vergara; J. Rovirosa (2008). "Steroids from the marine fungus Geotrichum sp". Journal of the Chilean Chemical Society. 53 (1): 1377–1378. 
^ "Fishbase". Retrieved 6 February 2017. 
^ Moyle, P. B.; Leidy, R. A. (1992). Fiedler, P. L.; Jain, S. A. Jain, ed. Loss of biodiversity in aquatic ecosystems: Evidence from fish faunas. Conservation Biology: the theory and practice of nature conservation, preservation, and management. Chapman and Hall. pp. 128–169. CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link)
^ Stidworthy J. 1974. Snakes of the World. Grosset & Dunlap Inc. 160 pp. ISBN 0-448-11856-4.
^ Sea snakes at Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. Accessed 7 August 2007.
^ Kaschner, K.; Tittensor, D. P.; Ready, J.; Gerrodette, T.; Worm, B. (2011). "Current and Future Patterns of Global Marine Mammal Biodiversity". PLoS ONE. 6 (5): e19653. Bibcode:2011PLoSO...619653K. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0019653. PMC 3100303 . PMID 21625431. 
^ Pompa, S.; Ehrlich, P. R.; Ceballos, G. (2011-08-16). "Global distribution and conservation of marine mammals". Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 108 (33): 13600–13605. Bibcode:2011PNAS..10813600P. doi:10.1073/pnas.1101525108. 
^ Pritchard, D. W. (1967). "What is an estuary: physical viewpoint". In Lauf, G. H. Estuaries. A.A.A.S. Publ. 83. Washington, DC. pp. 3–5. 
^ McLusky, D. S.; Elliott, M. (2004). The Estuarine Ecosystem: Ecology, Threats and Management. New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-852508-7. 
^ NOAA (1998) Record-breaking coral bleaching occurred in tropics this year. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Press release (October 23, 1998).
^ ICRS (1998) Statement on Global Coral Bleaching in 1997-1998. International Coral Reef Society, October 15, 1998.
^ Bryant, D., Burke, L., McManus, J., et al. (1998) "Reefs at risk: a map-based indicator of threats to the world's coral reefs". World Resources Institute, Washington, D.C.
^ Goreau, T. J. (1992). "Bleaching and Reef Commumity Change in Jamaica: 1951 - 1991". Am. Zool. 32: 683–695. doi:10.1093/icb/32.6.683. 
^ Sebens, K. P. (1994). "Biodiversity of Coral Reefs: What are We Losing and Why?". Am. Zool. 34: 115–133. doi:10.1093/icb/34.1.115. 
^ Wilkinson, C. R., and Buddemeier, R. W. (1994) "Global Climate Change and Coral Reefs:Implications for People and Reefs". Report of the UNEP-IOC-ASPEI-IUCN Global Task Team on the Implications of Climate Change on Coral Reefs. IUCN, Gland, Switzerland.
^ "The Open Ocean - MarineBio.org". marinebio.org. Retrieved 2016-09-26. 
^ Seven Miles Down: The Story of The Bathyscaph Trieste. Archived 2007-02-02 at the Wayback Machine., Rolex Deep Sea Special, January 2006.
^ http://us7.campaign-archive2.com/?u=82eb97f4b587306a3537ecf16&id=e398851e6b&e=%5BUNIQID%5D


Further references[edit]

Morrissey J and Sumich J (2011) Introduction to the Biology of Marine Life Jones & Bartlett Publishers. ISBN 9780763781606.

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Marine biology.



Smithsonian Ocean Portal
Marine Conservation Society
Marine biology at Curlie (based on DMOZ)
Marine Ecology - an evolutionary perspective
Free special issue: Marine Biology in Time and Space
Creatures of the deep ocean – National Geographic documentary, 2010.
Exploris
Freshwater and Marine Image Bank - From the University of Washington Library
Marine Training Portal - Portal grouping training initiatives in the field of Marine Biology







v
t
e


Branches of life science and biology






Anatomy
Astrobiology
Biochemistry
Biogeography
Biohistory
Biomechanics
Biophysics
Bioinformatics
Biostatistics
Botany
Cell biology
Cellular microbiology
Chemical biology
Chronobiology
Computational biology
Conservation biology
Cytogenetics
Developmental biology
Ecology
Embryology
Epidemiology
Epigenetics
Evolutionary biology
Freshwater biology
Geobiology
Genetics
Genomics
Histology
Human biology
Immunology
Marine biology
Mathematical biology
Microbiology
Molecular biology
Mycology
Neontology
Neuroscience
Nutrition
Origin of life
Paleontology
Parasitology
Pathology
Pharmacology
Phylogenetics
Physiology
Quantum biology
Sociobiology
Structural biology
Systematics
Systems biology
Taxonomy
Teratology
Toxicology
Virology
Virophysics
Zoology












v
t
e


Aquatic ecosystem topics








Aquatic ecosystems – general and freshwater components







General



Acoustic ecology
Adaptation
Agent-based models
Algal bloom
Anoxic waters
Aquatic animals (Insects
Mammals)
Aquatic plants
Aquatic science
Benthos
Biodiversity research
Bioluminescence
Biomass
Biomonitoring
Cascade effect
Colored dissolved organic matter
Camouflage and mimicry
Dead zone
Ecohydrology
Ecosystems
Eutrophication
Fisheries science
Food chain
Food web
GIS and aquatic science
Hydrobiology
Hypoxia
Isotope analysis
Microbial ecology
Microbial food web
Microbial loop
Nekton
Neuston
Particle
Pelagic zone
Photic zone
Phytoplankton
Plankton
Pleuston
Predation
Productivity
Ramsar Convention
Respiration
Schooling
Sediment trap
Siltation
Spawning
Substrate
Thermal pollution
Toxicology
Trophic level
Water column
Zooplankton
More...








Freshwater



Biology
Biomes
Ecosystems

freshwater
lake
river


Fish
Hyporheic zone
Limnology
Lake stratification
Macrophyte
Pond

Fish pond


Rheotaxis
Stream bed
Stream pool
Trophic state index
Upland and lowland
Water garden
Wetland

brackish marsh
freshwater marsh
swamp
bog
fen


Environmental quality
More...





Ecoregions



Freshwater (List)
Marine (List)
The Everglades
Maharashtra
The North Pacific Subtropical Gyre
The San Francisco Estuary
















Aquatic ecosystems – marine components







Marine



Marine biology
Marine chemistry
Deep scattering layer
Diel vertical migration
Ecosystems

large marine
marine)


f-ratio
Iron fertilization
Marine snow
Ocean nourishment
Oceanic physical-biological process
Ocean turbidity
Photophore
Thorson's rule
Upwelling
Whale fall
More...








Marine
life



Bacteriophages
Census
Fish

coastal
coral reef
deep sea
demersal
pelagic


Deep sea communities
Deep sea creature
Deep-water coral
Invertebrates
Larvae
Mammals
Marine life
Microorganisms
Paradox of the plankton
Reptiles
Seabirds
Seashore wildlife
Vertebrates
Wild fisheries





Marine
habitats



Bay mud
Coastal biogeomorphology
Cold seeps
Coral reefs
Davidson Seamount
Estuaries
Intertidal ecology
Intertidal wetlands
Kelp forests
Hydrothermal vents
Lagoons
Mangroves
Marine biomes
Marine habitats
Mudflats
Rocky shores
Salt marshes
Salt pannes and pools
Seagrass meadows
Sponge grounds
Sponge reefs
Tide pools





Issues



Ecological values of mangroves
Fisheries and climate change
HERMIONE
Marine conservation
Marine conservation activism
Marine pollution
Marine Protected Area




















Fisheries science and wild fisheries







Fisheries science



Population dynamics of fisheries
Shifting baseline
Fish stock
Fish mortality
Condition index
Stock assessment
Fish measurement
Standard weight in fish
Fish counter
Data storage tag
Catch per unit effort
Otolith microchemical analysis
Biomass
Fisheries acoustics
Acoustic tag
Coded wire tag
GIS and aquatic science
Pop-up satellite archival tag
EcoSCOPE
Age class structure
Trophic level
Trophic cascades
Match/mismatch hypothesis
Fisheries and climate change
Marine biology
Aquatic ecosystems
Bioeconomics
EconMult
Ecopath
FishBase
Census of Marine Life
OSTM
Fisheries databases
Institutes
Fisheries scientists








Wild fisheries



Ocean fisheries
Diversity of fish
Coastal fish
Coral reef fish
Demersal fish
Forage fish
Pelagic fish
Cod fisheries
Crab fisheries
Eel fisheries
Krill fisheries
Kelp fisheries
Lobster fisheries
Shrimp fishery
Eel ladder
Fish ladder
Fish screen
Migration
Salmon run
Sardine run
Shoaling and schooling
Marine habitats
Marine snow
Water column
Upwelling
Humboldt current
Algal blooms
Dead zones
Fish kill
















Fisheries management, sustainability and conservation







Management



Fisheries management
Fisheries law
Monitoring control and surveillance
Vessel monitoring system
Fishery Resources Monitoring System
Catch reporting
Fisheries observer
Illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing
Magnuson–Stevens Act
Pulse fishing
Fisheries organizations








Quotas



Catch share
Individual fishing quota
Minimum landing size
Slot limit
Bycatch
Discards
Incidental catch
Cetacean bycatch
Turtle excluder device
Shrimp-Turtle case
EU quotas
EU MLS
Exclusive economic zone





Sustainability



Sustainable fisheries
Maximum sustainable yield
List of harvested aquatic animals by weight
Sustainable seafood
Overfishing
Environmental effects of fishing
Fishing down the food web
Destructive fishing practices
Future of Marine Animal Populations
The Sunken Billions
The End of the Line





Conservation



Marine Protected Area
Marine reserve
Marine conservation
Marine conservation activism
Salmon conservation
Grey nurse shark conservation
Shark sanctuary





Organisations



The Black Fish
Marine Stewardship Council
Aquaculture Stewardship Council
Friend of the Sea
SeaChoice
Seafood Watch
Ocean Conservancy
Ocean Outcomes
Oceana
Sea Around Us Project
WorldFish Center
Defying Ocean's End
HERMIONE
PROFISH
International Seafood Sustainability Foundation
Sea Shepherd Conservation Society
Greenpeace





Related issues



CalCOFI
Fish slaughter
Marine pollution
Mercury in fish
Shark finning
Threatened sharks
Threatened rays








List of fishing topics by subject
Index of fishing articles
Fisheries glossary















Authority control



GND: 4169246-9











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Marine_biology&oldid=812949419"					Categories: Marine biologyBiological oceanographyFisheriesOceanographical terminologyHidden categories: CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors listWebarchive template wayback linksAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from March 2010Articles with unsourced statements from April 2010Articles with unsourced statements from December 2010Articles with DMOZ linksWikipedia articles with GND identifiers