

Part of a series on


Economic systems




By ideology


Anarchist
Capitalist
Christian
Communalist
Communist
Corporatist
Democratic
Dirigist
Distributist
Fascist
Feminist
Feudalism
Georgist
Green
Islamic
Laissez-faire
Market socialist
Mercantilist
Mutualist
Neo-mercantilist
Participatory
Protectionist
Socialist
State capitalist
Syndicalist








By coordination


Closed (autarky)
Decentralized
Digital
Dual
Gift
Informal
Market
Mixed
Natural
Open
Planned
Robinson Crusoe
Subsistence
Underground
Vertical archipelago
Virtual
Welfare








By regional model


Asian

East Asian
Chinese
Singaporean


European

Anglo-Saxon
German
Nordic
Rhenish
Soviet










Sectors


Common property
Private
Public
Voluntary








Transition


Collectivization
Communization
Corporatization
Demutualization
Deregulation
Expropriation
Financialization
Liberalization
Marketization
Municipalization
Mutualization
Nationalization
Privatization
Socialization








Coordination


Barter
Cybernetics
Democratic
Free market
In kind
Indicative planning
Market
Material balancing
Planned
Peer-to-peer
Price
Regulated market
Self-managed
Shared
Access economy








Other types


Corporate capitalism
Expeditionary
Hunter-gatherer
Inclusive Democracy
Information
Islamic economics
Manorialism
Newly industrialized
Palace
Plantation
Plutonomy
Post-capitalist
Post-industrial
Post-scarcity
Resource-based
Social market
Socialist market
State monopoly capitalist
Token
Traditional
Transition
World








 Business and economics portal







v
t
e







Part of a series on


Liberalism







Schools



History of liberalism
Contributions to liberal theory









Ideas



Civil and political rights
Cultural liberalism
Democracy

Liberal democracy


Economic liberalism
Egalitarianism
Free market
Free trade
Freedom of the press
Freedom of religion
Freedom of speech
Gender equality
Harm principle
Internationalism
Laissez-faire
Liberty
Market economy
Natural and legal rights
Negative / positive liberty
Open society
Permissive society
Private property
Rule of law
Secularism
Separation of church and state
Social contract
Welfare state









Variants



Anarcho-capitalism
Civic nationalism
Classical liberalism
Conservative liberalism
Democratic liberalism
Geolibertarianism
Green liberalism
Liberal feminism

Equity feminism


Liberal internationalism
Liberal socialism
Libertarianism
Muscular liberalism
Neoliberalism
Ordoliberalism
Radical centrism
Radicalism
Religious liberalism

Christian
Islamic


Secular liberalism
Social liberalism
Technoliberalism









People



Rifa'a al-Tahtawi
Juan Bautista Alberdi
Chu Anping
Matthew Arnold
Raymond Aron
Frédéric Bastiat
Simone de Beauvoir
Jeremy Bentham
Isaiah Berlin
Eduard Bernstein
William Beveridge
Norberto Bobbio
Ludwig Joseph Brentano
John Bright
Edmund Burke
Thomas Carlyle
Anders Chydenius
Richard Cobden
Marquis de Condorcet
Benjamin Constant
Benedetto Croce
Jean le Rond d'Alembert
Ralf Dahrendorf
John Dewey
Charles Dickens
Denis Diderot
Zhang Dongsun
Ronald Dworkin
Ahmed Lutfi el-Sayed
Ralph Waldo Emerson
Karl-Hermann Flach
Milton Friedman
John Kenneth Galbraith
William Lloyd Garrison
José Ortega y Gasset
David Lloyd George
William Gladstone
Friedrich Hayek
Auberon Herbert
Thomas Hobbes
Leonard Trelawny Hobhouse
John A. Hobson
Qin Hui
Wilhelm von Humboldt
Piero Gobetti
Francisco Luís Gomes
John Gray
Thomas Hill Green
Thomas Jefferson
Zef Jubani
Immanuel Kant
Namık Kemal
John Maynard Keynes
Will Kymlicka
John Locke
Salvador de Madariaga
James Madison
Harriet Martineau
Minoo Masani
James Mill
John Stuart Mill
John Milton
Ludwig von Mises
Donald Barkly Molteno
Leo Chiozza Money
Charles de Montesquieu
José María Luis Mora
Chantal Mouffe
Dadabhai Naoroji
Friedrich Naumann
Robert Nozick
Bertil Ohlin
Thomas Paine
Alan Paton
Karl Raimund Popper
Richard Price
Joseph Priestley
Guillermo Prieto
François Quesnay
Ignacio Ramírez
Ayn Rand
Walther Rathenau
John Rawls
Joseph Raz
David Ricardo
Wilhelm Röpke
Richard Rorty
Carlo Rosselli
Murray Rothbard
Jean-Jacques Rousseau
Jean-Baptiste Say
Amartya Sen
Li Shenzhi
Hu Shih
Algernon Sidney
Emmanuel Sieyès
İbrahim Şinasi
Adam Smith
Hernando de Soto
Herbert Spencer
Baruch Spinoza
Anne Louise Germaine de Staël
William Graham Sumner
R. H. Tawney
Johan Rudolf Thorbecke
Henry David Thoreau
Alexis de Tocqueville
Antoine Destutt de Tracy
Anne Robert Jacques Turgot
Voltaire
Lester Frank Ward
Max Weber
Mary Wollstonecraft
Tao Xingzhi
Gu Zhun









Organizations



Liberal parties
Africa Liberal Network (ALN)

Alliance of Liberals and
Democrats for Europe (ALDE)


Alliance of Liberals and Democrats
for Europe Party (ALDEP)


Arab Liberal Federation (ALF)


Council of Asian Liberals
and Democrats (CALD)

European Democratic Party (EDP)
European Liberal Youth (LYMEC)
European Party for Individual Liberty (EPIL)

International Alliance of
Libertarian Parties (IALP)


International Federation of
Liberal Youth (IFLRY)

Liberal International

Liberal Network for
Latin America (RELIAL)


Liberal South East
European Network (LIBSEEN)










Regional variants



Europe
Latin America
Albania
Armenia
Australia
Austria
Belgium
Bolivia
Brazil
Bulgaria
Canada
China
Chile
Colombia
Croatia
Cuba
Cyprus
Czech lands
Denmark
Ecuador
Egypt
Estonia
Finland
France
Germany
Greece
Honduras
Hong Kong
Hungary
Iceland
India
Iran
Israel
Italy
Japan
Latvia
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Macedonia
Mexico
Moldova
Montenegro
Netherlands
New Zealand
Nicaragua
Nigeria
Norway
Panama
Paraguay
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russia
Senegal
Serbia
Slovakia
Slovenia
Spain
South Africa
South Korea
Sweden
Switzerland
Taiwan
Thailand
Tunisia
Turkey
Ukraine
United Kingdom
United States
Uruguay
Venezuela
Zimbabwe









Related topics



Democratic capitalism
Democratic education
Liberal bias in academia
Liberal conservatism
Liberal socialism
National liberalism
Regressive left









 Liberalism portal
 Politics portal







v
t
e





A market economy is an economic system where decisions regarding investment, production, and distribution are based on the interplay of supply and demand,[1] which determines the prices of goods and services.[2] The major defining characteristic of a market economy is that investment decisions, or the allocation of producer good, are primarily made through capital and financial markets.[3] This is contrasted with a planned economy, where investment and production decisions are embodied in an integrated plan of production established by a state or other organizational body that controls the factors of production.
Market economies can range from free market systems to regulated markets and various forms of interventionist variants. In reality, free markets do not exist in pure form, since societies and governments all regulate them to varying degrees.[4][5] Different perspectives exist as to how strong a role the government should have in both guiding and regulating market economies and addressing the inequalities the market naturally produces. Most existing market economies include a degree of state-directed activity or economic planning, and are thus classified as mixed economies. The term free-market economy is sometimes used synonymously with market economy.[6]
Market economies do not logically presuppose the existence of private ownership of the means of production. A market economy can and often does include various types of cooperatives, collectives, or autonomous state agencies that acquire and exchange capital goods in capital markets. These all utilize a market-determined free price system to allocate capital goods and labor.[3] In addition, there are many variations of market socialism, some of which involve employee-owned enterprises based on self-management; as well as models that involve the combination of public ownership of the means of production with factor markets.[7]



Contents


1 Capitalism

1.1 Laissez-faire
1.2 Free-market economy
1.3 Welfare capitalism
1.4 Regional models

1.4.1 Anglo-Saxon model
1.4.2 East Asian model
1.4.3 Social market economy




2 Market socialism

2.1 Public ownership models
2.2 Cooperative socialism
2.3 Socialist market economy


3 Criticisms
4 See also
5 References



Capitalism[edit]
Main article: Capitalism


Part of a series on


Capitalism







Concepts


Business
Business cycle
Businessperson
Capital
Capital accumulation
Capital markets
Capitalist mode of production
Company
Corporation
Competitive markets
Economic interventionism
Economic surplus
Entrepreneurship
Fictitious capital
Financial market
Free price system
Free market
Goods and services
Investor
Invisible hand
Liberalization
Marginalism
Money
Private property
Privatization
Profit
Supply and demand
Surplus value
Value
Wage labour
Wage slavery








Economic systems


Anglo-Saxon
Free market
Laissez-faire
Mercantile
Mixed
Nordic
Regulated market
Regulatory
Rhine
Social market
State
Welfare
East Asian








Economic theories


American
Austrian
Chicago
Classical
Institutional
Keynesian
Marxian
Modern Monetary
Monetarist
Neoclassical
New institutional
New Keynesian
Supply-side








Origins


Age of Enlightenment
Capitalism and Islam
Commercial Revolution
Feudalism
Industrial Revolution
Mercantilism
Primitive accumulation
Physiocracy
Simple commodity production








Development


Advanced
Consumer
Corporate
Crony
Finance
Global
Late
Marxist
Merchant
Rentier
State monopoly
Techno








People


Adam Smith
John Stuart Mill
David Ricardo
Thomas Malthus
Jean-Baptiste Say
Milton Friedman
Friedrich Hayek
John Maynard Keynes
Alfred Marshall
Ludwig von Mises
Ayn Rand
Murray Rothbard
Joseph Schumpeter
Thorstein Veblen
Max Weber
Ronald Coase








Related topics


Anti-capitalism
Black capitalism
Capitalist state
Consumerism
Corporatism
Crisis theory
Criticism of capitalism
Cronyism
Culture of capitalism
Exploitation
Globalization
History
History of theory
Market economy
Periodizations of capitalism
Perspectives on capitalism
Post-capitalism
Speculation
Spontaneous order
Venture philanthropy








Ideologies


Anarcho-capitalism
Democratic capitalism
Dirigisme
Eco-capitalism
Humanistic capitalism
Inclusive capitalism
Liberalism (economic)
Libertarianism
Neo-Capitalism
Neoliberalism
Objectivism
Ordoliberalism
Social democracy








Capitalism portal
Economics portal
Philosophy portal
Politics portal







v
t
e





Capitalism generally refers to an economic system where the means of production are largely or entirely privately owned and operated for a profit, structured on the process of capital accumulation. In general, in capitalist systems investment, distribution, income, and prices are determined by markets, whether regulated or unregulated.
There are different variations of capitalism with different relationships to markets. In Laissez-faire and free market variations of capitalism, markets are utilized most extensively with minimal or no state intervention and regulation over prices and the supply of goods and services. In interventionist, welfare capitalism and mixed economies, markets continue to play a dominant role but are regulated to some extent by government in order to correct market failures or to promote social welfare. In state capitalist systems, markets are relied upon the least, with the state relying heavily on either indirect economic planning and/or state-owned enterprises to accumulate capital.
Capitalism has been dominant in the Western world since the end of feudalism, but most feel[who?] that the term "mixed economies" more precisely describes most contemporary economies, due to their containing both private-owned and state-owned enterprises. In capitalism, prices determine the demand-supply scale. For example, higher demand for certain goods and services lead to higher prices and lower demand for certain goods lead to lower prices.
Laissez-faire[edit]
Main articles: Laissez-faire and Economic liberalism
Laissez-faire is synonymous with what was referred to as strict capitalist free market economy during the early and mid-19th century[citation needed] as a classical liberal (right-libertarian) ideal to achieve. It is generally understood that the necessary components for the functioning of an idealized free market include the complete absence of government regulation, subsidies, artificial price pressures, and government-granted monopolies (usually classified as coercive monopoly by free market advocates) and no taxes or tariffs other than what is necessary for the government to provide protection from coercion and theft, maintaining peace and property rights, and providing for basic public goods. Right-libertarian advocates of anarcho-capitalism see the state as morally illegitimate and economically unnecessary and destructive.
Free-market economy[edit]
See also: Free market
Free-market economy refers to an economic system where prices for goods and services are set freely by the forces of supply and demand and are allowed to reach their point of equilibrium without intervention by government policy. It typically entails support for highly competitive markets, private ownership of productive enterprises. Laissez-faire is a more extensive form of free-market economy where the role of the state is limited to protecting property rights.
Welfare capitalism[edit]
Main article: Welfare capitalism
Welfare capitalism refers to a capitalist economy that includes public policies favoring extensive provisions for social welfare services. The economic mechanism involves a free market and the predominance of privately owned enterprises in the economy, but public provision of universal welfare services aimed at enhancing individual autonomy and maximizing equality. Examples of contemporary welfare capitalism include the Nordic model of capitalism predominant in Northern Europe.[8]
Regional models[edit]
Anglo-Saxon model[edit]
Main article: Anglo-Saxon economy
Anglo-Saxon capitalism refers to the form of capitalism predominant in Anglophone countries and typified by the economy of the United States. It is contrasted with European models of capitalism such as the continental Social market model and the Nordic model. Anglo-Saxon capitalism refers to a macroeconomic policy regime and capital market structure common to the Anglophone economies. Among these characteristics are low rates of taxation, more open financial markets, lower labor market protections, and a less generous welfare state eschewing collective bargaining schemes found in the continental and northern European models of capitalism.[9]
East Asian model[edit]
Main article: East Asian model of capitalism
The East Asian model of capitalism involves a strong role for state investment, and in some instances involves state-owned enterprises. The state takes an active role in promoting economic development through subsidies, the facilitation of "national champions", and an export-based model of growth. The actual practice of this model varies by country. This designation has been applied to the economies of Singapore, Japan, Taiwan, South Korea and the People's Republic of China.
A related concept in political science is the developmental state.
Social market economy[edit]
Main article: Social market economy
This model was implemented by Alfred Müller-Armack and Ludwig Erhard after World War II in West Germany. The social market economic model (sometimes called "Rhine capitalism") is based upon the idea of realizing the benefits of a free market economy, especially economic performance and high supply of goods, while avoiding disadvantages such as market failure, destructive competition, concentration of economic power and the socially harmful effects of market processes. The aim of the social market economy is to realize greatest prosperity combined with best possible social security. One difference from the free market economy is that the state is not passive, but takes active regulatory measures.[10] The social policy objectives include employment, housing and education policies, as well as a socio-politically motivated balancing of the distribution of income growth. Characteristics of social market economies are a strong competition policy and a contractionary monetary policy. The philosophical background is Neoliberalism or Ordoliberalism[11]
Market socialism[edit]
Main article: Market socialism


Part of a series on


Socialism







Development


History of socialism
Socialist calculation debate
Socialist economics








Ideas


Calculation in kind
Collective ownership
Cooperative
Common ownership
Economic democracy
Economic planning
Equal opportunity
Free association
Industrial democracy
Input–output model
Internationalism
Labour voucher
Material balance planning
Peer‑to‑peer economics
(Sharing economy)
Production for use
Social dividend
Social ownership
Socialism in One Country
Socialist mode of production
State ownership

To each according
to his contribution / needs

Workplace democracy
Workers' self-management








Models



Decentralized planning
Participatory economics


Market socialism


Economic democracy




Lange model
Mutualism
Ricardian socialism





Planned economy
Soviet-type
Project Cybersyn


Socialist market economy
Socialist-oriented market









Variants



African
Arab
Agrarian
Anarchist
Anarcho-communism
Anarcho-syndicalism
Authoritarian
Blanquism
Communism
Democratic
Ethical
Ecological
Feminist
Gandhian
Guild
Impossibilism
Leninism
Liberal
Libertarian
Market
Marhaenism
Marxism
Maoism
Municipal
Owenism
Platformism
Reformism
Religious
Revisionism
Revolutionary
Ricardian
Scientific
Social democracy
Socialist nationalism
State
Syndicalism
Technocracy
Third World
Trotskyism
Utopian
with Chinese characteristics
Zionist
21st-century









History by country



Australia
Bangladesh
Brazil
Canada
Estonia
Hong Kong
India
Iran
Netherlands
New Zealand
Pakistan
Tunisia
United Kingdom
United States









People



Charles Hall
Henri de Saint-Simon
François-Noël Babeuf
Robert Owen
Charles Fourier
William Thompson
Thomas Hodgskin
Pierre-Joseph Proudhon
Louis Blanc
Mikhail Bakunin
Karl Marx
Friedrich Engels
Ferdinand Lassalle
William Morris
Mary Harris Jones
Peter Kropotkin
Eduard Bernstein
Errico Malatesta
Fred M. Taylor
Eugene Debs
Georgi Plekhanov
John Dewey
Enrico Barone
W. E. B. Du Bois
Emma Goldman
Rosa Luxemburg
Léon Blum
Antonie Pannekoek
Bertrand Russell
Luis Emilio Recabarren
Albert Einstein
Clement Attlee
Karl Polanyi
Nestor Makhno
G. D. H. Cole
Imre Nagy
Einar Gerhardsen
George Orwell
Léopold Sédar Senghor
Salvador Allende
François Mitterrand
Nelson Mandela
Gamal Abdel Nasser
Murray Bookchin
Alexander Dubček
Howard Zinn
Noam Chomsky
Martin Luther King Jr.
Mikhail Gorbachev
Bernie Sanders
Tariq Ali
Abdullah Öcalan
Slavoj Žižek
Jeremy Corbyn
Cornel West
Jack Layton
Hugo Chávez
Chris Hedges
Yanis Varoufakis
Pablo Iglesias









Organizations



First International
(International Workingmen's Association)

Second International

Third International
(Comintern)

Fourth International
Fifth International
Labour and Socialist International
Socialist International

World Federation of
Democratic Youth


International Union of
Socialist Youth

World Socialist Movement

International Committee
of the Fourth International

Progressive Alliance








Related topics



Anarchism
Capitalism
Communist society
Criticism of capitalism
Economic system
French Left
List of socialist economists
Nanosocialism
Progressivism
Right-wing socialism
Socialism and LGBT rights
Socialist Party
Socialist state









Socialism portal
Economics portal
Politics portal







v
t
e





Market socialism refers to various types of economic systems where the means of production and the dominant economic institutions are either publicly owned or cooperatively owned but operated according to the rules of supply and demand. This type of market economy has its roots in classical economics and in the works of Adam Smith, the Ricardian socialists, and Mutualist philosophers.[12]
The distinguishing feature between non-market socialism and market socialism is the existence of a market for factors of production and the criteria of profitability for enterprises. Profits derived from publicly owned enterprises can variously be used to reinvest in further production, to directly finance government and social services, or be distributed to the public at large through a social dividend or basic income system.[13]
Public ownership models[edit]
In the 1930s the economists Oskar Lange and Abba Lerner developed a model of socialism that posited that a public body (dubbed the "Central Planning Board") could set prices through a trial-and-error approach until they equaled the marginal cost of production in order to achieve perfect competition and pareto optimality. In this model of socialism, firms would be state-owned and managed by their employees, and the profits would be disbursed among the population in a social dividend. This model came to be referred to as "market socialism" because it involved the use of money, a price system, and simulated capital markets; all of which were absent from traditional of non-market socialism.
A more contemporary model of market socialism is that put forth by the American economist John Roemer, referred to as Economic democracy. In this model, social ownership is achieved through public ownership of equity in a market economy. A Bureau of Public Ownership (BPO) would own controlling shares in publicly listed firms, so that the profits generated would be used for public finance and the provision of a basic income.
Cooperative socialism[edit]
Libertarian socialists and left-anarchists often promote a form of market socialism in which enterprises are owned and managed cooperatively by their workforce so that the profits directly remunerate the employee-owners. These cooperative enterprises would compete with each other in the same way private companies compete with each other in a capitalist market. The first major elaboration of this type of market socialism was made by Pierre Joseph Proudhon and was called "mutualism".
Self-managed market socialism was promoted in Yugoslavia by economists Branko Horvat and Jaroslav Vanek. In the self-managed model of socialism, firms would be directly owned by their employees and the management board would be elected by employees. These cooperative firms would compete with each other in a market for both capital goods and for selling consumer goods.
Socialist market economy[edit]
Following the 1978 reforms, the People's Republic of China developed what it calls a "socialist market economy", in which most of the economy is under state ownership, with the state enterprises organized as joint-stock companies with various government agencies owning controlling shares through a shareholder system. Prices are set by a largely free-price system and the state-owned enterprises are not subjected to micromanagement by a government planning agency. A similar system called "socialist-oriented market economy" has emerged in Vietnam following the Đổi Mới reforms in 1986. This system is frequently characterized as "state capitalism" instead of market socialism because there is no meaningful degree of employee self-management in firms, because the state enterprises retain their profits instead of distributing them to the workforce or government, and because many function as de facto private enterprises. The profits neither finance a social dividend to benefit the population at large, nor do they accrue to their employees.
In the People's Republic of China, this economic model is presented as a "preliminary stage of socialism" to explain the dominance of capitalistic management practices and forms of enterprise organization in both the state and non-state sectors.
Criticisms[edit]
The economist Joseph Stiglitz argues that markets suffer from informational inefficiency and the presumed efficiency of markets stems from the faulty assumptions of neoclassical welfare economics, particularly the assumption of perfect and costless information, and related incentive problems. Neoclassical economics assumes static equilibrium, and efficient markets require that there be no non-convexities, even though nonconvexities are pervasive in modern economies. Stiglitz's critique applies to both existing models of capitalism and to hypothetical models of market socialism. However, Stiglitz does not advocate replacing markets, but states that there is a significant role for government intervention to boost the efficiency of markets and to address the pervasive market failures that exist in contemporary economies.[14] A fair Market Economy is in fact a Martingale or a Brownian motion model and for a participant competitor in such a model there is no more than 50% of success chances at any given moment. Due to the fractal nature of any fair market and being market participants subject to the law of competition, which impose reinvesting an increasing part of profits, the mean statistical chance of bankruptcy within the half life of any participant is also 50% [15] and 100% whether an infinite sample of time is considered.
Robin Hahnel and Michael Albert claim that "markets inherently produce class division."[16] Albert states that even if everyone started out with a balanced job complex (doing a mix of roles of varying creativity, responsibility and empowerment) in a market economy, class divisions would arise.

Without taking the argument that far, it is evident that in a market system with uneven distribution of empowering work, such as Economic Democracy, some workers will be more able than others to capture the benefits of economic gain. For example, if one worker designs cars and another builds them, the designer will use his cognitive skills more frequently than the builder. In the long term, the designer will become more adept at conceptual work than the builder, giving the former greater bargaining power in a firm over the distribution of income. A conceptual worker who is not satisfied with his income can threaten to work for a company that will pay him more. The effect is a class division between conceptual and manual laborers, and ultimately managers and workers, and a de facto labor market for conceptual workers.[16]

David McNally argues that the logic of the market inherently produces inequitable outcomes and leads to unequal exchanges, arguing that Adam Smith's moral intent and moral philosophy espousing equal exchange was undermined by the practice of the free markets he championed. The development of the market economy involved coercion, exploitation and violence that Adam Smith's moral philosophy could not countenance. McNally also criticizes market socialists for believing in the possibility of "fair" markets based on equal exchanges to be achieved by purging "parasitical" elements from the market economy, such as private ownership of the means of production. McNally argues that market socialism is an oxymoron when socialism is defined as an end to wage-based labor.[17]
See also[edit]

Economic freedom
Economic liberalism
Free market
Grey market
Market socialism
Market structure
Mixed economy
Neoclassical economics
Planned economy
Price system
Regulated market
Social market economy
Socialist market economy

References[edit]


^ Gregory and Stuart, Paul and Robert (2004). Comparing Economic Systems in the Twenty-First Century, Seventh Edition. George Hoffman. p. 538. ISBN 0-618-26181-8. Market Economy: Economy in which fundamentals of supply and demand provide signals regarding resource utilization. 
^ Altvater, E. (1993). The Future of the Market: An Essay on the Regulation of Money and Nature After the Collapse of "Actually Existing Socialism. Verso. p. 57. 
^ a b Paul M. Johnson (2005). "A Glossary of Political Economy Terms, Market economy". Auburn University. Retrieved 28 December 2012. 
^ Altvater, E. (1993). The Future of the Market: An Essay on the Regulation of Money and Nature After the Collapse of "Actually Existing Socialism. Verso. pp. 237–238. 
^ Tucker, Irvin B. p 491. Macroeconomics for Today. West Publishing. p. 491
^ "market economy", Merriam-Webster Unabridged Dictionary
^ Bock man, Johanna (2011). Markets in the name of Socialism: The Left-Wing origins of Neoliberalism. Stanford University Press. ISBN 978-0-8047-7566-3. 
^ "The surprising ingredients of Swedish success - free markets and social cohesion" (PDF). Institute of Economic Affairs. June 25, 2013. Retrieved January 15, 2014. 
^ Anglo-Saxon capitalism, Business Dictionary on BusinessDictionary.com: http://www.businessdictionary.com/definition/Anglo-Saxon-capitalism.html
^ keyword "social market economy" = “Soziale Marktwirtschaft” Duden Wirtschaft von A bis Z. Grundlagenwissen für Schule und Studium, Beruf und Alltag. 2. Aufl. Mannheim: Bibliographisches Institut & F.A. Brockhaus 2004. Lizenzausgabe Bonn: Bundeszentrale für politische Bildung 2004.
^ Duden Wirtschaft von A bis Z: Eintrag: keyword "social market economy" = Soziale Marktwirtschaft
^ McNally, David (1993). Against the Market: Political economy, market socialism and the Marxist critique. Verso. p. 44. ISBN 978-0-86091-606-2. ...by the 1820s, 'Smithian' apologists for industrial capitalism confronted 'Smithian' socialists in a vigorous, and often venomous, debate over political economy. 
^ Social Dividend versus Basic Income Guarantee in Market Socialism, by Marangos, John. 2004. International Journal of Political Economy, vol. 34, no. 3, Fall 2004.
^ Michie, Jonathan (January 1, 2001). Reader’s Guide to the Social Sciences. Routledge. p. 1012. ISBN 978-1579580919. Stiglitz criticizes the first and second welfare theorems for being based on the assumptions of complete markets (including a full set of futures and risk markets) and perfect and costless information, which are simply not true. Incentives are dubious too. Thus, capitalist markets are also not efficient and there is some role for government intervention. The ability to decentralize using the price system requires that there be no nonconvexities, but nonconvexities are pervasive. 
^ Podobnik, Boris; Horvatic, Davor; Petersen, Alexander M.; Urošević, Branko; Stanley, H. Eugene (2010-10-26). "Bankruptcy risk model and empirical tests". Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 107 (43): 18325–18330. doi:10.1073/pnas.1011942107. ISSN 0027-8424. PMC 2972955 . PMID 20937903. 
^ a b Weiss, Adam (2005-05-04). "A Comparison of Economic Democracy and Participatory Economics". ZMag. Retrieved 2008-06-26. [permanent dead link]
^ McNally, David (1993). Against the Market: Political economy, market socialism and the Marxist critique. Verso. ISBN 978-0-86091-606-2. 





Authority control



GND: 4037653-9











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Market_economy&oldid=817709753"					Categories: CapitalismEconomic ideologiesEconomic liberalismEconomic systemsMarket (economics)Market socialismHidden categories: All articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from June 2017Articles with permanently dead external linksAll articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrasesArticles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from June 2012All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from December 2014Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers