For other uses, see Heidegger (disambiguation).


Martin Heidegger



Heidegger in 1960



Born
26 September 1889
Meßkirch, Baden, German Empire


Died
26 May 1976(1976-05-26) (aged 86)
Freiburg im Breisgau, Baden-Württemberg, Federal Republic of Germany


Nationality
German


Education
Collegium Borromaeum (de)
(1909–1911)[1]
University of Freiburg
(PhD, 1914; Dr. phil. hab. 1916)





Era
20th-century philosophy


Region
Western philosophy


School
Phenomenology
Hermeneutics
Ontological hermeneutics[2]
Hermeneutic phenomenology (early)[3]
Transcendental hermeneutic phenomenology (late)[4]
Existentialism
Existential phenomenology[5]


Institutions
University of Marburg
University of Freiburg



Main interests




Ontology
Christian philosophy
Metaphysics
Art
Greek philosophy
Technology
Language
Poetry
Thinking






Notable ideas




Heideggerian terminology
Dasein
Gestell
Ontotheology

Ontological difference (Ontologische Differenz)

Existentials (Existenzialien)

Ekstase
Sigetics (Sigetik)

Hermeneutic circle

Aletheia
Disclosure

Fundamental ontology

Forgetfulness of Being (Seinsvergessenheit)

Dwelling (Wohnen)

Language as the vehicle through which the question of Being can be unfolded[6]
"Language speaks"
Art's ability to manifest the "essential strife" between "earth and world...the world grounds itself on the earth and the earth juts through the world...the world, in resting upon the earth, strives to raise the earth completely [into the light]. As self-opening, the world cannot endure anything closed. The earth, however, as sheltering and concealing, tends always to draw the world into itself." [7]







Influences





Anaximander
Aristotle
Augustine
Brentano
Dilthey
Hartmann
Hegel
Heraclitus
Hölderlin
Husserl
Jaspers
Kant
Aquinas
Kierkegaard
Laozi[8]
Lask[9]
Nietzsche
Jakob von Uexküll[10]
Parmenides
Plato
Rickert
Duns Scotus
Thomas of Erfurt[11]
Count Yorck











Influenced





Agamben
Arendt
Beaufret
Blanchot
Borgmann
Bultmann
Derrida
Dreyfus
Dugin
El-Bizri
Foucault
Gadamer
Hans Jonas
Kopić
Kuki
Levinas
Löwith
Marcel
Marcuse
Marion
Merleau-Ponty
Nancy
Norberg-Schulz
Patočka
Rorty
Sartre
Schürmann
Sloterdijk
Stiegler
Strauss












Signature





Martin Heidegger (/ˈhaɪdɛɡər, -dɪɡər/;[12] German: [ˈmaɐ̯tiːn ˈhaɪdɛɡɐ]; 26 September 1889 – 26 May 1976) was a German philosopher and a seminal thinker in the Continental tradition and philosophical hermeneutics. According to the Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy, he is "widely acknowledged to be one of the most original and important philosophers of the 20th century".[6] Heidegger is best known for his contributions to phenomenology and existentialism, though as the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy cautions, "his thinking should be identified as part of such philosophical movements only with extreme care and qualification".[13]
His first and best known book, Being and Time (1927), though unfinished, is one of the central philosophical works of the 20th century.[14] In the first division of the work, Heidegger attempted to turn away from "ontic" questions about beings to ontological questions about Being, and recover the most fundamental philosophical question: the question of Being, of what it means for something to be. Heidegger approached the question through an inquiry into the being that has an understanding of Being, and asks the question about it, namely, Human being, which he called Dasein ("being-there"). Heidegger argued that Dasein is defined by Care, its practically engaged and concernful mode of Being-in-the-world, in opposition to Rationalist thinkers like René Descartes who located the essence of man in our thinking abilities. For Heidegger thinking is thinking about things originally discovered in our everyday practical engagements. The consequence of this is that our capacity to think cannot be the most central quality of our being because thinking is a reflecting upon this more original way of discovering the world. In the second division, Heidegger argues that human being is even more fundamentally structured by its Temporality, or its concern with, and relationship to time, existing as a structurally open "possibility-for-being." He emphasized the importance of Authenticity in human existence, involving a truthful relationship to our thrownness into a world which we are "always already" concerned with, and to our Being-towards-death, the Finitude of the time and being we are given, and the closing down of our various possibilities for being through time.[15]
Heidegger also made critical contributions to philosophical conceptions of truth, arguing that its original meaning was unconcealment, to philosophical analyses of art as a site of the revelation of truth, and to philosophical understanding of language as the "house of being."[16] Heidegger's later work includes criticisms of technology's instrumentalist understanding in the Western tradition as "enframing," treating all of Nature as a "standing reserve" on call for human purposes.[15][17] Heidegger is a controversial figure, largely for his affiliation with Nazism, as Rector of the University of Freiburg for 11 months, before his resignation in April 1934, for which he neither apologized nor publicly expressed regret.[18]



Contents


1 Biography

1.1 Early years
1.2 Marburg
1.3 Freiburg
1.4 Post-war
1.5 Personal life


2 Philosophy

2.1 Being, time, and Dasein
2.2 Being and Time
2.3 Later works: The Turn
2.4 Heidegger and the ground of History
2.5 Influences

2.5.1 St. Augustine of Hippo
2.5.2 Aristotle and the Greeks
2.5.3 Dilthey
2.5.4 Husserl
2.5.5 Kierkegaard
2.5.6 Hölderlin and Nietzsche


2.6 Heidegger and Eastern thought

2.6.1 Islam


2.7 Heidegger and architecture


3 The Heidegger controversy

3.1 The rectorate
3.2 Treatment of Husserl
3.3 Post-rectorate period
3.4 Post-war period
3.5 Der Spiegel interview


4 Influence and reception in France

4.1 Existentialism and pre-war influence
4.2 Post-war forays into France
4.3 Derrida and deconstruction
4.4 The Farías debate
4.5 Bernard Stiegler
4.6 Giorgio Agamben


5 Criticism

5.1 Early criticisms
5.2 Left-Hegelianism and critical theory
5.3 Reception by analytic and Anglo-American philosophy
5.4 Contemporary European reception


6 In film
7 Bibliography

7.1 Gesamtausgabe
7.2 Selected works


8 See also
9 References
10 Further reading

10.1 On Being and Time
10.2 Biographies
10.3 Politics and National Socialism
10.4 Other secondary literature
10.5 Reception in France
10.6 Influence on Japanese philosophy
10.7 Heidegger and Asian philosophy


11 External links

11.1 Archival collections
11.2 General information
11.3 Works by Heidegger





Biography[edit]
Early years[edit]




The Mesnerhaus in Meßkirch, where Heidegger grew up


Heidegger was born in rural Meßkirch, Baden-Württemberg, the son of Johanna (Kempf) and Friedrich Heidegger.[19] Raised a Roman Catholic, he was the son of the sexton of the village church that adhered to the First Vatican Council of 1870, which was observed mainly by the poorer class of Meßkirch. His family could not afford to send him to university, so he entered a Jesuit seminary, though he was turned away within weeks because of the health requirement and what the director and doctor of the seminary described as a psychosomatic heart condition. Heidegger was short and sinewy, with dark piercing eyes. He enjoyed outdoor pursuits, being especially proficient at skiing.[20]
Studying theology at the University of Freiburg while supported by the church, later he switched his field of study to philosophy. Heidegger completed his doctoral thesis on psychologism in 1914,[21] influenced by Neo-Thomism and Neo-Kantianism, and in 1916 finished his venia legendi with a habilitation thesis on Duns Scotus[22] directed by Heinrich Rickert[23] and influenced by Edmund Husserl's phenomenology.[24]
In the two years following, he worked first as an unsalaried Privatdozent then served as a soldier during the final year of World War I; serving "the last ten months of the war" with "the last three of those in a meteorological unit on the western front".[6]
Marburg[edit]
In 1923, Heidegger was elected to an extraordinary Professorship in Philosophy at the University of Marburg. His colleagues there included Rudolf Bultmann, Nicolai Hartmann, and Paul Natorp. Heidegger's students at Marburg included Hans-Georg Gadamer, Hannah Arendt, Karl Löwith, Gerhard Krüger, Leo Strauss, Jacob Klein, Gunther (Stern) Anders, and Hans Jonas. Following on from Aristotle, he began to develop in his lectures the main theme of his philosophy: the question of the sense of being. He extended the concept of subject to the dimension of history and concrete existence, which he found prefigured in such Christian thinkers as Saint Paul, Augustine of Hippo, Luther, and Kierkegaard. He also read the works of Dilthey, Husserl, and Max Scheler.[25]
Freiburg[edit]
In 1927, Heidegger published his main work Sein und Zeit (Being and Time). When Husserl retired as Professor of Philosophy in 1928, Heidegger accepted Freiburg's election to be his successor, in spite of a counter-offer by Marburg. Heidegger remained at Freiburg im Breisgau for the rest of his life, declining a number of later offers, including one from Humboldt University of Berlin. His students at Freiburg included Arendt, Günther Anders, Hans Jonas, Karl Löwith, Charles Malik, Herbert Marcuse and Ernst Nolte.[26] Emmanuel Levinas attended his lecture courses during his stay in Freiburg in 1928.[27]
Heidegger was elected rector of the University on 21 April 1933, and joined the National Socialist German Workers' (Nazi) Party on 1 May.[28] In his inaugural address as rector on 27 May he expressed his support of a German revolution, and in an article and a speech to the students from the same year he also supported Adolf Hitler.[29] In November 1933, Heidegger signed the Loyalty Oath of German Professors to Adolf Hitler and the National Socialist State. He resigned the rectorate in April 1934, but remained a member of the Nazi Party until 1945 even though (as Julian Young asserts) the Nazis eventually prevented him from publishing.[30]
According to historian Richard J. Evans, Heidegger was not only a member of the Nazi Party, but was enthusiastic about participating. He wanted to position himself as the philosopher of the Party, but the highly abstract nature of his work and the opposition of Alfred Rosenberg, who himself aspired to act in that position, limited Heidegger's role. His resignation from the rectorate owed more to his frustration as an administrator than to any principled opposition to the Nazis.[31]
Heidegger's Black Notebooks, written between 1931 and 1941 and first published in 2014, contain several anti-semitic statements and have led to a re-evaluation of Heidegger's relation to Nazism.[32]
Post-war[edit]
In late 1946, as France engaged in épuration légale in its Occupation zone, the French military authorities determined that Heidegger should be blocked from teaching or participating in any university activities because of his association with the Nazi Party.[33] The denazification procedures against Heidegger continued until March 1949 when he was finally pronounced a Mitläufer (the second lowest of five categories of "incrimination" by association with the Nazi regime). No punitive measures against him were proposed.[34] This opened the way for his readmission to teaching at Freiburg University in the winter semester of 1950–51.[34] He was granted emeritus status and then taught regularly from 1951 until 1958, and by invitation until 1967.
Personal life[edit]




Heidegger's stone-and-tile chalet clustered among others at Todtnauberg


Heidegger married Elfride Petri on 21 March 1917, in a Catholic ceremony officiated by his friend Engelbert Krebs (de), and a week later in a Protestant ceremony in the presence of her parents. Their first son, Jörg, was born in 1919. Elfride then gave birth to Hermann (de) in 1920. Heidegger knew that he was not Hermann's biological father but raised him as his son. Hermann's biological father, who became godfather to his son, was family friend and doctor Friedel Caesar. Hermann was told of this at the age of 14.[35] Hermann became a historian and would later serve as the executor of Heidegger's will.[36]
Heidegger had a long romantic relationship with Hannah Arendt and a steamy affair (over many decades) with Elisabeth Blochmann, both students of his. Arendt was Jewish, and Blochmann had one Jewish parent, making them subject to severe persecution by the Nazi authorities. He helped Blochmann emigrate from Germany before the start of World War II and resumed contact with both of them after the war.[37] Heidegger's letters to his wife contain information about several other affairs of his.[36]
Heidegger spent much time at his vacation home at Todtnauberg, on the edge of the Black Forest. He considered the seclusion provided by the forest to be the best environment in which to engage in philosophical thought.[38]




Heidegger's grave in Meßkirch


A few months before his death, he met with Bernhard Welte, a Catholic priest, Freiburg university professor and earlier correspondent. The exact nature of the conversation is not known, but what is known is that it included talk of Heidegger's relationship to the Catholic Church and subsequent Christian burial at which the priest officiated.[39][40][41] Heidegger died on 26 May 1976, and was buried in the Meßkirch cemetery, beside his parents and brother.
Philosophy[edit]
Being, time, and Dasein[edit]
Heidegger's philosophy is founded on the attempt to conjoin what he considers two fundamental insights: the first is his observation that, in the course of over 2,000 years of history, philosophy has attended to all the beings that can be found in the world (including the world itself), but has forgotten to ask what Being itself is. Heidegger thought the presence of things for us is not their being, but merely them interpreted as equipment according to a particular system of meaning and purpose. For instance, when a hammer is efficiently used to knock in nails, we cease to be aware of it. This is termed "ready to hand", and Heidegger considers it an authentic mode, saying that the given ("past") has presence in an oversimplified way when reduced to possible future usefulness to us.
Heidegger claimed philosophy and science since ancient Greece had reduced things to their presence, which was a superficial way of understanding them. One crucial source of this insight was Heidegger's reading of Franz Brentano's treatise on Aristotle's manifold uses of the word "being", a work which provoked Heidegger to ask what kind of unity underlies this multiplicity of uses. Heidegger opens his magnum opus, Being and Time, with a citation from Plato's Sophist[42] indicating that Western philosophy has neglected Being because it was considered obvious, rather than as worthy of question. Heidegger's intuition about the question of Being is thus a historical argument, which in his later work becomes his concern with the "history of Being", that is, the history of the forgetting of Being, which according to Heidegger requires that philosophy retrace its footsteps through a productive destruction of the history of philosophy.
The second intuition animating Heidegger's philosophy derives from the influence of Edmund Husserl, a philosopher largely uninterested in questions of philosophical history. Rather, Husserl argued that all that philosophy could and should be is a description of experience (hence the phenomenological slogan, "to the things themselves"). But for Heidegger, this meant understanding that experience is always already situated in a world and in ways of being. Thus Husserl's understanding that all consciousness is "intentional" (in the sense that it is always intended toward something, and is always "about" something) is transformed in Heidegger's philosophy, becoming the thought that all experience is grounded in "care". This is the basis of Heidegger's "existential analytic", as he develops it in Being and Time. Heidegger argues that describing experience properly entails finding the being for whom such a description might matter. Heidegger thus conducts his description of experience with reference to "Dasein", the being for whom Being is a question.[43]
In Being and Time, Heidegger criticized the abstract and metaphysical character of traditional ways of grasping human existence as rational animal, person, man, soul, spirit, or subject. Dasein, then, is not intended as a way of conducting a philosophical anthropology, but is rather understood by Heidegger to be the condition of possibility for anything like a philosophical anthropology.[44] Dasein, according to Heidegger, is care.[45] In the course of his existential analytic, Heidegger argues that Dasein, who finds itself thrown into the world (Geworfenheit) amidst things and with others, is thrown into its possibilities, including the possibility and inevitability of one's own mortality. The need for Dasein to assume these possibilities, that is, the need to be responsible for one's own existence, is the basis of Heidegger's notions of authenticity and resoluteness—that is, of those specific possibilities for Dasein which depend on escaping the "vulgar" temporality of calculation and of public life.
The marriage of these two observations depends on the fact that each of them is essentially concerned with time. That Dasein is thrown into an already existing world and thus into its mortal possibilities does not only mean that Dasein is an essentially temporal being; it also implies that the description of Dasein can only be carried out in terms inherited from the Western tradition itself. For Heidegger, unlike for Husserl, philosophical terminology could not be divorced from the history of the use of that terminology, and thus genuine philosophy could not avoid confronting questions of language and meaning. The existential analytic of Being and Time was thus always only a first step in Heidegger's philosophy, to be followed by the "dismantling" (Destruktion) of the history of philosophy, that is, a transformation of its language and meaning, that would have made of the existential analytic only a kind of "limit case" (in the sense in which special relativity is a limit case of general relativity).[citation needed]
That Heidegger did not write this second part of Being and Time, and that the existential analytic was left behind in the course of Heidegger's subsequent writings on the history of being, might be interpreted as a failure to conjugate his account of individual experience with his account of the vicissitudes of the collective human adventure that he understands the Western philosophical tradition to be. And this would in turn raise the question of whether this failure is due to a flaw in Heidegger's account of temporality, that is, of whether Heidegger was correct to oppose vulgar and authentic time.[46] There are also recent critiques in this regard that were directed at Heidegger's focus on time instead of primarily thinking about being in relation to place and space,[47] and to the notion of dwelling,[48] with connections too to architectural theory as impacted by phenomenology.[49]
Being and Time[edit]




View from Heidegger's vacation chalet in Todtnauberg. Heidegger wrote most of Being and Time there.


Main article: Being and Time
Being and Time (German title: Sein und Zeit), published in 1927, was Heidegger's first academic book. He had been under pressure to publish in order to qualify for Husserl's (to whom he dedicated the work) chair at the University of Freiburg and the success of this work ensured his appointment to the post.
In Being and Time, Heidegger investigates the question of Being by asking about the being for whom Being is a question. Heidegger names this being Dasein (see above), and he pursues his investigation through themes such as mortality, care, anxiety, temporality, and historicity. It was Heidegger's original intention to write a second half of the book, consisting of a "Destruktion" of the history of philosophy—that is, the transformation of philosophy by re-tracing its history—but he never completed this project.
Being and Time influenced many thinkers, including such existentialist thinkers as Jean-Paul Sartre (although Heidegger distanced himself from existentialism—see below).
Later works: The Turn[edit]
See also: Kehre




Am Feldweg in Meßkirch. Heidegger often went for a walk on the path in this field. See the text Der Feldweg GA Nr. 13


Heidegger's later works, beginning by 1930 and largely established by the early 1940s,[4] seem to many commentators (e.g. William J. Richardson[50]) to at least reflect a shift of focus, if not indeed a major change in his philosophical outlook, which is known as "the turn" (die Kehre).[51] One way this has been understood is as a shift from "doing" to "dwelling" (Wohnen) and from Being and Time to Time and Being[4][52][53] (This aspect had a particular influence on architectural theorists in their focus on place and space in thinking about dwelling. Such is the case with the work of Christian Norberg-Schulz and the philosopher-architect Nader El-Bizri.)[54] However, others feel that this is to overstate the difference. For example, in 2011 Mark Wrathall[55] argued that Heidegger pursued and refined the central notion of unconcealment throughout his life as a philosopher. Its importance and continuity in his thinking, Wrathall states, shows that he did not have a "turn". A reviewer of Wrathall's book stated: "An ontology of unconcealment [...] means a description and analysis of the broad contexts in which entities show up as meaningful to us, as well as the conditions under which such contexts, or worlds, emerge and fade."[56]
Heidegger focuses less on the way in which the structures of being are revealed in everyday behavior, and more on the way in which behaviour itself depends on a prior "openness to being." The essence of being human is the maintenance of this openness. Heidegger contrasts this openness to the "will to power" of the modern human subject, which is one way of forgetting this originary openness.
Heidegger understands the commencement of the history of Western philosophy as a brief period of authentic openness to being, during the time of the pre-Socratics, especially Anaximander, Heraclitus, and Parmenides. This was followed, according to Heidegger, by a long period increasingly dominated by the forgetting of this initial openness, a period which commences with Plato, and which occurs in different ways throughout Western history.
Two recurring themes of Heidegger's later writings are poetry and technology. Heidegger sees poetry and technology as two contrasting ways of "revealing." Poetry reveals being in the way in which, if it is genuine poetry, it commences something new. Technology, on the other hand, when it gets going, inaugurates the world of the dichotomous subject and object, which modern philosophy commencing with Descartes also reveals. But with modern technology a new stage of revealing is reached, in which the subject-object distinction is overcome even in the "material" world of technology. The essence of modern technology is the conversion of the whole universe of beings into an undifferentiated "standing reserve" (Bestand) of energy available for any use to which humans choose to put it. Heidegger described the essence of modern technology as Gestell, or "enframing." Heidegger does not unequivocally condemn technology: while he acknowledges that modern technology contains grave dangers, Heidegger nevertheless also argues that it may constitute a chance for human beings to enter a new epoch in their relation to being. Despite this, some commentators have insisted that an agrarian nostalgia permeates his later work.[57]
In a 1950 lecture he formulated the famous saying Language speaks, later published in the 1959 essays collection Unterwegs zur Sprache, and collected in the 1971 English book Poetry, Language, Thought.[58][59][60]
Heidegger's later works include Vom Wesen der Wahrheit ("On the Essence of Truth", 1930), Der Ursprung des Kunstwerkes ("The Origin of the Work of Art", 1935), Einführung in die Metaphysik ("Introduction to Metaphysics", 1935), Bauen Wohnen Denken ("Building Dwelling Thinking", 1951), and Die Frage nach der Technik ("The Question Concerning Technology", 1954) and Was heisst Denken? (What Is Called Thinking? 1954). Also Beiträge zur Philosophie (Vom Ereignis) (Contributions to Philosophy (From Enowning)), composed in the years 1936–38 but not published until 1989, on the centennial of Heidegger's birth.
Heidegger and the ground of History[edit]
Heidegger believed the Western world to be on a trajectory headed for total war,[61] and on the brink of profound nihilism[62] (the rejection of all religious and moral principles),[63] which would be the purest and highest revelation of Being itself,[64] offering a horrifying crossroads of either salvation or the end of metaphysics and modernity;[65] rendering the West a wasteland populated by tool-using brutes, characterized by an unprecedented ignorance and barbarism[66] in which everything is permitted.[67]
He thought the latter possibility would degenerate mankind generally into scientists, workers and brutes;[68] living under the last mantle of one of three ideologies, Americanism, Marxism or Nazism[69] (which he deemed metaphysically identical, as avatars of subjectivity and institutionalized nihilism),[70] and an unfettered totalitarian world technology.[68] Supposedly, this epoch would be ironically celebrated, as the most enlightened and glorious in human history.[71]
He envisaged this abyss to be the greatest event in the West's history because it would enable Humanity to comprehend Being more profoundly and primordially than the Pre-Socratics.[72]
Influences[edit]
St. Augustine of Hippo[edit]
Recent scholarship has shown that Heidegger was substantially influenced by St. Augustine of Hippo and that Being and Time would not have been possible without the influence of Augustine's thought. Augustine's Confessions was particularly influential in shaping Heidegger's thought.[73]
Augustine viewed time as relative and subjective, and that being and time were bound up together.[74] Heidegger adopted similar views, e.g. that time was the horizon of Being: ' ...time temporalizes itself only as long as there are human beings.'[75]
Aristotle and the Greeks[edit]
Heidegger was influenced at an early age by Aristotle, mediated through Catholic theology, medieval philosophy and Franz Brentano. Aristotle's ethical, logical, and metaphysical works were crucial to the development of his thought in the crucial period of the 1920s. Although he later worked less on Aristotle, Heidegger recommended postponing reading Nietzsche, and to "first study Aristotle for ten to fifteen years".[76] In reading Aristotle, Heidegger increasingly contested the traditional Latin translation and scholastic interpretation of his thought. Particularly important (not least for its influence upon others, both in their interpretation of Aristotle and in rehabilitating a neo-Aristotelian "practical philosophy")[77] was his radical reinterpretation of Book Six of Aristotle's Nicomachean Ethics and several books of the Metaphysics. Both informed the argument of Being and Time. Heidegger's thought is original in being an authentic retrieval of the past, a repetition of the possibilities handed down by the tradition.[78]
The idea of asking about being may be traced back via Aristotle to Parmenides. Heidegger claimed to have revived the question of being, the question having been largely forgotten by the metaphysical tradition extending from Plato to Descartes, a forgetfulness extending to the Age of Enlightenment and then to modern science and technology. In pursuit of the retrieval of this question, Heidegger spent considerable time reflecting on ancient Greek thought, in particular on Plato, Parmenides, Heraclitus, and Anaximander, as well as on the tragic playwright Sophocles.[79]
Dilthey[edit]
Heidegger's very early project of developing a "hermeneutics of factical life" and his hermeneutical transformation of phenomenology was influenced in part by his reading of the works of Wilhelm Dilthey.[80]
Of the influence of Dilthey, Hans-Georg Gadamer writes the following: "As far as Dilthey is concerned, we all know today what I have known for a long time: namely that it is a mistake to conclude on the basis of the citation in Being and Time that Dilthey was especially influential in the development of Heidegger's thinking in the mid-1920s. This dating of the influence is much too late." He adds that by the fall of 1923 it was plain that Heidegger felt "the clear superiority of Count Yorck over the famous scholar, Dilthey." Gadamer nevertheless makes clear that Dilthey's influence was important in helping the youthful Heidegger "in distancing himself from the systematic ideal of Neo-Kantianism, as Heidegger acknowledges in Being and Time."[81] Based on Heidegger's earliest lecture courses, in which Heidegger already engages Dilthey's thought prior to the period Gadamer mentions as "too late", scholars as diverse as Theodore Kisiel and David Farrell Krell have argued for the importance of Diltheyan concepts and strategies in the formation of Heidegger's thought.[82]
Even though Gadamer's interpretation of Heidegger has been questioned, there is little doubt that Heidegger seized upon Dilthey's concept of hermeneutics. Heidegger's novel ideas about ontology required a gestalt formation, not merely a series of logical arguments, in order to demonstrate his fundamentally new paradigm of thinking, and the hermeneutic circle offered a new and powerful tool for the articulation and realization of these ideas.[83]
Husserl[edit]
There is disagreement over the degree of influence that Husserl had on Heidegger's philosophical development, just as there is disagreement about the degree to which Heidegger's philosophy is grounded in phenomenology. These disagreements centre upon how much of Husserlian phenomenology is contested by Heidegger, and how much this phenomenology in fact informs Heidegger's own understanding.
On the relation between the two figures, Gadamer wrote: "When asked about phenomenology, Husserl was quite right to answer as he used to in the period directly after World War I: 'Phenomenology, that is me and Heidegger'." Nevertheless, Gadamer noted that Heidegger was no patient collaborator with Husserl, and that Heidegger's "rash ascent to the top, the incomparable fascination he aroused, and his stormy temperament surely must have made Husserl, the patient one, as suspicious of Heidegger as he always had been of Max Scheler's volcanic fire."[84]
Robert J. Dostal understood the importance of Husserl to be profound:

Heidegger himself, who is supposed to have broken with Husserl, bases his hermeneutics on an account of time that not only parallels Husserl's account in many ways but seems to have been arrived at through the same phenomenological method as was used by Husserl.... The differences between Husserl and Heidegger are significant, but if we do not see how much it is the case that Husserlian phenomenology provides the framework for Heidegger's approach, we will not be able to appreciate the exact nature of Heidegger's project in Being and Time or why he left it unfinished.[85]

Daniel O. Dahlstrom saw Heidegger's presentation of his work as a departure from Husserl as unfairly misrepresenting Husserl's own work. Dahlstrom concluded his consideration of the relation between Heidegger and Husserl as follows:

Heidegger's silence about the stark similarities between his account of temporality and Husserl's investigation of internal time-consciousness contributes to a misrepresentation of Husserl's account of intentionality. Contrary to the criticisms Heidegger advances in his lectures, intentionality (and, by implication, the meaning of 'to be') in the final analysis is not construed by Husserl as sheer presence (be it the presence of a fact or object, act or event). Yet for all its "dangerous closeness" to what Heidegger understands by temporality, Husserl's account of internal time-consciousness does differ fundamentally. In Husserl's account the structure of protentions is accorded neither the finitude nor the primacy that Heidegger claims are central to the original future of ecstatic-horizonal temporality.[86]

Kierkegaard[edit]
Heideggerians regarded Søren Kierkegaard as, by far, the greatest philosophical contributor to Heidegger's own existentialist concepts.[87] Heidegger's concepts of anxiety (Angst) and mortality draw on Kierkegaard and are indebted to the way in which the latter lays out the importance of our subjective relation to truth, our existence in the face of death, the temporality of existence, and the importance of passionate affirmation of one's individual being-in-the-world.[88]
Hölderlin and Nietzsche[edit]
Friedrich Hölderlin and Friedrich Nietzsche were both important influences on Heidegger,[89] and many of his lecture courses were devoted to one or the other, especially in the 1930s and 1940s. The lectures on Nietzsche focused on fragments posthumously published under the title The Will to Power, rather than on Nietzsche's published works. Heidegger read The Will to Power as the culminating expression of Western metaphysics, and the lectures are a kind of dialogue between the two thinkers.
The fundamental differences between the philosophical delineations of Heidegger and Adorno can be found in their contrasting views of Hölderlin's poetical works and to a lesser extent in their divergent views on German romanticism in general. For Heidegger, Hölderlin expressed the intuitive necessity of metaphysical concepts as a guide for ethical paradigms, devoid of reflection. Adorno, on the other hand, pointed to the dialectic reflection of historical situations, the sociological interpretations of future outcomes, and therefore opposed the liberating principles of intuitive concepts because they negatively surpassed the perception of societal realities.[90] Nevertheless, it was Heidegger's rationalization and later work on Hölderlin's poems as well as on Parmenides ("For to be aware and to be are the same," DK B 3) and his consistent understanding of Nietzsche's thought that formed the foundation of postmodern existentialism.[91]
This is also the case for the lecture courses devoted to the poetry of Friedrich Hölderlin, which became an increasingly central focus of Heidegger's work and thought. Heidegger grants to Hölderlin a singular place within the history of being and the history of Germany, as a herald whose thought is yet to be "heard" in Germany or the West. Many of Heidegger's works from the 1930s onwards include meditations on lines from Hölderlin's poetry, and several of the lecture courses are devoted to the reading of a single poem (see, for example, Hölderlin's Hymn "The Ister").
Heidegger and Eastern thought[edit]
Some writers on Heidegger's work see possibilities within it for dialogue with traditions of thought outside of Western philosophy, particularly East Asian thinking. Despite perceived differences between Eastern and Western philosophy, some of Heidegger's later work, particularly "A Dialogue on Language between a Japanese and an Inquirer", does show an interest in initiating such a dialogue.[92] Heidegger himself had contact with a number of leading Japanese intellectuals, including members of the Kyoto School, notably Hajime Tanabe and Kuki Shūzō. It has also been claimed that a number of elements within Heidegger's thought bear a close parallel to Eastern philosophical ideas, particularly Zen Buddhism and Taoism. Reinhard May records Chang Chung-Yuan saying that "Heidegger is the only Western Philosopher who not only intellectually understands but has intuitively grasped Taoist thought."[93] May sees great influence of Taoism and Japanese scholars in Heidegger's work, although this influence is not acknowledged by the author. He asserts: "The investigation concludes that Heidegger’s work was significantly influenced by East Asian sources. It can be shown, moreover, that in particular instances Heidegger even appropriated wholesale and almost verbatim major ideas from the German translations of Daoist and Zen Buddhist classics. This clandestine textual appropriation of non-Western spirituality, the extent of which has gone undiscovered for so long, seems quite unparalleled, with far-reaching implications for our future interpretation of Heidegger’s work."[94]
Islam[edit]
Heidegger has been influential in research on the relationship between Western philosophy and the history of ideas in Islam,[95] particularly for some scholars interested in Arabic philosophical medieval sources. These include the Lebanese philosopher and architectural theorist Nader El-Bizri,[96] who, as well as focusing on the critique of the history of metaphysics (as an 'Arab Heideggerian'), also moves towards rethinking the notion of "dwelling" in the epoch of the modern unfolding of the essence of technology and Gestell,[97] and realizing what can be described as a "confluence of Western and Eastern thought" as well. It is claimed that the works of counter-enlightenment philosophers such as Heidegger, along with Friedrich Nietzsche and Joseph de Maistre, influenced Iran's Shia Islamist scholars, notably Ali Shariati. A clearer impact of Heidegger in Iran is associated with thinkers such as Ahmad Fardid and Reza Davari Ardakani who have been closely associated with the unfolding of philosophical thinking in a Muslim modern theological legacy in Iran. This included the construction of the ideological foundations of the Iranian Revolution and modern political Islam in its connections with theology.[98][99][100]
Heidegger and architecture[edit]
Main article: Phenomenology (architecture)
Heidegger's thought influenced some architectural theorists in a direct manner, or through an impact via his reflections on 'dwelling', the 'origin of the work of art', 'the essence of technology', and the unfolding of a broad interest in phenomenology within the contemporary circles of architectural theory. This is for instance evident in the works and profiles of theorists such as Christian Norberg-Schulz, Dalibor Vesely, Nader El-Bizri, Karsten Harries, Neil Leach, Adam Sharr, etc., within what is known as Architectural phenomenology and in contemporary architectural theory in general.
The Heidegger controversy[edit]
Main article: Heidegger and Nazism
The rectorate[edit]




The University of Freiburg, where Heidegger was Rector from April 21, 1933, to April 23, 1934


Adolf Hitler was sworn in as Chancellor of Germany on January 30, 1933. Heidegger was elected rector of the University of Freiburg on April 21, 1933, and assumed the position the following day. On May 1, he joined the Nazi Party.
Heidegger delivered his inaugural address, the Rektoratsrede, on "Die Selbstbehauptung der Deutschen Universität" ("The Self-assertion of the German University") on 27 May.
His tenure as rector was fraught with difficulties from the outset. Some National Socialist education officials viewed him as a rival, while others saw his efforts as comical. Some of Heidegger's fellow National Socialists also ridiculed his philosophical writings as gibberish. He finally offered his resignation on 23 April 1934, and it was accepted on 27 April. Heidegger remained a member of both the academic faculty and of the Nazi Party until the end of the war.[101]
Philosophical historian Hans Sluga wrote:

Though as rector he prevented students from displaying an anti-Semitic poster at the entrance to the university and from holding a book burning, he kept in close contact with the Nazi student leaders and clearly signaled to them his sympathy with their activism.[102]

In 1945, Heidegger wrote of his term as rector, giving the writing to his son Hermann; it was published in 1983:

The rectorate was an attempt to see something in the movement that had come to power, beyond all its failings and crudeness, that was much more far-reaching and that could perhaps one day bring a concentration on the Germans' Western historical essence. It will in no way be denied that at the time I believed in such possibilities and for that reason renounced the actual vocation of thinking in favor of being effective in an official capacity. In no way will what was caused by my own inadequacy in office be played down. But these points of view do not capture what is essential and what moved me to accept the rectorate.[103]

Treatment of Husserl[edit]
Beginning in 1917, German-Jewish philosopher Edmund Husserl championed Heidegger's work, and helped him secure the retiring Husserl's chair in Philosophy at the University of Freiburg.[104]
On 6 April 1933, the Reichskommissar of Baden Province, Robert Wagner, suspended all Jewish government employees, including present and retired faculty at the University of Freiburg. Heidegger's predecessor as Rector formally notified Husserl of his "enforced leave of absence" on 14 April 1933.
Heidegger became Rector of the University of Freiburg on 22 April 1933. The following week the national Reich law of 28 April 1933, replaced Reichskommissar Wagner's decree. The Reich law required the firing of Jewish professors from German universities, including those, such as Husserl, who had converted to Christianity. The termination of the retired professor Husserl's academic privileges thus did not involve any specific action on Heidegger's part.[105]
Heidegger had by then broken off contact with Husserl, other than through intermediaries. Heidegger later claimed that his relationship with Husserl had already become strained after Husserl publicly "settled accounts" with Heidegger and Max Scheler in the early 1930s.[106]
Heidegger did not attend his former mentor's cremation in 1938. In 1941, under pressure from publisher Max Niemeyer, Heidegger agreed to remove the dedication to Husserl from Being and Time (restored in post-war editions).[107]
Heidegger's behavior towards Husserl has evoked controversy. Arendt initially suggested that Heidegger's behavior precipitated Husserl's death. She called Heidegger a "potential murderer." However, she later recanted her accusation.[108]
In 1939, only a year after Husserl's death, Heidegger wrote in his Black Notebooks: "The more original and inceptive the coming decisions and questions become, the more inaccessible will they remain to this [Jewish] 'race'. (Thus, Husserl’s step toward phenomenological observation, and his rejection of psychological explanations and historiological reckoning of opinions, are of enduring importance—yet it never reaches into the domains of essential decisions",[109] seeming to imply that Husserl's philosophy was limited purely because he was Jewish.
Post-rectorate period[edit]
After the failure of Heidegger's rectorship, he withdrew from most political activity, without canceling his membership in the NSDAP (Nazi Party). References to National Socialism continued to appear in his work.
The most controversial such reference occurred during a 1935 lecture which was published in 1953 as part of the book Introduction to Metaphysics. In the published version, Heidegger refers to the "inner truth and greatness" of the National Socialist movement (die innere Wahrheit und Größe dieser Bewegung), but he then adds a qualifying statement in parentheses: "namely, the confrontation of planetary technology and modern humanity" (nämlich die Begegnung der planetarisch bestimmten Technik und des neuzeitlichen Menschen). However, it subsequently transpired that this qualification had not been made during the original lecture, although Heidegger claimed that it had been. This has led scholars to argue that Heidegger still supported the Nazi party in 1935 but that he did not want to admit this after the war, and so he attempted to silently correct his earlier statement.[110]
In private notes written in 1939, Heidegger took a strongly critical view of Hitler's ideology;[111] however, in public lectures, he seems to have continued to make ambiguous comments which, if they expressed criticism of the regime, did so only in the context of praising its ideals. For instance, in a 1942 lecture, published posthumously, Heidegger said of recent German classics scholarship:

In the majority of "research results," the Greeks appear as pure National Socialists. This overenthusiasm on the part of academics seems not even to notice that with such "results" it does National Socialism and its historical uniqueness no service at all, not that it needs this anyhow.[112]

An important witness to Heidegger's continued allegiance to National Socialism during the post-rectorship period is his former student Karl Löwith, who met Heidegger in 1936 while Heidegger was visiting Rome. In an account set down in 1940 (though not intended for publication), Löwith recalled that Heidegger wore a swastika pin to their meeting, though Heidegger knew that Löwith was Jewish. Löwith also recalled that Heidegger "left no doubt about his faith in Hitler", and stated that his support for National Socialism was in agreement with the essence of his philosophy.[113]
Post-war period[edit]
After the end of World War II, Heidegger was summoned to appear at a denazification hearing. Heidegger's former lover Arendt spoke on his behalf at this hearing, while Jaspers spoke against him. He was charged on four counts, dismissed from the university and declared a "follower" (Mitläufer) of Nazism.[101] Heidegger was forbidden to teach between 1945 and 1951. One consequence of this teaching ban was that Heidegger began to engage far more in the French philosophical scene.[114]
In his postwar thinking, Heidegger distanced himself from Nazism, but his critical comments about Nazism seem "scandalous" to some since they tend to equate the Nazi war atrocities with other inhumane practices related to rationalisation and industrialisation, including the treatment of animals by factory farming. For instance in a lecture delivered at Bremen in 1949, Heidegger said: "Agriculture is now a motorized food industry, the same thing in its essence as the production of corpses in the gas chambers and the extermination camps, the same thing as blockades and the reduction of countries to famine, the same thing as the manufacture of hydrogen bombs."[101]
In 1967 Heidegger met with the Jewish poet Paul Celan, a concentration camp survivor. Celan visited Heidegger at his country retreat and wrote an enigmatic poem about the meeting, which some interpret as Celan's wish for Heidegger to apologize for his behavior during the Nazi era.[115]
Der Spiegel interview[edit]
On 23 September 1966, Heidegger was interviewed by Rudolf Augstein and Georg Wolff for Der Spiegel magazine, in which he agreed to discuss his political past provided that the interview be published posthumously. (It was published five days after his death, on 31 May 1976.)[116] In the interview, Heidegger defended his entanglement with National Socialism in two ways: first, he argued that there was no alternative, saying that he was trying to save the university (and science in general) from being politicized and thus had to compromise with the Nazi administration. Second, he admitted that he saw an "awakening" (Aufbruch) which might help to find a "new national and social approach," but said that he changed his mind about this in 1934, largely prompted by the violence of the Night of the Long Knives.
In his interview Heidegger defended as double-speak his 1935 lecture describing the "inner truth and greatness of this movement." He affirmed that Nazi informants who observed his lectures would understand that by "movement" he meant National Socialism. However, Heidegger asserted that his dedicated students would know this statement was no eulogy for the NSDAP. Rather, he meant it as he expressed it in the parenthetical clarification later added to Introduction to Metaphysics (1953), namely, "the confrontation of planetary technology and modern humanity."
The Löwith account from 1936 has been cited to contradict the account given in the Der Spiegel interview in two ways: that he did not make any decisive break with National Socialism in 1934, and that Heidegger was willing to entertain more profound relations between his philosophy and political involvement. The Der Spiegel interviewers did not bring up Heidegger's 1949 quotation comparing the industrialization of agriculture to the extermination camps. In fact, the interviewers were not in possession of much of the evidence now known for Heidegger's Nazi sympathies.[117]
Influence and reception in France[edit]
Heidegger was one of the most influential philosophers of the 20th century, and his ideas have penetrated into many areas, but in France there is a very long and particular history of reading and interpreting his work which in itself resulted in deepening the impact of his thought in Continental Philosophy. His influence is clear on Jean Beaufret, François Fédier, Dominique Janicaud, Jean-Luc Marion, Jean-François Courtine and others. One cannot even read Derrida or Levinas without taking into account their critiques of Heidegger that run deep at the basis of their thinking.
Existentialism and pre-war influence[edit]
Heidegger's influence on French philosophy began in the 1930s, when Being and Time, "What is Metaphysics?" and other Heideggerian texts were read by Jean-Paul Sartre and other existentialists, as well as by thinkers such as Alexandre Kojève, Georges Bataille and Emmanuel Levinas.[118] Because Heidegger's discussion of ontology (the study of being) is rooted in an analysis of the mode of existence of individual human beings (Da-sein, or there-being), his work has often been associated with existentialism. The influence of Heidegger on Sartre's Being and Nothingness is marked, but Heidegger felt that Sartre had misread his work, as he argued in later texts such as the "Letter on 'Humanism.'" In that text, intended for a French audience, Heidegger explained this misreading in the following terms:

Sartre's key proposition about the priority of existentia over essentia [that is, Sartre's statement that "existence precedes essence"] does, however, justify using the name "existentialism" as an appropriate title for a philosophy of this sort. But the basic tenet of "existentialism" has nothing at all in common with the statement from Being and Time [that "the 'essence' of Dasein lies in its existence"]—apart from the fact that in Being and Time no statement about the relation of essentia and existentia can yet be expressed, since there it is still a question of preparing something precursory.[119]

"Letter on 'Humanism'" is often seen as a direct response to Sartre's 1945 lecture "Existentialism is a Humanism". Aside from merely disputing readings of his own work, however, in "Letter on 'Humanism,'" Heidegger asserts that "Every humanism is either grounded in a metaphysics or is itself made to be the ground of one." Heidegger's largest issue with Sartre's existential humanism is that, while it does make a humanistic 'move' in privileging existence over essence, "the reversal of a metaphysical statement remains a metaphysical statement." From this point onward in his thought, Heidegger attempted to think beyond metaphysics to a place where the articulation of the fundamental questions of ontology were fundamentally possible: only from this point can we restore (that is, re-give [redonner]) any possible meaning to the word "humanism".
Post-war forays into France[edit]
After the war, Heidegger was banned from university teaching for a period on account of his activities as Rector of Freiburg University. He developed a number of contacts in France, where his work continued to be taught, and a number of French students visited him at Todtnauberg (see, for example, Jean-François Lyotard's brief account in Heidegger and "the Jews", which discusses a Franco-German conference held in Freiburg in 1947, one step toward bringing together French and German students). Heidegger subsequently made several visits to France, and made efforts to keep abreast of developments in French philosophy by way of correspondence with Jean Beaufret, an early French translator of Heidegger, and with Lucien Braun.
Derrida and deconstruction[edit]
Deconstruction came to Heidegger's attention in 1967 by way of Lucien Braun's recommendation of Jacques Derrida's work (Hans-Georg Gadamer was present at an initial discussion and indicated to Heidegger that Derrida's work came to his attention by way of an assistant). Heidegger expressed interest in meeting Derrida personally after the latter sent him some of his work. There was discussion of a meeting in 1972, but this failed to take place.[citation needed] Heidegger's interest in Derrida is said by Braun to have been considerable (as is evident in two letters, of September 29, 1967 and May 16, 1972, from Heidegger to Braun). Braun also brought to Heidegger's attention the work of Michel Foucault. Foucault's relation to Heidegger is a matter of considerable difficulty; Foucault acknowledged Heidegger as a philosopher whom he read but never wrote about. (For more on this see Penser à Strasbourg, Jacques Derrida, et al., which includes reproductions of both letters and an account by Braun, "À mi-chemin entre Heidegger et Derrida").
Derrida attempted to displace the understanding of Heidegger's work that had been prevalent in France from the period of the ban against Heidegger teaching in German universities, which amounted to an almost wholesale rejection of the influence of Jean-Paul Sartre and existentialist terms. In Derrida's view, deconstruction is a tradition inherited via Heidegger (the French term "déconstruction" is a term coined to translate Heidegger's use of the words "Destruktion"—literally "destruction"—and "Abbau"—more literally "de-building"). According to Derrida, Sartre's interpretation of Dasein and other key Heideggerian concerns is overly psychologistic, anthropocentric, and misses the historicality central to Dasein in Being and Time.
The Farías debate[edit]
Derrida, Lacoue-Labarthe, and Jean-François Lyotard, among others, all engaged in debate and disagreement about the relation between Heidegger's philosophy and his Nazi politics. These debates included the question of whether it was possible to do without Heidegger's philosophy, a position which Derrida in particular rejected. Forums where these debates took place include the proceedings of the first conference dedicated to Derrida's work, published as "Les Fins de l'homme à partir du travail de Jacques Derrida: colloque de Cerisy, 23 juillet-2 août 1980", Derrida's "Feu la cendre/cio' che resta del fuoco", and the studies on Paul Celan by Lacoue-Labarthe and Derrida which shortly preceded the detailed studies of Heidegger's politics published in and after 1987.
When in 1987 Víctor Farías published his book Heidegger et le nazisme, this debate was taken up by many others, some of whom were inclined to disparage so-called "deconstructionists" for their association with Heidegger's philosophy. Derrida and others not only continued to defend the importance of reading Heidegger, but attacked Farías on the grounds of poor scholarship and for what they saw as the sensationalism of his approach. Not all scholars agreed with this negative assessment: Richard Rorty, for example, declared that "[Farías'] book includes more concrete information relevant to Heidegger's relations with the Nazis than anything else available, and it is an excellent antidote to the evasive apologetics that are still being published."[120]
Bernard Stiegler[edit]
More recently, Heidegger's thought has considerably influenced the work of the French philosopher Bernard Stiegler. This is evident even from the title of Stiegler's multi-volume magnum opus, La technique et le temps (volume one translated into English as Technics and Time, 1: The Fault of Epimetheus).[121] Stiegler offers an original reading of Heidegger, arguing that there can be no access to "originary temporality" other than via material, that is, technical, supports, and that Heidegger recognised this in the form of his account of world historicality, yet in the end suppressed that fact. Stiegler understands the existential analytic of Being and Time as an account of psychic individuation, and his later "history of being" as an account of collective individuation. He understands many of the problems of Heidegger's philosophy and politics as the consequence of Heidegger's inability to integrate the two.
Giorgio Agamben[edit]
Heidegger has been very influential on the work of Italian philosopher Giorgio Agamben. Agamben attended seminars in France led by Heidegger in the late 1960s.[122]
Criticism[edit]
Heidegger's influence upon 20th century continental philosophy is unquestioned and has produced a variety of critical responses.
Early criticisms[edit]
According to Husserl, Being and Time claimed to deal with ontology but only did so in the first few pages of the book. Having nothing further to contribute to an ontology independent of human existence, Heidegger changed the topic to Dasein. Whereas Heidegger argued that the question of human existence is central to the pursuit of the question of being, Husserl criticized this as reducing phenomenology to "philosophical anthropology" and offering an abstract and incorrect portrait of the human being.[123]
The Neo-Kantian Ernst Cassirer and Heidegger engaged in an influential debate located in Davos in 1929, concerning the significance of Kantian notions of freedom and rationality (see Cassirer–Heidegger debate). Whereas Cassirer defended the role of rationality in Kant, Heidegger argued for the priority of the imagination.
Dilthey's student Georg Misch wrote the first extended critical appropriation of Heidegger in Lebensphilosophie und Phänomenologie. Eine Auseinandersetzung der Diltheyschen Richtung mit Heidegger und Husserl, Leipzig 1930 (3rd ed. Stuttgart 1964).
Left-Hegelianism and critical theory[edit]
Hegel-influenced Marxist thinkers, especially György Lukács and the Frankfurt School, associated the style and content of Heidegger's thought with German irrationalism and criticized its political implications.
Initially members of the Frankfurt School were positively disposed to Heidegger, becoming more critical at the beginning of the 1930s. Heidegger's student Herbert Marcuse became associated with the Frankfurt School. Initially striving for a synthesis between Hegelian Marxism and Heidegger's phenomenology, Marcuse later rejected Heidegger's thought for its "false concreteness" and "revolutionary conservativism." Theodor Adorno wrote an extended critique of the ideological character of Heidegger's early and later use of language in the Jargon of Authenticity. Contemporary social theorists associated with the Frankfurt School have remained largely critical of Heidegger's works and influence. In particular, Jürgen Habermas admonishes the influence of Heidegger on recent French philosophy in his polemic against "postmodernism" in The Philosophical Discourse of Modernity (1985). However, recent work by philosopher and critical theorist Nikolas Kompridis tries to show that Heidegger's insights into world disclosure are badly misunderstood and mishandled by Habermas, and are of vital importance for critical theory, offering an important way of renewing that tradition.[124][125]
Reception by analytic and Anglo-American philosophy[edit]
Criticism of Heidegger's philosophy has also come from analytic philosophy, beginning with logical positivism. In "The Elimination of Metaphysics Through Logical Analysis of Language" (1932), Rudolf Carnap accused Heidegger of offering an "illusory" ontology, criticizing him for committing the fallacy of reification and for wrongly dismissing the logical treatment of language which, according to Carnap, can only lead to writing "nonsensical pseudo-propositions."
The British logical positivist A. J. Ayer was strongly critical of Heidegger's philosophy. In Ayer's view, Heidegger proposed vast, overarching theories regarding existence, which are completely unverifiable through empirical demonstration and logical analysis. For Ayer, this sort of philosophy was a poisonous strain in modern thought. He considered Heidegger to be the worst example of such philosophy, which Ayer believed to be entirely useless.
Bertrand Russell commented, expressing the sentiments of many mid-20th-century analytic philosophers, that:

Highly eccentric in its terminology, his philosophy is extremely obscure. One cannot help suspecting that language is here running riot. An interesting point in his speculations is the insistence that nothingness is something positive. As with much else in Existentialism, this is a psychological observation made to pass for logic.[126]

Roger Scruton stated that: "His major work Being and Time is formidably difficult—unless it is utter nonsense, in which case it is laughably easy. I am not sure how to judge it, and have read no commentator who even begins to make sense of it".[127]
The analytic tradition values clarity of expression. Heidegger, however, has on occasion appeared to take an opposing view, stating for example:

those in the crossing must in the end know what is mistaken by all urging for intelligibility: that every thinking of being, all philosophy, can never be confirmed by "facts," i.e., by beings. Making itself intelligible is suicide for philosophy. Those who idolize "facts" never notice that their idols only shine in a borrowed light. They are also meant not to notice this; for thereupon they would have to be at a loss and therefore useless. But idolizers and idols are used wherever gods are in flight and so announce their nearness.[128]

Apart from the charge of obscurantism, other analytic philosophers considered the actual content of Heidegger's work to be either faulty and meaningless, vapid or uninteresting. However, not all analytic philosophers have been as hostile. Gilbert Ryle wrote a critical yet positive review of Being and Time. Ludwig Wittgenstein made a remark recorded by Friedrich Waismann: "To be sure, I can imagine what Heidegger means by being and anxiety"[129] which has been construed by some commentators[130] as sympathetic to Heidegger's philosophical approach. These positive and negative analytic evaluations have been collected in Michael Murray (ed.), Heidegger and Modern Philosophy: Critical Essays (Yale University Press, 1978). Heidegger's reputation within English-language philosophy has slightly improved in philosophical terms in some part through the efforts of Hubert Dreyfus, Richard Rorty, and a recent generation of analytically oriented phenomenology scholars. Pragmatist Rorty claimed that Heidegger's approach to philosophy in the first half of his career has much in common with that of the latter-day Ludwig Wittgenstein. Nevertheless, Rorty asserted that what Heidegger had constructed in his writings was a myth of being rather than an account of it.[131]
The Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy states that Heidegger's writing is "notoriously difficult", possibly because his thinking was "original" and clearly on obscure and innovative topics.[132]
Contemporary European reception[edit]
Even though Heidegger is considered by many observers to be the most influential philosopher of the 20th century in continental philosophy, aspects of his work have been criticised by those who nevertheless acknowledge this influence, such as Hans-Georg Gadamer and Jacques Derrida. Some questions raised about Heidegger's philosophy include the priority of ontology, the status of animals, the nature of the religious, Heidegger's supposed neglect of ethics (Levinas), the body (Maurice Merleau-Ponty), sexual difference (Luce Irigaray), or space (Peter Sloterdijk).
Levinas was deeply influenced by Heidegger, and yet became one of his fiercest critics, contrasting the infinity of the good beyond being with the immanence and totality of ontology. Levinas also condemned Heidegger's involvement with National Socialism, stating: "One can forgive many Germans, but there are some Germans it is difficult to forgive. It is difficult to forgive Heidegger."[133]
Heidegger's defenders, notably Arendt, see his support for Nazism as arguably a personal " 'error' " (a word which Arendt placed in quotation marks when referring to Heidegger's Nazi-era politics).[134] Defenders think this error was irrelevant to Heidegger's philosophy. Critics such as Levinas,[135] Karl Löwith,[136] and Theodor Adorno claim that Heidegger's support for National Socialism revealed flaws inherent in his thought.[137]
In film[edit]

Being in the World draws on Heidegger's work to explore what it means to be human in a technological age. A number of Heidegger scholars are interviewed, including Hubert Dreyfus, Mark Wrathall, Albert Borgmann, John Haugeland and Taylor Carman.
The Ister (2004) is a film based on Heidegger's 1942 lecture course on Friedrich Hölderlin, and features Jean-Luc Nancy, Philippe Lacoue-Labarthe, Bernard Stiegler, and Hans-Jürgen Syberberg.[138][139]
The film director Terrence Malick translated Heidegger's 1929 essay Vom Wesen des Grundes into English. It was published under the title The Essence of Reasons (Evanston: Northwestern University Press, 1969, bilingual edition). It is also frequently said of Malick that his cinema has Heideggerian sensibilities. See for instance: Marc Furstenau and Leslie MacAvoy, "Terrence Malick's Heideggerian Cinema: War and the Question of Being in The Thin Red Line" In The cinema of Terrence Malick: Poetic visions of America, 2nd ed. Edited by Hanna Patterson (London: Wallflower Press 2007): 179–91. See also: Stanley Cavell, The World Viewed: Reflections on the Ontology of Film (Cambridge: Harvard University Press 1979): XV.
The 2006 experimental short Die Entnazifizierung des MH by James T. Hong imagines Heidegger's denazification proceedings.[140]
In the 2012 film Hannah Arendt, Heidegger is portrayed by actor Klaus Pohl.

Bibliography[edit]
Gesamtausgabe[edit]
Heidegger's collected works are published by Vittorio Klostermann.[141][142] The Gesamtausgabe was begun during Heidegger's lifetime. He defined the order of publication and dictated that the principle of editing should be "ways not works." Publication has not yet been completed.
The contents are listed here: Heidegger Gesamtausgabe.
Selected works[edit]


Year
Original German
English Translation


1927
Sein und Zeit, Gesamtausgabe Volume 2
Being and Time, trans. by John Macquarrie and Edward Robinson (London: SCM Press, 1962); re-translated by Joan Stambaugh (Albany: State University of New York Press, 1996)


1929
Kant und das Problem der Metaphysik, Gesamtausgabe Volume 3
Kant and the Problem of Metaphysics, trans. by Richard Taft (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1990)


1935
Einführung in die Metaphysik (1935, published 1953), Gesamtausgabe Volume 40
Introduction to Metaphysics, trans. by Gregory Fried and Richard Polt (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2000)


1936–8
Beiträge zur Philosophie (Vom Ereignis) (1936–1938, published 1989), Gesamtausgabe Volume 65
Contributions to Philosophy (From Enowning), trans. by Parvis Emad and Kenneth Maly (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1999); re-translated as Contributions to Philosophy (Of the Event), trans. by Richard Rojcewicz and Daniela Vallega-Neu (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2012)


1942
Hölderlins Hymne »Der Ister« (1942, published 1984), Gesamtausgabe Volume 53
Hölderlin's Hymn "The Ister", trans. by William McNeill and Julia Davis (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1996)


1949
"Die Frage nach der Technik", in Gesamtausgabe Volume 7
"The Question Concerning Technology", in Heidegger, Martin, Basic Writings: Second Edition, Revised and Expanded, ed. David Farrell Krell (New York: Harper Collins, 1993)


1950
Holzwege, Gesamtausgabe Volume 5. This collection includes "Der Ursprung des Kunstwerkes" (1935–1936)
Off the Beaten Track. This collection includes "The Origin of the Work of Art"


1955–56
Der Satz vom Grund, Gesamtausgabe Volume 10
The Principle of Reason, trans. Reginald Lilly (Bloomington, Indiana University Press, 1991)


1955–57
Identität und Differenz, Gesamtausgabe Volume 11
Identity and Difference, trans. by Joan Stambaugh (New York: Harper & Row, 1969)


1959
Gelassenheit, in Gesamtausgabe Volume 16
Discourse On Thinking


1959
Unterwegs zur Sprache, Gesamtausgabe Volume 12
On the Way To Language, published without the essay "Die Sprache" ("Language") by arrangement with Heidegger


See also[edit]

Hölderlin's Hymn "The Ister"
Heidegger Gesamtausgabe
List of Nazi ideologues
Heidegger and Nazism
Daseinsanalysis
Hermeneutic idealism/realism
Object-oriented ontology
Sous rature
Khôra

References[edit]



^ Conor Cunningham, Peter M. Candler (eds.), Belief and Metaphysics, SCM Press, p. 267.
^ Martin Heidegger, Ontology: The Hermeneutics of Facticity, Indiana University Press, 2008, p. 92.
^ Anna-Teresa Tymieniecka, Phenomenology World-Wide: Foundations — Expanding Dynamics — Life-Engagements A Guide for Research and Study, Springer, 2014, p. 246.
^ a b c Wheeler, Michael (October 12, 2011). "Martin Heidegger – 3.1 The Turn and the Contributions to Philosophy". Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Retrieved 2013-05-22. 
^ Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy (1998): "Phenomenological movement: 4. Existential phenomenology.
^ a b c "Heidegger, Martin - Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy". www.iep.utm.edu. 
^ "The opposition of world and earth is a strife." (Heidegger (1971), Poetry, Language, Thought, translation and introduction by Albert Hofstadter, p. 47: translation corrected by Hubert Dreyfus; original German: "Das Gegeneinander von Welt und Erde ist ein Streit.") The two interconnected dimensions of intelligibility (revealing and concealing) are called "world" and "earth" by Heidegger (Heidegger's Aesthetics (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy)).
^ Heidegger's Hidden Sources: East-Asian Influences on His Work by Reinhard May, 1996.
^ Brian Elliott, Phenomenology and Imagination in Husserl and Heidegger, Routledge, 2004, p. 132.
^ Giorgio Agamben, The Open: Man and Animal, trans. Kevin Attell (Stanford University Press, 2004), p. 39.
^ Zupko, Jack (28 December 2017). Zalta, Edward N., ed. The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University – via Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. 
^ "Heidegger". Random House Webster's Unabridged Dictionary.
^ Michael Wheeler (2011-10-12). "Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy: Martin Heidegger". Retrieved 2016-03-02. 
^ Lackey, Douglas (1999). "What Are the Modern Classics? The Baruch Poll of Great Philosophy in the Twentieth Century". Philosophical Forum. 30 (4): 329–46. doi:10.1111/0031-806x.00022. 
^ a b John Richardson, Heidegger, Routledge, 2012.
^ Martin Heidegger. "Brief über den »Humanismus«" ("Letter on 'Humanism'"). Frankfurt a.M.: Klostermann, 1949. p. 5: "Die Sprache ist das Haus des Seins."
^ Heidegger, Martin. Poetry, Language, Thought. (New York: Harper Modern Perennial Classics, 2001.), p. 8.
^ The 1966 interview published in 1976 after Heidegger's death as "Only a God Can Save Us". Translated by William J. Richardson. Der Spiegel. 1976-05-31. pp. 193–219. CS1 maint: Date and year (link) . For critical readings, see the "Special Feature on Heidegger and Nazism", Critical Inquiry (Winter 1989 ed.), 15 (2), doi:10.1086/ci.15.2.1343581 , particularly the contributions by Jürgen Habermas and Blanchot. The issue includes partial translations of Derrida's Of Spirit and Lacoue-Labarthe's Of Spirit and Heidegger, Art, and Politics: the Fiction of the Political.
^ Sheehan, Thomas (31 December 2011). "Heidegger: The Man and the Thinker". Transaction Publishers – via Google Books. 
^ Hermann Philipse, Heidegger's Philosophy of Being p. 173, Notes to Chapter One, Martin Heidegger, Supplements, trans. John Van Buren p. 183.
^ Die Lehre vom Urteil im Psychologismus. Ein kritisch-theoretischer Beitrag zur Logik (1914). Source: Annemarie Gethmann-Siefert, "Martin Heidegger", Theologische Realenzyklopädie, XIV, 1982, p. 562. Now his thesis is included in: M. Heidegger, Frühe Schriften, Frankfurt-am-Main: Vittorio Klostermann, 1993.
^ Note, however, that it was discovered later that one of the two main sources used by Heidegger was not by Scotus, but by Thomas of Erfurt. Thus Heidegger's 1916 habilitation thesis, Die Kategorien- und Bedeutungslehre des Duns Scotus, should have been entitled, Die Kategorienlehre des Duns Scotus und die Bedeutungslehre des Thomas von Erfurt. Source: Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy: "Thomas Erfurt".
^ Sebastian Luft (ed.), The Neo-Kantian Reader, Routledge 2015, p. 461.
^ Francesco Alfieri, The Presence of Duns Scotus in the Thought of Edith Stein: The Question of Individuality, Springer, 2015, p. 6.
^ Gethmann-Siefert, 1982, p. 563
^ Richard Wolin (2001), Heidegger’s Children: Hannah Arendt, Karl Löwith, Hans Jonas, and Herbert Marcuse, Princeton: Princeton University Press; Samuel Fleischacker (ed., 2009) Heidegger's Jewish Followers: Essays on Hannah Arendt, Leo Strauss, Hans Jonas, and Emmanuel Levinas, P{ittsburgh: Duquesne University Press
^ "Emmanuel Levinas Web Page". www.levinas.sdsu.edu. 
^ Charles Bambach, Heidegger’s Roots (Cornell University Press, 2003, page 82)
^ Julian Young, Heidegger, Philosophy, Nazism (Cambridge University Press, 1997, page 3, page 11).
^ Julian Young, Heidegger, Philosophy, Nazism (Cambridge University Press, 1997, page 3)
^ Richard J. Evans, The Coming of the Third Reich (The Penguin Press, 2004), pp. 419-422.
^ Thomas Assheuer (21 March 2014). "Das vergiftete Erbe". Die Zeit (in German). 
^ Provisional ruling October 5, 1946; final ruling December 28, 1946; Hugo Ott, Martin Heidegger: A Political Life, (Harper Collins, 1993, page 348)
^ a b Rüdiger Safranski, Martin Heidegger: Between Good and Evil (Harvard University Press, 1998, page 373)
^ http://au.wiley.com/WileyCDA/WileyTitle/productCd-0745641369.html
^ a b "Es ist wieder da". Die Zeit. 30 January 2014. 
^ Martin Heidegger / Elisabeth Blochmann. Briefwechsel 1918–1969. Joachim W. Storck, ed. Marbach am Neckar: Deutsches Literatur-Archiv, 1989, 2nd edn. 1990.
^ Being There, a Spring 2007 article on Heidegger's vacation home for Cabinet magazine.
^ Emad, Parvis. (2006) "Martin Heidegger - Bernhard Welte Correspondence Seen in the Context of Heidegger's Thought". Heidegger Studies. 22: 197-207. Philosophy Documentation Center website
^ Lambert, Cesar (2007). "Some considerations about the correspondence between Martin Heidegger and Bernhard Welte". Revista de Filosofía. 63: 157–169. doi:10.4067/S0718-43602007000100012. 
^ S.J. McGrath, Heidegger; A (Very) Critical Introduction (Cambridge, U.K.: Erdmans, 2008), p. 10
^ For a study on Heidegger's reading of the Sophist and his less central interest in Plato's Timaeus and its conception of space qua khôra: see: Nader El-Bizri, "On kai khôra: Situating Heidegger between the Sophist and the Timaeus", Studia Phaenomenologica, Vol. IV, Issue 1–2 (2004), pp. 73–98. This study is also closely connected with an investigation of Heidegger's later reflections on 'dwelling' as set in: Nader El-Bizri, 'Being at Home Among Things: Heidegger’s Reflections on Dwelling', Environment, Space, Place 3 (2011), pp. 47–71. Refer also to other aspects of this research under the section of 'Heidegger and Eastern Thought', and also the influence on architectural thinking in the main body of the text above
^ In everyday German, "Dasein" means "existence." It is composed of "Da" (here/there) and "Sein" (being). Dasein is transformed in Heidegger's usage from its everyday meaning to refer, rather, to that being that is there in its world, that is, the being for whom being matters. In later publications Heidegger writes the term in hyphenated form as Da-sein, thus emphasizing the distance from the word's ordinary usage.
^ Jacques Derrida describes this in the following terms: "We can see then that Dasein, though not man, is nevertheless nothing other than man." Jacques Derrida, "The Ends of Man", Margins of Philosophy (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1982), p. 127.
^ Blair, Michael (1997). "Heidegger and Aquinas on the Self as Substance", in Postmodernism and Christian Philosophy edited by Roman Theodore Ciapalo. Mishawaka IN: Amer Maritain Assoc. pp. 39–46. ISBN 978-0813208817. Retrieved 27 April 2017. 
^ Cf. Bernard Stiegler, "Technics of Decision: An Interview", Angelaki 8 (2003), pp. 154–67, and cf. the discussion of Stiegler's reading of Heidegger in the sub-section "Bernard Stiegler" below.
^ El-Bizri, Nader (2004). "On Kai Khora: Situating Heidegger between the Sophist and the Timaeus". Studia Phaenomenologica. 4: 73–98. 
^ Nader El-Bizri, 'Being at Home Among Things: Heidegger’s Reflections on Dwelling', Environment, Space, Place 3 (2011), 47–71
^ Refer to the research of Nader El-Bizri on Heidegger's conception of "dwelling" and its architectural significance in: El-Bizri, Nader (2015). "On Dwelling: Heideggerian Allusions to Architectural Phenomenology" (PDF). Studia UBB Philosophia. 60: 5–30. 
^ Richardson, William J. (1963). Heidegger. Through Phenomenology to Thought. Preface by Martin Heidegger. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff Publishers.  4th Edition (2003). The Bronx: Fordham University Press. ISBN 0-823-22255-1; ISBN 978-08-2322-255-1.
^ Korab-Karpowicz, W. J. (December 21, 2009). "Martin Heidegger (1889—1976) – 1. Life and Works". Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Retrieved 2013-05-22. 
^ Heidegger, Martin (2002). "Time and Being". On Time and Being. Translated by Joan Stambaugh. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. ISBN 0-226-32375-7; ISBN 978-02-2632-375-6. 
^ Naess, Jr., Arne D. "Martin Heidegger's Later philosophy". Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved 2013-06-28. 
^ Refer to a recent study on Heidegger's conception of "dwelling" as set in: Nader El-Bizri, 'On Dwelling: Heideggerian Allusions to Architectural Phenomenology', Studia UBB Philosophia 60 (2015): 5-30 http://studia.ubbcluj.ro/download/pdf/920.pdf . See also the related article on Heidegger's reflections on Plato's khôra in: Nader El-Bizri, "On kai khôra: Situating Heidegger between the Sophist and the Timaeus", Studia Phaenomenologica, Vol. IV, Issue 1–2 (2004), pp. 73–98.
^ Wrathall, Mark: Heidegger and Unconcealment: Truth, Language, and History, Cambridge University Press, 2011
^ Käufer, Stephan (2 July 2011). "Review of Heidegger and Unconcealment: Truth, Language, and History" – via Notre Dame Philosophical Reviews. 
^ Refer in this context to reflections on Heidegger's conception of "dwelling" against the background of Gestell as set in:El-Bizri, Nader (2015). "On Dwelling: Heideggerian Allusions to Architectural Phenomenology" (PDF). Studia UBB Philosophia. 60: 5–30. 
^ Lyon, James K. Paul Celan and Martin Heidegger: an unresolved conversation, 1951–1970, pp. 128–9
^ Philipse, Herman (1998) Heidegger's philosophy of being: a critical interpretation, p. 205
^ Heidegger (1971) Poetry, Language, Thought, translation and introduction by Albert Hofstadter, pp. xxv and 187ff
^ Gillespie, Michael Allen (1984). Hegel, Heidegger, and the Ground of History. The start of the 3rd paragraph: The University of Chicago Press. p. 133. ISBN 0-226-29377-7. 
^ Gillespie, Michael Allen (1984). Hegel, Heidegger, and the Ground of History. 2nd half: The University of Chicago Press. p. 148. ISBN 0-226-29377-7. 
^ The Oxford Encyclopedic English Dictionary. Bottom of page: Oxford University Press. 1991. p. 984. ISBN 978-0198612483. 
^ Gillespie, Michael Allen (1984). Hegel, Heidegger, and the Ground of History. End of 1st paragraph: The University of Chicago Press. p. 154. ISBN 0-226-29377-7. 
^ Gillespie, Michael Allen (1984). Hegel, Heidegger, and the Ground of History. End of 2nd paragraph: The University of Chicago Press. p. 148. ISBN 0-226-29377-7. 
^ Gillespie, Michael Allen (1984). Hegel, Heidegger, and the Ground of History. Near end of 3rd paragraph.: The University of Chicago Press. p. 148. ISBN 0-226-29377-7. 
^ Gillespie, Michael Allen (1984). Hegel, Heidegger, and the Ground of History. Halfway through 2nd paragraph: The University of Chicago Press. p. 161. ISBN 0-226-29377-7. 
^ a b Gillespie, Michael Allen (1984). Hegel, Heidegger, and the Ground of History. Halfway through 3rd paragraph: The University of Chicago Press. p. 148. ISBN 0-226-29377-7. 
^ Gillespie, Michael Allen (1984). Hegel, Heidegger, and the Ground of History. End of 3rd paragraph: The University of Chicago Press. p. 157. ISBN 0-226-29377-7. 
^ Gillespie, Michael Allen (1984). Hegel, Heidegger, and the Ground of History. 2nd paragraph: The University of Chicago Press. p. 131. ISBN 0-226-29377-7. 
^ Gillespie, Michael Allen (1984). Hegel, Heidegger, and the Ground of History. End of 3rd paragraph: The University of Chicago Press. p. 148. ISBN 0-226-29377-7. 
^ Gillespie, Michael Allen (1984). Hegel, Heidegger, and the Ground of History. End of 1st paragraph: The University of Chicago Press. p. 151. ISBN 0-226-29377-7. 
^ See The Influence of Augustine on Heidegger: The Emergence of an Augustinian Phenomenology, ed. Craig J. N. de Paulo (Lewiston: The Edwin Mellen Press, 2006.) and also Martin Heidegger's Interpretations of Augustine: Sein und Zeit und Ewigkeit, ed. Frederick Van Fleteren (Lewiston: The Edwin Mellen Press, 2005.)
^ Augustine of Hippo (2008). Confessions. Chadwick, Henry transl. New York: Oxford University Press, Book XI
^ Introduction to Metaphysics, trans. by Gregory Fried and Richard Polt (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2000), p. 89.
^ Heidegger, What is Called Thinking? (New York: Harper & Row, 1968), p. 73.
^ Kelvin Knight, Aristotelian Philosophy: Ethics and Politics from Aristotle to MacIntyre (Cambridge: Polity Press, 2007).
^ Sonya Sikka (1997). Forms of Transcendence: Heidegger and Medieval Mystical Theology. SUNY Press. p. 265. ISBN 978-0-7914-3345-4. 
^ "The Ode on Man in Sophocles' Antigone" Archived 2012-06-11 at the Wayback Machine.
^ ROCKMORE, Tom (2003). "DILTHEY AND HISTORICAL REASON". Revue Internationale de Philosophie. 57: 477–494 – via JSTOR. 
^ Hans-Georg Gadamer, "Martin Heidegger's One Path", in Theodore Kisiel & John van Buren (eds.), Reading Heidegger from the Start: Essays in His Earliest Thought (Albany: SUNY Press, 1994), pp. 22–4.
^ In The Genesis of Heidegger's Being and Time (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1993), Theodor Kisiel designates the first version of the project that culminates in Being and Time, "the Dilthey draft" (p. 313). David Farrell Krell comments in Daimon Life: Heidegger and Life-Philosophy (Bloomington & Indianapolis: Indiana University Press, 1992) that "Heidegger's project sprouts (in part, but in good part) from the soil of Dilthey's philosophy of factical-historical life" (p. 35).
^ Nelson, Eric S. (2014). "Heidegger and Dilthey: Language, History, and Hermeneutics", in Horizons of Authenticity in Phenomenology, Existentialism, and Moral Psychology, edited by Hans Pedersen and Megan Altman. Dordrecht: Springer. pp. 109–28. ISBN 978-9401794411. 
^ Hans-Georg Gadamer, "Martin Heidegger—75 Years", Heidegger's Ways (Albany: SUNY Press, 1994), p. 18.
^ Robert J. Dostal, "Time and Phenomenology in Husserl and Heidegger", in Charles Guignon (ed.), The Cambridge Companion to Heidegger (Cambridge & New York: Cambridge University Press, 1993), p. 142.
^ Daniel O. Dahlstrom, "Heidegger's Critique of Husserl", in Theodore Kisiel & John van Buren (eds.), Reading Heidegger from the Start: Essays in His Earliest Thought (Albany: SUNY Press, 1994), p. 244.
^ Dreyfus, Hubert. Being-in-the-world: A Commentary on Heidegger's Being and Time, Division I. (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1991), Sec. Appendix.
^ A recent study touches specifically on the ontological aspects of angst from a Heideggerian standpoint and the nuances that distinguish it in a radical way from the take on anguish in Kierkegaard's thought, see: Nader El-Bizri, ‘Variations ontologiques autour du concept d’angoisse chez Kierkegaard’, in Kierkegaard notre contemporain paradoxal (Beirut, 2013), pp. 83–95
^ Historical Dictionary of Heidegger's Philosophy, By Frank Schalow, Alfred Denker
^ Oliver Garbrecht (1999). (Dissertation Universität München). Rationalitätskritik der Moderne – Adorno und Heidegger. p. 269. Herbert Utz Verlag – Wissenschaft. ISBN 3-89675-652-4.
^ Martin Heidegger (1954). Was heisst denken? p. 6-86. Max Niemeyer Verlag Tübingen. ISBN 3-484-70029-7.
^ Heidegger, "A Dialogue on Language between a Japanese and an Inquirer", in On the Way to Language (New York: Harper & Row, 1971).
^ Heidegger’s hidden sources: East Asian influences on his work by Reinhard May, p. 7. Translated, with a complementary essay, by Graham Parkes. 1996. London and New York.
^ Heidegger's hidden sources: East Asian influences on his work by Reinhard May, p. XV. Translated, with a complementary essay, by Graham Parkes. 1996. London and New York.
^ [1] University of Bern (Switzerland) international conference on Heidegger in the Islamicate World
^ See for instance: Nader El-Bizri, The Phenomenological Quest between Avicenna and Heidegger (Binghamton, N.Y.: Global Publications SUNY, 2000); Nader El-Bizri, 'Avicenna and Essentialism', Review of Metaphysics 2001; 54, 753–778; Nader El-Bizri, 'Being and Necessity: A Phenomenological Investigation of Avicenna's Metaphysics and Cosmology', in Islamic Philosophy and Occidental Phenomenology on the Perennial Issue of Microcosm and Macrocosm, ed. Anna-Teresa Tymieniecka (Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2006), 243–261; Nader El-Bizri, 'The Labyrinth of Philosophy in Islam', Comparative Philosophy 1.2 (2010), 3–23; Nader El-Bizri, 'Al-Sīnawiyya wa-naqd Hāydighir li-tārīkh al-mītāfīzīqā', al-Maĥajja 21 (2010), 119–140
^ Refer for example to Nader El-Bizri's recent research on Heidegger's conception of "dwelling" :- El-Bizri, Nader (2015). "On Dwelling: Heideggerian Allusions to Architectural Phenomenology" (PDF). Studia UBB Philosophia. 60: 5–30. 
^ "Political Islam, Iran, and the Enlightenment: Philosophies of Hope and Despair", Ali Mirsepassi. Cambridge University Press, 2010. ISBN 0-521-74590-X, 9780521745901. p. 90
^ "Iran's Islamists Influenced By Western Philosophers, NYU's Mirsepassi Concludes in New Book", New York University. January 11, 2011. Accessed 2011-02-15
^ [2] On the impact of Heidegger in the Arab and Muslim world, in "BULLETIN HEIDEGGÉRIEN" 7 (2017), pp. 8-16 ISSN 2034-7189
^ a b c Thomas Sheehan, "Heidegger and the Nazis" (Archived 2011-11-07 at the Wayback Machine.), a review of Victor Farias' Heidegger et le nazisme. Original article: "Heidegger and the Nazis". The New York Review of Books. 35 (10). 16 June 1988. pp. 38–47. Retrieved 27 April 2017. 
^ Hans Sluga, Heidegger's Crisis: Philosophy and Politics in Nazi Germany (Cambridge, Massachusetts, & London: Harvard University Press, 1993), p. 149.
^ Heidegger, "The Rectorate 1933/34: Facts and Thoughts", in Günther Neske & Emil Kettering (eds.), Martin Heidegger and National Socialism: Questions and Answers (New York: Paragon House, 1990), p. 29.
^ Seyla Benhabib, The Reluctant Modernism Of Hannah Arendt (Rowman and Littlefield, 2003, p. 120.)
^ Seyla Benhabib, The Personal is not the Political (October/November 1999 issue of Boston Review.)
^ Martin Heidegger, "Der Spiegel Interview", in Günther Neske & Emil Kettering (eds.), Martin Heidegger and National Socialism: Questions and Answers (New York: Paragon House, 1990), p. 48.
^ Rüdiger Safranski, Martin Heidegger: Between Good and Evil (Cambridge, Mass., & London: Harvard University Press, 1998), pp. 253–8.
^ Elzbieta Ettinger,Hannah Arendt – Martin Heidegger, (New Haven, Conn., & London: Yale University Press, 1995), p. 37.
^ GA 96: 46-47 (from Überlegungen XII, 24) (1939?)
^ Habermas, Jürgen (1989). "Work and Weltanschauung: the Heidegger Controversy from a German Perspective". Critical Inquiry. 15: 452–54.  See also J. Habermas, "Martin Heidegger: on the publication of the lectures of 1935", in Richard Wolin, ed., The Heidegger Controversy (MIT Press, 1993). The controversial page of the 1935 manuscript is missing from the Heidegger Archives in Marbach; however, Habermas's scholarship leaves little doubt about the original wording.
^ Martin Heidegger, Mindfulness (Continuum, 2006), section 47.
^ Heidegger, Hölderlin's Hymn "The Ister" (Bloomington & Indianapolis: Indiana University Press, 1996), pp. 79–80.
^ Karl Löwith, "My last meeting with Heidegger in Rome", in R. Wolin, The Heidegger Controversy (MIT Press, 1993).
^ Dominique Janicaud, Heidegger en France vol. 1 (Paris: Albin Michel, 2001).
^ Anderson, Mark M. (1991-04-01). "The "Impossibility of Poetry": Celan and Heidegger in France". New German Critique (53): 3–18. doi:10.2307/488241. ISSN 0094-033X. JSTOR 488241. 
^ Augstein, Rudolf; Wolff, Georg; Heidegger, Martin (31 May 1976). "Nur noch ein Gott kann uns retten". Der Spiegel: 193–219. Retrieved 2013-06-14.  English translation by William J. Richardson in Sheehan, Thomas, ed. (1981). Heidegger. The Man and the Thinker. Piscataway, New Jersey: Transaction Publishers. pp. 45–67. ISBN 978-1-412-81537-6. ISBN 1-41281537-1. 
^ For critical readings of the interview (published in 1976 as "Only a God Can Save Us," Der Spiegel), see the "Special Feature on Heidegger and Nazism" in Critical Inquiry 15:2 (Winter 1989), particularly the contributions by Jürgen Habermas and Blanchot. The issue includes partial translations of Derrida's Of Spirit and Lacoue-Labarthe's Of Spirit and Heidegger, Art, and Politics: the Fiction of the Political.
^ On the history of the French translation of Heidegger's "What is Metaphysics?", and on its importance to the French intellectual scene, cf. Denis Hollier, "Plenty of Nothing", in Hollier (ed.), A New History of French Literature (Cambridge, Massachusetts, Harvard University Press, 1989), pp. 894–900.
^ Heidegger, "Letter on 'Humanism,'" Pathmarks (Cambridge & New York: Cambridge University Press, 1998), pp. 250–1.
^ Richard Rorty, review of Heidegger and Nazism in the New Republic, quoted on the Temple University Press promotional page for Heidegger and Nazism
^ Bernard Stiegler, Technics and Time, 1: The Fault of Epimetheus (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1998), part 2.
^ Durantaye, Leland de la. (2009). Giorgio Agamben. A Critical Introduction. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
^ See Edmund Husserl, Psychological and transcendental phenomenology and the confrontation with Heidegger (1927–1931) (Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1997).
^ Nikolas Kompridis, Critique and Disclosure: Critical Theory between Past and Future MIT Press, 2006.[page needed]
^ Kompridis, Nikolas (2005). "Disclosing Possibility: The Past and Future of Critical Theory1". International Journal of Philosophical Studies. 13 (3): 325–51. doi:10.1080/09672550500169125. 
^ Bertrand Russell, Wisdom of the West (New York: Crescent Books, 1989), p. 303.
^ Jeff Collins, Introducing Heidegger (Thriplow, Cambridge: Icon Books, 1998), p. 7.
^ Martin Heidegger, Contributions to Philosophy (From Enowning) (Bloomington & Indianapolis: Indiana University Press, 1999), p. 307.
^ Wittgenstein and the Vienna Circle: Conversations Recorded by Friedrich Waismann, Basil Blackwell, Oxford, 1979, p. 68
^ James Luchte, ‘Under the Aspect of Time ("sub specie temporis"): Heidegger, Wittgenstein, and the Place of the Nothing,’ Philosophy Today, Volume 53, Number 2, 2009.
^ Jeff Collins, Introducing Heidegger (Thriplow, Cambridge: Icon Books, 1998), p. 170.
^ "Heidegger, Martin - Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy". www.iep.utm.edu. 
^ Emmanuel Levinas, Nine Talmudic Readings (Indiana University Press, 1990), p. xxv, translated by Annette Aronowicz
^ Hannah Arendt, Martin Heidegger At 80, New York Review of Books, 17/6, (Oct. 21, 1971), 50–54; repr. in Heidegger and Modern Philosophy ed. M. Murray (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1978), 293–303
^ "Martin Heidegger, Emmanuel Levinas, and the Politics of Dwelling" Archived 2016-03-03 at the Wayback Machine. by David J. Gauthier, Ph.D dissertation, Louisiana State University, 2004, page 156
^ Löwith, Karl. "Mein Leben in Deutschland vor und nach 1933: ein Bericht (Stuttgart: Metzler, 1986), p. 57, translated by Paula Wissing as cited by Maurice Blanchot in "Thinking the Apocalypse: a Letter from Maurice Blanchot to Catherine David"". Critical Inquiry. 15 (2): 476–477. 
^ "Emmanuel Faye [in his "Heidegger: The Introduction of Nazism Into Philosophy"] argues fascist and racist ideas are so woven into the fabric of Heidegger’s theories that they no longer deserve to be called philosophy. . . . Richard Wolin, the author of several books on Heidegger and a close reader of the Faye book, said he is not convinced Heidegger’s thought is as thoroughly tainted by Nazism as Mr. Faye argues. Nonetheless he recognizes how far Heidegger’s ideas have spilled into the larger culture." An Ethical Question: Does a Nazi Deserve a Place Among Philosophers? by Patricia Cohen. New York Times. Published: November 8, 2009. (Online)
^ "The Ister: Credits". The Ister. Black Box Sound and Image. Archived from the original on 9 February 2012. Retrieved 2 January 2018. 
^ "The Ister: Introduction". The Ister. Black Box Sound and Image. Archived from the original on 9 February 2012. Retrieved 2 January 2018. 
^ "ZUKUNFTSMUSIK -- DIE ENTNAZIFIZIERUNG DES MH". www.zukunftsmusik.com. 
^ "Verlag Vittorio Klostermann - Philosophie, Recht, Literatur, Bibliothek". www.klostermann.de. 
^ "Quick reference guide to the English translations of Heidegger". think.hyperjeff.net. 



Further reading[edit]






This article's further reading may not follow Wikipedia's content policies or guidelines. Please improve this article by removing less relevant or redundant publications with the same point of view; or by incorporating the relevant publications into the body of the article through appropriate citations. (August 2010) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



On Being and Time[edit]

William Blattner, Heidegger's Temporal Idealism
Taylor Carman, Heidegger's Analytic: Interpretation, Discourse, and Authenticity in "Being and Time"
Craig J. N. de Paulo, The Influence of Augustine on Heidegger: The Emergence of an Augustinian Phenomenology
Hubert Dreyfus, Being-in-the-World: A Commentary on Heidegger's Being and Time, Division I
Michael Gelven, A Commentary on Heidegger's Being and Time, Revised Edition
E.F. Kaelin, "Heidegger's Being & Time: A Reading for Readers"
Magda King, A Guide to Heidegger's Being and Time
Theodore Kisiel, The Genesis of Heidegger's Being and Time
Stephen Mulhall, Heidegger and Being and Time
James Luchte, Heidegger's Early Philosophy: The Phenomenology of Ecstatic Temporality
Mark Wrathall, How to Read Heidegger

Biographies[edit]

Víctor Farías, Heidegger and Nazism, ed. by Joseph Margolis and Tom Rockmore
Hugo Ott, Martin Heidegger: A Political Life
Otto Pöggeler, Martin Heidegger's Path of Thinking, trans. by D. Magurshak and S. Barber, Humanities Press, 1987.
Rüdiger Safranski, Martin Heidegger: Between Good and Evil
John van Buren, The Young Heidegger: Rumor of the Hidden King

Politics and National Socialism[edit]

Pierre Bourdieu, The Political Ontology of Martin Heidegger
Miguel de Beistegui, Heidegger and the Political: Dystopias
Jacques Derrida, Of Spirit: Heidegger and the Question
Víctor Farías, Heidegger and Nazism, Philadelphia, Temple University Press, 1989.
Emmanuel Faye, Heidegger, l'introduction du nazisme dans la philosophie : autour des séminaires inédits de 1933–1935, Paris, Albin Michel, 2005. ISBN 2-226-14252-5 in French language
Emmanuel Faye, Heidegger. The Introduction of Nazism into Philosophy in Light of the Unpublished Seminars of 1933–1935, Translated by Michael B. Smith, Foreword by Tom Rockmore, Yale University Press, 2009, 436 p. Foreword Award: Book of the year 2009 for Philosophy.
Annemarie Gethmann-Siefert & Otto Pöggeler (eds.), Heidegger und die praktische Philosophie, Frankfurt a. M., Suhrkamp, 1989. in German language
Dominique Janicaud, The Shadow of That Thought
W.J. Korab-Karpowicz, "Heidegger's Hidden Path: From Philosophy to Politics", Review of Metaphysics, 61 (2007)
Philippe Lacoue-Labarthe, "Transcendence Ends in Politics", in Typography: Mimesis, Philosophy, Politics
Philippe Lacoue-Labarthe, Heidegger, Art, and Politics: The Fiction of the Political
George Leaman, Heidegger im Kontext: Gesamtüberblick zum NS-Engagement der Universitätsphilosophen, Argument Verlag, Hamburg, 1993. ISBN 9783886192052
Karl Löwith, Martin Heidegger and European Nihilism
Karl Löwith, Heidegger's Existentialism
Jean-François Lyotard, Heidegger and "the Jews"
Hugo Ott, Heidegger. A Political Life.
Günther Neske & Emil Kettering (eds.), Martin Heidegger and National Socialism: Questions and Answers
Political Texts – Rectoral Addresses
Guillaume Payen, Martin Heidegger. Catholicisme, révolution, nazisme, Perrin, 2016 (in French)
Tom Rockmore and Joseph Margolis (ed.), The Heidegger Case
Daniel Ross, Heidegger and the Question of the Political
Hans Sluga, Heidegger's Crisis: Philosophy and Politics in Nazi Germany
Iain Thomson, Heidegger on Ontotheology: Technology and the Politics of Education
Dana Villa, Arendt and Heidegger: the Fate of the Political
Richard Wolin (ed.), The Heidegger Controversy ISBN 0-262-23166-2.
Julian Young, Heidegger philosophy Nazism

Other secondary literature[edit]

Aleksandr Dugin, Martin Heidegger: The Philosophy of Another Beginning. Washington Summit Publishers, 2014. ISBN 978-1593680381
Renate Maas, Diaphan und gedichtet. Der künstlerische Raum bei Martin Heidegger und Hans Jantzen, Kassel 2015, 432 Pages, 978-3-86219-854-2.
Jeffrey Andrew Barash, Martin Heidegger and the Problem of Historical Meaning (New York: Fordham, 2003)
Robert Bernasconi, Heidegger in Question: The Art of Existing
Babette Babich, Words in Blood, Like Flowers. Philosophy and Poetry, Music and Eros in Hoelderlin, Nietzsche and Heidegger (2006). ISBN 978-0791468364
Walter A. Brogan, Heidegger and Aristotle: The Twofoldness of Being
Scott M. Campbell: The Early Heidegger's Philosophy of Life: Facticity, Being, and Language. Fordham University Press, 2012. ISBN 978-0823242207
Richard M. Capobianco, Engaging Heidegger with a Foreword by William J. Richardson. University of Toronto Press, 2010.
Richard M. Capobianco, Heidegger's Way of Being. University of Toronto Press, 2014.
Maxence Caron, Heidegger – Pensée de l'être et origine de la subjectivité, 1760 pages, first and only book on Heidegger awarded by the Académie française.
Gabriel Cercel and Cristian Ciocan (eds.), The Early Heidegger (Studia Phaenomenologica I, 3–4), Bucharest: Humanitas, 2001, 506 p., including letters by Heidegger and Pöggeler, and articles by Walter Biemel, Friedrich-Wilhelm von Herrmann, Theodore Kisiel, Marion Heinz, Alfred Denker
Steven Galt Crowell, Husserl, Heidegger, and the Space of Meaning: Paths toward Transcendental Phenomenology
Walter A. Davis. Inwardness and Existence: Subjectivity in/and Hegel, Heidegger, Marx, and Freud. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1989.
Jacques Derrida, "Ousia and Gramme: Note on a Note from Being and Time", in Margins of Philosophy
Hubert L. Dreyfus & Mark A. Wrathall, A Companion to Heidegger (Oxford: Blackwell, 2007)
Paul Edwards, Heidegger's Confusions
Nader El-Bizri The Phenomenological Quest Between Avicenna and Heidegger (New York, 2000); reprinted by SUNY Press in 2014
Christopher Fynsk, Heidegger: Thought and Historicity
Michael Allen Gillespie, Hegel, Heidegger, and the Ground of History (University of Chicago Press, 1984)
Glazebrook, Trish (2000), Heidegger's Philosophy of Science, Fordham University Press.
Patricia Altenbernd Johnson, On Heidegger (Wadsworth Philosophers Series), Wadsworth Publishing, 1999
Alan Kim, Plato in Germany: Kant-Natorp-Heidegger (Academia, 2010)
Philippe Lacoue-Labarthe, Poetry as Experience
Philippe Lacoue-Labarthe, Heidegger and the Politics of Poetry
S. J. McGrath, Heidegger. A (Very) Critical Introduction
William McNeill, The Glance of the Eye: Heidegger, Aristotle, and the Ends of Theory
William McNeill, The Time of Life: Heidegger and Ethos
Jean-Luc Nancy, "The Decision of Existence", in The Birth to Presence
Herman Philipse, Heidegger's Philosophy of Being: A Critical Interpretation
Richard Polt, Heidegger: An Introduction
François Raffoul, Heidegger and the Subject
François Raffoul & David Pettigrew (ed), Heidegger and Practical Philosophy
François Raffoul & Eric S. Nelson (ed), The Bloomsbury Companion to Heidegger (Bloomsbury, 2013)
William J. Richardson, Heidegger: Through Phenomenology to Thought.
John Sallis, Echoes: After Heidegger
John Sallis (ed), Reading Heidegger: Commemorations, including articles by Robert Bernasconi, Jacques Derrida, Rodolphe Gasché, and John Sallis, among others.
Reiner Schürmann, Heidegger on Being and Acting: From Principles to Anarchy
Tony See, Community without Identity: The Ontology and Politics of Heidegger
Adam Sharr, Heidegger's Hut
Bernard Stiegler, Technics and Time, 1: The Fault of Epimetheus
Leo Strauss, "An Introduction to Heideggerian Existentialism," in The Rebirth of Classical Political Rationalism (University of Chicago: 1989).
Andrzej Warminski, Readings in Interpretation: Hölderlin, Hegel, Heidegger
Julian Young, Heidegger's Philosophy of Art
Julian Young, Heidegger's Later Philosophy
Bastian Zimmermann, Die Offenbarung des Unverfügbaren und die Würde des Fragens. Ethische Dimensionen der Philosophie Martin Heideggers (London: 2010) ISBN 978-1-84790-037-1
Sean McGrath and Andrzej Wierciński, ed., A Companion to Heidegger’s "Phenomenology of Religious Life" (Amsterdam: Rodopi, 2010).
Umberto Pagano, L'uomo senz'ombra. Elementi di sociologia dell'inautentico [3],(The Man with no Shadow. Principles for a Sociology of Inauthenticity) (Milan, 2007), FrancoAngeli, ISBN 978-88-464-8523-6.

Reception in France[edit]

Jean Beaufret, Dialogue avec Heidegger, 4 vols., Paris: Minuit, 1973–1985.
Jean-François Courtine, Heidegger et la phénoménologie, Paris: Vrin, 1990.
John E. Drabinski and Eric S. Nelson (eds.), Between Levinas and Heidegger, Albany: SUNY Press, 2014.
Dominique Janicaud, Heidegger en France, 2vols., Paris: Albin Michel, 2001.
Ethan Kleinberg, Generation Existential: Heidegger's Philosophy in France, 1927–1961
David Pettigrew and François Raffoul (eds.), French Interpretations of Heidegger: An Exceptional Reception, Albany : SUNY Press, 2006.

Influence on Japanese philosophy[edit]

Mayeda, Graham. 2006. Time, space and ethics in the philosophy of Watsuji Tetsurō, Kuki Shūzō, and Martin Heidegger (New York: Routledge, 2006). ISBN 0-415-97673-1 (alk. paper).

Heidegger and Asian philosophy[edit]

Parkes, Graham. 1987. Heidegger and Asian Thought. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press. ISBN 0-8248-1064-3.
(Refer to section 2.6 above, under the heading: "Heidegger and Eastern Thought", including the "Islam" part in 2.6.1)

External links[edit]


Library resources about
Martin Heidegger





Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries




By Martin Heidegger




Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries







Wikimedia Commons has media related to Martin Heidegger.





Wikiquote has quotations related to: Martin Heidegger


Archival collections[edit]

Guide to the Student Notes from Lectures by Martin Heidegger. Special Collections and Archives, The UC Irvine Libraries, Irvine, California.
Works by Heidegger and on Heidegger (categorization)

General information[edit]

Political Texts - Rectoral Addresses
W.J. Korab-Karpowicz, Martin Heidegger (1889-1976) in Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy
Karl Löwith, My Last Meeting with Heidegger, Rome 1936
German Heidegger Society (in German)
Arne D. Naess, Jr., Martin Heidegger in Encyclopædia Britannica
Martin Heidegger, Der Spiegel Interview by Rudolf Augstein and Georg Wolff, 23 September 1966; published May 31 1976
Timeline of German Philosophers
Human, all too human - a BBC film of his early life, with a focus on his political involvement[dead link]
Heidegger’s Notebooks Renew Focus on Anti-Semitism

Works by Heidegger[edit]

English translations of Heidegger's works
Works by or about Martin Heidegger at Internet Archive







v
t
e


Martin Heidegger



Philosophy



Aletheia
Dasein
Ekstase
Fundamental ontology
Gestell
Hermeneutic circle
Language speaks
Metaphysics of presence
Ontic
Terminology
Thrownness
World disclosure





Works



Being and Time (1927)
Kant and the Problem of Metaphysics (1929)
Introduction to Metaphysics (1935)
Black Notebooks (1931–41)
Contributions to Philosophy (1936–1938)
Hölderlin's Hymn "The Ister" (1942)
Letter on Humanism (1947)
The Question Concerning Technology (1949)
The Origin of the Work of Art (1950)
What Is Called Thinking? (1951–2)
What is Philosophy? (1955)
Only a God Can Save Us (1966)
Heidegger Gesamtausgabe





Film and TV



The Ister
Being in the World
Human, All Too Human





Related topics



Heidegger scholars
Heidegger Studies
Views on Nazism












v
t
e


Continental philosophy



Philosophers



Theodor W. Adorno
Giorgio Agamben
Louis Althusser
Hannah Arendt
Gaston Bachelard
Alain Badiou
Roland Barthes
Georges Bataille
Jean Baudrillard
Zygmunt Bauman
Walter Benjamin
Simone de Beauvoir
Henri Bergson
Maurice Blanchot
Pierre Bourdieu
Wendy Brown
Martin Buber
Judith Butler
Albert Camus
Ernst Cassirer
Cornelius Castoriadis
Emil Cioran
Guy Debord
Gilles Deleuze
Jacques Derrida
Hubert L. Dreyfus
Umberto Eco
Terry Eagleton
Frantz Fanon
Johann Gottlieb Fichte
Michel Foucault
Hans-Georg Gadamer
Félix Guattari
Antonio Gramsci
Roman Ingarden
Jürgen Habermas
Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel
Martin Heidegger
Edmund Husserl
Luce Irigaray
Fredric Jameson
Karl Jaspers
Walter Kaufmann
Søren Kierkegaard
Pierre Klossowski
Alexandre Kojève
Alexandre Koyré
Leszek Kołakowski
Julia Kristeva
Jacques Lacan
François Laruelle
Henri Lefebvre
Claude Lévi-Strauss
Emmanuel Levinas
Niklas Luhmann
György Lukács
Jean-François Lyotard
Gabriel Marcel
Herbert Marcuse
Karl Marx
Quentin Meillassoux
Maurice Merleau-Ponty
Antonio Negri
Friedrich Nietzsche
José Ortega y Gasset
Paul Ricœur
Edward Said
Jean-Paul Sartre
Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph Schelling
Carl Schmitt
Arthur Schopenhauer
Michel Serres
Gilbert Simondon
Peter Sloterdijk
Leo Strauss
Raymond Williams
Slavoj Žižek





Theories



Critical theory
Deconstruction
Existentialism
Frankfurt School
German idealism
Hermeneutics
Neo-Kantianism
Non-philosophy
Phenomenology
Postmodernism
Post-structuralism
Psychoanalytic theory
Social constructionism
Speculative realism
Structuralism
Western Marxism





Concepts



Angst
Authenticity
Being in itself
Boredom
Dasein
Différance
Difference
Existential crisis
Facticity
Intersubjectivity
Ontic
Other
Self-deception
Trace








Category
Index












v
t
e


Existentialism



Concepts



Abandonment
Absurdism
Angst
Authenticity
Bad faith
Being in itself
Existence precedes essence
Existential crisis
Facticity
Meaning
Nihilism
Other





Thinkers



Nicola Abbagnano
Hannah Arendt
Abdel Rahman Badawi
Hazel Barnes
Karl Barth
Nikolai Berdyaev
Steve Biko
Martin Buber
Rudolf Bultmann
Dino Buzzati
Albert Camus
Jane Welsh Carlyle
Thomas Carlyle
Emil Cioran
Walter A. Davis
Simone de Beauvoir
Fyodor Dostoyevsky
William A. Earle
Ralph Ellison
Frantz Fanon
Vilém Flusser
Benjamin Fondane
James Anthony Froude
Alberto Giacometti
Juozas Girnius
Lewis Gordon
Martin Heidegger
Edmund Husserl
Eugène Ionesco
Nae Ionescu
William James
Karl Jaspers
Franz Kafka
Walter Kaufmann
Søren Kierkegaard
Ladislav Klíma
Emmanuel Levinas
Ash Lieb
John Macquarrie
Naguib Mahfouz
Gabriel Marcel
Vytautas Mačernis
Maurice Merleau-Ponty
Friedrich Nietzsche
José Ortega y Gasset
Viktor Petrov
Franz Rosenzweig
Jean-Paul Sartre
Aous Shakra
Lev Shestov
Joseph B. Soloveitchik
Paul Tillich
Rick Turner
Miguel de Unamuno
John Daniel Wild
Colin Wilson
Richard Wright
Peter Wessel Zapffe





Related



Phenomenology (philosophy)
Continental philosophy
Transcendentalism
German idealism
Western Marxism
Existentialist anarchism












v
t
e


Metaphysics



Metaphysicians



Parmenides
Plato
Aristotle
Plotinus
Duns Scotus
Thomas Aquinas
Francisco Suárez
Nicolas Malebranche
René Descartes
John Locke
David Hume
Thomas Reid
Immanuel Kant
Isaac Newton
Arthur Schopenhauer
Baruch Spinoza
Georg W. F. Hegel
George Berkeley
Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz
Henri Bergson
Friedrich Nietzsche
Charles Sanders Peirce
Joseph Maréchal
Ludwig Wittgenstein
Martin Heidegger
Alfred N. Whitehead
Bertrand Russell
Dorothy Emmet
G. E. Moore
Jean-Paul Sartre
Gilbert Ryle
Hilary Putnam
P. F. Strawson
R. G. Collingwood
Adolph Stöhr
Rudolf Carnap
Saul Kripke
Willard V. O. Quine
G. E. M. Anscombe
Donald Davidson
Michael Dummett
David Malet Armstrong
David Lewis
Alvin Plantinga
Peter van Inwagen
Derek Parfit
more ...





Theories



Abstract object theory
Action theory
Anti-realism
Determinism
Dualism
Enactivism
Essentialism
Existentialism
Free will
Idealism
Libertarianism
Liberty
Materialism
Meaning of life
Monism
Naturalism
Nihilism
Phenomenalism
Realism
Physicalism
Pirsig's metaphysics of Quality
Platonic idealism
Relativism
Scientific realism
Solipsism
Subjectivism
Substance theory
Type theory





Concepts



Abstract object
Anima mundi
Being
Category of being
Causality
Choice
Cogito ergo sum
Concept
Embodied cognition
Entity
Essence
Existence
Experience
Hypostatic abstraction
Idea
Identity
Identity and change
Information
Insight
Intelligence
Intention
Linguistic modality
Matter
Meaning
Memetics
Mental representation
Mind
Motion
Necessity
Notion
Object
Pattern
Perception
Physical body
Principle
Property
Qualia
Quality
Reality
Soul
Subject
Substantial form
Thought
Time
Truth
Type–token distinction
Universal
Unobservable
Value
more ...





Related topics



Axiology
Cosmology
Epistemology
Feminist metaphysics
Interpretations of quantum mechanics
Meta-
Ontology
Philosophy of mind
Philosophy of psychology
Philosophy of self
Philosophy of space and time
Teleology
Theoretical physics








 Category
 Portal












v
t
e


Philosophy of mind



Theories



Behaviorism (Radical)
Biological naturalism
Cognitive psychology
Mind–body dualism
Eliminative materialism
Emergent materialism
Emergentism
Epiphenomenalism
Functionalism
Idealism
Interactionism
Materialism
Monism
Naïve realism

Neurophenomenology


Neutral monism
Occasionalism
Psychoanalysis
Parallelism
Phenomenalism
Phenomenology
Physicalism

identity theory


Property dualism
Representational
Solipsism
Substance dualism





Concepts



Abstract object
Artificial intelligence
Chinese room
Cognition
Cognitive closure
Concept
Concept and object
Consciousness
Hard problem of consciousness
Hypostatic abstraction
Idea
Identity
Ingenuity
Intelligence
Intentionality
Introspection
Intuition
Language of thought
Materialism
Mental event
Mental image
Mental process
Mental property
Mental representation
Mind
Mind–body problem

Non-physical entity


New mysterianism
Pain
Problem of other minds
Propositional attitude
Qualia
Tabula rasa
Understanding
Zombie
more...





Related topics



Metaphysics
Philosophy of artificial intelligence / information / perception / self








Portal
Category
Philosophers category
Project
Task Force












v
t
e


Aesthetics topics



Philosophers



Abhinavagupta
Theodor W. Adorno
Leon Battista Alberti
Thomas Aquinas
Hans Urs von Balthasar
Alexander Gottlieb Baumgarten
Clive Bell
Bernard Bosanquet
Edward Bullough
R. G. Collingwood
Ananda Coomaraswamy
Arthur Danto
John Dewey
Denis Diderot
Hubert Dreyfus
Curt John Ducasse
Thierry de Duve
Roger Fry
Nelson Goodman
Clement Greenberg
Georg Hegel
Martin Heidegger
David Hume
Immanuel Kant
Paul Klee
Susanne Langer
Theodor Lipps
György Lukács
Jean-François Lyotard
Joseph Margolis
Jacques Maritain
Thomas Munro
Friedrich Nietzsche
José Ortega y Gasset
Dewitt H. Parker
Stephen Pepper
David Prall
Jacques Rancière
Ayn Rand
George Lansing Raymond
I. A. Richards
George Santayana
Friedrich Schiller
Arthur Schopenhauer
Roger Scruton
Irving Singer
Rabindranath Tagore
Giorgio Vasari
Morris Weitz
Johann Joachim Winckelmann
Richard Wollheim
more...





Theories



Classicism
Evolutionary aesthetics
Historicism
Modernism
New Classical
Postmodernism
Psychoanalytic theory
Romanticism
Symbolism
more...





Concepts



Aesthetic emotions
Aesthetic interpretation
Art manifesto
Avant-garde
Axiology
Beauty
Boredom
Camp
Comedy
Creativity
Cuteness
Disgust
Ecstasy
Elegance
Entertainment
Eroticism
Gaze
Harmony
Judgement
Kama
Kitsch
Life imitating art
Magnificence
Mimesis
Perception
Quality
Rasa
Reverence
Style
Sublime
Taste
Work of art





Related topics



Aesthetics of music
Applied aesthetics
Architecture
Art
Arts criticism
Feminist aesthetics
Gastronomy
History of painting
Humour
Japanese aesthetics
Literary merit
Mathematical beauty
Mathematics and architecture
Mathematics and art
Music theory
Neuroesthetics
Painting
Patterns in nature
Philosophy of design
Philosophy of film
Philosophy of music
Poetry
Sculpture
Theory of painting
Theory of art
Tragedy
Visual arts








Index
Outline
Category
Portal









Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 24602613
LCCN: n79026812
ISNI: 0000 0001 2124 4141
GND: 118547798
SELIBR: 206984
SUDOC: 026917548
BNF: cb11907130r (data)
BIBSYS: 90055492
ULAN: 500282302
NLA: 35660419
NDL: 00442880
NKC: jn19990009594
BNE: XX1721444
IATH: w6417pt3











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Martin_Heidegger&oldid=818309467"					Categories: Martin Heidegger1889 births1976 deathsPeople from MeßkirchPeople from the Grand Duchy of BadenGerman Roman CatholicsNazi Party members20th-century German philosophersContinental philosophersDaseinsanalysisGerman philosophersHermeneutistsOntologistsPhilosophers of artPhilosophers of technologyExistentialistsPhenomenologistsEnactive cognitionNietzsche scholarsPhilosophers of nihilismPhilosophers of historyGerman military personnel of World War IUniversity of Freiburg alumniUniversity of Freiburg facultyUniversity of Marburg facultyHidden categories: CS1 maint: Date and yearCS1 German-language sources (de)Webarchive template wayback linksWikipedia articles needing page number citations from April 2017Interlanguage link template link numberBiography with signatureArticles with hCardsAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from May 2010Articles with unsourced statements from March 2011Wikipedia spam cleanup from August 2010Wikipedia further reading cleanupArticles with German-language external linksAll articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from December 2015Articles with Internet Archive linksAC with 14 elementsWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with SELIBR identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersWikipedia articles with BIBSYS identifiersWikipedia articles with ULAN identifiersWikipedia articles with NLA identifiersWikipedia articles with SNAC-ID identifiers