For other uses, see Master of Arts (disambiguation).
"M.A." redirects here. For other uses, see MA (disambiguation).







This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages)







This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (July 2009) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)









This article may require cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards. No cleanup reason has been specified. Please help improve this article if you can. (August 2009) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)





(Learn how and when to remove this template message)



A Master of Arts (Latin: Magister Artii; abbreviated M.A. or MA; also Latin: Artium Magister, abbreviated A.M. or AM) is a person who was admitted to a type of master's degree awarded by universities in many countries, and the degree is also named Master of Arts in colloquial speech. The degree is usually contrasted with the Master of Science. Those admitted to the degree typically study linguistics, history, communication studies, diplomacy, public administration, political science, or other subjects within the scope of the humanities and social sciences; however, different universities have different conventions and may also offer the degree for fields typically considered within the natural sciences and mathematics. The degree can be conferred in respect of completing courses and passing examinations, research, or a combination of the two.
The Master of Arts traces its origin to the teaching license or Licentia docendi of the University of Paris.[1]



Contents


1 Europe

1.1 Germany
1.2 Netherlands
1.3 Poland
1.4 Nordic countries
1.5 United Kingdom and Ireland

1.5.1 Most universities
1.5.2 Scotland
1.5.3 Oxford, Cambridge, Dublin (conferred)

1.5.3.1 Confusion


1.5.4 Oxford, Cambridge (earned)




2 North America
3 References



Europe[edit]
Germany[edit]
In Germany, the traditional equivalent of the postgraduate Master of Arts was the Magister Artium. This degree, which usually required 5 years of studies, did exist in former West Germany and in reunited Germany, but not in former East Germany where all degree courses led to Diplom degrees. Traditional Magister degrees were granted in social sciences and most of the humanities (International Business, Affairs, European Studies and Economics included), with the exception of visual and performing arts such as music and theatre.
The Magister Artium was either a double major degree or a combination of one major and two minors. German postgraduate Master's of Arts and Master's of Science degrees were introduced in 2001. Therefore, the new Master of Arts and the old Magister Artium degrees existed side by side until the phase out of the old degrees since 2010; Magister Artium degrees are still awarded (as of 2014). The new Bachelor of Arts and Master of Arts degrees together also require 5 years of studies, which is the reason why the new Master of Arts and the old Magister Artium degrees are considered equivalent.
M.A. degree can be obtained after completion of 120 credits and 2 years of studies at the University of Hamburg.
Netherlands[edit]
In the Netherlands, the Master of Arts and the Master of Science degrees were introduced in 2002. Until that time, a single program that led to the doctorandus degree (or the ingenieur degree in the case of technical subjects) was in effect, which comprised the same course load as the Bachelor and Master programs put together. Those who had already started the doctorandus program could, upon completing it, opt for the doctorandus degree (before their name, abbreviated to 'drs.'; in the case of ingenieur, this would be 'ir.'), or simply use the master's degree (behind their name) in accordance with the new standard (so, 'M.A.' or 'M.Sc.'). Because these graduates do not have a separate bachelor's degree (which is in fact – in retrospect – incorporated into the program), the master's degree is their first academic degree.
Poland[edit]
The Polish equivalent of Master of Arts is "magister" (its abbreviation "mgr" is placed before one's name, like dr). At the technical universities, one is awarded with inżynier (engineer) after three years and then with "magister" after completing another two years of study and graduating. Such persons use titles "mgr inż". In the 1990s, the M.A. programs usually lasting 5 years were replaced by separate 3-year bachelor's and 2-year master's programs. The degree is awarded in the arts (literature, foreign languages, filmmaking, theatre etc.), natural sciences, mathematics, computer science fields, and economics. The completion of a research thesis is required. All master's degrees in Poland qualify for a doctorate program.
Nordic countries[edit]
In Finland, Denmark and Norway, the master's degree is a combined taught/research degree, awarded after 2 years of studies after completing the bachelor's degree. The student is required to write a scientific thesis.
In Finland, this master's degree is called a filosofian maisteri (Finnish) or filosofie magister (Swedish) degree, and it is abbreviated as FM or "fil.mag.".
In Sweden, there is still an intermediate degree between the Bachelor (kandidat) and Master called magister which only requires one year of studies, including a scientific thesis after completing the bachelor's degree. This fourth year typically constitutes the first half of Master programme. If not, it may be supplemented by a fifth year and a Master's thesis to obtain a master's degree in the field of study.
United Kingdom and Ireland[edit]
Most universities[edit]
The M.A. is typically a "taught" postgraduate degree, involving lectures, examination, and a dissertation based on independent research. Taught master's programs involve one or two years of full-time study. Many can be done part-time as well. Until recently, both the undergraduate and postgraduate master's degrees were awarded without grade or class (like the class of an honours degree). Nowadays, however, master's degrees are normally classified into the categories of Fail, Pass, Pass with Merit, or Pass with Distinction. This education pattern in the United Kingdom is followed in India and many Commonwealth Nations.
The Master of Laws (LL. M.) is the standard degree taught for law, but certain courses may lead to M.A., MLitt, Master of Studies (MSt), and the Bachelor of Civil Law (BCL) at Oxford. All of these degrees are considered substitutes to one another and are thus generally equivalent.
Scotland[edit]
In the ancient universities of Scotland, the degree of Master of Arts is awarded in universities as a four-year undergraduate degree, see Master of Arts (Scotland).
The Master of Arts is awarded in Arts, Humanities, Theology and Social Sciences. However, some universities—particularly those in Scotland—award the Master of Letters (MLitt) to students in the Arts, Humanities, Divinity and Social Sciences.
Oxford, Cambridge, Dublin (conferred)[edit]
Main article: Master of Arts (Oxbridge and Dublin)
At Oxford, Cambridge and Dublin, the M. A. is conferred after a certain number of years without further examination to those who are Bachelors of Arts.
The title of Master of Arts may also be awarded, in the case of the oldest British universities only, without further examination to those who have graduated as Bachelor of Arts and who have the requisite years' standing as members of the university or as graduates. This happens, in England, only at the universities of Oxford, four years after completing a bachelor's degree, and Cambridge, six years after the first term of study. It is also the case at the University of Dublin in Ireland. The abbreviated name of the university (Oxon, Cantab or Dubl) is therefore almost always appended in parentheses to the initials "MA" in the same way that it is to higher degrees, e.g. "John Smith, MA (Cantab), PhD (Lond)", principally so that it is clear (to those who are aware of the system) that these are nominal and unexamined degrees.[2]
The MLitt is a research degree at the University of Cambridge, where the Master of Philosophy (MPhil) is the name given to the standard one-year taught degree with a unique research element, in contrast to the use of MPhil at other institutions for a research degree.
Confusion[edit]
In February 2011, Labour MP for Nottingham East, Chris Leslie, sponsored a private member's bill in Parliament, the master's degrees (Minimum Standards) Bill 2010-12, in order to "prohibit universities awarding Master’s degrees unless certain standards of study and assessment are met". The Bill's supporters described the practice as a "historical anachronism” and argued that unearned qualifications should be discontinued in order to preserve the academic integrity of the taught MA. Further, they warned that the title gave Oxbridge graduates an unfair advantage in the job market.
Research by the universities watchdog, the Quality Assurance Agency for Higher Education, in 2000, showed that two-thirds of employers were unaware that the Cambridge MA did not represent any kind of post-graduate achievement involving study.[3]
On 21 October 2011, the master's degrees (Minimum Standards) Bill 2010-12 received its second reading. The Bill failed to complete its passage through Parliament before the end of the session, meaning it made no further progress.[4]
Oxford, Cambridge (earned)[edit]
A number of different master's degrees may be earned at Oxford and Cambridge. The most common, the Master of Philosophy (MPhil), is a two-year research degree. The Master of Science (MSc) and the Master of Studies (MSt) degrees each take one year. They often combine some coursework with research. The Master of Letters (MLitt) is a pure research master's degree. More recently, Oxford and Cambridge offer a Masters of Business Administration. Master's degrees are generally offered without classification, though the top five percent may be deemed worthy of Distinction.[5] Both universities also offer a variety of four-year undergraduate integrated master's degrees such as MEng or MMath.[6][7][8]
North America[edit]
Main article: List of master's degrees in North America
In Canada and the United States, the Master of Arts (Magister Artium) and Master of Science (Magister Scientiæ) are the basic graduate-level degrees in most subjects and may be course-based, research-based, or, more typically, a combination of the two.[9]
Admission to a master's program is normally contingent upon holding a bachelor's degree. Some programs provide for a joint bachelor's and master's after about five years.[10] Some universities use the Latin degree names, such as Artium Magister (A.M.) or Scientiæ Magister (S.M.). For example, Harvard University, Dartmouth College, the University of Chicago, MIT, the University of Pennsylvania, and Brown University use the abbreviations A.M. and S.M. for some of their master's degrees.[11][12] A Master of Arts may be given in a scientific discipline, common at Ivy League universities.
Many universities offer Master of Arts programs, which are differentiated either as Thesis or Non-Thesis programs. Usually, the duration for a Non-Thesis option is one to two years of full-time study. The period for a Thesis option may last longer, depending also on the required level of courses and complexity of the thesis. Sometimes, qualified students who are admitted to a "very high research" Master of Arts might have to earn credits also at the Ph.D.- level, and they may need to complete their program in about three years of full-time candidature e.g. at the universities Harvard in the US and McGill in Canada.
A thesis must be a distinct contribution to knowledge. It must demonstrate ability to plan and carry out research, organize results, and defend the approach and conclusions in a scholarly manner. The research presented must meet current standards of the discipline. Finally, the thesis must clearly demonstrate how the research advances knowledge in the field.
References[edit]



^  Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913). "Master of Arts". Catholic Encyclopedia. New York: Robert Appleton Company. 
^ Debretts Correct Form (2013 edn) - Academics
^ "Oxbridge students' MA 'degrees' under threat". Daily Telegraph. Retrieved 2 January 2013. 
^ "Parliamentary business". http://www.parliament.uk/. Retrieved 2 January 2013.  External link in |publisher= (help)
^ "Graduate courses A-Z listing - University of Oxford". 
^ "The structure of undergraduate courses at the University of Cambridge". University of Cambridge. Retrieved 28 May 2016. 
^ "Mathematics". University of Oxford. Retrieved 28 May 2016. 
^ "Engineering Science". University of Oxford. Retrieved 28 May 2016. 
^ Structure of the U.S. Education System: Master’s Degrees, International Affairs Office, U.S. Department of Education, February 2008, retrieved 2010-02-25 
^ See, for example, the program run by Claremont Graduate University for graduates of the Claremont Colleges
^ "Degree Programs - The Graduate School of Arts and Sciences". Harvard University. Retrieved 13 June 2013. 
^ "Degree Abbreviations - Harvard University". Harvard University. Retrieved 3 October 2015. 









v
t
e


Levels of academic degree



Undergraduate




ISCED level 5



Associate degree
Foundation degree
Higher National Diploma/Diploma of Higher Education/Certificate of Higher Education





ISCED level 6



Bachelor's degree
Honours degree








Postgraduate




ISCED level 7



Master's degree
Magister degree
Postgraduate certificate/diploma
Diplom degree
Specialist degree
Engineer's degree





ISCED level 8



Doctorate
Magister degree
Candidate of Sciences








Other




Postdoctoral



Higher doctorate
Doktor nauk
Habilitation
Docent
Tenure
Fellow





No dominant classification



Laurea
Licentiate
Professional degree
Graduate certificate/diploma
Terminal degree





Unearned



Honorary degree
Ad eundem degree














						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Master_of_Arts&oldid=812582009"					Categories: Master's degreesHidden categories: Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource referenceCS1 errors: external linksArticles needing additional references from July 2009All articles needing additional referencesArticles needing cleanup from August 2009All pages needing cleanupCleanup tagged articles without a reason field from August 2009Wikipedia pages needing cleanup from August 2009Articles with multiple maintenance issuesArticles containing Latin-language text