For other uses, see Mauritius (disambiguation).
Coordinates: 20°12′S 57°30′E﻿ / ﻿20.2°S 57.5°E﻿ / -20.2; 57.5


Republic of Mauritius
République de Maurice  (French)
Repiblik Moris  (Mauritian creole)







Flag



Coat of arms






Motto: "Stella Clavisque Maris Indici" (Latin)
"Star and Key of the Indian Ocean"




Anthem: Motherland










Islands of the Republic of Mauritius (excluding Chagos Archipelago and Tromelin Island)




Islands of the Republic of Mauritius labelled in black; Chagos Archipelago and Tromelin are claimed by Mauritius.



Capital
and largest city
Port Louis
20°10′S 57°31′E﻿ / ﻿20.167°S 57.517°E﻿ / -20.167; 57.517


Official languages
None [Note 1]


National language
English and French[1][2]


Vernacular languages a



84% Creole
5.3% Bhojpuri-Hindustani
3.6% French
14.4% Others (including English)[3]





Ethnic groups (2011[4])
See Ethnic groups in Mauritius


Religion (2011[5])



51.9% Hinduism
31.4% Christianity
15.3% Islam
0.4% Buddhism
1% others





Demonym
Mauritian


Government
Unitary parliamentary republic



• President

Ameenah Gurib



• Prime Minister

Pravind Jugnauth


Legislature
National Assembly


Independence from the United Kingdom



• Constitution of Mauritius

12 March 1968



• Republic

12 March 1992


Area



• Total

2,040 km2 (790 sq mi) (169th)



• Water (%)

0.07


Population



• July 2016 estimate

1,262,132[6] (156th)



• 2011 census

1,236,817[7]



• Density

618.24/km2 (1,601.2/sq mi) (19th)


GDP (PPP)
2017 estimate



• Total

$23.322 billion[8]



• Per capita

US$19,797[8] (66th)


GDP (nominal)
2017 estimate



• Total

US$13.551 billion[8]



• Per capita

US$11,763[9] (68th)


Gini (2012)
35.9[10]
medium


HDI (2014)
 0.777[11]
high · 63rd


Currency
Mauritian rupee (MUR)


Time zone
MUT (UTC+4)


Date format
dd/mm/yyyy (AD)


Drives on the
left


Calling code
+230


ISO 3166 code
MU


Internet TLD
.mu





The mother tongue of Mauritians (2011 Census).[12]





Mauritius (/məˈrɪʃəs/ ( listen) or /məˈrɪʃiəs/; French: Maurice), officially the Republic of Mauritius (French: République de Maurice), is an island nation in the Indian Ocean about 2,000 kilometres (1,200 mi) off the southeast coast of the African continent. The country includes the islands of Mauritius and Rodrigues, 560 kilometres (350 mi) east of Mauritius, and the outer islands (Agaléga, St. Brandon and two disputed territories). The islands of Mauritius and Rodrigues form part of the Mascarene Islands, along with nearby Réunion, a French overseas department. The area of the country is 2,040 km2 (790 sq mi). The capital and largest city is Port Louis.
Formerly a Dutch colony (1638–1710) and a French colony (1715–1810), Mauritius became a British colonial possession in 1810 and remained so until 1968, the year in which it attained independence. The British crown colony of Mauritius once included the current territories of Mauritius, Rodrigues, the outer islands of Agaléga, St. Brandon, Chagos Archipelago, and Seychelles. The Mauritian territories gradually devolved with the creation of a separate colony of Seychelles in 1903 and the excision of the Chagos Archipelago in 1965.
The sovereignty over the Chagos Archipelago is disputed between Mauritius and the United Kingdom (UK). The UK excised the archipelago from Mauritian territory in 1965, three years prior to Mauritian independence. The UK gradually depopulated the archipelago's indigenous population and leased its biggest island, Diego Garcia, to the United States. Access to the archipelago is prohibited to casual tourists, the media, and its former inhabitants.
Mauritius also claims sovereignty over Tromelin Island from France.
The people of Mauritius are multiethnic, multi-religious, multicultural and multilingual. The island's government is closely modelled on the Westminster parliamentary system, and Mauritius is highly ranked for democracy and for economic and political freedom. Along with the other Mascarene Islands, Mauritius is known for its varied flora and fauna, with many species endemic to the island. The island is widely known as the only known home of the dodo, which, along with several other avian species, was made extinct by human activities relatively shortly after the island's settlement. Mauritius is the only country in Africa where Hinduism is the largest religion. The government uses English as its main language.



Contents


1 Geography

1.1 Mauritius Island


2 Etymology
3 History

3.1 Dutch Mauritius (1638–1710)
3.2 French Mauritius (1715–1810)
3.3 British Mauritius (1810–1968)
3.4 Independence (since 1968)
3.5 Republic (since 1992)
3.6 Truth and Justice Commission


4 Districts of Mauritius
5 Politics

5.1 Parliament
5.2 Government
5.3 Rule of law
5.4 Foreign relations
5.5 Military


6 Territorial dispute

6.1 Chagos Archipelago

6.1.1 MPA ruling


6.2 Tromelin


7 Environment and climate
8 Biodiversity
9 Demographics

9.1 Ethnic groups
9.2 Religion
9.3 Languages
9.4 Health
9.5 Education


10 Economy

10.1 Tourism
10.2 Transportation
10.3 Information and Communication Technology Sector


11 Culture

11.1 Music
11.2 Cuisine
11.3 Holidays and festivals
11.4 Sports


12 See also
13 Notes
14 References
15 Bibliography
16 Further reading
17 External links



Geography[edit]
Main articles: Geography of Mauritius and Outer islands of Mauritius
The total land area of the country is 2,040 km2 (790 sq mi) (about 80% the size of Luxembourg). It is the 169th largest nation in the world by size. The Republic of Mauritius is constituted of the main island of Mauritius and several outlying islands. The second-largest island is Rodrigues with an area of 108 km2 (42 sq mi) and situated 560 km (350 mi) to the east of Mauritius; the twin islands of Agalega with a total land area of 2,600 hectares (26 km2; 10 sq mi) are situated some 1,000 km (620 mi) north of Mauritius. Saint Brandon is an archipelago comprising a number of sand-banks, shoals and islets. It is situated some 430 km (270 mi) northeast of Mauritius and is mostly used as a fishing base by the Raphael Fishing Company Limited.[13][14] The nation's exclusive economic zone (EEZ) covers about 2.3 million square kilometres (890,000 sq mi) of the Indian Ocean, including approximately 400,000 km2 (150,000 sq mi) jointly managed with the Seychelles.[15][16][17]
Mauritius Island[edit]
Main article: Mauritius Island
Mauritius is 2,000 km (1,200 mi) off the southeast coast of Africa, between latitudes 19°58.8' and 20°31.7' south and longitudes 57°18.0' and 57°46.5' east. It is 65 km (40 mi) long and 45 km (30 mi) wide. Its land area is 1,864.8 km2 (720.0 sq mi).[18][19] The island is surrounded by more than 150 km (100 mi) of white sandy beaches, and the lagoons are protected from the open sea by the world's third-largest coral reef, which surrounds the island.[20] Just off the Mauritian coast lie some 49 uninhabited islands and islets, several used as natural reserves for endangered species.
The island of Mauritius is relatively young geologically, having been created by volcanic activity some 8 million years ago. Together with Saint Brandon, Réunion, and Rodrigues, the island is part of the Mascarene Islands. These islands have emerged as a result of gigantic underwater volcanic eruptions that happened thousands of kilometres to the east of the continental block made up of Africa and Madagascar.[14] They are no longer volcanically active and the hotspot now rests under Réunion Island. Mauritius is encircled by a broken ring of mountain ranges, varying in height from 300–800 m (1,000–2,600 ft) above sea level. The land rises from coastal plains to a central plateau where it reaches a height of 670 m (2,200 ft); the highest peak is in the southwest, Piton de la Petite Rivière Noire at 828 metres (2,717 ft). Streams and rivers speckle the island, many formed in the cracks created by lava flows.





Panoramic view showing Port Louis, mountain ranges, and sugar cane plantations


Etymology[edit]
The first historical evidence of the existence of an island now known as Mauritius is on a map produced by the Italian cartographer Alberto Cantino in 1502.[21][22] From this, it appears that Mauritius was first named Dina Arobi around 975 by Arab sailors, the first people to visit the island.
In 1507, Portuguese sailors visited the uninhabited island. The island appears with a Portuguese name Cirne on early Portuguese maps, probably from the name of a ship in the 1507 expedition. Another Portuguese sailor, Dom Pedro Mascarenhas, gave the name Mascarenes to the Archipelago.
In 1598, a Dutch squadron under Admiral Wybrand van Warwyck landed at Grand Port and named the island Mauritius, in honour of Prince Maurice van Nassau, stadholder of the Dutch Republic. Later the island became a French colony and was renamed Isle de France. On 3 December 1810, the French surrendered the island to Great Britain during the Napoleonic Wars. Under British rule, the island's name reverted to Mauritius /məˈrɪʃəs/ ( listen). Mauritius is also commonly known as Maurice (pronounced [mɔˈʁis]) and Île Maurice in French, Moris in Mauritian Creole.
History[edit]
Main article: History of Mauritius






This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (January 2015) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)








Cantino planisphere (1502), Biblioteca Estense, Modena, Italy



The island of Mauritius was uninhabited before its first recorded visit during the Middle Ages by Arab sailors, who named it Dina Arobi. However, the island might have been visited well before by sailors of ancient times; wax tablets were found on the shores of Mauritius by the Dutch, but since the tablets were not preserved, it cannot be said whether they were of Greek, Phoenician or Arab origin.[23]
In 1507, Portuguese sailors came to the uninhabited island and established a visiting base. Diogo Fernandes Pereira, a Portuguese navigator, was the first European known to land in Mauritius. He named the island "Ilha do Cirne". The Portuguese did not stay long as they were not interested in these islands.[24]
Dutch Mauritius (1638–1710)[edit]
Main article: Dutch Mauritius




This section needs expansion. You can help by adding to it. (May 2017)







Dutch map of a coast of Mauritius. The Dutch were the first to establish a permanent human settlement in Mauritius. Dutch colonists named it after Maurice of Nassau, Prince of Orange and the Stadtholder of the Dutch Republic.






Maurice, Prince of Orange, after whom the Island was named.


In 1598 a Dutch squadron under Admiral Wybrand Van Warwyck landed at Grand Port and named the island "Mauritius" after Prince Maurice van Nassau of the Dutch Republic, the ruler of his country. The Dutch established a small colony on the island in 1638, from which they exploited ebony trees and introduced sugar cane, domestic animals and deer. It was from here that Dutch navigator Abel Tasman set out to discover the western part of Australia. The first Dutch settlement lasted twenty years. Several attempts were subsequently made, but the settlements never developed enough to produce dividends, causing the Dutch to abandon Mauritius in 1710.[24][25]
French Mauritius (1715–1810)[edit]
Main article: Isle de France (Mauritius)




Map of Isle de France






Mahé de La Bourdonnais whose governorship brought an accelerated and the major development in the French colony period


France, which already controlled neighbouring Île Bourbon (now Réunion), took control of Mauritius in 1715 and renamed it Isle de France. In 1723, the Code Noir was established to categorise one group of human beings as "goods", in order for the owner of these goods to be able to obtain insurance money and compensation in case of loss of his "goods".[26] The 1735 arrival of French governor Bertrand-François Mahé de La Bourdonnais coincided with development of a prosperous economy based on sugar production. Mahé de La Bourdonnais established Port Louis as a naval base and a shipbuilding centre.[24]
Under his governorship, numerous buildings were erected, a number of which are still standing. These include part of Government House, the Château de Mon Plaisir, and the Line Barracks, the headquarters of the police force. The island was under the administration of the French East India Company which maintained its presence until 1767.[24]
From 1767 to 1810, except for a brief period during the French Revolution when the inhabitants set up a government virtually independent of France, the island was controlled by officials appointed by the French Government. Jacques-Henri Bernardin de Saint-Pierre lived on the island from 1768 to 1771, then went back to France, where he wrote Paul et Virginie, a love story, which made the Isle de France famous wherever the French language was spoken. Two famous French governors were the Vicomte de Souillac (who constructed the Chaussée in Port Louis[27] and encouraged farmers to settle in the district of Savanne), and Antoine Bruni d'Entrecasteaux (who saw to it that the French in the Indian Ocean should have their headquarters in Mauritius instead of Pondicherry in India).[23]




The Battle of Grand Port between French and British naval forces, 1810


Charles Mathieu Isidore Decaen was a successful general in the French Revolutionary Wars and, in some ways, a rival of Napoléon I. He ruled as Governor of Isle de France and Réunion from 1803 to 1810. British naval cartographer and explorer Matthew Flinders was arrested and detained by General Decaen on the island, in contravention of an order from Napoléon. During the Napoleonic Wars, Mauritius became a base from which French corsairs organised successful raids on British commercial ships. The raids continued until 1810, when a Royal Navy expedition led by Commodore Josias Rowley, R.N., an Anglo-Irish aristocrat, was sent to capture the island. Despite winning the Battle of Grand Port, the only French naval victory over the British during these wars, the French could not prevent the British from landing at Cap Malheureux three months later. They formally surrendered the island on the fifth day of the invasion, 3 December 1810,[23] on terms allowing settlers to keep their land and property and to use the French language and law of France in criminal and civil matters. Under British rule, the island's name reverted to Mauritius.[24]
British Mauritius (1810–1968)[edit]
Main article: British Mauritius




Champ de Mars Racecourse, Port Louis, 1880


The British administration, which began with Sir Robert Farquhar as Governor, led to rapid social and economic changes. However, it was tainted by the Ratsitatane episode. Ratsitatane, nephew of King Radama of Madagascar, was brought to Mauritius as a political prisoner. He managed to escape from prison and plotted a rebellion that would free the island's slaves. He was betrayed by an associate and was caught by the British forces, summarily judged, and condemned to death. He was beheaded at Plaine Verte on 15 April 1822, and his head was displayed as a deterrent against future uprisings among the slaves.[28]
In 1832, Adrien d'Épinay launched the first Mauritian newspaper (Le Cernéen) which was not controlled by the government. In the same year, there was a move by the procureur-general to abolish slavery without compensation to the slave owners. This gave rise to discontent, and, to check an eventual rebellion, the government ordered all the inhabitants to surrender their arms. Furthermore, a stone fortress, Fort Adelaide, was built on a hill (now known as the Citadel hill) in the centre of Port Louis to quell any uprising.[27]




Demographics of slaves in Mauritius (top line represents death rate)


Slavery was abolished in 1835, and the planters ultimately received two million pounds sterling in compensation for the loss of their slaves who had been imported from Africa and Madagascar during the French occupation. The abolition of slavery had important impacts on Mauritius' society, economy and population. The planters brought a large number of indentured labourers from India to work in the sugar cane fields. Between 1834 and 1921, around half a million indentured labourers were present on the island. They worked on sugar estates, factories, in transport and on construction sites. Additionally, the British brought 8,740 Indian soldiers to the island.[24] Aapravasi Ghat, in the bay at Port Louis and now a UNESCO site, was the first British colony to serve as a major reception centre for slaves and indentured servants for British plantation labour.[clarification needed]
An important figure of the 19th century was Rémy Ollier, a journalist of mixed origin. In 1828, the colour bar was officially abolished in Mauritius, but British governors gave little power to coloured persons, and appointed only whites as leading officials. Rémy Ollier petitioned to Queen Victoria to allow coloureds in the council of government, and this became possible a few years later. He also made Port Louis become a municipality so that the citizens could administer the town through their own elected representatives. A street has been named after him in Port Louis, and his bust was erected in the Jardin de la Compagnie in 1906.[23] In 1885 a new constitution was introduced to Mauritius. It created elected positions on the governing council, but the franchise was restricted mainly to the French and Creole classes.
The labourers brought from India were not always fairly treated, and a German, Adolph von Plevitz, made himself the unofficial protector of these immigrants. He mixed with many of the labourers, and in 1871 helped them to write a petition which was sent to Governor Gordon. A commission was appointed to look into the complaints made by the Indian immigrants, and in 1872 two lawyers, appointed by the British Crown, were sent from England to make an inquiry. This Royal Commission recommended several measures that would affect the lives of Indian labourers during the next fifty years.[23]
In November 1901, Mahatma Gandhi visited Mauritius, on his way from South Africa to India. He stayed on the island for two weeks, and urged the Indo-Mauritian community to take an interest in education and to play a more active role in politics. Back in India, he sent over a young lawyer, Manilal Doctor, to improve the plight of the Indo-Mauritians. During the same year, faster links were established with the island of Rodrigues thanks to the wireless.[29]
In 1903, motorcars were introduced in Mauritius, and in 1910 the first taxis, operated by Joseph Merven, came into service. The electrification of Port Louis took place in 1909, and in the same decade the Mauritius Hydro Electric Company (managed by the Atchia Brothers) was authorised to provide power to the towns of upper Plaines Wilhems.
The 1910s were a period of political agitation. The rising middle class (made up of doctors, lawyers, and teachers) began to challenge the political power of the sugar cane landowners. Dr. Eugène Laurent, mayor of Port Louis, was the leader of this new group; his party, Action Libérale, demanded that more people should be allowed to vote in the elections. Action Libérale was opposed by the Parti de l'Ordre, led by Henri Leclézio, the most influential of the sugar magnates.[23] In 1911 there were riots in Port Louis due to a false rumour that Dr. Eugène Laurent had been murdered by the oligarchs in Curepipe. Shops and offices were damaged in the capital, and one person was killed. In the same year, 1911, the first public cinema shows took place in Curepipe, and, in the same town, a stone building was erected to house the Royal College.[29] In 1912, a wider telephone network came into service, and it was used by the government, business firms, and a few private households.
World War I broke out in August 1914. Many Mauritians volunteered to fight in Europe against the Germans and in Mesopotamia against the Turks. But the war affected Mauritius much less than the wars of the eighteenth century. On the contrary, the 1914–18 war was a period of great prosperity because of a boom in sugar prices. In 1919 the Mauritius Sugar Syndicate came into being, and it included 70% of all sugar producers.




British colonial flag, 1923


The 1920s saw the rise of a "retrocessionism" movement which favoured the retrocession of Mauritius to France. The movement rapidly collapsed because none of the candidates who wanted Mauritius to be given back to France was elected in the 1921 elections. Due to the post-war recession, there was a sharp drop in sugar prices. Many sugar estates closed down, and it marked the end of an era for the sugar magnates who had not only controlled the economy, but also the political life of the country. Raoul Rivet, the editor of Le Mauricien newspaper, campaigned for a revision of the constitution that would give the emerging middle class a greater role in the running of the country. The principles of Arya Samaj began to infiltrate the Hindu community, who clamoured for more social justice.[29]
The 1930s saw the birth of the Labour Party, launched by Dr. Maurice Curé. Emmanuel Anquetil rallied the urban workers while Pandit Sahadeo concentrated on the rural working class. Labour Day was celebrated for the first time in 1938. More than 30,000 workers sacrificed a day's wage and came from all over the island to attend a giant meeting at the Champ de Mars.[30]
At the outbreak of World War II in 1939, many Mauritians volunteered to serve under the British flag in Africa and the Near East, fighting against the German and Italian armies. Some went to England to become pilots and ground staff in the Royal Air Force. Mauritius was never really threatened, but several British ships were sunk outside Port Louis by German submarines in 1943.
During World War II, conditions were hard in the country; the prices of commodities doubled, but the salaries of workers increased only by 10 to 20 percent. There was civil unrest, and the colonial government crushed all trade union activities. However, the labourers of Belle Vue Harel Sugar Estate went on strike on 27 September 1943. Police officers eventually fired on the crowd, and killed three labourers including a boy of ten and a pregnant woman, Anjaly Coopen.[31][32]




Postage stamp with portrait of Queen Elizabeth II, 1954


The first general elections were held on 9 August 1948 and were won by the Labour Party. This party, led by Guy Rozemont, bettered its position in 1953, and, on the strength of the election results, demanded universal suffrage. Constitutional conferences were held in London in 1955 and 1957, and the ministerial system was introduced. Voting took place for the first time on the basis of universal adult suffrage on 9 March 1959. The general election was again won by the Labour Party, led this time by Sir Seewoosagur Ramgoolam.[33]




Elizabeth II, the last British Monarch of Mauritius


A Constitutional Review Conference was held in London in 1961, and a programme of further constitutional advance was established. The 1963 election was won by the Labour Party and its allies. The Colonial Office noted that politics of a communal nature was gaining ground in Mauritius and that the choice of candidates (by parties) and the voting behaviour (of electors) were governed by ethnic and caste considerations.[33] Around that time, two eminent British academics, Richard Titmuss and James Meade, published a report of the island's social problems caused by overpopulation and the monoculture of sugar cane. This led to an intense campaign to halt the population explosion, and the decade registered a sharp decline in population growth.
Independence (since 1968)[edit]
Main article: Mauritius (Commonwealth realm)
At the Lancaster Conference of 1965, it became clear that Britain wanted to relieve itself of the colony of Mauritius. In 1959, Harold Macmillan had made his famous Winds of Change Speech where he acknowledged that the best option for Britain was to give complete independence to its colonies. Thus, since the late Fifties, the way was paved for independence.[34]




Seewoosagur Ramgoolam, known as Chacha led the independence movement which led to self-rule in 1968. He is revered as the 'father of the nation'


Later in 1965, after the Lancaster Conference, the Chagos Archipelago was excised from the territory of Mauritius to form the British Indian Ocean Territory (BIOT). A general election took place on 7 August 1967, and the Labour Party and its two allies obtained the majority of seats. Mauritius adopted a new constitution and independence was proclaimed on 12 March 1968. Sir Seewoosagur Ramgoolam became the first prime minister of an independent Mauritius with Queen Elizabeth II remaining head of state as Queen of Mauritius. In 1969, the opposition party Mauritian Militant Movement (MMM) led by Paul Bérenger was founded. Later in 1971, the MMM, backed by unions, called a series of strikes in the port which caused a state of emergency in the country.[35] The coalition government of the Labour Party and the PMSD (Parti Mauricien Social Democrate) reacted by curtailing civil liberties and curbing freedom of the press.[29] Two unsuccessful assassination attempts were made against Paul Bérenger. The second one led to the death of Azor Adélaïde, a dock worker and activist, on 25 November 1971.[36] General elections were postponed and public meetings were prohibited. Members of the MMM including Paul Bérenger were imprisoned on 23 December 1971. The MMM leader was released a year later.[37]
In May 1975, a student revolt that started at the University of Mauritius swept across the country.[38] The students were unsatisfied with an education system that did not meet their aspirations and gave limited prospects for future employment. On 20 May, thousands of students tried to enter Port-Louis over the Grand River North West bridge and clashed with police. An act of Parliament was passed on 16 December 1975 to extend the right to vote to 18-year-olds. This was seen as an attempt to appease the frustration of the younger generation.[28]
The next general election took place on 20 December 1976. The Labour Party won 28 seats out of 62[39] but Prime Minister Sir Seewoosagur Ramgoolam managed to remain in office, with a two-seat majority, after striking an alliance with the PMSD of Gaetan Duval.
In 1982 an MMM government led by Prime Minister Anerood Jugnauth and Paul Bérenger as Minister of Finance was elected. However, ideological and personality differences emerged within the MMM leadership. The power struggle between Bérenger and Jugnauth peaked in March 1983. Jugnauth travelled to New Delhi to attend a Non-Aligned Movement summit; on his return, Bérenger proposed constitutional changes that would strip power from the Prime Minister. At Jugnauth's request, PM Indira Gandhi of India planned an armed intervention involving the Indian Navy and Indian Army to prevent a coup under the code name Operation Lal Dora.[40][41][42]
The MMM government split up nine months after the June 1982 election. According to an Information Ministry official the nine months was a "socialist experiment".[43] The new MSM party, led by Aneerood Jugnauth, was elected in 1983. Gaëtan Duval became the vice-prime minister. Throughout the decade, Aneerood Jugnauth ruled the country with the help of the PMSD and the Labour Party.
That period saw a growth in the EPZ (Export Processing Zone) sector. Industrialisation began to spread to villages as well, and attracted young workers from all ethnic communities. As a result, the sugar industry began to lose its hold on the economy. Large retail chains began opening stores opened in 1985 and offered credit facilities to low income earners, thus allowing them to afford basic household appliances. There was also a boom in the tourism industry, and new hotels sprang up throughout the island. In 1989 the stock exchange opened its doors and in 1992 the freeport began operation.[29] In 1990, the Prime Minister lost the vote on changing the Constitution to make the country a republic with Bérenger as President.[44]
Republic (since 1992)[edit]
On 12 March 1992, twenty-four years after independence, Mauritius was proclaimed a republic within the Commonwealth of Nations.[24] The last Governor General, Sir Veerasamy Ringadoo became the first President.[45] This was under a transitional arrangement, in which he was replaced by Cassam Uteem later that year.[46] Political power remained with the Prime Minister.




Anerood Jugnauth led a coalition government which amended the constitution for Mauritius to become a Republic and a sovereign nation in 1991


Despite an improvement in the economy, which coincided with a fall in the price of petrol and a favourable dollar exchange rate, the government did not enjoy full popularity. As early as 1984, there was discontent. Through the Newspapers and Periodicals Amendment Act, the government tried to make every newspaper provide a bank guarantee of half a million rupees. Forty-three journalists protested by participating in a public demonstration in Port Louis, in front of Parliament. They were arrested and freed on bail. This caused a public outcry and the government had to review its policy.[29]
There was also dissatisfaction in the education sector. There were not enough high-quality secondary colleges to answer the growing demand of primary school leavers who had got through their CPE (Certificate of Primary Education). In 1991, a master plan for education failed to get national support and contributed to the government's downfall.[29]
Dr Navin Chandra Ramgoolam was elected as Prime Minister in the 1995 election. The landslide victory of 60–0 was a repeat of the 1982 score, but this time it was on the side of the Labour–MMM alliance.[citation needed]
In February 1999, the country experienced a brief period of civil unrest. Riots flared after the popular singer Kaya, arrested for smoking marijuana at a public concert, was found dead in his prison cell. President Cassam Uteem and Cardinal Jean Margéot toured the country and, after four days of turmoil, calm was restored.[47] A commission of enquiry was set up to investigate the root causes of the social disturbance. The resulting report delved into the cause of poverty and qualified many tenacious beliefs as perceptions.[48]
Aneerood Jugnauth of the MSM returned to power in 2000 after making an alliance with the MMM, which included prominent figures such as Anil Bachoo, Pravind Jugnauth and Sangeet Fowdar [clarification needed] amongst others. In 2002, the island of Rodrigues became an autonomous entity within the republic and was thus able to elect its own representatives to administer the island. In 2003, the prime ministership was transferred to Paul Bérenger of the MMM, and Aneerood Jugnauth went to Le Réduit to serve as president.[citation needed]
In the 2005 election, Navin Ramgoolam, leader of the Labour Party, was brought to power after making an alliance with the Parti Mauricien Xavier-Luc Duval (PMXD) and other minor parties. Navin Ramgoolam was again elected in May 2010. This time the Labour Party joined forces with the PMSD and the MSM. Under the new government, the country continued with its MID (Maurice Ile Durable) project, started in 2008, to make the economy less dependent on fossil fuels. The political landscape stayed rather confused. The Labour Party did away with the MSM, and then with the PMSD, whose leader had acted as Finance minister. The MMM made an alliance (known as Remake) with the MSM but broke off with the latter to become the ally of Labour Party. Parliament remained closed for most of 2014. A second republic was proposed (by the leaders of Labour and MMM) whereby a president, elected by the population, would hold more power and rule the country in joint collaboration with the PM. Nomination day took place on 24 November 2014 and, for the first time, electoral candidates had the option of not proclaiming their ethnic group. Only a few chose to do so. General elections were held on 10 December 2014, and the Lepep alliance made up of the MSM, PMSD, and Mouvement Liberater (led by an MMM dissident) was elected to power by reaping 47 seats out of 60. The Westminster system was thus maintained and Aneerood Jugnauth became the PM for the sixth time.[citation needed]
Shortly after the new government took office, the ex-PM was lengthily interrogated by the police on charges related to money laundering. The license of the Bramer Bank was revoked due to alleged lack of liquidity, and the BAI (British-American Insurance) was suspended from trading and placed in receivership. A United Nations tribunal ruled that Britain had acted illegally when it created a marine protected area around the Chagos without the consent of Mauritius, thereby depriving this country of its fishing rights. Fresh negotiations began with Jin Fei in view of reviving the project started in 2006. Mauritius will henceforth detain 80% of the shares while the rest would go to the Chinese promoters.




Modern skyline of Port Louis


Tourism continued to be the main source for foreign exchange, and the number of visitors to the island reached 1.1 million in 2015. Despite this boom in the tourism industry, Tourism Minister Xavier-Luc Duval placed a two-year moratorium on the construction of new hotels.[citation needed]
In December 2016, the PMSD left the coalition government in protest against the government’s decision to introduce a prosecution commission bill. The bill was intended to transfer the power to prosecute from the DPP (Director of Public Prosecutions) to an appointed commission made up of three judges. Because of the PMSD exit, the bill did not through and the PMSD leader, Xavier Luc Duval, replaced Paul Bérenger as leader as leader of the opposition.
On 21 January 2017, Anerood Jugnauth announced that in two days time he would resign in favor of his son, Finance Minister Pravind Jugnauth, who would assume the office of prime minister.[49] The transition took place as planned on 23 January.[50]
Truth and Justice Commission[edit]
Operating from 2009 to 2011 the Truth and Justice Commission was established to explore the impact of slavery and indentured servitude in Mauritius. The Commission was tasked to investigate the dispossession of land and "determine appropriate measures to be extended to descendants of slaves and indentured laborers."[51][52] It was "unique in that it [dealt] with socio-economic class abuses" and explored the possibility of reparations.[51] The Commission attempted to cover more than 370 years, the longest period of time that a truth commission has ever covered.[51] Published 25 November 2011, the report outlined over 300 recommendations detailing ways to bring those affected by slavery and indentured labour out of poverty.[53][needs update]
Districts of Mauritius[edit]
Main article: Districts of Mauritius
Mauritius is subdivided into nine Districts, they consist of different cities, towns and villages.

Savanne
Flacq
Rivière
Noire
Port Louis
Rivière
du
Rempart
Pamplemousses
Plaines
Wilhems
Grand Port
Moka


Politics[edit]
Main article: Politics of Mauritius




Ameenah Gurib, President since 2015


The politics of Mauritius take place in a framework of a parliamentary representative democratic republic, in which the President is the head of state and the Prime Minister is the head of government, assisted by a Council of Ministers. Mauritius has a multi-party system. Executive power is exercised by the Government. Legislative power is vested in both the Government and the National Assembly.
Parliament[edit]
Main article: National Assembly of Mauritius




National Assembly building


The National Assembly is Mauritius' unicameral legislature, which was called the Legislative Assembly until 1992, when the country became a republic. It consists of 70 members, 62 elected for four-year terms in multi-member constituencies and eight additional members, known as "best losers", appointed by the Supreme Court to ensure that ethnic and religious minorities are equitably represented. The UN Human Rights Committee (UNHRC), which monitors member states' compliance with the International Covenant on Political and Civil Rights (ICPCR), has criticised the country's Best Loser System following a complaint by a local youth and trade union movement.[54] The president is elected for a five-year term by the Parliament.
The island of Mauritius is divided into 20 constituencies that return three members each, while Rodrigues is a single constituency that returns two members. After a general election, the Electoral Supervisory Commission may nominate up to eight additional members with a view to correct any imbalance in the representation of ethnic minorities in Parliament. This system of nominating members is commonly called the best loser system.
The political party or party alliance that wins the majority of seats in Parliament forms the government. Its leader becomes the Prime Minister, who selects the Cabinet from elected members of the Assembly, except for the Attorney General, who may not be an elected member of the Assembly. The political party or alliance which has the second largest majority forms the Official Opposition and its leader is normally nominated by the President of the Republic as the Leader of the Opposition. The Assembly elects a Speaker, a Deputy Speaker and a Deputy Chairman of Committees as some of its first tasks.
Government[edit]
Main article: Government of Mauritius
Mauritius is a democracy with a government elected every five years. The most recent National Assembly Election was held on 10 December 2014 in all the 20 mainland constituencies, and in the constituency covering the island of Rodrigues. Elections have tended to be a contest between two major coalitions of parties.
The 2006–2014 Ibrahim Index of African Governance ranked Mauritius first in good governance.[55] According to the 2015 Democracy Index compiled by the Economist Intelligence Unit that measures the state of democracy in 167 countries, Mauritius ranks 18th worldwide and is the only African-related country with "full democracy".[56]


Office held
Office holder
Incumbency[57]


President
Ameenah Gurib
5 June 2015


Prime Minister
Pravind Jugnauth
23 January 2017


Vice President
Barlen Vyapoory
4 April 2015[58]


Deputy Prime Minister
Ivan Collendavelloo
14 December 2014


Chief Justice
Kheshoe Parsad Matadeen
31 December 2013


Speaker of the National Assembly
Mrs. Santi Bai Hanoomanjee
22 December 2014


Leader of the Opposition
Xavier-Luc Duval
14 December 2014


Rule of law[edit]
Laws governing the Mauritian penal system are derived partly from French civil law and British common law.[59] The crime rate reduced from 4.3 per 1,000 population in 2009 to 3.6 per 1,000 population in 2010.[60] The Constitution of Mauritius states that for purposes of separation of powers, the judiciary is independent. According to Justice E. Balancy,[when?] public opinion is characterised by excessive emotional reaction to crimes arousing the moral indignation of the community. The result is a reluctance to give due weight to the liberty of the citizen and the presumption of innocence.[61]
The provisional charge, part of criminal procedure law since 1852, is a practice that allows anyone suspected of a crime to be detained – sometimes for up to two years – before being charged.[62] In 1994, the police detained the editor-in-chief and a journalist of a weekly magazine for having "unlawfully published secret news". The chairman of the company was also arrested. In 1995, the Supreme Court found the provisional charge to be null and void, as the offence set out on the provisional charge "publishing secret news" was not known to the law.[63]
Foreign relations[edit]
Main article: Foreign relations of Mauritius
Mauritius has strong and friendly relations with various African, American, Asian, European and Oceania countries. Considered part of Africa geographically, Mauritius has friendly relations with African states in the region, particularly South Africa, by far its largest continental trading partner. Mauritian investors are gradually entering African markets, notably Madagascar, Mozambique and Zimbabwe. The country's political heritage and dependence on Western markets have led to close ties with the European Union and its member states, particularly France. It also depends on the United Kingdom as a trading partner. Relations with China and India are strong for both historical and commercial reasons.
Mauritius is a member of the World Trade Organization, the Commonwealth of Nations, La Francophonie, the African Union, the Southern Africa Development Community (SADC), the Indian Ocean Commission, COMESA, and formed the Indian Ocean Rim Association.
Military[edit]
Main article: Military of Mauritius
All military, police, and security functions in Mauritius are carried out by 10,000 active-duty personnel under the Commissioner of Police. The 8,000-member National Police Force is responsible for domestic law enforcement. The 1,400-member Special Mobile Force (SMF) and the 688-member National Coast Guard are the only two paramilitary units in Mauritius. Both units are composed of police officers on lengthy rotations to those services.[64]
Territorial dispute[edit]






This article may be too long to read and navigate comfortably. Please consider splitting content into sub-articles, condensing it, or adding or removing subheadings. (August 2016)



Chagos Archipelago[edit]
Main articles: Chagos Archipelago sovereignty dispute and Depopulation of Chagossians from the Chagos Archipelago
Mauritius has long sought sovereignty over the Chagos Archipelago, located 1,287 kilometres (800 mi) to the northeast. Chagos was administratively part of Mauritius from the 18th century when the French first settled the islands. All of the islands forming part of the French colonial territory of Isle de France (as Mauritius was then known) were ceded to the British in 1810 under the Act of Capitulation signed between the two powers.[65] In 1965, three years before the independence of Mauritius, the United Kingdom split the Chagos Archipelago from Mauritius and the islands of Aldabra, Farquhar and Desroches from the Seychelles to form the British Indian Ocean Territory (BIOT). The islands were formally established as an overseas territory of the United Kingdom on 8 November 1965. On 23 June 1976, Aldabra, Farquhar and Desroches were returned to Seychelles as a result of its attaining independence. The BIOT now comprises the Chagos Archipelago only. The UK leased the main island of the archipelago Diego Garcia to the United States under a 50-year lease (which expires in 2016[needs update]) to establish a military base.[65][66] Mauritius has repeatedly asserted that the separation of its territories is a violation of United Nations resolutions banning the dismemberment of colonial territories before independence and claims that the Chagos Archipelago, including Diego Garcia, forms an integral part of the territory of Mauritius under both Mauritian law and international law.[67] After initially denying that the islands were inhabited, British officials forcibly expelled to the mainland approximately 2,000 Chagossians who had lived on those islands for a century. Since 1971, only the atoll of Diego Garcia is inhabited, home to some 3,000 UK and US military and civilian contracted personnel. Chagossians have since engaged in activism to return to the archipelago, claiming that their forced expulsion and dispossession were illegal.[68][69]
MPA ruling[edit]




The biggest island of the Archipelago, Diego Garcia is home to an American military base.


On 20 December 2010, Mauritius initiated proceedings against the United Kingdom (UK) under the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) to challenge the legality of the Chagos Marine Protected Area (MPA), which the UK purported to declare around the Chagos Archipelago in April 2010. The dispute was arbitrated by the Permanent Court of Arbitration.
After lengthy written pleadings by the Parties and a hearing from 22 April to 9 May 2014 in Istanbul, Turkey, the Arbitral Tribunal ruled unanimously on 18 March 2015 that the ‘marine protected area' which the United Kingdom had declared around the Chagos Archipelago in April 2010 violates international law. It is the first time that UK's conduct with regard to the Chagos Archipelago has been considered and condemned by any international court or tribunal.[70]
The Tribunal held unanimously that, in declaring the ‘MPA', UK violated international law. It ruled that UK breached its obligations under Articles 2(3), 56(2), and 194(4) of UNCLOS. In reaching these conclusions, the Tribunal made several findings. It considered the undertakings given by UK to the Mauritian Ministers at the Lancaster House talks in September 1965. UK argued that those undertakings were not binding and had no status in international law. The Tribunal rejected that argument, holding that those undertakings became a binding international agreement upon the independence of Mauritius, and have bound UK since then. It found that UK's commitments to Mauritius in relation to fishing rights and oil and mineral rights in the Chagos Archipelago are legally binding. The Tribunal also found that UK's undertaking to return the Chagos Archipelago to Mauritius when no longer needed for defence purposes is legally binding.[70]
The Tribunal held that UK had not respected Mauritius' legal rights over the Chagos Archipelago. It considered the events from February 2009 to April 2010, during which time the ‘MPA' proposal came into being and was then imposed on Mauritius.[70]
The Tribunal observed that UK's failure to balance its rights and interests with those of Mauritius is to be contrasted with the approach adopted by UK with respect to the United States. It noted that the record demonstrates a conscious balancing of rights and interests, suggestions of compromise and willingness to offer assurances by UK, and an understanding of the United States' concerns in connection with the proposed ‘MPA'. Those elements were noticeably absent in UK's approach to Mauritius. Accordingly, the Tribunal found that, in declaring the ‘MPA', UK had acted unlawfully and in disregard of Mauritius' rights.[70]
The parties differ on the characterization of the dispute. Mauritius states that its case is that the MPA is unlawful under the Convention. UK argued that the dispute concerns sovereignty over the Chagos Archipelago. Mauritius requested the Tribunal to adjudge and declare that UK is not entitled to declare an "MPA" or other maritime zones because it is not the "coastal State within the meaning of inter alia Articles 2, 55, 56 and 76 of the Convention."[71]
The sovereignty of Mauritius was explicitly recognised by two of the arbitrators and denied by none of the other three. Three members of the Tribunal found that they did not have jurisdiction to rule on that question; they expressed no view as to which of the two States has sovereignty over the Chagos Archipelago. Tribunal Judges Rüdiger Wolfrum and James Kateka held that the Tribunal did have jurisdiction to decide this question, and concluded that UK does not have sovereignty over the Chagos Archipelago. They found that:[72]

Internal United Kingdom documents suggested there was an ulterior motive behind the ‘MPA' and noted the disturbing similarities and common pattern between the establishment of the so-called "BIOT" in 1965 and the proclamation of the ‘MPA' in 2010;
the excision of the Chagos Archipelago from Mauritius in 1965 shows a complete disregard for the territorial integrity of Mauritius by UK;
UK Prime Minister Harold Wilson's threat to Premier Sir Seewoosagur Ramgoolam in 1965 that he could return home without independence if he did not consent to the excision of the Chagos Archipelago amounted to duress; Mauritian Ministers were coerced into agreeing to the detachment of the Chagos Archipelago, and that this detachment violated the international law of self-determination;
the ‘MPA' is legally invalid.

The Tribunal's decision determined that UK's undertaking to return the Chagos Archipelago to Mauritius gives Mauritius an interest in significant decisions that bear upon possible future uses of the Archipelago. The result of the Tribunal's decision is that, it is now open to the Parties to enter into the negotiations that the Tribunal would have expected prior to the proclamation of the MPA, with a view to achieving a mutually satisfactory arrangement for protecting the marine environment, to the extent necessary under a "sovereignty umbrella".[70]
Tromelin[edit]
Mauritius also claims sovereignty over Tromelin island from France, a small island that lies 430 km northeast of Mauritius.[73][74] France and Mauritius reached a co-management treaty in 2010.[75]
Environment and climate[edit]




Tropical beach, Trou-aux-Biches


The environment in Mauritius is typically tropical in the coastal regions with forests in the mountainous areas. Seasonal cyclones are destructive to its flora and fauna, although they recover quickly. Mauritius ranked second in an air quality index released by the World Health Organization in 2011.[76]
Situated near the Tropic of Capricorn, Mauritius has a tropical climate. There are 2 seasons: a warm humid summer from November to April, with a mean temperature of 24.7 °C (76.5 °F) and a relatively cool dry winter from June to September with a mean temperature of 20.4 °C (68.7 °F). The temperature difference between the seasons is only 4.3 °C (7.7 °F). The warmest months are January and February with average day maximum temperature reaching 29.2 °C (84.6 °F) and the coolest months are July and August with average overnight minimum temperatures of 16.4 °C (61.5 °F). Annual rainfall ranges from 900 mm (35 in) on the coast to 1,500 mm (59 in) on the central plateau. Although there is no marked rainy season, most of the rainfall occurs in summer months. Sea temperature in the lagoon varies from 22–27 °C (72–81 °F) The central plateau is much cooler than the surrounding coastal areas and can experience as much as double the rainfall. The prevailing trade winds keep the east side of the island cooler and bring more rain. There can also be a marked difference in temperature and rainfall from one side of the island to the other. Occasional tropical cyclones generally occur between January to March and tend to disrupt the weather for only about three days, bringing heavy rain.[77]
Biodiversity[edit]
Main article: Wildlife of Mauritius




Mauritius ornate day gecko


The country is home to some of the world's rarest plants and animals, but human habitation and the introduction of non-native species have threatened its indigenous flora and fauna.[68] Due to its volcanic origin, age, isolation, and its unique terrain, Mauritius is home to a diversity of flora and fauna not usually found in such a small area. Before the Portuguese arrival in 1507, there were no terrestrial mammals on the island. This allowed the evolution of a number of flightless birds and large reptile species. The arrival of man saw the introduction of invasive alien species and the rapid destruction of habitat and the loss of much of the endemic flora and fauna. Less than 2% of the native forest now remains, concentrated in the Black River Gorges National Park in the southwest, the Bambous Mountain Range in the southeast, and the Moka-Port Louis Ranges in the northwest. There are some isolated mountains, Corps de Garde, Le Morne Brabant, and several offshore islands with remnants of coastal and mainland diversity. Over 100 species of plants and animals have become extinct and many more are threatened. Conservation activities began in the 1980s with the implementation of programmes for the reproduction of threatened bird and plant species as well as habitat restoration in the national parks and nature reserves.[78]
In 2011, The Ministry of Environment & Sustainable Development issued the "Mauritius Environment Outlook Report" which recommended that St Brandon be declared a Marine Protected Area.
In the President's Report of the Mauritian Wildlife Foundation dated March 2016, St Brandon is declared an official MWF project in order to promote the conservation of the atoll.[79]
In April 2016, a seven-day fact-finding mission[80][81][82] composed of three highly acclaimed international experts (Professor Henk Bauwman[83] (Ecotoxicology, Environmental Pollution, Bird Ecology); Professor Tony Martin[84] (world’s foremost expert on marine mammals) and Dr. Nick Cole[85] (herpetologist; MWF Islands Restoration Manager) inspected the islands to raise awareness about the need to protect the islands and to investigate, for the longer term, the effects of plastic and heavy metal pollution in the Indian Ocean.[86]
In 2016, a documentary was made on Conservation on the St Brandon islands held on permanent lease.[87][88]




Mauritius was the only known habitat of the extinct dodo, a flightless bird.


When it was discovered, Mauritius was the home of a previously unknown species of bird, the dodo, descendants of a type of pigeon which settled in Mauritius over four million years ago.[89] With no predators to attack them, they had lost their ability to fly. Arabs became the first humans to set foot on Mauritius, followed by Portuguese around 1505. The island quickly became a stopover for ships engaged in the spice trade. Weighing up to 50 pounds, the dodo was a welcome source of fresh meat for the sailors. Large numbers of dodos were killed for food. Later, when the Dutch used the island as a penal colony, new species were introduced to the island. Rats, pigs, and monkeys ate dodo eggs in the ground nests. The combination of human exploitation and introduced species significantly reduced the dodo population. Within 100 years of the arrival of humans on Mauritius, the once abundant dodo became a rare bird. The last one was killed in 1681.[90] The dodo is prominently featured as a (heraldic) supporter of the national coat of arms of Mauritius.




Cap Malheureux


Demographics[edit]
Main articles: Mauritians, Demographics of Mauritius, and Religion in Mauritius




Population pyramid of Mauritius according to 2011 census


The estimated resident population of the Republic of Mauritius was 1,264,000 as of December 2016. The female population was 637,032 compared to a male population of 624,176. The population on the island of Mauritius is 1,219,265, and that of Rodrigues island is 41,669; Agalega and Saint Brandon had an estimated total population of 274.[91] Mauritius has the highest population density in Africa.
Ethnic groups[edit]
Subsequent to a Constitutional amendment in 1982, there is no need for Mauritians to reveal their ethnic identities for the purpose of population census. Official statistics on ethnicity are not available. The 1972 census was the last one to measure ethnicity.[92][93] Mauritius is a multiethnic society, drawn from Indian (mostly Bihari), African, Chinese and European (mostly French) origin.
Religion[edit]




The Hindu festival of Thaipusam


According to the 2011 census conducted by Statistics Mauritius, Hinduism is the majority religion at 51.9%, followed by Christianity (31.4%), Islam (15.3%) and Buddhism (0.4%). Those of other religions accounted for 0.2% of the population, and 0.7% reported themselves as non-religious and 0.1% did not answer.[94] Mauritius is the only country in Africa to have a Hindu majority.
An officially secular state, Mauritius is a religiously diverse nation, with freedom of religion being enshrined as a constitutional right.[95] The culture of the Mauritian people is reflected in the various religious festivities that are celebrated throughout the year, some of which are recognized as public holidays. According to one estimate Mauritians spend an average of more than 700 hours per year engaging in religious activities.[96]
Languages[edit]
Main article: Languages of Mauritius
As both an English-speaking and French-speaking nation, Mauritius is a member of both the Commonwealth of Nations and the Francophonie. The Mauritian constitution makes no mention of an official language. In Parliament, the official language is English; however, any member of the National Assembly can also address the chair in French.[97] Despite this, English and French are generally considered to be de facto national and common languages of Mauritius, as they are the languages of government administration, courts, and business.[98] The constitution of Mauritius is written in English, while some laws, such as the Civil code, are in French.
The Mauritian population is multilingual; while Mauritian Creole is the mother tongue of most Mauritians, most people are also fluent in English and French; they tend to switch languages according to the situation.[99] French and English are favoured in educational and professional settings, while Asian languages are used mainly in music, religious and cultural activities. The media and literature are primarily in French.
The Creole language, derived mainly from French (a French-based Creole) with influences from the other dialects, is spoken by the majority of the population and is the country's native language.[100] The Creole languages which are spoken in different islands of the country are more or less similar: Mauritian Creole, Rodriguan Creole, Agalega Creole and Chagossian Creole are spoken by people from the islands of Mauritius, Rodrigues, Agalega and Chagos. Bhojpuri which was widely spoken as mother tongue, has been decreasing over the years. According to the 2011 census, there was a decrease in the use of Bhojpuri at home; it was spoken by 5% of the population compared to 12% in 2000.[12]
Some ancestral languages that are also spoken in Mauritius include Bhojpuri,[101] Chinese,[102] Hindi,[103] Marathi,[104], Tamil,[105] Telugu[106] and Urdu.[107] School students must learn English and French; they also have the option to study Asian languages and Creole. The medium of instruction varies from school to school but is usually Creole, French and English.
Health[edit]
See also: Drugs in Mauritius
Mauritius had a life expectancy of 75.17 years in 2014.[108] 39% of Mauritian men smoked in 2014.[109] 12.9% of men and 23% of women were obese in 2008.[109]
Heroin use has a high prevalence rate of 0.91% (2011 UN figure).[110]
Education[edit]
Main article: Education in Mauritius
The government of Mauritius provides free education to its citizens from pre-primary to tertiary level. In 2013 government expenditure on education was estimated at about Rs 13,584 million, representing 13% of total expenditure.[111]
The adult literacy rate was estimated at 89.8% in 2011.[112] Male literacy was 92.3% and female literacy 87.3%.[112]
The education system in Mauritius consists of pre-primary, primary, secondary and tertiary sectors. The education structure consists of two to three years of pre-primary school, six years of primary schooling leading to the Primary School Achievement Certificate, five years of secondary education leading to the School Certificate, and two years of higher secondary ending with the Higher School Certificate.[113] Secondary schools have "college" as part of their title.
The O-Level and A-Level examinations are carried out by the University of Cambridge through University of Cambridge International Examinations. The Tertiary Education sector includes universities and other technical institutions in Mauritius. The country's two main public universities are the University of Mauritius and the University of Technology. The Tertiary Education Commission's Strategic Plan envisages Mauritius as a regional knowledge hub and a centre for higher learning and excellence. It promotes open and distance learning to increase access to post-secondary education and lifelong learning locally and regionally.[113]
Economy[edit]
Main articles: Economy of Mauritius and International rankings of Mauritius




Sugar cane plantation in Mauritius


Since independence from Britain in 1968, Mauritius has developed from a low-income, agriculture-based economy to a middle-income diversified economy, based on tourism, textiles, sugar, and financial services. The economic history of Mauritius since independence has been called “the Mauritian Miracle” and the “success of Africa” (Romer, 1992; Frankel, 2010; Stiglitz, 2011).[114]
In recent years, information and communication technology, seafood, hospitality and property development, healthcare, renewable energy, and education and training have emerged as important sectors, attracting substantial investment from both local and foreign investors.[115]
Mauritius has no exploitable natural resources and therefore depends on imported petroleum products to meet most of its energy requirements. Local and renewable energy sources are biomass, hydro, solar and wind energy.[116] Mauritius has one of the largest Exclusive Economic Zones in the world, and in 2012 the government announced its intention to develop the marine economy.[117]
Mauritius is ranked high in terms of economic competitiveness, a friendly investment climate, good governance and a free economy.[8][55][118][119][120] The Gross Domestic Product (PPP) was estimated at US$22.025 billion in 2014, and GDP (PPP) per capita was over US$16,820, one of the highest in Africa.[8][55][118][119][120]
Mauritius has an upper middle income economy, according to the World Bank in 2011.[121] The World Bank's 2016 Ease of Doing Business Index ranks Mauritius 49th worldwide out of 189 economies in terms of ease of doing business.[120][122] According to the Mauritian Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the country's challenges are heavy reliance on a few industry sectors, high brain drain, scarcity of skilled labour, ageing population and inefficient public companies and para-statal bodies.[123]
Mauritius has built its success on a free market economy. According to the 2013 Index of Economic Freedom, Mauritius is ranked as having the 8th most free economy in the world, and the highest score in investment freedom.[124] The report's ranking of 183 countries is based on measures of economic openness, regulatory efficiency, rule of law, and competitiveness.
Tourism[edit]




The Seven Coloured Earths at Chamarel


Main article: Tourism in Mauritius
Mauritius is a major tourist destination, ranking 3rd in the region and 56th globally.[125] It enjoys a tropical climate with clear warm sea waters, beaches, tropical fauna and flora complemented by a multi-ethnic and cultural population.[126][better source needed]
Mauritius received the World's Leading Island Destination award for the third time and World's Best Beach at the World Travel Awards in January 2012.[127]
Tourists can now climb "Le Morne Brabant" mountain which is listed as a UNESCO World Heritage Site[128]
Issues often encountered by foreign tourists include scams, overcharging and dual pricing.[129][130][131][132]
Transportation[edit]
Main article: Transport in Mauritius
Since 2005 public bus transport in Mauritius is free of charge for students, people with disabilities and senior citizens.[133] There are currently no railways in Mauritius, former privately owned industrial railways having been abandoned. To cope with increasing road traffic congestion, a Light Rail Transit system has been proposed between Curepipe and Port Louis.
The harbour of Port Louis handles international trade as well as a cruise terminal. The sole international airport for civil aviation is Sir Seewoosagur Ramgoolam International Airport, which also serves as the home operating base for the national airline Air Mauritius; the airport authority inaugurated a new passenger terminal in September 2013.[134] Another airport is the Sir Gaëtan Duval Airport in Rodrigues.
Information and Communication Technology Sector[edit]
Since 2002, Mauritius has invested heavily into the development of an ICT Hub. The contribution of the ICT Sector accounts for 5.7% of the GDP[135]. The ICT Sector employs 15,390 people[135]. In 2016, Mauritius participated for the first time in the Google Code-in international competition, and was noted for its "strong debut" [136]. Mauritius has also participated in the IETF. It has been noted for its contribution to TLS[137] [138][139] and currently is ahead of other African countries for RFC development [140].
Culture[edit]
Main article: Culture of Mauritius
Music[edit]
Main articles: Music of Mauritius and Sega (genre)
The major musical genre of Mauritius is Sega music, other musical genres are its fusion genre, Seggae and Bhojpuri songs.
Cuisine[edit]
Further information: Cuisine of Mauritius




A food market at Port Louis, Mauritius


The cuisine of Mauritius is a combination of Creole, French, Chinese and Indian, with many dishes unique to the island. Spices are also a big part of Mauritian cuisine.
Holidays and festivals[edit]
The public holidays of Mauritius involve the blending of several cultures from Mauritius' history. There are Hindu festivals, Chinese festivals, Muslim festivals, as well as Christian festivals.


Public holidays in Mauritius in 2017
Date


New Year's Day
Sun 1- Mon 2 January


Chinese Spring Festival
Sat 28 January


Abolition of slavery
Wed 1 February


Thaipoosam Cavadee
Thurs 9 February


Maha Shivaratree
Fri 24 February


Independence and Republic Day
Sun 12 March


Ugadi
Wed 29 March


Labour Day
Mon 1 May


Eid ul-Fitr (Depending on the visibility of the moon)
Mon 26 June


Ganesh Chaturthi
Sat 26 August


Divali
Thurs 19 October


All Saints' Day
Wed 1 November


Arrival of Indentured Labourers
Thurs 2 November


Christmas Day
Mon 25 December


There are 15 annual public holidays in Mauritius. Seven of these are fixed holidays: 1 and 2 January; 1 February; 12 March; 1 May; 2 November; and 25 December. The remaining public holidays are religious festivals with dates that vary from year to year. However these are public holidays, many other festivals such as Holi, Raksha Bandhan, Père Laval Pilgrimage also exist in Mauritius.
Sports[edit]
See also: Football in Mauritius




The Maiden Cup in 2006


The most popular sport in Mauritius is football[141] and the national team is the Club M. Other popular sports in Mauritius include cycling, table tennis, badminton, volleyball, basketball, handball, boxing, judo, karate, taekwondo, weightlifting, bodybuilding and athletics. Water sports include swimming, sailing, scuba diving, windsurfing and kitesurfing.
Horseracing, which dates from 1812 when the Champ de Mars Racecourse was inaugurated, remains popular. The country hosted the second (1985) and fifth editions (2003) of the Indian Ocean Island Games. Mauritius won its first Olympic medal at the 2008 Summer Olympics in Beijing when boxer Bruno Julie won the bronze medal.
In golf, the former Mauritius Open and the current AfrAsia Bank Mauritius Open have been part of the European Tour.
See also[edit]

Outline of Mauritius
Index of Mauritius-related articles
List of Mauritius-related topics



Geography portal
Africa portal
Mauritius portal
Islands portal


Notes[edit]



^ The Mauritian Constitution does not mention any official language, only Section 49 mentions that the official language of the National Assembly shall be English, while French may be used.[1]



References[edit]


^ Article 49 in the Constitution of Mauritius. ilo.org
^ "Republic of Mauritius, Government Portal (Mauritius)". 
^ ref name="2011census"/>
^ ref name="2011census"/>
^ ref name="2011census"/>
^ "World Population Prospects: The 2017 Revision". ESA.UN.org (custom data acquired via website). United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division. Retrieved 10 September 2017. 
^ Statistics Mauritius. "Digest of Demographic Statistics 2013" (PDF). Government Portal of Mauritius: 22. Retrieved 28 January 2015. 
^ a b c d e "Report for Selected Countries and Subjects". International Monetary Fund. Retrieved 25 July 2014. 
^ "GDP per capita, current prices | IMF World Economic Outlook". EconStats. Retrieved 6 September 2016. 
^ "World Bank GINI index". 
^ "2015 Human Development Report" (PDF). United Nations Development Programme. 2015. Retrieved 15 December 2015. 
^ a b Statistics Mauritius. "2011 POPULATION CENSUS – MAIN RESULTS" (PDF). Government Portal of Mauritius. Retrieved 11 November 2017. 
^ "Mauritius: The Raphael Fishing Company Limited: Privy Council Decisions [2008] UKPC 43 (30 July 2008)". SAFLII. Retrieved 30 July 2008. 
^ a b "The territory of Mauritius". Government Portal of Mauritius. Retrieved 22 January 2015. 
^ "MAURITIUS: PROMOTING THE DEVELOPMENT OF AN OCEAN ECONOMY" (PDF). Intercontinental Trust. Retrieved 22 January 2015. 
^ "National Coast Guard" (PDF). Government Portal of Mauritius. Retrieved 22 January 2015. 
^ "Commission on the Limits of the Continental Shelf (CLCS) Outer limits of the continental shelf beyond 200 nautical miles from the baselines:Submissions to the Commission: Joint submission by the Republic of Mauritius and the Republic of Seychelles". United Nations. Retrieved 22 January 2015. 
^ "Meteorological Services − Monthly Bulletin of Climatological Summaries" (PDF). Mauritius Meteorological Services. May 2008. p. 3. Retrieved 22 January 2015. 
^ "General Info – Geography". Mauritius.net. Retrieved 22 January 2015. 
^ "Tourism − Overview of Mauritius". Government Portal of Mauritius. Retrieved 4 January 2012. 
^ Toorawa, S. (2007). The medieval Waqwaq islands and the Mascarenes. Hassam Toorawa Trust, Port Louis, Mauritius
^ "Cantino Planisphere by anonymous Portuguese (1502) – Biblioteca Estense Universitaria, Modena, Italy, Public Domain". 
^ a b c d e f A short History of Mauritius, P.J. Barnwell & A. Toussaint
^ a b c d e f g "History". Government Portal of Mauritius. Retrieved 22 January 2015. 
^ "History of Mauritius" (PDF). Ministry of Art & Culture, Government Portal of Mauritius. Retrieved 22 January 2015. 
^ USIP
^ a b Port Louis, A tropical City, Auguste Toussaint. ISBN 0 04 969001 9
^ a b A New Comprehensive History of Mauritius, Sydney Selvon, 2012. ISBN 978-99949-34-91-1
^ a b c d e f g Mauritius in the making across the censuses 1846–2000, Monique Dinan. ISBN 99903-904-6-0
^ L'ile Maurice: Vingt-Cinq leçons d'Histoire (1598–1998), Benjamin Moutou. ISBN 99903-929-1-9
^ Our Struggle, 20th Century Mauritius, Seewoosagur Ramgoolam, Anand Mulloo
^ "The historical significance of Anjalay Coopen". L'Express. Retrieved 22 January 2015. 
^ a b "Histoire: Mauritius Independence 1961–1968". Le Mauricien=9 March 2014. Retrieved 9 September 2014. 
^ "Why independence was irresistible (by Anand Moheeputh)". L'Express. 12 March 2014. 
^ "Mauritius profile". BBC. Retrieved 27 November 2012. 
^ "Affaire Azor Adélaïde". Le Mauricien. 25 June 2015. 
^ "Why are we not taught our own history? (by K. A. Cassimally), Weekly Magazine, 17–23 March 2016". 
^ "HISTOIRE : Un des hommes derrière le 20 mai 75 raconte – Le Mauricien". 
^ Untold Stories, A Collection of Socio-Political Essays, 1950–1995, Sir Satcam Boolell, EOI. ISBN 99903-0-234-0
^ "When India drew Top Secret 'red line' in Mauritius". The Hindu. 10 March 2013. Retrieved 22 March 2013. 
^ Medcalf, Rory (19 March 2013). "When India (Almost) Invaded Mauritius". The Diplomat. Retrieved 22 March 2013. 
^ David Brewster. "India's Ocean: the Story of India's Bid for Regional Leadership. Retrieved 13 August 2014". 
^ John D. Battersby (28 December 1987). "Port Louis Journal; Land of Apartheid Befriends an Indian Ocean Isle". The New York Times. Retrieved 29 December 2016. 
^ Jane Perlez, Special to The New York Times (27 August 1990). "Mauritius' Political Quarrel Saves the Queen". Great Britain; Mauritius: The New York Times. Retrieved 6 September 2016. 
^ AAPS Newsletter, Volume 1, Issues 5–19, African Association of Political Science, 1992, p. 20
^ Country Profile: Mauritius, Seychelles, Economist Intelligence Unit, 2001, p. 8
^ L'Express, Vendredi 26 février 1999
^ Rapport du Juge Matadeen sur les émeutes de 1999, Imprimerie du Gouvernement, 2000
^ Bob Minzesheimer (22 January 2017). "Mauritius: PM Anerood Jugnauth to hand over to son". BBC News. Retrieved 22 January 2017. 
^ Jean Paul Arouff (23 January 2017). "New Mauritius PM takes over from father, opponents cry foul". Reuters. Retrieved 23 January 2017. 
^ a b c "Truth Commission: Mauritius". United States Institute of Peace. Retrieved 28 March 2016. 
^ "Truth and Justice Commission Act 2008" (PDF). Government Gazette of Mauritius No. 84 of 28 August 2008. 28 August 2008. 
^ "Truth and Justice Commission Vol 1: Report of the Truth and Justice Commission" (PDF). 25 November 2011. 
^ "UN Human Rights Committee criticises Best Loser System". Country.eiu.com. Retrieved 6 September 2016. 
^ a b c "Mauritius's recent performance in the Ibrahim Index of African Governance". Moibrahim Foundation. Archived from the original on 20 October 2012. Retrieved 24 October 2012. 
^ "African democracy − A glass half-full". The Economist. 31 March 2012. Retrieved 7 April 2012. 
^ "National lists of precedence of Mauritius" (PDF). 14 October 2014. Retrieved 16 February 2015. 
^ 303, Belson (4 April 2015). "Mauritius has a new Vice-President". newsfeed.mu. Archived from the original on 5 April 2016. Retrieved 5 April 2015. 
^ "Mauritius-Penal System". Retrieved 20 October 2012. 
^ "Overview of the department" (PDF). Government of Mauritius: 151. Archived from the original (PDF) on 16 November 2011. Retrieved 10 February 2012. 
^ Court
^ Law & Order (26 September 2015). "An emerging vacation destination has a troubling human rights record". Business Insider. Retrieved 6 September 2016. 
^ "Provisional Charge Conundrum". 4 January 2016. 
^ "Background Note: Mauritius – Scoop News". scoop.co.nz. Retrieved 18 January 2017. 
^ a b "Time for UK to Leave Chagos Archipelago". Real clear world. Retrieved 22 January 2015. 
^ "Who Owns Diego Garcia? Decolonisation and Indigenous Rights in the Indian Ocean" (PDF). Geoffrey Robertson. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2 May 2014. Retrieved 22 January 2015. 
^ Indradev Curpen (15 June 2012). "Chagos remains a matter for discussion". Le Défi Media Group. Archived from the original on 27 April 2015. Retrieved 22 January 2015. 
^ a b "Mauritius profile". BBC World. 22 July 2011. Retrieved 22 January 2015. 
^ "History". The UK Chagos Support Association. Retrieved 22 January 2015. 
^ a b c d e "SIXTH NATIONAL ASSEMBLY PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES (HANSARD)" (PDF). National Assembly (Mauritius). 20 March 2015. Retrieved 21 January 2016. 
^ "CHARACTERIZATION OF THE DISPUTE". Permanent Court of Arbitration. Retrieved 21 January 2016. 
^ "IN THE MATTER OF THE CHAGOS" (PDF). 
^ "Government has requested that the Chagos Archipelago be returned by the United Kingdom, says PM". Mauritius Government Information Service, Prime Minister's Office. Retrieved 13 June 2016. 
^ "projet de loi autorisant l'approbation de l'accord-cadre entre le Gouvernement de la République française et le Gouvernement de la République de Maurice sur la cogestion économique, scientifique et environnementale relative à l'île de Tromelin (étude d'impact)". 
^ "Tromelin : La Réunion, spectatrice et spoliée". Lequotidien.re. 
^ "Mauritius's air quality 2nd best in world". Le Matinal. 26 September 2011. Archived from the original on 10 October 2013. Retrieved 22 January 2015. 
^ "Climate of Mauritius". Mauritius Meteorological Services. Retrieved 22 January 2015. 
^ "Chapter 1. Introduction to the Republic of Mauritius" (PDF). National Parks and Conservation Services, Government Portal of Mauritius. Retrieved 22 January 2015. 
^ "President's Report of the Mauritian Wildlife Foundation dated March 2016". Retrieved 29 August 2017. 
^ "Nathalie Boulle, International Conservationist". Retrieved 19 August 2017. 
^ "DÉVELOPPEMENT DURABLE: Raphaël Fishing investit dans la conservation à St Brandon – Le Mauricien". Retrieved 23 March 2017. 
^ Fact Finding Trip to St Brandon’s
^ "Prof Henk Bouwman". Retrieved 19 August 2017. 
^ "Professor Tony Martin" (PDF). Retrieved 19 August 2017. 
^ "Dr. Nick Cole". Retrieved 19 August 2017. 
^ "13 îlots de St-Brandon deviennent "zone protégée"". Retrieved 27 August 2017. 
^ "St Brandon : Video on Conservation and the Raphael Fishing Company by Ananda Pictures". Retrieved 29 July 2017. 
^ "Mauritius: The Raphael Fishing Company Limited: Privy Council Decisions [2008] UKPC 43 (30 July 2008)". SAFLII. Retrieved 30 July 2008. 
^ Shapiro, B.; et. al. (2002). "Flight of the Dodo" (PDF). Science. 295 (5560): 1683. doi:10.1126/science.295.5560.1683. PMID 11872833. 
^ "The Dodo". Government Portal of Mauritius. Retrieved 22 January 2015. 
^ Statistics Mauritius, Government Portal of Mauritius. "Population and vital statistics Republic of Mauritius" (PDF). Government of Mauritius. Retrieved 21 January 2015. 
^ La Redaction (5 June 2008). "A critical appraisal of the Best Loser System". L'Express (Mauritius). Retrieved 11 November 2017. 
^ M. Rafic Soormally (10 September 2012). "Debate on Best Loser System". Le Défi Media Group. Retrieved 21 January 2015. 
^ "Resident population by religion and sex" (PDF). Statistics Mauritius, Government Portal of Mauritius. p. 68. Retrieved 11 November 2017. 
^ "Country Studies Series: Mauritius" (PDF). Brandeis University. p. 2. Retrieved 31 July 2012. 
^ Religious Setting
^ "Constitution of Mauritius – 49. Official language". National Assembly, Government Portal of Mauritius. Retrieved 11 November 2017. 
^ "Language". Government Portal of Mauritius. Retrieved 11 November 2017. 
^ "Language Choice in Multilingual Mauritius". 
^ "Demographics". mauritiusgovernment.com. Retrieved 7 November 2013. 
^ "BHOJPURI-SPEAKING UNION ACT 2011" (PDF). Ministry of Arts and Culture. Retrieved 3 November 2015. 
^ "CHINESE-SPEAKING UNION ACT 2011" (PDF). Ministry of Arts and Culture. Retrieved 3 November 2015. 
^ "THE HINDI-SPEAKING UNION ACT 1994" (PDF). Ministry of Arts and Culture. Retrieved 3 November 2015. 
^ "MARATHI-SPEAKING UNION ACT 2008" (PDF). Ministry of Arts and Culture. Retrieved 3 November 2015. 
^ "TAMIL-SPEAKING UNION ACT 2008" (PDF). Ministry of Arts and Culture. Retrieved 3 November 2015. 
^ "TELUGU-SPEAKING UNION ACT 2008" (PDF). Ministry of Arts and Culture. Retrieved 3 November 2015. 
^ "THE URDU-SPEAKING UNION ACT 2002" (PDF). Ministry of Arts and Culture. Retrieved 3 November 2015. 
^ "Country Comparison: Life expectancy at birth". The World Factbook. CIA. 
^ a b ""Mauritius: health profile", World Health Organization" (PDF). 2014. Retrieved 6 September 2016. 
^ "UN world drug report 2011" (PDF). UN. Retrieved 27 January 2016. 
^ Ministry of Education and Human Resource (2013). "Education statistics – 2013" (PDF). Government Portal of Mauritius. Retrieved 22 January 2015. 
^ a b "2011 POPULATION CENSUS — MAIN RESULTS" (PDF). Statistics Mauritius, Government Portal of Mauritius. 2011. Archived from the original (PDF) on 23 December 2014. Retrieved 22 January 2015. 
^ a b "Education". commonwealth-of-nations.org. 2006. Retrieved 17 February 2012. 
^ "Mauritius: The Drivers of Growth—Can the Past be Extended?" (PDF) (IMF Working paper 2014). 
^ "Mauritius". CIA World Factbook. Retrieved 4 January 2012. 
^ Joseph E. Stiglitz. "The Mauritius Miracle". Project Syndicate. Retrieved 21 April 2012. 
^ "Moving the Nation Forward" (PDF). Government of Mauritius. Retrieved 21 April 2012. 
^ a b "Mauritius". The Heritage Foundation. Retrieved 16 April 2012. 
^ a b "2012 Investment Climate Statement – Mauritius". U.S. Department of State. Retrieved 8 August 2012. 
^ a b c "Economy Rankings". World Bank. Archived from the original on 4 June 2011. Retrieved 24 October 2012. 
^ "Country and Lending Groups – Upper-middle-income economies". World Bank. Archived from the original on 18 March 2011. Retrieved 8 June 2012. 
^ Walter, Karen (23 October 2016). "Ease of Doing Business: Maurice dégringole". lexpress.mu. Retrieved 18 January 2017. 
^ UNCTAD
^ "2013 Index of Economic Freedom". The Heritage Foundation. Retrieved 23 August 2013. 
^ "Travel and Tourism Competitiveness Report 2015 – Reports – World Economic Forum". Reports.weforum.org. 6 May 2015. Retrieved 6 September 2016. 
^ "Code of ethics of tourism for Mauritius" (PDF). MTPA. Archived from the original (PDF) on 21 January 2012. Retrieved 28 January 2012. 
^ "Mauritius awards". World travel award. Retrieved 24 February 2012. 
^ UNESCO World Heritage Centre – Le Morne Brabant
^ Par La Rédaction (1 February 2015). "Touristes arnaqués au marché central : Rs 12 000 pour des T-shirts "médicaux"" (in French). lexpress.mu. Retrieved 6 September 2016. 
^ "PLACEMENTS IMMOBILIERS: Huit Français dénoncent une escroquerie de Rs 48 M". Le Mauricien. Le Mauricien. 25 March 2016. Retrieved 6 September 2016. 
^ Defi Media Group (4 July 2016). "Sur La Plage De Cap-Malheureux: Deux Glaces Vendues À Rs 900". Business.mega.mu. Retrieved 6 September 2016. 
^ "Maurice: Un couple de Réunionnais porte plainte pour avoir payé dix fois plus cher des vêtements de marque". Indian-ocean-times.com. Retrieved 6 September 2016. 
^ "Rs 32 M de plus pour le transport gratuit" (in French). Le Matinal. Retrieved 22 August 2014. 
^ "Mauritius airport inaugurates US$305m terminal". Passenger Terminal Today. Retrieved 22 August 2014. 
^ a b "Statistics Mauritius - ICT Statistics Year 2016". statsmauritius.govmu.org. Retrieved 2017-10-31.  horizontal tab character in |title= at position 24 (help)
^ "Taking the pulse of Google Code-in 2016". Google Open Source Blog. Retrieved 2017-11-01. 
^ "Mauritian code-cutters to help deliver TLS 1.3". Retrieved 2017-12-16. 
^ "Participating in the IETF Hackathon from Mauritius | IETF Blog". www.ietf.org. Retrieved 2017-12-16. 
^ "IETF 100 TLS 1.3 Hackathon". IETF. 
^ "Distribution of RFCs According to the Countries of their Authors". www.arkko.com. Retrieved 2017-12-16. 
^ Richards, Alexandra.Mauritius: Rodrigues, Réunion. Bradt Travel Guides, 2009, p. 90


Bibliography[edit]


This article incorporates public domain text from the websites of the Government Portal of Mauritius, the United States Department of State, the U.S. Library of Congress, and the CIA World Factbook.
Macdonald, Fiona; et al. "Mauritius". Peoples of Africa. pp. 340–341. 


Further reading[edit]

Bahadur, Gaiutra (2014). Coolie Woman: The Odyssey of Indenture. The University of Chicago. ISBN 978-0-226-21138-1. 
Moree, Perry J. (1998). A Concise History of Dutch Mauritius, 1598–1710: A Fruitful and Healthy Land. Routledge. 
Vink, Markus (2003). "'The World's Oldest Trade': Dutch Slavery and Slave Trade in the Indian Ocean in the Seventeenth Century". Journal of World History. 14 (2): 131–177. 

External links[edit]



Wikibooks Cookbook has a recipe/module on


Mauritius






Find more aboutMauritiusat Wikipedia's sister projects

Definitions from Wiktionary
Media from Wikimedia Commons
News from Wikinews
Quotations from Wikiquote
Texts from Wikisource
Textbooks from Wikibooks
Travel guide from Wikivoyage
Learning resources from Wikiversity


Reference

"Mauritius". The World Factbook. Central Intelligence Agency. 
Mauritius entry at Encyclopædia Britannica
Mauritius at UCB Libraries GovPubs
Mauritius at Curlie (based on DMOZ)
Country Profile from the BBC News
Key Development Forecasts for Mauritius from International Futures

Government

Mauritius Government portal
Statistics Mauritius
Board of Investment

Geography

 Wikimedia Atlas of Mauritius
 Geographic data related to Mauritius at OpenStreetMap
WikiSatellite view of Mauritius at WikiMapia
Mauritius Meteorological Services

Travel

tourism-mauritius







v
t
e


Mauritius articles






History
Geography
Wildlife





Subdivisions




Outer islands







Agaléga
Cargados Carajos (St. Brandon)
Rodrigues








Islets of Mauritius





Fishing banks



Hawkins
Nazareth
Saya de Malha
Soudan








Districts



Flacq
Grand Port
Moka
Pamplemousses
Plaines Wilhems
Port Louis
Rivière du Rempart
Rivière Noire
Savanne





Claims



Chagos Archipelago
Tromelin











Politics







Cabinet
Elections
Foreign relations
Government
Military
National Assembly
Political parties
Supreme Court








Economy







Companies
Rupee (currency)
Telecommunications
Transport
International rankings








Society







Demographics

Creole
Franco-Mauritian
Indo-Mauritian
Sino-Mauritian


Education





Culture



Creole language
Mauritians
Media

Newspapers
Radio


Music
Religion

Hinduism
Christianity
Islam


Sport

Football
Rugby union














Outline
Index



Category
Portal












v
t
e


Countries and territories of Africa



Sovereign states




entirely
in Africa



Algeria
Angola
Benin
Botswana
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cameroon
Cape Verde
Central African Republic
Chad
Comoros
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Republic of the Congo
Djibouti
Egypt
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Ethiopia
Gabon
The Gambia
Ghana
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Ivory Coast (Côte d'Ivoire)
Kenya
Lesotho
Liberia
Libya
Madagascar
Malawi
Mali
Mauritania
Mauritius
Morocco
Mozambique
Namibia
Niger
Nigeria
Rwanda
São Tomé and Príncipe
Senegal
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Somalia
South Africa
South Sudan
Sudan
Swaziland
Tanzania
Togo
Tunisia
Uganda
Zambia
Zimbabwe





partly
in Africa



France

Mayotte
Réunion


Italy

Pantelleria
Pelagie Islands


Portugal

Madeira


Spain

Canary Islands
Ceuta
Melilla
Plazas de soberanía


Yemen

Socotra














Territories and
dependencies




Îles Éparses

France


Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha

UK


Southern Provinces (Western Sahara)1






States with limited
recognition




Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic
Somaliland






1 Unclear sovereignty.








Articles relating to Mauritius











v
t
e


Countries and territories bordering the Indian Ocean



Africa



Comoros
Djibouti
Egypt
Eritrea
France

Mayotte
Réunion


Kenya
Madagascar
Mauritius
Mozambique
Rodrigues (Mauritius)
Seychelles
Somalia
South Africa
Sudan
Tanzania
Zanzibar, Tanzania








Asia



Bahrain
Bangladesh
British Indian Ocean Territory

Chagos Archipelago - United Kingdom


Christmas Island (Australia)
Cocos (Keeling) Islands (Australia)
India
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Israel
Jordan
Kuwait
Malaysia
Maldives
Myanmar
Oman
Pakistan
Qatar
Saudi Arabia
Sri Lanka
Thailand
Timor-Leste
United Arab Emirates
Yemen





Other



Antarctica

Australian Antarctic Territory
French Southern and Antarctic Lands
Heard Island and McDonald Islands


Australia










International membership











v
t
e


Southern African Development Community (SADC)



Member states



Angola
Botswana
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Lesotho
Madagascar
Malawi
Mauritius
Mozambique
Namibia
Seychelles
South Africa
Swaziland
Tanzania
Zambia
Zimbabwe





Leaders




Chairpersons



Levy Mwanawasa
Kgalema Motlanthe





Secretaries-General



Kaire Mbuende
Prega Ramsamy
Tomaz Salomão








See also



Southern African Development Coordination Conference (forerunner)
Southern African Customs Union (SACU)
Common Monetary Area (CMA)
Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa (COMESA)












v
t
e


African Union (AU)



History







Pan-Africanism
Casablanca Group
Monrovia Group
Abuja Treaty
Sirte Declaration
Lome Summit





Organisation of African Unity



Chairperson
Secretary General











Geography



Borders
Extreme points
Member states
Regions





Organs







Executive Council
Permanent Representatives' Committee
Specialized Technical Committees





Assembly



Chairperson





Commission



Chairperson
Deputy Chairperson
AUCC





Pan-African Parliament



Bureau
Secretariat
Gallagher Estate





African Court of Justice



African Court on Human and Peoples' Rights





ECOSOCC Committees



Peace and Security
Political Affairs
Infrastructure and Energy
Social Affairs and Health
HR, Sciences and Technology
Trade and Industry
Rural Economy and Agriculture
Economic Affairs
Women and Gender
Cross-Cutting Programs





Financial Institutions



African Central Bank
African Monetary Fund
African Investment Bank





Peace and Security Council



ACIRC
African Standby Force
Panel of the Wise
UNAMID
AMIB
AMIS
AMISOM
MISCA








Politics







APRM
Foreign relations
African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights
African Commission on Human and Peoples' Rights
Enlargement





Symbols



Anthem
Emblem
Flag








Economy



Currencies
Development Bank
African Economic Community
NEPAD
African Free Trade Zone
Tripartite Free Trade Area





Culture



Africa Day
Languages





Theory



Afro
United States of Africa
United States of Latin Africa








 Category












v
t
e


Members of the Commonwealth of Nations



Sovereign states
(Members)



Antigua and Barbuda
Australia
Bahamas
Bangladesh
Barbados
Belize
Botswana
Brunei
Cameroon
Canada
Cyprus
Dominica
Fiji
Ghana
Grenada
Guyana
India
Jamaica
Kenya
Kiribati
Lesotho
Malawi
Malaysia
Malta
Mauritius
Mozambique
Namibia
Nauru
New Zealand
Nigeria
Pakistan
Papua New Guinea
Rwanda
St. Kitts and Nevis
St. Lucia
St. Vincent and the Grenadines
Samoa
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Singapore
Solomon Islands
South Africa
Sri Lanka
Swaziland
Tanzania
Tonga
Trinidad and Tobago
Tuvalu
Uganda
United Kingdom
Vanuatu
Zambia





Dependencies
of Members




Australia



Ashmore and Cartier Islands
Australian Antarctic Territory
Christmas Island
Cocos (Keeling) Islands
Coral Sea Islands
Heard Island and McDonald Islands
Norfolk Island





New Zealand



Cook Islands
Niue
Ross Dependency
Tokelau





United Kingdom



Akrotiri and Dhekelia
Anguilla
Bermuda
British Antarctic Territory
British Indian Ocean Territory
British Virgin Islands
Cayman Islands
Falkland Islands
Gibraltar
Guernsey
Isle of Man
Jersey
Montserrat
Pitcairn Islands
St. Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha
South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands
Turks and Caicos Islands









Source: Commonwealth Secretariat - Member States













Languages











v
t
e


La Francophonie



Membership




Members



Albania
Andorra
Armenia
Belgium

French Community


Benin
Bulgaria
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cambodia
Cameroon
Canada

New Brunswick
Quebec


Cape Verde
Central African Republic
Chad
Comoros
Cyprus1
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Republic of the Congo
Djibouti
Dominica
Egypt
Equatorial Guinea
France

French Guiana
Guadeloupe
Martinique
St. Pierre and Miquelon


Gabon
Ghana1
Greece
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Haiti
Ivory Coast
Laos
Luxembourg
Lebanon
Macedonia2
Madagascar
Mali
Mauritania
Mauritius
Moldova
Monaco
Morocco
Niger
Qatar
Romania
Rwanda
St. Lucia
São Tomé and Príncipe
Senegal
Seychelles
Switzerland
Togo
Tunisia
Vanuatu
Vietnam








Observers



Austria
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Croatia
Czech Republic
Dominican Republic
Georgia
Hungary
Kosovo
Latvia
Lithuania
Montenegro
Mozambique
Ontario
Poland
Serbia
Slovakia
Slovenia
Thailand
Ukraine
United Arab Emirates
Uruguay






1 Associate member.
2 Provisionally referred to by the Francophonie as the "former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia"; see Macedonia naming dispute.






Organization



Agence de Coopération Culturelle et Technique
Agence universitaire de la Francophonie





Secretaries-General



Boutros Boutros-Ghali
Abdou Diouf
Michaëlle Jean





Culture



French language
UN French Language Day
International Francophonie Day
Jeux de la Francophonie
Prix des cinq continents de la francophonie
Senghor University
AFFOI
TV5Monde
LGBT rights








 Category












v
t
e


Community of Portuguese Language Countries (CPLP)






 Category





Membership




Members



Angola
Brazil
Cape Verde
East Timor
Equatorial Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Mozambique
Portugal
São Tomé and Príncipe





Observers



Georgia
Japan
Mauritius
Namibia
Senegal
Turkey











Organization



CPLP Games
Flag
TV CPLP








ACOLOP

Lusophony Games


Portuguese-using countries












v
t
e


Dialects and accents of Modern English by continent



Europe




United Kingdom




England









Varieties by common name






Barrovian
Black Country
Brummie
Bristolian
Cheshire
Cockney

"Mockney"


Cornish
Cumbrian
East Anglian
East Midlands
Essex
Estuary
Geordie
Kentish
Lancastrian
Mackem
Mancunian
Multicultural London
Norfolk
Northern
Pitmatic
Potteries
Received Pronunciation
Scouse
Southern
Suffolk
Sussex
West Country

"Mummerset"


West Midlands
Yorkshire













Varieties by geographic location






East of England

Essex
Norfolk
Suffolk


East Midlands
North

Cheshire
Cumbria

Barrow


Lancashire
Manchester
Merseyside
Sunderland
Tyneside
Yorkshire


South

Kent
Thames Estuary; London

Multicultural London


Sussex


West Country

Bristol
Cornwall
Dorset


West Midlands

Black Country
Birmingham
Stoke-on-Trent













Northern Ireland



Mid Ulster
Ulster Scots





Scotland



Glasgow
Highlands





Wales



Cardiff
Gower
Port Talbot








Ireland



Dublin

D4


South-West

Cork


Supraregional
Ulster





Channel Islands



Alderney
Guernsey
Jersey





Elsewhere



Gibraltar
Isle of Man
Malta








North and
South
America




United States









Varieties by common name






African American
Appalachian
Boston
Cajun
California
Chicago; Detroit; Great Lakes
Chicano
Mid-Atlantic

Philadelphia; South Jersey
Baltimorese


General American
High Tider
Maine
Miami
Midland
Midwestern
New England
New Mexican
New York
Old Southern
Pacific Northwest
Pennsylvania Dutch
Pittsburghese
Rhode Island
Southern
Texan
Upper Midwestern
Western
Vermont
Yat
Yeshivish
Yooper













Varieties by geographic location






Delaware Valley; Mid-Atlantic

Pennsylvania Dutch
Philadelphia; South Jersey
Baltimore


Midland
Midwest

Great Lakes; Inland North
Upper Midwest
Upper Peninsula of Michigan


New England

Boston
Maine
Rhode Island
Vermont


New York City; Northeastern New Jersey

New York Latino


North
South

Acadiana
Appalachia
Chesapeake; Pamlico
Miami
New Orleans
Texas


West

California
New Mexico
Pacific Northwest


Western Pennsylvania











Canada



Aboriginal
Atlantic

Cape Breton
Newfoundland
Lunenburg


Standard

Ottawa Valley
Pacific Northwest
Quebec







Caribbean



Bahamas
Barbados
Dominican Republic
Jamaica
Puerto Rico
Trinidad





Elsewhere



Bermuda
Falkland Islands
Guyana








Oceania




Australia



Aboriginal
Broad; Strine
General
South Australian
Torres Strait
West Australian





Elsewhere



Fiji
New Zealand
Palau
Solomon Islands








Other
continents




Africa



Cameroon
Ghana
Kenya
Liberia
Malawi
Namibia
Nigeria
Sierra Leone
South Africa

White

Cultivated
General
Broad
Cape Flats


Black
Indian


Uganda





Asia



Bangladesh
Brunei
Burma or Myanmar
Hong Kong
India
Malaysia
Nepal
Pakistan
Philippines
Singapore
Sri Lanka















v
t
e


Countries and regions in the Somali Plate



Countries



Somalia
Madagascar
Seychelles
Comoros
Uganda
Kenya
Tanzania
Swaziland
Mozambique





Regions



Somaliland
Réunion
Mayotte
Mauritius
KwaZulu-Natal
Khatumo
Somali Region












v
t
e


English-speaking world






Click on a coloured area to see an article about English in that country or region






































































Further links







Articles



English-speaking world
History of the English language
British Empire
English in the Commonwealth of Nations
Anglosphere





Lists



List of countries by English-speaking population
List of countries where English is an official language









 







Countries and territories where English is the national language or the native language of the majority





Africa



Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha





Americas



Anguilla
Antigua and Barbuda
The Bahamas
Barbados
Belize
Bermuda
British Virgin Islands
Canada
Cayman Islands
Dominica
Falkland Islands
Grenada
Guyana
Jamaica
Montserrat
Saba
Saint Kitts and Nevis
Saint Lucia
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
Sint Eustatius
Sint Maarten
South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands
Trinidad and Tobago
Turks and Caicos Islands
United States
United States Virgin Islands





Europe



Guernsey
Ireland
Isle of Man
Jersey
United Kingdom





Oceania



Australia
New Zealand
Norfolk Island
Pitcairn Islands








 







Countries and territories where English is an official language, but not the majority first language





Africa



Botswana
Cameroon
The Gambia
Ghana
Kenya
Lesotho
Liberia
Malawi
Mauritius
Namibia
Nigeria
Rwanda
Sierra Leone
Somaliland
South Africa
South Sudan
Sudan
Swaziland
Tanzania
Uganda
Zambia
Zimbabwe





Americas



Puerto Rico





Asia



Christmas Island
Cocos (Keeling) Islands
Hong Kong Special Administrative Region
India
Pakistan
Philippines
Singapore





Europe



Gibraltar
Malta





Oceania



American Samoa
Cook Islands
Fiji
Guam
Kiribati
Marshall Islands
Micronesia
Nauru
Niue
Northern Mariana Islands
Palau
Papua New Guinea
Samoa
Solomon Islands
Tokelau
Tuvalu
Vanuatu












Dependencies shown in italics.























Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 153147628
GND: 4074641-0
BNF: cb153244016 (data)
NDL: 00567849











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mauritius&oldid=818060471"					Categories: MauritiusMascarene IslandsCommonwealth republicsCountries of the Indian OceanEast African countriesEnglish-speaking countries and territoriesFrench-speaking countries and territoriesHotspot volcanoesIslands of MauritiusLiberal democraciesMember states of the Organisation internationale de la FrancophonieMember states of the African UnionMember states of the Commonwealth of NationsMember states of the United NationsMiocene AfricaMiocene volcanismVolcanoes of MauritiusSmall Island Developing StatesStates and territories established in 19681968 establishments in Mauritius1968 establishments in AfricaPopulated places established in 1638Populated places established by the Dutch East India Company1638 establishments in the Dutch EmpireCountries in AfricaHidden categories: CS1 French-language sources (fr)CS1 errors: invisible charactersWikipedia indefinitely move-protected pagesUse dmy dates from March 2015Coordinates on WikidataArticles containing French-language textArticles containing Morisyen-language textArticles containing Latin-language textArticles with hAudio microformatsArticles including recorded pronunciations (English)Articles needing additional references from January 2015All articles needing additional referencesArticles to be expanded from May 2017All articles to be expandedArticles using small message boxesWikipedia articles needing clarification from June 2015All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from January 2017Wikipedia articles needing clarification from June 2016Wikipedia articles in need of updating from July 2017All articles with vague or ambiguous timeVague or ambiguous time from July 2017Articles that may be too long from August 2016Wikipedia articles in need of updating from May 2017All Wikipedia articles in need of updatingAll articles lacking reliable referencesArticles lacking reliable references from December 2013Articles with DMOZ linksWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiers