





This article relies too much on references to primary sources. Please improve this by adding secondary or tertiary sources. (January 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)




Metacritic





Type of site

Review aggregator


Owner
CBS Interactive


Slogan(s)
We Deal With Criticism


Website
metacritic.com


Alexa rank
 1,237 (December 2017[update])[1]


Commercial
Yes


Registration
Free/subscription


Launched
July 16, 1999; 18 years ago (1999-07-16)


Current status
Online


OCLC number
911795326


Metacritic is a website that aggregates reviews of media products: music albums, video games, films, TV shows, and formerly, books. For each product, the scores from each review are averaged (a weighted average[2]). Metacritic was created by Jason Dietz, Marc Doyle, and Julie Doyle Roberts in 1999. The site provides an excerpt from each review and hyperlinks to its source. A color of Green, Yellow or Red summarizes the critics' recommendations. It has been described as the video game industry's "premier" review aggregator.[3][4]
Metacritic's scoring converts each review into a percentage, either mathematically from the mark given, or which the site decides subjectively from a qualitative review. Before being averaged, the scores are weighted according to the critic's fame, stature, and volume of reviews.



Contents


1 History
2 Metascores
3 Video games

3.1 Criticism


4 Films
5 Critic weights
6 See also
7 References
8 External links



History[edit]
Metacritic was launched in January 2001[5] by Marc Doyle, his sister Julie Doyle Roberts, and a classmate from the University of Southern California law school, Jason Dietz, after two years of developing the site. Rotten Tomatoes was already compiling movie reviews, but Doyle, Roberts and Dietz saw an opportunity to cover a broader range of media. They sold Metacritic to CNET in 2005.[6] CNET and Metacritic are now owned by the CBS Corporation.[7] Doyle, 36, is now a senior product manager at CNET but he also acts as games editor of Metacritic".[6] Speaking of video games, he said: "A site like ours helps people cut through...unobjective promotional language". "By giving consumers, and web users specifically, early information on the objective quality of a game, not only are they more educated about their choices, but it forces publishers to demand more from their developers, license owners to demand more from their licensees, and eventually, hopefully, the games get better". He added that the review process is not taken as seriously when unconnected magazines and websites provide reviews in isolation.[8]
In August 2010, the website's appearance was revamped; reaction from users was overwhelmingly negative.[9][10]
Metascores[edit]
Scores are weighted averages. Certain publications are given more significance "because of their stature".[6]
Games Editor Marc Doyle was interviewed by Keith Stuart of The Guardian to "get a look behind the metascoring process". Stuart wrote: "The metascore phenomenon, namely Metacritic and GameRankings, have become an enormously important element of online games journalism over the past few years".[8] Doyle said that because video games lead to a greater investment of time and money, gamers are more informed about reviews than are fans of film or music; they want to know "whether that hotly anticipated title is going to deliver"[8].
The rating scale of metascores is:[11]


Indication
Video games
Films/television/music



Universal acclaim
91–100
81–100


Generally favorable reviews
75–90
61–80



Mixed or average reviews
50–74
40–60



Generally unfavorable reviews
20–49
20–39


Overwhelming dislike
0–19
0–19


Video games[edit]
Metacritic is regarded as the foremost online review aggregation site for the video game industry.[3][4]
Nick Wingfield of The Wall Street Journal has written that Metacritic "influence[s] the sales of games and the stocks of video game publishers". He explains its influence as coming from the higher cost of buying video games than music or movie tickets.[6] Many executives say that low scores "can hurt the long-term sales potential".[6] Wingfield wrote that Wall Street pays attention to Metacritic and GameRankings because the sites typically post scores before sales data are publicly available, citing the respective rapid rise and fall in company values after BioShock and Spider-Man 3 were released.[6]
In an interview with The Guardian, Marc Doyle cited "two major publishers" that "conducted comprehensive statistical surveys through which they've been able to draw a correlation between high metascores and stronger sales" in certain genres.[8] He claimed that an increasing number of businesses and financial analysts use Metacritic as "an early indicator of a game's potential sales and, by extension, the publisher's stock price".[8]
In 2004, Jason Hall and Marcus Johnson of Warner Bros. began "including 'quality metrics' in contracts with partners licensing its movies for games": if a product does not at least achieve a specific score, some deals require the publisher to pay higher royalties.[6]
In 2008, Microsoft began using Metacritic averages to de-list underperforming Xbox Live Arcade games.[12][13]
Criticism[edit]
Some game reviewers take issue with the way Metacritic assigns scores. When a reviewer gives a rating of "A", Metacritic assigns it a value of 100, and for "F" a value of zero; some think a score of 50 would be more appropriate.[6] For a "B–", Metacritic assigns a value of 67, yet some publishers, developers and websurfers believe it should be closer to 80, in line with the conversion often used in the US education system.[8] Joe Dodson, former editor at Game Revolution, criticized Metacritic and similar sites for turning reviews into scores that are too low.[6] However, Doyle responded: "I feel that ANY scale simply needs to be converted directly with its lowest possible grade equating to 0, and the highest to 100".[8]
Doyle said that some publishers want him to include extra critics, and exclude others, usually because they have given a poor review. Another common complaint from US publishers is that British critics should not be reviewing games that are based on American sports like the NFL, NASCAR, or the NBA. Doyle said: "Conversely, many European publishers feel that American critics are not qualified or properly situated to review football, rally, F1, cricket and rugby games...once I've decided to track a publication, I cannot pick and choose which reviews I list on Metacritic based on such individual judgments".[8]
Publishers often try to persuade Doyle to exclude reviews they feel are unfair, but he said that once a publication is included, he refuses to omit any of its reviews.[6] A Washington Post review of Uncharted 4 was assigned with a rating of 40% by Metacritic; this was the only "negative" review of the game. Gamers who did not like the review petitioned Metacritic to remove the Post as a trusted source.[14]
As a result of its perceived negative influence on the industry, several reviewing sites, including Kotaku[15] and Eurogamer[16], have dropped numerical reviews that would appear in Metacritic, instead favoring a qualitative assessment of a game.
Metacritic has been criticised for how it handles banning users and their reviews, with no notice or formal process for appeal,[17] and users have complained to the Better Business Bureau about the difficulty of contacting the company.[18] Critics and developers have pointed out the website's lack of personal management along with its automatic systems, since a video game can be review bombed with low ratings to damage its reputation. In the same respect, a game can be given multiple 10 ratings by throwaway accounts to make it appear more popular than it actually is, which is a much more commonly used tactic. Signal Studios president and creative director Douglas Albright described the website as having "no standards".[19]
Films[edit]
Metacritic lists over 9,000 films ranked by aggregate score on an Marcus rating scale.[20]
Critic weights[edit]
Metacritic has said that it will not reveal the relative weight assigned to each reviewer.[21]
See also[edit]

Rating site
Internet Movie Database (IMDb)

References[edit]


^ "metacritic.com Traffic Statistics". Alexa Internet. Retrieved October 30, 2017. 
^ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 2015-09-28. Retrieved 2013-10-28. 
^ a b "OpenCritic's Gamer-Centric Style Is Everything Metacritic Should Have Been". 
^ a b Mike Rose. "Gamasutra - Metacritic is here to stay, but can we fix it?". 
^ "Metacritic: The History", Metacritic.com
^ a b c d e f g h i j Nick Wingfield (2007-09-20). "High Scores Matter To Game Makers, Too". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved 2008-02-15. 
^ "Columbia Journalism Review - CJR's guide to what the major media companies own". Retrieved 2011-11-28. 
^ a b c d e f g h Keith Stuart (2008-01-17). "Interview: the science and art of Metacritic". The Guardian. Retrieved 2008-02-15. 
^ "Give Us Your Feedback!". Metacritic. CBS Corporation. 2010. Retrieved 2011-10-04. 
^ "Welcome to the New Metacritic". Metacritic. CBS Corporation. 2010. Retrieved 2011-10-04. 
^ "How We Create the Metascore Magic". Metacritic. CBS Interactive Inc. Archived from the original on 2015-09-28. Retrieved 2012-05-13. 
^ Chris Remo (2008-05-22). "Microsoft To Delist Low-Ranking XBLA Titles, Raise Size Limit". GamaSutra. Retrieved 2008-05-22. 
^ Joe Keiser (2008-05-22). "EXCLUSIVE INTERVIEW: MS to Delist XBLA Titles". Next Generation. Archived from the original on January 24, 2012. Retrieved 2008-05-29. 
^ Schreier, Jason (May 16, 2016). "Reviewer Targeted For Giving Uncharted 4 Negative Review". Kotaku. Retrieved May 16, 2016. 
^ Tolito, Stephan (2012-01-30). "How We Will Review Games". Kotaku. Retrieved 2015-02-10. 
^ Welsh, Oli (2015-02-10). "Eurogamer has dropped review scores". Eurogamer. Retrieved 2015-02-10. 
^ "Metacritic Bans "Bombing" Users – Bans several users only after a request by developers". Retrieved 2011-09-23. 
^ "Publicly available BBB complaints – Describes as a majority to have issues with CBS refusing contact". Retrieved 2014-03-01. 
^ "Metacritic criticized by company president – Exclaims site without standards". Retrieved 2011-09-22. 
^ "Best Movies of All Time". Metacritic. 
^ "Frequently Asked Questions". Metacritic. Retrieved 2015-07-29. 


External links[edit]



Wikidata has the property: Metacritic ID (P1712) (see uses)



Official website

"How We Create the Metascore Magic"









v
t
e


CBS Corporation



Corporate directors



David R. Andelman
Joseph A. Califano Jr.
William S. Cohen
Charles K. Gifford
Leonard Goldberg
Bruce S. Gordon
Arnold Kopelson
Leslie Moonves
Doug Morris
Shari Redstone
Sumner Redstone





Broadcast TV assets



CBS
The CW (co-owned with Warner Bros.)
Decades (co-owned with Weigel Broadcasting)
Network Ten

Eleven
One
Spree TV







Network facilities



CBS Building
CBS Broadcast Center
CBS Studio Center
CBS Television City
Ed Sullivan Theater





CBS Television Studios



CBS Productions
CBS Television Distribution
Big Ticket Entertainment
KWP Studios





Broadcast stations







v
t
e


CBS Television Stations



CBS/DEC O&O



KCBS
KCNC
KDKA
KOVR
KPIX
KTVT
KYW
WBBM
WBZ
WCBS
WCCO
WFOR
WJZ
WWJ





CW O&O



KBCW
KMAX
KSTW
WKBD
WPCW
WPSG
WTOG
WUPA





Other stations



Ind.

KCAL
KTXA
WBXI-CD (weather)
WLNY-TV


MyNetworkTV

WBFS
WSBK














Network Ten






TEN
ATV
TVQ
ADS
NEW











Cable channels



Showtime Networks
CBS Sports Network
Pop (50% with Lionsgate)
AXS TV (minority stake)





CBS Studios International



CBS Action
CBS Drama
CBS Europa
CBS Reality
Horror Channel
RTL CBS Entertainment
RTL CBS Extreme





CBS Interactive







v
t
e


CBS Interactive



Brands



CBS All Access
CBSNews.com
CBS MoneyWatch
CBSSports.com

247Sports.com
MaxPreps.com
Scout.com


Chowhound
CNET

Download.com


FindArticles
GameFAQs
GameSpot

GameRankings
Giant Bomb
Comic Vine


Last.fm
Metacritic
mySimon
TVGuide.com

TV.com


UrbanBaby
ZDNet

TechRepublic







Channels



CBSN
CNET Video





Staff, current



Dan Ackerman
Bridget Carey
Brian Cooley
Jeff Gerstmann
Jim Lanzone
Daniel Terdiman





Staff, former



Matthew Barzun
Veronica Belmont
Esther Dyson
Ina Fried
Richard Hart
James Kim
Declan McCullagh
Tom Merritt
Halsey Minor
Natali Morris
Rafe Needleman
Andrew Nusca
Ryan Seacrest
Molly Wood





Contributors, current



Violet Blue
Christopher Dawson
David Gewirtz
Jason Perlow





Contributors, former



Harry McCracken








Simon & Schuster



Atria Publishing Group

Howard
37 INK


Gallery Publishing Group

Pocket
Threshold


Scribner
Simon & Schuster
Simon & Schuster Audio Publishing

Pimsleur


Simon & Schuster Children’s Publishing

Aladdin
Atheneum







Radio networks



CBS News Radio
CBS Sports Radio





Miscellaneous assets



CBS Consumer Products
CBS Records
Westinghouse Electric
CBS Home Entertainment
CBS Films
CBS News

CBSN


CBS Sports





Defunct properties



CBS Cable
CBS Paramount Domestic Television
CBS Paramount Network Television
CBS Radio
Free FM
Paramount Stations Group
Spelling Television
UPN
Westinghouse Broadcasting
Worldvision Enterprises





See also



Viacom (original)
National Amusements
Westinghouse Electric Corporation
Gulf and Western Industries












v
t
e


Video game journalism



Review aggregators



GameRankings
Metacritic
OpenCritic





Video game magazines



Edge
Electronic Gaming Monthly
Famitsu
GamePro
Game Informer
Gamereactor
GamesTM
GamesMaster
Hardcore Gamer
Metro GameCentral
Nintendo Power
Official PlayStation Magazines
Official Xbox Magazine
PC Format
PC Gamer
PC World
Pocket Gamer
Power Unlimited
Retro Gamer





Video game websites



Adventure Gamers
AusGamers
Destructoid
Eurogamer
Game Revolution
Gameplanet
GamesRadar
GameSpot
GameZone
Giant Bomb
IGN
Kotaku
Nintendo Life
Operation Rainfall
PCGamesN
Polygon
Rock, Paper, Shotgun
Rooster Teeth
Shacknews
VG247
VideoGamer.com











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Metacritic&oldid=817560796"					Categories: Film review websitesOnline film databasesVideo game review aggregatorsRecommender systemsCBS Interactive websitesInternet properties established in 2001Hidden categories: Articles lacking reliable references from January 2016All articles lacking reliable referencesPages using deprecated image syntaxArticles containing potentially dated statements from December 2017All articles containing potentially dated statementsOfficial website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia