

Metropolitan county





Category
Counties


Location
England


Found in
Regions


Created by
Local Government Act 1972


Created
1 April 1974


Number
6 (as of 2008)


Additional status
Ceremonial counties


Populations
1.2–2.8 million


Subdivisions
Metropolitan district


The metropolitan counties are a type of county-level administrative division of England. There are six metropolitan counties, which each cover large urban areas, typically with populations of 1.2 to 2.8 million.[1] They were created in 1974 and are each divided into several metropolitan districts or boroughs.
The metropolitan county councils were abolished in 1986 with most of their functions being devolved to the individual boroughs, making them de facto unitary authorities. The remaining functions were taken over by joint boards.[2]
The metropolitan counties have population densities of between 800 (South Yorkshire) and 2,800 (West Midlands) people/km². Individual metropolitan districts range from 4,000 people/km² in Liverpool to only 500 people/km² in Doncaster.[3] Today, residents of metropolitan counties account for around 22% of the population of England, or 18% of the United Kingdom.



Contents


1 Counties and districts
2 History

2.1 Creation
2.2 Structure
2.3 Abolition of the county councils
2.4 Current status


3 See also
4 External links
5 References



Counties and districts[edit]
The six metropolitan counties and their metropolitan districts are:


Metropolitan county
Metropolitan boroughs


Greater Manchester
City of Manchester, City of Salford, Bolton, Bury, Oldham, Rochdale, Stockport, Tameside, Trafford, Wigan


Merseyside
City of Liverpool, Knowsley, St Helens, Sefton, Wirral


South Yorkshire
City of Sheffield, Barnsley, Doncaster, Rotherham


Tyne and Wear
City of Newcastle upon Tyne, City of Sunderland, Gateshead, South Tyneside, North Tyneside


West Midlands
City of Birmingham, City of Coventry, City of Wolverhampton, Dudley, Sandwell, Solihull, Walsall


West Yorkshire
City of Leeds, City of Bradford, City of Wakefield, Calderdale, Kirklees


The structure of Greater London is similar to the metropolitan counties, but it is not one. It was created earlier in 1965, by the London Government Act 1963.
History[edit]
Creation[edit]
The idea for creating administrative areas based upon the large conurbations outside London, based on the model of the County of London or Greater London, was mooted several times in the 20th century. The Local Government Boundary Commission in 1948 had proposed several new counties including ones based on 'South East Lancashire North East Cheshire' and 'South West Lancashire North West Cheshire'. The Local Government Commission for England proposed in the 1960s this arrangement for Tyneside and draft proposals considered it for Selnec. Its proposal for the West Midlands conurbation preferred instead an area of contiguous county boroughs with no overall metropolitan authority.
The Redcliffe-Maud Report of 1969 proposed the creation of three large "metropolitan areas" based upon the conurbations surrounding Manchester, Liverpool and Birmingham - Selnec, Merseyside, and West Midlands, which were to have both metropolitan councils covering the entire areas, and district councils covering parts. Harold Wilson's government published a white paper accepting these recommendations broadly, also adding South Yorkshire and West Yorkshire as metropolitan areas.[4]
The proposals of the report were radically altered when Edward Heath's Conservative government came to power in 1970. The Conservative's local government White Paper was published in February 1971, naming the metropolitan areas "metropolitan counties", and giving them as "Merseyside, south-east Lancashire and north-east Cheshire, the West Midlands, West Yorkshire, South Yorkshire, and the Tyne and Wear area".[5][6]
The counties were also far smaller than in the original proposals, being trimmed at each successive stage - the Redcliffe Maud report had included Chester in Merseyside and Redditch and Stafford in West Midlands. The Conservative policy favoured retaining historic boundaries as far as was practicable,[4] and the White Paper proposals generally reduced the metropolitan counties to the continuously built up area. Many areas on the edges were excluded from the metropolitan counties when the Bill was passed: Easington, Harrogate, Knaresborough, Ellesmere Port, Neston, New Mills, Whaley Bridge and Glossop : other areas were excluded during the Bill's passage, such as Seaham, Skelmersdale and Holland, Poynton and Wilmslow. One area, the county borough of Southport, was added to Merseyside in the Bill, at the local council's request.
Several other proposals for metropolitan counties were made during the Bill's passage, including a revival of the proposal for Hampshire (either the southern part or all of it)[7] and central Lancashire. A Thamesside metropolitan county, covering areas of north Kent and south Essex on the Thames Estuary (and now considered part of the Thames Gateway) was also proposed.[8]
The metropolitan counties were created by the Local Government Act 1972, the county councils were first elected in 1973, and were formally established in April 1974.
Structure[edit]
The metropolitan counties were first created with a two-tier structure of local government. Local government functions were divided between the metropolitan district councils as lower tier authorities and metropolitan county councils (MCCs) as the upper tier.
The structure differed from the non-metropolitan counties in the allocation of powers between the county and district councils. The metropolitan districts had more powers than non-metropolitan districts, in that they were responsible for services such as education, and social services. In the non-metropolitan counties these were the responsibility of the county councils.
The metropolitan county councils (MCCs) were intended to be strategic authorities that ran regional services such as main roads, public transport, emergency services, civil protection, waste disposal, and strategic town and country planning. The MCCs functioned between 1974 and 1986.
Abolition of the county councils[edit]
Just a decade after they were established the mostly Labour-controlled metropolitan county councils and the Greater London Council had several high-profile clashes, about overspending and high rates charging, with the Conservative government of Margaret Thatcher.
Government policy on the issue was considered throughout 1982, and the Conservative Party put a "promise to scrap the metropolitan county councils" and the GLC, in their manifesto for the 1983 general election.[9][10][11]
The exact details of the reform caused problems[12] In October 1983, it published a White Paper entitled Streamlining the cities[13] which proposed detailed plans for the abolition of the MCCs, together with the abolition of the Greater London Council (GLC).[14][15]
The Bill was formally announced in the Queen's Speech[16] and was introduced into Parliament soon thereafter. It became the Local Government Act 1985;[17] the MCCs and the GLC were abolished at midnight on 31 March 1986.
The last elections to the councils were held in May 1981: elections that would have been held in 1985 were abandoned under the Local Government (Interim Provisions) Act 1984;[18] The original plan had been for councillors' terms to expire in April 1985, and then be replaced by nominees from borough councils until 1986.[14]
While GLC abolition was highly controversial, the abolition of the MCCs was much less so. The Liberal Party leader David Steel had supported abolition of the MCCs in his 1981 conference speech[citation needed]. The government's stated reason for the abolition of the MCCs was based on efficiency and their overspending.
However the fact that all of the county councils were controlled by the Labour Party led to accusations that their abolition was motivated by party politics:[19] the general secretary of Nalgo described it as a "completely cynical manoeuvre".[20][21] Merseyside in particular put up a struggle against abolition. Most of the functions of the MCCs passed either to the metropolitan borough councils, or to joint boards. Some assets were given to residuary bodies for disposal. The split of functions from the metropolitan county councils was as follows:[22]


Special joint arrangements
Grants to voluntary bodies, roads and traffic management, waste disposal, airports


Joint boards
Fire, police, public transport


Quangos
Arts, pensions and debt, sport


District councils
Arts, civil defence, planning, trading standards, parks, tourism, archives, industrial assistance, highways


Current status[edit]






This article needs to be updated. Please update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information. (March 2017)







  metropolitan borough
  London borough
  unitary authority
  two-tier non-metropolitan county


The metropolitan counties are sometimes referred to as "former metropolitan counties",[23][24] although this description is not entirely correct. The county councils were abolished, but under the Local Government Act 1972, the counties themselves remain in existence,[25][26] although they no longer exist in ISO 3166-2:GB as extant administrative subdivisions.
By virtue of the Lieutenancies Act 1997 they remain as ceremonial counties (sometimes called 'geographic counties') which have an appointed Lord-Lieutenant. They are also used in certain government statistics, although they no longer appear on Ordnance Survey maps, which show the individual metropolitan boroughs.
Some local services are still run on a metropolitan county-wide basis, administered by statutory joint boards[27] and special joint arrangements, these include policing (by joint police authorities), fire services, public transport (by passenger transport executives) and waste disposal (in Merseyside and Greater Manchester) These joint boards are made up of councillors appointed by the boroughs. Since 2000, the metropolitan counties have been used as the areas of joint Local Transport Plans.[28][29][30]
In 1999, following a successful referendum, the Labour government under Tony Blair legislated to create a strategic authority for London (the Greater London Authority). Despite some talk of doing so, no bodies were established to replace the MCCs. The Blair government instead pursued the idea of elected Regional Assemblies, although following an unsuccessful referendum in the most positive region of the North East, this idea now has few proponents. The idea of city regions has been proposed subsequently, although the 2006 local government white paper has no firm proposals for formal recognition of this concept. This changed in 2010 when the Government accepted a proposal from the Association of Greater Manchester Authorities to establish a Greater Manchester Combined Authority as an indirectly elected, top tier, strategic authority for Greater Manchester.[31] In 2014 similar indirectly elected combined authorities were established for the metropolitan counties of South Yorkshire and West Yorkshire, and two combined authorities were established which each covered a metropolitan county and adjacent non-metropolitan districts: the Liverpool City Region Combined Authority for Merseyside and the Borough of Halton unitary authority, and the North East Combined Authority for Tyne and Wear and the unitary authorities of County Durham and Northumberland. In 2017 the West Midlands Combined Authority was established for the West Midlands county. Many of these new combined authorities have elected or are in the process of electing Authority-wide regional mayors.
Since 1995, the cities of Birmingham, Bristol, Leeds, Liverpool, Manchester, Newcastle, Nottingham and Sheffield have assembled together in the Core Cities Group. This organisation accords no distinct legal status on these councils over any other city council in England but appears to be organically moving towards some kind of recognition of their role as regional capitals outside London.
See also[edit]

List of articles about local government in the United Kingdom

External links[edit]

Map of the UK counties and unitary administrations
Map of all UK local authorities

References[edit]


^ Jones, B. et al., Politics UK, (2004)
^ Her Majesty's Stationery Office, Aspects of Britain: Local Government, (1996)
^ "2001 census : KS01 Usual resident population". Retrieved 2010-08-09. 
^ a b Hampton, W., Local Government and Urban Politics, (1991)
^ Cities and towns lose borough status in reshaped local councils. The Times. 17 February 1971.
^ Bryne, T., Local Government in Britain, (1994)
^ Future of Hampshire : Letter to the Editor by Mayors of Southampton and Southampton. The Times. 12 April 1972.
^ Thamesside county urged to tackle river problems. The Times. 19 January 1972.
^ Tory plan to abolish GLC and metropolitan councils, but rates stay. 15 January 1983.
^ Tories may abolish county councils if they win election. 5 May 1983.
^ Big cities defiant over police. 16 June 1983.
^ Whitehall admits problems in abolishing GLC and metropolitan conucils. The Times. 23 September 1983.
^ "Cmnd. 9063". Bopcris.ac.uk. 2007-03-27. Archived from the original on 27 September 2007. Retrieved 2010-08-09. 
^ a b "Streamlined" city authorities formula unveiled. The Times. 8 October 1983.
^ Labour storm over White Paper on council shake-up. 8 October 1983.
^ Bill to abolish GLC centrepiece of Queen's Speech. The Times. 7 November 1984.
^ 1985 c. 51
^ 1984 c. 53
^ Martin Loughlin Legality and Locality: The Role of Law in Central-local Government Relations Oxford University Press, 1996 ISBN 0-19-826015-6
^ Angry reaction to councils White Paper. The Times. 8 October 1983.
^ politics.co.uk Issue Brief Archived 13 November 2007 at the Wayback Machine. and Jonathan Rawle's website refer.
^ Kingdom, J., Local Government and Politics in Britain, (1991)
^ Number of counties/districts/unitary authorities/wards etc in the UK Office for National Statistics, 22 July 2003. Retrieved 14 April 2009.
^ Department for Transport - Regional transport statistics, 20 March 2009. Retrieved 14 April 2009.
^ Office for National Statistics - Gazetteer of the old and new geographies of the United Kingdom. p48
^ Metropolitan Counties and Districts Archived 15 March 2008 at the Wayback Machine., Beginners' Guide to UK Geography, Office for National Statistics, 17 September 2004. Retrieved 11 January 2007.
^ http://www.local.odpm.gov.uk/finance/stats/lgfs/lgfs14/xlsfiles_maps/chapter1/table13a.gif Archived 27 March 2009 at the Wayback Machine.
^ "Welcome to the Greater Manchester Local Transport Plan Website". Gmltp.co.uk. Archived from the original on 2000-05-20. Retrieved 2010-08-09. 
^ "Welcome to the TravelWise Merseyside website". Transportmerseyside.org. Retrieved 2010-08-09. 
^ "Home". Westmidlandsltp.gov.uk. Archived from the original on 19 July 2011. Retrieved 9 August 2010. 
^ [1] Archived 4 April 2010 at the Wayback Machine.








v
t
e


Administrative geography of the United Kingdom



United Kingdom local government



History
Subdivisions: Shrievalties
Lieutenancy areas
Counties (list)





England local government



History
Subdivisions: Regions
Ceremonial counties

list


Combined authorities
Metropolitan and Non-metropolitan counties
Unitary authorities (list)
Districts (list)
Civil parishes (list)





Northern Ireland local government



History
Subdivisions: Counties
Districts





Scotland local government



History
Subdivisions: Sheriffdoms
Lieutenancy areas
Council areas
Community council areas
Civil parishes





Wales local government



History
Subdivisions: Preserved counties
Principal areas
Communities (list)
Historic counties












v
t
e


 Subdivisions of England



Region



Regions
NUTS 1 statistical regions of England





County



Metropolitan
Non-metropolitan
Ceremonial





District



Metropolitan
Non-metropolitan
London borough
City of London
Unitary authority
Isles of Scilly





Civil parish



Civil parish












v
t
e


Metropolitan counties






Greater Manchester
Merseyside
South Yorkshire
Tyne and Wear
West Midlands
West Yorkshire












v
t
e


Designations for types of administrative territorial entities








English terms








Common English terms1



Area



Insular area
Local government area
Protected area
Special area
Statistical area

Combined statistical area
Metropolitan statistical area
Micropolitan statistical area


Urban area





Canton

Half-canton



Borough



County borough
Metropolitan borough





Capital



Federal capital
Imperial capital





City



City state
Autonomous city
Charter city
Independent city
Incorporated city
Imperial city
Free imperial city
Royal free city





Community



Autonomous community
Residential community





County



Administrative county
Autonomous county
Consolidated city-county
Metropolitan county

Non-metropolitan


Viscountcy





Country



Overseas country





Department



Overseas department





District



Capital district
City district
Congressional district
Electoral district
Federal district
Indian government district
Land district
Metropolitan district

Non-metropolitan district


Military district
Municipal district
Police district
Regional district
Rural district
Sanitary district
Subdistrict
Urban district
Special district





Division



Census division
Police division
Subdivision





Municipality



County municipality

Norway
Nova Scotia
Regional county municipality


Direct-controlled municipality
District municipality
Mountain resort municipality
Neutral municipality
Regional municipality
Resort municipality
Rural municipality
Specialized municipality





Prefecture



Autonomous prefecture
Subprefecture
Super-prefecture
Praetorian prefecture





Province



Autonomous province
Overseas province
Roman province





Region



Administrative region
Autonomous region
Capital region
Development region
Economic region
Mesoregion
Microregion
Overseas region
Planning region
Special administrative region
Statistical region
Subregion





Reserve



Biosphere reserve
Ecological reserve
Game reserve
Indian reserve
Nature reserve





State



Federal state
Free state
Sovereign state





Territory



Capital territory

Federal capital territory


Dependent territory
Federal territory
Military territory
Organized incorporated territory
Overseas territory
Union territory
Unorganized territory





Town



Census town
Market town





Township



Charter township
Civil township
Paper township
Survey township
Urban township





Unit



Autonomous territorial unit
Local administrative unit
Municipal unit
Regional unit





Zone



Economic zone

Exclusive economic zone
Free economic zone
Special economic zone


Free-trade zone
Neutral zone
Self-administered zone










Other English terms



Current



Alpine resort
Bailiwick
Banner

Autonomous


Block
Cadastre
Circle
Circuit
Colony
Commune
Condominium
Constituency
Duchy
Eldership
Emirate
Federal dependency
Governorate
Hamlet
Ilkhanate
Indian reservation
Manor

Royal


Muftiate
Neighbourhood
Parish
Periphery
Precinct
Principality
Protectorate
Quarter
Regency
Autonomous republic
Riding
Sector

Autonomous


Shire
Sultanate
Suzerainty
Townland
Village

Administrative
Summer


Ward






Historical



Agency
Barony
Burgh
Exarchate
Hide
Hundred
Imperial Circle
March
Monthon
Presidency
Residency
Roman diocese
Seat
Tenth
Tithing



















Non-English or loanwords







Current



Amt
Bakhsh
Barangay
Bezirk
Regierungsbezirk
Comune
Frazione
Fu
Gemeinde
Județ
Kunta / kommun

Finland
Sweden


Län
Località
Megye
Muban
Oblast

Autonomous


Okrug
Ostān
Poblacion
Purok
Shahrestān
Sum
Sýsla
Tehsil
Vingtaine





Historical



Commote
Gau
Heerlijkheid
Köping
Maalaiskunta
Nome

Egypt
Greece


Pagus
Pargana
Plasă
Satrapy
Socken
Subah
Syssel
Zhou












v
t
e


Arabic terms for country subdivisions



First-level



Muhafazah (محافظة governorate)
Wilayah (ولاية province)
Mintaqah (منطقة region)
Mudiriyah (مديرية directorate)
Imarah (إمارة emirate)
Baladiyah (بلدية municipality)
Shabiyah (شعبية "popularate")





Second / third-level



Mintaqah (منطقة region)
Qadaa (قضاء district)
Nahiyah (ناحية subdistrict)
Markaz (مركز district)
Mutamadiyah (معتمدية "delegation")
Daerah/Daïra (دائرة circle)
Liwa (لواء banner / sanjak)





City / township-level



Amanah (أمانة municipality)
Baladiyah (بلدية municipality)
Ḥai (حي neighborhood / quarter)
Mahallah (محلة)
Qarya (قرية)
Sheyakhah (شياخة "neighborhood subdivision")






English translations given are those most commonly used.








v
t
e


French terms for country subdivisions






arrondissement
département
préfecture
subprefectures










v
t
e


Greek terms for country subdivisions



Modern



apokentromenes dioikiseis / geniki dioikisis§ / diamerisma§ / periphereia
nomos§ / periphereiaki enotita
demos / eparchia§ / koinotita§





Historical



archontia/archontaton
bandon
demos
despotaton
dioikesis
doukaton
droungos
eparchia
exarchaton
katepanikion
kephalatikion
kleisoura
meris
naukrareia
satrapeia
strategis
thema
toparchia
tourma






§ signifies a defunct institution








v
t
e


Portuguese terms for country subdivisions



Regional subdivisions



Estado
Distrito federal
Província
Região
Distrito
Comarca
Capitania





Local subdivisions



Município
Concelho
Freguesia
Comuna
Circunscrição





Settlements



Cidade
Vila
Aldeia
Bairro
Lugar








Historical subdivisions in italics.










v
t
e


Slavic terms for country subdivisions



Current



dzielnica
gmina
krai
kraj
krajina / pokrajina
městys
obec
oblast / oblast' / oblasti / oblys / obwód / voblast'
okręg
okres
okrug
opština / općina / občina / obshtina
osiedle
powiat / povit
raion
selsoviet / silrada
sołectwo
voivodeship / vojvodina
županija





Historical



darugha
gromada
guberniya / gubernia
jurydyka
khutor
obshchina
okolia
opole
pogost
prowincja
sorok
srez
starostwo / starostva
uyezd
volost
ziemia
župa










v
t
e


Spanish terms for country subdivisions



National, Federal



Comunidad autónoma
Departamento
Distrito federal
Estado
Provincia
Región





Regional, Metropolitan



Cantón
Comarca
Comuna
Corregimiento
Delegación
Distrito
Mancomunidad
Merindad
Municipalidad
Municipio
Parroquia

Ecuador
Spain







Urban, Rural



Aldea
Alquería
Anteiglesia
Asentamiento

Asentamiento informal
Pueblos jóvenes


Barrio
Campamento
Caserío
Ciudad

Ciudad autónoma


Colonia
Lugar
Masía
Pedanía
Población
Ranchería
Sitio
Vereda
Villa
Village (Pueblito/Pueblo)








Historical subdivisions in italics.










v
t
e


Turkish terms for country subdivisions



Modern



il (province)
ilçe (district)
şehir (city)
kasaba (town)
belediye (municipality)
belde (community)
köy (village)
mahalle (neighbourhood/quarter)





Historical



ağalık (feudal district)
bucak (subdistrict)
beylerbeylik (province)
kadılık (subprovince)
kaza (sub-province)
hidivlik (viceroyalty)
mutasarrıflık (subprovince)
nahiye (nahiyah)
paşalık (province)
reya (Romanian principalities)
sancak (prefecture)
vilayet (province)
voyvodalık (Romanian provinces)















1 Used by ten or more countries or having derived terms. Historical derivations in italics.
See also: Census division, Electoral district, Political division, and List of administrative divisions by country










						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Metropolitan_county&oldid=812044647"					Categories: Types of country subdivisionsMetropolitan countiesLocal government in EnglandInterested parties in planning in England1972 establishments in EnglandHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksUse dmy dates from July 2014Use British English from July 2014Pages using deprecated image syntaxAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from September 2008Wikipedia articles in need of updating from March 2017All Wikipedia articles in need of updating