





This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (June 2006) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)







Macarius II, Metropolitan of Moscow. In the Russian Orthodox Church a white klobuk is distinctive of a metropolitan.


In Christian churches with episcopal polity, the rank of metropolitan bishop, or simply metropolitan, pertains to the diocesan bishop or archbishop of a metropolis (then more precisely called metropolitan archbishop); that is, the chief city of a historical Roman province, ecclesiastical province, or regional capital.
Before the establishment of patriarchs (beginning in AD 325), metropolitan was the highest episcopal rank in the Eastern rites of the Church. They presided over synods of bishops, and were granted special privileges by canon law and sacred tradition.
The Early Church structure generally followed the Roman imperial practice, with one bishop ruling each city and its territory.[1] The bishop of the provincial capital, the metropolitan, enjoyed certain rights over other bishops in the province, later called suffragans.[1]



Contents


1 Catholic Church

1.1 Latin Church
1.2 Eastern Catholic

1.2.1 Within Patriarchal or Major Archiepiscopal Churches
1.2.2 As Heads of their own Particular Churches




2 Eastern Orthodox
3 Oriental Orthodox

3.1 Malankara Churches


4 Anglican
5 See also
6 References
7 External links



Catholic Church[edit]

See also: Catholic Church hierarchy and Diocesan bishop






Part of a series on the


Hierarchy of the
Catholic Church



Saint Peter



Ecclesiastical titles (order of precedence)




Pope
Cardinal

Cardinal-nephew
Cardinal protector
Crown-cardinal
Cardinal Vicar


Moderator of the curia
Chaplain of His Holiness
Papal legate
Papal majordomo
Apostolic Nuncio
Apostolic Delegate
Apostolic Syndic
Apostolic visitor
Vicar Apostolic
Apostolic Exarch
Apostolic Prefect
Assistant at the Pontifical Throne
Eparch
Metropolitan
Patriarch
Bishop

Archbishop
Bishop Emeritus
Diocesan bishop
Major archbishop
Primate
Suffragan bishop
Titular bishop
Coadjutor bishop
Auxiliary bishop


Territorial prelate
Territorial abbot






Liturgical titles


Acolyte
Consecrator
Lector
Reader
Subdeacon








Administrative and pastoral titles


Auditor
Brother
Chancellor
Chaplain

Military chaplain
Military ordinary


Coarb
Confessor
Consultor
Curate
Deacon
Defender of the Bond
Definitor
Devil's advocate
Diocesan administrator
Ecclesiastical judge
Episcopal vicar
Exorcist
Judicial vicar
Lay brother
Lay cardinal
Monsignor
Officialis
Pastor

Assistant pastor


Personal prelate
Preacher
Prefect
Presbyter
Priest
Protonotary Apostolic
Saint

Blessed
Venerable


Seminarian
Vicar forane
Vicar general








Consecrated and professed titles


Abbess
Abbot
Consecrated virgin
Corrector
Custos
Friar
Dean
Grand Master
Hermit
Master general
Master of novices
Monk
Novice
Nun

Postulant


Oblate
Prior
Provincial superior
Rector
Religious
Superior general








Additional titles


Almoner
Altar server
Archimandrite
Archpriest
Archdeacon
Canon
Chorbishop
Commissary Apostolic
Datarius
Honorary Prelate
Minor canon
Notarius
Ostiarius
Peritus
Postulator
Precentor
Prince-bishop
Promotor Fidei
Protopriest
Protodeacon
Protosyncellus
Regionarius








Organization titles


Grand Master

Sovereign Military Order of Malta
Order of the Holy Sepulchre
Teutonic Knights










 Catholicism portal







v
t
e









Cardinal Daniel DiNardo is the Metropolitan Archbishop of Galveston-Houston. In the Catholic Church, the pallium is unique to a metropolitan bishop.


Latin Church[edit]
In the Latin Church, an ecclesiastical province, composed of several neighbouring dioceses,[2] is headed by a metropolitan, the archbishop of the diocese designated by the Pope.[3] The other bishops are known as suffragan bishops.
The metropolitan's powers over dioceses other than his own are normally limited to

supervising observance of faith and ecclesiastical discipline and notifying the Supreme Pontiff of any abuses;
carrying out, for reasons approved beforehand by the Holy See, a canonical inspection that the suffragan bishop has neglected to perform;
appointing a diocesan administrator if the college of consultors fails to elect an at least 35-year-old priest within eight days after the vacancy of the see becomes known;[4] and
serving as the default ecclesiastical court for appeals from decisions of the tribunals of the suffragan bishops.[5]

The metropolitan also has the liturgical privilege of celebrating sacred functions throughout the province, as if he were a bishop in his own diocese, provided only that, if he celebrates in a cathedral church, the diocesan bishop has been informed beforehand.[6]
The metropolitan is obliged to request the pallium, a symbol of the power that, in communion with the Church of Rome, he possesses over his ecclesiastical province.[7] This holds even if he had the pallium in another metropolitan see.




Coat of arms of a Catholic Metropolitan Archbishop


It is the responsibility of the metropolitan, with the consent of the majority of the suffragan bishops, to call a provincial council, decide where to convene it, and determine the agenda. It is his prerogative to preside over the provincial council.[8] No provincial council can be called if the metropolitan see is vacant.[9]
All Latin Rite metropolitans are archbishops; however, some archbishops are not metropolitans, as there are a few instances where an archdiocese has no suffragans or is itself suffragan to another archdiocese. Titular archbishops (i.e. ordained bishops who are given an honorary title to a now-defunct archdiocese; e.g. many Vatican officials and papal nuncios and apostolic delegates are titular archbishops) are never metropolitans.
As of April 2006, 508 archdioceses were headed by metropolitan archbishops, 27 archbishops lead an extant archdiocese, but were not metropolitans, and there were 89 titular archbishops. See also Catholic Church hierarchy for the distinctions.
Eastern Catholic[edit]




Lubomyr Husar, Major Archbishop emeritus of the Ukrainian Catholic Church


Within Patriarchal or Major Archiepiscopal Churches[edit]
In those Eastern Catholic Churches that are headed by a patriarch, metropolitans in charge of ecclesiastical provinces hold a position similar to that of metropolitans in the Latin Church. Among the differences is that Eastern Catholic metropolitans within the territory of the patriarchate are to be ordained and enthroned by the patriarch, who may also ordain and enthrone metropolitans of sees outside that territory that are part of his Church.[10] Similarly, a metropolitan has the right to ordain and enthrone the bishops of his province.[11] The metropolitan is to be commemorated in the liturgies celebrated within his province.[12]
A major archbishop is defined as the metropolitan of a certain see who heads an autonomous Eastern Church not of patriarchal rank. The canon law of such a Church differs only slightly from that regarding a patriarchal Church.[13] Within major archiepiscopal churches, there may be ecclesiastical provinces headed by metropolitan bishops.
As Heads of their own Particular Churches[edit]
There are also autonomous Eastern Catholic Churches consisting of a single province and headed by a metropolitan. Metropolitans of this kind are to obtain the pallium from the Pope as a sign of his metropolitan authority and of his Church's full communion with the Pope, and only after his investment with it can he convoke the Council of Hierarchs and ordain the bishops of his autonomous Church.[14] In his autonomous Church it is for him to ordain and enthrone bishops[15] and his name is to be mentioned immediately after that of the Pope in the liturgy.[16]
Eastern Orthodox[edit]




Metropolitan Vladimir of Saint Petersburg wearing the light blue mandyas of a Russian Orthodox metropolitan.


In the Eastern Orthodox Churches, the title of metropolitan is used variously, in terms of rank and jurisdiction.
In terms of rank, in some Eastern Orthodox Churches metropolitans are ranked above archbishops in precedence, while in others that order is reversed. Primates of autocephalous Eastern Orthodox Churches below patriarchal rank are generally designated as archbishops. In the Greek Orthodox Churches, archbishops are ranked above metropolitans in precedence. The reverse is true for some Slavic Orthodox Churches (Russian Orthodox, Bulgarian Orthodox) and also for Romanian Orthodox Church, where metropolitans rank above archbishops and the title can be used for important regional or historical sees.
In terms of jurisdiction, there are two basic types of metropolitans in Eastern Orthodox Church: real metropolitans, with actual jurisdiction over their ecclesiastical provinces, and honorary metropolitans who are in fact just diocesan bishops with honorary title of metropolitan and no jurisdiction outside their own diocese.
Some Eastern Orthodox Churches have functioning metropolitans on the middle (regional) level of church administration. In Romanian Orthodox Church there are six regional metropolitans who are the chairmen of their respective synods of bishops, and have special duties and privileges. For example, Metropolitan of Oltenia has regional jurisdiction over four dioceses.
On the other hand, in some Eastern Orthodox Churches title of metropolitan is only honorary, with no special or additional jurisdiction. In Serbian Orthodox Church, honorary title of metropolitan is given to diocesan bishops of some important historical sees (Article 14 of the Constitution of Serbian Orthodox Church).[17] For example, diocesan bishop of the Eparchy of Montenegro and the Littoral is given the honorary title of metropolitan, but without any jurisdiction over other diocesan bishops in Montenegro. Diocesan bishop of the Eparchy of Dabar-Bosnia is also given the honorary title of metropolitan, but without any jurisdiction over other diocesan bishops in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Non-canonical Eastern Orthodox Churches generally use metropolitan title according to local traditions of usage in Churches from which they were split (see: Macedonian Orthodox Church).[18]
Oriental Orthodox[edit]
Malankara Churches[edit]




His Holiness Baselios Mar Thoma Paulose II, Catholicos of the East & Malankara Metropolitan


Metropolitan is a titlle used by all oriental orthodox churches in Malankara. Malankara Metropolitan was a legal title given to the head of the Malankara Syrian Church aka Puthencoor (New Traditionalists) Syrian Christians by the Government of Travancore and Cochin in South India. This title was awarded by a proclamation from the King of Travancore & the King of Cochin (Kingdom of Cochin to the legal head of Malankara Syrian Church . The Supreme Court of India had authenticated the usage of this title by the Malankara Orthodox Syrian Church in its verdict in Malankara Church case.
Baselios Mar Thoma Paulose II was enthroned as Catholicos of the East and Malankara Metropolitan on 1 November 2010 at Parumala, Kerala. Under his see, the dioceses are further headed by Diocesan Metropolitans.
In the Mar Thoma Syrian Church which is based in India, the Metropolitan also known as the Mar Thoma is the primate and supreme head of the church who is entitled to special privileges and remains the ultimate authority over the synod.
Anglican[edit]






This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (May 2013) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



In the Anglican Communion, a metropolitan is generally the head of an ecclesiastical province (or cluster of dioceses). In the few Anglican churches with multiple provinces headed by metropolitans (namely the Church of England, the Church of Ireland, the Anglican Church of Canada, the Anglican Church of Australia, and the Church of Nigeria), a metropolitan ranks immediately under the primate or senior metropolitan of the national church.[19] Most metropolitans, but not all, are styled archbishop. In England, Ireland, and Australia, each province has a "metropolitical see" whose diocesan bishop is ex officio metropolitan (such as the Archbishops of Canterbury and Sydney), while in Canada metropolitans are elected by the provincial houses of bishops from among the sitting diocesans. Prior to 1970, however, the metropolitan of the Province of Rupert's Land was always the bishop of the eponymous diocese, centred on Winnipeg. (Since then, only one Bishop of Rupert's Land, Walter Jones, has been elected metropolitan).
See also[edit]

Exarch
Metropolitanate of Montenegro and the Littoral
List of Metropolitans and Patriarchs of Moscow
List of Metropolitans of the Indian Orthodox Church

References[edit]


^ a b Cross, F. L.; Livingstone, E. A., eds. (2005). "Metropolitan". The Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church. New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-192-80290-3. 
^ Code of Canon Law, canon 431
^ Code of Canon Law, canon 435
^ Code of Canon Law, canon 436 §1–2
^ Canon 1438 no. 1.
^ Code of Canon Law, canon 436 §3
^ Code of Canon Law, canon 437
^ Code of Canon Law, canon 442
^ Code of Canon Law, canon 440 §2
^ Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches, canon 86
^ Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches, canon 133
^ Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches, canon 135
^ Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches, canons 151–154
^ Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches, canon 156
^ Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches, canon 159
^ Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches, canon 161
^ "Constitution of the Serbian Orthodox Church". Serbian Orthodox Church. 
^ "MOC today". Macedonian Orthodox Church. 
^ http://www.anglican.ca/help/faq/ac-provinces/


External links[edit]



Wikisource has the text of the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica article metropolitan.



"List of Catholic Metropolitan Archdioceses in the world". GCatholic.org. 
 Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913). "Metropolitan". Catholic Encyclopedia. New York: Robert Appleton Company. 







v
t
e


Catholic Church






Index
Outline





History
(Timeline)



Jesus
Holy Family

Mary
Joseph


Apostles
Early Christianity
History of the papacy
Ecumenical councils
Missions
Great Schism of East
Crusades
Great Schism of West
Protestant Reformation
Council of Trent
Counter-Reformation
Catholic Church by country
Vatican City

index






Vatican II



Definition of the Church
Ecumenism
Dei verbum
Dignitatis humanae
Gaudium et spes
Lumen gentium
Nostra aetate
Sacrosanctum concilium











Hierarchy
(Precedence)




Pope (List)



Pope Francis (2013–)

conclave
inauguration
theology
canonizations
visits


Pope Emeritus Benedict XVI (2005–2013)







Roman Curia
College of Cardinals

Cardinal


Patriarchate
Episcopal conference
Patriarch
Major archbishop
Primate
Metropolitan
Archbishop
Diocesan bishop
Coadjutor bishop
Auxiliary bishop
Titular bishop
Bishop emeritus
Abbot
Abbess
Superior general
Provincial superior
Grand Master
Prior (-ess)
Priest
Brother

Friar


Sister
Monk
Nun
Hermit
Master of novices
Novice
Oblate
Postulant
Laity





Theology



Body and soul
Bible
Catechism
Divine grace
Dogma
Ecclesiology

Four Marks of the Church


Original sin

List


Salvation
Sermon on the Mount
Ten Commandments
Trinity
Worship




Mariology



Assumption
History
Immaculate Conception
Mariology of the popes
Mariology of the saints
Mother of God
Perpetual virginity
Veneration








Philosophy



Natural law
Moral theology
Personalism
Social teaching
Philosophers





Sacraments



Baptism
Confirmation
Eucharist
Penance
Anointing of the Sick

Last rites


Holy orders
Matrimony





Saints



Mary
Apostles
Archangels
Confessors
Disciples
Doctors of the Church
Evangelists
Church Fathers
Martyrs
Patriarchs
Prophets
Virgins





Doctors
of the
Church







Gregory the Great
Ambrose
Augustine of Hippo
Jerome
John Chrysostom
Basil of Caesarea
Gregory of Nazianzus
Athanasius of Alexandria
Cyril of Alexandria
Cyril of Jerusalem
John of Damascus
Bede the Venerable
Ephrem the Syrian
Thomas Aquinas
Bonaventure
Anselm of Canterbury
Isidore of Seville
Peter Chrysologus
Leo the Great
Peter Damian
Bernard of Clairvaux
Hilary of Poitiers
Alphonsus Liguori
Francis de Sales
Peter Canisius
John of the Cross
Robert Bellarmine
Albertus Magnus
Anthony of Padua
Lawrence of Brindisi
Teresa of Ávila
Catherine of Siena
Thérèse of Lisieux
John of Ávila
Hildegard of Bingen
Gregory of Narek








Institutes,
orders,
and societies



Assumptionists
Annonciades
Augustinians
Basilians
Benedictines
Bethlehemites
Blue nuns
Camaldoleses
Camillians
Carmelites
Carthusians
Cistercians
Clarisses
Conceptionists
Crosiers
Dominicans
Franciscans
Good Shepherd Sisters
Hieronymites
Jesuits
Mercedarians
Minims
Olivetans
Oratorians
Piarists
Premonstratensians
Redemptorists
Servites
Theatines
Trappists
Trinitarians
Visitandines





Associations
of the faithful



International Federation of Catholic Parochial Youth Movements
International Federation of Catholic Universities
International Kolping Society
Schoenstatt Apostolic Movement
International Union of Catholic Esperantists
Community of Sant'Egidio





Charities



Aid to the Church in Need
Caritas Internationalis
Catholic Home Missions
Catholic Relief Services
CIDSE





Particular
churches
(By country)



Latin Church
Eastern Catholic Churches: Albanian
Armenian
Belarusian
Bulgarian
Chaldean
Coptic
Croatian and Serbian
Eritrean
Ethiopian
Georgian
Greek
Hungarian
Italo-Albanian
Macedonian
Maronite
Melkite
Romanian
Russian
Ruthenian
Slovak
Syriac
Syro-Malabar
Syro-Malankara
Ukrainian




Liturgical rites



Alexandrian
Antiochian
Armenian
Byzantine
East Syrian
Latin

Anglican Use
Ambrosian
Mozarabic
Roman


West Syrian











 Catholicism portal
 Pope portal
 Vatican City portal


 Book
Name
 Media

 Category
 Templates
 WikiProject













						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Metropolitan_bishop&oldid=804255562"					Categories: Metropolitan bishopsBishops by typeChristian terminologyEastern Christian ecclesiastical officesEcclesiastical titlesAnglican episcopal officesEpiscopacy in Roman CatholicismEpiscopacy in Eastern OrthodoxyEpiscopacy in Oriental OrthodoxyHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from June 2006All articles needing additional referencesArticles needing additional references from May 2013Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference