For the American rock band, see Metro Station (band).




Outside the Consolação Metro station on Paulista Avenue in São Paulo, Brazil






Georg-Brauchle-Ring station of the Munich U-Bahn, Germany






Every station of the Paris Métro Line 14 in France has automatic platform screen doors






Display of archeological relics found during construction in Athens Metro, part of the Syntagma Metro Station Archaeological Collection






The Line 4 in Budapest, Hungary.






Glassart in Formosa Boulevard Station in Kaohsiung, Taiwan






Rotterdam metro station, Netherlands


A metro station or subway station is a railway station for a rapid transit system, which as a whole is usually called a Metro or Subway. The station provides a means for passengers to purchase tickets, access trains stopping at its platforms and evacuate the system in the case of an emergency.



Contents


1 Location
2 Facilities
3 Transfer stations
4 Platform-edge doors
5 Architectural design
6 Records
7 See also
8 References
9 External links



Location[edit]
The location of a metro station is carefully planned to provide easy access to important urban facilities such as roads, commercial centers, major buildings and other transport nodes.
Most stations are located underground, with entrances/exits leading up to ground or street level. The bulk of the station is typically positioned under land reserved for public thoroughfares or parks. Placing the station underground reduces the outside area occupied by the station, allowing vehicles and pedestrians to continue using the ground-level area in a similar way as before the station's construction. This is especially important where the station is serving high-density urban precincts, where ground-level spaces are already heavily utilised.[1]
In other cases, a station may be elevated above a road, or at ground level depending on the level of the train tracks. The physical, visual and economic impact of the station and its operations will be greater. Planners will often take metro lines or parts of lines at or above ground where urban density decreases, extending the system further for less cost. Metros are most commonly used in urban cities, with great populations. [2] Alternatively, a preexisting railway land corridor is re-purposed for rapid transit.[3]
Facilities[edit]
At street level the logo of the metro company marks the entrances/exits of the station. Usually, signage shows the name of the station and describes the facilities of the station and the system it serves. Often there are several entrances for one station, saving pedestrians from needing to cross a street and reducing crowding.[1]
A metro station typically provides ticket vending and ticket validating systems. The station is divided into an unpaid zone connected to the street, and a paid zone connected to the train platforms. The ticket barrier allows passengers with valid tickets to pass between these zones. The barrier may operated by staff or more typically with automated turnstiles or gates that open when a transit pass is scanned or detected.[4] Some small metro systems dispense with paid zones and validate tickets with staff in the train carriages.[5]
Access from the street to ticketing and the train platform is provided by stairs, concourses, escalators, elevators and tunnels. The station will be designed to minimise overcrowding and improve flow, sometimes by designating tunnels as one way.[2] Permanent or temporary barriers may be used to manage crowds. Some metro stations have direct connections to important nearby buildings (see underground city).
Most jurisdictions mandate that people with disabilities must have unassisted use of the station. This is resolved with elevators, taking a number of people from street level to the unpaid ticketing area, and then from the paid area to the platform. In addition, there will be stringent requirements for emergencies, with backup lighting, emergency exits and alarm systems installed and maintained. Stations are a critical part of the evacuation route for passengers escaping from a disabled or troubled train.[6]
A subway station may provide additional facilities, such as toilets, kiosks and amenities for staff and security services, such as Transit police.
Transfer stations[edit]
Some metro stations are interchanges, serving to transfer passengers between lines or transport systems. The platforms may be multi-level. Transfer stations handle more passengers than regular stations, with additional connecting tunnels and larger concourses to reduce walking times and manage crowd flows.
Platform-edge doors[edit]
In some stations, especially where trains are fully automated, the entire platform is screened from the track by a wall, typically of glass, with automatic platform-edge doors (PEDs). These open, like elevator doors, only when a train is stopped, and thus eliminate the hazard that a passenger will accidentally fall (or deliberately jump) onto the tracks and be run over or electrocuted.
Control over ventilation of the platform is also improved, allowing it to be heated or cooled without having to do the same for the tunnels. The doors add cost and complexity to the system, and trains may have to approach the station more slowly so they can stop in accurate alignment with them.
Architectural design[edit]
Metro stations, more so than railway and bus stations, often have a characteristic artistic design that can identify each stop. Some have sculptures or frescoes. For example, London's Baker Street station is adorned with tiles depicting Sherlock Holmes. The tunnel for Paris' Concorde station is decorated with tiles spelling the Déclaration des Droits de l'Homme et du Citoyen. Every metro station in Valencia, Spain has a different sculpture on the ticket-hall level. Each of the original four stations on Line 8 of the Beijing Subway is decorated traditionally with elements of Chinese culture. Alameda station is decorated with fragments of white tile, like the dominant style of the Ciutat de les Arts i les Ciències. On the Tyne and Wear Metro, the station at Newcastle United's home ground St James' Park is decorated in the clubs famous black and white stripes. Each station of the Red Line and Purple Line subway in Los Angeles was built with different artwork and decorating schemes, such as murals, tile artwork and sculptural benches. Every station of the Mexico City Metro is prominently identified by a unique icon in addition to its name, because the city had high illiteracy rates at the time the system was designed.
Some metro systems, such as those of Naples, Stockholm, Moscow, St. Petersburg, Tashkent, Kiev,[7] Montreal, Lisbon, Kaohsiung and Prague are famous for their beautiful architecture and public art. The Paris Métro is famous for its art nouveau station entrances; while the Athens Metro is known for its display of archeological relics found during construction.
However, it is not always the case that metro designers strive to make all stations artistically unique. Sir Norman Foster's new system in Bilbao, Spain uses the same modern architecture at every station to make navigation easier for the passenger, though some may argue that this is at the expense of character.
Metro stations usually feature prominent poster and video advertising, especially at locations where people are waiting, producing an alternative revenue stream for the operator.[8]
Records[edit]
The largest and most complex metro station in the world is the Paris Métro-RER station Châtelet-Les Halles in France.[9]
The metro station with the highest elevation above ground in the world is New York City's Smith–Ninth Streets station of the New York City Subway in the United States.[10]
The northernmost metro station in the world is Mellunmäki metro station of the Helsinki metro in Finland. [11]
See also[edit]

Rapid transit
List of metro systems
Bus stop
Train station
Railway platform
Outline of transport
"In a Station of the Metro" (poem)
Shallow column station
Deep column station
Pylon station
Single-vault station

References[edit]



^ a b Tumlin, Jeffrey (2012). Sustainable Transportation Planning: Tools for Creating Vibrant, Healthy, and Resilient Communities. Wiley. p. 118. 
^ a b Edwards, Jack (1990). Civil Engineering for Underground Rail Transport. Butterworth & Co. 
^ "Landmarks in urban transport". Nexus. 2015. Retrieved 2016-05-15. 
^ Benz, G.; et al. (1987). Rapid-rail transit and planning tools. National Research Council, Washington DC, Transportation Research Board. 
^ "Midland Metro Cash Fares". National Express. 2016. Retrieved 2016-05-15. 
^ Xiaohui Xu; Bo Song; Chunxia Li; Xujun Hu (2010). "Study on the Safety and Disaster-Prevention Signing System of the Subway Based on Site Investigation at Home and Abroad" (PDF). University of Science and Technology Beijing, China. Retrieved 2016-05-15. 
^ "Metro Arts and Architecture". Metro Bits. Retrieved 2006-12-04. 
^ "Subway Advertising". Retrieved 2016-05-16. 
^ "Archived copy" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 2008-03-07. Retrieved 2008-03-13. 
^ http://www.mta.info/news/stories/?story=177
^ http://finland.fi/?fact=16827



External links[edit]

UrbanRail.Net — descriptions of all metro systems in the world, each with a schematic map showing all stations.







v
t
e


Public transport



Bus service



Bus

list


Bus rapid transit
Charabanc
Express bus
Guided bus
Intercity bus

driver


Open top bus
Public light bus
Rail replacement bus
Shuttle bus
Transit bus
Trolleybus





Rail



Cable car
Commuter rail
Funicular
Heavy rail
Heritage railway
Heritage streetcar
High-speed rail
Horsecar
Inter-city rail
Interurban
Light rail
Medium-capacity rail system
Monorail
Rapid transit
Regional rail
Rubber-tyred metro
Street running
Tram
Tram-train





Vehicles for hire



Auto rickshaw
Boda-boda
Cycle rickshaw
Gondola
Hackney carriage
Limousine
Motorcycle taxi
Paratransit
Personal rapid transit
Pulled rickshaw
Share taxi
Taxicab





Carpooling



Car jockey
Flexible carpooling
Real-time ridesharing
Slugging
Vanpool





Ship



Cable ferry
Ferry
Hovercraft
Hydrofoil
Ocean liner
Water taxi





Other transport



Aerial tramway
Airline
Airliner
Bicycle-sharing
Carsharing
Elevator
Escalator
Gondola lift
Horse-drawn vehicle
Maglev
Moving walkway
People mover
Trackless train





Locations



Airport
Bus bulb
Bus garage (bus depot)
Bus lane
Bus stand
Bus station
Bus stop
Bus terminus
Bus turnout (bus bay)
Dry dock
Hangar
Harbor
Interchange station
Kassel kerb
Layover
Metro station
Park and ride
Port
Queue jump
Taxicab stand
Train station
Tram stop
Transit mall
Transport hub





Ticketing and fares



Automated fare collection
Bus advertising
Contract of carriage
Dead mileage
Exit fare
Fare avoidance
Fare evasion
Farebox recovery ratio
Free public transport
Free travel pass
Integrated ticketing
Manual fare collection
Money train
Paid area
Proof-of-payment
Reduced fare program
Smart cards
Ticket machine
Transfer
Transit pass





Routing



Circle route
Cross-city route
Network length
Non-revenue track
Radial route
Transport network





Facilities



Checked baggage
First class
Sleeper
Standing passenger
Travel class





Scheduling



Bus bunching
Clock-face scheduling
Headway
On-time performance
Public transport timetable
Short turn





Politics



Airport security
Rail subsidies
Security
Transit district
Transit police
Transit-oriented development (TOD)
Transportation authority





Other topics



Boarding
Crush load
Destination sign
Hail and ride
Prohibited activities
Request stop
Passenger load factor
Transit map











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Metro_station&oldid=817703840"					Categories: Railway stationsRapid transit