





This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (September 2015) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)





Metropolitan and non-metropolitan county





Category
Administrative counties


Location
England


Found in
Region


Created by
Local Government Act 1972


Created
1974


Number
83 (as of 1 April 2009)


Possible types
  Metropolitan (6)
  Non-metropolitan (77)


Possible status
Multiple districts with no county council (6 metropolitan counties and 1 non-metropolitan county)
Multiple districts with county council (27 non-metropolitan counties)
Single district with unitary authority (49 non-metropolitan counties)


Subdivisions
36 metropolitan districts
256 non-metropolitan districts





England






This article is part of a series on the
politics and government of
England




Governance


Sovereign

Queen Elizabeth II



Ministerial departments of the
UK Government

Specific to England


Communities and Local Government

Education

Environment, Food and Rural Affairs

Health


Primarily involving England

Transport

Culture, Media and Sport





West Lothian question
Devolution proposals








Regions



East Midlands
East of England
London
North East
North West
South East
South West
West Midlands
Yorkshire and the Humber









Law and justice



Supreme Court of the United Kingdom
Courts of England and Wales
English law









England in the UK


Parliament of the United Kingdom

Elections in England
Constituencies
Current Westminster MPs










England in the EU


UK elections to the European Parliament

European Parliament constituencies in England

East of England
East Midlands
London
North East England
North West England
South East England
South West England
West Midlands
Yorkshire and the Humber










Administrative divisions


Local government in England
Greater London

Greater London Authority
London boroughs


Counties

Districts


Metropolitan counties

Metropolitan districts


Unitary authorities
Combined authorities
Civil parishes









Other countries
Atlas








v
t
e





Metropolitan and non-metropolitan counties are one of the four levels of subdivisions of England used for the purposes of local government outside Greater London and the Isles of Scilly. As originally constituted, the metropolitan and non-metropolitan counties each consisted of multiple districts, had a county council and were also the counties for the purposes of Lieutenancies. Later changes in legislation during the 1980s and 1990s have allowed counties without county councils and 'unitary authority' counties of a single district. Counties for the purposes of Lieutenancies are now defined separately, based on the metropolitan and non-metropolitan counties.
In 2009, there were further structural changes in some areas, resulting in a total of 83 metropolitan and non-metropolitan counties. These 83 counties collectively consist of 292 districts or district-level subdivisions, i.e. 36 metropolitan boroughs and 256 non-metropolitan districts (201 of these are subdivisions of non-metropolitan counties with county councils; 6 are subdivisions (and also unitary authorities, but without non-metropolitan county status) of Berkshire, which is a non-metropolitan county with no county council; and the remaining 49 are unitary authorities that have non-metropolitan county status).



Contents


1 Current metropolitan and non-metropolitan counties of England

1.1 Metropolitan counties
1.2 Non-metropolitan counties

1.2.1 Shire counties
1.2.2 Unitary authorities




2 Exceptions in England

2.1 London
2.2 Isles of Scilly


3 History

3.1 Local Government Act 1972
3.2 Map 1974–1996
3.3 Abolition of metropolitan county councils
3.4 Local Government Act 1992


4 2009 structural changes
5 See also
6 References
7 External links



Current metropolitan and non-metropolitan counties of England[edit]


Metropolitan and non-metropolitan counties of England








Northumberland *
Tyne and Wear †
Durham *
Cumbria **
Lancashire **
Blackpool *
Blackburn with Darwen *
West Yorkshire †
North Yorkshire **
Darlington *
Stockton-on-Tees *
Middlesbrough *
Hartlepool *
Redcar and Cleveland *
York *
East Riding of Yorkshire *
Kingston upon Hull *
North Lincolnshire *
North East Lincolnshire *
Lincolnshire **
Nottinghamshire **
Nottingham *
South Yorkshire †
Derbyshire **
Derby *
Greater Manchester †
Merseyside †
Halton *
Warrington *
Cheshire West and Chester *
Cheshire East *
Shropshire *
Telford and Wrekin *
Staffordshire **
Stoke-on-Trent *
West Midlands †
Warwickshire **
Leicestershire **
Leicester *
Rutland *
Northamptonshire **
Peterborough *
Cambridgeshire **
Norfolk **
Suffolk **
Essex **
Southend-on-Sea *
Thurrock *
Hertfordshire **
Bedford *
Central Bedfordshire *
Luton *
Milton Keynes *
Buckinghamshire **
Oxfordshire **
Gloucestershire **
Worcestershire **
Herefordshire *
South Gloucestershire *
Bristol *
North Somerset *
Bath and North East Somerset *
Wiltshire *
Swindon *
Berkshire ‡
Medway *
Kent **
East Sussex **
Brighton and Hove *
West Sussex **
Surrey **
Hampshire **
Southampton *
Portsmouth *
Isle of Wight *
Dorset **
Poole *
Bournemouth *
Somerset **
Devon **
Torbay *
Plymouth *
Cornwall *

GL: Greater London ¹





† Metropolitan county (no county council).
‡ Non-metropolitan county with no county council.
** Non-metropolitan county with county council.
* Non-metropolitan county that is also a unitary authority.
¹ Region with no counties.


Metropolitan counties[edit]
Main article: Metropolitan county
The metropolitan counties are Greater Manchester, Merseyside, South Yorkshire, Tyne and Wear, West Midlands and West Yorkshire. The counties typically have populations of 1.2 to 2.8 million.[1]
The county councils of these were abolished in 1986, but the counties themselves still exist legally.[2] They are used for some administrative and geographic purposes, and are still ceremonial counties. Most of the powers that the former county councils had were devolved to their metropolitan boroughs, which are now in effect unitary authorities; however, some functions (such as emergency services, civil defence and public transport) are still run jointly on a metropolitan-county-wide basis.[3]
Non-metropolitan counties[edit]
Main article: Non-metropolitan county
Shire counties[edit]
A shire county is a non-metropolitan county that has multiple districts. Its name does not need to have shire in it. The term shire county is however unofficial.
There are 28 such counties:
Berkshire, Buckinghamshire, Cambridgeshire, Cumbria, Derbyshire, Devon, Dorset, East Sussex, Essex, Gloucestershire, Hampshire, Hertfordshire, Kent, Lancashire, Leicestershire, Lincolnshire, Norfolk, North Yorkshire, Northamptonshire, Nottinghamshire, Oxfordshire, Somerset, Staffordshire, Suffolk, Surrey, Warwickshire, West Sussex, Worcestershire.
All, apart from Berkshire, have county councils. Sometimes shire county is used to exclude Berkshire, because it has no county council. The counties have populations of 109,000 to 1.4 million.[1] Under local government reforms coming into effect in 2009, the number of such counties was reduced. The non-metropolitan counties of Bedfordshire and Cheshire were split into two separate non-metropolitan counties respectively, while Cornwall, County Durham, Northumberland, Shropshire and Wiltshire became unitary authorities each of a single district.
Unitary authorities[edit]
Main article: Unitary authorities of England
Unitary authorities are areas with only one council, and there are 55 in total.
49 are coterminous with a non-metropolitan county: 43 (Bath and North East Somerset, Bedford, Blackburn with Darwen, Blackpool, Bournemouth, Brighton and Hove, Bristol, Central Bedfordshire, Cheshire East, Cheshire West and Chester, Darlington, Derby, East Riding of Yorkshire, Halton, Hartlepool, Herefordshire, Kingston upon Hull, Leicester, Luton, Medway, Middlesbrough, Borough of Milton Keynes, North East Lincolnshire, North Lincolnshire, North Somerset, Nottingham, Peterborough, Plymouth, Poole, Portsmouth, Redcar and Cleveland, Rutland, South Gloucestershire, Southampton, Southend-on-Sea, Stockton-on-Tees, Stoke-on-Trent, Swindon, Telford and Wrekin, Thurrock, Torbay, Warrington, York) of these are defined as counties with a single district council and no county council; the other 6 (the Isle of Wight, Cornwall, Durham, Northumberland, Shropshire and Wiltshire) are technically counties with a county council and no district councils, but the effect is the same.
The remaining 6 unitary authorities (West Berkshire, Reading, Wokingham, Bracknell Forest, Windsor and Maidenhead, Slough) are districts of Berkshire, however they are not non-metropolitan counties, as the non-metropolitan county of Berkshire still exists albeit without a county council; this is a unique situation.
Exceptions in England[edit]
The Local Government Act 1972 created the system of metropolitan and non-metropolitan counties and districts, but specifically excluded two parts of England from the new system, a situation which exists to the present.
London[edit]
Greater London was created in 1965 by the London Government Act 1963 as a sui generis administrative area,[4] with the Greater London Council functioning as an upper-tier local government. It consists of 33 local authority districts and spans the area which was prior made up of the County of London, most of Middlesex, and parts of other neighbouring administrative counties. In 1972, no metropolitan or non-metropolitan counties or districts were created in this area. However, the council was abolished along with the metropolitan county councils in 1986.
In 1994, Greater London was designated as one of nine regions of England, which each had a government office up until they were abolished 2011. Since 2000, Greater London has had an elected Assembly and Mayor responsible for strategic local government. In the other eight regions, plans for elected assemblies were abandoned (although they had regional chambers with limited functions between 1999 and 2010), leaving London as the only region with a conterminous authority.
The area does however include two counties for the purposes of lieutenancies: the county of Greater London (which covers the 32 London boroughs) and the City of London.
Isles of Scilly[edit]
The Isles of Scilly are, like Greater London, not covered by the system of metropolitan and non-metropolitan counties. The Council of the Isles of Scilly remains a district council (constituted in 1890, by way of the Local Government Act 1888) with county council powers (granted by the Isles of Scilly Order 1930) and is therefore a sui generis unitary authority. Some functions, such as health and economic development, are shared with Cornwall Council, and the islands form part of the ceremonial county of Cornwall.
History[edit]
The current system of metropolitan and non-metropolitan counties came into effect on 1 April 1974 and replaced the administrative counties and county boroughs, which were abolished at that time. Greater London was created in 1965 under separate legislation.
In the 1990s, a new type of non-metropolitan county was created: the unitary authority, which combines the functions and powers of county and district. The existing non-metropolitan counties became known as shire counties to distinguish them from the unitary authorities.
Local Government Act 1972[edit]
Main article: Local Government Act 1972
By the late 1960s, it had become obvious that the structure of local government in England and Wales needed reforming. Harold Wilson's Labour government set up the Redcliffe-Maud Commission to produce proposals for wholesale reform.
The report proposed that for most of England the two-tier structure be abolished, and replaced with a system of 58 unitary authorities, which would generally ignore the previous administrative boundaries in favour of changes that made geographic sense - a total redrawing of the map. In the South of Lancashire, North East of Cheshire and the Birmingham area, there would be 3 metropolitan areas, with 20 district authorities.
These proposals were opposed by the Conservative Party opposition led by Edward Heath. They won the 1970 general election, and set to work defining their own scheme. This scrapped the concept of unitary authorities (even for existing county boroughs) – the entire area of England and Wales was to be divided into uniform counties and districts. In England the new divisions were to be largely modelled on the existing counties with quite radical reforms put forward, even in some non-metropolitan areas.
Despite reassurances from the government that nobody's loyalties were expected to change as a result of the local government reform, many changes did incur significant local opposition. Most of the radical changes were withdrawn. One aspect the government stood firm on was the mergers of small counties. Campaigns for the continuation of Rutland and Herefordshire were unsuccessful, although due to its special geographic circumstances, the Isle of Wight was permitted to retain a separate county council, as opposed to being reunified with its historic county of Hampshire.
The Local Government Act was passed in 1972, and defined the English counties and metropolitan districts, but not the non-metropolitan districts. These were set by a Boundary Commission that had already begun work.[5]
The metropolitan counties were composed as follows:

Merseyside - based around Liverpool, south-west Lancashire, along with the northern part of the Wirral Peninsula in Cheshire
Greater Manchester - the Manchester urban area along with many surrounding towns
South Yorkshire - based upon the Sheffield-Rotherham area in the West Riding of Yorkshire
Tyne and Wear - the Tyneside conurbation based on Newcastle-upon-Tyne in Northumberland, along with Sunderland in County Durham
West Midlands - Birmingham conurbation, including the Black Country and Coventry
West Yorkshire - Leeds-Bradford area in the West Riding

Other significant changes were:

Avon formed from northern Somerset, southern Gloucestershire, and Bristol and Bath
Cleveland formed from southern Durham and northern part of the North Riding, focusing on the Teesside conurbation along with Guisborough and Hartlepool
Cumbria was formed from Westmorland, Cumberland and part of Lancashire and Yorkshire
Herefordshire and Worcestershire were merged into Hereford and Worcester
Humberside formed from eastern Yorkshire and northern Lincolnshire
Huntingdon and Peterborough was annexed by Cambridgeshire
Rutland was merged into Leicestershire as a district
Vale of White Horse, including Berkshire's former county town Abingdon, was ceded to Oxfordshire, as was the area around Wallingford and Didcot now comprising the western half of the South Oxfordshire District
Bournemouth was moved from Hampshire to Dorset, to join its sister town of Poole

The changes were adopted by the Royal Mail for the purposes of postal addresses wherever they were able, with the notable exceptions of Hereford and Worcester and Greater Manchester. Humberside was divided for this purpose into North Humberside and South Humberside.
Map 1974–1996[edit]


Counties of England from 1974 to 1996





Northumberland
Tyne and Wear
Durham
Cleveland
North Yorkshire
Cumbria
Lancashire
Merseyside
Greater Manchester
West Yorkshire
South Yorkshire
Humberside
Lincolnshire
Nottinghamshire
Derbyshire
Cheshire
Shropshire
Staffordshire
West Midlands
Warwickshire
Leicestershire
Northamptonshire
Cambridgeshire
Norfolk
Suffolk
Essex
Hertfordshire
Bedfordshire
Buckinghamshire
Oxfordshire
Gloucestershire
Hereford and Worcester
Avon
Wiltshire
Berkshire
Greater London
Kent
East Sussex
West Sussex
Surrey
Hampshire
Isle of Wight
Dorset
Somerset
Devon
Cornwall






Abolition of metropolitan county councils[edit]
Main article: Local Government Act 1985
In 1986, the county councils of the metropolitan counties and the Greater London Council were abolished by Margaret Thatcher's government following disputes with central government, but the counties themselves remained legally in existence.
Local Government Act 1992[edit]
Main article: Local Government Commission for England (1992)




1 April 1996 to 31 March 1997






1 April 1997 to 31 March 1998






1 April 1998 to 31 March 2009


The 1990s led to the restoration of county boroughs under a new name, unitary authorities, which radically changed the administrative map of England. The changes were carried out in several waves.
On 1 April 1995, the Isle of Wight became a single unitary authority. It had previously had a two-tier structure with an Isle of Wight County Council, Medina Borough Council and South Wight Borough Council. Also on this day, two small areas were ceded from Surrey and Buckinghamshire to Berkshire, giving it a border with Greater London.
On 1 April 1996, the unpopular counties of Avon, Humberside and Cleveland were abolished and their former area divided into unitary districts. Also at this time, the city of York was expanded and separated from North Yorkshire.
On 1 April 1997, the districts of Bournemouth, Darlington, Derby, Leicester, Luton, Milton Keynes, Poole, Portsmouth, Rutland, Southampton, Stoke-on-Trent and Swindon (based on the former Thamesdown district) became unitary authorities. Also, the districts of Brighton and Hove were merged to form the new unitary authority of Brighton and Hove.
On 1 April 1998, Blackburn with Darwen (based on the former Blackburn district), Blackpool, Halton, Nottingham, Peterborough, Plymouth, Southend-on-Sea, Telford and Wrekin (based on the former Wrekin district), Torbay, Thurrock and Warrington became unitary authorities. Also, the districts of Rochester-upon-Medway and Gillingham were merged to form the new unitary authority of Medway, and the county of Hereford and Worcester was abolished and replaced by the unitary authority of Herefordshire and the shire county of Worcestershire. Berkshire was split into six unitary authorities, but not formally abolished.
2009 structural changes[edit]
Main article: 2009 structural changes to local government in England
In April 2009, the following changes were made to the non-metropolitan counties:


Non-metropolitan county
Action


Borough of Bedford
District became a non-metropolitan county[6]


Bedfordshire
Abolished[6]


Central Bedfordshire
New non-metropolitan county[6]


Cheshire
Abolished[7]


Cheshire East
New non-metropolitan county[7]


Cheshire West and Chester
New non-metropolitan county[7]


The effect was that Bedfordshire and Cheshire became ceremonial counties that do not correspond to a non-metropolitan county of the same name.
See also[edit]

Counties of England
Subdivisions of England
Ceremonial counties of England
List of local governments in the United Kingdom

References[edit]


^ a b Jones, B. et al., Politics UK (2004)
^ Elcock, H, Local Government (1994)
^ Her Majesty's Stationery Office, Aspects of Britain: Local Government (1996)
^ Bryne, T., Local Government in Britain (1994)
^ Arnold-Baker, C., Local Government Act 1972 (1973)
^ a b c Office of Public Sector Information - Bedfordshire (Structural Changes) Order 2008 (Draft)
^ a b c Office of Public Sector Information - Cheshire (Structural Changes) Order 2008 (Draft)


External links[edit]

Text of the European Parliamentary Elections Act 1999-Schedule 1, Amending Schedule 2 to the European Parliamentary Elections Act 1978- Electoral Regions in England as originally enacted or made within the United Kingdom, from legislation.gov.uk Last accessed:3 May 2011







v
t
e


Administrative geography of the United Kingdom



United Kingdom local government



History
Subdivisions: Shrievalties
Lieutenancy areas
Counties (list)





England local government



History
Subdivisions: Regions
Ceremonial counties

list


Combined authorities
Metropolitan and Non-metropolitan counties
Unitary authorities (list)
Districts (list)
Civil parishes (list)





Northern Ireland local government



History
Subdivisions: Counties
Districts





Scotland local government



History
Subdivisions: Sheriffdoms
Lieutenancy areas
Council areas
Community council areas
Civil parishes





Wales local government



History
Subdivisions: Preserved counties
Principal areas
Communities (list)
Historic counties












v
t
e


 Subdivisions of England



Region



Regions
NUTS 1 statistical regions of England





County



Metropolitan
Non-metropolitan
Ceremonial





District



Metropolitan
Non-metropolitan
London borough
City of London
Unitary authority
Isles of Scilly





Civil parish



Civil parish











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Metropolitan_and_non-metropolitan_counties_of_England&oldid=814160716"					Categories: England geography-related listsLocal government in the United KingdomMetropolitan and non-metropolitan countiesCounties of EnglandHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from September 2015All articles needing additional referencesPages using deprecated image syntax