

Population tables
of U.S. cities





Cities



Population


Area
Density
Ethnic identity
Foreign-born
Income
Spanish speakers
By decade





Urban areas


Populous cities and metropolitan areas


Metropolitan areas





574 Primary Statistical Areas
169 Combined Statistical Areas
929 Core Based Statistical Areas
388 Metropolitan Statistical Areas
540 Micropolitan Statistical Areas





Megaregions





See also
North American metro areas
World cities








v
t
e





See also: List of Metropolitan Statistical Areas
In the United States, a metropolitan statistical area (MSA) is a geographical region with a relatively high population density at its core and close economic ties throughout the area. Such regions are neither legally incorporated as a city or town would be, nor are they legal administrative divisions like counties or separate entities such as states. As such, the precise definition of any given metropolitan area can vary with the source. A typical metropolitan area is centered on a single large city that wields substantial influence over the region (e.g., Chicago or Atlanta). However, some metropolitan areas contain more than one large city with no single municipality holding a substantially dominant position (e.g., Dallas–Fort Worth metroplex, Norfolk-Virginia Beach (Hampton Roads), Riverside–San Bernardino (Inland Empire) or Minneapolis–Saint Paul).
MSAs are defined by the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) and used by the Census Bureau and other federal government agencies for statistical purposes.[1]



Contents


1 Map
2 Definitions
3 See also
4 References
5 External links



Map[edit]




An enlargeable map of the 955 core based statistical areas (CBSAs) of the United States and Puerto Rico, Feb 2013. The 374 metropolitan statistical areas (MSAs) are shown in medium green.



Definitions[edit]
U.S. Census statistics for metropolitan areas are reported according to the following definitions.
The U.S. Office of Management and Budget defines a set of core based statistical areas (CBSAs) throughout the country. CBSAs are delineated on the basis of a central urban area or urban cluster – in other words: a contiguous area of relatively high population density. CBSAs are composed of counties and county equivalents.[2] The counties containing the core urban area are known as the central counties of the CBSA. A central county is a county in which 50% of its population lives in urban areas of at least 10,000 in population, or where a population of 5,000 are located in an urban of at least 10,000 in population.[3] Additional surrounding counties, known as outlying counties, can be included in the CBSA if these counties have strong social and economic ties to the central counties as measured by commuting and employment. Outlying counties are included in the CBSA if the employment interchange measure (total of in- and out-commuting) is 25% or more, although these numbers are estimates and exceptions are made. Some areas within these outlying counties may be rural in nature. All counties in a CBSA must be contiguous, and a county can only be included within one CBSA.[3] In New England, towns have precedence over counties, so statistically similar areas are defined in terms of town-based units known as New England city and town areas (NECTAs).
Adjacent CBSAs are merged into a single CBSA when the central county or counties of one CBSA qualify as an outlying county or counties to the other CBSAs.[3] One or more CBSAs may be grouped together to form a larger statistical entity known as a combined statistical area (CSA) when they wen the employment interchange measure reaches 15% or more.
As well as MSAs, CBSAs are also subdivided into micropolitan statistical areas (μSAs) for CBSAs built around an urban cluster of at least 10,000 in population but less than 50,000 in population.[3] Previous terms that are no longer used include standard metropolitan statistical area (SMSA) and primary metropolitan statistical area (PMSA).[4]
See also[edit]


Geography portal
United States portal
Puerto Rico portal



United States of America

Outline of the United States
Index of United States-related articles
Book:United States


Demographics of the United States

United States Census Bureau

List of U.S. states and territories by population
List of metropolitan areas of the United States
List of United States cities by population
List of United States counties and county-equivalents


United States Office of Management and Budget

The OMB has defined 1098 statistical areas comprising 388 MSAs, 541 μSAs, and 169 CSAs

Primary statistical area (list)

Combined Statistical Area (list)
Core Based Statistical Area (list)

Metropolitan Statistical Area (list)
Micropolitan Statistical Area (list)












References[edit]


^ Nussle, Jim (Nov 20, 2008). "Update of Statistical Area Definitions and Guidance on Their Uses" (PDF). Office of Management and Budget. pp. 1–2. 
^ Census Geographic Glossary, U.S. Census Bureau
^ a b c d "Office of Management & Budget, 2010 Standards for Delineating Metropolitan and Micropolitan Statistical Areas; Notice" (PDF). U.S. Government Publishing Office. National Archives and Records Administration. Retrieved 2 January 2018. 
^ "Metropolitan and Micropolitan Statistical Areas". U.S. Census Bureau. Retrieved 16 February 2010. 


External links[edit]

Find more aboutthe United Statesat Wikipedia's sister projects

Definitions from Wiktionary
Media from Wikimedia Commons
News from Wikinews
Quotations from Wikiquote
Texts from Wikisource
Textbooks from Wikibooks
Learning resources from Wikiversity



US Census Metropolitan Statistical Area Delineations
United States Government

United States Census Bureau

2010 United States Census
USCB population estimates


United States Office of Management and Budget










v
t
e


The 100 most populous metropolitan statistical areas of the United States of America







   



New York, NY
Los Angeles, CA
Chicago, IL
Dallas, TX
Houston, TX
Washington, DC
Philadelphia, PA
Miami, FL
Atlanta, GA
Boston, MA
San Francisco, CA
Phoenix, AZ
Riverside, CA
Detroit, MI
Seattle, WA
Minneapolis, MN
San Diego, CA
Tampa, FL
Denver, CO
St. Louis, MO






Baltimore, MD
Charlotte, NC
San Juan, PR
Orlando, FL
San Antonio, TX
Portland, OR
Pittsburgh, PA
Sacramento, CA
Cincinnati, OH
Las Vegas, NV
Kansas City, MO
Austin, TX
Columbus, OH
Cleveland, OH
Indianapolis, IN
San Jose, CA
Nashville, TN
Virginia Beach, VA
Providence, RI
Milwaukee, WI






Jacksonville, FL
Memphis, TN
Oklahoma City, OK
Louisville, KY
Richmond, VA
New Orleans, LA
Hartford, CT
Raleigh, NC
Birmingham, AL
Buffalo, NY
Salt Lake City, UT
Rochester, NY
Grand Rapids, MI
Tucson, AZ
Honolulu, HI
Tulsa, OK
Fresno, CA
Bridgeport, CT
Worcester, MA
Albuquerque, NM






Omaha, NE
Albany, NY
New Haven, CT
Bakersfield, CA
Knoxville, TN
Greenville, SC
Oxnard, CA
El Paso, TX
Allentown, PA
Baton Rouge, LA
McAllen, TX
Dayton, OH
Columbia, SC
Greensboro, NC
Sarasota, FL
Little Rock, AR
Stockton, CA
Akron, OH
Charleston, SC
Colorado Springs, CO






Syracuse, NY
Winston-Salem, NC
Cape Coral, FL
Boise, ID
Wichita, KS
Springfield, MA
Madison, WI
Lakeland, FL
Ogden, UT
Toledo, OH
Deltona, FL
Des Moines, IA
Jackson, MS
Augusta, GA
Scranton, PA
Youngstown, OH
Harrisburg, PA
Provo, UT
Palm Bay, FL
Chattanooga, TN










United States Census Bureau population estimates for July 1, 2012










v
t
e


United States Census



Regions



Division
State
Federal District
Insular area

American Samoa
Guam
Northern Mariana Islands
Puerto Rico
United States Virgin Islands


ZIP Code Tabulation Area





Native areas



Alaska Native corporation
Indian reservation

list


Hawaiian home land
Off-reservation trust land
Oklahoma Tribal Statistical Area





Metropolitan



Primary statistical area

list


Combined statistical area
Core-based statistical area

list


Metropolitan statistical area

list


Micropolitan statistical area

list


New England city and town area
Urban area

list







State-level



Congressional district
County

list
Alaska census area
Independent city
Municipio


Place

Census-designated


Public use microdata area
School district

lists


State legislative district
Urban growth area





County-level



Census county division
Minor civil division
Traffic analysis zone
Voting district





Local



Block
Block group
Tract








Census Bureau
Office of Management and Budget











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Metropolitan_statistical_area&oldid=818197029"					Categories: Metropolitan statistical areas of the United StatesCore based statistical areas of the United StatesDemographics of the United States