





This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (December 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



"Gorbachev" redirects here. For other people with the surname, see Gorbachev (surname).
This name uses Eastern Slavic naming customs; the patronymic is Sergeyevich and the family name is Gorbachev.


Mikhail Gorbachev
Михаил Горбачёв
GCL








President of the Soviet Union


In office
15 March 1990 – 25 December 1991


Prime Minister
Nikolai Ryzhkov
Valentin Pavlov
Ivan Silayev


Vice President
Gennady Yanayev


Preceded by
Himself as Chairman of the Supreme Soviet


Succeeded by
Boris Yeltsin as President of Russian Federation


General Secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union


In office
10 March 1985 – 24 August 1991


Deputy
Vladimir Ivashko


Preceded by
Konstantin Chernenko


Succeeded by
Vladimir Ivashko (acting)


Chairman of the Supreme Soviet of the Soviet Union


In office
25 May 1989 – 15 March 1990


Deputy
Anatoly Lukyanov


Preceded by
Himself as Chairman of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the Soviet Union


Succeeded by
Anatoly Lukyanov (executive abilities transferred to President)


Chairman of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet


In office
1 October 1988 – 25 May 1989


Preceded by
Andrei Gromyko


Succeeded by
Himself as Chairman of the Supreme Soviet of the Soviet Union





Personal details


Born
Mikhail Sergeyevich Gorbachev
(1931-03-02) 2 March 1931 (age 86)
Privolnoye, North Caucasus Krai, Russian SFSR, Soviet Union


Nationality
Russian


Political party
Soviet Communist
(1950–91)
Independent
(1991–2001; 2004–07; 2014–)
Russian Social Democratic
(2001–04)
Union of Social Democrats
(2007–14)


Spouse(s)
Raisa Gorbachova
(m. 1953;  d. 1999)


Children
Irina Mikhailovna Virganskaya


Education
Law


Alma mater
Moscow State University


Signature



Website
Gorby.ru/en




Central institution membership

1980–1991: Full member, 25th, 26th, 27th, 28th Politburo
1979–1980: Candidate member, 25th Politburo
1978–1991: Member, 25th, 26th, 27th, 28th Secretariat
1971–1991: Full member, 24th, 25th, 26th, 27th, 28th Central Committee




Other offices held

2001–2004: Chairman, Social Democratic Party of Russia
1985–1991: Chairman, Defense Council
1970–1978: First Secretary, Stavropol Regional Committee


Leader of the Soviet Union


← Chernenko
Last leader






Mikhail Sergeyevich Gorbachev, GCL (/ˈɡɔːrbəˌtʃɒf, ˈɡɜːr-/;[1] Russian: Михаи́л Серге́евич Горбачёв, IPA: [mʲɪxɐˈil sʲɪrˈɡʲejɪvʲɪtɕ ɡərbɐˈtɕɵf] ( listen); born 2 March 1931)[2] is a Russian and former Soviet politician. He was the eighth and last leader of the Soviet Union, having been General Secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union from 1985 until 1991. He was the country's head of state from 1988 until 1991 (titled as Chairman of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet from 1988 to 1989, as Chairman of the Supreme Soviet from 1989 to 1990, and as President of the Soviet Union from 1990 to 1991).
Gorbachev was born in Stavropol Krai in 1931 into a peasant Ukrainian–Russian family, and in his teens, operated combine harvesters on collective farms. He graduated from Moscow State University in 1955 with a degree in law. While he was at the university, he joined the Communist Party, and soon became very active within it. In 1970, he was appointed the First Party Secretary of the Stavropol Regional Committee, First Secretary to the Supreme Soviet in 1974, and appointed a candidate member of the Politburo in 1979. Within three years of the death of Soviet leader Leonid Brezhnev, following the brief "interregna" of Andropov and Chernenko, Gorbachev was elected general secretary by the Politburo in 1985. Before he reached the post, he had occasionally been mentioned in Western newspapers as a likely next leader and a man of the younger generation at the top level.
Gorbachev's policies of glasnost ("openness") and perestroika ("restructuring") and his reorientation of Soviet strategic aims contributed to the end of the Cold War. Under this program, the role of the Communist Party in governing the state was removed from the constitution, which inadvertently led to crisis-level political instability with a surge of regional nationalist and anti-communist activism culminating in the dissolution of the Soviet Union. Gorbachev later expressed regret for his failure to save the USSR, though he has insisted that his policies were not failures but rather were vitally necessary reforms which were sabotaged and exploited by opportunists. He was awarded the Otto Hahn Peace Medal in 1989, the Nobel Peace Prize in 1990 and the Harvey Prize in 1992, as well as honorary doctorates from various universities.
In September 2008, Gorbachev and business oligarch Alexander Lebedev announced they would form the Independent Democratic Party of Russia,[3] and in May 2009 Gorbachev announced that the launch was imminent.[4] This was Gorbachev's third attempt to establish a political party, having started the Social Democratic Party of Russia in 2001 and the Union of Social Democrats in 2007.[5]



Contents


1 Early life
2 Rise in the Communist Party
3 General Secretary of the CPSU

3.1 Domestic reforms

3.1.1 Perestroika
3.1.2 Glasnost


3.2 Presidency of the USSR

3.2.1 Foreign engagements
3.2.2 Dissolution of the Soviet Union

3.2.2.1 Crisis of the Union: 1990–1991
3.2.2.2 Coup of August 1991
3.2.2.3 Final collapse






4 Post-presidency

4.1 Criticism of Vladimir Putin
4.2 Call for global restructuring


5 Honours and accolades

5.1 Soviet Union and Russia decorations
5.2 Foreign decorations and awards


6 Personal life

6.1 Attitude to religion
6.2 Port-wine birthmark


7 See also
8 References
9 Further reading
10 External links



Early life[edit]
Gorbachev was born on 2 March 1931 in Privolnoye, Stavropol Krai, Russian SFSR, Soviet Union, into a mixed Russian-Ukrainian family[6] of migrants from Voronezh and Chernigov Governorates. As a child, Gorbachev experienced the Soviet famine of 1932–1933. He recalled in a memoir that "In that terrible year [in 1933] nearly half the population of my native village, Privolnoye, starved to death, including two sisters and one brother of my father."[7] Both of his grandfathers were arrested on false charges in the 1930s; his paternal grandfather Andrey Moiseyevich Gorbachev (Андрей Моисеевич Горбачёв) was sent to exile in Siberia.[8][9]




Gorbachev and his Ukrainian maternal grandparents, late 1930s











Mikhail Gorbachev's voice





recorded November 2012






Problems playing this file? See media help.


His father was a combine harvester operator and Red Army veteran, named Sergey Andreyevich Gorbachev. According to Gorbachev, during World War II his father "defended Kursk, forded the Dnieper knee-deep in blood and was wounded in Czechoslovakia."[10]
His mother, Maria Panteleyevna Gorbacheva (née Gopkalo), was a kolkhoz worker.[9] He was brought up mainly by his Ukrainian maternal grandparents. In his teens, he became a leader in the Komsomol, a Communist youth organization. He operated combine harvesters on collective farms and won the Red Labor Banner in 1949 for helping his father break harvesting records.[11]
He entered Moscow State University in 1950 and graduated in 1955 with a degree in law.[11] While at the university, he joined the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (CPSU) and soon became very active within the party. He also became close friends with Zdenek Mlynar, who would become the primary ideologist of the Prague Spring in 1968. The two men influenced each other as they became disillusioned with Stalinism.[11]
In 1967 he qualified as an agricultural economist via a correspondence master's degree at the Stavropol Institute of Agriculture.
Gorbachev met his future wife, Raisa Titarenko, daughter of a Ukrainian railway engineer, at Moscow State University. They married in September 1953 and moved to Stavropol upon graduation. She gave birth to their only child, daughter Irina Mikhailovna Virganskaya (Ири́на Миха́йловна Вирга́нская), in 1957. Raisa Gorbacheva died of leukemia in 1999.[12] Gorbachev has two granddaughters (Ksenia and Anastasia) and one great granddaughter (Aleksandra).
Rise in the Communist Party[edit]
Gorbachev attended the important twenty-second Party Congress in October 1961, where Nikita Khrushchev announced a plan to surpass the U.S. in per capita production within twenty years. Gorbachev rose in the Communist League hierarchy and worked his way up through territorial leagues of the party. He was promoted to Head of the Department of Party Organs in the Stavropol Regional Committee in 1963.[13]
In 1970, he was appointed First Party Secretary of the Stavropol Regional Committee, a body of the CPSU, becoming one of the youngest provincial party chiefs in the nation.[13] In this position he helped reorganise the collective farms, improve workers' living conditions, expand the size of their private plots, and gave them a greater voice in planning.[13]




Identity cards of the general secretary Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (CPSU) Mikhail Gorbachev (1986–1991 yy.)


He was made a member of the Communist Party Central Committee in 1971. Three years later, in 1974, he was made a Deputy to the Supreme Soviet of the Soviet Union and Chairman of the Standing Commission on Youth Affairs. He was subsequently appointed to the Central Committee's Secretariat for Agriculture in 1978, replacing Fyodor Kulakov, who had supported Gorbachev's appointment, after Kulakov died of a heart attack.[13][14] In 1979, Gorbachev was elected a candidate (non-voting) member of the Politburo, the highest authority in the country, and received full membership in 1980. Gorbachev owed his steady rise to power to the patronage of Mikhail Suslov, the powerful chief ideologist of the CPSU.[15]
During Yuri Andropov's tenure as general secretary (1982–1984), Gorbachev became one of the Politburo's most visible and active members.[15] With responsibility over personnel, working together with Andropov, 20 percent of the top echelon of government ministers and regional governors were replaced, often with younger men. During this time Grigory Romanov, Nikolai Ryzhkov, and Yegor Ligachev were elevated, the latter two working closely with Gorbachev, Ryzhkov on economics, Ligachev on personnel.[16][page needed]




Gorbachev in 1966


Gorbachev's positions within the CPSU created more opportunities to travel abroad, and this would profoundly affect his political and social views in the future as leader of the country. In 1972, he headed a Soviet delegation to Belgium,[13] and three years later he led a delegation to West Germany; in 1983 he headed a delegation to Canada to meet with Prime Minister Pierre Trudeau and members of the Commons and Senate. In 1984, he travelled to the United Kingdom, where he met British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher.
Andropov died in 1984, and indicated that he wanted Gorbachev to succeed him as general secretary. Instead, the aged Konstantin Chernenko took power, even though he himself was terminally ill.[17] After Chernenko's death the following year, it became clear to the party hierarchy that younger leadership was needed.[18] Gorbachev was elected general secretary by the Politburo on 11 March 1985, only three hours after Chernenko's death. Upon his accession at age 54, he was the youngest member of the Politburo.[15] He was also the first person to be elected party leader after having initially failed in a previous bid for the post.[17]
General Secretary of the CPSU[edit]




U.S. President Ronald Reagan and Mikhail Gorbachev shaking hands at the American-Soviet summit in Washington, D.C., in 1987


Mikhail Gorbachev was the Party's first leader to have been born after the Revolution. As de facto ruler of the USSR, he tried to reform the stagnating Party and the state economy by introducing glasnost ("openness"), perestroika ("restructuring"), demokratizatsiya ("democratization"), and uskoreniye ("acceleration" of economic development), which were launched at the 27th Congress of the CPSU in February 1986.
Domestic reforms[edit]


Economic growth and regression[19]


Year
Indicators
Growth (in %)


1986
GNP growth
4.1


Internal debt as % GDP
20


Budget deficit as % GDP
−2.4


Balance payments in convertible currencies (U.S. dollars billions)
0,637


1987
GNP growth
1.3


Internal debt as % GDP
22


Budget deficit as % GDP
−6.2


Balance payments in convertible currencies (U.S. dollars billions)
−2.3


1988
GNP growth
2.1


Internal debt as % GDP
36


Budget deficit as % GDP
−8.8


Balance payments in convertible currencies (US dollars billions)
−0.72


1989
GNP growth
1.5


Internal debt as % GDP
43


Budget deficit as % GDP
−11


Balance payments in convertible currencies (U.S. dollars billions)
−3.7


1990
GNP growth
−12


Internal debt as % GDP
55


Budget deficit as % GDP
−14


Balance payments in convertible currencies (U.S. dollars billions)
−11.8


1991
GNP growth
−13


Internal debt as % GDP
—


Budget deficit as % GDP
−20


Balance payments in convertible currencies (U.S. dollars billions)
—


Gorbachev's primary goal as general secretary was to revive the Soviet economy after the stagnant Brezhnev years.[15] In 1985, he announced that the economy was stalled and that reorganization was needed. Gorbachev proposed a "vague programme of reform", which was adopted at the April Plenum of the Central Committee.[14] He called for fast-paced technological modernization and increased industrial and agricultural productivity, and tried to reform the Soviet bureaucracy to be more efficient and prosperous.[15]
Gorbachev soon came to believe that fixing the Soviet economy would be nearly impossible without reforming the political and social structure of the Communist nation.[20] He also initiated the concept of gospriyomka (state acceptance of production) during his time as leader,[21] which represented quality control.[22]
In a speech in May 1985 in Leningrad (now Saint Petersburg), he advocated widespread reforms. The reforms began with personnel changes, most notably by replacing Andrei Gromyko with Eduard Shevardnadze as Minister of Foreign Affairs. Gromyko, disparaged as "Mr Nyet" in the West, had served in the post for 28 years and was considered an 'old thinker'. Robert D. English notes that, despite Shevardnadze's diplomatic inexperience, Gorbachev "shared with him an outlook" and experience in managing an agricultural region of the Soviet Union (Georgia), which meant that both had weak links to the powerful military-industrial complex.[23]
A number of reformist ideas were discussed by Politburo members. One of the first reforms Gorbachev introduced was the anti-alcohol campaign, begun in May 1985, which was designed to fight widespread alcoholism in the Soviet Union. Prices of vodka, wine, and beer were raised, and their sales were restricted. It was pursued vigorously and cut both alcohol sales and government revenue.[24] As a result, alcohol production migrated to the black market economy and dealt a blow to state revenue—a loss of approximately 100 billion rubles, according to Alexander Yakovlev. However, the program proved to be a useful symbol for change in the country.[24]
The purpose of reform was to prop up the centrally planned economy—not to transition to market socialism. Speaking in late summer 1985 to the secretaries for economic affairs of the central committees of the East European communist parties, Gorbachev said: "Many of you see the solution to your problems in resorting to market mechanisms in place of direct planning. Some of you look at the market as a lifesaver for your economies. But, comrades, you should not think about lifesavers but about the ship, and the ship is socialism."[25]
Perestroika[edit]
Main article: Perestroika




Gorbachev at the Brandenburg Gate in 1986 during a visit to East Germany.


Gorbachev initiated his new policy of perestroika (literally "restructuring" in Russian) and its attendant radical reforms in 1986; they were sketched, but not fully spelled out, at the XXVIIth Party Congress in February–March 1986. The "reconstruction" was proposed in an attempt to overcome the economic stagnation by creating a dependable and effective mechanism for accelerating economic and social progress.[26]
According to Gorbachev, perestroika was the "conference of development of democracy, socialist self-government, encouragement of initiative and creative endeavor, improved order and discipline, more glasnost, criticism and self-criticism in all spheres of our society. It is utmost respect for the individual and consideration for personal dignity".[26]
Domestic changes continued. In a bombshell speech during Armenian SSR's Central Committee Plenum of the Communist Party, the young First Secretary of Armenia's Hrazdan Regional Communist Party, Hayk Kotanjian, criticised rampant corruption in the Armenian Communist Party's highest echelons, implicating Armenian SSR Communist Party First Secretary Karen Demirchyan and calling for his resignation. Symbolically, intellectual Andrei Sakharov was invited to return to Moscow by Gorbachev in December 1986 after six years of internal exile in Gorky. During the same month, however, signs of the nationalities problem that would haunt the later years of the Soviet Union surfaced as riots, named Jeltoqsan, occurred in Kazakhstan after Dinmukhamed Kunayev was replaced as First Secretary of the Communist Party of Kazakhstan.
The Central Committee Plenum in January 1987 saw the crystallisation of Gorbachev's political reforms, including proposals for multi-candidate elections and the appointment of non-Party members to government positions. He also first raised the idea of expanding co-operatives. Economic reforms took up much of the rest of 1987, as a new law giving enterprises more independence was passed in June and Gorbachev released a book, Perestroika: New Thinking for Our Country and the World, in November, elucidating his main ideas for reform. In 1987, he rehabilitated many opponents of Joseph Stalin—another part of the De-Stalinization, which began in 1956, when Lenin's Testament was published.
Glasnost[edit]
Main article: Glasnost




Gorbachev with Erich Honecker of East Germany


1988 would see Gorbachev's introduction of glasnost, which gave the Soviet people freedoms that they had never previously known, including greater freedom of speech. The press became far less controlled, and thousands of political prisoners and many dissidents were released. Gorbachev's goal in undertaking glasnost was to pressure conservatives within the CPSU who opposed his policies of economic restructuring, and he also hoped that through different ranges of openness, debate and participation, the Soviet people would support his reform initiatives.
At the same time, he opened himself and his reforms up for more public criticism, evident in Nina Andreyeva's critical letter in a March edition of Sovetskaya Rossiya.[14] Gorbachev acknowledged that his liberalising policies of glasnost and perestroika owed a great deal to Alexander Dubček's "Socialism with a human face". Indeed, when one reporter asked him what was the difference between his policies and the Prague Spring, Gorbachev replied, "Nineteen years".[27]
The Law on Cooperatives, enacted in May 1988, was perhaps the most radical economic reform of the early Gorbachev era. For the first time since Vladimir Lenin's New Economic Policy, the law permitted private ownership of businesses in the service, manufacturing, and foreign-trade sectors. The law initially imposed high taxes and employment restrictions, although these were ignored by some Soviet Socialist Republics (SSRs). Later, the restrictions were revised to avoid discouraging private-sector activity. Under the provision for private ownership, cooperative restaurants, shops, and manufacturers became part of the Soviet scene. Under the new law, the restructuring of large "All-Union" industrial organizations also began. Aeroflot was split up, eventually becoming several independent airlines. These newly autonomous business organisations were encouraged to seek foreign investment.
In June 1988, at the CPSU's Party Conference, Gorbachev launched radical reforms meant to reduce party control of the government apparatus. He proposed a new executive in the form of a presidential system, as well as a new legislative element, to be called the Congress of People's Deputies.[14] Elections to the Congress of People's Deputies were held throughout the Soviet Union in March and April 1989. This was the first free election in the Soviet Union since 1917. Gorbachev became Chairman of the Supreme Soviet (or head of state) on 25 May 1989.
Presidency of the USSR[edit]
On 15 March 1990, Gorbachev was elected as the first executive President of the Soviet Union with 59% of the Deputies' votes. He was the sole candidate on the ballot. The Congress of People's Deputies met for the first time on 25 May in order to elect representatives from the Congress to sit on the Supreme Soviet of the Soviet Union. Nonetheless, the Congress posed problems for Gorbachev: Its sessions were televised, airing more criticism and encouraging people to expect ever more rapid reform.[28] Perestroika meant changing the planned economy into a more active, self-financed system, where the duration of central planning would not exceed five years, and which would be more able to react to economic needs. Communist rule in the Soviet Union weakened, and centralized power from Moscow was unable to combat centrifugal forces in the South. In the elections, many Party candidates were defeated. Furthermore, Boris Yeltsin was elected as mayor of Moscow and returned to political prominence to become an increasingly vocal critic of Gorbachev.[14]
Following American practice, Gorbachev chose a Vice President. However, when first Shevardnadze, then Kazakh leader Nursultan Nazarbayev, turned it down, Gorbachev chose Gennady Yanayev, the head of the All-Union Central Council of Trade Unions and a known hardliner. This decision would come back to haunt Gorbachev later.[17]
Foreign engagements[edit]




Gorbachev meets Romanian leader Nicolae Ceauşescu, 1985


In contrast to the controversy at home over his domestic reforms, Gorbachev was largely hailed in the West for his 'new thinking' in foreign affairs. During his tenure, he sought to improve relations and trade with the West by reducing Cold War tensions. He established close relationships with several Western leaders, such as West German Chancellor Helmut Kohl, U.S. President Ronald Reagan, and British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher, who famously remarked, "I like Mr. Gorbachev; we can do business together".[29]
Gorbachev understood the link between achieving international détente and domestic reform and thus began extending "New Thinking" abroad immediately. On 8 April 1985, he announced the suspension of the deployment of SS-20 missiles in Europe as a move towards resolving intermediate-range nuclear weapons (INF) issues. Later that year, in September, Gorbachev proposed that the Soviets and Americans both cut their nuclear arsenals in half. He went to France on his first trip abroad as Soviet leader in October. November saw the Geneva Summit between Gorbachev and Ronald Reagan. Though no concrete agreement was made, Gorbachev and Reagan struck a personal relationship and decided to hold further meetings.[14]




Reagan and Gorbachev with wives (Nancy and Raisa, respectively) attending a dinner at the Soviet Embassy in Washington, 9 December 1987


January 1986 would see Gorbachev make his boldest international move so far, when he announced his proposal for the elimination of intermediate-range nuclear weapons in Europe and his strategy for eliminating all of the Soviet nuclear arsenal by the year 2000 (often referred to as the 'January Proposal'). He also began the process of withdrawing troops from Afghanistan and Mongolia on 28 July.[14] Nonetheless, many observers, such as Jack F. Matlock, Jr. (despite generally praising Gorbachev as well as Reagan), have criticized Gorbachev for taking too long to achieve withdrawal from the Afghanistan War, citing it as an example of lingering elements of "old thinking" in Gorbachev.[30]
On 11 October 1986, Gorbachev and Reagan met at Höfði house in Reykjavík, Iceland, to discuss reducing intermediate-range nuclear weapons in Europe. To the immense surprise of both men's advisers, the two agreed in principle to removing INF systems from Europe and to equal global limits of 100 INF missile warheads. They also essentially agreed in principle to eliminate all nuclear weapons in 10 years (by 1996), instead of by the year 2000 as in Gorbachev's original outline.[30] Continuing trust issues, particularly over reciprocity and Reagan's Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI), meant that the summit is often regarded as a failure for not producing a concrete agreement immediately, or for leading to a staged elimination of nuclear weapons. In the long term, nevertheless, this would culminate in the signing of the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces (INF) Treaty in 1987, after Gorbachev had proposed this elimination on 22 July 1987 (and it was subsequently agreed on in Geneva on 24 November).[14]
In February 1988, Gorbachev announced the full withdrawal of Soviet forces from Afghanistan. The withdrawal was completed the following year, although the civil war continued as the Mujahedin pushed to overthrow the pro-Soviet Najibullah government. An estimated 14,453 Soviets were killed between 1979 and 1989 as a result of the Afghanistan War.




Gorbachev in one-on-one discussions with Reagan


Also during 1988, Gorbachev announced that the Soviet Union would abandon the Brezhnev Doctrine, and allow the Eastern bloc nations to freely determine their own internal affairs. Jokingly dubbed the "Sinatra Doctrine" by Gorbachev's Foreign Ministry spokesman Gennadi Gerasimov, this policy of non-intervention in the affairs of the other Warsaw Pact states proved to be the most momentous of Gorbachev's foreign policy reforms. In his 6 July 1989 speech arguing for a "common European home" before the Council of Europe in Strasbourg, France, Gorbachev declared: "The social and political order in some countries changed in the past, and it can change in the future too, but this is entirely a matter for each people to decide. Any interference in the internal affairs, or any attempt to limit the sovereignty of another state, friend, ally, or another, would be inadmissible." A month earlier, on 4 June 1989, elections had taken place in Poland and the communist government had already been deposed.
Moscow's abandonment of the Brezhnev Doctrine allowed the rise of popular upheavals in Eastern Europe throughout 1989, in which Communism was overthrown. By the end of 1989, revolts had spread from one Eastern European capital to another, ousting the regimes built in Eastern Europe after World War II. Except in Romania, the popular upheavals against the pro-Soviet regimes were all peaceful (see Revolutions of 1989). The loosening of Soviet hegemony over Eastern Europe effectively ended the Cold War, and for this, Gorbachev was awarded the Otto Hahn Peace Medal in Gold in 1989 and the Nobel Peace Prize on 15 October 1990.




Reagan and President-elect Bush meeting with Gorbachev on Governors Island, New York City, 7 December 1988


On 9 November, people in East Germany (the German Democratic Republic, GDR) were suddenly allowed to cross through the Berlin Wall into West Berlin, following a peaceful protest against the country's dictatorial administration, including a demonstration by some one million people in East Berlin on 4 November. Unlike earlier riots which were ended by military force with the help of the USSR, Gorbachev now decided not to interfere with the process in Germany.[31] He stated that German reunification was an internal German matter.
The rest of 1989 was taken up by the increasingly problematic question of nationalities and the dramatic fragmentation of the Eastern Bloc. Despite unprecedented international détente, due to Soviet withdrawal from Afghanistan completed in January and continuing talks between Gorbachev and George H. W. Bush, domestic reforms suffered from increasing divergence between reformists, who wanted faster change, and conservatives, who wanted to limit change. Gorbachev states that he tried to find middle ground between both groups, but this would draw more criticism towards him.[14] The story from this point on moves away from reforms and becomes one of the nationalities question and the eventual dissolution of the Soviet Union.




Gorbachev and George H. W. Bush, 1990


Coit D. Blacker wrote in 1990 that the Soviet leadership "appeared to have believed that whatever loss of authority the Soviet Union might suffer in Eastern Europe would be more than offset by a net increase in its influence in Western Europe".[32] Nevertheless, it is unlikely that Gorbachev ever intended for the dismantling of Communism in Warsaw Pact countries. Rather, he assumed that the Communist parties of Eastern Europe could be reformed in a similar way to the reforms he hoped to achieve in the CPSU. Just as perestroika was aimed at making the USSR more efficient economically and politically, Gorbachev believed that the Comecon and Warsaw Pact could be reformed into more effective entities. Alexander Yakovlev, a close advisor to Gorbachev, would later state that it would have been "absurd to keep the system" in Eastern Europe. In contrast to Gorbachev, Yakovlev had come to the conclusion that the Soviet-dominated Comecon was inherently unworkable and that the Warsaw Pact had "no relevance to real life".[33]
Dissolution of the Soviet Union[edit]
Main article: Dissolution of the Soviet Union
While Gorbachev's political initiatives were positive for freedom and democracy in the Soviet Union and its Eastern bloc allies, the economic policy of his government gradually brought the country close to disaster. By the end of the 1980s, severe shortages of basic food supplies (meat, sugar) led to the reintroduction of the war-time system of distribution using food cards that limited each citizen to a certain amount of product per month. Compared to 1985, the state deficit grew from 0 to 109 billion rubles; gold funds decreased from 2,000 to 200 tons; and external debt grew from 0 to 120 billion dollars.
Furthermore, the democratisation of the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe had irreparably undermined the power of the CPSU and Gorbachev himself. The relaxation of censorship and attempts to create more political openness had the unintended effect of re-awakening long-suppressed nationalist and anti-Russian feelings in the Soviet republics. Calls for greater independence from Moscow's rule grew louder, especially in the Baltic republics of Lithuania, Latvia, and Estonia, which had been annexed into the Soviet Union by Joseph Stalin in 1940. Nationalist feeling also took hold in Georgia, Ukraine, Armenia, and Azerbaijan.
In December 1986, the first signs of the nationalities problem that would haunt the later years of the Soviet Union's existence surfaced as riots, named Jeltoqsan, occurred in Alma Ata and other areas of Kazakhstan after Dinmukhamed Kunayev was replaced as First Secretary of the Communist Party of Kazakhstan. Nationalism would then surface in Russia in May 1987, as 600 members of Pamyat, a nascent Russian nationalist group, demonstrated in Moscow and were becoming increasingly linked to Boris Yeltsin, who received their representatives at a meeting.[14]
Violence erupted in Nagorno-Karabakh—an Armenian-populated enclave of Azerbaijan—between February and April, when Armenians living in the area began a new wave of demands to transfer of NKAO from Azerbaijan to Armenia which eventually led to full scale Nagorno-Karabakh War.[34] Gorbachev imposed a temporary solution, but it did not last, as fresh trouble arose in Nagorno-Karabakh between June and July. Turmoil would once again return in late 1988, this time in Armenia itself, when the Spitak earthquake hit the region on 7 December. Poor local infrastructure magnified the hazard and some 25,000 people died.[14] Gorbachev was forced to break off his trip to the United States and cancel planned travel to Cuba and the UK.[14]
In March and April 1989 elections to the Congress of People's Deputies took place throughout the Soviet Union. This returned many pro-independence republicans, as many CPSU candidates were rejected. The televised Congress debates allowed the dissemination of pro-independence propositions. Indeed, 1989 would see numerous nationalistic protests; for example, beginning with the Baltic republics in January, laws were passed in most non-Russian republics giving precedence for the local language over Russian.




Gorbachev addressing the United Nations General Assembly in December 1988. During the speech he dramatically announced deep unilateral cuts in Soviet military forces in Eastern Europe.


9 April would see the crackdown on nationalist demonstrations by Soviet troops in Tbilisi, Georgia. There would be further bloody protests in Uzbekistan in June, when Uzbeks and Meskhetian Turks clashed in Fergana, Uzbekistan. Apart from this violence, three major events that altered the face of the nationalities issue occurred in 1989. Estonia had declared its sovereignty on 16 November 1988, to be followed by Lithuania in May 1989 and by Latvia in July (the Communist Party of Lithuania would also declare its independence from the CPSU in December). This brought the Union and the republics into clear confrontation and would form a precedent for other republics.
Around the 50th anniversary of the signing of the 1939 Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact in July 1989, the Soviet government formally acknowledged that the plan had included the placing of the Baltic states into the Soviet sphere of influence, which paved the way for their annexation into the USSR in 1940. The revelation supported the long-denied proposition that the Baltic states had been involuntarily brought into the Soviet Union, and so it boosted the Baltic aspirations to reestablish their independence. Finally, the Eastern bloc fragmented in the autumn of 1989,[14] and Gorbachev made the decision not to use military force in order to maintain the Communist regimes in Eastern Europe.[11] This raised hopes that Gorbachev would extend his non-interventionist doctrine to the internal workings of the USSR.[14]
Crisis of the Union: 1990–1991[edit]
1990 began with nationalist turmoil in January. Azerbaijanis rioted and troops were sent in to restore order; many Moldovans demonstrated in favour of unification with post-Communist Romania; and Lithuanian demonstrations continued. The same month, in a hugely significant move, Armenia asserted its right to veto laws coming from the All-Union level, thus intensifying the "war of laws" between the republics and Moscow.[14]
Soon after, the CPSU, which had already lost much of its control, began to lose even more power as Gorbachev deepened political reform. The February Central Committee Plenum advocated multi-party elections; local elections held between February and March returned a large number of pro-independence candidates. The Congress of People's Deputies then amended the Soviet Constitution in March, removing Article 6, which guaranteed the monopoly of the CPSU. Thus, political reform came from both above and below, and gained momentum that would augment republican nationalism. Soon after the constitutional amendment, Lithuania declared independence and elected Vytautas Landsbergis as Chairman of the Supreme Council (head of state).[14]
On 15 March, Gorbachev himself was elected as the first — and as it turned out, only — President of the Soviet Union by the Congress of People's Deputies and chose a Presidential Council of 15 politicians. Gorbachev was essentially creating his own political support base independent of CPSU conservatives and radical reformers. The new Executive was designed to be a powerful position to guide the spiraling reform process, and the Supreme Soviet of the Soviet Union and Congress of People's Deputies had already given Gorbachev increasingly presidential powers in February. This was again criticized by reformers. Despite the apparent increase in Gorbachev's power, he was unable to stop the process of nationalistic assertion.
Further embarrassing facts about Soviet history were revealed in April, when the government admitted that the NKVD had carried out the infamous Katyn massacre of Polish army officers during World War II; previously, the USSR had blamed Nazi Germany. More significantly for Gorbachev's position, Boris Yeltsin reached a new level of prominence, as he was elected Chairman of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the Russian SFSR in May, effectively making him the de jure leader of the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic. Problems for Gorbachev once again came from the Russian parliament in June, when it declared the precedence of Russian laws over All-Union-level legislation.[14]




Anti-Armenian and anti-government Dushanbe riots in Tajikistan, 1990


Meanwhile, Gorbachev's personal political position continued to change. At the 28th CPSU Congress in July, Gorbachev was re-elected general secretary, but this position was now completely independent of Soviet government, and the Politburo had no say in the ruling of the country. Gorbachev further reduced Party power in the same month, when he issued a decree abolishing Party control of all areas of the media and broadcasting.
At the same time, Gorbachev worked to consolidate his presidential position, culminating in the Supreme Soviet granting him special powers to rule by decree in September in order to pass a much-needed plan for transition to a market economy. However, the Supreme Soviet could not agree on which program to adopt. Gorbachev pressed on with political reform, his proposal for setting up a new Soviet government, with a Soviet of the Federation consisting of representatives from all 15 republics, was passed through the Supreme Soviet in November. In December, Gorbachev was once more granted increased executive power by the Supreme Soviet, arguing that such moves were necessary to counter "the dark forces of nationalism". Such moves led to Eduard Shevardnadze's resignation; Gorbachev's former ally warned of an impending dictatorship. This move was a serious blow to Gorbachev personally and to his efforts for reform.[14]
Meanwhile, Gorbachev was losing further ground to nationalists. October 1990 saw the founding of DemRossiya, the Russian pro-reform coalition; a few days later, both Ukraine and Russia declared their laws completely sovereign over Soviet laws. The 'war of laws' had become an open battle, with the Supreme Soviet refusing to recognise the actions of the two republics. Gorbachev would publish the draft of a new union treaty in November, which envisioned a continued union called the Union of Sovereign Soviet Republics, but, going into 1991, Gorbachev's actions were steadily overpowered by secessionism.[14]




Berlin Wall, "Thank you, Gorbi!", October 1990


January and February 1991 would see a new level of turmoil in the Baltic republics. On 10 January 1991, Gorbachev issued an ultimatum-like request addressing the Lithuanian Supreme Council demanding the restoration of the validity of the constitution of the Soviet Union in Lithuania and revocation of all anti-constitutional laws.[35] In his Memoirs, Gorbachev asserts that on 12 January he convened the Council of the Federation which agreed to political measures to prevent bloodshed, including sending representatives of the Council of the Federation on a "fact-finding mission" to Vilnius. However, before the delegation arrived, the local branches of the KGB and armed forces had worked together to seize the TV tower in Vilnius; Gorbachev asked the heads of the KGB and military if they had approved such action, and there is no evidence that they, or Gorbachev, ever did. Gorbachev cites documents found in the RSFSR Prokuratura after the August coup, which only mentioned that "some 'authorities'" had sanctioned the actions.[14]
The book Alpha – the KGB's Top Secret Unit also suggests that a "KGB operation co-ordinated with the military" was undertaken by the KGB Alpha Group.[36] Archie Brown, in The Gorbachev Factor, uses the memoirs of many people around Gorbachev and in the upper echelons of the Soviet political landscape, to implicate General Valentin Varennikov, a member of the August coup plotters, and General Vladislav Achalov, another August coup conspirator. These persons were characterised as individuals "who were prepared to remove Gorbachev from his presidential office unconstitutionally" and "were more than capable of using unauthorised violence against nationalist separatists some months earlier". Brown criticises Gorbachev for "a conscious tilt in the direction of the conservative forces he was trying to keep within an increasingly fragile coalition" who would later betray him; he also criticises Gorbachev "for his tougher line and heightened rhetoric against the Lithuanians in the days preceding the attack and for his slowness in condemning the killings" but notes that Gorbachev did not approve any action and was seeking political solutions.[37]
In continued violence, at least 14 civilians were killed and more than 600 injured from 11–13 January 1991 in Vilnius, Lithuania. News of support for the Lithuanians from Western governments began to appear. The strong Western reaction and the actions of Russian democratic forces put the Soviet president and government into a very awkward position. Further problems surfaced in Riga, Latvia, on 20 and 21 January, where OMON (special Ministry of the Interior troops) killed 4 people. Archie Brown suggests that Gorbachev's response this time was better, condemning the rogue action, sending his condolences and suggesting that secession could take place if it went through the procedures outlined in the Soviet constitution. According to Gorbachev's aide, Shakhnazarov, Gorbachev was finally beginning to accept the inevitability of "losing" the Baltic republics, although he would try all political means to preserve the Union. Brown believes that this put him in "imminent danger" of being overthrown by hard-liners opposing secession.[37]
Gorbachev continued to work on drafting a new treaty of union which would have created a truly voluntary federation in an increasingly democratised Soviet Union. The new treaty was strongly supported by the Central Asian republics, who needed the economic power and markets of the Soviet Union to prosper. However, the more radical reformists, such as Russian SFSR President Boris Yeltsin, were increasingly convinced that a rapid transition to a market economy was required and were more than happy to contemplate the disintegration of the Soviet Union if that was required to achieve their aims. Nevertheless, a referendum on the future of the Soviet Union was held in March (with a referendum in Russia on the creation of a presidency), which returned an average of 76.4% in the nine republics where it was taken, with a turnout of 80% of the adult population.[37] Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Armenia, Georgia and Moldova did not participate. Following this, an April meeting at Novo-Ogarevo between Gorbachev and the heads of the nine republics issued a statement on speeding up the creation of a new Union treaty.
In May, a hardline newspaper published "Architect amidst the Ruins", an open letter criticizing Yakovlev (often referred to as the "architect of perestroika") which was signed by Gennady Zyuganov. Many also saw this publication as the start of a campaign to oust Gorbachev.
Meanwhile, on 12 June 1991 Boris Yeltsin was elected President of the Russian Federation by 57.3% of the vote (with a turnout of 74%).[14]
Coup of August 1991[edit]
Main article: 1991 Soviet coup d'état attempt
In contrast to the reformers' moderate approach to the new treaty, the hard-line apparatchiks, still strong within the CPSU and military establishment, completely opposed anything which might lead to the break-up of the Soviet Union. On the eve of the treaty's signing, hardline Soviet leaders, calling themselves the 'State Committee on the State of Emergency', launched the August coup in an attempt to remove Gorbachev from power and prevent the signing of the new union treaty.
Under the pretense that Gorbachev was ill, his vice president, Yanayev, took over as president. Gorbachev spent three days (19, 20, and 21 August) under house arrest at his dacha in the Crimea before being freed and restored to power. However, upon his return, Gorbachev found that neither Union nor Russian power structures heeded his commands, as support had swung over to Yeltsin, whose defiance had led to the coup's collapse.
Furthermore, Gorbachev was forced to fire large numbers of his Politburo and, in several cases, arrest them. Those arrested for high treason included the "Gang of Eight" that had led the coup, including Kryuchkov, Yazov, Pavlov and Yanayev. Pugo killed his wife and then shot himself after the coup. Akhromeyev, who had offered his assistance but was never implicated, was found hanging in his Kremlin office. Most of these men had been former allies of Gorbachev or had been promoted by him, which drew fresh criticism.
Final collapse[edit]
For all intents and purposes, the coup destroyed Gorbachev politically. On 24 August, he advised the Central Committee to dissolve, resigned as general secretary and dissolved all party units within the government. Shortly afterward, the Supreme Soviet suspended all Party activities on Soviet territory. In effect, Communist rule in the Soviet Union had ended.
Gorbachev's hopes of a new Union were further hit when the Congress of People's Deputies dissolved itself on 5 September. Though Gorbachev and the representatives of eight republics (excluding Azerbaijan, Georgia, Moldova, Ukraine, Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia) signed an agreement on forming a new economic community on 18 October, events were overtaking him.[14] The Soviet Union collapsed with dramatic speed during the latter part of 1991, as one republic after another declared independence. By the autumn, Gorbachev could no longer influence events outside Moscow, and he was challenged even there by Yeltsin. Following the coup, Yeltsin suspended all CPSU activities on Russian territory and closed the Central Committee building at Staraya Square. He also ordered the Russian flag raised alongside the Soviet flag at the Kremlin. In the waning months of 1991, Russia began taking over what remained of the Soviet government, including the Kremlin.
With the country in a state of near collapse, Gorbachev's vision of a renewed union effectively received a fatal blow by a Ukrainian referendum on 1 December, where the Ukrainian people overwhelmingly voted for independence. Ukraine had been the second most powerful republic in the Soviet Union after Russia, and its secession ended any realistic chance of the Soviet Union staying united even on a limited scale. The presidents of Russia, Ukraine and Belarus met in Belovezh Forest, near Brest, Belarus, on 8 December and signed the Belavezha Accords, which declared the Soviet Union had ceased to exist and formed the Commonwealth of Independent States as its successor. Gorbachev initially denounced this move as illegal.[14]
However, on 12 December, the RSFSR Supreme Soviet ratified the Belevezha Accords and denounced the 1922 Union Treaty. It was now apparent that the momentum towards dissolution could not be stopped. Shortly after the RSFSR ratified the Accords, Gorbachev hinted that he was considering stepping aside.[38] On 17 December, he accepted the fait accompli and reluctantly agreed with Yeltsin to dissolve the Soviet Union.[14] Four days later, the leaders of 11 of the 12 remaining republics—all except Georgia (the Baltic states had already seceded in August)—signed the Alma-Ata Protocol which formally established the CIS. They also preemptively accepted Gorbachev's resignation. When Gorbachev learned what had transpired, he told CBS that he would resign as soon as he saw that the CIS was indeed a reality.[39]
On the night of 25 December, in a nationally televised speech, Gorbachev announced his resignation as president—as he put it, "I hereby discontinue my activities at the post of President of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics." He declared the office extinct and handed over its functions—including control of the Soviet nuclear codes—to Yeltsin. That same night after he left office, the flag of the Soviet Union was lowered from the Kremlin and was replaced with the Russian tricolor flag. The next day, 26 December, the Supreme Soviet declared that the Soviet Union had ceased to exist as a functioning state, and formally voted both itself and the Union out of existence. Two days after Gorbachev left office, on 27 December 1991, Yeltsin moved into Gorbachev's old office.[14]
Gorbachev had aimed to maintain the CPSU as a united party but move it in the direction of Scandinavian-style social democracy.[40] But when the CPSU was proscribed after the August coup, Gorbachev was left with no effective power base beyond the armed forces. In the aftermath of the coup, his rival Yeltsin quickly worked to consolidate his hold on the Russian government as well as the remnants of the Soviet armed forces, paving the way for Gorbachev's downfall.
Post-presidency[edit]




Gorbachev with Indian spiritual leader Sri Chinmoy


Following his resignation and the dissolution of the Soviet Union, Gorbachev remained active in Russian politics. During the early years of the post-Soviet era, he expressed criticism at the reforms carried out by Russian president Boris Yeltsin. When Yeltsin called a referendum for 25 April 1993 in an attempt to achieve even greater powers as president, Gorbachev did not vote and instead called for new presidential elections.[41]
Following a failed run for the presidency in 1996, Gorbachev established the Social Democratic Party of Russia, a union between several Russian social democratic parties. He resigned as party leader in May 2004 following a disagreement with the party's chairman over the direction taken in the 2003 election campaign. The party was later banned in 2007 by the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation due to its failure to establish local offices with at least 500 members in the majority of Russian regions, which is required by Russian law for a political organization to be listed as a party.[42] Later that year, Gorbachev founded a new political party, called the Union of Social Democrats.[5] In June 2004, he represented Russia at the funeral of Ronald Reagan.




Gorbachev, daughter Irina and his wife's sister Lyudmila at the funeral of Raisa, 1999


Gorbachev appeared in numerous media channels after his resignation from office. In 1993, he appeared as himself in the Wim Wenders film Faraway, So Close!, the sequel to Wings of Desire. In 1997, Gorbachev appeared with his granddaughter Anastasia in an internationally screened television commercial for Pizza Hut.[43] The U.S. corporation's payment for the 60-second ad went to Gorbachev's non-profit Gorbachev Foundation.[44] In 2007, French luxury brand Louis Vuitton announced that Gorbachev would be shown in an ad campaign, shot by Annie Leibovitz, for their signature luggage.[45] In February 2014, during the winter Olympic Games held in Sochi, Russia, 82-year-old Gorbachev made a rare appearance on The Daily Show with Jon Stewart in a segment where he was tracked down and interviewed by comedic correspondent Jason Jones on location from Moscow.[46]
Following Boris Yeltsin's death on 23 April 2007, Gorbachev released a eulogy for him, stating that Yeltsin was to be commended for assuming the "difficult task of leading the nation into the post-Soviet era", and "on whose shoulders are both great deeds for the country and serious errors".[47]
On 16 June 2009, Gorbachev announced that he had recorded an album of old Russian romantic ballads entitled Songs for Raisa to raise money for a charity dedicated to his late wife. On the album, he sings the songs himself accompanied by Russian musician Andrei Makarevich.[48]




Gorbachev (left) with former Canadian Prime Minister Brian Mulroney and former British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher at the funeral of Ronald Reagan, 11 June 2004


Since his resignation, Gorbachev has remained involved in world affairs. He founded the Gorbachev Foundation in 1992, headquartered in Moscow. He later founded Green Cross International, with which he was one of three major sponsors of the Earth Charter. He also became a member of the Club of Rome and the Club of Madrid, an independent non-profit organization composed of 81 democratic former presidents and Prime Ministers from 57 different countries.
In the decade that followed the Cold War, Gorbachev opposed both the U.S.-led NATO bombing of Yugoslavia in 1999 and the U.S.-led Iraq War in 2003. On 27 July 2007, Gorbachev criticized U.S. foreign policy: "What has followed are unilateral actions, what has followed are wars, what has followed is ignoring the UN Security Council, ignoring international law and ignoring the will of the people, even the American people", he said.[49] That same year, he visited New Orleans, a city hard-hit by Hurricane Katrina, and promised he would return in 2011 to personally lead a local revolution if the U.S. government had not repaired the levees by that time. He said that revolutionary action should be a last resort.[50]
In May 2008, The Telegraph (UK) published an article, "Gorbachev: US could start new Cold War," which quotes Gorbachev saying, "The Americans promised that NATO wouldn't move beyond the boundaries of Germany after the Cold War but now half of central and eastern Europe are members, so what happened to their promises? It shows they cannot be trusted."[51]
Concerning the 2008 South Ossetia war, started by a Georgian attack on Tskhinvali, the capital of pro-Russian South Ossetia,[52] in a 12 August 2008 op-ed essay in The Washington Post, Gorbachev criticized the United States' support for Georgian President Mikheil Saakashvili and for moving to bring the Caucasus into the sphere of its national interest.[53] He later said the following:

Russia did not want this crisis. The Russian leadership is in a strong enough position domestically; it did not need a little victorious war. Russia was dragged into the fray by the recklessness of the Georgian president, Mikheil Saakashvili...The decision by the Russian president, Dmitri Medvedev, to now cease hostilities was the right move by a responsible leader. The Russian president acted calmly, confidently and firmly...The planners of this campaign clearly wanted to make sure that, whatever the outcome, Russia would be blamed for worsening the situation. The West then mounted a propaganda attack against Russia, with the American news media leading the way".[54]

In September 2008, Gorbachev announced he would make a comeback to Russian politics along with a former KGB officer, Alexander Lebedev.[55] Their party is known as the Independent Democratic Party of Russia. He also is part owner of the opposition newspaper Novaya Gazeta.[56]




Gorbachev (right) being introduced to Barack Obama by Joe Biden, 20 March 2009


On 20 March 2009, Gorbachev met with United States President Barack Obama and Vice President Joe Biden in efforts to "reset" strained relations between Russia and the United States.
On 27 March 2009, Gorbachev visited Eureka College, Illinois, which is the alma mater of former U.S. President Ronald Reagan with whom he had negotiated historic nuclear arms reduction treaties. Gorbachev toured the Reagan Museum on campus, met with students, and spoke at a convocation in the Reagan Center; he then traveled to the nearby Peoria Civic Center in Peoria, Illinois, as the keynote speaker at the combined George Washington/Ronald Reagan Day Dinner where college president J. David Arnold named him an Honorary Reagan Fellow of Eureka College.[57]
To commemorate the 20th anniversary of the fall of the Berlin Wall, Gorbachev accompanied former Polish leader Lech Wałęsa and German Chancellor Angela Merkel at a celebration in Berlin on 9 November 2009.[58]
On 7 June 2010, Gorbachev gave an interview before "almost an annual pilgrimage" to London for a summer gala to raise money for the Raisa Gorbachev Foundation, which funds cancer care for children. The clinic in St. Petersburg can house 80 child patients.
From the interview: "Her death, after several years of ill-health, left Gorbachev bereft. He lives in Moscow, has not remarried and finds solace with his daughter and grand-daughters. He would not be coaxed to talk about Raisa, except fleetingly in the context of the charity."[59]
Gorbachev has defended the referendum that led to Russia's annexation of Crimea in March 2014: "While Crimea had previously been joined to Ukraine [in 1954] based on the Soviet laws, which means [Communist] party laws, without asking the people, now the people themselves have decided to correct that mistake."[60]
On 10 October 2014, it was reported that Gorbachev was in hospital and in deteriorating health.[61] However, on 16 October he granted an interview with Russian state newspaper Rossiyskaya Gazeta, opining on the Ukraine crisis and calling for a repeal of the sanctions.[62]
On 8 November 2014, Gorbachev attended an event near the Brandenburg Gate, Berlin to mark 25 years since the fall of the Berlin Wall. He warned that the conflict in Ukraine had brought the world to the brink of a new cold war, and he charged western powers, particularly the United States, with adopting an attitude of "triumphalism" towards Russia.[63][64][65]
Speaking on the war in eastern Ukraine, Gorbachev said in December 2014 that "Both sides in the Ukrainian conflict are breaching the ceasefire. Both sides are guilty of using especially dangerous types of weapons and breaching human rights."[66]
Gorbachev reiterated his support of Russia’s 2014 annexation of Crimea in May 2016, which led him being banned from entering Ukraine for five years.[67]
In July 2016, Gorbachev criticized the North Atlantic Treaty Organization amid escalating tensions between the military alliance and the Russian Federation.[68]
Criticism of Vladimir Putin[edit]




Inauguration of Vladimir Putin, 7 May 2000


Although he has credited Vladimir Putin for stabilizing Russia in the aftermath of the initial and turbulent years of the post-Soviet era, Gorbachev has become critical of both Putin and Dmitry Medvedev since at least March 2011.[69] His main grievances about the "tandem" are backsliding on democracy, corruption and the dominance of security officers. Gorbachev is also dissatisfied by the fact that he has not been allowed to register his social democratic party.[70]
When being interviewed by the BBC to reflect on the 20th anniversary of the August Coup, Gorbachev again announced his dissatisfaction with the policies and rule of Putin. Speaking of the status of democracy in the Russian Federation, he proclaimed: "The electoral system we had was nothing remarkable but they have literally castrated it". Gorbachev also stated that he believed that Putin should not have sought a third term as the Russian president in 2012.[71]
In response to the 2011 Russian protests as a result of United Russia's controversial victory in the 2011 legislative election, he called on the authorities to hold a new election, citing electoral irregularities and ballot box stuffing.[72]
In a political lecture delivered to the RIA-Novosti news agency in April 2013, Gorbachev decried Putin's retreat from democracy, noting that in Russia "politics is increasingly turning into imitation democracy" with "all power in the hands of the executive branch". Gorbachev addressed Putin directly, stating that "to go further on the path of tightening the screws, having laws that limit the rights and freedoms of people, attacking the news media and organisations of civil society, is a destructive path with no future".[73]
Call for global restructuring[edit]
Gorbachev calls for a kind of perestroika or restructuring of societies around the world, starting in particular with that of the United States, because he is of the view that the financial crisis of 2007–2008 shows that the Washington Consensus economic model is a failure that will sooner or later have to be replaced. According to Gorbachev, countries that have rejected the Washington Consensus and the International Monetary Fund approach to economic development, such as Brazil and China, have done far better economically on the whole and achieved far fairer results for the average citizen than countries that have accepted it.[74]
Gorbachev is also a member of the Club of Madrid, a group of more than 80 former leaders of democratic countries, which works to strengthen democratic governance and leadership.[75]
Gorbachev was co-chair of Earth Charter International Commission.
Honours and accolades[edit]




Former President of the United States Ronald Reagan awards Gorbachev the first ever Ronald Reagan Freedom Award at the Reagan Library, 4 May 1992


Soviet Union and Russia decorations[edit]

Order of St. Andrew (2011), the highest state decoration of Russia, awarded for work during USSR leadership
Order of Honour (2001)
Order of Lenin (1971, 1973, 1981)
Order of October Revolution (1978)
Order of the Badge of Honour (1966)
Order of the Red Banner of Labour (1947). He was awarded when he was only 16 and was one of the youngest recipients of the award.
Medal "For Labour Valour"
Medal "For Strengthening Military Cooperation"
Medal "In Commemoration of the 1500th Anniversary of Kiev"
Jubilee Medal "Forty Years of Victory in the Great Patriotic War 1941–1945"

Foreign decorations and awards[edit]

In 1987, Gorbachev was awarded the Indira Gandhi Prize from Government of India.
In 1989, Gorbachev was awarded the Otto Hahn Peace Medal in Gold of the United Nations Association of Germany (DGVN) in Berlin for "his contributions to nuclear disarmament of the great powers and the creation of a fundamentally new political order in Europe".
In 1990, Gorbachev was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize for "his leading role in the peace process which today characterizes important parts of the international community".[76]
On 4 May 1992, Gorbachev was awarded the first ever Ronald Reagan Freedom Award at the Ronald Reagan Presidential Library in Simi Valley, California.[77]
On 6 May 1992, Gorbachev was awarded the honorary degree of Doctor of Laws from Westminster College in Fulton, Missouri.[78]
In 1993 Gorbachev was awarded a Legum Doctor, honoris causa from Carleton University in Ottawa, Canada. He was also given an honorary degree from The University of Calgary in Calgary, Alberta, Canada.[79] In the same year, he was conferred with the Freedom of the City of Aberdeen.





Gorbachev on 12 March 2013



Gorbachev was the 1994 recipient of the Grawemeyer Award for ideas improving world order, awarded by the University of Louisville, Kentucky.[80]
In 1995, Gorbachev received an Honorary Doctorate from Durham University, County Durham, England for his contribution to "the cause of political tolerance and an end to Cold War-style confrontation".[81][82]
In 1995 he was awarded the Grand-Cross of the Order of Liberty by Portuguese President Mário Soares.[83]
For his historic role in the evolution of glasnost, and for his leadership in the disarmament negotiations with the United States during the Reagan administration, Gorbachev was awarded the Courage of Conscience award 20 October 1996.[84]
In 1998, Gorbachev received the Freedom Award from the National Civil Rights Museum in Memphis, Tennessee.[85]
In 2002, Gorbachev received the Freedom of the City of Dublin from the Dublin City Council, the Capital of Ireland.[86]
In 2002, Gorbachev received an honorary degree of a Doctor in Laws (LL.D.) "in recognition of his political service and contribution to peace" from Trinity College, Dublin, Ireland.[87]
In 2002, Gorbachev was awarded the Charles V Prize by the European Academy of Yuste Foundation.[88]
Gorbachev, together with Bill Clinton and Sophia Loren, were awarded the 2004 Grammy Award for Best Spoken Word Album for Children for their recording of Sergei Prokofiev's Peter and the Wolf for PENTATONE.[89]
In 2005, Gorbachev was awarded the Point Alpha Prize for his role in supporting German reunification. He also received an honorary doctorate from the University of Münster.[90]
In 2011, Gorbachev was awarded a honoris causa doctorate from University of Liège in Liège, Belgium.[91]

Personal life[edit]
Attitude to religion[edit]
At the end of a November 1996 interview on C-SPAN's Booknotes, Gorbachev described his plans for future books. He made the following reference to God: "I don't know how many years God will be giving me, [or] what His plans are".




Gorbachev at the Western Wall in Jerusalem, 16 June 1992


In 2005, he praised Pope John Paul II, saying "his devotion to his followers is a remarkable example to all of us."[92] In a 1989 meeting, he had told him: "We appreciate your mission on this high pulpit, we are convinced that it will leave a great mark on history."[93]
Gorbachev was the recipient of the Athenagoras Humanitarian Award of the Order of St. Andrew Archons of the Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople on 20 November 2005.[94]
In 2013, the Lubbock Avalanche-Journal reported a 1992 meeting between Gorbachev and Otis Gatewood, a Christian minister sent with a relief effort for orphans and elderly people in Russia by Churches of Christ in Texas. In the meeting, Gorbachev reportedly claimed that he was "indeed a Christian and had been baptized by his grandfather in the Volga River many years before".[95]
On 19 March 2008, during a surprise visit to pray at the tomb of Saint Francis in Assisi, Italy, Gorbachev made an announcement which has been interpreted to the effect that he was a Christian. Gorbachev stated: "St Francis is, for me, the alter Christus, another Christ. His story fascinates me and has played a fundamental role in my life". He added: "It was through St Francis that I arrived at the Church, so it was important that I came to visit his tomb".[96] However, a few days later, he reportedly told the Russian news agency Interfax: "Over the last few days some media have been disseminating fantasies—I can't use any other word—about my secret Catholicism, [...] To sum up and avoid any misunderstandings, let me say that I have been and remain an atheist", to which the contemporary Orthodox patriarch replied, "He is still on his way to Christianity".[97]
Port-wine birthmark[edit]




The official Soviet portrait of Gorbachev had been retouched to remove the birthmark.


The prominent crimson port-wine stain birthmark on Gorbachev's forehead was the source of much attention from critics and political cartoonists, who often illustrated the mark as the communist Hammer and Sickle. Though some suggested that he might have the mark surgically removed, Gorbachev opted not to, as once he was publicly known to have the mark, he believed it would be perceived as his being more concerned with his appearance than other more important issues.[98]
See also[edit]

April 9 Tragedy – Soviet crackdown on Georgian protests in 1989
Black January – Soviet crackdown on Azerbaijani protests in 1990
Index of Soviet Union-related articles
List of peace activists
Sergei M. Plekhanov – former Gorbachev advisor on the United States and Canada
Ruhollah Khomeini's letter to Mikhail Gorbachev

References[edit]



^ "Gorbachev". Random House Webster's Unabridged Dictionary.
^ Profile of Mikhail Gorbachev
^ Gray, Sadie (30 September 2008). "Gorbachev launches political party with Russian billionaire". The Guardian. UK. Retrieved 1 October 2008. 
^ "Mikhail Gorbachev will found new political party". mosnews.com. 13 May 2009. Archived from the original on 16 July 2011. Retrieved 13 June 2009. 
^ a b "Gorbachev sets up Russia movement". BBC News. 20 October 2007. Retrieved 20 October 2007. 
^ Mikhail Sergeevich Gorbachev, Daisaku Ikeda (2005). "Moral Lessons of the Twentieth Century: Gorbachev and Ikeda on Buddhism and Communism". I.B.Tauris. p. 11. ISBN 1-85043-976-1
^ Mikhail Sergeevich Gorbachev (2006). "Manifesto for the Earth: action now for peace, global justice and a sustainable future". CLAIRVIEW BOOKS. p.10. ISBN 1-905570-02-3
^ Mikhail Gorbachev (2000). Gorbachev: On My Country and the World. George Shriver (Translator). New York: Columbia University Press. p. 20. ISBN 978-0-231-11515-5. 
^ a b "Biography of Mikhail Gorbachev". The Gorbachev Foundation. Retrieved 13 January 2012. 
^ Irwin Abrams (2001). "The Nobel Peace Prize and the Laureates: An Illustrated Biographical History, 1901-2001". Science History Publications/USA. p. 286. ISBN 0881353884
^ a b c d "A definitive biography shows a Soviet leader changing his mind", Max Boot, Wall Street Journal, September 3, 2017
^ "Raisa Gorbachyova's Biography on the Gorbachyov Foundation website". 
^ a b c d e Current Biography, 1985. New York: The H. W. Wilson Co. 1985. 
^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w x y Gorbachev, M. S., Memoirs, 1996 (London: Bantam Books)
^ a b c d e "Mikhail Gorbachev". Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved 2 April 2009. 
^ Roxburgh, Angus (1991). The Second Russian Revolution: The Struggle for Power in the Kremlin. London: BBC Books. 
^ a b c "Union of Soviet Socialist Republics – historical state, Eurasia". 
^ "Mikhail Gorbachev Biography: Glasnost, Perestroika, and Leadership". American Academy of Achievement. 1 February 2005. Retrieved 2 April 2009. 
^ Oliver, Michael J.; Aldcroft, Derek Howard (2007). Economic Disasters of the Twentieth Century. Edward Elgar Publishing. p. 294. ISBN 978-1-84064-589-7. 
^ "Михаил Сергеевич Горбачёв (Mikhail Sergeyevičh Gorbačhëv)". Archontology.org. 27 March 2009. Retrieved 3 April 2009. 
^ Chiesa, Giulietto (1991). Time of Change: An Insider's View of Russia's Transformation. I.B.Tauris. p. 30. ISBN 978-1-85043-305-7. 
^ Hosking, Geoffrey Alan (1991). The Awakening of the Soviet Union. Harvard University Press. p. 139. ISBN 978-0-674-05551-3. 
^ English, R., D, Russia and the Idea of the West: Gorbachev, Intellectuals and the End of the Cold War, 2000 (Columbia University Press)
^ a b Hough, Jerry F. (1997), pp. 124–125
^ Bialer, Seweryn, and Joan Afferica. "The Genesis of Gorbachev's World", Foreign Affairs 64, no. 3 (1985): 605–644.
^ a b Mikhail Gorbachev, Perestroika (New York: Harper Collins, 1987), quoted in Mark Kishlansky, ed., Sources of the West: Readings in Western Civilization, 4th ed., vol. 2 (New York: Longman, 2001), p. 322.
^ Sebetsyen, Victor (2009). Revolution 1989: The Fall of the Soviet Empire. New York City: Pantheon Books. ISBN 0-375-42532-2. 
^ Thomas, Vladimir; Michael H. Hunt, The World Transformed 1945 to the present, p. 316 
^ "Gorbachev becomes Soviet leader". BBC News. March 1985. Retrieved 22 May 2006. 
^ a b Matlock, J. F. Jr., Reagan and Gorbachev: How the Cold War Ended, 2004
^ "Reuters, Moscow could have started WW3 over Berlin Wall: Gorbachev by Guy Faulconbridge". Reuters. 3 November 2009. Retrieved 11 July 2009. 
^ Coit D. Blacker. "The Collapse of Soviet Power in Europe", Foreign Affairs 1990.
^ Steele, Jonathan. Eternal Russia: Yeltsin, Gorbachev and the Mirage of Democracy (Boston: Faber, 1994).
^ "CIA – The World Factbook – Armenia". Retrieved 27 January 2007. 
^ DR Radio reported January 12, 1991, in its news broadcast on P3 at 13:00 hrs that the ultimatum required a reply within three days.
^ Boltunov, M., Alfa – Sverkhsekretnyi Otryad KGB [Alpha – The KGB's Top-Secret Unit], 1992, (Moscow: Kedr)
^ a b c Archie Brown, The Gorbachev Factor, 1996, (New York: Oxford University Press). ISBN 0-19-288052-7
^ Clines, Francis X. "Gorbachev is Ready to Resign as Post-Soviet Plan Advances", New York Times, 13 December 1991.
^ Clines, Francis X., "11 Soviet States Form Commonwealth Without Clearly Defining Its Powers", New York Times, 22 December 1991
^ Klein, Naomi (2008). The Shock Doctrine: The Rise of Disaster Capitalism. Picador. ISBN 0-312-42799-9 p. 276
^ Maurizio Giuliano, Müssen schnell wählen (interview), Profil, nr. 19. 10 May 1993, page 61
^ Mosnews.com[dead link]
^ "” (1 April 2006). "Pizza Hut – Gorbachev". YouTube. Retrieved 3 November 2010. 
^ Mikhail Gorbachev appears in Pizza Hut advertising campaign, PR Newswire, 23 December 1997. Retrieved 3 August 2007.
^ "Why Are There Hidden Messages in the New Louis Vuitton Ad?". www.adweek.com. Retrieved 2015-04-20. 
^ "'The Daily Show' Scores An Interview With Gorbachev". Retrieved 29 October 2014. 
^ "Ex-Russian Leader Boris Yeltsin Dies". CBS News. 23 April 2007. 
^ Odynova, Alexandra (19 June 2009). "Former Soviet Leader Gorbachev Records Album". Saint Petersburg Times. Retrieved 20 June 2009. 
^ "Gorbachev says U.S. is sowing world 'disorder'". MSNBC. Retrieved 4 August 2007. 
^ Pitney, Nico. "Gorbachev Vows Revolution If New Orleans Levees Don't Improve". Huffington Post. Retrieved 14 September 2007. 
^ Blomfield, Adrian; Smith, Mike (6 May 2008). "Gorbachev: US could start new Cold War". The Telegraph (UK). London. Retrieved 11 March 2015. 
^ Georgia 'started unjustified war', BBC News, 30 September 2009
^ Gorbachev, Mikhail (12 August 2008). "A Path to Peace in the Caucasus". The Washington Post. Retrieved 12 August 2008. 
^ Gorbachev, Mikhail, "Russia Never Wanted a War", New York Times, 19 August 2008, Retrieved on 2011-12-09.
^ Blomfield, Adrian (29 September 2008). "Mikhail Gorbachev returns to Russian politics". The Daily Telegraph. UK. Retrieved 3 November 2010. 
^ "Лебедев и Горбачев стали совладельцами Новой газеты". grani.ru. 7 June 2006. 
^ Morss, Gina, "Gorbachev Visits Eureka College", WEEK News 25, retrieved 24 March 2009 
^ Kulish, Nicholas & Dempsey, Judy (9 November 2009), "Leaders in Berlin Retrace the Walk West", New York Times 
^ "Mikhail Gorbachev: Russia's elder statesman still at home with power". The Independent. London. 7 June 2010. Retrieved 19 August 2011. 
^ "Mikhail Gorbachev hails Crimea annexation to Russia". United Press International. 18 March 2014. Retrieved 8 November 2014. 
^ "Mikhail Gorbachev reportedly 'fighting for his life' as health deteriorates in hospital". The Independent. Retrieved 29 October 2014. 
^ "Former Soviet leader Gorbachev warns against "new Cold War" in Ukraine crisis". Deutsche Welle. 16 October 2014. Retrieved 8 November 2014. 
^ Buchanan, Rose Troup (9 November 2014). "Mikhail Gorbachev warns global powers have put the world 'on the brink of a new Cold War'". The Independent. UK. Retrieved 9 May 2016. 
^ Johnston, Chris (9 November 2014). "Mikhail Gorbachev: world on brink of new cold war over Ukraine". The Guardian. Retrieved 9 May 2016. 
^ "Besuch zum Mauerfall-Jubiläum: Gorbatschow lobt Deutschland". 7 November 2014 – via FAZ.NET. 
^ "Gorbachev: Russia, US, EU should hold summits to ‘defrost’ relations". RT. 10 December 2014
^ MIKHAIL GORBACHEV BANNED FROM UKRAINE AFTER CRIMEA COMMENTS – Newsweek. 26 May 2016
^ NATO ‘speaks of defense, prepares offensive’, says Gorbachev RT. 10 July 2016
^ "Mikhail Gorbachev says Putin should not run for Russian presidency again", Christian Science Monitor (2 March 2011). Retrieved 9 December 2011.
^ Михаил Горбачев – про "дуумвират" и "штаны мотней назад" (видео). Радио Свобода. 15 February 2011. Svobodanews.ru. Retrieved 9 December 2011.
^ "Gorbachev says Putin 'castrated' democracy in Russia". BBC News. 18 August 2011. Retrieved 18 August 2011. 
^ "UPDATE 1-Russian police block new anti-Putin rally", Reuters (5 December 2011). Retrieved 9 December 2011.
^ "Gorbachev takes aim at Putin, praises protesters". 13 April 2013. Retrieved 7 May 2013. 
^ Mikhail Gorbachev, "We Had Our Perestroika. It's High Time for Yours", Washington Post, 7 June 2009.
^ "Mikhail Gorbachev | Club de Madrid". Clubmadrid.org. Retrieved 19 November 2012. 
^ "The Nobel Peace Prize 1990". Nobelprize.org. 15 October 1990. Retrieved 3 November 2010. 
^ "Ronald Reagan Presidential Foundation & Library". Archived from the original on 10 June 2008. Retrieved 2007-02-24. CS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknown (link)
^ "National Churchill Museum | Mikhail Gorbachev Lecture at the National Churchill Museum". Churchillmemorial.org. 6 May 1992. Retrieved 19 November 2012. 
^ Wark, Andrew (18 September 2000). "Mikhail Gorbachev to present U of C public lecture" (Press release). University of Calgary. Retrieved 10 September 2013. 
^ "1994– Mikhail Gorbachev". Archived from the original on 13 October 2011. 
^ Honorary Degrees. dur.ac.uk
^ "Minutes of the Council Meeting". Durham University. Archived from the original on 19 November 2011. Retrieved 8 September 2011. 
^ "CIDADÃOS ESTRANGEIROS AGRACIADOS COM ORDENS PORTUGUESAS - Página Oficial das Ordens Honoríficas Portuguesas". www.ordens.presidencia.pt (in Portuguese). Retrieved 2017-08-07. 
^ "The Peace Abbey Courage of Conscience Recipients List". Peaceabbey.org. 20 November 2005. Archived from the original on 16 February 2008. Retrieved 3 November 2010. 
^ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 30 March 2014. Retrieved 2014-02-28. 
^ "Previous Recipients of Keys to the City | Dublin City Council". www.dublincity.ie. Retrieved 2017-12-14. 
^ "Trinity College Honours Mikhail Gorbachev". Tcd.ie. Retrieved 3 November 2010. 
^ "Mikhail Gorbachev". European Academy of Yuste Foundation. Retrieved 16 September 2017. 
^ "Prokofiev Peter and the Wolf – Beintus Wolf Tracks". pentatonemusic. Retrieved 2016-12-18. 
^ "Reunification Politicians Accept Prize". Deutsche Welle. Retrieved 22 May 2006. 
^ "Université de Liège – Mikhail Gorbachev, a ULg Honorary Doctorate". ULg. Retrieved 29 October 2014. 
^ "Gorbachev: Pope was 'example to all of us'". CNN. 4 April 2005. Retrieved 3 November 2010. 
^ "Record of Conversation between M.S. Gorbachev and John Paul II" (PDF). Retrieved 3 November 2010. 
^ "Athenagoras humanitarian award to Nobel Peace Prize laureate Mikhail Gorbachev", goarch.org. 2 November 2005
^ Westbrook, Ray (1 April 2013). "Otis Gatewood helped rebuild Germany with God's word, supplies". Lubbock Avalanche-Journal. Lubbock, Texas. pp. A1, A5. Retrieved 7 April 2013. 
^ Moore, Malcolm (19 March 2008). "Mikhail Gorbachev admits he is a Christian". The Daily Telegraph. London. Retrieved 24 March 2008. 
^ "Gorbachev a closet Christian?". Chicago Tribune. 23 March 2008. Archived from the original on 11 May 2008. 
^ "den 11. time". 24 October 2007. Danmarks Radio. DR 2. Archived from the original on 19 November 2011.  Missing or empty |series= (help)[permanent dead link]


Further reading[edit]

Gorbachev, Mikhail. The New Russia. Polity (2016). ISBN 978-1-5095-0387-2
Cline, Ray S. Behind the Smile Are Teeth of Iron: 86 Photos and Illustrations Few People in America Have Ever Seen. (1989). Washington, D.C.: United States Global Strategy Council. Without ISBN
Gorbachev, Mikhail. Memoirs. Doubleday (1996). ISBN 0-385-40668-1
Gorbachev, Mikhail and Daisaku Ikeda (2005). Moral Lessons of the Twentieth Century: Gorbachev and Ikeda on Buddhism and Communism. I.B.Tauris. ISBN 1-85043-976-1
Wilson, James Graham (2014). The Triumph of Improvisation: Gorbachev's Adaptability, Reagan's Engagement, and the End of the Cold War. Ithaca: Cornell University Press. ISBN 0-8014-5229-5. 
Трофимов В.Н. Коллаборационисты: мнимые и настоящие. Субхас Чандра Бос, Махатма Ганди, Шарль де Голль, Андрей Власов, Михаил Горбачев. М., Отпечатано в типографии "Ваш Формат" (2015) – ISBN 978-5-9905971-9-8

External links[edit]



Wikiquote has quotations related to: Mikhail Gorbachev





Wikimedia Commons has media related to Mikhail Gorbachev.



The Gorbachev Foundation
Green Cross International
Gorbachev 80th Birthday Gala Celebration – Royal Albert Hall London, 30 March 2011
Appearances on C-SPAN
Column and op-ed archives at The Guardian
"Mikhail Gorbachev collected news and commentary". The Guardian.  
"Mikhail Gorbachev collected news and commentary". The New York Times. 


Interviews and articles


Commanding Heights: Mikhail Gorbachev (PBS interview), April 2001
Ubben Lecture at DePauw University – October 2005
"Gorbachev on 1989" – interview by The Nation, September 2009
"Gorbachev's Legacy Examined", 25 Years After His Rise To Power – March 2010
"Chernobyl 25 years later: Many lessons learned" – article by Mikhail Gorbachev published in the Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, March 2011



Party political offices


Preceded by
Leonid Yefremov
First Secretary of the Stavropol CPSU Regional Committee
1970–1978
Succeeded by
Vsevolod Murakhovsky


Preceded by
Konstantin Chernenko
General Secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union
1985–1991
Succeeded by
Vladimir Ivashko (Acting)


Political offices


Preceded by
Andrei Gromyko
as Chairman of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet
Chairman of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet (1988–1989)
Chairman of the Supreme Soviet (1989–1990)
President of the Soviet Union (1990–1991)
1988–1991
Position abolished


Awards and achievements


Preceded by
14th Dalai Lama
Recipient of the Nobel Peace Prize
1990
Succeeded by
Aung San Suu Kyi


Award established
Recipient of the Ronald Reagan Freedom Award
1992
Succeeded by
Colin Powell








v
t
e


Politics of the Soviet Union 1964–1985



Events 1964–1982



Collective leadership
Glassboro Summit Conference
Six Day War
Prague Spring
Invasion of Czechoslovakia
1968 Red Square demonstration
Brezhnev Doctrine
Brezhnev assassination attempt
Sino-Soviet border conflict
Détente
1973 oil crisis
Fall of Saigon
Vladivostok Summit
Helsinki Accords
1977 Moscow bombings
1977 Soviet Constitution
1978 Georgian demonstrations
Cambodian–Vietnamese War
War in Afghanistan
1980 Summer Olympics
Reaction to 1980–1981 Polish crisis
Exercise Zapad
Death and state funeral of Leonid Brezhnev
Legacy of Leonid Brezhnev





Events 1982–1985



RYAN
Korean Air Lines Flight 007
1983 false nuclear alarm incident
Able Archer 83
1984 Summer Olympics boycott
Friendship Games





Politburo members

22nd
23rd
24th
25th
26th





Aliyev
Andropov
Brezhnev
Chebrikov
Chernenko
Demichev
Dolgikh
Efremov
Gorbachev
Grechko
Grishin
Gromyko
Kirilenko
Kiselyov
Kunayev
Kosygin
Kulakov
Kuznetsov
Masherov
Mazurov
Mikoyan
Mzhavanadze
Pelše
Podgorny
Polyansky
Ponomarev
Rashidov
Romanov
Shcherbytsky
Shelepin
Shelest
Shevardnadze
Shvernik
Solomentsev
Suslov
Tikhonov
Ustinov
Voronov
Vorotnikov





Leaders



The Troika (Brezhnev
Kosygin
Podgorny)
Yuri Andropov
Konstantin Chernenko





Governments



Kosygin's 1st
2nd
3rd
4th
5th
Tikhonov's 1st
2nd





National economy




Reforms



OGAS
1965
1973
1979
Food Programme
1984





Five-year plans



8th Plan
9th Plan
10th Plan
11th Plan








Brezhnev's family



Churbanov (son-in-law)
Galina (daughter)
Lyubov (niece)
Viktoria (wife)
Yakov (brother)
Yuri (son)






 Soviet Union portal










v
t
e


History of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union



Organization



Congress
Conference
General Secretary
Politburo
Secretariat
Orgburo
Central Committee
Control Commission
Auditing Commission
Komsomol
Young Pioneers
Pravda





Congress



1st (1898)
2nd (1903)
3rd (1905)
4th (1906)
5th (1907)
6th (1917)
7th (1918)
8th (1919)
9th (1920)
10th (1921)
11th (1922)
12th (1923)
13th (1924)
14th (1925)
15th (1927)
16th (1930)
17th (1934)
18th (1939)
19th (1952)
20th (1956)
21st (1959)
22nd (1961)
23rd (1966)
24th (1971)
25th (1976)
26th (1981)
27th (1986)
28th (1990)





Conference



1st (1905)
2nd (1906)
3rd (August 1907)
4th (November 1907)
5th (1908)
6th (1912)
7th (1917)
8th (1919)
9th (1920)
10th (May 1921)
11th (December 1921)
12th (1922)
13th (1924)
14th (1925)
15th (1926)
16th (1929)
17th (1932)
18th (1941)
19th (1988)





Party leadership




Party leaders



Vladimir Lenin (1912–1924)
Joseph Stalin (1929–1953)
Nikita Khrushchev (1953–1964)
Leonid Brezhnev (1964–1982)
Yuri Andropov (1982–1984)
Konstantin Chernenko (1984–1985)
Mikhail Gorbachev (1985–1991)





Politburo



Aug.–Oct. 1917
Oct.–Dec. 1917
6th (1917–18)
7th (1918–19)
8th (1919–20)
9th (1920–21)
10th (1921–22)
11th (1922–23)
12th (1923–24)
13th (1924–25)
14th (1926–27)
15th (1927–30)
16th (1930–34)
17th (1934–39)
18th (1939–52)
19th (1952–56)
20th–21st (1956–61)
22nd (1961–66)
23rd (1966–71)
24th (1971–76)
25th (1976–81)
26th (1981–86)
27th (1986–90)
28th (1990–91)





Secretariat



6th (1917–18)
7th (1918–19)
8th (1919–20)
9th (1920–21)
10th (1921–22)
11th (1922–23)
12th (1923–24)
13th (1924–25)
14th (1926–27)
15th (1927–30)
16th (1930–34)
17th (1934–39)
18th (1939–52)
19th (1952–56)
20th–21st (1956–61)
22nd (1961–66)
23rd (1966–71)
24th (1971–76)
25th (1976–81)
26th (1981–86)
27th (1986–90)
28th (1990–91)





Orgburo



7th (Jan.–Mar. 1919)
8th (1919–20)
9th (1920–21)
10th (1921–22)
11th (1922–23)
12th (1923–24)
13th (1924–26)
14th (1926–27)
15th (1927–30)
16th (1930–34)
17th (1934–39)
18th (1939–52)





Central Control
Commission



9th (1920–21)
10th (1921–22)
11th (1922–23)
12th (1923–24)
13th (1924–25)
14th (1926–27)
15th (1927–30)
16th (1930–34)
17th (1934–39)
18th (1939–52)
19th (1952–56)
20th–21st (1956–61)
22nd (1961–66)
23rd (1966–71)
24th (1971–76)
25th (1976–81)
26th (1981–86)
27th (1986–90)
28th (1990–91)





Central
Committee



1st (1898–1903)
2nd (1903–05)
3rd (1905–06)
4th (1906–07)
5th (1907–12)
6th (1912–17)
7th (Apr.–Aug. 1917)
8th (1917–18)
9th (1918–19)
10th (1919–20)
11th (1920–21)
12th (1921–22)
13th (1922–23)
14th (1923–24)
15th (1924–25)
16th (1926–27)
17th (1927–30)
18th (1930–34)
19th (1934–39)
20th (1939–41)
21st (1941–52)
19th (1952–56)
20th (1956–61)
22nd (1961–66)
23rd (1966–71)
24th (1971–76)
25th (1976–81)
26th (1981–86)
27th (1986–90)
28th (1990–91)





Central Auditing
Commission



8th–9th (1919–21)
10th–12th (1921–24)
13th (1924–25)
14th (1926–27)
15th (1927–30)
16th (1930–34)
17th (1934–39)
18th (1939–52)
19th (1952–56)
20th–21st (1956–61)
22nd (1961–66)
23rd (1966–71)
24th (1971–76)
25th (1976–81)
26th (1981–86)
27th (1986–90)








Departments of the
Central Committee



Administrative Organs
Agriculture
Chemical Industry
Construction
Culture
Defence Industry
Foreign Cadres
General
Heavy Industry
Information
International
Light- and Food Industry
Machine Industry
Organisational-party Work
Planning and Financial Organs
Political Administration of the Ministry of Defence
Propaganda
Science and Education
Trade and Consumers' Services
Transportation-Communications





Republican branches



Armenia
Azerbaijan
Byelorussia
Bukhara
Estonia
Georgia
Karelo-Finland
Kazakhstan
Khorezm
Kirghizia
Latvia
Lithuania
Moldavia
Russian SFSR
Tajikistan
Transcaucasia
Turkestan
Turkmenistan
Ukraine
Uzbekistan





See also



General Jewish Labour Bund in Lithuania, Poland and Russia
League of Russian Revolutionary Social Democracy Abroad
League of Struggle for the Emancipation of the Working Class
Siberian Social-Democratic Union
Social Democracy of the Kingdom of Poland and Lithuania
Union of Russian Social Democrats Abroad












v
t
e


Heads of state of the Soviet Union



Heads of state



Kalinin (1922–1946)
Shvernik (1946–1953)
Voroshilov (1953–1960)
Brezhnev (1960–1964)
Mikoyan (1964–1965)
Podgorny (1965–1977)
Brezhnev (1977–1982)
Andropov (1983–1984)
Chernenko (1984–1985)
Gromyko (1985–1988)
Gorbachev (1988–1991)





Vice heads of state



Kuznetsov (1977–1986)
Demichev (1986–1988)
Lukyanov (1988–1990)
Yanayev (1990–1991)








 Presidents of Russian SFSR
Presidents of Russia












v
t
e


Leaders of the ruling Communist parties of the Eastern Bloc






Communist Party of the Soviet Union


Joseph Stalin
Nikita Khrushchev
Leonid Brezhnev
Yuri Andropov
Konstantin Chernenko
Mikhail Gorbachev



























Party of Labour of Albania



Enver Hoxha
Ramiz Alia





Bulgarian Communist Party



Georgi Dimitrov
Valko Chervenkov
Todor Zhivkov
Petar Mladenov





Communist Party of Czechoslovakia



Klement Gottwald
Antonín Novotný
Alexander Dubček
Gustáv Husák
Miloš Jakeš
Karel Urbánek





Socialist Unity Party of Germany



Walter Ulbricht
Erich Honecker
Egon Krenz









Hungarian Working People's Party
Hungarian Socialist Workers' Party



Mátyás Rákosi
Ernő Gerő
János Kádár
Károly Grósz





Polish Workers' Party
Polish United Workers' Party



Bolesław Bierut
Edward Ochab
Władysław Gomułka
Edward Gierek
Stanisław Kania
Wojciech Jaruzelski
Mieczysław Rakowski





Romanian Communist Party



Gheorghe Gheorghiu-Dej
Gheorghe Apostol
Nicolae Ceaușescu





League of Communists of Yugoslavia



Josip Broz Tito
(1980–1990, rotating leadership)






















v
t
e


Revolutions of 1989



Internal
background



Era of Stagnation
Communism
Anti-communism
Criticism of communist party rule
Eastern Bloc
Eastern Bloc economies
Eastern Bloc politics
Eastern Bloc media and propaganda
Eastern Bloc emigration and defection
KGB
Nomenklatura
Shortage economy
Totalitarianism
Eastern European anti-Communist insurgencies





International
background



Active measures
Cold War
List of socialist states
Predictions of the dissolution of the Soviet Union
Reagan Doctrine
Soviet Empire
Terrorism and the Soviet Union
Vatican Opposition
Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia
People Power Revolution





Reforms



Uskoreniye
Perestroika

Democratization in the Soviet Union
Khozraschyot
500 Days
Sinatra Doctrine


Glasnost
Socialism with Chinese characteristics
Đổi mới





Government
leaders



Ramiz Alia
Nicolae Ceaușescu
Mikhail Gorbachev
Károly Grósz
Erich Honecker
János Kádár
Miloš Jakeš
Egon Krenz
Wojciech Jaruzelski
Slobodan Milošević
Mathieu Kérékou
Mengistu Haile Mariam
Ne Win
Denis Sassou Nguesso
Heng Samrin
Deng Xiaoping
Todor Zhivkov
Siad Barre





Opposition
methods



Civil resistance
Demonstrations
Human chains
Magnitizdat
Polish underground press
Protests
Samizdat
Strike action





Opposition
leaders



Lech Wałęsa
Václav Havel
Alexander Dubček
Ion Iliescu
Liu Gang
Wu'erkaixi
Chai Ling
Wang Dan
Feng Congde
Tank Man
Joachim Gauck
Sali Berisha
Sanjaasürengiin Zorig
Vladimir Bukovsky
Boris Yeltsin
Viacheslav Chornovil
Vytautas Landsbergis
Zianon Pazniak
Zhelyu Zhelev
Aung San Suu Kyi
Meles Zenawi
Isaias Afwerki
Ronald Reagan
George H. W. Bush
Pope John Paul II





Opposition
movements



Beijing Students' Autonomous Federation
Charter 77
New Forum
Civic Forum
Democratic Party of Albania
Democratic Russia
Initiative for Peace and Human Rights
Sąjūdis
Peaceful Revolution
People's Movement of Ukraine
Solidarity
Popular Front of Latvia
Popular Front of Estonia
Public Against Violence
Belarusian Popular Front
National League for Democracy
National Salvation Front
Unification Church political activities
Union of Democratic Forces





Events
by location




Central and Eastern Europe



Albania
Bulgaria
Czechoslovakia
East Germany
Hungary
Poland
Romania
Soviet Union
Yugoslavia





Soviet Union



Armenia
Azerbaijan
Belarus
Chechnya
Estonia
Georgia
Latvia
Lithuania
Kazakhstan
Kyrgyzstan
Moldova
Russia
Tajikstan
Turkmenistan
Ukraine
Uzbekistan





Elsewhere



Afghanistan
Angola
Benin
Burma
Cambodia
China
Congo-Brazzaville
Ethiopia
Mongolia
Mozambique
Somalia
South Yemen








Individual
events



1988 Polish strikes
April 9 tragedy
Black January
Baltic Way
1987–89 Tibetan unrest
Tiananmen Square protests of 1989
Removal of Hungary's border fence with Austria
Polish Round Table Agreement
Hungarian Round Table Talks
Pan-European Picnic
Monday Demonstrations
Alexanderplatz demonstration
Malta Summit
German reunification
January Events in Lithuania
January Events in Latvia
1991 protests in Belgrade
August Coup
Dissolution of the Soviet Union





Later events



Colour revolution
Decommunization
Lustration
Democratization
Economic liberalization
Post-Soviet conflicts
Neo-Sovietism
Neo-Stalinism
Post-communism
Yugoslav Wars












v
t
e


Cold War






USA
USSR
ANZUS
NATO
Non-Aligned Movement
SEATO
Warsaw Pact





1940s



Morgenthau Plan
Hukbalahap Rebellion
Dekemvriana
Percentages Agreement
Yalta Conference
Guerrilla war in the Baltic states

Forest Brothers
Operation Priboi
Operation Jungle
Occupation of the Baltic states


Cursed soldiers
Operation Unthinkable
Potsdam Conference
Gouzenko Affair
Division of Korea
Operation Masterdom
Operation Beleaguer
Operation Blacklist Forty
Iran crisis of 1946
Greek Civil War
Baruch Plan
Corfu Channel incident
Turkish Straits crisis
Restatement of Policy on Germany
First Indochina War
Truman Doctrine
Asian Relations Conference
May 1947 Crises
Marshall Plan
1948 Czechoslovak coup d'état
Tito–Stalin Split
Berlin Blockade
Western betrayal
Iron Curtain
Eastern Bloc
Western Bloc
Chinese Civil War (Second round)
Malayan Emergency
Albanian Subversion





1950s



Bamboo Curtain
Korean War
McCarthyism
1953 Iranian coup d'état
Uprising of 1953 in East Germany
Dirty War (Mexico)
Bricker Amendment
1954 Guatemalan coup d'état
Partition of Vietnam
First Taiwan Strait Crisis
Geneva Summit (1955)
Bandung Conference
Poznań 1956 protests
Hungarian Revolution of 1956
Suez Crisis
"We will bury you"
Operation Gladio
Arab Cold War

Syrian Crisis of 1957
1958 Lebanon crisis
Iraqi 14 July Revolution


Sputnik crisis
Second Taiwan Strait Crisis
Cuban Revolution
Kitchen Debate
Sino-Soviet split





1960s



Congo Crisis
1960 U-2 incident
Bay of Pigs Invasion
1960 Turkish coup d'état
Soviet–Albanian split
Berlin Wall
Portuguese Colonial War

Angolan War of Independence
Guinea-Bissau War of Independence
Mozambican War of Independence


Cuban Missile Crisis
Sino-Indian War
Communist insurgency in Sarawak
Iraqi Ramadan Revolution
Sand War
1963 Syrian coup d'état
Vietnam War
1964 Brazilian coup d'état
United States occupation of the Dominican Republic (1965–66)
South African Border War
Transition to the New Order
Domino theory
ASEAN Declaration
Laotian Civil War
1966 Syrian coup d'état
Argentine Revolution
Korean DMZ Conflict
Greek military junta of 1967–74
USS Pueblo incident
Six-Day War
War of Attrition
Dhofar Rebellion
Protests of 1968
French May
Cultural Revolution
Prague Spring
Communist insurgency in Malaysia
Invasion of Czechoslovakia
Iraqi Ba'athist Revolution
Goulash Communism
Sino-Soviet border conflict
CPP–NPA–NDF rebellion
Corrective Move





1970s



Détente
Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty
Black September in Jordan
Corrective Movement (Syria)
Cambodian Civil War
Realpolitik
Ping-pong diplomacy
1971 Turkish military memorandum
Corrective Revolution (Egypt)
Four Power Agreement on Berlin
Bangladesh Liberation War
1972 Nixon visit to China
North Yemen-South Yemen Border Conflict
1973 Chilean coup d'état
Yom Kippur War
Carnation Revolution
Strategic Arms Limitation Talks
Rhodesian Bush War
Angolan Civil War
Mozambican Civil War
Ogaden War
Ethiopian Civil War
Lebanese Civil War
Sino-Albanian split
Cambodian–Vietnamese War
Sino-Vietnamese War
Iranian Revolution
Operation Condor
Dirty War
Korean Air Lines Flight 902
Saur Revolution
New Jewel Movement
1979 Herat uprising
Seven Days to the River Rhine
Struggle against political abuse of psychiatry in the Soviet Union





1980s



Soviet–Afghan War
1980 and 1984 Summer Olympics boycotts
1980 Turkish coup d'état
Invasion of Grenada
1986 Black Sea incident
1988 Black Sea bumping incident
Solidarity

Soviet reaction


Contras
Central American crisis
RYAN
Korean Air Lines Flight 007
Able Archer 83
Star Wars
People Power Revolution
Glasnost
Perestroika
Nagorno-Karabakh War
Tiananmen Square protests of 1989
Revolutions of 1989
Fall of the Berlin Wall





1990s



Mongolian Revolution of 1990
German reunification
Yemeni unification
Fall of communism in Albania
Breakup of Yugoslavia
Dissolution of the Soviet Union
Dissolution of Czechoslovakia





Frozen conflicts



Abkhazia
China-Taiwan
Korea
Nagorno-Karabakh
South Ossetia
Transnistria
Sino-Indian border dispute
North Borneo dispute





Foreign policy



Truman Doctrine
Containment
Eisenhower Doctrine
Domino theory
Hallstein Doctrine
Kennedy Doctrine
Peaceful coexistence
Ostpolitik
Johnson Doctrine
Brezhnev Doctrine
Nixon Doctrine
Ulbricht Doctrine
Carter Doctrine
Reagan Doctrine
Rollback
Sovereignty of Puerto Rico during the Cold War





Ideologies




Capitalism



Chicago school
Keynesianism
Monetarism
Neoclassical economics
Reaganomics
Supply-side economics
Thatcherism





Communism



Marxism–Leninism
Castroism
Eurocommunism
Guevarism
Hoxhaism
Juche
Maoism
Naxalism
Stalinism
Titoism





Other



Islamism
Liberal democracy
Social democracy
Third-Worldism
White supremacy








Organizations



ASEAN
CIA
Comecon
EEC
KGB
MI6
Non-Aligned Movement
SAARC
Safari Club
Stasi





Propaganda



Active measures
Crusade for Freedom
Izvestia
Pravda
Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty
Red Scare
TASS
Voice of America
Voice of Russia





Races



Arms race
Nuclear arms race
Space Race





See also



Allied intervention in the Russian Civil War
Soviet espionage in the United States
Soviet Union–United States relations
Soviet–US summits
Russian espionage in the United States
American espionage in the Soviet Union and Russian Federation
NATO–Russia relations
Brinkmanship
CIA and the Cultural Cold War
Cold War II








Category
Commons
Portal
Timeline
List of conflicts










Soviet–Afghan War



Belligerents







Allies
Soviet Union
Democratic Republic of Afghanistan








Mujahideen
Jamiat-e Islami

Shura-e Nazar


Hezb-e Islami Gulbuddin

Maktab al-Khidamat


Hezb-e Islami Khalis
Ittehad i-Islami
others








Leaders







Allies
Leonid Brezhnev
Yuri Andropov
Konstantin Chernenko
Mikhail Gorbachev
Babrak Karmal
Mohammad Najibullah
Abdul Rashid Dostum








Mujahideen
Ahmad Shah Massoud
Abdullah Yusuf Azzam
Gulbuddin Hekmatyar
Abdul Haq
Abdul Rahim Wardak
Burhanuddin Rabbani








Casualties / Losses



List of Soviet aircraft losses during the Soviet–Afghan War





Events / Controversies



1979: Operation Storm-333
1980: Siege of Khost
Panjshir offensives
1983: Siege of Urgun
1985: Battle of Maravar Pass
Badaber Uprising
Battles of Zhawar
1986: Battles of Zhawar
1987: Battle of Jaji
Battle of Arghandab (1987)
Operation Magistral
1988: Battle for Hill 3234
Operation Arrow
Soviet Troops withdrawal from Afghanistan





Related Articles



Afghanistan War Memorial, Kiev
in popular culture








  Category:Soviet–Afghan War
  Portal:Afghanistan
  Commons:Category:Soviet-Afghan War












v
t
e


Nagorno-Karabakh conflict



Background



Nagorno-Karabakh

History


Deportation of Azerbaijanis from Armenia
Dissolution of the Soviet Union
Karabakh movement

Miatsum


Armenians in Azerbaijan

Armenians in Baku


Azerbaijanis in Armenia
Anti-Armenian sentiment in Azerbaijan
Anti-Azerbaijani sentiment in Armenia
Armenia–Azerbaijan relations





Nagorno-Karabakh War



Askeran clash
Sumgait pogrom
Kirovabad pogrom
Baku pogrom
Battle of Kalbajar
Capture of Shusha
Black January
Zvartnots Airport clash
Siege of Stepanakert
Khojaly Massacre
Maraga massacre
Mardakert and Martuni Offensives
Law on Abolishment of Nagorno-Karabakh Autonomous Oblast
1991 Azerbaijani Mil Mi-8 shootdown
1992 Azerbaijani Mil Mi-8 shootdown
Operation Goranboy
Operation Ring
1993 Summer Offensives
1994 Bagratashen bombing





Post-war clashes



2008 Mardakert skirmishes
February 2010 Nagorno-Karabakh skirmish
2010 Mardakert skirmishes
2012 Armenian–Azerbaijani border clashes
2014 Armenian–Azerbaijani clashes
2014 Armenian Mil Mi-24 shootdown
2016 Nagorno-Karabakh clashes





Main locations



Administrative divisions of the Republic of Artsakh

Stepanakert
Askeran Region
Hadrut Region
Kashatagh Region
Martakert Region
Martuni Region
Shahumyan Region
Shushi Region


Armenian-controlled territories

Agdam District
Fuzuli District
Jabrayil District
Kalbajar District
Lachin District
Qubadli District
Zangilan District







Political leaders



 Armenia

Levon Ter-Petrosyan
Robert Kocharyan
Serzh Sargsyan


 Republic of Artsakh

Artur Mkrtchyan
Robert Kocharyan
Leonard Petrosyan
Arkadi Ghukasyan
Bako Sahakyan


 Azerbaijan

Abulfaz Elchibey
Ayaz Mutallibov
Heydar Aliyev
Ilham Aliyev


Azerbaijani Community of Nagorno-Karabakh

Bayram Safarov
Nizami Bahmanov


 Russia

Boris Yeltsin


 Soviet Union

Mikhail Gorbachev


 Turkey

Turgut Özal







Military leaders



 Armenia

Vazgen Sargsyan
Gurgen Dalibaltayan
Norat Ter-Grigoryants
Jirair Sefilian


 Republic of Artsakh

Samvel Babayan
Kristapor Ivanyan
Arkady Ter-Tadevosyan
Monte Melkonian


 Azerbaijan

Isgandar Hamidov
Rahim Gaziyev
Surat Huseynov
Valeh Barshadly


 Russia

Pavel Grachev


 Soviet Union

Viktor Polyanichko


 Chechen Republic of Ichkeria

Shamil Basayev


 Afghanistan

Gulbuddin Hekmatyar







Peace process



Baker rules
Bishkek Protocol
Tehran Communiqué
Zheleznovodsk Communiqué
OSCE Minsk Group
Prague Process
Madrid Principles





International documents



Astrakhan Declaration
Nagorno-Karabakh Declaration
NATO Lisbon Summit Declaration
OIC Resolution 10/11, OIC Resolution 10/37
PACE Resolution 1416
UNGA Resolution 62/243
UNSC Resolutions 822, 853, 874, 884












v
t
e


Time Persons of the Year



1927–1950



Charles Lindbergh (1927)
Walter Chrysler (1928)
Owen D. Young (1929)
Mohandas Gandhi (1930)
Pierre Laval (1931)
Franklin D. Roosevelt (1932)
Hugh S. Johnson (1933)
Franklin D. Roosevelt (1934)
Haile Selassie (1935)
Wallis Simpson (1936)
Chiang Kai-shek / Soong Mei-ling (1937)
Adolf Hitler (1938)
Joseph Stalin (1939)
Winston Churchill (1940)
Franklin D. Roosevelt (1941)
Joseph Stalin (1942)
George Marshall (1943)
Dwight D. Eisenhower (1944)
Harry S. Truman (1945)
James F. Byrnes (1946)
George Marshall (1947)
Harry S. Truman (1948)
Winston Churchill (1949)
The American Fighting-Man (1950)





1951–1975



Mohammed Mosaddeq (1951)
Elizabeth II (1952)
Konrad Adenauer (1953)
John Foster Dulles (1954)
Harlow Curtice (1955)
Hungarian Freedom Fighters (1956)
Nikita Khrushchev (1957)
Charles de Gaulle (1958)
Dwight D. Eisenhower (1959)
U.S. Scientists: George Beadle / Charles Draper / John Enders / Donald A. Glaser / Joshua Lederberg / Willard Libby / Linus Pauling / Edward Purcell / Isidor Rabi / Emilio Segrè / William Shockley / Edward Teller / Charles Townes / James Van Allen / Robert Woodward (1960)
John F. Kennedy (1961)
Pope John XXIII (1962)
Martin Luther King Jr. (1963)
Lyndon B. Johnson (1964)
William Westmoreland (1965)
The Generation Twenty-Five and Under (1966)
Lyndon B. Johnson (1967)
The Apollo 8 Astronauts: William Anders / Frank Borman / Jim Lovell (1968)
The Middle Americans (1969)
Willy Brandt (1970)
Richard Nixon (1971)
Henry Kissinger / Richard Nixon (1972)
John Sirica (1973)
King Faisal (1974)
American Women: Susan Brownmiller / Kathleen Byerly / Alison Cheek / Jill Conway / Betty Ford / Ella Grasso / Carla Hills / Barbara Jordan / Billie Jean King / Susie Sharp / Carol Sutton / Addie Wyatt (1975)





1976–2000



Jimmy Carter (1976)
Anwar Sadat (1977)
Deng Xiaoping (1978)
Ayatollah Khomeini (1979)
Ronald Reagan (1980)
Lech Wałęsa (1981)
The Computer (1982)
Ronald Reagan / Yuri Andropov (1983)
Peter Ueberroth (1984)
Deng Xiaoping (1985)
Corazon Aquino (1986)
Mikhail Gorbachev (1987)
The Endangered Earth (1988)
Mikhail Gorbachev (1989)
George H. W. Bush (1990)
Ted Turner (1991)
Bill Clinton (1992)
The Peacemakers: Yasser Arafat / F. W. de Klerk / Nelson Mandela / Yitzhak Rabin (1993)
Pope John Paul II (1994)
Newt Gingrich (1995)
David Ho (1996)
Andrew Grove (1997)
Bill Clinton / Ken Starr (1998)
Jeffrey P. Bezos (1999)
George W. Bush (2000)





2001–present



Rudolph Giuliani (2001)
The Whistleblowers: Cynthia Cooper / Coleen Rowley / Sherron Watkins (2002)
The American Soldier (2003)
George W. Bush (2004)
The Good Samaritans: Bono / Bill Gates / Melinda Gates (2005)
You (2006)
Vladimir Putin (2007)
Barack Obama (2008)
Ben Bernanke (2009)
Mark Zuckerberg (2010)
The Protester (2011)
Barack Obama (2012)
Pope Francis (2013)
Ebola Fighters: Dr. Jerry Brown / Dr. Kent Brantly / Ella Watson-Stryker / Foday Gollah / Salome Karwah (2014)
Angela Merkel (2015)
Donald Trump (2016)
The Silence Breakers (2017)






 Book










v
t
e


Laureates of the Nobel Peace Prize



1901–1925



1901 Henry Dunant / Frédéric Passy
1902 Élie Ducommun / Charles Gobat
1903 Randal Cremer
1904 Institut de Droit International
1905 Bertha von Suttner
1906 Theodore Roosevelt
1907 Ernesto Moneta / Louis Renault
1908 Klas Arnoldson / Fredrik Bajer
1909 A. M. F. Beernaert / Paul Estournelles de Constant
1910 International Peace Bureau
1911 Tobias Asser / Alfred Fried
1912 Elihu Root
1913 Henri La Fontaine
1914
1915
1916
1917 International Committee of the Red Cross
1918
1919 Woodrow Wilson
1920 Léon Bourgeois
1921 Hjalmar Branting / Christian Lange
1922 Fridtjof Nansen
1923
1924
1925 Austen Chamberlain / Charles Dawes





1926–1950



1926 Aristide Briand / Gustav Stresemann
1927 Ferdinand Buisson / Ludwig Quidde
1928
1929 Frank B. Kellogg
1930 Nathan Söderblom
1931 Jane Addams / Nicholas Butler
1932
1933 Norman Angell
1934 Arthur Henderson
1935 Carl von Ossietzky
1936 Carlos Saavedra Lamas
1937 Robert Cecil
1938 Nansen International Office for Refugees
1939
1940
1941
1942
1943
1944 International Committee of the Red Cross
1945 Cordell Hull
1946 Emily Balch / John Mott
1947 Friends Service Council / American Friends Service Committee
1948
1949 John Boyd Orr
1950 Ralph Bunche





1951–1975



1951 Léon Jouhaux
1952 Albert Schweitzer
1953 George Marshall
1954 United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
1955
1956
1957 Lester B. Pearson
1958 Georges Pire
1959 Philip Noel-Baker
1960 Albert Lutuli
1961 Dag Hammarskjöld
1962 Linus Pauling
1963 International Committee of the Red Cross / League of Red Cross Societies
1964 Martin Luther King Jr.
1965 UNICEF
1966
1967
1968 René Cassin
1969 International Labour Organization
1970 Norman Borlaug
1971 Willy Brandt
1972
1973 Lê Đức Thọ (declined award) / Henry Kissinger
1974 Seán MacBride / Eisaku Satō
1975 Andrei Sakharov





1976–2000



1976 Betty Williams / Mairead Corrigan
1977 Amnesty International
1978 Anwar Sadat / Menachem Begin
1979 Mother Teresa
1980 Adolfo Pérez Esquivel
1981 United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
1982 Alva Myrdal / Alfonso García Robles
1983 Lech Wałęsa
1984 Desmond Tutu
1985 International Physicians for the Prevention of Nuclear War
1986 Elie Wiesel
1987 Óscar Arias
1988 UN Peacekeeping Forces
1989 Tenzin Gyatso (14th Dalai Lama)
1990 Mikhail Gorbachev
1991 Aung San Suu Kyi
1992 Rigoberta Menchú
1993 Nelson Mandela / F. W. de Klerk
1994 Shimon Peres / Yitzhak Rabin / Yasser Arafat
1995 Pugwash Conferences / Joseph Rotblat
1996 Carlos Belo / José Ramos-Horta
1997 International Campaign to Ban Landmines / Jody Williams
1998 John Hume / David Trimble
1999 Médecins Sans Frontières
2000 Kim Dae-jung





2001–present



2001 United Nations / Kofi Annan
2002 Jimmy Carter
2003 Shirin Ebadi
2004 Wangari Maathai
2005 International Atomic Energy Agency / Mohamed ElBaradei
2006 Grameen Bank / Muhammad Yunus
2007 Al Gore / Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
2008 Martti Ahtisaari
2009 Barack Obama
2010 Liu Xiaobo
2011 Ellen Johnson Sirleaf / Leymah Gbowee / Tawakkol Karman
2012 European Union
2013 Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
2014 Kailash Satyarthi / Malala Yousafzai
2015 Tunisian National Dialogue Quartet
2016 Juan Manuel Santos
2017 International Campaign to Abolish Nuclear Weapons












v
t
e


1990 Nobel Prize laureates



Chemistry

Elias James Corey (United States)






Literature

Octavio Paz (Mexico)



Peace

Mikhail Gorbachev (Soviet Union)



Physics



Jerome I. Friedman (United States)
Henry Way Kendall (United States)
Richard E. Taylor (Canada)





Physiology or Medicine



Joseph E. Murray (United States)
E. Donnall Thomas (United States)





Economic Sciences



Harry Markowitz (United States)
Merton Miller (United States)
William F. Sharpe (United States)








Nobel Prize recipients
1990
91
92
93
94
95
96
97
98
99
2000
01
02
03
04
05
06
07
08
09
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17












v
t
e


Candidates in the Russian presidential election, 1996



Winner



Boris Yeltsin (Independent)





Lost in runoff



Gennady Zyuganov (Communist Party)





Other candidates



Alexander Lebed (KRO)
Grigory Yavlinsky (Yabloko)
Vladimir Zhirinovsky (LDPR)
Svyatoslav Fyodorov (PST)
Mikhail Gorbachev (Independent)
Martin Shakkum (Independent)
Yury Vlasov (Independent)
Vladimir Bryntsalov (Independent)





Withdrew



Aman Tuleyev (Independent)









Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 97859168
LCCN: n85050740
ISNI: 0000 0001 2096 6951
GND: 11874660X
SELIBR: 56647
SUDOC: 028127625
BNF: cb12002384m (data)
BIBSYS: 90559488
NLA: 35782074
NDL: 00441310
NKC: jn19990210249
BNE: XX882424
IATH: w60p14b7











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mikhail_Gorbachev&oldid=817423554"					Categories: Mikhail Gorbachev1931 birthsRussian presidential candidates, 1996Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union membersClub of Rome membersCollars of the Order of the White LionCommunist rulersGrammy Award winnersGrand Crosses Special Class of the Order of Merit of the Federal Republic of GermanyGrawemeyer Award winnersHeads of state of the Soviet UnionHeads of the Communist Party of the Soviet UnionHonorary Members of the Russian Academy of ArtsLiving peopleMembers of the Supreme Soviet of the Soviet UnionMoscow State University alumniNobel Peace Prize laureatesPeople from StavropolPeople of the 1991 Soviet coup d'état attemptPeople of the Soviet–Afghan WarPolitburo of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union membersRecipients of the Indira Gandhi Peace PrizeRecipients of the Order of LeninRecipients of the Order of St. AndrewReformersRussian anti-capitalistsRussian atheistsRussian Nobel laureatesRussian people of Ukrainian descentRussian politiciansRussian social democratsSoviet Nobel laureatesSoviet people of Ukrainian descentDemocratic socialistsHidden categories: All articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from December 2011CS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknownCS1 Portuguese-language sources (pt)Pages with citations lacking titlesArticles with dead external links from March 2017Articles with permanently dead external linksArticles needing additional references from December 2017All articles needing additional referencesPages using infobox officeholder with an atypical party valueArticles containing Russian-language textArticles with hAudio microformatsWikipedia articles needing page number citations from August 2010Use dmy dates from July 2016Wikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with SELIBR identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersWikipedia articles with BIBSYS identifiersWikipedia articles with NLA identifiersWikipedia articles with SNAC-ID identifiers