

Military History of the United States


Founded
Continental Army – June 14, 1775 (1775-06-14)


Service branches
 United States Army
 United States Marine Corps
 United States Navy
 United States Air Force
 United States Coast Guard


Headquarters
The Pentagon, Arlington County, Virginia, U.S.


Related articles


History


List

American Revolutionary War
Whiskey Rebellion
Indian Wars
Barbary Wars
War of 1812
Patriot War
Mexican–American War
Utah War
Cortina Troubles
Reform War
American Civil War
Las Cuevas War
Spanish–American War
Banana Wars
Philippine–American War
Boxer Rebellion
Border War
World War I
Russian Civil War
World War II
Cold War
Puerto Rican Nationalist Revolts
Korean War
1958 Lebanon crisis
Operation Power Pack
Vietnam War
Korean DMZ Conflict
Operation Eagle Claw
Multinational Force Lebanon
Invasion of Grenada
Operation Golden Pheasant
Invasion of Panama
Persian Gulf War
Somali Civil War
Kosovo War
War on Terror
Operation Enduring Freedom

Afghanistan
Philippines
Horn of Africa
Trans Sahara

Iraq War
War in North-West Pakistan
Pakistan-United States skirmishes
Intervention against ISIL Other









U.S. military personnel and expenditures, 1790–2006. Personnel is shown in orange (left axis); expenditures are in teal (right axis). The two axes are scaled to visually align for World War II, thus showing the difference between the cost per soldier before and after President Dwight D. Eisenhower's "New Look" policy of the mid-1950s.[1]


The military history of the United States spans a period of over two centuries. During those years, the United States evolved from a new nation fighting Great Britain for independence (1775–83), through the monumental American Civil War (1861–65) and, after collaborating in triumph during World War II (1941–45), to the world's sole remaining superpower from the late 20th century to present.[2]
The Continental Congress in 1775 established the Continental Army, Continental Navy, and Continental Marines and named General George Washington its commander. This newly formed military, along with state militia forces, the French Army and Navy, and the Spanish Navy defeated the British in 1781. The new Constitution in 1789 made the president the commander in chief, with authority for the Congress to levy taxes, make the laws, and declare war.[3]
As of 2017, the U.S. Armed Forces consists of the Army, Marine Corps, Navy and Air Force, all under the command of the United States Department of Defense. There also is the United States Coast Guard, which is controlled by the Department of Homeland Security.
The President of the United States is the commander-in-chief, and exercises the authority through the Secretary of Defense and the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, which supervises combat operations. Governors have control of each state's Army and Air National Guard units for limited purposes. The president has the ability to federalize National Guard units, bringing them under the sole control of the Department of Defense.[4]



Contents


1 Colonial wars (1620–1774)
2 War of Independence (1775–83)

2.1 George Washington


3 Early national period (1783–1812)

3.1 Barbary Wars


4 War of 1812
5 War with Mexico (1846–48)
6 American Civil War (1861–65)
7 Post-Civil War era (1865–1917)

7.1 Indian Wars (1865–91)
7.2 Spanish–American War (1898)
7.3 Philippine–American War (1899–1902)


8 Modernization
9 Banana Wars (1898–1935)
10 Moro Rebellion (1899–1913)
11 Mexico (1910–19)
12 World War I (1917–18)
13 Russian Revolution (1918–19)
14 1920s: Naval disarmament
15 1930s: Neutrality Acts
16 World War II (1941–45)
17 Cold War era (1945–91)

17.1 Postwar military reorganization (1947)
17.2 Korean War (1950–53)
17.3 Lebanon crisis of 1958
17.4 Dominican Intervention
17.5 Vietnam War (1964–75)
17.6 Grenada
17.7 Beirut
17.8 Libya
17.9 Panama


18 Post–Cold War era (1991–2001)

18.1 Persian Gulf War (1990–91)
18.2 Somalia
18.3 Haiti
18.4 Yugoslavia


19 War on Terrorism (2001–present)

19.1 Afghanistan
19.2 Philippines
19.3 Iraq
19.4 Syrian and Iraqi intervention


20 Libyan intervention
21 See also
22 References
23 Further reading

23.1 Historiography


24 External links



Colonial wars (1620–1774)[edit]
Main article: Colonial American military history




In 1763, the indigenous tribes of Pontiac's Confederacy lay siege of Fort Detroit, a British fort on the American frontier.


The beginning of the United States military lies in civilian frontier settlers, armed for hunting and basic survival in the wilderness. These were organized into local militias for small military operations, mostly against Native American tribes but also to resist possible raids by the small military forces of neighboring European colonies. They relied on the British regular Army and Navy for any serious military operation.[5]
In major operations outside the locality involved, the militia was not employed as a fighting force. Instead the colony asked for (and paid) volunteers, many of whom were also militia members.[6]
In the early years of the British colonization of North America, military action in the thirteen colonies that would become the United States were the result of conflicts with Native Americans, such as in the Pequot War of 1637, King Philip's War in 1675, the Yamasee War in 1715 and Father Rale's War in 1722.
Beginning in 1689, the colonies became involved in a series of wars between Great Britain and France for control of North America, the most important of which were Queen Anne's War, in which the British conquered French colony Acadia, and the final French and Indian War (1754–63) when Britain was victorious over all the French colonies in North America. This final war was to give thousands of colonists, including Virginia colonel George Washington, military experience which they put to use during the American Revolutionary War.[7]
War of Independence (1775–83)[edit]
Main article: American Revolutionary War




The Siege of Yorktown was the decisive battle of the American Revolutionary War. The battle was the last major land engagement in the war, with, with the British Army's defeat at Yorktown prompting the British to negotiate an end to the conflict.


Ongoing political tensions between Great Britain and the thirteen colonies reached a crisis in 1774 when the British placed the province of Massachusetts under martial law after the Patriots protested taxes they regarded as a violation of their constitutional rights as Englishmen. When shooting began at Lexington and Concord in April 1775, militia units from across New England rushed to Boston and bottled up the British in the city. The Continental Congress appointed George Washington as commander-in-chief of the newly created Continental Army, which was augmented throughout the war by colonial militia. In addition to the Army, Congress also created the Continental Navy and Continental Marines He drove the British out of Boston but in late summer 1776 they returned to New York and nearly captured Washington's army. Meanwhile, the revolutionaries expelled British officials from the 13 states, and declared themselves an independent nation on July 4, 1776.[8]
The British, for their part, lacked both a unified command and a clear strategy for winning. With the use of the Royal Navy, the British were able to capture coastal cities, but control of the countryside eluded them. A British sortie from Canada in 1777 ended with the disastrous surrender of a British army at Saratoga. With the coming in 1777 of General von Steuben, the training and discipline along Prussian lines began, and the Continental Army began to evolve into a modern force. France and Spain then entered the war against Great Britain as Allies of the US, ending its naval advantage and escalating the conflict into a world war. The Netherlands later joined France, and the British were outnumbered on land and sea in a world war, as they had no major allies apart from Indian tribes.
A shift in focus to the southern American states in 1779 resulted in a string of victories for the British, but General Nathanael Greene engaged in guerrilla warfare and prevented them from making strategic headway. The main British army was surrounded by Washington's American and French forces at Yorktown in 1781, as the French fleet blocked a rescue by the Royal Navy. The British then sued for peace.




Washington's surprise crossing of the Delaware River in December 1776 was a major comeback after the loss of New York City; his army defeated the British in two battles and recaptured New Jersey.


George Washington[edit]
General George Washington (1732–99) proved an excellent organizer and administrator, who worked successfully with Congress and the state governors, selecting and mentoring his senior officers, supporting and training his troops, and maintaining an idealistic Republican Army. His biggest challenge was logistics, since neither Congress nor the states had the funding to provide adequately for the equipment, munitions, clothing, paychecks, or even the food supply of the soldiers. As a battlefield tactician Washington was often outmaneuvered by his British counterparts. As a strategist, however, he had a better idea of how to win the war than they did. The British sent four invasion armies. Washington's strategy forced the first army out of Boston in 1776, and was responsible for the surrender of the second and third armies at Saratoga (1777) and Yorktown (1781). He limited the British control to New York and a few places while keeping Patriot control of the great majority of the population. The Loyalists, on whom the British had relied too heavily, comprised about 20% of the population but were never well organized. As the war ended, Washington watched proudly as the final British army quietly sailed out of New York City in November 1783, taking the Loyalist leadership with them. Washington astonished the world when, instead of seizing power, he retired quietly to his farm in Virginia.[9][10]
Patriots had a strong distrust of a permanent "standing army", so the Continental Army was quickly demobilized, with land grants to veterans. General Washington, who throughout the war deferred to elected officials, averted a potential coup d'état and resigned as commander-in-chief after the war, establishing a tradition of civil control of the U.S. military.[11]
Early national period (1783–1812)[edit]
Main articles: Northwest Indian War, Quasi-War, Barbary Wars, Tecumseh's War, and Creek War




The Battle of Fallen Timbers was a decisive battle in the Northwest Indian War, where American forces defeated the tribes of the Western Confederacy.


Following the American Revolutionary War, the United States faced potential military conflict on the high seas as well as on the western frontier. The United States was a minor military power during this time, having only a modest army, marine corps, and navy. A traditional distrust of standing armies, combined with faith in the abilities of local militia, precluded the development of well-trained units and a professional officer corps. Jeffersonian leaders preferred a small army and navy, fearing that a large military establishment would involve the United States in excessive foreign wars, and potentially allow a domestic tyrant to seize power.[12]
In the Treaty of Paris after the Revolution, the British had ceded the lands between the Appalachian Mountains and the Mississippi River to the United States, without consulting the Shawnee, Cherokee, Choctaw and other smaller tribes who lived there. Because many of the tribes had fought as allies of the British, the United States compelled tribal leaders to sign away lands in postwar treaties, and began dividing these lands for settlement. This provoked a war in the Northwest Territory in which the U.S. forces performed poorly; the Battle of the Wabash in 1791 was the most severe defeat ever suffered by the United States at the hands of American Indians. President Washington dispatched a newly trained army to the region led by General Anthony Wayne, which decisively defeated the Indian confederacy at the Battle of Fallen Timbers in 1794.[13]
When revolutionary France declared war on Great Britain in 1793, the United States sought to remain neutral, but the Jay Treaty, which was favorable to Great Britain, angered the French government, which viewed it as a violation of the 1778 Treaty of Alliance. French privateers began to seize U.S. vessels, which led to an undeclared "Quasi-War" between the two nations. Fought at sea from 1798 to 1800, the United States won a string of victories in the Caribbean. George Washington was called out of retirement to head a "provisional army" in case of invasion by France, but President John Adams managed to negotiate a truce, in which France agreed to terminate the prior alliance and cease its attacks.[14]




Stephen Decatur boarding the Tripolitan gunboat, 3 August 1804, the First Barbary War


Barbary Wars[edit]
Main articles: Barbary Wars, First Barbary War, and Second Barbary War
The Berbers along the Barbary Coast (modern day Libya) sent pirates to capture merchant ships and hold the crews for ransom. The U.S. paid protection money until 1801, when President Thomas Jefferson refused to pay and sent in the Navy to challenge the Barbary States, the First Barbary War followed. After the U.S.S. Philadelphia was captured in 1803, Lieutenant Stephen Decatur led a raid which successfully burned the captured ship, preventing Tripoli from using or selling it. In 1805, after William Eaton captured the city of Derna, Tripoli agreed to a peace treaty. The other Barbary states continued to raid U.S. shipping, until the Second Barbary War in 1815 ended the practice.[15]
War of 1812[edit]




"We have met the enemy and they are ours." Commodore Oliver Hazard Perry's victory on Lake Erie in 1813 was an important battle in the War of 1812.


Main article: War of 1812
By far the largest military action in which the United States engaged during this era was the War of 1812.[16] With Britain locked in a major war with Napoleon's France, its policy was to block American shipments to France. The United States sought to remain neutral while pursuing overseas trade. Britain cut the trade and impressed seamen on American ships into the Royal Navy, despite intense protests. Britain supported an Indian insurrection in the American Midwest, with the goal of creating an Indian state there that would block American expansion. The United States finally declared war on the United Kingdom in 1812, the first time the U.S. had officially declared war. Not hopeful of defeating the Royal Navy, the U.S. attacked the British Empire by invading British Canada, hoping to use captured territory as a bargaining chip. The invasion of Canada was a debacle, though concurrent wars with Native Americans on the western front (Tecumseh's War and the Creek War) were more successful. After defeating Napoleon in 1814, Britain sent large veteran armies to invade New York, raid Washington and capture the key control of the Mississippi River at New Orleans. The New York invasion was a fiasco after the much larger British army retreated to Canada. The raiders succeeded in the burning of Washington on 25 August 1814, but were repulsed in their Chesapeake Bay Campaign at the Battle of Baltimore and the British commander killed. The major invasion in Louisiana was stopped by a one-sided military battle that killed the top three British generals and thousands of soldiers. The winners were the commanding general of the Battle of New Orleans, Major General Andrew Jackson, who became president and the Americans who basked in a victory over a much more powerful nation. The peace treaty proved successful, and the U.S. and Britain never again went to war. The losers were the Indians, who never gained the independent territory in the Midwest promised by Britain.[17]
War with Mexico (1846–48)[edit]




American forces storming Chapultepec Castle during the Mexican-American War.


Main article: Mexican–American War
With the rapid expansion of the farming population, Democrats looked to the west for new lands, an idea which became known as "Manifest Destiny." In the Texas Revolution (1835–36), the settlers declared independence and defeated the Mexican army, but Mexico was determined to reconquer the lost province and threatened war with the U.S. if it annexed Texas. The U.S., much larger and more powerful, did annex Texas in 1845 and war broke out in 1846 over boundary issues.[18][19]
In the Mexican–American War 1846–48, the U.S. Army under Generals Zachary Taylor and Winfield Scott and others, invaded and after a series of victorious battles (and no major defeats) seized New Mexico and California, and also blockaded the coast, invaded northern Mexico, and invaded central Mexico, capturing the national capital. The peace terms involved American purchase of the area from California to New Mexico for $10 million.[20]
American Civil War (1861–65)[edit]




Dead soldiers lie where they fell at Antietam, the bloodiest day in American history. Abraham Lincoln issued the Emancipation Proclamation after this battle.


Main article: American Civil War
Long-building tensions between the Northern and Southern States over slavery suddenly reached a climax after the 1860 election of Abraham Lincoln of the new anti-slavery Republican Party as U.S. President. Southern states seceded from the U.S. and formed a separate Confederacy. Within the Confederate states, many U.S. forts with garrisons still loyal to the Union were cut off. Fighting started in 1861 when Fort Sumter was fired upon.[21]
The American Civil War caught both sides unprepared. Neither the North's small standing army nor the South's scattered state militias were capable of winning a civil war. Both sides raced to raise armies — larger than any U.S. forces before — first with repeated calls for volunteers, but eventually resorting to unpopular large-scale conscription for the first time in U.S. history.




The Battle of Gettysburg involved the largest number of casualities of the entire war.


The North initially sought a quick victory by trying to capture the Confederate capital at Richmond, Virginia, not far from the U.S. capital at Washington, D.C. The South hoped to win by getting Britain and France to intervene, or else by exhausting the North's willingness to fight. The Confederates under General Robert E. Lee skillfully and tenaciously defended their capital until the very end, while the North struggled to find any general to match.
As the fighting between the two capitals stalled, the North found more success in campaigns elsewhere, using rivers, railroads, and the seas to help move and supply their larger forces, putting a stranglehold on the South — the Anaconda Plan. The war spilled across the continent, and even to the high seas. After four years of appallingly bloody conflict, with more casualties than all other U.S. wars combined, the North's larger population and industrial might slowly ground the South down. The resources and economy of the South were ruined, while the North's factories and economy prospered filling government wartime contracts.
The American Civil War is sometimes called the "first modern war" due to the mobilization and destruction of the civilian base — total war — and due to by many technical military innovations involving railroads, telegraphs, rifles, trench warfare, and ironclad warships with turret guns.[22]
Post-Civil War era (1865–1917)[edit]




American forces led by George Custer suffered a major defeat against the Sioux in the Battle of Little Bighorn.


Indian Wars (1865–91)[edit]
Main article: Indian Wars
After the Civil War, population expansion, railroad construction, and the disappearance of the buffalo herds heightened military tensions on the Great Plains. Several tribes, especially the Sioux and Comanche, fiercely resisted confinement to reservations. The main role of the Army was to keep indigenous peoples on reservations and to end their wars against settlers and each other, William Tecumseh Sherman and Philip Sheridan were in charge. A famous victory for the Plains Nations was the Battle of the Little Big Horn in 1876, when Col. George Armstrong Custer and two hundred plus members of the 7th Cavalry were killed by a force consisting of Native Americans from the Lakota, Northern Cheyenne, and Arapaho nations. The last significant conflict came in 1891.[23]




Charge by the Rough Riders during the Battle of San Juan Hill.


Spanish–American War (1898)[edit]
Main article: Spanish–American War
The Spanish–American War was a short decisive war marked by quick, overwhelming American victories at sea and on land against Spain. The Navy was well-prepared and won laurels, even as politicians tried (and failed) to have it redeployed to defend East Coast cities against potential threats from the feeble Spanish fleet.[24] The Army performed well in combat in Cuba. However, it was too oriented to small posts in the West and not as well-prepared for an overseas conflict.[25] It relied on volunteers and state militia units, which faced logistical, training and food problems in the staging areas in Florida.[26] The United States freed Cuba (after an occupation by the U.S. Army). By the peace treaty Spain ceded to the United States its colonies of Puerto Rico, Guam, and the Philippines.[27] The Navy set up coaling stations there and in Hawaii (which voluntarily joined the U.S. in 1898). The U.S. Navy now had a major forward presence across the Pacific and (with the lease of Guantánamo Bay Naval Base in Cuba) a major base in the Caribbean guarding the approaches to the Gulf Coast and the Panama Canal.[28]




American soldiers in Manila during the Philippine-American War.


Philippine–American War (1899–1902)[edit]
Main article: Philippine–American War
The Philippine–American War (1899–1902) was an armed conflict between a group of Filipino revolutionaries and the American forces following the ceding of the Philippines to the United States after the defeat of Spanish forces in the Battle of Manila. The Army sent in 100,000 soldiers (mostly from the National Guard) under General Elwell Otis. Defeated in the field and losing its capital in March 1899, the poorly armed and poorly led rebels broke into armed bands. The insurgency collapsed in March 1901 when the leader Emilio Aguinaldo was captured by General Frederick Funston and his Macabebe allies. Casualties included 1,037 Americans killed in action and 3,340 who died from disease; 20,000 rebels were killed.[29]
Modernization[edit]
The Navy was modernized in the 1880s, and by the 1890s had adopted the naval power strategy of Captain Alfred Thayer Mahan—as indeed did every major navy. The old sailing ships were replaced by modern steel battleships, bringing them in line with the navies of Britain and Germany. In 1907, most of the Navy's battleships, with several support vessels, dubbed the Great White Fleet, were featured in a 14-month circumnavigation of the world. Ordered by President Theodore Roosevelt, it was a mission designed to demonstrate the Navy's capability to extend to the global theater.[30]




The Great White Fleet at the Straits of Magellan. The fleet set out to make friendly visits to other countries, and showcase America's naval power to the world.


Secretary of War Elihu Root (1899–1904) led the modernization of the Army. His goal of a uniformed chief of staff as general manager and a European-type general staff for planning was stymied by General Nelson A. Miles but did succeed in enlarging West Point and establishing the U.S. Army War College as well as the General Staff. Root changed the procedures for promotions and organized schools for the special branches of the service. He also devised the principle of rotating officers from staff to line. Root was concerned about the Army's role in governing the new territories acquired in 1898 and worked out the procedures for turning Cuba over to the Cubans, and wrote the charter of government for the Philippines.[31]
Rear Admiral Bradley A. Fiske was at the vanguard of new technology in naval guns and gunnery, thanks to his innovations in fire control 1890–1910. He immediately grasped the potential for air power, and called for the development of a torpedo plane. Fiske, as aide for operations in 1913–15 to Assistant Secretary Franklin D. Roosevelt, proposed a radical reorganization of the Navy to make it a war-fighting instrument. Fiske wanted to centralize authority in a chief of naval operations and an expert staff that would develop new strategies, oversee the construction of a larger fleet, coordinate war planning including force structure, mobilization plans, and industrial base, and ensure that the US Navy possessed the best possible war machines. Eventually, the Navy adopted his reforms and by 1915 started to reorganize for possible involvement in the World War then underway.[32]
Banana Wars (1898–1935)[edit]
Main article: Banana Wars
"Banana Wars" is an informal term for the minor intervention in Latin America from 1898 until 1934. These include military presence in Cuba, Panama with the Panama Canal Zone, Haiti (1915–1935), Dominican Republic (1916–1924) and Nicaragua (1912–1925) & (1926–1933). The U.S. Marine Corps began to specialize in long-term military occupation of these countries, primarily to safeguard customs revenues which were the cause of local civil wars.[33]
Moro Rebellion (1899–1913)[edit]
Main article: Moro Rebellion
The Moro Rebellion was an armed insurgency between Muslim Filipino tribes in the southern Philippines between 1899 and 1913. Pacification was never complete as sporadic antigovernment insurgency continues into the 21st century, with American advisors helping the Philippine government forces.[34]
Mexico (1910–19)[edit]




American and Mexican soldiers guarding the border in Ambos Nogales during the Border War.


Main article: Border War (1910–19)
The Mexican Revolution involved a civil war with hundreds of thousands of deaths and large numbers fleeing combat zones. Tens of thousands fled to the U.S. President Wilson sent U.S. forces to occupy the Mexican city of Veracruz for six months in 1914. It was designed to show the U.S. was keenly interested in the civil war and would not tolerate attacks on Americans, especially the April 9, 1914, "Tampico Affair", which involved the arrest of American sailors by soldiers of the regime of Mexican President Victoriano Huerta.[35] In early 1916 Pancho Villa a Mexican general ordered 500 soldiers on a murderous raid on the American city of Columbus New Mexico, with the goal of robbing banks to fund his army.[36]
The German Secret Service encouraged Pancho Villa in his attacks to involve the United States in an intervention in Mexico which would distract the United States from its growing involvement in the war and divert aid from Europe to support the intervention.[37] Wilson called up the state militias (National Guard) and sent them and the U.S. Army under General John J. Pershing to punish Villa in the Pancho Villa Expedition. Villa fled, with the Americans in pursuit deep into Mexico, thereby arousing Mexican nationalism. By early 1917 President Venustiano Carranza had contained Villa and secured the border, so Wilson ordered Pershing to withdraw.[38][39]
World War I (1917–18)[edit]




The American Expeditionary Force marches in France, 1918.


Main articles: American entry into World War I and American Expeditionary Forces
The United States originally wished to remain neutral when World War I broke out in August 1914. However, it insisted on its right as a neutral party to immunity from German submarine attack, even though its ships carried food and raw materials to Britain. In 1917 the Germans resumed submarine attacks, knowing that it would lead to American entry. When the United States declared war in early April 1917, the United States Army was still small by European standards (most of which had conscription) and mobilization would take at least a year. Meanwhile, the United States continued to provide supplies and money to Britain and France, and initiated the first peacetime draft.[40] Industrial mobilization took longer than expected, so divisions were sent to Europe without equipment, relying instead on the British and French to supply them.[41]
By summer 1918, a million American soldiers, or "doughboys" as they were often called, of the American Expeditionary Force (AEF) were in Europe, serving on the Western Front under the command of General John Pershing, with 25,000 more arriving every week. The failure of the German Army's Spring Offensive exhausted its manpower reserves and they were unable to launch new offensives. The Imperial German Navy and home front then revolted and a new German government signed a conditional surrender, the Armistice, ending the war on the Western Front on November 11, 1918.[42]
Russian Revolution (1918–19)[edit]
The so-called Polar Bear Expedition was the involvement of 5,000 U.S. troops, during the Russian Revolution, in blocking the Bolsheviks in Arkhangelsk, Russia as part of the greater Allied military expedition in the Russian Civil War.[43]
1920s: Naval disarmament[edit]
Main article: Washington Naval Conference
The U.S. sponsored a major world conference to limit the naval armaments of world powers, including the U.S., Britain, Japan, and France, plus smaller nations.[44] Secretary of State Charles Evans Hughes made the key proposal of each country to reduce its number of warships by a formula that was accepted. The conference enabled the great powers to reduce their navies and avoid conflict in the Pacific. The treaties remained in effect for ten years, but were not renewed as tensions escalated.[45]
1930s: Neutrality Acts[edit]
After the costly U.S. involvement in World War I, isolationism grew within the nation. Congress refused membership in the League of Nations, and in response to the growing turmoil in Europe and Asia, the gradually more restrictive Neutrality Acts were passed, which were intended to prevent the U.S. from supporting either side in a war. President Franklin D. Roosevelt sought to support Britain, however, and in 1940 signed the Lend-Lease Act, which permitted an expansion of the "cash and carry" arms trade to develop with Britain, which controlled the Atlantic sea lanes.[46]
Roosevelt favored the Navy (he was in effective charge in World War I), and used relief programs such as the PWA to support Navy yards and build warships. For example, in 1933 he authorized $238 million in PWA funds for thirty-two new ships. The Army Air Corps received only $11 million, which barely covered replacements and allowed no expansion.[47]
World War II (1941–45)[edit]
Main articles: Military history of the United States during World War II, United States Army Air Forces during World War II, and Special relationship




The explosion aboard the USS Arizona during the attack on Pearl Harbor.


Starting in 1940 (18 months before Pearl Harbor), the nation mobilized, giving high priority to air power. American involvement in World War II in 1940–41 was limited to providing war material and financial support to Britain, the Soviet Union, and the Republic of China. The U.S. entered officially on 8 December 1941 following the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor, Hawaii. Japanese forces soon seized American, Dutch, and British possessions across the Pacific and Southeast Asia, except for Australia, which became a main American forward base along with Hawaii.[48]
The loss of eight battleships and 2,403 Americans[49] at Pearl Harbor forced the U.S. to rely on its remaining aircraft carriers, which won a major victory over Japan at Midway just six months into the war, and on its growing submarine fleet. The Navy and Marine Corps followed this up with an island hopping campaign across the central and south Pacific in 1943–45, reaching the outskirts of Japan in the Battle of Okinawa. During 1942 and 1943, the U.S. deployed millions of men and thousands of planes and tanks to the UK, beginning with the strategic bombing of Nazi Germany and occupied Europe and leading up to the Allied invasions of occupied North Africa in November 1942, Sicily and Italy in 1943, France in 1944, and the invasion of Germany in 1945, parallel with the Soviet invasion from the east. That led to the surrender of Nazi Germany in May 1945. While the final European Axis Powers were defeated within a year of Operation Overlord, the fighting in Central Europe was especially bloody for the United States, with more US military deaths occurring in Germany than in any other country during the war.[50]




General of the Army MacArthur signs on behalf of the Allies


In the Pacific, the U.S. experienced much success in naval campaigns during 1944, but bloody battles at Iwo Jima and Okinawa in 1945 led the U.S. to look for a way to end the war with minimal loss of American lives. The U.S. used atomic bombs on Hiroshima and Nagasaki to destroy the Japanese war effort and to shock the Japanese leadership, which quickly caused the surrender of Japan. The United States was able to mobilize quickly, eventually becoming the dominant military power in most theaters of the war (excepting only eastern Europe), and the industrial might of the U.S. economy became a major factor in the Allies' mobilization of resources. Strategic and tactical lessons learned by the U.S., such as the importance of air superiority and the dominance of the aircraft carrier in naval actions, continue to guide U.S. military doctrine into the 21st century.
World War II holds a special place in the American psyche as the country's greatest triumph, and the U.S. military personnel of World War II are frequently referred to as "the Greatest Generation." Over 16 million served (about 11% of the population), and over 400,000 died during the war. The U.S. emerged as one of the two undisputed superpowers along with the Soviet Union, and unlike the Soviet Union, the U.S. homeland was virtually untouched by the ravages of war. During and following World War II, the United States and Britain developed an increasingly strong defense and intelligence relationship. Manifestations of this include extensive basing of U.S. forces in the UK, shared intelligence, shared military technology (e.g. nuclear technology), and shared procurement.
Further information: List of United States Army divisions during World War II
Cold War era (1945–91)[edit]
Main article: Cold War
Following World War II, the United States emerged as a global superpower vis-a-vis the Soviet Union in the Cold War. In this period of some forty years, the United States provided foreign military aid and direct involvement in proxy wars against the Soviet Union. It was the principal foreign actor in the Korean War and Vietnam War during this era. Nuclear weapons were held in ready by the United States under a concept of mutually assured destruction with the Soviet Union.[51]
Postwar military reorganization (1947)[edit]
The National Security Act of 1947, meeting the need for a military reorganization to complement the U.S. superpower role, combined and replaced the former Department of the Navy and War Department with a single cabinet-level Department of Defense. The act also created the National Security Council, the Central Intelligence Agency, and the Air Force.
Korean War (1950–53)[edit]
Main article: Korean War




American beachhead during the Battle of Inchon


The Korean War was a conflict between the United States and its United Nations allies and the communist powers under influence of the Soviet Union (also a UN member nation) and the People's Republic of China (which later also gained UN membership). The principal combatants were North and South Korea. Principal allies of South Korea included the United States, Canada, Australia, the United Kingdom, although many other nations sent troops under the aegis of the United Nations. Allies of North Korea included the People's Republic of China, which supplied military forces, and the Soviet Union, which supplied combat advisors and aircraft pilots, as well as arms, for the Chinese and North Korean troops.[52]
The war started badly for the US and UN. North Korean forces struck massively in the summer of 1950 and nearly drove the outnumbered US and ROK defenders into the sea. However the United Nations intervened, naming Douglas MacArthur commander of its forces, and UN-US-ROK forces held a perimeter around Pusan, gaining time for reinforcement. MacArthur, in a bold but risky move, ordered an amphibious invasion well behind the front lines at Inchon, cutting off and routing the North Koreans and quickly crossing the 38th Parallel into North Korea. As UN forces continued to advance toward the Yalu River on the border with Communist China, the Chinese crossed the Yalu River in October and launched a series of surprise attacks that sent the UN forces reeling back across the 38th Parallel. Truman originally wanted a Rollback strategy to unify Korea; after the Chinese successes he settled for a Containment policy to split the country.[53] MacArthur argued for rollback but was fired by President Harry Truman after disputes over the conduct of the war. Peace negotiations dragged on for two years until President Dwight D. Eisenhower threatened China with nuclear weapons; an armistice was quickly reached with the two Koreas remaining divided at the 38th parallel. North and South Korea are still today in a state of war, having never signed a peace treaty, and American forces remain stationed in South Korea as part of American foreign policy.[54]




Several hundred Marines were sent to Lebanon during the 1958 crisis to bolster the pro-Western government.


Lebanon crisis of 1958[edit]
In the Lebanon crisis of 1958 that threatened civil war, Operation Blue Bat deployed several hundred Marines to bolster the pro-Western Lebanese government from July 15 to October 25, 1958.
Dominican Intervention[edit]
Main article: Operation Power Pack
On April 28, 1965, 400 Marines were landed in Santo Domingo to evacuate the American Embassy and foreign nationals after dissident Dominican armed forces attempted to overthrow the ruling civilian junta. By mid-May, peak strength of 23,850 U.S. soldiers, Marines, and Airmen were in the Dominican Republic and some 38 naval ships were positioned offshore. They evacuated nearly 6,500 men, women, and children of 46 nations, and distributed more than 8 million tons of food.
Vietnam War (1964–75)[edit]
Main article: Vietnam War
See also: United States Air Force in Thailand and Secret War




Formation of Bell UH-1 Iroquois ca. 1966


The Vietnam War was a war fought between 1955 and 1975 on the ground in South Vietnam and bordering areas of Cambodia and Laos (see Secret War) and in the strategic bombing (see Operation Rolling Thunder) of North Vietnam. American advisors came in the late 1950s to help the RVN (Republic of Vietnam) combat Communist insurgents known as "Viet Cong." Major American military involvement began in 1964, after Congress provided President Lyndon B. Johnson with blanket approval for presidential use of force in the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution.[55]
Fighting on one side was a coalition of forces including the Republic of Vietnam (South Vietnam or the "RVN"), the United States, supplemented by South Korea, Thailand, Australia, New Zealand, and the Philippines. The allies fought against the North Vietnamese Army (NVA) as well as the National Liberation Front (NLF, also known as Viet communists Viet Cong), or "VC", a guerrilla force within South Vietnam. The NVA received substantial military and economic aid from the Soviet Union and China, turning Vietnam into a proxy war.[56]
The military history of the American side of the war involved different strategies over the years.[57] The bombing campaigns of the Air Force were tightly controlled by the White House for political reasons, and until 1972 avoided the main Northern cities of Hanoi and Haiphong and concentrated on bombing jungle supply trails, especially the Ho Chi Minh Trail.[58] The most controversial Army commander was William Westmoreland whose strategy involved systematic defeat of all enemy forces in the field, despite heavy American casualties that alienated public opinion back home.[59]




United States Embassy following the Tet Offensive


The U.S. framed the war as part of its policy of containment of Communism in south Asia, but American forces were frustrated by an inability to engage the enemy in decisive battles, corruption and incompetence in the Army of the Republic of Vietnam, and ever increasing protests at home. The Tet Offensive in 1968, although a major military defeat for the NLF with half their forces eliminated, marked the psychological turning point in the war. With President Richard M. Nixon opposed to containment and more interested in achieving détente with both the Soviet Union and China, American policy shifted to "Vietnamization," – providing very large supplies of arms and letting the Vietnamese fight it out themselves. After more than 57,000 dead and many more wounded, American forces withdrew in 1973 with no clear victory, and in 1975 South Vietnam was finally conquered by communist North Vietnam and unified.[60]
Memories and lessons from the war are still a major factor in American politics. One side views the war as a necessary part of the Containment policy, which allowed the enemy to choose the time and place of warfare. Others note the U.S. made major strategic gains as the Communists were defeated in Indonesia, and by 1972 both Moscow and Beijing were competing for American support, at the expense of their allies in Hanoi. Critics see the conflict as a "quagmire"—an endless waste of American blood and treasure in a conflict that did not concern US interests. Fears of another quagmire have been major factors in foreign policy debates ever since.[61] The draft became extremely unpopular, and President Nixon ended it in 1973,[62] forcing the military (the Army especially) to rely entirely upon volunteers. That raised the issue of how well the professional military reflected overall American society and values; the soldiers typically took the position that their service represented the highest and best American values.[63]




In 1983, American forces, assisted by the Caribbean Peace Force, invaded the island nation of Grenada.


Grenada[edit]
In October, 1983, a power struggle in Grenada, which had installed a communist-leaning government, led to increased tensions in the region. Neighboring nations asked the U.S. to intervene. The invasion was a hurriedly devised grouping of paratroopers, Marines, Rangers, and special operations forces in Operation Urgent Fury. Over a thousand Americans quickly seized the entire island, taking hundreds of military and civilian prisoners, especially Cubans, who were building a large military airstrip.[64][65]
Beirut[edit]
In 1983 fighting between Palestinian refugees and Lebanese factions reignited that nation's long-running civil war. A UN agreement brought an international force of peacekeepers to occupy Beirut and guarantee security. US Marines landed in August 1982 along with Italian and French forces. On October 23, 1983, a suicide bomber driving a truck filled with 6 tons of TNT crashed through a fence and destroyed the Marine barracks, killing 241 Marines; seconds later, a second bomber leveled a French barracks, killing 58. Subsequently, the US Navy engaged in bombing of militia positions inside Lebanon. While US President Ronald Reagan was initially defiant, political pressure at home eventually forced the withdrawal of the Marines in February 1984.[66]




In 1986, the USAF conducted air strikes against Libya, in retaliation for the West Berlin discotheque bombing.


Libya[edit]
Main article: Bombing of Libya (1986)
Code-named "Operation El Dorado Canyon", comprised the joint United States Air Force, Navy, and Marine Corps air-strikes against Libya on April 15, 1986. The attack was carried out in response to the 1986 Berlin discotheque bombing, and resulted in the killing of 45 officers and 15 civilians.
Panama[edit]
On December 20, 1989 the United States invaded Panama, mainly from U.S. bases within the then-Canal Zone, to oust dictator and international drug trafficker Manuel Noriega. American forces quickly overwhelmed the Panamanian Defense Forces, Noriega was captured on January 3, 1990 and imprisoned in the U.S. and a new government was installed.[67]
Post–Cold War era (1991–2001)[edit]




U.S. military engagements 1990–2002


Persian Gulf War (1990–91)[edit]
The Persian Gulf War was a conflict between Iraq and a coalition force of 34 nations led by the United States. The lead up to the war began with the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait in August 1990 which was met with immediate economic sanctions by the United Nations against Iraq. The coalition commenced hostilities in January 1991, resulting in a decisive victory for the U.S. led coalition forces, which drove Iraqi forces out of Kuwait with minimal coalition deaths. Despite the low death toll, over 180,000 US veterans would later be classified as "permanently disabled" according to the US Department of Veterans Affairs (see Gulf War Syndrome). The main battles were aerial and ground combat within Iraq, Kuwait and bordering areas of Saudi Arabia. Land combat did not expand outside of the immediate Iraq/Kuwait/Saudi border region, although the coalition bombed cities and strategic targets across Iraq, and Iraq fired missiles on Israeli and Saudi cities.[68]
Before the war, many observers believed the US and its allies could win but might suffer substantial casualties (certainly more than any conflict since Vietnam), and that the tank battles across the harsh desert might rival those of North Africa during World War II. After nearly 50 years of proxy wars, and constant fears of another war in Europe between NATO and the Warsaw Pact, some thought the Persian Gulf War might finally answer the question of which military philosophy would have reigned supreme. Iraqi forces were battle-hardened after 8 years of war with Iran, and they were well equipped with late model Soviet tanks and jet fighters, but the antiaircraft weapons were crippled; in comparison, the US had no large-scale combat experience since its withdrawal from Vietnam nearly 20 years earlier, and major changes in US doctrine, equipment and technology since then had never been tested under fire.




USS Wisconsin fires on Iraqi positions in Kuwait


However, the battle was one-sided almost from the beginning. The reasons for this are the subject of continuing study by military strategists and academics. There is general agreement that US technological superiority was a crucial factor but the speed and scale of the Iraqi collapse has also been attributed to poor strategic and tactical leadership and low morale among Iraqi troops, which resulted from a history of incompetent leadership. After devastating initial strikes against Iraqi air defenses and command and control facilities on 17 January 1991, coalition forces achieved total air superiority almost immediately. The Iraqi air force was destroyed within a few days, with some planes fleeing to Iran, where they were interned for the duration of the conflict. The overwhelming technological advantages of the US, such as stealth aircraft and infrared sights, quickly turned the air war into a "turkey shoot". The heat signature of any tank which started its engine made an easy target. Air defense radars were quickly destroyed by radar-seeking missiles fired from wild weasel aircraft. Grainy video clips, shot from the nose cameras of missiles as they aimed at impossibly small targets, were a staple of US news coverage and revealed to the world a new kind of war, compared by some to a video game. Over 6 weeks of relentless pounding by planes and helicopters, the Iraqi army was almost completely beaten but did not retreat, under orders from Iraqi President Saddam Hussein, and by the time the ground forces invaded on 24 February, many Iraqi troops quickly surrendered to forces much smaller than their own; in one instance, Iraqi forces attempted to surrender to a television camera crew that was advancing with coalition forces.
After just 100 hours of ground combat, and with all of Kuwait and much of southern Iraq under coalition control, US President George H. W. Bush ordered a cease-fire and negotiations began resulting in an agreement for cessation of hostilities. Some US politicians were disappointed by this move, believing Bush should have pressed on to Baghdad and removed Hussein from power; there is little doubt that coalition forces could have accomplished this if they had desired. Still, the political ramifications of removing Hussein would have broadened the scope of the conflict greatly, and many coalition nations refused to participate in such an action, believing it would create a power vacuum and destabilize the region.[69]
Following the Persian Gulf War, to protect minority populations, the US, Britain, and France declared and maintained no-fly zones in northern and southern Iraq, which the Iraqi military frequently tested. The no-fly zones persisted until the 2003 invasion of Iraq, although France withdrew from participation in patrolling the no-fly zones in 1996, citing a lack of humanitarian purpose for the operation.




American soldiers taking fire during the Battle of Mogadishu. The battle led to the withdrawal of U.S. forces in Somalia, and the end of American support for UNOSOM II.


Somalia[edit]
Main articles: Operation Restore Hope and UNOSOM II
US troops participated in a UN peacekeeping mission in Somalia beginning in 1992. By 1993 the US troops were augmented with Rangers and special forces with the aim of capturing warlord Mohamed Farrah Aidid, whose forces had massacred peacekeepers from Pakistan. During a raid in downtown Mogadishu, US troops became trapped overnight by a general uprising in the Battle of Mogadishu. Eighteen American soldiers were killed, and a US television crew filmed graphic images of the body of one soldier being dragged through the streets by an angry mob. Somali guerrillas paid a staggering toll at an estimated 1,000–5,000 total casualties during the conflict. After much public disapproval, American forces were quickly withdrawn by President Bill Clinton. The incident profoundly affected US thinking about peacekeeping and intervention. The book Black Hawk Down was written about the battle, and was the basis for the later movie of the same name.[70]
Haiti[edit]
Main article: Operation Uphold Democracy
Operation Uphold Democracy (September 19, 1994 – March 31, 1995) was an intervention designed to reinstate the elected President Jean-Bertrand Aristide, who was reported to have died in office during the bombing of the presidential palace. The operation was effectively authorized by the 31 July 1994 United Nations Security Council Resolution 940.[71]
Yugoslavia[edit]
During the war in Yugoslavia in the early 1990s, the US operated in Bosnia and Herzegovina as part of the NATO-led multinational implementation force (IFOR) in Operation Joint Endeavour . The USA was one of the NATO member countries who bombed Yugoslavia between March 24 and June 9, 1999 during the Kosovo War and later contributed to the multinational force KFOR.[72]
War on Terrorism (2001–present)[edit]
The War on Terrorism is a global effort by the governments of several countries (primarily the United States and its principal allies) to neutralize international terrorist groups (primarily Islamic Extremist terrorist groups, including al-Qaeda) and ensure that countries considered by the US and some of its allies to be Rogue Nations no longer support terrorist activities. It has been adopted primarily as a response to the September 11, 2001 attacks on the United States. Since 2001, terrorist motivated attacks upon service members have occurred in Arkansas and Texas.




U.S. Army Special Forces and U.S. Air Force Combat Controllers on horseback in November 2001.


Afghanistan[edit]
The intervention in Afghanistan (Operation Enduring Freedom – Afghanistan) to depose that country's Taliban government and destroy training camps associated with al-Qaeda is understood to have been the opening, and in many ways defining, campaign of the broader War on Terrorism. The emphasis on Special Operations Forces (SOF), political negotiation with autonomous military units, and the use of proxy militaries marked a significant change from prior U.S. military approaches.[73]
Philippines[edit]
In January 2002, the U.S. sent more than 1,200 troops (later raised to 2,000) to assist the Armed Forces of the Philippines in combating terrorist groups linked to al-Qaida, such as Abu Sayyaf, under Operation Enduring Freedom – Philippines. Operations have taken place mostly in the Sulu Archipelago, where terrorists and other groups are active. The majority of troops provide logistics. However, there are special forces troops that are training and assisting in combat operations against the terrorist groups.




A Marine Corps M1 Abrams tank patrols a Baghdad street in April 2003.


Iraq[edit]
Main article: History of Iraq (2003–11)
After the lengthy Iraq disarmament crisis culminated with an American demand that Iraqi President Saddam Hussein leave Iraq, which was refused, a coalition led by the United States and the United Kingdom fought the Iraqi army in the 2003 invasion of Iraq. Approximately 250,000 United States troops, with support from 45,000 British, 2,000 Australian and 200 Polish combat forces, entered Iraq primarily through their staging area in Kuwait. (Turkey had refused to permit its territory to be used for an invasion from the north.) Coalition forces also supported Iraqi Kurdish militia, estimated to number upwards of 50,000. After approximately three weeks of fighting, Hussein and the Ba'ath Party were forcibly removed, followed by 9 years of military presence by the United States and the coalition fighting alongside the newly elected Iraqi government against various insurgent groups.
Syrian and Iraqi intervention[edit]
Main articles: 2014 American-led intervention in Iraq and 2014 US-Coalition intervention in Syria
With the emergence of ISIL and its capture of large areas of Iraq and Syria, a number of crises resulted that sparked international attention. ISIL had perpetrated sectarian killings and war crimes in both Iraq and Syria. Gains made in the Iraq war were rolled back as Iraqi army units abandoned their posts. Cities were taken over by the terrorist group which enforced its brand of Sharia law. The kidnapping and decapitation of numerous Western journalists and aid-workers also garnered interest and outrage among Western powers. The US intervened with airstrikes in Iraq over ISIL held territories and assets in August, and in September a coalition of US and Middle Eastern powers initiated a bombing campaign in Syria aimed at degrading and destroying ISIL and Al-Nusra-held territory.[74]
Libyan intervention[edit]
Main article: Operation Odyssey Dawn
As a result of the Libyan Civil War, the United Nations enacted United Nations Security Council Resolution 1973, which imposed a no-fly zone over Libya, and the protection of civilians from the forces of Muammar Gaddafi. The United States, along with Britain, France and several other nations, committed a coalition force against Gaddafi's forces. On 19 March 2011, the first U.S. action was taken when 114 Tomahawk missiles launched by US and UK warships destroyed shoreline air defenses of the Gaddafi regime.[75] The U.S. continued to play a major role in Operation Unified Protector, the NATO-directed mission that eventually incorporated all of the military coalition's actions in the theater. Throughout the conflict however, the U.S. maintained it was playing a supporting role only and was following the UN mandate to protect civilians, while the real conflict was between Gaddafi's loyalists and Libyan rebels fighting to depose him.[76] During the conflict, American drones were also deployed.[77]
See also[edit]





Military budget of the United States
United States Armed Forces

History of the United States Army

National Museum of the United States Army


History of the United States Marine Corps

National Museum of the Marine Corps


History of the United States Navy

U.S. Navy Museum


History of the United States Air Force

National Museum of the United States Air Force


History of the United States Coast Guard
History of civil affairs in the United States armed forces


United States and weapons of mass destruction
United States Department of Defense
Awards and decorations of the United States military
United States casualties of war





Military of the United States portal



History of minorities in the United States Armed Forces


United States Armed Forces racial desegregation

Military history of African Americans
Military history of Asian Americans
Military history of Hispanic and Latino Americans
Military history of Jewish Americans
Military history of Sikh Americans
Native Americans in the American Civil War
Native Americans and World War II




Related lists


Timeline of United States military operations
United States military deployments
List of conflicts in the United States
List of military operations
List of United States military leaders by rank
List of wars involving the United States
Military history of Canada
Military history of Mexico
Military history of the Philippines, American period





References[edit]


^ Jim Newton (2011). Eisenhower: The White House Years. Random House. p. 129. 
^ John Whiteclay Chambers, ed., The Oxford Guide to American Military History (1999)
^ Jeremy Black, America as a Military Power: From the American Revolution to the Civil War (2002)
^ Fred Anderson, ed. The Oxford Companion to American Military History (2000)
^ Spencer C. Tucker, James Arnold, and Roberta Wiener eds. The Encyclopedia of North American Colonial Conflicts to 1775: A Political, Social, and Military History (2008) excerpt and text search
^ James Titus, The Old Dominion at War: Society, Politics and Warfare in Late Colonial Virginia (1991)
^ Fred Anderson, The War That Made America: A Short History of the French and Indian War (2006)
^ Don Higginbotham, The war of American independence: military attitudes, policies, and practice, 1763–1789 (1983)
^ Lesson Plan on "What Made George Washington a Good Military Leader?" NEH EDSITEMENT
^ Edward G. Lengel, General George Washington: A Military Life (2007)
^ Edward G. Lengel (2012). A Companion to George Washington. Wiley. p. 300. 
^ Richard H. Kohn, Eagle and Sword: The Federalists and the Creation of the Military Establishment in America, 1783–1802 (1975)
^ William B. Kessel and Robert Wooster, eds. Encyclopedia of Native American wars and warfare (2005) pp 50, 123, 186, 280
^ Michael A. Palmer, Stoddert's war: naval operations during the quasi-war with France (1999)
^ Frank Lambert, The Barbary Wars: American Independence in the Atlantic World (2007)
^ J. C. A. Stagg, The War of 1812: Conflict for a Continent (2012)
^ Walter R. Borneman, 1812: The War That Forged a Nation (2005) is an American perspective; Mark Zuehlke, For Honour's Sake: The War of 1812 and the Brokering of an Uneasy Peace (2006) provides a Canadian perspective.
^ Robert W. Merry, A Country of Vast Designs: James K. Polk, the Mexican War and the Conquest of the American Continent (2009) excerpt and text search
^ Justin Harvey Smith, The War with Mexico, Vol 1. (2 vol 1919), full text online; Smith, The War with Mexico, Vol 2. (1919). full text online of Pulitzer prize winning history.
^ K. Jack Bauer, The Mexican War, 1846–1848 (1974); David S. Heidler, and Jeanne T. Heidler, The Mexican War. (2005)
^ Louis P. Masur, The Civil War: A Concise History (2011)
^ Benjamin Bacon, Sinews of War: How Technology, Industry, and Transportation Won the Civil War (1997)
^ Utley, (1984)
^ Jim Leeke, Manila And Santiago: The New Steel Navy in the Spanish–American War (2009)
^ Graham A. Cosmas, An Army for Empire: The United States Army in the Spanish–American War (1998)
^ Richard W. Stewart, "Emergence to World Power 1898–1902" Ch. 15, in "American Military History, Volume I: The United States Army and the Forging of a Nation, 1775–1917", (2004)
^ "The Philippines". Digital History. University of Houston. 22 May 2011. Retrieved 22 May 2011. In December, Spain ceded the Philippines to the United States for $20 million. 
^ William Braisted, United States Navy in the Pacific, 1897–1909 (2008)
^ Brian McAllister Linn, The Philippine War 1899–1902 (University Press of Kansas, 2000). ISBN 0-7006-0990-3
^ Henry J. Hendrix, Theodore Roosevelt's Naval Diplomacy: The U.S. Navy and the Birth of the American Century (2009)
^ James E. Hewes, Jr. From Root to McNamara: Army Organization and Administration, 1900–1963 (1975)
^ Paolo Coletta, Admiral Bradley A. Fiske and the American Navy (1979)
^ Lester D. Langley, The Banana Wars: United States Intervention in the Caribbean, 1898–1934 (2001)
^ Charles Byler, "Pacifying the Moros: American Military Government in the Southern Philippines, 1899–1913" Military Review (May–June 2005) pp 41–45. online
^ John S. D. Eisenhower, Intervention!: The United States and the Mexican Revolution, 1913–1917 (1995)
^ E. Bruce White and Francisco Villa, "The Muddied Waters of Columbus, New Mexico," The Americas 32#1 (July 1975), pp. 72–98 in JSTOR
^ Friedrich Katz, The Secret War in Mexico: Europe, the United States, and the Mexican Revolution (1984)
^ James W. Hurst, Pancho Villa and Black Jack Pershing: The Punitive Expedition in Mexico (2007)
^ Friedrich Katz, "Pancho Villa and the Attack on Columbus, New Mexico," American Historical Review 83#1 (1978), pp. 101–130 in JSTOR
^ Kendrick A. Clements, "Woodrow Wilson and World War I," Presidential Studies Quarterly 34:1 (2004). pp 62+. online edition
^ Anne Venzon, ed., The United States in the First World War: An Encyclopedia (1995)
^ Edward M. Coffman, The War to End All Wars: The American Military Experience in World War I (1998)
^ Robert L. Willett, "Russian Sideshow" (Washington, D.C., Brassey's Inc., 2003), page 267
^ Germany and the Soviet Union were not invited.
^ Emily O. Goldman, Sunken Treaties (1994)
^ Divine, Robert (1969). Roosevelt and World War II. Baltimore, MD, USA: Johns Hopkins University Press. pp. 5–48. 
^ Jeffery S. Underwood, The Wings of Democracy: The Influence of Air Power on the Roosevelt Administration, 1933–1941 (1991) pp 34–35
^ "All in – 'over-sexed, over-paid and over here'". Australia's War 1939–1945. Retrieved 2 March 2008. 
^ "Fact Sheet: Pearl Harbor". Naval History & Heritage Command. United States Navy. Retrieved 13 September 2014. 
"Remembering Pearl Harbor" (PDF). .nationalww2museum.org. The National WWII Museum. Retrieved 13 September 2014. 
Shaw, Daron R. (15 September 2008). The Race to 270: The Electoral College and the Campaign Strategies of 2000 and 2004. University of Chicago Press. p. 162. ISBN 9780226751368. Retrieved 13 September 2014. 
^ Statistical and accounting branch office of the adjutant general p. 76
^ Parrington, Alan (1997). "Mutually Assured Destruction Revisited". Airpower Journal. Retrieved January 11, 2015. 
^ Allan R. Millett, "A Reader's Guide To The Korean War," Journal of Military History (1997) Vol. 61 No. 3; p. 583+ online version
^ James I. Matray, "Truman's Plan for Victory: National Self-Determination and the Thirty-Eighth Parallel Decision in Korea," Journal of American History, Sept. 1979, Vol. 66 Issue 2, pp 314–333, in JSTOR
^ Stanley Sandler, ed., The Korean War: An Encyclopedia (Garland, 1995)
^ John Prados, Vietnam: The History of an Unwinnable War, 1945–1975 (2009)
^ Mark Atwood Lawrence, The Vietnam War: A Concise International History (2010)
^ Spencer Tucker, Vietnam (2000); for coverage of wach major operation see Stanley I. Kutler, ed., Encyclopedia of the Vietnam War (1996) and Spencer C. Tucker, ed. Encyclopedia of the Vietnam War: A Political, Social, and Military History (2001)
^ Mark Clodfelter, The Limits of Air Power: The American Bombing of North Vietnam (2006)
^ Lewis Sorley, Westmoreland: The General Who Lost Vietnam (2011)
^ Robert D. Schulzinger, Time for War: The United States and Vietnam, 1941–1975. (1997) online edition
^ Patrick Hagopian, The Vietnam War in American Memory: Veterans, Memorials, and the Politics of Healing (2009) excerpt and text search
^ George Q. Flynn, The draft, 1940–1973 (1993)
^ Bernard Rostker, I want you!: the evolution of the All-Volunteer Force (2006)
^ Vijay Tiwathia, The Grenada war: anatomy of a low-intensity conflict (1987)
^ Mark Adkin, Urgent Fury: The Battle for Grenada: The Truth Behind the Largest U.S. Military Operation Since Vietnam (1989)
^ Col. Timothy J. Geraghty, USMC (Ret.) (2009). Peacekeepers at War: Beirut 1983—The Marine Commander Tells His Story. Potomac Books, Inc.  ch 8
^ Thomas Donnelly, Margaret Roth and Caleb Baker, Operation Just Cause: The Storming of Panama (1991)
^ Rick Atkinson, Crusade: The Untold Story of the Persian Gulf War (1994)
^ Marc J. O'Reilly, Unexceptional: America's Empire in the Persian Gulf, 1941–2007 (2008) p 173
^ John L. Hirsch and Robert B. Oakley, Somalia and Operation Restore Hope: Reflections on Peacemaking and Peacekeeping (1995)
^ John R. Ballard, Upholding democracy: the United States military campaign in Haiti, 1994–1997 (1998)
^ Richard C. Holbrooke, To End a War (1999) excerpt and text search
^ Christopher N. Koontz, Enduring Voices: Oral Histories of the U.S. Army Experience in Afghanistan, 2003–2005 (2008) online
^ "More than 1,700 bombs dropped in war on ISIL". Al Jazeera. October 24, 2014. Retrieved January 5, 2015. 
^ "U.S. Steps Up Assault on Libya, Firing Four More Tomahawk Missiles at Air Defense Systems". Fox News. 20 March 2011. Retrieved 21 October 2011. 
^ Goldman, Julianna; Johnston, Nicholas (21 March 2011). "Obama Says No Conflict in U.S. Policy, UN Libya Mandate". Bloomberg L.P. Retrieved 21 October 2011. 
^ Hopkins, Nick (21 April 2011). "Drones can be used by Nato forces in Libya, says Obama". The Guardian. London. Retrieved 21 October 2011. 


Further reading[edit]
Main article: Bibliography of United States military history


Allison, William T., Jeffrey G. Grey, Janet G. Valentine. American Military History: A Survey from Colonial Times to the Present (2nd ed. 2012) 416pp
Boyne, Walter J. Beyond the Wild Blue: A History of the U.S. Air Force, 1947–2007 (2nd ed. 2007) 576 pp excerpt
Bradford, James C. (2003). Atlas of American military history. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-521661-5. 
Brown, Jerold E. (2001). Historical Dictionary of the U.S. Army. Greenwood Publishing Group. 
Chambers, John Whiteclay; Fred Anderson (1999). The Oxford companion to American military history. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-507198-6. 
Chambers, John Whiteclay and G. Kurt Piehler, eds. Major Problems in American Military History: Documents and Essays (1988) 408pp excerpts from primary and secondary sources table of contents
Crocker, III, H. W. (2007). Don't Tread on Me: A 400-Year History of America at War. Random House Digital, Inc. ISBN 978-1-4000-5364-3. CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link)
Hacker, Barton C.; Margaret Vining (2007). American Military Technology: The Life Story of a Technology. JHU Press. ISBN 978-0-8018-8772-7. 
Hagan, Kenneth J. and Michael T. McMaster, eds. In Peace and War: Interpretations of American Naval History (2008), essays by scholars
Howarth, Stephen (1999). To Shining Sea: a History of the United States Navy, 1775–1998. Norman, OK: U of Oklahoma Press. ISBN 0-8061-3026-1. 
Hearn, Chester G. Air Force: An Illustrated History: The U.S. Air Force from 1910 to the 21st Century (2008) excerpt and text search
Isenberg, Michael T. Shield of the Republic: The United States Navy in an Era of Cold War and Violent Peace 1945–1962 (1993)
Lookingbill, Brad D. (2010). American Military History. John Wiley and Sons. ISBN 978-1-4051-9052-7. 
Love, Robert W., Jr. (1992). History of the U.S. Navy 2 vol.
Matloff, Maurice (1996). American Military History: 1775–1902. Da Capo Press. ISBN 978-0-938289-70-8. ; numerous editions;
Matloff (1996). American Military History: 1902–1996. Da Capo Press. ISBN 978-0-938289-71-5. ; numerous editions
Millett, Allan R. Semper Fidelis: History of the United States Marine Corps (1980) excerpt and text search
Millett, Allan R., Peter Maslowski and William B. Feis. For the Common Defense: A Military History of the United States from 1607 to 2012 (3rd ed. 2013) excerpt and text search
Morris, James M., ed. Readings in American Military History (2003) 401pp articles by experts
Moten, Matthew (2014). Presidents and Their Generals: An American History of Command in War. Harvard UP. 
Muehlbauer, Matthew S., and David J. Ulbrich. Ways of War: American Military History from the Colonial Era to the Twenty-First Century (Routledge, 2013), 536pp; university textbook; online review
Stewart, Richard W. American military history (2 vol 2010); The current ROTC textbook
Sweeney, Jerry K.; Kevin B. Byrne (2006). A handbook of American military history. U of Nebraska Press. ISBN 978-0-8032-9337-3. 
Urwin, Gregory J. W. (1983). The United States Cavalry: an illustrated history, 1776–1944. University of Oklahoma Press. ISBN 978-0-8061-3475-8. 
Utley, Robert M. (1984) Frontier Regulars: The United States Army and the Indian, 1866–1891
Utley, Robert M. (2002) Indian Wars
Williams, T. Harry (1960). Americans at War: The Development of the American Military System. LSU Press. ISBN 978-0-8071-2474-1. 
U. S. Department of the Army (2001). The Writing of American Military History: A Guide. The Minerva Group, Inc. ISBN 978-0-89875-350-9. 
Woodward, David R. The American Army and the First World War (Cambridge University Press, 2014). 484 pp. online review

Historiography[edit]

Grimsley, Mark. "The American military history master narrative: Three textbooks on the American military experience," Journal of Military History (2015) 79#3 pp 782–802; review of Allison, Millett, and Muehlbauer textbooks


External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Military history of the United States.



Website for Ways of War: American Military History from the Colonial Era to the Twenty-First Century By Muehlbauer and Ulbrich, with additional text, bibliographies and student aids
United States Military Campaigns, Conflicts, Expeditions and Wars Compiled by Larry Van Horn, U.S. Navy Retired
Military History wiki
A Continent Divided: The U.S. – Mexico War, Center for Greater Southwestern Studies, the University of Texas at Arlington
National Indian Wars Association
Instances of Use of United States Forces Abroad, 1798–1993 by U.S. Navy







v
t
e


History of the United States



Timeline



Prehistory
Pre-Columbian
Colonial
America's Critical Period
1776–89
1789–1849
1849–65
1865–1918
1918–45
1945–64
1964–80
1980–91
1991–2008
2008–present





Topics



American Century
Cities
Constitution
Demographic
Diplomatic
Economic
Education
Immigration
Medical
Merchant Marine
Military
Musical
Religious
Slavery
Southern
Technological and industrial
Territorial acquisitions
Territorial evolution
Voting rights
Women








 Category
 Portal












v
t
e


Armed conflicts involving the United States Armed Forces




listed chronologically



Domestic



Shays' Rebellion
Whiskey Rebellion
Fries's Rebellion
Mormon War
Dorr Rebellion
Bleeding Kansas
Utah War
Civil War
Indian Wars
Brooks–Baxter War
Range War
Lincoln County War
Johnson County War
Coal Creek War
Homestead Strike
Battle of Blair Mountain
Bonus Army
Battle of Athens





Foreign



Revolutionary War
Quasi-War
First Barbary War
War of 1812
Second Barbary War
First Sumatran expedition
Second Sumatran expedition
Ivory Coast Expedition
Mexican–American War
First Fiji Expedition
Second Opium War
Second Fiji Expedition
Formosa Expedition
Korean Expedition
Spanish–American War
Philippine–American War
Boxer Rebellion
Banana Wars
Border War
World War I
Russian Civil War
World War II
Korean War
Vietnam War
Invasion of the Dominican Republic
Invasion of Grenada
Lebanese Civil War
Invasion of Panama
Gulf War
Somali Civil War
Bosnian War
Kosovo War
Afghanistan War
Iraq War
War in North-West Pakistan
Libyan Civil War
Intervention against ISIL

Iraq
Syria
Cameroon
Libya







Related articles



List of conflicts in the U.S.
List of wars involving the U.S.
Timeline of U.S. military operations
Length of U.S. participation in major wars
Overseas expansion
Military history
Covert regime-change actions
Casualties of war
Peace movement
List of anti-war organizations
Conscientious objector
War on Terror












v
t
e


United States Armed Forces






 Book
 Portal

A
MC
N
AF
CG


 Category

A
MC
N
AF
CG


Navbox

A
MC
N
AF
CG







Leadership



Commander-in-chief: President of the United States
Secretary of Defense
Deputy Secretary of Defense
Secretary of Homeland Security
Deputy Secretary of Homeland Security
Joint Chiefs of Staff:

Chairman
Vice Chairman


United States Congress: Committees on Armed Services:

Senate
House


Active duty four-star officers
United States military seniority
National Security Act of 1947
Goldwater–Nichols Act





Organization




Service departments



Department of Defense (Secretary): Army (Secretary)
Navy (Secretary)
Air Force (Secretary)
Department of Homeland Security (Secretary): Coast Guard





Branches



Army (Chief of Staff)
Marine Corps (Commandant)
Navy (Chief of Naval Operations)
Air Force (Chief of Staff)
Coast Guard (Commandant)





Reserve components



Reserves:

Army
Marine Corps Reserve
N
AF
CG


National Guard:

A
AF







Civilian auxiliaries



Military Auxiliary Radio System
Merchant Marine
Civil Air Patrol
Coast Guard Auxiliary





Unified Combatant Command



Northern
Central
European
Pacific
Southern
Africa
Special Operations
Strategic
Transportation








Structure



United States Code

Title 10
Title 14
Title 32
Title 50


The Pentagon
Installations
Units:

A
MC
N
AF
CG


Logistics
Media
Unit mottoes





Operations and history



Current deployments
Conflicts
Wars
Timeline
History:

A
MC
N
AF
CG


Colonial
World War II
Civil affairs
African Americans
Asian Americans
Buddhist Americans
Jewish Americans
Muslim Americans
Pakistani Americans
Sikh Americans
Historiography:

Army Center of Military History
MC History Division
Naval History and Heritage Command
Air Force Historical Research Agency


American official war artists:

Army Art Program
AF Art Program







Personnel




Training



MEPS
ASVAB
Recruit training:

A
MC
N
AF
CG


Officer candidate school:

A
MC
N
AF


Warrant:

A
MC


Service academies:

A (prep)
N (prep)
AF (prep)
CG
Merchant Marine


ROTC

A:ECP
MC/N
AF


Medical
Other education





Uniforms



Uniforms:

A
MC
N
AF
CG


Awards & decorations:

Inter-service
A
MC/N
AF
CG
Foreign
International
Devices


Badges:

Identification
A
MC
N
AF
CG







Ranks



Enlisted:

A
MC
N
AF
CG


Warrant officers
Officer:

A
MC
N
AF
CG







Other



Oath:

Enlistment
Office


Creeds & Codes:

Code of Conduct
NCO
A
MC
N
AF
CG


Service numbers:

A
MC
N
AF
CG


Military Occupational Specialty/Rating/Air Force Specialty Code
Pay
Uniform Code of Military Justice
Judge Advocate General's Corps
Military Health System/TRICARE
Separation
Veterans Affairs
Conscription
Chiefs of Chaplains:

A
MC
N
AF
CG










Equipment



A
MC:

vehicles
weapons
other


N
AF
CG




Land



Individual weapons
Crew-served weapons
Vehicles (active)





Sea



All watercraft
Ships:

A
N (active)
AF
CG
MSC


Weapons:

N
CG


Aircraft:

N
CG


Reactors





Air



Aircraft

World War I
active


Aircraft designation
Missiles
Helicopter arms





Other



Nuclear football
Electronics (designations)
Flags:

A
MC
N
AF
CG
Ensign
Jack
Guidons


Food
WMDs:

Nuclear
Biological
Chemical













Legend
A = Army
MC = Marine Corps
N = Navy
AF = Air Force
CG = Coast Guard












v
t
e


United States articles



History




By event



Timeline of U.S. history
Pre-Columbian era
Colonial era

Thirteen Colonies
military history
Continental Congress


American Revolution

War


American frontier
America's Critical Period
Drafting and ratification of Constitution
Federalist Era
War of 1812
Territorial acquisitions
Territorial evolution
Mexican–American War
Civil War
Reconstruction Era
Indian Wars
Gilded Age
Progressive Era
African-American Civil Rights Movement 1865–1895 / 1896–1954
Spanish–American War
Imperialism
World War I
Roaring Twenties
Great Depression
World War II

home front
Nazism in the United States


American Century
Cold War
Korean War
Space Race
Civil Rights Movement
Feminist Movement
Vietnam War
Post-Cold War (1991–2008)
War on Terror

War in Afghanistan
Iraq War


Recent events (2008–present)





By topic



Outline of U.S. history
Demographic
Discoveries
Economic

debt ceiling


Inventions

before 1890
1890–1945
1946–91
after 1991


Military
Postal
Technological and industrial








Geography







Territory

counties
federal district
federal enclaves
Indian reservations
insular zones
minor outlying islands
populated places
states


Earthquakes
Extreme points
Islands
Mountains

peaks
ranges
Appalachian
Rocky


National Park Service

National Parks


Regions

East Coast
West Coast
Great Plains
Gulf
Mid-Atlantic
Midwestern
New England
Pacific
Central
Eastern
Northern
Northeastern
Northwestern
Southern
Southeastern
Southwestern
Western


Rivers

Colorado
Columbia
Mississippi
Missouri
Ohio
Rio Grande
Yukon


Time
Water supply and sanitation








Politics








Federal




Executive



Cabinet
Civil service
Executive departments
Executive Office
Independent agencies
Law enforcement
President of the United States
Public policy





Legislative



House of Representatives

current members
Speaker


Senate

current members
President pro tempore
Vice President







Judicial



Courts of appeals
District courts
Supreme Court





Law



Bill of Rights

civil liberties


Code of Federal Regulations
Constitution

federalism
preemption
separation of powers


Federal Reporter
United States Code
United States Reports





Intelligence



Central Intelligence Agency
Defense Intelligence Agency
Federal Bureau of Investigation
National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency
National Reconnaissance Office
National Security Agency
Office of the Director of National Intelligence





Uniformed



Armed Forces

Army
Marine Corps
Navy
Air Force
Coast Guard


National Guard
NOAA Corps
Public Health Service Corps











51st state

political status of Puerto Rico
District of Columbia statehood movement


Elections

Electoral College


Foreign relations

Foreign policy


Ideologies

anti-Americanism
exceptionalism
nationalism


Local government
Parties

Democratic
Republican
Third parties


Red states and blue states

Purple America


Scandals
State government

governor
state legislature
state court


Uncle Sam











Economy







By sector

Agriculture
Banking
Communications
Energy
Insurance
Manufacturing
Mining
Tourism
Trade
Transportation


Companies

by state


Currency
Exports
Federal budget
Federal Reserve System
Financial position
Labor unions
Public debt
Social welfare programs
Taxation
Unemployment
Wall Street








Society








Culture



Americana
Architecture
Cinema
Cuisine
Dance
Demography
Education
Family structure
Fashion
Flag
Folklore
Languages

American English
Indigenous languages
ASL

Black American Sign Language


HSL
Plains Sign Talk
Arabic
Chinese
French
German
Italian
Russian
Spanish


Literature
Media

Journalism
Internet
Newspapers
Radio
Television


Music
Names
People
Philosophy
Public holidays
Religion
Sexuality
Sports
Theater
Visual art





Social class



Affluence
American Dream
Educational attainment
Homelessness
Home-ownership
Household income
Income inequality
Middle class
Personal income
Poverty
Professional and working class conflict
Standard of living
Wealth





Issues



Ages of consent
Capital punishment
Crime

incarceration


Criticism of government
Discrimination

affirmative action
antisemitism
intersex rights
islamophobia
LGBT rights
racism
same-sex marriage


Drug policy
Energy policy
Environmental movement
Gun politics
Health care

abortion
health insurance
hunger
obesity
smoking


Human rights
Immigration

illegal


International rankings
National security

Mass surveillance
Terrorism


Separation of church and state















Outline
Index



Book
Category
Portal












v
t
e


Military history of North America



Sovereign states



Antigua and Barbuda
Bahamas
Barbados
Belize
Canada
Costa Rica
Cuba
Dominica
Dominican Republic
El Salvador
Grenada
Guatemala
Haiti
Honduras
Jamaica
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama
Saint Kitts and Nevis
Saint Lucia
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
Trinidad and Tobago
United States






Dependencies and
other territories




Anguilla
Aruba
Bermuda
Bonaire
British Virgin Islands
Cayman Islands
Curaçao
Greenland
Guadeloupe
Martinique
Montserrat
Puerto Rico
Saint Barthélemy
Saint Martin
Saint Pierre and Miquelon
Saba
Sint Eustatius
Sint Maarten
Turks and Caicos Islands
United States Virgin Islands











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Military_history_of_the_United_States&oldid=817392573"					Categories: Military history of the United StatesHidden categories: Use dmy dates from May 2013CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list