For other uses, see Minas Gerais (disambiguation).


Minas Gerais


State


State of Minas Gerais






Flag

Coat of arms





Motto(s): Libertas Quæ Sera Tamen (Latin)
"Freedom albeit Late"



Location of State of Minas Gerais in Brazil


Coordinates: 19°49′S 43°57′W﻿ / ﻿19.817°S 43.950°W﻿ / -19.817; -43.950Coordinates: 19°49′S 43°57′W﻿ / ﻿19.817°S 43.950°W﻿ / -19.817; -43.950


Country
 Brazil


Capital and largest city
 Belo Horizonte


Government


 • Governor
Fernando Pimentel (PT)


 • Vice Governor
Antônio Andrade (MDB)


 • Senators
Aécio Neves (PSDB)
Antonio Anastasia (PSDB)
Zezé Perrella (MDB)


Area


 • Total
586,528.29 km2 (226,459.84 sq mi)


Area rank
4th


Population (2012)[1][2]


 • Total
19,855,332


 • Estimate (2015)
20,869,101


 • Rank
2nd


 • Density
34/km2 (88/sq mi)


 • Density rank
14th


Demonym(s)
Mineiro


GDP


 • Year
2015 estimate


 • Total
US$280 billions (PPP) US$157.374 (nominal) (3rd)


 • Per capita
US$13.267 (PPP) US$7.458 (nominal) (11th)


HDI


 • Year
2014


 • Category
0.769 – high (8th)


Time zone
BRT (UTC-3)


 • Summer (DST)
BRST (UTC-2)


Postal Code
30000-000 to 39990-000


ISO 3166 code
BR-MG


Website
mg.gov.br


Minas Gerais (Portuguese pronunciation: [ˈminɐz ʒeˈɾajs])[3] is a state in the north of Southeastern Brazil. It ranks as the second most populous, the third by gross domestic product (GDP), and the fourth largest by area in the country. The state's capital and largest city, Belo Horizonte, is a major urban and finance center in Latin America, and is the sixth largest municipality in Brazil, after the cities of São Paulo, Rio de Janeiro, Salvador, Brasilia and Fortaleza, but its metropolitan area is the third largest in Brazil with just over 5,500,000 inhabitants, after those of São Paulo and Rio de Janeiro.[4] Minas Gerais is the state with the largest number of Brazilian presidents[citation needed].
With an area of 586,528 square kilometres (226,460 sq mi)—larger than Metropolitan France—it is the fourth most extensive state in Brazil. The main producer of coffee and milk in the country, Minas Gerais is known for its heritage of architecture and colonial art in historical cities such as São João del Rei, Congonhas, Ouro Preto, Diamantina, Tiradentes and Mariana. In the south, the tourist points are the hydro mineral spas, such as Caxambu, Lambari, São Lourenço, Poços de Caldas, São Thomé das Letras, Monte Verde and the national parks of Caparaó and Canastra. The landscape of the State is marked by mountains,[5] valleys, and large areas of fertile lands. In the Serra do Cipó, Sete Lagoas, Cordisburgo and Lagoa Santa, the caves and waterfalls are the attractions. Some of Brazil's most famous caverns are located there. In recent years, the state has emerged as one of the largest economic forces of Brazil, exploring its great economic potential.



Contents


1 Etymology
2 Location
3 Geography
4 Geology

4.1 Paleontology


5 History

5.1 Image gallery


6 Demographics

6.1 Major cities
6.2 Religion


7 Economy
8 Communications
9 Education

9.1 Educational institutions


10 Culture

10.1 People
10.2 Cuisine
10.3 Museums
10.4 Music
10.5 Famous personalities


11 Infrastructure

11.1 International Airport
11.2 Administrative Center/ Cidade Administrativa de Minas Gerais
11.3 Highways


12 Sports
13 Flag
14 Cities
15 References
16 External links



Etymology[edit]
Two interpretations are given for the origin of the name Minas Gerais.[6] It comes from "Minas dos Matos Gerais", the former name of the colonial province ("Mines of the General Woods"). So a first and more common understanding affirms that the name simply means "General Mines", with the word Gerais serving as an adjective to the mines, which were themselves spread in several spots around a larger region. Another explanation is that this ignores the two large geographical spaces which conformed the state in its history: the region of the mines (Minas), and the region of the Gerais ("Matos Gerais" or "Campos Gerais", which means something close to "General Fields"). These corresponded to the areas of Sertão which were farther and hard to access (with an economy based on farming and agriculture) from the mining spots (whose economic space was urban from its origin[7]). The confusion comes from the fact that the term "Gerais" is taken as an adjective to "Minas" in the first version, although according to this point of view it refers to the region called Gerais (as a noun). A further complication is that this is not a well-defined area on the map of the state, but rather a designation to these parts outside the mining spots, more related to the geography of Sertão, and more isolated from the state's nucleus.
Location[edit]
Minas Gerais is in the north of the southeastern subdivision of Brazil, which also contains the states of São Paulo, Rio de Janeiro and Espírito Santo. It borders on Bahia (north), Goiás (west and northwest), Mato Grosso do Sul (far west), the states of São Paulo and Rio de Janeiro (south) and the state of Espírito Santo (east). It also shares a short boundary with the Distrito Federal (northwest). Minas Gerais is situated between 14°13'58" and 22°54'00" S latitude and between 39°51'32" and 51°02'35" W longitude. It is larger in area than Metropolitan France or Spain.
Geography[edit]






This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (June 2013) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Minas Gerais features some of the longest rivers in Brazil, most notably the São Francisco, the Paraná and to a lesser extent, the Rio Doce. The state also holds many hydroelectric power plants, including Furnas. Some of the highest peaks in Brazil are in the mountain ranges in the southern part of the state, such as Serra da Mantiqueira and Serra do Cervo, that mark the border between Minas and its neighbors São Paulo and Rio de Janeiro. The most notable one is the Pico da Bandeira, the third highest mountain in Brazil at 2890 m, standing on the border with Espírito Santo state. The state also has huge reserves of iron and sizeable reserves of gold and gemstones, including emerald, topaz and aquamarine mines. Emeralds found in this location are comparable to the best Colombia-origin emeralds, and are most often a bluish-green color.[8]
Each region of the state has a distinct character, geographically and to a certain extent culturally.




Town of Bom Jesus de Matosinhos c.1821-1825



The central and eastern area of the state is hilly and rocky, with little vegetation on the mountains. Around Lagoa Santa and Sete Lagoas a typical Karst topography with caves and lakes is found. Some of the mountains are almost entirely iron ore, which led to extensive mining (in some places at the expense of the environment). Recent advances in environmental policy helped to put limits to mining. About 200 kilometres (120 mi) to the east of Belo Horizonte is the second Metropolitan Region of the state, Vale do Aço (steel valley), which has iron and steel processing companies along the course of the Rio Doce and its tributaries. Vale do Aço's largest cities are Ipatinga, Coronel Fabriciano and Timóteo. Now that mining is restricted large areas of forest are being removed for timber, charcoal and to clear land for cattle ranching. The original forest cover of these inland hills is very much fragmented. The city of Governador Valadares is in the limit of this region with the poorer North.
The south of Minas Gerais is hilly and green, with coffee and milk production. This region is notably cooler than the rest of the state, and some locations are subject to temperatures just below the freezing point during the winter. The region is also famed for its mineral-water resorts, including the cities of Poços de Caldas, Lambari, São Lourenço and Caxambu. Many industries are located at Varginha and Pouso Alegre.
The southeast of the state, called Zona da Mata (Forest Zone) was the richest region until the mid 20th century, nowadays the biggest city, Juiz de Fora, remains an important industrial, cultural and educational center, being also the fourth largest in the Minas state. The day-to-day living in the Zona da Mata however, is better represented by a group of smaller cities like Manhuaçu Além Paraíba, Viçosa, Leopoldina, Cataguases, Muriaé, Ubá, Astolfo Dutra and several others. Those cities put together form a strong economic presence based mostly on agriculture, textiles and minerals. The city of the principal coffee region in Minas Gerais is São João do Manhuaçu situated in Zona da Mata.
The west of Minas Gerais, also known as "Triângulo Mineiro" (which means "the Minas Triangle", due to the geographic shape of this region), is composed of a particular type of savanna, known as the Cerrado. This region was initially occupied by large free-wheeling beef ranches, which are still important for the economy of the region. Over the 1990s, extensive soy and corn farms occupied much of the farming land available. The Cerrado is also one of the principal coffee-growing areas of Brazil. The main cities of this region are Uberlândia, Uberaba, Patos de Minas and Araguari.
The north of Minas Gerais is part of the arid sertão of the Nordeste, and is thus subject to frequent droughts. Recent irrigation projects use the water from the São Francisco river for agriculture; the river crosses the northern region carrying water from its basin in the central area of the state, which is subject to a regular rainfall pattern. The diamond mines of this region, mainly in Diamantina, attracted miners but are now exhausted, and the remaining population lives in poor conditions, especially in the valley of the Jequitinhonha River. The region is, however, known for its high quality cachaça production. Salinas in particular exports large amounts of this alcoholic beverage. The main cities of this region are Montes Claros, Teófilo Otoni, Pirapora and Janaúba.














Serra da Mantiqueira. 













Serra da Canastra National Park. 













Flowers in Serra do Cipó. 













Waterfall in Serra da Canastra. 













Waterfall in Serra do Cipó. 






Geology[edit]
Paleontology[edit]




Maxakalisaurus.


The discovery of the Maxakalisaurus topai (Dinoprata) fossils was a significant paleontological find. The fossil is a genus of titanosaurid dinosaur found 45 kilometers (28 mi) from the city of Prata (Triângulo Mineiro), in the state of Minas Gerais in 1998. It was closely related to Saltasaurus, a sauropod considered unusual because it had evolved apparently defensive traits, including bony plates on its skin and vertical plates along its spine; such osteoderms have also been found for Maxakalisaurus. The genus name is derived from the tribe of the Maxakali.
The Maxakalisaurus fossils belonged to an animal about 13 meters (43.3 ft) long, with an estimated weight of 9 tons, although, according to paleontologist Alexander Kellner, it could reach a length of approximately 20 meters (65 ft). It had a long neck and tail, ridged teeth (unusual among sauropods) and lived about 80 million years ago. Because sauropods seem to have lacked significant competition in South America, they evolved there with greater diversity and more unusual traits than elsewhere in the world. A replica has been displayed at the Museu Nacional in Rio de Janeiro, since August 28, 2006.[9]
History[edit]




Baruch, 18th century Baroque sculpture, by Aleijadinho.


In the colonial era, the Brazilian interior was colonized by Portuguese and bandeirantes. The Brazilian gold rush ushered in an influx of new settlers in search of veins of gold (discovered 1693) and gems, and later diamonds which come from the naturally occurring itacolumite rock that can be found in great numbers in the region. These helped to boost occupation of the inner lands and led to the foundation of several new villages. In 1697, the Portuguese used enslaved African labor to start building the Estrada Real, the "royal road," that would connect the ports of cities of Rio de Janeiro and Paraty to the mineral-rich regions of Ouro Preto, Serro, and, at the northernmost point, Diamantina.
Prior to 1720, Minas Gerais was part of the captaincy of São Vicente (later renamed São Paulo e Minas de Ouro). The first capital of Minas Gerais, and seat of the local see, was the city of Mariana; it was later moved to Vila Rica. In the late 18th century, Vila Rica was the largest city in Brazil and one of the most populous in America. As the gold mines were exhausted over the 19th century, the city lost its importance; it was later renamed Ouro Preto and remained the state capital until the construction of the all-new, planned city of Belo Horizonte at the turn of the 20th century. The gold cycle left its mark in cities such as Mariana, Ouro Preto, Diamantina, Sabará, Tiradentes and São João del Rei. The relative isolation from European influence, added to the huge influx of gold and other valuable minerals, helped the local people to develop their own style of art, which became known as Barroco Mineiro. Prime examples of this period are the richly decorated churches in the colonial cities. The most important artist of this period was Antônio Francisco Lisboa, who became known as Aleijadinho. His sculptural and architectural work is highly valued by experts as one of the most refined artistic expressions outside Europe at that time.
In addition to art and architecture, there was an explosion of musical activity in Minas Gerais in the 18th century. Printed copies of European music, as well as accomplished musicians, made the journey to the area, and soon a local school of composition and performance was born and achieved considerable sophistication. Several composers worked in Minas Gerais in the 18th century, mainly in Vila Rica (now Ouro Preto), Sabará, Mariana, and other cities. Some of the names which have survived include José Joaquim Emerico Lobo de Mesquita, Marcos Coelho Netto, Francisco Gomes da Rocha and Ignácio Parreiras Neves; they cultivated a style related to the classical European style but marked by more a more chordal, homophonic sound, and they usually wrote for mixed groups of voices and instruments.
Guimarães Rosa's literature is mostly situated in Minas Gerais, with locations widely located across the State (hence the term General, although more concentrated in its north) rather than delimited and identifiable. This northern area began to be colonized (with brutal conflicts with the large Amerindian population who lived in some parts, especially in Vale do Jequitinhonha) and became accessible to colonists departing from Bahia up north, which made the Portuguese crown insert the region within the state of Minas Gerais's borders in order to prevent gold and diamond smuggling from people trying to avoid colonial taxation and oversight; thus the state of MG was closely watched by the crown because of its tax revenue.




People of Minas Gerais c.1820-1825


During the 18th century, mining exploration was strongly controlled by the Portuguese Crown, which imposed heavy taxes on everything extracted (one fifth of all gold would go to the Crown). Several rebellions were attempted by the colonists, always facing strong reaction by the imperial crown. One of the most important was the Felipe dos Santos revolt that ended with his execution but also with the separation of Minas Gerais of São Paulo. The most notable one, however, was the Inconfidência, started in 1789 by group of middle-class colonists, mostly intellectuals and young officers. They were inspired by the American and French Enlightenment ideals. The conspiracy failed and the rebels were arrested and exiled. The most famous of them, Joaquim José da Silva Xavier (known as Tiradentes), was hanged by order of Queen Maria I of Portugal, becoming a local hero and a national martyr of Brazil. The Minas Gerais flag—a red triangle on a white background, along with the Latin motto "Libertas quæ sera tamen", "freedom albeit late"—is based on the design for the national flag proposed by the "Inconfidentes", as the rebels became known.
In the economic history of Brazil, Minas Gerais plays a pivotal role in shifting the economic axis from the Brazilian northeast (based on sugarcane, that starts declining in the 18th century) to the southeast of the country, which still remains the major economic center. The large amounts of gold found in the region attracted the attention of Portugal back to Brazil, progressively turning Rio de Janeiro into an important port city, from where these would be shipped to Portugal and where the Portuguese crown would eventually move its administration in 1808 after Napoleon Bonaparte's invasion of Portugal (see Transfer of the Portuguese Court to Brazil).
Due to the economic importance of the state and the particular traits of the local population—famed for its reserved and balanced character—Minas Gerais has also played an important role on national politics. During the 19th century, politicians such as José Bonifácio de Andrada e Silva were instrumental in the establishment of the Brazilian Empire under the rule of Dom Pedro I and later his son, Dom Pedro II. After the installation of the Brazilian Republic, during the early 20th century, Minas Gerais shared the control of the national political scene with São Paulo in what became known as the "Coffee with Milk" (café com leite) political cycle (coffee being the major product of São Paulo, and milk representing Minas Gerais' dairy industry, despite the latter also being an important coffee producer).
Minas Gerais was also home to two of the most influential Brazilian politicians of the second half of the 20th century. Juscelino Kubitschek was president from 1956 to 1961, and he was responsible for the construction of Brasília as the new capital of Brazil. Tancredo Neves had an extensive political career that culminated with his election in 1984 to be the first civil president after the 1964 military countercoup. However, he died after a series of health complications just as he was about to assume the position. Also, Itamar, Brazil's previous president, lived there, though he was not born in Minas.
See also the List of Governors of Minas Gerais.
Image gallery[edit]













Ouro Preto and its colonial Portuguese architecture. 













Minas Gerais, 1865. 













Sanctuary of Bom Jesus de Matozinhos in Congonhas 













Ouro Preto 













São João del Rei 













Inconfidência Mineira 






Demographics[edit]
According to the IBGE of 2008, there were 19,765,000 people residing in the state. The population density was 32.73 inhabitants per square kilometre (84.8/sq mi). Urbanization: 85% (2006); Population growth: 1.4% (1991–2000); Houses: 5,741,000 (2006).[10]
The last PNAD (National Research for Sample of Domiciles) census revealed the following numbers: 9,091,000 White people (46%), 8,927,000 Brown (Multiracial) people (45%), 1,802,000 Black people (9%), 40,000 Asian people (0.2%), 37,000 Amerindian people (0.2%).[11]
Ethnic groups found in Minas Gerais include: Amerindians, Portuguese, Africans, Italians, Germans and Lebanese.
The ethnic composition of the population varies from town to town. For example, in Córrego do Bom Jesus, a small town located in the extreme south of Minas Gerais, White people make up 98.7% of the population.[12] The South of Minas Gerais is both the most European and the most densely populated part of the state. On the other hand, in Setubinha, located in the northeast part of the state, 71.8% are mixed-race and 14.7% Blacks.[12] It is historically explainable: southern Minas Gerais, in the border with São Paulo, received larger numbers of Portuguese farmers in colonial times. In the late 19th century, Italian immigrants also arrived. The north region, close to Bahia, was a place to the arrival of many African slaves since the 18th century. The central part of the state, where the capital Belo Horizonte is, has a more balanced ratio between Whites, Blacks and mixed people.




Downtown of Uberlândia, largest city in the state after Belo Horizonte.






Indians visiting a Brazilian farm plantation in Minas Gerais, 1824


The population of Minas Gerais is the result of an intense mixture of peoples, particularly between Black Africans and Portuguese.[13] In colonial Minas Gerais, the population was divided in five different categories: Whites, mostly Portuguese; Africans, who often did not have a surname and were usually known for their region of origin (for example Francisca Benguela would refer to Benguela); Crioulos (Black people born in Brazil, usually to both African parents); Mulattoes (people of mixed Black and White ancestry, usually born to a Black mother and a Portuguese father) and Cabras (people of mixed ancestry, usually with high degree of Amerindian admixture). Blacks and Mulattoes predominated in the population after the beginning of the colonization.[13] By the 19th century, however, whites were already the largest single group in the Minas Gerais population.[14] Taking the population as a whole (all groups included), European genes account for the majority of the Minas Gerais genetic heritage, which has been explained on the basis of the extremely high mortality rates of the enslaved African population and lower reproductive rate of African slaves (the vast majority of them were males, among other reasons for their lower reproductive success)[14] The Amerindian population was hit hard by the diseases brought by the European colonists and they did not have much of an impact either, especially in Minas Gerais, where European presence and colonization was massive.[14]
During the colonial period, the disproportion between the number of men and women was quite sharp. The census of 1738 in Serro do Frio, which included Diamantina, revealed that of the 9,681 inhabitants, 83.5% were men and 16.5% women. Among the slaves, women were only 3.1%.[13] The number of free "women of color" (Blacks and Mulattoes) was very high. The same census revealed that 63% of the former slaves were women and only 37% men. Since interracial relationships between "women of color" and White men were widespread, the female slaves were more likely to be freed than the male slaves.[13]
The monogamous family structure that the Catholic Church tried to deploy in colonial Brazil was the exception in Minas Gerais. At that time cohabitation and temporary relationships predominated in Minas Gerais, as well as in Brazil as a whole.[13] Monogamy and weddings in churches would only take root in Brazil in the 19th century, fitting the moral standards imposed by the Church. The role of women in colonial Minas Gerais was much more dynamic than it would be allowed by the standards of the time. Many women used to live on their own, were heads of family and worked, particularly the "women of color" and former slaves.[13] The society of Minas Gerais provided a great social mobility to former slaves, mainly for women. In Tejuco, the percentage of White males who were head of family (37.7%) was very similar to the percentage of Black women who were head of family (38.5%). Many former slaves were able to accumulate goods and many of them became slave owners as well. Some Blacks and mainly Mulattos were able to integrate themselves in the highest social stratum of the society of Minas Gerais, once restricted to Whites. This happened through a process of "whitening" their descendence and through the assimilation of the culture of the White elite, like being members of Catholic brotherhoods.[13]
Cohabitation was the most common crime in Minas Gerais. The Catholic Church was strict in the punishment of this crime, in order to prevent the widespread miscegenation between White, mostly Portuguese males with Black or Mulatto women.[13]
According to a 2013 autosomal DNA study, the ancestral composition of the state of Minas Gerais can be described as: 59,20% European, 28,90% African and 11,90% Native American [15] A genetic study (with a few samples and not covering the most populated part of the state, the South of Minas Gerais), suggested that the "Whites" from Minas Gerais would have slightly lower levels of European (at 71%) ancestry among the Brazilian regions and higher levels (at 16%) of African admixture, with significant Amerindian (13%) admixture, the European reference population in the study being 95% European, 2.8% Native American and 2.6% African, which would give an actual percentage of European ancestry of about 75% actual European ancestry, and less than 15% of each, Native American and African ancestries.[16]
According to another study, however, the European ancestry is dominant throughout Brazil at about 77%,[17] Minas Gerais included (and this taking into account the whole of the population of Minas Gerais, "white", "pardos" and "blacks"). "A new portrayal of each ethnicity contribution to the DNA of Brazilians, obtained with samples from the five regions of the country, has indicated that, on average, European ancestors are responsible for nearly 80% of the genetic heritage of the population. The variation between the regions is small, with the possible exception of the South, where the European contribution reaches nearly 90%. The results, published by the scientific magazine American Journal of Human Biology by a team of the Catholic University of Brasília, show that, in Brazil, physical indicators such as skin colour, colour of the eyes and colour of the hair have little to do with the genetic ancestry of each person, which has been shown in previous studies".[18]
During the time of the gold rush, the largest European immigration of the colonial period, to all of the Americas, took place, about 600,000 Portuguese immigrated to Brazil during the gold rush, and most of them to Minas Gerais, the place where the gold rush activities took place.[19] Most of them came from Entre Douro e Minho, in Northern Portugal.[20] The reference book for a large number of these families is "Velhos Troncos Mineiros" (Old Mineiro Branches) by Raimundo Trindade. The Native American population of Minas Gerais was estimated to be at 97,000 in 1500, by the time the Portuguese arrived in Brazil in 1500 (John Hemming in "Red Gold: The Conquest of the Brazilian Indians").
Major cities[edit]



 


v
t
e


Largest cities or towns in Minas Gerais
(2011 census of Instituto Brasileiro de Geografia e Estatística)[21]




Rank
Name
Mesoregion
Pop.
Rank
Name
Mesoregion
Pop.




Belo Horizonte

Uberlândia
1
Belo Horizonte
[[]]
2385639
11
Sete Lagoas
[[]]
216399

Contagem

Juiz de Fora


2
Uberlândia
[[]]
611903
12
Divinópolis
[[]]
215246


3
Contagem
[[]]
608714
13
Santa Luzia
[[]]
204327


4
Juiz de Fora
[[]]
520810
14
Ibirité
[[]]
160943


5
Betim
[[]]
383570
15
Poços de Caldas
[[]]
153725


6
Montes Claros
[[]]
366134
16
Patos de Minas
[[]]
139848


7
Ribeirão das Neves
[[]]
299728
17
Teófilo Otoni
[[]]
135153


8
Uberaba
[[]]
299360
18
Pouso Alegre
[[]]
132445


9
Governador Valadares
[[]]
264960
19
Barbacena
[[]]
127217


10
Ipatinga
[[]]
241538
20
Sabará
[[]]
127096


Religion[edit]




Oscar Niemeyer's Church of São Francisco de Assis, in Pampulha.




Religion
Percentage
Number


Catholics
79%
14,091,479


Protestants
14%
2,437,186


No religion
4.6%
822,855


Spiritists
1.6%
284,336


Umbandists
0.1%
20,223


Source: IBGE 2000.[22]
Economy[edit]




This satellite photograph illustrates the diverse agricultural landscape in the western part of Minas Gerais.


The service sector is the largest component of GDP at 47.1%, followed by the industrial sector at 44.1%. agriculture represents 8.8% of GDP (2004). Main exports: mineral products 44.4%, metals 15.8%, vegetable products 13%, precious metals 5.5%, foodstuffs 4.9%, transportation 3.5% (2012).[23]
Share of the Brazilian economy: 9% (2005).
Minas Gerais (or simply Minas, as it is commonly called) is a major producer of milk, coffee and other agricultural commodities, as well as minerals. Electronics are also produced in Minas. The automakers Fiat and Mercedes-Benz have factories there. Tourism is also an important activity for the state: historical cities like Ouro Preto, Mariana, Sabará, Congonhas, Diamantina, Tiradentes, and Sao João del Rey, are a major attractive for visitors interested in their colonial architecture. Other cities, like Araxá, Poços de Caldas, Lambari, Caxambu, Lavras, and others, attract visitors interested in their mineral watersprings. Eco-tourism is a rising economic activity in the state, specially in localities situated on the several Serras (highlands) that exist in Minas Gerais.
The state has marked economic divisions. The southern part of the state (close to the São Paulo and Rio de Janeiro state borders) has several mid-sized cities with solid industrial bases such as Juiz de Fora, Varginha, Pouso Alegre, and Poços de Caldas, as well as Ipatinga in the east of the state, which is also a modern and major industrial city and Itabira, considered mother city of mining company Vale, that has stocks quoted in Bovespa and NYSE. The northeastern region is marked by poverty, but Governador Valadares[24] and Teófilo Otoni attract foreign traders for the semi-precious gems such as topaz and sapphire. The central region of the state (where the capital is located) has big reserves of iron (and to a lesser extent, gold) still being actively mined. There are also large companies installed the automotive industry, as manufacturers FIAT in Betim, IVECO in Sete Lagoas and suppliers of auto-parts, as STOLA and USIPARTS. The western part, the "Triângulo Mineiro", is less densely populated than the rest of the state, and it is now a focus of biotechnology investment, particularly on the cities of Uberlândia, Uberaba, Patos de Minas and Araguari, which includes leading research on cattle, soy and corn culture.
Communications[edit]
As of April 2007, there are 11.3 million mobile phones and 4.2 million telephones in the country.[25]
Minas Gerais (MG) cities area phone codes (called DDD in Brazil) are from 31 to 38.[26]
Education[edit]
Minas Gerais is home to some of the best schools in the country, both at the secondary and higher levels. It is also the state that contains the largest number of Federal Universities, public universities maintained directly by the federal government.
Educational institutions[edit]




Pontifical Catholic University of Minas Gerais



Universidade do Estado de Minas Gerais (UEMG) (State University of Minas Gerais)
Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais (UFMG) (Federal University of Minas Gerais)
Universidade Federal de Uberlândia (UFU) (Federal University of Uberlandia)
Universidade Federal de Lavras (UFLA) (Federal University of Lavras)
Universidade Federal de Ouro Preto (UFOP) (Federal University of Ouro Preto)
Universidade Federal de Viçosa (UFV) (Federal University of Viçosa)
Universidade Federal de Juiz de Fora (UFJF) (Federal University of Juiz de Fora)
Universidade Federal de Itajuba (Unifei) (Federal University of Itajuba)
Universidade Federal de São João del Rei (UFSJ) (Federal University of São João del Rei)
Universidade Federal do Triângulo Mineiro (UFTM) (Federal University of Triangulo Mineiro)
Universidade Federal dos Vales do Jequitinhonha e Mucuri (UFVJM) (Federal University of Jequitinhonha and Murici Valleys)
Universidade Federal de Alfenas (Unifal-MG) (Federal University of Alfenas)
Centro Federal de Educação Tecnológica de Minas Gerais (CEFET-MG) (Federal Center for Technological Education of Minas Gerais)
Pontifícia Universidade Católica de Minas Gerais (PUC-MG) (Pontifical Catholic University of Minas Gerais)
Faculdade de Ciências Medicas de Minas Gerais (FCMMG) (Minas Gerais' School of Medical Sciences)
Universidade Estadual de Montes Claros (Unimontes) (State University of Montes Claros)
Escola Preparatória de Cadetes do Ar (EPCAr) (Preparatory School for Air Cadets)
Colégio Técnico/UFMG (Coltec)
Colégio Aplicação/UFV
Colégio Militar de Belo Horizonte (CMBH) (Belo Horizonte Military School)

Culture[edit]






This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (June 2013) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)







Baroque churches in Mariana.


Minas Gerais may be called Deep Brazil by analogy with France profonde. It has a distinctly more native flavour than cosmopolitan São Paulo, a more traditional slant than flashy Rio de Janeiro, and is more Portuguese than the South and São Paulo with their great influx of Italians and other Central Europeans, the North with its Native Americans, or the Northeast with its heavy Afro-Brazilian influence.
People[edit]
Those born and raised in Minas Gerais, also called Mineiros, bear an unmistakable accent that sets them apart from fellow Brazilians, although people born in different regions of the state bear slightly different accents, some resembling those of neighboring states, such as São Paulo, Rio de Janeiro and Bahia. They are considered reserved, prudent, relatively silent to the point of melancholy but welcoming and family-focused. It is one of the most religious states, with a large proportion of staunch Roman Catholics and a burgeoning Evangelical and neo-Pentecostal population, with pockets of African religions. The Spiritist doctrine is also professed by a significant portion of the population, partly due to the influence of Chico Xavier, the main spiritual icon of Brazil, who lived in Minas Gerais all his life.
Cuisine[edit]
Minas Gerais is known nationally for its cuisine. The cultural basis of its cuisine is the small farmhouse, and many of the dishes are prepared using locally produced vegetables and meats, especially chicken and pork. Traditional cooking is done using coal- or wood-fired ovens and cast iron pans, making for a particularly tasty flavor; some restaurant chains have adopted these techniques and made this type of food popular in other parts of the country.
Many of the cakes and appetizers of the local cuisine use corn or cassava (known there as mandioca) flour instead of wheat, as the latter did not adapt well to the local weather. The best-known dish from Minas Gerais is "pão de queijo", a small baked roll (known internationally as "Brazilian cheese rolls") made with cheese and cassava flour that can be served hot as an appetizer or for breakfast.
The state is also Brazil's most traditional producer of cheese. Minas cheese is renowned nationwide as the distinct Brazilian cheese. Cachaça is also a local produce of some importance.
The state cuisine is showcased in various festivals year round and in many locations throughout the state, but the biggest festival is the month-long Comida de Buteco in Belo Horizonte, where 41 bars and restaurant are selected to create a dish using ingredients traditional to local cuisine. People from all over the country and abroad rate the food, the temperature of the beer, the ambiance and service. In 2007, over 400,000 people participated in the festival according to Vox Populi statistics.
Museums[edit]




Yayoi Kusama at the Inhotim in Brumadinho


Mariano Procópio Museum, in Juiz de Fora, and Centro de Arte Contemporânea Inhotim, in Brumadinho, are among the most important cultural institutions.
Music[edit]
Music is one of the most striking features of Minas Gerais and has been part of the history of the state since the early 16th and 17th centuries.
From the 18th century, composers including Jose Joaquim Lobo de Mesquita, Francisco Gomes da Rocha, Marcos Coelho Neto and Manoel de Oliveira Dias reinforced the musical tradition of Minas with the composition of baroque pieces that are now revered as masterpieces. For classical music, the state features productions and performances of various orchestras and choirs.
Among them there are the Symphonic Orchestra of Minas Gerais and the Coral Lírico de Minas Gerais, a State Choir, maintained by Clovis Salgado Foundation, an institution linked to the Secretary of State for Culture. These and other groups have a strong presence in the capital and throughout the state, working for the popularization and democratization of classical music. One of the most prolific contemporary composers was born in Minas Gerais, Prof. Dr. Andersen Viana, which music has been recognized most frequently abroad.
The most varied rhythms and sounds have their origins in the state. Ary Barroso, who in 1939 composed one of Brazil's best known songs throughout the world, Aquarela do Brasil, was born in Ubá, in the Zona da Mata Mineira.
In the 1960s and 70s streets in the traditional neighborhood of Santa Tereza, Belo Horizonte, were the scene of one of the most important movements of national music: Clube da Esquina. With a unique blend of Brazilian popular music with pop and jazz, the Club was met with talents like Milton Nascimento, Wagner Tiso, Toninho Horta, Fernando Brant, Lô Borges, Beto Guedes, and Flávio Venturini.
In the 1980s and 90s a scene of Heavy Metal bands has been held in Belo Horizonte. It's the origin of important Brazilian bands of this genre, many of them are know worldwide, such as Sepultura, Sarcófago, Overdose, Mutilator, Holocausto and Chakal.
The current scenario continues reflecting the vibrancy and dynamism of its culture. A new generation of artists is represented by names like Skank, Pato Fu, Jota Quest, Vander Lee, Uakti, Marina Machado, Maurício Tizumba, Berimbrown, Copo Lagoinha and Amaranto.
Moving freely through different rhythms like rock, reggae, heavy metal, samba and MPB, among others, the music in Minas Gerais continues the excellence and diversity that has always been a staple in the country.
The important International Festival of Colonial Brazilian Music and Ancient Music takes place in Juiz de Fora since 1989.
Brazil's most prestigious dance company, Grupo Corpo is also from Minas Gerais, having its headquarters in Belo Horizonte.
Famous personalities[edit]
Many famous Brazilian writers were born in Minas Gerais: Carlos Drummond de Andrade, Fernando Sabino, Pedro Nava, Murilo Mendes and João Guimarães Rosa. Aviation pioneer Alberto Santos-Dumont was born in Minas Gerais, as well as various politicians, such as Presidents Afonso Pena, Venceslau Brás, Delfim Moreira, Artur Bernardes, Juscelino Kubitschek, Tancredo Neves and Dilma Rousseff. Former president Itamar Franco is usually included in lists of presidents born in Juiz de Fora, Minas Gerais, but he was actually born prematurely in a ship travelling in the Atlantic Ocean. Minas Gerais is often recognized abroad as the state where the footballer Pelé was born (he has lived in the state of São Paulo since childhood, though).
Infrastructure[edit]
International Airport[edit]
Tancredo Neves International Airport is located in the municipalities of Lagoa Santa and Confins, 38 km (23 mi) from Belo Horizonte, and was opened in January 1984. It was planned from the start for future expansion in steps to meet growing demand. The airport has one of the lowest rates of shutdown for bad weather in the country. However, the Confins airport was not using much of its capacity until 2005, when it was decided that a large part of the Pampulha Airport flights (which is smaller and located inside Belo Horizonte's urban area) would move to Confins.
The first step was undertaken with careful concern for the environment, including monitoring by specialized consultants, since the region has a rich archeological heritage. Among the hundreds of caverns in the region, the one at Lapa Vermelha stands out. Located 2.7 km (1.6 mi) from the airport, the oldest female cranium in the Americans was discovered there, dated at roughly 12 thousand years old. Confins is certified by the ISO 9001 standard, covering ten processes in the administrative, operational, safety/security and maintenance areas.
The Tancredo Neves International Airport is currently the fifth busiest airport in the country, after Guarulhos, Congonhas, Brasília and Galeão. It is a main hub for Azul. In addition to direct flights to over 40 destinations in Brazil, it also has regular scheduled international services to Buenos Aires, Panama City, Miami and Lisbon.
In 2014 the airport was auctioned to the private sector. Renovations were concluded in 2016. A new terminal was built with 17 new jetways, increasing the airport's capacity to 22 million passengers a year and the runway is undergoing expansion. A new runway is planned to be built by 2020.
Administrative Center/ Cidade Administrativa de Minas Gerais[edit]




Palácio Tiradentes, the seat of government of Minas Gerais


A new Administrative Center was completed in March 2010, for the state of Minas Gerais. Designed by the internationally renowned architect Oscar Niemeyer, the center consists of four large buildings on an 800,000 square meter site. Two buildings accommodate 17 of the state ministries, the third building consists of an auditorium, with capacity for 540 guests. The fourth and most impressive building is the "Palacio do Governo", which is the world's largest suspended structure, built in reinforced concrete. The building has a 150m span and its roof is supported by 4 columns.
Highways[edit]




Fernão Dias highway


Minas Gerais is the Brazilian state that harbors the highest mileage of highways. The state highway network is 269,545 kilometers, of which only 11,396 on federal roads and 21,472 on state highways and state coincide, corresponding to all other municipal roads. Because of its central position, the state is crossed by the most important national highways, like BR-116 (Rio-Bahia), BR-040 (Rio-Brasília) and others. Many of the most important Brazilian routes cross the state and, for this reason, it counts the greater proportion of car accidents per capita.
BR-122, BR-040, BR-135, BR-146, BR-251, BR-259, BR-265, BR-265, BR-265, BR-265, BR-267, BR-352, BR-354, BR-356, BR-356, BR-364, BR-367, BR-367, BR-367, BR-381, BR-381, BR-383, BR-383, BR-393, BR-459, BR-462, BR-464, BR-491.
Sports[edit]






This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (June 2013) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



As in the rest of Brazil, football is the most popular sport among locals. Pelé, widely considered the best footballer of all time, was born in the Minas city of Três Corações.[27] Belo Horizonte is home to two of the most successful teams in the country, and the city also has one of the biggest football stadiums in the world, the Mineirão, opened in 1965. Reopened after renovations in 2013, Mineirão was chosen as one of the venues for the 2014 FIFA World Cup, and also the soccer tournament of the 2016 Summer Olympics.[28] Another stadium in Belo Horizonte, Independência Stadium, was one of the venues of the 1950 FIFA World Cup,[29] where it hosted a legendary upset of the United States team over England.[30]
The biggest teams of Belo Horizonte and Minas as a whole are Atlético Mineiro, founded in 1908 and nicknamed "Galo" (rooster) after its mascot, and Cruzeiro, founded in 1921 as "Palestra Itália" by the members of the local Italian community - but renamed in the 1940s as the government of Getúlio Vargas forbid mentions to the Axis powers. Atlético won one edition of the Campeonato Brasileiro Série A in 1971, two CONMEBOL Cups (the predecessor of the current Copa Sudamericana), is the biggest winner of the State Championship with 41 titles, one title of the Libertadores Cup Champion in 2013 and one Copa do Brasil title in 2014. Cruzeiro won 36 state championships, won four times the Brazilian Championship, defeating Pelé's Santos in the 1966 Taça Brasil, the 2003 Campeonato Brasileiro Série A (which combined with a state championship and a Brazilian Cup in the same year lead to a treble named by Cruzeiro as "Triple Crown"), won the 2013 and 2014 national league. Cruzeiro has been one of Brazil's most successful clubs since the 1960s, being elected the most successful Brazilian team of the 20th century by IFFHS. Its titles include 4 editions of the Brazilian Cup, 4 Brazilian Championships and 2 Copa Libertadores in 1976 and 1997. Cruzeiro is one of the only five clubs to have never been relegated in the National League, while Atlético missed the 2006 edition, following a relegation in the previous year (2005).
Belo Horizonte is also home to América Mineiro, founded in 1912 current owner of Independência and considered the third force of the state. While the team's struggles combined with the popularization of Atlético and Cruzeiro reduced América's supporters, the team has won both the second and third levels of the Brazilian Championship, the Sul-Minas Cup in 2000, and 16 state championships, including a record dynasty of ten tournaments between 1916 and 1925.[31] Both Villa Nova of Nova Lima and Betim Esporte Clube (when it was known as Ipatinga Futebol Clube) have won the state championship and been in Série A of the Brazilian league.
Besides football, Belo Horizonte has one of the largest attendances at volleyball matches in the whole country. Multisport club Minas Tênis Clube had its male and female teams win the Brazilian Superleague of Volleyball, with Contagem-based Sada Cruzeiro also winning the male tournament. Sada-Cruzeiro also won the FIVB World Club Championship two times in last 3 years, being one of the most successful volleyball team in the world. The Brazil national volleyball team has had some of its highest attendance numbers at Mineirinho, an arena located near the Mineirão stadium.[32] On basketball, both Minas and Uberlândia's Uberlândia Tênis Clube are in the national tournament.
Flag[edit]
The flag of the state of Minas Gerais is the oldest one adopted in Brazil that was devised by Brazilians. It was remembered by the Republican Party, which opposed the Brazilian Imperial Government, and adopted unofficially as the flag of the state. It has been the official state flag since 1963.[33]




Belo Horizonte


The flag's Latin inscription, "Libertas quæ sera tamen", means "Freedom albeit late", and was the motto of the Inconfidência Mineira, which fought for Minas' independence from Portugal in the 18th century. The phrase was taken from Virgil's Eclogues, Eclogue 1. The triangle is said to represent God as a Trinity,[33] and the three ideals of the French Revolution: Liberté, Egalité, Fraternité. The colors were chosen for their revolutionary meaning: white represents the desire to forming a peaceful nation, discarding all colonial institutions, and red symbolises the flame of liberty and/or the blood of Inconfidencia martyrs, such as Tiradentes, or "The Dentist" revolutionary.
Cities[edit]
Main article: List of municipalities in Minas Gerais
In spite of not being the largest state of Brazil and ranking second in population, Minas Gerais has the largest number of cities. Of the more than 5,500 municipalities in the country, Minas has 853 of them, a fact explained by the number of inhabitants and by the vast territory, comparable in area to Madagascar and larger than Metropolitan France. The most notable cities are: the capital Belo Horizonte, Contagem, Betim, Juiz de Fora, Varginha, Muriae, Montes Claros, Uberlândia, Governador Valadares, Ipatinga, Ouro Preto, Sete Lagoas, Uberaba, Patos de Minas, Divinópolis, Barbacena, Pouso Alegre, Conselheiro Lafaiete, Mariana, Poços de Caldas, São João del Rei and Viçosa.
References[edit]


^ "Instituto Brasileiro de Geografia e Estatística". IBGE. 2012-08-31. Retrieved 2013-06-08. 
^ "Minas Gerais". IBGE. IBGE. Retrieved 16 January 2016. 
^ The presented pronunciation is in Brazilian Portuguese. The Iberian Portuguese pronunciation is [ˈminɐʒ ʒɨˈɾajʃ].
^ "Sala de imprensa | notícias | IBGE divulga as estimativas populacionais dos municípios em 2012". IBGE. Retrieved 2013-06-08. 
^ (PDF) (in Portuguese). Federal University of Viçosa http://www.coluni.ufv.br/revista-antiga/docs/volume02/existemMontanhas.pdf.  Missing or empty |title= (help)
^ João Batista de Almeida Costa. Os Berços de Minas Gerais
^ João Antônio de Paula: Raízes da Modernidade em Minas Gerais. Belo Horizonte: Editora Autêntica, 2000
^ Arem, Joel Beryl Gemology Information Retrieved December 30, 2014.
^ http://acd.ufrj.br/~museuhp/CP/Bol-Geol/Bol%20Geol%20Kellner%20-%20PDF.pdf
^ Source: PNAD
^ "Sistema IBGE de Recuperação Automática - SIDRA". Sidra.ibge.gov.br. Retrieved 2013-06-08. 
^ a b "Sistema IBGE de Recuperação Automática - SIDRA". Sidra.ibge.gov.br. Retrieved 2013-06-08. 
^ a b c d e f g h Júnia Ferreira Furtado (2009). Chica da Silva e o Contratador de Diamantes- o Outro Lado do Mito. Companhia das Letras. pp. 403–403. 
^ a b c "Domínio Público — Pesquisa Básica" (PDF). Dominiopublico.gov.br. Retrieved 2013-06-08. 
^ http://www.plosone.org/article/fetchObject.action?
^ "Admixture in White Brazilians". Scielo.br. Retrieved 2013-06-08. 
^ Lins, TC; Vieira, RG; Abreu, BS; Grattapaglia, D; Pereira, RW (2009-07-28). "Genetic composition of Brazilian population samples based on a set of twenty-eight ancestry informative SNPs". Am. J. Hum. Biol. 22: 187–92. doi:10.1002/ajhb.20976. PMID 19639555. Retrieved 2013-06-08. 
^    (1970-01-01). "Folha Online - Ciência - DNA de brasileiro é 80% europeu, indica estudo - 05/10/2009". .folha.uol.com.br. Retrieved 2013-06-08. CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link)
^ "Brasil 500 anos". Ibge.gov.br. Archived from the original on 2013-05-08. Retrieved 2013-06-08. 
^ [1] Archived September 27, 2007, at the Wayback Machine.
^ "ESTIMATIVAS DA POPULAÇÃO RESIDENTE NOS MUNICÍPIOS BRASILEIROS COM DATA DE REFERÊNCIA EM 1º DE JULHO DE 2011" (in Portuguese). Instituto Brasileiro de Geografia e Estatística. 30 August 2011. Archived from the original (PDF) on 31 August 2011. Retrieved 31 August 2011. 
^ "Sistema IBGE de Recuperação Automática - SIDRA". Sidra.ibge.gov.br. Retrieved 2013-06-08. 
^ Exports of Minas Gerais (2012). DataViva. Retrieved on 01/10/14.
^ Agrogemeos. "Governador Valadares MG Mapa e Imagens". 18.8635692596,-41.9568710327: Agrogemeos.com.br. Retrieved 2013-06-08. 
^ Source: IBGE.
^ "DDD das cidades de Minas Gerais (MG)" (in Portuguese). Códigos DDD. Retrieved 12 August 2016. 
^ Robert L. Fish; Pelé (1977). My Life and The Beautiful Game: The Autobiography of Pelé, Chapter 2. Doubleday & Company, Inc., Garden City, New York. ISBN 0-385-12185-7
^ Estadio Mineirao: the stadiums for the 2014 FIFA World Cup Brazil - FIFA.com
^ Patrimônio - América Futebol Clube
^ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 2010-07-15. Retrieved 2006-09-14. 
^ Centenário do América - Superesportes
^ Seleção Brasileira confia no ótimo retrospecto em jogos no Mineirinho | globoesporte.com
^ a b Minas Flag, Minas Gerais Government (in Portuguese)


External links[edit]



Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Minas Gerais.



(in Portuguese) Page of the Government of Minas Gerais
(in Portuguese) Page of the Legislative Assembly of Minas Gerais
(in Portuguese) EncontraMG - Page of Minas Gerais




Wikimedia Commons has media related to Minas Gerais.








v
t
e


 Municipalities of Minas Gerais




Capital: Belo Horizonte








Mesoregion Campo das Vertentes







Barbacena



Alfredo Vasconcelos
Antônio Carlos
Barbacena
Barroso
Capela Nova
Caranaíba
Carandaí
Desterro do Melo
Ibertioga
Ressaquinha
Santa Bárbara do Tugúrio
Senhora dos Remédios





Lavras



Carrancas
Ijaci
Ingaí
Itumirim
Itutinga
Lavras
Luminárias
Nepomuceno
Ribeirão Vermelho





São João del Rei



Conceição da Barra de Minas
Coronel Xavier Chaves
Dores de Campos
Lagoa Dourada
Madre de Deus de Minas
Nazareno
Piedade do Rio Grande
Prados
Resende Costa
Ritápolis
Santa Cruz de Minas
Santana do Garambéu
São João del Rei
São Tiago
Tiradentes



















Mesoregion Central Mineira







Bom Despacho



Araújos
Bom Despacho
Dores do Indaiá
Estrela do Indaiá
Japaraíba
Lagoa da Prata
Leandro Ferreira
Luz
Martinho Campos
Moema
Quartel Geral
Serra da Saudade





Curvelo



Augusto de Lima
Buenópolis
Corinto
Curvelo
Felixlândia
Inimutaba
Joaquim Felício
Monjolos
Morro da Garça
Presidente Juscelino
Santo Hipólito





Três Marias



Abaeté
Biquinhas
Cedro do Abaeté
Morada Nova de Minas
Paineiras
Pompéu
Três Marias
















Mesoregion Jequitinhonha







Almenara



Almenara
Bandeira
Divisópolis
Felisburgo
Jacinto
Jequitinhonha
Joaíma
Jordânia
Mata Verde
Monte Formoso
Palmópolis
Rio do Prado
Rubim
Salto da Divisa
Santa Maria do Salto
Santo Antônio do Jacinto





Araçuaí



Araçuaí
Caraí
Coronel Murta
Itinga
Novo Cruzeiro
Padre Paraíso
Ponto dos Volantes
Virgem da Lapa





Capelinha



Angelândia
Aricanduva
Berilo
Capelinha
Carbonita
Chapada do Norte
Francisco Badaró
Itamarandiba
Jenipapo de Minas
José Gonçalves de Minas
Leme do Prado
Minas Novas
Turmalina
Veredinha





Diamantina



Couto de Magalhaes de Minas
Datas
Diamantina
Felício dos Santos
Gouveia
Presidente Kubitschek
São Gonçalo do Rio Preto
Senador Modestino Gonçalves





Pedra Azul



Cachoeira de Pajeú
Comercinho
Itaobim
Medina
Pedra Azul
















Mesoregion Metropolitana de Belo Horizonte







Belo Horizonte



Belo Horizonte
Betim
Brumadinho
Caeté
Confins
Contagem
Esmeraldas
Ibirité
Igarapé
Juatuba
Lagoa Santa
Mário Campos
Mateus Leme
Nova Lima
Pedro Leopoldo
Raposos
Ribeirão das Neves
Rio Acima
Sabará
Santa Luzia
São Joaquim de Bicas
São José da Lapa
Sarzedo
Vespasiano





Conceição do Mato Dentro



Alvorada de Minas
Conceição do Mato Dentro
Congonhas do Norte
Dom Joaquim
Itambé do Mato Dentro
Morro do Pilar
Passabém
Rio Vermelho
Santo Antônio do Itambé
Santo Antônio do Rio Abaixo
São Sebastião do Rio Preto
Serra Azul de Minas
Serro





Conselheiro Lafaiete



Casa Grande
Catas Altas da Noruega
Congonhas
Conselheiro Lafaiete
Cristiano Otoni
Desterro de Entre Rios
Entre Rios de Minas
Itaverava
Ouro Branco
Queluzito
Santana dos Montes
São Brás do Suaçuí





Itabira



Alvinópolis
Barão de Cocais
Bela Vista de Minas
Bom Jesus do Amparo
Catas Altas
Dionísio
Ferros
Itabira
João Monlevade
Nova Era
Nova União
Rio Piracicaba
Santa Bárbara
Santa Maria de Itabira
São Domingos do Prata
São Gonçalo do Rio Abaixo
São José do Goiabal
Taquaraçu de Minas





Itaguara



Belo Vale
Bonfim
Crucilândia
Itaguara
Itatiaiuçu
Jeceaba
Moeda
Piedade dos Gerais
Rio Manso





Ouro Preto



Diogo de Vasconcelos
Itabirito
Mariana
Ouro Preto





Pará de Minas



Florestal
Onça de Pitangui
Pará de Minas
Pitangui
São José da Varginha





Sete Lagoas



Araçaí
Baldim
Cachoeira da Prata
Caetanópolis
Capim Branco
Cordisburgo
Fortuna de Minas
Funilândia
Inhaúma
Jaboticatubas
Jequitibá
Maravilhas
Matozinhos
Papagaios
Paraopeba
Pequi
Prudente de Morais
Santana de Pirapama
Santana do Riacho
Sete Lagoas
















Mesoregion Noroeste de Minas







Paracatu



Brasilândia de Minas
Guarda-Mor
João Pinheiro
Lagamar
Lagoa Grande
Paracatu
Presidente Olegário
São Gonçalo do Abaeté
Varjão de Minas
Vazante





Unaí



Arinos
Bonfinópolis de Minas
Buritis
Cabeceira Grande
Dom Bosco
Formoso
Natalândia
Unaí
Uruana de Minas
















Mesoregion Norte de Minas







Bocaiúva



Bocaiúva
Engenheiro Navarro
Francisco Dumont
Guaraciama
Olhos-d'Água





Grão Mogol



Botumirim
Cristália
Grão Mogol
Itacambira
Josenópolis
Padre Carvalho





Janaúba



Catuti
Espinosa
Gameleiras
Jaíba
Janaúba
Mamonas
Mato Verde
Monte Azul
Nova Porteirinha
Pai Pedro
Porteirinha
Riacho dos Machados
Serranópolis de Minas





Januária



Bonito de Minas
Chapada Gaúcha
Cônego Marinho
Icaraí de Minas
Itacarambi
Januária
Juvenília
Manga
Matias Cardoso
Miravânia
Montalvânia
Pedras de Maria da Cruz
Pintópolis
São Francisco
São João das Missões
Urucuia





Montes Claros



Brasília de Minas
Campo Azul
Capitão Enéas
Claro dos Poções
Coração de Jesus
Francisco Sá
Glaucilândia
Ibiracatu
Japonvar
Juramento
Lontra
Luislândia
Mirabela
Montes Claros
Patis
Ponto Chique
São João da Lagoa
São João da Ponte
São João do Pacuí
Ubaí
Varzelândia
Verdelândia





Pirapora



Buritizeiro
Ibiaí
Jequitaí
Lagoa dos Patos
Lassance
Pirapora
Riachinho
Santa Fé de Minas
São Romão
Várzea da Palma





Salinas



Águas Vermelhas
Berizal
Curral de Dentro
Divisa Alegre
Fruta de Leite
Indaiabira
Montezuma
Ninheira
Novorizonte
Rio Pardo de Minas
Rubelita
Salinas
Santa Cruz de Salinas
Santo Antônio do Retiro
São João do Paraíso
Taiobeiras
Vargem Grande do Rio Pardo
















Mesoregion Oeste de Minas







Campo Belo



Aguanil
Campo Belo
Cana Verde
Candeias
Cristais
Perdões
Santana do Jacaré





Divinópolis



Carmo do Cajuru
Cláudio
Conceição do Pará
Divinópolis
Igaratinga
Itaúna
Nova Serrana
Perdigão
Santo Antônio do Monte
São Gonçalo do Pará
São Sebastião do Oeste





Formiga



Arcos
Camacho
Córrego Fundo
Formiga
Itapecerica
Pains
Pedra do Indaiá
Pimenta





Oliveira



Bom Sucesso
Carmo da Mata
Carmópolis de Minas
Ibituruna
Oliveira
Passa Tempo
Piracema
Santo Antônio do Amparo
São Francisco de Paula





Piui



Bambuí
Córrego Danta
Doresópolis
Iguatama
Medeiros
Piumhi
São Roque de Minas
Tapiraí
Vargem Bonita
















Mesoregion Sudoeste de Minas







Alfenas



Alfenas
Alterosa
Areado
Carmo do Rio Claro
Carvalhópolis
Conceição da Aparecida
Divisa Nova
Fama
Machado
Paraguaçu
Poço Fundo
Serrania





Andrelândia



Aiuruoca
Andrelândia
Arantina
Bocaina de Minas
Bom Jardim de Minas
Carvalhos
Cruzília
Liberdade
Minduri
Passa-Vinte
São Vicente de Minas
Seritinga
Serranos





Itajubá



Brasópolis
Consolação
Cristina
Delfim Moreira
Dom Viçoso
Itajubá
Maria da Fé
Marmelópolis
Paraisópolis
Piranguçu
Piranguinho
Virgínia
Wenceslau Braz





Passos



Alpinópolis
Bom Jesus da Penha
Capetinga
Capitólio
Cássia
Claraval
Delfinópolis
Fortaleza de Minas
Ibiraci
Itaú de Minas
Passos
Pratápolis
São João Batista do Glória
São José da Barra





Poços de Caldas



Albertina
Andradas
Bandeira do Sul
Botelhos
Caldas
Campestre
Ibitiúra de Minas
Inconfidentes
Jacutinga
Monte Sião
Ouro Fino
Poços de Caldas
Santa Rita de Caldas





Pouso Alegre



Bom Repouso
Borda da Mata
Bueno Brandão
Camanducaia
Cambuí
Congonhal
Córrego do Bom Jesus
Espírito Santo do Dourado
Estiva
Extrema
Gonçalves
Ipuiúna
Itapeva
Munhoz
Pouso Alegre
Sapucaí-Mirim
Senador Amaral
Senador José Bento
Tocos do Moji
Toledo





Santa Rita do Sapucaí



Cachoeira de Minas
Careaçu
Conceição das Pedras
Conceição dos Ouros
Cordislândia
Heliodora
Natércia
Pedralva
Santa Rita do Sapucaí
São Gonçalo do Sapucaí
São João da Mata
São José do Alegre
São Sebastião da Bela Vista
Silvianópolis
Turvolândia





São Lourenco



Alagoa
Baependi
Cambuquira
Carmo de Minas
Caxambu
Conceição do Rio Verde
Itamonte
Itanhandu
Jesuânia
Lambari
Olímpio Noronha
Passa Quatro
Pouso Alto
São Lourenço
São Sebastião do Rio Verde
Soledade de Minas





São Sebastiao do Paraíso



Arceburgo
Cabo Verde
Guaranesia
Guaxupé
Itamogi
Jacuí
Juruaia
Monte Belo
Monte Santo de Minas
Muzambinho
Nova Resende
São Pedro da União
São Sebastião do Paraíso
São Tomás de Aquino





Varginha



Boa Esperança
Campanha
Campo do Meio
Campos Gerais
Carmo da Cachoeira
Coqueiral
Elói Mendes
Guapé
Ilicínea
Monsenhor Paulo
Santana da Vargem
São Bento Abade
São Thomé das Letras
Três Corações
Três Pontas
Varginha
















Mesoregion Triângulo Mineiro/Alto Paranaiba







Araxá



Araxá
Campos Altos
Ibiá
Nova Ponte
Pedrinópolis
Perdizes
Pratinha
Sacramento
Santa Juliana
Tapira





Frutal



Campina Verde
Carneirinho
Comendador Gomes
Fronteira
Frutal
Itapagipe
Iturama
Limeira do Oeste
Pirajuba
Planura
São Francisco de Sales
União de Minas





Ituiutaba



Cachoeira Dourada
Capinópolis
Gurinhatã
Ipiaçu
Ituiutaba
Santa Vitória





Patos de Minas



Arapuá
Carmo do Paranaíba
Guimarânia
Lagoa Formosa
Matutina
Patos de Minas
Rio Paranaíba
Santa Rosa da Serra
São Gotardo
Tiros





Patrocínio



Abadia dos Dourados
Coromandel
Cruzeiro da Fortaleza
Douradoquara
Estrela do Sul
Grupiara
Iraí de Minas
Monte Carmelo
Patrocínio
Romaria
Serra do Salitre





Uberaba



Água Comprida
Campo Florido
Conceição das Alagoas
Conquista
Delta
Uberaba
Veríssimo





Uberlândia



Araguari
Araporã
Canápolis
Cascalho Rico
Centralina
Indianópolis
Monte Alegre de Minas
Prata
Tupaciguara
Uberlândia
















Mesoregion Vale do Mucuri







Nanuque



Águas Formosas
Bertópolis
Carlos Chagas
Crisólita
Fronteira dos Vales
Machacalis
Nanuque
Santa Helena de Minas
Serra dos Aimorés
Umburatiba





Teófilo Otoni



Ataléia
Catuji
Franciscópolis
Frei Gaspar
Itaipé
Ladainha
Malacacheta
Novo Oriente de Minas
Ouro Verde de Minas
Pavão
Poté
Setubinha
Teófilo Otoni
















Mesoregion Zona da Mata







Cataguases



Além Paraíba
Argirita
Cataguases
Dona Eusébia
Estrela Dalva
Itamarati de Minas
Laranjal
Leopoldina
Palma
Pirapetinga
Recreio
Santana de Cataguases
Santo Antônio do Aventureiro
Volta Grande





Juiz de Fora



Aracitaba
Belmiro Braga
Bias Fortes
Bicas
Chácara
Chiador
Coronel Pacheco
Descoberto
Ewbank da Câmara
Goianá
Guarará
Juiz de Fora
Lima Duarte
Mar de Espanha
Maripá de Minas
Matias Barbosa
Olaria
Oliveira Fortes
Paiva
Pedro Teixeira
Pequeri
Piau
Rio Novo
Rio Preto
Rochedo de Minas
Santa Bárbara do Monte Verde
Santa Rita de Ibitipoca
Santa Rita de Jacutinga
Santana do Deserto
Santos Dumont
São João Nepomuceno
Senador Cortes
Simão Pereira





Manhuaçu



Abre Campo
Alto Caparaó
Alto Jequitibá
Caparaó
Caputira
Chalé
Durandé
Lajinha
Luisburgo
Manhuaçu
Manhumirim
Martins Soares
Matipó
Pedra Bonita
Reduto
Santa Margarida
Santana do Manhuaçu
São João do Manhuaçu
São José do Mantimento
Simonésia





Muriaé



Antônio Prado de Minas
Barão de Monte Alto
Caiana
Carangola
Divino
Espera Feliz
Eugenópolis
Faria Lemos
Fervedouro
Miradouro
Miraí
Muriaé
Orizânia
Patrocínio do Muriaé
Pedra Dourada
Rosário da Limeira
São Francisco do Glória
São Sebastião da Vargem Alegre
Tombos
Vieiras





Ponte Nova



Acaiaca
Barra Longa
Dom Silvério
Guaraciaba
Jequeri
Oratórios
Piedade de Ponte Nova
Ponte Nova
Raul Soares
Rio Casca
Rio Doce
Santa Cruz do Escalvado
Santo Antônio do Grama
São Pedro dos Ferros
Sem-Peixe
Sericita
Urucânia
Vermelho Novo





Ubá



Astolfo Dutra
Divinésia
Dores do Turvo
Guarani
Guidoval
Guiricema
Mercês
Piraúba
Rio Pomba
Rodeiro
São Geraldo
Senador Firmino
Silveirânia
Tabuleiro
Tocantins
Ubá
Visconde do Rio Branco





Viçosa



Alto Rio Doce
Amparo do Serra
Araponga
Brás Pires
Cajuri
Canaã
Cipotânea
Coimbra
Ervália
Lamim
Paula Cândido
Pedra do Anta
Piranga
Porto Firme
Presidente Bernardes
Rio Espera
São Miguel do Anta
Senhora de Oliveira
Teixeiras
Viçosa
















Mesoregion Vale do Rio Doce







Aimorés



Aimorés
Alvarenga
Conceição de Ipanema
Conselheiro Pena
Cuparaque
Goiabeira
Ipanema
Itueta
Mutum
Pocrane
Resplendor
Santa Rita do Itueto
Taparuba





Caratinga



Bom Jesus do Galho
Bugre
Caratinga
Córrego Novo
Dom Cavati
Entre Folhas
Iapu
Imbé de Minas
Inhapim
Ipaba
Piedade de Caratinga
Pingo-d'Água
Santa Bárbara do Leste
Santa Rita de Minas
São Domingos das Dores
São João do Oriente
São Sebastião do Anta
Tarumirim
Ubaporanga
Vargem Alegre





Governador Valadares



Alpercata
Campanário
Capitão Andrade
Coroaci
Divino das Laranjeiras
Engenheiro Caldas
Fernandes Tourinho
Frei Inocêncio
Galiléia
Governador Valadares
Itambacuri
Itanhomi
Jampruca
Marilac
Mathias Lobato
Nacip Raydan
Nova Módica
Pescador
São Geraldo da Piedade
São Geraldo do Baixio
São José da Safira
São José do Divino
Sobrália
Tumiritinga
Virgolândia





Guanhães



Braúnas
Carmésia
Coluna
Divinolândia de Minas
Dores de Guanhães
Gonzaga
Guanhães
Materlândia
Paulistas
Sabinópolis
Santa Efigênia de Minas
São João Evangelista
Sardoá
Senhora do Porto
Virginópolis





Ipatinga



Açucena
Antônio Dias
Belo Oriente
Coronel Fabriciano
Ipatinga
Jaguaraçu
Joanésia
Marliéria
Mesquita
Naque
Periquito
Santana do Paraíso
Timóteo





Mantena



Central de Minas
Itabirinha
Mantena
Mendes Pimentel
Nova Belém
São Félix de Minas
São João do Manteninha





Peçanha



Água Boa
Cantagalo
Frei Lagonegro
José Raydan
Peçanha
Santa Maria do Suaçuí
São José do Jacuri
São Pedro do Suaçuí
São Sebastião do Maranhão


















v
t
e


 Regions and States of Brazil



North



Acre
Amapá
Amazonas
Pará
Rondônia
Roraima
Tocantins





Northeast



Alagoas
Bahia
Ceará
Maranhão
Paraíba
Pernambuco
Piauí
Rio Grande do Norte
Sergipe





Center-West



Distrito Federal
Goiás
Mato Grosso
Mato Grosso do Sul





Southeast



Espírito Santo
Minas Gerais
Rio de Janeiro
São Paulo





South



Paraná
Rio Grande do Sul
Santa Catarina








Fernando de Noronha
Rocas Atoll
Saint Peter and Saint Paul
Trindade and Martim Vaz












v
t
e


Brazil 



History



Timeline of Brazilian history
Indigenous peoples
Portuguese Colony (1500–1815)
United Kingdom (1815–1822)
Empire (1822–1889)
Old Republic (1889–1930)
Vargas Era (1930–1946)
Second Republic (1946–1964)
Military rule (1964–1985)
New Republic (post 1985)





Geography







Amazon basin
Climate
Coastline
Conservation
Environment
Environmental issues
Extreme points
Islands
Largest cities
Mountains
Pantanal
Protected areas
Regions
Rivers
Water resources
Wildlife








Politics







Administrative divisions
Constitution
Elections
Foreign relations
Government
Human rights
Legal system
Law
Law enforcement
Military
National Congress
Political parties
President








Economy







Agriculture
Car industry
Central Bank
Economic history
Energy
Exports
Industry
Mining
Real (currency)
Science and technology
Stock index
Telecommunications
Tourism
Transport








Society







Corruption
Crime
Demographics
Education
Health
Immigration
Income inequality
Languages
People
Religion
Social issues
States by HDI
Unemployment
Water supply and sanitation
Welfare
Youth





Culture



Arts
Animation
Carnaval
Cinema
Comics
Cuisine
Literature
Malandragem
Music
Newspapers
Painting
Public holidays
Sculpture
Science fiction
Sports
Television












Outline
Index



Category
Portal









Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 139547738
GND: 4039398-7
BNF: cb11945096r (data)











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Minas_Gerais&oldid=818321089"					Categories: Minas GeraisStates of BrazilSoutheast Region, BrazilHidden categories: Pages with citations lacking titlesPages with citations having bare URLsCS1 Portuguese-language sources (pt)CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors listWebarchive template wayback linksArticles with Portuguese-language external linksCoordinates on WikidataAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from December 2016Articles needing additional references from June 2013All articles needing additional referencesWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiers