"Councillor of state" redirects here. For the differently spelled role it should not be confused for, see Counsellor of State.
"Junior Minister" redirects here. For the poRusition in the government of Northern Ireland, see Junior Minister (Northern Ireland).


Part of the Politics series on


Executive government


Head of state





Monarch
Supreme leader
President
President of the Council of State





Government




Head of government


Chancellor
Chief executive
Chief minister
First minister

Premier
Prime minister
President of the Council of Ministers









Cabinet
Cabinet collective responsibility






Ministry


Minister
Secretary









Other


Governor
Mayor







Systems




Monarchy (Constitutional)
Republic (Parliamentary)
Directorial
Parliamentary (Westminster)
Semi-parliamentary (simul simul)
Semi-presidential (cohabitational)
Presidential




Lists




National leaders
National governments
Heads of state and government




Politics portal





v
t
e





A minister is a politician who holds public office in a national or regional government, making and implementing decisions on policies in conjunction with the other ministers. In some jurisdictions the head of government is also a minister and is designated the "prime minister", "premier", "chief minister", "Chancellor" or other title.
In Commonwealth realm jurisdictions which use the Westminster system of government, ministers are usually required to be members of one of the houses of Parliament or legislature, and are usually from the political party that controls a majority in the lower house of the legislature. In other jurisdictions — such as Belgium, Mexico, Netherlands, Philippines — the holder of a cabinet-level post or other government official is not permitted to be a member of the legislature. Depending on the administrative arrangements in each jurisdiction, ministers are usually heads of a government department and members of the government's ministry, cabinet and perhaps of a committee of cabinet. Some ministers may be more senior than others, and some may hold the title "assistant minister" or "deputy minister". Some jurisdictions, with a large number of ministers, may designate ministers to be either in the inner or outer ministry or cabinet.
In some jurisdictions — such as Hong Kong, the Philippines, the United Kingdom, and the United States — holders of an equivalent cabinet-level post are called secretaries (e.g., the Home Secretary in the United Kingdom, Secretary of State in the United States). Some holders of a cabinet-level post may have another title, such as "Attorney-General" or "Postmaster-General".



Contents


1 Etymology
2 Selection
3 Types of ministers and name
4 See also
5 References
6 External links



Etymology[edit]
The term "minister" also is used in diplomacy, for a diplomat of the second class, such as in the title Minister Plenipotentiary, ranking between an Ambassador and a Minister Resident.
The term minister comes from Middle English, deriving from the Old French word ministre, originally minister in Latin, meaning "servant, attendant", which itself was derived from the word 'minus' meaning "less".[1]
Selection[edit]






This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (May 2011) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



In jurisdictions that use the Westminster system of government — such as the United Kingdom and Australia — ministers or their equivalents are selected from the legislature, and usually from the political party that controls a majority in the lower house of the legislature. In jurisdictions with strict separation of powers, ministers cannot be members of the legislature — such as Belgium, Mexico, Netherlands, Philippines, United States — and a legislator chosen to become a minister must resign from the legislature.
Normally the leader of the majority party becomes the prime minister, or an office of equivalent function, and selects the other ministers. In the Westminster system, these ministers continue to represent their constituency in parliament while being part of the government. Often, a person from the outside may be appointed minister, usually in order to bring special skills to the government. Such a person would not have to be part of the parliament while serving as minister, nor would he/she necessarily be a member of the party/parties in government.
Types of ministers and name[edit]
Various countries form ministries as Cabinets (see List of cabinets). Other cabinets are usually included in Politics of ..-articles

Lists of incumbents groups lists of ministers by country

Specific ministers include:


Agriculture minister
Climate change minister
Commerce minister
Communication minister
Culture minister
Defence minister
Deputy prime minister
Education minister
Energy minister
Environment minister
Finance minister
Fisheries minister
Food minister
Foreign minister
Forestry minister
Health minister
Home minister
Housing minister
Immigration minister
Industry minister
Information minister
Inland revenue minister
International development minister
Interior minister
Justice minister
Natural resources minister
Planning minister
Prime minister
Transport minister
Water resources minister


Some ministers may hold multiple portfolios and lead several ministries simultaneously, while multiple ministers with separate portfolios may oversee a single ministry, or may also share both ministerial and deputy-ministerial portfolios in different ministries. A cabinet minister may not be in charge of any ministry, and is then known as a "minister without portfolio".
See also[edit]

Minister of the Crown
Ministry (government department)
Ministry (collective executive)

References[edit]



^ The word Minister Definition, dictionary.com dictionaries



External links[edit]






v
t
e


Common types of government ministers and ministries



Leadership



President
Vice-President
Prime Minister
Deputy Prime Minister
Office of the President
Cabinet department / Office of the Prime Minister





Defence / Foreign Affairs /
Public Safety



Defence (list)
Foreign / External Affairs (list)
International development
Public Security / Internal Security / Homeland Security
Immigration





Economics / Infrastructure



Commerce / Trade
Communications
Finance / Treasury (list)
Industry
Public Works / Infrastructure
Transport





Environment / Natural resources



Agriculture
Climate change
Energy
Environment (list)
Fisheries
Forestry
Irrigation
Land management
Mining
Natural resources
Petroleum / Oil
Water resources





Social



Education (List)
Culture
Health
Information
Interior / Internal Affairs / Home Affairs (list)
Justice / Law
Labour
Religion
Science (and Technology)
Sports
Tourism








Minister without portfolio
 Ministries by portfolio











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Minister_(government)&oldid=816705907"					Categories: Government ministersGovernment occupationsHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from May 2011All articles needing additional references