





This article's use of external links may not follow Wikipedia's policies or guidelines. Please improve this article by removing excessive or inappropriate external links, and converting useful links where appropriate into footnote references. (July 2015) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)




MIT Press




Parent company
Massachusetts Institute of Technology


Founded
1932; 86 years ago (1932)


Founder
James R. Killian, Jr.


Country of origin
United States


Headquarters location
Cambridge, Massachusetts


Distribution
TriLiteral (United States)
John Wiley & Sons (international)[1]


Publication types
Books, Academic journals


Official website
mitpress.mit.edu






Display of publications at conference booth in 2008


The MIT Press is a university press affiliated with the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) in Cambridge, Massachusetts (United States).



Contents


1 History
2 Business
3 Retail outlet
4 Logo
5 List of journals published by the MIT Press
6 References
7 External links



History[edit]
The MIT Press traces its origins back to 1926 when MIT published under its own name a lecture series entitled Problems of Atomic Dynamics given by the visiting German physicist and later Nobel Prize winner, Max Born. Six years later, MIT's publishing operations were first formally instituted by the creation of an imprint called Technology Press in 1932. This imprint was founded by James R. Killian, Jr., at the time editor of MIT's alumni magazine and later to become MIT president. Technology Press published eight titles independently, then in 1937 entered into an arrangement with John Wiley & Sons in which Wiley took over marketing and editorial responsibilities. In 1962 the association with Wiley came to an end after a further 125 titles had been published. The press acquired its modern name after this separation, and has since functioned as an independent publishing house.[2]
A European marketing office was opened in 1969, and a Journals division was added in 1972. In the late 1970s, responding to changing economic conditions, the publisher narrowed the focus of their catalog to a few key areas, initially architecture, computer science and artificial intelligence, economics, and cognitive science. Other areas, such as technology and design, have been added since. A recent addition is environmental science.[2]
In January 2010 the MIT Press published its 9000th title,[2] and published about 200 books and 30 journals. In 2012 the Press celebrated its 50th anniversary, including publishing a commemorative booklet on paper and online.[3]
Business[edit]
MIT Press primarily publishes academic titles in the fields of Art and Architecture; Visual and Cultural Studies; Cognitive Science; Philosophy; Linguistics; Computer Science; Economics; Finance and Business; Environmental Science; Political Science; Life Sciences; Neuroscience; New Media; and Science, Technology, and Society.[4]
The MIT Press is a distributor for such publishers as Zone Books and Semiotext(e). In 2000, the MIT Press created CogNet, an online resource for the study of the brain and the cognitive sciences.[5] The MIT Press co-owns the distributor TriLiteral LLC with Harvard University Press and Yale University Press.[6]
In 1981 the MIT Press published its first book under the Bradford Books imprint, Brainstorms: Philosophical Essays on Mind and Psychology by Daniel C. Dennett.
Retail outlet[edit]
The MIT Press also operates the MIT Press Bookstore[7] showcasing both its front and backlist titles, along with a large selection of complementary works from other academic and trade publishers. The retail storefront was formerly located next to a subway entrance to Kendall/MIT station in the heart of Kendall Square, but has been temporarily moved to 301 Massachusetts Avenue in Cambridge, Massachusetts, a short distance north of the MIT Museum near Central Square. Once extensive construction around its former location is completed, the Bookstore is planned to be returned to a site adjacent to the subway entrance.
The Bookstore offers customized selections from the MIT Press at many conferences and symposia in the Boston area, and sponsors occasional lectures and book signings at MIT.[citation needed]
The Bookstore is also known for its periodic "Warehouse Sales" offering deep discounts on surplus, damaged, and returned books and journals from its own catalog, as well as remaindered books from other publishers.
Logo[edit]
The Press uses a colophon or logo designed by its longtime design director, Muriel Cooper, in 1962.[8] The design is based on a highly-abstracted version of the lower-case letters "mitp", with the ascender of the "t" at the fifth stripe and the descender of the "p" at the sixth stripe the only differentiation.[9] It later served as an important reference point for the 2015 redesign of the MIT Media Lab logo by Pentagram.[8]
List of journals published by the MIT Press[edit]
Main category: MIT Press academic journals
The Arts and Humanities


African Arts
ARTMargins
Computer Music Journal
Daedalus
Design Issues
Grey Room
International Journal of Learning and Media
Leonardo
Leonardo Music Journal
The New England Quarterly
October
PAJ: A Journal of Performance and Art
TDR: The Drama Review


Economics


American Journal of Health Economics
Asian Development Review
Asian Economic Papers
Education Finance and Policy
The Review of Economics and Statistics


International Affairs, History, and Political Science


Global Environmental Politics
Innovations
International Security
Journal of Cold War Studies
Journal of Interdisciplinary History
Perspectives on Science


Science and Technology


Artificial Life
Computational Linguistics
Evolutionary Computation
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience
Linguistic Inquiry
Neural Computation
Presence: Teleoperators & Virtual Environments


References[edit]


^ How to Order
^ a b c "History | The MIT Press". Retrieved 2012-11-17. 
^ "50 Years of Influential Books and Journal Articles | The MIT Press". 
^ "MIT Press Catalogs". 
^ "CogNet FAQ". 
^ TriLiteral
^ "The MIT Press Bookstore". 
^ a b Stinson, Liz. "MIT Media Lab Gets a Transforming Logo, Courtesy of Pentagram". 
^ http://www.aiga.org/medalist-murielcooper/ |AIGA profile of Muriel Cooper


External links[edit]

Official Website
MIT Press Journals Homepage
The MIT PressLog (news blog for the MIT Press)







v
t
e


Massachusetts Institute of Technology



Academics



Academics
School of Architecture and Planning
School of Engineering
School of Humanities, Arts, and Social Sciences
School of Science
MIT Sloan School of Management
Health Sciences and Technology
OpenCourseWare
Mathematics Department
MIT-SUTD Collaboration








Research



Broad Institute
Center for Information Systems Research
Center for Theoretical Physics
Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
Koch Institute
Laboratory for Electromagnetic and Electronic Systems
Laboratory for Information and Decision Systems
MIT Libraries
MIT Lincoln Laboratory
McGovern Institute
Media Laboratory
Picower Institute
Plasma Science and Fusion Center
Research Laboratory of Electronics
MIT Senseable City Lab
MIT Nuclear Research Reactor
Whitehead Institute
MIT Center for International Studies
Center for Bits and Atoms
Institute for Medical Engineering and Science





People



Alumni
Faculty
Presidents
Institute Professors
William Barton Rogers





Culture



History
List Visual Arts Center
Traditions and activities
MIT in popular culture
MIT Press
MIT Technology Review
Athena
Brass Rat
Hacks
MIT Science Fiction Society (MITSFS)
The Tech
Student Information Processing Board
Tech Model Railroad Club
Tech Squares
MIT $100K
Mystery Hunt
Smoot
Lemelson–MIT Prize





Campus



Campus
Building 20
Chapel
Fraternities and sororities
Graduate residences
Green Building
Infinite Corridor
Kresge Auditorium
Libraries
MIT Museum
Police
Stata Center
Undergraduate residences
Wiesner building





Athletics



Engineers









Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 159490691
LCCN: n83825884
ISNI: 0000 0001 0711 0219
GND: 120037-9
BIBSYS: 5077676
NLA: 35146298
NKC: kn20091201002
CiNii: DA02967160






Coordinates: 42°21′43.7″N 71°5′8.0″W﻿ / ﻿42.362139°N 71.085556°W﻿ / 42.362139; -71.085556





						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=MIT_Press&oldid=800698959"					Categories: MIT PressHidden categories: Wikipedia external links cleanup from July 2015Wikipedia spam cleanup from July 2015Pages using deprecated image syntaxAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from November 2012Pages using div col with small parameterWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with BIBSYS identifiersWikipedia articles with NLA identifiersCoordinates not on Wikidata