For the fighting styles that combine arts, see hybrid martial arts.
"NHB" redirects here. For other uses, see NHB (disambiguation).
"MMA" redirects here. For other uses, see MMA (disambiguation).

Mixed martial arts (MMA)


Junior dos Santos, in white shorts, and Shane Carwin, in black shorts, during an MMA fight at the main event of UFC 131 in Vancouver, British Columbia, on June 11, 2011.



Highest governing body
International Mixed Martial Arts Federation


Characteristics


Contact
Yes; full-contact


Mixed gender
Yes; separate event


Type
Indoor


Venue
Fighting ring or cage


Presence


Country or region
Worldwide


Olympic
No–not recognized by the International Olympic Committee (IOC)


Mixed martial arts (MMA) is a full-contact combat sport that allows both striking and grappling, both standing and on the ground, using techniques from other combat sports and martial arts. The first documented use of the term mixed martial arts was in a review of UFC 1 by television critic Howard Rosenberg in 1993.[1] The term gained popularity when newfullcontact.com, then one of the largest websites covering the sport, hosted and republished the article.[2] The question of who actually coined the term is subject to debate.[3]
During the early 20th century, various mixed-style contests took place throughout Japan, Taiwan and in the countries of the Four Asian Tigers. In 1980 CV Productions, Inc. created the first regulated MMA league in the United States, named Tough Guy Contest, later renamed Battle of the Superfighters. The company sanctioned ten tournaments in Pennsylvania. However, in 1983 the Pennsylvania State Senate passed a bill prohibiting the sport.[4][5]
In 1993 the Gracie family brought Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu, developed in Brazil from the 1920s, to the United States by founding the Ultimate Fighting Championship (UFC) MMA promotion company and implemented a different set of rules (example:eliminates kicking a grounded opponent) unlike other leagues which are more favorable of realistic fights.[6]
Originally promoted as a competition to find the most effective martial arts for real unarmed combat, competitors from different fighting styles were pitted against one another in contests with relatively few rules.[7] Later, individual fighters incorporated multiple martial arts into their style. MMA promoters were pressured to adopt additional rules to increase competitors' safety, to comply with sport regulations and to broaden mainstream acceptance of the sport.[8] Following these changes, the sport has seen increased popularity with a pay-per-view business that rivals boxing and professional wrestling.[9]



Contents


1 History

1.1 Timeline of major events


2 Modern sport

2.1 Origin of "MMA"
2.2 Regulation
2.3 MMA organizations

2.3.1 Promotions
2.3.2 Gyms
2.3.3 Media


2.4 Fighter development


3 Rules

3.1 Victory
3.2 Fighter ranking
3.3 Clothing
3.4 Fighting area


4 Common disciplines

4.1 Boxing
4.2 Muay Thai/Kickboxing
4.3 Brazilian jiu-jitsu
4.4 Judo
4.5 Wrestling

4.5.1 Catch


4.6 Karate
4.7 Taekwondo
4.8 Capoeira
4.9 Wushu Sanshou/Sanda


5 Strategies

5.1 Sprawl-and-Brawl
5.2 Ground-and-pound
5.3 Submission-Seeking
5.4 Score oriented fighting
5.5 Clinch-Fighting


6 Women's mixed martial arts

6.1 History


7 Amateur mixed martial arts

7.1 World Mixed Martial Arts Association
7.2 International Mixed Martial Arts Federation


8 Safety

8.1 Injury rates
8.2 Injury pattern
8.3 Mental health
8.4 Fatalities


9 Legality of professional competitions

9.1 Australia
9.2 Bahrain
9.3 Belgium
9.4 Brazil
9.5 Bulgaria
9.6 Cambodia
9.7 Canada
9.8 China
9.9 Denmark
9.10 France
9.11 India
9.12 Ireland
9.13 Japan
9.14 Malaysia
9.15 Norway
9.16 Pakistan
9.17 Portugal
9.18 Romania
9.19 Russia
9.20 Singapore
9.21 Sweden
9.22 South Africa
9.23 Taiwan
9.24 Thailand
9.25 United States


10 See also
11 References



History[edit]




The Pancrastinae: A statue portraying the pancratium, an event which took place in the Roman Colosseum. Even as late as the Early Middle Ages, statues were put up in Rome and other cities to honour remarkable pankratiasts. This statue, now part of the Uffizi collection, is a Roman copy of a lost Greek original, circa 3rd century BC.






A scene of Ancient Greek pankratiasts fighting. Originally found on a Panathenaic amphora, Lamberg Collection.


Over 6,000 years ago the earliest form of a mixed martial art was invented in ancient China by Han Chinese military generals and soldiers called Shuai jiao. It is an ancient style of Wrestling and Kung-Fu that incorporated grappling techniques that are the earliest ancient precursors of modern jujitsu and judo combined with kicking, punching, throwing, joint locks, finger locks, leg sweeps, leg locks and close range trapping techniques used by elite ancient Han Chinese military forces to kill enemy soldiers on the battlefield.[10][11][12]
In Ancient Greece there was a sport called pankration, which featured a combination of grappling and striking skills similar to those found in modern MMA. Pankration was formed by a combination of the already established wrestling and boxing traditions and, in Olympic terms, first featured in the 33rd Olympiad in 648 BC. All strikes and holds were allowed with the exception of biting and gouging, which were banned. The fighters, called pankratiasts, fought until someone could not continue or signaled submission by raising their index finger; there were no rounds.[13][14] According to E. Norman Gardiner, 'No branch of athletics was more popular than the pankration.'[15] From its origins in Ancient Greece, pankration was later passed on to the Romans.[16]
The mid-19th century saw the prominence of the new sport savate in the combat sports circle. French savate fighters wanted to test their techniques against the traditional combat styles of its time. In 1852, a contest was held in France between French savateurs and English bare-knuckle boxers in which French fighter Rambaud alias la Resistance fought English fighter Dickinson and won using his kicks. However, the English team still won the four other match-ups during the contest.[17] Since then other similar contest also occurred by the late 19th to mid-20th century between French Savateurs and other combat styles. Examples include a 1905 fight between a French savateur George Dubois and a judo practitioner Re-nierand which resulted in the latter winning by submission, as well as the highly publicized 1957 fight between French savateur and professional boxer Jacques Cayron and a young Japanese karateka named Mochizuki Hiroo which ended when Cayron knocked Hiroo out with a hook.[17]
No-holds-barred fighting reportedly took place in the late 1880s when wrestlers representing style of Catch wrestling and many others met in tournaments and music-hall challenge matches throughout Europe. In the USA, the first major encounter between a boxer and a wrestler in modern times took place in 1887 when John L. Sullivan, then heavyweight world boxing champion, entered the ring with his trainer, wrestling champion William Muldoon, and was slammed to the mat in two minutes. The next publicized encounter occurred in the late 1890s when future heavyweight boxing champion Bob Fitzsimmons took on European wrestling champion Ernest Roeber. In September 1901, Frank "Paddy" Slavin, who had been a contender for Sullivan's boxing title, knocked out future world wrestling champion Frank Gotch in Dawson City, Canada.[18] The judo-practitioner Ren-nierand who gained fame after defeating George Dubois, would fight again in another similar contest against Ukrainian Catch wrestler Ivan Poddubny and lost.[17]
Another early example of mixed martial arts was Bartitsu, which Edward William Barton-Wright founded in London in 1899. Combining catch wrestling, judo, boxing, savate, jujutsu and canne de combat (French stick fighting), Bartitsu was the first martial art known to have combined Asian and European fighting styles,[19] and which saw MMA-style contests throughout England, pitting European Catch wrestlers and Japanese Judoka champions against representatives of various European wrestling styles.[19]
The history of modern MMA competition can be traced to mixed style contests throughout Europe, Japan, and the Pacific Rim during the early 1900s;[20] In Japan these contests were known as merikan, from the Japanese slang for "American [fighting]". Merikan contests were fought under a variety of rules, including points decision, best of three throws or knockdowns, and victory via knockout or submission.[21]
As the popularity of professional wrestling, which were contested under various catch wrestling rules at the time, waned after World War I when the sport split into two genres: "shoot", in which the fighters actually competed, and "show", which evolved into modern professional wrestling.[22] In 1936, heavyweight boxing contender Kingfish Levinsky and veteran Catch wrestler Ray Steele competed in a mixed match, which Steele won in 35 seconds.[22] In 1963, a catch wrestler and judoka "Judo" Gene Lebell fought professional boxer Milo Savage in a no-holds-barred match. Lebell won by Harai Goshi to rear naked choke, leaving Savage unconscious. This was the first televised bout of mixed-style fighting in North America. The hometown crowd was so enraged that they began to boo and throw chairs at Lebell.[23]
In February 12, 1963, three karatekas from Oyama dojo (kyokushin later) went to the Lumpinee Boxing Stadium in Thailand and fought against three Muay Thai fighters. The three kyokushin karate fighters' were Tadashi Nakamura, Kenji Kurosaki and Akio Fujihira (also known as Noboru Osawa), while the Muay Thai team were composed of only one authentic Thai fighter.[24] Japan won by 2–1: Tadashi Nakamura and Akio Fujihira both KOed opponents by punch while Kenji Kurosaki, who fought the Thai, was KOed by elbow. This should be noted that the only Japanese loser Kenji Kurosaki was then a kyokushin instructor rather than a contender and temporarily designated as a substitute for the absent chosen fighter. On June of the same year, karateka and future kickboxer Tadashi Sawamura faced against top Thai fighter Samarn Sor Adisorn, in which Sawamura was knocked down 16 times and defeated.[24] Sawamura would use what he learned in that fight to incorporate in the evolving kickboxing tournaments.
During the late 1960s to early 1970s, the concept of combining the elements of multiple martial arts was popularized in the west by Bruce Lee via his system of Jeet Kune Do. Lee believed that "the best fighter is not a Boxer, Karate or Judo man. The best fighter is someone who can adapt to any style, to be formless, to adopt an individual's own style and not following the system of styles." In 2004, UFC President Dana White would call Lee the "father of mixed martial arts" stating: "If you look at the way Bruce Lee trained, the way he fought, and many of the things he wrote, he said the perfect style was no style. You take a little something from everything. You take the good things from every different discipline, use what works, and you throw the rest away".[25] A contemporary of Bruce Lee, Wing Chun practitioner Wong Shun Leung, gained prominence fighting in over 60-100 illegal beimo fights against other Chinese martial artist of various styles. In his career, Wong also fought and won against Western fighters and other combat styles such as his match against a Russian boxer named Giko,[26] his televised fight against a fencer,[27] and his well-documented fight against Taiwanese Kung-Fu master Wu Ming Jeet.[28] Like Bruce Lee, Wong also combined boxing and kickboxing into his kung fu.
Muhammad Ali vs. Antonio Inoki took place in Japan in 1976. The classic match-up between professional boxer vs professional wrestler turned sour as both fighters refused to engage in the other's style, and after a 15-round stalemate, it was declared a draw. However Ali had sustained a substantial amount of damage to his legs, as Inoki slide-kicked him continuously for the duration of the bout, causing him to be hospitalized for the next three days.[29]
In 1988 Rick Roufus challenged Changpuek Kiatsongrit to a non-title Muay Thai vs. kickboxing super fight. Rick Roufus was at the time an undefeated Kickboxer and held both the KICK Super Middleweight World title and the PKC Middleweight U.S title. Changpuek Kiatsongrit was finding it increasingly difficult to get fights in Thailand as his weight (70 kg) was not typical for Thailand, where competitive bouts at tend to be at the lower weights. Roufus knocked Changpuek down twice with punches in the first round, breaking Changpuek's jaw, but lost by technical knockout in the fourth round due to the culmination of low kicks to the legs that he was unprepared for. This match was the first popular fight which showcased the power of such low kicks to a predominantly Western audience.[30]
Sambo, a martial art and combat sport developed in Russia in the early 1920s, merged various forms of combat styles such as wrestling, judo and striking into one unique martial art.[31][32] Russia also saw a number of unsanctioned matches held in gyms in the late 20th century that pitted karatekas against Western-style boxers.[33] The matches resulted mostly with the boxers taking down and knocking out most karate fighters.[34]
Timeline of major events[edit]


Ancient China, 6,000+ years ago

– Shuai jiao (ancient Chinese Kung-Fu style)


Ancient Greece, 2,000+ years ago

– Pankration


Late 19th century

– Hybrid martial arts


Late 1880s

– Early NHB and Mixed Style contests


1899

– Barton-Wright and Bartitsu


Early 1900s

– Merikan contests


1920s

– Early vale tudo and Gracie Challenge


1960s and 1970s

– Bruce Lee and Jeet Kune Do


1970s

– Antonio Inoki and Ishu Kakutōgi Sen


1985

– Shooto forms


1989

– First professional Shooto event


1991

– First Desafio (BJJ vs. Luta Livre) event


1993

– Pancrase forms


1993

– UFC forms


Mid/Late 1990s

– International Vale Tudo


1997–2007

– PRIDE FC and UFC era


2000

– New Jersey SACB develops Unified Rules


2001

– Zuffa buys UFC


2005

– The Ultimate Fighter debuts


2005

– US Army begins sanctioning MMA


2006

– UFC dominance and international growth


2006

– Zuffa buys WFA and WEC


2006

– UFC 66 generates over a million PPV buys


2007

– Zuffa buys PRIDE FC


2008

– EliteXC: Primetime gains 6.5 million peak viewers on CBS


2009

– Strikeforce holds 1st major card with female main event


2011

– WEC merged with UFC


2011

– Zuffa buys Strikeforce


2011

– UFC on Fox gains 8.8 million peak viewers on Fox


2016

– WMG/IMG buys UFC for US$4 billion


Modern sport[edit]
The movement that led to the creation of the American and Japanese mixed martial arts scenes was rooted in two interconnected subcultures and two grappling styles, namely Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu and shoot wrestling. First were the vale tudo events in Brazil, followed by the Japanese shoot-style wrestling shows and Budo moussaraa mma.
Vale tudo began in the 1920s and became renowned with the "Gracie challenge" issued by Carlos Gracie and Hélio Gracie and upheld later on by descendants of the Gracie family.The "Gracie Challenges" were held in the garages and gyms of the Gracie family members. When the popularity grew, these types of mixed bouts were a staple attraction at the carnivals in Brazil.[35] Early mixed-match martial arts professional wrestling bouts in Japan (known as Ishu Kakutōgi Sen (異種格闘技戦), literally "heterogeneous combat sports bouts") became popular with Antonio Inoki in the 1970s. Inoki was a disciple of Rikidōzan, but also of Karl Gotch who trained numerous Japanese wrestlers in catch wrestling.
Regulated mixed martial arts competitions were first introduced in the United States by CV Productions, Inc.. Its first competition named Tough Guy Contest was held on March 20, 1980, New Kensington, Pennsylvania, Holiday Inn. During that year the company renamed the brand to Super Fighters and sanctioned ten regulated tournaments in Pennsylvania. In 1983 Pennsylvania State Senate passed a bill that specifically called for: "Prohibiting Tough Guy contests or Battle of the Brawlers contests", and ended the sport.[4][5][36] In 1993 the sport got reintroduced in the United States by the Ultimate Fighting Championship (UFC).[37] The sport gained international exposure and widespread publicity when jiu-jitsu fighter Royce Gracie won the first Ultimate Fighting Championship tournament, submitting three challengers in a total of just five minutes,[38] sparking a revolution in martial arts.[39][40]
Japan had its own form of mixed martial arts discipline Shooto that evolved from shoot wrestling in 1985, as well as the shoot wrestling derivative Pancrase founded as a promotion in 1993. The first Vale Tudo Japan tournaments were held in 1994 and 1995, both were won by Rickson Gracie. Around the same time, International Vale Tudo competition started to develop through (World Vale Tudo Championship (WVC), VTJ, IVC, UVF etc.). Interest in mixed martial arts as a sport resulted in the creation of the Pride Fighting Championships (Pride) in 1997, where again Rickson participated and won.[41]
The sport reached a new peak of popularity in North America in the December 2006 rematch between then UFC light heavyweight champion Chuck Liddell and former champion Tito Ortiz, rivaling the PPV sales of some of the biggest boxing events of all time,[42] and helping the UFC's 2006 PPV gross surpass that of any promotion in PPV history. In 2007, Zuffa LLC, the owners of the UFC MMA promotion, bought Japanese rival MMA brand Pride FC, merging the contracted fighters under one promotion[43] and drawing comparisons to the consolidation that occurred in other sports, such as the AFL-NFL Merger in American football.[44]
Origin of "MMA"[edit]
The first documented use of the name mixed martial arts was in a review of UFC 1 by television critic Howard Rosenberg, in 1993.[1] The term gained popularity when the website newfullcontact.com, then one of the biggest covering the sport, hosted and reprinted the article. The first use of the term by a promotion was in September 1995 by Rick Blume, president and CEO of Battlecade Extreme Fighting, just after UFC 7.[45] UFC official Jeff Blatnick was responsible for the Ultimate Fighting Championship officially adopting the name mixed martial arts. It was previously marketed as "Ultimate Fighting" and "No Holds Barred (NHB)", until Blatnick and John McCarthy proposed the name "MMA" at the UFC 17 rules meeting in response to increased public criticism.[46] The question of who actually coined the name is a question still in debate.[3]
Regulation[edit]
The first state regulated MMA event was held in Biloxi, Mississippi on August 23, 1996 with the sanctioning of IFC's Mayhem in Mississippi[47] show by the Mississippi Athletic Commission under William Lyons. The rules used were an adaptation of the kickboxing rules already accepted by most state athletic commissions. These modified kickboxing rules allowed for take downs and ground fighting and did away with rounds but did allow for fighters to be stood up by the referee and restarted if there was no action on the ground. These rules were the first in modern MMA to define fouls, fighting surfaces and the use of the cage.
In March 1997, the Iowa Athletic Commission officially sanctioned Battlecade Extreme Fighting under a modified form of its existing rules for Shootfighting. These rules created the 3, 5 minute round, one-minute break format, and mandated shootfighting gloves as well as weight classes for the first time. Illegal blows were listed as groin strikes, head butting, biting, eye gouging, hair pulling, striking an opponent with an elbow while the opponent is on the mat, kidney strikes, and striking the back of the head with closed fist. Holding onto the ring or cage for any reason was defined as foul.[48][49] While there are minor differences between these and the final Unified Rules, notably regarding elbow-strikes, the Iowa rules allowed mixed martial arts promoters to conduct essentially modern events legally, anywhere in the state. On March 28, 1997, Extreme Fighting 4 was held under these rules, making it the first show conducted under a version of the modern rules.
In April 2000, the California State Athletic Commission voted unanimously in favor of regulations that later became the foundation for the Unified Rules of Mixed Martial Arts. However, when the legislation was sent to the California capital in Sacramento for review, it was determined that the sport fell outside the jurisdiction of the CSAC, rendering the vote superfluous.[50]
On September 30, 2000, the New Jersey State Athletic Control Board (NJSACB) began to allow mixed martial arts promoters to conduct events in New Jersey. The first event was an IFC event titled Battleground 2000 held in Atlantic City. The intent was to allow the NJSACB to observe actual events and gather information to establish a comprehensive set of rules to effectively regulate the sport.[51]
On April 3, 2001, the NJSACB held a meeting to discuss the regulation of mixed martial arts events. This meeting attempted to unify the myriad rules and regulations which have been utilized by the different mixed martial arts organizations. At this meeting, the proposed uniform rules were agreed upon by the NJSACB, several other regulatory bodies, numerous promoters of mixed martial arts events and other interested parties in attendance. At the conclusion of the meeting, all parties in attendance were able to agree upon a uniform set of rules to govern the sport of mixed martial arts.[51]
The rules adopted by the NJSACB have become the de facto standard set of rules for professional mixed martial arts across North America. On July 30, 2009, a motion was made at the annual meeting of the Association of Boxing Commissions to adopt these rules as the "Unified Rules of Mixed Martial Arts". The motion passed unanimously.[52]
In November 2005 the United States Army began to sanction mixed martial arts with the first annual Army Combatives Championships held by the US Army Combatives School.[53]
Canada formally decriminalized mixed martial arts with a vote on Bill S-209 on June 5, 2013. The bill allows for provinces to have the power to create athletic commissions to regulate and sanction professional mixed martial arts bouts.[54]
MMA organizations[edit]
Promotions[edit]
According to MMA portal Tapology.com listings, there are hundreds of MMA promotions around the world producing MMA events.[55]
Since the UFC came to prominence in mainstream media in 2006, and with their 2007 merger with Pride FC and following purchase of WEC and Strikeforce, no companies have presented significant competition,[56] and the UFC has under contract almost all of the top ranked talent.[57] On April 30, 2011, UFC 129 set a new North American MMA attendance record, drawing 55,724 at the Rogers Centre in Toronto; the event also set a new MMA world record for the highest paid gate at $12,075,000[58] and is the highest gate in Toronto for any event.[59]
In 2011, the UFC reached a multi-year deal with the Fox Sports network, a tremendous milestone in the organization, bringing the sport to mainstream media.[60] The UFC also broadcasts their shows live to other networks around the world.
Outside of the UFC, the current secondary major MMA promotions that also have on their roster at least 3 top 15 ranked fighters are:

Bellator MMA. Based out of Newport Beach, California, United States. Broadcasts their fights locally on Spike TV and other networks around the world.
ONE Championship. Based out of Kallang, Singapore. Broadcasts their fights locally on ESPN Star Sports and other networks around the world.
Invicta FC (all female MMA). Based out of Enka, North Carolina, United States. Broadcasts their fights on UFC Fight-Pass online subscription service.[61]




Though ranked #20 promotion overall; Japanese, all female MMA promotion JEWELS (DEEP JEWELS) which formed a strategic partnership to cross-promote with Invicta FC since 2012,[62] has many top ranked fighters in their female Atomweight division.[63][64]



Fighters usually get contracts in the above promotions including the UFC after competing successfully in other MMA organisations from around the world.
Some MMA promotions tend to exist more to build up prospects while others have a good mix of prospect/veteran. Some exist only to be feeder leagues to the bigger promotions, others exist to try and be the best in the world. Some promotions only do 4 shows a year while others are doing them monthly. The top 50 regional MMA promotions in the world, compiled on Sherdog forum, have been evaluated by how much talent the promotion currently has, has had in the past, and how notable their fighting venues are while doing so. Popularity has some influence as well. (updated November 2014):[65]

1. Cage Warriors Fighting Championship (CWFC). Based out of London, England, UK. Broadcasts their fights locally on Premier Sports and other networks around the world.
2. M-1 Global. Based out of St. Petersburg, Russia. Broadcasts their fights locally on Russia-2 and on Fight Network internationally.
3. Jungle Fight. Based out of Manaus, Brazil. Broadcasts their fights locally on SporTV and ESPN Deportes in the USA.
4. Konfrontacja Sztuk Walki (KSW). Based out of: Warsaw, Poland. Broadcasts their fights locally on Polsat Sport and on Fight Network internationally.
5. Fight Nights (Russia). Based out of Moscow, Russia. Broadcasts their fights locally on Russia-2 and REN TV, and on UFC Fight-Pass online subscription service internationally.[61]
6. Resurrection Fighting Alliance (RFA). Based out of Kearney, Nebraska, USA. Broadcasts their fights locally on AXS TV Fights.
7. Legacy Fighting Championships (LFC). Based out of Houston, Texas, USA. Broadcasts their fights locally on AXS TV Fights.
8. Titan Fighting Championship. Based out of Kansas City, Kansas, USA. Broadcasts their fights locally on UFC Fight-Pass online subscription service.[61]
9. Shooto South America (ShootoBrazil). Based out of Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. Broadcasts internationally on UFC Fight-Pass online subscription service.[61]
10. British Association of Mixed Martial Arts (BAMMA). Based out of London, England. Broadcasts their fights locally on Channel 5 (UK) and other networks around the world.
11. Full Metal Dojo (FMD). Based out of Bangkok, Thailand. Broadcasts their fights locally on True Visions and Fox Sports.

Gyms[edit]
There are hundreds of MMA training facilities throughout the world.[66][67]
These are the current top 10 MMA Gyms in the world based on how many top 15 ranked UFC fighters they currently train. There are 160 fighters who train at over 80 different gyms at the top 15 rankings in the UFC 10 divisions. The rankings are based on a system where a champion earns their gym a score of 25 points. A #1 contender is worth 15 points, a #2 contender is worth 10 points with a decrease in ranking equaling a decrease of 1 point until the ranking reaches #10. From there, rankings 11-15 are each worth 1 point. (updated July 2015):[68]

1. Nova União located in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
2. Jackson-Winkeljohn MMA located in Albuquerque, New Mexico
3. American Kickboxing Academy (AKA) located in San Jose, California.
4. Team Alpha Male located in Sacramento, California.
5. American Top Team (ATT) located in Coconut Creek, Florida.
6. Kings MMA located in Huntington Beach, California.
7. Blackzilians located in Boca Raton, Florida.
8. Serra-Longo located in Long Island, New York.
9. Glendale Fighting Club located in Glendale, California.
10. Black House (Team Nogueira) based out of Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
11. Super 70 Fight Club (Drake and Drew Sizzle) based out of Fredericksburg, VA

Media[edit]
Web data traffic ranking leader Alexa Internet lists 40 online media outlets under its "MMA news and media" website category. As of November 13, 2017: the top 10 most popular websites covering the sport are:[69]

1. Sherdog.com
2. MMAFighting.com (SB Nation)
3. UFC.com
4. MMAjunkie.com
5. MMAmania.com (SB Nation)
6. BloodyElbow.com (SB Nation)
7. Mixedmartialarts.com
8. Espn.go.com/mma
9. MMAWeekly.com
10. Lowkickmma.com

Fighter development[edit]
As a result of an increased number of competitors, organized training camps, information sharing, and modern kinesiology, the understanding of the combat-effectiveness of various strategies has been greatly improved. UFC commentator Joe Rogan claimed that martial arts evolved more in the ten years following 1993 than in the preceding 700 years combined.[70]


"During his reign atop the sport in the late 1990s he was the prototype — he could strike with the best strikers; he could grapple with the best grapplers; his endurance was second to none. "

— describing UFC champion Frank Shamrock's early dominance[71]
The high profile of modern MMA promotions such as UFC and Pride has fostered an accelerated development of the sport. The early 1990s saw a wide variety of traditional styles competing in the sport.[72] However, early competition saw varying levels of success among disparate styles. In the early 1990s, practitioners of grappling based styles such as Brazilian jiu-jitsu dominated competition in the United States. Practitioners of striking based arts such as boxing, kickboxing, and karate who were unfamiliar with submission grappling proved to be unprepared to deal with its submission techniques.[73][74][75][76][77] As competitions became more and more common, those with a base in striking arts became more competitive as they cross trained in arts based around takedowns and submission holds.[77] Likewise, those from the varying grappling styles added striking techniques to their arsenal. This increase of cross-training resulted in fighters becoming increasingly multidimensional and well-rounded in their skill-sets.
The new hybridization of fighting styles can be seen in the technique of "ground and pound" developed by wrestling-based UFC pioneers such as Dan Severn, Don Frye and Mark Coleman. These wrestlers realized the need for the incorporation of strikes on the ground as well as on the feet, and incorporated ground striking into their grappling-based styles. Mark Coleman stated at UFC 14 that his strategy was to "Ground him and pound him" which may be the first televised use of the term.
Since the late 1990s, both strikers and grapplers have been successful at MMA, though it is rare to see any fighter who is not schooled in both striking and grappling arts reach the highest levels of competition.
The greatest MMA fighter of all time is considered by experts, fighters and fans to be either heavyweight Fedor Emelianenko or middleweight Anderson Silva.[78] UFC color commentator Joe Rogan responded to a fan's question: "Joe, is Fedor the Greatest Of All Time? It's him or Anderson, and I could see the argument going either way honestly. Both guys have had truly magical moments in competition against some of the best in the world."[79]
Rules[edit]
Main article: Mixed martial arts rules
The rules for modern mixed martial arts competitions have changed significantly since the early days of vale tudo, Japanese shoot wrestling, and UFC 1, and even more from the historic style of pankration. As the knowledge of fighting techniques spread among fighters and spectators, it became clear that the original minimalist rule systems needed to be amended.[80] The main motivations for these rule changes were protection of the health of the fighters, the desire to shed the perception of "barbarism and lawlessness", and to be recognized as a legitimate sport.[citation needed]
The new rules included the introduction of weight classes; as knowledge about submissions spread, differences in weight had become a significant factor. There are nine different weight classes in the Unified Rules of Mixed Martial Arts. These nine weight classes include flyweight (up to 125 lb / 56.7 kg), bantamweight (up to 135 lb / 61.2 kg), featherweight (up to 145 lb / 65.8 kg), lightweight (up to 155 lb / 70.3 kg), welterweight (up to 170 lb / 77.1 kg), middleweight (up to 185 lb / 83.9 kg), light heavyweight (up to 205 lb / 93.0 kg), heavyweight (up to 265 lb / 120.2 kg), and super heavyweight with no upper weight limit.[51]
Small, open-fingered gloves were introduced to protect fists, reduce the occurrence of cuts (and stoppages due to cuts) and encourage fighters to use their hands for striking to allow more captivating matches. Gloves were first made mandatory in Japan's Shooto promotion and were later adopted by the UFC as it developed into a regulated sport. Most professional fights have the fighters wear 4 oz gloves, whereas some jurisdictions require amateurs to wear a slightly heavier 6 oz glove for more protection for the hands and wrists.
Time limits were established to avoid long fights with little action where competitors conserved their strength. Matches without time limits also complicated the airing of live events. The time limits in most professional fights are three 5 minute rounds, and championship fights are normally five 5 minute rounds. Similar motivations produced the "stand up" rule, where the referee can stand fighters up if it is perceived that both are resting on the ground or not advancing toward a dominant position.[80]
In the U.S., state athletic and boxing commissions have played a crucial role in the introduction of additional rules because they oversee MMA in a similar fashion to boxing. In Japan and most of Europe, there is no regulating authority over competitions, so these organizations have greater freedom in rule development and event structure.[citation needed]
Previously, Japan-based organization Pride Fighting Championships held an opening 10-minute round followed by two five-minute rounds. Stomps, soccer kicks and knees to the head of a grounded opponent are legal, but elbow strikes to the head are not.[81] This rule set is more predominant in the Asian-based organizations as opposed to European and American rules. More recently, Singapore-based organization ONE Championship allows soccer kicks and knees to the head of a grounded opponent as well as elbow strikes to the head, but does not allow head stomps.[82]
Victory[edit]
Victory in a match is normally gained either by the judges' decision after an allotted amount of time has elapsed, a stoppage by the referee (for example if a competitor can not defend himself intelligently) or the fight doctor (due to an injury), a submission, by a competitor's cornerman throwing in the towel, or by knockout.
Knockout (KO): as soon as a fighter is unable to continue due to legal strikes, his opponent is declared the winner. As MMA rules allow submissions and ground and pound, the fight is stopped to prevent further injury to the fighter.
Submission: a fighter may admit defeat during a match by:

a tap on the opponent's body or mat/floor
a verbal submission

Technical Submission: the referee stops the match when the fighter is caught in a submission hold and is in danger of being injured. Often it is when a fighter gets choked unconscious; other times it is when a bone has been broken in a submission hold (a broken arm due to a kimura, etc.)
Technical Knockout (TKO):

Referee stoppage: The ref may stop a match in progress if:

a fighter becomes dominant to the point where the opponent can not intelligently defend himself and is taking excessive damage as a result
a fighter appears to be losing consciousness as he/she is being struck
a fighter appears to have a significant injury such as a cut or a broken bone



Doctor Stoppage/Cut: the referee will call for a time out if a fighter's ability to continue is in question as a result of apparent injuries, such as a large cut. The ring doctor will inspect the fighter and stop the match if the fighter is deemed unable to continue safely, rendering the opponent the winner. However, if the match is stopped as a result of an injury from illegal actions by the opponent, either a disqualification or no contest will be issued instead.
Corner stoppage: a fighter's corner men may announce defeat on the fighter's behalf by throwing in the towel during the match in progress or between rounds. This is normally done when a fighter is being beaten to the point where it is dangerous and unnecessary to continue. In some cases, the fighter may be injured.
Retirement: a fighter is so dazed or exhausted that he/she cannot physically continue fighting. Usually occurs between rounds.
Decision: if the match goes the distance, then the outcome of the bout is determined by three judges. The judging criteria are organization-specific.
Forfeit: a fighter or his representative may forfeit a match prior to the beginning of the match, thereby losing the match.
Disqualification: a "warning" will be given when a fighter commits a foul or illegal action or does not follow the referee's instruction. Three warnings will result in a disqualification. Moreover, if a fighter is unable to continue due to a deliberate illegal technique from his opponent, the opponent will be disqualified.
No Contest: in the event that both fighters commit a violation of the rules, or a fighter is unable to continue due to an injury from an accidental illegal technique, the match will be declared a "No Contest" except in the case of a technical decision in the unified rules.
Technical decision: in the unified rules of MMA, if a fighter is unable to continue due to an accidental illegal technique late in the fight, a technical decision is rendered by the judges based on who is ahead on the judges' scorecards at that time. In a three-round fight, two rounds must be completed for a technical decision to be awarded and in a five-round fight, three rounds must be completed.
Fighter ranking[edit]
See also: Sports rating system
MMA fighters get ranked according to their performance and outcome of their fights and level of competition they faced. The most popular and used, ranking portals are:

Fight Matrix: Ranks up to 250-500 fighters worldwide for every possible division male and female.
Sherdog: Ranks top 10 fighters worldwide only for current available UFC divisions. Also used by ESPN.
SB Nation: Ranks top 14 fighters worldwide only for male divisions. Also used by USA Today.
MMAjunkie.com: Ranks top 10 fighters worldwide for current UFC available divisions.
UFC: Ranks top 15 contenders, UFC signed fighters only, as per UFC divisions. (For example: #2 means the fighter is #3 for the UFC, behind the Champion and the #1)
Tapology: Ranks top 10 fighters worldwide for every possible division.[83]
Sports Illustrated: Ranks top 10 fighters worldwide for current UFC available divisions.[84]
MMA Rising: Ranks top 10 fighters worldwide in every possible division.[85] Notable for their Unified Women's Mixed Martial Arts. Rankings[86][87]
MMA Weekly: Ranks top 10 male fighters worldwide in every possible division, and P4P for female fighters.[88] Also used by Yahoo! Sports.
Bleacher Report: Ranks top 10 UFC fighters in each division.
Fight! Magazine: Ranks top 5 fighters and only in male divisions.[89]
Ranking MMA: Ranks top 20 male fighters worldwide in each division and also by promotions.[90]
Oddsshark.com: Ranks top 10 fighters worldwide in current UFC divisions.
GroundandPound.de: Ranks top 10 European male fighters in all divisions.[91]
MMAViking: Ranks top 5 Scandinavian male fighters in all divisions and Scandinavian female pound for pound.[92]

Clothing[edit]
Mixed martial arts promotions typically require that male fighters wear shorts in addition to being barechested, thus precluding the use of gi or fighting kimono to inhibit or assist submission holds. Male fighters are required by most athletic commissions to wear groin protectors underneath their trunks.[51] Female fighters wear short shorts and sports bras or other similarly snug-fitting tops. Both male and female fighters are required to wear a mouthguard.[51]
The need for flexibility in the legs combined with durability prompted the creation of various fighting shorts brands, which then spawned a range of mixed martial arts clothing and casual wear available to the public.
Fighting area[edit]
According to the Unified Rules of Mixed Martial Arts, an MMA competition or exhibition may be held in a ring or a fenced area. The fenced area can be round or have at least six sides. There are variations on the cage such as replacing the metal fencing with a net, or using a different shape for the area other than an octagon, as the term "the Octagon" is trademarked by the UFC (though the 8-sided shape itself is not trademarked).[93] The fenced area is called a cage generically, or a hexagon, an octagon or an octagon cage, depending on the shape.
Common disciplines[edit]
Most 'traditional' martial arts have a specific focus and these arts may be trained to improve in that area. Popular disciplines of each type include:[94]

Stand-up: Boxing, Kickboxing, Muay Thai, Karate, Taekwondo, Capoeira, Combat Sambo, Savate, and Wushu Sanshou are trained to improve stand-up striking.
Clinch: Judo, Freestyle and Greco-Roman wrestling, Jujutsu, Ninjutsu, Sambo, and Wushu Sanshou are trained to improve clinching, takedowns and throws, while Muay Thai is trained to improve the striking aspect of the clinch.
Ground: Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu, Judo, Jujutsu, Sambo, Catch wrestling, Luta Livre and submission grappling are trained to improve ground control and position, as well as to achieve submission holds, and defend against them.

Most styles have been adapted from their traditional forms, such as boxing stances which lack effective counters to leg kicks, the Muay Thai stance which is poor for defending against takedowns due to its static nature, and Judo or Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu techniques which must be adapted for No Gi competition. It is common for a fighter to train with multiple coaches of different styles or an organized fight team to improve various aspects of their game at once. Cardiovascular conditioning, speed drills, strength training and flexibility are also important aspects of a fighter's training. Some schools advertise their styles as simply "mixed martial arts", which has become a style in itself, but the training will still often be split into different sections.
While mixed martial arts was initially practiced almost exclusively by competitive fighters, this is no longer the case. As the sport has become more mainstream and more widely taught, it has become accessible to wider range of practitioners of all ages. Proponents of this sort of training argue that it is safe for anyone, of any age, with varying levels of competitiveness and fitness.[95][96]
Boxing[edit]
Main article: Boxing
Boxing is a combat form that is widely used in MMA and is one of the primary striking bases for many fighters.[97] Boxing punches account for the vast majority of strikes during the stand up portion of a bout and also account for the largest number of significant strikes, knock downs and KOs in MMA matches.[98] Several aspects of boxing are extremely valuable such as footwork, combinations, and defensive techniques like slips, head movement and stance (including chin protection and keeping hands up) commonly known as the Guard position.[99] Boxing-based fighters have also been shown to throw and land a higher volume of strikes compared to other striking bases at a rate of 3.88 per minute with 9.64 per minute thrown (compared to Muay Thai at 3.46 and 7.50, respectively).[97] Some fighters that are known for using boxing include Cain Velasquez, Nick Diaz, Junior dos Santos, B.J. Penn, Dan Hardy, Shane Carwin and Andrei Arlovski.
Muay Thai/Kickboxing[edit]
Main articles: Muay Thai and Kickboxing
Muay Thai or Thai boxing and kickboxing, along with boxing, are recognised as a foundation for striking in mixed martial arts, and are both widely practiced and taught. Although both may seem identical, they each have their different techniques. Muay Thai originated in Thailand, and is known as the "art of eight limbs" which refers to the use of the legs, knees, elbows and fists.[100] One of the primary benefits of training in Muay Thai for MMA is its versatility. Techniques cover the long, middle and short range with everything from kicks to clinch holds and throws.[101] Meanwhile, kickboxing is a group of stand-up combat martial arts based on kicking and punching. The modern style originated in Japan and is developed from Karate and Muay Thai. Different governing bodies apply different rules, such as allowing the use of elbows, knees, clinching or throws, etc. Notable fighters who use Muay Thai include former UFC women's strawweight champion Joanna Jedrzejczyk and former UFC champions Anderson Silva and José Aldo.
Brazilian jiu-jitsu[edit]
Main article: Brazilian jiu-jitsu
Brazilian jiu-jitsu (BJJ) and jujutsu (JJJ) came to international prominence in the martial arts community in the early 1990s, when BJJ expert Royce Gracie won the first, second and fourth Ultimate Fighting Championships, which at the time were single-elimination martial arts tournaments. Royce often fought against much larger opponents who practiced other styles, including boxing, wrestling, shoot-fighting, karate and taekwondo. It has since become a staple art and key component for many MMA fighters. BJJ and jujutsu are largely credited for bringing widespread attention to the importance of ground fighting. BJJ is primarily a ground-based fighting style that emphasizes joint locks and chokeholds, whereas jujutsu is a method of close combat that utilizes different forms of grappling techniques such as throws, holds and joint locks. As jujutsu may also involve the use of a short weapon, it cannot be used to its full potential in mixed martial arts which prohibits the use of such weapons. Current fighters who are known for their BJJ skills include Joe Lauzon, Ronaldo Souza, Demian Maia, Fabrício Werdum and Rafael Dos Anjos.
Judo[edit]
Main article: Judo
Using their knowledge of ne-waza/ground grappling and tachi-waza/standing grappling, several judo practitioners have also competed in mixed martial arts matches.[102] Some fighters who hold a black belt in judo include Fedor Emelianenko, Anderson Silva, Dong Hyun Kim, Cub Swanson, and Olympians Ronda Rousey,[103] Hector Lombard, Rick Hawn[104] and Hidehiko Yoshida. Former WEC middleweight champion Paulo Filho has credited judo for his success in an interview.[105]
Wrestling[edit]
Main article: Wrestling
Wrestling (including freestyle, Greco-Roman, and American folkstyle) gained tremendous respect due to its effectiveness in mixed martial arts competitions. It is widely studied by mixed martial artists and credited for conferring an emphasis on conditioning for explosive movement and stamina, both of which are critical in competitive mixed martial arts. It is known for excellent takedowns, particularly against the legs. Notable wrestlers in MMA include Chael Sonnen, Randy Couture, Brock Lesnar, and Olympians Daniel Cormier and Dan Henderson.
Catch[edit]
The term no holds barred was used originally to describe the wrestling method prevalent in catch wrestling tournaments during the late 19th century wherein no wrestling holds were banned from the competition, regardless of how dangerous they might be. The term was applied to mixed martial arts matches, especially at the advent of the Ultimate Fighting Championship.[106]
Karate[edit]
Main article: Karate
Karate, especially Kyokushin and other full contact styles, has proven to be effective in the sport as it is one of the core foundations of kickboxing, and specializes in striking techniques.[107][108][109][110] Various styles of karate are practiced by some MMA fighters, notably Chuck Liddell, Bas Rutten, Lyoto Machida, Stephen Thompson, John Makdessi, Uriah Hall, Ryan Jimmo, Georges St-Pierre, Kyoji Horiguchi, and Louis Gaudinot. Liddell is known to have an extensive striking background in Kenpō with Fabio Martella[111] whereas Lyoto Machida practices Shotokan Ryu,[112] and St-Pierre practices Kyokushin.[113]
Taekwondo[edit]
Main article: Taekwondo
Several accomplished MMA fighters have an extensive background in taekwondo.[114] Some fighters that use taekwondo techniques in MMA are former UFC lightweight champion and WEC lightweight champion Anthony Pettis, who is 3rd dan black belt as well as an instructor,[115] and former UFC middleweight champion Anderson Silva, who is 5th dan black belt and still competes in taekwondo.[116]
In his instructional book, Anderson Silva admitted the influence of taekwondo in the formation of his unique style. In each of my fights, I tried to utilize techniques from all the various styles I had studied. I threw taekwondo kicks. I threw Muay Thai knees and elbows, and I used my knowledge of Brazilian jiu-jitsu on the ground.[117] Anthony Pettis has also stated that he is definitely a traditional martial artist first and a mixed martial artist second,[115] as well as his style of attacking is different [because of his] taekwondo background.[118]
Capoeira[edit]
Main article: Capoeira
Capoeira came into UFC over more recent years used majorly as an attachement to Brazilian jiu-jitsu as they both originate from Brazil. Some certain fighters use this martial art as their main way of fighting but not fully as it does also majorly consist of music and dancing. But there have been many amazing knockouts with Capoeira with it being so impressive and quick. Conor McGregor and José Aldo were the two main fighters who helped Capoeira gain such attention. It is known for its quick and complex maneuvers, predominantly using power, speed, and leverage across a wide variety of kicks, spins and techniques.
Wushu Sanshou/Sanda[edit]
Main article: Sanshou
Wushu Sanshou and other Chinese martial arts have also been utilized in MMA by several fighters, being highly effective in competition thanks to its novel mixture of striking and stand up takedowns, achieved through a condensation of traditional Chinese martial arts techniques. Most prominent and chief amongst these fighters is Cung Le, who is most notable for his TKO and KO victories over former UFC champions Frank Shamrock (in Strikeforce) and Rich Franklin (at UFC Macau). Other Wushu Sanshou based fighters who have entered MMA include KJ Noons, Pat Barry, Zhang Tiequan[119] and Muslim Salihov. Fighters in the Ranik Ultimate Fighting Champion Federation also typically come from a Wushu, hence Wushu Sanshou background.
Strategies[edit]
The techniques utilized in mixed martial arts competition generally fall into two categories: striking techniques (such as kicks, knees, punches and elbows) and grappling techniques (such as clinch holds, pinning holds, submission holds, sweeps, takedowns and throws).
Today, mixed martial artists must cross-train in a variety of styles to counter their opponent's strengths and remain effective in all the phases of combat.
Sprawl-and-Brawl[edit]
Sprawl-and-Brawl is a stand-up fighting tactic that consists of effective stand-up striking, while avoiding ground fighting, typically by using sprawls to defend against takedowns.[120]
A Sprawl-and-Brawler is usually a boxer or kickboxer, Thai boxer or karate fighter who has trained in various styles of wrestling, judo, and/or sambo to avoid takedowns to keep the fight standing. This is a form which is heavily practiced in the amateur leagues.
These fighters will often study submission wrestling to avoid being forced into submission should they find themselves on the ground. This style can be deceptively different from traditional kickboxing styles, since sprawl-and-brawlers must adapt their techniques to incorporate takedown and ground fighting defense. A few notable examples are Igor Vovchanchyn, Mirko Filipović, Chuck Liddell, Mark Hunt and more recently Junior dos Santos, Andrei Arlovski.[121] and Joanna Jedrzejczyk.[122]
Ground-and-pound[edit]
Ground-and-pound is a strategy consisting of taking an opponent to the ground using a takedown or throw, obtaining a top, or dominant grappling position, and then striking the opponent, primarily with fists, hammerfists, and elbows. Ground-and-pound is also used as a precursor to attempting submission holds.
The style is used by fighters well-versed in submission defense and skilled at takedowns. They take the fight to the ground, maintain a grappling position, and strike until their opponent submits or is knocked out. Although not a traditional style of striking, the effectiveness and reliability of ground-and-pound has made it a popular tactic. It was first demonstrated as an effective technique by Mark Coleman, then popularized by fighters such as Chael Sonnen, Don Frye, Frank Trigg, Jon Jones, Cheick Kongo, Mark Kerr, Frank Shamrock, Tito Ortiz, Matt Hughes, and Chris Weidman.[123]
While most fighters utilize ground-and-pound statically, by way of holding their opponents down and mauling them with short strikes from the top position, a few fighters manage to utilize it dynamically by striking their opponents while changing positions, thus not allowing their opponents to settle once they take them down. Cain Velasquez is one of the most devastating ground strikers in MMA. He attacks his opponents on the ground while transitioning between positions. Whether he's moving from mount to back mount or from turtle to side control, he is constantly landing shots.[124] Fedor Emelianenko, considered the greatest master of ground-and-pound in MMA history, was the first to demonstrate this dynamic style of striking in transition. He was striking his opponents on the ground while passing guard or while his opponents were attempting to recover guard.[125][126]
In the year 2000, MMA play-by-play commentator Stephen Quadros coined the popular phrase lay and pray. This refers to a situation where a wrestler or grappler keeps another fighter pinned or controlled on the mat to avoid a stand up, yet exhibiting little or no urgency to finish the grounded opponent with a knockout or a submission and basically stalling a decision for the majority or entirety of the fight, basically taking the opponent down, holding on tight, referee stands them back up, and repeat—a sort of extreme form of defensive wrestling.[127] The implication of "lay and pray" is that after the wrestler/grappler takes the striker down and lays on him to neutralize the opponent's striking weapons, he prays that the referee does not return them to the standing position. This style is considered by many fans as the most boring style of fighting and is highly criticized for intentionally creating non-action, yet it is effective and some argue that lay-and-pray is justified and that it is the responsibility of the downed fighter to be able to protect himself from this legitimate fighting technique.[127][128][129][130] Many consider Jon Fitch to be the poster boy for lay and pray.[131] UFC Welterweight champion Georges St-Pierre has been criticized by fans for playing it safe and applying the lay and pray tactic in his fights[132] and so has Bellator MMA Welterweight champion Ben Askren who justified applying lay and pray, explaining that champion fights are much harder because they are 5 rounds long compared to the usual 3 round fights.[133]
Submission-Seeking[edit]
Submission-Seeking is a reference to the strategy of taking an opponent to the ground using a takedown or throw and then applying a submission hold, forcing the opponent to submit. While grapplers will often work to attain dominant position, some may be more comfortable fighting from other positions. If a grappler finds themselves unable to force a takedown, they may resort to pulling guard, whereby they physically pull their opponent into a dominant position on the ground.[134]
Submissions are an essential part of many disciplines, most notably Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu, catch wrestling, judo, Sambo, and shootwrestling. They were popularized in the early UFC events by Royce Gracie and Ken Shamrock, and was the dominant tactic in the early UFCs. Modern proponents of the submission-seeking style such as Demian Maia and Ronaldo Souza mostly come from Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu background.[135]
Score oriented fighting[edit]
Especially used by fighters with strong wrestling background facing a highly skilled BJJ opponent, or by wrestlers who prefer stand-up fights. Usually fighters who adopt this strategy use takedowns only for scoring, easily allowing the adversary to stand up and continue the fight. They also want to land clear strikes and control the octagon. In order to win the fight by decision all score oriented fighters have to master perfect MMA defense techniques and avoid takedowns.[136]
Clinch-Fighting[edit]
Clinch-Fighting is a tactic consisting of using a clinch hold to prevent the opponent from moving away into more distant striking range, while also attempting takedowns and striking the opponent using knees, stomps, elbows, and punches. The clinch is often utilized by wrestlers and Judokas that have added components of the striking game (typically boxing), and Muay Thai fighters.
Wrestlers and Judoka may use clinch fighting as a way to neutralize the superior striking skills of a stand-up fighter or to prevent takedowns by a superior ground fighter. Ronda Rousey, with her Judo background, is considered a master at initiating throws from the clinch to set up armbars.[137]
The clinch or "plum" of a Muay Thai fighter is often used to improve the accuracy of knees and elbows by physically controlling the position of the opponent. Anderson Silva is well known for his devastating Muay Thai clinch. He defeated UFC middle weight champion Rich Franklin using the Muay Thai clinch and kneeing Franklin repeatedly to the body and face - breaking Franklin's nose. In their rematch Silva repeated this and won again.[138]
Other fighters may use the clinch to push their opponent against the cage or ropes, where they can effectively control their opponent's movement and restrict mobility while striking them with punches to the body or stomps also known as dirty boxing or "Wall and Maul". Randy Couture used his Greco Roman wrestling background to popularize this style en route to six title reigns in the Ultimate Fighting Championship.[139]
In general, fighters who cannot win fights through lightning offense, or are more suited to win fights in the later rounds or via decision are commonly known as grinders. Grinders aim to shut down their opponent's game plan and chip away at them via clinching, smothering and ground-and-pound for most of the rounds. Prominent examples of grinders are Pat Healy,[140] Rampage Jackson, and Chael Sonnen.[141]
Women's mixed martial arts[edit]
Main article: Women's mixed martial arts




Ronda Rousey; one of the top Bantamweight fighters


While mixed martial arts is primarily a male dominated sport, it does have female athletes. Female competition in Japan includes promotions such as the all-female Valkyrie, and JEWELS (formerly known as Smackgirl).[142] However historically there has been only a select few major professional mixed martial arts organizations in the United States that invite women to compete. Among those are Strikeforce, Bellator Fighting Championships, the all female Invicta Fighting Championships, and the now defunct EliteXC.[citation needed]
There has been a growing awareness of women in mixed martial arts due to popular female fighters and personalities such as Megumi Fujii, Miesha Tate, Cristiane "Cyborg" Santos, Ronda Rousey, Joanna Jędrzejczyk, Holly Holm and Gina Carano among others. Carano became known as "the face of women's MMA" after appearing in a number of EliteXC events. This was furthered by her appearances on MGM Television's 2008 revival of their game show American Gladiators.[citation needed]
History[edit]
In Japan, female competition has been documented since the mid-1990s. Influenced by female professional wrestling and kickboxing, the Smackgirl competition was formed in 2001 and became the only major all-female promotion in mixed martial arts. Other early successful Japanese female organizations included Ladies Legend Pro-Wrestling, ReMix (a predecessor to Smackgirl), U-Top Tournament, K-Grace, and AX.[citation needed]
Aside from all-female organizations, most major Japanese male dominated promotions have held select female competitions. These have included DEEP, MARS, Gladiator, HEAT, Cage Force, K-1, Sengoku, Shooto (under the name G-Shooto), and Pancrase (under the name Pancrase Athena).[citation needed]
In the United States, prior to the success of The Ultimate Fighter reality show that launched mixed martial arts into the mainstream media,[citation needed] there was no major coverage of female competitions. Some early organizations who invited women to compete included, International Fighting Championships, SuperBrawl, King of the Cage, Rage in the Cage, Ring of Combat, Bas Rutten Invitational, and HOOKnSHOOT. From the mid-2000s, more coverage came when organizations such as Strikeforce, EliteXC, Bellator Fighting Championships, and Shark Fights invited women to compete.
Outside Japan and the United States, female competition is almost exclusively found in minor local promotions. However, in Europe some major organizations have held select female competitions, including It's Showtime, Shooto Europe, Cage Warriors, and M-1 Global.
Following Zuffa's acquisition of Strikeforce in March 2011,[143][144][145][146] the UFC began promoting women's fights. The notoriety of the female fights increased with Ronda Rousey's rise to fame, but the league still struggles to find its brand with women fighters.[147] Contract problems with athletes like Gina Carano have made it difficult to secure compelling female main events for the UFC.[148]
Controversy arose in 2013, when CFA (Championship Fighting Alliance) fighter Fallon Fox came out as a transgender woman. The case became a centerpiece of debates concerning whether it was fair to have a transsexual woman compete against one born of the female sex in a contact sport.[149] Neither the UFC nor Invicta FC say they will allow her to fight, and then-UFC Bantamweight champion Ronda Rousey says she will not fight her.[150]
Amateur mixed martial arts[edit]
Amateur Mixed Martial Arts is the amateur version of the Mixed Martial Arts in which participants engage largely or entirely without remuneration. Under the International Mixed Martial Arts Federation (IMMAF) and World MMA Association (WMMAA), it is practiced within a safe and regulated environment which relies on a fair and objective scoring system and competition procedures similar to those in force in the professional Mixed Martial Arts rules.[151][152] Amateur MMA is practiced with board shorts and with approved protection gear that includes shin protectors, and amateur MMA gloves.
World Mixed Martial Arts Association[edit]
World Mixed Martial Arts Association (WMMAA) was founded in 2012 in Monaco by M-1 Global commercial promoters and is under the leadership of the General Secretary Alexander Endelgarth, President Finkelstein and Fedor Emelianenko.[153][154][155][156] The World MMA Association is an organization that manages and develops mixed martial arts, it establishes rules and procedures and hosts MMA competitions. World MMA Association includes national MMA organizations, representing the sport and registered in accordance with national laws.
As of December 2013 WMMAA has 38 member states under its umbrella, in 2017 World MMA Association has 83 members: Afghanistan, Albania, Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Colombia, Czech Republic, France, Guatemala, Georgia, Greece, India, Iran, Italy, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Lithuania, Macedonia, Moldova, Monaco, Mongolia, the Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Russia, Senegal, Serbia, Slovakia, South Korea, Spain, Switzerland, Tajikistan, Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey, Ukraine, Uzbekistan, Venezuela.[157]
On October 20, 2013 the first World MMA Championship was held in Saint Petersburg, Russia.[158]
International Mixed Martial Arts Federation[edit]
Main article: International Mixed Martial Arts Federation
On February 29, 2012, the International Mixed Martial Arts Federation (IMMAF) was set up to bring international structure, development and support to mixed martial arts worldwide.[159] IMMAF launched with support of market leader, the Ultimate Fighting Championship (UFC).[160][161] The IMMAF is a non-profit, democratic federation organized according to international federation standards to ensure that MMA as a sport is allowed the same recognition, representation and rights as all other major sports. The IMMAF is registered under Swedish law and is founded on democratic principles, as outlined in their statutes.[162] As of March 2015, there are 39 total members from 38[163] countries, which come from Austria, Bahrain, Belgium, Brazil, Bulgaria, Cameroon, Canada, Czech Republic, Denmark, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Iceland, India, Ireland (Northern Ireland), Italy, Jordan, Lebanon, Lithuania, Malaysia, Nepal, The Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Pakistan, Paraguay, Poland, Portugal, Romania, The Seychelles, South Africa, Sweden, Switzerland, Tajikistan, Ukraine, the United Kingdom, and the United States of America.[163] [163][163]
The IMMAF held its first Amateur World Championships in Las Vegas, USA, from June 30 to July 6, 2014.[164][165][166]
Safety[edit]




A ring-side doctor attends to a fighter following a loss.


Mixed Martial Arts competitions have changed dramatically since the first Ultimate Fighting Championship in 1993, specifically with the inception of the Unified Rules of Mixed Martial Arts. A paucity of data on injuries that occur in MMA and the resulting concerns and controversy with regard to MMA's safety remain. A recent systematic review concluded that the injury incidence rate in MMA appears to be greater than in most, if not all, other popular and commonly practised combat sports.[167]
Injury rates[edit]
In a recent meta-analysis of the available injury data in MMA, the injury incidence rate was estimated to be 228.7 injuries per 1000 athlete-exposures (one athlete-exposure is defined as one athlete participating in a single fight).[167] The estimated injury incidence rate in MMA is greater than in other full-contact combat sports such as judo (44.0 injuries per 1000 athlete-exposures),[168] taekwondo (79.4 injuries per 1000 athlete-exposures),[169] amateur boxing (77.7 injuries per 1000 athlete-exposures),[170] and professional boxing (118.0-250.6 injuries per 1000 athlete-exposures).[171][172][173][174]
Injury pattern[edit]
In general, the injury pattern in MMA is very similar to that in professional boxing but unlike that found in other combat sports such as judo and taekwondo.[167] The most commonly injured body region is the head (66.8% to 78.0% of reported injuries) followed by the wrist/hand (6.0% to 12.0% of reported injuries), while the most frequent types of injury were laceration (36.7% to 59.4% of reported injuries), fracture (7.4% to 43.3% of reported injuries), and concussion (3.8% to 20.4% of reported injuries).[167]
Mental health[edit]
In preliminary results reported in April 2012 as part of an ongoing study of a 109 professional boxers and MMA fighters being conducted by Dr. Charles Bernick and his colleagues at Cleveland Clinic's Lou Ruvo Center for Brain Health, fighters with more than six years of ring experience were observed to have reductions in size in their hippocampus and thalamus whereas fighters with more than twelve years of ring experience were observed to have both reductions in size and symptoms such as memory loss (the hippocampus and thalamus deal with memory and alertness). Dr. Bernick speculates that the cumulative damage over time from lesser blows may eventually prove an even more important topic of study than that of infrequent concussions.[175]
Fatalities[edit]
Main article: Fatalities in mixed martial arts contests
There have been seven known deaths in MMA to date.[176] There were no documented cases of deaths after a sanctioned MMA event prior to 2007.[177]
Since 2007, there were six fatalities in mixed martial arts matches. The first was the death of Sam Vasquez on November 30, 2007.[178] Vasquez collapsed shortly after being knocked out by Vince Libardi in the third round of an October 20, 2007 fight at the Toyota Center in Houston, Texas.[177] Vasquez had two separate surgeries to remove blood clots from his brain, and shortly after the second operation suffered a devastating stroke and never regained consciousness.[178]
The second death stemming from a sanctioned mixed martial arts contest occurred in South Carolina on June 28, 2010, when 30-year-old Michael Kirkham was knocked out and never regained consciousness. He was pronounced dead two days after the fight.[179]
The third death on August 11, 2012 involved 30 year old Tyrone Mims who was making his amateur MMA debut at “Conflict MMA: Fight Night at the Point VI” in South Carolina, making his death the second MMA related death in the state.[180] After being TKO’d in the second round of the fight he became unresponsive and was taken to Medical University Hospital where he was pronounced dead one hour later. No evidence of brain trauma or concussion was found however and the initial autopsy has proved inconclusive. Coroner Rae Wooten explained that his death may likely have been from an irregular heartbeat caused by over exertion; however whether or not his death was a direct result of his fight remains a mystery.[181]
On February 27, 2014, 29 year old Booto Guylain was transported to a Johannesburg General Hospital to be treated for swelling and bleeding on the brain after suffering a KO loss via elbow in the last round of his fight in South Africa based promotion “Extreme Fighting Championship Africa”. He was unable to make a recovery, and after one week in the hospital he was pronounced dead.[182][183]
On April 9, 2016, 28 year old João Carvalho died following a Total Extreme Fighting event at the National Stadium in Dublin (Ireland). The Portuguese fighter was beaten in a TKO, and fell ill 20 minutes after the fight. He was taken immediately to Beaumont hospital where he underwent emergency brain surgery, but passed away two days later. [184]
On July 15, 2017 after a TKO loss resulting from unanswered punches in the second round of his fight, 37 year old Donshay White became unresponsive and collapsed in his locker room and was rushed to the KentuckyOne Health Sts. Mary & Elizabeth Hospital in Kentucky.[185] He was soon pronounced dead and was revealed to be caused by hypertensive/atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease.[186]
Legality of professional competitions[edit]
Australia[edit]
MMA in Australia is sanctioned in all States and Territories of Australia by various combat sports authorities/organizations. There is debate about the use of the cage, which was banned in Victoria in 2007[187] and then relegalized in 2015.[188] The cage was banned in Western Australia in March, 2013.
Bahrain[edit]
MMA is legalized in Bahrain. Bahrain National MMA Federation (BNMMAF) has been set up under the patronage of Sheikh Khalid bin Hamad Al Khalifa and the jurisdiction of the Sports Minister Sheikh Nasser bin Hamad Al Khalifa.[189] The development of MMA in the nation is convened through KHK MMA, which also owns Brave Combat Federation which is the largest Mixed Martial Arts promotion in the Middle East.[190] Bahrain will be hosting World MMA Amateurs Championship 2017 supported by International Mixed Martial Arts Federation.[191]
Belgium[edit]
MMA is tolerated in Belgium but not supported. In May 2012 the Belgian MMA Federation (BMMAF) was accepted by the International Mixed Martial Arts Federation as its third member, after several years of carrying out many of the tasks of a national federation under the former name of the Belgian Shooto and MMA Federation. Active in developing MMA in Belgium from 2005, the group later redefined their activities to include MMA in order to be able to use a cage. Registered as federation in Belgium in 2006, the former Belgian Shooto and MMA Federation organized more than 1500 MMA bouts (Amateur, B class and A class), and built a structure for the sport nationally that included insurance, rules and regulation, experience levels for fighters and technical seminars. The BMMAF has continued its activities as part of the wider MMA community under IMMAF.[192][193][194]
Brazil[edit]
Main article: Mixed martial arts in Brazil
January 17, 2013 saw the announcement that the Brazilian MMA Athletic Commission, or Comissao Atletica Brasileira de MMA (CABMMA), had joined the International MMA Federation. The CABMMA represents state federations across Brazil and is spearheaded by lawyers Giovanni Biscardi and Rafael Favettia, a former Executive Secretary of the Minister of Justice and Interim Minister of Justice.[195] The CABMMA supervised its first event with "UFC on FX 7" on 19 January 2013 at Ibirapuera Gymnasium in São Paulo.[196][197][198]
The CABMMA first hit international sports headlines when it suspended fighter Rousimar Palhares for prolonging a submission on opponent Mike Pierce, despite him tapping several times, during UFC Fight Night 29 in Barueri, Brazil on 9th Oct 2013.[199][200] The CABMMA was called to preside over another controversy to involve a Brazilian competitor, when Vitor Belfort's use of Testosterone Replacement Therapy came to light over UFC on FX 8 (May 18, 2013)[201]
Bulgaria[edit]
Appearing on professional basis around 2008–2009, MMA is a new sport in Bulgaria and growing rapidly. With a strong wrestling and boxing culture in the region, general interest in the sport is huge. However, it remains unregulated. The Bulgarian Federation for Mixed Martial Arts was elected as the national federation representing the Republic of Bulgaria under the International Mixed Martial Arts Federation in October 2014; and like all IMMAF members, is a non-profit, democratic organization. Established in November 2013 by 10 MMA clubs, the organization is headed by UFC competitor Stanislav Nedkov. The federation's registration to the Ministry of Justice was approved in June 2014 and its application for formal recognition by the Ministry of Sport is in its advanced stages.[202][203]
Cambodia[edit]
In January 2013, the Cambodian Mixed Martial Arts Association was created under the Cambodian Martial Arts Federation. At this time there are no MMA events organized with the CMMAA approval. Television channel MYTV holds its KWC promotion under the sanctioning of the Cambodian Boxing Federation, responsible for sanctioning all boxing and Kun Khmer events in the country, in direct contrast to the situation in neighbouring Thailand.
Canada[edit]
For many years, professional MMA competitions were illegal in Canada. Section 83(2) of the Canadian Criminal Code deemed that only boxing matches where only fists are used are considered legal.[204][205] However most provinces regulated it by a provincial athletic commission (skirting S. 83(2) by classifying MMA as "mixed boxing"),[206] such as the provinces of Manitoba, Ontario,[207] Nova Scotia, Quebec, and Northwest Territories. The legality of MMA in the provinces of Alberta, British Columbia, and New Brunswick varies depending on the municipality.[208][209] Professional MMA competitions remain illegal in the Canadian provinces of Newfoundland and Labrador, Prince Edward Island, Saskatchewan, Yukon, and Nunavut because it is not regulated by an athletic commission.
Canada formally decriminalized mixed martial arts with a vote on Bill S-209 on June 5, 2013. The bill formally gives provinces the power to create athletic commissions to regulate and sanction professional mixed martial arts bouts.[54] Bill S-209 does not in and of itself make MMA legal across Canada; it allows provinces to make it legal on a province by province basis.[206]
China[edit]
In 2011, the Ranik Ultimate Fighting Federation (RUFF) hosted the first MMA event in Shanghai sanctioned by China's governing body for combat sports, the Wushu Sports Management Center of the General Administration of Sport in China. RUFF formally crowned the first Chinese national MMA champions in 2013 with each champion receiving 1,000,000 RMB in prize money.[210] Other MMA promotions in China includes Real Fight Championship, which has produced 3 events in Henan and Beijing.
Denmark[edit]
In Denmark, Mixed Martial Arts may be practised but is not an official or legally regulated sport. On November 11, 2012 the voluntary Danish Mixed Martial Arts Federation held its first official general assembly in Odense, Denmark. There the DMMAF was officially founded and a board was elected headed up by President Claus Larsen. The Federation was publicly launched on Friday November 24, inviting Danish MMA organizations, gyms and academies to sign up as members. The DMMAF is working towards recognition under the Danish Sports Federation, Dansk Idræts Forbund. On November 25 the DMMAF's application to the International Mixed Martial Arts Federation was approved.[211][212]
France[edit]
There remains political opposition to MMA in France and full contact MMA competition is banned.[213][214][215] All bouts on French soil recorded as Mixed Martial Arts are in fact held under Pancrase Rules and other variants (Pankration, Kempo, Pankido).[216][217] These bouts involve no striking on the ground as it is illegal in the country. The Commission National de Mixed Martial Arts (CNMMA) was founded as a non-profit organization for the development of MMA in 2009. The CNMMA had worked over four years to put an educational structure in place, including a technical system for the safe progression from grass-roots level, all the way up to the top professional level.[218] Comprising 11 regional leagues working under regional technical advisers and teams,[218] the CNMMA joined the International Mixed Martial Arts Federation (IMMAF) in March 2013 as The Commission Française de Mixed Martial Arts (CFMMA).[219][220] In 2012, CFMMA president Bertrand Amoussou ascended to the position of President of the International Mixed Martial Arts Federation.
India[edit]
Minister of Youth Affairs and Sports (India) have not recognized Mixed Martial Arts as a sport in India. Hence conducting Mixed Martial Arts events are not covered as sports but as unsanctioned events or street fighting.[221] There had been allegations from MMA fighters about lack of insurance, medical facilities and financial benefits.
Ireland[edit]
The Irish Martial Arts Commission recognised by the Irish Sports Council does not include MMA among its recognised martial arts.[222][223] The Department of Transport, Tourism and Sport does not recognise MMA as a sport.[224][not in citation given] UFC Fight Night 46, featuring Conor McGregor, was held in Dublin in 2014.
Mixed Martial Arts Federation Ireland (MMAFI), intended as a federation for amateur MMA clubs, gained observer status at IMMAF in June 2012.[225] MMAFI had a meeting in March 2013 with the Northern Ireland sports minister, Carál Ní Chuilín about the prospect of getting recognition from Sport Northern Ireland.[225]
Japan[edit]
MMA competition has been legal in Japan since at least the mid-1980s, when Pancrase fights began to be held. There are several MMA-related organizations, including RIZIN FF, DEEP, Pancrase, Shooto and ZST.[226][227]
Malaysia[edit]
In July 2013 the Malaysia Mixed Martial Arts Association (MASMMAA) was formally announced as the official national governing body for MMA in Malaysia, ahead of its formation in December 2013. MASMMAA is registered under the Malaysian Sports Development Act 1997 and recognized by the Commissioner of Sports, under the auspices of the office of the Youth & Sports Ministry. The federation comprises representatives of ten states out of fourteen in Malaysia. MASMMAA became affiliated to the International Mixed Martial Arts Federation in April 2014.[228][229][230]
Norway[edit]
In Norway, sports that involve knock-outs as a means of securing victory or points are illegal, including MMA and boxing.[231][232] Norwegian MMA fighters must therefore travel abroad to compete. The Norwegian MMA Federation (NMMAF) was elected as a full member of the International MMA Federation (IMMAF) on 22 April 2012,[233] representing 49 member gyms across Norway.[234] In 2012 the "Merkekamper" concept was introduced by the NMMAF, with government sanctioning, that enables member MMA gyms to hold events with sparring matches, but governed by strict rules concerning how hard a fighter is permitted to strike.[235][236]
Pakistan[edit]
In Pakistan, Mixed Martial Arts Pakistan organizes MMA events, the organization was founded in 2007 by veteran Pakistani MMA fighter Bashir Ahmad for promotion of MMA in Pakistan. Bashir Ahmad came to Pakistan in 2007 and that is when MMA in Pakistan was born and ever since that day Bashir gave all he got to promote Mixed Martial Arts in Pakistan
Portugal[edit]
The FMMAP is recognized by the Portuguese government as a non-profit sports federation and oversees Amateur MMA competition and coaching nationally. Based in Vila do Conde, the Federação de Mixed Martial Arts de Portugal (FMMAP) was founded as a collaborative effort between 6 existing non-profit organizations in 2012, as Portugal's first dedicated MMA Federation. This is in line with government requirements of all sport federations in Portugal that they consist of at least 3 associated, non-profit groups. The composite FMMAP organisations are all involved in the coaching and promoting of MMA with a shared goal for the Amateur sport, but come from various martial arts that include Karate, Kickboxing, Muay Thai, Pankration Athlima, Mixed Martial Arts, Jeet Kune Do, Freestyle martial arts, Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu and Wrestling. Affiliated groups at launch were AAMU - Associação Artes Marciais, Associação de Artes Marciais e Desportos de Combate (Açores), Associação Areagon (Chaves City), Associação Mirandelense de Artes Orientais (Mirandela City), Associação Portuguesa de Ciências de Combate/JKD Unlimited Portugal (Lisbon City), KMD MMA system (Porto City), Barcelos Gym (Barcelos City). The FMMAP is affiliated to the International Mixed Martial Arts Federation (IMMAF).[237][238][239]
Romania[edit]
The Romanian Mixed Martial Arts Federation (RMMAF) was established in 2012 as a legal non-profit federation under the Ministry of Youth and Sport in Romania. The Federation was formed by the board of MMA organization AGON backed by a broad representation of the Romanian MMA community including around 20 pure MMA clubs and non-profit MMA organizations around the country. Based in Bucharest, Romania AGON club was founded in its present legal form in June 2012 following a long period of time of acting under different other organisations, and Gheorghe Stanciu was elected as its president. AGON's members brought long experience in the management of sports organizations, with Mr Mihail Mihailovici having previously founded the Kyolusing BudoKai organization in Romania under the IKO, organising national and international competitions over 5 years and working with the government as a recognised sports body. The RMMAF is affiliated to the International Mixed Martial Arts Federation (IMMAF).[240][241][242][243]
Russia[edit]
In September 2012, MMA was given 'National Sport' status in Russia, and on the same day fighter and M-1 Global promoter Fedor Emelianenko was appointed to the role of Russian MMA Union president.[244]
Singapore[edit]
The MMA program at Singapore is licensed by the Cantonment Police Division.[citation needed]
Sweden[edit]
MMA competition is legal[245] and under the purview of the Swedish Mixed Martial Arts Federation (SMMAF) which was formed in 2007[246] and began overseeing MMA events and governing the sport as a whole in 2008.[247] In 2009 the SMMAF was accepted into the Association of Swedish Budo and Martial Arts Federation,[247] thus granting MMA "national sport" status and making its approved clubs eligible for partial government subsidization.[247] On April 30, 2011, the SMMAF sanctioned the first event under its purview to utilize the Unified Rules of Mixed Martial Arts.[248] The Swedish Mixed Martial Arts Federation governs the sport of MMA in Sweden as a member affiliated to the International Mixed Martial Arts Federation.[163][249]
The SMMAF hit the headlines when it withdrew Swedish headliner, Alexander Gustafsson, from competing at UFC on FUEL 9 in Sweden (April 6, 2013), due to a facial laceration.[250][251][252][253]
South Africa[edit]
MMA competition is legal and under the purview of the Professional Mixed Martial Arts Council or PROMMA Africa;[citation needed] which was formed in 2010 with its main purpose to regulate MMA at larger MMA promotions such as EFC Worldwide (Formerly known as EFC Africa). PROMMA Africa began overseeing Rise of the Warrior MMA events in 2010. In 2012 the PROMMA Africa Council was accepted into the Mixed Martial Arts Association of South Africa (MASA) thus granting MMA "national sport" status.[citation needed] In addition to EFC Africa, there are other leagues such as Dragon Legends MMA.[254]
Taiwan[edit]
MMA is officially sanctioned by the government and sports authorities of Taiwan and numerous Taiwanese MMA fighters are currently training and competing on the international level, with a few of them in the UFC and other MMA organizations. Many major international MMA fights are held at stadiums in Taiwan every year. Additionally, many martial arts schools and gyms in Taiwan provide professional level MMA training.
Thailand[edit]
In 2012, the Sports Authority of Thailand banned competitions.[255] It has been speculated that the Muay Thai industry played a factor in the Sports Authority of Thailand (SAT)'s final decision, as MMA could potentially take away business from Muay Thai, from fighters to profit.[256] SAT Deputy Governor Sakol Wannapong has said "Organizing a MMA event here would hurt the image of Muay Thai, if you want to do this kind of business, you should do it in another country. Organizing MMA here could mislead the public into believing that Muay Thai is brutal."
Jussi Saloranta, the owner of Thailand's only MMA promotion, DARE Fight Sports, revealed that his lawyers found that the ban was actually premature, and that from a legal standpoint, there is no law banning mixed martial arts in the country, and that the SAT's ban was more of a scare tactic. Because of this DARE continue to showcase events while informing fans only at the last minute through texts on the day of the event, and presenting the videos on YouTube as The Most Dangerous Gameshow.[257] Saloranta has also helped set up the MMA Association of Thailand, in the hopes of reaching a compromise with SAT and regulating mixed martial arts in Thailand.
On September 12, 2013, DARE Fight Sports released a statement announcing SAT had removed the ban on MMA and would henceforth sanction the sport in Thailand.[258]
Dare Fight Sports is currently the only MMA organization in Thailand to be officially sanctioned and publicized by the tourism authority of Thailand but there is now also an ever-growing set of new MMA organizations appearing around the country.[259]
United States[edit]
Main article: Mixed martial arts in the United States
In the United States, professional MMA is overseen by the Association of Boxing Commissions.[260] According to the Associations of Boxing Commissions, professional MMA competitions are allowed in all states.[208] Alaska has no boxing or athletic commission. Montana has a state athletic commission although it doesn't regulate MMA. However, MMA is legal in both states. West Virginia became the 44th state to regulate mixed martial arts on March 24, 2011.[261] On March 8, 2012, Wyoming became the 45th state to regulate MMA.[262] On May 4, 2012, it was announced that Vermont had become the 46th state to regulate MMA.[263] Legislation allowing MMA in Connecticut came into effect on October 1, 2013, making it the 47th state to regulate the sport.[264] On March 22, 2016, the New York State Assembly voted to lift the State's 1997 ban on MMA and on April 14, 2016 Governor Cuomo signed the bill legalizing and regulating the sport into law.[265][266]
See also[edit]


MMA portal
Martial arts portal



Hybrid martial arts
List of current mixed martial arts champions
List of female mixed martial artists
List of male mixed martial artists
List of Mixed Martial Artists with the most sanctioned fights
Mixed martial arts clothing
Shoot fighting

References[edit]


^ a b Rosenberg, Howard (November 15, 1993). "'Ultimate' Fight Lives Up to Name". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved June 22, 2016. 
^ "Full Contact! presents - A UFC 1 Article". Archived from the original on 3 February 1998. 
^ a b Kirik Jenness (2012-02-04). "Did LA reporter coin the term Mixed Martial Arts?". Mixed Martial Arts News. Retrieved 2014-06-08. 
^ a b Nash, John S. (May 23, 2012) The Martial Chronicles: Before Fighting Was Ultimate It Was Super, SB Nation (bloodyelbow.com) Retrieved August 31, 2014
^ a b Werner, Sam (June 24, 2011) MMA roots were planted in New Kensington, Pittsburgh Post-Gazette Retrieved September 1, 2014
^ Sonmez, Can. "UFC 1: The Beginning". Mixed Martial Arts.com. 
^ Plotz, David (November 16, 1997). "Fight Clubbed". Slate. Retrieved 2006-12-26. 
^ McFarland, Matt (May 6, 2008). "Ultimate Fighting wants to come to NY". WNYT.com. Archived from the original on 2008-05-09. Retrieved 2008-05-06. 
^ Trembow, Ivan (March 1, 2007). "UFC PPV Revenue Tops $200 Million in 2006". MMA Weekly. Archived from the original on May 22, 2007. Retrieved 2007-06-18. 
^ http://fightland.vice.com/blog/shuai-jiao-chinas-indigenous-wrestling-style
^ http://legacy.ymaa.com/articles/kung-fu-wrestling-shuai-jiao
^ http://www.lvshaolin.com/shuai_chiao/
^ Gardiner, E. Norman, 'The Pankration' in Greek Athletic Sports and Festivals, London:MacMillan, 1910, p.435
^ Green, Thomas A., 'Pankration' in Martial Arts of the World: An Encyclopedia of History and Innovation, California:ABC-CLIO, 2010, p.237
^ Gardiner, E. Norman, 'The Pankration' in Greek Athletic Sports and Festivals, London:MacMillan, 1910, pp.436-437
^ John R. Little, Curtis F. Wong (September 2000). Ultimate Martial Arts Encyclopedia. McGraw-Hill; 1 edition. ISBN 0-8092-2835-1. CS1 maint: Uses authors parameter (link)
^ a b c Template:Https://geecomputers.blogspot.com/Green, Thomas A. Martial Arts of the World [2 volumes]: An Encyclopedia of History and Innovation. ABC-CLIO (June 11, 2010). pp. 259-260. ISBN 978-1598842432.
^ Graeme Kent (1968). A Pictorial History of Wrestling. Spring Books; 1 edition. 
^ a b Noble, Graham (March 2001). "An Introduction to E. W. Barton-Wright (1860–1951) and the Eclectic Art of Bartitsu". Journal of Manly Arts. Retrieved 2007-06-14. 
^ "Journal of Combative Sport: Jujitsu versus Boxing". Journal of Combative Sport. Retrieved 2008-05-07. 
^ "Fighting Spirit: An Introductory History of Korean Boxing, 1926–1945". Journal of Combative Sport. Retrieved 2009-02-16. 
^ a b Willoughby, David P. (1970). The Super Athletes. A.S. Barnes & Co., Inc. pp. 376–380. ISBN 0-498-06651-7. 
^ "Judo vs. Boxing: "Judo" Gene LeBell Defeats Boxer Milo Savage in First MMA Fight". blackbeltmag.com. 
^ a b Sylvie von Duuglas-Ittu. "Origins of Japanese Kickboxing – The Karate vs Muay Thai Fight That Started It All". 8 Limbs.  December 28, 2015
^ Wickert, Marc. 2004. Dana White and the future of UFC. kucklepit.com. See Wikiquotes for the text.
^ Peterson, D.: Wong Shun Leung: The Legend behind the Legend; Recalling the life of Bruce Lee's teacher Archived 2016-03-03 at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved on 25 June 2009.
^ Lam, G., & LeBlanc, G. E.: The Wing Chun double knife training: Baat Jaam Do Retrieved on 7 July 2009.
^ Longley, K.: Dave Lacey 'Lai Dai Wai': Buck Sing Choy Lay Fut's unrepentant 'Black Panther' Archived 2016-03-04 at the Wayback Machine. (originally published in Impact International Martial Arts Magazine). Retrieved 7 July 2009.
^ Bull, Andy (2009-11-11). "The forgotten story of ... Muhammad Ali v Antonio Inoki". The Guardian. Retrieved 2014-06-08. 
^ Black Belt Apr 1999 (Rick Roufus interview - mentions fight). books.google.co.uk. Retrieved 2011-06-06. 
^ "MMA Fan's Guide to Grappling: Sambo". Bloody Elbow. Retrieved 2014-02-07. 
^ Adams, Andy (2013-03-22). "Classic Black Belt Article From 1967: Russia Prepares to Export Sambo (Part 2) – - Black Belt". Blackbeltmag.com. Retrieved 2014-02-07. 
^ "Rare & Violent Footage From Russia's Legendary Boxing vs Karate Kumite Matches". South Land Post. 
^ "Boxing vs. Karate in Russia". Martial Arts Remix.  October 8, 2017
^ "MMA Origins: Vale Tudo and The Original MMA Rivalry". Bloody Elbow. 2012-01-01. Retrieved 2014-06-08. 
^ "MMA History, myths, facts, rumorsPittsburgh MMA". 
^ Sánchez Garcia, R.; D. Malcolm (2010). "Decivilizing, civilizing or informalizing? The international development of mixed martial arts". International Review for the Sociology of Sport. 45 (1): 39–58. doi:10.1177/1012690209352392. Retrieved 2014-03-15. 
^ "Fight Finder – UFC 1 The Beginning". Sherdog.com. 
^ Peligro, Kid (2003). The Gracie Way: An Illustrated History of the World's Greatest Martial Arts Family. Invisible Cities Press. pp. 79–84. ISBN 1-931229-28-7. 
^ "What is MMA (Mixed Martial Arts)?". Allout Fight Shop. 
^ "What is Pride?". Pride. Retrieved 2006-12-23. 
^ Sievert, Steve (December 29, 2006). "UFC 66 to make MMA history". Houston Chronicle. Retrieved 2007-06-18. 
^ Doyle, Dave (April 4, 2000). "UFC scores TKO on its business rival". Fox Sports, MSN. Archived from the original on April 6, 2007. Retrieved 2007-03-27. 
^ "Source: UFC buys Pride for less than $70M". Associated Press, ESPN. March 27, 2007. Retrieved 2007-06-15.  "This is really going to change the face of MMA. Literally creating a sport that could be as big around the world as soccer. I liken it somewhat to when the NFC and AFC came together to create the NFL" —Lorenzo Fertitta, one of the UFC's majority owners
^ Umstead, R. Thomas (September 18, 1995). "Operators struggle again with UFC time overrun. (multiple-systems operators; Ultimate Fighting Championships)". Multichannel News. Retrieved 2014-06-08 – via HighBeam Research. 
^ "Jeff Blatnick's funeral and how the term MMA came to be". MMA Fighting. 2012-10-27. Retrieved 2014-06-08. 
^ NO HOLDS BARRED:The complete history of Mixed Martial Arts in America by Clyde Gentry
^ Eddie Goldman. "EXTREME FIGHTING 4 RULES MEETING GOES ON AS PLANNED". Archived from the original on 1998-02-03. Retrieved 2014-06-08. 
^ "Chapter 74 : Professional Shoot Fighting" (PDF). Legis.iowa.org. Retrieved 2015-06-12. 
^ Gross, Josh (2005-02-22). "MMA Vote Takes Place Today in California". Sherdog.com. Retrieved 2011-05-17. 
^ a b c d e "Mixed Martial arts Unified Rules of Conduct". New Jersey State Athletic Control Board. September 5, 2002. Archived from the original on April 3, 2009. Retrieved 2006-06-18. 
^ "SUMMARY REPORT Discussion and Review of UNIFIED RULES OF MIXED MARTIAL ARTS". ABCBoxing.com. Archived from the original on 2012-07-05. Retrieved 2011-05-17. 
^ "Army Embraces MMA for Inaugural Combatives Tournament". Sherdog.com. 2005-11-03. Retrieved 2011-04-17. 
^ a b "Members of Parliament Vote to Give MMA Legal Framework in Canada!". TopMMANews.com. 2013-06-05. Retrieved 2013-06-05. 
^ "MMA Promotions Index". Tapology.com. Retrieved 2015-06-12. 
^ "UFC's Dana White Talks Competition". BloodyElbow.com. 2011-04-14. Retrieved 2011-04-16. 
^ "Current MMA Rankings". Fightmatrix.com. 2015-03-25. Retrieved 2015-06-12. 
^ "UFC 129 Officially Breaks Live Gate, Attendance Records". Sherdog.com. 2011-04-30. Retrieved 2011-05-13. 
^ Fagan, Mike (2011-05-06). "UFC 129 Does Big Business, Georges St. Pierre Is Huge in Canada". BloodyElbow.com. Retrieved 2011-05-13. 
^ "UFC Announces TV Deal with Fox". Ultimate Fighting Championship-Mobile. 2011-08-18. Retrieved 2014-06-08. 
^ a b c d "UFC Fight Pass adds live events from Japanese MMA pioneer promotion Pancrase". MMAjunkie. 
^ Press Release (June 7, 2012) Invicta FC Partners with Jewels to Create Top Female Fights. Fight Network Retrieved october 20,2014
^ (Issue Date: 10/19/2014) Women's Atomweight (110.9 lbs and under) fighter ranks, Fight Matrix Retrieved October 20, 2014
^ (October 1, 2014) Unified Women's Mixed Martial Arts Rankings mmarising.com Retrieved October 20, 2014
^ Worldwide MMA Discussion/Sticky Threads (November 21, 2014) Top 50 best regional orgs (Fall Update), Sherdog forum, Retrieved December 1, 2015
^ "MMA Gyms and Academies Directory". Tapology.com. Retrieved 2015-06-12. 
^ "Gyms". MMATraining.com. Retrieved 2015-06-12. 
^ Hutchinson, Michael (July 29, 2015) UFC Gyms fight camp rankings, SB Nation (BloodyElbow.com) retrieved September 22, 2015
^ "Alexa - Top Sites by Category: Sports/Martial Arts/Submission Fighting and MMA/News and Media". alexa.com. 
^ UFC 40: Vendetta (PPV)|format= requires |url= (help) (Television production). Zuffa (November 22, 2002). Event occurs at 1:00 into Chuck Liddell vs. Renato Sobral.  "The evolution of martial arts since 1993, since the UFC came around, martial arts have evolved more than they have in the last 700 years. We know exactly now what works in a real live situation with two warriors fighting. For a long time that was just speculation." —Joe Rogan
^ Sloan, Mike (June 22, 2007). "No Win Situation is Must Win for Shamrock". Sherdog, ESPN. Retrieved 2007-06-22. 
^ Rousseau, Robert. "A History and Style Guide of MMA". About.com. Retrieved 2011-04-20. 
^ Breen, Jordan (2009-03-11). "Art Jimmerson: Where Is He Now?". Sherdog.com. Retrieved 2011-04-20. 
^ Martin, Todd (2010-08-16). "Boxing vs. MMA? More Like Boxer vs. Reality". Sherdog.com. Retrieved 2011-04-20. 
^ Hunt, Loretta (2010-08-29). "White, Couture Soften Toney's Fall at UFC 118". Sherdog.com. Retrieved 2011-04-20. 
^ Rossen, Jake (2010-08-31). "Respecting James Toney". Sherdog.com. Retrieved 2011-04-20. 
^ a b Strickland, Jonathan. "UFC History". HowStuffWorks.com. Retrieved 2011-05-18. 
^

(February 10, 2011), Silva or Fedor? Who you prefer says lots about why you watch "You can argue the point either way, and people have, and will, and I don't have any fixed opinion on the matter other than that I would like to see the two fight at light heavyweight. What's actually interesting is that when you run down their records the two are even closer than you might think.", Sports Illustrated, Retrieved May 17, 2014
(December 31, 2013), Anderson Silva vs Fedor Emelianenko: Debating MMA's Greatest of All Time "I think to be honest we've kind of come to the crux of why it's so difficult to choose between Anderson and Fedor as the GOAT. It really does just come down to where you put the most value.", bloodyelbow.com, Retrieved May 17, 2014
(January 3, 2014), Fedor Emelianenko vs. Anderson Silva: Comparing and Contrasting 2 Legends, "What we can agree on is that both of these men changed the game. In a sport where everyone loses, these men beat the best of the best and held off the inevitable for the longest. Few men in any field can lay claim to such accomplishment and influence over their own sport. That is something to be applauded, examined and appreciated—not bickered over.", Bleacher report, Retrieved May 17, 2014
(January 2, 2014), BE's Baddest MMA Greatest of All Time Tournament Winner: Fedor Emelianenko, (Fan opinion pole), bloodyelbow.com, Retrieved May 17, 2014
(September 4, 2012), Fedor Emelianenko Voted The Greatest Fighter Of All Time By Brazilian Fans, (Fan opinion poll), bloodyelbow.com, Retrieved May 17, 2014


^ "MMA's worldwide leader in UFC news, gear and events". Mixedmartialarts.com. Retrieved 2014-06-08. 
^ a b Krauss, Erich (1 December 2004). Warriors of the Ultimate Fighting Championship. U.S.: Citadel Press Inc.,. ISBN 0-8065-2657-2. 
^ "PRIDE Rules". PRIDE FC Official Website. Retrieved 2014-06-08. 
^ "RULES". ONE Official Website. Retrieved 2014-06-29. 
^ "The Current Best Pound-for-Pound MMA Fighters". Tapology MMA Rankings. Retrieved 2014-06-08. 
^ Jeff Wagenheim. "Jon Jones's suspension means Ronda Rousey is No. 1 in pound for pound rankings - MMA - SI.com". SI.com. 
^ "Fighter Rankings For June 1, 2014". MMARising.com. 2014-06-01. Retrieved 2014-06-08. 
^ McKinley Noble. "Bellator". Bleacher Report. 
^ "The attitude of erasure - An op-ed on WMMA rankings by Fallon Fox". Bloody Elbow. 
^ "MMAWeekly World Top 10 MMA Rankings". MMAWeekly.com. 2010-10-05. Retrieved 2014-06-08. 
^ "MMA Rankings". FIGHT! Magazine. Retrieved 2014-06-08. 
^ "Rankings Archives". Ranking MMA. Retrieved 2014-06-08. 
^ "GroundandPound . Kampfsportnews . MMA, Thaiboxen, Kickboxen, Boxen, Grappling". groundandpound.de. 
^ "MMA Viking's Official Nordic Rankings – March Update". Nordic MMA Everyday at MMA Viking. 
^ "Rules and Regulations - Unified Rules and Other MMA Regulations". 
^ "UFC® Martial Arts Styles - Fighters Train in Multiple Disciplines". ufc.com. 
^ Gree, Andrew (December 20, 2005). "Kids in MMA". Innovative Martial arts. Archived from the original on July 9, 2007. Retrieved 2006-12-13. 
^ Gutierrez, Luis. "JKD and Children". One Dragon Martial arts. Retrieved 2006-12-13. 
^ a b "Striking Styles and Statistics, Part 1: Volume". Bloody Elbow. Retrieved 2014-08-12. 
^ "FightMetric LLC :.: The World's First Comprehensive MMA Statistics Provider". Fightmetric.com. Retrieved 2014-08-12. 
^ "Recipe For Success: Becoming well rounded in mixed martial arts (Part Four)". MMAmania.com. Retrieved 2014-08-12. 
^ WTBA Administrator. "History". thaiboxing.com. Archived from the original on 2015-06-30. 
^ Patterson, Jeff. "Muay Thai Training". nwfighting.com. Northwest Fighting Arts. Retrieved 11 March 2014. 
^ "Judo "The Gentle Way": Why Judo Is so Underrated in MMA Today". Bleacher Report. Retrieved 2015-01-19. 
^ "The Gentle Way: Strikeforce Champion Ronda Rousey and the Birth of a Judo Star". Bleacher Report. Retrieved 2015-01-19. 
^ "The Gentle Way Part II: Olympians Ronda Rousey and Rick Hawn Adapt to MMA". Bleacher Report. Retrieved 2015-01-19. 
^ "entrevista a paulo filho (interview with Paulo Filho)" (in Portuguese). youtube.com. 
^ Catch: the hold not taken documentary DVD 2005 Archived July 21, 2011, at the Wayback Machine.
^ http://www.espn.co.uk/mma/story/_/id/18015888/stephen-thompson-champion-karate-hopes-become-ufc-welterweight-champion-ufc-209
^ "Technique Talk: Stephen Thompson Retrofits Karate for MMA". MMA Fighting. Retrieved 2014-06-08. 
^ Schneiderman, R. M. (2009-05-23). "Contender Shores Up Karate's Reputation Among U.F.C. Fans". The New York Times. Retrieved 2010-01-30. 
^ "Lyoto Machida and the Revenge of Karate". Sherdog. Retrieved 2010-02-13. 
^ "Chuck Liddell - Biography and Profile of Chuck Liddell". Martialarts.about.com. Retrieved 2012-11-25. 
^ Jack Slack (2014-02-14). "Lyoto Machida: Old-School Karate". Bleacher Report. Retrieved 2014-06-08. 
^ Wickert, Marc. "Montreal's MMA Warrior". Knucklepit.com. Archived from the original on 13 June 2007. Retrieved 6 July 2007. 
^ "Taekwondo in MMA - Cage tactics - Fight! Australia magazine". Insidemma.com.au. Retrieved 2016-02-29. 
^ a b "5 Minutes With Anthony Pettis". FIGHT! Magazine. 
^ "Taekwondo Salto open 2010-anderson silva final -87kg(Professor Agnaldo Martins)". YouTube. 
^ Anderson Silva; Erich Krauss; Glen Cordoza (17 November 2008). The Mixed Martial Arts Instruction Manual: Striking. Victory Belt Publishing. ISBN 978-0-9815044-1-4. 
^ "Realer Sports w/ Rosenberg: UFC Champ Anthony Pettis". YouTube. 
^ Beacham, Greg (2010-09-29). "Zhang hoping to lead Chinese wave into MMA". USA Today. Retrieved 2010-11-25. 
^ Jonathan Snowden; Kendall Shields (1 November 2010). The MMA Encyclopedia. ECW Press. p. 961. ISBN 978-1-55490-844-8. 
^ UFC 160 Judo Chop: The Best and Worst of Junior Dos Santos "...Cigano's sprawl and brawl is a true throwback to the early days of MMA, when men like Chuck Liddell, Wanderlei Silva, Rampage Jackson, and Mirko Cro Cop...". Bloodyelbow.com. Retrieved July 16, 2013.
^ Ruebusch, Connor (11 March 2015). "UFC 185 Judo Chop - Joanna Jedrzejczyk: Payback and Fighting Dirty". SB Nation (BloodyElbow.com). Retrieved 12 July 2016. 
^ "UFC 10: Birth of ground 'n' pound is also well known for his ground and pound, as is Fedor Emelianenko". Yahoo. Retrieved 2010-01-19. 
^ Andrew Richardson. "UFC 160 complete fighter breakdown, Cain Velasquez edition". MMAmania.com. 
^ OBI, NEDU (December 12, 2011). UFC 140 Results: Tito Ortiz and the 5 Best Ground-and-Pound Artists Eve "..."The Emperor," fallen though he might be of late, takes the No. 1 spot as the greatest ground-and-pound artist in MMA history...". bleacher Report. Retrieved June 19, 2013.
^ Slack, Jack (June 04, 2012). Analyzing Fedor: Revolutionizing Ground And Pound "...What Fedor will always be remembered for by fans who saw him compete in his prime, however, was his revolutionizing of ground and pound...". bloodyelbow.com. Retrieved June 19, 2013.
^ a b Correspondent (2008-11-22). "The Ultimate Takedown Championship? Ways to End Lay and Pray". Bleacher Report. Retrieved 2014-08-12. 
^ Featured Columnist (2010-11-02). "MMA: The Falsities of Lay and Pray". Bleacher Report. Retrieved 2014-08-12. 
^ Analyst (2009-11-08). ""How I Mastered the Art of Lay-and-Pray" by Jake Shields". Bleacher Report. Retrieved 2014-08-12. 
^ "Judges need to punish lay-and-pray tactics - Hardy | UFC News". ESPN.co.uk. 2010-09-07. Retrieved 2014-08-12. 
^ Contributor (2011-07-22). "UFC and Jon Fitch: 5 Reasons Why the Jon Fitch Issue Is the Most Toxic in MMA". Bleacher Report. Retrieved 2014-08-12. 
^ "Rashad Evans Follows Georges St Pierre Down the Boring Road to Victory". Bloody Elbow. Retrieved 2014-08-12. 
^ I Don't Really Care Being Called Lay & Pray - Ben Askren on YouTube
^ "UFC Fighting Styles". Zewkey.com. Retrieved 2014-08-12. 
^ https://cagepages.com/2016/05/23/ufc-dream-match-jacare-souza-vs-demian-maia/
^ "FCF - Mixed Martial Arts Council UFC Rules update 6/99". Fcfighter.com. Retrieved 2014-08-12. 
^ Marrocco, Steven (Feb 22, 2013). UFC 157 preview: How can Liz Carmouche beat heavy favorite Ronda Rousey? Archived 2013-07-06 at the Wayback Machine. "...While Rousey is generally a master at initiating throws from the clinch to set up armbars...". MMAjunkie.com. Retrieved July 16, 2013.
^ Slack, Jack (March 29, 2013). Best of the Best: Anderson Silva's Muay Thai Clinch Work "...This is truly the difference between fighters who flail to grab a hold of their opponents head and try to knee, and someone like Silva who will set up his grips scientifically...". Bleacher Report. Retrieved July 16, 2013.
^ Sllack, Jack (January 04, 2013). Randy Couture Judo Chop: Boxing into the Clinch "...The first major exponent of Greco-Roman wrestling in MMA, Randy Couture remains one of the few fighters to make full use of opportunities to clinch and the damage which can be done to the opponent from there...". bloodyelbow.com. Retrieved July 16, 2013.
^ "Khabib Nurmagomedov vs. Pat Healy set for UFC 165 in Toronto". MMAmania.com. Retrieved 2014-06-08. 
^ Fowlkes, Ben (August 17, 2013). "UFC Fight Night: Sonnen submits Rua in first round". USA Today. 
^ Sherdog.com (2008-10-08). "Valkyrie Takes Flight Nov. 8". Sherdog.com. Retrieved 2009-09-12. 
^ "Bleacher Report". Bleacher Report. 2010-01-14. Retrieved 2012-11-25. 
^ Fowlkes, Ben. "Zuffa-Strikeforce Deal Could Mean Uncertain Future for Women's MMA". MMA Fighting. Retrieved 2012-11-25. 
^ "canada.com - Blogs". Communities.canada.com. 2012-11-20. Archived from the original on 2012-07-09. Retrieved 2012-11-25. 
^ "Is This the End of Women's MMA?". Bleacher Report. 2009-08-16. Retrieved 2012-11-25. 
^ Tomas Rios Ronda Rousey, Bro Queen: Why Is The UFC So Stupid About Women?, Deadspin, 22 February 2013.
^ "Dana White calls Gina Carano 'the hardest human being we've ever dealt with'". MMAfighting.com. Retrieved 2015-06-12. 
^ Sean Gregory, Should A Former Man Be Able To Fight Women?, Time magazine, 24 May 2013.
^ Brynn Tannehill, Fallon Fox and the Legacy of Satchel Paige, Huffington Post, 16 December 2014.
^ "worldmmacouncil.org". Retrieved 12 June 2015. 
^ "Rules | IMMAF – International Mixed Martial Arts Federation". Immaf.org. Archived from the original on 2014-07-07. Retrieved 2014-08-12. 
^ "Ошибка: обслуживание сайта было приостановлено". Wmmaa.org. Retrieved 2014-08-12. 
^ Export Strategy Dublin Ireland (2013-05-23). "Vadim Finkelstein on UFC in Sweden, Dana White, M-1 Challenge 38 & Emelianenko brothers - All about Mixed Martial Arts". Combatbear.com. Retrieved 2014-08-12. 
^ "Грязная политика". Mixfight.ru. Retrieved 2014-08-12. 
^ "M-1 Global намерена организовать поединок Емельяненко — Веласкес в Москве - Чемпионат". Championat.com. Retrieved 2014-08-12. 
^ Super User. "Members - World Mixed Martial Arts Association - We are the future of MMA". World Mixed Martial Arts Association - We are the future of MMA. 
^ "Press-release: 2013 World MMA Championship results and video". Retrieved December 16, 2013. 
^ "International MMA Federation founded". Retrieved April 12, 2010. 
^ "UFC Supports Creation of International MMA Federation". UFC. Retrieved 22 April 2015. 
^ "UFC backs creation of International Mixed Martial Arts Federation (IMMAF)". MMAmania.com. Retrieved 22 April 2015. 
^ "IMMAF Statutes 29 February 2012" (PDF). Immaf.org. Retrieved 2015-06-12. 
^ a b c d e "Members". IMMAF - International Mixed Martial Arts Federation. Archived from the original on 2015-03-16. 
^ "IMMAF Launches World Championships". Reuters. 2013-05-24. 
^ "IMMAF World Championships : Las Vegas 2014". Immaf.org. Archived from the original on 2015-07-30. Retrieved 2015-06-12. 
^ "First Amateur MMA World Championships To Be Held in the USA". MMA Platinum Gloves. 
^ a b c d Lystad, Reidar P.; Kobi Gregory; Juno Wilson (2014). "The epidemiology of injuries in mixed martial arts: A systematic review and meta-analysis". Orthopaedic Journal of Sports Medicine. 2 (1): 2325967113518492. doi:10.1177/2325967113518492. Retrieved 2014-03-15. 
^ Frey, A.; D. Rousseau; B. Vesselle; Y. Hervouet des Forges; M. Egoumendes (2004). "Neuf saisons de surveillance médicale de compétitions de judo: une analyse nationale de la traumatologie du judo en compétition". J Traumatologie Sport. 21: 100–109. doi:10.1016/s0762-915x(04)97390-1. 
^ Lystad, Reidar P.; Henry Pollar; Petra L. Graham (2009). "Epidemiology of injuries in competition taekwondo: a meta-analysis of observational studies". Journal of Science and Medicine in Sport. 12 (6): 614–621. doi:10.1016/j.jsams.2008.09.013. PMID 19054714. 
^ Estwanik, J.J.; M. Boitano; N. Ari (1984). "Amateur boxing injuries at the 1981 and 1982 USA/ABF national championships". Phys Sportsmed. 11: 123–128. 
^ Bledsoe, G.H.; G. Li; F. Levy (2005). "Injury risk in professional boxing". South Med J. 98: 994–998. doi:10.1097/01.smj.0000182498.19288.e2. 
^ Zazryn, T.R.; C.F. Finch; P. McCrory (2003). "A 16 year study of injuries to professional boxers in the state of Victoria, Australia". Br J Sports Med. 37: 321–324. doi:10.1136/bjsm.37.4.321. 
^ Zazryn, T.R.; P. Cameron; P. McCrory (2006). "A prospective cohort study of injury in amateur and professional boxing". Br J Sports Med. 40: 670–674. doi:10.1136/bjsm.2006.025924. 
^ Zazryn, T.R.; P. McCrory; P. Cameron (2006). "Injury rates and risk factors in competitive professional boxing". Clin J Sports Med. 19: 20–25. 
^ Study of Fighters Shows Brain Changes Are Seen Before Symptoms, The New York Times, TIMOTHY PRATT, April 24, 2012. ' . . This is part of the Professional Fighters Brain Health Study, now a year old . . . . Dr. Bernick will present these findings on Wednesday in New Orleans at the American Academy of Neurology's annual meeting . . . . Though Dr. Bernick intends to continue his study of boxers for at least five years, he said the preliminary findings were worth the attention of the neurology association's annual meeting, as "nobody has the numbers we do." . . '
^ "A Third Fatality for Modern Mixed Martial Arts | Martial History Magazine". Martialhistory.com. Archived from the original on 2013-06-09. Retrieved 2012-11-25. 
^ a b Sievert, Steve (2007-11-26). "Mixed Martial Arts Notebook: Vasquez in toughest fight". Houston Chronicle. Retrieved 2007-12-02. 
^ a b "Update: Sam Vasquez Dead at 35". Sherdog.com. 2007-12-02. Retrieved 2013-02-13. 
^ "Fighter Dies in South Carolina After First Pro Bout". Sherdog.com. June 28, 2010. Retrieved June 28, 2010. 
^ "Tyrone Mims, MMA Fighter, Dies Following Amateur Bout in South Carolina". MMA Fighting. Retrieved 2017-11-29. 
^ "Final autopsy results inconclusive on South Carolina MMA fighter following August death". MMAjunkie. 2012-11-09. Retrieved 2017-11-29. 
^ "EFC Africa fighter Booto Guylain dies from injuries suffered in February bout". MMAjunkie. 2014-03-05. Retrieved 2017-11-29. 
^ "Pro MMA Ffghter Booto Guylain dies after bout in South Africa". NY Daily News. Retrieved 2017-11-29. 
^ "Portuguese MMA fighter João Carvalho dies after TKO in Dublin". 2016-04-12. Retrieved 2017-12-20. 
^ "Amateur MMA fighter Donshay White dies in Louisville after collapsing in locker room". MMAjunkie. 2017-07-17. Retrieved 2017-11-29. 
^ Corsey, Gil. "No drugs and no foul play involved in MMA fighter death in Louisville". Retrieved 2017-11-29. 
^ "Victoria needs the 'cage' to lure UFC". 10 October 2013. 
^ Savage, Alison (3 March 2015). "MMA cage fighting: Victorian Government to lift ban on octagon". ABC.net.au. Retrieved 4 March 2015. 
^ Duane Finley (2015-08-20). "The Fighting Life: The Rise of MMA in Bahrain". Bleacher Report. Retrieved 2017-03-23. 
^ "Brave To Host 9 Events in Middle East in 2017; UAE to Have An Edition in March". ArabsMMA. 2014-06-20. Retrieved 2017-03-23. 
^ "Bahrain News Agency | Bahrain to host World MMA Amateurs Championship2017". Bna.bh. Retrieved 2017-03-23. 
^ [1] Archived November 4, 2013, at the Wayback Machine.
^ [2] Archived November 10, 2014, at the Wayback Machine.
^ Application for IMMAF membership documentation
^ [3] Archived April 30, 2013, at the Wayback Machine.
^ "Brazilian MMA Athletic Commission joins IMMAF regulatory group". MMAjunkie. 
^ "Brazil Establishes New MMA Regulatory Commission, Joins IMMAF". 411MANIA.com. 2013-01-17. Archived from the original on 2014-05-02. Retrieved 2015-06-12. 
^ "UFC on FX 7 - Belfort vs. Bisping". Sherdog.com. 2013-01-19. Retrieved 2015-06-12. 
^ "Brazilian commission suspends Rousimar Palhares for 120 days". MMA Fighting. 
^ "CABMMA suspends Rousimar Palhares 120 days following UFC Fight Night 29". MMAjunkie. 
^ "Brazil medical commissioner defends Belfort's TRT - Fighters Only". 
^ Paul Quigley. "Bulgaria joins the IMMAF - Fighters Only". 
^ "IMMAF WELCOMES THE BULGARIAN FEDERATION OF MMA". Sherdog. 
^ "Criminal Code". Laws-lois.justice.gc.ca. Retrieved 2012-11-25. 
^ Dave Deibert, Postmedia News, March 20, 2012. Bill introduced to legalize mixed martial arts in Canada Archived from the original Archived July 11, 2012, at the Wayback Machine.
^ a b Magraken, Erik. "Now That We're Done Celebrating Bill S-209, Time to Get To Work". CanadianMMALawBlog.com. Retrieved 16 July 2013. 
^ "Ontario joins list of provinces to allow mixed martial arts". Shaw Communications Inc. August 16, 2010. Retrieved November 16, 2010. 
^ a b "Mixed Martial Arts Regulation in North America" (PDF). January 22, 2010. Retrieved September 10, 2010. 
^ "States for Kickboxing or MMA". International Sport Combat Federation. July 13, 2010. Retrieved September 10, 2010. 
^ "RUFF new combat sport to contend with China's traditional martial arts". Archived from the original on 2012-12-19. 
^ [4] Archived February 22, 2014, at the Wayback Machine.
^ "DMMA - Danish Mixed Martial Arts Federation". Dmmaf.dk. Retrieved 2015-06-12. 
^ Kyle Symes. "France's Sports Ministry Says Non Merci to UFC, Upholds Ban on MMA". Bleacher Report. 
^ "- THE LEGALIZATION OF MMA IN FRANCE - MMAWeekly.com". MMAWeekly.com. 
^ "Despite UFC Lobbying Efforts, France Upholds Ban on Mixed Martial Arts - MMAWeekly.com". MMAWeekly.com. 
^ "Google Translate". 
^ "100% FIGHT". Facebook. 
^ a b "Commission nationale de Mixed Martials Arts". Website-Modern. 
^ "French MMA commission joins International Mixed Martial Arts Federation". MMAjunkie. 
^ "411MANIA - French MMA Commission Joins International Mixed Martial Arts Federation". French MMA Commission Joins International Mixed Martial Arts Federation. Archived from the original on 2014-11-10. 
^ 06 Jul 2014, 01:36 IST (2014-07-06). "The devil in disguise: Exposing the truth about MMA in India". Sportskeeda.com. Retrieved 2017-03-23. 
^ "IMAC Structure". Irish Martial Arts Commission. 15 June 2011. Retrieved 19 December 2015. 
^ "Martial Arts". Governing Bodies: NGB Sports Investment. Irish Sports Council. Retrieved 19 December 2015. 
^ "Senator backtracks on call to ban Conor McGregor's Dublin title fight after fan outcry". Independent.ie. 
^ a b "Irish federation gets full political support". IMMAF. 18 March 2013. Archived from the original on 8 July 2014. Retrieved 19 December 2015. 
^ "MMA Promotions and Organizations List - Pro and Small | MMA Styles, History, Strategies, and Facts". Mmawild.com. Retrieved 2012-11-25. 
^ "ＥＤがもっともかかりやすい生活習慣病といわれる理由". Hero-s.com. Archived from the original on 2012-12-08. Retrieved 2012-11-25. 
^ "IMMAF Regulation Around The World: Update". MMA Uncaged. 
^ [5] Archived July 28, 2014, at the Wayback Machine.
^ "Press Release From MASMMAA". Archived from the original on 2014-11-10. 
^ "Knockouts Aren't Allowed in Norwegian MMA". Fightland. 
^ "Nordic MMA Overview". Nordic MMA Everyday at MMA Viking. 
^ [6] Archived February 2, 2014, at the Wayback Machine.
^ [7] Archived December 6, 2013, at the Wayback Machine.
^ "NMMAF Merkekamper". 
^ NMMAF Merkekamper 6: Invasjon fra Nord: Robertsen vs Davila on YouTube
^ "FMMAP - Federação de Mixed Martial Arts de Portugal". Archived from the original on 2014-10-18. 
^ [8] Archived June 19, 2013, at the Wayback Machine.
^ IMMAF member application document
^ "RMMAF - Zi importanta pentru comunitatea de MMA din Romania - RMMAF". RMMAF. 
^ [9] Archived February 17, 2014, at the Wayback Machine.
^ IMMAF member documentation
^ "RMMAF a definitivat lotul Romaniei pentru Mondialele din Las Vegas". www.natiuneamma.ro. 
^ "Fedor Emelianenko Now President Of Russian MMA Union". Fightline.com. 
^ Leidecker, Tim (May 31, 2007). "European Throwdown: Notes From Iberia to Siberia". Sherdog.com. Retrieved May 23, 2011. 
^ O'Leary, Ryan (February 10, 2011). "Sweden Closer to Hosting UFC". Sherdog.com. Retrieved May 23, 2011. 
^ a b c O'Leary, Ryan. "Bright Lights in Sweden's Dark November". Sherdog.com. Retrieved May 23, 2011. 
^ O'Leary, Ryan (April 14, 2011). "Unified Rules Adopted for Superior Challenge 7". Sherdog.com. Retrieved May 23, 2011. 
^ "International MMA Federation launches in Sweden, expected to receive UFC backing". MMAjunkie. 
^ "Swedish MMA Federation rules Alexander Gustafsson medically unfit for UFC on FUEL 9 main event". MMA Fighting. 
^ "SMMAF rules against Alexander Gustafsson; 'Mauler' medically unfit to compete at UFC on FUEL TV 9". MMAmania.com. 
^ "Bleacher Report". Bleacher Report. 
^ "SMMAF issues statement on Alexander Gustafsson's removal from UFC on Fuel 9". Bloody Elbow. 
^ "UMF Muaythai & Dragon Legends MMA 'Underground' Fight Night", My City by Night, Cape Town, 10 May 2012. Retrieved on 21 October 2013.
^ Kittipong Thongsombat (2012-03-31). "Thailand bans mixed martial arts". Bangkok Post. p. S6. SAT officials met this week to discuss whether holding an MMA event was lawful or not following a request from a private company and they finally agreed that under the 1999 boxing law, it is unlawful to stage an MMA event in Thailand. "Organising a MMA event here would hurt the image of Muay Thai," Sakol Wannapong said. 
^ "THAILAND GOVERNMENT BANS MMA". FightersOnlyMag.com. September 27, 2012. Retrieved March 29, 2012. 
^ "Legal grey: DARE Championship defying Thailand's ban on MMA". mmafighting.com. September 27, 2012. Retrieved March 29, 2012. 
^ "Universalcombatnews.com". Retrieved 12 June 2015. 
^ "MMA organizations and upcoming MMA event news in Thailand". Combat 360X Muay Thai and MMA Camp Khao Lak. Retrieved 12 June 2015. [dead link]
^ "ABC Boxing - Association of Boxing Commissions - United States - Canada - Puerto Rico - US Virgin Islands". Archived from the original on 2014-02-02. 
^ "West Virginia becomes 45th state to regulate mixed martial arts". MMAJunkie.com. 2011-03-24. Archived from the original on 2011-08-23. 
^ "Wyoming becomes state No. 46 to regulate MMA". MMAJunkie.com. 2012-03-12. Archived from the original on 2012-03-15. Retrieved 2012-03-12. 
^ "Vermont becomes state No. 46 to regulate MMA". MMAJunkie.com. 2012-05-04. Archived from the original on 2012-05-08. Retrieved 2012-05-04. 
^ "Conn. gov signs bill legalizing mixed martial arts". Seattle Post-Intelligencer. 11 July 2013. Archived from the original on 13 July 2013. Retrieved 12 July 2013. 
^ "NY clears way to allowing professional mixed martial arts - Yahoo Sports". Sports.yahoo.com. 2016-03-22. Retrieved 2016-04-02. 
^ Cruz, Jason (14 April 2016). "Governor Cuomo signs NY MMA Bill into law; UFC announces event at MSG November 12th". MMAPayout.com. Retrieved 14 April 2016. 








v
t
e


Professional mixed martial arts training associations



USA



Alliance
Alpha Male
AMA Fight Club
AMC Pankration
AKA
ATT
Arizona Combat Sports
Black House
Blackzilians
Cesar Gracie
Elite Performance
Finney's HIT Squad
Grudge Training Center
Jackson-Winkeljohn MMA Academy
Kings MMA
Lion's Den
Miletich Fighting Systems
The Academy
The Pit
Renzo Gracie
Roufusport
Team Lloyd Irvin
Team Punishment
Team Quest
Team Sityodtong
Wand Fight Team
Xtreme Couture





Brazil



BTT
Chute Boxe Academy
Fight Training Academy
Gracie Barra
Gracie Humaitá
Nova União
Universidade da luta





Asia



AACC
Evolve MMA
Grabaka
Paraestra
Takada Dojo
Team Lakay Wushu
Yoshida Dojo





Canada



Team Tompkins
Tristar Gym





Europe



Golden Glory
London Shootfighters
Straight Blast Gym - Ireland
Team Kaobon
Team Rough House
Wolfslair





Russia



Red Devil Sport Club












v
t
e


Professional mixed martial arts organizations



Asia / Oceania
(ex. Japan)




Current



Art of War
AFC
BRACE
Brave Combat Federation
Fight Nights Global
Kunlun Fight
One Championship
Road FC
SFL
URCC





Defunct



Legend FC
RUFF








Brazil




Current



Jungle Fight
Shooto Brasil





Defunct



IVC








Canada




Current



Hard Knocks
KOTC Canada





Defunct



TFC
MFC
WSOF Canada








Europe




Current



BAMMA
Bushido FC
Cage Warriors
FFC
KSW
M-1
MMA Raju
R-1
RESPECT.FC
UCMMA





Defunct



10th Legion
Cage Contender
Cage Rage
Finnfight
SLAMM








Japan




Current



DEEP/Jewels
IGF
Pancrase
RINGS
Rizin FF
Shooto
VTJ
ZST





Defunct



Cage Force
DREAM
HERO'S
Pride FC
RisingOn
Smackgirl
SRC
Valkyrie








United States




Current



Bellator
Combate Americas
CFFC
Invicta FC
KOTC
LFA
TPF
Titan FC
UFC
PFL
XFC





Defunct



AMMA
Affliction
EF
EliteXC/ProElite
IFL
Legacy FC
PFC
RFA
Shark Fights
Strikeforce
USA-MMA
WEC
WFA











 Category












v
t
e


Mixed martial arts champions



Current champions for active organizations



UFC
Bellator MMA
FFC
ONE
WSOF
Pancrase
Shooto
KOTC
Deep
Invicta FC
SFL





Legacy champions for defunct organizations



Pride FC
Strikeforce
IFL
EliteXC
Cage Rage
Dream
Hero's
WEC
SRC





Miscellaneous



UFC Pound for Pound rankings
List of undefeated mixed martial artists












v
t
e


Major mixed martial arts events by year






1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017












v
t
e


Martial arts






List of styles
History
Timeline
Hard and soft





Regional origin



China
Europe
India
Indonesia
Japan
Korea
Philippines





Unarmed techniques



Chokehold
Clinch
Footwork
Elbow strike
Headbutt
Hold
Kick
Knee strike
Joint lock
Punch
Sweep
Takedown
Throw





Weapons



Archery
Knife fighting
Melee weapons
Shooting
Stick-fighting
Swordsmanship





Training



Kata
Practice weapon
Punching bag
Pushing hands
Randori
Sparring





Grappling



Brazilian jiu-jitsu
Judo
Jujutsu
Sambo
Sumo
Wrestling





Striking



Boxing
Capoeira
Karate
Kickboxing
Muay Thai
Lethwei
Sanshou
Savate
Taekwondo
Vovinam





Internal



Aikido
Aikijutsu
Baguazhang
Tai chi
Xing Yi Quan





Full contact / combat sports



Professional boxing
Professional kickboxing
Knockdown karate
Mixed martial arts
Submission wrestling





Self-defense / combatives



Arnis
Bartitsu
Hapkido
Kajukenbo
Krav Maga
MCMAP
Pencak Silat
Systema
Wing Chun
Legal aspects





Eclectic / hybrids



American Kenpo
Chun Kuk Do
Jeet Kune Do
Kuk Sool
Shooto
Shorinji Kempo
Unifight





Entertainment



Fighting game
Martial arts film (Chanbara)
Professional wrestling
Wuxia






 The Martial Arts Portal







Authority control



GND: 7619848-0
NDL: 01149129











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mixed_martial_arts&oldid=818210798"					Categories: Combat sportsMixed martial artsHidden categories: CS1 maint: Uses authors parameterWebarchive template wayback linksPages using citations with format and no URLCS1 Portuguese-language sources (pt)All articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from March 2016All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from January 2013All articles with failed verificationArticles with failed verification from December 2015Articles with unsourced statements from May 2016Articles with unsourced statements from February 2012Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers