Not to be confused with Monogram.
A monograph is a specialist work of writing (in contrast to reference works)[1] on a single subject or an aspect of a subject, usually by a single author.
In library cataloging, monograph has a broader meaning, that of a nonserial publication complete in one volume (book) or a finite number of volumes. Thus it differs from a serial publication such as a magazine, journal, or newspaper.[2] In this context only, books such as novels are monographs.



Contents


1 In academia
2 In art
3 In biology
4 In United States Food and Drug Administration regulation
5 See also
6 References



In academia[edit]
See also: Monographic series
The term "monographia" is derived from the Greek "mono" (single) and grapho (to write), meaning "writing on a single subject". Unlike a textbook, which surveys the state of knowledge in a field, the main purpose of a monograph is to present primary research and original scholarship. This research is presented at length, distinguishing a monograph from an article. For these reasons, publication of a monograph is commonly regarded as vital for career progression in many academic disciplines. Intended for other researchers and bought primarily by libraries, monographs are generally published as individual volumes in a short print run.[3]
In Britain and the U.S., what differentiates a scholarly monograph from an academic trade title varies by publisher, though generally it is the assumption that the readership has not only specialized or sophisticated knowledge but also professional interest in the subject of the work.[4]
In art[edit]
Book publishers use the term "artist monograph" to indicate books dealing with a single artist, as opposed to broader surveys of art subjects.
In biology[edit]
In biological taxonomy a monograph is a comprehensive treatment of a taxon. Monographs typically review all known species within a group, add any newly discovered species, and collect and synthesize available information on the ecological associations, geographic distributions, and morphological variations within the group. See this reference as an example.[5]
The first-ever monograph of a plant taxon was Robert Morison's 1672 Plantarum Umbelliferarum Distributio Nova, a treatment of the Apiaceae.[6]
In United States Food and Drug Administration regulation[edit]
See also: Pharmacopoeia
In the context of Food and Drug Administration (FDA) regulation, monographs represent published standards by which the use of one or more substances is automatically authorized. For example, the following is an excerpt from the Federal Register: "The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is issuing a final rule in the form of a final monograph establishing conditions under which over-the-counter (OTC) sunscreen drug products are generally recognized as safe and effective and not misbranded as part of FDA's ongoing review of OTC drug products."[7] Such usage has given rise to the use of the word monograph as a verb, as in "this substance has been monographed by the FDA".
See also[edit]

Compendium
Compilation thesis
Documentation
Open access monograph
Treatise

References[edit]


^ Campbell, Robert; Pentz, Ed; Borthwick, Ian (2012). Academic and Professional Publishing. ISBN 978-1-78063-309-1. '[M]onograph' has become a catch-all term for a book that is not of a reference type, that is of primary material .
^ Prytherch, Raymond John, Harrod's librarians' glossary and reference book: a directory of over 10,200 terms, organizations, projects and acronyms in the areas of information management, library science, publishing and archive management, 10th edn (Aldershot, Hants, England ; Burlington, VT: Ashgate, 2005), p. 462.; "For the purpose of library cataloging, any nonserial publication, complete in one volume or intended to be completed in a finite number of parts issued at regular or irregular intervals, containing a single work or collection of works. Monographs are sometimes published in monographic series and subseries. Compare with book."[1]
^ Williams, Peter; Stevenson, Iain; Nicholas, David; Watkinson, Anthony; Rowlands, Ian (2009). "The role and future of the monograph in arts and humanities research". Aslib Proceedings. 61: 67. doi:10.1108/00012530910932294. 
^ Thompson, John B. (2005). Books in the Digital Age: The Transformation of Academic and Higher Education Publishing in Britain and the United States. Cambridge: Polity Press. pp. 84–85. ISBN 978-0745634784. 
^ Lent, Herman; Wygodzinsky, Pedro W. "Revision of the Triatominae (Hemiptera, Reduviidae), and their significance as vectors of Chagas' disease". Bulletin of the American Museum of Natural History. 163 (3): 125–520. hdl:2246/1282. 
^ Vines, Sydney Howard (1913). "Robert Morison 1620–1683 and John Ray 1627–1705". In Oliver, Francis Wall (ed.). Makers of British Botany. Cambridge University Press. p. 22. CS1 maint: Extra text: editors list (link)
^ "DOCID:fr21my99-6", Federal Register, Rules and Regulations, 64 (98), pp. 27666–27693, May 21, 1999 








v
t
e


Academic publishing



Journals



Academic journal
Scientific journal
Open access journal
Public health journal





Papers



Scholarly paper
Review article
Position paper
Working paper
Literature review





Other types of publication



Thesis (Compilation thesis, Monograph)
Specialized patent (biological, chemical)
Book
Book chapter
Technical report
Pamphlet
Essay
White paper
Preprint
Poster session
Lab notes
Abstract





Impact and ranking



Altmetrics
Article-level metrics
Bibliometrics
Citation impact
Citation index
Journal ranking
Eigenfactor
h-index
Impact factor
SCImago Journal Rank
Scientometrics





Reform



Academic journal publishing reform
Full-text-on-the-Net bias (FUTON bias)
Open access
Serials crisis
Sci-Hub





Indexes and search engines



Google Scholar
PubMed
PubMed Central
Scopus
Web of Science
CiteSeerX
Scirus (defunct)





Related topics



Scientific writing
Peer review
Proceedings
Grey literature
Scientific literature
Learned society
Open research
Open science data
ORCID
Electronic publishing
Ingelfinger rule





Lists



Academic journals
Scientific journals
Open-access journals
Academic databases and search engines
University presses
Style/formatting guides
Category:Academic publishing
Category:Scientific documents












v
t
e


Books



Production



Authors
Binding
By date

Decade
Year


Covers

Jackets


Design
Editing
Illustration
Literature
Printing

History
Incunabula


Publishing

By country


Typesetting





Consumption



Awards
Bestsellers
Bibliography
Bibliophilia
Bibliotherapy
Bookmarks
Bookselling

Blurbs
Book towns
Shops


Censorship
Clubs
Collecting
Digitizing
Fairs
Furniture

Bookcases
Bookends


Libraries

Legislation


Lists
Print culture
Reading

Literacy


Reviews





Other



By country

Brazil
France
Germany
Italy
Pakistan
UK
US


Formats

Audiobooks
E-books


Genres

Children's
Fictional


History of books

Historians


Intellectual property
ISBN
Outline
Terminology
Types








 Category
 Commons
 Portal
 WikiProject









Authority control



GND: 4454906-4











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Monograph&oldid=813965737"					Categories: Academic publishingBooks by typeBook terminologyPublishingHidden categories: CS1 maint: Extra text: editors listWikipedia articles with GND identifiersBroad-concept articles