Monthon (Thai: มณฑล) were administrative subdivisions of Thailand at the beginning of the 20th century. The Thai word monthon is a translation of the word mandala (maṇḍala, literally "circle"), in its sense of a type of political formation. The monthon were created as a part of the thesaphiban (เทศาภิบาล, literally "local government") bureaucratic administrative system, introduced by Prince Damrong Rajanubhab which, together with the monthon, established step-by-step today's present provinces (changwat), districts (amphoe), and communes (tambon) throughout Thailand. Each monthon was led by a royal commissioner called thesaphiban (เทศาภิบาล), later renamed to samuhathesaphiban (สมุหเทศาภิบาล). The system was officially adopted by the 1897 Local Administration Act, after some monthon had been established and administrative details were sorted out.



Contents


1 History
2 Resistance to reform
3 Further development
4 List of monthons

4.1 North
4.2 Northeast
4.3 South
4.4 Central
4.5 East


5 Boriwen
6 See also
7 References
8 Further reading
9 External links



History[edit]
Further information: Mueang, Southeast Asian political model, and Tusi
Before the thesaphiban reforms, the country consisted of partially independent cities called mueang, some directly subordinate to the capital, some subordinate to larger mueang, or to one or more of the tributary kingdoms. Before the reforms, governors inherited their posts from their family lineage, and lived on taxes they collected in their area, a practice formally called tax farming. These were converted from hereditary governors to appointed governmental posts, as had been done by Chinese Yuan, Ming, and Qing-era rulers in first recognizing Tusi (tribal leaders) as imperial officials, then replacing them with imperial appointees. The arrangement resulted in governors being appointed and paid by the central government, and mueang developed into provinces. An essential step in the ending of tax farming was the creation on 3 September 1885 of the Royal Survey Department. Though its first fruits were not obtained until 1901, the department's cadastral surveys, i.e., surveys of specific land parcels, made possible the defining of ownership for land registration and equitable taxation. The term changwat (จังหวัด) for the provinces was first used in 1907 for the provinces in Monthon Pattani, and by 1916 had come into general use.
Resistance to reform[edit]
It took till around 1910 to implement the system throughout the country. The main reason for the slow implementation was the lack of suitably educated officials,[1] but also the resistance of the traditional local leaders, which recalled the 1768–1770 resistance of the monk Chao Phra Faang to Thonburi reestablishment of Siamese authority. In 1902 along both banks of the Mekong, local revolts (Prakottakan Phi Bun ปรากฏการณ์ผีบุญ) led by charismatic religious leaders called holy man or phi bun (ผีบุญ) broke out. The most serious of these was led by east-bank rebel Ong Keo against French authority in the former Thai tributary kingdom of Champasak. On the west bank in the area of Ubon Ratchathani, a less-well known former monk and phi bun headed a millenarian sect inspired by his apocalyptic prophecies, which spread fear, uncertainty and doubt among almost all the peoples along both banks of the river. The Bangkok government put down west bank resistance with little use of force, and cooperated with French Indochina officials insofar as limiting Thai authority to the west bank, later called Isan. East bank resistance however had no definitive end and became subsumed into the Second Indochina War.[2][3] Far from the Mekong, resistance to reform continued into the 21st century in the Southern Thailand insurgency.
Further development[edit]
In 1915 there were 19 monthons containing 72 provinces. Due to economic problems, several monthon were merged in 1925. Monthon Phetchabun had been dissolved in 1915. Only 14 monthon remained: Ayutthaya, Bangkok (Krung Thep), Chanthaburi, Nakhon Chaisi, Nakhon Ratchasima, Nakhon Sawan, Nakhon Si Thammarat, Pattani, Phayap, Phitsanulok, Phuket, Prachinburi, Ratchaburi, and Udon Thani. In 1932 another four were abolished: Chanthaburi, Nakhon Chaisi, Nakhon Sawan, and Pattani. Finally in 1933 the whole monthon system was abolished by the Provincial Administration Act 2476 B.E./A.D. 1933, part of the changes made after the coup d'état, which changed from an absolute to a constitutional monarchy, and the 70 provinces to second-level administrative divisions.
List of monthons[edit]
North[edit]




Map of Thailand 1915



Phayap (Thai: มณฑลพายัพ): Sanskrit Northwest.[4] or Monthon Lao Chiang (Thai: มณฑลลาวเฉียง). In 1899, this northwestern monthon was described in Thai as monthon fai tawan tok chiang nuea (มณฑลฝ่ายตะวันตกเฉียงเหนือ; literally "northwest-side circle"). In 1900, this was shortened to the Sanskrit for "northwest". The actual administrative reform was established gradually between 1907 and 1915, succeeding the previous high commissionership. It covered the northern principalities of former Lan Na, the provinces Chiang Mai, Lamphun, Mae Hong Son, Lampang, Chiang Rai, Nan, and Phrae.


Maharat (Thai: มณฑลมหาราษฎร์): Monthon Maharat was created in 1915, when Monthon Phayap was split into two halves. It covered the eastern part of former Phayap, i.e., the provinces Chiang Rai, Nan, Lampang, and Phrae.
Nakhon Sawan (Thai: มณฑลนครสวรรค์): Monthon Nakhon Sawan was created in 1895, and was thus among the first created. It covered the provinces of Nakhon Sawan, Chai Nat, Kamphaeng Phet, Manorom, Phayuha Khiri, Sankhaburi, Tak, Uthai Thani.
Phitsanulok (Thai: มณฑลพิษณุโลก): Monthon Phitsanulok was established in 1894. It covered the provinces Phitsanulok, Phichai, Phichit, Sukhothai, Sawankhalok.
Phetchabun (Thai: มณฑลเพชรบูรณ์): Monthon Phetchabun was split off from Monthon Nakhon Ratchasima in 1899. It consisted of the two provinces Lom Sak and Phetchabun, which were later merged. It then became the only monthon covering a single province. It was temporarily included into Monthon Pitsanulok from 1903-1907, before it was finally abolished in 1915 and incorporated into Monthon Phitsanulok.

Northeast[edit]

Nakhon Ratchasima (Thai: มณฑลนครราชสีมา): Monthon Nakhon Ratchasima was the first monthon to be created in 1893. It covered the provinces Nakhon Ratchasima (Khorat), Buriram, Chaiyaphum. In 1899 Monthon Phetchabun was split off from Khorat.
Isan (Thai: มณฑลอีสาน): Monthon Isan was established in 1900. In June 1912 it was split into the two parts, Monthon Roi Et and Monthon Ubon.
Roi Et (Thai: มณฑลร้อยเอ็จ): Monthon Roi Et was split from Monthon Isan in 1912. It contained the provinces Roi Et, Kalasin, and Maha Sarakham.
Ubon (Thai: มณฑลอุบล) or Monthon Laokao (Thai: มณฑลลาวกาว): Monthon Ubon was split from Monthon Isan in 1912. It included Ubon Ratchathani, Khukhan, Sisaket, and Surin.
Udon (Thai: มณฑลอุดร) or Monthon Lao Phuan (Thai: มณฑลลาวพวน): Monthon Udon was established in 1899. It contained the provinces Udon Thani, Khon Kaen, Loei, Nakhon Phanom, Nong Khai and Sakon Nakhon.

South[edit]

Phuket (Thai: มณฑลภูเก็จ): Monthon Phuket was established in 1898, succeeding a previously established commissionership. It consisted of the provinces Phuket, Thalang, Ranong, Phang Nga, Takua Pa, Krabi, Kelantan, and Terengganu.[5] In 1909 Satun was added when most of the area of Monthon Kedah along with Kelantan and Terengganu were ceded to Britain.
Chumphon (Thai: มณฑลชุมพร): Monthon Chumphon was established in 1896 consisting of the provinces Chumphon, Chaiya, Kanchanadit, and Lang Suan. Chaiya and Kanchanadit were later merged into one province named Chaiya. In 1905 the monthon administration was moved to Ban Don, the center of Chaiya province. Together with the renaming of Chaiya to Surat Thani the monthon was renamed "Monthon Surat". In 1925 the monthon was incorporated into Monthon Nakhon Si Thammarat.
Nakhon Si Thammarat (Thai: มณฑลนครศรีธรรมราช): Monthon Nakhon Si Thammarat was established in 1896, consisting of the provinces Songkhla, Nakhon Si Thammarat, and Phattalung.
Pattani (Thai: มณฑลปัตตานี): Monthon Pattani was created in 1906, and covered the so-called Seven Malay Provinces Pattani (Tani), Yala, Sai Buri, Yaring, Nong Chik, Raman, Ra-ngae.
Syburi (Thai: มณฑลไทรบุรี): Monthon Syburi was established in 1897. It covered the provinces Kedah, Perlis. and Satun. In 1909 Kedah was ceded to Britain. Satun, as the only remaining province, was added to Monthon Phuket.

Central[edit]

Krung Thep (Bangkok; Thai: มณฑลกรุงเทพ): The area around the capital was under the control of the Ministry of Urban Affairs, however a similar administration was established with the Monthon Krung Theb in 1897. It consisted of the provinces Phra Nakhon, Thon Buri, Nonthaburi, Pathum Thani, Phra Pradaeng (Nakhon Khueankhan), Samut Prakan, Thanyaburi, Min Buri. Pathum Thani and Thanyaburi later transferred to Monthon Ayutthaya. In 1915 it was renamed Krung Thep Phra Maha Nakhon (Bangkok metropolis). In 1922 the Ministry of Urban Affairs was dissolved and put under the Ministry of Interior, like all the other monthon.
Ayutthaya (Thai: มณฑลอยุธยา): Monthon Ayutthaya was created in 1893 as Monthon Krung Kao (Thai: มณฑลกรุงเก่า, Old Capital Monthon), consisting of the provinces Ayutthaya, also called Krung Kao or "old capital", Ang Thong, Lop Buri, Phrom Buri, Sara Buri.
Ratchaburi (Thai: มณฑลราชบุรี): Monthon Ratchaburi was created in 1895 and covered the provinces Ratchaburi, Kanchanaburi, Samut Songkhram, Phetchaburi and Prachuap Khiri Khan.
Nakhon Chai Si (Thai: มณฑลนครไชยศรี): Monthon Nakhon Chai Si was established in 1895, consisting of the provinces Nakhon Chai Si, Samut Sakhon, and Suphan Buri.

East[edit]

Prachinburi (Thai: มณฑลปราจิณบุรี): Monthon Prachinburi was established in 1893, covering the provinces Prachin Buri, Chachoengsao, Nakhon Nayok, and Phanom Sarakham.
Burapha (Thai: มณฑลบูรพา): Monthon Burapha was established in 1903, and covered the provinces Sisophon, Battambang, Phanomsok, and Siammarat, all in modern-day Cambodia. In 1907 the area was ceded to French Indochina.
Chanthaburi (Thai: มณฑลจันทบุรี): Monthon Chanthaburi was established in 1906, covering the provinces Chanthaburi, Rayong, and Trat. The monthon was created just before the area of monthon Burapha was ceded, and the French returned Trat Province to Thai authority.

Boriwen[edit]
The larger monthon Phayap, Udon Thani, and Isan had an additional administrative level between monthon and provincial administration. Three to five boriwen (บริเวณ), each administered by a commissioner (khaluang boriwen, ข้าหลวงบริเวณ).
See also[edit]

Administrative divisions of Thailand
Mandala (Southeast Asian political model)
Mueang
Native Chieftain System
Past provinces of Thailand
Royal Thai Survey Department

References[edit]



^ W. G. Johnson (2008) [1908]. "Education". In Wright, Arnold; Breakspear, Oliver T. Twentieth century impressions of Siam (PDF). London: Lloyds Greater Britain Publishing Co. p. 276. Retrieved January 28, 2012. Siam has progressed so rapidly of late years, and the machinery of Government has been reorganised and perfected so quickly, that it requires all the efforts of the Education Department to produce from its schools the supply of men capable of taking up the posts in the Government service 
^ บทความ ปรากฏการณ์ผีบุญ. blog (in Thai). @cloud. Retrieved September 21, 2011. เป็นกระทงร้อน มากกว่า 2 ปีพจนานุกรมฉบับราชบัณฑิตยสถาน ให้ความหมายของ ผีบุญ ไว้ว่า ผู้อวดคุณวิเศษว่ามีฤทธิ์ทําได้ต่าง ๆ อย่างผีสางเทวดาให้คนหลงเชื่อ 
^ Murdoch, John B (1974). "The 1901-1902 Holy Man's Rebellion" (PDF). Journal of the Siam Society. Siam Heritage Trust. 62 (1). Retrieved 2 April 2013. 
^ Glenn Slayden, ed. (1982). "พายัพ" (Dictionary). Royal Institute Dictionary. Thai-language.com. Retrieved 2013-09-29. 1982 พายัพ /พา-ยับ/ {Sanskrit: วายวฺย ว่า ของวายุ} [นาม] ชื่อทิศตะวันตกเฉียงเหนือ 
^ "Malaysian States". Retrieved 13 May 2017. 



Further reading[edit]

Damrong Rajanubhab (2002). เทศาภิบาล [Thesaphiban] (pdf) (in Thai). Bangkok: Matichon. ISBN 9743227814. 
Tej Bunnag (1977). The Provincial Administration of Siam, 1892-1915: the Ministry of the Interior under Prince Damrong Rajanubhab. Kuala Lumpur: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-580343-4. 
Tej Bunnag (2005). การปกครองระบบเทศาภิบาลของประเทศสยาม พ.ศ. 2435–2458 [The Provincial Administration of Siam, 1892–1915: the Ministry of the Interior under Prince Damrong Rajanubhab] (pdf) (in Thai) (2nd ed.). Bangkok: Thammasat University Press. ISBN 9745719374. 

External links[edit]

History of the Bangkok Metropolitan Council







v
t
e


Designations for types of administrative territorial entities








English terms








Common English terms1



Area



Insular area
Local government area
Protected area
Special area
Statistical area

Combined statistical area
Metropolitan statistical area
Micropolitan statistical area


Urban area





Canton

Half-canton



Borough



County borough
Metropolitan borough





Capital



Federal capital
Imperial capital





City



City state
Autonomous city
Charter city
Independent city
Incorporated city
Imperial city
Free imperial city
Royal free city





Community



Autonomous community
Residential community





County



Administrative county
Autonomous county
Consolidated city-county
Metropolitan county

Non-metropolitan


Viscountcy





Country



Overseas country





Department



Overseas department





District



Capital district
City district
Congressional district
Electoral district
Federal district
Indian government district
Land district
Metropolitan district

Non-metropolitan district


Military district
Municipal district
Police district
Regional district
Rural district
Sanitary district
Subdistrict
Urban district
Special district





Division



Census division
Police division
Subdivision





Municipality



County municipality

Norway
Nova Scotia
Regional county municipality


Direct-controlled municipality
District municipality
Mountain resort municipality
Neutral municipality
Regional municipality
Resort municipality
Rural municipality
Specialized municipality





Prefecture



Autonomous prefecture
Subprefecture
Super-prefecture
Praetorian prefecture





Province



Autonomous province
Overseas province
Roman province





Region



Administrative region
Autonomous region
Capital region
Development region
Economic region
Mesoregion
Microregion
Overseas region
Planning region
Special administrative region
Statistical region
Subregion





Reserve



Biosphere reserve
Ecological reserve
Game reserve
Indian reserve
Nature reserve





State



Federal state
Free state
Sovereign state





Territory



Capital territory

Federal capital territory


Dependent territory
Federal territory
Military territory
Organized incorporated territory
Overseas territory
Union territory
Unorganized territory





Town



Census town
Market town





Township



Charter township
Civil township
Paper township
Survey township
Urban township





Unit



Autonomous territorial unit
Local administrative unit
Municipal unit
Regional unit





Zone



Economic zone

Exclusive economic zone
Free economic zone
Special economic zone


Free-trade zone
Neutral zone
Self-administered zone










Other English terms



Current



Alpine resort
Bailiwick
Banner

Autonomous


Block
Cadastre
Circle
Circuit
Colony
Commune
Condominium
Constituency
Duchy
Eldership
Emirate
Federal dependency
Governorate
Hamlet
Ilkhanate
Indian reservation
Manor

Royal


Muftiate
Neighbourhood
Parish
Periphery
Precinct
Principality
Protectorate
Quarter
Regency
Autonomous republic
Riding
Sector

Autonomous


Shire
Sultanate
Suzerainty
Townland
Village

Administrative
Summer


Ward






Historical



Agency
Barony
Burgh
Exarchate
Hide
Hundred
Imperial Circle
March
Monthon
Presidency
Residency
Roman diocese
Seat
Tenth
Tithing



















Non-English or loanwords







Current



Amt
Bakhsh
Barangay
Bezirk
Regierungsbezirk
Comune
Frazione
Fu
Gemeinde
Județ
Kunta / kommun

Finland
Sweden


Län
Località
Megye
Muban
Oblast

Autonomous


Okrug
Ostān
Poblacion
Purok
Shahrestān
Sum
Sýsla
Tehsil
Vingtaine





Historical



Commote
Gau
Heerlijkheid
Köping
Maalaiskunta
Nome

Egypt
Greece


Pagus
Pargana
Plasă
Satrapy
Socken
Subah
Syssel
Zhou












v
t
e


Arabic terms for country subdivisions



First-level



Muhafazah (محافظة governorate)
Wilayah (ولاية province)
Mintaqah (منطقة region)
Mudiriyah (مديرية directorate)
Imarah (إمارة emirate)
Baladiyah (بلدية municipality)
Shabiyah (شعبية "popularate")





Second / third-level



Mintaqah (منطقة region)
Qadaa (قضاء district)
Nahiyah (ناحية subdistrict)
Markaz (مركز district)
Mutamadiyah (معتمدية "delegation")
Daerah/Daïra (دائرة circle)
Liwa (لواء banner / sanjak)





City / township-level



Amanah (أمانة municipality)
Baladiyah (بلدية municipality)
Ḥai (حي neighborhood / quarter)
Mahallah (محلة)
Qarya (قرية)
Sheyakhah (شياخة "neighborhood subdivision")






English translations given are those most commonly used.








v
t
e


French terms for country subdivisions






arrondissement
département
préfecture
subprefectures










v
t
e


Greek terms for country subdivisions



Modern



apokentromenes dioikiseis / geniki dioikisis§ / diamerisma§ / periphereia
nomos§ / periphereiaki enotita
demos / eparchia§ / koinotita§





Historical



archontia/archontaton
bandon
demos
despotaton
dioikesis
doukaton
droungos
eparchia
exarchaton
katepanikion
kephalatikion
kleisoura
meris
naukrareia
satrapeia
strategis
thema
toparchia
tourma






§ signifies a defunct institution








v
t
e


Portuguese terms for country subdivisions



Regional subdivisions



Estado
Distrito federal
Província
Região
Distrito
Comarca
Capitania





Local subdivisions



Município
Concelho
Freguesia
Comuna
Circunscrição





Settlements



Cidade
Vila
Aldeia
Bairro
Lugar








Historical subdivisions in italics.










v
t
e


Slavic terms for country subdivisions



Current



dzielnica
gmina
krai
kraj
krajina / pokrajina
městys
obec
oblast / oblast' / oblasti / oblys / obwód / voblast'
okręg
okres
okrug
opština / općina / občina / obshtina
osiedle
powiat / povit
raion
selsoviet / silrada
sołectwo
voivodeship / vojvodina
županija





Historical



darugha
gromada
guberniya / gubernia
jurydyka
khutor
obshchina
okolia
opole
pogost
prowincja
sorok
srez
starostwo / starostva
uyezd
volost
ziemia
župa










v
t
e


Spanish terms for country subdivisions



National, Federal



Comunidad autónoma
Departamento
Distrito federal
Estado
Provincia
Región





Regional, Metropolitan



Cantón
Comarca
Comuna
Corregimiento
Delegación
Distrito
Mancomunidad
Merindad
Municipalidad
Municipio
Parroquia

Ecuador
Spain







Urban, Rural



Aldea
Alquería
Anteiglesia
Asentamiento

Asentamiento informal
Pueblos jóvenes


Barrio
Campamento
Caserío
Ciudad

Ciudad autónoma


Colonia
Lugar
Masía
Pedanía
Población
Ranchería
Sitio
Vereda
Villa
Village (Pueblito/Pueblo)








Historical subdivisions in italics.










v
t
e


Turkish terms for country subdivisions



Modern



il (province)
ilçe (district)
şehir (city)
kasaba (town)
belediye (municipality)
belde (community)
köy (village)
mahalle (neighbourhood/quarter)





Historical



ağalık (feudal district)
bucak (subdistrict)
beylerbeylik (province)
kadılık (subprovince)
kaza (sub-province)
hidivlik (viceroyalty)
mutasarrıflık (subprovince)
nahiye (nahiyah)
paşalık (province)
reya (Romanian principalities)
sancak (prefecture)
vilayet (province)
voyvodalık (Romanian provinces)















1 Used by ten or more countries or having derived terms. Historical derivations in italics.
See also: Census division, Electoral district, Political division, and List of administrative divisions by country










						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Monthon&oldid=810024056"					Categories: Subdivisions of ThailandTypes of country subdivisionsHidden categories: CS1 uses Thai-language script (th)CS1 Thai-language sources (th)Articles containing Thai-language text