For other uses, see Moth (disambiguation).


Moth





Emperor gum moth, Opodiphthera eucalypti


Scientific classification 


Kingdom:
Animalia


Clade:
Euarthropoda


Class:
Insecta


Order:
Lepidoptera


(unranked):
Heterocera


Moths comprise a group of insects related to butterflies, belonging to the order Lepidoptera. Most lepidopterans are moths, and there are thought to be approximately 160,000 species of moth,[1] many of which are yet to be described. Most species of moth are nocturnal, but there are also crepuscular and diurnal species.



Contents


1 Differences between butterflies and moths
2 Etymology
3 Caterpillar
4 History
5 Economics

5.1 Significance to humans
5.2 Predators and parasites


6 Attraction to light
7 Notable moths
8 Gallery
9 See also
10 References
11 External links



Differences between butterflies and moths[edit]
Main article: Comparison of butterflies and moths
While the butterflies form a monophyletic group, the moths, comprising the rest of the Lepidoptera, do not. Many attempts have been made to group the superfamilies of the Lepidoptera into natural groups, most of which fail because one of the two groups is not monophyletic: Microlepidoptera and Macrolepidoptera, Heterocera and Rhopalocera, Jugatae and Frenatae, Monotrysia and Ditrysia.[2]
Although the rules for distinguishing moths from butterflies are not well established, one very good guiding principle is that butterflies have thin antennae and (with the exception of the Hedylidae family) have small balls or clubs at the end of their antennae. Moth antennae can be quite varied in appearance, but in particular lack the club end. The divisions are named by this principle: "club-antennae" (Rhopalocera) or "varied-antennae" (Heterocera).
Etymology[edit]
The modern English word "moth" comes from Old English "moððe" (cf. Northumbrian "mohðe") from Common Germanic (compare Old Norse "motti", Dutch "mot", and German "motte" all meaning "moth"). Its origins are possibly related to the Old English "maða" meaning "maggot" or from the root of "midge" which until the sixteenth century was used mostly to indicate the larva, usually in reference to devouring clothes.
Caterpillar[edit]




Poplar hawk-moth caterpillar
Laothoe populi


Moth larvae, or caterpillars, make cocoons from which they emerge as fully grown moths with wings. Some moth caterpillars dig holes in the ground, where they live until they are ready to turn into adult moths.[3]




Moth larva from India


History[edit]
Moths evolved long before butterflies, fossils having been found that may be 190 million years old. Both types of lepidoptera are thought to have evolved along with flowering plants, mainly because most modern species feed on flowering plants, both as adults and larvae. One of the earliest species thought to be a moth-ancestor is Archaeolepis mane, whose fossil fragments show scaled wings similar to caddisflies in their veining.[4]




Moth from Kerala, India


Economics[edit]
Significance to humans[edit]




An adult male pine processionary moth (Thaumetopoea pityocampa). This species is a serious forest pest when in larval state. Notice the bristle springing from the underside of the hindwing (frenulum) and running forward to be held in a small catch of the forewing, whose function is to link the wings together.


Some moths, particularly their caterpillars, can be major agricultural pests in many parts of the world. Examples include corn borers and bollworms.[5] The caterpillar of the gypsy moth (Lymantria dispar) causes severe damage to forests in the northeastern United States, where it is an invasive species. In temperate climates, the codling moth causes extensive damage, especially to fruit farms. In tropical and subtropical climates, the diamondback moth (Plutella xylostella) is perhaps the most serious pest of brassicaceous crops. Also in sub-Saharan Africa, the African sugarcane borer is a major pest of sugarcane, maize, and sorghum.[6]
Several moths in the family Tineidae are commonly regarded as pests because their larvae eat fabric such as clothes and blankets made from natural proteinaceous fibers such as wool or silk.[7] They are less likely to eat mixed materials containing some artificial fibers. There are some reports that they may be repelled by the scent of wood from juniper and cedar, by lavender, or by other natural oils; however, many consider this unlikely to prevent infestation. Naphthalene (the chemical used in mothballs) is considered more effective, but there are concerns over its effects on human health.
Moth larvae may be killed by freezing the items which they infest for several days at a temperature below −8 °C (18 °F).[8]
Despite being notorious for eating clothing, most moth adults do not eat at all. Many, like the Luna, Polyphemus, Atlas, Promethea, cecropia, and other large moths do not have mouth parts. While there are many species of adult moths that do eat, there are many that will drink nectar.[7]
Some moths are farmed for their economic value. The most notable of these is the silkworm, the larva of the domesticated moth Bombyx mori. It is farmed for the silk with which it builds its cocoon. As of 2002[update], the silk industry produces more than 130 million kilograms of raw silk, worth about 250 million U.S. dollars, each year.[9][10][11]
Not all silk is produced by Bombyx mori. There are several species of Saturniidae that also are farmed for their silk, such as the Ailanthus moth (Samia cynthia group of species), the Chinese oak silkmoth (Antheraea pernyi), the Assam silkmoth (Antheraea assamensis), and the Japanese silk moth (Antheraea yamamai).
The larvae of many species are used as food, particularly in Africa, where they are an important source of nutrition. The mopane worm, the caterpillar of Gonimbrasia belina, from the family Saturniidae, is a significant food resource in southern Africa. Another saturniid used as food is the cavorting emperor (Usta terpsichore). In one country alone, Congo, more than 30 species of moth larvae are harvested. Some are sold not only in the local village markets, but are shipped by the ton from one country to another.[12]
Predators and parasites[edit]




Tomato Hornworm parasitized by braconid wasps


Nocturnal insectivores often feed on moths; these include some bats, some species of owls and other species of birds. Moths also are eaten by some species of lizards, cats, dogs, rodents, and some bears. Moth larvae are vulnerable to being parasitized by Ichneumonidae.
Baculoviruses are parasite double-stranded DNA insect viruses that are used mostly as biological control agents. They are members of the Baculoviridae, a family that is restricted to insects. Most baculovirus isolates have been obtained from insects, in particular from Lepidoptera.
There is evidence that ultrasound in the range emitted by bats causes flying moths to make evasive maneuvers because bats eat moths. Ultrasonic frequencies trigger a reflex action in the noctuid moth that causes it to drop a few inches in its flight to evade attack.[13] Tiger moths also emit clicks which can foil bats' echolocation.[14][15]
Attraction to light[edit]




Assorted moths in the University of Texas Insect Collection


Moths frequently appear to circle artificial lights, although the reason for this behavior remains unknown. One hypothesis to explain this behavior is that moths use a technique of celestial navigation called transverse orientation. By maintaining a constant angular relationship to a bright celestial light, such as the moon, they can fly in a straight line. Celestial objects are so far away that, even after travelling great distances, the change in angle between the moth and the light source is negligible; further, the moon will always be in the upper part of the visual field, or on the horizon. When a moth encounters a much closer artificial light and uses it for navigation, the angle changes noticeably after only a short distance, in addition to being often below the horizon. The moth instinctively attempts to correct by turning toward the light, thereby causing airborne moths to come plummeting downward, and resulting in a spiral flight path that gets closer and closer to the light source.[16]
Notable moths[edit]

Atlas moth (Attacus atlas), the largest moth in the world
White witch moth (Thysania agrippina), the Lepidopteran with the longest wingspan
Madagascan sunset moth (Chrysiridia rhipheus), considered to be one of the most impressive and beautiful Lepidoptera[17]
Death's-head hawkmoth (Acherontia spp.), is associated with the supernatural and evil and has been featured in art and movies
Peppered moth (Biston betularia), the subject of a well-known study in natural selection
Luna moth (Actias luna)
Grease moth (Aglossa cuprina), known to have fed on the rendered fat of humans[18]
Emperor gum moth (Opodiphthera eucalypti)
Polyphemus moth (Antheraea polyphemus)
Bogong moth (Agrotis infusa), known to have been a food source for southeastern indigenous Australians
Ornate moth (Utetheisa ornatrix), the subject of numerous behavioral studies regarding sexual selection


Moths of economic significance


Gypsy moth (Lymantria dispar), an invasive species pest of hardwood trees in North America
Winter moth (Operophtera brumata), an invasive species pest of hardwood trees, cranberry and blueberry in northeastern North America
Corn earworm or cotton bollworm (Helicoverpa zea), a major agricultural pest
Indianmeal moth (Plodia interpunctella), a major pest of grain and flour
Codling moth (Cydia pomonella), a pest mostly of apple, pear and walnut trees
Light brown apple moth (Epiphyas postvittana), a highly polyphagous pest
Silkworm (Bombyx mori), for its silk
Wax moths (Galleria mellonella, Achroia grisella), pests of bee hives
Duponchelia fovealis, a new invasive pest of vegetables and ornamental plants in the United States

Gallery[edit]







Diagram of a Plume moth from Robert Hooke's Micrographia









Leaf-shaped moth









Giant grey moth









Moth in India









Six-spot burnet moths mating (Zygaena filipendulae)









Protective silk (or similar material) case (cocoon).









A caterpillar of death's-head hawkmoth









Mating pair of Laothoe populi, or poplar hawkmoths, showing two different color variants.









White-Lined Sphinx moth in Colorado, United States









Closeup of a common clothes moth









Giant silk moth









Adult emperor moth




See also[edit]

Baculovirus
Butterfly
Clothing moth
Comparison of butterflies and moths
Lepidoptera
List of moths
Lepidopterism
Pollination

References[edit]


^ "Moths". Smithsonian Institution. Retrieved 2012-01-12. 
^ Scoble, MJ 1995. The Lepidoptera: Form, function and diversity. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press; 404 p.
^ Darby, Gene (1958). What is a Butterfly. Chicago: Benefic Press. p. 41. 
^ Chihuahuan Desert Nature Center
Evolution of Moths and Butterflies
Studying the evolution of butterflies and moths is challenging, since fossils are so rare. But the few Lepidopteran fossils that exist, captured in amber or compressed in fine-grained rocks, show great detail. The earliest Lepidopteran fossils appear in rocks that are about 190 million years old. These tiny fragments of scaled wings and bodies clearly indicate that moths evolved before butterflies.
^ The First Decade of Genetically Engineered Crops in the United States. USDA.
^  Conlong, D. E. (1994-02-01). "A review and perspectives for the biological control of the African sugarcane stalkborer Eldana saccharina Walker (Lepidoptera: Pyralidae)". Agriculture, Ecosystems & Environment. 48 (1): 9–17. doi:10.1016/0167-8809(94)90070-1.
^ a b Scott, Thomas (1995). Concise Encyclopedia Biology. Walter de Gruyter. ISBN 3-11-010661-2.
^ Choe, D.-H. "Clothes Moths" in How to Manage Pests: Pests of Homes, Structures, People, and Pets. University of California
^ "Table 74. Raw silk: production (including waste)". Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. Retrieved 2008-10-02. Table lists worldwide raw silk production 132,400 metric tonnes in 2002 
^ "Silk Exchanges of Tamil Nadu and Andhra Pradesh". Central Silk Board of India. Archived from the original on March 7, 2007.  gives silk prices in rupees. Exchange rate is about 50 RS to dollar.
^ "Silk Worm Farming". Vegan Society. Archived from the original on June 19, 2008. Retrieved 2008-10-02. World Raw Silk Production in 1996 is listed as 83,670 metric tonnes 
^ "Some Edible Species". Food-Insects.com. Archived from the original on 2014-11-07. 
^ Jones, G; D A Waters (2000). "Moth hearing in response to bat echolocation calls manipulated independently in time and frequency". Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences. 267 (1453): 1627–32. doi:10.1098/rspb.2000.1188. PMC 1690724 . PMID 11467425. 
^ Kaplan, Matt (July 17, 2009) Moths Jam Bat Sonar, Throw the Predators Off Course. National Geographic News
^ Some Moths Escape Bats By Jamming Sonar (video). npr.org. July 17, 2009.
^ "Why Are Moths Attracted to Flame?". npr.org. August 18, 2007. 
^ Tait, Malcolm (2006). Animal Tragic: Popular Misconceptions of Wildlife Through the Centuries. Think Books. p. 38. ISBN 1-84525-015-X. 
^ Brundage, Adrienne (March 23, 2009), Other Arthropods of Forensic Importance, Texas A&M University, Texas A&M University Forensic Entomology Lecture


External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Lepidoptera.








v
t
e


Insects in culture



Aspects
of insects
in culture




In the arts



Insects in art

Beetlewing


Insects in film
Insects in literature
Insects in music

List of insect-inspired songs


Insects on stamps





In fishing



Fishing bait
Fly fishing
Artificial fly
Fly tying
Maggot
Mayfly
Mealworm





In medicine



Apitherapy

Apitoxin
Melittin


Maggot
Spanish fly

Cantharidin







In mythology



Bee
Butterfly
Cicada
Dragonfly
Praying mantis
Scarab





Entomophagy
(as food)




Adults



Ant
Cicada
Cricket
Grasshopper
Termite





Larvae



Bamboo worm
Darkling beetle
Mealworm
Mopani worm
Rhinoceros beetle
Silkworm
Waxworm
Witchetty grub








Other aspects



Biomimicry
Cricket fighting
Entomological warfare
Flea circus
Insects in religion
Jingzhe











Economic
entomology




Beneficial
insects




Pest control



Encarsia formosa
Ichneumon wasp
Ladybird





Pollination



Bees

crops pollinated
Bumblebee
Honey bee

western




Beetles
Flies
Lepidoptera





Products




Beekeeping



Bee pollen
Beeswax
Honey
Propolis
Royal jelly





Other insects



Carmine/Cochineal

Polish


Chitin
Kermes
Sericulture

Silk


Lac/Shellac








Model organism



Drosophila melanogaster








Harmful
insects




Crop pests



Aphid
Boll weevil
Colorado potato beetle
Cottony cushion scale
Japanese beetle
Locust
Phylloxera
Western corn rootworm





Livestock pests



Botfly
Horn fly
Horse-fly
Screwworm fly
Tsetse fly
Warble fly





Biting/stinging



Insect bites and stings
Insect sting allergy
Bed bug
Bee sting
Flea
Horse-fly
Louse
Mosquito
Wasp





Wood-eating



Deathwatch beetle
Furniture beetle
House longhorn beetle
Termite
Woodworm





Other pests



Home-stored product entomology
Clothes moth
Cockroach
Housefly











Pioneers



Jan Swammerdam
Alfred Russel Wallace
Jean-Henri Fabre
Hans Zinsser (Rats, Lice and History)
Lafcadio Hearn (Insect Literature)





Related



Living things in culture

Arthropods
Birds
Fish
Fungi
Mammals
Microbes
Molluscs
Reptiles
Plants


Zoomusicology








Butterflies and moths portal
Insects portal
Arthropods portal
Animals portal
Biology portal





Taxon identifiers



Wd: Q1725788
EoL: 39390341









Authority control



LCCN: sh85087552
GND: 4171063-0











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Moth&oldid=816826629"					Categories: Agricultural pest insectsHousehold pest insectsMothsPollinator insectsHidden categories: Articles with 'species' microformatsArticles containing potentially dated statements from 2002All articles containing potentially dated statementsWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiers