For other uses, see Motorsport (disambiguation).
"Motorsport engineering" redirects here. For the field of car engineering, see Automotive engineering.
"Arena racing" redirects here. For the indoor motorsports series, see Arena Racing USA. For the British horse racecourse operator, see Arena Racing Company.






This article includes a list of references, but its sources remain unclear because it has insufficient inline citations. Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations. (August 2015) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)




Motorsport


A modern-day Formula One car (the Mercedes F1 W06 Hybrid of 2015)



Highest governing body
FIA (four- or more wheeled)
FIM (two-wheeled)


First competitive race
1894


Presence


Country or region
Worldwide


Olympic
1900 (Demonstration only)


Motorsport or motor sport is a global term used to encompass the group of competitive sporting events which primarily involve the use of motorised vehicles, whether for racing or non-racing competition. The terminology can also be used to describe forms of competition of two-wheeled motorised vehicles under the banner of motorcycle racing, and includes off-road racing such as motocross.
Four- (or more) wheeled motorsport competition is globally governed by the Fédération Internationale de l'Automobile (FIA); and the Fédération Internationale de Motocyclisme (FIM) governs two-wheeled competition.



Contents


1 History
2 Motor racing

2.1 Formula racing

2.1.1 Formula One
2.1.2 Formula E
2.1.3 IndyCar Series


2.2 Enclosed wheel racing

2.2.1 Sports car racing
2.2.2 Stock car racing
2.2.3 Touring car racing


2.3 Other racing


3 Non-racing motorsport
4 Olympics
5 See also
6 Notes
7 References
8 External links



History[edit]
In 1894, a French newspaper organised a race from Paris to Rouen and back, starting city to city racing.[1] In 1900, the Gordon Bennett Cup was established. Closed circuit racing arose as open road racing, on public roads, was banned. Brooklands was the first dedicated motor racing track in the United Kingdom.[2]
Following World War I, European countries organised Grand Prix races over closed courses. In the United States, dirt track racing became popular.[3]
After World War II, the Grand Prix circuit became more formally organised. In the United States, stock car racing and drag racing became firmly established.[4]
Motorsports ultimately became divided by types of motor vehicles into racing events, and their appropriate organisations.
 Motor racing[edit]
"Motor racing" redirects here. For other uses, see Motor racing (disambiguation).
Motor racing[5] is the subset of motorsport activities which involve competitors racing against each other.
Formula racing[edit]




The Mercedes F1 W06 Hybrid, the 2015 Formula One World Championship winning car


Main article: Formula racing
Formula racing is a set of classes of motor vehicles, with their wheels outside, and not contained by, any bodywork of their vehicle. These have been globally classified as specific 'Formula' series - the most common being Formula One, and many others include the likes of Formula 3, Formula Ford, Formula Renault and Formula Palmer Audi. However, in North America, the IndyCar series is their pinnacle open-wheeled racing series. More recently, new open-wheeled series have been created, originating in Europe, which omit the 'Formula' moniker, such as GP2 and GP3. Former 'Formula' series include Formula 5000 and Formula Two.
Formula One[edit]
Main article: Formula One
Formula One is a class of single-seat and open-wheel grand prix closed course racing, governed by the Fédération Internationale de l'Automobile (FIA), and currently organized by the privately owned company Formula One Group. The formula regulations contain a very strict set of rules which govern vehicle power, weight and size.[6]
Formula E[edit]
Main article: Formula E
Formula E is a class of open-wheel auto racing that uses only electric-powered cars. The series was conceived in 2012, and the inaugural championship started in Beijing on 13 September 2014.[7] The series is also sanctioned by the FIA and races a spec chassis/battery combination with manufacturers allowed to develop their own electric power-trains. The series has gained significant traction in recent years.[8]
IndyCar Series[edit]
Main article: IndyCar Series
In the United States, Indy Car is a class of single seat paved track racing, organized by INDYCAR. Its premier race is the Indianapolis 500.
Enclosed wheel racing[edit]




A Ford Focus WRC rally racing car during 2010 Rally Finland


Enclosed wheel racing is a set of classes of vehicles, where the wheels are primarily enclosed inside the bodywork of the vehicle, similar to a North American 'stock car'.
Sports car racing[edit]
Main article: Sports car racing
Sports car racing is a set of classes of vehicles, over a closed course track, including sports cars, and specialised racing types. The premiere race is the 24 Hours of Le Mans which takes place annually in France during the month of June. Sports car racing rules and specifications differentiate in North America from established international sanctioning bodies.[9]
Stock car racing[edit]
Main article: Stock car racing
Stock car racing is a set of vehicles, that race over a speedway track, organised by NASCAR. While once stock cars, the vehicles are now purpose built, but resemble the body design and shape of production cars. NASCAR was organised in 1947, to combine flat track oval racing of production cars.[10] Daytona Beach and Road Course was founded where land speed records were set on the beach, and including part of A1A. The highlight of the stock car calendar is the season-opening Daytona 500, also nicknamed 'The Great American Race'.
Touring car racing[edit]
Main article: Touring car racing
Touring car racing is a set of vehicles,[11] modified street cars, that race over closed purpose built race tracks and street courses.
Other racing[edit]




Finnish speedway riders in the Speedway Extraliiga competition


Motor sports which involve competitors racing against each other include:

Auto (car) racing
Motor rallying
Motorcycle racing
Air racing
Kart racing
Motorboat racing
Drone racing
Hovercraft racing
Lawn mower racing
Radio-controlled model racing
Slot car racing
Snowmobile racing
Truck racing

Non-racing motorsport[edit]
Forms of motorsport which do not involve racing include drifting, regularity rally, motorcycle trials, gymkhana, Freestyle Motocross and tractor pulling.
Olympics[edit]
Motorsport was a demonstration event at the 1900 Summer Olympics.
See also[edit]


Motorsport portal



List of motorsport championships
Electric motorsport
International Motorsports Hall of Fame
Long Beach Motorsports Walk of Fame
Motorsports Hall of Fame of America

Notes[edit]



^ Gifford, p. 7.
^ Gifford, p. 9.
^ Gifford, p. 10.
^ Gifford, p. 11.
^ Macmillan Dictionary
^ Jonathan Noble; Mark Hughes. "Discovering What Makes Formula One, Formula One". Formula One Racing For Dummies. 
^ Telegraph Sport (13 September 2014). "Formula E opens with spectacular crash involving Nick Heidfeld and Nicolas Prost as Lucas di Grassi claims win". Daily Telegraph. Retrieved 13 September 2014. 
^ Formula E (31 July 2017). "Agag: This has been our take-off season". Retrieved 4 September 2017. 
^ "Regulations". Federation Internationale de l'Automobile. Retrieved 2015-10-09. 
^ Layford, Bob. Built for Speed. Courage Books. p. 29. ISBN 0762404418. 
^ "Car Facts | Pirelli World Challenge". www.World-Challenge.com. Retrieved 2015-10-09. 



References[edit]

Clive Gifford, Racing: The Ultimate Motorsports Encyclopedia Kingfisher, 2006, ISBN 9780753460405

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Motorsports and Motor racing.





Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Motor sport.



Official website (in English)
Formula 1 (F1)
Motorsports Association (UK)
World Rally Championship (WRC)







v
t
e


Racing








Running







Track running



Sprinting
Middle-distance running
Long-distance track event
Relay race
Hurdling
Steeplechase








Road running



Half marathon
Marathon
Ultramarathon
Ekiden





Off-road running



Adventure running
Cross country running
Fell running
Trail running





Other



Tower running
Racewalking
















Orienteering






Foot orienteering
Mountain bike orienteering
Ski orienteering
Trail orienteering
Radio orienteering
Canoe orienteering
Rogaining
Mountain marathon
Car orienteering













Bicycle racing






Road bicycle racing
Cyclo-cross
Mountain bike racing
Track cycling
BMX racing
Cycle speedway
Keirin













Animal racing






Camel racing
Greyhound racing
Horse racing
Pigeon racing
Sled dog racing













Swimming






Open water swimming
Marathon swimming
Paralympic swimming













Motorsport







Auto racing



Formula racing
Sports car racing
Touring car racing
Stock car racing
Rallying
Drag racing
Off-road racing









Motorboat racing



Drag boat racing
Hydroplane racing
Jet sprint boat racing
Offshore powerboat racing
F1 powerboat
River marathon racing





Other



Kart racing
Air racing
Radio-controlled car racing
Slot car racing
















Multi-sport racing






Duathlon
Triathlon









List of forms of racing










v
t
e


Extreme and adventure sports



Boardsports



Bellyboarding
Bodyboarding
Dirtsurfing
Flowriding
Kite landboarding
Kitesurfing
Longboarding
Mountainboarding
River surfing
Riverboarding
Sandboarding
Skateboarding
Skimboarding
Skysurfing
Snowboarding
Snowskating
Street luging
Surfing
Wakeboarding
Windsurfing





Motorsports



Drifting
Motocross
Rallying
Snocross
Supercross





Water sports



Coasteering
Freediving
High diving
Jet Skiing
Scuba diving

Cave diving
Technical diving


Snorkeling
Water skiing
Whitewater canoeing
Whitewater kayaking
Whitewater rafting





Mountaineering



Bouldering
Canyoning
Free solo climbing
Ice climbing
Rock climbing
Skyrunning





Free fall



BASE jumping
Bungee jumping
Cliff-diving
Parachuting (skydiving)
Wingsuit flying





Flying



Air racing
Gliding
Hang gliding
Paragliding
Parasailing
Powered paragliding
Speed flying





Cycling



BMX

BMX racing
Freestyle BMX


Mountain biking
Downhill mountain biking





Roller



Freestyle scootering
Inline skating

Aggressive inline skating
Vert skating


Roller skating





Skiing



Extreme skiing
Speed skiing





Sliding



Bobsleigh
Extreme sledding
Luge
Skeleton





Food



Cheese rolling
Nettle eating





Others



Caving
Extreme ironing
Extreme Pogo
Fell running
Obstacle racing
Orienteering
Paintball
Powerbocking
Slacklining
Ultramarathon
Zip-lining








 Commons
 Sports Portal











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Motorsport&oldid=818325615"					Categories: MotorsportRacingIndividual sportsSports by typeHidden categories: Articles lacking in-text citations from August 2015All articles lacking in-text citationsOfficial website not in Wikidata