

Mountain Time Zone




  MST or UTC−07




UTC offset


MST
UTC−7:00


MDT
UTC−6:00


Current time (Refresh the clock.)


MST
11:27 pm on  Jan 3, 2018


Observance of DST


DST is observed in certain regions of this time zone between the 2nd Sunday in March and the 1st Sunday in November.


DST ended
Nov 5, 2017


DST begins
Mar 11, 2018


The Mountain Time Zone of North America keeps time by subtracting seven hours from Coordinated Universal Time (UTC) when standard time is in effect, and by subtracting six hours during daylight saving time (UTC−6). The clock time in this zone is based on the mean solar time at the 105th meridian west of the Greenwich Observatory. In the United States, the exact specification for the location of time zones and the dividing lines between zones is set forth in the Code of Federal Regulations at 49 CFR 71.[a] cor In the United States and Canada, this time zone is generically called Mountain Time (MT). Specifically, it is Mountain Standard Time (MST) when observing standard time, and Mountain Daylight Time (MDT) when observing daylight saving time. The term refers to the fact that the Rocky Mountains, which range from northwestern Canada to the US state of New Mexico, are located almost entirely in the time zone. In Mexico, this time zone is known as the Zona Pacífico (Pacific Zone).
In the United States and Canada, the Mountain Time Zone is to the east of the Pacific Time Zone and to the west of the Central Time Zone.
In some areas, starting in 2007, the local time changes from MST to MDT at 2 am MST to 3 am MDT on the second Sunday in March and returns at 2 am MDT to 1 am MST on the first Sunday in November.
Sonora in Mexico and most of Arizona in the United States do not observe daylight saving time, and during the spring, summer, and autumn months they are on the same time as Pacific Daylight Time.[4] The Navajo Nation, most of which lies within Arizona, does observe DST, although the Hopi Nation, as well as some Arizona state offices lying within the Navajo Nation, do not.
The largest city in the Mountain Time Zone is Phoenix, Arizona. The Phoenix metropolitan area is the largest metropolitan area in the zone; the next largest metropolitan area that observes Mountain Time is Denver, closely followed by the El Paso–Juárez area. TV broadcasting in the Mountain Time Zone is typically tape-delayed one hour, so that shows match the broadcast times of the Central Time Zone (i.e. prime time begins at 7 pm MT following the same order of programming as the Central Time Zone).[citation needed]



Contents


1 Canada
2 Mexico
3 United States
4 See also
5 Notes
6 References



Canada[edit]
Main article: Time in Canada
Only one Canadian province is fully contained in the Mountain Time Zone:

Alberta

One province and one territory are split between the Mountain Time Zone and the Pacific Time Zone:

British Columbia – far eastern regions
Northwest Territories – Tungsten

One territory and one province are split between the Mountain Time Zone and the Central Time Zone

Nunavut: Kitikmeot Region
Saskatchewan: Lloydminster and vicinity

Mexico[edit]
Main article: Time in Mexico
The following states have the same time as Mountain Time Zone:



Baja California Sur
Chihuahua
Nayarit: Except for the Bahía de Banderas municipality, which uses the Central Time Zone.
Sonora – no daylight saving time, always on MST.
Sinaloa
Revillagigedo Islands (Colima): three of the four islands have the same time as Mountain Time Zone, Isla Socorro, San Benedicto Island and Roca Partida.



United States[edit]
Main article: Time in the United States
Five states are fully contained in the Mountain Time Zone:

Arizona – no DST, except in the Navajo Nation
Colorado
Montana
Utah
Wyoming

Three states are split between the Mountain Time Zone and the Pacific Time Zone:

Idaho – Southern Idaho
Nevada – all, except for West Wendover, Mountain City, Owyhee, Jackpot, and Jarbidge
Oregon – primary time zone for Malheur County

Seven states are split between the Mountain Time Zone and the Central Time Zone:

Kansas – Sherman, Wallace, Greeley and Hamilton counties
Nebraska – western third
North Dakota – southwest part
New Mexico – all, except for Nara Visa
Oklahoma – Kenton
South Dakota – western half
Texas – El Paso and Hudspeth counties

See also[edit]

Effects of time zones on North American broadcasting

Notes[edit]



^ The specification for the Mountain Time Zone in the United States is set forth at 49 CFR 71.8.[1] The boundary between Central and Mountain time zones is set forth at 49 CFR 71.7,[2] and the boundary between Mountain and Pacific time zones is set forth at 49 CFR 71.9.[3]



References[edit]



^ "49 CFR 71.8 Mountain zone". Code of Federal Regulations. Retrieved October 7, 2011. 
^ "49 CFR 71.7 Boundary line between central and mountain zones". Code of Federal Regulations. Retrieved October 7, 2011. 
^ "49 CFR 71.9 Boundary line between mountain and Pacific zones". Code of Federal Regulations. Retrieved October 7, 2011. 
^ Robbins, Ted (March 11, 2007). "Arizona Says No to Daylight-Saving Time". National Public Radio. Retrieved June 18, 2012. 




World time zone map
U.S. time zone map
History of U.S. time zones and UTC conversion
Canada time zone map
Time zones for major world cities
Official times across Canada
Official times across Mexico
Canada time map
U.S. time map






v
t
e


Time zones in North America



Time zone
Hours from UTC: Standard time
Hours from UTC: Daylight saving time


Hawaii–Aleutian (in Hawaii)
–10
–10


Hawaii–Aleutian (in Alaska)
–10
–9


Alaska
–9
–8


Pacific
–8
–7


Mountain (Arizona and Sonora only)
–7
–7


Mountain (other states)
–7
–6


Central (Saskatchewan only)
–6
–6


Central (other states)
–6
–5


Eastern (Southampton Island, Atikokan and New Osnaburgh/Pickle Lake only)
–5
–5


Eastern (other states)
–5
–4


Atlantic (Natashquan River)
–4
–4


Atlantic (other states)
–4
–3


Newfoundland
–3:30
–2:30


Saint Pierre and Miquelon
and most of Greenland
–3
–2




See also
Time in Canada
Time in Denmark
Time in Mexico
Time in the United States









						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mountain_Time_Zone&oldid=817581041"					Categories: Time zonesTime in CanadaTime in MexicoTime zones in the United StatesHidden categories: All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from June 2012