Not to be confused with multiple-stage competition.




The Pan American Games is one of the largest multi-sport events and involves athletes from the Americas.


A multi-sport event is an organized sports event, often held over multiple days, featuring competition in many different sports among organized teams of athletes from (mostly) nation states. The first major, modern, multi-sport event of international significance is the modern Olympic Games.
Many regional multi-sport events have since been founded on and modeled after the Olympics. Most have the same basic structure. Games are held over the course of several days in and around a "host city", which changes for each competition. Countries send national teams to each competition, consisting of individual athletes and teams that compete in a wide variety of sports. Athletes or teams are awarded gold, silver or bronze medals for first, second and third place respectively. The games are generally held every four years, though some are annual competitions.



Contents


1 History
2 Audience
3 Historic events

3.1 Olympic Games
3.2 Paralympic Games
3.3 Special Olympics
3.4 Others


4 List of international multi-sport competitions

4.1 Worldwide events
4.2 Regional events
4.3 National events


5 Disability
6 References



History[edit]
The Ancient Olympic Games, first held in 776 BC, was the precursor to the Modern Olympic Games, although its first edition only featured a footrace and the number of sporting competitions expanded at later editions.
There were several other "games" held in Europe in the classical era:

Panhellenic Games:

The Pythian Games (founded 527 BC) held in Delphi every four years
The Nemean Games (founded 516 BC) held in Argolid every two years
The Isthmian Games (founded 523 BC) held on the Isthmus of Corinth every two years


The Roman Games – Arising from Etruscan rather than purely Greek roots, the Roman Games deemphasized footraces and throwing. Instead, the Greek sports of chariot racing and wrestling, as well as the Etruscan sport of gladiatorial combat, took center stage.

Other multi-sport festivals emerged in the Middle Ages in Europe, including the Cotswold Olimpick Games in England in the 1600s, the Highland Games in Scotland, and the Olympiade de la République in France in the 1800s.
In the late 19th and early 20th century, athletes at multi-sport events were almost exclusively male. As international women's sport began to develop, events such as the Women's World Games and Olympics of Grace were held to allow women to engage in sport on the international stage. Though short-lived, events such as these led to greater inclusion of women at multi-sport events over the course of the 20th century.[1]
Audience[edit]
Since the establishment of the Olympics, most serial multi-sport events have been organized for specific audiences and participating countries or communities. These affiliations include:

Regional, such as the Asian Games and the Pan-American Games
Sub-Regional, such as the Southeast Asian Games and the South American Games
Political, such as the Spartakiad and the Games of the New Emerging Forces (GANEFO)
Historic or historicultural roots, such as the Commonwealth Games (for members of the Commonwealth of Nations) and the Jeux de la Francophonie (for members of La Francophonie)
Ethnocultural or ethnoreligious, such as the Pan-Armenian Games (for ethnic communities of Armenians both in Armenia and in other countries) and the Maccabiah Games (for communities of Jews of both ethnic and religious origins)
Religious, such as the Islamic Solidarity Games and the previously mentioned Maccabiah Games
Occupational, such as the Military World Games, the World Police and Fire Games, and the Universiade
Physical disabilities, such as the Paralympics and the Deaflympics
Intellectual disabilities, such as the Special Olympics World Games
Age, such as the World Masters Games, Commonwealth Youth Games, and the Senior Olympics
Gender and sexual orientation, such as the Women's Islamic Games and the Gay Games

Historic events[edit]
Olympic Games[edit]
Main article: Olympic Games
The first modern multi-sport event organised were the Olympic Games, organised by the International Olympic Committee (IOC) (est. 1894) for the first time in 1896 in Athens, Greece. After some celebrations (1900, 1904), the Olympics became very popular nowadays. The number of sports, initially only a few, is still growing.
Paralympic Games[edit]
Main article: Paralympic Games
The Paralympic Games is the largest multi-sport event involving athletes with physical disabilities, and is organised by the International Paralympic Committee (IPC). Arranged for the first time in 1960 in Rome, Italy. The number of sports, initially only a few, is still growing.
Special Olympics[edit]
Main article: Special Olympics World Games
The first Special Olympics International Summer Games were held in Chicago, Ill., in 1968. The most recent Special Olympics World Summer Games in Los Angeles, United States, involved 25 sports and approximately 6,500 athletes from 177 countries.[2]
Others[edit]
At the beginning of the 20th century, another multi-sport event, the Nordic Games were first held. These Games were held in Scandinavia, and the sports conducted were winter sports such as cross-country skiing and speed skating. The Nordic Games were last held in 1926, after which the 1924 Winter Sports Week in Chamonix was declared the first Olympic Winter Games.
In the 1920s, all kinds of other multi-sport events were set up. These were usually directed for a selected group of athletes, rather than everybody, which was — basically — the case with the Olympic Games. The Soviets organised the first Spartakiad in 1920, a communist alternative to the 'bourgeois' Olympic Games, and in 1922 the University Olympia was organised in Italy, the forerunner of the World University Games, meant for students only.
Regional games were another kind of multi-sport event that was established, such as the Far Eastern Championship Games (1913), the Central American and Caribbean Games (1926) or the Pan American Games (1951).
List of international multi-sport competitions[edit]
Main article: List of multi-sport events
The Olympic Games are still the largest multi-sport event in the world in terms of worldwide interest and importance (though no longer in participation), but several others also have significance.
Worldwide events[edit]

Multi-sports events for non-Olympic sports


World Games, held first in 1981, stage many sports (though not all) that are not Olympic sports. The World Games is therefore sometimes also unofficially called Olympics for non-Olympic sports. (They cannot be called "Olympic" games without infringing on the Olympic committees' trademarks.)
Mind Sports Olympiad, first held in 1997 for Mind Sports[3]
World Mind Sports Games, first held in 2008 for games of skill (e.g. chess, go, etc.)
The X Games and Winter X Games, which highlight extreme action sports.
The FAI World Air Games, first held in 1997, which is the premier international multi-discipline air sports event.


By occupation


Universiade, held first in 1959, for students at universities worldwide
Military World Games, held first in 1995, for military athletes from over 100 countries
World Police and Fire Games, began in 1985, for law enforcement officers and firefighters worldwide; third only to the World Masters Games and Summer Olympics in number of participants.


By organisation and language


Commonwealth Games, held first in 1930 (although a similar event was held in 1911) for all member states of the Commonwealth of Nations.
Commonwealth Youth Games, began in 2000.
Francophone Games, held first in 1989, for French-speaking nations and communities.
Lusophony Games, began in 2006, for Portuguese-speaking nations and communities.
Pan Arab Games, held first in 1953, for Arabic-speaking nations.
Islamic Solidarity Games, first held in 2005, for all member states of the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation.
Women's Islamic Games, began in 1993.


By political and historical allegiance


Bolivarian Games, began in 1938, for countries liberated by Simón Bolívar
Games of the Small States of Europe, first held in 1985, for small states of Europe
Island Games, first held in 1985, for teams from several islands and other small territories
Goodwill Games, first held in 1986, originally held as an alternative after the boycotted Olympics of 1980 and 1984 (Last edition was held in 2001)
Spartakiad, a defunct event involving athletes from the Soviet Union
Games of the New Emerging Forces, a defunct event first held in 1963, for the so-called "Emerging Nations" (mainly newly independent socialist states)


By national origin and national descent


Pan-Armenian Games, began in 1999.


By ethnicity


Maccabiah Games, first held in 1932, for Jewish athletes worldwide.


Other


Gay Games and World OutGames, first held in 1982 and 2006, for the worldwide gay community.
World Masters Games, first held in 1985, for mature athletes. Most participants of any multi-sport event, with approximately twice as many competitors as the Summer Olympics.
European Masters Games, first held in 2008, for mature athletes (generally for 30–35 years or older, dependent on sport).

Regional events[edit]

African Games, held first in 1965, for all African nations
Afro-Asian Games, first held in 2003 in India.
Australasian Police and Emergency Services Games, both by regional and by occupations.
Baltic Sea Games, for all nations bordering Baltic Sea, first held in Estonia 1993, then in Lithuania 1997.
Pan American Games, held first in 1951, for all nations of the Americas
Central American and Caribbean Games, held first in 1926, every 4 years for nations in the Caribbean, Central America and/or bordering the Caribbean Sea
Central American Games, held first in 1973, for nations in Central America
Caribbean Games, proposed to be held first in June 2009 for countries in the Caribbean Sea, was scheduled in Netherlands Antiles in May 2011. Now rescheduled for 2013[4][5][6][7]
South American Games, held first in 1978, for nations in South America
Arafura Games, held first in 1991 and hosted in the Oceania region.
Asian Games, held first in 1951, for all Asian nations
Southeast Asian Games, held first in 1959, for nations in Southeast Asia
East Asian Games, for nations in East Asia
West Asian Games, for nations in West Asia
Central Asian Games, for nations in Central Asia
South Asian Games, for nations in South Asia
European Games, held first in 2015, for nations in Europe
European Youth Olympic Festival (EYOF), for youth athletes from Europe, began in 1991 (summer) and 1993 (winter).
Mediterranean Games, held first in 1951, for all nations bordering the Mediterranean Sea
Pacific Games, held first in 1963 for countries around the South Pacific Ocean
Arctic Winter Games, held first in 1970, an international biennial celebration of circumpolar north and Arctic sports and culture
Indian Ocean Island Games, held first in 1979, for all islands in the Indian Ocean

National events[edit]

National Games of China, perhaps the oldest national games with a history dating back to 1910
Korean National Sports Festival, held first in 1920 for all provinces in entire Korea, but later for provinces in South Korea
National Sports Festival of Japan
National Games of India, started in 1924 as "Indian Olympics Games"
Palarong Pambansa in the Philippines
Pekan Olahraga Nasional in Indonesia
Thailand National Games, started in 1967, Thailand Para National Games
Canada Games
SUKMA Games in Malaysia
State Games of America in the United States
AAU Junior Olympic Games in the United States, held first in 1967

Disability[edit]
Other Games are intended for handicapped or disabled athletes. The International Silent Games, first held in Paris in 1924, were the first Games for deaf athletes. The Stoke Mandeville Wheelchair Games, incepted in 1948 in England, were the first Games for wheelchair athletes. In 1960, the first Paralympic Games were held, connected with the Olympic Games. The Special Olympics World Games, for athletes with intellectual disabilities, were first held in 1968.
References[edit]



^ Leigh, Mary H.; Bonin, Thérèse M. (1977). "The Pioneering Role Of Madame Alice Milliat and the FSFI in Establishing International Trade and Field Competition for Women" (PDF). Journal of Sport History. North American Society for Sport History. 4 (1): 72–83. Retrieved 3 September 2011. 
^ http://www.athens2011.org/en/sports.asp
^ Mental muscles flexed at Mind Sports Olympiad CNN, 24 August 1997, [1], retrieved 13 July 2012
^ [2][dead link]
^ "The Caribbean Games". canoc.net. 2008-11-07. Retrieved 2011-05-20. 
^ Caribbean Games hopefully in 2011 | Netherlands Antilles Olympic Committee. Naoc.info. Retrieved on 2013-07-12.
^ sportcaraibe Resources and Information. sportcaraibe.net. Retrieved on 2013-07-12.









v
t
e


Multi-sport events








Global



Olympics



Olympic Games

Summer
Winter


Youth Olympic Games





Disabled sports



Deaflympics
Défi sportif
Invictus Games
CPISRA World Games
INAS Global Games
IBSA World Games
IWAS World Games
World Dwarf Games
Paralympic Games

Summer
Winter


Special Olympics

Summer
Winter


World Transplant Games





Professions



Lumberjack World Championship
World Air Games
World Martial Arts Games
World Military Games
World Police and Fire Games
World Firefighters Games
World Roller Games
European Championship in Forestry Skills
Southern Forestry Conclave
Stihl Timbersports Series
World Logging Championship





Youth and students



Gymnasiade
International Children's Games
SELL Student Games
Universiade
World Interuniversity Games
Commonwealth Youth Games





Other types



Arafura Games
CSIT World Sports Games
Dew Tour
Mind Sports Olympiad
World Mind Sports Games
SportAccord World Mind Games
TAFISA World Games
World Combat Games
World Games
World Masters Games
X Games
World Beach Games





Intercommunity



Commonwealth Games
CPLP Games
Croatian World Games
Gay Games
Invictus Games
Islamic Solidarity Games
Jeux de la Francophonie
Lusophony Games
Maccabiah Games
Pan Arab Games
Pan-Armenian Games
Transplant Games
World Eskimo Indian Olympics
World Indigenous Games
World Nomad Games
World Outgames













Regional



Africa



African Youth Games
African Games
All-Africa University Games





Americas



Pan American

Pan American Games
Parapan American Games


Central American and Caribbean

Central American and Caribbean Games
Central American Games


Latin American

ALBA Games
Bolivarian Games


North American

CANUSA Games
North American Indigenous Games
North American Outgames


South American

South American Games
South American Beach Games
South American Youth Games







Asia



Pan Asian

Asian Games
Asian Beach Games
Asian Indoor and Martial Arts Games
Asian Para Games
Asian Winter Games
Asian Youth Games


Southeast Asian

Southeast Asian Games
ASEAN School Games
ASEAN University Games
ASEAN Para Games


Central Asian Games
South Asian Games
West Asian Games





Europe



Black Sea Games
European Games
European Masters Games
European Sports Championships
European Youth Olympic Festival
Games of the Small States of Europe
Jeux des îles
EuroGames





Oceania



Australian Youth Olympic Festival
Micronesian Games
Pacific Games





Intercontinental



Arctic Winter Games
Asia Pacific Deaf Games
Indian Ocean Island Games
Island Games
Mediterranean Games
Pan Arab Games













National



Africa



South African Games1





Americas







Canada

British Columbia
Quebec
Western


Colombia
United States

amateur juniors
seniors
Warrior Games







NCSG,
United States3



Alabama
California
Florida
Massachusetts
Missouri
Montana
Nebraska
New York
North Carolina
North Dakota1
Lakota Nation
Texas
Wisconsin








Asia



Bangladesh
China

All-China Games
National Games
National Peasants' Games
National Youth Games


India
Indonesia
Japan
Malaysia

Para


Mongolia
Pakistan
Philippines

National Games
Batang Pinoy
Palaro


Singapore
South Korea

Summer
Winter


Thailand

youth


Vietnam





Europe



Netherlands
Poland (youth)
All-Union Spartakiad1
Spartakiad of Albania1
Spartakiad of Peoples of the USSR1

youth1


WheelPower













Historical1



Pre-Modern Olympics
(in order, from 1900 BC to 1859 AD)



Tailteann Games (ancient)
Panhellenic Games

Ancient Olympic Games
Pythian Games
Nemean Games
Isthmian Games
Heraean Games


Panathenaic Games
Roman Games
Cotswold Olimpick Games
Gog Magog Games
Wenlock Olympian Society Annual Games
Zappas Olympics





Alternatives to the
Modern Olympics



Aryan Games
Friendship Games
GANEFO
Goodwill Games
Inter-Allied Games
Islamic Games
Liberty Bell Classic
People's Olympiad
Workers' Olympiads





Defunct regional or
community events



Afro-Asian Games
Asian Indoor Games
Asian Martial Arts Games
Central African Games
East Asian Games
Far Eastern Championship Games
FESPIC Games
Games of the New Emerging Forces
Nordic Games
Pacific Ocean Games
Spartakiad of Peoples of the USSR
Tailteann Games (modern)
Women's Islamic Games
World Youth Games













Winter games



International



Olympics
Paralympics
Winter Universiade
Commonwealth1
World Scout
Arctic Winter Games
Kennedy Memorial1
New Zealand Winter Games





Regional



National Winter Games of China
Asian Winter Games
European Youth Olympic Festival
Winter X Games Europe











1 Defunct
2 Sub-national
3 51 component games in 36 U.S. states


 Category
 List
 WikiProject











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Multi-sport_event&oldid=814943794"					Categories: Multi-sport eventsSports terminologySports competitionsSports eventsHidden categories: All articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from May 2011