






This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages)







This article includes a list of references, but its sources remain unclear because it has insufficient inline citations. Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations. (March 2013) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)









A major contributor to this article appears to have a close connection with its subject. It may require cleanup to comply with Wikipedia's content policies, particularly neutral point of view. Please discuss further on the talk page. (August 2015) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)









This article may require cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards. The specific problem is: The article is rambling and not focused at all. Please help improve this article if you can. (August 2015) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)









This article may contain an excessive amount of intricate detail that may only interest a specific audience. Please help by spinning off or relocating any relevant information, and removing excessive detail that may be against Wikipedia's inclusion policy. (August 2015) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)





(Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Multi-user MIMO (MU-MIMO) is a set of multiple-input and multiple-output technologies for wireless communication, in which a set of users or wireless terminals, each with one or more antennas, communicate with each other.[1] In contrast, single-user MIMO considers a single multi-antenna transmitter communicating with a single multi-antenna receiver. In a similar way that OFDMA adds multiple access (multi-user) capabilities to OFDM, MU-MIMO adds multiple access (multi-user) capabilities to MIMO. MU-MIMO has been investigated since the beginning of research into multi-antenna communication, including work by Telatar[2] on the capacity of the MU-MIMO uplink.
SDMA,[3][4][5] massive MIMO,[6][7] coordinated multipoint (CoMP)[8] and ad hoc MIMO are all related to MU-MIMO; each of those technologies often leverage spatial degrees of freedom to separate users.



Contents


1 Technology
2 MIMO broadcast (MIMO BC)
3 MIMO MAC
4 Cross-layer MIMO
5 Multi-user to multi-user

5.1 Cooperative MIMO (CO-MIMO)


6 See also
7 References
8 External links



Technology[edit]
Multi-user MIMO (MU-MIMO) can leverage multiple users as spatially distributed transmission resources, at the cost of somewhat more expensive signal processing. In comparison, conventional, or single-user MIMO considers only local device multiple antenna dimensions. Multi-user MIMO algorithms are developed to enhance MIMO systems when the number of users or connections is greater than one. Multi-user MIMO can be generalized into two categories: MIMO broadcast channels (MIMO BC) and MIMO multiple access channels (MIMO MAC) for downlink and uplink situations, respectively. Single-user MIMO can be represented as point-to-point, pairwise MIMO.
To remove ambiguity of the words receiver and transmitter, we can adopt the terms access point (AP; or, base station), and user. An AP is the transmitter and a user is the receiver for downlink environments, whereas an AP is the receiver and a user is the transmitter for uplink environments. Homogeneous networks are somewhat freed from this distinction.
MIMO broadcast (MIMO BC)[edit]




Multiuser MIMO System: MIMO BC case


MIMO broadcast represents a MIMO downlink case in a single sender to multiple receiver wireless network. Examples of advanced transmit processing for MIMO BC are interference aware precoding and SDMA-based downlink user scheduling. For advanced transmit processing, the channel state information has to be known at the transmitter (CSIT). That is, knowledge of CSIT allows throughput improvement, and methods to obtain CSIT become of significant importance. MIMO BC systems have an outstanding advantage over point-to-point MIMO systems, especially when the number of transmit antennas at the transmitter, or AP, is larger than the number of receiver antennas at each receiver (user). Two categories of coding techniques for the MIMO BC include those using dirty paper coding (DPC) and linear techniques.[9]
MIMO MAC[edit]
Conversely, the MIMO multiple-access-channel or MIMO MAC represents a MIMO uplink case in the multiple sender to single receiver wireless network. Examples of advanced receive processing for MIMO MAC are joint interference cancellation and SDMA-based uplink user scheduling. For advanced receive processing, the receiver has to know the channel state information at the receiver (CSIR). Knowing CSIR is generally easier than knowing CSIT. However, knowing CSIR costs a lot of uplink resources to transmit dedicated pilots from each user to the AP. MIMO MAC systems outperforms point-to-point MIMO systems especially when the number of receiver antennas at an AP is larger than the number of transmit antennas at each user.
Cross-layer MIMO[edit]
Cross-layer MIMO enhances the performance of MIMO links by solving certain cross-layer problems that may occur when MIMO configurations are employed in a system. Cross-layer techniques can be used to enhance the performance of SISO links as well. Examples of cross-layer techniques are Joint Source-Channel Coding, Adaptive Modulation and Coding (AMC, or "Link Adaptation"), Hybrid ARQ (HARQ), and user scheduling.
Multi-user to multi-user[edit]
The highly interconnected wireless ad hoc network increases the flexibility of wireless networking at the cost of increased multi-user interference. To improve the interference immunity, PHY/MAC-layer protocols have evolved from competition based to cooperative based transmission and reception. Cooperative wireless communications can actually exploit interference, which includes self-interference and other user interference. In cooperative wireless communications, each node might use self-interference and other user interference to improve the performance of data encoding and decoding, whereas conventional nodes are generally directed to avoid the interference. For example, once strong interference is decodable, a node decodes and cancels the strong interference before decoding the self-signal. The mitigation of low Carrier over Interference (CoI) ratios can be implemented across PHY/MAC/Application network layers in cooperative systems.

Cooperative multiple antenna research – Apply multiple antenna technologies in situations with antennas distributed among neighboring wireless terminals.

Cooperative diversity – Achieve antenna diversity gain by the cooperation of distributed antennas belonging to each independent node.
Cooperative MIMO – Achieve MIMO advantages, including the spatial multiplexing gain, using the transmit or receiver cooperation of distributed antennas belonging to many different nodes.


Cooperative relay – Apply cooperative concepts onto relay techniques, which is similar to cooperative diversity in terms of cooperative signalling. However, the main criterion of cooperative relay is to improve the tradeoff region between delay and performance, while that of cooperative diversity and MIMO is to improve the link and system performance at the expense of minimal cooperation loss.
Relaying techniques for cooperation

Store-and-forward (S&F), Amplify-and-forward (A&F), Decode-and-forward (D&F), Coded cooperation, Spatial coded cooperation, Compress-and-forward (C&F),Non-orthogonal methods



Cooperative MIMO (CO-MIMO)[edit]
Main article: Cooperative MIMO






This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (November 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



CO-MIMO, also known as network MIMO (net-MIMO), or ad hoc MIMO, uses distributed antennas which belong to other users, while conventional MIMO, i.e., single-user MIMO, only employs antennas belonging to the local terminal. CO-MIMO improves the performance of a wireless network by introducing multiple antenna advantages, such as diversity, multiplexing and beamforming. If the main interest hinges on the diversity gain, it is known as cooperative diversity. It can be described as a form of macro-diversity, used for example in soft handover. Cooperative MIMO corresponds to transmitter macro-diversity or simulcasting. A simple form that does not require any advanced signal processing is single frequency networks (SFN), used especially in wireless broadcasting. SFNs combined with channel adaptive or traffic adaptive scheduling is called dynamic single frequency networks (DSFN).
CO-MIMO is a technique useful for future cellular networks which consider wireless mesh networking or wireless ad hoc networking. In wireless ad hoc networks, multiple transmit nodes communicate with multiple receive nodes. To optimize the capacity of ad hoc channels, MIMO concepts and techniques can be applied to multiple links between the transmit and receive node clusters. Contrasted to multiple antennas in a single-user MIMO transceiver, participating nodes and their antennas are located in a distributed manner. So, to achieve the capacity of this network, techniques to manage distributed radio resources are essential. Strategies such as autonomous interference cognition, node cooperation, and network coding with dirty paper coding have been suggested to optimize wireless network capacity.
See also[edit]


Computer networking portal
Electronics portal



Distributed antenna system
Mesh network
Mobile ad hoc network
Phased array
Space-division multiple access
Space-time coding/processing

References[edit]


^ Golbon-Haghighi, M.H. (2016). Beamforming in Wireless Networks (PDF). InTech Open. pp. 163–199. doi:10.5772/66.399. ISBN 9781466557529. 
^ Telatar, Emre (1999). "Capacity of Multi-antenna Gaussian Channels". European Transactions on Telecommunications. 10 (6): 585–95. doi:10.1002/ett.4460100604. 
^ N. Jindal, MIMO Broadcast Channels with Finite Rate Feedback, IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 52, no. 11, pp. 5045–5059, 2006.
^ D. Gesbert, M. Kountouris, R.W. Heath Jr., C.-B. Chae, and T. Sälzer, Shifting the MIMO Paradigm, IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, vol. 24, no. 5, pp. 36-46, 2007.
^ R. Tweg, R. Alpert, H. Leizerovich, A. Steiner, E. Levitan, E. Offir-Arad, A.B. Guy, B. Zickel, A. Aviram, A. Frieman, M. Wax, ASIC Implementation of Beamforming and SDMA for WiFi Metropolitan-Area Deployment, Global Telecommunications Conference, 2006. GLOBECOM '06. IEEE.
^ T. L. Marzetta, Noncooperative Cellular Wireless with Unlimited Numbers of Base Station Antennas IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, vol. 9, no. 11, pp. 56-61, 3590-3600, Nov. 2010.
^ J. Hoydis, S. ten Brink, M. Debbah, Massive MIMO in the UL/DL of Cellular Networks: How Many Antennas Do We Need? IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 31, no. 2, pp. 160-171, Feb. 2013.
^ E. Björnson and E. Jorswieck, Optimal Resource Allocation in Coordinated Multi-Cell Systems, Foundations and Trends in Communications and Information Theory, vol. 9, no. 2-3, pp. 113-381, 2013.
^ Q. Spencer; M. Haardt & A. L. Swindlehurst (February 2004). "Zero-Forcing Methods for Downlink Spatial Multiplexing in Multi-User MIMO Channels". IEEE Trans. Signal Processing. 


External links[edit]

MU-MIMO Beamforming by Constructive Interference, Wolfram Demonstrations Project







v
t
e


Telecommunications



History




Beacon
Broadcasting
Cable protection system
Cable TV
Communications satellite
Computer network
Drums
Electrical telegraph
Fax
Heliographs
Hydraulic telegraph
Internet
Mass media
Mobile phone
Optical telecommunication
Optical telegraphy
Pager
Photophone
Prepaid mobile phone
Radio
Radiotelephone
Satellite communications
Semaphore
Smartphone
Smoke signals
Telecommunications history
Telautograph
Telegraphy
Teleprinter (teletype)
Telephone
The Telephone Cases
Television
Timeline of communication technology
Undersea telegraph line
Videoconferencing
Videophone
Videotelephony
Whistled language





Pioneers



Edwin Howard Armstrong
John Logie Baird
Paul Baran
Alexander Graham Bell
Tim Berners-Lee
Jagadish Chandra Bose
Vint Cerf
Claude Chappe
Donald Davies
Lee de Forest
Philo Farnsworth
Reginald Fessenden
Elisha Gray
Erna Schneider Hoover
Charles K. Kao
Hedy Lamarr
Innocenzo Manzetti
Guglielmo Marconi
Antonio Meucci
Radia Perlman
Alexander Stepanovich Popov
Johann Philipp Reis
Nikola Tesla
Camille Tissot
Alfred Vail
Charles Wheatstone
Vladimir K. Zworykin





Transmission
media



Coaxial cable
Free-space optical communication
Molecular communication
Optical fiber
Radio waves
Transmission line





Network topology
and switching



Links
Nodes
Terminal node
Network switching (circuit
packet)
Telephone exchange





Multiplexing



Space-division
Frequency-division
Time-division
Polarization-division
Orbital angular-momentum
Code-division





Networks



ARPANET
BITNET
Cellular network
Computer
CYCLADES
Ethernet
FidoNet
Internet
ISDN
LAN
Mobile
NGN
NPL network
Public Switched Telephone
Radio
Telecommunications equipment
Television
Telex
WAN
Wireless
World Wide Web








 Category
 Portal











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Multi-user_MIMO&oldid=810995185"					Categories: Information theoryRadio resource managementHidden categories: Articles lacking in-text citations from March 2013All articles lacking in-text citationsWikipedia articles with possible conflicts of interest from August 2015Articles needing cleanup from August 2015All pages needing cleanupCleanup tagged articles with a reason field from August 2015Wikipedia pages needing cleanup from August 2015Wikipedia articles needing style editing from August 2015All articles needing style editingArticles with multiple maintenance issuesArticles needing additional references from November 2017All articles needing additional references