A multiplayer video game is a video game in which more than one person can play in the same game environment at the same time. Video games are often single-player activities, putting the player against preprogrammed challenges or AI-controlled opponents (which lack the flexibility of human thought). Multiplayer games allow players interaction with other individuals in partnership, competition or rivalry, providing them with social communication absent from single-player games. In multiplayer games, players may compete against two (or more) human contestants, work cooperatively with a human partner to achieve a common goal, supervise other players' activity, co-op, and objective-based modes assaulting (or defending) a control point. Multiplayer games typically require players to share the resources of a single game system or use networking technology to play together over a greater distance.



Contents


1 History

1.1 Non-networked
1.2 Networked


2 Single-system
3 Online cheating
4 Asymmetrical gameplay
5 Asynchronous multiplayer
6 See also
7 References



History[edit]
Non-networked[edit]
Some of the earliest video games were two-player games, including early sports games (such as 1958's Tennis For Two and 1972's Pong), early shooter games such as Spacewar! (1962)[1] and early racing video games such as Astro Race (1973).[2] The first examples of multiplayer real-time games were developed on the PLATO system about 1973. Multi-user games developed on this system included 1973's Empire and 1974's Spasim; the latter was an early first-person shooter. Other early video games included turn-based multiplayer modes, popular in tabletop arcade machines. In such games, play is alternated at some point (often after the loss of a life). All players' scores are often displayed onscreen so players can see their relative standing.
Gauntlet (1985) and Quartet (1986) introduced co-operative 4-player gaming to the arcades. The games had broader consoles to allow for four sets of controls.
Networked[edit]
The first large-scale serial sessions using a single computer[citation needed] were STAR (based on Star Trek), OCEAN (a battle using ships, submarines and helicopters, with players divided between two combating cities) and 1975's CAVE (based on Dungeons and Dragons), created by Christopher Caldwell (with art work and suggestions by Roger Long and assembly coding by Robert Kenney) on the University of New Hampshire's DECsystem-1090. The university's computer system had hundreds of terminals, connected (via serial lines) through cluster PDP-11s for student, teacher and staff access. The games had a program running on each terminal (for each player), sharing a segment of shared memory (known as the "high segment" in the OS TOPS-10). The games became popular, and the university often banned them because of their RAM use. STAR was based on 1974's single-user, turn-oriented BASIC program STAR, written by Michael O'Shaughnessy at UNH.
Ken Wasserman and Tim Stryker in a 1980 BYTE article identified three factors which make networked computer games appealing:[3]

multiple humans competing with each other instead of a computer
incomplete information resulting in suspense and risk-taking
real-time play requiring quick reaction

Wasserman and Stryker described how to network two Commodore PET computers with a cable, which included a type-in, two-player Hangman and described the authors' more-sophisticated Flash Attack.[3] Digital Equipment Corporation distributed another multi-user version of Star Trek, Decwar, without real-time screen updating; it was widely distributed[by whom?] to universities with DECsystem-10s. In 1981 Cliff Zimmerman wrote an homage to Star Trek in MACRO-10 for DECsystem-10s and -20s using VT100-series graphics. "VTtrek" pitted four Federation players against four Klingons in a three-dimensional universe.
MIDI Maze, an early first-person shooter released in 1987 for the Atari ST, featured network multiplay through a MIDI interface before Ethernet and Internet play became common. It is considered[by whom?] the first multiplayer 3D shooter on a mainstream system, and the first network multiplayer action-game (with support for up to 16 players). There followed ports to a number of platforms (including Game Boy and Super NES) in 1991 under the title Faceball 2000, making it one of the first handheld, multi-platform first-person shooters and an early console example of the genre.[4]
Networked multiplayer gaming modes are known as "netplay". The first popular video-game title with a LAN version, 1991's Spectre for the Apple Macintosh, featured AppleTalk support for up to eight players. Spectre's popularity was partially attributed[by whom?] to the display of a player's name above their cybertank. There followed 1993's Doom, whose first network version allowed four simultaneous players.[5]
Networked multiplayer LAN games eliminate common Internet problems such as lag and anonymity, and are the focus of LAN parties. Play-by-email multiplayer games use email to communicate between computers. Other turn-based variations not requiring players to be online simultaneously are Play-by-post gaming and Play-by-Internet. Some online games are "massively multiplayer", with a large number of players participating simultaneously. Two massively-multiplayer genres are MMORPG (such as World of Warcraft or EverQuest) and MMORTS.
Some networked multiplayer games, including MUDs and massively multiplayer online games such as RuneScape, omit a single-player mode. First-person shooters have become popular multiplayer games; Battlefield 1942 and Counter-Strike have little (or no) single-player gameplay. Developer and gaming site OMGPOP's library includes multiplayer Flash games for the casual player. The world's largest MMOG is South Korea's Lineage, with 19 million registered players (primarily in Asia).[6] The largest Western MMOG in 2008 was World of Warcraft, with over 10 million registered players worldwide. This category of games requires multiple machines to connect via the Internet; before the Internet became popular, MUDs were played on time-sharing computer systems and games like Doom were played on a LAN.
Gamers refer to latency using the term "ping", after a utility which measures round-trip network communication delays (by the use of ICMP packets). A player on a DSL connection with a 50-ms ping can react faster than a modem user with a 350-ms average latency. Other problems include packet loss and choke, which can prevent a player from "registering" their actions with a server. In first-person shooters, this problem appears when bullets hit the enemy without damage. The player's connection is not the only factor; some servers are slower than others.
Beginning with the Sega NetLink in 1996, Game.com in 1997 and Dreamcast in 2000, game consoles support network gaming over LANs and the Internet. Many mobile phones and handheld consoles also offer wireless gaming with Bluetooth (or similar) technology. By the early 2010s online gaming had become a mainstay of console platforms such as Xbox and PlayStation.[citation needed]
Single-system[edit]
In modern console, arcade and personal computer games, "multiplayer" implies play with several controllers plugged into one game system. Home-console games often use split screen, so each player has an individual view of the action (important in first-person shooters and racing video games); most arcade games, and some console games (since Pong), do not. Nearly all multiplayer modes on beat 'em up games have a single-system option, but racing games are abandoning split screen in favor of a multiple-system, multiplayer mode. Turn-based games such as chess also lend themselves to single system single screen and even a single controller.
The term "couch co-op" refers to local multiplayer games played in a cooperative manner, such as by friends sitting on the same couch; these may by split-screen or other display method.
Hotseat games are typically turn-based games with only one controller or input set such as a single keyboard/mouse on the system. Players rotate using the input device to perform their turn such that each is taking a turn on the "hotseat".
Online cheating[edit]
Main article: Cheating in online games
Online cheating, in gaming, modifies the game experience to give one player an advantage over others.[7][8][9]
Asymmetrical gameplay[edit]






This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (July 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



An asymmetric video game is a type of multiplayer video game in which players may play on in an unbalanced way. In "soft asymmetry" games the players have the same basic mechanics such as movement and death, yet all have different roles. In "strong asymmetry" games typically have one team that are practically the same or in soft asymmetric roles while the other team features players that play in a drastically different way.
Asynchronous multiplayer[edit]
Asynchronous multiplayer is a form of multiplayer gameplay where players do not have to be playing simultaneously.[10]
See also[edit]

Game server
LAN gaming center
Matchmaking (video games)
Spawn installation
Massively multiplayer online role-playing game

References[edit]



^ "Getting Connected". Next Generation. No. 19. Imagine Media. July 1996. p. 20. There have been multiplayer electronic games since the dawn of computing. Space War!, the first real videogame, programmed by Steve Russell on the PDP-1, was an exclusive two-player game. So was Nolan Bushnell's pioneering coin-op Pong. 
^ Astro Race at the Killer List of Videogames
^ a b Wasserman, Ken; Stryker, Tim (December 1980). "Multimachine Games". BYTE. p. 24. Retrieved 18 October 2013. 
^ Parish, Jeremy, The Essential 50: Faceball 2000, 1UP, Accessed April 24, 2009
^ "Doom - electronic game". 
^ "NCsoft's Lineage II Expansion Dramatically Speeds Up Character Progression - IGN". Ca.ign.com. Retrieved 2013-08-28. 
^ "Cheating". Dictionary.com. Retrieved December 19, 2012. 
^ Thompson, Clive (December 19, 2012). "What Type of Game Cheater Are You?". Wired.com. Retrieved 2009-09-15. 
^ "How To Hurt The Hackers". Retrieved June 1, 2017. 
^ Kelly, Tadhg. "Opinion: Synchronous or Asynchronous Gameplay". 









v
t
e


Multiplayer video games



Player(s)



Cooperative gameplay
Multiplayer online game
Massively multiplayer online game

MMORPG


MUD





Genres



Action
Arcade
Role-playing
Simulation
Strategy





History



History of online games
History of massively multiplayer online games
List of massively multiplayer online strategy video games





Concepts



Virtual economy

Virtual tax


Social interaction in MMORPGs
Virtual world

Persistent world


Non-player character





See also



Online game

Browser game


Social networking service












v
t
e


Concepts of video games




Glossary of video game terms



Attributes



Health
Life
Experience point
Magic





Mechanics



Item
Power-up
HUD
Warp
Fog of war
Invisible wall
Cutscene
Mini-map
Paper doll
Destructible environment
Loading screen
Replay value
Scripted sequence
Password
Line of sight
Critical hit
Level
Permadeath
Status effect
Hitbox





Movement techniques



Rocket jumping
Strafe-jumping
Strafing
Trickjump





Modes




Player type



Single-player
Multiplayer
Cooperative





Competitive gameplay



eSports
Speedrun





Gameplay type



Capture the flag (CTF)
Deathmatch
Last man standing















v
t
e


Video game genres






List





Action



Beat 'em up

Hack and slash


Fighting
Maze

Pac-Man clone


Platform
Shooter

First-person
Third-person
Side-scrolling
Top-down
isometric
Light gun
Shoot 'em up
Tactical


Survival

Battle royale







Action-adventure



Grand Theft Auto clone
Immersive sim
Metroidvania
Stealth
Survival horror

Psychological horror







Adventure



Escape the room
Interactive fiction
Interactive movie
Point n' click
Visual novel





MMO



MMOFPS
MMORPG
MMORTS
MUD





Role-playing



Action role-playing
Dungeon crawl
Roguelike
Tactical role-playing





Simulation



Construction and management

Business
City
Government


Life simulation

Dating sim
Digital pet
God
Social simulation


Sports





Strategy



4X
Multiplayer online battle arena
Real-time strategy

Tower defense
Time management


Real-time tactics
Turn-based strategy
Turn-based tactics
Wargame





Vehicle simulation



Flight simulator

Amateur
Combat
Space


Racing

Kart racing
Sim racing


Submarine simulator
Train simulator





Other genres



Artillery
Breakout clone
Eroge
Exergame
Incremental
Music

Rhythm


Non-game
Party
Programming
Puzzle

Sokoban
Tile-matching







Related concepts



Advertising
Arcade game
Art game
Audio game
Casual game
Christian game
Crossover game
Cult game
Educational game
FMV
Gamification
Indie game
Multiplayer video game
Nonlinear gameplay

Open world


Nonviolent video game
Online game

Browser game
Multiplayer online game
Online gambling
Social network game


Pervasive game
Serious game
Toys-to-life
Twitch gameplay
Video game clone











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Multiplayer_video_game&oldid=812693749"					Categories: Video game gameplayMultiplayer video gamesVideo game terminologyHidden categories: All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from January 2017Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from January 2017Articles needing additional references from July 2017All articles needing additional references