






This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages)







This article may require cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards. The specific problem is: the article is poorly translated and needs to be rewritten up to professional standards Please help improve this article if you can. (May 2012) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)









This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (October 2012) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)





(Learn how and when to remove this template message)





Part of the Politics series


Party politics


Political spectrum





Left-wing







Far-left
Hard left







Centre







Centre-left
Radical center
Centre-right







Right-wing







Far-right/hard right










Party platform








Extremist
Radical








Moderate
Reformist
Syncretic
Third Position








Conservative
Fundamentalist
Reactionary








Party system








Non-partisan
One-party








Dominant-party
Two-party
Multi-party








Coalition





Hung parliament
Confidence and supply
Minority government
Rainbow coalition
Grand coalition
Full coalition



National unity government
Majority government




Lists




Ruling parties by country
Political parties by UN geoscheme
Political ideologies




Politics portal





v
t
e





A multi-party system is a system in which multiple political parties across the political spectrum run for national election, and all have the capacity to gain control of government offices, separately or in coalition.[1] Apart from one-party-dominant and two-party systems, multi-party systems tend to be more common in parliamentary systems than presidential systems and far more common in countries that use proportional representation compared to countries that use first-past-the-post elections.
First-past-the-post requires concentrated areas of support for large representation in the legislature whereas proportional representation better reflects the range of a population's views. Proportional systems have multi-member districts with more than one representative elected from a given district to the same legislative body, and thus a greater number of viable parties. Duverger's Law states that the number of viable political parties is one plus the number of seats in a district.
Argentina, Austria, Belgium, Brazil, Croatia, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Lebanon, Mexico, Moldova, Nepal, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, the Philippines, Portugal, Romania, Serbia, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sweden, Switzerland, Taiwan, Tunisia and Ukraine are examples of nations that have used a multi-party system effectively in their democracies. In these countries, usually no single party has a parliamentary majority by itself. Instead, multiple political parties are compelled to form compromised coalitions for the purpose of developing power blocks and attaining legitimate mandate.



Contents


1 Comparisons with other party systems

1.1 One-party system and two-party system


2 See also
3 References



Comparisons with other party systems[edit]




Indian state governments led by various political parties and coalitions


One-party system and two-party system[edit]
See also: one-party system and Two-party system
A system where only two parties have the possibility of winning an election is called two-party system. A system where only three parties have a realistic possibility of winning an election or forming a coalition is sometimes called a "Third-party system". But, in some cases the system is called a "Stalled Third-Party System," when there are three parties and all three parties win a large number of votes, but only two have a chance of winning a general election. Usually this is because the electoral system penalises the third party, e.g. as in UK politics. In the 2010 elections, the Liberal Democrats gained 23% of the total vote but won less than 10% of the seats due to the First-Past-The-Post electoral system. Despite this, they still had enough seats (and enough public support) to form coalitions with one of the two major parties, or to make deals in order to gain their support. An example is the Conservative-Liberal Democrat coalition formed after the 2010 general election. Another is the Lib-Lab pact during Prime Minister James Callaghan's Minority Labour Government; when Labour lost its three-seat majority in 1977, the pact fell short of a full coalition.
Unlike a one-party system (or a two-party system), a multi-party system encourages the general constituency to form multiple distinct, officially recognized groups, generally called political parties. Each party competes for votes from the enfranchised constituents (those allowed to vote). A multi-party system prevents the leadership of a single party from controlling a single legislative chamber without challenge.
If the government includes an elected Congress or Parliament, the parties may share power according to proportional representation or the first-past-the-post system. In proportional representation, each party wins a number of seats proportional to the number of votes it receives. In first-past-the-post, the electorate is divided into a number of districts, each of which selects one person to fill one seat by a plurality of the vote. First-past-the-post is not conducive to a proliferation of parties, and naturally gravitates toward a two-party system, in which only two parties have a real chance of electing their candidates to office. This gravitation is known as Duverger's law. Proportional representation, on the other hand, does not have this tendency, and allows multiple major parties to arise. But, recent coalition governments, such as that in the U.K., represent two-party systems rather than multi-party systems. This is regardless of the number of parties in government.
A two-party system requires voters to align themselves in large blocs, sometimes so large that they cannot agree on any overarching principles. Some theories argue that this allows centrists to gain control. On the other hand, if there are multiple major parties, each with less than a majority of the vote, the parties are strongly motivated to work together to form working governments. This also promotes centrism, as well as promoting coalition-building skills while discouraging polarization.
See also[edit]

Coalition
Polarized pluralism
Political organisation
Ingroups and outgroups

References[edit]



^ [1] - Education 2020, definition of multiparty: "A system in which several major and many lesser parties exist, seriously compete for, and actually win public offices."






Authority control



GND: 4169312-7











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Multi-party_system&oldid=809319418"					Categories: Forms of governmentPolitical systemsPolitical party systemsElectionsDemocracyGovernmentHidden categories: Articles needing cleanup from May 2012All pages needing cleanupCleanup tagged articles with a reason field from May 2012Wikipedia pages needing cleanup from May 2012Articles needing additional references from October 2012All articles needing additional referencesArticles with multiple maintenance issuesWikipedia articles with GND identifiers