



The Ponce City Hall, in the city of Ponce, Puerto Rico, is the seat of the government for both the city and the surrounding barrios making up the municipality.






Map of all city municipalities in Slovenia


A municipality is usually a single urban administrative division having corporate status and powers of self-government or jurisdiction as granted by national and state laws to which it is subordinate. It is to be distinguished from the county, which may encompass rural territory or numerous small communities such as towns, villages and hamlets.
The term municipality may also mean the governing or ruling body of a given municipality.[1] A municipality is a general-purpose administrative subdivision, as opposed to a special-purpose district.
The term is derived from French municipalité and Latin municipalis.[2] The English word municipality derives from the Latin social contract municipium (derived from a word meaning "duty holders"), referring to the Latin communities that supplied Rome with troops in exchange for their own incorporation into the Roman state (granting Roman citizenship to the inhabitants) while permitting the communities to retain their own local governments (a limited autonomy).
A municipality can be any political jurisdiction from a sovereign state, such as the Principality of Monaco, to a small village, such as West Hampton Dunes, New York.
The territory over which a municipality has jurisdiction may encompass

only one populated place such as a city, town, or village
several of such places (e.g., early jurisdictions in the U.S. state of New Jersey (1798–1899) as townships governing several villages, Municipalities of Mexico)
only parts of such places, sometimes boroughs of a city such as the 34 municipalities of Santiago, Chile.[3]




Contents


1 Political powers
2 In various countries

2.1 English-speaking
2.2 Chinese-speaking


3 Municipalities by country
4 See also
5 References
6 External links



Political powers[edit]
The power of municipalities range from virtual autonomy to complete subordination to the state. Municipalities may have the right to tax individuals and corporations with income tax, property tax, and corporate income tax, but may also receive substantial funding from the state.
In various countries[edit]




Coat of arms of the town Svätý Jur in Western Slovakia.


In various countries, municipalities are usually referred to as "communes", notably in Romance languages (derived from Latin) such as French commune (France, French-speaking areas of Belgium and Switzerland, French-speaking countries of Africa, e.g. Benin), Italian comune, Romanian comună, and Spanish comuna (Chile), and in Germanic languages such as German Kommune (in political parlance, the official term being Gemeinde), Swedish kommun, Faroese kommuna, and Norwegian, Danish kommune. However, in Moldova and Romania exists both municipalities (municipiu; urban administrative units) and communes (comună; rural units), and a commune may be part of a municipality (see more: communes of Moldova, communes of Romania).
Similar terms include Spanish ayuntamiento, also called municipalidad (cognate to "municipality"), Polish gmina, Dutch/Flemish Gemeente and Luxembourgish Gemeng.
English-speaking[edit]

In Australia, the term local government area (LGA) is used in place of the generic municipality. Here, the "LGA Structure covers only incorporated areas of Australia. Incorporated areas are legally designated parts of states and territories over which incorporated local governing bodies have responsibility."[4]
In Canada, municipalities are local governments established through provincial and territorial legislation, usually within general municipal statutes.[5][6] Types of municipalities within Canada include cities, district municipalities, municipal districts, municipalities, parishes, rural municipalities, towns, townships, villages, and villes among others.[6] The Province of Ontario has different tiers of municipalities, including lower, upper, and single tiers.[7] Types of upper tier municipalities in Ontario include counties and regional municipalities.[7] Nova Scotia also has regional municipalities, which include cities, counties, districts, or towns as municipal units.[8]
In India, a Nagar Palika or Municipality is an urban local body that administers a city of population 100,000 or more. However, there are exceptions to that, as previously Nagar Palikas were constituted in urban centers with population over 20,000, so all the urban bodies which were previously classified as Nagar Palikaa were reclassified as Nagar Palikas even if their population was under 100,000. Under the Panchayati Raj system, it interacts directly with the state government, though it is administratively part of the district it is located in. Generally, smaller district cities and bigger towns have a Nagar Palika. Nagar Palikas are also a form of local self-government entrusted with some duties and responsibilities, as enshrined in the Constitutional (74th Amendment) Act,1992.
In the United Kingdom, the term was used until 1974 in England and Wales, and until 1975 in Scotland and 1976 in Northern Ireland, "both for a city or town which is organized for self-government under a municipal corporation, and also for the governing body itself. Such a corporation in Great Britain consists of a head as a mayor or provost, and of superior members, as aldermen and councillors".[9] Since local government reorganisation, the unit in England, Northern Ireland and Wales is known as a district, and in Scotland as a council area. A district may be awarded borough or city status, or can retain its district title.
In Jersey, a municipality refers to the honorary officials elected to run each of the 12 parishes into which it is subdivided. This is the highest level of regional government in this jurisdiction.
In the United States, "municipality" is usually understood as a city, town, village, or other local government unit, formed by municipal charter from the state as a municipal corporation.[10] In a state law context, some U.S. state codes define "municipality" more widely, from the state itself to any political subdivisions given jurisdiction over an area that may include multiple populated places and unpopulated places.[11][12] (See also Political divisions of the United States.)

Chinese-speaking[edit]

In the People's Republic of China, a direct-controlled municipality (直辖市 in pinyin: zhíxiáshì) is a city with equal status to a province: Beijing, Tianjin, Shanghai, and Chongqing (see Municipality of China).
In Taiwan (Republic of China), a special municipality (直轄市 in pinyin: zhíxiáshì) is a city with equal status to a province: Kaohsiung, New Taipei, Taichung, Tainan, Taipei and Taoyuan (see Special municipality of Taiwan).

Municipalities by country[edit]






This article may be in need of reorganization to comply with Wikipedia's layout guidelines. Please help by editing the article to make improvements to the overall structure. (January 2014) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)









This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (June 2014) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)





Country
Term
Example
Subdivision of
Quantity
Notes
Further reading


Albania
bashki (urban) or komunë (rural)


61

Municipalities of Albania


Algeria
baladiyah

daïra (district), which is part of a wilaya (province)
1,541

Municipalities of Algeria


Andorra
parròquia
Sant Julià de Lòria

7




Argentina
municipalidad
Puerto Madryn
Provinces of Argentina, in some provinces they are a subdivision of departments
2,100
Smallest administrative division; either a city, town, or township
Municipalities of Argentina


Austria
Gemeinde

district (Bezirk), which is in turn part of a state (Bundesland).
1,725
The entire area of Austria is divided into municipalities, with no non-municipal gaps. This leads to some municipalities being very large despite having a small population.
Municipalities of Austria


Bangladesh
Pouroshabha / Pouroshava

Upazila or subdistrict, which is in turn part of a district
311

Municipalities of Bangladesh


Belgium
gemeente/commune
Montigny-le-Tilleul
a province (provincie/province) or of the Brussels-Capital Region
589
The provinces are themselves subdivisions of the Walloon and Flemish Regions which have the authority over the municipalities
Municipalities in Belgium


Bolivia
municipio
Arani Municipality
province, which is part of a departamento.
327 (2005)

Municipalities of Bolivia


Bosnia and Herzegovina
općina or opština

in Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina : of a canton (kanton). In Republika Srpska, municipality is first order of government after entity government.
144

Municipalities of Bosnia and Herzegovina


Brazil
município
São Paulo (most populous), Borá (least populous)
states (estados)
5,564
Smallest administrative subdivision. Not used in the Federal District or the Fernando de Noronha and St. Peter and St. Paul archipelagos, but encompasses all other territories nationwide
Municipalities of Brazil


Bulgaria
Bulgarian: община, Bulgarian: obshtina
Aksakovo Municipality
an oblast
264

Municipalities of Bulgaria


Kingdom of Cambodia
(ស឵ល឵ក្រុង) refers to city hall


1446




Chile
municipalidad

provinces

Specifically the administrative body, while subdivisions are comunas; most municipalities administer one comuna each, but occasional municipalities administer more



China
直辖市
Beijing

4
Status equal to a province
Municipalities of China


Colombia
municipio

a department (departamento)
1,102
It is also subdivided into Localities and Neighborhoods in urban municipalities and into Corregimientos and Veredas in rural municipalities
Municipalities of Colombia


Costa Rica
Municipalidad

Province (Provinces of Costa Rica)


Cantones of Costa Rica


Croatia
općina

county (županija)
428

Municipalities of Croatia


Czech Republic
obec
Karlovy Vary
a kraj (kraj)
6250




Denmark
kommune
Aabenraa Municipality
a region
98
Counties (amter) were abandoned in 2007
Municipalities of Denmark


Dominican Republic
municipio

province


Municipalities of the Dominican Republic


El Salvador
municipio
Ahuachapán, Ahuachapán
departamentos
262

Municipalities of El Salvador


Estonia
omavalitsus
Are vald (Are Parish)
county (maakond)
215
Can be either towns (linn) or parishes (vald)
Municipalities of Estonia


Finland
kunta/kommun
Helsinki
region
311
Can choose whether to call itself a "city" (kaupunki).
Municipalities of Finland


France
commune

canton, which is part of an arrondissement, which is part of a department (département) which is part of a region (région)
36,600




Germany
Gemeinde

district (Kreis, literally "Circle"). Larger entities of the same level are called Stadt, plural Städte (Cities resp. Towns), which can be part of a Kreis (they are kreisangehörig, meaning "belonging to a Circle") or constituting a district on its own (kreisfrei, meaning "free of a Circle"). In less populated regions, small municipalities are often put together into consolidated superior municipalities (Verbandsgemeinde, Samtgemeinde or Amtsgemeinde)
12,013

Municipalities of Germany


Georgia
munits'ipaliteti


76
self-governing towns/cities (k'alak'i) and communities (t'emi)
Municipalities of Georgia


Greece
demos (δήμος, pl. δήμοι) or koinoteta (κοινότητα, pl. κοινότητες)


325
Demoi and koinotetes are both considered municipalities; the latter are less populous
Municipalities and communities of Greece


Greenland
kommunea
Kujalleq

4
First-level administrative division
Municipalities of Greenland


Haiti
commune

an arrondissement, which is part of a department (département).





Honduras
municipio

was in 1895 originally the subdivision of the district (distrito), but as districts have fallen into disuse, it is now the subdivision of the department (departamento).
298

Municipalities of Honduras


Hungary
település

a county (megye).
3,168 (in 2005)




Iceland
sveitarfélag
Reykjavík
Regions
74
The country's only self-governing local administrative units
Municipalities of Iceland


India
Nagaraatchi nagar palika



Excludes both villages and large cities; typically has more than twenty thousand residents, but cannot exceed five hundred thousand
Municipalities of India


Israel




Includes city councils (large municipalities), local councils (small municipalities), and regional councils (a group of communities; often rural)



Italy
comune

a province (provincia) which is part of a region (regione).
7,982
Solely used for subdivisions of larger comuni, especially in Rome; municipio indicates the city hall; in some case, they are joined in mountain communities (comunità montane)[13]
List of comuni of Italy


Japan



1,719
Below the prefecture; includes shi (cities), cho (towns), and son (villages)
Municipalities of Japan


Kenya




a municipality is one of four types of local authorities. Nearly 50 major towns are given the municipality status.



Latvia
singular: novads, plural: novadi
Aglonas novads (Aglona Municipality)

110
A municipality normally consists of amalgamated parishes (singular: pagasts, plural: pagasti).
Municipalities of Latvia


Lebanon


a district (Arabic: Qadaa‎) which is part of a Governorate (Region or Province, Arabic: Mouhafazah).





Libya




the municipality level is that of the Basic People's Congress. Large cities are subdivided.
Municipalities of Libya


Lithuania
savivaldybė
Kalvarijos savivaldybė (Kalvarija Municipality)
a district (apskritis) and is subdivided into elderates (seniūnija).


Municipalities of Lithuania


Luxembourg
commune (in French); Gemeng, plur. Gemengen (in Luxembourgish)

part of a canton (Luxembourgish: Kantoun) which itself is part of a district
105
are the lowest divisions



Macedonia
opština
Aračinovo Municipality
the country (top-level) or the City of Skopje
84 (2004)
current set established in 2004, reduced from 123 created in 1996.
Municipalities of the Republic of Macedonia


Malta
Kunsill Lokali (Local Council)
Valletta Local Council
none
68
established 1993, one new council created since then (Mtarfa)
Local councils of Malta


Mauritius




a municipality: The administration of all the main towns in Mauritius is done by the municipality of the respective towns.Most of the towns are found in the district of Plaines Wilhems. The capital city, Port-Louis is managed by the Municipality of Port-Louis, found in the district of Port Louis. The other seven districts are administered by are called district councils.



Mexico
municipio / delegación
Asientos Municipality
a state (estado) or the DF

a borough (delegación) is a subdivision of the Federal District
Municipalities of Mexico and boroughs of the Mexican Federal District


Moldova
municipiu
Municipiul Chișinău

32
is a main city or town and surrounding villages ranked by law at this level.
Moldova#Administrative divisions


Montenegro
opština
Andrijevica Municipality
the country (top-level)


Municipalities of Montenegro


Nepal
Nagarpalika


58 (after the census in 2001)
a municipality is a town not large enough in population or infrastructure to qualify as a sub-metropolitan city.



Netherlands
gemeente

a province (provincie)
388 + 3 special municipalities

Municipalities in the Netherlands


New Zealand




a municipality is part of either a "city" (mostly urban) or a "district" (mostly rural). The term "municipality" has become rare in New Zealand since about 1979 and has no legal status. (See territorial authorities of New Zealand.)



Nicaragua
municipio

a department (departamento) or of one of the two Autonomous Regions, North Caribbean Coast Autonomous Region and South Caribbean Coast Autonomous Region.

Municipalities of Nicaragua



Norway
kommune
Røyken kommune
a county (fylke)
430 (2009)

Municipalities of Norway


Palestinian National Authority



105
municipalities are localities with populations over 4,000 and have 13-15 council members.
Municipality (Palestinian Authority)


Pakistan


of a tehsil/taluka or sub-district of a "district".
149

Local government in Pakistan


Paraguay
municipalidad

a departament (departamento)





Peru
municipio

a province (provincia), which is part of a department (departamento). As of 2002 a department is now called a region (región).

is another term for district (distrito) and is the lower-level administrative subdivision.



Philippines
bayan or munisipyo or munisipalidad

a province

is a town with a popularly elected administration including a mayor and is part of a province (lalawigan or probinsya) (except for the independent municipality of Pateros, Metro Manila in the National Capital Region). Municipalities are not the smallest division of local government and are composed of barangays.



Poland
gmina
Gmina Annopol
county (powiat).





Portugal
concelho or município



Concelho is a directly elected local area authority generally consisting of a main city or town and surrounding villages, with wide-ranging local administration powers. Apart from the municipality of Corvo, however, municípios are not the smallest administrative unit in Portugal, that being the freguesia (civil parish). For central government purposes, Portuguese municipalities are grouped into districts (distritos). In Portugal, a municipality (município/concelho) is the primary local administrative unit. Although part of a district (distrito) for certain national administrative purposes, the municipality is not subordinate to the district and decentralization is doing away with the districts. A municipality contains one or more freguesias.
Municipalities of Portugal


Puerto Rico
municipio



municipality consists of an urban area (termed a city or town) plus all of its surrounding barrios comprising the municipality. It has a popularly elected administration and a municipal mayor. The seat of the municipal government is located in such urban area and serves the entire municipal jurisdiction.[14][15]
Municipalities of Puerto Rico


Romania
municipiu / oraș / comună
Deva
County (județ)
103 + 217 + 2856
A municipality (municipiu) is a special status given to cities which fulfill certain criteria related to size, influence and development, as defined by Law no. 351/2001 (on the National Territorial Management Plan). Localities which do not meet the criteria are designated "cities" (orașe) or "communes" (comune).
Municipalities of Romania
Cities of Romania
Communes of Romania


Russia




several types of municipalities ("municipal formations") exist; see subdivisions of Russia



San Marino




there are also eight minor municipalities, castelli.



Serbia
opština

a district (okrug)





Slovakia
obec

district (okres) which is part of a kraj (kraj)
2,891




Slovenia
občina

region (regija)
212
a municipality (občina) is the primary local administrative unit. There are 212 of them, 11 of which have a special "Urban" status with additional autonomy.
Municipalities of Slovenia


South Africa




district municipalities and metropolitan municipalities are subdivisions of the provinces, and local municipalities are subdivisions of district municipalities.



Spain
municipio / municipi / concello / udalerria


8,122
a municipality (municipio) is the primary local administrative unit. It is a part of a province (provincia) for all national administrative purposes. In the Galicia region, the municipalities are called, in Galician language, concellos, and in the Principality of Asturias region, a municipality is called a concejo (in Spanish language) or a conceyu (in Asturian language). In these two regions a municipality contains one or more parroquias (parishes).
Municipalities of Spain


Sweden
kommun
Stockholm Municipality
Gothenburg Municipality Malmö Municipality Ale Municipality

County Councils of Sweden (Swedish: landsting) self-governing local authority, covering 21 counties, each comprising one or more of the municipalities.
290
is self-governing according to the Swedish constitution and constitutes local government. Before 1971, a municipality could be called a town (stad), a köping or a rural municipality (landskommun); present municipalities which used to be towns are still commonly called towns. Sweden is also divided in 2 523 districts (Swedish: distrikt) since 1 January 2016.[16]
Municipalities of Sweden


Switzerland
commune/Gemeinde/comune

a canton (canton/Kanton/cantone) and defined by cantonal law.
2,596

Municipalities in Switzerland


Thailand
thesaban

None
1,602
There are three levels of municipalities, and municipalities are not self-governed except for Bangkok and Pattaya. Municipalities introduced in 1935, Bangkok became self-governed in 1972, and Pattaya became self-governed in 1978.
Thesaban


Turkey
belediye
Istanbul Metropolitan Municipality
il(province)
2,920
is a local government authority and there are two types of municipalities: metropolitan (büyükşehir) municipality, district (alt/ilçe) municipality.



Ukraine




there are two types of municipalities: urban and rural. Both are referred to after their governing body as council (i.e. miskrada, selyshchna rada or silrada). They are considered the lowest administrative division in the country and better known as the local government. Urban municipalities are more complex and divided into city municipalities (miskrada) and town municipalities (selyshchna rada). The most complex municipalities are the cities of regional significance which are referred to simply as cities and create a sort of ambiguity.



United Arab Emirates


an emirate

is defined by the law of the specific emirates.



Uruguay
municipio


89

Municipalities of Uruguay


Venezuela
municipio
Anaco Municipality
a state, as well as a subdivision of the Capital District (estado)


Municipalities of Venezuela


Vietnam
Direct-controlled municipality
Ho Chi Minh City (largest)

5
A direct-controlled municipality (Thành phố trực thuộc trung ương) is a city with equal status to a province
Municipalities of Vietnam



In Portuguese language usage, there are two words to distinguish the territory and the administrative organ. When referring to the territory, the word concelho is used, when referring to the organ of State, the word município is used. This differentiation is still in use in Portugal and some of its former overseas provinces, but it’s no longer in use in Brazil.

See also[edit]

Council of European Municipalities and Regions
Council-manager government
Creature of statute
Lists of municipalities
Mayor-council government
Municipal corporation
Municipal government

References[edit]


^ "Municipality". Merriam-Webster. 
^ "municipality definition". Yourdictionary.com. 
^ "Santiago de Chile – Comunas". Mapas de Chile, Castor y Polux Ltda. 
^ "Australian Standard Geographical Classification (ASGC)". Australian Bureau of Statistics. 
^ "Municipal Government". The Canadian Encyclopedia > Government > Government, General > Municipal Government. Historica Foundation of Canada. 2009. Retrieved 2011-07-17. 
^ a b "Interim List of Changes to Municipal Boundaries, Status, and Names – From January 2, 2010 to January 1, 2011" (PDF). Statistics Canada. April 2011. Retrieved 2011-07-17. 
^ a b "List of Ontario Municipalities". Ontario Ministry of Municipal Affairs and Housing. 2011-07-04. Retrieved 2011-07-17. 
^ "Municipal Government Act" (PDF). Office of the Legislative Counsel, Nova Scotia House of Assembly. 2010-01-07. Retrieved 2011-07-17. 
^ Wikisource:1911 Encyclopædia Britannica/Municipality
^ "Legal Dictionary: Municipal Law". FindLaw. 
^ "2009 Nevada Code". Justia. 
^ "Kansas Statues". Lesterama. 
^ The law provides for the possibility of overlapping of the office of President of the mountain community with that of mayor of one of the municipalities of the community: Buonomo, Giampiero (2001). "Compatibile il sindaco-dirigente della locale Comunità montana". Diritto&Giustizia edizione online.   – via Questia (subscription required)
^ Ayuda: Divulgación de Resultados de la Comisión Estatal de Elecciones – Municipio. Comision Estatal de Elecciones. Estado Libre Asociado de Puerto Rico. San Juan, Puerto Rico. 2004. Retrieved 6 December 2011.
^ Autonomous Municipalities Law. (in Spanish) Retrieved 24 October 2011.
^ SFS 2015:493, Svensk författningssamling: Förordning om distrikt.


External links[edit]



Look up municipality in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.



 Elton, Charles Isaac (1884). "Municipality". Encyclopædia Britannica. 17 (9th ed.). 







v
t
e


Designations for types of administrative territorial entities








English terms








Common English terms1



Area



Insular area
Local government area
Protected area
Special area
Statistical area

Combined statistical area
Metropolitan statistical area
Micropolitan statistical area


Urban area





Canton

Half-canton



Borough



County borough
Metropolitan borough





Capital



Federal capital
Imperial capital





City



City state
Autonomous city
Charter city
Independent city
Incorporated city
Imperial city
Free imperial city
Royal free city





Community



Autonomous community
Residential community





County



Administrative county
Autonomous county
Consolidated city-county
Metropolitan county

Non-metropolitan


Viscountcy





Country



Overseas country





Department



Overseas department





District



Capital district
City district
Congressional district
Electoral district
Federal district
Indian government district
Land district
Metropolitan district

Non-metropolitan district


Military district
Municipal district
Police district
Regional district
Rural district
Sanitary district
Subdistrict
Urban district
Special district





Division



Census division
Police division
Subdivision





Municipality



County municipality

Norway
Nova Scotia
Regional county municipality


Direct-controlled municipality
District municipality
Mountain resort municipality
Neutral municipality
Regional municipality
Resort municipality
Rural municipality
Specialized municipality





Prefecture



Autonomous prefecture
Subprefecture
Super-prefecture
Praetorian prefecture





Province



Autonomous province
Overseas province
Roman province





Region



Administrative region
Autonomous region
Capital region
Development region
Economic region
Mesoregion
Microregion
Overseas region
Planning region
Special administrative region
Statistical region
Subregion





Reserve



Biosphere reserve
Ecological reserve
Game reserve
Indian reserve
Nature reserve





State



Federal state
Free state
Sovereign state





Territory



Capital territory

Federal capital territory


Dependent territory
Federal territory
Military territory
Organized incorporated territory
Overseas territory
Union territory
Unorganized territory





Town



Census town
Market town





Township



Charter township
Civil township
Paper township
Survey township
Urban township





Unit



Autonomous territorial unit
Local administrative unit
Municipal unit
Regional unit





Zone



Economic zone

Exclusive economic zone
Free economic zone
Special economic zone


Free-trade zone
Neutral zone
Self-administered zone










Other English terms



Current



Alpine resort
Bailiwick
Banner

Autonomous


Block
Cadastre
Circle
Circuit
Colony
Commune
Condominium
Constituency
Duchy
Eldership
Emirate
Federal dependency
Governorate
Hamlet
Ilkhanate
Indian reservation
Manor

Royal


Muftiate
Neighbourhood
Parish
Periphery
Precinct
Principality
Protectorate
Quarter
Regency
Autonomous republic
Riding
Sector

Autonomous


Shire
Sultanate
Suzerainty
Townland
Village

Administrative
Summer


Ward






Historical



Agency
Barony
Burgh
Exarchate
Hide
Hundred
Imperial Circle
March
Monthon
Presidency
Residency
Roman diocese
Seat
Tenth
Tithing



















Non-English or loanwords







Current



Amt
Bakhsh
Barangay
Bezirk
Regierungsbezirk
Comune
Frazione
Fu
Gemeinde
Județ
Kunta / kommun

Finland
Sweden


Län
Località
Megye
Muban
Oblast

Autonomous


Okrug
Ostān
Poblacion
Purok
Shahrestān
Sum
Sýsla
Tehsil
Vingtaine





Historical



Commote
Gau
Heerlijkheid
Köping
Maalaiskunta
Nome

Egypt
Greece


Pagus
Pargana
Plasă
Satrapy
Socken
Subah
Syssel
Zhou












v
t
e


Arabic terms for country subdivisions



First-level



Muhafazah (محافظة governorate)
Wilayah (ولاية province)
Mintaqah (منطقة region)
Mudiriyah (مديرية directorate)
Imarah (إمارة emirate)
Baladiyah (بلدية municipality)
Shabiyah (شعبية "popularate")





Second / third-level



Mintaqah (منطقة region)
Qadaa (قضاء district)
Nahiyah (ناحية subdistrict)
Markaz (مركز district)
Mutamadiyah (معتمدية "delegation")
Daerah/Daïra (دائرة circle)
Liwa (لواء banner / sanjak)





City / township-level



Amanah (أمانة municipality)
Baladiyah (بلدية municipality)
Ḥai (حي neighborhood / quarter)
Mahallah (محلة)
Qarya (قرية)
Sheyakhah (شياخة "neighborhood subdivision")






English translations given are those most commonly used.








v
t
e


French terms for country subdivisions






arrondissement
département
préfecture
subprefectures










v
t
e


Greek terms for country subdivisions



Modern



apokentromenes dioikiseis / geniki dioikisis§ / diamerisma§ / periphereia
nomos§ / periphereiaki enotita
demos / eparchia§ / koinotita§





Historical



archontia/archontaton
bandon
demos
despotaton
dioikesis
doukaton
droungos
eparchia
exarchaton
katepanikion
kephalatikion
kleisoura
meris
naukrareia
satrapeia
strategis
thema
toparchia
tourma






§ signifies a defunct institution








v
t
e


Portuguese terms for country subdivisions



Regional subdivisions



Estado
Distrito federal
Província
Região
Distrito
Comarca
Capitania





Local subdivisions



Município
Concelho
Freguesia
Comuna
Circunscrição





Settlements



Cidade
Vila
Aldeia
Bairro
Lugar








Historical subdivisions in italics.










v
t
e


Slavic terms for country subdivisions



Current



dzielnica
gmina
krai
kraj
krajina / pokrajina
městys
obec
oblast / oblast' / oblasti / oblys / obwód / voblast'
okręg
okres
okrug
opština / općina / občina / obshtina
osiedle
powiat / povit
raion
selsoviet / silrada
sołectwo
voivodeship / vojvodina
županija





Historical



darugha
gromada
guberniya / gubernia
jurydyka
khutor
obshchina
okolia
opole
pogost
prowincja
sorok
srez
starostwo / starostva
uyezd
volost
ziemia
župa










v
t
e


Spanish terms for country subdivisions



National, Federal



Comunidad autónoma
Departamento
Distrito federal
Estado
Provincia
Región





Regional, Metropolitan



Cantón
Comarca
Comuna
Corregimiento
Delegación
Distrito
Mancomunidad
Merindad
Municipalidad
Municipio
Parroquia

Ecuador
Spain







Urban, Rural



Aldea
Alquería
Anteiglesia
Asentamiento

Asentamiento informal
Pueblos jóvenes


Barrio
Campamento
Caserío
Ciudad

Ciudad autónoma


Colonia
Lugar
Masía
Pedanía
Población
Ranchería
Sitio
Vereda
Villa
Village (Pueblito/Pueblo)








Historical subdivisions in italics.










v
t
e


Turkish terms for country subdivisions



Modern



il (province)
ilçe (district)
şehir (city)
kasaba (town)
belediye (municipality)
belde (community)
köy (village)
mahalle (neighbourhood/quarter)





Historical



ağalık (feudal district)
bucak (subdistrict)
beylerbeylik (province)
kadılık (subprovince)
kaza (sub-province)
hidivlik (viceroyalty)
mutasarrıflık (subprovince)
nahiye (nahiyah)
paşalık (province)
reya (Romanian principalities)
sancak (prefecture)
vilayet (province)
voyvodalık (Romanian provinces)















1 Used by ten or more countries or having derived terms. Historical derivations in italics.
See also: Census division, Electoral district, Political division, and List of administrative divisions by country










						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Municipality&oldid=817362236"					Categories: Administrative divisionsMunicipalitiesTypes of populated placesHidden categories: Subscription required using viaPages containing links to subscription-only contentArticles containing French-language textArticles containing Italian-language textArticles containing Romanian-language textArticles containing Spanish-language textArticles containing German-language textArticles containing Swedish-language textArticles containing Faroese-language textArticles containing Norwegian-language textArticles containing Danish-language textArticles containing Polish-language textArticles containing Dutch-language textArticles containing Luxembourgish-language textWikipedia articles needing reorganization from January 2014Articles needing additional references from June 2014All articles needing additional referencesArticles containing Bulgarian-language textArticles containing Khmer-language textArticles containing Arabic-language textWikipedia articles incorporating a citation from EB9