








This article is part of a series on


Life in Egypt





Culture




Architecture

Egyptian revival


Art

Contemporary


Cinema
Cuisine
Dance

Raqs sharqi
Baladi
Tahtib
Tanoura


Fashion
Folklore
History
Holidays
Language
Literature
Music
Mythology
Radio
Sculpture
Sport
Symbols

Flag
Anthem


Television
Theater




Society




People
Identity
Education
Demographics
Health
Media
Human rights
Religion
World Heritage Sites




Politics




Presidency
Government
Parliament
Political parties
Military
Corruption
Law enforcement
Foreign relations
Law




Economy




Communications
Tourism
Telecommunications
Transportation
Energy





Egypt portal





v
t
e





Music has been an integral part of Egyptian culture since antiquity. The Bible documents the instruments played by the ancient Hebrews, all of which are correlated in Egyptian archaeology. Egyptian music probably had a significant impact on the development of ancient Greek music, and via the Greeks was important to early European music well into the Middle Ages. The modern music of Egypt is considered Arabic music as it has been a source for or influence on other regional styles. The tonal structure of Arabic music is defined by the maqamat, loosely similar to Western modes, while the rhythm of Arabic music is governed by the iqa'at, standard rhythmic modes formed by combinations of accented and unaccented beats and rests.



Contents


1 History

1.1 Neolithic period
1.2 Predynastic period
1.3 Old Kingdom
1.4 Medieval music
1.5 Modern Egyptian classical and pop music


2 Religious music in Egypt
3 Folkloric music
4 Folk and roots revival

4.1 Saidi (Upper Egyptian)
4.2 Nubian


5 Western classical music
6 Arabic Egyptian musical instruments
7 Electronic music
8 Reconstruction of Ancient Egyptian Music
9 See also
10 Notes and references
11 Further reading
12 External links



History[edit]
The ancient Egyptians credited the goddess Bat with the invention of music. The cult of Bat was eventually syncretised into that of Hathor because both were depicted as cows. Hathor's music was believed to have been used by Osiris as part of his effort to civilise the world. The lion-goddess Bastet was also considered a goddess of music.
Neolithic period[edit]
In prehistoric Egypt, music and chanting were commonly used in magic and rituals. Rhythms during this time were ovular[clarification needed] and music served to create rhythm. Small shells were used as whistles.[1](pp26–30)
Predynastic period[edit]
During the predynastic period of Egyptian history, funerary chants continued to play an important role in Egyptian religion and were accompanied by clappers or a flute. Despite the lack of physical evidence in some cases, Egyptologists theorise that the development of certain instruments known of the Old Kingdom period, such as the end-blown flute, took place during this time.[1](pp33–34)
Old Kingdom[edit]
The evidence is for instruments played more securely attested in the Old Kingdom when harps, flutes and double clarinets were played.[citation needed] Percussion instruments and lutes were added to orchestras by the Middle Kingdom. Cymbals frequently accompanied music and dance, much as they still do in Egypt today.
Typically ancient Egyptian music was composed from the phrygian dominant scale, phrygian scale, double harmonic scale (Arabic scale) or lydian scale.[citation needed] The phrygian dominant scale may often feature an altered note or two in parts to create tension. For instance the music could typically be in the key of E phrygian dominant using the notes E, F, G sharp, A, B, C, D and then have an A sharp, B, A sharp, G natural and E to create tension.
Medieval music[edit]
Arabic music is usually said to have begun in the 7th century in Syria during the Umayyad dynasty. Early Arabic music was influenced by Byzantine and Persian forms, which were themselves heavily influenced by earlier Greek, Semitic, and ancient Egyptian music.
Egyptians in Medieval Cairo believed that music exercised "too powerful an effect upon the passions, and leading men into gaiety, dissipation and vice." However, Egyptians generally were very fond of music. Though, according to E.W. Lane, no "man of sense" would ever become a musician, music was a key part of society. Tradesmen of every occupation used music during work and schools taught the Quran by chanting.[2](p359)
The music of Medieval Egypt was derived from Greek and Persian traditions. Lane said that "the most remarkable peculiarity of the Arab system of music is the division of tones into thirds," although today Western musicologists prefer to say that Arabic music's tones are divided into quarters. The songs of this period were similar in sound and simple, within a small range of tones. Egyptian song, though simple in form, is embellished by the singer. Distinct enunciation and a quavering voice are also characteristics of Egyptian singing.[2](pp360–361)
Male professional musicians during this period were called Alateeyeh (plural), or Alatee (singular), which means "a player upon an instrument". However, this name applies to both vocalists as well as instrumentalists. This position was considered disreputable and lowly. However, musicians found work singing or playing at parties to entertain the company. They generally made three shillings a night, but earned more by the guests giving more.
Female professional musicians were called Awalim (pl) or Al’meh, which means a learned female. These singers were often hired on the occasion of a celebration in the harem of a wealthy person. They were not with the harem, but in an elevated room that was concealed by a screen so as not to be seen by either the harem or the master of the house. The female Awalim were more highly paid than male performers and more highly regarded than the Alateeyeh as well. Lane relates an instance of a female performer who so enraptured her audience that she earned to fifty guineas for one night's performance from the guests and host, who were not considered wealthy.
Modern Egyptian classical and pop music[edit]
In the second half of the 19th century, the Hasaballah genre of popular improvisational brass band folk music emerged, initiated by clarinettist Mohammad Hasaballah and his band, also called Hasaballah, playing in Cairo's music and entertainment quarter on Mohammed Ali Street. The typical line-up of trumpet, trombone, bass and snare drums, was popular, such as at family events, for well over a century, and is still played.[3][4]
Egyptian music began to be recorded in the 1910s, when Egypt was still part of the Ottoman Empire. The cosmopolitan Ottomans encouraged the development of the arts, encouraging women and minorities to develop their musical abilities. By the fall of the Empire, Egypt's classical musical tradition was already thriving, centered on the city of Cairo. In general, modern Egyptian music blends its indigenous traditions with Turkish, Arabic, and Western elements.
Since the end of World War I, some of the Middle East's biggest musical stars have been Egyptian. Contemporary Egyptian music traces its beginnings to the creative work of luminaries such as Abdu-l Hamuli, Almaz and Mahmud Osman, who were all patronized by the Ottoman Khedive Ismail, and who influenced the later work of the 20th century's most important Egyptian composers: Sayed Darwish, Umm Kulthum, Mohammed Abdel Wahab, Abdel Halim Hafez, and Zakariyya Ahmad. Most of these stars, including Umm Kulthum and Najat Al Saghira, were part of the classical
Religious music in Egypt[edit]
Religious music remains an essential part of traditional Muslim and Coptic celebrations called mulids. Mulids are held in Egypt to celebrate the saint of a particular church. Muslim mulids are related to the Sufi zikr ritual. The Egyptian flute, called the ney, is commonly played at mulids. The liturgical music of the Alexandrian Rite also constitutes an important element of Egyptian music and is said to have preserved many features of ancient Egyptian music.




Lute and double pipe players from a painting found in the Theban tomb of Nebamun, a nobleman of the 18th Dynasty of the New Kingdom, c. 1350 BC


Folkloric music[edit]
Egyptian folk music, including the traditional Sufi dhikr rituals, are the closest contemporary music genre to ancient Egyptian music, having preserved many of its features, rhythms and instruments.[5][6]
Folk and roots revival[edit]
The 20th century has seen Cairo become associated with a roots revival. Musicians from across Egypt are keeping folk traditions alive, such as those of rural Egyptians (fellahin), the Nubians, the Arabs, the Berbers, the Gypsies and the Bedouins. Mixtures of folk and pop have also risen from the Cairo hit factory.
Since the Nasser era, Egyptian pop music has become increasingly important in Egyptian culture, particularly among the large youth population of Egypt. Egyptian folk music continues to be played during weddings and other traditional festivities. In the last quarter of the 20th century, Egyptian music was a way to communicate social and class issues. Among some of the most popular Egyptian pop singers today are Mohamed Mounir and Amr Diab.
Sawahli (coastal) music is a type of popular music from the northern coast, and is based around the simsimiyya, an indigenous stringed instrument. Well-known singers include Abdo'l Iskandrani and Aid el-Gannirni.
Saidi (Upper Egyptian)[edit]
Egyptian musicians from Upper Egypt play a form of folk music called Ṣa‘īdi which originates from Upper Egypt). Discovered in 1975 by Alan Weber, Metqal Qenawi's Les Musiciens du Nil( Musicians of the Nile) are the most popular saidi group, and were chosen by the government to represent Egyptian folk music abroad. They spent over three decades touring Europe performing at various festivals and musical events and in 1983 after their performance in the World of Music and Dance Festival, they were signed to Peter Gabriel's label Real World-Carolina and went on to feature on his Album Passion. Other performers include Shoukoukou, Ahmad Ismail, Omar Gharzawi, Sohar Magdy and Ahmed Mougahid.
Nubian[edit]
Nubians are native to the south of Egypt and northern Sudan, though many live in Cairo and other cities. Nubian folk music can still be heard, but migration and intercultural contact with Egyptian and other musical genres have produced new innovations. Ali Hassan Kuban's efforts had made him a regular on the world music scene, while Mohamed Mounir's social criticism and sophisticated pop have made him a star among Nubians, Egyptians, and other people worldwide. Ahmed Mounib, Mohamed Mounir's mentor, was by far the most notable Nubian singer to hit the Egyptian music scene, singing in both Egyptian Arabic his native Nobiin. Hamza El Din is another popular Nubian artist, well-known on the world music scene and has collaborated with the Kronos Quartet.
Western classical music[edit]
Western classical music was introduced to Egypt, and, in the middle of the 18th century, instruments such as the piano and violin were gradually adopted by Egyptians. Opera also became increasingly popular during the 18th century, and Giuseppe Verdi's Egyptian-themed Aida was premiered in Cairo on December 24, 1871.
By the early 20th century, the first generation of Egyptian composers, including Yusef Greiss, Abu Bakr Khairat, and Hasan Rashid, began writing for Western instruments. The second generation of Egyptian composers included notable artists such as Gamal Abdelrahim. Representative composers of the third generation are Ahmed El-Saedi and Rageh Daoud. In the early 21st century, even fourth generation composers such as Mohamed Abdelwahab Abdelfattah (of the Cairo Conservatory) have gained international attention.
Arabic Egyptian musical instruments[edit]




A typical Arabic ensemble compromising the Oud, qanun, violin, ney and cello.


During the Abbasid and Ottoman dynasty Egypt was one of the main musical hubs in the middle east and therefore after the fall of the Ottoman Empire in 1923 Egypt became the capital of Arabic music where classical instrument such as the oud, qanun and ney were widely used. The typical tact (ensemble) consisted of an Oud player, qanun player, ney player and violin player. The takht (literally meaning a sofa) was the most common form of ensembles in the early 20th century before the adoption of more orchestral instruments which were introduced by composers such as Mohamed El Qasabgi, Riad Al Sunbati and Mohammed Abdel Wahab.
Electronic music[edit]
One of the most respected early electronic music composers, Halim El-Dabh, is an Egyptian. However, the Egyptian electronic music scene has only gained a mainstream foothold recently in the form of techno, trance and dance pop DJs such as Aly & Fila. In the 2010s, Shaabi music, a form of electronic music which often contains political lyrics, gained popularity both inside and outside music.[7]
Reconstruction of Ancient Egyptian Music[edit]
In the early 21st century, interest in the music of the pharaonic period began to grow, inspired by the research of such foreign-born musicologists as Hans Hickmann. By the early 21st century, Egyptian musicians and musicologists led by the musicology professor Khairy El-Malt at Helwan University in Cairo had begun to reconstruct musical instruments of Ancient Egypt, a project that is ongoing.[8]







Broken Egyptian Sistrum









Egyptian Sistrum









Collection of sistrums at the Louvre









From the Walters Art Museum, 380–250 BC









Ancient Egyptian Long Flute









Ancient Egyptian Stringed Instruments









Ancient Egyptian With TwoSided Drum









Ancient Egyptian Music Band









Late Style Egyptian Lyre









Ancient Egyptian Woman Playing Drum









Egyptian Lyre




See also[edit]

Egyptian Arts post Revolution

Notes and references[edit]


^ a b Arroyos, Rafael Pérez (2003). Egypt: Music in the Age of the Pyramids (1st ed.). Madrid: Centro de Estudios Egipcios. p. 28. ISBN 8493279617. 
^ a b Lane, Edward William (2003). An Account of the Manners and Customs of the Modern Egyptians: The Definitive 1860 Edition. Cairo: American University in Cairo Press. ISBN 9789774247842. 
^ Egypt: Hasaballah, the People's Music, Al Jazeera, 22 Nov 2017
^ Hasaballah Music: The Past and The Present, The Community Times, 24 May 2016
^ Hickmann, Hans (1957). "Un Zikr Dans le Mastaba de Debhen, Guizah (IVeme Dynastie)". Journal of the International Folk Music Council. 9: 59–62. doi:10.2307/834982. 
^ Hickmann, Hans (January 1960). "Rythme, mètre et mesure de la musique instrumentale et vocale des anciens Egyptiens". Acta Musicologica. 32 (1): 11–22. doi:10.2307/931818. 
^ "Six Explosive Tracks that Define Mahraganat, Egypt's Wildly Popular Street Music". Thump. Retrieved 2017-05-23. 
^ Ancient Egyptian Music Symposium


Further reading[edit]

Lodge, David and Bill Badley. "Partner of Poetry". 2000. In Duane, Orla; McConnachie, James (2000). Broughton, Simon; Ellingham, Mark, eds. World Music, Vol. 1: Africa, Europe and the Middle East. London: Rough Guides. pp. 323–31. ISBN 1-85828-636-0. 
Marcus, Scott L. (2007). Music in Egypt. New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-514645-X. 

External links[edit]

Audio clips: Traditional music of Egypt. Musée d'ethnographie de Genève. Accessed November 25, 2010. (in French)
Coptic Orthodox Music of Egypt at Saint Takla Haymanout Church
Arabic Music and Songs
Ghostly Echoes: an essay on Egypt and its contemporary music!







v
t
e


Middle Eastern music



By style



Al Jeel
Arabesk
Arabic pop
Ashiq music
Assyrian pop
Azerbaijani folk
Azerbaijani pop
Bedouin
Classical Arab
Coptic
Jewish
Iranian folk
Eastern Arabia (Sawt and Khaliji)
Mizrahi
Meykhana
Mugham
Ottoman classical
Persian pop
Persian traditional
Samri
Sharki
Tsifteteli
Turkish folk





By region



Arabic
Azerbaijani
Bahrain
Cypriot
Egyptian
Iraqi
Israel
Jordanian
Kurdish
Kuwait
Lebanese
Oman
Palestinian
Persian
Qatar
Saudi Arabian
Syrian
Turkish
Yemen
United Arab Emirates





Related topics



Arabic hip hop
Arabic maqam
Assyrian folk dance
Azerbaijani hip hop
Dastgah
Egyptian hip hop
Iqa'
Iranian hip hop
Israeli hip hop
Kanto
Maqam al-iraqi
Makam
Middle Eastern dance
Middle Eastern hip hop
Palestinian hip hop
Pop folk
Rapbesk
Tallava
Usul












v
t
e


Music of Africa



Sovereign states



Algeria
Angola
Benin
Botswana
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cameroon
Cape Verde (Cabo Verde)
Central African Republic
Chad
Comoros
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Republic of the Congo
Djibouti
Egypt
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Ethiopia
Gabon
The Gambia
Ghana
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Ivory Coast (Côte d'Ivoire)
Kenya
Lesotho
Liberia
Libya
Madagascar
Malawi
Mali
Mauritania
Mauritius
Morocco
Mozambique
Namibia
Niger
Nigeria
Rwanda
São Tomé and Príncipe
Senegal
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Somalia
South Africa
South Sudan
Sudan
Swaziland
Tanzania
Togo
Tunisia
Uganda
Zambia
Zimbabwe






States with limited
recognition




Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic
Somaliland






Dependencies and
other territories





Canary Islands / Ceuta / Melilla / (see also plazas de soberanía) (Spain)
Madeira (Portugal)
Mayotte / Réunion (France)
Saint Helena / Ascension Island / Tristan da Cunha (United Kingdom)
Western Sahara













v
t
e


Music of Asia



Sovereign states



Afghanistan
Armenia
Azerbaijan
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Bhutan
Brunei
Cambodia
China
Cyprus
East Timor (Timor-Leste)
Egypt
Georgia
India
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Israel
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
North Korea
South Korea
Kuwait
Kyrgyzstan
Laos
Lebanon
Malaysia
Maldives
Mongolia
Myanmar
Nepal
Oman
Pakistan
Philippines
Qatar
Russia
Saudi Arabia
Singapore
Sri Lanka
Syria
Tajikistan
Thailand
Turkey
Turkmenistan
United Arab Emirates
Uzbekistan
Vietnam
Yemen





States with
limited recognition



Abkhazia
Artsakh
Northern Cyprus
Palestine
South Ossetia
Taiwan





Dependencies and
other territories



British Indian Ocean Territory
Christmas Island
Cocos (Keeling) Islands
Hong Kong
Macau












v
t
e


Ancient Egypt topics






Outline
Index
Major topics
Glossary of artifacts








Agriculture
Architecture (Egyptian Revival architecture)
Art
Astronomy
Burial customs
Chronology
Cities (list)
Clothing
Cuisine
Dynasties
Geography
Great Royal Wives
History
Language
Literature
Mathematics
Medicine
Military
Music
Mythology
People
Pharaohs (list)
Philosophy
Religion
Sites
Technology
Trade
Writing











Egyptology
Egyptologists
Museums








 Book
 Category
 Ancient Egypt portal
 WikiProject
 Commons








Ancient Egypt portal







						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Music_of_Egypt&oldid=818109116"					Categories: Egyptian musicHidden categories: Wikipedia articles needing clarification from January 2017All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from April 2017Articles with unsourced statements from January 2016Articles with French-language external links