



A music class at the Taimei Elementary School in Tokyo, Japan


Music education is a field of study associated with the teaching and learning of music. It touches on all learning domains, including the psychomotor domain (the development of skills), the cognitive domain (the acquisition of knowledge), and, in particular and significant ways, the affective domain (the learner's willingness to receive, internalize, and share what is learned), including music appreciation and sensitivity. Music training from preschool through post-secondary education is common in most nations because involvement with music is considered a fundamental component of human culture and behavior. Cultures from around the world have different approaches to music education, largely due to the varying histories and politics. Studies show that teaching music from other cultures can help students perceive unfamiliar sounds more comfortably, and they also show that musical preference is related to the language spoken by the listener and the other sounds they are exposed to within their own culture. Music, like language, is an accomplishment that distinguishes humans as a species.[1]
During the 20th century, many distinctive approaches were developed or further refined for the teaching of music, some of which have had widespread impact. The Dalcroze method (eurhythmics) was developed in the early 20th century by Swiss musician and educator Émile Jaques-Dalcroze. The Kodály Method emphasizes the benefits of physical instruction and response to music. The Orff Schulwerk "approach" to music education leads students to develop their music abilities in a way that parallels the development of western music.
The Suzuki method creates the same environment for learning music that a person has for learning their native language. Gordon Music Learning Theory provides the music teacher with a method for teaching musicianship through audiation, Gordon's term for hearing music in the mind with understanding. Conversational Solfège immerses students in the musical literature of their own culture, in this case American. The Carabo-Cone Method involves using props, costumes, and toys for children to learn basic musical concepts of staff, note duration, and the piano keyboard. The concrete environment of the specially planned classroom allows the child to learn the fundamentals of music by exploring through touch.[2] Popular music pedagogy is the systematic teaching and learning of rock music and other forms of popular music both inside and outside formal classroom settings. Oaklander has proven that certain musical activities can help to improve breath, body and voice control of a child. [3]
The MMCP (Manhattanville Music Curriculum Project) aims to shape attitudes, helping students see music not as static content to be mastered, but as personal, current, and evolving. American fiddler Mark O'Connor developed a method of violin education[4][5] that is designed to guide students in developing musical techniques necessary to become a proficient violinist. During its tenure, the Mumbai-based Boss School of Music developed a proprietary method of education[6] using audio-visual technology, simplified concepts, and specially designed musical equipment.[7][8]



Contents


1 Overview
2 Instructional methodologies

2.1 Major international music education methods

2.1.1 Dalcroze method
2.1.2 Kodály method
2.1.3 Orff Schulwerk
2.1.4 Suzuki method


2.2 Other notable methods

2.2.1 Gordon's Music Learning Theory
2.2.2 World Music Pedagogy
2.2.3 Conversational Solfège
2.2.4 Simply Music
2.2.5 Carabo-Cone Method
2.2.6 Popular Music Pedagogy
2.2.7 MMCP
2.2.8 O'Connor Method
2.2.9 Boss School Method




3 History of music education in the United States

3.1 18th century
3.2 19th century
3.3 Early 20th century
3.4 Middle 20th century to 21st century American Music Education


4 India
5 Africa
6 South America
7 Cross-Cultural Music Education
8 Standards and assessment
9 Integration with other subjects

9.1 Significance
9.2 Non-musical benefits
9.3 Music advocacy


10 Role of women
11 Notable music educators
12 Professional organizations
13 Public domain music
14 See also
15 References
16 Bibliography
17 Further reading



Overview[edit]
In primary schools in European countries, children often learn to play instruments such as keyboards or recorders, sing in small choirs, and learn about the elements of music and history of music. In countries such as India, the harmonium is used in schools, but instruments like keyboards and violin are also common. Students are normally taught basics of Indian Raga music. In primary and secondary schools, students may often have the opportunity to perform in some type of musical ensemble, such as a choir, orchestra, or school band: concert band, marching band, or jazz band. In some secondary schools, additional music classes may also be available. In junior high school or its equivalent, music usually continues to be a required part of the curriculum.[9]
At the university level, students in most arts and humanities programs receive academic credit for music courses such as music history, typically of Western art music, or music appreciation, which focuses on listening and learning about different musical styles. In addition, most North American and European universities offer music ensembles – such as choir, concert band, marching band, or orchestra – that are open to students from various fields of study. Most universities also offer degree programs in music education, certifying students as primary and secondary music educators. Advanced degrees such as the D.M.A. or the Ph.D can lead to university employment. These degrees are awarded upon completion of music theory, music history, technique classes, private instruction with a specific instrument, ensemble participation, and in depth observations of experienced educators. Music education departments in North American and European universities also support interdisciplinary research in such areas as music psychology, music education historiography, educational ethnomusicology, sociomusicology, and philosophy of education.
The study of western art music is increasingly common in music education outside of North America and Europe, including Asian nations such as South Korea, Japan, and China. At the same time, Western universities and colleges are widening their curriculum to include music of outside the Western art music canon, including music of West Africa, of Indonesia (e.g. Gamelan music), Mexico (e.g., mariachi music), Zimbabwe (marimba music), as well as popular music.
Music education also takes place in individualized, lifelong learning, and in community contexts. Both amateur and professional musicians typically take music lessons, short private sessions with an individual teacher.
Instructional methodologies[edit]
While instructional strategies are determined by the music teacher and the music curriculum in his or her area, many teachers rely heavily on one of many instructional methodologies that emerged in recent generations and developed rapidly during the latter half of the 20th Century.
Major international music education methods[edit]
Dalcroze method[edit]
Main article: eurhythmics
The Dalcroze method was developed in the early 20th century by Swiss musician and educator Émile Jaques-Dalcroze. The method is divided into three fundamental concepts − the use of solfège, improvisation, and eurhythmics. Sometimes referred to as "rhythmic gymnastics," eurhythmics teaches concepts of rhythm, structure, and musical expression using movement, and is the concept for which Dalcroze is best known. It focuses on allowing the student to gain physical awareness and experience of music through training that engages all of the senses, particularly kinesthetic. According to the Dalcroze method, music is the fundamental language of the human brain and therefore deeply connected to who we are. American proponents of the Dalcroze method include Ruth Alperson, Ann Farber, Herb Henke, Virginia Mead, Lisa Parker, Martha Sanchez, and Julia Schnebly-Black. Many active teachers of Dalcroze method were trained by Dr. Hilda Schuster who was one of the students of Dalcroze.
Kodály method[edit]
Main article: Kodály method




Depiction of Curwen's Solfège hand signs. This version includes the tonal tendencies and interesting titles for each tone.


Zoltán Kodály (1882–1967) was a prominent Hungarian music educator and composer who stressed the benefits of physical instruction and response to music. Although not really an educational method, his teachings reside within a fun, educational framework built on a solid grasp of basic music theory and music notation in various verbal and written forms. Kodály's primary goal was to instill a lifelong love of music in his students and felt that it was the duty of the child's school to provide this vital element of education. Some of Kodály's trademark teaching methods include the use of solfège hand signs, musical shorthand notation (stick notation), and rhythm solmization (verbalization). Most countries have used their own folk music traditions to construct their own instruction sequence, but the United States primarily uses the Hungarian sequence. The work of Denise Bacon, Katinka S. Daniel, John Feierabend, Jean Sinor, Jill Trinka, and others brought Kodaly's ideas to the forefront of music education in the United States.
Orff Schulwerk[edit]
Main article: Orff Schulwerk
Carl Orff was a prominent German composer. Orff Schulwerk is considered an "approach" to music education. It begins with a student's innate abilities to engage in rudimentary forms of music, using basic rhythms and melodies. Orff considers the whole body a percussive instrument and students are led to develop their music abilities in a way that parallels the development of western music. The approach fosters student self-discovery, encourages improvisation, and discourages adult pressures and mechanical drill. Carl Orff developed a special group of instruments, including modifications of the glockenspiel, xylophone, metallophone, drum, and other percussion instruments to accommodate the requirements of the Schulwerk courses. Experts in shaping an American-style Orff approach include Jane Frazee, Arvida Steen, and Judith Thomas.[10]
Suzuki method[edit]
Main article: Suzuki method
The Suzuki method was developed by Shinichi Suzuki in Japan shortly after World War II, and uses music education to enrich the lives and moral character of its students. The movement rests on the double premise that "all children can be well educated" in music, and that learning to play music at a high level also involves learning certain character traits or virtues which make a person's soul more beautiful. The primary method for achieving this is centered around creating the same environment for learning music that a person has for learning their native language. This 'ideal' environment includes love, high-quality examples, praise, rote training and repetition, and a time-table set by the student's developmental readiness for learning a particular technique. While the Suzuki Method is quite popular internationally, within Japan its influence is less significant than the Yamaha Method, founded by Genichi Kawakami in association with the Yamaha Music Foundation.
Other notable methods[edit]
In addition to the four major international methods described above, other approaches have been influential. Lesser-known methods are described below:
Gordon's Music Learning Theory[edit]
Main article: Gordon Music Learning Theory
Edwin Gordon's Music Learning Theory is based on an extensive body of research and field testing by Edwin E. Gordon and others in the larger field of Music Learning Theory. It provides music teachers with a comprehensive framework for teaching musicianship through audiation, Gordon's term for hearing music in the mind with understanding and comprehension when the sound is not physically present.[11] The sequence of instructions is Discrimination Leaning and Inference Learning. Discrimination Learning, the ability to determine whether two elements are the same or not the same using aural/oral, verbal association, partial synthesis, symbolic association, and composite synthesis. Inference Learning, students take an active role in their own education and learn to identify, create, and improvise unfamiliar patterns. The skills and content sequences within the Audiation theory help music teachers establish sequential curricular objectives in accord with their own teaching styles and beliefs.[12] There also is a Learning Theory for Newborns and Young Children in which the Types and Stages of Preparatory Audiation are outlined.
World Music Pedagogy[edit]
The growth of cultural diversity within school-age populations prompted music educators from the 1960s onward to diversify the music curriculum, and to work with ethnomusicologists and artist-musicians to establish instructional practices rooted in musical traditions. 'World music pedagogy' was coined by Patricia Shehan Campbell to describe world music content and practice in elementary and secondary school music programs. Pioneers of the movement, especially Barbara Reeder Lundquist, William M. Anderson, and Will Schmid, influenced a second generation of music educators (including J. Bryan Burton, Mary Goetze, Ellen McCullough-Brabson, and Mary Shamrock) to design and deliver curricular models to music teachers of various levels and specializations. The pedagogy advocates the use of human resources, i.e., "culture-bearers," as well as deep and continued listening to archived resources such as those of Smithsonian Folkways Recordings.[13]
Conversational Solfège[edit]
Influenced by both the Kodály method and Gordon's Music Learning Theory, Conversational Solfège was developed by Dr. John M. Feierabend, former chair of music education at the Hartt School, University of Hartford. The program begins by immersing students in the musical literature of their own culture, in this case American. Music is seen as separate from, and more fundamental than, notation. In twelve learning stages, students move from hearing and singing music to decoding and then creating music using spoken syllables and then standard written notation. Rather than implementing the Kodály method directly, this method follows Kodály's original instructions and builds on America's own folk songs instead of on Hungarian folk songs.
Simply Music[edit]
Australian music educator Neil Moore founded Simply Music on the core belief that all humans are naturally musical. Simply Music offers programs for students from birth through old age, with the stated goal that "students acquire and retain music as a lifelong companion." To meet this goal, the repertoire includes a wide variety of musical genres, such as classical, blues, jazz, and popular. Simply Music patterns its approach after primary language acquisition, where speaking comes first.[14] In this it shares some philosophical ground with other developmental approaches like Kodály, Orff-Schulwerk, and the Suzuki Method.[15] Simply Music currently licences teachers at over 700 locations worldwide.[14]
Carabo-Cone Method[edit]
This early-childhood approach, sometimes referred to as the Sensory-Motor Approach to Music, was developed by the violinist Madeleine Carabo-Cone. This approach involves using props, costumes, and toys for children to learn basic musical concepts of staff, note duration, and the piano keyboard. The concrete environment of the specially planned classroom allows the child to learn the fundamentals of music by exploring through touch.[16]
Popular Music Pedagogy[edit]
Main article: Popular music pedagogy
'Popular music pedagogy' — alternatively called rock music pedagogy, modern band, popular music education, or rock music education — is a recent development in music education consisting of the systematic teaching and learning of rock music and other forms of popular music both inside and outside formal classroom settings. Popular music pedagogy tends to emphasize group improvisation,[17] and is more commonly associated with community music activities than fully institutionalized school music ensembles.[18]
MMCP[edit]
Main article: MMCP
The Manhattanville Music Curriculum Project was developed in 1965 as a response to declining student interest in school music. This creative approach aims to shape attitudes, helping students see music not as static content to be mastered, but as personal, current, and evolving. Rather than imparting factual knowledge, this method centers around the student, who learns through investigation, experimentation, and discovery. The teacher gives a group of students a specific problem to solve together and allows freedom to create, perform, improvise, conduct, research, and investigate different facets of music in a spiral curriculum. MMCP is viewed as the forerunner to projects in creative music composition and improvisation activities in schools.
O'Connor Method[edit]
American bluegrass music fiddler Mark O'Connor developed a method of violin education[4][5] that is designed to guide students in developing musical techniques necessary to become a proficient violinist. The method consists of a series of pieces covering a wide range of genres.[19] Teacher training sessions based on the method take place around the US.
Boss School Method[edit]
Main article: Boss School of Music
During its tenure, the Mumbai-based Boss School of Music developed a proprietary method of education[6] using audio-visual technology, simplified concepts, and specially designed musical equipment.[7][8] They trained novice students for standardized electronic keyboard graded examinations conducted by Trinity College London, requiring only 3–6 months of training using their methods.[6][20][21][22] Traditional methods required up to 8 years to prepare students for testing.[6][20] Dr. Vidyadhar Vyas, Head of the Music Department at the University of Mumbai, claimed that they "revolutionized" music learning by teaching complex musical concepts in short periods of time.[6][20][22] They also trained a few young children ages 6–10 for the Trinity College Grade 8 examination; after passing the examination, the students were reportedly considered child prodigies.[23][24][25][26][27][28][29] Although the Boss School Method is not formally documented, various notable musicians in Mumbai such as Louis Banks agreed that the school had developed a "revolutionary technique".[6][8] Some controversy has surrounded the school and its methods.[30][31]
History of music education in the United States[edit]
18th century[edit]
After the preaching of Reverend Thomas Symmes, the first singing school was created in 1717 in Boston for the purposes of improving singing and music reading in the church. These singing schools gradually spread throughout the colonies. Music education continued to flourish with the creation of the Academy of Music in Boston. Reverend John Tufts published An Introduction to the Singing of Psalm Tunes Using Non-Traditional Notation which is regarded as the first music textbook in the colonies. Between 1700 and 1820, more than 375 tune books would be published by such authors as Samuel Holyoke, Francis Hopkinson, William Billings, and Oliver Holden.[32]
Music began to spread as a curricular subject into other school districts. Soon after music expanded to all grade levels and the teaching of music reading was improved until the music curriculum grew to include several activities in addition to music reading. By the end of 1864 public school music had spread throughout the country.
19th century[edit]
In 1832, Lowell Mason and George Webb formed the Boston Academy of Music with the purposes of teaching singing and theory as well as methods of teaching music. Mason published his Manuel of Instruction in 1834 which was based upon the music education works of Pestalozzian System of Education founded by Swiss educator Johann Heinrich Pestalozzi. This handbook gradually became used by many singing school teachers. From 1837–1838, the Boston School Committee allowed Lowell Mason to teach music in the Hawes School as a demonstration. This is regarded as the first time music education was introduced to public schools in the United States. In 1838 the Boston School Committee approved the inclusion of music in the curriculum and Lowell Mason became the first recognized supervisor of elementary music. In later years Luther Whiting Mason became the Supervisor of Music in Boston and spread music education into all levels of public education (grammar, primary, and high school). During the middle of the 19th century, Boston became the model to which many other cities across the United States included and shaped their public school music education programs.[33] Music methodology for teachers as a course was first introduced in the Normal School in Potsdam. The concept of classroom teachers in a school that taught music under the direction of a music supervisor was the standard model for public school music education during this century. (See also: Music education in the United States) While women were discouraged from composing in the 19th century, "later, it was accepted that women would have a role in music education, and they became involved in this field...to such a degree that women dominated music education during the later half of the 19th century and well into the 20th century."[34]
Early 20th century[edit]
In the United States, teaching colleges with four-year degree programs developed from the Normal Schools and included music. Oberlin Conservatory first offered the Bachelor of Music Education degree. Osbourne G. McCarthy, an American music educator, introduced details for studying music for credit in Chelsea High School. Notable events in the history of music education in the early 20th century also include:

Founding of the Music Supervisor's National Conference (changed to Music Educators National Conference in 1934, later MENC: The National Association for Music Education in 1998, and currently The National Association for Music Education – NAfME) in Keokuk, Iowa in 1907.
Rise of the school band and orchestra movement leading to performance oriented school music programs.
Growth in music methods publications.
Frances Elliot Clark develops and promotes phonograph record libraries for school use.
Carl Seashore and his Measures of Musical Talent music aptitude test starts testing people in music.

Middle 20th century to 21st century American Music Education[edit]
The following table illustrates some notable developments from this period:


Date
Major Event
Historical Importance for Music Education


1950
The Child's Bill of Rights in Music[35]
A student-centered philosophy was formally espoused by MENC.


1953
The American School Band Directors Association formed
The band movement becomes organized.


1957
Launch of Sputnik
Increased curricular focus on science, math, technology with less emphasis on music education.


1959
Contemporary Music Project
The purpose of the project was to make contemporary music relevant in children by placing quality composers and performers in the learning environment. Leads to the Comprehensive Musicianship movement.


1961
American Choral Directors Association formed
The choral movement becomes organized.


1963
Yale Seminar
Federally supported development of arts education focusing on quality music classroom literature. Juilliard Project leads to the compilation and publication of musical works from major historical eras for elementary and secondary schools.


1965
National Endowment for the Arts
Federal financial support and recognition of the value music has in society.


1967
Tanglewood Symposium
Establishment of a unified and eclectic philosophy of music education. Specific emphasis on youth music, special education music, urban music, and electronic music.


1969
GO Project
35 Objectives listed by MENC for quality music education programs in public schools. Published and recommended for music educators to follow.


1978
The Ann Arbor Symposium
Emphasized the impact of learning theory in music education in the areas of: auditory perception, motor learning, child development, cognitive skills, memory processing, affect, and motivation.


1984
Becoming Human Through Music symposium
"The Wesleyan Symposium on the Perspectives of Social Anthropology in the Teaching and Learning of Music" (Middletown, Connecticut, August 6–10, 1984). Emphasized the importance of cultural context in music education and the cultural implications of rapidly changing demographics in the United States.


1990
Multicultural Symposium in Music Education
Growing out of the awareness of the increasing diversity of the American School population, the three-day Symposium for music teachers was co-sponsored by MENC, the Society for Ethnomusicology, and the Smithsonian Institution, in order to provide models, materials, and methods for teaching music of the world's cultures to school children and youth.


1994
National Standards for Music Education
For much of the 1980s, there was a call for educational reform and accountability in all curricular subjects. This led to the National Standards for Music Education[36] introduced by MENC. The MENC standards were adopted by some states, while other states have produced their own standards or largely eschewed the standards movement.


1999
The Housewright Symposium / Vision 2020
Examined changing philosophies and practices and predicted how American music education will (or should) look in the year 2020.


2007
Tanglewood II: Charting the Future[37]
Reflected on the 40 years of change in music education since the first Tanglewood Symposium of 1967, developing a declaration regarding priorities for the next forty years.


2014
Revised National Standards for Music Education
The National Standards created in 1994 were revised with an emphasis on musical literacy. Instead of the 9 content standards, there are 4 artistic processes (Create, Perform, Respond and Connect) with 2–3 anchor standards per process.


Music course offerings and even entire degree programs in online music education developed in the first decade of the 21st century at various institutions, and the fields of world music pedagogy and popular music pedagogy have also seen notable expansion.
In the late 20th and early 21st centuries, social aspects of teaching and learning music came to the fore. This emerged as praxial music education,[38] critical theory,[39] and feminist theory.[40] Of importance are the colloquia and journals of the MayDay Group, "an international think tank of music educators that aims to identify, critique, and change taken-for-granted patterns of professional activity, polemical approaches to method and philosophy, and educational politics and public pressures that threaten effective practice and critical communication in music education."[41] With a new focus on social aspects of music education, scholars have analyzed critical aspects such as music and race,[42] gender,[43] class,[44] institutional belonging,[45] and sustainability.[46]
India[edit]
Institutional music education was started in colonial India by Rabindranath Tagore after he founded the Visva-Bharati University. At present, most universities have a faculty of music with some universities specially dedicated to fine arts such as Indira Kala Sangeet University, Swathi Thirunal College of Music or Rabindra Bharati University.Indian classical music is based on the gurushyshyaparampara system. The teacher, known as Guru, transmit the musical knowledge to the student, or shyshya. This is still the main system used in India to transmit musical knowledge. Although European art music became popularized in schools throughout much of the world during the twentieth century (East Asia, Latin America, Oceania, Africa), India remains one of the few highly populated nations in which non-European indigenous music traditions have consistently received relatively greater emphasis. That said, there is certainly much western influence in the popular music associated with Bollywood film scores.
Africa[edit]
The South African Department of Education and the ILAM Music Heritage Project SA teach African music using western musical framework. ILAM's Listen and Learn for students 11–14 is "unique" in teaching curriculum requirements for western music using recordings of traditional African music.[47]
From the time that Africa was colonized up to 1994, indigenous music and arts being taught in schools was a rare occurrence. The African National Congress (ANC) attempted to repair the neglect of indigenous knowledge and the overwhelming emphasis on written musical literacy in schools. It is not well known that the learning of indigenous music actually has a philosophy and teaching procedure that is different from western “formal” training. It involves the whole community because indigenous songs are about the history of its people. After the colonization of Africa, music became more centered on Christian beliefs and European folk songs, rather than the more improvised and fluid indigenous music. Before the major changes education went through from 1994 to 2004, during the first decade of the democratic government, teachers were trained as classroom teachers and told that they would have to incorporate music into other subject areas. The few colleges with teaching programs that included instrumental programs held a greater emphasis on music theory, history of western music, western music notation, and less on making music. Up until 1999, most college syllabi did not include training in indigenous South African Music.[48]
In African cultures music is seen as a community experience and is used for social and religious occasions. As soon as children show some sign of being able to handle music or a musical instrument they are allowed to participate with the adults of the community in musical events. Traditional songs are more important to many people because they are stories about the histories of the indigenous peoples.[49]
South America[edit]






This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (November 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Among the Aztecs, Mayans, and Incas, music was used in ceremonies and rituals to teach the history of their civilizations and was also used for worship. The Aztec people were mainly educated by their priests. Music remained an important way to teach religion and history and was taught by priests for many centuries. When Spain and Portugal colonized parts of South America, music started to be influenced by European ideas and qualities. Several priests of European descent, such as Antonio Sepp, taught European systems of music notation and theory based on their knowledge of playing instruments throughout the 1700-1800s. Since music was taught to the general public by rote, very few knew how to read music other than those who played instruments until the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. The development of music in South America mainly followed that of European development. Choirs were formed to sing masses, chants, psalms, but secular music also became more prevalent in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries and beyond.[50]
Music education in Latin America today has large emphasis on folk music, masses, and orchestral music. Many classrooms teach their choirs to sing in their native language as well as in English. Several Latin American Schools, specifically in Puerto Rico and Haiti, believe music to be an important subject and are working on expanding their programs. Outside of school, many communities form their own musical groups and organizations. Community performances are very popular with the local audiences. There are a few well-known Latin American choral groups, such as "El Coro de Madrigalistas" from Mexico. This famous choral group tours around Mexico, showing students around the country what a professional choral ensemble sounds like.[51]
Cross-Cultural Music Education[edit]
The music, languages, and sounds we are exposed to within our own cultures determine our tastes in music and affect the way we perceive the music of other cultures. Many studies have shown distinct differences in the preferences and abilities of musicians from around the world. One study attempted to view the distinctions between the musical preferences of English and Japanese speakers, providing both groups of people with the same series of tones and rhythms. The same type of study was done for English and French speakers. Both studies suggested that the language spoken by the listener determined which groupings of tones and rhythms were more appealing, based on the inflections and natural rhythm groupings of their language.[52]
Another study had Europeans and Africans try to tap along with certain rhythms. European rhythms are regular and built on simple ratios, while African rhythms are typically based on irregular ratios. While both groups of people could perform the rhythms with European qualities, the European group struggled with the African rhythms. This has to do with the ubiquity of complex polyrhythm in African culture and their familiarity with this type of sound.[53]
While each culture has its own musical qualities and appeals, incorporating cross-cultural curricula in our music classrooms can help teach students how to better perceive music from other cultures. Studies show that learning to sing folk songs or popular music of other cultures is an effective way to understand a culture as opposed to merely learning about it. If music classrooms discuss the musical qualities and incorporate styles from other cultures, such as the Brazilian roots of the Bossa Nova, the Afro-Cuban clave, and African drumming, it will expose students to new sounds and teach them how to compare their cultures’ music to the different music and start to make them more comfortable with exploring sounds.[54]
Standards and assessment[edit]
Achievement standards are curricular statements used to guide educators in determining objectives for their teaching. Use of standards became a common practice in many nations during the 20th century. For much of its existence, the curriculum for music education in the United States was determined locally or by individual teachers. In recent decades there has been a significant move toward adoption of regional and/or national standards. MENC: The National Association for Music Education, created nine voluntary content standards, called the National Standards for Music Education.[3] These standards call for:

Singing, alone and with others, a varied repertoire of music.
Performing on instruments, alone and with others, a varied repertoire of music.
Improvising melodies, variations, and accompaniments.
Composing and arranging music within specified guidelines.
Reading and notating music.
Listening to, analyzing, and describing music.
Evaluating music and music performances.
Understanding relationships between music, the other arts, and disciplines outside the arts.
Understanding music in relation to history and culture.

Many states and school districts have adopted their own standards for music education.
Integration with other subjects[edit]




Children in primary school are assembling a do-organ of Orgelkids


Some schools and organizations promote integration of arts classes, such as music, with other subjects, such as math, science, or English, believing that integrating the different curricula will help each subject to build off of one another, enhancing the overall quality of education.
One example is the Kennedy Center's "Changing Education Through the Arts" program. CETA defines arts integration as finding a natural connection(s) between one or more art forms (dance, drama/theater, music, visual arts, storytelling, puppetry, and/or creative writing) and one or more other curricular areas (science, social studies, English language arts, mathematics, and others) in order to teach and assess objectives in both the art form and the other subject area. This allows a simultaneous focus on creating, performing, and/or responding to the arts while still addressing content in other subject areas.[55]
The European Union Lifelong Learning Programme 2007–2013 has funded three projects that use music to support language learning. Lullabies of Europe (for pre-school and early learners),[56] FolkDC (for primary),[57] and the recent PopuLLar (for secondary).[58] In addition, the ARTinED project is also using music for all subject areas.[59]
Significance[edit]
A number of researchers and music education advocates have argued that studying music enhances academic achievement,[60] such as William Earhart, former president of the Music Educators National Conference, who claimed that "Music enhances knowledge in the areas of mathematics, science, geography, history, foreign language, physical education, and vocational training."[61] Researchers at the University of Wisconsin suggested that students with piano or keyboard experience performed 34% higher on tests that measure spatial-temporal lobe activity, which is the part of the brain that is used when doing mathematics, science, and engineering.[62]
An experiment by Wanda T. Wallace setting text to melody suggested that some music may aid in text recall.[63] She created a three verse song with a non-repetitive melody; each verse with different music. A second experiment created a three verse song with a repetitive melody; each verse had exactly the same music. A third experiment studied text recall without music. She found the repetitive music produced the highest amount of text recall, suggesting music can serve as a mnemonic device.[63]
Smith (1985) studied background music with word lists. One experiment involved memorizing a word list with background music; participants recalled the words 48 hours later. Another experiment involved memorizing a word list with no background music; participants also recalled the words 48 hours later. Participants who memorized word lists with background music recalled more words demonstrating music provides contextual cues.[64]
Citing studies that support music education's involvement in intellectual development and academic achievement, the United States Congress passed a resolution declaring that: "Music education enhances intellectual development and enriches the academic environment for children of all ages; and Music educators greatly contribute to the artistic, intellectual and social development of American children and play a key role in helping children to succeed in school."[65]
Bobbett (1990) suggests that most public school music programs have not changed since their inception at the turn of the last century. "…the educational climate is not conducive to their continuance as historically conceived and the social needs and habits of people require a completely different kind of band program."[66] A 2011 study conducted by Kathleen M. Kerstetter for the Journal of Band Research found that increased non-musical graduation requirements, block scheduling, increased number of non-traditional programs such as magnet schools, and the testing emphases created by the No Child Left Behind Act are only some of the concerns facing music educators. Both teachers and students are under increased time restrictions"[67]
Dr. Patricia Powers states, "It is not unusual to see program cuts in the area of music and arts when economic issues surface. It is indeed unfortunate to lose support in this area especially since music and the art programs contribute to society in many positive ways." [61] Comprehensive music education programs average $187 per pupil, according to a 2011 study funded by the national Association of Music Merchants (NAMM) Foundation[68] The Texas Commission on Drugs and Alcohol Abuse Report noted that students who participated in band or orchestra reported the lowest lifetime and current use of all substances including alcohol, tobacco, and illicit drugs.[69]
Non-musical benefits[edit]
Studies have shown that music education can be used to enhance cognitive achievement in students. In the United States an estimated 30% of students struggle with reading, while 17% are reported as having a specific learning disability linked to reading.[70] Using intensive music curriculum as an intervention paired alongside regular classroom activities, research shows that students involved with the music curriculum show increases in reading comprehension, word knowledge, vocabulary recall, and word decoding.[71] When a student is singing a melody with text, they are using multiple areas of their brain to multitask. Music effects language development, increases IQ, spatial-temporal skills, and improves test scores. Music education has also shown to improve the skills of dyslexic children in similar areas as mentioned earlier by focusing on visual auditory and fine motor skills as strategies to combat their disability.[72] Since research in this area is sparse, we cannot convincingly conclude these findings to be true, however the results from research done do show a positive impact on both students with learning difficulties and those who are not diagnosed. Further research will need to be done, but the positive engaging way of bringing music into the classroom cannot be forgotten, and the students generally show a positive reaction to this form of instruction.[73]
Music education has also been noted to have the ability to increase someones overall IQ, especially in children during peak development years.[74] Spacial ability, verbal memory, reading and mathematic ability are seen to be increased alongside music education (primarily through the learning of an instrument).[74] Researchers also note that a correlation between general attendance and IQ increases is evident, and due to students involvement in music education, general attendance rates increase along with their IQ.
Fine motor skills, social behaviours, and emotional well being can also be increased through music and music education. The learning of an instrument increases fine motor skills in students with physical disabilities. Emotional well being can be increased as students find meaning in songs and connect them to their everyday life.[75] Through social interactions of playing in groups like jazz and concert bands, students learn to socialize and this can be linked to emotional and mental well being.
Music advocacy[edit]
In some communities – and even entire national education systems – music is provided little support as an academic subject area, and music teachers feel that they must actively seek greater public endorsement for music education as a legitimate subject of study. This perceived need to change public opinion has resulted in the development of a variety of approaches commonly called "music advocacy". Music advocacy comes in many forms, some of which are based upon legitimate scholarly arguments and scientific findings, while other examples controversially rely on emotion, anecdotes, or unconvincing data.
Recent high-profile music advocacy projects include the "Mozart Effect", the National Anthem Project, and the movement in World Music Pedagogy (also known as Cultural Diversity in Music Education) which seeks out means of equitable pedagogy across students regardless of their race, ethnicity, or socioeconomic circumstance. The Mozart effect is particularly controversial as while the initial study suggested listening to Mozart positively impacts spatial-temporal reasoning, later studies either failed to replicate the results,[76][77] suggested no effect on IQ or spatial ability,[78] or suggested the music of Mozart could be substituted for any music children enjoy in a term called "enjoyment arousal."[79] Another study suggested that even if listening to Mozart may temporarily enhance a student's spatial-temporal abilities, learning to play an instrument is much more likely to improve student performance and achievement.[80] Educators similarly criticized the National Anthem Project not only for promoting the educational use of music as a tool for non-musical goals, but also for its links to nationalism and militarism.[81]
Contemporary music scholars assert that effective music advocacy uses empirically sound arguments that transcend political motivations and personal agendas. Music education philosophers such as Bennett Reimer, Estelle Jorgensen, David J. Elliott, John Paynter, and Keith Swanwick support this view, yet many music teachers and music organizations and schools do not apply this line of reasoning into their music advocacy arguments. Researchers such as Ellen Winner conclude that arts advocates have made bogus claims to the detriment of defending the study of music,[82] her research debunking claims that music education improves math, for example.[83] Researchers Glenn Schellenberg and Eugenia Costa-Giomi also criticize advocates incorrectly associating correlation with causation, Giomi pointing out that while there is a "strong relationship between music participation and academic achievement, the causal nature of the relationship is questionable."[83][84] Philosophers David Elliott and Marissa Silverman suggest that more effective advocacy involves shying away from "dumbing down" values and aims through slogans and misleading data, energy being better focused into engaging potential supporters in active music-making and musical-affective experiences,[85] these actions recognizing that music and music-making are inherent to human culture and behavior, distinguishing humans from other species.[1]
Role of women[edit]
Main article: Women in music education




A music teacher leading a music ensemble in an elementary school in 1943.


While music critics argued in the 1880s that "...women [composers] lacked the innate creativity to compose good music" due to "biological predisposition",[34] later, it was accepted that women would have a role in music education, and they became involved in this field "...to such a degree that women dominated music education during the later half of the 19th century and well into the 20th century."[34]"Traditional accounts of the history of music education [in the US] have often neglected the contributions of women, because these texts have emphasized bands and the top leaders in hierarchical music organizations." [86] When looking beyond these bandleaders and top leaders, women had many music education roles in the "...home, community, churches, public schools, and teacher-training institutions" and "...as writers, patrons, and through their volunteer work in organizations." [86]
Despite the limitations imposed on women's roles in music education in the 19th century, women were accepted as kindergarten teachers, because this was deemed to be a "private sphere". Women also taught music privately, in girl's schools, Sunday schools, and they trained musicians in school music programs. By the turn of the 20th century, women began to be employed as music supervisors in elementary schools, teachers in normal schools and professors of music in universities. Women also became more active in professional organizations in music education, and women presented papers at conferences. A woman, Frances Clarke (1860-1958) founded the Music Supervisors National Conference in 1907. While a small number of women served as President of the Music Supervisors National Conference (and the following renamed versions of the organization over the next century) in the early 20th century, there were only two female Presidents between 1952 and 1992, which "[p]ossibly reflects discrimination."
After 1990, however, leadership roles for women in the organization opened up. From 1990 to 2010, there were five female Presidents of this organization.[87] Women music educators "outnumber men two-to-one" in teaching general music, choir, private lessons, and keyboard instruction .[87] More men tend to be hired as for band education, administration and jazz jobs, and more men work in colleges and universities.[87] According to Dr. Sandra Wieland Howe, there is still a "glass ceiling" for women in music education careers, as there is "stigma" associated with women in leadership positions and "men outnumber women as administrators."[87]
Notable music educators[edit]


Jamey Aebersold
Stefan Ammer
Ysaye Barnwell
Leonard Bernstein
Edward Bailey Birge
Nadia Boulanger
Allen Britton
Patricia Shehan Campbell
F. Melius Christiansen
Frances Elliott Clark
Julia Crane
John Curwen
Max Deutsch
Duilio Dobrin
Peter W. Dykema
Will Earhart
Jacob Eisenberg
David J. Elliott
Sarah Ann Glover
Edwin Gordon
Lucy Green
Philip C. Hayden
David G. Hebert
Paul Hindemith
Jere T. Humphreys
Émile Jaques-Dalcroze
Dmitry Kabalevsky
Zoltán Kodály
Paul R. Lehman
Charles Leonhard
John T. Madden
Joseph E. Maddy
Michael Mark
Ellis Marsalis, Jr.
Wynton Marsalis
Lowell Mason
Luther Whiting Mason
James Mursell
Carl Orff
John Paynter
Bennett Reimer
R. Murray Schafer
Christopher Small
Shinichi Suzuki
Lennie Tristano
John Tufts
Thomas Tyra
Heitor Villa-Lobos


Professional organizations[edit]

American Choral Directors Association
American Orff-Schulwerk Association
American String Teachers Association
International Association for Jazz Education[88]
International Society for Music Education
International Society for Philosophy of Music Education[89]
National Association for Music Education (US-based: also called NafME, and previously MENC)
Music Teachers National Association

Public domain music[edit]
Main article: Public domain music
One of the most valued resources available for music education is all the music on Public Domain either written or recorded or an audio format, since it can be used for any teacher or institution to teach about any music gender and music evolution through human history.
See also[edit]


Music portal



Basic Concepts in Music Education
Colored music notation
Musical Futures
Music Education Bloggers
Music education for young children
Music school
Research in Music Education
Timeline of jazz education
Vocal coach

References[edit]


^ a b Yudkin, J. (2008). Understanding Music (p. 4). Upper Saddle River, NJ:Pearson/Prentice Hall.
^ A Sensory-Motor Approach to Music Learning. Book I - Primary Concepts
^ Oaklander, Violet. (2006) Hidden Treasure : A Map to the Child's Inner Self. London, Karnac Books.
^ a b Mark O’Connor to release American strings method, Blue Grass Journal
^ a b "O'Connor Violin Method". Mark O'Connor Musik International. Archived from the original on 2011-07-14. 
^ a b c d e f "Making Andheri Musical!". Ontrack Suburbs. June 2003. 
^ a b "Master Music". The Asian Age. 23 Sep 2002. 
^ a b c "Mumbai made Musical". The Asian Age. 2 June 2003. 
^ Randel, D. (Ed.) (1986). Education in the United States. In The New Harvard Dictionary of Music (pp. 276–278). London/Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press.
^ "Orff Approach". The Canadian Encyclopedia. Doreen Hall, Keith Bissell, Emily-Jane Orford. 02/07/2006
^ Christopher Azzara, Audiation, Improvisation, and Music Learning Theory. 1991, The Quarterly, 2(1–2), 106–109.
^ GIML: The Gordon Institute for Music Learning Archived 2007-08-24 at the Wayback Machine.
^ Campbell, Patricia Shehan, Teaching Music Globally (Oxford University Press, 2004)
^ a b "Simply Music Piano | Breakthroughs in Creativity for Humanity". Simply Music Piano. Retrieved 2016-03-04. 
^ Campbell, Patricia Shehan; Scott-Kassner, Carol (1995). Music in Childhood: From Preschool through the Elementary Grades. New York: Schirmer. pp. 47–57. 
^ A Sensory-Motor Approach to Music Learning. Book I – Primary Concepts
^ Higgins, Lee and Campbell, Patricia Shehan, Free to be Musical: Group Improvisation in Music (Rowman & Littlefield Education, 2010).
^ Higgins, Lee, Community Music: In Theory and in Practice (Oxford University Press, 2012).
^ "New American School of String Playing". Mark O'Connor Musik International. 
^ a b c "Musical Bonanza this Diwali". Ontrack Suburbs. Oct 2003. 
^ "Fun shortcut to that college seat". Ontrack Suburbs. July 2003. 
^ a b Nancy D'souza (25 Oct 2003). "Music Learning, A Fun Experience". The EXAMINER Magazine. 
^ "Hitting the right key". Andheri West. 25 July 2003. 
^ "Keyboard to success". Mid-Day. 2000-10-15. 
^ "Musical notes". The Times of India. Jul 29, 2002. 
^ Subuhi Saiyed (1 Dec 2000). "Robin's Melody". FEMINA Magazine. 
^ "Key to success". MID-DAY, Saturday Scene. 12 May 2001. 
^ Aliefya Vahanvaty (15 Feb 2003). "Malad boy's music wows Trinity College". Westside Plus, Malad. 
^ Alex Fernandes (Feb 2003). "The key to Kaustubh Kumar". MID-DAY. 
^ "Music School Founder Tried to 'Brainwash' Students." Times of India. April 1. 2005.
^ "SC Jails Elusive Boss School Women for 15 Days", Zee News India. March 14, 2012.
^ The Colonial Period: 1600-1800 - Timeline: Music Education History/Philosophy (archived)
^ Riley, Martha Chrisman, "Portrait of a Nineteenth-Century School Music Program", Journal of Research in Music Education, Vol. 38, No. 2 (Summer, 1990), pp. 79–89, MENC: The National Association for Music Education
^ a b c http://parlorsongs.com/issues/2002-9/thismonth/feature.php
^ The Child's Bill of Rights in Music
^ National Standards for Music Education
^ Tanglewood II
^ http://bern.library.nenu.edu.cn/upload/soft/0000/11.1goble[1].pdf
^ http://users.rider.edu/~vrme/v6n1/visions/Regelski%20Critical%20Theory%20as%20a%20Foundation.pdf
^ Gould, Elizabeth (2007). "Feminist theory in music education research: grrl‐illa games as nomadic practice (or how music education fell from grace)". Music Education Research. 6: 67–79. doi:10.1080/1461380032000182849. 
^ http://www.maydaygroup.org/about-us/
^ http://act.maydaygroup.org/articles/Bradley5_2.pdf
^ http://act.maydaygroup.org/articles/Lamb3_1.pdf
^ Bates, Vincent C (2012). "Social Class and School Music". Music Educators Journal. 98 (4): 33–37. doi:10.1177/0027432112442944. 
^ http://act.maydaygroup.org/articles/Froehlich6_3.pdf
^ http://act.maydaygroup.org/articles/Bates10_2.pdf
^ Theory and Method in Historical Ethnomusicology ed. Jonathan McCollum and David G. Hebert, p.325
^ Herbst, Anri; de Wet, Jacques; Rijsdijk, Susan (2005). "A Survey of Music Education in the Primary Schools of South Africa's Cape Peninsula". Journal of Research in Music Education. 53 (3): 260–283. doi:10.2307/3598684. JSTOR 3598684. 
^ Nketia, J. H. Kwabena (1970). "Music Education in Africa and the West: We Can Learn from Each Other". Music Educators Journal. 57 (3): 48–55. doi:10.2307/3392906. JSTOR 3392906. 
^ De Couve, Alicia C.; Pino, Claudia Dal; Frega, Ana Lucía (1997). "An Approach to the History of Music Education in Latin America". The Bulletin of Historical Research in Music Education. pp. 10–39. doi:10.2307/40214944. JSTOR 40214944.  Missing or empty |url= (help)
^ Lawler, Vanett (1945). "Music Education in Fourteen Latin-American Republics". Music Educators Journal. pp. 20–30. doi:10.2307/3386758. 
^ Bicknell, Jeanette. "Cross-Cultural Research and the Nature of Music". Psychology Today. 
^ Bicknell, Jeanette. "Cross-Cultural Research and the Nature of Music". Psychology Today. 
^ Ilari, Beatriz; Chen-Hafteck, Lily; Crawford, Lisa (1 May 2013). "Singing and cultural understanding: A music education perspective". International Journal of Music Education. pp. 202–216. doi:10.1177/0255761413487281. 
^ CETA Archived 2008-05-12 at the Wayback Machine.
^ Lullabies of Europe
^ FolkDC
^ PopuLLar
^ ARTinED
^ "Multiple studies link music study to academic achievement." Joanne Lipman, New York Times. October 12, 2013
^ a b Morrison, Steven J (1994). "Music students and academic growth". Music Educators Journal. 81 (2): 33. 
^ Rauscher, F.; Zupan, M.A. (2000). "Classroom Keyboard Instruction Improves Kindergarten Children's Spatial-Temporal Performance: A Field Experiment". Early Childhood Research Quarterly. 15 (2): 215–228. doi:10.1016/s0885-2006(00)00050-8. 
^ a b Wallace, W (1994). "Memory for music: Effect of melody on recall of text". Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition. 20 (6): 1471–1485. doi:10.1037/0278-7393.20.6.1471. 
^ Smith, S (1985). "Background music and context-dependent memory". American Journal of Psychology. 98 (4): 591–603. doi:10.2307/1422512. JSTOR 1422512. 
^ (H. Res. 266)
^ Bobbett, G. C. (1990). Rural Appalachian Band Directors' Academic Preparation: Musical Preparation, Facilities, Monetary Resources, and Methods of Student Evaluation, and Their Students' Musical Independence. [S.l.]: Distributed by ERIC Clearinghouse.
^ Kerstetter, Kathleen M (2011). "Investigating High School Band Recruitment Procedures Using Educational Marketing Principles". Journal of Band Research. 46 (2): 1–17. 
^ Fermanich, M. L. (2011). "Money for music education: a district analysis of the how, what, and where of spending for music education". Journal of Education Finance. 37 (2): 130. 
^ http://www.childrensmusicworkshop.com/advocacy/benefits.html
^ Register, D.; Darrow, A.A; Swedberd, O.; Standley, J. (2007). "The use of music to enhance reading skills of second grade students and students with reading disabilities". Journal of Music Therapy. 44 (1): 23–37. doi:10.1093/jmt/44.1.23. PMID 17419662. 
^ Register, D.; Darrow, A.A; Swedberd, O.; Standley, J. (2007). "The use of music to enhance reading skills of second grade students and students with reading disabilities". Journal of Music Therapy. 44 (1): 23–37. PMID 17419662. 
^ Overy, K. (2000). Dyslexia, temporal processing and music: The potential of music as an early learning aid for dyslexic children. Psychology of Music 28(2). 218–229.
^ Butzlaff, R. (2000). Can music be used to teach reading? The Journal of Aesthetic Education 34(3/4). 167–178.
^ a b Schellenberg, E.G. (2004). "Music lessons enhance IQ". Psychological Science. 15 (8): 511–514. doi:10.1111/j.0956-7976.2004.00711.x. 
^ Bosacki, S.; O'Neill, S. (2013). "Early adolescents' emotional perceptions and engagement with popular music activities in everyday life". International Journal of Adolescence and Youth. 20 (2): 228–244. doi:10.1080/02673843.2013.785438. 
^ Chabris, Christopher F (1999). "Prelude or requiem for the 'Mozart effect'?". Nature. 400 (6747): 826–827. doi:10.1038/23608. PMID 10476958. 
^ Steele, Kenneth M.; Bass, Karen E.; Crook, Melissa D. (1999). "The Mystery of the Mozart Effect: Failure to Replicate". Psychological Science. 10 (4): 366–369. doi:10.1111/1467-9280.00169. 
^ Rudi Črnčec, Sarah J. Wilson and Margot Prior, "No Evidence for the Mozart Effect in Children," Music Perception: An Interdisciplinary Journal, Vol. 23, No. 4 (2006): 305–318. [1]
^ Thompson, W.F.; Schellenberg, E.G.; Husain, G. (2001). "Mood, arousal, and the Mozart effect". Psychological Science. 12 (3): 248–251. doi:10.1111/1467-9280.00345. 
^ (Rauscher, F. H., & Hinton, S. C. (2006). The Mozart Effect: Music Listening is Not Music Instruction. Educational Psychologist, 41(4), 233–238. Abstract: This paper clarifies the position of the author's earlier works.)
^ Deborah Bradley, "Oh That Magic Feeling! Multicultural Human Subjectivity, Community, and Fascism's Footprints," Philosophy of Music Education Review, Vol. 17, No. 1 (2009): 56, 74.
^ Dorothy Wu, "Entrepreneurship in Research: Ellen Winner on Why We Need the Arts," Entrepreneurship Review, (2013): [2 http://miter.mit/edu/ellen-winner-on-why-we-need-the-arts/[permanent dead link]]
^ a b David J. Elliot and Marissa Silverman, Music Matters, A Philosophy of Music Education, (New York: Oxford University Press, 2015), 38
^ Eugenia Costa-Giomi, "Music Education and Intellectual Development in Children: Historical, Research, and Educational Perspectives," 2012, Conference Proceeding, Anais Do II Simpom 2012 – Simposio Brasileiro de Pos-Graduandos Em Musica, 21, [2]
^ David J. Elliott and Marissa Silverman, Music Matters, A Philosophy of Music Education, (New York: Oxford University Press, 2015), 42–43
^ a b Dr. Sandra Wieland Howe. "Women Music Educators In The United States: A History", in GEMS (Gender, Education, Music, and Society), the on-line journal of Gender Research in Music Education. Vol 8, No 4 (2015)
^ a b c d http://www.slideshare.net/bigbadbariguru/a-historical-view-of-women-in-music-education-careers
^ IAJE: International Association for Jazz Education
^ *International Society for Philosophy of Music Education


Bibliography[edit]

Anderson, William M. and Patricia Shehan Campbell, eds. Multicultural Perspectives in Music Education. Reston, VA: Music Educators National Conference, 1989.
Campbell, Patricia Shehan. Teaching Music Globally. New York: Oxford University Press, 2004.
DeBakey, Michael E., MD. Leading Heart Surgeon, Baylor College of Music.
Kertz-Welzel, Alexandra. "The Singing Muse: Three Centuries of Music Education in Germany." Journal of Historical Research in Music Education XXVI no. 1 (2004): 8-27.
Kertz-Welzel, Alexandra. "Didaktik of Music: A German Concept and its Comparison to American Music Pedagogy." International Journal of Music Education (Practice) 22 No. 3 (2004): 277-286.
Kertz-Welzel, Alexandra. Every Child for Music: Musikpädagogik und Musikunterricht in den USA. Musikwissenschaft/Musikpädagogik in der Blauen Eule, no. 74. Essen, Germany: Verlag Die Blaue Eule, 2006. ISBN 3-89924-169-X.
Machover, Tod, "My Cello" in Turkle, Sherry (editor), Evocative objects : things we think with, Cambridge, Mass. : MIT Press, 2007. ISBN 978-0-262-20168-1
Pete Moser and George McKay, eds. (2005) Community Music: A Handbook. Russell House Publishing. ISBN 1-903855-70-5.
National Standards for Arts Education. Reston, VA: Music Educators National Conference (MENC), 1994. ISBN 1-56545-036-1.
Neurological Research, Vol. 19, February 1997.
Ratey, John J., MD. A User's Guide to the Brain. New York: Pantheon Books, 2001.
Rauscher, F.H., et al. "Music and Spatial Task Performance: A Causal Relationship," University of California, Irvine, 1994.
Seashore, Carl, "The Measurement of Musical Talent", New York, G. Schirmer, 1915
Seashore, Carl, "The Psychology of Musical Talent", Boston, New York [etc.] Silver, Burdett and Company, 1919
Seashore, Carl, "Approaches to the Science of Music and Speech", Iowa City, The University, 1933
Seashore, Carl, "Psychology of Music", New York, London, McGraw-Hill Book Company, Inc., 1938
Schippers, Huib. Facing the Music. New York: Oxford University Press, 2010.
Sorce Keller, Marcello (1984). "Music in Higher Education in Italy and in the United States: the Pros and Cons of Tradition and Innovation". Symposium. XXIV: 140–147. 
Sorce Keller, Marcello (1987). "Music Education in Italy: Something New on the Western Front". International Journal of Music Education. 10: 17–19. doi:10.1177/025576148701000103. 
Sorin-Avram, Vîrtop (2015). "The Musical Education: From Testing the Ground to General Culture Acquisition". Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences. 191: 2500–4. doi:10.1016/j.sbspro.2015.04.443. 
Weinberger, Norm. "The Impact of Arts on Learning." MuSICa Research Notes 7, no. 2 (Spring 200).

Further reading[edit]

Barrett, Margaret, 2010. A Cultural Psychology of Music Education. New York: Oxford University Press.
Kertz-Welzel, Alexandra. "Piano Improvisation Develops Musicianship." Orff-Echo XXXVII No. 1 (2004): 11-14.
Lundquist, Barbara R.; Sims, Winston T. (Autumn 1996). "African-American Music Education: Reflections on an Experience". Black Music Research Journal. Nashville, TN: Institute for Research in Black American Music, Fisk University. 16 (2): 311–336. doi:10.2307/779334. ISSN 0276-3605. JSTOR 779334. 
McPherson, Gary (2006). The Child as Musician. New York: Oxford University Press.
McPherson, Gary and Graham Welch (2012). The Oxford Handbook of Research in Music Education. New York: Oxford University Press.
Mark, Michael L.; Gary, Charles L. (2007). A history of American music education (3 ed.). Rowman & Littlefield Education. ISBN 978-1-57886-523-9. 
Schafer, R. Murray (1965). The Composer in the Classroom. Toronto: B.M.I. Canada. 37 p.
Serenko, A. (2011). Student satisfaction with Canadian music programs: The application of the American Customer Satisfaction Model in higher education. Assessment and Evaluation in Higher Education, 36(3): 281-299.
Woodall, Laura and Brenda Ziembroski, (2002). Promoting Literacy Through Music.
Yarbrough, Cornelia (Winter 1984). "A Content Analysis of the "Journal of Research in Music Education", 1953-1983". Journal of Research in Music Education. Reston, VA: Music Educators National Conference. 32 (4): 213–222. doi:10.2307/3344920. ISSN 0022-4294. JSTOR 3344920. 







v
t
e


Music methods






Flute
General

Berklee method
Kodály Method
Orff method
Suzuki method


Saxophone

Cailliet Method


Other
Music education












v
t
e


Music



History of music and
Classical history



Prehistoric
Ancient
Religious

Biblical


Secular




Classical/art music



Medieval
Renaissance
Baroque
Classical period
Romantic
Impressionist
20th century
Contemporary
21st century





Vernacular music



Blues
Circus music
Country music
Jazz
Folk music
Popular music
Hip hop music
Pop music
Progressive music
Psychedelic music
Rock music

Heavy metal
Punk rock
Alternative


Soul music











Performance
Ensembles






Band (rock and pop)

Backup band
All-female band
Rhythm section


Big band
Choir
Concert band
Conducting
Disc jockey
Musician
Orchestra
Singing

Lead vocalist
Backing vocalist










Theory
Composition






Form
Genre
Notation
Composer
Improvisation
Songwriter
Lyrics
Song





Education and study



Bachelor of Music
Master of Music
Doctor of Musical Arts
PhD
Music education
Music history
Music psychology

Cultural aspects


Musicology
Ethnomusicology
Music archaeology
Ecomusicology





Production



Single

A-side and B-side
Extended play


Album

Compilation
Live
Remix


Audio engineer
Record label
Record producer
Sampling
Music technology (electric)
Music technology (electronic and digital)
Sound recording and reproduction
Cover
Remix






Cultural and
regional genres




African

Central
East
North
Southern
West


Asian

Central
East
Middle-Eastern
South
Southeast


European

Central
Eastern
Northern
Southeastern
Southern
Western


Latin American

Central American
South American


North American

Caribbean


Oceanian

Melanesian
Micronesian
Polynesian







By sovereign state





 






Afghanistan
Albania
Algeria
Andorra
Angola
Antigua and Barbuda
Argentina
Armenia
Australia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Bahamas
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Barbados
Belarus
Belgium
Belize
Benin
Bhutan
Bolivia
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Botswana
Brazil
Brunei
Bulgaria
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cambodia
Cameroon
Canada
Cape Verde
Central African Republic
Chad
Chile
China
Colombia
Comoros
Costa Rica
Croatia
Cuba
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Denmark
Djibouti
Dominica
Dominican Republic
East Timor
Ecuador
Egypt
El Salvador
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Estonia
Ethiopia
Federated States of Micronesia
Fiji
Finland
France
Gabon
Gambia
Georgia
Germany
Ghana
Greece
Grenada
Guatemala
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Hungary
Iceland
India
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Ivory Coast
Jamaica
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Kenya
Kiribati
Kosovo
Kuwait
Kyrgyzstan
Laos
Latvia
Lebanon
Lesotho
Liberia
Libya
Liechtenstein
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Madagascar
Malawi
Malaysia
Maldives
Mali
Malta
Marshall Islands
Mauritania
Mauritius
Mexico
Moldova
Monaco
Mongolia
Montenegro
Morocco
Mozambique
Myanmar
Namibia
Nauru
Nepal
Netherlands
New Zealand
Nicaragua
Niger
Nigeria
North Korea
Norway
Oman
Pakistan
Palau
Palestine
Panama
Papua New Guinea
Paraguay
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Qatar
Republic of Macedonia
Republic of the Congo
Romania
Russia
Rwanda
Saint Kitts and Nevis
Saint Lucia
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
Samoa
San Marino
Saudi Arabia
Senegal
Serbia
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Singapore
Slovakia
Slovenia
Solomon Islands
Somalia
South Africa
South Korea
Spain
Sri Lanka
Sudan
Suriname
Swaziland
Sweden
Switzerland
Syria
São Tomé and Príncipe
Taiwan
Tajikistan
Tanzania
Thailand
Togo
Tonga
Trinidad and Tobago
Tunisia
Turkey
Turkmenistan
Tuvalu
Uganda
Ukraine
United Arab Emirates
United Kingdom
United States
Uruguay
Uzbekistan
Vanuatu
Vatican City
Venezuela
Vietnam
Western Sahara
Yemen
Zambia
Zimbabwe








Lists



Index
Outline
Terminology
Instruments
Musical forms by era
Cultural and regional genres
Popular music genres
Albums
Songs
Jazz and popular music glossary
Audio





Related articles



Music and politics
Music festival
Music therapy
Musical instrument
Women in music








Category
Portal
WikiProject












v
t
e


Topics in education







General



Glossary
Index
Outline
Aims and objectives
Anthropology
Assessment
Economics
Evaluation
History
Leadership
Philosophy
Policy
Politics
Psychology
Research
Rights
Sociology
Technology
Theory
Types of institutions





By subject



Agricultural
Art
Bilingual
Business
Chemistry
Design
Economics
Engineering
Environmental
Euthenics
Health
Language
Legal
Mathematics
Medical
Military
Music
Nursing
Peace
Performing arts
Philosophy
Physical
Physics
Reading
Religious
Science
Sex
Teacher
Technology
Values
Vocational
More...





Alternative



Autodidacticism
Education reform
Gifted education
Homeschooling
Religious education
Special education
More...





Wikimedia



Books
Definitions
Images
Learning resources
News
Quotes
Texts















v
t
e


Stages of formal education







Early childhood education
Primary education
Secondary education
Tertiary education









Preschool
→
Kindergarten
→

















Elementary school
→









Infant
→
Junior
→
























High school
→









Junior high school
→
Senior high school
→
























Higher education
 
Vocational
Further
continuing









Undergraduate
→
Postgraduate
 



























Alternative education

Homeschooling


Adult education
 Portal














Education by region










v
t
e


Education in Africa



Sovereign states



Algeria
Angola
Benin
Botswana
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cameroon
Cape Verde (Cabo Verde)
Central African Republic
Chad
Comoros
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Republic of the Congo
Djibouti
Egypt
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Ethiopia
Gabon
The Gambia
Ghana
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Ivory Coast (Côte d'Ivoire)
Kenya
Lesotho
Liberia
Libya
Madagascar
Malawi
Mali
Mauritania
Mauritius
Morocco
Mozambique
Namibia
Niger
Nigeria
Rwanda
São Tomé and Príncipe
Senegal
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Somalia
South Africa
South Sudan
Sudan
Swaziland
Tanzania
Togo
Tunisia
Uganda
Zambia
Zimbabwe






States with limited
recognition




Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic
Somaliland






Dependencies and
other territories





Canary Islands / Ceuta / Melilla / (see also plazas de soberanía) (Spain)
Madeira (Portugal)
Mayotte / Réunion (France)
Saint Helena / Ascension Island / Tristan da Cunha (United Kingdom)











v
t
e


Education in Asia



Sovereign states



Afghanistan
Armenia
Azerbaijan
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Bhutan
Brunei
Cambodia
China
Cyprus
East Timor (Timor-Leste)
Egypt
Georgia
India
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Israel
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
North Korea
South Korea
Kuwait
Kyrgyzstan
Laos
Lebanon
Malaysia
Maldives
Mongolia
Myanmar
Nepal
Oman
Pakistan
Philippines
Qatar
Russia
Saudi Arabia
Singapore
Sri Lanka
Syria
Tajikistan
Thailand
Turkey
Turkmenistan
United Arab Emirates
Uzbekistan
Vietnam
Yemen





States with
limited recognition



Abkhazia
Artsakh
Northern Cyprus
Palestine
South Ossetia
Taiwan





Dependencies and
other territories



British Indian Ocean Territory
Christmas Island
Cocos (Keeling) Islands
Hong Kong
Macau










v
t
e


Education in Europe



Sovereign states



Albania
Andorra
Armenia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Belarus
Belgium
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bulgaria
Croatia
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
France
Georgia
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Iceland
Ireland

Italy
Kazakhstan
Latvia
Liechtenstein
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Macedonia
Malta
Moldova
Monaco
Montenegro
Netherlands
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russia
San Marino
Serbia
Slovakia
Slovenia
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Turkey
Ukraine
United Kingdom





States with limited
recognition



Abkhazia
Artsakh
Kosovo
Northern Cyprus
South Ossetia
Transnistria





Dependencies and
other entities



Åland
Faroe Islands
Gibraltar
Guernsey
Isle of Man
Jersey
Svalbard





Other entities



European Union










v
t
e


Education in North America



Sovereign states



Antigua and Barbuda
Bahamas
Barbados
Belize
Canada
Costa Rica
Cuba
Dominica
Dominican Republic
El Salvador
Grenada
Guatemala
Haiti
Honduras
Jamaica
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama
Saint Kitts and Nevis
Saint Lucia
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
Trinidad and Tobago
United States






Dependencies and
other territories




Anguilla
Aruba
Bermuda
Bonaire
British Virgin Islands
Cayman Islands
Curaçao
Greenland
Guadeloupe
Martinique
Montserrat
Puerto Rico
Saint Barthélemy
Saint Martin
Saint Pierre and Miquelon
Saba
Sint Eustatius
Sint Maarten
Turks and Caicos Islands
United States Virgin Islands










v
t
e


Education in Oceania



Sovereign states



Australia
Federated States of Micronesia
Fiji
Kiribati
Marshall Islands
Nauru
New Zealand
Palau
Papua New Guinea
Samoa
Solomon Islands
Tonga
Tuvalu
Vanuatu





Associated states
of New Zealand



Cook Islands
Niue





Dependencies
and other territories



American Samoa
Christmas Island
Cocos (Keeling) Islands
Easter Island
French Polynesia
Guam
Hawaii
New Caledonia
Norfolk Island
Northern Mariana Islands
Pitcairn Islands
Tokelau
Wallis and Futuna










v
t
e


Education in South America



Sovereign states



Argentina
Bolivia
Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Ecuador
Guyana
Paraguay
Peru
Suriname
Uruguay
Venezuela






Dependencies and
other territories




Falkland Islands
French Guiana
South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands














 Category
 Portal
 WikiProject












v
t
e


Sociomusicology






Développement des publics de la musique au Québec
Ethnomusicology
Music community
Music education
Music education for young children
Online music education
Psychoanalysis and music
Sociomusicology





Notable people



Theodor Adorno
Jacques Attali
Howard Saul Becker
Georgina Born
Tia DeNora
Norbert Elias
Simon Frith
Maurice Halbwachs
David G. Hebert
Barbara Reeder Lundquist
Peter Martin
John Mueller
Joseph Schloss
Alfred Schutz
Charles Seeger
Alphons Silbermann
Georg Simmel
John Shepherd
Christopher Small
Norman Stanfield
Max Weber









Authority control



GND: 4040843-7
NDL: 00568868











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Music_education&oldid=818247612"					Categories: Music educationOccupations in musicSociomusicologyHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksPages using web citations with no URLAll articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from January 2018Articles with permanently dead external linksArticles needing additional references from November 2017All articles needing additional referencesWikipedia articles with GND identifiers