"Indian music" redirects here. For other uses, see Indian music (disambiguation).






This article's lead section does not adequately summarize key points of its contents. Please consider expanding the lead to provide an accessible overview of all important aspects of the article. Please discuss this issue on the article's talk page. (April 2016)





Music of India



A Lady Playing the Tanpura, ca. 1735 (Rajasthan)



Genres




Traditional


Classical

Carnatic
Hindustani


Folk
Baul
Bhajan
Odissi
Rabindra Sangeet
Thumri
Dadra
Chaiti
Kajari
Sufi

Ghazal
Qawwali




Modern


Bhangra

Bhangragga


Blues
Filmi

Bollywood
Ghazal
Qawwali


Goa trance
Dance
Indi-pop

Asian Underground


Jazz
Rock

Bengali
Raga






Media and performance


Music awards


Filmfare Awards
Sangeet Natak Akademi Award




Music festivals


Saptak Festival of Music
Chennai Music Season
Dover Lane music festival
Tyagaraja Aradhana




Music media


Sruti
The Record Music Magazine




Nationalistic and patriotic songs


National anthem
Jana Gana Mana


Regional music




Andaman and Nicobar Islands
Andhra Pradesh
Arunachal Pradesh
Assam
Bihar
Chhattisgarh
Goa
Gujarat
Haryana
Himachal Pradesh
Jammu and Kashmir
Jharkhand
Karnataka
Kerala
Madhya Pradesh
Maharashtra
Manipur
Meghalaya
Mizoram
Nagaland
Odisha
Punjab
Rajasthan
Sikkim
Tamil Nadu

Ancient


Tripura
Uttar Pradesh
Uttarakhand
West Bengal







v
t
e







Part of a series on the


Culture of India





History


People




Languages


Assamese
Bengali
Bodo
Dogri
Gujarati
Kannada
Kashmiri
Konkani
Maithili
Malayalam
Manipuri
Marathi
Nepali
Odia
Punjabi
Sanskrit
Santali
Sindhi
Tamil
Telugu
Urdu








Mythology and folklore


Mythology
folklore






Cuisine


Religion




Art


Architecture
Sculpture
Painting








Literature


Indian poetry








Music and performing arts


Music
Performing arts








Media


Television
Cinema






Sport




Monuments


World Heritage Sites








Symbols


Flag
Coat of arms









 India  portal







v
t
e





The music of India includes multiple varieties of Indian classical music, folk music, filmi and Indian pop. India's classical music tradition, including Hindustani music and Carnatic, has a history spanning millennia and developed over several eras. Music in India began as an integral part of socio-religious life.



Contents


1 Classical music

1.1 Hindustani music
1.2 Carnatic music


2 Light classical music
3 Folk music

3.1 Rabindra Sangeet (Music of Bengal)
3.2 Bihu of Assam
3.3 Dandiya
3.4 Ganasangeet
3.5 Uttarakhandi Music
3.6 Lavani
3.7 Rajasthan


4 Popular music

4.1 Filmi music
4.2 Interaction with non-Indian music
4.3 Indian pop music
4.4 Rock & metal music

4.4.1 Raga rock
4.4.2 Indian rock


4.5 Dance music


5 Indian Hip Hop

5.1 Rappers
5.2 Groups/Duos


6 Jazz and blues
7 Western classical music
8 Patriotism and music
9 See also
10 References
11 Further reading
12 External links



Classical music[edit]
Main article: Indian classical music
The two main traditions of Indian classical music are Carnatic music, which is found predominantly in the peninsular regions, and Hindustani music, which is found in the northern, eastern and central regions. The basic concepts of this music includes shruti (microtones), swaras (notes), alankar (ornamentations), raga (melodies improvised from basic grammars), and tala (rhythmic patterns used in percussion). Its tonal system divides the octave into 22 segments called shrutis, not all equal but each roughly equal to a quarter of a whole tone of the Western music.
Hindustani music[edit]






This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (March 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Main article: Hindustani classical music
The Hindustani music tradition diverged from Carnatic music around the 13th-14th centuries CE.[citation needed] The practice Vedic times where the hymns in Sama Veda, an ancient religious text, were sung as Samagana and not chanted. Developing a strong and diverse tradition over several centuries, it has contemporary traditions established primarily in India but also in Pakistan and Bangladesh. In contrast to Carnatic music, the other main Indian classical music tradition originating from the South, Hindustani music was not only influenced by ancient Hindu musical traditions, historical Vedic philosophy and native Indian sounds but also enriched by the Persian performance practices of the Mughals. Classical genres are dhrupad, dhamar, khyal, tarana and sadra, and there are also several semi-classical forms.
Carnatic music[edit]






This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (March 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Main article: Carnatic music
The present of Carnatic music can be traced to the 14th - 15th centuries AD and thereafter. It originated in South India during the rule of Vijayanagar Empire. Like Hindustani music, it is melodic, with improvised variations, but tends to have more fixed compositions. It consists of a composition with improvised embellishments added to the piece in the forms of Raga Alapana, Kalpanaswaram, Neraval and, in the case of more advanced students, Raga, Tala, Pallavi. The main emphasis is on the vocals as most compositions are written to be sung, and even when played on instruments, they are meant to be performed in a singing style (known as gāyaki). There are about 7.2 million ragas (or scales) in Carnatic Music,[citation needed] with around 300 still in use today. Annamayya is the first known composer in Carnatic music. He is widely regarded as the Andhra Pada kavitā Pitāmaha (Godfather of Telugu song-writing). Purandara Dasa is considered the father of Carnatic music, while the later musicians Tyagaraja, Shyama Shastry and Muthuswami Dikshitar are considered the trinity of Carnatic music.[citation needed]
Noted artists of Carnatic music include Ariyakudi Ramanuja Iyengar (the father of the current concert format), Semmangudi Srinivasa Iyer, Palaghat K.V. Narayanaswamy, Alathur Brothers, MS Subbulakshmi, Lalgudi Jayaraman and more recently Balamuralikrishna, TN Seshagopalan, K J Yesudas, N. Ramani, Umayalpuram K. Sivaraman, Sanjay Subrahmanyan, Manipallavam K.Sarangan, Balaji Shankar, TM Krishna, Bombay Jayashri, T S Nandakumar, Aruna Sairam Mysore Manjunath.
Every December, the city of Chennai in India has its eight-week-long Music Season, which is the world's largest cultural event.
Carnatic music has served as the foundation for most music in South India, including folk music, festival music and has also extended its influence to film music in the past 100–150 years or so.
Light classical music[edit]
There are many types of music which comes under the category of light classical or semi-classical. Some of the forms are Thumri, Dadra, Ghazal, Chaiti, Kajri, Tappa, Natya Sangeet and Qawwali.
Folk music[edit]




Group of Dharohar folk musicians performing in Mehrangarh Fort, Jodhpur.


Main article: Indian folk music
Rabindra Sangeet (Music of Bengal)[edit]
Main article: Rabindra Sangeet




Rabindranath Tagore's Bengali-language initials are worked into this "Ro-Tho" wooden seal, stylistically similar to designs used in traditional Haida carvings. Tagore embellished his manuscripts with such art.






Dance accompanied by Rabindra Sangeet


Rabindra Sangeet (Bengali: রবীন্দ্রসঙ্গীত Robindro shonggit, Bengali pronunciation: [ɾobind̪ɾo ʃoŋɡit̪]), also known as Tagore songs, are songs written and composed by Rabindranath Tagore. They have distinctive characteristics in the music of Bengal, popular in India and Bangladesh.[1] "Sangeet" means music, "Rabindra Sangeet" means music (or more aptly Songs) of Rabindra.




N. Ramani and N Rajam accompanied by T S Nandakumar


Rabindra Sangeet used Indian classical music and traditional folk music as sources.[2] Tagore wrote some 2,230 songs.[3]
Rabindranath Tagore was a towering figure in Indian music. Writing in Bengali, he created a library of over 2,000 songs now known by Bengalis as rabindra sangeet whose form is primarily influenced by Hindustani classical, sub-classicals, Carnatic, western, bauls, bhatiyali and different folk songs of India. Many singers in West Bengal and Bangladesh base their entire careers on the singing of Tagore musical masterpieces. The national anthem of India and national anthem of Bangladesh are Rabindra Sangeets.
Bihu of Assam[edit]






This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (March 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)







Jeng Bihu dancers at Rongali Bihu celebration in Bangalore


Bihu (Assamese: বিহু) is the festival of New Year of Assam falling on mid April. This is a festival of nature and mother earth where the first day is for the cows and buffalos. Second day is for the man. Bihu dances and songs accompanied by traditional drums and wind instruments are essential part of this festival. Bihu songs are energetic and with beats to welcome the festive spring. Assamese drums (dhol), Pepa(horm usually made from buffalo horn), gogona are major instruments used.
Dandiya[edit]






This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (March 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Main article: Dandiya
Dandiya or Raas is a form of Gujarati cultural dance that is performed with sticks. The present musical style is derived from the traditional musical accompaniment to the folk dance. It is practiced in (mainly) the state of Gujarat. There is also another type of dance and music associated with Dandiya/Raas called Garba.
Ganasangeet[edit]
Ganasangeet message.[4] The songs are usually about Freedom, community strength, patriotism. Due to the British occupation in India, a lot of protest songs about anti-imperialism/pro-socialism have been written in India. Examples: Apni Azadi Ko Hum Hargis Mita Sakte Nahin, Ajadee hoyni tor, Kadam kadam badhaye jaa, Vande Mataram, etc.
Uttarakhandi Music[edit]






This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (March 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Uttarakhandi folk music had its root in the lap of nature and the hilly terrain of the region. Common themes in the folk music of Uttarakhand are the beauty of nature, various seasons, festivals, religious traditions, cultural practices, folk stories, historical characters, and the bravery of ancestors. The folks songs of Uttarakhand are a reflection of the cultural heritage and the way people live their lives in the Himalayas. Musical instruments used in Uttarakhand music include the dhol, damoun, turri, ransingha, dholki, daur, thali, bhankora and masakbhaja. Tabla and Harmonium are also sometimes used, especially in recorded folk music from the 1960s onwards. Generic Indian and global musical instruments have been incorporated in modern popular folks by singers like Narendra Singh Negi, Mohan Upreti, Gopal Babu Goswami, Chandra Singh Rahi etc.
Lavani[edit]
Main article: Lavani
Lavani comes from the word Lavanya which means beauty. This is one of the most popular forms of dance and music that is practiced all over Maharashtra. It has in fact become a necessary part of the Maharashtrian folk dance performances. Traditionally, the songs are sung by female artistes, but male artistes may occasionally sing Lavanis. The dance format associated with Lavani is known as Tamasha. Lavani is a combination of traditional song and dance, which particularly performed to the enchanting beats of 'Dholaki', a drum-like instrument. Dance performed by attractive women wearing nine-yard saris. They are sung in a quick tempo. The verve, the enthusiasm, the rhythm and above all the very beat of India finds an expressive declaration amidst the folk music of India, which has somewhat, redefined the term "bliss". Lavani originated in the arid region of Maharashtra and Madhya Pradesh.
Rajasthan[edit]
Main article: Music of Rajasthan




A traditional Indian folk singer practicing in front of Mehrangarh Fort.


Rajasthan has a very diverse cultural collection of musician castes, including Langas, Sapera, Bhopa, Jogi and Manganiyar (lit. "the ones who ask/beg"). Rajasthan Diary quotes it as a soulful, full-throated music with harmonious diversity. The melodies of Rajasthan come from a variety of instruments. The stringed variety include the Sarangi, Ravanahatha, Kamayacha, Morsing and Ektara. Percussion instruments come in all shapes and sizes from the huge Nagaras and Dhols to the tiny Damrus. The Daf and Chang are a favourite of Holi (the festival of colours) revellers. Flutes and bagpipers come in local flavours such as Shehnai, Poongi, Algoza, Tarpi, Been and Bankia.
Rajasthani music is derived from the combination of string instruments, percussion instruments and wind instruments accompanied by renditions of folk singers. It enjoys a respectable presence in Bollywood music as well.
Popular music[edit]
Filmi music[edit]
Main articles: Filmi and Music of Bollywood
The biggest form of Indian popular music is filmi, or songs from Indian films, it makes up 72% of the music sales in India.[5] The film industry of India supported music by according reverence to classical music while utilising the western orchestration to support Indian melodies. Music composers, like R. D. Burman, Shankar Jaikishan, S. D. Burman, Madan Mohan, Naushad Ali, O. P. Nayyar, Hemant Kumar, C. Ramchandra, Salil Chowdhury, Kalyanji Anandji, Ilaiyaraaja, A. R. Rahman, Jatin Lalit, Anu Malik, Nadeem-Shravan, Harris Jayaraj, Himesh Reshammiya, Vidyasagar, Shankar Ehsaan Loy, Salim-Sulaiman, Pritam, M.S. Viswanathan, K. V. Mahadevan, Ghantasala and S. D. Batish employed the principles of harmony while retaining classical and folk flavor. Reputed names in the domain of Indian classical music like Ravi Shankar, Vilayat Khan, Ali Akbar Khan and Ram Narayan have also composed music for films. Traditionally, in Indian films, the voice for the songs is not provided by the actors, they are provided by the professional playback singers, to sound more developed, melodious and soulful, while actors lipsynch on the screen. In the past, only a handful of singers provided the voice in Hindi films. These include K. J. Yesudas, Mohammed Rafi, Mukesh, S.P. Balasubrahmanyam, T.M. Soundararajan, Hemant Kumar, Manna Dey, P. Susheela, Lata Mangeshkar, Asha Bhonsle, K.S. Chitra, Geeta Dutt, S. Janaki, Shamshad Begum, Suraiya, Noorjahan and Suman Kalyanpur. Recent playback singers include Udit Narayan, Kumar Sanu, Kailash Kher, Alisha Chinai, KK, Shaan, Madhushree, Shreya Ghoshal, Nihira Joshi, Kavita Krishnamurthy, Hariharan (singer), Ilaiyaraaja, A.R. Rahman, Sonu Nigam, Sukhwinder Singh, Kunal Ganjawala, Anu Malik, Sunidhi Chauhan, Anushka Manchanda, Raja Hasan, Arijit Singh and Alka Yagnik. Rock bands like Indus Creed, Indian Ocean, Silk Route and Euphoria exist and have gained mass appeal with the advent of cable music television.
Interaction with non-Indian music[edit]
See also: Indo jazz, Raga rock, Psychedelic music, Indo-Caribbean music, Asian Underground, and Bhangra (music)
In the late 1970s and early 1980s, rock and roll fusions with Indian music were well known throughout Europe and North America. Ali Akbar Khan's 1955 performance in the United States was perhaps the beginning of this trend.
Jazz pioneers such as John Coltrane—who recorded a composition entitled 'India' during the November 1961 sessions for his album Live At The Village Vanguard (the track was not released until 1963 on Coltrane's album Impressions)—also embraced this fusion. George Harrison (of the Beatles) played the sitar on the song "Norwegian Wood (This Bird Has Flown)" in 1965, which sparked interest from Shankar, who subsequently took Harrison as his apprentice. Jazz innovator Miles Davis recorded and performed with musicians like Khalil Balakrishna, Bihari Sharma, and Badal Roy in his post-1968 electric ensembles. Virtuoso jazz guitarist John McLaughlin spent several years in Madurai learning Carnatic music and incorporated it into many of his acts including Shakti which featured prominent Indian musicians. Other Western artists such as the Grateful Dead, Incredible String Band, the Rolling Stones, the Move and Traffic soon incorporated Indian influences and instruments, and added Indian performers. Legendary Grateful Dead frontman Jerry Garcia joined guitarist Sanjay Mishra on his classic CD "Blue Incantation" (1995). Mishra also wrote an original score for French Director Eric Heumann for his film Port Djema (1996) which won best score at Hamptons film festival and The Golden Bear at Berlin. in 2000 he recorded Rescue with drummer Dennis Chambers (Carlos Santana, John McLaughlin et al.) and in 2006 Chateau Benares with guests DJ Logic and Keller Williams (guitar and bass).
Though the Indian music craze soon died down among mainstream audiences, die hard fans and immigrants continued the fusion. In 1985, a beat oriented, Raga Rock hybrid called Sitar Power by Ashwin Batish reintroduced sitar in western nations. Sitar Power drew the attention of a number of record labels and was snapped up by Shanachie Records of New Jersey to head their World Beat Ethno Pop division.
In the late 1980s, Indian-British artists fused Indian and Western traditions to make the Asian Underground. Since the 1990s, Canadian born musician Nadaka who has spent most of his life in India, has been creating music that is an acoustic fusion of Indian classical music with western styles. One such singer who has merged the Bhakti sangeet tradition of India with the western non-Indian music is Krishna Das and sells music records of his musical sadhana. Another example is Indo-Canadian musician Vandana Vishwas who has experimented with western music in her 2013 album Monologues.
In the new millennium, American hip-hop has featured Indian filmi and bhangra. Mainstream hip-hop artists have sampled songs from Bollywood movies and have collaborated with Indian artists. Examples include Timbaland's "Indian Flute", Erick Sermon and Redman's "React", Slum Village's "Disco", and Truth Hurts' hit song "Addictive", which sampled a Lata Mangeshkar song, and The Black Eyed Peas sampled Asha Bhosle's song "Yeh Mera Dil" in their hit single "Don't Phunk With My Heart". In 1997, the British band Cornershop paid tribute to Asha Bhosle with their song Brimful of Asha, which became an international hit. British-born Indian artist Panjabi MC also had a Bhangra hit in the U.S. with "Mundian To Bach Ke" which featured rapper Jay-Z. Asian Dub Foundation are not huge mainstream stars, but their politically charged rap and punk rock influenced sound has a multi-racial audience in their native UK. In 2008, international star Snoop Dogg appeared in a song in the film Singh Is Kinng. In 2007, hip-hop producer Madlib released Beat Konducta Vol 3–4: Beat Konducta in India; an album which heavily samples and is inspired by the music of India.
Sometimes, the music of India will fuse with the traditional music of other countries. For example, Delhi 2 Dublin, a band based in Canada, is known for fusing Indian and Irish music,[6] and Bhangraton is a fusion of Bhangra music with reggaeton, which itself is a fusion of hip hop, reggae, and traditional Latin American music.[7]
In a more recent example of Indian-British fusion, Laura Marling along with Mumford and Sons collaborated in 2010 with the Dharohar Project on a four-song EP.[8] The British band Bombay Bicycle Club also sampled the song "Man Dole Mera Tan Dole" for their single "Feel".[9]
Indian pop music[edit]
Main article: Indian pop
See also: Asian Underground, Bhangra (music), and Bhangragga
Indian pop music is based on an amalgamation of Indian folk and classical music, and modern beats from different parts of the world. Pop music really started in the South Asian region with the famous playback singer Ahmed Rushdi's song ‘Ko Ko Korina’ in 1966, followed initially by Mohammad Rafi in the late 1960s and then by Kishore Kumar in the early 1970s.[10]
After that, much of Indian Pop music comes from the Indian Film Industry, and until the 1990s, few singers like Usha Uthup, Sharon Prabhakar, and Peenaz Masani outside it were popular. Since then, pop singers in the latter group have included Daler Mehndi, Baba Sehgal, Alisha Chinai, KK, Shantanu Mukherjee a.k.a. Shaan, Sagarika, Colonial Cousins (Hariharan, Lesle Lewis), Lucky Ali, and Sonu Nigam, and music composers like Zila Khan or Jawahar Wattal, who made top selling albums with, Daler Mehndi, Shubha Mudgal, Baba Sehgal, Shweta Shetty and Hans Raj Hans.[11]
Besides those listed above, popular Indi-pop singers include Gurdas Maan, Sukhwinder Singh, Papon, Zubeen Garg, Raghav Sachar Rageshwari, Vandana Vishwas, Devika Chawla, Bombay Vikings, Asha Bhosle, Sunidhi Chauhan, Anushka Manchanda, Bombay Rockers, Anu Malik, Jazzy B, Malkit Singh, Raghav, Jay Sean, Juggy D, Rishi Rich, Sheila Chandra, Bally Sagoo, Punjabi MC, Bhangra Knights, Mehnaz, Sanober and Vaishali Samant.[citation needed]
Recently, Indian pop has taken an interesting turn with the "remixing" of songs from past Indian movie songs, new beats being added to them.
Rock & metal music[edit]
Raga rock[edit]
Main article: Raga rock
See also: Psychedelic rock
Raga rock is rock or pop music with a heavy Indian influence, either in its construction, its timbre, or its use of instrumentation, such as the sitar and tabla. Raga and other forms of classical Indian music began to influence many rock groups during the 1960s; most famously the Beatles. The first traces of "raga rock" can be heard on songs such as "See My Friends" by the Kinks and the Yardbirds' "Heart Full of Soul", released the previous month, featured a sitar-like riff by guitarist Jeff Beck.[12][13] The Beatles song "Norwegian Wood (This Bird Has Flown)", which first appeared on the band's 1965 album Rubber Soul, was the first western pop song to actually incorporate the sitar (played by lead guitarist George Harrison).[13][14] The Byrds' March 1966 single "Eight Miles High" and its B-side "Why" were also influential in originating the musical subgenre. Indeed, the term "raga rock" was coined by The Byrds' publicist in the press releases for the single and was first used in print by journalist Sally Kempton in her review of "Eight Miles High" for The Village Voice.[15][16] George Harrison's interest in Indian music, popularised the genre in the mid-1960s with songs such as "Love You To", "Tomorrow Never Knows" (credited to Lennon-McCartney), "Within You Without You" and "The Inner Light".[17][18][19] The rock acts of the sixties both in turn influenced British and American groups and Indian acts to develop a later form of Indian rock.
Indian rock[edit]
Main article: Indian rock




Nicotine playing at 'Pedal To The Metal', TDS, Indore, India in 2014. The band is known for being the pioneer of Metal Music in Central India.


The rock music "scene" in India is small compared to the filmi or fusion musicality "scenes" but as of recent years has come into its own, achieving a cult status of sorts. Rock music in India has its origins in the 1960s when international stars such as the Beatles visited India and brought their music with them. These artists' collaboration with Indian musicians such as Ravi Shankar and Zakir Hussain have led to the development of raga rock. International short wave radio stations such as The Voice of America, BBC, and Radio Ceylon played a major part in bringing Western pop, folk, and rock music to the masses. Indian rock bands began to gain prominence only much later, around the late 1980s.
It was around this time that the rock band Indus Creed formerly known as The Rock Machine got itself noticed on the international stage with hits like Rock N Roll Renegade. Other bands quickly followed. As of now, the rock music scene in India is quietly growing day by day and gathering more support. With the introduction of MTV in the early 1990s, Indians began to be exposed to various forms of rock such as grunge and speed metal. This influence can be clearly seen in many Indian bands today. The cities of the North Easter Region, mainly Guwahati and Shillong, Kolkata, Delhi, Mumbai and Bangalore have emerged as major melting pots for rock and metal enthusiasts. Bangalore has been the hub for rock and metal movement in India. Some prominent bands include Dorian Platonic, Nicotine, Cannibals, Phinix, Just, Voodoo Child, Rubella, Crystal Ann, Morgue, Indian Ocean, Kryptos, Pentagram, Thermal and a Quarter, Abandoned Agony, No Idea, Zero, Half Step Down, Scribe, Eastern Fare, Demonic Resurrection, Zygnema, Motherjane, Soulmate, Avial and Parikrama. The future looks encouraging thanks to entities such as Green Ozone, DogmaTone Records, Eastern Fare Music Foundation, that are dedicated to promoting and supporting Indian rock. From Central India, Nicotine, an Indore-based metal band, is widely credited of being the pioneer of metal music in the region.[20][21][22][23][24][25][26][27][28][29][30]
Dance music[edit]
Main articles: Dance in India, Hindi Dance Music, Music of Bollywood, Goa trance, Psychedelic trance, Charanjit Singh (musician), and Electronica
Indian Hip Hop[edit]


Indian hip hop


Stylistic origins



Hip hop
R&B
soul





Cultural origins



1990





Typical instruments



Bass
drum machine
rapping
sampler
synthesizer





Derivative forms
Urban


Subgenres





Urban
trance
R&B
EDM



(complete list)


Indian Hip Hop is a part of the south Asian hip hop culture termed as Desi Hip Hop.Desi hip hop is a term for music and culture which combines the influences of hip hop and the Indian subcontinent; the term desi referring to the South Asian diaspora. The term has also come to be used as an alternative for rap music and even pop music which involves rappers of South Asian origins. Creation of the term "desi hip hop" is credited to Bohemia.[31]
Apache Indian, UK artist of Indian origin, was the earliest to make an impact on the UK charts with a series of hits during the nineties.[32] Baba Sehgal introduced Hindi rap in the nineties with albums including Thanda Thanda Pani, Dilruba, Main bhi Madonna, Manjula and Dil Dhadke.[33] His album Thanda Thanda Pani (1992) sold 100,000 copies in three and a half months and brought rap music to the Indian club scene.[34] Following the launch of Bohemia's second album Pesa Nasha Pyar (2006), whose tracks such as "Kali Denali", "Kurti" and "Sahara" became big hits, there was a new-found interest in desi languages during the late 2000s.[35][36] Even though there were several occasional hits during this period, the desi hop scene remained limited largely to the underground, with a very niche loyal audience.[37] Hip-hop culture, including graffiti and b-boying started seeping into the club scene and street culture of big cities like Delhi and Mumbai.[38]
Bohemia introduced rap in Bollywood. He performed the title track for Warner Bros film Chandni Chowk to China, appearing in the film with Akshay Kumar and Deepika Padukone.[39] A few months later he did the title track for another Akshay Kumar film, 8 x 10 Tasveer.[40] In 2011, he gave a song as a present to Akshay Kumar for his first Hollywood production Breakaway.[41] Bohemia also featured in the track with Mika Singh on the film, Desi Boyz's track "Subha Hone Na De".
Besides Bollywood and commercial rap music, the underground hip hop scene started shaping. Many emerging rappers, crews started to create buzz in the underground hip hop scene. In north Desi Beam, in south Machas With Attitude, Hiphop Tamizha etc. became popular.
There was increased interest in the rap genre in India after 2011, with a large number of rappers emerging from all corners of the country.[37] This is largely credited to the success of Yo Yo Honey Singh in India and Bollywood, India's Hindi film industry.[42][43][44][45][46] Following huge success of his album International Villager,[47] Singh went on to release several hits songs both in independently and in Bollywood.[48][49] In the wake of success of Honey Singh, a new trend was formed in Bollywood with many producers roping in rap artists for their songs.[42] Even some big Bollywood actors like Ranveer Singh, Akshay Kumar and Varun Dhawan tried their hands at rapping.[50]
Indian hip hop has picked up steam in the suburbs of India's biggest cities creating big names like Divine and Naezy who have been picked up by talent management agencies like OML[51] who now have music videos with millions of views on YouTube. Down in the south, rappers like Brodha V have kept the flag of the Indian hip hop flying high.
Due to the exposure through Bollywood, rap became a household term and an increased production of rap music was observed, especially in the Punjabi music industry.[52] There is an ongoing debate among the hip-hop community about the contribution of Honey Singh to the genre. While some artists including Badshah,[44] Ikka,[45] Deep Money[46] and Manj Musik have acknowledged his contribution to the industry, others like Raftaar,[53] and Pakistani artists, Bohemia[53][54] and Imran Khan[55] have openly denied it. There is also a negative sentiment among some followers of hip-hop culture in India regarding the recent commercialization of the genre.[31][56][57] Even though many fans are not happy with the recent commercialization of hip-hop in India, this commercialization has also led to expansion of the underground scene, with independent artists building a name in Indian hip hop. Because of this, the future of hip-hop in India is generally perceived to be positive.[31][35] There are about 2,000 rappers in India, rapping in different languages like Punjabi, Bengali, Hindi, Bhojpuri, Khasi etc.[58]
Rappers[edit]


Artist
Known for
Years active


Raxstar
"Ego"
"Brand New Swag"
"Bandook"

2005–present


Badshah
"DJ Waley Babu"
"Saturday Saturday"
"Mercy"
Kapoor & Sons soundtrack

2006–present


Yo Yo Honey Singh
International Villager
Desi Kalakaar
Yaariyan soundtrack
Kick soundtrack

2006–present


Raftaar
"Swag Mera Desi"
"Desi Hip Hop" "Baby Marwake Manegi" "Dhakkad"

2009–present


Fateh Doe
Bring It Home
2009–present


Divine
"Yeh Mera Bombay"
"Mere Gully Main" "Jungli Sher" "Farak"

2011–present


Ikka Singh
"This Singh is So Stylish"
"Half Window Down" "Sapne" "Shuruwat"

2014–present


Brodha V
"Aathma Rama"
"Indian Flava" "Aigiri Nandini" "Let Em Talk"

2008–present


Raja Kumari
Change Your Life (Iggy Azalea song)
"Never Give Up" "Mute" "The Come Up(EP)"

2012–present


Groups/Duos[edit]


Artist
Known For
Years Active


Street Academics
"Chatha Kaakka"
"Native Bapa" "16 Adiyanthiram"

1999–present


Hiphop Tamizha
Hip Hop Tamizhan
Meesaya Murukku International Tamizhan

2005–present


Machas With Attitude
Red + Green = Brown
"Making our Money" "Ready Steady Po"

2008–2013


Jazz and blues[edit]
Main articles: Jazz in India and Indian blues
Western classical music[edit]
The spread and following of Western classical music in India is almost entirely non-existent. It is mainly patronised by the Indian Zoroastrian community and small esoteric groups with historical exposure to Western classical music. Another esoteric group with significant patronage is the Protestant Christian community in Chennai and Bangalore.[citation needed] Western Music education is also severely neglected and pretty rare in India. Western keyboard, drums and guitar instruction being an exception as it has found some interest; mainly in an effort to create musicians to service contemporary popular Indian music. Many reasons have been cited for the obscurity of Western classical music in India, a country rich in its musical heritage by its own right, however the two main reasons are an utter lack of exposure and a passive disinterest in what is considered esoteric at best. Also, the difficulty in importing Western musical instruments and their rarity has also contributed to the obscurity of classical Western music.[citation needed]
Despite more than a century of exposure to Western classical music and two centuries of British colonialism, classical music in India has never gained more than 'fringe' popularity. Many attempts to popularise Western classical music in India have failed in the past due to disinterest and lack of sustained efforts.[citation needed] Today, Western classical music education has improved with the help of numerous institutions in India. Institutions like KM Music Conservatory (founded by Oscar-winning Composer A.R.Rahman), Calcutta School of Music, Bangalore School of Music, Eastern Fare Music Foundation,[59] Delhi School of Music, UstadGah Foundation, Delhi Music Academy, Guitarmonk and many others are dedicated to contributing to the progress or growth and supporting Western classical music. In 1930, notable Mehli Mehta set up the Bombay Symphony Orchestra. There is 'Melody Academy' in Darjeeling established in the early 1980s by Mr. Jiwan Pradhan who single-handedly has brought the western music in the hills of Darjeeling which is very rich in its musical heritage.
The Bombay Chamber Orchestra[60] (BCO) was founded in 1962.
In 2006, the Symphony Orchestra of India was founded, housed at the NCPA in Mumbai. It is today the only professional symphony orchestra in India and presents two concert seasons per year, with world-renowned conductors and soloists.
Some prominent Indians in Western classical music are:

Andre de Quadros, Conductor and Music Educator.
Zubin Mehta, Conductor.
Mehli Mehta, Father of Zubin, violinist and founding conductor of the Bombay Symphony Orchestra.
Anil Srinivasan, pianist.
Ilaiyaraaja, the first Indian to compose a full symphony performed by the Royal Philharmonic Orchestra in London's Walthamstow Town Hall.
Naresh Sohal, British Indian-born composer.
Param Vir, British Indian-born composer.
Karishmeh Felfeli, Indian-born Irani pianist and radio broadcaster.

Patriotism and music[edit]






This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (March 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Patriotic feelings have been instigated within Indians through music, since the era of freedom struggle. Jana Gana Mana, the national anthem of India, by Rabindranath Tagore is largely credited[citation needed] for uniting India through music and Vande Mataram by Bankim Chandra Chattopadhyay as the national song of India, both of them belonged to West Bengal. Post-independence songs such as Aye mere watan ke logo, Mile Sur Mera Tumhara, Ab Tumhare Hawale Watan Saathiyo, Maa Tujhe Salaam by A.R.Rahman have been responsible for consolidating feelings of national integration and unity in diversity.
See also[edit]


Indian classical music portal




Carnatic music
Rabindra Sangeet
Odissi Music
Eastern Fare Music Foundation
Hindustani classical music
Indian musical instruments
Indian Music Industry
List of regional genres of music
Music of South Asia
Middle Eastern music
Sangita Ratnakara


References[edit]



^ Ghosh, p. xiii
^ Huke, Robert E. (2009). "West Bengal". Encyclopædia Britannica. Encyclopædia Britannica Online. Retrieved 2009-10-06. 
^ Tagore: At Home in the World ISBN 978-8-132-11084-2 pp. 253-254
^ calcuttaweb.com
^ Pinglay, Prachi (December 10, 2009). "Plans to start India music awards". BBC News. Retrieved May 19, 2010. 
^ "Delhi 2 Dublin: Indian Bhangra Meets Irish Jigs". Public Radio International. August 26, 2009. Retrieved March 27, 2014. 
^ reggaetonline.net
^ Irwin, Colin (2010-09-03). "A triumphant experiment that feels surprisingly authentic". BBC review. 
^ Pundir, Pallavi (March 15, 2013). "A Little This, A Little That". Indian Express. 
^ "Socio-political History of Modern Pop Music in Pakistan". Chowk. Retrieved 2008-06-27. 
^ "Music man with a golden touch". The Hindu. December 9, 2002. 
^ Miller, Andy. (2003). The Kinks are the Village Green Preservation Society (33⅓ series). Continuum International Publishing Group. p. 3. ISBN 0-8264-1498-2. 
^ a b Bellman, Jonathan. (1997). The Exotic in Western Music. Northeastern. p. 297. ISBN 1-55553-319-1. 
^ Lewisohn, Mark. (1989). The Complete Beatles Recording Sessions. The Hamlyn Publishing Group. p. 63. ISBN 0-600-55784-7. 
^ Bellman, Jonathan. (1997). The Exotic in Western Music. Northeastern Publishing. p. 351. ISBN 1-55553-319-1. 
^ Hjort, Christopher. (2008). So You Want To Be A Rock 'n' Roll Star: The Byrds Day-By-Day (1965-1973). Jawbone Press. p. 88. ISBN 1-906002-15-0. 
^ Lavezzoli, Peter. (2007). The Dawn of Indian music in the West. Continuum International Publishing Group. p. 293. ISBN 0-8264-2819-3. 
^ Lavezzoli, Peter. (2007). The Dawn of Indian music in the West. Continuum International Publishing Group. p. 175. ISBN 0-8264-2819-3. 
^ Pedler, Dominic (2003). The Songwriting Secrets of the Beatles. London: Omnibus Press. p. 524. ISBN 978-0-7119-8167-6. 
^ "Does Indore have the mettle for metal? - DNA - English News & Features - Art & Culture - dnasyndication.com<". dnasyndication.com. Retrieved 18 August 2015. 
^ "Metal mania". educationinsider.net. Retrieved 18 August 2015. 
^ "Indore has a bandtastic time!". dnaindia.com. Retrieved 18 August 2015. 
^ "The 10 Famous Rock Bands of India - Sinlung". sinlung.com. Retrieved 18 August 2015. 
^ "Best Rock Bands In India". indiaonline.in. Retrieved 18 August 2015. 
^ "The 10 Famous Rock Bands of India". walkthroughindia.com. Retrieved 18 August 2015. 
^ "Almost There: 6 Awesome Indian Music Bands To Look Forward To". Youth Ki Awaaz. Retrieved 18 August 2015. 
^ "# 12 Prominent Indian Rock Bands Who Gave a New Definition To The Music". Witty9. Retrieved 18 August 2015. 
^ "12 Cities That are Home to Awesome Bands and You Probably Din't Know It!". Travel India. Retrieved 18 August 2015. 
^ Neelima K. "Top 10 Rock Bands in India". Top List Hub. Retrieved 18 August 2015. 
^ "DNA E-Paper - Daily News & Analysis -Mumbai, India". dnaindia.com. Retrieved 18 August 2015. 
^ a b c Omulo, Bob (19 September 2014). "How India is Taking to Hip Hop". Rolling Stone. Retrieved 14 September 2015. 
^ Larkin, Colin (1998) The Virgin Encyclopedia of Reggae, Virgin Books, ISBN 0-7535-0242-9, p.13
^ "Baba unplugged". 
^ Gargan, Edward (August 23, 1992). "THE MANY ACCENTS OF RAP AROUND THE WORLD; India: Vanilla Ice In Hindi". The New York Times. Retrieved 14 September 2015. 
^ a b Mahmood, Rafay. "Bohemia: More than just forties and shorties". The Express Tribune. Tribune.com.pk. Retrieved 14 September 2015. 
^ "Bohemia Bio". mtv.com. MTV. Retrieved 14 September 2015. 
^ a b Mehrotra, Palash (12 August 2012). "Indian rap scene: A revolt that will not get televised". India Today. Retrieved 14 September 2015. 
^ Kappal, Bhanuj (12 October 2013). "Inside Mumbai's Burgeoning Hip-Hop Scene". The Sunday Guardian. Retrieved 14 September 2015. 
^ jfsocc (16 January 2009). "Chandni Chowk to China (2009)". IMDb. Retrieved 9 March 2015. 
^ manojharisree (3 April 2009). "8 x 10 Tasveer (2009)". IMDb. Retrieved 9 March 2015. 
^ "Sansaar [Breakaway 2011]". Bohemia The Punjabi Rapper. Retrieved 9 March 2015. 
^ a b Nijher, Jaspreet (17 December 2014). "Punjabis who rocked 2014: Imran Khan, Honey Singh, Badshah, Dr Zeus". The Times of India. Retrieved 14 September 2015. 
^ "Rappers on the rise". The Times of India. 9 June 2015. Retrieved 14 September 2015. 
^ a b Jones, Raaj. "BADSHAH INTERVIEW @104.8 OYE FM BY RAAJ JONES". Youtube. Oye 104.8 FM. Retrieved 14 September 2015. 
^ a b Jones, Raaj. "IKKA SINGH RARE INTERVIEW (TALKING ABOUT HIS MUSIC & YO YO HONEY SINGH @104.8 OYE FM BY RAAJ JONES". Youtube. Oye 104.8 FM. Retrieved 14 September 2015. 
^ a b Jones, Raaj. "DEEP MONEY - RARE & MUST WATCH INTERVIEW @104.8 OYE FM BY RAAJ JONES". Youtube. Oye 104.8 FM. Retrieved 14 September 2015. 
^ "Punjab's bhangra-rapper comes to Bollywood". Mid-Day. 6 May 2012. Retrieved 14 September 2015. 
^ Srivastava, Priyanka (7 July 2012). "Delhi's Yo Yo croons up a storm in Bollywood". Daily Mail. Retrieved 14 September 2015. 
^ "Yo! Yo! Honey Singh tops the chart of trending videos of 2012". India Today. 18 December 2012. Retrieved 14 September 2015. 
^ Abraham, Letty (13 September 2015). "Rap music is making a comeback in Bollywood films". Mid Day. Retrieved 14 September 2015. 
^ Chakrabarti, Samrat (2015-12-13). "Hip Hop on the Central Line". The Hindu. ISSN 0971-751X. Retrieved 2017-09-14. 
^ "From Bambi Bains to Aman Sandhu: Punjabi musicians talk about their journey". The Times of India. 24 June 2015. Retrieved 14 September 2015. 
^ a b Batra, Ruhi (15 March 2015). "Honey Singh versus the bitter rest". The Times of India. Retrieved 14 September 2015. 
^ Cite error: The named reference bohabuse was invoked but never defined (see the help page).
^ "Imran Khan says "I don't even know who Honey Singh is". Satisfya". Youtube. Retrieved 14 September 2015. 
^ "Rap is rebel music worldwide, here it's 'pop rap': Badshah". Hindustan Times. 29 July 2015. Retrieved 14 September 2015. 
^ "Imran Khan: Rappers are destroying image of Bollywood music". The Times of India. 20 December 2014. Retrieved 14 September 2015. 
^ "a world of over 2,000 rappers rapping in Hindi, Bhojpuri and Punjabi etc., all confident of making it big, which still means Bollywood, as TV reality shows won't have them, has opened up". 
^ "Outstanding Results for Eastern Fare in Trinity Guildhall Exam". G News. November 18, 2009. 
^ bcoindia.co.in



Further reading[edit]

Day; Joshi, O. P. (1982). "The changing social structure of music in India". International Social Science Journal. 34 (94): 625. 
Day, Charles Russell (1891). The Music and Musical instruments of Southern India and the Deccan. Adam Charles Black, London. 
Clements, Sir Ernest (1913). Introduction to the Study of Indian Music. Longmans, Green & Co., London. 
Strangways, A.H. Fox (1914). The Music of Hindostan. Oxford at The Clarendon Press, London. 
Popley, Herbert Arthur (1921). The Music of India. Association Press, Calcutta. 
Killius, Rolf. Ritual Music and Hindu Rituals of Kerala. New Delhi: B.R. Rhythms, 2006. 
Moutal, Patrick (2012). Hindustāni Gata-s Compilation: Instrumental themes in north Indian classical music. Rouen: Patrick Moutal Publisher. ISBN 978-2-9541244-1-4. 
Moutal, Patrick (1991). A Comparative Study of Selected Hindustāni Rāga-s. New Delhi: Munshiram Manoharlal Publishers Pvt Ltd. ISBN 81-215-0526-7. 
Moutal, Patrick (1991). Hindustāni Rāga-s Index. New Delhi: Munshiram Manoharlal Publishers Pvt Ltd. 
Manuel, Peter. Thumri in Historical and Stylistic Perspectives. New Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1989. 
Manuel, Peter. Cassette Culture: Popular Music and Technology in North India. University of Chicago Press, 1993. ISBN 0-226-50401-8. 
Wade, Bonnie C. (1987). Music in India: the Classical Traditions. New Dehi, India: Manohar, 1987, t.p. 1994. xix, [1], 252 p., amply ill., including with examples in musical notation. ISBN 81-85054-25-8
Maycock, Robert and Hunt, Ken. "How to Listen - a Routemap of India". 2000. In Broughton, Simon and Ellingham, Mark with McConnachie, James and Duane, Orla (Ed.), World Music, Vol. 2: Latin & North America, Caribbean, India, Asia and Pacific, pp 63–69. Rough Guides Ltd, Penguin Books. ISBN 1-85828-636-0
Hunt, Ken. "Ragas and Riches". 2000. In Broughton, Simon and Ellingham, Mark with McConnachie, James and Duane, Orla (Ed.), World Music, Vol. 2: Latin & North America, Caribbean, India, Asia and Pacific, pp 70–78. Rough Guides Ltd, Penguin Books. ISBN 1-85828-636-0.
"Hindu music." (2011). Columbia Electronic Encyclopedia, 6th Edition, 1.
Emmie te Nijenhuis (1977), A History of Indian Literature: Musicological Literature, Otto Harrassowitz Verlag, ISBN 978-3447018319, OCLC 299648131
Natya Sastra Ancient Indian Theory and Practice of Music (translated by M. Ghosh)

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Music of India.



BBC Radio 3 Audio (45 minutes): The Nizamuddin shrine in Delhi. Accessed November 25, 2010.
BBC Radio 3 Audio (45 minutes): A mahfil Sufi gathering in Karachi. Accessed November 25, 2010.
BBC Radio 3 Audio (60 minutes): The Misra brothers perform Vedic chant. Accessed November 25, 2010.
BBC Radio 3 Audio (60 minutes): Rikhi Ram and sons, Nizami brothers. Accessed November 25, 2010.
BBC Radio 3 Audio (60 minutes): Rajasthan, Bombay and Trilok Gurtu. Accessed November 25, 2010.
BBC Radio 3 Audio (45 minutes): Gujurat - Praful Dave. Accessed November 25, 2010.
BBC Radio 3 Audio (45 minutes): Courtesan songs and music of the Bauls. Accessed November 25, 2010.
BBC Radio 3 Audio (60 minutes): Music from the Golden Temple of Amritsar. Accessed November 25, 2010.
India Music - The first ever Indian Music domain and web site registered. Accessed May 17, 2014.
(in English) (in French) Hindustani Rag Sangeet Online - A rare collection of more than 800 audio and video archives from 1902







v
t
e


 India topics








History







Overviews



Timeline
Years


Astronomy
Economics
Linguistics
Maritime
Mathematics
Metallurgy
Military
Postal
Science and technology





Pre-colonial



Stone Age
Indus Valley Civilization
Vedic period
Mahajanapadas
Mauryas
Middle kingdoms
Hoysala
Chola
Pala
Kakatiya
Delhi Sultanate
Vijayanagara
Mughals
Marathas
European trade








Colonial
Princely






East India Company
Plassey
1857 rebellion
British Raj
Railways
Economy
Army
Zamindari
Bengali renaissance
Political reforms
Princely states
Partition of Bengal
Independence movement
1943 famine
World War II
Partition





Republic



Integration
Non-Aligned Movement
Five-Year Plans
Sino-Indian War
Indo-Pakistani wars
Green Revolution
White Revolution
Naxal Insurgency
Smiling Buddha
Space programme
The Emergency
Indian Peace Keeping Force (IPKF)
Economic liberalisation
Pokhran-II
















Geography







Environment



Biosphere reserves
Climate

Climatic regions


Earthquakes
Ecoregions
Environmental issues
Fauna
Flora
Geology
National parks
Protected areas
Wildlife
sanctuaries





Landforms



Beaches
Desert
Extreme points
Glaciers
Islands
Lakes
Mountains
Plains

Indo-Gangetic
Eastern coastal
Western coastal


Rivers
Valleys
Volcanoes
Waterfalls





Regions



East
North
Northeast
South
West





Subdivisions



Autonomous administrative divisions
Cities
Districts
Municipalities
States and territories
















Politics







Government



Agencies
Energy policy
Foreign relations
Parliament
President
Vice President
Prime Minister
Union Council of Ministers
Civil Services
Cabinet Secretary
State governments





Law







Chief Justice
Constitution
District Courts
Fundamental rights, principles and duties
High Courts
Human rights
Supreme Court





Enforcement




Federal



Border Security Force (BSF)
Central Industrial Security Force (CISF)
Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF)
Indo-Tibetan Border Police (ITBP)
National Security Guard (NSG)
Railway Protection Force (RPF)
Sashastra Seema Bal (SSB)
Special Protection Group (SPG)





Intelligence



Bureau of Police Research and Development (BPR&D)
Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI)
Directorate of Revenue Intelligence (DRI)
Enforcement Directorate
Intelligence Bureau (IB)
Joint Intelligence Committee (JIC)
Narcotics Control Bureau (NCB)
National Investigation Agency (NIA)
Research and Analysis Wing (R&AW)











Military



Army
Navy
Air Force





Politics



Censorship
Elections
Nationalism
Parliament

Lok Sabha
Rajya Sabha


Political parties

INC
BJP
BSP
CPI
CPM
NCP


Reservations
Scandals
Scheduled groups
Secularism
















Economy







Companies



BSE SENSEX
CNX Nifty
Government-owned companies
List of companies





Governance



Ministry of Finance

Finance ministers


Ministry of Commerce and Industry

Commerce ministers


Finance Commission
Planning Commission
Economic Advisory Council
Central Statistical Office
Securities and Exchange Board of India
Enforcement Directorate
Foreign trade
Remittances
Taxation
Subsidies
Industrial licensing
Voluntary guidelines
NITI Aayog
Make in India
FDI in India





Currency



Indian rupee

History
Historical exchange rates data of the Indian rupee
Coinage


Reserve Bank of India

Governors


India Government Mint





Financial services



Banking

Banks


Insurance
Foreign exchange reserves
Bombay Stock Exchange
National Stock Exchange
Multi Commodity Exchange
Bullion
Black money





History



Economic Development
Economic liberalisation
Licence Raj
Green revolution
Government initiatives
Numbering system





People



Billionaires
Businesspeople
Demography
Income

Poverty


Labour law
Pensions

EPFO
NPS
PPF







States



Andhra Pradesh
Assam
Bihar
Goa
Gujarat
Haryana
Himachal Pradesh
Jammu and Kashmir
Karnataka
Kerala
Madhya Pradesh
Maharashtra
Manipur
Mizoram
Nagaland
Odisha
Punjab
Rajasthan
Tamil Nadu
Telangana
Uttarakhand
Uttar Pradesh
West Bengal





Sectors



Agriculture

Livestock
Fishing


Automotive
Defence
Construction
Education
Energy

Nuclear
Solar
Wind


Entertainment
Forestry
Gambling
Healthcare
Information technology
Media

Cinema
Television
Printing


Mining
Pharmaceuticals
Retail
Science and technology

Biotechnology


Telecommunications
Textiles
Tourism
Transport

Aviation

Civil


Ports
Rail


Utilities

Electricity
Water





















Society
Culture










Society



Caste system
Corruption
Demographics
Education

Universities in India
Medical colleges in India
Law colleges in India
Engineering colleges in India


Ethnic relations
Healthcare

Hospitals in India


Languages
Literacy
Poverty
Prisons
Religion
Socio-economic issues
Standard of living
Water supply and sanitation
Crime





Culture



Arts and entertainment
Architecture
Blogging
Cinema
Comics

Webcomics


Cuisine

wine


Dance
Dress
Folklore
Festivals
Literature
Media

television


Martial arts
Music
Public holidays
Sport


















v
t
e


Music of Asia



Sovereign states



Afghanistan
Armenia
Azerbaijan
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Bhutan
Brunei
Cambodia
China
Cyprus
East Timor (Timor-Leste)
Egypt
Georgia
India
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Israel
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
North Korea
South Korea
Kuwait
Kyrgyzstan
Laos
Lebanon
Malaysia
Maldives
Mongolia
Myanmar
Nepal
Oman
Pakistan
Philippines
Qatar
Russia
Saudi Arabia
Singapore
Sri Lanka
Syria
Tajikistan
Thailand
Turkey
Turkmenistan
United Arab Emirates
Uzbekistan
Vietnam
Yemen





States with
limited recognition



Abkhazia
Artsakh
Northern Cyprus
Palestine
South Ossetia
Taiwan





Dependencies and
other territories



British Indian Ocean Territory
Christmas Island
Cocos (Keeling) Islands
Hong Kong
Macau












v
t
e


Indian music



Main



Indian classical music
Hindustani classical music
Semi Classical music/Light classical music
Carnatic music
Indian folk music








Concepts



Shruti
Swara
Alankara
Rāga
Tāla
Prahar





Hindustani classical music




Types of compositions



Dhrupad
Dhamar
Khyal
Tarana
Thumri
Dadra
Qawwali
Ghazal





Thaats



Bilaval
Khamaj
Kafi
Asavari
Bhairav
Bhairavi
Todi
Purvi
Marwa
Kalyan





Principles of Hindustani music



Alap
Bandish
Gat





Types of Bandish



Sthaayi
Antara
Sanchaari
Aabhog





Variations of Bandish



Vilambit
Madhyalaya
Drut








Semi-classical music



Natya Sangeet
Baithak Gana





Indian folk music



Rabindra Sangeet
Bihu of Assam
Dandiya
Ganasangeet
Uttarakhandi Music
Lavani





Indian Light Music




Indian film music



Music of Bollywood





Indian play music



Natya Sangeet
Light songs in the play
Sugama Sangeetha





Region wise Indian Music



Bhojpuri
Rajasthani Music
Karnataka Sugam sangeet
Goa trance music
Odissi music
Andaman and Nicobar Islands
Andhra Pradesh
Arunachal Pradesh
Assam
Bihar
Chhattisgarh
Goa
Gujarat
Haryana
Himachal Pradesh
Kashmir, Jammu and Ladakh
Jharkhand
Karnataka
Kerala
Madhya Pradesh
Maharashtra
Manipur
Meghalaya
Mizoram
Nagaland
Odisha
Punjab
Rajasthan
Sikkim
Tamil Nadu
Tripura
Uttar Pradesh
Uttarakhand
West Bengal





Language wise Music



Marathi Music
Hindi music
Kannada music
Telagu music
Tamil music
Aasami music








Maharashtra music



Powada
Gan
Gavlan
Lavani
Kirtan












v
t
e


Rāgas as per Performance Time



Morning



Ahir Bhairav
Asavari
Bairagi Bhairav
Basant Mukhari
Bhairav
Bhankar
Bhatiyar
Bhoopal Todi
Bilaskhani Todi
Bilawal
Deshkar
Desi
Gunakri
Gurjari Todi
Hindol
Jaunpuri
Jogiya
Kalingada
Lalit
Nat Bhairav
Sohni
Todi
Vibhas





Afternoon



Bhimpalasi
Gaud Saarang
Madhuvanti
Madhyamad Sarang
Marwa
Multani
Patdeep
Poorvi
Shri
Shuddh Sarang





Evening



Bhoopali
Desh
Hansdhwani
Kamod
Khamaj
Maru Bihag
Pahadi
Puriya
Puriya Dhanashree
Sham Kalyan
Shankara
Shuddh Kalyan
Tilang
Yaman
Yaman Kalyan





Night



Adana
Bageshri
Bahar
Basant
Bhinna Shadja
Bihag
Chandani Kedar
Chandrakauns
Chhayanat
Darbari
Durga
Gorakh Kalyan
Hameer
Jaijaivanti
Jhinjhoti
Kalavati
Kedar
Kirwani
Malgunji
Malhar
Malkauns
Malkauns Pancham
Nand
Rageshri
Shivranjani
Tilak Kamod





Anytime



Bhairavi
Charukeshi
Dhani
Gara
JanaSammohini
Kafi
Mand
Piloo
Vrindavani Sarang





Season



Gaud Malhar
Miyan Malhar











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Music_of_India&oldid=818558470"					Categories: Indian musicHidden categories: Pages with reference errorsPages with broken reference namesUse Indian English from August 2017All Wikipedia articles written in Indian EnglishWikipedia introduction cleanup from April 2016All pages needing cleanupArticles covered by WikiProject Wikify from April 2016All articles covered by WikiProject WikifyArticles needing additional references from March 2016All articles needing additional referencesAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from February 2014Articles with unsourced statements from April 2013Articles with unsourced statements from November 2011Articles containing Bengali-language textArticles containing Assamese-language textArticles with unsourced statements from November 2014Articles with unsourced statements from February 2012Articles with French-language external links