For other uses, see National anthem (disambiguation).
"State anthem" redirects here. For the songs of U.S. states, see List of U.S. state songs.
"National Hymn" redirects here. For the hymn tune of that title, see God of Our Fathers.


Play media


Instrumental performance of the Russian national anthem at the 2010 Moscow Victory Day Parade in Moscow's Red Square, resplendent with a 21 gun salute




Part of a series on


Nationalism




Development


Anthem
Language
Music
Symbol
Treasure








Core values


Identity
Self-determination
Solidarity








Types


Banal
Civic
Cultural
Economic
Ethnic
Expansionist
Left-wing
New (Neo-)
Pan-
Post-
Queer
Religious
Romantic
Territorial
Trans
Ultra








Examples of nationalism


Alt-right
Black
White
Others








Organizations
List of nationalist organizations




Politics portal





v
t
e





A national anthem (also state anthem, national hymn, national song, etc.) is generally a patriotic musical composition that evokes and eulogizes the history, traditions, and struggles of its people, recognized either by a nation's government as the official national song, or by convention through use by the people. The majority of national anthems are marches or hymns in style. The countries of Latin America, Central Asia, and Europe tend towards more ornate and operatic pieces, while those in the Middle East, Oceania, Africa, and the Caribbean use a more simplistic fanfare.[1]



Contents


1 Languages
2 History
3 Usage
4 Creators
5 Modality
6 See also
7 References
8 External links



Languages[edit]
A national anthem is usually in the national or most common language of the country, whether de facto or official, there are notable exceptions. Most commonly, states with more than one national language may offer several versions of their anthem, for instance:

The "Swiss Psalm", the national anthem of Switzerland, has different lyrics for each of the country's four official languages (French, German, Italian and Romansh).
The national anthem of Canada, "O Canada", has official lyrics in both English and French which are not translations of each other, and is frequently sung with a mixture of stanzas, representing the country's bilingual nature. The song itself was originally written in French.
"The Soldier's Song", the national anthem of Ireland, was originally written and adopted in English, but an Irish translation, although never formally adopted, is nowadays almost always sung instead.
The current South African national anthem is unique in that five of the country's eleven official languages are used in the same anthem (the first stanza is divided between two languages, with each of the remaining three stanzas in a different language). It was created by combining two different songs together and then modifying the lyrics and adding new ones.
One of the two official national anthems of New Zealand, "God Defend New Zealand", is commonly now sung with the first verse in Māori ("Aotearoa") and the second in English ("God Defend New Zealand"). The tune is the same but the words are not a direct translation of each other.
"God Bless Fiji" has lyrics in English and Fijian which are not translations of each other. Although official, the Fijian version is rarely sung, and it is usually the English version that is performed at international sporting events.
Although Singapore has four official languages, with English being the lingua franca, the national anthem, "Majulah Singapura" is in Malay and by law can only be sung with its original Malay lyrics, despite the fact that Malay is a minority language in Singapore.
Pakistan's national anthem "Qaumi Taranah" is in Persian language which was the cultural and the official language of the Mughal Empire. Pakistanis can understand the national anthem as it is considered to be in Persianized Urdu. There is only one word "Ka" which is exclusively from the Urdu language.
There are several countries that do not have official lyrics to their national anthems. One of these is the "Marcha Real", the national anthem of Spain. Although it originally had lyrics those lyrics were discontinued after governmental changes in the early 1980s. In 2007 a national competition to write words was held, but no lyrics were chosen.[2] Other national anthems with no words include "Inno Nazionale della Repubblica", the national anthem of San Marino, and that of Kosovo, entitled "Europe".
The national anthem of India, "Jana Gana Mana", has lyrics in the Bengali language, despite the fact that India has 22 official languages, with Hindi being the first official language and the most widely spoken of them.
Despite the most common language in Wales being English, the Welsh regional anthem "Hen Wlad Fy Nhadau" is sung in the Welsh language.

History[edit]




Early version of the "Wilhelmus" as preserved in a manuscript of 1617 (Brussels, Royal Library, MS 15662, fol. 37v-38r)[3]


National anthems rose to prominence in Europe during the 19th century, but some originated much earlier. The presumed oldest national anthem belongs to the Netherlands and is called the "Wilhelmus". It was written between 1568 and 1572 during the Dutch Revolt and its current melody variant was composed shortly before 1626. It was a popular orangist march during the 17th century but it did not become the official Dutch national anthem until 1932.
The Japanese national anthem, "Kimigayo", has the oldest lyrics, which were taken from a Heian period (794–1185) poem, yet it was not set to music until 1880.[4]
In contrast, the music of "Qaumi Taranah", Pakistan's national anthem was composed in 1949, preceding its lyrics, which were written in 1952.[5][6]
The Philippine national anthem "Lupang Hinirang" was composed in 1898 as wordless incidental music for the ceremony declaring independence from the Spanish Empire. The Spanish poem "Filipinas" was written the following year to serve as the anthem's lyrics; the current Tagalog version dates to 1962.
"God Save the Queen", the national anthem of the United Kingdom and the royal anthem reserved for use in the presence of the Monarch in some Commonwealth realms, was first performed in 1619 under the title "God Save the King". It is not officially the national anthem of the UK, though it became such through custom and usage.
Spain's national anthem, the "Marcha Real" (The Royal March), written in 1761, was among the first to be adopted as such, in 1770. Denmark adopted the older of its two national anthems, "Kong Christian stod ved højen mast", in 1780; and "La Marseillaise", the French national anthem, was written in 1792 and adopted in 1795. Serbia became the first Eastern European nation to have a national anthem – "Rise up, Serbia!" – in 1804.[citation needed]
"Ee Mungu Nguvu Yetu", the national anthem of Kenya, is one of the first national anthems to be specifically commissioned. It was written by the Kenyan Anthem Commission in 1963 to serve as the anthem after independence from the United Kingdom.[7]
The Welsh regional anthem "Hen Wlad Fy Nhadau" was the first anthem to be sung at an international sporting event. The anthem was sung in a Rugby game against New Zealand in Llanelli. This was done to counter the famous New Zealand haka.
Usage[edit]




Schoolroom in Turkey with the words of the "İstiklâl Marşı"


National anthems are used in a wide array of contexts. Certain etiquette may be involved in the playing of a country's anthem. These usually involve military honours, standing up/rising, removing headwear etc. In diplomatic situations the rules may be very formal. There may also be royal anthems, presidential anthems, state anthems etc. for special occasions.
They are played on national holidays and festivals, and have also come to be closely connected with sporting events. Wales was the first country to adopt this, during a rugby game against New Zealand in 1905. Since then during sporting competitions, such as the Olympic Games, the national anthem of the gold medal winner is played at each medal ceremony; also played before games in many sports leagues, since being adopted in baseball during World War II.[8] When teams from two different nations play each other, the anthems of both nations are played, the host nation's anthem being played last.
In some countries, the national anthem is played to students each day at the start of school as an exercise in patriotism, such as in Tanzania.[9] In other countries the anthem may be played in a theatre before a play or in a cinema before a movie. Many radio and television stations have adopted this and play the national anthem when they sign on in the morning and again when they sign off at night. For instance, the national anthem of China is played before the broadcast of evening news on Hong Kong's local television stations including TVB Jade and ATV Home.[10] In Colombia, it is a law to play the National Anthem at 6:00 and 18:00 on every public radio and television station, while in Thailand, "Phleng Chat" is played at 08:00 and 18:00 nationwide (the Royal Anthem is used for sign-ons and closedowns instead).




The words of the Taiwanese national anthem written by Sun Yat-sen


The use of a national anthem outside of its country, however, is dependent on the international recognition of that country. For instance, Taiwan has not been recognized by the Olympics as a separate nation since 1979 and must compete as Chinese Taipei; its National Banner Song is used instead of its national anthem.[11] In Taiwan, the country's national anthem is sung before instead of during flag-rising and flag-lowering, followed by the National Banner Song during the actual flag-rising and flag-lowering.
In the United States some view the U.S. national anthem as representing respect for dead soldiers and policemen whereas others view it as honoring the country generally.[12]
Creators[edit]




Rouget de Lisle performing "La Marseillaise" for the first time


Most of the best-known national anthems were written by little-known or unknown composers such as Claude Joseph Rouget de Lisle, composer of "'La Marseillaise" and John Stafford Smith who wrote the tune for "The Anacreontic Song", which became the tune for the U.S. national anthem, "The Star-Spangled Banner". The author of "God Save the Queen", one of the oldest and well known anthems in the world, is unknown and disputed.
Very few countries have a national anthem written by a world-renowned composer. Exceptions include Germany, whose anthem "Das Lied der Deutschen" uses a melody written by Joseph Haydn, and Austria, whose national anthem "Land der Berge, Land am Strome" is sometimes credited to Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart. The "Anthem of the Armenian Soviet Socialist Republic" was composed by Aram Khachaturian. The music of the "Pontifical Anthem", anthem of the Vatican City, was composed in 1869 by Charles Gounod, for the golden jubilee of Pope Pius IX's priestly ordination.
The committee charged with choosing a national anthem for Malaysia at independence decided to invite selected composers of international repute to submit compositions for consideration, including Benjamin Britten, William Walton, Gian Carlo Menotti and Zubir Said, who later composed "Majulah Singapura", the national anthem of Singapore. None were deemed suitable.
A few anthems have words by Nobel laureates in literature. The first Asian laureate, Rabindranath Tagore, wrote the words and music of "Jana Gana Mana" and "Amar Shonar Bangla", later adopted as the national anthems of India and Bangladesh respectively. Bjørnstjerne Bjørnson wrote the lyrics for the Norwegian national anthem "Ja, vi elsker dette landet".
Other countries had their anthems composed by locally important people. This is the case for Colombia, whose anthem's lyrics were written by former president and poet Rafael Nuñez, who also wrote the country's first constitution.
Modality[edit]






This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (March 2015) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



While most national anthems are in the major scale, there are a number of notable exceptions. For example, these anthems are in the minor scale:

"Qaumi Tarana" (Pakistan)
"İstiklâl Marşı" (Turkey)
"Jana Gana Mana" (India)
"Mila Rodino" (Bulgaria)
"Nad Tatrou sa blýska"' (Slovakia)
"Hatikvah" (Israel)
"Surudi Milli" (Tajikistan)
"Azərbaycan marşı" (Azerbaijan)
"Mawtini" (Iraq)
"Deșteaptă-te, române!" (Romania)
"Meniñ Qazaqstanım" (Kazakhstan)
"Shche ne vmerla Ukraina" (Ukraine)
"Sayaun Thunga Phool Ka" (Nepal)
"Afghan National Anthem" (Afghanistan)

These anthems use pentatonic scales:

"Kimigayo" (Japan)
"Wodefit Gesgeshi, Widd Innat Ityopp'ya" (Ethiopia)
"Ertra, Ertra, Ertra" (Eritrea)
"Qolobaa Calankeed" (Somalia)
"Ee Mungu Nguvu Yetu" (Kenya)
"Druk tsendhen" (Bhutan)
"Nokor Reach" (Cambodia)

And these anthems have unique modes/modulations:

"Garaşsyz, Bitarap Türkmenistanyň Döwlet Gimni" (Turkmenistan) uses the Mixolydian mode
The "Afghan National Anthem" uses parallel key modulation[original research?]
"Forged from the Love of Liberty" (Trinidad and Tobago) starts in the minor key and then modulates to major key
"Humat ad-Diyar" (Syria) (Modulates repeatedly between major and minor)
"National Anthem of Mauritania" (Mauritania)

See also[edit]

List of national anthems
List of historical national anthems
List of anthems of non-sovereign countries, regions and territories
Royal anthem
Earth anthem
Honors music

References[edit]


^ Burton-Hill, Clemency. "World Cup 2014: What makes a great national anthem?". 
^ "Spain: Lost for words - The Economist". The Economist. Retrieved 20 March 2015. 
^ M. de Bruin, "Het Wilhelmus tijdens de Republiek", in: L.P. Grijp (ed.), Nationale hymnen. Het Wilhelmus en zijn buren. Volkskundig bulletin 24 (1998), p. 16-42, 199–200; esp. p. 28 n. 65.
^ Japan Policy Research Institute JPRI Working Paper No. 79. The Indian National anthem "Jana Gana Mana" was transcribed from a poem by Rabindranath Tagore. Published July 2001. Retrieved 7 July 2007
^ "Pakistan". Retrieved 20 March 2015. 
^ Nadeem F. Paracha. "Saghar Siddiqui: A man, his demons and his dog". Retrieved 20 March 2015. 
^ "Kenya". Retrieved 20 March 2015. 
^ "Musical traditions in sports". CNN. 
^ 17 June 2013 (2013-06-17). "Tanzania: Dons Fault Court Over Suspension of Students (Page 1 of 2)". allAfrica.com. Retrieved 2014-06-19. 
^ "Identity: Nationalism confronts a desire to be different". Financial Times. Retrieved 20 March 2015. 
^ Yomiuri Shimbun Foul cried over Taiwan anthem at hoop tourney. Published 6 August 2007
^ "How national anthem became essential part of sports". USA TODAY. Retrieved September 27, 2017. 


External links[edit]






This article's use of external links may not follow Wikipedia's policies or guidelines. Please improve this article by removing excessive or inappropriate external links, and converting useful links where appropriate into footnote references. (August 2014) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)






Wikimedia Commons has media related to National anthem.





Wikiquote has quotations related to: National anthems





Wikidata has the property: anthem (P85) (see uses)



NationalAnthems.me, national anthems of every country in the world (and historical national anthems) with streaming audio, lyrics, information and links
National Anthems (mp3 files)
Nationalanthems.info, lyrics and history of national anthems
Recordings of countries' anthems (mp3 files)
Recordings of countries' anthems around the world by the United States Navy Band







v
t
e


National anthems of the world (list)






Abkhazia
Acadia
Afghanistan
Åland Islands
Albania
Algeria
Alsace
American Samoa
Andalusia
Andorra
Angola
Anguilla
Antigua and Barbuda
Argentina
Armenia
Artsakh
Aruba
Australia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Bahrain
Bahamas
Bangladesh
Barbados
Basque Country
Belarus
Belgium
Belize
Benin
Bermuda
Bhutan
Bolivia
Bonaire
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Botswana
Brazil
Brittany
Brunei
Bulgaria
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cambodia
Cameroon
Canada
Cape Verde
Catalonia
Cayman Islands
Central African Republic
Chad
Chile
China
Colombia
Comoros
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Republic of the Congo
Cook Islands
Cornwall
Corsica
Costa Rica
Côte d'Ivoire
Croatia
Cuba
Curaçao
Cyprus
Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Djibouti
Dominica
Dominican Republic
East Timor
Ecuador
Egypt
El Salvador
England
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Estonia
Ethiopia
European Union
Falkland Islands
Faroe Islands
Federated States of Micronesia
Fiji
Finland
Flanders
France
French Guiana
French Polynesia
Gabon
Galicia
Gambia
Georgia
Germany
Ghana
Gibraltar
Greece
Greenland
Grenada
Guadeloupe
Guam
Guatemala
Guernsey
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Guyana
Haiti
Hawaii
Honduras
Hong Kong
Hungary
Iceland
India
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Ireland
Isle of Man
Israel
Italy
Jamaica
Japan
Jersey
Jordan
Republic of Karelia
Kazakhstan
Kenya
Kiribati
North Korea
South Korea
Kosovo
Kurdistan
Kuwait
Kyrgyzstan
Laos
Latvia
Lebanon
Lesotho
Liberia
Libya
Liechtenstein
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Macau
Macedonia
Madagascar
Malawi
Malaysia
Maldives
Mali
Malta
Marshall Islands
Martinique
Mauritania
Mauritius
Mexico
Moldova
Monaco
Mongolia
Montenegro
Montserrat
Morocco
Mozambique
Myanmar
Namibia
Nauru
Nepal
Netherlands
New Zealand
Nicaragua
Niger
Nigeria
Niue
Northern Ireland
Norway
Oman
Pakistan
Palau
Palestine
Panama
Papua New Guinea
Paraguay
Peru
Philippines
Pitcairn Islands
Poland
Portugal
Puerto Rico
Qatar
Réunion
Romania
Russia
Rwanda
Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic (Western Sahara)
Saba
Saint Kitts and Nevis
Saint Lucia
Saint Martin
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
Samoa
San Marino
São Tomé and Príncipe
Saudi Arabia
Scotland
Senegal
Serbia
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Singapore
Sint Maarten
Slovakia
Slovenia
Solomon Islands
Somalia
Somaliland
South Africa
South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands
South Ossetia
South Sudan
Spain
Sri Lanka
Sudan
Suriname
Svalbard
Swaziland
Sweden
Switzerland
Syria
Taiwan (Republic of China)
Tajikistan
Tanzania
Tatarstan
Thailand
Togo
Tonga
Trinidad and Tobago
Transnistria
Tunisia
Turkey
Turkmenistan
Tuva
Tuvalu
Uganda
Ukraine
United Arab Emirates
United Kingdom
United States
Uruguay
Uzbekistan
Vanuatu
Vatican City
Venezuela
Vietnam
British Virgin Islands
United States Virgin Islands
Wales
Wallis and Futuna
Yemen
Wallonia
Zambia
Zimbabwe












v
t
e


Nationalism



By type



Anationalist
Anti-nationalist
Banal
Blind
Business
Civic
Cyber-nationalist
Communist
Constitutional patriotism
Corporate
Cultural
Diasporic
Eco-nationalist
Economic
Ethnic
Expansionist
Homonationalist
Integral
Internationalist
Irredentist
Left-wing
Pan-nationalist
Plurinationalist
Postnationalist
National-anarchist
National communist
National Bolshevik
National conservatist
National liberalist
National mysticist
National Socialist
National syndicalist
Neo-nationalist
Queer
Racial
Religious
Resource
Romantic
Revanchist
Technological
Territorial
Transnationalist





By manifestation



Anthem
Colours
Flag
Flower
Epic
God
Identity
Language
Myth
Music
Sport
Symbol
Treasure






Portal







Authority control



NDL: 00959011











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=National_anthem&oldid=818125600"					Categories: National anthemsDutch inventionsHidden categories: Use dmy dates from July 2016All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from November 2012Articles needing additional references from March 2015All articles needing additional referencesAll articles that may contain original researchArticles that may contain original research from November 2014Wikipedia external links cleanup from August 2014Wikipedia spam cleanup from August 2014Articles containing video clips