"Assemblée Nationale" redirects here. For other uses, see Assemblée Nationale (disambiguation).
This article is about the modern assembly. For the 1789 revolutionary legislature, see National Assembly (French Revolution).






This article needs to be updated. Please update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information. (June 2017)





National Assembly
Assemblée nationale


15th legislature of the French Fifth Republic





Type


Type

Lower house of the French Parliament



History


Founded
4 October 1958


Leadership



President


François de Rugy, REM
Since 27 June 2017



Structure


Seats
577 seats (289 for a majority)






Political groups



     GDR (16)
     FI (17)
     NG (30)
     REM (312)
     MoDem (47)
     UAI (34)
     LR (98)
     NI (18)
     Vacant (5)




Elections



Voting system

Two-round system



Last election

11 and 18 June 2017


Meeting place





Palais Bourbon, Paris


Website


http://www.assemblee-nationale.fr/





France






This article is part of a series on the
politics and government of
France




Republic



Fifth Republic
Constitution

Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen










Executive


President (list)

Emmanuel Macron


Prime Minister (list)

Édouard Philippe


Government

Philippe II










Legislature


National Assembly

President: François de Rugy


Senate

President: Gérard Larcher


Congress of the French Parliament








Judiciary



Constitutional Council
Council of State
Court of Cassation
Court of Audit

Cour de Justice de la République










Administrative divisions



Regions
Departments









Elections



Presidential
Legislative
Municipal


Political parties









Foreign relations



Africa
Americas
Asia


France and the United Nations


Foreign alliances



Ministry of Foreign and
European Affairs










Related topics



Human rights
Political scandals







France portal





Other countries
Atlas








v
t
e





The National Assembly (French: Assemblée nationale; pronounced [a.sɑ̃.ble.na.sjɔˈnal]) is the lower house of the bicameral Parliament of France under the Fifth Republic. The upper house is the Senate (Sénat). The National Assembly's members are known as députés (French pronunciation: ​[depyˈte]; "delegate" or "envoy" in English; the word is an etymological cognate of the English word "deputy", usually "adjoint" in French).
There are 577 députés, each elected by a single-member constituency through a two-round voting system. Thus, 289 seats are required for a majority. The assembly is presided over by a president (currently François de Rugy), normally from the largest party represented, assisted by vice-presidents from across the represented political spectrum. The term of the National Assembly is five years; however, the President of the Republic may dissolve the Assembly (thereby calling for new elections) unless it has been dissolved in the preceding twelve months. This measure is becoming rarer since the 2000 referendum reduced the presidential term from seven to five years: a President usually has a majority elected in the Assembly two months after the presidential election, and it would be useless for him/her to dissolve it for those reasons.
Following a tradition started by the first National Assembly during the French Revolution, the "left-wing" parties sit to the left as seen from the president's seat, and the "right-wing" parties sit to the right, and the seating arrangement thus directly indicates the political spectrum as represented in the Assembly. The official seat of the National Assembly is the Palais Bourbon on the banks of the river Seine; the Assembly also uses other neighbouring buildings, including the Immeuble Chaban-Delmas on the rue de l'Université. It is guarded by Republican Guards.



Contents


1 Relationships with the executive
2 Elections
3 Conditions and privileges for members

3.1 Accumulation of mandates and minimum age


4 Current legislature

4.1 Parliamentary groups
4.2 Bureau of the National Assembly
4.3 Presidencies of committees


5 Members
6 See also
7 Notes and references
8 External links



Relationships with the executive[edit]




Jacques Chaban-Delmas was three times President of the Assembly between 1958 and 1988.


The Constitution of the French Fifth Republic greatly increased the power of the executive at the expense of Parliament, compared to previous constitutions (Third and Fourth Republics).[1]
The President of the Republic can decide to dissolve the National Assembly and call for new legislative elections. This is meant as a way to resolve stalemates where the Assembly cannot decide on a clear political direction. This possibility is seldom exercised. The last dissolution was by Jacques Chirac in 1997, following from the lack of popularity of prime minister Alain Juppé; however, the plan backfired, and the newly elected majority was opposed to Chirac.
The National Assembly can overthrow the executive government (that is, the Prime Minister and other ministers) by a vote of no confidence (motion de censure). For this reason, the prime minister and his cabinet are necessarily from the dominant party or coalition in the assembly. In the case of a president and assembly from opposing parties, this leads to the situation known as cohabitation; this situation, which has occurred three times (twice under Mitterrand, once under Chirac), is likely to be rarer now that presidential and assembly terms are the same length.
While motions de censure are periodically proposed by the opposition following government actions that it deems highly inappropriate, they are purely rhetorical; party discipline ensures that, throughout a parliamentary term, the government is never overthrown by the Assembly.[2] Since the beginning of the Fifth Republic, there has only been one single successful motion de censure, in 1962 in hostility to the referendum on the method of election of the President,[3] and president Charles de Gaulle dissolved the Assembly within a few days.[4]
The Government (the Prime Minister and the Minister of relationships with Parliament) used to set the priorities of the agenda for the Assembly's sessions, except for a single day each month. In practice, given the number of priority items, it meant that the schedule of the Assembly was almost entirely set by the executive; bills generally only have a chance to be examined if proposed or supported by the executive. This, however, was amended on 23 July 2008. Under the amended constitution, the Government sets the priorities for two weeks in a month. Another week is designated for the Assembly's "control" prerogatives (consisting mainly of verbal questions addressed to the government). And the fourth one is set by the Assembly. Also, one day per month is set by a "minority" (group supporting the government but which is not the biggest group) or "opposition" (group having officially declared it did not support the government) group.
Members of the assembly can ask written or oral questions to ministers. The Wednesday afternoon 3 p.m. session of "questions to the Government" is broadcast live on television. Like Prime Minister's Questions in Britain, it is largely a show for the viewers, with members of the majority asking flattering questions, while the opposition tries to embarrass the government.[5]
Elections[edit]




The Palais Bourbon, where the National Assembly meets.


Since 1988, the 577 deputies are elected by direct universal suffrage with a two-round system by constituency, for a five-year mandate, subject to dissolution. The constituencies each have approximately 100,000 inhabitants. The electoral law of 1986 specifies that variations of population between constituencies should not, in any case, lead to a constituency exceeding more than 20% the average population of the constituencies of the département.[6] However, districts were not redrawn between 1982 and 2009. As a result of population movements over that period, there were inequalities between the less populous rural districts and the urban districts. For example, the deputy for the most populous constituency, in the department of Val-d'Oise, represented 188,000 voters, while the deputy for the least populous constituency, in the department of Lozère, represented only 34,000.[7] The constituencies were redrawn in 2009,[8] but this redistribution was controversial.[9] Among other controversial measures, it created eleven constituencies and seats for French residents overseas, albeit without increasing the overall number of seats beyond 577.[10][11]




Ceiling paintings in the Library of the Assemblée nationale in the Palais Bourbon, on a series of cupolas and pendentives, are by Eugène Delacroix.


To be elected in the first round of voting, a candidate must obtain at least 50% of the votes cast, with a turn-out of at least 25% of the registered voters on the electoral rolls. If no candidate is elected in the first round, those who poll in excess of 12.5% of the registered voters in the first-round vote are entered in the second round of voting. If no candidate comply such conditions, the two highest-placing candidates advance to second round. In the second round, the candidate who receives the most votes is elected. Each candidate is enrolled along with a substitute, who takes the candidate's place in the event of inability to represent the constituency, when the deputy becomes minister for example.
The organic law of 10 July 1985 established a system of party-list proportional representation within the framework of the département. It was necessary within this framework to obtain at least 5% of the vote to elect an official. However, the legislative election of 1986, carried out under this system, gave France a new majority which returned the National Assembly to the plurality voting system described above.
Of the 577 elected deputies, 539 represent Metropolitan France, 27 represent the overseas departments and overseas collectivities, and 11 represent French residents overseas.[12]
Conditions and privileges for members[edit]




Députés wear tricolor sashes on official occasions outside the Assembly, or on public marches; here Martine Billard (then Greens, currently Left Party)


Assembly members receive a salary of €7,043.69 per month. There is also the "compensation representing official expenses" ("IRFM" – indemnité représentative de frais de mandat) of €5,867.39 per month to pay costs related to the office, and finally a total of €8,949 per month to pay up to five employees. They also have an office in the Assembly, various advantages in terms of transport and communications, social security, a pension fund and unemployment insurance specific. Under Article 26 of the Constitution, deputies, like Senators, are protected by parliamentary immunity. In the case of an accumulation of mandates, a member cannot receive a wage of more than €9,779.11.
Accumulation of mandates and minimum age[edit]
See also: Cumul des mandats
The position of member of the National Assembly is incompatible with that of any other elected member (Senator or, since 2000, Member of European Parliament), or with some administrative functions (members of the Constitutional Council of France and senior officials such as prefects, magistrates or officers who are ineligible for Department where they are stationed). Members may not have more than one local mandate (in a municipal, intercommunal, general or regional council) in addition to their current mandate. Since the 2017 general election, deputies cannot hold an executive position in any local government (mayor, president...). However, they can hold a simple mandate of local councillor. As of July 2017, 58% of the members hold a such seat. Since 1958, the mandate is also incompatible with a ministerial function. Upon appointment to the Government, the elected member has one month to choose between the mandate and the office. If he or she chooses the second option, then they are replaced by their substitute. One month after the end of his cabinet position, the deputy return to his seat in the Assembly.
To be eligible to be elected to the National Assembly, one must be at least 23 years old, of French citizenship, and not subject to a sentence of deprivation of civil rights or to personal bankruptcy.
Current legislature[edit]
Main article: 15th legislature of the French Fifth Republic
See also: French legislative election, 2017
Parliamentary groups[edit]

Composition of the National Assembly as of 27 December 2017[13]

Parliamentary group
Members
Related
Total
President



REM
La République En Marche
310
2
312
Richard Ferrand



LR
The Republicans
94
4
98
Christian Jacob



MoDem
Democratic Movement and affiliated
41
6
47
Marc Fesneau



UAI
UDI, Agir and Independents
33
1
34
Franck Riester, Jean-Christophe Lagarde



NG
New Left
27
3
30
Olivier Faure



FI
La France Insoumise
17
0
17
Jean-Luc Mélenchon



GDR
Democratic and Republican Left
16
0
16
André Chassaigne



NI
Non-inscrits
–
–
18
–



Vacant, pending Val-d'Oise, Territoire de Belfort, French Guiana, Haute-Garonne, Loiret by-elections
5
–


Bureau of the National Assembly[edit]

Composition of the bureau[14]

Post
Name
Constituency
Group


Vice president in charge of
international relations

Carole Bureau-Bonnard
Oise's 6th
REM


Vice president in charge of
representatives of interest groups and study groups

Hugues Renson
Paris's 13th
REM


Vice president in charge of
communication and the press

Danielle Brulebois
Jura's 1st
REM


Vice president in charge of
artistic and cultural heritage of the National Assembly

Sacha Houlié
Vienne's 2nd
REM


Vice president in charge of
application of the deputy's statute

Cendra Motin
Isère's 6th
REM


Vice president in charge of
the admissibility of proposals of law

Sylvain Waserman
Bas-Rhin's 2nd
MoDem


Quaestor

Florian Bachelier
Ille-et-Vilaine's 8th
REM


Quaestor

Laurianne Rossi
Hauts-de-Seine's 11th
REM


Quaestor

Thierry Solère
Hauts-de-Seine's 9th
REM


Secretary

Vacant


Secretary

Ramlati Ali
Mayotte's 1st
REM


Secretary

Clémentine Autain
Seine-Saint-Denis's 11th
FI


Secretary

Luc Carvounas
Val-de-Marne's 9th
NG


Secretary

Lionel Causse
Landes's 2nd
REM


Secretary

Stéphanie Do
Seine-et-Marne's 10th
REM


Secretary

Laurence Dumont
Calvados's 2nd
NG


Secretary

Marie Guévenoux
Essonne's 9th
REM


Secretary

Annaïg Le Meur
Finistère's 1st
REM


Secretary

Sophie Mette
Gironde's 9th
MoDem


Secretary

Gabriel Serville
French Guiana's 1st
GDR


Secretary

Guillaume Vuilletet
Val-d'Oise's 2nd
REM


Presidencies of committees[edit]

Presidencies of committees[14]

Standing committees
President
Group


Cultural and Education Affairs Committee

Bruno Studer
REM


Economic Affairs Committee

Roland Lescure
REM


Foreign Affairs Committee

Marielle de Sarnez
MoDem


Social Affairs Committee

Brigitte Bourguignon
REM


National Defence and Armed Forces Committee

Jean-Jacques Bridey
REM


Sustainable Development, Spatial and Regional Planning Committee

Barbara Pompili
REM


Finance, General Economy and Budgetary Monitoring Committee

Éric Woerth
LR


Constitutional Acts, Legislation and General Administration Committee

Yaël Braun-Pivet
REM


Other committee



European Affairs Committee

Sabine Thillaye
REM


Members[edit]

List of deputies of the 11th National Assembly of France
List of deputies of the 12th National Assembly of France
List of deputies of the 13th National Assembly of France
List of deputies of the 14th National Assembly of France
List of deputies of the 15th National Assembly of France

See also[edit]

Congress of the French Parliament
Chamber of Deputies (France)
French Parliament
Senate (France)
Politics of France

Notes and references[edit]


^ William G. Andrews, The Constitutional Prescription of Parliamentary Procedures in Gaullist France, Legislative Studies Quarterly, Vol. 3, No. 3 (Aug. 1978), pp. 465–506
^ La motion de censure : véritable moyen de contrôle ?
^ Proceedings of the National Assembly, 4 October 1962, second sitting; vote tally on p. 3268. p. 38 in the PDF file
^ Decree of 9 October 1962
^ Anne-Laure Nicot, La démocratie en questions. L’usage stratégique de démocratie et de ses dérivés dans les questions au gouvernement de la 11e Législature, Mots. Les langages du politique, E.N.S. Editions, n° 83 2007/1, pp. 9 à 21
^ Stéphane Mandard, " En 2005, un rapport préconisait le remodelage des circonscriptions avant les législatives de 2007 ", Le Monde, 7 June 2007.
^ Ibid.
^ Ordonnance n° 2009-935 du 29 juillet 2009 portant répartition des sièges et délimitation des circonscriptions pour l'élection des députés; see the opinion of the advisory commission on redistricting.
^ Pierre Salvere, La révision des circonscriptions électorales : un échec démocratique annoncé, Fondation Terra Nova, 9 July 2009
^ "Elections 2012 – Votez à l’étranger" Archived 7 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine., French Ministry of Foreign and European Affairs
^ "Redécoupage électoral – 11 députés pour les Français de l'étranger" Archived 30 September 2011 at the Wayback Machine., Le Petit Journal, 22 October 2009
^ (in French) Article LO119 of the Electoral Code
^ "Effectif des groupes politiques". Assemblée nationale. Retrieved 27 December 2017. 
^ a b "Notices et portraits" (PDF). Assemblée nationale. Retrieved 29 June 2017. 


External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to National Assembly of France.



www.assemblee-nationale.fr/ – official site (French)
www.assemblee-nationale.fr/english/ – official site (English)







v
t
e


France topics



History




Periods



Timeline
Prehistory
Celtic Gaul
Roman Gaul
Kingdom of the Visigoths
Francia

West Francia


Middle Ages
Early modern era
Long nineteenth century

Revolutionary era
Napoleonic era
Belle Époque


Twentieth century





Regimes



Absolute monarchy

Ancien Régime


First Republic
First Empire
Constitutional monarchy

Bourbon Restoration
July Monarchy


Second Republic
Second Empire
Third Republic
France during the Second World War

Free France
Vichy France
Provisional Republic


Fourth Republic
Fifth Republic








Geography







Administrative divisions
Cities
Climate
Extreme points
Islands
Lakes
Mountains
Rivers








Politics







Constitution
Elections

presidential


Foreign relations
Government
Human rights

Intersex
LGBT


Judiciary
Law

enforcement


Military
Parliament
Political parties








Economy







Agriculture
Banking

Central bank


Economic history
Energy
Euro
Exports
Franc (former currency)
French subdivisions by GDP
Stock exchange
Taxation
Telecommunications
Tourism
Trade unions
Transport








Society







Crime
Demographics
Education
Health care
People
Poverty
Religion
Social class
Welfare





Culture



Architecture
Art
Cinema (comedy)
Cuisine
Fashion
Gardens
Language
Literature
Media
Music
Philosophy
Public holidays
Sport
Symbols
Theatre












Outline




Book
Category
Portal
WikiProject













v
t
e


Lower houses of national legislatures



Federal



Argentina
Australia
Austria
Belgium
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Brazil
Canada
Ethiopia
Germany
India
Malaysia
Mexico
Nepal
Nigeria
Pakistan
Russia
Somalia
South Sudan
Sudan
Switzerland
United States





Unitary



Afghanistan
Algeria
Antigua and Barbuda
Bahamas
Bahrain
Barbados
Belarus
Belize
Bhutan
Bolivia
Burundi
Cambodia
Cameroon
Central African Republic
Chile
Colombia
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Republic of the Congo
Czech Republic
Dominican Republic
Equatorial Guinea
France
Gabon
Grenada
Haiti
Indonesia
Ireland
Italy
Ivory Coast
Jamaica
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Kenya
Lesotho
Liberia
Madagascar
Mauritania
Morocco
Myanmar
Namibia
Netherlands
New Zealand
Oman
Palau
Paraguay
Philippines
Poland
Romania
Rwanda
Saint Lucia
Slovenia
South Africa
Spain
Swaziland
Tajikistan
Trinidad and Tobago
United Kingdom
Uruguay
Uzbekistan
Zimbabwe





Dependent and
other territories



American Samoa
Bermuda
Isle of Man
Northern Mariana Islands
Puerto Rico





Non-UN states



Somaliland





Related



Bicameralism
Unicameralism
List of legislatures by country








National upper houses
National bicameral legislatures
National unicameral legislatures








France portal
French politics portal





Authority control



ISNI: 0000 0001 2165 5389
GND: 35991-9











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=National_Assembly_(France)&oldid=818548833"					Categories: National lower housesGovernment of FranceNational Assembly (France)Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksArticles with French-language external linksUse dmy dates from May 2017Wikipedia articles in need of updating from June 2017All Wikipedia articles in need of updatingArticles containing French-language textWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiers