In the United States, the National Register of Historic Places classifies its listings by various types of architecture. Listed properties often are given one or more of 40 standard architectural style classifications that appear in the National Register Information System (NRIS) database. Other properties are given a custom architectural description with "vernacular" or other qualifiers, and others have no style classification. Many National Register-listed properties do not fit into the several categories listed here, or they fit into more specialized subcategories.[1]



Contents


1 Complete list of architectural style codes
2 Selected NRIS styles

2.1 Federal architecture

2.1.1 Greek Revival architecture
2.1.2 Palladian Revival architecture


2.2 Late Victorian architecture

2.2.1 Queen Anne


2.3 Late 19th and 20th Century Revivals
2.4 Mission/Spanish Revival
2.5 Pueblo Revival
2.6 Exotic Revival architecture

2.6.1 Mayan Revival


2.7 Postmedieval English
2.8 Late 19th and Early 20th Century American Movements
2.9 Bungalow/Craftsman
2.10 Early Commercial

2.10.1 Plains Commercial




3 See also
4 References



Complete list of architectural style codes[edit]
The complete list of the 40 architectural style codes in the National Register Information System—NRIS follows:[1]
Obs — ARSTYLCD — ARSTYL

1 — 01 NO STYLE LISTED
2 — 10 COLONIAL
3 — 11 GEORGIAN
4 — 20 EARLY REPUBLIC
5 — 21 FEDERAL
6 — 30 MID 19TH CENTURY REVIVAL
7 — 31 GREEK REVIVAL
8 — 32 GOTHIC REVIVAL
9 — 33 ITALIAN VILLA
10 — 34 EXOTIC REVIVAL
11 — 40 LATE VICTORIAN
12 — 41 GOTHIC
13 — 42 ITALIANATE
14 — 43 SECOND EMPIRE
15 — 44 STICK/EASTLAKE
16 — 45 QUEEN ANNE
17 — 46 SHINGLE STYLE
18 — 47 ROMANESQUE
19 — 48 RENAISSANCE
20 — 49 OCTAGON MODE
21 — 50 LATE 19TH AND 20TH CENTURY REVIVALS
22 — 51 COLONIAL REVIVAL
23 — 52 CLASSICAL REVIVAL
24 — 53 TUDOR REVIVAL
25 — 54 LATE GOTHIC REVIVAL
26 — 55 MISSION/SPANISH REVIVAL
27 — 56 BEAUX ARTS
28 — 57 PUEBLO
29 — 60 LATE 19TH AND EARLY 20TH CENTURY AMERICAN MOVEMENTS
30 — 61 PRAIRIE SCHOOL
31 — 62 EARLY COMMERCIAL
32 — 63 CHICAGO
33 — 64 SKYSCRAPER
34 — 65 BUNGALOW/CRAFTSMAN
35 — 70 MODERN MOVEMENT
36 — 71 MODERNE
37 — 72 INTERNATIONAL STYLE
38 — 73 ART DECO
39 — 80 OTHER
40 — 90 MIXED (MORE THAN 2 STYLES FROM DIFFERENT PERIODS)

Selected NRIS styles[edit]
Some selected National Register Information System (NRIS) styles, with examples, include:
Federal architecture[edit]
For examples, see Category: Federal architecture.
Federal architecture was the classicizing architecture style built in the newly founded United States between c. 1780 and 1830. Examples include: the Old Town Hall in Massachusetts, and Plumb House in Virginia.




This section needs expansion. You can help by adding to it. (May 2013)







Facade pediment of Simsbury Townhouse, Connecticut.






Greek Revival facade of Melrose plantation house, Mississippi.


Greek Revival architecture[edit]
For examples, see Category: Greek Revival architecture in the United States.
Greek Revival architecture is a Neoclassical movement of the late 18th and early 19th centuries in Europe. It emerged in the U.S. following the War of 1812 and while a revolutionary war in Greece attracted America's interest. Greek Revival architecture was popularized by Minard Lafever's pattern books: The Young Builders' General Instructor in 1829, the Modern Builders' Guide in 1833, The Beauties of Modern Architecture in 1835, and The Architectural Instructor in 1850.
Greek Revival in the U.S. includes vernacular versions such as the 1839 Simsbury Townhouse built by an unknown craftsman [2] and the Dicksonia Plantation, and high-style versions such as the Second Bank of the United States, Philadelphia.

Plantation houses

For examples (Southern states' subcategories), see Category: Greek Revival houses in the United States.
Many plantation houses in the Southern United States were built in Greek Revival variations, including Millford Plantation, Melrose, Gaineswood, and Annandale Plantation
Palladian Revival architecture[edit]
For examples, see Category: Palladian Revival architecture in the United States.
Examples of the American revival of classical Palladian architecture include: The Rotunda by Thomas Jefferson at the University of Virginia, and the Hammond-Harwood House in Annapolis, Maryland.




This section needs expansion. You can help by adding to it. (September 2011)







Late Victorian Carson Mansion in Eureka, California.


Late Victorian architecture[edit]
For examples, see Category: Victorian architecture in the United States.
Late Victorian architecture is widely distributed on the register's listings, for many building types in every state. The Carpenter Gothic style was popular for Late Victorian wooden churches.




This section needs expansion. You can help by adding to it. (May 2013)



Queen Anne[edit]
For examples, see Category: Queen Anne architecture in the United States.
The Queen Anne style was popular in later American Victorian architecture, after the earlier Italianate style, and is frequent on NRHP residential listings. The Shingle Style is an American variation of Queen Anne.
Late 19th and 20th Century Revivals[edit]
For examples, see Category: Revival architecture in the United States.
A grouping of historicist architecture Revival styles, with the title Late 19th and 20th Century Revivals, has been applied by the NRHP for many listings. There are numerous listed buildings designed in an amalgam of several to many revival styles that defy a singular or simpler classification title.




Santa Barbara station, in Mission Revival style.






Santa Fe Depot (San Diego), in Spanish Colonial Revival style.


Mission/Spanish Revival[edit]
For examples, see Category: Mission Revival architecture in the United States.
For examples, see Category: Spanish Colonial Revival architecture in the United States.
Mission/Spanish Revival is an amalgam of two distinct styles popular in different but adjacent eras: the primarily late 19th century Mission Revival Style architecture and early 20th century (and later) Spanish Colonial Revival architecture. The combined term, and/or the individual terms, are often used in the style classifications of NRHP listed buildings.[1]
Pueblo Revival[edit]
For examples, see Pueblo Revival architecture.
Pueblo Revival Style architecture is a revival style based on traditional Native American Pueblo architecture of adobe dwellings–communities in the Pueblo culture, primarily in present-day New Mexico, northeastern Arizona, and southwestern Colorado.
Examples include the Institute of American Indian Arts, La Fonda on the Plaza, and the Mabel Dodge Luhan House in New Mexico, and the Painted Desert Inn in Arizona.




This section needs expansion. You can help by adding to it. (May 2013)



Exotic Revival architecture[edit]
Exotic Revival architecture is another style that may reflect a mix of Moorish Revival architecture, Egyptian Revival architecture, and other influences. Just a few of many National Register-listed places identified with this style are El Zaribah Shrine Auditorium, Odd Fellows Rest Cemetery, Fort Smith Masonic Temple, and Algeria Shrine Temple.[1]
Examples in California include Grauman's Egyptian Theatre in Hollywood, and the Rosicrucian Egyptian Museum in San Jose.




This section needs expansion. You can help by adding to it. (May 2013)



Mayan Revival[edit]
For examples, see Category: Mayan Revival architecture.
The Mayan Revival architecture style frequently blends Maya architectural and artistic motifs with those of other Mesoamerican cultures, particularly of Aztec architecture.
Examples include: the Mayan Theater in Downtown Los Angeles; the Hollyhock House by Frank Lloyd Wright in East Hollywood; and the Aztec Hotel on historic U.S. Route 66 in Southern California.
Postmedieval English[edit]
"Postmedieval English" architecture is a style term used for a number of NRHP listings, including William Ward Jr. House in Middlefield, Connecticut.




This section needs expansion. You can help by adding to it. (September 2011)



Late 19th and Early 20th Century American Movements[edit]
For examples, see Category: Late 19th and Early 20th Century American Movements architecture.
"Late 19th and Early 20th Century American Movements" are revival styles and other American architectural movements, that originated during increasing development in the United States during the Second Industrial Revolution of the late 19th century, and continuing development and urbanization during the early 20th century before World War I.

Arts

For more details on this topic, see Category: American art movements.
'American Movements' is a broader design and art movement phrase used in the visual arts of the United States. It refers to U.S. centric art and design movements that originated during any century of the country's history.




Gamble House, an American Craftsman style bungalow, California.






Richard Nixon's birthplace bungalow.


Bungalow/Craftsman[edit]
For examples, see Category: American Craftsman architecture in the United States.
For examples, see Category: Bungalow architecture in the United States.
Bungalow/Craftsman is a term commonly appearing in NRHP listings, which reflects American Craftsman architecture and Bungalow architecture styles.
American Craftsman is often a term used for the Arts and Crafts movement works and philosophy expressed in the United States. It can include domestic architecture, interior design, landscape design, applied arts, decorative arts, and the fine arts. Many Craftsman and other style influenced California bungalow houses were popular and built nationwide into the 1930s.
Very large and well detailed custom residences are described as ultimate bungalows, such as the works by Greene and Greene in California. Examples include: the Gamble House in Pasadena, and the Thorsen House in Berkeley. Smaller American Craftsman homes include: Batchelder House and Holmes-Shannon House. Bungalow examples include the Birthplace of Richard Nixon and the Lanterman House. Bungalow courts include: Palmetto Court and Gartz Court.
Early Commercial[edit]
For examples, see Category: Buildings designated early commercial in the National Register of Historic Places.
There are hundreds of National Register-listed buildings of the Early Commercial architecture type.[1]
The style may be a subtype/predecessor of the full Chicago School style architecture.[citation needed]




This section needs expansion. You can help by adding to it. (September 2011)



Plains Commercial[edit]

Plains Commercial architecture and Plains Commercial Style is another variant of the Chicago School style.





This section needs expansion. You can help by adding to it. (September 2011)



See also[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Architecture of the United States by style.





Wikimedia Commons has media related to Buildings and structures on the National Register of Historic Places.



National Register of Historic Places property types
Index: American architectural styles

References[edit]



^ a b c d e National Park Service (2009-03-13). "National Register Information System". National Register of Historic Places. National Park Service. 
^ Jan Cunningham (July 15, 1992). "National Register of Historic Places Registration: Simsbury Townhouse / Boy Scout Hall" (PDF). National Park Service.  and Accompanying 5 photos, exterior and interior, from 1992 (see captions page 7 of text document)









v
t
e


U.S. National Register of Historic Places



Topics



Architectural style categories
Contributing property
Historic district
History of the National Register of Historic Places
Keeper of the Register
National Park Service
Property types





Lists by states



Alabama
Alaska
Arizona
Arkansas
California
Colorado
Connecticut
Delaware
Florida
Georgia
Hawaii
Idaho
Illinois
Indiana
Iowa
Kansas
Kentucky
Louisiana
Maine
Maryland
Massachusetts
Michigan
Minnesota
Mississippi
Missouri
Montana
Nebraska
Nevada
New Hampshire
New Jersey
New Mexico
New York
North Carolina
North Dakota
Ohio
Oklahoma
Oregon
Pennsylvania
Rhode Island
South Carolina
South Dakota
Tennessee
Texas
Utah
Vermont
Virginia
Washington
West Virginia
Wisconsin
Wyoming





Lists by insular areas



American Samoa
Guam
Minor Outlying Islands
Northern Mariana Islands
Puerto Rico
Virgin Islands





Lists by associated states



Federated States of Micronesia
Marshall Islands
Palau





Other areas



District of Columbia
Morocco








 Portal











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=National_Register_of_Historic_Places_architectural_style_categories&oldid=809743251"					Categories: National Register of Historic Places architecture categoriesAmerican architectural stylesArchitecture listsLists of buildings and structures in the United StatesNational Register of Historic PlacesUnited States history-related listsHidden categories: Articles to be expanded from May 2013All articles to be expandedArticles using small message boxesArticles to be expanded from September 2011All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from December 2010Commons category without a link on Wikidata