Not to be confused with Network Rail.
For the Australian railway operator of the same name, see National Rail Corporation.

National Rail




Product type
Public transport


Owner
Rail Delivery Group


Country
United Kingdom


Introduced
1999


Related brands



National Rail Enquiries
British Rail





Markets
United Kingdom


Website
www.nationalrail.co.uk


National Rail (NR) in the United Kingdom is the trading name licensed for use by the Rail Delivery Group, an unincorporated association whose membership consists of the passenger train operating companies (TOCs) of the island of Great Britain as well as the Isle of Wight that run the passenger services previously provided by the British Railways Board, from 1965 using the brand name British Rail. Northern Ireland, which is linked to the Republic of Ireland, has a different system. National Rail generally does not include services that do not have a BR history; this distinction is important because National Rail services share a ticketing structure and inter-availability that do not necessarily extend to other services. The name and the accompanying double arrow symbol are trademarks of the Secretary of State for Transport.[1]
The National Rail (NR) logo was introduced by ATOC in 1999, and was used on the Great Britain public timetable for the first time in the edition valid from 26 September in that year. Rules for its use are set out in the Corporate Identity Style Guidelines published by the Rail Delivery Group, available on its website.[2] "In 1964 the Design Research Unit—Britain’s first multi-disciplinary design agency founded in 1943 by Misha Black, Milner Gray and Herbert Read—was commissioned to breathe new life into the nation’s neglected railway industry".[3] The NR title is sometimes described as a "brand".[4] As it was used by British Rail, the single operator before franchising, its use also maintains continuity and public familiarity; and it avoids the need to replace signage.



Contents


1 National Rail and Network Rail
2 Train operating companies (TOCs)
3 Design and marketing
4 Other passenger rail operators in Great Britain
5 Ticketing
6 Timetables
7 National Rail Enquiries
8 See also
9 References
10 External links



National Rail and Network Rail[edit]




Young Person's railcard rail ticket from Wellington to Shrewsbury






Child return ticket from East Kilbride to Glasgow


National Rail should not be confused with Network Rail. National Rail is a title used to promote passenger railway services, and providing some harmonisation for passengers (e.g. tickets to all London Terminals), while Network Rail is the organisation owning and managing most of the fixed assets (tracks, signals etc.) of the railway network.
The two networks are generally coincident where passenger services are run. Most major Network Rail lines carry freight traffic and some lines are freight only. There are some scheduled passenger services on their own privately managed, non-Network Rail lines, for example Heathrow Express which also partly runs on Network Rail track and the London Underground also overlaps with Network Rail in places.
Train operating companies (TOCs)[edit]
Main article: List of companies operating trains in the United Kingdom
About twenty privately owned train operating companies, each franchised for a defined term by government, operate passenger trains on the main rail network in Great Britain. The Rail Delivery Group is the trade association representing the TOCs and provides core services, including the provision of the National Rail Enquiries service. It also runs Rail Settlement Plan, which allocates ticket revenue to the various TOCs, and Rail Staff Travel, which manages travel facilities for railway staff. It does not compile the national timetable, which is the joint responsibility of the Office of Rail Regulation (allocation of paths) and Network Rail (timetable production and publication).
Design and marketing[edit]
Since the privatisation of British Rail there is no longer a single approach to design on railways in Great Britain. The look and feel of signage, liveries and marketing material is largely the preserve of the individual TOCs.
However, National Rail continues to use BR's famous double-arrow symbol, designed by Gerald Burney of the Design Research Unit. It has been incorporated in the National Rail logotype and is displayed on tickets, the National Rail website and other publicity. The trademark rights to the double arrow symbol remain state-owned, being vested in the Secretary of State for Transport.
The double arrow was already prescribed for indicating a "railway station".[5]
The lettering used in the National Rail logotype is a modified form of the typeface Sassoon Bold. Some train operating companies continue to use the former British Rail Rail Alphabet lettering to varying degrees in station signage, although its use is no longer universal; however it remains compulsory (under Railway Group Standards) for safety signage in trackside areas and is still common (although not universal) on rolling stock.
It is a common misconception that Rail Alphabet was also used for printed material, but with the exception of logos ("British Rail", etc.) this has never been the case. The British Rail typefaces of choice from 1965 were Helvetica and Univers, with others (particularly Frutiger) coming into use during the sectorisation period after 1983. TOCs may use what they like: examples include Futura (Stagecoach Group), Helvetica (FirstGroup and National Express), Frutiger (Arriva Trains Wales), Bliss (CrossCountry, an Arriva franchise but not branded as such), and a modified version of Precious by London Midland.
Although TOCs compete against each other for franchises, and for passengers on routes where more than one TOC operates, the strapline used with the National Rail logo is 'Britain's train companies working together'.
Other passenger rail operators in Great Britain[edit]
See also: Commuter rail in the United Kingdom
Several conurbations have their own metro or tram systems, most of which are not part of National Rail. These include the London Underground, Docklands Light Railway, Blackpool Tramway, London Tramlink, Glasgow Subway, Tyne & Wear Metro, Manchester Metrolink, Sheffield Supertram, Midland Metro and Nottingham Express Transit. On the other hand, the largely self-contained Merseyrail system is part of the National Rail network, and urban rail networks around Birmingham, Cardiff, Glasgow and West Yorkshire consist entirely of National Rail services.
London Overground (LO) is a hybrid: its services are operated via a concession awarded by Transport for London, and are branded accordingly, but until 2010 all its routes used infrastructure owned by Network Rail. LO now also possesses some infrastructure in its own right, following the reopening of the former East London line of London Underground as the East London Railway of LO. Since all the previous LO routes were operated by National Rail franchise Silverlink until November 2007, they have continued to be shown in the National Rail timetable and are still considered to be a part of National Rail.
Heathrow Express and Eurostar are also not part of the National Rail network despite sharing of stations and routes (Heathrow Express and Heathrow Connect only). Northern Ireland Railways were never part of British Rail, which was always confined to Great Britain, and therefore are not part of the National Rail network.
There are many privately owned or heritage railways in Great Britain which are not part of the National Rail network and mostly operate for heritage or pleasure purposes rather than as public transport.
Ticketing[edit]






This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (January 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



National Rail services have a common ticketing structure inherited from British Rail. Through tickets are available between any pair of stations on the network, and can be bought from any station ticket office. Most tickets are inter-available between the services of all operators on routes appropriate to the journey being made. Operators on some routes offer operator-specific tickets that are cheaper than the inter-available ones.
Through tickets involving Heathrow Express and London Underground are also available. Oyster pay-as-you-go can be used on National Rail in Greater London from 2 January 2010.
Passengers without a valid ticket boarding a train at a station where ticket-buying facilities are available are required to pay the full Open Single or Return fare. On some services penalty fares apply - a ticketless passenger may be charged the greater of £20 or twice the full single fare to the next stop. Penalty Fares can be collected only by authorised Revenue Protection Inspectors, not by ordinary Guards.
National Rail distributes a number of technical manuals on which travel on the railways in Great Britain is based, such as the National Rail Conditions of Travel,[6] via their website.
Timetables[edit]
Pocket timetables for individual operators or routes are available free at staffed stations. The last official printed timetable with up to 3000 pages was published in 2007. Now the only complete print edition is published by Middleton Press (as of October 2016). A digital version of the full timetable is available as a pdf file without charge on the Network Rail website,[7] however passengers are recommended to obtain their timetables from the individual train companies.
National Rail Enquiries[edit]
The National Rail Enquiries website includes a journey planner, fare and live departure information. The site is designed to complement the myriad different websites of Britain's privatised rail companies, so when users have selected which tickets they wish to buy, they are redirected to the most relevant train company website, where they can buy their tickets without booking fees.
In 2012 the website was joined by a mobile app mirroring its functionality. The app is available for iPhone, Android and Windows Phone.[8][9] However Trainline remains the most downloaded rail app in the UK with 9.4 million users.[10]
See also[edit]

Rail Accident Investigation Branch
Rail transport in the United Kingdom
Railcard

References[edit]



^ http://www.ipo.gov.uk trade mark EU001733575
^ "National Rail Descriptor Guidelines". National Rail Descriptor Guidelines. Rail Delivery Group. Retrieved 24 October 2017. 
^ [1]: "British Rail’s double-arrow"
^ [2]: "National Rail is the collective brand for Britain's train companies working together"
^ Traffic Signs Regulations and General Directions 2002, Schedule 7
^ "National Rail Conditions of Travel". National Rail. Rail Delivery Group. Retrieved 24 October 2017. 
^ "Electronic National Rail Timetable". Network Rail. Network Rail. Retrieved 24 October 2017. 
^ "National Rail Enquiries announces a new app for iPhone & Android". National Rail blog. National Rail Enquiries. 1 May 2012. Retrieved 1 October 2016. 
^ "Download our FREE app and become more mobile and get FREE alerts". National Rail Enquiries. National Rail. Retrieved 1 October 2016. 
^ "Mobile App - Trainline". Trainline. Retrieved 1 October 2016. 



External links[edit]

National Rail – official website
Live departure boards – at National Rail







v
t
e


National railway companies of Europe






List of railway companies
Rail transport by country
Railway companies by country








Albania HSH
Armenia SKZD1
Austria ÖBB
Azerbaijan ADY
Belarus BŽD/BČ
Belgium SNCB/NMBS
Bosnia ŽFBH2 and ŽRS3
Bulgaria BDŽ
Croatia HŽ
Czech Republic ČD
Denmark DSB
Estonia EVR
Finland VR
France SNCF
Georgia SR1
Germany DB
Greece TrainOSE
Hungary MÁV
Ireland IÉ
Italy FS
Kazakhstan KTŽ1
Kosovo HK/KŽ4
Latvia LDz
Lithuania LG
Luxembourg CFL
Macedonia MŽ
Moldova CFM
Montenegro ŽPCG
Netherlands NS
Norway NSB
Poland PKP
Portugal CP
Romania CFR
Russia RŽD1
Serbia ŽS
Slovakia ŽSSK
Slovenia SŽ
Spain Renfe Operadora
Sweden SJ AB
Switzerland SBB/CFF/FFS
Turkey TCDD1
Ukraine UZ
United Kingdom NR5 / NIR6








1Country partly in Asia
2For the Federation BH
3For Srpska
4State with limited recognition
5For Great Britain
6For Northern Ireland











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=National_Rail&oldid=812103586"					Categories: Post-privatisation British railway companies1999 establishments in the United KingdomBritish brandsHidden categories: Use dmy dates from May 2013Use British English from May 2013Pages using deprecated image syntaxArticles needing additional references from January 2017All articles needing additional referencesOfficial website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia