
National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency


Seal of the U.S. National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency




Flag of the U.S. National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency




NGA Campus East is the headquarters of the agency. The building features trapezoidal windows, color-coded interior sections, and is bisected by an atrium that is large enough to hold the Statue of Liberty.[1][2][3]


Agency overview


Formed
October 1, 1996 (1996-10-01) (as the National Imagery and Mapping Agency)


Preceding agency



National Imagery and Mapping Agency (NIMA)





Jurisdiction
U.S. Department of Defense


Headquarters
Fort Belvoir, Springfield, Virginia, U.S.[2]
38°45′12″N 77°11′49″W﻿ / ﻿38.7532°N 77.1969°W﻿ / 38.7532; -77.1969Coordinates: 38°45′12″N 77°11′49″W﻿ / ﻿38.7532°N 77.1969°W﻿ / 38.7532; -77.1969


Motto
"Know the Earth... Show the Way... Understand the World"


Employees
About 16,000[4]


Annual budget
Classified (at least $4.9 billion, as of 2013)[5]


Agency executives



Marcel Lettre, Undersecretary of Defense for Intelligence
Robert Cardillo, Director
Susan M. Gordon, Deputy Director
Linda Urrutia-Varhall, Director of Operations





Parent agency
Department of Defense


Website
www.nga.mil


Footnotes


[6]


The National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency (NGA) is both a combat support agency under the United States Department of Defense and an intelligence agency of the United States Intelligence Community,[7] with the primary mission of collecting, analyzing, and distributing geospatial intelligence (GEOINT) in support of national security. NGA was known as the National Imagery and Mapping Agency (NIMA) until 2003.
NGA headquarters, also known as NGA Campus East, is located at Fort Belvoir in Springfield, Virginia. The agency also operates major facilities in the St. Louis, Missouri area, as well as support and liaison offices worldwide. The NGA headquarters, at 2.3 million square feet (214,000 m2), is the third-largest government building in the Washington metropolitan area after The Pentagon and the Ronald Reagan Building.[8]
In addition to using GEOINT for U.S. military and intelligence efforts, the NGA provides assistance during natural and man-made disasters, and security planning for major events such as the Olympic Games.[9]



Contents


1 History

1.1 Engineer Reproduction Plant (ERP)
1.2 Army Map Service (AMS) / U.S. Army Topographic Command (USATC)
1.3 Aeronautical Chart Plant (ACP)
1.4 National Photographic Interpretation Center (NPIC)

1.4.1 Cuban Missile Crisis


1.5 Directors of NPIC
1.6 Defense Mapping Agency (DMA)
1.7 National Imagery and Mapping Agency (NIMA)
1.8 NGA


2 Organization

2.1 Employees
2.2 NIMA / NGA Directors


3 Civilian, Department of Defense, and Intelligence Community activities
4 Controversies
5 Gallery
6 See also
7 References
8 Further reading
9 External links



History[edit]
U.S. mapping and charting efforts remained relatively unchanged until World War I, when aerial photography became a major contributor to battlefield intelligence. Using stereo viewers, photo-interpreters reviewed thousands of images. Many of these were of the same target at different angles and times, giving rise to what became modern imagery analysis and mapmaking.
Engineer Reproduction Plant (ERP)[edit]
The Engineer Reproduction Plant was the Army Corps of Engineers's first attempt to centralize mapping production, printing, and distribution.[when?] It was located on the grounds of the Army War College in Washington, D.C. Previously, topographic mapping had largely been a function of individual field engineer units using field surveying techniques or copying existing or captured products. In addition, ERP assumed the "supervision and maintenance" of the War Department Map Collection, effective April 1, 1939.
Army Map Service (AMS) / U.S. Army Topographic Command (USATC)[edit]
With the advent of the Second World War aviation, field surveys began giving way to photogrammetry, photo interpretation, and geodesy. During wartime, it became increasingly possible to compile maps with minimal field work. Out of this emerged AMS, which absorbed the existing ERP in May 1942. It was located at the Dalecarlia Site (including buildings now named for John C. Frémont and Charles H. Ruth) on MacArthur Blvd., just outside Washington, D.C., in Montgomery County, Maryland, and adjacent to the Dalecarlia Reservoir. AMS was designated as an Engineer field activity, effective July 1, 1942, by General Order 22, OCE, June 19, 1942. The Army Map Service also combined many of the Army's remaining geographic intelligence organizations and the Engineer Technical Intelligence Division. AMS was redesignated the U.S. Army Topographic Command (USATC) on September 1, 1968, and continued as an independent organization until 1972, when it was merged into the new Defense Mapping Agency (DMA) and redesignated as the DMA Topographic Center (DMATC) (see below).
The agency's credit union, Constellation Federal Credit Union, was chartered during the Army Map Service era, in 1944. It has continued to serve all successive legacy agencies' employees and their families.[10]
Aeronautical Chart Plant (ACP)[edit]
After the war, as airplane capacity and range improved, the need for charts grew. The Army Air Corps established its map unit, which was renamed ACP in 1943 and was located in St. Louis, Missouri. ACP was known as the U.S. Air Force Aeronautical Chart and Information Center (ACIC) from 1952 to 1972 (See DMAAC below).
A credit union was chartered for the ACP in 1948, called Aero Chart Credit Union. It was renamed Arsenal Credit Union in 1952,[11] a nod to the St. Louis site's Civil War-era use as an arsenal.[12]
National Photographic Interpretation Center (NPIC)[edit]




Seal of the NPIC


Shortly before leaving office in January 1961, President Dwight D. Eisenhower authorized the creation of the National Photographic Interpretation Center, a joint project of the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) and DOD. NPIC was a component of the CIA's Directorate of Science and Technology (DDS&T) and its primary function was imagery analysis.[13] NPIC became part of the National Imagery and Mapping Agency (now NGA) in 1996.[14]
Cuban Missile Crisis[edit]
Main article: Cuban Missile Crisis
NPIC first identified the Soviet Union's basing of missiles in Cuba in 1962. By exploiting images from U-2 overflights and film from canisters ejected by orbiting Corona (satellite)s,[15] NPIC analysts developed the information necessary to inform U.S. policymakers and influence operations during the Cuban Missile Crisis. Their analysis garnered worldwide attention when the Kennedy Administration declassified and made public a portion of the images depicting the Soviet missiles on Cuban soil; Adlai Stevenson presented the images to the United Nations Security Council on October 25, 1962.
Directors of NPIC[edit]


Director
Term of office


Arthur C. Lundahl
May 1953 – July 1973


John J. Hicks
July 1973 – May 1978


Brigadier Gen. Rutledge P. Hazzard
June 1978 – February 1984


Robert M. Huffstutler
Feb 1984 – Jan 1988


Frank J. Ruocco
February 1988 – February 1991


Leo Hazlewood
February 1991 – September 1993


Nancy E. Bone
October 1993 – September 1996


Defense Mapping Agency (DMA)[edit]
The Defense Mapping Agency was created on January 1, 1972, to consolidate all U.S. military mapping activities. DMA's "birth certificate", DoD Directive 5105.40, resulted from a formerly classified Presidential directive, "Organization and Management of the U.S. Foreign Intelligence Community" (November 5, 1971), which directed the consolidation of mapping functions previously dispersed among the military services.[16] DMA became operational on July 1, 1972, pursuant to General Order 3, DMA (June 16, 1972). On Oct. 1, 1996, DMA was folded into the National Imagery and Mapping Agency – which later became NGA.[17]
DMA was first headquartered at the United States Naval Observatory in Washington, D.C, then at Falls Church, Virginia. Its mostly civilian workforce was concentrated at production sites in Bethesda, Maryland, Northern Virginia, and St. Louis, Missouri. DMA was formed from the Mapping, Charting, and Geodesy Division, Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA), and from various mapping-related organizations of the military services.[18]

DMA Hydrographic Center (DMAHC)

DMAHC was formed in 1972 when the Navy's Hydrographic Office split its two components: The charting component was attached to DMAHC, and the survey component moved to the Naval Oceanographic Office, Bay St. Louis, Mississippi, on the grounds of what is now the NASA Stennis Space Center. DMAHC was responsible for creating terrestrial maps of coastal areas worldwide and hydrographic charts for DoD. DMAHC was initially located in Suitland, Maryland, but later relocated to Brookmont (Bethesda), Maryland.

DMA Topographic Center (DMATC)

DMATC was located in Brookmont (Bethesda), Maryland. It was responsible for creating topographic maps worldwide for DoD. DMATC's location in Bethesda, Maryland is the former site of NGA's headquarters.

DMA Hydrographic/Topographic Center (DMAHTC)

DMAHC and DMATC eventually merged to form DMAHTC, with offices in Brookmont (Bethesda), Maryland.

DMA Aerospace Center (DMAAC)

DMAAC originated with the U.S. Air Force's Aeronautical Chart and Information Center (ACIC) and was located in St. Louis, Missouri.
National Imagery and Mapping Agency (NIMA)[edit]










NIMA's logo, seal, and flag.



NIMA was established on October 1, 1996, by the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 1997.[19] The creation of NIMA followed more than a year of study, debate, and planning by the defense, intelligence, and policy-making communities (as well as the Congress) and continuing consultations with customer organizations. The creation of NIMA centralized responsibility for imagery and mapping.
NIMA combined the DMA, the Central Imagery Office (CIO), and the Defense Dissemination Program Office (DDPO) in their entirety, and the mission and functions of the NPIC. Also merged into NIMA were the imagery exploitation, dissemination, and processing elements of the Defense Intelligence Agency, National Reconnaissance Office, and the Defense Airborne Reconnaissance Office.
NIMA's creation was clouded by the natural reluctance of cultures to merge and the fear that their respective missions—mapping in support of defense activities versus intelligence production, principally in support of national policymakers—would be subordinated, each to the other.[20]
NGA[edit]
With the enactment of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2004 on November 24, 2003,[21] NIMA was renamed NGA to better reflect its primary mission in the area of GEOINT.[22] As a part of the 2005 Base Realignment and Closure (BRAC) process, all major Washington, D.C.-area NGA facilities, including those in Bethesda, Maryland; Reston, Virginia; and Washington, D.C., would be consolidated at a new facility at the Fort Belvoir proving grounds. This new facility, called the NGA Campus East houses several thousand people and is situated on the former Engineer Proving Ground site near Fort Belvoir. NGA facilities in St. Louis were not affected by the 2005 BRAC process.[23]
The cost of the new center, as of March 2009, was expected to be $2.4 billion. The center's campus is approximately 2,400,000 square feet (220,000 m2) and was completed in September 2011.[24]
Organization[edit]
Employees[edit]
NGA employs professionals in aeronautical analysis, cartography, geospatial analysis, imagery analysis, marine analysis, the physical sciences, geodesy, computer and telecommunication engineering, and photogrammetry, as well as those in the national security and law enforcement fields.
NIMA / NGA Directors[edit]
The current director of NGA is Robert Cardillo.




NGA Director Robert Cardillo


This table lists all Directors of the NIMA and NGA and their term of office.


Term of Office
Director


1996–1998
Rear Admiral (RADM) Joseph J. (Jack) Dantone, Jr., USN, Acting Director


1998–2001
Lieutenant General (LTG) James C. King, US Army


2001–2006
Lieutenant General (Lt Gen) James R. Clapper Jr., USAF, Retired[note 1]


2006–2010
Vice Admiral (VADM) Robert B. Murrett, USN


2010–2014
Letitia Long


2014–present
Robert Cardillo





^ Although General Clapper preferred the use of his military rank, he was in fact a member of the Defense Intelligence Senior Executive Service (DISES) during his term as Director of NIMA / NGA, as he had retired from active duty as the director of DIA in 1995. Clapper was the first civilian to head NIMA / NGA.






Wikinews has related news: Letitia Long becomes first female director of a major US intelligence agency


On February 22, 2010, Secretary of Defense Robert Gates announced that Letitia Long would become director later that year, becoming the first woman to head one of the 16 Intelligence Community component agencies. Long was at the time deputy director of the DIA.[25] Long was sworn in on August 9, 2010, as head of the NGA.[26]
Civilian, Department of Defense, and Intelligence Community activities[edit]

Osama bin Laden Compound Raid:The NGA was integral in helping the Department of Defense and the U.S. Intelligence Community pinpoint the Osama bin Laden's compound in Abbottabad in Pakistan, where bin Laden was residing. Following identification, NGA worked in collaboration with other intelligence agencies to create a replica of Osama bin Laden’s home in Pakistan, map bin Laden's compound, analyze drone data, and help the SEALs simulate their mission. Osama bin Laden was then killed in a SEAL team operation.[27][28]
9/11 aftermath: After the September 11, 2001 attacks, NIMA partnered with the U.S. Geological Survey to survey the World Trade Center site and determine the extent of the destruction.[15][dead link]
Olympic support: In 2002, NIMA partnered with Federal organizations to provide geospatial assistance to the 2002 Winter Olympics in Utah.[15][dead link] NGA also helped support the 2004 Summer Olympics in Athens, Greece, and the 2006 Winter Olympics in Turin, Italy.
Space Shuttle Columbia disaster: While the Space Shuttle Columbia was in orbit during STS-107, NIMA purportedly offered to image the shuttle and its suspected damage from falling debris during takeoff. NASA declined this offer (see Space Shuttle Columbia disaster), but has since forged an interagency agreement with NGA to collect imagery for all future space shuttle flights.[citation needed]
Keyhole investment: NGA contributed approximately 25% of In-Q-Tel's funding of Keyhole Inc, whose Earth-viewing software became Google Earth.[29]
Hurricane Katrina: The NGA supported Hurricane Katrina relief efforts by "providing geospatial information about the affected areas based on imagery from commercial and U.S. government satellites, and from airborne platforms, to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) and other government agencies.[30] NGA's Earth website is a central source of these efforts.
Microsoft partnership: Microsoft Corp. and the NGA have signed a letter of understanding to advance the design and delivery of geospatial information applications to customers.[31] NGA will continue to use the Microsoft Virtual Earth platform (as it did for Katrina relief) to provide geospatial support for humanitarian, peacekeeping, and national-security efforts. Virtual Earth is a set of online mapping and search services that deliver imagery through an API.
Social Software Training: Several agencies in the Intelligence community, most notably CIA and NGA, have developed training programs to provide time to integrate social software tools into analysts' daily work habits. These classes generally focus on the use of Intellipedia to capture and manage knowledge, but they also use other social software tools, such as blogs, RSS, and social bookmarking. The courses stress immersion in these tools, and instructors encourage participants to work on a specific project in Intellipedia and exposes participants to social media.[32][33][34]
Google and GeoEye: In 2008 the NGA partnered with Google and GeoEye. Google would be allowed to use GeoEye spy satellite imagery with reduced resolution for Google Earth.[29]
First Intelligence Agency to Open Source Software on GitHub: April 2014 NGA became the first intelligence agency to open-source software on GitHub.[35] NGA Director Letitia Long talks about NGA's GitHub initiative and the first offering, GeoQ, at the GEOINT Symposium. Her comments start at 40 minutes and 40 seconds from her GEOINT 2014 conference speech. NGA open sources software packages under their GitHub organizational account.

Controversies[edit]
NIMA / NGA has been involved in several controversies.

India tested a nuclear weapon in 1998 that reportedly took the United States by surprise. Due to budget cuts in defense spending after the end of the Cold War (see Peace dividend), the Intelligence Community was forced to reevaluate the allocation of its limited resources.[36]
In 1999, NIMA supposedly provided NATO war-planners with incorrect maps which did not reflect that the Chinese Embassy in Belgrade had moved locations, which some[who?] have argued was the cause of the accidental NATO Bombing of the Chinese embassy in Belgrade. The Central Intelligence Agency countered this criticism by saying this overstates the importance of the map itself in the analytic process. Maps of urban areas will be out-of-date the day after they are published, but what is important is having accurate databases.[37]
On Jan. 17, 2013, the USS Guardian was grounded on the Tubbataha Reef in the southern Philippines. The Navy investigated the cause of the accident and determined NGA was not at fault rather that the ship’s leadership team failed to adhere to prudent, safe, and sound navigation principles. The Navy relied solely on an inaccurate Digital Nautical Chart (DNC) during the planning and execution of the navigation plan and failed to appropriately cross-reference additional charts and utilize visual cues.[38]

Gallery[edit]






This section contains what may be an unencyclopedic or excessive gallery of images. Galleries containing indiscriminate images of the article subject are discouraged; please improve or remove the section accordingly. (March 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)










New Headquarters of the National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency









New NGA headquarters' atrium









Letitia Long, director of the NGA, 2010–2014




See also[edit]


Military of the United States portal



Cartography
Geographic Information System (GIS)
GEOnet Names Server
Geospatial engineering
Geospatial Information Officer
GIS use in the NGA
Imagery intelligence
Orthophoto
Remote sensing
Satellite imagery
Small Sats

References[edit]


^ "BRAC side effect: Greener buildings". May 13, 2011. 
^ a b "NGA Campus East Fact Sheet" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on February 21, 2014. 
^ "Photo gallery: An alternative geography". projects.washingtonpost.com. 
^ Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs) Archived November 24, 2013, at the Wayback Machine.. .nga.mil. Retrieved on July 21, 2013.
^ Gellman, Barton; Greg Miller (August 29, 2013). "U.S. spy network's successes, failures and objectives detailed in 'black budget' summary". The Washington Post. Retrieved August 29, 2013. 
^ "GSP - GSP". www.esa.int. 
^ "10 U.S. Code § 441 - Establishment". LII / Legal Information Institute. 
^ Serbu, Jared (2011-09-27). "Geospatial intelligence HQ is now DC's 3rd largest federal office building". Federal News Radio. Retrieved 2016-03-19. 
^ "About NGA". 
^ "Constellation Federal Credit Union - Miscellaneous - CFCU to NCE". constellationfcu.org. Retrieved December 3, 2012. 
^ "Arsenal Credit Union - Arsenal Credit Union - Our Roots and Structure". Arsenalcu.org. Retrieved November 27, 2012. 
^ ""Solving the Mystery of the Arsenal Guns" by Randy R. McGuire". civilwarstlouis.com. Retrieved November 27, 2012. 
^ "Thirty ... and thriving". Central Intelligence Agency. December 1, 1991. p. 1ff. Archived from the original on March 8, 2012. Retrieved May 30, 2010. 
^ "Jan. 18, 1961: National Photographic Interpretation Center". www.nga.mil. 
^ a b c NGA History Archived March 20, 2009, at the Wayback Machine., nga.mil
^ Nixon, Richard (November 5, 1971). "Memorandum, Subject: Organization and Management of the U.S. Foreign Intelligence Community" (PDF). gwu.edu. Retrieved August 12, 2007. 
^ "Defense Mapping Agency". NGA.mil. 
^ U.S. National Archives. "Guide to Federal Records: Records of the Defense Mapping Agency (DMA)". National Archives and Records Administration (NARA). Retrieved August 12, 2007. 
^ "National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 1997" (PDF). September 23, 1996. Retrieved February 10, 2008. 
^ Report of the Independent Commission on NIMA - December 2000, nga.mil
^ "National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2004" (PDF). November 24, 2003. Retrieved February 10, 2008. , gpo.gov
^ "NGA: September-October 2003 State of the Agency" (PDF). 
^ New Campus East, nga.mil
^ Davenport, Christian, "Projects' Costs Are Rising", Washington Post, March 31, 2009, p. B4
^ "Gates names first woman to head major intel agency". FederalTimes.com. February 23, 2010. Retrieved February 25, 2010. Letitia Long, currently the Defense Intelligence Agency's deputy director, will take over NGA this summer, Gates said. 
^ "Woman takes charge of major intelligence agency for the first time". CNN. August 9, 2010. Retrieved August 11, 2010. 
^ Ambinder, Marc (5 May 2011). "The Little-Known Agency That Helped Kill Bin Laden". The Atlantic Monthly. 
^ "Osama bin Laden Compound Raid". National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency. Retrieved 27 July 2017.   This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain.
^ a b "Oakland emails give another glimpse into the Google-Military-Surveillance Complex". PandoDaily. 
^ Geospatial Intelligence Aids Hurricane Recovery Efforts, nga.mil
^ Microsoft and NGA Announce Strategic Alliance, microsoft.com
^ Radio interview that highlights Intelligence Community social software training programs, Federal News Radio, 5 November 2007, Federalnewsradio.com
^ Executive Spotlight Interview with Sean Dennehy, ExecutiveBiz, December 5, 2007
^ Executive Spotlight Interview with Chris Rasmussen, ExecutiveBiz, October 25, 2007
^ NGA releases open source code on GitHub, FierceGovernmentIT, April 07, 2014
^ "Secretive map agency opens its doors", CNN.com, December 13, 2002
^ DCI Statement on the Belgrade Chinese Embassy Bombing to a House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence Open Hearing, 22 July 1999, cia.gov
^ U.S. Navy. "USS Guardian Grounding Investigation Results Released". navy.mil. U.S. Navy. Retrieved 20 June 2013. 


Further reading[edit]

Ambinder, Marc (May 5, 2011). "The Little-Known Agency That Helped Kill Bin Laden". The Atlantic.  Explains the NGA's capabilities.

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency.



Official website

GEOnet Names Server (GNS) - Database of foreign geographic feature names. Worldwide coverage excluding the United States and Antarctica, containing approximately 3.93 million features with 5.45 million names, and their coordinates
NGA Earth - Formerly KatrinaImagery.org (Hurricane Crisis Imagery)


Center for Geospatial Intelligence : University of Missouri - Columbia research center focused on GeoINT
JP 2-03, Geospatial Intelligence Support to Joint Operations, 31 October 2012
Commission Report on the National Imagery and Mapping Agency
GeoIntelligence: A trade publication covering the uses of spatial technologies for national defense and homeland security by organizations such as NGA
Ensor, David (December 13, 2002). "Secretive map agency opens its doors". CNN. 
DMA Receives Hammer Award, 26 January 1996
Agency Provides More Than Just Maps
The Center for Intelligence and Security Studies trains new analysts in Intelligence Analysis







v
t
e


United States Intelligence Community



Intelligence
Community




Defense



Defense Intelligence Agency (Defense Clandestine Service • Defense Attaché System • National Intelligence University • Missile and Space Intelligence Center • National Center for Medical Intelligence • Joint Functional Component Command for Intelligence, Surveillance and Reconnaissance)
National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency
National Reconnaissance Office
National Security Agency (Central Security Service, Special Collection Service)




Armed Forces



Army Intelligence and Security Command
Marine Corps Intelligence
Office of Naval Intelligence
Twenty-Fifth Air Force
Coast Guard Intelligence (Homeland Security)








Civilian



Bureau of Intelligence and Research (State)
Central Intelligence Agency (Directorate of Operations • Special Activities Division • Open Source Center • Directorate of Science and Technology • CIA University)
Drug Enforcement Administration (Justice)
Federal Bureau of Investigation (Justice)
Office of Intelligence and Analysis (Homeland Security)
Office of Terrorism and Financial Intelligence (Treasury)
Office of Intelligence and Counterintelligence (Energy)











Director of
National
Intelligence



Director of National Intelligence
National Counterterrorism Center
National Counterproliferation Center
Office of the National Counterintelligence Executive
National Intelligence Council
Intelligence Advanced Research Projects Activity
Joint Intelligence Community Council
Chief Information Officer





Executive Office
of the President



National Security Advisor
National Security Council
President's Intelligence Advisory Board
Homeland Security Council
Homeland Security Advisor
President's Daily Brief





Other



Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence
Army Intelligence Support Activity
Joint Worldwide Intelligence Communications System
Intellipedia





Oversight



United States Senate Select Committee on Intelligence
United States House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence
United States Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court
Privacy and Civil Liberties Oversight Board
Office of Management and Budget





Defunct



Contingency Fund for Foreign Intercourse
Counterintelligence Field Activity
Military Information Division
Military Intelligence Division
Military Intelligence Service
Office of Strategic Services
Office of Special Plans
Strategic Support Branch












v
t
e


United States Department of Defense






Headquarters: The Pentagon


James Mattis, Secretary of Defense
Patrick M. Shanahan, Deputy Secretary of Defense










Office of the Secretary of Defense
(including Defense Agencies and DoD Field Activities)







Deputy Secretary of Defense



Deputy's Advisory Working Group
Office of Net Assessment
Special Access Program Oversight Committee





Under Secretary of Defense
for Acquisition, Technology and Logistics



Director, Defense Research and Engineering
Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency
Missile Defense Agency
Defense Contract Management Agency
Defense Logistics Agency
Defense Technical Information Center
Defense Threat Reduction Agency
Office of Economic Adjustment
Defense Acquisition University
Defense Acquisition Board





Under Secretary of Defense for Policy



Defense Security Cooperation Agency
Defense POW/MIA Accounting Agency
Defense Policy Board Advisory Committee





Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller)



Defense Contract Audit Agency
Defense Finance and Accounting Service





Under Secretary of Defense
for Personnel and Readiness



Defense Commissary Agency
Department of Defense Education Activity
DoD Human Resources Activity
Military Health System
Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences
Defense Equal Opportunity Management Institute





Under Secretary of Defense
for Intelligence



Defense Intelligence Agency
Defense Security Service
Defense Information Systems Agency
National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency
National Reconnaissance Office
National Security Agency (Director)





Assistant Secretary of Defense for Public Affairs



Defense Media Activity (American Forces Press Service, American Forces Radio and Television Service, Stars and Stripes, The Pentagon Channel)





General Counsel of the Department of Defense



Defense Legal Services Agency





Director of Administration and Management



Pentagon Force Protection Agency
Washington Headquarters Services



















Military Departments







Department of the Army



Secretary of the Army
The Secretariat: Under Secretary of the Army
Assistant Secretary for Acquisition, Logistics, and Technology
Assistant Secretary for Civil Works
Assistant Secretary (Financial Management and Comptroller)
Assistant Secretary of the Army for Installations, Energy and Environment
Assistant Secretary of the Army for Manpower and Reserve Affairs
General Counsel of the Army
The Administrative Assistant
The Army Staff: Chief of Staff of the Army
Vice Chief of Staff of the Army
Sergeant Major of the Army
Deputy Chief of Staff G-8
Chief of Chaplains
Judge Advocate General
Provost Marshal General
Surgeon General
U.S. Army field organizations: see Structure of the United States Army





Department of the Navy



Secretary of the Navy
The Secretariat: Under Secretary of the Navy
Assistant Secretary of the Navy (Financial Management and Comptroller)
Assistant Secretary of the Navy (Installations and Environment)
Assistant Secretary of the Navy (Manpower and Reserve Affairs)
Assistant Secretary of the Navy (Research, Development and Acquisitions)
General Counsel of the Navy
Judge Advocate General
Naval Criminal Investigative Service
Naval Inspector General
Headquarters Marine Corps: Commandant of the Marine Corps
Assistant Commandant of the Marine Corps
Sergeant Major of the Marine Corps
Chaplain
U.S. Marine Corps field organizations: see Organization of the United States Marine Corps
Office of the Chief of Naval Operations: Chief of Naval Operations
Vice Chief of Naval Operations
Master Chief Petty Officer of the Navy
Director of Naval Reactors
Chief of Chaplains
Chief of Naval Personnel
Surgeon General United States Navy field organizations: see Structure of the United States Navy





Department of the Air Force



Secretary of the Air Force
The Secretariat: Under Secretary of the Air Force
Assistant Secretary of the Air Force (Acquisition)
Assistant Secretary of the Air Force (Financial Management & Comptroller)
Assistant Secretary of the Air Force (Installations, Environment & Logistics)
Assistant Secretary of the Air Force (Manpower & Reserve Affairs)
General Counsel of the Air Force
Air Force Office of Special Investigations
The Air Staff: Chief of Staff of the Air Force
Vice Chief of Staff of the Air Force
Chief Master Sergeant of the Air Force
Chief of Chaplains
Chief of Safety
Chief Scientist
Judge Advocate General
Surgeon General
U.S. Air Force field organizations: Major Commands
Direct Reporting Units
Field Operating Agencies
















Joint Chiefs of Staff






Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
Vice Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
Senior Enlisted Advisor to the Chairman
Joint Requirements Oversight Council
Director of the Joint Staff
Joint Staff
National Military Command Center
Alternate National Military Command Center
National Defense University













Combatant Commands






Africa Command
Central Command
European Command
Northern Command
Pacific Command
Southern Command
Special Operations Command
Strategic Command (Cyber Command)
Transportation Command













National Guard Bureau






Chief of the National Guard Bureau
Air National Guard
Army National Guard













Office of the Inspector General






Defense Criminal Investigative Service















v
t
e


National intelligence agencies



Foreign
intelligence



Afghanistan: NDS
Albania: SHISH
Algeria: DRS
Argentina: AFI
Armenia: SNB
Australia: ASIS
Azerbaijan: MTN
Bahrain: NSA
Bangladesh: NSI
Belarus: KGB RB
Belgium: ADIV/SGRS
Bosnia and Herzegovina: OSA-OBA
Brazil: ABIN
Brunei: BRD
Bulgaria: NRS
Cameroon: BMM
Canada: CSIS
Chad: ANS
Chile: ANI
China: MSS
Croatia: SOA
Cuba: DI
Czech Republic: ÚZSI
Denmark: FE
Djibouti: BSRG
Ecuador: SENAIN
Egypt: Mukhabarat
Estonia: EFIS
France: DGSE
Gambia: SIS
Georgia: GIS
Germany: BND
Ghana: BNI, BGU, RDU
Greece: EYP
Hungary: IH
India: RAW
Indonesia: BIN
Iran: VAJA
Iraq: GSD
Ireland: G2
Israel: Mossad
Italy: AISE
Ivory Coast: NSC
Japan: NPA
CIRO
Jordan: GID
Kazakhstan: Syrbar
Kenya: NIS
Kyrgyzstan: SNB
Kuwait: KSS
Latvia: SAB
Lithuania: VSD
Lebanon: GDGS
Libya: MJ
Republic of Macedonia: UBK
Malaysia: MEIO
Maldives: NSS
Mexico: CISEN
Mongolia: GIA
Montenegro: ANB
Morocco: DGST
Mozambique: SISE
Netherlands: AIVD
New Zealand: NZSIS
Nigeria: NIA
North Korea: RGB
Norway: E-tjenesten
Oman: Palace Office
Pakistan: ISI
Papua New Guinea: NIO
Philippines: NICA
Poland: AW
Portugal: SIED
Qatar: QSS
Romania: SIE
Russia: SVR
Saudi Arabia: Al Mukhabarat Al A'amah
Serbia: BIA
Sierra Leone: CISU
Singapore: SID
Slovakia: SIS
Slovenia: SOVA
Somalia: NISA
South Africa: SSA
South Korea: NIS
Spain: CNI
Sri Lanka: SIS
Sudan: JAWM
Sweden: KSI
Switzerland: NDB
Syria: GSD
Taiwan: NSB
Tajikistan: MoS
Thailand: NIA
Togo: NIA
Tunisia: TIA
Turkey: MİT
Turkmenistan: KNB
Uganda: ISO
Ukraine: SZRU
United Arab Emirates: UAEI
United Kingdom: SIS (MI6)
United States: CIA
Uzbekistan: SNB
Vietnam: TC2





Domestic
intelligence



Algeria: DRS
Argentina: AFI
Australia: ASIO
Azerbaijan: MTN
Bangladesh: SB
Belarus: KGB RB
Belgium: VS/SE
Bosnia and Herzegovina: SIPA
Brazil: PF
Brunei: IRD
Canada: CSIS
Chile: ANI
China: MSS
Croatia: SOA
Czech Republic: BIS
Denmark: PET
Egypt: EHS
Estonia: KAPO
Finland: Supo
France: DGSI
Germany: BfV
Ghana: GPS, CID
Greece: EYP
Hungary: AH
India: IB, CBI, NSC, AIRMS
Iran: VAJA, IRGC, PAVA
Ireland: CSB, SDU, NSU
Israel: Shin Bet
Italy: AISI
Kazakhstan: NSC
Kenya: NIS
Latvia: DP
Lithuania: STT
Republic of Macedonia: IA
Malaysia: SB
Japan: NPA, PSIA
Netherlands: NCTb
New Zealand: NZSIS
Nigeria: SSS
Norway: PST
North Korea: SSD
Oman: ISS
Pakistan: IB, FIA
Philippines: NBI
Poland: ABW
Portugal: SIS
Romania: SRI
Russia: FSB
Saudi Arabia: Mabahith
Serbia: BIA
Singapore: ISD
South Africa: SSA
South Korea: SPO
Spain: CITCO
Sri Lanka: SIS
Sweden: SÄPO
Switzerland: NDB
Syria: GSD
Taiwan: MJIB
Thailand: ISOC, SB
Turkey: KDGM
Ukraine: SBU
United Kingdom: Security Service (MI5), NDEDIU, NCA, NBIS
United States: FBI
Uzbekistan: SNB
Venezuela: SEBIN
Vietnam: TC5
Zimbabwe: CIO





Military
intelligence



Australia: DIO
Bangladesh: DGFI
Belgium: ADIV/SGRS
Brazil: DIE
Canada: Int Branch
China: MID
Croatia: VSOA
Czech Republic: VZ
Denmark: FE
Egypt: DMISR
Finland: PE TIEDOS
France: DRM, DGSE
Germany: MAD
Ghana: MIU
Hungary: KNBSZ
Iran: General Staff, SAHEFAJA, SAHEFASA, SAHEFAVEDJA
India: DMI, DIA
Indonesia: BAIS
Ireland: G2
Israel: Aman
Italy: CII
Japan: MIC
Kazakhstan: NSC
Lithuania: AOTD
Republic of Macedonia: MSSI
Malaysia: DSID
Morocco: DGED
Netherlands: MIVD
New Zealand: DDIS
Norway: E-tjenesten
Pakistan: MI, NI, AI
Philippines: ISAFP
Poland: SKW, SWW
Portugal: CISMIL
Romania: DGIA
Russia: GRU
Serbia: VOA, VBA
Singapore: MIO
Slovakia: VSS
Slovenia: OVS
South Africa: SANDF-ID
South Korea: DSC
Spain: Armed Forces Intelligence Center
Sri Lanka: DMI
Sweden: MUST
Switzerland: MND
Syria: MI, AFID
Taiwan: MND
Thailand: AFSC
Turkey: GENKUR İ.D.B., JİTEM
Ukraine: HUR MO
United Kingdom: DI
United States: DIA
Venezuela: DGCIM
Vietnam: TC2





Signals
intelligence



Australia: ASD
Brazil: 2ª Sch/EMD
Canada: CSE
China: SIGINT
Croatia: OTC
Finland: PVTIEDL
France: DGSE
Germany: BND
Ghana: RDU
India: JCB,NTRO
Indonesia: LEMSANEG
Ireland: CIS
Israel: 8200
Japan: DIH
Kazakhstan: NSC
Netherlands: AIVD
New Zealand: GCSB
Pakistan: JSIB
Russia: Spetssvyaz
South Africa: SSA
Sweden: FRA
Switzerland: NDB
Syria: MI
Turkey: MİT-ETİB, MİT-SİB
Ukraine: Derzhspetszviazok
United Kingdom: GCHQ
United States: NSA





Imagery
intelligence



Australia: AGO
Finland: PVTIEDL
India: DAI
Israel: Air Intelligence Group
New Zealand: GEOINT NZ
Portugal: CIGeoE
Russia: TsVTI GRU
United Kingdom: DGIFC
United States: NGA





Related
topics



Espionage
Global surveillance disclosures

Chelsea Manning
Snowden leaks
WikiLeaks


Great Firewall of China

Mass surveillance in China


Law enforcement
Surveillance

Big Brother
Call detail record
Carnivore
Dishfire
ECHELON
PRISM
Stone Ghost
Turbulence (NSA programme)


National security
Surveillance issues in smart cities









Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 235711089
LCCN: no2004002657
ISNI: 0000 0004 0561 129X
GND: 10089476-8
BNF: cb16552650k (data)











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=National_Geospatial-Intelligence_Agency&oldid=812908074"					Categories: United States Department of Defense agenciesUnited States intelligence agenciesMilitary cartographySurveillanceSpringfield, VirginiaMilitary in MarylandNational Geospatial-Intelligence AgencyGovernment agencies established in 19961996 establishments in the United StatesHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksUse mdy dates from September 2013Coordinates on WikidataAll articles with vague or ambiguous timeVague or ambiguous time from February 2017All articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from May 2017All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from November 2008All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrasesArticles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from July 2012Official website different in Wikidata and WikipediaWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiers