

Economics



A supply and demand diagram, illustrating
the effects of an increase in demand.






Index
Outline
Category








History
Types
Classification







History of economics
Economic history (academic study)
Schools of economics



Microeconomics
Macroeconomics
Methodology
Heterodox economics
JEL classification codes








Concepts
Theory
Techniques








Econometrics
Economic growth
Economic system
Experimental economics
Mathematical economics
Game theory
Post-scarcity
Market
National accounting





By application





Agricultural
Behavioral
Business
Computational
Cultural
Demographic
Development
Digitization
Ecological
Education
Engineering
Environmental
Evolutionary
Expeditionary
Geography
Health
Industrial organization
Information
International
Knowledge
Labour
Law
Managerial
Monetary / Financial
Natural resource
Organizational
Personnel
Public / Welfare economics
Regional
Rural
Service
Social
Urban
Welfare





Lists




Economists
Publications (journals)






 Business and economics portal







v
t
e








National accounts is included in the JEL classification codes as JEL: C82 and JEL:E01


National accounts or national account systems (NAS) are the implementation of complete and consistent accounting techniques for measuring the economic activity of a nation. These include detailed underlying measures that rely on double-entry accounting. By design, such accounting makes the totals on both sides of an account equal even though they each measure different characteristics, for example production and the income from it. As a method, the subject is termed national accounting or, more generally, social accounting.[1] Stated otherwise, national accounts as systems may be distinguished from the economic data associated with those systems.[2] While sharing many common principles with business accounting, national accounts are based on economic concepts.[3] One conceptual construct for representing flows of all economic transactions that take place in an economy is a social accounting matrix with accounts in each respective row-column entry.[4]
National accounting has developed in tandem with macroeconomics from the 1930s with its relation of aggregate demand to total output through interaction of such broad expenditure categories as consumption and investment.[5] Economic data from national accounts are also used for empirical analysis of economic growth and development.[1][6]



Contents


1 Scope
2 Main components
3 History
4 See also
5 References



Scope[edit]
National accounts broadly present output, expenditure, and income activities of the economic actors (households, corporations, government) in an economy, including their relations with other countries' economies, and their wealth (net worth). They present both flows (measured over a period) and stocks (measured at the end of a period), ensuring that the flows are reconciled with the stocks. As to flows, the national income and product accounts (in U.S. terminology) provide estimates for the money value of income and output per year or quarter, including GDP. As to stocks, the 'capital accounts' are a balance-sheet approach that has assets on one side (including values of land, the capital stock, and financial assets) and liabilities and net worth on the other, measured as of the end of the accounting period. National accounts also include measures of the changes in assets, liabilities, and net worth per accounting period. These may refer to flow of funds accounts or, again, capital accounts.[1]
There are a number of aggregate measures in the national accounts, notably including gross domestic product or GDP, perhaps the most widely cited measure of aggregate economic activity. Ways of breaking down GDP include as types of income (wages, profits, etc.) or expenditure (consumption, investment/saving, etc.). Measures of these are examples of macro-economic data.[7][8][9][10] Such aggregate measures and their change over time are generally of strongest interest to economic policymakers, although the detailed national accounts contain a source of information for economic analysis, for example in the input-output tables which show how industries interact with each other in the production process.
National accounts can be presented in nominal or real amounts, with real amounts adjusted to remove the effects of price changes over time.[11] A corresponding price index can also be derived from national output. Rates of change of the price level and output may also be of interest. An inflation rate (growth rate of the price level) may be calculated for national output or its expenditure components. Economic growth rates (most commonly the growth rate of GDP) are generally measured in real (constant-price) terms. One use of economic-growth data from the national accounts is in growth accounting across longer periods of time for a country or across to estimate different sources of growth, whether from growth of factor inputs or technological change.[12]
The accounts are derived from a wide variety of statistical source data including surveys, administrative and census data, and regulatory data, which are integrated and harmonized in the conceptual framework. They are usually compiled by national statistical offices and/or central banks in each country, though this is not always the case, and may be released on both an annual and (less detailed) quarterly frequency. Practical issues include inaccuracies from differences between economic and accounting methodologies, lack of controlled experiments on quality of data from diverse sources, and measurement of intangibles and services of the banking and financial sectors.[13]
Two developments relevant to the national accounts since the 1980s include the following. Generational accounting is a method for measuring redistribution of lifetime tax burdens across generations from social insurance, including social security and social health insurance. It has been proposed as a better guide to the sustainability of a fiscal policy than budget deficits, which reflect only taxes minus spending in the current year.[14] Environmental or green national accounting is the method of valuing environmental assets, which are usually not counted in measuring national wealth, in part due to the difficulty of valuing them. The method has been proposed as an alternative to an implied zero valuation of environmental assets and as a way of measuring the sustainability of welfare levels in the presence of environmental degradation.[15]
Macroeconomic data not derived from the national accounts are also of wide interest, for example some cost-of-living indexes, the unemployment rate, and the labor force participation rate.[16] In some cases, a national-accounts counterpart of these may be estimated, such as a price index computed from the personal consumption expenditures and the GDP gap (the difference between observed GDP and potential GDP).[17]
Main components[edit]
The presentation of national accounts data may vary by country (commonly, aggregate measures are given greatest prominence), however the main national accounts include the following accounts for the economy as a whole and its main economic actors.

Current accounts:




production accounts which record the value of domestic output and the goods and services used up in producing that output. The balancing item of the accounts is value added, which is equal to GDP when expressed for the whole economy at market prices and in gross terms;
income accounts, which show primary and secondary income flows - both the income generated in production (e.g. wages and salaries) and distributive income flows (predominantly the redistributive effects of government taxes and social benefit payments). The balancing item of the accounts is disposable income ("National Income" when measured for the whole economy);
expenditure accounts, which show how disposable income is either consumed or saved. The balancing item of these accounts is saving.




Capital accounts, which record the net accumulation, as the result of transactions, of non-financial assets; and the financing, by way of saving and capital transfers, of the accumulation. Net lending/borrowing is the balancing item for these accounts
Financial accounts, which show the net acquisition of financial assets and the net incurrence of liabilities. The balance on these accounts is the net change in financial position.
Balance sheets, which record the stock of assets, both financial and non-financial, and liabilities at a particular point in time. Net worth is the balance from the balance sheets (United Nations, 1993).

The accounts may be measured as gross or net of consumption of fixed capital (a concept in national accounts similar to depreciation in business accounts).
Notably absent from these components, however, is unpaid work, because its value is not included in any of the aforementioned categories of accounts, just as it is not included in calculating gross domestic product (GDP). An Australian study has shown the value of this uncounted work to be approximately 50% of GDP, making its exclusion rather significant.[18] As GDP is tied closely to the national accounts system,[19] this may lead to a distorted view of national accounts. Because national accounts are widely used by governmental policy-makers in implementing controllable economic agendas,[20] some analysts have advocated for either a change in the makeup of national accounts or adjustments in the formulation of public policy.[21]
History[edit]
The original motivation for the development of national accounts and the systematic measurement of employment was the need for accurate measures of aggregate economic activity. This was made more pressing by the Great Depression and as a basis for Keynesian macroeconomic stabilisation policy and wartime economic planning. The first efforts to develop such measures were undertaken in the late 1920s and 1930s, notably by Colin Clark and Simon Kuznets. Richard Stone of the U.K. led later contributions during World War II and thereafter. The first formal national accounts were published by the United States in 1947. Many European countries followed shortly thereafter, and the United Nations published A System of National Accounts and Supporting Tables in 1952.[1][22] International standards for national accounting are defined by the United Nations System of National Accounts, with the most recent version released for 2008.[23]
Even before that in early 1920s there were national economic accounts tables. One of such systems was called Balance of national economy and was used in USSR and other socialistic countries to measure the efficiency of socialistic production.Economic theory.[24]
In Europe, the worldwide System of National Accounts has been adapted in the European System of Accounts (ESA), which is applied by members of the European Union and many other European countries. Research on the subject continues from its beginnings through today.[25]
See also[edit]


Accounting identity
Aggregation problem
European System of Accounts
Measures of national income and output
Material Product System
National Income and Product Accounts (US)
Measures of national income and output
Official statistics
Penn World Table
Savings identity
Social accounting
United Nations System of National Accounts


References[edit]


^ a b c d Nancy D. Ruggles, 1987. "social accounting," The New Palgrave: A Dictionary of Economics, v. 4, pp. 377–82.
^ United Nations, The System of National Accounts and National Accounts Data.
^ Joel S. Demski, 2008. "accounting and economics," The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics. Abstract.
^ Graham Pyatt and Jeffery I. Round, ed., 1985. Social Accounting Matrices: A Basis for Planning, World Bank.
^ John Maynard Keynes, 1936. The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money, Macmillan.
^ Mankiw, N. Gregory; Romer, David; Weil, David N. (1992). "A Contribution to the Empirics of Economic Growth". Quarterly Journal of Economics. 107 (2): 407–437. doi:10.2307/2118477. 
^ Referred to in the Journal of Economic Literature classification codes under JEL: C8 - Data Collection and Data Estimation Methodology and JEL: E01 - Measurement and Data on National Income and Product Accounts and Wealth.
^ T. P. Hill (2001). Macroeconomic Data. International Encyclopedia of the Social & Behavioral Sciences. pp. 9111–9117. 
^ Lequiller, François; Blades, Derek (2006). Understanding National Accounts. OECD. 
^ Understanding National Accounts - Lequiller François, Derek W. Blades - Google Boeken. Books.google.com. Retrieved 2013-03-25. 
^ • Amartya Sen, 1979. "The Welfare Basis of Real Income Comparisons: A Survey," Journal of Economic Literature, 17(1), p p. 1–45.
   • D. Usher, 1987. "real income," The New Palgrave: A Dictionary of Economics, v. 4, p. 104.
^ From The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics, 2008, 2nd Edition, with Abstract links:
   • "economic growth" by Peter Howitt and David N. Weil
   • "growth accounting" by Francesco Caselli.
^ • Oskar Morgenstern, 1963. On the Accuracy of Economic Observations, 2nd ed. ch. 16. Princeton.
   • H. O. Stekler, 1964. [Review], Journal of the American Statistical Association, 59(307), pp. 965-967.
   • J. Steven Landefeld, Eugene P. Seskin, and Barbara M. Fraumeni. 2008. "Taking the Pulse of the Economy: Measuring GDP." Journal of Economic Perspectives, 22(2), pp. 193–216. PDF link (press +).
   From The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics, 2nd Edition, with Abstract links:
  • "intangible capital" by Daniel E. Sichel
   • "national income" by Thomas K. Rymes.
^ • The Economist, Economics A-Z, "Generational Accounting." Accessed 9 Aug. 2010.
   • Jagadeesh Gokhale, 2008. "generational accounting." The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics, 2nd Edition. Abstract and uncorrected proof.
   • Laurence J. Kotlikoff, 1992. Generational Accounting: Knowing Who Pays, and When, for What We Spend. Free Press. Review extract.
^ From The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics, 2008, 2nd Edition, with Abstract links:
   • "green national accounting" by Sjak Smulders
   • "sustainability' by Daniel W. Bromley
   • National Research Council, 1994. Assigning Economic Value to Natural Resources, National Academy Press. Chapter links.
^ • Robert Topel, 2008. "unemployment," The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics, 2nd Edition. Abstract.
  • Katharine Bradbury, 2008. "unemployment measurement," The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics, 2nd Edition. Abstract.
^ Robert J. Gordon and Peter K. Clark, 1984, "Unemployment and Potential Output in the 1980s," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, (2), pp. 537-568 Archived 2016-05-21 at the Portuguese Web Archive.
^ Blades, François Lequiller, Derek (2006). Understanding national accounts (Reprint. ed.). Paris: OECD. p. 112. ISBN 978-92-64-02566-0. 
^ Blades, François Lequiller, Derek (2006). Understanding national accounts (Reprint. ed.). Paris: OECD. ISBN 9264025669. GDP lies at the heart of the system of national accounts. 
^ "National Income Accounting and Public Policy" (PDF). 
^ "National Accounts: A Practical Introduction" (PDF). 
^ André Vanoli, 2008. "national accounting, history of," The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics, 2nd Edition. Abstract.
^ United Nations, System of National Accounts 2008-2008 SNA.
^ Economic theory , [1].
^ National Bureau of Economic Research Book Series, 1937-2010. Studies in Income and Wealth, 71 v.








v
t
e


Economic classification of countries






Developed country
Developing country
Least Developed Countries
World Bank high-income economy
Newly industrialized country
Heavily indebted poor countries





Three-World Model



First World
Second World
Third World
Fourth World





Gross domestic product (GDP)




Nominal



By country

past and projected

per capita


per capita







Purchasing
power parity (PPP)



By country

future estimates

per capita


per capita
per hour worked
per person employed










Gross national income (GNI)



(Nominal, Atlas method) per capita
(PPP) per capita





Wages



Average wage

Europe by monthly average wage


Employee compensation (per hour)
List of countries by median wage
Minimum wages

Canada
Europe
United States







Wealth



Wealth per adult





Other national accounts



Gross National Happiness
Net material product
Research and development spending





Human development



Human Development Index

by country
inequality-adjusted


Human Poverty Index
Percentage living in poverty
Social Progress Index





Digital divide



ICT Development Index
Number of broadband Internet subscriptions
Number of Internet users
Smartphone penetration





Net international
investment position (NIIP)



Per capita












v
t
e


Economics






Economic theory
Econometrics
Applied economics





Macroeconomics



Adaptive expectations
Aggregate demand
Balance of payments
Business cycle
Capacity utilization
Capital flight
Central bank
Consumer confidence
Currency
Demand shock
Depression (Great Depression)
DSGE
Economic growth
Economic indicator
Economic rent
Effective demand
General Theory of Keynes
Hyperinflation
Inflation
Interest
Interest rate
Investment
IS–LM model
Microfoundations
Monetary policy
Money
NAIRU
National accounts
PPP
Rate of profit
Rational expectations
Recession
Saving
Shrinkflation
Stagflation
Supply shock
Unemployment
Macroeconomics publications





Microeconomics



Aggregation problem
Budget set
Consumer choice
Convexity
Cost–benefit analysis
Deadweight loss
Distribution
Duopoly
Economic equilibrium
Economic shortage
Economic surplus
Economies of scale
Economies of scope
Elasticity
Expected utility hypothesis
Externality
General equilibrium theory
Indifference curve
Intertemporal choice
Marginal cost
Market failure
Market structure
Monopoly
Monopsony
Non-convexity
Oligopoly
Opportunity cost
Preference
Production set
Profit
Public good
Returns to scale
Risk aversion
Scarcity
Social choice theory
Sunk costs
Supply and demand
Theory of the firm
Trade
Transaction cost
Value
Uncertainty
Utility
Microeconomics publications





Applied fields



Agricultural
Business
Demographic
Development
Economic history
Education
Engineering
Environmental
Financial
Health
Industrial organization
International
Knowledge
Labour
Law and economics
Monetary
Natural resource
Public
Service
Transportation
Urban
Welfare





Methodology



Behavioral economics
Computational economics
Econometrics
Economic systems
Experimental economics
Mathematical economics
Methodological publications





Economic thought



Ancient economic thought
Austrian school of economics
Chicago school of economics
Classical economics
Feminist economics
Heterodox economics
Institutional economics
Keynesian economics
Mainstream economics
Marxian economics
Neoclassical economics
Post-Keynesian economics
Schools overview






Notable economists and
thinkers within economics




Kenneth Arrow
Gary Becker
Francis Ysidro Edgeworth
Milton Friedman
Ragnar Frisch
Friedrich Hayek
Harold Hotelling
John Maynard Keynes
Tjalling Koopmans
Paul Krugman
Robert Lucas Jr.
Jacob Marschak
Alfred Marshall
Karl Marx
John von Neumann
Vilfredo Pareto
David Ricardo
Paul Samuelson
Joseph Schumpeter
Amartya Sen
Herbert A. Simon
Adam Smith
Robert Solow
Léon Walras
more





International organizations



Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation
Economic Cooperation Organization
European Free Trade Association
International Monetary Fund
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
World Bank
World Trade Organization








Category
Index
Lists
Outline
Publications
Business and economics portal












v
t
e


Statistics






Outline
Index










Descriptive statistics







Continuous data




Center



Mean

arithmetic
geometric
harmonic


Median
Mode





Dispersion



Variance
Standard deviation
Coefficient of variation
Percentile
Range
Interquartile range





Shape



Central limit theorem
Moments

Skewness
Kurtosis
L-moments










Count data



Index of dispersion





Summary tables



Grouped data
Frequency distribution
Contingency table





Dependence



Pearson product-moment correlation
Rank correlation

Spearman's rho
Kendall's tau


Partial correlation
Scatter plot





Graphics



Bar chart
Biplot
Box plot
Control chart
Correlogram
Fan chart
Forest plot
Histogram
Pie chart
Q–Q plot
Run chart
Scatter plot
Stem-and-leaf display
Radar chart
















Data collection







Study design



Population
Statistic
Effect size
Statistical power
Sample size determination
Missing data





Survey methodology



Sampling

stratified
cluster


Standard error
Opinion poll
Questionnaire





Controlled experiments



Design

control
optimal


Controlled trial
Randomized
Random assignment
Replication
Blocking
Interaction
Factorial experiment





Uncontrolled studies



Observational study
Natural experiment
Quasi-experiment
















Statistical inference







Statistical theory



Population
Statistic
Probability distribution
Sampling distribution

Order statistic


Empirical distribution

Density estimation


Statistical model

Lp space


Parameter

location
scale
shape


Parametric family

Likelihood (monotone)
Location–scale family
Exponential family


Completeness
Sufficiency
Statistical functional

Bootstrap
U
V


Optimal decision

loss function


Efficiency
Statistical distance

divergence


Asymptotics
Robustness





Frequentist inference




Point estimation



Estimating equations

Maximum likelihood
Method of moments
M-estimator
Minimum distance


Unbiased estimators

Mean-unbiased minimum-variance

Rao–Blackwellization
Lehmann–Scheffé theorem


Median unbiased


Plug-in





Interval estimation



Confidence interval
Pivot
Likelihood interval
Prediction interval
Tolerance interval
Resampling

Bootstrap
Jackknife







Testing hypotheses



1- & 2-tails
Power

Uniformly most powerful test


Permutation test

Randomization test


Multiple comparisons





Parametric tests



Likelihood-ratio
Wald
Score








Specific tests







Z (normal)
Student's t-test
F





Goodness of fit



Chi-squared
Kolmogorov–Smirnov
Anderson–Darling
Lilliefors
Jarque–Bera
Normality (Shapiro–Wilk)
Likelihood-ratio test
Model selection

Cross validation
AIC
BIC







Rank statistics



Sign

Sample median


Signed rank (Wilcoxon)

Hodges–Lehmann estimator


Rank sum (Mann–Whitney)
Nonparametric anova

1-way (Kruskal–Wallis)
2-way (Friedman)
Ordered alternative (Jonckheere–Terpstra)










Bayesian inference



Bayesian probability

prior
posterior


Credible interval
Bayes factor
Bayesian estimator

Maximum posterior estimator





















Correlation
Regression analysis










Correlation



Pearson product-moment
Partial correlation
Confounding variable
Coefficient of determination





Regression analysis



Errors and residuals
Regression model validation
Mixed effects models
Simultaneous equations models
Multivariate adaptive regression splines (MARS)





Linear regression



Simple linear regression
Ordinary least squares
General linear model
Bayesian regression





Non-standard predictors



Nonlinear regression
Nonparametric
Semiparametric
Isotonic
Robust
Heteroscedasticity
Homoscedasticity





Generalized linear model



Exponential families
Logistic (Bernoulli) / Binomial / Poisson regressions





Partition of variance



Analysis of variance (ANOVA, anova)
Analysis of covariance
Multivariate ANOVA
Degrees of freedom
















Categorical / Multivariate / Time-series / Survival analysis







Categorical



Cohen's kappa
Contingency table
Graphical model
Log-linear model
McNemar's test





Multivariate



Regression
Manova
Principal components
Canonical correlation
Discriminant analysis
Cluster analysis
Classification
Structural equation model

Factor analysis


Multivariate distributions

Elliptical distributions

Normal









Time-series




General



Decomposition
Trend
Stationarity
Seasonal adjustment
Exponential smoothing
Cointegration
Structural break
Granger causality





Specific tests



Dickey–Fuller
Johansen
Q-statistic (Ljung–Box)
Durbin–Watson
Breusch–Godfrey





Time domain



Autocorrelation (ACF)

partial (PACF)


Cross-correlation (XCF)
ARMA model
ARIMA model (Box–Jenkins)
Autoregressive conditional heteroskedasticity (ARCH)
Vector autoregression (VAR)





Frequency domain



Spectral density estimation
Fourier analysis
Wavelet








Survival




Survival function



Kaplan–Meier estimator (product limit)
Proportional hazards models
Accelerated failure time (AFT) model
First hitting time





Hazard function



Nelson–Aalen estimator





Test



Log-rank test



















Applications







Biostatistics



Bioinformatics
Clinical trials / studies
Epidemiology
Medical statistics





Engineering statistics



Chemometrics
Methods engineering
Probabilistic design
Process / quality control
Reliability
System identification





Social statistics



Actuarial science
Census
Crime statistics
Demography
Econometrics
National accounts
Official statistics
Population statistics
Psychometrics





Spatial statistics



Cartography
Environmental statistics
Geographic information system
Geostatistics
Kriging














Category
Portal
Commons
 WikiProject









Authority control



GND: 4063886-8
NDL: 00566368











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=National_accounts&oldid=817118195"					Categories: National accountsEconomic dataOfficial statisticsHidden categories: Webarchive template other archivesCategories which are included in the JEL classification codesWikipedia articles with GND identifiers