



National Gallery, Trafalgar Square












Location within Central London






Established
1824; 194 years ago (1824)


Location
Trafalgar Square
London, WC2
United Kingdom


Coordinates
51°30′31″N 0°07′42″W﻿ / ﻿51.5086°N 0.1283°W﻿ / 51.5086; -0.1283


Visitors

5,908,254 (2015)[1][2]

Ranked 3rd nationally[2]
Ranked 11th globally[3]




Director
Gabriele Finaldi


Public transit access
 Charing Cross
 Charing Cross
Detailed information below


Website
www.nationalgallery.org.uk


The National Gallery is an art museum in Trafalgar Square in the City of Westminster, in Central London. Founded in 1824, it houses a collection of over 2,300 paintings dating from the mid-13th century to 1900.[a]
The Gallery is an exempt charity, and a non-departmental public body of the Department for Culture, Media and Sport.[4] Its collection belongs to the government on behalf of the British public, and entry to the main collection is free of charge. It is among the most visited art museums in the world, after the Louvre, the British Museum, and the Metropolitan Museum of Art.[3]
Unlike comparable museums in continental Europe, the National Gallery was not formed by nationalising an existing royal or princely art collection. It came into being when the British government bought 38 paintings from the heirs of John Julius Angerstein, an insurance broker and patron of the arts, in 1824. After that initial purchase the Gallery was shaped mainly by its early directors, notably Sir Charles Lock Eastlake, and by private donations, which comprise two-thirds of the collection.[5]
The resulting collection is small in size, compared with many European national galleries, but encyclopaedic in scope; most major developments in Western painting "from Giotto to Cézanne"[6] are represented with important works. It used to be claimed that this was one of the few national galleries that had all its works on permanent exhibition,[7] but this is no longer the case.
The present building, the third to house the National Gallery, was designed by William Wilkins from 1832 to 1838. Only the façade onto Trafalgar Square remains essentially unchanged from this time, as the building has been expanded piecemeal throughout its history. Wilkins's building was often criticised for the perceived weaknesses of its design and for its lack of space; the latter problem led to the establishment of the Tate Gallery for British art in 1897.
The Sainsbury Wing, an extension to the west by Robert Venturi and Denise Scott Brown, is a notable example of Postmodernist architecture in Britain. The current Director of the National Gallery is Gabriele Finaldi.



Contents


1 History

1.1 Call for a National Gallery
1.2 Foundation and early history
1.3 Growth under Eastlake and his successors
1.4 Early 20th century
1.5 World War II
1.6 Post-war developments


2 Architecture

2.1 William Wilkins's building
2.2 Alteration and expansion (Pennethorne, Barry and Taylor)
2.3 20th century: modernisation versus restoration
2.4 Sainsbury Wing and later additions


3 Controversies
4 List of Directors of the National Gallery
5 Collection highlights
6 Transport connections
7 See also
8 Notes
9 References

9.1 Footnotes
9.2 Bibliography


10 External links



History[edit]
Call for a National Gallery[edit]




The Raising of Lazarus by Sebastiano del Piombo, from the collection of John Julius Angerstein. This became the founding collection of the National Gallery in 1824. The painting has the accession number NG1, making it officially the first painting to enter the Gallery.


The late 18th century saw the nationalisation of royal or princely art collections across mainland Europe. The Bavarian royal collection (now in the Alte Pinakothek, Munich) opened to the public in 1779, that of the Medici in Florence around 1789 (as the Uffizi Gallery), and the Museum Français at the Louvre was formed out of the former French royal collection in 1793.[8] Great Britain, however, did not emulate the continental model, and the British Royal Collection remains in the sovereign's possession today. In 1777 the British government had the opportunity to buy an art collection of international stature, when the descendants of Sir Robert Walpole put his collection up for sale. The MP John Wilkes argued for the government to buy this "invaluable treasure" and suggested that it be housed in "a noble gallery... to be built in the spacious garden of the British Museum"[9] Nothing came of Wilkes's appeal and 20 years later the collection was bought in its entirety by Catherine the Great; it is now to be found in the State Hermitage Museum in St Petersburg.
A plan to acquire 150 paintings from the Orléans collection, which had been brought to London for sale in 1798, also failed, despite the interest of both the King and the Prime Minister, Pitt the Younger.[10] The twenty-five paintings from that collection now in the Gallery, including "NG1", have arrived by a variety of routes. In 1799 the dealer Noel Desenfans offered a ready-made national collection to the British government; he and his partner Sir Francis Bourgeois had assembled it for the king of Poland, before the Third Partition in 1795 abolished Polish independence.[8] This offer was declined and Bourgeois bequeathed the collection to his old school, Dulwich College, on his death. The collection opened in Britain's first purpose-built public gallery, the Dulwich Picture Gallery, in 1814. The Scottish dealer William Buchanan and another collector, Joseph Count Truchsess, both formed art collections expressly as the basis for a future national collection, but their respective offers (made in the same year, 1803) were also declined.[8]
Following the Walpole sale many artists, including James Barry and John Flaxman, had made renewed calls for the establishment of a National Gallery, arguing that a British school of painting could only flourish if it had access to the canon of European painting. The British Institution, founded in 1805 by a group of aristocratic connoisseurs, attempted to address this situation. The members lent works to exhibitions that changed annually, while an art school was held in the summer months. However, as the paintings that were lent were often mediocre,[11] some artists resented the Institution and saw it as a racket for the gentry to increase the sale prices of their Old Master paintings.[12] One of the Institution's founding members, Sir George Beaumont, Bt, would eventually play a major role in the National Gallery's foundation by offering a gift of 16 paintings.
In 1823 another major art collection came on the market, which had been assembled by the recently deceased John Julius Angerstein. Angerstein was a Russian-born émigré banker based in London; his collection numbered 38 paintings, including works by Raphael and Hogarth's Marriage à-la-mode series. On 1 July 1823 George Agar Ellis, a Whig politician, proposed to the House of Commons that it purchase the collection.[13] The appeal was given added impetus by Beaumont's offer, which came with two conditions: that the government buy Angerstein's collection, and that a suitable building was to be found. The unexpected repayment of a war debt by Austria finally moved the government to buy Angerstein's collection, for £57,000.
Foundation and early history[edit]




100 Pall Mall, the home of the National Gallery from 1824 to 1834


The National Gallery opened to the public on 10 May 1824, housed in Angerstein's former townhouse at No. 100 Pall Mall. Angerstein's paintings were joined in 1826 by those from Beaumont's collection, and in 1831 by the Reverend William Holwell Carr's bequest of 35 paintings.[14] Initially the Keeper of Paintings, William Seguier, bore the burden of managing the Gallery, but in July 1824 some of this responsibility fell to the newly formed board of trustees.
The National Gallery at Pall Mall was frequently overcrowded and hot and its diminutive size in comparison with the Louvre in Paris was the cause of national embarrassment. But Agar Ellis, now a trustee of the Gallery, appraised the site for being "in the very gangway of London"; this was seen as necessary for the Gallery to fulfil its social purpose.[15] Subsidence in No. 100 caused the Gallery to move briefly to No. 105 Pall Mall, which the novelist Anthony Trollope described as a "dingy, dull, narrow house, ill-adapted for the exhibition of the treasures it held".[15] This in turn had to be demolished for the opening of a road to Carlton House Terrace.[16]
In 1832 construction began on a new building by William Wilkins on the site of the King's Mews in Charing Cross, in an area that had been transformed over the 1820s into Trafalgar Square. The location was a significant one, between the wealthy West End and poorer areas to the east.[17] The argument that the collection could be accessed by people of all social classes outstripped other concerns, such as the pollution of central London or the failings of Wilkins's building, when the prospect of a move to South Kensington was mooted in the 1850s. According to the Parliamentary Commission of 1857, "The existence of the pictures is not the end purpose of the collection, but the means only to give the people an ennobling enjoyment".[18]
From 1837 until 1868 the Royal Academy was housed in the east wing of the building.
Growth under Eastlake and his successors[edit]
15th- and 16th-century Italian paintings were at the core of the National Gallery and for the first 30 years of its existence the Trustees' independent acquisitions were mainly limited to works by High Renaissance masters. Their conservative tastes resulted in several missed opportunities and the management of the Gallery later fell into complete disarray, with no acquisitions being made between 1847 and 1850.[19] A critical House of Commons report in 1851 called for the appointment of a director, whose authority would surpass that of the trustees. Many thought the position would go to the German art historian Gustav Friedrich Waagen, whom the Gallery had consulted on previous occasions about the lighting and display of the collections. However, the man preferred for the job by Queen Victoria, Prince Albert and the Prime Minister, Lord Russell, was the Keeper of Paintings at the Gallery, Sir Charles Lock Eastlake, who was President of the Royal Academy, played an essential role in the foundation of the Arundel Society, and knew most of London's leading art experts.




The Baptism of Christ by Piero della Francesca, one of Eastlake's purchases


The new director’s taste was for the Northern and Early Italian Renaissance masters or "primitives", who had been neglected by the Gallery’s acquisitions policy but were slowly gaining recognition from connoisseurs. Eastlake made annual tours to the continent and to Italy in particular, seeking out appropriate paintings to buy for the Gallery. In all, he bought 148 pictures abroad and 46 in Britain,[20] among the former such seminal works as Paolo Uccello’s Battle of San Romano. Eastlake also amassed a private art collection during this period, consisting of paintings that he knew did not interest the trustees. His ultimate aim, however, was for them to enter the National Gallery; this was duly arranged upon his death by his friend and successor as director, William Boxall, and his widow Lady Eastlake.
The Gallery’s lack of space remained acute in this period. In 1845 a large bequest of British paintings was made by Robert Vernon; there was insufficient room in the Wilkins building so these were displayed first in Vernon’s town house at No. 50 Pall Mall and then at Marlborough House.[21] The Gallery was even less well equipped for its next major bequest, as J. M. W. Turner was to bequeath the entire contents of his studio, excepting unfinished works, to the nation upon his death in 1851. The first 20 of these were displayed off-site in Marlborough House in 1856.[22] Ralph Nicholson Wornum the Gallery's Keeper and Secretary, worked with John Ruskin to bring the bequest together. The stipulation in Turner's will that two of his paintings be displayed alongside works by Claude[23] is still honoured in Room 15 of the Gallery, but his bequest has never been adequately displayed in its entirety; today the works are divided between Trafalgar Square and the Clore Gallery, a small purpose-built extension to the Tate completed in 1985.
The third director, Sir Frederick William Burton, laid the foundations of the collection of 18th-century art and made several outstanding purchases from English private collections. The acquisition in 1885 of two paintings from Blenheim Palace, Raphael's Ansidei Madonna and Van Dyck's Equestrian Portrait of Charles I, with a record-setting grant of £87,500 from the Treasury, brought the Gallery's "golden age of collecting" to an end, as its annual purchase grant was suspended for several years thereafter.[24] When the Gallery purchased Holbein's Ambassadors from the Earl of Radnor in 1890, it did so with the aid of private individuals for the first time in its history.[25] In 1897 the formation of the National Gallery of British Art, known unofficially from early in its history as the Tate Gallery, allowed some British works to be moved off-site, following the precedent set by the Vernon collection and the Turner Bequest. Works by artists born after 1790 were moved to the new gallery on Millbank, which allowed Hogarth, Turner and Constable to remain in Trafalgar Square.
Early 20th century[edit]




Venus at her Mirror (The Rokeby Venus) by Diego Velázquez


The agricultural crisis at the turn of the 20th century caused many aristocratic families to sell their paintings, but the British national collections were priced out of the market by American plutocrats.[26] This prompted the foundation of the National Art Collections Fund, a society of subscribers dedicated to stemming the flow of artworks to the United States. Their first acquisition for the National Gallery was Velázquez's Rokeby Venus in 1906, followed by Holbein's Portrait of Christina of Denmark in 1909. However, despite the crisis in aristocratic fortunes, the following decade was one of several great bequests from private collectors. In 1909 the industrialist Dr Ludwig Mond gave 42 Italian renaissance paintings, including the Mond Crucifixion by Raphael, to the Gallery.[27] Other bequests of note were those of George Salting in 1910, Austen Henry Layard in 1916 and Sir Hugh Lane in 1917; the last of these was one of the Gallery's more controversial bequests.
In a rare example of the political protest for which Trafalgar Square is famous occurring in the National Gallery, the Rokeby Venus was damaged on 10 March 1914 by Mary Richardson, a campaigner for women's suffrage, in protest against the arrest of Emmeline Pankhurst the previous day. Later that month another suffragette attacked five Bellinis, causing the Gallery to close until the start of the First World War, when the Women's Social and Political Union called for an end to violent acts drawing attention to their plight.[28]
The reception of Impressionist art at the Gallery got off to an exceptionally stormy start. In 1906, Sir Hugh Lane promised 39 paintings, including Renoir's Umbrellas, to the National Gallery on his death, unless a suitable building could be built in Dublin. Although eagerly accepted by the director Charles Holroyd, they were received with extreme hostility by the Trustees; Lord Redesdale wrote that "I would as soon expect to hear of a Mormon service being conducted in St. Paul's Cathedral as to see the exhibition of the works of the modern French Art-rebels in the sacred precincts of Trafalgar Square".[29] Perhaps as a result of such attitudes, Lane amended his will with a codicil that the works should only go to Ireland, but crucially this was never witnessed.[30] Lane died on board the RMS Lusitania in 1915, and a dispute began which was not resolved until 1959. Part of the collection is now on permanent loan to Dublin City Gallery ("The Hugh Lane") and other works rotate between London and Dublin every few years.
A fund for the purchase of modern paintings established by Samuel Courtauld in 1923 bought Seurat's Bathers at Asnières and other notable modern works for the nation;[31] in 1934 these transferred to the National Gallery from the Tate.
World War II[edit]




Paintings being evacuated from the National Gallery during the Second World War


Shortly before the outbreak of World War II the paintings were evacuated to various locations in Wales, including Penrhyn Castle and the university colleges of Bangor and Aberystwyth.[32] In 1940, as the Battle of France raged, a more secure home was sought, and there were discussions about moving the paintings to Canada. This idea was firmly rejected by Winston Churchill, who wrote in a telegram to the director Kenneth Clark, “bury them in caves or in cellars, but not a picture shall leave these islands”.[33] Instead a slate quarry at Manod, near Blaenau Ffestiniog in North Wales, was requisitioned for the Gallery's use. In the seclusion afforded by the paintings' new location, the Keeper (and future director) Martin Davies began to compile scholarly catalogues on the collection, helped by the fact that the Gallery's library was also stored in the quarry. The move to Manod confirmed the importance of storing paintings at a constant temperature and humidity, something the Gallery's conservators had long suspected but had hitherto been unable to prove.[34] This eventually resulted in the first air-conditioned gallery opening in 1949.[21]
For the course of the war Myra Hess, and other musicians, such as Moura Lympany, gave daily lunch-time recitals in the empty building, to raise public morale at a time when every concert hall in London was closed.[35] A number of art exhibitions were held at the Gallery as a complement to the recitals. The first of these was British Painting since Whistler in 1940, organised by Lillian Browse,[36] who also mounted the major joint retrospective Exhibition of Paintings by Sir William Nicholson and Jack B. Yeats held from 1 January – 15 March 1942, which was seen by 10,518 visitors.[37][38] Exhibitions of work by war artists, including Paul Nash, Henry Moore and Stanley Spencer, were also held; the War Artists' Advisory Committee had been set up by Clark in order "to keep artists at work on any pretext".[39] In 1941 a request from an artist to see Rembrandt's Portrait of Margaretha de Geer (a new acquisition) resulted in the "Picture of the Month" scheme, in which a single painting was removed from Manod and exhibited to the general public in the National Gallery each month. The art critic Herbert Read, writing that year, called the National Gallery "a defiant outpost of culture right in the middle of a bombed and shattered metropolis".[40] The paintings returned to Trafalgar Square in 1945.
Post-war developments[edit]




Titian’s Diana and Actaeon, bought in 2008, jointly with the National Gallery of Scotland



Titian’s Diana and Callisto, bought in 2012, jointly with the National Gallery of Scotland



In the post-war years, acquisitions have become increasingly difficult for the National Gallery as the prices for Old Masters – and even more so for the Impressionists and Post-impressionists – have risen beyond its means. Some of the Gallery's most significant purchases in this period would have been impossible without the major public appeals backing them, including The Virgin and Child with St. Anne and St. John the Baptist by Leonardo da Vinci (bought in 1962) and Titian’s Death of Actaeon (1972). The Gallery's purchase grant from the government was frozen in 1985, but later that year it received an endowment of £50 million from Sir Paul Getty, enabling many major purchases to be made.[21] In April 1985 Lord Sainsbury of Preston Candover and his brothers, the Hon. Simon Sainsbury and Sir Timothy Sainsbury, had made a donation that would enable the construction of the Sainsbury Wing.[41]
The directorship of Neil MacGregor saw a major rehang at the Gallery, dispensing with the classification of paintings by national school that had been introduced by Eastlake. The new chronological hang sought to emphasise the interaction between cultures rather than fixed national characteristics, reflecting the change in art historical values since the 19th century.[42] In other respects, however, Victorian tastes were rehabilitated: the building's interiors were no longer considered an embarrassment and were restored, and in 1999 the Gallery accepted a bequest of 26 Italian Baroque paintings from Sir Denis Mahon. Earlier in the 20th century many considered the Baroque to be beyond the pale: in 1945 the Gallery's trustees declined to buy a Guercino from Mahon's collection for £200. The same painting was valued at £4 million in 2003.[43] Mahon's bequest was made on the condition that the Gallery would never deaccession any of its paintings or charge for admission.[44]


Associate artists


Paula Rego
1989–1990


Ken Kiff
1991–1993


Peter Blake
1994–1996


Ana Maria Pacheco
1997–1999


Ron Mueck
2000–2002


John Virtue
2003–2005


Alison Watt
2006–2008


Michael Landy
2009–2013


George Shaw
2014–


Since 1989, the gallery has run a scheme that gives a studio to contemporary artists to create work based on the permanent collection. They usually hold the position of associate artist for two years and are given an exhibition in the National Gallery at the end of their tenure.
The respective remits of the National and Tate Galleries, which had long been contested by the two institutions, were more clearly defined in 1996. 1900 was established as the cut-off point for paintings in the National Gallery, and in 1997 more than 60 post-1900 paintings from the collection were given to the Tate on a long-term loan, in return for works by Gauguin and others. However, future expansion of the National Gallery may yet see the return of 20th-century paintings to its walls.[45]
In the 21st century there have been three large fundraising campaigns at the Gallery: in 2004, to buy Raphael’s Madonna of the Pinks, in 2008, for Titian's Diana and Actaeon, and in 2012, Titian's Diana and Callisto. Both Titians were bought in tandem with the National Gallery of Scotland for £95 m. Both of these major works were sold from the famous collection of the Duke of Sutherland. The National Gallery is now largely priced out of the market for Old Master paintings and can only make such acquisitions with the backing of major public appeals; the departing director Charles Saumarez Smith expressed his frustration at this situation in 2007.[46]
In 2014, the National Gallery was the subject of a documentary film by Frederick Wiseman. The film shows the gallery administration and staff at work, the conservation laboratory, docent tours, and the mounting of Leonardo Da Vinci, J. M. W. Turner, and Titian exhibitions in 2011–2012. [47]
Architecture[edit]
William Wilkins's building[edit]


National Gallery



The Wilkins Building, with the church of St Martin-in-the-Fields to the right



Built
1832–8


Architect
William Wilkins


Architectural style(s)
Neoclassical






Listed Building – Grade I



Official name: National Gallery


Designated
5 February 1970


Reference no.
1066236[48]





The first suggestion for a National Gallery on Trafalgar Square came from John Nash, who envisaged it on the site of the King's Mews, while a Parthenon-like building for the Royal Academy would occupy the centre of the square.[49] Economic recession prevented this scheme from being built, but a competition for the Mews site was eventually held in 1831, for which Nash submitted a design with C. R. Cockerell as his co-architect. Nash's popularity was waning by this time, however, and the commission was awarded to William Wilkins, who was involved in the selection of the site and submitted some drawings at the last moment.[50] Wilkins had hoped to build a "Temple of the Arts, nurturing contemporary art through historical example",[51] but the commission was blighted by parsimony and compromise, and the resulting building was deemed a failure on almost all counts.
The site only allowed for the building to be one room deep, as a workhouse and a barracks lay immediately behind.[b] To exacerbate matters, there was a public right of way through the site to these buildings, which accounts for the access porticoes on the eastern and western sides of the façade. These had to incorporate columns from the demolished Carlton House and their relative shortness result in an elevation that was deemed excessively low, and a far cry from the commanding focal point that was desired for the northern end of the Square. Also recycled are the sculptures on the façade, originally intended for Nash's Marble Arch but abandoned due to his financial problems.[c] The eastern half of the building housed the Royal Academy until 1868, which further diminished the space afforded to the Gallery.
The building was the object of public ridicule before it had even been completed, as a version of the design had been leaked to the Literary Gazette in 1833.[52] Two years before completion, its infamous "pepperpot" elevation appeared on the frontispiece of Contrasts (1836), an influential tract by the Gothicist A. W. N. Pugin, as an example of the degeneracy of the classical style.[53] Even William IV (in his last recorded utterance) thought the building a "nasty little pokey hole",[54] while William Makepeace Thackeray called it "a little gin shop of a building".[54] The twentieth-century architectural historian Sir John Summerson echoed these early criticisms when he compared the arrangement of a dome and two diminutive turrets on the roofline to "the clock and vases on a mantelpiece, only less useful".[50] Sir Charles Barry's landscaping of Trafalgar Square, from 1840, included a north terrace so that the building would appear to be raised, thus addressing one of the points of complaint.[16] Opinion on the building had mellowed considerably by 1984, when the Prince of Wales called the Wilkins façade a "much-loved and elegant friend", in contrast to a proposed extension. (See below)







The elevation onto Trafalgar Square in 2013









The piano nobile and ground floor of Wilkins's building, before expansion. Note the passageways behind the east and west porticoes. Areas shaded in pink were used by the Royal Academy until 1868.









Plan of the first floor of the National Gallery in 2013




Alteration and expansion (Pennethorne, Barry and Taylor)[edit]
The first significant alteration made to the building was the single, long gallery added by Sir James Pennethorne in 1860–1. Ornately decorated in comparison with the rooms by Wilkins, it nonetheless worsened the cramped conditions inside the building as it was built over the original entrance hall.[55] Unsurprisingly, several attempts were made either to completely remodel the National Gallery (as suggested by Sir Charles Barry in 1853), or to move it to more capacious premises in Kensington, where the air was also cleaner. In 1867 Barry's son Edward Middleton Barry proposed to replace the Wilkins building with a massive classical building with four domes. The scheme was a failure and contemporary critics denounced the exterior as "a strong plagiarism upon St Paul's Cathedral".[56]
With the demolition of the workhouse, however, Barry was able to build the Gallery's first sequence of grand architectural spaces, from 1872 to 1876. Built to a polychrome Neo-Renaissance design, the Barry Rooms were arranged on a Greek cross-plan around a huge central octagon. Though it compensated for the underwhelming architecture of the Wilkins building, Barry's new wing was disliked by Gallery staff, who considered its monumental aspect to be in conflict with its function as exhibition space. Also, the decorative programme of the rooms did not take their intended contents into account; the ceiling of the 15th- and 16th-century Italian gallery, for instance, was inscribed with the names of British artists of the 19th century.[57] But despite these failures, the Barry Rooms provided the Gallery with a strong axial groundplan. This was to be followed by all subsequent additions to the Gallery for a century, resulting in a building of clear symmetry.
Pennethorne's gallery was demolished for the next phase of building, a scheme by Sir John Taylor extending northwards of the main entrance. Its glass-domed entrance vestibule had painted ceiling decorations by the Crace family firm, who had also worked on the Barry Rooms. A fresco intended for the south wall was never realised, and that space is now taken up by Frederic, Lord Leighton’s painting of Cimabue's Celebrated Madonna carried in Procession through the Streets of Florence (1853–55), lent by the Royal Collection in the 1990s.[58]







The Barry Rooms (1872–76), designed by Edward Middleton Barry









The dome of Room 34, the central octagon of the Barry Rooms









The Staircase Hall, designed by Sir John Taylor in 1884–7. Cimabue's Celebrated Madonna by Frederic, Lord Leighton is visible to the left.









The dome of the Staircase Hall




20th century: modernisation versus restoration[edit]




The Awakening of the Muses (1933), a mosaic by Boris Anrep.


Later additions to the west came more steadily but maintained the coherence of the building by mirroring Barry's cross-axis plan to the east. The use of dark marble for doorcases was also continued, giving the extensions a degree of internal consistency with the older rooms. The classical style was still in use at the National Gallery in 1929, when a Beaux-Arts style gallery was built, funded by the art dealer and Trustee Lord Duveen. However, it was not long before the 20th-century reaction against Victorian attitudes became manifest at the Gallery. From 1928 to 1952 the landing floors of Taylor's entrance hall were relaid with a new series of mosaics by Boris Anrep, who was friendly with the Bloomsbury Group. These mosaics can be read as a satire on 19th-century conventions for the decoration of public buildings, as typified by the Albert Memorial's Frieze of Parnassus.[59] The central mosaic depicting The Awakening of the Muses includes portraits of Virginia Woolf and Greta Garbo, subverting the high moral tone of its Victorian forebears. In place of Christianity's seven virtues, Anrep offered his own set of Modern Virtues, including "Humour" and "Open Mind"; the allegorical figures are again portraits of his contemporaries, including Winston Churchill, Bertrand Russell and T. S. Eliot.[60]
In the 20th century the Gallery's late Victorian interiors fell out of fashion.[61] The Crace ceiling decorations in the entrance hall were not to the taste of the director Charles Holmes, and were obliterated by white paint.[62] The North Galleries, which opened to the public in 1975, marked the arrival of modernist architecture at the National Gallery. In the older rooms, the original classical details were effaced by partitions, daises and suspended roofs, the aim being to create neutral settings which did not distract from contemplation of the paintings. But the Gallery's commitment to modernism was short-lived: by the 1980s Victorian style was no longer considered anathema, and a restoration programme began to restore the 19th- and early-20th-century interiors to their purported original appearance. This began with the refurbishment of the Barry Rooms in 1985–6. From 1996 to 1999 even the North Galleries, by then considered to "lack a positive architectural character" were remodelled in a classical style, albeit a simplified one.[44]
Sainsbury Wing and later additions[edit]




The Sainsbury Wing, as built, seen from Trafalgar Square


The most important addition to the building in recent years has been the Sainsbury Wing, designed by the postmodernist architects Robert Venturi and Denise Scott Brown to house the collection of Renaissance paintings, and built in 1991. The building occupies the "Hampton's site" to the west of the main building, where a department store of the same name had stood until its destruction in the Blitz. The Gallery had long sought expansion into this space[citation needed] and in 1982 a competition was held to find a suitable architect; the shortlist included a radical high-tech proposal by Richard Rogers, among others. The design that won the most votes was by the firm Ahrends, Burton and Koralek, who then modified their proposal to include a tower, similar to that of the Rogers scheme. The proposal was dropped after the Prince of Wales compared the design to a "monstrous carbuncle on the face of a much-loved and elegant friend",[63] The term "monstrous carbuncle", for a modern building that clashes with its surroundings, has since become commonplace.[64][65]
One of the conditions of the 1982 competition was that the new wing had to include commercial offices as well as public gallery space. However, in 1985 it became possible to devote the extension entirely to the Gallery's uses, due to a donation of almost £50 million from Lord Sainsbury and his brothers Simon and Sir Tim Sainsbury. A closed competition was held, and the schemes produced were noticeably more restrained than in the earlier competition.




The main enfilade of the Sainsbury Wing


In contrast with the rich ornamentation of the main building, the galleries in the Sainsbury Wing are pared-down and intimate, to suit the smaller scale of many of the paintings[citation needed]. The main inspirations for these rooms are Sir John Soane's toplit galleries for the Dulwich Picture Gallery and the church interiors of Filippo Brunelleschi (the stone dressing is in pietra serena, the grey stone local to Florence)[citation needed]. The northernmost galleries align with Barry's central axis, so that there is a single vista down the whole length of the Gallery. This axis is exaggerated by the use of false perspective, as the columns flanking each opening gradually diminish in size until the visitor reaches the focal point (as of 2009), an altarpiece by Cima of The Incredulity of St Thomas. Venturi's postmodernist approach to architecture is in full evidence at the Sainsbury Wing, with its stylistic quotations from buildings as disparate as the clubhouses on Pall Mall, the Scala Regia in the Vatican, Victorian warehouses and Ancient Egyptian temples.
Following the pedestrianisation of Trafalgar Square, the Gallery is currently engaged in a masterplan to convert the vacated office space on the ground floor into public space. The plan will also fill in disused courtyards and make use of land acquired from the adjoining National Portrait Gallery in St Martin's Place, which it gave to the National Gallery in exchange for land for its 2000 extension. The first phase, the East Wing Project designed by Jeremy Dixon and Edward Jones, opened to the public in 2004. This provided a new ground level entrance from Trafalgar Square, named in honour of Sir Paul Getty. The main entrance was also refurbished, and reopened in September 2005. Possible future projects include a "West Wing Project" roughly symmetrical with the East Wing Project, which would provide a future ground level entrance, and the public opening of some small rooms at the far eastern end of the building acquired as part of the swap with the National Portrait Gallery. This might include a new public staircase in the bow on the eastern façade. No timetable has been announced for these additional projects.
Controversies[edit]




The restoration of Titian's Bacchus and Ariadne from 1967 to 1968 was a controversial restoration at the National Gallery, due to concern that the painting's tonality had been thrown out of balance.[66]


One of the most persistent criticisms of the National Gallery, apart from those who criticise inadequacies of the building, has been of its conservation policy. The Gallery's detractors accused it of having had an over-zealous approach to restoration. The first cleaning operation at the National Gallery began in 1844 after Eastlake's appointment as Keeper, and was the subject of attacks in the press after the first three paintings to receive the treatment – a Rubens, a Cuyp and a Velázquez – were unveiled to the public in 1846.[67] The Gallery's most virulent critic was J. Morris Moore, who wrote a series of letters to The Times under the pseudonym "Verax" savaging the institution's cleanings. While an 1853 Parliamentary Select Committee set up to investigate the matter cleared the Gallery of any wrongdoing, criticism of its methods has been erupting sporadically ever since from some in the art establishment.




An 1847 Punch cartoon by John Leech depicting the restoration controversy then ongoing


The last major outcry against the use of radical conservation techniques at the National Gallery was seventy-one years ago in the immediate post-war years, following a restoration campaign by Chief Restorer Helmut Ruhemann while the paintings were in Manod Quarry. When the cleaned pictures were exhibited to the public in 1946 there followed a furore with parallels to that of a century earlier. The principal criticism was that the extensive removal of varnish, which was used in the 19th century to protect the surface of paintings but which darkened and discoloured them with time, may have resulted in the loss of "harmonising" glazes added to the paintings by the artists themselves. The opposition to Ruhemann's techniques was led by Ernst Gombrich, a professor at the Warburg Institute who in later correspondence with a restorer described being treated with "offensive superciliousness" by the National Gallery.[68] A 1947 commission concluded that no damage had been done in the recent cleanings.




George Bellows: Men of the Docks (1912)


The National Gallery has also been criticised for misattributing paintings. Kenneth Clark's decision in 1939 to relabel a group of paintings by anonymous artists of the Venetian school as works by Giorgione (a crowd-pulling artist due to the rarity of his paintings) made him unpopular with his staff. More recently, the attribution of a 17th-century painting of Samson and Delilah (bought in 1980) to Rubens has been contested by a group of art historians, who believe that the National Gallery has not admitted the mistake to avoid embarrassing those who were involved in the purchase, many of whom still work for the Gallery.[69]
In February 2014, Men of the Docks, by U.S. artist George Bellows, was bought by the National Gallery for $25.5 million (£15.6 million). It was the first major American painting to be purchased by the Gallery. Director Nicholas Penny termed the painting a new direction for the Gallery – a non-European painting in a European style. Its sale was controversial in the U.S.[70]

List of Directors of the National Gallery[edit]


Name
Years in office


Sir Charles Lock Eastlake
1855–1865


Sir William Boxall
1866–1874


Sir Frederick William Burton
1874–1894


Sir Edward Poynter
1894–1904


Sir Charles Holroyd
1906–1916


Sir Charles Holmes
1916–1928


Sir Augustus Daniel
1929–1933


Sir Kenneth Clark
1934–1945


Sir Philip Hendy
1946–1967


Sir Martin Davies
1968–1973


Sir Michael Levey
1973–1986


Neil MacGregor
1987–2002


Charles Saumarez Smith
2002–2007


Sir Nicholas Penny
2008–2015


Gabriele Finaldi
2015–


Collection highlights[edit]
For a more comprehensive list, see Catalogue of paintings in the National Gallery, London.







Jan van Eyck,
The Arnolfini Portrait









Leonardo da Vinci,
The Virgin of the Rocks









Hans Holbein,
The Ambassadors









J. M. W. Turner,
The Fighting Temeraire









Vincent van Gogh,
Sunflowers






English or French Medieval: The Wilton Diptych
Jan van Eyck: The Arnolfini Portrait
Pisanello: The Vision of Saint Eustace
Paolo Uccello: The Battle of San Romano, Saint George and the Dragon
Rogier van der Weyden: The Magdalen Reading
Masaccio: Madonna and Child
Dieric Bouts: The Entombment
Piero della Francesca: The Baptism of Christ
Antonello da Messina: Portrait of a Man, St Jerome in his Study
Giovanni Bellini: The Agony in the Garden, Madonna del Prato, Portrait of Doge Leonardo Loredan
Piero del Pollaiolo: The Martyrdom of Saint Sebastian
Sandro Botticelli: Venus and Mars, The Mystical Nativity
Hieronymus Bosch: Christ Crowned with Thorns
Leonardo da Vinci: The Virgin of the Rocks, The Virgin and Child with St Anne and St John the Baptist
Albrecht Dürer, St Jerome in the Wilderness
Michelangelo: The Entombment, The Manchester Madonna
Jan Gossaert: The Adoration of the Kings
Raphael: The Aldobrandini Madonna, The Ansidei Madonna, Portrait of Pope Julius II, The Madonna of the Pinks, The Mond Crucifixion, Vision of a Knight
Titian: Allegory of Prudence, Bacchus and Ariadne, Diana and Actaeon, Diana and Callisto, The Death of Actaeon, A Man with a Quilted Sleeve, Portrait of the Vendramin Family
Hans Holbein the Younger: The Ambassadors
Parmigianino: Portrait of a Collector, The Vision of Saint Jerome
Agnolo Bronzino: Venus, Cupid, Folly and Time
Tintoretto: The Origin of the Milky Way
Pieter Bruegel the Elder: The Adoration of the Kings
Paolo Veronese: The Family of Darius before Alexander, The Conversion of Mary Magdalene, Adoration of the Magi
El Greco: Christ Driving the Money Changers from the Temple
Caravaggio: Boy Bitten by a Lizard, Supper at Emmaus, Salome with the Head of John the Baptist
Peter Paul Rubens: The Judgement of Paris
Nicolas Poussin: The Adoration of the Golden Calf
Diego Velázquez: Christ in the House of Martha and Mary, Philip IV in Brown and Silver, The Rokeby Venus
Anthony van Dyck: Equestrian Portrait of Charles I
Claude Lorrain: Seaport with the Embarkation of the Queen of Sheba
Rembrandt: Self-Portrait at the Age of 34, Belshazzar's Feast, Self-Portrait at the Age of 63
Johannes Vermeer: Lady Standing at a Virginal, Lady Seated at a Virginal
Meindert Hobbema: The Avenue at Middelharnis 1689
Canaletto: The Stonemason's Yard
William Hogarth: The Graham Children, Marriage à-la-mode
George Stubbs: Whistlejacket
Thomas Gainsborough: Mr and Mrs Andrews
Joseph Wright of Derby: An Experiment on a Bird in the Air Pump
Francisco Goya: Portrait of the Duke of Wellington
J. M. W. Turner: The Fighting Temeraire, Rain, Steam and Speed
John Constable: The Cornfield, The Hay Wain
Jean Auguste Dominique Ingres: Madame Moitessier
Eugène Delacroix: Ovid among the Scythians
Edgar Degas: Miss La La at the Cirque Fernando, Young Spartans Exercising
Paul Cézanne: Les Grandes Baigneuses
Claude Monet: Snow at Argenteuil
Pierre-Auguste Renoir: The Umbrellas
Henri Rousseau: Tiger in a Tropical Storm (Surprised!)
Vincent van Gogh: Sunflowers, A Wheatfield with Cypresses
Georges Seurat: Bathers at Asnières


Transport connections[edit]


Service
Station/Stop
Lines/Routes served
Distance
from National Gallery


London Buses 
Trafalgar Square / Charing Cross Station 
24, 29, 176



Trafalgar Square 
6, 9, 13, 15, 23, 139



Trafalgar Square / Charing Cross Station 
3, 12, 88, 159, 453



Trafalgar Square 
3, 6, 12, 13, 15, 23, 88, 139, 159, 453



London Underground 
Charing Cross





Embankment




0.3-mile walk[71]


National Rail 
Charing Cross 

0.2-mile walk[72]


See also[edit]

Micro Gallery, installed in 1991.
Doctor Who, "The Day of the Doctor", appeared in the 50th anniversary special in 2013.

Notes[edit]


a. ^ Sculptures and applied art are in the Victoria and Albert Museum, the British Museum houses earlier art, non-Western art, prints and drawings, and art of a later date is at Tate Modern. Some British art is in the National Gallery, but the National Collection of British Art is mainly in Tate Britain.


b. ^ St Martin's Workhouse (to the east) was cleared for the construction of E. M. Barry's extension, whereas St George's Barracks stayed until 1911, supposedly because of the need for troops to be at hand to quell disturbances in Trafalgar Square. (Conlin 2006, p. 401) Wilkins hoped for more land to the south, but was denied it as building there would have obscured the view of St Martin-in-the-Fields.


c. ^ They are as follows: above the main entrance, a blank roundel (originally to feature the Duke of Wellington's face) flanked by two female figures (personifications of Europe and Asia/India, sites of his campaigns) and high up on the eastern façade, Minerva by John Flaxman, originally Britannia.


References[edit]
Footnotes[edit]


^ "Visits made in 2015 to visitor attractions in membership with ALVA". ALVA. Retrieved 9 March 2016. 
^ a b Latest Visitor Figures, ALVA, 2014. Retrieved on 10 July 2014.
^ a b Top 100 Art Museum Attendance, The Art Newspaper, 2014. Retrieved on 10 July 2014.
^ "Constitution". The National Gallery. Archived from the original on 6 April 2010. Retrieved 14 March 2010. 
^ Gentili, Barcham & Whiteley 2000, p. 7
^ Chilvers, Ian (2003). The Concise Oxford Dictionary of Art and Artists. Oxford Oxford University Press, p. 413. The formula was used by Michael Levey, later the Gallery's eleventh director, for the title of a popular survey of European painting: Levey, Michael (1972). From Giotto to Cézanne: A Concise History of Painting. London: Thames and Hudson
^ Potterton 1977, p. 8
^ a b c Taylor 1999, pp. 29–30
^ Moore, Andrew (2 October 1996). "Sir Robert Walpole's pictures in Russia". Magazine Antiques. Retrieved 14 October 2007. [dead link]
^ Penny 2008, p. 466
^ Fullerton, Peter (1979). Some aspects of the early years of the British Institution for Promoting the Fine Arts in the United Kingdom 1805–1825. MA dissertation, Courtauld Institute of Art., p. 37
^ Conlin 2006, p. 45
^ Conlin 2006, p. 51
^ Crookham 2009, p. 43
^ a b Taylor 1999, pp. 36–7
^ a b 'Trafalgar Square and the National Gallery', Survey of London: volume 20: St Martin-in-the-Fields, pt III: Trafalgar Square & Neighbourhood (1940), pp. 15–18. Date accessed: 15 December 2009.
^ MacGregor 2004, p. 30
^ Quoted in Langmuir 2005, p. 11
^ Robertson, David (2004). "Eastlake, Sir Charles Lock (1793–1865)", Oxford Dictionary of National Biography, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
^ Grove Dictionary of Art, Vol. 9, p. 683
^ a b c Baker, Christopher and Henry, Tom (2001). "A short history of the National Gallery" in The National Gallery: Complete Illustrated Catalogue. London: National Gallery Company, pp. x–xix
^ Crookham 2012, p. 56
^ Smith 2009, pp. 72–3
^ Conlin 2006, pp. 87–9
^ Smith 2009, p. 93
^ Conlin 2006, p. 107
^ The Mond Bequest Archived 2 November 2005 at the Wayback Machine. (Official NG website)
^ Spalding 1998, p. 39
^ Quoted in Conlin 2006, p. 131
^ Conlin 2006, p. 132
^ Conlin 2006, p. 131
^ Bosman 2008, p. 25
^ MacGregor 2004, p. 43
^ Bosman 2008, p. 79
^ Bosman 2008, p. 35
^ Farr, Dennis (2006). "Empathy for Art and Artists: Lillian Browse, 1906–2005". Newsletter of the Courtauld Institute of Art, Issue 21: Spring 2006. Accessed March 2012. Archived 7 October 2013 at the Wayback Machine.
^ Clark, Sir Kenneth (1942). Exhibition of Paintings by Sir William Nicholson and Jack B. Yeats, exhibition catalogue. London: National Gallery.
^ Reed, Patricia (2011). William Nicholson: Catalogue raisonné of the Oil Paintings. London; New Haven: Modern Art Press, Yale University Press. ISBN 978 0 300 17054 2. pp. 636–638
^ Bosman 2008, pp. 91–3
^ Bosman 2008, p. 99
^ Conlin 2006, p. 429
^ Conlin 2006, p. 435
^ "Sir Denis Mahon". Cronaca. 23 February 2003. Archived from the original on 7 December 2008. Retrieved 8 February 2009. 
^ a b Gaskell 2000, pp. 179–82
^ Bailey, Martin (2 November 2005). "National Gallery may start acquiring 20th-century art". The Art Newspaper. Archived from the original on 28 September 2007. Retrieved 14 October 2007. 
^ Gayford, Martin (23 April 2007). "Wanted – National Gallery Chief to Muster Cash". Bloomberg. Archived from the original on 19 October 2008. Retrieved 21 March 2009. 
^ Dargis, Manohla (4 November 2014). "Framing the Viewers, and the Viewed". New York Times. Retrieved 28 December 2014. 
^ Historic England. "National Gallery (1066236)". National Heritage List for England (NHLE). Retrieved 11 November 2013. 
^ Liscombe 1980, pp. 180–2
^ a b Summerson 1962, pp. 208–9. Summerson's "mantelpiece" comparison inspired the title of Conlin's 2006 history of the Gallery, The Nation's Mantelpiece (op. cit.).
^ Grove Dictionary of Art, Vol. 33, p. 192
^ Conlin 2006, p. 60
^ Conlin 2006, p. 367
^ a b Smith 2009, p. 50
^ Conlin 2006, pp. 384–5
^ Barker & Hyde 1982, pp. 116–7
^ Conlin 2006, p. 396
^ Conlin 2006, p. 399
^ Conlin 2006, pp. 404–5
^ Oliver 2004, p. 54
^ See for example National Gallery (corporate author) (1974). The Working of the National Gallery. London: National Gallery Publishing, p. 8: "the National Gallery has suffered from the visual pretentiousness of its 19th century buildings". The modernist North Galleries opened the following year.
^ They were restored only in 2005. Jury, Louise (14 June 2004). "A Victorian masterpiece emerges from beneath the whitewash". The Independent. Retrieved 14 October 2007. [dead link]
^ "A speech by HRH The Prince of Wales at the 150th anniversary of the Royal Institute of British Architects (RIBA), Royal Gala Evening at Hampton Court Palace". Archived from the original on 27 September 2007. Retrieved 16 June 2007. 
^ "Prince's new architecture blast". BBC News. 21 February 2005. Retrieved 16 June 2007. 
^ "No cash for 'highest slum'". BBC News. 9 February 2001. Retrieved 16 June 2007. 
^ Bomford 1997, p. 72
^ Bomford 1997, p. 7
^ Walden 2004, p. 176
^ "AfterRubens.org: The Strange Story of the Samson and Delilah". 
^ Jaschik, Scott (12 February 2014). "Randolph sale of art to National Gallery sparks criticism". Inside Higher Ed. Archived from the original on 28 December 2014. Retrieved 28 December 2014.
^ Walking directions to the National Gallery from Embankment tube station
^ Walking directions to the National Gallery from Charing Cross station


Bibliography[edit]


Barker, Felix; Hyde, Ralph (1982), London As It Might Have Been, London: John Murray 


Bomford, David (1997), Conservation of Paintings, London: National Gallery Company 


Bosman, Suzanne (2008), The National Gallery in Wartime, London: National Gallery Company 


Conlin, Jonathan (2006), The Nation's Mantelpiece: A History of the National Gallery, London: Pallas Athene 


Crookham, Alan (2009), The National Gallery. An Illustrated History, London: National Gallery Company 


——— (2012), "The Turner Bequest at the National Gallery", in Warrell, Ian, Turner Inspired: In the light of Claude, New Haven and London: Yale University Press, pp. 51–65 


Gaskell, Ivan (2000), Vermeer's Wager: Speculations on Art History, Theory and Art Museums, London: Reaktion 


Gentili, Augusto; Barcham, William; Whiteley, Linda (2000), Paintings in the National Gallery, London: Little, Brown & Co. 


Jencks, Charles (1991), Post-Modern Triumphs in London, London and New York: Academy Editions, St. Martin's Press 


Langmuir, Erika (2005), The National Gallery Companion Guide, London and New Haven: Yale University Press 


Liscombe, R. W. (1980), William Wilkins, 1778–1839, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press 


MacGregor, Neil (2004), "A Pentecost in Trafalgar Square", in Cuno, James, Whose Muse? Art Museums and the Public Trust, Princeton and Cambridge: Princeton University Press and Harvard University Art Museums, pp. 27–49 


Oliver, Lois (2004), Boris Anrep: The National Gallery Mosaics, London: National Gallery Company 


Penny, Nicholas (2008), National Gallery Catalogues (new series): The Sixteenth Century Italian Paintings, Volume II, Venice 1540–1600, London: National Gallery Publications Ltd, ISBN 1-85709-913-3 


Pevsner, Nikolaus; Bradley, Simon (2003), The Buildings of England London 6: Westminster, London and New Haven: Yale University Press 


Potterton, Homan (1977), The National Gallery, London, London: Thames & Hudson 


Smith, Charles Saumarez (2009), The National Gallery: A Short History, London: Frances Lincoln Limited 


Spalding, Frances (1998), The Tate: A History, London: Tate Gallery Publishing 


Summerson, John (1962), Georgian London, London: Penguin 


Taylor, Brandon (1999), Art for the Nation: Exhibitions and the London Public, 1747–2001, Manchester: Manchester University Press 


Walden, Sarah (2004), The Ravished Image: An Introduction to the Art of Picture Restoration & Its Risks, London: Gibson Square 


Whitehead, Christopher (2005), The Public Art Museum in Nineteenth Century Britain, Farnham: Ashgate Publishing 


External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to:
National Gallery, London (category)




Official website
The National Gallery at Pall Mall from The Survey of London
30 highlight paintings at nationalgallery.org







v
t
e


London landmarks



Buildings and
structures




Bridges



Albert Bridge
Blackfriars Bridge
Hungerford Bridge and Golden Jubilee Bridges
Lambeth Bridge
London Bridge
Millennium Footbridge
Southwark Bridge
Tower Bridge
Vauxhall Bridge
Waterloo Bridge
Westminster Bridge





Entertainment
venues




Cinemas



Empire, Leicester Square
BFI IMAX
Odeon Leicester Square





Football stadia



Wembley Stadium (national stadium)
Craven Cottage (Fulham)
The Den (Millwall)
Emirates Stadium (Arsenal)
Loftus Road (Queens Park Rangers)
Olympic Stadium (West Ham United)
Selhurst Park (Crystal Palace)
Stamford Bridge (Chelsea)
The Valley (Charlton Athletic)
White Hart Lane (Tottenham Hotspur)





Other major
sports venues



All England Lawn Tennis and Croquet Club
The Championship Course (rowing)
Crystal Palace National Sports Centre
Lord's (cricket)
Queen Elizabeth Olympic Park
The Oval (cricket)
Twickenham Stadium (rugby)





Theatres



London Coliseum
London Palladium
The Old Vic
Royal National Theatre
Royal Opera House
Shakespeare's Globe
Theatre Royal, Drury Lane
Theatre Royal Haymarket





Other



Alexandra Palace
Brixton Academy
ExCeL
Hammersmith Apollo
O2 Arena
Royal Albert Hall
Royal Festival Hall
Wembley Arena








Government



10 Downing Street
Admiralty Arch
Bank of England
City Hall
County Hall
Guildhall
Horse Guards
Mansion House
National Archives
Old Bailey
Palace of Westminster
Royal Courts of Justice
Scotland Yard
SIS Building





Museums and
galleries



British Museum
Cutty Sark
Golden Hinde
HMS Belfast
Imperial War Museum
Madame Tussauds
Museum of London
National Gallery
National Maritime Museum
Natural History Museum
Royal Academy of Arts
Royal Observatory
Science Museum
Tate Britain
Tate Modern
Tower of London
Victoria and Albert Museum





Places of worship



All Hallows-by-the-Tower
BAPS Shri Swaminarayan Mandir
Bevis Marks Synagogue
Methodist Central Hall
Regent's Park Mosque
St Martin-in-the-Fields
St Mary-le-Bow
St Paul's Cathedral
Southwark Cathedral
Westminster Abbey
Westminster Cathedral





Retailing




Shops



Fortnum & Mason
Hamleys
Harrods
Liberty
Peter Jones
Selfridges





Shopping centres
and markets



Borough Market
Brent Cross
Burlington Arcade
Kensington Arcade
Leadenhall Market
The Mall Wood Green
One New Change
Petticoat Lane Market
Royal Exchange
Westfield London
Westfield Stratford City








Royal buildings




Partly occupied by
the Royal Family



Buckingham Palace
Clarence House
Kensington Palace
St James's Palace





Unoccupied



Banqueting House
Hampton Court Palace
Kew Palace
The Queen's Gallery
Royal Mews, Buckingham Palace








Skyscrapers



1 Canada Square
8 Canada Square
20 Fenchurch Street
30 St Mary Axe
125 London Wall
Broadgate Tower
BT Tower
Centre Point
Citigroup Centre
Heron Tower
Leadenhall Building
Lloyd's building
Millbank Tower
Senate House
The Shard
Shell Centre
St George Wharf Tower
Strata SE1
Tower 42





Structures



Albert Memorial
ArcelorMittal Orbit
Cleopatra's Needle
Crystal Palace transmitting station
London Eye
London Wall
Marble Arch
Monument to the Great Fire
Nelson's Column
Shaftesbury Memorial Fountain ("Eros")
Thames Barrier
Wellington Arch





Transport



City Airport
Heathrow Airport
Charing Cross station
Clapham Junction station
Euston station
King's Cross station
Liverpool Street station
London Bridge station
Paddington station
St Pancras station
Victoria station
Waterloo station
Emirates Air Line
Victoria Coach Station





Other



Barbican Estate
Battersea Power Station
British Library
Kew Gardens
Lambeth Palace
London Zoo
Oxo Tower
St Bartholomew's Hospital
Smithfield Market
Somerset House








Parks




Royal Parks



Bushy Park
Green Park
Greenwich Park
Hampton Court Park
Hyde Park
Kensington Gardens
Regent's Park
Richmond Park
St. James's Park





Other



Battersea Park
Burgess Park
Clapham Common
College Green
Epping Forest
Finsbury Park
Gunnersbury Park
Hampstead Heath
Holland Park
Mitcham Common
Osterley Park
Trent Park
Victoria Park
Wandsworth Common
Wimbledon Common








Squares and
public spaces



Covent Garden
Horse Guards Parade
Leicester Square
Oxford Circus
Parliament Square
Piccadilly Circus
Sloane Square
Trafalgar Square





Streets



Aldwych
Baker Street
Bishopsgate
Bond Street
Cannon Street
Carnaby Street
Chancery Lane
Charing Cross Road
Cheapside
Cornhill
Denmark Street
Fenchurch Street
Fleet Street
Haymarket
Jermyn Street
Kensington High Street
King's Road
Lombard Street
The Mall
Oxford Street
Park Lane
Piccadilly
Portobello Road
Regent Street
Shaftesbury Avenue
Sloane Street
Strand
Threadneedle Street
Tottenham Court Road
Victoria Embankment
Whitehall






Buildings and structures under construction shown in italics










v
t
e


Museums and galleries in London




List of museums in London



National museums



British Library
British Museum
Geffrye Museum
Horniman Museum
National Army Museum
National Gallery
National Portrait Gallery
Natural History Museum
Royal Air Force Museum
Sir John Soane's Museum
Wallace Collection




Imperial War Museums



Churchill War Rooms
HMS Belfast
Imperial War Museum London





Royal Museums Greenwich



Cutty Sark
National Maritime Museum
Queen's House
Royal Observatory





Science Museum Group



Science Museum





Tate



Tate Britain
Tate Modern





Victoria and Albert Museum



V&A Museum of Childhood








Designated collections



Courtauld Gallery
Dulwich Picture Gallery
Firepower – The Royal Artillery Museum
Hunterian Museum
Jewish Museum
Library and Museum of Freemasonry
London Transport Museum
Museum of Domestic Design and Architecture
Petrie Museum of Egyptian Archaeology
Royal Academy of Arts




Museum of London



Museum of London Docklands








Royal Collection Trust



Queen's Gallery
Royal Mews





Historic Royal Palaces



Banqueting House, Whitehall
Hampton Court Palace
Kensington Palace
Kew Palace
Tower of London





National Trust



2 Willow Road
575 Wandsworth Road
Blewcoat School
Carlyle's House
Eastbury Manor House
Fenton House
George Inn
Lindsey House

restricted


Morden Hall Park
Osterley Park
Rainham Hall
Red House
Roman Baths
Sutton House





English Heritage



Apsley House
Chiswick House
Down House
Eltham Palace
Jewel Tower
Kenwood House (Iveagh Bequest)
London Wall
Marble Hill House
Ranger's House (Wernher Collection)
Winchester Palace





The London Museums of
Health & Medicine (selected)



Florence Nightingale Museum
Foundling Museum
Freud Museum
Museum of the Order of St John
Old Operating Theatre Museum and Herb Garret
Wellcome Collection





Other



Arsenal Football Club Museum
Bank of England Museum
Barbican Art Gallery
Benjamin Franklin House
Bruce Castle
Charles Dickens Museum
Dennis Severs' House
Design Museum
Dr Johnson's House
Estorick Collection of Modern Italian Art
Fashion and Textile Museum
Garden Museum
Guildhall Art Gallery
Handel House Museum
Hayward Gallery
Hogarth's House
Institute of Contemporary Arts
Leighton House Museum
London Museum of Water & Steam
Museum of Brands, Packaging and Advertising
Museum of Croydon
Museum of Immigration and Diversity
Museum of Richmond
Orleans House Gallery
Royal Academy of Music Museum
Saatchi Gallery
Serpentine Galleries
Sherlock Holmes Museum
Two Temple Place
Twickenham Museum
Whitechapel Gallery
William Morris Gallery








 Category












v
t
e


Trafalgar Square, London



Buildings




Current



Clockwise from North: National Gallery
St Martin-in-the-Fields
South Africa House
Drummonds Bank
Admiralty Arch
Uganda House

Embassy of Burundi
High Commission of Uganda


Canadian Pacific building
Admiralty (pub)
Canada House





Former



Morley's Hotel
Northumberland House
Royal Mews











Statues




Plinths



SE: Henry Havelock
SW: Charles Napier
NE: George IV
NW: Fourth plinth





Busts



Lord Beatty
Lord Jellicoe
Lord Cunningham





Other



Charles I

Charing Cross


Nelson's Column
James II
George Washington








Adjacent streets



Charing Cross Road
Cockspur Street
Northumberland Avenue
Strand
Whitehall





People




Architects



Charles Barry
Norman Foster
Edwin Lutyens
John Nash





Fourth plinth
sculptors



Elmgreen and Dragset
Katharina Fritsch

Hahn/Cock


Antony Gormley

One & Other


Marc Quinn
Thomas Schütte
Yinka Shonibare
Mark Wallinger
Rachel Whiteread
Bill Woodrow








Events



Poll Tax Riots





Miscellaneous



Christmas tree








 Category
 Commons










Links to related articles











v
t
e


City of Westminster



Districts



Adelphi
Aldwych
Bayswater
Belgravia
Covent Garden
Fitzrovia
Hyde Park
Kilburn
Knightsbridge
Lisson Grove
Maida Vale

including Little Venice


Marylebone
Mayfair
Millbank
Paddington
Paddington Green
Pimlico
Queen's Park
St James's
St John's Wood
Soho

including Chinatown




Victoria
Westbourne Green
Westminster








Attractions



Buckingham Palace
Horse Guards
National Gallery
Tate Britain
Trafalgar Square
West End theatre
Westminster Abbey





Parks and open spaces



Green Park
Hyde Park
Kensington Gardens
Regent's Park
St James's Park





Constituencies



Cities of London and Westminster
Westminster North





Local government



Borough council
Local elections

2010
2014







Bridges



Chelsea Bridge
Grosvenor Bridge
Hungerford Bridge and Golden Jubilee Bridges
Lambeth Bridge
Vauxhall Bridge
Waterloo Bridge
Westminster Bridge





Rail and tube stations



     Baker Street
  Bayswater
   Bond Street
 Charing Cross
  Charing Cross
 Edgware Road
   Edgware Road
    Embankment
   Great Portland Street
   Green Park
 Hyde Park Corner
 Lancaster Gate
  Leicester Square
 Maida Vale
 Marble Arch
  Marylebone
   Oxford Circus
 Paddington
   Paddington
  Paddington
  Piccadilly Circus
 Pimlico
 Queensway
 Regent's Park
   Royal Oak
  St. James's Park
 St. John's Wood
  Temple
   Tottenham Court Road
    Victoria
 Warwick Avenue
  Westbourne Park
   Westminster





Art and architecture



Grade I listed buildings
Grade II* listed buildings

1–9
A–Z


Public art

Hyde Park
Paddington
St Marylebone
architectural sculpture







Other topics



Blue plaques
People
Schools








 Category
 Commons












v
t
e


Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport of the United Kingdom




Headquarters: 100 Parliament Street, London, SW1A 2BQ



Executive agencies



The Royal Parks
The National Archives





Non-departmental
public bodies




Advisory



Reviewing Committee on the Export of Works of Art and Objects of Cultural Interest
Theatres Trust
Treasure Valuation Committee





Executive



Arts Council England
British Film Institute
British Library
British Museum
Equality and Human Rights Commission
Gambling Commission
Geffrye Museum
Historic England
Horniman Museum
Horserace Betting Levy Board
Imperial War Museum
Information Commissioner's Office
National Gallery
National Heritage Memorial Fund
National Maritime Museum
National Museums Liverpool
National Portrait Gallery
Natural History Museum
Royal Armouries
Science Museum Group
Sir John Soane's Museum
Sport England
Sports Grounds Safety Authority
Tate
UK Anti-Doping
UK Sport
Victoria and Albert Museum
VisitBritain
VisitEngland
Wallace Collection





Tribunal

Horserace Betting Levy Appeal Tribunal






Public corporations



BBC

BBC Trust


Channel Four Television Corporation
Historic Royal Palaces
Ofcom
S4C

S4C Authority







Ministers




Secretary of State



Karen Bradley





Minister of State



Culture and the Digital Economy: Matthew Hancock





Under-Secretaries of State



Sport, Tourism and Heritage: Tracey Crouch
Internet Safety and Security: Joanna Shields, Baroness Shields
Intellectual Property: Lucy Neville-Rolfe, Baroness Neville-Rolfe









 Category











London portal
Visual arts portal





Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 144868906
LCCN: n80081622
ISNI: 0000 0001 2342 2001
GND: 1003322-1
SELIBR: 231112
SUDOC: 027687252
BNF: cb11866630z (data)
ULAN: 500125190
NLA: 35311349
NKC: kn20010710557






Coordinates: 51°30′31″N 0°07′42″W﻿ / ﻿51.5086°N 0.1283°W﻿ / 51.5086; -0.1283





						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=National_Gallery&oldid=817666122"					Categories: National Gallery, LondonArt museums and galleries in LondonMuseums in the City of Westminster1824 establishments in the United KingdomBuildings and structures completed in 1838Art museums established in 1824Charities based in LondonExempt charitiesGovernment agencies established in 1824Grade I listed buildings in the City of WestminsterGrade I listed museum buildingsMuseums sponsored by the Department for Culture, Media and SportNon-departmental public bodies of the United Kingdom governmentOrder of Arts and Letters of Spain recipientsGeorgian architecture in LondonGreek Revival architecture in the United KingdomNeoclassical architecture in LondonHidden categories: All articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from June 2016Webarchive template wayback linksUse British English from September 2013Use dmy dates from March 2015All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from March 2015Wikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with SELIBR identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersWikipedia articles with ULAN identifiersWikipedia articles with NLA identifiersCoordinates on WikidataGood articles