

Legal status of persons


Concepts




Administrative detention
Citizenship
Immigration (illegal)
Jus sanguinis
Jus soli
Nationality
Naturalization
Permanent residency
Statelessness




Designations




Administrative detainee
Alien

enemy





Citizen (dual / multiple
naturalized)



Illegal immigrant
Migrant worker
Political prisoner
Refugee
Stateless person




Social politics




Illegal immigration
Immigration law
Nationalism
Nationality law
Nativism







v
t
e







Conflict of laws and
private international law


Preliminaries




Characterisation


Incidental question


Renvoi
Choice of law


Conflict of laws in the United States


Public policy doctrine


Hague Conference




Definitional elements




Jurisdiction


Procedure


Forum non conveniens


Lex causae


Lex fori
Forum shopping


Lis alibi pendens




Connecting factors




Domicile
Lex domicilii


Habitual residence


Nationality
Lex patriae


Lex loci arbitri


Lex loci rei sitae


Lex loci contractus


Lex loci delicti commissi


Lex loci actus


Lex loci solutionis


Lex loci protectionis


Proper law


Lex loci celebrationis


Choice of law clause


Dépeçage


Forum selection clause




Substantive legal areas




Status
Capacity
Contract


Tort
Marriage


Divorce


Property


Forced heirship


Hague Trust Convention




Enforcement




Enforcement of foreign judgments


Anti-suit injunctions


Revenue rule







v
t
e





Nationality is a legal relationship between an individual person and a state.[1] Nationality affords the state jurisdiction over the person and affords the person the protection of the state. What these rights and duties are varies from state to state.[2]
By custom and international conventions, it is the right of each state to determine who its nationals are.[3] Such determinations are part of nationality law. In some cases, determinations of nationality are also governed by public international law—for example, by treaties on statelessness and the European Convention on Nationality.
Nationality differs technically and legally from citizenship, which is a different legal relationship between a person and a country. The noun national can include both citizens and non-citizens. The most common distinguishing feature of citizenship is that citizens have the right to participate in the political life of the state, such as by voting or standing for election. However, in most modern countries all nationals are citizens of the state, and full citizens are always nationals of the state.[1][4]
In English and some other languages, the word nationality is sometimes used to refer to an ethnic group (a group of people who share a common ethnic identity, language, culture, descent, history, and so forth). This meaning of nationality is not defined by political borders or passport ownership and includes nations that lack an independent state (such as the Scots, Welsh, English, Basques, Catalans, Kurds, Kabyles, Baloch, Berbers, Bosniaks, Palestinians, Sindhi, Tamils, Hmong, Inuit, Copts, Māori and Sikhs).[citation needed]
Individuals may also be considered nationals of groups with autonomous status that have ceded some power to a larger government.



Contents


1 International law
2 National law
3 Nationality versus citizenship
4 Nationality versus ethnicity
5 Nationality versus national identity
6 Dual nationality
7 Statelessness
8 Nationality conferment

8.1 Africa
8.2 Americas
8.3 Asia
8.4 Europe
8.5 Oceania


9 See also
10 Notes
11 References
12 Further reading



International law[edit]
In international law, nationality is the status or relationship that gives a nation the right to protect a person from other nations.[4] Diplomatic and consular protection are dependent upon this relationship between the person and the state.[4] A person's status as being the national of a country is used to resolve the conflict of laws.[5]
Nationality is also the status that allows a nation to grant rights to the subject and to impose obligations upon the subject.[4] In most cases, no rights or obligations are automatically attached to this status, although the status is a necessary precondition for any rights and obligations created by the state.[5]
Within the broad limits imposed by few treaties and international law, states may freely define who their nationals are and are not.[4] However, since the Nottebohm case, other states are only required to respect their claim to protect an alleged national if the nationality is based on a true social bond.[4] In the case of dual nationality, states may determine the most effective nationality for a person, to determine which state's laws are most relevant.[5] There are also limits on removing a person's status as a national. Article 15 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights states that "Everyone has the right to a nationality," and "No one shall be arbitrarily deprived of his nationality nor denied the right to change his nationality."
National law[edit]
Nationals normally have the right to enter or return to the country they belong to. Passports are issued to nationals of a state, rather than only to citizens, because the passport is the travel document used to enter the country. However, nationals may not have the right of abode (the right to live permanently) in the countries that grant them passports.
Nationality versus citizenship[edit]
Conceptually, citizenship is focused on the internal political life of the state and nationality is a matter of international dealings.[6]
In the modern era, the concept of full citizenship encompasses not only active political rights, but full civil rights and social rights.[4] Nationality is a necessary but not sufficient condition to exercise full political rights within a state or other polity.[1] Nationality is required for full citizenship, and some people have no nationality in international law. A person who is denied full citizenship or nationality is commonly called a stateless person.
Historically, the most significant difference between a national and a citizen is that the citizen has the right to vote for elected officials, and to be elected.[4] This distinction between full citizenship and other, lesser relationships goes back to antiquity. Until the 19th and 20th centuries, it was typical for only a small percentage of people who belonged to a city or state to be full citizens. In the past, most people were excluded from citizenship on the basis of gender, socioeconomic class, ethnicity, religion, and other factors. However, they held a legal relationship with their government akin to the modern concept of nationality.[4]
United States nationality law defines some persons born in U.S. outlying possessions as U.S. nationals but not citizens. British nationality law defines six classes of British national, among which "British citizen" is one class (having the right of abode in the United Kingdom, along with some "British subjects"). Similarly, in the Republic of China, commonly known as Taiwan, the status of national without household registration applies to people who have Republic of China nationality, but do not have an automatic entitlement to enter or reside in the Taiwan Area, and do not qualify for civic rights and duties there. Under the nationality laws of Mexico, Colombia, and some other Latin American countries, nationals do not become citizens until they turn 18.
Nationality versus ethnicity[edit]
Main article: Ethnic nationalism
Nationality is sometimes used simply as an alternative word for ethnicity or national origin, just as some people assume that citizenship and nationality are identical.[7] In some countries, the cognate word for nationality in local language may be understood as a synonym of ethnicity or as an identifier of cultural and family-based self-determination, rather than on relations with a state or current government. For example, some Kurds say that they have Kurdish nationality, even though there is no Kurdish sovereign state at this time in history.




A Soviet birth certificate, in which the nacional'nost' of both parents (here both Jewish) was recorded. These records were subsequently used to determine the ethnicity of the child, as specified in his internal passport.


In the context of former Soviet Union and former Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, "nationality" is often used as translation of the Russian nacional'nost' and Serbo-Croatian narodnost, which were the terms used in those countries for ethnic groups and local affiliations within the member states of the federation. In the Soviet Union, more than 100 such groups were formally recognized. Membership in these groups was identified on Soviet internal passports, and recorded in censuses in both the USSR and Yugoslavia. In the early years of the Soviet Union's existence, ethnicity was usually determined by the person's native language, and sometimes through religion or cultural factors, such as clothing.[8] Children born after the revolution were categorized according to their parents' recorded ethnicities. Many of these ethnic groups are still recognized by modern Russia and other countries.
Similarly, the term nationalities of China refers to ethnic and cultural groups in China. Spain is one nation, made up of nationalities, which are not politically recognized as nations (state), but can be considered smaller nations within the Spanish nation. Spanish law recognises the autonomous communities of Andalusia, Aragon, Balearic Islands, Canary Islands, Catalonia, Valencia, Galicia and the Basque Country as "nationalities" (nacionalidades).
Nationality versus national identity[edit]
National identity is a person's subjective sense of belonging to one state or to one nation. A person may be a national of a state, in the sense of having a formal legal relationship with it, without subjectively or emotionally feeling a part of that state. Conversely, a person may feel that he belongs to one state without having any legal relationship to it. For example, children who were brought to the U.S. illegally when quite young and grow up there in ignorance of their immigration status often have a national identity of feeling American, despite legally being nationals of a different country.
Dual nationality[edit]
Dual nationality is when a single person has a formal relationship with two separate, sovereign states.[6] This might occur, for example, if a person's parents are nationals of separate countries, and the mother's country claims all offspring of the mother's as their own nationals, but the father's country claims all offspring of the father's.
Nationality, with its historical origins in allegiance to a sovereign monarch, was seen originally as a permanent, inherent, unchangeable condition, and later, when a change of allegiance was permitted, as a strictly exclusive relationship, so that becoming a national of one state required rejecting the previous state.[6]
Dual nationality was considered a problem that caused conflict between states and sometimes imposed mutually exclusive requirements on affected people, such as simultaneously serving in two countries' military forces. Through the middle of the 20th century, many international agreements were focused on reducing the possibility of dual nationality. Since then, many accords recognizing and regulating dual nationality have been formed.[6]
Statelessness[edit]
Statelessness is the condition in which an individual has no formal or protective relationship with any state. This might occur, for example, if a person's parents are nationals of separate countries, and the mother's country rejects all offspring of mothers married to foreign fathers, but the father's country rejects all offspring born to foreign mothers. Although this person may have an emotional national identity, he or she may not legally be the national of any state.
Another stateless situation arises when a person holds a travel document (passport) which recognizes the bearer as having the nationality of a "state" which is not internationally recognized, has no entry in the International Organization for Standardization's country list, is not a member of the United Nations, etc. In the current era, persons native to Taiwan who hold Republic of China passports are one example. [9] [10]
Nationality conferment[edit]




  Unmarried fathers inability to confer nationality on their children
  Mothers inability to confer nationality on their children
  Women’s inability to confer nationality to spouses and/or acquire, change and retain her nationality



This list includes parents' ability to confer nationality on their children or to spouses.[11]
Africa[edit]


Country:
Unmarried fathers ability to confer nationality on children
Mothers ability to confer nationality on children
Women’s ability to confer nationality to spouses


 Benin





 Burundi

 [note 1]



 Cameroon





 Central African Republic





 Comoros





 Congo





 Egypt





 Guinea





 Lesotho





 Liberia





 Libya

 [note 2]



 Madagascar





 Malawi





 Mauritania

 [note 2]



 Mauritius





 Morocco





 Nigeria





 Sierra Leone





 Somalia





 Sudan





 Swaziland





 Tanzania





 Togo

 [note 2]



 Tunisia





Americas[edit]


Country:
Unmarried fathers ability to confer nationality on children
Mothers ability to confer nationality on children
Women’s ability to confer nationality to spouses


 Bahamas





 Barbados





 Guatemala





 Saint Lucia





 Saint Vincent and the Grenadines





Asia[edit]


Country:
Unmarried fathers ability to confer nationality on children
Mothers ability to confer nationality on children
Women’s ability to confer nationality to spouses


 Bahrain

 [note 2]



 Bangladesh





 Brunei





 Iran





 Iraq

 [note 3]



 Jordan

 [note 2]



 Kuwait

 [note 4]



 Lebanon

 [note 5]



 Malaysia

 [note 6]



 Nepal





 Oman





 Pakistan





 Philippines





 Qatar





 Saudi Arabia

 [note 2]



 Singapore





 Syria

 [note 7]



 Thailand





 United Arab Emirates

 [note 2]



 Yemen





Europe[edit]


Country:
Unmarried fathers ability to confer nationality on children
Mothers ability to confer nationality on children
Women’s ability to confer nationality to spouses


 Monaco





Oceania[edit]


Country:
Unmarried fathers ability to confer nationality on children
Mothers ability to confer nationality on children
Women’s ability to confer nationality to spouses


 Kiribati

 [note 6]



 Nauru





 Solomon Islands





See also[edit]

Blood quantum laws
Demonym
Imagined communities
Intersectionality
jus sanguinis
jus soli
List of adjectival and demonymic forms for countries and nations
Nottebohm (Liechtenstein v. Guatemala), a 1955 case that is cited for its definitions of nationality
Second-class citizen

Notes[edit]



^ In Burundi, women nationals can confer their nationality to their children if they are born out of wedlock to unknown fathers or if disowned by their fathers.[12]
^ a b c d e f g Women nationals can confer their nationality to their children where fathers are unknown, stateless, of unknown nationality or do not establish filiation.
^ In Iraq, nationality law limits the ability of Iraqi women to confer nationality to children born outside the country.[12]
^ In Kuwait, If a mother has a child with a father who is unknown or whose paternity has not been established, the individual concerned may apply for Kuwaiti citizenship at majority.[12]
^ In Lebanon, women can only confer their citizenship if the child is born out of marriage and recognized while a minor by the Lebanese mother.[12]
^ a b In Malaysia and Kiribati, women have the right to confer their nationality to their children born in the country, children born abroad do not have the right to their mother’s nationality.[13]
^ Mothers can only confer nationality if the child was born in Syria and the father does not establish filiation in relation to the child.[12]



References[edit]


^ a b c Vonk, Olivier (March 19, 2012). Dual Nationality in the European Union: A Study on Changing Norms in Public and Private International Law and in the Municipal Laws of Four EU Member States. Martinus Nijhoff Publishers. pp. 19–20. ISBN 90-04-22720-2. 
^ Weis, Paul. Nationality and Statelessness in International Law. BRILL; 1979 [cited 19 August 2012]. ISBN 9789028603295. p. 29–61.
^ Convention on Certain Questions Relating to the Conflict of Nationality Laws. The Hague, 12 April 1930. Full text. Article 1, "It is for each State to determine under its own law who are its nationals...".
^ a b c d e f g h i Kadelbach, Stefan (2007). "Part V: Citizenship Rights in Europe". In Ehlers, Dirk. European Fundamental Rights and Freedoms. Berlin: De Gruyter Recht. pp. 547–548. ISBN 9783110971965. 
^ a b c von Bogdandy, Armin; Bast, Jürgen, eds. (2009). Principles of European Constitutional Law (2nd ed.). Oxford: Hart Pub. pp. 449–451. ISBN 9781847315502. 
^ a b c d Turner, Bryan S; Isin, Engin F. Handbook of Citizenship Studies. SAGE; 2003-01-29. ISBN 9780761968580. p. 278–279.
^ Oommen, T. K. (1997). Citizenship, nationality, and ethnicity: reconciling competing identities. Cambridge, UK: Polity Press. p. 6. ISBN 0-7456-1620-8. 
^ Slezkine, Yuri (Summer 1994) "The USSR as a Communal Apartment, or How a Socialist State Promoted Ethnic Particularism" Slavic Review Vol. 53, No. 2, pp. 414-452
^ US District Court, Washington, D.C., Roger C. S. Lin et al. v. USA, retrieved 2017-08-06, Plaintiffs have essentially been persons without a state for almost 60 years. CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link)
^ International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO), ISO 3166-1 alpha-3 codes, retrieved 2017-08-06, The Republic of China passport carried by native Taiwanese people clearly indicates the bearer's nationality as 'Republic of China.' Under international standards however, such a nationality designation does not exist. This is explained as follows. ISO 3166-1 alpha-3 codes are three-letter country codes defined in ISO 3166-1, part of the ISO 3166 standard published by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO), to represent countries, territories, etc. These three-letter abbreviations have been formally adopted by the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) as the official designation(s) of a 'recognized nationality' for use in manufacturing machine-readable passports, carried by travelers in order to deal with entry/exit procedures at customs authorities in all nations/territories of the world. According to these three-letter ISO country codes adopted by ICAO, the 'Republic of China' is not a recognized nationality in the international community, and thus there is no 'ROC' entry. 
^ "Gender-Discriminatory Nationality Laws". Equal Nationality Rights. Retrieved 16 September 2017. 
^ a b c d e "Background note on Gender Equality, Nationality Laws and Statelessness" (PDF). 2014. Retrieved 16 September 2017. 
^ "Global Campaign for Equal Nationality Rights, Asia Pacific". Retrieved 16 September 2017. 


Further reading[edit]

White, Philip L. (2006). What is a nationality?, based on "Globalization and the Mythology of the Nation State," in A.G.Hopkins, ed. Global History: Interactions Between the Universal and the Local Palgrave Macmillan, pp. 257–284
Grossman, Andrew. Gender and National Inclusion
Lord Acton, Nationality (1862)







v
t
e


Substantive human rights




Note: What is considered a human right is controversial and not all the topics listed are universally accepted as human rights.



Civil and political



Cannabis rights
Equality before the law
Freedom from arbitrary arrest and detention
Freedom of assembly
Freedom of association
Freedom from cruel and unusual punishment
Freedom from discrimination
Freedom from exile
Freedom of information
Freedom of movement
Freedom of religion
Freedom from slavery
Freedom of speech
Freedom of thought
Freedom from torture
Legal aid
Liberty
LGBT rights
Nationality
Personhood
Presumption of innocence
Right of asylum
Right to die
Right to a fair trial
Right to family life
Right to keep and bear arms
Right to life
Right to petition
Right to privacy
Right to protest
Right to refuse medical treatment
Right of self-defense
Security of person
Universal suffrage






Economic, social
and cultural




Digital rights
Equal pay for equal work
Fair remuneration
Labor rights
Right to an adequate standard of living
Right to clothing
Right to development
Right to education
Right to food
Right to health
Right to housing
Right to Internet access
Right to property
Right to public participation
Right of reply
Right of return
Right to science and culture
Right to social security
Right to water
Right to work
Trade union membership





Sexual and
reproductive



Abortion
Family planning
Freedom from involuntary female genital mutilation
Intersex human rights
LGBT rights
Reproductive health
Right to sexuality





Violations



Corporal punishment





War and conflict



Civilian
Combatant
Freedom from genocide
Prisoner of war
War rape












v
t
e


Ethnicity



Related
concepts



Clan
Ethnic group

Ethnolinguistic group
Ethnoreligious group


Indigenous peoples
Ingroups and outgroups
Meta-ethnicity
Metroethnicity
Minority group
Monoethnicity
Nation
Nationality
Panethnicity
Polyethnicity
Population
Race
Symbolic ethnicity
Tribe





Ethnology



Anthropology
Ethnic studies
Ethnoarchaeology
Ethnobiology

Ethnobotany
Ethnozoology
Ethnoecology


Ethnocinema
Ethnogeology
Ethnography

Autoethnography
Clinical
Critical
Cyber-
Netnography
Online
Person-centered
Salvage
Transidioethnography
Video


Ethnohistory
Ethnolinguistics
Ethnology
Ethnomathematics
Ethnomethodology
Ethnomuseology
Ethnomusicology
Ethnophilosophy
Ethnopoetics
Ethnoscience
Ethnosemiotics
Ethnotaxonomy





Groups
by region



Africa

Arab League


Americas

Indigenous
Canada
Mexico
United States
Central America
South America


Asia

Central Asia
East Asia
Northern Asia
South Asia
Southeast Asia
West Asia


Australia

Indigenous


Europe
Oceania

Indigenous
European








Identity and
ethnogenesis




Cross-race effect
Cultural assimilation
Cultural identity
Demonym
Development
Endonym
Ethnic flag
Ethnic option
Ethnic origin
Ethnic religion
Ethnicity in census
Ethnofiction
Ethnonym
Folk religion
Historical
Imagined community
Kinship
Legendary progenitor
Lineage-bonded society
Mores
Nation-building
Nation state
National language
National myth
Origin myth
Pantribal sodality
Tribal name
Tribalism
Urheimat





Multiethnic
society



Consociationalism
Diaspora politics
Dominant minority
Ethnic democracy
Ethnic enclave
Ethnic interest group
Ethnic majority
Ethnic media
Ethnic pornography
Ethnic theme park
Ethnoburb
Ethnocracy
Indigenous rights
Middleman minority
Minority rights
Model minority
Multinational state






Ideology and
ethnic conflict




Ethnic bioweapon
Ethnic cleansing
Ethnic hatred
Ethnic joke
Ethnic nationalism
Ethnic nepotism
Ethnic penalty
Ethnic slur
Ethnic stereotype
Ethnic violence
Ethnocentrism
Ethnocide
Ethnosymbolism
Indigenism
Separatist movements
Xenophobia









Authority control



NDL: 00566456











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Nationality&oldid=810942414"					Categories: NationalityNationality lawConflict of lawsHuman migrationLegal categories of peopleNationalismRightsHidden categories: CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors listAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from October 2017