

National Guard of the United States





Active

English colonial government militias: since December 13, 1636

As "National Guard": since 1824 in New York, since 1903 nationwide
Dual state-federal reserve forces: since 1933




Country
 United States


Allegiance
Federal (10 U.S.C. § E)
State and territorial (32 U.S.C.)


Branch
 United States Army
 United States Air Force


Role
Reserve component of the U.S. Armed Forces
Militia of the United States


Size
348,156[1]


Part of
 National Guard Bureau


Garrison/HQ
All 50 U.S. states, as well as organized U.S. territories, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, and the District of Columbia


Nickname(s)
"Air Guard"
"Army Guard"


Motto(s)
"Always Ready, Always There!"


Commanders


Chief of the National Guard Bureau
General Joseph L. Lengyel, USAF


Insignia


Seal of the Army National Guard



Seal of the Air National Guard



The National Guard of the United States, part of the reserve components of the United States Armed Forces, is a reserve military force, composed of National Guard military members or units of each state and the territories of Guam, of the Virgin Islands, and of Puerto Rico, as well as of the District of Columbia, for a total of 54 separate organizations. All members of the National Guard of the United States are also members of the militia of the United States as defined by 10 U.S.C. § 246. National Guard units are under the dual control of the state and the federal government.
The majority of National Guard soldiers and airmen hold a civilian job full-time while serving part-time as a National Guard member.[2][3] These part-time guardsmen are augmented by a full-time cadre of Active Guard & Reserve (AGR) personnel in both the Army National Guard and Air National Guard, plus Army Reserve Technicians in the Army National Guard and Air Reserve Technicians (ART) in the Air National Guard.
The National Guard is a joint activity of the United States Department of Defense (DoD) composed of reserve components of the United States Army and the United States Air Force: the Army National Guard of the United States[2] and the Air National Guard of the United States respectively.[2]
Local militias were formed from the earliest English colonization of the Americas in 1607. The first colony-wide militia was formed by Massachusetts in 1636 by merging small older local units, and several National Guard units can be traced back to this militia. The various colonial militias became state militias when the United States became independent. The title "National Guard" was used in 1824 by some New York State militia units, named after the French National Guard in honor of the Marquis de Lafayette. "National Guard" became a standard nationwide militia title in 1903, and specifically indicated reserve forces under mixed state and federal control since 1933.



Contents


1 Origins
2 Organization

2.1 Territorial organization
2.2 National Guard Bureau
2.3 Agricultural Development Teams


3 Standards
4 Constitutional basis
5 Other organizations

5.1 State defense forces
5.2 Naval Militias


6 Duties and administrative organization
7 National Guard active duty character

7.1 State and territory duty
7.2 Federal duty


8 History

8.1 Colonial history
8.2 American Revolutionary War
8.3 Nineteenth century
8.4 Industrialization and labor unrest
8.5 Twentieth century
8.6 Twenty-first century


9 The National Guard compared to the Reserves
10 Relevant laws
11 Notable members

11.1 Presidents
11.2 Other famous or infamous members


12 Number of guardsmen by state, territory and D.C.

12.1 Sortable table


13 See also
14 References
15 Further reading
16 External links



Origins[edit]




Artist's re-creation of the first muster of the East Regiment (present-day Massachusetts Army National Guard) in Salem, Massachusetts Bay, as it may have looked






Postage stamp of 1953


The first muster of militia forces in what is today the United States took place on September 16, 1565, in the newly established Spanish military town of St. Augustine. Appropriately enough, this muster occurred in the shadow of an oncoming hurricane. The militia men were assigned to guard the expedition's supplies while their leader, Pedro Menéndez de Avilés, took the regular troops north to attack the French settlement at Fort Caroline on the St. Johns River.[4] This Spanish militia tradition and the English tradition that would be established to the north would provide the basic nucleus for Colonial defense in the New World.
The militia tradition continued with the first permanent English settlements in the New World. Jamestown Colony (established in 1607) and Plymouth Colony (established in 1620) both had militia forces, which initially consisted of every able bodied adult male. By the mid-1600s every town had at least one militia company (usually commanded by an officer with the rank of captain) and the militia companies of a county formed a regiment (usually commanded by an officer with the rank of major in the 1600s or a colonel in the 1700s).
From the nation's founding through the early 1900s, the United States maintained only a minimal army and relied on state militias, directly related to the earlier Colonial militias to supply the majority of its troops.[5] As a result of the Spanish–American War, Congress was called upon to reform and regulate the training and qualification of state militias. The first national laws regulating the militia were the Militia acts of 1792.
In 1903, with passage of the Dick Act, the predecessor to the modern-day National Guard was formed. It required the states to divide their militias into two sections. The law recommended the title "National Guard" for the first section, known as the organized militia, and "Reserve Militia" for all others.[6]
During World War I, Congress passed the National Defense Act of 1916, which required the use of the term "National Guard" for the state militias and further regulated them. Congress also authorized the states to maintain Home Guards, which were reserve forces outside the National Guards being deployed by the Federal Government.[7]
In 1933, with passage of the National Guard Mobilization Act, Congress finalized the split between the National Guard and the traditional state militias by mandating that all federally funded soldiers take a dual enlistment/commission and thus enter both the state National Guard and the National Guard of the United States, a newly created federal reserve force. The National Defense Act of 1947 created the Air Force as a separate branch of the Armed Forces and concurrently created the Air National Guard of the United States as one of its reserve components, mirroring the Army's structure.
Organization[edit]
Territorial organization[edit]
The National Guard of the several states, territories, and the District of Columbia serves as part of the first-line of defense for the United States.[8] The state National Guard is organized into units stationed in each of the 50 states, three territories, and the District of Columbia, and operates under their respective state or territorial governor, except in the instance of Washington, D.C., where the National Guard operates under the President of the United States or his designee. The governors exercise control through the state adjutants general.[9] The National Guard may be called up for active duty by the governors to help respond to domestic emergencies and disasters, such as hurricanes, floods, and earthquakes.[9]
National Guard Bureau[edit]
The National Guard is administered by the National Guard Bureau, which is a joint activity of the Army and Air Force under the DoD.[10][11][12] The National Guard Bureau provides a communication channel for state National Guards to the DoD.[13] The National Guard Bureau also provides policies and requirements for training and funds for state Army National Guard and state Air National Guard units,[14] the allocation of federal funds to the Army National Guard and the Air National Guard,[14] as well as other administrative responsibilities prescribed under 10 U.S.C. § 10503. The National Guard Bureau is headed by the Chief of the National Guard Bureau (CNGB), who is a four-star general[10][11] in the Army or Air Force and is a member of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
Agricultural Development Teams[edit]
Prior to 2008, the functions of Agricultural Development Teams were within Provincial Reconstruction Teams of the US Government. Today, ADTs consist of soldiers and airmen from the Army National Guard and the Air National Guard. Today, ADTs bring "an effective platform for enhanced dialogue, building confidence, sharing interests, and increasing cooperation amongst the disparate peoples and tribes of Afghanistan."[15] These teams are not only affiliated with the military, they frequently work across agencies, for example with USAID and the Department of State. ADTs provide education and expertise on the ground, while also providing security and order that is traditionally affiliated with the military. These teams have been essential to the counterinsurgency efforts in Afghanistan as a public diplomacy tool to build relations with the local people in the tribes and provinces of the country.
ADTs provide classroom instruction and teachings to Afghans about how to improve their farming practices during non-seasonal growing months, which allows the farmers to use skills in the winter to prepare for farming in the summer and fall. This enhances agricultural production and the Afghan economy as a whole. Agricultural education also improves lines of communication and builds trust between the people, the US government, and the Host Nation.[16] Additionally, through word of mouth in the provinces ideas are spread that inform others about these farming techniques, that may not have had direct interaction with the ADTs. The National Guard ADTs also introduce their US civilian colleagues to the Afghan University personnel, which further strengthens relations and trust in the US efforts in Afghanistan.[17]
ADTs also enhance public diplomacy in Afghanistan by providing security to the local provinces they are working within. This tool has provided the teams with the civilian-military partnership that is needed to conduct public diplomacy and defeat the insurgents in Afghanistan. President Barack Obama said that the US will enhance agricultural development instead of big reconstruction projects to build Afghanistan's economy, to have an immediate impact on the Afghan people. Today, these projects include "...basic gardening practices, to large watershed and irrigation projects. There are also projects that teach bee keeping and livestock production: all of which will have a positive impact on unemployment, hunger, and the ability to sustain future generations."[15]
More and more Afghan tribal leaders have been requesting additional ADTs, which illustrates how important the use of public diplomacy has been in the efforts to win the trust of the Afghan people. The case study from Nangarhar Province in Afghanistan serves as an excellent example. This province is one of the most stable and secure provinces in Afghanistan. For example, over 100,000 Afghans have returned to province; the province has also been declared poppy-free in 2007 by the UN. Additionally, most districts within the province have all-weather paved roads and it is also one of the most productive agricultural regions in Afghanistan.[15] ADT should further its progress within the provinces of Afghanistan in agricultural education, technical support, and logistics. To defeat the insurgency in Afghanistan public diplomacy is an essential force, ADTs help the US educate the population of Afghanistan with the hope of strengthening Afghan trust in the American mission in Afghanistan.
Standards[edit]






This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (May 2014) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Both the Army National Guard and Air National Guard are expected to adhere to the same moral and physical standards as their "full-time" active duty and "part-time" reserve federal counterparts. The same ranks and insignia of the U.S. Army and U.S. Air Force are used by the Army National Guard and the Air National Guard, respectively, and National Guardsmen are eligible to receive all United States military awards. The respective state National Guards also bestow state awards for services rendered both at home and abroad. Under Army and Air Force regulations, these awards may be worn while on state active duty or while on Title 32 federal activation. Regular Army and Army Reserve soldiers are also authorized to accept these awards, but are not authorized to wear them.
Constitutional basis[edit]




Army National Guard soldiers at New York City's Penn Station in 2004.


The respective state National Guards are authorized by the Constitution of the United States. As originally drafted, the Constitution recognized the existing state militias, and gave them vital roles to fill: "to execute the Laws of the Union, suppress Insurrections and repel Invasion." (Article I, Section 8, Clause 15). The Constitution distinguished "militias," which were state entities, from "Troops," which were unlawful for states to maintain without Congressional approval. (Article I, Section 10, Clause 3). Under current law, the respective state National Guards and the State Defense Forces are authorized by Congress to the states and are referred to as "troops." 32 U.S.C. § 109.
Although originally state entities, the Constitutional "Militia of the Several States" were not entirely independent because they could be federalized. According to Article I, Section 8; Clause 15, the United States Congress is given the power to pass laws for "calling forth the Militia to execute the Laws of the Union, suppress Insurrections and repel Invasions." Congress is also empowered to come up with the guidelines "for organizing, arming, and disciplining, the Militia, and for governing such Part of them as may be employed in the Service of the United States, reserving to the States respectively, the Appointment of the Officers, and the Authority of training the Militia according to the discipline prescribed by Congress" (clause 16). The President of the United States is the commander-in-chief of the state militias "when called into the actual Service of the United States." (Article II, Section 2).
The traditional state militias were redefined and recreated as the "organized militia"—the National Guard, via the Militia Act of 1903. They were now subject to an increasing amount of federal control, including having arms and accoutrements supplied by the central government, federal funding, and numerous closer ties to the Regular Army.
Other organizations[edit]
State defense forces[edit]
Main article: State defense force
Many states also maintain their own state defense forces. Although not federal entities like the National Guard of the United States, these forces are components of the state militias like the individual state National Guards.
These forces were created by Congress in 1917 as a result of the state National Guards' being deployed and were known as Home Guards. In 1940, with the onset of World War II and as a result of its federalizing the National Guard, Congress amended the National Defense Act of 1916, and authorized the states to maintain "military forces other than National Guard."[18] This law authorized the War Department to train and arm the new military forces that became known as State Guards. In 1950, with the outbreak of the Korean War and at the urging of the National Guard, Congress reauthorized the separate state military forces for a time period of two years. These state military forces were authorized military training at federal expense, as well as "arms, ammunition, clothing, and equipment," as deemed necessary by the Secretary of the Army.[19] In 1956, Congress finally revised the law and authorized "State defense forces" permanently under Title 32, Section 109, of the United States Code.[20]
Naval Militias[edit]
Main article: Naval militia
Although there are no Naval or Marine Corps components of the National Guard of the United States, there is a Naval Militia authorized under federal law.10 U.S.C. § 7851. Like the soldiers and airmen in the National Guard of the United States, members of the Naval Militia are authorized federal appointments or enlistments at the discretion of the Secretary of the Navy.10 U.S.C. § 7852. To receive federal funding and equipment, a state naval militia must be composed of at least 95% Naval Reservists or Marine Corps Reservists. As such, some states maintain such units. Some states also maintain naval components of their State Defense Force. Recently, Alaska, California, New Jersey, New York, South Carolina, Texas and Ohio have had or currently maintain naval militias. Other states have laws authorizing them but do not currently have them organized. To receive federal funding, as is the case in the National Guard, a state must meet specific requirements such as having a set percentage of its members in the federal reserves.10 U.S.C. § 7851.
Duties and administrative organization[edit]




Seal of the National Guard Bureau, 2013 to present.


National Guard units can be mobilized for federal active duty to supplement regular armed forces during times of war or national emergency declared by Congress,[21] the President[21] or the Secretary of Defense.[22] They can also be activated for service in their respective states upon declaration of a state of emergency by the governor of the state or territory where they serve, or in the case of Washington, D.C., by the Commanding General. Unlike U.S. Army Reserve members, National Guard members cannot be mobilized individually, except through voluntary transfers and Temporary Duty Assignments (TDY).
The National Guard Bureau is headquartered in Arlington County, Virginia, and is a joint activity of the Department of Defense to conduct all the administrative matters pertaining to the Army National Guard and the Air National Guard. The current chief of the National Guard Bureau is Air Force General Joseph L. Lengyel. The chief is either an Air Force or an Army 4-star general (flag) officer, is the senior uniformed National Guard officer, and is a member of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. In this capacity, he serves as a military adviser to the President, the Secretary of Defense, the National Security Council and is the Department of Defense's official channel of communication to the Governors and to State Adjutants General on all matters pertaining to the National Guard. He is responsible for ensuring that the more than half a million Army and Air National Guard personnel are accessible, capable, and ready to protect the homeland and to provide combat resources to the Army and the Air Force. He is appointed by the President in his capacity as Commander in Chief.[23]
National Guard active duty character[edit]
The term "activated" simply means that a unit or individual of the reserve components has been placed on orders. The purpose and authority for that activation determines limitations and duration of the activation. The Army and Air National Guard may be activated in a number of ways as prescribed by public law. Broadly, under federal law, there are two titles in the United States Code under which units and troops may be activated: as federal soldiers or airmen under Title 10 ("Armed Forces") and as state soldiers or airmen performing a federally funded mission under Title 32 ("National Guard").[24] Outside federal activation, the Army and Air National Guard may be activated under state law. This is known as state active duty (SAD).
State and territory duty[edit]
When National Guard units are not under federal control, the governor is the commander-in-chief of the units of his or her respective state or territory (such as Puerto Rico, Guam and the Virgin Islands). The President of the United States commands the District of Columbia National Guard, though this command is routinely delegated to the Commanding General of the DC National Guard.[24] States are free to employ their National Guard forces under state control for state purposes and at state expense as provided in the state's constitution and statutes. In doing so, governors, as commanders-in-chief, can directly access and utilize the Guard's federally assigned aircraft, vehicles and other equipment so long as the federal government is reimbursed for the use of fungible equipment and supplies such as fuel, food stocks, etc. This is the authority under which governors activate and deploy National Guard forces in response to natural disasters. It is also the authority under which governors deploy National Guard forces in response to man-made emergencies such as riots and civil unrest, or terrorist attacks.[25]

The Governor can activate National Guard personnel to "State Active Duty" in response to natural or man-made disasters or Homeland Defense missions. State Active Duty is based on State statute and policy as well as State funds. Soldiers and Airmen remain under the command and control of the Governor. The federal Posse Comitatus Act (PCA) does not apply under state active duty status or Title 32 status.
Title 32 Full-Time National Guard Duty. (Federally funded, but command and control remains with the State Governor through his Adjutant General.) Title 32 activation can only be done by the President or SECDEF with the approval and consent of the state Governor.

Federal duty[edit]
Title 10 service means full-time duty in the active military service of the United States. The term used is federalized. Federalized National Guard forces have been ordered, by the President to active duty either in their reserve component status or by calling them into Federal service in their militia status.[24] There are several forms:

Voluntary Order to Active Duty.


Federalized with the soldier's or airman's consent and the consent of their Governor.


Partial Mobilization.


In time of national emergency declared by the President for any unit or any member for not more than 24 consecutive months.


Presidential Reserve Call Up.


When the President determines that it is necessary to augment the active forces for any operational mission for any unit or any member for not more than 270 days.


Federal Aid for State Governments.


Whenever an insurrection occurs in any state against its government, the President may, upon the request of its legislature or of its governor call into Federal service such of the militia of the other states. This is a statutory exception to the PCA


Use of Militia and Armed Forces to Enforce Federal Authority.


Whenever the President considers that unlawful obstructions, assemblages, or rebellion make it impracticable to enforce the laws of the United States in any state or territory, he may call into Federal service such of the militia of any state. This is another statutory exception to the PCA.


Interference with State and Federal law.


The President, by using the militia or the armed forces, or both, or by any other means, shall take such measures as he considers necessary to suppress, in a state, any insurrection, domestic violence, unlawful combination, or conspiracy.


Air and Army National Guard.


Air and Army National Guard can specifically be called into Federal service in case of invasion, rebellion, or inability to execute Federal law with active forces.

In the categories listed above, Army and Air National Guard units or individuals may also be mobilized for non-combat purposes such as the State Partnership Program, humanitarian missions, counter-drug operations, and peacekeeping or peace enforcement missions.[24]
History[edit]
Colonial history[edit]
The Virginia Army National Guard traces its history back to 1607, to the Jamestown settlement, making it the oldest and the official start of the Army National Guard.




First Muster, Spring 1637, Massachusetts Bay Colony.


The claim that the National Guard is older than the nation itself, with over three and a half centuries of service, is based on the claim that the modern-day 101st Field Artillery Regiment, 182nd Infantry Regiment, 101st Engineer Battalion and 181st Infantry Regiment of the Massachusetts Army National Guard are directly descended from Massachusetts Bay Colony regiments formed over 375 years ago. On December 13, 1636,[26][27] the General Court of the Massachusetts Bay Colony had ordered that the Colony's scattered militia companies be organized into North, South and East Regiments—with a goal of increasing the militias' accountability to the colonial government, efficacy, and responsiveness in conflicts with indigenous Pequot Indians. Under this act, white males between the ages of 16 and 60 were obligated to possess arms and to take part in the defense of their communities by serving in nightly guard details and participating in weekly drills. The founding date of 1636 refers to service of the colonial government; the Massachusetts Bay Colony regiments were formed by reorganizing local militias that preceded the 1636 date and dated back to the founding dates of the various Massachusetts towns of the time.
American Revolutionary War[edit]
The Massachusetts militia began the American Revolutionary War at the Battles of Lexington and Concord,[28] The Massachusetts militia units were mobilized either during or shortly after the above battles and used to form, along with units from Rhode Island, Connecticut and New Hampshire, the Army of Observation during the Siege of Boston. On July 3rd, 1775 General George Washington, under the authority of the Continental Congress, assumed command of the Army of Observation and the new organization became the Continental Army from which the United States Army traces its origins.
Throughout the war, militia units were mobilized when British forces entered their geographic areas and participated in most of the battles fought during the war.
Nineteenth century[edit]
The early United States distrusted a standing army, and kept the number of professional soldiers small. During the Northwest Indian War, the majority of soldiers were provided by state militias. There are nineteen Army National Guard units with campaign credit for the War of 1812.
The Marquis de Lafayette visited the U.S. in 1824–25. The 2nd Battalion, 11th New York Artillery, was one of many militia commands who turned out in welcome. This unit decided to adopt the title "National Guard," in honor of Lafayette's French National Guard. The Battalion, later the 7th Regiment, was prominent in the line of march on the occasion of Lafayette's final passage through New York en route home to France. Taking note of the troops named for his old command, Lafayette alighted from his carriage, walked down the line, clasping each officer by the hand as he passed.
Militia units provided 70% of the soldiers that fought in the Mexican–American War,[28] and also provided the majority of soldiers in the early months of the American Civil War[29] The majority of soldiers in the Spanish–American War were from the National Guard.[28]
Industrialization and labor unrest[edit]
Labor unrest in the industrial and mining sections of the Northeast and Midwest led to demands for a stronger military force within the states. After the Great Railroad Strike of 1877, calls for military suppression of labor strikes grew louder, and National Guard units proliferated. In many states, large and elaborate armories, often built to resemble medieval castles, were constructed to house militia units. Businessmen and business associations donated monies for the construction of armories and to supplement funds of the local National Guard units. National Guard officers also came from the middle and upper classes.[30] National Guard troops were deployed to suppress strikers in some of the bloodiest and most significant conflicts of the late 19th and early 20th centuries, including the Homestead Strike, the Pullman Strike of 1894, and the Colorado Labor Wars.
Twentieth century[edit]




A National Guardsman in 1917.


Throughout the 19th century the Regular U.S. Army was small, and the state militias provided the majority of the troops during the Mexican–American War, the American Civil War, and the Spanish–American War. With the Militia Act of 1903, the militia was more organized and the name "National Guard" recommended. In 1933, federally-recognized state National Guard units were required to join the National Guard of the United States, a reserve component of the U.S. Army; this is the official founding of the present National Guard. In World War I, National Guard soldiers made up 40 percent of the men in U.S. combat divisions in France. In World War II, the National Guard made up 19 divisions. One hundred forty thousand Guardsmen were mobilized during the Korean War and over 63,000 for Operation Desert Storm. They have also participated in U.S. peacekeeping operations in Somalia, Haiti, Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Bosnia, and Kosovo as well as for natural disasters, strikes, riots and security for the Olympic Games when they have been in the States.
Following World War II, the National Guard aviation units that had previously been part of the U.S. Army Air Corps and its successor organization, the U.S. Army Air Forces, became the Air National Guard (ANG), one of two Reserve Components of the newly established United States Air Force.
At this time, the National Guard consisted of 27 Divisions; 25 Infantry and two armored, plus scores of smaller units.




The Kansas Army National Guard armory in Concordia, Kansas is a typical building used for the National Guard programs.


On September 24, 1957 President Dwight D. Eisenhower federalized the entire Arkansas National Guard to ensure the safe entry of the Little Rock Nine to Little Rock Central High School the following day. Governor Orval Faubus had previously used members of the guard to deny the students entry to the school.
The New York National Guard were ordered by Governor Nelson A. Rockefeller to respond to the Rochester 1964 race riot in July of that year, the first such use of the Guard in a Northern city since the Civil War. The California Army National Guard were mobilized by the Governor of California Edmund Gerald Brown, Sr. during the Watts Riots, in August 1965, to provide security and help restore order.




After 1992 Los Angeles Riots 4,000 National Guard troops patrolled the city to enforce the law.


Elements of the Ohio Army National Guard were ordered to Kent State University by Ohio's governor Jim Rhodes to quell anti-Vietnam War protests, culminating in their shooting into a crowd of students on May 4, 1970, killing four and injuring nine.
During the Vietnam War, Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara created the Selective Reserve Force (SRF) in October 1965. Since funding was not available to train and equip the entire National Guard adequately, the SRF would be a core group of 150,000 National Guardsmen available and ready for immediate overseas deployment if needed. SRF units were supposed to be authorized at 100% strength, receive priority training funds and modern equipment[31] as well as having more training and doing 58 hours of drills of four hours each a year rather than the standard 48 hours of drills.[32]
The 2 Battalion 138th Field Artillery of the Kentucky Army National Guard was ordered to service in Vietnam in late 1968. The unit served in support of the regular 101st Airborne Division. The Battalion's C Battery lost 9 men killed and thirty-two wounded when North Vietnamese troops overran Fire Base Tomahawk on June 19, 1969.[33]
During the 1992 Los Angeles Riots, when portions of south central Los Angeles erupted in chaos, overwhelming the Los Angeles Police Department's ability to contain the violence, the California Army National Guard and selected units of the California Air National Guard was mobilized to help restore order. The National Guard were attributed with five shootings of people suspected of violating the curfew order placed on the city.
During the 1993 Waco Siege of the Branch Davidians, elements of the Alabama and Texas Army National Guard were called in to assist the ATF and the follow on effort by the Federal Bureau of Investigation; the National Guard's involvement was limited to several specific areas; surveillance and reconnaissance, transport, maintenance and repairs, training and instruction, helicopters, unarmed tactical ground vehicles. The Army National Guard helicopters were also used to do photographic reconnaissance work. Training for ATF agents included such subjects as Close Quarters Combat, and combat medical instruction, and a mock up of the Mount Carmel complex was constructed at Fort Hood, Texas for rehearsals. ATF also received several surplus helmets, flack vests, canteens, first aid dressings, empty magazines, and some night-vision equipment, in addition to MREs and diesel fuel. The FBI would request and receive the use of Bradley Armored Fighting Vehicles, and tank retrieval vehicles, as well as overflights by UH-1 and CH-47 helicopters.[34]
As a result of the Bottom Up Review and post-Cold War force cutbacks, the Army National Guard maneuver force was reduced to eight divisions (from ten; the 26th Infantry and 50th Armored were consolidated in the northeastern states) and fifteen 'enhanced brigades,' which were supposed to be ready for combat operations, augmenting the active force, within 90 days.[35]
Twenty-first century[edit]




The National Guard Memorial Building in Washington, D.C.






Soldiers in the Missouri National Guard participating in self-defense training


National Guard units played a major role in providing security and assisting recovery efforts in the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina, in September 2005.
In 2005, National Guard members and reservists were said to comprise a larger percentage of frontline fighting forces than in any war in U.S. history (about 43 percent in Iraq and 55 percent in Afghanistan).[36] There were more than 183,366 National Guard members and reservists on active duty nationwide who left behind about 300,000 dependents, according to U.S. Defense Department statistics. In 2011, Army Chief of Staff Gen. George W. Casey, Jr. stated that "Every Guard brigade has deployed to Iraq or Afghanistan, and over 300,000 Guardsmen have deployed in this war."[37]
In January and February 2007, National Guard troops from 8 states were activated to go help shovel snow, drop hay for starving cattle, deliver food and necessities to stranded people in their houses, and help control traffic and rescue stranded motorists in blizzards dropping feet of snow across the country.[38]
In the first quarter of 2007, United States Secretary of Defense Robert M. Gates announced changes to the Guard deployment policy aimed at shorter and more predictable deployments for National Guard troops. "Gates said his goal is for Guard members to serve a one-year deployment no more than every five years... Gates is imposing a one-year limit to the length of deployment for National Guard Soldiers, effective immediately." Prior to this time, Guard troops deployed for a standard one-year deployment to Iraq or Afghanistan would serve for 18 or more months including training and transit time. During the transition to the new policy for all troops in the pipeline, deployed or soon to be deployed, some will face deployments faster than every five years. "The one-to-five year cycle does not include activations for state emergencies."[39]




Army National Guardsman of the 1st Battalion, 151st Infantry Regiment in Parun, Afghanistan. Note that he is wearing a 10th Mountain Division Former Wartime Service SSI


Prior to the attacks against the United States on September 11, 2001, the National Guard's general policy regarding mobilization was that Guardsmen would be required to serve no more than one year cumulative on active duty (with no more than six months overseas) for each five years of regular drill. Due to strains placed on active duty units following the attacks, the possible mobilization time was increased to 18 months (with no more than one year overseas). Additional strains placed on military units as a result of the invasion of Iraq further increased the amount of time a Guardsman could be mobilized to 24 months. Current Department of Defense policy is that no Guardsman is involuntarily activated for more than 24 months (cumulative) in one six-year enlistment period.[citation needed]
Traditionally, most National Guard personnel serve "One weekend a month, two weeks a year", although personnel in highly operational or high demand units serve far more frequently. Typical examples are pilots, navigators and aircrewmen in active flying assignments, primarily in the Air National Guard, and to a lesser extent in the Army National Guard, and special operations airmen and soldiers in both. A significant number also serve in a full-time capacity in roles such as Active Guard and Reserve (AGR) or Air Reserve Technician or Army Reserve Technician (ART).
The "One weekend a month, two weeks a year" slogan has lost most of its relevance since the Iraq War, when nearly 28% of total US forces in Iraq and Afghanistan at the end of 2007 consisted of mobilized personnel of the National Guard and other Reserve components.[40] In July 2012, the Army's top general stated his intention to increase the annual drill requirement from two weeks per year to up to seven weeks per year.[41]
The National Guard compared to the Reserves[edit]
The Army National Guard consists of 28 fully capable brigade combat teams with combat support and combat service support components. The Army Reserve is mostly Combat Service Support and Combat Support with only one infantry unit (the 100th Infantry Battalion).[42]
The senior National Guard Officer in each state is called the Adjutant General (or "TAG" for short) and is either appointed or elected in accordance with state laws. The National Guard may receive state funding, however in most states it is primarily funded through the federal government.
The Army, Navy, Marine, Coast Guard, and Air Force Reserve components are not under state control and are solely funded by the federal government. Unlike the state guard, the Reserve forces, with the exception of the Coast Guard, are restricted from civilian law enforcement operations by posse comitatus.
Relevant laws[edit]
The United States Congress has enacted various laws that control the National Guard

The Militia Act of 1792

Providing for the authority of the President to call out the Militia, and providing federal standards for the organization of the Militia.
For the 111 years that the Militia Act of 1792 remained in effect, it defined the position of the militia in relation to the federal government. The War of 1812 tested this uniquely American defense establishment. To fight the War of 1812, the republic formed a small regular military and trained it to protect the frontiers and coastlines. Although it performed poorly in the offensive against Canada, the small force of regulars backed by a well-armed militia, accomplished its defensive mission well. Generals like Andrew Jackson proved that, just as they had in the Revolution, regulars and militia could be effective when employed as a team.


The Insurrection Act
The Militia Act of 1862

Providing for the service of persons of African descent in the Militia, and the emancipation of slaves owned by Confederates.


Title 18, U.S. Code, Section 1385: The Posse Comitatus Act of June 18, 1878

Reaction in Congress against the Reconstruction-era suspensions of Southern states' rights to organize militias led to the passage of the Posse Comitatus Act, restricting any person's use of the U.S. Army and, as later amended, the U.S. Air Force in domestic law enforcement (use of the Navy and Marine Corps, being uniformed services within the Department of Defense, is similarly restricted by statute).[43] The U.S. Coast Guard, in its peacetime role within the Department of Homeland Security, and the National Guard, when not in Federal Service, are specifically not limited by this act.


The States revise the military codes – 1881 to 1892
The Militia Act of 1903

Established the creation of the National Guard of the United States as the primary organized reserve force for the U.S. armed forces.


National Defense Act of 1916

This act abandoned the idea of an expandable Regular Army and firmly established the traditional concept of the citizens' army as the keystone of the United States defense forces. It established the concept of merging the National Guard, the Army Reserve, and the Regular Army into the Army of the United States in time of war. The act further expanded the National Guard's role, and guaranteed the State militias' status as the Army's primary reserve force. The law mandated use of the term "National Guard" for that force, and the President was given authority, in case of war or national emergency, to mobilize the National Guard for the duration of the emergency. The number of yearly drills increased from 24 to 48 and annual training from five to 15 days. Drill pay was authorized for the first time.


The National Defense Act Amendments of 1920

This act established that the chief of the Militia Bureau (later the National Guard Bureau) would be a National Guard officer, that National Guard officers would be assigned to the general staff and that the divisions, as used by the Guard in World War I, would be reorganized.


The National Guard Mobilization Act, 1933

Made the National Guard a component of the Army.


The National Defense Act of 1947

Section 207 (f) established the Air National Guard of the United States, under the National Guard Bureau.


The Total Force Policy, 1973

Requires all active and reserve military organizations be treated as a single force.


The Montgomery Amendment to the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 1987

provides that a governor cannot withhold consent with regard to active duty outside the United States because of any objection to the location, purpose, type, or schedule of such duty. This law was challenged and upheld by the Supreme Court of the United States in 1990 in Perpich v. Department of Defense.[44]


The John Warner Defense Authorization Act of 2007 Pub.L. 109-364

Federal law was changed in section 1076 so that the Governor of a state is no longer the sole commander in chief of their state's National Guard during emergencies within the state. The President of the United States can now take total control of a state's National Guard units without the governor's consent.[45] In a letter to Congress, all 50 governors opposed the increase in power of the President over the National Guard.[46]


The National Defense Authorization Act 2008 Pub.L. 110-181

Repeals provisions in section 1076 in Pub.L. 109-364 but still enables the President to call up the National Guard of the United States for active federal military service during Congressionally sanctioned national emergency or war. Places the National Guard Bureau directly under the Department of Defense as a joint activity. Promoted the Chief of the National Guard Bureau from a three-star to a four-star general.



Notable members[edit]
Presidents[edit]
Militia service was a common trait among presidents of the United States. Eighteen of America's 45 presidents have served in colonial or state militias and two have served in the National Guard since it was established in 1903. Among these, three served in colonial militias (George Washington, Thomas Jefferson and James Madison), 15 served in state militias (James Monroe, Andrew Jackson, William Henry Harrison, Millard Fillmore, Franklin Pierce, James Buchanan, Abraham Lincoln, Andrew Johnson, Ulysses S. Grant, Rutherford B. Hayes, James Garfield, Chester A. Arthur, William Henry Harrison, William McKinley and Theodore Roosevelt), one in the Army National Guard (Harry S. Truman) and one (George W. Bush) served in the Air National Guard.[47]
Other famous or infamous members[edit]


Bolton, John R., former United States Representative to the United Nations
Brown, Scott Philip, politician, former United States Senator from Massachusetts, 2010–2012.
Donovan, William Joseph, founder of the Office of Strategic Services
Foss, Joe, Governor of South Dakota, Medal of Honor recipient in World War II
Graham, Lindsey, Senator from South Carolina
Haben, Ralph, former Speaker of the Florida House of Representatives
Holtzman, Ken, two-time major league baseball All Star pitcher
Lesnar, Brock, professional wrestler and former mixed martial artist
Muhammed, John Allen, spree killer, "Beltway Sniper"
Murphy, Audie, highly decorated soldier from WWII, prolific 1950s actor
Quayle, Dan, 44th Vice President of the United States
Ruth, Babe, former Major League Baseball player
Selleck, Tom, actor, Magnum, P.I.
Story, Rick, mixed martial artist in the UFC


Number of guardsmen by state, territory and D.C.[edit]
A member of the NG, often called a "guardsman," is a person who has signed an Enlistment Contract and has subscribed to an Enlistment Oath, is still alive, or has not yet been discharged. The subscription to the oath (typically a recitation) and the signature must be witnessed by a person, typically a Guard officer, authorized as an official witness. The term of the enlistment, or membership, runs from the date on the contract through the date on the discharge or the death certificate.[48]
The "number of guardsmen" is a statistic generated by the Defense Manpower Data Center (DMDC), an agency of the DoD tasked with tracking the identities of all persons in the active military, its reserves, and civilians employed by it. Membership in the Guard may be regarded as an independent variable. It changes constantly. Its value at any instant cannot be known exactly. It can, however, be estimated from the records of the DMDC. Its data and reports are for the most part inaccessible to the general public, but it does make available some reports under the category "DoD Personal, Workforce Reports & Publications."[49]
The series "Military and Civilian Personnel by Service/Agency by State/Country (Updated Quarterly)," containing the statistics on membership in the NG by state, territory, and D.C., is updated every 3rd month at the end of the month. For example, one was generated on June 30, 2017. Like all statistics, these numbers of guardsmen are a sample culled according to a certain method. The report states that it uses the sources: "Active Duty Master File, RCCPDS, APF Civilian Master, CTS Deployment File, Civilian Deployment." The probabilities of the statistics being accurate to various percentages are not stated.
Below is a sample summary of a profile of Guard membership taken from the file of June 30, 2017. Only the non-total columns come from the source. The totals are calculated from the data.
Sortable table[edit]


State/Territory
Army National Guard
Air National Guard
Total


Alabama
9,766
2,224
11,990


Alaska
1,746
2,021
3,767


Arizona
5,279
2,482
7,761


Arkansas
6,158
1,843
8,001


California
13,846
4,378
18,224


Colorado
3,603
1,580
5,183


Connecticut
3,483
1,004
4,487


Delaware
1,513
1,094
2,607


Florida
9,447
2,017
11,464


Georgia
10,789
2,687
13,476


Hawaii
2,996
2,172
5,168


Idaho
3,042
1,317
4,359


Illinois
9,810
2,894
12,704


Indiana
11,483
1,789
13,272


Iowa
6,799
1,728
8,527


Kansas
4,286
1,988
6,274


Kentucky
6,501
1,219
7,720


Louisiana
9,626
1,492
11,118


Maine
1,974
1,097
3,071


Maryland
4,225
1,834
6,059


Massachusetts
5,863
2,114
7,977


Michigan
7,989
2,197
10,186


Minnesota
10,906
2,158
13,064


Mississippi
9,547
2,582
12,129


Missouri
8,397
2,193
10,590


Montana
2,566
957
3,523


Nebraska
3,288
968
4,256


Nevada
3,271
1,103
4,374


New Hampshire
1,625
1,029
2,654


New Jersey
5,819
2,306
8,125


New Mexico
2,839
971
3,810


New York
9,863
5,539
15,402


North Carolina
10,113
1,360
11,473


North Dakota
2,917
992
3,909


Ohio
10,445
4,882
15,327


Oklahoma
6,409
2,161
8,570


Oregon
5,660
2,190
7,850


Pennsylvania
15,476
3,799
19,275


Rhode Island
1,992
1,028
3,020


South Carolina
9,094
1,314
10,408


South Dakota
3,000
1,042
4,042


Tennessee
9,128
3,273
12,401


Texas
17,270
3,086
20,356


Utah
5,372
1,373
6,745


Vermont
2,582
969
3,551


Virginia
6,876
1,302
8,178


Washington
5,934
1,959
7,893


West Virginia
4,137
2,120
6,257


Wisconsin
7,112
2,091
9,203


Wyoming
1,508
1,170
2,678


Puerto Rico
6,198
1,151
7,349


Guam
1,092
355
1,447


District of Columbia
1,358
1,248
2,606


Virgin Islands
703
55
758


Totals
332,721
101,897
434,618


See also[edit]


Military of the United States portal



Transformation of the Army National Guard
Minutemen
Youth Challenge Program
National Guard Memorial Museum

References[edit]


^ "By the Numbers ‹ Army National Guard". 
^ a b c 32 U.S.C. § 101 Definitions (National Guard)
^ 10 U.S.C. § 12401 Army and Air National Guard of the United States: status
^ "Four-and-a-half centuries of militia tradition". Florida Department of Military Affairs. Retrieved 20 April 2015. 
^ Halbrook, Stephen P. (2008). The Founders' Second Amendment: Origins of the Right to Bear Arms. pp. 299–309. 
^ 32 Stat. 775 (1903)
^ 40 Stat. 181 (1917)
^ 32 U.S.C. § 102 General policy
^ a b "Military Reserves Federal Call Up Authority". Usmilitary.about.com. April 9, 2012. 
^ a b Pub.L. 110-181: National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2008
^ a b Pub.L. 110-181: National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2008 full text
^ Sec. 1812. Establishment of National Guard Bureau as Joint Activity of the Department of Defense.
^ 10 U.S.C. § 10501 National Guard Bureau
^ a b 10 U.S.C. § 10503 Functions of National Guard Bureau: charter from Secretaries of the Army and Air Force
^ a b c Turner, Colonel Randal L. "Agricultural Development Teams and the Counterinsurgency Effort in Afghanistan". Strategy Research Project. U.S. Army War College. Retrieved April 14, 2011. 
^ Stewart, Alexander (2014-03-03). "U.S. Army Agriculture Development Teams". Science & Diplomacy. 3 (1). 
^ McKinley, General Craig R. "The National Guard: A Great Value for America" (PDF). National Guard Bureau. Archived from the original (PDF) on November 6, 2011. Retrieved April 15, 2011. 
^ 54 Stat. 1206 (1940)
^ 64 Stat. 1073 (1950)
^ 70A Stat. 600 (1956)
^ a b 10 U.S.C. § 12302 Ready Reserve
^ 10 U.S.C. § 12301 Reserve components generally
^ "Chief, National Guard Bureau". National Guard Bureau. Archived from the original on June 24, 2012. 
^ a b c d Renaud, John. "National Guard Fact Sheet Army National Guard (FY2005)" (PDF). Army National Guard, G5, Chief, Strategic Plans and Policy. Archived from the original (PDF) on August 12, 2012. 
^ Lowenburg, Timothy. "The Role of the National Guard in National Defense and Homeland Security" (PDF). National Guard Association of the United States. Archived from the original (PDF) on May 11, 2009. 
^ A.P. (August 20, 2010). "Salem declared National Guard's birthplace". Boston Herald. Associated Press. Retrieved August 21, 2010. 
^ Boehm, Bill (December 12, 2011). "Born from humble beginnings, the National Guard celebrates its 375th birthday". National Guard Bureau. Archived from the original on January 17, 2013. Retrieved December 13, 2011. 
^ a b c "About the Army National Guard". National Guard Bureau. Archived from the original on January 17, 2013. Retrieved December 13, 2011. 
^ "About the National Guard". Archived from the original on January 17, 2013. Retrieved December 13, 2011. 
^ Painter, Nell (1987). Standing at Armageddon. W.W. Norton. pp. 21–22. 
^ "Pages - Vietnam". 
^ p.1311 Hearings, Volume 1 United States. Congress. House, United States. Congress. Joint Committee ... U.S. Government Printing Office, 1967
^ "Kentucky: National Guard History eMuseum – Summary". Kynghistory.ky.gov. Archived from the original on April 9, 2015. 
^ "Military Assistance Provided at Branch Davidian Incident" (PDF). United States General Accounting Office. August 1999. Retrieved 28 April 2015. 
^ Government Accounting Office, Army National Guard: Enhanced Brigades Readiness Improving But Personnel and Workload Are Problems, June 2000, record accessed at DTIC, May 2009. The fifteen enhanced brigades included the 27th (NY), 29th (HI), 32nd (WI), 41st (OR), 45th (OK), 48th (GA), 53rd (FL), 76th (IN), 81st (WA), 256th (LA), 116th Cavalry Brigade (ID), 155th (MS), 218th (SC), and the 278th Armored Cavalry Regiment (TN).
^ "Nationwide Grassroots Drive To Aid Military Families Picks Up Steam". Illinois.gov - Illinois Government News Network (IGNN). March 22, 2005. 
^ Salzer, Darron. "Casey: National Guard very different today than 30 years ago". National Guard Bureau. Archived from the original on July 22, 2011. Retrieved March 5, 2011. 
^ FindLaw (February 14, 2007)."National Guard to Rescue in 8 States". FindLaw. Retrieved on February 14, 2007.
^ "Gates Promises Predictable Deployments". GX – the Guard Experience. 4 (3): 22. April 2007. 
^ "MSNBC. Health. Mental Health. Most vet suicides among Guard, Reserve troops. New government report raises alarm, calls for long-term mental services. Associated Press. February 12, 2008". MSNBC. October 7, 2001. 
^ "Army to expand citizen soldiers' training periods". USA Today. July 30, 2012. Retrieved January 22, 2013. 
^ 100th/442nd Reserve Unit. 100thbattalion.org. Retrieved on July 23, 2013.
^ 10 U.S.C. § 375 Restriction on direct participation by military personnel
^ FindLaw (June 27, 2004). "PERPICH v. DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE, 496 U.S. 334 (1990)". FindLaw. Retrieved May 13, 2006. 
^ "Governors lose in power struggle over National Guard". Stateline.org. 
^ National Governors Association Archived June 29, 2011, at the Wayback Machine.
^ "The National Guard – Image Gallery – Presidential Series". Ngb.army.mil. Archived from the original on July 11, 2007. 
^ "32 U.S. Code § 304 - Enlistment oath". Legal Information Institute. Cornell Law School. Retrieved 24 September 2017. “I do hereby acknowledge to have voluntarily enlisted this __ day of ____, 19_, in the ______ National Guard of the State of ______ for a period of __ year(s) under the conditions prescribed by law, unless sooner discharged by proper authority. I, ________, do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support and defend the Constitution of the United States and of the State of ______ against all enemies, foreign and domestic; that I will bear true faith and allegiance to them; and that I will obey the orders of the President of the United States and the Governor of ______ and the orders of the officers appointed over me, according to law and regulations. So help me God.” 
^ "DoD Personnel, Workforce Reports & Publications". DMDC. DoD. Retrieved 25 September 2017. 


Further reading[edit]

Vest, Bonnie, M (2013). "Citizen, Soldier, or Citizen-Soldier? Negotiating Identity in the US National Guard". Armed Forces & Society. Vol. 39 (No. 4). Lay summary. 
Russell, Henry Dozier; Kaplan, Lawrence M (2014). The purge of the Thirtieth Division. Annapolis: Naval Institute Press. 

External links[edit]

Find more aboutNational Guard of the United Statesat Wikipedia's sister projects

Media from Wikimedia Commons
Data from Wikidata



"National Guard". United States Army National Guard. 2017.  The Army National Guard Recruiting Site.
"Air National Guard". US Air National Guard. 2017.  The Air National Guard Recruiting Site.
"National Guard: Always Ready Always There". National Guard Bureau. 2017.  Official website of the National Guard.
"Heritage Series". National Guard. National Guard Bureau. 2017.  Thumbnails of the current National Guard Heritage Collection, a series of original paintings commissioned by the Bureau showing scenes from the Guard's past.
"National Guard Virtual Armory". facebook. 2017.  Facebook login required.






Articles related to the National Guard of the United States











v
t
e


 United States National Guard: Army National Guard and Air National Guard



States



Alabama (Army/Air)
Alaska (Army/Air)
Arizona (Army/Air)
Arkansas (Army/Air)
California (Army/Air)
Colorado (Army/Air)
Connecticut (Army/Air)
Delaware (Army/Air)
Florida (Army/Air)
Georgia (Army/Air)
Hawaii (Army/Air)
Idaho (Army/Air)
Illinois (Army/Air)
Indiana (Army/Air)
Iowa (Army/Air)
Kansas (Army/Air)
Kentucky (Army/Air)
Louisiana (Army/Air)
Maine (Army/Air)
Maryland (Army/Air)
Massachusetts (Army/Air)
Michigan (Army/Air)
Minnesota (Army/Air)
Mississippi (Army/Air)
Missouri (Army/Air)
Montana (Army/Air)
Nebraska (Army/Air)
Nevada (Army/Air)
New Hampshire (Army/Air)
New Jersey (Army/Air)
New Mexico (Army/Air)
New York (Army/Air)
North Carolina (Army/Air)
North Dakota (Army/Air)
Ohio (Army/Air)
Oklahoma (Army/Air)
Oregon (Army/Air)
Pennsylvania (Army/Air)
Rhode Island (Army/Air)
South Carolina (Army/Air)
South Dakota (Army/Air)
Tennessee (Army/Air)
Texas (Army/Air)
Utah (Army/Air)
Vermont (Army/Air)
Virginia (Army/Air)
Washington (Army/Air)
West Virginia (Army/Air)
Wisconsin (Army/Air)
Wyoming (Army/Air)









Federal district
and territories



District of Columbia (Army/Air)
Guam (Army/Air)
Puerto Rico (Army/Air)
U.S. Virgin Islands (Army/Air)
Northern Mariana Islands (proposed)
American Samoa (none)
Philippines (deactivated)












v
t
e


United States Army



Leadership



Secretary of the Army
Under Secretary of the Army
Chief of Staff
Vice Chief of Staff
4-star generals
Army Staff Senior Warrant Officer
Sergeant Major of the Army
House Armed Services Committee (House Subcommittee on Air and Land Forces)
Senate Committee on Armed Services (Senate Subcommittee on Air and Land Forces)





Components
and
commands



Regular Army
Army Reserve
Army National Guard
Active Units
Reorganization plan of United States Army




Army commands



Forces
Training and Doctrine
Materiel





Service components



Africa
Central
Europe
Pacific
North
South
Special Operations
Surface Deployment and Distribution
Space and Missile Defense
Cyber Command





Direct reporting
units



Second Army
Medical
Intelligence and Security
Criminal Investigation
Corps of Engineers
Military District of Washington
Test and Evaluation
Military Academy
Reserve
Acquisition Support Center
Installation Management
War College





Field armies



First
Second
Third
Fifth
Sixth
Seventh
Eighth
Ninth





Branches



Acquisition Corps
Adjutant General's Corps
Air Defense Artillery Branch
Armor Branch
Aviation Branch
Army Band
Chaplain Corps
Chemical Corps
Civil Affairs Corps
Corps of Engineers
Dental Corps
Field Artillery Branch
Finance Corps
Infantry Branch
Inspector General's Corps
Judge Advocate General's Corps
Logistics Branch
Medical Corps
Medical Service Corps
Medical Specialist Corps
Military Intelligence Corps
Military Police Corps
Nurse Corps
Ordnance Corps
Psychological Operations
Quartermaster Corps
Signal Corps
Special Forces
Transportation Corps
Veterinary Corps








Installations



United States and Overseas
Germany
Kosovo
Kuwait
South Korea





Training



Basic Training
BOLC
ROTC (ECP)
OCS
WOBC
WOCS
Military Academy (West Point)
MOS





Uniforms and
insignia



Awards and decorations
Badges
Branch
Officer
Warrant
Enlisted

World War I
World War II


Uniforms





Equipment



Individual weapons
Crew-served weapons
Vehicles





Premier
ensembles



Army Field Band
Army Band
Old Guard Fife and Drum Corps
West Point Band





History and
traditions



History
Continental Army
Union Army
National Army
Army of the United States
Center of Military History
Institute of Heraldry
America's Army
Army Art Program
Flag
National Museum
West Point Museum
Rangers
U.S. Army Regimental System
Soldier's Creed
"The Army Goes Rolling Along"
Division nicknames
Draft
Service numbers








 Category
 Portal












v
t
e


United States Air Force



Leadership



Secretary of the Air Force
Under Secretary of the Air Force
Chief of Staff
Vice Chief of Staff
Chief Master Sergeant of the Air Force
Four-star generals
House Armed Services Committee

House Subcommittee on Tactical Air and Land Forces
House Armed Services Subcommittee on Strategic Forces


Senate Committee on Armed Services

Senate Subcommittee on Airland
Senate Armed Services Subcommittee on Strategic Forces










Structure




Commands



Reserve
Air National Guard
Field Operating Agencies
Installations





Direct Reporting Units



District of Washington
Operational Test and Evaluation Center
USAF Academy





Major Commands



ACC
AETC
AFGSC
AFMC
AFRC
AFSPC
AFSOC
AMC
USAFE
PACAF





Numbered Air Forces



First
Second
Third
Fourth
Fifth
Seventh
Eighth
Ninth
Tenth
Eleventh
Twelfth
Fourteenth
Seventeenth
Eighteenth
Nineteenth
Twentieth
Twenty-Second
Twenty-Fourth
Twenty-Fifth
Air Forces Central








Wings

ANG


Groups

ANG


Squadrons

ANG
Security Forces


Civilian auxiliary: Civil Air Patrol








Personnel and
training



Airmen
Rank

officers
enlisted


Specialty Code
Aeronautical ratings
Judge Advocate General's Corps
RED HORSE
Medical Service
Chief of Chaplains
Chief Scientist


Training: Air Force Academy
Officer Training School
Reserve Officer Training Corps
Basic Training
Airman Leadership School
SERE
Fitness Assessment





Uniforms and
equipment



Awards and decorations
Badges
Equipment
Uniforms





History and
traditions



History
Aeronautical Division / Aviation Section / Division of Military Aeronautics / Army Air Service / Army Air Corps / Army Air Forces
"The U.S. Air Force"
Air Force Band
The Airmen of Note
Tops In Blue
Airman's Creed
Core Values
Flag
Symbol
Memorial
National Museum
Air Force One
Honor Guard
Thunderbirds
Service numbers








 Category
 United States Air Force portal












v
t
e


United States Armed Forces






 Book
 Portal

A
MC
N
AF
CG


 Category

A
MC
N
AF
CG


Navbox

A
MC
N
AF
CG







Leadership



Commander-in-chief: President of the United States
Secretary of Defense
Deputy Secretary of Defense
Secretary of Homeland Security
Deputy Secretary of Homeland Security
Joint Chiefs of Staff:

Chairman
Vice Chairman


United States Congress: Committees on Armed Services:

Senate
House


Active duty four-star officers
United States military seniority
National Security Act of 1947
Goldwater–Nichols Act





Organization




Service departments



Department of Defense (Secretary): Army (Secretary)
Navy (Secretary)
Air Force (Secretary)
Department of Homeland Security (Secretary): Coast Guard





Branches



Army (Chief of Staff)
Marine Corps (Commandant)
Navy (Chief of Naval Operations)
Air Force (Chief of Staff)
Coast Guard (Commandant)





Reserve components



Reserves:

Army
Marine Corps Reserve
N
AF
CG


National Guard:

A
AF







Civilian auxiliaries



Military Auxiliary Radio System
Merchant Marine
Civil Air Patrol
Coast Guard Auxiliary





Unified Combatant Command



Northern
Central
European
Pacific
Southern
Africa
Special Operations
Strategic
Transportation








Structure



United States Code

Title 10
Title 14
Title 32
Title 50


The Pentagon
Installations
Units:

A
MC
N
AF
CG


Logistics
Media
Unit mottoes





Operations and history



Current deployments
Conflicts
Wars
Timeline
History:

A
MC
N
AF
CG


Colonial
World War II
Civil affairs
African Americans
Asian Americans
Buddhist Americans
Jewish Americans
Muslim Americans
Pakistani Americans
Sikh Americans
Historiography:

Army Center of Military History
MC History Division
Naval History and Heritage Command
Air Force Historical Research Agency


American official war artists:

Army Art Program
AF Art Program







Personnel




Training



MEPS
ASVAB
Recruit training:

A
MC
N
AF
CG


Officer candidate school:

A
MC
N
AF


Warrant:

A
MC


Service academies:

A (prep)
N (prep)
AF (prep)
CG
Merchant Marine


ROTC

A:ECP
MC/N
AF


Medical
Other education





Uniforms



Uniforms:

A
MC
N
AF
CG


Awards & decorations:

Inter-service
A
MC/N
AF
CG
Foreign
International
Devices


Badges:

Identification
A
MC
N
AF
CG







Ranks



Enlisted:

A
MC
N
AF
CG


Warrant officers
Officer:

A
MC
N
AF
CG







Other



Oath:

Enlistment
Office


Creeds & Codes:

Code of Conduct
NCO
A
MC
N
AF
CG


Service numbers:

A
MC
N
AF
CG


Military Occupational Specialty/Rating/Air Force Specialty Code
Pay
Uniform Code of Military Justice
Judge Advocate General's Corps
Military Health System/TRICARE
Separation
Veterans Affairs
Conscription
Chiefs of Chaplains:

A
MC
N
AF
CG










Equipment



A
MC:

vehicles
weapons
other


N
AF
CG




Land



Individual weapons
Crew-served weapons
Vehicles (active)





Sea



All watercraft
Ships:

A
N (active)
AF
CG
MSC


Weapons:

N
CG


Aircraft:

N
CG


Reactors





Air



Aircraft

World War I
active


Aircraft designation
Missiles
Helicopter arms





Other



Nuclear football
Electronics (designations)
Flags:

A
MC
N
AF
CG
Ensign
Jack
Guidons


Food
WMDs:

Nuclear
Biological
Chemical













Legend
A = Army
MC = Marine Corps
N = Navy
AF = Air Force
CG = Coast Guard














Authority control



NDL: 00572371











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=National_Guard_of_the_United_States&oldid=816001234"					Categories: 1636 establishments in MassachusettsNational Guard of the United StatesUnited States ArmyUnited States Air ForceMilitary units and formations established in 1636Militia of the United StatesReserve forces of the United StatesHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksUse American English from December 2016All Wikipedia articles written in American EnglishUse mdy dates from December 2016Articles needing additional references from May 2014All articles needing additional referencesAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from April 2007