

Part of a series on


Economic systems




By ideology


Anarchist
Capitalist
Christian
Communalist
Communist
Corporatist
Democratic
Dirigist
Distributist
Fascist
Feminist
Feudalism
Georgist
Green
Islamic
Laissez-faire
Market socialist
Mercantilist
Mutualist
Neo-mercantilist
Participatory
Protectionist
Socialist
State capitalist
Syndicalist








By coordination


Closed (autarky)
Decentralized
Digital
Dual
Gift
Informal
Market
Mixed
Natural
Open
Planned
Robinson Crusoe
Subsistence
Underground
Vertical archipelago
Virtual
Welfare








By regional model


Asian

East Asian
Chinese
Singaporean


European

Anglo-Saxon
German
Nordic
Rhenish
Soviet










Sectors


Common property
Private
Public
Voluntary








Transition


Collectivization
Communization
Corporatization
Demutualization
Deregulation
Expropriation
Financialization
Liberalization
Marketization
Municipalization
Mutualization
Nationalization
Privatization
Socialization








Coordination


Barter
Cybernetics
Democratic
Free market
In kind
Indicative planning
Market
Material balancing
Planned
Peer-to-peer
Price
Regulated market
Self-managed
Shared
Access economy








Other types


Corporate capitalism
Expeditionary
Hunter-gatherer
Inclusive Democracy
Information
Islamic economics
Manorialism
Newly industrialized
Palace
Plantation
Plutonomy
Post-capitalist
Post-industrial
Post-scarcity
Resource-based
Social market
Socialist market
State monopoly capitalist
Token
Traditional
Transition
World








 Business and economics portal







v
t
e





Nationalization, or nationalisation, is the process of transforming private assets into public assets by bringing them under the public ownership of a national government or state.[1] Nationalization usually refers to private assets or assets owned by lower levels of government, such municipalities, being transferred to the state. The opposites of nationalization are privatization and demutualization. When previously nationalized assets are privatized and subsequently returned to public ownership by a later government, they are said to have undergone renationalization or renationalisation. Industries that are usually subject to nationalization include transport, communications, energy, banking and natural resources.
Nationalization may occur with or without compensation to the former owners. Nationalization is distinguished from property redistribution in that the government retains control of nationalized property. Some nationalizations take place when a government seizes property acquired illegally. For example, in 1945 the French government seized the car-makers Renault because its owners had collaborated with the Nazi occupiers of France.[2]
Nationalization is to be distinguished from "socialization", which refers to the process of restructuring the economic framework, organizational structure, and institutions of an economy on a socialist basis. By contrast, nationalization does not necessarily imply social ownership and the restructuring of the economic system. By itself, nationalization has nothing to do with socialism, having been historically carried out for various different purposes under a wide variety of different political systems and economic systems.[3] However, nationalization is, in most cases, opposed by laissez faire capitalists as it is perceived as excessive government interference in, and control of, economic affairs of individual citizens.



Contents


1 Overview

1.1 Compensation


2 Political support
3 Notable examples

3.1 United Kingdom
3.2 United States


4 See also
5 References
6 External links



Overview[edit]






This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (December 2015) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Nationalized industries, charged with operating in the public interest, may be under strong political and social pressures to give much more attention to externalities. They may be obliged to operate loss-making activities where it is judged that social benefits are greater than social costs — for example, rural postal and transport services. The government has recognized these social obligations and, in some cases, provides subsidies for such non-commercial operations.
Since nationalized industries are state owned, the government is responsible for meeting any debts. The nationalized industries do not normally borrow from the domestic market other than for short-term borrowing. If they are profitable, the profit is often used to finance other state services, such as social programs and government research, which can help lower the tax burden.
Compensation[edit]
The traditional Western stance on compensation was expressed by United States Secretary of State Cordell Hull during the Mexican nationalization of the petroleum industry in 1938, saying that compensation should be "prompt, effective and adequate". According to this view, the nationalizing state is obligated under international law to pay the deprived party the full value of the property taken.
The opposing position has been taken mainly by developing countries, claiming that the question of compensation should be left entirely up to the sovereign state, in line with the Calvo Doctrine.
Socialist states have held that no compensation is due, based on the view that private ownership over socialized assets is illegitimate, exploitative, or a hindrance to further economic development.
In 1962, the United Nations General Assembly adopted Resolution 1803, "Permanent Sovereignty over National Resources", which states that in the event of nationalization, the owner "shall be paid appropriate compensation in accordance with international law". In doing so, the UN rejected the traditional Calvo-doctrinal view and the Communist view. The term "appropriate compensation" represents a compromise between the traditional views, taking into account the need of developing countries to pursue reform, even without the ability to pay full compensation, and the Western concern for the protection of private property.
In the United States, the Fifth Amendment requires just compensation if private property is taken for public use.
Political support[edit]


Social democracy







Development



Humanism
Age of Enlightenment
French Revolution
Utopian socialism
Revolutions of 1848
Marxism

Orthodox
Revisionist


Ethical socialism
Democratic socialism
Liberal socialism
Market socialism
Progressivism
Reformism
Gradualism
Frankfurt Declaration
Keynesianism
Welfare capitalism
Third Way
Modern European socialism









Ideas



Social justice
Democracy

economic
representative


Labor rights
Mixed economy
Welfare
Trade unionism
Fair trade
Environmental protection
Negative and positive rights
Secularism
Social corporatism
Social market economy









Variants



Bernsteinism
Liberal socialism
Nordic model
Godesberg
Third Way









People



Attlee
Awolowo
Ben-Gurion
Bernstein
Betancourt
Bhutto
Blanc
Brandt
Branting
Corbyn
Craxi
Crosland
Curtin
Daszyński
Debs
Douglas
Ecevit
González
Goulart
Hilferding
Jaurès
Junmai
Katayama
Kennedy
Kerensky
Kéthly
Lagos
Lassalle
Layton
Lévesque
Luxemburg
MacDonald
Mandela
Morales
Nehru
Batlle y Ordóñez
Palme
Plekhanov
Prodi
Sanders
Savage
Stauning
Thomas









Organizations


Social democratic parties
Socialist International
International Union of Socialist Youth
Party of European Socialists
Progressive Alliance
Young European Socialists
International Trade Union Confederation








Socialism portal
Economics portal
Politics portal







v
t
e





Nationalization was one of the major mechanisms advocated by reformist socialists and social democrats for gradually transitioning to socialism. In this context, the goals of nationalization were to dispossess large capitalists, redirect the profits of industry to the public purse and establish some form of workers' self-management as a precursor to the establishment of a socialist economic system.[4]
In the United Kingdom after the Second World War, nationalization gained support by the Labour party and some social democratic parties throughout Europe. Although sometimes undertaken as part of a strategy to build socialism, more commonly nationalization was also undertaken and used to protect and develop industries perceived as being vital to the nation's competitiveness (such as aerospace and shipbuilding), or to protect jobs in certain industries.
A re-nationalization occurs when state-owned assets are privatized and later nationalized again, often when a different political party or faction is in power. A re-nationalization process may also be called "reverse privatization". Nationalization has been used to refer to either direct state-ownership and management of an enterprise or to a government acquiring a large controlling share of a publicly listed corporation.[citation needed]
Notable examples[edit]
United Kingdom[edit]

British Rail, 1948
British Steel Corporation, 1967
British Telecommunications, 1981

United States[edit]

Merck & Co, 1917
Airport security industry, 2001
Amtrak, 1971

See also[edit]


Compulsory purchase
Constitutional economics
Confiscation
Eminent domain
List of nationalizations by country
Municipalization
Privatization
Public ownership
Railway nationalization
Sequestration
State ownership
State capitalism
State socialism
State sector
Statism



References[edit]


^ http://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/nationalization
^ Chrisafis, Angelique (December 14, 2011). "Renault descendants demand payout for state confiscation". The Guardian. London. 
^ Hastings, Mason and Pyper, Adrian, Alistair and Hugh (December 21, 2000). The Oxford Companion to Christian Thought. Oxford University Press. p. 677. ISBN 978-0198600244. At the heart of its vision has been social or common ownership of the means of production. Common ownership and democratic control of these was far more central to the thought of the early socialists than state control or nationalization, which developed later...Nationalization in itself has nothing particularly to do with socialism and has existed under non-socialist and anti-socialist regimes. Kautsky in 1891 pointed out that a ‘co-operative commonwealth’ could not be the result of the ‘general nationalization of all industries’ unless there was a change in ‘the character of the state’. 
^ The Economics of Feasible Socialism Revisited, by Nove, Alexander. 1991. (P.176): "Nationalisation arouses no enthusiasm, in the minds of most socialists and anti-socialists. It would probably be agreed that hopes which reposed on nationalisation have been disappointed. Conservatives hold that this is due to defects inherent in nationalisation, that private enterprise based on private ownership is inherently superior. (Mrs Thatcher’s government tried to ensure that this was so by preventing essential investments and ordering the nationalized industries to sell off their more successful undertakings.)...The original notion was that nationalization would achieve three objectives. One was to dispossess the big capitalists. The second was to divert the profits from private appropriation to the public purse. Thirdly, the nationalized sector would serve the public good rather than try to make private profits...To these objectives some (but not all) would add some sort of workers' control, the accountability of management to employees."


External links[edit]



Look up nationalization in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.



The importance of public banking - article on Indian public sector banks
Time for Permanent Nationalization by economist Fred Moseley in Dollars & Sense magazine, January/February 2009
The Corporate Governance of Banks - a concise discussion of concepts and evidence
 Davies, Albert Emil (1922). "Nationalization". Encyclopædia Britannica (12th ed.). 




Authority control



NDL: 00566473











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Nationalization&oldid=816339805"					Categories: NationalizationEconomic policyEconomic systemsOwnershipHidden categories: Use American English from February 2016All Wikipedia articles written in American EnglishArticles needing additional references from December 2015All articles needing additional referencesAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from November 2010Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1922 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference