Not to be confused with the American Geographical Society.

National Geographic Society


Logo of the National Geographic Society



Abbreviation
NGS


Motto
"Further"[1]


Formation
Gardiner Greene Hubbard, January 13, 1888; 129 years ago (1888-01-13)


Headquarters
1145 17th Street N.W.[2] Washington, D.C.
United States



Region served

Worldwide



Membership

6.8 million



Chairman

Jean Case



CEO/President

Gary Knell



Main organ

Board of Trustees


Website
www.nationalgeographic.org


The National Geographic Society (NGS), headquartered in Washington, D.C., United States, is one of the largest non-profit scientific and educational institutions in the world. Founded in 1888, its interests include geography, archaeology and natural science, the promotion of environmental and historical conservation, and the study of world culture and history. The National Geographic Society’s logo is a yellow portrait frame – rectangular in shape – which appears on the margins surrounding the front covers of its magazines and as its television channel logo. In partnership with 21st Century Fox, the Society operates the magazine, TV channels, a website that features extra content and worldwide events, and other media operations.



Contents


1 Overview
2 History
3 National Geographic Partners Joint Venture
4 Founders
5 Publications

5.1 National Geographic
5.2 Other publications


6 Films and television

6.1 National Geographic Films
6.2 Television


7 National Geographic Museum
8 Support for research and projects
9 Awards

9.1 Hubbard Medal
9.2 Alexander Graham Bell Medal


10 See also
11 References
12 Further reading
13 External links



Overview[edit]




A dancer of the cafes, Algeria, 1917 photograph from National Geographic magazine


The National Geographic Society was founded in 1888 "to increase and diffuse geographic knowledge." It is governed by a board of trustees, whose 21 members include distinguished educators, business executives, former government officials and conservationists. The organization sponsors and funds scientific research and exploration. National Geographic maintains a museum for the public in its Washington, D.C., headquarters.
It has helped to sponsor popular traveling exhibits, such as an early 2010s King Tut exhibit featuring artifacts from the tomb of the young Egyptian Pharaoh; The Cultural Treasures of Afghanistan which opened in May 2008 and traveled to other cities for 18 months; and an exhibition of China's Terracotta Warriors in its Washington headquarters in 2009–10. Its Education Foundation gives grants to education organizations and individuals to improve geography education.[3] Its Committee for Research and Exploration has awarded more than 11,000 grants for scientific research and exploration.
National Geographic has retail stores in Washington, D.C., London, Sydney, and Panama. The locations outside of the United States are operated by Worldwide Retail Store S.L., a Spanish holding company.
The Society's media arm is National Geographic Partners, a joint venture between 21st Century Fox and the Society, which publishes a journal, National Geographic in English and nearly 40 local-language editions. It also publishes other magazines, books, school products, maps, and Web and film products in numerous languages and countries. National Geographic's various media properties reach more than 280 million people monthly.[4]
History[edit]




Historical emblem of the National Geographic Society


The National Geographic Society began as a club for an elite group of academics and wealthy patrons interested in travel.[5] On January 13, 1888, 33 explorers and scientists gathered at the Cosmos Club, a private club then located on Lafayette Square in Washington, D.C., to organize "a society for the increase and diffusion of geographical knowledge." After preparing a constitution and a plan of organization, the National Geographic Society was incorporated two weeks later on January 27. Gardiner Greene Hubbard became its first president and his son-in-law, Alexander Graham Bell, succeeded him in 1897.[6]
In 1899, Bell's son-in-law Gilbert Hovey Grosvenor was named the first full-time editor of National Geographic magazine and served the organization for fifty-five years (until 1954), and members of the Grosvenor family have played important roles in the organization since. Bell and Gilbert Hovey Grosvenor devised the successful marketing notion of Society membership and the first major use of photographs to tell stories in magazines.
The current National Geographic Society president and CEO is Gary E. Knell. The chairman of the board of trustees is John Fahey. The editor-in-chief of National Geographic magazine is Susan Goldberg. Gilbert Melville Grosvenor, a former chairman of the Society board of trustees received the Presidential Medal of Freedom in 2005 for his leadership in geography education.
In 2004, the National Geographic Society headquarters in Washington, D.C., was one of the first buildings to receive a "Green" certification[7] from Global Green USA.[8] The National Geographic received the prestigious Prince of Asturias Award for Communication and Humanities in October 2006 in Oviedo, Spain.
In 2013 the society was investigated for possible violation of the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act relating to their close association with an Egyptian government official responsible for antiquities.[9]
National Geographic Partners Joint Venture[edit]
On September 9, 2015, the Society announced that it would re-organize its media properties and publications into a new company known as National Geographic Partners, which would be majority-owned by 21st Century Fox with a 73% stake. This new, for-profit corporation, would own National Geographic and other magazines, as well as its affiliated television networks—most of which were already owned in joint ventures with Fox.[10] At the time of the deal’s announcement, James Murdoch, the CEO of 21st Century Fox, said in remarks to National Geographic that the pact created "an expanded canvas for the National Geographic brand to grow and reach customers in new ways, and to reach new customers."[11][12]
On November 2, 2015, roughly two weeks before the closing of the expanded joint venture deal,[12] National Geographic and 21st Century Fox announced that 9 percent of National Geographic's 2,000 employees, approximately 180 people, would be laid off, constituting the biggest staff reduction in the Society's history.[11]
As reported by The Guardian, a spokesman for National Geographic in a November 2, 2015 e-mail statement, briefly discussed the rationale for the staff reductions as part of the "... process of reorganizing in order to move forward strategically following the closing the National Geographic Partners deal, which is expected to occur in mid-November."[12]
Additional specifics were provided to Photo District News by M.J. Jacobsen, National Geographic’s SVP of communications, similar to the contents of a formal announcement by the two companies.[13] "The National Geographic Society and the National Geographic Channels are in the process of reorganizing in order to move forward strategically following the closing of the NG Partners deal (with Fox), which is expected to occur in mid-November," Jaobsen wrote. "Involuntary separations will represent about 9 percent of the overall workforce reduction, many in shared services and a voluntary separation offer has also been made to eligible employees," he added.
Specifics as to which departments would be affected were not immediately available but the Washington Post reported that the staff reduction appears to affect almost every department including the magazine and the National Geographic Channel.[11]
On October 26, 2016, National Geographic announced a rebrand and the television network dropped "Channel" from its name.[14]
On December 14, 2017, in a historic deal valued at over $52 billion, The Walt Disney Company announced it will buy the majority of 21st Century Fox. Disney would assume control of Fox's stake in the National Geographic partnership.[15]
Founders[edit]
There were 33 original founders in 1888.[16] Although Alexander Graham Bell is sometimes discussed as a founder, he was actually the second president, elected on January 7, 1898 and serving until 1903.[17]

Cleveland Abbe
Frank Baker
Marcus Baker
John Russell Bartlett
Charles J. Bell
Rogers Birnie
William Dall
Arthur Powell Davis
Clarence Dutton
Henry Gannett
Samuel Gannett
Grove Karl Gilbert
George Brown Goode
James Howard Gore
Adolphus Washington Greely
Edward Everett Hayden
Henry Wetherbee Henshaw
Gardiner Greene Hubbard
Willard Drake Johnson
George Kennan
George Wallace Melville
Clinton Hart Merriam
Henry Mitchell
Robert Muldrow II
Herbert Gouverneur Ogden
John Wesley Powell
William Bramwell Powell
Israel Russell
Winfield Scott Schley
Almon Harris Thompson
Gilbert Thompson
Otto Hilgard Tittmann
James Clarke Welling

Publications[edit]
National Geographic[edit]
Main article: National Geographic (magazine)




Cover of January 1915 National Geographic


The National Geographic Magazine, later shortened to National Geographic, published its first issue in October 1888, nine months after the Society was founded, as the Society's official journal, a benefit for joining the tax-exempt National Geographic Society. Starting with the February 1910 (Vol XXI., No. 2) issue, the magazine began using its now famous trademarked yellow border around the edge of its covers.
There are 12 monthly issues of National Geographic per year. The magazine contains articles about geography, popular science, world history, culture, current events and photography of places and things all over the world and universe. National Geographic magazine is currently published in 40 local-language editions in many countries around the world. Combined English and other language circulation is around 6.8 million monthly, with some 60 million readers.
Other publications[edit]
In addition to its flagship magazine, the Society publishes several other periodicals:

National Geographic Explorer: Classroom magazine. The National Geographic School Bulletin was launched in 1919 and was replaced by the children's magazine National Geographic World in 1975. NG World was separated into the current National Geographic Explorer and National Geographic Kids in 2001. It has four separate editions, for different grades, and has grown to about 2½ million circulation.[citation needed]
National Geographic History: Launched in Spring 2015.[18]
National Geographic Kids: A version of National Geographic Magazine for children, launched in 1975 under the name National Geographic World. It has a U.S. circulation of over 1.5 million. There are also currently 18 local-language editions of NG Kids, with another half million in circulation. An Arabic edition of the children's magazine was launched in Egypt in early 2007, and more than 42,000 copies are distributed to all the public schools in Egypt, in addition to another 15,000 single copy sales. More recently, an Albanian and Polish edition were launched.[19]
National Geographic Little Kids: For younger children aged 3–6
National Geographic Traveler: Launched in 1984. There are 18 local-language editions of NG Traveler.

The Society also runs an online news outlet called National Geographic Daily News.[20]
Additionally, the Society publishes atlases, books, and maps. It previously published and co-published other magazines, including National Geographic Adventure, National Geographic Research (a scientific journal), and others, and continues to publish special issues of various magazines.[citation needed]
Films and television[edit]

National Geographic Partners





Type

Public


Founded
September 1, 1997


Headquarters
1145 17th St NW, Washington, DC 20036, United States



Area served

Worldwide


Parent
National Geographic Society (27%)
21st Century Fox (pending sale to The Walt Disney Company) (73%)


Divisions
National Geographic
Nat Geo Wild
Nat Geo Kids
Nat Geo Music
Nat Geo People
National Geographic Magazine


Subsidiaries
NGC Studios


Website
www.nationalgeographic.org


National Geographic Films[edit]
National Geographic Films is a wholly owned taxable subsidiary of the National Geographic Society. Films it has produced include:

K-19: The Widowmaker (2002), a feature film, submarine thriller based on the diary of a Russian submarine commander, starring Harrison Ford.
March of the Penguins (2005), a French-made documentary for U.S. distribution with a new score and script, narrated by Morgan Freeman; it received an Academy Award for the Best Documentary in 2006. After a record $77 million theatrical gross in the United States, over four million DVD copies of March of the Penguins have been sold.
Arctic Tale (2007), a feature film documenting the story of two families of walrus and polar bears, narrated by Queen Latifah.
Sea Monsters (2007), inspired by a National Geographic Magazine article, is a 3-D large format and reality film, with a musical score by Peter Gabriel.
The Last Lions (2011)
Undaunted Courage: Meriwether Lewis, Thomas Jefferson and the Opening of the American West, a co-production for HBO by National Geographic Films, Edward Norton, and Brad Pitt, is a 10-hour mini series of Steven Ambrose's award-winning book. Undaunted Courage: Meriwether Lewis, Thomas Jefferson and the Opening of the American West for HBO.
Robots 3D (movie) (2015)

Television[edit]
Main article: National Geographic Channel
Programs by the National Geographic Society are also broadcast on television. National Geographic television specials and series have been aired on PBS and other networks in the United States and globally for many years. The Geographic series in the U.S. started on CBS in 1964, moved to ABC in 1973, shifted to PBS (produced by WQED, Pittsburgh) in 1975, shifted to NBC in 1995, and returned to PBS in 2000.
National Geographic Channel, launched in January 2001, is a joint venture of National Geographic and Fox Cable Networks. It has featured stories on numerous scientific figures such as Jacques Cousteau, Jane Goodall, and Louis Leakey that not only featured their work but as well helped make them world-famous and accessible to millions. Most of the specials were narrated by various actors, including Glenn Close, Linda Hunt, Stacy Keach, Richard Kiley, Burgess Meredith, Susan Sarandon, Alexander Scourby, Martin Sheen, and Peter Strauss. The specials' theme music, by Elmer Bernstein, was also adopted by the National Geographic Channel. The National Geographic Channel has begun to launch a number of sub-branded channels in international markets, such as Nat Geo Adventure, Nat Geo Music, and Nat Geo Wild.
The National Geographic Partners expanded joint venture with 21st Century Fox (to be controlled by the latter) will be concluded in mid-November 2015 with the new for-profit organization to own a 73% stake of the NG affiliated television networks (National Geographic-branded cable TV channels),[21] most of which were already co-owned (with the percentage information not readily available), as per earlier joint ventures with Fox.[21]
National Geographic Museum[edit]
The Society operates the National Geographic Museum, located at 1145 17th Street, NW (17th and M), in Washington, D.C. The museum features changing exhibitions featuring the work of National Geographic explorers, photographers, and scientists. There are also changing exhibits related to natural history, culture, history or society. Permanent exhibits include artifacts like the camera Robert Peary used at the North Pole and pottery that Jacques Cousteau recovered from a shipwreck.[22]







Courtyard entrance to the National Geographic Museum




Support for research and projects[edit]




National Geographic Society's Administration Building in Washington, D.C.


The Society has helped sponsor many expeditions and research projects over the years, including:

Codex Tchacos – Conservation and translation of the only known surviving copy of the Gospel of Judas
Ian Baker – Discovers hidden waterfall of the Tsangpo Gorge, Tibet
Robert Ballard – RMS Titanic (1985) and John F. Kennedy's PT-109 (2002) discovery
Robert Bartlett – Arctic Exploration (1925–45)
George Bass – Underwater archaeology – Bronze Age trade
Lee Berger – Oldest footprints of modern humans ever found and Homo naledi
Hiram Bingham – Machu Picchu Excavation (1915)
Richard E. Byrd – First flight over South Pole (1929)
Jacques-Yves Cousteau – Undersea exploration
Mike Fay – MegaTransect (1999) and MegaFlyover (2004) in Africa
Dian Fossey – Mountain gorillas
Birute Galdikas – Orangutans
Jane Goodall – Chimpanzees
Robert F. Griggs – Valley of Ten Thousand Smokes (1916)
Heather Halstead – World Circumnavigations of Reach the World
Louis and Mary Leakey – Discovery of Australopithecus boisei and Homo habilis
Gustavus McLeod – First flight to the North Pole in an open-air cockpit aircraft
Robert Peary and Matthew Henson – North Pole Expedition (1905)
Israel Russell Ascent of Mount St Elias on the Alaska-Canada border, 1890
Paul Sereno – Dinosaurs
Will Steger – Polar Exploration & First Explorer-in-Residence 1996[23]
Spencer Wells – The Genographic Project
Xu Xing – Discovery of fossil dinosaurs in China that have distinct feathers

The Society supports many socially based projects including AINA, a Kabul-based organization dedicated to developing an independent Afghan media, which was founded by one of the Society's most famous photographers, Reza.
The Society also organizes the National Geographic Bee, an annual geographic contest for U.S. fourth- through eighth-graders. About 4 million students a year begin the geography competition locally, which culminates in a national competition of the winners of each state each May in Washington, D.C. Journalist Soledad O'Brien is the moderator of the Bee. She succeeded Alex Trebek, host of Jeopardy!, who moderated the final round of the competition for 25 years, from its inception in 1989 to 2013. Every two years, the Society conducts an international geography competition of competing teams from all over the world. The most recent was held in St. Petersburg, Russia, in July 2013, and had representatives from 19 national teams. The team from the United States emerged as the winner, with teams from Canada and India in second and third place.
Awards[edit]
Hubbard Medal[edit]




Anne Morrow Lindbergh's customized medal detailing her flight route


The Hubbard Medal is awarded by the National Geographic Society for distinction in exploration, discovery, and research. The medal is named for Gardiner Greene Hubbard, the first National Geographic Society president. The Hubbard Medal has been presented 35 times as of 2010, the most recent award going to Don Walsh.
Alexander Graham Bell Medal[edit]
Not to be confused with IEEE Alexander Graham Bell Medal.
The National Geographic Society also awards, rarely, the Alexander Graham Bell Medal, for exceptional contributions to geographic research. The award is named after Alexander Graham Bell, scientist, inventor and the second president of the NGS. Up to mid-2011, the medal has been twice presented:[24][25]

1980: Bradford Washburn and wife Barbara Washburn
2010: Roger Tomlinson and Jack Dangermond

See also[edit]

American Geographical Society
Genographic Project
Maps of the United States
National Geographic Bee
Nicholas DeVore III
Royal Canadian Geographical Society
Royal Geographical Society

References[edit]


^ "National Geographic Press Room: Fact Sheet". National Geographic Society. Retrieved August 28, 2009.  Also note that, as of August 28, 2009 (and likely before), the website title is "National Geographic – Inspiring People to Care About the Planet".
^ http://www.nationalgeographic.com/contact
^ "National Geographic Education Foundation". National Geographic Society. 
^ "National Geographic Society". U.S. Department of State. 
^ Site designed by Shannon Roberts (April 24, 2007). "National Geographic CEO Says Nonprofit's Mission is Bringing the World to Readers". Mccombs.utexas.edu. Retrieved June 6, 2010. 
^ amyatwired, Author: amyatwired. "Jan. 27, 1888: National Geographic Society Gets Going". WIRED. Retrieved 2017-09-08. 
^ [1] Archived May 2, 2004, at the Wayback Machine.
^ Global Green Archived June 26, 2008, at the Wayback Machine.
^ "US investigates National Geographic over ‘corrupt payments’ to Egypt's keeper of antiquities", David Usborne. The Independent. October 28, 2013. Retrieved 28 jan 2017
^ "National Geographic magazine is now a for-profit business thanks to Fox". The Verge. Retrieved 9 September 2015. 
^ a b c Paul Farhi (November 3, 2015). "National Geographic Society sets biggest layoff in its history". Washington Post. 
^ a b c Mahita Gajanan. "National Geographic lays off staff following 21st Century Fox merger". the Guardian. 
^ "Approximately 180 National Geographic Employees Being Laid Off, Others Offered Buyouts". PDNPulse. 
^ Schwindt, Oriana (October 26, 2016). "National Geographic Rebrands, Drops 'Channel' From Its Name". 
^ "The Walt Disney Company To Acquire Twenty-First Century Fox, Inc., After Spinoff Of Certain Businesses, For $52.4 Billion In Stock" (Press release). The Walt Disney Company. December 14, 2017. Archived from the original on December 14, 2017. Retrieved December 14, 2017. 
^ "National Geographic founders". National Geographic Society. Retrieved 2014-01-09. 
^ Howley, Andrew (May 26, 2011). "NGS Celebrates 23rd Founders Day". NGS. National Geographic Society. Retrieved January 18, 2016. Though he wasn’t one of the original 33 founders, Bell had a major influence on the Society. 
^ "National Geographic History Magazine U.S Delivery". National Geographic Store. 
^ Room, National Geographic Press (April 4, 2016). "National Geographic and MM Publications Ltd. Introduce Local-Language Edition of National Geographic Kids Magazine in India – National Geographic Partners Press Room". 
^ "Daily Nature and Science News and Headlines | National Geographic News". News.nationalgeographic.com. Retrieved 2014-07-13. 
^ a b Paul Farhi (September 9, 2015). "National Geographic gives Fox control of media assets in $725 million deal". Washington Post. 
^ National Geographic Society. "National Geographic: Exploration Starts Here". National Geographic Society. Retrieved 2017-09-01. 
^ "Explorers' Bookmarks @". Nationalgeographic.com. 2002-10-17. Retrieved 2014-07-13. 
^ David Braun (July 13, 2010). "Nat Geo awards Alexander Graham Bell Medals to GIS pioneers". National Geographic Society. Retrieved June 22, 2011. 
^ "Bradford and Barbara Washburn, Climbers". National Geographic Society. Retrieved June 22, 2011. 


Further reading[edit]

Poole, Robert M. (2004). Explorers House: National Geographic and the World it Made. New York: Penguin. ISBN 1-59420-032-7. 

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to National Geographic Society.



Official websites


Official website
National Geographic Magazine Online
National Geographic for Kids
National Geographic News
National Geographic Photography
National Geographic Maps
National Geographic Maps TOPO! Explorer
National Geographic Channel
National Geographic Traveler
National Geographic Museum
National Geographic Expeditions
National Geographic Education Foundation
National Geographic Education - Encyclopedic Entry: citizen science




Additional resources


National Geographic Libraries & Information Services
NGS Collectors Corner – managed by National Geographic Libraries' Archives.
National Geographic Official YouTube Channel
National Geographic Animals
Works by or about National Geographic Society at Internet Archive
Works by National Geographic Society at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) 




Photos, maps, and other images


Society's flag









v
t
e


National Geographic Society




Gilbert Melville Grosvenor, Chairman Emeritus (since 2010) John M. Fahey, Jr., Chairman (since 2011) Gary Knell, President and CEO (since 2014)



People



Stephen Alvarez
Alexander Graham Bell
Barry Bishop
Gilbert Hovey Grosvenor
Gilbert Melville Grosvenor
Melville Bell Grosvenor
Gardiner Greene Hubbard
Chris Johns
John G. Mitchell
Mark Shelley
John Verano
Tim T. Kelly








Magazines



National Geographic
National Geographic Adventure (1999–2009; defunct)
National Geographic Traveler
National Geographic Kids





Television



National Geographic Abu Dhabi
Nat Geo People
National Geographic Farsi
National Geographic

NGC Asia
NGC Australia
NG Canada
NGC Korea
NG Netherlands
NGC Scandinavia
NGC United Kingdom and Ireland


Nat Geo Kids
Nat Geo Music
Nat Geo Wild

Nat Geo Wild Europe







Other



Bee (geography competition)
Endeavour (ship)
Greenberg v. National Geographic
Hubbard Medal
Image Collection
Maps
Palomar Observatory Sky Survey
World Championship (geography competition; on hiatus)
National Geographic Animal Jam












v
t
e


Major English-language science and technology magazines



Australia



Australian Geographic
Cosmos
Australasian Science





Canada



Canadian Geographic





United Kingdom



Astronomy Now
BBC Focus
BBC Sky at Night
BBC Wildlife
Computeractive
Computer Weekly
Computing
Geographical
Medicine Magazine
New Scientist
PC Pro
The Inquirer
The Register
Wired UK





United States



American Scientist
Astrobiology Magazine
Astronomy
Discover
InformationWeek
MIT Technology Review
National Geographic
PC Magazine
PC World
Popular Mechanics
Popular Science
Science News
Scientific American
Scientific American Mind
Seed
Wired
Sky & Telescope





See also



Science and technology magazines category
Cell (journal)
Communications of the ACM
Computer (magazine)
IEEE Spectrum
Nature (journal)
PNAS
Proceedings of the Royal Society
Science (journal)
AlphaGalileo
Ars Technica
Gizmodo
Lifehacker
Slashdot
TechCrunch
Engadget
CNET.com
SmartPlanet
Mashable
ReadWriteWeb












v
t
e


Alexander Graham Bell



Life and
family



Alexander Graham Bell
Alexander Melville Bell
Beinn Bhreagh, Nova Scotia
Bell House (Virginia)
Bras d'Or Lake
Canadian Parliamentary Motion on Alexander Graham Bell
Chichester Bell
David Fairchild
Graham Fairchild
Edwin S. Grosvenor
Gardiner Greene Hubbard
Gilbert Hovey Grosvenor
Gilbert Melville Grosvenor
Hubbard Bell Grossman Pillot Memorial
Kendall Myers
Mabel Gardiner Hubbard
Mabel H. Grosvenor
Melville Bell Grosvenor
Second International Congress on Education of the Deaf
Telephone Cases





People



Anthony Pollok
Charles Williams Jr.
Glenn Curtiss
Marcellus Bailey
Thomas Cowherd
Thomas Selfridge
Thomas A. Watson
Walter Seymour Allward





Works



AEA Cygnet
AEA June Bug
AEA Red Wing
AEA Silver Dart
AEA White Wing
Aerial Experiment Association
Alexander Graham Bell Association for the Deaf and Hard of Hearing
Bell Boatyard
Bell Oionus I
Bell System
Bell Telephone Company
Canadian Aerodrome Baddeck No. 1 and No. 2
Canadian Aerodrome Company
Clarke Schools for Hearing and Speech
Dictation machine
Edison Gower-Bell Telephone Company of Europe, Ltd.
Elisha Gray and Alexander Bell telephone controversy
Graphophone
HD-4
Hubbard Monoplane
Life Extension Institute
National Geographic Society
National Telephone Company
New England Telephone and Telegraph Company
Oriental Telephone Company
Phonograph cylinder
Photophone
Visible Speech
Volta Laboratory and Bureau





Tributes



Alexander Graham Bell National Historic Site
Alexander Graham Bell School (Illinois)
Alexander Graham Bell honors and tributes
Bell Homestead National Historic Site
Bell Telephone Memorial
Graham Bell Island
HMCS Bras d'Or
IEEE Alexander Graham Bell Medal
Pioneers, a Volunteer Network
Story of Alexander Graham Bell












v
t
e


Bonnier



Magazines




Bonnier
Corporation



Boating
Conceive
Cycle World
Field & Stream
Flying
Marlin
Motorcyclist
Outdoor Life
Popular Photography
Popular Science
Salt Water Sportsman
Saveur
Science Illustrated
Sound & Vision
Working Mother
Yachting





Bonnier
Publications



Allt om Historia
Bo Bedre
FHM (Norway)
Idényt
National Geographic
Penge og Privatøkonomi
Populär Historia
Illustrerad Vetenskap





Bonnier
Tidskrifter



Glamour (Sweden)
Kamratposten
Mama
Teknikens Värld
Veckans Affärer
Veckorevyn








Books




Bonnier Media
Deutschland



arsEdition
Carlsen
Piper (Westend)





Bonnierförlagen



Albert Bonniers Förlag
Wahlström & Widstrand





Other



Cappelen Damm (50%)
Tammi








TV




MTV



MTV3
Sub
AVA
MTV Max
MTV Fakta
MTV Juniori
MTV Sport 1
MTV Sport 2





TV4 Group



C More Entertainment
TV4 (HD)
Sjuan
TV12
TV4 Film
TV4 Fakta
TV4 Fakta XL
TV4 Sport
TV4 Komedi
TV4 Guld








Film



SF Studios
SF Bio
SF Anytime





Newspapers



Dagens Nyheter
Expressen
Helsingborgs Dagblad
Sydsvenskan





Business press



Äripäev
Børsen
Dagens Industri
Delovõje Vedomosti
Delovoy Petersburg
Finance
Puls Biznesu









Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 158995319
LCCN: n79042179
ISNI: 0000 0001 2194 6610
GND: 1009626-7
SUDOC: 026415143
BNF: cb11866632n (data)
BIBSYS: 7017061
NLA: 35170381
NDL: 00261044
NKC: ko2003164398
BNE: XX130397






Coordinates: 38°54′18″N 77°02′16″W﻿ / ﻿38.9051°N 77.0379°W﻿ / 38.9051; -77.0379





						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=National_Geographic_Society&oldid=816309650"					Categories: National Geographic SocietyPublishing companies established in 1888Magazine publishing companies of the United StatesAlexander Graham BellGeographic societiesNon-profit organizations based in Washington, D.C.Scientific organizations based in the United StatesEducational organizations based in the United States1888 establishments in the United StatesHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksUse mdy dates from January 2012All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from September 2015Pages using deprecated image syntaxOfficial website different in Wikidata and WikipediaArticles with Internet Archive linksArticles with LibriVox linksWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersWikipedia articles with BIBSYS identifiersWikipedia articles with NLA identifiersCoordinates not on Wikidata