
Natural History Museum













Location within Central London






Established
1881; 137 years ago (1881)


Location
Kensington & Chelsea, London, SW7
United Kingdom


Coordinates
51°29′46″N 0°10′35″W﻿ / ﻿51.495983°N 0.176372°W﻿ / 51.495983; -0.176372Coordinates: 51°29′46″N 0°10′35″W﻿ / ﻿51.495983°N 0.176372°W﻿ / 51.495983; -0.176372


Type
Natural History Museum


Visitors
5,284,023 (2015)[1]


Director
Michael Dixon


Public transit access
 South Kensington


Website
nhm.ac.uk


For other natural history museums, see List of natural history museums.
The Natural History Museum in London is a natural history museum that exhibits a vast range of specimens from various segments of natural history. It is one of three major museums on Exhibition Road in South Kensington, the others being the Science Museum and the Victoria and Albert Museum. The Natural History Museum's main frontage, however, is on Cromwell Road.
The museum is home to life and earth science specimens comprising some 80 million items within five main collections: botany, entomology, mineralogy, paleontology and zoology. The museum is a world-renowned centre of research specialising in taxonomy, identification and conservation. Given the age of the institution, many of the collections have great historical as well as scientific value, such as specimens collected by Charles Darwin. The museum is particularly famous for its exhibition of dinosaur skeletons and ornate architecture—sometimes dubbed a cathedral of nature—both exemplified by the large Diplodocus cast that dominated the vaulted central hall before it was replaced in 2017 with the skeleton of a blue whale hanging from the ceiling. The Natural History Museum Library contains extensive books, journals, manuscripts, and artwork collections linked to the work and research of the scientific departments; access to the library is by appointment only. The museum is recognised as the pre-eminent centre of natural history and research of related fields in the world.
Although commonly referred to as the Natural History Museum, it was officially known as British Museum (Natural History) until 1992, despite legal separation from the British Museum itself in 1963. Originating from collections within the British Museum, the landmark Alfred Waterhouse building was built and opened by 1881 and later incorporated the Geological Museum. The Darwin Centre is a more recent addition, partly designed as a modern facility for storing the valuable collections.
Like other publicly funded national museums in the United Kingdom, the Natural History Museum does not charge an admission fee. The museum is an exempt charity and a non-departmental public body sponsored by the Department for Culture, Media and Sport.[2] Catherine, Duchess of Cambridge is a patron of the museum.[3] There are approximately 850 staff at the Museum. The two largest strategic groups are the Public Engagement Group and Science Group.[4]



Contents


1 History
2 Planning and architecture

2.1 Separation from the British Museum
2.2 Geological Museum
2.3 The Darwin Centre
2.4 The Attenborough Studio


3 Major specimens and exhibits

3.1 Galleries


4 Education, public engagement and tourism
5 Research and curation
6 Access
7 In fiction
8 Natural History Museum at Tring
9 See also
10 References
11 Bibliography
12 External links



History[edit]




An 1881 plan showing the original arrangement of the Museum.
(Link to current floor plans).






The Natural History Museum, shown in wide-angle view here, has an ornate terracotta facade by Gibbs and Canning Limited typical of high Victorian architecture. The terracotta mouldings represent the past and present diversity of nature.






The main hall of the museum






Statue of Charles Darwin by Sir Joseph Boehm in the main hall


The foundation of the collection was that of the Ulster doctor Sir Hans Sloane (1660–1753), who allowed his significant collections to be purchased by the British Government at a price well below their market value at the time. This purchase was funded by a lottery. Sloane's collection, which included dried plants, and animal and human skeletons, was initially housed in Montagu House, Bloomsbury, in 1756, which was the home of the British Museum.
Most of the Sloane collection had disappeared by the early decades of the nineteenth century. Dr George Shaw (Keeper of Natural History 1806–13) sold many specimens to the Royal College of Surgeons and had periodic cremations of material in the grounds of the museum. His successors also applied to the trustees for permission to destroy decayed specimens.[5] In 1833 the Annual Report states that, of the 5,500 insects listed in the Sloane catalogue, none remained. The inability of the natural history departments to conserve its specimens became notorious: the Treasury refused to entrust it with specimens collected at the government's expense. Appointments of staff were bedevilled by gentlemanly favoritism; in 1862 a nephew of the mistress of a Trustee was appointed Entomological Assistant despite not knowing the difference between a butterfly and a moth.[6][7][verification needed]
J. E. Gray (Keeper of Zoology 1840–74) complained of the incidence of mental illness amongst staff: George Shaw threatened to put his foot on any shell not in the 12th edition of Linnaeus' Systema Naturae; another had removed all the labels and registration numbers from entomological cases arranged by a rival. The huge collection of the conchologist Hugh Cuming was acquired by the museum, and Gray's own wife had carried the open trays across the courtyard in a gale: all the labels blew away. That collection is said never to have recovered.[8]
The Principal Librarian at the time was Antonio Panizzi; his contempt for the natural history departments and for science in general was total. The general public was not encouraged to visit the Museum's natural history exhibits. In 1835 to a Select Committee of Parliament, Sir Henry Ellis said this policy was fully approved by the Principal Librarian and his senior colleagues.
Many of these faults were corrected by the palaeontologist Richard Owen, appointed Superintendent of the natural history departments of the British Museum in 1856. His changes led Bill Bryson to write that "by making the Natural History Museum an institution for everyone, Owen transformed our expectations of what museums are for".[9]
Planning and architecture[edit]
Owen saw that the natural history departments needed more space, and that implied a separate building as the British Museum site was limited. Land in South Kensington was purchased, and in 1864 a competition was held to design the new museum. The winning entry was submitted by the civil engineer Captain Francis Fowke, who died shortly afterwards. The scheme was taken over by Alfred Waterhouse who substantially revised the agreed plans, and designed the façades in his own idiosyncratic Romanesque style which was inspired by his frequent visits to the Continent.[10] The original plans included wings on either side of the main building, but these plans were soon abandoned for budgetary reasons. The space these would have occupied are now taken by the Earth Galleries and Darwin Centre.
Work began in 1873 and was completed in 1880. The new museum opened in 1881, although the move from the old museum was not fully completed until 1883.
Both the interiors and exteriors of the Waterhouse building make extensive use of terracotta tiles to resist the sooty atmosphere of Victorian London, manufactured by the Tamworth-based company of Gibbs and Canning Limited. The tiles and bricks feature many relief sculptures of flora and fauna, with living and extinct species featured within the west and east wings respectively. This explicit separation was at the request of Owen, and has been seen as a statement of his contemporary rebuttal of Darwin's attempt to link present species with past through the theory of natural selection.[11]
The central axis of the museum is aligned with the tower of Imperial College London (formerly the Imperial Institute) and the Royal Albert Hall and Albert Memorial further north. These all form part of the complex known colloquially as Albertopolis.
Separation from the British Museum[edit]
Even after the opening, the Natural History Museum legally remained a department of the British Museum with the formal name British Museum (Natural History), usually abbreviated in the scientific literature as B.M.(N.H.). A petition to the Chancellor of the Exchequer was made in 1866, signed by the heads of the Royal, Linnean and Zoological Societies as well as naturalists including Darwin, Wallace and Huxley, asking that the museum gain independence from the board of the British Museum, and heated discussions on the matter continued for nearly one hundred years. Finally, with the passing of the British Museum Act 1963, the British Museum (Natural History) became an independent museum with its own Board of Trustees, although – despite a proposed amendment to the act in the House of Lords – the former name was retained. In 1989 the museum publicly re-branded itself as The Natural History Museum and effectively stopped using the title British Museum (Natural History) on its advertising and its books for general readers. Only with the Museums and Galleries Act 1992 did the Museum's formal title finally change to the Natural History Museum.
Geological Museum[edit]
Main article: Geological Museum




The spinning globe in 1996


In 1986, the museum absorbed the adjacent Geological Museum of the British Geological Survey, which had long competed for the limited space available in the area. The Geological Museum became world-famous for exhibitions including an active volcano model and an earthquake machine (designed by James Gardner), and housed the world's first computer-enhanced exhibition (Treasures of the Earth). The museum's galleries were completely rebuilt and relaunched in 1996 as The Earth Galleries, with the other exhibitions in the Waterhouse building retitled The Life Galleries. The Natural History Museum's own Mineralogy displays remain largely unchanged as an example of the 19th-century display techniques of the Waterhouse building.
The central atrium design by Neal Potter overcame visitors' reluctance to visit the upper galleries by "pulling" them through a model of the Earth made up of random plates on an escalator. The new design covered the walls in recycled slate and sandblasted the major stars and planets onto the wall. The Museum's 'star' geological exhibits are displayed within the walls. Six iconic figures are the backdrop to discussing how previous generations have viewed Earth.
The Darwin Centre[edit]




Backstage at the NHM. The Tank Room within Darwin Centre Phase 1 holds larger fish from the spirit collection, and preparation facilities for them.


The Darwin Centre (named after Charles Darwin) was designed as a new home for the museum's collection of tens of millions of preserved specimens, as well as new work spaces for the museum's scientific staff, and new educational visitor experiences. Built in two distinct phases, with two new buildings adjacent to the main Waterhouse building, it is the most significant new development project in the museum's history.
Phase one of the Darwin Centre opened to the public in 2002, and it houses the zoological department's 'spirit collections'—organisms preserved in alcohol. Phase Two was unveiled in September 2008 and opened to the general public in September 2009. It was designed by the Danish architecture practice C. F. Møller Architects in the shape of a giant, eight-story cocoon and houses the entomology and botanical collections—the 'dry collections'.[12] It is possible for members of the public to visit and view non-exhibited items behind the scenes for a fee by booking onto one of the several Spirit Collection Tours offered daily.[13]
Arguably the most famous creature in the centre is the 8.62-metre-long giant squid, affectionately named Archie.[14]
The Attenborough Studio[edit]




Nature Live event in the Attenborough Studio, Natural History Museum, on 23 January 2012.


As part of the museum's remit to communicate science education and conservation work, a new multimedia studio will form an important part of Darwin Centre Phase 2. In collaboration with the BBC's Natural History Unit (holder of the largest archive of natural history footage) the Attenborough Studio—named after the broadcaster Sir David Attenborough—provides a multimedia environment for educational events. The studio plans to continue the daily lectures and demonstrations.

Major specimens and exhibits[edit]




Ice Rink of the museum, 2017


One of the most famous and certainly most prominent of the exhibits—nicknamed "Dippy"—is a 105-foot (32 m)-long replica of a Diplodocus carnegii skeleton which was on display for many years within the central hall. The cast was given as a gift by the Scottish-American industrialist Andrew Carnegie, after a discussion with King Edward VII, then a keen trustee of the British Museum. Carnegie paid £2,000 for the casting, copying the original held at the Carnegie Museum of Natural History. The pieces were sent to London in 36 crates, and on 12 May 1905, the exhibit was unveiled to great public and media interest. The real fossil had yet to be mounted, as the Carnegie Museum in Pittsburgh was still being constructed to house it. As word of Dippy spread, Mr Carnegie paid to have additional copies made for display in most major European capitals and in Latin and South America, making Dippy the most-viewed dinosaur skeleton in the world. The dinosaur quickly became an iconic representation of the museum, and has featured in many cartoons and other media, including the 1975 Disney comedy One of Our Dinosaurs Is Missing. After 112 years on display at the museum, the dinosaur replica was removed in early 2017 to be replaced by the actual skeleton of a young blue whale. Dippy is due to start a tour of British museums in 2018.[15][16]




A balcony view of the Large Mammals Hall


The blue whale skeleton that has replaced Dippy is another iconic display in the museum. The display of the skeleton, some 25 m long and weighing 10 tons, was only made possible in 1934 with the building of the New Whale Hall (now the Large Mammals Hall). The whale had been in storage for 42 years since its stranding on sandbanks at the mouth of Wexford Harbour, Ireland in March 1891 after being injured by whalers.[16] Discussion of the idea of a life-size model also began around this time, and work was undertaken within the Whale Hall itself. Since taking a cast of such a large animal was deemed prohibitively expensive, scale models were used to meticulously piece the structure together. During construction, workmen left a trapdoor within the whale's stomach, which they would use for surreptitious cigarette breaks. Before the door was closed and sealed forever, some coins and a telephone directory were placed inside—this soon growing to an urban myth that a time capsule was left inside. The work was completed—entirely within the hall and in view of the public—in 1938. At the time it was the largest such model in the world, at 28.3 m in length. The construction details were later borrowed by several American museums, who scaled the plans further. The work involved in removing Dippy and replacing it with the whale skeleton was documented in a BBC Television special, Horizon: Dippy and the Whale, narrated by David Attenborough, which was first broadcast on BBC Two on 13 July 2017, the day before the whale skeleton was unveiled for public display.[17]




A Blue Whale skeleton installed in Hintze Hall, 2017


The Darwin Centre is host to Archie, an eight-metre-long giant squid taken alive in a fishing net near the Falkland Islands in 2004. The squid is not on general display, but stored in the large tank room in the basement of the Phase 1 building. On arrival at the museum, the specimen was immediately frozen while preparations commenced for its permanent storage. Since few complete and reasonably fresh examples of the species exist, "wet storage" was chosen, leaving the squid undissected. A 9.45-metre acrylic tank was constructed (by the same team that provide tanks to Damien Hirst), and the body preserved using a mixture of formalin and saline solution.
The museum holds the remains and bones of the "River Thames whale", a northern bottlenose whale that lost its way on 20 January 2006 and swam into the Thames. Although primarily used for research purposes, and held at the museum's storage site at Wandsworth, the skeleton has been put on temporary public display.[18]
Dinocochlea, one of the longer-standing mysteries of paleontology (originally thought to be a giant gastropod shell, then a coprolite and now a concretion of a worm's tunnel), has been part of the collection since its discovery in 1921.
The museum keeps a wildlife garden on its west lawn, on which a potentially new species of insect resembling Arocatus roeselii was discovered in 2007.[19]
Galleries[edit]

Exhibits in the Life Galleries






Piranha









Tree Pangolin









Lumpsucker









Seahorse









Fennec Fox








The entrance to the Earth Galleries, designed by Neal Potter



Red Zone

This is the zone that can be entered from Exhibition Road, on the East side of the building. It is a gallery themed around the changing history of the Earth.
The Earth Lab is a gallery that centres around geology, and contains specimens of fossils, minerals and rocks. The "Lab Area" is only open to reserved groups and allows an interactive approach to the gallery, allowing the use of microscopes. It is currently the only gallery in the red-zone without step free access. Earth's Treasury shows specimens of rocks, minerals and gemstones behind glass in a dimly lit gallery. Lasting Impressions is a small gallery containing specimens of rocks, plants and minerals, of which most can be touched.

Earth Lab
Earth's Treasury
Lasting Impressions
Restless Surface
Earth Today and Tomorrow (closing soon)
From the Beginning
Volcanoes and Earthquakes
Visions of Earth
The Waterhouse Gallery (temporary exhibition space)





Gyps fulvus (Griffon vulture)



Green zone


Birds
Creepy Crawlies
Ecology
Fossil Marine Reptiles
Giant Sequoia and Hintze Hall (formerly the Central Hall)
Minerals
The Vault
Investigate





Skeleton of Triceratops horridus at the dinosaur area






Moving roaring model of a T. rex in the dinosaur area



Blue zone


Dinosaurs
Fish, Amphibians and Reptiles
Human Biology
Images of Nature
The Jerwood Gallery (temporary exhibition space)
Marine Invertebrates
Mammals
Mammals (Blue whale)
Treasures in the Cadogan Gallery


Orange zone


Wildlife Garden
Darwin Centre

Education, public engagement and tourism[edit]




A young student at the Museum


The museum runs a series of educational and public engagement programmes. These include for example a highly praised "How Science Works" hands on workshop for school students demonstrating the use of microfossils in geological research. The museum also played a major role in securing designation of the Jurassic Coast of Devon and Dorset as a UNESCO World Heritage site and has subsequently been a lead partner in the Lyme Regis Fossil Festivals.
In 2005, the museum launched a project to develop notable gallery characters to patrol display cases, including 'facsimiles' of luminaries such as Carl Linnaeus, Mary Anning, Dorothea Bate and William Smith. They tell stories and anecdotes of their lives and discoveries and aim to surprise visitors.[20]
In 2010 a six-part BBC documentary series was filmed at the museum entitled Museum of Life exploring the history and behind the scenes aspects of the museum.[21]
The Natural History Museum admission is free for most of the exhibitions. However, there are certain temporary exhibits and shows that would entail a fee.
Research and curation[edit]
The Natural History museum combines museum's life and earth science collections with specialist expertise in "taxonomy, systematics, biodiversity, natural resources, planetary science, evolution and informatics" to tackle scientific questions.[22] In 2011 the Museum led the setting up of an International Union for the Conservation of Nature Bumblebee Specialist Group, chaired by Dr. Paul H. Williams,[23] to assess the threat status of bumblebee species worldwide using Red List criteria.[24][25]
Access[edit]


Service
Station/Stop
Lines/Routes served


London Buses 
Kensington Museums 
360


Victoria & Albert Museum 
14, 74, 414, C1


London Underground 
South Kensington





The closest London Underground station is South Kensington — there is a tunnel from the station that emerges close to the entrances of all three museums. Admission is free, though there are donation boxes in the foyer.
Museum Lane immediately to the north provides disabled access to the museum.[26]
A connecting bridge between the Natural History and Science museums closed to the public in the late 1990s.
In fiction[edit]
The museum is a prominent setting in Charlie Fletcher's children's book about unLondon Stoneheart. George Chapman, the hero, sneaks outside when punished on a school trip; he breaks off a small dragon's stone head from a relief and is chased by a pterodactyl which comes to life from a statue on the roof.
The museum is the primary setting for Rattle His Bones, the 8th Daisy Dalrymple Mystery by Carola Dunn. The story revolves around a murder and jewel theft occurring during the time Daisy Dalrymple is writing a story about the museum for an American publisher.
The museum plays an important role in the London-based Disney live-action feature One of Our Dinosaurs Is Missing; the eponymous skeleton is stolen from the museum, and a group of intrepid nannies hide inside the mouth of what is supposed to be the Blue Whale model (in fact a specially created prop – the nannies peer out from behind the whale's teeth, but a real Blue Whale is a baleen whale and has no teeth). Additionally, the film is set in the 1920s, before the Blue Whale model was built.
British fantasy author China Miéville based the plot of his 2010 novel Kraken: An Anatomy around the theft of "Archie" from the museum's Darwin Centre by a mysterious squid cult.
In the 2014 film Paddington the villain is a taxidermist at the museum. She kidnaps the bear Paddington intending to kill and stuff him, but is thwarted by the Brown family after scenes involving chases inside and on the roof of the building.[27]
In the first episode of the third season of the TV series Penny Dreadful (2014 - 2016), the main character Vanessa Ives (Eva Green) visited the museum when her psychotherapist told her to "go somewhere different". There, she meets Dr. Alexander Sweet (Christian Camargo) who is a zoologist and the Director of Zoological Studies. The museum was then frequently seen in the following episodes as Vanessa and Dr. Sweet's relationship flourishes.
Natural History Museum at Tring[edit]
Main article: Natural History Museum at Tring
The NHM also has a sister museum, located at Tring, Hertfordshire. Built by local eccentric Lionel Walter Rothschild, the NHM took ownership in 1938. In 2007, the museum announced the name would be changed to the Natural History Museum at Tring, though the older name, the Walter Rothschild Zoological Museum is still in widespread use.
See also[edit]

Keeper of Entomology, Natural History Museum
Walter Rothschild Zoological Museum
Sophie the Stegosaurus
Notable employees of the Natural History Museum

References[edit]


^ "Visits made in 2015 to visitor attractions in membership with ALVA". 
^ "Museum governance". The Natural History Museum. Retrieved 14 March 2010. 
^ Harrison, Lily; Caldwell, Lindsey (22 April 2013). "Duchess Kate to become patron of three new charities". Today News. 
^ "Our vision". nhm.ac.uk. 
^ Harrison, Keith; Smith, Eric (2008). Rifle-Green by Nature: A Regency Naturalist and his Family, William Elford Leach. London: Ray Society. pp. 265–266. ISBN 9780903874359. 
^ Gunther, Albert E. (1975). A Century of Zoology at the British Museum through the Lives of Two Keepers, 1815–1914. London: Dawsons. ISBN 9780712906180. 
^ Gunther, Albert E. (1980). The Founders of Science at the British Museum, 1753–1900. Halesworth, Suffolk: Halesworth Press. ISBN 9780950727608. 
^ Barber, Lynn (1980). "Omnium Gatherum". The Heyday of Natural History: 1829–1870. London: Cape. ISBN 9780224014489. 
^ Bryson, Bill (2003). A Short History of Nearly Everything. London: Doubleday. ISBN 9780385408189. 
^ "Interior of the NHM". Royal Institute of British Architects. Retrieved 14 December 2010. 
^ "Decoration". nhm.ac.uk. Archived from the original on 8 June 2011. 
^ "Museum 'cocoon' prepares to open". BBC News. 2 September 2008. Retrieved 20 January 2009. 
^ "Behind-the-Scenes Tour: Spirit Collection | Natural History Museum". www.nhm.ac.uk. Retrieved 2017-10-20. 
^ "Giant squid goes on display". nhm.ac.uk. 
^ McVeigh, Tracy (1 January 2017). "Dippy's last days: diplodocus leaves London after 112 years for farewell UK tour". The Observer. 
^ a b Fuller, George (4 January 2017). "Dippy the Diplodocus bids farewell to his public at the Natural History Museum". The Daily Telegraph. 
^ "Dippy and the Whale". DocuWiki. 15 July 2017. 
^ "First ever display of Thames whale skeleton". nhm.ac.uk. 
^ "Mystery Insect Bugs Experts". Sky news. 15 July 2008. 
^ Review by Miles Russell of Discovering Dorothea: the Life of the Pioneering Fossil-Hunter Dorothea Bate by Karolyn Shindler at ucl.ac.uk (accessed 23 November 2007)
^ "Museum of Life". The Natural History Museum. 2010. Archived from the original on 30 August 2010. Retrieved 5 January 2011. 
^ Research and curation, Museum of Natural History, n.d., retrieved 22 December 2013 
^ Bumblebee Specialist Group, London, UK: Natural History Museum, retrieved 23 December 2013 
^ 2011 Update (PDF), IUCN, retrieved 7 October 2012 
^ Paul H. Williams (1986). "Environmental change and the distributions of British bumble bees (Bombus Latr.)". Bee World. 67: 50–61. doi:10.1080/0005772x.1986.11098871. 
^ Museum entrances, Natural History Museum.
^ O'Connor, Joanne (5 December 2014). "On location: Paddington". Financial Times. Retrieved 1 January 2015. 








This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (November 2007) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Bibliography[edit]

Dr Martin Lister: A bibliography by Geoffrey Keynes. St Paul's Bibliographies (UK). ISBN 0-906795-04-4. (Includes illustrations by Lister's wife and daughter).
The Travelling Naturalists (1985) by Clare Lloyd. (Study of 18th Century Natural History — includes Charles Waterton, John Hanning Speke, Henry Seebohm and Mary Kingsley). Contains colour and black and white reproductions. Croom Helm (UK). ISBN 0-7099-1658-2.

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to British Natural History Museum.



Official website
Picture Library of the Natural History Museum
The Natural History Museum on Google Cultural Institute
Architectural history and description from the Survey of London
Architecture and history of the NHM from the Royal Institute of British Architects
Maps of grid reference TQ267792
Nature News article on proposed cuts, June 2010







v
t
e


Museums and galleries in London




List of museums in London



National museums



British Library
British Museum
Geffrye Museum
Horniman Museum
National Army Museum
National Gallery
National Portrait Gallery
Natural History Museum
Royal Air Force Museum
Sir John Soane's Museum
Wallace Collection




Imperial War Museums



Churchill War Rooms
HMS Belfast
Imperial War Museum London





Royal Museums Greenwich



Cutty Sark
National Maritime Museum
Queen's House
Royal Observatory





Science Museum Group



Science Museum





Tate



Tate Britain
Tate Modern





Victoria and Albert Museum



V&A Museum of Childhood








Designated collections



Courtauld Gallery
Dulwich Picture Gallery
Firepower – The Royal Artillery Museum
Hunterian Museum
Jewish Museum
Library and Museum of Freemasonry
London Transport Museum
Museum of Domestic Design and Architecture
Petrie Museum of Egyptian Archaeology
Royal Academy of Arts




Museum of London



Museum of London Docklands








Royal Collection Trust



Queen's Gallery
Royal Mews





Historic Royal Palaces



Banqueting House, Whitehall
Hampton Court Palace
Kensington Palace
Kew Palace
Tower of London





National Trust



2 Willow Road
575 Wandsworth Road
Blewcoat School
Carlyle's House
Eastbury Manor House
Fenton House
George Inn
Lindsey House

restricted


Morden Hall Park
Osterley Park
Rainham Hall
Red House
Roman Baths
Sutton House





English Heritage



Apsley House
Chiswick House
Down House
Eltham Palace
Jewel Tower
Kenwood House (Iveagh Bequest)
London Wall
Marble Hill House
Ranger's House (Wernher Collection)
Winchester Palace





The London Museums of
Health & Medicine (selected)



Florence Nightingale Museum
Foundling Museum
Freud Museum
Museum of the Order of St John
Old Operating Theatre Museum and Herb Garret
Wellcome Collection





Other



Arsenal Football Club Museum
Bank of England Museum
Barbican Art Gallery
Benjamin Franklin House
Bruce Castle
Charles Dickens Museum
Dennis Severs' House
Design Museum
Dr Johnson's House
Estorick Collection of Modern Italian Art
Fashion and Textile Museum
Garden Museum
Guildhall Art Gallery
Handel House Museum
Hayward Gallery
Hogarth's House
Institute of Contemporary Arts
Leighton House Museum
London Museum of Water & Steam
Museum of Brands, Packaging and Advertising
Museum of Croydon
Museum of Immigration and Diversity
Museum of Richmond
Orleans House Gallery
Royal Academy of Music Museum
Saatchi Gallery
Serpentine Galleries
Sherlock Holmes Museum
Two Temple Place
Twickenham Museum
Whitechapel Gallery
William Morris Gallery








 Category












v
t
e


Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport of the United Kingdom




Headquarters: 100 Parliament Street, London, SW1A 2BQ



Executive agencies



The Royal Parks
The National Archives





Non-departmental
public bodies




Advisory



Reviewing Committee on the Export of Works of Art and Objects of Cultural Interest
Theatres Trust
Treasure Valuation Committee





Executive



Arts Council England
British Film Institute
British Library
British Museum
Equality and Human Rights Commission
Gambling Commission
Geffrye Museum
Historic England
Horniman Museum
Horserace Betting Levy Board
Imperial War Museum
Information Commissioner's Office
National Gallery
National Heritage Memorial Fund
National Maritime Museum
National Museums Liverpool
National Portrait Gallery
Natural History Museum
Royal Armouries
Science Museum Group
Sir John Soane's Museum
Sport England
Sports Grounds Safety Authority
Tate
UK Anti-Doping
UK Sport
Victoria and Albert Museum
VisitBritain
VisitEngland
Wallace Collection





Tribunal

Horserace Betting Levy Appeal Tribunal






Public corporations



BBC

BBC Trust


Channel Four Television Corporation
Historic Royal Palaces
Ofcom
S4C

S4C Authority







Ministers




Secretary of State



Karen Bradley





Minister of State



Culture and the Digital Economy: Matthew Hancock





Under-Secretaries of State



Sport, Tourism and Heritage: Tracey Crouch
Internet Safety and Security: Joanna Shields, Baroness Shields
Intellectual Property: Lucy Neville-Rolfe, Baroness Neville-Rolfe









 Category










v
t
e


London landmarks



Buildings and
structures




Bridges



Albert Bridge
Blackfriars Bridge
Hungerford Bridge and Golden Jubilee Bridges
Lambeth Bridge
London Bridge
Millennium Footbridge
Southwark Bridge
Tower Bridge
Vauxhall Bridge
Waterloo Bridge
Westminster Bridge





Entertainment
venues




Cinemas



Empire, Leicester Square
BFI IMAX
Odeon Leicester Square





Football stadia



Wembley Stadium (national stadium)
Craven Cottage (Fulham)
The Den (Millwall)
Emirates Stadium (Arsenal)
Loftus Road (Queens Park Rangers)
Olympic Stadium (West Ham United)
Selhurst Park (Crystal Palace)
Stamford Bridge (Chelsea)
The Valley (Charlton Athletic)
White Hart Lane (Tottenham Hotspur)





Other major
sports venues



All England Lawn Tennis and Croquet Club
The Championship Course (rowing)
Crystal Palace National Sports Centre
Lord's (cricket)
Queen Elizabeth Olympic Park
The Oval (cricket)
Twickenham Stadium (rugby)





Theatres



London Coliseum
London Palladium
The Old Vic
Royal National Theatre
Royal Opera House
Shakespeare's Globe
Theatre Royal, Drury Lane
Theatre Royal Haymarket





Other



Alexandra Palace
Brixton Academy
ExCeL
Hammersmith Apollo
O2 Arena
Royal Albert Hall
Royal Festival Hall
Wembley Arena








Government



10 Downing Street
Admiralty Arch
Bank of England
City Hall
County Hall
Guildhall
Horse Guards
Mansion House
National Archives
Old Bailey
Palace of Westminster
Royal Courts of Justice
Scotland Yard
SIS Building





Museums and
galleries



British Museum
Cutty Sark
Golden Hinde
HMS Belfast
Imperial War Museum
Madame Tussauds
Museum of London
National Gallery
National Maritime Museum
Natural History Museum
Royal Academy of Arts
Royal Observatory
Science Museum
Tate Britain
Tate Modern
Tower of London
Victoria and Albert Museum





Places of worship



All Hallows-by-the-Tower
BAPS Shri Swaminarayan Mandir
Bevis Marks Synagogue
Methodist Central Hall
Regent's Park Mosque
St Martin-in-the-Fields
St Mary-le-Bow
St Paul's Cathedral
Southwark Cathedral
Westminster Abbey
Westminster Cathedral





Retailing




Shops



Fortnum & Mason
Hamleys
Harrods
Liberty
Peter Jones
Selfridges





Shopping centres
and markets



Borough Market
Brent Cross
Burlington Arcade
Kensington Arcade
Leadenhall Market
The Mall Wood Green
One New Change
Petticoat Lane Market
Royal Exchange
Westfield London
Westfield Stratford City








Royal buildings




Partly occupied by
the Royal Family



Buckingham Palace
Clarence House
Kensington Palace
St James's Palace





Unoccupied



Banqueting House
Hampton Court Palace
Kew Palace
The Queen's Gallery
Royal Mews, Buckingham Palace








Skyscrapers



1 Canada Square
8 Canada Square
20 Fenchurch Street
30 St Mary Axe
125 London Wall
Broadgate Tower
BT Tower
Centre Point
Citigroup Centre
Heron Tower
Leadenhall Building
Lloyd's building
Millbank Tower
Senate House
The Shard
Shell Centre
St George Wharf Tower
Strata SE1
Tower 42





Structures



Albert Memorial
ArcelorMittal Orbit
Cleopatra's Needle
Crystal Palace transmitting station
London Eye
London Wall
Marble Arch
Monument to the Great Fire
Nelson's Column
Shaftesbury Memorial Fountain ("Eros")
Thames Barrier
Wellington Arch





Transport



City Airport
Heathrow Airport
Charing Cross station
Clapham Junction station
Euston station
King's Cross station
Liverpool Street station
London Bridge station
Paddington station
St Pancras station
Victoria station
Waterloo station
Emirates Air Line
Victoria Coach Station





Other



Barbican Estate
Battersea Power Station
British Library
Kew Gardens
Lambeth Palace
London Zoo
Oxo Tower
St Bartholomew's Hospital
Smithfield Market
Somerset House








Parks




Royal Parks



Bushy Park
Green Park
Greenwich Park
Hampton Court Park
Hyde Park
Kensington Gardens
Regent's Park
Richmond Park
St. James's Park





Other



Battersea Park
Burgess Park
Clapham Common
College Green
Epping Forest
Finsbury Park
Gunnersbury Park
Hampstead Heath
Holland Park
Mitcham Common
Osterley Park
Trent Park
Victoria Park
Wandsworth Common
Wimbledon Common








Squares and
public spaces



Covent Garden
Horse Guards Parade
Leicester Square
Oxford Circus
Parliament Square
Piccadilly Circus
Sloane Square
Trafalgar Square





Streets



Aldwych
Baker Street
Bishopsgate
Bond Street
Cannon Street
Carnaby Street
Chancery Lane
Charing Cross Road
Cheapside
Cornhill
Denmark Street
Fenchurch Street
Fleet Street
Haymarket
Jermyn Street
Kensington High Street
King's Road
Lombard Street
The Mall
Oxford Street
Park Lane
Piccadilly
Portobello Road
Regent Street
Shaftesbury Avenue
Sloane Street
Strand
Threadneedle Street
Tottenham Court Road
Victoria Embankment
Whitehall






Buildings and structures under construction shown in italics







Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 139009992
LCCN: n94113332
ISNI: 0000 0001 2270 9879
GND: 5086385-X
SUDOC: 078391474
BNF: cb12180842d (data)
NLA: 35178092
NKC: ko2002152744











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Natural_History_Museum,_London&oldid=811722457"					Categories: Natural History Museum, LondonBritish MuseumNatural history museums in EnglandMuseums sponsored by the Department for Culture, Media and SportGrade I listed buildings in the Royal Borough of Kensington and ChelseaGrade I listed museum buildingsCultural infrastructure completed in 1880Alfred Waterhouse buildingsNon-departmental public bodies of the United Kingdom governmentExempt charitiesCharities based in LondonMuseums in the Royal Borough of Kensington and ChelseaRomanesque Revival architecture in EnglandTerracottaMuseums established in 18811881 establishments in EnglandNational museums of the United KingdomDinosaur museumsSouth KensingtonHidden categories: Coordinates on WikidataAll pages needing factual verificationWikipedia articles needing factual verification from November 2014Articles needing additional references from November 2007All articles needing additional referencesArticles with OS grid coordinatesUse dmy dates from August 2014Wikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersWikipedia articles with NLA identifiers