"Biological reserve" redirects here. For the use of the term specific to Brazil, see Biological reserve (Brazil).
"Forest reserve" and "Forest Preserve" redirect here. For other uses, see Forest reserve (disambiguation) and Forest Preserve (disambiguation).




The Bee Lick Creek, of the Jefferson Memorial Forest, was designated as a National Audubon Society wildlife refuge.


A nature reserve (also called a natural reserve, bioreserve, (natural/nature) preserve, or (national/nature) conserve) is a protected area of importance for wildlife, flora, fauna or features of geological or other special interest, which is reserved and managed for conservation and to provide special opportunities for study or research. Nature reserves may be designated by government institutions in some countries, or by private landowners, such as charities and research institutions, regardless of nationality. Nature reserves fall into different IUCN categories depending on the level of protection afforded by local laws.



Contents


1 History
2 Around the world

2.1 Australia
2.2 Brazil
2.3 Egypt
2.4 European Union

2.4.1 Denmark
2.4.2 Sweden
2.4.3 Estonia
2.4.4 France
2.4.5 Germany
2.4.6 Hungary
2.4.7 Poland
2.4.8 Portugal
2.4.9 United Kingdom


2.5 Israel
2.6 Japan
2.7 Jordan
2.8 Kyrgyzstan
2.9 New Zealand
2.10 Nicaragua
2.11 Russia
2.12 South Africa
2.13 Switzerland
2.14 Ukraine
2.15 United States
2.16 Eritrea


3 See also
4 References



History[edit]




Charles Waterton established the first nature reserve in 1821.


Cultural practices that roughly equate to the establishment and maintenance of reserved areas for animals date back to antiquity, with King Devanampiya Tissa of Sri Lanka establishing one of the world's earliest wildlife sanctuaries in the 3rd century BC.[1] Early reservations often had a religious underpinning, such as the 'evil forest' areas of West Africa which were forbidden to humans, who were threatened with spiritual attack if they went there. Sacred areas taboo from human entry to fishing and hunting are known by many ancient cultures worldwide.[2]
The world's first modern nature reserve was established in 1821 by the naturalist and explorer Charles Waterton around his estate in Walton Hall, West Yorkshire. He spent £9000 on the construction of a 3 mile long, 9 ft tall wall to enclose his park from poachers.[3] He tried to encourage birdlife by planting trees and hollowing out trunks for owls to nest in.




Drachenfels (Siebengebirge)


He also invented artificial nest boxes to house starlings, jackdaws and sand martins and unsuccessfully attempted to introduce little owls from Italy.[4] Waterton allowed local people access to his reserve and was described by David Attenborough as “one of the first people anywhere to recognise not only that the natural world was of great importance but that it needed protection as humanity made more and more demands on it”.[5]
Drachenfels (Siebengebirge) was protected as the first state-designated nature reserve in modern-day Germany; the site was bought by the Prussian State in 1836 to protect it from further quarrying.
The first major nature reserve was Yellowstone National Park in Wyoming, United States, followed by the Royal National Park near Sydney, Australia and the Barguzin Nature Reserve of Imperial Russia, the first of zapovedniks set up by a federal government entirely for the scientific study of nature.[6]
Around the world[edit]
Australia[edit]
See also: Nature reserve (Australia)
In Australia, a nature reserve is the title of a type of protected area used in the jurisdictions of the Australian Capital Territory, New South Wales, Tasmania and Western Australia. The term “nature reserve” is defined in the relevant statutes used in those states and territories rather than by a single national statute. As of 2016, 1767 out of a total of 11044 protected areas listed within the Australian National Reserve System used the term “nature reserve" in their names.[7]
Brazil[edit]
In Brazil, nature reserves are classified as ecological stations (Portuguese: estações ecológicas) or biological reserves (Portuguese: reservas biológicas) by the National System of Conservation Units. Their main objectives are preserving fauna and flora and other natural attributes, excluding direct human interference. Visits are allowed only with permission, and only for educational or scientific purposes. Changes to the ecosystems in both types of reserve are allowed to restore and preserve the natural balance, biological diversity and natural ecological processes.[8] Ecological stations are also allowed to change the environment within strictly defined limits (e.g. affecting no more than 3% of the area or 1,500 hectares (3,700 acres), whichever is less) for the purpose of scientific research.[9] A wildlife reserve in Brazil is also protected, and hunting is not allowed, but products and by-products from research may be sold.[8]
Egypt[edit]
There are 30 nature reserves in Egypt which cover 12% of Egyptian land. Those nature reserves were built according to the laws no. 102/1983 and 4/1994 for protection of the Egyptian nature reserve. Egypt announced a plan from to build 40 nature reserves from 1997 to 2017, to help protect the natural resources and the culture and history of those areas. The largest nature reserve in Egypt is Gebel Elba (35,600 square kilometres (13,700 sq mi)) in the southeast, on the Red Sea coast.
European Union[edit]




A bridged stone river in Bistrishko Branishte, an early Bulgarian nature reserve established in 1934.


Denmark[edit]
Denmark has three national parks and several nature reserves, some of them inside the national park areas. The largest single reserve is Hanstholm Nature Reserve, which covers 40 km2 (9,900 acres) and is part of Thy National Park.
Sweden[edit]
In Sweden there are 29 national parks. The first of them were established in 1909. In fact, Sweden was the first European country that established 9 national parks.[10] There are almost 4,000 nature reserves in Sweden. They comprise about 85% of the surface that is protected by the Swedish Environmental Code.[11]
Estonia[edit]




Tarvasjõgi at Põhja-Kõrvemaa Nature Reserve in Estonia


In Estonia there are 5 national parks, more than 100 nature reserves and around 130 landscape protection areas. The largest nature reserve in Estonia is Alam-Pedja Nature Reserve, which covers 342 km2 (85,000 acres).
France[edit]
As of 2017, France counts 10 national parks, around 50 regional parks and 8 marine parks.
Germany[edit]
In 1995 Germany had 5,314 nature reserves (German: Naturschutzgebiete) covering 6,845 km2 (2,643 sq mi), the largest total areas being in Bavaria with 1,416 km2 (547 sq mi) and Lower Saxony with 1,275 km2 (492 sq mi).
Hungary[edit]




Nature reserve near Budapest, next to Lake Naplás


In Hungary there are 10 national Parks, more than 15 nature reserves and more than 250 protected areas. Hortobágy National Park is the largest continuous natural grassland in Europe and the oldest national park in Hungary. It is situated on the eastern part of Hungary, on the plain of the Alföld. It was established in 1972. There are alkaline grasslands interrupted by marshes. They have a sizable importance, because there are the fishponds. One of the most spectacular sights of the park is the autumn migration of cranes. Some famous Hungarian animal species live in Hortobágy National Park, such as the grey cattle, racka long-wool sheep living only in Hungary, Hungarian horses and buffalo. Hortobágy National Park has been a UNESCO World Heritage Site since 1 December 1999.
Poland[edit]
Main article: Nature reserves in Poland




Path on Szczeliniec Wielki, a famous nature reserve in the Stołowe Mountains in SW Poland


As of 2011, Poland has 1469 nature reserves.[12]
Portugal[edit]
Main article: Protected areas of Portugal
Nature reserves are one of the 11 types of protected areas in Portugal. As of 2012, Portugal had a total of 46 protected areas, which represented 6,807.89 km2 (2,628.54 sq mi) of land and 463.94 km2 (179.13 sq mi) of marine surfaces. Among the protected areas, nine are classified as nature reserve (Portuguese: reserva natural).[13][14]
United Kingdom[edit]
There are some differences between the regulations for England, Northern Ireland, Scotland and Wales, which are separately managed.
At the end of March 2004, there were 215 national nature reserves in England with a total area of 879 square kilometres. The reserves are scattered through England, from Lindisfarne in Northumberland to The Lizard in Cornwall. Nearly every rural county has at least one. Many national nature reserves contain nationally important populations of rare flowers, ferns and mosses, butterflies and other insects, and nesting and wintering birds. Examples include unique alpine plants at Upper Teesdale and the field of snake's head fritillaries at North Meadow, Cricklade, Wiltshire.
There are now over 1,050 local nature reserves in England. They range from windswept coastal headlands, ancient woodlands and flower-rich meadows to former inner-city railways, long-abandoned landfill sites and industrial areas now re-colonised by wildlife. In total they cover almost 40,000 ha—an impressive natural resource which makes an important contribution to England's biodiversity. A good example is Rye Harbour Nature Reserve in East Sussex, where a network of footpaths enables visitors to explore shingle, saltmarsh, saline lagoon, reedbed and grazing marsh habitats.
Through the Natural Heritage (Scotland) Act 1991 the Scottish Natural Heritage (SNH) was established in 1992 as a government body, responsible to the Scottish Government Ministers and through them to the Scottish Parliament. At 31 March 2008 there were 65 Scottish national nature reserves with a total area of approximately 1330 square kilometres. Section 21 of the National Parks and Access to the Countryside Act 1949 gives local authorities the exclusive statutory power to establish a local nature reserve in consultation with the SNH.[15]
Israel[edit]
Main article: Nature reserves of Israel
Israel's National Parks and Nature Reserves Act of 1963 defines a nature reserve as "an area where are preserved animal life, plant life, earth, caves or water, which have a scientific or educational significance, from unwanted changes in their appearance, in their biological composition or in their development, and which the Minister of the Interior, through the recommendation of the Minister of Agriculture or subsequent to consultation with him, declared in the protocols that it is a nature reserve." In 1984, the two areas with the highest number of nature reserves were the South (15.2%) and Samaria (the Shomron, 13.5%).[16]
Japan[edit]
Under the Nature Conservation Law, places can be designated as 'wilderness areas', 'nature conservation areas' and 'prefectural nature conservation areas'. In 1995, when the Japanese Government published its information in English, there were 5 wildernesses, 10 nature conservation areas and 516 prefectural nature conservation areas.[17]
Jordan[edit]
Main article: Nature reserves in Jordan
There are seven nature reserves in Jordan. In 1966 the organization that would later start Jordan's nature reserves, the Royal Society for the Conservation of Nature, was founded. RSCN's first efforts involved bringing back severely endangered species. In 1973, RSCN was given the right to issue hunting licenses, giving RSCN an upper hand in preventing extinction. The first step was the founding of Jordan's first nature reserve, Shaumari Wildlife Reserve, in 1975. The primary purpose was to create means to breed endangered species, specifically: the Arabian oryx, gazelles, ostriches, and Persian onagers in their natural environment.
Kyrgyzstan[edit]
By the end of 2009 there were 10 nature reserves (Kyrgyz: корук, koruk) in Kyrgyzstan covering 600,000 hectares (6,000 km2) or about 3% of the total area of the country.
New Zealand[edit]
Main article: Protected areas of New Zealand
New Zealand has a variety of types of reserve, including National Parks, various types of Conservation Areas (including stewardship land that is yet to be officially classified), and seven specific types of "Reserve", each of which prioritise various degrees of protection to different amenities such as scenery, recreation, flora and fauna, scientific value or history. Land is often sub-categorised beneath its general classification, as defined in law between the Reserves Act of 1977, the National Parks Act of 1980, and the Conservation Act of 1987. Under these classifications, the Department of Conservation administers more than 80,000 km2---nearly 30 percent of the nation's total area---with at least some degree of protection. This land is composed of 14 National Parks, 30 Conservation Parks, and approximately 8,900 discrete areas of land in total.
Although most public land is strongly protected for natural preservation, the term nature reserve is specifically defined in the Reserves Act to mean a reserve that prioritises the protection of rare flora and fauna, to the extent that public access is by permit only. Some of these reserves include Ecological Islands, a comparatively new concept in wildlife preservation, pioneered in New Zealand to help re-build the populations of nearly extinct birds, and other species that are heavily threatened by introduced predators.
Nicaragua[edit]




Peñas Blancas, part of the Bosawás Biosphere Reserve is the second largest rainforest in the Western Hemisphere, after the Amazonian Rainforest in Brazil. Located northeast of the city of Jinotega in Northeastern Nicaragua.


In Nicaragua, the Ministry of the Environment and Natural Resources (MARENA) is in charge of environmental protection and of the study, planning, and management of the Nicaragua's natural resources. Nearly one fifth of the territory is designated as protected areas like national parks, nature reserves (including the Bosawás Biosphere Reserve), and biological reserves. Nicaragua has 78 protected areas that cover 22,422 km2, about 17.3% of the nation's landmass. Private nature reserves exist with land excluded from private land trusts and maintained at the sole cost of the proprietor. For example, "O Parks, WildLife, and Recreation" was established within the Mesoamerican Biological Corridor by former FDNY firefighter Kevin Michael Shea, who purchased 46 acres (0.19 km2) of land in this manner and is an example of this type of private nature reserve.[18]
Russia[edit]
Main article: Zapovednik
There are around 100 nature reserves (Russian: заповедник, zapovednik) in Russia, covering some 330,000 square kilometres (130,000 sq mi), or about 1.4% of the country's total area. A few of them predate the October Revolution of 1917, but most have been created during the Soviet Union era. There are also natural protected areas where only certain species are protected, or only certain activities are prohibited; those are known as zakaznik (Russian: заказник).
South Africa[edit]
South Africa is well known for its many reserves. The oldest nature reserve in the country (and oldest conservation area in the world) is the Groenkloof Nature Reserve that was established in 1892 in the capital city Pretoria in the old South African Republic and current Republic of South Africa. The country has many national parks but the best-known is the Kruger National Park, which was (proclaimed in 1898), and is the largest, at nearly 2,000,000 hectares (20,000 km2). The Kruger Park and Table Mountain National Park are two of South Africa's most visited tourist attractions. South Africa also has a number of World Heritage Sites and provintial nature reserves including Shamwari, Londolozi, Sanbona and Lalibela. The country currently has 20 national parks covering 3,700,000 hectares (37,000 km2), about 3% of the total area of South Africa.




The Limmatspitz nature reserve of Pro Natura


Switzerland[edit]
See also: Nature parks in Switzerland
The Swiss National Park, created in 1914, was one of the earliest national parks in Europe. In addition to the Swiss National Park, Switzerland also has sixteen regional nature parks.[19]
The environmental organisation Pro Natura takes care of about 650 nature reserves of various sizes throughout Switzerland (250 square kilometres).
Ukraine[edit]
There are 4 biosphere reserves (two of them are dated 1927 and 1874) and 17 nature reserves in Ukraine, covering 160,000 hectares. Ukraine administers 40 national parks, 2632 habitat management areas, 3025 nature monuments and 1430 other preservations.
United States[edit]




Cascade Head, Oregon, United States, is a UNESCO biosphere reserve


In the United States the United States Fish and Wildlife Service is responsible for managing many nature reserves, including National Wildlife Refuges. State and local governments administer others, and some belong to private trusts, which are funded through personal donations. There are currently 2,205 preservations in the United States. Private nature reserves exist with land excluded from private land trusts and maintained at the sole cost of the proprietor. Wilbur Hot Springs' Dr. Richard Louis Miller donated 1,800 acres (7.3 km2) of land in this manner and is an example of this type of private nature reserve.
Eritrea[edit]
In Eritrea Yob Wildlife Reserve is in charge of looking after the wildlife of plants and animals in that area
See also[edit]


Conservation designation
Country park
Pleistocene rewilding
De-extinction
Protected species
Game reserve
List of countries by forest area
List of types of formally designated forests
Marine park
Private protected area
Protected area
Refuge (ecology)
Reserve design
Wildlife corridor


References[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Nature reserves.





^ The National Atlas of Sri Lanka (2nd ed.). Department of Survey. 2007. p. 86. ISBN 955-9059-04-1. 
^ "Sri Lanka Wildlife Conservation Society (SLWCS)". Retrieved 27 October 2011. 
^ "Walton Hall history". Retrieved 2012-12-17. 
^ "Charles Waterton (1782–1865)". Archived from the original on 17 December 2013. Retrieved 29 June 2014. 
^ Wakefield Express (2013-02-23). "Sir David Attenborough will open city centre's new museum". Retrieved 2014-08-24. 
^ Weiner, Douglas R. (1988). Models Of Nature: Ecology, Conservation, and Cultural Revolution in Soviet Russia. University of Pittsburgh Press. p. 29. ISBN 978-0-8229-5733-1. 
^ "Terrestrial Protected Areas in Australia by Type (2014)". CAPAD 2014. Australian Government - Department of the Environment. 2014. Retrieved 15 September 2015. 
^ a b Categorias (in Portuguese), ICMBio, retrieved 2016-07-16 
^ Ecological Station, ISA: Instituto Socioambiental, retrieved 2016-04-30 
^ "Sveriges nationalparker", Retrieved 2016-05-14
^ "Sveriges nationalparker", Retrieved 2016-05-14
^ Dariusz Bochenek (ed.). "Ochrona środowiska 2012" (PDF). Warszawa: Główny Urząd Statystyczny. p. 277. ISSN 0867-3217. Retrieved 2012-12-29. 
^ http://www.icnf.pt/portal/ap List of Protected areas in Mainland Portugal, Portuguese Forest and Nature Conservation Institute
^ "Ambiente:áreas protegidas". Retrieved 2016-11-01. 
^ "Scottish National Heritage (SNH)". Retrieved 27 October 2011. 
^ Hareuveni, Imanuel (1985). קום התהלך בארץ: מדריך שמורות טבע בישראל [Nature Reserves in Israel] (in Hebrew) (2nd ed.). Israel: Israel Ministry of Defense. p. 482. ISBN 965-05-0193-2. חוק גנים לאומיים ושמורות טבע תשכ"ג – 1963. 'שמורת טבע' – שטח שבו נשמרים חי, צומח, קרקע, מערות או מים, שיש בהם ענין של מדע או של חנוך, מפני שינויים בלתי רצויים במראם, בהרכבם הביאולוגי או במהלך התפתחותם, וששר הפנים, לפי הצעת שר החקלאות או לאחר התיעצות אתו, הכריז עליו ברשומות שהוא שמורת טבע. 
^ "Nature Conservation in Japan". Ministry of the Environment, Government of Japan. 31 March 1995. Retrieved 24 September 2012. 
^ "O Parks, WildLife, and Recreation". Retrieved 2014-10-17. 
^ Overview of the Swiss parks, Federal Office for the Environment (page visited on 27 July 2016).









v
t
e


Natural resources



Air




Pollution / quality



Ambient standards (USA)
Index
Indoor

developing nations


Law

Clean Air Act (USA)


Ozone depletion





Emissions



Airshed
Trading
Deforestation (REDD)











Energy



Law
Resources
Fossil fuels (peak oil)
Geothermal
Nuclear
Solar

sunlight
shade


Tidal
Wave
Wind





Land



Arable

peak farmland


Degradation
Law

property


Management

habitat conservation


Minerals

mining

law
sand


peak
rights


Soil

conservation
fertility
health
resilience


Use

planning
reserve







Life



Biodiversity
Bioprospecting
Biosphere
Bushfood
Bushmeat
Fisheries

law
management


Food
Forests

genetic resources
law
management


Game

law


Gene bank
Herbalist plants
Marine conservation
Non-timber forest products
Rangeland
Seed bank
Wildlife

conservation
management


Wood





Water




Types / location



Aquifer

storage and recovery


Drinking
Fresh
Groundwater

pollution
recharge
remediation


Hydrosphere
Ice

bergs
glacial
polar


Irrigation
Rain

harvesting


Stormwater
Surface water
Wastewater

reclaimed







Aspects



Desalination
Floods
Law
Leaching
Sanitation
Conflict
Conservation
Peak water
Pollution
Privatization
Quality
Right
Resources

management
policy










Related







Commons

enclosure
global
land
tragedy of


Economics

ecological
land


Ecosystem services
Exploitation

overexploitation
Earth Overshoot Day


Management

adaptive


Natural capital

accounting


Nature reserve
Systems ecology
Urban ecology
Wilderness





Resource



Common-pool
Conflict (perpetuation)
Curse
Depletion
Extraction
Nationalism
Renewable / Non-renewable








 Portals



Agriculture and agronomy
Energy
Environment
Fishing
Forestry
Mining
Water
Wetlands








 Category

agencies
law
management
ministries
organizations


Colleges
 Natural resources












v
t
e


Designations for types of administrative territorial entities








English terms








Common English terms1



Area



Insular area
Local government area
Protected area
Special area
Statistical area

Combined statistical area
Metropolitan statistical area
Micropolitan statistical area


Urban area





Canton

Half-canton



Borough



County borough
Metropolitan borough





Capital



Federal capital
Imperial capital





City



City state
Autonomous city
Charter city
Independent city
Incorporated city
Imperial city
Free imperial city
Royal free city





Community



Autonomous community
Residential community





County



Administrative county
Autonomous county
Consolidated city-county
Metropolitan county

Non-metropolitan


Viscountcy





Country



Overseas country





Department



Overseas department





District



Capital district
City district
Congressional district
Electoral district
Federal district
Indian government district
Land district
Metropolitan district

Non-metropolitan district


Military district
Municipal district
Police district
Regional district
Rural district
Sanitary district
Subdistrict
Urban district
Special district





Division



Census division
Police division
Subdivision





Municipality



County municipality

Norway
Nova Scotia
Regional county municipality


Direct-controlled municipality
District municipality
Mountain resort municipality
Neutral municipality
Regional municipality
Resort municipality
Rural municipality
Specialized municipality





Prefecture



Autonomous prefecture
Subprefecture
Super-prefecture
Praetorian prefecture





Province



Autonomous province
Overseas province
Roman province





Region



Administrative region
Autonomous region
Capital region
Development region
Economic region
Mesoregion
Microregion
Overseas region
Planning region
Special administrative region
Statistical region
Subregion





Reserve



Biosphere reserve
Ecological reserve
Game reserve
Indian reserve
Nature reserve





State



Federal state
Free state
Sovereign state





Territory



Capital territory

Federal capital territory


Dependent territory
Federal territory
Military territory
Organized incorporated territory
Overseas territory
Union territory
Unorganized territory





Town



Census town
Market town





Township



Charter township
Civil township
Paper township
Survey township
Urban township





Unit



Autonomous territorial unit
Local administrative unit
Municipal unit
Regional unit





Zone



Economic zone

Exclusive economic zone
Free economic zone
Special economic zone


Free-trade zone
Neutral zone
Self-administered zone










Other English terms



Current



Alpine resort
Bailiwick
Banner

Autonomous


Block
Cadastre
Circle
Circuit
Colony
Commune
Condominium
Constituency
Duchy
Eldership
Emirate
Federal dependency
Governorate
Hamlet
Ilkhanate
Indian reservation
Manor

Royal


Muftiate
Neighbourhood
Parish
Periphery
Precinct
Principality
Protectorate
Quarter
Regency
Autonomous republic
Riding
Sector

Autonomous


Shire
Sultanate
Suzerainty
Townland
Village

Administrative
Summer


Ward






Historical



Agency
Barony
Burgh
Exarchate
Hide
Hundred
Imperial Circle
March
Monthon
Presidency
Residency
Roman diocese
Seat
Tenth
Tithing



















Non-English or loanwords







Current



Amt
Bakhsh
Barangay
Bezirk
Regierungsbezirk
Comune
Frazione
Fu
Gemeinde
Județ
Kunta / kommun

Finland
Sweden


Län
Località
Megye
Muban
Oblast

Autonomous


Okrug
Ostān
Poblacion
Purok
Shahrestān
Sum
Sýsla
Tehsil
Vingtaine





Historical



Commote
Gau
Heerlijkheid
Köping
Maalaiskunta
Nome

Egypt
Greece


Pagus
Pargana
Plasă
Satrapy
Socken
Subah
Syssel
Zhou












v
t
e


Arabic terms for country subdivisions



First-level



Muhafazah (محافظة governorate)
Wilayah (ولاية province)
Mintaqah (منطقة region)
Mudiriyah (مديرية directorate)
Imarah (إمارة emirate)
Baladiyah (بلدية municipality)
Shabiyah (شعبية "popularate")





Second / third-level



Mintaqah (منطقة region)
Qadaa (قضاء district)
Nahiyah (ناحية subdistrict)
Markaz (مركز district)
Mutamadiyah (معتمدية "delegation")
Daerah/Daïra (دائرة circle)
Liwa (لواء banner / sanjak)





City / township-level



Amanah (أمانة municipality)
Baladiyah (بلدية municipality)
Ḥai (حي neighborhood / quarter)
Mahallah (محلة)
Qarya (قرية)
Sheyakhah (شياخة "neighborhood subdivision")






English translations given are those most commonly used.








v
t
e


French terms for country subdivisions






arrondissement
département
préfecture
subprefectures










v
t
e


Greek terms for country subdivisions



Modern



apokentromenes dioikiseis / geniki dioikisis§ / diamerisma§ / periphereia
nomos§ / periphereiaki enotita
demos / eparchia§ / koinotita§





Historical



archontia/archontaton
bandon
demos
despotaton
dioikesis
doukaton
droungos
eparchia
exarchaton
katepanikion
kephalatikion
kleisoura
meris
naukrareia
satrapeia
strategis
thema
toparchia
tourma






§ signifies a defunct institution








v
t
e


Portuguese terms for country subdivisions



Regional subdivisions



Estado
Distrito federal
Província
Região
Distrito
Comarca
Capitania





Local subdivisions



Município
Concelho
Freguesia
Comuna
Circunscrição





Settlements



Cidade
Vila
Aldeia
Bairro
Lugar








Historical subdivisions in italics.










v
t
e


Slavic terms for country subdivisions



Current



dzielnica
gmina
krai
kraj
krajina / pokrajina
městys
obec
oblast / oblast' / oblasti / oblys / obwód / voblast'
okręg
okres
okrug
opština / općina / občina / obshtina
osiedle
powiat / povit
raion
selsoviet / silrada
sołectwo
voivodeship / vojvodina
županija





Historical



darugha
gromada
guberniya / gubernia
jurydyka
khutor
obshchina
okolia
opole
pogost
prowincja
sorok
srez
starostwo / starostva
uyezd
volost
ziemia
župa










v
t
e


Spanish terms for country subdivisions



National, Federal



Comunidad autónoma
Departamento
Distrito federal
Estado
Provincia
Región





Regional, Metropolitan



Cantón
Comarca
Comuna
Corregimiento
Delegación
Distrito
Mancomunidad
Merindad
Municipalidad
Municipio
Parroquia

Ecuador
Spain







Urban, Rural



Aldea
Alquería
Anteiglesia
Asentamiento

Asentamiento informal
Pueblos jóvenes


Barrio
Campamento
Caserío
Ciudad

Ciudad autónoma


Colonia
Lugar
Masía
Pedanía
Población
Ranchería
Sitio
Vereda
Villa
Village (Pueblito/Pueblo)








Historical subdivisions in italics.










v
t
e


Turkish terms for country subdivisions



Modern



il (province)
ilçe (district)
şehir (city)
kasaba (town)
belediye (municipality)
belde (community)
köy (village)
mahalle (neighbourhood/quarter)





Historical



ağalık (feudal district)
bucak (subdistrict)
beylerbeylik (province)
kadılık (subprovince)
kaza (sub-province)
hidivlik (viceroyalty)
mutasarrıflık (subprovince)
nahiye (nahiyah)
paşalık (province)
reya (Romanian principalities)
sancak (prefecture)
vilayet (province)
voyvodalık (Romanian provinces)















1 Used by ten or more countries or having derived terms. Historical derivations in italics.
See also: Census division, Electoral district, Political division, and List of administrative divisions by country







Ecology portal
Environment portal
Forestry portal
Biology portal
Sustainable development portal







						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Nature_reserve&oldid=816889598"					Categories: Nature reservesConservationLand useRegional parksTypes of formally designated forestsProtected areasHidden categories: CS1 Portuguese-language sources (pt)CS1 uses Hebrew-language script (he)CS1 Hebrew-language sources (he)Use dmy dates from December 2010Articles containing Portuguese-language textArticles containing German-language textArticles containing Kyrgyz-language textArticles containing Russian-language text