This article is about natural language in neuropsychology and linguistics. For natural language in computer systems, see Natural language processing.


Neuropsychology




Topics


Brain regions
Clinical neuropsychology
Cognitive neuropsychology
Cognitive neuroscience
Dementia
Human brain
Neuroanatomy
Neurophysiology
Neuropsychological assessment
Neuropsychological rehabilitation
Traumatic brain injury








Brain functions


Arousal
Attention
Consciousness
Decision making
Executive functions
Natural language
Learning
Memory
Motor coordination
Perception
Planning
Problem solving
Thought








People


Arthur L. Benton
David Bohm
Antonio Damasio
Phineas Gage
Norman Geschwind
Elkhonon Goldberg
Patricia Goldman-Rakic
Pasko Rakic
Donald O. Hebb
Kenneth Heilman
Edith Kaplan
Muriel Lezak
Benjamin Libet
Rodolfo Llinás
Alexander Luria
Brenda Milner
Karl H. Pribram
Oliver Sacks
Mark Rosenzweig
Roger W. Sperry
Hans-Lukas Teuber
Henry Molaison ("H.M.", patient)
K.C. (patient)








Tests


Benton Visual Retention Test
Continuous Performance Task
Halstead-Reitan Neuropsychological Battery
Hayling and Brixton tests
Lexical Decision Task
Luria-Nebraska neuropsychological battery
Mini–Mental State Examination
Rey–Osterrieth complex figure
Stroop Test
Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale
Wechsler Memory Scale
Wisconsin Card Sorting Task






Mind and brain portal





v
t
e





In neuropsychology, linguistics and the philosophy of language, a natural language or ordinary language is any language that has evolved naturally in humans through use and repetition without conscious planning or premeditation. Natural languages can take different forms, such as speech or signing. They are distinguished from constructed and formal languages such as those used to program computers or to study logic.[1]



Contents


1 Defining natural language
2 Controlled languages
3 Constructed languages and international auxiliary languages
4 See also
5 Notes
6 References



Defining natural language[edit]
Though the exact definition varies between scholars, natural language can broadly be defined in contrast to artificial or constructed languages (such as computer programming languages and international auxiliary languages) and to other communication systems in nature. Such examples include bees' waggle dance[2] and whale song, to which researchers have found or applied the linguistic cognates of dialect and even syntax.
All language varieties of world languages are natural languages, although some varieties are subject to greater degrees of published prescriptivism or language regulation than others. Thus nonstandard dialects can be viewed as a wild type in comparison with standard languages. But even an official language with a regulating academy, such as Standard French with the French Academy, is classified as a natural language (for example, in the field of natural language processing), as its prescriptive points do not make it either constructed enough to be classified as a constructed language or controlled enough to be classified as a controlled natural language.
Controlled languages[edit]
Main article: Controlled natural language
Controlled natural languages are subsets of natural languages whose grammars and dictionaries have been restricted in order to reduce or eliminate both ambiguity and complexity (for instance, by cutting down on rarely used superlative or adverbial forms or irregular verbs). The purpose behind the development and implementation of a controlled natural language typically is to aid non-native speakers of a natural language in understanding it, or to ease computer processing of a natural language. An example of a widely used controlled natural language is Simplified English, which was originally developed for aerospace industry maintenance manuals.
Constructed languages and international auxiliary languages[edit]
Main articles: Constructed language and International auxiliary language
Constructed international auxiliary languages such as Esperanto and Interlingua (even those that have native speakers) are not generally considered natural languages.[3] Natural languages have been used to communicate and have evolved in a natural way, whereas Esperanto was designed by L.L. Zamenhof selecting elements from natural languages, not grown from natural fluctuations in vocabulary and syntax. Some natural languages have become naturally "standardized" by children's natural tendency to correct for illogical grammatical structures in their parents' speech, which can be seen in the development of pidgin languages into creole languages (as explained by Steven Pinker in The Language Instinct), but this is not the case in many languages, including constructed languages such as Esperanto, where strict rules are in place as an attempt to consciously remove such irregularities. The possible exception to this are true native speakers of such languages.[4] More substantive basis for this designation is that the vocabulary, grammar, and orthography of Interlingua are natural; they have been standardized and presented by a linguistic research body, but they predated it and are not themselves considered a product of human invention.[5] Most experts, however, consider Interlingua to be naturalistic rather than natural.[3] Latino Sine Flexione, a second naturalistic auxiliary language, is also naturalistic in content but is no longer widely spoken.[6]
See also[edit]

Language acquisition
Origin of language

Notes[edit]


^ Lyons, John (1991). Natural Language and Universal Grammar. New York: Cambridge University Press. pp. 68–70. ISBN 978-0521246965. 
^ Fernandes, Keith (2008). On the Significance of Speech: How Infants Discover Symbols and Structure. Ann Arbor, MI: ProQuest. pp. 7–8. ISBN 978-1243524065. 
^ a b Gopsill, F. P., "A historical overview of international languages". In International languages: A matter for Interlingua. Sheffield, England: British Interlingua Society, 1990.
^ Proponents contend that there are 200–2000 native speakers of Esperanto.
^ Gode, Alexander, Interlingua-English: A dictionary of the international language. New York: Storm Publishers, 1951. (Original edition)
^ Gopsill, F. P., "Naturalistic international languages". In International languages: A matter for Interlingua. Sheffield, England: British Interlingua Society, 1990.


References[edit]


ter Meulen, Alice, 2001, "Logic and Natural Language," in Goble, Lou, ed., The Blackwell Guide to Philosophical Logic. Blackwell.







						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Natural_language&oldid=798507726"					Categories: Natural language processingNeuropsychological assessmentLanguagePhilosophical logicPhilosophy of languageHidden categories: Use dmy dates from July 2012