For the cable news channel managed by NBC News, see MSNBC.

NBC News




Division of
NBC (National Broadcasting Company)


Key people
Steve Burke (President & CEO of NBCUniversal)
Noah Oppenheim (President of NBC News[1])
Andrew Lack (Chairman of NBCUniversal News Group[2])


Founded
February 21, 1940; 77 years ago (1940-02-21)


Headquarters
30 Rockefeller Plaza, New York City, New York, U.S.A.


Major Bureaus
West Coast Headquarters, Universal City, California
Governmental Affairs Headquarters
Washington, D.C.
European Headquarters
London, UK
Asia Pacific Headquarters
Singapore, Hong Kong


Area served
Worldwide


Broadcast programs:
Dateline NBC
Early Today
Meet the Press
NBC Nightly News
Today
Weekend Today
Sunday Night with Megyn Kelly


Owner
Comcast


Parent
NBCUniversal


Divisions
NBC News International


Subsidiaries
Euronews
(25%)


Website
www.nbcnews.com





v
t
e









1959–72 logo


NBC News is a division of the American broadcast television network NBC, formerly known as the National Broadcasting Company when it was founded on radio. The division operates under NBCUniversal News Group, a subsidiary of NBCUniversal, in turn a subsidiary of Comcast. The group's various operations report to the president of NBC News, Noah Oppenheim.[1]
NBC News aired the first news program in American broadcast television history on February 21, 1940. The group's broadcasts are produced and aired from 30 Rockefeller Center, NBC's headquarters in New York City.
The division presides over America's number-one-rated newscast,[3] NBC Nightly News, and the longest-running television series in American history, Meet The Press, the Sunday morning program of newsmakers interviews. NBC News also offers 70 years of rare historic footage[4] from the NBCUniversal Archives online.
NBC News operates a 24-hour cable news network known as MSNBC, which includes the organization's flagship daytime news operation, MSNBC Live. The cable network shares staff and editorial control with NBC News. In 2016, the organization also purchased a portion of Euronews, a European 24-hour news network that, in 2017, entered into an international editorial relationship with NBC News.[5]



Contents


1 History

1.1 Caravan era
1.2 Huntley-Brinkley era
1.3 NBC Nightly News era


2 Company news
3 Controversies

3.1 Virginia Tech massacre
3.2 Shooting of Trayvon Martin
3.3 NBC News team kidnapping


4 Presidents
5 Programming

5.1 Former programming
5.2 Syndicated productions
5.3 Other productions
5.4 NBC News International
5.5 NBC News Radio
5.6 NBC News Overnight/Nightside


6 NBC News Channel
7 Noted coverage
8 Notable personnel

8.1 Former staff


9 International broadcasts
10 Bureaus

10.1 Major bureaus
10.2 Minor bureaus (within the United States)
10.3 Foreign bureaus (NBC News/CNBC/MSNBC)


11 Theme music
12 Units
13 References
14 External links



History[edit]
Caravan era[edit]
The first American television newscast in history was made by NBC News on February 21, 1940, anchored by Lowell Thomas (1892-1981), and airing weeknights at 6:45 p.m.[6] In June 1940, NBC, through its flagship station in New York City, W2XBS (renamed commercial WNBT in 1941, now WNBC) operating on channel one, televised 30¼ hours of coverage of the Republican National Convention live and direct from Philadelphia. The station used a series of relays from Philadelphia to New York and on to upper New York State, for rebroadcast on W2XB in Schenectady (now WRGB), making this among the first "network" programs of NBC Television. Due to wartime restrictions, there were no live telecasts of the 1944 conventions, although films of the events were reportedly shown over WNBT the next day.
In 1948, NBC teamed up with Life magazine to provide election night coverage of President Harry S. Truman's surprising victory over New York governor Thomas E. Dewey. The television audience was small, but NBC's share in New York was double that of any other outlet.[7] The following year, the Camel News Caravan, anchored by John Cameron Swayze, debuted on NBC. Lacking the graphics and technology of later years, it nonetheless contained many of the elements of modern newscasts.[8] NBC hired its own film crews and in the program's early years, it dominated CBS's competing program, which did not hire its own film crews until 1953.[8] (by contrast, CBS spent lavishly on Edward R. Murrow's weekly series, See It Now[8]). In 1950, David Brinkley began serving as the program's Washington correspondent, but attracted little attention outside the network until paired with Chet Huntley in 1956.[9] In 1955, the Camel News Caravan fell behind CBS's Douglas Edwards with the News, and Swayze lost the already tepid support of NBC executives.[8] The following year, NBC replaced the program with the Huntley-Brinkley Report.
Beginning in 1951, NBC News was managed by director of news Bill McAndrew, who reported to vice president of news and public affairs J. Davidson Taylor.[10]
Huntley-Brinkley era[edit]




NBC News had close to 700 correspondents and cameramen in 1961 who were stationed throughout the world. Film was received in the United States by plane or by the jointly operated NBC-BBC transatlantic film cable.


Television assumed an increasingly prominent role in American family life in the late 1950s, and NBC News was called television's "champion of news coverage."[11] NBC president Robert Kintner provided the news division with ample amounts of both financial resources and air time.[8] In 1956, the network paired anchors Chet Huntley and David Brinkley and the two became celebrities,[9] supported by reporters including John Chancellor, Frank McGee, Edwin Newman, Sander Vanocur, Nancy Dickerson, Tom Pettit, and Ray Scherer.
Created by producer Reuven Frank, NBC's Huntley-Brinkley Report had its debut on October 29, 1956. During much of its 14-year run, it exceeded the viewership levels of its CBS News competition, anchored initially by Douglas Edwards and, beginning in April 1962, by Walter Cronkite.
NBC's vice president of news and public affairs, J. Davidson Taylor, was a Southerner who, with producer Reuven Frank, was determined that NBC would lead television's coverage of the civil rights movement.[12] In 1955, NBC provided national coverage of Rev. Martin Luther King, Jr.'s leadership of the bus boycott in Montgomery, Alabama, airing reports from Frank McGee, then news director of NBC's Montgomery affiliate WSFA-TV, who would later join the network.[13] A year later, John Chancellor's coverage of the admission of black students to Central High School in Little Rock, Arkansas was the first occasion when the key news story came from television rather than print[13] and prompted a prominent U.S. senator to observe later, "When I think of Little Rock, I think of John Chancellor."[10] Other reporters who covered the movement for the network included Sander Vanocur, Herbert Kaplow, Charles Quinn, and Richard Valeriani,[12] who was hit with an ax handle at a demonstration in Marion, Alabama in 1965.[14]
While Walter Cronkite's enthusiasm for the space race eventually won the anchorman viewers for CBS, NBC News, with the work of correspondents such as Frank McGee, Roy Neal, Jay Barbree, and Peter Hackes, also provided ample coverage of American manned space missions in the Project Mercury, Project Gemini, and Project Apollo programs. In an era when space missions rated continuous coverage, NBC configured its largest studio, Studio 8H, for space coverage. It utilized models and mockups of rockets and spacecraft, maps of the earth and moon to show orbital trackage, and stages on which animated figures created by puppeteer Bil Baird were used to depict movements of astronauts before on-board spacecraft television cameras were feasible. (Studio 8H had been home to the NBC Symphony Orchestra and is now the home of Saturday Night Live.) NBC's coverage of the first moon landing in 1969 earned the network an Emmy Award.[15]
In the late 1950s, Kintner reorganized the chain of command at the network, making Bill McAndrew president of NBC News, reporting directly to Kintner.[10] McAndrew served in that position until his death in 1968.[10] McAndrew was succeeded by his executive vice president, producer Reuven Frank, who held the position until 1973.[10]
On November 22, 1963, NBC interrupted various programs on its affiliate stations at 1:45 p.m. to announce that President John F. Kennedy had been shot in Dallas, Texas. Eight minutes later, at 1:53:12 p.m., NBC broke into programming with a network bumper slide and Chet Huntley, Bill Ryan and Frank McGee informing the viewers what was going on as it happened; but since a camera was not in service, the reports were audio only. However, NBC did not begin broadcasting over the air until 1:57 p.m. ET. About 40 minutes later, after word came that JFK was pronounced dead, NBC suspended regular programming and carried 71 hours of uninterrupted news coverage of the assassination and the funeral of the president—including the only live broadcast of the fatal shooting of Kennedy's assassin, Lee Harvey Oswald, by Jack Ruby as Oswald was being led in handcuffs by law-enforcement officials through the basement of Dallas Police Headquarters.[16]
NBC Nightly News era[edit]
NBC's ratings lead began to slip toward the end of the 1960s and fell sharply when Chet Huntley retired in 1970 (Huntley died of cancer in 1974). The loss of Huntley, along with a reluctance by RCA to fund NBC News at a similar level as CBS was funding its news division, left NBC News in the doldrums. NBC's primary news show gained its present title, NBC Nightly News, on August 3, 1970.
The network tried a platoon of anchors (Brinkley, McGee, and John Chancellor) during the early months of Nightly News. Despite the efforts of the network's eventual lead anchor, the articulate, even-toned Chancellor, and an occasional first-place finish in the Nielsens, Nightly News in the 1970s was primarily a strong second.[8] By the end of the decade, NBC had to contend not only with a powerful CBS but also a surging ABC, led by Roone Arledge. Tom Brokaw became sole anchor in 1983, after co-anchoring with Roger Mudd for a year, and began leading NBC's efforts. In 1986 and 1987, NBC won the top spot in the Nielsens for the first time in years,[17] only to fall back when Nielsen's ratings methodology changed. In late 1996, Nightly News again moved into first place,[18] a spot it has held onto in most of the succeeding years. Brian Williams assumed primary anchor duties when Brokaw retired in December 2004.[19] In February 2015, NBC suspended Williams for six months for telling an inaccurate story about his experience in the 2003 invasion of Iraq.[20] He was replaced by Lester Holt on an interim basis. On June 18, 2015, it was announced that Holt would become the permanent anchor and Williams would be moved to MSNBC as an anchor of breaking news and special reports beginning in August.[21]
In 1993, Dateline NBC broadcast an investigative report about the safety of General Motors (GM) trucks. GM discovered the "actual footage" utilized in the broadcast had been rigged by the inclusion of explosive incendiaries attached to the gas tanks and the use of improper sealants for those tanks. GM subsequently filed an anti-defamation lawsuit against NBC, which publicly admitted the results of the tests were rigged and settled the lawsuit with GM on the very same day.[22]
Company news[edit]
On October 22, 2007, Nightly News moved into its new high definition studios, at Studio 3C at NBC Studios in 30 Rockefeller Plaza in New York City. The network's 24-hour cable network, MSNBC, joined the network in New York on that day as well. The new studios/headquarters for NBC News and MSNBC are now located in one area.[citation needed]
During the financial crisis of 2007–2008, NBC News was urged to save $500 million by NBC Universal. On that occasion, NBC News laid off several of its in-house reporters such as Kevin Corke, Jeannie Ohm and Don Teague. This was the largest layoff in NBC News history.
After the sudden death of the influential moderator Tim Russert of Meet the Press in June 2008, Tom Brokaw took over as an interim host; and on December 14, 2008, David Gregory became the new moderator of the show until August 14, 2014, when NBC announced that NBC News Political Director Chuck Todd would take over as the 12th moderator of Meet the Press starting September 7, 2014. David Gregory's last broadcast was August 10, 2014.[23][24]
By 2009, NBC had established leadership in network news, airing the highest-rated morning, evening, and Sunday interview news programs.[25] Its ability to share costs with MSNBC and share in the cable network's advertising and subscriber revenue made it far more profitable than its network rivals.[26]
Controversies[edit]
Virginia Tech massacre[edit]
Further information: Virginia Tech massacre
On April 16, 2007, Cho Seung-hui, gunman in the Virginia Tech massacre, took time between the two shooting episodes to prepare and mail a large multimedia package to NBC News in New York City containing messages about his anger at the wealthy and alluding to the slaughter that was about to take place. Although the package was sent overnight mail, it was not received until 11 a.m. on April 18 because of Cho's confusion over the zip code of NBC's headquarters at 30 Rockefeller Plaza. The package contained a DVD showing video clips of Cho speaking and more than two dozen photos of Cho, including 11 of him thrusting pistols at the camera. A postal worker delivering the parcel to the network's Rockefeller Center offices recognized the sender and alerted NBC security personnel. They immediately reported the package to the FBI. Meanwhile, NBC made copies of the contents and aired carefully edited pieces on its evening news and cable programs. Snippets from the package, including still photos, videos and voice narration, were also made available to competing news outlets who agreed to credit the network as the source. Then-NBC News president Steve Capus defended use of the material, but the frequency of its broadcast was cut dramatically.
Shooting of Trayvon Martin[edit]
Main article: Shooting of Trayvon Martin




NBC Nightly News broadcast, March 2008


On March 27, 2012, NBC News broadcast an edited segment from a 911 call placed by George Zimmerman before he shot Trayvon Martin. The editing made it appear that Zimmerman volunteered that Martin was black, rather than merely responding to the dispatcher's inquiry, which would support a view that the shooting was racially motivated. A media watchdog organization accused NBC News of engaging in "an all-out falsehood." While NBC News initially declined to comment,[27] the news agency did issue an apology to viewers.[28] The Washington Post called the statement "skimpy on the details on just how the mistake unfolded."[28]
NBC News team kidnapping[edit]
Main article: NBC News team kidnapping in Syria
On December 13, 2012, NBC News reporter Richard Engel and his five crew members, Aziz Akyavaş, Ghazi Balkiz, John Kooistra, Ian Rivers and Ammar Cheikh Omar, were abducted in Syria. Having escaped after five days in captivity, Engel said he believed that a Shabiha group loyal to al-Assad was behind the abduction, and that the crew was freed by the Ahrar al-Sham group five days later.[29] Engel's account was however challenged from early on.[30] In April 2015, NBC had to revise the kidnapping account, following further investigations by The New York Times, which suggested that the NBC team "was almost certainly taken by a Sunni criminal element affiliated with the Free Syrian Army," rather than by a loyalist Shia group.[31]
Presidents[edit]
Nine men have served as president of NBC News during its history: Reuven Frank (1968–73, 1981–85), Richard Wald (1973–77), Lester M. Crystal (1977–79), William J. Small (1979–81), Lawrence Grossman (1985–88), Michael Gartner (1988–93), Andrew Lack (1993–2001), Neal Shapiro (2001–05), and Steve Capus (2005–March 5, 2013). In August 2013, Deborah Turness assumed the role as president of NBC News, becoming the first woman to head the division.[32] In February 2017, Today Show producer and executive Noah Oppenheim was named president of NBC News.[1]
Programming[edit]




NBC News Washington Bureau



NBC Nightly News (1970–present)
Early Today (1999–present)
Today (1952–present)
Weekend Today (1987–present)
Meet the Press (1947–present)
Dateline NBC (1992–present)
MSNBC Live (1996–present)
Morning Joe (2007–present)
The Rachel Maddow Show (2008–present)
The 11th Hour with Brian Williams (2016–present)
Sunday Night with Megyn Kelly (2017–present)

Former programming[edit]

Weekend (1974–79)
NBC News Overnight (1982–83)
NBC News at Sunrise (1983–99)
Real Life with Jane Pauley (1990–91)
Expose with Tom Brokaw (1991)
NBC News Nightside (1991–98)
Now with Tom Brokaw and Katie Couric (1993–94)
Later Today (1999–2000)
Rock Center with Brian Williams (2011–13)

Syndicated productions[edit]

The Chris Matthews Show (2002–13)

 This film, television or video-related list is incomplete; you can help by expanding it with reliably sourced additions.
Other productions[edit]
NBC News provides content for the Internet, as well as cable-only news networks CNBC and MSNBC. It produces a twice-daily show called Stay Tuned for Snapchat's Discover platform.
NBC News International[edit]
In November 2016, NBC News Group chairman Andy Lack announced NBCUniversal had purchased a 25% stake in Euronews, a European news organization competing against the likes of BBC News and ITV News. As part of the purchase, NBC News created "NBC News International," which seeks to combine the new European and pre-existing American resources of the newly-expanded organization into a streamlined, global operation. The new division of the company is under the direction of Deborah Turness, former President of NBC News. It was also announced that Euronews will take on EuronewsNBC branding once the deal is finalized.[5]
NBC News Radio[edit]





NBC News Radio logo


NBC News Radio has been distributed by iHeartMedia and its TTWN Networks since July 2016. It is provided to the network's 24/7 News Source affiliates and includes a top of the hour newscast along with other audio content which is heard on over 1,000 radio stations.[33]
The original NBC Radio Network was purchased by Westwood One in 1987 as General Electric, which acquired NBC's parent company RCA, divested most properties not pertaining to the NBC television network. NBC Radio's news operation was merged into the Mutual Broadcasting System, then into Westwood One's then-corporate sibling CBS Radio, and eventually assimilated into the syndicator itself. Initially just a service limited to one-hour reports from 6 a.m. to 10 p.m. ET, on March 5, 2012, Dial Global – who had acquired Westwood One – announced NBC News Radio would expand to a full-time 24-hour radio news network, replacing CNN Radio (that itself replaced both NBC Radio and Mutual in 1999).
As of 2016, WOR serves as NBC News Radio's East Coast flagship station, while KOGO serves as the network's West Coast flagship station.[citation needed]
It broadcasts in a 15-minute cycle with the latest news.
NBC News Overnight/Nightside[edit]
In 1982, NBC News began production on NBC News Overnight with anchors Linda Ellerbee, Lloyd Dobyns, and Bill Schechner. That program was cancelled in December 1983, but in 1991, NBC News launched another overnight news show called NBC Nightside. During its run, the show's anchors included Sara James,[34] Bruce Hall, Antonio Mora, Tom Miller, Campbell Brown, Kim Hindrew, Tom Donavan, and Tonya Strong.
NBC Nightside lasted until 1998 and was replaced by "NBC All Night", composed of reruns of The Tonight Show with Jay Leno and Late Night with Conan O'Brien, and later from January 1, 2007 to September 23, 2011, Poker After Dark. NBC now airs same day repeats of the fourth hour of Today and CNBC's Mad Money on weekdays, LXTV programs on early Sunday mornings, and Meet the Press and Dateline encores on early Monday mornings.
NBC News Channel[edit]
NBC News Channel is a news video and report feed service, similar to a wire service, providing pre-produced international, national and regional stories some with fronting reporters customized for NBC network affiliates. It is based in Charlotte, North Carolina and is connected to the studios of Charlotte NBC affiliate WCNC-TV. NBC News Channel also served as the production base of NBC Nightside and "Canal de Noticias, NBC", a Spanish language news wheel service for Latin America. Service ended two years before company bought Telemundo Network
Noted coverage[edit]
NBC News got the first American news interviews from two Russian presidents (Vladimir Putin, Mikhail Gorbachev), and Brokaw was the only American television news correspondent to witness the fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989.[35]
Notable personnel[edit]


Peter Alexander – Senior National Correspondent (2004–present)
Ron Allen – correspondent
Miguel Almaguer – Los Angeles based correspondent [36]
Jeremy Bash – Senior national security analyst
Catie Beck - Atlanta based correspondent [37]
Lisa Bloom – legal analyst
Tom Brokaw – special correspondent (1966–present)
Dara Brown - MSNBC anchor
Mika Brzezinski – MSNBC's Morning Joe co-anchor
Mike Barnicle – MSNBC's Morning Joe co-anchor
Andrea Canning – NBC News correspondent & Dateline NBC correspondent (2012–present)
Jean Chatzky – Today financial editor & NBC News financial correspondent
Bob Costas – NBC Sports anchor & NBC News Sports correspondent
Tom Costello – aviation, transportation and consumer affairs correspondent (1996–Present)
Carson Daly – Today "Orange Room" anchor & NBC's The Voice host
Jose Diaz-Balart – NBC Nightly News Saturday anchor (2015–present)
Dylan Dreyer – Today's Take co-host, Weekend Today weather anchor & NBC News meteorologist
Rehema Ellis – education correspondent (1994–present)
Richard Engel – chief foreign correspondent
Martin Fletcher – special foreign correspondent
Ben Fogle – special London correspondent
Joe Fryer – Los Angeles based correspondent
Joelle Garguilo – Weekend Today correspondent
Willie Geist – Sunday Today Anchor, MSNBC's Morning Joe co-anchor & NBC News correspondent
Kathie Lee Gifford – Today fourth hour co-host
Stephanie Gosk – correspondent
Savannah Guthrie – Today co-anchor & NBC News Chief Legal Correspondent (2007–present)
Jenna Bush Hager – "Today" special correspondent
Chris Hayes – Host of All In with Chris Hayes on MSNBC
Lester Holt – NBC Nightly News anchor; also host of Dateline NBC (2000–present)
Kasie Hunt - Capitol Hill Correspondent [38]
Hallie Jackson – NBC News Chief White House Correspondent & MSNBC Live anchor
Chris Jansing – NBC News Correspondent & MSNBC Breaking News Coverage anchor
Sheinelle Jones - Today's Take co-host, Weekend Today co-anchor & MSNBC Live Saturday anchor
Bill Karins – Early Today weather anchor, MSNBC weather anchor & NBC News chief meteorologist
Megyn Kelly[39] - Sunday Night with Megyn Kelly host and Megyn Kelly Today host
Jinah Kim – correspondent
Steve Kornacki – Chief Political Correspondent & host of MSNBC Live
Hoda Kotb – Today co-anchor & fourth hour co-host & Dateline NBC correspondent
Maria LaRosa – The Weather Channel meteorologist & NBC News contributing meteorologist


Richard Lui – MSNBC Live weekend anchor
Rachel Maddow – MSNBC's The Rachel Maddow Show anchor and NBC News Senior Political Analyst
Josh Mankiewicz – Dateline NBC correspondent
Chris Matthews – MSNBC's Hardball with Chris Matthews anchor
Blake McCoy - Chicago based correspondent
Cynthia McFadden – Senior Legal and Investigative correspondent
Craig Melvin – Today weekend co-anchor & MSNBC anchor
Andrea Mitchell – MSNBC's Andrea Mitchell Reports anchor & NBC News Chief Foreign Affairs correspondent (1978–present)
Ayman Mohyeldin – foreign correspondent and Early Today co-anchor
Natalie Morales – Today west coast anchor, Dateline NBC correspondent & host of Access Hollywood
Keith Morrison – Dateline NBC correspondent
Dennis Murphy – Dateline NBC correspondent
Bill Neely – Chief Global correspondent
Betty Nguyen – MSNBC's Morning Joe First Look alternating anchor
Kelly O'Donnell – Capitol Hill correspondent
Lawrence O'Donnell – Host of The Last Word on MSNBC
Carl Quintanilla – CNBC's Squawk on the Street co-anchor & NBC News correspondent
Jacob Rascon - Dallas based correspondent
Milissa Rehberger – MSNBC anchor
Morgan Radford – correspondent
Joy Reid – MSNBC's AM Joy anchor
Frances Rivera – Early Today co-anchor & NBC News correspondent
Thomas Roberts – MSNBC's MSNBC Live correspondent & NBC News correspondent
Al Roker – Chief NBC News Meteorologist Today weather anchor and Today's Take co-host
Jeff Rossen – National investigative correspondent
Stephanie Ruhle – MSNBC Live anchor
Kerry Sanders – Miami based correspondent
Joe Scarborough – MSNBC's Morning Joe co-anchor & NBC News Senior Political Analyst
Steve Schmidt – NBC News Senior Political Analyst & MSNBC contributor
Janet Shamlian – correspondent
Maria Shriver – special anchor & special correspondent
Keir Simmons – London correspondent*
Greta Van Susteren – MSNBC's For the Record with Greta anchor
Harry Smith – correspondent
Kate Snow – NBC Nightly News Sunday anchor & NBC News correspondent
Bret Stephens – senior political contributor
Kevin Tibbles - Chicago based correspondent [40]
Chuck Todd – NBC News Political director & Meet The Press moderator
Anne Thompson – chief environmental affairs correspondent
Katy Tur – NBC News correspondent & MSNBC anchor
Ali Velshi – Chief Business Correspondent & anchor of MSNBC Live
Meredith Vieira – special correspondent (2006–present)
Nicolle Wallace – NBC News Senior Political Analyst & MSNBC contributor (2015–present)
Kristen Welker – White House correspondent & MSNBC anchor (2010–present)
Brian Williams – MSNBC Breaking News anchor & anchor of The 11th Hour with Brian Williams (1993–present)
Pete Williams – Chief Justice correspondent (1993–present)
Alex Witt – MSNBC anchor & NBC News correspondent
Eunice Yoon – CNBC China correspondent & NBC News contributing correspondent


Former staff[edit]


Elie Abel (State Department Correspondent) (1961-1970)†
Bob Abernethy (1952-1994) – now at PBS
Dan Abrams (Chief Legal Analyst) – now at ABC News
Martin Agronsky (Foreign Correspondent)†
Jodi Applegate (Anchor, MSNBC and Weekend Today)
Jim Avila (Correspondent) – now with ABC News
Martin Bashir (later MSNBC's Martin Bashir anchor & Dateline NBC correspondent)
Robert Bazell (Chief Science & Health Correspondent) – retired
Lynn Berry – now at HLN
Jim Bittermann – now at CNN
Frank Blair (Today Show News Anchor)†
David Bloom (Correspondent and Weekend Today)†
Mike Boettcher – now at ABC News
Frank Bourgholtzer† – first full-time NBC White House correspondent
David Brinkley†
Ned Brooks†
Campbell Brown
Christina Brown – now anchor of Arise News
Erin Burnett – now at CNN
Billy Bush – fired due to the aftermath of sexual allegations about Donald Trump
Henry Champ†
John Chancellor (1956-1964; 1968-1993)†
Connie Chung – retired
Chelsea Clinton – left due to focus on the Clinton Foundation
Katie Couric (1989-2006) – now world affairs anchor of Yahoo News
Kevin Corke
Jim Cummins†
Ann Curry
Faith Daniels
Lisa Daniels
Veronica De La Cruz – now at KPIX in San Francisco
Nancy Dickerson†
Lloyd Dobyns
Phil Donahue
Bob Dotson – retired[41]
Hugh Downs – retired from journalism
Paul Duke†
Rosey Edeh
Linda Ellerbee (retired)
Bonnie Erbe
Giselle Fernandez
Jack Ford – now chief legal analyst at CBS News
Eliot Frankel†
Michelle Franzen – now at ABC News
Stephen Frazier
Pauline Frederick†
Dawna Friesen (1999-2010) – now anchoring Canada's Global TV's Global National
Betty Furness†
Joe Garagiola†
Anne Garrels
Dave Garroway†
Alexis Glick – now at Bloomberg TV
Robert Goralski†
Peter Greenberg (Travel Editor, "Today") – now at CBS News
David Gregory
Bryant Gumbel (1981-1997) – now host of HBO Sports' Real Sports
Tony Guida – now at CBS News
Robert Hager (1969-2004) – retired from journalism
Sara Haines - now at ABC News and The View co-host
Tamron Hall – Former Today's Take co-host, MSNBC Live with Tamron Hall anchor & NBC News correspondent [42]
Steve Handelsman – retired [43]
Chris Hansen
Nanette Hansen
Richard C. Harkness†
Don Harris†
John Hart
Jim Hartz – retired
John Hockenberry
Chet Huntley†
Gwen Ifill†
Michael Isikoff
Bob Jamieson – retired from journalism
Bernard Kalb
Marvin Kalb
Floyd Kalber†
Arthur Kent
Douglas Kiker†
Dan Kloeffler
Michelle Kosinski (2005-2014)
Bob Kur (1976-2006)
Matt Lauer – Today co-anchor & Dateline NBC contributing anchor and correspondent (1992–2017) - fired due to inappropriate sexual behavior
Jack Lescoulie (1952-1967)†
Irving R. Levine†
George Lewis – retired from journalism
Lilia Luciano (National correspondent)
Jim Maceda – special foreign correspondent[44]
Cassie Mackin†
Robert MacNeil – retired from journalism
Boyd Matson
Frank McGee†
Jim Miklaszewski (1985-2016) - retired form journalism
Bill Monroe†
Roger Mudd (1981-1986) – retired from journalism
Merrill Mueller†
Lisa Myers (1981-2014) - retired
Roy Neal†
Ron Nessen
Jackie Nespral (now main anchor with NBC o&o operated station WTVJ in Miami)
Edwin Newman†
Deborah Norville – now weekday host of Inside Edition
Soledad O'Brien
Norah O'Donnell (NBC News Washington Correspondent & MSNBC Chief Washington Correspondent) – now at CBS News
Keith Olbermann (Anchor, "Countdown with Keith Olbermann")
Don Oliver
John Palmer†
Jane Pauley (now with CBS News)
Jack Perkins – retired
Tom Pettit†
Stone Phillips
Gabe Pressman†
Charles Quinn†
Jill Rappaport
Chip Reid – now at CBS News
John Rich
Amy Robach – now at ABC News
Betty Rollin
Brian Ross – now at ABC News
Ford Rowan
Tim Russert†
Bill Ryan†
Aline Saarinen†
Jessica Savitch†
Chuck Scarborough – now at WNBC Channel 4 in New York City
Mike Schneider – now at NJTV
Willard Scott – Today contributing correspondent – retired
John Seigenthaler
Scott Simon (now with NPR)
Gene Shalit – retired
Claire Shipman – now at ABC News
Lawrence E. Spivak†
John Cameron Swayze†
Dr. Nancy Snyderman
Patricia Thompson†
Liz Trotta
Lem Tucker†
Garrick Utley†
Richard Valeriani
Charles Van Doren
Sander Vanocur
Linda Vester
Mike Viqueira (White House & Capitol Hill Correspondent) – now at Al Jazeera America
Lindsey Vonn (2014 Winter Olympics correspondent)
Chris Wallace – now at Fox News Channel
Barbara Walters – retired from journalism
Fredricka Whitfield – now at CNN
Mary Alice Williams
Brad Willis
Joe Witte – (later at CNBC, and WJLA-TV & Washington, D.C.'s Newschannel 8; now a researcher at the Goddard Spaceflight Center)
Lew Wood†
Judy Woodruff – now Monday–Friday anchor of PBS Newshour
Tony Zappone


† (deceased)
International broadcasts[edit]
MSNBC is not shown outside the Americas on a channel in its own right. However, both NBC News and MSNBC are shown for a few hours a day on OSN News in MENA Region.
MSNBC is also shown occasionally on sister network CNBC Europe during breaking news, and Nightly News and Meet the Press are also shown regularly. NBC Nightly News is shown in the Philippines on 9TV (formerly Talktv and Solar News Channel), while Early Today was officially dropped from the network in December 2013, but they replaced by the repeats of Inside Edition. NBC Nightly News, along with the full program lineup of NBC, was carried by affiliate VSB-TV in Bermuda.
The Seven Network in Australia has close ties with NBC and has used a majority of the network's imaging and slogans since the 1970s. Seven News has featured The Mission as its news theme since the mid-1980s. Local newscasts were named Seven Nightly News from the mid-1980s until around 2000. NBC and Seven will often share news recourses between the two countries. NBC News has been known to use Seven News reporters for live reports on a developing news story in Australia. Seven News will sometimes also incorporate an NBC News report into its national bulletins. Today, Weekend Today and Meet The Press are all broadcast on the Seven Network during the early morning hours from 3-5 a.m., just before Seven's own morning show Sunrise.
In Hong Kong, NBC Nightly News is live digital television broadcast transmission (or delayed) on TVB Pearl daily from 07:00 until 08:00 Hong Kong Time (18:00 until 19:00 New York City Time).
In the United Kingdom, the ITV network, used to air segments from NBC Nightly News on their ITV News at 5:30 morning newscast before it was cancelled in December 2012. NBC News share facilities and crew in the UK with ITN, who is the news provider for ITV.
Bureaus[edit]
Major bureaus[edit]

New York City: NBC News Headquarters
Universal City, California (Los Angeles): West Coast Bureau
Washington, D.C.: Government Affairs Bureau
London: Foreign Desk

Minor bureaus (within the United States)[edit]

Atlanta (WXIA-TV)
Chicago (WMAQ-TV)1
Denver (KUSA-TV)
Dallas (KXAS-TV)1
Houston (KPRC-TV)
Miami (WTVJ)1

1 All NBC owned-and-operated stations are considered NBC News bureaus, including those not listed here.
Foreign bureaus (NBC News/CNBC/MSNBC)[edit]

Johannesburg, South Africa (CNBC Africa headquarters)
Kabul, Afghanistan (NBC News)
Nairobi, Kenya (CNBC Africa)
Abuja, Nigeria (CNBC Africa)
Lagos, Nigeria (CNBC Africa)
Cape Town, South Africa (CNBC Africa)
Singapore (CNBC Asia headquarters)
Sydney, Australia (CNBC Asia Pacific)
Melbourne, Australia (NBC News Asia Pacific)
Managua, Nicaragua (Canal 15 Nicaragua-Telemundo 51 WSCV)
Tokyo, Japan (CNBC Asia)
Hong Kong (CNBC Asia)
Beijing, China (NBC News, MSNBC, and CNBC)
Frankfurt, Germany (CNBC Europe)
Baghdad, Iraq (MSNBC and CNBC Asia)
Beirut, Lebanon (MSNBC and CNBC Asia)
Jerusalem, Israel (MSNBC and CNBC Asia)
New Delhi, India (CNBC-TV18)
Islamabad, Pakistan (CNBC Pakistan)

Theme music[edit]
Most of NBC's news television programs use "The Mission" by John Williams as their theme. The composition was first used by NBC in 1985 and was updated in 2004.[45]
Units[edit]

Peacock Productions
NBCUniversal Archives
NBC NewsChannel[46]

References[edit]


^ a b c Battaglio, Stephen (February 14, 2017). "'Today' show executive Noah Oppenheim is named president of NBC News". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved February 15, 2017. 
^ Steel, Emily (March 6, 2015). "NBC Brings Back Andrew Lack to Lead Its News Division". The New York Times. Retrieved April 13, 2015. 
^ Masonhall, Erika (January 23, 2013). ""nbc nightly news" ratings win". Archived from the original on February 1, 2014. Retrieved February 22, 2013. 
^ "News Footage & Stock Video Footage". NBCUniversal Archives. Retrieved April 22, 2013. 
^ a b Barraclough, Leo (November 11, 2016). "NBC News, Euronews in Talks for Strategic Partnership". 
^ Thomas, Lowell (1977). So Long Until Tomorrow. New York: Wm. Morrow and Co. pp. 17–19. ISBN 0-688-03236-2. 
^ "New York City Hooper Ratings for Election Night 1948" TVObscurities.com.
^ a b c d e f Matusow, Barbara (1983). The Evening Stars: The Making of the Network News Anchor. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company. 
^ a b Whitworth, William (August 3, 1968). "An Accident of Casting". The New Yorker. 
^ a b c d e Frank, Reuven (1991). Out of Thin Air: The Brief Wonderful Life of Network News. New York: Simon & Schuster. 
^ Manchester, William (1967). The Death of a President. New York: Harper & Row. p. 190. 
^ a b Roberts, Gene; Klibanoff, Hank (2006). The Race Beat: The Press, the Civil Rights Struggle, and the Awakening of a Nation. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. p. 155. 
^ a b Halberstam, David (1993). The Fifties. New York: Villard Books. 
^ Raines, Howell (1971). My Soul Is Rested: Movement Days in the Deep South Remembered. New York: G.P. Putnam's Sons. pp. 371–72. 
^ Barbree, Jay (July 20, 2004). "The Moments before the Eagle Landed". MSNBC.com. 
^ NBC News (1966). There Was a President. New York: Random House. 
^ Gerard, Jeremy (November 29, 1989). "ABC Surpasses CBS in Evening News Ratings". The New York Times. 
^ "CBS tops Nielsens 2nd week in row". SFGate.com. San Francisco Examiner. March 12, 1997. 
^ "Tom Brokaw retires, makes way for Brian Williams on "NBC Nightly News" - wistv.com - Columbia, South Carolina". wistv.com. December 2, 2004. Retrieved August 5, 2015. 
^ "A Note from Deborah Turness". NBC News. February 10, 2015. Retrieved February 11, 2015. 
^ "Lester Holt Named Anchor of 'NBC Nightly News'". NBC News. Retrieved August 5, 2015. 
^ Richard L. Abel (May 6, 1998). Speaking Respect, Respecting Speech. University of Chicago Press. p. 191. 
^ "Chuck Todd Takes Helm of 'Meet the Press'". NBC News. Retrieved August 5, 2015. 
^ "NBC's Tim Russert dead at 58 - politics". NBC News. June 14, 2008. Retrieved August 5, 2015. 
^ Carter, Bill; Stelter, Brian (March 8, 2009). "A Matrix of News Winners Buoys NBC". The New York Times. 
^ Stelter, Brian; Carter, Bill (February 28, 2010). "Network News at a Crossroads". The New York Times. p. B1. 
^ Bond, Paul. "NBC News Accused of Editing 911 Call in Trayvon Martin Controversy (Video)". The Hollywood Reporter. 
^ a b Wemple, Erik (April 4, 2012). "NBC issues apology on Zimmerman tape screw-up". The Washington Post. 
^ Brian Stelter; Sebnem Arsu (December 18, 2012), "Richard Engel of NBC Is Freed in Syria", The New York Times, retrieved December 8, 2015 
^ Jamie Dettmer (December 22, 2012). "Richard Engel's Kidnapping: A Behind the Scenes Look". The Daily Beast. Retrieved December 8, 2015. 
^ Ravi Somaiya; C. J. Chivers; Karam Shoumali (April 15, 2015). "NBC News Alters Account of Correspondent's Kidnapping in Syria". The New York Times. Retrieved December 8, 2015. 
^ New NBC News President Deborah Turness: 'My first job is to listen', TVNewser, August 5, 2013.
^ "NBC News, iHeart Partner on 24/7 News Network". 
^ "NBC to launch overnight newscast". Knight Ridder News Service. The Baltimore Sun. November 2, 1991. Retrieved January 28, 2014. 
^ Shales, Tom (November 10, 1989). "The Day the Wall Cracked; Brokaw's Live Broadcast Tops Networks' Berlin Coverage". Washington Post. 
^ "Miguel Almaguer - NBCUniversal Media Village". 
^ "Catie Beck Joins NBC News". 
^ "NBC Names Hallie Jackson White House Correspondent, Kasie Hunt to Capitol Hill". 
^ Moraes, Lisa de (January 3, 2017). "Megyn Kelly To Exit Fox News This Week, Joins NBC News To Host Daytime Show & New Sunday Evening Newsmag – Update". 
^ "Kevin Tibbles - NBCUniversal Media Village". 
^ "Bob Dotson looks back at 40 years of American Stories, says goodbye". 
^ "Tamron Hall Leaving NBC News and MSNBC". 
^ "Fond Farewell to Retiring Correspondent Steve Handelsman". 
^ "Brian Williams Wishes NBC's Jim Maceda Good Luck". 
^ Submitted by NBC Universal (August 30, 2006). "SoundtrackNet: News: Legendary Composer John Williams Composes New "NBC Sunday Night Football" Theme". Soundtrack.net. Retrieved November 27, 2011. 
^ "NBC News". nbcuni.com. NBCUniversal. Retrieved October 5, 2012. 


External links[edit]

Official website





Links to related articles











v
t
e


Current White House James S. Brady Press Briefing Room seating chart







Row
Podium




1
2
3
4
5
6
7




NBC
Wall Street Journal
Agence France-Presse
MSNBC
Bloomberg BNA
Washington Examiner
Talk Media News/Univision




Fox News
CBS Radio
AP Radio
Foreign Pool
Time
Yahoo! News
Dallas Morning News




CBS News
Bloomberg
McClatchy
Washington Times
SiriusXM
Salem Radio
Globe/Roll Call




AP
NPR
AURN
The Hill
Regionals
Newsmax
CBN




ABC News
Washington Post
Politico
Fox News Radio
CSM/NY Post
Daily Mail
BBC/OAN




Reuters
NY Times
Chicago Tribune
VOA
RealClearPolitics
HuffPost/NY Daily News
BuzzFeed/Daily Beast




CNN
USA Today
ABC Radio
National Journal
Al Jazeera/PBS
Westwood One
Financial Times/Guardian




The seating chart as of July 10, 2017.







White House Correspondents' Association










v
t
e


The people of NBC News



NBC Nightly News



Lester Holt (weekdays)
Jose Diaz-Balart (Saturday)
Kate Snow (Sunday)





Today



Savannah Guthrie (co–anchor)
Hoda Kotb (co-anchor and fourth hour co–host)
Al Roker (weather anchor)
Carson Daly (orange room anchor)
Kathie Lee Gifford (fourth hour co–host)
Megyn Kelly (host of Megyn Kelly Today)
Natalie Morales (west coast anchor)





Weekend Today



Sheinelle Jones (Saturday co-anchor)
Craig Melvin (Saturday co-anchor)
Willie Geist (Sunday anchor)
Dylan Dreyer (weather anchor)





Early Today



Frances Rivera (anchor)
Bill Karins (weather)





Meet the Press



Chuck Todd (moderator)
Andrea Mitchell (substitute moderator)





Dateline



Lester Holt (anchor)
Andrea Canning
Hoda Kotb
Josh Mankiewicz
Natalie Morales
Keith Morrison
Dennis Murphy
Maria Shriver
Kate Snow





Chief correspondents



Rehema Ellis (chief education correspondent)
Richard Engel (chief foreign correspondent)
Savannah Guthrie (chief legal correspondent)
Hallie Jackson (chief White House correspondent)
Bill Karins (chief meteorologist)
Andrea Mitchell (chief foreign affairs correspondent)
Bill Neely (chief global correspondent)
Anne Thompson (chief environmental affairs correspondent)
Chuck Todd (political director)
Pete Williams (chief justice correspondent)





Senior correspondents



Cynthia McFadden (senior legal & investigative correspondent)





Special correspondents/anchors



Tom Brokaw
Martin Fletcher (Tel Aviv)
Ben Fogle (London)
Jenna Bush Hager
Maria Shriver
Meredith Vieira
Brian Williams (MSNBC breaking news anchor; NBC News fill-in breaking news anchor)





Correspondents



Miguel Almaguer (Universal City)
Peter Alexander (Washington, D.C.)
Ron Allen
Lisa Bloom (legal correspondent)
Jean Chatzky (financial editor)
Andrea Canning
Tom Costello (Washington, D.C.)
Bob Dotson
Dylan Dreyer (weather)
Ronan Farrow
Madelyn Fernstrom (diet & health editor)
Joe Fryer (Universal City)
Joelle Garguilo
Stephanie Gosk
Kasie Hunt
Hallie Jackson
Chris Jansing (MSNBC Senior National Correspondent)
Jinah Kim
Craig Melvin
Kelly O'Donnell (Capitol Hill Correspondent)
Morgan Radford
Jacob Rascon
Jeff Rossen (national investigative correspondent)
Kerry Sanders (Miami)
Janet Shamlian (Texas)
Kate Snow
Harry Smith
Jacob Soboroff
Katy Tur (New York)
Kristen Welker (White House correspondent)





Foreign correspondents



Richard Engel (chief foreign correspondent)
Bill Neely (chief global correspondent)
Keith Miller (senior foreign correspondent)
Martin Fletcher (Tel Aviv / London)
Ben Fogle (London)
Ayman Mohyeldin
Keir Simmons (London)








NBC evening news anchors
NBC
NBCUniversal












v
t
e


The Meteorologists of NBC News



Current



Bill Karins (NBC News, MSNBC & CNBC Chief Meteorologist)
Janice Huff (Chief Meteorologist for WNBC & NBC Contributing Meteorologist)
Al Roker (Today Weather Anchor)
Dylan Dreyer (Weekend Today Meteorologist & NBC News Meteorologist)
Stephanie Abrams (The Weather Channel Meteorologist & Today/NBC News Meteorologist)
Indra Petersons (NBC News Meteorologist)





Former



Rosey Edeh
John Elliott
Elise Finch
Sean McLaughlin (Former Chief Meteorologist)
Byron Miranda (Early Today)
Bob Ryan (First Today Weather Anchor)
Todd Santos
Willard Scott (Today Weather Anchor)
Joe Witte (Weekend Today & Early Today Weather Anchor)












v
t
e


Television news in the United States



Broadcast divisions



ABC News
CBS News
NBC News
PBS NewsHour
Noticias Telemundo
Noticias Univision





National cable/
satellite channels



BBC World News
CGTN America
CNN

HLN
CNN International
CNN en Español


Fox News
i24NEWS
MSNBC
Newsmax TV
Newsy
One America News
RT America
TheBlaze


Non-profits

Free Speech TV
Link TV







Business channels



Bloomberg TV
Cheddar
CNBC

CNBC World


Fox Business





Specialty channels



C-SPAN
ESPNews
Fusion





Weather



AccuWeather

Channel
Network


The Weather Channel

Local Now
Weatherscan


WeatherNation TV





Broadband services



National

CBSN


Specialty

AJ+
Vice News
Reuters TV







Outsourcing



AerisWeather
Independent News Network
Weather Services International





Defunct



ABC channels

ABC News Now
Satellite News


Al Jazeera America
All News Channel
CNN channels

CNNfn
CNN Pipeline
CNNSI


Current TV
FNN-SCORE
News Central
NBC channels

America's Talking
NBC Weather Plus
Shift


CBC Newsworld International
The Weather Cast
TouchVision
UPI Newstime
Univision Noticias












v
t
e


NBCUniversal




A subsidiary of Comcast



Corporate
officials




Board of Directors



Steve Burke (CEO)
Brian L. Roberts
Jeffrey R. Immelt
Keith Sherin





Executives



Steve Capus
Dick Ebersol
Robert Greenblatt
Bonnie Hammer
Ted Harbert
Ronald Meyer








Universal Filmed
Entertainment Group



Amblin Partners[nu 1]
Back Lot Music
Carnival Films
Chiller Films
DreamWorks Animation

DreamWorks Classics

Big Idea Entertainment
Bullwinkle StudiosJV
Harvey Entertainment


DreamWorks Channel
Oriental DreamWorks[nu 2]
DreamWorks New Media

AwesomenessTV[nu 3]

Big Frame






Fandango (70%)
Focus Features

Gramercy Pictures


Illumination Entertainment

Illumination Mac Guff


NBCUniversal Entertainment Japan
United International Pictures[nu 4]
Universal Animation Studios
Universal Playback
Universal Pictures
Universal Pictures Home Entertainment
Working Title Films





Universal Parks
& Resorts




United States



Universal Studios Hollywood

CityWalk


Universal Orlando Resort

Universal Studios Florida
Islands of Adventure
CityWalk







International



Universal Studios Japan
Universal Studios Singapore
Universal Studios Beijing








NBCU Cable
Entertainment



Universal Cable Productions
Craftsy (major stake)
Networks

Syfy
USA Network


Lifestyle Group

Bravo
E!
Oxygen
Universal Kids







NBCU Digital



Hulu[nu 5]
Movieclips





NBCU Telemundo
Enterprises



NBC Universo
Telemundo

Puerto Rico Studios
Telemundo TV Studios


Telemundo Deportesw/NBC Sports Group





NBC Sports Group







NBC Sports Ventures

Alli


Golf Channel
NBC Sports Digital

GolfNow


NBC Sports
NBCSN
Olympic Channel
part owner

MLB Network
NHL Network







NBC Sports
Regional Networks



Bay Area (45%)
Boston
California
Chicago (20%)
Northwest
Philadelphia
Washington
SNY (8%)








NBCUniversal
News Group







NBC News
NBCNews.com
The Weather Channel[nu 6]
MSNBC
Peacock Productions





CNBC global channels



CNBC
CNBC Africa (licensee)
CNBC Asia
CNBC Europe
CNBC Latin America
CNBC World





CNBC Europe branches



Class CNBC (20%)
CNBC Africa (licensee)
CNBC Arabiya
CNBC-e
CNBC Nordic





CNBC Asia branches



CNBC-TV18
CNBC Australia
CNBC Awaaz
CNBC Hong Kong
CNBC Pakistan
CNBC Singapore
Nikkei CNBC
SBS-CNBC








NBCUniversal
International
Networks



13th Street Universal

Australia
Benelux
France
Germany
Spain


Bravo New Zealand
Euronews[nu 7]
Syfy Universal

Asia
Australia
Benelux
France
Germany
Italy[nu 8]
Latin America
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russia
Serbia
Slovenia
Spain
United Kingdom


Diva Universal

Asia
Italy
Romania


Movies 24
Studio Universal

Latin America


Universal Channel

Asia
Australia
Germany
Greece
Japan
Poland
Turkey
United Kingdom


Style Network

Australia


E!

Asia
Australia
Europe







NBC Entertainment



NBC
DreamWorks Animation Television
Stamford Media Center
Universal Television





NBC Broadcasting







Affiliate Relations
NBCUniversal Television Distribution





NBCU Owned
TV Stations
O&Os




NBC Owned
TV Stations



KNBC
KNSD
KNTV
KXAS-TV
WBTS-LD
WCAU
WMAQ-TV
WNBC
WRC-TV
WTVJ
WVIT Other properties:
Cozi TV

K15CU-D


LXTV
New England Cable News





Telemundo
Station Group



KBLR
KDEN-TV
KEJT-LP
KHRR
KNSD-DT20
KNSO[nu 9]
KSTS
KTAZ
KTLM
KTMD
KVDA
KVEA
KXTX-TV
WKAQ-TV
WNEU
WNJU
WRDM-CD[nu 10]
WSCV
WSNS-TV
WWSI
WZDC-CD[nu 10] Other properties:
TeleXitos











Other assets:



EMKA, Ltd.
International Media Distribution
PictureBox Films





Former/Defunct
properties
and predecessors:



Castle Films
Chapman Entertainment
Chiller
CIC Video
Cloo
Comcast Network
Esquire Network
FilmDistrict
Filmation
G4
Good Machine
Gramercy Pictures
Harvey Films/Harvey Comics
ITC Entertainment
Interscope Communications
Miss Universe[nu 11]
Multimedia Entertainment
MCA Inc.
October Films
Kitty Films
Pacific Data Images
PolyGram Filmed Entertainment
Propaganda Films
Seagram Company Ltd.
Shift
Seeso
Total Television
United Productions of America
Universal HD









^ Co-owned with The Amblin Group, Participant Media, Reliance Entertainment, Entertainment One and Alibaba Pictures.
^ Co-owned with China Media Capital, Shanghai Media Group and Shanghai Alliance Investment.
^ Co-owned with Hearst Communications and Verizon Communications.
^ 50%, with Viacom's Paramount Pictures.
^ Co-owned with 21st Century Fox, The Walt Disney Company and Time Warner. NBCUniversal has no involvement with Hulu operations.
^ Co-owned with The Blackstone Group and Bain Capital.
^ Co-owned with Media Globe Networks and European public broadcasters.
^ Co-owned with Mediaset.
^ The station is owned by NBCUniversal, but is controlled by Serestar Communications.
^ a b Operated by NBCUniversal under a local marketing agreement.
^ Co-owned with The Trump Organization before September 2015 sale to WME/IMG.













v
t
e


Presidents of NBC News



Key figures



Robert E. Kintner (1958-1965)
Julian Goodman (1966-1974)
Reuven Frank (1968-1974; 1982-1984)
Lawrence K. Grossman (1984-1988)
William J. Small (1979-1982)
Michael Gartner (1988–1993)
Andrew Lack (1993-2001)
Neal Shapiro (June 2001-November 2005)
Steve Capus (November 2005-August 2013)
Deborah Turness (August 2013-February 2017)
Noah Oppenheim (February 2017-present)
















						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=NBC_News&oldid=818553481"					Categories: NBC News1940 American television series debutsNational Broadcasting CompanyNBC network showsTelevision news in the United StatesNBCUniversalHidden categories: Use mdy dates from August 2017All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from October 2012Articles with unsourced statements from December 2016