This article is about neural pathways of the peripheral nervous system. For other uses, see Nerve (disambiguation).


Nerve



Nerves (yellow) in the arm



Details


Identifiers


Latin
nervus


TA
A14.2.00.013


FMA
65239 65132, 65239


Anatomical terminology
[edit on Wikidata]



A nerve is an enclosed, cable-like bundle of axons (nerve fibers, the long and slender projections of neurons) in the peripheral nervous system. A nerve provides a common pathway for the electrochemical nerve impulses that are transmitted along each of the axons to peripheral organs.
In the central nervous system, the analogous structures are known as tracts.[1][2] Neurons are sometimes called nerve cells, though this term is potentially misleading since many neurons do not form nerves, and nerves also include non-neuronal Schwann cells that coat the axons in myelin.
Each nerve is a cordlike structure containing bundles of axons. Within a nerve, each axon is surrounded by a layer of connective tissue called the endoneurium. The axons are bundled together into groups called fascicles, and each fascicle is wrapped in a layer of connective tissue called the perineurium. Finally, the entire nerve is wrapped in a layer of connective tissue called the epineurium.



Contents


1 Anatomy
2 Physiology
3 Clinical significance
4 Growth and stimulation
5 Regeneration of peripheral nerve fibers
6 Other animals
7 See also
8 References
9 Further reading
10 External links



Anatomy[edit]
Nerves are categorized into three groups based on the direction that signals are conducted:

Afferent nerves conduct signals from sensory neurons to the central nervous system, for example from the mechanoreceptors in skin.
Efferent nerves conduct signals from the central nervous system along motor neurons to their target muscles and glands.
Mixed nerves contain both afferent and efferent axons, and thus conduct both incoming sensory information and outgoing muscle commands in the same bundle.

Nerves can be categorized into two groups based on where they connect to the central nervous system:

Spinal nerves innervate (distribute to/stimulate) much of the body, and connect through the vertebral column to the spinal cord and thus to the central nervous system. They are given letter-number designations according to the vertebra through which they connect to the spinal column.
Cranial nerves innervate parts of the head, and connect directly to the brain (especially to the brainstem). They are typically assigned Roman numerals from 1 to 12, although cranial nerve zero is sometimes included. In addition, cranial nerves have descriptive names.





Cross-section of a nerve


Each nerve is covered externally by a dense sheath of connective tissue, the epineurium. Underlying this is a layer of flat cells, the perineurium, which forms a complete sleeve around a bundle of axons. Perineurial septae extend into the nerve and subdivide it into several bundles of fibres. Surrounding each such fibre is the endoneurium. This forms an unbroken tube from the surface of the spinal cord to the level where the axon synapses with its muscle fibres, or ends in sensory receptors. The endoneurium consists of an inner sleeve of material called the glycocalyx and an outer, delicate, meshwork of collagen fibres.[2] Nerves are bundled along with blood vessels, since the neurons of a nerve have fairly high energy requirements.
Within the endoneurium, the individual nerve fibres are surrounded by a low-protein liquid called endoneurial fluid. This acts in a similar way to the cerebrospinal fluid in the central nervous system and constitutes a blood-nerve barrier similar to the blood-brain barrier.[3] Molecules are thereby prevented from crossing the blood into the endoneurial fluid. During the development of nerve edema from nerve irritation or (injury), the amount of endoneurial fluid may increase at the site of irritation. This increase in fluid can be visualized using magnetic resonance neurography, and thus MR neurography can identify nerve irritation and/or injury.
Physiology[edit]
A nerve conveys information in the form of electrochemical impulses (as nerve impulses known as action potentials) carried by the individual neurons that make up the nerve. These impulses are extremely fast, with some myelinated neurons conducting at speeds up to 120 m/s. The impulses travel from one neuron to another by crossing a synapse, the message is converted from electrical to chemical and then back to electrical.[2][4]
Nerves can be categorized into two groups based on function: An afferent nerve fiber conducts sensory information from a sensory neuron to the central nervous system, where the information is then processed. Bundles of fibres or axons, in the peripheral nervous system are called nerves, and bundles of afferent fibers are known as sensory nerves.[1][2] An efferent nerve fiber conducts signals from a motor neuron in the central nervous system to muscles. Bundles of these fibres are known as efferent nerves.
Clinical significance[edit]




Micrograph demonstrating perineural invasion of prostate cancer. H&E stain.


Cancer can spread by invading the spaces around nerves. This is particularly common in head and neck cancer, and prostate and colorectal cancer.
Nerves can be damaged by physical injury as well conditions like carpal tunnel syndrome and repetitive strain injury. Autoimmune diseases such as Guillain–Barré syndrome, neurodegenerative diseases, polyneuropathy, infection, neuritis, diabetes, or failure of the blood vessels surrounding the nerve all cause nerve damage, which can vary in severity.
Multiple sclerosis is a disease associated with extensive nerve damage. It occurs when the macrophages of an individual's own immune system damage the myelin sheaths that insulate the axon of the nerve.
A pinched nerve occurs when pressure is placed on a nerve, usually from swelling due to an injury, or pregnancy and can result in pain, weakness, numbness or paralysis. Symptoms may be felt in areas far from the actual site of damage, a phenomenon called referred pain. Referred pain can happen when the damage causes altered signalling to other areas.
Neurologists usually diagnose disorders of the nerves by a physical examination, including the testing of reflexes, walking and other directed movements, muscle weakness, proprioception, and the sense of touch. This initial exam can be followed with tests such as nerve conduction study, electromyography (EMG), and computed tomography (CT).[5]
Growth and stimulation[edit]
Nerve growth normally ends in adolescence, but can be re-stimulated with a molecular mechanism known as "Notch signaling."[6]
Regeneration of peripheral nerve fibers[edit]
It has also been discovered through research that if the axons of a neuron were damaged, as long as the cell body of the neuron is not damaged, the axons would regenerate and remake the synaptic connections with neurons with the help of guidepost cells. This is also referred to as neuroregeneration.[7]
The nerve begins the process by destroying the nerve distal to the site of injury allowing Schwann cells, basal lamina, and the neurilemma near the injury to begin producing a regeneration tube. Nerve growth factors are produced causing many nerve sprouts to bud. When one of the growth processes finds the regeneration tube, it begins to grow rapidly towards its original destination guided the entire time by the regeneration tube. Nerve regeneration is very slow and can take up to several months to complete. While this process does repair some nerves, there will still be some functional deficit as the repairs are not perfect.[8]
Other animals[edit]
A neuron is called identified if it has properties that distinguish it from every other neuron in the same animal—properties such as location, neurotransmitter, gene expression pattern, and connectivity—and if every individual organism belonging to the same species has exactly one neuron with the same set of properties.[9] In vertebrate nervous systems, very few neurons are "identified" in this sense. Researchers believe humans have none—but in simpler nervous systems, some or all neurons may be thus unique.[10]
In vertebrates, the best known identified neurons are the gigantic Mauthner cells of fish.[11] Every fish has two Mauthner cells, located in the bottom part of the brainstem, one on the left side and one on the right. Each Mauthner cell has an axon that crosses over, innervating (stimulating) neurons at the same brain level and then travelling down through the spinal cord, making numerous connections as it goes. The synapses generated by a Mauthner cell are so powerful that a single action potential gives rise to a major behavioral response: within milliseconds the fish curves its body into a C-shape, then straightens, thereby propelling itself rapidly forward. Functionally this is a fast escape response, triggered most easily by a strong sound wave or pressure wave impinging on the lateral line organ of the fish. Mauthner cells are not the only identified neurons in fish—there are about 20 more types, including pairs of "Mauthner cell analogs" in each spinal segmental nucleus. Although a Mauthner cell is capable of bringing about an escape response all by itself, in the context of ordinary behavior other types of cells usually contribute to shaping the amplitude and direction of the response.
Mauthner cells have been described as command neurons. A command neuron is a special type of identified neuron, defined as a neuron that is capable of driving a specific behavior all by itself.[12] Such neurons appear most commonly in the fast escape systems of various species—the squid giant axon and squid giant synapse, used for pioneering experiments in neurophysiology because of their enormous size, both participate in the fast escape circuit of the squid. The concept of a command neuron has, however, become controversial, because of studies showing that some neurons that initially appeared to fit the description were really only capable of evoking a response in a limited set of circumstances.[13]
In organisms of radial symmetry nerve nets serve for the nervous system. There is no brain or centralised head region, and instead there are interconnected neurons spread out in nerve nets. These are found in Cnidaria, Ctenophora and Echinodermata.
See also[edit]

Connective tissue in the peripheral nervous system
Dermatome (anatomy)
List of nerves of the human body
Nerve injury
Nervous system
Neuropathy
Peripheral nerve injury
Peripheral nerve injury classification

References[edit]



^ a b Purves D, Augustine GJ, Fitzppatrick D, et al. (2008). Neuroscience (4th ed.). Sinauer Associates. pp. 11–20. ISBN 978-0-87893-697-7. 
^ a b c d Marieb EN, Hoehn K (2007). Human Anatomy & Physiology (7th ed.). Pearson. pp. 388–602. ISBN 0-8053-5909-5. 
^ Kanda, T (Feb 2013). "Biology of the blood-nerve barrier and its alteration in immune mediated neuropathies". Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 84 (2): 208–212. doi:10.1136/jnnp-2012-302312. PMID 23243216. 
^ Purves, Dale, George J. Augustine, David Fitzpatrick, William C. Hall, Anthony-Samuel LaMantia, James O. McNamara, and Leonard E. White (2008). Neuroscience. 4th ed. Sinauer Associates. pp. 11–20. ISBN 978-0-87893-697-7. CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link)
^ Weinberg. Normal computed tomography of the brain. p. 109. 
^ Yale Study Shows Way To Re-Stimulate Brain Cell Growth ScienceDaily (Oct. 22, 1999) — Results Could Boost Understanding Of Alzheimer's, Other Brain Disorders
^ Kunik, D (2011). "Laser-based single-axon transection for high-content axon injury and regeneration studies". PLoS ONE. 6 (11): e26832. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0026832. PMC 3206876 . PMID 22073205. 
^ Burnett & Zager, Mark & Eric. "Pathophysiology of Peripheral Nerve Injury: A Brief Review: Nerve Regeneration". Medscape Article. Medscape. Retrieved 2011-10-26. 
^ Hoyle G, Wiersma CA (1977). Identified neurons and behavior of arthropods. Plenum Press. ISBN 978-0-306-31001-0. 
^ "Wormbook: Specification of the nervous system". 
^ Stein PSG (1999). Neurons, Networks, and Motor Behavior. MIT Press. pp. 38–44. ISBN 978-0-262-69227-4. 
^ Stein, p. 112
^ Simmons PJ, Young D (1999). Nerve cells and animal behaviour. Cambridge University Press. p. 43. ISBN 978-0-521-62726-9. 



Further reading[edit]


Nervous system William E. Skaggs, Scholarpedia
Bear, M. F.; B. W. Connors; M. A. Paradiso (2006). Neuroscience: Exploring the Brain (3rd ed.). Philadelphia: Lippincott. ISBN 0-7817-6003-8. 
Binder, Marc D.; Hirokawa, Nobutaka; Windhorst, Uwe, eds. (2009). Encyclopedia of Neuroscience. Springer. ISBN 978-3-540-23735-8. 
Kandel, ER; Schwartz JH; Jessell TM (2012). Principles of Neural Science (5th ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill. ISBN 0-8385-7701-6. 
Squire, L. et al. (2012). Fundamental Neuroscience, 4th edition. Academic Press; ISBN 0-12-660303-0
Andreasen, Nancy C. (March 4, 2004). Brave New Brain: Conquering Mental Illness in the Era of the Genome. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-514509-0. Archived from the original on February 24, 2007. 
Damasio, A. R. (1994). Descartes' Error: Emotion, Reason, and the Human Brain. New York, Avon Books. ISBN 0-399-13894-3 (Hardcover) ISBN 0-380-72647-5 (Paperback)
Gardner, H. (1976). The Shattered Mind: The Person After Brain Damage. New York, Vintage Books, 1976 ISBN 0-394-71946-8
Goldstein, K. (2000). The Organism. New York, Zone Books. ISBN 0-942299-96-5 (Hardcover) ISBN 0-942299-97-3 (Paperback)
Lauwereyns, Jan (February 2010). The Anatomy of Bias: How Neural Circuits Weigh the Options. Cambridge, Massachusetts: The MIT Press. ISBN 0-262-12310-X. 


External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Nerves.




Library resources about
Nerve





Resources in your library





List of nerves
 The Nervous System at Wikibooks (human)
 Nervous System at Wikibooks (non-human)







v
t
e


Human systems and organs



Musculoskeletal




Skeletal system



Bone

Carpus
Collar bone (clavicle)
Thigh bone (femur)
Fibula
Humerus
Mandible
Metacarpus
Metatarsus
Ossicles
Patella
Phalanges
Radius
Skull
Tarsus
Tibia
Ulna
Rib
Vertebra
Pelvis
Sternum


Cartilage





Joints



Fibrous joint
Cartilaginous joint
Synovial joint





Muscular system



Muscle
Tendon
Diaphragm








Circulatory system




Cardiovascular system



peripheral

Artery
Vein
Lymphatic vessel


Heart





Lymphatic system



primary

Bone marrow
Thymus


secondary

Spleen
Lymph node


CNS equivalent

Glymphatic system










Nervous system





Brain
Spinal cord
Nerve


Sensory system

Ear
Eye







Integumentary system



Skin
Subcutaneous tissue
Breast

Mammary gland







Immune system



Myeloid

Myeloid immune system


Lymphoid

Lymphoid immune system







Respiratory system



Upper

Nose
Nasopharynx
Larynx


Lower

Trachea
Bronchus
Lung







Digestive system



Mouth

Salivary gland
Tongue


upper GI

Oropharynx
Laryngopharynx
Esophagus
Stomach


lower GI

Small intestine
Appendix
Colon
Rectum
Anus


accessory

Liver
Biliary tract
Pancreas







Urinary system



Genitourinary system
Kidney
Ureter
Bladder
Urethra





Reproductive system



Female

Uterus
Vagina
Vulva
Ovary
Placenta


Male

Scrotum
Penis
Prostate
Testicle
Seminal vesicle







Endocrine system



Pituitary
Pineal
Thyroid
Parathyroid
Adrenal
Islets of Langerhans












v
t
e


Spinal nerves



Cervical



C1
C2
C3
C4
C5
C6
C7
C8


anterior

Cervical plexus
Brachial plexus


posterior

Posterior branches of cervical nerves
Suboccipital – C1
Greater occipital – C2
Third occipital – C3







Thoracic



T1
T2
T3
T4
T5
T6
T7
T8
T9
T10
T11
T12


anterior

Intercostal
Intercostobrachial – T2
Thoraco-abdominal nerves – T7–T11
Subcostal – T12


posterior

Posterior branches of thoracic nerves







Lumbar



L1
L2
L3
L4
L5


anterior

Lumbar plexus
Lumbosacral trunk


posterior

Posterior branches of the lumbar nerves
Superior cluneal L1–L3







Sacral



S1
S2
S3
S4
S5


anterior

Sacral plexus


posterior

Posterior branches of sacral nerves
Medial cluneal nerves







Coccygeal



anterior

Coccygeal plexus


posterior

Posterior branch of coccygeal nerve














v
t
e


The cranial nerves



terminal



Nuclei

Septal nuclei


Course

no significant branches







olfactory



Nuclei

Anterior olfactory nucleus


Course

olfactory bulb
olfactory tract







optic



Nuclei

Lateral geniculate nucleus


Course

optic chiasm
optic tract







oculomotor



Nuclei

Oculomotor nucleus
Edinger–Westphal nucleus


Branches

superior
parasympathetic root of ciliary ganglion/ciliary ganglion
inferior







trochlear



Nucleus
Branches

no significant branches







trigeminal



Nuclei

PSN
Spinal trigeminal nucleus
MN
TMN


Course

trigeminal ganglion


Branches

ophthalmic
maxillary
mandibular







abducens



Nucleus
Branches

no significant branches







facial




near origin



intermediate nerve
geniculate





inside
facial canal



greater petrosal

pterygopalatine ganglion


nerve to the stapedius
chorda tympani

lingual nerve
submandibular ganglion







at stylomastoid
foramen



posterior auricular
suprahyoid

digastric
stylohyoid


parotid plexus

temporal
zygomatic
buccal
mandibular
cervical







Nuclei



Facial motor nucleus
Solitary nucleus
Superior salivary nucleus








vestibulocochlear



Nuclei

Vestibular nuclei
Cochlear nuclei


cochlear nerve

striae medullares
lateral lemniscus


vestibular

Scarpa's ganglion







glossopharyngeal




before jugular fossa



ganglia

superior
inferior







after jugular fossa



tympanic

tympanic plexus
lesser petrosal
otic ganglion


stylopharyngeal branch
pharyngeal branches
tonsillar branches
lingual branches
carotid sinus





Nuclei



Nucleus ambiguus
Inferior salivatory nucleus
Solitary nucleus








vagus




before jugular fossa



ganglia

superior
inferior







after jugular fossa



meningeal branch
auricular branch





neck



pharyngeal branch

pharyngeal plexus


superior laryngeal

external
internal


recurrent laryngeal (inferior)
superior cervical cardiac





thorax



inferior cardiac
pulmonary
vagal trunks

anterior
posterior







abdomen



celiac
renal
hepatic
anterior gastric
posterior gastric





Nuclei



Nucleus ambiguus
Dorsal nucleus of vagus nerve
Solitary nucleus








accessory



Nuclei

Nucleus ambiguus
Spinal accessory nucleus


cranial
spinal





hypoglossal



Nucleus
Branches

lingual














v
t
e


Nerves of the cervical plexus



Superficial



C2
Lesser occipital


C2–C3
Greater auricular
Transverse cervical


C3–C4
Supraclavicular





Deep



C1–C3
Ansa cervicalis

superior root
inferior root




C3–C5
Phrenic












v
t
e


Nerves of the brachial plexus



Supraclavicular



root (dorsal scapular, long thoracic)
upper trunk (suprascapular, to the subclavius)





Infraclavicular




lateral cord



lateral pectoral

ansa pectoralis




musculocutaneous (lateral cutaneous of forearm)


median/lateral root: anterior interosseous
palmar
recurrent
common palmar digital (proper palmar digital)





medial cord



medial pectoral

ansa pectoralis




cutaneous: medial cutaneous of forearm
medial cutaneous of arm


ulnar: muscular
palmar
dorsal (dorsal digital nerves)
superficial (common palmar digital, proper palmar digital)
deep


median/medial root: see above





posterior cord



subscapular (upper, lower)
thoracodorsal


axillary (superior lateral cutaneous of arm)


radial: muscular
cutaneous (posterior of arm, inferior lateral of arm, posterior of forearm)
superficial (dorsal digital nerves)
deep (posterior interosseous)








Other



cutaneous innervation of the upper limbs












v
t
e


Anatomy of the autonomic nervous system



Head




Sympathetic



Cervical Chain Ganglion: roots
long ciliary
Deep Petrosal





Parasympathetic



Ciliary ganglion: roots

Sensory
Parasympathetic


Short ciliary


Pterygopalatine ganglion: deep petrosal
nerve of pterygoid canal


branches of distribution: greater palatine

inferior posterior nasal branches


lesser palatine
nasopalatine

medial superior posterior nasal branches


pharyngeal


Submandibular ganglion


Otic ganglion








Neck




Sympathetic



paravertebral ganglia: Cervical ganglia

Superior
Middle
Inferior


Stellate ganglion


prevertebral plexus: Cavernous plexus
Internal carotid








Chest




Sympathetic



paravertebral ganglia: Thoracic ganglia


prevertebral plexus: Cardiac plexus
Esophageal plexus
Pulmonary plexus
Thoracic aortic plexus


splanchnic nerves: cardiopulmonary
thoracic


cardiac nerves: Superior
Middle
Inferior








Abdomen




Sympathetic



paravertebral ganglia: Lumbar ganglia


prevertebral ganglia:

Celiac ganglia
Aorticorenal


Superior mesenteric ganglion
Inferior mesenteric ganglion


prevertebral plexus:
Celiac plexus

Hepatic
Splenic
Pancreatic




aorticorenal

Abdominal aortic plexus
Renal/Suprarenal


Superior mesenteric

Gastric


Inferior mesenteric

Spermatic
Ovarian


Superior hypogastric

hypogastric nerve
Superior rectal


Inferior hypogastric

Vesical
Prostatic / Cavernous nerves of penis
Uterovaginal
Middle rectal




splanchnic nerves: Lumbar splanchnic nerves





Enteric



Submucous plexus
Myenteric plexus








Pelvis




Sympathetic



paravertebral ganglia: Sacral ganglia
Ganglion impar


splanchnic nerves: Sacral splanchnic nerves





Parasympathetic



splanchnic nerves: Pelvic splanchnic nerves















v
t
e


Nerves of the lumbosacral plexus



Lumbar plexus




iliohypogastric



lateral cutaneous branch
anterior cutaneous branch





ilioinguinal



anterior scrotal ♂/labial ♀





genitofemoral



femoral branch
genital branch





Lateral cutaneous



patellar





obturator



anterior

cutaneous


posterior
accessory





femoral



anterior cutaneous branches
saphenous

(infrapatellar
medial crural cutaneous










sacral plexus




sciatic




common peroneal



lateral sural cutaneous

communicating branch


deep peroneal

lateral terminal branch
medial terminal branch
dorsal digital


superficial peroneal

medial dorsal cutaneous
intermediate dorsal cutaneous
dorsal digital







tibial



medial sural cutaneous
medial calcaneal
medial plantar (common plantar digital nerves
proper plantar digital)
lateral plantar (deep branch
superficial branch
common plantar digital
proper plantar digital)





sural



lateral dorsal cutaneous
lateral calcaneal








other



Muscular

superior gluteal
inferior gluteal


lateral rotator group (to quadratus femoris
to obturator internus
to the piriformis)
cutaneous: posterior cutaneous of thigh (inferior cluneal
perineal branches)
perforating cutaneous








coccygeal plexus



pudendal

inferior anal


perineal

deep
posterior scrotal ♂/labial ♀


dorsal of the penis ♂/clitoris ♀
anococcygeal





Related



cutaneous innervation of the lower limbs









Authority control



NDL: 00571039











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Nerve&oldid=812400470"					Categories: NervesPeripheral nervous systemNeuroanatomySoft tissueHidden categories: CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list