For personal income net of taxes, see disposable income.
"Bottom line" redirects here. For other uses, see Bottom line (disambiguation).


Accounting







Historical cost
Constant purchasing power
Management
Tax






Major types


Auditing
Cost
Forensic
Financial
Fund
Governmental
Management
Social
Tax








Key concepts


Accounting period
Accrual
Constant purchasing power
Economic entity
Fair value
Going concern
Historical cost
Matching principle
Materiality
Revenue recognition
Unit of account








Selected accounts


Assets
Cash
Cost of goods sold
Depreciation / Amortization
Equity
Expenses
Goodwill
Liabilities
Profit
Revenue








Accounting standards


Generally-accepted principles
Generally-accepted auditing standards
Convergence
International Financial Reporting Standards
International Standards on Auditing
Management Accounting Principles








Financial statements


Annual report
Balance sheet
Cash-flow
Equity
Income
Management discussion
Notes to the financial statements








Bookkeeping


Bank reconciliation
Debits and credits
Double-entry system
FIFO and LIFO
Journal
Ledger / General ledger
T accounts
Trial balance








Auditing


Financial
Internal
Firms
Report








People and organizations


Accountants
Accounting organizations
Luca Pacioli








Development


History
Research
Positive accounting
Sarbanes–Oxley Act






 Business portal





v
t
e






In business, net income (total comprehensive income, net earnings, net profit, informally, bottom line) is an entity's income minus cost of goods sold, expenses and taxes for an accounting period.[1] It is computed as the residual of all revenues and gains over all expenses and losses for the period,[2] and has also been defined as the net increase in shareholders' equity that results from a company's operations.[3] In the context of the presentation of financial statements, the IFRS Foundation defines net income as synonymous with profit and loss.[1]
Net income is a distinct accounting concept from profit but the same as net profit. Net income can also be calculated by adding a company's operating income to non-operating income and then subtracting off taxes.[4]



Contents


1 Definition
2 An equation for net income
3 Other terms
4 See also
5 References



Definition[edit]
Net income can be distributed among holders of common stock as a dividend or held by the firm as an addition to retained earnings. As profit and earnings are used synonymously for income (also depending on UK and US usage), net earnings and net profit are commonly found as synonyms for net income. Often, the term income is substituted for net income, yet this is not preferred due to the possible ambiguity. Net income is informally called the bottom line because it is typically found on the last line of a company's income statement (a related term is top line, meaning revenue, which forms the first line of the account statement).
The items deducted will typically include tax expense, financing expense (interest expense), and minority interest. Likewise, preferred stock dividends will be subtracted too, though they are not an expense. For a merchandising company, subtracted costs may be the cost of goods sold, sales discounts, and sales returns and allowances. For a product company advertising, manufacturing, and design and development costs are included.
An equation for net income[edit]

Net sales (revenue)

– Cost of goods sold


= Gross profit

– SG&A expenses (combined costs of operating the company)
– R&D


= EBITDA

– Depreciation and amortization


= EBIT

– Interest expense (cost of borrowing money)


= EBT

– Tax expense


= Net income (EAT)

Other terms[edit]

Net sales = gross sales – (customer discounts, returns, and allowances)
Gross profit = net sales – cost of goods sold
Operating profit = gross profit – total operating expenses
Net profit = operating profit – taxes – interest
Net profit = net sales – cost of goods sold – operating expense – taxes – interest

See also[edit]


Dividend
Economic value added
Gross income
Income statement
Liquidating dividend
Net income per employee
Operating income
Operating Income Before Depreciation and Amortization
Opportunity cost
Profit (accounting)


References[edit]



^ a b "IAS 1 Presentation of Financial Statements" (PDF). IFRS Foundation. 2012. Retrieved April 14, 2012. 
^ Stickney, et al. (2009) Financial Accounting: An Introduction to Concepts, Methods, and Uses. Cengage Learning.
^ Needles, et al. (2010) Financial Accounting. Cengage Learning.
^ "Net Income Formula". New Business Playbook. 








						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Net_income&oldid=815977313"					Categories: ProfitAccounting terminology