"NYPD" and "New York City Cops" redirect here. For other uses, see NYPD (disambiguation).
Not to be confused with New York City Sheriff's Office or New York State Police.


City of New York Police Department


Common name
New York City Police Department


Abbreviation
NYPD






Patch of the New York City Police Department




Badge of a New York City Police Department officer with the badge number 911.




Flag of the New York City Police Department



Motto
Fidelis ad mortem
(English: "Faithful Unto Death")


Agency overview


Formed
1845; 173 years ago (1845)


Employees
51,304 (of which 36,000 are sworn members) (2016)[1]


Annual budget
$4.8 billion


Legal personality
Governmental: Government agency


Jurisdictional structure


Operations jurisdiction*
City of New York City, U.S.





Map of City of New York Police Department's jurisdiction.


Size
468.9 square miles (1,214 km2)


Population
8,550,405[2]


Legal jurisdiction
New York City


General nature


Law enforcement
Local civilian police




Operational structure


Headquarters
1 Police Plaza
Park Row
Lower Manhattan
(across the street from City Hall)


Police Commissioner responsible
James P. O'Neill[3]


Agency executive
Carlos M. Gomez[4], Chief of Department


Parent agency
City Administrator's Office


Units


List

Auxiliary Police
Aviation
Crime Scene Unit
Anti-Crime Unit
Special Operations Division
Emergency Service
Highway Patrol
Housing Bureau
Evidence Collection
Counterterrorism
Major Case Squad
Movie and Television
Organized Crime Control Bureau
Real Time Crime
Scuba Team and Harbor
Special Victims
School Safety
Taxi Squad
Transit Bureau
Transportation Bureau





Boroughs


List

Manhattan North
Manhattan South
Brooklyn North
Brooklyn South
Queens North
Queens South
Bronx
Staten Island





Facilities


Commands



77 Precincts
12 Transit Districts
9 Housing Police Service Areas





Police cars
8,839


Police boats
11


Helicopters
8


Horses
120


Dogs



31 German Shepherds
3 Bloodhounds





Website


www.nyc.gov/html/nypd


Footnotes


* Divisional agency: Division of the country, over which the agency has usual operational jurisdiction.


The New York City Police Department (NYPD), officially the City of New York Police Department, is the largest police force in the United States.[5] Established in 1845, the agency has primary responsibilities in law enforcement and investigation within the five boroughs of New York City. The NYPD is one of the oldest police departments established in the U.S., tracing its roots back to the nineteenth century.
The NYPD has a broad array of specialized services, including the Emergency Service Unit, K9, harbor patrol, air support, bomb disposal, counter-terrorism, criminal intelligence, anti-gang, anti-organized crime, narcotics, public transportation, and public housing; the New York City Transit Police and New York City Housing Authority Police Department were fully integrated into the NYPD in 1995. According to the department, its mission is to "enforce the laws, preserve the peace, reduce fear, and provide for a safe environment." The department's regulations are compiled in title 38 of the New York City Rules.
In June 2004, there were about 40,000 sworn officers plus several thousand civilian employees; in June 2005, the number of officers dropped to 35,000. As of December 2011, that figure increased slightly to over 36,600, helped by the graduation of a class of 1,500 from the New York City Police Academy. The NYPD's current authorized uniformed strength is 37,000.[6] There are also approximately 4,500 Auxiliary Police Officers, 5,000 School Safety Agents, 2,300 Traffic Enforcement Agents, and 370 Traffic Enforcement Supervisors currently employed by the department. The Patrolmen's Benevolent Association of the City of New York (NYC PBA), the largest municipal police union in the United States, represents over 50,000 active and retired NYC police officers.
The NYPD Intelligence Division & Counter-Terrorism Bureau has officers stationed in 11 cities internationally.[7][8] In the 1990s the department developed a CompStat system of management which has also since been established in other cities.
The NYPD is headquartered at 1 Police Plaza, located on Park Row in Lower Manhattan across the street from City Hall.[9]
The NYPD has extensive crime scene investigation and laboratory resources, as well as units which assist with computer crime investigations. The NYPD runs a "Real Time Crime Center", essentially a large search engine and data warehouse operated by detectives to assist officers in the field with their investigations.[10] A Domain Awareness System, a joint project of Microsoft and the NYPD, links 6,000 closed-circuit television cameras, license plate readers, and other surveillance devices into an integrated system.[11]
Due to its high-profile location in the largest city and media center in the United States, fictionalized versions of the NYPD and its officers have frequently been portrayed in novels, radio, television, motion pictures, and video games.



Contents


1 History
2 Rank structure
3 Medals
4 Organization and structure

4.1 Office of the Chief of Department
4.2 Bureaus


5 Personnel
6 Crime prevention

6.1 Domain Awareness System


7 Demographics
8 Corruption and misconduct
9 Affiliations
10 Line of duty deaths
11 Vehicles

11.1 Vehicle appearance


12 Firearms

12.1 On duty
12.2 Off duty
12.3 Discontinued from service


13 In popular culture
14 See also
15 References
16 Further reading
17 External links



History[edit]
Main article: History of the New York City Police Department




Mounted Police Squad on Parade circa 1910


The Municipal Police were established in 1845, replacing an old night watch system. Mayor William Havemeyer shepherded the NYPD together, originating the phrase "New York's Finest."[12] In 1857, it was tumultuously replaced by a Metropolitan force, which consolidated many other local police departments in 1898. Twentieth-century trends included professionalization and struggles against corruption.
Rank structure[edit]
This section discusses ranks of the NYPD in general. The School Safety Division, Traffic Control Division, Auxiliary Police Section and Police Academy have their own rank and grade structures.
Officers begin service with the rank of Probationary Police Officer, also referred to as Recruit Officer. After successful completion of six months of Police Academy training and various academic, physical, and tactical tests, officers graduate from the Police Academy. While officially retaining the title of Probationary Police Officer, graduates are referred to as a Police Officer, or informally as a "Rookie", until they have completed an additional 18 months probationary period.
There are three career "tracks" in the NYPD: supervisory, investigative, and specialist. The supervisory track consists of 12 sworn titles, referred to as ranks. Promotion to the ranks of sergeant, lieutenant, and captain are made via competitive civil service examinations. Promotion to the ranks of deputy inspector, inspector, deputy chief, assistant chief, and chief are made at the discretion of the police commissioner, after successfully passing a series of civil service exams. Promotion from the rank of police officer to detective is determined by the current police labor contract, with the approval of the commissioner. The entry level appointment to detective is third grade or specialist. The commissioner may grant discretionary grades of first or second. These grades offer compensation roughly equivalent to that of supervisors. Specifically, a second grade detective's pay roughly corresponds to a sergeant's and a first grade detective's pay roughly corresponds to a lieutenant's. Detectives are police officers who have been given a more investigatory position but no official supervisory authority. A Detective First Grade still falls under the command of a sergeant or above. Just like detectives, sergeants and lieutenants can receive pay grade increases within their respective ranks.


Title
Insignia
Badge design
Badge color
Badge number
Uniform


Chief of Department





Medallion with eagle and star(s)
Gold, with silver star(s)
No
White shirt,
black peaked cap,
gold hat badge


Bureau Chief
Supervising Chief Surgeon
Bureau Chief Chaplain †







Assistant Chief
Assistant Chief Chaplain †
Assistant Chief Surgeon







Deputy Chief
Deputy Chief Chaplain †
District Surgeon







Inspector
Chaplain †
Police Surgeon





Medallion with eagle
(Chaplains have faith insignia overlaid)
Gold


Deputy Inspector





Laurels and crown with oak leaves


Captain





Laurels and crown


Lieutenant





Medallion


Sergeant




(sleeve)
Shield with eagle
Yes
Navy blue shirt,
peaked cap,
gold hat badge


Detective (grades 3rd–1st)
None



Police officer

Silver
Yes,
matching hat badge
Navy blue shirt,
peaked cap,
silver hat badge with matching number


Probationary Police officer


Recruit officer
Yes
Slate grey,
black garrison cap


Cadet
None


^ †: Uniform rank that has no police powers




NYPD officers from the Emergency Service Unit (ESU) in June 2009.






A NYPD police boat patrolling the East River


There are two basic types of detective in the NYPD: detective-investigators and detective-specialists.
Detective-Investigators are the type most people associate with the term "detective" and are the ones most frequently portrayed on television and in the movies. Most police officers gain their detective title by working in the Narcotics Division of the Organized Crime Control Bureau and are then moved to the Detective Bureau. Detectives assigned to squads are co-located within each precinct and are responsible for investigating murders, rapes, robberies, burglaries and other crimes within that precinct's boundaries. Other detective-investigators are assigned to specialized units at either the major command or citywide level, investigating terrorist groups, organized crime, narcotics dealing, extortion, bias crimes, political corruption, kidnappings, major frauds or thefts committed against banks or museums, police corruption, contractor fraud and other complex, politically sensitive or high-profile cases. A squad of detective-investigators is also assigned to each of the city's five district attorneys' offices. (Arsons are investigated by The Arson and Explosion Squad as well as fire marshals, who are part of the New York City Fire Department.)
Promotion from Police Officer to Detective-Investigator is based on investigative experience. Typically, a Police Officer who is assigned to investigative work for 18 months will be designated "Detective-Investigator" and receive the gold shield and pay increase commensurate with that designation. In the recent past, however, there has been controversy over the budget-conscious department compelling police officers to work past the 18 months without receiving the new title.
Newly appointed detectives start at Detective Third Grade, which has a pay rate roughly between that of Police Officer and Sergeant. As they gain seniority and experience, they can be "promoted" to Detective Second-Grade, which has a pay grade slightly less than sergeants. Detective First-Grade is an elite designation for the department's most senior and experienced investigators and carries a pay grade slightly less than Lieutenants. All these promotions are discretionary on the part of the Commissioner and can be revoked if warranted. And while senior detectives can give directions to junior detectives in their own squads, not even the most senior detective can lawfully issue orders to even a junior patrol officer. All Detective grades still fall under the "chain of command" of the supervisory ranks beginning with Sergeant through Chief of Department. Detectives, like Police Officers, are eligible to take the promotional civil service exams for entry into the supervisory ranks.




A lieutenant (white shirt) debriefing officers at Times Square in May 2010.


While carrying with them increased pay and prestige, none of these Detective grades confer on the holder any supervisory authority. Contrary to some media portrayals, there is no specific rank of "Detective Sergeant" or "Detective Lieutenant". Lieutenants and Sergeants are assigned to oversee Detective squads as Supervisors, and are responsible for all investigations.
There is a small percentage of Lieutenants and Sergeants who work as Investigative Supervisors (approximately equal to 10% of their respective ranks) and are granted the prestigious pay grade designations of "Sergeant—Supervisor Detective Squad" (SDS), or Lieutenant—Commander Detective Squad (CDS) therefore assuming full Investigative command responsibility as opposed to operational supervision. Their pay grade rises to an approximate midpoint between their normal rank and the next highest rank's pay grade, and similar to a Detective's "grade", is also a discretionary promotion. This pay grade designation is achieved by assignment to Investigative units, i.e. Detective Bureau, Internal Affairs Bureau, Counter-Terrorism Bureau, Intelligence Bureau, and Organized Crime Control Bureau. Lieutenants and Sergeants in non-investigatory assignments can be designated Lieutenant-Special Assignment or Sergeant-Special Assignment, pay equivalent to their investigative counterparts.
"Detective-specialists" are a relatively new designation and one unique to the NYPD. In the 1980s, many detectives resented that some officers were being granted the rank of detective in order to give them increased pay and status, but were not being assigned to investigative duties. Examples included officers assigned as bodyguards and drivers to the mayor, police commissioner and other senior officials.
To remedy this situation, the rank of detective-specialist was created. These officers are typically found in specialized units because they possess a unique or esoteric skill the department needs, e.g., crime-scene tech, sharpshooter, bomb technician, scuba instructor, helicopter instructor, sketch artist, etc. Like detective-investigators, detective-specialists start at third-grade and can be promoted to second- or first-grade status.




A NYPD motorcycle police officer speaks with a passerby in 2008.


The Department is administered and governed by the Police Commissioner, who is appointed by the Mayor. Technically, the commissioner serves a five-year term; as a practical matter, the commissioner serves at the Mayor's pleasure. The commissioner in turn appoints numerous deputy commissioners. The commissioner and his subordinate deputies are civilians under an oath of office and are not uniformed members of the force who are sworn officers of the law. However, a police commissioner who comes up from the uniformed ranks retains that status while serving as police commissioner. This has ramifications for their police pensions and the fact that any police commissioner who is considered sworn does not need a pistol permit to carry a firearm, and does retain the statutory powers of a police officer. Some police commissioners (like Ray Kelly) do carry a personal firearm, but they also have a full-time security detail from the Police Commissioner's (Detective) Squad.
A First Deputy Police Commissioner may have a security detail when he/she acts as commissioner or under other circumstances as approved by the police commissioner.
Commissioner titles:


Title
Insignia


Police Commissioner







First Deputy Commissioner







Deputy Commissioner







These individuals are administrators who supersede the Chief of Department, and they usually specialize in areas of great importance to the Department, such as counterterrorism, operations, training, public information, legal matters, intelligence, and information technology. Despite their role, as civilian administrators of the Department, deputy commissioners are prohibited from taking operational control of a police situation (the Commissioner and the First Deputy Commissioner may take control of these situations, however).
Within the rank structure, there are also designations, known as "grades", that connote differences in duties, experience, and pay. However, supervisory functions are generally reserved for the rank of sergeant and above.
Badges in the New York City Police Department are referred to as "shields" (the traditional term), though not all badge designs are strictly shield-shaped. Every rank has a different badge design (with the exception of Police Officer and Probationary Police Officer), and upon change in rank officers receive a new badge. Lower-ranked police officers are identified by their shield numbers, and tax registry number. Lieutenants and above do not have shield numbers and are identified by tax registry number. All sworn members of the NYPD have their ID card photos taken against a red background. Civilian employees of the NYPD have their ID card photos taken against a blue background, signifying that they are not commissioned to carry a firearm. All ID cards have an expiration date.
Medals[edit]
Main article: Medals of the New York City Police Department
The NYPD presents medals to its members for meritorious service.
Organization and structure[edit]
Main article: Organization of the New York City Police Department




One Police Plaza, headquarters of the New York City Police Department in Lower Manhattan.


Office of the Chief of Department[edit]
The Chief of Department serves as the senior sworn member of the NYPD.[13] Carlos M. Gomez is the 39th individual to hold the post, which prior to 1973 was known as the Chief of Operations and before that as Chief Inspector.[14]
Bureaus[edit]
The Department is divided into twenty bureaus,[15] which are typically commanded by a uniformed Bureau Chief (such as the Chief of Patrol and the Chief of Housing) or a civilian Deputy Commissioner (such as the Deputy Commissioner of Information Technology). The bureaus fit under four umbrellas: Patrol, Transit & Housing, Investigative, and Administrative. Bureaus are often subdivided until smaller divisions and units.


Bureau
Commander
Description
Subdivisions


Patrol Services Bureau
Chief of Patrol
The Patrol Services Bureau is the largest and most visible bureau in the NYPD, overseeing the majority of the department's uniformed officers on patrol.
The bureau is divided into eight borough commands, which are further divided into 77 police precincts.


Citywide Operations Bureau
Chief of Citywide Operations
Citywide Operations was created to enhance the department's coordinated response to major events and incidents that require specifically trained and equipped personnel.
The bureau oversees the Special Operations Division, which includes the Emergency Service Unit, the Aviation Unit, the Harbor Unit, and the Mounted Unit. The bureau is also responsible for the Strategic Response Group and the Crisis Outreach and Support Unit.


Transit Bureau
Chief of Transit
The Transit Bureau is responsible for the safety and security of the 5.6 million passengers who use the New York City subways each day. Providing police services for the busiest metropolitan rail system in the nation, members of the Transit Bureau patrol the subway's 25 lines, 472 stations, and nearly 250 miles of passenger rail line.
The bureau comprises 12 transit districts, each located within or adjacent to the subway system, and overseen by three borough commands: Manhattan, Brooklyn, and Bronx/Queens. District personnel are supplemented by members of several specialized units within the Transit Bureau—including three borough Task Forces, Anti-Terrorism Unit, Citywide Vandals Task Force, Canine Unit, Special Projects Unit, and MetroCard Fraud Task Force.


Housing Bureau
Chief of Housing
The Housing Bureau is responsible for the safety of nearly a half-million residents, employees, and visitors in the city's housing developments.
The bureau is divided into nine police service bureaus, which each cover a collection of housing developments.


Transportation Bureau
Chief of Transportation
The Transportation Bureau is responsible for the safety and security of motorists, passengers, pedestrians, and cyclists on the streets and highways throughout New York City and manages traffic control.
The bureau oversees the Traffic Management Center, Highway District, Traffic Operations District, and Traffic Enforcement District, in addition to several units.


Counterterrorism Bureau
Chief of Counterterrorism
The NYPD Counterterrorism Bureau (CT) is the city's primary local resource to guard against the threat of international and domestic terrorism in New York City.
The bureau contains the Critical Response Command, Counterterrorism Division, Terrorism Threat Analysis Group, Lower Manhattan Security Initiative, and World Trade Center Command.


Crime Control Strategies Bureau
Chief of Crime Control Strategies
The Office of Crime Control Strategies analyzes and monitors trends across the city and develops strategies targeted to reducing crime, ensuring that these strategies are applied across all units of the NYPD.
The bureau is divided into the CompStat Unit and Crime Analysis Unit.


Detective Bureau
Chief of Detectives
The Detective Bureau is responsible for the prevention, detection, and investigation of crime, and its work often complements the work of police officers assigned to the precincts.
The bureau oversees the Borough Investigative Commands, Special Victims Division, Forensic Investigations Division, Special Investigations Division, Criminal Enterprise Division, Fugitive Enforcement Division, Real Time Crime Center, District Attorneys Squad, Grand Larceny Division, Gun Violence Suppression Division, and Vice Enforcement Division.


Intelligence Bureau
Chief of Intelligence
The mission of the NYPD Intelligence Bureau is to detect and disrupt criminal and terrorist activity through the use of intelligence-led policing.
NYPD Intelligence operations are divided by functional responsibility: Intelligence Operations and Analysis Section (IOAS) and the Criminal Intelligence Section (CIS).


Internal Affairs Bureau
Deputy Commissioner of Internal Affairs
The Internal Affairs Bureau (IAB) is dedicated to preserving integrity, which is critical to the function of the Police Department, and fighting corruption within the NYPD. IAB helps to ensure that trust by detecting, investigating, and bringing to justice the small number of New York City police officers and civilians who engage in misconduct and corruption.
N/A


Administration
Deputy Commissioner of Administration
The Office of the Deputy Commissioner, Administration (DCA), was created in early 2014 to enhance morale, improve employee engagement, and foster communication within the Department. DCA acts as the liaison to the department's fraternal, religious, and line organizations.
DCA oversees the Employee Relations Section, the Chaplains Unit, and the Ceremonial Unit.


Collaborative Policing
Deputy Commissioner of Collaborative Policing
The Office of the Deputy Commissioner, Collaborative Policing (DCCP), focuses on partnering with other city agencies, non-profits, community-based organizations, the faith-based community, and other New York City stakeholders on a wide variety of public-safety initiatives.
N/A


Community Affairs Bureau
Chief of Community Affairs
The Community Affairs Bureau (CAB) plays a critical role in the department's refocused approach to achieving and sustaining gains against crime by strengthening community relationships and trust. The bureau partners with community leaders, civic organizations, block associations, and concerned citizens to educate them on police policies and practices, and to develop solutions to challenges that arise within the city's many diverse communities.
The Community Affairs Bureau oversees four divisions: Community Outreach Division, Crime Prevention Division, Juvenile Justice Division, and School Safety Division.


Information Technology Bureau
Deputy Commissioner of Information Technology
The Information Technology Bureau (ITB) plays an integral role in establishing the NYPD as one of the leading counterterrorism and crime-fighting forces in the nation, developing and implementing cutting-edge technology to support strategies, programs and procedures that promote safety, efficiency, and effectiveness.
ITB has six divisions: Administration, Fiscal Affairs, Strategic Technology, IT Services Division, Life-Safety Systems, and the Communications Division.


Legal Matters
Deputy Commissioner of Legal Matters
The NYPD Legal Bureau provides assistance to law enforcement personnel regarding department legal matters. The Legal Bureau also has a memorandum of understanding with the Manhattan DA to selectively prosecute New York City Criminal Court summons court cases.[16][17]
The bureau comprises the Civil Enforcement Unit, Criminal Section, Civil Section, Legislative Affairs Unit, Document Production/FOIL, and the Police Action Litigation Section (PALS).


Personnel
Chief of Personnel
The Personnel Bureau is responsible for the recruitment and selection of personnel and for managing the human resource functions of the NYPD.
The bureau oversees the Candidate Assessment Division, Career Enhancement Division, Employee Management Division, Personnel Orders Section, and Staff Services Section.


Public Information
Deputy Commissioner of Public Information
The Office of the Deputy Commissioner, Public Information (DCPI), works with local, national, and international media organizations to provide the most accurate and timely information to the public.
N/A


Risk Management
Assistant Chief, Risk Management
The Risk Management Bureau measures the performance of police officers and identifies officers who might be in need of enhanced training or supervision.
N/A


Support Services Bureau
Deputy Commissioner of Support Services
While the bureau handles a wide range of equipment and storage-related functions, the bulk of its operations center on the NYPD's vehicle fleet and its evidence warehouses.
The Support Services Bureau oversees the Fleet Services Division, Property Clerk Division, Central Records Division, and the Printing Section.


Training Bureau
Deputy Commissioner of Training
The NYPD Training Bureau provides recruits, uniformed officers, and civilians with the most up-to-date academic, tactical, and technological information available, transforming them into the best trained, most prepared law enforcement professionals in the nation.
The Training Bureau's training section includes: Recruit Training Section, Physical Training and Tactics Department, Tactical Training Unit, Firearms and Tactics Section, COBRA Training, In-Service Tactical Training Unit, Driver Education and Training Unit, Computer Training Unit, Civilian Training Program, School Safety Training Unit, Instructor Development Unit, Criminal Investigation Course, Leadership Development Section, and Citizens Police Academy.


Personnel[edit]




NYPD graduation ceremony in Madison Square Garden, July 2005.


Main article: List of New York City Police Department officers
Crime prevention[edit]
Domain Awareness System[edit]
In August 2008, the Lower Manhattan Security Initiative in a partnership between the New York City Police Department and Microsoft began the Domain Awareness System to monitor New York City.[18] The program allowed the department to track surveillance targets and gain detailed information about them. The system is connected to 6,000[19] video cameras around New York City as well as check radiological and nuclear detectors onboard helicopters, trucks and boats as well as detectors on police officers' gun belts that were so sensitive that people who have had medical procedures may trigger them. Lower Manhattan now includes thousands of surveillance cameras that can identify shapes and sizes of unidentified "suspicious" packages and can track people within seconds using descriptions such as "someone wearing a red shirt". In 2009, an extension into Midtown Manhattan was announced[20] and by 2012 the program was fully implemented.
The system was also licensed out to other cities with New York City getting 30% of the profits.[21] The system's development costs were estimated at US$40 million.[22]
This system was highlighted in a May 2013 episode of PBS' Nova on tracking the Boston Marathon Bombers.[23]
Demographics[edit]
As of the end of 2010, 53% of the entire 34,526-member police force were white and 47% were members of minority groups. Of 22,199 officers on patrol, 53% (11,717) were black, Latino (of any race), or Asian or Asian-American, and 47% (10,482) were non-Hispanic white. Of 5,177 detectives, 57% (2,953) were white and 43% (2,224) were people of color. Of 4,639 sergeants, 61% (2,841) were white and 39% (1,798) were minorities. Of 1,742 lieutenants, 76% (1,323) were white and 24% (419) were people of color. Of 432 captains, 82% (356) were white and 18% (76) were minorities. Of 10 chiefs, 7 were white and 3 were people of color. In 2002, whites accounted for 60% of members in the rank of police officer. Between 2002 and 2010, the number of minorities in top-tier positions in the force increased by about 4.5%.[24]
Corruption and misconduct[edit]
Main article: New York City Police Department corruption and misconduct
The Civilian Complaint Review Board is an all-civilian, 13-member panel tasked with investigating misconduct or lesser abuse accusations against NYPD officers, including use of excessive force, abuse of authority, discourtesy and offensive language. Complaints against officers may be filed online, by U.S. mail, by phone or in person at any NYPD station.[25]
Affiliations[edit]
The NYPD is affiliated with the New York City Police Foundation and the New York City Police Museum. It also runs a Youth Police academy to provide positive interaction with police officers and to educate young people about the challenges and responsibility of police work. The department also provides a citizen Police Academy which educates the public on basic law and policing procedures.
Line of duty deaths[edit]
According to the Officer Down Memorial Page, the NYPD has lost 867 officers in the line of duty since 1849, the most recent officer having been lost on July 5, 2017[update].[26] This figure includes officers from agencies that were absorbed by or became a part of the modern NYPD in addition to the modern department itself. This number also includes officers killed on and off duty by gunfire of other officers on duty. The NYPD lost 23 officers in the September 11, 2001 attacks, not including another 61 who died of illnesses related to the attacks.[26]


Type
Number


9/11-related illness
100


Accidental
9


Aircraft accident
7


Animal related
18


Assault
32


Automobile accident
51


Bicycle accident
4


Boating accident
5


Bomb
2


Drowned
12


Duty-related illness
10


Electrocuted
5


Explosion
8


Exposure
1


Exposure to toxins
3


Fall
10


Fire
16


Gunfire
327


Gunfire (accidental)
25


Heart attack
47


Motorcycle accident
36


Stabbed
21


Struck by streetcar
7


Struck by train
5


Struck by vehicle
39


Structure collapse
3


Terrorist attack
24


Vehicle pursuit
12


Vehicular assault
21


Total
867[27]


Vehicles[edit]


Patrol cars


Ford Crown Victoria
 United States (origin)
 Canada (manufacture)

Ford Police Interceptor Sedan[28][29]
 United States

Chevrolet Impala
 United States (origin)
 Canada (manufacture)

Ford Fusion Hybrid
 United States



Nissan Altima
 Japan (origin)
 United States (manufacture)

Dodge Charger
 United States (origin)
 Canada (manufacture)


Highway patrol


Toyota Prius
 Japan


Traffic enforcement


Chevrolet Volt
 United States


Traffic enforcement




SUVs


Chevrolet Tahoe/GMC Yukon
 United States

Ford Explorer Special Service Vehicle
 United States


Patrol and Traffic Enforcement


Ford Escape Hybrid
 United States


Patrol and Traffic Enforcement





Parking enforcement


Westward Go-4 Interceptor
 Canada

Cushman Truckster
 United States

Smart ForTwo
 Germany (origin)
 France (manufacture)


65 Broadway AMEX 08.jpg


Ford F550 XL Super Duty Tow Truck
 United States




Emergency Service Unit vehicles


Lenco Peacekeeper
 United States


Armored vehicle
two in use by the ESU


Lenco BearCat
 United States


Armored vehicle
five in use by the ESU


Modified Ford F-550
 United States


ESU Radio Emergency Patrol


Mack M-series rescue truck
 United States


ESU Heavy Rescue Truck




Communications vans


Chevrolet P30 van
 United States

LDV Custom Speciality Vehicles USA 40' Freightliner MT55
 United States


Communications Division Command Post


Modified Blue Bird All American
 United States


Communications Division Command post





Police buses


AmTran body on Navistar International chassis
 United States

TMC/Nova Bus RTS
 United States

Orion V Suburban
 Canada (origin)
 United States (manufacture)




Helicopters


AgustaWestland AW119
 United Kingdom &  Italy


Bell Helicopter Bell 429
 United States

Bell Helicopter 412



Miscellaneous


Ford E-Series
 United States

Modified Hummer H1
 United States

John Deere Gator
 United States

GMC C6500
 United States



T3 Motion Patroller - Tri-wheel scooter
 United States

Kenworth T700 chassis Dump Truck
 United States




There are many more NYPD Vehicles that are not on this list.
Vehicles also include police motorcycles.
Vehicle appearance[edit]







NYPD Vehicles




The current NYPD vehicle appearance is an all-white vehicle body with two blue stripes along each side of the car. The word "POLICE" is printed in small text above the front wheel wells, and as "NYPD Police" above the grille opening. The NYPD shoulder patch is printed on both sides just in front of the front doors or on the front doors. The letters "NYPD" are printed in blue Rockwell Extra Bold font on the front doors, and the NYPD motto "Courtesy, Professionalism, Respect" is printed on the rear doors. The unit's shop number is printed on the rear decklid. The shop number is also printed on the rear side panels above the gas intake, along with the number of the unit's assigned precinct.
Some Traffic Enforcement units used a modified paint job, with dark blue carbody and white stripes on the sides. The text on the car is also printed in white. These are being phased out in favor of units painted in a modified version of the regular NYPD paint job, with the word "TRAFFIC" printed on the rear side panels and trunk.
Some NYPD Auxiliary units used a modified paint job, with dark blue or black carbody and white stripes on the sides. The text on the car is also printed in white. These are being phased out in favor of units painted in a modified version of the regular NYPD paint job, with the word "Auxiliary" printed on the rear side panels and trunk.
Firearms[edit]
On duty[edit]
New NYPD officers are allowed to choose from one of three 9mm service pistols: the SIG Sauer P226 DAO, Glock 17 Gen4, and Glock 19 Gen4.[30] All duty handguns are modified to a 12-pound (53 N) NY-2 trigger pull.[31]
The Smith & Wesson 5946 was initially issued to new recruits[32]; however, the manufacturer stopped producing the weapon[33] and the agency is phasing it out.[34] After the switch in 1994 to semiautomatic pistols, officers who privately purchased revolvers before January 1, 1994, will be allowed to use them for duty use until August 31, 2018. They will then be grandfathered in as approved off-duty guns.[35]
Shotgun-certified officers were authorized to carry Ithaca 37 shotguns, which are being phased out in favor of the newer Mossberg 590. Officers and detectives belonging to special investigative units, Organized Crime Control Bureau, NYPD's Emergency Service Unit, Counter-terrorism bureau and Strategic Response Group are armed with a range of select-fire weapons and long guns, such as the Colt M4A1 carbine and similar-pattern AR-15 rifles, Ruger Mini-14 rifle, Heckler & Koch MP5 submachine gun, and the Remington Model 700 bolt-action rifle.[36]
Off duty[edit]
The firearms approved by the NYPD for off duty carry are the Glock 26, Smith & Wesson 3914 DAO, Smith & Wesson 3953TSW, Smith & Wesson Model 640 (.38 revolver), SIG Sauer P239 DAO, Springfield XDS, Smith & Wesson M&P Shield and the Beretta 8000D Mini Cougar.
Discontinued from service[edit]
From 1926 until 1986 the standard weapons of the department were the Smith & Wesson Model 10 and the Colt Official Police .38 Special revolvers with four-inch barrels. Prior to 1994 the standard weapon of the NYPD was the Smith & Wesson Model 64 DAO (Double Action Only) .38 Special revolver with a three or four inch barrel. This type of revolver was called the Model NY-1 by the department.
Prior to the issuing of the 9mm semi-automatic pistol NYPD detectives and plainclothes officers often carried the Colt Detective Special and/or the Smith & Wesson Model 36 "Chief's Special" .38 Special caliber snub-nosed (2-inch) barrel revolvers for their ease of concealment while dressed in civilian clothes.
The Kahr K9 9 mm pistol was an approved off-duty/backup weapon from 1998 to 2011. It was pulled from service because it could not be modified to a 12-pound trigger pull.
In popular culture[edit]
Further information: List of fictional portrayals of the NYPD
See also[edit]


New York City portal
Law enforcement/Law enforcement topics portal



New York City Office of Administrative Trials and Hearings (OATH), for hearings conducted on certain summonses issued by the NYPD
Law enforcement in the United States
Law enforcement in New York
Law enforcement in New York City
List of law enforcement agencies in New York
Mary Shanley, 4th female detective

References[edit]


^ a b "FBI — Table 78". Federal Bureau of Investigation. 
^ "Annual Estimates of the Resident Population: April 1, 2010 to July 1, 2015 – 2015 Population Estimates – New York". United States Census Bureau. Archived from the original on May 15, 2016. Retrieved March 24, 2016. 
^ "Commissioner James P. O'Neill". New York City Police Department. Retrieved 16 September 2016. 
^ "Chief of Department Carlos M. Gomez". New York City Police Department. Retrieved 16 September 2016. 
^ "Bureau of Justice Statistics - Appendix table 1" (PDF). United States Department of Justice. p. 34. Retrieved December 5, 2013. 
^ "Frequently Asked Questions". New York City Police Department. Retrieved September 27, 2013. 
^ "Document shows NYPD eyed Shiites based on religion". Associated Press. Retrieved September 27, 2013. 
^ Hartmann, Margaret (January 27, 2012). "NYPD Now Has an Israel Branch". New York. Retrieved September 27, 2013. 
^ "Property Clerk". New York City Police Department. February 16, 2011. Retrieved September 27, 2013. 
^ From database to crime scene
^ "NYPD launches new all-seeing 'Domestic Awareness System'". RT. July 30, 2012. Archived from the original on August 11, 2012. 
^ Wall Street Journal, May 13, 2017, pg.C6
^ "NYPD Administration". nyc.gov. 
^ "NYPD - Administration". nyc.gov. 
^ "Bureaus". New York Police Department. Retrieved 18 May 2017. 
^ Dolmetsch, Chris (14 December 2011). "Occupy Wall Street Judge Refuses to Throw Out Summonses". Bloomberg News. 
^ Pinto, Nick (November 3, 2016). "Protesters Sue to Stop NYPD from Acting as Prosecutors". The Village Voice. 
^ "News from the Blue Room". The City of New York. Office of the Mayor. 8 August 2012. Retrieved 6 April 2015. 
^ "NYPD expands surveillance net to fight crime as well as terrorism". Reuters. June 21, 2013. Retrieved October 31, 2015. 
^ ""Ring of Steel" Coming to Midtown". WNYC. 4 October 2009. Retrieved 6 April 2015. 
^ Ungerleider, Neal (August 8, 2012). "NYPD, Microsoft Launch All-Seeing "Domain Awareness System" With Real-Time CCTV, License Plate Monitoring [Updated]". Fast Company. Retrieved 19 June 2013. 
^ Long, Colleen (February 20, 2013). "NYPD, Microsoft Create Crime-Fighting 'Domain Awareness' Tech System". Associated Press. Archived from the original on February 24, 2013. Retrieved 19 June 2013. 
^ "Manhunt—Boston Bombers" (Video). NOVA. PBS. 29 May 2013. Retrieved 6 April 2015. 
^ El-Ghobashy, Tamer (January 7, 2011). "Minorities Gain in NYPD Ranks". Wall Street Journal. Retrieved May 8, 2012. 
^ "NYC Civilian Complaint Review Board". nyc.gov. nyc.gov. Retrieved 2015-03-28. 
^ a b "The Officer Down Memorial Page". 
^ "New York City Police Department, NY". The Officer Down Memorial Page (ODMP). Retrieved 2017-02-12. 
^ "Police Magazine". Policemag.com. Retrieved 2013-09-27. 
^ The Ford Motor Company (2012-02-08). "Ford's All-New Police Interceptors Roll Off the Chicago Assembly Line, Purpose-Built to Protect and Serve | Ford Media Center". Media.ford.com. Retrieved 2013-09-27. 
^ http://www.thefirearmblog.com/blog/2017/11/30/nypd-set-retire-last-revolvers/
^ Massad Ayoob (December 1999). "Trendy Guns Don't Sell Like the Classics". Shooting Industry. 
^ "Training Bureau | Firearms & Tactics Section". nyc.gov. Archived from the original on March 12, 2009. 
^ https://www.luckygunner.com/lounge/guide-smith-wesson-semi-automatic-models/
^ http://www.thefirearmblog.com/blog/2017/11/30/nypd-set-retire-last-revolvers/
^ http://www.thefirearmblog.com/blog/2017/11/30/nypd-set-retire-last-revolvers/
^ "NYPD's Elite E-Men". Tactical Life. Retrieved 26 July 2014. 


Further reading[edit]

Darien, Andrew T. Becoming New York's Finest: Race, Gender, and the Integration of the NYPD, 1935–1980. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2013.
Miller, Wilbur R. Cops and bobbies: Police authority in New York and London, 1830–1870 (The Ohio State University Press, 1999)
Monkkonen, Eric H. Police in Urban America, 1860–1920 (2004)
Richardson, James F. The New York Police, Colonial Times to 1901 (Oxford University Press, 1970)
Richardson, James F. "To Control the City: The New York Police in Historical Perspective". In Cities in American History, eds. Kenneth T. Jackson and Stanley K. Schultz (1972) pp. 3–13.
Thale, Christopher. "The Informal World of Police Patrol: New York City in the Early Twentieth Century", Journal of Urban History (2007) 33#2 pp. 183–216.

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to New York City Police Department.



Official website
Police Department in the Rules of the City of New York
"New York City Police Department collected news and commentary". The New York Times. 
Google (2015-01-17). "Map of NYC Law Enforcement Line of Duty Deaths" (Map). Google Maps. Google. Retrieved 2015-01-17. 
"With the Sky Police", Popular Mechanics, January 1932 article about the NY City Police Air Force and the Keystone-Loening Commuter in service at that time, photos pp. 26–30
NYPD Annual Reports 1912–1923 (digitized books) from the Lloyd Sealy Library on the Internet Archive
Historical images from the NYPD Annual Reports, 1923–23 from the Lloyd Sealy Library Digital Collections





Links to related articles











v
t
e


New York City Police Department



Facilities



1 Police Plaza
240 Centre Street
New York City Police Academy
New York City Police Museum
NYPD 9th Precinct
Real Time Crime Center





Corruption/
misconduct



A Battle For The Soul of New York
Dirty thirty
Hofstadter Committee
Knapp Commission
Mollen Commission
Pappas v. Giuliani





Events



2004 Republican National Convention protest activity
2014 killings of NYPD officers
2014 Queens hatchet attack
Death of Eric Garner
Death of Edmund Perry
Death of Michael Stewart
Hollywood Stuntz gang assault
Murder of Russel Timoshenko
New York City draft riots
New York City Police riot
Prospect Park alleged police sodomy incident
Shooting of Sean Bell
Shooting of Amadou Diallo
Shooting of Clifford Glover
Shooting of Ramarley Graham
Shooting of Akai Gurley
Shooting of Brian Moore
Shooting of Timothy Stansbury
Tompkins Square Park riot





Medals



Combat Cross
Medal for Valor
Medal of Honor





Organizations



Civilian Complaint Review Board
Cricket League
Detectives' Endowment Association
Housing Authority Police
New York City Police Foundation
Patrolmen's Benevolent Association of the City of New York
Shomrim
Transit Police





Units



Auxiliary Police
Cadet Corps
Detective Bureau
Emergency Service Unit
Highway Patrol
Housing Bureau
Organized Crime Control Bureau
School Safety Division
Special Victims Unit
Strategic Response Group
Street Crimes Unit
Transportation Bureau





Related



CompStat
FDNY Racing
Handschu agreement
Fictional portrayals of NYPD
Launch 5
Lexow Committee
List of officers
Marino v. Ortiz
Moroccan Initiative
NYPD X-ray vans
Police Commissioner
Project Griffin
The Seven Five
The Shack
Spring 3100
Stop-and-frisk in New York City












v
t
e


Highway patrol/state police in the United States





See also: Law enforcement in the United States and Highway patrol




States



Alabama
Alaska
Arizona
Arkansas
California
Colorado
Connecticut
Delaware
Florida
Georgia
Hawaii (does not have a statewide police agency)
Idaho
Illinois
Indiana
Iowa
Kansas
Kentucky
Louisiana
Maine
Maryland
Massachusetts
Michigan
Minnesota
Mississippi
Missouri
Montana
Nebraska
Nevada
New Hampshire
New Jersey
New Mexico
New York
North Carolina
North Dakota
Ohio
Oklahoma
Oregon
Pennsylvania
Rhode Island
South Carolina
South Dakota
Tennessee
Texas
Utah
Vermont
Virginia
Washington
West Virginia
Wisconsin
Wyoming





Federal district



District of Columbia





Insular areas



American Samoa
Guam
Northern Mariana Islands
Puerto Rico
U.S. Virgin Islands












v
t
e


 New York City






The Five Boroughs
The Bronx (Bronx County)
Brooklyn (Kings County):
Manhattan (New York County)
Queens (Queens County)
Staten Island (Richmond County)





General topics



History

Timeline


Neighborhoods

Ethnic enclaves


Architecture

Monuments
Skyscrapers


People
Media
Economy

Companies


Geography
Flags
Environment

Food and water


Demographics

History










Culture



Arts
Books
Cuisine
Dialect
Museums
Music
Nicknames
"Sixth borough"
Sports
Tourism

Gardens
Landmarks
Parks







Government



Mayor
Elections
Council
Borough presidents
Politics





Emergency services



Hospitals
Fire
Police

Crime
Law enforcement







Education



Dept. of Education
Elementary schools
High schools
Colleges





Transportation



History
Entities

DOT
Former BOT
Vision Zero Initiative


Metropolitan Transportation Authority

Subway
Bus
Long Island Rail Road
Metro-North Railroad


PATH
Bridges and tunnels
Streets





Topical



Other lists
Images
Portal








New York metropolitan area
State of New York
United States












v
t
e


Government of New York City



Elected officials



Mayor
Public Advocate
Comptroller
City Council
Borough Presidents





Independent organs



Board of Elections
Civil Court
Criminal Court





Departments



Aging
Buildings
Children's Services (Juvenile Justice)
City Planning
Citywide Administrative Services
Consumer Affairs
Correction
Cultural Affairs
Design & Construction
Education

Board
Chancellor


Environmental Protection
Finance

Sheriff's Office


Fire

Commissioner


Health & Mental Hygiene
Homeless Services
Housing Preservation & Development
Human Resources
Information Technology & Telecommunications
Investigation
Law
Parks & Recreation
Police

Commissioner


Probation
Records & Information Services
Sanitation
Small Business Services
Transportation
Youth & Community Development





Other agencies



City University of New York
Office of Administrative Trials and Hearings
Business Integrity Commission
Economic Development Corporation
Office of Chief Medical Examiner
Emergency Management
Health & Hospitals Corporation
Housing Authority
Landmarks Preservation Commission
Lower Manhattan Development Corporation
Mayor's Office of Film, Theatre & Broadcasting
NYC Media Group
Taxi & Limousine Commission





The Five Boroughs



The Bronx
Brooklyn
Manhattan
Queens
Staten Island




Community Boards



The Bronx
Brooklyn
Manhattan
Queens
Staten Island















v
t
e


Law enforcement in New York City



State



New York State Court Officers
Metropolitan Transportation Authority Police Department (MTAPD)
Port Authority Police Department (PAPD)
New York State Police
New York State University Police
Roosevelt Island Department of Public Safety
New York State Bridge Authority Police
Triborough Bridge and Tunnel Authority Police
Waterfront Commission of New York Harbor Police








City



Department of Correction
City University of New York Public Safety Department
Department of Environmental Protection Police
Fire Department Fire Marshals
Department of Health and Hospitals Police
Department of Homeless Services Police
Human Resources Administration Police
Department of Citywide Administrative Services Police
Department of Investigation
Parks Enforcement Patrol
Police Department (NYPD)
Department of Probation
Department of Sanitation Police
School Safety Agents
Sheriff's Office
Taxi and Limousine Commission Enforcement





Neighbor-
hood



Co-op City Department of Public Safety
Hunts Point Department of Public Safety
New York Racing Association Law Enforcement and Safety Division
Spring Creek Towers Department of Public Safety (Starrett City)
Sea Gate Police Department






Crime in New York City














						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=New_York_City_Police_Department&oldid=818253127"					Categories: Law enforcement agenciesNew York City Police Department1845 establishments in New York (state)Law enforcement in the New York metropolitan areaMunicipal police departments of New York (state)Organizations established in 1845Hidden categories: Articles containing Latin-language textArticles containing explicitly cited English-language textPages using infobox law enforcement with automatic label pluralizationPages using infobox law enforcement agency with unknown parametersArticles containing potentially dated statements from May 2016All articles containing potentially dated statementsOfficial website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia