

Journalism







News
Writing style
Ethics
Objectivity
News values
Attribution
Defamation
Editorial independence
Journalism school
Index of journalism articles




Areas




Arts
Business
Data
Entertainment
Environment
Fashion
Medicine
Politics
Science
Sports
Technology
Trade
Traffic
Weather
World




Genres




Advocacy
Analytic
Blogging
Broadcast
Citizen
Civic
Collaborative
Comics-based
Community
Data
Database
Gonzo
Immersion
Investigative
Literary
Muckraking
Narrative
"New Journalism"
Non-profit
Online
Opinion
Peace
Photojournalism
Scientific
Sensor
Underground
Visual
Watchdog




Social impact




Fake news
Fourth Estate
Fifth Estate
Freedom of the press
Infotainment
Media bias
Public relations
Press service
Propaganda model
Yellow journalism




News media




Newspapers
Magazines
TV and radio
Internet
News agencies
Alternative media




Roles




Journalists (reporters)
Columnist
Blogger
Editor
Copy editor
Meteorologist
News presenter
Photographer
Pundit / commentator






 Journalism portal
Category: Journalism







v
t
e









Reuters, Bonn 1988


A news agency is an organization that gathers news reports and sells them to subscribing news organizations, such as newspapers, magazines and radio and television broadcasters. A news agency may also be referred to as a wire service, newswire, or news service.
Although there are many news agencies around the world, three global news agencies, Agence France-Presse (AFP), Associated Press (AP) and Reuters, have offices in most countries of the world and cover all areas of information. All three began with and continue to operate on a basic philosophy of providing a single objective news feed to all subscribers; they do not provide separate feeds for conservative or liberal newspapers. Jonathan Fenby explains the philosophy:

To achieve such wide acceptability, the agencies avoid overt partiality. Demonstrably correct information is their stock in trade. Traditionally, they report at a reduced level of responsibility, attributing their information to a spokesman, the press, or other sources. They avoid making judgments and steer clear of doubt and ambiguity. Though their founders did not use the word, objectivity is the philosophical basis for their enterprises – or failing that, widely acceptable neutrality.[1]




Contents


1 History
2 Commercial services
3 Associations
4 List of major news agencies
5 List of commercial newswire services
6 See also
7 Notes and references
8 Further reading
9 External links



History[edit]
Only a few large newspapers could afford bureaus outside their home city. They relied instead on news agencies, especially Havas (founded 1835) in France and the Associated Press (founded 1846) in the United States. Former Havas employees founded Reuters in 1851 in Britain and Wolff in 1849 in Germany; Havas is now Agence France-Presse (AFP).[2] For international news, the agencies pooled their resources, so that Havas, for example, covered the French Empire, South America and the Balkans and shared the news with the other national agencies. In France the typical contract with Havas provided a provincial newspaper with 1800 lines of telegraphed text daily, for an annual subscription rate of 10,000 francs. Other agencies provided features and fiction for their subscribers.[3]
In the 1830s, France had several specialized agencies. Agence Havas was founded in 1835 by a Parisian translator and advertising agent, Charles-Louis Havas, to supply news about France to foreign customers. In the 1840s, Havas gradually incorporated other French agencies into his agency. Agence Havas evolved into Agence France-Presse (AFP).[4] Two of his employees, Bernhard Wolff and Paul Julius Reuter, later set up rival news agencies, Wolffs Telegraphisches Bureau in 1849 in Berlin and Reuters in 1851 in London. Guglielmo Stefani founded the Agenzia Stefani, which became the most important press agency in Italy from the mid-19th century to World War II, in Turin in 1853.
The development of the telegraph in the 1850s led to the creation of strong national agencies in England, Germany, Austria and the United States. But despite the efforts of governments, through telegraph laws such as in 1878 in France, inspired by the British Telegraph Act of 1869 which paved the way for the nationalisation of telegraph companies and their operations, the cost of telegraph remained high.
In the United States, the judgment in Inter Ocean Publishing v. Associated Press facilitated competition by requiring agencies to accept all newspapers wishing to join. As a result of the increasing newspapers, the Associated Press was now challenged by the creation of United Press Associations in 1907 and International News Service by newspaper publisher William Randolph Hearst in 1909. Driven by the huge U.S. domestic market, boosted by the runaway success of radio, all three major agencies required the dismantling of the "cartel agencies" through the Agreement of 26 August 1927. They were concerned about the success of U.S. agencies from other European countries which sought to create national agencies after the First World War. Reuters had been weakened by war censorship, which promoted the creation of cooperative newspapers in the Commonwealth and national agencies in Asia, two of its strong areas. After the Second World War, the movement for the creation of national agencies accelerated, when accessing the independence of former colonies, the national agencies were operated by the State. Reuters, became cooperative, managed a breakthrough in finance, and helped to reduce the number of U.S. agencies from three to one, along with the internationalization of the Spanish EFE and the globalization of Agence France-Presse.
In 1924, Benito Mussolini placed Agenzia Stefani under the direction of Manlio Morgagni, who expanded the agency's reach significantly both within Italy and abroad. Agenzia Stefani was dissolved in 1945, and its technical structure and organization were transferred to the new Agenzia Nazionale Stampa Associata (ANSA). Wolffs was taken over by the Nazi regime in 1934, and Reuters continues to operate as a major international news agency today.[5] In 1865, Reuter and Wolff signed agreements with Havas's sons, forming a cartel designating exclusive reporting zones for each of their agencies within Europe.[6]
Since the 1960s, the major agencies were provided with new opportunities in television and magazine, and news agencies delivered specialized production of images and photos, the demand for which is constantly increasing. In France, for example, they account for over two-thirds of national market.[7]
Commercial services[edit]
News agencies can be corporations that sell news (e.g., Press Association, Thomson Reuters and United Press International). Other agencies work cooperatively with large media companies, generating their news centrally and sharing local news stories the major news agencies may choose to pick up and redistribute (i.e., Associated Press (AP), Agence France-Presse (AFP) or American Press Agency (APA)) and Indian Press Agency PTI.
Governments may also control news agencies: China (Xinhua), the United States of America (RFE/RL, RFA), Russia (ITAR-TASS), and several other countries have government-funded news agencies which also use information from other agencies as well.[8][9][10]
Commercial newswire services charge businesses to distribute their news (e.g., Business Wire, GlobeNewswire, Marketwire, PR Newswire, PR Web, and CisionWire.
The major news agencies generally prepare hard news stories and feature articles that can be used by other news organizations with little or no modification, and then sell them to other news organizations. They provide these articles in bulk electronically through wire services (originally they used telegraphy; today they frequently use the Internet). Corporations, individuals, analysts, and intelligence agencies may also subscribe.
News sources, collectively, described as alternative media provide reporting which emphasizes a self-defined "non-corporate view" as a contrast to the points of view expressed in corporate media and government-generated news releases. Internet-based alternative news agencies form one component of these sources.
Associations[edit]
There are several different associations of news agencies. EANA is the European Alliance of Press Agencies, while the OANA is an association of news agencies of the Asia-Pacific region. MINDS is a global network of leading news agencies collaborating in new media business.
List of major news agencies[edit]


Agence France-Presse AFP (FRA)
Agência Brasil ABR (BRA)
Catalan News Agency CNA (ESP)
Agencia EFE (ESP)
Agenția de Presă RADOR (National Radio) (ROU)
Agenția Română de Presă AGERPRES (ROU)
Agenzia Giornalistica Italia AGI (ITA)
Agenzia Nazionale Stampa Associata ANSA (ITA)
AKIpress news agency (KGZ)
Algemeen Nederlands Persbureau ANP (NLD)
Algeria Press Service APS (DZA)
All Headline News AHN (USA)
Anadolu Agency (AA)
Antara (IDN)
Armenpress (ARM)
Asian News International ANI (IND)
Associated Press AP (USA)
Associated Press Service APS (PAK)
Associated Press of Pakistan APP (PAK)
Athens News Agency-Macedonian Press Agency ANA
Australian Associated Press AAP (AUS)
Austria Presse Agentur APA (AUT)
Azerbaijan Press Agency APA (AZE)
Azerbaijan State Telegraph Agency AzerTAc (AZE)
Bahrain News Agency BNA (BHR)
Bakhtar News Agency (AFG)
Baltic News Service BNS (LVA, LTU and EST)
Bangladesh Sangbad Shangstha (BGD)
Mohammadi News Agency (BGD)
Belga BELGA (BEL)
Bloomberg News (USA)
BNO News
Bulgarian Telegraph Agency BTA (BGR)
Canadian Press (CAN)
CCTV+ (CHN)
Central News Agency (TWN)
China News Service CNS (CHN)
Czech News Agency CTK (CZE)
DAPD News Agency DAPD (DEU)
Deutsche Presse-Agentur DPA (DEU)
Dow Jones Newswires (USA)
European Pressphoto Agency EPA (Europe)
Islamic Consultative Assembly News Agency ICANA (IRN)
Islamic Republic News Agency IRNA (IRN)
Iranian Students' News Agency ISNA (IRN)
Indo-Asian News Service IANS (IND)
Interfax (RUS)
Inter Press Service IPS (ITA)
Information Telegraph Agency of Russia ITAR-TASS (RUS)
Jiji Press (JPN)
Kenya News Agency (KE)
Kyodo News (JPN)
Lao News Agency KPL (LAO)
Lusa news agency LUSA (PRT)
Magyar Távirati Iroda MTI (HUN)
Malaysian National News Agency BERNAMA (MYS)
Namibia Press Agency NAMPA (NAM)
National Iraqi News Agency NINA (IRQ)
New Zealand Press Association NZPA (NZL)
Norsk Telegrambyrå NTB (NOR)
Notimex (MEX)
Pacnews
Pakistan Press International PPI (PAK)
PanARMENIAN.Net (ARM)
Philippines News Agency PNA (PHL)
Polska Agencja Prasowa PAP (POL)
Press Association PA (GBR)
Pressclub Information Agency PIA
Press Trust of India PTI (IND)
Qatar News Agency QNA (QAT)
Reuters (GBR)
RIA Novosti RIA (RUS)
Ritzaus Bureau Ritzau (DNK)
Ruptly (RUS)
Saba News Agency or Yemen News Agency SABA (YEM)
Saudi Press Agency SPA (KSA)
Schweizerische Depeschenagentur SDA (CHE)
Sipa USA
Samachar Bharti SB (IND)
Slovenian Press Agency STA (SVN)
Suomen Tietotoimisto STT (FIN)
Syrian Arab News Agency SANA (SYR)
Tahitipresse ATP (PYF)
Tanjug (SCG)
Telenoticiosa Americana TELAM (ARG)
Tidningarnas Telegrambyrå (SWE)
Turkmenistan State news agency (TKM)
UNI (IND)
Ukrainian Independent Information Agency UNIAN (UKR)
United News of Bangladesh UNB (BGD)
United Press International UPI (USA)
World Entertainment News Network WENN
Vietnam News Agency (VIE)
Via News Agency Via.News (PRT)
Xinhua News Agency XINHUA (CHN)
Yonhap News Agency YONHAP (KOR)
ZUMA Press (USA)


List of commercial newswire services[edit]


African Press Organization
Business Wire
CisionWire
CNW Group
CSRWire Canada
GlobeNewswire
Japan Corporate News Network
Marketwired
PR Newswire
PR Web
TOI
WION
ZEEN
Korea Newswire


See also[edit]


Journalism portal



List of news agencies
List of wire services

Notes and references[edit]


^ Jonathan Fenby, The International News Services (1986) p. 25
^ Jonathan Fenby, The International News Services (1986).
^ Theodore Zeldin, France: 1848–1945 (1977) 2: 538–539
^ Broderick, James F.; Darren W. Miller (2007). Consider the source: A Critical Guide to 100 Prominent News and Information Sites on the Web. Information Today, Inc. p. 1. ISBN 0-910965-77-3. 
^ "Baroness Reuter, last link to news dynasty, dies", Reuters, January 25, 2009. Retrieved February 12, 2013.
^ "Ch 7 Telegraph", Revolutions in Communication: Media history from Gutenberg to the digital age (2010). Retrieved February 12, 2013.
^ « Statistiques d’entreprises des industries culturelles », par Valérie Deroin, Secrétariat général Délégation au développement et aux affaires internationales au sein du Département des études, de la prospective et des statistiques [1]
^ Boyd-Barrett, Oliver, ed. (2010). News Agencies in the Turbulent Era of the Internet. Generalitat de Catalunya. ISBN 978-84-393-8303-1
^ Kirschten, Dick (1 May 1999). "A new agency with a bold mission is set to boost America's broadcast efforts overseas". Government Executive. Retrieved 2017-11-09. 
^ Central Intelligence Agency (1 April 1953). "International Radio Broadcasting by Radio Free Asia" (PDF). 


Further reading[edit]

Fenby, Jonathan. The International News Services (1986)
Gramling, Oliver. AP: The Story of News (1940)
Kenny, Peter. "News agencies as content providers and purveyors of news: A mediahistoriographical study on the development and diversity of wire services" (MPhil Diss. University of Stellenbosch, 2009) online, with a detailed bibliography pp. 171–200
Morris, Joel Alex. The Deadline Every Minute: The Story of the United Press (1957)
Paterson, Chris A., and Annabelle Sreberny, eds. International news in the 21st Century (University of Luton Press, 2004)
Putnis, P. "Reuters in Australia: the supply and exchange of news, 1859–1877" Media History (2004). 10#2 pp: 67–88.
Read, D. The power of news: the history of Reuters (Oxford UP, 1992).
Schwarzlose, Richard Allen. The American wire services: a study of their development as a social institution (1979)
Stephens, M. A history of news (3rd ed. Oxford UP, 2007).
Sterling, C. H. "News agencies" in Encyclopedia of international media and communications (2003) 3: 235–246.
Storey, Graham. Reuter's Century (1951)
Xin, X. "A developing market in news: Xinhua News Agency and Chinese newspapers" Media, Culture & Society (2006) 28#1 pp: 45–66.

External links[edit]

 Media related to News agencies at Wikimedia Commons







v
t
e


News agencies




List of news agencies






Agence France-Presse (Paris)
Reuters (London)
Associated Press (New York)








Agencia Boliviana de Información (La Paz)
Agência Brasil (Brasília)
Agenzia Fides (Vatican City)
Agenzia Nazionale Stampa Associata (Rome)
allAfrica.com (Mauritius)
Anadolu Agency (Ankara)
Austria Press Agency (Vienna)
Asian News International (New Delhi)
Asia News Network (Bangkok)
Athens-Macedonian News Agency (Athens)
Algeria Press Service (Algiers)
Belga (Brussels)
Bloomberg (New York)
Bolpress (La Paz)
CBC (Ottawa)
Catalan News Agency (Barcelona)
Canadian Press (Toronto)
Catholic News Agency (Denver)
Catholic News Service (America)
Central News Agency (Taipei)
Deutsche Presse-Agentur (Hamburg)
EFE (Madrid)
Kenya News Agency (Nairobi)
Kyodo News (Tokyo)
Integrated Regional Information Networks (Nairobi)
Interfax (Moscow)
Inter Press Service (Rome)
Islamic Republic News Agency (Tehran)
MTI (Budapest)
News Agency of Nigeria (Abuja)
Pakistan Television (Islamabad)
PAP (Warsaw)
Lusa (Lisbon)
Maghreb Arabe Press (Rabat)
PanaPress (Dakar)
Press Association (London)
Press Trust of India (Delhi)
RIA Novosti (Moscow)
Swiss Telegraphic Agency (Bern)
TASS (Moscow)
Tanjug (Belgrade)
Télam (Buenos Aires)
Tunis Afrique Presse (Tunis)
United Press International (Washington, DC)
United News of India (New Delhi)
Vietnam News Agency (Hanoi)
Xinhua (Beijing)
Zenit (Rome)
Zee Media Pvt (Mumbai)






European Alliance of News Agencies (Geneva)







Authority control



GND: 4041059-6
NDL: 00573548











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=News_agency&oldid=818169974"					Categories: News agenciesMass mediaJournalismHidden categories: Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers