"News International" redirects here. For the Pakistani newspaper, see The News International.

News Corp UK & Ireland Limited





South side of The News Building, London




Trading name

News UK



Type

Private limited company


Industry
Mass media


Founded
February 1981; 36 years ago (1981-02)


Headquarters
London, United Kingdom



Key people

Rupert Murdoch
James Murdoch
Rebekah Brooks (CEO)


Products
Newspapers and Websites


Owner
News Corp


Website
news.co.uk


News Corp UK & Ireland Limited (trading as News UK, formerly News International and NI Group), is a British newspaper publisher, and a wholly owned subsidiary of the American mass media conglomerate News Corp. It is the current publisher of The Times, The Sunday Times and The Sun newspapers and its former publications include the Today, News of the World and The London Paper newspapers. Until June 2002, it was called News International plc.[1] On 31 May 2011 the company name was changed from News International Limited to NI Group Limited,[2] and on 26 June 2013 to News UK.[3]
News UK's main competitor is DMG Media, which is in turn owned by the Daily Mail and General Trust.



Contents


1 History

1.1 Phone hacking allegations
1.2 Rebekah Brooks £10m payout
1.3 Brooks reappointed as CEO


2 Operations

2.1 Times Newspapers Ltd
2.2 News Group Newspapers Ltd
2.3 NI Free Newspapers Limited
2.4 Other


3 See also
4 References
5 External links



History[edit]
Between 1987 and 1995, News International owned, through its subsidiary News (UK) Ltd, Today, the first UK national newspaper to be printed in colour. All of News International's newspapers (with the exception of The London Paper, launched in 2006) were founded by other owners, in some cases hundreds of years ago.
In October 2005 News International sold TSL Education, publishers of Times Higher Education, Times Educational Supplement, and other education titles, for £235m ($415m). The Times Literary Supplement, previously part of TSL Education, has been retained by News International as part of this deal. Darwin Ltd, who had taken over the company, continued to produce the same product.
Phone hacking allegations[edit]
Main article: News International phone hacking scandal
In July 2009 The Guardian, a newspaper owned by Guardian Media Group reported that News Group Newspapers paid in excess of £1m to settle legal cases that threatened to reveal News Group journalists' use on repeated occasions of illegal methods in the pursuit of stories.[4] It has been alleged that News Group staff, including Clive Goodman, illegally accessed voicemail for the mobile phones of thousands of public figures, including politicians and celebrities.[4] Goodman was jailed in 2007 for tapping the mobile phones of three members of the royal staff; this is an offence under the Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act. It was stated by News International at the time that Goodman had acted without their knowledge, and that no other journalists made use of such methods.
The evidence uncovered by The Guardian apparently shows that many more figures were in fact the subject of phone-taps, including Nigella Lawson, Lenny Henry, Gwyneth Paltrow, John Prescott, Boris Johnson and Tessa Jowell. In 2008, the News of the World paid in excess of £400,000 in damages to Gordon Taylor, the chief executive of the Professional Footballers' Association, who was suing the newspaper for its involvement in the illegal interception of messages to his mobile phone. According to The Guardian, this payment, made in exchange for Taylor's silence 'prevented the public from knowing anything about the hundreds of pages of evidence which had been disclosed in Taylor's case.'[5]
In contrast to News International's earlier denials of knowledge, The Guardian cites suppressed evidence revealing that News of the World's editorial staff were involved with private investigators who engaged in illegal phone-hacking, and that both reporters and executives were commissioning purchases of confidential information; this is illegal unless it is shown to be in the public interest. Apparently, these activities were well-known within the News of the World, being "openly paid for by the accounts department with invoices which itemised illegal acts".[5] The paperwork is alleged to show that the above occurred during the tenure of Andy Coulson, who was chief press advisor to David Cameron, leader of the UK's Conservative Party,[5] until his resignation on 21 January 2011.[6]
On 4 July, The Guardian reported that a private investigator at the News of the World had hacked into the phone of the murdered teenager Amanda Dowler, causing both her parents and police investigating her murder to wrongly believe she was still alive. This occurred during the period that Rebekah Brooks (née Wade) was editor.
On 7 July, British newspaper The Daily Telegraph alleged that the families of dead British service personnel were targeted by private investigators working for the News of the World. This led to The Royal British Legion severing ties with the paper until such allegations are proved false. On the same day, James Murdoch announced the News of the World would be shut down after the publication of one more edition on 10 July 2011, due to the allegations. The newspaper had already been faced with the withdrawal of a number of sponsors which had advertised their products and services in the newspaper, not to mention the inevitable fall in sales that the newspaper would have faced had it remained in circulation.[7]
On 15 July Rebekah Brooks resigned as Chief Executive of News International. Her comments on her leaving were:[8]

As chief executive of the company, I feel a deep sense of responsibility for the people we have hurt and I want to reiterate how sorry I am for what we now know to have taken place. I have believed that the right and responsible action has been to lead us through the heat of the crisis. However my desire to remain on the bridge has made me a focal point of the debate. This is now detracting attention from all our honest endeavours to fix the problems of the past. Therefore I have given Rupert and James Murdoch my resignation. While it has been a subject of discussion, this time my resignation has been accepted. Rupert's wisdom, kindness and incisive advice has guided me throughout my career and James is an inspirational leader who has shown me great loyalty and friendship. I would like to thank them both for their support.
— Rebekah Brooks

Rebekah Brooks £10m payout[edit]
The Guardian newspaper, citing official company accounts, claims Brooks received a £10.8m payoff for leaving News International. [9]
Brooks reappointed as CEO[edit]
In September 2015, Rebekah Brooks was reappointed as CEO of the company, now named News UK.[10]
Operations[edit]
The company's major titles are published by subsidiary companies, Times Newspapers Ltd and News Group Newspapers.[1] These newspapers were until 2010 written at a large site in Wapping in east London, near Tower Hill, which earned the nickname "Fortress Wapping" after a fierce dispute with the union to which the workforce had previously belonged. The printing of the papers is now undertaken at Waltham Cross, Knowsley, and Lanarkshire (the largest and fastest print press in the world).[11]
The News Building, where all of News UK's London operations are based, was opened on 16 September 2014 by the Mayor of London, Boris Johnson.[12]
Times Newspapers Ltd[edit]
Times Newspapers Limited publishes the compact daily newspaper The Times and the broadsheet The Sunday Times.
Times Newspapers was formed in 1967 when The Thomson Corporation purchased The Times from the Astor family and merged it with The Sunday Times, which it had owned since 1959. The company was purchased by Murdoch's News International in February 1981. The acquisition followed an intense 21 days of negotiations with the print unions conducted by John Collier and Bill O'Neill.[13] The Times Literary Supplement, Times Educational Supplement and Times Higher Education Supplement were also part of the group; the latter two publications have since been sold.
In 2006 an American edition of The Times was launched in New York, Boston and some other East Coast U.S. cities.
Murdoch states that the law and the independent board prevent him from exercising editorial control.[14] However, an article in The Spectator following the resignation of James Harding stated that the trust has "never played much of a role in the 30 years Murdoch has owned the paper" and suggested that Murdoch had pressurised Harding to resign.[15]
News Group Newspapers Ltd[edit]
News Group Newspapers Ltd publishes the tabloid newspaper The Sun. The News of the World was another tabloid newspaper owned by the company; however its closure was announced on 7 July 2011, following new evidence about a phone hacking scandal at the newspaper. The final issue was released on 10 July 2011.
The News of the World was purchased by Murdoch in January 1969. The Sun was acquired in October 1969 from International Publishing Corporation.
Murdoch states that he acts as a "traditional proprietor"; exercising editorial control on major issues such as which political party to back in a general election or policy on Europe.[14]
NI Free Newspapers Limited[edit]
The London Paper was the first newspaper to be launched by News International rather than bought. It was an evening freesheet distributed at bus and rail stations in London. It was published five days a week from September 2006 to September 2009, when it closed faced with competition from other free papers.[16]
Other[edit]




News Corporation organigram



News International (Advertisements) Limited
News International Associated Services Limited
News International Distribution Limited
News Printers (Knowsley) Limited
News Printers (Scotland) Limited
News International Pension Trustees Limited
News International Supply Company Limited
News International Television Investment Company Limited
News International Television Limited
NI Syndication Limited

See also[edit]

Metropolitan police role in phone hacking scandal
News Corp Australia
News International phone hacking scandal
Phone hacking scandal reference lists
List of companies based in London

References[edit]


^ a b The Times Online Style Guide – see entry for News International for change from plc to Ltd
^ "Companies House WebCHeck – Company No. 00081701". Retrieved 4 January 2012. 
^ "News International changes name to News UK". BBC News. 2013-06-26. Retrieved 2013-06-27. 
^ a b Davies, Nick (8 July 2009). "Murdoch papers paid £1m to gag phone-hacking victims". The Guardian. London. Retrieved 2009-09-09. 
^ a b c Davies, Nick (8 July 2009). "Trail of hacking and deceit under nose of Tory PR chief". The Guardian. London. Retrieved 2009-09-09. 
^ Wells, Matt (21 January 2011). "Andy Coulson resigns – as it happened". The Guardian. London. Retrieved 31 January 2011. 
^ "Murdoch Folds NOTW Over Phone Hacking". Sky News. 7 July 2011. Retrieved 7 July 2011. 
^ "Phone hacking resignation: Statements in full". BBC News. 15 July 2011. Retrieved 15 July 2011. 
^ Sabbagh, Dan; O'Carroll, Lisa (12 December 2012). "Rebekah Brooks took £10.8m compensation from News Corp". The Guardian. Guardian Media Group. Retrieved 16 April 2016. 
^ Sweney, Mark; Greenslade, Roy (2 September 2015). "Rebekah Brooks' return confirmed.." The Guardian. Guardian Media Group. Retrieved 16 April 2016. 
^ Brook, Stephen (30 October 2007). "Murdoch unveils Scottish print operation". The Guardian. London. Retrieved 2010-05-20. 
^ "Boris Johnson hopes for new Times as he meets Rupert Murdoch". The Guardian. 16 September 2014. Retrieved 28 November 2014. 
^ The History of The Times, Graham Stewart, HarperCollins, London, 2005.
^ a b "Minute of the meeting with Mr Rupert Murdoch, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, News Corporation". Inquiry into Media Ownership and the News. New York: House of Commons Select Committee on Communications. 17 September 2007. p. 10. Archived from the original on 1 December 2007. 
^ "Why James Harding had to quit as Times editor". The Spectator. 13 December 2013. Retrieved 22 May 2013. 
^ Final edition of The London Paper, BBC News, 18 September 2009


External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to News International.



The Times
The Sun
News Commercial
News Syndication
News UK companies grouped at OpenCorporates
Wapping: legacy of Rupert's revolution, 15 January 2006 – The Observer: Three views of the industrial dispute twenty years on.
"News UK collected news and commentary". The Guardian.  







v
t
e


News UK






The Times
The Sunday Times
The Sun
The Times Literary Supplement
Wireless Group












v
t
e


2011–2012 News Corporation scandal



Events



News International phone hacking scandal
News of the World royal phone hacking scandal
News Corporation takeover bid for BSkyB
News of the World phone hacking scandal investigations





Companies and
organisations




News Corporation



News International

News of the World
The Sun
The Times
The Sunday Times


News Limited





Other



BSkyB
Culture, Media and Sport Committee
Federal Bureau of Investigation
Harbottle & Lewis
Independent Police Complaints Commission
Metropolitan Police

role


Ofcom
Press Complaints Commission
Serious Fraud Office
Solicitors Regulation Authority








People




Known victims



7/7 attack victims
Leslie Ash
Gordon Brown
Lee Chapman
Charlotte Church
Steve Coogan
Anne Diamond
Milly Dowler
Garry Flitcroft
Sheryl Gascoigne
Hugh Grant
Andy Gray
Tessa Jowell
Gerry and Kate McCann
Elle Macpherson
Sienna Miller
Ian Paisley
Ian Paisley, Jr.
Sara Payne
John Prescott
J. K. Rowling





Metropolitan Police



Sue Akers
Peter Clarke
Andy Hayman
Paul Stephenson
John Yates





News Corporation



Rebekah Brooks
Jonathan Chapman
Daniel Cloke
Andy Coulson
Tom Crone
Wendi Deng Murdoch
James Desborough
Viet Dinh
Ian Edmondson
Clive Goodman
Baron Grabiner
Simon Greenberg
Les Hinton
Sean Hoare
Lawrence Jacobs
Joel Klein
Stuart Kuttner
William Lewis
Paul McMullan
Greg Miskiw
Tom Mockridge
Glenn Mulcaire
James Murdoch
Rupert Murdoch
Colin Myler
Lucy Panton
Jamie Pyatt
Jonathan Rees
Neville Thurlbeck
Neil Wallis
James Weatherup





Other



Nick Davies
Lord Fowler
Lord Justice Leveson
Jay Rockefeller
Paul Staines
Tom Watson
John Whittingdale








Investigations
and legal cases



HM Advocate v Sheridan and Sheridan
Leveson Inquiry
Operation Elveden
Operation Kalmyk
Operation Tuleta
Operation Weeting
R v Coulson, Brooks and others





In popular culture



Dial M for Murdoch
Great Britain





Related topics



Foreign Corrupt Practices Act
Hacked Off
Operation Glade
Operation Motorman
Phone hacking
Phreaking
Politico-media complex
Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act 2000
Social engineering








 Category












v
t
e


 Media in the United Kingdom








UK national newspapers, magazines, and other periodicals







Newspapers
(History)




Berliner



The Guardian
The Observer





Broadsheet



Financial Times
The Daily Telegraph
The Sunday Telegraph
The Sunday Times





Compact



i
The Times





Middle-market



Daily Express
Daily Mail
The Mail on Sunday





Tabloid



Daily Mirror
Sunday Mirror
Morning Star
The Sunday People
Daily Star
Daily Star Sunday
The Sun
Sunday Sport








Magazines &
other periodicals



List of magazines by circulation
















Radio in the UK







National
stations




BBC



Analogue / digital
Radio 1
Radio 2
Radio 3
Radio 4
5 Live
Digital only
Radio 1Xtra
Radio 4 Extra
5 Live Sports Extra
6 Music
Asian Network
World Service
BBC National DAB (multiplex)





Independent
/ commercial



Analogue / digital
Absolute Radio
Classic FM
Heart
Kiss
Talksport
Digital only
Absolute 80s
Absolute Radio Extra
BFBS Radio
Capital
Digital One (multiplex)
Heart Extra
heat
The Hits
Jazz FM
Kerrang!
Kiss Fresh
Kisstory
LBC
Magic
Planet Rock
Premier Christian Radio
Radio X
RNIB Connect Radio
Sound Digital (multiplex)
Smooth
Talkradio
UCB UK
Virgin Radio UK








Regional
& local
stations




BBC



List of BBC Local Radio stations
List of BBC Regional Radio stations





Independent
/ commercial



List of community radio stations
List of local commercial radio stations
List of semi-national / regional analogue and digital radio stations








Other
stations



List of hospital radio stations
Pirate radio
Restricted Service Licence (RSL)

List of RSL stations


List of satellite radio stations
List of student and schools radio





Other



Broadcasting House
FM broadcasting
The Studios, MediaCityUK
Radio Academy

Radio Academy Awards


Radio Independents Group
RAJAR
Most listened to programmes
















Television in the UK







Principal
channels
(List)




BBC



BBC One
BBC Two
BBC Four
BBC News
BBC Parliament
CBBC
CBeebies





ITV



ITV
ITV2
ITV3
ITV4
CITV
ITV Encore
ITVBe
ITV Box Office





Ch 4



Channel 4
E4
Film4
More4
4seven





Ch 5



Channel 5
5Prime
5Spike
5Star
5USA





Sky



Challenge
Pick
Real Lives
Sky One
Sky Two
Sky Arts
Sky Atlantic
Sky Cinema
Sky Living
Sky News
Sky Sports
Sky Sports F1
Sky Sports News





UKTV



Alibi
Dave
Drama
Eden
Gold
Good Food
Home
Really
W
Yesterday





Sony Pictures Television



Chart Show TV
Chart Show Hits
Movies4Men
Pop
Pop Max
Starz TV
Sony Channel
Sony Movie Channel
Scuzz
Tiny Pop
True Crime
True Entertainment
True Movies
truTV
The Vault








Services
&
platforms



All 4

Film4oD


analogue

analogue terrestrial (defunct)


BBC iPlayer

BBC Three


BBC Store
TalkTalk TV Store
BT TV
cable
digital

digital terrestrial
List of channels


Freesat

Freesat+


Freeview
high-definition

List of channels


ITV

ITV Hub, STV Player


local television
My5
Now TV
Real Digital
Restricted Service Licence
satellite

List of channels


Sky

Freesat from Sky
On Demand
Sky+
Sky+ HD


TalkTalk TV
Top Up TV
TVPlayer
Virgin Media

FilmFlex
TiVo
V+


YouView
Zattoo





Studios




Current



BBC Elstree Centre
BBC Pacific Quay
The Bottle Yard Studios
Broadcasting House
Broadcasting House, Belfast
Broadcasting House, Bristol
Broadcasting House, Cardiff
Elstree Studios (Shenley Road)
Gas Street Studios
The Leeds Studios
The London Studios
The Maidstone Studios
Mailbox Birmingham
MediaCityUK
Osterley Television Centre
Roath Lock
Television Centre, London





Defunct



British and Dominions Imperial Studios
Fountain Studios
Gate Studios
Granada Studios
MGM-British Studios
Pebble Mill Studios
Teddington Studios
Television Centre, Newcastle upon Tyne
Television Centre, Southampton
Upper Boat Studios








Other



Defunct channels
Edinburgh International Television Festival
History

List of years


List of channels
Student television
Viewing statistics

Most-watched broadcasts


















Companies and organisations







Companies




Major
companies



Archant
Ascential
Bauer Radio
BBC
Bloomsbury Publishing
BT Group
Channel Four Television Corporation
Daily Mail and General Trust
Dentsu Aegis Network
Economist Group
EMI Music Publishing
Endemol Shine UK
Global Group
Guardian Media Group
Haymarket Media Group
Informa
ITN
ITV plc
Johnston Press
Mecom Group
News UK
Newsquest
Northern & Shell
Now TV Limited
Origin Broadband
Pearson PLC
Press Holdings
RELX Group
Reuters
Sky UK Limited
Sky plc
STV Group
Syco
TalkTalk Group
Time Inc. UK
Trinity Mirror
UBM plc
Virgin Media
Wireless Group





Other resources



Arqiva
List of largest UK book publishers








Government
& regulatory
bodies



Advertising Standards Authority
BBC Trust
British Board of Film Classification
British Film Institute
Culture, Media, and Sport Select Committee
Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport
Independent Press Standards Organisation
Ofcom
Press Recognition Panel
S4C Authority





Industry
& trades
bodies



British Academy of Film and Television Arts
British Phonographic Industry
Broadcasting, Entertainment, Cinematograph and Theatre Union
Clearcast
Digital TV Group
Digital UK
Equity
Federation Against Copyright Theft
National Union of Journalists
The Publishers Association
Royal Television Society
United Kingdom Independent Broadcasting





Other



BBC Academy
National Film and Television School
National Science and Media Museum
















Regional and student media







Regional media



Media in England

Birmingham
London
Manchester


Media in Scotland

Aberdeen
Dundee
Glasgow


Media in Wales

Cardiff







Student media



Student television














 Category











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=News_UK&oldid=812618327"					Categories: News UK1981 establishments in the United KingdomCompanies based in LondonCompanies established in 1981Newspaper companies of the United KingdomNews Corporation subsidiariesHidden categories: Use British English from February 2013Use dmy dates from February 2013Pages using deprecated image syntaxCommons category without a link on WikidataOpenCorporates groupings