This article is about the media company that existed from 1979 to 2013. For the company split off in 2013, see News Corp.

News Corporation


News Corporation logo




1211 Avenue of the Americas: Headquarters of News Corporation




Former type

Public


Industry
Mass media


Fate
Corporate spin-off


Successor
21st Century Fox
News Corp


Founded
1979; 39 years ago (1979)
Adelaide, Australia[1][2]
November 12, 2004 (2004-11-12)
Delaware, U.S.[3]


Founder
Rupert Murdoch


Defunct
June 28, 2013 (2013-06-28)


Headquarters
New York City, New York, United States



Area served

Worldwide



Key people

Rupert Murdoch
(Chairman and CEO)
Chase Carey
(President & COO)


Products
Cable network programming, Filmed entertainment, Television, direct-broadcast satellite television, Publishing, and other


Revenue
 US$ 33.706 billion (2012)[4]



Operating income

 US$ 2.212 billion (2012)[4]



Net income

 US$ 1.179 billion (2012)[4]


Total assets
 US$ 50.944 billion (2013)[5]
 US$ 56.663 billion (2012)[6]


Total equity
 US$ 24.684 billion (2012)[4]



Number of employees

47,650 (2012)[4]


Subsidiaries
List of subsidiaries:
News Corp and 21st Century Fox
Fox Filmed Entertainment


Website
www.newscorp.com


The original News Corporation or News Corp. was an American multinational mass media corporation headquartered in New York City. It was the world's fourth-largest media group in 2014 in terms of revenue.[7][8][9][10][11] Board members include prominent former Spanish prime minister José María Aznar.[12]
News Corporation was a publicly traded company listed on the NASDAQ. Formerly incorporated in Adelaide, South Australia, the company was re-incorporated under Delaware General Corporation Law after a majority of shareholders approved the move on 12 November 2004. News Corporation was headquartered at 1211 Avenue of the Americas, New York, in the newer 1960s–1970s corridor of the Rockefeller Center complex.
On 28 June 2012, after concerns from shareholders in response to its recent scandals and to "unlock even greater long-term shareholder value", founder Rupert Murdoch announced that News Corporation's assets would be split into two publicly traded companies like [13], one oriented towards media, and the other towards publishing. The Corporate spin-off formally took place on 28 June 2013; where the present News Corp. was renamed 21st Century Fox and consists primarily of media outlets, while a new News Corp was formed to take on the publishing and Australian broadcasting assets.
Its major holdings at the time of the split were News Limited (a group of newspaper publishers in Murdoch's native Australia), News International (a newspaper publisher in the United Kingdom, whose properties include The Times, The Sun, and the now-defunct News of the World—which was the subject of a phone hacking scandal that led to its closure in July 2011), Dow Jones & Company (an American publisher of financial news outlets, including The Wall Street Journal), the book publisher HarperCollins, and the Fox Entertainment Group (owners of the 20th Century Fox film studio and the Fox Broadcasting Company—one of the United States' major television networks).



Contents


1 History

1.1 Moving into the United States
1.2 Expansion and consolidation
1.3 Development since 2000
1.4 Scandals
1.5 Split


2 Shareholders
3 Annual conference
4 Political donations
5 Corporate governance
6 Office of the chairman
7 Final holdings

7.1 Books
7.2 Newspapers
7.3 Magazines
7.4 Music and radio
7.5 Sport
7.6 Studios
7.7 TV

7.7.1 Broadcast
7.7.2 Satellite television
7.7.3 Cable


7.8 Internet
7.9 Other assets


8 See also
9 References
10 External links



History[edit]
News Corp was created in 1979 by Rupert Murdoch as a holding company for News Limited. News Limited was created in 1923 in Adelaide; subsequently the controlling interest was bought by The Herald and Weekly Times. In 1949, Sir Keith Murdoch took control of The Adelaide News. When he died in 1952, his son Rupert inherited a controlling interest in an Adelaide afternoon tabloid, The News. News Limited operates today as News Corporation's Australian brand, The Australian operating out of Surry Hills, in Sydney.
Moving into the United States[edit]
News Ltd. made its first acquisition in the United States in 1973, when it purchased the San Antonio Express-News. Soon afterwards it founded the National Star, a supermarket tabloid, and in 1976 it purchased the New York Post.
In 1981, News Corp bought two eights of the movie studio 20th Century Fox, buying the other half in 1984. In 1985, News Corp announced it was buying the Metromedia group of stations, setting the stage for the launch of a fourth U.S. commercial broadcasting television network. On 4 September 1985, Murdoch became a naturalized citizen to satisfy the legal requirement that only United States citizens could own American television stations. In 1986, the Metromedia deal closed, and the Fox Broadcasting Company was launched. This network, known on-screen as "Fox", can now be picked up in over 96% of U.S. households.
Expansion and consolidation[edit]
In 1986 and 1987, News Corp (through subsidiary News International) moved to adjust the production process of its British newspapers, over which the printing unions had long maintained a highly restrictive grip.[14] A number of senior Australian media moguls were brought into Murdoch's powerhouse, including John Dux, who was managing director of the South China Morning Post. This led to a confrontation with the printing unions National Graphical Association and Society of Graphical and Allied Trades. The move of News International's London operation to Wapping in the East End resulted in nightly battles outside the new plant. Delivery vans and depots were frequently and violently attacked.[14] Ultimately the unions capitulated.[citation needed]
By 1992, News Corp had gotten huge[clarification needed] debts, which forced it to sell many of the American magazine interests it had acquired in the mid-1980s to K-III Communications, as well spinning off long-held Australian magazines interests as Pacific Magazines. Much of this debt came from its stake in the Sky Television satellite network in the UK, which incurred massive losses in its early years of operation, which (like many of its business interests) was heavily subsidised with profits from its other holdings until it was able to force[citation needed] rival satellite operator BSB to accept a merger on its terms in 1990. (The merged company, BSkyB, has dominated the British pay-TV market since.)
In 1993, News Corp acquired a 63.6% stake of the Hong Kong-based STAR TV satellite network for over $500 million, followed by the purchase of the remaining 36.4% in July 1995.[15][16] Murdoch declared that:[17]

"(Telecommunications) have proved an unambiguous threat to totalitarian regimes everywhere ... satellite broadcasting makes it possible for information-hungry residents of many closed societies to bypass state-controlled television channels."

In 1995, the Fox network became the object of scrutiny from the FCC when it was alleged that its Australian base made Murdoch's ownership of Fox illegal. The FCC, however, ruled in Murdoch's favour, stating that his ownership of Fox was in the public's best interests. It was also noted that the stations themselves were owned by a separate company whose chief shareholder was a U.S. citizen, Murdoch, although nearly all of the stations' equity was controlled by News Corp. In the same year, News Corp announced a deal with MCI Communications to develop a major news website as well as funding a conservative news magazine, The Weekly Standard. In the same year, News Corp launched the Foxtel pay television network in Australia in a partnership with Telstra and Publishing and Broadcasting Limited.
In 1996, Fox established the Fox News Channel, a 24-hour cable news station to compete against Ted Turner's rival channel CNN.
In 1999, News Corp significantly expanded its music holdings in Australia by acquiring the controlling share in a leading Australian-based label, Michael Gudinski's Mushroom Records, merging it with already held Festival Records to create Festival Mushroom Records (FMR). Both Festival and FMR were managed by Rupert Murdoch's son James Murdoch for several years.
Also mid 1999, The Economist reported that News Corp paid comparatively lower taxes and Newscorp Investments specifically had made £11.4 billion ($20.1 billion) in profits over the previous 11 years but had not paid net corporation tax. It also reported that after an examination of the available accounts, Newscorp could normally have been expected to pay corporate tax of approximately $350 million. The article explained that in practice, the corporation's complex structure, international scope and use of offshore tax havens allowed News Corporation to pay minimal[clarification needed] taxes.[18][19]
Development since 2000[edit]
In late 2003, News Corp acquired a 34% stake in DirecTV Group (formerly Hughes Electronics), operator of the largest American satellite TV system, from General Motors for US $6 billion. DirecTV was sold to Liberty Media in 2008 in exchange for its holding in News International.
In January 2005, shortly after reincorporation in the United States, News Corporation announced that it was buying out Fox Entertainment Group.[20] The manoeuvre delisted Fox from the New York Stock Exchange; Fox traded on the NYSE under the ticker FOX.[21]
In July 2005, in one of the company's first major Internet purchases, News Corporation purchased the social networking website Myspace for $580 million.[22][23] News Corporation had beat out Viacom by offering a higher price for the website,[24] and the purchase was seen as a good investment at the time.[24] Of the $580 million purchase price, approximately $327 million has been attributed to the value of Myspace according to the financial adviser fairness opinion.[25] Within a year, Myspace had tripled in value from its purchase price.[24]
In February 2007, Murdoch announced at the McGraw-Hill Media Summit that Fox would launch a new business news channel later in the year, which would compete directly against rival network CNBC. Murdoch explained that the channel would be more "business-friendly" than CNBC, because he felt that they "leap on every scandal, or what they think is a scandal."[26] In July 2007, News Corp. reached a deal to acquire Dow Jones & Company, owners of The Wall Street Journal, of $5 billion for [27].[28] Despite CNBC already having a contract with Dow Jones to provide content and services to the network, Fox officially launched the Fox Business Channel on 15 October 2007. Alexis Glick, the network's original morning show host and vice president of business news, indicated that its lawyers had reviewed the details of Dow Jones' contract with CNBC, but noted that it would still "actively use" other Dow Jones properties.[29][30]
In 2009, News Corp established NewsCore, a global wire service set up to provide news stories to all of News Corp's journalistic outlets.[31]
In 2010, due to the Fijian government's requirement that the country's media outlet must be 90% owned by Fiji Nationals, News Corporation sold 90% of their stake in their Fijian newspapers (Fiji Times, Nai Lalakai, and Shanti Dut) to Motibhai Group of Companies.[32]
In late February 2011, News Corp officially put the now-struggling Myspace up for sale, which was estimated to be worth $50–200 million.[33] Losses from the last quarter of 2010 were $156 million, over double of the previous year, which dragged down the otherwise strong results of parent News Corp. Its struggles were attributed to the growth of the competing social network Facebook.[34][35] The deadline for bids, 31 May 2011, passed without any above the reserve price of $100 million being submitted.[36] The rapid deterioration in Myspace's business during the most recent quarter had deterred many potent suitors.[34] Later in June, Specific Media and pop singer Justin Timberlake bought the site for $35 million, which CNN reported noted was "far less than the $580 million News Corp. paid for Myspace in 2005."[37] Murdoch went on to call the Myspace purchase a "huge mistake".[38]
On 13 July 2011, Rupert Murdoch announced that the company would withdraw its takeover bid for BSkyB due to concerns relating to the News of the World scandal.[39] News Corporation already owned, and continues to own, 39.1% of BSkyB.
On 6 June 2012, News Corporation announced that it would buy out ESPN Inc.'s stake in ESPN Star Sports to gain full control over the Asian sports network.[40] In January 2013, News Corp. attained 54.5% majority control of Sky Deutschland.[41]
On 4 February 2013, News Corporation announced the sale of IGN and its related properties to the publishing company Ziff Davis. News Corp. had planned to spin off IGN as an independent company, but failed to do so.[42][43]
Scandals[edit]
Main article: 2011 News Corporation scandals
In July 2011, News Corp closed down the News of the World newspaper in the United Kingdom due to allegations of phone hackings. The allegations include trying to access former Prime Minister Gordon Brown's voice mail, and obtain information from his bank accounts, family's medical records, and private legal files. Allegations of hacking have also been brought up in relation to former Prime Minister Tony Blair, and the Royal Family.[44] Other allegations put out by The Guardian newspaper include the exploitation, with intent to gain access to or use private information, of a list of 4,332 names or partial names, 2,987 mobile phone numbers, 30 audio tapes of varying length and 91 PIN codes, of a kind required to access the voicemail of the minority of targets who change the factory settings on their mobile phones.[45] The names are said to include those of British victims of 11 September 2001 terror attacks, family members of victims of the "7/7" bombings on London's transit system, family members of British troops killed overseas, Milly Dowler, a 13-year-old missing British girl who was later found dead, actor Hugh Grant and a lawyer representing the family of Princess Diana's lover at the inquest into her death.[45]
On 13 July 2011, News Corp withdrew its bid to purchase the final 61% stake in BSkyB after pressure from both the Labour and Conservative Parties in Parliament.[46]
Allegations about the violation of ethical standards by the News Corporation subsidiary News of the World have been speculatively applied to News Corporation holdings in the United States. Senator John Rockefeller (D-WV) stated on 12 July 2011 that there should be a government investigation into News Corporation "to ensure that Americans have not had their privacy violated."[47] His statement was echoed on Wednesday[48] by Sen. Robert Menendez (D-NJ), who specifically requested an investigation into 9/11 victims, as well as Sen. Frank Lautenberg (D-NJ) who encouraged an investigation by the Securities and Exchange Commission.[47] On 13 July 2011, Representative Peter King (R-NY) wrote a letter to the FBI requesting an investigation into News Corporation's ethical practices, and on 14 July, the FBI opened a probe into the hacking of 9/11 victims.[49] Les Hinton, chief executive of the media group's Dow Jones, resigned on 15 July, saying, "I have seen hundreds of news reports of both actual and alleged misconduct during the time I was executive chairman of News International and responsible for the company. The pain caused to innocent people is unimaginable. That I was ignorant of what apparently happened is irrelevant and in the circumstances I feel it is proper for me to resign from News Corp, and apologize to those hurt by the actions of the News of the World."[50]
In 2012, following a BBC Panorama report, allegations were made that News Corp subsidiary NDS Group had used hackers to undermine pay TV rivals around the world. Some of the victims of the alleged hacking, such as Austar, were later taken over by News Corp and others such as Ondigital later went bust. NDS had originally been set up to provide security to News Corp's pay TV interests but emails obtained by Fairfax Media revealed they had also pursued a wider agenda by distributing the keys to rival set-top box operators and seeking to obtain phone records of suspected rivals.[51] The emails were from the hard drive of NDS European chief Ray Adams. In 2012, it was also revealed that Australian Federal police were working with UK police to investigate hacking by News Corp.[52]
Split[edit]
Main articles: News Corp and 21st Century Fox




21st Century Fox logo.


On 28 June 2012, Rupert Murdoch announced that, after concerns from shareholders in response to the recent scandals and to "unlock even greater long-term shareholder value", News Corporation's assets would be split into two publicly traded companies, one oriented towards media, and the other towards publishing. News Corp's publishing operations were spun out into a new News Corporation with Robert James Thomson, editor of The Wall Street Journal, as CEO. The present News Corporation, which retains most of its media properties (such as the Fox Entertainment Group and 20th Century Fox) and Murdoch as CEO, was renamed 21st Century Fox. Murdoch remains chairman for both companies.[53][54][55]




News Corp's post-split logo, based on Rupert Murdoch's personal handwriting.[56]


Shareholders approved the split on 11 June 2013. On 19 June 2013, preliminary trading for the new News Corp on the Australian Securities Exchange commenced in preparation for the formal split that was finalized on 28 June 2013. Shareholders received one share of New News Corp for every four shares they owned of the old News Corp. The two new companies began trading on the NASDAQ on 1 July 2013.[57][58][59] The Wolverine (2013) became the first film to feature the 20th Century Fox logo without the News Corporation byline during the logo, and has been featured in Fox films since then.
Shareholders[edit]

In August 2005, the Murdoch family owned only about 29% of the company of which as of June 2013 had been diluted to around 17%. However, nearly all of these shares were voting shares which currently stand at 39% of the total voting shares, and Rupert Murdoch retained effective control of the company. Nonetheless, John Malone of Liberty Media had built up a large stake, with about half of the shares being voting shares. Therefore, in November 2006, News Corporation announced its intention to transfer its 38.5% interest in DirecTV Group to John Malone's Liberty Media; in return it bought back Liberty's 16.3% stake in News Corp., giving Murdoch tighter control of the latter firm.[60] Murdoch sold 17.5 million class A shares in December 2007.[61]
Another major stakeholder has been Al-Waleed bin Talal, of the Saudi Royal Family. In 1997, Time reported that Al-Waleed owned about five percent of News Corporation.[62] In 2010, Alwaleed's stake in News Corp. was about 7 percent, amounting to $3 billion. In 2013, News Corp. had a $175 million (19 percent) investment in Al-Waleed's Rotana Group, the Arab world's largest entertainment company.[63] Sold all shares which was already at 6% in November 2017[64]

Annual conference[edit]
News Corporation organises an annual management conference, discussing media issues related to geopolitics. Attendees include News Corporation executives, senior journalists, politicians and celebrities. Previous events were in Cancún, Mexico, and the Hayman Island off the coast of Australia. The events are private and secretive, there are no records available for the agenda or talks given at the conferences, and no uninvited journalists are permitted access.[65]
The 2006 event in Pebble Beach, California was led by Rupert Murdoch. According to a copy of the agenda leaked to the Los Angeles Times and other media accounts,[66] issues discussed related from Europe to broadcasting and new media, terrorism to the national policy.[67] The event included speeches from Murdoch, Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger, former British Prime Minister Tony Blair, Bono, Al Gore, Senator John McCain and Bill Clinton while Israel's President, Shimon Peres, appeared on a panel named "Islam and the West". Other notable attendees included Newt Gingrich and Nicole Kidman.
Political donations[edit]
In anticipation of US midterm elections, News Corp. donated $1 million to the Republican Governors Association in June 2010. The move was criticised by Democrats, who said this was evidence of News Corp's media outlets conservative leanings (see Fox News Channel controversies). The Democratic Governors Association also criticised the donation and demanded more transparency in the reporting by News Corp companies. DGA head Nathan Daschle wrote to the chairman of News Corp company Fox News, Roger Ailes: "In the interest of some fairness and balance, I request that you add a formal disclaimer to your coverage any time any of your programs covers governors or gubernatorial races between now and election day."[68]
Around the same time, News Corp. also donated $1 million to the United States Chamber of Commerce. The Chamber aggressively supported the Republican effort to retake Congress in 2010.[69] This donation and an earlier $1 million contribution that News Corp. made to the Republican Governor's Association led media critics to question whether the company had crossed an ethical line for a media company.[69]
Corporate governance[edit]




Rupert Murdoch


The company's Board of Directors consists of 16 individuals:

Rupert Murdoch (Chairman of the Board and Chief Executive Officer)
José María Aznar (Former Prime Minister of Spain)
Natalie Bancroft (Director)
Peter Barnes
James W. Breyer
Chase Carey (President and Chief Operating Officer)
Elaine Chao
David F. DeVoe (Chief Financial Officer)
Viet Dinh
Sir Roderick Ian Eddington
Joel I. Klein (Executive Vice President)
James Murdoch (Chairman & Chief Executive Officer, Europe & Asia)
Lachlan Murdoch
Álvaro Uribe (Former President of Colombia)
Stanley S. Shuman (Director Emeritus)
Arthur M. Siskind (Director Emeritus, Senior Advisor to the Chairman)

Office of the chairman[edit]

Rupert Murdoch (Chairman and CEO)
Chase Carey (President, Chief Operating Officer & Deputy Chairman)
David DeVoe (Chief Financial Officer)
James Murdoch (Deputy Chief Operating Officer; Chairman and CEO, International)
Roger Ailes (Chairman, Fox Television Stations Group)
Daniel Suárez García (Chairman and CEO, Latin America)

Final holdings[edit]






This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (February 2013) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



List of companies and businesses owned by News Corporation prior to its formal split on 28 June 2013. All media and broadcasting assets, except media assets owned by News Limited, now belong to 21st Century Fox, its legal successor. Meanwhile, newspapers and other publishing assets, including media assets under News Limited, were spun off as a new News Corp.
Books[edit]

HarperCollins book publishing company[70]

HarperCollins India


Zondervan Christian book publisher

Inspirio – religious gift production.



Newspapers[edit]

Australia published by News Limited.

The Australian (Nationwide)
Community Media Group (16 QLD & NSW suburban/regional titles)
Cumberland-Courier Newspapers (23 suburban/commuter titles)
The Courier-Mail (Queensland)
The Sunday Mail (Queensland)
The Cairns Post (Cairns, Queensland)
The Gold Coast Bulletin (Gold Coast, Queensland)
The Townsville Bulletin (Townsville, Queensland)
The Daily Telegraph (New South Wales)
The Sunday Telegraph (New South Wales)
Herald Sun (Victoria)
Sunday Herald Sun (Victoria)
The Weekly Times (Victoria)
Leader Newspapers (33 suburban Melbourne titles)
MX (Sydney, Melbourne and Brisbane CBD)
The Geelong Advertiser (Geelong, Victoria)
The Advertiser (South Australia)
The Sunday Mail (South Australia)
Messenger Newspapers (11 suburban Adelaide, SA titles)
The Sunday Times (Western Australia)
The Mercury (Tasmania)
Quest Newspapers (19 suburban Brisbane, QLD titles)
The Sunday Tasmanian (Tasmania)
Northern Territory News (Northern Territory)
The Sunday Territorian (Northern Territory)
The Tablelands Advertiser (Atherton Tablelands and the Far North, Queensland)


Fiji

Fiji Times (National) (10%)
Nai Lalakai (10%)
Shanti Dut (10%)


Papua New Guinea

Papua New Guinea Post-Courier (National) (62.5%)


UK and Ireland newspapers, published by subsidiaries of News International Ltd.

News Group Newspapers Ltd.

The Sun (published in Scotland as The Scottish Sun and in Ireland as The Irish Sun)

The Sun on Sunday




Times Newspapers Ltd.

The Sunday Times
The Times
The Times Literary Supplement




US newspapers and magazines

The New York Post

Community Newspaper Group

The Brooklyn Paper
Bronx Times-Reporter
Brooklyn Courier-Life
TimesLedger Newspapers




Dow Jones & Company

Consumer Media Group

The Wall Street Journal
Wall Street Journal Europe
Wall Street Journal Asia
Barron's – weekly financial markets magazine.
Marketwatch – Financial news and information website.
Far Eastern Economic Review


Enterprise Media Group

Dow Jones Newswires – global, real-time news and information provider.
Factiva – provides business news and information together with content delivery tools and services.
Dow Jones Indexes – stock market indexes and indicators, including the Dow Jones Industrial Average.
Dow Jones Financial Information Services – produces databases, electronic media, newsletters, conferences, directories, and other information services on specialised markets and industry sectors.
Betten Financial News – leading Dutch language financial and economic news service.


Local Media Group

Ottaway Community Newspapers – 8 daily and 15 weekly regional newspapers.


STOXX (33%)- joint venture with Deutsche Boerse and SWG Group for the development and distribution of Dow Jones STOXX indices.
Vedomosti (33%) – Russia's leading financial newspaper (joint venture with Financial Times and Independent Media).
SmartMoney


The Timesledger Newspapers of Queens, New York:

Bayside Times, Whitestone Times, Flushing Times, Little Neck Ledger, Jamaica Times, Astoria Times, Forest Hills Ledger


The Courier-Life Newspapers in Brooklyn
The Brooklyn Paper
Caribbean Life
Flatbush Jewish Journal



Magazines[edit]

U.S.A.

SmartSource Magazine (weekly Sunday newspaper coupon insert)


Australian

Alpha Magazine
Australian Country Style
Australian Golf Digest
Australian Good Taste
Big League
BCME
Delicious
Donna Hay
Fast Fours
GQ (Australia)
Gardening Australia
InsideOut (Aust)
Lifestyle Pools
Live to Ride
Notebook
Overlander 4WD
Modern Boating
Modern Fishing
Parents
Pure Health
Super Food Ideas
Truck Australia
Truckin' Life
twowheels
twowheels scooter
Vogue (Australia)
Vogue Entertaining & Travel
Vogue Living


Inside Out (UK Based Magazine)

Music and radio[edit]

Fox Film Music Group
Fox News Radio
Wireless Group Plc (acquired in June 2016, encompassing UK & Ireland radio stations Virgin Radio, TalkSport, U105 Belfast, LMFM (Louth-Meath), Q102 Dublin, FM104, 96FM Cork)

Sport[edit]

Majority ownership of the Brisbane Broncos (68.9%) and full ownership of the Melbourne Storm rugby league team.
Colorado Rockies (15%)

Studios[edit]

Fox Filmed Entertainment: 20th Century Fox's parent company
20th Century Fox: a film production/distribution company

Fox Searchlight Pictures – specialised films.
Fox 2000 Pictures – general audience feature films.


20th Century Fox Television – primetime television programming.

20th Television – television distribution (syndication).
Fox 21 – low scripted/budgeted television production company.
Fox Television Animation - animation production company.
Fox Television Studios (productions)- market specific programming e.g. COPS and network television company.

Fox Television Studios International
Fox World Productions
Fox World Australia
Fox TV Studios France
Fox TV Studios India


Natural History New Zealand – natural world documentaries, non-fiction programming.


Fox Faith – Promotion and distribution of Christian and related "family friendly" movies on DVD and some theatrical release.
Fox Studios Australia, Sydney, New South Wales
Blue Sky Studios – production of CGI films e.g. Ice Age.
Fox Entertainment Group
New Regency Productions (20%) – general audience feature films.
Regency Enterprises (20%) – parent company of New Regency Productions (50%).
FOX Star Studios fully owned -the Studio for Indian Movie's Production and Distribution.

TV[edit]
News Corp agreed to sell eight of its television stations to Oak Hill Capital Partners for approximately $1.1 billion as of 22 December 2007. The stations are US Fox affiliates.[71] These stations, along with those already acquired by Oak Hill that were formerly owned by The New York Times Company, formed the nucleus of Oak Hill's Local TV LLC division.
Broadcast[edit]

Fox Broadcasting Company (Fox), a US broadcast television network
MyNetworkTV, a US broadcast television network
Fox Television Stations, a group of owned and operated Fox television stations
Saeta TV Channel 10, channel of Uruguay
ITV plc (7.5%), a British broadcast television network and the UK's largest advertising revenue based broadcaster
News Corp Europe

bTV, a broadcast television network in Bulgaria. They sold this to CME in February 2010.
B1 TV (12,5%), a broadcast television network in Romania, in partnership with Ismar International NVkkkk
Fox Televizija, a broadcast television network in Serbia (49%). They sold this to Antenna Group in January 2010
Fox Turkey, a Turkish terrestrial channel (56,5%) (formerly TGRT)
Imedi Media Holding (100%), a Georgian radio and TV broadcaster.

Imedi Television
Radio Imedi


Israel 10 (9%), a terrestrial channel in Israel.
LNT (100%), a terrestrial channel in Latvia
TV5 Riga (100%), a terrestrial channel in Latvia
Cielo (100%), a free channel in Italy


Prime Television New Zealand – commercial TV station, interest held through stake in SKY Network Television
Nine Network, an Australian television network that was formerly owned by this company's founder from 1956 to 1970.

Satellite television[edit]

BSkyB, United Kingdom & Ireland (39.1% holding). In practice, a controlling interest.
Sky Network Television, New Zealand (44%)
Sky Italia (100%), Italy's largest pay TV service (previously owning part of Stream TV)
Sky Deutschland (54.5%), Germany's largest pay TV provider
Tata Sky (30%), an Indian DirectToHome TeleVision Service Provider. (in partnership with Tata Group (70%))
Foxtel (25%), Australia, a joint venture with Telstra (50%) and Consolidated Media Holdings (25%)
FOX Italy, Italian Broadcast and Production Company (with 2 HDTV)
Star TV Channels (Satellite TeleVision Asian Region), an Asian satellite TV service having 300 million viewers in 53 countries, mainly in India, China & other Asian countries
Phoenix Television (17.6%), satellite TV network with landing rights in Hong Kong, and select provinces on Mainland China.

Cable[edit]
Cable TV channels owned (in whole or part) and operated by News Corporation include:

Fox Business Network, a business news channel.
Meiji (TV Channel), a channel TV Shows and Comedy and Kids and Movies and Drama
Fox Classics, a channel airing classic TV shows and movies
Fox Movie Channel, an all-movie channel that airs commercial-free movies from 20th Century Fox's film library
Fox News Channel, a 24-hour news and opinion channel
Fox Sports Networks, a chain of US regional cable news television networks broadcasting local sporting events linked together by national sports news programming. Local channels include "Fox Sports Southwest", "Fox Sports Detroit", etc. (some affiliates are owned by Cablevision.)

SportSouth, a regional sports network in the United States, with its headquarters in Atlanta, and affiliate of Fox Sports Net.
Sun Sports a regional sports network in the United States, with its headquarters in Miami, Florida, and affiliate of Fox Sports Net.


Fox College Sports, a college sports network consisting of three regionally aligned channels, mostly with archived Fox Sports Net programmes but also some live and original content.
Fox Sports International

Fox Soccer Channel, a United States digital cable and satellite network specialising mainly in soccer.
Fox Soccer Plus, a sister network to FSC, but including coverage of other sports, most notably rugby. Launched in 2010 after News Corporation picked up many of the broadcast rights abandoned by Setanta Sports when it stopped broadcasting in the U.S.
Fox Pan American Sports (37.9%) – joint venture with Hicks, Muse, and Tate & Furst.

Fox Sports en Español (50%), a Spanish-language North American cable sports network; its sports line-up is tailored to appeal to a Latin American audience.
Fox Sports en Latinoamérica, a Latin American satellite and cable sports network.




FX Networks, a cable network broadcasting reruns of programming previously shown on other channels, but recently creating its own programming, including the Emmy Award-winning programmes The Shield and Damages.
SPEED
FUEL TV
Big Ten Network, cable and satellite channel dedicated to The Big Ten Conference, launched August 2007 (49%)
National Geographic Channel (joint venture with National Geographic Society) 67%
National Geographic Channel International 75%
Nat Geo Mundo (joint venture with National Geographic Society)
Nat Geo Wild (joint venture with National Geographic Society)
YES Network (49%),[72] regional cable sports network; broadcasts New York Yankees and Brooklyn Nets games, among other teams.
Fox International Channels, domestic cable channels offering different formats of Fox programming in over thirty countries worldwide.

Fox
Fox Life
Fox Life HD
Fox Crime
FX
Fox Horror
Fox Movies
Fox Sports
Speed Channel
National Geographic Channel
National Geographic Channel HD
National Geographic Wild
National Geographic Adventure
National Geographic Music
National Geographic Junior
Cult
Next:HD
Voyage
Real Estate TV
BabyTV
Fox Toma 1 – Spanish-language television production.
Fox Telecolombia – Spanish-language television production. (51%)
Utarget.Fox – European and Latin American online ad company, plus now handles TV ad sales.


Central & South America

Fox Latin American Channels – channels available in over 17 countries in Latin America

National Geographic Channel
National Geographic Channel HD
National Geographic Wild
Nat Geo Music
Universal Channel
Universal HD
Fox Channel
Fox HD
FX
Fox Life
Fox Sports
Speed Channel
Baby TV
Utilisima
Fox One-Stop Media – advertising sales for company owned and third party channels in Latin America


LAPTV (60%) (Latin American Pay Television) operates 8 cable movie channels throughout South America excluding Brazil.
Telecine (12.5%) operates 5 cable movie channels in Brazil.


Australia

Premier Media Group (50%)

Fox Sports 1
Fox Sports 2
Fox Sports 3
SPEED
FoxSportsNews
Fuel TV Australia


Premium Movie Partnership (20%) – movie channels, a joint venture between 20th Century Fox, Sony, NBCUniversal, Viacom and Liberty Media



PLATFORMS

India

Hathway Cable & Datacom (22.2%), India's 2nd largest cable network through 7 cities including Bangalore, Chennai, Delhi, Mumbai & Pune


Taiwan

Total TV (20%), a pay TV platform with JV partner KOO's Group majority owner (80%). News Corp also has a 20% interest in the KOO's Group directly.



Internet[edit]

News Corp. Digital Media

Foxsports.com – website with sports news, scores, statistics, video and fantasy sports
Hulu (27%) – online video streaming site in partnership with NBCUniversal and The Walt Disney Company.
Flektor – provides Web-based tools for photo and video editing and mashups.
Slingshot Labs – web development incubator (Includes the sites DailyFill).
Strategic Data Corp – interactive advertising company which develops technology to deliver targeted internet advertising.
Scout.com[73]
WhatIfSports.com – sports simulation and prediction website. Also provides fantasy-style sports games to play.


Indya.com[74] – 'India's no. 1 Entertainment Portal'
ROO Group Inc (5% increasing to 10% with performance targets)
News Digital Media

News.com.au[75] – Australia's most popular news website in 2013 and as of April 2014[76]
CareerOne.com.au[77] (50%) – recruitment advertisement website in partnership with Monster Worldwide.
Carsguide.com.au[78]
in2mobi.com.au[79]
TrueLocal.com.au[80]
Moshtix.com.au[81] – a ticket retailer
Learning Seat[82]
Wego[83] News owns minority stake in Wego.com
Weair[84] News owns minority stake in weair.com
Netus (75%) – investment co. in online properties.


Move, Inc (80%)

realtor.com - United States online real estate portal with up to date and accurate listings[85]
move.com
listhub.com
Doorsteps
Tigerlead
Moving.com
Top Producer
Reesio
Relocation.com
SeniorHousingNet.com


REA Group (60.7%)

Realestate.com.au
Business Services s.r.l.[86] Access our internationalization service opens to endless proposals and possibilities of rooting in markets around the world.
Casa.it[87] (69.4%), Sky Italia also holds a 30.6% share
atHome group, operator of leading realestate websites in Luxembourg, France, Belgium and Germany.

Altowin (51%), provider of office management tools for realestate agents in Belgium.


Propertyfinder.com[88] (50%), News International holds the remaining 50%

Sherlock Publications, owner of hotproperty.co.uk portal and magazine titles 'Hot Property', 'Renting' and 'Overseas'
ukpropertyshop.co.uk, most comprehensive UK estate agent directory.


PropertyLook, property websites in Australia and New Zealand.
HomeSite.com.au[89] home renovation and improvement website.
Square Foot Limited, Hong Kong's largest English Language property magazine and website

Primedia – Holding co. of Inside DB, a Hong Kong lifestyle magazine.




TadpoleNet Media[90] (10%) Hosts of ArmySailor.com[91]
New Zealand

Fatso – leading online DVD subscription service (ownership through stake in Sky Network Television).
Fox Networks – one of the largest international ad networks.
Expedient InfoMedia[92] blog network.


Storyful[93]
Unruly[94]

Other assets[edit]

Broadsystem Ltd (UK) – Telephony provider for media companies, bought in 1991
Broadsystem Australia (Australia)
Broadsystem Ventures (UK) – provider of cheap-rate telephone calls, particularly for customers of Sky Television. Bought outright in 1999.
Jamba! – Mobile entertainment, mobile handsets Personalisation/games.
News Outdoor Group – Largest outdoor advertising company in Eastern Europe with over 70,000 ads including billboards and bus shelters, operating in Bulgaria, Czech Republic, Hungary, India, Israel, Poland, Romania, Russia (96 cities), Turkey and Ukraine.

Maximedia Israel (67%)
Mosgorreklama (50%) – Russia sign and marketing material manufacturer
Kamera Acikhava Reklamclik (?) – leading outdoor advertising company in Turkey


Australian Associated Press (45%) – real time news service.
STATS, Inc. (50%) – world's leading provider of sporting information and statistical analysis (a JV with Associated Press)
Fox Sports Grill (50%) – Upscale sports bar and restaurant with 7 locations: Scottsdale, Arizona; Irvine, California; Seattle; Plano, Texas; Houston; San Diego; and Atlanta.
Fox Sports Skybox (70%) – Sports fans' Bar & Grill at Staples Center and six airport restaurants.
News America Marketing (US) – (100%) – nation's leading marketing services company, products include a portfolio of in-store, home-delivered and online media under the SmartSource brand.
Rotana (19%) – Largest Arab entertainment company owned by Saudi Prince Al-Waleed bin Talal
The Daily – iPad only newspaper delivered daily.
Making Fun – social game developer for making games for social networking sites, smartphones, tablets and other devices.[95]
Stockpoint

See also[edit]


Companies portal



List of assets owned by News Corporation
List of conglomerates

References[edit]


^ "News Corp investors agree US move". BBC News. 26 October 2004. Retrieved 27 March 2010. 
^ Fabrikant, Geraldine (7 April 2004). "Market Place; News Corp. Plans to Follow Its Chief to the United States". The New York Times. Retrieved 27 March 2010. 
^ "News Corporation". NewsCorp.com. 12 November 2004. Retrieved 13 August 2011. 
^ a b c d e "Financial Statements for News Corporation – Google Finance". Google. Google.com. Retrieved 11 July 2011. 
^ "TWENTY-FIRST CENTURY FOX, INC. 2013 Q2 Quarterly Report Form (10-Q)" (XBRL). United States Securities and Exchange Commission. 7 February 2014. 
^ "TWENTY-FIRST CENTURY FOX, INC. 2012 Annual Report Form (10-K)" (XBRL). United States Securities and Exchange Commission. 19 August 2013. 
^ "Forbes". Forbes. Retrieved 1 April 2015. 
^ "Fortune". CNN. Retrieved 20 May 2010. 
^ "PowerPoint Presentation" (PDF). Retrieved 11 July 2011. 
^ Siklos, Richard (9 February 2009). "Why Disney wants DreamWorks". CNN. Retrieved 20 May 2010. 
^ "News Corporation – Annual Report 2007". Newscorp.com. 30 June 2007. Retrieved 11 July 2011. 
^ Dan Milmo (22 June 2006). "Former Spanish PM to join Murdoch board". London: Guardian Business. Retrieved 2008-01-03. 
^ "Real estate mornington"
^ a b Revolution on Fleet Street, TIME magazine, 21 August 1996.
^ Palmer, Rhonda (27 July 1993). "Murdoch catches rising Star". Variety. 
^ Shenon, Philip (23 August 1993). "THE MEDIA BUSINESS; Star TV Extends Murdoch's Reach". The New York Times. 
^ George Monbiot (22 April 2008). "The most potent weapon wielded by the empires of Murdoch and China | Comment is free". London: The Guardian. Retrieved 11 July 2011. 
^ Rupert Murdoch Laid Bare Archived 17 January 2008 at the Wayback Machine.
^ "Tax free: Rupert Murdoch's zero status". BBC News. 25 March 1999. Retrieved 25 April 2010. 
^ Lazaroff, Leon (11 January 2005). "Murdoch to buy out Fox shares". Chicago Tribune. Retrieved 11 October 2012. 
^ "News Corporation Completes Acquisition of Fox". News Corp. Retrieved 11 October 2012. 
^ Lapinski, Trent (11 September 2006). "MySpace: The Business of Spam 2.0 (Exhaustive Edition)". ValleyWag. Retrieved 13 March 2008. 
^ "News Corp in $580m internet buy". BBC News. 19 July 2005. Retrieved 13 March 2008. 
^ a b c Haden, Jeff (12 January 2011). "MySpace Layoffs Are A Good Reminder how Uncool Rupert Murdock's acquisition of the social media was?". Business.time.com. Retrieved 30 June 2012. 
^ "Internet Entrepreneur & Myspace Founder Brad Greenspan Leads Investment Group Seeking to Take Non-Controlling Stake in Dow Jones Corp" (Press release). PRNewsWire. 20 June 2007. Retrieved 13 March 2008. 
^ Rupert Murdoch Speaks His Mind, Business Week, February 2007.
^ "Real estate mornington"
^ "Murdoch Wins His Bid for Dow Jones". Wall Street Journal. Retrieved 11 May 2013. 
^ Fox Business makes TV debut, Hollywood Reporter, 16 October 2007. Retrieved 10-17-2007. Archived 6 May 2008 at the Wayback Machine.
^ Fox Business Network blazes new trail, USA Today, 14 October 2007. Retrieved 17 October 2007.
^ Rupert Murdoch's News Corp launches global service to link all its outlets, Guardian.co.uk, 7 September 2009. Retrieved 15 September 2010.
^ Staff writers of The Australian (15 September 2010). "News Limited sells Fiji Times to Fijian company Motibhai". The Australian. Retrieved 29 January 2011. 
^ "News Corp taps Allen & Co for MySpace interest – sources". Reuters. 5 February 2011. 
^ a b Vascellaro, Jessica E. (30 June 2011). "News Corp. Selling Myspace to Specific Media". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved 23 October 2011. 
^ Vascellaro, Jessica E.; Adams, Russell (25 February 2011). "Myspace Opens Books to Prospective Buyers". The Wall Street Journal. 
^ Swisher, Kara (3 June 2011). "The Myspace Sweepstakes Drag on–Another Bid Deadline Today As Sale Deadline Looms". All Things D. 
^ Laurie Segall (29 June 2011). "News Corp. sells Myspace to Specific Media". CNN. Retrieved 29 June 2011. 
^ "News Corp.'s Rupert Murdoch calls Myspace buy a 'huge mistake'". Latimesblogs.latimes.com. 21 October 2011. Retrieved 30 June 2012. 
^ Chandrasekhar, Indu; Wardrop, Murray; Trotman, Andy (7 July 2005). "News of the World phone hacking scandal: timeline". London: Telegraph. Retrieved 14 July 2011. 
^ "News Corp to buy out ESPN from ESS, Sawhney to leave". The Hindu. 6 June 2012. 
^ Christoph Steitz & Harro Ten Wolde (14 January 2013). "News Corp to grab control of Sky Deutschland". Reuters. 
^ "News Corp.'s IGN Poised to Sell to J2's Ziff Davis". Wall Street Journal. Retrieved 4 February 2013. 
^ "IGN Entertainment sold by News Corp to publisher Ziff Davis". Digital Spy. Retrieved 4 February 2013. 
^ Nick Davies & David Leigh (11 July 2011). "News International papers targeted Gordon Brown". London: The Guardian. Retrieved 14 July 2011. 
^ a b "Our phone hacking victims list". London: Guardian. 12 July 2011. Retrieved 14 July 2011. 
^ Holton, Kate (13 July 2011). "UPDATE 1-BSkyB investors eye cash after deal collapse". Reuters. Retrieved 14 July 2011. 
^ a b Stelter, Brian (13 July 2011). "News Corp. Newspapers May Face U.S. Inquiry". The New York Times. Retrieved 14 July 2011. 
^ "U.S. lawmakers urge feds to investigate Murdoch media company". 14 July 2011. Retrieved 5 December 2017. 
^ Rashbaum, William (14 July 2011). "F.B.I. Opens Inquiry Into Hacking of 9/11 Victims". The New York Times. Retrieved 14 July 2011. 
^ BBC, BBC. "News Corp's Les Hinton resigns amid phone-hack scandal". BBC. Retrieved 14 July 2011. 
^ Chenoweth, Neil Pay TV Piracy Hits News, The Financial Review, 28 March 2012, online accessed 04/05 2012
^ Tingle, Laura & Daley, Gemma Federal Police Join News Probe, The Financial Review, 28 March 2012, online accessed 04/05 2012
^ "News Corp confirms plan to split the media giant". BBC News. 28 June 2012. Retrieved 28 June 2012. 
^ "News Corp. Will Use Fox Name as Breakup Proceeds". Bloomberg. Retrieved 3 December 2012. 
^ Sweney, Mark (21 December 2012). "News Corp's head of demerged newspaper arm may take home £2.5m". The Guardian. Retrieved 26 December 2012. 
^ Szalai, Georg (28 May 2013). "News Corp. Unveils Post-Split Logo Based on Rupert Murdoch's Handwriting". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved 29 May 2013. 
^ "Rupert Murdoch splits empire but keeps faith in tomorrow's newspapers". The Guardian. 18 June 2013. Retrieved 18 June 2013. 
^ Wall, Matthew (11 June 2013). "News Corp shareholders vote to split company into two". BBC News. Retrieved 11 June 2013. 
^ "'New News Corp' makes muted stock market debut". Retrieved 19 June 2013. 
^ News Corp and Liberty Media, USA Today, 22 December 2006.
^ News Corp Murdoch trust sells shares, The Age, 16 November 2007.
^ Macleod, Scott (1 December 1997). "Prince Alwaleed: The Prince and the Portfolio". Time. Archived from the original on 13 September 2010. Retrieved 24 August 2010. 
^ Gustin, Sam (16 August 2010) "News Corp., the Saudi Prince and the 'Ground Zero Mosque'", Daily Finance (AOL), via Rich, Frank (21 August 2010) "How Fox Betrayed Petraeus",The New York Times, p. WK8 NY ed.. Retrieved 22 August 2010.
^ https://www.theguardian.com/media/2017/nov/08/saudi-prince-sells-21st-century-fox-stake-in-blow-to-murdochs
^ "Murdoch's Pebble Beach shindig". Australian Broadcasting Corporation. Retrieved 1 December 2007. 
^ Brook, Stephen (28 July 2006). "Bono and Blair to join Murdoch on the beach". The Guardian. UK. Retrieved 1 December 2007. 
^ Hinsliff, Gaby (23 July 2006). "The PM, the mogul and the secret agenda". The Guardian. UK. Retrieved 1 December 2007. 
^ Greenslade, Roy (20 August 2010). "Fox News quiet on News Corp's $1m donation to Republicans". The Guardian. London. Retrieved 14 July 2011. 
^ a b "News Corp. gave $1 million to pro-GOP group – Ben Smith". Politico.Com. Retrieved 14 July 2011. 
^ Archipelago, World. "Company Profile HarperCollins Publishers Global". corporate.harpercollins.com. Retrieved 2017-05-04. 
^ Kercheval, Nancy & Danielle Rossingh (22 December 2007). "News Corp. to Sell U.S. TV Stations for $1.1 billion (Update5)". Bloomberg. Retrieved 22 December 2007. 
^ It's Official: News Corp Buys 49% Of YES Network. Deadline.com. Retrieved on 2013-07-21.
^ "Scout.com - College Sports, Football Recruiting, NFL, Fantasy Advice & More Front Page". scout.com. 
^ indya.com
^ "News.com.au". news.com.au. 
^ Monique Perry, Head of Media Industry Group, Nielsen. "Holidays give Boost to Travel and Gaming Sites". nielsen.com. CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link)
^ "Job Search, Upload your Resume, Find employment - CareerOne". careerone.com.au. 
^ "CarsGuide: Cars for Sale - New & Used Car Sales". CarsGuide. 
^ in2mobi.com.au
^ "Local Business Directory Australia". truelocal.com.au. 
^ "Moshtix - Live Entertainment Tickets". moshtix.com.au. 
^ "Online Compliance Training - Learning Seat". learningseat.com.au. 
^ "Cheap Flights, Hotels and Travel Deals - Wego.com". wego.com. 
^ "Cheap Flights booking - Wego.com". weair.com. 
^ Up to date and accurate listings
^ "Compravendita immobili e terreni – Annunci commerciali - businesservices.com". businesservices.com. 
^ "Case e appartamenti in vendita – Annunci immobiliari - Casa.it". casa.it. 
^ "Zoopla – Search Property to Buy, Rent, House Prices, Estate Agents". propertyfinder.com. 
^ homesite.com.au
^ "tadpolenet.com". tadpolenet.com. 
^ armysailor.com
^ "Expedient InfoMedia". expedientinfomedia.com. 
^ "News Corp Makes Social-Media Push". The Wall Street Journal. 20 December 2013. Retrieved 21 December 2013. 
^ "News Corp to Buy Video Platform Unruly for $90 Million". The Wall Street Journal. 16 September 2015. Retrieved 16 September 2015. 
^ "Making Fun debuts as the video-game arm of Rupert Murdoch's empire". VentureBeat. 25 February 2011. Retrieved 11 July 2011. 


External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to News Corporation.



Official website
News Corporation companies grouped at OpenCorporates
Records of political donations at Opensecrets.org
News Corp at Bloomberg Businessweek
News Corp at Forbes
"News Corporation collected news and commentary". The Guardian.  
News Corporation collected news and commentary at The New York Times
Ketupa – News Corporation profile with history and holdings
News Corp. Holdings and Timeline at Columbia Journalism Review, as of 24 December 2010
Nieman Journalism Lab. "News Corp". Encyclo: an Encyclopedia of the Future of News. 







v
t
e


News Corp










v
t
e


Dow Jones & Company



National consumer products



Barron's
Financial News
Heat Street
MarketWatch.com

BigCharts
VSE


Vedomosti
The Wall Street Journal
The Wall Street Journal Asia
The Wall Street Journal Europe
Wall Street Journal Radio Network
WSJ.





Enterprise products



Factiva
S&P Dow Jones Indices (2.6%)















v
t
e


HarperCollins



United States



Avon
Caedmon
Ecco
Harper
Harper Perennial
I Can Read!
William Morrow and Company





United Kingdom



William Collins, Sons
Collins Bartholomew
The Friday Project
Leckie & Leckie





Australia



Angus & Robertson





Christian



BibleGateway.com
Thomas Nelson
Women of Faith
Zondervan





Canada



Harlequin Enterprises















v
t
e


News Corp Australia



Metropolitan
newspapers



The Australian
The Daily Telegraph
Herald Sun / Sunday Herald Sun
The Courier Mail
The Sunday Mail (Brisbane)
The Advertiser
The Sunday Times (Western Australia)
The Mercury
Northern Territory News
mX





Community
newspapers



Leader Community Newspapers (Victoria)
NewsLocal (NSW)
Quest Community Newspapers (Queensland)
Messenger Newspapers (South Australia)
Community Newspaper Group (Western Australia)





Regional
newspapers



Geelong Advertiser
Gold Coast Bulletin
The Cairns Post
Townsville Bulletin





Magazines



Big League
GQ Australia
Vogue Australia





Television
channels




Fox Sports Pty Limited



Fox Sports
Fox Footy
Fox League
Fox Sports News





Australian News Channel



Sky News Live
Sky News Business Channel
Sky News Weather Channel
A-PAC








Professional sports



Brisbane Broncos (68.87%)





Other properties



Australian Associated Press (45%)
Newspoll (polling brand)
Papua New Guinea Post-Courier (63%)
REA Group (61.6%)
Foxtel (50%)















v
t
e


News UK






The Times
The Sunday Times
The Sun
The Times Literary Supplement
Wireless Group












Other assets



Move
New York Post
News America Marketing
News Outdoor Group
Texture (partial)











See also List of assets owned by News Corp, 21st Century Fox, News Corporation












v
t
e


21st Century Fox







Corporate directors



Rupert Murdoch (Executive Co-Chairman)
Lachlan Murdoch (Executive Co-Chairman)
James Murdoch (CEO)
Chase Carey















v
t
e


Fox Entertainment Group



20th Century Fox



20th Century Fox Animation
20th Century Fox Home Entertainment
Fox Star Studios
Blue Sky Studios
Fox Searchlight Pictures
Fox Studios Australia
Fox Music





Fox Television Group



20th Century Fox Television
20th Television
Fox 21 Television Studios
Fox Television Animation
Fox Broadcasting Company





Endemol Shine GroupJV




Endemol



USA

Authentic Entertainment
True Entertainment
51 Minds Entertainment


UK

Tiger Aspect Productions
Zeppotron


Australia
India





Shine Group



Bossa Studios
ChannelFlip
Dragonfly
Friday TV
Kudos
Metronome
Princess Productions
Shine America
Shine TV





CORE
Media Group



19 Entertainment
Sharp Entertainment








Fox News Group



Fox News Channel
Fox Business Network
Fox News Radio
Fox Nation





Fox Television Stations







Movies!JV
MyNetworkTV
Fox Television Stations Productions





Fox



KDFW
KMSP
KRIV
KSAZ
KTBC
KTTV
KTVU
WAGA
WFLD
WJBK
WJZY
WNYW
WOFL
WOGX
WTTG
WTVT
WTXF





MyNetworkTV



KCOP
KDFI
KTXH
KUTP
WDCA
WFTC
WMYT
WPWR
WRBW
WWOR





Other



WPWR (CW)
KICU (Ind.)








Fox Networks
Group




FX Networks



FX
FXX
FX Movie Channel





Fox Sports



Big Ten NetworkJV
Fox Deportes
Fox Sports Networks
Fox Sports 1
Fox Sports 2
Fox Soccer Plus
Fox College Sports
YES Network








Fox Networks
Group
International




Fox



Asia
Bulgaria
Finland
Germany, Austria and Switzerland
Greece and Cyprus
India
Italy
Latin America
Arabia
Netherlands
Poland
Portugal
Balkans
Spain
Turkey
UK and Ireland
Hungary
Norway
Russia
Estonia
Lithuania
Latvia
Sweden
Belgium





Fox Life



Asia
Bulgaria
Croatia
Greece and Cyprus
Italy
India
Latin America
Portugal
Spain
Turkey





FX



Australia
Asia
CanadaJV
Latin America
Turkey





Fox Sports



Africa
Asia
Australia
Fox Sports and EntertainmentJV (Japan)
Brazil
Europe
Italy
Latin America
Middle East
NetherlandsJV

Fox Sports Eredivisie
Fox Sports International


Philippines
Fox Sports Racing (Canada and Caribbean)
Turkey
JTBC3 Fox SportsJV (South Korea)
Fox Sports News (Australia)
Fuel TV (Europe, Middle East and Africa)
Fox Footy (Australia)
Fox League (Australia)





National
Geographic



National Geographic

Africa
Asia
Australia and New Zealand
CanadaJV
France
Germany
Greece
India
Latin America
Netherlands
Portugal
Scandinavia
South Korea
UK and Ireland
Turkey


Nat Geo WildJV

Canada
Europe
Latin America


Nat Geo Mundo
Nat Geo People
Nat Geo Music
Nat Geo Kids

Spanish Latin America
Brazil







FXX



CanadaJV





Fox Crime



Asia
Bulgaria
Italy
Portugal
Serbia
Turkey





Fox Comedy



Italy
Poland
Portugal
MENA





Fox Movies



MENA
Portugal
Balkans
Japan
Asia





24Kitchen



Netherlands
Portugal
Turkey





Fox Premium



Brazil
Latin America





Other



Channel V
Fox Action Movies
Fox Family Movies
TVNJV (Asia)
Fox Animation (Italy)
BabyTV
Fox Classics (Japan)
Fox Filipino
Fox Kids (Finland)
FXM (Latin America)
Viajar (Spain)
Voyage (France)
YourTV (UK and Ireland)





STAR TV



Star World

Premiere


Star Movies

Action


Star Sports

China
India


Star Plus

UK and Ireland


Movies OK
Star Bharat
Star Utsav
Star Gold
Star Vijay (81%)
Star Jalsha
Star Pravah
Jalsha Movies
Asianet Communications

Asianet
Asianet Plus
Asianet Suvarna
Asianet Movies


Star Chinese Movies
Star Chinese Channel
Star Entertainment Channel
Phoenix Television (17.6%)

Phoenix InfoNews Channel
Phoenix Movies Channel
Phoenix Hong Kong Channel
Phoenix Chinese News and Entertainment Channel
Phoenix North America Chinese Channel










Fox Sports
Digital Media



FoxSports.com

WhatIfSports
Yardbarker







Investments



Fox Telecolombia (51%)





Other



Fox Digital Entertainment
Zero Day Fox
20th Century Fox World (Malaysia) (license to Resort World by Genting Group)
20th Century Fox World (Dubai)





Defunct



20th Century Fox Records
20th Century Fox Video
Bem Simples
CBS/Fox Video
ESPN Asia
ESPN Philippines
ESPNews Asia
Fox Atomic
Fox Animation Studios
Foxstar Productions
Fox Faith
Fox Football Channel
Fox Footy Channel
Fox Interactive
Fox Kids
Fox Life Netherlands
Fox Movie Channel
Fox Next
Fox Reality Channel
Fox Sports Houston
Fox Sports News Asia
Fox Sports Türkiye
Fox Sports World Canada
Fox Soccer
Fox Television Studios
Fox Video
FSN Chicago
Fuel TV Australia
Fuel TV Portugal
FX Greece
FX India
GXT
Life OK
Metromedia
MTM Enterprises
MBC3
MTV
Nat Geo y Yo
New World Pictures
Prime Network
Regency Television
Speed
Speed Australia
Speed Latin America
Star One
SportsChannel America
Utilísima
Viva Cinema















v
t
e


Star Group



China



Star Chinese Channel
Star Chinese Movies
Star Sports
Star Sports 2
Star Entertainment Channel
Xing Kong (47%)
Fortune Star





India



Channel [V] India
Star Bharat
Star Gold
Star Jalsha
Star Movies
Star Movies Action
Jalsha Movies
Life OK
Movies OK
Star Plus

UK


Star Pravah
Star Utsav
Star World
Star World Premiere
Star Sports
Star Suvarna
Asianet Communications

Asianet
Asianet Plus
Asianet Movies
Asianet Middle East


Hathway (17%)
Star Vijay (81%)
Star Utsav Movies
MAA TV
Tata Sky (30%)





Star Select



Broadcast Middle East (50%)

Farsi1
Zemzemeh


Rotana (15%)












Investments and
joint ventures



Sky (39.1%)
STAR DEN (50%)
Hulu (36%, Joint venture with NBCUniversal, Time Warner and The Walt Disney Company)
National Geographic Partners (73%, Joint venture with the National Geographic Society)









See also: List of assets owned by 21st Century Fox, News Corp, News Corporation, Acquisition by Disney (pending)








Links to related articles











v
t
e


2011–2012 News Corporation scandal



Events



News International phone hacking scandal
News of the World royal phone hacking scandal
News Corporation takeover bid for BSkyB
News of the World phone hacking scandal investigations





Companies and
organisations




News Corporation



News International

News of the World
The Sun
The Times
The Sunday Times


News Limited





Other



BSkyB
Culture, Media and Sport Committee
Federal Bureau of Investigation
Harbottle & Lewis
Independent Police Complaints Commission
Metropolitan Police

role


Ofcom
Press Complaints Commission
Serious Fraud Office
Solicitors Regulation Authority








People




Known victims



7/7 attack victims
Leslie Ash
Gordon Brown
Lee Chapman
Charlotte Church
Steve Coogan
Anne Diamond
Milly Dowler
Garry Flitcroft
Sheryl Gascoigne
Hugh Grant
Andy Gray
Tessa Jowell
Gerry and Kate McCann
Elle Macpherson
Sienna Miller
Ian Paisley
Ian Paisley, Jr.
Sara Payne
John Prescott
J. K. Rowling





Metropolitan Police



Sue Akers
Peter Clarke
Andy Hayman
Paul Stephenson
John Yates





News Corporation



Rebekah Brooks
Jonathan Chapman
Daniel Cloke
Andy Coulson
Tom Crone
Wendi Deng Murdoch
James Desborough
Viet Dinh
Ian Edmondson
Clive Goodman
Baron Grabiner
Simon Greenberg
Les Hinton
Sean Hoare
Lawrence Jacobs
Joel Klein
Stuart Kuttner
William Lewis
Paul McMullan
Greg Miskiw
Tom Mockridge
Glenn Mulcaire
James Murdoch
Rupert Murdoch
Colin Myler
Lucy Panton
Jamie Pyatt
Jonathan Rees
Neville Thurlbeck
Neil Wallis
James Weatherup





Other



Nick Davies
Lord Fowler
Lord Justice Leveson
Jay Rockefeller
Paul Staines
Tom Watson
John Whittingdale








Investigations
and legal cases



HM Advocate v Sheridan and Sheridan
Leveson Inquiry
Operation Elveden
Operation Kalmyk
Operation Tuleta
Operation Weeting
R v Coulson, Brooks and others





In popular culture



Dial M for Murdoch
Great Britain





Related topics



Foreign Corrupt Practices Act
Hacked Off
Operation Glade
Operation Motorman
Phone hacking
Phreaking
Politico-media complex
Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act 2000
Social engineering








 Category












v
t
e


Business in Australia



Institutions



Australian Competition & Consumer Commission
Australian corporate law
Australian Prudential Regulation Authority
Australian Securities & Investments Commission
Australian Takeovers Panel
Constitution of Australia, 1901 (Cth) corporations power
Economy of Australia





Stock exchange



Australian Securities Exchange
S&P/ASX 20
S&P/ASX 50
S&P/ASX 200
S&P/ASX 300
Chi-X





Business associations



Australian Chamber of Commerce and Industry
Australian Hotels Association
Australian Industry Group
Business Council of Australia
Consult Australia
Minerals Council of Australia
National Farmers' Federation





S&P/ASX 50 companies
(alpha–sorted)



AGL Energy
Amcor
AMP
APA
Asciano
Aurizon
ANZ
ASX
BHP
Brambles
Caltex Australia
Coca-Cola Amatil
Commonwealth Bank
Computershare
Crown
CSL
Dexus
Goodman
GPT
Incitec Pivot
IAG
James Hardie
Lend Lease
Macquarie Group
Medibank
Mirvac
National Australia Bank
Newcrest Mining
Oil Search
Orica
Origin Energy
QBE Insurance
Ramsay Health Care
Rio Tinto
Santos
Scentre
Seek Limited
Sonic Healthcare
South32
Stockland
Suncorp
Sydney Airport Holdings
Telstra
Transurban
Vicinity Centres
Wesfarmers
Westfield
Westpac
Woodside Petroleum
Woolworths





Other notable companies



Adelaide Bank
Akubra
Alumina
Australian Radio Network
Australian Broadcasting Corporation
AXA Asia Pacific
Bendigo Bank
BlueScope
Bunnings
Caltex
Camperdown Dairy International
Challenger
CIMIC
Citibank
Cochlear
Coles
Downer Group
Fairfax Media
Fosters
Harvey Norman
Holden
James Hardie
JB Hi-Fi
Jetstar Airways
John Holland
Macquarie Radio
Manildra Group
Metcash
National Storage
News Corp Australia
Nine Entertainment/Nine Network
Optus
Qantas
Qube Holdings
RM Williams
Seven West Media/Seven Network
Southern Cross Austereo
St George Bank
Star Entertainment Group
Vero Insurance
Virgin Australia
Zinifex





Corporate controversies
and collapses



Adelaide Steamship Company
Ansett Australia
Bridgecorp Holdings
Dick Smith Holdings
Firepower International
Great Southern Group
James Hardie asbestos controversy
Rodney Adler, Brad Cooper, Ray Williams and the collapse of HIH Insurance
King Brothers
Masters Home Improvement
Network Ten
Opes Prime
Pasminco becomes Zinifex
Poseidon bubble
Price fixing in the packaging industry
Rene Rivkin and the Offset Alpine fire
Jodee Rich and One.Tel
Christopher Skase and Qintex
Storm Financial
Timbercorp
WA Inc
Wayne Mansfield
Westpoint





Notable individuals



Peter Abeles
Warren Anderson
Reg Ansett
Alan Bond
Chris Corrigan
Robert Champion de Crespigny
Janet Holmes à Court
Robert Holmes à Court
Rod Eddington
John Elliott
Andrew Forrest
David Gonski
Joseph Gutnick
Lang Hancock
Margaret Jackson
Mike Cannon-Brookes
Gail Kelly
Solomon Lew
Frank Lowy
David Morgan
Hugh Morgan
Lachlan Murdoch
Rupert Murdoch
Sidney Myer
Scott Farquhar
Jacques Nasser
Frank Packer
James Packer
Kerry Packer
Clive Palmer
Arvi Parbo
Gina Rinehart
Dick Smith
Kerry Stokes
Ziggy Switkowski
Harry Triguboff
Malcolm Turnbull
Solomon Trujillo
Nicholas Whitlam














Authority control



GND: 6099559-2











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=News_Corporation&oldid=818399391"					Categories: News CorporationDefunct media companies of AustraliaDefunct media companies of the United StatesDefunct companies based in New York CityCompanies based in ManhattanConglomerate companies of the United StatesMedia companies based in New York CityMultinational companies based in New York CityPublishing companies based in New York City1979 establishments in Australia2004 establishments in New York (state)2013 disestablishments in New York (state)Conglomerate companies established in 2004Media companies established in 1979Media companies established in 2004Media companies disestablished in 2013Companies formerly listed on the Australian Securities ExchangeCompanies formerly listed on the Hong Kong Stock ExchangeCompanies formerly listed on NASDAQCompanies formerly listed on the New York Stock ExchangePublicly traded companies based in New York CityHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksCS1 maint: Multiple names: authors listUse British English from October 2012Use dmy dates from October 2012Pages using deprecated image syntaxAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from May 2013Wikipedia articles needing clarification from May 2013Articles needing additional references from February 2013All articles needing additional referencesOpenCorporates groupingsWikipedia articles with GND identifiers