

Nilo-Saharan


(undemonstrated)


Geographic
distribution
Central, North-Central Africa and East Africa


Linguistic classification
One of the world's primary language families


Subdivisions


Berta
Fur
Gumuz
Koman
Kuliak
Kunama
Maban
Saharan
Songhay
Sudanic
Central Sudanic
Eastern Sudanic
Northern Eastern Sudanic
Nubian
Eastern Jebel
Nilotic
? Kadu
? Mimi-D
? Shabo




ISO 639-2 / 5
ssa


Glottolog
None



Map showing the distribution of Nilo-Saharan languages



The Nilo-Saharan languages are a proposed family of African languages spoken by some 50–60 million people, mainly in the upper parts of the Chari and Nile rivers, including historic Nubia, north of where the two tributaries of the Nile meet. The languages extend through 17 nations in the northern half of Africa: from Algeria to Benin in the west; from Libya to the Democratic Republic of the Congo in the centre; and from Egypt to Tanzania in the east.
As indicated by its hyphenated name, Nilo-Saharan is a family of the African interior, including the greater Nile basin and the central Sahara desert. Eight of its proposed constituent divisions (excluding Kunama, Kuliak, and Songhay) are found in the modern two nations of Sudan and South Sudan, through which the Nile River flows.
In his 1963 book The Languages of Africa, Joseph Greenberg named the group and argued it was a genetic family. It contains the languages not included in the Niger–Congo, Afroasiatic or Khoisan groups. It has not been sufficiently demonstrated that the Nilo-Saharan languages constitute a valid genetic grouping, and some linguists have seen the phylum as "Greenberg's wastebasket", into which he placed all the otherwise unaffiliated non-click languages of Africa.[1][2] Its supporters accept that it is a challenging proposal to demonstrate, but contend that it looks more promising the more work is done.[3][4][5]
Some of the constituent groups of Nilo-Saharan are estimated to predate the African neolithic. Thus, the unity of Eastern Sudanic is estimated to date to at least the 5th millennium BC.[6] Nilo-Saharan genetic unity would necessarily be much older still and date to the late Upper Paleolithic.
This larger classification system is not accepted by all linguists, however. Glottolog (2013), for example, a publication of the Max Planck Institute in Germany, does not recognise the unity of the Nilo-Saharan family, or even of the Eastern Sudanic branch; Georgiy Starostin (2016) likewise does not accept a relationship between the branches of Nilo-Saharan, though he leaves open the possibility that some of them may prove to be related to each other once the necessary reconstructive work is done.



Contents


1 Characteristics
2 Major languages
3 History of the proposal
4 Internal relationships

4.1 Greenberg 1963
4.2 Bender 2000
4.3 Blench 2010
4.4 Glottolog 2.7
4.5 Starostin (2016)


5 External relations
6 Phonology

6.1 Bender's reconstruction
6.2 Ehret's reconstruction


7 See also
8 References
9 Further reading

9.1 External relationships


10 External links



Characteristics[edit]
The constituent families of Nilo-Saharan are quite diverse. One characteristic feature is a tripartite[disambiguation needed] singulative–collective–plurative number system, which Blench (2010) believes is a result of a noun-classifier system in the protolanguage. The distribution of the families may reflect ancient water courses in a green Sahara during the Neolithic Subpluvial, when the desert was more habitable than it is today.[7]
Major languages[edit]
Within the Nilo-Saharan languages are a number of languages with at least a million speakers (most data from SIL's Ethnologue 16 (2009)). In descending order:

Luo (Dholuo, 4.4 million). Dholuo language of the Luo people of Kenya and Tanzania, Kenya's third largest ethnicity after the Niger–Congo-speaking Agĩkũyũ and Luhya). (The term "Luo" is also used for a wider group of languages which includes Dholuo.)
Kanuri (4.0 million, all dialects; 4.7 million if Kanembu is included). The major ethnicity around Lake Chad.
Songhay (3.2 million all dialects, mostly Zarma). Spread along the Niger River in Mali, Burkina Faso, and Niger, throughout the historic Songhai Empire, including its former capital Gao and the well-known city of Timbuktu.
Teso (1.9 million). Related to Maasai.
Nubian (1.7 million, all dialects). The language of Nubia, extending today from southern Egypt into northern Sudan. Many Nubians have also migrated northwards to Cairo since the building of the Aswan Dam.
Lugbara (1.7 million, 2.2 if Aringa (Low Lugbara) is included). The major Central Sudanic language; Uganda and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Nandi–Markweta languages (1.6 million). Kenyan Rift Valley.
Lango (1.5 million). A Luo language, one of the major languages of Uganda.
Dinka (1.4 million). The major ethnicity of South Sudan.
Acholi (1.2 million). Another Luo language of Uganda.
Nuer (1.1,million in 2011, significantly more today). The language of the Nuer, another numerous people from South Sudan and Ethiopia.
Maasai (1.0 million). Spoken by the Maasai people of Kenya, one of the most well-known African peoples internationally.[8]
Ngambay (1.0 million with Laka). Central Sudanic, the principal language of southern Chad.

Some other important Nilo-Saharan languages under 1 million speakers:

Fur (500,000 in 1983, significantly more today). The eponymous language of Darfur Province in western Sudan.
Tubu (350,000 to 400,000) One of the northernmost Nilo-Saharan languages, extending from Nigeria, Niger, Chad into Libya. Most Tubu speakers live in northern Chad close to the Tibesti Mountains. Tubu has two main varieties: the Daza language and the Teda language.

The total for all speakers of Nilo-Saharan languages according to Ethnologue 16 is 38–39 million people. However, the data spans a range from ca. 1980 to 2005, with a weighted median at ca. 1990. Given population growth rates, the figure in 2010 might be half again higher, or about 60 million.
History of the proposal[edit]
The Saharan family (which includes Kanuri, Kanembu, the Tebu languages, and Zaghawa) was recognized by Heinrich Barth in 1853, the Nilotic languages by Karl Richard Lepsius in 1880, the various constituent branches of Central Sudanic (but not the connection between them) by Friedrich Müller in 1889, and the Maban family by Maurice Gaudefroy-Demombynes in 1907. The first inklings of a wider family came in 1912, when Diedrich Westermann included three of the (still independent) Central Sudanic families within Nilotic in a proposal he called Niloto-Sudanic;[9] this expanded Nilotic was in turn linked to Nubian, Kunama, and possibly Berta, essentially Greenberg's Macro-Sudanic (Chari–Nile) proposal of 1954. In 1920 G. W. Murray fleshed out the Eastern Sudanic languages when he grouped Nilotic, Nubian, Nera, Gaam, and Kunama. Carlo Conti Rossini made similar proposals in 1926, and in 1935 Westermann added Murle. In 1940 A. N. Tucker published evidence linking five of the six branches of Central Sudanic alongside his more explicit proposal for East Sudanic. In 1950 Greenberg retained Eastern Sudanic and Central Sudanic as separate families, but accepted Westermann's conclusions of four decades earlier in 1954 when he linked them together as Macro-Sudanic (later Chari–Nile, from the Chari and Nile watersheds). Greenberg's later contribution came in 1963, when he tied Chari–Nile to Songhai, Saharan, Maban, Fur, and Koman-Gumuz and coined the current name Nilo-Saharan for the resulting family. Lionel Bender noted that Chari–Nile was a historical artifact of the discovery of the family, and did not reflect an exclusive relationship between these languages, and the group has been abandoned, with its constituents becoming primary branches of Nilo-Saharan—or, equivalently, Chari–Nile and Nilo-Saharan have merged, with the name Nilo-Saharan retained. When it was realized that the Kadu languages were not Niger–Congo, they were commonly assumed to therefore be Nilo-Saharan, but evidence for this has not been presented.
Although progress has been made since Greenberg established the plausibility of the family, Nilo-Saharan has not actually been demonstrated. Koman and Gumuz remain poorly attested, and so are difficult to work with, while arguments continue over the inclusion of Songhai. Blench (2010) believes that the distribution of Nilo-Saharan reflects the waterways of the wet Sahara 12,000 years ago, and that the protolanguage had noun classifiers, which today are reflected in a diverse range of prefixes, suffixes, and number marking.
Internal relationships[edit]
Dimmendaal (2008) notes that Greenberg (1963) based his conclusion on sound evidence, and that the proposal as a whole has become more convincing in the decades since. Mikkola (1999) reviewed Greenberg's evidence and found it convincing. Roger Blench notes morphological similarities in all putative branches, which leads him to believe that the family is likely to be valid.
Koman and Gumuz, however, are poorly known, and have been difficult to evaluate until recently. Songhai is markedly divergent, probably due to massive influence from the Mande languages. Also problematic are the Kuliak languages, which are spoken by hunter-gatherers and appear to retain a non-Nilo-Saharan core; Blench believes they may have been similar to Hadza or Dahalo and shifted incompletely to Nilo-Saharan.
Dimmendaal (who had originally supported their inclusion) believes the Kadu languages form a small family of their own. Anbessa Tefera and Peter Unseth consider the poorly attested Shabo language to be Nilo-Saharan, though unclassified within the family due to lack of data; Dimmendaal considers it to be a language isolate on current evidence. Proposals have sometimes been made to add Mande (usually included in Niger–Congo), largely due to its many noteworthy similarities with Songhay rather than with Nilo-Saharan as a whole.
The extinct Meroitic language of ancient Kush has been accepted by linguists such as Rille, Dimmendaal, and Blench as Nilo-Saharan, though others argue for an Afroasiatic affiliation. It is poorly attested.
There is little doubt that the constituent families of Nilo-Saharan—of which only Eastern Sudanic and Central Sudanic show much internal diversity—are valid groups. However, there have been several conflicting classifications in grouping them together. Each of the proposed higher-order groups has been rejected by other researchers: Greenberg's Chari–Nile by Bender and Blench, and Bender's Core Nilo-Saharan by Dimmendaal and Blench. What remains are eight (Dimmendaal) to twelve (Bender) constituent families of no consensus arrangement.
Greenberg 1963[edit]




The branches of the Nilo-Saharan languages.


Joseph Greenberg, in The Languages of Africa, set up the family with the following branches. The Chari–Nile core are the connections that had been suggested by previous researchers.


 Nilo-Saharan 





Koman








Saharan








Songhay








Fur








Maban






 Chari–Nile 





Central Sudanic








Kunama








Berta








Eastern Sudanic (including Kuliak, Nubian and Nilotic)


















Gumuz was not recognized as distinct from neighboring Koman; it was separated out (forming "Komuz") by Bender (1989).
Bender 2000[edit]
By 2000 Bender had abandoned the Chari–Nile and Komuz branches, added Kadu, and removed Kuliak from Eastern Sudanic. He stated that Shabo could not yet be adequately classified, but might prove to be Nilo-Saharan.


 Nilo-Saharan 





Songhay








Saharan








Kuliak






 Satellite–Core 





Maban








Fur








Central Sudanic








Berta








Kunama






 Core 





Eastern Sudanic








Koman








Gumuz








Kadu
























Blench 2010[edit]
With a better understanding of Nilo-Saharan classifiers, and the affixes or number marking they have developed into in various branches, Blench believes that all of the families postulated as Nilo-Saharan belong together. He proposes the following tentative internal classification, with Shabo possibly closest to Koman and Gumuz, and Songhai closest to Saharan, a relationship that had not previously been suggested:


 Nilo-Saharan 





Kunama








Berta
















Koman








Gumuz














Shabo






















Saharan








Songhay














Kuliak












Maban








Fur








Kadu








Central Sudanic








Eastern Sudanic
























? Mimi of Decorse
By 2017,[10] Blench had refined the subclassification of this model, linking Maban with Fur, Kadu with Eastern Sudanic, and Kuliak with the node that contained them, for the following structure:


 Nilo-Saharan 









Kunama
















Saharan








Songhay












 Central African 





Kuliak
















Maban








Fur














Central Sudanic












Kadu








Eastern Sudanic






































Berta
















Koman








Gumuz














Shabo (?)


















Glottolog 2.7[edit]
In summarizing the literature to date, Hammarström et al. do not accept that the following families are demonstrably related with current research:

Berta
Birri (putatively Central Sudanic)
Central Sudanic (less Birri and Kresh–Aja)
Daju (putatively East Sudanic)
Eastern Jebel (putatively East Sudanic)
Furan
Gule
Gumuz
Kadugli–Krongo
Koman (excluding Gule)
Kresh–Aja (putatively Central Sudanic)
Kuliak
Kunama
Maban (including Mimi-N)
Mimi-Gaudefroy (Mimi-D)
Nara (putatively East Sudanic)
Nilotic (putatively East Sudanic)
Nubian (putatively East Sudanic)
Nyimang (putatively East Sudanic)
Saharan
Shabo
Songhai (NS affiliation "thoroughly dismantled by Nicolaï")
Surmic (putatively East Sudanic)
Tama (putatively East Sudanic)
Temein (putatively East Sudanic)

Starostin (2016)[edit]
Georgiy Starostin (2016),[11] using lexicostatistics based on Swadesh lists, is slightly more inclusive than Glottolog, and in addition finds probable and possible links between the families that will require reconstruction of the protolanguages for confirmation.
In addition to the families listed in Glottolog (previous section), Starostin considers the following to be established:

Northern "K" Eastern Sudanic or "NNT" (Nubian, Nara, and Tama; see below for Nyima)
Southern "N" Eastern Sudanic (Surmic, Temein, Jebel, Daju, Nilotic), though their exact relationships to each other remain obscure
Central Sudanic (including Birri and Kresh–Aja, which may prove to be closest to each other)
Koman (including Gule)

A relationship of Nyima with Nubian, Nara and Tama (NNT) is considered "highly likely" and close enough that proper comparative work should be able to demonstrate the connection if it's valid, though it would fall outside NNT proper (see Eastern Sudanic languages).
Other units that are "highly likely" to eventually prove to be valid families are:

East Sudanic as a whole
Central Sudanic – Kadu (Central Sudanic + Kadugli–Krongo)
Maba–Kunama (Maban + Kunama)
Komuz (Koman + Gumuz)

In summary, at this level of certainty, "Nilo-Saharan" constitutes ten distinct and separate language families: Eastern Sudanic, Central Sudanic – Kadu, Maba–Kunama, Komuz, Saharan, Songhai, Kuliak, Fur, Berta, and Shabo.
Possible further "deep" connections, which cannot be evaluated until the proper comparative work on the constituent branches has been completed, are:

Eastern Sudanic + Fur + Berta
Central Sudanic – Kadu + Maba–Kunama

There are faint suggestions that Eastern and Central Sudanic may be related (essentially the old Chari–Nile clade), though that possibility is "unexplorable under current conditions" and could be complicated if Niger–Congo were added to the comparison. Starostin finds no evidence that the Komuz, Kuliak, Saharan, Songhai or Shabo languages are related to any of the other Nilo-Saharan languages. Mimi-D and Meroitic were not considered, though Starostin had previously proposed that Mimi-D was also an isolate despite its slight similarity to Central Sudanic.
External relations[edit]
Proposals for the external relationships of Nilo-Saharan typically center on Niger–Congo: Gregersen (1972) grouped the two together as Kongo–Saharan. However, Blench (2011) proposed that the similarities between Niger–Congo and Nilo-Saharan (specifically Atlantic–Congo and Central Sudanic) are due to contact, with the noun-class system of Niger–Congo developed from, or elaborated on the model of, the noun classifiers of Central Sudanic.
Phonology[edit]
Nilo-Saharan languages present great differences being a highly diversified group. It has proven difficult to reconstruct many aspects of Proto-Nilo-Saharan language, and many authors remain skeptical about the validity of the family. Two very different reconstructions of the proto-language have been proposed, by the linguist L. Bender and the historian C. Ehret.
Bender's reconstruction[edit]
The consonant system reconstructed by Bender for Proto-Nilo-Saharan is:



Labial
Coronal
Palatal
Velar


plosive
voiceless

*t, *t2

*k, *kʰ


voiced
*b
*d, *d2
*ɟ
*g


fricative
*f
*s




liquid

*r, *l
*r2



nasal
*m
*n

*ŋ


semivowel
*w

*j



The phonemes /*d2, *t2/ correspond to coronal plosives, the phonetic details are difficult to specify, but clearly, they remain distinct from /*d, *t/ and supported by many phonetic correspondences (another author, C. Ehret, reconstructs for the coronal area the sound [d̪], [ḍ] and [t̪], [ṭ] which perhaps are closer to the phonetic detail of /*d2, *t2/, see infra)
Bender gave a list of about 350 cognates and discussed in deep the grouping and the phonological system proposed by Ch. Ehret. Blench (2000) "The classification of Nilo-Saharan", p. 299[dead link] compares both systems (Bender's and Ehret's) and prefers the former because it is more secure and is based in more reliable data. For example, Bender points out that there is a set of phonemes including implosives /*ɓ, *ɗ, *ʄ, *ɠ/, ejectives /*pʼ, *tʼ, (*sʼ), *cʼ, *kʼ/ and prenasal constants /*mb, *nd, (*nt), *ñɟ, *ŋg/, but it seems that they can be reconstructed only for core groups (E, I, J, L) and the collateral group (C, D, F, G, H), but not for Proto-Nilo-Saharan.
Ehret's reconstruction[edit]
Christopher Ehret used a less clear methodology and proposed a maximalist phonemic system:



Labial
Dental
Alveol.
Retrof.
Palatal
Velar
Glottal


plosive
implosive
*ɓ

*ɗ
*ɗ

*ɠ



voiced
*b
*d̪
*d
*ḍ

*g



voiceless
*p
*t̪
*t
*ṭ

*k



aspirate
*pʰ
*t̪ʰ
*tʰ
*ṭʰ

*kʰ



ejective
*pʼ
*t̪̕
*tʼ
*ṭ̕

*kʼ



fricative

*θ
*s, *z
*ṣ





nasal
simple
*m

*n

*ɲ
*ŋ



prenasal
*ⁿb
*ⁿð
*ⁿd
*ⁿḍ

*ⁿg



liquid

*l̪
*r, *l





approximant
plain
*w



*j




complex
*ʼw



*ʼj

*h


This maximalist system has been criticized by Bender and Blench. These authors state that the correspondences used by Ehret are not very clear, and because of this many of the sounds in the table may only be allophonic variations.[citation needed]
See also[edit]

Languages of Sudan

References[edit]



^ Lyle Campbell & Mauricio J. Mixco, A Glossary of Historical Linguistics (2007, University of Utah Press)
^ P.H. Matthews, Oxford Concise Dictionary of Linguistics (2007, 2nd edition, Oxford)
^ Gerrit J. Dimmendaal, "Nilo-Saharan Languages," International Encyclopedia of Linguistics (1992, Oxford), volume 3, pp. 100–104
^ M. Lionel Bender, "Nilo-Saharan," African Languages, An Introduction (2000, Cambridge), pp. 43–73.
^ Blench & Ahland (2010)
^ John Desmond Clark, From Hunters to Farmers: The Causes and Consequences of Food Production in Africa, University of California Press, 1984, p. 31
^ Drake NA, Blench RM, Armitage SJ, Bristow CS, White KH. 2011. "Ancient watercourses and biogeography of the Sahara explain the peopling of the desert." Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 2011 Jan 11, 108(2):458–62.
^ Lewis, M. Paul, ed. (2009). "Maasai: A language of Kenya". Ethnologue: Languages of the World (Sixteenth ed.). Dallas, TX: SIL International. .
^ Diedrich Westermann, 1912. The Shilluk people, their language and folklore
^ Africa over the last 12,000 years
^ George Starostin (2016) The Nilo-Saharan hypothesis tested through lexicostatistics: current state of affairs



Further reading[edit]

Lionel Bender, 1996. The Nilo-Saharan languages: a comparative essay. Munich: Lincom Europa.
Lionel Bender, 2000. "Nilo-Saharan". In Bernd Heine and Derek Nurse, eds., African Languages: An Introduction. Cambridge University Press.
Roger Blench and Colleen Ahland, 2010. "The Classification of Gumuz and Koman Languages",[1] presented at the Language Isolates in Africa workshop, Lyons, December 4
Gerrit Dimmendaal, 2008. "Language Ecology and Linguistic Diversity on the African Continent", Language and Linguistics Compass 2/5:842.
Joseph Greenberg, 1963. The Languages of Africa (International Journal of American Linguistics 29.1). Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press.
Pertti Mikkola, 1999. "Nilo-Saharan revisited: some observations concerning the best etymologies". Nordic Journal of African Studies, 8(2):108–138.

External relationships[edit]

Roger Blench, 2011. "Can Sino-Tibetan and Austroasiatic help us understand the evolution of Niger-Congo noun classes?",[2] CALL 41, Leiden
Gregersen, Edgar (1972). "Kongo-Saharan". Journal of African Languages. 11 (1): 69–89. 

External links[edit]

Roger Blench: Nilo-Saharan

Nilo-Saharan list (Blench 2012)


Nilo-Saharan Newsletter
Map of Nilo-Saharan







v
t
e


List of primary language families



Africa



Afro-Asiatic
Austronesian
Khoe
Kx'a
Niger–Congo
Nilo-Saharan?
Tuu
Mande?
Songhay?
Ijaw?
Ubangian?
Kadu?




Isolates



Bangime
Hadza
Jalaa
Sandawe
Kwadi?
Laal?
Shabo?





Sign languages



Arab
BANZSL
French
Lasima
Tanzanian
Others








Europe
and Asia



Afro-Asiatic
Ainu
Austroasiatic
Austronesian
Chukotko-Kamchatkan
Dravidian
Eskimo–Aleut
Great Andamanese
Hmong–Mien
Hurro-Urartian
Indo-European
Japonic
Kartvelian
Koreanic
Mongolic
Northeast Caucasian
Northwest Caucasian
Ongan
Sino-Tibetan
Tai–Kadai
Tungusic
Turkic
Tyrsenian
Uralic
Yeniseian
Yukaghir
Dené–Yeniseian?
Altaic?
Austronesian–Ongan?
Austro-Tai?
Sino-Austronesian?
Digaro?
Kho-Bwa?
Siangic?
Miji?
Vasconic?




Isolates



Basque
Burushaski
Elamite
Hattic
Kusunda
Nihali
Nivkh
Sumerian
Hruso?
Miju?
Puroik?





Sign languages



BANZSL
French
German
Japanese
Swedish
Chinese
Indo-Pakistani
Arab
Chiangmai–Bangkok
Others








New Guinea
and
the Pacific



Arai–Samaia
Arafundi
Austronesian
Baining
Binanderean–Goilalan
Border
Bulaka River
Central Solomons
Chimbu–Wahgi
Doso–Turumsa
East Geelvink Bay
East Strickland
Eleman
Engan
Fas
Kaure–Kosare
Kiwaian
Kutubuan
Kwomtari
Lakes Plain
Lower Mamberamo
Lower Sepik
Madang
Mairasi
North Bougainville
Pauwasi
Piawi
Ramu
Senagi
Sentani
Sepik
Skou
South Bougainville
Teberan
Tor–Kwerba–Nimboran
Torricelli
Trans-Fly
Trans–New Guinea
Turama–Kikorian
West Papuan
Yam
Yawa
Yuat
North Papuan?
Northeast New Guinea?
Papuan Gulf?




Isolates



Abinomn
Anêm?
Ata?
Kol
Kuot
Porome
Taiap?
Pawaia
Porome
Sulka?
Tambora
Wiru





Sign languages



Hawai'i Sign Language
Others








Australia



Arnhem/Macro-Gunwinyguan
Bunuban
Darwin River
Eastern Daly
Eastern Tasmanian
Garawan
Iwaidjan
Jarrakan
Mirndi
Northern Tasmanian
Northeastern Tasmanian
Nyulnyulan
Pama–Nyungan
Southern Daly
Tangkic
Wagaydyic
Western Daly
Western Tasmanian
Worrorran
Yangmanic (Wardaman)




Isolates



Giimbiyu
Malak-Malak
Marrgu
Tiwi
Wagiman








North
America



Algic
Alsea
Caddoan
Chimakuan
Chinookan
Chumashan
Comecrudan
Coosan
Eskimo–Aleut
Iroquoian
Kalapuyan
Keresan
Maiduan
Muskogean
Na-Dene
Palaihnihan
Plateau Penutian
Pomoan
Salishan
Shastan
Siouan
Tanoan
Tsimshianic
Utian
Uto-Aztecan
Wakashan
Wintuan
Yokutsan
Yukian
Yuman–Cochimí
Dené–Yeniseian?
Hokan?
Penutian?




Isolates



Chimariko
Haida
Karuk
Kutenai
Seri
Siuslaw
Takelma
Timucua
Waikuri
Washo
Yana
Yuchi
Zuni





Sign languages



Inuit (Inuiuuk)
Plains Sign Talk
Others








Mesoamerica



Chibchan
Jicaquean
Lencan
Mayan
Misumalpan
Mixe–Zoque
Oto-Manguean
Tequistlatecan
Totonacan
Uto-Aztecan
Xincan
Totozoquean?




Isolates



Cuitlatec
Huave
Tarascan/Purépecha





Sign languages



Plains Sign Talk
Mayan
Others








South
America



Arawakan
Arauan
Araucanian
Arutani–Sape
Aymaran
Barbacoan
Boran
Borôroan
Cahuapanan
Cariban
Catacaoan
Chapacuran
Charruan
Chibchan
Choco
Chonan
Guaicuruan
Guajiboan
Jê/Gê
Harákmbut–Katukinan
Jirajaran
Jivaroan
Kariri
Katembri–Taruma
Mascoian
Matacoan
Maxakalian
Nadahup
Nambikwaran
Otomákoan
Pano-Tacanan
Peba–Yaguan
Purian
Quechuan
Piaroa–Saliban
Ticuna–Yuri
Timotean
Tiniguan
Tucanoan
Tupian
Uru–Chipaya
Witotoan
Yabutian
Yanomaman
Zamucoan
Zaparoan
Chimuan?
Esmeralda–Yaruro?
Hibito–Cholón?
Lule–Vilela?
Macro-Jê?
Tequiraca–Canichana?




Isolates
(extant in 2000)



Aikanã?
Alacalufan
Andoque?
Camsá
Candoshi
Chimane
Chiquitano
Cofán?
Fulniô
Guató
Hodï/Joti
Irantxe?
Itonama
Karajá
Krenak
Kunza
Leco
Maku-Auari of Roraima
Movima
Mura-Pirahã
Nukak?
Ofayé
Puinave
Huaorani/Waorani
Trumai
Urarina
Warao
Yamana
Yuracaré








See also



Language isolates
Unclassified languages
Creoles
Pidgins
Mixed languages
Artificial languages
List of sign languages







Families with more than 30 languages are in bold. Families in italics have no living members.








Authority control



LCCN: sh85091959
GND: 4042341-4
SUDOC: 027861260
BNF: cb11981256x (data)











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Nilo-Saharan_languages&oldid=818280928"					Categories: Nilo-Saharan languagesHidden categories: Families rejected by GlottologAll articles with links needing disambiguationArticles with links needing disambiguation from January 2018All articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from May 2016All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from December 2015Wikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiers