






This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages)







This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (April 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)









This article may rely excessively on sources too closely associated with the subject, potentially preventing the article from being verifiable and neutral. Please help improve it by replacing them with more appropriate citations to reliable, independent, third-party sources. (April 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)





(Learn how and when to remove this template message)




National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration


Logo of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration




Flag of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration



Agency overview


Formed
February 10, 1807; 210 years ago (1807-02-10)[1]
Reestablished: October 3, 1970; 47 years ago (1970-10-03)


Preceding agency



United States Survey of the Coast[2]





Jurisdiction
United States federal government


Headquarters
Silver Spring, Maryland


Employees

379 NOAA Commissioned Officer Corps
11,000+ civilian employees (as of 2015)[3]


Annual budget
US$5.6 billion (est. 2011)


Agency executive



RDML (ret) Timothy Gallaudet, PhD, Administrator ; Deputy Under Secretary for Operations





Parent agency
U.S. Department of Commerce


Website
NOAA.gov


The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA; pronounced /ˈnoʊ.ə/, like "Noah") is an American scientific agency within the United States Department of Commerce that focuses on the conditions of the oceans and the atmosphere. NOAA warns of dangerous weather, charts seas, guides the use and protection of ocean and coastal resources and conducts research to provide understanding and improve stewardship of the environment. In addition to its over 11,000 civilian employees,[3] NOAA research and operations are supported by 321 uniformed service members who make up the NOAA Commissioned Officer Corps.[4] NOAA traces its history back to the convergence of multiple agencies: The United States Coastal and Geodetic Survey (founded in 1807), the Weather Bureau (1870) and the Bureau of Commercial Fisheries (1871). NOAA was officially formed in 1970.[5] The acting Under Secretary of Commerce for Oceans and Atmosphere at the Department of Commerce and the agency's interim administrator has been Benjamin Friedman since the end of the Obama administration on January 20, 2017.[6] Barry Myers, CEO of AccuWeather is proposed to be the next administrator.[7]



Contents


1 Purpose and function
2 History
3 Organizational structure

3.1 National Weather Service
3.2 National Ocean Service
3.3 National Environmental Satellite, Data, and Information Service
3.4 National Marine Fisheries Service
3.5 Office of Oceanic and Atmospheric Research
3.6 Office of Marine and Aviation Operations and the Commissioned Officer Corp
3.7 National Geodetic Survey
3.8 National Integrated Drought Information System
3.9 Office of Program Planning and Integration


4 Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
5 Flag
6 See also
7 References
8 External links



Purpose and function[edit]




Two NOAA WP-3D Orions


NOAA plays several specific roles in society, the benefits of which extend beyond the U.S. economy and into the larger global community:

A Supplier of Environmental Information Products. NOAA supplies to its customers and partners information pertaining to the state of the oceans and the atmosphere. This is clear through the production of weather warnings and forecasts via the National Weather Service, but NOAA's information products extend to climate, ecosystems and commerce as well.
A Provider of Environmental Stewardship Services. NOAA is a steward of U.S. coastal and marine environments. In coordination with federal, state, local, tribal and international authorities, NOAA manages the use of these environments, regulating fisheries and marine sanctuaries as well as protecting threatened and endangered marine species.
A Leader in Applied Scientific Research. NOAA is intended to be a source of accurate and objective scientific information in the four particular areas of national and global importance identified above: ecosystems, climate, weather and water, and commerce and transportation.[8]

The five "fundamental activities" are:

Monitoring and observing Earth systems with instruments and data collection networks.
Understanding and describing Earth systems through research and analysis of that data.
Assessing and predicting the changes of these systems over time.
Engaging, advising, and informing the public and partner organizations with important information.
Managing resources for the betterment of society, economy and environment.[9]

History[edit]




Seal of the NOAA Commissioned Corps


NOAA was formed on October 3, 1970, after U.S. President Richard Nixon proposed creating a new agency to serve a national need for "better protection of life and property from natural hazards…for a better understanding of the total environment…[and] for exploration and development leading to the intelligent use of our marine resources." NOAA formed a conglomeration of several existing scientific agencies that were among the oldest in the federal government. They were the United States Coast and Geodetic Survey, formed in 1807; the Weather Bureau, formed in 1870—Geodetic Survey and Weather Service had been combined by a 1965 consolidation into the Environmental Science Services Administration (ESSA), including the uniformed Commissioned Corp (founded 1917); and the Bureau of Commercial Fisheries, formed in 1871. NOAA was established within the Department of Commerce via the Reorganization Plan No. 4 of 1970.[10] In 2007, NOAA celebrated 200 years of service with its ties to the United States Coast and Geodetic Survey.[11]
Organizational structure[edit]




NOAA Headquarters in Silver Spring, Maryland


The NOAA Commissioned Officer Corps is a uniformed service of men and women who operate NOAA ships and aircraft, and serve in scientific and administrative posts.
NOAA works toward its mission through six major line offices, the National Environmental Satellite, Data and Information Service (NESDIS), the National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS), the National Ocean Service (NOS), the National Weather Service (NWS), the Office of Oceanic and Atmospheric Research (OAR) and the Office of Marine & Aviation Operations (OMAO).[12] and in addition more than a dozen staff offices, including the Office of the Federal Coordinator for Meteorology, the NOAA Central Library, the Office of Program Planning and Integration (PPI).[12]
National Weather Service[edit]




Seal of the National Weather Service


The National Weather Service (NWS) is tasked with providing "weather, hydrologic and climate forecasts and warnings for the United States, its territories, adjacent waters and ocean areas, for the protection of life and property and the enhancement of the national economy." This is done through a collection of national and regional centers, 13 river forecast centers (RFCs), and more than 120 local weather forecast offices (WFOs). They are charged with issuing weather and river forecasts, advisories, watches, and warnings on a daily basis. They issue more than 734,000 weather and 850,000 river forecasts, and more than 45,000 severe weather warnings annually. NOAA data is also relevant to the issues of global warming and ozone depletion.[citation needed]
The NWS operates NEXRAD, a nationwide network of Doppler weather radars which can detect precipitation and their velocities. Many of their products are broadcast on NOAA Weather Radio, a network of radio transmitters that broadcasts weather forecasts, severe weather statements, watches and warnings 24 hours a day.[13]
National Ocean Service[edit]
The National Ocean Service (NOS) focuses on ensuring that ocean and coastal areas are safe, healthy, and productive. NOS scientists, natural resource managers, and specialists serve America by ensuring safe and efficient marine transportation, promoting innovative solutions to protect coastal communities, and conserving marine and coastal places.[citation needed]
The National Ocean Service is composed of eight program offices: the Center for Operational Oceanographic Products and Services,[14] the Coastal Services Center,[15] the National Centers for Coastal Ocean Science,[16] the Office of Coast Survey,[17] the Office of National Geodetic Survey,[18] the Office of National Marine Sanctuaries[19] the Office of Ocean and Coastal Resource Management[20] and the Office of Response and Restoration.[21]
There are two NOS programs, namely the Mussel Watch Contaminant Monitoring Program and the NOAA Integrated Ocean Observing System (IOOS) and two staff offices, the International Program Office and the Management and Budget Office.
National Environmental Satellite, Data, and Information Service[edit]




NOAA engineer at work


The National Environmental Satellite, Data, and Information Service (NESDIS) was created by NOAA to operate and manage the US environmental satellite programs, and manage NWS data and those of other government agencies and departments.[citation needed] NESDIS's National Centers for Environmental Information (NCEI) archives data collected by the NOAA, U.S. Navy, U.S. Air Force, the Federal Aviation Administration, and meteorological services around the world and comprises the Center for Weather and Climate (previously NOAA's National Climatic Data Center) and the Center for Coasts, Oceans, and Geophysics (created by a merger of NOAA's National Coastal Data Development Center (NCDDC), National Oceanographic Data Center (NODC) and the National Geophysical Data Center (NGDC)).
In 1960 TIROS-1, NOAA's first owned and operated geostationary satellite was launched. Since 1966 NESDIS has managed polar orbiting satellites (POES) and since 1974 it has operated geosynchronous satellites (GOES) . In 1979 NOAA's first polar-orbiting environmental satellite was launched. Current operational satellites include NOAA-15, NOAA-18, NOAA-19, GOES 13, GOES 14, GOES 15, Jason-2 and DSCOVR. In 1983, NOAA assumed operational responsibility for Landsat satellite system.[22][citation needed] Since May 1998, NESIDS has operated the Defense Meteorological Satellite Program (DMSP) satellites on behalf of the Air Force Weather Agency.[23][citation needed]
New generations of satellites are developed to succeed the current polar orbiting and geosynchronous satellites, the Joint Polar Satellite System) and GOES-R, which is scheduled for launch in March 2017.[24][citation needed]
NESDIS runs the Office of Projects, Planning, and Analysis (OPPA)] formerly the Office of Systems Development,[25] the Office of Satellite Ground Systems (formerly the Office of Satellite Operations)[26] the Office of Satellite and Project Operations,[27] the Center for Satellite Applications and Research (STAR)],[28] the Joint Polar Satellite System Program Office[29] the GOES-R Program Office, the International & Interagency Affairs Office, the Office of Space Commercialization[30] and the Office of System Architecture and Advanced Planning.
National Marine Fisheries Service[edit]
The National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS) was initiated in 1871, with a primary goal of the research, protection, management, and restoration of commercial fisheries and protected species. The NMFS operates six fisheries science centers throughout the United States, which are the sites of research and management on marine resources. The NMFS also operates the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration Fisheries Office of Law Enforcement in Silver Spring, Maryland, which is the primary site of marine resource law enforcement.
Office of Oceanic and Atmospheric Research[edit]
Main article: Office of Oceanic and Atmospheric Research
NOAA's research, conducted through the Office of Oceanic and Atmospheric Research (OAR), is the driving force behind NOAA environmental products and services that protect life and property and promote economic growth. Research, conducted in OAR laboratories and by extramural programs, focuses on enhancing our understanding of environmental phenomena such as tornadoes, hurricanes, climate variability, solar flares, changes in the ozone, air pollution transport and dispersion,[31][32] El Niño/La Niña events, fisheries productivity, ocean currents, deep sea thermal vents, and coastal ecosystem health. NOAA research also develops innovative technologies and observing systems.
The NOAA Research network consists of seven internal research laboratories, extramural research at 30 Sea Grant university and research programs, six undersea research centers, a research grants program through the Climate Program Office, and 13 cooperative institutes with academia. Through NOAA and its academic partners, thousands of scientists, engineers, technicians, and graduate students participate in furthering our knowledge of natural phenomena that affect the lives of us all.[33][citation needed]
The Air Resources Laboratory (ARL) is one of the laboratories in the Office of Oceanic and Atmospheric Research. It studies processes and develops models relating to climate and air quality, including the transport, dispersion, transformation and removal of pollutants from the ambient atmosphere. The emphasis of the ARL's work is on data interpretation, technology development and transfer. The specific goal of ARL research is to improve and eventually to institutionalize prediction of trends, dispersion of air pollutant plumes, air quality, atmospheric deposition, and related variables.[34][self-published source][citation needed]
The Atlantic Oceanographic and Meteorological Laboratory (AOML), is part of NOAA's Office of Oceanic and Atmospheric Research, located in Miami, Florida. AOML's research spans hurricanes, coastal ecosystems, oceans and human health, climate studies, global carbon systems, and ocean observations. AOML's organizational structure consists of an Office of the Director and three scientific research divisions (Physical Oceanography, Ocean Chemistry and Ecosystems, and Hurricane Research). The Office of the Director oversees the Laboratory's scientific programs, as well as its financial, administrative, computer, outreach/education, and facility management services. Research programs are augmented by the Cooperative Institute for Marine and Atmospheric Studies (CIMAS), a joint enterprise with the University of Miami's Rosenstiel School of Marine and Atmospheric Science. CIMAS enables AOML and university scientists to collaborate on research areas of mutual interest and facilitates the participation of students and visiting scientists. AOML is a member of a unique community of marine research and educational institutions located on Virginia Key in Miami, Florida.[citation needed]
In 1977 the Pacific Marine Environmental Laboratory (PMEL) deployed the first successful moored equatorial current meter – the beginning of the Tropical Atmosphere Ocean, TAO, array. In 1984 the Tropical Ocean-Global Atmosphere program (TOGA) program began.
Office of Marine and Aviation Operations and the Commissioned Officer Corp[edit]
The Office of Marine and Aviation Operations is responsible for the fleet of NOAA ships, aircraft, and diving operations. It has the largest research fleet of the Federal government. Its personnel is made up of civilians and the NOAA Commissioned Officer Corps.[35] The office is headed by a NOAA Corps two-star rear admiral, who also commands the Corps.[36]
National Geodetic Survey[edit]
The National Geodetic Survey (NGS) is the primary surveying organization in the United States.[citation needed]
National Integrated Drought Information System[edit]
The National Integrated Drought Information System is a program within NOAA with an interagency mandate to coordinate and integrate drought research, building upon existing federal, tribal, state, and local partnerships in support of creating a national drought early warning information system.[37][citation needed]
Office of Program Planning and Integration[edit]
The Office of Program Planning and Integration (PPI) was established in June 2002 as the focus for a new corporate management culture at NOAA. PPI was created to address the needs to foster strategic management among NOAA Line and Staff Offices, Goal Teams, Programs, and Councils, support planning activities through greater opportunities for active participation of employees, stakeholders, and partners, build decision support systems based on the goals and outcomes set in NOAA's strategic plan, and guide managers and employees on program and performance management, the National Environmental Policy Act, and socioeconomic analysis.[38][citation needed]
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change[edit]
Since 2001, the organization has hosted the senior staff and recent chair, Susan Solomon, of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change's working group on climate science.[39]
Flag[edit]




The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration flag, flown as a distinguishing mark by all commissioned NOAA ships.


The NOAA flag is a modification of the flag of one of its predecessor organizations, the United States Coast and Geodetic Survey. The Coast and Geodetic Survey's flag, authorized in 1899 and in use until 1970, was blue, with a white circle centered in it and a red triangle centered within the circle. It symbolized the use of triangulation in surveying, and was flown by ships of the Survey.[citation needed]
When NOAA was established in 1970 and the Coast and Geodetic Survey's assets became a part of NOAA, NOAA based its own flag on that of the Coast and Geodetic Survey. The NOAA flag is in essence the Coast and Geodetic Survey flag, with the NOAA logo—a circle divided by the silhouette of a seabird into an upper dark blue and a lower light blue section, but with the "NOAA" legend omitted—centered within the red triangle. NOAA ships in commission display the NOAA flag; those with only one mast fly it immediately beneath the ship's commissioning pennant or the personal flag of a civilian official or flag officer if one is aboard the ship, while multimasted vessels fly it at the masthead of the forwardmost mast.[40] NOAA ships fly the same ensign as United States Navy ships but fly the NOAA flag as a distinguishing mark to differentiate themselves from Navy ships.
See also[edit]


Underwater diving portal



Center for Environmental Technology (CET)
Climate Mirror
Federation of Earth Science Information Partners (ESIP Federation)
List of auxiliaries of the United States Navy
Marine Mammal Protection Act
Minerals Management Service
NOAA's Environmental Real-time Observation Network
NOAA's Virtual World Program
Office of Naval Research
Title 15 of the Code of Federal Regulations
United States Naval Research Laboratory
University-National Oceanographic Laboratory System
Volcanic Ash Advisory Center
Weather Modification Operations and Research Board

References[edit]


^ Celebrating 200 Years NOAA website, 2007.
^ "About Our Agency | National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration". Noaa.gov. Retrieved 2016-04-03. 
^ a b "BestPlacesToWork.org Agency Report". Best Places to Work. Retrieved 1 Jul 2014. 
^ "About | Office of Marine and Aviation Operations". Omao.noaa.gov. Retrieved 2017-06-13. 
^ "Our history | National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration". Noaa.gov. Retrieved 2017-06-13. 
^ "Benjamin Friedman | National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration". Noaa.gov. Retrieved 2017-06-13. 
^ "Trump administration nominates AccuWeather CEO Barry Myers to head NOAA - Geospatial World". Geospatial World. 2017-10-25. Retrieved 2017-10-25. 
^ "About the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)". Retrieved 2016-05-18. 
^ "New Priorities for the 21st Century NOAA STRATEGIC PLAN FY 2005 – FY 2010" (PDF). oceanservice.noaa.gov. U.S. Department of Commerce, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Office of Program Planning and Integration, NOAA Strategic Planning. Retrieved 30 May 2013. 
^ "Reorganization Plan 4 - 197 - NOAA Central Library". Lib.noaa.gov. Retrieved 2016-04-03. 
^ Shea, Eileen. "A History of NOAA". Department of Commerce Historical Council. Retrieved 30 May 2013. 
^ a b "Organization | National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration". Noaa.gov. 2016-03-30. Retrieved 2016-04-03. 
^ Service, US Department of Commerce, NOAA, National Weather. "NOAA Weather Radio". Weather.gov. Retrieved 2017-01-30. 
^ "NOAA Tides & Currents". tidesandcurrents.noaa.gov. Retrieved 19 August 2017. 
^ NOAA Office for Coastal Management ADS Group. "NOAA Office for Coastal Management". Csc.noaa.gov. Retrieved 2016-04-03. 
^ "Home - NOAA Tides & Currents". Tidesandcurrents.noaa.gov. 2013-10-15. Retrieved 2016-04-03. 
^ "Nautical Charts & Pubs". Nauticalcharts.noaa.gov. Retrieved 2016-04-03. 
^ "National Geodetic Survey - Home". Geodesy.noaa.gov. Retrieved 2016-04-03. 
^ "NOAA National Marine Sanctuaries". Sanctuaries.noaa.gov. Retrieved 2016-04-03. 
^ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on October 27, 2006. Retrieved October 25, 2006. 
^ "Our role is stewardship; our product is science". Response.restoration.noaa.gov. 1989-03-24. Retrieved 2016-04-03. 
^ "Landsat Data Data Sheet". usgs.gov. 1997. 
^ "Department of Commerce". history.nasa.gov. Retrieved 2017-05-28. 
^ "NASA Successfully Launches NOAA Advanced Geostationary Weather Satellite". nasa.gov. November 19, 2016. 
^ "NOAA/NESDIS Office of Systems Development Homepage". Osd.noaa.gov. Retrieved 2016-04-03. 
^ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on November 10, 2013. Retrieved July 22, 2015. 
^ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on May 28, 2015. Retrieved July 22, 2015. 
^ "NOAA Star : Center for Satellite Applications and Research". Star.nesdis.noaa.gov. Retrieved 2016-04-03. 
^ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on July 29, 2012. Retrieved July 22, 2015. 
^ Office of Space Commerce. "Office of Space Commerce | Helping U.S. businesses use the unique medium of space to benefit our economy". Space.commerce.gov. Retrieved 2016-04-03. 
^ Turner, D.B. (1994). Workbook of atmospheric dispersion estimates: an introduction to dispersion modeling (2nd ed.). CRC Press. ISBN 1-56670-023-X.  CRCpress.com Archived 2007-11-05 at the Wayback Machine.
^ Beychok, M.R. (2005). Fundamentals Of Stack Gas Dispersion (4th ed.). author-published. ISBN 0-9644588-0-2.  www.air-dispersion.com
^ "NOAA News Online (Story 235)". Noaanews.noaa.gov. Retrieved 2017-05-28. 
^ Pan, Jock (2010). The United States Outer Executive Departments and Independent Establishments & Government Corporations. Xlibris. ISBN 1450086748. 
^ "About OMAO - Office of Marine and Aviation Operations". Omao.noaa.gov. Retrieved 19 August 2017. 
^ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 2017-04-20. Retrieved 2017-04-19. 
^ "What is NIDIS? | U.S Drought Portal". Drought.gov. Retrieved 2017-05-28. 
^ "NOAA Office of Program Planning and Integration (PPI)". Department of Commerce. Retrieved 2017-05-28. 
^ Pearce, Fred, The Climate Files: The Battle for the Truth about Global Warming, (2010) Guardian Books, ISBN 978-0-85265-229-9, p. XVIII.
^ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on December 24, 2008. Retrieved January 10, 2009. 


External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.



Official website
Records of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration in the National Archives (Record Group 370)
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration in the Federal Register







v
t
e


Agencies under the United States Department of Commerce






Headquarters: Herbert C. Hoover Building


Wilbur Ross, Secretary of Commerce
Vacant, Deputy Secretary of Commerce





Deputy Secretary of Commerce



Economic Development Administration
National Technical Information Service
Minority Business Development Agency
National Telecommunications and Information Administration








Under Secretary of Commerce for Industry and Security



Bureau of Industry and Security





Under Secretary of Commerce for Economic Affairs



Economics and Statistics Administration
Bureau of Economic Analysis
Census Bureau





Under Secretary of Commerce for International Trade



International Trade Administration





Under Secretary of Commerce and Administrator for NOAA



National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration Commissioned Corps





Under Secretary of Commerce for Standards and Technology



National Institute of Standards and Technology





Under Secretary of Commerce for Intellectual Property



Patent and Trademark Office












v
t
e


Research and development agencies of the federal government of the United States



Independent agencies



National Science Foundation (NSF)
National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA)
Environmental Protection Agency Office of Research and Development
Intelligence Advanced Research Projects Activity (IARPA)
Smithsonian Institution research centers and programs





Agriculture



Agricultural Research Service (ARS)
National Institute of Food and Agriculture (NIFA)
Economic Research Service (ERS)
United States Forest Service Research and Development (R&D)





Commerce



National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST)
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)





Defense




Air Force



Air Force Research Laboratory (AFRL)
Air Force Life Cycle Management Center (AFLCMC)
Air Force Nuclear Weapons Center (NWC)
Air Force Institute of Technology (AFIT)





Army



Army Research, Development and Engineering Command (RDECOM)
U.S. Army Test and Evaluation Command (ATEC)
Army Medical Research and Materiel Command (USAMRMC)
Engineer Research and Development Center (ERDC)
Army Research Lab (ARL)





Navy



Office of Naval Research (ONR)
Naval Research Laboratory (NRL)
Naval Medical Research Center (NMRC)
Naval Warfare Centers

Air (NAWC)
Surface (NSWC)
Undersea (NUWC)
Command, Control and Ocean Surveillance (NCCOSC)


Naval Postgraduate School (NPS)
Marine Corps Warfighting Laboratory (MCWL)





Other



Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA)
Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences (USU)








Education



Institute of Education Sciences (IES)
National Institute on Disability and Rehabilitation Research (NIDRR)





Energy



Office of Science (DOE SC)
Advanced Research Projects Agency-Energy (ARPA-E)
National Laboratories





Health and Human Services



National Institutes of Health (NIH)
National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH)
Food and Drug Administration science and research programs
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ)
Biomedical Advanced Research and Development Authority (BARDA)





Homeland Security



Directorate for Science and Technology (S&T)
Coast Guard Research & Development Center (CG RDC)





Interior



United States Geological Survey (USGS)





Justice



National Institute of Justice (NIJ)





Transportation



Research and Innovative Technology Administration
Federal Aviation Administration Research, Engineering, and Development
Federal Highway Administration Research and Technology





Veterans Affairs



Veterans Health Administration Office of Research and Development (ORD)





Multi-agency initiatives



U.S. Global Change Research Program (USGCRP)
Networking and Information Technology Research and Development Program (NITRD)
National Nanotechnology Initiative (NNI)





Judicial branch



Federal Judicial Center





Policy-making bodies



Office of Science and Technology Policy (OSTP)
Office of Technology Assessment (OTA) (defunct)
House Committee on Science, Space and Technology
Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation












v
t
e


United States government agencies involved in environmental science






Environmental Protection Agency
National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Global Change Research Program
Smithsonian Institution
National Science Foundation





Department of the Interior



National Park Service
United States Fish and Wildlife Service
Bureau of Indian Affairs
Bureau of Land Management
Bureau of Ocean Energy Management, Regulation and Enforcement
Bureau of Reclamation
Office of Surface Mining, Reclamation, and Enforcement
United States Geological Survey
Office of Insular Affairs





Department of Commerce



National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
National Weather Service
National Ocean Service
National Geodetic Survey
National Marine Fisheries Service
Office of Oceanic and Atmospheric Research





Department of Energy



Office of Science
Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy
National Laboratories
Office of Environmental Management





Department of Agriculture



Farm Service Agency
Foreign Agricultural Service
United States Forest Service
Natural Resources Conservation Service
National Water and Climate Center
Rural Utilities Service
Food and Nutrition Service
Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service
Agricultural Research Service
Agricultural Stabilization and Conservation Service





Department of Homeland Security



United States Coast Guard
Directorate for Science and Technology





Department of Health
and Human Services



National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences





Department of Defense



Office of Naval Research
Air Force Research Laboratory
United States Army Research, Development and Engineering Command












v
t
e


Diver training, certification and accreditation organisations



Commercial
certification authorities



Australian Diver Accreditation Scheme (ADAS)
Divers Institute of Technology
Health and Safety Executive (HSE)
South African Department of Labour








Free-diving
certification agencies



AIDA International (AIDA)
Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS)
Performance Freediving International (PI)
Scuba Schools International (SSI)





Recreational
certification agencies



American Canadian Underwater Certifications (ACUC)
American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI)
Association nationale des moniteurs de plongée (ANMP)
British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC)
Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT)
Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS)
Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM)
Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS)
Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS)
Global Underwater Explorers (GUE)
International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD)
International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD)
International Diving Educators Association (IDEA)
Israeli Diving Federation (TIDF)
National Association for Cave Diving (NACD)
National Academy of Scuba Educators (NASE)
National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI)
Nederlandse Onderwatersport Bond (NOB)
Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI)
Professional Diving Instructors Corporation International (PDIC)
The Sub-Aqua Association (SAA)
Scuba Diving International (SDI)
Scuba Educators International (SEI)
Scottish Sub Aqua Club (ScotSAC)
Scuba Schools International (SSI)
Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu (TSSF)
United Diving Instructors (UDI)
Unified Team Diving (UTD)
YMCA SCUBA Program





Recreational
certification levels



Advanced Open Water Diver
Autonomous diver
CMAS* SCUBA Diver
Divemaster
Diving instructor
Open Water Diver
Master Instructor
Master Scuba Diver
Rescue Diver
Supervised diver
Introductory diving





Scientific diver
certification authorities



American Academy of Underwater Sciences (AAUS)
CMAS Scientific Committee





Technical
certification agencies




Cave
diving



Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA)
Cave Diving Group (CDG)
Global Underwater Explorers (GUE)
National Association for Cave Diving (NACD)
National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI)
Unified Team Diving (UTD)
Technical Diving International (TDI)







American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI)
British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC)
Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS)
Diving Science and Technology (DSAT)
Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS)
Global Underwater Explorers (GUE)
International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD)
National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI)
Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI)
Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC)
Technical Diving International (TDI)
Trimix Scuba Association (TSA)
Technical Extended Range (TXR)
Unified Team Diving (UTD)





Related



Divers Alert Network
Diver certification
European Underwater Federation (EUF)
International Diving Regulators and Certifiers Forum (IDRCF)
International Diving Schools Association (IDSA)
International Marine Contractors Association (IMCA)
List of diver certification organizations
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)
Nautical Archaeology Society
Recreational diver training
World Recreational Scuba Training Council (WRSTC)








 Category
 Glossary
 Portal












v
t
e


Richard Nixon






37th President of the United States (1969–1974)
36th Vice President of the United States (1953–1961)
U.S. Senator from California (1950–1953)
U.S. Representative for CA-12 (1947–1950)





Presidency



First inauguration
Second inauguration
Nixon Doctrine
"Bring Us Together"
Economic policies

Nixon shock


Tar Baby Option
Environmental Protection Agency

creation


National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
Space exploration
1971 National Cancer Act
Vietnam War

Cambodian bombing
Paris Peace Accords
"Peace with Honor"


Silent majority
Cold War period

Linkage policy


1972 Visit to China

Shanghai Communiqué


Détente

1972 Moscow Summit
Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty
SALT I Treaty
Prevention of Nuclear War Agreement
Threshold Test Ban Treaty


Endangered Species Act
Drug Abuse Prevention and Control Act
National Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse
War on Drugs

Drug Enforcement Administration


Enemies List

list of opponents


Operation CHAOS
Watergate

timeline
White House tapes
United States v. Nixon
Senate Watergate Committee
impeachment process


Resignation

speech


Pardon
State of the Union Address (1970
1973
1974)
Wilson desk
Judicial appointments

Supreme Court
controversies







Life and
politics



Presidential Library and Museum

Richard Nixon Foundation


Birthplace and boyhood home
Checkers speech
Kitchen Debate
Operation 40
"Last press conference"
Florida White House
"La Casa Pacifica"
Nixon Center
Nixon v. General Services Administration
Death and funeral





Books



Six Crises (1962)
Bibliography





Elections



United States House of Representatives elections, 1946
1948
U.S. Senate election, 1950
California gubernatorial election, 1962
Republican Party presidential primaries, 1960
1964
1968
1972
Republican National Conventions, 1952
1956
1960
1968
1972
Nixon Presidential campaign, 1968
United States presidential elections, 1952
1956
1960

debates


1968
1972





Popular
culture



Nixon goes to China (phrase)
Millhouse (1971 film)
Four More Years (1972 film)
All the President's Men (1976 film)
White House Madness (1975 film)
Nixon in China (1987 opera)
Nixon (1995 film)
Elvis Meets Nixon (1997 film)
Dick (1999 film)
The Frost-Nixon Interviews (2006 play, 2008 film)
Our Nixon (2013 film)
U.S. Postage stamp





Related



Presidential Recordings and Materials Preservation Act
Presidential Townhouse





Staff



Colonel Jack Brennan (aide de camp)
Manolo Sanchez (valet)
Rose Mary Woods (secretary)





Family



Thelma "Pat" Ryan Nixon (wife)
Tricia Nixon Cox (daughter)
Julie Nixon Eisenhower (daughter)
Frank Nixon (father)
Hannah Nixon (mother)
Donald Nixon (brother)
Edward Nixon (brother)
Donald A. Nixon (nephew)
Christopher Nixon Cox (grandson)
Jennie Eisenhower (granddaughter)








← Lyndon B. Johnson
Gerald Ford →


 Category









Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 138297002
LCCN: n79004184
ISNI: 0000 0001 1940 3043
GND: 16282942-5
SUDOC: 026613670
BNF: cb11882745q (data)
NLA: 35569905
IATH: w64n309s











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=National_Oceanic_and_Atmospheric_Administration&oldid=817424657"					Categories: National Oceanic and Atmospheric AdministrationGovernmental meteorological agencies in the AmericasEarth sciences organizationsHydrology organizationsMeteorological organizationsOceanographic organizationsEnvironmental dataMeteorological institutions and stationsSatellite operatorsScientific organizations based in the United StatesUnited States Department of Commerce agenciesGovernment agencies established in 1970Scientific organizations established in 19701970 establishments in the United StatesHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksArticles needing additional references from April 2016All articles needing additional referencesArticles lacking reliable references from April 2016All articles lacking reliable referencesArticles with multiple maintenance issuesAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from April 2016Articles with unsourced statements from March 2014Accuracy disputes from December 2017Pages containing citation needed template with deprecated parametersOfficial website different in Wikidata and WikipediaWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersWikipedia articles with NLA identifiersWikipedia articles with SNAC-ID identifiers