The nominative case (abbreviated NOM), subjective case, straight case or upright case is one of the grammatical cases of a noun or other part of speech, which generally marks the subject of a verb or the predicate noun or predicate adjective, as opposed to its object or other verb arguments. Generally, the noun "that is doing something" is in the nominative, and the nominative is often the form listed in dictionaries.



Contents


1 Etymology
2 Linguistic characteristics

2.1 Subjective case


3 Examples

3.1 Subject
3.2 Predicate noun or adjective


4 References
5 External links



Etymology[edit]
Nominative comes from Latin cāsus nominātīvus "case for naming",[1] which was translated from Ancient Greek ὀνομαστικὴ πτῶσις, onomastikḗ ptôsis "inflection for naming",[2] from onomázō "call by name",[3] from ónoma "name".[4] Dionysius Thrax in his Art of Grammar refers to it as orthḗ or eutheîa "straight",[5] in contrast to the oblique or "bent" cases.
Linguistic characteristics[edit]
The reference form (more technically, the least marked) of certain parts of speech is normally in the nominative case, but this is often not a complete specification of the reference form, as it may also be necessary to specify the number and gender. Thus the reference or least marked form of an adjective might be the nominative masculine singular. The parts of speech which are often declined and therefore may have a nominative case are nouns, adjectives, pronouns and less frequently numerals and participles. The nominative case often indicates the subject of a verb but sometimes does not indicate any particular relationship with other parts of a sentence. In some languages the nominative case is unmarked, and it may be said to be marked by a zero morpheme. Moreover, in most languages with a nominative case, the nominative form is the lemma; that is, it is the reference form used to cite a word, to list it as a dictionary entry, etc.
Nominative cases are found in Arabic, Estonian, Slovak, Ukrainian, Hungarian, Lithuanian, Georgian, German, Latin, Greek, Icelandic, Old English, Old French, Polish, Serbian, Czech, Romanian, Russian, and Pashto, among other languages. English still retains some nominative pronouns, which are contrasted with the accusative (comparable to the oblique or disjunctive in some other languages): I (accusative me), we (accusative us), he (accusative him), she (accusative her), they (accusative them) and who (accusative whom). A usage that is archaic in most, but not all, current English dialects is the singular second-person pronoun thou (accusative thee). A special case is the word you: Originally, ye was its nominative form and you the accusative, but over time you has come to be used for the nominative as well.
The term "nominative case" is most properly used in the discussion of nominative–accusative languages, such as Latin, Greek, and most modern Western European languages.
In active–stative languages there is a case sometimes called nominative which is the most marked case and is used for the subject of a transitive verb or a voluntary subject of an intransitive verb but not for an involuntary subject of an intransitive verb; since such languages are a relatively new field of study, there is no standard name for this case.
Subjective case[edit]
The English language is now often described as having a subjective case instead of a nominative, to draw attention to the differences between the "standard" generic nominative and the way it is used in English.[6][7][8][9][10] The term objective case is then used for the oblique case, which covers the roles of accusative, dative, and objects of a preposition. The genitive case is then usually called the possessive form, rather than a noun case per se. In this system, English is said to have two cases: the subjective and the objective.
Examples[edit]
Subject[edit]
The nominative case marks the subject of a verb. When the verb is active, the nominative is the person or thing doing the action (agent); when the verb is passive, the nominative is the person or thing receiving the action.

The boy saw her.
She was seen

Predicate noun or adjective[edit]
In copular sentences, the nominative is used for both subject and predicate.

Socrates was a wise man.
Socrates was wise.

References[edit]



^ nominativus. Charlton T. Lewis and Charles Short. A Latin Dictionary on Perseus Project.
^ ὀνομαστικός. Liddell, Henry George; Scott, Robert; A Greek–English Lexicon at the Perseus Project
^ ὀνομάζω
^ ὄνομα
^ Dionysius Thrax. τέχνη γραμματική (Art of Grammar), section ιβ´ (10b): περὶ ὀνόματος (On the noun). Bibliotheca Augustana.
^ "Personal pronoun". Oxford Dictionaries. Oxford University Press. Retrieved 2016-01-29. 
^ "Grammar Handbook « Writers Workshop: Writer Resources « The Center for Writing Studies, Illinois". www.cws.illinois.edu. Retrieved 2015-09-23. 
^ Shrives, Craig. "What Is the Subjective Case? (grammar lesson)". www.grammar-monster.com. Retrieved 2015-09-23. 
^ "What Is the Subjective (or Nominative) Case?". Retrieved 2015-09-23. 
^ "Subjective and Objective Case @ The Internet Grammar of English". www.ucl.ac.uk. Retrieved 2015-09-23. 



External links[edit]

German nominative case A lesson covering the nominative case in the German language
The Nominative Case - Russian Grammar A lesson covering the nominative case in the Russian language







v
t
e


Grammatical cases






List of cases
Declension
Morphosyntactic alignment










Cases







Morphosyntactic alignment



Absolutive
Accusative
Direct
Ergative
Intransitive
Nominative
Oblique
Partitive
Pegative





Location, time, direction



Ablative
Addirective
Adelative
Adessive
Allative
Antessive
Apudessive
Approximative
Delative
Distantitive
Distributive (–temporal)
Egressive
Elative
Illative
Inelative
Inessive
Initiative
Intrative
Lative
Locative
Medial
Perlative
Pertingent
Postdirective
Postelative
Postessive
Prolative
Prosecutive
Proximative
Separative
Subdirective
Subelative
Subessive
Sublative
Superdirective
Superelative
Superessive
Superlative
Temporal
Terminative





Possession, companion, instrument



Abessive
Associative
Caritive
Comitative
Dative
Genitive
Instrumental (–comitative)
Ornative
Possessed
Possessive
Privative
Sociative





State, manner



Adverbial
Comparative
Equative
Essive (–formal, –modal)
Exessive
Formal
Identical
Instructive
Modal
Multiplicative
Orientative
Revertive
Semblative
Translative





Cause, purpose



Aversive
Benefactive
Causal (–final)
Evitative
Final





Other



Dubitive
Postpositional
Prepositional
Vocative
















Declensions






Czech
Archaic Dutch
English (Middle English, Old English)
Finnish
German (Old High German)
Gothic
Irish
Latin
Latvian
Lithuanian
Serbo-Croatian
Slovak














						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Nominative_case&oldid=817822847"					Categories: Grammatical casesHidden categories: Articles containing Ancient Greek-language text