

North Germanic


Nordic
Scandinavian


Ethnicity
Germanic peoples


Geographic
distribution
Northern Europe


Linguistic classification
Indo-European

Germanic

North Germanic






Proto-language
Proto-Norse, later Old Norse


ISO 639-5
gmq


Glottolog
nort3160[1]



North Germanic-speaking lands
Continental Scandinavian languages:
  Danish
  Norwegian
  Swedish
Insular Scandinavian languages:
  Faroese
  Icelandic
  Norn (†)
  Greenlandic Norse (†)

Extinct Norn was spoken in Orkney, Shetland and Caithness in what is now Scotland until 19th century.
Extinct Greenlandic Norse was spoken in the Norse settlements of Greenland until their demise in the late 15th century.





The North Germanic languages make up one of the three branches of the Germanic languages, a sub-family of the Indo-European languages, along with the West Germanic languages and the extinct East Germanic languages. The language group is sometimes referred to as the "Nordic languages", a direct translation of the most common term used among Danish, Swedish, Icelandic and Norwegian scholars and laypeople.
In Scandinavia, the term "Scandinavian languages" refers specifically to the generally mutually intelligible languages of the three continental Scandinavian countries, and is thus used in a more narrow sense as a subset of the Nordic languages, leaving aside the insular subset of Faroese and Icelandic. Danish, Norwegian and Swedish are also referred to as Continental Scandinavian or Nordic languages, while Faroese and Icelandic are grouped together as Insular Scandinavian or Nordic languages. The term Scandinavian arose in the 18th century as a result of the early linguistic and cultural Scandinavist movement, referring to the people, cultures, and languages of the three Scandinavian countries and stressing their common heritage.
The term "North Germanic languages" is used in comparative linguistics,[2] whereas the term "Scandinavian languages" appears in studies of the modern standard languages and the dialect continuum of Scandinavia.[3][4]
Approximately 20 million people in the Nordic countries speak a Scandinavian language as their native language,[5] including an approximately 5% minority in Finland. Languages belonging to the North Germanic language tree are also commonly spoken on Greenland and, to a lesser extent, by immigrants in North America.



Contents


1 Modern languages and dialects
2 History

2.1 Distinction from East and West Germanic
2.2 Features shared with West Germanic
2.3 North Germanic features
2.4 Middle Ages


3 Demographics
4 Classification

4.1 Mutual intelligibility
4.2 Vocabulary
4.3 Language boundaries
4.4 Family tree
4.5 Classification difficulties
4.6 Written norms of Norwegian


5 See also
6 References
7 References
8 External links



Modern languages and dialects[edit]
The modern languages in this group are:

Danish

Jutlandic dialect

North Jutlandic
East Jutlandic
West Jutlandic
South Jutlandic


Insular Danish
Bornholmsk dialect


Swedish[6]

South Swedish dialects

Scanian


Göta dialects
Gotland dialects
Svea dialects

Dalecarlian dialects

Elfdalian




Norrland dialects

Jämtland dialects


East Swedish dialects

Finland Swedish
Estonian Swedish




Norwegian

Bokmål (written)
Nynorsk (written)
Trønder dialects (Norway and parts of Sweden)
East Norwegian dialects (Norway and minor parts of Sweden)
West Norwegian dialects
North Norwegian dialects


Faroese
Icelandic

History[edit]
Distinction from East and West Germanic[edit]
The Germanic languages are traditionally divided into three groups: West, East and North Germanic.[7] Their exact relation is difficult to determine from the sparse evidence of runic inscriptions, and they remained mutually intelligible to some degree during the Migration Period, so that some individual varieties are difficult to classify. Dialects with the features assigned to the northern group formed from the Proto-Germanic language in the late Pre-Roman Iron Age in Northern Europe.
At last around the year 200 AD, speakers of the North Germanic branch became distinguishable from the other Germanic language speakers. The early development of this language branch is attested through runic inscriptions.
Features shared with West Germanic[edit]
The North Germanic group is characterized by a number of phonological and morphological innovations shared with West Germanic:

The retraction of Proto-Germanic ē (/ɛː/, also written ǣ) to ā.[8]

Proto-Germanic *jēran ‘year’ > Northwest Germanic *jāran >:

North Germanic *āra > Old Norse ár; and
West Germanic *jāra > Old High German jār, Old English ġēar [jæ͡ɑːr]; vs. Gothic jēr.




The raising of [ɔː] to [oː] (and word-finally to [uː]). The original vowel remained when nasalised *ōn [ɔ̃ː] and when before /z/, and was then later lowered to [ɑː].

Proto-Germanic *geƀō ‘gift’ [ˈɣeβɔː] > Northwest Germanic *geƀu >:

North Germanic *gjavu > with u-umlaut *gjǫvu > ON gjǫf, and
West Germanic *gebu > OE giefu; cf. Goth giba (vowel lowering).


Proto-Germanic *tungōn ‘tongue’ [ˈtuŋɡɔ̃ː] > late Northwest Germanic *tungā > *tunga > ON tunga, OHG zunga, OE tunge (unstressed a > e); vs. Goth tuggō.
Proto-Germanic gen.sg. *geƀōz ‘of a gift’ [ˈɣeβɔːz] > late Northwest Germanic *geƀāz >:

North Germanic *gjavaz > ON gjafar, and
West Germanic *geba > OHG geba, OE giefe (unstressed a > e); vs. Goth gibōs.




The development of i-umlaut.
The rhotacism of /z/ to /r/, with presumably a rhotic fricative of some kind as an earlier stage.

This change probably affected West Germanic much earlier and then spread from there to North Germanic, but failed to reach East Germanic which had already split off by that time. This is confirmed by an intermediate stage ʀ, clearly attested in late runic East Norse at a time when West Germanic had long merged the sound with /r/.


The development of the demonstrative pronoun ancestral to English this.

Germanic *sa, sō, þat ‘this, that’ (cf. ON sá m., sú f., þat n.; OE se, sēo, þæt; Goth sa m., so f., þata n.) + proximal *si ‘here’ (cf. ON si, OHG sē, Goth sai ‘lo!, behold!’);

Runic Norse: nom.sg. sa-si, gen. þes-si, dat. þeim-si, etc., with declension of the 1st part;


fixed form with declension on the 2nd part: ON sjá, þessi m., OHG these m., OE þes m., þēos f., þis n.



Some have argued that after East Germanic broke off from the group, the remaining Germanic languages, the Northwest Germanic languages, divided into four main dialects:[9] North Germanic, and the three groups conventionally called "West Germanic", namely

North Sea Germanic (Ingvaeonic languages, ancestral to the Anglo-Frisian languages and Low German)
Weser-Rhine Germanic (Low Franconian languages)
Elbe Germanic (High German languages)

Under this view, the properties that the West Germanic languages have in common separate from the North Germanic languages are not inherited from a "Proto-West-Germanic" language, but rather spread by language contact among the Germanic languages spoken in central Europe, not reaching those spoken in Scandinavia.
North Germanic features[edit]
Some innovations are not found in West and East Germanic such as:

Sharpening of geminate /jj/ and /ww/ according to Holtzmann's law

Occurred also in East Germanic, but with a different outcome.
Proto-Germanic *twajjôN ("of two") > Old Norse tveggja, Gothic twaddjē, but > Old High German zweiio


Word-final devoicing of stop consonants.

Proto-Germanic *band ("I/he bound") > *bant > Old West Norse batt, Old East Norse bant, but Old English band


Loss of medial /h/ with compensatory lengthening of the preceding vowel and the following consonant, if present.

Proto-Germanic *nahtuN ("night", accusative) > *nāttu > (by u-umlaut) *nǭttu > Old Norse nótt


/ɑi̯/ > /ɑː/ before /r/ (but not /z/)

Proto-Germanic *sairaz ("sore") > *sāraz > *sārz > Old Norse sárr, but > *seira > Old High German sēr.
With original /z/ Proto-Germanic *gaizaz > *geizz > Old Norse geirr.


General loss of word-final /n/, following the loss of word-final short vowels (which are still present in the earliest runic inscriptions).

Proto-Germanic *bindanaN > *bindan > Old Norse binda, but > Old English bindan.
This also affected stressed syllables: Proto-Germanic *in > Old Norse í


Vowel breaking of /e/ to /jɑ/ except after w, j or l (see "gift" above).

The diphthong /eu/ was also affected (also l), shifting to /jɒu/ at an early stage. This diphthong is preserved in Old Gutnish and survives in modern Gutnish. In other Norse dialects, the /j/-onset and length remained, but the diphthong simplified resulting in variously /juː/ or /joː/.
This affected only stressed syllables. The word *ek ("I"), which could occur both stressed and unstressed, appears varyingly as ek (unstressed, with no breaking) and jak (stressed, with breaking) throughout Old Norse.


Loss of initial /j/ (see "year" above), and also of /w/ before a round vowel.

Proto-Germanic *wulfaz > North Germanic ulfz > Old Norse ulfr


The development of u-umlaut, which rounded stressed vowels when /u/ or /w/ followed in the next syllable. This followed vowel breaking, with ja /jɑ/ being u-umlauted to jǫ /jɒ/.

Middle Ages[edit]




The approximate extent of Old Norse and related languages in the early 10th century:
  Old West Norse dialect
  Old East Norse dialect
  Old Gutnish
  Old English
  Crimean Gothic
  Other Germanic languages with which Old Norse still retained some mutual intelligibility



After the Proto-Norse and Old Norse periods, the North Germanic languages developed into an East Scandinavian branch, consisting of Danish and Swedish; and, secondly, a West Scandinavian branch, consisting of Norwegian, Faroese and Icelandic and, thirdly, an Old Gutnish branch.[10] Norwegian settlers brought Old West Norse to Iceland and the Faroe Islands around 800. Of the modern Scandinavian languages, written Icelandic is closest to this ancient language.[11] An additional language, known as Norn, developed on Orkney and Shetland after Vikings had settled there around 800, but this language became extinct around 1700.[5]
In medieval times, speakers of all the Scandinavian languages could understand one another to a significant degree, and it was often referred to as a single language, called the "Danish tongue" until the 13th century by some in Sweden[11] and Iceland.[12] In the 16th century, many Danes and Swedes still referred to North Germanic as a single language, which is stated in the introduction to the first Danish translation of the Bible and in Olaus Magnus' A Description of the Northern Peoples. Dialectal variation between west and east in Old Norse however was certainly present during the Middle Ages and three dialects had emerged: Old West Norse, Old East Norse and Old Gutnish. Old Icelandic was essentially identical to Old Norwegian, and together they formed the Old West Norse dialect of Old Norse and were also spoken in settlements in Faroe Islands, Ireland, Scotland, the Isle of Man, and Norwegian settlements in Normandy.[13] The Old East Norse dialect was spoken in Denmark, Sweden, settlements in Russia,[14] England, and Danish settlements in Normandy. The Old Gutnish dialect was spoken in Gotland and in various settlements in the East.
Yet, by 1600, another classification of the North Germanic language branches had arisen from a syntactic point of view,[5] dividing them into an insular group (Icelandic and Faroese) and a continental group (Danish, Norwegian and Swedish). The division between Insular Scandinavian (önordiska/ønordisk/øynordisk)[15] and Continental Scandinavian (Skandinavisk)[16] is based on mutual intelligibility between the two groups and developed due to different influences, particularly the political union of Denmark and Norway (1536–1814) which led to significant Danish influence on central and eastern[citation needed] Norwegian dialects (Bokmål or Dano-Norwegian).[4]
Demographics[edit]
The North Germanic languages are national languages in Denmark, Iceland, Norway and Sweden, whereas the non-Germanic Finnish is spoken by the majority in Finland. In inter-Nordic contexts, texts are today often presented in three versions: Finnish, Icelandic, and one of the three languages Danish, Norwegian and Swedish.[17] Another official language in the Nordic countries is Greenlandic (in the Eskimo–Aleut family), the sole official language of Greenland.
In Southern Jutland in southwestern Denmark, German is also spoken by the North Schleswig Germans, and German is a recognized minority language in this region. German is the primary language among the Danish minority of Southern Schleswig, and likewise, Danish is the primary language of the North Schleswig Germans. Both minority groups are highly bilingual.
Traditionally, Danish and German were the two official languages of Denmark–Norway; laws and other official instruments for use in Denmark and Norway were written in Danish, and local administrators spoke Danish or Norwegian. German was the administrative language of Holstein and the Duchy of Schleswig.
Sami languages form an unrelated group that has coexisted with the North Germanic language group in Scandinavia since prehistory.[18] Sami, like Finnish, is part of the group of the Uralic languages.[19] During centuries of interaction, Finnish and Sami have imported many more loanwords from North Germanic languages than vice versa.


Language
Speakers
Official Status


Swedish
9,200,000*
 Finland,  Sweden,  European Union,  Nordic Council


Danish
5,600,000
 Denmark,  Faroe Islands,  European Union,  Nordic Council


Norwegian
5,000,000
 Norway,  Nordic Council


Icelandic
358,000
 Iceland


Faroese
90,000
 Faroe Islands


Elfdalian
3,500



Total
20,251,500





* The figure includes 450,000 members of the Swedish-speaking population of Finland


Classification[edit]






This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (August 2010) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)







The present-day distribution of the Germanic languages in Europe:
North Germanic languages
  Icelandic
  Faroese
  Norwegian (partially national boundaries)
  Swedish (partially national boundaries)
  Danish (partially national boundaries)
West Germanic languages
  Scots
  English
  Frisian
  Dutch (partially national boundaries)
  Low German (partially national boundaries)
  German
Dots indicate a few of the areas where multilingualism is common.


In historical linguistics, the North Germanic family tree is divided into two main branches, West Scandinavian languages (Norwegian, Faroese and Icelandic) and East Scandinavian languages (Danish and Swedish), along with various dialects and varieties. The two branches are derived from the western and eastern dialect groups of Old Norse respectively. There was also an Old Gutnish branch spoken on the island of Gotland. The continental Scandinavian languages (Swedish, Norwegian and Danish) were heavily influenced by Middle Low German during the period of Hanseatic expansion.
Currently, English loanwords are influencing the languages. A 2005 survey of words used by speakers of the Scandinavian languages showed that the number of English loanwords used in the languages has doubled during the last 30 years and is now 1.2%. Icelandic has imported fewer English words than the other North Germanic languages, despite the fact that it is the country that uses English most.[20]
Another way of classifying the languages — focusing on mutual intelligibility rather than the tree-of-life model — posits Norwegian, Danish, and Swedish as Continental Scandinavian, and Faroese and Icelandic as Insular Scandinavian.[4] Because of the long political union between Norway and Denmark, moderate and conservative Norwegian Bokmål share most of the Danish vocabulary and grammar, and was nearly identical to written Danish until the spelling reform of 1907. (For this reason, Bokmål and its unofficial, more conservative variant Riksmål are sometimes considered East Scandinavian, and Nynorsk West Scandinavian via the West-East division shown above.[21])
However, Danish has developed a greater distance between the spoken and written versions of the language, so the differences between spoken Norwegian and spoken Danish are somewhat more significant than the difference between their respective written forms. Written Danish is relatively close to the other Continental Scandinavian languages, but the sound developments of spoken Danish include reduction and assimilation of consonants and vowels, as well as the prosodic feature called stød in Danish, developments which have not occurred in the other languages (though the stød corresponds to the different tones in Norwegian and Swedish, which are tonal languages). However, Scandinavians are widely expected to understand some of the other spoken Scandinavian languages. Many people[who?] may have some difficulty, particularly with elderly dialect speakers, but a lot of people[who?] can understand the languages, as they appear in radio and television, of the other Scandinavian countries.
Sweden left the Kalmar Union in 1523 due to conflicts with Denmark, leaving two Scandinavian units: The union of Denmark–Norway (ruled from Copenhagen, Denmark) and Sweden (including present-day Finland). The two countries took different sides during several wars until 1814, when the Denmark-Norway unit was disestablished, and made different international contacts. This led to different borrowings from foreign languages (Sweden had a francophone period), for example the Old Swedish word vindöga ‘window’ was replaced by fönster (from Middle Low German), whereas native vindue was kept in Danish. Norwegians, who spoke (and still speak) the Norwegian dialects derived from Old Norse, would say vindauga or similar. The written language of Denmark-Norway however, was based on the dialect of Copenhagen and thus had vindue. On the other hand, the word begynde ‘begin’ (now written begynne in Norwegian Bokmål) was borrowed into Danish and Norwegian, whereas native börja was kept in Swedish. Even though standard Swedish and Danish were moving apart, the dialects were not influenced that much. Thus Norwegian and Swedish remained similar in pronunciation, and words like børja were able to survive in some of the Norwegian dialects whereas vindöga survived in some of the Swedish dialects. Nynorsk incorporates much of these words, like byrja (cf. Swedish börja, Danish begynde), veke (cf. Sw vecka, Dan uge) and vatn (Sw vatten, Dan vand) whereas Bokmål has retained the Danish forms (begynne, uke, vann). As a result, Nynorsk does not conform the above model,[clarification needed] since it shares a lot of features with Swedish. According to the Norwegian linguist Arne Torp, the Nynorsk project (which had as a goal to re-establish a written Norwegian language) would have been much harder to carry out if Norway had been in a union with Sweden instead of with Denmark, simply because the differences would have been smaller.[22]
Mutual intelligibility[edit]
See also: Germanic languages § Vocabulary comparison
The mutual intelligibility between the Continental Scandinavian languages is asymmetrical. Various studies have shown Norwegian speakers to be the best in Scandinavia at understanding other languages within the language group.[23][24] According to a study undertaken during 2002–2005 and funded by the Nordic Cultural Fund, Swedish speakers in Stockholm and Danish speakers in Copenhagen have the greatest difficulty in understanding other Nordic languages.[20] The study, which focused mainly on native speakers under the age of 25, showed that the lowest ability to comprehend another language is demonstrated by youth in Stockholm in regard to Danish, producing the lowest ability score in the survey. The greatest variation in results between participants within the same country was also demonstrated by the Swedish speakers in the study. Participants from Malmö, located in the southernmost Swedish province of Scania (Skåne), demonstrated a better understanding of Danish than Swedish speakers to the north.
Access to Danish television and radio, direct trains to Copenhagen over the Øresund Bridge and a larger number of cross-border commuters in the Øresund Region contribute to a better knowledge of spoken Danish and a better knowledge of the unique Danish words among the region's inhabitants. According to the study, youth in this region were able to understand the Danish language (slightly) better than the Norwegian language. But they still could not understand Danish as well as the Norwegians could, demonstrating once again the relative distance of Swedish from Danish. Youth in Copenhagen had a very poor command of Swedish, showing that the Øresund connection was mostly one-way.
The results from the study of how well native youth in different Scandinavian cities did when tested on their knowledge of the other Continental Scandinavian languages are summarized in table format,[23] reproduced below. The maximum score was 10.0:


City
Comprehension
of Danish
Comprehension
of Swedish
Comprehension
of Norwegian
Average


Århus, Denmark
N/A

3.74


4.68


4.21



Copenhagen, Denmark
N/A

3.60


4.13


3.87



Malmö, Sweden

5.08

N/A

4.97


5.02



Stockholm, Sweden

3.46

N/A

5.56


4.51



Bergen, Norway

6.50


6.15

N/A

6.32



Oslo, Norway

6.57


7.12

N/A

6.85



Faroese speakers (of the Insular Scandinavian languages group) are even better than the Norwegians at comprehending two or more languages within the Continental Scandinavian languages group, scoring high in both Danish (which they study at school) and Norwegian and having the highest score on a Scandinavian language other than their native language, as well as the highest average score. Icelandic speakers, in contrast, have a poor command of Norwegian and Swedish. They do somewhat better with Danish, as they are taught Danish in school. When speakers of Faroese and Icelandic were tested on how well they understood the three Continental Scandinavian languages, the test results were as follows (maximum score 10.0):[23]


Area/
Country
Comprehension
of Danish
Comprehension
of Swedish
Comprehension
of Norwegian
Average


Faroe Islands

8.28


5.75


7.00


7.01



Iceland

5.36


3.34


3.40


4.19



Vocabulary[edit]
The North Germanic languages share many lexical, grammatical, phonological, and morphological similarities, to a more significant extent than the West Germanic languages do. These lexical, grammatical, and morphological similarities can be outlined in the table below.


Language
Sentence


English
It was a humid, grey summer day at the end of June.


Frisian
It wie in stribbelige/fochtige, graue simmerdei oan de ein fan Juny.


Afrikaans
Dit was 'n vogtige, grou somer dag aan die einde van Junie.


Dutch
Het was een vochtige, grauwe zomerdag eind juni.


German
Es war ein feuchter, grauer Sommertag Ende Juni.


Swedish
Det var en fuktig, grå sommardag i slutet av juni.


Danish
Det var en fugtig, grå sommerdag i slutningen af juni.


Norwegian (Bokmål)
Det var en fuktig, grå sommerdag i slutten av juni.


Norwegian (Nynorsk)
Det var ein fuktig, grå sumardag/sommardag i slutten/enden av juni.


Icelandic
Það var rakur, grár sumardagur í lok júní.


Faroese
Tað var ein rakur/fuktigur, gráur summardagur síðst í juni.


Language boundaries[edit]
Given the aforementioned homogeneity, there exists some discussion on whether the continental group should be considered one or several languages.[25] The Scandinavian languages (in the narrow sense, i.e. the languages of Scandinavia) are often cited as proof of the aphorism "A language is a dialect with an army and navy". The differences in dialects within the countries of Norway, Sweden, and Denmark can often be greater than the differences across the borders, but the political independence of these countries leads continental Scandinavian to be classified into Norwegian, Swedish, and Danish in the popular mind as well as among most linguists. The generally agreed upon language border is, in other words, politically shaped. This is also because of the strong influence of the standard languages, particularly in Denmark and Sweden.[25] Even if the language policy of Norway has been more tolerant of rural dialectal variation in formal language, the prestige dialect often referred to as "Eastern Urban Norwegian", spoken mainly in and around the Oslo region, is sometimes considered normative. The influence of a standard Norwegian is nevertheless less so than in Denmark and Sweden, since the prestige dialect in Norway has moved geographically several times over the past 200 years. The organised formation of Nynorsk out of western Norwegian dialects after Norway became independent of Denmark in 1814 intensified the politico-linguistic divisions.
The Nordic Council has on several occasions referred to the (Germanic) languages spoken in Scandinavia as the "Scandinavian language" (singular); for instance, the official newsletter of the Nordic Council is written in the "Scandinavian language".[26] The creation of one unified written language has been considered as highly unlikely, given the failure to agree upon a common standardized language in Norway. However, there is a slight chance of "some uniformization of spelling" between Norway, Sweden and Denmark.[27][28]
Family tree[edit]






This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (May 2014) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



All North Germanic languages are descended from Old Norse. Divisions between subfamilies of North Germanic are rarely precisely defined: Most form continuous clines, with adjacent dialects being mutually intelligible and the most separated ones not.




Germanic languages division including West and East Scandinavian languages and dialects



Proto-Norse

West Scandinavian

Greenlandic Norse (extinct)
Icelandic
Faroese
Norn (extinct)
Norwegian

Vestlandsk (Western and Southern Norway)

Arendalsk dialect (no) (Arendal region) (influenced by Danish pronunciation)
Bergensk dialect (no) (Midhordland district) (heavily influenced by Danish and Low German)
Sogn dialect (Sogn district) (has some wide similarities with Old West Norse, Faroese and Icelandic)
Jærsk dialect (no) (Jæren district) (influenced by Danish pronunciation)
Valle dialect (no) (Upper Setesdal district) (one of the dialects with the best preservation of Old West Norse)
other dialects


Nordnorsk (no) (Northern Norway)

various dialects


Østlandsk (no) (Eastern Norway)

Bohuslänska dialect (sv) (Bohuslän province) (influenced by Swedish in retrospective)
Toten dialect (no) (Toten district)
Valdris dialect (Valdres district)
Vikværsk dialect (Viken historical district)
other dialects


Trøndersk (Trøndelag)

Härjedalska dialect (sv) (Härjedalen)
Jamtlandic dialects (Jämtland province) (disputed, but has a larger linguistic similarity with the Trøndersk dialect in Norway)












East Scandinavian

Danish

Insular Danish (Ømål)
East Danish (Bornholmsk along with former East Danish dialects in Blekinge, Halland and Skåne (Scanian dialect) as well as the southern parts of Småland, now generally considered South Swedish dialects)
Jutlandic (or Jutish, in Jutland)

Northern Jutlandic

East Jutlandic
West Jutlandic


Southern Jutlandic (in Southern Jutland and Southern Schleswig)


Urban East Norwegian (generally considered a Norwegian dialect)


Swedish

Sveamål (Svealand)
Norrland dialects (Norrland, including Westrobothnian and Kalix)
Götamål (Götaland)
Swedish dialects in Ostrobothnia (Finland and Estonia)


Gutnish (Gotland)



other dialects




Dalecarlian (Dalarna), including Elfdalian (which is considered a separate language from Swedish, Älvdalen locality)[29]





Classification difficulties[edit]
The Jamtlandic dialects share many characteristics with both Trøndersk and with Norrländska mål. Due to this ambiguous position, it is contested whether Jamtlandic belongs to the West Norse or the East Norse group.[30]
Elfdalian (Älvdalen speech), generally considered a Sveamål dialect, today has an official orthography and is, because of a lack of mutual intelligibility with Swedish, considered as a separate language by many linguists. Traditionally regarded as a Swedish dialect,[31] but by several criteria closer to West Norse dialects,[29] Elfdalian is a separate language by the standard of mutual intelligibility.[32][33][34][35]
Traveller Danish, Rodi, and Swedish Romani are varieties of Danish, Norwegian and Swedish with Romani vocabulary or Para-Romani known collectively as the Scandoromani language.[36] They are spoken by Norwegian and Swedish Travellers. The Scando-Romani varieties in Sweden and Norway combine elements from the dialects of Western Sweden, Eastern Norway (Østlandet) and Trøndersk.
Written norms of Norwegian[edit]
See also: Norwegian language conflict
Norwegian has two official written norms, Bokmål and Nynorsk. In addition, there are some unofficial norms. Riksmål is more conservative than Bokmål (that is, closer to Danish) and is used to various extents by numerous people, especially in the cities and by the largest newspaper in Norway, Aftenposten. On the other hand, Høgnorsk (High Norwegian) is similar to Nynorsk and is used by a very small minority.
See also[edit]

Comparison of Norwegian Bokmål and Standard Danish
East Germanic languages
Ingvaeonic languages
Low Franconian languages
Gender in Danish and Swedish
High German languages
Scanian dialect
Svorsk
West Germanic languages

References[edit]


^ Hammarström, Harald; Forkel, Robert; Haspelmath, Martin, eds. (2017). "North Germanic". Glottolog 3.0. Jena, Germany: Max Planck Institute for the Science of Human History. 
^ Gordon, Raymond G., Jr. (ed.), 2005. Language Family Trees Indo-European, Germanic, North. Ethnologue: Languages of the World, Fifteenth edition. Dallas, Texas: SIL International
^ Scandinavian Dialect Syntax. Network for Scandinavian Dialect Syntax. Retrieved 11 November 2007.
^ a b c Torp, Arne (2004). Nordiske sprog i fortid og nutid. Sproglighed og sprogforskelle, sprogfamilier og sprogslægtskab. Moderne nordiske sprog. In Nordens sprog – med rødder og fødder. Nord 2004:010, ISBN 92-893-1041-3, Nordic Council of Ministers' Secretariat, Copenhagen 2004. (In Danish).
^ a b c Holmberg, Anders and Christer Platzack (2005). "The Scandinavian languages". In The Comparative Syntax Handbook, eds Guglielmo Cinque and Richard S. Kayne. Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press. Excerpt at Durham University Archived 3 December 2007 at the Wayback Machine..
^ Leinonen, Therese (2011), "Aggregate analysis of vowel pronunciation in Swedish dialects", Oslo Studies in Language 3 (2) Aggregate analysis of vowel pronunciation in Swedish dialects]", Oslo Studies in Language 3 (2); Dahl, Östen (2000), Språkets enhet och mångfald., Lund: Studentlitteratur, pp. 117–119; Lars-Erik Edlund "Språklig variation i tid och rum" in Dahl, Östen & Edlund, Lars-Erik, eds. (2010), Sveriges nationalatlas. Språken i Sverige.Stockholm: Kungl. Vitterhets historie och antikvitets akademien, p. 9
^ Hawkins, John A. (1987). "Germanic languages". In Bernard Comrie. The World's Major Languages. Oxford University Press. pp. 68–76. ISBN 0-19-520521-9. 
^ But see Cercignani, Fausto, Indo-European ē in Germanic, in «Zeitschrift für vergleichende Sprachforschung», 86/1, 1972, pp. 104–110.
^ Kuhn, Hans (1955–56). "Zur Gliederung der germanischen Sprachen". Zeitschrift für deutsches Altertum und deutsche Literatur. 86: 1–47. 
^ Bandle, Oskar (ed.)(2005). The Nordic Languages: An International Handbook of the History of the North Germanic Languages. Walter de Gruyter, 2005, ISBN 3-11-017149-X.
^ a b Lund, Jørn. Language Archived 15 August 2004 at the Wayback Machine.. Published online by Royal Danish Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Version 1-November 2003. Retrieved 13 November 2007.
^ Lindström, Fredrik; Lindström, Henrik (2012). Svitjods undergång och Sveriges födelse. Albert Bonniers Förlag. ISBN 978-91-0-013451-8. , p. 259
^ Adams 1895, pp. 336-338.
^ Article Nordiska språk, section Historia, subsection Omkring 800–1100, in Nationalencyklopedin (1994).
^ Jónsson, Jóhannes Gísli and Thórhallur Eythórsson (2004). "Variation in subject case marking in Insular Scandinavian". Nordic Journal of Linguistics (2005), 28: 223–245 Cambridge University Press. Retrieved 9 November 2007.
^ Heine, Bernd and Tania Kuteva (2006). The Changing Languages of Europe. Oxford University Press, 2006, ISBN 0-19-929734-7.
^ The Nordic Council's/Nordic Council of Ministers' political magazine Analys Norden offers three versions: a section labeled "Íslenska" (Icelandic), a section labeled "Skandinavisk" (in either Danish, Norwegian or Swedish), and a section labeled "Suomi" (Finnish).
^ Sammallahti, Pekka, 1990. "The Sámi Language: Past and Present". In Arctic Languages: An Awakening. The United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO). Paris. ISBN 92-3-102661-5, p. 440: "the arrival of a Uralic population and language in Samiland [...] means that there has been a period of at least 5000 years of uninterrupted linguistic and cultural development in Samiland. [...] It is also possible, however, that the earlier inhabitants of the area also spoke a Uralic language: we do not know of any linguistic groups in the area other than the Uralic and Indo-Europeans (represented by the present Scandinavian languages)."
^ Inez Svonni Fjällström (2006). "A language with deep roots" Archived 5 October 2007 at the Wayback Machine..Sápmi: Language history, 14 November 2006. Samiskt Informationscentrum Sametinget: "The Scandinavian languages are Northern Germanic languages. [...] Sami belongs to the Finno-Ugric language family. Finnish, Estonian, Livonian and Hungarian belong to the same language family and are consequently related to each other."
^ a b "Urban misunderstandings". In Norden this week – Monday 01.17.2005.The Nordic Council and the Nordic Council of Ministers. Retrieved 13 November 2007.
^ Victor Ginsburgh, Shlomo Weber (2011). How many languages do we need?: the economics of linguistic diversity, Princeton University Press. p.42.
^ http://www.uniforum.uio.no/nyheter/2005/03/nynorsk-noe-for-svensker.html
^ a b c Delsing, Lars-Olof and Katarina Lundin Åkesson (2005). Håller språket ihop Norden? En forskningsrapport om ungdomars förståelse av danska, svenska och norska. Available in pdf format. Numbers are from Figure 4:11. "Grannspråksförståelse bland infödda skandinaver fördelade på ort", p.65 and Figure 4:6. "Sammanlagt resultat på grannspråksundersökningen fördelat på område", p.58.
^ Maurud, Ø (1976). Nabospråksforståelse i Skandinavia. En undersøkelse om gjensidig forståelse av tale- og skriftspråk i Danmark, Norge og Sverige. Nordisk utredningsserie 13. Nordiska rådet, Stockholm.
^ a b Nordens språk - med rötter och fötter
^ Hello Norden newsletter's language of publication is described as skandinaviska (in Swedish)
^ The Scandinavian Languages: Their Histories and Relationships
^ Finlandssvensk som hovedspråk (in Norwegian bokmål)
^ a b Kroonen, Guus. "On the origins of the Elfdalian nasal vowels from the perspective of diachronic dialectology and Germanic etymology" (PDF). Department of Nordic Studies and Linguistics. University of Copenhagen. Retrieved 27 January 2016. In many aspects, Elfdalian, takes up a middle position between East and West Nordic. However, it shares some innovations with West Nordic, but none with East Nordic. This invalidates the claim that Elfdalian split off from Old Swedish. 
^ Dalen, Arnold (2005). Jemtsk og trøndersk – to nære slektningar. Språkrådet, Norway. (In Norwegian). Retrieved 13 November 2007.
^ Ekberg, Lena (2010). "The National Minority Languages in Sweden". In Gerhard Stickel. National, Regional and Minority Languages in Europe: Contributions to the Annual Conference 2009 of Efnil in Dublin. Peter Lang. pp. 87–92. ISBN 9783631603659. Retrieved 6 March 2013. 
^ Dahl, Östen; Dahlberg, Ingrid; Delsing, Lars-Olof; Halvarsson, Herbert; Larsson, Gösta; Nyström, Gunnar; Olsson, Rut; Sapir, Yair; Steensland, Lars; Williams, Henrik (8 February 2007). "Älvdalskan är ett språk – inte en svensk dialekt" [Elfdalian is a language – not a Swedish dialect]. Aftonbladet (in Swedish). Stockholm. Retrieved 7 March 2013. 
^ Dahl, Östen (December 2008). "Älvdalska – eget språk eller värsting bland dialekter?" [Elfdalian – its own language or an outstanding dialect?]. Språktidningen (in Swedish). Retrieved 16 May 2013. 
^ Zach, Kristine (2013). "Das Älvdalische — Sprache oder Dialekt? (Diplomarbeit)" [Elfdalian — Language or dialect? (Masters thesis)] (PDF) (in German). University of Vienna. 
^ Sapir, Yair (2004). Elfdalian, the Vernacular of Övdaln. Conference paper, 18–19 juni 2004. Available in pdf format at Uppsala University online archive Archived 22 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine..
^ LLOW – Traveller Danish


References[edit]

Adams, Charles Kendall (1895). Johnson's Universal Cyclopedia: A New Edition. D. Appleton, A. J. Johnson. 
Jervelund, Anita (2007), Sådan Staver Vi .
Kristiansen, Tore m.fl. (1996), Dansk Sproglære .
Lucazin, M (2010), Utkast till ortografi över skånska språket med morfologi och ordlista. Första. revisionen (PDF), ISBN 978-91-977265-2-8  Outlined Scanian orthography including morphology and word index. First revision.
Maurer, Friedrich (1942), Nordgermanen und Alemannen: Studien zur germanischen und frühdeutschen Sprachgeschichte, Stammes- und Volkskunde, Strasbourg: Hünenburg.
Rowe, Charley. The problematic Holtzmann's Law in Germanic. (Indogermanische Forschungen Bd. 108, 2003).
Iben Stampe Sletten red., Nordens sprog – med rødder og fødder, 2005, ISBN 92-893-1041-3, available online, also available in the other Scandinavian languages.

External links[edit]



Wikisource has the text of the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica article Scandinavian Languages.



Middle Low German influence on the Scandinavian languages
Scandinavian-only words
Scandinavian loans in Old and Middle English, and their legacy in the dialects of England and modern standard English
Most similar languages to Danish







v
t
e


Modern Germanic languages and dialects




North
Germanic






West
Scandinavian




Bergensk
Elfdalian
Faroese

Gøtudanskt


Icelandic
Jamtlandic
Norwegian

Bokmål
Nynorsk


Sognamål
Trøndersk
Valdris
Vestlandsk
Vikværsk






East
Scandinavian




Bornholmsk
Dalecarlian
Danish
Insular Danish
Jutlandic

South


Perkerdansk
Gutnish
Kalix
Kebabnorsk
Kiruna
Luleå
Norrland
Småländska
South Swedish

Scanian


Stockholm

Rinkeby


Uppländska
Västgötska
Westrobothnian
Swedish

Åland
Estonia
Finland
Ostrobothnia











West
Germanic






Anglo-
Frisian




East Frisian

Saterland Frisian
Wangerooge Frisian
Wursten Frisian


English

English dialects


North Frisian
Scots
West Frisian






Netherlandic






Standardized variants




Dutch
Afrikaans






West Netherlandic




Hollandic
West Flemish
Zeelandic
East Flemish
Brabantian






East Netherlandic




Limburgish
Meuse-Rhenish









Low German/
Low Saxon






Dutch-influenced:




Dutch Low Saxon






German-influenced:




Northern Low Saxon
Westphalian
Eastphalian
Mecklenburgisch-Vorpommersch
Brandenburgisch
East Pomeranian
Central Pomeranian
Low Prussian









High
German






Standard
German




German
Swiss
Austrian






Central
German




Central Franconian

Luxembourgish
Moselle Franconian

Hunsrückisch
Transylvanian Saxon


Ripuarian

Kölsch




Rhine Franconian

Hessian
Lorraine Franconian
Palatine


Thuringian
Upper Saxon
High Prussian
Lausitzisch-neumärkisch
Silesian






Upper
German




High Franconian

East Franconian
South Franconian


Bavarian

Northern Bavarian
Central Bavarian
Southern Bavarian


Cimbrian
Mòcheno
Swabian
Alemannic

Low Alemannic

Coloniero


Central Alemannic
High Alemannic
Highest Alemannic

Walser




Swiss German





 



Prague German
Yiddish


















v
t
e


Germanic languages and philology



Language subgroups



North
East
West —
Elbe
Weser-Rhine
North Sea


Northwest
Gotho-Nordic
South





Reconstructed



Proto-Germanic
Proto-Germanic grammar
Germanic parent language





Historical languages




North



Proto-Norse
Old Norse
Old Swedish
Old Gutnish
Norn
Greenlandic Norse
Old Norwegian
Middle Norwegian





East



Gothic
Crimean Gothic
Vandalic
Burgundian





West



Old Saxon
Middle Low German
Old High German
Middle High German
Frankish
Old Dutch
Middle Dutch
Old Frisian
Middle Frisian
Old English
Middle English
Early Scots
Middle Scots
Lombardic
Forth and Bargy
Fingallian








Modern languages



Afrikaans
Alemannic
Cimbrian
Danish
Dutch
English
Faroese
German
Gutnish
Icelandic
Limburgish
Low German
Mòcheno
Mennonite Low German
Luxembourgish
North Frisian
Norwegian
Saterland Frisian
Scots
Swedish
Wymysiöeryś
West Frisian
Yiddish





Diachronic features



Grimm's law
Verner's law
Holtzmann's law
Sievers' law
Kluge's law
Germanic substrate hypothesis
West Germanic gemination
High German consonant shift
Germanic a-mutation
Germanic umlaut
Germanic spirant law
Ingvaeonic nasal spirant law
Great Vowel Shift





Synchronic features



Germanic verb
Germanic strong verb
Germanic weak verb
Preterite-present verb
Grammatischer Wechsel
Indo-European ablaut





Language histories



English (phonology)
Scots (phonology)
German
Dutch
Danish
Icelandic
Swedish









Authority control



LCCN: sh85117963
GND: 4120035-4
SUDOC: 027399737
BNF: cb12649042d (data)











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=North_Germanic_languages&oldid=817689243"					Categories: North Germanic languagesNorth Germanic peoplesHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksCS1 Swedish-language sources (sv)CS1 German-language sources (de)All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from February 2012Articles needing additional references from August 2010All articles needing additional referencesAll articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrasesArticles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from April 2017Wikipedia articles needing clarification from March 2013Articles containing West Frisian-language textArticles containing Afrikaans-language textArticles containing Dutch-language textArticles containing German-language textArticles containing Swedish-language textArticles containing Danish-language textArticles containing Bokmål-language textArticles containing Nynorsk-language textArticles containing Icelandic-language textArticles containing Faroese-language textArticles needing additional references from May 2014Interlanguage link template link numberUse dmy dates from April 2011Wikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiers