

Eastern Time Zone




  Eastern Time Zone




UTC offset


EST
UTC−5:00


EDT
UTC−4:00


Current time (Refresh the clock.)


EST
8:51 am on  Jan 3, 2018


Observance of DST


DST is observed in certain regions of this time zone between the 2nd Sunday in March and the 1st Sunday in November.


DST ended
Nov 5, 2017


DST begins
Mar 11, 2018


The Eastern Time Zone (ET) is a time zone encompassing 17 U.S. states in the eastern part of the contiguous United States, parts of eastern Canada, the state of Quintana Roo in Mexico, Panama in Central America, and the Caribbean Islands.
Places that use Eastern Standard Time (EST) when observing standard time (autumn/winter) are 5 hours behind Coordinated Universal Time (UTC−05:00).
Eastern Daylight Time (EDT), when observing daylight saving time DST (spring/summer) is 4 hours behind Coordinated Universal Time (UTC−04:00).
In the northern parts of the time zone, on the second Sunday in March, at 2:00 a.m. EST, clocks are advanced to 3:00 a.m. EDT leaving a one-hour "gap". On the first Sunday in November, at 2:00 a.m. EDT, clocks are moved back to 1:00 a.m. EST, thus "duplicating" one hour. Southern parts of the zone (Panama and the Caribbean) do not observe daylight saving time.



Contents


1 History
2 Canada
3 United States
4 Mexico
5 Caribbean Islands
6 Central and South America
7 See also
8 References
9 External links



History[edit]
The Uniform Time Act of 1966 ruled that daylight saving time would run from the last Sunday of April until the last Sunday in October in the United States.[1] The act was amended to make the first Sunday in April the beginning of daylight saving time as of 1987.[1] The Energy Policy Act of 2005 extended daylight saving time in the United States beginning in 2007. So local times change at 2:00 a.m. EST to 3:00 a.m. EDT on the second Sunday in March and return at 2:00 a.m. EDT to 1:00 a.m. EST on the first Sunday in November.[1] In Canada, the time changes as it does in the United States.[2][3]
Canada[edit]
Main article: Time in Canada
In Canada, the following provinces and territories are part of the Eastern Time Zone:

Ontario, most of
Quebec, most of
Nunavut, most of

United States[edit]
Main article: Time in the United States
The boundary between time zones is set forth in the Code of Federal Regulations, with the boundary between the Eastern and Central Time Zones being specifically detailed at 49 CFR 71.[4]
Seventeen states and Washington, D.C. are located entirely within the Eastern Time Zone, they are:

Connecticut
Delaware
Georgia
Maine
Maryland
Massachusetts
New Hampshire
New Jersey
New York
North Carolina
Ohio
Pennsylvania
Rhode Island
South Carolina
Vermont
Virginia
West Virginia

Five states are partly in both the Eastern Time Zone and the Central Time Zone, they are:

Florida - peninsula and Big Bend regions east of the Apalachicola River.
Indiana - all except for northwest and southwest regions
Kentucky - eastern 60%
Michigan: all, except for Gogebic, Iron, Dickinson, and Menominee counties
Tennessee: East Tennessee

[5] Eastern Time is also used somewhat as a de facto official time for all of the United States because it includes the capital city (Washington D.C.), the most populous city (New York City), the largest city by area in the contiguous U.S. (Jacksonville), and half of the country’s population. For this reason, media organizations will often report when events happened or are scheduled to happen in Eastern Time even if they occurred in another time zone, and TV schedules are also almost always posted in Eastern Time. In the United States, all nationally televised morning programs (except Good Morning America Weekend Edition which some ABC affiliates on the east coast air on a tape-delay), some daytime talk shows, evening newscasts, most talent and awards shows, and any other nationally televised event that airs live on American television during prime time and on the weekends (such as sports television) are broadcast live in the Eastern Time Zone. Major professional sports leagues also post all game times in Eastern time, even if both teams are from the same time zone, outside of Eastern Time. For example, a game time between two teams from Pacific Time Zone will still be posted in Eastern time (for example, one may see "Seattle at Los Angeles" with "10:00 p.m." posted as the start time for the game, often without even clarifying the time is posted in Eastern time).[citation needed]
Most cable television and national broadcast networks advertise airing times in Eastern time. National broadcast networks (ABC, CBS, The CW, FOX, NBC) generally have two primary feeds, an eastern feed for Eastern and Central time zones, and a tape-delayed western feed for the Pacific Time Zone. The prime time is set on Eastern and Pacific at 8:00 p.m., with the Central time zone stations receiving the eastern feed at 7:00 p.m. local time. Mountain Time Zone stations receive a separate feed at 7:00 p.m. local time.[citation needed] As Arizona does not observe daylight saving time, during the summer months, it has its own feed at 7:00 p.m. local time.[citation needed] Cable channels with a separate western feed (such as HBO, whose western feed is called "HBOW") generally air the same programming as the eastern feed delayed by three hours. Other cable networks such as the Discovery family of networks repeat their prime time programming three hours later; this allows for the same show to be advertised as airing at "8:00 p.m. E/P" (that is, "8:00 p.m. Eastern and Pacific time"). Networks specializing in the airing of sports events, such as ESPN, advertise all of their programming in Eastern and Pacific, incorporating the 3-hour time difference (as in "8:00 p.m. Eastern/5:00 p.m. Pacific") and leaving viewers in the remaining time zones to calculate start time in their own areas.[citation needed]
Mexico[edit]
Main article: Time in Mexico

Quintana Roo: this eastern state followed CST for an almost-17-year period (1982 to some time in 1998).[6] After more than two years of lobbying by a coalition of local hotel owners with the backing of the state's government, the Federal government approved the change to Quintana Roo's time zone, moving it from Central Standard Time (CST) to Eastern Standard Time (EST).[7] The time change took effect on February 1, 2015.[7]

Caribbean Islands[edit]
The Bahamas officially observe both Eastern Standard Time during the winter months and Eastern Daylight Time during the summer months. Cuba is usually the same, with Eastern Standard Time in the winter, and Eastern Daylight Time in the summer, but it often changes on different days. Cayman Islands, Haiti, and Jamaica use Eastern Standard Time year-round. The Turks and Caicos Islands used to follow eastern time with daylight saving but switched in 2015 to the Atlantic Time Zone.
Central and South America[edit]
Panama in Central America uses Eastern Standard Time UTC−05 year-round. The state of Acre and the southwest part of the state of Amazonas all in Brazil as well as Colombia, Ecuador (except for the Galápagos Islands, which uses Central Standard Time), and Peru in South America also use EST (UTC−5) all year-round.
See also[edit]

Effects of time zones on North American broadcasting
The time zone used in Eastern Australia is also called Eastern Time Zone. See Time in Australia.

References[edit]


^ a b c Prerau, David (2006). "Early adoption and U.S. Law". Daylight Saving Time. Web Exhibit. Retrieved 2007-04-23. 
^ Law, Gwillim (2007-09-21). "United States Time Zones". 
^ "Daylight Saving Time Starts Sunday". Government of Ontario. 2008-03-07. Retrieved 2010-09-21. 
^ The specification for the Eastern Time Zone is set forth at 49 CFR 71.4, and is listed in Text and pdf formats. The boundary between Eastern and Central is set forth at 49 CFR 71.5, and is listed in text and pdf formats.
^ http://legacy.decaturdaily.com/decaturdaily/news/060813/zones.shtml
^ "SIID División de Politica Social "Horario de Verano. Antecedentes y legislación comparada"" (in Spanish). Chamber of Deputies (Mexico). Retrieved 2013-11-04. 
^ a b "On Mexican Time: Changing Time Zones To Accommodate Tourism". Forbes. Retrieved 29 January 2015. 


External links[edit]

Official U.S. time in the Eastern time zone
North American Time Zone border data and images
World time zone map
U.S. time zone map
History of U.S. time zones and UTC conversion
Canada time zone map
Time zones for major world cities
Official times across Canada
Federal Regulations defining time zones






v
t
e


Time zones in North America



Time zone
Hours from UTC: Standard time
Hours from UTC: Daylight saving time


Hawaii–Aleutian (in Hawaii)
–10
–10


Hawaii–Aleutian (in Alaska)
–10
–9


Alaska
–9
–8


Pacific
–8
–7


Mountain (Arizona and Sonora only)
–7
–7


Mountain (other states)
–7
–6


Central (Saskatchewan only)
–6
–6


Central (other states)
–6
–5


Eastern (Southampton Island, Atikokan and New Osnaburgh/Pickle Lake only)
–5
–5


Eastern (other states)
–5
–4


Atlantic (Natashquan River)
–4
–4


Atlantic (other states)
–4
–3


Newfoundland
–3:30
–2:30


Saint Pierre and Miquelon
and most of Greenland
–3
–2




See also
Time in Canada
Time in Denmark
Time in Mexico
Time in the United States









						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Eastern_Time_Zone&oldid=818041951"					Categories: Time zonesTime in CanadaTime in MexicoTime zones in the United StatesHidden categories: CS1 Spanish-language sources (es)All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from March 2012Articles with unsourced statements from August 2014