

Norwegian


norsk


Pronunciation
[nɔʂk] (East and North)
[nɔʁsk] (West)


Native to
Norway


Ethnicity
Norwegians



Native speakers

5 million (2014)[1]



Language family


Indo-European

Germanic

North Germanic

disputed

Norwegian












Early forms


Old Norse

disputed






Standard forms


written Bokmål (official)
 •  written Riksmål (unofficial)
written Nynorsk (official)
 •  written Høgnorsk (unofficial)




Writing system

Latin (Norwegian alphabet)
Norwegian Braille



Signed forms

Norwegian Sign Language


Official status



Official language in

 Norway
 Nordic Council


Regulated by
Language Council of Norway (Bokmål and Nynorsk)
Norwegian Academy (Riksmål)
Ivar Aasen-sambandet (Høgnorsk)


Language codes


ISO 639-1

no – inclusive code
Individual codes: nb – Bokmål
nn – Nynorsk


ISO 639-2

nor – inclusive code
Individual codes:
nob – Bokmål
nno – Nynorsk


ISO 639-3
nor – inclusive code
Individual codes:
nob – Bokmål
nno – Nynorsk


Glottolog
norw1258[2]


Linguasphere
52-AAA-ba to -be; 52-AAA-cf to -cg



Areas where Norwegian is spoken, including North Dakota (where 0.4% of the population speaks Norwegian) and Minnesota (0.1% of the population) (Data: U.S. Census 2000).



This article contains IPA phonetic symbols. Without proper rendering support, you may see question marks, boxes, or other symbols instead of Unicode characters. For an introductory guide on IPA symbols, see Help:IPA.




Part of a series on


Norwegians


Culture




Architecture
Art
Cinema
Cuisine
Dance
Dress
Folk art
Literature
Media
Music
Religion
Sport
Theatre
Tourism




By country or region




Iceland
Russia
United Kingdom
Sweden
South Africa
Argentina
Brazil
United States

Minnesota
Dakota


Canada
Australia
New Zealand


Diaspora




Other




Religion
Language




Norwegian Portal





v
t
e





Norwegian (norsk) is a North Germanic language spoken mainly in Norway, where it is the official language. Along with Swedish and Danish, Norwegian forms a dialect continuum of more or less mutually intelligible local and regional variants.
These Scandinavian languages, together with Faroese and Icelandic as well as some extinct languages, constitute the North Germanic languages. Faroese and Icelandic are hardly mutually intelligible with Norwegian in their spoken form because continental Scandinavian has diverged from them.
As established by law and governmental policy, the two official forms of written Norwegian are Bokmål (literally "book tongue") and Nynorsk (literally "new Norwegian"). The official Norwegian Language Council (Språkrådet) is responsible for regulating the two forms, and recommends the terms "Norwegian Bokmål" and "Norwegian Nynorsk" in English.[citation needed] Two other written forms without official status also exist, one, called Riksmål ("state language"), is today to a large extent the same language as Bokmål though somewhat closer to the Danish language. It is regulated by the unofficial Norwegian Academy, which translates the name as "Standard Norwegian". The other is Høgnorsk ("High Norwegian"), a more purist form of Nynorsk, which maintains the language in an original form as given by Ivar Aasen and rejects most of the reforms from the 20th century; this form has limited use.
Nynorsk and Bokmål provide standards for how to write Norwegian, but not for how to speak the language. No standard of spoken Norwegian is officially sanctioned, and most Norwegians speak their own dialects in all circumstances. Thus, unlike in many other countries, the use of any Norwegian dialect, whether it coincides with the written norms or not, is accepted as correct spoken Norwegian. However, in areas where East Norwegian dialects are used, a tendency exists to accept a de facto spoken standard for this particular regional dialect, Urban East Norwegian or Standard East Norwegian (Norwegian: Standard Østnorsk), in which the vocabulary coincides with Bokmål.[3][4] Outside Eastern Norway, this spoken variation is not used.
From the 16th to the 19th centuries, Danish was the standard written language of Norway. As a result, the development of modern written Norwegian has been subject to strong controversy related to nationalism, rural versus urban discourse, and Norway's literary history. Historically, Bokmål is a Norwegianised variety of Danish, while Nynorsk is a language form based on Norwegian dialects and puristic opposition to Danish. The now-abandoned official policy to merge Bokmål and Nynorsk into one common language called Samnorsk through a series of spelling reforms has created a wide spectrum of varieties of both Bokmål and Nynorsk. The unofficial form known as Riksmål is considered more conservative than Bokmål, and the unofficial Høgnorsk more conservative than Nynorsk.
Norwegians are educated in both Bokmål and Nynorsk. A 2005 poll indicates that 86.3% use primarily Bokmål as their daily written language, 5.5% use both Bokmål and Nynorsk, and 7.5% use primarily Nynorsk.[citation needed] Thus, 13% are frequently writing Nynorsk, though the majority speak dialects that resemble Nynorsk more closely than Bokmål.[5] Broadly speaking, Nynorsk writing is widespread in western Norway, though not in major urban areas, and also in the upper parts of mountain valleys in the southern and eastern parts of Norway. Examples are Setesdal, the western part of Telemark county (fylke) and several municipalities in Hallingdal, Valdres, and Gudbrandsdalen. It is little used elsewhere, but 30–40 years ago, it also had strongholds in many rural parts of Trøndelag (mid-Norway) and the southern part of northern Norway (Nordland county). Today, not only is Nynorsk the official language of four of the 19 Norwegian counties, but also of many municipalities in five other counties. NRK, the Norwegian broadcasting corporation, broadcasts in both Bokmål and Nynorsk, and all governmental agencies are required to support both written languages. Bokmål is used in 92% of all written publications, and Nynorsk in 8% (2000).[citation needed]
Norwegian is one of the working languages of the Nordic Council. Under the Nordic Language Convention, citizens of the Nordic countries who speak Norwegian have the opportunity to use their native language when interacting with official bodies in other Nordic countries without being liable to any interpretation or translation costs.[6][7]
Norwegian is one of the two official languages in Norway. The other is Sami, spoken by some members of the Sami people, mostly in the Northern part of Norway. Norwegian and Sami are not mutually intelligible, as Sami belongs to the Finno-Ugric group of languages. Sami is spoken by less than one percent of people in Norway.



Contents


1 History

1.1 Origins
1.2 Advent of Christianity
1.3 Dano-Norwegian
1.4 Danish to Norwegian


2 Phonology

2.1 Consonants
2.2 Vowels
2.3 Accent


3 Written language

3.1 Alphabet
3.2 Bokmål and Nynorsk
3.3 Riksmål
3.4 Høgnorsk
3.5 Current usage


4 Dialects
5 Examples
6 Morphology

6.1 Nouns
6.2 Adjectives
6.3 Verbs
6.4 Pronouns
6.5 Determiners
6.6 Particle classes
6.7 Compound words


7 Vocabulary
8 See also
9 References
10 Bibliography
11 External links



History[edit]
Origins[edit]




The approximate extent of Old Norse and related languages in the early 10th century:
  Old West Norse dialect
  Old East Norse dialect
  Old Gutnish
  Old English
  Crimean Gothic
  Other Germanic languages with which Old Norse still retained some mutual intelligibility



Like most of the languages in Europe, the Norwegian language descends from the Proto-Indo-European language spoken about 5500 years ago on the Pontic–Caspian steppe north of the Black Sea.[8] As early Indo-Europeans spread across Europe, they became isolated and new languages evolved. In the northwest of Europe, the West Germanic languages evolved, which would eventually become English, Dutch, German, and the Scandinavian languages, of which Norwegian is one.
Proto-Norse is thought to have evolved as a northern dialect of Proto-Germanic during the first centuries AD. It is the earliest stage of a characteristically North Germanic language, and the language attested in the Elder Futhark inscriptions, the oldest form of the runic alphabets. A number of inscriptions are memorials to the dead, while others are magical in content. The oldest are carved on loose objects, while later ones are chiseled in runestones.[9] They are the oldest written record of any Germanic language.
Around 800 AD, the script was simplified to the Younger Futhark, and inscriptions became more abundant. At the same time, the beginning of the Viking Age led to the spread of Old Norse to Iceland, Greenland, and the Faroe Islands. Viking colonies also existed in parts of the British Isles, France (Normandy), and Russia. In all of these places except Iceland and the Faroes, Old Norse speakers went extinct or were absorbed into the local population.[9]
Advent of Christianity[edit]
Around 1030, Christianity came to Scandinavia, bringing with it the Latin script. The Scandinavian languages at this time are not considered to be separate languages, although there were minor differences among what are customarily called Old Icelandic, Old Norwegian, Old Gutnish, Old Danish, and Old Swedish. New words began to enter the language from the church. Because of the economic dominance of the Hanseatic League between 1250 and 1450, the main Scandinavian cities had large Middle Low German-speaking populations. The influence of their language on Scandinavian is similar to that of French on English after the Norman conquest.[9]
Dano-Norwegian[edit]
In the late Middle Ages, dialects began to develop in Scandinavia because population was rural and little travel occurred. When the Reformation came from Germany, Martin Luther's High German translation of the Bible was quickly translated into Swedish, Danish, and Icelandic. Norway entered a union with Denmark in 1397. Danish was the language of the elite, the church, literature, and the law. When the union with Denmark ended in 1814, the Dano-Norwegian koiné had become the mother tongue of many Norwegians.[10]
Danish to Norwegian[edit]
Main article: Norwegian language struggle






This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (July 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)









It has been suggested that this article be split into a new article titled Samnorsk. (Discuss) (January 2017)



From the 1840s, some writers experimented with a Norwegianised Danish by incorporating words that were descriptive of Norwegian scenery and folk life, and adopting a more Norwegian syntax. Knud Knudsen proposed to change spelling and inflection in accordance with the Dano-Norwegian koiné, known as "cultivated everyday speech." A small adjustment in this direction was implemented in the first official reform of the Danish language in Norway in 1862 and more extensively after his death in two official reforms in 1907 and 1917.
Meanwhile, a nationalistic movement strove for the development of a new written Norwegian. Ivar Aasen, a botanist and self-taught linguist, began his work to create a new Norwegian language at the age of 22. He traveled around the country collecting words and examples of grammar from the dialects and comparing the dialects among the different regions. He examined the development of Icelandic, which had largely escaped the influences under which Norwegian had come. He called his work, which was published in several books from 1848 to 1873, Landsmål, meaning "national language". The name "Landsmål" is sometimes interpreted as "rural language" or "country language", but this was clearly not Aasen's intended meaning.
The name of the Danish language in Norway was a topic of hot dispute through the 19th century. Its proponents claimed that it was a language common to Norway and Denmark, and no more Danish than Norwegian. The proponents of Landsmål thought that the Danish character of the language should not be concealed. In 1899, Bjørnstjerne Bjørnson proposed the neutral name Riksmål, meaning national language like Landsmål, and this was officially adopted along with the 1907 spelling reform. The name "Riksmål" is sometimes interpreted as "state language", but this meaning is secondary at best. (Compare to Danish rigsmål from where the name was borrowed.)
After the personal union with Sweden was dissolved in 1905, both languages were developed further and reached what is now considered their classic forms after a reform in 1917. Riksmål was in 1929 officially renamed Bokmål (literally "book language"), and Landsmål to Nynorsk (literally "new Norwegian"). A proposition to substitute Danish-Norwegian (dansk-norsk) for Bokmål lost in parliament by a single vote. The name Nynorsk, the linguistic term for modern Norwegian, was chosen for contrast to Danish and emphasis on the historical connection to Old Norwegian. Today, this meaning is often lost, and it is commonly mistaken as a "new" Norwegian in contrast to the "real" Norwegian Bokmål.
Bokmål and Nynorsk were made closer by a reform in 1938. This was a result of a state policy to merge Nynorsk and Bokmål into a single language, to be called Samnorsk. A 1946 poll showed that this policy was supported by 79% of Norwegians at the time. However, opponents of the official policy still managed to create a massive protest movement against Samnorsk in the 1950s, fighting in particular the use of "radical" forms in Bokmål text books in schools. In the reform in 1959, the 1938 reform was partially reversed in Bokmål, but Nynorsk was changed further towards Bokmål. Since then Bokmål has reverted even further toward traditional Riksmål, while Nynorsk still adheres to the 1959 standard. Therefore, a small minority of Nynorsk enthusiasts uses a more conservative standard called Høgnorsk. The Samnorsk policy had little influence after 1960, and was officially abandoned in 2002.
Phonology[edit]
Main article: Norwegian phonology






This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (July 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



While the sound systems of Norwegian and Swedish are similar, considerable variation exists among the dialects.
Consonants[edit]

Consonant phonemes of Urban East Norwegian


Labial
Dental/
Alveolar
Palato-
alveolar
Palatal
Velar
Glottal


Nasal
m
n

ɳ
ŋ



Stop
p b
t d

ʈ ɖ
k ɡ



Fricative
f
s
ʃ
ʂ

h


Approximant
ʋ
l

ɭ
j



Tap

ɾ






The retroflex consonants only appear in East Norwegian dialects as a result of sandhi, combining /ɾ/ with /d/, /l/, /n/, /s/, and /t/.
The realization of the rhotic /ɾ/ depends on the dialect. In Eastern, Central, and Northern Norwegian dialects, it is a tap [ɾ], whereas in Western and Southern Norway, and for some speakers also in Eastern Norway, it is rendered more gutturally as [χ] or [ʁ]. And in the dialects of North-Western Norway, it is realized as [r], much like the trilled R of Spanish.
Vowels[edit]

Vowel phonemes of Urban East Norwegian

Orthography
IPA
Description


a
/ɑ/
Open back unrounded


ai
/ɑɪ̯/



au
/æʉ/



e (short)
/ɛ/, /æ/
open mid front unrounded


e (long)
/e/, /æ/
close-mid front unrounded


e (weak)
/ə/
schwa (mid central unrounded)


ei
/æɪ/, /ɛɪ/



i (short)
/ɪ/
close front unrounded


i (long)
/i/
close front unrounded


o
/u, o, ɔ/
close back rounded


oi
/ɔʏ/



u
/ʉ/, /u/
close central rounded (close front extra rounded)


y (short)
/ʏ/
close front rounded (close front less rounded)


y (long)
/y/
close front rounded (close front less rounded)


æ
/æ/, /ɛ/
near open front unrounded


ø
/ø/
close-mid front rounded


øy
/øʏ/



å
/ɔ/
open-mid back rounded


Accent[edit]
Norwegian is a pitch accent language with two distinct pitch patterns, like Swedish. They are used to differentiate two-syllable words with otherwise identical pronunciation. For example, in many East Norwegian dialects, the word "bønder" (farmers) is pronounced using tone 1, while "bønner" (beans or prayers) uses tone 2. Though spelling differences occasionally differentiate written words, in most cases the minimal pairs are written alike, since written Norwegian has no explicit accent marks. In most eastern low-tone dialects, accent 1 uses a low flat pitch in the first syllable, while accent 2 uses a high, sharply falling pitch in the first syllable and a low pitch in the beginning of the second syllable. In both accents, these pitch movements are followed by a rise of intonational nature (phrase accent)—the size (and presence) of which signals emphasis or focus, and corresponds in function to the normal accent in languages that lack lexical tone, such as English. That rise culminates in the final syllable of an accentual phrase, while the utterance-final fall common in most languages is either very small or absent.
There are significant variations in pitch accent between dialects. Thus, in most of western and northern Norway (the so-called high-pitch dialects) accent 1 is falling, while accent 2 is rising in the first syllable and falling in the second syllable or somewhere around the syllable boundary. The pitch accents (as well as the peculiar phrase accent in the low-tone dialects) give the Norwegian language a "singing" quality that makes it easy to distinguish from other languages. Interestingly, accent 1 generally occurs in words that were monosyllabic in Old Norse, and accent 2 in words that were polysyllabic.
Written language[edit]




Danish keyboard with keys for Æ, Ø, and Å. On Norwegian keyboards, the Æ and Ø are swapped.


Main article: Norwegian orthography
Alphabet[edit]
Main article: Danish and Norwegian alphabet
The Norwegian alphabet has 29 letters.[11]


A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
K
L
M
N
O
P
Q
R
S
T
U
V
W
X
Y
Z
Æ
Ø
Å


a
b
c
d
e
f
g
h
i
j
k
l
m
n
o
p
q
r
s
t
u
v
w
x
y
z
æ
ø
å


The letters c, q, w, x and z are only used in loanwords. As loanwords are assimilated into Norwegian, their spelling might change to reflect Norwegian pronunciation and the principles of Norwegian orthography, e.g. zebra in Norwegian is written sebra. Due to historical reasons, some otherwise Norwegian family names are also written using these letters.
Some letters may be modified by diacritics: é, è, ê, ó, ò, and ô. In Nynorsk, ì and ù and ỳ are occasionally seen as well. The diacritics are not compulsory, but may in a few cases distinguish between different meanings of the word, e.g.: for (for/to), fór (went), fòr (furrow) and fôr (fodder). Loanwords may be spelled with other diacritics, most notably ü, á and à.
Bokmål and Nynorsk[edit]
Main articles: Bokmål and Nynorsk






This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (July 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Like some other European countries, Norway has an official "advisory board"— Språkrådet (Norwegian Language Council)— that determines, after approval from the Ministry of Culture, official spelling, grammar, and vocabulary for the Norwegian language. The board's work has been subject to considerable controversy throughout the years.
Both Nynorsk and Bokmål have a great variety of optional forms. The Bokmål that uses the forms that are close to Riksmål is called moderate or conservative, depending on one's viewpoint, while the Bokmål that uses the forms that are close to Nynorsk is called radical. Nynorsk has forms that are close to the original Landsmål and forms that are close to Bokmål.
There is no single "Norwegian Wikipedia"; there is a Nynorsk Wikipedia and a Bokmål Wikipedia.
Riksmål[edit]
Main article: Riksmål






This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (July 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)







Map of the official language forms of Norwegian municipalities. Red is Bokmål, blue is Nynorsk and gray depicts neutral areas.


Opponents of the spelling reforms aimed at bringing Bokmål closer to Nynorsk have retained the name Riksmål and employ spelling and grammar that predate the Samnorsk movement. Riksmål and conservative versions of Bokmål have been the de facto standard written language of Norway for most of the 20th century, being used by large newspapers, encyclopedias, and a significant proportion of the population of the capital Oslo, surrounding areas, and other urban areas, as well as much of the literary tradition. Since the reforms of 1981 and 2003 (effective in 2005), the official Bokmål can be adapted to be almost identical with modern Riksmål. The differences between written Riksmål and Bokmål are comparable to American and British English differences.
Riksmål is regulated by the Norwegian Academy, which determines acceptable spelling, grammar, and vocabulary.
Høgnorsk[edit]
Main article: Høgnorsk






This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (July 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



There is also an unofficial form of Nynorsk, called Høgnorsk, discarding the post-1917 reforms, and thus close to Ivar Aasen's original Landsmål. It is supported by Ivar Aasen-sambandet, but has found no widespread use.
Current usage[edit]






This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (July 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



In 2010 86.5% of the pupils in the primary and lower secondary schools in Norway receive education in Bokmål, while 13.0% receive education in Nynorsk. From the eighth grade onwards pupils are required to learn both. Out of the 431 municipalities in Norway, 161 have declared that they wish to communicate with the central authorities in Bokmål, 116 (representing 12% of the population) in Nynorsk, while 156 are neutral. Of 4,549 state publications in 2000 8% were in Nynorsk, and 92% in Bokmål. The large national newspapers (Aftenposten, Dagbladet, and VG) are published in Bokmål or Riksmål. Some major regional newspapers (including Bergens Tidende and Stavanger Aftenblad), many political journals, and many local newspapers use both Bokmål and Nynorsk.
A newer trend is to write in dialect for informal use. When writing an SMS, Facebook update, or fridge note, most younger people write the way they talk rather than using Bokmål or Nynorsk.[citation needed]
Dialects[edit]
Main article: Norwegian dialects






This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (July 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



There is general agreement that a wide range of differences makes it difficult to estimate the number of different Norwegian dialects. Variations in grammar, syntax, vocabulary, and pronunciation cut across geographical boundaries and can create a distinct dialect at the level of farm clusters. Dialects are in some cases so dissimilar as to be unintelligible to unfamiliar listeners. Many linguists note a trend toward regionalization of dialects that diminishes the differences at such local levels; there is, however, a renewed interest in preserving distinct dialects.
Examples[edit]






This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (July 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Below are a few sentences giving an indication of the differences between Bokmål and Nynorsk, compared to the conservative (closer to Danish) form Riksmål, Danish, as well as Old Norse, Swedish, Faroese, Icelandic (the living language grammatically closest to Old Norse), Old English and some modern West Germanic languages:


Language
Phrase


Modern English
I come from Norway
What is his name?
This is a horse
The rainbow has many colours


Danish
Jeg kommer fra Norge
Hvad hedder han?
Dette er en hest
Regnbuen har mange farver


Riksmål
Hva heter han?


Bokmål
Regnbuen har mange farger


Nynorsk
Eg kjem frå Noreg
Kva heiter han?
Dette er ein hest
Regnbogen har mange fargar/leter
Regnbogen er mangleta


Høgnorsk
Regnbogen hev mange leter /
Regnbogen er manglìta


Old Norse
Ek kem frá Noregi
Hvat heitir hann?
Þetta er hross /
Þessi er hestr
Regnboginn er marglitr


Icelandic
Ég kem frá Noregi
Hvað heitir hann?
Þetta er hestur/hross
Regnboginn er marglitur


Faroese
Eg komi úr Noregi/Norra
Hvussu eitur hann?
Hetta er eitt ross / ein hestur
Ælabogin hevur nógvar litir /
Ælabogin er marglittur


Swedish
Jag kommer från Norge
Vad heter han?
Detta är en häst
Regnbågen har många färger


Old English
Ic cume fram Norwegan
Hwat hatþ he?
Þis is hors
Se regnboga hæfð manige hiw


German
Ich komme aus Norwegen
Wie heißt er?
Das ist ein Pferd
Der Regenbogen hat viele Farben


Dutch
Ik kom uit Noorwegen
Hoe heet hij?
Dit is een paard
De regenboog heeft veel (vele) kleuren


Afrikaans
Ek kom van Noorweë
Wat is sy naam?
Hoe heet hy? (more archaic and formal)
Dit is 'n perd
Die reënboog het baie kleure


West Frisian
Ik kom út Noarwegen
Hoe hjit er?
Dit is in hynder
De reinbôge hat in protte kleuren


Low Saxon
Ik kom üüt Noorwegen
Ho hit e?
Dit is een peerd
De regenboge hev völe klören


Morphology[edit]






This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (July 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Nouns[edit]
Norwegian nouns are inflected or declined in definiteness (indefinite/definite) and number (singular/plural). In some dialects, definite nouns are furthermore declined in case (nominative/dative).
As in most Indo-European languages (English being one of a few exceptions), nouns are classified by gender, which has consequences for the declension of agreeing adjectives and determiners. Norwegian has three genders: masculine, feminine and neuter—except the Bergen dialect, which has only two genders: common and neuter. Riksmål and conservative Bokmål traditionally have two genders like Danish, but Nynorsk and many Norwegian regional dialects have three genders.

Noun forms
båt (boat) in Bokmål

Singular
Plural


Indefinite
Definite
Indefinite
Definite


en båt
båten
båter
båtene


The declension of regular nouns depends on gender. Some dialects and variants of Nynorsk furthermore have different declension of weak and strong feminines and neuters.

Bokmål

m.
en gutt
(a boy)
gutten
(the boy)
gutter
(boys)
guttene
(the boys)


en fot
(a foot)
foten
(the foot)
føtter
(feet)
føttene
(the feet)


en måne
(a moon)
månen
(the moon)
måner
(moons)
månene
(the moons)


f.
ei/en dør
(a door)
døra/døren
(the door)
dører
(doors)
dørene
(the doors)


ei/en hånd
(a hand)
hånda/hånden
(the hand)
hender
(hands)
hendene
(the hands)


ei/en jente
(a girl)
jenta/jenten
(the girl)
jenter
(girls)
jentene
(the girls)


n.
et hus
(a house)
huset
(the house)
hus
(houses)
husene/husa
(the houses)


et eple
(an apple)
eplet
(the apple)
epler
(apples)
eplene
(the apples)


As of June 5, 2005, all feminine nouns could once again be written as masculine nouns in Bokmål, giving the option of writing the language with only two genders – common and neuter.

Nynorsk

Plurals with "ar"
English


m.
ein gut
guten
gutar
gutane
boy


f.
ei dronning
dronninga
(dronningi)
dronningar
dronningane
queen


Plurals with "er"


m.
ein sau
sauen
sauer
sauene
sheep


f.
ei sol
sola (soli)
soler
solene
sun


Zero-plurals


m.
ein ting
tingen
ting
tinga (tingi)
thing


n.
eit hus
huset
hus
husa (husi)
house


eit rike
riket
rike
rika (riki)
kingdom


Plurals with i-mutation


m.
ein fot
foten
føter
føtene
foot


ein nagl
naglen
negler
neglene
nail


f.
ei bok
boka (boki)
bøker
bøkene
book


ei hand
handa (handi)
hender
hendene
hand


ei stong
stonga (stongi)
stenger
stengene
rod


ei tå
tåa (tåi)
tær
tærne
toe


Weak declension


m.
ein måne
månen
månar
månane
moon


f.
ei tunge
(ei tunga)
tunga
tunger
(tungor)
tungene
(tungone)
tongue


n.
eit auga
auga
augo
augo
eye


Note that most masculine nouns with "er" plurals, may also be realised with "ar" plurals. Likewise, feminine nouns with "ar" plurals that do not end in -ing, often are seen with "er" endings. These two declensions are by far the most common. Also note that weak neuter nouns like auga n. also are regularly seen declined like rike n.: auge – auget – auge – auga.
Adjectives[edit]
Norwegian adjectives have two inflectional paradigms. The weak inflection is applicable when the argument is definite, the strong inflection is used when the argument is indefinite. In both paradigms the adjective is declined in comparison (positive/comparative/superlative). Strong, positive adjectives are furthermore declined in gender and number in agreement with their argument. In some southwestern dialects, the weak positive is also declined in gender and number, with one form for feminine and plural, and one form for masculine and neuter.
In Norwegian, a definite noun has a suffixed article (cf. above). It is noteworthy, however, that when a definitive noun is preceded by an adjective (or a numeral), an additional definite article is placed in front of the adjective, thus producing double definiteness. (In Bokmål, though, the suffixed article may be dropped in these cases, due to its Danish origin. When this is invoked, it is typically considered to lend a formal or "old-fashioned" flavor to the phrasing.)
Example of weak positive inflection in Nynorsk: huset—det grøne huset (the house—the green house).
Examples of weak positive inflection in Bokmål: "det grønne huset" (the green house), "den grønne bilen" (the green car), or "Det Hvite Hus" (The White House—note the dropped suffix). Whenever the noun is preceded by a pronoun, the suffix is always dropped: "mitt grønne hus" (my green house), "min grønne bil" (my green car). Note, however the more common phrasing of these sentiments: "det grønne huset mitt" (my green house), "den grønne bilen min" (my green car).
Examples of strong positive inflection in Bokmål: "et grønt hus" (a green house), "en grønn bil" (a green car); likewise "grønt lys, grønn bil" (green light, green car) if no article is used.
Examples of comparative and superlative inflections in Bokmål: "et hvitere hus" (a whiter house), "den grønneste bilen" (the greenest car); "hvitere hus" (whiter house), "grønnest bil" (greenest car).

Adjective forms
grønn/ grøn (green) and åpen/ open (open)


Weak declension
Strong declension


Positive
Comparative
Superlative
Positive
Comparative
Superlative


Masculine
Feminine
Neuter
Plural


Bokmål
grønne
grønnere
grønneste
grønn
grønn
grønt
grønne
grønnere
grønnest


åpne
åpnere
åpneste
åpen
åpen
åpent
åpne
åpnere
åpnest


Nynorsk
grøne
grønare
grønaste
grøn
grøn
grønt
grøne
grønare
grønast


opne
opnare
opnaste
open
open
ope
opne
opnare
opnast


Verbs[edit]
Norwegian finite verbs are inflected or conjugated according to mood: indicative/imperative/subjunctive. The subjunctive mood is constrained to only a handful of verbs. Indicative verbs are conjugated for tense: present / past / future. The infinitive, present and past tense also have a passive form. In a few dialects, indicative verbs are also conjugated according to number. Agreement with person is lost in Norwegian.
There are four non-finite verb forms: infinitive, passive infinitive, and the two participles perfective/past participle and imperfective/present participle.
The participles are verbal adjectives. The imperfective participle is not declined, whereas the perfect participle is declined for gender (though not in Bokmål) and number like strong, positive adjectives. The definite form of the participle is identical to the plural form.
As with other Germanic languages, Norwegian verbs can be either weak or strong.

Verb forms in Nynorsk
leva (to live) and finna (to find)


Finite
Non-finite


Indicative
Subjunctive
Imperative
Verbal nouns
Verbal adjectives (Participles)


Present
Past
Infinitive
Imperfective
Perfective


Masculine
Feminine
Neuter
Plural/Def


Active
lever
levde
leve
lev
leva
levande
levd
levd
levt
levde


finn
fann

finn
finna
(har) funne
funnen
funnen
funne
funne


Passive
levest
levdest


levast







finst
fannst


finnast








Verb forms in Bokmål
leve (to live) and finne (to find)


Finite
Non-finite


Indicative
Subjunctive
Imperative
Verbal nouns
Verbal adjectives (Participles)


Present
Past
Infinitive
Imperfective
Perfective


Singular
Plural/Def


Active
lever
levde/ levet
leve
lev
leve
levende
levd
levde/ levet


finner
fant

finn
finne
(har) funnet
funnet
funne


Passive
leves
levdes


leves





fins/ finnes
fantes


finnes
(har funnes)




Pronouns[edit]
Norwegian personal pronouns are declined according to case: nominative / accusative. Some of the dialects that have preserved the dative in nouns, also have a dative case instead of the accusative case in personal pronouns, while others have accusative in pronouns and dative in nouns, effectively giving these dialects three distinct cases.
In the most comprehensive Norwegian grammar, Norsk referansegrammatikk, the categorization of personal pronouns by person, gender, and number is not regarded as inflection. As with nouns, adjectives must agree with the gender and number of pronoun arguments.
Other pronouns have no inflection.
The so-called possessive, demonstrative and relative pronouns are no longer considered pronouns.
Pronouns are a closed class.

Examples of pronouns in Bokmål

Nominative
Accusative
English equivalent


jeg
meg
I, me


du
deg
you (singular)


han
ham/han
he, him


hun
henne
she, her


den
den
it (masculine/feminine)


det
det
it (neuter)


vi
oss
we, us


dere
dere
you (plural)


de
dem
they, them



Examples of pronouns in Nynorsk

Nominative
Accusative
English equivalent


eg
meg
I, me


du
deg
you (singular)


han
han/honom
he, him or it (masculine)


ho
ho/henne
she, her or it (feminine)


det
det
it (neuter)


me/vi
oss
we, us


de
dykk
you (plural)


dei
dei
they, them


Bokmål, like English, has two sets of 3rd person pronouns. Han and hun refer to male and female individuals respectively, den and det refer to impersonal or inanimate nouns, of masculine/feminine or neutral gender respectively. In contrast, Nynorsk and most dialects use the same set of pronouns (han (m.), ho (f.) and det (n.)) for both personal and impersonal references. Det also has expletive and cataphoric uses like in the English examples it rains and it was known by everyone (that) he had travelled the world.
Determiners[edit]
The closed class of Norwegian determiners are declined in gender and number in agreement with their argument. Not all determiners are inflected.

Determiner forms
egen (own) in Bokmål

Masculine
Feminine
Neuter
Plural


egen/eigen
egen/eiga
eget/eige
egne/eigne



Determiner forms
eigen (own) in Nynorsk

Masculine
Feminine
Neuter
Plural


eigen
eiga
eige
eigne


Particle classes[edit]
Norwegian has five closed classes without inflection, i.e. lexical categories with grammatical function and a finite number of members that may not be distinguished by morphological criteria. These are interjections, conjunctions, subjunctions, prepositions, and adverbs. The inclusion of adverbs here requires that traditional adverbs that are inflected in comparison be classified as adjectives, as is sometimes done.
Compound words[edit]
In Norwegian compound words, the head, i.e. the part determining the compound's class, is the last part. Only the first part has primary stress. For instance, the compound tenketank (think tank) has primary stress on the first syllable and is a noun (some sort of tank).
Compound words are written together in Norwegian, which can cause words to become very long, for example sannsynlighetsmaksimeringsestimator (maximum likelihood estimator) and menneskerettighetsorganisasjoner (human rights organizations). Another example is the title høyesterettsjustitiarius (Chief Justice of the Supreme Court, originally a combination of supreme court and the actual title, justiciar). Note also the translation En midtsommernattsdrøm (A Midsummer Night's Dream).
If they are not written together, each part is naturally read with primary stress, and the meaning of the compound is lost. Examples of this in English are the difference between a green house and a greenhouse or a black board and a blackboard.
This is sometimes forgotten, occasionally with humorous results. Instead of writing, for example, lammekoteletter (lamb chops), people make the mistake of writing lamme koteletter (lame, or paralyzed, chops). The original message can even be reversed, as when røykfritt (lit. "smoke-free" meaning no smoking) becomes røyk fritt (smoke freely).
Other examples include:

Terrasse dør ("Terrace dies") instead of Terrassedør ("Terrace door")
Tunfisk biter ("Tuna bites", verb) instead of Tunfiskbiter ("Tuna bits", noun)
Smult ringer ("Lard calls", verb) instead of Smultringer ("Doughnuts")
Tyveri sikret ("Theft guaranteed") instead of Tyverisikret ("Theft proof")
Stekt kylling lever ("Fried chicken lives", verb) instead of Stekt kyllinglever ("Fried chicken liver", noun)
Smør brød ("Butter bread", verb) instead of Smørbrød ("Sandwich")
Klipp fisk ("Cut fish", verb) instead of Klippfisk ("Clipfish")
På hytte taket ("On cottage the roof") instead of På hyttetaket ("On the cottage roof")
Altfor Norge ("Too Norway") instead of Alt for Norge ("Everything for Norway", the royal motto of Norway)

These misunderstandings occur because most nouns can be interpreted as verbs or other types of words. Similar misunderstandings can be achieved in English too. The following are examples of phrases that both in Norwegian and English mean one thing as a compound word, and something different when regarded as separate words:

stavekontroll (spellchecker) or stave kontroll (spell checker)
kokebok (cookbook) or koke bok (cook book)
ekte håndlagde vafler (real handmade waffles) or ekte hånd lagde vafler (real hand made waffles)

Vocabulary[edit]






This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (July 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)







Norwegian ambulances changed their markings in 2005. This is the old appearance, with the Norwegian ambulanse, "Ambulance."


By far the largest part of the modern vocabulary of Norwegian dates back to Old Norse. The largest source of loanwords is Middle Low German, which had a huge influence on Norwegian vocabulary from the late Middle Ages onwards partially even influencing grammatical structures, such as genitive constructions. At present, the main source of new loanwords is English e.g. rapper, e-mail, catering, juice, bag (originally a loan word to English from Old Norse).
Some loanwords have their spelling changed to reflect Norwegian pronunciation rules, but in general Norwegianised spellings of these words tend to take a long time to sink in: e.g. sjåfør (from French chauffeur) and revansj (from French revanche) are now the common Norwegian spellings, but juice is more often used than the Norwegianised form jus, catering more often than keitering, service more often than sørvis, etc.
Norwegian has also and continues to borrow words and phrases from both Danish and Swedish to a relatively large extent. And though there are very often related, similar- or identical-sounding words in those languages, the spelling in Norwegian is often less conservative and, arguably, closer to the pronunciation, and thus different from the others, and four of the letters most shunned in Norwegian in comparison to the other Scandinavian languages are "c", "d", "j" and "x". Norwegian hei is hej in Swedish and Danish; the words "sex" and "six" are sex and seks in Norwegian, but in Swedish they are both sex; Danish words ending in -tion end in -sjon to reflect pronunciation and many traditional Danish spellings with d preceded by another consonant are changed to double consonants, such as in the Danish for water, vand, versus Norwegian (Bokmål) spelling vann, but "sand" is spelled sand in both languages (Norwegian was standardized this way because in some dialects a "d" was pronounced in sand, whereas Norwegian speakers pronounced vann without a "d"-sound). (The word for water in Nynorsk is vatn.)
See also[edit]


Norway portal
Languages portal





Bokmål edition of Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia





Nynorsk edition of Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia





For a list of words relating to Norwegian language, see the Norwegian language category of words in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.





Wikivoyage has a phrasebook for Norwegian.





Wikisource has the text of the 1905 New International Encyclopedia article Norwegian Language.



Differences between the Norwegian and Danish languages
Noregs Mållag
Norsk Ordbok
Det Norske Akademi for Sprog og Litteratur
Riksmålsforbundet
Russenorsk
Tone (linguistics)

References[edit]



^ http://language.media.mit.edu/rankings/books[permanent dead link]
^ Hammarström, Harald; Forkel, Robert; Haspelmath, Martin, eds. (2017). "Norwegian". Glottolog 3.0. Jena, Germany: Max Planck Institute for the Science of Human History. 
^ http://ojs.statsbiblioteket.dk/index.php/sin/article/viewFile/17027/14789
^ Kristoffersen, Gjert (2000). The Phonology of Norwegian. Oxford University Press. pp. 6–11. ISBN 978-0-19-823765-5. 
^ Venås, Kjell (1994). "Dialekt og normaltalemålet". Apollon. 1. ISSN 0803-6926. Archived from the original on 2011-07-24. 
^ Konvention mellan Sverige, Danmark, Finland, Island och Norge om nordiska medborgares rätt att använda sitt eget språk i annat nordiskt land, Nordic Council website. Retrieved on May 4, 2008.
^ 20th anniversary of the Nordic Language Convention, Nordic news, February 22, 2007. Retrieved on April 25, 2007.
^ Anthony, David W. (2007). The horse, the wheel, and language : how bronze-age riders from the Eurasian steppes shaped the modern world (8th reprint. ed.). Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press. ISBN 0-691-05887-3. 
^ a b c "Scandinavian languages". Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved 11 September 2016. 
^ "The Norwegian language". Norwegian on the Web. Retrieved 11 September 2016. 
^ Torp, Arne. 2001. Bokstaver og alfabet. Språknytt 4. (in Norwegian)



Bibliography[edit]

Olav T. Beito, Nynorsk grammatikk. Lyd- og ordlære, Det Norske Samlaget, Oslo 1986, ISBN 82-521-2801-7
Jan Terje Faarlund, Svein Lie, Kjell Ivar Vannebo, Norsk referansegrammatikk, Universitetsforlaget, Oslo 1997, 2002 (3rd edition), ISBN 82-00-22569-0 (Bokmål and Nynorsk)
Rolf Theil Endresen, Hanne Gram Simonsen, Andreas Sveen, Innføring i lingvistikk (2002), ISBN 82-00-45273-5
Arne Torp, Lars S. Vikør (1993), Hovuddrag i norsk språkhistorie (3.utgåve), Gyldendal Norsk Forlag AS 2003
Lars S. Vikør (2015), Norwegian: Bokmål vs. Nynorsk, on Språkrådet's website
The Norwegian Language Council (1994), Language usage in Norway's civil service, in English

External links[edit]



Wikibooks has a book on the topic of: Norwegian



Ordboka - Online dictionary search, both Bokmål and Nynorsk.
 Norwegian Phrasebook travel guide from Wikivoyage
 Fiske, Willard (1879). "Norway, Language and Literature of". The American Cyclopædia. 
Norwegian as a Normal Language, in English, at Språkrådet







v
t
e


Norwegian language






Alphabet
Orthography

Æ
Ø
Å
Scandinavian Braille


Phonology
Norwegian language conflict





Varieties




Written




Official



Bokmål
Nynorsk
Samnorsk (discontinued)





Unofficial



Høgnorsk
Riksmål








Spoken




West and south



Arendalsk
Bergensk
Sandnesmål
Sognamål
Stavangersk
etc.





East (no)



Bohusmål (no)
Gudbrandsdalsmål
Hallingmål-Valdris
Särna-Idremål (sv)
Urban East Norwegian
Vikværsk
etc.





Trøndersk



Herjedalsk (sv)
Jemtlansk
Medalsk
Trondheimsk
etc.





North (no)



Brønnøymål
etc.





Non-dialectical



Kebabnorsk
Modern Norwegian
Svorsk





Extinct



Old West Norse
Old Norwegian
Middle Norwegian
Dano-Norwegian
Russenorsk











Other topics



Comparison of Norwegian Bokmål and Standard Danish
Exonyms
Literature
Profanity
Sign language
 "Kjell"





Institutions



Language Council of Norway
Noregs Mållag
Norwegian Academy
Riksmål Society












v
t
e


 Languages of Norway



Official languages



Norwegian

Bokmål
Nynorsk


Kven
Sami

Southern
Ume
Pite
Lule
Northern







Minority languages



Romani
Scandoromani





Sign languages



Norwegian Sign Language












v
t
e


Modern Germanic languages and dialects




North
Germanic






West
Scandinavian




Bergensk
Elfdalian
Faroese

Gøtudanskt


Icelandic
Jamtlandic
Norwegian

Bokmål
Nynorsk


Sognamål
Trøndersk
Valdris
Vestlandsk
Vikværsk






East
Scandinavian




Bornholmsk
Dalecarlian
Danish
Insular Danish
Jutlandic

South


Perkerdansk
Gutnish
Kalix
Kebabnorsk
Kiruna
Luleå
Norrland
Småländska
South Swedish

Scanian


Stockholm

Rinkeby


Uppländska
Västgötska
Westrobothnian
Swedish

Åland
Estonia
Finland
Ostrobothnia











West
Germanic






Anglo-
Frisian




East Frisian

Saterland Frisian
Wangerooge Frisian
Wursten Frisian


English

English dialects


North Frisian
Scots
West Frisian






Netherlandic






Standardized variants




Dutch
Afrikaans






West Netherlandic




Hollandic
West Flemish
Zeelandic
East Flemish
Brabantian






East Netherlandic




Limburgish
Meuse-Rhenish









Low German/
Low Saxon






Dutch-influenced:




Dutch Low Saxon






German-influenced:




Northern Low Saxon
Westphalian
Eastphalian
Mecklenburgisch-Vorpommersch
Brandenburgisch
East Pomeranian
Central Pomeranian
Low Prussian









High
German






Standard
German




German
Swiss
Austrian






Central
German




Central Franconian

Luxembourgish
Moselle Franconian

Hunsrückisch
Transylvanian Saxon


Ripuarian

Kölsch




Rhine Franconian

Hessian
Lorraine Franconian
Palatine


Thuringian
Upper Saxon
High Prussian
Lausitzisch-neumärkisch
Silesian






Upper
German




High Franconian

East Franconian
South Franconian


Bavarian

Northern Bavarian
Central Bavarian
Southern Bavarian


Cimbrian
Mòcheno
Swabian
Alemannic

Low Alemannic

Coloniero


Central Alemannic
High Alemannic
Highest Alemannic

Walser




Swiss German





 



Prague German
Yiddish


















v
t
e


Norwegian dictionaries



Riksmål



Norsk Riksmålsordbok
Norsk ordbok
Riksmålsordlisten





Bokmål



Bokmålsordboka
Norsk ordbok
Tanums store rettskrivningsordbok





Nynorsk



Nynorskordboka
Norsk Ordbok












v
t
e


Norway articles



History



Stone Age
Bronze Age
Petty kingdoms
Viking Age
Unification
High Middle Ages
Kingdom of Norway (872–1397)

Hereditary Kingdom of Norway


Kalmar Union
Denmark–Norway
Kingdom of Norway (1814)
Sweden–Norway
End of the union
World War II

Reichskommissariat
Quisling regime
Norwegian government in exile


1945–2000
21st century








Geography







Climate
Extreme points
Islands
Lakes
Mammals
Mountains
Municipalities
Cities
Protected areas
Rivers








Politics







Administrative divisions
National budget
Constitution
Correctional services
Courts
Customs
Elections
Foreign relations
Governments
Health care services
LGBT history
Military
Monarchy
Parliament
Police
Political parties
Prime Minister
Vinmonopolet








Economy







Energy
Krone (currency)
National bank
Norwegian paradox
Oil
Stock Exchange
Taxation
Tourism
Transport
Whaling








Society







Crime
Demographics
Education
Ethnic groups
Immigration
Languages
Norwegians
Pensions
Religion





Culture



Architecture
Art
Bunad (clothing)
Christmas (season)
Cinema
Cuisine
Jante law
Music
Norwegian language
Literature
Media
Prostitution
Public holidays
Sport
Romantic nationalism





Symbols



Anthem
Coat of arms
Flags

national flag


Mottos
Name of Norway












Outline



Category
Portal









Authority control



LCCN: sh85092722
GND: 4120291-0
BNF: cb119797174 (data)
NDL: 00568691











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Norwegian_language&oldid=818461665"					Categories: Norwegian languageFusional languagesLanguages of NorwayWest Scandinavian languagesScandinaviaStress-timed languagesSubject–verb–object languagesTonal languagesVerb-second languagesHidden categories: All articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from December 2017Articles with permanently dead external linksArticles with Norwegian-language external linksLanguages with ISO 639-2 codeLanguages with ISO 639-1 codeISO language articles citing sources other than EthnologueAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from January 2017Articles containing Norwegian-language textArticles with unsourced statements from January 2009Articles needing additional references from July 2016All articles needing additional referencesArticles to be split from January 2017All articles to be splitArticles with unsourced statements from April 2016Articles containing Danish-language textArticles containing Bokmål-language textArticles containing Nynorsk-language textArticles containing Old Norse-language textArticles containing Icelandic-language textArticles containing Faroese-language textArticles containing Swedish-language textArticles containing Old English-language textArticles containing German-language textArticles containing Dutch-language textArticles containing Afrikaans-language textArticles containing West Frisian-language textArticles containing Low German-language textArticles containing French-language textWikipedia articles incorporating a citation from The American CyclopaediaWikipedia articles incorporating a citation from The American Cyclopaedia with a Wikisource referenceInterlanguage link template link numberWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiers