For other uses, see Noun (disambiguation).


Examples




The cat sat on the mat.
Please hand in your assignments by the end of the week.
Cleanliness is next to godliness.
Plato was an influential philosopher in ancient Greece.
Revel the night, rob, murder, and commit/The oldest sins the newest kind of ways? Henry IV Part 2, act 4 scene 5

A noun can co-occur with an article or an attributive adjective. Verbs and adjectives cannot. In the following, an asterisk (*) in front of an example means that this example is ungrammatical.

the name (name is a noun: can co-occur with a definite article the.)
*the baptise (baptise is a verb: cannot co-occur with a definite article.)
constant circulation (circulation is a noun: can co-occur with the attributive adjective constant.)
*constant circulate (circulate is a verb: cannot co-occur with the attributive adjective constant.)
a fright (fright is a noun: can co-occur with the indefinite article a.)
*an afraid (afraid is an adjective: cannot co-occur with the article a.)
terrible fright (The noun fright can co-occur with the adjective terrible.)
*terrible afraid (The adjective afraid cannot co-occur with the adjective terrible.)







English grammar




Grammatical case
Grammatical conjugation
Grammatical mood
Grammatical aspect
Grammatical voice
Grammatical number
Grammatical person
Periphrasis
Adjectives
Adverbs
English articles
Definiteness
Specificity
Clauses (in English)
Predicate (grammar)
Copula (linguistics)
Argument (linguistics)
Adjunct (grammar)
Collocation (in English)
Negation
Double negatives
Intensive word form
Modifier
Expletive
Intensifier
Augmentative
Diminutive (in Australian English)
Interrogative word
Interrogative
Frequentative
Causative
Complementizer
Demonstrative
Determiners
Determiner
English prefix
Prefix
Suffix
Compounds
Portmanteau
Conditionals
Conjunctions
English phonology
Vowel length
Great Vowel Shift
English honorifics
Style (manner of address)
Gender
Idiom (in English)
Interjections
Inversion
Nouns
Noun class
Pronouns
Phrases
Plurals
Possessives
Prepositions
Hypocorism
Abbreviations
Acronyms
Comma
Hyphen
English orthography
Verbs

Auxiliaries, contractions
Irregular verbs
Modal verbs

deduction
habits and past facts


Passive voice
Phrasal verbs
Subjunctive
Verb usage


Grammar disputes







v
t
e





A noun (from Latin nōmen, literally meaning "name")[1] is a word that functions as the name of some specific thing or set of things, such as living creatures, objects, places, actions, qualities, states of existence, or ideas.[2][note 1] Linguistically, a noun is a member of a large, open part of speech whose members can occur as the main word in the subject of a clause, the object of a verb, or the object of a preposition.[3]
Lexical categories (parts of speech) are defined in terms of the ways in which their members combine with other kinds of expressions. The syntactic rules for nouns differ from language to language. In English, nouns are those words which can occur with articles and attributive adjectives and can function as the head of a noun phrase.



Contents


1 History
2 Definitions of nouns
3 Gender
4 Classification of nouns

4.1 Proper nouns and common nouns
4.2 Countable and uncountable nouns
4.3 Collective nouns
4.4 Concrete nouns and abstract nouns
4.5 Alienable vs. Inalienable Nouns

4.5.1 Pingelapese




5 Noun phrases
6 Pronouns
7 Nominalization
8 See also
9 Notes
10 References

10.1 Bibliography


11 Further reading
12 External links



History [edit]
See also History of parts of speech
Word classes (parts of speech) were described by Sanskrit grammarians from at least the 5th century BC. In Yāska's Nirukta, the noun (nāma) is one of the four main categories of words defined.[4]
The Ancient Greek equivalent was ónoma (ὄνομα), referred to by Plato in the Cratylus dialog, and later listed as one of the eight parts of speech in The Art of Grammar, attributed to Dionysius Thrax (2nd century BC). The term used in Latin grammar was nōmen. All of these terms for "noun" were also words meaning "name".[5] The English word noun is derived from the Latin term, through the Anglo-Norman noun.
The word classes were defined partly by the grammatical forms that they take. In Sanskrit, Greek and Latin, for example, nouns are categorized by gender and inflected for case and number. Because adjectives share these three grammatical categories, adjectives are placed in the same class as nouns.
Similarly, the Latin nōmen includes both nouns (substantives) and adjectives, as originally did the English word noun, the two types being distinguished as nouns substantive and nouns adjective (or substantive nouns and adjective nouns, or short substantives and adjectives). (The word nominal is now sometimes used to denote a class that includes both nouns and adjectives.)
Many European languages use a cognate of the word substantive as the basic term for noun (for example, Spanish sustantivo, "noun"). Nouns in the dictionaries of such languages are demarked by the abbreviation s. or sb. instead of n., which may be used for proper nouns or neuter nouns instead. In English, some modern authors use the word substantive to refer to a class that includes both nouns (single words) and noun phrases (multiword units, also called noun equivalents).[6] It can also be used as a counterpart to attributive when distinguishing between a noun being used as the head (main word) of a noun phrase and a noun being used as a noun adjunct. For example, the noun knee can be said to be used substantively in my knee hurts, but attributively in the patient needed knee replacement.
Definitions of nouns[edit]
Nouns have sometimes been defined in terms of the grammatical categories to which they are subject (classed by gender, inflected for case and number). Such definitions tend to be language-specific, since nouns do not have the same categories in all languages.
Nouns are frequently defined, particularly in informal contexts, in terms of their semantic properties (their meanings). Nouns are described as words that refer to a person, place, thing, event, substance, quality, quantity, etc. However this type of definition has been criticized by contemporary linguists as being uninformative.[7]
There have been offered several examples of English-language nouns which do not have any reference: drought, enjoyment, finesse, behalf (as found in on behalf of), dint (in dint of), and sake (for the sake of).[8][9][10] Moreover, there may be a relationship similar to reference in the case of other parts of speech: the verbs to rain or to mother; many adjectives, like red; and there is little difference between the adverb gleefully and the noun-based phrase with glee.[note 2]
There are placeholder names, such as the legal fiction reasonable person (whose existence is not in question), an experimental artifact, or personifications such as gremlin.
Linguists often prefer to define nouns (and other lexical categories) in terms of their formal properties. These include morphological information, such as what prefixes or suffixes they take, and also their syntax – how they combine with other words and expressions of particular types. Such definitions may nonetheless still be language-specific, since syntax as well as morphology varies between languages. For example, in English it might be noted that nouns are words that can co-occur with definite articles (as stated at the start of this article), but this would not apply in Russian, which has no definite articles.
There have been several attempts, sometimes controversial, to produce a stricter definition of nouns on a semantic basis. Some of these are referenced in the § Further reading section below.
Gender[edit]
Main article: Grammatical gender
In some languages, genders are assigned to nouns, such as masculine, feminine and neuter (or other combinations). The gender of a noun (as well as its number and case, where applicable) will often entail agreement in words that modify or are related to it. For example, in French, the singular form of the definite article is le with masculine nouns and la with feminines; adjectives and certain verb forms also change (with the addition of -e with feminines). Grammatical gender often correlates with the form of the noun and the inflection pattern it follows; for example, in both Italian and Russian most nouns ending -a are feminine. Gender can also correlate with the sex of the noun's referent, particularly in the case of nouns denoting people (and sometimes animals). Nouns arguably do not have gender in Modern English, although many of them denote people or animals of a specific sex, and pronouns that refer to nouns must take the appropriate gender for that noun. (The girl lost her spectacles.)
Classification of nouns[edit]
Proper nouns and common nouns[edit]
Main article: Proper noun
A proper noun or proper name is a noun representing unique entities (such as India, Pegasus, Jupiter, Confucius, or Pequod), as distinguished from common nouns which describe a class of entities (such as country, animal, planet, person or ship).[11]
Countable and uncountable nouns[edit]
Main articles: Count noun and Mass noun
Count nouns or countable nouns are common nouns that can take a plural, can combine with numerals or counting quantifiers (e.g., one, two, several, every, most), and can take an indefinite article such as a or an (in languages which have such articles). Examples of count nouns are chair, nose, and occasion.
Mass nouns or uncountable (or non-count) nouns differ from count nouns in precisely that respect: they cannot take plurals or combine with number words or the above type of quantifiers. For example, it is not possible to refer to a furniture or three furnitures. This is true even though the pieces of furniture comprising furniture could be counted. Thus the distinction between mass and count nouns should not be made in terms of what sorts of things the nouns refer to, but rather in terms of how the nouns present these entities.[12][13]
Many nouns have both countable and uncountable uses; for example, beer is countable in "give me three beers", but uncountable in "he likes beer".
Collective nouns[edit]
Main article: Collective noun
Collective nouns are nouns that – even when they are inflected for the singular – refer to groups consisting of more than one individual or entity. Examples include committee, government, and police. In English these nouns may be followed by a singular or a plural verb and referred to by a singular or plural pronoun, the singular being generally preferred when referring to the body as a unit and the plural often being preferred, especially in British English, when emphasizing the individual members.[14] Examples of acceptable and unacceptable use given by Gowers in Plain Words include:[14]

"A committee was appointed to consider this subject." (singular)
"The committee were unable to agree." (plural)
* "The committee were of one mind when I sat on them" (unacceptable use of plural)

Concrete nouns and abstract nouns[edit]
Further information: Physical body and Abstract object
Concrete nouns refer to physical entities that can, in principle at least (ie. different schools of philosophy and sciences may question the assumption, but, for the most part, people agree to the existence of something. Eg. a rock, a tree, universe), be observed by at least one of the senses (for instance, chair, apple, Janet or atom). Abstract nouns, on the other hand, refer to abstract objects; that is, ideas or concepts (such as justice or hatred). While this distinction is sometimes exclusive, some nouns have multiple senses, including both concrete and abstract ones: consider, for example, the noun art, which usually refers to a concept (e.g., Art is an important element of human culture.) but which can refer to a specific artwork in certain contexts (e.g., I put my daughter's art up on the fridge.)
Some abstract nouns developed etymologically by figurative extension from literal roots. These include drawback, fraction, holdout and uptake. Similarly, some nouns have both abstract and concrete senses, with the latter having developed by figurative extension from the former. These include view, filter, structure and key.
In English, many abstract nouns are formed by adding a suffix (-ness, -ity, -ion) to adjectives or verbs. Examples are happiness (from the adjective happy), circulation (from the verb circulate) and serenity (from the adjective serene).
Alienable vs. Inalienable Nouns[edit]
Some world languages refer to nouns differently, depending on how ownership is being given for the given noun. This can be broken into two categories: Alienable and Inalienable. An alienable noun is something that does not belong to a person indefinitely. Inalienable nouns, on the other hand, is something that is possessed definitely. Examples of alienable nouns would be a tree or a shirt or roads. Examples of inalienable nouns would be a father or shadow or hair.
Pingelapese[edit]
The Pingelapese language uses a distinction between nouns.[15] There are several classifier forms. the first is for objects which tend to be pretty large in size and not being a favorite possession (tree or shirt), the second is for small, controllable, favorite objects like dogs, books or spears. A third form would be set aside for food objects like bananas, oranges or fish. Drinks like water or coconut liquor also have a classifier forms. A fifth classifier would be designated for things that are to be chewed but not fully consumed. The only example of this was from the book Papers in Kosraean and Ponapeic, the fruit, pandanus, is chewed for the sweet/ bitter juice, but what remains after consuming the juice discarded. The 6th classifier forms are set aside for ways of transportation (bikes, canoes, and boats). The last two classifiers are designated for the land and the house.
Noun phrases[edit]
Main article: Noun phrase
A noun phrase is a phrase based on a noun, pronoun, or other noun-like word (nominal) optionally accompanied by modifiers such as determiners and adjectives. A noun phrase functions within a clause or sentence in a role such as that of subject, object, or complement of a verb or preposition. For example, in the sentence "The black cat sat on a dear friend of mine", the noun phrase the black cat serves as the subject, and the noun phrase a dear friend of mine serves as the complement of the preposition on.
Pronouns[edit]
Main article: Pronoun
Nouns and noun phrases can typically be replaced by pronouns, such as he, it, which, and those, in order to avoid repetition or explicit identification, or for other reasons. For example, in the sentence Gareth thought that he was weird, the word he is a pronoun standing in place of the person's name. The word one can replace parts of noun phrases, and it sometimes stands in for a noun. An example is given below:

John's car is newer than the one that Bill has.

But one can also stand in for larger parts of a noun phrase. For example, in the following example, one can stand in for new car.

This new car is cheaper than that one.

Nominalization[edit]
Main article: Nominalization
Nominalization is a process whereby a word that belongs to another part of speech comes to be used as a noun. In French and Spanish, for example, adjectives frequently act as nouns referring to people who have the characteristics denoted by the adjective. This sometimes happens in English as well, as in the following examples:

This legislation will have the most impact on the poor.
The race is not to the swift, nor the battle to the strong.
The Socialist International is a worldwide association of political parties.

See also[edit]

Description
Grammatical case
Phi features
Reference
Verb
Punctuation

Notes[edit]



^ Example nouns for:

Living creatures (including people, alive, dead or imaginary): mushrooms, dog, Afro-Caribbeans, rosebush, Nelson Mandela, bacteria, Klingons, etc.
Physical objects: hammer, pencils, Earth, guitar, atom, stones, boots, shadow, etc.
Places: closet, temple, river, Antarctica, houses, Grand Canyon, Utopia, etc.
Actions: swimming, exercise, diffusion, explosions, flight, electrification, embezzlement, etc.
Qualities: color, length, deafness, weight, roundness, symmetry, warp speed, etc.
Mental or physical states of existence: jealousy, sleep, heat, joy, stomachache, confusion, mind meld, etc.
Ideas or abstract entities: musicianship, cooperativeness, perfection, The New York Times, mathematics, impossibility, etc.


^ Nouns occur in idioms with no meaning outside the idiom: rock and roll does not describe two different things named by rock and by roll; someone who falls for something lock, stock and barrel does not fall for something lock, for stock, and for barrel; a trick using smoke and mirrors does not separate into the effect of smoke and each mirror. See hendiadys and hendiatris.



References[edit]


^ nōmen. Charlton T. Lewis and Charles Short. A Latin Dictionary on Perseus Project.
^ "Noun". Merriam-Webster Dictionary (online). Merriam-Webster, Incorporated. 2014. 
^ Loos, Eugene E., et al. 2003. Glossary of linguistic terms: What is a noun?
^ Bimal Krishna Matilal, The word and the world: India's contribution to the study of language, 1990 (Chapter 3)
^ nōmen. Charlton T. Lewis and Charles Short. A Latin Dictionary on Perseus Project.; ὄνομα. Liddell, Henry George; Scott, Robert; A Greek–English Lexicon at the Perseus Project
^ Chicago Manual of Style, "5.10: Noun-equivalents and substantives", The Chicago Manual of Style, University of Chicago Press. 
^ Jackendoff, Ray (2002). "§5.5 Semantics as a generative system". Foundations of language: brain, meaning, grammar, evolution (PDF). Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-827012-7. 
^ pages 218, 225 and elsewhere in Quine, Willard Van Orman (2013) [1960 print]. "7 Ontic Decision". Word and Object. Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press. pp. 215–254. 
^ Reimer, Marga (May 20, 2009). Zaita, Edward N., ed. "Reference §3.4 Non-Referring Expressions". Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Spring 2010 Edition). Retrieved 15 July 2014. 
^ English nouns with restricted non-referential interpretation in bare noun phrases
^ Lester & Beason 2005, p. 4
^ Krifka, Manfred. 1989. "Nominal Reference, Temporal Constitution and Quantification in Event Semantics". In R. Bartsch, J. van Benthem, P. von Emde Boas (eds.), Semantics and Contextual Expression, Dordrecht: Foris Publication.
^ Borer 2005
^ a b Gowers 2014, pp. 189–190
^ M., Good, Elaine (1989-01-01). Papers in Kosraean and Ponapeic. Dept. of Linguistics, Research School of Pacific Studies, Australian National University. ISBN 0-8588-3390-5. OCLC 22068434. 


Bibliography[edit]

Lester, Mark; Beason, Larry (2005). The McGraw-Hill Handbook of English Grammar and Usage. McGraw-Hill. ISBN 0-07-144133-6. 
Borer, Hagit (2005). In Name Only. Structuring Sense. I. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Gowers, Ernest (2014). Gowers, Rebecca, ed. Plain Words. Particular. ISBN 978-0-141-97553-5. 

Further reading[edit]

Laycock, Henry (2005). "Mass nouns, Count nouns and Non-count nouns", Draft version of entry in Encyclopedia of Language and Linguistics Oxford: Elsevier.

For definitions of nouns based on the concept of "identity criteria":

Geach, Peter. 1962. Reference and Generality. Cornell University Press.

For more on identity criteria:

Gupta, Anil. 1980, The logic of common nouns. New Haven and London: Yale University Press.

For the concept that nouns are "prototypically referential":

Croft, William. 1993. "A noun is a noun is a noun — or is it? Some reflections on the universality of semantics". Proceedings of the Nineteenth Annual Meeting of the Berkeley Linguistics Society, ed. Joshua S. Guenter, Barbara A. Kaiser and Cheryl C. Zoll, 369-80. Berkeley: Berkeley Linguistics Society.

For an attempt to relate the concepts of identity criteria and prototypical referentiality:

Baker, Mark. 2003, Lexical Categories: verbs, nouns, and adjectives. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

Understanding nouns in the context of WordNet:

Understanding Nouns in WordNet.

External links[edit]



Look up noun in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.



Nouns - Singular and Plural Agreement
List of Nouns
ESL Guide to Countable and Uncountable Nouns
Nouns







v
t
e


Lexical categories and their features



Noun



Abstract / Concrete
Adjectival
Agent
Animate / Inanimate
Attributive
Common / Proper
Countable / Mass / Collective
Initial-stress-derived
Relational
Strong / Weak
Verbal / Deverbal





Verb




Forms



Finite / Non-finite
Attributive
Converb
Gerund
Gerundive
Infinitive
Participle (adjectival · adverbial)
Supine
Verbal noun





Types



Accusative
Ambitransitive
Andative/Venitive
Anticausative
Autocausative
Auxiliary
Captative
Catenative
Compound
Copular
Defective
Denominal
Deponent
Ditransitive
Dynamic
ECM
Ergative
Frequentative
Impersonal
Inchoative
Intransitive
Irregular
Lexical
Light
Modal
Monotransitive
Negative
Performative
Phrasal
Predicative
Preterite-present
Reflexive
Regular
Separable
Stative
Stretched
Strong
Transitive
Unaccusative
Unergative
Weak








Adjective



Collateral
Demonstrative
Nominalized
Possessive
Postpositive





Adverb



Genitive
Conjunctive
Flat
Locative
Interrogative
Prepositional
Pronominal
Relative





Pronoun



Demonstrative
Disjunctive
Distributive
Donkey
Dummy
Formal/Informal
Gender-neutral
Gender-specific
Inclusive/Exclusive
Indefinite
Intensive
Interrogative
Objective
Personal
Possessive
Prepositional
Reciprocal
Reflexive
Relative
Resumptive
Subjective
Weak





Preposition/postposition



Inflected
Casally modulated
Stranded





Conjunction





Determiner



Article
Demonstrative
Interrogative
Possessive
Quantifier





Classifier



Measure word





Particle



Discourse
Interrogative
Modal
Noun
Possessive





Complementizer









Other



Yes and no
Copula
Coverb
Expletive
Interjection (verbal)
Preverb
Pro-form
Pro-sentence
Pro-verb
Procedure word
Prop-word









Authority control



GND: 4058333-8
NDL: 00576461











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Noun&oldid=817769167"					Categories: GrammarParts of speechHidden categories: Articles containing Ancient Greek-language textWikipedia articles with GND identifiers