

Nymphalidae





Scientific classification 


Kingdom:
Animalia


Clade:
Euarthropoda


Class:
Insecta


Order:
Lepidoptera


Superfamily:
Papilionoidea


Family:
Nymphalidae
Rafinesque, 1815


Subfamilies




Apaturinae
Biblidinae
Calinaginae
Charaxinae
Cyrestinae
Danainae
Heliconiinae
Libytheinae
Limenitidinae
Morphinae
Nymphalinae
Satyrinae

and see article text



Diversity


Over 600 genera
About 5,700 species


The Nymphalidae are the largest family of butterflies with about 6,000 species distributed throughout most of the world, belonging to the superfamily Papilionoidea. These are usually medium-sized to large butterflies. Most species have a reduced pair of forelegs and many hold their colourful wings flat when resting. They are also called brush-footed butterflies or four-footed butterflies, because they are known to stand on only four legs while the other two are curled up; in some species, these forelegs have a brush-like set of hairs, which gives this family its other common name. Many species are brightly coloured and include popular species such as the emperors, monarch butterfly, admirals, tortoiseshells, and fritillaries. However, the under wings are, in contrast, often dull and in some species look remarkably like dead leaves, or are much paler, producing a cryptic effect that helps the butterflies blend into their surroundings.



Contents


1 Nomenclature
2 Classification

2.1 Systematics and phylogeny
2.2 Example species from this family


3 Morphology
4 See also
5 References
6 Further reading
7 External links



Nomenclature[edit]
Rafinesque[1] introduced the name Nymphalia as a subfamily name in diurnal Lepidoptera. Rafinesque did not include Nymphalis among the listed genera, but Nymphalis was unequivocally implied in the formation of the name (Code Article 11.7.1.1). The attribution of the Nymphalidae to Rafinesque has now been widely adopted.[2]
Classification[edit]
For terms see External morphology of Lepidoptera.
In the adult butterflies, the first pair of legs is small or reduced,[3] giving the family the other names of four-footed or brush-footed butterflies. The caterpillars are hairy or spiky with projections on the head, and the chrysalids have shiny spots.
The forewings have the submedial vein (vein 1) unbranched and in one subfamily forked near the base; the medial vein has three branches, veins 2, 3, and 4; veins 5 and 6 arise from the points of junction of the discocellulars; the subcostal vein and its continuation beyond the apex of cell, vein 7, has never more than four branches, veins 8–11; 8 and 9 always arise from vein 7, 10, and 11 sometimes from vein 7 but more often free, i.e., given off by the subcostal vein before apex of the cell.[4]
The hindwings have internal (1a) and precostal veins. The cell in both wings is closed or open, often closed in the fore, open in the hindwing. The dorsal margin of the hindwing is channelled to receive the abdomen in many of the forms.[4]
The antennae always have two grooves on the underside; the club is variable in shape. Throughout the family, the front pair of legs in the male, and with three exceptions (Libythea, Pseudergolis, and Calinaga) in the female also, is reduced in size and functionally impotent; in some, the atrophy of the forelegs is considerable, e.g., the Danainae and Satyrinae. In many of the forms of these subfamilies, the forelegs are kept pressed against the underside of the thorax, and are in the male often very inconspicuous.[4]
Systematics and phylogeny[edit]
The phylogeny of the Nymphalidae is complex. Several taxa are of unclear position, reflecting the fact that some subfamilies were formerly well-recognized as distinct families due to insufficient study.
The five main clades within the family are:[5]
The libytheine clade (basal)

Libytheinae (snout butterflies, earlier treated as the distinct family Libytheidae)

The danaine clade (basal)

Danainae (milkweed butterflies, earlier treated as the distinct family Danaidae)


Host plant families include Apocynaceae, Asclepiadoideae (subfamily of Apocynaceae), and Moraceae.

Ithomiini (about 300 neotropical species, sometimes considered a subfamily Ithomiinae)


Most species have long wings, and some have transparent wings. Host plants are in the families Apocynaceae, Gesneriaceae, and Solanaceae.


Tellervini (about 6–10 species in Australasia, sometimes considered a subfamily Tellervinae)


Caterpillars resemble those of the Danainae and feed on Apocynaceae.



The satyrine clade

Calinaginae (about six species, restricted to the Himalayas)


Mimics of the Danainae, they are restricted to host plants in the family Moraceae.[6]


Charaxinae


Tropical canopy butterflies, the caterpillars often have head spines or projections. Mostly edible species, have some Batesian mimics. Host plants are in the families Annonaceae, Celastraceae, Convolvulaceae, Euphorbiaceae, Fabaceae, Flacourtiaceae, Lauraceae, Myrtaceae, Piperaceae, Poaceae, Rhamnaceae, Rutaceae, Santalaceae, and Sapindaceae.[6]


Morphinae (including Amathusiini, sometimes considered a subfamily Amathusiinae)


Include the spectacular neotropical Morpho, its food plants include the Arecaceae, Bignoniaceae, Fabaceae, Menispermaceae, Poaceae, and Sapindaceae.

Brassolini (owls, neotropical with 70–80 species, mostly crepuscular, sometimes considered a subfamily Brassolinae)


Host plants in the families Arecaceae, Bromeliaceae, Heliconiaceae, Musaceae, and Poaceae.[6]




Satyrinae (satyrs and browns, earlier treated as distinct family Satyridae)


Host plants are in the families Arecaceae, Araceae, Cyperaceae, Heliconiaceae, Poaceae, and Selaginellaceae.

The heliconiine clade (sister group of the nymphaline clade, excludes former tribes Biblidini and Cyrestini, and tribes Pseudergolini and Coeini)

Heliconiinae (earlier treated as distinct family Heliconiidae)


Colourful tropical butterflies, they are noted for Müllerian mimicry. All species use host plants in the family Passifloraceae.

Acraeini (mostly African, but some species in Asia, sometimes considered a family Acraeinae)


Host plants are in the families Asteraceae, Passifloraceae, Sterculiaceae, Tiliaceae, and Urticaceae.




Limenitidinae

The nymphaline clade (sister group of the heliconiine clade, also includes tribes Coeini and Pseudergolini)

Apaturinae (mostly tropical)


Host plants are in the family Ulmaceae. Caterpillars are smooth with bifid tails and horns on the head.[6]


Biblidinae (formerly in Limenitidinae)
Cyrestinae (formerly in Limenitidinae)
Nymphalinae (a large subfamily that sometimes includes the Limenitidinae and Biblidinae)


Some species migrate. Caterpillars are sometimes covered in spines. Host plants include Acanthaceae, Caprifoliaceae, Convolvulaceae, Euphorbiaceae, Fagaceae, Flacourtiaceae, Lamiaceae, Loranthaceae, Moraceae, Plantaginaceae, Poaceae, Rubiaceae, Rutaceae, Salicaceae, Sapindaceae, Scrophulariaceae, Urticaceae, and Verbenaceae.[6]

Example species from this family[edit]


Archdukes, genus Lexias
California tortoiseshell, Nymphalis californica
Comma, Polygonia c-album
Common buckeye, Junonia coenia
Common snout butterfly, Libytheana carinenta
Cracker butterflies, genus Hamadryas
Crimson patch, Chlosyne janais
Edith's checkerspot, Euphydryas editha
Grayling (butterfly), "Hipparchia semele"
Hackberry Emperor, "Asterocampa celtis"
Lorquin's admiral, Limenitis lorquini
Marsh fritillary, Euphydryas aurinia
Meadow brown, Maniola jurtina
Mourning cloak, Nymphalis antiopa
Monarch butterfly, Danaus plexippus
Blue morpho, Morpho menelaus
Painted lady, Vanessa cardui
Peacock, Aglais io
Plain tiger, Danaus chrysippus
Question mark, Polygonia interrogationis
Red admiral, Vanessa atalanta
Small heath, Coenonympha pamphilus
Small tortoiseshell, Nymphalis urticae
Gatekeeper, Pyronia tithonus
Small pearl-bordered fritillary, "Boloria Selene"


Morphology[edit]
The trait for which these butterflies are most known is the use of only four legs; the reason their forelegs have become vestigial is not yet completely clear. Some suggest the forelegs are used to amplify the sense of smell, because some species possess a brush-like set of soft hair called setae, which has led researchers to believe the forelegs are used to improve signaling and communication between the species, while standing in the other four. This ability proves useful in terms of reproduction and the overall health of the species, and it is the leading theory so far.[7]
See also[edit]


Insects portal
Arthropods portal



List of fritillaries (butterflies)

References[edit]



^ Rafinesque, C.S. (1815). Analyse de la Nature, ou Tableau de l'Univers et des Corps Organisés. Jean Barravecceia: Palermo. 224 pages, p 127.
^ Vane-Wright & de Jong, 2003: 167; Pelham, 2008; Wahlberg, 2010
^ Wolfe, Joanna M.; Oliver, Jeffrey C.; Monteiro, Antónia (2011-01-01). "Evolutionary reduction of the first thoracic limb in butterflies". Journal of Insect Science. 11 (1): 66. doi:10.1673/031.011.6601. ISSN 1536-2442. PMC 3281478 . PMID 21867433. 
^ a b c Bingham, C.T. (1905). The Fauna of British India, Including Ceylon and Burma Butterflies. 1 (1st ed.). London: Taylor and Francis, Ltd. 
^ Niklas Wahlberg, Elisabet Weingartner & Sören Nylin (2003). Gisella Caccone & Giacomo Bernardi, ed. "Papers presented at the Mammalian Phylogeny symposium during the 2002 Annual Meeting of the Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution, Sorrento, Italy, June 13–16, 2002 (Chapter: Towards a better understanding of the higher systematics of Nymphalidae (Lepidoptera: Papilionoidea))" (PDF). Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution. 28 (3): 473–484. doi:10.1016/S1055-7903(03)00052-6. PMID 12927132. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2007-10-25. 
^ a b c d e Philip J. DeVries (2001). "Nymphalidae". In Simon A. Levin. Encyclopedia of Biodiversity. Academic Press. pp. 559–573. doi:10.1016/B0-12-226865-2/00039-0. ISBN 978-0-12-226865-6. 
^ Gould, S.E. "Butterfly watch: four legs vs. six legs". Scientific American. Scientific American. Retrieved 7 Sep 2013. 



Further reading[edit]

Glassberg, Jeffrey Butterflies through Binoculars, The West (2001)
Guppy, Crispin S. and Shepard, Jon H. Butterflies of British Columbia (2001)
James, David G. and Nunnallee, David Life Histories of Cascadia Butterflies (2011)
Pelham, Jonathan Catalogue of the Butterflies of the United States and Canada (2008)
Pyle, Robert Michael The Butterflies of Cascadia (2002)

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Nymphalidae.





Wikispecies has information related to Nymphalidae



Canadian Biodiversity Information Facility (2003): Family Nymphalidae
Family Nymphalidae at Lepidoptera.pro
Peter Chew: Danaids and Browns - Family Nymphalidae, Brisbane butterflies web site (2005).
Tree of Life Web Project: Nymphalidae
Nymphalidae from all over the world
Butterflies and Moths of North America
Butterflies of America







v
t
e


Extant Lepidoptera families






Kingdom: Animalia
Phylum: Arthropoda
Class: Insecta
Subclass: Pterygota
Infraclass: Neoptera
Superorder: Endopterygota










Suborder Zeugloptera







Micropterigoidea

Micropterigidae (mandibulate archaic moths)














Suborder Aglossata







Agathiphagoidea

Agathiphagidae (kauri moths)














Suborder Heterobathmiina







Heterobathmioidea

Heterobathmiidae














Suborder Glossata











Dacnonypha




Eriocranioidea



Eriocraniidae








Acanthoctesia




Acanthopteroctetoidea



Acanthopteroctetidae (archaic sun moths)








Lophocoronina




Lophocoronoidea

Lophocoronidae






Neopseustina




Neopseustoidea

Neopseustidae (archaic bell moths)






Exoporia




Hepialoidea



Anomosetidae
Hepialidae (swift moths, ghost moths)
Neotheoridae (Amazonian primitive ghost moths)
Palaeosetidae (miniature ghost moths)
Prototheoridae (African primitive ghost moths)





Mnesarchaeoidea



Mnesarchaeidae (New Zealand primitive moths)











H
e
t
e
r
o
n
e
u
r
a




M
o
n
o
t
r
y
s
i
a




Incurvarioidea



Adelidae (fairy longhorn moths)
Cecidosidae
Crinopterygidae
Heliozelidae
Incurvariidae
Prodoxidae (yucca moths)





Andesianoidea



Andesianidae (Andean endemic moths)





Nepticuloidea



Nepticulidae (pigmy, or midget moths)
Opostegidae (white eyecap moths)





Palaephatoidea



Palaephatidae (Gondwanaland moths)





Tischerioidea



Tischeriidae (trumpet leaf miner moths)








D
i
t
r
y
s
i
a








Simaethistoidea



Simaethistidae





Tineoidea



Acrolophidae (burrowing webworm moths)
Arrhenophanidae
Eriocottidae (Old World spiny-winged moths)
Lypusidae
Psychidae (bagworm moths)
Tineidae (fungus moths)





Gracillarioidea



Bucculatricidae (ribbed cocoon makers)
Douglasiidae (Douglas moths)
Gracillariidae
Roeslerstammiidae





Yponomeutoidea



Acrolepiidae (false diamondback moths)
Bedelliidae
Glyphipterigidae (sedge moths)
Heliodinidae
Lyonetiidae
Plutellidae
Yponomeutidae (ermine moths)
Ypsolophidae





Gelechioidea



Autostichidae
Batrachedridae
Blastobasidae
Coleophoridae (case-bearers, case moths)
Cosmopterigidae (cosmet moths)
Elachistidae (grass-miner moths)
Gelechiidae (twirler moths)
Lecithoceridae (long-horned moths)
Metachandidae
Momphidae (mompha moths)
Oecophoridae (concealer moths)
Pterolonchidae
Scythrididae (flower moths)
Xyloryctidae (timber moths)





Galacticoidea



Galacticidae





Zygaenoidea



Heterogynidae
Zygaenidae (burnet, forester, or smoky moths)
Himantopteridae
Lacturidae
Somabrachyidae
Megalopygidae (flannel moths)
Aididae
Anomoeotidae
Cyclotornidae
Epipyropidae (planthopper parasite moths)
Dalceridae (slug caterpillars)
Limacodidae (slug, or cup moths)





Cossoidea



Cossidae (carpenter millers, or goat moths)
Dudgeoneidae (dudgeon carpenter moths)





Sesioidea



Brachodidae (little bear moths)
Castniidae (castniid moths: giant butterfly-moths, sun moths)
Sesiidae (clearwing moths)





Choreutoidea



Choreutidae (metalmark moths)





Tortricoidea



Tortricidae (tortrix moths)





Urodoidea



Urodidae (false burnet moths)





Schreckensteinioidea



Schreckensteiniidae (bristle-legged moths)





Epermenioidea



Epermeniidae (fringe-tufted moths)





Alucitoidea



Alucitidae (many-plumed moths)
Tineodidae (false plume moths)





Pterophoroidea



Pterophoridae (plume moths)





Whalleyanoidea



Whalleyanidae





Immoidea



Immidae





Copromorphoidea



Copromorphidae (tropical fruitworm moths)
Carposinidae (fruitworm moths)





Hyblaeoidea



Hyblaeidae (teak moths)
















Pyraloidea



Pyralidae (snout moths)
Crambidae (grass moth)





Thyridoidea



Thyrididae (picture-winged leaf moths)





Mimallonoidea



Mimallonidae (sack bearer moths)





Lasiocampoidea



Lasiocampidae (eggars, snout moths, or lappet moths)





Bombycoidea



Anthelidae (Australian lappet moth)
Bombycidae (silk moths)
Brahmaeidae (Brahmin moths)
Carthaeidae (Dryandra moth)
Endromidae (Kentish glory and relatives)
Eupterotidae
Lemoniidae
Saturniidae (saturniids)
Sphingidae (hawk moths, sphinx moths and hornworms)
Phiditiidae





Noctuoidea



Doidae
Erebidae (underwing, tiger, tussock, litter, snout, owlet moths)
Euteliidae
Noctuidae (daggers, sallows, owlet moths, quakers, cutworms, darts)
Nolidae (tuft moths)
Notodontidae (prominents, kittens)
Oenosandridae





Drepanoidea



Epicopeiidae (oriental swallowtail moths)
Drepanidae (hook-tips)





Geometroidea



Sematuridae
Uraniidae
Geometridae (geometer moths)





Cimelioidea



Cimeliidae (gold moths)





Calliduloidea



Callidulidae (Old World butterfly-moths)





Superfamily unassigned



Millieriidae








Rhopalocera
(butterflies)




Hedyloidea



Hedylidae (American moth-butterflies)





Hesperioidea



Hesperiidae (skippers)





Papilionoidea
(true butterflies)



Lycaenidae (gossamer-winged butterflies: blues, coppers and relatives)
Nymphalidae (brush-footed, or four-footed butterflies)
Papilionidae (swallowtail butterflies)
Pieridae (whites, yellows, orangetips, sulphurs)
Riodinidae (metalmarks)


















Note: division Monotrysia is not a clade.












Taxonomy of the Lepidoptera
Lists by region









Taxon identifiers



Wd: Q156449
ADW: Nymphalidae
BAMONA: Nymphalidae
BugGuide: 192
EoL: 876
Fauna Europaea: 7202
Fossilworks: 135150
GBIF: 7017
iNaturalist: 47922
ITIS: 117276
NCBI: 33415











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Nymphalidae&oldid=814560129"					Categories: NymphalidaeButterfly familiesTaxa named by Constantine Samuel RafinesqueHidden categories: Articles using diversity taxoboxArticles with 'species' microformats