





This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (January 2014) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)













The ocean currents.





Play media


Distinctive white lines trace the flow of surface currents around the world.




Play media


Visualization showing global ocean currents from Jan 01, 2010 to Dec 31, 2012 at sea level then at 2000 meters below sea level.




Play media


Animation of circulation around ice shelves of Antarctica.


An ocean current is a seasonal directed movement of seawater generated by forces acting upon this mean flow, such as breaking waves, wind, the Coriolis effect, cabbeling, temperature and salinity differences, while tides are caused by the gravitational pull of the Sun and Moon. Depth contours, shoreline configurations, and interactions with other currents influence a current's direction and strength. Therefore, ocean currents are primarily horizontal water movements.
Ocean currents flow for great distances, and together, create the global conveyor belt which plays a dominant role in determining the climate of many of the Earth’s regions. More specifically, ocean currents influence the temperature of the regions through which they travel. For example, warm currents traveling along more temperate coasts increase the temperature of the area by warming the sea breezes that blow over them. Perhaps the most striking example is the Gulf Stream, which makes northwest Europe much more temperate than any other region at the same latitude. Another example is Lima, Peru where the climate is cooler (sub-tropical) than the tropical latitudes in which the area is located, due to the effect of the Humboldt Current.



Contents


1 Function
2 Thermohaline circulation

2.1 Downwelling of deep water in polar regions


3 Importance
4 OSCAR: Near-realtime global ocean surface current data set
5 See also
6 References
7 External links



Function[edit]




The bathymetry of the Kerguelen Plateau in the Southern Ocean governs the course of the new current part of the global network of ocean currents (Source:CSIRO)


Surface oceanic currents are sometimes wind driven and develop their typical clockwise spirals in the northern hemisphere and counter-clockwise rotation in the southern hemisphere due to imposed wind stresses. In these wind driven currents, the Ekman spiral effect results in the currents flowing at an angle to the driving winds. In addition, the areas of surface ocean currents move somewhat with the seasons; this is most notable in equatorial currents.
Deep ocean basins generally have a non-symmetric surface current, in that the eastern equatorward-flowing branch is broad and diffuse whereas the western poleward flowing branch is very narrow. These western boundary currents (of which the Gulf Stream is an example) are a consequence of the rotation of the Earth.
Deep ocean currents are driven by density and temperature gradients. Thermohaline circulation is also known as the ocean's conveyor belt (which refers to deep ocean density driven ocean basin currents). These currents, called submarine rivers, flow under the surface of the ocean and are hidden from immediate detection. Where significant vertical movement of ocean currents is observed, this is known as upwelling and downwelling. Deep ocean currents are currently being researched using a fleet of underwater robots called Argo.
The South Equatorial Currents of the Atlantic and Pacific straddle the equator. Though the Coriolis effect is weak near the equator (and absent at the equator), water moving in the currents on either side of the equator is deflected slightly poleward and replaced by deeper water. Thus, equatorial upwelling occurs in these westward flowing equatorial surface currents. Upwelling is an important process because this water from within and below the pycnocline is often rich in nutrients and greatly benefits the growth of marine organisms. By contrast, generally poor conditions for growth prevail in most of the open tropical ocean because strong layering isolates deep, nutrient rich water from the sunlit ocean surface.
Surface currents make up only 8% of all water in the ocean, are generally restricted to the upper 400 m (1,300 ft) of ocean water, and are separated from lower regions by varying temperatures and salinity which affect the density of the water, which in turn, defines each oceanic region. Because the movement of deep water in ocean basins is caused by density driven forces and gravity, deep waters sink into deep ocean basins at high latitudes where the temperatures are cold enough to cause the density to increase.
Ocean currents are measured in sverdrup (sv), where 1 sv is equivalent to a volume flow rate of 1,000,000 m3 (35,000,000 cu ft) per second.
Surface currents are found on the surface of an ocean, and are driven by large scale wind currents. They are directly affected by the wind—the Coriolis effect plays a role in their behaviors.[1]
Thermohaline circulation[edit]
Further information: Deep ocean water and Thermohaline circulation




Coupling data collected by NASA/JPL by several different satellite-borne sensors, researchers have been able to "break through" the ocean's surface to detect "Meddies" – super-salty warm-water eddies that originate in the Mediterranean Sea and then sink more than a half-mile underwater in the Atlantic Ocean. The Meddies are shown in red in this scientific figure.


Horizontal and vertical currents also exist below the pycnocline in the ocean's deeper waters. The movement of water due to differences in density as a function of water temperature and salinity is called thermohaline circulation. Ripple marks in sediments, scour lines, and the erosion of rocky outcrops on deep-ocean floors are evidence that relatively strong, localized bottom currents exist. Some of these currents may move as rapidly as 60 centimeters (24 inches) per second.
These currents are strongly influenced by bottom topography, since dense, bottom water must forcefully flow over and around depressions and projections in the seafloor. Thus, they are sometimes called contour currents. Bottom currents generally move equator-ward at or near the western boundaries of ocean basins (below the western boundary surface currents). The deep-water masses are not capable of moving water at speeds comparable to that of wind-driven surface currents. Water in some of these currents may move only 1 to 2 meters per day; however, even at that slow speed, the Coriolis effect modifies their pattern of flow.
Downwelling of deep water in polar regions[edit]




A recording current meter


Antarctic Bottom Water is the most distinctive of the deep-water masses. It is characterized by a salinity of 34.65‰, a temperature of −0.5 °C (30 °F), and a density of 1.0279 grams per cubic centimeter. This water is noted for its extreme density (the densest in the world ocean), for the great amount of it produced near Antarctic coasts, and for its ability to migrate north along the seafloor. Most Antarctic Bottom Water forms near the Antarctic coast south of South America during winter. Salt is concentrated in pockets between crystals of pure water and then squeezed out of the freezing mass to form a frigid brine. Between 20 million and 50 million cubic meters of this brine form every second. The water's great density causes it to sink toward the continental shelf, where it mixes with nearly equal parts of water from the southern Antarctic Circumpolar Current. The mixture settles along the edge of Antarctica's continental shelf, descends along the slope, and spreads along the deep-sea bed, creeping north in slow sheets. Antarctic Bottom Water flows many times slower than the water in surface currents: in the Pacific it may take a thousand years to reach the equator. Antarctic Bottom Water also flows into the Atlantic Ocean basin, where it flows north at a faster rate than in the Pacific. Antarctic Bottom Water has been identified as high as 40° N on the Atlantic floor.
A small amount of dense bottom water also forms in the northern polar ocean. Although, the topography of the Arctic Ocean basin prevents most of the bottom water from escaping, with the exception of deep channels formed in the submarine ridges between Scotland, Iceland, and Greenland. These channels allow the cold, dense water formed in the Arctic to flow into the North Atlantic to form North Atlantic Deep Water. North Atlantic Deep Water forms when the relatively warm and salty North Atlantic Ocean cools as cold winds from northern Canada sweep over it. Exposed to the chilled air, water at the latitude of Iceland releases heat, cools from 10 °C to 2 °C, and sinks. Gulf Stream water that sinks in the north is replaced by warm water flowing clockwise along the U.S. east coast in the North Atlantic gyre.
Importance[edit]




A 1943 map of the world's ocean currents.


Knowledge of surface ocean currents is essential in reducing costs of shipping, since traveling with them reduces fuel costs. In the wind powered sailing-ship era, knowledge of wind patterns and ocean currents is even more essential. A good example of this is the Agulhas Current, which long prevented Portuguese sailors from reaching India. In recent times, around-the-world sailing competitors make good use of surface currents to build and maintain speed. Ocean currents are also very important in the dispersal of many life forms. An example is the life-cycle of the European Eel.
Ocean currents are important in the study of marine debris, and vice versa. These currents also affect temperatures throughout the world. For example, the ocean current that brings warm water up the north Atlantic to northwest Europe also cumulatively and slowly blocks ice from forming along the seashores, which would also block ships from entering and exiting inland waterways and seaports, hence ocean currents play a decisive role in influencing the climates of regions through which they flow. Cold ocean water currents flowing from polar and sub-polar regions bring in a lot of plankton that are crucial to the continued survival of several key sea creature species in marine ecosystems. Since plankton are the food of fish, abundant fish populations often live where these currents prevail.
Ocean currents can also be used for marine power generation, with areas off of Japan, Florida and Hawaii being considered for test projects.
OSCAR: Near-realtime global ocean surface current data set[edit]
The OSCAR Near-realtime global ocean surface currents website describes the project and links to data validation and data downloads.
OSCAR data is used extensively in climate studies. maps and descriptions or annotations of climatic anomalies have been published in the monthly Climate Diagnostic Bulletin since 2001 and are routinely used to monitor ENSO and to test weather prediction models. OSCAR currents are routinely used to evaluate the surface currents in Global Circulation Models (GCMs), for example in NCEP Global Ocean Data Assimilation System (GODAS) and European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts (ECMWF).[2]
See also[edit]


Underwater diving portal



Currentology
Deep ocean water
Fish migration
Latitude of the Gulf Stream and the Gulf Stream north wall index
List of ocean circulation models
Marine current power
Oceanic gyre
Physical oceanography
Thermohaline circulation
Volta do mar

References[edit]



^ National Ocean Service (March 25, 2008). "Surface Ocean Currents". noaa.gov. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. Retrieved 2017-06-13. 
^ Dohan, Kathleen; Lagerloef, Gary. "OSCAR—Ocean Surface Current Analyses Real-time". esr.org. Earth & Space Research. Retrieved 2017-06-12. 




Hansen, B.; Østerhus, S; Quadfasel, D; Turrell, W (2004). "Already the day after tomorrow?". Science. 305 (5686): 953–954. doi:10.1126/science.1100085. PMID 15310882. 
Kerr, Richard A. (2004). "A slowing cog in the North Atlantic ocean's climate machine". Science. 304 (5669): 371–372. doi:10.1126/science.304.5669.371a. PMID 15087513. 
Munday, Phillip L.; Jones, Geoffrey P.; Pratchett, Morgan S.; Williams, Ashley J. (2008). "Climate change and the future for coral reef fishes". Fish and Fisheries. 9 (3): 261–285. doi:10.1111/j.1467-2979.2008.00281.x. 
Rahmstorf, S. (2003). "Thermohaline circulation: The current climate". Nature. 421 (6924): 699–699. doi:10.1038/421699a. PMID 12610602. 
Roemmich, D. (2007). "Physical oceanography: Super spin in the southern seas". Nature. 449 (7158): 34–35. doi:10.1038/449034a. PMID 17805284. 

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Ocean currents.



RSMAS Ocean Surface Currents
Coastal Ocean Current Monitoring Program
Ocean Motion and Surface Currents
Data Visualizer from OceanMotion.org
ocean currents map







v
t
e


Ocean currents and gyres



Currents




Arctic Ocean



East Greenland
North Icelandic
Norwegian
Transpolar Drift Stream





Atlantic Ocean



Angola
Antilles
Azores
Baffin Island
Benguela
Brazil
Canary
Cape Horn
Caribbean
East Greenland
East Iceland
Falkland
Florida
Guinea
Gulf Stream
Irminger
Labrador
Lomonosov
Loop
North Atlantic
North Brazil
North Equatorial
Norwegian
Portugal
Slope Jet
South Atlantic
South Equatorial
West Greenland
West Spitsbergen





Indian Ocean



Agulhas
Agulhas Return
East Madagascar
Equatorial Counter
Indian Monsoon
Indonesian Throughflow
Leeuwin
Madagascar
Mozambique
North Madagascar
Somali
South Australian
South Equatorial
West Australian





Pacific Ocean



Alaska
Aleutian
California
Cromwell
Davidson
East Australian
East Korea Warm
Equatorial Counter
Humboldt
Indonesian Throughflow
Kamchatka
Kuroshio
Mindanao
North Equatorial
North Korea Cold
North Pacific
Oyashio
South Equatorial
Tasman Front





Southern Ocean



Antarctic Circumpolar
Tasman Outflow








Gyres




Major gyres



Indian Ocean Gyre
North Atlantic Gyre
South Atlantic Gyre
North Pacific Gyre
South Pacific Gyre





Other gyres



Beaufort Gyre
Ross Gyre
Weddell Gyre








Related



Atmospheric circulation
Boundary current
Coriolis force
Ekman transport
Great Pacific garbage patch
Indian Ocean garbage patch
Marine debris
North Atlantic garbage patch
Thermohaline circulation












v
t
e


Physical oceanography



Waves



Airy wave theory
Ballantine scale
Benjamin–Feir instability
Boussinesq approximation
Breaking wave
Clapotis
Cnoidal wave
Cross sea
Dispersion
Edge wave
Equatorial waves
Fetch
Gravity wave
Green's law
Infragravity wave
Internal wave
Iribarren number
Kelvin wave
Kinematic wave
Longshore drift
Luke's variational principle
Mild-slope equation
Radiation stress
Rogue wave
Rossby wave
Rossby-gravity waves
Sea state
Seiche
Significant wave height
Soliton
Stokes boundary layer
Stokes drift
Stokes wave
Swell
Trochoidal wave
Tsunami

megatsunami


Undertow
Ursell number
Wave action
Wave base
Wave height
Wave power
Wave radar
Wave setup
Wave shoaling
Wave turbulence
Wave–current interaction
Waves and shallow water

one-dimensional Saint-Venant equations
shallow water equations


Wind wave

model
















Circulation



Atmospheric circulation
Baroclinity
Boundary current
Coriolis force
Coriolis–Stokes force
Craik–Leibovich vortex force
Downwelling
Eddy
Ekman layer
Ekman spiral
Ekman transport
El Niño–Southern Oscillation
General circulation model
Geostrophic current
Global Ocean Data Analysis Project
Gulf Stream
Halothermal circulation
Humboldt Current
Hydrothermal circulation
Langmuir circulation
Longshore drift
Loop Current
Modular Ocean Model
Ocean dynamics
Ocean gyre
Princeton Ocean Model
Rip current
Subsurface currents
Sverdrup balance
Thermohaline circulation

shutdown


Upwelling
Whirlpool
World Ocean Circulation Experiment





Tides



Amphidromic point
Earth tide
Head of tide
Internal tide
Lunitidal interval
Perigean spring tide
Rip tide
Rule of twelfths
Slack water
Tidal bore
Tidal force
Tidal power
Tidal race
Tidal range
Tidal resonance
Tide gauge
Tideline





Landforms



Abyssal fan
Abyssal plain
Atoll
Bathymetric chart
Coastal geography
Cold seep
Continental margin
Continental rise
Continental shelf
Contourite
Guyot
Hydrography
Oceanic basin
Oceanic plateau
Oceanic trench
Passive margin
Seabed
Seamount
Submarine canyon
Submarine volcano





Plate
tectonics



Convergent boundary
Divergent boundary
Fracture zone
Hydrothermal vent
Marine geology
Mid-ocean ridge
Mohorovičić discontinuity
Vine–Matthews–Morley hypothesis
Oceanic crust
Outer trench swell
Ridge push
Seafloor spreading
Slab pull
Slab suction
Slab window
Subduction
Transform fault
Volcanic arc





Ocean zones



Benthic
Deep ocean water
Deep sea
Littoral
Mesopelagic
Oceanic
Pelagic
Photic
Surf
Swash





Sea level



Deep-ocean Assessment and Reporting of Tsunamis
Future sea level
Global Sea Level Observing System
North West Shelf Operational Oceanographic System
Sea-level curve
Sea level rise
World Geodetic System





Acoustics



Deep scattering layer
Hydroacoustics
Ocean acoustic tomography
Sofar bomb
SOFAR channel
Underwater acoustics





Satellites



Jason-1
Jason-2 (Ocean Surface Topography Mission)
Jason-3





Related



Argo
Benthic lander
Color of water
DSV Alvin
Marginal sea
Marine energy
Marine pollution
Mooring
National Oceanographic Data Center
Ocean
Ocean exploration
Ocean observations
Ocean reanalysis
Ocean surface topography
Ocean thermal energy conversion
Oceanography
Pelagic sediment
Sea surface microlayer
Sea surface temperature
Seawater
Science On a Sphere
Thermocline
Underwater glider
Water column
World Ocean Atlas








 Category
 Commons












v
t
e


Diving medicine, physiology, physics and environment



Diving
medicine




Injuries
and
disorders




Pressure




Oxygen



Freediving blackout
Hyperoxia
Hypoxia (medical)
Oxygen toxicity





Inert gases



Atrial septal defect
Avascular necrosis
Decompression sickness
Dysbaric osteonecrosis
High-pressure nervous syndrome
Hydrogen narcosis
Isobaric counterdiffusion
Nitrogen narcosis
Taravana
Uncontrolled decompression





Carbon dioxide



Hypercapnia
Hypocapnia







Aerosinusitis
Air embolism
Alternobaric vertigo
Barodontalgia
Barostriction
Barotrauma
Compression arthralgia
Decompression illness
Dental barotrauma
Dysbarism
Ear clearing
Frenzel maneuver
Valsalva maneuver





Immersion



Asphyxia
Drowning
Hypothermia
Immersion diuresis
Instinctive drowning response
Laryngospasm
Salt water aspiration syndrome
Swimming-induced pulmonary edema







List of signs and symptoms of diving disorders
Cramps
Diving disorders
Motion sickness
Surfer's ear





Treatments



Diving chamber
Diving medicine
Hyperbaric medicine
Hyperbaric treatment schedules
In-water recompression
Oxygen therapy







Fitness to dive








Diving
physiology



Artificial gills (human)
Blood–air barrier
Blood shift
Breathing
Circulatory system
CO₂ retention
Cold shock response
Dead space (physiology)
Decompression (diving)
Decompression theory
Diving reflex
Gas exchange
History of decompression research and development
Lipid
Maximum operating depth
Metabolism
Normocapnia
Oxygen window in diving decompression
Perfusion
Physiological response to water immersion
Physiology of decompression
Pulmonary circulation
Respiratory exchange ratio
Respiratory quotient
Respiratory system
Systemic circulation
Tissue (biology)





Diving
physics



Ambient pressure
Amontons' law
Anti-fog
Archimedes' principle
Atmospheric pressure
Boyle's law
Breathing performance of regulators
Buoyancy
Charles's law
Combined gas law
Dalton's law
Diffusion
Force
Gay-Lussac's law
Henry's law
Hydrophobe
Hydrostatic pressure
Ideal gas law
Molecular diffusion
Neutral buoyancy
Oxygen fraction
Partial pressure
Permeation
Pressure
Psychrometric constant
Snell's law
Solubility
Solution
Supersaturation
Surface tension
Surfactant
Torricellian chamber
Underwater vision
Weight





Diving
environment



Algal bloom
Breaking wave
Ocean current
Current (stream)
Ekman transport
Halocline
List of diving hazards and precautions
Longshore drift
Rip current
Stratification
Surf
Surge (wave action)
Thermocline
Tides
Turbidity
Undertow (water waves)
Upwelling





Researchers in
diving medicine
and physiology



Arthur J. Bachrach
Albert R. Behnke
Paul Bert
George F. Bond
Robert Boyle
Albert A. Bühlmann
John R Clarke
William Paul Fife
John Scott Haldane
Robert William Hamilton Jr.
Leonard Erskine Hill
Brian Andrew Hills
Felix Hoppe-Seyler
Christian J. Lambertsen
Simon Mitchell
Charles Momsen
John Rawlins R.N.
Charles Wesley Shilling
Edward D. Thalmann
Jules Triger





Diving medical
research
organisations



Aerospace Medical Association
Divers Alert Network (DAN)
Diving Diseases Research Centre (DDRC)
Diving Medical Advisory Council (DMAC}
European Diving Technology Committee (EDTC)
European Underwater and Baromedical Society (EUBS)
National Board of Diving and Hyperbaric Medical Technology
Naval Submarine Medical Research Laboratory
Royal Australian Navy School of Underwater Medicine
Rubicon Foundation
South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society (SPUMS)
Southern African Underwater and Hyperbaric Medical Association (SAUHMA}
Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society (UHMS)
United States Navy Experimental Diving Unit (NEDU)








 Categories: Diving medicine
Underwater diving physiology
Underwater diving physics
Physical oceanography
 Glossary
 Portal









Authority control



GND: 4130725-2
NDL: 00564617











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ocean_current&oldid=817459725"					Categories: Ocean currentsOceansOceanographical terminologyPhysical oceanographyHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from January 2014All articles needing additional referencesWikipedia articles with GND identifiersArticles containing video clips