For other uses, see Ministry of Communications.
For the Federal Office of Communications in Switzerland, also known as OFCOM, see Federal Department of Environment, Transport, Energy and Communications.

Office of Communications


Ofcom offices at Riverside House, Bankside, next to Southwark Bridge






Abbreviation
Ofcom


Formation
29 December 2003


Type
Statutory corporation


Legal status
Created by Office of Communications Act 2002[1]


Purpose
Regulator and competition authority for broadcasting, postal services, telecommunications and radiocommunications spectrum


Headquarters
London, England


Location



London, Belfast, Cardiff, Caterham, Glasgow, Warrington






Region served

United Kingdom



Official language

English, Welsh



Chief Executive

Sharon White



Chairman

Dame Patricia Hodgson


Website
ofcom.org.uk


The Office of Communications (Welsh: Y Swyddfa Gyfathrebiadau), commonly known as Ofcom, is the UK government-approved regulatory and competition authority for the broadcasting, telecommunications and postal industries of the United Kingdom.
Ofcom has wide-ranging powers across the television, radio, telecoms and postal sectors. It has a statutory duty to represent the interests of citizens and consumers by promoting competition and protecting the public from harmful or offensive material.[2][3]
Some of the main areas Ofcom presides over are licensing, research, codes and policies, complaints, competition and protecting the radio spectrum from abuse (e.g. pirate radio stations).
The regulator was initially established by the Office of Communications Act 2002 and received its full authority from the Communications Act 2003.[1]



Contents


1 History
2 Activities

2.1 Television and radio
2.2 Telephone and broadband
2.3 Spectrum licensing and protection
2.4 Postal services
2.5 Consultations


3 Leadership

3.1 Current
3.2 Historical
3.3 Key personnel


4 Ofcom committees
5 Controversies

5.1 Expenditure
5.2 Al Jazeera
5.3 Press TV
5.4 Sitefinder database and freedom of information


6 See also
7 References
8 External links



History[edit]
The creation of Ofcom was announced in the Queen's Speech to the UK Parliament, in June 2001. The new body, which would replace several existing authorities, was conceived as a "super-regulator" to oversee media channels that were rapidly converging through digital transmission.[4]
Ofcom launched on 29 December 2003, formally inheriting the duties that had previously been the responsibility of five different regulators:[5]

the Broadcasting Standards Commission,
the Independent Television Commission,
the Office of Telecommunications (Oftel),
the Radio Authority, and
the Radiocommunications Agency.

In July 2009, Conservative party opposition leader David Cameron said in a speech against the proliferation of quangos that:

With a Conservative government, Ofcom as we know it will cease to exist… Its remit will be restricted to its narrow technical and enforcement roles. It will no longer play a role in making policy. And the policy-making functions it has today will be transferred back fully to the Department for Culture, Media and Sport.[6][7]

Under Cameron's subsequent premiership of the 2010 UK coalition government, the Public Bodies Act 2011 did remove or modify several of Ofcom's duties, although it did not substantially reduce Ofcom's remit.[8]
On 1 October 2011, Ofcom took over responsibility for regulating the postal services industry from the Postal Services Commission (Postcomm).
In April 2015, Ofcom announced that, as of 1 July, phone companies will have to provide customers with a set charge for the cost of calling numbers starting 084, 087 and 09. The streamlining of these charges must be printed in each customer's contract and monthly bills. The change will affect over 175 million phone numbers, making it the biggest overhaul of telephoning in over a decade.[9]
On 1 January 2016, the regulation of video on demand was transferred to Ofcom from ATVOD, the Authority for Television on Demand.[10]
On 1 January 2017, the regulation of the BBC was transferred to Ofcom from the BBC Trust, as indicated by the 2016 Royal charter.[11]
News International phone hacking scandal
Main article: News International phone hacking scandal
In July 2011, in the wake of the News International phone hacking scandal, Ofcom came under pressure to launch an inquiry into whether the parent company of News International, News Corporation, was still the "fit and proper" owner of a controlling stake in the satellite broadcasting company British Sky Broadcasting (BSkyB). On 13 July former Prime Minister Gordon Brown urged Ofcom to launch an investigation.[12][13] On 15 July the Deputy Prime Minister Nick Clegg stated that the Government would launch a review of laws on what constituted a "fit and proper" owner for broadcasting companies in the United Kingdom, and that anyone found not to meet that standard can be forced to give up their current holdings in a company.[14]
On 22 July 2011, it was reported that Ofcom had begun an investigation into whether the phone-hacking scandal may have changed BSkyB's status as the "fit and proper" holder of a UK broadcasting licence.[15] On the same day Ed Richards, the then chief executive of Ofcom, replied to Simon Hughes MP, Don Foster MP and Tim Farron MP following a letter which they had written to him on 8 July concerning News Corporation's shareholding in BSkyB.[16] In the letter Richards confirmed that Ofcom considers that News Corporation's current shareholding of 39.14% in BSkyB does give it a material influence over the company; that Ofcom is not precluded from acting by ongoing police investigations; and that Ofcom's process is not dependent upon a criminal conviction being secured.[16]
In April 2012, Ofcom's probe moved from a monitoring phase to an "evidence gathering" phase.[17]
Activities[edit]
Television and radio[edit]
Ofcom licenses all UK commercial television and radio services in the UK. Broadcasters must comply by the terms of their licence, or risk having it revoked. Ofcom also publishes the Broadcasting Code, a series of rules which all broadcast content on television and radio must follow.[18] The Broadcasting Code requires that content inappropriate for children should not be broadcast between the hours of 5:30 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. Premium-rate film services may broadcast content equivalent to a BBFC 15 certificate at any time of day provided a PIN-protected system is in place to restrict access to those authorised to view it.[19] The broadcasting of pornography with a BBFC R18 certificate is not permitted.[20] In 2010 Ofcom revoked the licences of four free-to-air television channels for promoting adult chat services during daytime hours and transmitting content that was too sexually explicit. The companies involved were fined £157,250.[21] Ofcom's jurisdiction does not cover television and radio channels which are broadcast in the UK but licensed abroad. In 2012 Ofcom lodged a complaint with the Dutch media regulator regarding the content of adult chat television channels which are broadcast in the UK but licensed in the Netherlands.[22] Based on a survey of 200 British respondents, Ofcom published in 2016 a list of about 50 words classified in four grades of offensiveness, from "milder" to "strongest."[23]
Telephone and broadband[edit]
Ofcom regulates the UK telecoms sector, defining and enforcing the conditions by which all mobile and fixed-line phone and broadband companies must abide. These 'general conditions' are wide-ranging rules relating to matters such as telephone numbering, emergency services, sales, marketing and interconnection standards. Ofcom's investigation unit monitors compliance with the conditions and resolves disputes between providers.
Ofcom is also the competition authority for telecoms, enforcing remedies in markets where it believes dominant operators may have a potentially harmful influence on competition or consumers. One of its most high-profile interventions was to require BT to split its wholesale and retail arms into separate companies, bringing about the creation of Openreach which supplies wholesale services to both BT Retail and competing providers.[24]
On 1 July 2015, Ofcom made a number of changes to the way phone calls to UK service numbers would be charged. Under the new legislation, which was promoted by an information campaign entitled UK Calling,[25] call charges must be clearly stated on all materials that advertise a service number. The changes came after research found that callers are often confused about service call charges, and thus can avoid calling these numbers. The July 2015 changes also saw 'freephone numbers' 0800 and 0808 become free to call from both mobiles and landlines.[26]
In March 2016, Ofcom launched an interactive 'Mobile coverage and fixed broadband checker',[27] allowing people to check mobile coverage and broadband speeds via their post code.
Spectrum licensing and protection[edit]
Ofcom is responsible for the management, regulation, assignment and licensing of the electromagnetic spectrum in the UK, and licenses portions of it for use in TV and radio broadcasts, mobile phone transmissions, private communications networks, wireless devices and so on. The process of licensing varies depending on the type of use required. Some licences simply have to be applied and paid for, other commercial licences are subject to a bidding process. Most of the procedures in place have been inherited from the systems used by the previous regulators. However, Ofcom may change some of these processes in future.
Ofcom protects the radio spectrum in a number of ways:

Working within international organisations (ITU, CEPT and BEREC).
Licensing UK-controlled commercial radio spectrum; the Ministry of Defence controls its own spectrum. Within the international frame work for frequency use; Ofcom liaises through the UK Government to produce the UKFAT (UK Frequency Allocation Table). The current table was produced in 2013.
Investigate and, when necessary, carry out enforcement activities to clear interference or illegal use from the spectrum. Until June 2010 Ofcom investigated all interference cases within the UK. Interference reporting has now been transferred to the BBC. This contract specifically excludes any requirement to investigate interference relating to AM radio reception.[28] Commercial and spectrum licence holders report to Ofcom and in all cases Illegal/Pirate Radio operations are still reported to Ofcom.

Postal services[edit]
In October 2010 the government announced plans for Ofcom to inherit the functions of Postcomm as part of a wider set of public service sell-off measures.[29] Following the Postal Services Act 2011 regulatory responsibility for postal services transferred to Ofcom on 1 October 2011, with its primary duty to maintain the UK's six-day-a-week universal postal service.
Consultations[edit]
Ofcom makes extensive use of consultations with industry and the public to help it make decisions based upon the evidence presented. Consultation processes begin with publishing documents on its website,[30] asking for views and responses. If the document is perceived to be long and complicated, a plain English summary is usually published as well. A period, usually of 10 weeks, is allowed for interested persons, companies or organisations to send in their responses to the consultation.
After this consultation period, Ofcom publishes all the responses on its website, excluding any personal or confidential information. Ofcom then prepares a summary of the responses received, and uses this information as a basis for its decisions.[31]
Leadership[edit]
Current[edit]
Dame Patricia Hodgson DBE was appointed as chairman of Ofcom for a three-year term from April 2014. She was a member of the Ofcom board from July 2011 and became deputy chairman in January 2012.[32] On 18 July 2016 it was announced that her term would be extended for a further year until 2018.[33]
Sharon White became Ofcom's chief executive in 2015, replacing Ed Richards.[34]
On 15 March 2016 it was announced that Steve Gettings would become Acting Corporation Secretary in succession to Graham Howell.[35]
Historical[edit]
Colette Bowe was appointed Ofcom chairman with effect from 11 March 2009.[36][37][38] She is the founding chairman of the Telecoms Ombudsman Council, and chaired Ofcom's Consumer Panel from its inception in 2003 to December 2007.
The first chairman of Ofcom was David Currie, Dean of Cass Business School at City University and a life peer under the title Lord Currie of Marylebone. The first chief executive was Stephen Carter, Baron Carter of Barnes, formerly a senior executive of JWT UK and NTL and subsequently a Minister for Communications, Technology and Broadcasting.[39]
Key personnel[edit]
Ofcom's key personnel are:[40]

Chief executive, Sharon White
Board members:

Dr Stephen Unger, appointed April 2015
Graham Mather, appointed June 2014
Jonathan Oxley, appointed January 2015
Ben Verwaayen
Nick Pollard, appointed November 2016
Tim Suter, appointed 29 September 2017[41]



Ofcom publishes a register of disclosable interests of the Ofcom board.[42]
Ofcom committees[edit]
Ofcom has a number of committees and advisory bodies which inform the Ofcom Board and Executive. These include:[43]

Communications Consumer Panel (CCP)
Advisory Committee for Older and Disabled People (ACOD)
Risk and Audit Committee
Nominations Committee
Remuneration Committee
Election Committee
Non-Executive Remuneration Committee
Nations Committee
Advisory Committee for England
Advisory Committee for Northern Ireland
Advisory Committee for Scotland
Advisory Committee for Wales
Community Radio Fund Panel
Ofcom Spectrum Advisory Board (OSAB)
Broadcast Licensing Committee

Controversies[edit]
Expenditure[edit]
Ofcom has received criticism for incurring unnecessary costs as a result of "extravagant Thames-side offices" and a "top-heavy salary bill",[44] for inflexibility in its regulation of commercial radio,[45] and for "poor service".[46]
Al Jazeera[edit]
The Qatar-based newsmedia outlet was reported[47] to Ofcom in January 2017, following an exposé about Israeli diplomatic[48] corp irregularities and influence peddling amongst political and student groups in the UK. After investigations exceeding eight months, Ofcom reported that Al Jazeera was in line with journalism standards and cleared the filmmakers of the allegations.[49]
Press TV[edit]
In May 2011, Ofcom ruled that Press TV, an Iranian English-language satellite channel, was responsible for a serious breach of UK broadcasting rules and could face a fine for airing an interview with Maziar Bahari, the Newsweek journalist arrested covering the Iranian presidential election in 2009, that was obtained by force while he was held in a Tehran jail.[50]
Upon the release of Ofcom's findings, Press TV claimed that Maziar Bahari was "an MI6 contact person"[51] taking guidance from "The Protocols of the Learned Elders of Zion, protocol No. 7".[52] Press TV called Ofcom's ruling "part of an anti-Iranian campaign," and that "A quick look at senior decision makers at OFCOM demonstrates that the regulator is mostly made up of former Channel 4 and BBC executives, some of whom are well-linked to and influenced by powerful pro-Israeli politicians."[53][54]
Sitefinder database and freedom of information[edit]
The Sitefinder database is a national database of mobile phone base stations in the UK.[55] In September 2007 an Information Tribunal ruled that the public should have access to the database under the Freedom of Information Act 2000.[56] However, as Ofcom has no legal power to force mobile phone operators to add information to the database, UK mobile phone operators consequently ceased updating it.[24] Ofcom appealed against the Freedom of Information Act ruling, together with one UK mobile operator – T-Mobile.[57] This has led to accusations of the organisation's complicity with the mobile telecommunications industry in keeping information about mast locations secret.[58] Ofcom's stated reasons for the appeal have ranged from "preventing terrorist attacks" on the sites of phone masts to "protecting the intellectual property" of the mobile telecommunications industry.[57]
In April 2008, the High Court found in favour of the Information Commissioner's Office and over-ruled Ofcom's objections. Ofcom appealed to the Supreme Court, who in turn referred a point of law to the European Court of Justice, and then in October 2011 ordered that the matter should be remitted to the Information Rights Tribunal to reconsider the public interest balancing exercise.[59] On 12 December 2012, the Information Rights Tribunal upheld its decision of 4 September 2007.[60]
See also[edit]

Advertising Standards Authority
Annan Committee, that in 1977 recommended the establishment of a Broadcasting Complaints Commission
Broadband stakeholder group
Office of Fair Trading
Press Complaints Commission
ATVOD
ITSPA
ISPA
International Telecommunication Union
List of telecommunications regulatory bodies

References[edit]


^ a b "Office of Communications Act 2002 – 2002 CHAPTER 11". Office of Public Sector Information. 19 March 2002. Retrieved 23 February 2010. 
^ "Your rights – Ofcom". The Liberty Guide to Human Rights. Liberty. 12 August 2010. Archived from the original on 11 January 2014. Retrieved 11 January 2014. 
^ Lunt, Peter; Livingstone, Sonia (2007). "Regulating markets in the interest of consumers?: on the changing regime of governance in the financial service and communications sectors.". Governance, consumers and citizens: agency and resistance in contemporary politics (PDF). Basingstoke, UK: Palgrave Macmillan. pp. 139–161. Retrieved 11 January 2014.  Footnote 15.
^ "Queen announces media shake-up". BBC News. 20 June 2001. 
^ "'Super-regulator' Ofcom launches". BBC News. 29 December 2003. 
^ Chris Williams (6 July 2009). "Ofcom top of Tory deathlist – Quangogeddon". The Register. Retrieved 23 February 2010. 
^ Leigh Holmwood (6 July 2009). "Ofcom hits back at David Cameron". The Guardian. Retrieved 12 March 2016. 
^ "Ofcom". Politics.co.uk. 
^ "Ofcom cracks down on hidden charges in TV phone-ins". The Daily Telegraph. 27 April 2015. Retrieved 27 March 2016. 
^ Jasper Jackson (14 October 2015). "Ofcom to take on regulation of video-on-demand services". The Guardian. Retrieved 12 March 2016. 
^ "Royal Charter for the continuance of the British Broadcasting Corporation" (PDF). BBC Trust archive. Department of Culture, Media and Sport. December 2016. Retrieved 13 April 2017. 
^ "Brown Urges Ofcom to Probe News Corp.'s Existing BSkyB Stake". San Francisco Chronicle. 13 July 2011. Retrieved 24 July 2011. [dead link]
^ Hutton, Robert (14 July 2011). "Brown Calls on Regulator to Probe News Corp.'s Existing BSkyB Shareholding". Bloomberg L.P. Retrieved 24 July 2011. 
^ Kirkup, James (15 July 2011). "Phone Hacking: Murdoch's grip on BSkyB may be threatened, warns Clegg". The Telegraph. London. Retrieved 24 July 2011. 
^ "UK regulator begins probe into BSkyB's status". Financial Times. 22 July 2011. Retrieved 24 July 2011. 
^ a b "Letter to Simon Hughes, Don Foster and Tim Farron MP from Ed Richards July 22, 2011". Ofcom. Archived from the original on 20 September 2011. Retrieved 25 July 2011. 
^ Katherine Rushton Ofcom steps up 'fit and proper' probe into BSkyB, The Daily Telegraph. 26 April 2012
^ "Ofcom broadcasting". Ofcom. 
^ "Appendix 3: International Comparison of Classification and Content Regulation – The United Kingdom". Australian Law Reform Commission. 1 March 2012. Retrieved 16 March 2016. 
^ Joe Lepper (25 May 2005). "Ofcom to consider product placement on TV and radio". Brand Republic. Retrieved 16 March 2016. 
^ "Adult TV channels become first to lose licences". BBC News. 26 November 2010. Retrieved 16 March 2016. 
^ Del Crookes (8 March 2012). "Ofcom lodges porn TV complaint with Dutch regulator". BBC newsbeat. Retrieved 16 March 2016. 
^ Will Butler (3 October 2016). "Ofcom Have Officially Ranked Every British Swear Word". Look Magazine. 
^ a b "Overview of UK telecommunications regulation". Chartered Institute for IT. 
^ "UK Calling". Ofcom. 
^ burton, Tony. "July number Change". 0345 Numbers. 
^ "Mobile coverage and fixed broadband checker". maps.ofcom.org.uk. Retrieved 4 April 2016. 
^ "About Us". Radio & Television Investigation Service. 8 April 2013. 
^ Tim Bradshaw (21 October 2010). "Ofcom to cut staff by a fifth". Financial Times. 
^ "List of Ofcom consultations". Stakeholders.ofcom.org.uk. 24 May 2010. Retrieved 2 May 2012. 
^ "Ofcom – Official Website – Homepage". 
^ "Dame Patricia Hodgson DBE". Ofcom. 1 February 2012. Archived from the original on 21 April 2014. Retrieved 20 April 2014. 
^ "Dame Patricia Hodgson to remain Ofcom Chairman until 2018". Ofcom. Retrieved 22 May 2017. 
^ "Ofcom Board appoints Sharon White as Chief Executive". Ofcom. 16 December 2014. 
^ "Note of the 225th Meeting of the Ofcom Board, held on 15 March 2016" (PDF). Ofcom. 22 March 2016. 
^ "Colette Bowe". Ofcom. Archived from the original on 30 April 2012. Retrieved 2 May 2012. 
^ Colette Bowe Institute of Competition Law. Retrieved 9 July 2011.
^ Sweney, Mark (17 December 2008). "Colette Bowe appointed as Ofcom chair". The Guardian. Retrieved 10 August 2017. 
^ "Lord Carter of Barnes". Department for Business, Information and Skills. 6 November 2009. Archived from the original on 14 July 2009. Retrieved 2 May 2012. 
^ "Ofcom Board". Ofcom. 25 June 2010. Retrieved 25 October 2017. 
^ "New Ofcom board member appointed". Ofcom. 29 September 2017. Retrieved 25 October 2017. 
^ "Register of disclosable interests". Ofcom. Retrieved 22 May 2017. 
^ "Ofcom committees". Ofcom. Retrieved 25 October 2017. 
^ [1] Archived 13 October 2008 at the Wayback Machine.
^ Plunkett, John (5 June 2007). "Ofcom accused of 'Nero approach'". The Guardian. London. 
^ "Poor Service from OFCOM". Letsfixbritain.com. Retrieved 2 May 2012. 
^ "Israel moves against Al Jazeera". BBC News. 6 August 2017. Retrieved 25 October 2017. 
^ Lizzie Dearden (12 January 2017). "Israeli embassy official caught discussing 'take down' of pro-Palestinian MPs quits". The Independent. Retrieved 25 October 2017. 
^ Ruddick, Graham (9 October 2017). "Ofcom clears al-Jazeera of antisemitism in exposé of Israeli official". The Guardian. Retrieved 25 October 2017. 
^ Sweney, Mark (23 May 2011). "Iran's Press TV censured for interview with arrested journalist". The Guardian. London. Retrieved 25 May 2011. 
^ "PressTV – A British game against PressTV". Press TV. Archived from the original on 2 April 2015. Retrieved 28 October 2012. 
^ "PressTV – Empire continues to sweat over Press TV". Press TV. Archived from the original on 2 April 2015. Retrieved 28 October 2012. 
^ "PressTV – OfCom, UK Office of Miscommunication". Press TV. Archived from the original on 2 April 2015. Retrieved 28 October 2012. 
^ "PressTV – The OFCOM sitcom". Press TV. Archived from the original on 18 October 2015. Retrieved 28 October 2012. 
^ "Ofcom | Frequently Asked Questions". Stakeholders.ofcom.org.uk. 21 June 2010. Retrieved 20 April 2014. 
^ "Data row hits mobile mast website". Technology. BBC News. 2 October 2007. Retrieved 6 January 2010. 
^ a b Bill Ray (13 September 2007). "Ofcom fails to prevent release of cell locations – But operators might not play ball". Networks. Retrieved 23 February 2010. 
^ Geoffrey Lean, Environment Editor (27 May 2007). "Phone mast locations kept from public". The Independent. London. Archived from the original on 21 December 2008. Retrieved 23 February 2010. CS1 maint: Extra text: authors list (link)
^ "Sitefinder: Frequently Asked Questions". Ofcom. Retrieved 21 August 2012. 
^ "EIR Exemptions and Aggregation : a round trip". Panopticon Blog. 17 December 2012. Retrieved 20 April 2014. 


External links[edit]

Ofcom website
Ofcom Broadcast Codes
OfcomWatch – Ofcom-related blog
Quick video guide to Ofcom for broadcast journalists



Preceded by
BBC Trust
Regulation of BBC
1 January 2017–present
Succeeded by
Current


Preceded by
Independent Television Commission
Regulation of ITV
29 December 2003–present
Succeeded by
Current


Preceded by
Independent Television Commission
Regulation of Channel 4
29 December 2003–present
Succeeded by
Current


Preceded by
Independent Television Commission
Regulation of Satellite Television
29 December 2003–present
Succeeded by
Current


Preceded by
Independent Television Commission
Regulation of Cable Television
29 December 2003–present
Succeeded by
Current


Preceded by
Radio Authority
Regulation of Independent Local Radio
29 December 2003–present
Succeeded by
Current


Preceded by
Radiocommunications Agency
Regulation of use of the Radio Spectrum
29 December 2003–present
Succeeded by
Current


Preceded by
Broadcasting Standards Commission
Monitoring of 'Taste and Decency'
29 December 2003–present
Succeeded by
Current


Preceded by
Postal Services Commission
Regulation of Postal services
1 October 2011–present
Succeeded by
Current








v
t
e


Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport of the United Kingdom




Headquarters: 100 Parliament Street, London, SW1A 2BQ



Executive agencies



The Royal Parks
The National Archives





Non-departmental
public bodies




Advisory



Reviewing Committee on the Export of Works of Art and Objects of Cultural Interest
Theatres Trust
Treasure Valuation Committee





Executive



Arts Council England
British Film Institute
British Library
British Museum
Equality and Human Rights Commission
Gambling Commission
Geffrye Museum
Historic England
Horniman Museum
Horserace Betting Levy Board
Imperial War Museum
Information Commissioner's Office
National Gallery
National Heritage Memorial Fund
National Maritime Museum
National Museums Liverpool
National Portrait Gallery
Natural History Museum
Royal Armouries
Science Museum Group
Sir John Soane's Museum
Sport England
Sports Grounds Safety Authority
Tate
UK Anti-Doping
UK Sport
Victoria and Albert Museum
VisitBritain
VisitEngland
Wallace Collection





Tribunal

Horserace Betting Levy Appeal Tribunal






Public corporations



BBC

BBC Trust


Channel Four Television Corporation
Historic Royal Palaces
Ofcom
S4C

S4C Authority







Ministers




Secretary of State



Karen Bradley





Minister of State



Culture and the Digital Economy: Matthew Hancock





Under-Secretaries of State



Sport, Tourism and Heritage: Tracey Crouch
Internet Safety and Security: Joanna Shields, Baroness Shields
Intellectual Property: Lucy Neville-Rolfe, Baroness Neville-Rolfe









 Category










v
t
e


 Media in the United Kingdom








UK national newspapers, magazines, and other periodicals







Newspapers
(History)




Berliner



The Guardian
The Observer





Broadsheet



Financial Times
The Daily Telegraph
The Sunday Telegraph
The Sunday Times





Compact



i
The Times





Middle-market



Daily Express
Daily Mail
The Mail on Sunday





Tabloid



Daily Mirror
Sunday Mirror
Morning Star
The Sunday People
Daily Star
Daily Star Sunday
The Sun
Sunday Sport








Magazines &
other periodicals



List of magazines by circulation
















Radio in the UK







National
stations




BBC



Analogue / digital
Radio 1
Radio 2
Radio 3
Radio 4
5 Live
Digital only
Radio 1Xtra
Radio 4 Extra
5 Live Sports Extra
6 Music
Asian Network
World Service
BBC National DAB (multiplex)





Independent
/ commercial



Analogue / digital
Absolute Radio
Classic FM
Heart
Kiss
Talksport
Digital only
Absolute 80s
Absolute Radio Extra
BFBS Radio
Capital
Digital One (multiplex)
Heart Extra
heat
The Hits
Jazz FM
Kerrang!
Kiss Fresh
Kisstory
LBC
Magic
Planet Rock
Premier Christian Radio
Radio X
RNIB Connect Radio
Sound Digital (multiplex)
Smooth
Talkradio
UCB UK
Virgin Radio UK








Regional
& local
stations




BBC



List of BBC Local Radio stations
List of BBC Regional Radio stations





Independent
/ commercial



List of community radio stations
List of local commercial radio stations
List of semi-national / regional analogue and digital radio stations








Other
stations



List of hospital radio stations
Pirate radio
Restricted Service Licence (RSL)

List of RSL stations


List of satellite radio stations
List of student and schools radio





Other



Broadcasting House
FM broadcasting
The Studios, MediaCityUK
Radio Academy

Radio Academy Awards


Radio Independents Group
RAJAR
Most listened to programmes
















Television in the UK







Principal
channels
(List)




BBC



BBC One
BBC Two
BBC Four
BBC News
BBC Parliament
CBBC
CBeebies





ITV



ITV
ITV2
ITV3
ITV4
CITV
ITV Encore
ITVBe
ITV Box Office





Ch 4



Channel 4
E4
Film4
More4
4seven





Ch 5



Channel 5
5Prime
5Spike
5Star
5USA





Sky



Challenge
Pick
Real Lives
Sky One
Sky Two
Sky Arts
Sky Atlantic
Sky Cinema
Sky Living
Sky News
Sky Sports
Sky Sports F1
Sky Sports News





UKTV



Alibi
Dave
Drama
Eden
Gold
Good Food
Home
Really
W
Yesterday





Sony Pictures Television



Chart Show TV
Chart Show Hits
Movies4Men
Pop
Pop Max
Starz TV
Sony Channel
Sony Movie Channel
Scuzz
Tiny Pop
True Crime
True Entertainment
True Movies
truTV
The Vault








Services
&
platforms



All 4

Film4oD


analogue

analogue terrestrial (defunct)


BBC iPlayer

BBC Three


BBC Store
TalkTalk TV Store
BT TV
cable
digital

digital terrestrial
List of channels


Freesat

Freesat+


Freeview
high-definition

List of channels


ITV

ITV Hub, STV Player


local television
My5
Now TV
Real Digital
Restricted Service Licence
satellite

List of channels


Sky

Freesat from Sky
On Demand
Sky+
Sky+ HD


TalkTalk TV
Top Up TV
TVPlayer
Virgin Media

FilmFlex
TiVo
V+


YouView
Zattoo





Studios




Current



BBC Elstree Centre
BBC Pacific Quay
The Bottle Yard Studios
Broadcasting House
Broadcasting House, Belfast
Broadcasting House, Bristol
Broadcasting House, Cardiff
Elstree Studios (Shenley Road)
Gas Street Studios
The Leeds Studios
The London Studios
The Maidstone Studios
Mailbox Birmingham
MediaCityUK
Osterley Television Centre
Roath Lock
Television Centre, London





Defunct



British and Dominions Imperial Studios
Fountain Studios
Gate Studios
Granada Studios
MGM-British Studios
Pebble Mill Studios
Teddington Studios
Television Centre, Newcastle upon Tyne
Television Centre, Southampton
Upper Boat Studios








Other



Defunct channels
Edinburgh International Television Festival
History

List of years


List of channels
Student television
Viewing statistics

Most-watched broadcasts


















Companies and organisations







Companies




Major
companies



Archant
Ascential
Bauer Radio
BBC
Bloomsbury Publishing
BT Group
Channel Four Television Corporation
Daily Mail and General Trust
Dentsu Aegis Network
Economist Group
EMI Music Publishing
Endemol Shine UK
Global Group
Guardian Media Group
Haymarket Media Group
Informa
ITN
ITV plc
Johnston Press
Mecom Group
News UK
Newsquest
Northern & Shell
Now TV Limited
Origin Broadband
Pearson PLC
Press Holdings
RELX Group
Reuters
Sky UK Limited
Sky plc
STV Group
Syco
TalkTalk Group
Time Inc. UK
Trinity Mirror
UBM plc
Virgin Media
Wireless Group





Other resources



Arqiva
List of largest UK book publishers








Government
& regulatory
bodies



Advertising Standards Authority
BBC Trust
British Board of Film Classification
British Film Institute
Culture, Media, and Sport Select Committee
Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport
Independent Press Standards Organisation
Ofcom
Press Recognition Panel
S4C Authority





Industry
& trades
bodies



British Academy of Film and Television Arts
British Phonographic Industry
Broadcasting, Entertainment, Cinematograph and Theatre Union
Clearcast
Digital TV Group
Digital UK
Equity
Federation Against Copyright Theft
National Union of Journalists
The Publishers Association
Royal Television Society
United Kingdom Independent Broadcasting





Other



BBC Academy
National Film and Television School
National Science and Media Museum
















Regional and student media







Regional media



Media in England

Birmingham
London
Manchester


Media in Scotland

Aberdeen
Dundee
Glasgow


Media in Wales

Cardiff







Student media



Student television














 Category












v
t
e


Telecommunications industry in the United Kingdom






Economy of the United Kingdom
Science and technology in the United Kingdom





Companies




Infrastructure
providers



Arqiva
Babcock International
BT Wholesale and Ventures
Openreach
Interxion
TelecityGroup
Telehouse Europe





Service
providers




Current



Andrews & Arnold
Asda Mobile
BT Group

BT Consumer
BT Business and Public Sector
BT Global Services
EE
Plusnet


Claranet
Colt Group
The Co-operative
Cable & Wireless Communications
Delight Mobile
Family Mobile
Inmarsat
KCOM Group

Eclipse Internet


Lebara Mobile
Lycamobile
Mapesbury Communications
O2 (UK)

Giffgaff


Origin Broadband
Sky

Sky Broadband


Talkmobile
TalkTalk Group

AOL Broadband
TalkTalk Business
TalkTalk Mobile
TalkTalk TV


Telecom Plus
Tesco Mobile
Three

SMARTY


Tru
Virgin Media

Virgin Media Business
Virgin Mobile UK


Vodafone

Vodafone UK


Voipfone
WightFibre
Zen Internet





Defunct



Atlantic Telegraph Company
Be Un Limited
Bonelli's Electric Telegraph Company
Cable & Wireless plc
Cable & Wireless Worldwide
Dolphin Telecom
Electric Telegraph Company
Energis
General Post Office
Ionica
London and Provincial District Telegraph Company
Mercury Communications
Mobile by Sainsbury's
National Telephone Company
NTL
Orange (UK)
Ovivo
Post Office Telecommunications
Pipex
Rabbit
Stan Mobile
Tiscali UK
T-Mobile UK
Universal Private Telegraph Company








Suppliers




Current



ARM Holdings
Artevea
CSR
Icera
Metaswitch
Pace
Sarantel
Spirent
Telent





Defunct



GEC Plessey Telecommunications
Marconi Company
Marconi Communications
PicoChip
Standard Telephones and Cables








Other



Carphone Warehouse
Hibu
Phones 4u

Dial-a-Phone










Government and
regulatory bodies



Broadband Stakeholder Group
Defence Science and Technology Laboratory
European Conference of Postal and Telecommunications Administrations
International Telecommunication Union
Ofcom
PhonepayPlus





Industry bodies



GSM Association
Internet Service Providers Association
LONAP
London Internet Exchange
MaNAP
Symbian Foundation
Internet Telephony Services Providers’ Association





Other



Adastral Park
British Approvals Board for Telecommunications
British Telecommunications Act 1981
British telephone sockets
BT Research
BT site engineering code
Communications Act 2003
Earth stations in the United Kingdom
Hull Colour Pages
Interception of Communications Act 1985
Internet in the United Kingdom
Telegraph Act
Telegraph Act 1868
Telegraph Act 1885
Telephone numbers in the United Kingdom
UK telephone code misconceptions
Web blocking in the United Kingdom








 Category
 Commons












v
t
e


2011–2012 News Corporation scandal



Events



News International phone hacking scandal
News of the World royal phone hacking scandal
News Corporation takeover bid for BSkyB
News of the World phone hacking scandal investigations





Companies and
organisations




News Corporation



News International

News of the World
The Sun
The Times
The Sunday Times


News Limited





Other



BSkyB
Culture, Media and Sport Committee
Federal Bureau of Investigation
Harbottle & Lewis
Independent Police Complaints Commission
Metropolitan Police

role


Ofcom
Press Complaints Commission
Serious Fraud Office
Solicitors Regulation Authority








People




Known victims



7/7 attack victims
Leslie Ash
Gordon Brown
Lee Chapman
Charlotte Church
Steve Coogan
Anne Diamond
Milly Dowler
Garry Flitcroft
Sheryl Gascoigne
Hugh Grant
Andy Gray
Tessa Jowell
Gerry and Kate McCann
Elle Macpherson
Sienna Miller
Ian Paisley
Ian Paisley, Jr.
Sara Payne
John Prescott
J. K. Rowling





Metropolitan Police



Sue Akers
Peter Clarke
Andy Hayman
Paul Stephenson
John Yates





News Corporation



Rebekah Brooks
Jonathan Chapman
Daniel Cloke
Andy Coulson
Tom Crone
Wendi Deng Murdoch
James Desborough
Viet Dinh
Ian Edmondson
Clive Goodman
Baron Grabiner
Simon Greenberg
Les Hinton
Sean Hoare
Lawrence Jacobs
Joel Klein
Stuart Kuttner
William Lewis
Paul McMullan
Greg Miskiw
Tom Mockridge
Glenn Mulcaire
James Murdoch
Rupert Murdoch
Colin Myler
Lucy Panton
Jamie Pyatt
Jonathan Rees
Neville Thurlbeck
Neil Wallis
James Weatherup





Other



Nick Davies
Lord Fowler
Lord Justice Leveson
Jay Rockefeller
Paul Staines
Tom Watson
John Whittingdale








Investigations
and legal cases



HM Advocate v Sheridan and Sheridan
Leveson Inquiry
Operation Elveden
Operation Kalmyk
Operation Tuleta
Operation Weeting
R v Coulson, Brooks and others





In popular culture



Dial M for Murdoch
Great Britain





Related topics



Foreign Corrupt Practices Act
Hacked Off
Operation Glade
Operation Motorman
Phone hacking
Phreaking
Politico-media complex
Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act 2000
Social engineering








 Category






Coordinates: 51°30′28″N 0°05′43″W﻿ / ﻿51.5079°N 0.0953°W﻿ / 51.5079; -0.0953





						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ofcom&oldid=817424852"					Categories: Radio in the United KingdomTelevision in the United KingdomCommunications authoritiesCommunications in the United KingdomMedia complaints authoritiesPostal system of the United KingdomStatutory corporations of the United Kingdom governmentDepartment for Culture, Media and SportGovernment agencies established in 20032003 establishments in the United KingdomRegulators of the United KingdomTelecommunications in the United KingdomTelecommunications regulatory authoritiesHidden categories: All articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from December 2011Webarchive template wayback linksCS1 maint: Extra text: authors listUse British English from September 2017Articles containing Welsh-language textUse dmy dates from September 2017Coordinates on Wikidata