




Non-ministerial government department overview


Formed
1 April 1996; 21 years ago (1996-04-01)


Preceding agencies



Central Statistical Office
Office of Population Censuses and Surveys





Jurisdiction
United Kingdom


Headquarters
Government Buildings, Cardiff Road, Newport NP10 8XG
51°33′58.89″N 3°1′38″W﻿ / ﻿51.5663583°N 3.02722°W﻿ / 51.5663583; -3.02722


Employees
3,302 (including UK Statistics Authority)


Annual budget
£206.5 million (2009–2010)[1] (including UK Statistics Authority)


Non-ministerial government department executive



John Pullinger, National Statistician





Parent Non-ministerial government department
UK Statistics Authority


Website
ons.gov.uk


The Office for National Statistics (ONS) is the executive office of the UK Statistics Authority, a non-ministerial department which reports directly to the UK Parliament.



Contents


1 Overview
2 History
3 Purpose and scope

3.1 Applications of data


4 Independence
5 Heads of the Office and the National Statistician
6 Work of the ONS

6.1 Data collection
6.2 Former departments
6.3 The Blue Book
6.4 Education of Statisticians
6.5 Virtual Microdata Laboratory


7 Office Locations

7.1 Former Headquarters
7.2 Gradual move of functions to South Wales


8 Criticism of the ONS
9 See also
10 References
11 External links



Overview[edit]
It is charged with the collection and publication of statistics related to the economy, population and society of the UK; responsibility for some areas of statistics in Scotland, Northern Ireland and Wales is devolved to the devolved governments for those areas. The ONS functions as the executive office of the National Statistician, who is also the UK Statistics Authority's Chief Executive and principal statistical adviser to the UK's National Statistics Institute,[2] and the 'Head Office' of the Government Statistical Service (GSS). Its main office is in Newport near the United Kingdom Intellectual Property Office and Tredegar House, but another significant office is in Titchfield in Hampshire, and a small office is in London. ONS co-ordinates data collection with the respective bodies in Northern Ireland and Scotland, namely NISRA and NRS.
History[edit]
The ONS was formed on 1 April 1996 by the merger of the Central Statistical Office (CSO) and the Office of Population Censuses and Surveys (OPCS).[3] Following the Statistics and Registration Service Act 2007, the United Kingdom Statistics Authority became a non-ministerial department on 1 April 2008.[4]
Purpose and scope[edit]
ONS produces and publishes a wide range of the information about the United Kingdom that can be used for social and economic policy-making as well as painting a portrait of the country as its population evolves over time. This is often produced in ways that make comparison with other societies and economies possible. Much of the data on which policy-makers depend is produced by ONS through a combination of a decennial population census, samples and surveys and analysis of data generated by businesses and organisations such as the National Health Service and the register of births, marriages and deaths. Its publications, and analyses by other users based on its published data, are reported and discussed daily in the media as the basis for the public understanding of the country in which they live.
Applications of data[edit]
The reliance on some of these data by government (both local and national) makes ONS material central to debates about the determination of priorities, the allocation of resources and for decisions on interest rates or borrowing. The complexity and degree and speed of change in the society, combined with the challenge of measuring some of these (e.g. in relation to longevity, migration or illness patterns or fine movements in inflation or other aspects of national accounts) give rise to periodic debates about some of its indicators and portrayals. Many of these rely on sources which are outside ONS, while some of its own sources need to be supplemented, for example between censuses, by updated but less rigorously obtained information from other sources. Consequently, unexpected or incomplete data or occasional errors or disputes about its analysis can also attract considerable attention.
ONS data can also be used in epidemiologic studies such as survival analysis.
Independence[edit]
Gordon Brown, then Chancellor of the Exchequer, announced on 28 November 2005,[5] that the government intended to publish plans in early 2006 to legislate to render the ONS and the statistics it generates independent of government on a model based on the independence of the Monetary Policy Committee of the Bank of England.[6] This was originally a 1997 Labour manifesto commitment[7] and was also the policy of the Liberal Democrat[8] and Conservative[9] parties. Such independence was also sought by the Royal Statistical Society[10] and the Statistics Commission.[11] The National Statistician would be directly accountable to Parliament through a more widely constituted independent governing Statistics Board.[12] The ONS would be a non-ministerial government department so that the staff, including the Director, would remain as civil servants but without being under direct ministerial control.[13] The then National Statistician, Dame Karen Dunnell, stated that legislation would help improve public trust in official statistics[14] although the ONS already acts independently according to its own published guidelines, the National Statistics Code of Practice,[15] which sets out the key principles and standards that official statisticians, including those in other parts of the government statistical service, are expected to follow and uphold.
The details of the plans for independence were considered in Parliament during the 2006/2007 session and resulted in the Statistics and Registration Service Act 2007.[16] In July 2007, Sir Michael Scholar was nominated by the government to be the three-day-a-week non-executive chairman of the Statistics Board which, with the intention of re-establishing faith in the integrity of government statistics, was to take on statutory responsibility for oversight of UK statistics in April 2008 and oversee the Office for National Statistics; also having a duty to assess all UK government statistics. Following Gordon Brown's announcement of new constitutional arrangements for public appointments, Sir Michael also became, on 18 July, the first such nominee to appear before the House of Commons Treasury Committee and to have his nomination subject to confirmation by the House.[17] On 7 February 2008, following the first meeting of the shadow board, it was announced that it would be known as the UK Statistics Authority (UKSA).
In 2012, Andrew Dilnot replaced Michael Scholar as chairman of the Authority.
Heads of the Office and the National Statistician[edit]
Since its establishment, ONS has had five Directors: Professor Tim Holt; Len Cook; Karen Dunnell; Jil Matheson; and, from October 2012, Glen Watson. Len Cook was the first Director to hold the newly created role of National Statistician. The roles of Director of ONS and National Statistician were combined until 2012 when Jil Matheson continued as National Statistician while Glen Watson became Director of the ONS. John Pullinger replaced Jil Matheson as National Statistician (and Chief Executive of the UK Statistics Authority) in July 2014.
Work of the ONS[edit]
The work of the ONS covers the collection of data and the analysis and publication of statistics covering the economy, population, and society of the UK.
Where data is broken down by geographical area, this is usually done by the areas defined in the ONS geographical coding system.
Data collection[edit]
The principal areas of data collection include:

Agriculture and Environment
Business and Energy
Children, Education and Skills
Crime and Justice
Economy
Government
Health and Social Care
Labour Market
People and Places
Population
Travel and Transport

Statisticians are also employed by many other Government departments and agencies, and these statisticians often collect and publish data. They are members of the Government Statistical Service and are the professional responsibility of the head of the service, who is also the National Statistician. Each department has a statistical service Head of Profession. For example, data on Agriculture, Fishing and Forestry comes primarily from the Department for the Environment, Food and Rural Affairs. Along with economic data on which the Treasury and Bank of England rely for decision-making, many of the statistics that receive widespread media attention are issued by the Home Office, the Department of Health, and the Department for Education and Skills. ONS is also responsible for the maintenance of the Inter-Departmental Business Register and the Business Structure Database.[18]
Former departments[edit]
Prior to the establishment of the UK Statistics Authority, the statistical work of ONS, since June 2000, was scrutinised by the Statistics Commission, an independent body with its own chairman and small staff. This ceased to operate from 1 April 2008. The General Register Office and the post of Registrar-General for England & Wales ceased to be part of ONS from that date but remains subject to ministerial accountability within the Home Office.
The Blue Book[edit]
Main article: United Kingdom National Accounts - The Blue Book
The annual United Kingdom National Accounts are published in an online publication (The Blue Book[19]) by the Office for National Statistics. It records and describes economic activity in the United Kingdom and as such is used by government, banks, academics and industries to formulate the economic and social policies and monitor the economic progress of the United Kingdom. It also allows international comparisons to be made. The Blue Book is published alongside the United Kingdom Balance of Payments – The Pink Book.[20]
Education of Statisticians[edit]
The Office for National Statistics collaborates with the University of Southampton in the teaching of a MSc in Official Statistics, the programme has been running since 2003.[21]
Virtual Microdata Laboratory[edit]
The Virtual Microdata Laboratory (VML) was established in 2004 to allow researchers access to business data.[22] It is a secure facility within the Office for National Statistics where both government officials and academic researchers can analyse sensitive, detailed data for statistical purposes.[23] The researchers cannot download the data or take any copies out of the laboratory and the results of the analysis is checked for statistical disclosure.
Office Locations[edit]
The ONS has a head office in the city of Newport, South Wales, and other offices in Pimlico in London and Titchfield in Hampshire.[24] The Family Records Centre in Myddelton Street in Islington, London, moved to the National Archives in Kew in 2008.[25] They also have an Archive Storage site located in Christchurch, Dorset.[26]
Former Headquarters[edit]
The London (Pimlico) office was the head office until April 2006 when the corporate headquarters was moved to Newport[27] following the Lyons Review[28] on public sector relocation. Since May 2011 the London office has been located on the 2nd floor of the former Drummond Gate headquarters and houses the methodology consultancy service, the virtual microdata laboratory and media briefings.[29]
Gradual move of functions to South Wales[edit]
The ONS asserted that recruitment and training of quality staff in South Wales, where data collection and analysis already took place, would ensure that there was no risk to the quality of its services and that it managed the risks associated with the changes.[30] However the plan to discontinue statistical activity in London proved controversial amid claims that the shift of functions from London and the closure of the London office would have serious implications for the future of certain sets of statistics. These include health statistics, National Accounts, Retail and Consumer Prices and Labour Market Statistics. These risks were stated to derive from the fact that few of the experienced staff working in these highly technical areas were expected to relocate to Newport, resulting in a substantial loss of expertise and a consequent threat to the continued quality of the statistics.[31] In a submission to the Parliamentary Treasury Sub Committee, the Bank of England expressed concern over the relocation of the ONS to Newport, saying, that "the relocation programme poses serious risks to the maintenance of the quality of macroeconomic data. If substantial numbers of ONS staff are unwilling to relocate, the loss of skilled individuals could have a severe impact on a range of statistics."[32][33] The director of ONS at the time vigorously defended the implementation of government policy on civil service relocation and the decision to concentrate staff in the three locations outside London.[34]
Criticism of the ONS[edit]
Occasional errors and revisions account for some past criticism,[citation needed] while the allocation of Private Finance Initiative expenditure (albeit following OECD and international statistical guidelines according to who carries the risk) has attracted political attention[vague]. Many of the most controversial topics for statistics issued by government do not come from the ONS though they are expected to meet National Statistics standards.[vague] Crime statistics, and other data (e.g. health and education) that could be deemed to assess the effectiveness of government policies, often attract media scepticism.[citation needed] The compulsory nature of the census (unlike most other surveys by academics and market researchers) differentiates the ONS from other data collectors (apart from HM Revenue and Customs).
The Office for National Statistics won the 2004 Big Brother Award for the "Most Heinous Government Organisation" from the campaigning organisation Privacy International for its Citizen Information Project.[35] The project is one of several that lead the Information Commissioner to warn that there is a danger of the country "sleepwalking" into a surveillance society.[36]
In December 2012 the organisation's new website to provide statistics to the public was described as "a disaster" by members of parliament on the Public Administration Committee.[citation needed] The chair of the UK Statistics Authority said that significant improvements to the website were being made, but admitted that its state at the time made it "difficult to use, difficult to navigate and difficult to search".[37]
See also[edit]

Departments of the United Kingdom Government
List of national and international statistical services
Northern Ireland Statistics and Research Agency
United Kingdom Census 2001

References[edit]


^ UK Statistics Authority Resource Accounts 2009–2010, UK Statistics Authority, 26 July 2010, retrieved 19 December 2010 
^ 'National Statistics Institute' and NSI are a standard expression and its acronym used about statistical services in OECD & EU terminology
^ John Pullinger (1997) "The Creation of the Office for National Statistics", International Statistical Review, Vol. 65, No. 3, pp. 291–308
^ The Statistics Act: Office for National Statistics Archived 21 April 2008 at the Wayback Machine.
^ Statement to the House of Commons on the review of the Framework for National Statistics, by the Chancellor of the Exchequer, 28 November 2005.
^ Budget Statement Archived 25 September 2006 at the Wayback Machine. made by the Chancellor of the Exchequer, 22 March 2006
^ Labour Party Manifesto, General Election 1997, Keele University website.
^ Liberal Democrats Manifesto General Election 2005.
^ "Let Parliament appoint new UK statistics chief", press release from Conservative Party website.
^ "A Vision for National Statistics", Royal Statistical Society.
^ "Legislation to build trust in statistics", a report by the Statistics Commission.
^ "Statistics And Registration Service Bill", House of Commons Explanatory Note to the Bill, para. 7–8. Retrieved 10 June 2007.
^ "Statistics And Registration Service Bill", House of Commons Explanatory Note to the Bill, para. 42. Retrieved 10 June 2007.
^ "National Statistician welcomes Statistics and Registration Service Bill", news release from ONS website.
^ "National Statistics Code of Practice" ONS website
^ "Statistics and Registration Service Bill", progress of the Bill through the UK Parliament from Parliament website.
^ "Whitehall veteran in frame for statistics chief post", Financial Times, 18 July 2007.
^ "Executive Summary UK Company Statistics Reconciliation Project" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 9 June 2009. Retrieved 27 February 2014. 
^ "United Kingdom National Accounts – The Blue Book". 
^ "The United Kingdom Balance of Payments – The Pink Book". 
^ "MSc in Official Statistics, University of Southampton". Southampton.ac.uk. Retrieved 27 February 2014. 
^ Welpton, Richard. "Virtual Microdata Laboratory – Access to Confidential Data" (PDF). 
^ "Virtual Microdata Laboratory". Office for National Statistics. 
^ Office for National Statistics: location maps, www.ons.gov.uk. Retrieved 22 December 2017.
^ "Page Not Found – The National Archives". 
^ UK Government properties database, governmentbuildings.co.uk. Retrieved 7 June 2014
^ "Newport to be ONS headquarters" Archived 30 September 2007 at the Wayback Machine., National Statistics news release, 20 September 2004. Retrieved 9 June 2007.
^ "The Lyons Review: Independent Review of public sector relocation" Archived 27 February 2006 at the Wayback Machine., HM Treasury website.
^ ONS moves to new London office, ONS press release, 16 May 2011.
^ "Stats staff 'quitting' over move", news report from the BBC website, 14 May 2007.
^ Debate on the Statistics and Registration Service Bill in the House of Lords, 24 April 2007, Hansard, Column 597.
^ "Bank of England comments on recent ONS performance", a submission made by the Bank of England to the Treasury Sub-Committee inquiry into progress on the efficiency programme in the Chancellor's departments, May 2007.
^ "Bank warns on ONS move to Wales", news report from the BBC website, 10 May 2007.
^ "Statistics officers get the measure of relocation", article by Karen Dunnell, Financial Times, 4 June 2007. Retrieved 7 June 2007.
^ Travis, Alan; editor, home affairs (18 April 2006). "'Big Brother' scheme axed" – via The Guardian. 
^ "Beware rise of Big Brother state, warns data watchdog", The Times, 16 August 2004.
^ Parnell, Brid-Aine (13 December 2012). "Shiny new UK.gov stats website a 'disaster' – MPs". The Register. Archived from the original on 16 February 2013. Retrieved 21 March 2013. 


External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Office for National Statistics.



Office for National Statistics – official site
UK Statistics Authority
The National Statistics Publication Hub
Statistics and Registration Service Bill, Treasury website.
Statistics and Registration Service Bill, Parliament website.
Palgrave Macmillan, official publisher for the Office for National Statistics
A Brief History of the ONS







v
t
e


National statistics agencies






 CSA
 INSTAT
 ONS
 INDEC
 ARMSTAT
 CBS
 ABS
 SA
 SSC
 BBS
 SB
 INSAE
 INE
 IBGE
 NSI
 NIS
 INS
 SC
 INE
 NBS
 DANE
 INEC
 INS
 DZS
 CSO
 DST
 CAPMAS
 SE
 CSA
 SFI
 SF
 INSEE
 NSO
 SB
 SM
 SNZ
 CSO
 PBS
 PSA
 GUS
 INE
 SSA
 SCB
 TUIK
 ONS
 FSS






List of national and international statistical services







Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 130761166
LCCN: nr96018011
ISNI: 0000 0001 2157 6840
GND: 5176735-1
SUDOC: 034467602
BNF: cb125220695 (data)
NLA: 36750898
NKC: kn20081103002











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Office_for_National_Statistics&oldid=816596305"					Categories: Office for National StatisticsDemographics of EnglandDemographics of WalesNational statistical servicesOrganisations based in Newport, WalesGovernment databases in the United KingdomOrganizations established in 19961996 establishments in the United KingdomStatistical organisations in the United KingdomHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksEngvarB from August 2014Use dmy dates from September 2017All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from January 2013All Wikipedia articles needing clarificationWikipedia articles needing clarification from January 2013Wikipedia articles needing clarification from February 2014Articles with unsourced statements from February 2014Wikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersWikipedia articles with NLA identifiers