"Cromwell" redirects here. For other uses, see Cromwell (disambiguation).
For other topics referred to as Oliver Cromwell, see Oliver Cromwell (disambiguation).


His Highness
Oliver Cromwell
MP



A 1656 Samuel Cooper portrait of Cromwell






1st Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland


In office
16 December 1653 – 3 September 1658


Preceded by
Council of State


Succeeded by
Richard Cromwell


Member of Parliament
for Cambridge


In office
1640–1649


Monarch
Charles I


Member of Parliament
for Huntingdon


In office
1628–1629


Monarch
Charles I





Personal details


Born
(1599-04-25)25 April 1599
Huntingdon, Huntingdonshire, Kingdom of England


Died
3 September 1658(1658-09-03) (aged 59)
Whitehall, London, The Protectorate


Resting place
Tyburn, London


Nationality
English


Spouse(s)
Elizabeth Bourchier (m. 1620)


Relations



Robert Cromwell (father)
Elizabeth Steward (mother)





Children



Robert
Oliver
Bridget
Richard
Henry
Elizabeth
James
Mary
Frances





Alma mater
Sidney Sussex College, Cambridge


Occupation
Farmer, parliamentarian, military commander


Signature



Military service


Nickname(s)
"Old Ironsides"


Allegiance
Roundhead


Service/branch
Eastern Association (1643–1645); New Model Army (1645–1646)


Years of service
1643–1651


Rank
Colonel (1643 – bef. 1644); Lieutenant-General of Horse (bef. 1644–1645); Lieutenant-General of Cavalry (1645–1646)


Commands
Cambridgeshire Ironsides (1643 – bef. 1644); Eastern Association (bef. 1644–1645); New Model Army (1645–1646)


Battles/wars

English Civil War:

Gainsborough
Marston Moor
Newbury II
Naseby
Langport
Preston
Dunbar
Worcester






Royal styles of
Oliver Cromwell,
Lord Protector of the Commonwealth





Reference style
His Highness


Spoken style
Your Highness


Alternative style
Sir


Oliver Cromwell (25 April 1599 – 3 September 1658)[a] was an English military and political leader. He served as Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland from 1653 until his death.
Cromwell was born into the middle gentry, albeit to a family descended from the sister of King Henry VIII's minister Thomas Cromwell. Little is known of the first 40 years of his life as only four of his personal letters survive alongside a summary of a speech he delivered in 1628.[1] He became an Independent Puritan after undergoing a religious conversion in the 1630s, taking a generally tolerant view towards the many Protestant sects of his period.[2] He was an intensely religious man, a self-styled Puritan Moses, and he fervently believed that God was guiding his victories. He was elected Member of Parliament for Huntingdon in 1628 and for Cambridge in the Short (1640) and Long (1640–1649) parliaments. He entered the English Civil War on the side of the "Roundheads" or Parliamentarians. Nicknamed "Old Ironsides", he demonstrated his ability as a commander and was quickly promoted from leading a single cavalry troop to being one of the principal commanders of the New Model Army, playing an important role in the defeat of the royalist forces.
Cromwell was one of the signatories of King Charles I's death warrant in 1649, and he dominated the short-lived Commonwealth of England as a member of the Rump Parliament (1649–1653). He was selected to take command of the English campaign in Ireland in 1649–1650. Cromwell's forces defeated the Confederate and Royalist coalition in Ireland and occupied the country, bringing to an end the Irish Confederate Wars. During this period, a series of Penal Laws were passed against Roman Catholics (a significant minority in England and Scotland but the vast majority in Ireland), and a substantial amount of their land was confiscated. Cromwell also led a campaign against the Scottish army between 1650 and 1651.
On 20 April 1653, he dismissed the Rump Parliament by force, setting up a short-lived nominated assembly known as Barebone's Parliament, before being invited by his fellow leaders to rule as Lord Protector of England (which included Wales at the time), Scotland and Ireland from 16 December 1653.[3] As a ruler, he executed an aggressive and effective foreign policy. He died from natural causes in 1658 and was buried in Westminster Abbey. The Royalists returned to power in 1660, and they had his corpse dug up, hung in chains, and beheaded.
Cromwell is one of the most controversial figures in the history of the British Isles, considered a regicidal dictator by historians such as David Sharp,[4] a military dictator by Winston Churchill,[5] but a hero of liberty by John Milton, Thomas Carlyle, and Samuel Rawson Gardiner, and a class revolutionary by Leon Trotsky.[6] In a 2002 BBC poll in Britain, Cromwell, sponsored by military historian Richard Holmes, was selected as one of the ten greatest Britons of all time.[7] However, his measures against Catholics in Scotland and Ireland have been characterised as genocidal or near-genocidal,[8] and in Ireland his record is harshly criticised.[9]



Contents


1 Early years

1.1 Marriage and family
1.2 Crisis and recovery


2 Member of Parliament: 1628–29 and 1640–42
3 Military commander: 1642–46

3.1 English Civil War begins
3.2 Marston Moor 1644
3.3 New Model Army
3.4 Battle of Naseby 1645
3.5 Cromwell's military style


4 Politics: 1647–49

4.1 Second Civil War
4.2 King tried and executed


5 Establishment of the Commonwealth: 1649
6 Irish campaign: 1649–1650
7 Debate over Cromwell's effect on Ireland
8 Scottish campaign: 1650–51

8.1 Scots proclaim Charles II as King
8.2 Battle of Dunbar
8.3 Battle of Worcester
8.4 Conclusion


9 Return to England and dissolution of the Rump Parliament: 1651–53
10 Establishment of Barebone's Parliament: 1653
11 The Protectorate: 1653–58
12 Death and posthumous execution
13 Political reputation
14 Monuments and posthumous honours
15 Title as Lord Protector and arms

15.1 Arms


16 Ancestry
17 In popular culture
18 See also
19 Footnotes
20 Citations
21 References
22 Further reading

22.1 Biographical
22.2 Military studies
22.3 Surveys of era
22.4 Primary sources
22.5 Historiography


23 External links



Early years[edit]
Cromwell was born in Huntingdon on 25 April 1599[10] to Robert Cromwell and Elizabeth Steward. The family's estate derived from Oliver's great-grandfather, a Welshman named Morgan ap William. He was a brewer from Glamorgan who settled at Putney in London, and married Katherine Cromwell (born 1482), the sister of Thomas Cromwell, chancellor to Henry VIII. The Cromwell family acquired considerable wealth by taking over monastery property during the Reformation. Morgan ap William was a son of William ap Yevan of Wales. The family line continued through Richard Williams, alias Cromwell, (c. 1500–1544), Henry Williams, alias Cromwell, (c. 1524 – 6 January 1604),[b] Henry VIII strongly suggested that the Welsh should adopt surnames in the English style rather than taking their fathers' names as Morgan ap William and his male ancestors had done. Henry suggested to Sir Richard Williams, who was the first to use a surname in his family, that he use Cromwell, in honour of his uncle Thomas Cromwell. For several generations, the Williams super-added the surname of Cromwell to their own, styling themselves Williams alias Cromwell in legal documents (Noble 1784, pp. 11–13), then to Oliver's father Robert Cromwell (c. 1560–1617), who married Elizabeth Steward (c. 1564 – 1654), probably in 1591. They had ten children, but Oliver, the fifth child, was the only boy to survive infancy.[11] Cromwell was also a distant relation of the Tudor Royal family and through them the Welsh princely family through his descent from Jasper Tudor through his younger daughter, Joan Tudor, as shown in the Genealogy of the Tudors. Jasper was the uncle of Henry VII and great uncle of Henry VIII.[12]
Cromwell's paternal grandfather Sir Henry Williams was one of the two wealthiest landowners in Huntingdonshire. Cromwell's father Robert was of modest means but still a part of the gentry class. As a younger son with many siblings, Robert inherited only a house at Huntingdon and a small amount of land. This land would have generated an income of up to £300 a year, near the bottom of the range of gentry incomes.[13] Cromwell himself in 1654 said, "I was by birth a gentleman, living neither in considerable height, nor yet in obscurity".[14]
Cromwell was baptised on 29 April 1599 at St John's Church,[15] and attended Huntingdon Grammar School. He went on to study at Sidney Sussex College, Cambridge, then a recently founded college with a strong Puritan ethos. He left in June 1617 without taking a degree, immediately after the death of his father.[16] Early biographers claim that he then attended Lincoln's Inn, but the Inn's archives retain no record of him. Fraser concludes that it was likely that he did train at one of the London Inns of Court during this time.[17] His grandfather, his father, and two of his uncles had attended Lincoln's Inn, and Cromwell sent his son Richard there in 1647.[18]
Cromwell probably returned home to Huntingdon after his father's death. As his mother was widowed, and his seven sisters unmarried, he would have been needed at home to help his family.[19]
Marriage and family[edit]




Portrait of Cromwell's wife Elizabeth Bourchier, painted by Robert Walker


On 22 August 1620 at St Giles-without-Cripplegate, Fore Street, London,[15] Cromwell married Elizabeth Bourchier (1598–1665). Elizabeth's father, Sir James Bourchier, was a London leather merchant who owned extensive lands in Essex and had strong connections with Puritan gentry families there. The marriage brought Cromwell into contact with Oliver St John and with leading members of the London merchant community, and behind them the influence of the Earls of Warwick and Holland. A place in this influential network would prove crucial to Cromwell’s military and political career. The couple had nine children:[20]

Robert (1621–1639), died while away at school.
Oliver (1622–1644), died of typhoid fever while serving as a Parliamentarian officer.
Bridget (1624–1662), married (1) Henry Ireton, (2) Charles Fleetwood.
Richard (1626–1712), his father's successor as Lord Protector[21], married Dorothy Maijor.
Henry (1628–1674), later Lord Deputy of Ireland, married Elizabeth Russell (daughter of Sir Francis Russell).
Elizabeth (1629–1658), married John Claypole.
James (b. & d. 1632), died in infancy.
Mary (1637–1713), married Thomas Belasyse, 1st Earl Fauconberg
Frances (1638–1720), married (1) Robert Rich (1634–1658), son of Robert Rich, 3rd Earl of Warwick, (2) Sir John Russell, 3rd Baronet

Crisis and recovery[edit]
Little evidence exists of Cromwell's religion at this stage. His letter in 1626 to Henry Downhall, an Arminian minister, suggests that Cromwell had yet to be influenced by radical Puritanism.[22] However, there is evidence that Cromwell went through a period of personal crisis during the late 1620s and early 1630s. In 1628 he was elected to Parliament from the Huntingdonshire county town of Huntingdon. Later that year, he sought treatment for a variety of physical and emotional ailments, including valde melancholicus (depression), from the Swiss-born London doctor Theodore de Mayerne. In 1629 he was caught up in a dispute among the gentry of Huntingdon over a new charter for the town, as a result of which he was called before the Privy Council in 1630.[23]




Oliver Cromwell's house in Ely


In 1631 Cromwell sold most of his properties in Huntingdon—probably as a result of the dispute—and moved to a farmstead in nearby St Ives (then in Huntingdonshire, now in Cambridgeshire). This signified a major step down in society compared with his previous position, and seems to have had a significant emotional and spiritual impact. A 1638 letter survives from Cromwell to his cousin, the wife of Oliver St John, and gives an account of his spiritual awakening. The letter outlines how, having been "the chief of sinners", Cromwell had been called to be among "the congregation of the firstborn".[22] The language of this letter, which is saturated with biblical quotations and which represents Cromwell as having been saved from sin by God's mercy, places his faith firmly within the Independent beliefs that the Reformation had not gone far enough, that much of England was still living in sin, and that Catholic beliefs and practices needed to be fully removed from the church.[22]
Along with his brother Henry, Cromwell had kept a smallholding of chickens and sheep, selling eggs and wool to support himself, his lifestyle resembling that of a yeoman farmer. In 1636 Cromwell inherited control of various properties in Ely from his uncle on his mother's side, and his uncle's job as tithe collector for Ely Cathedral. As a result, his income is likely to have risen to around £300–400 per year;[24] by the end of the 1630s Cromwell had returned to the ranks of acknowledged gentry. He had become a committed Puritan and had established important family links to leading families in London and Essex.[25]
Member of Parliament: 1628–29 and 1640–42[edit]
Cromwell became the Member of Parliament for Huntingdon in the Parliament of 1628–1629, as a client of the Montagu family of Hinchingbrooke House. He made little impression: records for the Parliament show only one speech (against the Arminian Bishop Richard Neile), which was poorly received.[26] After dissolving this Parliament, Charles I ruled without a Parliament for the next 11 years. When Charles faced the Scottish rebellion known as the Bishops' Wars, shortage of funds forced him to call a Parliament again in 1640. Cromwell was returned to this Parliament as member for Cambridge, but it lasted for only three weeks and became known as the Short Parliament. Cromwell moved his family from Ely to London in 1640.[27]
A second Parliament was called later the same year, and became known as the Long Parliament. Cromwell was again returned as member for Cambridge. As with the Parliament of 1628–29, it is likely that Cromwell owed his position to the patronage of others, which might explain why in the first week of the Parliament he was in charge of presenting a petition for the release of John Lilburne, who had become a Puritan cause célèbre after his arrest for importing religious tracts from the Netherlands. For the first two years of the Long Parliament Cromwell was linked to the godly group of aristocrats in the House of Lords and Members of the House of Commons with whom he had established familial and religious links in the 1630s, such as the Earls of Essex, Warwick and Bedford, Oliver St John and Viscount Saye and Sele.[28] At this stage, the group had an agenda of reformation: the executive checked by regular parliaments, and the moderate extension of liberty of conscience. Cromwell appears to have taken a role in some of this group's political manoeuvres. In May 1641, for example, it was Cromwell who put forward the second reading of the Annual Parliaments Bill and later took a role in drafting the Root and Branch Bill for the abolition of episcopacy.[29]
Military commander: 1642–46[edit]
English Civil War begins[edit]
Main article: First English Civil War




Engraving of Oliver Cromwell


Failure to resolve the issues before the Long Parliament led to armed conflict between Parliament and Charles I in late 1642, the beginning of the English Civil War. Before joining Parliament's forces Cromwell's only military experience was in the trained bands, the local county militia. He recruited a cavalry troop in Cambridgeshire after blocking a valuable shipment of silver plate from Cambridge colleges that was meant for the king. Cromwell and his troop then rode to, but arrived too late to take part in, the indecisive Battle of Edgehill on 23 October 1642. The troop was recruited to be a full regiment in the winter of 1642 and 1643, making up part of the Eastern Association under the Earl of Manchester. Cromwell gained experience in a number of successful actions in East Anglia in 1643, notably at the Battle of Gainsborough on 28 July.[30] He was subsequently appointed governor of Ely and a colonel in the Eastern Association.[25]
Marston Moor 1644[edit]
By the time of the Battle of Marston Moor in July 1644, Cromwell had risen to the rank of Lieutenant General of horse in Manchester's army. The success of his cavalry in breaking the ranks of the Royalist cavalry and then attacking their infantry from the rear at Marston Moor was a major factor in the Parliamentarian victory. Cromwell fought at the head of his troops in the battle and was slightly wounded in the neck, stepping away briefly to receive treatment during the battle but returning to help force the victory.[31] After Cromwell's nephew was killed at Marston Moor he wrote a famous letter to his brother-in-law. Marston Moor secured the north of England for the Parliamentarians, but failed to end Royalist resistance.[32]
The indecisive outcome of the Second Battle of Newbury in October meant that by the end of 1644 the war still showed no signs of ending. Cromwell's experience at Newbury, where Manchester had let the King's army slip out of an encircling manoeuvre, led to a serious dispute with Manchester, whom he believed to be less than enthusiastic in his conduct of the war. Manchester later accused Cromwell of recruiting men of "low birth" as officers in the army, to which he replied: "If you choose godly honest men to be captains of horse, honest men will follow them ... I would rather have a plain russet-coated captain who knows what he fights for and loves what he knows than that which you call a gentleman and is nothing else".[33] At this time, Cromwell also fell into dispute with Major-General Lawrence Crawford, a Scottish Covenanter attached to Manchester's army, who objected to Cromwell's encouragement of unorthodox Independents and Anabaptists.[34] He was also charged with familism by Scottish Presbyterian Samuel Rutherford in response to his letter to the House of Commons in 1645.[35]
New Model Army[edit]
Partly in response to the failure to capitalise on their victory at Marston Moor, Parliament passed the Self-Denying Ordinance in early 1645. This forced members of the House of Commons and the Lords, such as Manchester, to choose between civil office and military command. All of them—except Cromwell, whose commission was given continued extensions and was allowed to remain in parliament—chose to renounce their military positions. The Ordinance also decreed that the army be "remodelled" on a national basis, replacing the old county associations; Cromwell contributed significantly to these military reforms. In April 1645 the New Model Army finally took to the field, with Sir Thomas Fairfax in command and Cromwell as Lieutenant-General of cavalry and second-in-command.[25]
Battle of Naseby 1645[edit]
At the critical Battle of Naseby in June 1645, the New Model Army smashed the King's major army. Cromwell led his wing with great success at Naseby, again routing the Royalist cavalry. At the Battle of Langport on 10 July, Cromwell participated in the defeat of the last sizeable Royalist field army. Naseby and Langport effectively ended the King's hopes of victory, and the subsequent Parliamentarian campaigns involved taking the remaining fortified Royalist positions in the west of England. In October 1645, Cromwell besieged and took the wealthy and formidable Catholic fortress Basing House, later to be accused of killing 100 of its 300-man Royalist garrison after its surrender.[36] Cromwell also took part in successful sieges at Bridgwater, Sherborne, Bristol, Devizes, and Winchester, then spent the first half of 1646 mopping up resistance in Devon and Cornwall. Charles I surrendered to the Scots on 5 May 1646, effectively ending the First English Civil War. Cromwell and Fairfax took the formal surrender of the Royalists at Oxford in June 1646.[25]
Cromwell's military style[edit]
Cromwell had no formal training in military tactics, and followed the common practice of ranging his cavalry in three ranks and pressing forward, relying on impact rather than firepower. His strengths were an instinctive ability to lead and train his men, and his moral authority. In a war fought mostly by amateurs, these strengths were significant and are likely to have contributed to the discipline of his cavalry.[37]
Cromwell introduced close-order cavalry formations, with troopers riding knee to knee; this was an innovation in England at the time, and was a major factor in his success. He kept his troops close together following skirmishes where they had gained superiority, rather than allowing them to chase opponents off the battlefield. This facilitated further engagements in short order, which allowed greater intensity and quick reaction to battle developments. This style of command was decisive at both Marston Moor and Naseby.[38]
Politics: 1647–49[edit]
In February 1647 Cromwell suffered from an illness that kept him out of political life for over a month. By the time he had recovered, the Parliamentarians were split over the issue of the king. A majority in both Houses pushed for a settlement that would pay off the Scottish army, disband much of the New Model Army, and restore Charles I in return for a Presbyterian settlement of the Church. Cromwell rejected the Scottish model of Presbyterianism, which threatened to replace one authoritarian hierarchy with another. The New Model Army, radicalised by the failure of the Parliament to pay the wages it was owed, petitioned against these changes, but the Commons declared the petition unlawful. In May 1647 Cromwell was sent to the army's headquarters in Saffron Walden to negotiate with them, but failed to agree.[39]
In June 1647, a troop of cavalry under Cornet George Joyce seized the King from Parliament's imprisonment. With the King now present, Cromwell was eager to find out what conditions the King would acquiesce to if his authority was restored. The King appeared to be willing to compromise, so Cromwell employed his son-in-law, Henry Ireton, to draw up proposals for a constitutional settlement. Proposals were drafted multiple times with different changes until finally the "Heads of Proposals" pleased Cromwell in principle and would allow for further negotiations.[40] It was designed to check the powers of the executive, to set up regularly elected parliaments, and to restore a non-compulsory Episcopalian settlement.[41]
Many in the army, such as the Levellers led by John Lilburne, thought this was not enough and demanded full political equality for all men, leading to tense debates in Putney during the autumn of 1647 between Fairfax, Cromwell and Ireton on the one hand, and radical Levellers like Colonel Rainsborough on the other. The Putney Debates ultimately broke up without reaching a resolution.[42][43]
Second Civil War[edit]




The trial of Charles I on 4 January 1649.


The failure to conclude a political agreement with the king led eventually to the outbreak of the Second English Civil War in 1648, when the King tried to regain power by force of arms. Cromwell first put down a Royalist uprising in south Wales led by Rowland Laugharne, winning back Chepstow Castle on 25 May and six days later forcing the surrender of Tenby. The castle at Carmarthen was destroyed by burning. The much stronger castle at Pembroke, however, fell only after a siege of eight weeks. Cromwell dealt leniently with the ex-royalist soldiers, but less so with those who had previously been members of the parliamentary army, John Poyer eventually being executed in London after the drawing of lots.[44]
Cromwell then marched north to deal with a pro-Royalist Scottish army (the Engagers) who had invaded England. At Preston, Cromwell, in sole command for the first time and with an army of 9,000, won a decisive victory against an army twice as large.[45]
During 1648, Cromwell's letters and speeches started to become heavily based on biblical imagery, many of them meditations on the meaning of particular passages. For example, after the battle of Preston, study of Psalms 17 and 105 led him to tell Parliament that "they that are implacable and will not leave troubling the land may be speedily destroyed out of the land". A letter to Oliver St John in September 1648 urged him to read Isaiah 8, in which the kingdom falls and only the godly survive. On four occasions in letters in 1648 he referred to the story of Gideon's defeat of the Midianites at Ain Harod.[46] These letters suggest that it was Cromwell's faith, rather than a commitment to radical politics, coupled with Parliament's decision to engage in negotiations with the king at the Treaty of Newport, that convinced him that God had spoken against both the king and Parliament as lawful authorities. For Cromwell, the army was now God's chosen instrument.[47] The episode shows Cromwell’s firm belief in "Providentialism"—that God was actively directing the affairs of the world, through the actions of "chosen people" (whom God had "provided" for such purposes). Cromwell believed, during the Civil Wars, that he was one of these people, and he interpreted victories as indications of God's approval of his actions, and defeats as signs that God was directing him in another direction.[48]
King tried and executed[edit]
Main article: High Court of Justice for the trial of Charles I
In December 1648, in an episode that became known as Pride's Purge, a troop of soldiers headed by Colonel Thomas Pride forcibly removed from the Long Parliament all those who were not supporters of the Grandees in the New Model Army and the Independents.[49] Thus weakened, the remaining body of MPs, known as the Rump, agreed that Charles should be tried on a charge of treason. Cromwell was still in the north of England, dealing with Royalist resistance, when these events took place, but then returned to London. On the day after Pride's Purge, he became a determined supporter of those pushing for the king's trial and execution, believing that killing Charles was the only way to end the civil wars.[25] Cromwell approved Thomas Brook's address to the House of Commons, which justified the trial and execution of the King on the basis of the Book of Numbers, chapter 35 and particularly verse 33 ("The land cannot be cleansed of the blood that is shed therein, but by the blood of him that shed it.").[50]
The death warrant for Charles was eventually signed by 59 of the trying court's members, including Cromwell (who was the third to sign it).[51] Though it was not unprecedented, execution of the king, or "regicide", was controversial, if for no other reason due to the doctrine of the divine right of kings.[52] Thus, even after a trial, it was difficult to get ordinary men to go along with it: "None of the officers charged with supervising the execution wanted to sign the order for the actual beheading, so they brought their dispute to Cromwell...Oliver seized a pen and scribbled out the order, and handed the pen to the second officer, Colonel Hacker who stooped to sign it. The execution could now proceed." [53] Although Fairfax conspicuously refused to sign,[54] Charles I was executed on 30 January 1649.[25]
Establishment of the Commonwealth: 1649[edit]




Arms of the Commonwealth


After the execution of the King, a republic was declared, known as the "Commonwealth of England". The "Rump Parliament" exercised both executive and legislative powers, with a smaller Council of State also having some executive functions. Cromwell remained a member of the "Rump" and was appointed a member of the Council. In the early months after the execution of Charles I, Cromwell tried but failed to unite the original group of "Royal Independents" centred around St John and Saye and Sele, which had fractured during 1648. Cromwell had been connected to this group since before the outbreak of civil war in 1642 and had been closely associated with them during the 1640s. However, only St John was persuaded to retain his seat in Parliament. The Royalists, meanwhile, had regrouped in Ireland, having signed a treaty with the Irish known as "Confederate Catholics". In March, Cromwell was chosen by the Rump to command a campaign against them. Preparations for an invasion of Ireland occupied Cromwell in the subsequent months. In the latter part of the 1640s, Cromwell came across political dissidence in his "New Model Army". The "Leveller" or "Agitator" movement was a political movement that emphasised popular sovereignty, extended suffrage, equality before the law, and religious tolerance. These sentiments were expressed in the manifesto "Agreement of the People" in 1647. Cromwell and the rest of the "Grandees" disagreed with these sentiments in that they gave too much freedom to the people; they believed that the vote should only extend to the landowners. In the "Putney Debates" of 1647, the two groups debated these topics in hopes of forming a new constitution for England. There were rebellions and mutinies following the debates, and in 1649, the Bishopsgate mutiny resulted in the execution of Leveller Robert Lockyer by firing squad. The next month, the Banbury mutiny occurred with similar results. Cromwell led the charge in quelling these rebellions. After quelling Leveller mutinies within the English army at Andover and Burford in May, Cromwell departed for Ireland from Bristol at the end of July.[55]
Irish campaign: 1649–1650[edit]
See also: Irish Confederate Wars and Cromwellian conquest of Ireland
Cromwell led a Parliamentary invasion of Ireland from 1649–50. Parliament's key opposition was the military threat posed by the alliance of the Irish Confederate Catholics and English royalists (signed in 1649). The Confederate-Royalist alliance was judged to be the biggest single threat facing the Commonwealth. However, the political situation in Ireland in 1649 was extremely fractured: there were also separate forces of Irish Catholics who were opposed to the royalist alliance, and Protestant royalist forces that were gradually moving towards Parliament. Cromwell said in a speech to the army Council on 23 March that "I had rather be overthrown by a Cavalierish interest than a Scotch interest; I had rather be overthrown by a Scotch interest than an Irish interest and I think of all this is the most dangerous".[56]
Cromwell's hostility to the Irish was religious as well as political. He was passionately opposed to the Catholic Church, which he saw as denying the primacy of the Bible in favour of papal and clerical authority, and which he blamed for suspected tyranny and persecution of Protestants in continental Europe.[57] Cromwell's association of Catholicism with persecution was deepened with the Irish Rebellion of 1641. This rebellion, although intended to be bloodless, was marked by massacres of English and Scottish Protestant settlers by Irish ("Gaels") and Old English in Ireland, and Highland Scot Catholics in Ireland. These settlers had settled on land seized from former, native Catholic owners to make way for the non-native Protestants. These factors contributed to the brutality of the Cromwell military campaign in Ireland.[58]
Parliament had planned to re-conquer Ireland since 1641 and had already sent an invasion force there in 1647. Cromwell's invasion of 1649 was much larger and, with the civil war in England over, could be regularly reinforced and re-supplied. His nine-month military campaign was brief and effective, though it did not end the war in Ireland. Before his invasion, Parliamentarian forces held only outposts in Dublin and Derry. When he departed Ireland, they occupied most of the eastern and northern parts of the country. After his landing at Dublin on 15 August 1649 (itself only recently defended from an Irish and English Royalist attack at the Battle of Rathmines), Cromwell took the fortified port towns of Drogheda and Wexford to secure logistical supply from England. At the Siege of Drogheda in September 1649, Cromwell's troops killed nearly 3,500 people after the town's capture—comprising around 2,700 Royalist soldiers and all the men in the town carrying arms, including some civilians, prisoners and Roman Catholic priests.[59] Cromwell wrote afterwards that:

I am persuaded that this is a righteous judgment of God upon these barbarous wretches, who have imbrued their hands in so much innocent blood and that it will tend to prevent the effusion of blood for the future, which are satisfactory grounds for such actions, which otherwise cannot but work remorse and regret"[60]

At the Siege of Wexford in October, another massacre took place under confused circumstances. While Cromwell was apparently trying to negotiate surrender terms, some of his soldiers broke into the town, killed 2,000 Irish troops and up to 1,500 civilians, and burned much of the town.[61]
After the taking of Drogheda, Cromwell sent a column north to Ulster to secure the north of the country and went on to besiege Waterford, Kilkenny and Clonmel in Ireland's south-east. Kilkenny surrendered on terms, as did many other towns like New Ross and Carlow, but Cromwell failed to take Waterford, and at the siege of Clonmel in May 1650 he lost up to 2,000 men in abortive assaults before the town surrendered.[62]
One of his major victories in Ireland was diplomatic rather than military. With the help of Roger Boyle, 1st Earl of Orrery, Cromwell persuaded the Protestant Royalist troops in Cork to change sides and fight with the Parliament.[63] At this point, word reached Cromwell that Charles II (son of Charles I) had landed in Scotland from exile in France and been proclaimed King by the Covenanter regime. Cromwell therefore returned to England from Youghal on 26 May 1650 to counter this threat.[64]
The Parliamentarian conquest of Ireland dragged on for almost three years after Cromwell's departure. The campaigns under Cromwell's successors Henry Ireton and Edmund Ludlow mostly consisted of long sieges of fortified cities and guerrilla warfare in the countryside. The last Catholic-held town, Galway, surrendered in April 1652 and the last Irish Catholic troops capitulated in April of the following year.[62]
In the wake of the Commonwealth's conquest of the island of Ireland, the public practice of Roman Catholicism was banned and Catholic priests were killed when captured.[65] All Catholic-owned land was confiscated under the Act for the Settlement of Ireland of 1652 and given to Scottish and English settlers, Parliament's financial creditors and Parliamentary soldiers.[66] The remaining Catholic landowners were allocated poorer land in the province of Connacht.[67]
Debate over Cromwell's effect on Ireland[edit]
The extent of Cromwell's brutality[68][69] in Ireland has been strongly debated. Some historians argue that Cromwell never accepted that he was responsible for the killing of civilians in Ireland, claiming that he had acted harshly but only against those "in arms".[70] Other historians, however, cite Cromwell's contemporary reports to London including that of 27 September 1649 in which he lists the slaying of 3,000 military personnel, followed by the phrase "and many inhabitants".[71] In September 1649, he justified his sacking of Drogheda as revenge for the massacres of Protestant settlers in Ulster in 1641, calling the massacre "the righteous judgement of God on these barbarous wretches, who have imbrued their hands with so much innocent blood."[59] However, Drogheda had never been held by the rebels in 1641—many of its garrison were in fact English royalists. On the other hand, the worst atrocities committed in Ireland, such as mass evictions, killings and deportation of over 50,000 men, women and children as prisoners of war and indentured servants[72] to Bermuda and Barbados, were carried out under the command of other generals after Cromwell had left for England.[73] Some point to his actions on entering Ireland. Cromwell demanded that no supplies were to be seized from the civilian inhabitants and that everything should be fairly purchased; "I do hereby warn....all Officers, Soldiers and others under my command not to do any wrong or violence toward Country People or any persons whatsoever, unless they be actually in arms or office with the enemy.....as they shall answer to the contrary at their utmost peril."[74]




Oliver Cromwell c. 1649 by Robert Walker


The massacres at Drogheda and Wexford were in some ways typical of the day, especially in the context of the recently ended Thirty Years War,[75][76] although there are few comparable incidents during the Civil Wars in England or Scotland, which were fought mainly between Protestant adversaries, albeit of differing denominations. One possible comparison is Cromwell's Siege of Basing House in 1645—the seat of the prominent Catholic the Marquess of Winchester—which resulted in about 100 of the garrison of 400 being killed after being refused quarter. Contemporaries also reported civilian casualties, six Catholic priests and a woman.[77] However, the scale of the deaths at Basing House was much smaller.[78] Cromwell himself said of the slaughter at Drogheda in his first letter back to the Council of State: "I believe we put to the sword the whole number of the defendants. I do not think thirty of the whole number escaped with their lives."[79] Cromwell's orders—"in the heat of the action, I forbade them to spare any that were in arms in the town"—followed a request for surrender at the start of the siege, which was refused. The military protocol of the day was that a town or garrison that rejected the chance to surrender was not entitled to quarter.[80] The refusal of the garrison at Drogheda to do this, even after the walls had been breached, was to Cromwell justification for the massacre.[81] Where Cromwell negotiated the surrender of fortified towns, as at Carlow, New Ross, and Clonmel, some historians[who?] argue that he respected the terms of surrender and protected the lives and property of the townspeople.[82] At Wexford, Cromwell again began negotiations for surrender. However, the captain of Wexford castle surrendered during the middle of the negotiations, and in the confusion some of his troops began indiscriminate killing and looting.[83][84][85][86]
Although Cromwell's time spent on campaign in Ireland was limited, and although he did not take on executive powers until 1653, he is often the central focus of wider debates about whether, as historians such as Mark Levene and John Morrill suggest, the Commonwealth conducted a deliberate programme of ethnic cleansing in Ireland.[87] Faced with the prospect of an Irish alliance with Charles II, Cromwell carried out a series of massacres to subdue the Irish. Then, once Cromwell had returned to England, the English Commissary, General Henry Ireton, adopted a deliberate policy of crop burning and starvation, which was responsible for the majority of an estimated 600,000 deaths out of a total Irish population of 1,400,000.[88]
The sieges of Drogheda and Wexford have been prominently mentioned in histories and literature up to the present day. James Joyce, for example, mentioned Drogheda in his novel Ulysses: "What about sanctimonious Cromwell and his ironsides that put the women and children of Drogheda to the sword with the bible text God is love pasted round the mouth of his cannon?" Similarly, Winston Churchill (writing 1957) described the impact of Cromwell on Anglo-Irish relations:

...upon all of these Cromwell's record was a lasting bane. By an uncompleted process of terror, by an iniquitous land settlement, by the virtual proscription of the Catholic religion, by the bloody deeds already described, he cut new gulfs between the nations and the creeds. 'Hell or Connaught' were the terms he thrust upon the native inhabitants, and they for their part, across three hundred years, have used as their keenest expression of hatred 'The Curse of Cromwell on you.' ... Upon all of us there still lies 'the curse of Cromwell'.[89]

A key surviving statement of Cromwell's own views on the conquest of Ireland is his Declaration of the lord lieutenant of Ireland for the undeceiving of deluded and seduced people of January 1650.[90] In this he was scathing about Catholicism, saying that "I shall not, where I have the power... suffer the exercise of the Mass."[91] However, he also declared that: "as for the people, what thoughts they have in the matter of religion in their own breasts I cannot reach; but I shall think it my duty, if they walk honestly and peaceably, not to cause them in the least to suffer for the same."[91] Private soldiers who surrendered their arms "and shall live peaceably and honestly at their several homes, they shall be permitted so to do."[92]
In 1965 the Irish minister for lands stated that his policies were necessary to "undo the work of Cromwell"; circa 1997, Taoiseach Bertie Ahern demanded that a portrait of Cromwell be removed from a room in the Foreign Office before he began a meeting with Robin Cook.[93]
Scottish campaign: 1650–51[edit]
Scots proclaim Charles II as King[edit]




Moray House on the Royal Mile – Cromwell's residence in Edinburgh when he implored the Assembly of the Kirk to stop supporting Charles II


Cromwell left Ireland in May 1650 and several months later invaded Scotland after the Scots had proclaimed Charles I's son Charles II as king. Cromwell was much less hostile to Scottish Presbyterians, some of whom had been his allies in the First English Civil War, than he was to Irish Catholics. He described the Scots as a people "fearing His [God's] name, though deceived".[94] He made a famous appeal to the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland, urging them to see the error of the royal alliance—"I beseech you, in the bowels of Christ, think it possible you may be mistaken."[95] The Scots' reply was robust: "would you have us to be sceptics in our religion?" This decision to negotiate with Charles II led Cromwell to believe that war was necessary.[96]
Battle of Dunbar[edit]
His appeal rejected, Cromwell's veteran troops went on to invade Scotland. At first, the campaign went badly, as Cromwell's men were short of supplies and held up at fortifications manned by Scottish troops under David Leslie. Sickness began to spread in the ranks. Cromwell was on the brink of evacuating his army by sea from Dunbar. However, on 3 September 1650, unexpectedly, Cromwell smashed the main Scottish army at the Battle of Dunbar, killing 4,000 Scottish soldiers, taking another 10,000 prisoner, and then capturing the Scottish capital of Edinburgh.[97] The victory was of such a magnitude that Cromwell called it "A high act of the Lord's Providence to us [and] one of the most signal mercies God hath done for England and His people".[97]
Battle of Worcester[edit]
The following year, Charles II and his Scottish allies made a desperate attempt to invade England and capture London while Cromwell was engaged in Scotland. Cromwell followed them south and caught them at Worcester on 3 September 1651. At the subsequent Battle of Worcester, Cromwell's forces destroyed the last major Scottish Royalist army. Charles II barely escaped capture, and subsequently fled to exile in France and the Netherlands, where he would remain until 1660.[98] Many of the Scottish prisoners of war taken in the campaigns died of disease, and others were sent as indentured labourers to the colonies. To fight the battle, Cromwell organised an envelopment followed by a multi-pronged coordinated attack on Worcester that involved his forces attacking from three directions with two rivers partitioning his force. During the battle, Cromwell switched his reserves from one side of the river Severn to the other and back again. The editor of the Great Rebellion article of the Encyclopædia Britannica (eleventh edition) noted that compared to the early Civil War Battle of Turnham Green, Worcester was a battle of manoeuvre, which the English parliamentary armies at the start of the war were unable to execute, and agreed with a German critic that it was a prototype for the Battle of Sedan (1870).[99]
Conclusion[edit]
In the final stages of the Scottish campaign, Cromwell's men, under George Monck, sacked Dundee, killing up to 1,000 men and 140 women and children.[100] During the Commonwealth, Scotland was ruled from England, and was kept under military occupation, with a line of fortifications sealing off the Highlands, which had provided manpower for Royalist armies in Scotland, from the rest of the country. The north west Highlands was the scene of another pro-royalist uprising in 1653–55, which was only put down with deployment of 6,000 English troops there.[101] Presbyterianism was allowed to be practised as before, but the Kirk (the Scottish church) did not have the backing of the civil courts to impose its rulings, as it had previously.[102]
Cromwell's conquest, unwelcome as it was, left no significant lasting legacy of bitterness in Scotland. The rule of the Commonwealth and Protectorate was, the Highlands aside, largely peaceful. Moreover, there were no wholesale confiscations of land or property. Three out of every four Justices of the Peace in Commonwealth Scotland were Scots and the country was governed jointly by the English military authorities and a Scottish Council of State.[103]
Return to England and dissolution of the Rump Parliament: 1651–53[edit]



Wikisource has original text related to this article:
Dissolution of the Long Parliament



From the middle of 1649 until 1651 Cromwell was away on campaign. In the meantime, with the king gone (and with him their common cause), the various factions in Parliament began to engage in infighting. On his return, Cromwell tried to galvanise the Rump into setting dates for new elections, uniting the three kingdoms under one polity, and to put in place a broad-brush, tolerant national church. However, the Rump vacillated in setting election dates, and although it put in place a basic liberty of conscience, it failed to produce an alternative for tithes or dismantle other aspects of the existing religious settlement. In frustration, in April 1653 Cromwell demanded that the Rump establish a caretaker government of 40 members (drawn both from the Rump and the army) and then abdicate. However, the Rump returned to debating its own bill for a new government.[104] Cromwell was so angered by this that on 20 April 1653, supported by about forty musketeers, he cleared the chamber and dissolved the Parliament by force. Several accounts exist of this incident: in one, Cromwell is supposed to have said "you are no Parliament, I say you are no Parliament; I will put an end to your sitting".[105] At least two accounts agree that Cromwell snatched up the mace, symbol of Parliament's power, and demanded that the "bauble" be taken away.[106] Cromwell's troops were commanded by Charles Worsley, later one of his Major Generals and one of his most trusted advisors, to whom he entrusted the mace.[107]
Establishment of Barebone's Parliament: 1653[edit]
After the dissolution of the Rump, power passed temporarily to a council that debated what form the constitution should take. They took up the suggestion of Major-General Thomas Harrison for a "sanhedrin" of saints. Although Cromwell did not subscribe to Harrison's apocalyptic, Fifth Monarchist beliefs—which saw a sanhedrin as the starting point for Christ's rule on earth—he was attracted by the idea of an assembly made up of men chosen for their religious credentials. In his speech at the opening of the assembly on 4 July 1653, Cromwell thanked God’s providence that he believed had brought England to this point and set out their divine mission: "truly God hath called you to this work by, I think, as wonderful providences as ever passed upon the sons of men in so short a time."[108] The Nominated Assembly, sometimes known as the Parliament of Saints, or more commonly and denigratingly called Barebone's Parliament after one of its members, Praise-God Barebone. The assembly was tasked with finding a permanent constitutional and religious settlement (Cromwell was invited to be a member but declined). However, the revelation that a considerably larger segment of the membership than had been believed were the radical Fifth Monarchists led to its members voting to dissolve it on 12 December 1653, out of fear of what the radicals might do if they took control of the Assembly.[109]
The Protectorate: 1653–58[edit]
See also: The Protectorate













Coat of arms of the Protectorate 













Banner of Oliver Cromwell 






After the dissolution of the Barebones Parliament, John Lambert put forward a new constitution known as the Instrument of Government, closely modelled on the Heads of Proposals. It made Cromwell Lord Protector for life to undertake “the chief magistracy and the administration of government”. Cromwell was sworn in as Lord Protector on 16 December 1653, with a ceremony in which he wore plain black clothing, rather than any monarchical regalia.[110] However, from this point on Cromwell signed his name 'Oliver P', the P being an abbreviation for Protector, which was similar to the style of monarchs who used an R to mean Rex or Regina, and it soon became the norm for others to address him as "Your Highness".[111] As Protector, he had the power to call and dissolve parliaments but was obliged under the Instrument to seek the majority vote of a Council of State. Nevertheless, Cromwell's power was buttressed by his continuing popularity among the army. As the Lord Protector he was paid £100,000 a year.[112]
Cromwell had two key objectives as Lord Protector. The first was "healing and settling" the nation after the chaos of the civil wars and the regicide, which meant establishing a stable form for the new government to take.[113] Although Cromwell declared to the first Protectorate Parliament that, "Government by one man and a parliament is fundamental," in practice social priorities took precedence over forms of government. Such forms were, he said, "but ... dross and dung in comparison of Christ".[114] The social priorities did not, despite the revolutionary nature of the government, include any meaningful attempt to reform the social order. Cromwell declared, "A nobleman, a gentleman, a yeoman; the distinction of these: that is a good interest of the nation, and a great one!",[115] Small-scale reform such as that carried out on the judicial system were outweighed by attempts to restore order to English politics. Direct taxation was reduced slightly and peace was made with the Dutch, ending the First Anglo-Dutch War.[116]
England's American colonies in this period consisted of the New England Confederation, the Providence Plantation, the Virginia Colony and the Maryland Colony. Cromwell soon secured the submission of these and largely left them to their own affairs, intervening only to curb his fellow Puritans who were usurping control over the Maryland Colony at the Battle of the Severn, by his confirming the former Catholic proprietorship and edict of tolerance there. Of all the English dominions, Virginia was the most resentful of Cromwell's rule, and Cavalier emigration there mushroomed during the Protectorate.[117]
Cromwell famously stressed the quest to restore order in his speech to the first Protectorate parliament at its inaugural meeting on 3 September 1654. He declared that "healing and settling" were the "great end of your meeting".[118] However, the Parliament was quickly dominated by those pushing for more radical, properly republican reforms. After some initial gestures approving appointments previously made by Cromwell, the Parliament began to work on a radical programme of constitutional reform. Rather than opposing Parliament’s bill, Cromwell dissolved them on 22 January 1655. The First Protectorate Parliament had a property franchise of £200 per annum in real or personal property value set as the minimum value in which a male adult was to possess before he was eligible to vote for the representatives from the counties or shires in the House of Commons. The House of Commons representatives from the boroughs were elected by the burgesses or those borough residents who had the right to vote in municipal elections, and by the aldermen and councilors of the boroughs.[119]













Cromwell's signature before becoming Lord Protector in 1653, and afterwards. 'Oliver P', standing for Oliver Protector, similar in style to English monarchs who signed their names as, for example, 'Elizabeth R' standing for Elizabeth Regina. 













A 1658 issue Cromwell half-crown, with the Latin inscription OLIVAR D G RP ANG SCO ET HIB &c PRO, translated as "Oliver, by the Grace of God of the Republic of England, Scotland and Ireland etc. Protector". 






Cromwell's second objective was spiritual and moral reform. He aimed to restore liberty of conscience and promote both outward and inward godliness throughout England.[120] During the early months of the Protectorate, a set of "triers" was established to assess the suitability of future parish ministers, and a related set of "ejectors" was set up to dismiss ministers and schoolmasters who were deemed unsuitable for office. The triers and the ejectors were intended to be at the vanguard of Cromwell's reform of parish worship. This second objective is also the context in which to see the constitutional experiment of the Major Generals that followed the dissolution of the first Protectorate Parliament. After a royalist uprising in March 1655, led by Sir John Penruddock, Cromwell (influenced by Lambert) divided England into military districts ruled by Army Major Generals who answered only to him. The 15 major generals and deputy major generals—called "godly governors"—were central not only to national security, but Cromwell's crusade to reform the nation's morals. The generals not only supervised militia forces and security commissions, but collected taxes and ensured support for the government in the English and Welsh provinces. Commissioners for securing the peace of the commonwealth were appointed to work with them in every county. While a few of these commissioners were career politicians, most were zealous puritans who welcomed the major-generals with open arms and embraced their work with enthusiasm. However, the major-generals lasted less than a year. Many feared they threatened their reform efforts and authority. Their position was further harmed by a tax proposal by Major General John Desborough to provide financial backing for their work, which the second Protectorate parliament—instated in September 1656—voted down for fear of a permanent military state. Ultimately, however, Cromwell's failure to support his men, sacrificing them to his opponents, caused their demise. Their activities between November 1655 and September 1656 had, however, reopened the wounds of the 1640s and deepened antipathies to the regime.[121]
As Lord Protector, Cromwell was aware of the Jewish community's involvement in the economics of the Netherlands, now England's leading commercial rival. It was this—allied to Cromwell's tolerance of the right to private worship of those who fell outside Puritanism—that led to his encouraging Jews to return to England in 1657, over 350 years after their banishment by Edward I, in the hope that they would help speed up the recovery of the country after the disruption of the Civil Wars.[122] There was a longer-term motive for Cromwell's decision to allow the Jews to return to England, and that was the hope that they would convert to Christianity and therefore hasten the Second Coming of Jesus Christ, ultimately based on Matthew 23:37–39 and Romans 11. At the Whitehall conference of December 1655 he quoted from St. Paul's Epistle to the Romans 10:12–15 on the need to send Christian preachers to the Jews. Cromwell's long-term religious motive for readmitting the Jews to England should not be doubted; after all, he was serious enough to ban Christmas as a pagan festival. William Prynne the Presbyterian, in contrast to Cromwell the Congregationalist, was strongly opposed to the latter's pro-Jewish policy.[123][124][125]
On 23 March 1657 the Protectorate signed the Treaty of Paris with Louis XIV against Spain. Cromwell pledged to supply France with 6,000 troops and war ships. In accordance with the terms of the treaty, Mardyck and Dunkirk – a base for privateers and commerce raiders attacking English merchant shipping – were ceded to England.[126]
In 1657, Cromwell was offered the crown by Parliament as part of a revised constitutional settlement, presenting him with a dilemma since he had been "instrumental" in abolishing the monarchy. Cromwell agonised for six weeks over the offer. He was attracted by the prospect of stability it held out, but in a speech on 13 April 1657 he made clear that God's providence had spoken against the office of king: “I would not seek to set up that which Providence hath destroyed and laid in the dust, and I would not build Jericho again”.[127] The reference to Jericho harks back to a previous occasion on which Cromwell had wrestled with his conscience when the news reached England of the defeat of an expedition against the Spanish-held island of Hispaniola in the West Indies in 1655—comparing himself to Achan, who had brought the Israelites defeat after bringing plunder back to camp after the capture of Jericho.[128] Instead, Cromwell was ceremonially re-installed as Lord Protector on 26 June 1657 at Westminster Hall, sitting upon King Edward's Chair, which was moved specially from Westminster Abbey for the occasion. The event in part echoed a coronation, using many of its symbols and regalia, such as a purple ermine-lined robe, a sword of justice and a sceptre (but not a crown or an orb). But, most notably, the office of Lord Protector was still not to become hereditary, though Cromwell was now able to nominate his own successor. Cromwell's new rights and powers were laid out in the Humble Petition and Advice, a legislative instrument which replaced the Instrument of Government. Despite failing to restore the Crown, this new constitution did set up many of the vestiges of the ancient constitution including a house of life peers (in place of the House of Lords). In the Humble Petition it was called the Other House as the Commons could not agree on a suitable name. Furthermore, Oliver Cromwell increasingly took on more of the trappings of monarchy. In particular, he created two baronages after the acceptance of the Humble Petition and Advice—Charles Howard was made Viscount Morpeth and Baron Gisland in July 1657 and Edmund Dunch was created Baron Burnell of East Wittenham in April 1658.[129]
Death and posthumous execution[edit]
See also: Oliver Cromwell's head




Oliver Cromwell's death mask at Warwick Castle


Cromwell is thought to have suffered from malaria and from "stone", a common term for urinary/kidney infections. In 1658 he was struck by a sudden bout of malarial fever, followed directly by illness symptomatic of a urinary or kidney complaint. The Venetian ambassador, who wrote regular dispatches to the Doge of Venice in which he included details of Cromwell's final illness, was suspicious of the rapidity of Cromwell's death.[130] The decline may also have been hastened by the death of one of his daughters, Elizabeth Claypole, in August. He died aged 59 at Whitehall on Friday 3 September 1658, the anniversary of his great victories at Dunbar and Worcester.[131] The most likely cause of Cromwell's death was septicaemia following his urinary infection. He was buried with great ceremony, with an elaborate funeral based on that of James I, at Westminster Abbey,[132] his daughter Elizabeth also being buried there.[133]
He was succeeded as Lord Protector by his son Richard. Although not entirely without ability, Richard had no power base in either Parliament or the Army, and was forced to resign in May 1659, ending the Protectorate. There was no clear leadership from the various factions that jostled for power during the short-lived reinstated Commonwealth, so George Monck, the English governor of Scotland, at the head of New Model Army regiments was able to march on London, and restore the Long Parliament. Under Monck's watchful eye the necessary constitutional adjustments were made so that in 1660 Charles II could be invited back from exile to be king under a restored monarchy.[134]




The execution of the bodies of Cromwell, Bradshaw and Ireton, from a contemporary print


On 30 January 1661 (the 12th anniversary of the execution of Charles I), Cromwell's body was exhumed from Westminster Abbey, and was subjected to a posthumous execution, as were the remains of Robert Blake, John Bradshaw and Henry Ireton. (The body of Cromwell's daughter was allowed to remain buried in the Abbey.) His disinterred body was hanged in chains at Tyburn, and then thrown into a pit. Cromwell's severed head was displayed on a pole outside Westminster Hall until 1685. Afterwards it allegedly was owned by various people, including a documented sale in 1814 to Josiah Henry Wilkinson,[135][136] and was publicly exhibited several times before being buried beneath the floor of the antechapel at Sidney Sussex College, Cambridge, in 1960.[133][137] The exact position was not publicly disclosed, but a plaque marks the approximate location.[138]
Many people began to question whether the body mutilated at Tyburn and the head seen on Westminster Hall were Cromwell’s.[139] These doubts arose because it was assumed that between his death in September 1658 and the exhumation of January 1661, Cromwell's body was buried and reburied in several places to protect it from vengeful royalists. The stories suggest that his bodily remains are buried in London, Cambridgeshire, Northamptonshire or Yorkshire.[140]
The Cromwell vault was later used as a burial place for Charles II's illegitimate descendants.[141] In Westminster Abbey, the site of Cromwell’s burial was marked during the 19th century by a floor stone in what is now the Air Force Chapel, reading "The burial place of Oliver Cromwell 1658–1661".[142]
Political reputation[edit]




A contemporary satirical view of Cromwell as a usurper of monarchical power


During his lifetime, some tracts painted him as a hypocrite motivated by power—for example, The Machiavilian Cromwell and The Juglers Discovered, both part of an attack on Cromwell by the Levellers after 1647, present him as a Machiavellian figure.[143] In a more positive contemporary assessment, John Spittlehouse in A Warning Piece Discharged—compared him to Moses, rescuing the English by taking them safely through the Red Sea of the civil wars.[144] The poet and polemicist John Milton called Cromwell "our chief of men" in his Sonnet XVI,[145] and in works like Defensio secunda, defended the Republic and the Lord Protector, while exhorting him to remain true to the principles of the Revolution. Several biographies were published soon after his death. An example is The Perfect Politician, which described how Cromwell "loved men more than books" and gave a nuanced assessment of him as an energetic campaigner for liberty of conscience brought down by pride and ambition.[146] An equally nuanced but less positive assessment was published in 1667 by Edward Hyde, 1st Earl of Clarendon, in his History of the Rebellion and Civil Wars in England. Clarendon famously declared that Cromwell "will be looked upon by posterity as a brave bad man".[147] He argued that Cromwell's rise to power had been helped not only by his great spirit and energy, but also by his ruthlessness. Clarendon was not one of Cromwell's confidantes, and his account was written after the Restoration of the monarchy.[147]
During the early 18th century, Cromwell's image began to be adopted and reshaped by the Whigs, as part of a wider project to give their political objectives historical legitimacy. A version of Edmund Ludlow’s Memoirs, re-written by John Toland to excise the radical Puritan elements and replace them with a Whiggish brand of republicanism, presented the Cromwellian Protectorate as a military tyranny. Through Ludlow, Toland portrayed Cromwell as a despot who crushed the beginnings of democratic rule in the 1640s.[148]


“
I hope to render the English name as great and formidable as ever the Roman was.[149]
”


– Cromwell


During the early 19th century, Cromwell began to be portrayed in a positive light by Romantic artists and poets. Thomas Carlyle continued this reassessment of Cromwell in the 1840s, publishing an annotated collection of Cromwell's letters and speeches in which he described English Puritanism as "the last of all our Heroisms" while taking a negative view of his own era.[150]
By the late 19th century, Carlyle's portrayal of Cromwell, stressing the centrality of puritan morality and earnestness, had become assimilated into Whig and Liberal historiography. The Oxford civil war historian Samuel Rawson Gardiner concluded that "the man—it is ever so with the noblest—was greater than his work".[151] Gardiner stressed Cromwell’s dynamic and mercurial character, and his role in dismantling absolute monarchy, while underestimating Cromwell’s religious conviction.[152] Cromwell’s foreign policy also provided an attractive forerunner of Victorian imperial expansion, with Gardiner stressing his “constancy of effort to make England great by land and sea”.[153]
During the first half of the 20th century, Cromwell's reputation was often influenced by the rise of fascism in Nazi Germany and in Italy. Wilbur Cortez Abbott, for example—a Harvard historian—devoted much of his career to compiling and editing a multi-volume collection of Cromwell's letters and speeches. In this work, which was published between 1937 and 1947, Abbott began to argue that Cromwell was a proto-fascist. However, subsequent historians such as John Morrill have criticised both Abbott's interpretation of Cromwell and his editorial approach.[154]
Late 20th century historians re-examined the nature of Cromwell's faith and of his authoritarian regime. Austin Woolrych explored the issue of "dictatorship" in depth, arguing that Cromwell was subject to two conflicting forces: his obligation to the army and his desire to achieve a lasting settlement by winning back the confidence of the political nation as a whole. Woolrych argued that the dictatorial elements of Cromwell's rule stemmed not so much from its military origins or the participation of army officers in civil government, as from his constant commitment to the interest of the people of God and his conviction that suppressing vice and encouraging virtue constituted the chief end of government.[155]
Historians such as John Morrill, Blair Worden and J. C. Davis have developed this theme, revealing the extent to which Cromwell’s writing and speeches are suffused with biblical references, and arguing that his radical actions were driven by his zeal for godly reformation.[156]
Monuments and posthumous honours[edit]




1899 statue of Cromwell by Hamo Thornycroft outside the Palace of Westminster, London


In 1776, one of the first ships commissioned to serve in the Continental Navy during the American Revolutionary War was named Oliver Cromwell.[157]
19th century engineer Sir Richard Tangye was a noted Cromwell enthusiast and collector of Cromwell manuscripts and memorabilia.[158] His collection included many rare manuscripts and printed books, medals, paintings, objects d'art and a bizarre assemblage of "relics." This includes Cromwell's bible, button, coffin plate, death mask and funeral escutcheon. On Tangye's death, the entire collection was donated to the Museum of London, where it can still be seen.[159]
In 1875 a statue of Cromwell by Matthew Noble was erected in Manchester outside the cathedral, a gift to the city by Mrs. Abel Heywood in memory of her first husband.[160][161] It was the first such large-scale statue to be erected in the open in England and was a realistic likeness, based on the painting by Peter Lely and showing Cromwell in battledress with drawn sword and leather body armour. The statue was unpopular with local Conservatives and the large Irish immigrant population. When Queen Victoria was invited to open the new Manchester Town Hall, she is alleged to have consented on condition that the statue of Cromwell be removed. The statue remained, Victoria declined, and the town hall was instead opened by the Lord Mayor. During the 1980s the statue was relocated outside Wythenshawe Hall, which had been occupied by Cromwell's troops.[162]
During the 1890s plans to erect a statue of Cromwell outside Parliament also proved to be controversial. Pressure from the Irish Nationalist Party[163] forced the withdrawal of a motion to seek public funding for the project, and though the statue was eventually erected, it had to be funded privately by Lord Rosebery.[164]
Cromwell controversy continued into the 20th century. As First Lord of the Admiralty before the First World War, Winston Churchill twice suggested naming a British battleship HMS Oliver Cromwell. The suggestion was vetoed by King George V, not only because of his personal feelings but because he felt, given the anger caused by the erection of the statue outside Parliament, to give such a name to an expensive warship at a time of Irish political unrest was unwise. Churchill was eventually told by the First Sea Lord Admiral Battenberg that the king's decision must be treated as final.[165]
The Cromwell Tank, a British Second World War medium weight tank first used in 1944,[166] and a steam locomotive built by British Railways in 1951, 70013 Oliver Cromwell, were both named after Cromwell.[167]
Other public statues of Cromwell are located in St Ives, Cambridgeshire (Statue of Oliver Cromwell, St Ives)[168] and Warrington, Cheshire (Statue of Oliver Cromwell, Warrington).[169]
An oval plaque at Sidney Sussex College, Cambridge says:[138][170]
Near to
this place was buried
on 25 March 1960 the head of
OLIVER CROMWELL
Lord Protector of the Common-
wealth of England, Scotland &
Ireland, Fellow Commoner
of this College 1616-7
Title as Lord Protector and arms[edit]

His Highness By the Grace of God and Republic, Lord Protector of England, Scotland and Ireland (16 December 1653 – 3 September 1658)

Arms[edit]

Coat of arms of Oliver Cromwell




Notes
Source: Klebeband Nr. 2 der Fürstlich Waldeckschen Hofbibliothek Arolsen.
Crest
A demi lion issuant argent, holding in his paws a broken spear proper
Escutcheon
Quarterly of six: first, sable, a lion rampant argent; second, sable, three spear-heads argent imbrued proper; third, sable, a chevron between three fleurs-de-lis argent; fourth, gules, three chevrons argent; fifth, argent, a lion rampant sable; sixth, argent, on a chevron sable a mullet of the field.




Ancestry[edit]

Ancestors of Oliver Cromwell 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







 

16. Morgan ap William



 




 


 


 


 


 







 

8. Sir Richard Williams

 




 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







 

17. Katherine Cromwell



 




 


 


 


 


 







 

4. Sir Henry Williams

 




 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 











































 

2. Robert Cromwell

 




 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







 

20. Sir Thomas Warren



 




 


 


 


 


 







 

10. Sir Ralph Warren

 




 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 



















 

5. Joan Warren

 




 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







 

22. John Lake



 




 


 


 


 


 







 

11. Joan Lake

 




 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 



















 

1. Oliver Cromwell

 




 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 



























































































 

3. Elizabeth Steward

 




 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




























































































In popular culture[edit]
Main article: Oliver Cromwell in popular culture

See also[edit]

Cromwell's Soldiers' Pocket Bible – a booklet Cromwell issued to his army in 1643
Republicanism in the United Kingdom
Robert Walker – various portraits of Cromwell by the artists Robert Walker, Peter Lely and Samuel Cooper
Cromwell's Panegyrick, a contemporary satirical ballad
Oliver Cromwell (ship) - a corvette launched in 1776 by the Connecticut State Navy

Footnotes[edit]



^ These dates are according to the Julian calendar in force in England during Cromwell's lifetime. The Gregorian calendar counterparts are: 5 May 1599 – 13 September 1658 (see Old Style and New Style dates).
^ See Henry Williams article for a detailed explanation of the family name change.



Citations[edit]


^ Morrill, John (2004). "Cromwell, Oliver (1599–1658)". Oxford Dictionary of National Biography. Oxford University Press. Retrieved 23 April 2017. (Subscription required (help)). 
^ "The survival of English nonconformity and the reputation of the English for tolerance is part of his abiding legacy," says David Sharp, (Sharp 2003, p. 68)
^ "Oliver Cromwell (1599–1658)". 
^ Sharp 2003, p. 60.
^ Churchill 1956, p. 314.
^ Trotsky, Leon. "Two traditions: the seventeenth-century revolution and Chartism". marxists.anu.edu.au. Marxists Internet Archive. Retrieved 10 July 2014. 
^ "Ten greatest Britons chosen". BBC. 20 October 2002. Retrieved 27 November 2008. 
^ Genocidal or near-genocidal: Brendan O'Leary and John McGarry, "Regulating nations and ethnic communities", in Breton Albert (ed.) (1995). Nationalism and Rationality, Cambridge University Press. p. 248.
^ Ó Siochrú, Micheál (2008). God's executioner. Faber and Faber. ISBN 978-0-571-24121-7. 
^ David Plant. "Oliver Cromwell 1599–1658". British-civil-wars.co.uk. Retrieved 27 November 2008. 
^ Thomas Carlyle, ed. (1887). Oliver Cromwell's letters and speeches. 1. p. 17. CS1 maint: Extra text: authors list (link)
^ Abernethy, Susan (10 March 2017). "Jasper Tudor, Duke of Bedford and Earl of Pembroke". Retrieved 6 August 2017. 
^ Gaunt, p. 31.
^ Speech to the First Protectorate Parliament, 4 September 1654, (Roots 1989, p. 42).
^ a b British Civil Wars, Commonwealth and Proctectorate 1638–1660
^ "Cromwell, Oliver (CRML616O)". A Cambridge Alumni Database. University of Cambridge. 
^ Antonia Fraser, Cromwell: Our Chief of Men (1973), ISBN 0-297-76556-6, p. 24.
^ Antonia Fraser, Cromwell: Our Chief of Men (1973), ISBN 0-297-76556-6, p. 24.
^ John Morrill, (1990). "The Making of Oliver Cromwell", in Morrill, ed., Oliver Cromwell and the English Revolution (Longman), ISBN 0-582-01675-4, p.24.
^ "Cromwell's family". The Cromwell Association. Retrieved 6 August 2017. 
^ Gardiner, Samuel Rawson (1901). Oliver Cromwell, ISBN 1-4179-4961-9, p.4; Gaunt, Peter (1996). Oliver Cromwell (Blackwell), ISBN 0-631-18356-6, p.23.
^ a b c Morrill, p.34.
^ Morrill, pp.24–33.
^ Gaunt, p.34.
^ a b c d e f "Oliver Cromwell". British Civil Wars Project. Retrieved 6 August 2017. 
^ Morrill, pp.25–26.
^ Cromwell: Our Chief of Men, by Antonia Fraser, Weidenfeld and Nicolson, London 1973
^ Adamson, John (1990). "Oliver Cromwell and the Long Parliament", in Morrill, p. 57.
^ Adamson, p. 53.
^ David Plant. "1643: Civil War in Lincolnshire". British-civil-wars.co.uk. Retrieved 27 November 2008. 
^ Cromwell: Our Chief of Men, by Antonia Fraser, London 1973, ISBN 0297765566, Weidenfeld and Nicolson, pp. 120–129.
^ "The Battle of Marston Moor". British Civil Wars. Retrieved 21 June 2015. 
^ Letter to Sir William Spring, September 1643, quoted in Carlyle, Thomas (ed.) (1904 edition). Oliver Cromwell's letters and speeches, with elucidations, vol I, p.154; also quoted in Young and Holmes (2000). The English Civil War, (Wordsworth), ISBN 1-84022-222-0, p.107.
^ "Sermons of Rev Martin Camoux: Oliver Cromwell". Archived from the original on 16 May 2009. 
^ "A Survey of the Spirituall Antichrist Opening the Secrets of Familisme and Antinomianisme in the Antichristian Doctrine of John Saltmarsh and Will. del, the Present Preachers of the Army Now in England, and of Robert Town". 
^ Kenyon, John & Ohlmeyer, Jane (eds.) (2000). The Civil Wars: A Military History of England, Scotland, and Ireland 1638–1660 (Oxford University Press), ISBN 0-19-280278-X, p.141
^ Woolrych, Austin (1990). Cromwell as a soldier, in Morrill, pp.117–118.
^ Cromwell: Our Chief of Men, by Antonia Fraser, London 1973, Weidenfeld and Nicolson, ISBN 0-297-76556-6, pp. 154–161
^ "A lasting place in history". Saffron Walden Reporter. 10 May 2007. Retrieved 6 August 2017. 
^ Ashley, Maurice (1957). The Greatness of Oliver Cromwell. London: Collier- Macmillan LTD. pp. 187–190. 
^ Although there is debate over whether Cromwell and Ireton were the authors of the Heads of Proposals or acting on behalf of Saye and Sele: Adamson, John (1987). "The English Nobility and the Projected Settlement of 1647", in Historical Journal, 30, 3; Kishlansky, Mark (1990). "Saye What?" in Historical Journal 33, 4.
^ Woolrych, Austin (1987). Soldiers and Statesmen: the General Council of the Army and its Debates (Clarendon Press), ISBN 0-19-822752-3, ch. 2–5.
^ See The Levellers: The Putney Debates, Texts selected and annotated by Philip Baker, Introduction by Geoffrey Robertson QC. London and New York: Verso, 2007.
^ "Spartacus: Rowland Laugharne at Spartacus.Schoolnet.co.uk". Archived from the original on 25 October 2008. 
^ Gardiner (1901), pp.144–47; Gaunt (1997) 94–97.
^ Morrill and Baker (2008), p.31.
^ Adamson, pp.76–84.
^ Jendrysik, p. 79
^ Macaulay, p. 68
^ Coward 1991, p. 65
^ "Death Warrant of King Charles I". UK Parliament. Retrieved 6 August 2017. 
^ Hart, Ben. "Oliver Cromwell Destroys the "Divine Right of Kings"". Retrieved 6 August 2017. 
^ Gentles, Ian (2011). Oliver Cromwell. Macmillian Distribution Ltd. p. 82. ISBN 0-333-71356-7. 
^ "The Regicides". The Brish Civil wars Project. Retrieved 6 August 2017. 
^ David Plant (14 December 2005). "The Levellers". British-civil-wars.co.uk. Retrieved 2012-06-14. 
^ Quoted in Lenihan, Padraig (2000). Confederate Catholics at War (Cork University Press), ISBN 1-85918-244-5, p.115.
^ Fraser, pp.74–76.
^ Fraser, pp.326–328.
^ a b Kenyon & Ohlmeyer, p.98.
^ Cromwell, Oliver (1846). Thomas Carlyle, ed. "Oliver Cromwell's letters and speeches, with elucidations". William H. Colyer. p. 128. Retrieved 22 January 2010. 
^ Fraser, Antonia (1973). Cromwell, Our Chief of Men, and Cromwell: the Lord Protector (Phoenix Press), ISBN 0-7538-1331-9 pp.344–46; and Austin Woolrych, Britain In Revolution (Oxford, 2002), p. 470
^ a b Kenyon & Ohlmeyer, p.100.
^ Fraser, pp.321–322; Lenihan 2000, p.113.
^ Fraser, p.355.
^ Kenyon & Ohlmeyer, p.314.
^ "Act for the Settlement of Ireland, 12 August 1652, Henry Scobell, ii. 197. See Commonwealth and Protectorate, iv. 82-5". the Constitution Society. Retrieved 14 February 2008. 
^ Lenihan 2007, pp. 135-136
^ Christopher Hill, 1972, God's Englishman: Oliver Cromwell and the English Revolution, Penguin Books: London, p.108: "The brutality of the Cromwellian conquest of Ireland is not one of the pleasanter aspects of our hero's career ..."
^ Barry Coward, 1991, Oliver Cromwell, Pearson Education: Rugby, p.74: "Revenge was not Cromwell's only motive for the brutality he condoned at Wexford and Drogheda, but it was the dominant one ..."
^ Philip McKeiver, 2007, A New History of Cromwell's Irish Campaign
^ Micheal O'Siochru, 2008, God's Executioner, Oliver Cromwell and the Conquest of Ireland, p. 83, 90
^ O'Callaghan, Sean (2000). To Hell or Barbados. Brandon. p. 86. ISBN 0-86322-287-0. 
^ Lenihan 2000, p. 1O22; "After Cromwell returned to England in 1650, the conflict degenerated into a grindingly slow counter-insurgency campaign punctuated by some quite protracted sieges...the famine of 1651 onwards was a man-made response to stubborn guerrilla warfare. Collective reprisals against the civilian population included forcing them out of designated 'no man's lands' and the systematic destruction of foodstuffs".
^ Carlyle, Thomas (1897). "Oliver Cromwell's Letters and Speeches II: Letters from Ireland, 1649 and 1650". Chapman and Hall Ltd, London. Retrieved 6 August 2017. 
^ Woolrych, Austin (1990). Cromwell as soldier, in Morrill, John (ed.), Oliver Cromwell and the English Revolution (Longman), ISBN 0-582-01675-4, p. 112: "viewed in the context of the German wars that had just ended after thirty years of fighting, the massacres at Drogheda and Wexford shrink to typical casualties of seventeenth-century warfare".
^ The Thirty Years War (1618–48) 7 500 000: "R.J. Rummel: 11.5M total deaths in the war (half democides)"
^ Gardiner (1886), Vol. II, p. 345
^ J.C. Davis, Oliver Cromwell, pp. 108–10.
^ Abbott, Writings and Speeches, vol II, p.124.
^ Woolrych, Austin (1990). Cromwell as soldier, p. 111; Gaunt, p. 117.
^ Lenihan 2000, p.168.
^ Gaunt, p.116.
^ Stevenson, Cromwell, Scotland and Ireland, in Morrill, p.151.
^ "Eugene Coyle. Review of Cromwell—An Honourable Enemy. History Ireland". Archived from the original on 21 February 2001. 
^ Micheal O'Siochru, 2008, God's Executioner, Oliver Cromwell and the Conquest of Ireland, p. 83-93
^ Schama, Simon, "A History of Britain," 2000.
^ Citations for genocide, near genocide and ethnic cleansing:

Albert Breton (Editor, 1995). Nationalism and Rationality. Cambridge University Press 1995. Page 248. "Oliver Cromwell offered Irish Catholics a choice between genocide and forced mass population transfer"
Ukrainian Quarterly. Ukrainian Society of America 1944. "Therefore, we are entitled to accuse the England of Oliver Cromwell of the genocide of the Irish civilian population.."
David Norbrook (2000).Writing the English Republic: Poetry, Rhetoric and Politics, 1627–1660. Cambridge University Press. 2000. In interpreting Andrew Marvell's contemporarily expressed views on Cromwell Norbrook says; "He (Cromwell) laid the foundation for a ruthless programme of resettling the Irish Catholics which amounted to large scale ethnic cleansing."
Alan Axelrod (2002). Profiles in Leadership, Prentice-Hall. 2002. Page 122. "As a leader Cromwell was entirely unyielding. He was willing to act on his beliefs, even if this meant killing the king and perpetrating, against the Irish, something very nearly approaching genocide"
Morrill, John (December 2003). "Rewriting Cromwell—A Case of Deafening Silences". Canadian Journal of History. University of Toronto Press. 38 (3). Retrieved 23 June 2015. Of course, this has never been the Irish view of Cromwell. Most Irish remember him as the man responsible for the mass slaughter of civilians at Drogheda and Wexford and as the agent of the greatest episode of ethnic cleansing ever attempted in Western Europe as, within a decade, the percentage of land possessed by Catholics born in Ireland dropped from sixty to twenty. In a decade, the ownership of two-fifths of the land mass was transferred from several thousand Irish Catholic landowners to British Protestants. The gap between Irish and the English views of the seventeenth-century conquest remains unbridgeable and is governed by G.K. Chesterton's mirthless epigram of 1917, that 'it was a tragic necessity that the Irish should remember it; but it was far more tragic that the English forgot it'. 
Lutz, James M.; Lutz, Brenda J. (2004). Global Terrorism. London: Routledge. p. 193. The draconian laws applied by Oliver Cromwell in Ireland were an early version of ethnic cleansing. The Catholic Irish were to be expelled to the northwestern areas of the island. Relocation rather than extermination was the goal.  |access-date= requires |url= (help)
Mark Levene (2005). Genocide in the Age of the Nation State: Volume 2. ISBN 978-1-84511-057-4 Page 55, 56 & 57. A sample quote describes the Cromwellian campaign and settlement as "a conscious attempt to reduce a distinct ethnic population".
Mark Levene (2005). Genocide in the Age of the Nation-State, I.B.Tauris: London:

[The Act of Settlement of Ireland], and the parliamentary legislation which succeeded it the following year, is the nearest thing on paper in the English, and more broadly British, domestic record, to a programme of state-sanctioned and systematic ethnic cleansing of another people. The fact that it did not include 'total' genocide in its remit, or that it failed to put into practice the vast majority of its proposed expulsions, ultimately, however, says less about the lethal determination of its makers and more about the political, structural and financial weakness of the early modern English state.




^ Frances Stewart Archived 16 December 2008 at the Wayback Machine. (2000). War and Underdevelopment: Economic and Social Consequences of Conflict v. 1 (Queen Elizabeth House Series in Development Studies), Oxford University Press. 2000.
^ Winston S. Churchill, 1957, A History of the English Speaking Peoples: The Age of Revolution, Dodd, Mead and Company: New York (p. 9): "We have seen the many ties which at one time or another have joined the inhabitants of the Western islands, and even in Ireland itself offered a tolerable way of life to Protestants and Catholics alike. Upon all of these Cromwell's record was a lasting bane. By an uncompleted process of terror, by an iniquitous land settlement, by the virtual proscription of the Catholic religion, by the bloody deeds already described, he cut new gulfs between the nations and the creeds. "Hell or Connaught" were the terms he thrust upon the native inhabitants, and they for their part, across three hundred years, have used as their keenest expression of hatred "The Curse of Cromwell on you." The consequences of Cromwell's rule in Ireland have distressed and at times distracted English politics down even to the present day. To heal them baffled the skill and loyalties of successive generations. They became for a time a potent obstacle to the harmony of the English-speaking people throughout the world. Upon all of us there still lies 'the curse of Cromwell'.
^ Abbott, W.C. (1929). Writings and Speeches of Oliver Cromwell, Harvard University Press, pp.196–205.
^ a b Abbott, p.202.
^ Abbott, p.205.
^ Cunningham, John. "Conquest and Land in Ireland". Royal Historical Society, Boydell Press. Retrieved 16 December 2012. 
^ Lenihan 2000, p.115.
^ Gardiner (1901), p.184.
^ Stevenson, David (1990). Cromwell, Scotland and Ireland, in Morrill, John (ed.), Oliver Cromwell and the English Revolution (Longman), ISBN 0-582-01675-4, p.155.
^ a b Kenyon & Ohlmeyer, p.66.
^ Cromwell: Our Chief of Men, by Antonia Fraser, London 1973, Weidenfeld and Nicolson, ISBN 0-297-76556-6, pp. 385–389.
^ Encyclopædia Britannica Eleventh Edition article "GREAT REBELLION" Sections "4. Battle of Edgehill" and "59. The Crowning Mercy
^ Williams, Mark; Forrest, Stephen Paul (2010). Constructing the Past: Writing Irish History, 1600-1800. Boydell & Brewer. p. 160. ISBN 9781843835738. 
^ Kenyon & Ohlmeyer, p.306.
^ Parker, Geoffrey (2003). Empire, War and Faith in Early Modern Europe, p.281.
^ Kenyon & Ohlmeyer, p.320.
^ Worden, Blair (1977). The Rump Parliament (Cambridge University Press), ISBN 0-521-29213-1, ch.16–17.
^ Abbott, p.643
^ Abbott, p.642-643.
^ "Charles Worsley". British Civil Wars Project. Retrieved 6 August 2017. 
^ Roots 1989, pp. 8–27.
^ Woolrych, Austin (1982). Commonwealth to Protectorate (Clarendon Press), ISBN 0-19-822659-4, ch.5–10.
^ Gaunt, p.155.
^ Gaunt, p.156.
^ A History of Britain – The Stuarts. Ladybird. 1991. ISBN 0-7214-3370-7. 
^ Hirst, Derek (1990). "The Lord Protector, 1653–8", in Morrill, p.172.
^ Quoted in Hirst, p.127.
^ "Cromwell, At the Opening of Parliament Under the Protectorate (1654)". Strecorsoc.org. Retrieved 27 November 2008. 
^ "First Anglo-Dutch War". British Civil Wars project. Retrieved 6 August 2017. 
^ Fischer, David Hackett (1991) [1989]. "The South of England to Virginia: Distressed Cavaliers and Indentured Servants, 1642–75". Albion's Seed: Four British Folkways in America. Oxford: Oxford University Press. pp. 219–220. ISBN 9780195069051. 
^ Roots 1989, pp.41–56.
^ Aylmer, G.E., Rebellion or Revolution? England 1640-1660, Oxford and New York, 1990 Oxford University Paperback, p.169.
^ Hirst, p.173.
^ Durston, Christopher (1998). The Fall of Cromwell's Major-Generals in English Historical Review 1998 113(450): pp.18–37, ISSN 0013-8266 .
^ Hirst, p.137.
^ Coulton, Barbara. "Cromwell and the 'readmission' of the Jews to England, 1656" (PDF). The Cromwell Association. Lancaster University. Retrieved 23 April 2017. 
^ Carlyle, Thomas, Oliver Cromwell's Letters and Speeches with Elucidations, London, Chapman and Hall Ltd, 1897, pp.109-113 and 114-115
^ Morrill, John (editor), Oliver Cromwell and the English Revolution, 1990, pp.137-138, 190, and 211-213.
^ Manganiello, Stephen, The Concise Encyclopedia of the Revolutions and Wars of England, Scotland and Ireland, 1639-1660, Scarecrow Press, 2004, 613 p., ISBN 9780810851009, p. 539.
^ Roots 1989, p.128.
^ Worden, Blair (1985). "Oliver Cromwell and the sin of Achan", in Beales, D. and Best, G. (eds.) History, Society and the Churches, ISBN 0-521-02189-8, pp.141–145.
^ Masson, p. 354
^ McMains 2015, p. 75.
^ Gaunt, p.204.
^ Rutt 1828, pp. 516–530.
^ a b "Cromwell's head". Cambridge County Council. 2010. Archived from the original on 11 March 2010. Retrieved 5 July 2016. 
^ "MONCK, George (1608-70), of Potheridge, Merton, Devon. - History of Parliament Online". Retrieved 30 July 2016. 
^ Staff. "Roundhead on the Pike", Time magazine, 6 May 1957
^ Terri Schlichenmeyer (21 August 2007). "Missing body parts of famous people". CNN. Retrieved 27 November 2008. 
^ Gaunt, p.4.
^ a b Larson, Frances (August 2014). "Severance Package". Readings. Harper's Magazine. Harper's Magazine Foundation. 329 (1971): 22–5. 
^ Pepys, Samuel. The Diary of Samuel Pepys: Diary entries from October 1664. Thursday 13 October 1664. Retrieved 4 August 2017. When I told him of what I found writ in a French book of one Monsieur Sorbiere, that gives an account of his observations herein England; among other things he says, that it is reported that Cromwell did, in his life-time, transpose many of the bodies of the Kings of England from one grave to another, and that by that means it is not known certainly whether the head that is now set up upon a post be that of Cromwell, or of one of the Kings... 
^ Gaunt, Peter (1996). Oliver Cromwell. Massachusetts: Blackwell Publishers Inc. p. 4.  |access-date= requires |url= (help)
^ "Westminster Abbey reveals Cromwell's original grave". Westminster Abbey. Retrieved 29 July 2011. 
^ "Westminster Abbey site: Oliver Cromwell". 
^ Morrill, John (1990). "Cromwell and his contemporaries", in Morrill, pp.263–4.
^ Morrill, pp.271–2.
^ "RPO - John Milton : Sonnet XVI: To the Lord General Cromwell". Tspace.library.utoronto.ca. Retrieved 2015-10-28. 
^ Morrill, pp. 279–81.
^ a b Gaunt, p.9.
^ Worden, Blair (2001). Roundhead Reputations: The English Civil Wars and the Passions of Posterity (Penguin), ISBN 0-14-100694-3, pp. 53–59
^ "The Life and Eccentricities of the late Dr. Monsey, F.R.S, physician to the Royal Hospital at Chelsea", printed by J.D. Dewick, Aldergate street, 1804, p.108
^ Carlyle, Thomas (December 1843). Oliver Cromwell's Letters and Speeches (PDF). 
^ Gardiner (1901), p.315.
^ Worden, pp.256–260.
^ Gardiner (1901), p.318.
^ Morrill, John (1990). "Textualising and Contextualising Cromwell". Historical Journal. 33 (3): 629–39. 
^ Woolrych, Austin (1990). "The Cromwellian Protectorate: a Military Dictatorship?" in History 1990 75(244): 207–31, ISSN 0018-2648.
^ Morrill (2004). "Cromwell, Oliver (1599–1658)", in Oxford Dictionary of National Biography, (Oxford University Press) Oxforddnb.com; Worden, Blair (1985). "Oliver Cromwell and the sin of Achan". In Beales, D. and Best, G., History, Society and the Churches; Davis, J.C. (1990). "Cromwell’s religion", in Morrill, John (ed.), Oliver Cromwell and the English Revolution (Longman).
^ Hahn, Harold H. Ships of the American Revolution and their Models. Pp. 74–101. Naval Institute Press, Annapolis Maryland, 2000.
^ "Death of Sir Richard Tangye". New York Times. 15 October 1906. Retrieved 5 June 2010. 
^ "War websites". Channel4. Retrieved 5 June 2010. 
^ "Greater Manchester Photographic Memories". Francis Frith. Archived from the original on 11 January 2012. Retrieved 29 July 2011. 
^ "Oliver Cromwell". Public Monument and Sculpture Association. Archived from the original on 9 February 2012. Retrieved 12 January 2012. 
^ Moss, John. "Manchester during the Reformation, Oliver Cromwell & the English Civil Wars". Manchester2002-uk.com. Archived from the original on 23 May 2011. Retrieved 29 July 2011. 
^ "STATUE OF OLIVER CROMWELL". Hansard.millbanksystems.com. 25 April 1899. Retrieved 29 July 2011. 
^ "The Cromwell Statue at Westminster – Icons of England". Icons.org.uk. Archived from the original on 14 March 2009. Retrieved 29 July 2011. 
^ Kenneth Rose, King George V, New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1984, p. 160-1. The King also vetoed the name HMS "Pitt" as sailors might give the ship a nickname based on its rhyming with a "vulgar and ill-conditioned word".
^ "Cromwell Mark I". On war. Retrieved 6 August 2017. 
^ National Railway Museum (May 2004). "Oliver Cromwell on the move again!" (Press release). Archived from the original on 18 January 2009. Retrieved 13 April 2008. 
^ Historic England, "Statue of Oliver Cromwell, Market Hill (1161588)", National Heritage List for England (NHLE), retrieved 5 February 2016 
^ Historic England, "Statue of Oliver Cromwell, Bridge Street (1139417)", National Heritage List for England (NHLE), retrieved 18 February 2016 
^ Comerford, Patrick (6 July 2009). "Is Cromwell's head buried in Sidney Sussex Chapel?". Patrick Comerford: my thoughts on Anglicanism, theology, spirituality, history, architecture, travel, poetry and beach walks. Retrieved 16 July 2014. 


References[edit]

Adamson, John (1990), "Oliver Cromwell and the Long Parliament", in Morrill, John, Oliver Cromwell and the English Revolution, Longman, ISBN 0-582-01675-4 
Adamson, John (1987), "The English Nobility and the Projected Settlement of 1647", Historical Journal, 30 (3) 
BBC staff (3 October 2014), "The Execution of Charles I", BBC Radio 4—This Sceptred Isle—The Execution of Charles I., BBC Radio 4, retrieved 4 November 2007 
Carlyle, Thomas, ed. (1845), Oliver Cromwell's letters and speeches, with elucidations (1904 ed.)  — "All five volumes (1872)" (PDF).  (40.2 MB);
Churchill, Winston (1956), A History of English Speaking Peoples:, Dodd, Mead & Company, p. 314 
Coward, Barry (1991), Oliver Cromwell, Pearson Education, ISBN 978-0582553859 
Coward, Barry (2003), The Stuart Age: England, 1603–1714, Longman, ISBN 0-582-77251-6 
Durston, Christopher (1998), "The Fall of Cromwell's Major-Generals (CXIII (450))", English Historical Review, pp. 18–37, doi:10.1093/ehr/CXIII.450.18, ISSN 0013-8266  (subscription required)
Gardiner, Samuel Rawson (1886), History of the Great Civil War, 1642–1649, Longmans, Green, and Company 
Gardiner, Samuel Rawson (1901), Oliver Cromwell, ISBN 1-4179-4961-9 
Gaunt, Peter (1996), Oliver Cromwell, Blackwell, ISBN 0-631-18356-6 
Hirst, Derek (1990), "The Lord Protector, 1653-8", in Morrill, John, Oliver Cromwell and the English Revolution, Longman, ISBN 0-582-01675-4 
Jendrysik, mark (2007), Explaining the English Revolution: Hobbes and His Contemporaries, Lexington, ISBN 978-0739121818 
Kenyon, John; Ohlmeyer, Jane, eds. (2000), The Civil Wars: A Military History of England, Scotland, and Ireland 1638–1660, Oxford University Press, ISBN 0-19-280278-X 
Kishlansky, Mark (1990), "Saye What?", Historical Journal, 33 (4) 
Lenihan, Padraig (2000), Confederate Catholics at War, Cork University Press, ISBN 1-85918-244-5 
Lenihan, Padraig (2007), Consolidating Conquest: Ireland 1603-1727 (Longman History of Ireland), Routledge, ISBN 978-0582772175 
Macaulay, James (1891), Cromwell Anecdotes, London: Hodder 
McMains, H.F. (2015), The Death of Oliver Cromwell, University Press of Kentucky, p. 75, ISBN 978-0-8131-5910-2 
Masson, David (1877), The Life of John Milton: 1654-1660, 5 (7 volumes ed.), pp. ,354 
Morrill, John (1990), "Cromwell and his contemporaries", in Morrill, John, Oliver Cromwell and the English Revolution, Longman, ISBN 0-582-01675-4 
Morrill, John (1990), "The Making of Oliver Cromwell", in Morrill, John, Oliver Cromwell and the English Revolution, Longman, ISBN 0-582-01675-4 
Morrill, John; Baker, Phillip (2008), "Oliver Cromwell, the Regicide and the Sons of Zeruiah", in Smith, David Lee, Cromwell and the Interregnum: The Essential Readings, John Wiley & Sons, ISBN 1405143142 
Noble, Mark (1784), Memoirs of the Protectorate-house of Cromwell: Deduced from an Early Period, and Continued Down to the Present Time,..., 2, Printed by Pearson and Rollason 
O'Siochru, Micheal (2008), God's Executioner, Oliver Cromwell and the Conquest of Ireland, Faber and Faber, ISBN 978-0-571-24121-7 
Roots, Ivan (1989), Speeches of Oliver Cromwell, Everyman classics, ISBN 0-460-01254-1 
Rutt, John Towill, ed. (1828), "Cromwell's death and funeral order", Diary of Thomas Burton esq, April 1657 – February 1658, Institute of Historical Research, 2, pp. 516–530, retrieved 8 November 2011 
Sharp, David (2003), Oliver Cromwell, Heinemann, p. 60, ISBN 978-0-435-32756-9 
Woolrych, Austin (1982), Commonwealth to Protectorate, Clarendon Press, ISBN 0-19-822659-4 
Woolrych, Austin (1990), "Cromwell as a soldier", in Morrill, John, Oliver Cromwell and the English Revolution, Longman, ISBN 0-582-01675-4 
Woolrych, Austin (1987), Soldiers and Statesmen: the General Council of the Army and its Debates, Clarendon Press, ISBN 0-19-822752-3 
Worden, Blair (1985), "Oliver Cromwell and the sin of Achan", in Beales, D.; Best, G., History, Society and the Churches, ISBN 0-521-02189-8 
Worden, Blair (1977), The Rump Parliament, Cambridge University Press, ISBN 0-521-29213-1 
Worden, Blair (2000), "Thomas Carlyle and Oliver Cromwell", Proceedings Of The British Academy, 105: 131–170, ISSN 0068-1202 
Young, Peter; Holmes, Richard (2000), The English Civil War, Wordsworth, ISBN 1-84022-222-0 

Further reading[edit]
Biographical[edit]

Adamson, John (1990). "Oliver Cromwell and the Long Parliament", in Morrill, John (ed.), Oliver Cromwell and the English Revolution Longman, ISBN 0-582-01675-4
Ashley, Maurice (1958). The Greatness of Oliver Cromwell Macmillan. online
Ashley, Maurice (1969) Cromwell excerpts from primary and secondary sources online
Bennett, Martyn. Oliver Cromwell (2006), ISBN 0-415-31922-6
Boyer, Richard E., ed. Oliver Cromwell and the Puritan revolt; failure of a man or a faith? (1966) excerpts from primary and secondary sources. online
Clifford, Alan (1999). Oliver Cromwell: the lessons and legacy of the Protectorate Charenton Reformed Publishing, ISBN 0-9526716-2-X. Religious study.
Davis, J. C. (2001). Oliver Cromwell Hodder Arnold, ISBN 0-340-73118-4
Firth, C.H. (1900). Oliver Cromwell and the Rule of the Puritans online edition ISBN 1-4021-4474-1; classic older biography
Fraser, Antonia (1973). Cromwell, Our Chief of Men, and Cromwell: the Lord Protector Phoenix Press, ISBN 0-7538-1331-9. Popular narrative. online
Gardiner, Samuel Rawson (1901). Oliver Cromwell, ISBN 1-4179-4961-9. Classic older biography. online
Gaunt, Peter (1996). Oliver Cromwell Blackwell, ISBN 0-631-18356-6. Short biography.
Hill, Christopher (1970). God's Englishman: Oliver Cromwell And The English Revolution Dial Press, ISBN 0-297-00043-8. online
Hirst, Derek (1990). "The Lord Protector, 1653-8", in Morrill, John (ed.), Oliver Cromwell and the English Revolution Longman, ISBN 0-582-01675-4
Kerlau, Yann (1989) "Cromwell", Perrin/France
Mason, James and Angela Leonard (1998). Oliver Cromwell Longman, ISBN 0-582-29734-6
McKeiver, Philip (2007). "A New History of Cromwell's Irish Campaign", Advance Press, Manchester, ISBN 978-0-9554663-0-4
Morrill, John (May 2008) [2004]. "Cromwell, Oliver (1599–1658)". Oxford Dictionary of National Biography (online ed.). Oxford University Press. doi:10.1093/ref:odnb/6765.  (Subscription or UK public library membership required.)
Morrill, John (1990). "The Making of Oliver Cromwell", in Morrill, John (ed.), Oliver Cromwell and the English Revolution Longman, ISBN 0-582-01675-4.
Paul, Robert (1958). The Lord Protector: Religion And Politics In The Life Of Oliver Cromwell
Smith, David (ed.) (2003). Oliver Cromwell and the Interregnum Blackwell, ISBN 0-631-22725-3
Wedgwood, C.V. (1939). Oliver Cromwell Duckworth, ISBN 0-7156-0656-5
Worden, Blair (1985). "Oliver Cromwell and the sin of Achan", in Beales, D. and Best, G. (eds.) History, Society and the Churches, ISBN 0-521-02189-8

Military studies[edit]

Durston, Christopher (2000). "'Settling the Hearts and Quieting the Minds of All Good People': the Major-generals and the Puritan Minorities of Interregnum England", in History 2000 85(278): pp. 247–267, ISSN 0018-2648 . Full text online at Ebsco.
Durston, Christopher (1998). "The Fall of Cromwell's Major-Generals", in English Historical Review 1998 113(450): pp. 18–37, ISSN 0013-8266
Firth, C.H. (1921). Cromwell's Army Greenhill Books, ISBN 1-85367-120-7 online
Gillingham, J. (1976). Portrait of a Soldier: Cromwell Weidenfeld & Nicholson, ISBN 0-297-77148-5
Kenyon, John & Ohlmeyer, Jane (eds.) (2000). The Civil Wars: A Military History of England, Scotland, and Ireland 1638–1660 Oxford University Press, ISBN 0-19-280278-X
Kitson, Frank (2004). Old Ironsides: The Military Biography of Oliver Cromwell Weidenfeld Military, ISBN 0-297-84688-4
Marshall, Alan (2004). Oliver Cromwell: Soldier: The Military Life of a Revolutionary at War Brassey's, ISBN 1-85753-343-7
McKeiver, Philip (2007). "A New History of Cromwell's Irish Campaign", Advance Press, Manchester, ISBN 978-0-9554663-0-4
Woolrych, Austin (1990). "The Cromwellian Protectorate: a Military Dictatorship?" in History 1990 75(244): 207–231, doi:10.1111/j.1468-229X.1990.tb01515.x. Full text online at Wiley Online Library.
Woolrych, Austin (1990). "Cromwell as a soldier", in Morrill, John (ed.), Oliver Cromwell and the English Revolution Longman, ISBN 0-582-01675-4
Young, Peter and Holmes, Richard (2000). The English Civil War, Wordsworth, ISBN 1-84022-222-0

Surveys of era[edit]

Coward, Barry (2002). The Cromwellian Protectorate Manchester University Press, ISBN 0-7190-4317-4
Coward, Barry and Peter Gaunt. (2017). The Stuart Age: England, 1603–1714, 5th edition, Longman, ISBN 113894954X. Survey of political history of the era.
Davies, Godfrey (1959). The Early Stuarts, 1603–1660 Oxford University Press, ISBN 0-19-821704-8. Political, religious, and diplomatic overview of the era.
Korr, Charles P. (1975). Cromwell and the New Model Foreign Policy: England's Policy toward France, 1649–1658 University of California Press, ISBN 0-520-02281-5
Macinnes, Allan (2005). The British Revolution, 1629–1660 Palgrave Macmillan, ISBN 0-333-59750-8
Morrill, John (1990). "Cromwell and his contemporaries". In Morrill, John (ed.), Oliver Cromwell and the English Revolution Longman, ISBN 0-582-01675-4
Trevor-Roper, Hugh (1967). Oliver Cromwell and his Parliaments, in his Religion, the Reformation and Social Change Macmillan. "online" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 2 September 2008.  (256 KB)
Venning, Timothy (1995). Cromwellian Foreign Policy Palgrave Macmillan, ISBN 0-333-63388-1
Woolrych, Austin (1982). Commonwealth to Protectorate Clarendon Press, ISBN 0-19-822659-4
Woolrych, Austin (2002). Britain in Revolution 1625–1660 Oxford University Press, ISBN 978-0-19-927268-6

Primary sources[edit]

Abbott, W.C. (ed.) (1937–1947). Writings and Speeches of Oliver Cromwell, 4 vols. The standard academic reference for Cromwell's own words. Questia.com.
Carlyle, Thomas (ed.) (1904 edition), Oliver Cromwell's letters and speeches, with elucidations. "Gasl.org" (PDF).  (40.2 MB);
Haykin, Michael A. G. (ed.) (1999). To Honour God: The Spirituality of Oliver Cromwell Joshua Press, ISBN 1-894400-03-8. Excerpts from Cromwell's religious writings.
Morrill, John, et al. (eds.). Writings and Speeches of Oliver Cromwell: A New Critical Edition, 5 vols. (projected). A new edition of Cromwell's writings, currently in progress. ("A New Critical Edition of the Writings and Speeches of Oliver Cromwell". Archived from the original on 14 April 2014. Retrieved 13 April 2014. )
Roots, Ivan (1989). Speeches of Oliver Cromwell. Everyman classics. ISBN 0-460-01254-1. 

Historiography[edit]

Davis, J. C. Oliver Cromwell (2001). 243 pp; a biographical study that covers sources and historiography
Gaunt, Peter. "The Reputation of Oliver Cromwell in the 19th century", Parliamentary History, Oct 2009, Vol. 28 Issue 3, pp 425–428
Hardacre, Paul H. "Writings on Oliver Cromwell since 1929", in Elizabeth Chapin Furber, ed. Changing views on British history: essays on historical writing since 1939 (Harvard University Press, 1966), pp 141–59
Lunger Knoppers, Laura. Constructing Cromwell: Ceremony, Portrait and Print, 1645–1661 (2000), shows how people compared Cromwell to King Ahab, King David, Elijah, Gideon and Moses, as well as Brutus and Julius Caesar.
Mills, Jane, ed. Cromwell's Legacy (Manchester University Press, 2012) online review by Timothy Cooke
Morrill, John. "Rewriting Cromwell: A Case of Deafening Silences". Canadian Journal of History 2003 38(3): 553–578. ISSN 0008-4107 Fulltext: Ebsco
Morrill, John (1990). "Textualizing and Contextualizing Cromwell", in Historical Journal 1990 33(3): pp. 629–639. ISSN 0018-246X. Full text online at JSTOR. Examines the Carlyle and Abbott editions.
Worden, Blair. "Thomas Carlyle and Oliver Cromwell", in Proceedings Of The British Academy(2000) 105: pp. 131–170. ISSN 0068-1202.
Worden, Blair. Roundhead Reputations: the English Civil Wars and the passions of posterity (2001), 387 pp.; ISBN 0-14-100694-3.

External links[edit]

Find more aboutOliver Cromwellat Wikipedia's sister projects

Media from Wikimedia Commons
News from Wikinews
Quotations from Wikiquote
Texts from Wikisource



The Perfect Politician: Or, a Full View of the Life and Actions (Military and Civil) of O. Cromwell, 1660 A digitised copy by John Geraghty
Well established informational website about Oliver Cromwell.
The Oliver Cromwell Project at the University of Cambridge
Oliver Cromwell World History Database
Oliver Cromwell and the English Revolution—In Honor of Christopher Hill 1912–2003
The Cromwell Association
The Cromwell Museum in Huntingdon
Chronology of Oliver Cromwell World History Database
Biography at the British Civil Wars & Commonwealth website
London Gazette report on the trial and execution of Charles I
London Gazette report on the death of Oliver Cromwell
Works by Oliver Cromwell at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) 
Works by or about Oliver Cromwell in libraries (WorldCat catalog)
"Archival material relating to Oliver Cromwell". UK National Archives. 
Works by or about Oliver Cromwell at Internet Archive
Vallely, Paul. The Big Question: Was Cromwell a revolutionary hero or a genocidal war criminal?, The Independent 4 September 2008.
The Cromwellian Catastrophe in Ireland:an Historiographical Analysis (an overview of writings/writers on the subject by Jameel Hampton pub. Gateway An Academic Journal on the Web: Spring 2003 PDF)
An Interview with a conservator from the Library of Congress who conserved a document that bears the signature of Oliver Cromwell
Cromwell (1970) at IMDb



Parliament of England


Preceded by
Arthur Mainwaring
John Goldsborough
Member of Parliament for Huntingdon
1628–1629
With: James Montagu
Vacant
Parliament suspended until 1640
Title next held by
Robert Bernard


Vacant
Parliament suspended since 1629
Title last held by
Thomas Purchase
Member of Parliament for Cambridge
1640–1653
With: Thomas Meautys 1640
John Lowry 1640–1653
Vacant
Not represented in Barebones Parliament
Title next held by
Richard Timbs


Military offices


Preceded by
Thomas Fairfax
Captain General and Commander-in-Chief of the Forces
1650–1653
Succeeded by
Office vacant
(next held by George Monck)


Political offices


Council of State
Lord Protector of England, Scotland and Ireland
16 December 1653 – 3 September 1658
Succeeded by
Richard Cromwell


Academic offices


Preceded by
Earl of Pembroke
Chancellor of the University of Oxford
1650–1653
Succeeded by
Richard Cromwell








v
t
e


English monarchs



Anglo-Saxon England
927–1066



Æthelstan1
Edmund I1
Eadred1
Eadwig1
Edgar1
Edward the Martyr
Æthelred the Unready
Sweyn
Edmund Ironside
Cnut1
Harold Harefoot
Harthacnut
Edward the Confessor
Harold Godwinson
Edgar Ætheling





Kingdom of England
1066–1649



William I
William II
Henry I
Stephen
Matilda
Henry II2
Henry the Young King
Richard I
John2
Louis
Henry III2
Edward I2
Edward II2
Edward III2
Richard II2
Henry IV2
Henry V2
Henry VI2
Edward IV2
Edward V2
Richard III2
Henry VII2
Henry VIII2
Edward VI2
Jane2
Mary I2 with Philip2
Elizabeth I2
James I3
Charles I3





Commonwealth of
England, Scotland and Ireland
1653–1659



Oliver Cromwell4
Richard Cromwell4





Kingdom of England
1660–1707



Charles II3
James II3
William III and Mary II3
Anne3








1Overlord of Britain
2Also ruler of Ireland
3Also ruler of Scotland and Ireland
4Lord Protector


Debatable or disputed rulers are in italics.









Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 34498004
LCCN: n80067079
ISNI: 0000 0001 2100 5431
GND: 118522841
SELIBR: 182934
SUDOC: 027428974
BNF: cb121696507 (data)
ULAN: 500287104
NDL: 00620539
NKC: jn20000700339
BNE: XX898107
IATH: w6nc5zdc











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Oliver_Cromwell&oldid=818525820"					Categories: Oliver Cromwell1599 births1658 deaths16th-century English people17th-century English PuritansAlumni of Sidney Sussex College, CambridgeAnti-Catholicism in IrelandAnti-Catholicism in the United KingdomChancellors of the University of OxfordCromwellian IrelandDeaths from malariaEnglish CongregationalistsEnglish farmersEnglish generalsEnglish revolutionariesHeads of state of EnglandEnglish people of Welsh descentLeaders who took power by coupMembers of the Parliament of England (pre-1707)People from HuntingdonRegicides of Charles IPeople convicted under a bill of attainderPersecution of CatholicsRoundheadsCromwell familyPeople from Ely, CambridgeshireEnglish MPs 1628–1629English MPs 1640 (April)English MPs 1640–1648English MPs 1648–1653English MPs 1653 (Barebones)Critics of the Catholic ChurchLords Protector of EnglandHidden categories: Pages containing links to subscription-only contentCS1 maint: Extra text: authors listPages using citations with accessdate and no URLWebarchive template wayback linksAll articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrasesArticles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from March 2015Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the ODNBArticles with LibriVox linksArticles with Internet Archive linksUse dmy dates from October 2012Use British English from October 2012Wikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with SELIBR identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersWikipedia articles with ULAN identifiersWikipedia articles with SNAC-ID identifiers