This article is about the process of ordaining clergy. For other uses, see Ordination (disambiguation).
Ordination is the process by which individuals are consecrated, that is, set apart as clergy to perform various religious rites and ceremonies. The process and ceremonies of ordination vary by religion and denomination. One who is in preparation for, or who is undergoing the process of ordination is sometimes called an ordinand. The liturgy used at an ordination is sometimes referred to as an ordination.



Contents


1 Buddhism

1.1 Mahayana
1.2 Theravada
1.3 Fully ordained nuns
1.4 Posthumous ordination
1.5 New Kadampa Tradition


2 Christianity

2.1 Roman Catholic, Orthodox, and Anglican churches

2.1.1 Details peculiar to the various denominations
2.1.2 Notes


2.2 Protestantism
2.3 Non-denominational
2.4 Jehovah's Witnesses
2.5 The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints


3 Islam
4 Judaism
5 Unitarian Universalism
6 Wicca
7 Ordination of women

7.1 In Christianity
7.2 In Judaism


8 Ordination of homosexual, bisexual and transgender people
9 See also
10 References
11 External links



Buddhism[edit]




Novitiate Buddhist ordination


Main article: Vinaya
The tradition of the ordained monastic community (sangha) began with the Buddha, who established orders of monks and later of nuns. The procedure of ordination in Buddhism is laid down in the Vinaya and Patimokkha or Pratimoksha scriptures. There exist three intact ordination lineages nowadays in which one can receive an ordination according to the Buddha's teachings:[citation needed]

Dharmaguptaka Lineage
Mulasarvastivadin Lineage
Theravada Lineage

Mahayana[edit]
Main article: Mahayana Buddhism
Saicho repeatedly requested that the Japanese government allow the construction of a Mahayana ordination platform. Permission was granted in 822 CE, seven days after Saicho died. The platform was finished in 827 CE at Enryaku-ji temple on Mount Hiei, and was the first in Japan. Prior to this, those wishing to become monks/nuns were ordained using the Hinayana precepts, whereas after the Mahayana ordination platform, people were ordained with the Bodhisattva precepts as listed in the Brahma Net Sutra.[1]
Theravada[edit]
Main articles: Sangha § Ordination process, Bhikkhu, Bhikkhuni, Theravada § Ordination, and Pabbajja
Pabbajja is an ordination procedure for novice Buddhist monks in the Theravada tradition.
Fully ordained nuns[edit]
The legitimacy of fully ordained nuns (bhikkhuni/bhiksuni) has become a significant topic of discussion in recent years. Texts passed down in every Buddhist tradition record that Gautama Buddha created an order of fully ordained nuns, but the tradition has died out in some Buddhist traditions such as Theravada Buddhism, while remaining strong in others such as Chinese Buddhism (Dharmaguptaka lineage). In the Tibetan lineage, which follows the Mulasarvastivadin lineage, the lineage of fully ordained nuns was not brought to Tibet by the Indian Vinaya masters, hence there is no rite for the ordination of full nuns. However th 14th Dalai Lama has endeavored for many years to improve this situation.[2] In 2005, he asked fully ordained nuns in the Dharmaguptaka lineage, especially Jampa Tsedroen, to form a committee to work for the acceptance of the bhiksuni lineage within the Tibetan tradition,[2] and donated €50,000 for further research. The "1st International Congress on Buddhist Women’s Role in the Sangha: Bhikshuni Vinaya and Ordination Lineages" was held at the University of Hamburg from July 18–20, 2007, in cooperation with the University’s Asia-Africa Institute. Although the general tenor was that full ordination was overdue, the Dalai Lama presented a pre-drafted statement[3] saying that more time was required to reach a decision, thus nullifying the intentions of the congress.
Posthumous ordination[edit]
In Medieval Sōtō Zen, a tradition of posthumous ordination was developed to give the laity access to Zen funeral rites. Chinese Ch’an monastic codes, from which Japanese Sōtō practices were derived, contain only monastic funeral rites; there were no provisions made for funerals for lay believers. To solve this problem, the Sōtō school developed the practice of ordaining laypeople after death, thus allowing monastic funeral rites to be used for them as well.[4]
New Kadampa Tradition[edit]
Main article: New Kadampa Tradition § Ordination






The neutrality of this section is disputed. Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page. Please do not remove this message until conditions to do so are met. (November 2015) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



The Buddhist ordination tradition of the New Kadampa Tradition-International Kadampa Buddhist Union (NKT-IKBU) is not the traditional Buddhist ordination, but rather one newly created by Kelsang Gyatso. Although those ordained within this organisation are called 'monks' and 'nuns' within the organisation, and wear the robes of traditional Tibetan monks and nuns, in terms of traditional Buddhism they are neither fully ordained monks and nuns (Skt.: bhikshu, bhikshuni; Tib.: gelong, gelongma) nor are they novice monks and nuns (Skt.: sramanera, srameneri; Tib.: gestul, getsulma).[5][6][7][8][9][10][11]
Unlike most other Buddhist traditions, including all Tibetan Buddhist schools, which follow the Vinaya, the NKT-IKBU ordination consists of the Five Precepts of a lay person, plus five more precepts created by Kelsang Gyatso. He is said to view them as a “practical condensation” of the 253 Vinaya vows of fully ordained monks.[5]
There are also no formal instructions and guidelines for the behaviour of monks and nuns within the NKT. Because the behaviour of monks and nuns is not clearly defined “each Resident Teacher developed his or her own way of ‘disciplining’ monks and nuns at their centres …”.[12]
Kelsang Gyatso's ordination has been publicly criticised by Geshe Tashi Tsering as going against the core teachings of Buddhism and against the teachings of Tsongkhapa, the founder of the Gelugpa school from which Kelsang Gyatso was expelled[6][13][14][15][16]
Christianity[edit]
Roman Catholic, Orthodox, and Anglican churches[edit]
Main article: Holy Orders




Ordination of a Catholic priest (pre-1968 form of the Roman Rite).


Ordination is one of the seven sacraments, variously called holy orders or cheirotonia ("Laying on of Hands").
Apostolic succession is considered an essential and necessary concept for ordination, in the belief that all ordained clergy are ordained by bishops who were ordained by other bishops tracing back to bishops ordained by the Apostles who were ordained by Christ, the great High Priest (Hebrews 7:26, Hebrews 8:2), who conferred his priesthood upon his Apostles (John 20:21–23, Matthew 28:19–20, Mark 16:15–18, and Acts 2:33).[17]
There are three "degrees" of ordination (or holy orders): deacon, presbyter, and bishop. Both bishops and presbyters are priests and have authority to celebrate the Eucharist. In common use, however, the term priest, when unqualified, refers to the rank of presbyter, whereas presbyter is mainly used in rites of ordination and other places where a technical and precise term is required.
Ordination of a bishop is performed by several bishops; ordination of a priest or deacon is performed by a single bishop. The ordination of a new bishop is also called a consecration. Many ancient sources specify that at least three bishops are necessary to consecrate another, e.g., the 13th Canon of the Council of Carthage (AD 394) states, "A bishop should not be ordained except by many bishops, but if there should be necessity he may be ordained by three,"[18] and the first of "The Canons of the Holy and Altogether August Apostles" states, "Let a bishop be ordained by two or three bishops," while the second canon thereof states, "Let a presbyter, deacon, and the rest of the clergy, be ordained by one bishop";[19] the latter canons, whatever their origin, were imposed on the universal church by the Seventh Ecumenical Council, the Second Council of Nicaea, in its first canon.[20]
Only a person ordained to the priesthood may administer certain sacraments (most especially, hear confessions, serve as the ordinary minister of giving the host during Communion, anointing the sick- unction, presiding at Requiem or Memorial services or religious marriages involving a Mass, or celebrating any Mass- the Eucharist).




Ordination of an Orthodox priest. The deacon being ordained is kneeling with the bishop's omophorion over his head and is being blessed by the bishop straightway before the Cheirotonia.






Eastern Orthodox subdeacon being ordained to the diaconate. The bishop has placed his omophorion and right hand on the head of the candidate and is reading the Prayer of Cheirotonia.


Details peculiar to the various denominations[edit]
The Catholic Church teaches that one bishop is sufficient to consecrate a new bishop validly (that is, for an episcopal ordination actually to take place). In most Christian denominations that retain the practice of ordination, only an already ordained (consecrated) bishop or the equivalent may ordain bishops, priests, and deacons.[21] However, Canon Law requires that bishops always be consecrated with the mandate (approval) of the Roman Pontiff, as the guarantor of the Church's unity.[22] Moreover, at least three bishops are to perform the consecration, although the Apostolic See may dispense from this requirement in extraordinary circumstances (for example, in missionary settings or times of persecution).[23]
In the Roman Catholic Church, those deacons destined to be ordained priests are often termed transitional deacons; those deacons who are married before being ordained, as well as any unmarried deacons who chose not to be ordained priests, are called permanent deacons. Those married deacons who become widowers have the possibility of seeking ordination to the priesthood in exceptional cases.[24]
While some Eastern churches have in the past recognized Anglican ordinations as valid,[25] the current Anglican practice, in many provinces, of ordaining women to the priesthood—and, in some cases, to the episcopate—has caused the Orthodox generally to question earlier declarations of validity and hopes for union.[26] The Roman Catholic Church has never recognized Anglican orders as valid.[27] Anglicanism recognizes Roman Catholic and Orthodox ordinations; hence, clergy converting to Anglicanism are not "re-ordained".
Some Eastern Orthodox churches recognize Roman Catholic ordinations while others "re-ordain" Roman Catholic clergy (as well as Anglicans) who convert. However, both the Roman Catholic and Anglican churches recognize Orthodox ordinations.
In the Roman Catholic and Anglican churches, ordinations have traditionally been held on Ember Days, though there is no limit to the number of clergy who may be ordained at the same service. In the Eastern Orthodox Church, ordinations may be performed any day of the year on which the Divine Liturgy may be celebrated (and deacons may also be ordained at the Presanctified Liturgy), but only one person may be ordained to each rank at any given service, that is, at most one bishop, one presbyter, and one deacon may be ordained at the same liturgy.[28]
Notes[edit]

There have long existed orders of clergy below that of deacon. In the Eastern Orthodox and Oriental Orthodox churches (and, until 1970, in the Roman Catholic Church), a person has to be tonsured a cleric and be ordained to sundry minor orders prior to being ordained a deacon. Although a person may be said to be ordained to these orders, such ordinations are not reckoned as part of the sacrament of Holy Orders; in the Eastern Orthodox, the term Cheirothesia ("imposition of hands")[28] is used for such ordinations in contrast to Cheirotonia ("laying on of hands") for ordinations of deacons, presbyters, and bishops.
The following are positions that are not acquired by ordination:

Becoming a monk or nun or, generally, a member of a religious order, which is open to men and women; men in religious orders may or may not be ordained. Anglican nuns may, like their male counterparts, be ordained as well.
Offices and titles such as pope, patriarch, archbishop, archpriest, archimandrite, archdeacon, etc., which are given to ordained persons for sundry reasons, e.g., to rank them or honor them.
Cardinals are simply a large collegiate body who are electors of and the senior-most counselors to the Pope, and are not a fourth order beyond bishop. At presently nearly all cardinals are bishops, although several are priests, having been granted a dispensation from being ordained a bishop by the Pope (most of these were elevated by the Pope for services to the Church, and are over 80, thus not having the right to elect a pope or have active voting memberships in Vatican departments). As recently as 1899 there was a cardinal who was a deacon when he died, having been a cardinal for 41 years (Teodolfo Mertel). There have even been noble lay men, or men who only possessed minor orders (now called ministries, and carried out by seminarians and laypeople) who at one time were made cardinals. Cardinals are considered princes in diplomatic protocol and by the Church, and even if they are not ordained bishops and cannot perform episcopal functions such as ordination, they have both real and ceremonial precedence over all non-cardinal patriarchs, archbishops, and bishops. Some have discussed the possibility in Catholicism of having women serve as cardinals or, more realistically in the short-term, as sub-deacons, since they cannot be ordained[citation needed].


In the Church of England, the priest of the diocese who oversees the process of discernment, selection and training of ordinands is usually called the "Diocesan Director of Ordinands", commonly shortened to "DDO".

Protestantism[edit]




A Presbyterian ordinand making his ordination vows.


In most Protestant churches, ordination to the pastoral office is the rite by which their various churches:

recognize and confirm that an individual has been called by God to ministry,
acknowledges that the individual has gone through a period of discernment and training related to this call, and
authorizes that individual to take on the office of ministry.

For the sake of authorization and church order, and not for reason of 'powers' or 'ability', individuals in most mainline Protestant churches must be ordained in order to preside at the sacraments (Baptism, Holy Absolution and Holy Communion), and to be installed as a called pastor of a congregation or parish.
Some Protestant traditions have additional offices of ministry to which persons can be ordained. For instance:

most Presbyterian and Reformed churches maintain a threefold order of ministry of pastor, elder, and deacon. The order of Pastor, the only one of the three orders considered "clergy", is comparable to most other denominations' pastoral office or ordained ministry. The order of elder comprises lay persons ordained to the ministries of church order and spiritual care (for example, elders form the governing bodies of congregations and are responsible for a congregation's worship life). The order of deacon comprises lay persons ordained to ministries of service and pastoral care.
in the Methodist tradition, deacons are also ordained.[29]

For most Protestant denominations that have an office of bishop, such as Lutheranism and Methodism, this is not viewed as a separate ordination or order of ministry. Rather, bishops are ordained ministers of the same order as other pastors, simply having been "consecrated" or installed into the "office" (that is, the job) of bishop. However, some Lutheran churches also have valid apostolic succession.[citation needed]
Some Protestant Churches – especially Pentecostal and Charismatic ones – also have an informal tier of ministers. Those who graduate from a Bible College or take a year of prescribed courses are Licensed Ministers. Two more years of courses or graduation from a seminary or theological graduate school, as well as an exam by senior ministers, will result in one becoming an Ordained Minister. Licensed ministers are addressed as "Minister" and ordained ministers as "Reverend."
Non-denominational[edit]
In Christianity, the term non-denominational refers to those churches that have not formally aligned themselves with an established denomination, or remain otherwise officially autonomous. This, however, does not preclude an identifiable standard among such congregations. Non-denominational congregations may establish a functional denomination by means of mutual recognition of or accountability to other congregations and leaders with commonly held doctrine, policy and worship without formalizing external direction or oversight in such matters. Some non-denominational churches explicitly reject the idea of a formalized denominational structure as a matter of principle, holding that each congregation must be autonomous.
Non-denominational is generally used to refer to one of two forms of independence: political or theological. That is, the independence may come about because of a religious disagreement or political disagreement. This causes some confusion in understanding. Some churches say they are non-denominational because they have no central headquarters (though they may have affiliations with other congregations.) Other churches say they are non-denominational because their belief structures are unique.
Members of non-denominational churches often consider themselves simply "Christians". However, the acceptance of any particular stance on a doctrine or practice (for example, on baptism), about which there is not general unanimity among churches or professing Christians, may be said to establish a de facto credal identity. In essence, this would mean that each non-denominational church forms its own unofficial "denomination" with a specific set of tenets as defined by the beliefs and practices of its own congregation.
Jehovah's Witnesses[edit]
Jehovah's Witnesses consider an adherent's baptism to constitute ordination as a minister.[30] Governments have generally recognized that Jehovah's Witnesses' full-time appointees (such as their "regular pioneers") qualify as ministers[31] regardless of sex or appointment as an elder or deacon ("ministerial servant"). The religion asserts ecclesiastical privilege only for its appointed elders,[32][33] but the religion permits any baptized adult male in good standing to officiate at a baptism, wedding, or funeral.[34]
The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints[edit]
Main article: Priesthood (Latter Day Saints)
In The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, a rite of ordination is performed to bestow either the Aaronic or Melchizedek priesthood (Hebrews 5:4–6) upon a worthy male member. As in the Anglican, Roman Catholic and Orthodox traditions, great care is taken to assure that the candidate for priesthood is ordained by those with proper authority and ordained properly and validly; thorough records of priesthood ordination are kept by the church. Ordination is performed by the laying on of hands. Ordination to the office of priest in the Aaronic priesthood gives the ordained person the authority to:

baptize converts and children over the age of 8 into the church
bless and administer the sacrament (the Lord's Supper)
participate in, or perform, ordinations of others to the Aaronic Priesthood or its offices
collect fast offerings for the Bishop (usually ordained Deacons and Teachers perform this)

Ordination to the Melchizedek priesthood includes the authority to perform all the duties of the Aaronic priesthood, as well as ordain others to the Melchizedek or Aaronic priesthood, perform confirmations, bless and anoint the sick with oil, bless and dedicate graves, and other such rites. There are five offices within the Melchizedek Priesthood to which one could potentially be ordained:

Elder
High Priest
Patriarch
Seventy
Apostle

"Ordination to an office in the Aaronic Priesthood is done by or under the direction of the bishop or branch president. Ordination to an office in the Melchizedek Priesthood is done by or under the direction of the stake or mission president. To perform a priesthood ordination, one or more authorized priesthood holders place their hands lightly on the person’s head."[35]
Latter-day Saints believe in a line of priesthood authority that traces back to Jesus Christ and his apostles. LDS adherents believe the church's founder, Joseph Smith, was ordained under the hands of apostles Peter, James, and John, who appeared to Smith as angelic messengers in 1829.[36]
Islam[edit]
Main articles: Islam, Muslim, and Women as imams
Muslims do not formally ordain religious leaders. Ordination is viewed as a distinct aspect of other religions and is rejected. Islam does not have a formal and separated clergy.
Religious leaders are usually called Imams or Sheikhs or Maulana. The title Imam (when used outside the historic Shi'ite context) refers to someone who leads in prayer and can also be used in a linguistic sense for anyone who leads other Muslims in congregational prayers. Sheikh is an Arabic word meaning "old man" and is used as an honorable title for a learned man; Shaikhah refers to a woman learned in Islamic issues. This title is usually more prevalent in the Arabic countries. The word Maulana is a title bestowed upon students who have graduated from a Madrasah (Islamic theological school) throughout the Indian subcontinent region. Although different Muslim schools, universities or madrasas might follow different graduation ceremonies upon a student's completion of a 4-year B.A. of Islamic Studies or a 7–8 Alim Course, these ceremonies do not in any way symbolize ordination.
Judaism[edit]
Main article: Semikhah
Semikhah (Hebrew: סמיכה‎, "leaning [of the hands]"), also semichut (Hebrew: סמיכות‎, "ordination"), or semicha lerabanim (Hebrew: סמיכה לרבנות‎, "rabbinical ordination") is derived from a Hebrew word which means to "rely on" or "to be authorized". It generally refers to the ordination of a rabbi or hazzan within Judaism. While the Hebrew word semikhah is rendered as "ordination" in English, a rabbi is a teacher of Torah, not a priest. For example, for many religious purposes such as prayer a minyan (quorum) of ten people (men or adults in different streams of Judaism) is both necessary and sufficient; it is said that "nine rabbis do not constitute a minyan, but ten cobblers can"[37]—the presence of a rabbi is not necessary.
Unitarian Universalism[edit]
As Unitarian Universalism features very few doctrinal thresholds for prospective congregation members, ordinations of UU ministers are considerably less focused upon doctrinal adherence than upon factors such as possessing a Masters of Divinity degree from an accredited higher institution of education and an ability to articulate an understanding of ethics, spirituality and humanity.
In the Unitarian Universalist Association, candidates for "ministerial fellowship" are approved by Ministerial Fellowship Committee (MFC). However, individual congregations of the UUA possess final voting rights on ordination of ministers, and congregations may sometimes even hire or ordain ministers who have not received ministerial fellowship.
Wicca[edit]
In the Neo-Pagan religion of Wicca, a person's initiation is regarded as an induction and ordination as a priestess or priest. The rites which a person undergoes to become a priestess or priest, and the education and years of study required differ according to denomination.
Ordination of women[edit]
Main article: Ordination of women
The ordination of women is often a controversial issue in religions where either the office of ordination, or the role that an ordained person fulfills, is traditionally restricted to men, for various theological reasons.
In Christianity[edit]
Main article: Ordination of women § Christianity
The Christian priesthood has traditionally been reserved to men. Some[who?] claim that women were ordained deacons in the first millennium of Christianity, but their claims are disputed. After the Protestant Reformation and the loosening of authority structures within many denominations, most Protestant groups re-envisioned the role of the ordained priesthood. Many did away with it altogether. Others altered it in fundamental ways, often favoring a rabbinical-type married minister of teaching (word) and discarding any notion of a sacrificial priesthood. A common epithet used by Protestants (especially Anglicans) against Catholics was that Catholics were a 'priest-ridden' people. Hatred for priests was a common element of anti-Catholicism and pogroms against Catholics focused on expelling, killing, or forcefully 'laicizing' priests.[citation needed]
Beginning in the twentieth century, many Protestant denominations began re-evaluating the roles of women in their churches. Many now ordain women.[citation needed] A woman named Deborah was a judge of the ancient Israelites according to the biblical book of Judges. Based partially upon this precedent, other Protestant and non-denominational organizations grant ordination to women. Other denominations refute the claim of a precedent based on Deborah's example because she is not specifically described as ruling over Israel, rather giving judgments on contentious issues in private, not teaching publicly,[38] neither did she lead the military.[39][40] Her message to her fellow judge Barak in fact affirmed the male leadership of Israel.[41][42] The United Church of Canada has ordained women since 1932. The Evangelical Lutheran Church in America ordains women as pastors, and women are eligible for election as bishops. The Episcopal Church in the United States of America ordains women as deacons, priests and bishops. The Lutheran Evangelical Protestant Church ordains women at all levels including deacon, priest and bishop. Other denominations leave the decision to ordain women to the regional governing body, or even to the congregation itself; these include the Christian Reformed Church in North America and the Evangelical Presbyterian Church. The ordination of women in the latter half of the 20th century was an important issue between Anglicans and Catholics since the Catholic Church viewed the ordination of women as a huge obstacle to possible rapprochement between the two churches.[citation needed]
The Catholic Church has not changed its view or practice on the ordination or women, and neither have any of the Orthodox churches; these churches represent approximately 65% of all Christians worldwide. In response to the growing call for the ordination of women, Pope John Paul II issued the statement Ordinatio Sacerdotalis in 1995. In it, he gave reasons why women cannot be ordained, and defined that the Holy Spirit had not conferred the power to ordain women upon the Church. In the wake of this definitive statement, many theologians considered the issue settled, but many continue to push for the ordination of women in the Catholic Church. Some have even begun protest churches.[citation needed]
In Judaism[edit]
Main article: Women in Judaism
Policy regarding the ordination of women differs among the different denominations of Judaism. Most Orthodox congregations do not allow female rabbis, while more liberal congregations began allowing female rabbis by the middle of the twentieth century.
Ordination of homosexual, bisexual and transgender people[edit]
Main article: Ordination of LGBT Christian clergy
Most Abrahamic religions condemn homosexuality; only recently have a minority of denominational or non-denominational sects of Christianity and Judaism endorsed the ordination of openly LGBT people.
The United Church of Christ ordained openly gay Bill Johnson in 1972, and lesbian Anne Holmes in 1977.[43]
While Buddhist ordinations of monks have occurred, the more notable ordinations of openly LGBT novitiates have taken place in Western Buddhism.
See also[edit]

Fellowship Of Vocation
Ordination exams

References[edit]


^ Mahayana Ordination Platform "Soka Gakkai Dictionary of Buddhism."
^ a b A New Possibility
^ Statement of His Holiness the Dalai Lama on Bhikshuni Ordination in the Tibetan Tradition
^ William M. Bodiford, Soto Zen in Medieval Japan (Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press, 1993), 195–96.
^ a b http://info-buddhism.com/new_kadampa_tradition.html#Ordination
^ a b http://buddhism-controversy-blog.com/?s=ordination
^ http://www.accesstoinsight.org/tipitaka/vin/
^ http://www.budsas.org/ebud/whatbudbeliev/148.htm
^ http://www.rigpawiki.org/index.php?title=Fully_ordained_monk
^ http://www.rigpawiki.org/index.php?title=Pratimoksha_vows
^ http://www.rigpawiki.org/index.php?title=Gelong
^ Realising the Guru’s Intention: Hungry Humans and Awkward Animals in a New Kadampa Tradition community by Carol McQuire, in Spiritual and Visionary Communities – Out to Save the World, Ashgate Publishing, 2013, pp. 72–73
^ Expulsion letter: http://info-buddhismus.de/200514.pdf
^ http://buddhism-controversy-blog.com/2016/01/02/did-geshe-kelsang-gyatso-lie-when-he-claimed-that-he-didnt-receive-teachings-from-h-h-the-14th-dalai-lama/
^ https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JhckkxSgQ8g
^ https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OKZK6DAzKto
^ [1] "The Orthodox Faith — The Sacrament of the Holy Priesthood", Retrieved 2011-08-03
^ [2], "Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers — The Seven Ecumenical Councils, p641", Retrieved 2011-08-03
^ [3], "Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers — The Seven Ecumenical Councils, p839", Retrieved 2011-08-03
^ [4], "Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers — The Seven Ecumenical Councils, P790", Retrieved 2011-08-03
^ Pius XII. "Episcopali consecrationis". Retrieved 20 September 2013. Episcopalis Consecrationis Ministrum esse Episcopum et ad huius Consecrationis validitatem unum solum sufficere Episcopum, qui cum debita mentis intentione essentiales ritus perficiat, extra omne dubium est diuturnaque praxi comprobatum. [That the minister of episcopal consecration is a bishop, and that only one bishop–who performs the act with the necessary intention of the mind performs the essential rites—is necessary for the validity of that consecration, is proved beyond all doubt and by long practice.] 
^ "Code of Canon Law – IntraText". Code of Canon Law. Canon 1014. No bishop is permitted to consecrate anyone a bishop unless it is first evident that there is a pontifical mandate. 
^ "Code of Canon Law – IntraText". Code of Canon Law. Canon 1014. Unless the Apostolic See has granted a dispensation, the principal bishop consecrator in an episcopal consecration is to be joined by at least two consecrating bishops; it is especially appropriate, however, that all the bishops present consecrate the elect together with the bishops mentioned. 
^ National Directory for the Formation, Ministry, and Life of Permanent Deacons in the United States (PDF). Chapter 2, No. 77: United States Conference of Catholic Bishops. p. 37. 
^ "Orthodox Statements on Anglican Orders"
^ [5]"Unity Faith and Order – Dialogues – Anglican Orthodox," Introduction, par. 2 ("From Moscow to Lambeth (1976–8)
^ Leo XII. "Apostolicae Curae". Retrieved 20 September 2013. 
^ a b Sokolof, Archpriest Dimitrii (1899), Manual of the Orthodox Church's Divine Services, Jordanville, New York: Holy Trinity Monastery (published 2001), pp. 132–136, ISBN 0-88465-067-7 
^ Order of Service: Ordination of a Deacon and Ordination of a Minister of the Word, Uniting Church in Australia
^ "Beliefs—Membership and Organization", Authorized Site of the Office of Public Information of Jehovah's Witnesses, As Retrieved 2009-09-01, "Jehovah's Witnesses have no clergy-laity division. All baptized members are ordained ministers"
^ For example, the U.S. Supreme Court case Dickinson v. United States found that Dickinson should have been considered a minister by his draft board because of his ordination by baptism as a Jehovah's Witness and his continued service as a Jehovah's Witness "pioneer". Online
^ "Russian Federation Federal Law", Chapter 1, Article 3, Paragraph 7, as cited by Authorized Site of the Office of Public Information of Jehovah's Witnesses, As Retrieved 2009-09-01, "Ecclesiastical privilege is protected by the law. A clergyman may not be prosecuted for refusal to testify on circumstances that became known to him during confession."
^ "Who Are Jehovah's Witnesses?", Authorized Site of the Office of Public Information of Jehovah's Witnesses, As Retrieved 2009-09-01, "Who Are Jehovah's Witnesses?...The worldwide organization is directed by an unpaid, ecclesiastical governing body serving at the international offices in Brooklyn, New York."
^ "Question Box", Our Kingdom Ministry, November 1973, page 8, "Weddings and funerals may be conducted by any dedicated, baptized brother as permitted by law."
^ Duties and Blessings of the Priesthood Part B Lesson 5>
^ "Melchizedek Priesthood", Bible Dictionary, KJV (LDS), LDS Church, 1979, archived from the original on August 28, 2013 
^ Temple Israel Chrnicle, January 2009, p3
^ Judges 4:5
^ Judges 4:6, 10, 14
^ Grudem, Wayne (2004). Evangelical Feminism and Biblical Truth: An Analysis of more than 100 Disputed Questions. Sisters, Oregon: Multnomah Publishers, Inc. p. 864. ISBN 1-57673-840-X. 
^ Judges 4:6–7 & 14
^ Grudem, Wayne (2004). Evangelical Feminism and Biblical Truth: An Analysis of more than 100 Disputed Questions. Sisters, Oregon: Multnomah Publishers, Inc. p. 864. ISBN 1-57673-840-X. 
^ http://www.ucc.org/about-us/old-firsts.html


External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Ordination.



J. Frederick, 2001 "What Presbyterians Believe about ordination", Presbyterians Today, May 2001
Lutheran Evangelical Protestant Church (LEPC)







v
t
e


Religion








Major religious groups and religious denominations







Abrahamic




Judaism



Orthodox

Haredi
Hasidic
Modern


Conservative
Reform
Karaite
Reconstructionist
Renewal
Humanistic
Haymanot





Christianity



Catholicism

Eastern Catholic Churches


Eastern Christianity

Church of the East

Assyrian Church of the East


Eastern Orthodoxy
Oriental Orthodoxy

Ethiopian Orthodoxy




Independent Catholicism

Old Catholicism


Protestantism

Adventism
Anabaptism
Anglicanism
Baptists
Calvinism

Presbyterianism
Congregationalism
Continental Reformed


Lutheranism
Methodism
Pentecostalism
Evangelicalism


Nontrinitarianism

Jehovah's Witnesses
Mormonism
Jesuism


Nondenominational





Islam



Sunni

Hanafi
Maliki
Hanbali
Shafi'i


Shia

Twelver
Isma'ilism
Zaidiyyah


Ahmadi
Ibadi
Non-denominational
Quranism
Zahirism
Salafism

Wahhabism
Ahl al-Hadith


Mahdavia
European Islam
Nation of Islam





Others



Bábism

Azáli Bábism
Bahá'í Faith


Druze
Mandaeism
Rastafari
Samaritanism








Dharmic




Hinduism



Vaishnavism
Shaktism
Shaivism
Ayyavazhi
Smartism
Balinese





Buddhism



Mahayana

Chan

Zen
Thiền
Seon


Pure Land
Nichiren
Madhyamaka
Tiantai


Theravada
Vajrayana

Tibetan
Shingon
Newar
Bon


Navayana





Others



Dravidian
Jainism

Digambara
Śvētāmbara


Sikhism
Gurung shamanism
Bon Lamaism
Kirant Mundhum








Persian



Manichaeism
Yazdânism

Yazidism
Ishikism
Ali-Illahism
Yarsanism


Zoroastrianism





European



Armenian
Baltic

Dievturība
Druwi
Romuva


Caucasian
Celtic

Druidry


Germanic
Hellenism
Italo-Roman
Romanian
Slavic





Uralic



Finnish
Hungarian
Uralic

Mari
Mordvin
Udmurt







Central and
Northern Asian



Burkhanism
Chuvash
Manchu
Mongolian
Siberian
Tengrism





East Asian



Benzhuism
Bimoism
Bon
Cheondoism
Confucianism
Dongbaism
Faism
Hmongism
Jeungsanism
Luoism
Meishanism
Mileism
Muism
Neo-Confucianism
Ryukyuan religion
Shenism
Shigongism
Shinto
Taoism
Tenrikyo
Wuism
Yiguandao





Southeast Asian



Burmese
Satsana Phi
Malaysian
Indonesian

Marapu
Kaharingan
Kebatinan


Philippine
Vietnamese

Caodaism
Đạo Mẫu
Hoahaoism







African




Traditional



Akan
Akamba
Baluba
Bantu
Berber
Bushongo
Cushitic
Dinka
Efik
Fon and Ewe
Guanche
Igbo
Isoko
Lotuko
Lozi
Lugbara
Maasai
Mbuti
San
Serer
Tumbuka
Waaq
Yoruba
Zulu





Diasporic



Candomblé
Kumina
Obeah
Quimbanda
Palo
Santería
Umbanda
Vodou
Voodoo
Winti








Other groups



Bathouism
Bongthingism
Donyi-Polo
Kiratism
Sanamahism
Sarnaism
Aboriginal Australian
Native American
Mesoamerican
Hawaiian
Polynesian





Recent



Discordianism
Eckankar
Jediism
New Age
New Thought
Pastafarianism
Raëlism
Satanism
Scientology
Thelema
Unitarian Universalism
Wicca
















Historical religions







Prehistoric



Paleolithic





Near East



Arabian
Egyptian
Mesopotamian
Semitic

Canaanite
Yahwism







Indo-European




Asia



Proto-Indo-Iranian
Armenian
Ossetian
Vedic
Zoroastrianism

Mithraism
Zurvanism


Gnosticism

Manichaeism







Europe



Celtic
Germanic

Anglo-Saxon
Continental
Norse


Greek

Gnosticism
Neoplatonism


Manichaeism
Balkan
Roman
Slavic



















Topics







Aspects



Apostasy / Disaffiliation
Behaviour
Beliefs
Clergy
Conversion
Deities
Entheogens
Ethnic religion
Denomination
Faith
Fire
Folk religion
God
Meditation
Monasticism

monk
nun


Mysticism
Mythology
Nature
Ordination
Orthodoxy
Orthopraxy
Prayer
Religious experience
Ritual

liturgy
sacrifice


Spirituality
Supernatural
Symbols
Truth
Water
Worship





Theism



Animism
Deism
Dualism
Henotheism
Monotheism
Nontheism
Panentheism
Pantheism
Polytheism
Transtheism





Religious studies



Anthropology
Cognitive science
Comparative
Development
Evolutionary origin
Evolutionary psychology
History
Philosophy
Neurotheology
Psychology
Sociology
Theology
Theories
Women






Religion and
society




Agriculture
Business
Clergy

monasticism
ordination


Conversion

evangelism
missionary
proselytism


Education
Fanaticism
Freedom

pluralism
syncretism
toleration
universalism


Fundamentalism
Growth
Happiness
Homosexuality
Minorities
National church
National religiosity levels
Religiocentrism
Political science
Populations
Schism
Science
State
Theocracy
Vegetarianism
Video games
Violence

persecution
terrorism
war


Wealth






Secularism and
irreligion




Antireligion
Deism
Agnosticism
Atheism
Criticism
LaVeyan Satanism
Deconstruction
Humanistic Judaism
Irreligion by country
Objectivism
Secular humanism
Secular theology
Secularization
Separation of church and state
Unaffiliated






Overviews
and lists




Index
Outline
Timeline
Abrahamic prophets
Deification
Deities
Founders
Mass gatherings
New religious movements
Organizations
Religions and spiritual traditions
Scholars














Category
Portal











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ordination&oldid=796025688"					Categories: Buddhist monasticismChristian ordinationReligious terminologyEcclesiologyReligious behaviour and experienceRites of passageHidden categories: All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from August 2011NPOV disputes from November 2015All NPOV disputesArticles with unsourced statements from October 2015Articles with unsourced statements from December 2011Articles containing Hebrew-language textAll articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrasesArticles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from May 2013Articles with unsourced statements from May 2013