For other uses, see Ore (disambiguation).






This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (September 2014) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)







Iron ore (banded iron formation)






Manganese ore – psilomelane (size: 6.7 × 5.8 × 5.1 cm)






Lead ore – galena and anglesite (size: 4.8 × 4.0 × 3.0 cm)






Gold ore (size: 7.5 × 6.1 × 4.1 cm)






Cart for carrying ore from a mine on display at the Historic Archive and Museum of Mining in Pachuca, Mexico


An ore is a type of rock that contains sufficient minerals with important elements including metals that can be economically extracted from the rock.[1] The ores are extracted from the earth through mining; they are then refined (often via smelting) to extract the valuable element, or elements.
The grade or concentration of an ore mineral, or metal, as well as its form of occurrence, will directly affect the costs associated with mining the ore. The cost of extraction must thus be weighed against the metal value contained in the rock to determine what ore can be processed and what ore is of too low a grade to be worth mining. Metal ores are generally oxides, sulfides, silicates, or "native" metals (such as native copper) that are not commonly concentrated in the Earth's crust, or "noble" metals (not usually forming compounds) such as gold. The ores must be processed to extract the metals of interest from the waste rock and from the ore minerals. Ore bodies are formed by a variety of geological processes. The process of ore formation is called ore genesis.



Contents


1 Ore deposits

1.1 Classification

1.1.1 Hydrothermal epigenetic deposits
1.1.2 Granite related hydrothermal
1.1.3 Magmatic deposits
1.1.4 Volcanic-related deposits
1.1.5 Metamorphically reworked deposits
1.1.6 Carbonatite-alkaline igneous related
1.1.7 Sedimentary deposits
1.1.8 Sedimentary hydrothermal deposits
1.1.9 Astrobleme-related ores




2 Extraction
3 Trade
4 Important ore minerals
5 See also
6 References
7 Further reading



Ore deposits[edit]
Main article: Mineral resource classification
An ore deposit is an accumulation of ore. This is distinct from a mineral resource as defined by the mineral resource classification criteria. An ore deposit is one occurrence of a particular ore type. Most ore deposits are named according to their location (for example, the Witswatersrand, South Africa), or after a discoverer (e.g. the kambalda nickel shoots are named after drillers), or after some whimsy, a historical figure, a prominent person, something from mythology (phoenix, kraken, serepentleopard, etc.) or the code name of the resource company which found it (e.g. MKD-5 is the in-house name for the Mount Keith nickel ).
Classification[edit]
Main article: Ore genesis
Ore deposits are classified according to various criteria developed via the study of economic geology, or ore genesis. The classifications below are typical.
Hydrothermal epigenetic deposits[edit]

Mesothermal lode gold deposits, typified by the Golden Mile, Kalgoorlie
Archaean conglomerate hosted gold-uranium deposits, typified by Elliot Lake, Canada and Witwatersrand, South Africa
Carlin–type gold deposits, including;
Epithermal stockwork vein deposits

Granite related hydrothermal[edit]

IOCG or iron oxide copper gold deposits, typified by the supergiant Olympic Dam Cu-Au-U deposit
Porphyry copper +/- gold +/- molybdenum +/- silver deposits
Intrusive-related copper-gold +/- (tin-tungsten), typified by the Tombstone, Arizona deposits
Hydromagmatic magnetite iron ore deposits and skarns
Skarn ore deposits of copper, lead, zinc, tungsten, etcetera

Magmatic deposits[edit]

Magmatic nickel-copper-iron-PGE deposits including

Cumulate vanadiferous or platinum-bearing magnetite or chromite
Cumulate hard-rock titanium (ilmenite) deposits
Komatiite hosted Ni-Cu-PGE deposits
Subvolcanic feeder subtype, typified by Noril'sk-Talnakh and the Thompson Belt, Canada
Intrusive-related Ni-Cu-PGE, typified by Voisey's Bay, Canada and Jinchuan, China


Lateritic nickel ore deposits, examples include Goro and Acoje, (Philippines) and Ravensthorpe, Western Australia.

Volcanic-related deposits[edit]

Volcanic hosted massive sulfide (VHMS) Cu-Pb-Zn including;

Examples include Teutonic Bore and Golden Grove, Western Australia

Besshi type
Kuroko type





Metamorphically reworked deposits[edit]

Podiform serpentinite-hosted paramagmatic iron oxide-chromite deposits, typified by Savage River, Tasmania iron ore, Coobina chromite deposit
Broken Hill Type Pb-Zn-Ag, considered to be a class of reworked SEDEX deposits

Carbonatite-alkaline igneous related[edit]

Phosphorus-tantalite-vermiculite (Phalaborwa South Africa)
Rare earth elements – Mount Weld, Australia and Bayan Obo, Mongolia
Diatreme hosted diamond in kimberlite, lamproite or lamprophyre

Sedimentary deposits[edit]




Magnified view of banded iron formation specimen from Upper Michigan. Scale bar is 5.0 mm.



Banded iron formation iron ore deposits, including

Channel-iron deposits or pisolite type iron ore


Heavy mineral sands ore deposits and other sand dune hosted deposits
Alluvial gold, diamond, tin, platinum or black sand deposits
Alluvial oxide zinc deposit type: sole example Skorpion Zinc

Sedimentary hydrothermal deposits[edit]

SEDEX

Lead-zinc-silver, typified by Red Dog, McArthur River, Mount Isa, etc.
Stratiform arkose-hosted and shale-hosted copper, typified by the Zambian copperbelt.
Stratiform tungsten, typified by the Erzgebirge deposits, Czechoslovakia
Exhalative spilite-chert hosted gold deposits


Mississippi valley type (MVT) zinc-lead deposits
Hematite iron ore deposits of altered banded iron formation

Astrobleme-related ores[edit]

Sudbury Basin nickel and copper, Ontario, Canada

Extraction[edit]




Some ore deposits in the world






Some additional ore deposits in the world


Main article: mining
The basic extraction of ore deposits follows these steps:

Prospecting or exploration to find and then define the extent and value of ore where it is located ("ore body")
Conduct resource estimation to mathematically estimate the size and grade of the deposit
Conduct a pre-feasibility study to determine the theoretical economics of the ore deposit. This identifies, early on, whether further investment in estimation and engineering studies is warranted and identifies key risks and areas for further work.
Conduct a feasibility study to evaluate the financial viability, technical and financial risks and robustness of the project and make a decision as whether to develop or walk away from a proposed mine project. This includes mine planning to evaluate the economically recoverable portion of the deposit, the metallurgy and ore recoverability, marketability and payability of the ore concentrates, engineering, milling and infrastructure costs, finance and equity requirements and a cradle to grave analysis of the possible mine, from the initial excavation all the way through to reclamation.
Development to create access to an ore body and building of mine plant and equipment
The operation of the mine in an active sense
Reclamation to make land where a mine had been suitable for future use

Trade[edit]
Ores (metals) are traded internationally and comprise a sizeable portion of international trade in raw materials both in value and volume. This is because the worldwide distribution of ores is unequal and dislocated from locations of peak demand and from smelting infrastructure.
Most base metals (copper, lead, zinc, nickel) are traded internationally on the London Metal Exchange, with smaller stockpiles and metals exchanges monitored by the COMEX and NYMEX exchanges in the United States and the Shanghai Futures Exchange in China.
Iron ore is traded between customer and producer, though various benchmark prices are set quarterly between the major mining conglomerates and the major consumers, and this sets the stage for smaller participants.
Other, lesser, commodities do not have international clearing houses and benchmark prices, with most prices negotiated between suppliers and customers one-on-one. This generally makes determining the price of ores of this nature opaque and difficult. Such metals include lithium, niobium-tantalum, bismuth, antimony and rare earths. Most of these commodities are also dominated by one or two major suppliers with >60% of the world's reserves. The London Metal Exchange aims to add uranium to its list of metals on warrant.
The World Bank reports that China was the top importer of ores and metals in 2005 followed by the US and Japan.[citation needed]
Important ore minerals[edit]


Acanthite (cooled polymorph of Argentite): Ag2S for production of silver
Barite: BaSO4
Bauxite Al(OH)3 and AlOOH, dried to Al2O3 for production of aluminium
Beryl: Be3Al2(SiO3)6
Bornite: Cu5FeS4
Cassiterite: SnO2
Chalcocite: Cu2S for production of copper
Chalcopyrite: CuFeS2
Chromite: (Fe, Mg)Cr2O4 for production of chromium
Cinnabar: HgS for production of mercury
Cobaltite: (Co, Fe)AsS
Columbite-Tantalite or Coltan: (Fe, Mn)(Nb, Ta)2O6
Dolomite: CaMg(CO3)2
Galena: PbS
Native gold: Au, typically associated with quartz or as placer deposits
Hematite: Fe2O3
Ilmenite: FeTiO3
Magnetite: Fe3O4
Malachite: Cu2CO3(OH)2
Molybdenite: MoS2
Pentlandite:(Fe, Ni)9S8
Pyrolusite:MnO2
Scheelite: CaWO4
Sperrylite: PtAs2 for production of platinum
Sphalerite: ZnS
Uraninite (pitchblende): UO2 for production of metallic uranium
Wolframite: (Fe, Mn)WO4


See also[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Ore.



Economic geology
Mineral resource classification
Ore genesis
Petrology
Froth Flotation
Extractive metallurgy (ore processing)

References[edit]



^ Guilbert, John M. and Charles F. Park, Jr. (1986) The Geology of Ore Deposits, W. H. Freeman, p. 1. ISBN 0-7167-1456-6



Further reading[edit]
DILL, H.G. (2010) The “chessboard” classification scheme of mineral deposits: Mineralogy and geology from aluminum to zirconium, Earth-Science Reviews, Volume 100, Issue 1-4, June 2010, Pages 1-420






v
t
e


Ore minerals, mineral mixtures and ore deposits



Ores




Oxides



Cassiterite (tin)
Chromite (chromium)
Coltan (niobium and tantalum)
Columbite (niobium)
Hematite (iron)
Ilmenite (titanium)
Magnetite (iron)
Pyrolusite (manganese)
Tantalite (tantalum)
Uraninite (uranium)





Sulfides



Acanthite (silver)
Argentite (silver)
Bornite (copper)
Chalcopyrite (copper)
Chalcocite (copper)
Cinnabar (mercury)
Cobaltite (cobalt)
Galena (lead)
Molybdenite (molybdenum)
Pentlandite (nickel)
Sphalerite (zinc)





Carbonates



Dolomite (magnesium)
Magnesite (magnesium)
Malachite (copper)





Other



Baryte (barium)
Bauxite (aluminium)
Beryl (beryllium)
Sperrylite (platinum)
Scheelite (tungsten)
Wolframite (tungsten)








Deposit types



Banded iron formation
Carbonate-hosted lead-zinc
Heavy mineral sands
Iron oxide copper gold (IOCG)
Kambalda-type komatiitic nickel
Lateritic nickel
Magmatic nickel-copper-iron-PGE
Porphyry copper
Sedimentary exhalative (SedEx)
Uranium
Volcanogenic massive sulfide (VMS)









Authority control



GND: 4152966-2
NDL: 00566705











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ore&oldid=813897004"					Categories: Economic geologyMiningHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from September 2014All articles needing additional referencesAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from August 2009Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers