Not to be confused with United States of America.






It has been suggested that Executive Secretary for Integral Development be merged into this article. (Discuss) Proposed since April 2017.








Organization of American States

Organisation des États américains  (French)
Organização dos Estados Americanos  (Portuguese)
Organización de los Estados Americanos  (Spanish)










Flag



Seal






Motto: 
"Democracy for peace, security, and development"






Headquarters
Washington, D.C.


Official languages
Spanish
English
Portuguese
French


Demonym
American


Member states


35 states

 Antigua and Barbuda
 Argentina
 Bahamas
 Barbados
 Belize
 Bolivia
 Brazil
 Canada
 Chile
 Colombia
 Costa Rica
 Cuba
 Dominica
 Dominican Republic
 Ecuador
 El Salvador
 Grenada
 Guatemala
 Guyana
 Haiti
 Honduras
 Jamaica
 Mexico
 Nicaragua
 Panama
 Paraguay
 Peru
 Saint Kitts and Nevis
 Saint Lucia
 Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
 Suriname
 Trinidad and Tobago
 United States
 Uruguay
 Venezuela





Leaders



• Secretary General

 Luis Almagro



• Assistant Secretary General

 Nestor Mendez


Establishment



• Charter

30 April 1948


Area



• Total

40,275,678 km2 (15,550,526 sq mi)


Population



• 2008 estimate

980,457,921



• Density

24/km2 (62.2/sq mi)


Time zone
(UTC-10 to +0)



Website
oas.org



The Organization of American States (Spanish: Organización de los Estados Americanos, Portuguese: Organização dos Estados Americanos, French: Organisation des États américains), or the OAS or OEA, is a continental organization that was founded on 30 April 1948, for the purposes of regional solidarity and cooperation among its member states. Headquartered in the United States capital Washington, D.C.,[1] the OAS's members are the 35 independent states of the Americas.
As of 26 May 2015, the Secretary General of OAS is Luis Almagro.[2]



Contents


1 History
2 Goals and purpose
3 Organizational structure
4 General Assembly
5 Membership and adhesions

5.1 Notes
5.2 Canada and the OAS
5.3 Sanctions against the Dominican Republic
5.4 Status of Cuba
5.5 Suspension of Honduras (2009–2011)
5.6 Status of Venezuela
5.7 Permanent Observers


6 Official languages
7 See also
8 References
9 External links



History[edit]




The Pan American Union shortly after its construction in 1910


The notion of an international union in the New World was first put forward by Simón Bolívar[3] who, at the 1826 Congress of Panama (still being part of Colombia), proposed creating a league of American republics, with a common military, a mutual defense pact, and a supranational parliamentary assembly. This meeting was attended by representatives of Gran Colombia (comprising the modern-day countries of Colombia, Ecuador, Panama and Venezuela), Peru, Bolivia, The United Provinces of Central America, and Mexico but the grandly titled "Treaty of Union, League, and Perpetual Confederation" was ultimately ratified only by Gran Colombia. Bolívar's dream soon floundered with civil war in Gran Colombia, the disintegration of Central America, and the emergence of national rather than New World outlooks in the newly independent American republics. Bolívar's dream of American unity was meant to unify Hispanic American nations against external powers.
The pursuit of regional solidarity and cooperation again came to the forefront in 1889–1890, at the First International Conference of American States. Gathered together in Washington, D.C., 18 nations resolved to found the International Union of American Republics, served by a permanent secretariat called the Commercial Bureau of the American Republics (renamed the International Commercial Bureau at the Second International Conference in 1901–1902). These two bodies, in existence as of 14 April 1890, represent the point of inception to which the OAS and its General Secretariat trace their origins.
At the Fourth International Conference of American States (Buenos Aires, 1910), the name of the organization was changed to the Union of American Republics and the Bureau became the Pan American Union. The Pan American Union Building was constructed in 1910, on Constitution Avenue, Northwest, Washington, D.C.




Pan American Union headquarters building in Washington, D.C., 1943.


In the mid-1930s, U.S. President Franklin Delano Roosevelt organized an inter-American conference in Buenos Aires. One of the items at the conference was a "League of Nations of the Americas", an idea proposed by Colombia, Guatemala, and the Dominican Republic.[4] At the subsequent Inter-American Conference for the Maintenance of Peace, 21 nations pledged to remain neutral in the event of a conflict between any two members.[5] The experience of World War II convinced hemispheric governments that unilateral action could not ensure the territorial integrity of the American nations in the event of external aggression. To meet the challenges of global conflict in the postwar world and to contain conflicts within the hemisphere, they adopted a system of collective security, the Inter-American Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance (Rio Treaty) signed in 1947 in Rio de Janeiro.
The Ninth International Conference of American States was held in Bogotá between March and May 1948 and led by United States Secretary of State George Marshall, a meeting which led to a pledge by members to fight communism in the western hemisphere. This was the event that saw the birth of the OAS as it stands today, with the signature by 21 American countries of the Charter of the Organization of American States on 30 April 1948 (in effect since December 1951). The meeting also adopted the American Declaration of the Rights and Duties of Man, the world's first general human rights instrument.
The transition from the Pan American Union to OAS would have been smooth if it had not been for the assassination of Colombian leader Jorge Eliécer Gaitán. The Director General of the former, Alberto Lleras Camargo, became the Organization's first Secretary General. The current Secretary General is former Uruguayan minister of foreign affairs Luis Almagro.
Significant milestones in the history of the OAS since the signing of the Charter have included the following:

1959: Inter-American Commission on Human Rights created.
1959: Inter-American Development Bank created.
1960: First application of the Inter-American Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance against the regimen of Rafael Trujillo in Dominican Republic
1961: Charter of Punta del Este signed, launching the Alliance for Progress.
1962: OAS suspends Cuba.
1969: American Convention on Human Rights signed (in force since 1978).
1970: OAS General Assembly established as the Organization's supreme decision-making body.
1979: Inter-American Court of Human Rights created.
1991: Adoption of Resolution 1080, which requires the Secretary General to convene the Permanent Council within ten days of a coup d'état in any member country.
1994: First Summit of the Americas (Miami), which resolved to establish a Free Trade Area of the Americas by 2005.
2001: Inter-American Democratic Charter adopted.
2009: OAS revokes 1962 suspension of Cuba.
2009: OAS suspends Honduras due to the coup which ousted president Manuel Zelaya.
2011: OAS lifts the suspension of Honduras with the return of Manuel Zelaya from exile.
2017: Venezuela announces it will begin the process to leave the OAS in response to what it alleged was OAS interference in Venezuela's political crisis.

Goals and purpose[edit]
In the words of Article 1 of the Charter, the goal of the member nations in creating the OAS was "to achieve an order of peace and justice, to promote their solidarity, to strengthen their collaboration, and to defend their sovereignty, their territorial integrity, and their independence." Article 2 then defines eight essential purposes:

To strengthen the peace and security of the continent.
To promote and consolidate representative democracy, with due respect for the principle of nonintervention.
To prevent possible causes of difficulties and to ensure the pacific settlement of disputes that may arise among the member states.
To provide for common action on the part of those states in the event of aggression.
To seek the solution of political, judicial, and economic problems that may arise among them.
To promote, by cooperative action, their economic, social, and cultural development.
To eradicate extreme poverty, which constitutes an obstacle to the full democratic development of the peoples of the hemisphere.
To achieve an effective limitation of conventional weapons that will make it possible to devote the largest amount of resources to the economic and social development of the member states.

Over the course of the 1990s, with the end of the Cold War, the return to democracy in Latin America, and the thrust toward globalization, the OAS made major efforts to reinvent itself to fit the new context. Its stated priorities now include the following:

Strengthening democracy: Between 1962 and 2002, the Organization sent multinational observation missions to oversee free and fair elections in the member states on more than 100 occasions. The OAS also works to strengthen national and local government and electoral agencies, to promote democratic practices and values, and to help countries detect and defuse official corruption.
Working for peace: Special OAS missions have supported peace processes in Nicaragua, Suriname, Haiti, and Guatemala. The Organization has played a leading part in the removal of landmines deployed in member states and it has led negotiations to resolve the continents' remaining border disputes (Guatemala/Belize; Peru/Ecuador). Work is also underway on the construction of a common inter-American counter-terrorism front.
Defending human rights: The agencies of the inter-American human rights system provide a venue for the denunciation and resolution of human rights violations in individual cases. They also monitor and report on the general human rights situation in the member states.
Fostering free trade: The OAS is one of the three agencies currently engaged in drafting a treaty aiming to establish an inter-continental free trade area from Alaska to Tierra del Fuego.
Fighting the drugs trade: The Inter-American Drug Abuse Control Commission was established in 1986 to coordinate efforts and crossborder cooperation in this area.
Promoting sustainable development: The goal of the OAS's Inter-American Council for Integral Development is to promote economic development and combating poverty. OAS technical cooperation programs address such areas as river basin management, the conservation of biodiversity, preservation of cultural diversity, planning for global climate change, sustainable tourism, and natural disaster mitigation.

Organizational structure[edit]
The Organization of American States is composed of an Organization of American States General Secretariat, the Permanent Council, the Inter-American Council for Integral Development, and a number of committees.
The General Secretariat of the Organization of American States consists of six secretariats.

Secretariat for Political Affairs
Executive Secretariat for Integral Development
Secretariat for Multidimensional Security
Secretariat for Administration and Finance
Secretariat for Legal Affairs
Secretariat for External Relations

The various committees of the Organization of American States include:

The Committee on Juridical and Political Affairs
The Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Affairs
The Committee on Hemispheric Security
The Committee on Inter-American Summits Management and Civil Society Participation in OAS Activities

General Assembly[edit]




A session of the OAS's thirty-fifth General Assembly in Fort Lauderdale, Florida, United States, June 2005.


Main article: General Assembly of the Organization of American States
The General Assembly is the supreme decision-making body of OAS. It convenes once every year in a regular session. In special circumstances, and with the approval of two-thirds of the member states, the Permanent Council can convene special sessions.
The Organization's member states take turns hosting the General Assembly on a rotating basis. The states are represented at its sessions by their chosen delegates: generally, their ministers of foreign affairs, or their appointed deputies. Each state has one vote, and most matters—except for those for which the Charter or the General Assembly's own rules of procedure specifically require a two-thirds majority—are settled by a simple majority vote.
The General Assembly's powers include setting the OAS's general course and policies by means of resolutions and declarations; approving its budget and determining the contributions payable by the member states; approving the reports and previous year's actions of the OAS's specialized agencies; and electing members to serve on those agencies.
Membership and adhesions[edit]
See also: Member states of the Organization of American States




Exclusive Economic Zones of the member states of the OAS. Considering them, the total area of the OAS reaches the 76 857 956 km². Thus, the largest regional organization in the world.


All 35 independent nations of the Americas are members of the OAS. Upon foundation on 5 May 1948, there were 21 members:


 Argentina
 Bolivia
 Brazil
 Chile
 Colombia
 Costa Rica
 Cuba[Note 1]
 Dominican Republic
 Ecuador
 El Salvador
 Guatemala
 Haiti
 Honduras[Note 2]
 Mexico
 Nicaragua
 Panama
 Paraguay
 Peru
 United States
 Uruguay
 Venezuela


The later expansion of the OAS included Canada and the newly independent nations of the Caribbean. Members with later admission dates (sorted chronologically):


 Barbados (member since 1967)
 Trinidad and Tobago (1967)
 Jamaica (1969)
 Grenada (1975)
 Suriname (1977)
 Dominica (1979)
 Saint Lucia (1979)
 Antigua and Barbuda (1981)
 Saint Vincent and the Grenadines (1981)
 Bahamas (1982)
 Saint Kitts and Nevis (1984)
 Canada (1990)
 Belize (1991)
 Guyana (1991)


Notes[edit]



^ Suspended between 1962–2009.[6] Has chosen not to resume their participation.[7] See Status of Cuba below.
^ Suspended between 2009–2011.[8] See Suspension of Honduras below.



Canada and the OAS[edit]
Although Canada obtained independence in its foreign policy from the United Kingdom in 1931, it chose not to join the OAS when it was first formed, despite its close relations with the United States. Canada became a Permanent Observer in the OAS on 2 February 1972. Canada signed the Charter of the Organization of American States on 13 November 1989 and this decision was ratified on 8 January 1990.
In 2004–2005, Canada was the second largest contributor to the OAS, with an annual assessed contribution representing 12.36 percent of the OAS Regular Budget (US$9.2 million) and an additional C$9 million in voluntary contributions to specific projects.[9][10] Shortly after joining as a full member, Canada was instrumental in the creation of the Unit for the Promotion of Democracy, which provides support for the strengthening and consolidation of democratic processes and institutions in OAS member states.[11]
Sanctions against the Dominican Republic[edit]
During the 6th Conference of Foreign Ministers of the Organization of American States (OAS) in Costa Rica, from 16 to 20 August 1960, a conviction against the State of the Dominican Republic was agreed to unanimously. The penalty was motivated because the foreign ministers checked the veracity of the claim that the Rafael Trujillo regime had sponsored an attack against Rómulo Betancourt, at that time, constitutional president of Venezuela. The meeting was attended by foreign ministers from 21 American nations, including Cuba, which at that time had not yet been expelled from the inter-American system.
All countries, including the United States and Haiti broke off diplomatic relations with the Dominican Republic. Additionally an economic blockade that affected the exports of sugar was applied, which at that time was the pillar of the Dominican economy.
It was the first application of the Inter-American Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance, which had been adopted at the OAS on July 29, 1960.
Status of Cuba[edit]
Further information: Cuban relations with the Organization of American States
The current government of Cuba was excluded from participation in the Organization under a decision adopted by the Eighth Meeting of Consultation in Punta del Este, Uruguay, on 31 January 1962. The vote was passed by 14 in favor, with one against (Cuba) and six abstentions (Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Ecuador, and Mexico). The operative part of the resolution reads as follows:


That adherence by any member of the Organization of American States to Marxism-Leninism is incompatible with the inter-American system and the alignment of such a government with the communist bloc breaks the unity and solidarity of the continents.
That the present Government of Cuba, which has officially identified itself as a Marxist-Leninist government, was incompatible with the principles and objectives of the inter-American system.
That this incompatibility excluded the present Government of Cuba from participation in the inter-American system.[12]


This meant that the Cuban nation was still technically a member state, but that the current government was denied the right of representation and attendance at meetings and of participation in activities. The OAS's position was that although Cuba's participation was suspended, its obligations under the Charter, the American Declaration of the Rights and Duties of Man, etc. still hold: for instance, the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights continued to publish reports on Cuba's human rights situation and to hear individual cases involving Cuban nationals. However, this stance was occasionally questioned by other individual member states.
Cuba's position was stated in an official note sent to the Organization "merely as a courtesy" by Minister of Foreign Affairs Dr. Raúl Roa on 4 November 1964: "Cuba was arbitrarily excluded... The Organization of American States has no juridical, factual, or moral jurisdiction, nor competence, over a state which it has illegally deprived of its rights."[13]
The reincorporation of Cuba as an active member regularly arose as a topic within the inter-American system –  for instance, it was intimated by the outgoing ambassador of Mexico in 1998[14] – but most observers did not see it as a serious possibility while the present government remained in power. Since 1960, the Cuban administration had repeatedly characterized the OAS as the "Ministry of Colonies" of the United States of America.[15][16] On 6 May 2005, President Fidel Castro reiterated that the island nation would not "be part of a disgraceful institution that has only humiliated the honor of Latin American nations."[17] After Fidel Castro's recent retirement and the ascent of his brother Raúl to power, this official position was reasserted. Venezuelan President Hugo Chávez promised to veto any final declaration of the 2009 Summit of the Americas due to Cuba's exclusion.[18]
On 17 April 2009, after a "trading of warm words" between the administrations of U.S. President Barack Obama and Cuban leader Raúl Castro, OAS Secretary General José Miguel Insulza said he would ask the 2009 General Assembly to annul the 1962 resolution excluding Cuba.[19]
On 3 June 2009, foreign ministers assembled in San Pedro Sula, Honduras, for the OAS's 39th General Assembly, passed a vote to lift Cuba's suspension from the OAS. The United States had been pressuring the OAS for weeks to condition Cuba's readmission to the group on democratic principles and commitment to human rights. Ecuador's Foreign Minister Fander Falconí said there will be no such conditions. "This is a new proposal, it has no conditions—of any kind," Falconí said. "That suspension was made in the Cold War, in the language of the Cold War. What we have done here is fix a historic error."[20] The suspension was lifted at the end of the General Assembly, but, to be readmitted to the Organization, Cuba will need to comply with all the treaties signed by the Member States, including the Inter-American Democratic Charter of 2001.[21] A statement issued by the Cuban government on 8 June 2009 stated that while Cuba welcomed the Assembly's gesture, in light of the Organization's historical record "Cuba will not return to the OAS."[22]
Suspension of Honduras (2009–2011)[edit]




Those attending the Extraordinary Assembly of the OAS voted to suspend Honduras.


Following the expulsion of its President Manuel Zelaya, Honduras' membership of the Organization was suspended unanimously at midnight on 5 July 2009.[23] The de facto government had already announced it was leaving the OAS hours earlier; this was not, however, taken into account by the OAS, which did not recognize that government as legitimate.[24] An extraordinary meeting had been conducted by the OAS in Washington, D.C., with Zelaya in attendance.[23][25][26] The suspension of Honduras was approved unanimously with 33 votes (Honduras did not vote).[23][26] This was the first suspension carried out by the OAS since that of Cuba in 1962.[23][26]
After Zelaya's return to Honduras in 2011, the country was re-admitted to the Organization on 1 June 2011 with 32 votes in favor and 1 (Ecuador) against. Venezuela expressed some reservations.[27]
Status of Venezuela[edit]
On 26 April 2017, Venezuela announced its intention to withdraw from the OAS.[28] Venezuelan Foreign Minister Delcy Rodríguez said that President Nicolás Maduro planned to publicly renounce Venezuela's membership on 27 April 2017. It would take two years for the country to formally leave. During this period, the country does not plan on participating in the OAS.[29]
Permanent Observers[edit]
As of 31 January 2014, there are 69 permanent observer countries including the four countries with territories in the Americas—Denmark, France, the Netherlands, and the United Kingdom; as well as the European Union.[30][31][32]
Official languages[edit]




Statue of Isabella I the Catholic in front of the seat of the Organization of American States in Washington D.C.


The Organization's official languages are Spanish, English, Portuguese, and French. The Charter, the basic instrument governing OAS, makes no reference to the use of official languages. These references are to be found in the Rules of Procedure governing the various OAS bodies. Article 51 of the Rules of Procedure of the General Assembly,[33] the supreme body of the OAS, which meets once a year, states that English, French, Portuguese and Spanish are the four official languages. Article 28 stipulates that a Style Committee shall be set up with representatives of the four official languages to review the General Assembly resolutions and declarations. Article 53 states that proposals shall be presented in the four official languages. The Rules of Procedure and Statutes of other bodies, such as the Inter-American Council for Integral Development (CIDI), the Permanent Executive Committee of the Inter-American Council for Integral Development (CEPCIDI), the Inter-American Commission of Women (CIM), the Inter-American Drug Abuse Control Commission (CICAD), the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (IACHR) and the Inter-American Juridical Committee (CJI), technical bodies of the OAS, also mention the four official languages in which their meetings are to be conducted. Policy is therefore dictated through these instruments that require use of the four official languages at meetings.[34]
Although a number of other languages have official status in one or more member states of OAS (Dutch in Suriname; Haitian Creole alongside French in Haiti; Quechua and Aymara in Peru, Ecuador and Bolivia; Guaraní in Paraguay), they are not official languages of the Organization.
See also[edit]





























































A clickable Euler diagram showing the relationships between various multinational organisations in the Americas.v • d • e



Regional integration
Organization of Ibero-American States
Union of South American Nations
Community of Latin American and Caribbean States
Rio Group
Rio Pact
Statues of the Liberators


References[edit]


^ Coordinates of OAS headquarters: 38°53′34″N 77°02′25″W﻿ / ﻿38.8929138°N 77.0403734°W﻿ / 38.8929138; -77.0403734﻿ (OAS headquarters, Washington, D.C.)Coordinates: 38°53′34″N 77°02′25″W﻿ / ﻿38.8929138°N 77.0403734°W﻿ / 38.8929138; -77.0403734﻿ (OAS headquarters, Washington, D.C.)
^ WYSS, JIM. "As a Uruguayan is poised to head the OAS, questions swirl about Venezuela". Miami Herald. Miami Herald. Retrieved 18 March 2015. 
^ "Panama: A Country Study". Washington: GPO for the Library of Congress, 1987. 
^ Special to the New York Times. "League of Nations in Americas urged by 3 Latin states", The New York Times. April 13, 1936. p. 1.
^ "Americas adopt neutrality pact", The New York Times. December 20, 1936.
^ "Member States". OAS. Retrieved 2012-11-01. 
^ "Cuba Will Not Return to the OAS". Havana Times. 2014-01-24. 
^ "OAS readmits Honduras to its ranks". CNN. 2011-06-01. Retrieved 2012-11-01. 
^ Canada and the Organization of American States Archived 2009-01-23 at the Wayback Machine., Foreign Affairs and International Trade Canada (DFAIT), 2005.
^ Canada and the Organization of American States by Dr. Ludwil J. Kos-Rabcewicz-Zubkowski, Air University Review, September–October 1967.
^ Canada and the OAS: A Vigorous Partnership, Canada World View, Issue 8, Summer 2000.
^ "Six Report on the Situation of Political Prisoners in Cuba". Inter-American Commission on Human Rights. Organization of American States. 1979-12-14. 
^ "The Situation of Human Rights in Cuba: Seventh Report". Inter-American Commission on Human Rights. Organization of American States. 1983-10-04. 
^ "Mexico Calls for Cuba's Reinstatement into the OAS" (Press release). Organization of American States. 1998-02-04.  Organization of American States.
^ "The Testing of the OAS". Time. 1960-08-22. 
^ Solis, Marta (1972-04-26). "Castro admits problems in education". Siempre. Latin American Network Information Center, University of Texas at Austin. pp. 40–41. 
^ "Fidel Castro: OAS Is an Instrument of the US". Prensa Latina. Havana, Cuba. 2006-05-07. Archived from the original on 2008-10-11. 
^ "Chavez threatens veto over Cuba". BBC News Online. 2009-04-17. Retrieved 2009-04-17. 
^ "U.S., Cuba trade warm words ahead of summit". msnbc.com. 2009-04-17. Retrieved 2009-04-17. 
^ "OAS votes to lift suspension of Cuba". The Miami Herald. 2009-06-03. Retrieved 2009-06-03. [dead link]
^ http://www.oas.org/consejo/GENERAL%20ASSEMBLY/Documents/AG04688E08.doc
^ "Declaration of the Revolutionary Government". Granma. 2009-06-08. Archived from the original on 2012-02-19. Retrieved 2009-06-15. 
^ a b c d "Americas group suspends Honduras". BBC. 2009-07-05. Retrieved 2009-07-05. 
^ "Honduras leaders pull out of OAS". RTÉ. 2009-07-04. Retrieved 2009-07-05. 
^ "OAS expels Honduras' membership over coup". China Daily. 2009-07-05. Retrieved 2009-07-05. 
^ a b c Hipwell, Deirdre (2009-07-05). "Organisation of American States suspends Honduras over coup". London: The Times. Retrieved 2009-07-05. 
^ Press Releases :: E-698/11. OAS. Retrieved on 2013-07-12.
^ "Venezuela to withdraw from OAS as deadly protests continue". BBC News. 2017-04-27. Retrieved 2017-04-27. 
^ "Venezuela says it will quit Organization of American States". Washington Post. Retrieved 2017-04-27. 
^ Macedonia Becomes 66th OAS Permanent Observer http://www.oas.org/en/media_center/press_release.asp?sCodigo=E-675/11
^ SER :: DIA :: Permanent Observers. OAS. Retrieved on 2013-07-12.
^ "Montenegro Gains Observer Status to Organisation of American States". February 4, 2014. 
^ General Assembly of the OAS, Amendments to the Rules of Procedure of the General Assembly, 5 June 2000
^ Marguerite Groves (Coordinator, Division of Language Services, OAS), Information on the use of language at the OAS: multilingualism Archived February 3, 2007, at the Wayback Machine., Inter-American Languages Management Seminar, Conseil supérieur de la langue française (Quebec), Quebec City, 20 to 22 August 2002


External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Organization of American States.



OAS official site
Door Opens to OAS for Cuba by Thelma Mejia, Havana Times, 4 June 2009.
OAS Special Rapporteur on Freedom of Expression
OAS Executive Secretariat for Integral Development (SEDI)
OAS Foreign Trade Information System – SICE
Outdoor sculpture at the OAS headquarters building.
Educational Portal of the Americas
OAS Lifts Ban On Cuba After 47 Years by Portia Siegelbaum, CBS News, 3 June 2009.
Cuba's Fidel Castro Calls OAS a "U.S. Trojan Horse" by Xinhua, 4 June 2009.
The Organization of American States in Haiti: Election Monitoring or Political Intervention?, from the Center for Economic and Policy Research, October 2011.







v
t
e


Organization of American States (OAS)



Members







Antigua and Barbuda
Argentina
Barbados
Brazil
Belize
Bahamas
Bolivia
Canada
Chile
Colombia
Costa Rica
Dominica
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
El Salvador
Grenada
Guatemala
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Jamaica
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama
Paraguay
Peru
St. Lucia
St. Vincent and the Grenadines
St. Kitts and Nevis
Suriname
Trinidad and Tobago
United States
Uruguay





Renounced



Venezuela








Organization



Secretariat for Political Affairs
Secretariat for Multidimensional Security
General Assembly
Inter-American Commission of Women
Inter-American Commission on Human Rights
Inter-American Court of Human Rights
Pan American Union Building





Politics



Charter
Inter-American Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance
American Declaration of the Rights and Duties of Man
American Convention on Human Rights
Pan-American Conference
Summits of the Americas








Americas
Pan American Sports Organization












v
t
e


Pan-Americanism



History



Spanish American wars of independence
Latin American wars of independence
Latin American integration
North American integration
Patria Grande
Simón Bolívar
José de San Martín
Lucas Alamán
Inter-American Commission of Women





Organizations



Amazon Cooperation Treaty Organization (ACTO)
Andean Community of Nations (CAN)
Association of Caribbean States (ACS)
Bolivarian Alliance for the Americas (ALBA)
Caribbean Community (CARICOM)
Central American Integration System (SICA)
Community of Latin American and Caribbean States (CELAC)
Contadora group
Contadora support group
Latin American Economic System (SELA)
Latin American Integration Association (ALADI)
Mercosur
Organization of American States (OAS)
Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States (OECS)
Organization of Ibero-American States (OEI)
Pacific Alliance
Petrocaribe
Rio Group
Union of South American Nations (Unasur)
United Nations Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC, CEPAL)





Projects



Andean passport
CARICOM passport
CARICOM Single Market and Economy
CARIPASS
Central America-4 Border Control Agreement
Central America-4 passport
Eastern Caribbean Currency Union
Initiative for the Integration of the Regional Infrastructure of South America (IIRSA)
Interoceanic Highway
SUCRE





Institutions



Andean Parliament
Bank of the South
Caribbean Court of Justice
Caribbean Development Bank
Central American Parliament
Development Bank of Latin America
Inter-American Development Bank
Latin American Parliament
Mercosur Parliament
South American Parliament





Free trade areas



Caribbean Free Trade Association (CARIFTA)
CARIFORUM
Dominican Republic–Central America Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA-DR)
Economic Partnership Agreements
Free Trade Area of the Americas
G3 Free Trade Agreement
North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA)












v
t
e


Regional organizations



Bodies



African Union
Arab League
Asia Cooperation Dialogue
Association of Caribbean States
ASEAN
BBIN
BIMSTEC
Caribbean Community
Central American Integration System
Commonwealth of Independent States
Community of Latin American and Caribbean States
Council of Europe
East African Community
Economic Community of West African States
Economic Cooperation Organization
Eurasian Economic Union
European Union
GUAM
Gulf Cooperation Council
Latin American Parliament
Melanesian Spearhead Group
Mercosur
NATO
Nordic Council
Organization of American States
Pacific Islands Forum
Polynesian Leaders Group
Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership
SCO
SAARC
TAKM
Trilateral Cooperation Secretariat
Turkic Council
Union of South American Nations
NORDEFCO
West Nordic Council





Topics



Regional integration
Regional organizations by population
Regionalism (international relations)












v
t
e


Power in international relations







Types



Economic
Energy
Food
Hard
National
Power politics
Realpolitik
Smart
Soft





Status



Emerging
Small
Middle
Regional
Great
Super
Hyper





Geopolitics



American
Asian
British
Chinese
Indian
Pacific





History



List of ancient great powers
List of medieval great powers
List of modern great powers
International relations of the Great Powers (1814–1919)





Theory



Balance of power

European


Center of power
Hegemonic stability theory
Philosophy of power
Polarity
Power projection
Power transition theory
Second Superpower
Sphere of influence
Superpower collapse
Superpower disengagement





Studies



Composite Index of National Capability
Comprehensive National Power













Organizations and groups by region or regions affected







Africa



African Union
Union for the Mediterranean





Africa–Asia



Arab League
Cooperation Council for the Arab States of the Gulf (GCC)
Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC)





Americas



Mercosur
North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO)
Organization of American States (OAS)
Union of South American Nations (Unasur)





Asia



Asia Cooperation Dialogue (ACD)
Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC)
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN)
China–Japan–South Korea trilateral summits
Economic Cooperation Organization (ECO)
South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC)
Shanghai Cooperation Organisation (SCO)





Europe



Council of Europe (CE)
European Union (EU)
Nordic Council
Visegrád Group





Eurasia



Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS)
Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO)
Economic Cooperation Organization (ECO)
Eurasian Economic Union (EaEU)
Turkic Council





North America–Europe



North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO)
Arctic Council





Africa–Asia–Europe



Union for the Mediterranean





Africa–South America



South Atlantic Peace and Cooperation Zone





Oceania-Pacific



Australia–New Zealand–United States Security Treaty (ANZUS)
Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC)
Melanesian Spearhead Group (MSG)
Pacific Islands Forum (PIF)
Polynesian Leaders Group (PLG)





Non-regional



Brazil–Russia–India–China–South Africa (BRICS)
Commonwealth of Nations
Francophonie
Colombia–Indonesia–Vietnam–Egypt–Turkey–South Africa (CIVETS)
E7
E9
G4
G7
G8
G8+5
G20
G24
G77
India–Brazil–South Africa Dialogue Forum (IBSA)
Mexico–Indonesia–Nigeria–Turkey (MINT)
Next Eleven (N-11)
Non-Aligned Movement (NAM)
Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD)
Uniting for Consensus





Global



United Nations (UN)

















						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Organization_of_American_States&oldid=817393858"					Categories: Organization of American StatesInternational diplomatic organizationsInternational organizations of the AmericasInternational political organizationsUnited States–South American relationsOrganizations established in 1948United Nations General Assembly observers1948 establishments in the United StatesOrganizations based in Washington, D.C.Hidden categories: Coordinates not on WikidataWebarchive template wayback linksAll articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from September 2010Articles to be merged from April 2017All articles to be mergedArticles containing French-language textArticles containing Portuguese-language textArticles containing Spanish-language textPages using infobox country or infobox former country with the symbol caption or type parameters