Not to be confused with Eastern Orthodox Church or Oriental Catholics.


Oriental Orthodoxy


Classification
Eastern Christian


Theology
Miaphysitism


Polity
Episcopal


Structure
Communion


Autocephalous
churches



Coptic Orthodox Church of Alexandria
Armenian Apostolic Church
Syriac Orthodox Church
Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church
Eritrean Orthodox Tewahedo Church
Malankara Orthodox Syrian Church





Liturgy
Armenian Rite, West Syrian Rite, Alexandrian Rite


Members
86 million




Part of a series on


Oriental Orthodoxy





Oriental Orthodox churches





Coptic
Ethiopian
Armenian
Syriac
Eritrean
Indian (Malankara)







Subdivisions


Autonomous churches grouped by tradition:
Coptic: French
Armenian: Cilicia, Constantinople, Jerusalem
Syriac: British, Malankara Jacobite








History and theology



Coptic history
Tewahedo history
Syriac history
Saint Thomas Christians



Ecumenical Councils:



First
Second
Third



Historical topics and events:



Peshitta
Tur Abdin
Miaphysitism
Monophysitism
2nd Council of Ephesus
Council of Dvin
Council of Capharthutha
Coonan Cross Oath









Liturgy and practices



Apostolic Church-Ordinance
Armenian calendar
Coptic calendar
Coptic fasting
Coptic monasticism
Coptic saints
Debtera
Ethiopian chant
Fast of Nineveh
Holy Qurbana
Tabot
Timkat









Major figures



Abgar V
Nine Saints of Ethiopia
Gregory the Illuminator
Tiridates III
Mar Awgin
Ezana of Axum
Frumentius
Shenoute
Dioscorus of Alexandria
Severus of Antioch
Abraham of Farshut
Yared
Simon the Tanner
Gregory of Narek
Nerses IV
Michael the Syrian
Bar Hebraeus
Tekle Haymanot
Giyorgis of Segla
Mar Thoma I
Gregorios Abdal Jaleel
Geevarghese Gregorios
Geevarghese Dionysius









Other topics



Abuna
Catholicos
Coptic cross
Cross of St. Thomas
Ethiopian titles
Maphrian
Tewahedo biblical canon







 Oriental Orthodoxy portal





v
t
e







Part of a series on


Christianity










Jesus
Christ






Jesus in Christianity
Son of God
Virgin birth
Ministry
Crucifixion
Resurrection












Bible
Foundations






Old Testament
New Testament
Gospel
Canon
Books
Church
Creed
New Covenant









Theology



God
Trinity

Father
Son
Holy Spirit






Apologetics
Baptism
Christology
History of theology
Mission
Patriology
Pneumatology
Salvation












History
Tradition






Mary
Apostles
Peter
Paul
Fathers
Early Christianity
Constantine
Councils
Augustine
East–West Schism
Crusades
Aquinas
Luther
Reformation
Radical Reformation









Related topics



Art
Holidays (list)
Criticism
Culture
Ecumenism
Liturgy
Music
Other religions
Prayer
Sermon
Symbolism












Denominations
Groups






Western




Adventist
Anabaptist
Anglican
Baptist
Calvinist
Catholic
Charismatic
Evangelical
Lutheran
Methodist
Pentecostal
Protestant




Eastern




Eastern Orthodox
Oriental Orthodox
Assyrian




Nontrinitarian




Jehovah's Witness
Latter Day Saint
Oneness Pentecostal









 Christianity portal





v
t
e





Oriental Orthodoxy[a] is the third largest communion of Christian churches, with about 86 million members worldwide. As one of the oldest religious institutions in the world, it has played a prominent role in the history and culture of Abyssinia, and parts of the Middle East and India. An Eastern Christian communion of autocephalous churches, its bishops are equal by virtue of ordination, with doctrines summarised in the recognition of only the first three ecumenical councils.[5] Although Pope Tawadros II of Alexandria is considered the most prominent, it lacks central governance analogous to the Papacy in the Roman Catholic Church.
The Oriental Orthodox communion is composed of six autocephalous churches: the Coptic Orthodox Church of Alexandria, the Syriac Orthodox Church of Antioch, the Armenian Apostolic Church, the Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church, the Eritrean Orthodox Tewahedo Church, and the Malankara Orthodox Syrian Church.[6] Collectively, they consider themselves to be the One, Holy, Catholic, and Apostolic church founded by Jesus Christ in his Great Commission, and that its bishops are the successors of Christ's apostles. Most member churches are part of the World Council of Churches. All member churches share a virtually identical theology, with the distinguishing feature being Miaphysitism. Three very different rites are practiced in the communion: the western-influenced Armenian Rite, the West Syrian Rite of the two Syriac churches, and the Alexandrian Rite of the Copts and Ethiopians.
Prior to the Council of Chalcedon in 451 AD, the Oriental Orthodox churches shared in this communion with the contemporary Roman Catholic Church, and Eastern Orthodoxy, separating primarily over differences in Christology. Subsequent to this event, Oriental Orthodoxy developed distinctively under the patriarchate of Alexandria in Egypt, originally part of the Pentarchy, and the only episcopal see besides the Holy See to maintain the title "Pope". Its Syriac Orthodox patriarchate member church was recognised as authority among part of the Saint Thomas Christians in India, retained until this day.
The majority of Oriental Orthodox Christians live in Egypt, Ethiopia, and Eritrea, with smaller Armenian and Syriac communities living in the Middle East – descreasingly due to persecution – and India. There are also many in other parts of the world, formed through diaspora, conversions, and missionary activity.



Contents


1 Overview

1.1 Chalcedonian Schism


2 History

2.1 Post Council of Chalcedon (451 AD)
2.2 20th century


3 Geographical distribution
4 Churches
5 Internal disputes

5.1 Armenian Apostolic
5.2 Ethiopia
5.3 India


6 Occasional confusions
7 See also
8 Notes
9 References
10 Bibliography
11 External links



Overview[edit]
The Oriental Orthodox churches are distinguished by their recognition of only the first three ecumenical councils during the period of the state church of the Roman Empire – the First Council of Nicaea in 325, the First Council of Constantinople in 381 and the Council of Ephesus in 431. Oriental Orthodoxy shares much theology and many ecclesiastical traditions with the Eastern Orthodox Church; these include a similar doctrine of salvation and a tradition of collegiality between bishops, as well as reverence of the Theotokos and use of the Nicene creed.[7]
The primary theological difference between the two communions is the differing Christology. Oriental Orthodoxy rejects the Chalcedonian Definition, and instead adopts the Miaphysite formula, believing that the human and divine natures of Christ are united. Historically, the early prelates of the Oriental Orthodox churches thought that the Chalcedonian Definition implied a possible repudiation of the Trinity or a concession to Nestorianism.
Other differences include minor deviations in social teaching and different views on ecumenism. Oriental Orthodox churches are generally considered to be more conservative with regard to social issues as well more enthusiastic about ecumenical relations with non-Orthodox churches. Creationism is popular among Oriental Orthodox clergy, while it is clearly a minority opinion in the Eastern Orthodox Church.
The break in communion between the various Eastern Orthodox and Oriental Orthodox churches did not occur suddenly, but rather gradually over 2-3 centuries following the Council of Chalcedon.[8] Eventually the two communions developed separate institutions, and the Oriental Orthodox did not participate in any of the later ecumenical councils.
The Oriental Orthodox churches maintain their own ancient apostolic succession.[9] The various churches are governed by Holy Synods, with a primus inter pares bishop serving as primate. The primates hold titles like patriarch, catholicos, and pope. Among these patriarchs, the Pope of Alexandria takes precedence, and is sometimes considered the "face" of Oriental Orthodoxy; that said, the Pope of Alexandria has no governing powers with respect to the non-Coptic churches. Oriental Orthodoxy does not have a magisterial leader like the Roman Catholic Church, nor does the communion have a leader who can convene ecumenical synods like the Eastern Orthodox Church.
Chalcedonian Schism[edit]
Main article: History of Oriental Orthodoxy § Schism
The schism between Oriental Orthodoxy and the adherents of Chalcedonian Christianity was based on differences in Christology. The First Council of Nicaea, in 325, declared that Jesus Christ is God, that is to say, "consubstantial" with the Father. Later, the third ecumenical council, the Council of Ephesus, declared that Jesus Christ, though divine as well as human, is only one being, or person (hypostasis). Thus, the Council of Ephesus explicitly rejected Nestorianism, the Christological doctrine that Christ was two distinct beings, one divine (the Logos) and one human (Jesus), who happened to inhabit the same body. The Churches that later became Oriental Orthodoxy were firmly anti-Nestorian, and therefore strongly supported the decisions made at Ephesus.
Twenty years after Ephesus, the Council of Chalcedon reaffirmed the view that Jesus Christ was a single person, but at the same time declared that this one person existed "in two complete natures", one human and one divine. Those who opposed Chalcedon saw this as a concession to Nestorianism, or even as a conspiracy to convert the Church to Nestorianism by stealth. As a result, over the following decades, they gradually separated from communion with those who accepted the Council of Chalcedon, and formed the body that is today called Oriental Orthodoxy.
At times, Chalcedonian Christians have referred to the Oriental Orthodox as being Monophysites – that is to say, accusing them of following the teachings of Eutyches (c. 380 – c. 456), who argued that Jesus Christ was not human at all, but only divine. Monophysitism was condemned as heretical alongside Nestorianism, and to accuse a church of being Monophysite is to accuse it of falling into the opposite extreme from Nestorianism. However, the Oriental Orthodox themselves reject this description as inaccurate, having officially condemned the teachings of both Nestorius and Eutyches. They define themselves as Miaphysite instead, holding that Christ has one nature, but this nature is both human and divine.[10]
Today, the Oriental Orthodox Churches are in full communion with each other, but not with the Eastern Orthodox Church or any other churches. Slow dialogue towards restoring communion between the two Orthodox groups began in the mid-20th century,[11] and dialogue is also underway between Oriental Orthodoxy and the Catholic Church and others.[12] In 2017, the mutual recognition of baptism was restored between the Coptic Orthodox Church of Alexandria and the Catholic Church.[13]
History[edit]
Main article: History of Oriental Orthodoxy
Post Council of Chalcedon (451 AD)[edit]
The schism between the Oriental Orthodox and the rest of Christendom occurred in the 5th century. The separation resulted in part from the refusal of Pope Dioscorus I of Alexandria and the other thirteen Egyptian Bishops to accept the Christological dogmas promulgated by the Council of Chalcedon, which held that Jesus is in two natures: one divine and one human. They would accept only "of or from two natures" but not "in two natures".
To the hierarchs who would lead the Oriental Orthodox, the latter phrase was tantamount to accepting Nestorianism, which expressed itself in a terminology incompatible with their understanding of Christology. Nestorianism was understood as seeing Christ in two separate natures, human and divine, each with different actions and experiences; in contrast Cyril of Alexandria advocated the formula "One Nature of God the Incarnate Logos"[14] (or as others translate,[15] "One Incarnate Nature of the Word"), stressing the unity of the incarnation over all other considerations. It is not entirely clear that Nestorius himself was a Nestorian.
The Oriental Orthodox churches were therefore often called "Monophysite", although they reject this label, as it is associated with Eutychian Monophysitism; they prefer the term "Miaphysite". Oriental Orthodox churches reject what they consider to be the heretical Monophysite teachings of Apollinaris of Laodicea and Eutyches, the Dyophysite definition of the Council of Chalcedon and the Antiochene christology of Theodore of Mopsuestia, Nestorius, Theodoret, and Ibas of Edessa.
Christology, although important, was not the only reason for the Alexandrian Church's refusal to accept the declarations of the Council of Chalcedon; political, ecclesiastical and imperial issues were hotly debated during that period.
In the years following Chalcedon the patriarchs of Constantinople intermittently remained in communion with the non-Chalcedonian Patriarchs of Alexandria and Antioch (see Henotikon), while Rome remained out of communion with the latter and in unstable communion with Constantinople. It was not until 518 that the new Byzantine Emperor, Justin I (who accepted Chalcedon), demanded that the Church in the Roman Empire accept the Council's decisions.[16]
Justin ordered the replacement of all non-Chalcedonian bishops, including the patriarchs of Antioch and Alexandria. The extent of the influence of the Bishop of Rome in this demand has been a matter of debate. Justinian I also attempted to bring those monks who still rejected the decision of the Council of Chalcedon into communion with the greater church. The exact time of this event is unknown, but it is believed to have been between 535 and 548.
St Abraham of Farshut was summoned to Constantinople and he chose to bring with him four monks. Upon arrival, Justinian summoned them and informed them that they would either accept the decision of the Council or lose their positions. Abraham refused to entertain the idea. Theodora tried to persuade Justinian to change his mind, seemingly to no avail. Abraham himself stated in a letter to his monks that he preferred to remain in exile rather than subscribe to a faith which he believed to be contrary to that of Athanasius of Alexandria.
20th century[edit]
By the 20th century the Chalcedonian schism was not seen with the same importance, and from several meetings between the authorities of the Holy See and the Oriental Orthodoxy, reconciling declarations emerged in the common statement of Syriac Patriarch Mar Ignatius Zakka I Iwas and the Roman Pope John Paul II in 1984.

The confusions and schisms that occurred between their Churches in the later centuries, they realize today, in no way affect or touch the substance of their faith, since these arose only because of differences in terminology and culture and in the various formulae adopted by different theological schools to express the same matter. Accordingly, we find today no real basis for the sad divisions and schisms that subsequently arose between us concerning the doctrine of Incarnation. In words and life we confess the true doctrine concerning Christ our Lord, notwithstanding the differences in interpretation of such a doctrine which arose at the time of the Council of Chalcedon.[17]

According to the canons of the Oriental Orthodox Churches, the four bishops of Rome, Constantinople, Alexandria and Antioch were all given status as Patriarchs; in other words, the ancient apostolic centres of Christianity, by the First Council of Nicaea (predating the schism)—each of the four patriarchs was responsible for those bishops and churches within his own area of the Universal Church. Thus, the Bishop of Rome has always been held by the others to be fully sovereign within his own area, as well as "First-Among-Equals", due to the traditional belief that the Apostles Saint Peter and Saint Paul were martyred in Rome.[citation needed]
The technical reason for the schism was that the bishops of Rome and Constantinople excommunicated the non-Chalcedonian bishops in 451 for refusing to accept the "in two natures" teaching, thus declaring them to be out of communion.
The highest office in Oriental Orthodoxy is that of Patriarch. There are Patriarchs within the local Oriental Orthodox communities of the Coptic, Armenian, Eritrean, Ethiopian, Syriac, and Indian (Malankara) Orthodox Churches. The title of Pope, as used by the leading bishop of the Coptic Church, has the meaning of "Father" and is not a jurisdictional title. All the heads of the mentioned oriental churches are equal unlike those within the Eastern Orthodox Churches.
Geographical distribution[edit]
Further information: List of Christian denominations by number of members




Distribution of Oriental Orthodox Christians in the world by country:
  Main religion (more than 75%)
  Main religion (50–75%)
  Important minority religion (20–50%)
  Important minority religion (5–20%)
  Minority religion (1–5%)
  Tiny minority religion (below 1%), but has local autocephaly



According to the Encyclopedia of Religion, Oriental Orthodoxy is the Christian tradition "most important in terms of the number of faithful living in the Middle East", which, along with other Eastern Christian communions, represent an autochthonous Christian presence whose origins date further back than the birth and spread of Islam in the Middle East.[18] It is the dominant religion in Armenia (94%), the ethnically Armenian unrecognized Nagorno-Karabakh Republic (95%)[19][20] and in Ethiopia (43%, the total Christian population being 62%), especially in two regions in Ethiopia: Amhara (82%) and Tigray (96%), as well as the capital city of Addis Ababa (75%).[21] It is also one of two dominant religions in Eritrea (50%).
It is a minority in Egypt (<20%),[22] Sudan (3–5%),[citation needed] Syria (2–3% out of the 10% of total Christians), Lebanon (10% of the 40% of Christians in Lebanon or 200,000 Armenians and members of the Church of the East) and Kerala, India (7% out of the 20% of total Christians in Kerala).[23] In terms of total number of members, the Ethiopian Church is the largest of all Oriental Orthodox Churches, and is second among all Orthodox Churches among Eastern and Oriental Churches (exceeded in number only by the Russian Orthodox Church).
Also of particular importance are the Armenian Patriarchate of Constantinople in Turkey and the Armenian Apostolic Church of Iran. These Oriental Orthodox churches represent the largest Christian minority in both of these predominantly Muslim countries, Turkey[24] and Iran.[25]
Churches[edit]




Etchmiadzin Armenian Apostolic Cathedral in Armenia






Aswan Coptic Orthodox Cathedral in Egypt






Pope Tawadros II of Alexandria (centre) of the Coptic Orthodox Church receives Ignatius Aphrem II (left) Patriarch of Antioch of the Syriac Orthodox Church, Aram I (right) Supreme Catholicose of the Armenian Apostolic Orthodox Church in Lebanon.


The Oriental Orthodox communion is a group of churches within Oriental Orthodoxy which are all in full communion with each other. The communion comprises:

Armenian Apostolic Church

Mother See of Holy Etchmiadzin
Holy See of Cilicia
Armenian Patriarchate of Constantinople
Armenian Patriarchate of Jerusalem


Syriac Orthodox Church of Antioch

Jacobite Syrian Church


Malankara Orthodox Syrian Church
Coptic Orthodox Church of Alexandria

French Coptic Orthodox Church


Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church
Eritrean Orthodox Tewahedo Church

There are a number of organizations considered non-canonical, but whose members and clergy may or may not be in communion with the greater Oriental Orthodox Church. Examples include the Celtic Orthodox Church, the Ancient British Church, and lately the British Orthodox Church. These organizations have passed in and out of official recognition, but members rarely face excommunication when recognition is ended. The primates of these churches are typically referred to as episcopi vagantes or vagantes in short.
Internal disputes[edit]
There are numerous ongoing internal disputes within the Oriental Orthodox Churches. These disputes result in lesser or greater degrees of impaired communion.
Armenian Apostolic[edit]
The least divisive of these disputes is within the Armenian Apostolic Church, between the Catholicosate of Etchmiadzin and the Catholicosate of the Great House of Cilicia. The division of the two Catholicosates stemmed from frequent relocations of Church headquarters due to political and military upheavals.
The division between the two Sees intensified during the Soviet period. By some Western Bishops and clergy the Holy See of Etchmiadzin was seen as a captive Communist puppet. Sympathizers of this established congregations independent of Etchmiadzin, declaring loyalty instead to the See based in Antelias in Lebanon. The division was formalized in 1956 when the Antelias (Cilician) See broke away from the Etchmiadzin See. Though recognising the supremacy of the Catholicos of All Armenians, the Catholicos of Cilicia administers the clergy and dioceses independently. The dispute, however, has not at all caused a breach in communion between the two churches.
Ethiopia[edit]
In 1992, following the abdication of Abune Merkorios and election of Abune Paulos, some Ethiopian Orthodox bishops in the United States maintained that the new election was invalid, and declared their independence from the Addis Ababa administration.[26]
India[edit]
Indians who follow the Oriental Orthodox faith belong to two churches: the Malankara Orthodox Syrian Church and the Malankara Jacobite Syrian Orthodox Church. The two churches were united before 1912 and again from 1958 after reconciliation efforts but again separated in 1975. The Malankara Orthodox also known as Indian Orthodox Church, is autocephalous. It is headed by the Catholicos of the East and Malankara Metropolitan. The Malankara Jacobite officially known as Malankara Jacobite Syrian Orthodox Church is the name of the autonomous body of the Syriac Orthodox Church in India. It is headed by Catholicos of India.
The Malabar Independent Syrian Church also follows the Oriental Orthodox faith but not in communion with other Oriental Orthodox Churches.
Occasional confusions[edit]
The Assyrian Church of the East is sometimes incorrectly described as an Oriental Orthodox church, though its origins lie in disputes that predated the Council of Chalcedon and it follows a different Christology from Oriental Orthodoxy. The historical Church of the East was the church of Greater Iran and declared itself separate from the state church of the Roman Empire in 424–27, years before Chalcedon. Theologically, the Church of the East was affiliated with the dyophysite doctrine of Nestorianism, and thus rejected the Council of Ephesus, which declared Nestorianism heretical in 431. The Christology of the Oriental Orthodox churches in fact developed as a reaction against Nestorian Christology, which emphasizes the distinctness of the human and divine natures of Christ.
There are many overlapping ecclesiastical jurisdictions in India, mostly with a Syriac liturgical heritage centered in the state of Kerala. The autonomous (Malankara) Jacobite Syrian Christian Church, which comes under the Syriac Orthodox Church, is quite often confused with the autocephalous Malankara Orthodox Syrian Church as the similarity in their names.
See also[edit]


Oriental Orthodoxy portal



Conference of Addis Ababa
Eastern Christianity
List of Orthodox churches
List of Christian denominations

Notes[edit]



^ Also known by several other names, including Old Oriental, Anti-Chalcedonian, Non-Chalcedonian, Pre-Chalcedonian, Miaphysite, or Monophysite Christianity [1][2][3][4]



References[edit]



^ Bradley, Jeremy; Media, Demand. "Difference Between Oriental & Eastern Orthodox Churches". Synonym.com. Demand Media. Retrieved 3 June 2016. 
^ "Coptic Orthodox Church of Alexandria". Encyclopædia Britannica. Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc. Retrieved 3 June 2016. 
^ "Monophysite Christianity". Encyclopædia Britannica. Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc. Retrieved 3 June 2016. 
^ Frend, W.H.C. (2005). "Monophysitism". In Jones, Lindsay. Encyclopedia of Religion. 9 (2nd ed.). Farmington Hills, MI: Thomas Gale. pp. 6153–6155. ISBN 0-02-865742-X. 
^ Hindson, Ed; Mitchell, Dan (2013). The Popular Encyclopedia of Church History. Harvest House Publishers. p. 108. ISBN 978-0-7369-4806-7. 
^ https://www.oikoumene.org/en/church-families/orthodox-churches-oriental
^ Nicene Creed in Coptic Church
^ "Chalcedonians". TheFreeDictionary. Retrieved June 11, 2016. 
^ Krikorian 2010, pp. 45, 128, 181, 194, 206.
^ Davis, SJ, Leo Donald (1990). The First Seven Ecumenical Councils (325-787): Their History and Theology (Theology and Life Series 21). Collegeville, MN: Michael Glazier/Liturgical Press. p. 342. ISBN 978-0-8146-5616-7. 
^ Syrian Orthodox Resources – Middle Eastern Oriental Orthodox Common Declaration
^ "Dialogue with the Assyrian Church of the East and its Effect on the Dialogue with the Roman Catholic". Coptic Orthodox Church of Alexandria Diocese of Los Angeles, Southern California, and Hawaii. Retrieved 2 June 2016. 
^ http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/speeches/2017/april/documents/papa-francesco_20170428_egitto-tawadros-ii.html
^ Pope Shenouda III of Alexandria (1999). "NATURE OF CHRIST" (PDF). http://www.copticchurch.net. St. Mark Coptic Orthodox Church. Retrieved 30 November 2014.  External link in |website= (help)
^ CYRIL OF ALEXANDRIA; Pusey, P. E. (Trans.). "FROM HIS SECOND BOOK AGAINST THE WORDS OF THEODORE". The Tertullian Project. Retrieved 30 November 2014. 
^ CATHOLIC ENCYCLOPEDIA: Pope St. Hormisdas
^ From the common declaration of Pope John Paul II and HH Mar Ignatius Zakka I Iwas, 23 June 23 1984.
^ Encyclopedia of Religion. "Christianity: Christianity in the Middle East" (2nd ed.). Farmington Hills, MI: Thomson Gale. 2005. pp. 1672–1673. 
^ UN Security Council resolutions on the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict
^ "Statement of the Co-Chairs of the OSCE Minsk Group". OSCE. Retrieved June 25, 2011. 
^ Ethiopia: 2007 Census
^ "The World Factbook: Egypt". CIA. Retrieved 7 October 2010. 
^ "Church in India - Syrian Orthodox Church of India - Roman Catholic Church - Protestant Churches in India". Syrianchurch.org. Retrieved 14 October 2013. 
^ "Foreign Ministry: 89,000 minorities live in Turkey". Today's Zaman. 15 December 2008. Archived from the original on 20 May 2011. Retrieved 16 May 2011. 
^ Ahmadinejad: Religious minorities live freely in Iran (PressTV, 24 Sep 2009)
^ Goldman, Ari L. (22 September 1992). "U.S. Branch Leaves Ethiopian Orthodox Church". The New York Times. Retrieved 29 April 2016. 



Bibliography[edit]

Betts, Robert B., Christians in the Arab East, Lycabbetus Press (Athens, 1978)
Charles, R. H. The Chronicle of John, Bishop of Nikiu: Translated from Zotenberg's Ethiopic Text, 1916. Reprinted 2007. Evolution Publishing, ISBN 978-1-889758-87-9
Krikorian, Mesrob K. (2010). Christology of the Oriental Orthodox Churches: Christology in the Tradition of the Armenian Apostolic Church. Peter Lang. 

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Oriental Orthodoxy.



Orthodox Joint Commission
The Standing Conference of Oriental Orthodox Churches in America
Encyclical, Pope Benedict XIV, Allatae Sunt (On the observance of Oriental Rites), 1755
Common Declaration of Pope John Paul II and HH Mar Ignatius Zakka I Iwas
Joint Declarations Between the Syriac Orthodox and Roman Catholic Churches
Dialogue with the Oriental Orthodox Churches on the Anglican Communion Website
Dialogue with the Oriental Orthodox Churches on the Vatican Website
The Rejection of the Term Theotokos by Nestorius Constantinople







v
t
e


Eastern Christianity




Cultural sphere of Christian traditions that developed since Early Christianity in the Middle East, Eastern Europe, Eastern Africa, Asia Minor, Southern India, and parts of the Far East.



Communions



Eastern Orthodox Church
Oriental Orthodoxy
Eastern Catholic Churches
Assyrian Church of the East
Ancient Church of the East








History



Eastern Orthodox Church
Byzantine Empire
Ecumenical council
Church of the East
Council of Chalcedon
Iconoclastic controversy
St Thomas Christians
Christianization of Bulgaria
Christianization of Kievan Rus'
East–West Schism





Scriptures



Books
Canon
Old Testament
New Testament





Theology



Hesychasm
Icon
Apophaticism
Filioque clause
Miaphysitism
Dyophysitism
Nestorianism
Theosis
Theoria
Phronema
Philokalia
Praxis
Theotokos
Hypostasis
Ousia
Essence–energies distinction
Metousiosis¨





Worship



Sign of the cross
Divine Liturgy
Iconography
Asceticism
Omophorion





Ethnic
groups
with
significant
adherence




Majorities




Indo-European



Armenians
Aromanians
Belarusians
Bulgarians
Greeks

including Greek Cypriots


Macedonians
Megleno-Romanians
Moldovans
Montenegrins
Ossetians
Romanians
Russians
Serbs
Ukrainians





Afro-Asiatic



Agaw
Amhara
Assyrians
Copts
Chaldean Catholics
Maronites
Tigrayans





Turkic



Chuvash
Dolgans
Gagauz
Khakas
Kryashens
Yakuts





Kartvelian



Georgians

including Svans and Mingrelians







Finno-Ugric



Izhorians
Karelians
Khanty
Komi
Mansi
Mari
Mordvins
Setos
Udmurts
Vepsians
Votes





Samoyedic



Enets
Nenets
Nganasans
Selkups





Chukotko-Kamchatkan



Alyutors
Itelmens
Kereks
Koryaks





Dené–Yeniseian



Kets
Tlingits





Eskimo–Aleut



Aleuts
Yupiks





Northwest Caucasian



Abkhazians





Nakh



Batsbi








Minorities



Adyghe

Kabardians


Kists
Albanians
Altai
Arabs
Buryats
Chukchi
Finns
Inuit
Malayali
Oromos
Romani
Rusyns
Saami









 Eastern Christianity portal










v
t
e


Autocephalous and autonomous churches of Oriental Orthodoxy



Autocephalous
churches



Coptic Orthodox Church of Alexandria
Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church
Armenian Apostolic Church
Eritrean Orthodox Tewahedo Church
Syriac Orthodox Church
Malankara Orthodox Syrian Church





Autonomous
churches



Coptic Orthodox:
French Coptic Orthodox Church


Armenian Apostolic:
Holy See of Cilicia
Armenian Patriarchate of Constantinople
Armenian Patriarchate of Jerusalem


Syriac Orthodox:
Malankara Jacobite


Malankara Orthodox Syrian Church:
Brahmavar (Goan) Orthodox Church











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Oriental_Orthodoxy&oldid=815571731"					Categories: Oriental OrthodoxyNon-ChalcedonianismOriental Orthodoxy in AfricaEastern Christianity in AsiaEastern Christianity in EuropeChristianity in the Middle EastChristian terminologyEastern ChristianityHidden categories: CS1 errors: external linksWikipedia indefinitely move-protected pagesAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from August 2014Articles with unsourced statements from June 2017