"OVA" redirects here. For other uses, see Ova (disambiguation).







This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages)







This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (January 2007) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)









This section possibly contains original research. Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations. Statements consisting only of original research should be removed. (April 2010) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)









This article may be written from a fan's point of view, rather than a neutral point of view. Please clean it up to conform to a higher standard of quality, and to make it neutral in tone. (June 2014) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)





(Learn how and when to remove this template message)





Part of a series on


Anime and manga







Anime


History
Industry
Original net animation


Original video animation
Fansub
Fandub


Companies
Longest series








Manga


History
International market
Mangaka (list)


Dōjinshi
Scanlation
Publishers


Best-selling series
Longest series


Alternative








Demographic groups


Children
Shōnen
Shōjo
Seinen
Josei








Genres


Harem
Magical girl
Mecha
Yaoi
Yuri


Others








People


Mitsuru Adachi
Fujio Akatsuka


George Akiyama
Hideaki Anno


Hideo Azuma
Clamp


Osamu Dezaki
Hisashi Eguchi


Tetsuo Hara
Yukinobu Hoshino


Ryoichi Ikegami
Kunihiko Ikuhara


Ken Ishikawa
Shotaro Ishinomori


Ikki Kajiwara
Tomoharu Katsumata


Yoshiaki Kawajiri
Shōji Kawamori


Rakuten Kitazawa
Kazuo Koike


Satoshi Kon
Masami Kurumada


Kōichi Mashimo
Katsuji Matsumoto


Leiji Matsumoto
Hayao Miyazaki


Shigeru Mizuki
Hideko Mizuno


Shinji Mizushima
Daijiro Morohoshi


Tadao Nagahama
Go Nagai


Shinji Nagashima
Daisuke Nishio


Eiichiro Oda
Kyoko Okazaki


Mamoru Oshii
Rintaro


Takao Saito
Hiroshi Sasagawa


Junichi Sato
Sanpei Shirato


Masamune Shirow
Gisaburō Sugii


Isao Takahata
Osamu Tezuka


Akira Toriyama
Year 24 Group


Tatsuo Yoshida








Fandom


Conventions (list)
Clubs


Cosplay
Anime music video
Otaku


Moe
Yaoi fandom








General


Omake
Terminology
Iconography






 Anime and Manga portal





v
t
e





Original video animation (オリジナル・ビデオ・アニメーション, Orijinaru bideo animēshon), abbreviated as OVA (オーブイエー / オーヴィーエー / オヴァ, ōbuiē, ōvīē or ova) media (and sometimes as OAV, original animated video), are animated films and series made specially for release in home video formats without prior showings on television or in theatres, though the first part of an OVA series may be broadcast for promotional purposes. OVA titles were originally made available on VHS, later becoming more popular on LaserDisc and eventually DVD.[1] Starting in 2008, the term OAD (original animation DVD)[2][3] began to refer to DVD releases published bundled with their source-material manga.



Contents


1 Format
2 History
3 See also
4 References



Format[edit]
Like anime made for television broadcast, OVAs sub-divide into episodes. OVA media (tapes, laserdiscs, or DVDs) usually contain just one episode each. Episode length varies from title to title: each episode may run from a few minutes to two hours or more. An episode length of 30 minutes occurs quite commonly, but no standard length exists. In some cases, the length of episodes in a specific OVA may vary greatly, for example in GaoGaiGar FINAL, the first 7 episodes last around 30 minutes, while the last episode lasts 50 minutes; the OVA Key the Metal Idol consists of 15 separate episodes, ranging in length from 20 minutes to nearly two hours each; The OVA Hellsing Ultimate had released 10 episodes, ranging from 42 minutes to 56 minutes. An OVA series can run anywhere from a single episode (essentially a direct-to-video movie) to dozens of episodes in length. Probably the longest OVA series ever made, Legend of the Galactic Heroes, spanned 110 main episodes and 52 gaiden episodes.
Many popular series first appear animated as an OVA, and later grow to become television series or movies. Tenchi Muyo!, for example, began as an OVA but went on to spawn several TV series, three movies, and numerous other spin-offs. Producers make other OVA releases as sequels, side stories, music-video collections, or bonus episodes that continue existing as television series or films, such as Love Hina Again and Wolf's Rain.
OVA titles generally have a much higher budget per episode than in a television series; therefore the technical quality of animation can generally surpass that in television series; occasionally it even equals that of animated movies.
OVA titles have a reputation for the detailed plots and character-development which can result from the greater creative freedom offered to writers and directors in comparison with other formats. This also allows for animated adaptations of manga to reflect their source material more faithfully. Since OVA episodes and series have no fixed conventional length, OVA directors can use however much time they like to tell the story. Time becomes available for significant background, character, and plot development. This contrasts with television episodes (which must begin and conclude in 22 to 26 minutes) and with films (which rarely last more than two hours). In the same way, no pressure exists to produce "filler content" to extend a short plot into a full television series. The producers of OVA titles generally target a specific audience, rather than the more mass-market audience of films and television series, or may feel less constrained by content-restrictions and censorship (such as for violence, nudity, and language) often placed on television series. For example, the Kissxsis OVA series generally contains more sexual themes than its television counterpart.
Much OVA-production aims at an audience of male anime enthusiasts. Bandai Visual stated in a 2004 news release (for their new OVAs aimed at women) that about 50% of the customers who had bought their anime DVDs in the past fell into the category of 25- to 40-year-old men, with only 13% of purchasers women, even with all ages included.[4] These statistics cover Bandai Visual anime DVDs in general, not just OVAs, but they show the general tendency at this point[citation needed]. Nikkei Business Publications also stated in a news-release that mainly 25- to 40-year-old adults bought anime DVDs.[5] Few OVAs specifically target female audiences, but Earthian exemplifies the exceptions.
Some OVAs based on television series (and especially those based on manga) may provide closure to the plot – closure not present in the original series. The Rurouni Kenshin OVAs, to name one series, exemplified numerous aspects of OVAs; they were slightly based on chapters of the author Nobuhiro Watsuki's manga that had not been adapted into the anime television series, had higher-quality animation, were much more violent, and were executed in a far more dark and realistic style than the TV episodes or the manga.
Dark realism featured in Masami Kurumada's famous manga Saint Seiya. The anime adapted two of the three arcs in Kurumada's manga – the project to adapt the third arc to the anime never started. As Kurumada had completed his manga in 1991, its third act was finally adapted to anime, releasing the episodes as OVAs, starting in 2003 and finishing in 2008, at last adapting Kurumada's manga completely to anime.
Most OVA titles run for 4 to 8 episodes, and some only have 1. They tend to have a complex and continuous plot[citation needed], best enjoyed if all episodes are viewed in sequence. This contrasts with television series, which generally have many short "mini-stories" that happen to be related somehow, rather than a unified plot. Many OVA titles can be thought of as "long films" that just happen to be released in parts. Release schedules vary: some series may progress as slowly as 1–2 episodes per year. Some OVA titles with a lengthy release-schedule ended up unfinished due to lack of fan support and sales.
Many one-episode OVAs exist as well. Typically, such an OVA provides a side-story to a popular TV series (Detective Conan OVAs). At an early stage in the history of the OVA (1980s) many one-episode OVAs appeared. Hundreds of manga that were popular but not enough to gain TV series were granted one-shot (or otherwise extremely short) OVA episodes. When these one-shot OVAs prove popular enough, a network can use the OVA as a pilot to an anime series.
History[edit]







This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (April 2010) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)










This section possibly contains original research. Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations. Statements consisting only of original research should be removed. (April 2010) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



OVAs originated during the early 1980s. As the VCR became a widespread fixture in Japanese homes the Japanese anime industry grew to behemoth proportions. Demand for anime became massive, so much so that consumers would willingly go directly to video stores to buy new animation outright. While people in the United States use the phrase "direct-to-video" as a pejorative for works that could not make it onto television or movie screens, in Japan the demand was so great that direct-to-video became a necessity. Many popular and influential series such as Bubblegum Crisis (1987–1991) and Tenchi Muyo! (1992–2005) were released directly to video as OVAs.
The earliest known attempt to release an OVA involved Osamu Tezuka's The Green Cat (part of the Lion Books series) in 1983, although it cannot count as the first OVA: there is no evidence that the VHS tape became available immediately, and the series remained incomplete. Therefore, the first official OVA release to be billed as such was 1983's Dallos, directed by Mamoru Oshii and released by Bandai. Other famous early OVAs, premièring shortly thereafter, were Fight! Iczer One and the original Megazone 23. Other companies were quick to pick up on the idea, and the mid-to-late 1980s saw the market flooded with OVAs. During this time, most OVA series were new, stand-alone titles.
In the 1980s during Japan's economic bubble, production companies were more than willing to spontaneously decide to make a one- or two-part OVA. They paid money to anime studios who then haphazardly created an OVA to be released to rental shops. Judging from sales, should a longer series be deemed feasible, TV networks paid for most of the production costs of the entire series.[6]
As the Japanese economy worsened in the 1990s, the flood of new OVA titles diminished to a trickle. Production of OVAs continued, but in smaller numbers. Many anime television series ran an economical 13 episodes rather than the traditional 26-episodes per season. New titles were often designed[by whom?] to be released to TV if they approached these lengths. In addition, the rising popularity of cable and satellite TV networks (with their typically less strict censorship rules) allowed the public to see direct broadcasts of many new titles – previously that would have been impossible. Therefore, many violent, risque, and fan service series became regular TV series when previously those titles would have been OVAs. During this time period most OVA content was limited to that related to existing and established titles.
However, in 2000 and later, a new OVA trend began. Producers released many TV series without normal broadcasts of all of the episodes – but releasing some episodes on DVD-videos of the series. Examples of this include the DVD-only 25th episode of Love Hina, while several episodes of the Oh My Goddess TV series are DVD-only. In addition, the final episode of Excel Saga was offered only as an OVA, mostly due to content issues that would have made TV broadcast impossible. In these cases the series as a whole cannot be called an OVA, though certain episodes are. This trend is becoming quite common, and furthermore, many recent OVA series pre-broadcast the episodes and release the DVD with unedited and better quality, revised animations – thus further blurring the boundary between TV and video anime.
See also[edit]


Animation portal
Film portal



Direct-to-video
Original net animation
V-Cinema

References[edit]


^ Nakayama, Whitney (2004-12-21). "Anime Glossary". G4. Retrieved 2008-09-14. 
^ "魔法先生ネギま!～もうひとつの世界～公式HP" [Negima! Magister Negi Magi!: Another World Official HP] (in Japanese). Kodansha. Retrieved April 8, 2011. 
^ 今日の5の2 初回限定版コミック　～公式サイト～ [Kyō no Go no Ni Limited Edition Comic Official Site] (in Japanese). Kodansha. Retrieved April 8, 2011. 
^ "[ 女性向けアニメションDVDを連続発売 ] バンダイビジュアル株式会社". Bandai Visual. 2004-09-22. Archived from the original on 2006-10-06. Retrieved 2007-01-16. 
^ "日経BP社｜ニュースリリース". Nikkei Business Publications. 2003-06-11. Archived from the original on 2007-11-20. Retrieved 2007-01-15. 
^ Sevakis, Justin (March 5, 2012). "The Anime Economy". Anime News Network. Retrieved September 30, 2012. 








v
t
e


 Animation industry in Japan






History of anime





Companies/studios




Active



3Hz
8-Bit
A.C.G.T
A.P.P.P.
AIC
Ajia-do Animation Works
Aniplex

A-1 Pictures


Arms
Artland
Asahi Production
Asread
Bandai Namco Holdings

Actas
Bandai Namco Pictures
Bandai Visual
Sunrise


Bee Train
Bones
Brain's Base
Bridge
C-Station
C2C
CoMix Wave Films
Daume
David Production
Digital Frontier
Diomedéa
DLE
Doga Kobo
Eiken
Feel
G&G Direction
Gainax
Gallop
Genco
GoHands
Gonzo
Hoods Entertainment
IG Port

Production I.G
Wit Studio
Xebec


Imagin
J.C.Staff
Khara
Kinema Citrus
Knack Productions
Kyoto Animation
Lay-duce
Madhouse
Magic Bus
MAPPA
Mook Animation
Mushi Production
NAZ
Nihon Ad Systems
Nippon Animation
Nomad
Oh! Production
OLM
Passione
P.A.Works
Pierrot
Pine Jam
Polygon Pictures
Production IMS
Production Reed
Project No.9
Robot Communications
Satelight
Sega Sammy Holdings

Marza Animation Planet
TMS Entertainment


Seven Arcs
Shaft
Shin-Ei Animation
Shuka
Silver Link
Square Enix

Visual Works


Studio 4°C
Studio Comet
Studio Deen
Studio Ghibli
Studio Gokumi
Studio Hibari

Lerche


Studio Nue
Studio Ponoc
SynergySP
Tatsunoko Production
Tezuka Productions
TNK
Toei Animation
Troyca
TYO Animations
Ufotable
Ultra Super Pictures

Liden Films
Ordet
Sanzigen
Studio Trigger


White Fox
Zexcs





Defunct



Artmic
Cherry Lips
Group TAC
Hal Film Maker
J2 Communications
Jetlag Productions
Kitayama Eiga Seisakujo
Manglobe
Palm Studio
Radix Ace Entertainment
Spectrum Animation
Studio Fantasia
Topcraft
Triangle Staff
Tsuchida Production
Walt Disney Animation Japan








Industry
associations



The Association of Japanese Animations
Japanese Animation Creators Association





Awards



Animation Kobe Awards
Animax Anison Grand Prix
Anime Grand Prix
Japan Academy Prize for Animation of the Year
Japan Media Arts Awards
Mainichi Film Award for Best Animation Film
Newtype Anime Award
Ōfuji Noburō Award
Seiyu Awards
Sugoi Japan Award
Tokyo Anime Award





Types



Original net animation (ONA)
Original video animation (OVA)
Television

Late night
UHF







Genres



Ecchi
Girls with guns
Harem
Hentai

Tentacle erotica


Lolicon
Kaitō
Magical girl
Mecha
Shotacon
Yaoi
Yuri





Related topics



Animage
Katsudō Shashin
Kinema Junpo
Manga
Newtype











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Original_video_animation&oldid=809994783"					Categories: Anime and manga terminologyAnime OVAsHidden categories: CS1 Japanese-language sources (ja)CS1 uses Japanese-language script (ja)Articles needing additional references from January 2007All articles needing additional referencesArticles that may contain original research from April 2010All articles that may contain original researchArticles with a promotional tone from June 2014All articles with a promotional toneArticles with multiple maintenance issuesArticles containing Japanese-language textAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from July 2009Articles with unsourced statements from January 2010Articles needing additional references from April 2010Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from November 2009