



Osculating orbit (inner, black) and perturbed orbit (red)


In astronomy, and in particular in astrodynamics, the osculating orbit of an object in space at a given moment in time is the gravitational Kepler orbit (i.e. ellipse or other conic) that it would have about its central body if perturbations were not present.[1] That is, it is the orbit that coincides with the current orbital state vectors (position and velocity).
The word "osculate" derives from a Latin word meaning "to kiss". Its use in this context derives from the fact that, at any point in time, an object's osculating orbit is precisely tangent to its actual orbit, with the tangent point being the object's location – and has the same curvature as the orbit would have in the absence of perturbing forces.



Contents


1 Kepler elements
2 Perturbations
3 Parameters
4 See also
5 References
6 External links



Kepler elements[edit]
An osculating orbit and the object's position upon it can be fully described by the six standard Keplerian orbital elements (osculating elements), which are easy to calculate as long as one knows the object's position and velocity relative to the central body. The osculating elements would remain constant in the absence of perturbations. However, real astronomical orbits experience perturbations that cause the osculating elements to evolve, sometimes very quickly. In cases where general celestial mechanical analyses of the motion have been carried out (as they have been for the major planets, the Moon, and other planetary satellites), the orbit can be described by a set of mean elements with secular and periodic terms. In the case of minor planets, a system of proper orbital elements has been devised to enable representation of the most important aspects of their orbits.
Perturbations[edit]
Perturbations that cause an object's osculating orbit to change can arise from:

A non-spherical component to the central body (when the central body can be modeled neither with a point mass nor with a spherically symmetrical mass distribution, e.g. when it is an oblate spheroid).
A third body or multiple other bodies whose gravity perturbs the object's orbit, for example the effect of the Moon's gravity on objects orbiting Earth.
A relativistic correction.
A non-gravitational force acting on the body, for example force arising from:

Thrust from a rocket engine
Releasing, leaking, venting or ablation of a material
Collisions with other objects
Atmospheric drag
Radiation pressure
Solar wind pressure
Switch to a non-inertial reference frame (e.g. when a satellite's orbit is described in a reference frame associated with the precessing equator of the planet).



Parameters[edit]
An object's orbital parameters will be different if they are expressed with respect to a non-inertial reference frame (for example, a frame co-precessing with the primary's equator), than if it is expressed with respect to a (non-rotating) inertial reference frame.
Put in more general terms, a perturbed trajectory can be analysed as if assembled of points, each of which is contributed by a curve out of a sequence of curves. Variables parameterising the curves within this family can be called orbital elements. Typically (though not necessarily), these curves are chosen as Keplerian conics, all of which share one focus. In most situations, it is convenient to set each of these curves tangent to the trajectory at the point of intersection. Curves that obey this condition (and also the further condition that they have the same curvature at the point of tangency as would be produced by the object's gravity towards the central body in the absence of perturbing forces) are called osculating, while the variables parameterising these curves are called osculating elements. In some situations, description of orbital motion can be simplified and approximated by choosing orbital elements that are not osculating. Also, in some situations, the standard (Lagrange-type or Delaunay-type) equations furnish orbital elements that turn out to be non-osculating.[2]
See also[edit]

Kepler orbit
Eccentricity vector
Orbital elements
Contact (mathematics)
Osculating circle
List of orbits

References[edit]



^ Moulton, Forest R. (1970) [1902]. Introduction to Celestial Mechanics (2nd revised ed.). Mineola, NY: Dover. ISBN 0486646874,  at pp.322-3.
^ For details see: Efroimsky, M. (2005). "Gauge Freedom in Orbital Mechanics". Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences. 1065: 346–74. arXiv:astro-ph/0603092 . Bibcode:2005NYASA1065..346E. doi:10.1196/annals.1370.016. PMID 16510420. ; Efroimsky, Michael; Goldreich, Peter (2003). "Gauge symmetry of the N-body problem in the Hamilton–Jacobi approach". Journal of Mathematical Physics. 44 (12): 5958–5977. arXiv:astro-ph/0305344 . Bibcode:2003JMP....44.5958E. doi:10.1063/1.1622447. 



External links[edit]

Diagram of a sequence of osculating orbits for the escape from Earth orbit by the ion-driven SMART-1 spacecraft: http://sci.esa.int/science-e/www/object/index.cfm?fobjectid=35722
A sequence of osculating orbits for the approach to the Moon by the SMART-1 spacecraft: http://sci.esa.int/science-e/www/object/index.cfm?fobjectid=36359


Videos


Osculating orbits: restricted 3-Body problem on YouTube (min. 4:26)
Osculating orbits: 3-Body Lagrange problem on YouTube (min. 4:00)
Osculating orbits: 4-Body Lagrange problem on YouTube (min. 1:05)
Osculating orbits: in: the Pythagorean 3-Body problem on YouTube (min. 4:26)
Minor Planet Center: Asteroid Hazards, Part 3: Finding the Path on YouTube (min. 5:38)







v
t
e


Gravitational orbits



Types




General



Box
Capture
Circular
Elliptical / Highly elliptical
Escape
Graveyard
Horseshoe
Hyperbolic trajectory
Inclined / Non-inclined
Osculating
Parabolic trajectory
Parking
Synchronous

semi
sub


Transfer orbit





Geocentric



Geosynchronous
Geostationary
Sun-synchronous
Low Earth
Medium Earth
High Earth
Molniya
Near-equatorial
Orbit of the Moon
Polar
Tundra





About other points



Areosynchronous
Areostationary
Halo
Lissajous
Lunar
Heliocentric
Heliosynchronous








Parameters







Shape
Size






e  Eccentricity
a  Semi-major axis
b  Semi-minor axis
Q, q  Apsides





Orientation



i  Inclination
Ω  Longitude of the ascending node
ω  Argument of periapsis
ϖ  Longitude of the periapsis





Position



M  Mean anomaly
ν  True anomaly
E  Eccentric anomaly
L  Mean longitude
l  True longitude





Variation



T  Orbital period
n  Mean motion
v  Orbital speed
t0  Epoch








Maneuvers



Collision avoidance (spacecraft)
Delta-v
Delta-v budget
Bi-elliptic transfer
Geostationary transfer
Gravity assist
Gravity turn
Hohmann transfer
Low energy transfer
Oberth effect
Inclination change
Phasing
Rocket equation
Rendezvous
Transposition, docking, and extraction





Orbital mechanics



Celestial coordinate system
Characteristic energy
Escape velocity
Ephemeris
Equatorial coordinate system
Ground track
Hill sphere
Interplanetary Transport Network
Kepler's laws of planetary motion
Lagrangian point
n-body problem
Orbit equation
Orbital state vectors
Perturbation
Retrograde motion
Specific orbital energy
Specific relative angular momentum
Two-line elements








List of orbits











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Osculating_orbit&oldid=797413385"					Categories: AstrodynamicsOrbital perturbations