"Ottomans" redirects here. For the dynasty that ruled the Ottoman Empire, see Ottoman dynasty. For the modern descendants of the dynastic family, see Osmanoğlu family.






This article does not cite any sources. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (December 2012) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)









This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (December 2009) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



The Ottoman Turks (or Osmanlı Turks, Turkish: Osmanlı Türkleri) were the Turkish-speaking population of the Ottoman Empire who formed the base of the state's military and ruling classes. Reliable information about the early history of Ottoman Turks is scarce, but they take their Turkish name, Osmanlı ("Osman" being corrupted in some European languages as "Ottoman"), from the house of Osman I (reigned ca. 1299–1326), the founder of the dynasty that ruled the Ottoman Empire for its entire 624 years. After the expansion from its home in Bithynia, the Ottoman principality began incorporating other Turkish-speaking Muslims and non-Turkish Christians, becoming the Ottoman Turks and ultimately the Turks of the present. The Ottoman Turks blocked all land routes to Europe by conquering the city of Constantinople, the capital city of the Byzantine–East Roman Empire, and Europeans had to find other ways to trade with Eastern countries.[1]



Contents


1 Brief history
2 Culture and the arts

2.1 Ottoman calligraphy
2.2 Ottoman poetry
2.3 Ottoman painting


3 See also
4 Notes
5 References

5.1 Primary sources





Brief history[edit]
Main article: Ottoman Empire
The "Ottomans" became first known to the West in the 14th century when they migrated westward into the Seljuk Empire, in Anatolia. The Ottoman Turks created a state in Western Anatolia under Ertugrul, the capital of which was Sögüt in western Anatolia. Ertugrul established a principality as part of the decaying Seljuk empire. His son Osman expanded the principality; the empire and the people were named "Ottomans" by Europeans after him ("Ottoman" being a corruption of "Osman"). Osman's son Orhan expanded the growing Ottoman Empire, taking Nicaea (present-day İznik) and crossed the Dardanelles in 1362. The Ottoman Empire came into its own when Mehmed II captured the Byzantine Empire's capital, Constantinople (Istanbul), in 1453.[2]
The Ottoman Empire came to rule much of the Balkans, the Caucasus, the Middle East (excluding Iran), and North Africa over the course of several centuries, with an advanced army and navy. The Empire lasted until the end of the First World War, when it was defeated by the Allies and partitioned. Following the successful Turkish War of Independence that ended with the Turkish national movement retaking most of the land lost to the Allies, the movement abolished the Ottoman sultanate on November 1, 1922 and proclaimed the Republic of Turkey on October 29, 1923. The movement nullified the Treaty of Sèvres and negotiated the enormously more favorable Treaty of Lausanne, assuring recognition of modern Turkish national borders, termed Misak-ı Milli (National Pact).
Not all Ottomans were Muslims and not all Ottoman Muslims were Turks, but by 1923, the majority of people living within the borders of the new Turkish republic identified as Turks. (Notable exceptions were the Kurds and the few remaining Armenians and Georgians and Greeks.)
Culture and the arts[edit]
Main article: Culture of the Ottoman Empire
The conquest of Constantinople began to make the Ottomans the rulers of one of the most profitable empires, connected to the flourishing Islamic cultures of the time, and at the crossroads of trade into Europe. The Ottomans made major developments in calligraphy, writing, law, architecture, and military science, and became the standard of opulence.
Ottoman calligraphy[edit]
Because Islam is a monotheistic religion that focuses heavily on learning the central text of the Quran, and because Islamic culture has historically tended towards discouraging or prohibiting figurative art, calligraphy became one of the foremost of the arts.
The early Yâkût period was supplanted in the late 15th century by a new style pioneered by Şeyh Hamdullah (1429–1520), which became the basis for Ottoman calligraphy, focusing on the Nesih version of the script, which became the standard for copying the Quran (see Islamic calligraphy).
The next great change in Ottoman calligraphy came from the style of Hâfiz Osman (1642–1698), whose rigorous and simplified style found favor with an empire at its peak of territorial extent and governmental burdens.
The late calligraphic style of the Ottomans was created by Mustafa Râkim (1757–1826) as an extension and reform of Osman's style, placing greater emphasis on technical perfection, which broadened the calligraphic art to encompass the sülüs script as well as the Nesih script.
Ottoman poetry[edit]
Main article: Turkish literature
Ottoman poetry included epic length verse, but is better Known for shorter forms such as the gazel. For example the epic poet Ahmedi (-1412) is remembered for his Alexander the Great. His contemporary Sheykhi wrote verses on love and romance. Yaziji-Oglu produced a religious epic on Mohammed's life, drawing from the stylistic advances of the previous generation and Ahmedi's epic forms.
Ottoman painting[edit]
Main article: Ottoman miniature
By the 14th century, the Ottoman Empire's prosperity made manuscript works available to merchants and craftsmen, and produced a flowering of miniatures that depicted pagentry, daily life, commerce, cities and stories, and chronicled events.
By the late 18th century, European influences in painting were clear, with the introduction of oils, perspective, figurative paintings, use of anatomy and composition.
See also[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Ottoman Turks.



Turkish people

Notes[edit]



^ Tolan, John; Veinstein, Gilles and Henry Laurens (2013). "Europe and the Islamic World: A History". Princeton University Press. pp. 167–188. ISBN 978-0-691-14705-5. CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link)
^ Tolan, John; Veinstein, Gilles and Henry Laurens (2013). "Europe and the Islamic World: A History". Princeton University Press. pp. 67–68. ISBN 978-0-691-14705-5. CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link)



References[edit]
Primary sources[edit]



Library resources about
Ottoman Turks





Online books
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries





Itzkowitz, Norman (1980). Ottoman Empire and Islamic Tradition. University of Chicago Press. ISBN 0-226-38806-9. 








v
t
e


Ottoman Empire articles



History



Osman's Dream
Rise

Gaza Thesis
Interregnum
Constantinople


Classical Age

Sultanate of Women


Transformation

Decline Thesis
Köprülü


Stagnation and reform

Tulip


Decline and modernization

Tanzimat
1st Constitutional


Defeat and dissolution

2nd Constitutional
Partitioning
Abolition







Politics







Foreign relations
Law

Constitution
Armenian Constitution
Electoral


Civil codes

Mecelle
Halakha







Government




House of Osman



Ottoman dynasty

List of Ottoman sultans
Ottoman Caliphate
Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques


Imperial Harem

Valide sultan
Haseki sultan
Kadınefendi
Hanımefendi
List of Ottoman sultans' mothers
List of Ottoman sultans' consorts
Kizlar Agha


Inner Palace Service

Kapi Agha
Palace Schools







Central (Porte)





Imperial Council
(Classic period)




Grand Vizier
Viziers
Kazaskers
Defterdars/Ministers of Finance
Nişancı
Reis ül-Küttab






Imperial Government
(constitutional period)





Assembly



Senate
Chamber of Deputies








Millets



Islam

Shaykh al-Islām


Christianity

Rum Millet
Bulgarian Millet
Orthodox
Armenian
Syriac Orthodox
Coptic Orthodox


Judaism

Hakham Bashi










Provincial



Eyalets

Beylerbeys


Vilayets
Sanjaks

Sanjakbeys


Mutasarrifates
Kazas/Kadiluks
Vassal and tributary states








Military




Army



Classic period army
Reform period

Nizam-i Djedid
Sekban-i Djedid
Mansure Army
Hamidiye


Modernized army





Navy



Kapudan Pasha

List


Imperial Arsenal
Admirals
Naval battles
Ships





Other



Aviation
Conscription
Weapons











Economy







By era

Enlargement
Reformation


Agriculture
Central bank
Currency

Akçe
Para
Sultani
Kuruş
Lira


Taxation
Transport








Society







Social structure
Devshirme
Ottomanism
Ottoman court

Court Positions


Languages

Ottoman Turkish


Slavery





Culture



Architecture

Mosques


Art

Miniature
Music


Clothing
Cuisine
Literature

Prose
Poetry


Science and technology





Demographics



Armenians
Greeks
Jews





Religion



Islam
Christianity and Judaism





Symbols



Anthem
Coat of arms
Flag
Tughra












Outline
Index
Bibliography



Category
Portal











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ottoman_Turks&oldid=817446434"					Categories: Turks of the Ottoman EmpireHidden categories: CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors listArticles lacking sources from December 2012All articles lacking sourcesArticles needing additional references from December 2009All articles needing additional referencesArticles containing Turkish-language text