This article is about the time zone with daylight change in North America. For the static time zones, see UTC−08:00 and UTC−07:00. For the radio show, see Pacific Time (radio show). For the art exhibition, see Pacific Standard Time: Art in L.A., 1945–1980.







This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages)







This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (November 2009) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)









This article includes a list of references, but its sources remain unclear because it has insufficient inline citations. Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations. (June 2012) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)





(Learn how and when to remove this template message)





Pacific Time Zone




  Pacific Time Zone




UTC offset


PST
UTC−8:00


PDT
UTC−7:00


Current time (Refresh the clock.)


PST
9:14 pm on  Jan 3, 2018


Observance of DST


DST is observed throughout this time zone between the 2nd Sunday in March and the 1st Sunday in November.


DST ended
Nov 5, 2017


DST begins
Mar 11, 2018


The Pacific Time Zone (PT) is a time zone encompassing parts of western Canada, the western United States, and western Mexico. Places in this zone observe standard time by subtracting eight hours from Coordinated Universal Time (UTC−8). During daylight saving time, a time offset of UTC−7 is used.
In the United States and Canada, this time zone is generically called the "Pacific Time Zone". Specifically, time in this zone is referred to as "Pacific Standard Time" (PST) when standard time is being observed (early November to mid-March), and "Pacific Daylight Time" (PDT) when daylight saving time (mid-March to early November) is being observed. In Mexico, the corresponding time zone is known as the Zona Noroeste (Northwest Zone) and observes the same daylight saving schedule as the U.S. and Canada. The largest city in the Pacific Time Zone is Los Angeles; the city's metropolitan area is the largest in the zone.
The zone is two hours ahead of the Hawaii–Aleutian Time Zone, one hour ahead of the Alaska Time Zone, one hour behind the Mountain Time Zone,[nb 1] two hours behind the Central Time Zone, and three hours behind the Eastern Time Zone.



Contents


1 Canada
2 Mexico
3 United States
4 Daylight time
5 See also
6 Notes
7 External links



Canada[edit]
Main article: Time in Canada
Only one Canadian territory is entirely in the Pacific Time Zone:

Yukon

One Canadian province and one territory are split between the Pacific Time Zone and the Mountain Time Zone:

British Columbia – all, except for the Highway 95 corridor (including Golden and Creston) in the southeast, and Tumbler Ridge, Fort St. John, and Dawson Creek in the northeast
Northwest Territories – Tungsten

Mexico[edit]
Main article: Time in Mexico
In Mexico, the Zona Noroeste, which corresponds to Pacific Time in the United States and Canada, includes:

Baja California
Colima – Clarion Island

United States[edit]
Main article: Time in the United States
Two states are fully contained in the Pacific Time Zone:

California
Washington

Three states are split between the Pacific Time Zone and the Mountain Time Zone:

Idaho – Idaho Panhandle
Nevada – all, except for West Wendover and Jackpot, Mountain City, Owyhee, and Jarbidge.
Oregon – all, except for the majority of Malheur County

One state is split between the Pacific Time Zone and the Alaska Time Zone:

Alaska – Hyder

Daylight time[edit]
Through 2006, the local time (PST, UTC−8) changed to daylight time (PDT, UTC−7) at 02:00 LST (local standard time) to 03:00 LDT (local daylight time) on the first Sunday in April, and returned at 02:00 LDT to 01:00 LST on the last Sunday in October.
Effective in the U.S. in 2007 as a result of the Energy Policy Act of 2005, the local time changes from PST to PDT at 02:00 LST to 03:00 LDT on the second Sunday in March and the time returns at 02:00 LDT to 01:00 LST on the first Sunday in November. The Canadian provinces and territories that use daylight time each adopted these dates between October 2005 and February 2007. In Mexico, beginning in 2010, the portion of the country in this time zone uses the extended dates, as do some other parts. The vast majority of Mexico, however, still uses the old dates.
See also[edit]

Effects of time zones on North American broadcasting

Notes[edit]



^ Most of Arizona uses standard time year-round, so during daylight saving time, the Pacific Time Zone is actually on the same time as most of Arizona.



External links[edit]

The Official NIST US Time
Official times across Canada
World time zone map
U.S. time zone map
History of U.S. time zones and UTC conversion
Canada time zone map
Time zones for major world cities






v
t
e


Time zones in North America



Time zone
Hours from UTC: Standard time
Hours from UTC: Daylight saving time


Hawaii–Aleutian (in Hawaii)
–10
–10


Hawaii–Aleutian (in Alaska)
–10
–9


Alaska
–9
–8


Pacific
–8
–7


Mountain (Arizona and Sonora only)
–7
–7


Mountain (other states)
–7
–6


Central (Saskatchewan only)
–6
–6


Central (other states)
–6
–5


Eastern (Southampton Island, Atikokan and New Osnaburgh/Pickle Lake only)
–5
–5


Eastern (other states)
–5
–4


Atlantic (Natashquan River)
–4
–4


Atlantic (other states)
–4
–3


Newfoundland
–3:30
–2:30


Saint Pierre and Miquelon
and most of Greenland
–3
–2




See also
Time in Canada
Time in Denmark
Time in Mexico
Time in the United States









						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Pacific_Time_Zone&oldid=818450253"					Categories: Time zonesTime in CanadaTime in MexicoTime zones in the United StatesHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from November 2009All articles needing additional referencesArticles lacking in-text citations from June 2012All articles lacking in-text citationsArticles with multiple maintenance issues