

Part of a series on


God




General conceptions


Agnosticism
Apatheism
Atheism
Deism
Henotheism
Ignosticism
Monotheism
Monism
Dualism
Monolatry
Kathenotheism
Omnism
Panpsychism
Panentheism
Pantheism
Polytheism
Theism
Transtheism








Specific conceptions


Creator
Demiurge
Deus
Father
Great Architect
Monad
Mother
Supreme Being
Sustainer
The All
The Lord
Trinity
Tawhid
Ditheism
Monism
Personal
Unitarianism








In particular religions



Abrahamic




Judaism
Christianity
Islam
Bahá'í
Mormonism




Indo-Iranian




Hinduism
Buddhism
Jainism
Sikhism
Zoroastrianism




Chinese




Tian
Shangdi
Hongjun Laozu











Attributes


Eternalness
Existence
Gender
Names ("God")
Omnibenevolence
Omnipotence
Omnipresence
Omniscience











Experiences
Practices





Belief
Esotericism
Faith
Fideism
Gnosis
Hermeticism
Metaphysics
Mysticism
Prayer
Revelation
Worship








Related topics


Euthyphro dilemma
God complex
God gene
Theology
Ontology
Problem of evil (theodicy)
Religion

philosophy
texts


Portrayals of God in popular media









v
t
e







Part of a series on


Spirituality


 





Outline





 




Religion



History
Timeline









Traditional



Christian (Catholic)
Mysticism









Modern


Buddhist modernism
New religious movement
"Spiritual but not religious"
Syncretism








Spiritual experience


Mystical experience
Religious experience
Spiritual practice








Spiritual development


Ego death
Individuation
Spiritual development
Self-actualization






Influences




Western


General


Divine illumination
Panpsychism
Pantheism


Antiquity


Gnosticism
Hermeticism
Neoplatonism
Western esotericism


Medieaval


Mysticism


Early modern


Perennial philosophy
Jakob Böhme
Emanuel Swedenborg
Pietism


Modern


Romanticism
German idealism
Liberal Christianity
Transcendentalism
Universalism
New Thought
Theosophy
Anthroposophy
Occultism
Spiritualism
Esoteric Christianity
New Age








Orientalist


Comparative religion
Neo-Advaita
Nondualism
Orientalism
Theosophical Society








Asian


Pre-historic


Proto-Indo-Iranian religion


Iran


Zoroastrianism


India


Advaita Vedanta
Buddha-nature
Enlightenment (spiritual)
Madhyamaka
Neo-Vedanta
Tantra
Yoga
Yogacara


East-Asia


Taoism








Other non-western


Animism
Shamanism
Totemism








Psychological


Humanistic psychology
Mindfulness
Positive psychology
Self-help
Self-realization
True self and false self






Research




Neurological


Mystical psychosis
Cognitive science of religion
Neuroscience of religion
Geschwind syndrome
Evolutionary psychology of religion








Category







v
t
e







Part of a series on


Irreligion




Irreligion



Secular humanism
Freethought

Post-theism
Nontheism
Anti-clericalism
Antireligion
Criticism of religion
Parody religion









Atheism






History
Demographics
Discrimination/Persecution
Criticism
Lists of atheists





Forms and variations





Implicit and explicit
Negative and positive
New
State
Christian
Hindu
Jewish





Aspects





Anti-clericalism
Antireligion
Antitheism



Relationship between atheism and religion
Existence of God











Agnosticism



Strong
Weak
Atheistic
Theistic (Christian)
Apatheism
Secular Buddhism



List of agnostics








Nontheism



Criticism of religion
Secular humanism
Freethought
Flying Spaghetti Monster
Ignosticism
Inconsistent revelations
Invisible Pink Unicorn
Nontheistic religions
Pantheism
Parody religion
Post-theism

Russell's teapot
Theological noncognitivism
Transtheism









Naturalism



Humanistic
Metaphysical

Methodological
Religious









People



Lists of  agnostics
atheists
deists
humanists
pantheists









Books



Breaking the Spell
Ethics
The End of Faith



The God Delusion
God Is Not Great
The System of Nature
Letter to a Christian Nation
Why I Am Not a Christian
Why I Am Not a Muslim








Secularist organizations


Atheist Alliance International
Freedom From Religion Foundation



Reason Rally
World Pantheist Movement









Related topics



Secularism
Laïcité



Parody or mock religions








Irreligion by country







v
t
e





Pantheism is the belief that all reality is identical with divinity,[1] or that everything composes an all-encompassing, immanent god.[2] Pantheists do not believe in a distinct personal or anthropomorphic god[3] and hold a broad range of doctrines differing with regards to the forms of and relationships between divinity and reality.[4]
Pantheism was popularized in Western culture as a theology and philosophy based on the work of the 17th-century philosopher Baruch Spinoza,[5]:p.7 particularly his book Ethics, published in 1677.[6] The term "pantheism" was coined by Mathematician Joseph Raphson in 1697[7][8] and has since been used to describe the beliefs of a variety of people and organizations.
Pantheistic concepts date back thousands of years, and pantheistic elements have been identified in branches of Eastern religions such as Hinduism.[9]



Contents


1 Etymology
2 Definitions
3 History

3.1 Pre-modern times
3.2 Baruch Spinoza
3.3 18th century

3.3.1 Pantheism controversy


3.4 19th century

3.4.1 Growing influence
3.4.2 Comparison with non-Christian religions


3.5 20th century


4 Categorizations

4.1 Degree of determinism
4.2 Degree of belief
4.3 Form of monism
4.4 Other


5 Related concepts
6 Pantheism in religion

6.1 Traditional religions
6.2 Spirituality and New Religious Movements


7 See also
8 Notes
9 References
10 Sources
11 Further reading
12 External links



Etymology[edit]
Pantheism derives from the Greek πᾶν pan (meaning "all, of everything") and θεός theos (meaning "god, divine"). The first known combination of these roots appears in Latin, in Joseph Raphson's 1697 book De Spatio Reali seu Ente Infinito[8], where he refers to the "pantheismus" of Spinoza and others.[7] It was subsequently translated into English as "pantheism" in 1702.
Definitions[edit]
There are a variety of definitions of pantheism. Some consider it a theological and philosophical position concerning God.[5]:p.8
As a religious position, some describe pantheism as the polar opposite of atheism.[10]:pp. 7 From this standpoint, pantheism is the view that everything is part of an all-encompassing, immanent God.[11] All forms of reality may then be considered either modes of that Being, or identical with it.[12] Some hold that pantheism is a non-religious philosophical position. To them, pantheism is the view that the Universe (in the sense of the totality of all existence) and God are identical (implying a denial of the personality and transcendence of God).[13]
History[edit]
Pre-modern times[edit]
Pantheistic tendencies existed in a number of early Gnostic groups, with pantheistic thought appearing throughout the Middle Ages.[14] These included a section of Johannes Scotus Eriugena's 9th-century work De divisione naturae and the beliefs of mystics such as Amalric of Bena (11th–12th centuries) and Eckhart (12th–13th).[14]:pp. 620–621
The Roman Catholic Church has long regarded pantheistic ideas as heresy.[15][16] Giordano Bruno, an Italian monk who evangelized about an immanent and infinite God, was burned at the stake in 1600 by the Roman Inquisition. He has since become known as a celebrated pantheist and martyr of science[17], and an influence on many later thinkers.
Baruch Spinoza[edit]
Main article: Baruch Spinoza




The philosophy of Baruch Spinoza is often regarded as pantheism.[5][18]


In the West, pantheism was formalized as a separate theology and philosophy based on the work of the 17th-century philosopher Baruch Spinoza.[5]:p.7 Spinoza was a Dutch philosopher of Portuguese descent raised in the Sephardi Jewish community in Amsterdam.[19] He developed highly controversial ideas regarding the authenticity of the Hebrew Bible and the nature of the Divine, and was effectively excluded from Jewish society at age 23, when the local synagogue issued a herem against him.[20] A number of his books were published posthumously, and shortly thereafter included in the Catholic Church's Index of Forbidden Books. The breadth and importance of Spinoza's work would not be realized for many years - as the groundwork for the 18th-century Enlightenment[21] and modern biblical criticism,[22] including modern conceptions of the self and the universe.[23]
In the posthumous Ethics, "Spinoza wrote the last indisputable Latin masterpiece, and one in which the refined conceptions of medieval philosophy are finally turned against themselves and destroyed entirely."[24]. In particular, he opposed René Descartes' famous mind–body dualism, the theory that the body and spirit are separate.[10] Spinoza held the monist view that the two are the same, and monism is a fundamental part of his philosophy. He was described as a "God-intoxicated man," and used the word God to describe the unity of all substance.[10] This view influenced philosophers such as Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel, who said, "You are either a Spinozist or not a philosopher at all."[25] Spinoza earned praise as one of the great rationalists of 17th-century philosophy[26] and one of Western philosophy's most important thinkers.[27] Although the term "pantheism" was not coined until after his death, he is regarded as the most celebrated advocate of the concept.[28] Ethics was the major source from which Western pantheism spread.[6]
18th century[edit]
The first known use of the term "pantheism" was in Latin ("pantheismus" [7]) by the English mathematician Joseph Raphson in his work De Spatio Reali seu Ente Infinito, published in 1697.[8] Raphson begins with a distinction between atheistic "panhylists" (from the Greek roots pan, "all", and hyle, "matter"), who believe everything is matter, and Spinozan "pantheists" who believe in "a certain universal substance, material as well as intelligence, that fashions all things that exist out of its own essence."[29][30] Raphson thought that the universe was immeasurable in respect to a human's capacity of understanding, and believed that humans would never be able to comprehend it.[31] He referred to the pantheism of the Ancient Egyptians, Persians, Syrians, Assyrians, Greek, Indians, and Jewish Kabbalists, specifically referring to Spinoza.[32]
The term was first used in English by a translation of Raphson's work in 1702. It was later used and popularized by Irish writer John Toland in his work of 1705 Socinianism Truly Stated, by a pantheist.[33][14]:pp. 617–618 Toland was influenced by both Spinoza and Bruno, and had read Joseph Raphson's De Spatio Reali, referring to it as "the ingenious Mr. Ralphson's (sic) Book of Real Space".[34] Like Raphson, he used the terms "pantheist" and "Spinozist" interchangeably.[35] In 1720 he wrote the Pantheisticon: or The Form of Celebrating the Socratic-Society in Latin, envisioning a pantheist society that believed, "All things in the world are one, and one is all in all things ... what is all in all things is God, eternal and immense, neither born nor ever to perish."[36][37] He clarified his idea of pantheism in a letter to Gottfried Leibniz in 1710 when he referred to "the pantheistic opinion of those who believe in no other eternal being but the universe".[14][38][39][40]
In the mid-eighteenth century, the English theologian Daniel Waterland defined pantheism this way: "It supposes God and nature, or God and the whole universe, to be one and the same substance—one universal being; insomuch that men's souls are only modifications of the divine substance."[14][41] In the early nineteenth century, the German theologian Julius Wegscheider defined pantheism as the belief that God and the world established by God are one and the same.[14][42]
Pantheism controversy[edit]
Between 1785–89, a major controversy about Spinoza's philosophy arose between the German philosophers Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi (a critic) and Moses Mendelssohn (a defender). Known in German as the Pantheismusstreit (pantheism controversy), it helped spread pantheism to many German thinkers.[43] A 1780 conversation with the German dramatist Gotthold Ephraim Lessing led Jacobi to a protracted study of Spinoza's works. Lessing stated that he knew no other philosophy than Spinozism. Jacobi's Über die Lehre des Spinozas (1st ed. 1785, 2nd ed. 1789) expressed his strenuous objection to a dogmatic system in philosophy, and drew upon him the enmity of the Berlin group, led by Mendelssohn. Jacobi claimed that Spinoza's doctrine was pure materialism, because all Nature and God are said to be nothing but extended substance. This, for Jacobi, was the result of Enlightenment rationalism and it would finally end in absolute atheism. Mendelssohn disagreed with Jacobi, saying that pantheism shares more characteristics of theism than of atheism. The entire issue became a major intellectual and religious concern for European civilization at the time[44]
Willi Goetschel argues that Jacobi's publication significantly shaped Spinoza's wide reception for centuries following its publication, obscuring the nuance of Spinoza's philosophic work.[45]
19th century[edit]
Growing influence[edit]
During the beginning of the 19th century, pantheism was the viewpoint of many leading writers and philosophers, attracting figures such as William Wordsworth and Samuel Coleridge in Britain; Johann Gottlieb Fichte, Schelling and Hegel in Germany; Knut Hamsun in Norway; and Walt Whitman, Ralph Waldo Emerson and Henry David Thoreau in the United States. Seen as a growing threat by the Vatican, in 1864 it was formally condemned by Pope Pius IX in the Syllabus of Errors.[46]
In 2011, a letter written in 1886 by William Herndon, Abraham Lincoln's law partner, was sold at auction for US$30,000.[47] In it, Herndon writes of the U.S. President's evolving religious views, which included pantheism.

"Mr. Lincoln's religion is too well known to me to allow of even a shadow of a doubt; he is or was a Theist and a Rationalist, denying all extraordinary – supernatural inspiration or revelation. At one time in his life, to say the least, he was an elevated Pantheist, doubting the immortality of the soul as the Christian world understands that term. He believed that the soul lost its identity and was immortal as a force. Subsequent to this he rose to the belief of a God, and this is all the change he ever underwent."[47][48]

The subject is understandably controversial, but the content of the letter is consistent with Lincoln's fairly lukewarm approach to organized religion.[48]
Comparison with non-Christian religions[edit]
Some 19th-century theologians thought that various pre-Christian religions and philosophies were pantheistic.
They thought Pantheism was similar to the ancient Hindu[14]:pp. 618 philosophy of Advaita (non-dualism) to the extent that the 19th-century German Sanskritist Theodore Goldstücker remarked that Spinoza's thought was "... a western system of philosophy which occupies a foremost rank amongst the philosophies of all nations and ages, and which is so exact a representation of the ideas of the Vedanta, that we might have suspected its founder to have borrowed the fundamental principles of his system from the Hindus."[49]
19th-century European theologians also considered Ancient Egyptian religion to contain pantheistic elements and pointed to Egyptian philosophy as a source of Greek Pantheism.[14]:pp. 618–620 The latter included some of the Presocratics, such as Heraclitus and Anaximander.[50] The Stoics were pantheists, beginning with Zeno of Citium and culminating in the emperor-philosopher Marcus Aurelius. During the pre-Christian Roman Empire, Stoicism was one of the three dominant schools of philosophy, along with Epicureanism and Neoplatonism.[51][52] The early Taoism of Laozi and Zhuangzi is also sometimes considered pantheistic.[38]
20th century[edit]




Albert Einstein is considered a pantheist by some commentators.


In 2007, Dorion Sagan, the son of famous scientist and science communicator, Carl Sagan, published a book entitled Dazzle Gradually: Reflections on the Nature of Nature co-written with his mother, Lynn Margulis. In a chapter entitled, "Truth of My Father", he declares: "My father believed in the God of Spinoza and Einstein, God not behind nature, but as nature, equivalent to it."[53]
In a letter written to Eduard Büsching (25 October 1929), after Büsching sent Albert Einstein a copy of his book Es gibt keinen Gott ("There is no God"), Einstein wrote, "We followers of Spinoza see our God in the wonderful order and lawfulness of all that exists and in its soul [Beseeltheit] as it reveals itself in man and animal."[54] According to Einstein, the book only dealt with the concept of a personal god and not the impersonal God of pantheism.[54] In a letter written in 1954 to philosopher Eric Gutkind, Einstein wrote "the word God is for me nothing more than the expression and product of human weaknesses."[55][56] In another letter written in 1954 he wrote "I do not believe in a personal God and I have never denied this but have expressed it clearly.".[55]
In the late 20th century, some declared that pantheism was the underlying theology of Neopaganism,[57] and pantheists began forming organizations devoted specifically to pantheism and treating it as a separate religion.[38]




Levi Ponce's "Luminaries of Pantheism" in Venice, California for The Paradise Project.


Pantheism is mentioned in a Papal encyclical in 2009[58] and a statement on New Year's Day in 2010,[59] criticizing pantheism for denying the superiority of humans over nature and seeing the source of man's salvation in nature.[58] In a review of the 2009 film Avatar, Ross Douthat, an author, described pantheism as "Hollywood's religion of choice for a generation now".[60]
In 2015, notable Los Angeles muralist Levi Ponce was commissioned to paint "Luminaries of Pantheism" for an area in Venice, California that receives over a million onlookers per year. The organization that commissioned the work, The Paradise Project, is "dedicated to celebrating and spreading awareness about pantheism."[61] The mural painting depicts Albert Einstein, Alan Watts, Baruch Spinoza, Terence McKenna, Carl Jung, Carl Sagan, Emily Dickinson, Nikola Tesla, Friedrich Nietzsche, Ralph Waldo Emerson, W.E.B. Du Bois, Henry David Thoreau, Elizabeth Cady Stanton, Rumi, Adi Shankara, and Laozi.[62]
Categorizations[edit]
There are multiple varieties of pantheism[14][63]:3 and various systems of classifying them relying upon one or more spectra or in discrete categories.
Degree of determinism[edit]
The philosopher Charles Hartshorne used the term Classical Pantheism to describe the deterministic philosophies of Baruch Spinoza, the Stoics, and other like-minded figures.[64] Pantheism (All-is-God) is often associated with monism (All-is-One) and some have suggested that it logically implies determinism (All-is-Now).[10][65][66][67][68] Albert Einstein explained theological determinism by stating,[69] "the past, present, and future are an 'illusion'". This form of pantheism has been referred to as "extreme monism", in which –  in the words of one commentator –  "God decides or determines everything, including our supposed decisions."[70] Other examples of determinism-inclined pantheisms include those of Ralph Waldo Emerson,[71] and Hegel.[72]
However, some have argued against treating every meaning of "unity" as an aspect of pantheism,[73] and there exist versions of pantheism that regard determinism as an inaccurate or incomplete view of nature. Examples include the beliefs of Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph Schelling and William James.[74]
Degree of belief[edit]
It may also be possible to distinguish two types of pantheism, one being more religious and the other being more philosophical. The Columbia Encyclopedia writes of the distinction:

"If the pantheist starts with the belief that the one great reality, eternal and infinite, is God, he sees everything finite and temporal as but some part of God. There is nothing separate or distinct from God, for God is the universe. If, on the other hand, the conception taken as the foundation of the system is that the great inclusive unity is the world itself, or the universe, God is swallowed up in that unity, which may be designated nature."[75]

Form of monism[edit]




A diagram with neutral monism compared to Cartesian dualism, physicalism and idealism.


Philosophers and theologians have often suggested that pantheism implies monism.[76] Different types of monism include:[77][78]

Substance monism, "the view that the apparent plurality of substances is due to different states or appearances of a single substance"[77]
Attributive monism, "the view that whatever the number of substances, they are of a single ultimate kind"[77]
Partial monism, "within a given realm of being (however many there may be) there is only one substance"[77]
Existence monism, the view that there is only one concrete object token (The One, "Τὸ Ἕν" or the Monad).[79]
Priority monism, "the whole is prior to its parts" or "the world has parts, but the parts are dependent fragments of an integrated whole."[78]
Property monism: the view that all properties are of a single type (e.g. only physical properties exist)
Genus monism: "the doctrine that there is a highest category; e.g., being" [78]

Views contrasting with monism are:

Metaphysical dualism, which asserts that there are two ultimately irreconcilable substances or realities such as Good and Evil, for example, Manichaeism,[80]
Metaphysical pluralism, which asserts three or more fundamental substances or realities.[80]
Nihilism, negates any of the above categories (substances, properties, concrete objects, etc.).

Monism in modern philosophy of mind can be divided into three broad categories:

Idealist, phenomenalism, or mentalistic monism, which holds that only mind or spirit is real[80]
Neutral monism, which holds that one sort of thing fundamentally exists,[81] to which both the mental and the physical can be reduced[82]
Material monism (also called Physicalism and materialism), which holds that only the physical is real, and that the mental or spiritual can be reduced to the physical[80][81]




a. Eliminative Materialism, according to which everything is physical and mental things do not exist[81]
b. Reductive physicalism, according to which mental things do exist and are a kind of physical thing[81][note 1]



Certain positions do not fit easily into the above categories, such as functionalism, anomalous monism, and reflexive monism. Moreover, they do not define the meaning of "real".
Other[edit]
In 1896, J. H. Worman, a theologian, identified seven categories of pantheism: Mechanical or materialistic (God the mechanical unity of existence); Ontological (fundamental unity, Spinoza); Dynamic; Psychical (God is the soul of the world); Ethical (God is the universal moral order, Fichte; Logical (Hegel); and Pure (absorption of God into nature, which Worman equates with atheism).[14]
More recently, Paul D. Feinberg, professor of biblical and systematic theology at Trinity Evangelical Divinity School, also identified seven: Hylozoistic; Immanentistic; Absolutistic monistic; Relativistic monistic; Acosmic; Identity of opposites; and Neoplatonic or emanationistic.[83]
Related concepts[edit]
Nature worship or nature mysticism is often conflated and confused with pantheism. It is pointed out by at least one expert in pantheist philosophy that Spinoza's identification of God with nature is very different from a recent idea of a self identifying pantheist with environmental ethical concerns, Harold Wood, founder of the Universal Pantheist Society. His use of the word nature to describe his worldview may be vastly different from the "nature" of modern sciences. He and other nature mystics who also identify as pantheists use "nature" to refer to the limited natural environment (as opposed to man-made built environment). This use of "nature" is different from the broader use from Spinoza and other pantheists describing natural laws and the overall phenomena of the physical world. Nature mysticism may be compatible with pantheism but it may also be compatible with theism and other views.[4]
Nontheism is an umbrella term which has been used to refer to a variety of religions not fitting traditional theism, and under which pantheism has been included.[4]
Panentheism (from Greek πᾶν (pân) "all"; ἐν (en) "in"; and θεός (theós) "God"; "all-in-God") was formally coined in Germany in the 19th century in an attempt to offer a philosophical synthesis between traditional theism and pantheism, stating that God is substantially omnipresent in the physical universe but also exists "apart from" or "beyond" it as its Creator and Sustainer.[84]:p.27 Thus panentheism separates itself from pantheism, positing the extra claim that God exists above and beyond the world as we know it.[85]:p.11 The line between pantheism and panentheism can be blurred depending on varying definitions of God, so there have been disagreements when assigning particular notable figures to pantheism or panentheism.[84]:pp. 71–72, 87–88, 105[86]
Pandeism is another word derived from pantheism, and is characterized as a combination of reconcilable elements of pantheism and deism.[87] It assumes a Creator-deity that is at some point distinct from the universe and then transforms into it, resulting in a universe similar to the pantheistic one in present essence, but differing in origin.
Panpsychism is the philosophical view held by many pantheists that consciousness, mind, or soul is a universal feature of all things.[88] Some pantheists also subscribe to the distinct philosophical views hylozoism (or panvitalism), the view that everything is alive, and its close neighbor animism, the view that everything has a soul or spirit.[89]
Pantheism in religion[edit]
Traditional religions[edit]
Many traditional and folk religions including African traditional religions[90] and Native American religions[91][92] can be seen as pantheistic, or a mixture of pantheism and other doctrines such as polytheism and animism. According to pantheists, there are elements of pantheism in some forms of Christianity.[93][94][95]
Ideas resembling pantheism existed in East/South Asian religions before the 18th century (notably Sikhism, Hinduism, Confucianism, and Taoism). Although there is no evidence that these influenced Spinoza's work, there is such evidence regarding other contemporary philosophers, such as Leibniz, and later Voltaire.[96][97] In the case of Hinduism, pantheistic views exist alongside panentheistic, polytheistic, monotheistic, and atheistic ones.[98][99][100] In the case of Sikhism, stories attributed to Guru Nanak suggest that he believed God was everywhere in the physical world, and the Sikh tradition typically describes God as the preservative force within the physical world, present in all material forms, each created as a manifestation of God. However, Sikhs view God as the transcendent creator[101], "immanent in the phenomenal reality of the world in the same way in which an artist can be said to be present in his art"[102]. This implies a more panentheistic position.
Spirituality and New Religious Movements[edit]
Pantheism is popular in modern spirituality and New Religious Movements, such as Neopaganism and Theosophy.[103] Two organizations that specify the word pantheism in their title formed in the last quarter of the 20th century. The Universal Pantheist Society, open to all varieties of pantheists and supportive of environmental causes, was founded in 1975.[104] The World Pantheist Movement is headed by Paul Harrison, an environmentalist, writer and a former vice president of the Universal Pantheist Society, from which he resigned in 1996. The World Pantheist Movement was incorporated in 1999 to focus exclusively on promoting naturalistic pantheism - a strict metaphysical naturalistic version of pantheism,[105] considered by some a form of religious naturalism.[106] It has been described as an example of "dark green religion" with a focus on environmental ethics.[107]
See also[edit]

List of pantheists
Theopanism, a term that is philosophically distinct but derived from the same root words

Notes[edit]



^ Such as Behaviourism,[82] Type-identity theory[82] and Functionalism[82]



References[edit]


^ The New Oxford Dictionary Of English. Oxford: Clarendon Press. 1998. p. 1341. ISBN 0-19-861263-X. 
^ Encyclopedia of Philosophy ed. Paul Edwards. New York: Macmillan and Free Press. 1967. p. 34. 
^ A Companion to Philosophy of Religion edited by Charles Taliaferro, Paul Draper, Philip L. Quinn, p.340 "They deny that God is "totally other" than the world or ontologically distinct from it."
^ a b c Levine, Michael, Pantheism: A Non-Theistic Concept of Deity, Psychology Press, 1994, ISBN 9780415070645, pgs 44, 274-275.

"The idea that Unity that is rooted in nature is what types of nature mysticism (e.g. Wordsworth, Robinson Jeffers, Gary Snyder) have in common with more philosophically robust versions of pantheism. It is why nature mysticism and philosophical pantheism are often conflated and confused for one another."
"[Wood's] pantheism is distant from Spinoza's identification of God with nature, and much closer to nature mysticism. In fact it is nature mysticism
"Nature mysticism, however, is as compatible with theism as it is with pantheism."


^ a b c d Picton, James Allanson (1905). Pantheism: its story and significance. Chicago: Archibald Constable & CO LTD. ISBN 978-1419140082. 
^ a b Genevieve Lloyd, Routledge Philosophy GuideBook to Spinoza and The Ethics (Routledge Philosophy Guidebooks), Routledge; 1 edition (2 October 1996), ISBN 978-0-415-10782-2, Page: 24
^ a b c Taylor, Bron (2008). Encyclopedia of Religion and Nature. A&C Black. pp. 1341–1342. ISBN 1441122788. Retrieved 27 July 2017. 
^ a b c Ann Thomson; Bodies of Thought: Science, Religion, and the Soul in the Early Enlightenment, 2008, page 54.
^ Yogīndra, Sadānanda (1881). Books on Google Play A Manual of Hindu Pantheism: The Vedântasâra. Trübner & Company. Retrieved 27 July 2017. 
^ a b c d Plumptre, Constance (1879). General sketch of the history of pantheism, Volume 2. London: Samuel Deacon and Co. pp. 3–5, 8, 29. ISBN 9780766155022. 
^ Mastin, Luke. "Pantheism - By Branch / Doctrine - The Basics of Philosophy". www.philosophybasics.com. 
^ Owen, H. P. Concepts of Deity. London: Macmillan, 1971, p. 65..
^ The New Oxford Dictionary Of English. Oxford: Clarendon Press. 1998. p. 1341. ISBN 0-19-861263-X. 
^ a b c d e f g h i j Worman, J. H., "Pantheism", in Cyclopædia of Biblical, Theological, and Ecclesiastical Literature, Volume 1, John McClintock, James Strong (Eds), Harper & Brothers, 1896, pp 616–624.
^ Collinge, William, Historical Dictionary of Catholicism, Scarecrow Press, 2012, p 188, ISBN 9780810879799.
^ "What is pantheism?". catholic.com. 
^ McIntyre, James Lewis, Giordano Bruno, Macmillan, 1903, p 316.
^ *Fraser, Alexander Campbell "Philosophy of Theism", William Blackwood and Sons, 1895, p 163.
^ Anthony Gottlieb. "God Exists, Philosophically (review of "Spinoza: A Life" by Steven Nadler)". The New York Times, Books. 18 July 1999. Retrieved 7 September 2009. 
^ "Why Spinoza Was Excommunicated". National Endowment for the Humanities. 2015-09-01. Retrieved 2017-09-05. 
^ Yalom, Irvin (21 February 2012). "The Spinoza Problem". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 12 November 2013. Retrieved 7 March 2013. 
^ Yovel, Yirmiyahu, Spinoza and Other Heretics: The Adventures of Immanence (Princeton University Press, 1992), p. 3
^ "Destroyer and Builder". The New Republic. 3 May 2012. Retrieved 7 March 2013. 
^ Scruton 1986 (2002 ed.), ch. 1, p.32.
^ Hegel's History of Philosophy. Google Books. 2003. ISBN 9780791455432. Archived from the original on 13 May 2011. Retrieved 2 May 2011. 
^ Scruton 1986 (2002 ed.), ch. 2, p.26
^ Gilles Deleuze (1990). "(translator's preface)". Expressionism in Philosophy: Spinoza. Zone Books.  Referred to as "the prince" of the philosophers.
^ Shoham, Schlomo Giora (2010). To Test the Limits of Our Endurance. Cambridge Scholars. p. 111. ISBN 1443820687. 
^ Raphson, Joseph (1697). De spatio reali (in Latin). Londini. p. 2. 
^ Suttle, Gary. "Joseph Raphson: 1648–1715". Pantheist Association for Nature. Retrieved 7 September 2012. 
^ Koyré, Alexander (1957). From the Closed World to the Infinite Universe. Baltimore, Md.: Johns Hopkins Press. pp. 190–204. ISBN 0801803470. 
^ Bennet, T (1702). The History of the Works of the Learned. H.Rhodes. p. 498. Retrieved 28 July 2017. 
^ Dabundo, Laura (2009). Encyclopedia of Romanticism (Routledge Revivals):. Routledge. pp. 442–443. ISBN 1135232350. Retrieved 27 July 2017. 
^ Daniel, Stephen H. "Toland's Semantic Pantheism," in John Toland's Christianity not Mysterious, Text, Associated Works and Critical Essays. Edited by Philip McGuinness, Alan Harrison, and Richard Kearney. Dublin, Ireland: The Lilliput Press, 1997.
^ R.E. Sullivan, "John Toland and the Deist controversy: A Study in Adaptations", Harvard University Press, 1982, p. 193
^ Harrison, Paul. "Toland: The father of modern pantheism". Pantheist History. World Pantheist Movement. Retrieved 5 September 2012. 
^ Toland, John, Pantheisticon, 1720; reprint of the 1751 edition, New York and London: Garland, 1976, p 54
^ a b c Paul Harrison, Elements of Pantheism, 1999.
^ Honderich, Ted, The Oxford Companion to Philosophy, Oxford University Press, 1995, p.641: "First used by John Toland in 1705, the term 'pantheist' designates one who holds both that everything there is constitutes a unity and that this unity is divine."
^ Thompson, Ann, Bodies of Thought: Science, Religion, and the Soul in the Early Enlightenment, Oxford University Press, 2008, p 133, ISBN 9780199236190
^ Worman cites Waterland, Works, viii, p 81.
^ Worman cites Wegscheider, Inst 57, p 250.
^ Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi, in Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (plato.stanford.edu).
^ Dahlstrom (3 Dec 2002). "Moses Mendelssohn". Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Retrieved 28 July 2017. 
^ Goetschel, Willi (2004). Spinoza's Modernity: Mendelssohn, Lessing, and Heine. Madison, Wisconsin: University of Wisconsin Press. pp. 12–13. ISBN 0299190803. 
^ Pope BI. Pius IX (9 June 1862). "Syllabus of Errors 1.1". Papal Enclyclicals Online. Retrieved 28 July 2017. 
^ a b Herndon, William (4 February 1866). "Sold – Herndon's Revelations on Lincoln's Religion" (Excerpt and review). Raab Collection. Retrieved 5 June 2012. 
^ a b Adams, Guy (17 April 2011). "'Pantheist' Lincoln would be unelectable today". The Independent. Los Angeles. Retrieved 5 June 2012. 
^ Literary Remains of the Late Professor Theodore Goldstucker, W. H. Allen, 1879. p32.
^ Thilly, Frank, "Pantheism", in Encyclopedia of Religion and Ethics, Part 18, Hastings, James (Ed.), Kessinger Publishing, 2003 (reprint, originally published 1908), p 614, ISBN 9780766136953.
^ Armstrong, AH (1967). The Cambridge History of Later Greek and Early Medieval Philosophy. Cambridge University Press. pp. 57, 60, 161, 186, 222. ISBN 978052104-0549. 
^ McLynn, Frank (2010). Marcus Aurelius: A Life. Da Capo Press. p. 232. ISBN 9780306819162. 
^ Sagan, Dorion, "Dazzle Gradually: Reflections on the Nature of Nature" 2007, p 14.
^ a b Jammer (2011), Einstein and Religion: Physics and Theology, Princeton University Press, p.51; original at Einstein Archive, reel 33-275
^ a b "Belief in God a 'product of human weaknesses': Einstein letter". CBC Canada. 13 May 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2011. 
^ Richard Dawkins Foundation, Der Einstein-Gutkind Brief - Mit Transkript und Englischer Übersetzung
^ Margot Adler, Drawing Down the Moon, Beacon Press, 1986.
^ a b Caritas In Veritate, 7 July 2009.
^ "Message of His Holiness Pope Benedict XVI For The Celebration Of The World Day Of Peace". 
^ Heaven and Nature, Ross Douthat, New York Times, 20 December 2009
^ Rod, Perry. "About the Paradise Project". The Paradise Project. Retrieved 21 June 2017. 
^ "New mural in Venice! "Luminaries of Pantheism"". Venice Paparazzi. 14 January 2015. Retrieved 19 October 2015. 
^ Levine, Michael. "Pantheism". The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. 
^ Charles Hartshorne and William Reese, ed. (1953). Philosophers Speak of God. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. pp. 165–210. 
^ Goldsmith, Donald; Marcia Bartusiak (2006). E = Einstein: His Life, His Thought, and His Influence on Our Culture. New York: Stirling Publishing. p. 187. ISBN 9781402763199. 
^ F.C. Copleston, "Pantheism in Spinoza and the German Idealists," Philosophy 21, 1946, p. 48
^ Literary and Philosophical Society of Liverpool, "Proceedings of the Liverpool Literary & Philosophical Society, Volumes 43–44", 1889, p 285
^ John Ferguson, "The Religions of the Roman Empire", Cornell University Press, 1970, p 193
^ Isaacson, Walter (2007). Einstein: His Life and Universe. Simon and Schuster. p. 391. ISBN 9781416539322. I am a determinist. 
^ Lindsay Jones, ed. (2005). Encyclopedia of Religion: Volume 10 (2nd ed.). USA: MacMillan. ISBN 0028657330. 
^ Dependence and Freedom: The Moral Thought of Horace Bushnell By David Wayne Haddorff [1] Emerson's belief was "monistic determinism".

Creatures of Prometheus: Gender and the Politics of Technology By Timothy Vance Kaufman-Osborn, Prometheus ((Writer)) [2] "Things are in a saddle, and ride mankind."
Emerson's position is "soft determinism" (a variant of determinism) [3]
"The 'fate' Emerson identifies is an underlying determinism." (Fate is one of Emerson's essays) [4]


^ "Hegel was a determinist" (also called a combatibilist a.k.a. soft determinist) [5]

"Hegel and Marx are usually cited as the greatest proponents of historical determinism" [6]


^ Levine, Michael P. (August 1992). "Pantheism, substance and unity". International Journal for Philosophy of Religion. 32: 1–23. doi:10.1007/bf01313557. JSTOR 40036697. 
^

Theories of the will in the history of philosophy By Archibald Alexander p 307 Schelling holds "...that the will is not determined but self-determined." [7]
The Dynamic Individualism of William James by James O. Pawelski p 17 "[His] fight against determinism" "My first act of free will shall be to believe in free will." [8]


^ "Pantheism". The Columbia Electronic Encyclopedia, Sixth Edition. Columbia University Press. 2012. Retrieved 13 June 2012. 
^ Owen, H. P. Concepts of Deity. London: Macmillan, 1971, p. 67.
^ a b c d Urmson 1991, p. 297.
^ a b c Schaffer, Jonathan, Monism: The Priority of the Whole, http://www.jonathanschaffer.org/monism.pdf
^ Schaffer, Jonathan, "Monism", The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer 2015 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), URL=http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/sum2015/entries/monism/
^ a b c d Brugger 1972.
^ a b c d Mandik 2010, p. 76.
^ a b c d Luke Mastin (2008),Monism
^ Evangelical Dictionary of Theology, edited by Walter A. Elwell, p. 887
^ a b John W. Cooper, The Other God of the Philosophers, Baker Academic, 2006
^ Levine, Michael Philip (1994). Pantheism: A Non-Theistic Concept of Deity. Psychology Press. ISBN 9780203014776. 
^ Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy: Genealogy to Iqbal edited by Edward Craig, pg 100 [9].
^ Sean F. Johnston (2009). The History of Science: A Beginner's Guide. p. 90. ISBN 1-85168-681-9. 
^ Seager, William and Allen-Hermanson, Sean, "Panpsychism", The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 2012 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), URL = <http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/win2012/entries/panpsychism/
^ Haught, John F. (1990). What Is Religion?: An Introduction. Paulist Press. p. 19.
^ Parrinder, EG (1970). "Monotheism and Pantheism in Africa". Journal of Religion in Africa. 3 (2): 81–88. doi:10.1163/157006670x00099. JSTOR 1594816. 
^ Levine 1994, p. 67.
^ Harrison, Paul. "North American Indians: the spirituality of nature". World Pantheist Movement. Retrieved 7 September 2012. 
^ Harrison, Paul. "The origins of Christian pantheism". Pantheist history. World Pantheists Movement. Retrieved 20 September 2012. 
^ Fox, Michael W. "Christianity and Pantheism". Universal Pantheist Society. Retrieved 20 September 2012. 
^ Zaleha, Bernard. "Recovering Christian Pantheism as the Lost Gospel of Creation". Fund for Christian Ecology, Inc. Archived from the original on 17 July 2012. Retrieved 20 September 2012. 
^ https://www.jstor.org/stable/1397760?seq=1#page_scan_tab_contents
^ Lan, Feng (2005). Ezra Pound and Confucianism: remaking humanism in the face of modernity. University of Toronto Press. p. 190. ISBN 978-0-8020-8941-0.
^ Fowler 1997, p. 2.
^ Fowler 2002, p. 15-32.
^ Long 2011, p. 128.
^ Singh, Nikky-Guninder Kaur (1992). "The Myth of the Founder: The Janamsākhīs and Sikh Tradition". History of Religions. 31 (4): 329–343.  |access-date= requires |url= (help)
^ Ahluwalia, Jasbir Singh (March 1974). "Anti-Feudal Dialectic of Sikhism". Social Scientist. 2 (8). Retrieved 28 July 2017. 
^ Carpenter, Dennis D. (1996). "Emergent Nature Spirituality: An Examination of the Major Spiritual Contours of the Contemporary Pagan Worldview". In Lewis, James R., Magical Religion and Modern Witchcraft. Albany: State University of New York Press. ISBN 978-0-7914-2890-0. p 50
^ "Home page". Universal Pantheist Society. Retrieved 8 August 2012. 
^ World Pantheist Movement. "Naturalism and Religion: can there be a naturalistic & scientific spirituality?". Retrieved 4 September 2012. 
^ Stone, Jerome Arthur (2008). Religious Naturalism Today: The Rebirth of a Forgotten Alternative. Albany: State University of New York Press. p. 10. ISBN 0791475379. 
^ Bron Raymond Taylor, "Dark Green Religion: Nature Spirituality and the Planetary Future", University of California Press 2010, pp 159–160.


Sources[edit]


Fowler, Jeaneane D. (1997), Hinduism: Beliefs and Practices, Sussex Academic Press 
Fowler, Jeaneane D. (2002), Perspectives of Reality: An Introduction to the Philosophy of Hinduism, Sussex Academic Press 
Long, Jeffrey D. (2011), Historical Dictionary of Hinduism, Scarecrow Press 


Further reading[edit]

Amryc, C. Pantheism: The Light and Hope of Modern Reason, 1898. online
Harrison, Paul, Elements of Pantheism, Element Press, 1999. preview
Hunt, John, Pantheism and Christianity, William Isbister Limited, 1884. online
Levine, Michael, Pantheism: A Non-Theistic Concept of Deity, Psychology Press, 1994, ISBN 9780415070645
Picton, James Allanson, Pantheism: Its story and significance, Archibald Constable & Co., 1905. online.
Plumptre, Constance E., General Sketch of the History of Pantheism, Cambridge University Press, 2011 (reprint, originally published 1879), ISBN 9781108028028 online
Russell, Sharman Apt, Standing in the Light: My Life as a Pantheist, Basic Books, 2008, ISBN 0465005179
Urquhart, W. S. Pantheism and the Value of Life, 1919. online

External links[edit]



Look up pantheism in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.





Wikiquote has quotations related to: Pantheism





Wikimedia Commons has media related to Pantheism.



Mander, William. "Pantheism". In Zalta, Edward N. Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. 
Pantheism entry by Michael Levine (earlier article on pantheism in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy)
Pantheism at Curlie (based on DMOZ)
The Pantheist Index, pantheist-index.net
An Introduction to Pantheism (wku.edu)
 Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913). "Pantheism". Catholic Encyclopedia. New York: Robert Appleton Company. 
The Universal Pantheist Society (pantheist.net)
The World Pantheist Movement (pantheism.net)
Pantheism.community by The Paradise Project (pantheism.com)
Pantheism and Judaism (chabad.org)
On Whitehead's process pantheism : Michel Weber, Whitehead's Pancreativism. The Basics. Foreword by Nicholas Rescher, Frankfurt / Paris, Ontos Verlag, 2006.







v
t
e


Religion








Major religious groups and religious denominations







Abrahamic




Judaism



Orthodox

Haredi
Hasidic
Modern


Conservative
Reform
Karaite
Reconstructionist
Renewal
Humanistic
Haymanot





Christianity



Catholicism

Eastern Catholic Churches


Eastern Christianity

Church of the East

Assyrian Church of the East


Eastern Orthodoxy
Oriental Orthodoxy

Ethiopian Orthodoxy




Independent Catholicism

Old Catholicism


Protestantism

Adventism
Anabaptism
Anglicanism
Baptists
Calvinism

Presbyterianism
Congregationalism
Continental Reformed


Lutheranism
Methodism
Pentecostalism
Evangelicalism


Nontrinitarianism

Jehovah's Witnesses
Mormonism
Jesuism


Nondenominational





Islam



Sunni

Hanafi
Maliki
Hanbali
Shafi'i


Shia

Twelver
Isma'ilism
Zaidiyyah


Ahmadi
Ibadi
Non-denominational
Quranism
Zahirism
Salafism

Wahhabism
Ahl al-Hadith


Mahdavia
European Islam
Nation of Islam





Others



Bábism

Azáli Bábism
Bahá'í Faith


Druze
Mandaeism
Rastafari
Samaritanism








Dharmic




Hinduism



Vaishnavism
Shaktism
Shaivism
Ayyavazhi
Smartism
Balinese





Buddhism



Mahayana

Chan

Zen
Thiền
Seon


Pure Land
Nichiren
Madhyamaka
Tiantai


Theravada
Vajrayana

Tibetan
Shingon
Newar
Bon


Navayana





Others



Dravidian
Jainism

Digambara
Śvētāmbara


Sikhism
Gurung shamanism
Bon Lamaism
Kirant Mundhum








Persian



Manichaeism
Yazdânism

Yazidism
Ishikism
Ali-Illahism
Yarsanism


Zoroastrianism





European



Armenian
Baltic

Dievturība
Druwi
Romuva


Caucasian
Celtic

Druidry


Germanic
Hellenism
Italo-Roman
Romanian
Slavic





Uralic



Finnish
Hungarian
Uralic

Mari
Mordvin
Udmurt







Central and
Northern Asian



Burkhanism
Chuvash
Manchu
Mongolian
Siberian
Tengrism





East Asian



Benzhuism
Bimoism
Bon
Cheondoism
Confucianism
Dongbaism
Faism
Hmongism
Jeungsanism
Luoism
Meishanism
Mileism
Muism
Neo-Confucianism
Ryukyuan religion
Shenism
Shigongism
Shinto
Taoism
Tenrikyo
Wuism
Yiguandao





Southeast Asian



Burmese
Satsana Phi
Malaysian
Indonesian

Marapu
Kaharingan
Kebatinan


Philippine
Vietnamese

Caodaism
Đạo Mẫu
Hoahaoism







African




Traditional



Akan
Akamba
Baluba
Bantu
Berber
Bushongo
Cushitic
Dinka
Efik
Fon and Ewe
Guanche
Igbo
Isoko
Lotuko
Lozi
Lugbara
Maasai
Mbuti
San
Serer
Tumbuka
Waaq
Yoruba
Zulu





Diasporic



Candomblé
Kumina
Obeah
Quimbanda
Palo
Santería
Umbanda
Vodou
Voodoo
Winti








Other groups



Bathouism
Bongthingism
Donyi-Polo
Kiratism
Sanamahism
Sarnaism
Aboriginal Australian
Native American
Mesoamerican
Hawaiian
Polynesian





Recent



Discordianism
Eckankar
Jediism
New Age
New Thought
Pastafarianism
Raëlism
Satanism
Scientology
Thelema
Unitarian Universalism
Wicca
















Historical religions







Prehistoric



Paleolithic





Near East



Arabian
Egyptian
Mesopotamian
Semitic

Canaanite
Yahwism







Indo-European




Asia



Proto-Indo-Iranian
Armenian
Ossetian
Vedic
Zoroastrianism

Mithraism
Zurvanism


Gnosticism

Manichaeism







Europe



Celtic
Germanic

Anglo-Saxon
Continental
Norse


Greek

Gnosticism
Neoplatonism


Manichaeism
Balkan
Roman
Slavic



















Topics







Aspects



Apostasy / Disaffiliation
Behaviour
Beliefs
Clergy
Conversion
Deities
Entheogens
Ethnic religion
Denomination
Faith
Fire
Folk religion
God
Meditation
Monasticism

monk
nun


Mysticism
Mythology
Nature
Ordination
Orthodoxy
Orthopraxy
Prayer
Religious experience
Ritual

liturgy
sacrifice


Spirituality
Supernatural
Symbols
Truth
Water
Worship





Theism



Animism
Deism
Dualism
Henotheism
Monotheism
Nontheism
Panentheism
Pantheism
Polytheism
Transtheism





Religious studies



Anthropology
Cognitive science
Comparative
Development
Evolutionary origin
Evolutionary psychology
History
Philosophy
Neurotheology
Psychology
Sociology
Theology
Theories
Women






Religion and
society




Agriculture
Business
Clergy

monasticism
ordination


Conversion

evangelism
missionary
proselytism


Education
Fanaticism
Freedom

pluralism
syncretism
toleration
universalism


Fundamentalism
Growth
Happiness
Homosexuality
Minorities
National church
National religiosity levels
Religiocentrism
Political science
Populations
Schism
Science
State
Theocracy
Vegetarianism
Video games
Violence

persecution
terrorism
war


Wealth






Secularism and
irreligion




Antireligion
Deism
Agnosticism
Atheism
Criticism
LaVeyan Satanism
Deconstruction
Humanistic Judaism
Irreligion by country
Objectivism
Secular humanism
Secular theology
Secularization
Separation of church and state
Unaffiliated






Overviews
and lists




Index
Outline
Timeline
Abrahamic prophets
Deification
Deities
Founders
Mass gatherings
New religious movements
Organizations
Religions and spiritual traditions
Scholars














Category
Portal












v
t
e


Philosophy of religion



Concepts in religion



Afterlife
Euthyphro dilemma
Faith
Intelligent design
Miracle
Problem of evil
Religious belief
Soul
Spirit
Theodicy
Theological veto





Conceptions of God







Aristotelian view
Brahman
Demiurge
Divine simplicity
Egoism
Holy Spirit
Misotheism
Pandeism
Personal god
Process theology
Supreme Being
Unmoved mover





God in



Abrahamic religions
Buddhism
Christianity
Hinduism
Islam
Jainism
Judaism
Mormonism
Sikhism
Bahá'í Faith
Wicca








Existence of God




For



Beauty
Christological
Consciousness
Cosmological

Kalam
Contingency


Degree
Desire
Experience
Fine-tuning of the Universe
Love
Miracles
Morality
Necessary existent
Ontological
Pascal's Wager
Proper basis
Reason
Teleological

Natural law
Watchmaker analogy


Transcendental





Against



747 gambit
Atheist's Wager
Evil
Free will
Hell
Inconsistent revelations
Nonbelief
Noncognitivism
Occam's razor
Omnipotence
Poor design
Russell's teapot








Theology



Acosmism
Agnosticism
Animism
Antireligion
Atheism
Creationism
Dharmism
Deism
Demonology
Divine command theory
Dualism
Esotericism
Exclusivism
Existentialism

Christian
Agnostic
Atheistic


Feminist theology

Thealogy
Womanist theology


Fideism
Fundamentalism
Gnosticism
Henotheism
Humanism

Religious
Secular
Christian


Inclusivism
Theories about religions
Monism
Monotheism
Mysticism
Naturalism

Metaphysical
Religious
Humanistic


New Age
Nondualism
Nontheism
Pandeism
Panentheism
Pantheism
Perennialism
Polytheism
Possibilianism
Process theology
Religious skepticism
Spiritualism
Shamanism
Taoic
Theism
Transcendentalism
more...





Religious language



Eschatological verification
Language-game
Logical positivism
Apophatic theology
Verificationism





Problem of evil



Augustinian theodicy
Best of all possible worlds
Euthyphro dilemma
Inconsistent triad
Irenaean theodicy
Natural evil
Theodicy






Philosophers
of religion

(by date active)




Ancient
and
Medieval



Anselm of Canterbury
Augustine of Hippo
Avicenna
Averroes
Boethius
Erasmus
Gaunilo of Marmoutiers
Pico della Mirandola
Heraclitus
King James VI and I
Marcion of Sinope
Thomas Aquinas
Maimonides





Enlightenment



Augustin Calmet
René Descartes
Blaise Pascal
Baruch Spinoza
Nicolas Malebranche
Gottfried W Leibniz
William Wollaston
Thomas Chubb
David Hume
Baron d'Holbach
Immanuel Kant
Johann G Herder





1800
1850



Friedrich Schleiermacher
Karl C F Krause
Georg W F Hegel


William Whewell
Ludwig Feuerbach
Søren Kierkegaard
Karl Marx
Albrecht Ritschl
Afrikan Spir





1880
1900



Ernst Haeckel
W. K. Clifford
Friedrich Nietzsche
Harald Høffding
William James


Vladimir Solovyov
Ernst Troeltsch
Rudolf Otto
Lev Shestov
Sergei Bulgakov
Pavel Florensky
Ernst Cassirer
Joseph Maréchal





1920
postwar



George Santayana
Bertrand Russell
Martin Buber
René Guénon
Paul Tillich
Karl Barth
Emil Brunner
Rudolf Bultmann
Gabriel Marcel
Reinhold Niebuhr


Charles Hartshorne
Mircea Eliade
J L Mackie
Walter Kaufmann
Martin Lings
Peter Geach
George I Mavrodes
William Alston
Antony Flew





1970
1990
2010



William L Rowe
Dewi Z Phillips
Alvin Plantinga
Anthony Kenny
Nicholas Wolterstorff
Richard Swinburne
Robert Merrihew Adams


Peter van Inwagen
Daniel Dennett
Loyal Rue
Jean-Luc Marion
William Lane Craig
Ali Akbar Rashad


Alexander Pruss








Related topics



Criticism of religion
Ethics in religion
Exegesis
History of religions
Religion
Religious language
Religious philosophy
Relationship between religion and science
Political science of religion
Faith and rationality
more...








 Portal
 Category












v
t
e


Theology: Outline








Conceptions of God







Theism




Forms




Deism
Dystheism
Henotheism
Hermeticism
Kathenotheism
Nontheism
Monolatry
Monotheism
Mysticism
Panentheism
Pandeism
Pantheism
Polydeism
Polytheism
Spiritualism
Theopanism





Concepts




Deity
Divinity
Gender of God and gods

Male deity
Goddess


Numen








Singular god
theologies




By faith



Abrahamic religions

Judaism
Christianity
Islam


the Bahá'í Faith
Buddhism
Hinduism
Jainism
Sikhism
Zoroastrianism





Concepts



Absolute
Brahman
Emanationism
Logos
Supreme Being





God as



the Devil
Sustainer
Time








Trinitarianism



Athanasian Creed
Comma Johanneum
Consubstantiality
Homoousian
Homoiousian
Hypostasis
Perichoresis
Shield of the Trinity
Trinitarian formula
Trinity
Trinity of the Church Fathers
Trinitarian Universalism





Eschatology



Afterlife
Apocalypticism
Buddhist
Christian
Heaven
Hindu
Islamic
Jewish
Taoist
Zoroastrian





Feminist



Buddhism
Christianity
Hinduism
Islam
Judaism
Mormonism
Goddesses





Other concepts



The All
Aristotelian view
Attributes of God in Christianity / in Islam
Binitarianism
Demiurge
Divine simplicity
Divine presence
Egotheism
Exotheology
Holocaust
Godhead in Christianity

Latter Day Saints


Great Architect of the Universe
Great Spirit
Apophatic theology
Olelbis
Open theism
Personal god
Phenomenological definition
Philo's view
Process
Tian
Unmoved mover





Names of God in



Christianity
Hinduism
Islam
Jainism
Judaism
















By Faith







Christian



History
Outline
Biblical canon
Glossary
Christology
Cosmology
Ecclesiology
Ethics
Hamartiology
Messianism
Nestorianism
Philosophy
Practical
Sophiology
Soteriology





Hindu



Ayyavazhi theology
Krishnology





Islamic



Oneness of God
Prophets
Holy Scriptures
Angels
Predestination
Last Judgment





Jewish



Abrahamic prophecy
Aggadah
Denominations
Kabbalah
Philosophy


















v
t
e


Philosophy








Branches







Traditional



Metaphysics

Ontology


Epistemology
Logic
Ethics
Aesthetics





Philosophy of



Action
Art

Culture
Design
Music
Film


Business
Color
Cosmos
Dialogue
Education
Environment
Futility
Happiness
Healthcare
History
Human nature
Humor
Feminism
Language
Life
Literature
Mathematics
Mind

Pain
Psychology


Philosophy of psychiatry
Philosophy of perception
Philosophy
Religion
Science

Physics
Chemistry
Biology
Geography


Sexuality
Social science

Culture
Economics
Justice
Law
Politics
Society


Space and time
Sport
Technology

Artificial intelligence
Computer science
Engineering
Information


War
















Schools of thought







By era



Ancient
Western

Medieval
Renaissance
Early modern
Modern
Contemporary







Ancient




Chinese



Agriculturalism
Confucianism
Legalism
Logicians
Mohism
Chinese naturalism
Neotaoism
Taoism
Yangism
Zen





Greco-Roman



Aristotelianism
Atomism
Cynicism
Cyrenaics
Eleatics
Eretrian school
Epicureanism
Hermeneutics
Ionian

Ephesian
Milesian


Megarian school
Neoplatonism
Peripatetic
Platonism
Pluralism
Presocratic
Pyrrhonism
Pythagoreanism
Neopythagoreanism
Sophistic
Stoicism





Indian



Samkhya
Nyaya
Vaisheshika
Yoga
Mīmāṃsā
Ājīvika
Ajñana
Cārvāka
Jain

Anekantavada
Syādvāda


Buddhist

Śūnyatā
Madhyamaka
Yogacara
Sautrāntika
Svatantrika







Persian



Mazdakism
Zoroastrianism
Zurvanism








Medieval




European



Christian philosophy
Scholasticism
Thomism
Renaissance humanism





East Asian



Korean Confucianism
Edo Neo-Confucianism
Neo-Confucianism





Indian



Vedanta

Acintya bheda abheda
Advaita
Bhedabheda
Dvaita
Dvaitadvaita
Shuddhadvaita
Vishishtadvaita


Navya-Nyāya





Islamic



Averroism
Avicennism
Illuminationism
ʿIlm al-Kalām
Sufi





Jewish



Judeo-Islamic








Modern




People



Cartesianism
Kantianism
Neo-Kantianism
Hegelianism
Marxism
Spinozism





0



Anarchism
Classical Realism
Liberalism
Collectivism
Conservatism
Determinism
Dualism
Empiricism
Existentialism
Foundationalism
Historicism
Holism
Humanism
Idealism

Absolute
British
German
Objective
Subjective
Transcendental


Individualism
Kokugaku
Materialism
Modernism
Monism
Naturalism
Natural law
Nihilism
New Confucianism
Neo-Scholasticism
Pragmatism
Phenomenology
Positivism
Reductionism
Rationalism
Social contract
Socialism
Transcendentalism
Utilitarianism








Contemporary




Analytic



Applied ethics
Analytic feminism
Analytical Marxism
Communitarianism
Consequentialism
Critical rationalism
Experimental philosophy
Falsificationism
Foundationalism / Coherentism
Generative linguistics
Internalism and Externalism
Logical positivism
Legal positivism
Normative ethics
Meta-ethics
Moral realism
Neo-Aristotelian
Quinean naturalism
Ordinary language philosophy
Postanalytic philosophy
Quietism
Rawlsian
Reformed epistemology
Systemics
Scientism
Scientific realism
Scientific skepticism
Contemporary utilitarianism
Vienna Circle
Wittgensteinian





Continental



Critical theory
Deconstruction
Existentialism
Feminist
Frankfurt School
New Historicism
Hermeneutics
Neo-Marxism
Phenomenology
Postmodernism
Post-structuralism
Social constructionism
Structuralism
Western Marxism





Other



Kyoto School
Objectivism
Russian cosmism
more...



















Positions







Aesthetics



Formalism
Institutionalism
Aesthetic response





Ethics



Consequentialism
Deontology
Virtue





Free will



Compatibilism
Determinism
Libertarianism





Metaphysics



Atomism
Dualism
Monism
Naturalism





Epistemology



Constructivism
Empiricism
Idealism
Particularism
Fideism
Rationalism / Reasonism
Skepticism
Solipsism





Mind



Behaviorism
Emergentism
Eliminativism
Epiphenomenalism
Functionalism
Objectivism
Subjectivism





Normativity



Absolutism
Particularism
Relativism
Nihilism
Skepticism
Universalism





Ontology



Action
Event
Process





Reality



Anti-realism
Conceptualism
Idealism
Materialism
Naturalism
Nominalism
Physicalism
Realism



















Philosophy by region
Philosophy-related lists
Miscellaneous










By region



African
Ethiopian
Aztec
Native America
Eastern
Chinese
Egyptian
Czech
Indian
Indonesian
Iranian
Japanese
Korean
Vietnam
Pakistani
Western
American
Australian
British
Danish
French
German
Greek
Italian
Polish
Romanian
Russian
Slovene
Spanish
Turkish





Lists



Outline
Index
Years
Problems
Schools
Glossary
Philosophers
Movements
Publications





Miscellaneous



Women in philosophy
Sage (philosophy)














 Portal
 Category
 Book









Authority control



LCCN: sh85097492
GND: 4173188-8
NDL: 00562946











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Pantheism&oldid=818386574"					Categories: PantheismSpinoza studiesHidden categories: CS1 Latin-language sources (la)Pages using citations with accessdate and no URLUse dmy dates from May 2015Articles with DMOZ linksArticles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource referenceWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiers