For other uses, see Paper (disambiguation).




Paper products: Book, toilet paper, Ruled paper, carton, egg box







Paper



"Paper" in Traditional (top) and Simplified (bottom) Chinese characters



Traditional Chinese
紙


Simplified Chinese
纸





Transcriptions


Standard Mandarin


Hanyu Pinyin
zhǐ


IPA
[ʈʂɨ̀]


Wu


Suzhounese
tsỳ


Yue: Cantonese


Yale Romanization
jí


Jyutping
zi2


Southern Min


Hokkien POJ
choá


Tâi-lô
tsuá








Paper is a thin material produced by pressing together moist fibres of cellulose pulp derived from wood, rags or grasses, and drying them into flexible sheets. It is a versatile material with many uses, including writing, printing, packaging, cleaning, and a number of industrial and construction processes.
The pulp papermaking process is said to have been developed in China during the early 2nd century CE, possibly as early as the year 105 CE,[1] by the Han court eunuch Cai Lun, although the earliest archaeological fragments of paper derive from the 2nd century BCE in China.[2] The modern pulp and paper industry is global, with China leading its production and the United States right behind it.



Contents


1 History
2 Early sources of fibre
3 Etymology
4 Papermaking

4.1 Chemical pulping
4.2 Mechanical pulping
4.3 De-inked pulp
4.4 Additives
4.5 Producing paper
4.6 Finishing

4.6.1 Paper grain




5 Applications
6 Types, thickness and weight
7 Paper stability
8 Environmental impact
9 Future
10 See also
11 Notes
12 References
13 Further reading
14 External links



History
Main article: History of paper




Hemp wrapping paper, China, circa 100 BC.


The oldest known archaeological fragments of the immediate precursor to modern paper, date to the 2nd century BCE in China. The pulp papermaking process is ascribed to Cai Lun, a 2nd-century CE Han court eunuch.[2]
Its knowledge and uses spread from China through the Middle East to medieval Europe in the 13th century, where the first water powered paper mills were built.[3] Because of paper's introduction to the West through the city of Baghdad, it was first called bagdatikos.[4] In the 19th century, industrialization greatly reduced the cost of manufacturing paper. In 1844, the Canadian inventor Charles Fenerty and the German F. G. Keller independently developed processes for pulping wood fibres.[5]
Early sources of fibre




Ancient Sanskrit on Hemp based Paper. Hemp Fibre was commonly used in the production of paper from 200 BCE to the Late 1800's.


See also: wood pulp and deinking
Before the industrialisation of the paper production the most common fibre source was recycled fibres from used textiles, called rags. The rags were from hemp, linen and cotton.[6] A process for removing printing inks from recycled paper was invented by German jurist Justus Claproth in 1774.[6] Today this method is called deinking. It was not until the introduction of wood pulp in 1843 that paper production was not dependent on recycled materials from ragpickers.[6]
Etymology
Further information: Papyrus
The word "paper" is etymologically derived from Latin papyrus, which comes from the Greek πάπυρος (papuros), the word for the Cyperus papyrus plant.[7][8] Papyrus is a thick, paper-like material produced from the pith of the Cyperus papyrus plant, which was used in ancient Egypt and other Mediterranean cultures for writing before the introduction of paper into the Middle East and Europe.[9] Although the word paper is etymologically derived from papyrus, the two are produced very differently and the development of the first is distinct from the development of the second. Papyrus is a lamination of natural plant fibres, while paper is manufactured from fibres whose properties have been changed by maceration.[2]
Papermaking
Main article: Papermaking
Chemical pulping
Main articles: kraft process, sulfite process, and soda pulping
To make pulp from wood, a chemical pulping process separates lignin from cellulose fibres. This is accomplished by dissolving lignin in a cooking liquor, so that it may be washed from the cellulose; this preserves the length of the cellulose fibres. Paper made from chemical pulps are also known as wood-free papers–not to be confused with tree-free paper; this is because they do not contain lignin, which deteriorates over time. The pulp can also be bleached to produce white paper, but this consumes 5% of the fibres; chemical pulping processes are not used to make paper made from cotton, which is already 90% cellulose.




The microscopic structure of paper: Micrograph of paper autofluorescing under ultraviolet illumination. The individual fibres in this sample are around 10 µm in diameter.


There are three main chemical pulping processes: the sulfite process dates back to the 1840s and it was the dominant method extent before the second world war. The kraft process, invented in the 1870s and first used in the 1890s, is now the most commonly practiced strategy, one of its advantages is the chemical reaction with lignin, that produces heat, which can be used to run a generator. Most pulping operations using the kraft process are net contributors to the electricity grid or use the electricity to run an adjacent paper mill. Another advantage is that this process recovers and reuses all inorganic chemical reagents. Soda pulping is another specialty process used to pulp straws, bagasse and hardwoods with high silicate content.
Mechanical pulping
There are two major mechanical pulps: thermomechanical pulp (TMP) and groundwood pulp (GW). In the TMP process, wood is chipped and then fed into steam heated refiners, where the chips are squeezed and converted to fibres between two steel discs. In the groundwood process, debarked logs are fed into grinders where they are pressed against rotating stones to be made into fibres. Mechanical pulping does not remove the lignin, so the yield is very high, >95%, however it causes the paper thus produced to turn yellow and become brittle over time. Mechanical pulps have rather short fibres, thus producing weak paper. Although large amounts of electrical energy are required to produce mechanical pulp, it costs less than the chemical kind.
De-inked pulp
Paper recycling processes can use either chemically or mechanically produced pulp; by mixing it with water and applying mechanical action the hydrogen bonds in the paper can be broken and fibres separated again. Most recycled paper contains a proportion of virgin fibre for the sake of quality; generally speaking, de-inked pulp is of the same quality or lower than the collected paper it was made from.
There are three main classifications of recycled fibre:.

Mill broke or internal mill waste – This incorporates any substandard or grade-change paper made within the paper mill itself, which then goes back into the manufacturing system to be re-pulped back into paper. Such out-of-specification paper is not sold and is therefore often not classified as genuine reclaimed recycled fibre, however most paper mills have been reusing their own waste fibre for many years, long before recycling became popular.
Preconsumer waste – This is offcut and processing waste, such as guillotine trims and envelope blank waste; it is generated outside the paper mill and could potentially go to landfill, and is a genuine recycled fibre source; it includes de-inked preconsumer (recycled material that has been printed but did not reach its intended end use, such as waste from printers and unsold publications).[10]
Postconsumer waste – This is fibre from paper that has been used for its intended end use and includes office waste, magazine papers and newsprint. As the vast majority of this material has been printed – either digitally or by more conventional means such as lithography or rotogravure – it will either be recycled as printed paper or go through a de-inking process first.

Recycled papers can be made from 100% recycled materials or blended with virgin pulp, although they are (generally) not as strong nor as bright as papers made from the latter.
Additives
Besides the fibres, pulps may contain fillers such as chalk or china clay,[11] which improve its characteristics for printing or writing.[12] Additives for sizing purposes may be mixed with it or applied to the paper web later in the manufacturing process; the purpose of such sizing is to establish the correct level of surface absorbency to suit ink or paint.
Producing paper
Main articles: Paper machine and papermaking
The pulp is fed to a paper machine where it is formed as a paper web and the water is removed from it by pressing and drying.
Pressing the sheet removes the water by force; once the water is forced from the sheet, a special kind of felt, which is not to be confused with the traditional one, is used to collect the water; whereas when making paper by hand, a blotter sheet is used instead.
Drying involves using air or heat to remove water from the paper sheets. In the earliest days of paper making, this was done by hanging the sheets like laundry; in more modern times, various forms of heated drying mechanisms are used. On the paper machine, the most common is the steam-heated can dryer. These can reach temperatures above 200 °F (93 °C) and are used in long sequences of more than forty cans where the heat produced by these can easily dry the paper to less than six percent moisture.
Finishing
The paper may then undergo sizing to alter its physical properties for use in various applications.
Paper at this point is uncoated. Coated paper has a thin layer of material such as calcium carbonate or china clay applied to one or both sides in order to create a surface more suitable for high-resolution halftone screens. (Uncoated papers are rarely suitable for screens above 150 lpi.) Coated or uncoated papers may have their surfaces polished by calendering. Coated papers are divided into matte, semi-matte or silk, and gloss. Gloss papers give the highest optical density in the printed image.
The paper is then fed onto reels if it is to be used on web printing presses, or cut into sheets for other printing processes or other purposes. The fibres in the paper basically run in the machine direction. Sheets are usually cut "long-grain", i.e. with the grain parallel to the longer dimension of the sheet. Continuous form paper (or continuous stationery) is cut to width with holes punched at the edges, and folded into stacks.
Paper grain
All paper produced by paper machines as the Fourdrinier Machine are wove paper, i.e. the wire mesh that transports the web leaves a pattern that has the same density along the paper grain and across the grain. Textured finishes, watermarks and wire patterns imitating hand-made laid paper can be created by the use of appropriate rollers in the later stages of the machine.
Wove paper does not exhibit "laidlines", which are small regular lines left behind on paper when it was handmade in a mould made from rows of metal wires or bamboo. Laidlines are very close together. They run perpendicular to the "chainlines", which are further apart. Handmade paper similarly exhibits "deckle edges", or rough and feathery borders.[13]
Applications
Paper can be produced with a wide variety of properties, depending on its intended use.

For representing value: paper money, bank note, cheque, security (see security paper), voucher and ticket
For storing information: book, notebook, graph paper, magazine, newspaper, art, zine, letter
For personal use: diary, note to remind oneself, etc.; for temporary personal use: scratch paper
For communication: between individuals and/or groups of people.
For packaging: corrugated box, paper bag, envelope, Packing & Wrapping Paper, Paper string, Charta emporetica and wallpaper
For cleaning: toilet paper, handkerchiefs, paper towels, facial tissue and cat litter
For construction: papier-mâché, origami, paper planes, quilling, paper honeycomb, used as a core material in composite materials, paper engineering, construction paper and paper clothing
For other uses: emery paper, sandpaper, blotting paper, litmus paper, universal indicator paper, paper chromatography, electrical insulation paper (see also dielectric and permittivity) and filter paper

It is estimated that paper-based storage solutions captured 0.33% of the total in 1986 and only 0.007% in 2007, even though in absolute terms, the world's capacity to store information on paper increased from 8.7 to 19.4 petabytes.[14] It is estimated that in 1986 paper-based postal letters represented less than 0.05% of the world's telecommunication capacity, with sharply decreasing tendency after the massive introduction of digital technologies.[14]
Types, thickness and weight
Main articles: Paper size, Grammage, and Paper density




Card and paper stock for crafts use comes in a wide variety of textures and colors.


The thickness of paper is often measured by caliper, which is typically given in thousandths of an inch in the United States and in micrometers (µm) in the rest of the world.[15] Paper may be between 0.07 and 0.18 millimetres (0.0028 and 0.0071 in) thick.[16]
Paper is often characterized by weight. In the United States, the weight assigned to a paper is the weight of a ream, 500 sheets, of varying "basic sizes", before the paper is cut into the size it is sold to end customers. For example, a ream of 20 lb, 8.5 in × 11 in (216 mm × 279 mm) paper weighs 5 pounds, because it has been cut from a larger sheet into four pieces.[17] In the United States, printing paper is generally 20 lb, 24 lb, or 32 lb at most. Cover stock is generally 68 lb, and 110 lb or more is considered card stock.
In Europe, and other regions using the ISO 216 paper sizing system, the weight is expressed in grammes per square metre (g/m2 or usually just g) of the paper. Printing paper is generally between 60 g and 120 g. Anything heavier than 160 g is considered card. The weight of a ream therefore depends on the dimensions of the paper and its thickness.
Most commercial paper sold in North America is cut to standard paper sizes based on customary units and is defined by the length and width of a sheet of paper.
The ISO 216 system used in most other countries is based on the surface area of a sheet of paper, not on a sheet's width and length. It was first adopted in Germany in 1922 and generally spread as nations adopted the metric system. The largest standard size paper is A0 (A zero), measuring one square meter (approx. 1189 × 841 mm). A1 is half the size of a sheet of A0 (i.e., 594 mm × 841 mm), such that two sheets of A1 placed side by side are equal to one sheet of A0. A2 is half the size of a sheet of A1, and so forth. Common sizes used in the office and the home are A4 and A3 (A3 is the size of two A4 sheets).
The density of paper ranges from 250 kg/m3 (16 lb/cu ft) for tissue paper to 1,500 kg/m3 (94 lb/cu ft) for some speciality paper. Printing paper is about 800 kg/m3 (50 lb/cu ft).[18]
Paper may be classified into seven categories:[19]

Printing papers of wide variety.
Wrapping papers for the protection of goods and merchandise. This includes wax and kraft papers.
Writing paper suitable for stationery requirements. This includes ledger, bank, and bond paper.
Blotting papers containing little or no size.
Drawing papers usually with rough surfaces used by artists and designers, including cartridge paper.
Handmade papers including most decorative papers, Ingres papers, Japanese paper and tissues, all characterized by lack of grain direction.
Specialty papers including cigarette paper, toilet tissue, and other industrial papers.

Some paper types include:


Bank paper
Banana paper
Bond paper
Book paper
Coated paper: glossy and matte surface
Construction paper/sugar paper
Cotton paper
Fish paper (vulcanized fibres for electrical insulation)
Inkjet paper
Kraft paper
Laid paper
Leather paper
Mummy paper
Oak tag paper
Sandpaper
Tyvek paper
Wallpaper
Washi
Waterproof paper
Wax paper
Wove paper
Xuan paper


Paper stability
Much of the early paper made from wood pulp contained significant amounts of alum, a variety of aluminium sulfate salts that is significantly acidic. Alum was added to paper to assist in sizing,[20] making it somewhat water resistant so that inks did not "run" or spread uncontrollably. Early papermakers did not realize that the alum they added liberally to cure almost every problem encountered in making their product would eventually be detrimental.[21] The cellulose fibres that make up paper are hydrolyzed by acid, and the presence of alum would eventually degrade the fibres until the paper disintegrated in a process that has come to be known as "slow fire". Documents written on rag paper were significantly more stable. The use of non-acidic additives to make paper is becoming more prevalent, and the stability of these papers is less of an issue.
Paper made from mechanical pulp contains significant amounts of lignin, a major component in wood. In the presence of light and oxygen, lignin reacts to give yellow materials,[22] which is why newsprint and other mechanical paper yellows with age. Paper made from bleached kraft or sulfite pulps does not contain significant amounts of lignin and is therefore better suited for books, documents and other applications where whiteness of the paper is essential.
Paper made from wood pulp is not necessarily less durable than a rag paper. The aging behavior of a paper is determined by its manufacture, not the original source of the fibers.[23] Furthermore, tests sponsored by the Library of Congress prove that all paper is at risk of acid decay, because cellulose itself produces formic, acetic, lactic and oxalic acids.[24]
Mechanical pulping yields almost a tonne of pulp per tonne of dry wood used, which is why mechanical pulps are sometimes referred to as "high yield" pulps. With almost twice the yield as chemical pulping, mechanical pulps is often cheaper. Mass-market paperback books and newspapers tend to use mechanical papers. Book publishers tend to use acid-free paper, made from fully bleached chemical pulps for hardback and trade paperback books.
Environmental impact
Main articles: Environmental impact of paper and Deforestation
The production and use of paper has a number of adverse effects on the environment.
Worldwide consumption of paper has risen by 400% in the past 40 years[clarification needed] leading to increase in deforestation, with 35% of harvested trees being used for paper manufacture. Most paper companies also plant trees to help regrow forests. Logging of old growth forests accounts for less than 10% of wood pulp,[25] but is one of the most controversial issues.
Paper waste accounts for up to 40% of total waste produced in the United States each year, which adds up to 71.6 million tons of paper waste per year in the United States alone.[26] The average office worker in the US prints 31 pages every day.[27] Americans also use in the order of 16 billion paper cups per year.
Conventional bleaching of wood pulp using elemental chlorine produces and releases into the environment large amounts of chlorinated organic compounds, including chlorinated dioxins.[28] Dioxins are recognized as a persistent environmental pollutant, regulated internationally by the Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants. Dioxins are highly toxic, and health effects on humans include reproductive, developmental, immune and hormonal problems. They are known to be carcinogenic. Over 90% of human exposure is through food, primarily meat, dairy, fish and shellfish, as dioxins accumulate in the food chain in the fatty tissue of animals.[29]
Future
Some manufacturers have started using a new, significantly more environmentally friendly alternative to expanded plastic packaging. Made out of paper, and known commercially as PaperFoam, the new packaging has mechanical properties very similar to those of some expanded plastic packaging, but is biodegradable and can also be recycled with ordinary paper.[30]
With increasing environmental concerns about synthetic coatings (such as PFOA) and the higher prices of hydrocarbon based petrochemicals, there is a focus on zein (corn protein) as a coating for paper in high grease applications such as popcorn bags.[31]
Also, synthetics such as Tyvek and Teslin have been introduced as printing media as a more durable material than paper.
See also


Arches paper
Buckypaper
Continuous form paper (or "continuous stationery")
Deinked pulp
Environmental impact of paper
Fibre crop
Graphene oxide paper
Lokta paper
Mass deacidification
Origami
Paper and ink testing
Paper armour
Paper chemicals
Paper craft
Paper engineering
Paper recycling
Paper size, sizing
Paper towels
Papier "paper" in French or German
Papier-mâché
Papyrus
Parchment paper, a form of paper made to emulate the texture of animal-based parchment
Roll hardness tester
Security paper
Seed paper
Toilet paper
Wood pulp


Notes


^ Hogben, Lancelot. "Printing, Paper and Playing Cards". Bennett, Paul A. (ed.) Books and Printing: A Treasury for Typophiles. New York: The World Publishing Company, 1951. pp. 15–31. p. 17. & Mann, George. Print: A Manual for Librarians and Students Describing in Detail the History, Methods, and Applications of Printing and Paper Making. London: Grafton & Co., 1952. p. 77
^ a b c Tsien 1985, p. 38
^ Burns 1996, pp. 417f.
^ Murray, Stuart A. P. The Library: An illustrated History. Skyhorse Publishing, 2009, p. 57.
^ Burger, Peter (2007). Charles Fenerty and his paper invention. Toronto: Peter Burger. pp. 25–30. ISBN 9780978331818. OCLC 173248586. 
^ a b c Göttsching, Lothar; Gullichsen, Johan; Pakarinen, Heikki; Paulapuro, Hannu; Yhdistys, Suomen Paperi-Insinöörien; Technical Association of the Pulp and Paper Industry (2000). Recycling fiber and deinking. Finland: Fapet Oy. pp. 12–14. ISBN 9525216071. OCLC 247670296. 
^ πάπυρος, Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, A Greek-English Lexicon, on Perseus
^ papyrus, on Oxford Dictionaries
^ "papyrus". Dictionary.com Unabridged. Random House. Retrieved 20 November 2008. 
^ Natural Resource Defense Council
^ Appropriate Technology. Intermediate Technology Publications. 1996. 
^ Thorn, Ian; Au, Che On (2009-07-24). Applications of Wet-End Paper Chemistry. Springer Science & Business Media. ISBN 9781402060380. 
^ "Document Doubles" in a virtual museum exhibition at Library and Archives Canada
^ a b "The World’s Technological Capacity to Store, Communicate, and Compute Information", especially Supporting online material, Martin Hilbert and Priscila López (2011), Science, 332(6025), 60–65; free access to the article through here: martinhilbert.net/WorldInfoCapacity.html
^ "Paper Thickness Chart". Case Paper. Retrieved 2017-05-27. 
^ Elert, Glenn. "Thickness of a Piece of Paper". The Physics Factbook. Retrieved 2017-05-27. 
^ McKenzie, Bruce G. (1989). The Hammerhill guide to desktop publishing in business. Hammerhill. p. 144. ISBN 9780961565114. OCLC 851074844. 
^ "Density of paper and paperboard". PaperOnWeb. Retrieved 31 October 2007. 
^ Johnson, Arthur (1978). The Thames and Hudson manual of bookbinding. London: Thames and Hudson. OCLC 959020143. 
^ Biermann, Christopher J/ (1993). Essentials of pulping and papermaking. San Diego: Academic Press. ISBN 012097360X. OCLC 813399142. 
^ Clark, James d'A. (1985). Pulp Technology and Treatment for Paper (2nd ed.). San Francisco: Miller Freeman Publications. ISBN 0-87930-164-3. 
^ Fabbri, Claudia; Bietti, Massimo; Lanzalunga, Osvaldo. "Generation and Reactivity of Ketyl Radicals with Lignin Related Structures. On the Importance of the Ketyl Pathway in the Photoyellowing of Lignin Containing Pulps and Papers". J. Org. Chem. 2005 (70): 2720–2728. doi:10.1021/jo047826u. 
^ Erhardt, D.; Tumosa, C. (2005). "Chemical Degradation of Cellulose in Paper over 500 years". Restaurator: International Journal for the Preservation of Library and Archival Material. 26: 155. doi:10.1515/rest.2005.26.3.151. 
^ "The Deterioration and Preservation of Paper: Some Essential Facts". Library of Congress. Retrieved 7 January 2015. Research by the Library of Congress has demonstrated that cellulose itself generates acids as it ages, including formic, acetic, lactic, and oxalic acids 
^ Martin, Sam (2004). "Paper Chase". Ecology Communications, Inc. Archived from the original on 19 June 2007. Retrieved 21 September 2007. 
^ EPA (28 June 2006). "General Overview of What's in America's Trash". United States Environmental Protection Agency. Archived from the original on 5 January 2012. Retrieved 4 April 2012. 
^ Groll, T. 2015 In vielen Büros wird unnötig viel ausgedruckt, Zeit Online, 20 June 2015.
^ "Effluents from Pulp Mills using Bleaching – PSL1". ISBN 0-662-18734-2 DSS. Health Canada. 1991. Retrieved 21 September 2007. 
^ "Dioxins and their effects on human health". World Health Organization. June 2014. Retrieved 7 January 2015. More than 90% of human exposure is through food 
^ PaperFoam Carbon Friendly Packaging
^ Barrier compositions and articles produced with the compositions cross-reference to related application


References

Burns, Robert I. (1996). "Paper comes to the West, 800–1400". In Lindgren, Uta. Europäische Technik im Mittelalter. 800 bis 1400. Tradition und Innovation (4th ed.). Berlin: Gebr. Mann Verlag. pp. 413–422. ISBN 3-7861-1748-9. 
Tsien, Tsuen-Hsuin (1985). Needham, Joseph, ed. Paper and Printing. Science and Civilisation in China, Chemistry and Chemical Technology. V (part 1). Cambridge University Press. 
"Document Doubles" in Detecting the Truth: Fakes, Forgeries and Trickery, a virtual museum exhibition at Library and Archives Canada

Further reading

Alexander Monro, The Paper Trail: An Unexpected History of the World's Greatest Invention, Allen Lane, 2014

External links



Look up paper in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.





Wikimedia Commons has media related to Paper.



Technical Association of the Pulp and Paper Industry (TAPPI) official website
Paper at Encyclopædia Britannica
How is paper made? at The Straight Dope, 22 November 2005
'Paper thickness cross reference guide
Thirteen-minute video on modern paper production system, from Sappi







v
t
e


Paper data storage media



Antiquity



Writing on papyrus (c. 3000 BCE)
Paper (105 CE)





Modern



Railroad/Transit Punch Photograph (1880s)
Punched card (1890)
Edge-notched card (1896)
Optical mark recognition
Optical character recognition (1929)
Barcode (1948)












v
t
e


Paper






History
Manufacture/Papermaking





Types



Bible
Blotting
Bond
Cartridge
Construction
Cotton (rag)
Crêpe
Display
Dó
Asphalt
Glassine
India
Korean
Kraft
Laid
Manila
Newsprint
Oatmeal
Onionskin
Origami
Baking
Building
Rice
Rolling
Scritta
Security
Seed
Copy
Stone
Tar
Thermal
Tissue
Tracing
Transfer
Tree-free
Wallpaper
Washi
Waterproof
Wax
Wood-free
Wove
Writing
Xuan





Materials



Fiber crop
Paper chemicals
Papyrus
Wood pulp





Specifications



Grammage
Density
Size
Units of paper quantity
Surface chemistry of paper
Wet strength





Manufacture and process



Bleaching of wood pulp
Calender
Conical refiner
Deinking
Paper pollution
Environmental impact of paper
Handmade paper
Hollander beater
Kraft process
Organosolv
Paper machine
Paper recycling
Papermaking
Soda pulping
Sulfite process





Industry



Paper industry
In Europe
In Canada
In India
In Japan
In the United States
Paper mill
List of paper mills








  Category:Paper
  Commons












v
t
e


Decorative arts and handicrafts



Textile



Banner-making
Canvas work
Cross-stitch
Crocheting
Embroidery
Felting
Friendship bracelet
Knitting
Lace-making
Lucet
Macrame
Millinery
Needlepoint
Needlework
Patchwork
Quilting
Ribbon embroidery
Rug hooking
Rug making
Sewing
Shoemaking
Spinning (textiles)
String art
Tapestry
Tatting
Tie-dye
Weaving





Paper



Altered book
Bookbinding
Calligraphy
Cardmaking
Cast paper
Collage

Decoupage
Photomontage


Iris folding
Jianzhi
Origami

Kirigami
Moneygami


Embossing
Marbling
Papercraft
Papercutting
Papermaking
Paper toys
Papier-mâché
Pop-up book
Quilling
Scrapbooking
Stamping
Wallpaper





Wood



Bentwood
Cabinetry
Carpentry
Chip carving
Ébéniste
Fretwork
Intarsia
Marquetry
Wood burning
Wood carving
Woodturning





Ceramic



Azulejo
Bone china
Earthenware
Porcelain
Pottery
Stoneware
Terracotta





Glass



Cameo glass
Glassware
Stained glass





Metal



Engraving
Jewellery
Goldsmith
Silversmith





Other



Assemblage
Balloon modelling
Beadwork
Bone carving
Doll making
Dollhouse
Egg decorating
Engraved gems
Hardstone carving
Lathart
Lapidary
Leatherworking
Miniatures
Micromosaic
Mosaic

Glass mosaic


Pietra dura
Pressed flower craft
Scrimshaw
Straw marquetry
Wall decal












v
t
e


Labeling



Label Construction



Adhesive
Die cutting (web)
Hologram
In-mould labelling
Label
Paper
Perforation
Pressure sensitive adhesive
Plastic
Printing
Security hologram
Release liner
Security printing
Security label
Smart label
Sticker





Content



Advertising
Barcode
Country of origin
Cigarette warning label
Ecolabel
EU energy label
Fair Packaging and Labeling Act
List of food labeling regulations
Mandatory labelling
Nameplate
Nutrition facts label
Radio frequency identification
United Kingdom food labeling regulations
UPC
Warning label
Wine label





Use



Advertising
Authentication
Automatic identification and data capture
Label dispenser
Label printer
Packaging and labeling
Track & Trace












v
t
e


Packaging



General topics



Active packaging
Child-resistant packaging
Contract packager
Disposable food packaging
Food packaging
Luxury packaging
Modified atmosphere/modified humidity packaging
Package pilferage
Package testing
Packaging engineering
Pharmaceutical packaging
Reusable packaging
Shelf life
Sustainable packaging
Tamper-evident
Tamper resistance
Wrap rage





Containers



Aerosol Container
Aluminium bottle
Aluminum can
Ampoule
Antistatic bag
Bag-in-box
Bags and flexible containers
Barrel
Beer bottle
Biodegradable bag
Blister pack
Boil-in-Bag
Bottle
Box
Bulk box
Cage
Case
Carboy
Carton
Chub
Clamshell
Corrugated box design
Crate
Disposable cup
Drum
Envelope
Flexible intermediate bulk container
Foam food container
Folding carton
Glass bottle
Growler
Insulated shipping container
Intermediate bulk container
Jar
Jerrycan
Jug
Juicebox
Keg
Multi-pack
Oyster pail
Packet (container)
Padded mailer
Pail
Paper bag
Paper sack
Plastic bag
Plastic bottle
Popcorn bag
Retort pouch
Sachet
Security bag
Self-heating can
Self-heating food packaging
Shipping container
Skin pack
Spray bottle
Tin can
Tub (container)
Tube
Unit load
Vial
Wooden box





Materials and
components



Adhesive
Aluminium foil
Bioplastic
Biodegradable plastic
BoPET
Bubble wrap
Bung
Cellophane
Closure
Coated paper
Coating
Coextrusion
Corrugated fiberboard
Corrugated plastic
Cushioning
Desiccant
Double seam
Foam peanut
Glass
Hot-melt adhesive
Kraft paper
Label
Lid
Linear low-density polyethylene
Liquid packaging board
Low-density polyethylene
Metallised film
Modified atmosphere
Molded pulp
Nonwoven fabric
Overwrap
Oxygen scavenger
Packaging gas
Pallet
Paper
Paper pallet
Paperboard
Plastic film
Plastic pallet
Plastic wrap
Polyester
Polyethylene
Polypropylene
Pressure-sensitive tape
Screw cap
Screw cap (wine)
Security printing
Security tape
Shock detector
Shock and vibration data logger
Shrink wrap
Slip sheet
Staple (fastener)
Strapping
Stretch wrap
Susceptor
Tamper-evident band
Tear tape
Temperature data logger
Time temperature indicator
Tinplate
Velostat





Processes



Aseptic processing
Authentication
Automatic identification and data capture
Blow fill seal
Blow molding
Calendering
Canning
Coating
Containerization
Curtain Coating
Die cutting
Die forming (plastics)
Electronic article surveillance
Extrusion
Extrusion coating
Glass production
Graphic design
HACCP
Hermetic seal
Induction sealing
Injection molding
Laminating
Laser cutting
Molding
Papermaking
Plastic welding
Plastics extrusion
Printing
Quality assurance
Radio-frequency identification
Roll slitting
Shearing (manufacturing)
Thermoforming
Track and trace
Vacuum forming
Ultrasonic welding
Vacuum packaging
Verification and validation





Machinery



Barcode printer
Barcode reader
Bottling line
Calender
Can seamer
Cartoning machine
Case sealer
Check weigher
Conveyor system
Extended core stretch wrapper
Filler
Heat gun
Heat sealer
Industrial robot
Injection molding machine
Label printer applicator
Lineshaft roller conveyor
Logistics automation
Material handling equipment
Mechanical brake stretch wrapper
Multihead weigher
Orbital stretch wrapping
Palletizer
Rotary wheel blow molding systems
Shrink tunnel
Staple gun
Tape dispenser
Turntable stretch wrapper
Vertical form fill sealing machine





Environment,
post-use



Biodegradation
Environmental engineering
Glass recycling
Industrial ecology
Life-cycle assessment
Litter
Paper recycling
Plastic recycling
Recycling
Reusable packaging
Reverse logistics
Source reduction
Sustainable packaging
Waste management












v
t
e


Wood products



Lumber/
timber



Batten
Beam
Bressummer
Cruck
Flitch beam
Flooring
Joist
Lath
Molding
Panelling
Plank
Plate
Post
Purlin
Rafter
Railroad ties
Reclaimed
Shingle
Siding
Sill
Stud
Timber truss
Treenail
Truss
Utility pole





Engineered
wood



Glued laminated timber

veneer
LVL
parallel strand


I-joist
Fiberboard

hardboard
Masonite
MDF


Oriented strand board
Oriented structural straw board
Particle board
Plywood
Structural insulated panel
Wood-plastic composite

lumber







Fuelwood



Charcoal

biochar


Firelog
Firewood
Pellet fuel
Wood fuel





Fibers



Cardboard
Corrugated fiberboard
Paper
Paperboard
Pulp
Pulpwood
Rayon





Derivatives



Birch-tar
Cellulose

nano


Hemicellulose
Cellulosic ethanol
Dyes
Lignin
Liquid smoke
Lye
Methanol
Pyroligneous acid
Pine tar
Pitch
Sandalwood oil
Tannin
Wood gas





By-products



Barkdust
Black liquor
Ramial chipped wood
Sawdust
Tall oil
Wood flour
Wood wool
Woodchips





Historical



Axe ties
Clapboard
Dugout canoe
Potash
Sawdust brandy
Split-rail fence
Tanbark
Timber framing
Wooden masts





See also



Biomass
Certified wood
Destructive distillation
Dry distillation
Engineered bamboo
Forestry
List of woods
Mulch
Non-timber forest products
Papermaking
Wood drying
Wood preservation
Wood processing
Woodworking








 Forestry portal
 Trees portal
 Category
 Commons
 WikiProject Forestry












v
t
e


Writing



Semi-permanent Writing material




Plant based



Palm-leaf manuscript (Borassus spp.)
Ola leaf (manuscript) (C. umbraculifera)
Birch bark manuscript
Papyrus
Paper
Wax tablet (wood)
Amate

Trema micrantha
Ficus aurea


Parabaik (S. asper)
Bamboo and wooden slips





Other



Clay tablet
Metals

Stamping (metalworking)
Intaglio (printmaking)


Stone inscription
animal skin
Samut khoi kraing (paper usu. Mulberry bark, metals, other)
Oracle bone
silk
E-ink
Textile printing
Geoglyph
Ink
Photographic film








Inherently impermanent material



Electronic visual display
Skywriting
Sand writing
Blood writing





Types



manuscript
inscription
book
sign
electronic storage
codex
bas-relief
high-relief





Misc



Writing systems









Authority control



GND: 4044522-7
HDS: 10462
NDL: 00564806











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Paper&oldid=817653040"					Categories: 2nd-century worksPaperPrinting materialsPapermakingWriting mediaMaterialsStationeryArt materialsPaper artChinese inventionsPackaging materialsHidden categories: Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pagesWikipedia indefinitely move-protected pagesUse dmy dates from August 2014Articles containing Chinese-language textWikipedia articles needing clarification from November 2017Articles with Encyclopædia Britannica linksWikipedia articles with GND identifiers