This article is about the country. For the single by The Future Sound of London, see Papua New Guinea (song).
Coordinates: 6°S 147°E﻿ / ﻿6°S 147°E﻿ / -6; 147


Independent State of Papua New Guinea



Independen Stet bilong Papua Niugini
Papua Niu Gini










Flag



National emblem






Motto: "Unity in diversity"[1]




Anthem: O Arise, All You Sons [2]












Location of  Papua New Guinea  (green)




Capital
and largest city
Port Moresby
9°30′S 147°07′E﻿ / ﻿9.500°S 147.117°E﻿ / -9.500; 147.117


Official languages[3][4]



Hiri Motu
Tok Pisin
PNG Sign Language
English





Demonym
Papua New Guinean


Government
Unitary parliamentary
constitutional monarchy



• Monarch

Elizabeth II



• Governor-General

Bob Dadae



• Prime Minister

Peter O'Neill


Legislature
National Parliament


Independence from Australia



• Papua and New Guinea Act 1949

1 July 1949



• Declared and recognised

16 September 1975


Area



• Total

462,840 km2 (178,700 sq mi) (54th)



• Water (%)

2


Population



• 2016 census preliminary estimate

8,084,999 [5] (101st)



• 2000 census

5,190,783



• Density

15/km2 (38.8/sq mi) (201st)


GDP (PPP)
2017 estimate



• Total

$29.481 billion[6] (139th)



• Per capita

$3,635[6]


GDP (nominal)
2017 estimate



• Total

$21.189 billion[6] (115th)



• Per capita

$2,613[6]


Gini (1996)
50.9[7]
high


HDI (2015)
 0.516[8]
low · 154th


Currency
Papua New Guinean kina (PGK)


Time zone
AEST (UTC+10, +11)


Drives on the
left


Calling code
+675


ISO 3166 code
PG


Internet TLD
.pg


Papua New Guinea (PNG; /ˈpæpuə njuː ˈɡɪniː, ˈpɑː-, -pju-/, US: /ˈpæpjuə, pɑːˈpuːə/;[9] Tok Pisin: Papua Niugini; Hiri Motu: Papua Niu Gini), officially the Independent State of Papua New Guinea, is an Oceanian country that occupies the eastern half of the island of New Guinea and its offshore islands in Melanesia, a region of the southwestern Pacific Ocean north of Australia. Its capital, located along its southeastern coast, is Port Moresby. The western half of New Guinea forms the Indonesian provinces of Papua and West Papua.
At the national level, after being ruled by three external powers since 1884, Papua New Guinea established its sovereignty in 1975. This followed nearly 60 years of Australian administration, which started during World War I. It became an independent Commonwealth realm in 1975 with Queen Elizabeth II as its head of state and became a member of the Commonwealth of Nations in its own right.
Papua New Guinea is one of the most culturally diverse countries in the world. It is also one of the most rural, as only 18 percent of its people live in urban centres.[10] There are 852 known languages in the country, of which 12 now have no known living speakers.[11] Most of the population of more than 7 million people live in customary communities, which are as diverse as the languages.[12] The country is one of the world's least explored, culturally and geographically. It is known to have numerous groups of uncontacted peoples, and researchers believe there are many undiscovered species of plants and animals in the interior.[13]
Papua New Guinea is classified as a developing economy by the International Monetary Fund.[14] Strong growth in Papua New Guinea's mining and resource sector led to the country becoming the sixth fastest-growing economy in the world in 2011.[15] Growth was expected to slow once major resource projects came on line in 2015.[16] Mining remains a major economic factor, however. Local and national governments are discussing the potential of resuming mining operations in Panguna mine in Bougainville Province, which has been closed since the civil war in the 1980s–1990s.[17] Nearly 40 percent of the population lives a self-sustainable natural lifestyle with no access to global capital.[18]
Most of the people still live in strong traditional social groups based on farming. Their social lives combine traditional religion with modern practices, including primary education.[12] These societies and clans are explicitly acknowledged by the Papua New Guinea Constitution, which expresses the wish for "traditional villages and communities to remain as viable units of Papua New Guinean society"[19] and protects their continuing importance to local and national community life.



Contents


1 History
2 Government and politics

2.1 Law
2.2 Foreign policy
2.3 Military
2.4 Human rights
2.5 Administrative divisions


3 Geography

3.1 Borders
3.2 Ecology
3.3 Environmental issues


4 Economy

4.1 Land tenure


5 Demographics

5.1 Urbanisation
5.2 Languages
5.3 Health
5.4 Religion


6 Culture

6.1 Sport


7 Education
8 Science and technology
9 Transport
10 See also
11 Sources
12 References

12.1 Further reading
12.2 Primary sources


13 External links



History[edit]
Main article: History of Papua New Guinea




Kerepunu women at the marketplace of Kalo, British New Guinea, 1885






Slaked lime holder, late 19th or early 20th century. The holder is decorated with wood carving of crocodile and bird. Details are emphasised with a white paint. The central portion, hollow to hold the slaked lime, is made of bamboo. The joints are covered with basketry work. The device is used in conjunction with chewing betel nut.


Archaeological evidence indicates that humans first arrived in Papua New Guinea around 42,000 to 45,000 years ago. They were descendants of migrants out of Africa, in one of the early waves of human migration.[20]
Agriculture was independently developed in the New Guinea highlands around 7000 BC, making it one of the few areas in the world where people independently domesticated plants.[21] A major migration of Austronesian-speaking peoples to coastal regions of New Guinea took place around 500 BC. This has been correlated with the introduction of pottery, pigs, and certain fishing techniques.
In the 18th century, traders brought the sweet potato to New Guinea, where it was adopted and became part of the staples. Portuguese traders had obtained it from South America and introduced it to the Moluccas.[22] The far higher crop yields from sweet potato gardens radically transformed traditional agriculture and societies. Sweet potato largely supplanted the previous staple, taro, and resulted in a significant increase in population in the highlands.
Although by the late 20th century headhunting and cannibalism had been practically eradicated, in the past they were practised in many parts of the country as part of rituals related to warfare and taking in enemy spirits or powers.[23][24] In 1901, on Goaribari Island in the Gulf of Papua, missionary Harry Dauncey found 10,000 skulls in the island's Long Houses, a demonstration of past practices.[25] According to writer Marianna Torgovnick, "The most fully documented instances of cannibalism as a social institution come from New Guinea, where head-hunting and ritual cannibalism survived, in certain isolated areas, into the Fifties, Sixties, and Seventies, and still leave traces within certain social groups."[26]
Little was known in Europe about the island until the 19th century, although Portuguese and Spanish explorers, such as Dom Jorge de Meneses and Yñigo Ortiz de Retez, had encountered it as early as the 16th century. Traders from Southeast Asia had visited New Guinea beginning 5,000 years ago to collect bird of paradise plumes.[27]
The country's dual name results from its complex administrative history before independence. The word papua is derived from an old local term of uncertain origin.[28] "New Guinea" (Nueva Guinea) was the name coined by the Spanish explorer Yñigo Ortiz de Retez. In 1545, he noted the resemblance of the people to those he had earlier seen along the Guinea coast of Africa. Guinea, in its turn, is etymologically derived from Portuguese word Guiné. The name is one of several toponyms sharing similar etymologies, ultimately meaning "land of the blacks" or similar meanings, in reference to the dark skin of the inhabitants.




New Guinea from 1884 to 1919. Germany and Britain controlled the eastern half of New Guinea.


In the nineteenth century, Germany ruled the northern half of the country for some decades, beginning in 1884, as a colony named German New Guinea. In 1914 after the outbreak of the Great War, Australian forces landed and captured German New Guinea in a small military campaign. Australia maintained occupation of the territory with its forces through the war. After the war, in which Germany and the Central Powers were defeated, the League of Nations authorised Australia to administer this area as a Mandate territory.
The southern half of the country had been colonised in 1884 by the United Kingdom as British New Guinea. With the Papua Act 1905, the UK transferred this territory to the newly formed Commonwealth of Australia, which took on its administration. Additionally, from 1905, British New Guinea was renamed as the Territory of Papua. In contrast to establishing an Australian mandate in former German New Guinea, the League of Nations determined that Papua was an External Territory of the Australian Commonwealth; as a matter of law it remained a British possession. The difference in legal status meant that until 1949, Papua and New Guinea had entirely separate administrations, both controlled by Australia. These conditions contributed to the complexity of organising the country's post-independence legal system.




Australian forces attack Japanese positions during the Battle of Buna–Gona, 7 January 1943.


During World War II, the New Guinea campaign (1942–1945) was one of the major military campaigns and conflicts between Japan and the Allies. Approximately 216,000 Japanese, Australian, and US servicemen died.[29] After World War II and the victory of the Allies, the two territories were combined into the Territory of Papua and New Guinea. This was later referred to as "Papua New Guinea".




Australian patrol officer in 1964


The natives of Papua appealed to the United Nations for oversight and independence. The nation established independence from Australia on 16 September 1975, becoming a Commonwealth realm, continuing to share Queen Elizabeth II as its head of state. It maintains close ties with Australia, which continues to be its largest aid donor. Papua New Guinea was admitted to membership in the United Nations on 10 October 1975.[30]
A secessionist revolt in 1975–76 on Bougainville Island resulted in an eleventh-hour modification of the draft Constitution of Papua New Guinea to allow for Bougainville and the other eighteen districts to have quasi-federal status as provinces. A renewed uprising on Bougainville Island started in 1988 and claimed 20,000 lives until it was resolved in 1997. Bougainville had been the chief mining region of the country, generating 40% of the national budget. The native peoples felt they were bearing the adverse environmental effects of the mining, which poisoned the land, water and air, without gaining a fair share of the profits.[31]
The government and rebels negotiated a peace agreement that established the Bougainville Autonomous District and Province. The autonomous Bougainville elected Joseph Kabui as president in 2005, who served until his death in 2008. He was succeeded by his deputy John Tabinaman as acting president while an election to fill the unexpired term was organised. James Tanis won that election in December 2008 and served until the inauguration of John Momis, the winner of the 2010 elections. As part of the current peace settlement, a referendum on independence is planned to be held in Bougainville sometime before mid-2020. Preparations were underway in 2015.[32][33]
Numerous Chinese have worked and lived in Papua New Guinea, establishing Chinese-majority communities. Chinese merchants became established in the islands before European exploration. Anti-Chinese rioting involving tens of thousands of people broke out in May 2009. The initial spark was a fight between ethnic Chinese and Papua New Guinean workers at a nickel factory under construction by a Chinese company. Native resentment against Chinese ownership of numerous small businesses and their commercial monopoly in the islands led to the rioting. The Chinese have long been merchants in Papua New Guinea.[34][35]
Government and politics[edit]
Main article: Politics of Papua New Guinea
Papua New Guinea is a Commonwealth realm. As such, Queen Elizabeth II is its sovereign and head of state. The constitutional convention, which prepared the draft constitution, and Australia, the outgoing metropolitan power, had thought that Papua New Guinea would not remain a monarchy. The founders, however, considered that imperial honours had a cachet.[36] The monarch is represented by the Governor-General of Papua New Guinea, currently Bob Dadae. Papua New Guinea (and the Solomon Islands) are unusual among Commonwealth realms in that governors-general are elected by the legislature, rather than chosen by the executive branch.
The Prime Minister heads the cabinet, which consists of 31 MPs from the ruling coalition, which make up the government. The current prime minister is Peter O'Neill. The unicameral National Parliament has 111 seats, of which 22 are occupied by the governors of the 22 provinces and the National Capital District (NCD). Candidates for members of parliament are voted upon when the prime minister asks the governor-general to call a national election, a maximum of five years after the previous national election.
In the early years of independence, the instability of the party system led to frequent votes of no confidence in parliament, with resulting changes of the government, but with referral to the electorate, through national elections only occurring every five years. In recent years, successive governments have passed legislation preventing such votes sooner than 18 months after a national election and within 12-month of the next election. In December 2012, the first two (of three) readings were passed to prevent votes of no confidence occurring within the first 30 months. This restriction on votes of no confidence has arguably resulted in greater stability, although perhaps at a cost of reducing the accountability of the executive branch of government.
Elections in PNG attract numerous candidates. After independence in 1975, members were elected by the first past the post system, with winners frequently gaining less than 15% of the vote. Electoral reforms in 2001 introduced the Limited Preferential Vote system (LPV), a version of the Alternative Vote. The 2007 general election was the first to be conducted using LPV.





Prime Minister Peter O'Neill








This section needs to be updated. Please update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information. (October 2012)



In 2011 there was a constitutional crisis between the parliament-elect Prime Minister, Peter O'Neill (voted into office by a large majority of MPs) and Sir Michael Somare, who was deemed by the supreme court (in a December Opinion, 3:2) to retain office. The stand-off between parliament and the supreme court continued until the July 2012 national elections, with legislation passed effectively removing the chief justice and subjecting the supreme court members to greater control by the legislature, as well as a series of other laws passed, for example limiting the age for a prime minister. The confrontation reached a peak, with the Deputy Prime Minister entering the supreme court during a hearing, escorted by some police, ostensibly to arrest the Chief Justice. There was strong pressure among some MPs to defer the national elections for a further six months to one year, although their powers to do that were highly questionable.
The parliament-elect prime minister and other cooler-headed MPs carried the votes for the writs for the new election to be issued, slightly late, but for the election itself to occur on time, thereby avoiding a continuation of the constitutional crisis. The crisis was tense at times, but largely restricted to the political and legal fraternity, plus some police factions. The public and public service (including most police and military) stood back. It was a period when, with increased telecommunication access and use of social media (notably Facebook and mobile phones), the public and students played some part in helping maintain restraint and demanding the leadership to adhere to constitutional processes. They insisted on having the elections so that the people could say who should be their legitimate representatives for the next five years.
Under an amendment of 2002, the leader of the party winning the largest number of seats in the election is invited by the governor-general to form the government, if he can muster the necessary majority in parliament. The process of forming such a coalition in PNG, where parties do not have much ideology, involves considerable horsetrading right up until the last moment. Peter O'Neill emerged as Papua New Guinea's prime minister after the July 2012 election, and formed a government with Leo Dion, the former Governor of East New Britain Province, as deputy prime minister.
Law[edit]




The Parliament building of Papua New Guinea in Port Moresby


Main article: Law of Papua New Guinea
The unicameral Parliament enacts legislation in the same manner as in other jurisdictions that have "cabinet,"[clarification needed] "responsible government," or "parliamentary democracy": it is introduced by the executive government to the legislature, debated and, if passed, becomes law when it receives royal assent by the Governor-General. Most legislation is regulation implemented by the bureaucracy under enabling legislation previously passed by Parliament.
All ordinary statutes enacted by Parliament must be consistent with the Constitution. The courts have jurisdiction to rule on the constitutionality of statutes, both in disputes before them and on a reference where there is no dispute but only an abstract question of law. Unusual among developing countries, the judicial branch of government in Papua New Guinea has remained remarkably independent, and successive executive governments have continued to respect its authority.
The "underlying law" (Papua New Guinea's common law) consists of principles and rules of common law and equity in England[37] common law as it stood on 16 September 1975 (the date of Independence), and thereafter the decisions of PNG's own courts. The courts are directed by the Constitution and, latterly, the Underlying Law Act, to take note of the "custom" of traditional communities. They are to determine which customs are common to the whole country and may be declared also to be part of the underlying law. In practice, this has proved extremely difficult and has been largely neglected. Statutes are largely adapted from overseas jurisdictions, primarily Australia and England. Advocacy in the courts follows the adversarial pattern of other common-law countries.
This national court system, used in towns and cities, is supported by a village court system in the more remote areas. The law underpinning the village courts is 'customary law'.
Foreign policy[edit]
In foreign policy, Papua New Guinea is a member of the Commonwealth of Nations, Pacific Islands Forum, and the Melanesian Spearhead Group (MSG) of countries. It was accorded Observer status within ASEAN in 1976, followed later by Special Observer status in 1981. It is also a member of APEC and an ACP country, associated with the Europe.
Military[edit]
Main article: Papua New Guinea Defence Force
The Papua New Guinea Defence Force (PNGDF) is the military organisation responsible for the defence of Papua New Guinea.
Human rights[edit]




The unity shown by men, women and children on White Ribbon Day is an important reminder that violence against women impacts on society as a whole.


Main article: Human rights in Papua New Guinea
See also: Sexual violence in Papua New Guinea
Papua New Guinea is often ranked as likely the worst place in the world for violence against women.[38][39] A 2013 study in The Lancet found that 41% of men on Bougainville Island, Papua New Guinea, reported having raped a non-partner, while 14.1% reported having committed gang rape.[40] According to UNICEF, nearly half of reported rape victims are under 15 years of age and 13% are under 7 years of age.[41] A report by ChildFund Australia, citing former Parliamentarian Dame Carol Kidu, claimed 50% of those seeking medical help after rape are under 16, 25% are under 12, and 10% are under 8.[42] Homosexual acts are prohibited by law in Papua New Guinea.[43]
The 1976 Sorcery Act imposed a penalty of up to 2 years in prison for the practice of "black" magic, until the Act was repealed in 2013.[44] An estimated 50–150 alleged witches are killed each year in Papua New Guinea.[45]
Administrative divisions[edit]
Main articles: Regions of Papua New Guinea, Provinces of Papua New Guinea, and Districts and LLGs of Papua New Guinea
Papua New Guinea is divided into four regions, which are not the primary administrative divisions but are quite significant in many aspects of government, commercial, sporting and other activities.
The nation has 22 province-level divisions: twenty provinces, the Autonomous Region of Bougainville and the National Capital District. Each province is divided into one or more districts, which in turn are divided into one or more Local Level Government areas.
Provinces[46] are the primary administrative divisions of the country. Provincial governments are branches of the national government – Papua New Guinea is not a federation of provinces. The province-level divisions are as follows:




Central
Chimbu (Simbu)
Eastern Highlands
East New Britain
East Sepik
Enga
Gulf
Madang
Manus
Milne Bay
Morobe




New Ireland
Northern (Oro Province)
Bougainville (autonomous region)
Southern Highlands
Western Province (Fly)
Western Highlands
West New Britain
West Sepik (Sandaun)
National Capital District
Hela
Jiwaka







In 2009, Parliament approved the creation of two additional provinces: Hela Province, consisting of part of the existing Southern Highlands Province, and Jiwaka Province, formed by dividing Western Highlands Province.[47] Jiwaka and Hela officially became separate provinces on 17 May 2012.[48]
Geography[edit]
Main article: Geography of Papua New Guinea


Map of Papua New Guinea


At 462,840 km2 (178,704 sq mi), Papua New Guinea is the world's fifty-fourth largest country. Including all its islands, it lies between latitudes 0° and 12°S, and longitudes 140° and 160°E.
The country's geography is diverse and, in places, extremely rugged. A spine of mountains, the New Guinea Highlands, runs the length of the island of New Guinea, forming a populous highlands region mostly covered with tropical rainforest, and the long Papuan Peninsula, known as the 'Bird's Tail'. Dense rainforests can be found in the lowland and coastal areas as well as very large wetland areas surrounding the Sepik and Fly rivers. This terrain has made it difficult for the country to develop transportation infrastructure. Some areas are accessible only on foot or by aeroplane.[citation needed] The highest peak is Mount Wilhelm at 4,509 metres (14,793 ft). Papua New Guinea is surrounded by coral reefs which are under close watch, in the interests of preservation.
The country is situated on the Pacific Ring of Fire, at the point of collision of several tectonic plates. There are a number of active volcanoes, and eruptions are frequent. Earthquakes are relatively common, sometimes accompanied by tsunamis.
The mainland of the country is the eastern half of New Guinea island, where the largest towns are also located, including Port Moresby (capital) and Lae; other major islands within Papua New Guinea include New Ireland, New Britain, Manus and Bougainville.
Papua New Guinea is one of the few regions close to the equator that experience snowfall, which occurs in the most elevated parts of the mainland.
Borders[edit]
The border between Papua New Guinea and Indonesia was confirmed by treaty with Australia before independence in 1974.[49] Maritime boundaries with Australia were confirmed by a treaty in 1978.[50]
Ecology[edit]
See also: Conservation in Papua New Guinea




Mount Tavurvur






Papua New Guinea's highlands


Papua New Guinea is part of the Australasia ecozone, which also includes Australia, New Zealand, eastern Indonesia, and several Pacific island groups, including the Solomon Islands and Vanuatu.
Geologically, the island of New Guinea is a northern extension of the Indo-Australian tectonic plate, forming part of a single land mass which is Australia-New Guinea (also called Sahul or Meganesia). It is connected to the Australian segment by a shallow continental shelf across the Torres Strait, which in former ages had lain exposed as a land bridge, particularly during ice ages when sea levels were lower than at present.
Consequently, many species of birds and mammals found on New Guinea have close genetic links with corresponding species found in Australia. One notable feature in common for the two landmasses is the existence of several species of marsupial mammals, including some kangaroos and possums, which are not found elsewhere.
Many of the other islands within PNG territory, including New Britain, New Ireland, Bougainville, the Admiralty Islands, the Trobriand Islands, and the Louisiade Archipelago, were never linked to New Guinea by land bridges. As a consequence, they have their own flora and fauna; in particular, they lack many of the land mammals and flightless birds that are common to New Guinea and Australia.




A tree-kangaroo in Papua New Guinea


Australia and New Guinea are portions of the ancient supercontinent of Gondwana, which started to break into smaller continents in the Cretaceous era, 66–130 million years ago. Australia finally broke free from Antarctica about 45 million years ago. All the Australasian lands are home to the Antarctic flora, descended from the flora of southern Gondwana, including the coniferous podocarps and Araucaria pines, and the broadleafed southern beech (Nothofagus). These plant families are still present in Papua New Guinea.
As the Indo-Australian Plate (which includes landmasses of India, Australia, and the Indian Ocean floor in between) drifts north, it collides with the Eurasian Plate. The collision of the two plates pushed up the Himalayas, the Indonesian islands, and New Guinea's Central Range. The Central Range is much younger and higher than the mountains of Australia, so high that it is home to rare equatorial glaciers. New Guinea is part of the humid tropics, and many Indomalayan rainforest plants spread across the narrow straits from Asia, mixing together with the old Australian and Antarctic floras.
PNG includes a number of terrestrial ecoregions:

Admiralty Islands lowland rain forests – forested islands to the north of the mainland, home to a distinct flora.
Central Range montane rain forests




The green jungle of Papua New Guinea bears a sharp contrast to the nearby desert of Australia.



Huon Peninsula montane rain forests
Louisiade Archipelago rain forests
New Britain-New Ireland lowland rain forests
New Britain-New Ireland montane rain forests
New Guinea mangroves
Northern New Guinea lowland rain and freshwater swamp forests
Northern New Guinea montane rain forests
Solomon Islands rain forests (includes Bougainville Island and Buka)
Southeastern Papuan rain forests
Southern New Guinea freshwater swamp forests
Southern New Guinea lowland rain forests
Trobriand Islands rain forests
Trans Fly savanna and grasslands
Central Range sub-alpine grasslands

Three new species of mammals were discovered in the forests of Papua New Guinea by an Australian-led expedition. A small wallaby, a large-eared mouse and shrew-like marsupial were discovered. The expedition was also successful in capturing photographs and video footage of some other rare animals such as the Tenkile tree kangaroo and the Weimang tree kangaroo.[51]
Environmental issues[edit]
At current rates of deforestation, more than half of Papua New Guinea's forests could be lost or seriously degraded by 2021, according to a new satellite study of the region.[52] Nearly one-quarter of Papua New Guinea's rainforests were damaged or destroyed between 1972 and 2002.[53]
Economy[edit]
Main article: Economy of Papua New Guinea




Port Moresby's central business district


Papua New Guinea is richly endowed with natural resources, including mineral and renewable resources, such as forests, marine (including a large portion of the world's major tuna stocks), and in some parts agriculture. The rugged terrain — including high mountain ranges and valleys, swamps and islands — and high cost of developing infrastructure, combined with other factors (including serious law and order problems in some centres and the system of customary land title) makes it difficult for outside developers. Local developers are handicapped by years of deficient investment in education, health, ICT and access to finance. Agriculture, for subsistence and cash crops, provides a livelihood for 85% of the population and continues to provide some 30% of GDP. Mineral deposits, including gold, oil, and copper, account for 72% of export earnings. Oil palm production has grown steadily over recent years (largely from estates and with extensive outgrower output), with palm oil now the main agricultural export. In households participating, coffee remains the major export crop (produced largely in the Highlands provinces), followed by cocoa and coconut oil/copra from the coastal areas, each largely produced by smallholders and tea, produced on estates and rubber. The Iagifu/Hedinia Field was discovered in 1986 in the Papuan fold and thrust belt.[54]:471
Former Prime Minister Sir Mekere Morauta tried to restore integrity to state institutions, stabilise the kina, restore stability to the national budget, privatise public enterprises where appropriate, and ensure ongoing peace on Bougainville following the 1997 agreement which ended Bougainville's secessionist unrest. The Morauta government had considerable success in attracting international support, specifically gaining the backing of the IMF and the World Bank in securing development assistance loans. Significant challenges face Prime Minister Sir Michael Somare, including gaining further investor confidence, continuing efforts to privatise government assets, and maintaining the support of members of Parliament.
In March 2006, the United Nations Development Programme Policy called for Papua New Guinea's designation of developing country to be downgraded to least-developed country because of protracted economic and social stagnation.[55] However, an evaluation by the International Monetary Fund in late 2008 found that "a combination of prudent fiscal and monetary policies, and high global prices for mineral commodity exports, have underpinned Papua New Guinea's recent buoyant economic growth and macroeconomic stability. By 2012 PNG had enjoyed a decade of positive economic growth, at over 6% since 2007, even during the Global Financial Crisis years of 2008/9. PNG's Real GDP growth rate as at 2011 was 8.9%,[56] and 9.2% for 2012, according to the Asian Development Bank.[57]
This economic growth has been primarily attributed to strong commodity prices, particularly mineral but also agricultural, with the high demand for mineral products largely sustained even during the crisis by the buoyant Asian markets a booming mining sector, and particularly since 2009[citation needed] by a buoyant outlook and the construction phase for natural gas exploration, production, and exportation in liquefied form (Liquefied Natural Gas or "LNG") by LNG tankers (LNG carrier), all of which will require multibillion-dollar investments (exploration, production wells, pipelines, storage, liquefaction plants, port terminals, LNG tanker ships).
The first major gas project was the PNG LNG joint venture. ExxonMobil is operator of the joint venture, also comprising Oil Search, Santos, Kumul Petroleum Holdings (Papua New Guinea’s national oil and gas company), JX Nippon Oil and Gas Exploration, the PNG government's Mineral Resources Development Company and Petromin PNG Holdings.[58] The project is an integrated development that includes gas production and processing facilities in the Hela, Southern Highlands and Western Provinces of Papua New Guinea, including liquefaction and storage facilities (located northwest of Port Moresby) with capacity of 6.9 million tonnes per year. There are over 700 kilometres (430 mi) of pipelines connecting the facilities.[58] It is the largest private-sector investment in the history of PNG.[59]
A second major project is based on initial rights held by the French oil and gas major Total S.A. and the US company InterOil Corp. (IOC), which have partly combined their assets after Total agreed in December 2013 to purchase 61.3% of IOC's Antelope and Elk gas fields rights, with the plan to develop them starting in 2016, including the construction of a liquefaction plant to allow export of LNG. Total S.A. has separately another joint operating agreement with the PNG company Oil Search.
Further gas and mineral projects are proposed (including the large Wafi-Golpu copper-gold mine), with extensive exploration ongoing across the country.[60]
Economic 'development' based on the extractive industries carries difficult consequences for local communities. There has been much contention[clarification needed] around river tailings in the vast Fly River,[citation needed] submarine tailings from the new Ramu-Nickel-cobalt mine, commencing exports in late 2012 (after a delay from landowner-led court challenges),[citation needed] and from proposed submarine mining in the Bismarck Sea (by Nautilus Minerals).[citation needed] One major project conducted through the PNG Department for Community Development suggested that other pathways to sustainable development should be considered.[61]
The PNG government's long-term Vision 2050 and shorter-term policy documents, including the 2013 Budget and the 2014 Responsible Sustainable Development Strategy, emphasise the need for a more diverse economy, based upon sustainable industries and avoiding the effects of Dutch Disease from major resource extraction projects undermining other industries, as has occurred in many countries experiencing oil or other mineral booms, notably in Western Africa, undermining much of their agriculture sector, manufacturing and tourism, and with them broad-based employment prospects. Measures have been taken to mitigate these effects, including through the establishment of a sovereign wealth fund, partly to stabilise revenue and expenditure flows, but much will depend upon the readiness to make real reforms to effective use of revenue, tackling rampant corruption and empowering households and businesses to access markets, services and develop a more buoyant economy, with lower costs, especially for small- to medium-size enterprises.
The Institute of National Affairs, a PNG independent policy think tank, provides a report on the business and investment environment of Papua New Guinea every five years, based upon a survey of large and small, local and overseas companies, highlighting law and order problems and corruption, as the worst impediments, followed by the poor state of transport, power and communications infrastructure.[62]
Land tenure[edit]




The Ok Tedi Mine in southwestern Papua New Guinea


The PNG legislature has enacted laws in which a type of tenure called "customary land title" is recognised, meaning that the traditional lands of the indigenous peoples have some legal basis to inalienable tenure. This customary land notionally covers most of the usable land in the country (some 97% of total land area);[63] alienated land is either held privately under state lease or is government land. Freehold title (also known as fee simple) can only be held by Papua New Guinean citizens.[64]
Only some 3% of the land of Papua New Guinea is in private hands; it[clarification needed] is privately held under 99-year state lease, or it is held by the State. There is virtually no freehold title; the few existing freeholds are automatically converted to state lease when they are transferred between vendor and purchaser. Unalienated land is owned under customary title by traditional landowners. The precise nature of the seisin varies from one culture to another. Many writers portray land as in the communal ownership of traditional clans; however, closer studies usually show that the smallest portions of land whose ownership cannot be further divided are held by the individual heads of extended families and their descendants or their descendants alone if they have recently died.[citation needed]
This is a matter of vital importance because a problem of economic development is identifying the membership of customary landowning groups and the owners. Disputes between mining and forestry companies and landowner groups often devolve on the issue of whether the companies entered into contractual relations for the use of land with the true owners. Customary property — usually land — cannot be devised by will. It can only be inherited according to the custom of the deceased's people.[citation needed] The Lands Act was amended in 2010 along with the Land Group Incorporation Act, intended to improve the management of state land, mechanisms for dispute resolution over land, and to enable customary landowners to be better able to access finance and possible partnerships over portions of their land, if they seek to develop it for urban or rural economic activities. The Land Group Incorporation Act requires more specific identification of the customary landowners than hitherto and their more specific authorisation before any land arrangements are determined; (a major issue in recent years has been a land grab, using, or rather misusing, the Lease-Leaseback provision under the Land Act, notably using 'Special Agricultural and Business Leases' (SABLs) to acquire vast tracts of customary land, purportedly for agricultural projects, but in an almost all cases as a back-door mechanism for securing tropical forest resources for logging — circumventing the more exacting requirements of the Forest Act, for securing Timber Permits (which must comply with sustainability requirements and be competitively secured, and with the customary landowners approval). Following a national outcry, these SABLs have been subject to a Commission of Inquiry, established in mid-2011, for which the report is still awaited for initial presentation to the Prime Minister and Parliament.
Demographics[edit]
Main article: Demographics of Papua New Guinea




Huli wigman from the Southern Highlands


Papua New Guinea is one of the most heterogeneous nations in the world.[65] There are hundreds of ethnic groups indigenous to Papua New Guinea, the majority being from the group known as Papuans, whose ancestors arrived in the New Guinea region tens of thousands of years ago. The other indigenous peoples are Austronesians, their ancestors having arrived in the region less than four thousand years ago.
There are also numerous people from other parts of the world now resident, including Chinese,[66] Europeans, Australians, Indonesians, Filipinos, Polynesians, and Micronesians (the last four belonging to the Austronesian family). Around 40,000 expatriates, mostly from Australia and China, were living in Papua New Guinea in 1975.[67]
Urbanisation[edit]



 


v
t
e


Largest cities and towns in Papua New Guinea
www.geonames.org/PG/largest-cities-in-papua-new-guinea.html




Rank
Name
Province
Pop.



Port Moresby

Lae
1
Port Moresby
National capital district
283,733


2
Lae
Morobe
76,255


3
Arawa
Bougainville
40,266


4
Mount Hagen
Western Highlands
33,623


5
Popondetta
Northern Province
28,198


6
Madang
Madang
27,419


7
Kokopo
East New Britain
26,273


8
Mendi
Southern Highlands
26,252


9
Kimbe
West New Britain
18,847


10
Goroka
Eastern Highlands
18,503



Languages[edit]
Main article: Languages of Papua New Guinea




The language families in Ross's conception of the Trans-New Guinea language family


Papua New Guinea has more languages than any other country,[68] with over 820 indigenous languages, representing 12% of the world's total, but most have fewer than 1,000 speakers. The most widely spoken indigenous language is Enga, with about 200,000 speakers, followed by Melpa and Huli.[69] Indigenous languages are classified into two large groups, Austronesian languages and non-Austronesian, or Papuan, languages. There are four official languages for Papua New Guinea: English, "sign language" (which in practice means Papua New Guinean Sign Language), Tok Pisin and Hiri Motu.
English is the language of government and the education system, but it is not spoken widely.
The primary lingua franca of the country is Tok Pisin (commonly known in English as New Guinean Pidgin or Melanesian Pidgin), in which much of the debate in Parliament is conducted, many information campaigns and advertisements are presented, and until recently a national newspaper, Wantok, was published. The only area where Tok Pisin is not prevalent is the southern region of Papua, where people often use the third official language, Hiri Motu.
Although it lies in the Papua region, Port Moresby has a highly diverse population which primarily uses Tok Pisin, and to a lesser extent English, with Motu spoken as the indigenous language in outlying villages. With an average of only 7,000 speakers per language, Papua New Guinea has a greater density of languages than any other nation on earth except Vanuatu.[citation needed]
Health[edit]
Public expenditure was at 7.3% of all government expenditure in 2006,[70] whereas private expenditure was at 0.6% of the GDP.[citation needed] There were five physicians per 100,000 people in the early 2000s.[71] Malaria is the leading cause of illness and death in New Guinea. In 2003, the most recently reported year, 70,226 cases of laboratory confirmed malaria were reported, along with 537 deaths. A total of 1,729,697 cases were probable.[72]
Papua New Guinea has the highest incidence of HIV and AIDS in the Pacific region and is the fourth country in the Asia Pacific region to fit the criteria for a generalised HIV/AIDS epidemic.[73] Lack of HIV/AIDS awareness is a major problem, especially in rural areas.
The 2010 maternal mortality rate per 100,000 births for Papua New Guinea is 250. This is compared with 311.9 in 2008 and 476.3 in 1990. The under 5 mortality rate, per 1,000 births is 69 and the neonatal mortality as a percentage of under 5's mortality is 37. In Papua New Guinea the number of midwives per 1,000 live births is 1 and the lifetime risk of death for pregnant women is 1 in 94.[74]
Religion[edit]
Main article: Religion in Papua New Guinea






































Citizen population in Papua New Guinea by religion, based on the 2011 census[75]
  Roman Catholic (26%)
  Evangelical Lutheran Church of Papua New Guinea (18.4%)
  Seventh-day Adventist (12.9%)
  Pentecostal (10.4%)
  United Church in Papua New Guinea and the Solomon Islands (10.3%)
  Evangelical Alliance Papua New Guinea (5.9%)
  Anglican Church of Papua New Guinea (3.2%)
  Baptist (2.8%)
  Salvation Army (0.4%)
  Kwato Church (0.2%)
  Other Christian (5.1%)
  Non Christian (1.4%)
  Not stated (3.1%)



The courts and government practice uphold the constitutional right to freedom of speech, thought, and belief, and no legislation to curb those rights has been adopted. The 2011 census found that 95.6% of citizens identified themselves as members of a Christian church, 1.4% were not Christian, 3.1% did not answer this census question. These who stated no religion accounted for, approximately, 0%. Many citizens combine their Christian faith with some traditional indigenous religious practices.[76]
Christianity in Papua New Guinea is predominantly made up of Protestants, who collectively constitute roughly 70% of the total population. They are mostly represented by the Evangelical Lutheran Church of Papua New Guinea, the Seventh-day Adventist Church, diverse Pentecostal denominations, the United Church in Papua New Guinea and the Solomon Islands, the Evangelical Alliance Papua New Guinea, and the Anglican Church of Papua New Guinea. Apart from Protestants, there is a notable Roman Catholic minority with approximately 25% of the population.
Among non Christians, the Bahai Faith has a strong standing. There are also approximately 4,000 Muslims in the country. The majority belong to the Sunni group, while a small number are Ahmadi.[77] Non-traditional Christian churches and non-Christian religious groups are active throughout the country. The Papua New Guinea Council of Churches has stated that both Muslim and Confucian missionaries are active, and foreign missionary activity in general is high.[citation needed]
Traditional religions are often animist. Some also tend to have elements of Veneration of the dead, though generalisation is suspect given the extreme heterogeneity of Melanesian societies. Prevalent among traditional tribes is the belief in masalai, or evil spirits, which are blamed for "poisoning" people, causing calamity and death, and the practice of puripuri (sorcery).[78][79]
Culture[edit]
Main articles: Culture of Papua New Guinea, Music of Papua New Guinea, and Papua New Guinean cuisine




Bilum bag from Goroka, Eastern Highlands Province






A resident of Boga-Boga, a village on the southeast coast of mainland Papua New Guinea






A 20th century wooden Abelam ancestor figure (nggwalndu)


It is estimated that more than a thousand cultural groups exist in Papua New Guinea. Because of this diversity, many styles of cultural expression have emerged. Each group has created its own expressive forms in art, dance, weaponry, costumes, singing, music, architecture and much more.
Most of these cultural groups have their own language. People typically live in villages that rely on subsistence farming. In some areas people hunt and collect wild plants (such as yam roots) to supplement their diets. Those who become skilled at hunting, farming and fishing earn a great deal of respect.
On the Sepik river, there is a tradition of wood carving, often in the form of plants or animals, representing ancestor spirits.
Sea shells are no longer the currency of Papua New Guinea, as they were in some regions — sea shells were abolished as currency in 1933. This tradition is still present in local customs. In some cultures, to get a bride, a groom must bring a certain number of golden-edged clam shells[80] as a bride price. In other regions, the bride price is paid in lengths of shell money, pigs, cassowaries or cash. Elsewhere, it is brides who traditionally pay a dowry.
People of the highlands engage in colourful local rituals that are called "sing sings". They paint themselves and dress up with feathers, pearls and animal skins to represent birds, trees or mountain spirits. Sometimes an important event, such as a legendary battle, is enacted at such a musical festival.
Sport[edit]
Main article: Sport in Papua New Guinea
Sport is an important part of Papua New Guinean culture and rugby league is by far the most popular sport.[81] In a nation where communities are far apart and many people live at a minimal subsistence level, rugby league has been described as a replacement for tribal warfare as a way of explaining the local enthusiasm for the game (a matter of life and death). Many Papua New Guineans have become instant celebrities by representing their country or playing in an overseas professional league. Even Australian rugby league players who have played in the annual State of Origin series, which is celebrated feverishly every year in PNG, are among the most well known people throughout the nation.
State of Origin is a highlight of the year for most Papua New Guineans, although the support is so passionate that many people have died over the years in violent clashes supporting their team.[82] The Papua New Guinea national rugby league team usually plays against the Australian Prime Minister's XIII (a selection of NRL players) each year, normally in Port Moresby.
Although not as popular, Australian rules football is more significant in another way, as the national team is ranked second, only after Australia.
Other major sports which have a part in the Papua New Guinea sporting landscape are association football, rugby union, basketball and, in eastern Papua, cricket.
The capital city, Port Moresby, hosted the Pacific Games in 2015.
Education[edit]
Main article: Education in Papua New Guinea
A large proportion of the population is illiterate,[70] with women predominating in this area.[70] Much of the education in PNG is provided by church institutions.[83] This includes 500 schools of the Evangelical Lutheran Church of Papua New Guinea.[84] Papua New Guinea has six universities apart from other major tertiary institutions. The two founding universities are the University of Papua New Guinea based in the National Capital District,[85] and the Papua New Guinea University of Technology based outside of Lae, in Morobe Province.
The four other universities which were once colleges were established recently after gaining government recognition. These are the University of Goroka in the Eastern Highlands province, Divine Word University (run by the Catholic Church's Divine Word Missionaries) in Madang Province, Vudal University in East New Britain Province and Pacific Adventist University (run by the Seventh-day Adventist Church) in the National Capital District.
Science and technology[edit]
Papua New Guinea's National Vision 2050 was adopted in 2009. This has led to the establishment of the Research, Science and Technology Council. At its gathering in November 2014, the Council re-emphasised the need to focus on sustainable development through science and technology.[86]
Vision 2050’s medium-term priorities are:[86]

emerging industrial technology for downstream processing;
infrastructure technology for the economic corridors;
knowledge-based technology;
Science and engineering education; and
to reach the target of investing 5% of GDP in research and development by 2050. (There are no recent data for this indicator.)

According to Thomson Reuters' Web of Science, Papua New Guinea had the largest number of publications (110) among Pacific Island states in 2014, followed by Fiji (106). Nine out of ten scientific publications from Papua New Guinea focused on immunology, genetics, biotechnology and microbiology. Nine out of ten were also co-authored by scientists from other countries, mainly Australia, the United States of America, United Kingdom, Spain and Switzerland.[86]
Forestry is an important economic resource for Papua New Guinea but the industry uses low and semi-intensive technological inputs. As a result, product ranges are limited to sawed timber, veneer, plywood, block board, moulding, poles and posts and wood chips. Only a few limited finished products are exported. Lack of automated machinery, coupled with inadequately trained local technical personnel, are some of the obstacles to introducing automated machinery and design. Policy-makers need to turn their attention to eliminating these barriers, in order for forestry to make a more efficient and sustainable contribution to national economic development.[86]
In Papua New Guinea, renewable energy sources represent two-thirds of the total electricity supply.[86] In 2015, the Secretariat of the Pacific Community observed that, 'while Fiji, Papua New Guinea and Samoa are leading the way with large-scale hydropower projects, there is enormous potential to expand the deployment of other renewable energy options such as solar, wind, geothermal and ocean-based energy sources'.[87] The European Union has funded the Renewable Energy in Pacific Island Countries Developing Skills and Capacity programme (EPIC). Since its inception in 2013, the programme has developed a master’s programme in renewable energy management at the University of Papua New Guinea and helped to establish a Centre of Renewable Energy at the same university.[86]
Papua New Guinea is one of the 15 beneficiaries of a programme on Adapting to Climate Change and Sustainable Energy worth €37.26 million. The programme resulted from the signing of an agreement in February 2014 between the European Union and the Pacific Islands Forum Secretariat. The other beneficiaries are the Cook Islands, Fiji, Kiribati, Marshall Islands, Federated States of Micronesia, Nauru, Niue, Palau, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Timor-Leste, Tonga, Tuvalu and Vanuatu.[86]
Transport[edit]
Main article: Transport in Papua New Guinea
Transport in Papua New Guinea is heavily limited by the country's mountainous terrain. As a result, air travel is the single most important form of transport for human and high density/value freight. Aeroplanes made it possible to open up the country during its early colonial period. Even today the two largest cities, Port Moresby and Lae, are only directly connected by planes. Port Moresby is not linked by road to any of the other major towns, and many remote villages can only be reached by light aircraft or on foot.
Jacksons International Airport is the major international airport in Papua New Guinea, located 8 kilometres (5 mi) from Port Moresby. In addition to two international airfields, Papua New Guinea has 578 airstrips, most of which are unpaved.[3] Assets are not maintained to good operating standards and poor transport remains a major impediment to the development of ties of national unity.
See also[edit]


Geography portal
Oceania portal
Commonwealth realms portal
Papua New Guinea portal



Communications in Papua New Guinea
Conservation in Papua New Guinea
Foreign relations of Papua New Guinea
Human rights in Papua New Guinea
Military of Papua New Guinea
Outline of Papua New Guinea
Papua New Guinea honours system
Science and technology in Pacific Island countries
Tourism in Papua New Guinea

Lists

List of airports in Papua New Guinea
List of cities and towns in Papua New Guinea
List of diplomatic missions in Papua New Guinea
List of Districts and Local Level Governments of Papua New Guinea
List of earthquakes in Papua New Guinea
List of Papua New Guineans


Sources[edit]


This article incorporates text from a free content work. Licensed under CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0 UNESCO Science Report: towards 2030, 535-555, UNESCO, UNESCO Publishing.
To learn how to add freely licensed text to Wikipedia articles, please see the terms of use.

References[edit]


^ Somare, Michael (6 December 2004). "Stable Government, Investment Initiatives, and Economic Growth". Keynote address to the 8th Papua New Guinea Mining and Petroleum Conference. Archived from the original on 2006-06-28. Retrieved 9 August 2007. 
^ "Never more to rise". The National (February 6, 2006). Archived from the original on 13 July 2007. Retrieved 19 January 2005. 
^ a b "Papua New Guinea". The World Factbook. Langley, Virginia: Central Intelligence Agency. 2012. Retrieved 5 October 2012. 
^ "Sign language becomes an official language in PNG". Radio New Zealand. 21 May 2015. 
^ "Papua New Guinea Population (2016)". worldbank.org. Retrieved October 19, 2017. 
^ a b c d "Papua New Guinea". International Monetary Fund. Retrieved 25 July 2017. 
^ "GINI index". World Bank. Retrieved 30 July 2013. 
^ "2016 Human Development Report" (PDF). United Nations Development Programme. 2016. Retrieved 21 March 2017. 
^ Jones, Daniel (2003) [1917], Peter Roach, James Hartmann and Jane Setter, eds., English Pronouncing Dictionary, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ISBN 3-12-539683-2 CS1 maint: Uses editors parameter (link)
^ "World Bank data on urbanisation". World Development Indicators. World Bank. 2005. Archived from the original on 2009-02-03. Retrieved 15 July 2005. 
^ Papua New Guinea, Ethnologue
^ a b James, Paul; Nadarajah, Yaso; Haive, Karen; Stead, Victoria (2012). Sustainable Communities, Sustainable Development: Other Paths for Papua New Guinea. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press. 
^ Gelineau, Kristen (26 March 2009). "Spiders and frogs identified among 50 new species". The Independent. Retrieved 26 March 2009. 
^ World Economic Outlook Database, October 2015, International Monetary Fund. Database updated on 6 October 2015. Accessed on 6 October 2015.
^ "Raising the profile of PNG in Australia". Australian Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade. 9 March 2012. Retrieved 27 July 2012. 
^ Asian Development Outlook 2015: Financing Asia’s Future Growth. Asian Development Bank (March 2015)
^ "Bougainville Copper Limited". Retrieved 24 August 2015. 
^ World Bank. 2010. World Development Indicators. Washington DC.
^ "Constitution of Independent State of Papua New Guinea (consol. to amendment #22)". Pacific Islands Legal Information Institute. Retrieved 16 July 2005. 
^ O’Connell, J. F., and J. Allen. "Pre-LGM Sahul (Australia-New Guinea) and the archaeology of early modern humans," Rethinking the human revolution: new behavioural and biological perspectives on the origin and dispersal of modern humans (2007): 395–410.
^ Diamond, J. (March 1997). Guns, Germs, and Steel: The Fates of Human Societies. W.W. Norton & Company. ISBN 0-393-03891-2.
^ Swadling, p. 282
^ Knauft, Bruce M. (1999) From Primitive to Postcolonial in Melanesia and Anthropology. University of Michigan Press. p. 103. ISBN 0-472-06687-0
^ "Cannibalism Normal For Early Humans?". National Geographic News. 10 April 2003.
^ Goldman, Laurence (1999).The Anthropology of Cannibalism. Greenwood Publishing Group. p. 19. ISBN 0-89789-596-7
^ Torgovnick, Marianna (1991). Gone Primitive: Savage Intellects, Modern Lives, University of Chicago Press. p. 258 ISBN 0-226-80832-7
^ Swadling: "Such trade links and the nominal claim of the Sultan of Ceram over New Guinea constituted the legal basis for the Netherlands' claim over West New Guinea and ultimately that of Indonesia over what is new West Papua."
^ Pickell, David & Müller, Kal (2002). Between the Tides: A Fascinating Journey among the Kamoro of New Guinea. Tuttle Publishing. p. 153. ISBN 0-7946-0072-7. 
^ Fenton, Damien. ""How many died? (QnA)"". Archived from the original on 5 July 2009. Retrieved 9 August 2012. CS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknown (link) . Australian War Memorial.
^ "United Nations Official Document". www.un.org. 
^ "New report doubles death toll on Bougainville to 20,000". Radio Australia. 19 March 2012.
^ "Australia's interest in Bougainville's independence is far from locals' wishes", The Guardian. 20 May 2015
^ "Bougainville makes first preparations for referendum". Radio New Zealand. 17 April 2015
^ Callick, Rowan (23 May 2009). "Looters shot dead amid chaos of Papua New Guinea's anti-Chinese riots". The Australian. Retrieved 30 June 2014. 
^ "Overseas and under siege", The Economist, 11 August 2009
^ Bradford, Sarah (1997). Elizabeth: A Biography of Britain's Queen. Riverhead Books. ISBN 1-57322-600-9. 
^ Papua New Guinea Constitution Schedule 2.2.2
^ Davidson, Helen (5 July 2013). "Médecins Sans Frontières opens Papua New Guinea clinic for abuse victims". Guardian News and Media Limited. Retrieved 12 February 2013. 
^ Davidson, Helen (19 July 2013). "Papua New Guinea: a country suffering spiralling violence". Guardian News and Media Limited. Retrieved 2014-01-17. 
^ Jewkes, Rachel; Fulu, Emma; Roselli, Tim; Garcia-Moreno, Claudia (2013). "Prevalence of and factors associated with non-partner rape perpetration: findings from the UN Multi-country Cross-sectional Study on Men and Violence in Asia and the Pacific". The Lancet. 323 (4): e208. doi:10.1016/S2214-109X(13)70069-X. PMID 25104346. 
^ "UNICEF strives to help Papua New Guinea break cycle of violence". UNICEF. 18 August 2008. Retrieved 26 February 2014. 
^ Wiseman H (August 2013). "Stop Violence Against Women and Children in Papua New Guinea" (PDF). ChildFund. p. 5. Retrieved 18 May 2015. 
^ "The state of gay rights around the world". The Washington Post. June 14, 2016.
^ "PNG repeals sorcery law and expands death penalty". BBC News. 29 May 2013.
^ "Papua New Guinea's 'Sorcery Refugees': Women Accused of Witchcraft Flee Homes to Escape Violence". Vice News. January 6, 2015.
^ The Constitution of Papua New Guinea sets out the names of the 19 provinces at the time of Independence. Several provinces have changed their names; such changes are not strictly speaking official without a formal constitutional amendment, though "Oro," for example, is universally used in reference to that province.
^ Kolo, Pearson (15 July 2009). "Jiwaka, Hela set to go!". Postcourier.com.pg. Archived from the original on 16 June 2011. 
^ "Hela, Jiwaka declared". The National (Papua New Guinea). 17 May 2012. Retrieved 18 May 2012. 
^ "Agreement between Australia and Indonesia concerning Certain Boundaries between Papua New Guinea and Indonesia (1974) ATS 26". www3.austlii.edu.au. Austraasian Legal Information Institute, Australian Treaties Library. Retrieved 19 April 2017. 
^ "Treaty between Australia and the Independent State of Papua New Guinea concerning Sovereignty and Maritime Boundaries in the area between the two Countries, including the area known as Torres Strait, and Related Matters [1985] ATS 4". www3.austlii.edu.au. Austraasian Legal Information Institute, Australian Treaties Library. Retrieved 19 April 2017. 
^ Australian Geographic (July 2014). "New and rare species found in remote PNG". 
^ "Satellite images show Papua New Guinea deforestation at critical level", Guardian, 2 June 2008.
^ "Satellite images uncover rapid PNG deforestation". ABC News. 2 June 2008.
^ Matzke, R.H., Smith, J.G., and Foo, W.K., 1992, Iagifu/Hedinia Field, In Giant Oil and Gas Fields of the Decade, 1978–1988, AAPG Memoir 54, Halbouty, M.T., editor, Tulsa: American Association of Petroleum Geologists, ISBN 0-89181-333-0
^ "Review of the status of least-developed countries". Overcoming economic vulnerability and creating employment (PDF). Committee for Development Policy. 20–24 March 2006. p. 29. Retrieved 24 December 2008. 
^ "GDP – Real Growth Rate". cia.gov. 5 July 2012. Retrieved 27 July 2012. 
^ Maierbrugger, Arno (31 March 2013). "Asia-Pacific: PNG, East Timor grew fastest". Inside Investor. Retrieved 1 April 2013. 
^ a b "Papua New Guinea". ExxonMobil. Retrieved 13 January 2017. 
^ "Voters in Papua New Guinea head to the polls". The Economist. 29 June 2017. Retrieved 30 June 2017. 
^ "Project Overview". pnglng.com. Retrieved 27 July 2012. 
^ James, P.; Nadarajah, Y.; Haive, K. and Stead, V. (2012) Sustainable Communities, Sustainable Development: Other Paths for Papua New Guinea, Honolulu, University of Hawaii Press.
^ [1] Institute of National Affairs (2013)
^ Armitage, Lynne. "Customary Land Tenure in Papua New Guinea: Status and Prospects" (PDF). Queensland University of Technology. Retrieved 15 July 2005. 
^ HBW International Inc. (10 September 2003). "Facilitating Foreign Investment through Property Lease Options" (PDF). p. 9. Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 September 2007. Retrieved 28 August 2007. 
^ James Fearon (2003). "Ethnic and Cultural Diversity by Country" (PDF). Journal of Economic Growth. 8: 195–222. doi:10.1023/A:1024419522867. 
^ "Chinese targeted in PNG riots – report". News.com.au. 15 May 2009.
^ "Papua New Guinea". Encyclopædia Britannica Online.
^ "Seven decades after Independence, many small languages in India face extinction threat". 
^ "Languages on Papua vanish without a whisper". Archived from the original on 11 January 2012. Retrieved 22 July 2011. CS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknown (link) . AFP via dawn.com (21 July 2011)
^ a b c "Papua New Guinea HDI Rank – 145". 2007/2008 Human Development Report, Hdrstats.undp.org. Archived from the original on 2009-04-29. Retrieved 27 June 2010. 
^ "Human Development Report 2009". Retrieved 19 February 2010. 
^ "Papua New Guinea Overview of malaria control activities and programme results" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 August 2009. Retrieved 19 February 2010. 
^ "HIV/AIDS in Papua New Guinea". Australia's Aid Program (AusAID). Archived from the original on 2007-09-01. Retrieved 16 December 2005. 
^ "The State of the World's Midwifery – Papua New Guinea" (PDF). United Nations Population Fund. 
^ http://sdd.spc.int/en/resources/document-library?view=preview&format=raw&fileId=218
^ "Papua New Guinea". International Religious Freedom Report 2003. US Department of State. 
^ "Islam in Papua New Guinea" (PDF). Retrieved 31 January 2015. 
^ Salak, Kira (2004). Four Corners: A Journey into the Heart of Papua New Guinea. National Geographic Society. ISBN 0-7922-7417-2. 
^ puripuri. coombs.anu.edu.au (26 January 2005)
^ "Papua New Guinea – culture". Datec Pty Ltd. Archived from the original on 10 February 1999. Retrieved 16 December 2005. 
^ Hadfield, Dave (8 October 1995). "Island gods high in a dream world". The Independent. Retrieved 6 October 2009. 
^ "Three dead in PNG after State of Origin violence". BrisbaneTimes.com.au. 26 June 2009. Retrieved 27 June 2010. 
^ "Kichte-in-not.de". Kirche-in-not.de. 6 March 2009. Retrieved 27 June 2010. 
^ "Evangelisch-Lutherische Kirche in Papua-Neuguinea". NMZ-mission.de. Archived from the original on 2010-12-31. Retrieved 27 June 2010. 
^ Vahau, Alfred (5 January 2007). "University of Papua New Guinea". Upng.ac.pg. Retrieved 27 June 2010. 
^ a b c d e f g UNESCO Science Report: towards 2030 (PDF). Paris: UNESCO. 2015. pp. 693–731. ISBN 978-92-3-100129-1. 
^ "Pacific-first centre of excellence for renewable energy and energy efficiency takes shape". Secretariat of Pacific Community press release. 18 June 2015. Retrieved 17 March 2017. 


Further reading[edit]

Biskup, Peter, B. Jinks and H. Nelson. A Short History of New Guinea (1970)
Connell, John. Papua New Guinea: The Struggle for Development (1997) online
Gash, Noel. A Pictorial History of New Guinea (1975)
Golson, Jack. 50,000 years of New Guinea history (1966)
Griffin, James. Papua New Guinea: A political history (1979)
James, Paul; Nadarajah, Yaso; Haive, Karen; Stead, Victoria (2012). Sustainable Communities, Sustainable Development: Other Paths for Papua New Guinea. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press. 
Knauft, Bruce M. South Coast New Guinea Cultures: History, Comparison, Dialectic (1993) excerpt and text search
McCosker, Anne. Masked Eden: A History of the Australians in New Guinea (1998)
Mckinnon, Rowan, et al. Papua New Guinea & Solomon Islands (Country Travel Guide) (2008) excerpt and text search
Swadling, Pamela (1996). Plumes from Paradise. Papua New Guinea National Museum. ISBN 9980-85-103-1. 
Waiko. John. Short History of Papua New Guinea (1993)
Waiko, John Dademo. Papua New Guinea: A History of Our Times (2003)
Zimmer-Tamakoshi, Laura. Modern Papua New Guinea (1998) online

Primary sources[edit]

Jinks, Brian, ed. Readings in New Guinea history (1973)
Tim Flannery Throwim' Way Leg: Tree-Kangaroos, Possums, and Penis Gourds (2000) memoir excerpt and text search
Malinowski, Bronislaw. Argonauts of the Western Pacific: An Account of Native Enterprise and Adventure in the Archipelagoes of Melanesian New Guinea (2002) famous anthropological account of the Trobriand Islanders; based on field work in 1910s online
Visser, Leontine, ed. Governing New Guinea: An Oral History of Papuan Administrators, 1950–1990 (2012)
Whitaker, J.L. et al. eds. Documents and readings in New Guinea history: Pre-history to 1889 (1975)

External links[edit]

Find more aboutPapua New Guineaat Wikipedia's sister projects

Definitions from Wiktionary
Media from Wikimedia Commons
News from Wikinews
Quotations from Wikiquote
Texts from Wikisource
Textbooks from Wikibooks
Travel guide from Wikivoyage
Learning resources from Wikiversity
Data from Wikidata





Wikisource has original text related to this article:
Constitution of the Independent State of Papua New Guinea



Government

Prime Minister of Papua New Guinea

General information

"Papua New Guinea". The World Factbook. Central Intelligence Agency. 
Papua New Guinea at UCB Libraries GovPubs.
Papua New Guinea at Curlie (based on DMOZ)
 Wikimedia Atlas of Papua New Guinea
 Papua New Guinea travel guide from Wikivoyage
 Geographic data related to Papua New Guinea at OpenStreetMap







v
t
e


Papua New Guinea articles



History



Headhunting
British New Guinea
German New Guinea
North Solomon Islands
New Guinea campaign
Bougainville campaign
Australian mandate
Territorial merger
Bougainville history








Geography







Cities and towns
Conservation
Deforestation
Earthquakes
Geology
Kuk Swamp
Lakes
Mount Wilhelm
New Guinea
Rivers
Volcanoes
Wildlife








Politics







Administrative divisions

regions
provinces
districts


Cabinet
Constitution
Elections
Foreign relations
Governor-General
Human rights

LGBT


LGBT history
Law

enforcement


Military
Monarchy
Parliament
Political parties
Prime Minister
Supreme Court








Economy







Agriculture
Kina (currency)
Mining
Postage and postal history
Telecommunications
Tourism
Transport

airports










Society







Anthem
Cinema
National emblem
Culture
Demographics
Education
Ethnic groups
Flag
International rankings
Languages
List of Papua New Guineans
Literature
Melanesia
Music
Religion
Sing-sing (gathering)
Sports
Visual art












Outline



Category
Portal












v
t
e


Islands of Papua New Guinea






Admiralty Islands
Ambitle
Aua
Auriora
Baudisson
Bougainville
Bagabag
Bagaman
Babase
Baluan
Barahun
Basilaki
Big Ndrova
Bipi
Bismarck Archipelago
Blup Blup
Boagis
Boang
Bonvouloir Islands
Brumer
Buka
Calvados Chain
Carteret Islands
Conflict Group
D'Entrecasteaux Islands
Daloloia Group
Dart Reefs
Daru
Deboyne Islands
Dobu
Duchateau Islands
Duke of York Island / Duke of York Islands
Dyaul
East
Emirau
Feni Islands
Fergusson
Goaribari
Gonubalabala Island
Goodenough
Green Islands
Gulowa
Hastings
Hemenahei
Hermit Islands
Kabakon
Kaniet Islands
Karkar
Kadovar
Kerawara
Kiriwina
Kiwai
Kui
Kuwanak
Lihir Island / Lihir Group
Lif
Little Ndrova
Long
Los Negros
Lou
Louisiade Archipelago
Lunn Island
Madau
Mailu
Malendok
Makada
Manam
Manne
Manus
Marshall Bennett
Mioko
Misima
Motorina
Mussau
Mut Mut
New Britain
New Hanover
New Guinea
New Ireland
Ninigo Islands
Nissan
Normanby
North Solomon Islands
Nuakata
Nubara
Nukumanu
Nusam
Pak
Pam Islands
Panapompom Islands
Pana Tinani
Panaeati
Panarairai Island
Panatinane
Pana Wina Island
Patio
Pinipel
Pocklington Reef
Purdy
Purutu
Rambutyo
Renard Islands
Ritter
Rossel (Yela)
Sae
Sakar
Samarai
Sanaroa
Schouten Islands
Selapiu
Sideia
Simberi
Sirot
St. Andrews Islands
St Matthias Islands
Strathord Islands
Sudest
Tabar Group
Tabar
Takuu
Tanga Islands
Tatau
Tefa
Tong
Trobriands
Tsoilaunung
Ulu
Umboi
Utian
Vanatinai
Vial
Vitu Islands
Wabuda
Wagifa
Western Islands
Woodlark
Wuvulu
Yeina
Yule










International membership











v
t
e


Pacific Islands Forum (PIF)



Members



Australia
Cook Islands
Fiji
Kiribati
Marshall Islands
Micronesia
Nauru
New Zealand
Niue
Palau
Papua New Guinea
Samoa
Solomon Islands
Tonga
Tuvalu
Vanuatu








Associate members



French Polynesia
New Caledonia





Observers



Commonwealth of Nations
East Timor
Tokelau
United Nations
Wallis and Futuna
Guam
American Samoa
Northern Mariana Islands
Asian Development Bank
Western and Central Pacific Fisheries Commission (WCPFC)





Dialogue partners



Canada
China
Cuba
European Union
France
India
Indonesia
Italy
Japan
Korea
Malaysia
Philippines
Spain
Thailand
Turkey
United Kingdom
United States





Meetings



45th





















v
t
e


Association of Southeast Asian Nations



Politics







Charter
Customs union
Date of Establishment
Organisations
Secretariat
Treaty of Amity and Cooperation
Visa policies





Symbols



Anthem
Emblem
Flag
Hymn








Membership







Brunei
Cambodia
Indonesia
Laos
Malaysia
Myanmar
Philippines
Singapore
Thailand
Vietnam





Observer and Candidate for Member



Papua New Guinea
East Timor








Events




Summits



ASEAN Summit
East Asia Summit





Other



ASEAN Plus Three
Asian Monetary Unit
ASEAN Regional Forum
Asia–Europe Meeting
Chiang Mai Initiative
Comprehensive Economic Partnership for East Asia
Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership








Competitions



SEA Games
ASEAN University Games
ASEAN School Games
ASEAN Para Games
ASEAN Football Championship
ASEAN Armies Rifle Meet





Related



ASEAN Football Federation
ASEAN Free Trade Area
ASEAN–China Free Trade Area
ASEAN–India Free Trade Area
Common Time
Economy












v
t
e


East Asia Summit (EAS)






First
Second
Third
Fourth
Fifth
Sixth
Seventh
Eighth
Ninth
Tenth
Eleventh
Twelfth









 Australia
 Brunei
 Cambodia
 China
 India
 Indonesia
 Japan
 Laos
 Malaysia
 Myanmar
 New Zealand
 Philippines
 Russia
 Singapore
 South Korea
 Thailand
 United States
 Vietnam













v
t
e


Non-Aligned Movement



Members



List of members of Non-Aligned Movement
India and the Non-Aligned Movement
Yugoslavia and the Non-Aligned Movement
Egypt and the Non-Aligned Movement





Structure




Organizations



NAM News Network





Principles



Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence





Summits



Bandung Conference
Non-Aligned Foreign Ministers Conference
16th Summit of the Non-Aligned Movement





People



Josip Broz Tito
Sukarno
Gamal Abdel Nasser
Houari Boumediene
Fidel Castro
Nelson Mandela
Mohamed Morsi















v
t
e


Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC)



Nations



 Australia
 Brunei
 Canada
 Chile
 China
 Hong Kong¹
 Indonesia
 Japan
 South Korea
 Malaysia
 Mexico
 New Zealand
 Papua New Guinea
 Peru
 Philippines
 Russia
 Singapore
 Chinese Taipei²
 Thailand
 United States
 Vietnam





Summits



1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017





Other



APEC Business Travel Card
APEC blue
APEC Climate Center
APEC Youth Science Festival








1. A special administrative region of China, participates as "Hong Kong, China"; 2. Officially the Republic of China, participates as "Chinese Taipei"












v
t
e


World Trade Organization



System



Accession and membership
Appellate Body
Dispute Settlement Body
International Trade Centre
Chronology of key events





Issues



Criticism
Doha Development Round
Singapore issues
Quota Elimination
Peace Clause





Agreements



General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade
Agriculture
Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures
Technical Barriers to Trade
Trade Related Investment Measures
Trade in Services
Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights
Government Procurement
Information Technology
Marrakech Agreement
Doha Declaration
Bali Package





Ministerial
Conferences



1st (1996)
2nd (1998)
3rd (1999)
4th (2001)
5th (2003)
6th (2005)
7th (2009)
8th (2011)
9th (2013)
10th (2015)





People



Roberto Azevêdo (Director-General)
Pascal Lamy
Supachai Panitchpakdi
Alejandro Jara
Rufus Yerxa





Members



Afghanistan
Albania
Algeria
Angola
Antigua and Barbuda
Argentina
Armenia
Australia
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Barbados
Belize
Benin
Bolivia
Botswana
Brazil
Brunei
Burkina Faso
Burma
Burundi
Cambodia
Cameroon
Canada
Cape Verde
Central African Republic
Chad
Chile
China
Colombia
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Republic of the Congo
Costa Rica
Côte d'Ivoire
Cuba
Djibouti
Dominica
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
Egypt
El Salvador
Fiji
Gabon
The Gambia
Georgia
Ghana
Grenada
Guatemala
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Hong Kong1
Iceland
India
Indonesia
Israel
Jamaica
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Kenya
South Korea
Kuwait
Kyrgyzstan
Laos
Lesotho
Liberia
Liechtenstein
Macau1
Macedonia
Madagascar
Malawi
Malaysia
Maldives
Mali
Mauritania
Mauritius
Mexico
Moldova
Mongolia
Montenegro
Morocco
Mozambique
Namibia
Nepal
New Zealand
Nicaragua
Niger
Nigeria
Norway
Oman
Pakistan
Panama
Papua New Guinea
Paraguay
Peru
Philippines
Qatar
Russia
Rwanda
St. Kitts and Nevis
St. Lucia
St. Vincent and the Grenadines
Samoa
Saudi Arabia
Senegal
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Singapore
Solomon Islands
South Africa
Sri Lanka
Suriname
Swaziland
Switzerland
Tajikistan
Taiwan2
Tanzania
Thailand
Togo
Tonga
Trinidad and Tobago
Tunisia
Turkey
Uganda
Ukraine
United Arab Emirates
United States
Uruguay
Venezuela
Vietnam
Yemen
Zambia
Zimbabwe




European Union



Austria
Belgium
Bulgaria
Croatia
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
France
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Ireland
Italy
Latvia
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Malta
Netherlands
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Slovakia
Slovenia
Spain
Sweden
United Kingdom











Special administrative regions of the People's Republic of China, participates as "Hong Kong, China" and "Macao China".
Officially the Republic of China, participates as "Separate Customs Territory of Taiwan, Penghu, Kinmen and Matsu", and "Chinese Taipei" in short.












v
t
e


Members of the Commonwealth of Nations



Sovereign states
(Members)



Antigua and Barbuda
Australia
Bahamas
Bangladesh
Barbados
Belize
Botswana
Brunei
Cameroon
Canada
Cyprus
Dominica
Fiji
Ghana
Grenada
Guyana
India
Jamaica
Kenya
Kiribati
Lesotho
Malawi
Malaysia
Malta
Mauritius
Mozambique
Namibia
Nauru
New Zealand
Nigeria
Pakistan
Papua New Guinea
Rwanda
St. Kitts and Nevis
St. Lucia
St. Vincent and the Grenadines
Samoa
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Singapore
Solomon Islands
South Africa
Sri Lanka
Swaziland
Tanzania
Tonga
Trinidad and Tobago
Tuvalu
Uganda
United Kingdom
Vanuatu
Zambia





Dependencies
of Members




Australia



Ashmore and Cartier Islands
Australian Antarctic Territory
Christmas Island
Cocos (Keeling) Islands
Coral Sea Islands
Heard Island and McDonald Islands
Norfolk Island





New Zealand



Cook Islands
Niue
Ross Dependency
Tokelau





United Kingdom



Akrotiri and Dhekelia
Anguilla
Bermuda
British Antarctic Territory
British Indian Ocean Territory
British Virgin Islands
Cayman Islands
Falkland Islands
Gibraltar
Guernsey
Isle of Man
Jersey
Montserrat
Pitcairn Islands
St. Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha
South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands
Turks and Caicos Islands









Source: Commonwealth Secretariat - Member States










v
t
e


Commonwealth realms and dominions



Current



Antigua and Barbuda (monarchy)
Australia (monarchy)
Bahamas (monarchy)
Barbados (monarchy)
Belize (monarchy)
Canada (monarchy)
Grenada (monarchy)
Jamaica (monarchy)
Realm of New Zealand

Cook Islands
New Zealand
Niue


Papua New Guinea (monarchy)
Saint Kitts and Nevis (monarchy)
Saint Lucia (monarchy)
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines (monarchy)
Solomon Islands (monarchy)
Tuvalu (monarchy)
United Kingdom (monarchy)





Former



Ceylon
Fiji (monarchy)
The Gambia
Ghana
Guyana
India1
Ireland1 (monarchy)
Kenya
Malawi
Malta
Mauritius
Newfoundland2
Nigeria
Pakistan
Rhodesia3
Sierra Leone
South Africa (monarchy)
Tanganyika
Trinidad and Tobago
Uganda








1 Dominion, became republic before adoption of the term "realm"
2 Dominion, never ratified Statute of Westminster 1931, London-based external government 1934–1949, annexed by Canada in 1949
3 Rhodesia unilaterally declared independence as a realm in 1965, but this was not recognised internationally. Declared itself a republic in 1970.















Locale











v
t
e


Melanesia










Sovereign states



Fiji
Papua New Guinea
Solomon Islands
Vanuatu








Other political units



West Papua (region)

Papua (province)
West Papua (province)


New Caledonia





Culture



People
Languages
Music
Mythology
Universities





Geography



Region
Island Melanesia
New Guinea
Louisiade archipelago
Bismarck Archipelago
Santa Cruz Islands
Loyalty Islands
Lau Islands
d'Entrecasteaux Islands
Raja Ampat Islands
Schouten Islands
Torres Strait Islands
Trobriand Islands
Woodlark Island





Organizations



Melanesian Spearhead Group
Melanesia 2000





Sports



Melanesia Cup
Melanesian Super Cup





Politics



Political parties
United Liberation Movement for West Papua









 Commons
 Category













v
t
e


Countries and territories of Oceania



Sovereign states




Entire



Australia
Federated States of Micronesia
Fiji
Kiribati
Marshall Islands
Nauru
New Zealand
Palau
Papua New Guinea
Samoa
Solomon Islands
Tonga
Tuvalu
Vanuatu





In part



Chile

Easter Island
Juan Fernández Islands


Indonesia

West Papua
Papua


Japan

Bonin Islands
Minami-Tori-Shima


United States

Hawaii
Palmyra Atoll














Associated states
of New Zealand




Niue
Cook Islands






Dependencies and
other territories





Australia



Ashmore and Cartier Islands
Coral Sea Islands
Kangaroo Island
Lord Howe Island
Macquarie Islands
Norfolk Island





United States



American Samoa
Baker Island
Guam
Howland Island
Jarvis Island
Johnston Atoll
Kingman Reef
Midway Atoll
Northern Mariana Islands
Wake Island





New Zealand



Auckland Islands
Bounty Islands
Chatham Islands
Campbell Island
Tokelau





France



French Polynesia
New Caledonia
Wallis and Futuna





United Kingdom



Pitcairn Islands















v
t
e


Countries of the Malay Archipelago






Brunei
East Timor
Indonesia
Malaysia
Philippines
Singapore
Papua New Guinea














Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 151781392
LCCN: n81034915
ISNI: 0000 0001 2296 5717
GND: 4044569-0
SELIBR: 156257
BNF: cb10133671v (data)
NLA: 35408370
NDL: 00569039
BNE: XX454068











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Papua_New_Guinea&oldid=818385396"					Categories: Papua New Guinea1975 establishments in Oceania1975 establishments in Papua New GuineaCommonwealth realmsCountries in AustralasiaCountries in MelanesiaEnglish-speaking countries and territoriesIsland countriesMaritime Southeast AsiaMember states of the Commonwealth of NationsMember states of the United NationsNew GuineaSmall Island Developing StatesStates and territories established in 1975Hidden categories: CS1 maint: Uses editors parameterCS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknownWikipedia indefinitely move-protected pagesUse British English from July 2015Use dmy dates from July 2013Coordinates on WikidataPages using infobox country or infobox former country with the symbol caption or type parametersArticles containing Tok Pisin-language textWikipedia articles in need of updating from October 2012All Wikipedia articles in need of updatingWikipedia articles needing clarification from September 2016All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from July 2012Articles with unsourced statements from January 2014Wikipedia articles needing clarification from February 2013Articles with unsourced statements from February 2013Wikipedia articles needing clarification from December 2011Articles with unsourced statements from January 2011Articles with unsourced statements from July 2010Articles with unsourced statements from March 2010Free-content attributionFree content from UNESCO PublishingArticles with DMOZ linksWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with SELIBR identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersWikipedia articles with NLA identifiers