Not to be confused with Paratrooper or Private army.






The examples and perspective in this article may not include all significant viewpoints. Please improve the article or discuss the issue. (January 2018) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)









This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (October 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)







Emergency Response Team of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police (RCMP).


A paramilitary is a semi-militarized force whose organizational structure, tactics, training, subculture, and (often) function are similar to those of a professional military, but which is not included as part of a state's formal armed forces.[1]



Contents


1 Legality
2 Types

2.1 Examples of paramilitary units


3 See also
4 References
5 Further reading
6 External links



Legality[edit]
Under the law of war, a state may incorporate a paramilitary organization or armed agency (such as a national police, a private volunteer militia) into its combatant armed forces. The other parties to a conflict have to be notified thereof.[2]
Though a paramilitary is not a military force, it is usually equivalent to a military's light infantry force in terms of intensity, firepower, and organizational structure. A paramilitary may also commonly fall under the command of a military, even despite not being part of the military or play an assisting role for the military in times of war.
Types[edit]
Depending on the standards used, "paramilitaries" may include:

Irregular military forces: militias, guerrillas, insurgents, terrorists, and so forth
The auxiliary forces of a state's military: National Guard, Presidential Guard, Republican Guard, State Guard, Home Guard, Royal Guard, and Imperial Guard
Some police forces, such as police SWAT Teams, or auxiliary police and Indonesia's Mobile Brigade Corps (Brimob)
Gendarmeries, such as Egyptian Central Security Forces and Russia's National Guard
Border guards, such as Russia's Border Guard Service, Australian Border Force and India's Border Security Force
The United States' Federal Protective Forces,
Security forces of ambiguous military status: internal troops, railroad guards or railway troops
Semi-militarized law enforcement personnel, such as SWAT teams in the United States and a number of other countries
Foreign volunteers
Youth Military Cadet Organisations, such as Junior Reserve Officers' Training Corps, Bangladesh National Cadet Corps
In the United Kingdom and Ireland, the term is often restricted to the various armed groups involved in the Northern Ireland Troubles, such as the Ulster Volunteer Force or the Provisional Irish Republican Army.

Examples of paramilitary units[edit]

List of paramilitary organizations
List of defunct paramilitary organizations

See also[edit]


Military history portal



Category:Rebel militia groups
Weimar paramilitary groups
List of Serbian paramilitary formations
Militarization of police
Fourth-generation warfare
Private army
Death squad
Violent non-state actor

References[edit]



^ "paramilitary". Oxford English Dictionary (3rd ed.). Oxford University Press. June 2011 [online edition; original published in June 2005]. Retrieved 2011-09-13. Designating, of, or relating to a force or unit whose function and organization are analogous or ancillary to those of a professional military force, but which is not regarded as having professional or legitimate status. 
^ "Customary IHL - Section B. Incorporation of paramilitary or armed law enforcement agencies into armed forces". Icrc.org. Retrieved 2013-07-27. 



Further reading[edit]

Golkar, Saeid. (2012) Paramilitarization of the Economy: the Case of Iran's Basij Militia, Armed Forces & Society, Vol. 38, No. 4
Golkar, Saeid. (2012). Organization of the Oppressed or Organization for Oppressing: Analysing the Role of the Basij Militia of Iran. Politics, Religion & Ideology, Dec., 37–41. doi:10.1080/21567689.2012.725661
Mexico's Plan to Create a Paramilitary Force

External links[edit]



Look up paramilitary in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.



Human Rights Watch, Colombia and Military-Paramilitary Links
Global Security
List of Terrorist Groups






						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Paramilitary&oldid=818465233"					Categories: Irregular militaryParamilitary organizationsMilitary terminologyHidden categories: Articles needing more viewpoints from January 2018Articles needing additional references from October 2017All articles needing additional references