



Map of different parliamentary systems
  Parliamentary republics where parliaments are effectively supreme over a separate head of state.
  Parliamentary republics with an executive president dependent on the legislature.
  Constitutional monarchies in which authority is vested in a parliament.





Part of a series on


Politics







Primary topics



Index of politics articles
Politics by country
Politics by subdivision
Political economy
Political history
Political history of the world
Political philosophy









Political systems



Anarchy


City-state
Democracy


Federacy
Feudalism


Dictatorship
Directory


Meritocracy
Monarchy


Parliamentary
Presidential


Republic
Semi-parliamentary


Semi-presidential
Theocracy









Academic disciplines




Political science
(political scientists)


International relations
(theory)

Comparative politics









Public administration



Bureaucracy (street-level)
Adhocracy









Policy



Public policy (doctrine)


Domestic and foreign policy


Civil society


Public interest









Organs of government



Separation of powers


Legislature
Executive


Judiciary
Election commission









Related topics



Sovereignty
Theories of political behavior
Political psychology
Biology and political orientation
Political organisations
Foreign electoral intervention









Subseries



Electoral systems


Elections (voting)


Federalism
Form of government


Ideology
Political campaigning


Political parties










v
t
e







Part of the Politics series on


Executive government


Head of state





Monarch
Supreme leader
President
President of the Council of State





Government




Head of government


Chancellor
Chief executive
Chief minister
First minister

Premier
Prime minister
President of the Council of Ministers









Cabinet
Cabinet collective responsibility






Ministry


Minister
Secretary









Other


Governor
Mayor







Systems




Monarchy (Constitutional)
Republic (Parliamentary)
Directorial
Parliamentary (Westminster)
Semi-parliamentary (simul simul)
Semi-presidential (cohabitational)
Presidential




Lists




National leaders
National governments
Heads of state and government




Politics portal





v
t
e





A parliamentary system is a system of democratic governance of a state where the executive branch derives its democratic legitimacy from its ability to command the confidence of the legislative branch, typically a parliament, and is also held accountable to that parliament. In a parliamentary system, the head of state is usually a different person from the head of government. This is in contrast to a presidential system, where the head of state often is also the head of government and, most importantly, the executive branch does not derive its democratic legitimacy from the legislature.
Countries with parliamentary democracies may be constitutional monarchies, where a monarch is the head of state while the head of government is almost always a member of parliament (such as the United Kingdom, Denmark, Sweden and Japan), or parliamentary republics, where a mostly ceremonial president is the head of state while the head of government is regularly from the legislature (such as Ireland, Germany, India and Italy). In a few parliamentary republics, such as Botswana, South Africa, and Suriname, among some others, the head of government is also head of state, but is elected by and is answerable to parliament. In bicameral parliaments, the head of government is generally, though not always, a member of the lower house.
Parliamentarism is the dominant form of government in Europe, with 32 of its 50 sovereign states being parliamentarian. It is also common in the Caribbean, being the form of government of 10 of its 13 island states, and in Oceania. Elsewhere in the world, parliamentary countries are less common, but they are distributed through all continents, most often in former British Empire colonies.



Contents


1 History
2 Characteristics
3 Advantages and disadvantages
4 Countries

4.1 Africa
4.2 Americas
4.3 Asia
4.4 Europe
4.5 Pacific


5 See also
6 References
7 External links



History[edit]
Further information: History of Parliamentarism
Since ancient times, when societies were tribal, there were councils or a headman whose decisions were assessed by village elders. Eventually these councils have slowly evolved into the modern Parliamentary system.
The first parliaments date back to Europe in the Middle Ages, for example in 1188 Alfonso IX, King of Leon convened the three states in the Cortes of León.[1][2] An early example of parliamentary government developed in today's Netherlands and Belgium during the Dutch revolt (1581), when the sovereign, legislative and executive powers were taken over by the States General of the Netherlands from the then-monarch, King Philip II of Spain.[citation needed] The modern concept of parliamentary government emerged in the Kingdom of Great Britain between 1707–1800 and its contemporary, the Parliamentary System in Sweden between 1721–1772.
In England, Simon de Montfort is remembered as one of the fathers of representative government for holding two famous parliaments.[3][4] The first, in 1258, stripped the King of unlimited authority and the second, in 1265, included ordinary citizens from the towns.[5] Later, in the 17th century, the Parliament of England pioneered some of the ideas and systems of liberal democracy culminating in the Glorious Revolution and passage of the Bill of Rights 1689.[6][7]
In the Kingdom of Great Britain, the monarch, in theory, chaired cabinet and chose ministers. In practice, King George I's inability to speak English led the responsibility for chairing cabinet to go to the leading minister, literally the prime or first minister, Robert Walpole. The gradual democratisation of parliament with the broadening of the voting franchise increased parliament's role in controlling government, and in deciding who the king could ask to form a government. By the nineteenth century, the Great Reform Act of 1832 led to parliamentary dominance, with its choice invariably deciding who was prime minister and the complexion of the government.[8][9]
Other countries gradually adopted what came to be called the Westminster Model of government, with an executive answerable to parliament, but exercising powers nominally vested in the head of state, in the name of the head of state. Hence the use of phrases like Her Majesty's government or His Excellency's government. Such a system became particularly prevalent in older British dominions, many of whom had their constitutions enacted by the British parliament; examples include Australia, New Zealand, Canada, the Irish Free State and the Union of South Africa. Some of these parliaments evolved, were reformed from, or were initially developed as distinct from their original British model: the Australian Senate, for instance, has since its inception more closely reflected the US Senate than the British House of Lords; whereas since 1950 there is no upper house in New Zealand.
Democracy and parliamentarism became increasingly prevalent in Europe in the years after World War I, partially imposed by the democratic victors, Great Britain and France, on the defeated countries and their successors, notably Germany's Weimar Republic and the new Austrian Republic. Nineteenth century urbanisation, industrial revolution and, modernism had already fueled the political left's struggle for democracy and parliamentarism for a long time. In the radicalised times at the end of World War I, democratic reforms were often seen as a means to counter popular revolutionary currents.
Characteristics[edit]






This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (January 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Further information: Parliamentary procedure
A parliamentary system may be either bicameral, with two chambers of parliament (or houses) or unicameral, with just one parliamentary chamber. In the case of a bicameral parliament, this is usually characterised by an elected lower house that has the power to determine the executive government and an upper house which may be appointed or elected through a different mechanism from the lower house.
Scholars of democracy such as Arend Lijphart distinguish two types of parliamentary democracies: the Westminster and Consensus systems.[10]




The Palace of Westminster in London, United Kingdom. The Westminster system originates from the British Houses of Parliament.






The Reichstag Building in Berlin, Germany. The Consensus system is used in most of Western European countries.



The Westminster system is usually found in the Commonwealth of Nations and countries which were influenced by the British political tradition.[11][12][13] These parliaments tend to have a more adversarial style of debate and the plenary session of parliament is more important than committees. Some parliaments in this model are elected using a plurality voting system (first past the post), such as the United Kingdom, Canada, and India, while others use proportional representation, such as Ireland and New Zealand. The Australian House of Representatives is elected using instant-runoff voting, while the Senate is elected using proportional representation through single transferable vote. Regardless of which system is used, the voting systems tend to allow the voter to vote for a named candidate rather than a closed list.
The Western European parliamentary model (e.g. Spain, Germany) tends to have a more consensual debating system, and usually has semi-circular debating chambers. Consensus systems have more of a tendency to use proportional representation with open party lists than the Westminster Model legislatures. The committees of these Parliaments tend to be more important than the plenary chamber. Some West European countries' parliaments (e.g. in the Netherlands and Sweden) implement the principle of dualism as a form of separation of powers. In countries using this system, Members of Parliament have to resign their place in Parliament upon being appointed (or elected) minister. Ministers in those countries usually actively participate in parliamentary debates, but are not entitled to vote.

Implementations of the parliamentary system can also differ on the manner of how the prime minister and government are appointed and as to whether the government needs the explicit approval of the parliament, rather than just the absence of its disapproval. Some countries such as India also require the prime minister to be a member of the legislature, though in other countries this only exists as a convention.

The head of state appoints a prime minister who will likely have majority support in parliament. While in practice most prime ministers under the Westminster system (including Australia, Canada, India, New Zealand and the United Kingdom) are the leaders of the largest party in parliament, technically the appointment of the prime minister is a prerogative exercised by the monarch, the governor-general, or the president. No parliamentary vote takes place on who is forming a government, but since parliament can immediately defeat the government with a motion of no confidence, the head of state is limited by convention to choosing a candidate who can command the confidence of parliament, and thus has little or no influence in the decision.[citation needed]
The head of state appoints a prime minister who must gain a vote of confidence within a set time. Examples: Italy, Thailand.
The head of state appoints the leader of the political party holding a plurality of seats in parliament as prime minister. For example, in Greece if no party has a majority, the leader of the party with a plurality of seats is given an exploratory mandate to receive the confidence of the parliament within three days. If this is not possible, then the leader of the party with the second highest seat number is given the exploratory mandate. If this fails, then the leader of the third largest party is given it and so on.
The head of state nominates a candidate for prime minister who is then submitted to parliament for approval before appointment. Example: Spain, where the King sends a nomination to parliament for approval. Also, Germany where under the German Basic Law (constitution) the Bundestag votes on a candidate nominated by the federal president. In these cases, parliament can choose another candidate who then would be appointed by the head of state.
Parliament nominates a candidate whom the head of state is constitutionally obliged to appoint as prime minister. Example: Japan, where the Emperor appoints the Prime Minister on the nomination of the Diet. Also, Ireland where the President of Ireland appoints the Taoiseach on the nomination of the Dáil.
A public officeholder (other than the head of state or their representative) nominates a candidate, who, if approved by parliament, is appointed as prime minister. Example: Under the Swedish Instrument of Government (1974), the power to appoint someone to form a government has been moved from the monarch to the Speaker of Parliament and the parliament itself. The speaker nominates a candidate, who is then elected to prime minister (statsminister) by the parliament if an absolute majority of the members of parliament does not vote no (i.e. he can be elected even if more members of parliament vote No than Yes).
Direct election by popular vote. Example: Israel, 1996–2001, where the prime minister was elected in a general election, with no regard to political affiliation, and whose procedure can also be described as of a semi-parliamentary system.[14][15]

Furthermore, there are variations as to what conditions exist (if any) for the government to have the right to dissolve the parliament:

In some countries, such as Denmark, Malaysia, Australia and New Zealand, the prime minister has the de facto power to call an election, at will. This was also the case in the United Kingdom until the passage of the Fixed-term Parliaments Act 2011.
In Israel, parliament may vote in order to call an election or pass a vote of no confidence against the government.
Other countries only permit an election to be called in the event of a vote of no confidence against the government, a supermajority vote in favour of an early election or prolonged deadlock in parliament. These requirements can still be circumvented. For example, in Germany in 2005, Gerhard Schröder deliberately allowed his government to lose a confidence motion, in order to call an early election.
In Sweden, the government may call a snap election at will, but the newly elected Riksdag is only elected to fill out the previous Riksdag's term. The last time this option was used was in 1958.
Norway is unique among parliamentary systems in that the Storting always serves the whole of its four-year term.

The parliamentary system can be contrasted with a presidential system which operates under a stricter separation of powers, whereby the executive does not form part of, nor is appointed by, the parliamentary or legislative body. In such a system, parliaments or congresses do not select or dismiss heads of governments, and governments cannot request an early dissolution as may be the case for parliaments. There also exists the semi-presidential system that draws on both presidential systems and parliamentary systems by combining a powerful president with an executive responsible to parliament, as for example the French Fifth Republic.
Parliamentarism may also apply to regional and local governments. An example is the city of Oslo, which has an executive council (Byråd) as a part of the parliamentary system.
A few parliamentary democratic nations such as India,[16] Pakistan, and Bangladesh, have enacted an anti-defection law, which prohibits a member of the legislature from switching to another party after being elected. With this law, elected representatives lose their seats in parliament if they vote contrary to the directions of their party.
Advantages and disadvantages[edit]







This section has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages)







This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (December 2015) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)









This section's factual accuracy is disputed. Relevant discussion may be found on Talk:Parliamentary system. Please help to ensure that disputed statements are reliably sourced. (December 2015) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)









This section possibly contains original research. Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations. Statements consisting only of original research should be removed. (December 2015) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)





(Learn how and when to remove this template message)



One of the commonly attributed advantages to parliamentary systems is that it is faster and easier to pass legislation,[17] as the executive branch is formed by the direct or indirect support of the legislative branch and often includes members of the legislature. Thus the executive (as the majority party or coalition of parties in the legislature) has a majority of the votes, and can pass legislation at will. In a presidential system, the executive is often chosen independently from the legislature. If the executive and the majority of the legislature are from different political parties, then stalemate can occur. Thus the executive might not be able to implement its legislative proposals. An executive in any system (be it parliamentary, presidential or semi-presidential) is chiefly voted into office on the basis of his or her party's platform/manifesto,[citation needed] and the same is also true of the legislature.
In addition to quicker legislative action, parliamentary government has attractive features for nations that are ethnically, racially, or ideologically divided. In a presidential system, all executive power is vested in one person: the president. In a parliamentary system, with a collegial executive, power is more divided. In the 1989 Lebanese Taif Agreement, in order to give Muslims greater political power, Lebanon moved from a semi-presidential system with a strong president[dubious – discuss] to a system more structurally similar to classical parliamentary government. Iraq similarly disdained a presidential system out of fears that such a system would be tantamount to Shiite domination; Afghanistan's minorities refused to go along with a presidency as strong as the Pashtuns desired.[citation needed]
It can also be argued that power is more evenly spread out in parliamentary government.[citation needed] The prime minister is seldom as important as a ruling president.
In his 1867 book The English Constitution, Walter Bagehot praised parliamentary government for producing serious debates, for allowing change in power without an election, and for allowing elections at any time. Bagehot considered the four-year election rule of the United States to be unnatural.
Some scholars like Juan Linz, Fred Riggs, Bruce Ackerman, and Robert Dahl claim that parliamentary government is less prone to authoritarian collapse.[citation needed] These scholars point out that since World War II, two-thirds of Third World countries establishing parliamentary governments successfully made the transition to democracy.[citation needed] By contrast, no Third World presidential system successfully made the transition to democracy without experiencing coups and other constitutional breakdowns.[citation needed]
A recent World Bank study found that parliamentary systems are associated with less corruption.[18]
Some constituencies may have a popular local candidate under an unpopular leader (or the reverse), forcing a difficult choice on the electorate. Mixed-member proportional representation (where voters cast two ballots) can make this choice easier by allowing voters to cast one vote for the local candidate but also cast a second vote for another party.
Although Bagehot praised parliamentary government for allowing an election to take place at any time, the lack of a definite election calendar can be abused. Previously under some systems, such as the British, a ruling party could schedule elections when it felt that it was likely to retain power, and so avoid elections at times of unpopularity. (Election timing in the UK, however, is now partly fixed under the Fixed-term Parliaments Act 2011.) Thus, by wise timing of elections, in a parliamentary system a party can extend its rule for longer than is feasible in a functioning presidential system. This problem can be alleviated somewhat by setting fixed dates for parliamentary elections, as is the case in several of Australia's state parliaments. In other systems, such as the Dutch and the Belgian, the ruling party or coalition has some flexibility in determining the election date. Conversely, flexibility in the timing of parliamentary elections can avoid periods of legislative gridlock that can occur in a fixed period presidential system.
Critics of the Westminster parliamentary system[who?] point out that people with significant popular support in the community are prevented from becoming prime minister if they cannot get elected to parliament since there is no option to "run for prime minister" as one can run for president under a presidential system. Additionally, prime ministers may lose their positions if they lose their seats in parliament, even though they may still be popular nationally. Supporters of parliamentary government respond by saying that as members of parliament, prime ministers are elected first to represent their electoral constituents and if they lose their support then consequently they are no longer entitled to be prime minister.[citation needed]
Countries[edit]




Statue of President Nelson Mandela of South Africa in Parliament Square, London


Main article: List of countries by system of government § Parliamentary systems
Africa[edit]


Country
Connection between legislative and executive branch


 Botswana
Parliament of Botswana elects the President who appoints the Cabinet


 Ethiopia
Federal Parliamentary Assembly appoints the Council of Ministers


 Mauritius
National Assembly appoints the Cabinet of Mauritius


 Somalia
Federal Parliament of Somalia elects the President who appoints the Prime Minister


 South Africa
Parliament of South Africa elects the President who appoints the Cabinet


Americas[edit]




Parliament of Canada




Country
Connection between legislative and executive branch


 Antigua and Barbuda
Leader of the political party that has the support of a majority in the House of Representatives of Antigua and Barbuda is appointed Prime Minister of Antigua and Barbuda by the Governor-General of Antigua and Barbuda, who then appoints the Cabinet of Antigua and Barbuda on the advice of the Prime Minister


 Bahamas, The
Leader of the political party that has the support of a majority in the House of Assembly of the Bahamas is appointed Prime Minister of the Bahamas by the Governor-General of the Bahamas, who then appoints the Cabinet of the Bahamas on the advice of the Prime Minister


 Barbados
Leader of the political party that has the support of a majority in the House of Assembly of Barbados is appointed Prime Minister of Barbados by the Governor-General of Barbados, who then appoints the Cabinet of Barbados on the advice of the Prime Minister


 Belize
Leader of the political party that has the support of a majority in the House of Representatives of Belize is appointed Prime Minister of Belize by the Governor-General of Belize, who then appoints the Cabinet of Belize on the advice of the Prime Minister


 Canada
Leader of the political party that has the support of a majority in the House of Commons of Canada is appointed Prime Minister of Canada by the Governor General of Canada, who then appoints the Cabinet of Canada on the advice of the Prime Minister


 Dominica
Parliament approves the Cabinet of Dominica


 Grenada
Leader of the political party that has the support of a majority in the House of Representatives of Grenada is appointed Prime Minister of Grenada by the Governor-General of Grenada, who then appoints the Cabinet of Grenada on the advice of the Prime Minister


 Jamaica
Leader of the political party that has the support of a majority in the House of Representatives of Jamaica is appointed Prime Minister of Jamaica by the Governor-General of Jamaica, who then appoints the Cabinet of Jamaica on the advice of the Prime Minister


 Saint Kitts and Nevis
Leader of the political party that has the support of a majority in the National Assembly of Saint Kitts and Nevis is appointed Prime Minister of Saint Kitts and Nevis by the Governor-General of Saint Kitts and Nevis, who then appoints the Cabinet of Saint Kitts and Nevis on the advice of the Prime Minister


 Saint Lucia
Leader of the political party that has the support of a majority in the House of Assembly of Saint Lucia is appointed Prime Minister of Saint Lucia by the Governor-General of Saint Lucia, who then appoints the Cabinet of Saint Lucia on the advice of the Prime Minister


 Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
Leader of the political party that has the support of a majority in the House of Assembly of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines is appointed Prime Minister of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines by the Governor-General of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, who then appoints the Cabinet of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines on the advice of the Prime Minister


 Suriname
National Assembly elects the President, who appoints the Cabinet of Suriname


 Trinidad and Tobago
Parliament of Trinidad and Tobago approves the Prime Minister of Trinidad and Tobago


Asia[edit]




Sansad Bhavan, parliament building of India, India






Council of Representatives of Iraq






Knesset of Israel in Jerusalem






Parliament of Malaysia






Jatiyo Sangshad Bhaban of Bangladesh




Country
Connection between legislative and executive branch


 Bangladesh
Jatiyo Sangshad approves the Cabinet of Bangladesh


 Bhutan
Parliament of Bhutan approves the Lhengye Zhungtshog


 Cambodia
Parliament of Cambodia approves the Council of Ministers


 India
President of India appoints the leader of the political party that has the support of a majority in the Lok Sabha as Prime Minister of India, who then forms the Cabinet of India


 Iraq
Council of Representatives approves the Cabinet of Iraq


 Israel
Leader of the political party with the most Knesset seats in the governing coalition is appointed Prime Minister of Israel by the President of Israel. The Prime Minister then appoints the Cabinet of Israel.


 Japan
National Diet nominates the Prime Minister who appoints the Cabinet of Japan


 Kuwait
National Assembly approves the Crown Prince who appoints the Prime Minister who appoints the Cabinet of Kuwait


 Kyrgyzstan
Supreme Council approves the Cabinet of Kyrgyzstan


 Lebanon
Parliament of Lebanon approves the Cabinet of Lebanon


 Malaysia
Parliament of Malaysia appoints the Cabinet of Malaysia


 Myanmar
Assembly of the Union, by an electoral college, elects the President who forms the Cabinet of Myanmar


   Nepal
Parliament of Nepal elects the Prime Minister who, by turn, appoints the Cabinet of Nepal


 Pakistan
Parliament of Pakistan appoints the Cabinet of Pakistan


 Singapore
Parliament of Singapore approves the Cabinet of Singapore


 Thailand
The Monarch appoints the MP nominated by in the House of Representatives (usually the leader of the largest party or coalition) as Prime Minister, who forms the Cabinet of Thailand. Under the current junta, the appointee is nominated by the National Legislative Assembly.


Europe[edit]




The administrative building of the Albanian Parliament




Country
Connection between legislative and executive branch


 Albania
Parliament of Albania approves the Cabinet of Albania


 Andorra



 Austria
National Council can dismiss the Cabinet of Austria through a motion of no confidence


 Belgium
Federal Parliament approves the Cabinet of Belgium


 Bulgaria
National Assembly appoints the Council of Ministers of Bulgaria


 Croatia
Croatian Parliament approves President of Government and the Cabinet nominated by him/her.


 Czech Republic
President of the Czech Republic appoints the leader of the largest party or coalition in the Chamber of Deputies of the Parliament as Prime Minister, who forms the Cabinet. The Prime Minister must gain vote of confidence by the Chamber of Deputies.


 Denmark
The Monarch appoints, based on recommendations from the leaders of the parties in Folketinget, the cabinet leader who is most likely to successfully assemble a Cabinet which will not be disapproved by a majority in Folketinget.


 Estonia
Riigikogu elects the Prime Minister candidate nominated by the President of the Republic (normally this candidate is the leader of the parliamentary coalition of parties). The Government of the Republic of Estonia is later appointed by the President of the Republic under proposal of the approved Prime Minister candidate. The Riigikogu may remove the Prime Minister and any other member of the government through a motion of no confidence.


 Finland
Parliament of Finland appoints the Cabinet of Finland


 Germany
Bundestag elects the Federal Chancellor (after nomination from the President of Germany), who forms the Cabinet


 Greece
Hellenic Parliament approves the Cabinet of Greece


 Hungary
National Assembly approves the Cabinet of Hungary


 Iceland
The President of Iceland appoints and discharges the Cabinet of Iceland. Ministers can not even resign without being discharged by presidential decree.


 Ireland
Dáil Éireann nominates the Taoiseach, who is then appointed by the President of Ireland


 Italy
Italian Parliament grants and revokes its confidence in the Cabinet of Italy, appointed by the President of Italy


 Kosovo
Assembly of Kosovo appoints the Government of Kosovo


 Latvia
Saeima appoints the Cabinet of Ministers of the Republic of Latvia


 Liechtenstein



 Luxembourg
Chamber of Deputies appoints the Cabinet of Luxembourg


 Macedonia
Assembly approves the Government of Macedonia


 Malta
House of Representatives appoints the Cabinet of Malta


 Moldova
Parliament of Moldova appoints the Cabinet of Moldova


 Monaco



 Montenegro
Parliament of Montenegro appoints the Government of Montenegro


 Netherlands
Second Chamber of the States-General can dismiss the Cabinet of the Netherlands through a motion of no confidence


 Norway
The Monarch appoints the MP leading the largest party or coalition in Stortinget as Prime Minister, who forms the Cabinet


 San Marino



 Serbia
National Assembly appoints the Government of Serbia


 Slovakia
National Council approves the Government of Slovakia


 Slovenia
National Assembly appoints the Government of Slovenia


 Spain
The Congress of Deputies elects the President of the Government, who forms the Cabinet


 Sweden
The Riksdag elects the Prime Minister, who in turn appoints the other members of the Government


  Switzerland
A United Federal Assembly elects the members of the Swiss Federal Council


 Turkey
Grand National Assembly approves the Cabinet of Turkey


 United Kingdom
The Monarch appoints the MP leading the largest party or coalition in the House of Commons as Prime Minister, who forms the Cabinet


Pacific[edit]




Parliament of Australia






Parliament of New Zealand






National Parliament of Papua New Guinea




Country
Connection between legislative and executive branch


 Australia
Leader of the political party that has the support of a majority in the Australian House of Representatives is appointed Prime Minister of Australia by the Governor-General of Australia, who then appoints the Cabinet of Australia on the advice of the Prime Minister


 New Zealand
Leader of the political party that has the support of a majority in the New Zealand Parliament is appointed Prime Minister of New Zealand by the Governor-General of New Zealand, who then appoints the Cabinet of New Zealand on the advice of the Prime Minister


 Papua New Guinea
Leader of the political party that has the support of a majority in the National Parliament is appointed Prime Minister of Papua New Guinea by the Governor-General of Papua New Guinea, who then appoints the Cabinet of Papua New Guinea on the advice of the Prime Minister


 Samoa
Legislative Assembly appoints the Cabinet of Samoa


 Vanuatu
Parliament of Vanuatu appoints the Cabinet of Vanuatu


See also[edit]

Parliamentary republic
Semi-parliamentary system
Semi-presidential system
Presidential system
List of countries by system of government
List of legislatures by country
Parliament in the Making
Parliamentary leader
Rule according to higher law
Rule of law
Law reform

References[edit]


^ "The Decreta of León of 1188 - The oldest documentary manifestation of the European parliamentary system". UNESCO Memory of the World. 2013. Retrieved 21 May 2016. 
^ John Keane: The Life and Death of Democracy, London 2009, 169-176.
^ Jobson, Adrian (2012). The First English Revolution: Simon de Montfort, Henry III and the Barons' War. Bloomsbury. pp. 173–4. ISBN 978-1-84725-226-5. 
^ "Simon de Montfort: The turning point for democracy that gets overlooked". BBC. 19 January 2015. Retrieved 19 January 2015 ; "The January Parliament and how it defined Britain". The Telegraph. 20 January 2015. Retrieved 28 January 2015. 
^  Norgate, Kate (1894). "Montfort, Simon of (1208?-1265)". In Lee, Sidney. Dictionary of National Biography. 38. London: Smith, Elder & Co. 
^ Kopstein, Jeffrey; Lichbach, Mark; Hanson, Stephen E., eds. (2014). Comparative Politics: Interests, Identities, and Institutions in a Changing Global Order (4, revised ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp. 37–9. ISBN 1139991388. Britain pioneered the system of liberal democracy that has now spread in one form or another to most of the world's countries 
^ "Constitutionalism: America & Beyond". Bureau of International Information Programs (IIP), U.S. Department of State. Archived from the original on 24 October 2014. Retrieved 30 October 2014. The earliest, and perhaps greatest, victory for liberalism was achieved in England. The rising commercial class that had supported the Tudor monarchy in the 16th century led the revolutionary battle in the 17th, and succeeded in establishing the supremacy of Parliament and, eventually, of the House of Commons. What emerged as the distinctive feature of modern constitutionalism was not the insistence on the idea that the king is subject to law (although this concept is an essential attribute of all constitutionalism). This notion was already well established in the Middle Ages. What was distinctive was the establishment of effective means of political control whereby the rule of law might be enforced. Modern constitutionalism was born with the political requirement that representative government depended upon the consent of citizen subjects.... However, as can be seen through provisions in the 1689 Bill of Rights, the English Revolution was fought not just to protect the rights of property (in the narrow sense) but to establish those liberties which liberals believed essential to human dignity and moral worth. The "rights of man" enumerated in the English Bill of Rights gradually were proclaimed beyond the boundaries of England, notably in the American Declaration of Independence of 1776 and in the French Declaration of the Rights of Man in 1789. 
^ Dr Andrew Blick and Professor George Jones — No 10 guest historian series, Prime Ministers and No. 10 (1 January 2012). "The Institution of Prime Minister". Government of the United Kingdom: History of Government Blog. Retrieved 15 April 2016. 
^ Carter, Byrum E. (2015) [1955]. "The Historical Development of the Office of Prime Minister". Office of the Prime Minister. Princeton University Press. ISBN 9781400878260. 
^ Lijphart, Arend (1999). Patterns of democracy. New Haven: Yale University Press. 
^ Julian Go (2007). "A Globalizing Constitutionalism?, Views from the Postcolony, 1945-2000". In Arjomand, Saïd Amir. Constitutionalism and political reconstruction. Brill. pp. 92–94. ISBN 9004151745. 
^ "How the Westminster Parliamentary System was exported around the World". University of Cambridge. 2 December 2013. Retrieved 16 December 2013. 
^ Seidle, F. Leslie; Docherty, David C. (2003). Reforming parliamentary democracy. McGill-Queen's University Press. p. 3. ISBN 9780773525085. 
^ Duverger, Maurice (September 1996). "Les monarchies républicaines" [The crowned republics] (PDF). Pouvoirs, revue française d’études constitutionnelles et politiques (in French). No. 78. Paris: Éditions du Seuil. pp. 107–120. ISBN 2-02-030123-7. ISSN 0152-0768. Retrieved 10 September 2016. 
^ Frosini, Justin Orlando (2008). Ferrari, Giuseppe Franco, ed. Forms of State and Forms of Government. Giuffrè Editore. pp. 54–55. ISBN 9788814143885. Retrieved 13 November 2016 – via Google Books. 
^ "ANTI-DEFECTION LAW: A DEATH KNELL FOR PARLIAMENTARY DISSENT?" (PDF). NUJS Law Review. Mar 2012. Retrieved 15 May 2016. 
^ T. St. John N. Bates (1986), "Parliament, Policy and Delegated Power" (PDF), Statute Law Review, Oxford: Oxford University Press 
^ Lederman, Daniel; Loayza, Norman; Soares, Rodrigo. "Accountability and Corruption: Political Institutions Matter"





Authority control



GND: 4044696-7
NDL: 00575218






External links[edit]



Wikiquote has quotations related to: Parliamentary system







						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Parliamentary_system&oldid=817234561"					Categories: DemocracyForms of governmentLiberalismPolitical terminologyHidden categories: Articles incorporating Cite DNB templateCS1 French-language sources (fr)All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from September 2016Articles needing additional references from January 2016All articles needing additional referencesArticles with unsourced statements from January 2016Articles needing additional references from December 2015Accuracy disputes from December 2015All accuracy disputesArticles that may contain original research from December 2015All articles that may contain original researchArticles with multiple maintenance issuesArticles with unsourced statements from May 2016Articles with disputed statements from December 2015Articles with unsourced statements from August 2010Articles with unsourced statements from October 2013All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrasesArticles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from September 2016Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers