"Arsacid Dynasty" redirects here. For other uses, see Arsacid Dynasty (disambiguation).


Parthian Empire






247 BC–228 AD










The Parthian Empire at its greatest extent



Capital
Ctesiphon,[1] Ecbatana, Hecatompylos, Susa, Mithradatkirt, Asaak, Rhages


Languages
Greek (official),[2] Parthian (official),[3] Persian, Aramaic (lingua franca),[2][4] Akkadian[1]


Religion



Zoroastrianism
Babylonian religion[5]





Government
Feudal monarchy[6]


Shahanshah



 • 
247–211 BC
Arsaces I (first)


 • 
208–224 AD
Vologases VI (last)


Legislature
Megisthanes


Historical era
Classical antiquity


 • 
Established
247 BC


 • 
Disestablished
228 AD


Area


 • 
1 AD[7][8]
2,800,000 km2 (1,100,000 sq mi)


Currency
Drachma







Preceded by
Succeeded by






Seleucid Empire






Sasanian Empire



Kushan Empire












Part of a series on the



History of Iran







Mythological history


Pishdadian dynasty
Kayanian dynasty








Ancient period




BC


Prehistory of Iran
Ancient Times–4000


Kura–Araxes culture
3400–2000


Proto-Elamite
3200–2700


Jiroft culture
c. 3100 – c. 2200


Elam
2700–539


Akkadian Empire
2400–2150


Kassites
c. 1500 – c. 1155


Neo-Assyrian Empire
911–609


Urartu
860–590


Mannaeans
850–616









Imperial period



Median Empire
678–550 BC


(Scythian Kingdom)
652–625 BC


Neo-Babylonian Empire
626 BC–539 BC


Achaemenid Empire
550–330 BC


Kingdom of Armenia
331 BC – 428 AD


Atropatene
320s BC – 3rd century AD


Kingdom of Cappadocia
320s BC – 17 AD


Seleucid Empire
312–63 BC


Kingdom of Pontus
281–62 BC


Frataraka dynasty
3rd-century BC – c. 222 AD


Parthian Empire
247 BC – 224 AD


Suren Kingdom
119 BC – 240 AD


Sasanian Empire
224–651


Zarmihrids
6th century – 785


Qarinvandids
550s – 11th century









Medieval period



Rashidun Caliphate
632-661


Umayyad Caliphate
661–750


Abbasid Caliphate
750–1258


Dabuyids
642–760


Bavandids
651–1349


Masmughans of Damavand
651–760


Paduspanids
665–1598


Justanids
791 – 11th century


Alid dynasties
864 – 14th century


Tahirid dynasty
821–873


Samanid Empire
819–999


Saffarid dynasty
861–1003


Ghurid dynasty
pre-879 – 1141


Sajid dynasty
889–929


Sallarid dynasty
919–1062


Ziyarid dynasty
930–1090


Ilyasids
932–968


Buyid dynasty
934–1062


Ghaznavid dynasty
977–1186


Kakuyids
1008–1141


Nasrid dynasty
1029–1236


Shabankara
1030–1355


Seljuk Empire
1037–1194


Khwarazmian dynasty
1077–1231


Eldiguzids
1135–1225


Atabegs of Yazd
1141–1319


Salghurids
1148–1282


Hazaraspids
1155–1424


Mihrabanids
1236–1537


Kurt dynasty
1244–1396


Ilkhanate Empire
1256–1335


Chobanid dynasty
1335–1357


Muzaffarid dynasty
1335–1393


Jalairid dynasty
1337–1376


Sarbadars
1337–1376


Injuids
1335–1357


Afrasiyab dynasty
1349–1504


Marashis
1359–1596


Timurid Empire
1370–1507


Karkiya dynasty
1370s–1592


Kara Koyunlu
1406–1468


Aq Qoyunlu
1468–1508









Early modern period



Safavid dynasty
1501–1736


(Hotak dynasty)
1722–1729


Afsharid dynasty
1736–1796


Talysh Khanate
1747–1826


Zand dynasty
1751–1794


Qajar dynasty
1789–1925









Modern period



Pahlavi dynasty
1925–1979


Interim Government of Iran
1979–1980


History of the Islamic Republic of Iran
1980–present









Related articles



Name
Monarchs
Economic history
Military history
Wars







Timeline
 Iran portal





v
t
e





The Parthian Empire (/ˈpɑːrθiən/; 247 BC – 224 AD), also known as the Arsacid Empire (/ˈɑːrsəsɪd/),[9] was a major Iranian political and cultural power in ancient Iran and Iraq.[10] Its latter name comes from Arsaces I of Parthia[11] who, as leader of the Parni tribe, founded it in the mid-3rd century BC when he conquered the region of Parthia[12] in Iran's northeast, then a satrapy (province) in rebellion against the Seleucid Empire. Mithridates I of Parthia (r. c. 171–138 BC) greatly expanded the empire by seizing Media and Mesopotamia from the Seleucids. At its height, the Parthian Empire stretched from the northern reaches of the Euphrates, in what is now central-eastern Turkey, to eastern Iran. The empire, located on the Silk Road trade route between the Roman Empire in the Mediterranean Basin and the Han Empire of China, became a center of trade and commerce.
The Parthians largely adopted the art, architecture, religious beliefs, and royal insignia of their culturally heterogeneous empire, which encompassed Persian, Hellenistic, and regional cultures. For about the first half of its existence, the Arsacid court adopted elements of Greek culture, though it eventually saw a gradual revival of Iranian traditions. The Arsacid rulers were titled the "King of Kings", as a claim to be the heirs to the Achaemenid Empire; indeed, they accepted many local kings as vassals where the Achaemenids would have had centrally appointed, albeit largely autonomous, satraps. The court did appoint a small number of satraps, largely outside Iran, but these satrapies were smaller and less powerful than the Achaemenid potentates. With the expansion of Arsacid power, the seat of central government shifted from Nisa to Ctesiphon along the Tigris (south of modern Baghdad, Iraq), although several other sites also served as capitals.
The earliest enemies of the Parthians were the Seleucids in the west and the Scythians in the east. However, as Parthia expanded westward, they came into conflict with the Kingdom of Armenia, and eventually the late Roman Republic. Rome and Parthia competed with each other to establish the kings of Armenia as their subordinate clients. The Parthians soundly defeated Marcus Licinius Crassus at the Battle of Carrhae in 53 BC, and in 40–39 BC, Parthian forces captured the whole of the Levant except Tyre from the Romans. However, Mark Antony led a counterattack against Parthia, although his successes were generally achieved in his absence, under the leadership of his lieutenant Ventidius. Also, various Roman emperors or their appointed generals invaded Mesopotamia in the course of the several Roman-Parthian Wars which ensued during the next few centuries. The Romans captured the cities of Seleucia and Ctesiphon on multiple occasions during these conflicts, but were never able to hold on to them. Frequent civil wars between Parthian contenders to the throne proved more dangerous to the Empire's stability than foreign invasion, and Parthian power evaporated when Ardashir I, ruler of Estakhr in Fars, revolted against the Arsacids and killed their last ruler, Artabanus V, in 224 AD. Ardashir established the Sassanid Empire, which ruled Iran and much of the Near East until the Muslim conquests of the 7th century AD, although the Arsacid dynasty lived on through the Arsacid Dynasty of Armenia, the Arsacid dynasty of Iberia, and the Arsacid Dynasty of Caucasian Albania; all eponymous branches of the Parthian Arsacids.
Native Parthian sources, written in Parthian, Greek and other languages, are scarce when compared to Sassanid and even earlier Achaemenid sources. Aside from scattered cuneiform tablets, fragmentary ostraca, rock inscriptions, drachma coins, and the chance survival of some parchment documents, much of Parthian history is only known through external sources. These include mainly Greek and Roman histories, but also Chinese histories, prompted by the Han Chinese desire to form alliances against the Xiongnu.[13] Parthian artwork is viewed by historians as a valid source for understanding aspects of society and culture that are otherwise absent in textual sources.



Contents


1 History

1.1 Origins and establishment
1.2 Expansion and consolidation
1.3 Rome and Armenia
1.4 Peace with Rome, court intrigue and contact with Chinese generals
1.5 Continuation of Roman hostilities and Parthian decline
1.6 Native and external sources


2 Government and administration

2.1 Central authority and semi-autonomous kings
2.2 Nobility
2.3 Military
2.4 Currency


3 Society and culture

3.1 Hellenism and the Iranian revival
3.2 Religion
3.3 Art and architecture
3.4 Clothing and apparel
3.5 Language
3.6 Writing and literature


4 Chronological table of Parthian kings
5 See also
6 Notes
7 References
8 Further reading
9 External links



History[edit]
Origins and establishment[edit]




The silver drachma of Arsaces I of Parthia (r. c. 247–211 BC) with a Greek-alphabet inscription of his name (ΑΡΣΑΚΟΥ)


Further information: Parni conquest of Parthia
Before Arsaces I of Parthia founded the Arsacid Dynasty, he was chieftain of the Parni, an ancient Central-Asian tribe of Iranian peoples and one of several nomadic tribes within the confederation of the Dahae.[14] The Parni most likely spoke an eastern Iranian language, in contrast to the northwestern Iranian language spoken at the time in Parthia.[15] The latter was a northeastern province, first under the Achaemenid, and then the Seleucid empires.[16] After conquering the region, the Parni adopted Parthian as the official court language, speaking it alongside Middle Persian, Aramaic, Greek, Babylonian, Sogdian and other languages in the multilingual territories they would conquer.[17]
Why the Arsacid court retroactively chose 247 BC as the first year of the Arsacid era is uncertain. A.D.H. Bivar concludes that this was the year the Seleucids lost control of Parthia to Andragoras, the appointed satrap who rebelled against them. Hence, Arsaces I "backdated his regnal years" to the moment when Seleucid control over Parthia ceased.[18] However, Vesta Sarkhosh Curtis asserts that this was simply the year Arsaces was made chief of the Parni tribe.[19] Homa Katouzian[20] and Gene Ralph Garthwaite[21] claim it was the year Arsaces conquered Parthia and expelled the Seleucid authorities, yet Curtis[19] and Maria Brosius[22] state that Andragoras was not overthrown by the Arsacids until 238 BC.
It is unclear who immediately succeeded Arsaces I. Bivar[23] and Katouzian[20] affirm that it was his brother Tiridates I of Parthia, who in turn was succeeded by his son Arsaces II of Parthia in 211 BC. Yet Curtis[24] and Brosius[25] state that Arsaces II was the immediate successor of Arsaces I, with Curtis claiming the succession took place in 211 BC, and Brosius in 217 BC. Bivar insists that 138 BC, the last regnal year of Mithridates I, is "the first precisely established regnal date of Parthian history."[26] Due to these and other discrepancies, Bivar outlines two distinct royal chronologies accepted by historians.[27] Later on, some of the Parthian Kings would claim Achaemenid descent. The claim has recently received support from numismatic and other written evidence suggesting that both Achaemenid and Parthian kings suffered from the hereditary disease neurofibromatosis.[28]




Parthia, shaded yellow, alongside the Seleucid Empire (blue) and the Roman Republic (purple) around 200 BC


For a time, Arsaces consolidated his position in Parthia and Hyrcania by taking advantage of the invasion of Seleucid territory in the west by Ptolemy III Euergetes (r. 246–222 BC) of Egypt. This conflict with Ptolemy, the Third Syrian War (246–241 BC), also allowed Diodotus I to rebel and form the Greco-Bactrian Kingdom in Central Asia.[22] The latter's successor, Diodotus II, formed an alliance with Arsaces against the Seleucids, but Arsaces was temporarily driven from Parthia by the forces of Seleucus II Callinicus (r. 246–225 BC).[29] After spending some time in exile among the nomadic Apasiacae tribe, Arsaces led a counterattack and recaptured Parthia. Seleucus II's successor, Antiochus III the Great (r. 222–187 BC), was unable to immediately retaliate because his troops were engaged in putting down the rebellion of Molon in Media.[29]
Antiochus III launched a massive campaign to retake Parthia and Bactria in 210 or 209 BC. He was unsuccessful, but did negotiate a peace settlement with Arsaces II. The latter was granted the title of king (Greek: basileus) in return for his submission to Antiochus III as his superior.[30] The Seleucids were unable to further intervene in Parthian affairs following increasing encroachment by the Roman Republic and the Seleucid defeat at Magnesia in 190 BC.[30] Phriapatius of Parthia (r. c. 191–176 BC) succeeded Arsaces II, and Phraates I of Parthia (r. c. 176–171 BC) eventually ascended the throne. Phraates I ruled Parthia without further Seleucid interference.[31]
Expansion and consolidation[edit]
Main article: Seleucid–Parthian wars




Parthian Empire timeline including important events and territorial evolution.






A rock-carved relief of Mithridates I of Parthia (r. c. 171–138 BC), seen riding on horseback, at Kong-e Aždar, city of Izeh, Khūzestān Province, Iran


Phraates I is recorded as expanding Parthia's control past the Gates of Alexander and occupied Apamea Ragiana, the locations of which are unknown.[32] Yet the greatest expansion of Parthian power and territory took place during the reign of his brother and successor Mithridates I of Parthia (r. c. 171–138 BC),[25] whom Katouzian compares to Cyrus the Great (d. 530 BC), founder of the Achaemenid Empire.[20]
Relations between Parthia and Greco-Bactria deteriorated after the death of Diodotus II, when Mithridates' forces captured two eparchies of the latter kingdom, then under Eucratides I (r. c. 170–145 BC).[33] Turning his sights on the Seleucid realm, Mithridates invaded Media and occupied Ecbatana in 148 or 147 BC; the region had been destabilized by a recent Seleucid suppression of a rebellion there led by Timarchus.[34] This victory was followed by the Parthian conquest of Babylonia in Mesopotamia, where Mithridates had coins minted at Seleucia in 141 BC and held an official investiture ceremony.[35] While Mithridates retired to Hyrcania, his forces subdued the kingdoms of Elymais and Characene and occupied Susa.[35] By this time, Parthian authority extended as far east as the Indus River.[36]
Whereas Hecatompylos had served as the first Parthian capital, Mithridates established royal residences at Seleucia, Ecbatana, Ctesiphon and his newly founded city, Mithradatkert (Nisa, Turkmenistan), where the tombs of the Arsacid kings were built and maintained.[37] Ecbatana became the main summertime residence for the Arsacid royalty.[38] Ctesiphon may not have become the official capital until the reign of Gotarzes I of Parthia (r. c. 90–80 BC).[39] It became the site of the royal coronation ceremony and the representational city of the Arsacids, according to Brosius.[40]
The Seleucids were unable to retaliate immediately as general Diodotus Tryphon led a rebellion at the capital Antioch in 142 BC.[41] However, by 140 BC Demetrius II Nicator was able to launch a counter-invasion against the Parthians in Mesopotamia. Despite early successes, the Seleucids were defeated and Demetrius himself was captured by Parthian forces and taken to Hyrcania. There Mithridates treated his captive with great hospitality; he even married his daughter Rhodogune of Parthia to Demetrius.[42]




Drachma of Mithridates I of Parthia, showing him wearing a beard and a royal diadem on his head


Antiochus VII Sidetes (r. 138–129 BC), a brother of Demetrius, assumed the Seleucid throne and married the latter's wife Cleopatra Thea. After defeating Diodotus Tryphon, Antiochus initiated a campaign in 130 BC to retake Mesopotamia, now under the rule of Phraates II of Parthia (r. c. 138–128 BC). The Parthian general Indates was defeated along the Great Zab, followed by a local uprising where the Parthian governor of Babylonia was killed. Antiochus conquered Babylonia and occupied Susa, where he minted coins.[43] After advancing his army into Media, the Parthians pushed for peace, which Antiochus refused to accept unless the Arsacids relinquished all lands to him except Parthia proper, paid heavy tribute, and released Demetrius from captivity. Arsaces released Demetrius and sent him to Syria, but refused the other demands.[44] By spring 129 BC, the Medes were in open revolt against Antiochus, whose army had exhausted the resources of the countryside during winter. While attempting to put down the revolts, the main Parthian force swept into the region and killed Antiochus in battle. His body was sent back to Syria in a silver coffin; his son Seleucus was made a Parthian hostage[45] and a daughter joined Phraates' harem.[46]




Drachma of Mithridates II of Parthia (r. c. 124–90 BC)


While the Parthians regained the territories lost in the west, another threat arose in the east. In 177–176 BC the nomadic confederation of the Xiongnu dislodged the nomadic Yuezhi from their homelands in what is now Gansu province in Northwest China;[47] the Yuezhi then migrated west into Bactria and displaced the Saka (Scythian) tribes. The Saka were forced to move further west, where they invaded the Parthian Empire's northeastern borders.[48] Mithridates was thus forced to retire to Hyrcania after his conquest of Mesopotamia.[49]
Some of the Saka were enlisted in Phraates' forces against Antiochus. However, they arrived too late to engage in the conflict. When Phraates refused to pay their wages, the Saka revolted, which he tried to put down with the aid of former Seleucid soldiers, yet they too abandoned Phraates and joined sides with the Saka.[50] Phraates II marched against this combined force, but he was killed in battle.[51] The Roman historian Justin reports that his successor Artabanus I of Parthia (r. c. 128–124 BC) shared a similar fate fighting nomads in the east. He claims Artabanus was killed by the Tokhari (identified as the Yuezhi), although Bivar believes Justin conflated them with the Saka.[52] Mithridates II of Parthia (r. c. 124–90 BC) later recovered the lands lost to the Saka in Sistan.[53]




Han-dynasty Chinese silk from Mawangdui, 2nd century BC, silk from China was perhaps the most lucrative luxury item the Parthians traded at the western end of the Silk Road.[54]


Following the Seleucid withdrawal from Mesopotamia, the Parthian governor of Babylonia, Himerus, was ordered by the Arsacid court to conquer Characene, then ruled by Hyspaosines from Charax Spasinu. When this failed, Hyspaosines invaded Babylonia in 127 BC and occupied Seleucia. Yet by 122 BC, Mithridates II forced Hyspaosines out of Babylonia and made the kings of Characene vassals under Parthian suzerainty.[55] After Mithridates extended Parthian control further west, occupying Dura-Europos in 113 BC, he became embroiled in a conflict with the Kingdom of Armenia.[56] His forces defeated and deposed Artavasdes I of Armenia in 97 BC, taking his son Tigranes hostage, who would later become Tigranes II "the Great" of Armenia (r. c. 95–55 BC).[57]
The Indo-Parthian Kingdom, located in modern-day Afghanistan and Pakistan made an alliance with the Parthian Empire in the 1st century BC.[58] Bivar claims that these two states considered each other political equals.[59] After the Greek philosopher Apollonius of Tyana visited the court of Vardanes I of Parthia (r. c. 40–47 AD) in 42 AD, Vardanes provided him with the protection of a caravan as he traveled to Indo-Parthia. When Apollonius reached Indo-Parthia's capital Taxila, his caravan leader read Vardanes' official letter, perhaps written in Parthian, to an Indian official who treated Apollonius with great hospitality.[58]
Following the diplomatic venture of Zhang Qian into Central Asia during the reign of Emperor Wu of Han (r. 141–87 BC), the Han Empire of China sent a delegation to Mithridates II's court in 121 BC. The Han embassy opened official trade relations with Parthia via the Silk Road yet did not achieve a desired military alliance against the confederation of the Xiongnu.[60] The Parthian Empire was enriched by taxing the Eurasian caravan trade in silk, the most highly priced luxury good imported by the Romans.[61] Pearls were also a highly valued import from China, while the Chinese purchased Parthian spices, perfumes, and fruits.[62] Exotic animals were also given as gifts from the Arsacid to Han courts; in 87 AD Pacorus II of Parthia sent lions and Persian gazelles to Emperor Zhang of Han (r. 75–88 AD).[63] Besides silk, Parthian goods purchased by Roman merchants included iron from India, spices, and fine leather.[64] Caravans traveling through the Parthian Empire brought West Asian and sometimes Roman luxury glasswares to China.[65] The merchants of Sogdia, speaking an Eastern Iranian language, served as the primary middlemen of this vital silk trade between Parthia and Han China.[66]
Rome and Armenia[edit]
Main articles: Roman–Persian relations and Roman–Parthian Wars
The Yuezhi Kushan Empire in northern India largely guaranteed the security of Parthia's eastern border.[67] Thus, from the mid-1st century BC onwards, the Arsacid court focused on securing the western border, primarily against Rome.[67] A year following Mithridates II's subjugation of Armenia, Lucius Cornelius Sulla, the Roman proconsul of Cilicia, convened with the Parthian diplomat Orobazus at the Euphrates river. The two agreed that the river would serve as the border between Parthia and Rome, although several historians have argued that Sulla only had authority to communicate these terms back to Rome.[68]
Despite this agreement, in 93 or 92 BC Parthia fought a war in Syria against the tribal leader Laodice and her Seleucid ally Antiochus X Eusebes (r. 95–92? BC), killing the latter.[69] When one of the last Seleucid monarchs, Demetrius III Eucaerus, attempted to besiege Beroea (modern Aleppo), Parthia sent military aid to the inhabitants and Demetrius was defeated.[69]




Drachma of Orodes I of Parthia (r. c. 90–80 BC)


Following the rule of Mithridates II, Gotarzes I ruled Babylonia, while Orodes I (r. c. 90–80 BC) ruled Parthia separately.[70] This system of split monarchy weakened Parthia, allowing Tigranes II of Armenia to annex Parthian territory in western Mesopotamia. This land would not be restored to Parthia until the reign of Sanatruces of Parthia (r. c. 78–71 BC).[71] Following the outbreak of the Third Mithridatic War, Mithridates VI of Pontus (r. 119–63 BC), an ally of Tigranes II of Armenia, requested aid from Parthia against Rome, but Sanatruces refused help.[72] When the Roman commander Lucullus marched against the Armenian capital Tigranocerta in 69 BC, Mithridates VI and Tigranes II requested the aid of Phraates III of Parthia (r. c. 71–58). Phraates did not send aid to either, and after the fall of Tigranocerta he reaffirmed with Lucullus the Euphrates as the boundary between Parthia and Rome.[73]
Tigranes the Younger, son of Tigranes II of Armenia, failed to usurp the Armenian throne from his father. He fled to Phraates III and convinced him to march against Armenia's new capital at Artaxarta. When this siege failed, Tigranes the Younger once again fled, this time to the Roman commander Pompey. He promised Pompey that he would act as a guide through Armenia, but, when Tigranes II submitted to Rome as a client king, Tigranes the Younger was brought to Rome as a hostage.[74] Phraates demanded Pompey return Tigranes the Younger to him, but Pompey refused. In retaliation, Phraates launched an invasion into Corduene (southeastern Turkey) where, according to two conflicting Roman accounts, the Roman consul Lucius Afranius forced the Parthians out by either military or diplomatic means.[75]




A Roman marble head of the triumvir Marcus Licinius Crassus, who was defeated at Carrhae by Surena


Phraates III was assassinated by his sons Orodes II of Parthia and Mithridates III of Parthia, after which Orodes turned on Mithridates, forcing him to flee from Media to Roman Syria.[76] Aulus Gabinius, the Roman proconsul of Syria, marched in support of Mithridates to the Euphrates, but had to turn back to aid Ptolemy XII Auletes (r. 80–58; 55–51 BC) against a rebellion in Egypt.[77] Despite losing his Roman support, Mithridates managed to conquer Babylonia, and minted coins at Seleucia until 54 BC. In that year, Orodes' general, known only as Surena after his noble family's clan name, recaptured Seleucia, and Mithridates was executed.[78]
Marcus Licinius Crassus, one of the triumvirs who was now proconsul of Syria, launched an invasion into Parthia in 53 BC in belated support of Mithridates.[79] As his army marched to Carrhae (modern Harran, southeastern Turkey), Orodes II invaded Armenia, cutting off support from Rome's ally Artavasdes II of Armenia (r. 53–34 BC). Orodes persuaded Artavasdes to a marriage alliance between the crown prince Pacorus I of Parthia (d. 38 BC) and Artavasdes' sister.[80]
Surena, with an army entirely on horseback, rode to meet Crassus.[81] Surena's 1,000 cataphracts, armed with lances, and 9,000 horse archers were outnumbered roughly four to one by Crassus' army, comprising seven Roman legions and auxiliaries including mounted Gauls and light infantry.[82] Relying on a baggage train of about 1,000 camels, the Parthian horse archers were given constant supplies of arrows.[82] The horse archers employed the "Parthian shot" tactic, where they would fake a retreat, only to turn and fire upon their opponents. This tactic, combined with the use of heavy composite bows on flat plain devastated Crassus' infantry.[83] With some 20,000 Romans dead, approximately 10,000 captured, and roughly another 10,000 escaping west, Crassus fled into the Armenian countryside.[84] At the head of his army, Surena approached Crassus, offering a parley, which Crassus accepted. However, he was killed when one of his junior officers, suspecting a trap, attempted to stop him from riding into Surena's camp.[85]
Crassus' defeat at Carrhae was one of the worst military defeats of Roman history.[86] Parthia's victory cemented its reputation as a formidable if not equal power with Rome.[87] With his camp followers, war captives, and precious Roman booty, Surena traveled some 700 km (430 mi) back to Seleucia where his victory was celebrated. However, fearing his ambitions even for the Arsacid throne, Orodes had Surena executed shortly thereafter.[86]




Roman aurei bearing the portraits of Mark Antony (left) and Octavian (right), issued in 41 BC to celebrate the establishment of the Second Triumvirate by Octavian, Antony and Marcus Lepidus in 43 BC


Emboldened by the victory over Crassus, the Parthians attempted to capture Roman-held territories in Western Asia.[88] Crown prince Pacorus I and his commander Osaces raided Syria as far as Antioch in 51 BC, but were repulsed by Gaius Cassius Longinus, who ambushed and killed Osaces.[89] The Arsacids sided with Pompey in his civil war against Julius Caesar and even sent troops to support the anti-Caesarian forces at the Battle of Philippi in 42 BC.[90] Quintus Labienus, a general loyal to Cassius and Brutus, sided with Parthia against the Second Triumvirate in 40 BC; the following year he invaded Syria alongside Pacorus I.[91] The triumvir Mark Antony was unable to lead the Roman defense against Parthia due to his departure to Italy, where he amassed his forces to confront his rival Octavian and eventually conducted negotiations with him at Brundisium.[92] After Syria was occupied by Pacorus' army, Labienus split from the main Parthian force to invade Anatolia while Pacorus and his commander Barzapharnes invaded the Roman Levant.[91] They subdued all settlements along the Mediterranean coast as far south as Ptolemais (modern Acre, Israel), with the lone exception of Tyre.[93] In Judea, the pro-Roman Jewish forces of high priest Hyrcanus II, Phasael, and Herod were defeated by the Parthians and their Jewish ally Antigonus II Mattathias (r. 40–37 BC); the latter was made king of Judea while Herod fled to his fort at Masada.[91]
Despite these successes, the Parthians were soon driven out of the Levant by a Roman counteroffensive. Publius Ventidius Bassus, an officer under Mark Antony, defeated and then executed Labienus at the Battle of the Cilician Gates (in modern Mersin Province, Turkey) in 39 BC.[94] Shortly afterward, a Parthian force in Syria led by general Pharnapates was defeated by Ventidius at the Battle of Amanus Pass.[94] As a result, Pacorus I temporarily withdrew from Syria. When he returned in the spring of 38 BC, he faced Ventidius at the Battle of Mount Gindarus, northeast of Antioch. Pacorus was killed during the battle, and his forces retreated across the Euphrates. His death spurred a succession crisis in which Orodes II chose Phraates IV of Parthia (r. c. 38–2 BC) as his new heir.[95]




Drachma of Phraates IV of Parthia (r. c. 38–2 BC)


Upon assuming the throne, Phraates IV eliminated rival claimants by killing and exiling his own brothers.[96] One of them, Monaeses, fled to Antony and convinced him to invade Parthia.[97] Antony defeated Parthia's Judaean ally Antigonus in 37 BC, installing Herod as a client king in his place. The following year, when Antony marched to Erzurum, Artavasdes II of Armenia once again switched alliances by sending Antony additional troops. Antony invaded Media Atropatene (modern Iranian Azerbaijan), then ruled by Parthia's ally Artavasdes I of Media Atropatene, with the intention of seizing the capital Praaspa, the location of which is now unknown. However, Phraates IV ambushed Antony's rear detachment, destroying a giant battering ram meant for the siege of Praaspa; after this, Artavasdes abandoned Antony's forces.[98] The Parthians pursued and harassed Antony's army as they fled to Armenia. Eventually, the greatly weakened force reached Syria.[99] After this, Antony lured Artavasdes II into a trap with the promise of a marriage alliance. He was taken captive in 34 BC, sent back to Rome, and executed.[100] Antony attempted to strike an alliance with Artavasdes I of Media Atropatene, whose relations with Phraates IV had recently soured. This was abandoned when Antony and his forces withdrew from Armenia in 33 BC; they escaped a Parthian invasion while Antony's rival Octavian attacked his forces to the west.[100] Following Antony's suicide in Egypt, the Parthian ally Artaxias II reassumed the throne of Armenia.
Peace with Rome, court intrigue and contact with Chinese generals[edit]
Further information: Pax Romana
Following the defeat of Antony at the Battle of Actium in 31 BC, Octavian consolidated his political power and in 27 BC was named Augustus by the Roman Senate, becoming the first Roman emperor. Around this time, Tiridates II of Parthia briefly overthrew Phraates IV, who was able to quickly reestablish his rule with the aid of Scythian nomads.[101] Tiridates fled to the Romans, taking one of Phraates' sons with him. In negotiations conducted in 20 BC, Phraates arranged for the release of his kidnapped son. In return, the Romans received the lost legionary standards taken at Carrhae in 53 BC, as well as any surviving prisoners of war.[102] The Parthians viewed this exchange as a small price to pay to regain the prince.[103] Augustus hailed the return of the standards as a political victory over Parthia; this propaganda was celebrated in the minting of new coins, the building of a new temple to house the standards, and even in fine art such as the breastplate scene on his statue Augustus of Prima Porta.[104]




A close-up view of the breastplate on the statue of Augustus of Prima Porta, showing a Parthian man returning to Augustus the legionary standards lost by Marcus Licinius Crassus at Carrhae


Along with the prince, Augustus also gave Phraates IV an Italian slave-girl, who later became Queen Musa of Parthia. To ensure that her child Phraataces would inherit the throne without incident, Musa convinced Phraates IV to give his other sons to Augustus as hostages. Again, Augustus used this as propaganda depicting the submission of Parthia to Rome, listing it as a great accomplishment in his Res Gestae Divi Augusti.[105] When Phraataces took the throne as Phraates V (r. c. 2 BC – 4 AD), Musa married her own son and ruled alongside him. The Parthian nobility, disapproving of both the incestuous relationship and the notion of a king with non-Arsacid blood, forced the pair into exile in Roman territory.[106] Phraates' successor Orodes III of Parthia lasted just two years on the throne, and was followed by Vonones I, who had adopted many Roman mannerisms during time in Rome. The Parthian nobility, angered by Vonones' sympathies for the Romans, backed a rival claimant, Artabanus III of Parthia (r. c. 10–38 AD), who eventually defeated Vonones and drove him into exile in Roman Syria.[107]
During the reign of Artabanus III, two Jewish commoners and brothers, Anilai and Asinai from Nehardea (near modern Fallujah, Iraq),[108] led a revolt against the Parthian governor of Babylonia. After defeating the latter, the two were granted the right to govern the region by Artabanus III, who feared further rebellion elsewhere.[109] Anilai's Parthian wife poisoned Asinai out of fear he would attack Anilai over his marriage to a gentile. Following this, Anilai became embroiled in an armed conflict with a son-in-law of Artabanus, who eventually defeated him.[110] With the Jewish regime removed, the native Babylonians began to harass the local Jewish community, forcing them to emigrate to Seleucia. When that city rebelled against Parthian rule in 35–36 AD, the Jews were expelled again, this time by the local Greeks and Aramaeans. The exiled Jews fled to Ctesiphon, Nehardea, and Nisibis.[111]




A denarius struck in 19 BC during the reign of Augustus, with the goddess Feronia depicted on the obverse, and on the reverse a Parthian man kneeling in submission while offering the Roman military standards taken at the Battle of Carrhae[112]


Although at peace with Parthia, Rome still interfered in its affairs. The Roman emperor Tiberius (r. 14–37 AD) became involved in a plot by Pharasmanes I of Iberia to place his brother Mithridates on the throne of Armenia by assassinating the Parthian ally King Arsaces of Armenia.[113] Artabanus III tried and failed to restore Parthian control of Armenia, prompting an aristocratic revolt that forced him to flee to Scythia. The Romans released a hostage prince, Tiridates III of Parthia, to rule the region as an ally of Rome. Shortly before his death, Artabanus managed to force Tiridates from the throne using troops from Hyrcania.[114] After Artabanus' death in 38 AD, a long civil war ensued between the rightful successor Vardanes I and his brother Gotarzes II of Parthia.[115] After Vardanes was assassinated during a hunting expedition, the Parthian nobility appealed to Roman emperor Claudius (r. 41–54 AD) in 49 AD to release the hostage prince Meherdates to challenge Gotarzes. This backfired when Meherdates was betrayed by the governor of Edessa and Izates bar Monobaz of Adiabene; he was captured and sent to Gotarzes, where he was allowed to live after having his ears mutilated, an act that disqualified him from inheriting the throne.[116]
In 97 AD, the Chinese general Ban Chao, the Protector-General of the Western Regions, sent his emissary Gan Ying on a diplomatic mission to reach the Roman Empire. Gan visited the court of Pacorus II at Hecatompylos before departing towards Rome.[117] He traveled as far west as the Persian Gulf, where Parthian authorities convinced him that an arduous sea voyage around the Arabian Peninsula was the only means to reach Rome.[118] Discouraged by this, Gan Ying returned to the Han court and provided Emperor He of Han (r. 88–105 AD) with a detailed report on the Roman Empire based on oral accounts of his Parthian hosts.[119] William Watson speculates that the Parthians would have been relieved at the failed efforts by the Han Empire to open diplomatic relations with Rome, especially after Ban Chao's military victories against the Xiongnu in eastern Central Asia.[117] However, Chinese records maintain that a Roman embassy, perhaps only a group of Roman merchants, arrived at the Han capital Luoyang by way of Jiaozhi (northern Vietnam) in 166 AD, during the reigns of Marcus Aurelius (r. 161–180 AD) and Emperor Huan of Han (r. 146–168 AD).[120] Although it could be coincidental, Antonine Roman golden medallions dated to the reigns of Marcus Aurelius and his predecessor Antoninus Pius have been discovered at Oc Eo, Vietnam (among other Roman artefacts in the Mekong Delta), a site that is one of the suggested locations for the port city of "Cattigara" along the Magnus Sinus (i.e. Gulf of Thailand and South China Sea) in Ptolemy's Geography.[121]
Continuation of Roman hostilities and Parthian decline[edit]
Main articles: Roman–Parthian War of 58–63, Trajan's Parthian campaign, Roman–Parthian War of 161–166, and Parthian war of Caracalla
Further information: Roman Armenia




Map of the troop movements during the first two years of the Roman–Parthian War of 58–63 AD over the Kingdom of Armenia, detailing the Roman offensive into Armenia and capture of the country by Gnaeus Domitius Corbulo


After the Iberian king Pharasmanes I had his son Rhadamistus (r. 51–55 AD) invade Armenia to depose the Roman client king Mithridates, Vologeses I of Parthia (r. c. 51–77 AD) planned to invade and place his brother, the later Tiridates I of Armenia, on the throne.[122] Rhadamistus was eventually driven from power, and, beginning with the reign of Tiridates, Parthia would retain firm control over Armenia—with brief interruptions—through the Arsacid Dynasty of Armenia.[123] Even after the fall of the Parthian Empire, the Arsacid line lived on through the Armenian kings.[124] However, not only did the Arsacid line continue through the Armenians, it as well continued through the Georgian kings with the Arsacid dynasty of Iberia, and for many centuries afterwards in Caucasian Albania through the Arsacid Dynasty of Caucasian Albania.[125]
When Vardanes II of Parthia rebelled against his father Vologeses I in 55 AD, Vologeses withdrew his forces from Armenia. Rome quickly attempted to fill the political vacuum left behind.[126] In the Roman–Parthian War of 58–63 AD, the commander Gnaeus Domitius Corbulo achieved some military successes against the Parthians while installing Tigranes VI of Armenia as a Roman client.[127] However, Corbulo's successor Lucius Caesennius Paetus was soundly defeated by Parthian forces and fled Armenia.[128] Following a peace treaty, Tiridates I traveled to Naples and Rome in 63 AD. At both sites the Roman emperor Nero (r. 54–68 AD) ceremoniously crowned him king of Armenia by placing the royal diadem on his head.[129]
A long period of peace between Parthia and Rome ensued, with only the invasion of Alans into Parthia's eastern territories around 72 AD mentioned by Roman historians.[130] Whereas Augustus and Nero had chosen a cautious military policy when confronting Parthia, later Roman emperors invaded and attempted to conquer the eastern Fertile Crescent, the heart of the Parthian Empire along the Tigris and Euphrates. The heightened aggression can be explained in part by Rome's military reforms.[131] To match Parthia's strength in missile troops and mounted warriors, the Romans at first used foreign allies (especially Nabataeans), but later established a permanent auxilia force to complement their heavy legionary infantry.[132] The Romans eventually maintained regiments of horse archers (sagittarii) and even mail-armored cataphracts in their eastern provinces.[133] Yet the Romans had no discernible grand strategy in dealing with Parthia and gained very little territory from these invasions.[134] The primary motivations for war were the advancement of the personal glory and political position of the emperor, as well as defending Roman honor against perceived slights such as Parthian interference in the affairs of Rome's client states.[135]




A Parthian (right) wearing a Phrygian cap, depicted as a prisoner of war in chains held by a Roman (left); Arch of Septimius Severus, Rome, 203 AD


Hostilities between Rome and Parthia were renewed when Osroes I of Parthia (r. c. 109–128 AD) deposed the Armenian king Tiridates and replaced him with Axidares, son of Pacorus II, without consulting Rome.[136] The Roman emperor Trajan (r. 98–117 AD) had the next Parthian nominee for the throne, Parthamasiris, killed in 114 AD, instead making Armenia a Roman province.[137] His forces, led by Lusius Quietus, also captured Nisibis; its occupation was essential to securing all the major routes across the northern Mesopotamian plain.[138] The following year, Trajan invaded Mesopotamia and met little resistance from only Meharaspes of Adiabene, since Osroes was engaged in a civil war to the east with Vologases III of Parthia.[139] Trajan spent the winter of 115–116 at Antioch, but resumed his campaign in the spring. Marching down the Euphrates, he captured Dura-Europos, the capital Ctesiphon[140] and Seleucia, and even subjugated Characene, where he watched ships depart to India from the Persian Gulf.[141]
In the last months of 116 AD, Trajan captured the Persian city of Susa. When Sanatruces II of Parthia gathered forces in eastern Parthia to challenge the Romans, his cousin Parthamaspates of Parthia betrayed and killed him: Trajan crowned him the new king of Parthia.[142] Never again would the Roman Empire advance so far to the east.
On Trajan's return north, the Babylonian settlements revolted against the Roman garrisons.[143] Trajan was forced to retreat from Mesopotamia in 117 AD, overseeing a failed siege of Hatra during his withdrawal.[144] His retreat was—in his intentions—temporary, because he wanted to renew the attack on Parthia in 118 AD and "make the subjection of the Parthians a reality,"[145] but Trajan died suddenly in August 117 AD.
During his campaign, Trajan was granted the title Parthicus by the Senate and coins were minted proclaiming the conquest of Parthia.[146] However, only the 4th-century AD historians Eutropius and Festus allege that he attempted to establish a Roman province in lower Mesopotamia.[147]
Trajan's successor Hadrian (r. 117–138 AD) reaffirmed the Roman-Parthian border at the Euphrates, choosing not to invade Mesopotamia due to Rome's now limited military resources.[148] Parthamaspates fled after the Parthians revolted against him, yet the Romans made him king of Osroene. Osroes I died during his conflict with Vologases III, the latter succeeded by Vologases IV of Parthia (r. c. 147–191 AD) who ushered in a period of peace and stability.[149] However, the Roman–Parthian War of 161–166 AD began when Vologases invaded Armenia and Syria, retaking Edessa. Roman emperor Marcus Aurelius (r. 161–180 AD) had co-ruler Lucius Verus (r. 161–169 AD) guard Syria while Marcus Statius Priscus invaded Armenia in 163 AD, followed by the invasion of Mesopotamia by Avidius Cassius in 164 AD.[150]
The Romans captured and burnt Seleucia and Ctesiphon to the ground, yet they were forced to retreat once the Roman soldiers contracted a deadly disease (possibly smallpox) that soon ravaged the Roman world.[151] Although they withdrew, from this point forward the city of Dura-Europos remained in Roman hands.[152]
When Roman emperor Septimius Severus (r. 193–211 AD) invaded Mesopotamia in 197 AD during the reign of Vologases V of Parthia (r. c. 191–208 AD), the Romans once again marched down the Euphrates and captured Seleucia and Ctesiphon. After assuming the title Parthicus Maximus, he retreated in late 198 AD, failing as Trajan once did to capture Hatra during a siege.[153]
Around 212 AD, soon after Vologases VI of Parthia (r. c. 208–222 AD) took the throne, his brother Artabanus V of Parthia (d. 224 AD) rebelled against him and gained control over a greater part of the empire.[154] Meanwhile, the Roman emperor Caracalla (r. 211–217 AD) deposed the kings of Osroene and Armenia to make them Roman provinces once more. He marched into Mesopotamia under the pretext of marrying one of Artabanus' daughters, but—because the marriage was not allowed—made war on Parthia and conquered Arbil east of the Tigris river.




The Sassanid relief at Naqsh-e Rustam showing the investiture of Ardashir I


Caracalla was assassinated the next year on the road to Carrhae by his soldiers.[154] After this debacle, the Parthians made a settlement with Macrinus (r. 217–218) where the Romans paid Parthia over two-hundred million denarii with additional gifts.[155]
But the Parthian Empire, weakened by internal strife and wars with Rome, was soon to be followed by the Sassanid Empire. Indeed, shortly afterward, Ardashir I, the local Iranian ruler of Persis (modern Fars Province, Iran) from Estakhr began subjugating the surrounding territories in defiance of Arsacid rule.[156] He confronted Artabanus V at the Battle of Hormozdgān on 28 April 224 AD, perhaps at a site near Isfahan, defeating him and establishing the Sassanid Empire.[156] There is evidence, however, that suggests Vologases VI continued to mint coins at Seleucia as late as 228 AD.[157]
The Sassanians would not only assume Parthia's legacy as Rome's Persian nemesis, but they would also attempt to restore the boundaries of the Achaemenid Empire by briefly conquering the Levant, Anatolia, and Egypt from the Eastern Roman Empire during the reign of Khosrau II (r. 590–628 AD).[158] However, they would lose these territories to Heraclius—the last Roman emperor before the Arab conquests. Nevertheless, for a period of more than 400 years, they succeeded the Parthian realm as Rome's principal rival.[159][160][161]
Native and external sources[edit]









Parthian gold jewelry items found at a burial site in Nineveh (near modern Mosul, Iraq) in the British Museum


Local and foreign written accounts, as well as non-textual artifacts, have been used to reconstruct Parthian history.[162] Although the Parthian court maintained records, the Parthians had no formal study of history; the earliest universal history of Iran, the Khwaday-Namag, was not compiled until the reign of the last Sassanid ruler Yazdegerd III (r. 632–651 AD).[163] Indigenous sources on Parthian history remain scarce, with fewer of them available than for any other period of Iranian history.[164] Most contemporary written records on Parthia contain Greek as well as Parthian and Aramaic inscriptions.[165] The Parthian language was written in a distinct script derived from the Imperial Aramaic chancellery script of the Achaemenids, and later developed into the Pahlavi writing system.[166]




A Sarmatian-Parthian gold necklace and amulet, 2nd century AD. Located in Tamoikin Art Fund


The most valuable indigenous sources for reconstructing an accurate chronology of Arsacid rulers are the metal drachma coins issued by each ruler.[167] These represent a "transition from non-textual to textual remains," according to historian Geo Widengren.[168] Other Parthian sources used for reconstructing chronology include cuneiform astronomical tablets and colophons discovered in Babylonia.[169] Indigenous textual sources also include stone inscriptions, parchment and papyri documents, and pottery ostraca.[168] For example, at the early Parthian capital of Mithradatkert/Nisa in Turkmenistan, large caches of pottery ostraca have been found yielding information on the sale and storage of items like wine.[170] Along with parchment documents found at sites like Dura-Europos, these also provide valuable information on Parthian governmental administration, covering issues such as taxation, military titles, and provincial organization.[171]




Parthian golden necklace, 2nd century A.D., Iran, Reza Abbasi Museum






A Parthian ceramic oil lamp, Khūzestān Province, Iran, National Museum of Iran


The Greek and Latin histories, which represent the majority of materials covering Parthian history, are not considered entirely reliable since they were written from the perspective of rivals and wartime enemies.[172] These external sources generally concern major military and political events, and often ignore social and cultural aspects of Parthian history.[173] The Romans usually depicted the Parthians as fierce warriors but also as a culturally refined people; recipes for Parthian dishes in the cookbook Apicius exemplifies their admiration for Parthian cuisine.[174] Apollodorus of Artemita and Arrian wrote histories focusing on Parthia, which are now lost and survive only as quoted extracts in other histories.[175] Isidore of Charax, who lived during the reign of Augustus, provides an account of Parthian territories, perhaps from a Parthian government survey.[176] To a lesser extent, people and events of Parthian history were also included in the histories of Justin, Strabo, Diodorus Siculus, Plutarch, Cassius Dio, Appian, Josephus, Pliny the Elder, and Herodian.[177]
Parthian history can also be reconstructed via the Chinese historical records of events.[178] In contrast to Greek and Roman histories, the early Chinese histories maintained a more neutral view when describing Parthia,[179] although the habit of Chinese chroniclers to copy material for their accounts from older works (of undetermined origin) makes it difficult to establish a chronological order of events.[180] The Chinese called Parthia Ānxī (Chinese: 安息, Old Chinese pronunciation: 'ansjək), perhaps after the Greek name for the Parthian city Antiochia in Margiana (Greek: Αντιόχεια της Μαργιανήs).[181] However, this could also have been a transliteration of "Arsaces", after the dynasty's eponymous founder.[182] The works and historical authors include the Shiji (also known as the Records of the Grand Historian) by Sima Qian, the Han shu (Book of Han) by Ban Biao, Ban Gu, and Ban Zhao, and the Hou Han shu (Book of Later Han) by Fan Ye.[183] They provide information on the nomadic migrations leading up to the early Saka invasion of Parthia and valuable political and geographical information.[178] For example, the Shiji (ch. 123) describes diplomatic exchanges, exotic gifts given by Mithridates II to the Han court, types of agricultural crops grown in Parthia, production of wine using grapes, itinerant merchants, and the size and location of Parthian territory.[184] The Shiji also mentions that the Parthians kept records by "writing horizontally on strips of leather," that is, parchment.[185]
Government and administration[edit]
Central authority and semi-autonomous kings[edit]




Coin of Kamnaskires III, king of Elymais (modern Khūzestān Province), and his wife Queen Anzaze, 1st century BC


Compared with the earlier Achaemenid Empire, the Parthian government was notably decentralized.[186] An indigenous historical source reveals that territories overseen by the central government were organized in a similar manner to the Seleucid Empire. They both had a threefold division for their provincial hierarchies: the Parthian marzbān, xšatrap, and dizpat, similar to the Seleucid satrapy, eparchy, and hyparchy.[187] The Parthian Empire also contained several subordinate semi-autonomous kingdoms, including the states of Caucasian Iberia, Armenia, Atropatene, Gordyene, Adiabene, Edessa, Hatra, Mesene, Elymais, and Persis.[188] The state rulers governed their own territories and minted their own coinage distinct from the royal coinage produced at the imperial mints.[189] This was not unlike the earlier Achaemenid Empire, which also had some city-states, and even distant satrapies who were semi-independent but "recognised the supremacy of the king, paid tribute and provided military support", according to Brosius.[190] However, the satraps of Parthian times governed smaller territories, and perhaps had less prestige and influence than their Achaemenid predecessors.[191] During the Seleucid period, the trend of local ruling dynasties with semi-autonomous rule, and sometimes outright rebellious rule, became commonplace, a fact reflected in the later Parthian style of governance.[192]
Nobility[edit]
Further information: Seven Parthian clans




A bronze statue of a Parthian nobleman from the sanctuary at Shami in Elymais (modern-day Khūzestān Province, Iran, along the Persian Gulf), now located at the National Museum of Iran.


The King of Kings headed the Parthian government. He maintained polygamous relations, and was usually succeeded by his first-born son.[193] Like the Ptolemies of Egypt, there is also record of Arsacid kings marrying their nieces and perhaps even half-sisters; Queen Musa married her own son, though this was an extreme and isolated case.[193] Brosius provides an extract from a letter written in Greek by King Artabanus II in 21 AD, which addresses the governor (titled "archon") and citizens of the city of Susa. Specific government offices of Preferred Friend, Bodyguard and Treasurer are mentioned and the document also proves that "while there were local jurisdictions and proceedings to appointment to high office, the king could intervene on behalf of an individual, review a case and amend the local ruling if he considered it appropriate."[194]
The hereditary titles of the hierarchic nobility recorded during the reign of the first Sassanid monarch Ardashir I most likely reflect the titles already in use during the Parthian era.[195] There were three distinct tiers of nobility, the highest being the regional kings directly below the King of Kings, the second being those related to the King of Kings only through marriage, and the lowest order being heads of local clans and small territories.[196]
By the 1st century AD, the Parthian nobility had assumed great power and influence in the succession and deposition of Arsacid kings.[197] Some of the nobility functioned as court advisers to the king, as well as holy priests.[198] Strabo, in his Geographica, preserved a claim by the Greek philosopher and historian Poseidonius that the Council of Parthia consisted of noble kinsmen and magi, two groups from which "the kings were appointed."[199] Of the great noble Parthian families listed at the beginning of the Sassanian period, only two are explicitly mentioned in earlier Parthian documents: the House of Suren and the House of Karen.[200] The historian Plutarch noted that members of the Suren family, the first among the nobility, were given the privilege of crowning each new Arsacid King of Kings during their coronations.[201] Later on, some of the Parthian kings would claim Achaemenid descent. This has recently been corroborated via the possibility of an inherited disease (neurofibromatosis) demonstrated by the physical descriptions of rulers and from evidence of familial disease on ancient coinage.[202]
Military[edit]




A Parthian stucco relief of an infantryman, from the walls of Zahhak Castle, East Azarbaijan Province, Iran


The Parthian Empire had no standing army, yet were able to quickly recruit troops in the event of local crises.[203] There was a permanent armed guard attached to the person of the king, comprising nobles, serfs and mercenaries, but this royal retinue was small.[204] Garrisons were also permanently maintained at border forts; Parthian inscriptions reveal some of the military titles granted to the commanders of these locations.[204] Military forces could also be used in diplomatic gestures. For example, when Chinese envoys visited Parthia in the late 2nd century BC, the Shiji maintains that 20,000 horsemen were sent to the eastern borders to serve as escorts for the embassy, although this figure is perhaps an exaggeration.[205]
The main striking force of the Parthian army was its cataphracts, heavy cavalry with man and horse decked in mailed armor.[206] The cataphracts were equipped with a lance for charging into enemy lines, but were not equipped with bows and arrows which were restricted to horse archers.[207] Due to the cost of their equipment and armor, cataphracts were recruited from among the aristocratic class who, in return for their services, demanded a measure of autonomy at the local level from the Arsacid kings.[208] The light cavalry was recruited from among the commoner class and acted as horse archers; they wore a simple tunic and trousers into battle.[206] They used composite bows and were able to shoot at enemies while riding and facing away from them; this technique, known as the Parthian shot, was a highly effective tactic.[209] The heavy and light cavalry of Parthia proved to be a decisive factor in the Battle of Carrhae where a Parthian force defeated a much larger Roman army under Crassus. Light infantry units, composed of levied commoners and mercenaries, were used to disperse enemy troops after cavalry charges.[210]
The size of the Parthian army is unknown, as is the size of the empire's overall population. However, archaeological excavations in former Parthian urban centers reveal settlements which could have sustained large populations and hence a great resource in manpower.[211] Dense population centers in regions like Babylonia were no doubt attractive to the Romans, whose armies could afford to live off the land.[211]
Currency[edit]
Usually made of silver,[212] the Greek drachma coin, including the tetradrachm, was the standard currency used throughout the Parthian Empire.[213] The Arsacids maintained royal mints at the cities of Hecatompylos, Seleucia, and Ecbatana.[40] They most likely operated a mint at Mithridatkert/Nisa as well.[24] From the empire's inception until its collapse, drachmas produced throughout the Parthian period rarely weighed less than 3.5 g or more than 4.2 g.[214] The first Parthian tetradrachms, weighing in principle around 16 g with some variation, appear after Mithridates I conquered Mesopotamia and were minted exclusively at Seleucia.[215]
Society and culture[edit]
Hellenism and the Iranian revival[edit]




Parthian horseman, now on display at the Palazzo Madama, Turin.


Although Greek culture of the Seleucids was widely adopted by peoples of the Near East during the Hellenistic period, the Parthian era witnessed an Iranian cultural revival in religion, the arts, and even clothing fashions.[216] Conscious of both the Hellenistic and Persian cultural roots of their kingship, the Arsacid rulers styled themselves after the Persian King of Kings and affirmed that they were also philhellenes ("friends of the Greeks").[217] The word "philhellene" was inscribed on Parthian coins until the reign of Artabanus II.[218] The discontinuation of this phrase signified the revival of Iranian culture in Parthia.[219] Vologases I was the first Arsacid ruler to have the Parthian script and language appear on his minted coins alongside the now almost illegible Greek.[220] However, the use of Greek-alphabet legends on Parthian coins remained until the collapse of the empire.[221]




A ceramic Parthian water spout in the shape of a man's head, dated 1st or 2nd century AD


Greek cultural influence did not disappear from the Parthian Empire, however, and there is evidence that the Arsacids enjoyed Greek theatre. When the head of Crassus was brought to Orodes II, he, alongside Armenian king Artavasdes II, were busy watching a performance of The Bacchae by the playwright Euripides (c. 480–406 BC). The producer of the play decided to use Crassus' actual severed head in place of the stage-prop head of Pentheus.[222]
On his coins, Arsaces I is depicted in apparel similar to Achaemenid satraps. According to A. Shahbazi, Arsaces "deliberately diverges from Seleucid coins to emphasize his nationalistic and royal aspirations, and he calls himself Kārny/Karny (Greek: Autocratos), a title already borne by Achaemenid supreme generals, such as Cyrus the Younger."[223] In line with Achaemenid traditions, rock-relief images of Arsacid rulers were carved at Mount Behistun, where Darius I of Persia (r. 522–486 BC) made royal inscriptions.[224] Moreover, the Arsacids claimed familial descent from Artaxerxes II of Persia (r. 404–358 BC) as a means to bolster their legitimacy in ruling over former Achaemenid territories, i.e. as being "legitimate successors of glorious kings" of ancient Iran.[225] Artabanus III named one of his sons Darius and laid claim to Cyrus' heritage.[223] The Arsacid kings chose typical Zoroastrian names for themselves and some from the "heroic background" of the Avesta, according to V.G. Lukonin.[226] The Parthians also adopted the use of the Babylonian calendar with names from the Achaemenid Iranian calendar, replacing the Macedonian calendar of the Seleucids.[227]
Religion[edit]




Parthian votive relief from Khūzestān Province, Iran, 2nd century AD


The Parthian Empire, being culturally and politically heterogeneous, had a variety of religious systems and beliefs, the most widespread being those dedicated to Greek and Iranian cults.[228] Aside from a minority of Jews[229] and early Christians,[230] most Parthians were polytheistic.[231] Greek and Iranian deities were often blended together as one. For example, Zeus was often equated with Ahura Mazda, Hades with Angra Mainyu, Aphrodite and Hera with Anahita, Apollo with Mithra, and Hermes with Shamash.[232] Aside from the main gods and goddesses, each ethnic group and city had their own designated deities.[231] As with Seleucid rulers,[233] Parthian art indicates that the Arsacid kings viewed themselves as gods; this cult of the ruler was perhaps the most widespread.[234]
The extent of Arsacid patronism of Zoroastrianism is debated in modern scholarship.[235] The followers of Zoroaster would have found the bloody sacrifices of some Parthian-era Iranian cults to be unacceptable.[228] However, there is evidence that Vologeses I encouraged the presence of Zoroastrian magi priests at court and sponsored the compilation of sacred Zoroastrian texts which later formed the Avesta.[236] The Sassanid court would later adopt Zoroastrianism as the official state religion of the empire.[237]
Although Mani (216–276 AD), the founding prophet of Manichaeism, did not proclaim his first religious revelation until 228/229 AD, Bivar asserts that his new faith contained "elements of Mandaean belief, Iranian cosmogony, and even echoes of Christianity ... [it] may be regarded as a typical reflection of the mixed religious doctrines of the late Arsacid period, which the Zoroastrian orthodoxy of the Sasanians was soon to sweep away."[238]
There is scant archaeological evidence for the spread of Buddhism from the Kushan Empire into Iran proper.[239] However, it is known from Chinese sources that An Shigao (fl. 2nd century AD), a Parthian nobleman and Buddhist monk, traveled to Luoyang in Han China as a Buddhist missionary and translated several Buddhist canons into Chinese.[240]
Art and architecture[edit]
Further information: Parthian art




A barrel vaulted iwan at the entrance at the ancient site of Hatra, modern-day Iraq, built c. 50 AD


Parthian art can be divided into three geo-historical phases: the art of Parthia proper; the art of the Iranian plateau; and the art of Parthian Mesopotamia.[241] The first genuine Parthian art, found at Mithridatkert/Nisa, combined elements of Greek and Iranian art in line with Achaemenid and Seleucid traditions.[241] In the second phase, Parthian art found inspiration in Achaemenid art, as exemplified by the investiture relief of Mithridates II at Mount Behistun.[242] The third phase occurred gradually after the Parthian conquest of Mesopotamia.[242]
Common motifs of the Parthian period include scenes of royal hunting expeditions and the investiture of Arsacid kings.[243] Use of these motifs extended to include portrayals of local rulers.[241] Common art mediums were rock-reliefs, frescos, and even graffiti.[241] Geometric and stylized plant patterns were also used on stucco and plaster walls.[242] The common motif of the Sassanid period showing two horsemen engaged in combat with lances first appeared in the Parthian reliefs at Mount Behistun.[244]
In portraiture the Parthians favored and emphasized frontality, meaning the person depicted by painting, sculpture, or raised-relief on coins faced the viewer directly instead of showing his or her profile.[245] Although frontality in portraiture was already an old artistic technique by the Parthian period, Daniel Schlumberger explains the innovation of Parthian frontality:[246]

'Parthian frontality', as we are now accustomed to call it, deeply differs both from ancient Near Eastern and from Greek frontality, though it is, no doubt, an offspring of the latter. For both in Oriental art and in Greek art, frontality was an exceptional treatment: in Oriental art it was a treatment strictly reserved for a small number of traditional characters of cult and myth; in Greek art it was an option resorted to only for definite reasons, when demanded by the subject, and, on the whole, seldom made use of. With Parthian art, on the contrary, frontality becomes the normal treatment of the figure. For the Parthians frontality is really nothing but the habit of showing, in relief and in painting, all figures full-face, even at the expense (as it seems to us moderns) of clearness and intelligibility. So systematic is this use that it amounts to a complete banishment de facto of the side-view and of all intermediate attitudes. This singular state of things seems to have become established in the course of the 1st century A.D.[246]





A wall mural depicting a scene from the Book of Esther at the Dura-Europos synagogue, dated 245 AD, which Curtis[247] and Schlumberger[248] describe as a fine example of 'Parthian frontality'


Parthian art, with its distinct use of frontality in portraiture, was lost and abandoned with the profound cultural and political changes brought by the Sassanid Empire.[249] However, even after the Roman occupation of Dura-Europos in 165 AD, the use of Parthian frontality in portraiture continued to flourish there. This is exemplified by the early 3rd-century AD wall murals of the Dura-Europos synagogue, a temple in the same city dedicated to Palmyrene gods, and the local Mithraeum.[250]
Parthian architecture adopted elements of Achaemenid and Greek architecture, but remained distinct from the two. The style is first attested at Mithridatkert/Nisa.[251] The Round Hall of Nisa is similar to Hellenistic palaces, but different in that it forms a circle and vault inside a square space.[251] However, the artwork of Nisa, including marble statues and the carved scenes on ivory rhyton vessels, is unquestionably influenced by Greek art.[252]
A signature feature of Parthian architecture was the iwan, an audience hall supported by arches or barrel vaults and open on one side.[253] Use of the barrel vault replaced the Hellenic use of columns to support roofs.[242] Although the iwan was known during the Achaemenid period and earlier in smaller and subterranean structures, it was the Parthians who first built them on a monumental scale.[253] The earliest Parthian iwans are found at Seleucia, built in the early 1st century AD.[242] Monumental iwans are also commonly found in the ancient temples of Hatra and perhaps modeled on the Parthian style.[254] The largest Parthian iwans at that site have a span of 15 m (50 ft).[255]
Clothing and apparel[edit]




A statue of a young Palmyran in fine Parthian trousers, from a funerary stele at Palmyra, early 3rd century AD


The typical Parthian riding outfit is exemplified by the famous bronze statue of a Parthian nobleman found at Shami, Elymais. Standing 1.9 m (6 ft), the figure wears a V-shaped jacket, a V-shaped tunic fastened in place with a belt, loose-fitting and many-folded trousers held by garters, and a diadem or band over his coiffed, bobbed hair.[256] His outfit is commonly seen in relief images of Parthian coins by the mid-1st century BC.[219]
Examples of clothing in Parthian inspired sculptures have been found in excavations at Hatra, in northwestern Iraq. Statues erected there feature the typical Parthian shirt (qamis), combined with trousers and made with fine, ornamented materials.[257] The aristocratic elite of Hatra adopted the bobbed hairstyles, headdresses, and belted tunics worn by the nobility belonging to the central Arsacid court.[254] The trouser-suit was even worn by the Arsacid kings, as shown on the reverse images of coins.[258] The Parthian trouser-suit was also adopted in Palmyra, Syria, along with the use of Parthian frontality in art.[259]
Parthian sculptures depict wealthy women wearing long-sleeved robes over a dress, with necklaces, earrings, bracelets, and headdresses bedecked in jewelry.[260] Their many-folded dresses were fastened by a brooch at one shoulder.[254] Their headdresses also featured a veil which was draped backwards.[254]
As seen in Parthian coinage, the headdresses worn by the Parthian kings changed over time. The earliest Arsacid coins show rulers wearing the soft cap with cheek flaps, known as the bashlyk (Greek: kyrbasia).[261] This may have derived from an Achaemenid-era satrapal headdress and the pointy hats depicted in the Achaemenid reliefs at Behistun and Persepolis.[262] The earliest coins of Mithridates I show him wearing the soft cap, yet coins from the latter part of his reign show him for the first time wearing the royal Hellenistic diadem.[263] Mithridates II was the first to be shown wearing the Parthian tiara, embroidered with pearls and jewels, a headdress commonly worn in the late Parthian period and by Sassanid monarchs.[264]
Language[edit]
As culturally and religiously tolerant as the Parthians were, they adopted Greek as their official language,[2] while Aramaic remained the lingua franca in the empire.[2] The native Parthian language, Middle Persian, and Akkadian were also used.
Writing and literature[edit]




A sculpted head (broken off from a larger statue) of a Parthian soldier wearing a Hellenistic-style helmet, from the Parthian royal residence and necropolis of Nisa, Turkmenistan, 2nd century BC


It is known that during the Parthian period the court minstrel (gōsān) recited poetic oral literature accompanied by music. However, their stories, composed in verse form, were not written down until the subsequent Sassanian period.[265] In fact, there is no known Parthian-language literature that survives in original form, since it was written down in the following centuries.[266] It is believed that such stories as the romantic tale Vis and Rāmin and epic cycle of the Kayanian dynasty were part of the corpus of oral literature from Parthian times, although compiled much later.[267] Although literature of the Parthian language was not committed to written form, there is evidence that the Arsacids acknowledged and respected written Greek literature.[268]
Chronological table of Parthian kings[edit]
Main article: List of Parthian kings
Further information: List of rulers of Parthian sub-kingdoms
See also[edit]

Assyria (Roman province)
Baghdad Battery
Battle of Nisibis (217)
Arsacid dynasty of Iberia
Arsacid dynasty of Caucasian Albania
Romans in Persia
History of Iran
Inscription of Parthian imperial power


Notes[edit]


^ a b Fattah, Hala Mundhir (2009). A Brief History Of Iraq. Infobase Publishing. p. 46. ISBN 978-0-8160-5767-2. One characteristic of the Parthians that the kings themselves maintained was their nomadic urge. The kings built or occupied numerous cities as their capitals, the most important being Ctesiphon on the Tigris River, which they built from the ancient town of Opis. 
^ a b c d Green 1992, p. 45
^ Skjaervo, Prods Oktor. "IRAN vi. IRANIAN LANGUAGES AND SCRIPTS (2) Doc – Encyclopaedia Iranica". www.iranicaonline.org. Encyclopedia Iranica. Retrieved 8 February 2017. Parthian. This was the local language of the area east of the Caspian Sea and official language of the Parthian state (see ARSACIDS) and is known from inscriptions on stone and metal, including coins and seals, and from large archives of potsherd labels on wine jars from the Parthian capital of Nisa, as well as from the Manichean texts. 
^ Chyet, Michael L. (1997). Afsaruddin, Asma; Krotkoff, Georg; Zahniser, A. H. Mathias, eds. Humanism, Culture, and Language in the Near East: Studies in Honor of Georg Krotkoff. Eisenbrauns. p. 284. ISBN 978-1-57506-020-0. In the Middle Persian period (Parthian and Sassanid Empires), Aramaic was the medium of everyday writing, and it provided scripts for writing Middle Persian, Parthian, Sogdian, and Khwarezmian. 
^ Brosius, Maria (2006). The Persians. Routledge. p. 125. ISBN 978-0-203-06815-1. The Parthians and the peoples of the Parthian empire were polytheistic. Each ethnic group, each city, and each land or kingdom was able to adhere to its own gods, their respective cults and religious rituals. In Babylon the city-god Marduk continued to be the main deity alongside the goddesses Ishtar and Nanai, while Hatra's main god, the sun-god Shamash, was revered alongside a multiplicity of other gods. 
^ Sheldon 2010, p. 231
^ Turchin, Peter; Adams, Jonathan M.; Hall, Thomas D (December 2006). "East-West Orientation of Historical Empires". Journal of world-systems research. 12 (2): 223. ISSN 1076-156X. Retrieved 16 September 2016. 
^ Taagepera, Rein (1979). "Size and Duration of Empires: Growth-Decline Curves, 600 B.C. to 600 A.D". Social Science History. 3 (3/4): 121. doi:10.2307/1170959. Retrieved 16 September 2016. 
^ From Ancient Greek Ἀρσάκης Arsakēs, from Parthian 𐭀𐭓𐭔𐭊 Aršak.
^ Waters 1974, p. 424.
^ Brosius 2006, p. 84
^ "roughly western Khurasan" Bickerman 1983, p. 6.
^ Ball 2016, p. 155
^ Katouzian 2009, p. 41; Curtis 2007, p. 7; Bivar 1983, pp. 24–27; Brosius 2006, pp. 83–84
^ Bivar 1983, p. 24; Brosius 2006, p. 84
^ Bivar 1983, pp. 24–27; Brosius 2006, pp. 83–84
^ Curtis 2007, pp. 7–8; Brosius 2006, pp. 83–84
^ Bivar 1983, pp. 28–29
^ a b Curtis 2007, p. 7
^ a b c Katouzian 2009, p. 41
^ Garthwaite 2005, p. 67
^ a b Brosius 2006, p. 85
^ Bivar 1983, pp. 29–31
^ a b Curtis 2007, p. 8
^ a b Brosius 2006, p. 86
^ Bivar 1983, p. 36
^ Bivar 1983, pp. 98–99
^ Ashrafian, Hutan. (2011), "Limb gigantism, neurofibromatosis and royal heredity in the Ancient World 2500 years ago: Achaemenids and Parthians", J Plast Reconstr Aesthet Surg, 64 (4): 557, doi:10.1016/j.bjps.2010.08.025, PMID 20832372. [permanent dead link]
^ a b Brosius 2006, pp. 85–86
^ a b Bivar 1983, p. 29; Brosius 2006, p. 86; Kennedy 1996, p. 74
^ Bivar 1983, pp. 29–31; Brosius 2006, p. 86
^ Bivar 1983, p. 31
^ Bivar 1983, p. 33; Brosius 2006, p. 86
^ Curtis 2007, pp. 10–11; Bivar 1983, p. 33; Garthwaite 2005, p. 76
^ a b Curtis 2007, pp. 10–11; Brosius 2006, pp. 86–87; Bivar 1983, p. 34; Garthwaite 2005, p. 76;
^ Garthwaite 2005, p. 76; Bivar 1983, p. 35
^ Brosius 2006, pp. 103, 110–113
^ Kennedy 1996, p. 73; Garthwaite 2005, p. 77
^ Garthwaite 2005, p. 77; Bivar 1983, pp. 38–39
^ a b Brosius 2006, p. 103
^ Bivar 1983, p. 34
^ Brosius 2006, p. 89; Bivar 1983, p. 35; Shayegan 2007, pp. 83–103
^ Bivar 1983, pp. 36–37; Curtis 2007, p. 11; Shayegan 2011, pp. 121–150
^ Garthwaite 2005, pp. 76–77; Bivar 1983, pp. 36–37; Curtis 2007, p. 11
^ Shayegan 2011, pp. 145–150
^ Bivar 1983, pp. 37–38; Garthwaite 2005, p. 77; see also Brosius 2006, p. 90 and Katouzian 2009, pp. 41–42
^ Torday 1997, pp. 80–81
^ Garthwaite 2005, p. 76; Bivar 1983, pp. 36–37; Brosius 2006, pp. 89, 91
^ Brosius 2006, p. 89
^ Bivar 1983, p. 38; Garthwaite 2005, p. 77
^ Bivar 1983, pp. 38–39; Garthwaite 2005, p. 77; Curtis 2007, p. 11; Katouzian 2009, p. 42
^ Bivar 1983, pp. 38–39
^ Bivar 1983, pp. 40–41; Katouzian 2009, p. 42
^ Garthwaite 2005, p. 78
^ Bivar 1983, p. 40; Curtis 2007, pp. 11–12; Brosius 2006, p. 90
^ Curtis 2007, pp. 11–12
^ Brosius 2006, pp. 91–92; Bivar 1983, pp. 40–41
^ a b Bivar 2007, p. 26
^ Bivar 1983, p. 41
^ Brosius 2006, pp. 90–91; Watson 1983, pp. 540–542; Garthwaite 2005, pp. 77–78
^ Garthwaite 2005, p. 78; Brosius 2006, pp. 122–123
^ Brosius 2006, pp. 123–125
^ Wang 2007, pp. 100–101
^ Kurz 1983, p. 560
^ Ebrey 1999, p. 70; for an archaeological survey of Roman glasswares in ancient Chinese burials, see An 2002, pp. 79–84
^ Howard 2012, p. 133
^ a b Brosius 2006, p. 92
^ Kennedy 1996, pp. 73–78; Brosius 2006, p. 91; Sheldon 2010, pp. 12–16
^ a b Kennedy 1996, pp. 77–78
^ Bivar 1983, pp. 41–44; also see Garthwaite 2005, p. 78
^ Brosius 2006, pp. 91–92
^ Bivar 1983, pp. 44–45
^ Bivar 1983, pp. 45–46; Brosius 2006, p. 94
^ Bivar 1983, pp. 46–47
^ Bivar 1983, p. 47; Cassius Dio writes that Lucius Afranius reoccupied the region without confronting the Parthian army, whereas Plutarch asserts that Afranius drove him out by military means.
^ Bivar 1983, pp. 48–49; see also Katouzian 2009, pp. 42–43
^ Bivar 1983, pp. 48–49; also, Brosius 2006, pp. 94–95 mentions this in passing.
^ Bivar 1983, p. 49
^ Bivar 1983, pp. 49–50; Katouzian 2009, pp. 42–43
^ Bivar 1983, pp. 55–56; Garthwaite 2005, p. 79; see also Brosius 2006, pp. 94–95 and Curtis 2007, pp. 12–13
^ Bivar 1983, pp. 52–55
^ a b Bivar 1983, p. 52
^ Bivar 1983, pp. 52–55; Brosius 2006, pp. 94–95; Garthwaite 2005, pp. 78–79
^ Katouzian 2009, pp. 42–43; Garthwaite 2005, p. 79; Bivar 1983, pp. 52–55; Brosius 2006, p. 96
^ Bivar 1983, pp. 52–55; Brosius 2006, p. 96
^ a b Kennedy 1996, p. 78
^ Bivar 1983, pp. 55–56; Brosius 2006, p. 96
^ Kennedy 1996, p. 80 asserts that permanent occupation was the obvious goal of the Parthians, especially after the cities of Roman Syria and even the Roman garrisons submitted to the Parthians and joined their cause.
^ Kennedy 1996, pp. 78–79; Bivar 1983, p. 56
^ Bivar 1983, pp. 56–57; Strugnell 2006, p. 243
^ a b c Bivar 1983, p. 57; Strugnell 2006, p. 244; Kennedy 1996, p. 80
^ Syme 1939, pp. 214–217
^ Bivar 1983, p. 57
^ a b Bivar 1983, pp. 57–58; Strugnell 2006, pp. 239, 245; Brosius 2006, p. 96; Kennedy 1996, p. 80
^ Bivar 1983, p. 58; Brosius 2006, p. 96; Kennedy 1996, pp. 80–81; see also Strugnell 2006, pp. 239, 245–246
^ Garthwaite 2005, p. 79
^ Bivar 1983, pp. 58–59; Kennedy 1996, p. 81
^ Bivar 1983, pp. 58–59
^ Bivar 1983, pp. 60–63; Garthwaite 2005, p. 80; Curtis 2007, p. 13; see also Kennedy 1996, p. 81 for analysis on Rome's shift of attention away from Syria to the Upper Euphrates, starting with Antony.
^ a b Bivar 1983, pp. 64–65
^ Bivar 1983, pp. 65–66
^ Garthwaite 2005, p. 80; see also Strugnell 2006, pp. 251–252
^ Bivar 1983, pp. 66–67
^ Brosius 2006, pp. 96–97; 136–137; Bivar 1983, pp. 66–67; Curtis 2007, pp. 12–13
^ Bivar 1983, p. 67; Brosius 2006, pp. 96–99
^ Bivar 1983, p. 68; Brosius 2006, pp. 97–99; see also Garthwaite 2005, p. 80
^ Bivar 1983, pp. 68–69; Brosius 2006, pp. 97–99
^ Bivar 1983, pp. 69–71
^ Bivar 1983, p. 71
^ Bivar 1983, pp. 71–72
^ Bivar 1983, pp. 72–73
^ See Brosius 2006, pp. 137–138 for more information on Roman coins depicting Parthians returning the lost military standards to Rome.
^ Bivar 1983, p. 73
^ Bivar 1983, pp. 73–74
^ Bivar 1983, pp. 75–76
^ Bivar 1983, pp. 76–78
^ a b Watson 1983, pp. 543–544
^ Watson 1983, pp. 543–544; Yü 1986, pp. 460–461; de Crespigny 2007, pp. 239–240; see also Wang 2007, p. 101
^ Wood 2002, pp. 46–47; Morton & Lewis 2005, p. 59
^ Yü 1986, pp. 460–461; de Crespigny 2007, p. 600
^ Young 2001, p. 29; Mawer 2013, p. 38; Ball 2016, p. 153
^ Bivar 1983, p. 79
^ Bivar 1983, pp. 79–81; Kennedy 1996, p. 81
^ Garthwaite 2005, p. 82; Bivar 1983, pp. 79–81
^ Bausani 1971, p. 41
^ Bivar 1983, p. 81
^ Bivar 1983, pp. 81–85
^ Bivar 1983, pp. 83–85
^ Brosius 2006, pp. 99–100; Bivar 1983, p. 85
^ Bivar 1983, p. 86
^ Kennedy 1996, pp. 67, 87–88
^ Kennedy 1996, p. 87
^ Kennedy 1996, pp. 87–88; see also Kurz 1983, pp. 561–562
^ Sheldon 2010, pp. 231–232
^ Sheldon 2010, pp. 9–10, 231–235
^ Bivar 1983, pp. 86–87
^ Bivar 1983, p. 88; Curtis 2007, p. 13; Lightfoot 1990, p. 117
^ Lightfoot 1990, pp. 117–118; see also Bivar 1983, pp. 90–91
^ Bivar 1983, pp. 88–89
^ Dr. Aaron Ralby (2013). "Emperor Trajan, 98—117: Greatest Extent of Rome". Atlas of Military History. Parragon. p. 239. ISBN 978-1-4723-0963-1. 
^ Bivar 1983, pp. 88–90; Garthwaite 2005, p. 81; Lightfoot 1990, p. 120; see also Katouzian 2009, p. 44
^ Bivar 1983, pp. 90–91
^ Lightfoot 1990, p. 120; Bivar 1983, pp. 90–91
^ Bivar 1983, p. 91; Curtis 2007, p. 13; Garthwaite 2005, p. 81
^ Mommsen 2004, p. 69
^ Bivar 1983, pp. 90–91; see also Brosius 2006, p. 137 and Curtis 2007, p. 13
^ Lightfoot 1990, pp. 120–124
^ Brosius 2006, p. 100; see also Lightfoot 1990, p. 115; Garthwaite 2005, p. 81; and Bivar 1983, p. 91
^ Bivar 1983, pp. 92–93
^ Bivar 1983, p. 93
^ Brosius 2006, p. 100; Bivar 1983, pp. 93–94
^ Curtis 2007, p. 13; Bivar 1983, pp. 93–94
^ Brosius 2006, p. 100; Curtis 2007, p. 13; Bivar 1983, p. 94; Katouzian 2009, p. 44
^ a b Bivar 1983, pp. 94–95
^ Brosius 2006, pp. 100–101; see also Katouzian 2009, p. 44, who mentions this in passing
^ a b Brosius 2006, p. 101; Bivar 1983, pp. 95–96; Curtis 2007, p. 14; see also Katouzian 2009, p. 44
^ Bivar 1983, pp. 95–96
^ Frye 1983, pp. 173–174
^ (Shapur Shahbazi 2005)
^ Norman A. Stillman The Jews of Arab Lands pp 22 Jewish Publication Society, 1979 ISBN 0-8276-1155-2
^ International Congress of Byzantine Studies Proceedings of the 21st International Congress of Byzantine Studies, London, 21–26 August 2006, Volumes 1–3 pp 29. Ashgate Pub Co, 30 sep. 2006 ISBN 0-7546-5740-X
^ Widengren 1983, pp. 1261–1262
^ Yarshater 1983, p. 359
^ Widengren 1983, p. 1261
^ Garthwaite 2005, pp. 75–76
^ Boyce 1983, pp. 1151–1152
^ Garthwaite 2005, p. 67; Widengren 1983, p. 1262; Brosius 2006, pp. 79–80
^ a b Widengren 1983, p. 1262
^ Widengren 1983, p. 1265
^ Garthwaite 2005, pp. 75–76; Widengren 1983, p. 1263; Brosius 2006, pp. 118–119
^ Widengren 1983, p. 1263; Brosius 2006, pp. 118–119
^ Garthwaite 2005, pp. 67, 75; Bivar 1983, p. 22
^ Garthwaite 2005, p. 75; Bivar 1983, pp. 80–81
^ Kurz 1983, p. 564; see also Brosius 2006, p. 138 for further analysis: "Curiously, at the same time as the Parthian was depicted as uncivilised, he was also 'orientalised' in traditional fashion, being described as luxury-loving, leading an effeminate lifestyle, and demonstrating excessive sexuality."
^ Widengren 1983, pp. 1261, 1264
^ Widengren 1983, p. 1264
^ Widengren 1983, pp. 1265–1266
^ a b Widengren 1983, pp. 1265, 1267
^ Brosius 2006, p. 80; Posch 1998, p. 363
^ Posch 1998, p. 358
^ Watson 1983, pp. 541–542
^ Wang 2007, p. 90
^ Wang 2007, p. 88
^ Wang 2007, pp. 89–90; Brosius 2006, pp. 90–91, 122
^ Brosius 2006, p. 118; see also Wang 2007, p. 90 for a similar translation
^ Garthwaite 2005, pp. 67–68
^ Widengren 1983, p. 1263
^ Lukonin 1983, p. 701
^ Lukonin 1983, p. 701; Curtis 2007, pp. 19–21
^ Brosius 2006, pp. 113–114
^ Brosius 2006, pp. 115–116
^ Brosius 2006, pp. 114–115
^ a b Brosius 2006, pp. 103–104
^ Brosius 2006, p. 119
^ Lukonin 1983, pp. 699–700
^ Lukonin 1983, pp. 700–704
^ Brosius 2006, pp. 99–100, 104
^ Brosius 2006, pp. 104–105, 117–118
^ "Strabo, Geography, Book 11, chapter 9, section 3". www.perseus.tufts.edu. Retrieved 2017-09-11. 
^ Lukonin 1983, pp. 704–705
^ Lukonin 1983, p. 704; Brosius 2006, p. 104
^ Ashrafian, Hutan. (2011). "Limb gigantism, neurofibromatosis and royal heredity in the Ancient World 2500 years ago: Achaemenids and Parthians". J Plast Reconstr Aesthet Surg. 64: 557. doi:10.1016/j.bjps.2010.08.025. PMID 20832372. 
^ Brosius 2006, pp. 116, 122; Sheldon 2010, pp. 231–232
^ a b Kennedy 1996, p. 84
^ Wang 2007, pp. 99–100
^ a b Brosius 2006, p. 120; Garthwaite 2005, p. 78
^ Brosius 2006, p. 120; Kennedy 1996, p. 84
^ Brosius 2006, pp. 116–118; see also Garthwaite 2005, p. 78 and Kennedy 1996, p. 84
^ Brosius 2006, p. 120; Garthwaite 2005, p. 78; Kurz 1983, p. 561
^ Brosius 2006, p. 122
^ a b Kennedy 1996, p. 83
^ Curtis 2007, pp. 9, 11–12, 16
^ Curtis 2007, pp. 7–25; Sellwood 1983, pp. 279–298
^ Sellwood 1983, p. 280
^ Sellwood 1983, p. 282
^ Curtis 2007, pp. 14–15; see also Katouzian 2009, p. 45
^ Garthwaite 2005, p. 85; Curtis 2007, pp. 14–15
^ Curtis 2007, p. 11
^ a b Curtis 2007, p. 16
^ Garthwaite 2005, pp. 80–81; see also Curtis 2007, p. 21 and Schlumberger 1983, p. 1030
^ Schlumberger 1983, p. 1030
^ Bivar 1983, p. 56
^ a b Shahbazi 1987, p. 525
^ Garthwaite 2005, p. 85; Brosius 2006, pp. 128–129
^ Lukonin 1983, p. 697
^ Lukonin 1983, p. 687; Shahbazi 1987, p. 525
^ Duchesne-Guillemin 1983, pp. 867–868
^ a b Katouzian 2009, p. 45
^ Neusner 1983, pp. 909–923
^ Asmussen 1983, pp. 924–928
^ a b Brosius 2006, p. 125
^ Garthwaite 2005, pp. 68, 83–84; Colpe 1983, p. 823; Brosius 2006, p. 125
^ Duchesne-Guillemin 1983, pp. 872–873
^ Colpe 1983, p. 844
^ Katouzian 2009, p. 45; Brosius 2006, pp. 102–103
^ Bivar 1983, pp. 85–86; Garthwaite 2005, pp. 80–81; Duchesne-Guillemin 1983, p. 867
^ Garthwaite 2005, p. 67; Asmussen 1983, pp. 928, 933–934
^ Bivar 1983, p. 97
^ Emmerick 1983, p. 957
^ Demiéville 1986, p. 823; Zhang 2002, p. 75
^ a b c d Brosius 2006, p. 127
^ a b c d e Brosius 2006, p. 128
^ Brosius 2006, p. 127; see also Schlumberger 1983, pp. 1041–1043
^ Brosius 2006, pp. 129, 132
^ Brosius 2006, p. 127; Garthwaite 2005, p. 84; Schlumberger 1983, pp. 1049–1050
^ a b Schlumberger 1983, p. 1051
^ Curtis 2007, p. 18
^ Schlumberger 1983, pp. 1052–1053
^ Schlumberger 1983, p. 1053
^ Curtis 2007, p. 18; Schlumberger 1983, pp. 1052–1053
^ a b Brosius 2006, pp. 111–112
^ Brosius 2006, pp. 111–112, 127–128; Schlumberger 1983, pp. 1037–1041
^ a b Garthwaite 2005, p. 84; Brosius 2006, p. 128; Schlumberger 1983, p. 1049
^ a b c d Brosius 2006, pp. 134–135
^ Schlumberger 1983, p. 1049
^ Brosius 2006, pp. 132–134
^ Bivar 1983, pp. 91–92
^ Curtis 2007, p. 15
^ Curtis 2007, p. 17
^ Brosius 2006, pp. 108, 134–135
^ Brosius 2006, p. 101
^ Curtis 2007, p. 8; see also Sellwood 1983, pp. 279–280 for comparison with Achaemenid satrapal headdresses
^ Brosius 2006, pp. 101–102; Curtis 2007, p. 9
^ Brosius 2006, pp. 101–102; Curtis 2007, p. 15
^ Brosius 2006, p. 106
^ Boyce 1983, p. 1151
^ Boyce 1983, pp. 1158–1159
^ Boyce 1983, pp. 1154–1155; see also Kennedy 1996, p. 74


References[edit]


An, Jiayao (2002), "When Glass Was Treasured in China", in Juliano, Annette L. and Judith A. Lerner, Silk Road Studies: Nomads, Traders, and Holy Men Along China's Silk Road, 7, Turnhout: Brepols Publishers, pp. 79–94, ISBN 2-503-52178-9 .
Asmussen, J.P. (1983), "Christians in Iran", in Yarshater, Ehsan, Cambridge History of Iran, 3.2, London & New York: Cambridge University Press, pp. 924–948, ISBN 0-521-20092-X .
Ball, Warwick (2016), Rome in the East: Transformation of an Empire, 2nd Edition, London & New York: Routledge, ISBN 978-0-415-72078-6 .
Bausani, Alessandro (1971), The Persians, from the earliest days to the twentieth century, New York: St. Martin's Press, p. 41, ISBN 978-0-236-17760-8 .
Bickerman, Elias J. (1983), "The Seleucid Period", in Yarshater, Ehsan, Cambridge History of Iran, 3.1, London & New York: Cambridge University Press, pp. 3–20, ISBN 0-521-20092-X .
Bivar, A.D.H. (1983), "The Political History of Iran Under the Arsacids", in Yarshater, Ehsan, Cambridge History of Iran, 3.1, London & New York: Cambridge University Press, pp. 21–99, ISBN 0-521-20092-X .
Bivar, A.D.H. (2007), "Gondophares and the Indo-Parthians", in Curtis, Vesta Sarkhosh and Sarah Stewart, The Age of the Parthians: The Ideas of Iran, 2, London & New York: I.B. Tauris & Co Ltd., in association with the London Middle East Institute at SOAS and the British Museum, pp. 26–36, ISBN 978-1-84511-406-0 .
Boyce, Mary (1983), "Parthian Writings and Literature", in Yarshater, Ehsan, Cambridge History of Iran, 3.2, London & New York: Cambridge University Press, pp. 1151–1165, ISBN 0-521-20092-X .
Brosius, Maria (2006), The Persians: An Introduction, London & New York: Routledge, ISBN 0-415-32089-5 .
Colpe, Carsten (1983), "Development of Religious Thought", in Yarshater, Ehsan, Cambridge History of Iran, 3.2, London & New York: Cambridge University Press, pp. 819–865, ISBN 0-521-20092-X .
Curtis, Vesta Sarkhosh (2007), "The Iranian Revival in the Parthian Period", in Curtis, Vesta Sarkhosh and Sarah Stewart, The Age of the Parthians: The Ideas of Iran, 2, London & New York: I.B. Tauris & Co Ltd., in association with the London Middle East Institute at SOAS and the British Museum, pp. 7–25, ISBN 978-1-84511-406-0 .
de Crespigny, Rafe (2007), A Biographical Dictionary of Later Han to the Three Kingdoms (23–220 AD), Leiden: Koninklijke Brill, ISBN 90-04-15605-4 .
Demiéville, Paul (1986), "Philosophy and religion from Han to Sui", in Twitchett and Loewe, Cambridge History of China: the Ch'in and Han Empires, 221 B.C. – A.D. 220, 1, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 808–872, ISBN 0-521-24327-0 .
Duchesne-Guillemin, J. (1983), "Zoroastrian religion", in Yarshater, Ehsan, Cambridge History of Iran, 3.2, London & New York: Cambridge University Press, pp. 866–908, ISBN 0-521-20092-X .
Ebrey, Patricia Buckley (1999), The Cambridge Illustrated History of China, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ISBN 0-521-66991-X  (paperback).
Emmerick, R.E. (1983), "Buddhism Among Iranian Peoples", in Yarshater, Ehsan, Cambridge History of Iran, 3.2, London & New York: Cambridge University Press, pp. 949–964, ISBN 0-521-20092-X .
Frye, R.N. (1983), "The Political History of Iran Under the Sasanians", in Yarshater, Ehsan, Cambridge History of Iran, 3.1, London & New York: Cambridge University Press, pp. 116–180, ISBN 0-521-20092-X .
Garthwaite, Gene Ralph (2005), The Persians, Oxford & Carlton: Blackwell Publishing, Ltd., ISBN 1-55786-860-3 .
Green, Tamara M. (1992), The City of the Moon God: Religious Traditions of Harran, BRILL, ISBN 90-04-09513-6 .
Howard, Michael C. (2012), Transnationalism in Ancient and Medieval Societies: the Role of Cross Border Trade and Travel, Jefferson: McFarland & Company .
Katouzian, Homa (2009), The Persians: Ancient, Medieval, and Modern Iran, New Haven & London: Yale University Press, ISBN 978-0-300-12118-6 .
Kennedy, David (1996), "Parthia and Rome: eastern perspectives", The Roman Army in the East, Ann Arbor: Cushing Malloy Inc., Journal of Roman Archaeology: Supplementary Series Number Eighteen, pp. 67–90, ISBN 1-887829-18-0 
Kurz, Otto (1983), "Cultural Relations Between Parthia and Rome", in Yarshater, Ehsan, Cambridge History of Iran, 3.1, London & New York: Cambridge University Press, pp. 559–567, ISBN 0-521-20092-X .
Lightfoot, C.S. (1990), "Trajan's Parthian War and the Fourth-Century Perspective", The Journal of Roman Studies, 80: 115–126, doi:10.2307/300283, JSTOR 300283 
Lukonin, V.G. (1983), "Political, Social and Administrative Institutions: Taxes and Trade", in Yarshater, Ehsan, Cambridge History of Iran, 3.2, London & New York: Cambridge University Press, pp. 681–746, ISBN 0-521-20092-X .
Mawer, Granville Allen (2013), "The Riddle of Cattigara", in Nichols, Robert; Woods, Martin, Mapping Our World: Terra Incognita to Australia, Canberra: National Library of Australia, pp. 38–39, ISBN 978-0-642-27809-8 .
Mommsen, Theodor (2004) [original publication 1909 by Ares Publishers, Inc.], The Provinces of the Roman Empire: From Caesar to Diocletian, 2, Piscataway (New Jersey): Gorgias Press, ISBN 1-59333-026-X .
Morton, William S.; Lewis, Charlton M. (2005), China: Its History and Culture, New York: McGraw-Hill, ISBN 0-07-141279-4 .
Neusner, J. (1983), "Jews in Iran", in Yarshater, Ehsan, Cambridge History of Iran, 3.2, London & New York: Cambridge University Press, pp. 909–923, ISBN 0-521-20092-X .
Posch, Walter (1998), "Chinesische Quellen zu den Parthern", in Weisehöfer, Josef, Das Partherreich und seine Zeugnisse, Historia: Zeitschrift für alte Geschichte, vol. 122 (in German), Stuttgart: Franz Steiner, pp. 355–364 .
Schlumberger, Daniel (1983), "Parthian Art", in Yarshater, Ehsan, Cambridge History of Iran, 3.2, London & New York: Cambridge University Press, pp. 1027–1054, ISBN 0-521-20092-X .
Sellwood, David (1983), "Parthian Coins", in Yarshater, Ehsan, Cambridge History of Iran, 3.1, London & New York: Cambridge University Press, pp. 279–298, ISBN 0-521-20092-X .
Shahbazi, Shahpur A. (1987), "Arsacids. I. Origin", Encyclopaedia Iranica, 2: 255 
Shayegan, Rahim M. (2007), "On Demetrius II Nicator's Arsacid Captivity and Second Rule", Bulletin of the Asia Institute, 17: 83–103 
Shayegan, Rahim M. (2011), Arsacids and Sasanians: Political Ideology in Post-Hellenistic and Late Antique Persia, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ISBN 978-0-521-76641-8 
Sheldon, Rose Mary (2010), Rome's Wars in Parthia: Blood in the Sand, London & Portland: Valentine Mitchell, ISBN 978-0-85303-981-5 
Strugnell, Emma (2006), "Ventidius' Parthian War: Rome's Forgotten Eastern Triumph", Acta Antiqua, 46 (3): 239–252, doi:10.1556/AAnt.46.2006.3.3 
Syme, Ronald (1939), The Roman Revolution, Oxford: Oxford University Press, ISBN 0-19-280320-4 
Torday, Laszlo (1997), Mounted Archers: The Beginnings of Central Asian History, Durham: The Durham Academic Press, ISBN 1-900838-03-6 
Wang, Tao (2007), "Parthia in China: a Re-examination of the Historical Records", in Curtis, Vesta Sarkhosh and Sarah Stewart, The Age of the Parthians: The Ideas of Iran, 2, London & New York: I.B. Tauris & Co Ltd., in association with the London Middle East Institute at SOAS and the British Museum, pp. 87–104, ISBN 978-1-84511-406-0 .
Waters, Kenneth H. (1974), "The Reign of Trajan, part VII: Trajanic Wars and Frontiers. The Danube and the East", in Temporini, Hildegard, Aufstieg und Niedergang der römischen Welt. Principat. II.2, Berlin: Walter de Gruyter, pp. 415–427 .
Watson, William (1983), "Iran and China", in Yarshater, Ehsan, Cambridge History of Iran, 3.1, London & New York: Cambridge University Press, pp. 537–558, ISBN 0-521-20092-X .
Widengren, Geo (1983), "Sources of Parthian and Sasanian History", in Yarshater, Ehsan, Cambridge History of Iran, 3.2, London & New York: Cambridge University Press, pp. 1261–1283, ISBN 0-521-20092-X .
Wood, Frances (2002), The Silk Road: Two Thousand Years in the Heart of Asia, Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, ISBN 0-520-24340-4 .
Yarshater, Ehsan (1983), "Iranian National History", in Yarshater, Ehsan, Cambridge History of Iran, 3.1, London & New York: Cambridge University Press, pp. 359–480, ISBN 0-521-20092-X .
Yü, Ying-shih (1986), "Han Foreign Relations", in Twitchett, Denis and Michael Loewe, Cambridge History of China: the Ch'in and Han Empires, 221 B.C. – A.D. 220, 1, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 377–462, ISBN 0-521-24327-0 .
Young, Gary K. (2001), Rome's Eastern Trade: International Commerce and Imperial Policy, 31 BC - AD 305, London & New York: Routledge, ISBN 0-415-24219-3 .

Young, Gary K. (2001). Rome's Eastern Trade: International Commerce and Imperial Policy, 31 BC - AD 305. London & New York: Routledge, ISBN .

Zhang, Guanuda (2002), "The Role of the Sogdians as Translators of Buddhist Texts", in Juliano, Annette L. and Judith A. Lerner, Silk Road Studies: Nomads, Traders, and Holy Men Along China's Silk Road, 7, Turnhout: Brepols Publishers, pp. 75–78, ISBN 2-503-52178-9 .


Further reading[edit]


Neusner, J. (1963), "Parthian Political Ideology", Iranica Antiqua, 3: 40–59 
Schippmann, Klaus (1987), "Arsacid ii. The Arsacid dynasty", Encyclopaedia Iranica, 2, New York: Routledge & Kegan Paul, pp. 526–535 


External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Parthia.



Various articles from Iran Chamber Society (Parthian Empire, The Art of Parthians, Parthian Army)
Parthia.com (a website featuring the history, geography, coins, arts and culture of ancient Parthia, including a bibliographic list of scholarly sources)





Links to related articles











v
t
e


Parthian Empire



Origins



Parni
Dahae
Parni conquest of Parthia





Dynasty



List of Parthian kings
List of rulers of Parthian sub-kingdoms
Arsacid dynasty of Armenia
Arsacid dynasty of Iberia
Arsacid dynasty of Caucasian Albania
Seven Parthian clans
Chosroid dynasty
Indo-Parthian Kingdom





Culture



Parthian language
Parthian art





Wars



Seleucid–Parthian wars
Roman–Parthian Wars
Armenian–Parthian War





Other related topics



Parthia
Parthian shot
Roman–Iranian relations












v
t
e


Ancient Syria and Mesopotamia








Syria
Northern Mesopotamia
Southern Mesopotamia


c. 3500–2350 BCE
Martu
Subartu
Sumerian city-states


c. 2350–2200 BCE
Akkadian Empire


c. 2200–2100 BCE
Gutians


c. 2100–2000 BCE
Third Dynasty of Ur (Sumerian Renaissance)


c. 2000–1800 BCE
Mari and other Amorite city-states
Old Assyrian Empire (Northern Akkadians)
Isin/Larsa and other Amorite city-states


c. 1800–1600 BCE
Old Hittite Kingdom
Old Babylonian Empire (Southern Akkadians)


c. 1600–1400 BCE
Mitanni (Hurrians)
Karduniaš (Kassites)


c. 1400–1200 BCE
New Hittite Kingdom

Middle Assyrian Empire


c. 1200–1150 BCE
Bronze Age collapse ("Sea Peoples")
Arameans


c. 1150–911 BCE
Phoenicia
Syro-Hittite states
Aram-
Damascus
Arameans
Middle Babylonia (Isin II)
Chal
de-
ans


911–729 BCE
Neo-Assyrian Empire


729–609 BCE




626–539 BCE
Neo-Babylonian Empire (Chaldeans)


539–331 BCE
Achaemenid Empire (Persians)


336–301 BCE
Macedonian Empire (Ancient Greeks)


311–129 BCE
Seleucid Empire


129–63 BCE
Seleucid Empire
Parthian Empire (Iranians)


63 BCE – 243 CE
Roman Empire/Byzantine Empire (Syria)


243–636 CE
Sasanian Empire (Persians)













v
t
e


Ancient Mesopotamia



Geography




Modern



Euphrates
Upper Mesopotamia
Mesopotamian Marshes
Persian Gulf
Syrian Desert
Taurus Mountains
Tigris
Zagros Mountains





Ancient



Akkad
Assyria
Babylonia
Chaldea
Elam
Hittites
Media
Mitanni
Sumer
Urartu
Cities











History




Pre- / Protohistory



Acheulean
Mousterian
Trialetian
Zarzian
Natufian
Nemrikian
Khiamian
Pre-Pottery Neolithic A (PPNA)
Pre-Pottery Neolithic B (PPNB)
Hassuna/Samarra
Halaf
Ubaid
Uruk
Jemdet Nasr
Kish civilization





History



Early Dynastic
Akkadian
Ur III
Old Babylonian
Kassite
Neo-Assyrian
Neo-Babylonian
Achaemenid
Seleucid
Parthian
Roman
Sasanian
Muslim conquest
Timeline of the Assyrian Empire








Languages



Akkadian
Amorite
Aramaic
Eblaite
Elamite
Gutian
Hittite
Hurrian
Luwian
Middle Persian
Old Persian
Parthian
Proto-Armenian
Sumerian
Urartian





Culture / Society



Architecture
Art
Cuneiform script
Akkadian literature
Sumerian literature
Music
Religion





Archaeology



Looting
Destruction by ISIL
Tell






Portal










v
t
e


 Iran topics








History








Prehistory



Ancient




3400–550 BCE



Kura-Araxes culture (3400–2000 BC)
Proto-Elamite civilization (3200–2800 BC)
Elamite dynasties (2800–550 BC)
Akkadian Empire (c.2334 BC–c.2154 BC)
Kassites (c.1500–c.1155 BC)
Kingdom of Mannai (10th–7th century BC)
Neo-Assyrian Empire (911–609 BC)
Urartu (860 BC–590 BC)
Median Empire (728–550 BC)
(Scythian Kingdom) (652–625 BC)
Neo-Babylonian Empire (626–539 BC)





550 BC – 224 AD



Achaemenid Empire (550–330 AD)
Kingdom of Armenia (331 BC–428 AD)
Atropatene (320s BC–3rd century AD)
Kingdom of Cappadocia (320s BC–17 AD)
Seleucid Empire (330 BC–150 AD)
Kingdom of Pontus (281 BC–62 AD)
Parthian Empire (248 BC –  224 AD)





224–651 AD



Sasanian Empire (224–651 AD)








Medieval




637 – 1055



Patriarchal Caliphate (637–651)
Umayyad Caliphate (661–750)
Abbasid Caliphate (750–1258)
Tahirid dynasty (821–873)
Alavid dynasty (864–928)
Saffarid dynasty (861–1003)
Samanid dynasty (819–999)
Ziyarid dynasty (928–1043)
Buyid dynasty (934–1062)





975–1432



Ghaznavid Empire (975–1187)
Ghurid dynasty (1011–1215)
Seljuk Empire (1037–1194)
Khwarazmian dynasty (1077–1231)
Eldiguzids (1135/36-1225)
Ilkhanate (1256–1335)
Kurt dynasty (1231–1389)
Muzaffarid dynasty (1314–1393)
Chobanid dynasty (1337–1357)
Jalairid Sultanate dynasty (1339–1432)





1370–1925



Timurid Empire (1370–1507)
Qara Qoyunlu Turcomans (1375–1468)
Ag Qoyunlu Turcomans (1378–1508)
Safavid Empire (1501 – 1722 / 1736)
Afsharid dynasty (1736–50)
Zand Dynasty (1750–94)
Qajar Dynasty (1794–1925)

Khanates of the Caucasus (18th century–20th century)










Modern




1925–1979



Pahlavi dynasty (1925–1979)
Iran Constituent Assembly, 1949
1953 coup d'état
Iranian Revolution (1979)
Interim Government





Islamic Republic



History (1979–)
Arab separatism in Khuzestan

Embassy siege (1980)


Iran–Iraq War (1980–88)
Iranian pilgrim massacre (1987)
Iran Air Flight 655 shootdown (1988)
PJAK insurgency
Balochistan conflict
Syrian Civil War
Military intervention against ISIL








See also



Ancient Iran
Greater Iran
Iranic peoples (languages)
Kura–Araxes culture
Jiroft culture
Aryans
Persian people
Azerbaijanis
Caucasian peoples
Kings of Persia
Cities
Military history
History of democracy
List of years in Iran
















Geography






Cities (list)
Earthquakes
Iranian Azerbaijan
Iranian Balochistan
Caspian Hyrcanian mixed forests
Caucasus
Iranian Kurdistan
Iranian Plateau
Lake Urmia
Islands
Mountains
Provinces
Wildlife













Politics







General



Censorship
Constitution (Persian Constitutional Revolution)
Elections (2009 presidential
Green Revolution)
Foreign relations
Human rights (LGBT)
Judicial system
Military (Army
Air Force
Navy)
Ministry of Intelligence and National Security
Cyberwarfare
Nuclear program (UN Security Council Resolution 1747)
Political parties
Principlists
Propaganda
Reformists
Terrorism (state-sponsorship allegations)
White Revolution (1963)
Women's rights movement





Councils



Assembly (or Council) of Experts
Expediency Discernment Council
City and Village Councils
Guardian Council
Islamic Consultative Assembly (parliament)
Supreme National Security Council





Officials



Ambassadors
President
Provincial governors
Supreme Leader
















Economy







General



Bonyad (charitable trust)
Brain drain
Companies (Automotive industry)
Corruption
Economic Cooperation Organization (ECO)
Economic history
Economic Reform Plan
Energy
Environmental issues
Foreign direct investment
Intellectual property
International oil bourse
International rankings
Iran and the World Trade Organization
Taxation
Main economic laws
Economy of the Middle East
Milad Tower and complex
Military equipment manufactured
Nuclear program (UN Security Council Resolution 1747)
Privatization
Rial (currency)
Space Agency
Setad
Supreme Audit Court
Tehran Stock Exchange
Venture capital (Technology start-ups)





Sectors



Agriculture (fruit)
Banking and insurance (Banks (Central Bank)
Electronic banking)
Construction
Defense
Health care (Pharmaceuticals)
Industry
Mining
Petroleum (Anglo-Persian Oil Company)
Telecommunications and IT (TCI)
Transport (airlines
metro
railways
shipping)
Tourism





State-owned
companies



Defense Industries Organization (DIO)
Industrial Development and Renovation Organization (IDRO)
Iran Aviation Industries Organization (IAIO)
Iran Electronics Industries (IEI)
National Iranian Oil Company (NIOC)
National Development Fund





Places



Asaluyeh industrial corridor
Chabahar Free Trade-Industrial Zone
Kish Island Free Trade Zone
Research centers
















Society







Demographics




Languages



Persian (Farsi)
Armenian
Azerbaijani
Kurdish
Georgian
Neo-Aramaic
Iranian languages





Peoples



Iranian citizens (abroad)
Ethnic minorities

Armenians
Assyrians
Azerbaijanis
Circassians
Georgians
Kurds
Persian Jews
Turkmen







Religion



Islam
Bahá'í (persecution)
Christianity
Zoroastrians (persecution)
minorities





Other



Corruption
Crime
Education (higher
scientists and scholars
universities)
Brain drain
Health care
International rankings
Nationality
Water supply and sanitation
Women








Culture







Architecture (Achaemenid
architects)
Art (modern / contemporary)
Blogs
Calendars (Persian New Year (Nowruz))
Chādor (garment)
Chicago Persian antiquities dispute
Cinema
Crown jewels
Cuisine
Folklore
Intellectual movements
Iranians
Iranian studies
Islam (Islamization)
Literature
Media (news agencies (student)
newspapers)
Mythology
National symbols (Imperial Anthem)
Opium consumption
Persian gardens
Persian name
Philosophy
Public holidays
Scouting
Sport (football)





Music



Folk
Heavy metal
Pop
Rap and hip-hop
Rock and alternative
Traditional
Ey Iran








Other topics



Science and technology
Anti-Iranian sentiment
Tehrangeles














 Category
 Portal
 WikiProject
 Commons












v
t
e


Empires



Ancient



Akkadian
Egyptian
Assyrian
Babylonian
Carthaginian
Chinese

Qin
Han
Jin
Northern Wei


Hellenistic

Macedonian
Seleucid


Hittite
Indian

Nanda
Maurya
Satavahana
Shunga
Gupta
Harsha


Iranian

Median
Achaemenid
Parthian
Sasanian


Kushan
Mongol

Xianbei
Xiongnu


Roman

Western
Eastern


Teotihuacan





Post-classical



Arab

Rashidun
Umayyad
Abbasid
Fatimid
Córdoba


Aragonese
Angevin
Aztec
Benin
Bornu
Bruneian
Bulgarian

First
Second


Byzantine

Nicaea
Trebizond


Carolingian
Chinese

Sui
Tang
Song
Yuan


Ethiopian

Zagwe
Solomonic


Georgian
Hunnic
Inca
Indian

Chola
Gurjara-Pratihara
Pala
Eastern Ganga dynasty
Delhi
Vijayanagara


Iranian

Tahirid
Samanid
Buyid
Sallarid
Ziyarid


Kanem
Khmer
Latin
Majapahit
Malaccan
Mali
Mongol

Yuan
Golden Horde
Chagatai Khanate
Ilkhanate


Moroccan

Idrisid
Almoravid
Almohad
Marinid


North Sea
Oyo
Roman
Serbian
Somali

Ajuran
Ifatite
Adalite
Mogadishan
Warsangali


Songhai
Srivijaya
Tibetan
Turko-Persian

Ghaznavid
Great Seljuk
Khwarezmian
Timurid


Vietnamese

Ly
Tran
Le


Wagadou





Modern



Ashanti
Austrian
Austro-Hungarian
Brazilian
Central African
Chinese

Ming
Qing
China
Manchukuo


Ethiopian
French

First
Second


German

First/Old Reich
Second Reich
Third Reich


Haitian

First
Second


Indian

Maratha
Sikh
Mughal
British Raj


Iranian

Safavid
Afsharid
Zand
Qajar
Pahlavi


Japanese
Johor
Korean
Mexican

First
Second


Moroccan

Saadi
Alaouite


Russian
USSR
Somali

Gobroon
Majeerteen
Hobyo
Dervish


Swedish
Tongan
Turkish

Ottoman
Karaman
Ramazan


Vietnamese

Tay Son
Nguyen
Vietnam







Colonial



American
Belgian
British

English


Danish
Dutch
French
German
Italian
Japanese
Omani
Norwegian
Portuguese
Spanish
Swedish





Lists



Empires

largest


ancient great powers
medieval great powers
modern great powers











Coordinates: 33°05′37″N 44°34′51″E﻿ / ﻿33.09361°N 44.58083°E﻿ / 33.09361; 44.58083





						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Parthian_Empire&oldid=818301290"					Categories: Parthian EmpireFormer countries in AsiaFormer empires in AsiaSeleucid Empire successor statesStates and territories established in the 3rd century BCStates and territories disestablished in the 3rd century247 BC240s BC establishments224 disestablishmentsHistory of IranArsacid dynastyAncient history of IraqAncient history of AfghanistanHistory of ArmeniaHistory of Georgia (country)History of AzerbaijanHistory of SyriaClassical AnatoliaHistory of the CaucasusHistory of TurkmenistanHistory of the Middle EastHistory of Western AsiaSuperpowersHidden categories: Articles containing Ancient Greek-language textArticles containing Parthian-language textAll articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from September 2017Articles with permanently dead external linksFormer country articles requiring maintenanceCS1 German-language sources (de)Featured articlesCoordinates on Wikidata