For other uses of the word "particle" in physics and elsewhere, see particle (disambiguation).


Standard Model of particle physics



Elementary particles of the standard model





Background
Particle physics
Standard Model
Quantum field theory
Gauge theory
Spontaneous symmetry breaking
Higgs mechanism






Constituents
Electroweak interaction
Quantum chromodynamics
CKM matrix
Standard Model mathematics






Limitations
Strong CP problem
Hierarchy problem
Neutrino oscillations
Physics beyond the Standard Model






Scientists
Rutherford · Thomson · Chadwick · Bose · Sudarshan · Koshiba · Davis Jr. · Anderson · Fermi · Dirac · Feynman · Rubbia · Gell-Mann · Kendall · Taylor · Friedman · Powell · P. W. Anderson · Glashow · Iliopoulos · Maiani · Meer · Cowan · Nambu · Chamberlain · Cabibbo · Schwartz · Perl · Majorana · Weinberg · Lee · Ward · Salam · Kobayashi · Maskawa · Yang · Yukawa · 't Hooft · Veltman · Gross · Politzer · Wilczek · Cronin · Fitch · Vleck · Higgs · Englert · Brout · Hagen · Guralnik  · Kibble  · Ting · Richter







v
t
e





Particle physics (also high energy physics) is the branch of physics that studies the nature of the particles that constitute matter and radiation. Although the word "particle" can refer to various types of very small objects (e.g. protons, gas particles, or even household dust), "particle physics" usually investigates the irreducibly smallest detectable particles and the fundamental interactions necessary to explain their behaviour. By our current understanding, these elementary particles are excitations of the quantum fields that also govern their interactions. The currently dominant theory explaining these fundamental particles and fields, along with their dynamics, is called the Standard Model. Thus, modern particle physics generally investigates the Standard Model and its various possible extensions, e.g. to the newest "known" particle, the Higgs boson, or even to the oldest known force field, gravity.[1][2]



Contents


1 Subatomic particles
2 History
3 Standard Model
4 Experimental laboratories
5 Theory
6 Practical applications
7 Future
8 High energy physics compared to low energy physics
9 See also
10 References
11 Further reading
12 External links



Subatomic particles[edit]




The particle content of the Standard Model of Physics



Elementary Particles


Types
Generations
Antiparticle
Colours
Total


Quarks
2
3
Pair
3
36


Leptons
Pair
None
12


Gluons
1
1
Own
8
8


Photon
Own
None
1


Z Boson
Own
1


W Boson
Pair
2


Higgs
Own
1


Total number of (known) elementary particles:
61


Modern particle physics research is focused on subatomic particles, including atomic constituents such as electrons, protons, and neutrons (protons and neutrons are composite particles called baryons, made of quarks), produced by radioactive and scattering processes, such as photons, neutrinos, and muons, as well as a wide range of exotic particles. Dynamics of particles is also governed by quantum mechanics; they exhibit wave–particle duality, displaying particle-like behaviour under certain experimental conditions and wave-like behaviour in others. In more technical terms, they are described by quantum state vectors in a Hilbert space, which is also treated in quantum field theory. Following the convention of particle physicists, the term elementary particles is applied to those particles that are, according to current understanding, presumed to be indivisible and not composed of other particles.[3]

All particles and their interactions observed to date can be described almost entirely by a quantum field theory called the Standard Model.[4] The Standard Model, as currently formulated, has 61 elementary particles.[3] Those elementary particles can combine to form composite particles, accounting for the hundreds of other species of particles that have been discovered since the 1960s. The Standard Model has been found to agree with almost all the experimental tests conducted to date. However, most particle physicists believe that it is an incomplete description of nature and that a more fundamental theory awaits discovery (See Theory of Everything). In recent years, measurements of neutrino mass have provided the first experimental deviations from the Standard Model[clarification needed].
History[edit]


Modern physics









H
^




|


ψ

n


(
t
)
⟩
=
i
ℏ


∂

∂
t




|


ψ

n


(
t
)
⟩


{\displaystyle {\hat {H}}|\psi _{n}(t)\rangle =i\hbar {\frac {\partial }{\partial t}}|\psi _{n}(t)\rangle }








1


c


2









∂


2




ϕ


n





∂
t


2




−



∇


2




ϕ


n



+



(



m
c

ℏ


)



2




ϕ


n


=
0


{\displaystyle {\frac {1}{{c}^{2}}}{\frac {{\partial }^{2}{\phi }_{n}}{{\partial t}^{2}}}-{{\nabla }^{2}{\phi }_{n}}+{\left({\frac {mc}{\hbar }}\right)}^{2}{\phi }_{n}=0}


Manifold dynamics: Schrödinger and Klein–Gordon equations





Founders
Max Planck  · Albert Einstein  · Niels Bohr  · Max Born  · Werner Heisenberg  · Erwin Schrödinger  · Pascual Jordan  · Wolfgang Pauli  · Paul Dirac  · Ernest Rutherford  · Louis de Broglie  · Satyendra Nath Bose






Concepts
Topology · space · time · energy · matter · work
randomness · information · entropy · mind
light · particle · wave






Branches
Applied · Experimental · Theoretical
Philosophy of Science · Philosophy of physics
Mathematical logic · Mathematical physics
Supersymmetry · String theory · M-theory
Grand Unified Theory · Standard model
Quantum mechanics · Quantum field theory
Antiparticle · Antimatter
Electromagnetism · Quantum electrodynamics
Weak interaction · Electroweak interaction
Strong interaction · Quantum chromodynamics
Atomic physics · Particle physics · Nuclear physics
Exotic matter · Higgs boson
Atomic, molecular, and optical physics
Condensed matter physics
Quantum statistical mechanics
Quantum information · Quantum computation
Spintronics · Superconductivity
Non-linear dynamics · Photonics · Biophysics
Neurophysics · Quantum mind
Plasma physics · Neutrino astronomy
Special relativity · General relativity
Scale relativity · Spacetime symmetries
Dark matter · Dark energy
Fractal analysis · Quantum chaos
Emergence · Complex systems
Black holes · Holographic principle
Astrophysics · Observable universe
Big Bang · Cosmology
Theories of gravitation · Loop quantum gravity
Quantum gravity · Theory of everything
Mathematical universe hypothesis · Multiverse · Weak gravity conjecture






Scientists
Röntgen · Becquerel · Lorentz · Planck · Curie · Wien · Skłodowska-Curie · Sommerfeld · Rutherford · Soddy · Onnes · Einstein · Wilczek · Born · Weyl · Bohr · Schrödinger · de Broglie · Laue · Bose · Compton · Pauli · Walton · Fermi · van der Waals · Heisenberg · Dyson · Zeeman · Moseley · Hilbert · Gödel · Jordan · Dirac · Wigner · Hawking · P.W Anderson · Lemaître · Thomson · Poincaré · Wheeler · Penrose · Millikan · Nambu · von Neumann · Higgs · Hahn · Feynman · Lee · Lenard · Salam · 't Hooft · Bell · Gell-Mann · J. J. Thomson  · Raman · Bragg · Bardeen · Shockley · Chadwick · Lawrence · Zeilinger







v
t
e





Main article: History of subatomic physics
The idea that all matter is composed of elementary particles dates from at least the 6th century BC.[5] In the 19th century, John Dalton, through his work on stoichiometry, concluded that each element of nature was composed of a single, unique type of particle.[6] The word atom, after the Greek word atomos meaning "indivisible", has since then denoted the smallest particle of a chemical element, but physicists soon discovered that atoms are not, in fact, the fundamental particles of nature, but are conglomerates of even smaller particles, such as the electron. The early 20th century explorations of nuclear physics and quantum physics led to proofs of nuclear fission in 1939 by Lise Meitner (based on experiments by Otto Hahn), and nuclear fusion by Hans Bethe in that same year; both discoveries also led to the development of nuclear weapons. Throughout the 1950s and 1960s, a bewildering variety of particles were found in collisions of particles from increasingly high-energy beams. It was referred to informally as the "particle zoo". That term was deprecated[citation needed] after the formulation of the Standard Model during the 1970s, in which the large number of particles was explained as combinations of a (relatively) small number of more fundamental particles.
Standard Model[edit]
Main article: Standard Model
The current state of the classification of all elementary particles is explained by the Standard Model. It describes the strong, weak, and electromagnetic fundamental interactions, using mediating gauge bosons. The species of gauge bosons are eight gluons, W−, W+ and Z bosons, and the photon.[4] The Standard Model also contains 24 fundamental fermions (12 particles and their associated anti-particles), which are the constituents of all matter.[7] Finally, the Standard Model also predicted the existence of a type of boson known as the Higgs boson. Early in the morning on 4 July 2012, physicists with the Large Hadron Collider at CERN announced they had found a new particle that behaves similarly to what is expected from the Higgs boson.[8]
Experimental laboratories[edit]
The world's major particle physics laboratories are:

Brookhaven National Laboratory (Long Island, United States). Its main facility is the Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider (RHIC), which collides heavy ions such as gold ions and polarized protons. It is the world's first heavy ion collider, and the world's only polarized proton collider.[9][not in citation given]
Budker Institute of Nuclear Physics (Novosibirsk, Russia). Its main projects are now the electron-positron colliders VEPP-2000,[10] operated since 2006, and VEPP-4,[11] started experiments in 1994. Earlier facilities include the first electron-electron beam-beam collider VEP-1, which conducted experiments from 1964 to 1968; the electron-positron colliders VEPP-2, operated from 1965 to 1974; and, its successor VEPP-2M,[12] performed experiments from 1974 to 2000.[13]
CERN (European Organization for Nuclear Research) (Franco-Swiss border, near Geneva). Its main project is now the Large Hadron Collider (LHC), which had its first beam circulation on 10 September 2008, and is now the world's most energetic collider of protons. It also became the most energetic collider of heavy ions after it began colliding lead ions. Earlier facilities include the Large Electron–Positron Collider (LEP), which was stopped on 2 November 2000 and then dismantled to give way for LHC; and the Super Proton Synchrotron, which is being reused as a pre-accelerator for the LHC.[14]
DESY (Deutsches Elektronen-Synchrotron) (Hamburg, Germany). Its main facility is the Hadron Elektron Ring Anlage (HERA), which collides electrons and positrons with protons.[15]
Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory (Fermilab) (Batavia, United States). Its main facility until 2011 was the Tevatron, which collided protons and antiprotons and was the highest-energy particle collider on earth until the Large Hadron Collider surpassed it on 29 November 2009.[16]
Institute of High Energy Physics (IHEP) (Beijing, China). IHEP manages a number of China’s major particle physics facilities, including the Beijing Electron Positron Collider (BEPC), the Beijing Spectrometer (BES), the Beijing Synchrotron Radiation Facility (BSRF), the International Cosmic-Ray Observatory at Yangbajing in Tibet, the Daya Bay Reactor Neutrino Experiment, the China Spallation Neutron Source, the Hard X-ray Modulation Telescope (HXMT), and the Accelerator-driven Sub-critical System (ADS) as well as the Jiangmen Underground Neutrino Observatory (JUNO). [17]
KEK (Tsukuba, Japan). It is the home of a number of experiments such as the K2K experiment, a neutrino oscillation experiment and Belle, an experiment measuring the CP violation of B mesons.[18]
SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory (Menlo Park, United States). Its 2-mile-long linear particle accelerator began operating in 1962 and was the basis for numerous electron and positron collision experiments until 2008. Since then the linear accelerator is being used for the Linac Coherent Light Source X-ray laser as well as advanced accelerator design research. SLAC staff continue to participate in developing and building many particle detectors around the world.[19]

Many other particle accelerators also exist.
The techniques required for modern experimental particle physics are quite varied and complex, constituting a sub-specialty nearly completely distinct[citation needed] from the theoretical side of the field.
Theory[edit]


Quantum field theory



Feynman diagram



History




Background


Field theory
Electromagnetism
Weak force
Strong force
Quantum mechanics
Special relativity
General relativity
Gauge theory








Symmetries


Symmetry in quantum mechanics
C-symmetry
P-symmetry
T-symmetry
Space translation symmetry
Time translation symmetry
Rotation symmetry
Lorentz symmetry
Poincaré symmetry
Gauge symmetry
Explicit symmetry breaking
Spontaneous symmetry breaking
Yang–Mills theory
Noether charge
Topological charge








Tools


Anomaly
Crossing
Effective field theory
Expectation value
Faddeev–Popov ghosts
Feynman diagram
Lattice gauge theory
LSZ reduction formula
Partition function
Propagator
Quantization
Regularization
Renormalization
Vacuum state
Wick's theorem
Wightman axioms








Equations


Dirac equation
Klein–Gordon equation
Proca equations
Wheeler–DeWitt equation
Bargmann–Wigner equations








Standard Model


Quantum electrodynamics
Electroweak interaction
Quantum chromodynamics
Higgs mechanism








Incomplete theories


Topological quantum field theory
String theory
Supersymmetry
Technicolor
Theory of everything
Quantum gravity








Scientists



C. D. Anderson
P. W. Anderson
Bethe
Bjorken
Bogoliubov
Brout
Callan
Coleman
DeWitt
Dirac
Dyson
Englert
Fermi
Feynman
Fierz
Fock
Fröhlich
Glashow
Gell-Mann
Gross
Guralnik
Heisenberg
Higgs
Haag
Hagen
't Hooft
Jordan
Kendall
Kibble
Lamb
Landau
Lee
Majorana
Mills
Nambu
Nishijima
Parisi
Polyakov
Salam
Schwinger
Skyrme
Sudarshan
Tomonaga
Veltman
Ward
Weinberg
Weisskopf
Weyl
Wilczek
Wilson
Yang
Yukawa










v
t
e





Theoretical particle physics attempts to develop the models, theoretical framework, and mathematical tools to understand current experiments and make predictions for future experiments. See also theoretical physics. There are several major interrelated efforts being made in theoretical particle physics today. One important branch attempts to better understand the Standard Model and its tests. By extracting the parameters of the Standard Model, from experiments with less uncertainty, this work probes the limits of the Standard Model and therefore expands our understanding of nature's building blocks. Those efforts are made challenging by the difficulty of calculating quantities in quantum chromodynamics. Some theorists working in this area refer to themselves as phenomenologists and they may use the tools of quantum field theory and effective field theory. Others make use of lattice field theory and call themselves lattice theorists.
Another major effort is in model building where model builders develop ideas for what physics may lie beyond the Standard Model (at higher energies or smaller distances). This work is often motivated by the hierarchy problem and is constrained by existing experimental data. It may involve work on supersymmetry, alternatives to the Higgs mechanism, extra spatial dimensions (such as the Randall-Sundrum models), Preon theory, combinations of these, or other ideas.
A third major effort in theoretical particle physics is string theory. String theorists attempt to construct a unified description of quantum mechanics and general relativity by building a theory based on small strings, and branes rather than particles. If the theory is successful, it may be considered a "Theory of Everything", or "TOE".
There are also other areas of work in theoretical particle physics ranging from particle cosmology to loop quantum gravity.
This division of efforts in particle physics is reflected in the names of categories on the arXiv, a preprint archive:[20] hep-th (theory), hep-ph (phenomenology), hep-ex (experiments), hep-lat (lattice gauge theory).
Practical applications[edit]
In principle, all physics (and practical applications developed therefrom) can be derived from the study of fundamental particles. In practice, even if "particle physics" is taken to mean only "high-energy atom smashers", many technologies have been developed during these pioneering investigations that later find wide uses in society. Particle accelerators are used to produce medical isotopes for research and treatment (for example, isotopes used in PET imaging), or used directly in external beam radiotherapy. The development of superconductors has been pushed forward by their use in particle physics. The World Wide Web and touchscreen technology were initially developed at CERN. Additional applications are found in medicine, national security, industry, computing, science, and workforce development, illustrating a long and growing list of beneficial practical applications with contributions from particle physics.[21]
Future[edit]
The primary goal, which is pursued in several distinct ways, is to find and understand what physics may lie beyond the standard model. There are several powerful experimental reasons to expect new physics, including dark matter and neutrino mass. There are also theoretical hints that this new physics should be found at accessible energy scales.
Much of the effort to find this new physics are focused on new collider experiments. The Large Hadron Collider (LHC) was completed in 2008 to help continue the search for the Higgs boson, supersymmetric particles, and other new physics. An intermediate goal is the construction of the International Linear Collider (ILC), which will complement the LHC by allowing more precise measurements of the properties of newly found particles. In August 2004, a decision for the technology of the ILC was taken but the site has still to be agreed upon.
In addition, there are important non-collider experiments that also attempt to find and understand physics beyond the Standard Model. One important non-collider effort is the determination of the neutrino masses, since these masses may arise from neutrinos mixing with very heavy particles. In addition, cosmological observations provide many useful constraints on the dark matter, although it may be impossible to determine the exact nature of the dark matter without the colliders. Finally, lower bounds on the very long lifetime of the proton put constraints on Grand Unified Theories at energy scales much higher than collider experiments will be able to probe any time soon.
In May 2014, the Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel released its report on particle physics funding priorities for the United States over the next decade. This report emphasized continued U.S. participation in the LHC and ILC, and expansion of the Long Baseline Neutrino Experiment, among other recommendations.
High energy physics compared to low energy physics[edit]
The term high energy physics requires elaboration. Intuitively, it might seem incorrect to associate "high energy" with the physics of very small, low mass objects, like subatomic particles. By comparison, an example of a macroscopic system, one gram of hydrogen, has ~ 7023600000000000000♠6×1023 times[22] the mass of a single proton. Even an entire beam of protons circulated in the LHC contains ~ 7014323000000000000♠3.23×1014 protons,[23] each with 7012650000000000000♠6.5×1012 eV of energy, for a total beam energy of ~ 7008336457062270000♠2.1×1027 eV or ~ 336.4 MJ, which is still ~ 7005270000000000000♠2.7×105 times lower than the mass-energy of a single gram of hydrogen. Yet, the macroscopic realm is "low energy physics",[citation needed] while that of quantum particles is "high energy physics".
The interactions studied in other fields of physics and science have comparatively very low energy. For example, the photon energy of visible light is about 1.8 to 3.1 eV. Similarly, the bond-dissociation energy of a carbon-carbon bond is about 3.6 eV. Other chemical reactions typically involve similar amounts of energy. Even photons with far higher energy, gamma rays of the kind produced in radioactive decay, mostly have photon energy between 6986160217648700000♠105 eV and 6988160217648700000♠107 eV – still two orders of magnitude lower than the mass of a single proton. Radioactive decay gamma rays are considered as part of nuclear physics, rather than high energy physics.
The proton has a mass of around 6990150604589778000♠9.4×108 eV; some other massive quantum particles, both elementary and hadronic, have yet higher masses. Due to these very high energies at the single particle level, particle physics is, in fact, high-energy physics.
See also[edit]


Atomic physics
High pressure
International Conference on High Energy Physics
Introduction to quantum mechanics
List of accelerators in particle physics
List of particles
Magnetic monopole
Micro black hole
Number theory
Resonance (particle physics)
Self-consistency principle in high energy Physics
Non-extensive self-consistent thermodynamical theory
Standard Model (mathematical formulation)
Stanford Physics Information Retrieval System
Timeline of particle physics
Unparticle physics
Tetraquark
International Conference on Photonic, Electronic and Atomic Collisions


References[edit]


^ "The Higgs boson - CERN". 
^ https://www.nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/physics/laureates/2013/advanced-physicsprize2013.pdf
^ a b Braibant, S.; Giacomelli, G.; Spurio, M. (2009). Particles and Fundamental Interactions: An Introduction to Particle Physics. Springer. pp. 313–314. ISBN 978-94-007-2463-1. 
^ a b "Particle Physics and Astrophysics Research". The Henryk Niewodniczanski Institute of Nuclear Physics. Retrieved 31 May 2012. 
^ "Fundamentals of Physics and Nuclear Physics" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 2 October 2012. Retrieved 21 July 2012. 
^ "Scientific Explorer: Quasiparticles". Sciexplorer.blogspot.com. 22 May 2012. Retrieved 21 July 2012. 
^ Nakamura, K (1 July 2010). "Review of Particle Physics". Journal of Physics G: Nuclear and Particle Physics. 37 (7A): 075021. Bibcode:2010JPhG...37g5021N. doi:10.1088/0954-3899/37/7A/075021. 
^ Mann, Adam (28 March 2013). "Newly Discovered Particle Appears to Be Long-Awaited Higgs Boson - Wired Science". Wired.com. Retrieved 6 February 2014. 
^ "Brookhaven National Laboratory – A Passion for Discovery". Bnl.gov. Retrieved 23 June 2012. 
^ "index". Vepp2k.inp.nsk.su. Retrieved 21 July 2012. 
^ "The VEPP-4 accelerating-storage complex". V4.inp.nsk.su. Retrieved 21 July 2012. 
^ "VEPP-2M collider complex" (in Russian). Inp.nsk.su. Retrieved 21 July 2012. 
^ "The Budker Institute Of Nuclear Physics". English Russia. 21 January 2012. Retrieved 23 June 2012. 
^ "Welcome to". Info.cern.ch. Retrieved 23 June 2012. 
^ "Germany's largest accelerator centre – Deutsches Elektronen-Synchrotron DESY". Desy.de. Retrieved 23 June 2012. 
^ "Fermilab | Home". Fnal.gov. Retrieved 23 June 2012. 
^ "IHEP | Home". ihep.ac.cn. Archived from the original on 1 February 2016. Retrieved 29 November 2015. 
^ "Kek | High Energy Accelerator Research Organization". Legacy.kek.jp. Archived from the original on 21 June 2012. Retrieved 23 June 2012. 
^ "SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory Home Page". Retrieved 19 February 2015. 
^ "arXiv.org e-Print archive". 
^ "Fermilab | Science at Fermilab | Benefits to Society". Fnal.gov. Retrieved 23 June 2012. 
^ "CODATA Value: Avogadro constant". The NIST Reference on Constants, Units, and Uncertainty. US National Institute of Standards and Technology. June 2015. Retrieved 2016-12-10.
^ "Beam Requirements and Fundamental Choices" (PDF). CERN Engineering & Equipment Data Management Service (EDMS). Retrieved 10 December 2016. 


Further reading[edit]

Introductory reading


Close, Frank (2004). Particle Physics: A Very Short Introduction. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-280434-0. 
Close, Frank; Marten, Michael; Sutton, Christine (2004). The Particle Odyssey: A Journey to the Heart of the Matter. Oxford University Press. ISBN 9780198609438. 
Ford, Kenneth W. (2005). The Quantum World. Harvard University Press. 
Oerter, Robert (2006). The Theory of Almost Everything: The Standard Model, the Unsung Triumph of Modern Physics. Plume. 
Schumm, Bruce A. (2004). Deep Down Things: The Breathtaking Beauty of Particle Physics. Johns Hopkins University Press. ISBN 0-8018-7971-X. 
Close, Frank (2006). The New Cosmic Onion. Taylor & Francis. ISBN 1-58488-798-2. 


Advanced reading


Robinson, Matthew B.; Bland, Karen R.; Cleaver, Gerald. B.; Dittmann, Jay R. (2008). "A Simple Introduction to Particle Physics". arXiv:0810.3328  [hep-th]. 
Robinson, Matthew B.; Ali, Tibra; Cleaver, Gerald B. (2009). "A Simple Introduction to Particle Physics Part II". arXiv:0908.1395  [hep-th]. 
Griffiths, David J. (1987). Introduction to Elementary Particles. Wiley, John & Sons, Inc. ISBN 0-471-60386-4. 
Kane, Gordon L. (1987). Modern Elementary Particle Physics. Perseus Books. ISBN 0-201-11749-5. 
Perkins, Donald H. (1999). Introduction to High Energy Physics. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-62196-8. 
Povh, Bogdan (1995). Particles and Nuclei: An Introduction to the Physical Concepts. Springer-Verlag. ISBN 0-387-59439-6. 
Boyarkin, Oleg (2011). Advanced Particle Physics Two-Volume Set. CRC Press. ISBN 978-1-4398-0412-4. 

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Particle physics.



Symmetry magazine
Fermilab
Particle physics – it matters – the Institute of Physics
Nobes, Matthew (2002) "Introduction to the Standard Model of Particle Physics" on Kuro5hin: Part 1, Part 2, Part 3a, Part 3b.
CERN – European Organization for Nuclear Research
The Particle Adventure – educational project sponsored by the Particle Data Group of the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (LBNL)







v
t
e


Branches of physics



Divisions



Applied
Experimental
Theoretical








Energy
Motion






Thermodynamics
Mechanics

Classical

Ballistics
Lagrangian
Hamiltonian


Continuum
Celestial
Statistical
Solid
Fluid
Quantum










Waves
Fields






Gravitation
Electromagnetism
Optics

Geometrical
Physical
Nonlinear
Quantum


Quantum field theory
Relativity

Special
General







By speciality



Accelerator
Acoustics
Astrophysics

Nuclear
Stellar
Heliophysics

Solar


Space
Astroparticle


Atomic–molecular–optical (AMO)
Communication
Computational
Condensed matter

Mesoscopic
Solid-state
Soft


Digital
Engineering
Material
Mathematical
Molecular
Nuclear
Particle

Phenomenology


Plasma
Polymer
Statistical






Physics in life science




Biophysics

Virophysics
Biomechanics


Medical physics

Cardiophysics
Health physics
Laser medicine
Medical imaging‎
Nuclear medicine
Neurophysics
Psychophysics








Physics with
other sciences




Agrophysics

Soil


Atmospheric

Cloud


Chemical
Econophysics
Geophysics












v
t
e


Particles in physics



Elementary




Fermions




Quarks



Up (quark
antiquark)
Down (quark
antiquark)
Charm (quark
antiquark)
Strange (quark
antiquark)
Top (quark
antiquark)
Bottom (quark
antiquark)





Leptons



Electron
Positron
Muon
Antimuon
Tau
Antitau
Electron neutrino
Electron antineutrino
Muon neutrino
Muon antineutrino
Tau neutrino
Tau antineutrino








Bosons




Gauge



Photon
Gluon
W and Z bosons





Scalar



Higgs boson








Others



Ghosts





Hypothetical




Superpartners




Gauginos



Gluino
Gravitino
Photino





Others



Higgsino
Neutralino
Chargino
Axino
Sfermion (Stop squark)








Others



Planck particle
Axion
Dilaton
Dual graviton
Graviton
Leptoquark
Majoron
Majorana fermion
Magnetic monopole
Preon
Sterile neutrino
Tachyon
W′ and Z′ bosons
X and Y bosons











Composite




Hadrons




Baryons / hyperons



Nucleon

Proton
Antiproton
Neutron
Antineutron


Delta baryon
Lambda baryon
Sigma baryon
Xi baryon
Omega baryon





Mesons / quarkonia



Pion
Rho meson
Eta and eta prime mesons
Phi meson
J/psi meson
Omega meson
Upsilon meson
Kaon
B meson
D meson





Exotic hadrons



Tetraquark
Pentaquark








Others



Atomic nuclei
Atoms
Exotic atoms

Positronium
Muonium
Tauonium
Onia


Superatoms
Molecules





Hypothetical








Hypothetical baryons



Hexaquark
Skyrmion





Hypothetical mesons



Glueball
Theta meson
T meson








Others



Mesonic molecule
Pomeron
Diquarks











Quasiparticles



Davydov soliton
Dropleton
Exciton
Hole
Magnon
Phonon
Plasmaron
Plasmon
Polariton
Polaron
Roton
Trion





Lists



Baryons
Mesons
Particles
Quasiparticles
Timeline of particle discoveries





Related



History of subatomic physics

timeline


Standard Model

mathematical formulation


Subatomic particles
Particles
Antiparticles
Nuclear physics
Eightfold Way

Quark model


Exotic matter
Massless particle
Relativistic particle
Virtual particle
Wave–particle duality





Wikipedia books



Hadronic Matter
Particles of the Standard Model
Leptons
Quarks






 Physics portal










v
t
e


The fundamental interactions of physics



Physical forces



Strong interaction
Weak interaction
Electromagnetism
Gravitation





Radiations



Electromagnetic radiation
Gravitational radiation





Hypothetical forces



Quintessence
Weak gravity conjecture








Glossary of physics
Particle physics
Philosophy of physics
Universe
Weakless Universe












v
t
e


Standard Model



Background



Particle physics

Fermions
Gauge boson
Higgs boson


Quantum field theory
Gauge theory
Quantum electrodynamics
Strong interaction

Color charge
Quantum chromodynamics
Quark model


Weak interaction

Electroweak interaction
Fermi's interaction
Weak hypercharge
Weak isospin










Constituents



CKM matrix
Spontaneous symmetry breaking
Higgs mechanism
Standard Model (mathematical formulation)





Beyond the Standard Model




Evidence



Hierarchy problem
Dark matter
Cosmological constant problem
Strong CP problem
Neutrino oscillation





Theories



Technicolor
Kaluza–Klein theory
Grand Unified Theory
Theory of everything





Supersymmetry



MSSM
Superstring theory
Supergravity





Quantum gravity



String theory
Loop quantum gravity
Causal dynamical triangulation
Canonical quantum gravity
Superfluid vacuum theory
Twistor theory








Experiments



Gran Sasso
INO
LHC
SNO
Super-K
Tevatron








Physics portal







						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Particle_physics&oldid=818247354"					Categories: Particle physicsSubfields of physicsHidden categories: CS1 Russian-language sources (ru)Use British English Oxford spelling from September 2016Wikipedia articles needing clarification from March 2014All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from December 2016All articles with failed verificationArticles with failed verification from May 2012Use dmy dates from July 2011