A participle (glossing abbreviation PTCP) is a form of a verb that is used in a sentence to modify a noun, noun phrase, verb, or verb phrase, and plays a role similar to an adjective or adverb.[1] It is one of the types of nonfinite verb forms. Its name comes from the Latin participium,[2] a calque of Greek metochḗ "partaking" or "sharing";[3] it is so named because the Ancient Greek and Latin participles "share" some of the categories of the adjective or noun (gender, number, case) and some of those of the verb (tense and voice).
Like other parts of the verb, participles can be either active (e.g. breaking) or passive (e.g. broken). Participles are also often associated with certain verbal aspects or tenses. The two types of participle in English are traditionally called the present participle (forms such as writing, singing and raising) and the past participle (forms such as written, sung and raised).
Participles have various uses in a sentence. One use of a participle is simply as an adjective:

A broken window. A fallen tree. An interesting book.

Another use is in a phrase which serves as a shortened form of a relative clause, as in the following phrases:

A woman wearing a red hat. A window broken by the wind.

Here the first phrase is equivalent to "a woman who was wearing a red hat". Such participle phrases generally follow the noun they describe, just as relative clauses do.
Often a participle replaces an adverbial clause. For example:

With drawn sword, he came to the sleeping Lucretia.

In the above sentence, the participles can be interpreted as equivalent to an adverbial clause of time, namely "after he had drawn his sword", and "when she was sleeping".
A fourth use of participles in some languages is in combination with an auxiliary verb such as "has" or "is" to make a compound or periphrastic verb tense which in other languages can often be expressed by a single word:

He had drawn his sword (= Latin strinxerat). She was sleeping (= Latin dormiebat).

A verb phrase based on a participle is called a participle phrase or participial phrase (participial is an adjective derived from participle). For example, wearing a hat and broken by the wind are participial phrases based respectively on an English present participle and past participle. Since these phrases are equivalent to a clause, they may also be called a participle clause or participial clause. Participial clauses generally do not have an expressed grammatical subject; but occasionally a participial clause does include a subject, as in the English nominative absolute construction The king having died, ... .



Contents


1 Types of participle
2 Indo-European languages

2.1 Germanic languages

2.1.1 Early English
2.1.2 Middle English
2.1.3 Modern English
2.1.4 Scandinavian languages


2.2 Latin and Romance languages

2.2.1 Latin
2.2.2 French
2.2.3 Spanish


2.3 Hellenic languages

2.3.1 Ancient Greek


2.4 Celtic languages

2.4.1 Welsh


2.5 Slavic languages

2.5.1 Polish
2.5.2 Russian
2.5.3 Bulgarian
2.5.4 Macedonian


2.6 Baltic languages

2.6.1 Lithuanian




3 Semitic languages

3.1 Arabic


4 Finno-Ugric languages

4.1 Finnish


5 Turkic languages

5.1 Turkish


6 Eskimo-Aleut languages

6.1 Sireniki Eskimo


7 Constructed languages

7.1 Esperanto


8 See also
9 Notes
10 References
11 External links



Types of participle[edit]
Participles are often identified with a particular tense, as with the English present participle and past participle (see under § Modern English below). However, this is often a matter of convention; present participles are not necessarily associated with the expression of present time, or past participles necessarily with past time.
Participles may also be identified with a particular voice: active or passive. Some languages (such as Latin and Russian) have distinct participles for active and passive uses. In English the present participle is essentially an active participle, while the past participle has both active and passive uses. The following examples illustrate this:

I saw John eating his dinner. (Here eating is an active present participle)
The food was gone. (Here gone is an active past participle)
He found the window broken. (Here broken is a passive past participle)

A distinction is also sometimes made between adjectival participles and adverbial participles. An adverbial participle (or a participial phrase/clause based on such a participle) plays the role of an adverbial (adverb phrase) in the sentence in which it appears, whereas an adjectival participle (or a participial phrase/clause based on one) plays the role of an adjective phrase. Some languages have different forms for the two types of participle; such languages include Russian[4] and other Slavic languages, Hungarian, and many Eskimo languages, such as Sireniki,[5] which has a sophisticated participle system. Details can be found in the sections below or in the articles on the grammars of specific languages.
Some descriptive grammars treat adverbial and adjectival participles as distinct lexical categories, while others include them both in a single category of participles.[4][6] Sometimes different names are used; adverbial participles in certain languages may be called converbs, gerunds, or gerundives (though this is not consistent with the meanings of the terms gerund or gerundive as normally applied to English or Latin), or transgressives.
Sometimes adjectival participles come to be used as pure adjectives, without any verbal characteristics (deverbal adjectives). They then no longer take objects or other modifiers typical of verbs, possibly taking instead modifiers that are typical of adjectives, such as the English word very. The difference is illustrated by the following examples:

The subject interesting him at the moment is Greek history.
Greek history is a very interesting subject.

In the first sentence interesting is used as a true participle; it acts as a verb, taking the object him, and forming the participial phrase interesting him at the moment, which then serves as an adjective phrase modifying the noun subject. However, in the second sentence interesting has become a pure adjective; it stands in an adjective's typical position before the noun, it can no longer take an object, and it could be accompanied by typical adjective modifiers such as very or quite (or in this case the prefix un-). Similar examples are "interested people", "a frightened rabbit", "fallen leaves", "meat-eating animals".
Indo-European languages[edit]
Germanic languages[edit]
Early English[edit]
In Old English, past participles of Germanic strong verbs were marked with a ge- prefix, as are most strong and weak past participles in Dutch and German today, and often by a vowel change in the stem. Those of weak verbs were marked by the ending -d, with or without an epenthetic vowel before it. Modern English past participles derive from these forms (although the ge- prefix, which became y- in Middle English, has now been lost).
Old English present participles were marked with an ending in -ende (or -iende for verbs whose infinitives ended in -ian).
Middle English[edit]
In Middle English, the form of the present participle varied across regions: -ende (southwest, southeast, Midlands), -inde (southwest, southeast), -and (north), -inge (southeast). The last is the one that became standard, falling together with the suffix -ing used to form verbal nouns. See -ing (etymology).
Modern English[edit]
 Modern English verbs have two participles:[7]

The present participle, also sometimes called the active, imperfect, or progressive participle, takes the ending -ing, for example doing, seeing, working, running. It is identical in form to the verbal noun and gerund (see below). The term present participle is sometimes used to include the gerund;[8] and the term "gerund–participle" is also used.
The past participle, also sometimes called the passive or perfect participle, is identical to the past tense form (ending in -ed) in the case of regular verbs, for example "loaded", "boiled", "mounted", but takes various forms in the case of irregular verbs, such as done, sung, written, put, gone, etc.

In addition various compound participles can be formed, such as having done, being done, having been doing, having been done.[9]
Details of participle formation can be found under English verbs and List of English irregular verbs.
The present participle, or participial phrases (clauses) formed from it, are used as follows:

to form the progressive (continuous) aspect: Jim was sleeping.
as an adjective phrase modifying a noun phrase: The man sitting over there is my uncle.
adverbially, the subject being understood to be the same as that of the main clause: Looking at the plans, I gradually came to see where the problem lay. He shot the man, killing him.
similarly, but with a different subject, placed before the participle (the nominative absolute construction): He and I having reconciled our differences, the project then proceeded smoothly.
more generally as a clause or sentence modifier: Broadly speaking, the project was successful. (See also dangling participle.)

Past participles, or participial phrases (clauses) formed from them, are used as follows:

to form the perfect aspect: The chicken has eaten.
to form the passive voice: The chicken was eaten.
as an adjective phrase: The chicken eaten by the children was contaminated. (See also reduced relative clause.)
adverbially: Eaten in this manner, the chicken presents no problem.
in a nominative absolute construction, with a subject: The chicken eaten, we returned home.

Both types of participles are also often used as pure adjectives (see Types of participles above). Here present participles are used in their active sense ("an exciting adventure", i.e. one that excites), while past participles are usually used passively ("the attached files", i.e. those that have been attached), although those formed from intransitive verbs may sometimes be used with active meaning ("our fallen comrades", i.e. those who have fallen). Some such adjectives also form adverbs, such as interestingly and excitedly.
The gerund is distinct from the present participle in that it (or rather the verb phrase it forms) acts as a noun rather than an adjective or adverb: "I like sleeping"; "Sleeping is not allowed." There is also a pure verbal noun with the same form ("the breaking of one's vows is not to be taken lightly"). Sometimes this identity of forms can lead to ambiguity, as Noam Chomsky pointed out in his well-known example:[10]

Flying planes can be dangerous.

When the meaning is "The practice of flying a plane is dangerous", flying is a noun and can be called a gerund; when the meaning is "Planes which fly" or "Planes when they are flying", flying is being used adjectivally or adverbially and can be called a participle.
For more on the distinctions between these uses of the -ing verb form, see -ing: uses.
For more details on uses of participles and other parts of verbs in English, see Uses of English verb forms, including the sections on the present participle and past participle.
Scandinavian languages[edit]
In all of the Scandinavian languages the past participle has to agree with the noun to some degree. All of the Scandinavian languages have mandatory agreement with the noun in number. Nynorsk and Swedish have mandatory agreement in both number and gender. Icelandic has agreement in number, gender and case. For the present participle there is no agreement.
Examples in Nynorsk:

Sjølvkøyrande bilar kan vere farleg. (English: self-driving cars can be dangerous)
Kyllingen blei eten (English: The chicken was eaten)
Dyret blei ete (English: The animal was eaten)

The participles are marked in bold. The first example involves a present participle and the two latter examples involves a past participle. All present participles end with an -ande suffix.
Latin and Romance languages[edit]
Latin[edit]
Main articles: Latin syntax § Participles, Latin conjugation § Participles, and Latin syntax § The gerundive
Latin grammar was studied in Europe for hundreds of years, especially the handbook written by the 4th-century teacher Aelius Donatus, and it is from Latin that the name and concept of the participle derives. According to Donatus there are four participles in Latin, as follows:[11]

present participle: present stem + -ns (gen. -ntis); e.g. legēns (plural legentēs) "(while) reading"
perfect participle: supine stem + -us, -a, -um; e.g. lēctus "read (by someone)"
future participle: supine stem + -ūrus, -ūra, -ūrum; e.g. lēctūrus "going to read", "due to read"
gerundive (sometimes[12] considered the future passive participle): e.g. legendus "due to be read", "necessary to be read"

However, many modern Latin grammars treat the gerundive as a separate part of speech.[13]
The perfect participle is usually passive in meaning, and thus mainly formed from transitive verbs, for example frāctus "broken", missus "sent (by someone)". However, certain verbs (called deponent verbs) have a perfect participle in an active sense, e.g. profectus "having set out", hortātus "having encouraged", etc. The present and future participles are always active, the gerundive usually passive.
Because a participle is an adjective as well as a verb, just like any other Latin adjective its ending changes according to the noun it describes. So when the noun is masculine, the participle must be masculine; when the noun is in the accusative (object) case, the participle is also in the accusative case; when the noun has plural endings, the participle also has plural endings. Thus a simple participle such as frāctus "broken" can change to frācta, frāctum, frāctī, frāctō and so on, according to its gender, number, and case.
A participle can have a descriptive meaning like an adjective, or a more dynamic meaning like a verb. Thus in the following sentence the participle strīctō "drawn" is better taken as describing an action ("he drew his sword" or "after drawing his sword") rather than as describing the sword ("with a drawn sword"):

Strīctō gladiō ad dormientem Lucrētiam vēnit.[14]
"With drawn sword he came to the sleeping Lucretia."

The dynamic, verbal meaning is more common, and Latin often uses a participle where English might use a simple verb.
The present participle often describes the circumstances attending the main verb. A typical example is:

Balbus ad mē vēnit currēns.[15]
"Balbus came to me running."

Both the future and the perfect participle (but not the present participle) can be used with various tenses of the verb esse "to be" to make a compound tense such as the future-in-the-past or the perfect passive:

Eō diē Rōmam ventūrus erat.[16]
"On that day he was going to return to Rome."
Occīsus est ā Thēbānīs.[17]
"He was killed by the Thebans."

The perfect and future participles can also be used, with or without the verb esse "to be", in indirect speech clauses:

(Dīxit eōs) locum facile inventūrōs (esse).[18]
"He said that they were easily going to find the place / He said that they would find the place easily."

For uses of the gerundive, see Latin syntax#The gerundive.
French[edit]
There are two basic participles:

Present active participle: formed by dropping the -ons of the nous form of the present tense of a verb (except with être and avoir) and then adding ant: marchant "walking", étant "being", ayant "having".
Past participle: formation varies according to verb group: vendu "sold", mis "placed", marché "walked", été "been", and fait "done". The sense of the past participle is passive as an adjective and in most verbal constructions with "avoir", but active in verbal constructions with "être", in reflexive constructions, and with some intransitive verbs.[19]

Compound participles are possible:

Present perfect participle: ayant appelé "having called", étant mort "being dead"
Passive perfect participle: étant vendu "being sold, having been sold"

Usage:

Present participles are used as qualifiers as in "un insecte volant" (a flying insect) and in some other contexts. They are never used to form tenses. The present participle is used in subordinate clauses, usually with en: "Je marche, en parlant".
Past participles are used as qualifiers for nouns: "la table cassée" (the broken table); to form compound tenses such as the perfect "Vous avez dit" (you have said) and to form the passive voice: "il a été tué" (he/it has been killed).

Spanish[edit]
In Spanish, the so-called present or active participle (participio activo or participio de presente) of a verb is traditionally formed with one of the suffixes -ante, -ente or -iente, but modern grammar does not consider it a true participle, as such forms usually have the meaning of simple adjectives or nouns: e.g. amante "loving" or "lover", viviente "living" or "live".
Another participial form is known as the gerundio, which ends in an (unchanging) suffix -ando, -endo, or -iendo. The gerundio is used in combination with the verb estar ("to be") to make continuous tenses: for example, estar haciendo means "to be doing" (haciendo being the gerundio of hacer, "to do"), and there are related constructions such as seguir haciendo meaning "to keep doing" (seguir being "to continue"). Another use is in phrases such as vino corriendo ("he/she came running") and lo vi corriendo ("I saw him running").
The past participle (participio pasado or participio pasivo) is regularly formed with one of the suffixes -ado or -ido; but some verbs have an irregular form ending in -to (e.g. escrito, visto), or -cho (e.g. dicho, hecho). The past participle is used generally as an adjective referring to a finished action, in which case its ending changes according to gender and number. At other times is used to form compound tenses (as in English), in which case it is indeclinable. Some examples:
As an adjective:

las cartas escritas "the written letters"

To form compound tenses:

Ha escrito una carta. "She (he, it) has written a letter."

Hellenic languages[edit]
Ancient Greek[edit]
Main article: Participle (Ancient Greek)
The Ancient Greek participle shares in the properties of adjectives and verbs. Like an adjective, it changes form for gender, case, and number. Like a verb, it has tense and voice, is modified by adverbs, and can take verb arguments, including an object.[20]
There is a form of the participle for every combination of tense (present, aorist, perfect, future) and voice (active, middle, passive). All participles are based on the stems of the corresponding tenses. Here are the masculine nominative singular forms for a thematic and an athematic verb:


λῡ́ω
"I release"
active
middle
passive


present
λῡ́ων
λῡόμενος


aorist
λῡ́σας
λῡσάμενος
λυθείς


future
λῡ́σων
λῡσόμενος
λυθησόμενος


perfect
λελυκώς
λελυμένος




τίθημι
"I put"
active
middle
passive


present
τιθείς
τιθέμενος


aorist
θείς
θέμενος
τεθείς


future
θήσων
θησόμενος
τεθησόμενος


perfect
τεθηκώς
τεθειμένος


Like an adjective, it can modify a noun, and can be used to embed one thought into another.

πολλὰ καὶ φύσει καὶ ἐπιστήμῃ δεῖ τὸν εὖ στρατηγήσοντα ἔχειν
"he who intends to be a good general must have a great deal of ability and knowledge"

In the example, the participial phrase τὸν εὖ στρατηγήσοντα, literally "the one going to be a good general," is used to embed the idea εὖ στρατηγήσει "he will be a good general" within the main verb.
The participle is very widely used in Ancient Greek, especially in prose.
Celtic languages[edit]
Welsh[edit]
In Welsh, the effect of a participle in the active voice is constructed by yn followed by the verb-noun (for the present participle) and wedi followed by the verb-noun (for the past participle). There is no mutation in either case. In the passive voice, participles are usually replaced by a compound phrase such as wedi cael ei/eu ("having got his/her/their ...ing") in contemporary Welsh and by the impersonal form in classical Welsh.
Slavic languages[edit]
Polish[edit]
The Polish word for participle is imiesłów (pl.: imiesłowy). There are four types of imiesłowy in two classes:
Adjectival participle (imiesłów przymiotnikowy):

active adjectival participle (imiesłów przymiotnikowy czynny): robiący – "doing", "one who does"
passive adjectival participle (imiesłów przymiotnikowy bierny): robiony – "being done" (can only be formed off transitive verbs)

Adverbial participle (imiesłów przysłówkowy):

present adverbial participle (imiesłów przysłówkowy współczesny): robiąc – "doing", "while doing"
perfect adverbial participle (imiesłów przysłówkowy uprzedni): zrobiwszy – "having done" (formed in virtually all cases off verbs in their perfective forms, here denoted by the prefix z-)

Due to the distinction between adjectival and adverbial participles, in Polish it is practically impossible to make a dangling participle in the classical English meaning of the term. For instance, in the sentence:

I found them hiding in the closet.

it is unclear whether "I" or "they" were hiding in the closet. In Polish there is a clear distinction:

Znalazłem ich, chowając się w szafie. – chowając is a present adverbial participle agreeing grammatically with the subject ("I")
Znalazłem ich chowających się w szafie. – chowających is an active adjectival participle agreeing grammatically with the object ("them")

Russian[edit]
Verb: слышать [ˈslɨ.ʂɐtʲ] (to hear, imperfective aspect)

Present active: слышащий [ˈslɨ.ʂɐ.ɕɕɪj] "hearing", "who hears"
Present passive: слышимый [ˈslɨ.ʂᵻ.məj] "being heard", "that is heard", "audible"
Past active: слышавший [ˈslɨ.ʂɐf.ʂəj] "who heard", "who was hearing"
Past passive: услышанный [ˈslɨ.ʂɐn.nəj] "that was heard", "that was being heard"
Adverbial present active: слыша [ˈslɨ.ʂɐ] "(while) hearing"
Adverbial past active: слышав [ˈslɨ.ʂɐf] "having been hearing"

Verb: услышать [ʊˈslɨ.ʂɐtʲ] (to hear, perfective aspect)

Past active: услышавший [ʊˈslɨ.ʂɐf.ʂəj] "who has heard"
Past passive: услышанный [ʊˈslɨ.ʂɐn.nəj] "that has been heard"
Adverbial past active: услышав [ʊˈslɨ.ʂɐf] "having heard"

Future participles formed from perfective verbs are technically possible, though not considered a part of standard language.[21]
Bulgarian[edit]
Participles are adjectives formed from verbs. There are various kinds:
Verb: правя [pravja] (to do, imperfective aspect):

Present active: правещ [pravešt]
Past active aorist: правил [pravil]
Past active imperfect: правел [pravel] (only used in verbal constructions)
Past passive: правен [praven]
Adverbial present active: правейки [pravejki]

Verb: направя [napravja] (to do, perfective aspect):

Past active aorist: направил [napravil]
Past active imperfect: направел [napravel] (only used in verbal constructions)
Past passive: направен [napraven]

Macedonian[edit]
Macedonian has completely lost or transformed the participles of Common Slavic, unlike the other Slavic languages. The following points may be noted:[22]

present active participle: this has transformed into a verbal adverb;
present passive participle: there are some isolated cases or remnants of the present passive participle, such as the word лаком [lakom] (greedy);
past active participle: there is only one remnant of the past active participle, which is the word бивш [bivš] (former). However, this word is often replaced with the word поранешен [poranešen] (former);
past passive participle: this has been transformed into a verbal adjective (it behaves like a normal adjective);
resultative participle: this has transformed into a verbal l-form (глаголска л-форма). It is not a participle since it doesn't function attributively.

Baltic languages[edit]
Lithuanian[edit]
Among Indo-European languages, the Lithuanian language is unique for having fourteen different participial forms of the verb, that can be grouped into five when accounting for inflection by tense. Some of these are also inflected by gender and case. For example, the verb eiti ("to go, to walk") has the active participle forms einąs/einantis ("going, walking", present tense), ėjęs (past tense), eisiąs (future tense), eidavęs (past frequentative tense), the passive participle forms einamas ("being walked", present tense), eitas (“walked” past tense), eisimas (future tense), the adverbial participles einant ("while [he, different subject] is walking" present tense), ėjus (past tense), eisiant (future tense), eidavus (past frequentative tense), the semi-participle eidamas ("while [he, the same subject] is going, walking") and the participle of necessity eitinas ("that which needs to be walked"). The active, passive, and the semi-participles are inflected by gender, and the active, passive, and necessity ones are inflected by case.
Semitic languages[edit]
Arabic[edit]
Main article: Arabic verbs: Participle
The Arabic verb has two participles: an active participle (اسم الفاعل) and a passive participle (اسم المفعول ), and the form of the participle is predictable by inspection of the dictionary form of the verb. These participles are inflected for gender, number and case, but not person. Arabic participles are employed syntactically in a variety of ways: as nouns, as adjectives or even as verbs. Their uses vary across varieties of Arabic. In general the active participle describes a property of the syntactic subject of the verb from which it derives, whilst the passive participles describes the object. For example, from the verb كتب kataba, the active participle is kātib كاتب and the passive participle is maktūb مكتوب. Roughly these translate to "writing" and "written" respectively. However, they have different, derived lexical uses. كاتب kātib is further lexicalized as "writer", "author" and مكتوب maktūb as "letter".
In Classical Arabic these participles do not participate in verbal constructions with auxiliaries the same way as their English counterparts do, and rarely take on a verbal meaning in a sentence (a notable exception being participles derived from motion verbs as well as participles in Qur'anic Arabic). In certain dialects of Arabic however, it is much more common for the participles, especially the active participle, to have verbal force in the sentence. For example, in dialects of the Levant, the active participle is a structure that describes the state of the syntactic subject after the action of the verb from which it derives has taken place. ʼĀkil, the active participle of ʼakala ("to eat"), describes one's state after having eaten something. Therefore, it can be used in analogous way to the English present perfect (for example, ʼAnā ʼākil انا آكل meaning "I have eaten", "I have just eaten" or "I have already eaten"). Other verbs, such as rāḥa راح ("to go") give a participle (rāyiḥ رايح), which has a progressive ("is going...") meaning. The exact tense or continuity of these participles is therefore determined by the nature of the specific verb (especially its lexical aspect and its transitivity) and the syntactic/semantic context of the utterance. What ties them all together is that they describe the subject of the verb from which they derive. The passive participles in certain dialects can be used as a sort of passive voice, but more often than not, are used in their various lexicalized senses as adjectives or nouns.
Finno-Ugric languages[edit]
Finnish[edit]
Finnish uses six participles to convey different meanings. Below is a table displaying the declension of the participles of the verb tappaa (to kill).

Finnish Participles


Active
Passive


Present
tappava
tapettava


Past
tappanut
tapettu




Agent
tappama-


Negative
tappamaton


The participles work in the following way:


tappava
Present active participle: Conveys an ongoing action. Used to omit the use of the relative pronoun who, which or that. Tappava means "killing" as in "killing machine". In other words, machine that kills. It can also work as the subject of the sentence. In other words, tappava can mean "the one who kills" or "he who kills". Tappava on... = He who kills is...


tapettava
Present passive participle: Conveys possibility and obligation. Possibility as in -able (killable) and obligation as in something that has to be killed. Tapettava mies can mean both "the killable man" (possibility) and "the man who has to be killed" (obligation).


tappanut
Past active participle: Used with the verb olla (to be) to construct the perfect and the past perfect tenses. In English the verb "to have" is used to form the perfect and past perfect tense (I have/had killed), in Finnish the verb "to be" is used instead (minä olen/olin tappanut). Just like the present active participle, it can also be used as the subject in a sentence, except it conveys the meaning in the past tense. In other words, tappanut can mean "the one who killed" or "he who killed". Tappanut on... = He who killed is...


tapettu
Past passive participle: A concluded action. Tapettu mies = the killed man.


tappama-
Agent participle: Always used with a possessive suffix. It is used to convey the meaning of the word "by" in English, since there is no word for "by" in Finnish. Hänen tappamansa mies = The man killed by him. The tense of the translation depends on the context.


tappamaton
Negative participle: Used to convey impossibility (unkillable) and undoneness (not killed). Tappamaton mies means both "unkillable man" and "man (who is) not killed".


Each and every one of these participles can be used as adjectives, which means that some of them can be turned into nouns.


Finnish (adjective)
tappava
tapettava
tappamaton


English (adjective)
killing
killable
unkillable (possibility) or not killed (undoneness)


Finnish (noun)
tappavuus
tapettavuus
tappamattomuus


English (noun)
killingness
killability
unkillability (possibility) or lack of killing (undoneness)


Turkic languages[edit]
Turkish[edit]
Participles are called sıfat-fiil (lit. adjective-verb) or ortaç in Turkish.[23]
Turkish paticiples consist of a verb stem and a suffix. Some participles may be conjugated, but some may not. Participles always precede the noun they are defining, as in English.
Participle suffixes, like many other suffixes in Turkish, change according to the vowel harmony and sandhi.
There are eight types of participle suffixes; -en, -esi, -mez, -ar, -di(k/ği) -ecek and -miş [24][25]
Eskimo-Aleut languages[edit]
Sireniki Eskimo[edit]
Sireniki Eskimo language, an extinct Eskimo–Aleut language, has separate sets of adverbial participles and adjectival participles. Different from in English, adverbial participles are conjugated to reflect the person and number of their implicit subjects; hence, while in English a sentence like "If I were a marksman, I would kill walruses" requires two full clauses (to distinguish the two verbs' different subjects), in Sireniki Eskimo one of these may be replaced with an adverbial participle (since its conjugation indicates the subject).
Constructed languages[edit]
Esperanto[edit]
Main article: Esperanto grammar: Participles
Esperanto has six different participle conjugations; active and passive for past, present and future. The participles are formed as follows:



Past
Present
Future


Active
-inta
-anta
-onta


Passive
-ita
-ata
-ota


For example, a falonta botelo is a bottle that will fall or is about to fall. A falanta botelo is one that is falling through the air. After it hits the floor, it is a falinta botelo. These examples use the active participles, but the usage of the passive participles is similar. A cake that is going to be divided is a dividota kuko. When it is in the process of being divided, it is a dividata kuko. Having been cut, it is now a dividita kuko.
These participles can be used in conjunction with the verb to be, esti, forming 18 compound tenses (9 active and 9 passive). However, this soon becomes complicated and often unnecessary, and is only frequently used when rigorous translation of English is required. An example of this would be la knabo estos instruita, or, the boy will have been taught. This example sentence is then in the future anterior.
When the suffix -o is used, instead of -a, then the participle refers to a person. A manĝanto is someone who is eating. A manĝinto is someone who ate. A manĝonto is someone who will eat. Also, a manĝito is someone who was eaten, a manĝato is someone who is being eaten, and a manĝoto is someone who will be eaten.
These rules hold true for all transitive verbs. Since copular and intransitive verbs do not have passive voice, their participle forms can only be active.
An informal addition to these six are the participles for conditional forms, which use -unt-. The active participles are the only ones generally used. For example, a "komencunto" is a person who would (have) begun. A "parolunto" is someone who would (have) spoken.
See also[edit]

Attributive verb
Gerund
Grammar
Hanging participle
Nonfinite verb
Transgressive (linguistics)

Notes[edit]


^ What is a participle? in Glossary of linguistic terms at SIL International.
^ participium. Charlton T. Lewis and Charles Short. A Latin Dictionary on Perseus Project.
^ μετοχή. Liddell, Henry George; Scott, Robert; A Greek–English Lexicon at the Perseus Project
^ a b The Russian Participles. Part of “An Interactive On-line Reference Grammar — Russian” by Dr. Robert Beard.
^ Menovshchikov, G.A.: Language of Sireniki Eskimos. Phonetics, morphology, texts and vocabulary. Academy of Sciences of the USSR, Moscow • Leningrad, 1964. Original data: Г.А. Меновщиков: Язык сиреникских эскимосов. Фонетика, очерк морфологии, тексты и словарь. Академия Наук СССР. Институт языкознания. Москва • Ленинград, 1964
^ Kiss, Katalin E.; Kiefer, Ferenc; Siptár, Péter (2003). Új magyar nyelvtan. Osiris tankönyvek (in Hungarian) (3. kiadás ed.). Budapest: Osiris Kiadó. ISSN 1218-9855. 
^ Quirk et al., 3.9
^ For example, Quirk et al., 4.12.
^ Quirk et al., 3.15.
^ Noam Chomsky, Aspects of the Theory of Syntax (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1965), 21.
^ Donatus, Ars Minor: de participio.
^ cf. Wheelock, pp. 106ff and 112 note; Allen & Greenough, p. 315.
^ e.g. Kennedy, Gildersleeve & Lodge, etc.
^ Livy, 1.58.2
^ Cicero, ad Atticum 9.2a.3.
^ Cicero, pro Milone 28.
^ Nepos, Lysander 3.4.
^ Nepos, Hannibal 12.3.
^ Maurice Grevisse, Le Bon Usage, 10th edition, § 776.
^ Smyth. A Greek grammar for colleges. § 2039. 
^ Shagal (Krapivina), Future participles in Russian: Expanding the participial paradigm
^ Macedonian Grammar, Victor Friedman
^ Ergin 309
^ Ergin 310
^ Dâsitân-ı Sultân Mahmûd Mesnevisi'nde Fiiller, Süleyman Demirel Üniversitesi Sosyal Bilimler Dergisi, Osman Yıldız, May 2007 (PDF)


References[edit]

Participles from the American Heritage Book of English Usage (1996).
Quirk, R; Greenbaum, S; Leech, G.; Svartvik, J. (1972). A Grammar of Contemporary English. Longman.

External links[edit]

List of English simple past and past participle verb forms from myenglishteacher.net
Ernest De Witt Burton: Moods and Tenses of New Testament Greek. The adverbial participle.







v
t
e


Lexical categories and their features



Noun



Abstract / Concrete
Adjectival
Agent
Animate / Inanimate
Attributive
Common / Proper
Countable / Mass / Collective
Initial-stress-derived
Relational
Strong / Weak
Verbal / Deverbal





Verb




Forms



Finite / Non-finite
Attributive
Converb
Gerund
Gerundive
Infinitive
Participle (adjectival · adverbial)
Supine
Verbal noun





Types



Accusative
Ambitransitive
Andative/Venitive
Anticausative
Autocausative
Auxiliary
Captative
Catenative
Compound
Copular
Defective
Denominal
Deponent
Ditransitive
Dynamic
ECM
Ergative
Frequentative
Impersonal
Inchoative
Intransitive
Irregular
Lexical
Light
Modal
Monotransitive
Negative
Performative
Phrasal
Predicative
Preterite-present
Reflexive
Regular
Separable
Stative
Stretched
Strong
Transitive
Unaccusative
Unergative
Weak








Adjective



Collateral
Demonstrative
Nominalized
Possessive
Postpositive





Adverb



Genitive
Conjunctive
Flat
Locative
Interrogative
Prepositional
Pronominal
Relative





Pronoun



Demonstrative
Disjunctive
Distributive
Donkey
Dummy
Formal/Informal
Gender-neutral
Gender-specific
Inclusive/Exclusive
Indefinite
Intensive
Interrogative
Objective
Personal
Possessive
Prepositional
Reciprocal
Reflexive
Relative
Resumptive
Subjective
Weak





Preposition/postposition



Inflected
Casally modulated
Stranded





Conjunction





Determiner



Article
Demonstrative
Interrogative
Possessive
Quantifier





Classifier



Measure word





Particle



Discourse
Interrogative
Modal
Noun
Possessive





Complementizer









Other



Yes and no
Copula
Coverb
Expletive
Interjection (verbal)
Preverb
Pro-form
Pro-sentence
Pro-verb
Procedure word
Prop-word











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Participle&oldid=816311351"					Categories: Syntactic entitiesHidden categories: Articles containing Ancient Greek-language textCS1 Hungarian-language sources (hu)