This article is about the travel document. For a gallery and links to articles about specific passports, see List of passports. For other uses, see Passport (disambiguation).
A passport is a travel document, usually issued by a country's government, that certifies the identity and nationality of its holder primarily for the purpose of international travel.[1] Standard passports may contain information such as the holder's name, place and date of birth, photograph, signature, and other identifying information. Many countries are moving towards including biometric information in a microchip embedded in the passport, making them machine-readable and difficult to counterfeit.[1] There are currently over 120 jurisdictions issuing e-Passport.[2] Previously issued passports usually remain valid until each expires.
A passport holder is normally entitled to enter the country that issued the passport, though some people entitled to a passport may not be full citizens with right of abode. A passport does not of itself create any rights in the country being visited or obligate the issue country in any way, such as providing consular assistance. Some passports attest to status as a diplomat or other official, entitled to rights and privileges such as immunity from arrest or prosecution.[1]
Many countries normally allow entry to holders of passports of other countries, sometimes requiring a visa also to be obtained, but this is not an automatic right. Many other additional conditions, such as not being likely to become a public charge for financial or other reasons, and the holder not having been convicted of a crime, may apply.[3] Where a country does not recognise another, or is in dispute with it, it may prohibit the use of their passport for travel to that other country, or may prohibit entry to holders of that other country's passports, and sometimes to others who have, for example, visited the other country.
Some countries and international organisations issue travel documents which are not standard passports, but enable the holder to travel internationally to countries that recognise the documents. For example, stateless persons are not normally issued a national passport, but may be able to obtain a refugee travel document or the earlier "Nansen passport" which enables them to travel to countries which recognise the document, and sometimes to return to the issuing country.
Passports are often requested in other circumstances to confirm identification such as checking in to a hotel or when changing money to a local currency.



Contents


1 History
2 Issuance

2.1 National conditions
2.2 National status

2.2.1 Multiple classes of nationality in a single country
2.2.2 Multiple types of passports, one nationality
2.2.3 Special nationality class through investment
2.2.4 Passports without sovereign territory


2.3 Validity
2.4 Value


3 Types

3.1 Full passports
3.2 Non-citizen passports

3.2.1 Latvia and Estonia
3.2.2 American Samoa
3.2.3 United Kingdom


3.3 Other types of travel documents
3.4 Intra-sovereign territory travel that requires passports


4 Designs and format

4.1 International Civil Aviation Organization standards
4.2 Common designs
4.3 Request page
4.4 Languages
4.5 Immigration stamps


5 Limitations on use

5.1 Asia
5.2 Europe
5.3 Oceania
5.4 South America


6 International travel without passports

6.1 Africa
6.2 Asia
6.3 Europe
6.4 North America
6.5 Oceania
6.6 South America


7 See also
8 Notes
9 References
10 Further reading
11 External links



History[edit]




First Japanese passport, issued in 1866.






Chinese passport from the Qing Dynasty, 24th Year of the Guangxu Reign - 1898.






An Ottoman passport (passavant) issued to Russian subject dated July 24th, 1900.


One of the earliest known references to paperwork that served in a role similar to that of a passport is found in the Hebrew Bible. Nehemiah 2:7-9, dating from approximately 450 BC, states that Nehemiah, an official serving King Artaxerxes I of Persia, asked permission to travel to Judea; the king granted leave and gave him a letter "to the governors beyond the river" requesting safe passage for him as he traveled through their lands.
In the medieval Islamic Caliphate, a form of passport was the bara'a, a receipt for taxes paid. Only people who paid their zakah (for Muslims) or jizya (for dhimmis) taxes were permitted to travel to different regions of the Caliphate; thus, the bara'a receipt was a "traveler's basic passport."[4]
Etymological sources show that the term "passport" is from a medieval document that was required in order to pass through the gate (or "porte") of a city wall or to pass through a territory.[5][6] In medieval Europe, such documents were issued to travelers by local authorities, and generally contained a list of towns and cities the document holder was permitted to enter or pass through. On the whole, documents were not required for travel to sea ports, which were considered open trading points, but documents were required to travel inland from sea ports.[citation needed]
King Henry V of England is credited with having invented what some consider the first true passport, as a means of helping his subjects prove who they were in foreign lands. The earliest reference to these documents is found in a 1414 Act of Parliament.[7][8] In 1540, granting travel documents in England became a role of the Privy Council of England, and it was around this time that the term "passport" was used. In 1794, issuing British passports became the job of the Office of the Secretary of State.[7] The 1548 Imperial Diet of Augsburg required the public to hold imperial documents for travel, at the risk of permanent exile.[9]
A rapid expansion of railway infrastructure and wealth in Europe beginning in the mid-nineteenth century led to large increases in the volume of international travel and a consequent unique dilution of the passport system for approximately thirty years prior to World War I. The speed of trains, as well as the number of passengers that crossed multiple borders, made enforcement of passport laws difficult. The general reaction was the relaxation of passport requirements.[10] In the later part of the nineteenth century and up to World War I, passports were not required, on the whole, for travel within Europe, and crossing a border was a relatively straightforward procedure. Consequently, comparatively few people held passports.
During World War I, European governments introduced border passport requirements for security reasons, and to control the emigration of people with useful skills. These controls remained in place after the war, becoming a standard, though controversial, procedure. British tourists of the 1920s complained, especially about attached photographs and physical descriptions, which they considered led to a "nasty dehumanization".[11]
In 1920, the League of Nations held a conference on passports, the Paris Conference on Passports & Customs Formalities and Through Tickets.[12] Passport guidelines and a general booklet design resulted from the conference,[13] which was followed up by conferences in 1926 and 1927.[14]
While the United Nations held a travel conference in 1963, no passport guidelines resulted from it. Passport standardization came about in 1980, under the auspices of the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO). ICAO standards include those for machine-readable passports.[15] Such passports have an area where some of the information otherwise written in textual form is written as strings of alphanumeric characters, printed in a manner suitable for optical character recognition. This enables border controllers and other law enforcement agents to process these passports more quickly, without having to input the information manually into a computer. ICAO publishes Doc 9303 Machine Readable Travel Documents, the technical standard for machine-readable passports.[16] A more recent standard is for biometric passports. These contain biometrics to authenticate the identity of travellers. The passport's critical information is stored on a tiny RFID computer chip, much like information stored on smartcards. Like some smartcards, the passport booklet design calls for an embedded contactless chip that is able to hold digital signature data to ensure the integrity of the passport and the biometric data.




WW2 Spanish official passport issued in late 1944 and used during the last 6 months of the war by an official being sent to Berlin.


Issuance[edit]
Historically, legal authority to issue passports is founded on the exercise of each country's executive discretion (or Crown prerogative). Certain legal tenets follow, namely: first, passports are issued in the name of the state; second, no person has a legal right to be issued a passport; third, each country's government, in exercising its executive discretion, has complete and unfettered discretion to refuse to issue or to revoke a passport; and fourth, that the latter discretion is not subject to judicial review. However, legal scholars including A.J. Arkelian have argued that evolutions in both the constitutional law of democratic countries and the international law applicable to all countries now render those historical tenets both obsolete and unlawful.[17][18]
Under some circumstances some countries allow people to hold more than one passport document. This may apply, for example, to people who travel a lot on business, and may need to have, say, a passport to travel on while another is awaiting a visa for another country. The UK for example may issue a second passport if the applicant can show a need and supporting documentation, such as a letter from an employer.
National conditions[edit]
Many countries issue only one passport to each national (an exception is the Family Passport, see below under "Types"). When passport holders apply for a new passport (commonly, due to expiration of an old passport or lack of blank pages), they may be required to surrender the old passport for invalidation. In some circumstances an expired passport is not required to be surrendered or invalidated (for example, if it contains an unexpired visa).
Under the law of most countries, passports are government property, and may be limited or revoked at any time, usually on specified grounds, and possibly subject to judicial review.[19] In many countries, surrender of the passport is a condition of granting bail in lieu of imprisonment for a pending criminal trial.[20]
Each country sets its own conditions for the issue of passports.[21] For example, Pakistan requires applicants to be interviewed before a Pakistani passport will be granted.[22] When applying for a passport or a national ID card, all Pakistanis are required to sign an oath declaring Mirza Ghulam Ahmad to be an impostor prophet and all Ahmadis to be non-Muslims.[23]
Some countries limit the issuance of passports, where incoming and outgoing international travels are highly regulated, such as North Korea, where general use passports are the privilege of a very small number of people trusted by the government.[citation needed] Other countries put requirements on some citizens in order to be granted passports, such as Finland, where male citizens aged 18–30 years must prove that they have completed, or are exempt from, their obligatory military service to be granted an unrestricted passport; otherwise a passport is issued valid only until the end of their 28th year, to ensure that they return to carry out military service.[24] Other countries with obligatory military service, such as Syria, have similar requirements.[25]
National status[edit]
Passports contain a statement of the nationality of the holder. In most countries, only one class of nationality exists, and only one type of ordinary passport is issued. However, several types of exceptions exist:
Multiple classes of nationality in a single country[edit]
The United Kingdom has a number of classes of United Kingdom nationality due to its colonial history. As a result, the UK issues various passports which are similar in appearance but representative of different nationality statuses which, in turn, has caused foreign governments to subject holders of different UK passports to different entry requirements.
Multiple types of passports, one nationality[edit]
The People's Republic of China (PRC) authorizes its Special Administrative Regions of Hong Kong and Macau to issue passports to their permanent residents with Chinese nationality under the "one country, two systems" arrangement. Visa policies imposed by foreign authorities on Hong Kong and Macau permanent residents holding such passports are different from those holding ordinary passports of the People's Republic of China. A Hong Kong Special Administrative Region passport (HKSAR passport) permits visa-free access to many more countries than ordinary PRC passports.
The three constituent countries of the Danish Realm have a common nationality. Denmark proper is a member of the European Union, but Greenland and Faroe Islands are not. Danish citizens residing in Greenland or Faroe Islands can choose between holding a Danish EU passport and a Greenlandic or Faroese non-EU Danish passport.
Special nationality class through investment[edit]
In rare instances a nationality is available through investment. Some investors have been described in Tongan passports as 'a Tongan protected person', a status which does not necessarily carry with it the right of abode in Tonga.[26]
Passports without sovereign territory[edit]
Several entities without a sovereign territory issue documents described as passports, most notably Iroquois League,[27][28] the Aboriginal Provisional Government in Australia and the Sovereign Military Order of Malta.[29] Such documents are not necessarily accepted for entry into a country.
Validity[edit]
Main article: Passport validity
Passports have a limited validity, usually between 5 and 10 years.





Maximum adult passport validity across the world



Many countries require a remaining passport validity of no less than six months on arrival, as well as having at least two to four blank pages.[30]
Value[edit]
One method to measure the 'value' of a passport is to calculate its 'visa-free score', which is the number of countries that allow the holder of that passport entry without requiring a visa. The top 10 groups are as follows:[31]

Germany (visa-free score: 161)
Singapore, Sweden (160)
Denmark, Finland, Italy, Spain, United Kingdom (159)
Luxembourg, France, Netherlands, Belgium, Austria, Portugal, Norway (158)
Switzerland, South Korea, Japan, Ireland, United States of America, Canada (157)
Greece, Australia (156)
Malta, Czechia, Malaysia, New Zealand (155)
Iceland (154)
Hungary (153)
Slovenia, Slovakia, Poland, Lithuania, Latvia (152)

Types[edit]






This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (July 2014) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



A rough standardization exists in types of passports throughout the world, although passport types, number of pages and definitions can vary by country.
Full passports[edit]


 
Left to right: diplomatic, official, and regular passport from India.
Each passport type has a different cover colour.



Passport (also called tourist passport or regular passport) – The most common form of passport, issued to citizens and other nationals. Occasionally, children are registered within the parents' passport, making it equivalent to a family passport.[citation needed]
Official passport (also called service passport) – Issued to government employees for work-related travel, and their accompanying dependants.[citation needed]
Diplomatic passport – Issued to diplomats of a country and their accompanying dependents for official international travel and residence. Accredited diplomats of certain grades may be granted diplomatic immunity by a host country, but this is not automatically conferred by holding a diplomatic passport. Any diplomatic privileges apply in the country to which the diplomat is accredited; elsewhere diplomatic passport holders must adhere to the same regulations and travel procedures as are required of other nationals of their country.[citation needed]
Emergency passport (also called temporary passport) – Issued to persons whose passports were lost or stolen, without time to obtain a replacement. Laissez-passer are also used for this purpose.[32]




British Emergency Passport



Collective passport – Issued to defined groups for travel together to particular destinations, such as a group of school children on a school trip.[33]
Family passport – Issued to an entire family. There is one passport holder, who may travel alone or with other family members included in the passport. A family member who is not the passport holder cannot use the passport for travel without the passport holder.[citation needed] Few countries now issue family passports; for example, all the EU countries and Canada require each child to have their own passport.[34]

Non-citizen passports[edit]
Latvia and Estonia[edit]
Further information: Non-citizen (Latvia) and Estonian nationality law
Non-citizens in Latvia and Estonia are individuals, primarily of Russian or Ukrainian ethnicity, who are not citizens of Latvia or Estonia but whose families have resided in the area since the Soviet era, and thus have the right to a non-citizen passport issued by the Latvian government as well as other specific rights. Approximately two thirds of them are ethnic Russians, followed by ethnic Belarusians, ethnic Ukrainians, ethnic Poles and ethnic Lithuanians.[35][36]
Non-citizens in the two countries are issued special non-citizen passports[37][38][39] as opposed to regular passports issued by the Estonian and Latvian authorities to citizens. This practice has been described as xenophobic.[40]
American Samoa[edit]
Main article: United States nationality law § Nationals
Although all U.S. citizens are also U.S. nationals, the reverse is not true. As specified in 8 U.S.C. § 1408, a person whose only connection to the U.S. is through birth in an outlying possession (which is defined in 8 U.S.C. § 1101 as American Samoa and Swains Island, the latter of which is administered as part of American Samoa), or through descent from a person so born, acquires U.S. nationality but not U.S. citizenship. This was formerly the case in only four other current or former U.S. overseas possessions.[41]
The U.S. passport issued to non-citizen nationals contains the endorsement code 9 which states: "THE BEARER IS A UNITED STATES NATIONAL AND NOT A UNITED STATES CITIZEN." on the annotations page.[42]
Non-citizen U.S. nationals may reside and work in the United States without restrictions, and may apply for citizenship under the same rules as resident aliens. Like resident aliens, they are not presently allowed by any U.S. state to vote in federal or state elections, although, as with resident aliens, there is no constitutional prohibition against their doing so.
United Kingdom[edit]
Main article: British nationality law § Classes of British nationality
Due to the complexity of British nationality law, the United Kingdom has six variants of British nationality. Out of these variants, however, only the status known as British citizen grants the right of abode in a particular country or territory (the United Kingdom) while others do not. Hence, the UK issues British passports to those who are British nationals but not British citizens, which include British Overseas Territories citizens, British Overseas citizens, British subjects, British Nationals (Overseas) and British Protected Persons.[43]
Other types of travel documents[edit]




Nansen passport for refugees (now defunct)



Laissez-passer — Issued by national governments or international organizations (such as the U.N.) as emergency passports, travel on humanitarian grounds, or for official travel.
Interpol Travel Document — Issued by Interpol to police officers for official travel, allowing them to bypass certain visa restrictions in certain member states when investigating transnational crime.
Certificate of identity (also called alien's passport, or informally, a Travel Document) — Issued under certain circumstances, such as statelessness, to non-citizen residents. An example is the "Nansen passport" (pictured). Sometimes issued as an internal passport to non-residents.
Refugee travel document — Issued to a refugee by the state in which she or he currently resides allowing them to travel outside that state and to return. Made necessary because refugees are unlikely to be able to obtain passports from their state of nationality.
Permits. Many types of travel permit exist around the world. Some, like the U.S. Re-entry Permit and Japan Re-entry Permit, allow residents of those countries who are unable to obtain a permit to travel outside the country and return. Others, like the Bangladesh Special Passport,[44] the Two-way permit, and the Taibaozheng (Taiwan Compatriot Entry Permit), are used for travel to and from specific countries or locations, for example to travel between mainland China and Macau, or between Taiwan and China.
Chinese Travel Document — Issued by the People's Republic of China to Chinese citizens in lieu of a passport.
Hajj passport — a special passport used only for Hajj and Umrah pilgrimage to Mecca and Medina.

Intra-sovereign territory travel that requires passports[edit]
For some countries, passports are required for some types of travel between their sovereign territories. Two examples of this are:

Hong Kong and Macau, both Chinese special administrative regions (SARs), have their own immigration control systems different from each other and mainland China. Travelling between the three is technically not international, so residents of the three locations do not use passports to travel between the three places, instead using other documents, such as the Mainland Travel Permit (for the people of Hong Kong and Macau). Foreigners are required to present their passports with applicable visas at the immigration control points.[citation needed]
Malaysia, where an arrangement was agreed upon during the formation of the country, the East Malaysian states of Sabah and Sarawak were allowed to retain their respective immigration control systems. Therefore, a passport is required for foreigners when travelling from Peninsular Malaysia to East Malaysia, as well as traveling between Sabah and Sarawak. For social/business visits not more than 3 months, Peninsular Malaysians are required to produce a Malaysian identity card or, for children below 12 years a birth certificate, and obtain a special immigration printout form to be kept until departure.[45] However, one may present a Malaysian passport or a Restricted Travel Document and get an entry stamp on the travel document to avoid the hassle of keeping an extra sheet of paper. For other purposes, Peninsular Malaysians are required to have a long-term residence permit along with a passport or a Restricted Travel Document.
Norfolk Island, one of Australia's external, self-governing territories, has its own immigration controls. Australian and New Zealand citizens travelling to the territory are required to carry a passport, or an Australian Document of Identity, while people of other nationalities must also have a valid Australian visa and/or Permanent Resident of Norfolk Island visa.[46]

Internal passports are issued by some countries as an identity document. An example is the internal passport of Russia or certain other post-Soviet countries dating back to imperial times. Some countries use internal passports for controlling migration within a country.
Designs and format[edit]
International Civil Aviation Organization standards[edit]




Colors across the world for modern passport booklet covers


The International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) issues passport standards which are treated as recommendations to national governments. The size of passport booklets normally complies with the ISO/IEC 7810 ID-3 standard, which specifies a size of 125 × 88 mm (4.921 × 3.465 in). This size is the B7 format. Passport cards are issued to the ID-1 (credit card sized) standard.[47] [48] [49][50][51]




More than 5 million passports of the United Kingdom (also called the "red book") are printed each year—one every 2.5 seconds—at this secret location in the North of England[52]



A standard passport booklet format includes the cover, which contains the name of the issuing country, a national symbol, a description of the document (e.g., passport, diplomatic passport), and a biometric passport symbol, if applicable. Inside, there is a title page, also naming the country. A data page follows, containing information about the bearer and the issuing authority. There are blank pages for visas, and to stamp for entries and exit. Passports have numerical or alphanumerical designators ("serial number") assigned by the issuing authority.
Machine-readable passport standards have been issued by the ICAO,[53] with an area set aside where most of the information written as text is also printed in a manner suitable for optical character recognition.
Biometric passports (or e-Passports) have an embedded contactless chip in order to conform to ICAO standards. These chips contain data about the passport bearer, a photographic portrait in digital format, and data about the passport itself. Many countries now issue biometric passports, in order to speed up clearance through immigration and the prevention of identity fraud. These reasons are disputed by privacy advocates.[54][55]

Common designs[edit]






This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (November 2013) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Main articles: Andean passport, CARICOM passport, Central America-4 passport, ECOWAS passport, Passports of the European Economic Area, and Passports of the European Union



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Common-design passport groups.






An Argentine passport with the name of Mercosur at the top


Passport booklets from almost all countries around the world display the national coat of arms of the issuing country on the front cover. The United Nations keeps a record of national coats of arms.
There are several groups of countries, who through mutual agreement, have adopted common designs for the passports of their respective countries:

The European Union. The design and layout of passports of the member states of the European Union are a result of consensus and recommendation, rather than of directive.[56] Passports are issued by member states and may consist of either the usual passport booklet or the newer passport card format. The covers of ordinary passport booklets are burgundy-red (except for Croatia which has a blue cover), with "European Union" written in the national language or languages. Below that are the name of the country, the national coat of arms, the word or words for "passport", and, at the bottom, the symbol for a biometric passport. The data page can be at the front or at the back of a passport booklet and there are significant design differences throughout to indicate which member state is the issuer.[note 1] Only British and Irish passports are not obliged by EU law to contain fingerprint information in their chip.
In 2006, the members of the CA-4 Treaty (Guatemala, El Salvador, Honduras, and Nicaragua) adopted a common-design passport, called the Central American passport, following a design already in use by Nicaragua and El Salvador since the mid-1990s. It features a navy-blue cover with the words "América Central" and a map of Central America, and with the territory of the issuing country highlighted in gold (in place of the individual nations' coats of arms). At the bottom of the cover are the name of the issuing country and the passport type.
The members of the Andean Community of Nations (Bolivia, Colombia, Ecuador, and Peru) began to issue commonly designed passports in 2005. Specifications for the common passport format were outlined in an Andean Council of Foreign Ministers meeting in 2002.[57] Previously-issued national passports will be valid until their expiry dates. Andean passports are bordeaux (burgundy-red), with words in gold. Centered above the national seal of the issuing country is the name of the regional body in Spanish (Comunidad Andina). Below the seal is the official name of the member country. At the bottom of the cover is the Spanish word "pasaporte" along with the English "passport". Venezuela had issued Andean passports, but has subsequently left the Andean Community, so they will no longer issue Andean passports.
The Union of South American Nations signaled an intention to establish a common passport design, but it appears that implementation will take many years.





A Trinidad and Tobago passport with the CARICOM logo at the top



The member states of the Caribbean Community (CARICOM) recently began issuing passports with a common design. It features the CARICOM symbol along with the national coat of arms and name of the member state, rendered in a CARICOM official language (English, French, Dutch). The member states which use the common design are Antigua and Barbuda, Barbados, Belize, Dominica, Grenada, Guyana, Jamaica, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Suriname, and Trinidad and Tobago. There was a movement by the Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States (OECS) to issue a common designed passport, but the implementation of the CARICOM passport made that redundant, and it was abandoned.

Request page[edit]




Passport message found inside the United States passport


Passports often contain a message, usually near the front, requesting that the passport's bearer be allowed to pass freely, and further requesting that, in the event of need, the bearer be granted assistance. The message is sometimes made in the name of the government or the head of state, and may be written in more than one language, depending on the language policies of the issuing authority. There are countries, such as Switzerland, Finland and Austria, on whose passports such messages are absent.[citation needed]
Languages[edit]






This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (January 2014) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



In 1920, an international conference on passports and through tickets held by the League of Nations recommended that passports be issued in French, historically the language of diplomacy, and one other language.[58] Currently, the ICAO recommends that passports be issued in English and French, or in the national language of the issuing country and in either English or French. Many European countries use their national language, along with English and French.
Some unusual language combinations are:

Passports of European Union states bear all of the official languages of the EU. Two or three languages are printed at the relevant points, followed by reference numbers which point to the passport page where translations into the remaining languages appear. In addition to the official EU languages, British passports bear Welsh and Scottish Gaelic.
The Barbadian passport and the United States passport are tri-lingual: English, French and Spanish. United States passports were traditionally English and French, but began being printed with a Spanish message and labels during the late 1990s, in recognition of Puerto Rico's Spanish-speaking status. Only the message and labels are in multiple languages, the cover and instructions pages are printed solely in English.
In Belgium, all three official languages (Dutch, French, German) appear on the cover, in addition to English on the main page. The order of the official languages depends on the official residence of the holder.
Passports of Bosnia and Herzegovina are in the three official languages (Bosnian, Serbian, Croatian), in addition to English.
Brazilian passports contain four languages: Portuguese, the official country language, Spanish, in accordance with neighboring nations, English and French.
Cypriot passports are in Greek, Turkish and English.
The first page of a Libyan passport is in Arabic only. The last page (first page from western viewpoint) has an English equivalent of the information on the Arabic first page (western last page). Similar arrangements are found in passports of some other Arab countries.
Iraqi passports are in Arabic, Kurdish and English.
Macau SAR passports are in three languages: Chinese, Portuguese and English.
New Zealand passports are in English and Māori.
Norwegian passports are in the two forms of the Norwegian language, Bokmål and Nynorsk, and in English.
Sri Lankan passports are in Sinhalese, Tamil and English.
Swiss passports are in five languages: German, French, Italian, Romansh and English.
Syrian passports are in Arabic, English, and French.

Immigration stamps[edit]






This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (January 2014) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Main article: Passport stamp
For immigration control, officials of many countries use entry and exit stamps. Depending on the country, a stamp can serve different purposes. For example, in the United Kingdom, an immigration stamp in a passport includes the formal leave to enter granted to a person subject to entry control. In other countries, a stamp activates or acknowledges the continuing leave conferred in the passport bearer's entry clearance.
Under the Schengen system, a foreign passport is stamped with a date stamp which does not indicate any duration of stay. This means that the person is deemed to have permission to remain either for three months or for the period shown on his visa (whichever is shorter).
Visas often take the form of an inked stamp, although some countries use adhesive stickers that incorporate security features to discourage forgery.
Member states of the European Union are not permitted to place a stamp in the passport of a person who is not subject to immigration control. Stamping is prohibited because it is an imposition of a control that the person is not subject to.
Countries usually have different styles of stamps for entries and exits, to make it easier to identify the movements of people. Other ways to easily determine information. Ink color might be used to designate mode of transportation (air, land or sea), such as in Hong Kong prior to 1997; while border styles did the same thing in Macau. Other variations include changing the size of the stamp to indicate length of stay, as in Singapore.
Immigration stamps are a useful reminder of travels. Some travellers "collect" immigration stamps in passports, and will choose to enter or exit countries via different means (for example, land, sea or air) in order to have different stamps in their passports. Some countries, such as Liechtenstein,[59] that do not stamp passports may provide a passport stamp on request for such "memory" purposes. However, such memorial stamps can preclude the passport bearer from travelling to certain countries. For example, Finland consistently rejects what they call 'falsified passports', where travelers have been refused visas or entry due to memorial stamps and are required to renew their passports.
Limitations on use[edit]






This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (January 2014) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Main article: Visa (document)
A passport is merely an identity document that is widely recognised for international travel purposes, and the possession of a passport does not in itself entitle a traveller to enter any country other than the country that issued it, and sometimes not even then. Many countries normally require visitors to obtain a visa. Each country has different requirements or conditions for the grant of visas, such as for the visitor not being likely to become a public charge for financial, health, family, or other reasons, and the holder not having been convicted of a crime or considered likely to commit one.[3][60]
Where a country does not recognise another, or is in dispute with it, entry may be prohibited to holders of passports of the other party to the dispute, and sometimes to others who have, for example, visited the other country; examples are listed below. A country that issues a passport may also restrict its validity or use in specified circumstances, such as use for travel to certain countries for political, security or health reasons.
Asia[edit]
Main articles: Bangladeshi passport, Chinese passport, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region passport, Israeli passport, Macau Special Administrative Region passport, Philippine passport, Republic of Korea passport, and Taiwan passport

Bangladesh — a Bangladeshi passport is valid for travel to all countries except Israel.
Mainland China and Taiwan — Nationals of Taiwan (ROC) use a special travel permit (Mainland Travel Permit for Taiwan Residents) issued by China's (PRC) Ministry of Public Security to enter mainland China. Nationals of Mainland China entering Taiwan must also use a special travel permit (Exit & Entry Permit) issued by the ROC's immigration department. Depending on where they're traveling from, they also need either a Chinese passport when departing from outside Mainland China, or a passport-like travel document, known as Taiwan Travel Permit for Mainland Residents, when departing from Mainland China (along with a special visa-like exit endorsement issued by PRC immigration authorities affixed to the permit). Chinese nationals who are Hong Kong and Macau permanent residents can apply for the ROC Exit and Entry Permit online or on arrival and must travel with their HKSAR passport, MSAR passport or BN(O) passport.
Hong Kong and Macau — A 'Home Return Permit' is required for Chinese citizens domiciled in Hong Kong and Macau to enter and exit mainland China. The Hong Kong Special Administrative Region passport and the Macau Special Administrative Region passport cannot be used for travel to mainland China. Also, British National (Overseas) passports cannot be used by Chinese citizens who reside in Hong Kong as the PRC does not recognize dual nationality. Mainland China residents visiting Hong Kong or Macau are required to hold an Exit-entry Permit for Travelling to and from Hong Kong and Macau (往来港澳通行证 or 双程证) issued by Mainland authorities, along with an endorsement (签注), on the Exit-entry Permit which needs to be applied each time (similar to a visa) when visiting the SARs (except residents with hukou in Shenzhen can apply for a multi-entry endorsement).[61] Non-permanent residents of Macau who are not eligible for a passport may travel to Hong Kong on the Visit Permit to Hong Kong (澳門居民往來香港特別行政區旅行證) valid for 7 years, which allows holders to travel only to Hong Kong SAR during its validity.
Israel —




Legend:
  Israel
  Countries that reject passports from Israel
  Countries that reject passports from Israel and any other passports which contain Israeli stamps or visas



Until 1952, Israeli passports were normally not valid for travel to Germany, as in the aftermath of the Holocaust it was considered improper for Israelis to visit Germany on any but official state business. Some Muslim and African countries do not permit entry to anyone using an Israeli passport. In addition, Iran,[62] Kuwait,[63] Lebanon,[64] Libya,[65] Saudi Arabia,[66] Sudan,[67] Syria[68] and Yemen[69] do not allow entry to people with evidence of travel to Israel, or whose passports have either a used or an unused Israeli visa. For this reason, Israel no longer issues visa stamps directly on passports, but on a slip of paper that serves as a substitute for a stamp on a travel document.[citation needed] Some countries do not permit their passports to be used for travel to Israel.
Malaysia — a Malaysian passport is valid to travel to all countries except Israel.
Pakistan — a Pakistani passport is valid for travel to all countries except Israel.
Philippines — between 2004 and mid-2011, Philippine passports could not be used for travel to Iraq due to the security threats in that country.[70]
South Korea — the South Korean government has banned travel to Afghanistan, Iraq, Somalia, Syria and Yemen for safety reasons.[71] South Korea does not consider travel within the Korean peninsula (between South Korean and North Korean administrations) to be international travel, as South Korea's constitution regards the entire Korean peninsula as its territory. South Koreans traveling to the Kaesong Industrial Region in North Korea pass through the Gyeongui Highway Transit Office at Dorasan, Munsan, where they present a plastic Visit Certificate (방문증명서) card issued by the South Korean Ministry of Unification, and an immigration-stamped Passage Certificate (개성공업지구 출입증) issued by the Kaesong Industrial District Management Committee (개성공업지구 관리위원회).[72] Until 2008, South Koreans traveling to tourist areas in the North such as Mount Kumgang needed to carry a South Korean ID card for security reasons.

Europe[edit]
Main articles: Visa policy of Azerbaijan, Visa policy of Armenia, Cypriot passport, Spanish passport, and British passport (Gibraltar)

As a result of the Nagorno-Karabakh War between Azerbaijan and Armenia, Azerbaijan refuses entry to holders of Armenian passports, as well as passport-holders of any other country if they are of Armenian descent. It also strictly refuses entry to foreigners in general whose passport shows evidence of entry into the self-proclaimed Nagorno-Karabakh Republic, immediately declaring them permanent personae non gratae. Conversely, Armenia does allow visa-free entry for holders of Azerbaijani passports.
The Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus (TRNC) issues passports, but only Turkey recognises its statehood. TRNC passports are not accepted for entry into the Republic of Cyprus via airports or sea ports, but are accepted at the designated green line crossing points. However, all Turkish Cypriots are entitled by law to the issue of a Republic of Cyprus EU passport, and since the opening of the border between the two sides, Cypriot and EU citizens can travel freely between them. The United Kingdom, United States, France, Australia, Pakistan and Syria currently officially accept TRNC passports with the relevant visas.
Spain does not accept United Kingdom passports issued in Gibraltar, alleging that the Government of Gibraltar is not a competent authority for issuing UK passports. The word "Gibraltar" now appears beneath the words "United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland" on the covers of British passports issued in Gibraltar.
British passports may be issued to people holding any of the various forms of British nationality, with holders identified as of 2014[update] as: British citizens (GBR), British Overseas Territories Citizens (GBD), British Overseas citizens (GBO), British subjects (GBS), British protected persons (GBP), and British Nationals (Overseas) (GBN). Holders other than British citizens may not have the right to enter or reside in the United Kingdom, and other countries may apply restrictions that do not apply to GBR holders.

Oceania[edit]

Some countries do not accept Tongan Protected Person passports, though they accept Tongan citizen passports.[73] Tongan Protected Person passports are sold by the Government of Tonga to anyone who is not a Tongan national.[74] A holder of a Tongan Protected Person passport is forbidden to enter or settle in Tonga. Generally, those holders are refugees or stateless persons for some other reason.

South America[edit]
Main article: Brazilian passport

For countries that do not maintain diplomatic relations with Brazil, such as Kosovo, Taiwan and Western Sahara, diplomatic, official and work passports are not accepted, and visas are only granted to tourist or business visitors. In addition, except for Kosovo and Taiwan, these visas must be issued on a Brazilian “laissez-passer”, not on the country's passport.[75]

International travel without passports[edit]
International travel is possible without passports in some circumstances.[76] Nonetheless, a document stating citizenship, such as a national identity card or an Enhanced Drivers License, is usually required.[76]
Africa[edit]

Members of the East African Community (composed of Kenya, Tanzania, Uganda, Rwanda and Burundi) may issue an East African passport. East African passports are recognised by only the five members, and are only used for travel between or among those countries. The requirements for eligibility are less rigorous than are the requirements for national passports used for other international travel.
The member states of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) do not require passports for their citizens traveling within the community. National ID cards are sufficient. The member states are Benin, Burkina Faso, Cape Verde, Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, Guinea Bissau, Ivory Coast, Liberia, Mali, Niger, Nigeria, Senegal, Sierra Leone, and Togo.

Asia[edit]

Passports are not needed by citizens of India and Nepal to travel to each other's country, but some identification is required for border crossings. Additionally, Indians can travel in Bhutan without a passport, while Bhutanese must travel with their citizenship identity cards.
Lebanon and Syria citizens do not require passports when traveling in either country if they are carrying ID cards.
Travel between Russia and some former Soviet republics, designated by membership in the Commonwealth of Independent States, may be accomplished with a national identity document (e.g. an internal passport) or passport. However, according to a statement made by President Putin in December 2012, Russia has plans to restrict travel without a passport only to citizens of the member states of the Customs Union of Belarus, Kazakhstan and Russia by 2015. After that date, citizens of other CIS states will need passports (although not visas) to visit Russia.[77]
Citizens of the Cooperation Council for the Arab States of the Gulf countries need only national ID cards (also referred to as civil ID cards) to cross the borders of council countries. This also applies to anyone that has a residence permit in any of the GCC countries.
The 20 countries of the APEC issue the APEC Business Travel Card, which allows visa-free entry into all participating countries.

Europe[edit]

Travel with minimal travel documents is possible between the United Kingdom, the Isle of Man, the Channel Islands, and the Republic of Ireland, which together form the Common Travel Area
The countries that apply the Schengen Agreement (Schengen Area, a subset of the EEA) do not implement passport controls between each other, unless exceptional circumstances occur. It is, however, mandatory to carry a passport, compliant national identity card or alien's resident permit.
A citizen of one of the 28 member states of the European Union or of Liechtenstein, Andorra, Monaco, Norway, San Marino, Iceland and Switzerland may travel in and between these countries using a standard compliant National Identity Card rather than a passport. Not all EU/EEA member states issue standard compliant National Identity Cards, notably Denmark, Norway, Iceland, Ireland and the United Kingdom.
The Nordic Passport Union allows Nordic citizens—citizens from Denmark (including the Faroe Islands), Finland, Iceland, Norway and Sweden to visit any of these countries without being in possession of identity documents (Greenland and Svalbard are excluded). This is an extension of the principle that Nordic citizens need no identity document in their own country. A means to prove identity when requested is recommended (e.g. using a driver's license, which does not state citizenship), even in one's own country. Joining the Schengen Area in 1997 has not changed these rules.
Albania accepts national ID cards or passports for entry from nationals of the EU, EFTA, Bosnia & Herzegovina, Kazakhstan, Kosovo, Monaco, Montenegro, the Republic of Macedonia, San Marino and Singapore.
Bosnia and Herzegovina accepts national ID cards or passports for entry from citizens of the EU, EFTA, Montenegro, Monaco, San Marino and Serbia.
The Republic of Macedonia accepts national ID cards or passports for entry from nationals of the EU, EFTA, Albania, Montenegro and Serbia.
Montenegro accepts national ID cards or passports for entry from nationals of the EU, EFTA, Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Kosovo, Monaco, the Republic of Macedonia, San Marino and Serbia.
Serbia accepts national ID cards or passports for entry from nationals of the EU, EFTA (except Liechtenstein), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Montenegro and the Republic of Macedonia.
Citizens of Belgium, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Italy, Liechtenstein, Luxemburg, Malta, the Netherlands, the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus, Portugal, Spain, Switzerland, and Ukraine are allowed to enter Turkey with a valid national ID card.
EU and Turkish citizens are allowed to enter the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus with a valid ID card.
EU and Turkish citizens are allowed to enter Georgia with a valid ID card.

North America[edit]




The United States Passport Card






A NEXUS Card



CARICOM countries issue a CARICOM passport to their citizens, and as of June 2009, eligible nationals in participating countries will be permitted to use the CARICOM travel card which provides for intra-community travel without a passport.
There are several cards available to certain North American residents which allow passport free travel; generally only for land and sea border crossings:






The U.S. Passport card is an alternative to an ordinary U.S. passport booklet for land and sea travel within North America (Canada, Mexico, the Caribbean, and Bermuda). Like the passport book, the passport card is issued only to U.S. citizens and non-citizen nationals.[78]
The NEXUS card allows border crossing between the U.S. and Canada for U.S. nationals and Canadian citizens. It can also be used for air travel as the only means of identification for U.S. nationals and Canadian citizens. The card can also be used for entering the U.S. from Mexico but not vice versa.[78]
The SENTRI card allows passport-free entry into the U.S. from Mexico and Canada (but not vice versa) for U.S. citizens and nationals as well as Canadian citizens.[78]
The FAST card can be used for crossing between U.S. and Canada, as well as entering U.S. from Mexico for U.S. and Canadian citizens.[78]
U.S. nationals may further enter the U.S. and Canada using an enhanced driver license issued by the States of Vermont, Washington, Michigan and New York (which qualify as WHTI compliant). Other documents that can be used to enter the U.S. include: enhanced tribal cards; U.S. military ID cards plus military travel orders; U.S. merchant mariner ID cards, when traveling on maritime business; Native American tribal ID cards; Form I-872 American Indian card.[78]
Canadian citizens may enter the U.S. and Canada via land or sea using an "Enhanced" WHTI-compliant driver's license. These are currently issued by British Columbia, Manitoba, and Ontario. If Canadians wish to enter the U.S. via air, they must use a passport book or a Nexus card.[78]
Canadian citizens may return to Canada using any proof of citizenship and identity, however those without an acceptable document will be questioned by a Border Services officer until their identity is established.[79]
For travel to the French islands of Saint Pierre and Miquelon directly from Canada, Canadians and foreign nationals holding Canadian identification documents are exempted from passport and visa requirements for stays of maximum duration of 3 months within a period of 6 months. Accepted documents include a driver's licence, citizenship card, permanent resident card and others. Those without Canadian identifications are not exempt and must carry a passport.





Oceania[edit]




The Torres Strait separating Australia and Papua



Residents of nine coastal villages in Papua New Guinea are permitted to enter the 'Protected Zone' of the Torres Strait (part of Queensland, Australia) for traditional purposes. This exemption from passport control is part of a treaty between Australia and Papua New Guinea negotiated when PNG became independent from Australia in 1975.[80] Vessels from other parts of Papua New Guinea and other countries attempting to cross into Australia or Australian waters are stopped by Australian Customs or the Royal Australian Navy.

South America[edit]

Many Central American and South American nationals can travel within their respective regional economic zones, such as Mercosur and the Andean Community of Nations, or on a bilateral basis (e.g., between Chile and Peru, between Brazil and Chile), without passports, presenting instead their national ID cards, or, for short stays, their voter-registration cards. In some cases this travel must be done overland rather than by air. There are plans to extend these rights to all of South America under a Union of South American Nations, and it already extends them (since 2006[81]) to every South American country except Guyana and Suriname.

See also[edit]

List of passports
Identity theft
Passport stamp

Notes[edit]



^ All nations issuing EU passports make an effort to ensure that their passports feature nationally distinctive designs. Finnish passports make a flip-book of a moose walking. The UK passport launched on 3 November 2015 features Shakespeare's Globe Theater on pages 26-27, with architectural plans as well as performers on stage. Each UK passport page is completely different from all the other pages and from all the other pages of other EU passports.



References[edit]



^ a b c Cane, P & Conaghan, J (2008). The New Oxford Companion to Law. London: Oxford University Press. ISBN 9780199290543. 
^ The electronic passport in 2017 and beyond
^ a b "ilink - USCIS". uscis.gov. 
^ Frank, Daniel (1995). The Jews of Medieval Islam: Community, Society, and Identity. Brill Publishers. p. 6. ISBN 90-04-10404-6. 
^ George William Lemon (1783). English etymology; or, A derivative dictionary of the English language. p. 397.  said that passport may signify either a permission to pass through a portus or gate, but noted that an earlier work had contained information that a traveling warrant, a permission or license to pass through the whole dominions of any prince, was originally called a pass par teut.
^ James Donald (1867). Chamber's etymological dictionary of the English language. W. and R. Chambers. pp. 366. passport, pass´pōrt, n. orig. permission to pass out of port or through the gates; a written warrant granting permission to travel. 
^ a b A brief history of the passport - The Guardian
^ Casciani, Dominic (2008-09-25). "Analysis: The first ID cards". BBC. Retrieved 2008-09-27. 
^ John Torpey, « Le contrôle des passeports et la liberté de circulation. Le cas de l'Allemagne au XIXe siècle », Genèses, 1998, n° 1, pp. 53-76
^ "History of Passports". Passport Canada. Retrieved April 18, 2008. 
^ Marrus, Michael, The Unwanted: European Refugees in the Twentieth Century. New York: Oxford University Press (1985), p. 92.
^ "League of Nations Photo Archive - Timeline - 1920". Indiana University. Retrieved July 13, 2013. 
^ "League of Nations 'International' or 'Standard' passport design". IU. 
^ "International Conferences – League of Nations Archives". Center for the Study of Global Change. 2002. Retrieved 2009-08-05. 
^ "Welcome to the ICAO Machine Readable Travel Documents Programme". ICAO. Retrieved 2012-09-06. 
^ Machine Readable Travel Documents, Doc 9303 (Sixth ed.). ICAO. 2006. Retrieved 2013-08-09. 
^ Arkelian, A.J. "The Right to a Passport in Canadian Law." “The Canadian Yearbook of International Law," Volume XXI, 1983. Republished in November 2012 in Artsforum Magazine at http://artsforum.ca/ideas/in-depth
^ Arkelian, A.J. “Freedom of Movement of Persons Between States and Entitlement to Passports.” Saskatchewan Law Review, Volume 49, No.1, 1984-85.
^ "What Is a Passport Seizure?". 
^ Devine, F. E (1991). Commercial bail bonding: a comparison of common law alternatives. ABC-CLIO. pp. 84, 91, 116, 178. ISBN 978-0-275-93732-4. 
^ Hannum, Hurst (1987). The Right to Leave and Return in International Law and Practice. Martinus Nijhoff Publishers. p. 73. ISBN 9789024734450. Retrieved 3 November 2012. 
^ "Government of Pakistan, DIRECTORATE GENERAL OF IMMIGRATION & PASSPORTS". Dgip.gov.pk. Archived from the original on 2009-08-06. Retrieved 2013-07-01. 
^ Hanif, Mohammed (16 June 2010). "Why Pakistan's Ahmadi community is officially detested". BBC News. 
^ "Passports for persons liable for military service". Finnish Police. 2009. Retrieved 2009-08-24. 
^ "Passports for Syrian Citizens". 
^ Crocombe, R. G. (2007). Asia in the Pacific Islands: replacing the West. University of South Pacific Press. p. 165. ISBN 978-982-02-0388-4. 
^ "Question 1". Dear Uncle Ezra... Cornell University. 2012. Retrieved 15 October 2012. 
^ Wallace, William N. (1990-06-12). "Putting Tradition to the Test". The New York Times. Retrieved 2010-05-21. 
^ "The New e-Passport". Osterreichs Bundesheer (in German and English). Eigentümer und Herausgeber: Bundesministerium für Landesverteidigung und Sport. February 2006. Retrieved 15 October 2012. 
^ "Frequently Asked Questions". US Department of State. Retrieved 9 August 2016. 
^ "Global Passport Power Rank 2017". Passport Index. Retrieved 2017-12-14. 
^ "Guidance ECB08: What are acceptable travel documents for entry clearance". Retrieved 19 March 2015. 
^ "Collective (group) passports". GOV.UK. Government Digital Service. Retrieved 4 July 2015. 
^ "Passports for children". Canada.CA. Government of Canada. Retrieved 6 December 2015. 
^ Population of Latvia by ethnicity and nationality; Office of Citizenship and Migration Affairs 2015(in Latvian)
^ Section 1 and Section 8, Law "On the Status of those Former U.S.S.R. Citizens who do not have the Citizenship of Latvia or that of any Other State"
^ see para. 16 of the Resolution on national minorities OSCE PA, 2004
^ Amnesty International 2009 Report
^ Hammarberg, Thomas. "Email this document Printable version "No one should have to be stateless in today's Europe"". Council of Europe: Commissioner for Human Rights. Retrieved 9 August 2016. 
^ Report on mission to Latvia (2008), UN Special Rapporteur on contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance — see Para. 30 and 88
^ In the Panama Canal Zone only those persons born there prior to January 1, 2000 with at least one parent as a U.S. citizen were recognized as U.S. citizens and were both nationals and citizens. Also in the former Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands the residents were considered nationals and citizens of the Trust Territory and not U.S. nationals.
^ "U.S. Department of State Foreign Affairs Manual Volume 7 – Consular Affairs 7 FAM 1140 ACQUISITION OF NONCITIZEN U.S. NATIONALITY BY BIRTH ABROAD" (PDF). U.S. Department of State. Retrieved 2015-12-13. 
^ British passport eligibility
^ "National Web Portal Of Bangladesh - Citizen Services". Bangladesh.gov.bd. Retrieved 2013-07-01. 
^ Document In Lieu of Internal Travel Document IMM.114, Immigration Department of Malaysia; retrieved 26 March 2014
^ [1]
^ "Doc 9303: Machine Readable Travel Documents," (PDF). Seventh Edition, 2015. 999 Robert-Bourassa Boulevard, Montréal, Quebec, Canada H3C 5H7: International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO). 2015. Retrieved 22 November 2015. ICAO’s work on machine readable travel documents began in 1968 with the establishment, by the Air Transport Committee of the Council, of a Panel on Passport Cards. This Panel was charged with developing recommendations for a standardized passport book or card that would be machine readable, in the interest of accelerating the clearance of passengers through passport controls. ... In 1998, the New Technologies Working Group of the TAG/MRTD began work to establish the most effective biometric identification system and associated means of data storage for use in MRTD applications, particularly in relation to document issuance and immigration considerations. The bulk of the work had been completed by the time the events of 11 September 2001 caused States to attach greater importance to the security of a travel document and the identification of its holder. The work was quickly finalized and endorsed by the TAG/MRTD and the Air Transport Committee. ... The Seventh Edition of Doc 9303 represents a restructuring of the ICAO specifications for Machine Readable Travel Documents. Without incorporating substantial modifications to the specifications, in this new edition Doc 9303 has been reformatted into a set of specifications for Size 1 Machine Readable Official Travel Documents (TD1), Size 2 Machine Readable Official Travel Documents (TD2), and Size 3 Machine Readable Travel Documents (TD3) ... 
^ "Doc 9303: Machine Readable Travel Documents, Part 2: Specifications for the Security of the Design, Manufacture and Issuance of MRTDs" (PDF). Seventh Edition, 2015. 999 Robert-Bourassa Boulevard, Montréal, Quebec, Canada H3C 5H7: International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO). 2015. ISBN 978-92-9249-791-0. Retrieved 22 November 2015. The Seventh Edition of Doc 9303 represents a restructuring of the ICAO specifications for Machine Readable Travel Documents. Without incorporating substantial modifications to the specifications, in this new edition Doc 9303 has been reformatted into a set of specifications for Size 1 Machine Readable Official Travel Documents (TD1), Size 2 Machine Readable Official Travel Documents (TD2), and Size 3 Machine Readable Travel Documents (TD3), as well as visas. This set of specifications consists of various separate documents in which general (applicable to all MRTDs) as well as MRTD form factor specific specifications are grouped ... Where the substrate used for the biographical data page (or inserted label) of a passport book or MRTD card is formed entirely of plastic or a variation of plastic, it is not usually possible to incorporate many of the security components described in 5.1.1 through 5.1.3 ... A.5.2.5 Special security measures for use with cards and biographical data pages made of plastic' Where a travel document is constructed entirely of plastic, optically variable security features shall be employed which give a changing appearance with angle of viewing. Such devices may take the form of latent images, lenticular features, colour-shifting ink, or diffractive optically variable image features. 
^ "Doc 9303: Machine Readable Travel Documents, Part 3: Specifications Common to all MRTDs" (PDF). Seventh Edition, 2015. 999 Robert-Bourassa Boulevard, Montréal, Quebec, Canada H3C 5H7: International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO). 2015. ISBN 978-92-9249-792-7. Retrieved 22 November 2015. Part 3 defines specifications that are common to TD1, TD2 and TD3 size machine readable travel documents (MRTDs) including those necessary for global interoperability using visual inspection and machine readable (optical character recognition) means. Detailed specifications applicable to each form factor appear in Doc 9303, Parts 4 through 7. 
^ "Doc 9303: Machine Readable Travel Documents, Part 5: Specifications for TD1 Size Machine Readable Official Travel Documents (MROTDs)" (PDF). Seventh Edition, 2015. 999 Robert-Bourassa Boulevard, Montréal, Quebec, Canada H3C 5H7: International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO). 2015. ISBN 978-92-9249-794-1. Retrieved 22 November 2015. The nominal dimensions shall be those specified in ISO/IEC 7810 for the ID-1 type card: 53.98 mm x 85.6 mm (2.13 in x 3.37 in) ... The edges of the document after final preparation shall be within the area circumscribed by the concentric rectangles as illustrated in Figure 1. Inner rectangle: 53.25 mm x 84.85 mm (2.10 in x 3.34 in), Outer rectangle: 54.75 mm x 86.35 mm (2.16 in x 3.40 in). In no event shall the dimensions of the finished TD1 document exceed the dimensions of the outer rectangle, including any final preparation (e.g. laminate edges) ... Note k: The first character shall be A, C or I. Historically these three characters were chosen for their ease of recognition in the OCR-B character set. The second character shall be at the discretion of the issuing State or organization except that V shall not be used, and C shall not be used after A except in the Crew Member Certificate. 
^ "U.S. Passport Service Guide - Passport Card Facts". 2015. Retrieved 22 November 2015. A passport card serves the same purpose as a passport book. It attests to your United States citizenship and your identity. The passport card is a fully valid passport. However, it is similar in size to a credit card ... Production of the passport card began on July 14, 2008. Millions of cards have already been issued since that date. 
^ "How Your Passport is Made -- Exclusive Behind-The-Scenes Footage". National Archives. July 1, 2013. Archived from the original on August 2, 2012. 
^ "Machine Readable Travel Documents (MRTD)" (PDF). ICAO. Retrieved August 8, 2016. 
^ "The ID Chip You Don't Want in Your Passport". Bruce Schneier. 2006-09-16. Retrieved September 1, 2007. 
^ "Scan This Guy's E-Passport and Watch Your System Crash". Kim Zetter. 1 August 2007. Archived from the original on August 1, 2007. Retrieved September 1, 2007. 
^ Resolutions of 23 June 1981, 30 June 1982, 14 July 1986 and 10 July 1995 concerning the introduction of a passport of uniform pattern, OJEC, 19 September 1981, C 241, p. 1; 16 July 1982, C 179, p. 1; 14 July 1986, C 185, p. 1; 4 August 1995, C 200, p. 1.
^ Andean Community / Decision 525: Minimum specific technical characteristics of Andean Passport.
^ Baenninger, Martin (2009). In the eye of the wind: a travel memoir of prewar Japan. Footprints. Footprints. Cheltenham, England: McGill-Queen's Press - MQUP. p. 12. ISBN 978-0-7735-3497-1. Retrieved 2011-11-17. 
^ "About Liechtenstein - Tourism Overview". about-liechtenstein.co.uk. 
^ Chris Brown won't be able to come to Australia unless he challenges visa refusal and wins
^ "Arrangement for entry to Hong Kong from Mainland China". Immigration Department, The Government of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region. www.immd.gov.hk. Retrieved 2008-05-20. 
^ "Travel Advice for Iran - Australian Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade". Smartraveller.gov.au. Retrieved 2013-07-01. 
^ "Travel Report - Kuwait". Voyage.gc.ca. 2012-11-16. Retrieved 2013-07-01. 
^ Travel Advice for Lebanon - Australian Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade and Lebanese Ministry of Tourism
^ "Travel Advice for Libya - Australian Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade". Smartraveller.gov.au. Retrieved 2013-07-01. 
^ Michael Freund, Canada defends Saudi policy of shunning tourists who visited Israel, 7 December 2008, Jerusalem Post
^ "Travel Advice for Sudan - Australian Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade". Smartraveller.gov.au. Retrieved 2013-07-01. 
^ Travel Advice for Syria - Australian Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade and Syrian Ministry of Tourism
^ "Travel Advice for Yemen - Australian Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade". Smartraveller.gov.au. Retrieved 2013-07-01. 
^ "Passport General Information". Newyorkpcg.org. Retrieved 2013-07-01. 
^ S. Korea extends travel ban on four nations, Yonhap News, July 23, 2013
^ "한국일보 : 北초청장 없어도 개성공단 방문가능". News.hankooki.com. 2007-03-25. Retrieved 2013-07-01. 
^ "GEN 1.3 ENTRY, TRANSIT AND DEPARTURE OF PASSENGERS AND CREW" (PDF). Retrieved 2015-09-26. 
^ Paul TherouxPublished: June 07, 1992 (1992-06-07). "In the Court of the King of Tonga". New York Times. Retrieved 2013-07-01. 
^ Entrance Visas in Brazil, Ministry of Foreign Relations of Brazil, August 12, 2015.
^ a b PASSPORT & VISA REQUIREMENTS (Timatic, through olympicair.com)
^ Путин: въезд в РФ должен быть разрешен только по загранпаспортам (Putin: passports will be required for entering Russia), 2012-12-12 (in Russian)
^ a b c d e f Western Hemisphere Travel Initiative
^ Travel Documents
^ "Torres Strait Treaty and You - What is free movement for traditional activities?". Australian Government = Dept. of Foreign Affairs and Trade. Retrieved 3 March 2010. 
^ "Ya no se requerirá pasaporte para viajar por Sudamérica". Edant.clarin.com. 2008-06-28. Retrieved 2013-07-01. 



Further reading[edit]

Advisory and technical committee for communications and transit. Replies of the governments to the enquiry on the application of the resolutions relating to passports, customs formalities and through tickets. Geneva: League of Nations. 1922. OCLC 46235968. 
Holder IV, Floyd William (Fall 2009). An Empirical Analysis of the State’s Monopolization of the Legitimate Means of Movement: Evaluating the Effects of Required Passport use on International Travel (M. P. A. thesis). San Marcos: Texas State University. OCLC 503473693. Docket Applied Research Projects, Paper 308. 
Lloyd, Martin (2008) [2003]. The Passport: The History of Man's Most Travelled Document (2nd ed.). Canterbury: Queen Anne's Fan. ISBN 978-0-9547150-3-8. OCLC 220013999. 
Salter, Mark B. (2003). Rights of Passage: The Passport in International Relations. Boulder, Co: Lynne Rienner Publishers. ISBN 978-1-58826-145-8. OCLC 51518371. 
Torpey, John C. (2000). The Invention of the Passport: Surveillance, Citizenship and the State. Cambridge studies in law and society. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-63249-8. OCLC 59408523. 
United States; Hunt, Gaillard (1898). The American Passport; Its History and a Digest of Laws, Rulings and Regulations Governing Its Issuance by the Department of State. Washington: Govt. print. off. OCLC 3836079. 

External links[edit]



Wikivoyage has an article for Passports.





Wikisource has the text of the 1905 New International Encyclopedia article Passport.





Wikimedia Commons has media related to Passports.



PRADO - The Council of the European Union Public Register of Authentic Travel- and ID Documents Online
How Passports Work US-focused information from Howstuffworks
Investigation into passport fraud, Dateline NBC, December 28, 2007
Passport-free travel to begin for citizens of nine more European countries, Seattle Times, November 8, 2007







v
t
e


Passports








Africa







Central




CEMAC



Cameroon
Central African Republic
Chad
Congo, Republic of the
Equatorial Guinea
Gabon








Angola
Congo, Democratic Republic of the
São Tomé and Príncipe








Eastern



Burundi
Comoros
Djibouti
Eritrea
Ethiopia
Kenya
Madagascar
Malawi
Mauritius
Mozambique
Rwanda
Seychelles
Somalia
Somaliland10
South Sudan
Tanzania
Uganda
Zambia
Zimbabwe





Northern



Algeria
Egypt8
Libya
Morocco
Sudan
Tunisia
Western Sahara9





Southern



Botswana
Lesotho
Namibia
South Africa
Swaziland





Western







Mauritania
Saint Helena1





ECOWAS



Benin
Burkina Faso
Cape Verde
Côte d'Ivoire
Gambia
Ghana
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Liberia
Mali
Niger
Nigeria
Senegal
Sierra Leone
Togo



















Americas







Caribbean







Anguilla1
British Virgin Islands1
Cayman Islands1
Cuba
Dominican Republic
Montserrat1
Turks and Caicos Islands1





CARICOM



Antigua and Barbuda
Bahamas
Barbados
Dominica
Grenada
Haiti
Jamaica
Saint Kitts and Nevis
Saint Lucia
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
Trinidad and Tobago








Central







Costa Rica
Panama





CARICOM



Belize





Central America-4



El Salvador
Guatemala
Honduras
Nicaragua








North



Bermuda1
Canada
Greenland
France (Saint Pierre and Miquelon)
Mexico
United States

Iroquois League10







South







Chile
Venezuela





Andean



Bolivia
Colombia
Ecuador
Peru





CARICOM



Guyana
Suriname





Mercosur



Argentina
Brazil
Paraguay
Uruguay



















Asia







Central & North



Afghanistan
Kazakhstan6
Kyrgyzstan
Russia3
Tajikistan
Turkmenistan
Uzbekistan





East



People's Republic of China

Hong Kong11( SAR, BN(O) )
Macao11


Japan
Korea, North
Korea, South
Mongolia
Republic of China (Taiwan)9





South



Bangladesh
Bhutan
India
Maldives
Nepal
Pakistan
Sri Lanka





Southeast



Brunei
Burma
Cambodia
East Timor
Indonesia
Laos
Malaysia
Philippines
Singapore
Thailand
Vietnam





West



Abkhazia5 9
Armenia7
Artsakh7 9
Azerbaijan5
Bahrain
Cyprus7
Egypt8
Georgia5
Iran
Iraq
Israel
Jordan
Kurdistan10
Kuwait
Lebanon
Northern Cyprus7 9
Oman
Palestine9
Qatar
Saudi Arabia
South Ossetia5 9
Syria
Turkey4
United Arab Emirates
Yemen
















Europe







Other Europe







Abkhazia5 9
Albania
Andorra
Armenia7
Artsakh7 9
Azerbaijan5
Belarus
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Faroe Islands
Georgia5
Guernsey1
Iceland2
Isle of Man1
Jersey1
Kazakhstan6
Kosovo9
Liechtenstein2
Macedonia
Malta, Sovereign Military Order of
Moldova
Monaco2
Montenegro
Northern Cyprus7 9
Norway2
Russia3
San Marino2
Serbia
South Ossetia5 9
Switzerland2
Transnistria9
Turkey4
Ukraine
Vatican City2









European Union




Austria
Belgium
Bulgaria
Croatia
Cyprus7
Czech Republic
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
France
Germany
Gibraltar1
Greece
Hungary
Ireland
Italy
Latvia
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Malta
Netherlands
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Slovakia
Slovenia
Spain
Sweden
United Kingdom1
















Oceania






Australia

Aboriginal


Fiji
Kiribati
Marshall Islands
Micronesia, Federated States of
Nauru
New Zealand
Palau
Papua New Guinea
Pitcairn Islands1
Samoa
Solomon Islands
Tonga
Tuvalu
Vanuatu
















International organizations
Defunct passports
Passport types











International organizations




European Union laissez-passer
International Committee of the Red Cross
Interpol
United Nations laissez-passer





Defunct



British Indian Empire1
Czechoslovakia
East Germany
Korean Empire
Nansen (refugee)
Mandatory Palestine
Rhodesia
Soviet Union12
UNMIK Travel Document
Yugoslavia





Types



Biometric
Camouflage
Diplomatic
Fake
Fantasy passport
Hajj
Horse
Internal
International
Machine-readable
Pet
Travel document

alien
refugee
stateless person


World
















Notes




1 A) Includes Crown dependencies, British Overseas Territories, and former British plantations, crown colonies, colonies, protectorates, protected states, mandates, trust territories and other British possessions.
1 B) The Isle of Man, Jersey and Guernsey are not part of the European Union, but Manxmen and Channel Islanders are citizens of the European Union; the Isle of Man, Jersey and Guernsey, and Manxmen and Channel Islanders themselves (unless they qualify and apply for recognition of a change in status), are however excluded from the benefits of the Four Freedoms of the European Union.
1 C) The Government of the United Kingdom also issue passports to British nationals who are not British citizens with the right of abode in the United Kingdom and who are also not otherwise citizens of the European Union.
2 Non-EU country that has open border with Schengen Area.
3 Russia is a transcontinental country in Eastern Europe and Northern Asia. The vast majority of its population (80%) lives in European Russia, therefore Russia as a whole is included as a European country here.
4 Turkey is a transcontinental country in the Middle East and Southeast Europe. Turkey has a small part of its territory (3%) in Southeast Europe called Turkish Thrace.
5 Azerbaijan and Georgia (Abkhazia; South Ossetia) are transcontinental countries. Both have a small part of their territories in the European part of the Caucasus.
6 Kazakhstan is a transcontinental country. Kazakhstan has a small part of its territories located west of the Urals in Eastern Europe.
7 Armenia (Artsakh) and Cyprus (Northern Cyprus) are entirely in Southwest Asia but having socio-political connections with Europe.
8 Egypt is a transcontinental country in North Africa and Western Asia. Egypt has a small part of its territory in Western Asia called Sinai Peninsula.
9 Partially recognized.
10 Not recognized by any other state.
11 Special administrative regions of China
12 The Soviet Union was a transcontinental country located in Eurasia









 Category
 Commons
 List












v
t
e


Nationality laws



By continent




Africa



Angola
Algeria
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Egypt 8
Ghana
Liberia
Morocco
Namibia
Nigeria
Somalia
South Africa
South Sudan
Tanzania
Western Sahara6





Asia



Afghanistan
Armenia 7
Azerbaijan 5
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Bhutan
Burma (Myanmar)
China
Cyprus 7
Georgian 7
Egypt 8
India
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Israel
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan 6
Kuwait
Lebanon
Malaysia
Mongolia
Nepal
North Korea
Northern Cyprus 7 9
Oman
Pakistan
Palestine9
Philippines
Qatar
Russia 3
Saudi Arabia
Syria
Singapore
South Korea
Taiwan 9
Thailand
Turkey 4
United Arab Emirates





Europe




European Union
& Schengen Area



Austria
Belgium
Bulgaria
Croatia
Cyprus 7
Czech Republic
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
France
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Iceland
Ireland
Italy
Latvia
Liechtenstein
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Malta
Netherlands
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Slovakia
Slovenia
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
United Kingdom





Rest of Europe



Albania
Andorra 2
Armenia 7
Azerbaijan 5
Belarus
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Georgia 7
Kazakhstan 6
Kosovo9
Macedonia
Moldova
Monaco 2
Montenegro
Northern Cyprus 7 9
Russia 3
San Marino 2
Serbia
Ukraine
Turkey 4








North America



Barbados
Canada
Greenland (Kingdom of Denmark)
Grenada
Jamaica
Mexico
Panama
Honduras
Guatemala
Costa Rica
Belize
United States





Oceania



Australia
Federated States of Micronesia
Nauru
New Zealand
Samoa
Tonga





South America



Argentina
Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Paraguay
Peru
Venezuela
Uruguay





International
organizations



Commonwealth of Nations
European Union








By type



Jus matrimonii
Jus sanguinis
Jus soli
Naturalization





Other



Citizenship Act
Birth aboard aircraft and ships
Multiple citizenship
Passport

Internal


Repatriation
Right of return
Second-class citizen
Statelessness
Travel visa





Defunct



Nazi Germany
Ancient Rome






1 British Overseas Territories.
2 Open border with Schengen Area.
3 Russia is a transcontinental country in Eastern Europe and Northern Asia. The vast majority of its population (80%) lives in European Russia, therefore Russia as a whole is included as a European country here.
4 Turkey is a transcontinental country in the Middle East and Southeast Europe. Has a small part of its territory (3%) in Southeast Europe called Turkish Thrace.
5 Azerbaijan and Georgia (Abkhazia; South Ossetia) are transcontinental countries. Both have a small part of their territories in the European part of the Caucasus.
6 Kazakhstan is a transcontinental country. Has a small part of its territories located west of the Urals in Eastern Europe.
7 Armenia (Artsakh) and Cyprus (Northern Cyprus) are entirely in Southwest Asia but having socio-political connections with Europe.
8 Egypt is a transcontinental country in North Africa and the Middle East. Has a small part of its territory in the Middle East called Sinai Peninsula.
9 Partially recognized.

 Category












v
t
e


Tourism



Types



Accessible
Adventure
Agritourism
Alternative
Atomic
Birth
Business
Culinary

Enotourism


Cultural

Archaeological
Bookstore
Heritage

Militarism heritage


Literary

Tolkien


Music
Pop-culture


Dark

Holocaust


Disaster
Domestic
Drug
Ecotourism

Shark


Extreme
Factory Tourism
Garden
Genealogy
Geotourism
Honeymoon
Jihadi
Jungle
Justice
LGBT
Medical

Dental


Moon
Nautical
Rail
Religious

Christian
Halal
Kosher


Rural
Sacred
Safaris
Sex

Child sex
Female sex


Slum
Space
Sports
Stag party
Suicide
Sustainable
Vacation
Volunteer travel
War
Water
Wellness
Wildlife





Hospitality
industry



Bed and breakfast
Boutique hotel
Conference and resort hotels
Convention center
Destination spa
Front desk
General manager
Homestay
Hospitality management studies
Hospitality services
Hostel
Hotel
Hotel manager
Inn
Island resort
Motel
Referral chain
Resort
Resort town
Restaurant
Seaside resort
Ski resort





Terminology



Campus tour
Convention (meeting)
Gift shop
Grand Tour
Holiday (vacation)
Hypermobility
Package tour
Passport
Perpetual traveler
Road trip
Roadside attraction
Souvenir
Staycation
Sunday drive
Tour guide
Tour operator
Tourism geography
Tourism minister
Tourism region
Tourist attraction
Tourist gateway
Tourist trap
Touron
Transport
Travel
Travel agency
Travel behavior
Travel document
Travel insurance
Travel literature
Travel medicine
Travel survey
Travel technology
Travel warning
Travel website
Trip planner
Visa
Visitor center





Industry organizations,
rankings and events



American Bus Association
American Hotel and Lodging Association
American Hotel & Lodging Educational Institute
BEST Education Network
Caribbean Tourism Organization
Destination marketing organization
European Travel Commission
Historical archive on tourism
South-East Asian Tourism Organisation
Tourism Radio
Travel and Tourism Competitiveness Report
Wikivoyage
World Tourism Day
World Tourism Organization
World Tourism rankings
World Travel and Tourism Council
World Travel Monitor





Lists



Adjectival tourisms
Attractions
Bibliography
Casino hotels
Casinos
Convention and exhibition centers
Hotels
Largest hotels in the world
Motels
Travel magazines
UNESCO Intangible Cultural Heritage Lists
World Heritage Sites by country








 Category
 Commons
 Portal
 WikiProject












v
t
e


Visa policy by country






Visa
Passport
Travel document





Africa




Central



Angola
Cameroon
Central African Republic
Chad
DR Congo
R Congo
Equatorial Guinea
Gabon
São Tomé and Príncipe





Eastern



Burundi
Comoros
Djibouti
Eritrea
Ethiopia
Kenya
Madagascar
Malawi
Mauritius
Mozambique
Rwanda
Seychelles
Somalia (Somaliland)
South Sudan
Tanzania
Uganda
Zambia
Zimbabwe





Northern



Algeria
Egypt8
Libya
Morocco
Sudan
Tunisia





Southern



Botswana
Lesotho
Namibia
Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha1
South Africa
Swaziland





Western



Benin
Burkina Faso
Cape Verde
Gambia
Ghana
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Ivory Coast
Liberia
Mali
Mauritania
Niger
Nigeria
Senegal
Sierra Leone
Togo








Americas




Caribbean



Dutch Caribbean (Aruba, Caribbean Netherlands, Curaçao, Sint Maarten)
Anguilla1
Antigua and Barbuda
Bahamas
Barbados
British Virgin Islands1
Cayman Islands1
Cuba
Dominica
Dominican Republic
Grenada
Haiti
Jamaica
Montserrat1
Puerto Rico11
St. Kitts and Nevis
St. Lucia
St. Vincent and the Grenadines
Trinidad and Tobago
Turks and Caicos Islands1
United States Virgin Islands11





Central



Belize
Costa Rica
El Salvador
Guatemala
Honduras
Nicaragua
Panama





North



Bermuda1
Canada
Mexico
United States





South



Argentina
Bolivia
Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Ecuador
Falkland Islands1
Guyana
Paraguay
Peru
South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands1
Suriname
Uruguay
Venezuela








Asia




Central & North



Afghanistan
Kazakhstan6
Kyrgyzstan
Russia3
Tajikistan
Turkmenistan
Uzbekistan





East



China

Hong Kong
Macau


Japan
North Korea
South Korea
Mongolia
Taiwan (Republic of China)10





South



Bangladesh
Bhutan
India
Maldives
Nepal
Pakistan
Sri Lanka





Southeast (ASEAN)



Brunei
Cambodia
East Timor
Indonesia
Laos
Malaysia
Myanmar
Philippines
Singapore
Thailand
Vietnam





Western



Abkhazia510
Akrotiri and Dhekelia1 7
Armenia7
Artsakh7 10
Azerbaijan5
Bahrain
Cyprus7
Egypt8
Georgia5
Iran
Iraq
Israel
Jordan
Kuwait
Lebanon
Northern Cyprus7 10
Oman
Palestine
Qatar
Saudi Arabia
South Ossetia5
Syria
Turkey4
United Arab Emirates
Yemen








Europe




European Union/EFTA



Austria
Belgium
Bulgaria
Croatia
Czech Republic
Cyprus7
Denmark

Faroe Islands


Estonia
Finland
France

Overseas


Germany
Gibraltar1
Greece
Hungary
Iceland
Ireland
Italy
Latvia
Liechtenstein
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Malta
Netherlands

Overseas


Norway

Svalbard12


Poland
Portugal
Romania
Slovakia
Slovenia
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
United Kingdom

Overseas







Other Europe



Abkhazia5 10
Akrotiri and Dhekelia1 7
Albania
Andorra
Armenia7
Artsakh7 10
Azerbaijan5
Belarus
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Georgia5
Kazakhstan6
Kosovo10
Macedonia
Moldova
Monaco 2
Montenegro
Northern Cyprus7 10
Russia3
San Marino 2
Serbia
South Ossetia5 10
Transnistria10
Turkey4
Ukraine
Vatican City 2








Oceania



American Samoa11
Australia
Cook Islands9
Fiji
Guam11
Kiribati
Marshall Islands
Micronesia
Nauru
New Zealand
Niue9
Northern Mariana Islands11
Palau
Papua New Guinea
Pitcairn Islands1
Samoa
Solomon Islands
Tokelau9
Tonga
Tuvalu
Vanuatu







1 British Overseas Territories. 2 Open border with Schengen Area. 3 Russia is a transcontinental country in Eastern Europe and Northern Asia. The majority of its population (80%) lives in European Russia, therefore Russia as a whole is included as a European country here. 4 Turkey is a transcontinental country in the Middle East and Southeast Europe. Has part of its territory (3%) in Southeast Europe called Turkish Thrace. 5 Azerbaijan (Artsakh) and Georgia (Abkhazia; South Ossetia) are transcontinental countries. Both have part of their territories in the European part of the Caucasus. 6 Kazakhstan is a transcontinental country. Has part of its territories located west of the Urals in Eastern Europe. 7 Armenia and Cyprus (Northern Cyprus; Akrotiri and Dhekelia) are entirely in Southwest Asia but having socio-political connections with Europe. 8 Egypt is a transcontinental country in North Africa and the Middle East. Has part of its territory in the Middle East called Sinai Peninsula. 9 Part of the Realm of New Zealand. 10 Partially recognized. 11 Unincorporated territory of the United States. 12 Part of Norway, not part of the Schengen Area, special open-border status under Svalbard Treaty











v
t
e


Visa requirements






Visa
Passport
Travel document





Africa




Central



Angolan
Cameroonian
Central African Republic
Chadian
DR Congo
R Congo
Equatorial Guinean
Gabonese
Santomean





Eastern



Burundian
Comorian
Djiboutian
Eritrean
Ethiopian
Kenyan
Malagasy
Malawian
Mauritian
Mozambican
Rwandan
Seychellois
Somali (Somaliland)
South Sudanese
Tanzanian
Ugandan
Zambian
Zimbabwean





Northern



Algerian
Egyptian8
Libyan
Moroccan
Sudanese
Tunisian





Southern



Botswana
Lesotho
Namibian
Saint Helena1
South African
Swazi





Western



Beninese
Burkinabe
Cape Verdean
Gambian
Ghanaian
Guinean
Guinea-Bissauan
Ivorian
Liberian
Malian
Mauritanian
Nigerian
Nigerien
Senegalese
Sierra Leonean
Togolese








Americas




Caribbean



Anguillan1
Antigua and Barbuda
Bahamian
Barbadian
British Virgin Islands1
Caymanian1
Cuban
Dominica
Dominican Republic
Grenadian
Haitian
Jamaican
Montserratian1
Saint Kitts and Nevis
Saint Lucian
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
Trinidad and Tobago
Turks and Caicos Islands1





Central



Belizean
Costa Rican
El Salvador
Guatemalan
Honduran
Nicaraguan
Panamanian





North



Bermudian1
Canadian
Mexican
United States





South



Argentine
Bolivian
Brazilian
Chilean
Colombian
Ecuadorian
Guyanese
Paraguayan
Peruvian
Surinamese
Uruguayan
Venezuelan








Asia




Central & North



Afghanistani
Kazakhstani6
Kyrgyzstani
Russian3
Tajik
Turkmen
Uzbekistani





East



Chinese

Hong Kongese
Macanese


Japanese
North Korean
South Korean
Mongolian
Taiwanese9





South



Bangladeshi
Bhutanese
Indian
Maldivian
Nepalese
Pakistani
Sri Lankan





Southeast



Bruneian
Cambodian
East Timorese
Indonesian
Laotian
Malaysian
Myanmar
Philippine
Singaporean
Thai
Vietnamese





Western



Abkhaz5 9
Armenian7
Artsakh7 9
Azerbaijani5
Bahraini
Cypriot7
Egyptian8
Georgian5
Emirati
Iranian
Iraqi
Israeli
Jordanian
Kuwaiti
Lebanese
Northern Cypriot7 9
Omani
Palestinian5
Qatari
Saudi
South Ossetian5 9
Syrian
Turkish4
Yemeni








Europe




European Union



Austrian
Belgian
British (BOTC · BN(O) · BOC)
Bulgarian
Croatian
Cypriot7
Czech
Danish
Dutch
Estonian (Non-citizens)
Finnish
French
German
Greek
Hungarian
Irish
Italian
Latvian (Non-citizens)
Lithuanian
Luxembourg
Maltese
Polish
Portuguese
Romanian
Slovak
Slovenian
Spanish
Swedish





Other Europe



Abkhaz5 9
Albanian
Andorran2
Armenian7
Artsakh7 9
Azerbaijani5
Belarusian
Bosnian and Herzegovinian
Georgian5
Gibraltar1
Icelandic2
Kazakhstani6
Kosovan9
Liechtenstein2
Macedonia
Moldovan
Monégasque2
Montenegrin
Northern Cypriot7 9
Norwegian2
Russian3
San Marino2
Serbian
South Ossetian5 9
Sovereign Military Order of Malta
Swiss
Transnistrian9
Turkish4
Ukrainian
Vatican City2








Oceania



Australian
Fijian
Kiribati
Marshallese
Micronesian
Nauruan
New Zealand
Palauan
Papua New Guinean
Pitcairn Islands1
Samoan
Solomon Islands
Tongan
Tuvaluan
Vanuatuan







1 British Overseas Territories. 2 Open border with Schengen Area. 3 Russia is a transcontinental country in Eastern Europe and Northern Asia. The vast majority of its population (80%) lives in European Russia. 4 Turkey is a transcontinental country in the Middle East and Southeast Europe. Has a small part of its territory (3%) in Southeast Europe called Turkish Thrace. 5 Azerbaijan and Georgia (Abkhazia; South Ossetia) are transcontinental countries. Both have a small part of their territories in the European part of the Caucasus. 6 Kazakhstan is a transcontinental country. Has a small part of its territories located west of the Urals in Eastern Europe. 7 Armenia (Artsakh) and Cyprus (Northern Cyprus) are entirely in Southwest Asia but having socio-political connections with Europe. 8 Egypt is a transcontinental country in North Africa and the Middle East. Has a small part of its territory in the Middle East called Sinai peninsula. 9 Partially recognized.
Immigration law







Authority control



GND: 4049302-7
NDL: 00569844











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Passport&oldid=818216189"					Categories: PassportsInternational travel documentsIdentity documentsHidden categories: CS1 German-language sources (de)Articles with Latvian-language external linksArticles with Russian-language external linksAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from January 2014Articles needing additional references from July 2014All articles needing additional referencesArticles needing additional references from November 2013Articles with unsourced statements from June 2012Articles needing additional references from January 2014Articles with unsourced statements from March 2015Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2014All articles containing potentially dated statementsWikipedia articles with GND identifiers