Not to be confused with Podiatry.
This article is about the branch of medicine. For the journal, see Pediatrics (journal). For the branch of dentistry, see Pedodontics.

Pediatrics


A doctor examines a newly born baby.



Focus
Adolescents and other children


Subdivisions
Pediatric cardiology, neonatology, pediatric emergency medicine, pediatric oncology, others (see below)


Significant diseases
Congenital diseases, Infectious diseases, Childhood cancer


Significant tests
World Health Organization Child Growth Standards


Specialist
Pediatrician


Pediatrics (also spelled paediatrics or pædiatrics) is the branch of medicine that involves the medical care of infants, children, and adolescents. The American Academy of Pediatrics recommends people be under pediatric care up to the age of 21.[1] A medical doctor who specializes in this area is known as a pediatrician, or paediatrician. The word pediatrics and its cognates mean "healer of children"; they derive from two Greek words: παῖς (pais "child") and ἰατρός (iatros "doctor, healer"). Pediatricians work both in hospitals, particularly those working in its subspecialties such as neonatology, and as primary care physicians.



Contents


1 History
2 Differences between adult and pediatric medicine
3 Education Requirements
4 Training of pediatricians
5 Subspecialties
6 See also
7 References
8 Further reading
9 External links



History[edit]




Part of Great Ormond Street Hospital in London, United Kingdom, which was the first pediatric hospital in the English-speaking world.


Already Hippocrates, Aristotle, Celsus, Soranus, and Galen understood the differences in growing and maturing organisms that necessitated different treatment: Ex toto non sic pueri ut viri curari debent ( "In general, boys should not be treated in the same way as men." Celsus[2]).[3]
Some of the oldest traces of pediatrics can be discovered in Ancient India where children's doctors were called kumara bhrtya.[3] Sushruta Samhita an ayurvedic text, composed during the sixth century BC contains the text about pediatrics.[4] Another ayurvedic text from this period is Kashyapa Samhita.[5][6]
A second century AD manuscript by the Greek physician and gynecologist Soranus of Ephesus dealt with neonatal pediatrics.[7] Byzantine physicians Oribasius, Aëtius of Amida, Alexander Trallianus, and Paulus Aegineta contributed to the field.[3] The Byzantines also built brephotrophia (crêches).[3] Islamic writers served as a bridge for Greco-Roman and Byzantine medicine and added ideas of their own, especially Haly Abbas, Serapion, Avicenna, and Averroes. The Persian scholar and doctor al-Razi (865–925) published a short treatise on diseases among children.[8] The first book about pediatrics was Libellus [Opusculum] de aegritudinibus et remediis infantium 1472 ("Little Book on Children Diseases and Treatment"), by the Italian pediatrician Paolo Bagellardo.[9] In sequence came Bartholomäus Metlinger's Ein Regiment der Jungerkinder 1473, Cornelius Roelans (1450–1525) no title Buchlein, or Latin compendium, 1483, and Heinrich von Louffenburg (1391–1460) Versehung des Leibs written in 1429 (published 1491), together form the Pediatric Incunabula, four great medical treatises on children's physiology and pathology.[3]
The Swedish physician Nils Rosén von Rosenstein (1706–1773) is considered to be the founder of modern pediatrics as a medical specialty,[10][11] while his work The diseases of children, and their remedies (1764) is considered to be "the first modern textbook on the subject".[12] Pediatrics as a specialized field of medicine continued to develop in the mid-19th century; German physician Abraham Jacobi (1830–1919) is known as the father of American pediatrics because of his many contributions to the field.[13][14] He received his medical training in Germany but later practiced in New York City.
The first generally accepted pediatric hospital is the Hôpital des Enfants Malades (French: Hospital for Sick Children), which opened in Paris in June 1802 on the site of a previous orphanage.[15] From its beginning, this famous hospital accepted patients up to the age of fifteen years,[16] and it continues to this day as the pediatric division of the Necker-Enfants Malades Hospital, created in 1920 by merging with the physically contiguous Necker Hospital, founded in 1778.
In other European countries, the Charité (a hospital founded in 1710) in Berlin established a separate Pediatric Pavilion in 1830, followed by similar institutions at Sankt Petersburg in 1834, and at Vienna and Breslau (now Wrocław), both in 1837. In 1852 Britain's first pediatric hospital, the Hospital for Sick Children, Great Ormond Streets.[15] The first Children's hospital in Scotland opened in 1860 in Edinburgh.[17] In the US, the first similar institutions were the Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, which opened in 1855, and then Boston Children's Hospital (1869).[18] Subspecialties in pediatrics were created at the Harriet Lane Home at Johns Hopkins Hospital by Edwards A. Park.[19]
Differences between adult and pediatric medicine[edit]
The body size differences are paralleled by maturation changes. The smaller body of an infant or neonate is substantially different physiologically from that of an adult. Congenital defects, genetic variance, and developmental issues are of greater concern to pediatricians than they often are to adult physicians. A common adage is that children are not simply "little adults". The clinician must take into account the immature physiology of the infant or child when considering symptoms, prescribing medications, and diagnosing illnesses.
A major difference between the practice of pediatric and adult medicine is that children, in most jurisdictions and with certain exceptions, cannot make decisions for themselves. The issues of guardianship, privacy, legal responsibility and informed consent must always be considered in every pediatric procedure. Pediatricians often have to treat the parents and sometimes, the family, rather than just the child. Adolescents are in their own legal class, having rights to their own health care decisions in certain circumstances. The concept of legal consent combined with the non-legal consent (assent) of the child when considering treatment options, especially in the face of conditions with poor prognosis or complicated and painful procedures/surgeries, means the pediatrician must take in to account the desires of many people, in addition to those of the patient.
Education Requirements[edit]
Aspiring medical students will need 4 years of undergraduate courses at a college or university, which will get them a BS, BA, or other bachelor's degree. After completing college future pediatricians will need to attend 4 years of medical school and later do 3 more years of residency training, the first year of residency is formerly called "Internship." After completing the 3 years of residency, physicians are eligible to become certified in pediatrics by passing a rigorous test that deals with medical conditions related to young children.
In high school, future pediatricians are required to take basic science classes, such as, biology, chemistry, physics, algebra, geometry, and calculus and also foreign language class, preferably Spanish, and get involved in high school organizations and extracurricular activities. After high school, college students simply need to fulfill the basic science course requirements that most medical schools recommend and will need to prepare to take the MCAT (Medical College Admission Test) their junior or early senior year in college. Once attending medical school, students courses will focus on basic medical sciences, like human anatomy, physiology, chemistry, etc., for the first three years. The second year is when medical students start to get "hands-on" experience with patients.[20]
Training of pediatricians[edit]

Pediatrics




Occupation


Names


Pediatrician
Paediatrician




Specialty



Activity sectors

Medicine


Description



Education required



Doctor of Medicine
Doctor of Osteopathic Medicine
Bachelor of Medicine, Bachelor of Surgery (MBBS/MBChB)





Fields of
employment

Hospitals, Clinics


The training of pediatricians varies considerably across the world. Depending on jurisdiction and university, a medical degree course may be either undergraduate-entry or graduate-entry. The former commonly takes five or six years, and has been usual in the Commonwealth. Entrants to graduate-entry courses (as in the US), usually lasting four or five years, have previously completed a three- or four-year university degree, commonly but by no means always in sciences. Medical graduates hold a degree specific to the country and university in and from which they graduated. This degree qualifies that medical practitioner to become licensed or registered under the laws of that particular country, and sometimes of several countries, subject to requirements for "internship" or "conditional registration".
Pediatricians must undertake further training in their chosen field. This may take from four to eleven or more years, (depending on jurisdiction and the degree of specialization).
In the United States, a medical school graduate wishing to specialize in pediatrics must undergo a three-year residency composed of outpatient, inpatient, surgical, and critical care rotations. Specialties within pediatrics require further training in the form of 3-year fellowships. Specialties include critical care, gastroenterology, neurology, infectious disease, hematology/oncology, rheumatology, pulmonology, child abuse, emergency medicine, endocrinology, neonatology, and others.[21]
In most jurisdictions, entry-level degrees are common to all branches of the medical profession, but in some jurisdictions, specialization in pediatrics may begin before completion of this degree. In some jurisdictions, pediatric training is begun immediately following completion of entry-level training. In other jurisdictions, junior medical doctors must undertake generalist (unstreamed) training for a number of years before commencing pediatric (or any other) specialization. Specialist training is often largely under the control of pediatric organizations (see below) rather than universities, and depend on jurisdiction.
Subspecialties[edit]
Subspecialties of pediatrics include:
(not an exhaustive list)

Adolescent medicine
Child abuse pediatrics
Clinical informatics
Developmental-behavioral pediatrics
Electrophysiology
Genetics
Headache medicine
Hospice & palliative care
Neonatology
Pain medicine
Pediatric allergy and immunology
Pediatric cardiology
Pediatric critical care
Pediatric emergency medicine
Pediatric endocrinology
Pediatric gastroenterology
Pediatric hematology
Pediatric infectious disease
Pediatric nephrology
Pediatric neuropsychology
Pediatric oncology

Pediatric neuro-oncology


Pediatric pulmonology
Pediatric rheumatology
Sleep medicine
Social pediatrics
Sports medicine
Transplant hepatology


Other specialties that care for children include:

Child neurology, a specialty in its own right

Epilepsy
Neurocritical Care
Pediatric neuro-oncology


Child psychiatry, subspecialty of psychiatry
Pediatric anesthesiology, subspecialty of anesthesiology
Pediatric dermatology, subspecialty of dermatology
Pediatric neurosurgery, subspecialty of neurosurgery
Pediatric ophthalmology, subspecialty of ophthalmology
Pediatric orthopedic surgery, subspecialty of orthopedic surgery
Pediatric otolaryngology, subspecialty of otolaryngology
Pediatric rehabilitation medicine, subspecialty of physical medicine and rehabilitation
Pediatric surgery, subspecialty of general surgery
Pediatric urology, subspecialty of urology

See also[edit]

Children's hospital
Child life specialist
Pain in babies
American Academy of Pediatrics
American Osteopathic Board of Pediatrics
Royal College of Paediatrics and Child Health
Center on Media and Child Health (CMCH)
Pediatric Oncall
Medical specialty

References[edit]


^ "Age limits of pediatrics". Pediatrics. 81 (5): 736. May 1988. PMID 3357740. Retrieved 18 April 2017. 
^ Celsus, De Medicinâ, Book 3, Chapter 7, § 1.
^ a b c d e Colón, A. R.; Colón, P. A. (January 1999). Nurturing children: a history of pediatrics. Greenwood Press. ISBN 9780313310805. Retrieved 20 October 2012. 
^ John G. Raffensperger. Children's Surgery: A Worldwide History. McFarland. p. 21. 
^ David Levinson; Karen Christensen. Encyclopedia of modern Asia. 4. Charles Scribner's Sons. p. 116. 
^ Desai, A.B. Textbook Of Paediatrics. Orient blackswan. p. 1. 
^ P.M. Dunn, "Soranus of Ephesus (circa AD 98–138) and perinatal care in Roman times", Archives of Disease in Childhood: Fetal and Neonatal Edition, 1995 July; 73(1): F51–F52.[1]
^ U.S. National Library of Medicine, "Islamic Culture and the Medical Arts, Al-Razi, the Clinician" [2]
^ "Achar S Textbook Of Pediatrics (Third Edition)". A. B. Desai (ed.) (1989). p.1. ISBN 81-250-0440-8
^ Lock, Stephen; John M. Last; George Dunea (2001). The Oxford illustrated companion to medicine. Oxford University Press US. p. 173. ISBN 978-0-19-262950-0. Retrieved 9 July 2010. 
^ Roberts, Michael (2003). The Age of Liberty: Sweden 1719–1772. Cambridge University Press. p. 216. ISBN 978-0-521-52707-1. Retrieved 9 July 2010. 
^ Dallas, John. "Classics of Child Care". Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh. Retrieved 9 July 2010. 
^ "Broadribb's Introductory Pediatric Nursing". Nancy T. Hatfield (2007). p.4. ISBN 0-7817-7706-2
^ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 2006-04-18. Retrieved 2006-04-06. 
^ a b Ballbriga, Angel (1991). "One century of pediatrics in Europe (section: development of pediatric hospitals in Europe)". In Nichols, Burford L.; et al. History of Paediatrics 1850–1950. Nestlé Nutrition Workshop Series. 22. New York: Raven Press. pp. 6–8. ISBN 0-88167-695-0. 
^ official history site (in French) of nineteenth century paediatric hospitals in Paris
^ Young, D.G. (August 1999). "The Mason Brown Lecture: Scots and paediatric surgery". Journal of the Royal College of surgeons Edinburgh. 44: 211–5. Archived from the original on 2014-07-14. 
^ Pearson, Howard A. (1991). "Pediatrics in the United States". In Nichols, Burford L.; et al. History of Paediatrics 1850–1950. Nestlé Nutrition Workshop Series. 22. New York: Raven Press. pp. 55–63. ISBN 0-88167-695-0. 
^ ""Commentaries: Edwards A Park"". Pediatrics. American Academy of Pediatrics. 44: 897–901. 1969. 
^ "What Education Is Required to Be a Pediatrician?". Retrieved 2017-06-14. 
^ http://www.pedsubs.org/subDes/index.cfm


Further reading[edit]

Contemporary Pediatrics – a monthly magazine
Clinical Pediatrics – a peer-reviewed journal
Consultant for Pediatricians – a peer-reviewed journal

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Paediatrics.





Wikibooks has a book on the topic of: Pediatrics





Look up Paediatrics or Pediatrics in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.



American Academy of Pediatrics
Canadian Paediatric Society
Academia Mexicana de Pediatria
Pediatric Collection by the BMJ – Collection of Pediatric papers published in the British Medical Journal.
Health-EU Portal – Babies' and Children's health in the EU
Paediatrics.info
New York University Pediatrics Video Lectures
Infant Feeders Collection – A historical collection of infant feeding devices from the UBC Library Digital Collections
Pediatric Oncall – Child Health Care website for doctors and parents







v
t
e


Medicine






Outline
History





Specialties
and
subspecialties





Surgery






Cardiac surgery
Cardiothoracic surgery
Colorectal surgery
Eye surgery
General surgery
Neurosurgery
Oral and maxillofacial surgery
Orthopedic surgery
Hand surgery
Otolaryngology (ENT)
Pediatric surgery
Plastic surgery
Reproductive surgery
Surgical oncology
Thoracic surgery
Transplant surgery
Trauma surgery
Urology

Andrology


Vascular surgery








Internal medicine






Allergy / Immunology
Angiology
Cardiology
Endocrinology
Gastroenterology

Hepatology


Geriatrics
Hematology
Hospital medicine
Infectious disease
Nephrology
Oncology
Pulmonology
Rheumatology








Obstetrics and gynaecology






Gynaecology
Gynecologic oncology
Maternal–fetal medicine
Obstetrics
Reproductive endocrinology and infertility
Urogynecology








Diagnostic






Radiology

Interventional radiology
Nuclear medicine


Pathology

Anatomical pathology
Clinical pathology
Clinical chemistry
Clinical immunology
Cytopathology
Medical microbiology
Transfusion medicine










Other specialties






Addiction medicine
Adolescent medicine
Anesthesiology
Dermatology
Disaster medicine
Diving medicine
Emergency medicine

Mass-gathering medicine


Family medicine
General practice
Hospital medicine
Intensive-care medicine
Medical genetics
Neurology

Clinical neurophysiology


Occupational medicine
Ophthalmology
Oral medicine
Pain management
Palliative care
Pediatrics

Neonatology


Physical medicine and rehabilitation (PM&R)
Preventive medicine
Psychiatry
Public health
Radiation oncology
Reproductive medicine
Sexual medicine
Sleep medicine
Sports medicine
Transplantation medicine
Tropical medicine

Travel medicine


Venereology








Medical education



Medical school
Bachelor of Medicine, Bachelor of Surgery
Bachelor of Medical Sciences
Master of Medicine
Master of Surgery
Doctor of Medicine
Doctor of Osteopathic Medicine
MD–PhD





Related topics



Allied health

Dentistry
Podiatry
Physiotherapy


Nanomedicine
Molecular oncology
Personalized medicine
Veterinary medicine
Physician

Chief physician


History of medicine








 Book












v
t
e


Infants and their care



Main Article



Infant








Health



Baby food
Birth weight
Breast pump
Breastfeeding
Breastfeeding and medications
Bottle feeding
Colic
Immunizations
Cradle cap
Cross eyed
Failure to thrive
Immunization
Infant and toddler safety
Infant bathing
Infant food safety
Infant formula
Infant massage
Infant food safety
Infant nutrition
Infant respiratory distress syndrome
infant sleep training
Neo-natal intensive care unit
Oral rehydration therapy/Pedialyte
Newborn care and safety
Pediatrician
Preterm birth
Shaken baby syndrome
Soy formula
Sudden infant death syndrome





Development



Attachment parenting
Baby-led weaning
Baby talk
Babbling
Childbirth
Congential disorder
Crawling
Infant visual development
Diaper rash
Gestational age
Infant cognitive development
Itsy Bitsy Spider
Kangaroo care
Mother
Object permanence
Parent
Parenting
Pat-a-cake, pat-a-cake, baker's man
Peekaboo
Play
Prenatal development
Prenatal development table
Teething
This Little Piggy
Types of crying
Walking
Weaning





Socialization and Culture



Attachment
Babysitting
Child abuse
Child custody
Child's rights
UN Child rights
Circumcision
Daycare
Foster care
Grandparent visitation
Infant swimming
Milk bank
Nanny
Wet nurse





Infant care and equipment



Baby bouncer
Baby gate
Baby monitor/Hidden camera
Baby powder
Baby shampoo
Baby toy
Baby walker
Bib
baby swing
Baby transport
Bassinet
Child safety seat/Car seat safety
Cloth diaper
Cradle board
Diaper
Diaper bag
Baby wipes
Haberman Feeder
Highchair
Infant bed (American 'crib' and 'cradle', British 'cot')
Infant carrier
Infant clothing
Pacifier
Playpen
Stroller
Supplemental nursing system
Swaddling
Swim diaper
Baby teether
Travel cot





Other topics



Baby shower
Babywearing
Child neglect
Closed adoption
Cry room
Infant ear piercing
Open adoption
Prenatal cocaine exposure
Neonatal withdrawal syndrome
Parental child abduction
Parental rights
Parenting plan
Paternity fraud
Paternity










Authority control



GND: 4030594-6
NDL: 00572264











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Pediatrics&oldid=817694522"					Categories: PediatricsChildhoodHidden categories: Pages using deprecated image syntaxArticles containing Ancient Greek-language textArticles containing Latin-language textArticles containing French-language textWikipedia articles with GND identifiers