For the Bosnian Serb writer, see Vasa Pelagić.


Aquatic layers




   Pelagic

   Photic

   Epipelagic


   Aphotic

   Mesopelagic
   Bathypelagic
   Abyssopelagic
   Hadopelagic




   Demersal
   Benthic




Stratification




   Pycnocline

   Isopycnal
   Chemocline

   Halocline


   Thermocline

   Thermohaline








See also




Marine habitats
Lake stratification
Aquatic ecosystems
Wild fisheries







v
t
e





The pelagic zone consists of the water column of the open ocean, and can be further divided into regions by depth. The word "pelagic" is derived from Greek πέλαγος (pélagos), meaning 'open sea'. The pelagic zone can be thought of in terms of an imaginary cylinder or water column that goes from the surface of the sea almost to the bottom. Conditions differ deeper in the water column such that as pressure increases with depth, the temperature drops and less light penetrates. Depending on the depth, the water column, rather like the Earth's atmosphere, may be divided into different layers.
The pelagic zone occupies 1,330 million km3 (320 million mi3) with a mean depth of 3.68 km (2.29 mi) and maximum depth of 11 km (6.8 mi).[1][2][3] Fish that live in the pelagic zone are called pelagic fish. Pelagic life decreases with increasing depth. It is affected by light intensity, pressure, temperature, salinity, the supply of dissolved oxygen and nutrients, and the submarine topography, which is called bathymetry. In deep water, the pelagic zone is sometimes called the open-ocean zone and can be contrasted with water that is near the coast or on the continental shelf. In other contexts, coastal water not near the bottom is still said to be in the pelagic zone.
The pelagic zone can be contrasted with the benthic and demersal zones at the bottom of the sea. The benthic zone is the ecological region at the very bottom of the sea. It includes the sediment surface and some subsurface layers. Marine organisms living in this zone, such as clams and crabs, are called benthos. The demersal zone is just above the benthic zone. It can be significantly affected by the seabed and the life that lives there. Fish that live in the demersal zone are called demersal fish, and can be divided into benthic fish, which are denser than water so they can rest on the bottom, and benthopelagic fish, which swim in the water column just above the bottom. Demersal fish are also known as bottom feeders and groundfish.



Contents


1 Depth and layers

1.1 Epipelagic (sunlight)
1.2 Mesopelagic (twilight)
1.3 Bathypelagic (midnight)
1.4 Abyssopelagic (lower midnight)
1.5 Hadopelagic


2 Pelagic ecosystem

2.1 Pelagic birds
2.2 Pelagic fish
2.3 Pelagic invertebrates
2.4 Pelagic reptiles


3 References
4 Further reading



Depth and layers[edit]




A scale diagram of the layers of the pelagic zone


Depending on how deep the sea is, the pelagic zone can extend over up to five horizontal regions in the ocean. From the top down, these are:
Epipelagic (sunlight)[edit]
See also: Photic zone and Epipelagic fish
From the surface (MSL) down to around 200 m (660 ft)
This is the illuminated zone at the surface of the sea where enough light is available for photosynthesis. Nearly all primary production in the ocean occurs here. Consequently, plants and animals are largely concentrated in this zone. Examples of organisms living in this zone are plankton, floating seaweed, jellyfish, tuna, many sharks and dolphins.
Mesopelagic (twilight)[edit]
See also: Mesopelagic zone and pelagic fish § Mesopelagic fish
From 200 m (660 ft) down to around 1,000 m (3,300 ft)
Examples of animals that live here are swordfish, squid, Anarhichadidae or "wolffish" and some species of cuttlefish. Many organisms that live in this zone are bioluminescent.[4] Some creatures living in the mesopelagic zone rise to the epipelagic zone at night to feed.[4]
Bathypelagic (midnight)[edit]
See also: Bathyal zone and pelagic fish § Bathypelagic fish
From 1,000 m (3,300 ft) down to around 4,000 m (13,000 ft)
The name stems from Greek βαθύς, meaning 'deep'. At this depth, the ocean is pitch black, apart from occasional bioluminescent organisms, such as anglerfish. No living plant exists here. Most animals living here survive by consuming the detritus falling from the zones above, which is known as "marine snow", or, like the marine hatchetfish, by preying on other inhabitants of this zone. Other examples of this zone's inhabitants are giant squid, smaller squids and the grimpoteuthis or "dumbo octopus". The giant squid is hunted here by deep-diving sperm whales.
Abyssopelagic (lower midnight)[edit]
Main article: Abyssal zone
From around 4,000 m (13,000 ft) down to above the ocean floor
The name is derived from Greek ἄβυσσος, meaning 'bottomless' (a holdover from the times when the deep ocean, or abyss, was believed to be bottomless). Very few creatures live in the cold temperatures, high pressures and complete darkness of this depth.[4] Among the species found in this zone are several species of squid; echinoderms including the basket star, swimming cucumber, and the sea pig; and marine arthropods including the sea spider.[4] Many of the species living at these depths are transparent and eyeless because of the total lack of light in this zone.[4]
Hadopelagic[edit]
Main article: Hadal zone
The deep water in ocean trenches
The name is derived from the realm of Hades, the Greek underworld. However, many organisms live in hydrothermal vents in this and other zones. Some define the hadopelagic as waters below 6,000 m (20,000 ft), whether in a trench or not.
Pelagic ecosystem[edit]




The pelagic sooty tern spends months at a time flying at sea, returning to land only for breeding.[5]


The pelagic ecosystem is based on phytoplankton. Phytoplankton manufacture their own food using a process of photosynthesis. Because they need sunlight, they inhabit the upper, sunlit epipelagic zone, which includes the coastal or neritic zone. Biodiversity diminishes markedly in the deeper zones below the epipelagic zone as dissolved oxygen diminishes, water pressure increases, temperatures become colder, food sources become scarce, and light diminishes and finally disappears.[6]
Pelagic birds[edit]
See also: Seabird
Pelagic birds, also called oceanic birds, live on the open sea, rather than around waters adjacent to land or around inland waters. Pelagic birds feed on planktonic crustaceans, squid and forage fish. Examples are the Atlantic puffin, macaroni penguins, sooty terns, shearwaters, and Procellariiformes such as the albatross, Procellariidae and petrels.
The term seabird includes birds which live around the sea adjacent to land, as well as pelagic birds.
Pelagic fish[edit]
Main article: Pelagic fish
Pelagic fish live in the water column of coastal, ocean, and lake waters, but not on or near the bottom of the sea or the lake. They can be contrasted with demersal fish, which live on or near the bottom, and coral reef fish.[7]
These fish are often migratory forage fish, which feed on plankton, and the larger fish that follow and feed on the forage fish. Examples of migratory forage fish are herring, anchovies, capelin, and menhaden. Examples of larger pelagic fish which prey on the forage fish are billfish, tuna, and oceanic sharks.
Pelagic invertebrates[edit]
Some examples of pelagic invertebrates include krill, copepods, jellyfish, decapod larvae, hyperiid amphipods, rotifers and cladocerans.
Thorson's rule states that benthic marine invertebrates at low latitudes tend to produce large numbers of eggs developing to widely dispersing pelagic larvae, whereas at high latitudes such organisms tend to produce fewer and larger lecithotrophic (yolk-feeding) eggs and larger offspring.[8][9]
Pelagic reptiles[edit]
Pelamis platura, the pelagic sea snake, is the only one of the 65 species of marine snakes to spend its entire life in the pelagic zone. It bears live young at sea and is helpless on land. The species sometimes forms aggregations of thousands along slicks in surface waters. The pelagic sea snake is the world’s most widely distributed snake species.
Many species of sea turtles spend the first years of their lives in the pelagic zone, moving closer to shore as they reach maturity.
References[edit]



^ Costello, Mark John; Cheung, Alan; De Hauwere, Nathalie (2010). "Surface Area and the Seabed Area, Volume, Depth, Slope, and Topographic Variation for the World's Seas, Oceans, and Countries". Environmental Science & Technology. 44 (23): 8821–8. Bibcode:2010EnST...44.8821C. doi:10.1021/es1012752. 
^ Charette, Matthew; Smith, Walter (2010). "The Volume of Earth's Ocean". Oceanography. 23 (2): 112–4. doi:10.5670/oceanog.2010.51. hdl:1912/3862. 
^ Ocean's Depth and Volume Revealed OurAmazingPlanet, 19 May 2010.
^ a b c d e http://www.marinebio.com/Oceans/open-ocean.asp
^ BirdLife International (2008). "Sterna fuscata". IUCN Red List of Threatened Species. Version 2008. International Union for Conservation of Nature. Retrieved 7 August 2009. 
^ Walker P and Wood E (2005) The Open Ocean (volume in a series called Life in the sea), Infobase Publishing, ISBN 978-0-8160-5705-4.
^ Lal, Brij V.; Fortune, Kate (January 2000). The Pacific Islands: An Encyclopedia. University of Hawaii Press. p. 8. ISBN 978-0-8248-2265-1. 
^ Thorson, G (1957). "Bottom communities (sublittoral or shallow shelf)". In Hedgpeth, J.W. Treatise on Marine Ecology and Palaeoecology. Geological Society of America. pp. 461–534. 
^ Mileikovsky, S. A. (1971). "Types of larval development in marine bottom invertebrates, their distribution and ecological significance: a re-evaluation". Marine Biology. 10 (3): 193–213. doi:10.1007/BF00352809. 



Further reading[edit]

Ryan, Paddy "Deep-sea creatures" Te Ara - the Encyclopedia of New Zealand, updated 21 September 2007
"Pelagic-zone (oceanography)" Encyclopædia Britannica Online. 21 March 2009.
Grantham HS, Game ET, Lombard AT, et al. (2011) "Accommodating Dynamic Oceanographic Processes and Pelagic Biodiversity in Marine Conservation Planning" PLoS ONE 6(2): e16552. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0016552.
Wrobel, David; Mills, Claudia (2003) [1998]. Pacific Coast Pelagic Invertebrates: A Guide to the Common Gelatinous Animals. Sea Challengers and Monterey Bay Aquarium. ISBN 0-930118-23-5. 







v
t
e


Physical oceanography



Waves



Airy wave theory
Ballantine scale
Benjamin–Feir instability
Boussinesq approximation
Breaking wave
Clapotis
Cnoidal wave
Cross sea
Dispersion
Edge wave
Equatorial waves
Fetch
Gravity wave
Green's law
Infragravity wave
Internal wave
Iribarren number
Kelvin wave
Kinematic wave
Longshore drift
Luke's variational principle
Mild-slope equation
Radiation stress
Rogue wave
Rossby wave
Rossby-gravity waves
Sea state
Seiche
Significant wave height
Soliton
Stokes boundary layer
Stokes drift
Stokes wave
Swell
Trochoidal wave
Tsunami

megatsunami


Undertow
Ursell number
Wave action
Wave base
Wave height
Wave power
Wave radar
Wave setup
Wave shoaling
Wave turbulence
Wave–current interaction
Waves and shallow water

one-dimensional Saint-Venant equations
shallow water equations


Wind wave

model
















Circulation



Atmospheric circulation
Baroclinity
Boundary current
Coriolis force
Coriolis–Stokes force
Craik–Leibovich vortex force
Downwelling
Eddy
Ekman layer
Ekman spiral
Ekman transport
El Niño–Southern Oscillation
General circulation model
Geostrophic current
Global Ocean Data Analysis Project
Gulf Stream
Halothermal circulation
Humboldt Current
Hydrothermal circulation
Langmuir circulation
Longshore drift
Loop Current
Modular Ocean Model
Ocean dynamics
Ocean gyre
Princeton Ocean Model
Rip current
Subsurface currents
Sverdrup balance
Thermohaline circulation

shutdown


Upwelling
Whirlpool
World Ocean Circulation Experiment





Tides



Amphidromic point
Earth tide
Head of tide
Internal tide
Lunitidal interval
Perigean spring tide
Rip tide
Rule of twelfths
Slack water
Tidal bore
Tidal force
Tidal power
Tidal race
Tidal range
Tidal resonance
Tide gauge
Tideline





Landforms



Abyssal fan
Abyssal plain
Atoll
Bathymetric chart
Coastal geography
Cold seep
Continental margin
Continental rise
Continental shelf
Contourite
Guyot
Hydrography
Oceanic basin
Oceanic plateau
Oceanic trench
Passive margin
Seabed
Seamount
Submarine canyon
Submarine volcano





Plate
tectonics



Convergent boundary
Divergent boundary
Fracture zone
Hydrothermal vent
Marine geology
Mid-ocean ridge
Mohorovičić discontinuity
Vine–Matthews–Morley hypothesis
Oceanic crust
Outer trench swell
Ridge push
Seafloor spreading
Slab pull
Slab suction
Slab window
Subduction
Transform fault
Volcanic arc





Ocean zones



Benthic
Deep ocean water
Deep sea
Littoral
Mesopelagic
Oceanic
Pelagic
Photic
Surf
Swash





Sea level



Deep-ocean Assessment and Reporting of Tsunamis
Future sea level
Global Sea Level Observing System
North West Shelf Operational Oceanographic System
Sea-level curve
Sea level rise
World Geodetic System





Acoustics



Deep scattering layer
Hydroacoustics
Ocean acoustic tomography
Sofar bomb
SOFAR channel
Underwater acoustics





Satellites



Jason-1
Jason-2 (Ocean Surface Topography Mission)
Jason-3





Related



Argo
Benthic lander
Color of water
DSV Alvin
Marginal sea
Marine energy
Marine pollution
Mooring
National Oceanographic Data Center
Ocean
Ocean exploration
Ocean observations
Ocean reanalysis
Ocean surface topography
Ocean thermal energy conversion
Oceanography
Pelagic sediment
Sea surface microlayer
Sea surface temperature
Seawater
Science On a Sphere
Thermocline
Underwater glider
Water column
World Ocean Atlas








 Category
 Commons












v
t
e


Aquatic ecosystem topics








Aquatic ecosystems – general and freshwater components







General



Acoustic ecology
Adaptation
Agent-based models
Algal bloom
Anoxic waters
Aquatic animals (Insects
Mammals)
Aquatic plants
Aquatic science
Benthos
Biodiversity research
Bioluminescence
Biomass
Biomonitoring
Cascade effect
Colored dissolved organic matter
Camouflage and mimicry
Dead zone
Ecohydrology
Ecosystems
Eutrophication
Fisheries science
Food chain
Food web
GIS and aquatic science
Hydrobiology
Hypoxia
Isotope analysis
Microbial ecology
Microbial food web
Microbial loop
Nekton
Neuston
Particle
Pelagic zone
Photic zone
Phytoplankton
Plankton
Pleuston
Predation
Productivity
Ramsar Convention
Respiration
Schooling
Sediment trap
Siltation
Spawning
Substrate
Thermal pollution
Toxicology
Trophic level
Water column
Zooplankton
More...








Freshwater



Biology
Biomes
Ecosystems

freshwater
lake
river


Fish
Hyporheic zone
Limnology
Lake stratification
Macrophyte
Pond

Fish pond


Rheotaxis
Stream bed
Stream pool
Trophic state index
Upland and lowland
Water garden
Wetland

brackish marsh
freshwater marsh
swamp
bog
fen


Environmental quality
More...





Ecoregions



Freshwater (List)
Marine (List)
The Everglades
Maharashtra
The North Pacific Subtropical Gyre
The San Francisco Estuary
















Aquatic ecosystems – marine components







Marine



Marine biology
Marine chemistry
Deep scattering layer
Diel vertical migration
Ecosystems

large marine
marine)


f-ratio
Iron fertilization
Marine snow
Ocean nourishment
Oceanic physical-biological process
Ocean turbidity
Photophore
Thorson's rule
Upwelling
Whale fall
More...








Marine
life



Bacteriophages
Census
Fish

coastal
coral reef
deep sea
demersal
pelagic


Deep sea communities
Deep sea creature
Deep-water coral
Invertebrates
Larvae
Mammals
Marine life
Microorganisms
Paradox of the plankton
Reptiles
Seabirds
Seashore wildlife
Vertebrates
Wild fisheries





Marine
habitats



Bay mud
Coastal biogeomorphology
Cold seeps
Coral reefs
Davidson Seamount
Estuaries
Intertidal ecology
Intertidal wetlands
Kelp forests
Hydrothermal vents
Lagoons
Mangroves
Marine biomes
Marine habitats
Mudflats
Rocky shores
Salt marshes
Salt pannes and pools
Seagrass meadows
Sponge grounds
Sponge reefs
Tide pools





Issues



Ecological values of mangroves
Fisheries and climate change
HERMIONE
Marine conservation
Marine conservation activism
Marine pollution
Marine Protected Area

















						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Pelagic_zone&oldid=814510058"					Categories: Aquatic biomesFisheries scienceOceanographical terminologyOceanographyHidden categories: Use dmy dates from February 2011