"Perennial" redirects here. For other uses, see Perennial (disambiguation).







This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages)







This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (March 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)









This article possibly contains original research. Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations. Statements consisting only of original research should be removed. (August 2007) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)





(Learn how and when to remove this template message)







Common chicory, Cichorium intybus, is a herbaceous perennial plant


A perennial plant or simply perennial is a plant that lives for more than two years.[1] The term (per- + -ennial, "through the years") is often used to differentiate a plant from shorter-lived annuals and biennials. The term is also widely used to distinguish plants with little or no woody growth from trees and shrubs, which are also technically perennials.[2]
Perennials, especially small flowering plants, that grow and bloom over the spring and summer, die back every autumn and winter, and then return in the spring from their rootstock, are known as herbaceous perennials. However, depending on the rigors of local climate, a plant that is a perennial in its native habitat, or in a milder garden, may be treated by a gardener as an annual and planted out every year, from seed, from cuttings or from divisions. Tomato vines, for example, live several years in their natural tropical/subtropical habitat but are grown as annuals in temperate regions because they don't survive the winter.
There is also a class of evergreen, or non-herbaceous, perennials, including plants like Bergenia which retain a mantle of leaves throughout the year. An intermediate class of plants is known as subshrubs, which retain a vestigial woody structure in winter, e.g. Penstemon. The local climate may dictate whether plants are treated as shrubs or perennials. For instance, many varieties of Fuchsia are shrubs in warm regions, but in colder temperate climates may be cut to the ground every year as a result of winter frosts.
The symbol for a perennial plant, based on Species Plantarum by Linnaeus, is , which is also the astronomical symbol for the planet Jupiter.[3]



Contents


1 Life cycle and structure
2 Growth
3 Benefits in agriculture
4 Location
5 Types
6 List of perennials

6.1 Perennial flowers
6.2 Perennial fruits
6.3 Perennial herbs
6.4 Perennial vegetables


7 See also
8 References
9 External links



Life cycle and structure[edit]






This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (March 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Perennial plants can be short-lived (only a few years) or they can be long-lived, as are some woody plants like trees. They include a wide assortment of plant groups from ferns and liverworts to the highly diverse flowering plants like orchids and grasses.
Plants that flower and fruit only once and then die are termed monocarpic or semelparous. However, most perennials are polycarpic (or iteroparous), flowering over many seasons in their lifetime.
Perennials typically grow structures that allow them to adapt to living from one year to the next through a form of vegetative reproduction rather than seeding. These structures include bulbs, tubers, woody crowns, rhizomes plus others. They might have specialized stems or crowns that allow them to survive periods of dormancy over cold or dry seasons during the year. Annuals produce seeds to continue the species as a new generation while the growing season is suitable, and the seeds survive over the cold or dry period to begin growth when the conditions are again suitable.
Many perennials have developed specialized features that allow them to survive extreme climatic and environmental conditions. Some have adapted to survive hot and dry conditions or cold temperatures. Those plants tend to invest a lot of resource into their adaptations and often do not flower and set seed until after a few years of growth. Many perennials produce relatively large seeds, which can have an advantage, with larger seedlings produced after germination that can better compete with other plants. Some annuals produce many more seeds per plant in one season, while some (polycarpic) perennials are not under the same pressure to produce large numbers of seeds but can produce seeds over many years.




Dahlia plants are perennial.


Growth[edit]






This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (July 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



In warmer and more favorable climates, perennials grow continuously. In seasonal climates, their growth is limited to the growing season.
In some species, perennials retain their foliage all year round; these are evergreen perennials. Other plants are deciduous perennials, for example, in temperate regions a perennial plant may grow and bloom during the warm part of the year, with the foliage dying back in the winter. In many parts of the world, seasonality is expressed as wet and dry periods rather than warm and cold periods, and deciduous perennials lose their leaves in the dry season.
With their roots protected below ground in the soil layer, perennial plants are notably tolerant of wildfire. Herbaceous perennials are also able to tolerate the extremes of cold in temperate and Arctic winters, with less sensitivity than trees or shrubs.
Benefits in agriculture[edit]




Switchgrass is a deep-rooted perennial. These roots are more than 3 meters long.


Although most of humanity is fed by the re-sowing of the seeds of annual grain crops, (either naturally or by the manual efforts of man), perennial crops provide numerous benefits.[4] Perennial plants often have deep, extensive root systems which can hold soil to prevent erosion, capture dissolved nitrogen before it can contaminate ground and surface water, and out-compete weeds (reducing the need for herbicides). These potential benefits of perennials have resulted in new attempts to increase the seed yield of perennial species,[5] which could result in the creation of new perennial grain crops.[6] Some examples of new perennial crops being developed are perennial rice and intermediate wheatgrass. The Land Institute estimates that profitable, productive perennial grain crops will take at least 25 years to achieve.
Location[edit]






This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (July 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)





Stereo image











Left frame 















Right frame 















Parallel view ()















Cross-eye view ()













Seeds from various perennial flowers


Perennial plants dominate many natural ecosystems on land and in fresh water, with only a very few (e.g. Zostera) occurring in shallow sea water. Herbaceous perennial plants are particularly dominant in conditions too fire-prone for trees and shrubs, e.g., most plants on prairies and steppes are perennials; they are also dominant on tundra too cold for tree growth. Nearly all forest plants are perennials, including the trees and shrubs.
Perennial plants are usually better competitors than annual plants, especially under stable, resource-poor conditions. This is due to the development of larger root systems which can access water and soil nutrients deeper in the soil and to earlier emergence in the spring.
Types[edit]






This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (July 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)




Examples of evergreen perennials include Begonia and banana.
Examples of deciduous perennials include goldenrod and mint.
Examples of monocarpic perennials include Agave and some species of Streptocarpus.
Examples of woody perennials include maple, pine, and apple trees.
Examples of herbaceous perennials used in agriculture include alfalfa, Thinopyrum intermedium, and Red clover.

List of perennials[edit]






This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (July 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Perennial flowers[edit]

Gulmohur
Hibiscus

Perennial fruits[edit]


Apple
Apricot
Avocado
Banana
Blackcurrant
Blueberry
Blackberry
Currant
Feijoa
Grape
Kiwi fruit
Japanese wineberry
Pear
Persimmon
Pineapple
Plum
Pomegranate
Raspberries
Strawberry
Strawberry tree
Tomato


Perennial herbs[edit]
The following perennial plants are used as herbs:


Agastache
Alfalfa
Althaea officinalis (marshmallow)
Basil, many varieties: African blue, East Indian
Chives
Fennel
Ferula
Garlic
Ginger
Hops - Humulus
Hyssop
Horseradish
Lavender
Lemon balm
Mint
Onions, many varieties: potato onions, shallots, Egyptian onions, Japanese bunching onions, Welsh onions, Chinese leeks
Oregano
Piper nigrum (black pepper)
Rosemary
Sage
Thyme
Valerian
White horehound - Marrubium vulgare
Yarrow - Achillea millefolium


Perennial vegetables[edit]






This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (March 2011) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Many vegetable plants can grow as perennials in tropical climates, but die in cold weather. Some of the more completely perennial vegetables are:


Allium tricoccum
Asparagus
Broccoli: nine star
Chives
Colocasia esculenta
Globe artichoke
Apios americana ground Nut
Jerusalem artichoke
Konjac
Leek
Milkweed (Asclepias)
New Zealand spinach
Potato
Radicchio or a.k.a. Italian chicory
Rhubarb
Siberian pea tree (Caragana arborescens)
Sorrel
Rakkyo
Sea kale
Collard greens
Mustard greens
Turnip greens
Kale
Sweet potato
Taro
Watercress


See also[edit]

Annual plant
Biennial plant
Herbaceous
Herbchronology
Perennial grain

References[edit]



^ The Garden Helper. The Difference Between Annual Plants and Perennial Plants in the Garden. Retrieved on 2008-06-22.
^ RHS A-Z encyclopedia of garden plants. United Kingdom: Dorling Kindersley. 2008. p. 1136. ISBN 1405332964. 
^ Stearn, William T. "Botanical Latin" (four editions, 1966-92)
^ Glover et al. Future Farming: A return to roots? Retrieved on 2008-11-11.
^ Moffat 1996 [1] Retrieved on 2008-11-14
^ Cox et al. 2000 [2] Retrieved on 2008-11-14



External links[edit]



Wikiquote has quotations related to: Perennial plant



USDA Plant Hardiness Zone Map
Gardening with Perennials
Edible Aroids
Plants for a Future






						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Perennial_plant&oldid=811428224"					Categories: Botanical nomenclaturePlantsGarden plantsPerennial plantsHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from March 2016All articles needing additional referencesArticles that may contain original research from August 2007All articles that may contain original researchArticles with multiple maintenance issuesArticles needing additional references from July 2017Articles needing additional references from March 2011