"Farsi" redirects here. For other uses, see Farsi (disambiguation).


Persian


Fārsi


فارسی



Fārsi written in Persian (Nastaʿlīq script)



Pronunciation
[fɒːɾˈsiː]


Native to



Iran[1]
Afghanistan[1] (as Dari)




Tajikistan[1] (as Tajik)
Uzbekistan (as Tajik and Bukhori)
Iraq[2]
Russia[3][4]
Azerbaijan[5]






Native speakers

45 million (2007)[6] – 60 million (2009)[5]
(110 million total speakers)[5]



Language family


Indo-European

Indo-Iranian

Iranian

Western Iranian

Southwestern Iranian

Persian














Early forms


Old Persian

Middle Persian






Standard forms


Western Persian
Dari
Tajik



Dialects


Western Persian
Dari
Tajik
Bukhori
Pahlavani
Hazaragi
Aimaq
Judeo-Persian
Dehwari
Judeo-Tat[5]
Caucasian Tat[5]
Armeno-Tat[5]





Writing system




Persian alphabet (Iran and Afghanistan)
Tajik alphabet (Tajikistan)



Hebrew
Persian Braille








Official status



Official language in




 Iran (as Persian)
 Afghanistan (as Dari)
 Tajikistan (as Tajik)





Regulated by




Academy of Persian Language and Literature (Iran)






Language codes


ISO 639-1
fa


ISO 639-2
per (B)
fas (T)


ISO 639-3
fas – inclusive code
Individual codes:
pes – Western Persian
prs – Dari language (Afghan Persian)
tgk – Tajiki
aiq – Aimaq dialect
bhh – Bukhori dialect
haz – Hazaragi dialect
jpr – Judeo-Persian
phv – Pahlavani
deh – Dehwari
jdt – Judeo-Tat
ttt – Caucasian Tat


Glottolog
fars1254[7]


Linguasphere

58-AAC (Wider Persian)
 > 58-AAC-c (Central Persian)




Areas with significant numbers of Persian speakers (including dialects)





  Countries where Persian is an official language




This article contains IPA phonetic symbols. Without proper rendering support, you may see question marks, boxes, or other symbols instead of Unicode characters. For an introductory guide on IPA symbols, see Help:IPA.





This article contains Persian text. Without proper rendering support, you may see question marks, boxes, or other symbols.


Persian (/ˈpɜːrʒən/ or /ˈpɜːrʃən/), also known by its endonym Farsi (فارسی fārsi [fɒːɾˈsiː] ( listen)), is one of the Western Iranian languages within the Indo-Iranian branch of the Indo-European language family. It is primarily spoken in Iran, Afghanistan (officially known as Dari since 1958),[8] and Tajikistan (officially known as Tajiki since the Soviet era),[9] and some other regions which historically were Persianate societies and considered part of Greater Iran. It is written in the Persian alphabet, a modified variant of the Arabic script.
The Persian language is classified as a continuation of Middle Persian, the official religious and literary language of the Sasanian Empire, itself a continuation of Old Persian, the language of the Achaemenid Empire.[10][11][12] Its grammar is similar to that of many contemporary European languages.[13] Persian gets its name from its origin at the capital of the Achaemenid Empire, Persis (modern-day Fars Province), hence the name Persian (Farsi).[14] A Persian-speaking person may be referred to as Persophone.[15]
There are approximately 110 million Persian speakers worldwide, with the language holding official status in Iran, Afghanistan, and Tajikistan. For centuries, Persian has also been a prestigious cultural language in other regions of Western Asia, Central Asia, and South Asia by the various empires based in the regions.[16]
Persian has had a considerable (mainly lexical) influence on neighboring languages, particularly the Turkic languages in Central Asia, Caucasus, and Anatolia, neighboring Iranian languages, as well as Armenian, Georgian, and Indo-Aryan languages, especially Urdu (a register of Hindustani). It also exerted some influence on Arabic, particularly Bahrani Arabic,[17] while borrowing much vocabulary from it after the Arab conquest of Iran.[10][13][18][19][20][21][22]
With a long history of literature in the form of Middle Persian before Islam, Persian was the first language in the Muslim world to break through Arabic's monopoly on writing, and the writing of poetry in Persian was established as a court tradition in many eastern courts.[16] Some of the famous works of Persian literature are the Shahnameh of Ferdowsi, the works of Rumi, the Rubaiyat of Omar Khayyam, the Panj Ganj of Nizami Ganjavi, the Divān of Hafez and the two miscellanea of prose and verse by Saadi Shirazi, the Gulistan and the Bustan.



Contents


1 Classification
2 Etymology

2.1 Persian language name in Persian
2.2 Persian language name in English


3 History

3.1 Old Persian
3.2 Middle Persian
3.3 New Persian

3.3.1 Early New Persian
3.3.2 Classical Persian
3.3.3 Use in Asia Minor
3.3.4 Use in South Asia
3.3.5 Contemporary Persian




4 Varieties
5 Phonology

5.1 Vowels
5.2 Consonants


6 Grammar

6.1 Morphology
6.2 Syntax


7 Vocabulary

7.1 Native word formation
7.2 Influences


8 Orthography

8.1 Persian alphabet

8.1.1 Additions
8.1.2 Variations


8.2 Latin alphabet
8.3 Tajik alphabet


9 Examples
10 See also
11 References
12 Sources
13 Further reading
14 External links



Classification[edit]
Persian is one of the Western Iranian languages within the Indo-European family. Other Western Iranian languages are the Kurdish languages, Gilaki, Mazanderani, Talysh, and Balochi. Persian is classified as a member of the Southwestern subgroup within Western Iranian along with Lari, Kumzari, and Luri.[23]
Etymology[edit]
Persian language name in Persian[edit]
In Persian, the language is known by several names:

Western Persian, Parsi (پارسی‬ pārsi) or Farsi (فارسی‬ fārsi or زبان فارسی‬ zabān-e fārsi) has been the name used by all native speakers until the 20th century. In recent decades some authors writing in English have referred to the variety of Persian spoken in Iran as Farsi;[24][25] although the name Persian is also still widely used.[26][27][28]
Eastern Persian, Dari Persian (دری‬ darī or فارسی دری‬ fārsi-ye dari) was originally a synonym for Fārsi but since the latter decades of the 20th century has become the name for the variety of Persian spoken in Afghanistan, where it is one of the two official languages; it is sometimes called Afghan Persian in English.[29]
Tajiki (тоҷикӣ, تاجیکی‬ tojikī or забони тоҷикӣ / فارسی تاجیکی‬ zabon-i tojiki) is the variety of Persian spoken in Tajikistan and Uzbekistan by the Tajiks.

Persian language name in English[edit]
Persian, the historically more widely used name of the language in English, is an anglicized form derived from Latin *Persianus < Latin Persia < Greek Περσίς Persís "Persia",[30] a Hellenized form of Old Persian Pārsa.[31] According to the Oxford English Dictionary, the term Persian as a language name is first attested in English in the mid-16th century.[32] Native Iranian Persian speakers call it Fārsi.[33] Farsi is the Arabicized form of Pārsi, subsequent to Muslim conquest of Persia, due to a lack of the phoneme /p/ in Standard Arabic (i.e., the /p/ was replaced with an /f/).[34][35][36] The origin of the name Farsi and the place of origin of the language which is Fars Province is the Arabicized form of Pārs.[34][35][36] In English, this language has historically been known as Persian, though Farsi has also gained some currency. Farsi is encountered in some linguistic literature as a name for the language, used both by Iranian and by foreign authors.[37]
In modern English the word Farsi refers to the language while Parsi (or Parsee) describes Zoroastrians, particularly in South Asia.
The Academy of Persian Language and Literature has declared that the name Persian is more appropriate, as it has the longer tradition in western languages and better expresses the role of the language as a mark of cultural and national continuity.[38] Some Persian language scholars such as Ehsan Yarshater, editor of Encyclopædia Iranica, and University of Arizona professor Kamran Talattof, have also rejected the usage of "Farsi" in their articles.[39][40]
The international language-encoding standard ISO 639-1 uses the code fa, as its coding system is mostly based on the local names. The more detailed standard ISO 639-3 uses the name "Persian" (code fas) for the dialect continuum spoken across Iran and Afghanistan. This consists of the individual languages Dari (Afghan Persian) and Iranian Persian.[41]
Currently, Voice of America, BBC World Service, Deutsche Welle, and Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty use "Persian Service" for their broadcasts in the language. Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty also includes a Tajik service and an Afghan (Dari) service. This is also the case for the American Association of Teachers of Persian, The Centre for Promotion of Persian Language and Literature, and many of the leading scholars of the Persian language.[42]
History[edit]


History of the
Persian language


Proto-Iranian (c. 1500 BCE)
Western Iranian languages



Old Persian (c. 525 – 300 BCE)
Old Persian cuneiform



Middle Persian (c. 300 BCE – 800 CE)
Pahlavi scripts • Manichaean alphabet • Avestan alphabet



Modern Persian (from 800)
Persian alphabet • Tajiki Cyrillic alphabet



Persian is an Iranian language belonging to the Indo-Iranian branch of the Indo-European family of languages. In general, Iranian languages are known from three periods, usually referred to as Old, Middle, and New (Modern) periods. These correspond to three eras in Iranian history; Old era being the period from sometime before Achaemenids, the Achaemenid era and sometime after Achaemenids (that is to 400–300 BC), Middle era being the next period most officially Sassanid era and sometime in post-Sassanid era, and the New era being the period afterwards down to present day.[43]
According to available documents, the Persian language is "the only Iranian language"[10] for which close philological relationships between all of its three stages are established and so that Old, Middle, and New Persian represent[10][44] one and the same language of Persian; that is, New Persian is a direct descendant of Middle and Old Persian.[44]
The known history of the Persian language can be divided into the following three distinct periods:
Old Persian[edit]
Main articles: Old Persian and Persian verbs




Old Persian


As a written language, Old Persian is attested in royal Achaemenid inscriptions. The oldest known text written in Old Persian is from the Behistun Inscription.[45] Examples of Old Persian have been found in what is now Iran, Romania (Gherla),[46][47][48] Armenia, Bahrain, Iraq, Turkey and Egypt.[49][50] Old Persian is one of the oldest Indo-European languages which is attested in original texts.[51]
Xenophon, a Greek general serving in some of the Persian expeditions, describes many aspects of Armenian village life and hospitality in around 401 BC, which is at a time when Old Persian was the only form of Persian used. He relates that the Armenians spoke a language that to his ear sounded like the language of the Persians.[52]
Middle Persian[edit]
Main article: Middle Persian
The complex grammatical conjugation and declension of Old Persian yielded to the structure of Middle Persian in which the dual number disappeared, leaving only singular and plural, as did gender. Middle Persian developed the ezāfe construction, expressed through ī (modern ye), to indicate some of the relations between words that have been lost with the simplification of the earlier grammatical system.
Although the "middle period" of the Iranian languages formally begins with the fall of the Achaemenid Empire, the transition from Old to Middle Persian had probably already begun before the 4th century. However, Middle Persian is not actually attested until 600 years later when it appears in the Sassanid era (224–651) inscriptions, so any form of the language before this date cannot be described with any degree of certainty. Moreover, as a literary language, Middle Persian is not attested until much later, to the 6th or 7th century. And from the 8th century onward, Middle Persian gradually began yielding to New Persian, with the middle-period form only continuing in the texts of Zoroastrianism.
The native name of Middle Persian was Parsig or Parsik, after the name of the ethnic group of the southwest, that is, "of Pars", Old Persian Parsa, New Persian Fars. This is the origin of the name Farsi as it is today used to signify New Persian. Following the collapse of the Sassanid state, Parsik came to be applied exclusively to (either Middle or New) Persian that was written in the Arabic script. From about the 9th century onward, as Middle Persian was on the threshold of becoming New Persian, the older form of the language came to be erroneously called Pahlavi, which was actually but one of the writing systems used to render both Middle Persian as well as various other Middle Iranian languages. That writing system had previously been adopted by the Sassanids (who were Persians, i.e. from the southwest) from the preceding Arsacids (who were Parthians, i.e. from the northeast). While Ibn al-Muqaffa' (eighth century) still distinguished between Pahlavi (i.e. Parthian) and Persian (in Arabic text: al-Farisiyah) (i.e. Middle Persian), this distinction is not evident in Arab commentaries written after that date.
Gernot Windfuhr considers new Persian as an evolution of the Old Persian language and the Middle Persian language[53] but also states that none of the known Middle Persian dialects is the direct predecessor of Modern Persian.[54][55] Ludwig Paul states: "The language of the Shahnameh should be seen as one instance of continuous historical development from Middle to New Persian."[56]
New Persian[edit]




Ferdowsi's Shahnameh


"New Persian" is conventionally divided into three stages:

Early New Persian (8th/9th centuries)
Classical Persian (10th–18th centuries)
Contemporary Persian (19th century to present)

Early New Persian remains largely intelligible to speakers of Contemporary Persian, as the morphology and, to a lesser extent, the lexicon of the language have remained relatively stable.[57]
Early New Persian[edit]
"New Persian" is taken to replace Middle Persian in the course of the 8th to 9th centuries, under Abbasid rule.[58] With the decline of the Abbasids began the reestablishment of Persian national life and Persians laid the foundations for a renaissance in the realm of letters. New Persian as an independent literary language first emerges in Bactria through the adaptation of the spoken form of Sassanian Middle Persian court language called Dari. The cradle of the Persian literary renaissance lay in the east of Greater Iran in Greater Khorasan and Transoxiana close to the Amu Darya (Modern day Afghanistan).[59]
The mastery of the newer speech having now been transformed from Middle into New Persian was already complete by the era of the three princely dynasties of Iranian origin, the Tahirid dynasty (820–872), Saffarid dynasty (860–903) and Samanid Empire (874–999), and could develop only in range and power of expression.[59]
Abbas of Merv is mentioned as being the earliest minstrel to chant verse in the newer Persian tongue and after him the poems of Hanzala Badghisi were among the most famous between the Persian-speakers of the time.[60]
The first poems of the Persian language, a language historically called Dari, emerged in Afghanistan.[61] The first significant Persian poet was Rudaki. He flourished in the 10th century, when the Samanids were at the height of their power. His reputation as a court poet and as an accomplished musician and singer has survived, although little of his poetry has been preserved. Among his lost works is versified fables collected in the Kalila wa Dimna.[16]
The language spread geographically from the 11th century on and was the medium through which among others, Central Asian Turks became familiar with Islam and urban culture. New Persian was widely used as a trans-regional lingua franca, a task for which it was particularly suitable due to its relatively simple morphological structure and this situation persisted until at least 19th century.[58] In the late Middle Ages, new Islamic literary languages were created on the Persian model: Ottoman Turkish, Chagatai and Urdu, which are regarded as "structural daughter languages" of Persian.[58]
Classical Persian[edit]
See also: List of Persian poets and authors




Kalilah va Dimna, an influential work in Persian literature.


"Classical Persian" loosely refers to the standardized language of medieval Persia used in literature and poetry. This is the language of the 10th to 12th centuries, which continued to be used as literary language and lingua franca under the "Persianized" Turko-Mongol dynasties during the 12th to 15th centuries, and under restored Persian rule during the 16th to 19th centuries.[62]
Persian during this time served as lingua franca of Greater Persia and of much of the Indian subcontinent. It was also the official and cultural language of many Islamic dynasties, including the Samanids, Buyids, Tahirids, Ziyarids, the Mughal Empire, Timurids, Ghaznavids, Seljuqs, Khwarazmians, the Sultanate of Rum, the Shirvanshahs, Safavids, Afsharids, Zands, Qajars, Ottomans and also many Mughal successors such as the Nizam of Hyderabad. Persian was the only non-European language known and used by Marco Polo at the Court of Kublai Khan and in his journeys through China.[63]
Use in Asia Minor[edit]




Persian on an Ottoman miniature.


Despite Anatolia having been ruled at various times prior to the Middle Ages by various Persian-speaking dynasties originating in Iran, the language lost its traditional foothold there with the demise of the Sasanian Empire. Centuries later however, the practise and usage of Persian in the region would be strongly revived. A branch of the Seljuks, the Sultanate of Rum, took Persian language, art and letters to Anatolia.[64] They adopted Persian language as the official language of the empire.[65] The Ottomans, which can roughly be seen as their eventual successors, took this tradition over. Persian was the official court language of the empire, and for some time, the official language of the empire.[66] The educated and noble class of the Ottoman Empire all spoke Persian, such as sultan Selim I, despite being Safavid Iran's archrival and a staunch opposer of Shia Islam.[67] It was a major literary language in the empire.[68] Some of the noted earlier Persian works during the Ottoman rule are Idris Bidlisi's Hasht Bihisht, which begun in 1502 and covered the reign of the first eight Ottoman rulers, and the Salim-Namah, a glorification of Selim I.[67] After a period of several centuries, Ottoman Turkish (which was highly Persianised itself) had developed towards a fully accepted language of literature, which was even able to satisfy the demands of a scientific presentation.[69] However, the number of Persian and Arabic loanwords contained in those works increased at times up to 88%.[69]
Use in South Asia[edit]
Main article: Persian language in South Asia
See also: Persian and Urdu




Persian poem, Agra Fort, India, 18th century






Persian poem, Takht-e Shah Jahan, Agra Fort, India


The Persian language influenced the formation of many modern languages in West Asia, Europe, Central Asia, and South Asia. Following the Turko-Persian Ghaznavid conquest of South Asia, Persian was firstly introduced in the region by Turkic Central Asians.[70] The basis in general for the introduction of Persian language into the subcontinent was set, from its earliest days, by various Persianized Central Asian Turkic and Afghan dynasties.[64] For five centuries prior to the British colonization, Persian was widely used as a second language in the Indian subcontinent, due to the admiration the Mughals (who were of Turco-Mongol origin) had for the foreign language. It took prominence as the language of culture and education in several Muslim courts on the subcontinent and became the sole "official language" under the Mughal emperors. Beginning in 1843, though, English and Hindustani gradually replaced Persian in importance on the subcontinent.[71] Evidence of Persian's historical influence there can be seen in the extent of its influence on certain languages of the Indian subcontinent. Words borrowed from Persian are still quite commonly used in certain Indo-Aryan languages, especially Urdu, also historically known as Hindustani. There is also a small population of Zoroastrian Iranis in India, who migrated around 16th-18th century to escape religious execution in Qajar Iran and speak a Dari dialect.
Contemporary Persian[edit]




A variant of the Iranian standard ISIRI 9147 keyboard layout for Persian


In the 19th century, under the Qajar dynasty, the dialect spoken in Tehran rose to prominence. This became the basis of what is now known as "Contemporary Standard Persian".
There is still substantial Arabic vocabulary, but many of these words have been integrated into Persian phonology and grammar. In addition, since the 19th century numerous Russian, French, and English terms have been borrowed, especially vocabulary related to technology. The Iranian National Academy of Persian Language and Literature is responsible for evaluating neologisms in order to devise their Persian equivalents.
Varieties[edit]
There are three modern varieties of standard Persian:

Western Persian (Persian, Iranian Persian, or Farsi) is spoken in Iran, and by minorities in Iraq and the Persian Gulf states.
Dari (Dari Persian, Afghan Persian, or Dari) is spoken in Afghanistan.
Tajiki (Tajik Persian) is spoken in Tajikistan and Uzbekistan. It is written in the Cyrillic script.

All these three varieties are based on the classic Persian literature and its literary tradition. There are also several local dialects from Iran, Afghanistan and Tajikistan which slightly differ from the standard Persian. The Hazaragi dialect (in Central Afghanistan and Pakistan), Herati (in Western Afghanistan), Darwazi (in Afghanistan and Tajikistan), and the Tehrani accent (in Iran, the basis of standard Iranian Persian) are examples of these dialects. Persian-speaking peoples of Iran, Afghanistan, and Tajikistan can understand one another with a relatively high degree of mutual intelligibility.[72]
The following are some languages closely related to Persian, or in some cases are considered dialects:

Luri (or Lori), spoken mainly in the southwestern Iranian provinces of Lorestan, Kohgiluyeh and Boyer-Ahmad Province, some western parts of Fars Province and some parts of Khuzestan Province.
Lari (in southern Iran)
Tat, spoken in parts of Azerbaijan, Russia, and Transcaucasia. It is classified as a variety of Persian.[73][74][75][76][77]
Judeo-Tat. Part of the Tat Persian continuum, and spoken in Azerbaijan, Russia, as well as notably by immigrant communities in Israel and New York.

Phonology[edit]
Main article: Persian phonology
Iranian Persian has six vowels and twenty-three consonants.
Vowels[edit]




The vowel phonemes of modern Tehran Persian


Historically, Persian has distinguished length. Early New Persian had a series of five long vowels (/iː/, /uː/, /ɒː/, /oː/ and /eː/) along with three short vowels /æ/, /i/ and /u/. At some point prior to the 16th century in the general area now modern Iran, /eː/ and /iː/ merged into /iː/, and /oː/ and /uː/ merged into /uː/. Thus, older contrasts such as شیر‬ shēr "lion" vs. شیر‬ shīr "milk", and زود‬ zūd "quick" vs زور‬ zōr "strong" were lost. However, there are exceptions to this rule, and in some words, ē and ō are preserved[citation needed] or merged into the diphthongs [eɪ] and [oʊ] (which are descendants of the diphthongs [æɪ] and [æʊ] in Early New Persian), instead of merging into /iː/ and /uː/. Examples of the exception can be found in words such as روشن‬ [roʊʃæn] (bright).
However, in Dari, the archaic distinction of /eː/ and /iː/ (respectively known as یای مجهول‬ Yā-ye majhūl and یای معروف‬ Yā-ye ma'rūf) is still preserved as well as the distinction of /oː/ and /uː/ (known as واو مجهول‬ Wāw-e majhūl and واو معروف‬ Wāw-e ma'rūf). On the other hand, in standard Tajik, the length distinction has disappeared, and /iː/ merged with /i/ and /uː/ with /u/.[78] Therefore, contemporary Afghan Dari dialects are the closest to the vowel inventory of Early New Persian.
According to most studies on the subject (e.g. Samareh 1977, Pisowicz 1985, Najafi 2001), the three vowels traditionally considered long (/i/, /u/, /ɒ/) are currently distinguished from their short counterparts (/e/, /o/, /æ/) by position of articulation rather than by length. However, there are studies (e.g. Hayes 1979, Windfuhr 1979) that consider vowel length to be the active feature of the system, with /ɒ/, /i/, and /u/ phonologically long or bimoraic and /æ/, /e/, and /o/ phonologically short or monomoraic.
There are also some studies that consider quality and quantity to be both active in the Iranian system (such as Toosarvandani 2004). That offers a synthetic analysis including both quality and quantity, which often suggests that Modern Persian vowels are in a transition state between the quantitative system of Classical Persian and a hypothetical future Persian, which will eliminate all traces of quantity and retain quality as the only active feature.
The length distinction is still strictly observed by careful reciters of classic-style poetry for all varieties (including Tajik).
Consonants[edit]



Labial
Alveolar
Postalveolar
Palatal
Velar
Uvular
Glottal


Nasal
m
n


ŋ




Plosive
p b
t d


k ɡ
q ɢ



Affricate


tʃ dʒ






Fricative
f v
s z
ʃ ʒ


χ ʁ
h


Trill

r







Approximant

l

j





Grammar[edit]
Main article: Persian grammar
Morphology[edit]
Suffixes predominate Persian morphology, though there are a small number of prefixes.[79] Verbs can express tense and aspect, and they agree with the subject in person and number.[80] There is no grammatical gender in Persian, and pronouns are not marked for natural gender.
Syntax[edit]
Normal declarative sentences are structured as (S) (PP) (O) V: sentences have optional subjects, prepositional phrases, and objects followed by a compulsory verb. If the object is specific, the object is followed by the word rā and precedes prepositional phrases: (S) (O + rā) (PP) V.[80]
Vocabulary[edit]
Main article: Persian vocabulary
Native word formation[edit]
Persian makes extensive use of word building and combining affixes, stems, nouns and adjectives. Persian frequently uses derivational agglutination to form new words from nouns, adjectives, and verbal stems. New words are extensively formed by compounding – two existing words combining into a new one, as is common in German.
Influences[edit]
See also: List of English words of Persian origin, List of French loanwords in Persian, and Iranian languages § Comparison table of the Iranian languages
While having a lesser influence on Arabic[19] and other languages of Mesopotamia and its core vocabulary being of Middle Persian origin,[13] New Persian contains a considerable amount of Arabic lexical items,[10][18][20] which were Persianized[21] and often took a different meaning and usage than the Arabic original. Persian loanwords of Arabic origin especially include Islamic terms. The Arabic vocabulary in other Iranian, Turkic and Indic languages is generally understood to have been copied from New Persian, not from Arabic itself.[81]
John R. Perry, in his article Lexical Areas and Semantic Fields of Arabic, estimates that about 24 percent of an everyday vocabulary of 20,000 words in current Persian, and more than 25 percent of the vocabulary of classical and modern Persian literature, are of Arabic origin. The text frequency of these loan words is generally lower and varies by style and topic area. It may approach 25 percent of a text in literature.[82] Among the Arabic loan words, relatively few (14 percent) are from the semantic domain of material culture, while a larger number are from domains of intellectual and spiritual life.[83] Most of the Arabic words used in Persian are either synonyms of native terms or could be glossed in Persian.[84]
The inclusion of Mongolian and Turkic elements in the Persian language should also be mentioned,[85] not only because of the political role a succession of Turkic dynasties played in Iranian history, but also because of the immense prestige Persian language and literature enjoyed in the wider (non-Arab) Islamic world, which was often ruled by sultans and emirs with a Turkic background. The Turkish and Mongolian vocabulary in Persian is minor in comparison to that of Arabic and these words were mainly confined to military, pastoral terms and political sector (titles, administration, etc.).[86] New military and political titles were coined based partially on Middle Persian (e.g. ارتش‬ arteš for "army", instead of the Uzbek قؤشین‬ qoʻshin; سرلشکر‬ sarlaškar; دریابان‬ daryābān; etc.) in the 20th century. Persian has likewise influenced the vocabularies of other languages, especially other Indo-European languages such as Armenian,[87] Urdu, and (to a lesser extent) Hindi; the latter two through conquests of Persianized Central Asian Turkic and Afghan invaders;[88] Turkic languages such as Ottoman Turkish, Chagatai, Tatar, Turkish,[89] Turkmen, Azeri,[90] Uzbek, and Karachay-Balkar;[91] Caucasian languages such as Georgian,[92] and to a lesser extent, Avar and Lezgin;[93] Afro-Asiatic languages like Assyrian (List of loanwords in Assyrian Neo-Aramaic) and Arabic;[94] and even Dravidian languages indirectly especially Telugu and Brahui; as well as Austronesian languages such as Indonesian and Malay. Persian has also had a significant lexical influence, via Turkish, on Albanian, Serbian, Croatian, Bosnian, and Serbo-Croatian, particularly as spoken in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Use of occasional foreign synonyms instead of Persian words can be a common practice in everyday communications as an alternative expression. In some instances in addition to the Persian vocabulary, the equivalent synonyms from multiple foreign languages can be used. For example, in Iranian colloquial Persian (not in Afghanistan or Tajikistan), the phrase "thank you" may be expressed using the French word مرسی‬ merci (stressed, however, on the first syllable), the hybrid Persian-Arabic phrase متشکّر ام‬ motešakker am (متشکّر‬ motešakker being "merciful" in Arabic, commonly pronounced motčakker in Persian, and the verb ام‬ am meaning "I am" in Persian), or by the pure Persian phrase سپاس‌گزار ام‬ sepās-gozār am.
Orthography[edit]




Example showing Nastaʿlīq's (Persian) proportion rules.[ 1 ]






Ali-Akbar Dehkhoda's personal handwriting, a typical cursive Persian script.






The word Persian in Pahlavi scripts


The vast majority of modern Iranian Persian and Dari text is written with the Arabic script. Tajiki, which is considered by some linguists to be a Persian dialect influenced by Russian and the Turkic languages of Central Asia,[95][96] is written with the Cyrillic script in Tajikistan (see Tajik alphabet).
Persian alphabet[edit]
Main article: Persian alphabet
Modern Iranian Persian and Afghan Persian are written using a modified variant of the Arabic alphabet, which uses different pronunciation and additional letters not found in Arabic. Tajik Persian, as used in Tajikistan, is typically written in a modified version of the Cyrillic script. There also exist several romanization systems for Persian. After the Muslim conquest of Persia, it took approximately 150 years before Persians adopted the Arabic script in place of the older alphabet. Previously, two different scripts were used, Pahlavi, used for Middle Persian, and the Avestan alphabet (in Persian, Dīndapirak or Din Dabire—literally: religion script), used for religious purposes, primarily for the Avestan but sometimes for Middle Persian.
In the modern Persian script, historically short vowels are usually not written, only the historically long ones are represented in the text, so words distinguished from each other only by short vowels are ambiguous in writing: Western Persian kerm "worm", karam "generosity", kerem "cream", and krom "chrome" are all spelled krm (کرم‬) in Persian. The reader must determine the word from context. The Arabic system of vocalization marks known as harakat is also used in Persian, although some of the symbols have different pronunciations. For example, a ḍammah is pronounced [ʊ~u], while in Iranian Persian it is pronounced [o]. This system is not used in mainstream Persian literature; it is primarily used for teaching and in some (but not all) dictionaries.
There are several letters generally only used in Arabic loanwords. These letters are pronounced the same as similar Persian letters. For example, there are four functionally identical letters for /z/ (ز ذ ض ظ‬), three letters for /s/ (س ص ث‬), two letters for /t/ (ط ت‬), two letters for /h/ (ح ه‬). On the other hand, there are four letters that don't exist in Arabic پ چ ژ گ‬.
Additions[edit]
The Persian alphabet adds four letters to the Arabic alphabet:


Sound
Isolated form
Name


/p/
پ‬
pe


/tʃ/
چ‬
če (che)


/ʒ/
ژ‬
že (zhe or jhe)


/ɡ/
گ‬
ge (gāf)


Historically, there was used also a special letter for the sound /β/. This letter is used no more as the /β/-sound changed to /b/, i.e. archaic زڤان /zaβān/ > زبان /zæbɒn/ 'language'


Sound
Isolated form
Name


/β/
ڤ‬
βe


Variations[edit]
The Persian alphabet also modifies some letters of the Arabic alphabet. For example, alef with hamza below ( إ‬ ) changes to alef ( ا‬ ); words using various hamzas get spelled with yet another kind of hamza (so that مسؤول‬ becomes مسئول‬) even though the latter is also correct in Arabic; and teh marbuta ( ة‬ ) changes to heh ( ه‬ ) or teh ( ت‬ ).
The letters different in shape are:


Arabic Style letter
Persian Style letter
name


ك
ک
ke (kāf)


ي
ی
ye


Latin alphabet[edit]
Main article: Romanization of Persian
The International Organization for Standardization has published a standard for simplified transliteration of Persian into Latin, ISO 233-3, titled "Information and documentation – Transliteration of Arabic characters into Latin characters – Part 3: Persian language – Simplified transliteration"[97] but the transliteration scheme is not in widespread use.
Another Latin alphabet, based on the Common Turkic Alphabet, was used in Tajikistan in the 1920s and 1930s. The alphabet was phased out in favor of Cyrillic in the late 1930s.[95]
Fingilish is Persian using ISO basic Latin alphabet. It is most commonly used in chat, emails and SMS applications. The orthography is not standardized, and varies among writers and even media (for example, typing 'aa' for the [ɒ] phoneme is easier on computer keyboards than on cellphone keyboards, resulting in smaller usage of the combination on cellphones).
Tajik alphabet[edit]




Tajiki advertisement for an academy.


Main article: Tajik alphabet
The Cyrillic script was introduced for writing the Tajik language under the Tajik Soviet Socialist Republic in the late 1930s, replacing the Latin alphabet that had been used since the October Revolution and the Persian script that had been used earlier. After 1939, materials published in Persian in the Persian script were banned from the country.[95][98]
Examples[edit]
The following text is from Article 1 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.


Western Persian
همهٔ افراد بشر آزاد به دنیا می‌آیند و حیثیت و حقوق شان با هم برابر است، همه اندیشه و وجدان دارند و باید در برابر یکدیگر با روح برادری رفتار کنند.‬


Western Persian
transliteration
Hamaye afrâd bašâr âzâd be donyâ miâyand o heysiyat o hoğuğe šân bâ ham barâbar ast hame šân andiše o vejdân dârand o bâjad dar barâbare yekdigar bâ ruhe barâdari raftâr konand.


Western Persian IPA
[hæmeje æfrɒde bæʃær ɒzɒd be donjɒ miɒjænd o hejsijæt o hoɢuɢe ʃɒn bɒ hæm bærɒbær æst hæme ʃɒn ændiʃe o vedʒdɒn dɒrænd o bɒjæd dær bærɒbære jekdiɡær bɒ ruhe bærɒdæri ræftɒr konænd]


Tajiki
Ҳамаи афроди башар озод ба дунё меоянд ва ҳайсияту ҳуқуқашон бо ҳам баробар аст, ҳамаашон андешаву виҷдон доранд ва бояд дар баробари якдигар бо рӯҳи бародарӣ рафтор кунанд.


Interlinear gloss
All human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights. They are endowed with reason and conscience and should act towards one another in a spirit of brotherhood.


See also[edit]

The existential "be" and copula in Persian
Academy of Persian Language and Literature
Pahlavi
List of English words of Persian origin
List of French loanwords in Persian
Persian alphabet
Persian Braille
Persian grammar
Persian name
Persian phonology
Persian metres
Persianate society
Romanization of Persian
Western Iranian languages

References[edit]


^ a b c Samadi, Habibeh; Nick Perkins (2012). Martin Ball; David Crystal; Paul Fletcher, eds. Assessing Grammar: The Languages of Lars. Multilingual Matters. p. 169. ISBN 978-1-84769-637-3. 
^ "IRAQ". Retrieved 7 November 2014. 
^ Pilkington, Hilary; Yemelianova, Galina (2004). Islam in Post-Soviet Russia. Taylor & Francis. p. 27. ISBN 978-0-203-21769-6. : "Among other indigenous peoples of Iranian origin were the Tats, the Talishes and the Kurds"
^ Mastyugina, Tatiana; Perepelkin, Lev (1996). An Ethnic History of Russia: Pre-revolutionary Times to the Present. Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 978-0-313-29315-3. , p. 80: "The Iranian Peoples (Ossetians, Tajiks, Tats, Mountain Judaists)"
^ a b c d e f Windfuhr, Gernot: The Iranian Languages, Routledge 2009, p. 418.
^ Mikael Parkvall, "Världens 100 största språk 2007" (The World's 100 Largest Languages in 2007), in Nationalencyklopedin
^ Hammarström, Harald; Forkel, Robert; Haspelmath, Martin, eds. (2017). "Farsic – Caucasian Tat". Glottolog 3.0. Jena, Germany: Max Planck Institute for the Science of Human History. 
^ Asta Olesen, "Islam and Politics in Afghanistan, Volume 3", Psychology Press, 1995. pg 205: "There began a general promotion of the Pashto language at the expense of Fārsi – previously dominant at the educational and administrative level – and the term 'Dari' for the Afghan version of Persian came into common use, being officially adopted in 1958"
^ Baker, Mona (2001). Routledge Encyclopedia of Translation Studies. Psychology Press. ISBN 978-0-415-25517-2. , pg 518: "among them the realignment of Central Asian Persian, renamed Tajiki by the Soviet Union"
^ a b c d e Lazard, Gilbert 1975, "The Rise of the New Persian Language" in Frye, R. N., The Cambridge History of Iran, Vol. 4, pp. 595–632, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. "The language known as New Persian, which usually is called at this period (early Islamic times) by the name of Dari or Farsi-Dari, can be classified linguistically as a continuation of Middle Persian, the official religious and literary language of Sassanian Iran, itself a continuation of Old Persian, the language of the Achaemenids. Unlike the other languages and dialects, ancient and modern, of the Iranian group such as Avestan, Parthian, Soghdian, Kurdish, Balochi, Pashto, etc., Old Persian, Middle and New Persian represent one and the same language at three states of its history. It had its origin in Fars (the true Persian country from the historical point of view) and is differentiated by dialectical features, still easily recognizable from the dialect prevailing in north-western and eastern Iran."
^ Ulrich Ammon, Norbert Dittmar, Klaus J. Mattheier, Peter Trudgill, "Sociolinguistics Hsk 3/3 Series Volume 3 of Sociolinguistics: An International Handbook of the Science of Language and Society", Walter de Gruyter, 2006. 2nd edition. pg 1912. Excerpt: "Middle Persian, also called Pahlavi is a direct continuation of old Persian, and was used as the written official language of the country." "However, after the Moslem conquest and the collapse of the Sassanids, the Pahlavi language was gradually replaced by Dari, a variety of Middle Persian, with considerable loan elements from Arabic and Parthian."
^ Skjærvø, Prods Oktor (2006). Encyclopedia Iranica, "Iran, vi. Iranian languages and scripts, "new Persian, is "the descendant of Middle Persian" and has since been "official language of Iranian states for centuries", whereas for other non-Persian Iranian languages "close genetic relationships are difficult to establish" between their different (Middle and Modern) stages. Modern Yaḡnōbi belongs to the same dialect group as Sogdian, but is not a direct descendant; Bactrian may be closely related to modern Yidḡa and Munji (Munjāni); and Wakhi (Wāḵi) belongs with Khotanese."
^ a b c Richard Davis, "Persian" in Josef W. Meri, Jere L. Bacharach, "Medieval Islamic Civilization", Taylor & Francis, 2006. pp. 602–603. "The grammar of New Persian is similar to many contemporary European languages."Similarly, the core vocabulary of Persian continued to be derived from Pahlavi.
^ "Persian or Farsi?". parents.berkeley.edu. Retrieved 2016-02-27. 
^ "Modernity and Modernism in Persophone Literary History", Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin
^ a b c Encyclopædia Britannica: Persian literature, retrieved September 2011.
^ Holes, Clive (2001). Dialect, Culture, and Society in Eastern Arabia: Glossary. BRILL. ISBN 90-04-10763-0. , p. XXX
^ a b Lazard, Gilbert, "Pahlavi, Pârsi, dari: Les langues d'Iran d'apès Ibn al-Muqaffa" in R.N. Frye, Iran and Islam. In Memory of the late Vladimir Minorsky, Edinburgh University Press, 1971.
^ a b Nushin Namazi (24 November 2008). "Persian Loan Words in Arabic". Retrieved 1 June 2009. 
^ a b Classe, Olive (2000). Encyclopedia of literary translation into English. Taylor & Francis. p. 1057. ISBN 1-884964-36-2. Since the Arab conquest of the country in 7th century AD, many loan words have entered the language (which from this time has been written with a slightly modified version of the Arabic script) and the literature has been heavily influenced by the conventions of Arabic literature. 
^ a b Ann K. S. Lambton, Persian grammar, Cambridge University Press 1953. "The Arabic words incorporated into the Persian language have become Persianized".
^ Most similar languages to Persian, ezglot.com
^ Windfuhr, Gernot (1987). Berard Comrie, ed. The World's Major Languages. Oxford: Oxford University Press. pp. 523–546. ISBN 978-0-19-506511-4. 
^ E.g. Gholamreza Nazari (2014): Farsi Grammar in Use: For Beginners
^ Saeid Atoofi (2015): Farsi (Persian) for Beginners: Mastering Conversational Farsi.
^ E.g. Bahman Solati (2013): Persian Grammar: An Elementary Guide to Some Persian Grammatical Problems
^ Mehdi Purmohammad (2013): An Applied Persian Grammar: Speaking as the Macro-skill
^ Abdi Rafiee (1988/2001): Colloquial Persian (Routledge).
^ See Dari – Geographical distribution
^ Περσίς. Liddell, Henry George; Scott, Robert; A Greek–English Lexicon at the Perseus Project.
^ Harper, Douglas. "Persia". Online Etymology Dictionary. 
^ Oxford English Dictionary online, s.v. "Persian", draft revision June 2007.
^ OED online, s.v. "Pārsi".
^ a b Spooner, Brian (1994). "Dari, Farsi, and Tojiki". In Marashi, Mehdi. Persian Studies in North America: Studies in Honor of Mohammad Ali Jazayery. Leiden: Brill. pp. 177–178. 
^ a b Spooner, Brian (2012). "Dari, Farsi, and Tojiki". In Schiffman, Harold. Language policy and language conflict in Afghanistan and its neighbors: the changing politics of language choice. Leiden: Brill. p. 94. 
^ a b Campbell, George L.; King, Gareth, eds. (2013). "Persian". Compendium of the World's Languages (3rd ed.). Routledge. p. 1339. 
^ For example: A. Gharib, M. Bahar, B. Fooroozanfar, J. Homaii, and R. Yasami. Farsi Grammar. Jahane Danesh, 2nd edition, 2001.
^ "Pronouncement of the Academy of Persian Language and Literature". Heritage.chn.ir. 19 November 2005. Retrieved 13 July 2010. 
^ "Persian or Farsi?". Iranian.com. 16 November 1997. Retrieved 23 September 2010. 
^ "Fársi: "recently appeared language!"". PersianDirect.com. 15 February 2005. Retrieved 23 September 2010. 
^ "Documentation for ISO 639 identifier: fas". Sil.org. Retrieved 13 July 2010. 
^ "Kamran Talattof Persian or Farsi? The debate continues". Iranian.com. 16 December 1997. Retrieved 13 July 2010. 
^ (Skjaervo 2006) vi(2). Documentation.
^ a b cf. (Skjaervo 2006) vi(2). Documentation. Excerpt 1: "Only the official languages Old, Middle, and New Persian represent three stages of one and the same language, whereas close genetic relationships are difficult to establish between other Middle and Modern Iranian languages. Modern Yaḡnōbi belongs to the same dialect group as Sogdian, but is not a direct descendant; Bactrian may be closely related to modern Yidḡa and Munji (Munjāni); and Wakhi (Wāḵi) belongs with Khotanese. Excerpt 2: New Persian, the descendant of Middle Persian and official language of Iranian states for centuries."
^ (Schmitt 2008, pp. 80–1)
^ Kuhrt 2013, p. 197.
^ Frye 1984, p. 103.
^ Schmitt 2000, p. 53.
^ Roland G. Kent, Old Persian, 1953
^ Kent, R. G.: "Old Persian: Grammar Texts Lexicon", page 6. American Oriental Society, 1950.
^ (Skjærvø 2006, vi(2). Documentation. Old Persian.)
^ Xenophon. Anabasis. pp. IV.v.2–9. 
^ Comrie, Bernard (2003). The Major Languages of South Asia, the Middle East and Africa. Routledge. ISBN 978-1-134-93257-3. , p. 82. "The evolution of Persian as the culturally dominant language of major parts of the Near East, from Anatolia and Iran, to Central Asia, to northwest India until recent centuries, began with the political domination of these areas by dynasties originating in southwestern province of Iran, Pars, later Arabicised to Fars: first the Achaemenids (599–331 BC) whose official language was Old Persian; then the Sassanids (c. AD 225–651) whose official language was Middle Persian. Hence, the entire country used to be called Perse by the ancient Greeks, a practice continued to this day. The more general designation 'Iran(-shahr)" derives from Old Iranian aryanam (Khshathra)' (the realm) of Aryans'. The dominance of these two dynasties resulted in Old and Middle-Persian colonies throughout the empire, most importantly for the course of the development of Persian, in the north-east i.e., what is now Khorasan, northern Afghanistan and Central Asia, as documented by the Middle Persian texts of the Manichean found in the oasis city of Turfan in Chinese Turkistan (Sinkiang). This led to certain degree of regionalisation".
^ Comrie, Bernard (1990) The major languages of South Asia, the Middle East and Africa, Taylor & Francis, p. 82
^ Barbara M. Horvath, Paul Vaughan, Community languages, 1991, p. 276
^ L. Paul (2005), "The Language of the Shahnameh in historical and dialectical perspective", p. 150: "The language of the Shahnameh should be seen as one instance of continuous historical development from Middle to New Persian.", in Weber, Dieter; MacKenzie, D. N. (2005). Languages of Iran: Past and Present: Iranian Studies in Memoriam David Neil MacKenzie. Otto Harrassowitz Verlag. ISBN 978-3-447-05299-3. 
^ Jeremias, Eva M. (2004). "Iran, iii. (f). New Persian". Encyclopaedia of Islam. 12 (New Edition, Supplement ed.). p. 432. ISBN 90-04-13974-5. 
^ a b c Johanson, Lars, and Christiane Bulut. 2006. Turkic-Iranian contact areas: historical and linguistic aspects. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz.
^ a b Jackson, A. V. Williams. 1920. Early Persian poetry, from the beginnings down to the time of Firdausi. New York: The Macmillan Company. pp.17–19. (in Public Domain)
^ Jackson, A. V. Williams.pp.17–19.
^ Adamec, Ludwig W. (2011). Historical Dictionary of Afghanistan (4th Revised ed.). Scarecrow. p. 105. ISBN 978-0-8108-7815-0. 
^ according to iranchamber.com "the language (ninth to thirteenth centuries), preserved in the literature of the Empire, is known as Classical Persian, due to the eminence and distinction of poets such as Roudaki, Ferdowsi, and Khayyam. During this period, Persian was adopted as the lingua franca of the eastern Islamic nations. Extensive contact with Arabic led to a large influx of Arab vocabulary. In fact, a writer of Classical Persian had at one's disposal the entire Arabic lexicon and could use Arab terms freely either for literary effect or to display erudition. Classical Persian remained essentially unchanged until the nineteenth century, when the dialect of Teheran rose in prominence, having been chosen as the capital of Persia by the Qajar Dynasty in 1787. This Modern Persian dialect became the basis of what is now called Contemporary Standard Persian. Although it still contains a large number of Arab terms, most borrowings have been nativized, with a much lower percentage of Arabic words in colloquial forms of the language."
^ John Andrew Boyle, Some thoughts on the sources for the Il-Khanid period of Persian history, in Iran: Journal of the British Institute of Persian Studies, British Institute of Persian Studies, vol. 12 (1974), p. 175.
^ a b de Laet, Sigfried J. (1994). History of Humanity: From the seventh to the sixteenth century. UNESCO. ISBN 978-92-3-102813-7. , p 734
^ Ágoston, Gábor; Masters, Bruce Alan (2010). Encyclopedia of the Ottoman Empire. Infobase Publishing. ISBN 978-1-4381-1025-7. , p 322
^ Doris Wastl-Walter. The Ashgate Research Companion to Border Studies Ashgate Publishing, Ltd., 2011 ISBN 0754674061 p 409
^ a b Bertold Spuler. Persian Historiography & Geography Pustaka Nasional Pte Ltd ISBN 9971774887 p 68
^ Franklin D. Lewis. Rumi - Past and Present, East and West: The Life, Teachings, and Poetry of Jal l al-Din Rumi Oneworld Publications, 18 okt. 2014 ISBN 1780747373
^ a b Bertold Spuler. Persian Historiography & Geography Pustaka Nasional Pte Ltd ISBN 9971774887 p 69
^ "South Asian Sufis: Devotion, Deviation, and Destiny". Retrieved 2 January 2015. 
^ Clawson, Patrick (2004). Eternal Iran. Palgrave Macmillan. p. 6. ISBN 1-4039-6276-6. 
^ Beeman, William. "Persian, Dari and Tajik" (PDF). Brown University. Archived (PDF) from the original on 30 March 2013. Retrieved 30 March 2013. 
^ Gernot Windfuhr, "Persian Grammar: history and state of its study", Walter de Gruyter, 1979. pg 4:""Tat- Persian spoken in the East Caucasus""
^ V. Minorsky, "Tat" in M. Th. Houtsma et al., eds., The Encyclopædia of Islam: A Dictionary of the Geography, Ethnography and Biography of the Muhammadan Peoples, 4 vols. and Suppl., Leiden: Late E.J. Brill and London: Luzac, 1913–38.
^ V. Minorsky, "Tat" in M. Th. Houtsma et al., eds., The Encyclopædia of Islam: A Dictionary of the Geography, Ethnography and Biography of the Muhammadan Peoples, 4 vols. and Suppl., Leiden: Late E.J. Brill and London: Luzac, 1913–38. Excerpt: "Like most Persian dialects, Tati is not very regular in its characteristic features"
^ C Kerslake, Journal of Islamic Studies (2010) 21 (1): 147–151. excerpt: "It is a comparison of the verbal systems of three varieties of Persian—standard Persian, Tat, and Tajik—in terms of the 'innovations' that the latter two have developed for expressing finer differentiations of tense, aspect and modality..." [1]
^ Borjian, Habib (2006). "Tabari Language Materials from Il'ya Berezin's Recherches sur les dialectes persans". Iran & the Caucasus. 10 (2): 243–258. , "It embraces Gilani, Ta- lysh, Tabari, Kurdish, Gabri, and the Tati Persian of the Caucasus, all but the last belonging to the north-western group of Iranian language."
^ Perry, J. R. (2005) A Tajik Persian Reference Grammar (Boston : Brill) ISBN 90-04-14323-8
^ Megerdoomian, Karine (2000). "Persian computational morphology: A unification-based approach" (PDF). Memoranda in Computer and Cognitive Science: MCCS-00-320. p. 1. 
^ a b Mahootian, Shahrzad (1997). Persian. London: Routledge. ISBN 0-415-02311-4. 
^ John R. Perry, "Lexical Areas and Semantic Fields of Arabic" in Éva Ágnes Csató, Eva Agnes Csato, Bo Isaksson, Carina Jahani, Linguistic convergence and areal diffusion: case studies from Iranian, Semitic and Turkic, Routledge, 2005. pg 97: "It is generally understood that the bulk of the Arabic vocabulary in the central, contiguous Iranian, Turkic and Indic languages was originally borrowed into literary Persian between the ninth and thirteenth centuries"
^ John R. Perry, "Lexical Areas and Semantic Fields of Arabic" in Éva Ágnes Csató, Eva Agnes Csato, Bo Isaksson, Carina Jahani, Linguistic convergence and areal diffusion: case studies from Iranian, Semitic and Turkic, Routledge, 2005. p.97
^ Perry 2005, p.99.
^ Perry 2005, p. 99.
^ e.g. The role of Azeri-Turkish in Iranian Persian, on which see John Perry, "The Historical Role of Turkish in Relation to Persian of Iran", Iran & the Caucasus, Vol. 5 (2001), pp. 193–200.
^ Xavier Planhol, "Land of Iran", Encyclopedia Iranica. "The Turks, on the other hand, posed a formidable threat: their penetration into Iranian lands was considerable, to such an extent that vast regions adapted their language. This process was all the more remarkable since, in spite of their almost uninterrupted political domination for nearly 1,500 years, the cultural influence of these rough nomads on Iran's refined civilization remained extremely tenuous. This is demonstrated by the mediocre linguistic contribution, for which exhaustive statistical studies have been made (Doerfer). The number of Turkish or Mongol words that entered Persian, though not negligible, remained limited to 2,135, i.e., 3 percent of the vocabulary at the most. These new words are confined on the one hand to the military and political sector (titles, administration, etc.) and, on the other hand, to technical pastoral terms. The contrast with Arab influence is striking. While cultural pressure of the Arabs on Iran had been intense, they in no way infringed upon the entire Iranian territory, whereas with the Turks, whose contributions to Iranian civilization were modest, vast regions of Iranian lands were assimilated, notwithstanding the fact that resistance by the latter was ultimately victorious. Several reasons may be offered."
^ "ARMENIA AND IRAN iv. Iranian influences in Armenian Language". Retrieved 2 January 2015. 
^ "South Asian Sufis: Devotion, Deviation, and Destiny". Retrieved 23 April 2015. 
^ Andreas Tietze, Persian loanwords in Anatolian Turkish, Oriens, 20 (1967) pp- 125–168. (accessed August 2016)
^ L. Johanson, "Azerbaijan: Iranian Elements in Azeri Turkish" in Encyclopedia Iranica Iranica.com
^ George L. Campbell and Gareth King (2013). Compendium of the World Languages. Routledge. ISBN 978-1-1362-5846-6. Retrieved 23 May 2014. CS1 maint: Uses authors parameter (link)
^ "GEORGIA v. LINGUISTIC CONTACTS WITH IRANIAN LANGUAGES". Retrieved 2 January 2015. 
^ "DAGESTAN". Retrieved 2 January 2014. 
^ Pasad. "Bashgah.net". Bashgah.net. Retrieved 13 July 2010. 
^ a b c Perry, John R. (2005). A Tajik Persian Reference Grammar. Boston: Brill. ISBN 90-04-14323-8. 
^ Lazard, Gilbert (1956). "Charactères distinctifs de la langue Tadjik". Bulletin de la Société Linguistique de Paris. 52: 117–186. 
^ "ISO 233-3:1999". Iso.org. 14 May 2010. Retrieved 13 July 2010. 
^ Smallwars.quantico.usmc.mil


Sources[edit]

Kuhrt, A. (2013). The Persian Empire: A Corpus of Sources from the Achaemenid Period. Routledge. ISBN 978-1136016943. 
Frye, Richard Nelson (1984). Handbuch der Altertumswissenschaft: Alter Orient-Griechische Geschichte-Römische Geschichte. Band III,7: The History of Ancient Iran. C.H. Beck. ISBN 978-3406093975. 
Schmitt, Rüdiger (2000). The Old Persian Inscriptions of Naqsh-i Rustam and Persepolis. Corpus Inscriptionum Iranicarum by School of Oriental and African Studies. ISBN 978-0728603141. 

Further reading[edit]

Asatrian, Garnik (2010). Etymological Dictionary of Persian. Leiden Indo-European Etymological Dictionary Series, 12. Brill Academic Publishers. ISBN 978-90-04-18341-4. 
Bleeck, Arthur Henry (1857). A concise grammar of the Persian language. Retrieved 6 July 2011. 
Bleeck, Arthur Henry (1857). A concise grammar of the Persian language: containing dialogues, reading lessons, and a vocabulary: together with a new plan for facilitating the study of languages. B. Quaritch. p. 206. Retrieved 6 July 2011. 
Bleeck, Arthur Henry (1857). A concise grammar of the Persian language (Oxford University ed.). Retrieved 6 July 2011. 
Dahlén, Ashk (April 2014) [1st edition October 2010]. Modern persisk grammatik (2nd ed.). Ferdosi International Publication. ISBN 9789197988674. 
Delshad, Farshid (September 2007). Anthologia Persica. Logos Verlag. ISBN 978-3-8325-1620-8. 
Doctor, Sorabshaw Byramji (1880). The student's Persian and English dictionary, pronouncing, etymological, & explanatory. Irish Presbyterian Mission Press. p. 558. Retrieved 6 July 2011. 
Doctor, Sorabshaw Byramji; Saʻdī (1880). Second book of Persian, to which are added the Pandnámah of Shaikh Saádi and the Gulistán, chapter 1, together with vocabulary and short notes (2 ed.). Irish Presbyterian Mission Press. p. 120. Retrieved 6 July 2011. 
Doctor, Sorabshaw Byramji (1879). The Persian primer, being an elementary treatise on grammar, with exercises. Irish Presbyterian Mission Press. p. 94. Retrieved 6 July 2011. 
Doctor, Sorabshaw Byramji (1875). A new grammar of the Persian tongue for the use of schools and colleges. Irish Presbyterian Mission Press. p. 84. Retrieved 6 July 2011. 
Forbes, Duncan (1844). A grammar of the Persian language: To which is added, a selection of easy extracts for reading, together with a copious vocabulary (2 ed.). Printed for the author, sold by Allen & co. p. 158. Retrieved 6 July 2011. 
Forbes, Duncan (1844). A grammar of the Persian language: To which is added, a selection of easy extracts for reading, together with a copious vocabulary (2 ed.). Printed for the author, sold by Allen & co. p. 114. Retrieved 6 July 2011. 
Forbes, Duncan (1876). A grammar of the Persian language: to which is added, a selection of easy extracts for reading, together with a vocabulary, and translations. W.H. Allen. p. 238. Retrieved 6 July 2011. 
Forbes, Duncan (1869). A grammar of the Persian language: to which is added, a selection of easy extracts for reading, together with a vocabulary, and translations (4 ed.). W.H. Allen & co. p. 238. Retrieved 6 July 2011. 
Ibrâhîm, Muḥammad (1841). A grammar of the Persian language. Retrieved 6 July 2011. 
Jones, Sir William (1783). A grammar of the Persian language (3 ed.). Retrieved 6 July 2011. 
Jones, Sir William (1797). A grammar of the Persian language (4 ed.). Retrieved 6 July 2011. 
Jones, Sir William (1801). A grammar of the Persian language (5 ed.). Murray and Highley, J. Sewell. p. 194. Retrieved 6 July 2011. 
Jones, Sir William (1823). Samuel Lee, ed. A grammar of the Persian language (8 ed.). Printed by W. Nicol, for Parbury, Allen, and co. p. 230. Retrieved 6 July 2011. 
Jones, Sir William (1828). Samuel Lee, ed. A grammar of the Persian language (9 ed.). Printed by W. Nicol, for Parbury, Allen, and Co. p. 283. Retrieved 6 July 2011. 
Lazard, Gilbert (January 2006). Grammaire du persan contemporain. Institut Français de Recherche en Iran. ISBN 978-2909961378. 
Lumsden, Matthew (1810). A grammar of the Persian language; comprising a portion of the elements of Arabic inflexion etc. Watley. Retrieved 6 July 2011. 
Mace, John (18 October 2002). Persian Grammar: For Reference and Revision (illustrated ed.). RoutledgeCurzon. ISBN 0700716955. 
Moises, Edward (1792). The Persian interpreter: in three parts: A grammar of the Persian language. Persian extracts, in prose and verse. A vocabulary: Persian and English. Printed by L. Hodgson. p. 143. Retrieved 6 July 2011. 
Palmer, Edward Henry (1883). Guy Le Strange, ed. A concise dictionary, English-Persian; together with a simplified grammar of the Persian language. Completed and ed. by G. Le Strange. Retrieved 6 July 2011. 
Palmer, Edward Henry (1883). Guy Le Strange, ed. A concise dictionary, English-Persian: together with a simplified grammar of the Persian language. Trübner. p. 42. Retrieved 6 July 2011. 
Platts, John Thompson (1894). A grammar of the Persian language .. Williams and Norgate. Retrieved 6 July 2011. 
Ranking, George Speirs Alexander (1907). A primer of Persian: containing selections for reading and composition with the elements of syntax. The Claredon Press. p. 72. Retrieved 6 July 2011. 
Richardson, John (1810). Sir Charles Wilkins; David Hopkins, eds. A vocabulary, Persian, Arabic, and English: abridged from the quarto edition of Richardson's dictionary. Printed for F. and C. Rivingson. p. 643. Retrieved 6 July 2011. 
Rosen, Friedrich; Nāṣir al-Dīn Shāh (Shah of Iran) (1898). Modern Persian colloquial grammar: containing a short grammar, dialogues and extracts from Nasir-Eddin shah's diaries, tales, etc., and a vocabulary. Luzac & C.̊. p. 400. Retrieved 6 July 2011. 
Schmitt, Rüdiger (1989). Compendium linguarum Iranicarum. L. Reichert. ISBN 3882264136. 
Sen, Ramdhun (1841). Madhub Chunder Sen, ed. A dictionary in Persian and English, with pronunciation (ed. by M.C. Sen) (2 ed.). Retrieved 6 July 2011. 
Sen, Ramdhun (1829). A dictionary in Persian and English. Printed for the author at the Baptist Mission Press. p. 226. Retrieved 6 July 2011. 
Sen, Ramdhun (1833). A dictionary in English and Persian. Printed at the Baptist Mission Press. p. 276. Retrieved 6 July 2011. 
Sen, Ramdhun (1833). A dictionary in English and Persian. Retrieved 6 July 2011. 
Skjærvø, Prods Oktor (2006). "Iran, vi. Iranian languages and scripts". Encyclopaedia Iranica. 13. 
Thackston, W. M. (1 May 1993). An Introduction to Persian (3rd Rev ed.). Ibex Publishers. ISBN 0936347295. 
Tucker, William Thornhill (1801). A pocket dictionary of English and Persian. Retrieved 6 July 2011. 
Tucker, William Thornhill (1850). A pocket dictionary of English and Persian. J. Madden. p. 145. Retrieved 6 July 2011. 
Tucker, William Thornhill (1850). A pocket dictionary of English and Persian. J. Madden. p. 145. Retrieved 6 July 2011. 
Windfuhr, Gernot L. (15 January 2009). "Persian". In Bernard Comrie. The World's Major Languages (2 ed.). Routledge. ISBN 0415353394. CS1 maint: Uses editors parameter (link)
Wollaston, (Sir) Arthur Naylor (1882). An English-Persian dictionary. W. H. Allen. Retrieved 6 July 2011. 

External links[edit]

Find more aboutPersianat Wikipedia's sister projects

Definitions from Wiktionary
Media from Wikimedia Commons
Travel guide from Wikivoyage





Persian edition of Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia



Academy of Persian Language and Literature official website (in Persian)
Assembly for the Expansion of the Persian Language official website (in Persian)
Persian language Resources (in Persian)
Persian Language Resources, parstimes.com
Persian language tutorial books for beginners
Haim, Soleiman. New Persian–English dictionary. Teheran: Librairie-imprimerie Beroukhim, 1934–1936. uchicago.edu
Steingass, Francis Joseph. A Comprehensive Persian–English dictionary. London: Routledge & K. Paul, 1892. uchicago.edu
UCLA Language Materials Project: Persian, ucla.edu
How Persian Alphabet Transits into Graffiti, Persian Graffiti
Basic Persian language course (book + audio files) USA Foreign Service Institute (FSI)







v
t
e


Persian language



History



Old Persian
Middle Persian
Modern Persian





Dialects



Western (Iranian)
Dari (Afghan)
Tajik
Hazaragi
Aimaq
Kuwaiti Persian
Tat
Judeo-Persian (Dzhidi)
Judeo-Tat (Juhuri)
Judeo-Tajik (Bukhori)
Sistani
Barbari





Language features



Vocabulary

Nouns
Verbs


Phonology





Grammar



Persian grammar
Tajik grammar





Writing system



Old Persian cuneiform
Pahlavi scripts
Persian alphabet

Persian calligraphy


Tajik alphabet
Romanized Persian alphabet

Fingilish


Persian Braille





Literature



Persian literature
Middle Persian literature
Tajik literature





Other topics



List of English words of Persian origin
Persian language in South Asia












v
t
e


Iranian languages



Old




Western



Old Persian
Median





Eastern



Avestan
Old Scythian








Middle




Western



Middle Persian
Parthian





Eastern



Bactrian
Khwarezmian
Ossetic

Jassic


Saka
Scythian
Sogdian








Modern




North



Old Azari
Balochi
Central Iran
Zoroastrian Dari
Fars
Gilaki
Gorani
Kurdic

Sorani
Kurmanji
Southern group
Laki


Mazandarani
Semnani
Taleshi
Deilami
Tati
Zazaki





Eastern




Pamir



Ishkashimi
Sanglechi
Wakhi
Munji
Yidgha
Vanji
Yazghulami
Shughni
Roshani
Khufi
Bartangi
Sarikoli





Others



Ossetian

Digor
Iron


Pashto

Central
Northern
Southern
Wanetsi


Yaghnobi
Ormuri
Parachi








Western




South



Persian

Caucasian Tat
Dari
Tajik


Luri

Feyli
Bakhtiari
Kumzari


Larestani
Bashkardi












Italics indicate extinct languages.










v
t
e


 Languages of Iran



Official languages



Persian





Regional languages



Azerbaijani
Kurdish
Luri
Gilaki
Mazanderani
Arabic
Balochi
Talysh
Tati
Qashqai
Turkmen
Semnani





Minority languages



Armenian
Assyrian
Circassian
Georgian
Hebrew
Domari





Sign languages



Persian Sign Language












v
t
e


Languages of the Caucasus



Caucasian
(areal)




Caspian




Avar–Andic



Andic

Akhvakh
Bagvalal–Tindi
Botlix–Godoberi
Chamalal
Karata
Literary Andi


Avar





Dargic



Literary Dargwa and dialects

Chirag
Itsari
Kajtak
Kubachi







Didoic



Bezhta–Hunzib–Khwarshi
Hinukh–Literary Tsez





Lezgic



Aghul
Archi
Budukh
Kryts
Lezgian
Rutul
Tabasaran
Tsakhur
Udi





Nakh



Bats
Chechen–Ingush





Other



Khinalug
Lak








Kartvelian




Karto-Zan–Svan



Georgian
Svan
Zan

Laz
Mingrelian










Pontic




Abazgi–Adyghe



Abkhaz–Abaza
Circassian














Indo-European




Armenian



Armenian





Germanic



German





Hellenic



Pontic Greek





Iranic




Northern



Ossetian





Western



Judæo-Tat
Kurdish
Persian
Talysh
Tat








Slavic



Russian
Ukrainian








Mongolic



Kalmyk





Turkic




Kipchak–Cuman



Karachay–Balkar
Kumyk
Urum





Kipchak–Nogai



Nogai





Oghuz



Azerbaijani
Turkish
Turkmen








Afro-Asiatic




Semitic



Assyrian Neo-Aramaic
Bohtan Neo-Aramaic











 See also: Languages of Armenia
 Languages of Azerbaijan
 Languages of Georgia
 Languages of Russia









Authority control



GND: 4065403-5











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Persian_language&oldid=817732635"					Categories: Persian languageLanguages attested from the 6th century BCIranian cultureLanguages of IranLanguages of IraqLanguages of AzerbaijanLanguages of RussiaLanguages of BahrainSouthwestern Iranian languagesSubject–object–verb languagesLanguages of AfghanistanLanguages of KuwaitLanguages of TajikistanLanguages of UzbekistanLanguages of AsiaLanguages of the CaucasusHidden categories: Articles containing Ancient Greek-language textCS1 maint: Uses authors parameterUse dmy dates from September 2010Articles containing Persian-language textLanguages with ISO 639-2 codeLanguages with ISO 639-1 codeISO language articles citing sources other than EthnologueArticles with hAudio microformatsArticles containing Tajik-language textArticles containing Latin-language textArticles containing Old Persian-language textAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from December 2015CS1 maint: Uses editors parameterArticles with Persian-language external linksWikipedia articles with GND identifiers