"PDA" redirects here. For other uses, see PDA (disambiguation).
Not to be confused with Virtual assistant (artificial intelligence).






This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (November 2012) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)







The Palm TX






Apple Newton MessagePad (1993) - Computer History Museum


A personal digital assistant (PDA), also known as a handheld PC,[1][2] is a mobile device that functions as a personal information manager. PDAs were largely discontinued in the early 2010s after the widespread adoption of highly capable smartphones, in particular those based on iOS and Android.[3]
Nearly all PDAs have the ability to connect to the Internet. A PDA has an electronic visual display, letting it include a web browser. All models also have audio capabilities, allowing usage as a portable media player, and also enabling most of them to be used as telephones. Most PDAs can access the Internet, intranets or extranets via Wi-Fi or Wireless Wide Area Networks. Sometimes, instead of buttons, PDAs will employ touchscreen technology.The technology industry has recently recycled the term personal digital assistance. The term is more commonly used for software that identifies a user’s voice to reply to the queries.
The first PDA, the Organizer, was released in 1984 by Psion, followed by Psion's Series 3, in 1991. The latter began to resemble the more familiar PDA style, including a full keyboard.[4][5] The term PDA was first used on January 7, 1992 by Apple Computer CEO John Sculley at the Consumer Electronics Show in Las Vegas, Nevada, referring to the Apple Newton.[6] In 1994, IBM introduced the first PDA with full telephone functionality, the IBM Simon, which can also be considered the first smartphone. Then in 1996, Nokia introduced a PDA with telephone functionality, the 9000 Communicator, which became the world's best-selling PDA. Another early entrant in this market was Palm, with a line of PDA products which began in March 1996.



Contents


1 Typical features

1.1 Touchscreen
1.2 Memory cards
1.3 Wired connectivity
1.4 Wireless connectivity
1.5 Synchronization

1.5.1 Wireless synchronization




2 Operating systems of PDAs
3 Automobile navigation
4 Ruggedized
5 Medical and scientific uses
6 Educational uses

6.1 Recreational uses


7 Models

7.1 Consumer
7.2 Ruggedized


8 See also
9 References
10 External links



Typical features[edit]
A typical PDA has a touchscreen for navigation, a memory card slot for data storage, and IrDA, Bluetooth and/or Wi-Fi. However, some PDAs may not have a touchscreen, using softkeys, a directional pad, and a numeric keypad or a thumb keyboard for input. To have the functions expected of a PDA, a device's software typically includes an appointment calendar, a to-do list, an address book for contacts, a calculator, and some sort of memo (or "note") program. PDAs with wireless data connections also typically include an email client and a Web browser, and may or may not include telephony functionality.
Touchscreen[edit]




PalmPilot organiser on display at the Musée Bolo, EPFL, Lausanne


Many of the original PDAs, such as the Apple Newton and Palm Pilot, featured a touchscreen for user interaction, having only a few buttons—usually reserved for shortcuts to often-used programs. Some touchscreen PDAs, including Windows Mobile devices, had a detachable stylus to facilitate making selections. The user interacts with the device by tapping the screen to select buttons or issue commands, or by dragging a finger (or the stylus) on the screen to make selections or scroll.
Typical methods of entering text on touchscreen PDAs include:

A virtual keyboard, where a keyboard is shown on the touchscreen. Text is entered by tapping the on-screen keyboard with a finger or stylus.
An external keyboard connected via USB, Infrared port, or Bluetooth. Some users may choose a chorded keyboard for one-handed use.
Handwriting recognition, where letters or words are written on the touchscreen, often with a stylus, and the PDA converts the input to text. Recognition and computation of handwritten horizontal and vertical formulas, such as "1 + 2 =", may also be a feature.
Stroke recognition allows the user to make a predefined set of strokes on the touchscreen, sometimes in a special input area, representing the various characters to be input. The strokes are often simplified character shapes, making them easier for the device to recognize. One widely known stroke recognition system is Palm's Graffiti.

Despite research and development projects, end-users experience mixed results with handwriting recognition systems. Some find it frustrating and inaccurate, while others are satisfied with the quality of the recognition.[7]
Touchscreen PDAs intended for business use, such as the BlackBerry and Palm Treo, usually also offer full keyboards and scroll wheels or thumbwheels to facilitate data entry and navigation. Many touchscreen PDAs support some form of external keyboard as well. Specialized folding keyboards, which offer a full-sized keyboard but collapse into a compact size for transport, are available for many models. External keyboards may attach to the PDA directly, using a cable, or may use wireless technology such as infrared or Bluetooth to connect to the PDA. Newer PDAs, such as the HTC HD2, Apple iPhone, Apple iPod Touch, and Palm Pre, Palm Pre Plus, Palm Pixi, Palm Pixi Plus, Google Android (operating system) include more advanced forms of touchscreen that can register multiple touches simultaneously. These "multi-touch" displays allow for more sophisticated interfaces using various gestures entered with one or more fingers.
Memory cards[edit]
Although many early PDAs did not have memory card slots, now most have either some form of Secure Digital (SD) slot, a CompactFlash slot or a combination of the two. Although designed for memory, Secure Digital Input/Output (SDIO) and CompactFlash cards are available that provide accessories like Wi-Fi or digital cameras, if the device can support them. Some PDAs also have a USB port, mainly for USB flash drives.[dubious – discuss] Some PDAs use microSD cards, which are electronically compatible with SD cards, but have a much smaller physical size.
Wired connectivity[edit]
While early PDAs connected to a user's personal computer via serial ports or another proprietary connection,[specify] many today connect via a USB cable. Older PDAs were unable to connect to each other via USB, as their implementations of USB didn't support acting as the "host". Some early PDAs were able to connect to the Internet indirectly by means of an external modem connected via the PDA's serial port or "sync" connector,[8] or directly by using an expansion card that provided an Ethernet port.
Wireless connectivity[edit]
Most modern PDAs have Bluetooth, a popular wireless protocol for mobile devices. Bluetooth can be used to connect keyboards, headsets, GPS receivers, and other nearby accessories. It's also possible to transfer files between PDAs that have Bluetooth. Many modern PDAs have Wi-Fi wireless network connectivity and can connect to Wi-Fi hotspots.[9] All smartphones, and some other modern PDAs, can connect to Wireless Wide Area Networks, such as those provided by cellular telecommunications companies. Older PDAs from the 1990s to 2006 typically had an IrDA (infrared) port allowing short-range, line-of-sight wireless communication. Few current models use this technology, as it has been supplanted by Bluetooth and Wi-Fi. IrDA allows communication between two PDAs, or between a PDA and any device with an IrDA port or adapter. Some printers have IrDA receivers,[10] allowing IrDA-equipped PDAs to print to them, if the PDA's operating system supports it. Universal PDA keyboards designed for these older PDAs use infrared technology.[citation needed] Infrared technology is low-cost and has the advantage of being allowed aboard.
Synchronization[edit]
Most PDAs can synchronize their data with applications on a user's computer. This allows the user to update contact, schedule, or other information on their computer, using software such as Microsoft Outlook or ACT!, and have that same data transferred to PDA—or transfer updated information from the PDA back to the computer. This eliminates the need for the user to update their data in two places. Synchronization also prevents the loss of information stored on the device if it is lost, stolen, or destroyed. When the PDA is repaired or replaced, it can be "re-synced" with the computer, restoring the user's data. Some users find that data input is quicker on their computer than on their PDA, since text input via a touchscreen or small-scale keyboard is slower than a full-size keyboard. Transferring data to a PDA via the computer is therefore a lot quicker than having to manually input all data on the handheld device.[citation needed]
Most PDAs come with the ability to synchronize to a computer. This is done through synchronization software provided with the handheld, or sometime with the computer's operating system. Examples of synchronization software include:

HotSync Manager, for Palm OS PDAs
Microsoft ActiveSync, used by Windows XP and older Windows operating systems to synchronize with Windows Mobile, Pocket PC, and Windows CE PDAs, as well as PDAs running iOS, Palm OS, and Symbian
Microsoft Windows Mobile Device Center for Windows Vista, which supports Microsoft Windows Mobile and Pocket PC devices
Apple iTunes, used on Mac OS X and Microsoft Windows to sync iOS devices (such as the iPhone and iPod touch)
iSync, included with Mac OS X, can synchronize many SyncML-enabled PDAs
BlackBerry Desktop Software, used to sync BlackBerry devices.

These programs allow the PDA to be synchronized with a personal information manager, which may be part of the computer's operating system, provided with the PDA, or sold separately by a third party. For example, the RIM BlackBerry comes with RIM's Desktop Manager program, which can synchronize to both Microsoft Outlook and ACT!. Other PDAs come only with their own proprietary software. For example, some early Palm OS PDAs came only with Palm Desktop, while later Palm PDAs—such as the Treo 650—have the ability to sync to Palm Desktop or Microsoft Outlook. Microsoft's ActiveSync and Windows Mobile Device Center only synchronize with Microsoft Outlook or a Microsoft Exchange server.[citation needed] Third-party synchronization software is also available for some PDAs from companies like CommonTime[11] and CompanionLink.[12] Third-party software can be used to synchronize PDAs to other personal information managers that are not supported by the PDA manufacturers (for example, GoldMine and IBM Lotus Notes).
Wireless synchronization[edit]
Some PDAs can synchronize some or all of their data using their wireless networking capabilities, rather than having to be directly connected to a personal computer via a cable. Devices running Palm's webOS or Google's Android operating system primarily sync with the cloud. For example, if Gmail is used, information in contacts, email, and calendar can be synchronized between the PDA and Google's servers. RIM sells BlackBerry Enterprise Server to corporations so that corporate BlackBerry users can wirelessly synchronize their PDAs with the company's Microsoft Exchange Server, IBM Lotus Domino, or Novell GroupWise servers.[13] Email, calendar entries, contacts, tasks, and memos kept on the company's server are automatically synchronized with the BlackBerry.[14]
Operating systems of PDAs[edit]
The most common operating systems pre-installed on PDAs are:

Palm OS
Microsoft Windows Mobile (Pocket PC) with a Windows CE kernel

Other, rarely used operating systems:

EPOC, then Symbian OS (in mobile phone + PDA combos)
Linux (e.g. VR3, iPAQ,[15] Sharp Zaurus PDA, Opie, GPE, Familiar Linux[16] etc.)
Newton
QNX (also on iPAQ)

Automobile navigation[edit]
Some PDAs include Global Positioning System (GPS) receivers; this is particularly true of smartphones. Other PDAs are compatible with external GPS-receiver add-ons that use the PDA's processor and screen to display location information.[17] PDAs with GPS functionality can be used for automotive navigation. PDAs are increasingly being fitted as standard on new cars. PDA-based GPS can also display traffic conditions, perform dynamic routing, and show known locations of roadside mobile radar guns. TomTom, Garmin, and iGO offer GPS navigation software for PDAs.
Ruggedized[edit]
Some businesses and government organizations rely upon rugged PDAs, sometimes known as enterprise digital assistants (EDAs) or mobile computers, for mobile data applications. These PDAs have features that make them more robust and able to handle inclement weather, jolts and moisture. EDAs often have extra features for data capture, such as barcode readers, radio-frequency identification (RFID) readers, magnetic stripe card readers, or smart card readers. These features are designed to facilitate the use of these devices to scan in product or item codes.
Typical applications include:

Military (U.S. Army)
Rangers
Wildlife biologists
Supply chain management in warehouses
Package delivery
Route accounting
Medical treatment and recordkeeping in hospitals
Facilities maintenance and management
Parking enforcement
Access control and security
Capital asset maintenance
Meter reading by utilities
Waiter and waitress applications in restaurants and hospitality venues
Infection control audit and surveillance within healthcare environments
Taxicab allocation and routing

Medical and scientific uses[edit]






This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (August 2010) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Many companies have developed PDA products aimed at the medical profession's, such as PDAs loaded with drug databases, treatment information, and medical information. Services such as AvantGo translate medical journals into PDA-readable formats. WardWatch organizes medical records, providing reminders of information such as the treatment regimens of patients to doctors making ward rounds. Pendragon and Syware provide tools for conducting research with, allowing the user to enter data into a centralized database using their PDA. Microsoft Visual Studio and Sun Java also provide programming tools for developing survey instruments on the handheld. These development tools allow for integration with SQL databases that are stored on the handheld and can be synchronized with a desktop- or server-based database. PDAs have been used by doctors to aid diagnosis and drug selection and some studies[who?] have concluded that when patients can use PDAs to record their symptoms, they communicate more effectively with hospital staff during follow-up visits. The development of Sensor Web technology may lead to wearable bodily sensors to monitor ongoing conditions, like diabetes or epilepsy, which would alert patients and doctors when treatment is required using wireless communication and PDAs.
Educational uses[edit]






This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (August 2010) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



PDAs and handheld devices are allowed in many classrooms for digital note-taking. Students can spell-check, modify, and amend their class notes on a PDA. Some educators[who?] distribute course material through the Internet or infrared file-sharing functions of the PDA. Textbook publishers have begun to release e-books, which can be uploaded directly to a PDA, reducing the number of textbooks students must carry.[18] Brighton and SUSSEX Medical School in the UK was the first medical school to provide wide scale use of PDAs to its undergraduate students. The learning opportunities provided by having PDAs complete with a suite of key medical texts was studied with results showing that learning occurred in context with timely access to key facts and through consolidation of knowledge via repetition. The PDA was an important addition to the learning ecology rather than a replacement.[19] Software companies have developed PDA programs to meet the instructional needs of educational institutions, such as dictionaries, thesauri, word processing software, encyclopedias, webinar and digital lesson planners.
Recreational uses[edit]
PDAs may be used by music enthusiasts to play a variety of music file formats. Many PDAs include the functionality of an MP3 player. Road rally enthusiasts can use PDAs to calculate distance, speed, and time. This information may be used for navigation, or the PDA's GPS functions can be used for navigation. Underwater divers can use PDAs to plan breathing gas mixtures and decompression schedules using software such as "V-Planner".
Models[edit]
Consumer[edit]


Acer N Series
AlphaSmart
Apple Newton
Atari Portfolio
Dell Axim
E-TEN
Fujitsu Siemens Computers Pocket LOOX
Handspring (company)
HP iPAQ
HTC (Dopod, Qtek)'s series of Windows Mobile PDA/phones
Huawei series
I-mate
iPhone
HP Jornada Pocket PC
LifeDrive
NEC MobilePro
Osaris running EPOC OS distributed by Oregon Scientific
Palm (PDA) (Tungsten E2, TX, Treo, Zire Handheld)
Palm, Inc. smartphones under Palm OS and under the successor WebOS (Pre, and Pixi).
Philips Nino
Casio Pocket Viewer
PocketMail (email PDA with built-in acoustic coupler)
Psion
Sharp Wizard and Sharp Zaurus
Tapwave Zodiac
Toshiba e310
Abacus PDA Watch
Amida Simputer
GMate Yopy
Roland PMA-5 (Personal Music Assistant)[20]
Royal (ezVue 7, etc.)
Sony CLIÉ
Sony Magic Link with the Magic Cap operating system


Ruggedized[edit]


Getac
Handheld Group
Honeywell (Hand Held Products)
Intermec
Motorola (Symbol Technologies)
Psion Teklogix
Trimble Navigation
American Industrial Systems (Mil-Spec, IP67)
Catchwell[21]
Datalogic Mobile
ecom instruments
M3 Mobile[22]
Bluebird [23]
Skeye (Hoeft & Wessel AG)
Two Technologies, Inc.[24] (Ultra Rugged Handheld Computers)
Unitech[25]


See also[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Personal digital assistants.




Automotive navigation system
Graffiti (Palm OS)
Information appliance
Medical calculator
Pen computing
Personal navigation assistant (PNA)


References[edit]


^ Viken, Alexander (April 10, 2009). "The History of Personal Digital Assistants 1980 – 2000". Agile Mobility. Archived from the original on 30 October 2013. Retrieved 22 September 2017. 
^ "History of the HP 95LX computer". HP Virtual Museum. Hewlett-Packard. Retrieved February 18, 2011. 
^ Andrew Smith, Faithe Wempen (2011). CompTIA Strata Study Guide. John Wiley & Sons. p. 140. ISBN 978-0-470-97742-2. Retrieved July 5, 2012. 
^ "The Protea Story". The Register. 
^ "3-Lib History of Psion". Retrieved 9 June 2015. 
^ Newton, Reconsidered - Time magazine, June 1, 2012
^ Kahney, Leander (August 29, 2002). "Apple's Newton Just Won't Drop". Wired. Condé Nast Publications. Archived from the original on September 2, 2010. Retrieved August 21, 2010. 

Mayer, Don (July 1, 1997). "Kibbles&Bytes #29: Don's Review of the Newton Message Pad 2000". Small Dog Electronics. Archived from the original on April 16, 2008. Retrieved February 18, 2011. 
Klingsporn, Geoffrey (May 1997). "The Postgraduate Newton: a month in academia with Apple's new handheld computer". The History and Macintosh Society. note-taking. Retrieved August 21, 2010. 
Wittmann, Michael C. "What's Right With The Newton: Part I: Handwriting recognition". Retrieved August 21, 2010. 


^ Patrick (December 14, 2006). "Palm PDA Cables". DeepWave. Patrick Khoo. Archived from the original on August 30, 2010. Retrieved August 21, 2010. 
^ "MC55A0 Rugged Wi-Fi Enterprise Mobile Computer". Retrieved January 26, 2013. 
^ For example: "HP LaserJet 5P and 5MP Printers — Product Specifications". HP Business Support Center. Hewlett-Packard. Retrieved August 21, 2010. 
^ "CommonTime - Cross platform mobile app development tools". CommonTime. Retrieved 9 June 2015. 
^ "Sync calendar, contacts, tasks and notes to Android, iPhone, iPad, BlackBerry - CompanionLink". Retrieved 9 June 2015. 
^ "BlackBerry — Enterprise Server — BlackBerry BES Server". Research In Motion. Retrieved August 21, 2010. 
^ "BlackBerry — Business Software Features". Research In Motion. Retrieved August 21, 2010. 
^ "Ernest Khoo: Alternative operating systems on your PDA". 
^ "Highlights: Knowing the differences in PDA operating systems". Retrieved 9 June 2015. 
^ "Palm Support: Palm GPS Navigator 3207NA". Retrieved August 21, 2010. 
^ "10 tips to save on college textbooks". Centre Daily Times. August 20, 2010. Archived from the original on August 23, 2010. Retrieved August 21, 2010. 
^ Davies, Bethany S.; Rafique, Jethin; Vincent, Tim R.; Fairclough, Jil; Packer, Mark H.; Vincent, Richard; Haq, Inam (1 January 2012). "Mobile Medical Education (MoMEd) - how mobile information resources contribute to learning for undergraduate clinical students - a mixed methods study". BMC Medical Education. 12: 1. doi:10.1186/1472-6920-12-1. PMC 3317860 . PMID 22240206 – via BioMed Central. 
^ "ROLAND PMA-5 PERSONAL MUSIC ASSISTANT". Retrieved 9 June 2015. 
^ CATCHWELL. "CATCHWELL - Handheld Mobile Computers". Retrieved 9 June 2015. 
^ "M3 Mobile". 
^ "Pidion". Retrieved 9 June 2015. 
^ Two Technologies, Inc. "Rugged Handheld Computers and Android Devices - Two Technologies". Retrieved 9 June 2015. 
^ "unitech - Global Website. Worldwide leading ADC manufacturer". 


External links[edit]

Annotated bibliography of references to gesture and pen computing
epocalc list of PDA manufacturers







v
t
e


Mobile operating systems



Linux
kernel



Android
Bada
EZX Linux
Firefox OS

KaiOS


MeeGo

Mer

Sailfish OS




MotoMagx
OpenEmbedded

Ångström
KaeilOS
QtMoko
SHR


postmarketOS
Tizen
Ubuntu Touch
WebOS

LuneOS







XNU



iOS





QNX



BlackBerry 10
BlackBerry Tablet OS





Windows



Windows Mobile
Windows Phone
Windows XP Tablet PC Edition
Windows RT
Windows 10 Mobile





Zircon



Fuchsia





Other



BlackBerry OS
EPOC
GEOS
Nintendo DSi
Nintendo 3DS
S30
S30+
S40
Nokia Asha platform
PalmDOS
Palm OS
PSP
PS Vita
Symbian








Comparison of mobile operating systems
List of mobile app distribution platforms
Open Handset Alliance
Open Mobile Alliance
Mobile app development












v
t
e


Computer sizes




Classes of computers



Microcomputer,
personal
computer




Stationary



Workstation
Desktop
Home
Personal supercomputer
SFF

Nettop


Plug
Portable

Tabletop


Game arcade cabinet

System board


Home console
Microconsole
Interactive kiosk
Smart TV
Smart speaker





Mobile




Laptop



Desktop replacement
Notebook
2-in-1
Subnotebook

Netbook
Smartbook
Ultrabook


Ultra-mobile PC





Tablet



Ultra-mobile PC
2-in-1
Mobile Internet device
Tabletop
Phablet





Information
appliance



Handheld PC

Palm-size PC
Pocket PC
Pocket computer
Palmtop PC


PDA

Electronic organizer
EDA


Mobile phone

Feature phone
Smartphone

Phablet




PMP

DAP


E-reader
Handheld game console
Portable/Mobile data terminal





Calculator



Scientific
Programmable
Graphing





Wearable



Digital wristwatch

Calculator watch
Smartwatch


Smartglasses
Smart ring











Midrange



Server
Minicomputer
Supermini





Large



Super
Mainframe
Minisuper





Others



Microcontroller
Nanocomputer
Pizza box form factor
Single-board computer
Smartdust
Wireless sensor network









Authority control



GND: 4288993-5
NDL: 00948207











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Personal_digital_assistant&oldid=816277523"					Categories: Personal digital assistantsMobile computersInformation appliancesTime managementHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from November 2012All articles needing additional referencesAll accuracy disputesArticles with disputed statements from August 2010Articles needing more detailed referencesAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from August 2010Articles needing additional references from August 2010All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrasesArticles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from August 2010Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers