"Oil patch" redirects here. For the magazine, see Oil Patch Hotline.




World oil reserves, 2013.






The distribution of oil and gas reserves among the world's 50 largest oil companies. The reserves of the privately owned companies are grouped together. The oil produced by the "supermajor" companies accounts for less than 15% of the total world supply. Over 80% of the world's reserves of oil and natural gas are controlled by national oil companies. Of the world's 20 largest oil companies, 15 are state-owned oil companies.


The petroleum industry, also known as the oil industry or the oil patch, includes the global processes of exploration, extraction, refining, transporting (often by oil tankers and pipelines), and marketing of petroleum products. The largest volume products of the industry are fuel oil and gasoline (petrol). Petroleum (oil) is also the raw material for many chemical products, including pharmaceuticals, solvents, fertilizers, pesticides, synthetic fragrances, and plastics. The industry is usually divided into three major components: upstream, midstream and downstream. Midstream operations are often included in the downstream category.
Petroleum is vital to many industries, and is of importance to the maintenance of industrial civilization in its current configuration, and thus is a critical concern for many nations. Oil accounts for a large percentage of the world’s energy consumption, ranging from a low of 32% for Europe and Asia, to a high of 53% for the Middle East.
Other geographic regions' consumption patterns are as follows: South and Central America (44%), Africa (41%), and North America (40%). The world consumes 30 billion barrels (4.8 km³) of oil per year, with developed nations being the largest consumers. The United States consumed 25% of the oil produced in 2007.[1] The production, distribution, refining, and retailing of petroleum taken as a whole represents the world's largest industry in terms of dollar value.
Governments such as the United States government provide a heavy public subsidy to petroleum companies, with major tax breaks at virtually every stage of oil exploration and extraction, including the costs of oil field leases and drilling equipment.[2]



Contents


1 History

1.1 Natural history
1.2 Early history
1.3 Modern history


2 Industry structure

2.1 Upstream
2.2 Midstream


3 Environmental impact

3.1 Water pollution
3.2 Air pollution
3.3 Climate change


4 Future shortages
5 Petroleum industry in popular culture
6 See also
7 Notes and references
8 Further reading
9 External links



History[edit]
Main article: History of the petroleum industry




Oil Field in Baku, Azerbaijan, 1926


Natural history[edit]




Natural oil spring in Korňa, Slovakia.


Petroleum is a naturally occurring liquid found in rock formations. It consists of a complex mixture of hydrocarbons of various molecular weights, plus other organic compounds. It is generally accepted that oil is formed mostly from the carbon rich remains of ancient plankton after exposure to heat and pressure in Earth's crust over hundreds of millions of years. Over time, the decayed residue was covered by layers of mud and silt, sinking further down into Earth’s crust and preserved there between hot and pressured layers, gradually transforming into oil reservoirs.[citation needed]
Early history[edit]
Petroleum in an unrefined state has been utilized by humans for over 5000 years. Oil in general has been used since early human history to keep fires ablaze and in warfare.
It's importance to the world economy however, evolved slowly, with whale oil being used for lighting in the 19th century and wood and coal used for heating and cooking well into the 20th century. Even though the Industrial Revolution generated an increasing need for energy, this was initially met mainly by coal, and from other sources including whale oil. However, when it was discovered that kerosene could be extracted from crude oil and used as a lighting and heating fuel, the demand for petroleum increased greatly, and by the early twentieth century had become the most valuable commodity traded on world markets.[3]
Modern history[edit]
See also: Baku oil boom and The Petroleum Trail International Tourist Trail




Oil wells in Boryslav






Galician oil wells






World crude oil production from wells (excludes surface-mined oil, such as from Canadian heavy oil sands), 1930-2012






Top oil-producing countries
(million barrels per day)


Imperial Russia produced 3,500 tons of oil in 1825 and doubled its output by mid-century.[4] After oil drilling began in what is now Azerbaijan in 1846 in Baku, two large pipelines were built in the Russian Empire: the 833 km long pipeline to transport oil from the Caspian to the Black Sea port of Batum (Baku-Batum pipeline), completed in 1906, and the 162 km long pipeline to carry oil from Chechnya to the Caspian. Batum is renamed to Batumi in 1936.
At the turn of the 20th century, Imperial Russia's output of oil, almost entirely from the Apsheron Peninsula, accounted for half of the world's production and dominated international markets.[5] Nearly 200 small refineries operated in the suburbs of Baku by 1884.[6] As a side effect of these early developments, the Apsheron Peninsula emerged as the world's "oldest legacy of oil pollution and environmental negligence."[7] In 1846, Baku the first ever well drilled with percussion tools to a depth of 21 meters for oil exploration. In 1878, Ludvig Nobel and his Branobel company "revolutionized oil transport" by commissioning the first oil tanker and launching it on the Caspian Sea.[5]
Samuel Kier established America's first oil refinery in Pittsburgh on Seventh avenue near Grant Street, in 1853. One of the first modern oil refineries were built by Ignacy Łukasiewicz near Jasło (then in the dependent Kingdom of Galicia and Lodomeria in Central European Galicia), Poland in 1854–56.[8] These were initially small, as demand for refined fuel was limited. The refined products were used in artificial asphalt, machine oil and lubricants, in addition to Łukasiewicz's kerosene lamp. As kerosene lamps gained popularity, the refining industry grew in the area.
The first commercial oil well in Canada became operational in 1858 at Oil Springs, Ontario (then Canada West).[9] Businessman James Miller Williams dug several wells between 1855 and 1858 before discovering a rich reserve of oil four metres below ground.[10][11] Williams extracted 1.5 million litres of crude oil by 1860, refining much of it into kerosene lamp oil.[9] Some historians challenge Canada’s claim to North America’s first oil field, arguing that Pennsylvania’s famous Drake Well was the continent’s first. But there is evidence to support Williams, not least of which is that the Drake well did not come into production until August 28, 1859. The controversial point might be that Williams found oil above bedrock while Edwin Drake’s well located oil within a bedrock reservoir. The discovery at Oil Springs touched off an oil boom which brought hundreds of speculators and workers to the area. Canada's first gusher (flowing well) erupted on January 16, 1862, when local oil man John Shaw struck oil at 158 feet (48 m).[12] For a week the oil gushed unchecked at levels reported as high as 3,000 barrels per day.
The first modern oil drilling in the United States began in West Virginia and Pennsylvania in the 1850s. Edwin Drake's 1859 well near Titusville, Pennsylvania, is typically considered the first true modern oil well, and touched off a major boom.[13][14] In the first quarter of the 20th century, the United States overtook Russia as the world's largest oil producer. By the 1920s, oil fields had been established in many countries including Canada, Poland, Sweden, Ukraine, the United States, Peru and Venezuela.[14]
The first successful oil tanker, the Zoroaster, was built in 1878 in Sweden, designed by Ludvig Nobel. It operated from Baku to Astrakhan.[15] A number of new tanker designs were developed in the 1880s.
In the early 1930s the Texas Company developed the first mobile steel barges for drilling in the brackish coastal areas of the Gulf of Mexico. In 1937 Pure Oil Company (now part of Chevron Corporation) and its partner Superior Oil Company (now part of ExxonMobil Corporation) used a fixed platform to develop a field in 14 feet (4.3 m) of water, one mile (1.6 km) offshore of Calcasieu Parish, Louisiana. In early 1947 Superior Oil erected a drilling/production oil platform in 20 ft (6.1 m) of water some 18 miles[vague] off Vermilion Parish, Louisiana. It was Kerr-McGee Oil Industries (now Anadarko Petroleum Corporation), as operator for partners Phillips Petroleum (ConocoPhillips) and Stanolind Oil & Gas (BP), that completed its historic Ship Shoal Block 32 well in November 1947, months before Superior actually drilled a discovery from their Vermilion platform farther offshore. In any case, that made Kerr-McGee's Gulf of Mexico well, Kermac No. 16, the first oil discovery drilled out of sight of land.[16][17] Forty-four Gulf of Mexico exploratory wells discovered 11 oil and natural gas fields by the end of 1949.[18] During World War II (1939-1945) - control of oil supply from Baku and Middle East played a huge role in the events of the war and the ultimate victory of the allies. Cutting off the oil supply considerably weakened Japan in the latter part of the war. After World War II ended, the countries of the Middle East took the lead in oil production from the United States. Important developments since World War II include deep-water drilling, the introduction of the Drillship, and the growth of a global shipping network for petroleum relying upon oil tankers and pipelines. In 1949, first offshore oil drilling at Oil Rocks (Neft Dashlari) in the Caspian Sea off Azerbaijan eventually resulted in a city built on pylons. In the 1960s and 1970s, multi-governmental organizations of oil–producing nations OPEC and OAPEC played a major role in setting petroleum prices and policy. Oil spills and their cleanup have become an issue of increasing political, environmental, and economic importance.
Industry structure[edit]




NIS refinery in Pančevo, Serbia


The American Petroleum Institute divides the petroleum industry into five sectors:[19]

upstream (exploration, development and production of crude oil or natural gas)
downstream (oil tankers, refiners, retailers and consumers)
pipeline
marine
service and supply

Upstream[edit]
Oil companies used to be classified by sales as "supermajors" (BP, Chevron, ExxonMobil, ConocoPhillips, Shell, Eni and Total S.A.), "majors", and "independents" or "jobbers". In recent years however, National Oil Companies (NOC, as opposed to IOC, International Oil Companies) have come to control the rights over the largest oil reserves; by this measure the top ten companies all are NOC. The following table shows the ten largest national oil companies ranked by reserves[20][21] and by production in 2012.[22]

Top 10 largest world oil companies by reserves and production

Rank
Company (Reserves)
Worldwide Liquids Reserves (109 bbl)
Worldwide Natural Gas Reserves (1012 ft3)
Total Reserves in Oil Equivalent Barrels (109 bbl)

Company (Production)
Output (Millions bbl/day)[1]


1
 Saudi Aramco
260
254
303

 Saudi Aramco
12.5


2
 NIOC
138
948
300

 NIOC
6.4


3
 Qatar Petroleum
15
905
170

 ExxonMobil
5.3


4
 INOC
116
120
134

 PetroChina
4.4


5
 PDVSA
99
171
129

 BP
4.1


6
 ADNOC
92
199
126

  Royal Dutch Shell
3.9


7
 Pemex
102
56
111

 Pemex
3.6


8
 NNPC
36
184
68

 Chevron
3.5


9
 NOC
41
50
50

 Kuwait Petroleum Corporation
3.2


10
 Sonatrach
12
159
39

 ADNOC
2.9


^1 : Total energy output, including natural gas (converted to bbl of oil) for companies producing both.


Most upstream work in the oil field or on an oil well is contracted out to drilling contractors and oil field service companies.[citation needed]
Aside from the NOCs which dominate the Upstream sector, there are many international companies that have a market share. For example:[23]

BG Group
BHP Billiton
ConocoPhillips
Chevron
Eni
ExxonMobil
OMV
Hess Ltd
Marathon Oil
Total
Tullow Oil
First Texas Energy Corp

Midstream[edit]
Midstream operations are sometimes classified within the downstream sector, but these operations compose a separate and discrete sector of the petroleum industry. Midstream operations and processes include the following:

Gathering: The gathering process employs narrow, low-pressure pipelines to connect oil- and gas-producing wells to larger, long-haul pipelines or processing facilities.[24]
Processing/refining: Processing and refining operations turn crude oil and gas into marketable products. In the case of crude oil, these products include heating oil, gasoline for use in vehicles, jet fuel, and diesel oil.[25] Oil refining processes include distillation, vacuum distillation, catalytic reforming, catalytic cracking, alkylation, isomerization and hydrotreating.[25] Natural gas processing includes compression; glycol dehydration; amine treating; separating the product into pipeline-quality natural gas and a stream of mixed natural gas liquids; and fractionation, which separates the stream of mixed natural gas liquids into its components. The fractionation process yields ethane, propane, butane, isobutane, and natural gasoline.
Transportation: Oil and gas are transported to processing facilities, and from there to end users, by pipeline, tanker/barge, truck, and rail. Pipelines are the most economical transportation method and are most suited to movement across longer distances, for example, across continents.[26] Tankers and barges are also employed for long-distance, often international transport. Rail and truck can also be used for longer distances but are most cost-effective for shorter routes.
Storage: Midstream service providers provide storage facilities at terminals throughout the oil and gas distribution systems. These facilities are most often located near refining and processing facilities and are connected to pipeline systems to facilitate shipment when product demand must be met. While petroleum products are held in storage tanks, natural gas tends to be stored in underground facilities, such as salt dome caverns and depleted reservoirs.
Technological applications: Midstream service providers apply technological solutions to improve efficiency during midstream processes. Technology can be used during compression of fuels to ease flow through pipelines; to better detect leaks in pipelines; and to automate communications for better pipeline and equipment monitoring.

While some upstream companies carry out certain midstream operations, the midstream sector is dominated by a number of companies that specialize in these services. Midstream companies include:

Aux Sable
Bridger Group
DCP Midstream Partners
Enbridge Energy Partners
Enterprise Products Partners
Genesis Energy
Gibson Energy
Inergy Midstream
Kinder Morgan Energy Partners
Oneok Partners
Plains All American
Sunoco Logistics
Targa Midstream Services
TransCanada
Williams Companies

Environmental impact[edit]
Water pollution[edit]
See also: Oil pollution toxicity to marine fish
Some petroleum industry operations have been responsible for water pollution through by-products of refining and oil spills.
Air pollution[edit]
See also: Air pollution
The industry is the largest industrial source of emissions of volatile organic compounds (VOCs), a group of chemicals that contribute to the formation of ground-level ozone (smog).[27] The combustion of fossil fuels produces greenhouse gases and other air pollutants as by-products. Pollutants include nitrogen oxides, sulphur dioxide, volatile organic compounds and heavy metals.
Researchers have discovered that the petrochemical industry can produce ground-level ozone pollution at higher amounts in winter than in summer.[28].
Climate change[edit]
See also: Global warming and Attribution of recent climate change
The greenhouse gases due to fossil fuels drive global warming. Already in 1959, at a symposium organised by the American Petroleum Institute for the centennial of the American oil industry, the physicist Edward Teller warned then of the danger of global climate change.[29] Edward Teller explained that carbon dioxide "in the atmosphere causes a greenhouse effect" and that burning more fossil fuels could "melt the icecap and submerge New York".[29]
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, founded by the United Nations in 1988, concludes that human-sourced greenhouse gases are responsible for most of the observed temperature increase since the middle of the twentieth century.
Future shortages[edit]
As petroleum is a non-renewable natural resource the industry is faced with an inevitable eventual depletion of the world's oil supply. The BP Statistical Review of World Energy 2007 listed the reserve/production ratio for proven resources worldwide. The study placed the ratio of proven reserves to production in the Middle East at 79.5 years, Latin America at 41.2 years and North America at 12 years. A simplistic interpretation of the ratio has led to many false predictions of immanent "running out of oil" since the early years of the oil industry in the 1800s. This has been especially true in the United States, where the ratio of proved reserves-to-production has been between 8 years and 17 years since 1920. Many have mistakenly interpreted the result as the number of years before the oil supply is exhausted. Such analyses do not take into account future reserves growth.[30]
The Hubbert peak theory, which introduced the concept of peak oil, questions the sustainability of oil production. It suggests that after a peak in oil production rates, a period of oil depletion will ensue. Since virtually all economic sectors rely heavily on petroleum, peak oil could lead to a partial or complete failure of markets.[31]
According to research by IBIS World, biofuels (primarily ethanol, but also biodiesel) will continue to supplement petroleum. However output levels are low, and these fuels will not displace local oil production. More than 90% of the ethanol used in the US is blended with gasoline to produce a 10% ethanol mix, lifting the oxygen content of the fuel.[32]
Petroleum industry in popular culture[edit]
The petroleum industry is a popular subject in contemporary fiction. Films with oil-industry themes include There Will Be Blood (2007) set around Southern California's oil boom of the late 19th and early 20th centuries, and Syriana (2005) set in present-day Middle-East.
See also[edit]


Industry pioneers


Faustino Piaggio, an early oil industry pioneer


Oil production


Oil well
Oil terminal
Oil refinery
Oil supplies
Integrated operations
Instrumentation in petrochemical industries
Standardization in oil industry
List of crude oil products


Financial and political


List of oil exploration and production companies
List of largest oil and gas companies by revenue
Chronology of world oil market events (1970–2005)
Energy crisis: 1973 oil crisis, 1979 energy crisis
Energy development
Petroleum politics
Oil imperialism theories
World oil market chronology from 2003
Oil-storage trade
OPEC
Peak oil
Oil and gas law in the United States
Fossil fuels lobby


Environmental issues


Environmental impact of the petroleum industry
Greenhouse gases
Oil spills
Renewable energy


Oil geology


Abiogenic petroleum origin
Fossil fuel
Oil sands
Petroleum geology
Thermal depolymerization


Oil-producing areas


History of the petroleum industry in Canada
History of the petroleum industry in the United States
List of oil fields
Oil megaprojects
List of countries by oil production
Oil industry in Azerbaijan


Industry Research Projects


TaskForceMajella


Other articles


All pages with a title containing oil industry
All pages with a title containing petroleum industry
All pages with a title containing gas industry


Notes and references[edit]



^ The World Factbook. "Country Comparison - Oil Consumption". Found at https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/rankorder/2174rank.html
^ New York Times, 2010 July 3, "As Oil Industry Fights a Tax, It Reaps Subsidies," https://www.nytimes.com/2010/07/04/business/04bptax.html?_r=1
^ Halliday, Fred. The Middle East in International Relations: Cambridge University Press: USA, p. 270
^ N.Y. Krylov, A.A. Bokserman, E.R.Stavrovsky. The Oil Industry of the Former Soviet Union. CRC Press, 1998. P. 187.
^ a b Shirin Akiner, Anne Aldis. The Caspian: Politics, Energy and Security. Routledge, 2004. P. 5.
^ United States Congress, Joint Economic Committee. The Former Soviet Union in Transition. M.E. Sharpe, 1993. P. 463.
^ Quoted from: Tatyana Saiko. Environmental Crises. Pearson Education, 2000. P. 223.
^ Frank, Alison Fleig (2005). Oil Empire: Visions of Prosperity in Austrian Galicia (Harvard Historical Studies). Harvard University Press. ISBN 0-674-01887-7. 
^ a b "Black Gold: Canada's Oil Heritage". The Corporation of the County of Lambton. Archived from the original on 29 July 2013. Retrieved 30 July 2013. The North American oil industry began in Oil Springs in 1858 in less spectacular fashion. James Miller Williams, a coachmaker from Hamilton, dug into the tar-like gum beds of Enniskillen Township to find their source. At a depth of fourteen feet, he struck oil. Williams immediately built a small refinery and began to produce illuminating oil for lamps - kerosene. It was Williams who was able to take full advantage of the ancient resource. Not only was he astute enough to look below the surface of the gum beds to find oil and to realize its commercial potential, but the timing of his discovery was perfect. 
^ Turnbull Elford, Jean. Canada West's Last Frontier. Lambton County Historical Society, 1982, p. 110
^ Sarnia Observer and Lambton Advertiser, "Important Discovery in the Township of Enniskillen Archived 2015-04-03 at the Wayback Machine.," 5 August 1858, p. 2.
^ "Extraordinary Flowing Oil Well". Hamilton Times. 20 January 1862. p. 2. Archived from the original on 3 April 2015. Retrieved 30 July 2013. Our correspondent writes us from the Oil Springs, under date of the 16th inst., [an] interesting account of a flowing Oil well which has just been tapped. He says:— I have just time to mention that to-day at half past eleven o'clock, a.m., Mr. John Shaw, from Kingston, C. W., tapped a vein of oil in his well, at a depth of one hundred and fifty-eight feet in the rock, which filled the surface well, (forty-five feet to the rock) and the conductors [sic] in the course of fifteen minutes, and immediately commenced flowing. It will hardly be credited, but nevertheless such is the case, that the present enormous flow of oil cannot be estimated at less than two thousand barrels per day, (twenty-four hours), of pure oil, and the quantity increasing every hour. I saw three men in the course of one hour, fill fifty barrels from the flow of oil, which is running away in every direction; the flat presenting the appearance of a sea of oil. The excitement is intense, and hundreds are rushing from every quarter to see this extraordinary well. Experience oil well diggers from the other side, affirm that this week equals their best flowing wells in Pennsylvania, and they pronounced the oil as being of a superior quality. This flowing well is situation on lot No. 10, Range B, Messrs. Sanborn & Co.'s Oil Territory. 
^ John Steele Gordon Archived 2008-04-20 at the Wayback Machine. "10 Moments That Made American Business," American Heritage, February/March 2007.
^ a b Vassiliou, Marius (2009). Historical Dictionary of the Petroleum Industry. Lanham, MD: Scarecrow Press (Rowman and Littlefield), 700 pp.
^ Tolf, Robert W. (1976). "4: The World's First Oil Tankers". The Russian Rockefellers: The Saga of the Nobel Family and the Russian Oil Industry. Hoover Press. ISBN 0-8179-6581-5. p. 55.
^ Ref accessed 02-12-89 by technical aspects and coast mapping. Kerr-McGee
^ "Project Redsand". www.project-redsand.com. 
^ Wells, Bruce. "Offshore Petroleum History". American Oil & Gas Historical Society. Retrieved 11 November 2014. 
^ American Petroleum Institute. "Industry Sectors." http://www.api.org/aboutoilgas/sectors/ Retrieved 12 May 2008
^ Ranked in order of 2007 worldwide oil equivalent reserves as reported in "OGJ 200/100", Oil & Gas Journal, September 15, 2008. http://www.petrostrategies.org/Links/Worlds_Largest_Oil_and_Gas_Companies_Sites.htm
^ "The Role of National Oil Companies in the International Oil Market" (PDF). Congressional Research Service. August 2007. Retrieved 2009-09-17. Ranking by oil reserves and production, 2006 values
^ "The World's 25 Biggest Oil Companies" (2012). Forbes
^ International Association of oil and Gas Producers http://www.ogp.org.uk/about-ogp/membership/upstream-companies/
^ "The Transportation of Natural Gas," Archived 2011-01-01 at the Wayback Machine. NaturalGas.org, Retrieved December 14, 2012.
^ a b "Refining and Product Specifications Module Overview," Petroleum Online, Retrieved December 14, 2012.
^ Trench, Cheryl J., "How Pipelines Make the Oil Market Work – Their Networks, Operation and Regulation," Archived 2013-12-28 at the Wayback Machine. Allegro Energy Group, December 2001.
^ http://www.epa.gov/airquality/oilandgas/basic.html
^ http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/vaop/ncurrent/full/nature13767.html
^ a b Benjamin Franta, "On its 100th birthday in 1959, Edward Teller warned the oil industry about global warming", The Guardian, 1 January 2018 (page visited on 2 January 2018).
^ Deffeyes, Kenneth S. (2001). Hubbert's Peak: The Impending World Oil Shortage. Princeton University press. pp. 1–13. Archived from the original on 2010-07-03. 
^ "German Military Braces for Scarcity After ‘Peak Oil’". The New York Times. September 9, 2010.
^ IBISWorld. "US Oil Drilling Industry Market Research Report." http://www.ibisworld.com/industry/retail.aspx?indid=103&chid=10 Retrieved 14 May 2008



Further reading[edit]

Mau, Mark; Edmundson, Henry (2015). Groundbreakers: the Story of Oilfield Technology and the People Who Made It Happen. UK: FastPrint. ISBN 978-178456-187-1. 
Ordons Oil & Gas Information & News
Robert Sobel The Money Manias: The Eras of Great Speculation in America, 1770–1970 (1973) reprinted (2000).
Daniel Yergin, The Prize: The Epic Quest for Oil, Money, and Power, (Simon and Schuster 1991; paperback, 1993), ISBN 0-671-79932-0.
Matthew R. Simmons, Twilight in the Desert: The Coming Saudi Oil Shock and the World Economy, John Wiley & Sons, 2005, ISBN 0-471-73876-X.
Matthew Yeomans, Oil: Anatomy of an Industry (New Press, 2004), ISBN 1-56584-885-3.
Smith, GO (1920): Where the World Gets Its Oil: National Geographic, February 1920, pp 181–202
Marius Vassiliou, Historical Dictionary of the Petroleum Industry. Lanham, MD: Scarecrow Press (Rowman & Littlefield), 700pp. ISBN 0-8108-5993-9.
Ronald W. Ferrier; J. H. Bamberg (1982). The History of the British Petroleum Company: Volume 1, The Developing Years, 1901-1932. Cambridge UP. pp. A–13. 
Miryusif Mirbabayev, Concise History of Azerbaijani Oil. Baku, Azerneshr, (2008), 340pp.

External links[edit]



Look up oil patch or oilpatch in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.





Wikimedia Commons has media related to Petroleum industry.



OPEC - Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries
AAPG - American Association of Petroleum Geologists
AOGHS - American Oil & Gas Historical Society







v
t
e


Petroleum industry






Petroleum
Primary energy









Benchmarks



Argus Sour
Bonny Light
Brent
Dubai
Indian Basket
Indonesian
Isthmus-34 Light
Japan Cocktail
OPEC Reference Basket
Tapis
Urals
West Texas Intermediate
Western Canadian Select





Data




Natural gas



Consumption
Production
Reserves
Imports
Exports
Price





Petroleum



Consumption
Production
Reserves
Imports
Exports
Price (of gasoline and diesel)








Exploration



Core sampling
Geophysics
Integrated asset modelling
Petroleum engineering

Reservoir simulation
Seismic to simulation


Petroleum geology
Petrophysics
Reflection seismology (Seismic inversion)
Seismic source





Drilling



Blowout
Completion (Squeeze job)
Differential sticking
Directional drilling (Geosteering)
Drilling engineering
Drilling fluid (invasion)
Drill stem test
Lost circulation
Measurement
Tracers
Underbalanced drilling
Well logging





Production



Petroleum fiscal regime

Concessions
Production sharing agreements


Artificial lift

Pumpjack
Submersible pump (ESP)
Gas lift


Downstream
Enhanced oil recovery (EOR)

Steam injection
Gas reinjection


Midstream
Petroleum product
Pipeline transport
Refining
Upstream
Water injection
Well intervention
XT





History



1967 Oil Embargo
1973 oil crisis
1979 energy crisis
1980s oil glut
1990 oil price shock
2000s energy crisis
2010s oil glut
Founders
History of the petroleum industry
Nationalization
OPEC
GECF
Seven Sisters
Standard Oil
Oil market timelines





Provinces
and fields



List of natural gas fields
List of oil fields
East Midlands Oil Province
East Texas
Gulf of Mexico
Niger Delta
North Sea
Permian Basin
Persian Gulf
Prudhoe Bay Oil Field
Russia
Venezuela
Western Canadian Sedimentary Basin





Other topics



Acronyms
Oil shale gas
Peak oil

mitigation
timing


People
Petrocurrency
Petrodollar recycling
Shale band
Shale gas
Swing producer
Unconventional oil

heavy crude
oil sands
oil shale















Companies and organisations








Major petroleum
companies





Supermajors



BP
Chevron
Eni
ExxonMobil
Royal Dutch Shell
Total






National oil
companies




ADNOC (UAE)
CNOOC (China)
CNPC (China)
Ecopetrol (Colombia)
Gazprom (Russia)
Iraq National Oil Company
Indian Oil Corporation
KazMunayGas (Kazakhstan)
Kuwait Petroleum Corporation
Lotos (Poland)
Nigerian National Petroleum Corporation
NIOC (Iran)
NISOC (Iran)
OGDCL (Pakistan)
ONGC (India)
PDVSA (Venezuela)
PKN Orlen (Poland)
Pemex (Mexico)
Pertamina (Indonesia)
PetroBangla (Bangladesh)
Petrobras (Brazil)
PetroChina
Petronas (Malaysia)
Petrovietnam
PTT (Thailand)
Qatar Petroleum
Rosneft (Russia)
Saudi Aramco (Saudi Arabia)
Sinopec (China)
SOCAR (Azerbaijan)
Sonangol (Angola)
Sonatrach (Algeria)
Statoil (Norway)
TPAO (Turkey)
YPF (Argentina)





Energy trading



Glencore
Gunvor
Mercuria
Naftiran Intertrade
Trafigura
Vitol





Other



Anadarko
Apache
BG Group
Cenovus Energy
Compañía Española de Petróleos
ConocoPhillips
Devon
Galp Energia
Hess
Husky Energy
Imperial Oil
Lukoil
Marathon Oil
Nippon Oil
Occidental
OMV
Port Harcourt Refining Company
Reliance Industries
Repsol
Suncor Energy
Surgutneftegas
TNK-BP
Tullow Oil
Tüpraş









Major services
companies




Amec Foster Wheeler
Baker Hughes
Cameron
CGG
CH2M Hill
Chicago Bridge & Iron Company
China Oilfield Services
Enbridge
Ensco
GE Oil & Gas
Halliburton
Nabors Industries
Naftiran Intertrade
National Oilwell Varco
Petrofac
Saipem
Schlumberger
Snam
Subsea 7
TransCanada
Transocean
Weatherford
Wood Group





Other



International Association of Oil & Gas Producers
International Energy Agency
International Petroleum Exchange
OPEC
Society of Petroleum Engineers
World Petroleum Council














Category
 Commons












v
t
e


Major industries






Heavy
Light








Activism
Advertising
Aerospace

Space


Aircraft

Aircraft tire


Agriculture

Flowers
Horticulture
Coffee


Audiovisual
Alcohol
Anime
Arms
Automotive
Bicycle
Biotechnology
Chemical
Computer
Construction

Dredging


Content
Creative
Cultural
Education
Electric power
Electronics

Semiconductor


Energy

Renewable energy


Engineering
Entertainment
Fashion
Film
Financial services

Insurance industry


Fishing
Food

Bushfood


Fur
Gaming

Online gambling


Health care
Hospitality
Information
Language
Leisure
Manufacturing
Meat industry

Meat packing


Mineral
Motorsport
Music
Naval stores
Payment card
Personal care
Petroleum

Oil shale


Pharmaceutical
Plastics
Poverty
Professional services
Pulp and paper
Radio
Real estate

Housing


Online service
Security
Sex
Shipbuilding
Software
Sport
Textile
Tobacco
Tourism
Video game
Water








Energy portal
Companies portal
Global warming portal







						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Petroleum_industry&oldid=818311484"					Categories: Petroleum industryFossil fuelsHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from March 2011All Wikipedia articles needing clarificationWikipedia articles needing clarification from February 2010Articles with unsourced statements from March 2008