For other uses, see Pharaoh (disambiguation).






This article's lead section does not adequately summarize key points of its contents. Please consider expanding the lead to provide an accessible overview of all important aspects of the article. Please discuss this issue on the article's talk page. (January 2015)





Pharaoh of Egypt



The Pschent combined the Red Crown of Lower Egypt and the White Crown of Upper Egypt.







A typical depiction of a pharaoh. After Djoser of the third dynasty, pharaohs were usually depicted wearing the nemes headdress, a false beard, and an ornate kilt.






Details


Style
Five-name titulary


First monarch
Narmer or Menes (by tradition)


Last monarch
Cleopatra & Caesarion


Formation
c. 3150 BC


Abolition
30 BC


Residence
Varies by era


Appointer
Divine right




















pr-ˤ3
"Great house"
in hieroglyphs















































































nswt-bjt
"King of Upper
and Lower Egypt"
in hieroglyphs


Pharaoh (/ˈfeɪ.roʊ/, /fɛr.oʊ/[1][2] or /fær.oʊ/[2];Coptic: Ⲫⲁⲣⲁⲱ) is the common title of the monarchs of ancient Egypt from the First Dynasty (c. 3150 BCE) until the annexation of Egypt by the Roman Empire in 30 BCE,[3] although the actual term "Pharaoh" was not used contemporaneously for a ruler until circa 1200 BCE. In the early dynasty, Ancient Egyptian kings used to have up to three titles, the Horus, the Nesu Bety, and the Nebty name. The Golden Horus and Nomen and prenomen titles were later added.
In Egyptian society, religion was central to everyday life. One of the roles of the pharaoh was as an intermediary between the gods and the people. The pharaoh thus deputised for the gods; his role was both as civil and religious administrator. He owned all of the land in Egypt, enacted laws, collected taxes, and defended Egypt from invaders as the commander-in-chief of the army.[4] Religiously, the pharaoh officiated over religious ceremonies and chose the sites of new temples. He was responsible for maintaining Maat, or balance and justice, and part of this included going to war when necessary to defend the country or attacking others when it was believed that this would contribute to Maat, such as to obtain resources.[5]
During the early days prior the unity of the lower and upper kingdoms of ancient Egypt, a Deshret, the red crown, was a representation the Kingdom of lower Egypt; while the Hadjet, a white crown, was worn by the kings of the kingdom of upper Egypt. After the unification of both kingdoms into one united Egypt, the Pschent, the combination of both the red and white crowns was the official crown of kings. With time new headdresses were introduced during different dynasties like Khat, Nemes, Atef, Hemhem, and Kepresh. At times, it was depicted that a combination of these headdresses or crowns would be worn together.



Contents


1 Etymology
2 Regalia

2.1 Scepters and staves
2.2 The Uraeus


3 Crowns and headdresses

3.1 Deshret
3.2 Hedjet
3.3 Pschent
3.4 Khat
3.5 Nemes
3.6 Atef
3.7 Hemhem
3.8 Khepresh
3.9 Physical evidence


4 Titles

4.1 Nesu Bity name
4.2 Horus name
4.3 Nebty name
4.4 Golden Horus
4.5 Nomen and prenomen


5 See also
6 Notes
7 References
8 Bibliography
9 External links



Etymology[edit]
The word pharaoh ultimately derives from the Egyptian compound pr-ˤ3 "great house," written with the two biliteral hieroglyphs pr "house" and ˤ3 "column", here meaning "great" or "high". It was used only in larger phrases such as smr pr-ˤ3 "Courtier of the High House", with specific reference to the buildings of the court or palace.[6] From the twelfth dynasty onward, the word appears in a wish formula "Great House, may it live, prosper, and be in health", but again only with reference to the royal palace and not the person.
During the reign of Thutmose III (circa 1479–1425 BCE) in the New Kingdom, after the foreign rule of the Hyksos during the Second Intermediate Period, pharaoh became the form of address for a person who was king.[7]
The earliest instance where pr-ˤ3 is used specifically to address the ruler is in a letter to Amenhotep IV (Akhenaten), who reigned circa 1353–1336 BCE, which is addressed to "Pharaoh, all life, prosperity, and health".[8] During the eighteenth dynasty (16th to 14th centuries BCE) the title pharaoh was employed as a reverential designation of the ruler. About the late twenty-first dynasty (10th century BCE), however, instead of being used alone as before, it began to be added to the other titles before the ruler's name, and from the twenty-fifth dynasty (eighth to seventh centuries BCE) it was, at least in ordinary usage, the only epithet prefixed to the royal appellative.[9]
From the nineteenth dynasty onward pr-ˤ3 on its own was used as regularly as ḥm, "Majesty".[10][note 1] The term, therefore, evolved from a word specifically referring to a building to a respectful designation for the ruler, particularly by the twenty-second dynasty and twenty-third dynasty.[citation needed]
For instance, the first dated appearance of the title pharaoh being attached to a ruler's name occurs in Year 17 of Siamun on a fragment from the Karnak Priestly Annals. Here, an induction of an individual to the Amun priesthood is dated specifically to the reign of Pharaoh Siamun.[11] This new practice was continued under his successor Psusennes II and the twenty-second dynasty kings. For instance, the Large Dakhla stela is specifically dated to Year 5 of king "Pharaoh Shoshenk, beloved of Amun", whom all Egyptologists concur was Shoshenq I—the founder of the Twenty-second dynasty—including Alan Gardiner in his original 1933 publication of this stela.[12] Shoshenq I was the second successor of Siamun. Meanwhile, the old custom of referring to the sovereign simply as pr-ˤ3 continued in traditional Egyptian narratives.[citation needed]
By this time, the Late Egyptian word is reconstructed to have been pronounced *[par-ʕoʔ] whence Herodotus derived the name of one of the Egyptian kings, Φερων.[13] In the Old Testament of the Bible, the title also occurs as פרעה [par‘ōh];[14] from that, Septuagint φαραώ pharaō and then Late Latin pharaō, both -n stem nouns. The Qur'an likewise spells it فرعون fir'awn with "n" (here, always referring to the one evil king in the Exodus story, by contrast to the good king Aziz in sura 12's Joseph story). Interestingly, the Arabic combines the original pharyngeal ayin sound from Egyptian, along with the -n ending from Greek.
English at first spelt it "Pharao", but the King James Bible revived "Pharaoh" with "h" from the Hebrew. Meanwhile in Egypt itself, *[par-ʕoʔ] evolved into Sahidic Coptic ⲡⲣ̅ⲣⲟ prro and then rro (by mistaking p- as the definite article prefix "the" from ancient Egyptian p3).[15]
Other notable epithets, nsw is translated to "king", ity for "monarch or soveriegn", nb for "lord".[10][note 2] and heqa for "ruler".
Regalia[edit]
Scepters and staves[edit]




Beaded Scepter of Khasekhemwy (Museum of Fine Arts in Boston).


Scepters and staves were a general sign of authority in ancient Egypt.[16] One of the earliest royal scepters was discovered in the tomb of Khasekhemwy in Abydos.[16] Kings were also known to carry a staff, and Pharaoh Anedjib is shown on stone vessels carrying a so-called mks-staff.[17] The scepter with the longest history seems to be the heqa-scepter, sometimes described as the shepherd's crook.[18] The earliest examples of this piece of regalia dates to pre-dynastic times. A scepter was found in a tomb at Abydos that dates to the late Naqada period.
Another scepter associated with the king is the was-scepter.[18] This is a long staff mounted with an animal head. The earliest known depictions of the was-scepter date to the first dynasty. The was-scepter is shown in the hands of both kings and deities.
The flail later was closely related to the heqa-scepter (the crook and flail), but in early representations the king was also depicted solely with the flail, as shown in a late pre-dynastic knife handle which is now in the Metropolitan museum, and on the Narmer Macehead.[19]
The Uraeus[edit]
The earliest evidence known of the Uraeus—a rearing cobra—is from the reign of Den from the first dynasty. The cobra supposedly protected the pharaoh by spitting fire at its enemies.[20]
Crowns and headdresses[edit]
Main article: Crowns of Egypt

Narmer Palette





Narmer wearing the white crown
Narmer wearing the red crown


Deshret[edit]
The red crown of Lower Egypt, the Deshret crown, dates back to pre-dynastic times. A red crown has been found on a pottery shard from Naqada, and later, king Narmer is shown wearing the red crown on both the Narmer macehead and the Narmer palette.
Hedjet[edit]
The white crown of Upper Egypt, the Hedjet crown, is shown on the Qustul incense burner which dates to the pre-dynastic period. Later, King Scorpion was depicted wearing the white crown, as was Narmer.
Pschent[edit]
This is the combination of the Deshret and Hedjet crowns into a double crown, called the Pschent crown. It is first documented in the middle of the first dynasty. The earliest depiction may date to the reign of Djet, and is otherwise surely attested during the reign of Den.[21]
Khat[edit]




Den


The khat headdress consists of a kind of "kerchief" whose end is tied similarly to a ponytail. The earliest depictions of the khat headdress comes from the reign of Den, but is not found again until the reign of Djoser.
Nemes[edit]
The Nemes headdress dates from the time of Djoser. It is the most common type of crown that has been depicted throughout Pharaonic Egypt. Any other type of crown, apart from the Khat headdress, has been commonly depicted on top of the Nemes. The statue from his Serdab in Saqqara shows the king wearing the nemes headdress.[21]




Statuette of Pepy I (ca. 2338-2298 B.C.E.) wearing a nemes headdress Brooklyn Museum


Atef[edit]
Osiris is shown to wear the Atef crown, which is an elaborate Hedjet with feathers and disks. Depictions of Pharaohs wearing the Atef crown originate from the Old Kingdom.
Hemhem[edit]
The Hemhem crown is usually depicted on top of Nemes, Pschent, or Deshret crowns. It is an ornate triple Atef with corkscrew sheep horns and usually two uraei. The usage (depiction) of this crown begins during the Early 18th dynasty of Egypt.
Khepresh[edit]
Also called the blue crown, the Khepresh crown has been depicted since the New Kingdom.
Physical evidence[edit]
Egyptologist Bob Brier has noted that despite its widespread depiction in royal portraits, no ancient Egyptian crown ever has been discovered. Tutankhamun's tomb, discovered largely intact, did contain such regalia as his crook and flail, but no crown was found, however, among the funerary equipment. Diadems have been discovered.[22]
It is presumed that crowns would have been believed to have magical properties. Brier's speculation is that crowns were religious or state items, so a dead pharaoh likely could not retain a crown as a personal possession. The crowns may have been passed along to the successor.[23]
Titles[edit]
Main article: Ancient Egyptian royal titulary
During the early dynastic period kings had as many as three titles. The Horus name is the oldest and dates to the late pre-dynastic period. The Nesu Bity name was added during the first dynasty. The Nebty name was first introduced toward the end of the first dynasty.[21] The Golden falcon (bik-nbw) name is not well understood. The prenomen and nomen were introduced later and are traditionally enclosed in a cartouche.[24] By the Middle Kingdom, the official titulary of the ruler consisted of five names; Horus, nebty, golden Horus, nomen, and prenomen[25] for some rulers, only one or two of them may be known.
Nesu Bity name[edit]
The Nesu Bity name, also known as Prenomen, was one of the new developments from the reign of Den. The name would follow the glyphs for the "Sedge and the Bee". The title is usually translated as king of Upper and Lower Egypt. The nsw bity name may have been the birth name of the king. It was often the name by which kings were recorded in the later annals and king lists.[21]
Horus name[edit]
The Horus name was adopted by the king, when taking the throne. The name was written within a square frame representing the palace, named a serekh. The earliest known example of a serekh dates to the reign of king Ka, before the first dynasty.[26] The Horus name of several early kings expresses a relationship with Horus. Aha refers to "Horus the fighter", Djer refers to "Horus the strong", etc. Later kings express ideals of kingship in their Horus names. Khasekhemwy refers to "Horus: the two powers are at peace", while Nebra refers to "Horus, Lord of the Sun".[21]
Nebty name[edit]
The earliest example of a nebty name comes from the reign of king Aha from the first dynasty. The title links the king with the goddesses of Upper and Lower Egypt Nekhbet and Wadjet.[21][24] The title is preceded by the vulture (Nekhbet) and the cobra (Wadjet) standing on a basket (the neb sign).[21]
Golden Horus[edit]
The Golden Horus or Golden Falcon name was preceded by a falcon on a gold or nbw sign. The title may have represented the divine status of the king. The Horus associated with gold may be referring to the idea that the bodies of the deities were made of gold and the pyramids and obelisks are representations of (golden) sun-rays. The gold sign may also be a reference to Nubt, the city of Set. This would suggest that the iconography represents Horus conquering Set.[21]
Nomen and prenomen[edit]
The prenomen and nomen were contained in a cartouche. The prenomen often followed the King of Upper and Lower Egypt (nsw bity) or Lord of the Two Lands (nebtawy) title. The prenomen often incorporated the name of Re. The nomen often followed the title Son of Re (sa-ra) or the title Lord of Appearances (neb-kha).[24]





Nomen and prenomen of Ramesses III



See also[edit]


Ancient Egypt portal
Monarchy portal



List of pharaohs
Coronation of the pharaoh
Great Royal Wife, the chief wife of a male pharaoh
Egyptian chronology
Pharaohs in the Bible
Pharaoh, a historical novel written by Bolesław Prus

Notes[edit]



^ The Bible refers to Egypt as the "Land of Ham"
^ nb.f means "his lord", the monarchs were introduced with (.f) for his, (.k) for your.[10]



References[edit]



^ Merriam-Webster's Collegiate Dictionary, Eleventh Edition. Merriam-Webster, 2007. p. 928
^ a b Dictionary Reference: pharaoh
^ Clayton, Peter A. Chronicle of the Pharaohs the Reign-by-reign Record of the Rulers and Dynasties of Ancient Egypt. London: Thames & Hudson, 2012. Print.
^ "Pharaoh". AncientEgypt.co.uk. The British Museum. 1999. Retrieved 20 December 2017. 
^ Mark, Joshua (2 September 2009). "Pharaoh - Ancient History Encyclopedia". ancient.eu. Ancient History Encyclopedia Limited. Retrieved 20 December 2017. 
^ A. Gardiner, Ancient Egyptian Grammar (3rd edn, 1957), 71–76.
^ Redmount, Carol A. "Bitter Lives: Israel in and out of Egypt." p. 89–90. Michael D. Coogan, ed. The Oxford History of the Biblical World, Oxford University Press. 1998.
^ Hieratic Papyrus from Kahun and Gurob, F. LL. Griffith, 38, 17. Although see also R. Mond and O. Myers (1940), Temples of Armant, pl. 93, 5, for an instance possibly dating from the reign of Thutmose III.
^ "pharaoh" in Encyclopædia Britannica. Ultimate Reference Suite. Chicago: Encyclopædia Britannica, 2008.
^ a b c Denise M. Doxey (1998). Egyptian Non-Royal Epithets in the Middle Kingdom: A Social and Historical Analysis. BRILL. p. 151. ISBN 9789004110779. 
^ J-M. Kruchten, Les annales des pretres de Karnak (OLA 32), 1989, pp.474–8.
^ Alan Gardiner, "The Dakhleh Stela", Journal of Egyptian Archaeology, Vol. 19, No. 1/2 (May, 1933) pp. 193–200.
^ Herodotus, Histories 2.111.1. See Anne Burton (1972). Diodorus Siculus, Book 1: A Commentary. Brill. , commenting on ch. 59.1.
^ Elazar Ari Lipinski: Pesach - A holiday of questions. About the Haggadah-Commentary Zevach Pesach of Rabbi Isaak Abarbanel (1437–1508). Explaining the meaning of the name Pharaoh. Published first in German in the official quarterly of the Organization of the Jewish Communities of Bavaria: Jüdisches Leben in Bayern. Mitteilungsblatt des Landesverbandes der Israelitischen Kultusgemeinden in Bayern. Pessach-Ausgabe = Nr. 109, 2009, ZDB-ID 2077457-6, S. 3–4.
^ Walter C. Till: "Koptische Grammatik." VEB Verläg Enzyklopädie, Leipzig, 1961. p. 62.
^ a b Wilkinson, Toby A.H. Early Dynastic Egypt. Routledge, 2001, p. 158.
^ Wilkinson, Toby A.H. Early Dynastic Egypt. Routledge, 2001, p. 159.
^ a b Wilkinson, Toby A.H. Early Dynastic Egypt. Routledge, 2001, p. 160.
^ Wilkinson, Toby A.H. Early Dynastic Egypt. Routledge, 2001, p. 161.
^ Wilkinson, Toby A.H. Early Dynastic Egypt. Routledge, 2001, p. 162.
^ a b c d e f g h Wilkinson, Toby A.H. Early Dynastic Egypt. Routledge, 2001 ISBN 978-0-415-26011-4
^ Shaw, Garry J. The Pharaoh, Life at Court and on Campaign. Thames and Hudson, 2012, pp. 21, 77.
^ Bob Brier, The Murder of Tutankhamen, 1998, p. 95.
^ a b c Dodson, Aidan and Hilton, Dyan. The Complete Royal Families of Ancient Egypt. Thames & Hudson. 2004. ISBN 0-500-05128-3
^ Ian Shaw, The Oxford History of Ancient Egypt, Oxford University Press 2000, p. 477
^ Toby A. H. Wilkinson, Early Dynastic Egypt, Routledge 1999, pp. 57f.



Bibliography[edit]

Shaw, Garry J. The Pharaoh, Life at Court and on Campaign, Thames and Hudson, 2012.
Sir Alan Gardiner Egyptian Grammar: Being an Introduction to the Study of Hieroglyphs, Third Edition, Revised. London: Oxford University Press, 1964. Excursus A, pp. 71–76.
Jan Assmann, "Der Mythos des Gottkönigs im Alten Ägypten," in Christine Schmitz und Anja Bettenworth (hg.), Menschen - Heros - Gott: Weltentwürfe und Lebensmodelle im Mythos der Vormoderne (Stuttgart, Franz Steiner Verlag, 2009), pp. 11–26.

External links[edit]

Find more aboutPharaohat Wikipedia's sister projects

Definitions from Wiktionary
Media from Wikimedia Commons
Textbooks from Wikibooks



Digital Egypt for Universities
10 Influential Pharaohs




Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Pharaohs.








v
t
e


Ancient Egypt topics






Outline
Index
Major topics
Glossary of artifacts








Agriculture
Architecture (Egyptian Revival architecture)
Art
Astronomy
Burial customs
Chronology
Cities (list)
Clothing
Cuisine
Dynasties
Geography
Great Royal Wives
History
Language
Literature
Mathematics
Medicine
Military
Music
Mythology
People
Pharaohs (list)
Philosophy
Religion
Sites
Technology
Trade
Writing











Egyptology
Egyptologists
Museums








 Book
 Category
 Ancient Egypt portal
 WikiProject
 Commons












v
t
e


Pharaohs








Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period  (<3150–2040 BC)








Period






Dynasty





Pharaohs  (male
female )
uncertain









Protodynastic
(pre-3150 BC)




Lower



Hsekiu
Khayu
Tiu
Thesh
Neheb
Wazner
Mekh
Double Falcon





Upper



Scorpion I
Crocodile
Iry-Hor
Ka
Scorpion II
Narmer / Menes








Early Dynastic
(3150–2686 BC)




I



Narmer / Menes
Hor-Aha
Djer
Djet
Merneith 
Den
Anedjib
Semerkhet
Qa'a
Sneferka
Horus Bird





II



Hotepsekhemwy
Nebra/Raneb
Nynetjer
Ba
Nubnefer
Horus Sa
Weneg-Nebty
Wadjenes
Senedj
Seth-Peribsen
Sekhemib-Perenmaat
Neferkara I
Neferkasokar
Hudjefa I
Khasekhemwy








Old Kingdom
(2686–2181 BC)




III



Nebka
Djoser
Sekhemkhet
Sanakht
Khaba
Qahedjet
Huni





IV



Snefru
Khufu
Djedefre
Khafre
Bikheris
Menkaure
Shepseskaf
Thamphthis





V



Userkaf
Sahure
Neferirkare Kakai
Neferefre
Shepseskare
Nyuserre Ini
Menkauhor Kaiu
Djedkare Isesi
Unas





VI



Teti
Userkare
Pepi I
Merenre Nemtyemsaf I
Pepi II
Merenre Nemtyemsaf II
Netjerkare Siptah








1st Intermediate
(2181–2040 BC)







VIII






Menkare
Neferkare II
Neferkare III Neby
Djedkare Shemai
Neferkare IV Khendu
Merenhor
Neferkamin
Nikare
Neferkare V Tereru
Neferkahor
Neferkare VI Pepiseneb
Neferkamin Anu
Qakare Iby
Neferkaure
Neferkauhor
Neferirkare
Wadjkare
Khuiqer
Khui








IX






Meryibre Khety
Neferkare VII
Nebkaure Khety
Setut








X






Meryhathor
Neferkare VIII
Wahkare Khety
Merykare



















Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period  (2040–1550 BC)








Period






Dynasty





Pharaohs  (male
female )
uncertain









Middle Kingdom
(2040–1802 BC)




XI



Mentuhotep I
Intef I
Intef II
Intef III
Mentuhotep II
Mentuhotep III
Mentuhotep IV





Nubia



Segerseni
Qakare Ini
Iyibkhentre





XII



Amenemhat I
Senusret I
Amenemhat II
Senusret II
Senusret III
Amenemhat III
Amenemhat IV
Sobekneferu 








2nd Intermediate
(1802–1550 BC)




XIII



Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep
Sonbef
Nerikare
Sekhemkare Amenemhat V
Ameny Qemau
Hotepibre
Iufni
Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI
Semenkare Nebnuni
Sehetepibre
Sewadjkare
Nedjemibre
Khaankhre Sobekhotep
Renseneb
Hor
Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw
Djedkheperew
Sebkay
Sedjefakare
Wegaf
Khendjer
Imyremeshaw
Sehetepkare Intef
Seth Meribre
Sobekhotep III
Neferhotep I
Sihathor
Sobekhotep IV
Merhotepre Sobekhotep
Khahotepre Sobekhotep
Wahibre Ibiau
Merneferre Ay
Merhotepre Ini
Sankhenre Sewadjtu
Mersekhemre Ined
Sewadjkare Hori
Merkawre Sobekhotep
Mershepsesre Ini II
Sewahenre Senebmiu
Merkheperre
Merkare
Sewadjare Mentuhotep
Seheqenre Sankhptahi





XIV



Yakbim Sekhaenre
Ya'ammu Nubwoserre
Qareh Khawoserre
'Ammu Ahotepre
Maaibre Sheshi
Nehesy
Khakherewre
Nebefawre
Sehebre
Merdjefare
Sewadjkare III
Nebdjefare
Webenre
Nebsenre
Sekheperenre
Djedkherewre
Bebnum
'Apepi
Nuya
Wazad
Sheneh
Shenshek
Khamure
Yakareb
Yaqub-Har





XV



Semqen
'Aper-'Anati
Sakir-Har
Khyan
Apepi
Khamudi





XVI



Djehuti
Sobekhotep VIII
Neferhotep III
Mentuhotepi
Nebiryraw I
Nebiriau II
Semenre
Bebiankh
Sekhemre Shedwast
Dedumose I
Dedumose II
Montuemsaf
Merankhre Mentuhotep
Senusret IV
Pepi III





Abydos



Senebkay
Wepwawetemsaf
Pantjeny
Snaaib





XVII



Rahotep
Nebmaatre
Sobekemsaf I
Sobekemsaf II
Sekhemre-Wepmaat Intef
Nubkheperre Intef
Sekhemre-Heruhirmaat Intef
Senakhtenre Ahmose
Seqenenre Tao
Kamose



















New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period  (1550–664 BC)








Period






Dynasty





Pharaohs  (male
female )
uncertain









New Kingdom
(1550–1070 BC)




XVIII



Ahmose I
Amenhotep I
Thutmose I
Thutmose II
Thutmose III
Hatshepsut 
Amenhotep II
Thutmose IV
Amenhotep III
Akhenaten
Smenkhkare
Neferneferuaten 
Tutankhamun
Ay
Horemheb





XIX



Ramesses I
Seti I
Ramesses II
Merneptah
Amenmesses
Seti II
Siptah
Twosret 





XX



Setnakhte
Ramesses III
Ramesses IV
Ramesses V
Ramesses VI
Ramesses VII
Ramesses VIII
Ramesses IX
Ramesses X
Ramesses XI








3rd Intermediate
(1069–664 BC)




XXI



Smendes
Amenemnisu
Psusennes I
Amenemope
Osorkon the Elder
Siamun
Psusennes II





XXII



Shoshenq I
Osorkon I
Shoshenq II
Takelot I
Osorkon II
Shoshenq III
Shoshenq IV
Pami
Shoshenq V
Osorkon IV





XXIII



Harsiese A
Takelot II
Pedubast I
Shoshenq VI
Osorkon III
Takelot III
Rudamun
Menkheperre Ini





XXIV



Tefnakht
Bakenranef





XXV



Piye
Shebitku
Shabaka
Taharqa
Tanutamun



















Late Period and Hellenistic Period  (664–30 BC)








Period






Dynasty





Pharaohs  (male
female )
uncertain









Late
(664–332 BC)




XXVI



Necho I
Psamtik I
Necho II
Psamtik II
Wahibre
Ahmose II
Psamtik III





XXVII



Cambyses II
Petubastis III
Darius I
Xerxes
Artaxerxes I
Darius II





XXVIII



Amyrtaeus





XXIX



Nepherites I
Hakor
Psammuthes
Nepherites II





XXX



Nectanebo I
Teos
Nectanebo II





XXXI



Artaxerxes III
Khabash
Arses
Darius III








Hellenistic
(332–30 BC)




Argead



Alexander the Great
Philip III Arrhidaeus
Alexander IV





Ptolemaic



Ptolemy I Soter
Ptolemy II Philadelphus
Ptolemy III Euergetes
Ptolemy IV Philopator
Ptolemy V Epiphanes
Ptolemy VI Philometor
Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator
Ptolemy VIII Euergetes
Ptolemy IX Soter
Ptolemy X Alexander I
Ptolemy XI Alexander II
Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos
Berenice IV 
Cleopatra 
Ptolemy XV Caesarion



















Dynastic genealogies






4th
11th
12th
18th
19th
20th
21st to 23rd
25th
26th
27th
30th
31st
Ptolemaic









List of pharaohs










v
t
e


Ancient Egyptian titulary



Royal titulary



Great Royal Wife
Khenemetneferhedjet
Pharaoh








Religious titulary



Divine Adoratrice of Amun
God's Wife
God's Wife of Amun
High Priests of Amun
High Priest of Osiris
High Priest of Ptah
High Priest of Ra
Lector priest
Servant in the Place of Truth
Two Ladies





Courtly and administrative titulary



Fan-bearer on the Right Side of the King
Haty-a
High steward
Iry-pat
Khekeret-nisut
Nomarch
Overseer of the treasuries
Overseer of Upper Egypt
Treasurer
Viceroy of Kush
Vizier








 Book
 Ancient Egypt portal











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Pharaoh&oldid=818375758"					Categories: Ancient Egyptian titlesHeads of stateRoyal titlesNoble titlesPharaohsPositions of authorityTorah monarchsTorah peopleTitles of national or ethnic leadershipDeified peopleEgyptian royal titlesHidden categories: Wikipedia introduction cleanup from January 2015All pages needing cleanupArticles covered by WikiProject Wikify from January 2015All articles covered by WikiProject WikifyArticles containing Coptic-language textArticles containing Ancient Egyptian-language textAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from October 2010