This article is about the science. For the book type ("a pharmacology"), see Materia medica.




A variety of topics involved with pharmacology, including neuropharmacology, renal pharmacology, human metabolism, intracellular metabolism, and intracellular regulation


Pharmacology is the branch of biology concerned with the study of drug action,[1] where a drug can be broadly defined as any man-made, natural, or endogenous (from within body) molecule which exerts a biochemical or physiological effect on the cell, tissue, organ, or organism (sometimes the word pharmacon is used as a term to encompass these endogenous and exogenous bioactive species). More specifically, it is the study of the interactions that occur between a living organism and chemicals that affect normal or abnormal biochemical function. If substances have medicinal properties, they are considered pharmaceuticals.
The field encompasses drug composition and properties, synthesis and drug design, molecular and cellular mechanisms, organ/systems mechanisms, signal transduction/cellular communication, molecular diagnostics, interactions, toxicology, chemical biology, therapy, and medical applications and antipathogenic capabilities. The two main areas of pharmacology are pharmacodynamics and pharmacokinetics. Pharmacodynamics studies the effects of a drug on biological systems, and Pharmacokinetics studies the effects of biological systems on a drug. In broad terms, pharmacodynamics discusses the chemicals with biological receptors, and pharmacokinetics discusses the absorption, distribution, metabolism, and excretion (ADME) of chemicals from the biological systems. Pharmacology is not synonymous with pharmacy and the two terms are frequently confused. Pharmacology, a biomedical science, deals with the research, discovery, and characterization of chemicals which show biological effects and the elucidation of cellular and organismal function in relation to these chemicals. In contrast, pharmacy, a health services profession, is concerned with application of the principles learned from pharmacology in its clinical settings; whether it be in a dispensing or clinical care role. In either field, the primary contrast between the two are their distinctions between direct-patient care, for pharmacy practice, and the science-oriented research field, driven by pharmacology.
The origins of clinical pharmacology date back to the Middle Ages in Avicenna's The Canon of Medicine, Peter of Spain's Commentary on Isaac, and John of St Amand's Commentary on the Antedotary of Nicholas.[2] Clinical pharmacology owes much of its foundation to the work of William Withering.[3] Pharmacology as a scientific discipline did not further advance until the mid-19th century amid the great biomedical resurgence of that period.[4] Before the second half of the nineteenth century, the remarkable potency and specificity of the actions of drugs such as morphine, quinine and digitalis were explained vaguely and with reference to extraordinary chemical powers and affinities to certain organs or tissues.[5] The first pharmacology department was set up by Rudolf Buchheim in 1847, in recognition of the need to understand how therapeutic drugs and poisons produced their effects.[4]
Early pharmacologists focused on natural substances, mainly plant extracts. Pharmacology developed in the 19th century as a biomedical science that applied the principles of scientific experimentation to therapeutic contexts.[6] Today pharmacologists use genetics, molecular biology, chemistry, and other advanced tools to transform information about molecular mechanisms and targets into therapies directed against disease, defects or pathogens, and create methods for preventative care, diagnostics, and ultimately personalized medicine.



Contents


1 Divisions

1.1 Clinical pharmacology
1.2 Neuropharmacology
1.3 Psychopharmacology
1.4 Cardiovascular pharmacology
1.5 Pharmacogenetics
1.6 Pharmacogenomics
1.7 Pharmacoepidemiology
1.8 Safety pharmacology
1.9 Systems pharmacology
1.10 Toxicology
1.11 Theoretical pharmacology
1.12 Posology
1.13 Pharmacognosy
1.14 Environmental pharmacology
1.15 Experimental pharmacology
1.16 Dental pharmacology


2 Scientific background
3 Medicine development and safety testing
4 Drug legislation and safety
5 Education
6 Etymology
7 See also
8 References
9 External links



Divisions[edit]
The discipline of pharmacology can be divided into many sub disciplines each with a specific focus.
Clinical pharmacology[edit]
Clinical pharmacology is the basic science of pharmacology with an added focus on the application of pharmacological principles and methods in the medical clinic and towards patient care and outcomes.
Neuropharmacology[edit]
Neuropharmacology is the study of the effects of medication on central and peripheral nervous system functioning.
Psychopharmacology[edit]
Psychopharmacology, also known as behavioral pharmacology, is the study of the effects of medication on the psyche (psychology), observing changed behaviors of the body and mind, and how molecular events are manifest in a measurable behavioral form. Psychopharmacology is an interdisciplinary field which studies behavioral effects of psychoactive drugs. It incorporates approaches and techniques from neuropharmacology, animal behavior and behavioral neuroscience, and is interested in the behavioral and neurobiological mechanisms of action of psychoactive drugs. Another goal of behavioral pharmacology is to develop animal behavioral models to screen chemical compounds with therapeutic potentials. People in this field (called behavioral pharmacologists) typically use small animals (e.g. rodents) to study psychotherapeutic drugs such as antipsychotics, antidepressants and anxiolytics, and drugs of abuse such as nicotine, cocaine and methamphetamine. Ethopharmacology (not to be confused with ethnopharmacology) is a term which has been in use since the 1960s[7] and derives from the Greek word ἦθος ethos meaning character and "pharmacology" the study of drug actions and mechanism.
Cardiovascular pharmacology[edit]
Cardiovascular pharmacology is the study of the effects of drugs on the entire cardiovascular system, including the heart and blood vessels.
Pharmacogenetics[edit]
Pharmacogenetics is clinical testing of genetic variation that gives rise to differing response to drugs.
Pharmacogenomics[edit]
Pharmacogenomics is the application of genomic technologies to drug discovery and further characterization of older drugs.
Pharmacoepidemiology[edit]
Pharmacoepidemiology is the study of the effects of drugs in large numbers of people.
Safety pharmacology[edit]
Safety pharmacology specialises in detecting and investigating potential undesirable pharmacodynamic effects of new chemical entities (NCEs) on physiological functions in relation to exposure in the therapeutic range and above.
Systems pharmacology[edit]
Systems pharmacology is the coding system principles in the field of pharmacology.
Toxicology[edit]
Toxicology is the study of the adverse effects, molecular targets, and characterization of drugs or any chemical substance in excess (including those beneficial in lower doses).
Theoretical pharmacology[edit]
Theoretical pharmacology is a relatively new and rapidly expanding field of research activity in which many of the techniques of computational chemistry, in particular computational quantum chemistry and the method of molecular mechanics, are proving to be of great value. Theoretical pharmacologists aim at rationalizing the relation between the activity of a particular drug, as observed experimentally, and its structural features as derived from computer experiments. They aim to find structure—activity relations. Furthermore, on the basis of the structure of a given organic molecule, the theoretical pharmacologist aims at predicting the biological activity of new drugs that are of the same general type as existing drugs. More ambitiously, it aims to predict entirely new classes of drugs, tailor-made for specific purposes.
Posology[edit]
Posology is the study of how medicines are dosed. This depends upon various factors including age, climate, weight, sex, elimination rate of drug, genetic polymorphism and time of administration. It is derived from the Greek words πόσος posos meaning "how much?" and -λογία -logia "study of".[8]
Pharmacognosy[edit]
Pharmacognosy is a branch of pharmacology dealing especially with the composition, use, and development of medicinal substances of biological origin and especially medicinal substances obtained from plants.
Environmental pharmacology[edit]
Environmental pharmacology is a new discipline.[9] Focus is being given to understand gene–environment interaction, drug-environment interaction and toxin-environment interaction. There is a close collaboration between environmental science and medicine in addressing these issues, as healthcare itself can be a cause of environmental damage or remediation. Human health and ecology are intimately related. Demand for more pharmaceutical products may place the public at risk through the destruction of species. The entry of chemicals and drugs into the aquatic ecosystem is a more serious concern today. In addition, the production of some illegal drugs pollutes drinking water supply by releasing carcinogens.[10] This field is intimately linked with Public Health fields.
Experimental pharmacology[edit]
Experimental pharmacology involves the study of pharmacology through bioassay, to test the efficacy and potency of a drug.
Dental pharmacology[edit]
Dental pharmacology relates to the study of drugs commonly used in the treatment of dental disease.[citation needed]
Scientific background[edit]
The study of chemicals requires intimate knowledge of the biological system affected. With the knowledge of cell biology and biochemistry increasing, the field of pharmacology has also changed substantially. It has become possible, through molecular analysis of receptors, to design chemicals that act on specific cellular signaling or metabolic pathways by affecting sites directly on cell-surface receptors (which modulate and mediate cellular signaling pathways controlling cellular function).
A chemical has, from the pharmacological point-of-view, various properties. Pharmacokinetics describes the effect of the body on the chemical (e.g. half-life and volume of distribution), and pharmacodynamics describes the chemical's effect on the body (desired or toxic).
When describing the pharmacokinetic properties of the chemical that is the active ingredient or active pharmaceutical ingredient (API), pharmacologists are often interested in L-ADME:

Liberation – How is the API disintegrated (for solid oral forms (breaking down into smaller particles)), dispersed, or dissolved from the medication?
Absorption – How is the API absorbed (through the skin, the intestine, the oral mucosa)?
Distribution – How does the API spread through the organism?
Metabolism – Is the API converted chemically inside the body, and into which substances. Are these active (as well)? Could they be toxic?
Excretion – How is the API excreted (through the bile, urine, breath, skin)?

Medication is said to have a narrow or wide therapeutic index or therapeutic window. This describes the ratio of desired effect to toxic effect. A compound with a narrow therapeutic index (close to one) exerts its desired effect at a dose close to its toxic dose. A compound with a wide therapeutic index (greater than five) exerts its desired effect at a dose substantially below its toxic dose. Those with a narrow margin are more difficult to dose and administer, and may require therapeutic drug monitoring (examples are warfarin, some antiepileptics, aminoglycoside antibiotics). Most anti-cancer drugs have a narrow therapeutic margin: toxic side-effects are almost always encountered at doses used to kill tumors.
Medicine development and safety testing[edit]
Development of medication is a vital concern to medicine, but also has strong economical and political implications. To protect the consumer and prevent abuse, many governments regulate the manufacture, sale, and administration of medication. In the United States, the main body that regulates pharmaceuticals is the Food and Drug Administration and they enforce standards set by the United States Pharmacopoeia. In the European Union, the main body that regulates pharmaceuticals is the EMA and they enforce standards set by the European Pharmacopoeia.
The metabolic stability and the reactivity of a library of candidate drug compounds have to be assessed for drug metabolism and toxicological studies. Many methods have been proposed for quantitative predictions in drug metabolism; one example of a recent computational method is SPORCalc.[11] If the chemical structure of a medicinal compound is altered slightly, this could slightly or dramatically alter the medicinal properties of the compound depending on the level of alteration as it relates to the structural composition of the substrate or receptor site on which it exerts its medicinal effect, a concept referred to as the structural activity relationship (SAR). This means that when a useful activity has been identified, chemists will make many similar compounds called analogues, in an attempt to maximize the desired medicinal effect(s) of the compound. This development phase can take anywhere from a few years to a decade or more and is very expensive.[12]
These new analogues need to be developed. It needs to be determined how safe the medicine is for human consumption, its stability in the human body and the best form for delivery to the desired organ system, like tablet or aerosol. After extensive testing, which can take up to 6 years, the new medicine is ready for marketing and selling.[12]
As a result of the long time required to develop analogues and test a new medicine and the fact that of every 5000 potential new medicines typically only one will ever reach the open market, this is an expensive way of doing things, often costing over 1 billion dollars. To recoup this outlay pharmaceutical companies may do a number of things:[12]

Carefully research the demand for their potential new product before spending an outlay of company funds.[12]
Obtain a patent on the new medicine preventing other companies from producing that medicine for a certain allocation of time.[12]

Drug legislation and safety[edit]
In the United States, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is responsible for creating guidelines for the approval and use of drugs. The FDA requires that all approved drugs fulfill two requirements:

The drug must be found to be effective against the disease for which it is seeking approval (where 'effective' means only that the drug performed better than placebo or competitors in at least two trials).
The drug must meet safety criteria by being subject to animal and controlled human testing.

Gaining FDA approval usually takes several years to attain. Testing done on animals must be extensive and must include several species to help in the evaluation of both the effectiveness and toxicity of the drug. The dosage of any drug approved for use is intended to fall within a range in which the drug produces a therapeutic effect or desired outcome.[13]
The safety and effectiveness of prescription drugs in the U.S. is regulated by the federal Prescription Drug Marketing Act of 1987.
The Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) has a similar role in the UK.
Education[edit]






This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (February 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Students of pharmacology are trained as biomedical scientists, studying the effects of drugs on living organisms. This can lead to new drug discoveries, as well as a better understanding of the way in which the human body works.[14][15]
Students of pharmacology must have detailed working knowledge of aspects in physiology, pathology and chemistry. During a typical degree they will cover areas such as (but not limited to) biochemistry, cell biology, basic physiology, genetics and the Central Dogma, medical microbiology, neuroscience, and depending on the department's interests, bio-organic chemistry, or chemical biology.
Modern Pharmacology is highly interdisciplinary. Graduate programs accept students from most biological and chemical backgrounds. With the increasing drive towards biophysical and computational research to describe systems, pharmacologists may even consider themselves mainly physical scientists. In many instances, Analytical Chemistry is closely related to the studies and needs of pharmacological research. Therefore, many institutions will include pharmacology under a Chemistry or Biochemistry Department, especially if a separate Pharmacology Dept. does not exist. What makes an institutional department independent of another, or exist in the first place, is usually an artifact of historical times.
Whereas a pharmacy student will eventually work in a pharmacy dispensing medications, a pharmacologist will typically work within a laboratory setting. Careers for a pharmacologist include academic positions (medical and non-medical), governmental positions, private industrial positions, science writing, scientific patents and law, consultation, biotech and pharmaceutical employment, the alcohol industry, food industry, forensics/law enforcement, public health, and environmental/ecological sciences.
Etymology[edit]
The word "pharmacology" is derived from Greek φάρμακον, pharmakon, "drug, poison, spell" and -λογία, -logia "study of", "knowledge of"[16][17] (cf. the etymology of pharmacy).
See also[edit]


Certain safety factor
Cosmeceuticals
Crude drugs
Nicholas Culpeper – 17th century English Physician who translated and used 'pharmacological texts'.
Drug design
Drug Discovery Hit to Lead
Drug metabolism
Enzyme inhibitors
Herbalism
History of pharmacy
International Union of Basic and Clinical Pharmacology
Inverse benefit law
List of abbreviations used in medical prescriptions
List of pharmaceutical companies
List of withdrawn drugs
Loewe additivity
Medical School
Medicare Part D – the new prescription drug plan in the U.S.
Medication
Medicinal chemistry
Neuropharmacology – The Molecular and Behavior study of Disease and Drugs in the Nervous System
Neuropsychopharmacology – The detailed comprehensive study of mind, brain and drugs.
Pharmaceutical company
Pharmaceutical formulation
Pharmaceuticals and personal care products in the environment
Pharmacognosy
Pharmacopoeia
Pharmacotherapy
Pharmakos
Placebo (origins of technical term)
Prescription drug
Prescription Drug Marketing Act (PDMA)
Psychopharmacology – medication for mental conditions
Traditional Chinese Medicine


References[edit]



^ Vallance P, Smart TG (January 2006). "The future of pharmacology". British Journal of Pharmacology. 147 Suppl 1 (S1): S304–7. doi:10.1038/sj.bjp.0706454. PMC 1760753 . PMID 16402118. 
^ Brater DC, Daly WJ (May 2000). "Clinical pharmacology in the Middle Ages: principles that presage the 21st century". Clin. Pharmacol. Ther. 67 (5): 447–50. doi:10.1067/mcp.2000.106465. PMID 10824622. 
^ Mannfred A. Hollinger (2003)."Introduction to pharmacology". CRC Press. p.4. ISBN 0-415-28033-8
^ a b Rang HP (January 2006). "The receptor concept: pharmacology's big idea". Br. J. Pharmacol. 147 Suppl 1 (S1): S9–16. doi:10.1038/sj.bjp.0706457. PMC 1760743 . PMID 16402126. 
^ Maehle AH, Prüll CR, Halliwell RF (August 2002). "The emergence of the drug receptor theory". Nat Rev Drug Discov. 1 (8): 637–41. doi:10.1038/nrd875. PMID 12402503. 
^ Rang, H.P.; M.M. Dale; J.M. Ritter; R.J. Flower (2007). Pharmacology. China: Elsevier. ISBN 0-443-06911-5. 
^ Krsiak, M (1991). "Ethopharmacology: A historical perspective". Neuroscience and biobehavioral reviews. 15 (4): 439–45. doi:10.1016/s0149-7634(05)80124-1. PMID 1792005. 
^ "posology". Random House Webster's Unabridged Dictionary.
^ Rahman, SZ; Khan, RA (Dec 2006). "Environmental pharmacology: A new discipline". Indian J Pharmacol. 38 (4): 229–30. doi:10.4103/0253-7613.27017. 
^ Sue Ruhoy Ilene; Daughton Christian G (2008). "Beyond the medicine cabinet: An analysis of where and why medications accumulate". Environment International. 34 (8): 1157–1169. doi:10.1016/j.envint.2008.05.002. 
^ James Smith; Viktor Stein (2009). "SPORCalc: A development of a database analysis that provides putative metabolic enzyme reactions for ligand-based drug design". Computational Biology and Chemistry. 33 (2): 149–159. doi:10.1016/j.compbiolchem.2008.11.002. PMID 19157988. 
^ a b c d e Newton, David; Alasdair Thorpe; Chris Otter (2004). Revise A2 Chemistry. Heinemann Educational Publishers. p. 1. ISBN 0-435-58347-6. 
^ Nagle, Hinter; Barbara Nagle (2005). Pharmacology: An Introduction. Boston: McGraw Hill. ISBN 0-07-312275-0. 
^ "Pharmacology Education Project". Pharmacology Education Project. The International Union of Basic and Clinical Pharmacology. Retrieved 30 November 2017. 
^ Rang, Humphrey P. (2015). Rang and Dale's Pharmacology (International ed.). Churchill Livingstone. p. 776. ISBN 9780702053634. 
^ Pharmacy (n.) - Online Etymology Dictionary
^ Pharmacology - Online Etymology Dictionary



External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Pharmacology.



American Society for Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics
British Pharmacological Society
Pharmaceutical company profiles at NNDB
International Conference on Harmonisation
US Pharmacopeia
International Union of Basic and Clinical Pharmacology
IUPHAR Committee on Receptor Nomenclature and Drug Classification







v
t
e


Concepts in pharmacology



Pharmacokinetics



(L)ADME: (Liberation)
Absorption
Distribution
Metabolism
Excretion (Clearance)


Loading dose
Volume of distribution (Initial)
Rate of infusion


Compartment
Bioequivalence
Bioavailability


Onset of action
Biological half-life
Mean residence time
Plasma protein binding


Therapeutic index (Median lethal dose, Effective dose)





Pharmacodynamics



Mechanism of action
Toxicity (Neurotoxicology)
Dose–response relationship (Efficacy, Potency)


Antimicrobial pharmacodynamics: Minimum inhibitory concentration (Bacteriostatic)
Minimum bactericidal concentration (Bactericide)





Agonism and
antagonism



Agonist: Inverse agonist
Irreversible agonist
Partial agonist
Superagonist
Physiological agonist


Antagonist: Competitive antagonist
Irreversible antagonist
Physiological antagonist


Other: Binding
Affinity
Binding selectivity
Functional selectivity





Other



Drug tolerance: Tachyphylaxis


Drug resistance: Antibiotic resistance
Multiple drug resistance





Drug discovery
strategies



Classical pharmacology


Reverse pharmacology





Related
fields/subfields



Pharmacogenetics
Pharmacogenomics


Neuropsychopharmacology (Neuropharmacology, Psychopharmacology)












v
t
e


Pharmacology: major drug groups



Gastrointestinal tract/
metabolism (A)



stomach acid

Antacids
H2 antagonists
Proton pump inhibitors


Antiemetics
Laxatives
Antidiarrhoeals/Antipropulsives
Anti-obesity drugs
Anti-diabetics
Vitamins
Dietary minerals





Blood and blood
forming organs (B)



Antithrombotics

Antiplatelets
Anticoagulants
Thrombolytics/fibrinolytics


Antihemorrhagics

Platelets
Coagulants
Antifibrinolytics







Cardiovascular
system (C)



cardiac therapy/antianginals

Cardiac glycosides
Antiarrhythmics
Cardiac stimulants


Antihypertensives
Diuretics
Vasodilators
Beta blockers
Calcium channel blockers
renin-angiotensin system

ACE inhibitors
Angiotensin II receptor antagonists
Renin inhibitors


Antihyperlipidemics

Statins
Fibrates
Bile acid sequestrants







Skin (D)



Emollients
Cicatrizants
Antipruritics
Antipsoriatics
Medicated dressings





Genitourinary
system (G)



Hormonal contraception
Fertility agents
SERMs
Sex hormones





Endocrine
system (H)



Hypothalamic-pituitary hormones
Corticosteroids

Glucocorticoids
Mineralocorticoids


Sex hormones
Thyroid hormones/Antithyroid agents





Infections and
infestations (J, P, QI)



Antimicrobials: Antibacterials (Antimycobacterials)
Antifungals
Antivirals
Antiparasitics

Antiprotozoals
Anthelmintics
Ectoparasiticides


IVIG
Vaccines





Malignant disease
(L01-L02)



Anticancer agents

Antimetabolites
Alkylating
Spindle poisons
Antineoplastic
Topoisomerase inhibitors







Immune disease
(L03-L04)



Immunomodulators

Immunostimulants
Immunosuppressants







Muscles, bones,
and joints (M)



Anabolic steroids
Anti-inflammatories

NSAIDs


Antirheumatics
Corticosteroids
Muscle relaxants
Bisphosphonates





Brain and
nervous system (N)



Analgesics
Anesthetics

General
Local


Anorectics
Anti-ADHD Agents
Antiaddictives
Anticonvulsants
Antidementia Agents
Antidepressants
Antimigraine Agents
Antiparkinson's Agents
Antipsychotics
Anxiolytics
Depressants
Entactogens
Entheogens
Euphoriants
Hallucinogens

Psychedelics
Dissociatives
Deliriants


Hypnotics/Sedatives
Mood Stabilizers
Neuroprotectives
Nootropics
Neurotoxins
Orexigenics
Serenics
Stimulants
Wakefulness-Promoting Agents





Respiratory
system (R)



Decongestants
Bronchodilators
Cough medicines
H1 antagonists





Sensory organs (S)



Ophthalmologicals
Otologicals





Other ATC (V)



Antidotes
Contrast media
Radiopharmaceuticals
Dressings
Senotherapeutics












v
t
e


Branches of chemistry






Dictionary of chemical formulas
List of biomolecules
List of inorganic compounds
Periodic table





Physical



Chemical kinetics
Chemical physics
Nuclear chemistry
Electrochemistry
Femtochemistry
Geochemistry
Photochemistry
Quantum chemistry
Solid-state chemistry
Spectroscopy
Surface science
Thermochemistry





Organic



Biochemistry
Bioorganic chemistry
Biophysical chemistry
Chemical biology
Clinical chemistry
Fullerene chemistry
Medicinal chemistry
Neurochemistry
Pharmacy
Physical organic chemistry
Polymer chemistry





Inorganic



Bioinorganic chemistry
Cluster chemistry
Coordination chemistry
Materials science
Organometallic chemistry





Others



Actinide chemistry
Analytical chemistry
Astrochemistry
Chemistry education
Clay chemistry
Click chemistry
Computational chemistry
Cosmochemistry
Environmental chemistry
Food chemistry
Forensic chemistry
Green chemistry
Post-mortem chemistry
Supramolecular chemistry
Theoretical chemistry
Wet chemistry








 Category
 Portal
 Commons
 WikiProject








Pharmacy and pharmacology portal





Authority control



LCCN: sh85100599
GND: 4045687-0
SUDOC: 027410390
BNF: cb11945810d (data)
NDL: 00574204
BNE: XX524409











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Pharmacology&oldid=817677270"					Categories: PharmacologyBiochemistryLife sciences industryHidden categories: Use dmy dates from March 2014All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from July 2017Articles needing additional references from February 2016All articles needing additional referencesArticles containing Ancient Greek-language textWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiers