

Philip II



Portrait by Titian, c. 1550






King of Spain (more)





Duke of Milan
1540–1598


King of Naples
1554–1598


Lord of the Netherlands
1555–1598


Duke of Lothier
1555–1598


Duke of Brabant
1555–1598


Duke of Limburg
1555–1598


Duke of Luxemburg
1555–1598


Duke of Guelders
1555–1581


Margrave of Namur
1555–1598


Count Palatine of Burgundy
1555–1598


Count of Flanders
1555–1598


Count of Hainaut
1555–1598


Count of Artois
1555–1598


Count of Holland
1555–1581


Count of Zeeland
1555–1581


Count of Zutphen
1555–1581


King of Spain
1556–1598


King of Sardinia
1556–1598


King of Sicily
1556–1598


Count of Charolais
1558–1598









Reign
16 January 1556 – 13 September 1598


Predecessor
Charles V


Successor
Philip III


King of Portugal and the Algarves


Reign
16 April 1581 – 13 September 1598


Acclamation
16 April 1581, Tomar


Predecessor
Anthony (disputed) or Henry


Successor
Philip III


King of England and Ireland (jure uxoris)


Reign
25 July 1554 –
17 November 1558


Predecessor
Mary I


Successor
Elizabeth I


Co-monarch
Mary I







Born
(1527-05-21)21 May 1527
Palacio de Pimentel, Valladolid, Spain


Died
13 September 1598(1598-09-13) (aged 71)
El Escorial, Spain


Burial
El Escorial


Spouse



Maria Manuela of Portugal
Mary I of England
Elisabeth of Valois
Anna of Austria





Issue
see details...



Carlos, Prince of Asturias
Isabella, Governess of the Netherlands
Catherine, Duchess of Savoy
Ferdinand, Prince of Asturias
Diego, Prince of Asturias
Philip III, King of Spain





House
Habsburg


Father
Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor


Mother
Isabella of Portugal


Religion
Roman Catholicism


Signature



Philip II (Spanish: Felipe II; 21 May 1527 – 13 September 1598), called "the Prudent" (el Prudente), was King of Spain[a] (1556–98), King of Portugal (1581–98, as Philip I, Filipe I),[1] King of Naples and Sicily (both from 1554), and jure uxoris King of England and Ireland (during his marriage to Queen Mary I from 1554–58).[2] He was also Duke of Milan.[3] From 1555, he was lord of the Seventeen Provinces of the Netherlands.
Known in Spain as "Felipe el Prudente" ('"Philip the Prudent'"), his empire included territories on every continent then known to Europeans, including his namesake the Philippines. During his reign, Spain reached the height of its influence and power. This is sometimes called the Golden Age. The expression, "the empire on which the sun never sets," was coined during Philip's time to reflect the extent of his dominion.
During Philip's reign there were separate state bankruptcies in 1557, 1560, 1569, 1575, and 1596. This was partly the cause of the declaration of independence that created the Dutch Republic in 1581. A devout Catholic, Philip is also known for organising a naval expedition against Protestant England in 1588, the Spanish Armada, which was unsuccessful, mostly due to storms and serious logistical problems.
Philip was described by the Venetian ambassador Paolo Fagolo in 1563 as "slight of stature and round-faced, with pale blue eyes, somewhat prominent lip, and pink skin, but his overall appearance is very attractive." The Ambassador went on to say "He dresses very tastefully, and everything that he does is courteous and gracious."[4]



Contents


1 Early life: 1527–54
2 Domestic policy
3 Economy
4 Foreign policy

4.1 Italy
4.2 France
4.3 Mediterranean


5 Revolt in the Netherlands
6 King of Portugal
7 Relations with England and Ireland

7.1 King of England and Ireland
7.2 After Mary I's death


8 Death
9 Legacy
10 In popular culture
11 Titles, honours and styles
12 Heraldry
13 Ancestry
14 Family
15 See also
16 Notes
17 References
18 Sources and further reading
19 External links



Early life: 1527–54[edit]
The son of Holy Roman Emperor Charles V and his wife, Isabella of Portugal, Philip was born in the Spanish capital of Valladolid on 21 May 1527 at Palacio de Pimentel, which was owned by Don Bernardino Pimentel (the first Marqués de Távara). The culture and courtly life of Spain were an important influence in his early life. He was tutored by Juan Martínez Siliceo, the future Archbishop of Toledo. Philip displayed reasonable aptitude in arts and letters alike. Later he would study with more illustrious tutors, including the humanist Juan Cristóbal Calvete de Estrella. Though Philip had good command over Latin, Spanish, and Portuguese, he never managed to equal his father, Charles V, as a polyglot. While Philip was also a German archduke of the House of Habsburg, he was seen as a foreigner in the Holy Roman Empire. The feeling was mutual. Philip felt himself to be culturally Spanish; he had been born in Spain and raised in the Castilian court, his native tongue was Spanish, and he preferred to live in Spain. This would ultimately impede his succession to the imperial throne.[5]




'The Baptism of Phillip II' in Valladolid, Spain. Historical ceiling preserved in Palacio de Pimentel (Valladolid).


In April 1528, when Philip was eleven months old, he received the oath of allegiance as heir to the crown from the Cortes of Castile. From that time until the death of his mother Isabella in 1539, he was raised in the royal court of Castile under the care of his mother and one of her Portuguese ladies, Dona Leonor de Mascarenhas, to whom he was devotedly attached. Philip was also close to his two sisters, María and Juana, and to his two pages, the Portuguese nobleman Rui Gomes da Silva and Luis de Requesens, the son of his governor Juan de Zúñiga. These men would serve Philip throughout their lives, as would Antonio Pérez, his secretary from 1541.
Philip's martial training was undertaken by his governor, Juan de Zúñiga, a Castilian nobleman who served as the commendador mayor of Castile. The practical lessons in warfare were overseen by the Duke of Alba during the Italian Wars. Philip was present at the Siege of Perpignan in 1542 but did not see action as the Spanish army under Alba decisively defeated the besieging French forces under the Dauphin of France. On his way back to Castile, Philip received the oath of allegiance of the Aragonese Cortes at Monzón. His political training had begun a year previously under his father, who had found his son studious, grave, and prudent beyond his years, and having decided to train and initiate him in the government of Spain. The king-emperor's interactions with his son during his stay in Spain convinced him of Philip's precocity in statesmanship, so he determined to leave in his hands the regency of Spain in 1543. Philip, who had previously been made the Duke of Milan in 1540, began governing the most extensive empire in the world at the young age of sixteen.
Charles left Philip with experienced advisors—notably the secretary Francisco de los Cobos and the general Duke of Alba. Philip was also left with extensive written instructions that emphasised "piety, patience, modesty, and distrust." These principles of Charles were gradually assimilated by his son, who would grow up to become grave, self-possessed and cautious. Personally, Philip spoke softly and had an icy self-mastery; in the words of one of his ministers, "he had a smile that cut like a sword."[6]
Domestic policy[edit]
After living in the Netherlands in the early years of his reign,[7] Philip II decided to return to Spain. Although sometimes described as an absolute monarch, Philip faced many constitutional constraints on his authority, influenced by the growing strength of the bureaucracy. The Spanish Empire was not a single monarchy with one legal system but a federation of separate realms, each jealously guarding its own rights against those of the House of Habsburg. In practice, Philip often found his authority overruled by local assemblies, and his word less effective than that of local lords.[8]
Philip carried several titles as heir to the Spanish kingdoms and empire, including Prince of Asturias. The newest constituent kingdom in the empire was Navarre, a realm invaded by Ferdinand II of Aragon mainly with Castilian troops (1512), and annexed to Castile with an ambiguous status (1513). War across Navarre continued until 1528 (Treaties of Madrid and Cambrai). Charles V proposed to end hostilities with King Henry II of Navarre—the legitimate monarch of Navarre—by marrying his son Philip to the heiress of Navarre, Jeanne III of Navarre. The marriage would provide a dynastic solution to instability in Navarre, making him king of all Navarre and prince of independent Béarn, as well as lord of a large part of southern France. However, the French nobility under Francis I opposed the arrangement and successfully ended the prospects of marriage between the heirs of Habsburg and Albret in 1541.




Philip, in the prime of his life, by Giacomo Antonio Moro


In his will Charles stated his doubts over Navarre and recommended that his son give the kingdom back. Both King Charles and his son Philip II failed to abide by the elective (contractual) nature of the Crown of Navarre, and took the kingdom for granted. This sparked mounting tension not only with King Henry II and Queen Jeanne III of Navarre, but also with the Parliament of the Spanish Navarre (Cortes, The Three States) and the Diputación for breach of the realm specific laws (fueros)—violation of the pactum subjectionis as ratified by Ferdinand. Tensions in Navarre came to a head in 1592 after several years of disagreements over the agenda of the intended parliamentary session.
In November 1592, the Parliament (Cortes) of Aragón revolted against another breach of the realm-specific laws, so the Attorney General (Justicia) of the kingdom, Juan de Lanuza, was executed on Philip II's orders, with his secretary Antonio Perez taking exile in France. In Navarre the major strongholds of the kingdom were garrisoned by troops alien to the kingdom (Castilians) in conspicuous violation of the laws of Navarre, and the Parliament had long been refusing to pledge loyalty to Philip II's son and heir apparent without a proper ceremony. On 20 November 1592 a ghostly Parliament session was called, pushed by Philip II, who had arrived in Pamplona at the head of an unspecified military force, and with one only point on his agenda—attendance to the session was kept blank on the minutes: unlawful appointments of trusted Castilian officials and an imposition of his son as future king of Navarre at the Santa Maria Cathedral. A ceremony was held before the bishop of Pamplona (22 November), but its customary procedure and terms were altered. Protests erupted in Pamplona, but they were quelled.
Philip II also grappled with the problem of the large Morisco population in Spain, who were sometimes forcibly converted to Christianity by his predecessors. In 1569, the Morisco Revolt broke out in the southern province of Granada in defiance of attempts to suppress Moorish customs. Philip ordered the expulsion of the Moriscos from Granada and their dispersal to other provinces.
Despite its immense dominions, Spain was a country with a sparse population that yielded a limited income to the crown (in contrast to France, for example, which was much more heavily populated). Philip faced major difficulties in raising taxes, and collection was largely farmed out to local lords. He was able to finance his military campaigns only by taxing and exploiting the local resources of his empire. The flow of income from the New World proved vital to his militant foreign policy, but nonetheless his exchequer several times faced bankruptcy.
Spanish culture flourished during Philip's reign, beginning the "Spanish Golden Age", creating a lasting legacy in literature, music, and the visual arts. One of the notable artists from Phillip II's court was Sofonisba Anguissola, who gained fame for her talent and unusual role as a woman artist. She was invited to the court of Madrid in 1559 and was chosen to become an attendant to Isabella Clara Eugenia (1566–1633). Anguissola also became a lady-in-waiting and court painter for the queen, Elizabeth de Valois. During her time as a court painter, Anguissola painted many official portraits of the royal family, a sharp departure from her previous personal portraits.
Economy[edit]




Portrait of Philip II on 1/5 Philipsdaalder, struck 1566, Guelders, Low Countries


Charles V had left his son Philip with a debt of about 36 million ducats and an annual deficit of 1 million ducats. This debt caused Phillip II to default on loans in 1557, 1560, 1575, and 1596 (including debt to Poland, known as Neapolitan sums). Lenders had no power over the King and could not force him to repay his loans. These defaults were just the beginning of Spain's economic troubles as its kings would default six more times in the next 65 years.[9] Aside from reducing state revenues for overseas expeditions, the domestic policies of Philip II further burdened Spain and would, in the following century, contribute to its decline, as maintained by some historians.[10]
Spain was subject to different assemblies: the Cortes in Castile, the assembly in Navarre, and one each for the three regions of Aragon, which preserved traditional rights and laws from the time when they were separate kingdoms. This made Spain and its possessions difficult to rule, unlike France, which while divided into regional states, had a single Estates-General. The lack of a viable supreme assembly led to power defaulting into Philip II's hands, especially as manager and final arbiter of the constant conflict between different authorities. To deal with the difficulties arising from this situation, authority was administered by local agents appointed by the crown and viceroys carrying out crown instructions. Philip II felt it necessary to be involved in the detail, and he presided over specialised councils for state affairs, finance, war, and the Inquisition.
Philip II played groups against each other, leading to a system of checks and balances that managed affairs inefficiently, even to the extent of damaging state business, as in the Perez affair. Following a fire in Valladolid in 1561, he resisted calls to move his Court to Lisbon, an act that could have curbed centralisation and bureaucracy domestically as well as relaxed rule in the Empire as a whole. Instead, with the traditional Royal and Primacy seat of Toledo now essentially obsolete, he moved his Court to the Castilian stronghold of Madrid. Except for a brief period under Philip III of Spain, Madrid has remained the capital of Spain. It was around this time that Philip II converted the Royal Alcázar of Madrid into a royal palace. The works, which lasted from 1561 until 1598, were done by tradesmen that came from the Netherlands, Italy, and France.
King Philip II ruled at a critical turning point in European history toward modernity whereas his father Charles V had been forced to an itinerant rule as a medieval king. He mainly directed state affairs, even when not at Court. Indeed, when his health began failing, he worked from his quarters at the Palace-Monastery-Pantheon of El Escorial that he had built in 1584, a palace built as a monument to Spain's role as a center of the Christian world. But Philip did not enjoy the supremacy that King Louis XIV of France would in the next century, nor was such a rule necessarily possible at his time. The inefficiencies of the Spanish state and the restrictively regulated industry under his rule were common to many contemporary countries. Further, the dispersal of the Moriscos from Granada – motivated by the fear they might support a Muslim invasion – had serious negative effects on the economy, particularly in that region.
Foreign policy[edit]




Engraving of Philip II


Philip's foreign policies were determined by a combination of Catholic fervour and dynastic objectives. He considered himself the chief defender of Catholic Europe, both against the Ottoman Turks and against the forces of the Protestant Reformation. He never relented from his fight against heresy, defending the Catholic faith and limiting freedom of worship within his territories.[11] These territories included his patrimony in the Netherlands, where Protestantism had taken deep root. Following the Revolt of the Netherlands in 1568, Philip waged a campaign against Dutch heresy and secession. It also dragged in the English and the French at times and expanded into the German Rhineland with the Cologne War. This series of conflicts lasted for the rest of his life. Philip's constant involvement in European wars took a significant toll on the treasury and caused economic difficulties for the Crown and even bankruptcies.
In 1588, the English defeated Philip's Spanish Armada, thwarting his planned invasion of the country to reinstate Catholicism. But war with England continued for the next sixteen years, in a complex series of struggles that included France, Ireland and the main battle zone, the Low Countries. It would not end until all the leading protagonists, including himself, had died. Earlier, however, after several setbacks in his reign and especially that of his father, Philip did achieve a decisive victory against the Turks at the Lepanto in 1571, with the allied fleet of the Holy League, which he had put under the command of his illegitimate brother, John of Austria. He also successfully secured his succession to the throne of Portugal.
With regard to Philip's overseas possessions, in response to the reforms imposed by the Ordenanzas, extensive questionnaires were distributed to every major town and region in New Spain called relaciones geográficas. These surveys helped the Spanish monarchy to govern these overseas conquests more effectively.
Italy[edit]
Main article: Italian Wars
Charles V abdicated the throne of Naples to Philip on 25 July 1554, and the young king was invested with the kingdom (officially called "Naples and Sicily") on 2 October by Pope Julius III. The date of Charles' abdication of the throne of Sicily is uncertain, but Philip was invested with this kingdom (officially "Sicily and Jerusalem") on 18 November 1554 by Julius.[12] In 1556, Philip decided to declare war in the Papal States and temporarily held territory there, perhaps in response to Pope Paul IV's anti-Spanish outlook. According to Philip II, he was doing it for the benefit of the Church.
In a letter from Francisco de Vargas to the Princess Dowager of Portugal, Regent of Spain, dated 22 September 1556, it is written:

"I have reported to your Highness what has been happening here, and how far the Pope is going in his fury and vain imaginings. His Majesty could not do otherwise than have a care for his reputation and dominions. I am sure your Highness will have had more recent news from the Duke of Alva, who has taken the field with an excellent army and has penetrated so far into the Pope's territory that his cavalry is raiding up to ten miles from Rome, where there is such panic that the population would have run away had not the gates been closed. The Pope has fallen ill with rage, and was struggling with a fever on the 16th of this month. The two Carafa brothers, the Cardinal and Count Montorio, do not agree, and they and Piero Strozzi are not on as good terms as they were in the past. They would like to discuss peace. The best thing would be for the Pope to die, for he is the poison at the root of all this trouble and more which may occur. His Majesty's intention is only to wrest the knife from this madman's hand and make him return to a sense of his dignity, acting like the protector of the Apostolic See, in whose name, and that of the College of Cardinals, his Majesty has publicly proclaimed that he has seized all he is occupying. The Pope is now sending again to the potentates of Italy for help. I hope he will gain as little thereby as he has done in the past, and that the French will calm down. May God give us peace in the end, as their Majesties desire and deserve!"[13]

Pope Paul IV charged a seven-member commission with preparing a peace agreement. The efforts were later abandoned and the war continued. On 27 August 1557, Fernando Alvarez de Toledo, Duke of Alba and Viceroy of Naples, was at the walls of Rome, ready to lead his troops for a final assault. On 13 September 1557, Cardinal Carlo Carafa signed a peace agreement, accepting all of the duke's conditions.[14]
Philip led Spain into the final phase of the Italian Wars. The Spanish army decisively defeated the French at St. Quentin in 1557 and at Gravelines in 1558. The resulting Treaty of Cateau-Cambresis in 1559 secured Piedmont, Savoy, and Corsica for the Spanish allied states, the Duchy of Savoy, and the Republic of Genoa. France recognised Spanish control over the Franche-Comté, but, more importantly, the treaty also confirmed the direct control of Philip over Milan, Naples, Sicily, Sardinia, and the State of Presidi, and indirectly (through his dominance of the rulers of Tuscany, Genoa, and other minor states) of all Italy[citation needed]. The Pope was a natural Spanish ally[citation needed]. The only truly independent entities on Italian soil were the allied Duchy of Savoy and the Republic of Venice. Spanish control of Italy would last until the early eighteenth century. Ultimately, the treaty ended the 60-year, Franco-Spanish wars for supremacy in Italy.
By the end of the wars in 1559, Habsburg Spain had been established as the premier power of Europe, to the detriment of France. In France, Henry II was fatally wounded in a joust held during the celebrations of the peace. His death led to the accession of his 15-year-old son Francis II, who in turn soon died. The French monarchy was thrown into turmoil, which increased further with the outbreak of the French Wars of Religion that would last for several decades. The states of Italy were reduced to second-rate powers, and Milan and Naples were annexed directly to Spain. Mary Tudor's death in 1558 enabled Philip to seal the treaty by marrying Henry II's daughter, Elisabeth of Valois, later giving him a claim to the throne of France on behalf of his daughter by Elisabeth, Isabel Clara Eugenia.
France[edit]
Main article: French Wars of Religion
The French Wars of Religion (1562–98) were primarily fought between French Catholics and Protestants (Huguenots). The conflict involved the factional disputes between the aristocratic houses of France, such as the House of Bourbon and House of Guise (Lorraine), and both sides received assistance from foreign sources.
Philip signed the Treaty of Vaucelles with Henry II of France in 1556. Based on the terms of the treaty, the territory of the Franche-Comté was to be relinquished to Philip. However, the treaty was broken shortly afterwards. France and Spain waged war in northern France and Italy over the following years. Spanish victories at St. Quentin and Gravelines led to the Treaty of Cateau-Cambresis, in which France recognised Spanish sovereignty over the Franche-Comté.
During the War of the Portuguese Succession, the pretender António fled to France following his defeats and, as Philip’s armies had not yet occupied the Azores, he sailed there with a large Anglo-French fleet under Filippo Strozzi, a Florentine exile in the service of France. The naval Battle of Terceira took place on 26 July 1582, in the sea near the Azores, off São Miguel Island, as part of the War of the Portuguese Succession and the Anglo-Spanish War (1585–1604). The Spanish navy defeated the combined Anglo-French fleet that had sailed to preserve control of the Azores under António. The French naval contingent was the largest French force sent overseas before the age of Louis XIV.[15]




A marble bust of Philip II of Spain by Pompeo Leoni, son of Leone Leoni, Metropolitan Museum of Art


The Spanish victory at Terceira was followed by the Battle of the Azores between the Portuguese loyal to the claimant António, supported by French and English troops, and the Spanish-Portuguese forces loyal to Philip commanded by the admiral Don Álvaro de Bazán. Victory in Azores completed the incorporation of Portugal into the Spanish Empire.[16]
Philip financed the Catholic League during the French Wars of Religion. He directly intervened in the final phases of the wars (1589–1598), ordering the Duke of Parma into France in an effort to unseat Henry IV, and perhaps dreaming of placing his favourite daughter, Isabel Clara Eugenia, on the French throne. Elizabeth of Valois, Philip's third wife and Isabella's mother, had already ceded any claim to the French Crown with her marriage to Philip. However the Parlement de Paris, in power of the Catholic party, gave verdict that Isabella Clara Eugenia was "the legitimate sovereign" of France. Philip's interventions in the fighting – sending the Duke of Parma, to end Henry IV's siege of Paris in 1590 – and the siege of Rouen in 1592 contributed in saving the French Catholic Leagues's cause against a Protestant monarchy.
In 1593, Henry agreed to convert to Catholicism; weary of war, most French Catholics switched to his side against the hardline core of the Catholic League, who were portrayed by Henry's propagandists as puppets of a foreign monarch, Philip. By the end of 1594 certain League members were still working against Henry across the country, but all relied on the support of Spain. In January 1595, therefore, Henry officially declared war on Spain, to show Catholics that Philip was using religion as a cover for an attack on the French state, and Protestants that he had not become a puppet of Spain through his conversion, while hoping to take the war to Spain and make territorial gain.[17]
French victory at the Battle of Fontaine-Française marked an end to the Catholic League in France. Spain launched a concerted offensive in 1595, taking Doullens, Cambrai and Le Catelet and in the spring of 1596 capturing Calais by April. Following the Spanish capture of Amiens in March 1597 the French crown laid siege to it until it managed to reconquer Amiens from the overstretched Spanish forces in September 1597. Henry then negotiated a peace with Spain. The war was only drawn to an official close, however, after the Edict of Nantes, with the Peace of Vervins in May 1598.
The 1598 Treaty of Vervins was largely a restatement of the 1559 Peace of Câteau-Cambrésis and Spanish forces and subsidies were withdrawn; meanwhile, Henry issued the Edict of Nantes, which offered a high degree of religious toleration for French Protestants. The military interventions in France thus failed to oust Henry from the throne or suppress Protestantism in France, and yet they had played a decisive part in helping the French Catholic cause gain the conversion of Henry, ensuring that Catholicism would remain France's official and majority faith – matters of paramount importance for the devoutly Catholic Spanish king.
Mediterranean[edit]
Further information: Ottoman–Habsburg wars




Titian; after the Battle of Lepanto in 1571, Philip offers his short-lived heir Fernando to Glory in this allegory






Flag of Spanish armies under Philip II


In the early part of his reign Philip was concerned with the rising power of the Ottoman Empire under Suleiman the Magnificent. Fear of Islamic domination in the Mediterranean caused him to pursue an aggressive foreign policy.
In 1558, Turkish admiral Piyale Pasha captured the Balearic Islands, especially inflicting great damage on Menorca and enslaving many, while raiding the coasts of the Spanish mainland. Philip appealed to the Pope and other powers in Europe to bring an end to the rising Ottoman threat. Since his father's losses against the Ottomans and against Hayreddin Barbarossa in 1541, the major European sea powers in the Mediterranean, namely Spain and Venice, became hesitant in confronting the Ottomans. The myth of "Turkish invincibility" was becoming a popular story, causing fear and panic among the people.
In 1560, Philip II organised a Holy League between Spain and the Republic of Venice, the Republic of Genoa, the Papal States, the Duchy of Savoy and the Knights of Malta. The joint fleet was assembled at Messina and consisted of 200 ships (60 galleys and 140 other vessels) carrying a total of 30,000 soldiers under the command of Giovanni Andrea Doria, nephew of the famous Genoese admiral Andrea Doria.
On 12 March 1560, the Holy League captured the island of Djerba, which had a strategic location and could control the sea routes between Algiers and Tripoli. As a response, Suleiman sent an Ottoman fleet of 120 ships under the command of Piyale Pasha, which arrived at Djerba on 9 May 1560. The battle lasted until 14 May 1560, and the forces of Piyale Pasha and Turgut Reis (who joined Piyale Pasha on the third day of the battle) won an overwhelming victory at the Battle of Djerba. The Holy League lost 60 ships (30 galleys) and 20,000 men, and Giovanni Andrea Doria was barely able to escape with a small vessel. The Ottomans retook the Fortress of Djerba, whose Spanish commander, D. Álvaro de Sande, attempted to escape with a ship but was followed and eventually captured by Turgut Reis. In 1565 the Ottomans sent a large expedition to Malta, which laid siege to several forts on the island, taking some of them. The Spanish sent a relief force, which finally drove the Ottoman army out of the island.
The grave threat posed by the increasing Ottoman domination of the Mediterranean was reversed in one of history's most decisive battles, with the destruction of nearly the entire Ottoman fleet at the Battle of Lepanto in 1571, by the Holy League under the command of Philip's half brother, Don Juan of Austria. A fleet sent by Philip, again commanded by Don John, reconquered Tunis from the Ottomans in 1573. The Turks soon rebuilt their fleet, and in 1574 Uluç Ali Reis managed to recapture Tunis with a force of 250 galleys and a siege that lasted 40 days. Nevertheless, Lepanto marked a permanent reversal in the balance of naval power in the Mediterranean and the end of the threat of Ottoman control.
In 1585 a peace treaty was signed with the Ottomans.
Revolt in the Netherlands[edit]
Main articles: Dutch Revolt and Eighty Years' War
Philip's rule in the Seventeen Provinces known collectively as the Netherlands faced many difficulties, leading to open warfare in 1568. He appointed Margaret of Parma as Governor of the Netherlands, when he left the low countries for Spain in 1559, but forced her to adjust policy to the advice of Cardinal Granvelle, who was greatly disliked in the Netherlands, after he insisted on direct control over events in the Netherlands despite being over two weeks' ride away in Madrid. There was discontent in the Netherlands about Philip's taxation demands and the incessant persecution of Protestants. In 1566, Protestant preachers sparked anti-clerical riots known as the Iconoclast Fury; in response to growing Protestant influence, the army of the Iron Duke (Fernando Álvarez de Toledo, 3rd Duke of Alba) went on the offensive, further alienating the local aristocracy. In 1572 a prominent exiled member of the Dutch aristocracy, William the Silent (Prince of Orange), invaded the Netherlands with a Protestant army, but he only succeeded in holding two provinces, Holland and Zeeland.
The war continued. The States General of the northern provinces, united in the 1579 Union of Utrecht, passed an Act of Abjuration declaring that they no longer recognised Philip as their king. The southern Netherlands (what is now Belgium and Luxembourg) remained under Spanish rule. In 1584, William the Silent was assassinated by Balthasar Gérard, after Philip had offered a reward of 25,000 crowns to anyone who killed him, calling him a "pest on the whole of Christianity and the enemy of the human race". The Dutch forces continued to fight on under Orange's son Maurice of Nassau, who received modest help from Queen Elizabeth I in 1585. The Dutch gained an advantage over the Spanish because of their growing economic strength, in contrast to Philip's burgeoning economic troubles. The war came to an end in 1648, when the Dutch Republic was recognised by Spain as independent.
King of Portugal[edit]
Main article: Iberian Union




Anthony I of Portugal


In 1578 young king Sebastian of Portugal died at the Battle of Alcácer Quibir without descendants, triggering a succession crisis. His granduncle, the elderly Cardinal Henry, succeeded him as King, but Henry also had no descendants, having taken holy orders. When the Cardinal-King died two years after Sebastian's disappearance, three grandchildren of Manuel I claimed the throne: Infanta Catarina, Duchess of Braganza, António, Prior of Crato, and Philip II of Spain. António was acclaimed King of Portugal in many cities and towns throughout the country, but members of the Council of Governors of Portugal who had supported Philip escaped to Spain and declared him to be the legal successor of Henry. Philip II then marched into Portugal and defeated Prior António's troops in the Battle of Alcântara. The troops commanded by Fernando Álvarez de Toledo the 3rd Duke of Alba[18] imposed subjection to Philip before entering Lisbon, where he seized an immense treasure.[19] Philip II of Spain was crowned Philip I of Portugal in 1581 (recognised as king by the Portuguese Cortes of Tomar) and a sixty-year personal union under the rule of the Philippine Dynasty began. This gave Philip II complete control of Portugal and Brazil. When Philip left for Madrid in 1583, he made his nephew Albert of Austria his viceroy in Lisbon. In Madrid he established a Council of Portugal to advise him on Portuguese affairs, giving prominent positions to Portuguese nobles in the Spanish courts, and allowing Portugal to maintain autonomous law, currency, and government.
Relations with England and Ireland[edit]
King of England and Ireland[edit]




Titian portrait of Philip as prince (1554), aged about twenty-four dressed in a lavishly decorated set of armour. The whiteness of his skin corresponds to his white stockings and the greenish golden sheen on his armour. In this way, the prince's pale complexion appears more distinguished.


Philip's father arranged his marriage to 37-year-old Queen Mary I of England, Charles' maternal first cousin. To elevate Philip to Mary's rank, his father ceded the crown of Naples, as well as his claim to the Kingdom of Jerusalem, to him. Their marriage at Winchester Cathedral on 25 July 1554 took place just two days after their first meeting. Philip's view of the affair was entirely political. Lord Chancellor Gardiner and the House of Commons petitioned Mary to consider marrying an Englishman, preferring Edward Courtenay.
Under the terms of the Act for the Marriage of Queen Mary to Philip of Spain, Philip was to enjoy Mary I's titles and honours for as long as their marriage should last. All official documents, including Acts of Parliament, were to be dated with both their names, and Parliament was to be called under the joint authority of the couple. Coins were also to show the heads of both Mary and Philip. The marriage treaty also provided that England would not be obliged to provide military support to Philip's father in any war. The Privy Council instructed that Philip and Mary should be joint signatories of royal documents, and this was enacted by an Act of Parliament, which gave him the title of king and stated that he "shall aid her Highness ... in the happy administration of her Grace’s realms and dominions."[20] In other words, Philip was to co-reign with his wife.[21] As the new King of England could not read English, it was ordered that a note of all matters of state should be made in Latin or Spanish.[21][22][23]




Philip and Mary I of England, 1558


Acts making it high treason to deny Philip's royal authority were passed in Ireland[24] and England.[25] Philip and Mary appeared on coins together, with a single crown suspended between them as a symbol of joint reign. The Great Seal shows Philip and Mary seated on thrones, holding the crown together.[21] The coat of arms of England was impaled with Philip's to denote their joint reign.[26][27] During their joint reign, they waged war against France, which resulted in the loss of Calais, England's last remaining possession in France.
Philip's wife had succeeded to the Kingdom of Ireland, but the title of King of Ireland had been created in 1542 by Henry VIII after he was excommunicated, and so it was not recognised by Catholic monarchs. In 1555, Pope Paul IV rectified this by issuing a papal bull recognising Philip and Mary as rightful King and Queen of Ireland.[28] King's County and Philipstown in Ireland were named after Philip as King of Ireland in 1556. The couple's joint royal style after Philip ascended the Spanish throne in 1556 was: Philip and Mary, by the Grace of God King and Queen of England, Spain, France, Jerusalem, both the Sicilies and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith, Archdukes of Austria, Dukes of Burgundy, Milan and Brabant, Counts of Habsburg, Flanders and Tirol.
However, the couple had no children. Mary died in 1558 before the union could revitalise the Roman Catholic Church in England. With her death, Philip lost his rights to the English throne (including the ancient English claims to the French throne) and ceased to be King of England, Ireland and (as claimed by them) France.
Philip's distaff great-grandson, Philippe I, Duke of Orléans, married Princess Henrietta of England in 1661; in 1807, the Jacobite claim to the British throne passed to the descendants of their child Anne Marie d'Orléans.
After Mary I's death[edit]
Further information: Anglo-Spanish War (1585–1604)




Part of Philip's dominions in 1581


Upon Mary's death, the throne went to Elizabeth I. Philip had no wish to sever his tie with England, and had sent a proposal of marriage to Elizabeth. However, she delayed in answering, and in that time learned Philip was also considering a Valois alliance. Elizabeth I was the Protestant daughter of Henry VIII and Anne Boleyn. This union was deemed illegitimate by English Catholics, who disputed the validity of both the annulment of Henry's marriage to Catherine of Aragon and of his subsequent marriage to Boleyn, and hence claimed that Mary, Queen of Scots, the Catholic great granddaughter of Henry VII, was the legitimate heir to the throne.
For many years Philip maintained peace with England, and even defended Elizabeth from the Pope's threat of excommunication. This was a measure taken to preserve a European balance of power. Ultimately, Elizabeth allied England with the Protestant rebels in the Netherlands. Further, English ships began a policy of piracy against Spanish trade and threatened to plunder the great Spanish treasure ships coming from the new world. English ships went so far as to attack a Spanish port. The last straw for Philip was the Treaty of Nonsuch signed by Elizabeth in 1585 – promising troops and supplies to the rebels. Although it can be argued this English action was the result of Philip's Treaty of Joinville with the Catholic League of France, Philip considered it an act of war by England.
The execution of Mary, Queen of Scots, in 1587 ended Philip's hopes of placing a Catholic on the English throne. He turned instead to more direct plans to invade England and return the country to Catholicism. In 1588, he sent a fleet, the Spanish Armada, to rendezvous with the Duke of Parma's army and convey it across the English Channel. However, the operation had little chance of success from the beginning, because of lengthy delays, lack of communication between Philip II and his two commanders and the lack of a deep bay for the fleet. At the point of attack, a storm struck the English Channel, already known for its harsh currents and choppy waters, which devastated large numbers of the Spanish fleet. There was a tightly fought battle against the English Royal Navy; it was by no means a slaughter (the Spanish lost 5 ships whilst the English lost none), but the Spanish were forced into a retreat, and the overwhelming majority of the Armada was destroyed by the harsh weather. Whilst the English Royal Navy may not have destroyed the Armada at the Battle of Gravelines, they had prevented it from linking up with the army it was supposed to convey across the channel. Thus whilst the English Royal Navy may have only won a slight tactical victory over the Spanish, it had delivered a major strategic one—preventing the invasion of England.
Eventually, three more Armadas were assembled; two were sent to England in 1596 and 1597, but both also failed; the third (1599) was diverted to the Azores and Canary Islands to fend off raids. This Anglo-Spanish War (1585–1604) would be fought to a grinding end, but not until both Philip II (d. 1598) and Elizabeth I (d. 1603) were dead.
The defeat of the Spanish Armada gave great heart to the Protestant cause across Europe. The storm that smashed the Armada was seen by many of Philip's enemies as a sign of the will of God. Many Spaniards blamed the admiral of the Armada for its failure, but Philip, despite his complaint that he had sent his ships to fight the English, not the elements, was not among them. A year later, Philip remarked:


“
It is impiety, and almost blasphemy to presume to know the will of God. It comes from the sin of pride. Even kings, Brother Nicholas, must submit to being used by God's will without knowing what it is. They must never seek to use it.
”


— Philip II


The Spanish navy was rebuilt, and intelligence networks were improved. A measure of the character of Philip can be gathered by the fact that he personally saw to it that the wounded men of the Armada were treated and received pensions, and that the families of those who died were compensated for their loss, which was highly unusual for the time.
While the invasion had been averted, England was unable to take advantage of this success. An attempt to use her newfound advantage at sea with a counter armada the following year failed disastrously. Likewise, English buccaneering and attempts to seize territories in the Caribbean were defeated by Spain's rebuilt navy and their improved intelligence networks (although Cádiz was destroyed by an Anglo-Dutch force after a failed attempt to seize the treasure fleet).
Death[edit]
Philip II died in El Escorial, near Madrid, on 13 September 1598, of cancer.[29] He was succeeded by his 20-year-old son, Philip III.
Legacy[edit]
Main article: Cultural depictions of Philip II of Spain




Philip's dominions in 1598


Under Philip II, Spain reached the peak of its power. However, in spite of the great and increasing quantities of gold and silver flowing into his coffers from the American mines, the riches of the Portuguese spice trade, and the enthusiastic support of the Habsburg dominions for the Counter-Reformation, he would never succeed in suppressing Protestantism or defeating the Dutch rebellion. Early in his reign, the Dutch might have laid down their weapons if he had desisted in trying to suppress Protestantism,[citation needed] but his devotion to Catholicism would not permit him to do so. He was a devout Catholic and exhibited the typical 16th century disdain for religious heterodoxy; he said, "Before suffering the slightest damage to religion in the service of God, I would lose all of my estates and a hundred lives, if I had them, because I do not wish nor do I desire to be the ruler of heretics."[30]
The defeat of Protestantism was always uppermost in Philip's mind. For a while, he ruled England jointly with Queen Mary Tudor, and a reconciliation with the Catholic Church followed. Heresy trials were reestablished and hundreds of Protestants burned at the stake.
England and Philip parted ways after the death of his Queen, nicknamed "Bloody Mary". Philip's gravest mistake over the long run was his attempt to violently eradicate Protestantism from the Netherlands, which was a major economic asset for the empire. Under harsh occupation, the Dutch finally rebelled and wrested independence after an 80-year war, the strain of which did Philip's realm little good. His greatest battlefield accomplishment was the defeat of the Ottoman fleet at Lepanto, which turned the tide against Turkish aggression.
As he strove to enforce Catholic orthodoxy through an intensification of the Inquisition, students were barred from studying elsewhere, and books printed by Spaniards outside the kingdom were banned. Even a highly respected churchman like Archbishop Carranza of Toledo was jailed by the Inquisition for 17 years, for publishing ideas that seemed sympathetic in some degree with Protestantism. Such strict enforcement of orthodox belief was successful, and Spain avoided the religiously inspired strife tearing apart other European dominions.
Yet, the School of Salamanca flourished under his reign. Martín de Azpilcueta, highly honoured at Rome by several popes and looked on as an oracle of learning, published his Manuale sive Enchiridion Confessariorum et Poenitentium (Rome, 1568), long a classical text in the schools and in ecclesiastical practice.
Francisco Suárez, generally regarded as the greatest scholastic after Thomas Aquinas and regarded during his lifetime as being the greatest living philosopher and theologian, was writing and lecturing, not only in Spain but also in Rome (1680–1685), where Pope Gregory XIII attended the first lecture that he gave. Luis de Molina published his De liberi arbitrii cum gratiae donis, divina praescientia, praedestinatione et reprobatione concordia (1588), wherein he put forth the doctrine attempting to reconcile the omniscience of God with human free will that came to be known as Molinism, thereby contributing to what was one of the most important intellectual debates of the time; Molinism became the de facto Jesuit doctrine on these matters, and is still advocated today by William Lane Craig and Alvin Plantinga, among others.




Statue of Philip II at the Sabatini Gardens in Madrid (F. Castro, 1753).


Because Philip II was the most powerful European monarch in an era of war and religious conflict,[31] evaluating both his reign and the man himself has become a controversial historical subject.[32] Even before his death in 1598, his supporters had started presenting him as an archetypical gentleman, full of piety and Christian virtues, whereas his enemies depicted him as a fanatical and despotic monster, responsible for inhuman cruelties and barbarism.[33] This dichotomy, further developed into the so-called Spanish Black Legend and White Legend, was helped by King Philip himself. Philip prohibited any biographical account of his life to be published while he was alive, and he ordered that all his private correspondence be burned shortly before he died.[34] Moreover, Philip did nothing to defend himself after being betrayed by his ambitious secretary Antonio Perez, who published incredible calumnies against his former master; this allowed Perez's tales to spread all around Europe unchallenged.[35] That way, the popular image of the king that survives to today was created on the eve of his death, at a time when many European princes and religious leaders were turned against Spain as a pillar of the Counter-Reformation. This means that many histories depict Philip from deeply prejudiced points of view, usually negative.[36]
However, some historians classify this anti-Spanish analysis as part of the Black Legend. In a more recent example of popular culture, Philip II's portrayal in Fire Over England (1937) is not entirely unsympathetic; he is shown as a very hardworking, intelligent, religious, somewhat paranoid ruler whose prime concern is his country, but who had no understanding of the English, despite his former co-monarchy there.
Even in countries that remained Catholic, primarily France and the Italian states, fear and envy of Spanish success and domination created a wide receptiveness for the worst possible descriptions of Philip II. Although some efforts have been made to separate legend from reality,[37] that task has proved extremely difficult, since many prejudices are rooted in the cultural heritage of European countries. Spanish-speaking historians tend to assess his political and military achievements, sometimes deliberately avoiding issues such as the king's lukewarmness (or even support) toward Catholic fanaticism.[38] English-speaking historians tend to show Philip II as a fanatical, despotical, criminal, imperialist monster,[39] minimising his military victories (Battle of Lepanto, Battle of Saint Quentin, etc.) to mere anecdotes, and magnifying his defeats (namely the Invincible Armada[40]) even though at the time those defeats did not result in great political or military changes in the balance of power in Europe. Moreover, it has been noted that objectively assessing Philip's reign would necessitate a re-analysis of the reign of his greatest opponents, namely England's Queen Elizabeth I and the Dutch William the Silent, who are popularly regarded as great heroes in their home nations; if Philip II is to be shown to the English or Dutch public in a more favourable light, Elizabeth and William would lose their cold-blooded, fanatical enemy, thus decreasing their own patriotic accomplishments.[41]
Philip II's reign can hardly be characterised by its failures. He ended French Valois ambitions in Italy and brought about the Habsburg ascendency in Europe. He commenced settlements in the Philippines, which were named after him,[b] and established the first trans-Pacific trade route between America and Asia. He secured the Portuguese kingdom and empire. He succeeded in increasing the importation of silver in the face of English, Dutch, and French privateers, overcoming multiple financial crises and consolidating Spain's overseas empire. Although clashes would be ongoing, he ended the major threat posed to Europe by the Ottoman navy.
In popular culture[edit]
John Masefield Philip the King. A Play in One Act. Heinemann, 1930.
In Civilization VI, Philip II leads the Spanish empire.
Titles, honours and styles[edit]




Cannon with arms of Philip II as King of Spain and jure uxoris King of England and France.



Heir titles

Prince of Girona: 21 May 1527 – 16 January 1556
Prince of Asturias 1528–1556


King of Castile as Philip II: 16 January 1556 – 13 September 1598

King of Castile, of León, of Granada, of Toledo, of Galicia, of Seville, of Cordoba, of Murcia, of Jaen, of the Algarves, of Algeciras, of Gibraltar, of the Canary Islands, of the Indias, the Islands and Mainland of the Ocean Sea.[c] Lord of Molina.
Lord of Biscay.


King of Aragon as Philip I: 16 January 1556 – 13 September 1598

King of Aragón.
King of the Two Sicilies.

King of Naples, of Jerusalem: Since 25 July 1554.
King of Sicily. Duke of Athens, of Neopatria.


King of Valencia.
King of Majorca.
King of Sardinia, of Corsica. Margrave of Oristano. Count of Goceano.
King of Navarre.
Count of Barcelona, of Roussillon, of Cerdanya.


King of Portugal as Philip I: 12 September 1580 – 13 September 1598

King of Portugal and the Algarves of either side of the sea in Africa, Lord of Guinea and of Conquest, Navigation, and Commerce of Ethiopia, Arabia, Persia, and India, etc.


King of England de jure uxoris as Philip I: 25 July 1554 – 17 November 1558

King of England, France (titular). Defender of the Faith.
King of Ireland


Imperial and Habsburg patrimonial titles:

Duke of Milan: 11 October 1540 (secret donation)/25 July 1554 (public investiture) – 13 September 1598
Imperial vicar of Siena: since 30 May 1554
Archduke of Austria.
Princely Count of Habsburg and of Tyrol
Prince of Swabia


Burgundian titles

Lord of the Netherlands: 25 October 1555 – 13 September 1598

Duke of Lothier, of Brabant, of Limburg, of Luxemburg, of Guelders. Count of Flanders, of Artois, of Hainaut, of Holland, of Zeeland, of Namur, of Zutphen. Margrave of the Holy Roman Empire. Lord of Frisia, Salins, Mechelen, the cities, towns & lands of Utrecht, Overyssel, Groningen.


Count Palatine of Burgundy, since 10 June 1556. Count of Charolais since 21 September 1558.
Duke of Burgundy.
Dominator in Asia, Africa


Honours

Knight of the Golden Fleece: 1531 – 13 September 1598
Grand Master of the Order of the Golden Fleece:[42] 23 October 1555 – 13 September 1598
Grand Master of the Order of Calatrava: 16 January 1556 – 13 September 1598
Grand Master of the Order of Alcantara: 16 January 1556 – 13 September 1598
Grand Master of the Order of Santiago: 16 January 1556 – 13 September 1598
Grand Master of the Order of Montesa: 8 December 1587 – 13 September 1598



Philip continued his father's style of "Majesty" (Latin: Maiestas; Spanish: Majestad) in preference to that of "Highness" (Celsitudo; Alteza). In diplomatic texts, he continued the use of the title "Most Catholic" (Rex Catholicismus; Rey Católico) first bestowed by Pope Alexander VI on Ferdinand and Isabella in 1496.
Following the Act of Parliament sanctioning his marriage with Mary, the couple was styled "Philip and Mary, by the grace of God King and Queen of England, France, Naples, Jerusalem, and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith, Princes of Spain and Sicily, Archdukes of Austria, Dukes of Milan, Burgundy and Brabant, Counts of Habsburg, Flanders and Tyrol".[43] Upon his inheritance of Spain in 1556, they became "Philip and Mary, by the grace of God King and Queen of England, Spain, France, both the Sicilies, Jerusalem and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith, Archdukes of Austria, Dukes of Burgundy, Milan and Brabant, Counts of Habsburg, Flanders and Tyrol".[43]
In the 1584 Treaty of Joinville, he was styled "Philip, by the grace of God second of his name, king of Castille, Leon, Aragon, Portugal, Navarre, Naples, Sicily, Jerusalem, Majorca, Sardinia, and the islands, Indies, and terra firma of the Ocean Sea; archduke of Austria; duke of Burgundy, Lothier, Brabant, Limbourg, Luxembourg, Guelders, and Milan; Count of Habsburg, Flanders, Artois, and Burgundy; Count Palatine of Hainault, Holland and Zeeland, Namur, Drenthe, Zutphen; prince of "Zvuanem"; marquis of the Holy Roman Empire; lord of Frisia, Salland, Mechelen, and of the cities, towns, and lands of Utrecht, Overissel, and Groningen; master of Asia and Africa".[44]
His coinage typically bore the obverse inscription "PHS·D:G·HISP·Z·REX" (Latin: "Philip, by the grace of God King of Spain et cetera"), followed by the local title of the mint ("DVX·BRA" for Duke of Brabant, "C·HOL" for Count of Holland, "D·TRS·ISSV" for Lord of Overissel, &c.). The reverse would then bear a motto such as "PACE·ET·IVSTITIA" ("For Peace and Justice") or "DOMINVS·MIHI·ADIVTOR" ("The Lord is my helper").[45] A medal struck in 1583 bore the inscriptions "PHILIPP II HISP ET NOVI ORBIS REX" ("Philip II, King of Spain and the New World") and "NON SUFFICIT ORBIS" ("The world is not enough").[46]
Heraldry[edit]


Heraldry of Philip II of Spain






COMMON VERSIONS



















1556–1558
(As Spanish Monarch)
1558–1580
1558–1580
1580–1598
1580–1598






SPANISH KINGDOMS VERSIONS


Kingdom of Navarre
Kingdom of Galicia



















1558–1580
1580–1598
1580–1598
1558–1580
1580–1598






BURGUNDIAN VARIANTS


Free County of Burgundy










1556-1580
1580-1898






ITALIAN VARIANTS


Duchy of Milan
Kingdom of Sardinia
Naples and Sicily



















1554–1558
1558–1580
1580–1598
1580–1598
1554–1598

















Coat of Arms as Spanish Monarch and King
Jure Uxoris of England
(with symbols of the Crowns of Aragon, Castile and
England imperially crowned in the top)
1556–1558
Coat of Arms with Supporters, Crest and Motto
1558–1580
Coat of Arms with Supporters, Crest and Motto
1580–1598






Ancestry[edit]


Ancestors of Philip II of Spain







 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







 

16. Frederick III, Holy Roman Emperor



 




 


 


 


 


 







 

8. Maximilian I, Holy Roman Emperor

 




 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







 

17. Eleanor of Portugal



 




 


 


 


 


 







 

4. Philip I of Castile

 




 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







 

18. Charles, Duke of Burgundy



 




 


 


 


 


 







 

9. Mary, Duchess of Burgundy

 




 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







 

19. Isabella of Bourbon



 




 


 


 


 


 







 

2. Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor

 




 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







 

20. John II of Aragon



 




 


 


 


 


 







 

10. Ferdinand II of Aragon

 




 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







 

21. Juana Enríquez



 




 


 


 


 


 







 

5. Joanna I of Castile

 




 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







 

22. John II of Castile



 




 


 


 


 


 







 

11. Isabella I of Castile

 




 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







 

23. Isabella of Portugal



 




 


 


 


 


 







 

1. Philip II of Spain

 




 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







 

24. Edward, King of Portugal



 




 


 


 


 


 







 

12. Ferdinand, Duke of Viseu

 




 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







 

25. Eleanor of Aragon



 




 


 


 


 


 







 

6. Manuel I of Portugal

 




 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







 

26. John, Constable of Portugal



 




 


 


 


 


 







 

13. Beatrice of Portugal

 




 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







 

27. Isabel of Barcelos



 




 


 


 


 


 







 

3. Isabella of Portugal

 




 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







 

28. John II of Aragon (= 20)



 




 


 


 


 


 







 

14. Ferdinand II of Aragon (= 10)

 




 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







 

29. Juana Enríquez (= 21)



 




 


 


 


 


 







 

7. Maria of Aragon

 




 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







 

30. John II of Castile (= 22)



 




 


 


 


 


 







 

15. Isabella I of Castile (= 11)

 




 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







 

31. Isabella of Portugal (= 23)



 




 


 


 


 


 










Family[edit]




Philip and Anna banqueting with family and courtiers, by Alonso Sánchez Coello






Cenotaph of Philip and his family at El Escorial.


Philip was married four times and had children with three of his wives.
Philip's first wife was his first cousin, Maria Manuela, Princess of Portugal. She was a daughter of Philip's maternal uncle, John III of Portugal, and paternal aunt, Catherine of Austria. They were married at Salamanca on 12 November 1543. The marriage produced one son in 1545, after which Maria died 4 days later due to haemorrhage:

Carlos, Prince of Asturias (8 July 1545 – 24 July 1568), died unmarried and without issue.

Philip's second wife was his first cousin once removed, Queen Mary I of England. The marriage, which took place on 25 July 1554 at Winchester Cathedral, was political. By this marriage, Philip became jure uxoris King of England and Ireland, although the couple was apart more than together as they ruled their respective countries. The marriage produced no children, although there was a false pregnancy, and Mary died in 1558, ending Philip's reign in England and Ireland.
Philip's third wife was Elisabeth of Valois, the eldest daughter of Henry II of France and Catherine de' Medici. She was also a distant relation of Philip-she was descended from their mutual ancestor Alfonso VII of León and Castile. The original ceremony was conducted by proxy (the Duke of Alba standing in for Philip) at Notre Dame prior to Elisabeth's departure from France. The actual ceremony was conducted in Guadalajara upon her arrival in Spain. During their marriage (1559–1568) they conceived five daughters and a son, though only two of the girls survived. Elisabeth died a few hours after the loss of her last child. Their children were:

Stillborn son (1560)
Miscarried twin daughters (August 1564).
Isabella Clara Eugenia (12 August 1566 – 1 December 1633), married Albert VII, Archduke of Austria,
Catherine Michelle (10 October 1567 – 6 November 1597), married Charles Emmanuel I, Duke of Savoy, and had issue.
Miscarried daughter (3 October 1568).

Philip's fourth and final wife was his niece, Anna of Austria. By contemporary accounts, this was a convivial and satisfactory marriage (1570–1580) for both Philip and Anna. This marriage produced four sons and one daughter. Anna died of heart failure 8 months after giving birth to Maria in 1580. Their children were:

Ferdinand, Prince of Asturias (4 December 1571 – 18 October 1578), died young.
Charles Laurence (12 August 1573 – 30 June 1575), died young.
Diego, Prince of Asturias (15 August 1575 – 21 November 1582), died young.
Philip III of Spain (3 April 1578 – 31 March 1621).
Maria (14 February 1580 – 5 August 1583), died young.








Princess Maria of Portugal









Queen Mary Tudor of England









Queen Elisabeth of Valois









Queen Anna of Austria by Sofonisba Anguissola









King Phillip II by Sofonisba Anguissola




See also[edit]

Descendants of Isabella I of Castile and Ferdinand II of Aragon
List of Portuguese monarchs
List of Spanish monarchs
The empire on which the sun never sets
Royal Armoury of Madrid

Notes[edit]



^ Spain was a composite monarchy, and besides being the second Philip to rule Castille, he was the first to rule Aragon and the fourth to rule Navarre.
^ The Philippine archipelago was first sighted by Ferdinand Magellan on his expedition to the Spice Islands, but it was during Philip's reign that Spanish explorer Ruy Lopez de Villalobos renamed them from the archipelago of St. Lazarus to Las Islas Filipinas in Philip's honour.
^ With la incorporation of Portugal to the Monarchy the title changed to East and West Indies, the Islands and Mainland of the Ocean sea.



References[edit]


^ Also rendered as Felipe in Archaic Portuguese
^ Geoffrey Parker. The Grand Strategy of Philip II, (2000)
^ Garret Mattingly. The Armada p. 22, p. 66 ISBN 0-395-08366-4
^ Davis, James C. (1970). Pursuit of Power: Venetian Ambassadors' Reports on Spain, Turkey, and France in the Age of Philip II 1560–1600. New York: Harper & Row. pp. 81–82. 
^ James Boyden; Europe, 1450 to 1789: Encyclopaedia of the Early Modern World.
^ Encyclopedia of World Biography 2004.
^ Parker, Geoffrey. The Dutch Revolt.. London: Penguin. p.41.
^ Parker, The Dutch Revolt. p.42.
^ Gat, Azar (2006). War in Human Civilization (4. ed.). Oxford [u.a.]: Oxford University Press. p. 488. ISBN 978-0-19-923663-3. 
^ Elliott, J.H. (2002). Imperial Spain 1469–1716 (Repr. ed.). London [u.a.]: Penguin Books. pp. 285–291. ISBN 0-14-100703-6. 
^ As Philip wrote in 1566 to Luis de Requesens: "You can assure his Holiness that rather than suffer the least injury to religion and the service of God, I would lose all my states and a hundred lives if I had them, for I do not intend to rule over heretics." Pettegree 2002, p. 214.
^ Fernand Braudel, The Mediterranean and the Mediterranean World in the Age of Philip II, vol. 2 (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1995), 935–36 and notes.
^ Royall Tyler (editor) (1954). "Spain: September 1556". Calendar of State Papers, Spain, Vol. 13: 1554–1558. Institute of Historical Research. Retrieved 19 April 2013. CS1 maint: Extra text: authors list (link)
^ Salvador Miranda (2010). "The Cardinals of the Holy Roman Church". Florida International University. Retrieved 2010-04-21. 
^ Jan Glete p.156
^ Nascimiento Rodrigues/Tessaleno Devezas p.122
^ Knecht French Civil Wars p272
^ Geoffrey Parker The army of Flanders and the Spanish road, London, 1972 ISBN 0-521-08462-8, p. 35
^ Henry Kamen, The duke of Alba (New Haven–London: Yale University Press, 2004), Pp. x + 204.
^ Adams, George Burton; Stephens, H. Morse, eds. (1901). "An Act for the Marriage of Queen Mary to Philip of Spain". Select Documents of English Constitutional History. MacMillan. p. 284 – via Internet Archive. 
^ a b c Louis Adrian Montrose, The subject of Elizabeth: authority, gender, and representation, University of Chicago Press, 2006
^ A. F. Pollard, The History of England – From the Accession of Edward VI. to the Death of Elizabeth (1547–1603), READ BOOKS, 2007
^ Wim de Groot, The Seventh Window: The King's Window Donated by Philip II and Mary Tudor to Sint Janskerk in Gouda (1557), Uitgeverij Verloren, 2005
^ Robert Dudley Edwards, Ireland in the age of the Tudors: the destruction of Hiberno-Norman civilisation, Taylor & Francis, 1977
^ Treason Act 1554
^ Richard Marks, Ann Payne, British Museum, British Library; British heraldry from its origins to c. 1800; British Museum Publications Ltd., 1978
^ American Numismatic Association, The Numismatist, American Numismatic Association, 1971
^ Francois Velde (25 July 2003). "Text of 1555 Bull". Heraldica.org. Retrieved 2012-08-22. 
^ Koenigsberger, Helmut Georg (2012), Philip II, Encyclopædia Britannica Online, retrieved 31 January 2012 
^ The Myth of the Spanish Inquisition on YouTube (at 21:27 – 21:40). BBC.
^ Fernández Álvarez, Manuel. Felipe II y su tiempo. Espasa Calpe, Madrid, 6th Ed. ISBN 84-239-9736-7 In the introduction to this work, Felipe is mentioned as the most powerful European monarch by resources and army, depicting Europe at the time as a world full of unsolved issues and religious conflicts
^ Cfr. Fernández Álvarez, Manuel. Felipe II y su tiempo. Espasa Calpe, Madrid, 6th Ed. ISBN 84-239-9736-7. Yet again, the several points of view towards his reign are mentioned in the Introduction
^ Kamen, Henry. Felipe de España, Madrid, Siglo XXI, 1997. Cultural depictions of the king are mentioned, although Kamen tends to place himself with those favouring the king
^ Fernández Álvarez, Manuel. Felipe II y su tiempo. Espasa Calpe, Madrid, 6th Ed. ISBN 84-239-9736-7. He discusses the lack of correspondence of the king because he ordered it burned, thus avoiding any chance of getting further into Philip's private life.
^ Vid. Marañón, Gregorio. Antonio Pérez: el hombre, el drama, la época. Madrid, Espasa Calpe, 1951, 2 vols. Judiciously argued review on the harm Perez did to the king, analyzing the king's responsibility on the assassination of Escobedo
^ "Ten Great Events in History – Chapter VII. The Invincible Armada (by James Johonnot)". Authorama.com. Retrieved 2012-08-22. 
^ Hume, Martin. Philip II of Spain, London, 1897. Martin tried to retrieve the prejudiced views on the king at his time, something Carl Bratli also tried to do in his Filip of Spanien (Koebenhaven, 1909). Their works oppose to those of Ludwig Pfandl, Felipe II. Bosquejo de una vida y un tiempo, Munich, 1938, who assessed very negatively Felipe's personality
^ In his work, Felipe II (Madrid, 1943) W.T. Walsh depicts Felipe's reign as a prosperous and successful one, tending to make an apology of it. Fernández Álvarez, in España y los españoles en la Edad Moderna (Salamanca, 1979), points out how White Legend supporters flourished during the 1940s and 1950s, and how they omitted the darkest issues of Felipe's reign
^ Those kinds of adjectives can be read in M. Van Durme's 1953 El Cardenal Granvela
^ Cabrera de Córdoba, Felipe II rey de España, ed. RAH, 1877, criticizes how Felipe's victories are being minimised by English historians, and points out the small consequences of defeats such as the Invincible Armada
^ This appreciation is noted by Martin Hume in his aforementioned work ("Philip II of Spain", London 1897), pointing out how difficult is to show Philip II in a more favorable light to his fellow Englishmen because of that.
^ Rocquet, Claude-Henri. Bruegel; or The Workshop of Dreams. Univ. of Chicago Press, 1991. ISBN 0226723429.
^ a b Waller, Maureen. Sovereign Ladies: The Six Reigning Queens of England. St. Martin's Press (New York), 2006. ISBN 0-312-33801-5.
^ "Treaty of Joinville". (in French) In Davenport, Frances G. European Treaties Bearing on the History of the United States and Its Dependencies. The Lawbook Exchange, Ltd., 2004.
^ See, inter alia, "Amberes Archived 3 February 2012 at the Wayback Machine." (in Spanish) and Standard Catalog of World Gold Coins.
^ Cremades, Checa. Felipe II. Op. cit. in "The Place of Tudor England". Transactions of the Royal Historical Society, 6th Series, Vol. 12. Cambridge Univ. Press, 2003. ISBN 0521815614.


Sources and further reading[edit]

Henry Kamen, Philip of Spain (New Haven, Yale University Press, 1999) – the standard modern biographical source.
Glyn Redworth, "Philip (1527–1598)", Oxford Dictionary of National Biography, online edition, May 2011 Retrieved 25 Aug 2011
Pettegree, Andrew (2002). Europe in the Sixteenth Century. Oxford: Blackwell. ISBN 0-631-20704-X. .
Benton Rain Patterson, With the Heart of a King: Elizabeth I of England, Philip II of Spain & the Fight for a Nation's Soul & Crown (2007)
Rodriguez-Salgado, M.J. "The Court of Philip II of Spain". In Princes Patronage and the Nobility: The Court at the Beginning of the Modern Age, cc. 1450–1650. Edited by Ronald G. Asch and Adolf M. Birke. New York: Oxford University Press, 1991. ISBN 0-19-920502-7.
Geoffrey Parker, Imprudent King: A New Life of Philip II (2014).
Geoffrey Parker, The Grand Strategy of Philip II (New Haven, 1998).
Markus Reinbold, Jenseits der Konfession. Die frühe Frankreichpolitik Philipps II. von Spanien 1559–1571 (Stuttgart, Thorbecke, 2005) (Beihefte der Francia, 61).
Harry Kelsey, Philip of Spain, King of England: the forgotten sovereign (London, I.B. Tauris, 2011).

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Philip II of Spain.





Wikiquote has quotations related to: Philip II of Spain



The Grand Strategy of Philip II"
Letters of Philip II, King of Spain 1592–1597
Philip II of Spain (King of England)
 Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913). "Philip II". Catholic Encyclopedia. New York: Robert Appleton Company. 
Philip II Letter, 1578 Dec. 2. From the Collections at the Library of Congress
King Philip II Grant of Arms, 1566 Nov. 25. From the Collections at the Library of Congress
Letters of Philip II, King of Spain, 1592–1597 at L. Tom Perry Special Collections, Brigham Young University
Paul IV letter to Philip II, MSS 8489 at L. Tom Perry Special Collections, Brigham Young University




Philip II of Spain
House of Habsburg
Born: 21 May 1527 Died: 13 September 1598


Regnal titles


Preceded by
Mary I
as sole monarch
King of England and Ireland (jure uxoris)
25 July 1554 – 17 November 1558
with Mary I
Succeeded by
Elizabeth I


Preceded by
Emperor Charles V
Duke of Brabant, Limburg, Lothier and Luxemburg;
Marquis of Namur; Count Palatine of Burgundy;
Count of Artois, Flanders and Hainaut
16 January 1556 – 6 May 1598
Succeeded by
Isabella Clara Eugenia
Albert


Count of Charolais
21 September 1558 – 6 May 1598


Duke of Guelders;
Count of Zutphen, Holland and Zeeland
16 January 1556 – 26 July 1581
Dutch Republic


King of Naples
1554–1598
Succeeded by
Philip III of Spain


King of Spain
1556–1598


Preceded by
Henry
King of Portugal and the Algarve
disputed with António
1581–1598


Vacant
Title last held by
Francesco II Sforza
Duke of Milan
1540–1598


Spanish royalty


Vacant
Title last held by
Charles I
Prince of Asturias
1528–1556
Succeeded by
Carlos


Prince of Girona
1527–1556








v
t
e


Monarchs of Spain









Charles I
Philip II
Philip III
Philip IV
Charles II
Philip V
Louis I
Philip V
Ferdinand VI
Charles III
Charles IV
Ferdinand VII
Joseph I
Ferdinand VII
Isabel II
Amadeo I
Alfonso XII
Alfonso XIII
Juan Carlos I
Felipe VI















v
t
e


Spanish Empire








Timeline






Catholic Monarchs
Habsburgs
Golden Age
Encomiendas
New Laws in favour of the indigenous
Expulsion of the Moriscos
Eighty Years' War
Portuguese Restoration War
Bourbons
Napoleonic invasion
Independence of Spanish continental Americas
Liberal constitution
Carlist Wars
Spanish–American War
German–Spanish Treaty (1899)
Spanish Civil War
Independence of Morocco (Western Sahara conflict)













Territories






Kingdoms of Naples, Sicily and Sardinia
Milan
Union with Holy Roman Empire
Netherlands
Franche-Comté
Portugal
Philippines
East Pacific (Guam, Mariana, Caroline, Palau, Marshall, Micronesia, Moluccas)
Northern Taiwan
Tidore
Florida
New Spain (Western United States, Mexico, Central America, Spanish Caribbean)
Spanish Louisiana
Coastal Alaska
Haiti
Belize
Jamaica
Trinidad and Tobago
Venezuela, Northern and Western Guyana
New Granada (Panama, Colombia, Ecuador, a northernmost portion of Brazilian Amazon)
Peru (Peru, Acre)
Río de la Plata (Argentina, Paraguay, Charcas (Bolivia), Banda Oriental (Uruguay), Falkland Islands)
Chile
Equatorial Guinea
Spanish North Africa (Ifni, Cape Juby, Spanish Morocco and Western Sahara)













Administration






Archivo de Indias
Council of the Indies
Cabildo
Trial of residence
Laws of the Indies
Royal Decree of Graces
Exequatur
Papal bull
School of Salamanca













Administrative subdivisions







Viceroyalties



New Spain
New Granada
Perú
Río de la Plata





Audiencias



Bogotá
Buenos Aires
Caracas
Charcas
Concepción
Cusco
Guadalajara
Guatemala
Lima
Manila
Mexico
Panamá
Quito
Santiago
Santo Domingo





Captaincies General



Chile
Cuba
Guatemala
Philippines
Puerto Rico
Santo Domingo
Venezuela
Yucatán
Provincias Internas





Governorates



Castilla de Oro
Cuba
New Andalusia (1501–1513)
New Andalusia
New Castile
New Toledo
Paraguay
Río de la Plata
















Economy







Currencies



Dollar
Real
Maravedí
Escudo
Columnario





Trade



Manila galleon
Spanish treasure fleet
Casa de Contratación
Guipuzcoan Company of Caracas
Camino Real de Tierra Adentro
















Military







Armies



Tercio
Army of Flanders
Spanish Armada
Indian auxiliaries
Legión





Warriors



Duke of Alba
Antonio de Leyva
Martín de Goiti
Alfonso d'Avalos
García de Toledo Osorio
Duke of Savoy
Álvaro de Bazán the Elder
John of Austria
Charles Bonaventure de Longueval
Pedro de Zubiaur
Ambrosio Spinola
Bernardo de Gálvez





Sailors



Christopher Columbus
Pinzón brothers
Ferdinand Magellan
Juan Sebastián Elcano
Juan de la Cosa
Juan Ponce de León
Miguel López de Legazpi
Pedro Menéndez de Avilés
Sebastián de Ocampo
Álvar Núñez Cabeza de Vaca
Alonso de Ojeda
Vasco Núñez de Balboa
Alonso de Salazar
Andrés de Urdaneta
Antonio de Ulloa
Ruy López de Villalobos
Diego Columbus
Alonso de Ercilla
Nicolás de Ovando
Juan de Ayala
Sebastián Vizcaíno
Juan Fernández
Felipe González de Ahedo





Conquistadors



Hernán Cortés
Francisco Pizarro
Gonzalo Jiménez de Quesada
Hernán Pérez de Quesada
Francisco Vázquez de Coronado
Diego Velázquez de Cuéllar
Pedro de Valdivia
Pedro de Alvarado
Martín de Ursúa
Diego de Almagro
Pánfilo de Narváez
Diego de Mazariegos
Jerónimo Luis de Cabrera





Battles




Old World




Won



Bicocca
Landriano
Pavia
Tunis
Mühlberg
St. Quentin
Gravelines
Malta
Lepanto
Antwerp
Azores
Siege of Mons
Gembloux
Siege of Ostend
English Armada
Cape Celidonia
White Mountain
Siege of Breda
Nördlingen
Valenciennes
Siege of Ceuta
Bitonto
Bailén
Vitoria
Tetouan
Alhucemas





Lost



Capo d'Orso
Preveza
Siege of Castelnuovo
Algiers
Ceresole
Djerba
Tunis
Spanish Armada
Leiden
Rocroi
Downs
Passaro
Trafalgar
Somosierra
Annual








New World




Won



Siege of Tenochtitlan
Cajamarca
Cuzco
Bogotá savanna
Reynogüelén
Penco
Guadalupe Island
San Juan
Cartagena de Indias
Cuerno Verde
Pensacola





Lost



La Noche Triste
Tucapel
Chacabuco
Carabobo
Ayacucho
Guam
Santiago de Cuba
Manila Bay
Asomante






















Spanish colonizations






Canary Islands
Aztec
Maya

Chiapas
Yucatán
Guatemala
Petén


El Salvador
Honduras
Nicaragua
Chibchan Nations
Colombia
Peru
Chile













Other civil topics






Spanish missions in the Americas
Architecture
Mesoamerican codices
Cusco painting tradition
Indochristian painting in New Spain
Quito painting tradition
Colonial universities in Latin America
Colonial universities in the Philippines
General Archive of the Indies
Colonial Spanish Horse
Castas
Old inquisition
Slavery in Spanish Empire
British and American slaves granted their freedom by Spain















v
t
e


Monarchs of Portugal



House of Burgundy (1139–1383)



Afonso I
Sancho I
Afonso II
Sancho II
Afonso III
Dinis I
Afonso IV
Pedro I
Fernando I
Beatriz I








House of Aviz (1385–1580)



João I
Duarte I
Afonso V
João II
Manuel I
João III
Sebastião I
Henrique I
António I





House of Habsburg (1581–1640)



Filipe I
Filipe II
Filipe III





House of Braganza (1640–1910)



João IV
Afonso VI
Pedro II
João V
José I
Maria I with Pedro III
João VI
Pedro IV
Maria II
Miguel I
Maria II with Fernando II
Pedro V
Luís I
Carlos I
Manuel II






Debatable or disputed rulers are in italics.










v
t
e


English, Scottish and British monarchs











Monarchs of England before 1603
Monarchs of Scotland before 1603





Æthelstan
Edmund I
Eadred
Eadwig
Edgar the Peaceful
Edward the Martyr
Æthelred the Unready
Sweyn
Edmund II
Cnut
Harold I
Harthacnut
Edward the Confessor
Harold II
Edgar Ætheling
William I
William II
Henry I
Stephen
Matilda
Henry II
Henry the Young King
Richard I
John
Henry III
Edward I
Edward II
Edward III
Richard II
Henry IV
Henry V
Henry VI
Edward IV
Edward V
Richard III
Henry VII
Henry VIII
Edward VI
Jane
Mary I and Philip
Elizabeth I






Kenneth I MacAlpin
Donald I
Constantine I
Áed
Giric
Eochaid
Donald II
Constantine II
Malcolm I
Indulf
Dub
Cuilén
Amlaíb
Kenneth II
Constantine III
Kenneth III
Malcolm II
Duncan I
Macbeth
Lulach
Malcolm III
Donald III
Duncan II
Donald III
Edgar
Alexander I
David I
Malcolm IV
William I
Alexander II
Alexander III
Margaret of Norway
First Interregnum
John Balliol
Second Interregnum
Robert I
David II
Edward Balliol
Robert II
Robert III
James I
James II
James III
James IV
James V
Mary I
James VI



















Monarchs of England and Scotland after the Union of the Crowns in 1603








James I & VI
Charles I
Commonwealth
Charles II
James II & VII
William III & II and Mary II
Anne















British monarchs after the Acts of Union 1707








Anne
George I
George II
George III
George IV
William IV
Victoria
Edward VII
George V
Edward VIII
George VI
Elizabeth II











Debatable or disputed rulers are in italics.












v
t
e


Monarchs of Luxembourg








County of Luxemburg (963–1354)







Elder House of Luxembourg
(963–1136)



Siegfried (963–998)
Henry I (998–1026)
Henry II (1026–1047)
Giselbert (1047–1059)
Conrad I (1059–1086)
Henry III (1086–1096)
William I (1096–1131)
Conrad II (1131–1136)








House of Namur
(1136–1189)



Henry IV (1136–1189)





House of Hohenstaufen
(1196–1197)



Otto (1196–1197)





House of Namur
(1197–1247)



Ermesinde (1197–1247), with
Theobald (1197–1214), and then
Waleran (1214–1226)





House of Limburg
(1247–1354)



Henry V (1247–1281)
Henry VI (1281–1288)
Henry VII (1288–1313)
John I (1313–1346)
Charles I (1346–1353)
Wenceslaus I (1353–1354)
















Duchy of Luxemburg (1354–1794)







House of Limburg
(1354–1443)



Wenceslaus I (1354–1383)
Wenceslaus II (1383–1388)
Jobst (1388–1411)
Elisabeth (1411–1443) with
Anthony (1411–1415), and then
John II (1418–1425)








House of Valois-Burgundy
(1443–1482)



Philip I (1443–1467)
Charles II (1467–1477)
Mary I (1477–1482) and
Maximilian I (1477–1482)





House of Habsburg
(1482–1700)



Philip II (1482–1506)
Charles III (1506–1556)
Philip III (1556–1598)
Isabella Clara Eugenia (1598–1621) and Albert (1598–1621)
Philip IV (1621–1665)
Charles IV (1665–1700)





House of Bourbon
(1700–1712)



Philip V (1700–1712)





House of Wittelsbach
(1712–1713)



Maximilian II (1712–1713)





House of Habsburg
(1713–1780)



Charles V (1713–1740)
Mary II (1740–1780)





House of Habsburg-Lorraine
(1780–1794)



Joseph (1780–1790)
Leopold (1790–1792)
Francis (1792–1794)
















Grand Duchy of Luxembourg (since 1815)







House of Orange-Nassau
(1815–1890)



William I (1815–1840)
William II (1840–1849)
William III (1849–1890)








House of Nassau-Weilburg
(1890–present)



Adolphe (1890–1905)
William IV (1905–1912)
Marie-Adélaïde (1912–1919)
Charlotte (1919–1964)
Jean (1964–2000)
Henri (since 2000)


















v
t
e


Infantes of Spain




The generations indicate descent from Carlos I, under whom the crowns of Castile and Aragon were united, forming the Kingdom of Spain. Previously, the title Infante had been largely used in the different realms.



1st generation



Felipe II
Infante Fernando
Infante Juan
Infante João





2nd generation



Carlos, Prince of Asturias
Fernando, Prince of Asturias
Infante Carlos Lorenzo
Diego, Prince of Asturias
Felipe III





3rd generation



Felipe IV
Infante Carlos
Infante Fernando
Infante Alfonso Mauricio





4th generation



Baltasar Carlos, Prince of Asturias
Felipe Próspero, Prince of Asturias
Infante Fernando Tomás
Carlos II





5th generation



None





6th generation



None





7th generation



Luis I
Infante Felipe
Infante Felipe Pedro
Fernando VI
Carlos III
Felipe, Duke of Parma
Infante Luis, Count of Chinchón





8th generation



Infante Philip, Duke of Calabria
Carlos IV
Fernando I of the Two Sicilies
Infante Gabriel
Infante Antonio Pascual
Infante Francisco Javier
Fernando, Duke of Parma 1





9th generation



Infante Carlos Clemente
Infante Carlos Domingo
Infante Carlos Francisco de Paula
Infante Felipe Francisco de Paula
Fernando VII
Infante Carlos, Count of Molina
Infante Felipe María
Infante Francisco de Paula
Infante Pedro Carlos, Infante of Portugal 1
Infante Carlos1
Luis I of Etruria 2





10th generation



Infante Antonio, Duke of Montpensier 2
Infante Carlos, Count of Montemolin 1
Infante Juan, Count of Montizón 1
Infante Fernando1
Infante Francisco de Asís, Duke of Cádiz1
Francisco de Asís, King consort of Spain 1
Infante Enrique, Duke of Seville 1
Infante Eduardo Felipe 1
Infante Fernando María1
Infante Sebastián, Infante of Portugal 1
Carlos II, Duke of Parma 1





11th generation



Infante Fernando
Infante Francisco de Asís
Alfonso XII
Infante Francisco de Asís
Infante Gaetan, Count of Girgenti 2
Infante Ludwig Ferdinand of Bavaria 2
Infante Fernando of Orléans 1
Infante Felipe of Orleans1
Infante Antonio, Duke of Galliera 1
Infante Luis of Orleans1
Carlos III, Duke of Parma 1





12th generation



Infante Carlos of Bourbon-Two Sicilies 2
Infante Ferdinand of Bavaria 2
Infante Alfonso, Duke of Galliera 1
Infante Luis Fernando of Orléans 1
Roberto I, Duke of Parma 1





13th generation



Alfonso, Prince of Asturias
Infante Jaime, Duke of Segovia
Infante Fernando
Infante Juan, Count of Barcelona
Infante Gonzalo
Infante Alfonso, Duke of Calabria 1
Infante Fernando of Bourbon-Two Sicilies1
Infante Luis Alfonso of Bavaria 1
Infante José Eugenio of Bavaria 1
Infante Alvaro, Duke of Galliera 1
Infante Afonso of Orléans 1
Infante Ataúlfo of Orléans 1





14th generation



Juan Carlos I
Infante Alfonso
Infante Carlos, Duke of Calabria 1





15th generation



Felipe VI





16th generation



None








1 title granted by Royal Decree
2 consort to an Infanta naturalized as a Spanish Infante












v
t
e


Austrian archdukes



1st generation



Frederick V
Albert VI
Sigismund





2nd generation



Cristopher
Maximilian I
John
Wolfgang





3rd generation



Philip I of Castile
Archduke Francis





4th generation



Charles I
Ferdinand I





5th generation



Philip II of Spain*
Maximilian II
Ferdinand II
Ferdinand*
John*
John
Ferdinand*
Charles II





6th generation



Charles, Prince of Asturias*
Ferdinand
Rudolf V
Ernest
Matthias
Maximilian III
Albert VII
Wenzel
Frederick
Charles
Ferdinand, Prince of Asturias*
Ferdinand
Carlos Lorenzo*
Diego, Prince of Asturias*
Philip III of Spain*
Ferdinand III
Charles
Maximilian Ernest
Leopold V
Charles, Bishop of Wroclaw





7th generation



Charles
Philip IV of Spain*
Philipp
John-Charles
Albert
Charles*
Ferdinand IV
Ferdinand*
Alfonso Mauricio
Leopold Wilhelm
Ferdinand Charles
Sigismund Francis





8th generation



Balthasar Charles, Prince of Asturias*
Ferdinand IV of Hungary
Francisco Fernando*
Philip August
Maximilian Thomas
Leopold VI
Charles Joseph
Ferdinand Joseph Alois
Philip Prospero, Prince of Asturias*
Ferdinand Thomas*
Charles II of Spain*





9th generation



Ferdinand Wenzel
John Leopold
Joseph I
Leopold Joseph
Charles III





10th generation



Leopold Joseph
Leopold John





11th generation



Joseph II**
Charles Louis**
Leopold VII**
Ferdinand**
Maximilian Franz, Archbishop-Elector of Cologne**





12th generation



Emperor Francis I**
Ferdinand III, Grand Duke of Tuscany**
Charles, Duke of Teschen**
Alexander Leopold, Palatine of Hungary**
Joseph, Palatine of Hungary**
Anton Victor**
John**
Rainer Joseph**
Archduke Louis**
Cardinal-Archduke Rudolf**
Joseph Franz***
Francis IV, Duke of Modena***
Ferdinand Karl Joseph***
Maximilian***
Karl, Primate of Hungary***





13th generation



Emperor Ferdinand I
Francis Leopold, Grand Prince of Tuscany**
Leopold II, Grand Duke of Tuscany**
Joseph Franz
Franz Karl
Johann Nepomuk
Albert, Duke of Teschen
Stephen, Palatine of Hungary
Karl Ferdinand
Francis V, Duke of Modena***
Frederick Ferdinand
Ferdinand Karl Viktor***
Archduke Rudolf
Leopold Ludwig
Ernest
Alexander
Sigismund Leopold
Rainer Ferdinand
Wilhelm Franz
Heinrich Anton
Maximilian Karl
Joseph Karl





14th generation



Emperor Franz Joseph I
Maximilian I of Mexico
Karl Ludwig
Ludwig Viktor
Ferdinand IV, Grand Duke of Tuscany**
Karl Salvator**
Rainier**
Ludwig Salvator**
John Salvator**
Karl
Franz Joseph
Friedrich, Duke of Teschen
Charles Stephen
Eugen
Joseph August
Ladislaus





15th generation



Crown Prince Rudolf
Franz Ferdinand***
Otto Francis
Ferdinand Karl
Leopold Ferdinand**
Josef Ferdinand**
Peter Ferdinand**
Heinrich Ferdinand**
Robert Ferdinand**
Leopold Salvator**
Franz Salvator**
Albrecht Salvator**
Rainier Salvator**
Ferdinand Salvator**
Albrecht Franz, Duke of Teschen
Karl Albrecht
Leo Karl
Wilhelm
Joseph Francis
Ladislaus Joseph
Matthias





16th generation



Emperor Charles I
Maximilian Eugen
Habsburg - Tuscany :
Gottfried**
Georg**
Rainer**
Leopold Maria**
Anton**
Franz Joseph**
Karl Pius**
Franz Karl**
Hubert Salvator**
Theodor Salvator**
Clemens Salvator**
Palatines of Hungary :
Joseph Árpád
István
Géza
Michael Koloman





17th generation



Descent of Charles I :
Crown Prince Otto
Robert***
Felix
Carl Ludwig
Rudolf
Descent of Maximilian :
Ferdinand Karl
Heinrich Maria
Tuscany :
Leopold Franz**
Guntram**
Radbot**
Johann**
Georg**
Stephan**
Dominic**
Friederich Salvator**
Andreas Salvator**
Markus**
Johann**
Michael**
Franz Salvator**
Karl Salvator**
Palatines of Hungary :
Joseph Karl
Andreas Agustinus
Nicholas Franz
Johann Jacob
Edward Karl
Paul Rudolf





18th generation



Descent of Charles I :
Karl
Georg
Lorenz***
Gerhard***
Martin***
Karl Philipp
Raimund Joseph
István
Rudolf
Carl Christian
Karl Peter
Simeon
Johannes
Descent of Maximilian :
Maximilian Heinrich
Philipp Joachim
Ferdinand Karl
Konrad
Tuscany :
Sigismund**
Georg**
Guntram**
Leopold**
Alexander Salvator**
Thaddäus Salvator**
Casimir Salvator**
Matthias**
Johannes**
Bernhard**
Benedikt**
Palatines :
Joseph Albrecht (1994–)
Paul Leo (1996–)
Friedrich Cyprian (1995–)
Pierre (1997–)
Benedikt Alexander (2005–)
Nicolás (2003–)
Santiago (2006–)
Johannes (2010–)
Paul Benedikt (2000–)





19th generation



Descent of Charles I :
Ferdinand Zvonimir
Karl Konstantin
Amedeo***
Joachim***
Bartholomaeus***
Emmanuel***
Luigi***
Felix Carl
Andreas Franz
Paul Johannes
Carl Christian
Johannes
Thomas
Franz Ludwig
Michael
Joseph
Imre
Christoph
Alexander
Lorenz Carl
Johannes
Ludwig
Philipp
Descent of Maximilian :
Nicholas
Constantin
Jacob Maximilian
Tuscany :
Leopold Amedeo**
Maximilian**
Leopold**
Constantin Salvator**
Paul Salvator**








*also an infante of Spain
** also a prince of Tuscany
*** also a prince of Modena












v
t
e


Princes and Princesses of Asturias






Leonor (2014–present)













Henry (1388–90)
Maria (1402–05)
John (1405–06)
Catherine (1423–24)
Eleanor (1424–25)
Henry (1425–54)
Joanna (1462–64)
Alfonso (1464–68)
Isabella (1468–70)
Isabella (1470–78)
John (1478–97)
Isabella (1497–98)
Michael (1498–1500)
Joanna (1502–04)
Charles (1504–16)
Philip (1527–56)
Charles (1556–68)
Ferdinand (1571–78)
Diego (1578–82)
Philip (1582–98)
Philip (1605–21)
Balthasar Charles (1629–1646)
Philip Prospero (1657–1661)
Charles (1661–1665)
Louis (1709–24)
Ferdinand (1724–46)
Charles (1759–88)
Ferdinand (1788–1808)
Isabella (1830–33)
Isabella (1851–57)
Alfonso (1857–68)
Emanuele Filiberto (1871–73)
Isabella (1875–80)
Mercedes (1881–1904)
Alfonso (1907–38)
Felipe (1977–2014)
Leonor (2014– )









Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 88973996
LCCN: n78067330
ISNI: 0000 0001 0837 7767
GND: 118593862
SELIBR: 186544
SUDOC: 030249899
BNF: cb12170664z (data)
ULAN: 500253117
NLA: 35079885
NDL: 00998296
NKC: jn20000700532
BNE: XX885445
RKD: 435459
IATH: w6m907f7











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Philip_II_of_Spain&oldid=817197227"					Categories: Philip II of Spain1527 births1598 deathsSpanish monarchsPortuguese monarchsPhilippine dynastyBritish monarchs buried abroadRoman Catholic monarchsKings of SicilyMonarchs of NaplesCounter-ReformationAnti-ProtestantismSpanish people of the Eighty Years' WarPeople of the French Wars of ReligionRulers of the Habsburg NetherlandsDukes of MilanRegents of SpainPrinces of AsturiasPrinces of GironaDukes of MontblancCounts of CerveraLords of BalaguerSpanish infantesSpanish Renaissance peopleKnights of SantiagoKnights of the GarterPeople of the Anglo-Spanish War (1585–1604)Burials in the Pantheon of Kings at El EscorialGrand Masters of the Order of the Golden FleecePeople from ValladolidSpanish people of English descentSpanish people of German descentSpanish people of Portuguese descentMary I of EnglandGrand Masters of the Order of Montesa16th-century House of Habsburg16th-century Portuguese monarchs16th-century Spanish people16th-century English monarchsHidden categories: CS1 maint: Extra text: authors listArticles with French-language external linksWebarchive template wayback linksArticles with Spanish-language external linksEngvarB from January 2015Use dmy dates from October 2012Articles containing Spanish-language textAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from June 2017Articles with attributed pull quotesArticles with unsourced statements from October 2013Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource referenceAC with 14 elementsWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with SELIBR identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersWikipedia articles with ULAN identifiersWikipedia articles with NLA identifiersWikipedia articles with RKDartists identifiersWikipedia articles with SNAC-ID identifiers