For other uses, see Philanthropy (disambiguation).
"Philanthropist" redirects here. For other uses, see Philanthropist (disambiguation).







This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages)







This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (January 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)









This article is written like a personal reflection or opinion essay that states a Wikipedia editor's personal feelings about a topic. Please help improve it by rewriting it in an encyclopedic style. (January 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)





(Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Philanthropy (from Greek φιλανθρωπία) means etymologically, the love of humanity, in the sense of caring and nourishing, it involves both the benefactor in their identifying and exercising their values, and the beneficiary in their receipt and benefit from the service or goods provided. A conventional modern definition is "private initiatives, for the public good, focusing on quality of life," which combines an original humanistic tradition with a social scientific aspect developed in the 20th century. The definition also serves to contrast philanthropy with business endeavors, which are private initiatives for private good, e.g., focusing on material gain, and with government endeavors, which are public initiatives for public good, e.g., focusing on provision of public services.[not verified in body] A person who practices philanthropy is called a philanthropist.
Philanthropy has distinguishing characteristics separate from charity; not all charity is philanthropy, or vice versa, though there is a recognized degree of overlap in practice. A difference commonly cited is that charity aims to relieve the pain of a particular social problem, whereas philanthropy attempts to address the root cause of the problem—the difference between the proverbial gift of a fish to a hungry person, versus teaching them how to fish.



Contents


1 Definitions
2 Etymology
3 Modern philanthropy
4 21st century efforts
5 Organizations supporting
6 See also
7 References
8 External links



Definitions[edit]






This section needs expansion with: clearly sourced definitions of the term from the most important texts in use at leading academic programs on philanthropy (e.g., IU, CUNY, Duke, etc.), and at the most important major philanthropic organisations. You can help by adding to it. (January 2016)



The most conventional modern definition, according to the Catalogue for Philanthropy, is "private initiatives, for public good, focusing on quality of life".[1] This combines the social scientific aspect developed in the century with the original humanistic tradition, and serves to contrast philanthropy with business (private initiatives for private good, focusing on material prosperity) and government (public initiatives for public good, focusing on law and order). These distinctions have been analyzed by Olivier Zunz,[2][not in citation given] and others.[who?]
Etymology[edit]
In the first century BCE, both paideia and philanthrôpía were translated into Latin by the single word humanity, which was also understood to be the core of liberal education study humanities, the studies of humanity, or simply "the humanities." In the second century CE, Plutarch used the concept of philanthrôpía to describe superior human beings. This Classically synonymous troika, of philanthropy, the humanities, and liberal education, declined with the replacement of the classical world by Christianity. During the Middle Ages, philanthrôpía was superseded by Caritas charity, selfless love, valued for salvation. Philanthropy was modernized by Sir Francis Bacon in the 1600s, who is largely credited with preventing the word from being owned by horticulture. Bacon considered philanthrôpía to be synonymous with "goodness", which correlated with the Aristotelian conception of virtue, as consciously instilled habits of good behavior.[3][full citation needed] Then in the 1700s, an influential lexical figurehead by the name of Samuel Johnson simply defined philanthropy as "love of mankind; good nature".[4] This definition still survives today and is often cited more gender-neutrally as the "love of humanity." However, it was Noah Webster who would more accurately reflect the word usage in American English.[5]
Modern philanthropy[edit]




The Foundling Hospital. The building has been demolished.


In London prior to the 18th century, parochial and civic charities were typically established by bequests and operated by local church parishes (such as St Dionis Backchurch) or guilds (such as the Carpenters' Company). During the 18th century, however, "a more activist and explicitly Protestant tradition of direct charitable engagement during life" took hold, exemplified by the creation of the Society for the Promotion of Christian Knowledge and Societies for the Reformation of Manners.[6]
In 1739, Captain Thomas Coram, appalled by the number of abandoned children living on the streets of London, received a royal charter to establish the Foundling Hospital to look after these unwanted orphans in Lamb's Conduit Fields, Bloomsbury.[7] This was "the first children's charity in the country, and one that 'set the pattern for incorporated associational charities' in general."[7] The hospital "marked the first great milestone in the creation of these new-style charities."[6]
Jonas Hanway, another notable philanthropist of the era, established The Marine Society in 1756 as the first seafarer's charity, in a bid to aid the recruitment of men to the navy.[8] By 1763, the society had recruited over 10,000 men and it was incorporated by an Act of Parliament in 1772. Hanway was also instrumental in establishing the Magdalen Hospital to rehabilitate prostitutes. These organizations were funded by subscription and run as voluntary associations. They raised public awareness of their activities through the emerging popular press and were generally held in high social regard—some charities received state recognition in the form of the Royal Charter.
Philanthropists, such as anti-slavery campaigner William Wilberforce, began to adopt active campaigning roles, where they would champion a cause and lobby the government for legislative change. This included organized campaigns against the ill treatment of animals and children and the campaign that eventually succeeded in ending the slave trade throughout the British Empire at the turn of the 19th century.




Andrew Carnegie's philanthropy. Puck magazine cartoon by Louis Dalrymple, 1903


During the 19th century, a profusion of charitable organizations was set up to alleviate the awful conditions of the working class in the slums. The Labourer's Friend Society, chaired by Lord Shaftesbury in the United Kingdom in 1830, was set up to improve working class conditions. This included the promotion of allotment of land to labourers for "cottage husbandry" that later became the allotment movement, and in 1844 it became the first Model Dwellings Company—an organization that sought to improve the housing conditions of the working classes by building new homes for them, while at the same time receiving a competitive rate of return on any investment. This was one of the first housing associations, a philanthropic endeavor that flourished in the second half of the nineteenth century, brought about by the growth of the middle class. Later associations included the Peabody Trust, and the Guinness Trust. The principle of philanthropic intention with capitalist return was given the label "five per cent philanthropy."[9][10]
In 1863, the Swiss businessman Henry Dunant used his personal fortune to finding the Geneva Society for Public Welfare, which became the International Committee of the Red Cross. During the Franco-Prussian War of 1870, Dunant personally led Red Cross delegations that treated soldiers. He shared the first Nobel Peace Prize for this work in 1901.[11]
Philanthropy became a very fashionable activity among the expanding middle classes in Britain and America. Octavia Hill and John Ruskin were an important force behind the development of social housing and Andrew Carnegie exemplified the large-scale philanthropy of the newly rich in industrialized America. In Gospel of Wealth (1889), Carnegie wrote about the responsibilities of great wealth and the importance of social justice. He established public libraries throughout the English-speaking countries[12] as well as contributing large sums to schools and universities. Other American philanthropists of the early 20th century were John D. Rockefeller and Henry Ford. The sheer size of their endowments directed their attention to addressing the causes and instruments, as distinct from the symptoms and expressions, of social problems and cultural opportunities.[2][not in citation given]
21st century efforts[edit]
Studies by The Chronicle of Philanthropy have indicated that the rich—those making over $100,000 a year—give a smaller share of their income[clarification needed] to charity (4.2% on average) than those making $50,000–$100,000 a year.[13][14]
Trends in philanthropy have been affected in various ways by a technological and cultural change. Today, many donations are made through the Internet (see also donation statistics).[15]
Organizations supporting[edit]






This section needs expansion with: further coverage of modern extant organizations that have long histories of studying philanthropy and analyzing its societal roles—such as the CUNY and Duke efforts pioneered in the 80s, remnants of the Rockefeller-funded postwar Japanese efforts, etc., see Talk—I'm with concomitant reduction of space for the Lilly School (and reigning it of its clear advert-style partiality). You can help by adding to it. (January 2016)



A variety of organizations that have been created over the decades to study, support, and evaluate practical philanthropic endeavors and ideas exist today and continue research into philanthropy, analysis of its trends, and student-training for its occupations and further study.




John D. Rockefeller in 1885






Front building of the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation in Seattle


See also[edit]

Effective altruism
Venture philanthropy
List of philanthropists

References[edit]


^ "What Is Philanthropy?", Catalogue for Philanthropy, accessed 16 July 2017.
^ a b Zunz, Olivier (2011). Philanthropy in America, A History: Politics and Society in Twentieth-Century America. Princeton, NJ, USA: Princeton University Press. ISBN 1400839416. Archived from the original on October 17, 2011. Retrieved 28 January 2016. [page needed]
^ Aristotle, & Irwin, T. (1985). Nicomachean ethics. Indianapolis, IN: Hackett.[page needed]
^ Johnson, S. (1979). A dictionary of the English language. London: Times Books.
^ "Mitchell Kutney: Philanthropy is what sustains the charitable sector, not money". Blue & Green Tomorrow. 2013-06-18. Retrieved 2014-11-08. [better source needed]
^ a b "Background - Associational Charities". London Lives. Retrieved 29 January 2016. 
^ a b "The London Foundling Hospital". victorianweb.org. Retrieved 29 January 2016. 
^ N. A. M. Rodger, The Command of the Ocean: A Naval History of Britain 1649–1815 (New York: W. W. Norton & Company: 2004), 313.
^ Siegel, Fred (1974). "Five Per Cent Philanthropy: An Account of Housing in Urban Areas Between 1840 and 1914. By John Nelson Tarn… [Book Review]". The Journal of Economic History. 34 (4, December): 1061f. doi:10.1017/S0022050700089683. Retrieved 29 January 2016. 
^ Tarn, John Nelson (1973). Five Per Cent Philanthropy: An Account of Housing in Urban Areas Between 1840 and 1914. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. pp. xiv, 23, and passim. ISBN 0521085063. Retrieved 29 January 2016. 
^ "Henry Dunant". nndb.com. Retrieved 29 January 2016. 
^ Abigail A. VanSlyck, "'The Utmost Amount of Effectiv [Sic] Accommodation': Andrew Carnegie and the Reform of the American Library", Journal of the Society of Architectural Historians (1991) 50#4 pp. 359–383 in JSTOR.
^ Frank, Robert (August 20, 2012). "The Rich Are Less Charitable Than the Middle Class: Study". CNBC. Retrieved February 21, 2014. 
^ Kavoussi, Bonnie. "Rich People Give A Smaller Share Of Their Income To Charity Than Middle-Class Americans Do". The Huffington Post. Retrieved February 21, 2014. 
^ "The 2011 Online Giving Report, presented by Steve MacLaughlin, Jim O'Shaughnessy, and Allison Van Diest" (PDF). blackbaud.com. February 2012. Retrieved January 2013.  Check date values in: |access-date= (help)


External links[edit]



Look up philanthropy in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.





Wikimedia Commons has media related to Philanthropy.



NPtrust.org, History of Philanthropy, 1601–present compiled and edited by National Philanthropic Trust







v
t
e


Charitable giving



Main topics



Alms
Altruism
Donation
Fundraising
Philanthropy
Volunteering





Types of charitable
organizations



Charitable trust / Registered charity
Foundation

Private


Mutual-benefit nonprofit corporation
Non-governmental organization
Nonprofit organization
Public-benefit nonprofit corporation
Religious corporation
Voluntary association





Charity and religion



Dāna
Tithe
Tzedakah
Sadaqah
Zakat





Charity evaluators



Charity Navigator
CharityWatch
GiveWell
Giving What We Can
GuideStar
Open Philanthropy Project





Further topics



Alternative giving
Benefit concert
Charity / thrift / op shop
Click-to-donate site
Drive
Donor intent
Earning to give
Effective altruism
List of charitable foundations

wealthiest


Master of Nonprofit Organizations
Matching funds
Telethon
Volunteer grant
Wall of Kindness
Warm-glow giving












v
t
e


Extreme wealth



Concepts



Capital accumulation
Distribution of wealth
Dynastic wealth
Economic inequality
Geography and wealth
High-net-worth individual

UHNWI


National wealth
Oligarchy
Overaccumulation
Paper wealth
Plutocracy
Plutonomy
Wealth concentration
Wealth effect
Wealth management
Wealth and religion
Wealth tax





Individuals



Wealthiest historical figures
Wealthiest Americans
Female billionaires‎
Wealthiest families
Wealthiest animals
Forbes list of billionaires





Lists of
organizations



Wealthiest organizations
Companies by profit and loss
Largest companies by revenue
Largest financial services companies by revenue
Largest manufacturing companies by revenue
Public corporations by market capitalization





See also



Business magnate
Business oligarch
Upper class

Nouveau riche
Vieux riche


The rich get richer and the poor get poorer
Philanthropy

The Giving Pledge











Authority control



GND: 4174264-3











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Philanthropy&oldid=815985433"					Categories: PhilanthropyHidden categories: Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from January 2016All articles lacking reliable referencesArticles lacking reliable references from January 2016CS1 errors: datesArticles needing additional references from January 2016All articles needing additional referencesWikipedia articles needing style editing from January 2016All articles needing style editingArticles with multiple maintenance issuesArticles containing Ancient Greek-language textAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from January 2016Articles to be expanded from January 2016All articles to be expandedAll articles with failed verificationArticles with failed verification from January 2016All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrasesArticles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from January 2016Articles needing more detailed referencesWikipedia articles needing clarification from January 2016Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers