This article is about the form of language in general. For the language called Pidgin, see Nigerian Pidgin. For the instant messaging client, see Pidgin (software). For the family of birds commonly known as pigeons, see Columbidae.
A pidgin[1][2][3] /ˈpɪdʒɪn/, or pidgin language, is a grammatically simplified means of communication that develops between two or more groups that do not have a language in common: typically, a mixture of simplified languages or a simplified primary language with other languages' elements included. It is most commonly employed in situations such as trade, or where both groups speak languages different from the language of the country in which they reside (but where there is no common language between the groups). Fundamentally, a pidgin is a simplified means of linguistic communication, as it is constructed impromptu, or by convention, between individuals or groups of people. A pidgin is not the native language of any speech community, but is instead learned as a second language.[4][5] A pidgin may be built from words, sounds, or body language from multiple other languages and cultures. They allow people who have no common language to communicate with each other. Pidgins usually have low prestige with respect to other languages.[6]
Not all simplified or "broken" forms of a language are pidgins. Each pidgin has its own norms of usage which must be learned for proficiency in the pidgin.[7]
A pidgin differs from a creole, which is the first language of a speech community of native speakers, and thus has a fully developed vocabulary and grammar. Most linguists believe that a creole develops through a process of nativization of a pidgin when children of acquired pidgin-speakers learn it and use it as their native language.



Contents


1 Etymology
2 Terminology
3 Common traits
4 Development
5 Examples
6 See also
7 Notes
8 References
9 Further reading
10 External links



Etymology[edit]
The origin of the word is uncertain. Pidgin first appeared in print in 1850. The most widely accepted etymology is from a Chinese pronunciation of the English word business.[8]
Another etymology that has been proposed, likely an example of a just-so story, is English pigeon, a bird sometimes used for carrying brief written messages, especially in times prior to modern telecommunications.[9]
Terminology[edit]
The word pidgin, formerly also spelled pigion,[8] used to refer originally to Chinese Pidgin English, but was later generalized to refer to any pidgin.[10] Pidgin may also be used as the specific name for local pidgins or creoles, in places where they are spoken. For example, the name of the creole language Tok Pisin derives from the English words talk pidgin. Its speakers usually refer to it simply as "pidgin" when speaking English.[11][12] Likewise, Hawaiian Creole English is commonly referred to by its speakers as "Pidgin".
The term jargon has also been used to refer to pidgins, and is found in the names of some pidgins, such as Chinook Jargon. In this context, linguists today use jargon to denote a particularly rudimentary type of pidgin;[13] however, this usage is rather rare, and the term jargon most often refers to the words particular to a given profession.
Pidgins may start out as or become trade languages, such as Tok Pisin. Trade languages can eventually evolve into fully developed languages in their own right such as Swahili, distinct from the languages they were originally influenced by. Trade languages and pidgins can also influence an established language's vernacular, especially amongst people who are directly involved in a trade where that pidgin is commonly used, which can alternatively result in a regional dialect being developed.
Common traits[edit]
Pidgins are usually less morphologically complex but more syntactically rigid than other languages, usually have fewer morphosyntactic irregularities than other languages, and often consist of:[citation needed]

Uncomplicated clausal structure (e.g., no embedded clauses, etc.)
Reduction or elimination of syllable codas
Reduction of consonant clusters or breaking them with epenthesis
Basic vowels, such as [a, e, i, o, u]
No tones, such as those found in West African, Asian and many North American Indigenous languages
Use of separate words to indicate tense, usually preceding the verb
Use of reduplication to represent plurals, superlatives, and other parts of speech that represent the concept being increased
A lack of morphophonemic variation

Development[edit]
The initial development of a pidgin usually requires:

prolonged, regular contact between the different language communities
a need to communicate between them
an absence of (or absence of widespread proficiency in) a widespread, accessible interlanguage

Keith Whinnom (in Hymes (1971)) suggests that pidgins need three languages to form, with one (the superstrate) being clearly dominant over the others.
Linguists sometimes posit that pidgins can become creole languages when a generation of children learn a pidgin as their first language,[14] a process that regularizes speaker-dependent variation in grammar. Creoles can then replace the existing mix of languages to become the native language of a community (such as the Chavacano language in the Philippines, Krio in Sierra Leone, and Tok Pisin in Papua New Guinea). However, not all pidgins become creole languages; a pidgin may die out before this phase would occur (e.g. the Mediterranean Lingua Franca).
Other scholars, such as Salikoko Mufwene, argue that pidgins and creoles arise independently under different circumstances, and that a pidgin need not always precede a creole nor a creole evolve from a pidgin. Pidgins, according to Mufwene, emerged among trade colonies among "users who preserved their native vernaculars for their day-to-day interactions". Creoles, meanwhile, developed in settlement colonies in which speakers of a European language, often indentured servants whose language would be far from the standard in the first place, interacted extensively with non-European slaves, absorbing certain words and features from the slaves' non-European native languages, resulting in a heavily basilectalized version of the original language. These servants and slaves would come to use the creole as an everyday vernacular, rather than merely in situations in which contact with a speaker of the superstrate was necessary.[15]
Examples[edit]
The following pidgins have Wikipedia articles or sections in articles.


List of English-based pidgins
Algonquian–Basque pidgin
Arafundi-Enga Pidgin
Barikanchi Pidgin
Basque–Icelandic pidgin
Bimbashi Arabic
Broken Oghibbeway
Broken Slavey and Loucheux Jargon
Camtho
Duvle-Wano Pidgin
Eskimo Trade Jargon
Ewondo Populaire
Fanagalo (Pidgin Zulu)
Français Tirailleur
Haflong Hindi
Helsinki slang
International Sign
Inuktitut-English Pidgin
KiKAR (Swahili pidgin)
Kwoma-Manambu Pidgin
Kyakhta Russian–Chinese Pidgin
Kyowa-go and Xieheyu
Labrador Inuit Pidgin French
Maridi Arabic
Mediterranean Lingua Franca (Sabir)
Mekeo pidgins
Mobilian Jargon
Namibian Black German
Ndyuka-Tiriyó Pidgin
Nefamese
Nigerian Pidgin
Nootka Jargon
Pequeno Português
Pidgin Delaware
Pidgin Hawaiian
Pidgin Iha
Pidgin Ngarluma
Pidgin Onin
Pidgin Wolof
Russenorsk
Settler Swahili
Taimyr Pidgin Russian
Tây Bồi Pidgin French
Tok Pisin
Turku
West Greenlandic Pidgin
Yokohama Pidgin Japanese


See also[edit]

Engrish
Spanglish
Camfranglais (Cameroon)
Béarlachas
Hiri Motu
Konglish
Lingua franca
Mixed language

Notes[edit]


^ Muysken, Pieter; Smith, Norval (2008). "The study of pidgin and creole languages" (PDF). In Arends, Jacques; Muijsken, Pieter; Smith, Norval. Pidgins and Creoles: An Introduction. John Benjamins. pp. 3–14. 
^ Özüorçun, Fatma (2014). "Language varieties: Pidgins and creoles" (PDF). 
^ Bickerton, Derek (1976). "Pidgin and creole studies". Annual Review of Anthropology. 5: 169–93. doi:10.1146/annurev.an.05.100176.001125. JSTOR 2949309. 
^ See Todd (1990:3)
^ See Thomason & Kaufman (1988:169)
^ Bakker (1994:27)
^ Bakker (1994:26)
^ a b Online Etymology Dictionary 
^ Crystal, David (1997), "Pidgin", The Cambridge Encyclopedia of Language (2nd ed.), Cambridge University Press 
^ Bakker (1994:25)
^ Smith, Geoff P. Growing Up with Tok Pisin: Contact, creolization, and change in Papua New Guinea's national language. London: Battlebridge. 2002. p. 4.
^ Thus the published court reports of Papua New Guinea refer to Tok Pisin as "Pidgin": see for example Schubert v The State [1979] PNGLR 66.
^ Bakker, 1994 & pp25–26
^ For example: Campbell, John Howland; Schopf, J. William, eds. (1994). Creative Evolution. Life Science Series. Contributor: University of California, Los Angeles. IGPP Center for the Study of Evolution and the Origin of Life. Jones & Bartlett Learning. p. 81. ISBN 9780867209617. Retrieved 2014-04-20. [...] the children of pidgin-speaking parents face a big problem, because pidgins are so rudimentary and inexpressive, poorly capable of expressing the nuances of a full range of human emotions and life situations. The first generation of such children spontaneously develops a pidgin into a more complex language termed a creole. [...] [T]he evolution of a pidgin into a creole is unconscious and spontaneous. 
^ "Salikoko Mufwene: "Pidgin and Creole Languages"". Humanities.uchicago.edu. Retrieved 2010-04-24. 


References[edit]

Bakker, Peter (1994), "Pidgins", in Arends, Jacques; Muijsken, Pieter; Smith, Norval, Pidgins and Creoles: An Introduction, John Benjamins, pp. 26–39 
Hymes, Dell (1971), Pidginization and Creolization of Languages, Cambridge University Press, ISBN 0-521-07833-4 
McWhorter, John (2002), The Power of Babel: The Natural History of Language, Random House Group, ISBN 0-06-052085-X 
Sebba, Mark (1997), Contact Languages: Pidgins and Creoles, MacMillan, ISBN 0-333-63024-6 
Thomason, Sarah G.; Kaufman, Terrence (1988), Language contact, creolization, and genetic linguistics, Berkeley: University of California Press, ISBN 0-520-07893-4 
Todd, Loreto (1990), Pidgins and Creoles, Routledge, ISBN 0-415-05311-0 

Further reading[edit]

Holm, John (2000), An Introduction to Pidgins and Creoles, Cambridge University Press

External links[edit]

Language Varieties Web Site




Authority control



GND: 4076134-4











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Pidgin&oldid=810385225"					Categories: InterlinguisticsPidgins and creolesHidden categories: All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from February 2011Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers